abbreviate (v.)

mid-15c., from Latin abbreviatus, past participle of abbreviare to shorten (see abbreviation). Also
sometimes 15c. abbrevy, from Middle French abrevier (14c.), from Latin abbreviare. Related:
Abbreviated; abbreviating.


breviary (n.)

1540s, brief statement; sense of short prayer book used by Catholic priests is from 1610s, from
Latin breviarium summary, noun use of neuter of adjective breviarius abridged, from breviare to
shorten, abbreviate, from brevis short (see brief (adj.)).


abridge (v.)

c.1300, abreggen, to make shorter, to condense, from Old French abregier abridge, diminish, shorten,
from Late Latin abbreviare make short (see abbreviate). The sound development from Latin -vi- to
French -dg- is paralleled in assuage (from assuavidare) and deluge (from diluvium). Related:
Abridged; abridging.


Met (n.)

1879 as colloquial shortening of Metropolitan (n.) member of the New York Metropolitan Base-Ball
Club.    THE baseball season has opened, and along with the twittering of the birds, the budding of
the trees, and the clattering of the truck, comes the news that the Mets were beaten yesterday 17 to
5. It is an infallible sign of spring when the Mets are beaten 17 to 5, and we invariably put on our
thinner clothing when we read that refreshing, though perennial news in the papers. [Life, May 12,
1887]    Used variously to abbreviate other proper names beginning with Metropolitan, such as
Metropolitan Museum of Art (N.Y.), by 1919; Metropolitan Railway (stock), by 1890; Metropolitan
Opera Company (N.Y.), by 1922. Related: Mets.


Xmas (n.)

Christmas, 1551, X'temmas, wherein the X is an abbreviation for Christ in Christmas, English letter
X being identical in form (but not sound signification) to Greek chi, the first letter of Greek
Christos Christ (see Christ). The earlier way to abbreviate the word in English was Xp- or Xr-
(corresponding to the Chr- in Greek &#935;&#961;&#953;&#963;&#964;&#959;&#962;), and the form Xres
m&aelig;sse for Christmas appears in the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle (c.1100).


meme (n.)

1976, introduced by evolutionary biologist Richard Dawkins in The Selfish Gene, coined by him from
Greek sources, such as mimeisthai to imitate (see mime), and intended to echo gene.    We need a
name for the new replicator, a noun that conveys the idea of a unit of cultural transmission, or a
unit of imitation. 'Mimeme' comes from a suitable Greek root, but I want a monosyllable that sounds
a bit like 'gene'. I hope my classicist friends will forgive me if I abbreviate mimeme to meme. If
it is any consolation, it could alternatively be thought of as being related to 'memory', or to the
French word m&#234;me. It should be pronounced to rhyme with 'cream'. [Richard Dawkins, The Selfish
Gene, 1976]


