abide (v.)

Old English abidan, gebidan remain, wait, delay, remain behind, from ge- completive prefix (denoting
onward motion; see a- (1)) + bidan bide, remain, wait, dwell (see bide). Originally intransitive
(with genitive of the object: we abidon his we waited for him); transitive sense emerged in Middle
English. Meaning to put up with (now usually negative) first recorded 1520s. Related: Abided;
abiding. The historical conjugation is abide, abode, abidden, but the modern formation is now
generally weak.


abode (n.)

mid-13c., action of waiting, verbal noun identical with Old English abad, past participle of abiden
to abide (see abide), used as a verbal noun. The present-to-preterite vowel change is consistent
with an Old English class I strong verb (ride/rode, etc.). Meaning habitual residence is first
attested 1570s.


compromise (n.)

early 15c., a joint promise to abide by an arbiter's decision, from Middle French compromis (13c.),
from Latin compromissus, past participle of compromittere to make a mutual promise (to abide by the
arbiter's decision), from com- together (see com-) + promittere (see promise). The main modern sense
of a coming to terms is from extension to the settlement itself (late 15c.).


abiding (adj.)

late 14c., enduring, present participle adjective from abide (v.).


abidance (n.)

1640s, from abide + -ance.


sagebrush (n.)

1850, from sage (n.1), to which it has no biological affinity, + brush (n.2). Said to be so called
for resemblance of its appearance or odor.    Sage-brush is very fair fuel, but as a vegetable it is
a distinguished failure. Nothing can abide the taste of it but the jackass and his illegitimate
child, the mule. [Mark Twain, Roughing It]


Menelaeus

king of Sparta, husband of Helen, brother of Agamemnon, Latinized form of Greek Menelaos, literally
restraining the people, from menein to stay, abide, remain + laos people (see lay (adj.)).


obsess (v.)

c.1500, to besiege, from Latin obsessus, past participle of obsidere watch closely; besiege, occupy;
stay, remain, abide literally sit opposite to, from ob against (see ob-) + sedere sit (see
sedentary). Of evil spirits, to haunt, from 1530s. Psychological sense is 20c. Related: Obsessed;
obsessing.


persist (v.)

1530s, from Middle French persister (14c.), from Latin persistere abide, continue steadfastly, from
per- thoroughly (see per) + sistere come to stand, cause to stand still (see assist). Related:
Persisted; persisting.


manor (n.)

late 13c., mansion, habitation, country residence, principal house of an estate, from Anglo-French
maner, Old French manoir abode, home, dwelling place; manor (12c.), noun use of maneir to dwell,
from Latin manere to stay, abide, from PIE root *men- to remain (see mansion). As a unit of
territorial division in Britain and some American colonies (usually land held in demesne by a lord,
with tenants) it is attested from 1530s.


subsist (v.)

1540s, to exist; c.1600, retain the existing state, from Middle French subsister and directly from
Latin subsistere to stand still or firm, take a stand, take position; abide, hold out, from sub
under, up to (see sub-) + sistere to assume a standing position, stand still, remain; set, place,
cause to stand still (see assist (v.)). Meaning to support oneself (in a certain way) is from 1640s.
Related: Subsisted; subsisting.


remain (v.)

early 15c., from Anglo-French remayn-, Old French remain-, stressed stem of remanoir stay, dwell,
remain; be left; hold out, from Latin remanere to remain, to stay behind; be left behind; endure,
abide, last (source also of Spanish remaner, Italian rimanere), from re- back (see re-) + manere to
stay, remain (see mansion). Related: Remained; remaining.


mansion (n.)

mid-14c., chief residence of a lord, from Old French mansion stay, permanent abode, house,
habitation, home; mansion; state, situation (13c.), from Latin mansionem (nominative mansio) a
staying, a remaining, night quarters, station, noun of action from past participle stem of manere to
stay, abide, from PIE *men- to remain, wait for (cognates: Greek menein to remain, Persian mandan to
remain). Sense of any large and stately house is from 1510s. The word also was used in Middle
English as a stop or stage of a journey, hence probably astrological sense temporary home (late
14c.).


was (v.)

Old English wesan, w&aelig;s, w&aelig;ron 1st and 3rd person singular of wesan to remain, from
Proto-Germanic *was- (cognates: Old Saxon wesan, Old Norse vesa, Old Frisian wesa, Middle Dutch
wesen, Dutch wezen, Old High German wesen being, existence, Gothic wisan to be), from PIE root *wes-
(3) remain, abide, live, dwell (cognates Sanskrit vasati he dwells, stays; compare vestal). Wesan
was a distinct verb in Old English, but it came to supply the past tense of am. This probably began
to develop in Proto-Germanic, because it is also the case in Gothic and Old Norse. See be.


bide (v.)

Old English bidan to stay, continue, live, remain, also to trust, rely (cognate with Old Norse
bi&eth;a, Old Saxon bidan, Old Frisian bidia, Middle Dutch biden, Old High German bitan, Gothic
beidan to wait), apparently from PIE *bheidh-, an extended stem of one root of Old English biddan
(see bid (v.)), the original sense of which was to command, and to trust (compare Greek peithein to
persuade, pistis faith; Latin fidere to trust, foedus compact, treaty, Old Church Slavonic beda
need). Perhaps the sense evolved in prehistoric times through endure, and endure a wait, to to wait.
Preserved in Scotland and northern England, replaced elsewhere by abide in all senses except to bide
one's time. Related: Bided; biding.


stay (v.1)

mid-15c., cease going forward, come to a halt, also (transitive) detain, hold back, from Old French
estai-, stem of estare to stay or stand, from Latin stare to stand, stand still, remain standing; be
upright, be erect; stand firm, stand in battle; abide; be unmovable; be motionless; remain, tarry,
linger; take a side, (source also of Italian stare, Spanish estar to stand, to be), from PIE root
*sta- to stand (see stet). Sense of remain is first recorded 1570s; that of reside as a guest for a
short period is from 1550s. Related: Stayed; staying.    Of things, remain in place, 1590s. Stay put
is first recorded 1843, American English. To stay put is to keep still, remain in order. A vulgar
expression [Bartlett]. Phrase stay the course is originally (1885) in reference to horses holding
out till the end of a race. Stay-stomach was (1800) a snack.


son of a bitch

1707 as a direct phrase, but implied much earlier, and Old Norse had bikkju-sonr. Abbreviated form
SOB from 1918; form sumbitch attested in writing by 1969.    Abide &thorn;ou &thorn;ef malicious!
Biche-sone &thorn;ou drawest amis  &thorn;ou schalt abigge it ywis!  [Of Arthour &amp; of Merlin,
c.1330]    Probably the most common American vulgarity from about the middle of the eighteenth
century to the middle of the twentieth [Rawson].     Our maid-of-all-work in that department
[indecency] is son-of-a-bitch, which seems as pale and ineffectual to a Slav or a Latin as fudge
does to us. There is simply no lift in it, no shock, no sis-boom-ah. The dumbest policeman in
Palermo thinks of a dozen better ones between breakfast and the noon whistle. [H.L. Mencken, The
American Language, 4th ed., 1936, p.317-8]    Elsewhere, complaining of the tepidity of the American
vocabulary of profanity, Mencken writes that the toned-down form son-of-a-gun is so lacking in punch
that the Italians among us have borrowed it as a satirical name for an American: la sanemagogna is
what they call him, and by it they indicate their contempt for his backwardness in the art that is
one of their great glories.    It was in 1934 also that the New York Daily News, with commendable
frankness, in reporting a hearing in Washington at which Senator Huey P. Long featured, forsook the
old-time dashes and abbreviations and printed the complete epithet son of a bitch. [Stanley Walker,
City Editor, 1934]


stand (v.)

Old English standan occupy a place; stand firm; congeal; stay, continue, abide; be valid, be, exist,
take place; oppose, resist attack; stand up, be on one's feet; consist, amount to (class VI strong
verb; past tense stod, past participle standen), from Proto-Germanic *sta-n-d- (cognates: Old Norse
standa, Old Saxon and Gothic standan, Old High German stantan, parallel with simpler forms, such as
Swedish st&#229;, Dutch staan, German stehen [see discussion in OED]), from PIE root *sta- to stand
(see stet).    Sense of to exist, be present is attested from c.1300. Meaning encounter without
flinching is from 1590s; weaker sense of put up with is from 1620s. Meaning to submit (to chances,
etc.) is from c.1700. Meaning to pay for as a treat is from 1821. Meaning become a candidate for
office is from 1550s. Nautical sense of hold a course at sea is from 1620s. Meaning to be so high
when standing is from 1831.   Stand back keep (one's) distance is from c.1400. Phrase stand pat is
from poker (1882), earlier simply stand (1824 in other card games). To stand down is from 1680s,
originally of witnesses in court; in the military sense of come off duty it is first recorded 1916.
To let (something) stand is from c.1200. To stand for is c.1300 as count for; early 14c. as be
considered in lieu of; late 14c. as represent by way of sign; sense of tolerate first recorded
1620s. Phrase stands to reason (1620) is from earlier stands (is constant) with reason.


