abjection (n.)

early 15c., from Old French abjection (14c.), from Latin abjectionem (nominative abjectio)
dejection, despondency, literally a throwing away, noun of action from past participle stem of
abicere (see abject).


abject (adj.)

early 15c., cast off, rejected, from Latin abiectus, past participle of abicere to throw away, cast
off; degrade, humble, lower, from ab- away, off (see ab-) + iacere to throw (past participle iactus;
see jet (v.)). Figurative sense of downcast, brought low first attested 1510s. Related: Abjectly;
abjectness.


stick-in-the-mud (n.)

1852, from verbal phrase, stick (v.) on notion of one who sticks in the mud, hence one who is
content to remain in an abject condition. The phrase appears in 1730, in city of London court
records, as the alias of an accused named John Baker, who with two other men received a death
sentence at the Old Bailey in December 1733 for breaking open the House of Mr. Thomas Rayner, a
Silversmith, and stealing thence Plate to a great Value.


lickspittle (n.)

also lick-spittle, sycophant, abject toady, 1741, from lick (v.1) + spittle.


worm (n.)

Old English wurm, variant of wyrm serpent, snake, dragon, reptile, also in later Old English
earthworm, from Proto-Germanic *wurmiz (cognates: Old Saxon, Old High German, German wurm, Old
Frisian and Dutch worm, Old Norse ormr, Gothic waurms serpent, worm), from PIE *wrmi- worm
(cognates: Greek rhomos, Latin vermis worm, Old Russian vermie insects, Lithuanian varmas insect,
gnat), probably from root *wer- (3) turn (see versus).    The ancient category of these was much
more extensive than the modern, scientific, one and included serpents, scorpions, maggots, and the
supposed causes of certain diseases. For substitution of -o- for -u-, see come. As an insult meaning
abject, miserable person it dates from Old English. Worms any disease arising from the presence of
parasitic worms is from late Old English. Can of worms figurative for difficult problem is from
1951, from the literal can of worms a fisherman might bring with him, on the image of something all
tangled up.


