abnormality (n.)

quality of being abnormal, 1854; abnormal feature or quality, 1859, from abnormal + -ity. Earlier as
abnormity (1731).


abnormal (adj.)

1835, displaced older abnormous (1742) and rival anormal (1835) under influence of Latin abnormis
deviating from a rule, from ab- off, away from (see ab-) + norma rule (see norm). The older forms
were via Old French anormal (13c.), from Medieval Latin anormalos, from Greek anomalos, from an- not
+ homalos, from homos same. The Greek word was altered in Latin by association with norma. Related:
Abnormally.


monster (n.)

early 14c., malformed animal or human, creature afflicted with a birth defect, from Old French
monstre, mostre monster, monstrosity (12c.), and directly from Latin monstrum divine omen, portent,
sign; abnormal shape; monster, monstrosity, figuratively repulsive character, object of dread, awful
deed, abomination, from root of monere warn (see monitor (n.)). Abnormal or prodigious animals were
regarded as signs or omens of impending evil. Extended by late 14c. to imaginary animals composed of
parts of creatures (centaur, griffin, etc.). Meaning animal of vast size is from 1520s; sense of
person of inhuman cruelty or wickedness is from 1550s. As an adjective, of extraordinary size, from
1837. In Old English, the monster Grendel was an agl&aelig;ca, a word related to agl&aelig;c
calamity, terror, distress, oppression.


tappet (n.)

machine part, 1745, apparently from tap (v.1) + -et, but the use of the suffix is abnormal [OED].


anomalo-

word-forming element meaning deviating from the usual, abnormal, from comb. form of Greek anomalos
uneven, irregular (see anomaly).


mononucleosis (n.)

1920, coined from mononuclear + Modern Latin -osis abnormal condition.


-phyte

word-forming element meaning plant, plant characteristic; planting, growth; abnormal growth, from
Greek phyton plant (see phyto-).


dysfunction (n.)

1916, from dys- bad, abnormal, difficult + function (n.).


tobacconist (n.)

dealer in tobacco, 1650s, from tobacco + -ist + abnormal inserted consonant; earlier meaning was
person addicted to tobacco (1590s).


necrophobia (n.)

abnormal fear of death or corpses, 1833, from necro- + -phobia fear. Related: Necrophobic.


-philia

word-forming element meaning friendship, fondness, tendency toward, and in recent use abnormal
attraction to, from Greek philia affection, from philos loving, of uncertain origin. Related:
-philic.


dystopia (n.)

imaginary bad place, 1868, apparently coined by J.S. Mill (Hansard Commons), from Greek dys- bad,
abnormal, difficult (see dys-) + utopia. Related: Dystopian.


defibrillation (n.)

1940, in reference to heartbeat, from de- + fibrillation a beating in an abnormal way, from Modern
Latin fibrilla, diminutive of fibra fiber, in reference to the muscle strands of the heart that
contract irregularly in this condition.


neurosis (n.)

1776, functional derangement arising from disorders of the nervous system, coined by Scottish
physician William Cullen (1710-1790) from Greek neuron nerve (see neuro-) + Modern Latin -osis
abnormal condition. Used in a general psychological sense since 1871; clinical use in psychiatry
dates from 1923.


microtia (n.)

abnormal smallness of the ear, 1881, Medical Latin, from micro- + Greek ous (genitive otos) ear (see
ear (n.)).


psychosis (n.)

1847, mental derangement, Modern Latin, from Greek psykhe- mind (see psyche) + -osis abnormal
condition. Greek psykhosis meant a giving of life; animation; principle of life.


trauma (n.)

1690s, physical wound, medical Latin, from Greek trauma a wound, a hurt; a defeat, from PIE *trau-,
extended form of root *tere- (1) to rub, turn, with derivatives referring to twisting, piercing,
etc. (see throw (v.)). Sense of psychic wound, unpleasant experience which causes abnormal stress is
from 1894.


dyslexia (n.)

c.1887, from German dyslexie (1883), from Greek dys- bad, abnormal, difficult (see dys-) + lexis
word, from legein speak (see lecture (n.)). Dyslexic (n.) is first recorded 1961; dyslectic (adj.)
from 1964.


stricture (n.)

c.1400, abnormal narrowing in a body part, from Late Latin strictura contraction, constriction, from
past participle stem of stringere (2) to bind or draw tight (see strain (v.)). Sense of criticism,
critical remark is first recorded 1650s, perhaps from the other Latin word stringere to touch
lightly (see strigil).


aneuploidy (n.)

abnormal number of chromosomes, 1934, from aneuploid (1931), Modern Latin, coined 1922 by G.
T&auml;ckholm from an- (1) not + euploid, from Greek eu- well, good (see eu-) + -ploid, from ploos
fold (see -plus) + -oid.


para- (1)

before vowels, par-, word-forming element meaning alongside, beyond; altered; contrary; irregular,
abnormal, from Greek para- from para (prep.) beside, near, issuing from, against, contrary to, from
PIE *prea, from root *per- (1) forward, through (see per). Cognate with Old English for- off, away.


steatopygia (n.)

abnormal accumulation of fat on the buttocks of certain races, 1822, Modern Latin, from steato- fat,
tallow, comb. form of Greek stear (genitive steatos) solid fat, suet (see stearin) + Greek pyge
rump, buttocks. Related: Steatopygous having enormously fat buttocks [Century Dictionary];
steatopygy.


dysentery (n.)

late 14c., dissenterie, from Old French disentere (13c.), from Latin dysenteria, from Greek
dysenteria, coined by Hippocrates, from dys- bad, abnormal, difficult (see dys-) + entera
intestines, bowels (see inter-). Related: Dysenteric.


excrescence (n.)

early 15c., action of growing out, from Latin excrescentia (plural) abnormal growths, from
excrescentem (nominative excrescens), present participle of excrescere grow out, grow up, from ex-
out (see ex-) + crescere to grow (see crescent). Meaning that which grows out abnormally (on a
living thing) is from 1570s (excrescency in this sense is 1540s).


Asperger&#039;s Syndrome (n.)

1981, named for the sake of Austrian pediatrician Hans Asperger (1906-1980), who described it in
1944 (and called it autistic psychopathy; German autistischen psychopathen). A standard diagnosis
since 1992; recognition of Asperger's work was delayed, perhaps, because his school and much of his
early research were destroyed by Allied bombing in 1944.    The example of autism shows particularly
well how even abnormal personalities can be capable of development and adjustment. Possibilities of
social integration which one would never have dremt of may arise in the course of development. [Hans
Asperger, Autistic psychopathy in Childhood, 1944]


pathology (n.)

science of diseases, 1610s, from French pathologie (16c.), from medical Latin pathologia study of
disease, from Greek pathos suffering (see pathos) + -logia study (see -logy). In reference to the
study of abnormal mental conditions from 1842. Ancient Greek pathologia was study of the passions;
the Greek word for science of diseases was pathologike (pathologics).


silo (n.)

1835, from Spanish silo, traditionally derived from Latin sirum (nominative sirus), from Greek siros
a pit to keep corn in.  The change from r to l in Spanish is abnormal and Greek siros was a rare
foreign term peculiar to regions of Asia Minor and not likely to emerge in Castilian Spain
[Barnhart]. Alternatively, the Spanish word is from a pre-Roman Iberian language word represented by
Basque zilo, zulo dugout, cave or shelter for keeping grain. Meaning underground housing and launch
tube for a guided missile is attested from 1958.


dysphemism (n.)

1884, substitution of a vulgar or derogatory word or expression for a dignified or normal one, from
Greek dys- bad, abnormal, difficult (see dys-) + pheme speaking, from phanai speak (see fame (n.);
Greek dysphemia meant ill language, words of ill omen). The opposite of euphemism. Rediscovered 1933
from French formation dysph&eacute;misme (1927, Carnoy).    The French psychologist Albert J. Carnoy
gave an extensive definition in his study Le Science du Mot, which in translation runs: Dysphemism
is unpitying, brutal, mocking. It is also a reaction against pedantry, rigidity and pretentiousness,
but also against nobility and dignity in language (1927, xxii, 351). [Geoffrey L. Hughes, An
Encyclopedia of Swearing, 2006]


freak (n.)

1560s, sudden turn of mind, of unknown origin, perhaps related to Old English frician to dance (not
recorded in Middle English, but the word may have survived in dialect) [OED, Barnhart], or perhaps
from Middle English frek bold, quickly, from Old English frec greedy, gluttonous (compare German
frech bold, impudent).    Sense of capricious notion (1560s) and unusual thing, fancy (1784)
preceded that of strange or abnormal individual (first in freak of nature, 1847; compare Latin lusus
natur&#230;, which was used in English from 1660s). The sense in health freak, ecology freak, etc.
is attested from 1908 (originally Kodak freak, a camera buff). Freak show attested from 1887.


dys-

word-forming element meaning bad, ill, abnormal, from Greek dys-, inseparable prefix destroying the
good sense of a word or increasing its bad sense [Liddell &amp; Scott], bad, hard, unlucky, from PIE
root (and prefix) *dus- bad, ill, evil (cognates: Sanskrit dus-, Old Persian du&#353;- ill, Old
English to-, Old High German zur-, Gothic tuz- un-), a derivative of *deu- to lack, be wanting
(source of Greek dein to lack, want).    Very productive in ancient Greek, where it could attach
even to proper names (such as dysparis unhappy Paris); its entries take up nine columns in Liddell
and Scott. Among the words formed from it were some English might covet: dysouristos fatally
favorable, driven by a too-favorable wind; dysadelphos unhappy in one's brothers; dysagres unlucky
in fishing; dysantiblepos hard to look in the face.


marriage (n.)

c.1300, action of marrying, entry into wedlock; also state or condition of being husband and wife,
matrimony, wedlock; from Old French mariage marriage; dowry (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *maritaticum
(11c.), from Latin maritatus, past participle of maritatre to wed, marry, give in marriage (see
marry (v.)). The Vulgar Latin word also is the source of Italian maritaggio, Spanish maridaje.
Meaning a union of a man and woman for life by marriage, a particular matrimonial union is early
14c. Meanings the marriage vow, formal declaration or contract by which two join in wedlock; also a
wedding, celebration of a marriage; the marriage ceremony are from late 14c. Figurative use (non-
theological) intimate union, a joining as if by marriage is from early 15c.[W]hen two people are
under the influence of the most violent, most insane, most delusive, and most transient of passions,
they are required to swear that they will remain in that excited, abnormal, and exhausting condition
until death do them part. [G.B. Shaw, preface to Getting Married, 1908]Marriage counseling recorded
by 1939. Marriage bed, figurative of marital intercourse generally, is attested from 1580s (bed of
marriage is from early 15c.).


mad (adj.)

late 13c., from Old English gem&aelig;dde (plural) out of one's mind (usually implying also violent
excitement), also foolish, extremely stupid, earlier gem&aelig;ded rendered insane, past participle
of a lost verb *gem&aelig;dan to make insane or foolish, from Proto-Germanic *ga-maid-jan,
demonstrative form of *ga-maid-az changed (for the worse), abnormal (cognates: Old Saxon gimed
foolish, Old High German gimeit foolish, vain, boastful, Gothic gamai&thorn;s crippled, wounded, Old
Norse mei&eth;a to hurt, maim), from intensive prefix *ga- + PIE *moito-, past participle of root
*mei- (1) to change (cognates: Latin mutare to change, mutuus done in exchange, migrare to change
one's place of residence; see mutable).    Emerged in Middle English to replace the more usual Old
English word, wod (see wood (adj.)). Sense of beside oneself with excitement or enthusiasm is from
early 14c. Meaning beside oneself with anger is attested from early 14c., but deplored by Rev. John
Witherspoon (1781) as an Americanism. It now competes in American English with angry for this sense.
Of animals, affected with rabies, from late 13c. Phrase mad as a March hare is attested from 1520s,
via notion of breeding season; mad as a hatter is from 1829 as demented, 1837 as enraged, according
to a modern theory supposedly from erratic behavior caused by prolonged exposure to poison mercuric
nitrate, used in making felt hats. For mad as a wet hen see hen. Mad money is attested from 1922;
mad scientist is from 1891.


