abode (n.)

mid-13c., action of waiting, verbal noun identical with Old English abad, past participle of abiden
to abide (see abide), used as a verbal noun. The present-to-preterite vowel change is consistent
with an Old English class I strong verb (ride/rode, etc.). Meaning habitual residence is first
attested 1570s.


Himalaya

from Sanskrit himalayah, literally abode of snow, from hima snow (see hibernation) + alaya abode.
Related: Himalayas; Himalayan.


Olympus

high mountain in Thessaly, abode of the gods, from Greek Olympos, of unknown origin.  The name was
given to several mountains, each seemingly the highest in its district.


vagrant (n.)

mid-15c., person who lacks regular employment, one without fixed abode, a tramp, probably from
Anglo-French vageraunt, also wacrant, walcrant, which is said in many sources to be a noun use of
the past participle of Old French walcrer to wander, from Frankish (Germanic) *walken, from the same
source as Old Norse valka wander and English walk (v.).    Under this theory the word was influenced
by Old French vagant, vagaunt wandering, from Latin vagantem (nominative vagans), past participle of
vagari to wander, stroll about (see vagary). But on another theory the Anglo-French word ultimately
is from Old French vagant, with an intrusive -r-. Middle English also had vagaunt wandering, without
fixed abode (late 14c.), from Old French vagant.


gashouse (n.)

1880 as a power-generating station, from gas (n.) + house (n.). By 1926, emblematic of a run-down
district of a U.S. city, a typical abode of gangsters.


Elysium (n.)

1590s, from Latin Elysium, from Greek Elysion (pedion) abode of the blessed (see Elysian).


shadowland (n.)

also shadow-land, 1821, abode of ghosts and spirits, from shadow (n.) + land (n.). From 1923 as
indeterminate place.


Nepal

from Sanskrit Nepala, said to be from nipat to fly down (from ni down + pat to fly) + alaya abode,
house. If this is right, the reference would be to villages in mountain vales. Related: Nepalese.


habitation (n.)

late 14c., act or fact of dwelling; also place of lodging, abode, from Old French habitacion,
abitacion act of dwelling (12c.) or directly from Latin habitationem (nominative habitatio) act of
dwelling, noun of action from past participle stem of habitare to inhabit, dwell (see habitat).


Cockaigne (n.)

c.1300, from Old French Cocaigne (12c.) lubberland, imaginary country, abode of luxury and idleness.
Of obscure origin, speculation centers on words related to cook (v.) and cake (compare Middle Dutch
kokenje, a child's honey-sweetened treat; also compare Big Rock Candy Mountain). The German
equivalent is Schlaraffenland.


fortunate (adj.)

late 14c., from Latin fortunatus prospered, prosperous; lucky, happy, past participle of fortunare
to make prosperous, from fortuna (see fortune). Fortunate Islands mythical abode of the blessed
dead, in the Western Ocean, early 15c., translates Latin Fortunatae Insulae.


Midgard

in Germanic cosmology, world inhabited by men (opposed to Asgard, the abode of the gods), 1882, from
Old Norse mi&eth;gar&eth;r, from mi&eth; mid (see mid) + Proto-Germanic *gardoz enclosure, tract
(see yard (n.1)). The Old English cognate was middangeard, which later was folk-etymologized as
middle earth (late 13c.).


see (n.)

c.1300, throne of a bishop, archbishop, or pope, also throne of a monarch, a goddess, Antichrist,
etc., from Old French sie seat, throne; town, capital; episcopal see, from Latin sedem (nominative
sedes) seat, throne, abode, temple, related to sedere to sit (see sedentary). Early 14c. as
administrative center of a bishopric; c.1400 as province under the jurisdiction of a bishop.


Olympic (adj.)

c.1600, of or in reference to Mount Olympos, also to Olympia (khora), town or district in Elis in
ancient Greece, where athletic contests in honor of Olympian Zeus were held 776 B.C.E. and every
four years thereafter; from Greek Olympikos, from Olympos, of unknown origin. The modern Olympic
Games are a revival, begun in 1896. Not the same place as Mount Olympus, abode of the gods, which
was in Thessaly.


empyrean (n.)

mid-14c. (as empyre), from Greek empyros fiery, from en (see en- (2)) + pyr fire (see fire (n.));
confused by early writers with imperial. In Greek cosmology, the highest heaven, the sphere of pure
fire; later baptized with a Christian gloss as the abode of God and the angels.


etagere (n.)

1858, from French &eacute;tag&egrave;re (15c.), from &eacute;tage shelf, story, abode, stage, floor
(11c., Old French estage), from Vulgar Latin *staticum, from Latin statio station, post, residence
(see station (n.)).


chalet (n.)

1782, from Swiss-French chalet herdsman's hut, Alpine cottage, probably a diminutive of Old French
chasel farmhouse, house, abode, hut, perhaps from Vulgar Latin *casalis belonging to a house, from
Latin casa house; or from Old Proven&ccedil;al cala small shelter for ships, from a pre-Latin
language [Barnhart].


manor (n.)

late 13c., mansion, habitation, country residence, principal house of an estate, from Anglo-French
maner, Old French manoir abode, home, dwelling place; manor (12c.), noun use of maneir to dwell,
from Latin manere to stay, abide, from PIE root *men- to remain (see mansion). As a unit of
territorial division in Britain and some American colonies (usually land held in demesne by a lord,
with tenants) it is attested from 1530s.


Parnassus (n.)

late 14c., from Latin, from Greek Parnassos, mountain in central Greece, sacred to Apollo and the
Muses, thus symbolic of poetry. Room writes that the name is from Hittite parna abode. Related:
Parnassian.    Various kinds of literary fame seem destined to various measures of duration. Some
spread into exuberance with a very speedy growth, but soon wither and decay; some rise more slowly,
but last long. Parnassus has its flowers of transient fragrance, as well as its oaks of towering
height, and its laurels of eternal verdure. [Samuel Johnson, The Rambler, March 23, 1751]


Utgard

abode of the giants in Norse mythology, from Old Norse Utgar&eth;ar, from ut out (see out (adv.)) +
gar&eth;r yard (see yard (n.1)).


seat (n.2)

residence, abode, established place, late 13c., extended use of seat (n.1), influenced by Old French
siege seat, established place, and Latin sedes seat. Meaning city in which a government sits is
attested from c.1400. Sense of right of taking a place in a parliament or other legislative body is
attested from 1774. Old English had s&aelig;t place where one sits in ambush, which also meant
residents, inhabitants, and is the source of the -set in Dorset and Somerset.


garret (n.)

c.1300, turret, small tower on the roof of a house or castle, from Old French garite watchtower,
place of refuge, from garir defend, preserve, from a Germanic source (compare Gothic warjan forbid,
Old High German warjan to defend), from Proto-Germanic *warjan, from PIE root *wer- (5) to cover
(see warrant (n.)). Meaning room on uppermost floor of a house is from early 14c. See attic. As the
typical wretched abode of a poor poet, by mid-18c.


tabernacle (n.)

mid-13c., portable sanctuary carried by the Israelites in the wilderness, from Old French tabernacle
the Jewish Tabernacle; tent, canopy; tomb, monument (12c.), from Latin tabernaculum tent, especially
a tent of an augur (for taking observations), diminutive of taberna hut, cabin, booth (see tavern).
Use of the word in English transferred late 14c. to the Temple in Jerusalem (which continued its
function). Sense of house of worship first recorded 1690s. Also in Biblical language, the body as
the temporary abode of the soul (late 14c.). The Jewish Feast of Tabernacles (mid-October) was
observed as a thanksgiving for harvest. Related: Tabernacular.


pit (n.1)

hole, cavity, Old English pytt water hole, well; pit, grave, from Proto-Germanic *puttjaz pool,
puddle (cognates: Old Frisian pet, Old Saxon putti, Old Norse pyttr, Middle Dutch putte, Dutch put,
Old High German pfuzza, German Pf&uuml;tze pool, puddle), early borrowing from Latin puteus well,
pit, shaft. Meaning abode of evil spirits, hell is attested from early 13c. Pit of the stomach
(1650s) is from the slight depression there between the ribs.


abide (v.)

Old English abidan, gebidan remain, wait, delay, remain behind, from ge- completive prefix (denoting
onward motion; see a- (1)) + bidan bide, remain, wait, dwell (see bide). Originally intransitive
(with genitive of the object: we abidon his we waited for him); transitive sense emerged in Middle
English. Meaning to put up with (now usually negative) first recorded 1520s. Related: Abided;
abiding. The historical conjugation is abide, abode, abidden, but the modern formation is now
generally weak.


mansion (n.)

mid-14c., chief residence of a lord, from Old French mansion stay, permanent abode, house,
habitation, home; mansion; state, situation (13c.), from Latin mansionem (nominative mansio) a
staying, a remaining, night quarters, station, noun of action from past participle stem of manere to
stay, abide, from PIE *men- to remain, wait for (cognates: Greek menein to remain, Persian mandan to
remain). Sense of any large and stately house is from 1510s. The word also was used in Middle
English as a stop or stage of a journey, hence probably astrological sense temporary home (late
14c.).


wick (n.2)

dairy farm, now surviving, if at all, as a localism in East Anglia or Essex, it was once the common
Old English wic dwelling place, lodging, house, mansion, abode, then coming to mean village, hamlet,
town, and later dairy farm (as in Gatwick Goat-farm). Common in this latter sense 13c.-14c. The word
is from a general Germanic borrowing from Latin vicus group of dwellings, village; a block of
houses, a street, a group of streets forming an administrative unit (see vicinity). Compare Old High
German wih village, German Weichbild municipal area, Dutch wijk quarter, district, Old Frisian wik,
Old Saxon wic village.


settle (n.)

long bench, 1550s, from Middle English setle a seat, from Old English setl a seat, stall; position,
abode; setting of a heavenly body, related to sittan to sit, from Proto-Germanic *setla- (cognates:
Middle Low German, Middle Dutch setel, Dutch zetel, German Sessel, Gothic sitls), from PIE *sedla-
(cognates: Latin sella seat, chair, Old Church Slavonic sedlo saddle, Old English sadol saddle),
from root *sed- (1) to sit (see sedentary).


stance (n.)

1530s, standing place, station, probably from Middle French stance resting place, harbor (16c.),
from Vulgar Latin *stantia place, abode (also source of Italian stanza stopping place, station,
stanza, Spanish stancia a dwelling), from Latin stans (genitive stantis), present participle of
stare to stand, from PIE root *sta- to stand (see stet). Sense of position of the feet (in golf,
etc.) is first recorded 1897; figurative sense of point of view is recorded from 1956. The sense of
the French word has since narrowed.


hole (n.)

Old English hol orifice, hollow place, cave, perforation, from Proto-Germanic *hul (cognates: Old
Saxon, Old Frisian, Old High German hol, Middle Dutch hool, Old Norse holr, German hohl hollow,
Gothic us-hulon to hollow out), from PIE root *kel- (2) to cover, conceal (see cell).    As a
contemptuous word for small dingy lodging or abode it is attested from 1610s. Meaning a fix, scrape,
mess is from 1760. Obscene slang use for vulva is implied from mid-14c. Hole in the wall small and
unpretentious place is from 1822; to hole up first recorded 1875. To need (something) like a hole in
the head, applied to something useless or detrimental, first recorded 1944 in entertainment
publications, probably a translation of a Yiddish expression such as ich darf es vi a loch in kop.


celestial (adj.)

late 14c., pertaining to heaven, from Old French celestial celestial, heavenly, sky-blue, from Latin
caelestis heavenly, pertaining to the sky, from caelum heaven, sky; abode of the gods; climate, of
uncertain origin; perhaps from PIE *kaid-slo-, perhaps from a root also found in Germanic and Baltic
meaning bright, clear (compare Lithuanian skaidrus shining, clear; Old English hador, German heiter
clear, shining, cloudless, Old Norse hei&#240; clear sky).    The Latin word is the source of the
usual word for sky in most of the Romance languages, such as French ciel, Spanish cielo, Italian
cielo. General sense of heavenly, very delightful in English is from early 15c.


migration (n.)

1610s, of persons, 1640s of animals, from Latin migrationem (nominative migratio) a removal, change
of abode, migration, noun of action from past participle stem of migrare to move from one place to
another, probably originally *migwros, from PIE *meigw- (source of Greek ameibein to change), from
root *mei- (1) to change, go, move (see mutable). Related: Migrational.    That European birds
migrate across the seas or to Asia was understood in the Middle Ages, but subsequently forgotten.
Dr. Johnson held that swallows slept all winter in the beds of rivers, while the naturalist Morton
(1703) stated that they migrated to the moon. As late as 1837 the Kendal Mercury detailed the
circumstance of a person having observed several Swallows emerging from Grasmere Lake, in the spring
of that year, in the form of 'bell-shaped bubbles,' from each of which a Swallow burst forth ....


sedentary (adj.)

1590s, remaining in one place, from Middle French s&#233;dentaire (16c.) and directly from Latin
sedentarius sitting, remaining in one place, from sedentem (nominative sedens), present participle
of sedere to sit; occupy an official seat, preside; sit still, remain; be fixed or settled, from PIE
root *sed- (1) to sit (cognates: Sanskrit a-sadat sat down, sidati sits; Old Persian hadis abode;
Greek ezesthai to sit, hedra seat, chair, face of a geometric solid; Old Irish suide seat, sitting;
Welsh sedd seat, eistedd sitting; Old Church Slavonic se&#382;da, sedeti to sit; Lithuanian sedmi to
sit; Russian sad garden, Lithuanian soditi to plant; Gothic sitan, Old English sittan to sit; see
sit). Of persons, the sense not in the habit of exercise is recorded from 1660s.


cracker (n.2)

Southern U.S. derogatory term for poor, white trash (1766), probably an agent noun from crack (v.)
in the sense to boast (as in not what it's cracked up to be). Compare Latin crepare to rattle,
crack, creak, with a secondary figurative sense of boast of, prattle, make ado about.I should
explain to your Lordship what is meant by crackers; a name they have got from being great boasters;
they are a lawless set of rascalls on the frontiers of Virginia, Maryland, the Carolinas and
Georgia, who often change their places of abode. [1766, G. Cochrane]  But DARE compares corn-cracker
poor white farmer (1835, U.S. Midwest colloquial). Especially of Georgians by 1808, though often
extended to residents of northern Florida. Another name in mid-19c. use was sand-hiller poor white
in Georgia or South Carolina.    Not very essentially different is the condition of a class of
people living in the pine-barrens nearest the coast [of South Carolina], as described to me by a
rice-planter. They seldom have any meat, he said, except they steal hogs, which belong to the
planters, or their negroes, and their chief diet is rice and milk. They are small, gaunt, and
cadaverous, and their skin is just the color of the sand-hills they live on. They are quite
incapable of applying themselves steadily to any labor, and their habits are very much like those of
the old Indians. [Frederick Law Olmsted, A Journey in the Seaboard Slave States, 1856]


hell (n.)

Old English hel, helle, nether world, abode of the dead, infernal regions, from Proto-Germanic
*haljo the underworld (cognates: f. Old Frisian helle, Dutch hel, Old Norse hel, German H&ouml;lle,
Gothic halja hell) the underworld, literally concealed place (compare Old Norse hellir cave,
cavern), from PIE *kel- (2) to cover, conceal (see cell).    The English word may be in part from
Old Norse Hel (from Proto-Germanic *halija one who covers up or hides something), in Norse mythology
the name of Loki's daughter, who rules over the evil dead in Niflheim, the lowest of all worlds
(nifl mist). Transfer of a pagan concept and word to a Christian idiom. In Middle English, also of
the Limbus Patrum, place where the Patriarchs, Prophets, etc. awaited the Atonement. Used in the KJV
for Old Testament Hebrew Sheol and New Testament Greek Hades, Gehenna. Used figuratively for state
of misery, any bad experience since at least late 14c. As an expression of disgust, etc., first
recorded 1670s.    Expression Hell in a handbasket is attested by 1867, in a context implying use
from a few years before, and the notion of going to Heaven in a handbasket is from 1853, with a
sense of easy passage to the destination. Hell or high water (1874) apparently is a variation of
between the devil and the deep blue sea. To wish someone would go to hell is in Shakespeare
(Merchant of Venice). Snowball's chance in hell no chance is from 1931; till hell freezes over never
is from 1832. To ride hell for leather is from 1889, originally with reference to riding on
horseback. Hell on wheels is said to be from 1843 in DAS; popularity dates from 1869 in reference to
the temporary workers' towns along the U.S. transcontinental railroad and their vices.


world (n.)

Old English woruld, worold human existence, the affairs of life, also a long period of time, also
the human race, mankind, humanity, a word peculiar to Germanic languages (cognates: Old Saxon
werold, Old Frisian warld, Dutch wereld, Old Norse verold, Old High German weralt, German Welt),
with a literal sense of age of man, from Proto-Germanic *wer man (Old English wer, still in
werewolf; see virile) + *ald age (see old).    Originally life on earth, this world (as opposed to
the afterlife), sense extended to the known world, then to the physical world in the broadest sense,
the universe (c.1200). In Old English gospels, the commonest word for the physical world, was
Middangeard (Old Norse Midgard), literally the middle enclosure (see yard (n.1)), which is rooted in
Germanic cosmology. Greek kosmos in its ecclesiastical sense of world of people sometimes was
rendered in Gothic as manase&thorn;s, literally seed of man. The usual Old Norse word was heimr,
literally abode (see home). Words for world in some other Indo-European languages derive from the
root for bottom, foundation (such as Irish domun, Old Church Slavonic duno, related to English
deep); the Lithuanian word is pasaulis, from pa- under + saule sun.    Original sense in world
without end, translating Latin saecula saeculorum, and in worldly. Latin saeculum can mean both age
and world, as can Greek aion. Meaning a great quantity or number is from 1580s. Out of this world
surpassing, marvelous is from 1928; earlier it meant dead. World Cup is by 1951; U.S. baseball World
Series is by 1893 (originally often World's Series). World power in the geopolitical sense first
recorded 1900. World-class is attested from 1950, originally of Olympic athletes.


