abolish (v.)

mid-15c., from Middle French aboliss-, present participle stem of abolir to abolish (15c.), from
Latin abolere destroy, cause to die out, retard the growth of, perhaps from ab- from (see ab-) +
adolere to grow, from PIE *ol-eye-, causative of root *al- to grow, nourish (see old), and perhaps
formed as an antonym to adolere. But the Latin word rather could be from a root in common with Greek
ollymi, apollymi destroy. Tucker writes that there has been a confusion of forms in Latin, based on
similar roots, one meaning to grow, the other to destroy. Application to persons and concrete
objects has long been obsolete. Related: Abolished; abolishing.


rescission (n.)

1610s, action of cutting off; 1650s, action of annulling, from Late Latin rescissionem (nominative
rescisio) annulment, noun of action from past participle stem of rescindere to cut off; abolish (see
rescind).


abolition (n.)

1520s, from Middle French abolition or directly from Latin abolitionem (nominative abolitio) an
abolition, noun of action from past participle stem of abolere destroy (see abolish). Specific
application to opposition to the black slave trade as a political question is first attested 1788.


rescind (v.)

1630s, from French rescinder cut off, cancel (15c.), and directly from Latin rescindere to cut off,
tear off, abolish, from re- back (see re-) + scindere to cut, split (see shed (v.)). Related:
Rescinded; rescinding.


mirepoix (n.)

in cookery, 1815, from French, evidently named for Charles Pierre Gaston Fran&#231;ois, duc de
Mirepoix (1699-1757), French diplomat. The concoction supposedly created by his head chef and named
in his honor during the reign of Louis XV, one of the grand epochs of French cookery, when it was
the style of the aristocracy to have dishes named in their honor.    MIREPOIX.--It is probable that
one of these days the common sense of mankind will rise in rebellion against this word and abolish
it. What is the Duke of Mirepoix to us because his wife was amiable to Louis XV.?    If she be not
fair to me,  What care I how fair she be?    The Duke of Mirepoix made himself convenient to the
king, and his name is now convenient to the people--the convenient name for the faggot of vegetables
that flavours a stew or a sauce. [Kettner's Book of the Table, London, 1877]


admonish (v.)

mid-14c., amonesten remind, urge, exhort, warn, give warning, from Old French amonester (12c.) urge,
encourage, warn, from Vulgar Latin *admonestare, from Latin admonere bring to mind, remind, suggest;
also warn, advise, urge, from ad- to (see ad-) + monere advise, warn (see monitor (n.)).    The -d-
was restored on Latin model. The ending was influenced by words in -ish (such as astonish, abolish).
Related: Admonished; admonishing.


