abominable (adj.)

mid-14c., from Old French abominable (12c.) and directly from Late Latin abominabilis deserving
abhorrence, from stem of Latin abominari deplore as an evil omen (see abomination). Sometimes
misdivided in earlier centuries as a bominable. Also often abhominable 14c.-17c. Related:
Abominably.


abominable snowman (n.)

1921, translating Tibetan meetaoh kangmi.


yeti (n.)

1937, from Sherpa (Tibetan) yeh-teh small manlike animal. Compare abominable snowman.


detestable (adj.)

early 15c., from Middle French d&eacute;testable (14c.), from Latin detestabilis execrable,
abominable, from detestari (see detest). Related: Detestably.


nameless (adj.)

early 14c., undistinguished, from name (n.) + -less. Meaning having no name is early 15c.; that of
too abominable to be named is from 1610s. Similar formation in Dutch naamloos, German namenlos.
Related: Namelessly; namelessness.


nefarious (adj.)

c.1600, from Latin nefarius wicked, abominable, impious, from nefas crime, wrong, impiety, from ne-
not (see un-) + fas right, lawful, divinely spoken, related to fari to speak (see fame (n.)).
Related: Nefariously.


powerful (adj.)

c.1400, from power (n.) + -ful. Meaning of great quality or number is from 1811; colloquial sense of
exceedingly (adv.) is from 1822. Related: Powerfully. Thornton (American Glossary) notes powerful as
Much used by common people in the sense of very, along with monstrous and cites curious expressions
such as devilish good, monstrous pretty (1799), dreadful polite, cruel pretty, abominable fine
(1803), or when a young lady admires a lap dog for being so vastly small and declares him prodigious
handsome (1799).


perversion (n.)

late 14c., action of turning aside from truth, corruption, distortion (originally of religious
beliefs), from Latin perversionem (nominative perversio) a turning about, noun of action from past
participle stem of pervertere (see pervert (v.)). Psychological sense of disorder of sexual behavior
in which satisfaction is sought through channels other than those of normal heterosexual intercourse
is from 1892, originally including homosexuality.Perversions are defined as unnatural acts, acts
contrary to nature, bestial, abominable, and detestable. Such laws are interpretable only in
accordance with the ancient tradition of the English common law which ... is committed to the
doctrine that no sexual activity is justifiable unless its objective is procreation. [A.C. Kinsey,
et.al., Sexual Behavior in the Human Male, 1948]


abomination (n.)

early 14c., abominable thing or action; late 14c., feeling of disgust, hatred, loathing, from Old
French abominacion abomination, horror, repugnance, disgust (13c.), from Latin abominationem
(nominative abominatio) abomination, noun of action from past participle stem of abominari shun as
an ill omen, from ab- off, away from (see ab-) + omin-, stem of omen (see omen). Meaning intensified
by folk etymology derivation from Latin ab homine away from man, thus beastly.    Doubtless, the
life of an Irregular is hard; but the interests of the Greater Number require that it shall be hard.
If a man with a triangular front and a polygonal back were allowed to exist and to propagate a still
more Irregular posterity, what would become of the arts of life? Are the houses and doors and
churches in Flatland to be altered in order to accommodate such monsters? [Edwin Abbot, Flatland: A
Romance of Many Dimensions, 1885]


