abortive (adj.)

late 14c., born prematurely or dead, from Latin abortivus pertaining to miscarriage; causing
abortion, from abort-, past participle stem of aboriri disappear, miscarry, from ab- amiss (see ab-)
+ oriri appear, be born, arise (see orchestra); the compound word used in Latin for deaths,
miscarriages, sunsets, etc. The Latin verb for to produce an abortion was abigo, literally to drive
away. Not originally used to imply forced or deliberate miscarriage; from 14c.-18c. stillborn
children or domestic animals were said to be abortive. Also see abortion. Related: Abortiveness.


misborn (adj.)

abortive, premature, mis-shapen from birth, late Old English misboren abortive, degenerate, from
mis- (1) + born. From 1580s as born of an unlawful union.


abortifacient (n.)

1875, noun and adjective, from Latin abortus (see abortive) + facientem making, related to facere do
(see factitious). An earlier word for this in the noun sense was abortive (1640s).


moon-calf (n.)

also mooncalf, abortive, shapeless, fleshy mass, 1560s, attributed to the influence of the moon;
from moon (n.) + calf (n.). In later 16c., deformed creature, monster.


abort (v.)

1570s, to miscarry, from Latin abortus, past participle of aboriri to miscarry (see abortive); 1610s
as to deliberately terminate anything, but especially a pregnancy, which seems to be the literal
sense. Transitive meaning to cause a woman to miscarry is recorded from 1933. Related: Aborted;
aborting.


square (adj.)

early 14c., containing four equal sides and right angles, from square (n.), or from Old French
esquarre, past participle of esquarrer. Meaning honest, fair, is first attested 1560s; that of
straight, direct is from 1804. Of meals, from 1868.    Sense of old-fashioned is 1944, U.S. jazz
slang, said to be from shape of a conductor's hand gestures in a regular four-beat rhythm. Square-
toes meant nearly the same thing late 18c.: precise, formal, old-fashioned person, from the style of
men's shoes worn early 18c. and then fallen from fashion. Squaresville is attested from 1956. Square
dance attested by 1831; originally one in which the couples faced inward from four sides; later of
country dances generally.    [T]he old square dance is an abortive attempt at conversation while
engaged in walking certain mathematical figures over a limited area. [March 1868]


abortion (n.)

1540s, originally of both deliberate and unintended miscarriages; from Latin abortionem (nominative
abortio) miscarriage; abortion, noun of action from past participle stem of aboriri (see abortive).
Earlier noun in English was simple abort (early 15c.) miscarriage. In 19c. some effort was made to
distinguish abortion expulsion of the fetus between 6 weeks and 6 months from miscarriage (the same
within 6 weeks of conception) and premature labor (delivery after 6 months but before due time). The
deliberate miscarriage was criminal abortion. This broke down late 19c. as abortion came to be used
principally for intentional miscarriages, probably via phrases such as procure an abortion.
Foeticide (n.) appears 1823 as a forensic medical term for deliberate premature fatal expulsion of
the fetus; also compare prolicide. Abortion was a taboo word for much of early 20c., disguised in
print as criminal operation (U.S.) or illegal operation (U.K.), and replaced by miscarriage in film
versions of novels.


