aboriginal (adj.)

1660s, first, earliest, especially in reference to inhabitants of lands colonized by Europeans, from
aborigines (see aborigine) + -al (1); specific Australian sense is from 1820. The noun is attested
from 1767. Related: Aboriginally.


wobbegong (n.)

type of Australian shark, 1852, an Aboriginal word.


wombat (n.)

marsupial mammal of Australia, 1798, from aboriginal Australian womback, wombar.


boomerang (n.)

1827, adapted from an extinct Aboriginal languages of New South Wales, Australia. Another variant,
perhaps, was wo-mur-rang (1798).


walkabout (n.)

periodic migration by a westernized Aboriginal into the bush, 1828, Australian English, from walk
(v.) + about.


primitive (n.)

c.1400, original ancestor, from Latin primitivus (see primitive (adj.)). Meaning aboriginal person
in a land visited by Europeans is from 1779, hence the sense uncivilized person.


Australian (n.)

1690s, in reference to aboriginal inhabitants, from Australia + -an. As an adjective by 1814.
Australianism in speech is attested from 1891.


billabong

Australian, backwater, stagnant pool, 1865, from Billibang, Aboriginal name of Bell River, from
billa water + bang, of uncertain meaning.


koala (n.)

Australian marsupial, 1808, from the Aboriginal name of the animal, variously given as koola, kulla,
kula.


coolie (n.)

name given by Europeans to hired laborers in India and China, c.1600, from Hindi quli hired servant,
probably from kuli, name of an aboriginal tribe or caste in Gujarat. The name was picked up by the
Portuguese, who used it in southern India (where by coincidence kuli in Tamil meant hire) and in
China.


aborigine (n.)

1858, mistaken singular of aborigines (1540s; the correct singular is aboriginal), from Latin
Aborigines the first ancestors of the Romans; the first inhabitants (especially of Latium), possibly
a tribal name, or from ab origine, literally from the beginning. Extended 1789 to natives of other
countries which Europeans have colonized. Australian slang shortening Abo attested from 1922.


tangram (n.)

Chinese geometric puzzle, 1864, said to be an arbitrary formation based on anagram, etc. First
element perhaps Chinese t'an to extend, or t'ang, commonly used in Cantonese for Chinese. Some
suggest it is the name of the inventor, but no such person is known to Chinese scholars [OED].
Another theory involves the Tanka, an outcast aboriginal people of southern China, and Western
sailors who discovered the puzzle from their Tanka girlfriends. Perhaps from an obscure sense of
tram. The Chinese name is Ch'i ch'iao t'u seven ingenious plan.


