abound (v.)

early 14c., from Old French abonder to abound, be abundant, come together in great numbers (12c.),
from Latin abundare overflow, run over, from Latin ab- off (see ab-) + undare rise in a wave, from
unda water, wave (see water (n.1)). Related: Abounded; abounding.


abounding (adj.)

1630s, present participle adjective from abound; originally affluent; sense of overflowing is
recorded by 1680s.


teem (v.1)

abound, swarm, be prolific, Old English teman (Mercian), tieman (West Saxon) beget, give birth to,
bring forth, produce, propagate, from Proto-Germanic *tau(h)mjan (denominative), from PIE *deuk- to
lead (see duke (n.)). Related to team (n.) in its now-obsolete Old English sense of family, brood of
young animals. The meaning abound, swarm is first recorded 1590s, on the notion of be full of as if
ready to give birth. Related: Teemed; teeming.


surround (v.)

early 15c., to flood, overflow, from Anglo-French surounder, Middle French soronder to overflow,
abound; surpass, dominate, from Late Latin superundare overflow, from Latin super over (see super-)
+ undare to flow in waves, from unda wave (see water (n.1); and compare abound). Sense of to shut in
on all sides first recorded 1610s, influenced by figurative meaning in French of dominate, and by
sound association with round, which also influenced the spelling of the English word from 17c.
Related: Surrounded; surrounding.


stonefly (n.)

mid-15c., from stone (n.) + fly (n.). So called because the larval forms abound under stones of
steams.


abundance (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French abondance and directly from Latin abundantia fullness, plenty, noun of
state from abundantem (nominative abundans), present participle of abundare to overflow (see
abound).


abundant (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French abundant and directly from Latin abundantem (nominative abundans)
overflowing, present participle of abundare to overflow (see abound). Related: Abundantly.


redound (v.)

late 14c., to overflow, from Old French redonder overflow, abound, be in profusion (12c.), from
Latin redundare to overflow (see redundant). Meaning to flow or go back (to a place or person) is
from late 14c.; hence to rebound (c.1500), and to contribute to (the credit, honor, etc.), early
15c. Related: Redounded; redounding.


sink (n.)

early 15c., cesspool, pit for reception of wastewater or sewage, from sink (v.). Figurative sense of
place where corruption and vice abound is from 1520s. Meaning drain for carrying water to a sink is
from late 15c. Sense of shallow basin (especially in a kitchen) with a drainpipe for carrying off
dirty water first recorded 1560s. In science and technical use, place where heat or other energy is
removed from a system (opposite of source), from 1855.


effloresce (v.)

to come into flower, 1775, from Latin efflorescere to blossom, spring up, flourish, abound, from ex
out (see ex-) + florescere to blossom, from flos (see flora).


Ophelia

fem. proper name, from Greek opheleia help, aid, from ophelein to help, aid, assist, ophelos
advantage, help, from PIE root *obhel- to avail (cognates: Greek ophelos advantage, Armenian avelum
increase, abound).


superabundance (n.)

early 15c., superaboundance, from Late Latin superabundantia, from present participle stem of Latin
superabundare, from super (see super-) + abundare (see abound). Related: Superabundant; superabound.


manifold (adj.)

Old English monigfald (Anglian), manigfeald (West Saxon), various, varied in appearance,
complicated; numerous, abundant, from manig (see many) + -feald (see -fold). A common Germanic
compound (Old Frisian manichfald, Middle Dutch menichvout, German mannigfalt, Swedish m&#229;ngfalt,
Gothic managfal&thorn;s), perhaps a loan-translation of Latin multiplex (see multiply). Retains the
original pronunciation of many. Old English also had a verbal form, manigfealdian to multiply,
abound, increase, extend.


fluent (adj.)

1580s, flowing freely (of water, also of speech), from Latin fluentem (nominative fluens) lax,
relaxed, figuratively flowing, fluent, present participle of fluere to flow, stream, run, melt, from
PIE *bhleugw-, extended form of *bhleu- to swell, well up, overflow (cognates: Latin flumen river;
Greek phluein to boil over, bubble up, phlein to abound), an extension of root *bhel- (2) to blow,
inflate, swell; see bole. Used interchangeably with fluid in Elizabethan times. Related: Fluently.


flow (v.)

Old English flowan to flow, stream, issue; become liquid, melt; abound, overflow (class VII strong
verb; past tense fleow, past participle flowen), from Proto-Germanic *flo- (cognates: Middle Dutch
vloyen, Dutch vloeien to flow, Old Norse floa to deluge, Old High German flouwen to rinse, wash),
probably from PIE *pleu- flow, float (see pluvial). The weak form predominated from 14c., but strong
past participle flown is occasionally attested through 18c. Related: Flowed; flowing.


midget (n.)

as a type of tiny biting insect, 1839, American English, from midge, perhaps with diminutive suffix
-et.    Dr. Webster is in error in saying the word midge is not in use at the present day. In the
neighboring Green mountain districts, one or more most annoying species of Simulium that there
abound, are daily designated in common conversation as the midges, or, as the name is often
corrupted, the midgets. From Dr. Harris' treatise it appears that the same name is in popular use
for the same insects in Maine. The term is limited in this country, we believe, exclusively to those
minute insects, smaller than the musketoe, which suck the blood of other animals. [Transactions of
the New-York State Agricultural Society, vol. VI, Albany, 1847]    Transferred sense of very small
person is attested by 1854. It is also noted mid-19c. as a pet form of Margaret.


chaparral (n.)

shrub thicket, 1850, American English, from Spanish chaparro evergreen oak, perhaps from Basque
txapar little thicket, diminutive of sapar heath, thicket.    In Spain, a chaparral   is a bush of a
species of oak. The termination al signifies a place abounding in; as, chaparral, a place of oak-
bushes, almendral, an almond orchard; parral, a vineyard; cafetal, a coffee plantation, etc., etc.
This word, chaparral, has been introduced into the language since our acquisition of Texas and New
Mexico, where these bushes abound. It is a series of thickets, of various sizes, from one hundred
yards to a mile through, with bushes and briars, all covered with thorns, and so closely entwined
together as almost to prevent the passage of any thing larger than a wolf or hare. [John Russell
Bartlett, Dictionary of Americanisms, 1859]


fat (adj.)

Old English f&aelig;tt fat, fatted, plump, obese, originally a contracted past participle of
f&aelig;ttian to cram, stuff, from Proto-Germanic *faitaz fat (cognates: Old Frisian fatt, Old Norse
feitr, Dutch vet, German feist), from PIE *poid- to abound in water, milk, fat, etc. (source also of
Greek piduein to gush forth), from root *peie- to be fat, swell (cognates: Sanskrit payate swells,
exuberates, pituh juice, sap, resin; Lithuanian pienas milk; Greek pion fat, wealthy; Latin pinguis
fat).    Teen slang meaning attractive, up to date (also later phat) is attested from 1951. Fat cat
privileged and rich person is from 1928; fat chance no chance at all attested from 1905, perhaps
ironic (the expression is found earlier in the sense good opportunity). Fathead is from 1842; fat-
witted is from 1590s; fatso is first recorded 1943. Expression the fat is in the fire originally
meant the plan has failed (1560s).


