absolute (adj.)

late 14c., unrestricted; complete, perfect; also not relative to something else (mid-15c.), from
Middle French absolut (14c., Old French asolu, Modern French absolu), from Latin absolutus, past
participle of absolvere to set free, make separate (see absolve).    Most of the current senses also
were in the Latin word. Sense evolution was detached, disengaged, thus perfect, pure. Meaning
despotic (1610s) is from notion of absolute in position. Absolute monarchy is recorded from 1735
(absolute king is recorded from 1610s); scientific absolute magnitude (1902), absolute value (1907)
are from early 20c. In metaphysics, the absolute that which is absolute is from 1809.


absolute zero (n.)

the idea dates back to 1702 and its general value was guessed to within a few degrees soon
thereafter, but not precisely discovered until Lord Kelvin's work in 1848. It was known by many
names, such as infinite cold, absolute cold, natural zero of temperature; the term absolute zero was
among them by 1806.


absolutely (adv.)

late 14c., unconditionally, completely, from absolute (adj.) + -ly (2). From mid-15c. as without
reference to anything else, not relatively; meaning to the utmost degree emerged by mid-16c. As a
colloquial emphatic in American English, it is attested from 1892.


dictator (n.)

late 14c., from Latin dictator, agent noun from dictare (see dictate (v.)). Transferred sense of one
who has absolute power or authority in any sphere is from c.1600. In Latin use, a dictator was a
judge in the Roman republic temporarily invested with absolute power.


autarchy (n.)

1660s, absolute sovereignty, from Greek autarkhia, from autarkhein to be an absolute ruler, from
autos self (see auto-) + arkhein to rule (see archon).


monarchy (n.)

state ruled by monarchical government, mid-14c.; rule by one person, late 14c.; from Old French
monarchie sovereignty, absolute power (13c.), from Late Latin monarchia, from Greek monarkhia
absolute rule, literally ruling of one, from monos alone (see mono-) + arkhein to rule (see archon).


despot (n.)

1560s, absolute ruler, from Old French despot (14c.), from Medieval Latin despota, from Greek
despotes master of a household, lord, absolute ruler, from PIE *dems-pota- house-master; for first
element see domestic (adj.); second element cognate with Latin potis, potens (see potent).
Faintly pejorative in Greek, progressively more so as used in various languages for Roman emperors,
Christian rulers of Ottoman provinces, and Louis XVI during the French Revolution. The female
equivalent was despoina lady, queen, mistress, source of the proper name Despina.


Kelvin

unit of absolute temperature scale, 1911, in honor of British physicist Sir William Thompson, Lord
Kelvin (1824-1907).


void (n.)

1610s, unfilled space, gap, from void (adj.). Meaning absolute empty space, vacuum is from 1727.


dead reckoning

might be from nautical abbreviation ded. (deduced) in log books, but it also fits dead (adj.) in the
sense of unrelieved, absolute.


absolutism (n.)

1753 in theology; 1830 in politics, in which sense it was first used by British reformer and
parliamentarian Maj. Gen. Thomas Perronet Thompson (1783-1869). See absolute and   -ism.


tyrant (n.)

c.1300, absolute ruler, especially one without legal right; cruel, oppressive ruler, from Old French
tiran, tyrant (12c.), from Latin tyrannus lord, master, monarch, despot, especially arbitrary ruler,
cruel governor, autocrat (source also of Spanish tirano, Italian tiranno), from Greek tyrannos lord,
master, sovereign, absolute ruler unlimited by law or constitution, a loan-word from a language of
Asia Minor (probably Lydian); Klein compares Etruscan Turan mistress, lady (surname of Venus).  In
the exact sense, a tyrant is an individual who arrogates to himself the royal authority without
having a right to it. This is how the Greeks understood the word 'tyrant': they applied it
indifferently to good and bad princes whose authority was not legitimate. [Rousseau, The Social
Contract]    Originally in Greek the word was not applied to old hereditary sovereignties
(basileiai) and despotic kings, but it was used of usurpers, even when popular, moderate, and just
(such as Cypselus of Corinth), however it soon became a word of reproach in the usual modern sense.
The spelling with -t arose in Old French by analogy with present participle endings in -ant. Fem.
form tyranness is recorded from 1590 (Spenser); Medieval Latin had tyrannissa (late 14c.).


absolutist (n.)

1830, from absolute + -ist. From 1837 as an adjective.


solipsism (n.)

1871, coined from Latin solus alone (see sole (adj.)) + ipse self. The view or theory that self is
the only object of real knowledge or the only thing that is real. The identification of one's self
with the Absolute is not generally intended, but the denial of there being really anybody else
[Century Dictionary].


ours

c.1300, a double possessive (with genitive suffix -s (1)), originating in northern England, and has
taken over the absolute function of our (q.v.). In Middle English ourn, ouren also were used.


totalitarian (adj.)

1926, first in reference to Italian fascism, formed in English on model of Italian totalitario
complete, absolute, totalitarian, from total (adj.) + ending from authoritarian. The noun is
recorded from 1938.


tropism (n.)

1899, tendency of an animal or plant to turn or move in response to a stimulus, 1899, abstracted
from geotropism or heliotropism, with the second element taken in an absolute sense; ultimately from
Greek tropos a turning (see trope).


autocracy (n.)

1650s, independent power, self-sustained power, from French autocratie, from Greek autokrateia
ruling by oneself, noun of state from autokrates (see autocrat). Meaning absolute government,
supreme political power is recorded from 1855.


brahmin (n.)

member of Boston's upper class, 1823, figurative use of Brahman member of the highest priestly Hindu
caste, late 15c., from Sanskrit brahmana-s, from brahman- prayer, also the universal soul, the
Absolute, of uncertain origin. Related to Brahma.


technophobe (n.)

by 1952, perhaps by 1946, from techno- + -phobe.    If the reader will consult such a book as Recent
Economic Changes, by David A. Wells, published in 1889, he will find passages that, except for the
dates and absolute amounts involved, might have been written by our technophobes (if I may coin a
needed word) of today. [Henry Hazlitt, Economics in One Lesson, 1952 edition]


Essene (n.)

1550s, member of a Jewish sect (first recorded 2c. B.C.E.), from Latin, from Greek Essenoi, of
disputed etymology, perhaps from Hebrew tzenum the modest ones, or Hebrew hashaim the silent ones.
Klein suggests Syriac hasen, plural absolute state of hase pious.


utterly (adv.)

early 13c., truly, plainly, outspokenly, from utter (v.) + -ly (1);  meaning to an absolute degree
is late 14c., from utter (adj.)). Cf similarly formed German &#228;usserlich. Old English uterlic
(adj.) meant external.


arbitration (n.)

late 14c., absolute decision, from Old French arbitracion, from Latin arbitrationem (nominative
arbitratio) judgment, will, noun of action from past participle stem of arbitrari to be of an
opinion, give a decision, from arbiter (see arbiter). Meaning settlement of a dispute by a third
party is from 1630s.


inferior (adj.)

early 15c., of land, low, lower, from Latin inferior lower, further down (also used figuratively),
comparative of inferus (adj.) that is below or beneath, from infra below (see infra-). Meaning lower
in degree, rank, or importance is from 1530s; also in an absolute sense, of low quality or rank.


maxim (n.)

precept, principle, early 15c., from Middle French maxime, from Late Latin maxima, shortened from
phrases such as maxima propositio, maxima sententarium axiom, literally greatest premise, greatest
among propositions (one which is general and absolute), from fem. of maximus greatest (see maximum).


during (prep.)

late 14c., durand, present participle of obsolete verb duren to last, endure (mid-13c.), from Old
French durer, from Latin durare endure (see endure). During the day really is while the day endures,
and the usage is a transference into English of a Latin ablative absolute (compare durante bello
during (literally 'enduring') the war).


bare (adj.)

Old English b&aelig;r naked, uncovered, unclothed, from Proto-Germanic *bazaz (cognates: German bar,
Old Norse berr, Dutch baar), from PIE *bhosos (cognates: Armenian bok naked; Old Church Slavonic
bosu, Lithuanian basas barefoot). Meaning sheer, absolute (c.1200) is from the notion of complete in
itself.


autocrat (n.)

1803, from French autocrate, from Greek autokrates ruling by oneself, absolute, autocratic, from
autos- self (see auto-) + kratia rule, from kratos strength, power (see -cracy). First used by
Robert Southey, with reference to Napoleon. An earlier form was autocrator (1789), used in reference
to the Russian Czars. Earliest form in English is the fem. autocratress (1762).


his (pron.)

Old English his (genitive of he), from Proto-Germanic *hisa (cognates: Gothic is, German es).
Originally also the neuter possessive pronoun, but replaced in that sense c.1600 by its. In Middle
English, hisis was tried for the absolute pronoun (compare her/hers), but it failed to stick. For
dialectal his'n, see her.


omnipotent (adj.)

early 14c., from Old French omnipotent almighty, all-powerful (11c.) or directly from Latin
omnipotentem (nominative omnipotens) all-powerful, almighty, from omnis all (see omni-) + potens
(genitive potentis) powerful (see potent). Strictly only of God or a deity; general sense of having
absolute power or authority is attested from 1590s.


tyranny (n.)

late 14c., cruel or unjust use of power; the government of a tyrant, from Old French tyranie (13c.),
from Late Latin tyrannia tyranny, from Greek tyrannia rule of a tyrant, absolute power, from
tyrannos master (see tyrant).


plurality (n.)

late 14c., state of being plural, from Old French pluralite (14c.), from Late Latin pluralitatem
(nominative pluralitas), from Latin pluralis (see plural). Meaning fact of there being many,
multitude is from mid-15c. Church sense of holding of two or more offices concurrently is from mid-
14c. Meaning greater number, more than half is from 1570s but is etymologically improper, perhaps
modeled on majority. U.S. sense of excess of votes over rival candidate(s), especially when none has
an absolute majority, is from 1828.


resolute (adj.)

early 15c., dissolved, of loose structure, also morally lax, from Latin resolutus, past participle
of resolvere untie, unfasten, loose, loosen (see resolution). Meaning determined, decided, absolute,
final is from c.1500, especially in resolute answer, a phrase common in 16th c. [OED]. From 1530s of
persons. The notion is of breaking (something) into parts as the way to arrive at the truth of it
and thus make the final determination (compare resolution). Related: Resolutely; resoluteness.


positive (adj.)

early 14c., originally a legal term meaning formally laid down, from Old French positif (13c.) and
directly from Latin positivus settled by agreement, positive (opposed to naturalis natural), from
positus, past participle of ponere put, place (see position (n.)).    Sense of absolute is from mid-
15c. Meaning in philosophy of dealing only with facts is from 1590s. Sense broadened to expressed
without qualification (1590s), then confident in opinion (1660s); mathematical use is from 1704; in
electricity, 1755. Psychological sense of concentrating on what is constructive and good is recorded
from 1916.


freight (n.)

early 13c., fraght, from Middle Dutch or Middle Low German vracht, vrecht, meaning originally cost
of transport and probably from a lost Old Frisian word, from Proto-Germanic *fra-aihtiz absolute
possession, property (source also of Old High German freht earnings), from *fra-, intensive prefix,
+ *aik to be master of, possess, from PIE *aik- (see owe). Meaning transporting of goods or
passengers for money is from late 14c. Danish fragt, Swedish frakt apparently also are from Frisian.
As a verb, from late 14c.


apparent (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French aparant evident, obvious, visible, from Latin apparentem (nominative
apparens) visible, manifest, present participle of apparere (see appear). First attested in phrase
heir apparent (see heir). Meaning superficial is c.1400. Apparent magnitude in astronomy (how bright
a heavenly body looks from earth, as opposed to absolute magnitude, which is how bright it really
is) is attested from 1875.


Catch-22 (n.)

from the title of Joseph Heller's 1961 novel. In widespread use only after release of the movie
based on the book in 1970. The catch is that a bomber pilot is insane if he flies combat missions
without asking to be relieved from duty, and is thus eligible to be relieved from duty. But if he
asks to be relieved from duty, that means he's sane and has to keep flying.  There was only one
catch and that was Catch-22, which specified that a concern for one's safety in the face of dangers
that were real and immediate was the process of a rational mind. Orr was crazy and could be
grounded. All he had to do was ask; and as soon as he did, he would no longer be crazy and would
have to fly more missions. Orr would be crazy to fly more missions and sane if he didn't, but if he
was sane he had to fly them. If he flew them he was crazy and didn't have to; but if he didn't want
to he was sane and had to. Yossarian was moved very deeply by the absolute simplicity of this clause
of Catch-22 and let out a respectful whistle.  That's some catch, that Catch-22, he observed.It's
the best there is, Doc Daneeka agreed.  See catch (n.).


personality (n.)

late 14c., quality or fact of being a person, from Medieval Latin personalitatem (nominative
personalitas), from Late Latin personalis (see personal). Sense of a distinctive character is first
recorded 1795, from French personnalit&eacute;.Personality is the supreme realization of the innate
idiosyncrasy of a living being. It is an act of courage flung in the face of life, the absolute
affirmation of all that constitutes the individual, the most successful adaptation to the universal
conditions of existence, coupled with the greatest possible freedom of self-determination. [C.G.
Jung, 1875-1961]Meaning person whose character stands out from that of others is from 1889.
Personality cult is attested from 1956.


mere (adj.)

c.1400, unmixed, pure, from Old French mier pure (of gold), entire, total, complete, and directly
from Latin merus unmixed (of wine), pure; bare, naked; figuratively true, real, genuine, probably
originally clear, bright, from PIE *mer- to gleam, glimmer, sparkle (cognates: Old English amerian
to purify, Old Irish emer not clear, Sanskrit maricih ray, beam, Greek marmarein to gleam, glimmer).
Original sense of nothing less than, absolute (mid-15c., now only in vestiges such as mere folly)
existed for centuries alongside opposite sense of nothing more than (1580s, as in a mere dream).


superlative (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French superlatif absolute, highest; powerful; best (13c.) and directly from
Late Latin superlativus extravagant, exaggerated, hyperbolic, from Latin superlatus exaggerated
(used as past participle of superferre carry over or beyond), from super beyond (see super-) + lat-
carry, from *tlat-, past participle stem of tollere to take away (see extol). Related:
Superlatively; superlativeness.    The noun is attested from 1520s, originally in the grammatical
sense, a word in the superlative; hence exaggerated language (1590s).


pure (adj.)

c.1300 (late 12c. as a surname, and Old English had purlamb lamb without a blemish), unmixed, also
absolutely, entirely, from Old French pur pure, simple, absolute, unalloyed, figuratively simple,
sheer, mere (12c.), from Latin purus clean, clear; unmixed; unadorned; chaste, undefiled, from PIE
root *peue- to purify, cleanse (cognates: Latin putus clear, pure; Sanskrit pavate purifies,
cleanses, putah pure; Middle Irish ur fresh, new; Old High German fowen to sift).    Replaced Old
English hlutor. Meaning free from moral corruption is first recorded mid-14c. In reference to
bloodlines, attested from late 15c.


sheer (adj.)

c.1200, exempt, free from guilt (as in Sheer Thursday, the Thursday of Holy Week); later schiere
thin, sparse (c.1400), from Old English scir bright, clear, gleaming; translucent; pure, unmixed,
and influenced by Old Norse cognate sc&aelig;r bright, clean, pure, both from Proto-Germanic
*skeran- (cognates: Old Saxon skiri, Old Frisian skire, German schier, Gothic skeirs clean, pure),
from PIE root *(s)ker- (1) to cut (see shear (v.)).     Sense of absolute, utter (sheer nonsense)
developed 1580s, probably from the notion of unmixed; that of very steep (a sheer cliff) is first
recorded 1800, probably from notion of continued without halting. Meaning diaphanous is from 1560s.
As an adverb from c.1600.


dead (adj.)

Old English dead dead, also torpid, dull; of water, still, standing, from Proto-Germanic *dauthaz
(cognates: Old Saxon dod, Danish d&oslash;d, Swedish d&ouml;d, Old Frisian dad, Middle Dutch doot,
Dutch dood, Old High German tot, German tot, Old Norse dau&eth;r, Gothic dau&thorn;s dead), from PIE
*dhou-toz-, from root *dheu- (3) to die (see die (v.)).    Meaning insensible is first attested
early 13c. Of places, inactive, dull, from 1580s. Used from 16c. in adjectival sense of utter,
absolute, quite (as in dead drunk, first attested 1590s; dead heat, 1796). As an adverb, from late
14c. Dead on is 1889, from marksmanship. Dead duck is from 1844. Dead letter is from 1703, used of
laws lacking force as well as uncollected mail. Phrase in the dead of the night first recorded
1540s. Dead soldier emptied liquor bottle is from 1913 in that form; the image is older.  For but
ich haue bote of mi bale I am ded as dorenail (c.1350).


fee (n.)

late 13c., from Old French fieu, fief fief, possession, holding, domain; feudal duties, payment,
from Medieval Latin feodum land or other property whose use is granted in return for service, widely
said to be from Frankish *fehu-od payment-estate, or a similar Germanic compound, in which the first
element is cognate with Old English feoh money, movable property, cattle (also German Vieh cattle,
Gothic faihu money, fortune), from PIE *peku- cattle (cognates: Sanskrit pasu, Lithuanian pekus
cattle; Latin pecu cattle, pecunia money, property); second element similar to Old English ead
wealth.    OED rejects this, and suggests a simple adaptation of Germanic fehu, leaving the Medieval
Latin -d- unexplained. Sense of payment for services first recorded late 14c. Fee-simple is absolute
ownership, as opposed to fee-tail entailed ownership, inheritance limited to some particular class
of heirs (second element from Old French taillir to cut, to limit).


science (n.)

mid-14c., what is known, knowledge (of something) acquired by study; information; also assurance of
knowledge, certitude, certainty, from Old French science knowledge, learning, application; corpus of
human knowledge (12c.), from Latin scientia knowledge, a knowing; expertness, from sciens (genitive
scientis) intelligent, skilled, present participle of scire to know, probably originally to separate
one thing from another, to distinguish, related to scindere to cut, divide, from PIE root *skei- to
cut, to split (cognates: Greek skhizein to split, rend, cleave, Gothic skaidan, Old English sceadan
to divide, separate; see shed (v.)).    From late 14c. in English as book-learning, also a
particular branch of knowledge or of learning; also skillfulness, cleverness; craftiness. From
c.1400 as experiential knowledge; also a skill, handicraft; a trade. From late 14c. as collective
human knowledge (especially that gained by systematic observation, experiment, and reasoning).
Modern (restricted) sense of body of regular or methodical observations or propositions concerning a
particular subject or speculation is attested from 1725; in 17c.-18c. this concept commonly was
called philosophy. Sense of non-arts studies is attested from 1670s.    Science, since people must
do it, is a socially embedded activity. It progresses by hunch, vision, and intuition. Much of its
change through time does not record a closer approach to absolute truth, but the alteration of
cultural contexts that influence it so strongly. Facts are not pure and unsullied bits of
information; culture also influences what we see and how we see it. Theories, moreover, are not
inexorable inductions from facts. The most creative theories are often imaginative visions imposed
upon facts; the source of imagination is also strongly cultural. [Stephen Jay Gould, introduction to
The Mismeasure of Man, 1981]   <hr />   In science you must not talk before you know. In art you
must not talk before you do. In literature you must not talk before you think. [John Ruskin, The
Eagle's Nest, 1872]    The distinction is commonly understood as between theoretical truth (Greek
episteme) and methods for effecting practical results (tekhne), but science sometimes is used for
practical applications and art for applications of skill. To blind (someone) with science confuse by
the use of big words or complex explanations is attested from 1937, originally noted as a phrase
from Australia and New Zealand.


