abstinence (n.)

mid-14c., forbearance in indulgence of the appetites, from Old French abstinence (earlier
astenance), from Latin abstinentia abstinence, starvation; self-restraint, integrity, noun of
quality from abstinentem (nominative abstinens), present participle of abstinere (see abstain).
Specifically of sexual appetites from mid-14c., but also in Middle English of food, fighting,
luxury.


teetotal (v.)

pledged to total abstinence from intoxicating drink, 1834, possibly formed from total (adj.) with a
reduplication of the initial T- for emphasis (T-totally totally, though not in an abstinence sense,
is recorded in Kentucky dialect from 1832 and is possibly older in Irish-English).    The use in
temperance jargon was first noted September 1833 in a speech advocating total abstinence (from beer
as well as wine and liquor) by Richard Dicky Turner, a working-man from Preston, England. Also said
to have been introduced in 1827 in a New York temperance society which recorded a T after the
signature of those who had pledged total abstinence, but contemporary evidence for this is wanting,
and while Century Dictionary allows that the word may have originated independently in the two
countries, OED favors the British origin and ones that Webster (1847) calls teetotaler a cant word
formed in England.


incontinence (n.)

late 14c., inability to restrain sexual desire, sexual immorality, later inability to keep to a
religious rule (early 15c.), from Old French incontinence lack of abstinence, unchastity (12c.) or
directly from Latin incontinentia greediness; incontinence, noun of quality from incontinens
incontinent, immoderate, intemperate (see incontinent). Meaning inability to retain bodily functions
is from 1754.


temperance (n.)

mid-14c., self-restraint, moderation, from Anglo-French temperaunce (mid-13c.), from Latin
temperantia moderation, sobriety, discretion, self-control, from temperans, present participle of
temperare to moderate (see temper (v.)). Latin temperantia was used by Cicero to translate Greek
sophrosyne moderation. In English, temperance was used to render Latin continentia or abstinentia,
specifically in reference to drinking alcohol and eating; hence by early 1800s it had come to mean
abstinence from alcoholic drink.


abstain (v.)

late 14c., to withhold oneself, from Old French abstenir (14c.), earlier astenir (13c.) hold
(oneself) back, refrain, abstain (from), practice abstinence, from Latin abstinere withhold, keep
back, keep off, from ab(s)- from, away from (see ab-) + tenere to hold (see tenet). Specifically of
liquor, late 14c. Of voting, 1796. Related: Abstained; abstaining.


mortify (v.)

late 14c., to kill, from Old French mortefiier destroy, overwhelm, punish, from Late Latin
mortificare cause death, kill, put to death, literally make dead, from mortificus producing death,
from Latin mors (genitive mortis) death (see mortal (adj.)) + root of facere to make (see
factitious). Religious sense of to subdue the flesh by abstinence and discipline first attested
early 15c. Sense of humiliate first recorded 1690s (compare mortification). Related: Mortified;
mortifying.


prohibition (n.)

late 14c., act of prohibiting, a forbidding by authority, from Anglo-French and Old French
prohibition (early 13c.), from Latin prohibitionem (nominative prohibitio) a hindering, forbidding;
legal prohibition, noun of action from past participle stem of prohibere hold back, restrain,
hinder, prevent, from pro- away, forth (see pro-) + habere to hold (see habit (n.)). Meaning forced
alcohol abstinence is 1851, American English; in effect nationwide in U.S. as law 1920-1933 under
the Volstead Act.    People whose youth did not coincide with the twenties never had our reverence
for strong drink. Older men knew liquor before it became the symbol of a sacred cause. Kids who
began drinking after 1933 take it as a matter of course. ... Drinking, we proved to ourselves our
freedom as individuals and flouted Congress. We conformed to a popular type of dissent -- dissent
from a minority. It was the only period during which a fellow could be smug and slopped
concurrently. [A.J. Liebling, Between Meals, 1959]    Related: Prohibitionist.


