abstruse (adj.)

1590s, from Middle French abstrus (16c.) or directly from Latin abstrusus hidden, concealed, secret,
past participle of abstrudere conceal, literally to thrust away, from ab- away (see ab-) + trudere
to thrust, push (see extrusion). Related: Abstrusely; abstruseness.


metaphysical (adj.)

early 15c., pertaining to metaphysics, from methaphesik (late 14c.) + -al, and in part from Medieval
Latin metaphysicalis, from Medieval Latin metaphysica (see metaphysics). It came to be used in the
sense of abstract, speculative (among others by Johnson, who applied it to certain 17c. poets,
notably Donne and Cowley, who used witty conceits and abstruse imagery). Related: Metaphysically.


subtle (adj.)

c.1300 (mid-13c. as a surname), sotil, penetrating; ingenious; refined (of the mind); sophisticated,
intricate, abstruse (of arguments), from Old French sotil, soutil, subtil adept, adroit; cunning,
wise; detailed; well-crafted (12c., Modern French subtil), from Latin subtilis fine, thin, delicate,
finely woven; figuratively precise, exact, accurate, in taste or judgment, fine, keen, of style,
plain, simple, direct, from sub under (see sub-) + -tilis, from tela web, net, warp of a fabric (see
texture (n.)).     From early 14c. in reference to things, of thin consistency; in reference to
craftsmen, cunning, skilled, clever; Depreciative sense insidious, treacherously cunning; deceitful
is from mid-14c. Material senses of not dense or viscous, light; pure; delicate, thin, slender;
fine, consisting of small particles are from late 14c. sotil wares were goods sold in powdered form
or finely ground. Partially re-Latinized in spelling, and also by confusion with subtile.


abstract (adj.)

late 14c., originally in grammar (of nouns), from Latin abstractus drawn away, past participle of
abstrahere to drag away, detach, pull away, divert; also figuratively, from ab(s)- away (see ab-) +
trahere draw (see tract (n.1)).    Meaning withdrawn or separated from material objects or practical
matters is from mid-15c. That of difficult to understand, abstruse is from c.1400. Specifically in
reference to modern art, it dates from 1914; abstract expressionism as an American-based uninhibited
approach to art exemplified by Jackson Pollock is from 1952, but the term itself had been used in
the 1920s of Kandinsky and others.    Oswald Herzog, in an article on Der Abstrakte Expressionismus
(Sturm, heft 50, 1919) gives us a statement which with equal felicity may be applied to the artistic
attitude of the Dadaists. Abstract Expressionism is perfect Expressionism, he writes. It is pure
creation. It casts spiritual processes into a corporeal mould. It does not borrow objects from the
real world; it creates its own objects .... The abstract reveals the will of the artist; it becomes
expression. ... [William A. Drake, The Life and Deeds of Dada, 1922]   <hr />   Then, that art we
have called abstract for want of any possible descriptive term, with which we have been patient,
and, even, appreciative, getting high stimulation by the new Guggenheim non-objective Art Museum, is
reflected in our examples of surrealism, dadaism, and what-not, to assert our acquaintance in every
art, fine or other. [Report of the Art Reference Department of Pratt Institute Free Library for year
ending June 30, 1937]


