abstract (n.)

abridgement or summary of a document, mid-15c., from abstract (adj.). The general sense of a smaller
quantity containing the virtue or power of a greater [Johnson] is recorded from 1560s.


abstract (v.)

1540s, from Latin abstractus or else from the adjective abstract. Related: Abstracted; abstracting,
abstractedly.


abstract (adj.)

late 14c., originally in grammar (of nouns), from Latin abstractus drawn away, past participle of
abstrahere to drag away, detach, pull away, divert; also figuratively, from ab(s)- away (see ab-) +
trahere draw (see tract (n.1)).    Meaning withdrawn or separated from material objects or practical
matters is from mid-15c. That of difficult to understand, abstruse is from c.1400. Specifically in
reference to modern art, it dates from 1914; abstract expressionism as an American-based uninhibited
approach to art exemplified by Jackson Pollock is from 1952, but the term itself had been used in
the 1920s of Kandinsky and others.    Oswald Herzog, in an article on Der Abstrakte Expressionismus
(Sturm, heft 50, 1919) gives us a statement which with equal felicity may be applied to the artistic
attitude of the Dadaists. Abstract Expressionism is perfect Expressionism, he writes. It is pure
creation. It casts spiritual processes into a corporeal mould. It does not borrow objects from the
real world; it creates its own objects .... The abstract reveals the will of the artist; it becomes
expression. ... [William A. Drake, The Life and Deeds of Dada, 1922]   <hr />   Then, that art we
have called abstract for want of any possible descriptive term, with which we have been patient,
and, even, appreciative, getting high stimulation by the new Guggenheim non-objective Art Museum, is
reflected in our examples of surrealism, dadaism, and what-not, to assert our acquaintance in every
art, fine or other. [Report of the Art Reference Department of Pratt Institute Free Library for year
ending June 30, 1937]


abstractly (adv.)

late 14c., by itself, absolutely, from abstract (adj.) + -ly (2).


abstraction (n.)

c.1400, a withdrawal from worldly affairs, asceticism, from Old French abstraction (14c.), from
Latin abstractionem (nominative abstractio), noun of action from past participle stem of abstrahere
(see abstract (adj.)). Meaning idea of something that has no actual existence is from 1640s.


-cy

abstract noun suffix of quality or rank, from Latin -cia, -tia, from Greek -kia, -tia, from abstract
ending -ia + stem ending -c- or -t-. The native correspondents are -ship, -hood.


-dom

abstract suffix of state, from Old English dom statute, judgment (see doom (n.)). Already active as
a suffix in Old English (as in freodom, wisdom); from stem *do- do + *-moz abstract suffix. Cognate
with German -tum, Old High German tuom.


dearth (n.)

mid-13c., derthe scarcity (originally used of famines, when food was costly because scarce; extended
to other situations of scarcity from early 14c.), abstract noun formed from root of Old English
deore precious, costly (see dear) + abstract noun suffix -th (2). Common Germanic formation, though
not always with the same sense (cognates: Old Saxon diurtha splendor, glory, love, Middle Dutch
dierte, Dutch duurte, Old High German tiurida glory).


-ness

word-forming element denoting action, quality, or state, attached to an adjective or past participle
to form an abstract noun, from Old English -nes(s), from Proto-Germanic *in-assu- (cognates: Old
Saxon -nissi, Middle Dutch -nisse, Dutch -nis, Old High German -nissa, German -nis, Gothic
-inassus), from *-in-, noun stem, + *-assu-, abstract noun suffix, probably from the same root as
Latin -tudo (see -tude).


hysteria (n.)

1801, coined in medical Latin as an abstract noun from hysteric (see hysterical).


constructivism (n.)

1924, in reference to an abstract artistic movement begun in Russia c.1920, from Russian
konstruktivizm. Related: Constructivist (1928).


docket (n.)

mid-15c., a summary or abstract, of unknown origin, perhaps a diminutive form related to dock (v.).
An early form was doggette. Meaning list of lawsuits to be tried is from 1709.


Boolean (adj.)

in reference to abstract algebraic systems, 1851, named for George Boole (1815-1864), English
mathematician. The surname is a variant of Bull.


Fahrenheit

temperature scale, 1753, named for Gabriel Daniel Fahrenheit (1686-1736), Prussian physicist who
proposed the scale in 1714. The zero in it is arbitrary, based on the lowest temperature observed by
him in the winter of 1709. An abstract surname meaning literally experience.


applied (adj.)

put to practical use, (as opposed to abstract or theoretical), 1650s, from past participle of apply.
Earlier it was used in a sense of folded (c.1500).


-ure

suffix forming abstract nouns of action, from Old French -ure, from Latin -ura, an ending of fem.
nouns denoting employment or result.


optical (adj.)

1560s, from optic + -al (1). Of abstract art, from 1964. Related: Optically.


metapolitics (n.)

1784, abstract political science; see meta- + politics. Related: metapolitical, attested from 1670s
in sense outside the realm of politics.


idealism (n.)

1796, in the abstract sense, originally belief that reality is made up only of ideas, from ideal
(adj.) + -ism; on model of French id&eacute;alisme. Meaning representing things in an ideal form is
from 1829.


summary (n.)

a summary statement or account, c.1500, from Latin summarium an epitome, abstract, summary, from
summa totality, gist (see sum (n.)).


Arian (adj.)

1530s, pertaining to the doctrines of Arius, priest in Alexandria early 4c., who posed the question
of Christ's nature in terms which appeared to debase the Savior's relation to God (denial of
consubstantiation). Besides taking an abstract view of Christ's nature, he reaffirmed man's capacity
for perfection. The dissention was widespread and split the Church for about a century during a
crucial time.


beau-ideal (n.)

1801, from French beau id&eacute;al the ideal beauty, beautifulness as an abstract ideal, in which
beau is the subject, but as English usually puts the adjective first, the sense has shifted in
English toward perfect type or model.


pedophilia (n.)

1900, from Greek pais (genitive paidos) child (see pedo-) + philos loving see -phile). First
attested in an abstract of a report by Krafft-Ebing.


nominalism (n.)

1820, view that treats abstract concepts as names only, not realities, from French nominalisme
(1752), from nominal, from Latin nominalis (see nominal). Related: Nominalist.


-tude

syllable formed when the word-forming element -ude, making abstract nouns from adjectives and
participles, is fixed to a base or to another suffix ending in -t or -te; from French -ude, from
Latin -udo (stem -udin-). The equivalent of native -ness.


concept (n.)

1550s, from Medieval Latin conceptum draft, abstract, in classical Latin (a thing) conceived, from
concep-, past participle stem of concipere to take in (see conceive). In some 16c. cases a
refashioning of conceit (perhaps to avoid negative connotations).


servitude (n.)

early 15c., condition of being enslaved, from Old French servitude, servitute (13c.) and directly
from Late Latin servitudo slavery, from Latin servus a slave (see serve (v.)) + abstract noun
suffix.


-ancy

word-forming element denoting quality or state, from Latin -antia, forming abstract nouns on pp.
adjectives in -antem, appearing in English mostly in words borrowed directly from Latin (those
passing through French usually have -ance or -ence; see -ance).


Ferdinand

masc. proper name, of Germanic origin, first element perhaps Proto-Germanic *farthi, abstract noun
from root *far- to fare, travel (see fare (v.)); second element perhaps related to Old English
ne&eth;an, Old High German nendan to risk, venture.


magnitude (n.)

c.1400, greatness of size or character, from Latin magnitudo greatness, bulk, size, from magnus
great (see magnate) + -tudo, suffix forming abstract nouns from adjectives and participles (see
-tude). Meaning size, extent is from early 15c. Of stars, brightness, from 1640s.


broad-minded (adj.)

1590s; see broad (adj.) + minded. This abstract mental sense of broad existed in Old English; for
example in bradnes breadth, also liberality.


hourglass (n.)

1510s, from hour + glass. Used 19c. in a variety of technical and scientific senses to describe the
shape; reference to women's bodies is attested by 1897.    Men condemn corsets in the abstract, and
are sometimes brave enough to insist that the women of their households shall be emancipated from
them; and yet their eyes have been so generally educated to the approval of the small waist, and the
hourglass figure, that they often hinder women who seek a hygienic style of dress. [Mary Ashton Rice
Livermore, The Story of My Life, 1898]


berth (n.)

1620s, convenient sea room (both for ships and sailors), of uncertain origin, probably from bear
(v.) + abstract noun suffix -th (2) as in strength, health, etc. Original sense is preserved in
phrase to give (something or someone) wide berth. Meaning place on a ship to stow chests, room for
sailors is from 1706; extended to non-nautical situations by 1778.


metaphysical (adj.)

early 15c., pertaining to metaphysics, from methaphesik (late 14c.) + -al, and in part from Medieval
Latin metaphysicalis, from Medieval Latin metaphysica (see metaphysics). It came to be used in the
sense of abstract, speculative (among others by Johnson, who applied it to certain 17c. poets,
notably Donne and Cowley, who used witty conceits and abstruse imagery). Related: Metaphysically.


kind (adj.)

friendly, deliberately doing good to others, from Old English gecynde natural, native, innate,
originally with the feeling of relatives for each other, from Proto-Germanic *kundi- natural,
native, from *kunjam family (see kin), with collective prefix *ga- and abstract suffix *-iz. Sense
development from with natural feelings, to well-disposed (c.1300), benign, compassionate (c.1300).


valetudinarian (n.)

one who is constantly concerned with his own ailments, 1703, from valetudinary (1580s), from Latin
valetudinarius, from valetudo state of health (either good or bad), from valere be strong (see
valiant) + -tudo, abstract noun suffix (see -tude). Valetudinary (adj.) sickly is recorded from
1580s.


feint (n.)

1670s, a false show, a pretended blow, from French feinte a feint, sham, abstract noun from Old
French feint (13c.) false, deceitful, originally fem. past participle of feindre (see feign).
Borrowed late 13c. as adjective, but now obsolete in that sense. Also as a noun in Middle English
with sense false-heartedness (early 14c.), also bodily weakness (c.1400).


entity (n.)

1590s, from Late Latin entitatem (nominative entitas), from ens (genitive entis) a thing, proposed
by Caesar as present participle of esse be (see is), to render Greek philosophical term to on that
which is (from neuter of present participle of einai to be; see essence). Originally abstract;
concrete sense in English is from 1620s.


Sophia

fem. proper name, from Greek sophia skill, knowledge of, acquaintance with; sound judgement,
practical wisdom; cunning, shrewdness; philosophy, also wisdom personified, abstract noun from
sophos wise (see sophist). Saint Sophia in ancient church names and place names in the East is not
necessarily a reference to a person; the phrase also is the English translation of the Greek for
divine wisdom, holy wisdom, to which churches were dedicated.


enterprise (n.)

early 15c., an undertaking, from Old French enterprise an undertaking, noun use of fem. past
participle of entreprendre undertake, take in hand, from entre- between (see entre-) + prendre to
take, contraction of prehendere (see prehensile). Abstract sense of readiness to undertake
challenges, spirit of daring is from late 15c.


appearance (n.)

late 14c., visible state or form, figure; mere show, from Anglo-French apparaunce, Old French
aparance appearance, display, pomp (13c.), from Latin apparentia, abstract noun from aparentem, past
participle of apparere (see appear). Meaning semblance is recorded from early 15c.; that of action
of coming into view is mid-15c. Phrase keep up appearances attested from 1760 (save appearances in
same sense is 1711).


epitome (n.)

1520s, an abstract; brief statement of the chief points of some writing, from Middle French
&eacute;pitom&eacute; (16c.), from Latin epitome abridgment, from Greek epitome abridgment, from
epitemnein cut short, abridge, from epi into (see epi-) + temnein to cut (see tome). Sense of person
or thing that typifies something is first recorded c.1600.


-ty (2)

suffix used in forming abstract nouns from adjectives (such as safety, surety), Middle English -tie,
-te, from Old French -te (Modern French -t&#233;), from Latin -tatem (nominative -tas, genitive
-tatis), cognate with Greek -tes, Sanskrit -tati-. Also see -ity.


beverage (n.)

mid-13c., from Anglo-French beverage, Old French bevrage, from Old French boivre to drink (Modern
French boire; from Latin bibere to imbibe; see imbibe) + -age, suffix forming mass or abstract
nouns.


-y (4)

suffix indicating state, condition, or quality; also activity or the result of it (as in victory,
history, etc.), via Anglo-French and Old French &#233;, from Latin -ia, Greek -ia, from PIE *-a-,
suffix forming abstract or collective nouns. It is etymologically identical with -ia and the second
element in -cy, -ery, -logy, etc.


drought (n.)

Old English druga&eth;, drugo&eth; drought, dryness, desert, from Proto-Germanic *drugothaz, from
Germanic root *dreug- dry (cf high/height) with *-itho, Germanic suffix for forming abstract nouns
(see -th (2)). Drouth was a Middle English variant continued in Scottish and northern English
dialect and in poetry.


ruth (n.)

sorrow for the misery of another; repentance, regret, c.1200, ruthe, from Old Norse hrygg&eth; ruth,
sorrow, from hryggr sorrowful, grieved (see rue (v.)) + Proto-Germanic abstract noun suffix *-itho
(see -th (2)). Or else formed in English from reuwen to rue on the model of true/truth, etc. The Old
English word was rue (n.2).


theft (n.)

mid-13c., from Old English &thorn;eof&eth; (West Saxon &thorn;ief&eth;) theft, from Proto-Germanic
*theubitho (cognates: Old Frisian thiufthe, Old Norse &thorn;yf&eth;), from *theubaz thief (see
thief) + abstract formative suffix *-itha (cognate with Latin -itatem; see -th (2)).


stress (n.)

c.1300, hardship, adversity, force, pressure, in part a shortening of Middle English distress (n.);
in part from Old French estrece narrowness, oppression, from Vulgar Latin *strictia, from Latin
strictus tight, compressed, drawn together, past participle of stringere draw tight (see strain
(v.)). Meaning physical strain on a material object is from mid-15c. As an abstract force in
mechanics from 1855. The purely psychological sense is attested from 1955.


length (n.)

Old English leng&eth;u length, from Proto-Germanic *langitho, noun of quality from *langgaz (root of
Old English lang; see long (adj.)) + *-itho, abstract noun suffix (see -th (2)).    Cognate with Old
Norse lengd, Old Frisian lengethe, Dutch lengte. Figurative sense of the distance one goes,
extremity to which something is carried is from 1690s. Phrase at length to full extent is attested
from c.1500.


