abstain (v.)

late 14c., to withhold oneself, from Old French abstenir (14c.), earlier astenir (13c.) hold
(oneself) back, refrain, abstain (from), practice abstinence, from Latin abstinere withhold, keep
back, keep off, from ab(s)- from, away from (see ab-) + tenere to hold (see tenet). Specifically of
liquor, late 14c. Of voting, 1796. Related: Abstained; abstaining.


abstainer (n.)

mid-15c., one who practices self-denial, agent noun from abstain.


vegan (n.)

1944, from vegetable (n.) + -an; coined by English vegetarian Donald Watson (1910-2005) to
distinguish those who abstain from all animal products (eggs, cheese, etc.) from those who merely
refuse to eat the animals.


abstinent (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French abstinent (earlier astenant) moderate, abstemious, modest, from Latin
abstinentem (nominative abstinens) temperate, moderate, present participle of abstinere to refrain
from (see abstain).


abstention (n.)

1520s, from Middle French abstention (Old French astencion), from Late Latin abstentionem
(nominative abstentio) the act of retaining, noun of action from past participle stem of Latin
abstinere keep back, keep off, hold off (see abstain).


abstinence (n.)

mid-14c., forbearance in indulgence of the appetites, from Old French abstinence (earlier
astenance), from Latin abstinentia abstinence, starvation; self-restraint, integrity, noun of
quality from abstinentem (nominative abstinens), present participle of abstinere (see abstain).
Specifically of sexual appetites from mid-14c., but also in Middle English of food, fighting,
luxury.


shun (v.)

Old English scunian to shun, avoid; abhor; desist, abstain; to hide, seek safety by concealment, of
uncertain origin; not found in any other language. Perhaps ultimately from PIE root *skeu- to cover,
to hide. Related: Shunned; shunning. A shun-pike (American English, 1911) was a road constructed to
avoid tolls.


supersede (v.)

mid-15c., Scottish, postpone, defer, from Middle French superceder desist, delay, defer, from Latin
supersedere literally sit on top of; also, with ablative, stay clear of, abstain from, forbear,
refrain from, from super above (see super-) + sedere to sit (see sedentary). Meaning displace,
replace first recorded 1640s. Related: Superseded; superseding.


forbear (v.)

to abstain, Old English forberan bear up against, control one's feelings, endure, from for- + beran
to bear (see bear (v.)). Related: Forbearer; forbearing; forbore.


miss (n.1)

late 12c., loss, lack;  c. 1200, regret occasioned by loss or absence, from Old English miss
absence, loss, from source of missan to miss (see miss (v.)). Meaning an act or fact of missing; a
being without is from late 15c.; meaning a failure to hit or attain is 1550s. To give something a
miss to abstain from, avoid is from 1919. Phrase a miss is as good as a mile was originally, an
inch, in a miss, is as good as an ell (see ell).


pledge (n.)

mid-14c., surety, bail, from Old French plege (Modern French pleige) hostage, security, bail,
probably from Frankish *plegan to guarantee, from *pleg-, a West Germanic root meaning have
responsibility for (cognates: Old Saxon plegan vouch for, Middle Dutch plien to answer for,
guarantee, Old High German pflegan to care for, be accustomed to, Old English pleon to risk the loss
of, expose to danger; see plight (v.)).    Meaning allegiance vow attested by drinking with another
is from 1630s. Sense of solemn promise first recorded 1814, though this notion is from 16c. in the
verb. Weekley notes the curious contradiction in pledge (v.) to toast with a drink (1540s) and
pledge (n.) the vow to abstain from drinking (1833). Meaning student who has agreed to join a
fraternity or sorority dates from 1901.


