abusive (adj.)

1530s (implied in abusively), originally improper, from Middle French abusif, from Latin abusivus,
from abus-, past participle stem of abuti (see abuse (v.)). Meaning full of abuse is from 1580s.
Abuseful was used 17c., and Shakespeare has abusious (Taming of the Shrew, 1594). Related:
Abusiveness.


invective (n.)

1520s, from Medieval Latin invectiva abusive speech, from Late Latin invectivus abusive, from Latin
invectus, past participle of invehi to attack with words (see inveigh). For nuances of usage, see
humor. The earlier noun form was inveccion (mid-15c.).


blimey

by 1889, probably a corruption of (God) blind me! First attested in a slang dictionary which defines
it as an apparently meaningless, abusive term.


contumelious (adj.)

late 15c., from Old French contumelieus, from Latin contumeliosus reproachful, insolently abusive,
from contumelia (see contumely).


villainous (adj.)

c.1300, offensive, abusive, from Old French vileneus worthless, base, from vilain (see villain).
Sense of despicable, shameful, morally corrupt is from c.1400 in English. Related: Villainously;
villainousness.


scold (v.)

late 14c., be abusive or quarrelsome, from scold (n.). Related: Scolded; scolding.


injurious (adj.)

early 15c., abusive, from Middle French injurios (14c., Modern French injurieux) and directly from
Latin injuriosus unlawful, wrongful, harmful, noxious, from injuria (see injury). Related:
Injuriously.


scold (n.)

mid-12c., person of ribald speech, later person fond of abusive language (c.1300), especially a
shrewish woman [Johnson defines it as A clamourous, rude, mean, low, foul-mouthed woman], from Old
Norse skald poet (see skald). The sense evolution might reflect the fact that Germanic poets (like
their Celtic counterparts) were famously feared for their ability to lampoon and mock (as in
skaldskapr poetry, also, in Icelandic law books, libel in verse).


pumpernickel (n.)

dark rye bread, 1756, pompernickel, from German (Westphalian dialect) Pumpernickel (1663),
originally an abusive nickname for a stupid person, from pumpern to break wind + Nickel goblin,
lout, rascal, from proper name Niklaus (see Nicholas). An earlier German name for it was krankbrot,
literally sick-bread.


saucy (adj.)

c.1500, resembling sauce, later impertinent, flippantly bold, cheeky (1520s), from sauce (n.) + -y
(2). The connecting notion is the figurative sense of piquancy in words or actions. Compare sauce
malapert impertinence (1520s), and slang phrase to have eaten sauce be abusive (1520s). Also compare
salty in same senses.


billingsgate (n.)

1670s, the kind of coarse, abusive language once used by women in the Billingsgate market on the
River Thames below London Bridge.  Billingsgate is the market where the fishwomen assemble to
purchase fish; and where, in their dealings and disputes they are somewhat apt to leave decency and
good manners a little on the left hand. [Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, 1811]  The place name is
Old English Billingesgate, gate of (a man called) Billing; the gate probably being a gap in the
Roman river wall. The market is mid-13c., not exclusively a fish market until late 17c.


smoke (n.1)

late Old English smoca (rare) fumes and volatile material given off by burning substances, related
to smeocan give off smoke, from Proto-Germanic *smuk- (cognates: Middle Dutch smooc, Dutch smook,
Middle High German smouch, German Schmauch), from PIE root *smeug- to smoke; smoke (cognates:
Armenian mux smoke, Greek smykhein to burn with smoldering flame, Old Irish much, Welsh mwg smoke).
The more usual noun was Old English smec, which became dialectal smeech. Abusive meaning black
person attested from 1913, American English. Smoke-eater firefighter is c.1930. Figurative phrase go
up in smoke be destroyed (as if by fire) is from 1933. Smoke alarm first attested 1936; smoke-
detector from 1957.


slang (n.)

1756, special vocabulary of tramps or thieves, later jargon of a particular profession (1801), of
uncertain origin, the usual guess being that it is from a Scandinavian source, such as Norwegian
slengenamn nickname, slengja kjeften to abuse with words, literally to sling the jaw, related to Old
Norse slyngva to sling. But OED, while admitting some approximation in sense, discounts this
connection based on date and early associations. Liberman also denies it, as well as any connection
with French langue (or language or lingo). Rather, he derives it elaborately from an old slang word
meaning narrow piece of land, itself of obscure origin. Century Dictionary says there is no evidence
to establish a Gipsy origin. Sense of very informal language characterized by vividness and novelty
first recorded 1818.    [S]lang is a conscious offence against some conventional standard of
propriety. A mere vulgarism is not slang, except when it is purposely adopted, and acquires an
artificial currency, among some class of persons to whom it is not native. The other distinctive
feature of slang is that it is neither part of the ordinary language, nor an attempt to supply its
deficiencies. The slang word is a deliberate substitute for a word of the vernacular, just as the
characters of a cipher are substitutes for the letters of the alphabet, or as a nickname is a
substitute for a personal name. [Henry Bradley, from Slang, in Encyclopedia Britannica, 11th ed.]
A word that ought to have survived is slangwhanger (1807, American English) noisy or abusive talker
or writer.


