abyssal (adj.)

1690s, used especially of the zone of ocean water below 300 fathoms, from abyss + -al (1). Though
the 19th century, abysmal was more common in oceanography.


abyss (n.)

late 14c., earlier abime (c.1300, from a form in Old French), from Late Latin abyssus bottomless
pit, from Greek abyssos (limne) bottomless (pool), from a- without (see a- (2)) + byssos bottom,
possibly related to bathos depth.


Tartarus (n.)

in Homer and older Greek mythology, the sunless abyss below Hades, from Greek Tartaros, of uncertain
origin; prob. a word of imitative origin, suggestive of something frightful [Klein]. Later in Greek
almost synonymous with Hades.


swallow (n.2)

an act of swallowing, 1822, from swallow (v.). In late Old English and Middle English it meant gulf,
abyss, hole in the earth, whirlpool, also, in Middle English, throat, gullet. Compare Old Norse
svelgr whirlpool, literally devourer, swallower. Meaning as much as one can swallow at once,
mouthful is from 1861.


abysm (n.)

bottomless gulf, greatest depths, now chiefly poetic, c.1300, from Old French abisme (Modern French
ab&icirc;me), from Vulgar Latin *abyssimus (source of Spanish and Portuguese abismo), which
represents either a superlative of Latin abyssus or a formation on analogy of Greek-derived words in
-ismus; see abyss.


regurgitation (n.)

c.1600, from Medieval Latin regurgitationem (nominative regurgitatio), noun of action from past
participle stem of regurgitare to overflow, from re- back (see re-) + Late Latin gurgitare engulf,
flood (found in Latin ingurgitare to pour in), from gurges whirlpool, gorge, abyss (see gurges).


groin (n.)

1590s, earlier grine (1530s), from Middle English grynde groin (c.1400), originally depression in
the ground, from Old English grynde abyss, perhaps also depression, hollow, from Proto-Germanic
*grundus (see ground). Altered 16c. by influence of loin or obsolete groin snout. The architectural
groin edge formed by the intersection of two vaults is from 1725.


brinkmanship (n.)

also brinksmanship, with parasitic -s- and construction based on salesmanship, sportsmanship, etc.;
from brink (the image of the brink of war dates to at least 1840).    Associated with the policies
advocated by John Foster Dulles (1888-1959), U.S. Secretary of State 1953-1959. The word springs
from Dulles' philosophy as outlined in a magazine interview [with Time-Life Washington bureau chief
James Shepley] early 1956:    The ability to get to the verge without getting into the war is the
necessary art. If you cannot master it, you inevitably get into war. If you try to run away from it,
if you are scared to go to the brink, you are lost.    The quote was widely criticized by the
Eisenhower Administration's opponents, and the first attested use of brinkmanship seems to have been
in such a context, a few weeks after the magazine appeared, by Democratic presidential candidate
Adlai Stevenson criticizing Dulles for boasting of his brinkmanship, ... the art of bringing us to
the edge of the nuclear abyss.


chaos (n.)

late 14c., gaping void, from Old French chaos (14c.) or directly from Latin chaos, from Greek khaos
abyss, that which gapes wide open, is vast and empty, from *khnwos, from PIE root *gheu- to gape,
yawn (cognates: Greek khaino I yawn, Old English ginian, Old Norse ginnunga-gap; see yawn (v.)).
Meaning utter confusion (c.1600) is extended from theological use of chaos for the void at the
beginning of creation in Vulgate version of Genesis (1530s in English). The Greek for disorder was
tarakhe, however the use of chaos here was rooted in Hesiod (Theogony), who describes khaos as the
primeval emptiness of the Universe, begetter of Erebus and Nyx (Night), and in Ovid (Metamorphoses),
who opposes Khaos to Kosmos, the ordered Universe. Meaning orderless confusion in human affairs is
from c.1600. Chaos theory in the modern mathematical sense is attested from c.1977.


