academic (adj.)

1580s, relating to an academy, also collegiate, scholarly, from Latin academicus of the Academy,
from academia (see academy). Meaning theoretical, not practical, not leading to a decision (such as
university debates or classroom legal exercises) is from 1886. Academic freedom is attested from
1901. Related: Academically.


university (n.)

c.1300, institution of higher learning, also body of persons constituting a university, from Anglo-
French universit&eacute;, Old French universite universality; academic community (13c.), from
Medieval Latin universitatem (nominative universitas), the whole, aggregate, in Late Latin
corporation, society, from universus whole, entire (see universe). In the academic sense, a
shortening of universitas magistrorum et scholarium community of masters and scholars; superseded
studium as the word for this. The Latin word also is the source of Spanish universidad, German
universit&#228;t, Russian universitet&#365;, etc.


baccalaureate (n.)

1620s, university degree of a bachelor, from Modern Latin baccalaureatus, from baccalaureus student
with the first degree, alteration of Medieval Latin baccalarius one who has attained the lowest
degree in a university, advanced student lecturing under his master's supervision but not yet having
personal license (altered by folk etymology or word-play, as if from bacca lauri laurel berry,
laurels being awarded for academic success).    The Medieval Latin word is of uncertain origin;
perhaps ultimately from Latin baculum staff (see bacillus), which the young student might carry. Or
it might be a re-Latinization of bachelor in its academic sense.     In modern U.S. usage,
baccalaureate usually is short for baccalaureate sermon (1864), a religious farewell address to a
graduating class at an American college, from the adjectival sense pertaining to the university
degree of bachelor.


graduation (n.)

early 15c., in alchemy, tempering, refining of something to a certain degree; measurement according
to the four degrees of a quality, from graduate (n.). General sense of dividing into degrees is from
1590s; meaning action of receiving or giving an academic degree is from early 15c.; in reference to
the ceremony where a degree is given, from 1818.


college (n.)

body of scholars and students within a university, late 14c., from Old French college collegiate
body (14c.), from Latin collegium community, society, guild, literally association of collegae (see
colleague). At first meaning any corporate group, the sense of academic institution attested from
1560s became the principal sense in 19c. via use at Oxford and Cambridge.


psych

as a noun, short for psychology in various senses (e.g. as an academic study, in student slang by
1895). As a verb, first attested 1917 as to subject to psychoanalysis, short for psychoanalyze. From
1934 as to outsmart (also psych out); from 1963 as to unnerve. However to psych (oneself) up is from
1972; to be psyched up is attested from 1968.


course (n.)

late 13c., onward movement, from Old French cors (12c.) course; run, running; flow of a river, from
Latin cursus a running race or course, from curs- past participle stem of currere to run (see
current (adj.)).    Most extended senses (meals, etc.) are present in 14c. Academic meaning planned
series of study is c.1600 (in French from 14c.). Phrase of course is attested from 1540s; literally
of the ordinary course; earlier in same sense was bi cours (c.1300).


diploma (n.)

1640s, state paper, official document, from Latin diploma, from Greek diploma license, chart,
originally paper folded double, from diploun to double, fold over, from diploos double (see diploid)
+ -oma. Specific academic sense is 1680s in English.


mortarboard (n.)

also mortar-board, academic cap, 1854, probably from mortar (1) + board (n.1); so called because it
resembles a mason's square board for carrying mortar.  Earlier it was called a mortar cap (1680s) or
simply morter (c.1600), from French mortier.


creator (n.)

c.1300, Supreme Being, from Anglo-French creatour, Old French creator (12c., academic and
liturgical, alongside popular creere, Modern French cr&eacute;ateur), from Latin creator creator,
author, founder, from creatus (see create). Translated in Old English as scieppend (from verb
scieppan; see shape (v.)). Not generally capitalized until KJV. General meaning one who creates is
from 1570s.


faculty (n.)

late 14c., ability, means, resources, from Old French facult&eacute; (14c.) skill, accomplishment,
learning, and directly from Latin facultatem (nominative facultas) power, ability, wealth, from
*facli-tat-s, from facilis (see facile).    Academic sense branch of knowledge probably was the
earliest in English (attested in Anglo-Latin from late 12c.), on notion of ability in knowledge.
Originally each department was a faculty; the use in reference to the whole teaching staff of a
college dates from 1767.


queer (adj.)

c.1500, strange, peculiar, eccentric, from Scottish, perhaps from Low German (Brunswick dialect)
queer oblique, off-center, related to German quer oblique, perverse, odd, from Old High German twerh
oblique, from PIE root *terkw- to turn, twist, wind (see thwart (adv.)).    Sense of homosexual
first recorded 1922; the noun in this sense is 1935, from the adjective. Related: Queerly. Queer
studies as an academic discipline attested from 1994.


credit (n.)

1520s, from Middle French cr&eacute;dit (15c.) belief, trust, from Italian credito, from Latin
creditum a loan, thing entrusted to another, from past participle of credere to trust, entrust,
believe (see credo). The commercial sense was the original one in English (creditor is mid-15c.).
Meaning honor, acknowledgment of merit, is from c.1600. Academic sense of point for completing a
course of study is 1904. Movie/broadcasting sense is 1914. Credit rating is from 1958; credit union
is 1881, American English.


able (adj.)

early 14c., from Old French (h)able (14c.), from Latin habilem, habilis easily handled, apt, verbal
adjective from habere to hold (see habit). Easy to be held, hence fit for a purpose. The silent h-
was dropped in English and resisted academic attempts to restore it 16c.-17c., but some derivatives
(such as habiliment, habilitate) acquired it via French.Able-whackets - A popular sea-game with
cards, in which the loser is beaten over the palms of the hands with a handkerchief tightly twisted
like a rope. Very popular with horny-fisted sailors. [Smyth, Sailor's Word-Book, 1867]


Academe (n.)

The Academy, 1580s, from phrase groves of Academe, translating Horace's silvas Academi (see
academy); general sense of the world of universities and scholarship is attested from 1849. With
lower-case letter, academia in the sense of academic community is from 1956.   <b>Academe</b>
properly means Academus (a Greek hero); &amp; its use as a poetic variant for academy, though
sanctioned by Shakespeare, Tennyson &amp; Lowell, is a mistake; the grove of A., however, (Milton)
means rightly The Academy. [Fowler]


degree (n.)

early 13c., from Old French degr&eacute; (12c.) a step (of a stair), pace, degree (of relationship),
academic degree; rank, status, position, said to be from Vulgar Latin *degradus a step, from Late
Latin degredare, from Latin de- down (see de-) + gradus step (see grade (n.)).    Most modern senses
date from Middle English, from notion of a hierarchy of steps. Meaning a grade of crime is 1670s;
that of a unit of temperature is from 1727. The division of the circle into 360 degrees was known in
Babylon and Egypt. It is perhaps from the daily motion of the sun through the zodiac in the course
of a year.


master (n.)

late Old English m&aelig;gester one having control or authority, from Latin magister (n.) chief,
head, director, teacher (source of Old French maistre, French ma&icirc;tre, Spanish and Italian
maestro, Portuguese mestre, Dutch meester, German Meister), contrastive adjective (he who is
greater) from magis (adv.) more, from PIE *mag-yos-, comparative of root *meg- great (see mickle).
Form influenced in Middle English by Old French cognate maistre. Meaning original of a recording is
from 1904. In academic senses (from Medieval Latin magister) it is attested from late 14c.,
originally a degree conveying authority to teach in the universities. As an adjective from late 12c.


meta-

word-forming element meaning 1. after, behind, 2. changed, altered, 3. higher, beyond; from Greek
meta (prep.) in the midst of, in common with, by means of, in pursuit or quest of, from PIE *me- in
the middle (cognates: German mit, Gothic mi&thorn;, Old English mi&eth; with, together with, among;
see mid). Notion of changing places with probably led to senses change of place, order, or nature,
which was a principal meaning of the Greek word when used as a prefix (but also denoting community,
participation; in common with; pursuing).    Third sense, higher than, transcending, overarching,
dealing with the most fundamental matters of, is due to misinterpretation of metaphysics as science
of that which transcends the physical. This has led to a prodigious erroneous extension in modern
usage, with meta- affixed to the names of other sciences and disciplines, especially in the academic
jargon of literary criticism, which affixes it to just about anything that moves and much that
doesn't.


trivial (adj.)

ordinary (1580s); insignificant, trifling (1590s), from Latin trivialis common, commonplace, vulgar,
literally of or belonging to the crossroads, from trivium place where three roads meet, in
transferred use, an open place, a public place, from tri- three (see three) + via road (see via).
The sense connection is public, hence common, commonplace.    The earliest use of the word in
English was early 15c., a separate borrowing in the academic sense of the trivium (the first three
liberal arts -- grammar, rhetoric, and logic); from Medieval Latin use of trivialis in the sense of
the first three liberal arts, from trivium, neuter of the Latin adjective trivius of three roads, of
the crossroads. Related: Trivially. For sense evolution to pertaining to useless information, see
trivia.


Aryan

c.1600, as a term in classical history, from Latin Arianus, Ariana, from Greek Aria, Areia, names
applied in classical times to the eastern part of ancient Persia and to its inhabitants. Ancient
Persians used the name in reference to themselves (Old Persian ariya-), hence Iran. Ultimately from
Sanskrit arya- compatriot; in later language noble, of good family.    Also the name Sanskrit-
speaking invaders of India gave themselves in the ancient texts, from which early 19c. European
philologists (Friedrich Schlegel, 1819, who linked the word with German Ehre honor) applied it to
the ancient people we now call Indo-Europeans (suspecting that this is what they called themselves);
this use is attested in English from 1851. The term fell into the hands of racists, and in German
from 1845 it was specifically contrasted to Semitic (Lassen).    German philologist Max M&uuml;ller
(1823-1900) popularized the term in his writings on comparative linguistics, recommending it as the
name (replacing Indo-European, Indo-Germanic, Caucasian, Jshortened) for the group of related,
inflected languages connected with these peoples, mostly found in Europe but also including Sanskrit
and Persian. Arian was used in this sense from 1839 (and is more philologically correct), but this
spelling caused confusion with Arian, the term in ecclesiastical history.    Gradually replaced in
comparative linguistics c.1900 by Indo-European, except when used to distinguish Indo-European
languages of India from non-Indo-European ones. Used in Nazi ideology to mean member of a Caucasian
Gentile race of Nordic type. As an ethnic designation, however, it is properly limited to Indo-
Iranians (most justly to the latter) and has fallen from general academic use since the Nazi era.


