accessory (adj.)

1550s, subordinate, from Late Latin accessorius, from accessor, agent noun from accedere (see access
(n.)). Meaning aiding in crime is from c.1600.


accessory (n.)

also accessary, early 15c. as a legal term in the criminal sense of one aiding in a crime; also that
which is subordinate to something else, from Late Latin accessorius, from accessor, agent noun from
accedere (see access (n.)). Attested from 1896 as woman's smaller articles of dress, hence
accessorize.


Levis (n.)

1926, American English, originally Levi's, from Levi Strauss and Company, original manufacturer.
Strauss' innovation was the copper rivets at strain points. A cowboy's accessory, adopted as a
fashion c.1940s.


annex (n.)

1540s, an adjunct, accessory, from French annexe, from annexer (see annex (v.)). Meaning
supplementary building is from 1861.


aril (n.)

accessory covering of seeds, 1794, from Modern Latin arillus, from Medieval Latin arilli, Spanish
arillos dried grapes, raisins.


accessorize (v.)

1939, from accessory + -ize. Related: Accessorized; accessorizing.


ornament (n.)

early 13c., an accessory, from Old French ornement ornament, decoration, and directly from Latin
ornamentum apparatus, equipment, trappings; embellishment, decoration, trinket, from ornare equip,
adorn (see ornate). Meaning decoration, embellishment in English is attested from late 14c. (also a
secondary sense in classical Latin). Figurative use from 1550s.


Dorothy

fem. proper name, from French Doroth&eacute;e, from Latin Dorothea, from Greek, literally gift of
God, from doron gift (see date (n.1)) + fem. of theos god (see theo-). With the elements reversed,
it becomes Theodora. The accessory called a Dorothy bag is so called from 1907.


of (prep.)

Old English of, unstressed form of &aelig;f (prep., adv.) away, away from, from Proto-Germanic *af
(cognates: Old Norse af, Old Frisian af, of of, Dutch af off, down, German ab off, from, down), from
PIE *apo- off, away (see apo-). Primary sense in Old English still was away, but shifted in Middle
English with use of the word to translate Latin de, ex, and especially Old French de, which had come
to be the substitute for the genitive case. Of shares with another word of the same length, as, the
evil glory of being accessory to more crimes against grammar than any other. [Fowler]    Also from
1837 a non-standard or dialectal representation of have as pronounced in unstressed positions (could
of, must of, etc.)


