accommodate (v.)

1530s, from Latin accomodatus suitable, past participle of accomodare make fit, adapt, fit one thing
to another, from ad- to (see ad-) + commodare make fit, from commodus fit (see commode). Related:
Accommodated; accommodating.


accommodating (adj.)

obliging, 1771, present participle adjective from accommodate.


accommodation (n.)

room and provisions, lodging, c.1600, now usually plural (accommodations) and chiefly U.S.; from
French accommodation, from Latin accommodationem (nominative accommodatio), noun of action from past
participle stem of accommodare (see accommodate). Meaning appliance, anything which affords aid is
from 1610s; that of act of accommodating is from 1640s.


obsequious (adj.)

late 15c., prompt to serve, from Middle French obs&#233;quieux (15c.), from Latin obsequiosus
compliant, obedient, from obsequium compliance, dutiful service, from obsequi to accommodate oneself
to the will of another, from ob after (see ob-) + sequi to follow (see sequel). Pejorative sense of
fawning, sycophantic had emerged by 1590s. Related: Obsequiously; obsequiousness (mid-15c.).


abomination (n.)

early 14c., abominable thing or action; late 14c., feeling of disgust, hatred, loathing, from Old
French abominacion abomination, horror, repugnance, disgust (13c.), from Latin abominationem
(nominative abominatio) abomination, noun of action from past participle stem of abominari shun as
an ill omen, from ab- off, away from (see ab-) + omin-, stem of omen (see omen). Meaning intensified
by folk etymology derivation from Latin ab homine away from man, thus beastly.    Doubtless, the
life of an Irregular is hard; but the interests of the Greater Number require that it shall be hard.
If a man with a triangular front and a polygonal back were allowed to exist and to propagate a still
more Irregular posterity, what would become of the arts of life? Are the houses and doors and
churches in Flatland to be altered in order to accommodate such monsters? [Edwin Abbot, Flatland: A
Romance of Many Dimensions, 1885]


