accord (n.)

late 13c., accourd, from Old French acord agreement, a back-formation from acorder (see accord
(v.)).


according

c.1300, matching, similar, correponding, present participle adjective and adverb from accord (v.).
Meanings conforming (to), compliant, in agreement; consistent, harmonious; suitable, appropriate are
from late 14c. According to referring to, literally in a manner agreeing with is attested from mid-
15c.


accordion (n.)

1831, from German Akkordion, from Akkord musical chord, concord of sounds, be in tune (compare
Italian accordare to attune an instrument); ultimately from same source as English accord (v.), with
suffix on analogy of clarion, etc. Invented 1829 by piano-maker Cyrill Demian (1772-1847) of Vienna.


accordance (n.)

c.1300, compliance; early 14c., agreement, concurrence, from Old French acordance agreeing,
reconciliation, harmony, noun of action from acorder (see accord). Of things, conformity,
compatibility, harmony, late 14c. Phrase in accordance with is attested from c.1810 (in Middle
English, in accordance of was the usual form).


accord (v.)

early 12c., from Old French acorder (12c.) reconcile, agree, be in harmony, from Vulgar Latin
*accordare make agree, literally be of one heart, bring heart to heart, from Latin ad- to (see ad-)
+ cor (genitive cordis) heart (see heart). Related: Accorded; according.


mannerly (adj.)

well-mannered, seemly, modest, late 14c., from manner (n.) + -ly (1). As an adverb, in accord with
custom; becomingly (mid-14c.); later in accord with good manners (c.1400). Related: Mannerliness.


spontaneous (adj.)

1650s, occurring without external stimulus, from Late Latin spontaneus willing, of one's free will,
from Latin (sua) sponte of one's own accord, willingly; of uncertain origin. Related: Spontaneously;
spontaneousness. Used earlier of persons and characters, with a sense acting of one's own accord
(c.1200). Spontaneous combustion first attested 1795. Spontaneous generation (the phrase, not the
feat) attested from 1650s.


constitutionality (n.)

1787, quality of being in accord with a constitution, from constitutional (adj.) + -ity.


consensus (n.)

1854 as a term in physiology; 1861 of persons; from Latin consensus agreement, accord, past
participle of consentire (see consent). There is an isolated instance of the word from 1633.


unnatural (adj.)

early 15c., not in accord with physical nature, from un- (1) not + natural (adj.). Meaning
artificial is attested from 1746; that of at variance with moral standards is from 1520s. Related:
Unnaturally; unnaturalness.


naturally (adv.)

late 13c., inherently, intrinsically, characteristically, from natural + -ly (2). From late 14c. as
in accord with natural law; also normally; usually, expectedly; as a matter of course, consequently,
understandably. The notion is as a natural result. From early 15c. as without artificial assistance,
by a natural process.


chord (n.1)

related notes in music, 1590s, ultimately a shortening of accord (or borrowed from a similar
development in French) and influenced by Latin chorda catgut, a string of a musical instrument (see
cord (n.)). Spelling with an -h- first recorded c.1600, from confusion with chord (n.2). Originally
two notes; of three or more from 18c.


disagreeable (adj.)

c.1400, not in agreement, from Old French desagreable (13c.), from des- (see dis-) + agreable (see
agreeable). Meaning not in accord with one's taste is from 1690s. Related: Disagreeably;
disagreeableness. Slightly earlier in same sense was unagreeable (late 14c.).


square (v.)

late 14c. of stones, from Old French esquarrer, escarrer to cut square, from Vulgar Latin
*exquadrare (see square (adj.)). Meaning regulate according to standard is from 1530s; sense of to
accord with is from 1590s. With reference to accounts from 1815. In 15c.-17c. the verb also could
mean to deviate, vary, digress, fall out of order. Related: Squared; squaring.


disaccord (v.)

late 14c.; see dis- + accord (v.). Related: Disaccorded; disaccording; disaccordance.


atone (v.)

1550s, from adverbial phrase atonen (c.1300) in accord, literally at one, a contraction of at and
one. It retains the older pronunciation of one. The phrase perhaps is modeled on Latin adunare
unite, from ad- to, at (see ad-) + unum one. Related: Atoned; atoning.


arbitrator (n.)

early 15c., from Old French arbitratour (13c.), from Latin arbitrator a spectator, hearer, witness,
judge, agent noun from past participle stem of arbitrari, from arbiter (see arbiter). The legal form
of popular arbiter; in modern usage, an arbiter makes decisions of his own accord and is accountable
to no one but himself; an arbitrator (early 15c.) decides issues referred to him by the parties.


unison (n.)

1570s, note having the same pitch as another; identity in pitch of two or more sounds; interval
between tones of the same pitch, especially the interval of an octave, from Middle French unisson
unison, accord of sound (16c.) or directly from Medieval Latin unisonus having one sound, sounding
the same, from Late Latin unisonius in immediate sequence in the scale, monotonous, from Latin uni-
one (see one) + sonus sound (see sound (n.1)). Figurative sense of harmonious agreement is first
attested 1640s.


rapport (n.)

1660s, reference, relation, relationship, from French rapport bearing, yield, produce; harmony,
agreement, intercourse, back-formation from rapporter bring back; refer to, from re- again (see re-)
+ apporter to bring, from Latin apportare to bring, from ad- to (see ad-) + portare to carry (see
port (n.1)).    Psychological meaning intense harmonious accord, as between therapist and patient,
is first attested 1894, though the word had been used in a very similar sense with reference to
mesmerism from 1845 (first recorded in Poe). See also report (n.). Johnson frowns on the word and
credits its use in English to Sir William Temple, naturalizer of French terms, who did use it but
was not the first to do so.


perverse (adj.)

mid-14c., wicked, from Old French pervers unnatural, degenerate; perverse, contrary (12c.) and
directly from Latin perversus turned away, contrary, askew, figuratively, turned away from what is
right, wrong, malicious, spiteful, past participle of pervertere to corrupt (see pervert (v.)). The
Latin word is glossed in Old English by forcerred, from past participle of forcyrran to avoid, from
cierran to turn, return. Meaning wrong, not in accord with what is accepted is from 1560s; sense of
obstinate, stubborn is from 1570s. It keeps the non-sexual senses of pervert (v.) and allows the
psychological ones to go with perverted. Related: Perversely; perverseness.


union (n.)

early 15c., action of joining one thing to another, also agreement, accord, also state of matrimony,
from Anglo-French unioun, Old French union (12c.), from Late Latin unionem (nominative unio)
oneness, unity, a uniting, also in Latin meaning a single pearl or onion, from unus one, from PIE
*oi-no- one, unique (see one).    Sense of action of uniting into one political body is attested
from 1540s. Meaning group of people or states is from 1650s. Short for trade union, it is recorded
from 1833. U.S. political sense is attested from 1775; used especially during the Civil War, in
reference to the remainder of the United States after the Southern secession.


concert (n.)

1660s, agreement, accord, harmony, from French concert (16c.), from Italian concerto concert,
harmony, from concertare bring into agreement, in Latin to contend, contest, dispute, from com- with
(see com-) + certare to contend, strive, frequentative of certus, variant past participle of cernere
separate, decide (see crisis).    Before the word entered English, meaning shifted from to strive
against to to strive alongside. Sense of public musical performance is 1680s. But Klein considers
this too much of a stretch and suggests Latin concentare to sing together (from con- + cantare to
sing) as the source of the Italian word in the musical sense.


