acetic (adj.)

1808, from French ac&eacute;tique pertaining to vinegar, from Latin acetum vinegar (properly vinum
acetum wine turned sour; see vinegar), originally past participle of acere be sour, related to acer
sharp (see acrid).


aceto-

before vowels acet-, word-forming element from comb. form of acetic and generally indicating
compounds from or related to acetic acid.


acetone (n.)

colorless volatile liquid, 1839, literally a derivative of acetic acid, from Latin acetum vinegar
(see acetic) + Greek-based chemical suffix -one, which owes its use in chemistry to this word.


acetate (n.)

1827, salt formed by combining acetic acid with a base, from Latin acetum vinegar (see acetic) +
chemical suffix -ate (3). As a type of synthetic material, it is attested from 1920, short for
acetate silk, etc.


acetylene (n.)

gaseous hydrocarbon, 1864, from French ac&#233;tyl&#232;ne, coined by French chemist Marcelin-
Pierre-Eug&egrave;ne Berthelot (1823-1907) from chemical ending -ene + acetyl, which was coined from
acetic in 1839 by German chemist Justus von Liebig; see acetic. Liebig's coinage was in reference to
a different radical; acetyl was transferred to its current sense in 1850s, but Berthelot's coinage
was based on the original use of acetyl.    The name <b>acetylene</b> is an unfortunate one as the
hydrocarbon is not directly related to the modern acetyl radical and the molecule ... contains a
triple bond, not a double bond which the suffix -ene (q.v.) implies. [Flood, Origins of Chemical
Names, 1963]


uracil (n.)

pyramidine base, coined in German, 1885, perhaps from urea + German Acets&auml;ure acetic acid (or
possibly acrylic) + chemical suffix -il.


-ate (3)

in chemistry, word-forming element used to form the names of salts from acids in -ic; from Latin
-atus, -atum, suffix used in forming adjectives and thence nouns; identical with -ate (1).    The
substance formed, for example, by the action of acetic acid (vinegar) on lead was described in the
18th century as plumbum acetatum, i.e. acetated lead. Acetatum was then taken as a noun meaning the
acetated (product), i.e. acetate. [W.E. Flood, The Origins of Chemical Names, London, 1963]


