acknowledge (v.)

1550s, a blend of Middle English aknow (from Old English oncnawan understand, from on + cnawan
recognize; see know) and Middle English knowlechen admit, acknowledge (c.1200; see knowledge). In
the merger, a parasitic -c- slipped in, so that while the kn- became a simple n sound (as in know),
the -c- stepped up to preserve, in this word, the ancient kn- sound. Related: Acknowledged;
acknowledging.


acknowledgement (n.)

1590s, act of acknowledging, from acknowledge + -ment. An early instance of -ment added to an orig.
Eng. vb. [OED]. Meaning token of due recognition is recorded from 1610s.


profess (v.)

early 14c., to take a vow (in a religious order), a back-formation from profession or else from Old
French profes, from Medieval Latin professus avowed, literally having declared publicly, past
participle of Latin profiteri declare openly, testify voluntarily, acknowledge, make public
statement of, from pro- forth (see pro-) + fateri (past participle fassus) acknowledge, confess,
akin to fari speak (see fame (n.)). Meaning declare openly first recorded 1520s, a direct borrowing
of the sense from Latin [Barnhart]. Related: Professed; professing.


unacknowledged (adj.)

1580s, from un- (1) not + past participle of acknowledge (v.).


apologize (v.)

1590s, to speak in defense of; see apology + -ize. Main modern sense to regretfully acknowledge is
attested by 1725. The Greek equivalent, apologizesthai, meant simply to give an account. Related:
Apologized; apologizing.


grant (v.)

early 13c., to allow, consent, permit, from Old French granter (see grant (n.)). Meaning admit,
acknowledge is from c.1300; hence to take (something) for granted (1610s). Related: Granted;
granting.


recognition (n.)

mid-15c., knowledge of an event or incident; understanding, from Middle French recognition (15c.)
and directly from Latin recognitionem (nominative recognitio) a reviewing, investigation,
examination, noun of action from past participle stem of recognoscere to acknowledge, know again;
examine (see recognize).    Sense of formal avowal of knowledge and approval is from 1590s;
especially acknowledgement of the independence of a country by a state formerly exercising
sovereignty (1824). Meaning a knowing again is from 1798.


ken (v.)

to know, Scottish dialect, from Old English cennan make known, declare, acknowledge (in late Old
English also to know), originally make to know, causative of cunnan to become acquainted with, to
know (see can (v.)). Cognate with German kennen, Danish kjende, Swedish k&auml;nna. Related: Kenned;
kenning.


avow (v.)

early 13c., from Anglo-French avouer, Old French avoer acknowledge, accept, recognize, especially as
a protector (Modern French avouer), from Latin advocare (see advocate). A synonym of avouch (q.v.),
which tends to contain the more technical, legal aspect of the word. Related: Avowed; avowing.


recognize (v.)

early 15c., resume possession of land, back-formation from recognizance, or else from Old French
reconoiss-, stem of reconoistre to know again, identify, recognize, from Latin recognoscere
acknowledge, recall to mind, know again; examine; certify, from re- again (see re-) + cognoscere
know (see cognizance). Meaning know again, recall or recover the knowledge of, perceive an identity
with something formerly known or felt first recorded 1530s. Related: Recognized; recognizing.


knowledge (n.)

early 12c., cnawlece acknowledgment of a superior, honor, worship; for first element see know.
Second element obscure, perhaps from Scandinavian and cognate with the -lock action, process, found
in wedlock. Meaning capacity for knowing, understanding; familiarity; fact of knowing is late 14c.
Sense of an organized body of facts or teachings is from c.1400, as is that of sexual intercourse.
Also a verb in Middle English, knoulechen acknowledge (c.1200), later find out about; recognize, and
to have sexual intercourse with (c.1300).


susceptible (adj.)

c.1600, from Late Latin susceptibilis capable, sustainable, susceptible, from Latin suscept-, past
participle stem of suscipere to take, catch, take up, lift up; receive, admit; submit to; sustain,
support, bear; acknowledge, accept, from sub up from under (see sub-) + capere to take (see
capable). Susceptive in the same sense is recorded from early 15c. Related: Susceptibly.


renown (n.)

c.1300, from Anglo-French renoun, Old French renon renown, fame, reputation, from renomer make
famous, from re- repeatedly (see re-) + nomer to name, from Latin nominare to name (see nominate).
The Middle English verb reknouen make known, acknowledge has been assimilated to the noun via
renowned. In old German university slang, a reknowner (German renommist) was a boaster, a swaggerer.


repudiate (v.)

1540s, to cast off by divorce,     from Latin repudiatus, past participle of repudiare to cast off,
put away, divorce, reject, scorn, disdain, from repudium divorce, rejection, a putting away,
dissolution of marriage, from re- back, away (see re-) + pudium, probably related to pes-/ped- foot
[Barnhart]. If this is so, the original notion may be of kicking something away, but folk etymology
commonly connects it with pudere cause shame to. Of opinions, conduct, etc., to refuse to
acknowledge, attested from 1824. Earliest in English as an adjective meaning divorced, rejected,
condemned (mid-15c.). Related: Repudiated; repudiating.


confess (v.)

late 14c., from Old French confesser (transitive and intransitive), from Vulgar Latin *confessare,
from Latin confess-, past participle stem of confiteri to acknowledge, from com- together (see com-)
+ fateri to admit, akin to fari speak (see fame (n.)).    Its original religious sense was of one
who avows his religion in spite of persecution or danger but does not suffer martyrdom. Old French
confesser thus had a figurative sense of to harm, hurt, make suffer. Related: Confessed; confessing.
An Old English word for it was andettan.


avouch (v.)

late 15c., from Middle French avochier call upon as authority, in Old French call (to court),
advocate, plead (a case), from Latin advocare call to as a witness (see advocate).   Avouch, which
is no longer in common use, means guarantee, solemnly aver, prove by assertion, maintain the truth
or existence of, vouch for .... Avow means own publicly to, make no secret of, not shrink from
admitting, acknowledge one's responsibility for .... Vouch is now common only in the phrase vouch
for, which has taken the place of avouch in ordinary use, &amp; means pledge one's word for ....
[Fowler]    Related: Avouched; avouching.


bogey (n.2)

in golfing, c.1891, originally number of strokes a good player is supposed to need for a given hole
or course; later, score one over par (1946); from the same source as bogey (n.1), on the notion of a
phantom opponent, represented by the ground score. The word was in vogue at the time in Britain
because of the popularity of a music hall tune Hush, Hush, Hush, Here Comes the Bogey Man.One
popular song at least has left its permanent effect on the game of golf. That song is 'The Bogey
Man.' In 1890 Dr. Thos. Browne, R.N., the hon. secretary of the Great Yarmouth Club, was playing
against a Major Wellman, the match being against the 'ground score,' which was the name given to the
scratch value of each hole. The system of playing against the 'ground score' was new to Major
Wellman, and he exclaimed, thinking of the song of the moment, that his mysterious and well-nigh
invincible opponent was a regular 'bogey-man.' The name 'caught on' at Great Yarmouth, and to-day
'Bogey' is one of the most feared opponents on all the courses that acknowledge him. [1908, cited in
OED]  Other early golfing sources give it an American origin. As a verb, attested by 1948.


know (v.)

Old English cnawan (class VII strong verb; past tense cneow, past participle cnawen), to know,
perceive; acknowledge, declare, from Proto-Germanic *knew- (cognates: Old High German bi-chnaan, ir-
chnaan to know), from PIE root *gno- to know (cognates: Old Persian x&#353;nasatiy he shall know;
Old Church Slavonic znati, Russian znat to know; Latin gnoscere; Greek *gno-, as in gignoskein;
Sanskrit jna- know). Once widespread in Germanic, this form is now retained only in English, where
however it has widespread application, covering meanings that require two or more verbs in other
languages (such as German wissen, kennen, erkennen and in part k&ouml;nnen; French conna&icirc;tre,
savoir; Latin novisse, cognoscere; Old Church Slavonic znaja, vemi). The Anglo-Saxons used two
distinct words for this, witan (see wit) and cnawan.    Meaning to have sexual intercourse with is
attested from c.1200, from the Old Testament. To not know one's ass from one's elbow is from 1930.
To know better to have learned from experience is from 1704. You know as a parenthetical filler is
from 1712, but it has roots in 14c. To know too much (to be allowed to live, escape, etc.) is from
1872. As an expression of surprise, what do you know attested by 1914.


aspirin (n.)

coined 1899 by German chemist Heinrich Dreser (1860-1924) in German as a trademark name, from Latin
Spiraea (ulmaria) meadow-sweet, the plant in whose flowers or leaves the processed acid in the
medicine is naturally found, + common chemical ending -in (see -ine (2)). Spiraea (Tournefort, 1700)
is from Latinized form of Greek speiraia meadow-sweet, so called from the shape of its follicles
(see spiral (adj.)). The initial -a- is to acknowledge acetylation; Dreser said the word was a
contraction of acetylierte spirs&auml;ure, the German name of the acid, which now is obsolete,
replaced by salicylic acid.   Die Bezeichnung Aspirin ist abgeleitet aus Spirs&#228;ure -- alter
Name der Salicyls&#228;ure und A = Acetyl; statt Acetylirte Spirs&#228;ure, kurzweg Aspirin. [H,
Dreser, Pharmakologisches &#252;ber Aspirin (Acetylsalicyls&#228;ure), in Archiv f&#252;r die
Gesammte Physiologie des Menschen und der Thiere, 1899, p.307]    The custom of giving commercial
names to medicinal products began in Germany in the late 19th century, when nascent pharmaceutical
firms were discovering medical uses for common, easily made chemicals. To discourage competitors
they would market the substance under a short trademarked name a doctor could remember, rather than
the long chemical compound word. German law required prescriptions to be filled exactly as written.


shade (n.)

Middle English schade, Kentish ssed, from late Old English scead partial darkness; shelter,
protection, also partly from sceadu shade, shadow, darkness; shady place, arbor, protection from
glare or heat, both from Proto-Germanic *skadwaz (cognates: Old Saxon skado, Middle Dutch scade,
Dutch schaduw, Old High German scato, German Schatten, Gothic skadus), from PIE *skot-wo-, from root
*skot- dark, shade (cognates: Greek skotos darkness, gloom, Albanian kot darkness, Old Irish scath,
Old Welsh scod, Breton squeut darkness, Gaelic sgath shade, shadow, shelter).    Figurative use in
reference to comparative obscurity is from 1640s. Meaning a ghost is from 1610s; dramatic (or mock-
dramatic) expression shades of _____ to invoke or acknowledge a memory is from 1818, from the ghost
sense. Meaning lamp cover is from 1780. Sense of window blind first recorded 1845. Meaning cover to
protect the eyes is from 1801. Meaning grade of color first recorded 1680s; that of degree or
gradiation of darkness in a color is from 1680s (compare nuance, from French nue cloud). Meaning
small amount or degree is from 1782.


hand (n.)

Old English hond, hand hand; side; power, control, possession, from Proto-Germanic *handuz
(cognates: Old Saxon, Old Frisian, Dutch, German hand, Old Norse h&ouml;nd, Gothic handus), of
uncertain origin. The original Old English plural handa was superseded in Middle English by handen,
later hands.    Meaning person who does something with his hands is from 1580s, hence hired workman
(1630s) and sailor in a ship's crew (1660s). Clock and watch sense is from 1570s. Meaning round of
applause is from 1838. The linear measure of 4 inches (originally 3) is from 1560s, now used only in
giving the height of horses. The meaning playing cards held in one player's hand is from 1620s; that
of a round at a card game is from 1620s.  First hand, second hand, etc. (mid-15c.) are from the
notion of something being passed down from hand to hand. Out of hand (1590s) is opposite of in hand
under control (c.1200). Hand over fist (1825) is suggestive of sailors and fishermen hauling in
nets. Hand jive is from 1958. To win something hands down (1855) is from horse racing, from a
jockey's gesture of letting the reins go loose in an easy victory.    The Two Thousand Guinea Stakes
was not the best contested one that it has been our fortune to assist at. ... [T]hey were won by
Meteor, with Scott for his rider; who went by the post with his hands down, the easiest of all easy
half-lengths. Wiseacre certainly did the best in his power to spoil his position, and Misdeal was at
one time a little vexatious. [The Sportsman, report from April 26, 1840]    To hand it to (someone)
acknowledge someone's ability is slang from c.1906. Phrase on the one hand ... on the other hand is
recorded from 1630s, a figurative use of the physical sense of hand in reference to position on one
side or the other side of the body (as in the lefthand side), which goes back to Old English Hands
up! as a command from a policeman, robber, etc., is from 1873. Hand-to-mouth is from c.1500. Hand-
in-hand attested from c.1500 as with hands clasped; figurative sense of concurrently recorded from
1570s.


