acquittal (n.)

early 15c., payment of debt or retribution; see acquit + -al (2). Sense of a release from debt or
obligation is from mid-15c.; that of freeing from charge or offense (by legal process) is from
1530s.


psychopath (n.)

1885, in the criminal psychology sense, a back-formation from psychopathic.    The Daily Telegraph
had, the other day, a long article commenting on a Russian woman who had murdered a little girl. A
Dr. Balinsky prevailed upon the jury to give a verdict of acquittal, because she was a psychopath.
The Daily Telegraph regards this term as a new coinage, but it has been long known amongst
Spiritualists, yet in another sense. [The Medium and Daybreak, Jan. 16, 1885]    The case alluded
to, and the means of acquittal, were briefly notorious in England and brought the word into currency
in the modern sense.


absolution (n.)

remission, forgiveness, c.1200, from Old French absolucion, earlier assolucion, from Latin
absolutionem (nominative absolutio) completion, acquittal, noun of action from past participle stem
of absolvere to absolve (see absolve). Originally of sins; in general use from c.1400.


witchcraft (n.)

Old English wiccecr&aelig;ft witchcraft, magic, from wicce (see witch) + cr&aelig;ft power, skill
(see craft). Witchcraft was declared a crime in English law in 1542; trials there peaked in 1580s
and 1640s but fell sharply after 1660. The last, in 1717, ended in acquittal. The Witchcraft Act was
repealed 1736.


Philadelphia

city in Pennsylvania, U.S., from Greek, taken by William Penn to mean brotherly love, from philos
loving (see -phile) + adelphos brother (see Adelphia). Also the name recalls that of the ancient
city in Lydia, mentioned in the New Testament, which was so called in honor of Attalos II
Philadelphos, 2c B.C.E. king of Pergamon, who founded it. His title is said to have meant loving the
brethren. Philadelphia lawyer clever, shrewd attorney attested from 1788 in London, said originally
to have been applied to Andrew Hamilton, who obtained the famous acquittal of J.P. Zenger on libel
charges in 1735.    [C]ricket and coaching were after all popular in their day in places besides
Philadelphia. It was merely that Philadelphia kept on with them longer than most places. This is a
perennial Philadelphia trick, and gives to Philadelphia a sort of perpetual feeling of loss.
Philadelphians are always just now getting rid of things that are picturesque, like those gas lamps
on the streets, only because everybody else got rid of them long ago. [Nathaniel Burt, The Perennial
Philadelphians, 1963]


