acrid (adj.)

1712, formed irregularly from Latin acer (fem. acris) sharp, pungent, bitter, eager, fierce, from
PIE *akri- sharp, from root *ak- be sharp, rise (out) to a point, pierce (cognates: Oscan akrid
(ablative singular) sharply; Greek akis sharp point, akros at the farthest point, highest,
outermost, akantha thorn, akme summit, edge; also oxys sharp, bitter; Sanskrit acri- corner, edge,
acani- point of an arrow, asrih edge; Lithuanian a&#353;muo sharpness, akstis sharp stick; Old
Lithuanian a&#353;tras, Lithuanian a&#353;trus sharp; Old Church Slavonic ostru, Russian &#243;stryj
sharp; Old Irish er high; Welsh ochr edge, corner, border; Old Norse eggja goad; Old English ecg
sword). The -id suffix probably is in imitation of acid. Acrious (1670s) is a correct formation, but
seldom seen.


acrimony (n.)

1540s, quality of being acrid, from Middle French acrimonie or directly from Latin acrimonia
sharpness, pungency of taste, figuratively acrimony, severity, energy, from acer sharp (fem. acris,
neuter acre; see acrid) + -monia suffix of action, state, condition. Figurative extension to
sharpness of temper is first recorded 1610s.


acro-

word-forming element meaning highest, topmost, at the extremities, before vowels, acr-, from Greek
akro- pertaining to an end, extreme, comb. form of akros at the end, at the top (see acrid).


acme (n.)

highest point, 1560s, from Greek akme (highest) point, edge; peak of anything, from PIE root *ak-
sharp (see acrid). Written in Greek letters until c.1620. The U.S. grocery store chain was founded
1891 in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.


acrostic (n.)

short poem in which the initial letters of the lines, taken in order, spell a word or phrase, 1580s,
from Medieval Latin acrostichis, from Greek akrostikhis, from akros at the end, outermost (see
acrid) + stikhos line of verse, literally row (see stair).


acrimonious (adj.)

1610s, acrid, from French acrimonieux, from Medieval Latin acrimoniosus, from Latin acrimonia (see
acrimony). Of dispositions, debates, etc., from 1775. Related: Acrimoniously; acrimoniousness.


acrobat (n.)

1825, from French acrobate (14c.), tightrope-walker, and directly from Greek akrobates rope dancer,
gymnastic performer, related to akrobatos going on tip-toe, climbing up high, from akros topmost, at
the point end (see acrid) + stem of bainein walk, go (see come).


oxalic (adj.)

1791, from French oxalique (1787, Lavoisier), from Latin oxalis sorrel, from Greek oxalis, from oxys
sharp (see acrid). So called because it occurs in sorrel.


acanthus (n.)

1660s, from Latin acanthus, from Greek akanthos, from ake point, thorn (see acrid) + anthos flower
(see anther). So called for its large spiny leaves. A conventionalized form of the leaf is used in
Corinthian capitals.


acropolis (n.)

1660s, from Greek akropolis citadel (especially that of Athens), from akros highest, upper (see
acrid) + polis city (see polis).


acacia (n.)

1540s, from Latin acacia, from Greek akakia thorny Egyptian tree, perhaps related to Greek ake
point, thorn, from PIE root *ak- sharp (see acrid). Or perhaps a Hellenization of some Egyptian
word. From late 14c. in English as the name of a type of gum used as an astringent, etc.


oxy-

word-forming element meaning sharp, pointed; acid, from Greek oxy-, comb. form of oxys sharp,
pungent (see acrid). Also used as a comb. form of oxygen.


exacerbation (n.)

c.1400, from Late Latin exacerbationem (nominative exacerbatio), noun of action from past participle
stem Latin exacerbare exasperate, irritate, provoke, from ex- thoroughly (see ex-) + acerbus harsh,
bitter, from acer sharp, keen (see acrid).


acromegaly (n.)

gigantism due to activity of pituitary after normal growth has ceased, 1886, from French
acrom&eacute;galie, from medical Latin acromegalia, from Greek akron extremity (see acrid) + megas
great (fem. megale; see mickle). Said in contemporary literature to have been coined 1885 by French
physician Dr. Pierre Marie.


oxymoron (n.)

1650s, from Greek oxymoron, noun use of neuter of oxymoros (adj.) pointedly foolish, from oxys sharp
(see acrid) + moros stupid (see moron). Rhetorical figure by which contradictory terms are conjoined
so as to give point to the statement or expression; the word itself is an illustration of the thing.
Now often used loosely to mean contradiction in terms. Related: Oxymoronic.


acuity (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French acuit&eacute; (16c.) or directly from Medieval Latin acuitatem
(nominative acuitas) sharpness, from Latin acuere to sharpen, related to acus needle, acuere to
sharpen, from PIE root *ak- rise to a point, be sharp (see acrid).


pyracanth (n.)

thorny shrub of the apple family, 1660s, from Modern Latin genus name Pyracantha, from Greek
pyrakantha (Dioscorides), a plant named but not described, from pyr- fire (see fire (n.)) + akantha
thorn, thorny plant, from PIE root *ak- sharp, pointed (see acrid).


acetic (adj.)

1808, from French ac&eacute;tique pertaining to vinegar, from Latin acetum vinegar (properly vinum
acetum wine turned sour; see vinegar), originally past participle of acere be sour, related to acer
sharp (see acrid).


acrylic (adj.)

1855, of or containing acryl, name of a radical from acrolein (1843), the name of a liquid in onions
and garlic that makes eyes tear, from Latin acer sharp (see acrid) + olere to smell (see odor) + -in
(see -ine (2)). With adjectival suffix + -ic. Modern senses often short for acrylic fiber, acrylic
resin, etc.


acid (adj.)

1620s, of the taste of vinegar, from French acide (16c.) or directly from Latin acidus sour, sharp,
adjective of state from acere to be sour, from PIE root *ak- sharp, pointed (see acrid). Figurative
use from 1775; applied to intense colors from 1916. Acid test is American English, 1892, from the
frontier days, when gold was distinguished from similar metals by application of nitric acid. Acid
rain is first recorded 1859 in reference to England.


awn (n.)

bristly fibers on grain of plants, c.1300, from Old Norse &ouml;gn, from Proto-Germanic *agano
(cognates: Old English egenu, Old High German agana, German Ahne, Gothic ahana), from PIE *ak-ona-
(cognates: Sanskrit asani- arrowhead, Greek akhne husk of wheat, Latin acus chaff, Lithuanian
akuotas beard, awn); suffixed form of PIE root *ak- sharp (see acrid).


paroxysm (n.)

sudden attack, convulsion, early 15c., from Middle French paroxysme (16c.), earlier paroxime (13c.),
from Medieval Latin paroxysmus irritation, fit of a disease, from Greek paroxysmos irritation,
exasperation, from paroxynein to irritate, goad, provoke, from para- beyond (see para- (1)) +
oxynein sharpen, goad, from oxys sharp, pointed (see acrid). Non-medical sense first attested
c.1600. Related: Paroxysmal.


acerbity (n.)

1570s, from Middle French acerbit&eacute;, from Latin acerbitatem (nominative acerbitas) harshness,
sharpness, bitterness, from acerbus bitter to taste, sharp, sour, tart (related to acer sharp;
compare Latin superbus haughty, from super above), from Proto-Italic *akro-po- sharp, from PIE *ak-
sharp (see acrid). Earliest use in English is figurative, of sharp and bitter persons. Of tastes,
from 1610s.


ear (n.2)

grain part of corn, from Old English ear (West Saxon), &aelig;her (Northumbrian) spike, ear of
grain, from Proto-Germanic *akhaz (genitive *akhizaz; cognates: Dutch aar, Old High German ehir,
German &Auml;hre, Old Norse ax, Gothic ahs ear of corn), from PIE root *ak- sharp, pointed (source
of Latin acus husk of corn, Greek akoste barley; see acrid).


acrophobia (n.)

morbid fear of heights, 1887, medical Latin, from Greek akros at the end, the top (see acrid) +
-phobia fear. Coined by Italian physician Dr. Andrea Verga in a paper describing the condition, from
which Verga himself suffered.    In this paper, read somewhat over a year ago at the congress of
alienists at Pavia, the author makes confession of his own extreme dread of high places. Though
fearless of the contagion of cholera, he has palpitations on mounting a step-ladder, finds it
unpleasant to ride on the top of a coach or to look out of even a first-story window, and has never
used an elevator. [American Journal of Psychology, Nov. 1888, abstract of Verga's report]


mediocre (adj.)

1580s, from Middle French m&eacute;diocre (16c.), from Latin mediocris of middling height or state,
moderate, ordinary, figuratively mediocre, mean, inferior, originally halfway up a mountain, from
medius middle (see medial (adj.)) + ocris jagged mountain (cognate with Greek okris peak, point,
Welsh ochr corner, border, Latin acer sharp; see acrid). As a noun, medicore thing or person, by
1834.


paragon (n.)

1540s, from Middle French paragon a model, pattern of excellence (15c., Modern French parangon),
from Italian paragone, originally touchstone to test gold (early 14c.), from paragonare to test on a
touchstone, compare, from Greek parakonan to sharpen, whet, from para- on the side (see para- (1)) +
akone whetstone, from PIE root *ak- sharp, pointed (see acrid).


eager (adj.)

late 13c., strenuous, ardent, fierce, angry, from Old French aigre sour, acid; harsh, bitter, rough;
eager greedy; lively, active, forceful, from Latin acrem (nominative acer) keen, sharp, pointed,
piercing; acute, ardent, zealous (see acrid).    Meaning full of keen desire (early 14c.) seems to
be peculiar to English. The English word kept an alternative meaning of pungent, sharp-edged till
19c. (as in Shakespeare's The bitter clamour of two eager tongues, in Richard II). Related: Eagerly;
eagerness.


pismire (n.)

ant, late 14c. (early 14c. as a surname), from pyss urine (said to be in reference to the acrid
smell of an anthill) + mire an ant, probably from Old Norse maurr ant (cognates: Swedish myra,
Danish myre, Middle Dutch miere, Dutch mier, Crimean Gothic miera ant), from PIE base *morwi- (see
Formica (2)). Compare pissant, also early Dutch mierseycke (from seycke urine), Finnish kusiainen
(from kusi urine). He is as angry as a pissemyre,Though &thorn;at he haue al that he kan
desire.[Chaucer]Applied contemptuously to persons from 1560s.


bitter (adj.)

Old English biter bitter, sharp, cutting; angry, embittered; cruel, from Proto-Germanic *bitras-
(cognates: Old Saxon bittar, Old Norse bitr, Dutch bitter, Old High German bittar, German bitter,
Gothic baitrs bitter), from PIE root *bheid- to split (cognates: Old English bitan to bite; see bite
(v.)). Evidently the meaning drifted in prehistoric times from biting, of pungent taste, to acrid-
tasting. Used figuratively in Old English of states of mind and words. Related: Bitterly.


oxygen (n.)

gaseous chemical element, 1790, from French oxyg&egrave;ne, coined in 1777 by French chemist
Antoine-Laurent Lavoisier (1743-1794), from Greek oxys sharp, acid (see acrid) + French -g&egrave;ne
something that produces (from Greek -genes formation, creation; see -gen).    Intended to mean
acidifying (principle), it was a Greeking of French principe acidifiant. So called because oxygen
was then considered essential in the formation of acids (it is now known not to be). The element was
isolated by Priestley (1774), who, using the old model of chemistry, called it dephlogisticated air.
The downfall of the phlogiston theory required a new name, which Lavoisier provided.


vinegar (n.)

early 14c., from Old French vinaigre vinegar, from vin wine (from Latin vinum; see wine (n.)) +
aigre sour (see eager). In Latin, it was vinum acetum wine turned sour; compare Greek oxos wine
vinegar, which is related to oxys sharp (see acrid). Related: Vinegary; vinegarish.


coelacanth (n.)

1857, from Modern Latin Coelacanthus (genus name, 1839, Agassiz), from Greek koilos hollow (from PIE
root *kel- (2); see cell) + akantha spine (see acrid). So called from the hollow fin rays supporting
the tail. Known only as a fossil, the most recent one from 70 million years ago, until discovered
living in the sea off the east coast of South Africa Dec. 22, 1938. The specimen was described by
Marjorie Courtney-Latimer, who wrote about it to S.African ichthyologist J.L.B. Smith.    I stared
and stared, at first in puzzlement. I did not know any fish of our own, or indeed of any seas like
that; it looked more like a lizard. And then a bomb seemed to burst in my brain, and beyond that
sketch and the paper of the letter, I was looking at a series of fishy creatures that flashed up as
on a screen, fishes no longer here, fishes that had lived in dim past ages gone, and of which only
fragmentary remains in rock are known. [J.L.B. Smith, Old Fourlegs: The Story of the Coelacanth,
1956]


hot (adj.)

Old English hat hot, flaming, opposite of cold, also fervent, fierce, intense, excited, from Proto-
Germanic *haita- (cognates: Old Saxon and Old Frisian het, Old Norse heitr, Middle Dutch and Dutch
heet, German hei&szlig; hot, Gothic heito heat of a fever), from PIE root *kai- heat (cognates:
Lithuanian kaistu to grow hot).    The association of hot with sexuality dates back to c.1500. Taste
sense of pungent, acrid, biting is from 1540s. Sense of exciting, remarkable, very good is 1895;
that of stolen is first recorded 1925 (originally with overtones of easily identified and difficult
to dispose of); that of radioactive is from 1942.   Hot flashes in the menopausal sense attested
from 1887. Hot air unsubstantiated statements, boastful talk is from 1900. Hot stuff for anything
good or excellent is by 1889. Hot potato in figurative sense is from 1846. The hot and cold in hide-
and-seek or guessing games are from hunting (1640s), with notion of tracking a scent.


edge (n.)

Old English ecg corner, edge, point, also sword (also found in ecgplega, literally edge play,
ecghete, literally edge hate, both used poetically for battle), from Proto-Germanic *agjo (cognates:
Old Frisian egg edge; Old Saxon eggia point, edge; Middle Dutch egghe, Dutch eg; Old Norse egg, see
egg (v.); Old High German ecka, German Eck corner), from PIE root *ak- sharp, pointed (cognates:
Sanskrit asrih edge, Latin acies, Greek akis point; see acrid).    Spelling development of Old
English -cg to Middle English -gg to Modern English -dge represents a widespread shift in
pronunciation. To get the edge on (someone) is U.S. colloquial, first recorded 1911. Edge city is
from Joel Garreau's 1992 book of that name. Razor's edge as a perilous narrow path translates Greek
epi xyrou akmes. To have (one's) teeth on edge is from late 14c., though It is not quite clear what
is the precise notion originally expressed in this phrase [OED].


