acuity (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French acuit&eacute; (16c.) or directly from Medieval Latin acuitatem
(nominative acuitas) sharpness, from Latin acuere to sharpen, related to acus needle, acuere to
sharpen, from PIE root *ak- rise to a point, be sharp (see acrid).


acupressure (n.)

1859, from Latin acus needle (see acuity) + pressure (n.).


acupuncture (n.)

1680s, pricking with a needle to ease pain, from Latin acus needle (see acuity) + puncture. The verb
is first recorded 1972.


acumen (n.)

1530s, from Latin acumen a point, sting, hence mental sharpness, shrewdness, from acuere to sharpen
(see acuity).


eglantine (n.)

sweet briar, c.1400, from French &eacute;glantine, from Old French aiglent dog rose, from Vulgar
Latin *aquilentus rich in prickles, from Latin aculeus spine, prickle, diminutive of acus needle
(see acuity).


acute (adj.)

late 14c., originally of fevers and diseases, coming and going quickly (opposed to a chronic), from
Latin acutus sharp, pointed, figuratively shrill, penetrating; intelligent, cunning, past participle
of acuere sharpen (see acuity). Meaning sharp, irritating is from early 15c. Meaning intense is from
1727. Related: Acutely; acuteness.


aiglet (n.)

metal tag of a lace, meant to make it easier to thread through the eyelet-holes, but later merely
ornamental, mid-15c., from Middle French aiguillette, diminutive of aiguille needle, from Late Latin
acucula, itself a diminutive of Latin acus needle (see acuity). Compare Italian agucchia, Portuguese
agulha, Spanish aguja needle.


twenty (n.)

Old English twentig group of twenty, from twegen two (see two) + -tig group of ten (see -ty (1)).
Cognate with Old Saxon twentig , Old Frisian twintich, Dutch twintig, Old High German zweinzug,
German zwanzig. Gothic twai tigjus is even more transparent: literally two tens.    The card game
twenty-one (1790) is from French vingt-et-un (1781). Twenty-twenty hindsight is first recorded 1962,
a figurative use of the Snellen fraction for normal visual acuity, expressed in feet. The guessing
game of twenty questions is recorded from 1786.


