acute (adj.)

late 14c., originally of fevers and diseases, coming and going quickly (opposed to a chronic), from
Latin acutus sharp, pointed, figuratively shrill, penetrating; intelligent, cunning, past participle
of acuere sharpen (see acuity). Meaning sharp, irritating is from early 15c. Meaning intense is from
1727. Related: Acutely; acuteness.


sagacity (n.)

c.1500, from Middle French sagacit&eacute;, from Latin sagacitatem (nominative sagacitas) keenness
of perception, quality of being acute, from sagax (genitive sagacis) of quick perception, acute,
related to sagus prophetic, sagire perceive keenly, from PIE root *sag- to track down, trace, seek
(cognates: Old English secan to seek; see seek). Also used 17c.-18c. of animals, meaning acute sense
of smell.


sub-acute (adj.)

also subacute, 1752, from sub- + acute.


ague (n.)

malarial fever, c.1300, from Old French ague an acute fever, from Medieval Latin (febris) acuta
sharp (fever), fem. of acutus sharp (see acute).


poliomyelitis (n.)

1874, also polio-myelitis, coined by German physician Adolph Kussmaul (1822-1902) from Greek polios
grey (see fallow (adj.)) + myelos marrow + -itis inflammation. So called because the gray matter in
the spinal cord is inflamed, which causes paralysis. The earlier name was infantile paralysis
(1843).    In many respects, also, this affection resembles the acute spinal paralysis of infancy,
which, from the researches of Charcot, Joffroy, and others, have been shown pathologically to be an
acute myelitis of the anterior cornua. Hence, for these forms of paralysis, Professor Kussmaul
suggests the name of 'poliomyelitis anterior.' [London Medical Record, Dec. 9, 1874]


SARS (n.)

by 2003, acronym from severe acute respiratory syndrome.


cute (adj.)

1731, clever, shortening of acute; informal sense of pretty is 1834, American English student slang.
Related: Cuteness.


sharp (adj.)

Old English scearp having a cutting edge; pointed; intellectually acute, active, shrewd; keen (of
senses); severe; biting, bitter (of tastes), from Proto-Germanic *skarpaz, literally cutting
(cognates: Old Saxon scarp, Old Norse skarpr, Old Frisian skerp, Dutch scherp, German scharf sharp),
from PIE *(s)ker- (1) to cut (cognates: Lettish skarbs sharp, Middle Irish cerb cutting; see shear
(v.)).    The figurative meaning acute or penetrating in intellect or perception was in Old English;
hence keenly alive to one's own interests, quick to take advantage (1690s). Of words or talk,
cutting, sarcastic, from early 13c. Meaning distinct in contour is from 1670s. The adverbial meaning
abruptly is from 1836; that of promptly is first attested 1840. The musical meaning half step above
(a given tone) is from 1570s. Meaning stylish is from 1944, hepster slang, from earlier general
slang sense of excellent (1940). Phrase sharp as a tack first recorded 1912 (sharp as a needle has
been around since Old English). Sharp-shinned attested from 1704 of persons, 1813 of hawks.


perspicacious (adj.)

1630s, formed as an adjective to perspicacity, from Latin perspicax sharp-sighted, having the power
of seeing through; acute (see perspicacity). Related: Perspicaciously; perspicaciousness.


anguish (n.)

c.1200, acute bodily or mental suffering, from Old French anguisse, angoisse choking sensation,
distress, anxiety, rage, from Latin angustia (plural angustiae) tightness, straitness, narrowness;
figuratively distress, difficulty, from ang(u)ere to throttle, torment (see anger (v.)).


smallpox (n.)

acute, highly contagious disease, 1510s, small pokkes, as distinguished from great pox syphillis;
from small-pock pustule caused by smallpox (mid-15c.); see small (adj.) + pox. Compare French petite
v&eacute;role. Fatal in a quarter to a third of unvaccinated cases.


incisive (adj.)

early 15c., inscisif, slashing, cutting with a sharp edge, from Middle French incisif and directly
from Medieval Latin incisivus, from Latin incis-, past participle stem of incidere (see incision).
Originally literal; figurative sense of mentally acute first recorded 1850 as a borrowing from
French. Related: Incisively; incisiveness.


e-

the later Romans evidently found words beginning in sc-, sp-, st- difficult or unpleasant to
pronounce; in Late Latin forms begin to emerge in i- (such as ispatium, ispiritu), and from 5c. this
shifted to e-. The development was carried into the Romanic languages, especially Old French, and
the French words were modified further after 15c. by natural loss of -s- (the suppression being
marked by an acute accent on the e-), while in other cases the word was formally corrected back to
the Latin spelling (for example sp&#233;cial). Hence French &#233;tat for Old French estat for Latin
status, etc.


ellipse (n.)

1753, from French ellipse (17c.), from Latin ellipsis ellipse, also, a falling short, deficit, from
Greek elleipsis (see ellipsis). So called because the conic section of the cutting plane makes a
smaller angle with the base than does the side of the cone, hence, a falling short. The Greek word
was first applied by Apollonius of Perga (3c. B.C.E.). to the curve which had been previously called
the section of the acute-angled cone, but it had previously been technically applied to a rectangle
one of whose sides coincides with a part of a given line (Euclid, VI. 27).


eager (adj.)

late 13c., strenuous, ardent, fierce, angry, from Old French aigre sour, acid; harsh, bitter, rough;
eager greedy; lively, active, forceful, from Latin acrem (nominative acer) keen, sharp, pointed,
piercing; acute, ardent, zealous (see acrid).    Meaning full of keen desire (early 14c.) seems to
be peculiar to English. The English word kept an alternative meaning of pungent, sharp-edged till
19c. (as in Shakespeare's The bitter clamour of two eager tongues, in Richard II). Related: Eagerly;
eagerness.


lozenge (n.)

figure having four equal sides and two acute and two obtuse angles, early 14c., from Old French
losenge windowpane, small square cake, etc., used for many flat quadrilateral things (Modern French
losange). It has cognates in Spanish losanje, Catalan llosange, Italian lozanga. Probably from a
pre-Roman Celtic language, perhaps Iberian *lausa or Gaulish *lausa flat stone (compare
Proven&ccedil;al lausa, Spanish losa, Catalan llosa, Portuguese lousa slab, tombstone), from a pre-
Celtic language.    Originally in English a term in heraldry; meaning small cake or tablet
(originally diamond-shaped) of medicine and sugar, etc., meant to be held in the mouth and dissolved
is from 1520s.


typhus (n.)

acute infectious fever, usually accompanied by prostration, delirium, and small reddish spots, 1785,
from medical Latin, from Greek typhos stupor caused by fever, literally smoke, from typhein to
smoke, related to typhos blind, typhon whirlwind, from PIE *dheubh-, perhaps an extended form of
root *dheu- (1) to fly about like dust.    The Greek term [typhos] (smoke, mist, fog) was employed
by Hippocrates to define a confused state of the intellect, with a tendency to stupor (stupor
attonitus); and in this sense it is aptly applied to typhus fever with its slow cerebration and
drowsy stupor. Boissier de Sauvages first (in 1760) called this fever typhus, and the name was
adopted by Cullen of Edinburgh in 1769. Previous to the time of de Sauvages typhus was known as
Pestilential or Putrid Fever, or by some name suggested by the eruption, or expressive of the
locality in which it appeared, as Camp, Jail, Hospital, or Ship Fever (Murchison). [Thomas Clifford,
ed., A System of Medicine, New York, 1897]    Related: typhous (adj.).


