adage (n.)

brief, familiar proverb, 1540s, Middle French adage, from Latin adagium adage, proverb, apparently
from adagio, from ad- to (see ad-) + *agi-, root of aio I say, from PIE *ag- to speak. But Tucker
thinks the second element is rather ago set in motion, drive, urge.


prodigy (n.)

late 15c., sign, portent, something extraordinary from which omens are drawn, from Latin prodigium
prophetic sign, omen, portent, prodigy, from pro- forth (see pro-) + -igium, a suffix or word of
unknown origin, perhaps from *agi-, root of aio I say (see adage). Meaning child with exceptional
abilities first recorded 1650s.


proverb (n.)

c.1300, in boke of Prouerbyys, the Old Testament work, from Old French proverbe (12c.) and directly
from Latin proverbium a common saying, old adage, maxim, literally words put forward, from pro-
forth (see pro-) + verbum word (see verb). Used generally from late 14c. The Book of Proverbs in Old
English was cwidboc, from cwide speech, saying, proverb, homily, related to cwiddian to talk, speak,
say, discuss; cwiddung speech, saying, report.


kleptomania (n.)

1830, formed from mania + Greek kleptes thief, from kleptein to steal, act secretly, from PIE *klep-
to steal, an extention of root *kel- (2) to cover, conceal (see cell; cognate with Latin clepere to
steal, listen secretly to, Old Prussian au-klipts hidden, Old Church Slavonic poklopu cover,
wrapping, Gothic hlifan to steal, hliftus thief). Much-derided 19c. as a fancy term for old-
fashioned thievery and an opportunity for the privileged to claim a psychological motive for
criminal misbehavior.    There is a popular belief that some of the criminal laws under which the
poor are rigorously punished are susceptible of remarkable elasticity when the peccadilloes of the
rich are brought under judgment, and that there is some truth in the old adage which declares that
one man may steal a horse where another dare not look over the hedge. This unwholesome distrust is
not likely to diminish if, in cases of criminal prosecutions where so-called respectable persons
commit theft without sufficiently obvious motive for the act, they have their crime extenuated on
the plea of kleptomania, as has recently occurred in several notable instances. [Kleptomania, The
Lancet, Nov. 16, 1861]


