address (n.)

1530s, dutiful or courteous approach, from address (v.) and from French adresse. Sense of formal
speech is from 1751. Sense of superscription of a letter is from 1712 and led to the meaning place
of residence (1888).


addressee (n.)

1810; see address (v.) + -ee.


address (v.)

early 14c., to guide or direct, from Old French adrecier go straight toward; straighten, set right;
point, direct (13c.), from Vulgar Latin *addirectiare make straight, from Latin ad to (see ad-) +
*directiare, from Latin directus straight, direct (see direct (v.)). Late 14c. as to set in order,
repair, correct. Meaning to write as a destination on a written message is from mid-15c. Meaning to
direct spoken words (to someone) is from late 15c. Related: Addressed; addressing.


salutatorian (n.)

1841, American English, from salutatory of the nature of a salutation, here in the specific sense
designating the welcoming address given at a college commencement (1702) + -ian. The address was
originally usually in Latin and given by the second-ranking graduating student.


princess (n.)

late 14c., woman of royal or noble birth; daughter or wife of a ruler or prince; female ruler, a
native formation, or else from Old French princesse, fem. of prince (see prince). Compare Medieval
Latin principissa, Italian principessa. As a colloquial form of address to a woman or girl, it is
recorded from 1924 (as a term of address to a lover, early 15c.).


toots (n.)

slang familiar form of address to a woman or girl, 1936, American English, short for tootsie,
tootsy, from tootsy-wootsy (1895), a familiar form of address to a sweetheart, originally a playful
or nursery name for a small foot, from childish pronunciation of foot (n.); compare tootsy.


p.a. (n.)

abbreviation of public address (system), attested from 1936.


direct (v.)

late 14c., to write (to someone), to address, from Latin directus straight, past participle of
dirigere set straight, from dis- apart (see dis-) + regere to guide (see regal). Compare dress;
address.    Meaning to govern, regulate is from c.1500; to order, ordain is from 1650s. Sense of to
write the destination on the outside of a letter is from 16c. Of plays, films, etc., from 1913.
Related: Directed; directing.


bwana

respectful or reverential form of address in East Africa, 1878, from Swahili.


mister

as a title of courtesy before a man's Christian name, mid-15c., unaccented variant of master. As a
form of address, without a name and with a tinge of rudeness, from 1760.


appeal (v.)

early 14c., originally in legal sense of to call to a higher judge or court, from Anglo-French
apeler to call upon, accuse, Old French apeler make an appeal (11c., Modern French appeler), from
Latin appellare to accost, address, appeal to, summon, name, iterative of appellere to prepare, from
ad- to (see ad-) + pellere to beat, drive (see pulse (n.1)). Related: Appealed; appealing.
Probably a Roman metaphoric extension of a nautical term for driving a ship toward a particular
landing. Popular modern meaning to be attractive or pleasing is quite recent, attested from 1907
(appealing in this sense is from 1891), from the notion of to address oneself in expectation of a
sympathetic response.


sir

c.1300, title of honor of a knight or baronet (until 17c. also a title of priests), variant of sire,
originally used only in unstressed position. Generalized as a respectful form of address by mid-
14c.; used as a salutation at the beginning of letters from early 15c.


sirrah

1520s, term of address used to men or boys expressing anger or contempt, archaic extended form of
sir (in U.S., siree, attested from 1823).


ma&#039;am

also maam, 1660s, colloquial shortening of madam (q.v.). At one time the ordinary respectful form of
address to a married woman; later restricted to the queen and royal princesses or used by servants
to their mistresses.


sweetheart (n.)

late 13c. as a form of address, 1570s as a synonym for loved one; from sweet (adj.) + heart. As an
adjective, with reference to labor contracts, it is attested from 1959.


Mac

casual, generic term of address for a man, 1928, from Irish and Gaelic mac, a common element in
Scottish and Irish names (literally son of; see Mac-); hence used generally from early 19c. for a
Celtic Irishman.


sonny (n.)

small boy, 1833, from son + -y (3). As a familiar form of address to one younger or inferior, from
1852. The song Sonny Boy (Jolson) was popular 1928.


entanglement (n.)

1640s, from entangle + -ment. Foreign entanglements does not appear as such in Washington's Farewell
Address, though he nonetheless warns against them. The phrase is found in William Coxe's 1798
memoirs of Sir Robert Walpole.


lecture (v.)

1580s, from lecture (n.). Meaning to address severely and at length is from 1706. Related: Lectured;
lecturing.


inaugural (adj.)

1680s, from French inaugural (17c.), from inaugurer to inaugurate (see inauguration). The noun
meaning an inaugural address is recorded from 1832, American English.


culprit (n.)

1670s, from Anglo-French cul prit, contraction of Culpable: prest (d'averrer nostre bille) guilty,
ready (to prove our case), words used by prosecutor in opening a trial. It seems the abbreviation
cul. prit was mistaken in English for an address to the defendant.


bub (n.)

familiar address for males, 1839, perhaps a variation of bud a little boy (1848), American English
colloquial; perhaps from German bube boy, or from English brother.


squire (n.)

early 13c., young man who attends a knight, later member of the landowning class ranking below a
knight (c.1300), from Old French esquier squire, literally shield carrier (see esquire). Meaning
country gentleman, landed proprietor is from 1670s; as a general term of address to a gentleman, it
is attested from 1828.


auntie (n.)

1787, also aunty, familiar diminutive form of aunt. As a form of kindly address to an older woman to
whom one is not related, originally in southern U.S., of elderly slave women.  The negro no longer
submits with grace to be called uncle or auntie as of yore. [Harper's Magazine, October 1883]


lover (n.)

early 13c., agent noun from love (v.). Old English had lufend for male lovers, lufestre for women.
Meaning one who has a predilection for (a thing, concept, pursuit, etc.) is mid-14c. As a form of
address to a lover, from 1911. Related: Loverly.


salutatory (adj.)

1690s, pertaining to a salutation, from Latin salutatorius pertaining to visiting or greeting, from
salut-, past participle stem of salutare to greet (see salute (v.)). From 1702 in reference to an
address which welcomes those attending commencement exercises.


style (v.)

c.1500, address with a title; 1560s, to give a name to, from style (n.). Meaning to arrange in
(fashionable) style (especially of hair) is attested from 1934. Slang sense of act or play in a
showy way is by 1974, U.S. Black slang. Related: Styled; styling.


pigsney (n.)

(obsolete), late 14c., endearing form of address to a girl or woman, apparently from Middle English
pigges eye, literally pig's eye, with excrescent -n- from min eye, an eye, etc. See OED for
explanation of why this might have been felt as a compliment. In a pig's eye! as an adverse retort
is recorded from 1872.


bucko (n.)

term of address, originally (1883) nautical and with a sense of swaggering, domineering fellow.
Probably from buck (n.1) in the slang sense of a blood or choice spirit.There are in London divers
lodges or societies of Bucks, formed in imitation of the Free Masons: one was held at the Rose, in
Monkwell-street, about the year 1705. The president is styled the Grand Buck. [Dictionary of the
Vulgar Tongue, 1811]


valedictory (adj.)

1650s, pertaining or relating to leave-taking, from Latin valedictum (past participle of valedicere;
see valediction) + -ory. As a noun meaning valedictory address from 1779.


sahib (n.)

respectful address to Europeans in India, 1670s, from Hindi or Urdu sahib master, lord, from Arabic
sahib, originally friend, companion, from sahiba he accompanied. Female form (European lady) is
memsahib.


chica (n.)

young girl, U.S. slang, c.2002, from American Spanish chica girl, fem. of chico boy, noun use of
adjective meaning small (here used as an affectionate term of address), from Latin ciccum, literally
chick-pea, figurative of an object of little value (compare Old French chiche).


talk (n.)

late 15c., speech, discourse, conversation, from talk (v.). Meaning informal lecture or address is
from 1859. Meaning a subject of gossip is from 1620s (in talk of the town). Talk show first recorded
1965; talk radio is from 1985.


Gettysburg

town in southern Pennsylvania, U.S., 1800 (earlier it was Gettys-town), founded 1780s by Gen. James
Gettys and named for him. Civil War battle there was fought July 1-3, 1863. The Gettysburg Address
was given Nov. 19, 1863, and was being called that by 1865, though before Lincolnâ&euro;&trade;s
assassination the term tended to refer to Edward Everettâ&euro;&trade;s full oration that preceded
Lincolnâ&euro;&trade;s short speech.


dan

title of address to members of religious orders, c.1300, from Old French dan (Modern French dom),
from Latin dominus lord (source of Portuguese don, Spanish don, Italian donno; see don (n.)).


highness (n.)

Old English heanes; see high (adj.) + -ness. Meaning royalty, excellence, nobility is early 13c.;
Your Highness as a form of address to English royalty is attested from c.1400.


amigo (n.)

friend, comrade, often a form of address, 1837, American English (first attested in the phrase
adios, Amigo), from Spanish amigo, literally friend, from Latin amicus friend, related to amare to
love (see Amy).


appellee (n.)

1530s, from Anglo-French (late 14c.), from Old French apel&eacute; (Modern French appel&eacute;)
accused, defendant, noun use of past participle of appeler to call, address; see appeal + -ee.


catastrophism (n.)

as a geological or biological theory, 1869, coined by Huxley from catastrophe + -ism.    By
CATASTROPHISM I mean any form of geological speculation which, in order to account for the phenomena
of geology, supposes the operation of forces different in their nature, or immeasurably different in
power, from those which we at present see in action in the universe. [T.H. Huxley, Address to the
Geological Society of London, Feb. 19, 1869]    Related: Catastrophist.


swami (n.)

1773, Hindu idol, later, Hindu religious teacher (1901), from Hindi swami master (used as a term of
address to a Brahmin), from Sanskrit svamin lord, prince, master, (one's own) master, from sva-s
one's own (from PIE *s(u)w-o- one's own, from root *s(w)e-; see idiom) + amah pressure, vehemence.


multiverse (n.)

1895, William James's coinage, an alternative to universe meant to convey absence of order and
unity.    But those times are past; and we of the nineteenth century, with our evolutionary theories
and our mechanical philosophies, already know nature too impartially and too well to worship
unreservedly any god of whose character she can be an adequate expression. Truly all we know of good
and beauty proceeds from nature, but none the less so all we know of evil. Visible nature is all
plasticity and indifference, a moral multiverse, as one might call it, and not a moral universe.
[William James, Is Life Worth Living? address to the Young Men's Christian Association of Harvard
University, May 1895]


reason (v.)

early 14c., resunmen, to question (someone), also to challenge, from Old French raisoner speak,
discuss; argue; address; speak to, from Late Latin rationare to discourse, from ratio (see reason
(n.)). Intransitive sense of to think in a logical manner is from 1590s; transitive sense of employ
reasoning (with someone) is from 1847. Related: Reasoned; reasoning.


secession (n.)

1530s, from Latin secessionem (nominative secessio) a withdrawal, separation; political withdrawal,
insurrection, schism, noun of action from past participle stem of secedere secede, from se- apart
(see secret) + cedere to go (see cede). Originally in a Roman historical context, temporary
migration of plebeians from the city to compel patricians to address their grievances; modern use in
reference to religious or political unions dates from 1650s.


weatherman (n.)

one who observes the weather, 1869, from weather (n.) + man (n.). Weather-prophet is from 1784 as
barometer; 1827 as person who predicts the weather.    Clerk of the Weather, I deplore  That all thy
greatness is no more,  As should a gentle bard;  That Nature, or that Nature's law  When you
politely called for thaw,  Gave frost was rather hard.  [from Consolatory Address to Mr. Murphy, the
Weather Prophet, Colburn's New Monthly Magazine, 1838]


return (n.)

late 14c., act of coming back, also official report of election results, from Anglo-French retorn,
Old French retorne, verbal noun from retorner (see return (v.)). In ball games from 1833;
specifically in tennis from 1886. Meaning a yield, a profit is recorded from 1620s. Meaning a thing
sent back is from 1875. Many happy returns of the day was used by Addison (1716). Mailing return
address attested from 1884.


keynote (n.)

also key-note, lowest note of a musical scale, basis of a scale, 1776, from key (n.1) in sense of
musical scale + note (n.). Figurative sense of leading idea is from 1783; keynote address is 1905,
American English.


superscript (n.)

1580s, address or direction on a letter, from Middle French superscript, from Latin superscriptus
written above, past participle of superscribere write over or above something (as a correction),
from super above (see super-) + scribere write (see script (n.)). Meaning number or letter written
above something first recorded 1901.


arraign (v.)

late 14c., araynen, to call to account, from Old French araisnier speak to, address; accuse (in a
law court), from Vulgar Latin *arrationare, from Latin adrationare, from ad- to (see ad-) +
*rationare, from ratio argumentation, reckoning, calculation (see ratio). Sense of to call up on a
criminal charge is c.1400. The excrescent -g- is a 16c. overcorrection based on reign, etc. Related:
Arraigned; arraigning.


reverend (adj.)

early 15c., worthy of respect, from Middle French reverend, from Latin reverendus (he who is) to be
respected, gerundive of revereri (see reverence). As a form of address for clergymen, it is attested
from late 15c.; earlier reverent (late 14c. in this sense). Abbreviation Rev. is attested from 1721,
earlier Revd. (1690s). Very Reverend is used of deans, Right Reverend of bishops, Most Reverend of
archbishops.


nun (n.)

Old English nunne nun, vestal, pagan priestess, woman devoted to religious life under vows, from
Late Latin nonna nun, tutor, originally (along with masc. nonnus) a term of address to elderly
persons, perhaps from children's speech, reminiscent of nana (compare Sanskrit nona, Persian nana
mother, Greek nanna aunt, Serbo-Croatian nena mother, Italian nonna, Welsh nain grandmother; see
nanny).


