adept (n.)

an expert, especially one who is skilled in the secrets of anything, 1660s, from Latin adeptus (see
adept (adj.)). The Latin adjective was used as a noun in this sense in Medieval Latin among
alchemists.


adept (adj.)

1690s, completely skilled from Latin adeptus having reached, attained, past participle of adipisci
to come up with, arrive at, figuratively to attain to, acquire, from ad- to (see ad-) + apisci
grasp, attain, related to aptus fitted (see apt). Related: Adeptly.


deft (adj.)

Old English ged&aelig;fte mild, gentle, differentiated in Middle English into daft (q.v.) and this
word, via sense of apt, skillful, adept. Cognate with Gothic gadaban to be fit, Old Norse dafna to
grow strong, Dutch deftig important, relevant.


musical (adj.)

early 15c., pertaining to music; tuneful, harmonious; adept at making music, from Middle French
musical (14c.) and directly from Medieval Latin musicalis, from Latin musica (see music). Musical
box is from 1829. Children's game musical chairs is attested from 1877, hence use of musical as a
modifier meaning changing rapidly from one to another possessor (1924). Related: Musically.


subtle (adj.)

c.1300 (mid-13c. as a surname), sotil, penetrating; ingenious; refined (of the mind); sophisticated,
intricate, abstruse (of arguments), from Old French sotil, soutil, subtil adept, adroit; cunning,
wise; detailed; well-crafted (12c., Modern French subtil), from Latin subtilis fine, thin, delicate,
finely woven; figuratively precise, exact, accurate, in taste or judgment, fine, keen, of style,
plain, simple, direct, from sub under (see sub-) + -tilis, from tela web, net, warp of a fabric (see
texture (n.)).     From early 14c. in reference to things, of thin consistency; in reference to
craftsmen, cunning, skilled, clever; Depreciative sense insidious, treacherously cunning; deceitful
is from mid-14c. Material senses of not dense or viscous, light; pure; delicate, thin, slender;
fine, consisting of small particles are from late 14c. sotil wares were goods sold in powdered form
or finely ground. Partially re-Latinized in spelling, and also by confusion with subtile.


