adherent (n.)

follower, associate, supporter, early 15c., from Old French adherent or directly from Latin
adhaerentem (see adherent (adj.)). Meaning adhesive substance is from 1912.


adherent (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French adherent or directly from Latin adhaerentem (nominative adhaerens),
present participle of adhaerere stick to, from ad- to (see ad-) + haerere to stick (see hesitation).


adhere (v.)

1590s, from Middle French adh&eacute;rer (15c.) or directly from Latin adhaerare to stick to (see
adherent (adj.)). Originally often of persons, to cleave to a leader, cause, party, etc. (compare
adherent (n.), which still often retains this sense). Related: Adhered; adhering.


establishmentarian (n.)

adherent of the principle of an established church, 1846, from establishment.


Roundhead (n.)

adherent of the Parliamentary party in the English Civil War, 1641, so called for their custom of
wearing the hair close-cropped, in contrast to the flowing curls of the cavaliers.


supporter (n.)

early 15c., adherent, partisan, agent noun from support (v.). Meaning that which supports is from
1590s.


romantic (n.)

an adherent of romantic virtues in literature, 1827, from romantic (adj.).


ame damnee (n.)

devoted adherent, toady, 1823, from French &acirc;me damn&eacute;e familiar spirit, literally damned
soul, originally a soul damned by compact with a controlling demon.


Ghibelline

adherent of the emperor in medieval Italy, 1570s, from German Waiblingen, seat of the Hohenstaufens
in W&uuml;rttemberg. The name was said to have been used as a rallying cry by partisans of Conrad
III at the Battle of Weinsberg (1140). See Guelph.


Parnellite (n.)

in Irish history, 1881, adherent of the Irish Home Rule policy of Charles Stewart Parnell
(1846-1891) + -ite (1).


royalist (n.)

1640s, from royal + -ist. In England, a partisan of Charles I and II during the Civil War; in the
U.S., an adherent of British government during the Revolution; in France, a supporter of the
Bourbons.


Donatist (n.)

mid-15c., adherent of a Christian sect in 4c. North Africa, from Medieval Latin Donatista, from
Donatus name of two of the principal men in it. The schism had more to do with episcopal succession
in Carthage than with doctrine. The name is literally bestowed, given.


Sunni (n.)

1620s, from Arabic, adherent of the Sunnah; Muslim who accepts the orthodox tradition as well as the
Quran, from Sunna traditional teachings of Muhammad (not, like the Quran, committed to writing, but
preserved from his lips by his disciples or founded on his actions), literally way, custom, course,
tradition, usage. Related: Sunnite.


adhesive (adj.)

1660s, from French adh&eacute;sif, formed in French from Latin adhaes-, past participle stem of
adhaere (see adherent (adj.)).


sectary (n.)

member or adherent of a sect, 1550s, from French sectaire or directly from Medieval Latin sectarius,
from secta (see sect).


adherence (n.)

mid-15c., attachment to a person, support, from Middle French adh&eacute;rence, from Latin
adhaerentia, noun of action from adhaerentem (nominative adhaerens), present participle of adhaerare
(see adherent (adj.)).


doctrinaire (n.)

1820, from French doctrinaire impractical person, originally adherent of doctrines (14c.), from
Latin doctrina (see doctrine).    At first used in the context of French politics, contemptuously
applied by rival factions to those who tried to reconcile liberty with royal authority after 1815.
Hence, anyone who applies doctrine without making allowance for practical considerations (1831). As
an adjective, from 1834.


imperialist (n.)

c.1600, an adherent of an emperor, such as the emperor of Germany, France, China, etc., probably
modeled on French imp&eacute;rialiste (early 16c.); from imperial + -ist. The shift in meaning to
advocate of imperialism (1893) came via the British Empire, which involved a worldwide colonial
system. See imperialism. As a term of abuse in communist circles, attested by 1918. As an adjective
by 1816.


Anglican (adj.)

1630s, of the reformed Church of England (opposed to Roman), from Medieval Latin Anglicanus, from
Anglicus of the English people, of England (see anglicize). The noun meaning adherent of the
reformed Church of England is first recorded 1797.


pragmatism (n.)

matter-of-fact treatment, 1825, from Greek pragmat-, stem of pragma that which has been done (see
pragmatic) + -ism. As a philosophical doctrine, 1898, said to be from 1870s; probably from German
Pragmatismus. As a name for a political theory, from 1951. Related: Pragmatist (1630s as busybody;
1892 as adherent of a pragmatic philosophy).


papist (n.)

1530s, adherent of the pope, from Middle French papiste, from papa pope, from Church Latin papa (see
pope).


populist

1892 (n.) adherent of populism; 1893 (adj.), American English, from Latin populus people (see people
(n.)) + -ist. Originally in reference to the U.S. Populist Party organized February 1892 to promote
certain issues important to farmers and workers. The term outlasted the party, and by 1920s came to
mean representing the views of the masses in a general way.


adhesion (n.)

1620s, from French adh&eacute;sion or directly from Latin adhaesionem (nominative adhaesio) a
sticking to, noun of action from past participle stem of adhaerare (see adherent (adj.)).   Adhesion
is generally used in the material, and adherence in the metaphysical sense. [Johnson]


democrat (n.)

1790, adherent of democracy, with reference to France, from French d&eacute;mocrate (18c., opposed
to aristocrate), back-formation from d&eacute;mocratie (see democracy); revived in U.S. as a
political party affiliation 1798, with a capital D. As a shortening of this, Demo (1793) is older
than Dem (c.1840).


Sabian (n.)

an adherent of a religious sect mentioned thrice in the Qu'ran (in which they are classified with
Christians, and Jews as true believers worth of toleration by Muslims), 1610s, from Arabic, of
uncertain origin. As an adjective from 1748.    Perhaps the reference is to a Gnostic sect akin to
the later Mand&aelig;ans (if the word derives, as some think it does, from Arabic ch'bae to baptize,
Aramaic tzebha he dipped, dyed); but it has the appearance of derivation from the Semitic root of
Hebrew tzabha host (see Sabaoth), and as the Sabians were thought in the Middle Ages to have been
star-worshippers, it was interpreted as referring to the host of heaven. Related: Sabaism.


Hezbollah (n.)

extremist Shiite group active in Lebanon, founded c.1982, from Persian hezbollah, Arabic hizbullah,
literally Party of God, from hezb/hizb party + allah God. An adherent is a Hezbollahi. The name of
various Islamic groups in modern times, the name itself is attested in English by 1960 in referense
to an Indonesian guerilla battalion of 1945 that grew out of a similarly named organization formed
by the Japanese to give training in military drill to young Moslems.    In Modjokuto (like Masjumi
itself, Hizbullah was Indonesia-wide but, also like Masjumi, it had little effective central
organization) this group was led by the present head of Muhammadijah -- the same man who a year or
so before was going to Djakarta for propaganda training and studying to be a kamikaze. [Clifford
Geertz, The Religion of Java, Chicago, 1960]


cavalier (n.)

1580s, from Italian cavalliere mounted soldier, knight; gentleman serving as a lady's escort, from
Late Latin caballarius horseman, from Vulgar Latin caballus, the common Vulgar Latin word for horse
(and source of Italian cavallo, French cheval, Spanish caballo, Irish capall, Welsh ceffyl),
displacing Latin equus (see equine).    Sense advanced in 17c. to knight, then courtly gentleman
(but also, pejoratively, swaggerer), which led to the adjectival senses, especially disdainful
(1650s). Meaning Royalist adherent of Charles I is from 1641. Meaning one who devotes himself solely
to attendance on a lady is from 1817, roughly translating Italian cavaliere-servente. In classical
Latin caballus was work horse, pack horse, sometimes, disdainfully, hack, nag. Not a native Lat.
word (as the second -a- would show), though the source of the borrowing is uncertain [Tucker].
Perhaps from some Balkan or Anatolian language, and meaning, originally, gelding. The same source is
thought to have yielded Old Church Slavonic kobyla.


