adhere (v.)

1590s, from Middle French adh&eacute;rer (15c.) or directly from Latin adhaerare to stick to (see
adherent (adj.)). Originally often of persons, to cleave to a leader, cause, party, etc. (compare
adherent (n.), which still often retains this sense). Related: Adhered; adhering.


leave (v.)

Old English l&aelig;fan to let remain; remain; have left; bequeath, from Proto-Germanic *laibijan
(cognates: Old Frisian leva to leave, Old Saxon farlebid left over), causative of *liban remain,
(source of Old English belifan, German bleiben, Gothic bileiban to remain), from root *laf- remnant,
what remains, from PIE *leip- to stick, adhere; also fat.    The Germanic root has only the sense
remain, continue, which also is in Greek lipares persevering, importunate. But this usually is
regarded as a development from the primary PIE sense of adhere, be sticky (compare Lithuanian lipti,
Old Church Slavonic lipet to adhere, Greek lipos grease, Sanskrit rip-/lip- to smear, adhere to.
Seemingly contradictory meaning of depart (early 13c.) comes from notion of to leave behind (as in
to leave the earth to die; to leave the field retreat).


cling (v.)

Old English clingan hold fast, adhere closely; congeal, shrivel (strong verb, past tense clang, past
participle clungen), from Proto-Germanic *klingg- (cognates: Danish klynge to cluster; Old High
German klinga narrow gorge; Old Norse klengjask press onward; Danish klinke, Dutch klinken to
clench; German Klinke latch).    The main sense shifted in Middle English to adhere to (something
else), stick together. Of persons in embrace, c.1600. Figuratively (to hopes, outmoded ideas, etc.),
from 1580s. Of clothes from 1792. Related: Clung; clinging.


cleave (v.2)

to adhere, Middle English cleven, clevien, cliven, from Old English clifian, cleofian, from West
Germanic *klibajan (cognates: Old Saxon klibon, Old High German kliban, Dutch kleven, Old High
German kleben, German kleben to stick, cling, adhere), from PIE *gloi- to stick (see clay). The
confusion was less in Old English when cleave (v.1) was a class 2 strong verb; but it has grown
since cleave (v.1) weakened, which may be why both are largely superseded by stick (v.) and split
(v.).


adhesive (n.)

1881, from adhesive (adj.). Originally of postage stamps (adhesive stamp is attested from 1840). Of
substances that cause to adhere by 1900.


clannish (adj.)

disposed to adhere closely to one another, 1747, from clan + -ish. Related: Clannishly;
clannishness.


lipo-

word-forming element meaning fat (n.), from Greek lipo-, comb. form of lipos fat (n.), from PIE root
*leip- to stick, adhere, also used to form words for fat, see leave (v.)).


inherent (adj.)

1570s, from Latin inhaerentem (nominative inhaerens), present participle of inhaerere be closely
connected with, literally adhere to, from in- in (see in- (2)) + haerere to stick (see hesitation).
Related: Inherently.


flounce (v.)

1540s, to dash, plunge, flop, perhaps from Scandinavian (compare dialectal Swedish flunsa to plunge,
Norwegian flunsa to hurry, but first record of these is 200 years later than the English word), said
to be of imitative origin. Spelling likely influenced by bounce. Notions of anger, impatience began
to adhere to the word 18c. Related: Flounced; flouncing. As a noun, from 1580s as a motion.


hesitation (n.)

c.1400, from Old French hesitacion or directly from Latin haesitationem (nominative haesitatio) a
hesitation, stammering, figuratively irresolution, uncertainty, noun of action from past participle
stem of haesitare stick fast, remain fixed; stammer in speech, figuratively hesitate, be irresolute,
be at a loss, be undecided, frequentative of haerere stick, cling, from PIE *ghais-e (source also of
Lithuanian gaistu to delay, tarry), from root *ghais- to adhere; hesitate.


liver (n.1)

secreting organ of the body, Old English lifer, from Proto-Germanic *librn (cognates: Old Norse
lifr, Old Frisian livere, Middle Dutch levere, Dutch lever, Old High German lebara, German Leber
liver), perhaps from PIE *leip- to stick adhere; fat. Formerly believed to be the body's blood-
producing organ; in medieval times it rivaled the heart as the supposed seat of love and passion,
hence lily-livered. Liver-spots, once thought to be caused by a dysfunction of the organ, is
attested from 1730.


clay (n.)

Old English cl&aelig;g stiff, sticky earth; clay, from Proto-Germanic *klaijaz (cognates: Old High
German kliwa bran, German Kleie, Old Frisian klai clay, Old Saxon klei, Middle Dutch clei, Danish
kl&aelig;g clay; also Old English cl&aelig;man, Old Norse kleima, Old High German kleiman to cover
with clay), from PIE root *glei- clay (cognates: Greek gloios sticky matter; Latin gluten glue; Old
Church Slavonic glina clay, glenu slime, mucus; Old Irish glenim I cleave, adhere).    in Scripture,
the stuff from which the body of the first man was formed; hence human body (especially when dead).
Clay pigeon is from 1888. Feet of clay fundamental weakness is from Dan. ii:33.


life (n.)

Old English life (dative lif) existence, lifetime, way of life, condition of being a living thing,
opposite of death, from Proto-Germanic *libam (cognates: Old Norse lif life, body, Dutch lijf body,
Old High German lib life, German Leib body), properly continuance, perseverance, from PIE *leip- to
remain, persevere, continue; stick, adhere (see leave (v.)). Much of the modern range of meanings
was present in Old English. Meaning property which distinguishes living from non-living matter is
from 1560s. Sense of vitality, energy is from 1580s. Extended 1703 to term of duration (of inanimate
objects).   Life-jacket is from 1840; life-preserver from 1630s of anything that is meant to save a
life, 1803 of devices worn to prevent drowning. Life-saver is from 1883, figurative use from 1909,
as a brand of hard sugar candy, from 1912, so called for shape. Life-form is from 1861. Life cycle
is from 1855.


