adjacent (adj.)

early 15c., from Latin adiacentem (nominative adiacens) lying at, present participle of adiacere lie
at, border upon, lie near, from ad- to (see ad-) + iacere to lie, rest, literally to throw (see jet
(v.)), with notion of to cast (oneself) down.


Chappaquiddick

place in Dukes County, Mass., from a native New England Algonquian language, literally island
adjacent to the mainland.


Tlingit (n.)

Indian group in southwestern Alaska and adjacent parts of Canada, 1865, the people's word for
themselves, literally human beings.


justly (adv.)

early 14c., in an adjacent position, closely, from just (adj.) + -ly (2). Meanings truthfully,
honestly, in an equitable manner, with justice, fairly are from late 14c. Sense of justifiably, with
good reason is from c.1400; that of legally, legitimately, rightfully is early 15c.


pwned (adj.)

dominated, humiliatingly defeated, taken over, by 2001, leetspeak slang, probably from the common
typographical mistake for owned (the -p- and -o- keys being adjacent on standard English keyboards)
in the gamer slang sense completely dominated by another (in a contest).


adagio (adv.)

c.1746, in music, slowly, leisurely and gracefully, Italian, from ad agio, from ad to, at (see ad-)
+ agio leisure, from Vulgar Latin adiacens, present participle of adiacere to lie at, to lie near
(compare adjacent). In noun sense of a slow movement, first attested 1784.


adjoin (v.)

c.1300, unite, ally from Old French ajoin- stem of ajoindre join together, unite, from Latin
adiungere fasten on, harness, join to, from ad- to (see ad-) + iungere to bind together (see
jugular). Meaning be contiguous with, be adjacent to is from late 14c. Related: Adjoined; adjoining.


affinity (n.)

c.1300, relation by marriage (as opposed to consanguinity), from Old French afinit&eacute; (12c.),
from Latin affinitatem (nominative affinitas) neighborhood, relationship by marriage, noun of state
from affinis adjacent, also kin by marriage, literally bordering on, from ad- to (see ad-) + finis a
border, an end (see finish (v.)). Used figuratively since c.1600 of structural relationships in
chemistry, philology, etc. Meaning natural attraction (as though by family) is from 1610s.


tarantella (n.)

1782, peasant dance popular in Italy, originally hysterical malady characterized by extreme impulse
to dance (1630s), epidemic in Apulia and adjacent parts of southern Italy 15c.-17c., popularly
attributed to (or believed to be a cure for) the bite of the tarantula. This is likely folk-
etymology, however, and the names of the dance and the spider more probably share an origin in
Taranto, the name of a city in southern Italy (see tarantula). Used from 1833 to mean the style of
music that accompanies this dance, usually in 6/8 time, with whirling triplets and abrupt major-
minor modulations. Related: Tarantism.


verge (v.1)

tend, incline, c.1600, from Latin vergere to bend, turn, tend toward, incline, from PIE *werg- to
turn, from root *wer- (3) to turn, bend (see versus). Influenced by verge (v.2) provide with a
border (c.1600); be adjacent to (1787), from verge (n.). Related: Verged; verging.


liberty (n.)

late 14c., free choice, freedom to do as one chooses, from Old French libert&eacute; freedom,
liberty, free will (14c.), from Latin libertatem (nominative libertas) freedom, condition of a free
man; absence of restraint; permission, from liber free (see liberal)The spirit of liberty is the
spirit which is not too sure it is right. [Learned Hand, 1944]Nautical sense of leave of absence is
from 1758. To take liberties go beyond the bounds of propriety is from 1620s. Sense of privileges by
grant (14c.) led to sense of a person's private land (mid-15c.), which yielded sense in 18c. in both
England and America of a district within a county but having its own justice of the peace, and also
a district adjacent to a city and in some degree under its municipal jurisdiction (as in Northern
Liberties of Philadelphia). Also compare Old French libert&eacute;s local rights, laws, taxes.


yard (n.1)

patch of ground around a house, Old English geard fenced enclosure, garden, court; residence, house,
from Proto-Germanic *gardaz (cognates: Old Norse gar&eth;r enclosure, garden, yard; Old Frisian
garda, Dutch gaard, Old High German garto, German Garten garden; Gothic gards house, garda stall),
from PIE *ghor-to-, suffixed form of root *gher- (1) to grasp, enclose, with derivatives meaning
enclosure (cognates: Old English gyrdan to gird, Sanskrit ghra- house, Albanian garth hedge, Latin
hortus garden, Phrygian -gordum town, Greek khortos pasture, Old Irish gort field, Breton garz
enclosure, garden, and second element in Latin cohors enclosure, yard, company of soldiers,
multitude).    Lithuanian gardas pen, enclosure, Old Church Slavonic gradu town, city, and Russian
gorod, -grad town, city belong to this group, but linguists dispute whether they are independent
developments or borrowings from Germanic. As college campus enclosed by the main buildings, 1630s.
In railway usage, ground adjacent to a train station or terminus, used for switching or coupling
trains, 1827. Yard sale is attested by 1976.


