admonish (v.)

mid-14c., amonesten remind, urge, exhort, warn, give warning, from Old French amonester (12c.) urge,
encourage, warn, from Vulgar Latin *admonestare, from Latin admonere bring to mind, remind, suggest;
also warn, advise, urge, from ad- to (see ad-) + monere advise, warn (see monitor (n.)).    The -d-
was restored on Latin model. The ending was influenced by words in -ish (such as astonish, abolish).
Related: Admonished; admonishing.


monitor (n.)

1540s, senior pupil at a school charged with keeping order, etc., from Latin monitor one who
reminds, admonishes, or checks, also an overseer, instructor, guide, teacher, agent noun from monere
to admonish, warn, advise, related to memini I remember, I am mindful of, and to mens mind, from PIE
root *men- to think (see mind (n.)).    The type of lizard so called because it is supposed to give
warning of crocodiles (1826). Meaning squat, slow-moving type of ironclad warship (1862) so called
from name of the first vessel of this design, chosen by the inventor, Swedish-born U.S. engineer
John Ericsson (1803-1889), because it was meant to admonish the Confederate leaders in the U.S.
Civil War. Broadcasting sense of a device to continuously check on the technical quality of a
transmission (1931) led to special sense of a TV screen displaying the picture from a particular
camera.


admonitory (adj.)

1590s, from Late Latin admonitorius, from Latin admonitus, past participle of admonere (see
admonish).


praecipe (n.)

c.1500 (in Magna Carta in Anglo-Latin), from Latin praecipe, imperative of praecipere to admonish,
enjoin, from the opening words of such a writ, praecipe quod reddat enjoin (him) that he render.


admonition (n.)

late 14c., amonicioun reminding, instruction, from Old French amonicion admonition, exhortation,
from Latin admonitionem (nominative admonitio), noun of action from past participle stem of admonere
(see admonish). Meaning warning is early 15c. The -d- was restored in English 17c.


warn (v.)

Old English warnian to give notice of impending danger, also intransitive, to take heed, from Proto-
Germanic *war-non (cognates: Old Norse varna to admonish, Old High German warnon to take heed,
German warnen to warn), from PIE *wer- (5) to cover (see weir). Related: Warned; warning.


chastise (v.)

c.1300, chastisen, from Old French chastiier to warn, advise, instruct; chastise, admonish; punish;
dominate, tame (12c., Modern French ch&acirc;tier), from Latin castigare to set or keep right, to
reprove, chasten, to punish, literally to make pure (see castigate). Or perhaps from Middle English
chastien (see chasten) + -ise, though this would be early for such a native formation. The form of
the modern word is not easily accounted for [OED]. Related: Chastised; chastising.  He alone may
chastise who loves. [Rabindranath Tagore, The Crescent Moon, 1913]


distinguish (v.)

1560s, from Middle French distinguiss-, stem of distinguer, or directly from Latin distinguere to
separate between, separate by pricking, from dis- apart (see dis-) + -stinguere to prick (see
extinguish, and compare Latin instinguere to incite, impel).    The suffix -ish is due to the
influence of many verbs in which it is the equivalent of Old French -iss-, ultimately from Latin
inchoative suffix -iscere (this is also the case in extinguish, admonish, and astonish). Related:
Distinguishing. The earlier form of the verb was distinguen (mid-14c.).


