adore (v.)

late 14c., aouren, to worship, pay divine honors to, bow down before, from Old French aorer to
adore, worship, praise (10c.), from Latin adorare speak to formally, beseech, ask in prayer, in Late
Latin to worship, from ad- to (see ad-) + orare speak formally, pray (see orator). Meaning to honor
very highly is attested from 1590s; weakened sense of to be very fond of emerged by 1880s. Related:
Adored; adoring.


adoring (adj.)

1650s, worshipping, present participle adjective from adore. Related: Adoringly.


adoration (n.)

1540s, from Middle French adoration, from Latin adorationem (nominative adoratio) worship,
adoration, noun of action from past participle stem of adorare; see adore, the original sense of
which is preserved in this word.


adorable (adj.)

1610s, from French adorable, from Latin adorabilis worthy of worship, from adorare (see adore).
Weakened sense of delightful, charming is recorded from 1710. Related: Adorably; adorableness.


tomato (n.)

1753, earlier tomate (c.1600), from Spanish tomate (mid-16c.) from Nahuatl (Aztecan) tomatl a
tomato, said to mean literally the swelling fruit, from tomana to swell. Spelling probably
influenced by potato (1565). Slang meaning an attractive girl is recorded from 1929, on notion of
juicy plumpness.    A member of the nightshade family, all of which contain poisonous alkaloids.
Introduced in Europe from the New World, by 1550 they regularly were consumed in Italy but grown
only as ornamental plants in England and not eaten there or in the U.S. at first. An encyclopedia of
1753 describes it as a fruit eaten either stewed or raw by the Spaniards and Italians and by the Jew
families of England. Introduced in U.S. 1789 as part of a program by then-Secretary of State Thomas
Jefferson, but not commonly eaten until after c.1830.    Alternative name love apple and alleged
aphrodisiac qualities have not been satisfactorily explained; perhaps from Italian name pomodoro,
taken as from adorare to adore, but probably rather from d'or of gold (in reference to color) or de
Moro of the Moors.


