adorn (v.)

late 14c., to decorate, embellish, also be an ornament to, from Old French aorner to order, arrange,
dispose, equip; adorn, from Latin adornare equip, provide, embellish, from ad- to (see ad-) + ornare
prepare, furnish, adorn, fit out, from stem of ordo order (see order (n.)). The -d- was reinserted
by French scribes 14c., in English from late 15c. Related: Adorned; adorning.


adornment (n.)

late 14c., act of adorning; also a thing which adorns; from Old French aornement ornament,
decoration, from aorner (see adorn).


garland (n.)

wreath of flowers, c.1300 (mid-13c. in Anglo-Latin), from Old French garlande, perhaps from Frankish
*weron adorn, bedeck (cognate with Middle High German wieren adorn, bedeck), from PIE *wei- to turn,
twist (see wire (n.)).


dress (n.)

c.1600, originally any clothing, especially that appropriate to rank or to some ceremony; sense of
woman's garment is first recorded 1630s, with overtones of made not merely to clothe but to adorn.
Dress rehearsal first recorded 1828.


set off (v.)

verbal phrase; see set (v.) + off (adv.). From 1590s as make prominent by contrast, 1610s as adorn.
Intransitive sense of start on a journey is from 1774. Meaning separate from contect (in typography)
is from 1824; sense of ignite, discharge, cause to explode is from 1810.


unadorned (adj.)

1630s, from un- (1) not + past participle of adorn (v.).


plume (v.)

late 14c., to pluck, strip, from plume (n.). From mid-15c. as to adorn with plumes. Meaning to dress
the feathers is from 1702. Related: Plumed; pluming.


trick (v.)

deceive by trickery, 1590s, from trick (n.). Related: Tricked; tricking. The sense of to dress,
adorn (c.1500) is perhaps a different word entirely.


wire (v.)

c.1300, adorn with (gold) wire, from wire (n.). From 1859 as communicate by means of a telegraphic
wire; 1891 as furnish with electrical wires and connections. Related: Wired; wiring.


bead (v.)

1570s, to adorn with beads, from bead (n.). Meaning to string like beads is from 1883. Related:
Beaded; beading.


stitch (v.)

c.1200, to stab, pierce, also to fasten or adorn with stitches; see stitch (n.). Surgical sense is
from 1570s. Related: Stitched; stitcher; stitching.


tip (v.4)

put a tip on, adorn with a tip, late 14c., from tip (n.) or Old Norse typpa. Related: Tipped;
tipping.


cosmetic (adj.)

1640s, from French cosm&eacute;tique (16c.), from Greek kosmetikos skilled in adornment or
arrangement, from kosmein to arrange, adorn, from kosmos order (see cosmos). Figurative sense of
superficial is from 1955. Related: Cosmetically.


dub (v.1)

give a name to, originally make a knight, from late Old English dubbian knight by striking with a
sword (11c.), a late word, perhaps borrowed from Old French aduber equip with arms, adorn (11c.) of
uncertain origin, but there are phonetic difficulties. Meaning provided with a name is from 1590s.
Related: Dubbed; dubbing.


garment (n.)

c.1400, variant of garnement (early 14c.), from Old French garnement garment, attire, clothes, from
garnir fit out, provide, adorn (see garnish (v.)).


ornate (adj.)

early 15c., from Latin ornatus fitted out, furnished, supplied; adorned, decorated, embellished,
past participle of ornare adorn, fit out, from stem of ordo order (see order (n.)). Earliest
reference is to literary style. Related: Ornately; ornateness.


decorate (v.)

early 15c., from Latin decoratus, past participle of decorare to decorate, adorn, embellish,
beautify, from decus (genitive decoris) an ornament, from PIE root *dek- to receive, be suitable
(see decent). Related: Decorated; decorating.


attire (v.)

c.1300, to fit out, equip; to dress in finery, to adorn, from Old French atirier to equip, ready,
prepare, from a- to + tire order, row, dress (see tier). Related: Attired; attiring.


feather (v.)

Old English fi&eth;erian to furnish with feathers or wings, from fe&eth;er (see feather (n.)).
Meaning to fit (an arrow) with feathers is from early 13c.; that of to deck, adorn, or provide with
plumage is from late 15c. In reference to oars (later paddles, propellers, etc.) from 1740. Phrase
feather one's nest enrich oneself is from 1580s. Related: Feathered; feathering.


ornament (n.)

early 13c., an accessory, from Old French ornement ornament, decoration, and directly from Latin
ornamentum apparatus, equipment, trappings; embellishment, decoration, trinket, from ornare equip,
adorn (see ornate). Meaning decoration, embellishment in English is attested from late 14c. (also a
secondary sense in classical Latin). Figurative use from 1550s.


bedizen (v.)

1660s, from be- + dizen to dress (1610s), especially, from late 18c., to dress finely, adorn,
originally to dress (a distaff) for spinning (1520s), and evidently the verbal form of the first
element in distaff.    It is remarkable that neither the vb., nor the sb. as a separate word, has
been found in OE. or ME., and that on the other hand no vb. corresponding to dizen is known in L.G.
or Du. [OED]


deck (v.1)

adorn (as in deck the halls), early 15c., from Middle Dutch dekken to cover, from the same Germanic
root as deck (n.). Meaning to cover is from 1510s in English. Replaced Old English &thorn;eccan.
Related: Decked; decking.


inhumanity (n.)

late 15c., from French inhumanit&eacute; (14c.) or directly from Latin inhumanitatem (nominative
inhumanitas) inhuman conduct, savageness, noun of quality from inhumanus (see inhuman).    And Man,
whose heav'n-erected face   The smiles of love adorn,--   Man's inhumanity to man   Makes countless
thousands mourn!  [Robert Burns, Man was Made to Mourn, 1784]


gem (n.)

Old English gimm precious stone, gem, jewel, also eye, from Latin gemma precious stone, jewel,
originally bud, perhaps from the root *gen- to produce, or from PIE *gembh- tooth, nail. Of persons,
from late 13c. Forms in -i-, -y- were lost early 14c., and the modern form of the word probably
representing a Middle English borrowing from Old French gemme (12c.). As a verb, from c.1600, to
adorn with gems; mid-12c. as to bud.


smug (adj.)

1550s, trim, neat, spruce, smart, possibly an alteration of Low German smuk trim, neat, from Middle
Low German sm&uuml;cken to adorn (originally to dress, secondary sense of words meaning to creep or
slip into), from the same source as smock. The meaning having a self-satisfied air is from 1701, an
extension of the sense of smooth, sleek (1580s), which was commonly used of attractive women and
girls. Related: Smugly; smugness.


sign (v.)

c.1300, to make the sign of the cross, from Old French signier to make a sign (to someone); to mark,
from Latin signare to set a mark upon, mark out, designate; mark with a stamp; distinguish, adorn;
figuratively to point out, signify, indicate, from signum (see sign (n.)). Sense of to mark, stamp
is attested from mid-14c.; that of to affix one's name is from late 15c. Meaning to communicate by
hand signs is recorded from 1700. Related: Signed; signing.


parade (n.)

1650s, a show of bravado, also an assembly of troops for inspections, from French parade display,
show, military parade, from Middle French parade (15c.), or from Italian parate a warding or
defending, a garish setting forth, or Spanish parada a staying or stopping, all from Vulgar Latin
*parata, from Latin parere arrange, prepare, adorn (see pare), which developed widespread senses in
Romanic derivatives. Non-military sense of march, procession is first recorded 1670s.


vest (v.)

early 15c., to put in possession of a person, from Old French vestir to clothe; get dressed, from
Medieval Latin vestire to put into possession, to invest, from Latin vestire to clothe, dress,
adorn, related to vestis garment, clothing, from PIE *wes- (4) to clothe (see wear (v.)). Related:
Vested; vesting.


dight (v.)

to adorn (archaic or poetic), Old English dihtan dictate, appoint, ordain; guide; compose, an early
borrowing from Latin dictare to dictate (see dictate (v.)).    The Latin word borrowed even earlier
into continental Germanic became Old High German dihton to write compose, German dichten to write
poetry. In Middle English, dight exploded to a vast array of meanings (including to rule, to handle,
to abuse, to have sex with, to kill, to clothe, to make ready, to repair) till it was one of the
most-used verbs in the language, but all senses have faded now into obscurity, dialect, or poetic
use.


illustration (n.)

c.1400, a shining; early 15c., a manifestation; mid-15c., a spiritual illumination, from Old French
illustration apparition, appearance, and directly from Latin illustrationem (nominative illustratio)
vivid representation (in writing), literally an enlightening, from past participle stem of
illustrare light up, make light, illuminate; figuratively make clear, disclose, explain; adorn,
render distinguished, from assimilated form of in- in (see in- (2)) + lustrare make bright,
illuminate, related to lucere shine, lux light (see light (n.)). Mental sense of act of making clear
in the mind is from 1580s. Meaning an illustrative picture is from 1816.


trim (v.)

mid-15c., probably from Old English trymian, trymman strengthen, fortify, confirm; comfort; incite;
set in order, arrange, prepare, make ready; become strong, from trum strong, stable, from Proto-
Germanic *trum-, from PIE *dru-mo-, suffixed form of *deru- to be firm, solid, steadfast (see true).
Examples in Middle English are wanting.    Original sense is preserved in nautical phrase in
fighting trim (see trim (n.)); where the verb meant distribute the load of a ship so she floats on
an even keel (1570s). Meaning make neat by cutting is first recorded 1520s; that of decorate, adorn
is from 1540s. Sense of reduce is attested from 1966.


dress (v.)

early 14c., make straight; direct, guide, control, prepare for cooking, from Old French dresser,
drecier raise (oneself), address, prepare, lift, raise, hoist, set up, arrange, set (a table), serve
(food), straighten, put right, direct, from Vulgar Latin *directiare, from Latin directus direct,
straight (see direct (v.)).    Sense of decorate, adorn is late 14c., as is that of put on clothing.
Original sense survives in military meaning align columns of troops. Dress up attire elaborately is
from 1670s; dressing down wearing clothes less formal than expected is from 1960. To dress (someone)
down (1769) is ironical. Related: Dressed; dressing.


pare (v.)

to trim by cutting close, c.1300, from Old French parer arrange, prepare; trim, adorn, and directly
from Latin parare make ready, prepare, furnish, provide, arrange, order; contrive, design, intend,
resolve; procure, acquire, obtain, get; get with money, buy, purchase (related to parere produce,
bring forth, give birth to), from PIE *par-a-, suffixed form of root *pere- (1) produce, procure,
bring forward, bring forth, and derived words in diverse senses (cognates: Lithuanian pariu to
brood, Greek poris calf, bull, Old High German farro, German Farre bullock, Old English fearr bull,
Sanskrit prthukah child, calf, young of an animal, Czech spratek brat, urchin, premature calf).
Generalized meaning to reduce something little by little is from 1520s. Related: Pared; paring.


cosmos (n.)

c.1200 (but not popular until 1848, as a translation of Humboldt's Kosmos), from Latinized form of
Greek kosmos order, good order, orderly arrangement, a word with several main senses rooted in those
notions: The verb kosmein meant generally to dispose, prepare, but especially to order and arrange
(troops for battle), to set (an army) in array; also to establish (a government or regime); to deck,
adorn, equip, dress (especially of women). Thus kosmos had an important secondary sense of ornaments
of a woman's dress, decoration (compare kosmokomes dressing the hair) as well as the universe, the
world.    Pythagoras is said to have been the first to apply this word to the universe, perhaps
originally meaning the starry firmament, but later it was extended to the whole physical world,
including the earth. For specific reference to the world of people, the classical phrase was he
oikoumene (ge) the inhabited (earth). Septuagint uses both kosmos and oikoumene. Kosmos also was
used in Christian religious writing with a sense of worldly life, this world (as opposed to the
afterlife), but the more frequent word for this was aion, literally lifetime, age.


paint (v.)

early 13c., represent in painting or drawing, portray; early 14c., paint the surface of, color,
stain; from Old French peintier to paint, from peint, past participle of peindre to paint, from
Latin pingere to paint, represent in a picture, stain; embroider, tattoo, from PIE root *peig- (1),
also *peik- to cut (cognates: Sanskrit pimsati hews out, cuts, carves, adorns, Old Church Slavonic
pila file, saw, Lithuanian pela file).    Sense evolution between PIE and Latin was, presumably,
from decorate with cut marks to decorate to decorate with color. Compare Sanskrit pingah reddish,
pesalah adorned, decorated, lovely, Old Church Slavonic pegu variegated; Greek poikilos variegated;
Old High German fehjan to adorn; Old Church Slavonic pisati, Lithuanian piesiu to write. Probably
also representing the cutting branch of the family is Old English feol (see file (n.)).    To paint
the town (red) go on a spree first recorded 1884; to paint (someone or something) black represent it
as wicked or evil is from 1590s. Adjective paint-by-numbers simple is attested by 1970; the art-for-
beginners kits themselves date to c.1953.


smock (n.)

Old English smoc garment worn by women, corresponding to the shirt on men, from Proto-Germanic
*smukkaz (cognates: Old Norse smokkr a smock, but this is perhaps from Old English; Old High German
smoccho smock, a rare word; North Frisian smok woman's shift, but this, too, perhaps from English).
Klein's sources, Barnhart and the OED see this as connected to a group of Germanic sm- words having
to do with creeping or pressing close, such as Old Norse smjuga to creep (through an opening), to
put on (a garment), smuga narrow cleft to creep through; small hole; Old Swedish smog a round hole
for the head; Old English smugan, smeogan to creep, smygel a burrow. Compare also German schmiegen
to cling to, press close, nestle; and Schmuck jewelry, adornments, from schmucken to adorn,
literally to dress up.    Watkins, however, traces it to a possible Germanic base *(s)muk- wetness,
figuratively slipperiness, from PIE root*meug- slimy, slippery (see mucus). Either way, the original
notion, then, seems generally to have been garment one creeps or slips into, by the same pattern
that produced sleeve and slip (n.2).    Now replaced by euphemistic shift (n.2); smock was the
common word down to 18c., and was emblematic of womanhood generally, as in verb smock to render (a
man) effeminate or womanish (1610s); smocker man who consorts with women (18c.); smock-face person
having a pale, effeminate face (c.1600). A smock-race (1707) was an old country pastime, a foot-race
for women and girls with a smock as a prize. Modern meaning woman's or child's loose dress or blouse
is from 1907; sense of loose garment worn by artists over other clothes is from 1938.


