adroit (adj.)

1650s, dexterous, originally rightly, from French adroit, from phrase &agrave; droit according to
right, from Old French &agrave; to (see ad-) + droit right, from Late Latin directum right, justice,
accusative of Latin directus straight (see direct (v.)). Related: Adroitly; adroitness.


tactical (adj.)

1560s, pertaining to tactics, from Modern Latin tactica (see tactics) + -al (1). Meaning
characterized by adroit management is from 1883. In reference to nuclear weapons (for limited use in
military operations, opposed to strategic) it is recorded from 1957. Related: Tactically.


maladroit (adj.)

1670s, from mal- + adroit. Related: Maladroitly; maladroitness.


diplomatic (adj.)

1711, pertaining to documents, texts, charters, from Medieval Latin diplomaticus, from diplomat-,
stem of diploma (see diploma).    Meaning pertaining to international relations is recorded from
1787, apparently a sense evolved in 18c. from the use of diplomaticus in Modern Latin titles of
collections of international treaties, etc., in which the word referred to the texts but came to be
felt as meaning pertaining to international relations. In the general sense of tactful and adroit,
it dates from 1826. Related: Diplomatically.


maneuver (n.)

planned movement of troops or warship, 1758, from French manoeuvre manipulation, maneuver, from Old
French manovre manual labor 13c.), from Medieval Latin manuopera (source of Spanish maniobra,
Italian manovra), from manuoperare work with the hands, from Latin manu operari, from manu, ablative
of manus hand (see manual (adj.)) + operari to work, operate (see operation). The same word had been
borrowed from French into Middle English in a sense hand-labor (late 15c.). General meaning artful
plan, adroit movement is from 1774. Related: Maneuvers.


subtle (adj.)

c.1300 (mid-13c. as a surname), sotil, penetrating; ingenious; refined (of the mind); sophisticated,
intricate, abstruse (of arguments), from Old French sotil, soutil, subtil adept, adroit; cunning,
wise; detailed; well-crafted (12c., Modern French subtil), from Latin subtilis fine, thin, delicate,
finely woven; figuratively precise, exact, accurate, in taste or judgment, fine, keen, of style,
plain, simple, direct, from sub under (see sub-) + -tilis, from tela web, net, warp of a fabric (see
texture (n.)).     From early 14c. in reference to things, of thin consistency; in reference to
craftsmen, cunning, skilled, clever; Depreciative sense insidious, treacherously cunning; deceitful
is from mid-14c. Material senses of not dense or viscous, light; pure; delicate, thin, slender;
fine, consisting of small particles are from late 14c. sotil wares were goods sold in powdered form
or finely ground. Partially re-Latinized in spelling, and also by confusion with subtile.


