adulterate (v.)

1530s, back-formation from adulteration, or else from Latin adulteratus, past participle of
adulterare to falsify, corrupt, also to commit adultery. Earlier verb was adulter (late 14c.).
Related: Adulterated; adulterating.


unadulterated (adj.)

1719, from un- (1) not + past participle of adulterate (v.).


adulterer (n.)

early 15c., earlier avouter (c.1300), avoutrer (late 14c.), agent noun from obsolete verb adulter
commit adultery; adulterate (late 14c.), from Latin adulterare to corrupt (see adulteration).


sophistication (n.)

early 15c., use of sophistry; fallacious argument intended to mislead; adulteration; an adulterated
or adulterating substance, from Medieval Latin sophisticationem (nominative sophisticatio), noun of
action from past participle stem of sophisticare adulterate, cheat quibble, from Latin sophisticus
of sophists, from Greek sophistikos of or pertaining to a sophist, from sophistes a wise man,
master, teacher (see sophist). Meaning wordly wisdom, refinement, discrimination is attested from
1850.


Americanism (n.)

1781, in reference to words or phrases distinct from British use, coined by John Witherspoon
(1723-1794), president of Princeton College, from American + -ism. (American English English
language as spoken in the United States is first recorded 1806, in Webster.) Americanism in the
patriotic sense attachment to the U.S. is attested from 1797, first found in the writings of Thomas
Jefferson.    I have been not a little disappointed, and made suspicious of my own judgment, on
seeing the Edinburgh Reviews, the ablest critics of the age, set their faces against the
introduction of new words into the English language; they are particularly apprehensive that the
writers of the United States will adulterate it. Certainly so great growing a population, spread
over such an extent of country, with such a variety of climates, of productions, of arts, must
enlarge their language, to make it answer its purpose of expressing all ideas, the new as well as
the old. [Jefferson to John Waldo, Aug. 16, 1813]


