adversary (n.)

mid-14c., aduersere, from Anglo-French adverser (13c.), Old French adversaire adversary, opponent,
enemy, or directly from Latin adversarius opponent, adversary, rival, noun use of adjective meaning
opposite, hostile, contrary, literally turned toward one, from adversus turned against (see
adverse). The Latin word is glossed in Old English by wi&eth;erbroca.


adversarial (adj.)

by 1892, from adversary + -al (1). Probably coined to avoid confusion which might arise with use of
adversary (adj.), which is attested from late 14c. Related: Adversarially.


snooker (v.)

to cheat, early 1900s, from snooker (n.). Related: Snookered; snookering.    One of the great
amusements of this game is, by accuracy in strength, to place the white ball so close behind a pool
ball that the next player cannot hit a pyramid ball, he being snookered from all of them. If he fail
to strike a pyramid ball, this failure counts one to the adversary. If, however, in attempting to
strike a pyramid ball off a cushion, he strike a pool ball, his adversary is credited with as many
points as the pool ball that is struck would count if pocketed by rule. [Maj.-Gen. A.W. Drayson, The
Art of Practical Billiards for Amateurs, 1889]


foe (n.)

Old English gefa foe, enemy, adversary in a blood feud (the prefix denotes mutuality), from fah at
feud, hostile, from Proto-Germanic *fakhaz (cognates: Old High German fehan to hate, Gothic faih
deception), probably from PIE root *peig- (2) evil-minded, treacherous, hostile (cognates: Sanskrit
pisunah malicious, picacah demon; Greek pikros bitter; Latin piget it irks, troubles, displeases,
piger reluctant, lazy; Lithuanian piktas wicked, angry, pekti to blame). Weaker sense of adversary
is first recorded c.1600.


Satan (n.)

proper name of the supreme evil spirit in Christianity, Old English Satan, from Late Latin Satan (in
Vulgate in Old Testament only), from Greek Satanas, from Hebrew satan adversary, one who plots
against another, from satan to show enmity to, oppose, plot against, from root s-t-n one who
opposes, obstructs, or acts as an adversary.    In Septuagint (Greek) usually translated as diabolos
slanderer, literally one who throws (something) across the path of another (see devil (n.)), though
epiboulos plotter is used once.    In biblical sources the Hebrew term the satan describes an
adversarial role. It is not the name of a particular character. Although Hebrew storytellers as
early as the sixth century B.C.E. occasionally introduced a supernatural character whom they called
the satan, what they meant was any one of the angels sent by God for the specific purpose of
blocking or obstructing human activity. [Elaine Pagels, The Origin of Satan, 1995]


fit (n.1)

1823, the fitting of one thing to another, later (1831) the way something fits. Originally an
adversary of equal power (mid-13c.), obscure, possibly from Old English fitt a conflict, a struggle
(see fit (n.2)).


mayhem (n.)

late 15c., from Anglo-French maihem (13c.), from Old French mahaigne injury, wrong, a hurt, harm,
damage; related to mahaignier to injure, wound, mutilate, cripple (see maim). Originally, in law,
the crime of maiming a person to make him less able to defend himself or annoy his adversary [OED].


fit (adj.)

suited to the circumstances, proper, mid-15c., of unknown origin, perhaps from Middle English noun
fit an adversary of equal power (mid-13c.), which is perhaps connected to fit (n.1). Related:
Fitter; fittest. Survival of the fittest (1867) coined by H. Spencer.


Heinie (n.)

also Heine, as a typical name of a German man, 1904, North American slang, from pet form of common
German masc. proper name Heinrich (see Henry). Brought to Europe in World War I by Canadian soldiers
(British soldiers called the adversary Fritz).


encounter (v.)

c.1300, to meet as an adversary, from Old French encontrer confront, from encontre (see encounter
(n.). Weakened sense of casually meet first recorded in English early 16c.  Related: Encountered;
encountering.


rival (n.)

1570s, from Latin rivalis a rival, adversary in love; neighbor, originally, of the same brook, from
rivus brook (see rivulet). One who is in pursuit of the same object as another. The sense evolution
seems to be based on the competitiveness of neighbors: one who uses the same stream, or one on the
opposite side of the stream A secondary sense in Latin and sometimes in English was associate,
companion in duty, from the notion of one having a common right or privilege with another. As an
adjective 1580s from the noun.


quarterstaff (n.)

also quarter-staff, 1540s (quarter-stroke stroke with a quarterstaff is attested from early 15c.),
stout pole, six to eight feet long (six-and-a-half sometimes is given as the standard length),
tipped with iron, formerly a weapon used by the English peasantry. From staff (n.). The quarter
likely is in reference to its operation.    It was grasped by one hand in the middle, and by the
other between the middle and the end. In the attack the latter hand shifted from one quarter of the
staff to the other, giving the weapon a rapid circular motion, which brought the ends on the
adversary at unexpected points. [Century Dictionary]


carom (n.)

1779, earlier carambole (1775), from French carambole the red ball in billiards, from Spanish
carombola the red ball in billiards, perhaps originally fruit of the tropical Asian carambola tree,
which is round and orange and supposed to resemble a red billiard ball; from Marathi (southern
Indian) karambal. Originally a type of stroke involving the red ball:    If the Striker hits the Red
and his Adversary's Ball with his own Ball he played with, he wins two Points; which Stroke is
called a Carambole, or for Shortness, a Carrom. [Hoyle's Games Improved, London, 1779]


match (n.2)

one of a pair, an equal, Old English m&aelig;cca, companion, mate, one of a pair, wife, husband, one
suited to another, an equal, from gem&aelig;cca, from Proto-Germanic *gamakon fitting well together
(cognates: Old Saxon gimaco fellow, equal, Old High German gimah comfort, ease, Middle High German
gemach comfortable, quiet, German gemach easy, leisurely), from PIE root *mak-/*mag- to fit (see
make (v.)). Middle English sense of matching adversary, person able to contend with another (c.1300)
led to sporting meaning contest, first attested 1540s.


enemy (n.)

early 13c., from Old French enemi (12c.), earlier inimi (9c.) enemy, adversary, foe, demon, the
Devil, from Latin inimicus hostile, unfriendly; an enemy (source of Italian nemico, Catalan enamic,
Spanish enemigo, Portuguese inimigo), from in- not (see in- (1)) + amicus friend related to amare to
love (see Amy).    Most words for personal enemy cover also enemy in war, but certain languages have
special terms for the latter, such as Greek polemioi (distinct from ekhthroi), Latin hostis,
originally stranger (distinct from inimicus), Russian neprijatel' (distinct from vrag).    Russian
vrag (Old Church Slavonic vragu) is cognate with Lithuanian vargas misery (see urge (v.)), and
probably is related to Proto-Germanic *wargoz, source of Old Norse vargr outlaw, hence wolf;
Icelandic vargur fox, Old English wearg criminal, felon; which likely were the inspirations for
J.R.R. Tolkien's warg a kind of large ferocious wolf in The Hobbit (1937) and Lord of the Rings.
Related: Enemies.


