adventitious (adj.)

of the nature of an addition from without, c.1600, from Medieval Latin adventitius coming from
abroad, extraneous, a corruption of Latin adventicius foreign, strange, accidental, from advent-
past participle stem of advenire arrive (see advent). Related: Adventitiously; adventitiousness.


advent (n.)

important arrival, 1742, an extended sense of  Advent season before Christmas (Old English), from
Latin adventus a coming, approach, arrival, in Church Latin the coming of the Savior, from past
participle stem of advenire arrive, come to, from ad- to (see ad-) + venire to come (see venue). In
English, also sometimes extended to the Pentecost.


Adventist (n.)

one of a religious denomination that believes in or looks for the early second coming of Christ,
1843; see advent + -ist. Church Latin adventus was applied to the coming of the Savior, both the
first or the anticipated second, hence Adventist was a name applied to millenarian sects, especially
and originally the Millerites (U.S.).


ice-skate (v.)

1690s, from ice (n.) + skate (n.2). The verb usually was simply skate until the advent of roller-
skating mid-18c. made distinction necessary.


photocopy (v.)

1924 in the sense of make a photographic reproduction, from photo- photographic + copy (v.). The
usual modern meaning arose 1942 with the advent of xerography. The noun is recorded from 1934.
Related: Photocopied; photocopying.


epiphany (n.)

early 14c., festival of the manifestation of Christ to the gentiles (celebrated Jan. 6; usually with
a capital -E-), from Old French epiphanie, from Late Latin epiphania, neuter plural (taken as
feminine singular), from late Greek epiphaneia manifestation, striking appearance (in New Testament,
advent or manifestation of Christ), from epiphanes manifest, conspicuous, from epiphainein to
manifest, display, from epi on, to (see epi-) + phainein to show (see phantasm).    Of divine beings
other than Christ, first recorded 1660s; general literary sense of any manifestation or revelation
appeared 1840, first in De Quincey.


thresh (v.)

Old English &thorn;rescan, &thorn;erscan, to beat, sift grain by trampling or beating, from Proto-
Germanic *threskan to thresh, originally to tread, to stamp noisily (cognates: Middle Dutch
derschen, Dutch dorschen, Old High German dreskan, German dreschen, Old Norse &thorn;reskja, Swedish
tr&#246;ska, Gothic &thorn;riskan), from PIE root *tere- (1) to rub, turn (see throw (v.)).    The
basic notion is of men or oxen treading out wheat; later, with the advent of the flail, the word
acquired its modern extended sense of to knock, beat, strike. The original Germanic sense is
suggested by the use of the word in Romanic languages that borrowed it, such as Italian trescare to
prance, Old French treschier to dance, Spanish triscar to stamp the feet.


symphony (n.)

c.1300, a name given to various types of musical instruments, from Old French simphonie, sifonie,
simfone musical harmony; stringed instrument (12c., Modern French symphonie) and directly from Latin
symphonia a unison of sounds, harmony, from Greek symphonia harmony, concord of sounds, from
symphonos harmonious, agreeing in sound, from assimilated form of syn- together (see syn-) + phone
voice, sound (see fame (n.)).    Meaning harmony of sounds in English is attested from late 14c.;
sense of music in parts is from 1590s. It was only after the advent of Haydn that this word began to
mean a sonata for full orchestra. Before that time it meant a prelude, postlude, or interlude, or
any short instrumental work. [Elson's Music Dictionary] Meaning elaborate orchestral composition
first attested 1789. Elliptical for symphony orchestra from 1926. Diminutive symphonette is recorded
from 1947.


th

A sound found chiefly in words of Old English, Old Norse or Greek origin, unpronounceable by Normans
and many other Europeans. In Greek, the sound corresponds etymologically to Sanskrit -dh- and
English -d-; and it was represented graphically by -TH- and at first pronounced as a true aspirate
(as still in English outhouse, shithead, etc.). But by 2c. B.C.E. the Greek letter theta was in
universal use and had the modern -th- sound. Latin had neither the letter nor the sound, however,
and the Romans represented Greek theta by -TH-, which they generally pronounced, at least in Late
Latin, as simple -t- (passed down to Romanic languages, as in Spanish termal thermal, teoria theory,
teatro theater).    In Germanic languages it represents PIE *-t- and was common at the start of
words or after stressed vowels. To represent it, Old English and Old Norse used the characters &eth;
eth (a modified form of -d-) and &thorn; thorn, which originally was a rune. Old English, unlike Old
Norse, seems never to have standardized which of the two versions of the sound (hard and soft) was
represented by which of the two letters.    The digraph -th- sometimes appears in early Old English,
on the Roman model, and it returned in Middle English with the French scribes, driving out eth by
c.1250, but thorn persisted, especially in demonstratives (&thorn;at, &thorn;e, &thorn;is, etc.),
even as other words were being spelled with -th-. The advent of printing dealt its death-blow,
however, as types were imported from continental founders, who had no thorn. For a time y was used
in its place (especially in Scotland), because it had a similar shape, hence ye for the in
historical tourist trap Ye Olde _______ Shoppe (it never was pronounced ye, only spelled that way).
The awareness that some Latin words in t- were from Greek th- encouraged over-correction in English
and created unetymological forms such as Thames and author, while some words borrowed from Romanic
languages preserve, on the Roman model, the Greek -th- spelling but the simple Latin t pronunciation
(as in Thomas and thyme).


