adverse (adj.)

late 14c., contrary, opposing, from Old French avers (13c., Modern French adverse) antagonistic,
unfriendly, contrary, foreign (as in gent avers infidel race), from Latin adversus turned against,
turned toward, fronting, facing, figuratively hostile, adverse, unfavorable, past participle of
advertere, from ad- to (see ad-) + vertere to turn (see versus). Related: Adversely.


blackball (v.)

also black-ball, to exclude from a club by adverse votes, 1770, from black (adj.) + ball (n.1).
Black balls of wood or ivory dropped into an urn during secret ballots.


pigsney (n.)

(obsolete), late 14c., endearing form of address to a girl or woman, apparently from Middle English
pigges eye, literally pig's eye, with excrescent -n- from min eye, an eye, etc. See OED for
explanation of why this might have been felt as a compliment. In a pig's eye! as an adverse retort
is recorded from 1872.


discriminate (v.)

1620s, from Latin discriminatus, past participle of discriminare to divide, separate, from discrimen
(genitive discriminis) interval, distinction, difference, derived noun from discernere (see
discern). The adverse (usually racial) sense is first recorded 1866, American English. Positive
sense remains in discriminating. Related: Discriminated. Also used 17c. and after as an adjective
meaning distinct.


adversity (n.)

c.1200, aduersite misfortune, hardship, difficulty, from Old French aversit&eacute; adversity,
calamity, misfortune; hostility, wickedness, malice (Modern French adversit&eacute;), from Latin
adversitatem (nominative adversitas) opposition, from adversus (see adverse).


adversary (n.)

mid-14c., aduersere, from Anglo-French adverser (13c.), Old French adversaire adversary, opponent,
enemy, or directly from Latin adversarius opponent, adversary, rival, noun use of adjective meaning
opposite, hostile, contrary, literally turned toward one, from adversus turned against (see
adverse). The Latin word is glossed in Old English by wi&eth;erbroca.


sinister (adj.)

early 15c., prompted by malice or ill-will, intending to mislead, from Old French senestre, sinistre
contrary, false; unfavorable; to the left (14c.), from Latin sinister left, on the left side
(opposite of dexter), of uncertain origin. Perhaps meaning properly the slower or weaker hand
[Tucker], but Klein and Buck suggest it's a euphemism (see left (adj.)) connected with the root of
Sanskrit saniyan more useful, more advantageous. With contrastive or comparative suffix -ter, as in
dexter (see dexterity).    The Latin word was used in augury in the sense of unlucky, unfavorable
(omens, especially bird flights, seen on the left hand were regarded as portending misfortune), and
thus sinister acquired a sense of harmful, unfavorable, adverse. This was from Greek influence,
reflecting the early Greek practice of facing north when observing omens. In genuine Roman auspices,
the augurs faced south and left was favorable. Thus sinister also retained a secondary sense in
Latin of favorable, auspicious, fortunate, lucky.    Meaning evil is from late 15c. Used in heraldry
from 1560s to indicate left, to the left. Bend (not bar) sinister in heraldry indicates illegitimacy
and preserves the literal sense of on or from the left side (though in heraldry this is from the
view of the bearer of the shield, not the observer of it).


pick (v.)

early 13c., picken to peck; c.1300, piken to work with a pick, probably representing a fusion of Old
English *pician to prick, (implied by picung a piercing, pricking, an 8c. gloss on Latin stigmata)
with Old Norse pikka to prick, peck, both from a Germanic root (source also of Middle Dutch picken,
German picken to pick, peck), perhaps imitative. Influence from Middle French piquer to prick, sting
(see pike (n.2)) also is possible, but that French word generally is not considered a source of the
English word. Related: Picked; picking.    Meaning to eat with small bites is from 1580s. The
meaning to choose, select, pick out emerged late 14c., from earlier meaning to pluck with the
fingers (early 14c.). Sense of to rob, plunder (c.1300) weakened to a milder sense of steal petty
things by late 14c. Of forcing locks with a pointed tool, by 1540s. Meaning to pluck (a banjo) is
recorded from 1860. To pick a quarrel, etc. is from mid-15c.; to pick at find fault with is from
1670s. Pick on single out for adverse attention is from late 14c.; pick off shoot one by one is
recorded from 1810; baseball sense of to put out a runner on base is from 1939. Also see pick up. To
pick and choose select carefully is from 1660s (choose and pick is attested from c.1400).


