advocate (n.)

mid-14c., one whose profession is to plead cases in a court of justice, a technical term from Roman
law, from Old French avocat barrister, advocate, spokesman, from Latin advocatus one called to aid;
a pleader, advocate, noun use of past participle of advocare to call (as witness or advisor) from
ad- to (see ad-) + vocare to call, related to vocem (see voice (n.)). Also in Middle English as one
who intercedes for another, and protector, champion, patron. Feminine forms advocatess, advocatrice
were in use in 15c.


advocate (v.)

1640s, from advocate (n.). Related: Advocated; advocating; advocation.


devil&#039;s advocate (n.)

1760, translating Latin advocatus diaboli, one whose job it is to urge against the canonization of a
candidate for sainthood. [F]ar from being the whitewasher of the wicked, the [devil's advocate] is
the blackener of the good. [Fowler]


avouch (v.)

late 15c., from Middle French avochier call upon as authority, in Old French call (to court),
advocate, plead (a case), from Latin advocare call to as a witness (see advocate).   Avouch, which
is no longer in common use, means guarantee, solemnly aver, prove by assertion, maintain the truth
or existence of, vouch for .... Avow means own publicly to, make no secret of, not shrink from
admitting, acknowledge one's responsibility for .... Vouch is now common only in the phrase vouch
for, which has taken the place of avouch in ordinary use, &amp; means pledge one's word for ....
[Fowler]    Related: Avouched; avouching.


disciplinarian (n.)

one who enforces order, 1630s, see discipline; earlier used of Puritans who wanted to establish the
Presbyterian discipline in England (1580s). Meaning advocate of greater discipline is from 1746.


Naderism (n.)

1969, in reference to the methods of U.S. lawyer and consumer advocate Ralph Nader (b.1934) + -ism.


preservationist (n.)

advocate of protecting existing things, 1905, from preservation + -ist; specifically of historic
buildings by 1957.


mutualistic (adj.)

1885, from mutualist advocate of mutualism (1848); see mutualism.


unilateralism (n.)

1926, from unilateral + -ism. Earliest usages seem to be in the sense of advocate of unilateral
disarmament. Meaning pursuit of a foreign policy without allies is attested by 1964.


Graham

in reference to crackers, etc., from unsifted whole-wheat flour, 1834, American English, from
Sylvester Graham (1794-1851), U.S. dietetic reformer and temperance advocate. The family name is
attested from early 12c., an Anglo-French form of the place name Grantham (Lincolnshire).


suffragist (n.)

1822, advocate of extension of the political franchise in Britain, without regard to gender, or, in
the U.S., of voting rights for free blacks; from suffrage + -ist. After c.1885 especially with
reference to voting rights for women.


proctor (n.)

late 14c., contraction of procurator (c.1300) steward or manager of a household; also a provider
(see procurator). From late 14c. as one who acts or speaks for another; spokesman, advocate; early
15c. as business manager or financial administrator of a church, college, holy order, etc.


prevaricator (n.)

c.1400, from Old French prevaricator and directly from Latin praevaricator sham accuser; unfaithful
advocate, agent noun from past participle stem of praevaricari (see prevaricate).


advocacy (n.)

late 14c., from Old French avocacie (14c.), from Medieval Latin advocatia, noun of state from Latin
advocatus (see advocate (n.)).


imperialist (n.)

c.1600, an adherent of an emperor, such as the emperor of Germany, France, China, etc., probably
modeled on French imp&eacute;rialiste (early 16c.); from imperial + -ist. The shift in meaning to
advocate of imperialism (1893) came via the British Empire, which involved a worldwide colonial
system. See imperialism. As a term of abuse in communist circles, attested by 1918. As an adjective
by 1816.


notice (v.)

early 15c., to notify, from notice (n.). Sense of to point out is from 1620s. Meaning to take notice
of is attested from 1757, but was long execrated in England as an Americanism (occasionally as a
Scottishism, the two offenses not being clearly distinguished). Ben Franklin noted it as one of the
words (along with verbal uses of progress and advocate) that seemed to him to have become popular in
America while he was absent in France during the Revolution. Related: Noticed; noticing.


procurer (n.)

late 14c., advocate, spokesman, from Anglo-French procurour, Old French procureur (13c., Modern
French procureur), from Latin procuratorem (see procurator). Meaning contriver is from mid-15c.
Specifically of one who supplies women to gratify the lusts of another from 1630s. Fem. form
procuress is shortened from Old French procureresse.


avow (v.)

early 13c., from Anglo-French avouer, Old French avoer acknowledge, accept, recognize, especially as
a protector (Modern French avouer), from Latin advocare (see advocate). A synonym of avouch (q.v.),
which tends to contain the more technical, legal aspect of the word. Related: Avowed; avowing.


paraclete (n.)

mid-15c., Paraclit, a title of the Holy Spirit, from Old French paraclet (13c.), from Medieval Latin
paracletus, from Greek parakletos advocate, intercessor, legal assistant, noun use of adjective
meaning called to one's aid, from parakalein to call to one's aid, in later use to comfort, to
console, from para (see para- (1)) + kalein to call (see claim (v.)).


protagonist (n.)

1670s, principal character in a story, drama, etc., from Greek protagonistes actor who plays the
chief or first part, from protos first (see proto-) + agonistes actor, competitor, from agon contest
(see act (n.)). Meaning leading person in any cause or contest is from 1889. Mistaken sense of
advocate, supporter (1935) is from misreading of Greek protos as Latin pro- for.


Plimsoll (n.)

mark on the hull of a British ship showing how deeply she may be loaded, 1881, from Samuel Plimsoll
(1824-1898), M.P. for Derby and advocate of shipping reforms (which were embodied in the Merchant
Shipping Act of 1876). Sense extended 1907 to rubber-soled canvas shoe (equivalent of American
English sneakers) because the band around the shoes that holds the two parts together reminded
people of a ship's Plimsoll line; sense perhaps reinforced by sound association with sole (which
sometimes influenced the spelling to plimsole). The name is of Huguenot origin.


syndic (n.)

c.1600, a civil magistrate, especially in Geneva, from French syndic chief representative (14c.),
from Late Latin syndicus representative of a group or town, from Greek syndikos public advocate, as
an adjective, belonging jointly to, from syn- together (see syn-) + dike judgment, justice, usage,
custom (cognate with Latin dicere to show, tell; see diction). Meaning accredited representative of
a university or other corporation first found c.1600. Related: Syndical.


avocado (n.)

1763, from Spanish avocado, altered (by folk etymology influence of earlier Spanish avocado lawyer,
from same Latin source as advocate (n.)) from earlier aguacate, from Nahuatl (Aztecan) ahuakatl
avocado (with a secondary meaning testicle probably based on resemblance), from proto-Nahuan *pawa
avocado. As a color-name, first attested 1945. The English corruption alligator (pear) is 1763, from
Mexican Spanish alvacata, alligato.


bundling (n.)

1640s, a gathering into a bundle, verbal noun from bundle (v.). Meaning sharing a bed for the night,
fully dressed, wrapped up with someone of the opposite sex (1782) is a former local custom in New
England (especially Connecticut and southeastern Massachusetts). It was noted there from about 1750s
and often regarded by outsiders as grossly immoral, but New Englanders wrote defenses of it and
claimed it was practiced elsewhere, too. It seems to have died out with the 18th century.    I am no
advocate for temptation; yet must say, that bundling has prevailed 160 years in New England, and, I
verily believe, with ten times more chastity than the sitting on a sofa. I had daughters, and speak
from near forty years' experience. Bundling takes place only in cold seasons of the year--the sofa
in summer is more dangerous than the bed in winter. [The Rev. Samuel Peters, A general history of
Connecticut, 1782]


patron (n.)

a lord-master, a protector, c.1300, from Old French patron patron, protector, patron saint (12c.)
and directly from Medieval Latin patronus patron saint, bestower of a benefice, lord, master, model,
pattern, from Latin patronus defender, protector, former master (of a freed slave); advocate, from
pater (genitive patris) father (see father (n.)). Meaning one who advances the cause (of an artist,
institution, etc.), usually by the person's wealth and power, is attested from late 14c.; commonly a
wretch who supports with insolence, and is paid with flattery [Johnson]. Commercial sense of regular
customer first recorded c.1600. Patron saint (1717) originally was simply patron (late 14c.).


apostle (n.)

Old English apostol messenger, especially the 12 witnesses sent forth by Jesus to preach his Gospel,
from Late Latin apostolus, from Greek apostolos messenger, person sent forth, from apostellein send
away, send forth, from apo- from (see apo-) + stellein in its secondary sense of to send, from PIE
*stel-yo-, suffixed form of root *stel- to put, stand, with derivatives referring to a standing
object or place (see stall (n.1)). Compare epistle.    The current form of the word, predominant
since 16c., is influenced by Old French apostle (12c.), from the same Late Latin source. Figurative
sense of chief advocate of a new principle or system is from 1810. Apostles, short for The Acts and
Epistles of the Apostles, is attested from c.1400.


