aesthetics (n.)

1803, from aesthetic (also see -ics).


aestheticism (n.)

1855, from aesthetic + -ism.


aesthetic (n.)

1798, from German &Auml;sthetisch or French esth&eacute;tique, both from Greek aisthetikos
sensitive, perceptive, from aisthanesthai to perceive (by the senses or by the mind), to feel, from
PIE *awis-dh-yo-, from root *au- to perceive (see audience).  Popularized in English by translation
of Immanuel Kant, and used originally in the classically correct sense the science which treats of
the conditions of sensuous perception. Kant had tried to correct the term after Alexander Baumgarten
had taken it in German to mean criticism of taste (1750s), but Baumgarten's sense attained
popularity in English c.1830s (despite scholarly resistance) and removed the word from any
philosophical base. Walter Pater used it (1868) to describe the late 19c. movement that advocated
art for art's sake, which further blurred the sense. As an adjective by 1803. Related:
Aesthetically.


esthetic (adj.)

alternative form of aesthetic (see aesthetic). Also see &aelig;. Related: esthetical; esthetically;
esthetician; esthetics.


taste (n.)

early 14c., act of tasting, from Old French tast sense of touch (Modern French t&acirc;t), from
taster (see taste (v.)). From late 14c. as a small portion given; also faculty or sense by which the
flavor of a thing is discerned; also savor, sapidity, flavor.    Meaning aesthetic judgment, faculty
of discerning and appreciating what is excellent is first attested 1670s (compare French go&#251;t,
German geschmack, Russian vkus, etc.).    Of all the five senses, 'taste' is the one most closely
associated with fine discrimination, hence the familiar secondary uses of words for 'taste, good
taste' with reference to aesthetic appreciation. [Buck]   <hr />  Taste is active, deciding,
choosing, changing, arranging, etc.; sensibility is passive, the power to feel, susceptibility of
impression, as from the beautiful. [Century Dictionary]


aesthete (n.)

1878, in vogue 1881, from Greek aisthetes one who perceives, from stem of aisthanesthai to perceive,
to feel (see aesthetic).    I want to be an aesthete,  And with the aesthetes stand;  A sunflower on
my forehead,  And a lily in my hand.  [Puck, Oct. 5, 1881]


kinesthetic (adj.)

also kinaesthetic, pertaining to kinesthesia, 1880, coined by British neurologist Henry Charlton
Bastian (1837-1915) from Greek kinein to move (see cite) + aisthesis sensation (see anaesthesia).
Perhaps on model of aesthetic, prosthetic.


dude (n.)

1883, fastidious man, New York City slang of unknown origin; recent research suggests it is a
shortening of Yankee Doodle, based on the song's notion of foppish, over-fastidious male (compare
macaroni). The vogue word of 1883, originally used in reference to the devotees of the aesthetic
craze, later applied to city slickers, especially Easterners vacationing in the West (as in dude
ranch, first recorded 1921).    Now, tenderfoot is not to be construed as the Western equivalent of
that much evolved and more abused specimen of mankind, familiarly styled dude. For even the Montana
cowboy recognizes the latter. Not that he has ever seen the true prototype of a class that was
erstwhile so numerous among us. But he is convinced that a person caught in the act of wearing a
white linen collar, and who looks as though he might have recently shaved or washed his face, must
be a dude, true and proper. [Random Notes and Observations of a Trip through the Great Northwest,
The Medical Record, Oct. 20, 1883]    Application to any male is recorded by 1966, U.S., originally
in Black English.


