affable (adj.)

late 15c., from Old French afable (14c.), from Latin affabilis approachable, courteous, kind,
friendly, literally who can be (easily) spoken to, from affari to speak to, from ad- to (see ad-) +
fari to speak (see fame (n.)). Related: Affably.


affability (n.)

late 15c., from Old French affabilit&eacute; (14c.), noun of quality from affable (see affable).


approachable (adj.)

1570s, from approach (v.) + -able. Figurative sense, affable, friendly, is from 1610s. Related:
Approachably; approachability.


Mutt and Jeff

comic strip characters Augustus Mutt and Jim Jeffries, in U.S. cartoonist Henry Conway (Bud)
Fisher's strip, which debuted in 1907. Used allusively from 1917 in reference to a pair of stupid
men, affable losers, or to one tall (Mutt) and one short (Jeff).


homiletic (adj.)

1640s, of or having to do with sermons, from Late Latin homileticus, from Greek homiletikos of
conversation, affable, from homelein associate with, from homilos (see homily).


debonair (adj.)

c.1200, mild, gentle, kind courteous, from Old French debonaire, from de bon' aire of good race,
originally used of hawks, hence, thoroughbred (opposite of French demalaire). Used in Middle English
to mean docile, courteous, it became obsolete and was revived with an altered sense of pleasant,
affable (1680s).


civility (n.)

late 14c., status of a citizen, from Old French civilite (14c.), from Latin civitatem (nominative
civitas) the art of governing; courteousness, from cvilis relating to a citizen, relating to public
life, befitting a citizen; popular, affable, courteous (see civil). Later especially good
citizenship (1530s). Also state of being civilized (1540s); behavior proper to civilized persons
(1560s).


civilian (n.)

late 14c., judge or authority on civil law, from Old French civilien of the civil law, created from
Latin civilis relating to a citizen, relating to public life, befitting a citizen; popular, affable,
courteous (see civil). Sense of non-military person is attested by 1819 (earlier in this sense was
civilian, attested from c.1600 as non-soldier). The adjective is from 1640s.


civilize (v.)

c.1600, to bring out of barbarism, from French civiliser, verb from Old French civil (adj.), from
Latin civilis relating to a citizen, relating to public life, befitting a citizen; popular, affable,
courteous (see civil). Meaning become civilized is from 1868. Related: Civilized; civilizing.


incivility (n.)

1580s, want of civilized behavior, rudeness, from French incivilit&eacute; (early 15c.), from Late
Latin incivilitatem (nominative incivilitas), from incivilis not civil, from in- not, opposite of
(see in- (1)) + civilis relating to a citizen, relating to public life, befitting a citizen;
popular, affable, courteous (see civil). Meaning an act of rudeness is from 1650s. Incivil not
conducive to common good is from mid-15c.


dangerous (adj.)

early 13c., difficult, arrogant, severe (the opposite of affable), from Anglo-French dangerous, Old
French dangeros (12c., Modern French dangereux), from danger (see danger).    In Chaucer, it means
hard to please, reluctant to give; sense of full of danger, risky is from late 15c. Other words used
in this sense included dangersome (1560s), dangerful (1540s). Related: Dangerously.


civil (adj.)

late 14c., relating to civil law or life; pertaining to the internal affairs of a state, from Old
French civil civil, relating to civil law (13c.) and directly from Latin civilis relating to a
citizen, relating to public life, befitting a citizen, hence by extension popular, affable,
courteous; alternative adjectival derivation of civis townsman (see city).    The sense of polite
was in classical Latin, from the courteous manners of citizens, as opposed to those of soldiers. But
English did not pick up this nuance of the word until late 16c. Courteous is thus more commonly said
of superiors, civil of inferiors, since it implies or suggests the possibility of incivility or
rudeness [OED]. Civil case (as opposed to criminal) is recorded from 1610s. Civil liberty is by
1640s. Civil service is from 1772, originally in reference to the East India Company.


