affected (adj.)

past participle adjective from affect (v.2); 1530s in the now-obsolete sense favorably disposed
(preserved in disaffected); meaning artificially displayed is recorded from 1580s.


simper (v.)

1560s, to smile in an affected and silly way, perhaps from a Scandinavian source (such as dialectal
Danish semper affected, coy, prudish) or Middle Dutch zimperlijk affected, coy, prim, of unknown
origin. Related: Simpered; simpering. As a noun, 1590s, from the verb.


la-di-da

mocking of affected gentility, 1874, in derisive imitation of swell way of talking.


amnesiac (n.)

one affected by amnesia, 1913, from amnesia (q.v.).


sick (adj.)

unwell, Old English seoc ill, diseased, feeble, weak; corrupt; sad, troubled, deeply affected, from
Proto-Germanic *seukaz, of uncertain origin. The general Germanic word (Old Norse sjukr, Danish syg,
Old Saxon siok, Old Frisian siak, Middle Dutch siec, Dutch ziek, Old High German sioh, Gothic siuks
sick, ill), but in German and Dutch displaced by krank weak, slim, probably originally with a sense
of twisted, bent (see crank (n.)).    Restricted meaning having an inclination to vomit, affected
with nausea is from 1610s; sense of tired or weary (of something), disgusted from satiety is from
1590s; phrase sick and tired of is attested from 1783. Meaning mentally twisted in modern colloquial
use is from 1955, a revival of the word in this sense from 1550s (sense of spiritually or morally
corrupt was in Old English, which also had seocmod infirm of mind); sick joke is from 1958.


unmoved (adj.)

late 14c., not affected by emotion or excitement, from un- (1) not + past participle of move (v.).
Meaning fixed in position is from mid-15c.


effected (adj.)

brought about, past participle adjective from effect (v.). Sometimes used erroneously for affected.


enthuse (v.)

1827, American English, back-formation from enthusiasm. Originally often humorous or with affected
ignorance. Related: enthused; enthusing.


poser (n.)

one who practices an affected attitude, 1881, agent noun from pose (v.1); revived in teen-ager slang
by 1983. Meaning question that puzzles is from 1793 from pose (v.2); earlier it meant one who asks
testing questions (1580s).


scratchy (adj.)

1710, affected with 'the scratch,' a skin disease, from scratch (n.1) + -y (2). Meaning composed of
scratches is from 1827; that of grating is from 1866. Of sounds (especially in reproduction) from
1889. Related: Scratchiness.


measly (adj.)

affected with measles, 1680s, from measle (see measles) + -y (2); sense of meager and contemptible
first recorded 1864 in British slang.


affect (v.1)

to make an impression on, 1630s; earlier to attack (c.1600), act upon, infect (early 15c.), from
affect (n.). Related: Affected; affecting.


prandial (adj.)

pertaining to dinner, 1820, from Latin prandium late breakfast, luncheon (see postprandial). OED
reports it as affected or jocose.


frantic (adj.)

mid-14c., insane, unexplained variant of Middle English frentik (see frenetic). Transferred meaning
affected by wild excitement is from late 15c. Of the adverbial forms, frantically (1749) is later
than franticly (1540s).


haw (v.)

hesitate in speech, 1580s, imitative. Related: Hawed; hawing. The noun in this sense is from c.1600.
Haw-haw style of affected enunciation is from 1841, imitative.


squirm (v.)

1690s, originally referring to eels, of unknown origin; sometimes associated with worm or swarm, but
perhaps imitative. Figurative sense to be painfully affected, to writhe inside is from 1804.
Related: Squirmed; squirming. As a noun from 1839.


cataleptic (adj.)

1680s, from Late Latin catalepticus, from Greek kataleptikos, from kataleptos (see catalepsy). The
noun meaning one affected by catalepsy is from 1851.


stigmatism (n.)

1660s, a branding, from Greek stigmatizein, from stigmat-, stem of stigma (see stigma). Meaning
condition of being affected with stigmata is from 1897.


stricken (adj.)

1510s, wounded, affected (by disease, trouble, etc.), adjective use of archaic past participle of
strike (v.). Figurative meaning overwhelmed with terror, grief, etc. is from 1530s. An earlier
development is reflected in 13c. phrase striken in elde advanced in years, from strike in the sense
of to move, go, hence far advanced.


tidewater (n.)

also tide-water, 1772, water affected by the normal ebb and flow of the tide, from tide (n.) + water
(n.1). In reference to the lowland regions of the Virginia shore of the western Chesapeake Bay,
1832.


neurotic (adj.)

1775, acting upon or stimulating the nerves, from Greek neuron nerve (see neuro-) + -otic, as in
hypnotic. Sense of affected by neurosis is 1887. The noun meaning a neurotic person is from 1896.
Related: Neurotically.


Wardour-street (n.)

affected pseudo-archaic diction of historical novels, 1888, from street in London lined with shops
selling imitation-antique furniture.    This is not literary English of any date; this is Wardour-
Street Early English -- a perfectly modern article with a sham appearance of the real antique about
it. [A. Ballantyne, Wardour-Street English, Longman's Magazine, October, 1888]


tolerant (adj.)

1784, free from bigotry or severity in judging others, from French tol&#233;rant (16c.), and
directly from Latin tolerantem (nom. tolerans), present participle of tolerare to bear, endure,
tolerate (see toleration). Meaning able to bear (something) without being affected is from 1879.
Related: Tolerantly.


lupus (n.)

late 14c., used of several diseases that cause ulcerations of the skin, from Medieval Latin lupus,
from Latin lupus wolf (see wolf (n.)), apparently because it devours the affected part.


spastic (adj.)

1753, from Latin spasticus, from Greek spastikos afflicted with spasms, literally drawing, pulling,
stretching, from span draw up (see spasm (n.)). The noun meaning a person affected with spastic
paralysis is attested from 1896, used insultingly by 1960s. Related: Spastically; spasticity.


passionate (adj.)

early 15c., angry; emotional, from Medieval Latin passionatus affected with passion, from Latin
passio (genitive passionis) passion (see passion). Specific sense of amorous is attested from 1580s.
Related: Passionately.


lethargic (adj.)

late 14c., litargik, from Latin lethargicus affected with lethargy, from Greek lethargikos, from
lethargos (see lethargy). Related: Lethargically.


windy (adj.)

Old English windig windy, breezy; see wind (n.1) + -y (2). Meaning affected by flatulence is in late
Old English. Chichago has been the Windy City since at least 1885.


slop (n.)

c.1400, mudhole, probably from Old English -sloppe dung (in plant name cusloppe, literally cow
dung), related to slyppe slime (see slip (v.)). Meaning semiliquid food first recorded 1650s; that
of refuse liquid of any kind, household liquid waste (usually slops) is from 1815. Meaning affected
or sentimental material is from 1866.


affect (v.2)

to make a pretense of, 1660s, earlier to assume the character of (someone) (1590s); originally in
English to aim at, aspire to, desire (early 15c.), from Middle French affecter (15c.), from Latin
affectare to strive after, aim at, frequentative of afficere (past participle affectus) to do
something to, act on (see affect (n.)). Related: Affected; affecting.


irony (n.)

c.1500, from Latin ironia, from Greek eironeia dissimulation, assumed ignorance, from eiron
dissembler, perhaps related to eirein to speak (see verb). Used in Greek of affected ignorance,
especially that of Socrates. For nuances of usage, see humor. Figurative use for condition opposite
to what might be expected; contradictory circumstances is from 1640s.


ressentiment (n.)

1943, a word from Nietzsche, from German ressentiment, from French ressentiment (see resentment).
The French word also was borrowed as obsolete English resentiment (16c.) feeling or sense (of
something); state of being deeply affected by (something); resentment.


craven (adj.)

early 13c., cravant, perhaps from Old French crevante defeated, past participle of cravanter to
strike down, to fall down, from Latin crepare to crack, creak. Sense affected by crave and moved
from defeated to cowardly (c.1400) perhaps via intermediary sense of confess oneself defeated.
Related: Cravenly; cravenness.


used (adj.)

second-hand, 1590s, past participle adjective from use (v.). To be used to accustomed, familiar is
recorded by late 14c. Verbal phrase used to formerly did or was (as in I used to love her)
represents a construction attested from c.1300, and common from c.1400, from use (intransitive) be
accustomed, practice customarily, but now surviving only in past tense form. The pronunciation is
affected by the t- of to. Used-to-be (n.) one who has outlived his fame is from 1853.


anent (prep.)

concerning, about, early 13c., onont on level with, also in the company of, fronting against, from
Old English on efn near to, close by, originally on even (ground) with; the parasitic -t added 12c.
A northern form (in Midlands, anenst, with adverbial genitive), affected by English writers in
Scottish sense of in respect or reference to. Compare German neben near to, by the side of, short
for in eben, from Old High German ebani equality.


rose-water (n.)

late 14c., water tinctured with oil of roses, from rose (n.1) + water (n.1). Symbolic of affected
delicacy or sentimentalism. Similar formation in Middle Dutch rosenwater, Dutch rozenwater, German
Rosenwasser.


varsity (adj.)

1825, university, variant of earlier versity (1670s), shortened form of university. Compare varsal
(1690s), short for universal; varmint from vermin; and Grose's Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue
(1788) has vardy as slang for verdict. Used in English universities, and affected to some extent in
American colleges [Century Dictionary].


manic (adj.)

pertaining to or affected with mania, 1902, from mania + -ic. The clinical term manic depressive
also is from 1902; manic depression is first attested 1903.


poseur (n.)

one who practices affected attitudes, 1866, from French poseur, from verb poser affect an attitude
or pose, from Old French poser to put, place, set (see pose (v.1)). The word is English poser in
French garb, and thus could itself be considered an affectation.


snivel (v.)

Old English *snyflan to run at the nose, related to snyflung running of the nose, snofl nasal mucus;
see snout. Meaning to be in an (affected) tearful state is from 1680s. Related: Snivelled;
snivelling. As a noun from 14c. Melville coined snivelization (1849). Middle English had
contemptuous term snivelard (n.).


Spock

half-alien character in the Star Trek U.S. entertainment franchise, developed and named 1964 by
series creator Gene Roddenberry, who later said he was searching for an alien-sounding word and not
thinking of U.S. physician and child-care specialist Benjamin M. Spock (1903-1998), whose name is of
Dutch origin. The doctor wrote the enormously popular Common Sense Book of Baby and Child Care
(1946) and is the source of the first element in Spock-marked (1967), defined in OED as (Adversely)
affected by an upbringing held to be in accordance with the principles of Dr. Spock ....


spavin (n.)

disease of the hock joint of a horse, early 15c., from Middle French espavain (Modern French
&#233;pavin, cognate with Italian spavenio, Spanish esparavan); in most sources said to be perhaps
from Frankish *sparwan sparrow (see sparrow), on the supposition that a horse affected with spavin
moved with a walk that reminded people of the bird's awkward gait. This seems a stretcher, and
Century Dictionary admits it rests on mere resemblance of form.


gravitate (v.)

1640s, exert weight, move downward, from Modern Latin gravitatus, past participle of gravitare
gravitate, from Latin gravitas heaviness, weight (see gravity). Meaning To be affected by gravity is
from 1690s. Figurative use from 1670s. Related: Gravitated; gravitating. The classical Latin verb
was gravare to make heavy, burden, oppress, aggravate.


soubrette (n.)

1753, theatrical jargon word for lady's maid characters in plays and operas, who typically were
pert, flirtatious, and intriguing, from French soubrette, from Proven&ccedil;al soubreto affected,
conceited, fem. of soubret coy, reserved, from soubra to set aside, originally to exceed, from Old
Proven&ccedil;al sobrar, from Latin superare to rise above, overcome, from super over, above, beyond
(see super-).


experience (n.)

late 14c., observation as the source of knowledge; actual observation; an event which has affected
one, from Old French esperience (13c.) experiment, proof, experience, from Latin experientia
knowledge gained by repeated trials, from experientem (nominative experiens), present participle of
experiri to try, test, from ex- out of (see ex-) + peritus experienced, tested, from PIE root *per-
to lead, pass over (see peril). Meaning state of having done something and gotten handy at it is
from late 15c.


cognizance (n.)

mid-14c., from Anglo-French conysance recognition, later, knowledge, from Old French conoissance
acquaintance, recognition; knowledge, wisdom (Modern French connaissance), from past participle of
conoistre to know, from Latin cognoscere to get to know, recognize, from com- together (see co-) +
gnoscere to know (see notice (n.)). The -g- was restored in English spelling 15c. and has gradually
affected the pronunciation, which was always con-. The old pronunciation lingered longest in legal
use.


nauseate (v.)

1630s, to feel sick, to become affected with nausea, from nauseat- past participle stem of Latin
nauseare to feel seasick, to vomit, also to cause disgust, from nausea (see nausea). Related:
Nauseated; nauseating;  nauseatingly. In its early life it also had transitive senses of to reject
(food, etc.) with a feeling of nausea (1640s) and to create a loathing in, to cause nausea (1650s).
Careful writers use nauseated for sick at the stomach and reserve nauseous (q.v.) for sickening to
contemplate.


fey (adj.)

of excitement that presages death, from Old English f&aelig;ge doomed to die, fated, destines, also
timid, feeble; and/or from Old Norse feigr, both from Proto-Germanic *faigjo- (cognates: Old Saxon
fegi, Old Frisian fai, Middle Dutch vege, Middle High German veige doomed, also timid, German feige
cowardly), from PIE *peig- (2) evil-minded, hostile (see foe). Preserved in Scottish. Sense of
displaying unearthly qualities and disordered in the mind (like one about to die) led to modern
ironic sense of affected.


babble (v.)

mid-13c., babeln to prattle, chatter, akin to other Western European words for stammering and
prattling (cognates: Swedish babbla, Old French babillier) attested from the same era, some of which
probably were borrowed from others, but etymologists cannot now determine which were original.
Probably imitative of baby-talk, in any case (compare Latin babulus babbler, Greek barbaros non-
Greek-speaking). No direct connexion with Babel can be traced; though association with that may have
affected the senses [OED]. Meaning to repeat oneself incoherently, speak foolishly is attested from
c.1400. Related: Babbled; babbler; babbling; babblement.


decadent (adj.)

in a state of decline or decay (from a former condition of excellence), 1837, from French
d&eacute;cadent, back-formation from d&eacute;cadence (see decadence). In reference to literary
(later, other artistic) schools that believed, or affected to believe, they lived in an age of
artistic decadence, 1885 in French, 1888 in English. Usually in a bad sense:    Bread, supposedly
the staff of life, has become one of our most decadent foods -- doughy, gummy, and without the
aroma, flavor, texture, taste and appearance that is typical of good bread. [College and University
Business 1960]    Beckoning sense of desirable and satisfying to self-indulgence begins c.1970 in
commercial publications in reference to desserts.


