affinity (n.)

c.1300, relation by marriage (as opposed to consanguinity), from Old French afinit&eacute; (12c.),
from Latin affinitatem (nominative affinitas) neighborhood, relationship by marriage, noun of state
from affinis adjacent, also kin by marriage, literally bordering on, from ad- to (see ad-) + finis a
border, an end (see finish (v.)). Used figuratively since c.1600 of structural relationships in
chemistry, philology, etc. Meaning natural attraction (as though by family) is from 1610s.


chemistry (n.)

c.1600, alchemy, from chemist + -ry; also see chemical (adj.). The meaning natural physical process
is 1640s, and the scientific study not so called until 1788. The figurative sense of instinctual
attraction or affinity is attested slightly earlier, from the alchemical sense.


sagebrush (n.)

1850, from sage (n.1), to which it has no biological affinity, + brush (n.2). Said to be so called
for resemblance of its appearance or odor.    Sage-brush is very fair fuel, but as a vegetable it is
a distinguished failure. Nothing can abide the taste of it but the jackass and his illegitimate
child, the mule. [Mark Twain, Roughing It]


petunia (n.)

1825, from Modern Latin Petunia (1789), from French petun (16c.), an obsolete word for tobacco
plant, from Portuguese petum, evidently from Guarani (Paraguay) pety. The petunia has a botanical
affinity to the tobacco plant. See tobacco.


propinquity (n.)

late 14c., nearness in relation, kinship, later also physical nearness (early 15c.), from Old French
propinquite (13c.) and directly from Latin propinquitatem (nominative propinquitas) nearness,
vicinity; relationship, affinity, from propinquus near, neighboring, from prope near (enlarged from
PIE *pro before; see pro-) + suffix -inquus.    Nothing propinks like propinquity [Ian Fleming,
chapter heading, Diamonds are Forever, 1956; phrase popularized 1960s by U.S. diplomat George Ball]


paraffin (n.)

1838, from German Paraffin, coined c.1830 by German chemist Karl von Reichenbach (1788-1869), who
first obtained it as a waxy substance from wood tar, irregularly from Latin parum not very, too
little, probably related to parvus little, small (see parvi-) + affinis associated with (see
affinity).    So called because paraffin is chemically not closely related to other substances. The
liquid form (originally parafin oil) Reichenbach called eupion, but this was the standard meaning of
paraffin in English by 1860.


sympathy (n.)

1570s, affinity between certain things, from Middle French sympathie (16c.) and directly from Late
Latin sympathia community of feeling, sympathy, from Greek sympatheia fellow-feeling, community of
feeling, from sympathes having a fellow feeling, affected by like feelings, from assimilated form of
syn- together (see syn-) + pathos feeling (see pathos).    In English, almost a magical notion at
first; used in reference to medicines that heal wounds when applied to a cloth stained with blood
from the wound. Meaning conformity of feelings is from 1590s; sense of fellow feeling, compassion is
first attested c.1600. An Old English loan-translation of sympathy was efensargung.


