affirmation (n.)

early 15c., assertion that something is true, from Old French afermacion (14c.), from Latin
affirmationem (nominative affirmatio) an affirmation, solid assurance, noun of action from past
participle stem of affirmare (see affirm). In law, as the Quaker alternative to oath-taking, it is
attested from 1690s.


yea (adv.)

Old English gea (West Saxon), ge (Anglian) so, yes, from Proto-Germanic *ja-, *jai-, a word of
affirmation (cognates: German, Danish, Norwegian, Swedish ja), from PIE *yam-, from pronomial stem
*i- (see yon). As a noun, affirmation, affirmative vote, from early 13c.


re-affirmation (n.)

also reaffirmation, 1845, noun of action from re-affirm.


protester (n.)

also protestor, 1540s, one who makes solemn affirmation; agent noun from protest (v.). From 1960 as
demonstrator, public opponent of the established order.


protestation (n.)

mid-14c., affirmation; late 14c., avowal, declaration, assertion, from Old French protestacion
protest, protestation (13c.) and directly from Latin protestationem (nominative protestatio) a
declaration, protestation, noun of action from past participle stem of  protestari (see protest
(n.)).


personality (n.)

late 14c., quality or fact of being a person, from Medieval Latin personalitatem (nominative
personalitas), from Late Latin personalis (see personal). Sense of a distinctive character is first
recorded 1795, from French personnalit&eacute;.Personality is the supreme realization of the innate
idiosyncrasy of a living being. It is an act of courage flung in the face of life, the absolute
affirmation of all that constitutes the individual, the most successful adaptation to the universal
conditions of existence, coupled with the greatest possible freedom of self-determination. [C.G.
Jung, 1875-1961]Meaning person whose character stands out from that of others is from 1889.
Personality cult is attested from 1956.


answer (n.)

Old English andswaru an answer, a reply, from and- against (see ante) + -swaru affirmation, from
swerian to swear (see swear), suggesting an original sense of make a sworn statement rebutting a
charge. A common Germanic compound (cognates: Old Saxon antswor, Old Norse andsvar, Old Frisian
ondser, Danish and Swedish ansvar), implying a Proto-Germanic *andswara-. Meaning a reply to a
question, the main modern sense, was present in Old English. Meaning solution of a problem is from
c.1300.


position (n.)

late 14c., as a term in logic and philosophy, from Old French posicion position, supposition (Modern
French position), from Latin positionem (nominative positio) act or fact of placing, situation,
position, affirmation, noun of state from past participle stem of ponere put, place, from PIE
*po-s(i)nere, from *apo- off, away (see apo-) + *sinere to leave, let (see site).    Meaning proper
place occupied by a person or thing is from 1540s. Meaning manner in which some physical thing is
arranged or posed first recorded 1703; specifically in reference to dance steps, 1778, sexual
intercourse, 1883. Meaning official station, employment is from 1890.


