affliction (n.)

c.1300, from Old French afliction (11c.), from Latin afflictionem   (nominative afflictio), noun of
action from past participle stem of affligere (see afflict).


suffering (n.)

patient enduring of pain, inconvenience, loss, etc., mid-14c.; undergoing of punishment, affliction,
etc., late 14c., verbal noun from suffer (v.). Meaning a painful condition, pain felt is from late
14c.


broke (adj.)

past tense and obsolete past participle of break (v.); extension to insolvent is first recorded 1716
(broken in this sense is attested from 1590s). Old English cognate broc meant, in addition to that
which breaks, affliction, misery.


heaviness (n.)

Old English hefigness heaviness, weight; burden, affliction; dullness, torpor; see heavy + -ness.


sufferance (n.)

c.1300, enduring of hardship, affliction, etc., also allowance of wrongdoing, from Old French
suffrance, from Late Latin sufferentia, from sufferens, present participle of sufferre to bear,
undergo, endure (see suffer).


grief (n.)

early 13c., hardship, suffering, pain, bodily affliction, from Old French grief wrong, grievance,
injustice, misfortune, calamity (13c.), from grever afflict, burden, oppress, from Latin gravare to
cause grief, make heavy, from gravis weighty (see grave (adj.)). Meaning mental pain, sorrow is from
c.1300.


anger (n.)

mid-13c., distress, suffering; anguish, agony, also hostile attitude, ill will, surliness, from Old
Norse angr distress, grief. sorrow, affliction, from the same root as anger (v.). Sense of rage,
wrath is early 14c. Old Norse also had angr-gapi rash, foolish person; angr-lauss free from care;
angr-lyndi sadness, low spirits.


rancor (n.)

c.1200, from Old French rancor bitterness, resentment; grief, affliction, from Late Latin rancorem
(nominative rancor) rancidness, a stinking smell (Palladius); grudge, bitterness (Hieronymus and in
Late Latin), from Latin rancere to stink (see rancid).


inconvenience (n.)

c.1400, harm, damage, danger, also a harmful incident, misfortune, affliction, from Old French
inconvenience misfortune, calamity; impropriety (Modern French inconvenance), from Late Latin
inconvenientia lack of consistency, incongruity, noun of quality from inconvenientem (see
inconvenient). Later impropriety, unfitness; an improper act or utterance (early 15c.). Meaning
quality of being inconvenient is from 1650s.


distress (n.)

late 13c., circumstance that causes anxiety or hardship, from Old French destresse, from Vulgar
Latin *districtia restraint, affliction, narrowness, distress, from Latin districtus, past
participle of distringere draw apart, hinder, also, in Medieval Latin compel, coerce, from dis-
apart (see dis-) + stringere draw tight, press together (see strain (v.)). Meaning anguish,
suffering; grief is from c.1300.


tribulation (n.)

c.1200, from Old French tribulacion (12c.), from Church Latin tribulationem (nominative tribulatio)
distress, trouble, affliction, noun of action from past participle stem of tribulare to oppress,
afflict, a figurative use by Christian writers of Latin tribulare to press, also possibly to thresh
out grain, from tribulum threshing sledge, from stem of terere to rub (see throw (v.)) + -bulum,
suffix forming names of tools.


cramp (n.1)

muscle contraction, late 14c., from Old French crampe, from a Frankish or other Germanic word
(compare Old High German krapmhe cramp, spasm, related to kramph bent, crooked), from a Proto-
Germanic root forming many words for bent, crooked, including, via French, crampon. Writer's cramp
is first attested 1842 as the name of a physical affliction of the hand, in reference to
translations of German medical papers (Stromeyer); also known as scrivener's palsy.


persecution (n.)

mid-14c., oppression for the holding of a belief or opinion, from Old French persecucion
persecution, damage, affliction, suffering (12c.) and directly from Latin persecutionem (nominative
persecutio), noun of action from past participle stem of persequi follow, pursue, hunt down; proceed
against, prosecute, start a legal action, from per- through (see per) + sequi follow (see sequel).
Psychological persecution complex is recorded from 1961; earlier persecution mania (1892).


throe (n.)

c.1200, throwe pain, pang of childbirth, agony of death, of uncertain origin, possibly from Old
English &thorn;rawan twist, turn, writhe (see throw (v.)), or altered from Old English &thorn;rea
(genitive &thorn;rawe) affliction, pang, evil; threat, persecution (related to &thorn;rowian to
suffer), from Proto-Germanic *thrawo (cognates: Middle High German dro threat, German drohen to
threaten). Modern spelling first recorded 1610s. Related: Throes.


ail (v.)

c.1300, from Old English eglan to trouble, plague, afflict, from Proto-Germanic *azljaz (cognates:
Old English egle hideous, loathsome, troublesome, painful; Gothic agls shameful, disgraceful,
agli&thorn;a distress, affliction, hardship, us-agljan to oppress, afflict), from PIE *agh-lo-,
suffixed form of root *agh- to be depressed, be afraid. Related: Ailed; ailing; ails.    It is
remarkable, that this word is never used but with some indefinite term, or the word no thing; as
What ails him? ... Thus we never say, a fever ails him. [Johnson]


plague (n.)

late 14c., plage, affliction, calamity, evil, scourge; early 15c., malignant disease, from Old
French plage (14c.), from Late Latin plaga, used in Vulgate for pestilence, from Latin plaga stroke,
wound, probably from root of plangere to strike, lament (by beating the breast), from or cognate
with Greek (Doric) plaga blow, from PIE *plak- (2) to strike, to hit (cognates: Greek plazein to
drive away, plessein to beat, strike; Old English flocan to strike, beat; Gothic flokan to bewail;
German fluchen, Old Frisian floka to curse).    The Latin word also is the source of Old Irish plag
(genitive plaige) plague, pestilence, German Plage, Dutch plaage. Meaning epidemic that causes many
deaths is from 1540s; specifically in reference to bubonic plague from c.1600. Modern spelling
follows French, which had plague from 15c. Weakened sense of anything annoying is from c.1600.


