affront (n.)

1590s, from affront (v.).


affront (v.)

early 14c., from Old French afronter to face, confront, to slap in the face (13c.), from Late Latin
affrontare to strike against, from Latin ad frontem to the face, from frons (genitive frontis)
forehead (see front (n.)). Related: Affronted; affronting.


vexation (n.)

c.1400, from Old French vexacion abuse, harassment; insult, affront, or directly from Latin
vexationem (nominative vexatio) annoyance, harassing; distress, trouble, noun of action from past
participle stem of vexare to harass, trouble (see vex).


offense (n.)

late 14c., hurt, harm, injury, pain, from Old French ofense offense, insult, wrong (13c.) and
directly from Latin offensa an offense, injury, affront, crime, literally a striking against, noun
use of fem. past participle of offendere (see offend). Meaning action of attacking and feeling of
being hurt are both first recorded c.1400. Sense of breach of the law, transgression is first
recorded late 14c. Sporting sense first recorded 1894.


outrage (n.)

c.1300, evil deed, offense, crime; affront, indignity, from Old French outrage harm, damage; insult;
criminal behavior; presumption, insolence, overweening (12c.), earlier oltrage (11c.), from Vulgar
Latin *ultraticum excess, from Latin ultra beyond (see ultra-). Etymologically, the passing beyond
reasonable bounds in any sense; meaning narrowed in English toward violent excesses because of folk
etymology from out + rage. Of injuries to feelings, principles, etc., from 1769.


insult (v.)

1560s, triumph over in an arrogant way, from Middle French insulter (14c.) and directly from Latin
insultare to assail, to leap upon (already used by Cicero in sense of insult, scoff at, revile),
frequentative of insilire leap at or upon, from in- on, at (see in- (2)) + salire to leap (see
salient (adj.)). Sense of to verbally abuse, affront, assail with disrespect is from 1610s. Related:
Insulted; insulting.


scorn (n.)

c.1200, a shortening of Old French escarn mockery, derision, contempt, a common Romanic word
(Spanish escarnio, Italian scherno) of Germanic origin, from Proto-Germanic *skarnjan mock, deride
(cognates: Old High German skern mockery, jest, sport, Middle High German scherzen to jump with
joy).    Probably influenced by Old French escorne affront, disgrace, which is a back-formation from
escorner, literally to break off (someone's) horns, from Vulgar Latin *excornare (source of Italian
scornare treat with contempt), from Latin ex- without (see ex-) + cornu horn (see horn (n.)).


call (v.)

Old English ceallian to call, shout, less common than clipian; replaced by related Old Norse kalla
to cry loudly, from Proto-Germanic *kall- (cognates: Dutch kallen to talk, Old High German kallon to
call), from PIE root *gal- (2) to call, scream, shriek, shout (cognates: Sanskrit garhati bewail,
criticize; Latin gallus cock; Old High German klaga, German Klage complaint, grievance, lament,
accusation; Old English clacu affront; Old Church Slavonic glasu voice, glagolu word; Welsh galw
call). Related: Called; calling.    Meaning to give a name to is mid-13c. Coin-toss sense is from
1801. Meaning to visit (Middle English) was literally to stand at the door and call.
Telephone/telegraph sense is from 1889. To call out someone to fight (1823) corresponds to French
provoquer. To call it a day is from 1834.


