afterlife (n.)

1590s, a future life (especially after resurrection), from after + life.


tantalum (n.)

metallic element, 1809, Modern Latin, named 1802 by its discoverer, Swedish chemist Anders Ekberg
(1767-1813), for Tantalus, according to Ekberg partly because of its inability to absorb acid
recalled Tantalus' punishment in the afterlife (see tantalize). Sometimes it is said to be so called
from the difficulty scientists faced in obtaining a pure specimen.


Sisyphus

 King of Corinth, famed as the craftiest of men, he was condemned in the afterlife to roll uphill a
stone which perpetually rolls down again; Greek Sisyphos, a name of unknown origin. Liddell &amp;
Scott suggest a reduplication of syphos the crafty (with Aeolic -u- for -o-), but Klein calls this
folk-etymology.


otherworldly (adj.)

1854, from other + world + -ly (1). Otherworldliness is recorded from 1819. Phrase other world world
of idealism or fantasy, afterlife, spirit-land is c.1200.


tantalize (v.)

1590s, with -ize + Latin Tantalus, from Greek Tantalos, king of Phrygia, son of Zeus, father of
Pelops and Niobe, punished in the afterlife (for an offense variously given) by being made to stand
in a river up to his chin, under branches laden with fruit, all of which withdrew from his reach
whenever he tried to eat or drink. His story was known to Chaucer (c.1369). Related: Tantalized;
tantalizing; tantalizingly; tantalization.


hunt (v.)

Old English huntian chase game, related to hentan to seize, from Proto-Germanic *huntojan (cognates:
Gothic hin&thorn;an to seize, capture, Old High German hunda booty), from PIE *kend-.    General
sense of search diligently (for anything) is first recorded c.1200. Related: Hunted; hunting. Happy
hunting-grounds Native American afterlife paradise is from Last of the Mohicans (1826).


cosmos (n.)

c.1200 (but not popular until 1848, as a translation of Humboldt's Kosmos), from Latinized form of
Greek kosmos order, good order, orderly arrangement, a word with several main senses rooted in those
notions: The verb kosmein meant generally to dispose, prepare, but especially to order and arrange
(troops for battle), to set (an army) in array; also to establish (a government or regime); to deck,
adorn, equip, dress (especially of women). Thus kosmos had an important secondary sense of ornaments
of a woman's dress, decoration (compare kosmokomes dressing the hair) as well as the universe, the
world.    Pythagoras is said to have been the first to apply this word to the universe, perhaps
originally meaning the starry firmament, but later it was extended to the whole physical world,
including the earth. For specific reference to the world of people, the classical phrase was he
oikoumene (ge) the inhabited (earth). Septuagint uses both kosmos and oikoumene. Kosmos also was
used in Christian religious writing with a sense of worldly life, this world (as opposed to the
afterlife), but the more frequent word for this was aion, literally lifetime, age.


world (n.)

Old English woruld, worold human existence, the affairs of life, also a long period of time, also
the human race, mankind, humanity, a word peculiar to Germanic languages (cognates: Old Saxon
werold, Old Frisian warld, Dutch wereld, Old Norse verold, Old High German weralt, German Welt),
with a literal sense of age of man, from Proto-Germanic *wer man (Old English wer, still in
werewolf; see virile) + *ald age (see old).    Originally life on earth, this world (as opposed to
the afterlife), sense extended to the known world, then to the physical world in the broadest sense,
the universe (c.1200). In Old English gospels, the commonest word for the physical world, was
Middangeard (Old Norse Midgard), literally the middle enclosure (see yard (n.1)), which is rooted in
Germanic cosmology. Greek kosmos in its ecclesiastical sense of world of people sometimes was
rendered in Gothic as manase&thorn;s, literally seed of man. The usual Old Norse word was heimr,
literally abode (see home). Words for world in some other Indo-European languages derive from the
root for bottom, foundation (such as Irish domun, Old Church Slavonic duno, related to English
deep); the Lithuanian word is pasaulis, from pa- under + saule sun.    Original sense in world
without end, translating Latin saecula saeculorum, and in worldly. Latin saeculum can mean both age
and world, as can Greek aion. Meaning a great quantity or number is from 1580s. Out of this world
surpassing, marvelous is from 1928; earlier it meant dead. World Cup is by 1951; U.S. baseball World
Series is by 1893 (originally often World's Series). World power in the geopolitical sense first
recorded 1900. World-class is attested from 1950, originally of Olympic athletes.


