aggregate (n.)

number of persons, things, etc., regarded as a unit, early 15c., from noun use of Latin adjective
aggregatum, neuter of aggregatus (see aggregate (adj.)).


aggregate (v.)

c.1400, from Latin aggregatum, neuter past participle of aggregare (see aggregate (adj.)). Related:
Aggregated; aggregating.


aggregate (adj.)

c.1400, from Latin aggregatus associated, literally united in a flock, past participle of aggregare
add to (a flock), lead to a flock, bring together (in a flock), from ad- to (see ad-) + gregare herd
(see gregarious).


yardage (n.)

aggregate number of yards, 1900 in sports, from yard (n.2) + -age.


individuality (n.)

the aggregate of one's idiosyncrasies, 1610s, from individual + -ity. Meaning fact of existing as an
individual is from 1650s.


aggregation (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French agr&eacute;gation or directly from Medieval Latin aggregationem
(nominative aggregatio), noun of action from past participle stem of Latin aggregare (see aggregate
(adj.)).


university (n.)

c.1300, institution of higher learning, also body of persons constituting a university, from Anglo-
French universit&eacute;, Old French universite universality; academic community (13c.), from
Medieval Latin universitatem (nominative universitas), the whole, aggregate, in Late Latin
corporation, society, from universus whole, entire (see universe). In the academic sense, a
shortening of universitas magistrorum et scholarium community of masters and scholars; superseded
studium as the word for this. The Latin word also is the source of Spanish universidad, German
universit&#228;t, Russian universitet&#365;, etc.


tribe (n.)

mid-13c., one of the twelve divisions of the ancient Hebrews, from Old French tribu or directly from
Latin tribus one of the three political/ethnic divisions of the original Roman state (Tites, Ramnes,
and Luceres, corresponding, perhaps, to the Latins, Sabines, and Etruscans), later, one of the 30
political divisions instituted by Servius Tullius (increased to 35 in 241 B.C.E.), of unknown
origin. Perhaps from tri- three + *bheue-, root of the verb be. Others connect the word with the PIE
root *treb- a dwelling (see tavern).    In the Biblical sense, which was the original one in
English, the Latin word translates Greek phyle race or tribe of men, body of men united by ties of
blood and descent, a clan (see phylo-). Extension to modern ethnic groups or races of people is from
1590s, specifically a division of a barbarous race of people, usually distinguishable in some way
from their congeners, united into a community under a recognized head or chief [Century Dictionary],
but colloquially of any aggregate of individuals of a kind.


sum (n.)

c.1300, summe, quantity or amount of money, from Anglo-French and Old French summe, somme amount,
total; collection; essential point; summing up, conclusion (13c., Modern French somme), from Latin
summa the top, summit; chief place, highest rank; main thing, chief point, essence, gist; an amount
(of money), noun use (via phrases such as summa pars, summa res) of fem. of summus highest,
uppermost, from PIE *sup-mos-, from root *uper over (see super-).    The sense development from
highest to total number, the whole probably is via the Roman custom of adding up a stack of figures
from the bottom and writing the sum at the top, rather than at the bottom as now (compare the bottom
line).    General sense of numerical quantity of anything, a total number is from late 14c. Meaning
essence of a writing or speech also is attested from mid-14c. Meaning aggregate of two or more
numbers is from early 15c.; sense of arithmetical problem to be solved is from 1803. Sum-total is
attested from late 14c., from Medieval Latin summa totalis.


number (n.)

c.1300, sum, aggregate of a collection, from Anglo-French noumbre, Old French nombre and directly
from Latin numerus a number, quantity, from PIE root *nem- to divide, distribute, allot (related to
Greek nemein to deal out; see nemesis). Meaning symbol or figure of arithmetic value is from late
14c. Meaning single (numbered) issue of a magazine is from 1795. Meaning dialing combination to
reach a particular telephone receiver is from 1879; hence wrong number (1886). The modern meaning
musical selection (1885) is from vaudeville theater programs, where acts were marked by a number.
Earlier numbers meant Harmony; proportion calculated by number, and Verses, poetry [Johnson].
Number one oneself is from 1704 (mock-Italian form numero uno attested from 1973); the biblical Book
of Numbers (c.1400, Latin Numeri, Greek Arithmoi) so called because it begins with a census of the
Israelites. Slang number one and number two for urination and defecation attested from 1902. Number
cruncher is 1966, of machines; 1971, of persons. To get or have (someone's) number have someone
figured out is attested from 1853. The numbers illegal lottery is from 1897, American English.


score (n.)

late Old English scoru twenty, from Old Norse skor mark, notch, incision; a rift in rock, also, in
Icelandic, twenty, from Proto-Germanic *skura-, from PIE root *(s)ker- (1) to cut (see shear).
The connecting notion probably is counting large numbers (of sheep, etc.) with a notch in a stick
for each 20. That way of counting, called vigesimalism, also exists in French: In Old French, twenty
(vint) or a multiple of it could be used as a base, as in vint et doze (32), dous vinz et diz (50).
Vigesimalism was or is a feature of Welsh, Irish, Gaelic and Breton (as well as non-IE Basque), and
it is speculated that the English and the French picked it up from the Celts. Compare tally (n.).
The prehistoric sense of the Germanic word, then, likely was straight mark like a scratch, line
drawn by a sharp instrument, but in English this is attested only from c.1400, along with the sense
mark made (on a chalkboard, etc.) to keep count of a customer's drinks in a tavern. This sense was
extended by 1670s to mark made for purpose of recording a point in a game or match, and thus
aggregate of points made by contestants in certain games and matches (1742, originally in whist).
From the tavern-keeping sense comes the meaning amount on an innkeeper's bill (c.1600) and thus the
figurative verbal expression settle scores (1775).  Meaning printed piece of music first recorded
1701, said to be from the practice of connecting related staves by scores of lines. Especially music
composed for a film (1927). Meaning act of obtaining narcotic drugs is by 1951.   Scoreboard is from
1826;   score-keeping- from 1905; newspaper sports section score line is from 1965; baseball score-
card is from 1877.


