aim (v.)

early 14c., to estimate, calculate, also to intend, from Old French aesmer value, rate; count,
estimate, from Latin aestimare appraise (see estimation); current meaning apparently developed from
esteem, to calculate, to calculate with a view to action (c. 1400), then to direct a missile, a
blow, etc. (1570s). Related: Aimed; aiming.


aim (n.)

early 14c., target; late 14c., guess; from aim (v.). Meaning action of aiming is from early 15c. (to
take aim, originally make aim); that of thing intended, purpose is from 1620s.


aimless (adj.)

1620s, from aim (n.) + -less. Related: Aimlessly; aimlessness.


acclaim (n.)

act of acclaiming, 1667 (in Milton), from acclaim (v.).


acclaim (v.)

early 14c., to lay claim to, from Latin acclamare to cry out at (see acclamation); the meaning to
applaud is recorded by 1630s. Related: Acclaimed; acclaiming.


caiman (n.)

also cayman, 1570s, from Portuguese or Spanish caiman, from Carib acayouman crocodile, or perhaps
from a Congo African word applied to the reptiles in the new world by African slaves. The name
appears to be one of those like anaconda and bom, boma, which the Portuguese or Spaniards very early
caught up in one part of the world, and naturalized in another. [OED]


claim (v.)

c. 1300, to call, call out; to ask or demand by virtue of right or authority, from accented stem of
Old French clamer to call, name, describe; claim; complain; declare, from Latin clamare to cry out,
shout, proclaim, from PIE *kele- (2) to shout, imitative (compare Sanskrit usakala cock, literally
dawn-calling; Latin calare to announce solemnly, call out; Middle Irish cailech cock; Greek kalein
to call, kelados noise, kledon report, fame; Old High German halan to call; Old English hlowan to
low, make a noise like a cow; Lithuanian kalba language). Related: Claimed; claiming.    Meaning to
maintain as true is from 1864; specific sense to make a claim (on an insurance company) is from
1897. Claim properly should not stray too far from its true meaning of to demand recognition of a
right.


claim (n.)

early 14c., a demand of a right; right of claiming, from Old French claime claim, complaint, from
clamer (see claim (v.)). Meaning thing claimed or demanded is from 1792; specifically piece of land
allotted and taken (chiefly U.S. and Australia, in reference to mining) is from 1851. Insurance
sense is from 1878.


claimant (n.)

1747, from claim (v.), on model of appellant, defendant, etc., or from French noun use of present
participle of clamer.


daimon (n.)

transliteration of Greek daimon lesser god, guiding spirit, tutelary deity, 1852; see demon.
Employed to avoid the post-classical associations of that word.


daimyo

also daimio, former title of the chief nobles of Japan, 1839, from Japanese, literally big name,
from Chinese dai great + mio, myo name.


declaim (v.)

late 14c., from Middle French d&eacute;clamer and directly from Latin declamare to practice public
speaking, to bluster, from de- intensive prefix + clamare to cry, shout (see claim (v.)). At first
in English spelled declame, but altered under influence of claim. Related: Declaimed; declaiming.


disclaim (v.)

c. 1400, from Anglo-French disclaimer, Old French desclamer disclaim, disavow, from des- (see dis-)
+ clamer to call, cry out, claim (see claim (v.)). Related: Disclaimed; disclaiming.


disclaimer (n.)

denial of a claim, mid-15c., from Anglo-French disclaimer disavowal, denial; see disclaim.
Infinitive used as a noun in Old French. Compare waiver, etc.


Ephraim

masc. personal name, in Old Testament the younger son of Joseph, also the name of the tribe
descended from him, and sometimes used figuratively for Kingdom of Israel; Greek form of Hebrew
Ephrayim, a derivative of parah was fruitful (related to Aramaic pera fruit).


exclaim (v.)

1560s, back-formation from exclamation or else from Middle French exclamer (16c.), from Latin
exclamare cry out loud, call out, from ex- out, or else here as an intensive prefix (see ex-) +
clamare cry, shout, call (see claim (v.)). Spelling influenced by claim. Related: Exclaimed;
exclaiming.


maim (v.)

c. 1300, maimen, from Old French mahaignier injure, wound, muitilate, cripple, disarm, possibly from
Vulgar Latin *mahanare (source also of Proven&ccedil;al mayanhar, Italian magagnare), of unknown
origin; or possibly from a Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic *mait- (source of Old Norse
mei&eth;a to hurt, related to mad (adj.)), or from PIE root *mai- to cut. Related: Maimed; maiming.


proclaim (v.)

late 14c., proclamen, from Latin proclamare cry or call out, from pro- forth (see pro-) + clamare to
cry out (see claim (v.)). Spelling altered by influence of claim. Related: Proclaimed; proclaiming;
proclaimer.


quitclaim (n.)

a relinquishing of a legal right or claim, c. 1300, from Anglo-French quiteclame; see quit (v.) +
claim (n.). Compare Old French clamer quitte to give up (a right).


raiment (n.)

c. 1400, clothing, vesture (archaic), shortening of arayment clothing (late 14c.), from Anglo-French
araiement, from Old French areement, from areer to array (see array (v.)).


reclaim (v.)

early 14c., call back a hawk to the glove, from Old French reclamer to call upon, invoke; claim;
seduce; to call back a hawk (12c.) and directly from Latin reclamare cry out against, contradict,
protest, appeal, from re- opposite, against (see re-) + clamare cry out (see claim (v.)).    Call
back a hawk, hence to make tame (mid-15c.), subdue, reduce to obedience, make amenable to control
(late 14c.). In many Middle English uses with no sense of return or reciprocation. Meaning revoke (a
grant, gift, etc.) is from late 15c. That of recall (someone) from an erring course to a proper
state is mid-15c. Sense of get back by effort might reflect influence of claim. Meaning bring waste
land into useful condition fit for cultivation first attested 1764, probably on notion of reduce to
obedience. Related: Reclaimed; reclaiming.


