airy (adj.)

late 14c., of the air, made of air, from air (n.1) + -y (2). Meaning breezy is attested from 1590s;
that of lively is from 1640s. Sense of vain, unsubstantial is from 1580s. Disparaging airy-fairy is
attested from 1920 (earlier in a sense of delicate or light as a fairy, which is how Tennyson used
it in 1830).


ethereal (adj.)

1510s, of the highest regions of the atmosphere, from ether + -al (1); extended sense of light, airy
is from 1590s. Meaning spiritlike, immaterial is from 1640s. Related: Ethereally.


breezy (adj.)

1718, from breeze (n.) + -y (2). Figurative sense fresh, easygoing, light, airy is from 1870.
Related: Breezily; breeziness.


extrapolate (v.)

1862 (in a Harvard observatory account of the comet of 1858), from extra- + ending from interpolate.
Said in early references to be an expression of Sir George Airy (1801-1892), English mathematician
and astronomer. Related: Extrapolated; extrapolating.


airily (adv.)

1766, from airy with ostentatious air (see air (n.2)) + -ly (2).


aerial (adj.)

c.1600, from Latin aerius airy, aerial, lofty, high (from Greek aerios of the air, pertaining to
air, from aer air; see air (n.1)) + adjectival suffix -al (1).


sylph (n.)

1650s, air-spirit, from Modern Latin sylphes (plural), coined 16c. by Paracelsus (1493-1541),
originally referring to any race of spirits inhabiting the air, described as being mortal but
lacking a soul. Paracelsus' word seems to be an arbitrary coinage, but perhaps it holds a suggestion
of Latin silva and Greek nymph, or Greek silphe a kind of beetle, but French etymologists propose a
Gaulish origin. The Century Dictionary comments that, to occultists and quacks like Paracelsus words
spelled with -y- look more Greek and convincing. The meaning graceful girl first recorded 1838, on
the notion of slender figure and light, airy movement [OED].


rare (adj.1)

unusual, late 14c., thin, airy, porous; mid-15c., few in number and widely separated, sparsely
distributed, seldom found; from Old French rere sparse (14c.), from Latin rarus thinly sown, having
a loose texture; not thick; having intervals between, full of empty spaces, from PIE *ra-ro-, from
root *ere- to separate; adjoin (cognates: Sanskrit rte besides, except, viralah distant, tight,
rare; Old Church Slavonic rediku rare, Old Hittite arha&#353; border, Lithuanian irti to be
dissolved). Few in number, hence, unusual. Related: Rareness. In chemistry, rare earth is from 1818.


spirit (n.)

mid-13c., animating or vital principle in man and animals, from Anglo-French spirit, Old French
espirit spirit, soul (12c., Modern French esprit) and directly from Latin spiritus a breathing
(respiration, and of the wind), breath; breath of a god, hence inspiration; breath of life, hence
life; also disposition, character; high spirit, vigor, courage; pride, arrogance, related to spirare
to breathe, from PIE *(s)peis- to blow (cognates: Old Church Slavonic pisto to play on the flute).
Meaning supernatural immaterial creature; angel, demon; an apparition, invisible corporeal being of
an airy nature is attested from mid-14c.; from late 14c. as a ghost (see ghost (n.)). From c.1500 as
a nature, character; sense of essential principle of something (in a non-theological context, as in
Spirit of St. Louis) is attested from 1680s, common after 1800; Spirit of '76 in reference to the
qualities that sparked and sustained the American Revolution is attested by 1797 in William
Cobbett's Porcupine's Gazette and Daily Advertiser.    From late 14c. in alchemy as volatile
substance; distillate; from c.1500 as substance capable of uniting the fixed and the volatile
elements of the philosopher's stone. Hence spirits volatile substance; sense narrowed to strong
alcoholic liquor by 1670s. This also is the sense in spirit level (1768). Also from mid-14c. as
character, disposition; way of thinking and feeling, state of mind; source of a human desire; in
Middle English freedom of spirit meant freedom of choice. From late 14c. as divine substance, divine
mind, God; also Christ or His divine nature; the Holy Ghost; divine power; also, extension of divine
power to man; inspiration, a charismatic state; charismatic power, especially of prophecy. Also
essential nature, essential quality. From 1580s in metaphoric sense animation, vitality.
According to Barnhart and OED, originally in English mainly from passages in Vulgate, where the
Latin word translates Greek pneuma and Hebrew ruah. Distinction between soul and spirit (as seat of
emotions) became current in Christian terminology (such as Greek psykhe vs. pneuma, Latin anima vs.
spiritus) but is without significance for earlier periods [Buck]. Latin spiritus, usually in
classical Latin breath, replaces animus in the sense spirit in the imperial period and appears in
Christian writings as the usual equivalent of Greek pneuma. Spirit-rapping is from 1852.


