alchemist (n.)

1510s, from Middle French alquemiste, from Medieval Latin alchimista (see alchemy). Earlier forms
were alchemister (late 14c.), alkanamyer (late 15c.).


chemist (n.)

1560s, chymist, alchemist, from Middle French chimiste, from Medieval Latin chimista, reduced from
alchimista (see alchemy). Modern spelling is from c.1790. Meaning chemical scientist is from 1620s;
meaning dealer in medicinal drugs (mostly in British English) is from 1745.


phosphorus (n.)

substance or organism that shines of itself, 1640s, from Latin phosphorus light-bringing, also the
morning star (a sense attested in English from 1620), from Greek Phosphoros morning star, literally
torchbearer, from phos light, contraction of phaos light, daylight (related to phainein to show, to
bring to light; see phantasm) + phoros bearer, from pherein to carry (see infer).    As the name of
a non-metallic chemical element, it is recorded from 1680, originally one among several substances
so called; the word used exclusively of the element from c.1750. It was discovered in 1669 by
Henning Brand, merchant and alchemist of Hamburg, who derived it from urine. Lavoisier demonstrated
it was an element in 1777. According to Flood, It is the first element whose discoverer is known.


antimony (n.)

brittle metallic element, early 15c., from Old French antimoine and directly from Medieval Latin
antimonium, an alchemist's term (used 11c. by Constantinus Africanus), origin obscure, probably a
Latinization of Greek stimmi powdered antimony, black antimony (a cosmetic used to paint the
eyelids), from some Arabic word (such as al 'othmud), unless the Arabic word is from the Greek or
the Latin is from Arabic; probably ultimately from Egyptian stm powdered antimony. In French folk
etymology, anti-moine monk's bane (from moine).    As the name of a pure element, it is attested in
English from 1788. Its chemical symbol Sb is for Stibium, the Latin name for black antimony, which
word was used also in English for black antimony.


