alias (n.)

assumed name, c.1600, from alias (adv.).


alias (adv.)

mid-15c., otherwise called, from Latin alias at another time, in another way, from alius (an)other,
from PIE *al- (1) beyond (cognates: Sanskrit anya other, different, Avestan anya-, Armenian ail,
Greek allos another, Gothic aljis other, Old English elles otherwise, else, Modern English else).


Lenin

pseudonym or alias chosen c.1902 (for publishing clandestine political works in exile) by Russian
revolutionary Vladimir Il'ich Ulyanov (1870-1924). Related: Leninist (1917); Leninism (1918).


allo-

word-forming element meaning other, from Greek allo-, comb. form of allos other, different (see
alias (adv.)).


stick-in-the-mud (n.)

1852, from verbal phrase, stick (v.) on notion of one who sticks in the mud, hence one who is
content to remain in an abject condition. The phrase appears in 1730, in city of London court
records, as the alias of an accused named John Baker, who with two other men received a death
sentence at the Old Bailey in December 1733 for breaking open the House of Mr. Thomas Rayner, a
Silversmith, and stealing thence Plate to a great Value.


allergy (n.)

1911, from German Allergie, coined 1906 by  Austrian pediatrician Clemens E. von Pirquet (1874-1929)
from Greek allos other, different, strange (see alias (adv.)) + ergon activity (see organ).


allopathy (n.)

1842, treatment of disease by remedies that produce effects opposite to the symptoms, from German
Allopathie (Hahnemann), from Greek allos other (see alias (adv.)) + -patheia, suffering, disease,
feeling (see -pathy). The term applied by homeopathists to traditional medicine.


alienate (v.)

1540s, make estranged (in feelings or affections), from Latin alienatus, past participle of alienare
to make another's, estrange, from alienus of or belonging to another person or place, from alius
(an)other (see alias (adv.)). Related: Alienated; alienating.


alibi (n.)

1743, the plea of having been elsewhere when an action took place, from Latin alibi elsewhere,
somewhere else, locative of alius (an)other (see alias (adv.)). The weakened sense of excuse is
attested since 1912, but technically any proof of innocence that doesn't involve being elsewhere is
an excuse, not an alibi.


allele (n.)

1931, from German allel, abbreviation of allelomorph (1902), coined from Greek allel- one another
(from allos other; see alias (adv.)) + morphe form (see Morpheus).


synallagmatic (adj.)

expressing reciprocal obligations, from Greek synallagmatikos, from synallagma a covenant, contract,
from syn- together with (see syn-) + allagma thing taken in exchange, from stem of allassein to
exchange, barter, from allos another (see alias (adv.)).


parallax (n.)

1570s, from Middle French parallaxe (mid-16c.), from Greek parallaxis change, alteration,
inclination of two lines meeting at an angle, from parallassein to alter, make things alternate,
from para- (see para- (1)) + allassein to change, from allos other (see alias (adv.)). Related:
Parallactic.


alien (adj.)

mid-14c., strange, foreign, from Old French alien alien, strange, foreign; an alien, stranger,
foreigner, from Latin alienus of or belonging to another, foreign, alien, strange, also, as a noun,
a stranger, foreigner, adjectival form of alius (an)other (see alias (adv.)). Meaning not of the
Earth first recorded 1920. An alien priory (c.1500) is one owing obedience to a mother abbey in a
foreign country.


allegory (n.)

late 14c., from Old French allegorie (12c.), from Latin allegoria, from Greek allegoria figurative
language, description of one thing under the image of another, literally a speaking about something
else, from allos another, different (see alias (adv.)) + agoreuein speak openly, speak in the
assembly, from agora assembly (see agora).


parallel (adj.)

1540s, from Middle French parall&egrave;le (16c.) and directly from Latin parallelus, from Greek
parallelos parallel, from para allelois beside one another, from para- beside (see para- (1)) +
allelois each other, from allos other (see alias (adv.)). As a noun from 1550s. Parallel bars as
gymnastics apparatus are recorded from 1868.


alter (v.)

late 14c., to change (something), from Old French alterer change, alter, from Medieval Latin
alterare to change, from Latin alter the other (of the two), from PIE *al- beyond (see alias (adv.))
+ comparative suffix -ter (as in other). Intransitive sense to become otherwise first recorded
1580s. Related: Altered; altering.


ultra-

word-forming element meaning beyond (ultraviolet) or extremely (ultramodern), from Latin ultra- from
ultra (adv. and prep.) beyond, on the other side, on the farther side, past, over, across, from PIE
*ol-tero-, suffixed form of root *al- (1) beyond (see alias (adv.)). In common use from early 19c.,
it appears to have arisen from French political designations. As its own word, a noun meaning
extremist of various stripes, it is first recorded 1817, from French ultra, shortening of ultra-
royaliste extreme royalist.


else (adj.)

Old English elles other, otherwise, different, from Proto-Germanic *aljaz (cognates: Gothic aljis
other, Old High German eli-lenti, Old English el-lende, both meaning in a foreign land; see also
Alsace), an adverbial genitive of the neuter of PIE root *al- (1) beyond (cognates: Greek allos
other, Latin alius; see alias (adv.)). Synonym of other, the nuances of usage are often arbitrary.
Productive of a number of handy compounds that somehow never got traction or have been suffered to
fall from use: elsehow (1660s) somehow or other; elsewards (adv.), 1882, somewhere else; Old English
elsewhat (pron.)  something else, anything else; elsewhen (adv.), early 15c., at another time;
elsewhence (c.1600); elsewho (1540s). Among the survivors are elsewhere, elsewise.


rum (n.)

liquor from sugar cane or molasses, 1650s, shortening of rumbullion (1651), rombostion (1652), of
uncertain origin, perhaps from rum (adj.).The chiefe fudling they make in the Island [i.e. Barbados]
is Rumbullion alias Kill-Devill, and this is made of suggar cane distilled, a hott, hellish and
terrible liquor. [A briefe Description of the Island of Barbados, 1651]The English word was borrowed
into Dutch, German, Swedish, Danish, Spanish, Portuguese, Italian, French, and Russian. Used since
1800 in North America as a general (hostile) name for intoxicating liquors.    Rum I take to be the
name which unwashed moralists apply alike to the product distilled from molasses and the noblest
juices of the vineyard. Burgundy in all its sunset glow is rum. Champagne, soul of the foaming grape
of Eastern France, is rum. ... Sir, I repudiate the loathsome vulgarism as an insult to the first
miracle wrought by the Founder of our religion! [Oliver Wendell Holmes, The Autocrat of the
Breakfast-Table, 1891]


tweed (n.)

1839, a trade name for a type of woolen fabric:    MICHAEL NOWAK, alias John Mazurkiewiez, was
indicted for stealing on the 15th of April 2 &#188; yards of woollen cloth, called tweed, value
12s., and 2 &#188; yards of woollen cloth, called doe skin, value 17s., the goods of George
Priestley Heap. [London Central Criminal Court minutes of evidence from 1839]    This apparently
developed from the Tweed Fishing or Travelling Trousers advertised in numerous publications from
1834-1838 by the clothing house of Doudney &amp; Son, 49 Lombard Street.    So celebrated has
amateur rod-fishing in the Tweed become, that the proper costume of the sportsman has now become an
object of speculation among the London tailors, one of whom advertises among other articles of dress
Tweed Fishing Trousers. The anglers who have so long established their head-quarters at Kelso, for
the purpose of enjoying the amusement of salmon fishing in the Tweed, have had excellent sport
lately : some of the most skilful having caught five or six salmon a day, weighing from six to
fourteen pounds each. [New Sporting Magazine, June 1837]    Thus ultimately named for the River
Tweed in Scotland. The place name has not been explained, and it is perhaps pre-Celtic and non-Indo-
European.


other (adj.)

Old English o&thorn;er the second (adj.), also as a pronoun, one of the two, other, from Proto-
Germanic *antharaz (cognates: Old Saxon athar, Old Frisian other, Old Norse annarr, Middle Dutch and
Dutch ander, Old High German andar, German ander, Gothic an&thorn;ar other).    These are from PIE
*an-tero-, variant of *al-tero- the other of two (source of Lithuanian antras, Sanskrit antarah
other, foreign, Latin alter), from root *al- (1) beyond (see alias (adv.)) + adjectival comparative
suffix *-tero-. The Old English, Old Saxon, and Old Frisian forms show a normal loss of n before
fricatives [Barnhart]. Meaning different is mid-13c.    Sense of second was detached from this word
in English (which uses second, from Latin) and German (zweiter, from zwei two) to avoid ambiguity.
In Scandinavian, however, the second floor is still the other floor (Swedish andra, Danish anden).
Also compare Old English o&thorn;ergeara next year.   The other woman a woman with whom a man begins
a love affair while he is already committed is from 1855. The other day originally (mid-12c.) was
the next day; later (c.1300) yesterday; and now, loosely, a day or two ago (early 15c.). Phrase
other half in reference to either the poor or the rich, is recorded from c.1600.La moiti&eacute; du
monde ne s&ccedil;ayt comment l'aultre vit. [Rabelais, Pantagruel, 1532]


