allay (v.)

Old English alecgan to put down, remit, give up, a Germanic compound (cognates: Gothic uslagjan, Old
High German irleccan, German erlegen), from a- down, aside + lecgan to lay (see lay).    Early
Middle English pronunciations of -y- and -g- were not always distinct, and the word was confused in
Middle English with various senses of Romanic-derived alloy and allege, especially the latter in an
obsolete sense of to lighten, from Latin ad- to + levis (see lever).  Amid the overlapping of
meanings that thus arose, there was developed a perplexing network of uses of allay and allege, that
belong entirely to no one of the original vbs., but combine the senses of two or more of them.
[OED]The double -l- is 17c., a mistaken Latinism. Related: Allayed; allaying.


pacify (v.)

late 15c., appease, allay the anger of (someone), from Middle French pacifier make peace, from Latin
pacificare to make peace; pacify, from pacificus (see pacific). Of countries or regions, to bring to
a condition of calm, c.1500, from the start with suggestions of submission and terrorization.
Related: Pacified; pacifying.


slake (v.)

late Old English sleacian, slacian become slack or remiss; slacken an effort (intransitive); delay,
retard (transitive), from sl&aelig;c lax (see slack (adj.)). Transitive sense of make slack is from
late 12c. Sense of allay, diminish in force, quench, extinguish (in reference to thirst, hunger,
desire, wrath, etc.) first recorded early 14c. via notion of make slack or inactive. Related:
Slaked; slaking.


lenient (adj.)

1650s, relaxing, soothing, from Middle French lenient, from Latin lenientem (nominative leniens),
present participle of lenire to soften, alleviate, mitigate, allay, calm, from lenis mild, gentle,
calm, probably from PIE root *le- to leave, yield, let go, slacken (cognates: Lithuanian lenas
quiet, tranquil, tame, slow, Old Church Slavonic lena lazy, Latin lassus faint, weary, Old English
l&aelig;t sluggish, slow, l&aelig;tan to leave behind). Sense of mild, merciful (of persons) first
recorded 1787. In earlier use was lenitive, attested from early 15c. of medicines, 1610s of persons.


