alleviate (v.)

late 15c., from Middle French allevier or directly from Late Latin alleviatus, past participle of
alleviare to lighten, from Latin ad- to (see ad-) + levis light in weight (see lever). Related:
Alleviated; alleviating.


relieve (v.)

late 14c., alleviate (pain, etc.), mitigate; afford comfort; allow respite; diminish the pressure
of, also give alms to, provide for; also figuratively, take heart, cheer up; from Old French relever
to raise, relieve (11c.) and directly from Latin relevare to raise, alleviate, lift up, free from a
burden, from re-, intensive prefix (see re-), + levare to lift up, lighten, from levis not heavy
(see lever).    The notion is to raise (someone) out of trouble. From c.1400 as advance to the
rescue in battle; also return from battle; recall (troops). Meaning release from duty is from early
15c. Related: relieved; relieving.


alleviation (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French aleviacion or directly from Medieval Latin alleviationem (nominative
alleviatio), noun of action from past participle stem of alleviare (see alleviate).


palliate (v.)

alleviate without curing, early 15c., from Medieval Latin palliatus, literally cloaked, from past
participle of Late Latin palliare cover with a cloak, conceal, from Latin pallium cloak (see pall
(n.)). Related: Palliated; palliating; palliation.


elevate (v.)

late 15c., from Latin elevatus, past participle of elevare lift up, raise, figuratively, to lighten,
alleviate, from ex- out (see ex-) + levare lighten, raise, from levis light in weight (see lever).
Related: Elevated; elevating.


light (v.1)

touch down, from Old English lihtan to alight; alleviate, leave, from Proto-Germanic *linkhtijan,
literally to make light, from *lingkhtaz not heavy (see light (adj.1)). Apparently the ground sense
is to dismount a horse, etc., and thus relieve it of one's weight. To light out leave hastily is
1870, from a nautical meaning move out, move heavy objects, of unknown origin but perhaps belonging
to this word (compare lighter (n.1)).


sage (n.1)

kind of herb (Salvia officinalis), early 14c., from Old French sauge (13c.), from Latin salvia, from
salvus healthy (see safe (adj.)). So called for its healing or preserving qualities (it was used to
keep teeth clean and relieve sore gums, and boiled in water to make a drink to alleviate arthritis).
In English folklore, sage, like parsley, is said to grow best where the wife is dominant. In late
Old English as salvie, directly from Latin. Compare German Salbei, also from Latin.


assuage (v.)

c.1300, from Anglo-French assuager, Old French assoagier soften, moderate, alleviate, calm, soothe,
pacify, from Vulgar Latin *adsuaviare, from Latin ad- to (see ad-) + suavis sweet, agreeable (see
sweet (adj.)). For sound development in French, compare deluge from Latin diluvium, abridge from
abbreviare. Related: Assuaged; assuaging.


lenient (adj.)

1650s, relaxing, soothing, from Middle French lenient, from Latin lenientem (nominative leniens),
present participle of lenire to soften, alleviate, mitigate, allay, calm, from lenis mild, gentle,
calm, probably from PIE root *le- to leave, yield, let go, slacken (cognates: Lithuanian lenas
quiet, tranquil, tame, slow, Old Church Slavonic lena lazy, Latin lassus faint, weary, Old English
l&aelig;t sluggish, slow, l&aelig;tan to leave behind). Sense of mild, merciful (of persons) first
recorded 1787. In earlier use was lenitive, attested from early 15c. of medicines, 1610s of persons.


release (v.)

c.1300, to withdraw, revoke (a decree, etc.), cancel, lift; remit, from Old French relaissier,
relesser to relinquish, quit, let go, leave behind, abandon, acquit, variant of relacher release,
relax, from Latin relaxare loosen, stretch out (see relax), source also of Spanish relajar, Italian
relassare.    Meaning alleviate, ease is mid-14c., as is sense of free from (duty, etc.); exonerate.
From late 14c. as grant remission, forgive; set free from imprisonment, military service, etc. Also
give up, relinquish, surrender. In law, c.1400, to grant a release of property. Of press reports,
attested from 1904; of motion pictures, from 1912; of music recordings, from 1962. As a euphemism
for to dismiss, fire from a job it is attested in American English since 1904. Related: Released;
releasing.


