alleged (adj.)

mid-15c., quoted, past participle adjective from allege. Attested from 1610s in sense of brought
forth in court; 1670s as asserted but not proved.


alleger (n.)

1570s, agent noun from allege. The Latinate form, allegator (1680s) rarely was used, for some
reason.


allege (v.)

c.1300. It has the form of one French verb and the meaning of another. The form is Anglo-French
aleger, Old French eslegier to clear at law, from Latin ex- out of (see ex-) and litigare bring suit
(see litigate); however eslegier meant acquit, clear of charges in a lawsuit. It somehow acquired
the meaning of French all&eacute;guer, from Latin allegare send for, bring forth, name, produce in
evidence, from ad- to (see ad-) + legare to depute, send (see legate). Related: Alleged; alleging.


allay (v.)

Old English alecgan to put down, remit, give up, a Germanic compound (cognates: Gothic uslagjan, Old
High German irleccan, German erlegen), from a- down, aside + lecgan to lay (see lay).    Early
Middle English pronunciations of -y- and -g- were not always distinct, and the word was confused in
Middle English with various senses of Romanic-derived alloy and allege, especially the latter in an
obsolete sense of to lighten, from Latin ad- to + levis (see lever).  Amid the overlapping of
meanings that thus arose, there was developed a perplexing network of uses of allay and allege, that
belong entirely to no one of the original vbs., but combine the senses of two or more of them.
[OED]The double -l- is 17c., a mistaken Latinism. Related: Allayed; allaying.


allegation (n.)

early 15c., action of alleging, from Middle French all&eacute;gation, from Latin allegationem
(nominative allegatio) a sending, despatching, noun of action from past participle stem of allegare
(see allege).


pretension (n.)

mid-15c., assertion, allegation; objection; intention; signification, from Medieval Latin
pretensionem (nominative praetensio), noun of action from past participle stem of Latin praetendere
stretch in front, put forward, allege (see pretend (v.)). Meaning unproven claim is from c.1600.
Sense of ostentation is from 1727.


surmise (v.)

c.1400, in law, to charge, allege, from Old French surmis, past participle of surmettre to accuse,
from sur- upon (see sur- (1)) + mettre put, from Latin mittere to send (see mission). Meaning to
infer conjecturally is recorded from 1700, from the noun. Related: Surmised; surmising.


defend (v.)

mid-13c., from Old French defendre (12c.) defend, resist, and directly from Latin defendere ward
off, protect, guard, allege in defense, from de- from, away (see de-) + -fendere to strike, push,
from PIE root *gwhen- to strike, kill (see bane). In the Mercian hymns, Latin defendet is glossed by
Old English gescilde&eth;. Related: Defended; defending.


stultify (v.)

1766, allege to be of unsound mind (legal term), from Late Latin stultificare turn into foolishness,
from Latin stultus foolish (literally uneducated, unmovable, from PIE root *stel- to put, stand) +
root of facere to make (see factitious). The first element is cognate with Latin stolidus slow,
dull, obtuse (see stolid). Meaning cause to appear foolish or absurd is from 1809. Hence stultiloquy
foolish talk, silly babbling (1650s). Related: Stultified; stultifying.


ruse (n.)

early 15c., dodging movements of a hunted animal; 1620s, a trick, from Old French ruse, reuse
diversion, switch in flight; trick, jest (14c.), back-formed noun from reuser to dodge, repel,
retreat; deceive, cheat, from Latin recusare deny, reject, oppose, from re-, intensive prefix (see
re-), + causari plead as a reason, object, allege, from causa reason, cause (see cause (n.)). It
also has been proposed that the French word may be from Latin rursus backwards, or a Vulgar Latin
form of refusare. Johnson calls it, A French word neither elegant nor necessary. The verb ruse was
used in Middle English.


pretend (v.)

late 14c., to profess, assert, maintain (a claim, etc.), to direct (one's) efforts, from Old French
pretendre to lay claim, from Latin praetendere stretch in front, put forward, allege, from prae
before (see pre-) + tendere to stretch, from PIE root *ten- to stretch (see tend).    Main modern
sense of feign, put forward a false claim is recorded from c.1400; the older sense of simply to
claim is behind the string of royal pretenders (1690s) in English history. Meaning to play, make
believe is recorded from 1865. In 17c. pretend also could mean make a suit of marriage for, from a
sense in French. Related: Pretended; pretending.


