allegiance (n.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French legaunce loyalty of a liege-man to his lord, from Old French legeance,
from liege (see liege); erroneously associated with Latin ligare to bind; corrupted in spelling by
confusion with the now-obsolete legal term allegeance alleviation. General figurative sense of
recognition of claims to respect or duty is attested from 1732.


orphan (n.)

c.1300, from Late Latin orphanus parentless child (source of Old French orfeno, Italian orfano),
from Greek orphanos orphaned, without parents, fatherless, literally deprived, from orphos bereft,
from PIE *orbho- bereft of father, also deprived of free status, from root *orbh- to change
allegiance, to pass from one status to another (cognates: Hittite harb- change allegiance, Latin
orbus bereft, Sanskrit arbhah weak, child, Armenian orb orphan, Old Irish orbe heir, Old Church
Slavonic rabu slave, rabota servitude (see robot), Gothic arbja, German erbe, Old English ierfa
heir, Old High German arabeit, German Arbeit work, Old Frisian arbed, Old English earfo&eth;
hardship, suffering, trouble). As an adjective from late 15c.


underling (n.)

late Old English, one who owes allegiance to a sovereign or ruler, from under + diminutive suffix
-ling.


Romanism (n.)

Roman Catholicism (usually, if not always, with a disparaging savor; in some contexts suggesting
political allegiance to the Vatican), 1670s, from Roman + -ism.


Mozarab (n.)

assimilated Christian in Moorish Spain, one who was allowed to continue practicing his religion in
exchange for political allegiance, from Spanish Mozarabe would-be Arab, from Arabic mostarib, from a
desiderative verbal form of Arab.


disloyalty (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French desloyaulte, from Old French desloiaute, desleaut&eacute; disloyalty,
faithlessness, marital infidelity, from desloial (see disloyal). Especially of allegiance to a state
or sovereign since c.1600.


subduce (v.)

mid-15c., to delete; 1540s, to withdraw oneself (from a place, allegiance, etc.), from Latin
subducere to draw away, withdraw, remove, from sub- (see sub-) + ducere to lead (see duke (n.)).
Related: Subduced; subducing.


faithful (adj.)

c.1300, full of faith, also firm in allegiance, from faith + -ful. Meaning true to the facts is from
1520s. The noun sense of true believers is from 1550s. Related: Faithfully; faithfulness. Old
Faithful geyser named 1870 by explorer Gen. H.D. Washburn, Surveyor-General of the Montana
Territory, in reference to the regularity of its outbursts.


traitor (n.)

c.1200, one who betrays a trust or duty, from Old French traitor, traitre traitor, villain, deceiver
(11c., Modern French tra&#238;tre), from Latin traditor betrayer, literally one who delivers, agent
noun from stem of tradere deliver, surrender (see tradition). Originally usually with a suggestion
of Judas Iscariot; especially of one false to his allegiance to a sovereign, government, or cause
from late 15c.


homage (n.)

late 13c., from Old French homage (12c., Modern French hommage) allegiance or respect for one's
feudal lord, from homme man, from Latin homo (genitive hominis) man (see homunculus). Figurative
sense of reverence, honor shown is from late 14c. As a verb, from 1590s (agent noun homager is from
c.1400).


attorn (v.)

late 13c., Anglo-French, to turn over to another, from Old French atorner to turn, turn to, assign,
attribute, dispose, from a- to (see ad-) + tourner to turn (see turn (v.)). In feudal law, to
transfer homage or allegiance to another lord.


defy (v.)

c.1300, to renounce one's allegiance; mid-14c., to challenge, defy, from Old French defier, desfier
to challenge, defy, provoke; renounce (a belief), repudiate (a vow, etc.), from Vulgar Latin
*disfidare renounce one's faith, from Latin dis- away (see dis-) + fidus faithful (see faith).


devotion (n.)

early 13c., from Old French devocion devotion, piety, from Latin devotionem (nominative devotio),
noun of action from past participle stem of devovere dedicate by a vow, sacrifice oneself, promise
solemnly, from de- down, away (see de-) + vovere to vow, from votum vow (see vow (n.)).    In
ancient Latin, act of consecrating by a vow, also loyalty, fealty, allegiance; in Church Latin,
devotion to God, piety. This was the original sense in English; the etymological sense, including
secular situations, returned 16c. via Italian and French.


recreant (adj.)

c.1300, confessing oneself to be overcome or vanquished, from Old French recreant defeated,
vanquished, yielding, giving; weak, exhausted; cowardly, present participle adjective from recroire
to yield in a trial by combat, surrender allegiance, literally believe again; perhaps on notion of
take back one's pledge, yield one's cause, from re- again, back (see re-) + croire entrust, believe,
from Latin credere (see credo).Non sufficit ... nisi dicat illud verbum odiosum, quod recreantus
sit. [Bracton, c.1260]Meaning cowardly in English is from late 14c. Meaning unfaithful to duty is
from 1640s.


seduce (v.)

1520s, to persuade a vassal, etc., to desert his allegiance or service, from Latin seducere lead
away, lead astray, from se- aside, away (see secret (n.)) + ducere to lead (see duke (n.)). Sexual
sense, now the prevailing one, is attested from 1550s and apparently was not in Latin. Originally
entice (a woman) to a surrender of chastity. Related: Seduced; seducing.    Replaced Middle English
seduisen (late 15c.), from Middle French s&eacute;duire seduce, from Old French suduire to corrupt,
seduce, from Latin subducere draw away, withdraw, remove (see subduce).


treason (n.)

c.1200, betraying; betrayal of trust; breech of faith, from Anglo-French treson, from Old French
traison treason, treachery (11c.; Modern French trahison), from Latin traditionem (nominative
traditio) a handing over, delivery, surrender (see tradition). Old French form influenced by the
verb trair betray. In old English law, high treason is violation by a subject of his allegiance to
his sovereign or to the state; distinguished from petit treason, treason against a subject, such as
murder of a master by his servant. Constructive treason was a judicial fiction whereby actions
carried out without treasonable intent, but found to have the effect of treason, were punished as
though they were treason itself. The protection against this accounts for the careful wording of the
definition of treason in the U.S. Constitution.


waive (v.)

c.1300, deprive of legal protection, from Anglo-French weyver to abandon, waive (Old French guever
to abandon, give back), probably from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse veifa to swing about,
from Proto-Germanic *waif- (see waif). In Middle English legal language, used of rights, goods, or
women.    If the defendant be a woman, the proceeding is called a waiver; for as women were not
sworn to the law by taking the oath of allegiance in the leet (as men anciently were when of the age
of twelve years and upwards), they could not properly be outlawed, but were said to be waived, i.e.,
derelicta, left out, or not regarded. [from section subtitled Outlawry in J.J.S. Wharton, Law-
Lexicon, or Dictionary of Jurisprudence, London, 1867]    Related: Waived; waiving.


pledge (n.)

mid-14c., surety, bail, from Old French plege (Modern French pleige) hostage, security, bail,
probably from Frankish *plegan to guarantee, from *pleg-, a West Germanic root meaning have
responsibility for (cognates: Old Saxon plegan vouch for, Middle Dutch plien to answer for,
guarantee, Old High German pflegan to care for, be accustomed to, Old English pleon to risk the loss
of, expose to danger; see plight (v.)).    Meaning allegiance vow attested by drinking with another
is from 1630s. Sense of solemn promise first recorded 1814, though this notion is from 16c. in the
verb. Weekley notes the curious contradiction in pledge (v.) to toast with a drink (1540s) and
pledge (n.) the vow to abstain from drinking (1833). Meaning student who has agreed to join a
fraternity or sorority dates from 1901.


serve (v.)

late 12c., to render habitual obedience to, also minister, give aid, give help, from Old French
servir to do duty toward, show devotion to; set table, serve at table; offer, provide with, from
Latin servire be a servant, be in service, be enslaved; figuratively be devoted; be governed by;
comply with; conform; flatter, originally be a slave, related to servus slave, perhaps from Etruscan
(compare Etruscan proper names Servi, Serve, Latinized as Servius).    By c.1200 also as to be in
the service of, perform a service for; attend upon, be personal servant to; be a slave; owe
allegiance to; officiate at Mass or other religious rites; from early 13c. as set food at table;
mid-14c. as to wait on (customers). From late 14c. as treat (someone or something) in some fashion.
To serve (someone) right to treat as he deserves is recorded from 1580s.    He no schuld neuer wond
To seruen him fro fot to hond  [Amis and Amiloun, c.1330]    Sense of be useful, be beneficial, be
suitable for a purpose or function is from early 14c.; that of take the place or meet the needs of,
be equal to the task is from late 14c.; that of suffice is from mid-15c. Meaning render active
military service is from 1510s. Sporting sense, in tennis, badminton, etc., first recorded 1580s.
Legal sense present (a writ, warrant,etc.), give legal notice of is from early 15c.


religion (n.)

c.1200, state of life bound by monastic vows, also conduct indicating a belief in a divine power,
from Anglo-French religiun (11c.), Old French religion piety, devotion; religious community, and
directly from Latin religionem (nominative religio) respect for what is sacred, reverence for the
gods; conscientiousness, sense of right, moral obligation; fear of the gods; divine service,
religious observance; a religion, a faith, a mode of worship, cult; sanctity, holiness, in Late
Latin monastic life (5c.).    According to Cicero derived from relegere go through again (in reading
or in thought), from re- again (see re-) + legere read (see lecture (n.)). However, popular
etymology among the later ancients (Servius, Lactantius, Augustine) and the interpretation of many
modern writers connects it with religare to bind fast (see rely), via notion of place an obligation
on, or bond between humans and gods. In that case, the re- would be intensive. Another possible
origin is religiens careful, opposite of negligens. In English, meaning particular system of faith
is recorded from c.1300; sense of recognition of and allegiance in manner of life (perceived as
justly due) to a higher, unseen power or powers is from 1530s.   To hold, therefore, that there is
no difference in matters of religion between forms that are unlike each other, and even contrary to
each other, most clearly leads in the end to the rejection of all religion in both theory and
practice. And this is the same thing as atheism, however it may differ from it in name. [Pope Leo
XIII, Immortale Dei, 1885]


slave (n.)

late 13c., person who is the chattel or property of another, from Old French esclave (13c.), from
Medieval Latin Sclavus slave (source also of Italian schiavo, French esclave, Spanish esclavo),
originally Slav (see Slav); so used in this secondary sense because of the many Slavs sold into
slavery by conquering peoples.  This sense development arose in the consequence of the wars waged by
Otto the Great and his successors against the Slavs, a great number of whom they took captive and
sold into slavery. [Klein]    Meaning one who has lost the power of resistance to some habit or vice
is from 1550s. Applied to devices from 1904, especially those which are controlled by others
(compare slave jib in sailing, similarly of locomotives, flash bulbs, amplifiers). Slave-driver is
attested from 1807; extended sense of cruel or exacting task-master is by 1854. Slate state in U.S.
history is from 1812. Slave-trade is attested from 1734.    Old English Wealh Briton also began to
be used in the sense of serf, slave c.850; and Sanskrit dasa-, which can mean slave, apparently is
connected to dasyu- pre-Aryan inhabitant of India. Grose's dictionary (1785) has under Negroe A
black-a-moor; figuratively used for a slave, without regard to race. More common Old English words
for slave were &thorn;eow (related to &thorn;eowian to serve) and &thorn;r&aelig;l (see thrall). The
Slavic words for slave (Russian rab, Serbo-Croatian rob, Old Church Slavonic rabu) are from Old
Slavic *orbu, from the PIE root *orbh- (also source of orphan), the ground sense of which seems to
be thing that changes allegiance (in the case of the slave, from himself to his master). The Slavic
word is also the source of robot.


toleration (n.)

1510s, permission granted by authority, license, from Middle French tol&eacute;ration (15c.), from
Latin tolerationem (nominative toleratio) a bearing, supporting, enduring, noun of action from past
participle stem of tolerare to endure, sustain, support, suffer, literally to bear, from PIE *tele-
to bear, carry (see extol).    Meaning forbearance, sufferance is from 1580s. The specific religious
sense is from 1609; as in Act of Toleration (1689), statute granting freedom of religious worship
(with conditions) to dissenting Protestants in England. In this it means recognition of the right of
private judgment in matters of faith and worship; liberty granted by the government to preach and
worship as one pleases; equality under the law without regard to religion.    If any man err from
the right way, it is his own misfortune, no injury to thee; nor therefore art thou to punish him in
the things of this life because thou supposest he will be miserable in that which is to come.
Nobody, therefore, in fine, neither single persons nor churches, nay, nor even commonwealths, have
any just title to invade the civil rights and worldly goods of each other upon pretence of religion.
[John Locke, Letter Concerning Toleration, 1689]   <hr />   Before any man can be considered as a
member of Civil Society, he must be considered as a subject of the Governour of the Universe: And if
a member of Civil Society, do it with a saving of his allegiance to the Universal Sovereign. We
maintain therefore that in matters of Religion, no man's right is abridged by the institution of
Civil Society and that Religion is wholly exempt from its cognizance. [James Madison, Memorial and
Remonstrance Against Religious Assessments, 1785]   <hr />   Unlimited tolerance must lead to the
disappearance of tolerance. If we extend unlimited tolerance even to those who are intolerant, if we
are not prepared to defend a tolerant society against the onslaught of the intolerant, then the
tolerant will be destroyed, and tolerance with them. [Karl Popper, The Open Society and Its Enemies,
1962]


