allegory (n.)

late 14c., from Old French allegorie (12c.), from Latin allegoria, from Greek allegoria figurative
language, description of one thing under the image of another, literally a speaking about something
else, from allos another, different (see alias (adv.)) + agoreuein speak openly, speak in the
assembly, from agora assembly (see agora).


allegorical (adj.)

1520s, from French all&eacute;gorique, from Latin allegoricus, from Greek allegorikos (see
allegory). Earlier form was allegoric (late 14c.). Related: Allegorically.


amphigory (n.)

1809, burlesque nonsense writing or verse, from French amphigouri, of unknown origin, perhaps from
Greek amphi- (see amphi-) + gyros circle, thus circle on both sides, or second element may be from
Greek -agoria speech (compare allegory, category). Related: Amphigoric.


figure (n.)

c.1200, numeral; mid-13c. as visible appearance of a person; late 14c. as form of anything, from Old
French figure (10c.) shape, body, form, figure; symbol, allegory, from Latin figura a shape, form,
figure, from PIE *dheigh- to form, build (see dough).    Philosophical and scientific senses are
from Latin figura being used to translate Greek skhema. The rhetorical use of figure dates to late
14c.; hence figure of speech (1824). Figure eight as a shape was originally figure of eight
(c.1600).


macabre (adj.)

early 15c., originally in reference to a kind of morality show or allegorical representation of
death and his victims, from Old French (danse) Macabr&eacute; (dance) of Death (1376), of uncertain
origin, probably a translation of Medieval Latin (Chorea) Machab&aelig;orum, literally dance of the
Maccabees (leaders of the Jewish revolt against Syro-Hellenes; see Maccabees). The association with
the dance of death seems to be from vivid descriptions of the martyrdom of the Maccabees in the
Apocryphal books. The abstracted sense of gruesome is first attested 1842 in French, 1889 in
English.    The typical form which the allegory takes is that of a series of pictures, sculptured or
painted, in which Death appears, either as a dancing skeleton or as a shrunken corpse wrapped in
grave-clothes to persons representing every age and condition of life, and leads them all in a dance
to the grave. [Encyclopaedia Britannica, 11th ed., 1911]


