alloy (n.)

early 14c. relative freedom of a noble metal from alloy or other impurities, from Anglo-French alai,
Old French aloi, from aloiier (see alloy (v.)). Meaning  base metal alloyed with a noble metal is
from c.1400. Modern spelling from late 17c.


alloy (v.)

c.1400, mix with a baser metal, from Old French aloiier assemble, join, from Latin alligare bind to,
tie to, compound of ad- to (see ad-) + ligare to bind (see ligament); hence bind one thing to
another. Related: Alloyed; alloying.


electrum (n.)

alloy of gold and up to 40% silver, late 14c. (in Old English elehtre), from Latin electrum alloy of
gold and silver, also amber (see electric). So called probably for its pale yellow color.


bronze (n.)

1721, alloy of copper and tin, from French bronze, from Italian bronzo, from Medieval Latin
bronzium. Perhaps cognate (via notion of color) with Venetian bronza glowing coals, or German brunst
fire. Perhaps influenced by Latin Brundisium the Italian town of Brindisi (Pliny writes of aes
Brundusinum). Perhaps ultimately from Persian birinj copper.    In Middle English, the distinction
between bronze (copper-tin alloy) and brass (copper-zinc alloy) was not clear, and both were called
bras. A bronze medal was given to a third-place finisher since at least 1852. The archaeological
Bronze Age (1865) falls between the Stone and Iron ages, and is a reference to the principal
material for making weapons and ornaments.


brass (n.)

Old English br&aelig;s brass, bronze, originally in reference to an alloy of copper and tin (now
bronze), later and in modern use an alloy of two parts copper, one part zinc. A mystery word, with
no known cognates beyond English. Perhaps akin to French brasser to brew, because it is an alloy. It
also has been compared to Old Swedish brasa fire, but no sure connection can be made. Yet another
theory connects it with Latin ferrum iron, itself of obscure origin.    As brass was unknown in
antiquity, use of the word in Bible translations, etc., likely means bronze. The Romans were the
first to deliberately make it. Words for brass in other languages (such as German Messing, Old
English m&aelig;sling, French laiton, Italian ottone) also tend to be difficult to explain.    The
meaning effrontery, impudence is from 1620s. Slang sense of high officials is first recorded 1899.
The brass tacks that you get down to (1897) probably are the ones used to measure cloth on the
counter of a dry goods store, suggesting precision. Slang brass balls toughness, courage
(emphatically combining two metaphors for the same thing) attested by 1960s.


gun-metal

commonly an alloy of copper and zinc; used attributively of a dull blue-gray color since 1905.


copper (n.1)

malleable metallic element, Old English coper, from Proto-Germanic *kupar (cognates: Middle Dutch
koper, Old Norse koparr, Old High German kupfar), from Late Latin cuprum, contraction of Latin
Cyprium (aes) Cyprian (metal), after Greek Kyprios Cyprus (see Cyprus).    Latin aes originally was
copper, but this was extended to its alloy with tin, bronze, and as this was far more extensively
used than pure copper, the word's primary sense shifted to the alloy and a new word evolved for
copper, from the Latin form of the name of the island of Cyprus, where copper was mined. Aes passed
into Germanic (which originally did not distinguish copper from its alloys) and became English ore.
In Latin, aes was the common word for cash, coin, debt, wages in many figurative expressions.
Chemical symbol Cu is from cuprum.


amalgamation (n.)

1610s, noun of action from archaic amalgam (v.) to alloy with mercury (see amalgamate). Figurative,
non-chemical sense of a combining into one uniform whole is attested from 1775.


mag

car wheel made of magnesium alloy, 1969. As an abbreviation of magazine, it dates from 1801.


unalloyed (adj.)

1670s (figurative); 1760s (literal), from un- (1) not + past participle of alloy (v.).


karat (n.)

variant of carat (q.v.). In U.S., karat is used for proportion of fine gold in an alloy and carat
for weight of a precious stone.


tain (n.)

thin tin plate for mirrors, etc., 1858, from French tain tinfoil (17c.), an alteration of
&eacute;tain tin, from Latin stagnum, stannum alloy of silver and lead, in Late Latin tin (see
stannic).


stainless (adj.)

1580s, from stain (n.) + -less. Related: Stainlessly. Stainless steel is from 1917, a chromium-steel
alloy (usually 14% chromium) used for cutlery, etc., so called because it is highly resistant to
rust or tarnish.


ally (v.)

late 13c., to join in marriage, from Old French alier combine, unite, from a differentiated stem of
aliier (from Latin alligare bind to; see alloy). Meaning to form an alliance, join, associate is
late 14c. Related: allied; allying.


stannic (adj.)

containing tin, 1790, from Modern Latin stannum, from Late Latin stannum tin (earlier alloy of
silver and lead), a scribal alteration of Latin stagnum, probably from a Celtic source (compare
Irish stan tin, Cornish and Breton sten, Welsh ystaen). The Latin word is the source of Italian
stagno, French &eacute;tain, Spanish esta&ntilde;o tin.


amalgam (n.)

c.1400, blend of mercury with another metal; soft mass formed by chemical manipulation, from Old
French amalgame or directly from Medieval Latin amalgama, alloy of mercury (especially with gold or
silver), an alchemists' word, perhaps an alteration of Latin malagma poultice, plaster, probably
from Arabic al-malgham an emollient poultice or unguent for sores (especially warm) [Francis
Johnson, A Dictionary of Persian, Arabic, and English], perhaps from Greek malagma softening
substance, from malassein to soften, from malakos soft.


ormolu (n.)

alloy of copper, zinc, and tin, resembling gold, 1765, from French or moulu, literally ground gold,
from or gold (from Latin aurum, from PIE *aus- (2) gold; see aureate) + moulu ground up, past
participle of moudre to grind, from Latin molere to grind (see mallet).


allay (v.)

Old English alecgan to put down, remit, give up, a Germanic compound (cognates: Gothic uslagjan, Old
High German irleccan, German erlegen), from a- down, aside + lecgan to lay (see lay).    Early
Middle English pronunciations of -y- and -g- were not always distinct, and the word was confused in
Middle English with various senses of Romanic-derived alloy and allege, especially the latter in an
obsolete sense of to lighten, from Latin ad- to + levis (see lever).  Amid the overlapping of
meanings that thus arose, there was developed a perplexing network of uses of allay and allege, that
belong entirely to no one of the original vbs., but combine the senses of two or more of them.
[OED]The double -l- is 17c., a mistaken Latinism. Related: Allayed; allaying.


carat (n.)

also karat, mid-15c., from Middle French carat measure of the fineness of gold (14c.), from Italian
carato or Medieval Latin carratus, both from Arabic qirat fruit of the carob tree, also weight of 4
grains, from Greek keration carob seed, also the name of a small weight of measure (one-third obol),
literally little horn diminutive of keras horn (see kerato-).    Carob beans were a standard for
weighing small quantities. As a measure of diamond weight, from 1570s in English. The Greek measure
was the equivalent of the Roman siliqua, which was one-twentyfourth of a golden solidus of
Constantine; hence karat took on a sense of a proportion of one twentyfourth and became a measure of
gold purity (1550s). Eighteen carat gold is eighteen parts gold, six parts alloy. It is unlikely
that the classical carat ever was a measure of weight for gold.


