allure (v.)

c.1400, from Anglo-French alurer, Old French aleurer to attract, captivate; train a falcon to hunt,
from &agrave; to (see ad-) + loirre falconer's lure, from a Frankish word (see lure), perhaps
influenced by French allure gait, way of walking. Related: Allured; alluring. The noun is first
attested 1540s; properly this sense is allurement.


allurement (n.)

1540s, means of alluring; see allure + -ment. Meaning act of alluring is recorded from 1560s.


alluring (n.)

1530s, action of attracting, verbal noun from allure (v.).


alluring (adj.)

appealing to desires, 1570s, present participle adjective from allure (v.). Related: Alluringly.


delicate (adj.)

late 14c., self-indulgent, loving ease; delightful; sensitive, easily hurt; feeble, from Latin
delicatus alluring, delightful, dainty, also addicted to pleasure, luxurious, effeminate; of
uncertain origin; related by folk etymology (and perhaps genuinely) to deliciae a pet, and delicere
to allure, entice (see delicious). Meaning easily broken is recorded from 1560s.


entice (v.)

late 13c., intice, from Old French enticier to stir up (fire), to excite, incite,  perhaps from
Vulgar Latin *intitiare set on fire, from Latin in- in (see in- (2)) + titio (genitive titionis)
firebrand, of uncertain origin. Meaning to allure, attract is from c.1300. Related: Enticed;
enticing.


delight (n.)

c.1200, delit, from Old French delit pleasure, delight, sexual desire, from delitier please greatly,
charm, from Latin delectare to allure, delight, charm, please, frequentative of delicere entice (see
delicious). Spelled delite until 16c. when it changed under influence of light, flight, etc.


captivate (v.)

1520s, to enthrall with charm, from Late Latin captivatus, past participle of captivare to take,
capture, from captivus (see captive). Literal sense (1550s) is rare or obsolete in English, which
uses capture (q.v.). Latin captare to take, hold also had a transferred sense of to entice, entrap,
allure. Related: Captivated; captivating; captivatingly.


delicious (adj.)

c.1300 (implied in deliciously), from Old French delicios (Modern French d&eacute;licieux), from
Late Latin deliciosus delicious, delicate, from Latin delicia (plural deliciae) a delight,
allurement, charm, from delicere to allure, entice, from de- away (see de-) + lacere lure, deceive
(related to laqueus noose, snare; see lace). As a name of a type of apple, attested from 1903, first
grown by Jesse Hiatt of Iowa, U.S.A. Colloquial shortening delish is attested from 1920.


troll (v.)

late 14c., to go about, stroll, later (early 15c.) roll from side to side, trundle, probably from
Old French troller, a hunting term, wander, to go in quest of game without purpose (Modern French
tr&#244;ler), from a Germanic source (compare Old High German trollen to walk with short steps),
from Proto-Germanic *truzlanan.    Sense of sing in a full, rolling voice (first attested 1570s) and
that of fish with a moving line (c.1600) both are extended technical uses from the general sense of
roll, trundle, the former from sing in the manner of a catch or round, the latter perhaps confused
with trail or trawl. Figurative sense of to lure on as with a moving bait, entice, allure is from
1560s. Meaning to cruise in search of sexual encounters is recorded from 1967, originally in
homosexual slang.


