alms (n.)

Old English &aelig;lmesse alms, almsgiving, from Proto-Germanic *alemosna (cognates: Old Saxon
alamosna, Old High German alamuosan, Old Norse &ouml;lmusa), an early borrowing of Vulgar Latin
*alemosyna (source of Old Spanish almosna, Old French almosne, Italian limosina), from Church Latin
eleemosyna (Tertullian, 3c.), from Greek eleemosyne pity, mercy, in Ecclesiastical Greek charity,
alms, from eleemon compassionate, from eleos pity, mercy, of unknown origin, perhaps imitative of
cries for alms. Spelling perversion in Vulgar Latin is perhaps by influence of alimonia.


almshouse (n.)

mid-15c., from alms + house (n.).


almoner (n.)

official distributor of alms on behalf of another, c.1300 (mid-13c. as a surname), from Old French
almosnier (12c.; Modern French aum&ocirc;nerie), from Vulgar Latin *almosinarius, from Late Latin
elemosinarius (adj.) connected with alms, from eleemosyna alms (see alms).


eleemosynary (adj.)

1610s, from Medieval Latin eleemosynarius pertaining to alms, from Late Latin eleemosyna alms, from
Greek eleemosyne pity (see alms).


hand-out (n.)

also handout, hand out, alms or food given to a beggar, 1882, hobo slang, from hand (v.) + out.
Meaning distributed printed informational matter is from 1927.


crispin (n.)

1640s, shoemaker, in literary use only, from Ss. Crispin and Crispinian (martyred at Soissons, c.285
C.E.), patrons of shoemakers. French hagiographers make the brothers noble Romans who, while they
preached in Gaul, worked as shoemakers to avoid living on the alms of the faithful. The name is
Crispinus, a Roman cognomen, from Latin crispus curly (probably with reference to hair; see crisp).


bestow (v.)

early 14c., bistowen give (as alms, etc.), from be- + stowen to place (see stow). Related: Bestowed;
bestowing; bestower.


stipend (n.)

early 15c., periodical payment; soldier's pay, from Latin stipendium tax, impost, tribute, in
military use pay, salary, from stips alms, small payment, contribution of money, gift + pendere
weigh (see pendant). According to Klein's sources, the first element is related to Latin stipes log,
stock, trunk of a tree (see stipe). As a verb from late 15c.


mendicant (adj.)

late 14c., from Latin mendicantem (nominative mendicans) present participle of mendicare to beg, ask
alms, from mendicus beggar, originally cripple (connection via cripples who must beg), from menda
fault, physical defect (see mendacious). As an adjective from 1540s. Also in Middle English was
mendinant (mid-14c.), from Old French mendinant, present participle of mendiner to beg, from the
same Latin source.


kyrie eleison

early 13c., Greek liturgical formula, adopted untranslated into the Latin mass, literally lord have
mercy (Ps. cxxii:3, Matt. xv:22, xvii:15, etc.). From kyrie, vocative of kyrios lord, master (see
church) + eleeson, aorist imperative of eleo I have pity on, show mercy to, from eleos pity, mercy
(see alms).


trunk (n.1)

mid-15c., box, case, from Old French tronc alms box in a church, also trunk of a tree, trunk of the
human body, wooden block (12c.), from Latin truncus trunk of a tree, trunk of the body, of uncertain
origin, perhaps originally mutilated, cut off. The meaning box, case is likely to be from the notion
of the body as the case of the organs. English acquired the main stem of a tree and torso of the
body senses from Old French in late 15c. The sense of luggage compartment of a motor vehicle is from
1930. Railroad trunk line is attested from 1843; telephone version is from 1889.


relieve (v.)

late 14c., alleviate (pain, etc.), mitigate; afford comfort; allow respite; diminish the pressure
of, also give alms to, provide for; also figuratively, take heart, cheer up; from Old French relever
to raise, relieve (11c.) and directly from Latin relevare to raise, alleviate, lift up, free from a
burden, from re-, intensive prefix (see re-), + levare to lift up, lighten, from levis not heavy
(see lever).    The notion is to raise (someone) out of trouble. From c.1400 as advance to the
rescue in battle; also return from battle; recall (troops). Meaning release from duty is from early
15c. Related: relieved; relieving.


jubilee (n.)

late 14c., in the Old Testament sense, from Old French jubileu jubille; anniversary; rejoicing, from
Late Latin jubilaeus the jubilee year, originally an adjective, of the jubilee, altered (by
association with Latin jubilare to shout with joy) from Greek iabelaios, from iobelos, from Hebrew
yobhel jubilee, formerly a trumpet, ram's horn, literally ram.    The original notion was of a year
of emancipation of slaves and restoration of lands, to be celebrated every 50th year (Levit. xxv:9);
it was proclaimed by the sounding of a ram's horn on the Day of Atonement. The Catholic Church sense
of a period for remission of sin penalties in exchange for pilgrimages, alms, etc. was begun in 1300
by Boniface VIII. The general sense of season of rejoicing is first recorded mid-15c., though
through early 20c. the word kept its specific association with 50th anniversaries. As a type of
African-American folk song, it is attested from 1872.


charity (n.)

mid-12c., benevolence for the poor, from Old French charit&eacute; (Christian) charity, mercy,
compassion; alms; charitable foundation (12c., Old North French carit&eacute;), from Latin caritatem
(nominative caritas) costliness, esteem, affection (in Vulgate often used as translation of Greek
agape love -- especially Christian love of fellow man -- perhaps to avoid the sexual suggestion of
Latin amor), from carus dear, valued, from PIE *karo-, from root *ka- to like, desire (see whore
(n.)).    Vulgate also sometimes translated agape by Latin dilectio, noun of action from diligere to
esteem highly, to love (see diligence).  Wyclif and the Rhemish version regularly rendered the
Vulgate dilectio by 'love,' caritas by 'charity.' But the 16th c. Eng. versions from Tindale to
1611, while rendering agape sometimes 'love,' sometimes 'charity,' did not follow the dilectio and
caritas of the Vulgate, but used 'love' more often (about 86 times), confining 'charity' to 26
passages in the Pauline and certain of the Catholic Epistles (not in I John), and the Apocalypse
.... In the Revised Version 1881, 'love' has been substituted in all these instances, so that it now
stands as the uniform rendering of agape. [OED]  Sense of charitable foundation or institution in
English attested by 1690s.


