aloft (adv.)

c.1200, from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse a lopti up above, literally up in the air, from
a in, on + lopt sky, air, atmosphere; loft, upper room (cognates: Gothic luftus, Old High German
luft, Old English lyft air; see loft).


catch-up (n.)

a working to overtake a leading rival, by 1971, probably a figurative use from U.S. football in
reference to being behind in the score. From verbal phrase catch up, which was used from early 14c.
in sense raise aloft and from 1855 in sense overtake; see catch (v.) + up (adv.).


hypsi-

word-forming element meaning on high, from Greek hypsi aloft, on high, related to hypsos height;
cognate with Sanskrit os above, over, Old Church Slavonic vysoku high.


sublime (adj.)

1580s, expressing lofty ideas in an elevated manner, from Middle French sublime (15c.), or directly
from Latin sublimis uplifted, high, borne aloft, lofty, exalted, eminent, distinguished, possibly
originally sloping up to the lintel, from sub up to + limen lintel, threshold, sill (see limit
(n.)). The sublime (n.) the sublime part of anything, that which is stately or imposing is from
1670s. For Sublime Porte, former title of the Ottoman government, see Porte.


tilt (v.2)

to joust, 1590s, from tilt (n.1). Related: Tilted; tilting. The figurative sense of tilting at
windmills is suggested in English by 1798; the image is from Don Quixote, who mistook them for
giants.    So saying, and heartily recommending himself to his lady Dulcinea, whom he implored to
succour him in this emergency, bracing on his target, and setting his lance in the rest, he put his
Rozinante to full speed, and assaulting the nearest windmill, thrust it into one of the sails, which
was drove about by the wind with so much fury, that the lance was shivered to pieces, and both
knight and steed whirled aloft, and overthrown in very bad plight upon the plain. [Smollett
translation, 1755]


ossifrage (n.)

sea-eagle, osprey, c.1600, from Latin ossifraga vulture, fem. of ossifragus, literally bone-breaker,
from ossifragus (adj.) bone-breaking, from os (genitive ossis) bone (see osseous) + stem of frangere
to break (see fraction). By this name Pliny meant the lammergeier (from German, literally lamb-
vulture), a very large Old World vulture that swallows and digests bones and was believed also to
drop them from aloft to break them and get at the marrow. But in England and France, the word was
transferred to the osprey, perhaps on similarity of sound between the two words.


