ambiguous (adj.)

1520s, from Latin ambiguus having double meaning, shifting, changeable, doubtful, adjective derived
from ambigere to dispute about, literally to wander, from ambi- about (see ambi-) + agere drive,
lead, act (see act). Sir Thomas More (1528) seems to have first used it in English, but ambiguity
dates back to c.1400. Related: Ambiguously; ambiguousness.


Aesopic (adj.)

1927, in reference to Soviet literary censorship: obscure or ambiguous writing, often allegorical,
which disguises dissent, from Aesop + -ic. The term (Russian ezopovskii, 1875) arose under the Tsars
and the style was used by Russian communists. Once they took power the word was applied by them as a
charge against their own dissidents.


ambiguity (n.)

c.1400, uncertainty, doubt, indecision, hesitation, also from Medieval Latin ambiguitatem
(nominative ambiguitas) double meaning, equivocalness, double sense, noun of state from ambiguus
(see ambiguous).


unambiguous (adj.)

1630s, from un- (1) not + ambiguous. Related: Unambiguously; unambiguousness.


equivocal (adj.)

c.1600, from Late Latin aequivocus of equal voice, of equal significance, ambiguous (see
equivocation) + -al (1). Earlier in same sense was equivoque (late 14c.). Related: Equivocally
(1570s).


disambiguation (n.)

1827; see dis- + ambiguous + -ation.


beer (n.)

Old English beor strong drink, beer, mead, a word of much-disputed and ambiguous origin, cognate
with Old Frisian biar, Middle Dutch and Dutch bier, Old High German bior, German Bier.    Probably a
6c. West Germanic monastic borrowing of Vulgar Latin biber a drink, beverage (from Latin infinitive
bibere to drink; see imbibe). Another suggestion is that it comes from Proto-Germanic *beuwoz-, from
*beuwo- barley. The native Germanic word for the beverage was the one that yielded ale (q.v.).
Beer was a common drink among most of the European peoples, as well as in Egypt and Mesopotamia, but
was known to the Greeks and Romans only as an exotic product. [Buck]    They did have words for it,
however. Greek brytos, used in reference to Thracian or Phrygian brews, was related to Old English
breowan brew; Latin zythum is from Greek zythos, first used of Egyptian beer and treated as an
Egyptian word but perhaps truly Greek and related to zyme leaven. French bi&egrave;re is from
Germanic. Spanish cerveza is from Latin cervesia beer, perhaps related to Latin cremor thick broth.
Old Church Slavonic pivo, source of the general Slavic word for beer, is originally a drink (compare
Old Church Slavonic piti drink). French bi&egrave;re is a 16c. borrowing from German. U.S. slang
beer goggles, through which every potential romantic partner looks desirable, is from 1986.


love (n.)

Old English lufu love, affection, friendliness, from Proto-Germanic *lubo (cognates: Old High German
liubi joy, German Liebe love; Old Norse, Old Frisian, Dutch lof; German Lob praise; Old Saxon liof,
Old Frisian liaf, Dutch lief, Old High German liob, German lieb, Gothic liufs dear, beloved).    The
Germanic words are from PIE *leubh- to care, desire, love (cognates: Latin lubet, later libet
pleases; Sanskrit lubhyati desires; Old Church Slavonic l'ubu dear, beloved; Lithuanian liaupse song
of praise).    Even now, she thought, almost no one remembers Esteban and Pepita but myself. Camilla
alone remembers her Uncle Pio and her son; this woman, her mother. But soon we shall die and all
memory of those five will have left the earth, and we ourselves shall be loved for a while and
forgotten. But the love will have been enough; all those impulses of love return the love that made
them. Even memory is not necessary for love. There is a land of the living and a land of the dead
and the bridge is love, the only survival, the only meaning. [Thornton Wilder, Bridge of San Luis
Rey, 1927]    Meaning a beloved person is from early 13c. The sense no score (in tennis, etc.) is
1742, from the notion of playing for love, i.e. for nothing (1670s). Phrase for love or money for
anything is attested from 1580s. Love seat is from 1904. Love-letter is attested from mid-13c.;
love-song from early 14c. To fall in love is attested from early 15c. To be in love with (someone)
is from c.1500. To make love is from 1570s in the sense pay amorous attention to; as a euphemism for
have sex, it is attested from c.1950. Love life one's collective amorous activities is from 1919,
originally a term in psychological jargon. Love affair is from 1590s. The phrase no love lost
(between two people) is ambiguous and was used 17c. in reference to two who love each other well
(c.1640) as well as two who have no love for each other (1620s).


gay (adj.)

late 14c., full of joy, merry; light-hearted, carefree; also wanton, lewd, lascivious (late 12c. as
a surname, Philippus de Gay), from Old French gai joyful, happy; pleasant, agreeably charming;
forward, pert (12c.; compare Old Spanish gayo, Portuguese gaio, Italian gajo, probably French loan-
words). Ultimate origin disputed; perhaps from Frankish *gahi (related to Old High German wahi
pretty), though not all etymologists accept this. Meaning stately and beautiful; splendid and
showily dressed is from early 14c. The word gay by the 1890s had an overall tinge of promiscuity --
a gay house was a brothel. The suggestion of immorality in the word can be traced back at least to
the 1630s, if not to Chaucer:    But in oure bed he was so fressh and gay  Whan that he wolde han my
bele chose.    Slang meaning homosexual (adj.) begins to appear in psychological writing late 1940s,
evidently picked up from gay slang and not always easily distinguished from the older sense:
After discharge A.Z. lived for some time at home. He was not happy at the farm and went to a Western
city where he associated with a homosexual crowd, being gay, and wearing female clothes and makeup.
He always wished others would make advances to him. [Rorschach Research Exchange and Journal of
Projective Techniques, 1947, p.240]    The association with (male) homosexuality likely got a boost
from the term gay cat, used as far back as 1893 in American English for young hobo, one who is new
on the road, also one who sometimes does jobs.    A Gay Cat, said he, is a loafing laborer, who
works maybe a week, gets his wages and vagabonds about hunting for another 'pick and shovel' job. Do
you want to know where they got their monica (nickname) 'Gay Cat'? See, Kid, cats sneak about and
scratch immediately after chumming with you and then get gay (fresh). That's why we call them 'Gay
Cats'. [Leon Ray Livingston (America's Most Celebrated Tramp), Life and Adventures of A-no. 1, 1910]
Quoting a tramp named Frenchy, who might not have known the origin. Gay cats were severely and
cruelly abused by real tramps and bums, who considered them an inferior order of beings who begs of
and otherwise preys upon the bum -- as it were a jackal following up the king of beasts [Prof. John
J. McCook, Tramps, in The Public Treatment of Pauperism, 1893], but some accounts report certain
older tramps would dominate a gay cat and employ him as a sort of slave. In Sociology and Social
Research (1932-33) a paragraph on the gay cat phenomenon notes, Homosexual practices are more common
than rare in this group, and gey cat homosexual boy is attested in N. Erskine's 1933 dictionary of
Underworld &amp; Prison Slang (gey is a Scottish variant of gay).    The Dictionary of American
Slang reports that gay (adj.) was used by homosexuals, among themselves, in this sense since at
least 1920. Rawson [Wicked Words] notes a male prostitute using gay in reference to male homosexuals
(but also to female prostitutes) in London's notorious Cleveland Street Scandal of 1889. Ayto [20th
Century Words] calls attention to the ambiguous use of the word in the 1868 song The Gay Young Clerk
in the Dry Goods Store, by U.S. female impersonator Will S. Hays, but the word evidently was not
popularly felt in this sense by wider society until the 1950s at the earliest.    Gay (or gai) is
now widely used in French, Dutch, Danish, Japanese, Swedish, and Catalan with the same sense as the
English. It is coming into use in Germany and among the English-speaking upper classes of many
cosmopolitan areas in other countries. [John Boswell, Christianity, Social Tolerance, and
Homosexuality, 1980]   Gay as a noun meaning a (usually male) homosexual is attested from 1971; in
Middle English it meant excellent person, noble lady, gallant knight, also something gay or bright;
an ornament or badge (c.1400). As a slang word meaning bad, inferior, undesirable, from 2000.


