ambler (n.)

late 14c., agent noun from amble (v.).


amble (v.)

early 14c., from Old French ambler walk as a horse does, from Latin ambulare to walk, to go about,
take a walk, perhaps a compound of ambi- around (see ambi-) and -ulare, from PIE root *el- to go
(cognates: Greek ale wandering, alaomai wander about; Latvian aluot go around or astray). Until
1590s used only of horses or persons on horseback. Related: Ambled; ambling. As a noun, from late
14c.


ambulant (adj.)

1610s, from Latin ambulantem (nominative ambulans), present participle of ambulare (see amble). Of
diseases, denoting cases in which the patient may be up and around, by 1913.


funambulist (n.)

rope-walker, 1793, coined from Latin funis rope + ambulare to walk (see amble (v.)).


ambulation (n.)

1540s, from Latin ambulationem (nominative ambulatio), noun of action from past participle stem of
ambulare (see amble).


ambulate (v.)

1620s, from Latin ambulatus, past participle of ambulare to walk (see amble). Related: Ambulated;
ambulating.


ambulatory (adj.)

pertaining to walking; also shifting, not permanent, 1620s, from Latin ambulatorius of or pertaining
to a walker; movable, from ambulator, agent noun from past participle stem of ambulare to walk (see
amble). Middle English had ambulary movable (mid-15c.).


ambulatory (n.)

from Medieval Latin ambulatorium, from Latin ambulatorius movable, from ambulare (see amble).


preamble (n.)

late 14c., from Old French preambule (13c.) and directly from Medieval Latin preambulum, neuter
adjective used as a noun, properly preliminary, from Late Latin praeambulus walking before, from
Latin prae- before (see pre-) + ambulare to walk (see amble (v.)).


perambulate (v.)

1560s, from Latin perambulatus, past participle of perambulare to walk through, go through, ramble
through, from per- through (see per) + ambulare to walk (see amble). Related: Perambulated;
perambulating.


circumambulate (v.)

1650s, from Latin circumambulatus, past participle of circumambulare to walk around, from circum
around (see circum-) + ambulare to walk (see amble). Related: Circumambulated; circumambulating;
circumambulation.


somnambulism (n.)

1786, walking in one's sleep or under hypnosis, from French somnambulisme, from Modern Latin
somnambulus sleepwalker, from Latin somnus sleep (see Somnus) + ambulare to walk (see amble (v.)).
Originally brought into use during the excitement over animal magnetism; it won out over
noctambulation. A stack of related words came into use early 19c., such as somnambule sleepwalker
(1837, from French somnambule, 1690s), earlier somnambulator (1803); as adjectives, somnambulary
(1827), somnambular (1820).


ambulance (n.)

1798, mobile or field hospital, from French (h&ocirc;pital) ambulant, literally walking (hospital),
from Latin ambulantem (nominative ambulans), present participle of ambulare to walk (see amble).
AMBULANCE, s. f. a moveable hospital. These were houses constructed in a manner so as to be taken to
pieces, and carried from place to place, according to the movements of the army; and served as
receptacles in which the sick and wounded men might be received and attended. [Lexicographica-
Neologica Gallica (The Neological French Dictionary), William Dupr&#233;, London, 1801]    The word
was not common in English until the meaning transferred from field hospital to vehicle for conveying
wounded from field (1854) during the Crimean War. In late 19c. U.S. the word was used dialectally to
mean prairie wagon. Ambulance-chaser as a contemptuous term for a type of lawyer dates from 1897.


