ambush (n.)

late 15c., embushe, from the English verb or from Middle French embusche, from Old French embuscher
(see ambush (v.)). Earlier was ambushment (late 14c.). Figurative use by 1590s.


ambush (v.)

c.1300, from Old French embuscher (13c., Modern French emb&#251;cher) to lay an ambush, from en- in
+ busch wood, apparently from Frankish *busk bush, woods (see bush (n.)). Related: Ambushed;
ambushing.


lochia (n.)

discharge from the uterus after childbirth, 1680s, Modern Latin, from Greek lokhia, neuter plural of
lokhios pertaining to childbirth, from lokhos a lying in, childbirth, also, an ambush, from PIE root
*legh- to lie, lay (see lie (v.2)).


waylay (v.)

to ambush, 1510s, from way (n.) + lay (v.), on model of Middle Low German, Middle Dutch wegelagen
besetting of ways, lying in wait with evil or hostile intent along public ways. Related: Waylaid;
waylaying.


ambuscade (n.)

1580s, essentially a variant form of ambush (n.), representing a reborrowing of that French word
after it had been Italianized. Ambuscade is from French embuscade (16c.), Gallicized from Italian
imboscata, literally a hiding in the bush, compounded from the same elements as Old French
embuscher. Sometimes in English as ambuscado, with faux Spanish ending of the sort popular in 17c.


insidious (adj.)

1540s, from Middle French insidieux (15c.) or directly from Latin insidiosus deceitful, cunning,
artful, from insidiae (plural) plot, snare, ambush, from insidere sit on, occupy, from in- in (see
in- (2)) + sedere to sit (see sedentary). Related: Insidiously; insidiousness.


forestall (v.)

late 14c. (implied in forestalling), to lie in wait for; also to intercept goods before they reach
public markets and buy them privately (formerly a crime; mid-14c. in this sense in Anglo-French),
from Old English noun foresteall intervention, hindrance (of justice); an ambush, a waylaying,
literally a standing before (someone), from fore- before + steall standing position (see stall
(n.1)). Modern sense of to anticipate and delay is from 1580s. Related: Forestalled; forestalling.


lurch (n.2)

predicament, 1580s, from Middle English lurch (v.) to beat in a game of skill (often by a great many
points), mid-14c., probably literally to make a complete victory in lorche, a game akin to
backgammon, from Old French lourche. The game name is perhaps related to Middle English lurken,
lorken to lie hidden, lie in ambush, or it may be adopted into French from Middle High German lurz
left, also wrong.


seat (n.2)

residence, abode, established place, late 13c., extended use of seat (n.1), influenced by Old French
siege seat, established place, and Latin sedes seat. Meaning city in which a government sits is
attested from c.1400. Sense of right of taking a place in a parliament or other legislative body is
attested from 1774. Old English had s&aelig;t place where one sits in ambush, which also meant
residents, inhabitants, and is the source of the -set in Dorset and Somerset.


wait (n.)

early 13c., a watcher, onlooker, from Old North French wait (Old French gait look-out, watch,
sentry), from Old North French waitier (Old French gaitier; see wait (v.)). Compare Old High German
wahta, German Wacht a watchman. From late 14c. as an ambush, a trap (as in lie in wait). From 1855
as time occupied in waiting; 1873 as an act of waiting. From the sense civic employee responsible
for signaling the hour or an alarm by sounding on a trumpet, etc. comes the old sense town musicians
(mid-15c.).


fear (n.)

Old English f&aelig;r calamity, sudden danger, peril, from Proto-Germanic *feraz danger (cognates:
Old Saxon far ambush, Old Norse far harm, distress, deception, Dutch gevaar, German Gefahr danger),
from PIE verbal root *per- (3) to try, risk (source also of Greek peira trial, attempt, experience,
Latin periculum trial, risk, danger), related to *per- (1) forward, through (see per).    Sense of
uneasiness caused by possible danger developed late 12c. Old English words for fear as we now use it
were ege, fyrhto; as a verb, ondr&aelig;dan.


Trojan (adj.)

Old English Troian of or pertaining to ancient Troy, from Latin Trojanus, from Troia, Troja Troy,
from the Greek name for the city, said to be from Tros, name of a king of Phrygia, the mythical
founder of Troy. Trojan horse was figurative of ambush-from-within in Roman times (equus Troianus);
attested in English from 1570s; the computer virus sense is attested by 1982.    As a noun from mid-
14c., inhabitant of ancient Troy; in early modern English, the noun could mean a determined fellow,
one who fights or works hard, from the Trojans' long resistance to the Greeks in the Trojan War, but
also in 17c., it was a colloquial term for person of dissolute life, carousing companion. The trade
name for a brand of prophylactic contraceptive was registered 1927 in U.S.


