amends (n.)

early 14c., restitution, collective singular, from Old French amendes fine, penalty, plural of
amende reparation, from amender to amend (see amend).


amendment (n.)

early 13c., betterment, improvement; c.1300, of persons, correction, reformation, from Old French
amendment, from amender (see amend). Sense expanded to include correction of error in a legal
process (c.1600) and alteration of a writ or bill to remove its faults (1690s).


amend (v.)

early 13c., to free from faults, rectify, from Old French amender (12c.), from Latin emendare to
correct, free from fault, from ex- out (see ex-) + menda fault, blemish, from PIE *mend- physical
defect, fault (cognates: Sanskrit minda physical blemish, Old Irish mennar stain, blemish, Welsh
mann sign, mark).    Supplanted in senses of repair, cure by its shortened offspring mend (v.).
Meaning to add to legislation (ostensibly to correct or improve it) is recorded from 1777. Related:
Amended; amending.


mend (v.)

c.1200, to repair, from a shortened form of Old French amender (see amend). Meaning to put right,
atone for, amend (one's life), repent is from c.1300; that of to regain health is from early 15c.
Related: Mended; mending.


right (v.)

Old English rihtan to straighten, rule, set up, set right, amend; guide, govern; restore, replace,
from riht (adj.); see right (adj.1). Compare Old Norse retta to straighten, Old Saxon rihtian, Old
Frisian riuchta, German richten, Gothic garaihtjan. Related: Righted; righting.


revise (v.)

1560s, to look at again, from Middle French reviser (13c.), from Latin revisere look at again, visit
again, look back on, frequentative of revidere (past participle revisus), from re- again (see re-) +
videre to see (see vision). Meaning to look over again with intent to improve or amend is recorded
from 1590s. Related: Revised; revising.


better (v.)

Old English *beterian improve, amend, make better, from Proto-Germanic  *batizojan (cognates: Old
Frisian beteria, Dutch beteren, Old Norse betra, Old High German baziron, German bessern), from
*batiz- (see better (adj.)). Related: Bettered; bettering.


emend (v.)

c.1400, from Latin emendare to free from fault, from ex- out (see ex-) + mendum (nominative menda)
fault, blemish (see amend). Related: Emended; emending.


correct (v.)

mid-14c., to set right, rectify (a fault or error), from Latin correctus, past participle of
corrigere to put straight, reduce to order, set right; in transferred use, to reform, amend,
especially of speech or writing, from com-, intensive prefix (see com-), + regere to lead straight,
rule (see regal). Originally of persons; with reference to writing, etc., attested from late 14c.
Related: Corrected; correcting.


redress (v.)

mid-14c., to correct, reform; late 14c., restore, put right (a wrong, error, offense); repair;
relieve; improve; amend, from Old French redrecier reform, restore, rebuild (Modern French
redresser), from re- again (see re-) + drecier to straighten, arrange (see dress (v.)). Formerly
used in many more senses than currently. Related: Redressed; redressing.


mendacious (adj.)

1610s, from Middle French mendacieux, from Latin mendacium a lie, untruth, falsehood, fiction, from
mendax (genitive mendacis) lying, deceitful, from menda fault, defect, carelessness in writing, from
PIE root *mend- physical defect, fault (see amend (v.)). The sense evolution of Latin mendax was
influenced by mentiri to speak falsely, lie, deceive. Related: Mendaciously; mendaciousness.


Gramophone (n.)

1887, trademark by German-born U.S. inventor Emil Berliner (1851-1929), an inversion of phonogram
(1884) the tracing made by a phonograph needle, coined from Greek phone voice, sound (see fame (n.))
+ gramma something written (see grammar).    Berliner's machine used a flat disc and succeeded with
the public. Edison's phonograph used a cylinder and did not. Despised by linguistic purists (Weekley
calls gramophone An atrocity formed by reversing phonogram) who tried to at least amend it to
grammophone, it was replaced by record player after mid-1950s.


help (v.)

Old English helpan (class III strong verb; past tense healp, past participle holpen) help, support,
succor; benefit, do good to; cure, amend, from Proto-Germanic *helpan (cognates: Old Norse hjalpa,
Old Frisian helpa, Middle Dutch and Dutch helpen, Old High German helfan, German helfen), from PIE
root *kelb- to help (cognates: Lithuanian selpiu to support, help).    Recorded as a cry of distress
from late 14c. Sense of serve someone with food at table (1680s) is translated from French servir to
help, stead, avail, and led to helping portion of food. Related: Helped (c.1300). The Middle English
past participle holpen survives in biblical and U.S. dialectal use.


