amiable (adj.)

mid-14c., from Old French amiable, from Late Latin amicabilis friendly, from amicus friend, related
to amare to love (see Amy). The form confused in Old French with amable lovable, from Latin amare.
Reborrowed later in proper Latin form as amicable.


puddinghead (n.)

amiable stupid person, 1851, from pudding + head (n.).


amiability (n.)

1807; see amiable + -ity. Amiableness is recorded from 1530s.


amicable (adj.)

early 15c., from Late Latin amicabilis friendly, a word in Roman law, from Latin amicus friend,
related to amare to love (see Amy). Also see amiable.


no-frills (adj.)

1957, from no + frills. The expression no thrills meaning without extra flourishes or ornamentation
is in use from 1870s; the original notion probably is of plain clothing.   <b>Man with no frills</b>
(American) a plain person, a man without culture or refinement. An amiable term to express a vulgar
fellow. [Albert Barrere and Charles G. Leland, A Dictionary of Slang, Jargon &amp; Cant, Ballantyne
Press, 1890]


mirepoix (n.)

in cookery, 1815, from French, evidently named for Charles Pierre Gaston Fran&#231;ois, duc de
Mirepoix (1699-1757), French diplomat. The concoction supposedly created by his head chef and named
in his honor during the reign of Louis XV, one of the grand epochs of French cookery, when it was
the style of the aristocracy to have dishes named in their honor.    MIREPOIX.--It is probable that
one of these days the common sense of mankind will rise in rebellion against this word and abolish
it. What is the Duke of Mirepoix to us because his wife was amiable to Louis XV.?    If she be not
fair to me,  What care I how fair she be?    The Duke of Mirepoix made himself convenient to the
king, and his name is now convenient to the people--the convenient name for the faggot of vegetables
that flavours a stew or a sauce. [Kettner's Book of the Table, London, 1877]


one (n.)

c.1200, from Old English an (adjective, pronoun, noun) one, from Proto-Germanic *ainaz (cognates:
Old Norse einn, Danish een, Old Frisian an, Dutch een, German ein, Gothic ains), from PIE *oi-no-
one, unique (cognates: Greek oinos ace (on dice); Latin unus one; Old Persian aivam; Old Church
Slavonic -inu, ino-; Lithuanian vienas; Old Irish oin; Breton un one).    Originally pronounced as
it still is in only, and in dialectal good 'un, young 'un, etc.; the now-standard pronunciation wun
began c.14c. in southwest and west England (Tyndale, a Gloucester man, spells it won in his Bible
translation), and it began to be general 18c. Use as indefinite pronoun influenced by unrelated
French on and Latin homo.   One and only sweetheart is from 1906. One of those things unpredictable
occurrence is from 1934. Slang one-arm bandit a type of slot machine is recorded by 1938. One-night
stand is 1880 in performance sense; 1963 in sexual sense. One of the boys ordinary amiable fellow is
from 1893. One-track mind is from 1927. Drinking expression one for the road is from 1950 (as a song
title).


