amiss (adv.)

mid-13c., amis off the mark, also out of order, literally on the miss, from a in, on (see a- (1)) +
missen fail to hit (see miss (v.)). To take (something) amiss originally (late 14c.) was to miss the
meaning of (see mistake). Now it means to misinterpret in a bad sense.


misspeak (v.)

late 14c., to say amiss, also to speak insultingly, from mis- (1) + speak (v.). Related:
Misspeaking; misspoken. Old English missprecan meant to grumble, murmur.


mistime (v.)

late Old English mistimian to happen amiss (of an event); see mis- (1) + time (v.). Meaning not to
time properly is first recorded late 14c. Related: Mistimed; mistiming.


misspend (v.)

also mis-spend, to spend amiss or wastefully, late 14c.; see mis- (1) + spend. Related: Misspent,
frequently coupled with youth; misspending.


peccadillo (n.)

slight sin, 1590s (earlier in corrupt form peccadilian, 1520s), from Spanish pecadillo, diminutive
of pecado a sin, from Latin peccatum a sin, fault, error, noun use of neuter past participle of
peccare to miss, mistake, make a mistake, do amiss; transgress, offend, be licentious, sin, perhaps
literally to stumble, from a PIE verbal root *ped- to walk, stumble, fall, related to the root of
foot (n.).


blaspheme (v.)

mid-14c., from Old French blasfemer to blaspheme (14c., Modern French blasph&eacute;mer), from
Church Latin blasphemare (also in Late Latin revile, reproach), from Greek blasphemein to speak
lightly or amiss of sacred things, to slander, from blasphemos evil-speaking (see blasphemy). A
reintroduction after the original word had been worn down and sense-shifted to blame (v.). Related:
Blasphemed; blaspheming.


forget (v.)

Old English forgietan, from for-, used here with negative force, away, amiss, opposite + gietan to
grasp (see get). To un-get, hence to lose from the mind. A common Germanic construction (compare Old
Saxon fargetan, Old Frisian forjeta, Dutch vergeten, Old High German firgezzan, German vergessen to
forget). The literal sense would be to lose (one's) grip on, but that is not recorded in any
Germanic language. Related: Forgetting; forgot; forgotten.


abortive (adj.)

late 14c., born prematurely or dead, from Latin abortivus pertaining to miscarriage; causing
abortion, from abort-, past participle stem of aboriri disappear, miscarry, from ab- amiss (see ab-)
+ oriri appear, be born, arise (see orchestra); the compound word used in Latin for deaths,
miscarriages, sunsets, etc. The Latin verb for to produce an abortion was abigo, literally to drive
away. Not originally used to imply forced or deliberate miscarriage; from 14c.-18c. stillborn
children or domestic animals were said to be abortive. Also see abortion. Related: Abortiveness.


mis- (1)

prefix meaning bad, wrong, from Old English mis-, from Proto-Germanic *missa- divergent, astray
(cognates: Old Frisian and Old Saxon mis-, Middle Dutch misse-, Old High German missa-, German
mi&szlig;-, Old Norse mis-, Gothic missa-), perhaps literally in a changed manner, and with a root
sense of difference, change (compare Gothic misso mutually), and thus from PIE *mit-to-, from root
*mei- (1) to change (see mutable); see Watkins.    Others [Barnhart] see in Proto-Germanic *missa-
the stem of an ancient past participle, related to Old English missan fail to hit (see miss (v.)),
which is from the same PIE root.    Productive as word-forming element in Old English (as in
misl&#230;ran to give bad advice, teach amiss). In 14c.-16c. in a few verbs its sense began to be
felt as unfavorably and was used as an intensive prefix with verbs already expressing negative
feeling (as in misdoubt). Practically a separate word in Old and early Middle English (and often
written as such). Old English also had an adjective (mislic diverse, unlike, various) and an adverb
(mislice in various directions, wrongly, astray) derived from it, corresponding to German misslich
(adj.).


