ample (adj.)

mid-15c., from Middle French ample, from Latin amplus large, spacious, related to ampla handle,
grip.


well-endowed (adj.)

1680s, with ample material endowments, from well (adv.) + past participle of endow (v.). Sexual
sense is attested from 1951.


frequent (adj.)

mid-15c., ample, profuse, from Middle French frequent, or directly from Latin frequentem (nominative
frequens) crowded, repeated, of uncertain origin. Meaning common, usual is from 1530s; that of
happening at short intervals, often recurring is from c.1600.


amply (adv.)

1550s, from ample + -ly (2).


panem et circenses

Latin, literally bread and circuses, supposedly coined by Juvenal and describing the cynical formula
of the Roman emperors for keeping the masses content with ample food and entertainment.   Duas
tantum res anxius optat, Panem et circenses [Juvenal, Sat. x.80].


brief (n.)

from Latin breve (genitive brevis), noun derivative of adjective brevis (see brief (adj.)) which
came to mean letter, summary, specifically a letter of the pope (less ample and solemn than a bull),
and thus came to mean letter of authority, which yielded the modern, legal sense of summary of the
facts of a case (1630s).


amplify (v.)

early 15c., to enlarge or expand, from Middle French amplifier, from Latin amplificare to enlarge,
from amplificus splendid, from amplus large (see ample) + the root of facere make, do (see
factitious). Meaning augment in volume or amount is from 1570s. Restriction of use to sound seems to
have emerged in the electronic age, c.1915, in reference to radio technology.


copious (adj.)

mid-14c., from Latin copiosus plentiful, from copia an abundance, ample supply, profusion, plenty,
from com- with (see com-) + ops (genitive opis) power, wealth, resources, from PIE root *op- (1) to
work, produce in abundance, (see opus). Related: Copiously.


amplitude (n.)

1540s, from Middle French amplitude or directly from Latin amplitudinem (nominative amplitudo) wide
extent, width, from amplus (see ample). Amplitude modulation in reference to radio wave broadcast
(as opposed to frequency modulation) first attested 1921, usually abbreviated a.m.


substantial (adj.)

mid-14c., ample, sizeable, from Old French substantiel (13c.) and directly from Latin substantialis
having substance or reality, material, in Late Latin pertaining to the substance or essence, from
substantia being, essence, material(see substance). Meaning existing, having real existence is from
late 14c. Meaning involving an essential part or point is early 15c. Related: Substantially.


spacious (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French spacios, espacios roomy, spacious, extensive (12c., Modern French
spacieux), or directly from Latin spatiosus roomy, ample (Medieval Latin spaciosus), from spatium
room, space (see space (n.)). Related: Spaciously; spaciousness.


spiv (n.)

petty crook who will turn his hand to anything so long as it does not involve honest work, 1934,
British slang, probably dating back to late 19c. and connected with spiff (see spiffy) in one of its
various senses. Being a flashy dresser was a spiv characteristic.    The spiv reached his apotheosis
during World War II and the succeeding years, when the disrupted economic conditions allowed ample
scope for unofficial trading (a pair of nylons here, a few packets of cigarettes there) and other
petty crime. He became a stock figure in the English social comedy, represented on screen by such
stereotypes as 'Flash Harry' (played by George Cole) in the St. Trinian's films and Pte. Walker in
Dad's Army. [Ayto, 20th Century Words]


measure (n.)

c.1200, moderation, temperance, abstemiousness; c.1300, instrument for measuring, from Old French
mesure limit, boundary; quantity, dimension; occasion, time (12c.), from Latin mensura measure (see
measure (v.)). Meaning size or quantity as ascertained by measuring is from early 14c. Meaning
action of measuring; standard measure of quantity; system of measuring; appointed or alloted amount
of anything is late 14c. Also from late 14c. are senses proper proportion, balance. Sense of that to
which something is compared to determine its quantity is from 1570s. Meaning rhythmic pattern in
music is late 14c.; from mid-15c. in poetry, c.1500 in dance. Meaning treatment 'meted out' to
someone is from 1590s; that of plan or course of action intended to obtain some goal is from 1690s;
sense of legislative enactment is from 1759. Phrase for good measure (late 14c.) is literally ample
in quantity, in goods sold by measure.


mazuma (n.)

slang for money, 1894, from Yiddish, from Mishnaic Hebrew mezumman designated, fixed, appointed,
used in Medieval Hebrew in sense of cash (compare slang the needful money), from Akkad. simanu
appointed time. It figured in People v. Stokes, case argued before Supreme Court of California
(1894), which cites newspaper coverage of an earlier trial mentioning Colonel Mazuma:    It appears
that the term Colonel Mazuma not only does not indicate some gentleman with a military title, but it
does not even refer to a person at all. We fail to find the term mentioned by our lexicographers,
but understand it to be a modern provincialism, probably emanating from the daily press, and used
when referring to the corrupt application of money in the accomplishment of certain ends. If these
jurors understood this term with the signification thus attached to it, it of itself furnished ample
material to demand a retrial of the case. [Pacific Reporter, vol. 37]


freeze (v.)

Old English freosan turn to ice (class II strong verb; past tense freas, past participle froren),
from Proto-Germanic *freusan to freeze (cognates: Old Norse frjosa, Old High German friosan, German
frieren to freeze, Gothic frius frost), from Proto-Germanic *freus-, equivalent to PIE root *preus-
to freeze, also to burn (cognates: Sanskrit prusva, Latin pruina hoarfrost, Welsh rhew frost,
Sanskrit prustah burnt, Albanian prus burning coals, Latin pruna a live coal).    Transitive sense
first recorded 14c., figurative sense c.1400. Meaning become rigid or motionless attested by 1720.
Sense of fix at a certain level, make non-transactable is 1922. Freeze frame is from 1960,
originally a briefly Frozen Shot after the Jingle to allow ample time for Change over at the end of
a T.V. 'Commercial.'  [ABC of Film &amp; TV, 1960].


