analogous (adj.)

1640s, from Latin analogus, from Greek analogos proportionate, according to due proportion (see
analogy).


correspondent (adj.)

early 15c., having an analogous relationship (to), a sense taken up since 19c. by corresponding;
from Medieval Latin correspondentem, present participle of correspondere (see correspond).


analogue (n.)

1826, an analogous thing, from French analogue, from Greek analogon (itself used in English from
c.1810), from ana up to (see ana-) + logos account, ratio (see lecture (n.)). Computing sense is
recorded from 1946.


myself (pron.)

c.1500, alteration of meself, from Old English phrase (ic) me self, where me is a kind of ethical
dative [OED], altered in Middle Ages from meself on analogy of herself, with her- felt as genitive;
though analogous hisself remains bad form.


boom (n.1)

long pole, 1540s, from Scottish boun, borrowed from Dutch boom tree, pole, beam, from a Middle Dutch
word analogous to Old English beam (see beam (n.)).


branch (n.)

c.1300, braunch, limb of a tree (also used of things analogous to it, especially geographic
features), from Old French branche branch, bough, twig; branch of a family (12c.), from Late Latin
branca footprint, later a claw, paw, of unknown origin, probably from Gaulish. The connecting notion
would be the shape (compare pedigree). Replaced native bough. Meaning local office of a business is
first recorded 1817, from earlier sense of component part of a system (1690s).


iodine (n.)

1814, formed by English chemist Sir Humphrey Davy (1778-1829) from French iode iodine, coined 1812
by French chemist Joseph Louis Gay-Lussac from Greek ioeides violet-colored, from ion the violet;
dark blue flower, + eidos appearance (see -oid). Davy added the chemical suffix -ine (2) to make it
analogous with chlorine and fluorine. So called from the color of the vapor given off when the
crystals are heated.


none (n.)

Old English nan (pron.) not one, not any, from ne not (see no) + an one (see one). Cognate with Old
Saxon, Middle Low German nen, Old Norse neinn, Middle Dutch, Dutch neen, Old High German, German
nein no, and analogous to Latin non- (see non-). As an adverb from c.1200. As an adjective, since
c.1600 reduced to no except in a few archaic phrases, especially before vowels, such as none other,
none the worse.


twelve (adj.)

Old English twelf twelve, literally two left (over ten), from Proto-Germanic *twa-lif-, a compound
of the root of two + *lif-, root of the verb leave (see eleven). Compare Old Saxon twelif, Old Norse
tolf, Old Frisian twelef, Middle Dutch twalef, Dutch twaalf, Old High German zwelif, German
zw&ouml;lf, Gothic twalif. Outside Germanic, an analogous formation is Lithuanian dvylika, with
second element -lika left over.


veranda (n.)

also verandah, 1711, from Hindi varanda, which probably is from Portuguese varanda, originally long
balcony or terrace, of uncertain origin, possibly related to Spanish baranda railing, and ultimately
from Vulgar Latin *barra barrier, bar. French v&eacute;randa is borrowed from English.    That the
word as used in England and in France was brought by the English from India need not be doubted. But
either in the same sense, or in one closely analogous, it appears to have existed, quite
independently, in Portuguese and Spanish; and the manner in which it occurs without explanation in
the very earliest narrative of the adventure of the Portuguese in India ... seems almost to preclude
the possibility of their having learned it in that country for the first time .... [Col. Henry Yule
and A.C. Burnell, Hobson-Jobson, A Glossary of Colloquial Anglo-Indian Words and Phrases, 1903]


like (adj.)

having the same characteristics or qualities (as another), Middle English shortening of Old English
gelic like, similar, from Proto-Germanic *galika- having the same form, literally with a
corresponding body (cognates: Old Saxon gilik, Dutch gelijk, German gleich, Gothic galeiks equally,
like), a compound of *ga- with, together + Germanic base *lik- body, form; like, same (cognates: Old
English lic body, German Leiche corpse, Danish lig, Swedish lik, Dutch lijk body, corpse).
Analogous, etymologically, to Latin conform. The modern form (rather than *lich) may be from a
northern descendant of the Old English word's Norse cognate, glikr.    Formerly with comparative
liker and superlative likest (still in use 17c.). The preposition (c.1200) and the adverb (c.1300)
both are from the adjective. As a conjunction, first attested early 16c. The word has been used as a
postponed filler (going really fast, like) from 1778; as a presumed emphatic (going, like, really
fast) from 1950, originally in counterculture slang and bop talk. Phrase more like it closer to what
is desired is from 1888.


