ancestry (n.)

early 14c., from Old French ancesserie ancestry, ancestors, forefathers, from ancestre (see
ancestor); spelling modified in English by influence of ancestor.


nobly (adv.)

c.1300, valorous, courageous, spirited, from noble (adj.) + -ly (2). Meaning of or befitting noble
birth or descent, of high ancestry is from 1590s.


Dalmatian

1810, spotted dog, presumably named for Dalmatia, but dog breeders argue over whether there is a
Croatian ancestry for the breed, which seems to be represented in Egyptian bas-reliefs and Hellenic
friezes. Popular in early 1800s as a carriage dog, to trot alongside carriages and guard them in
owner's absence. Even fire departments nowadays tend to spell it *Dalmation.


tarbrush (n.)

1711, from tar (n.1) + brush (n.1). To have a touch of the tarbrush have a dash of African ancestry
visible in the skin tone (1796) was a term of contempt from the West Indies [Century Dictionary].


West Indies

Caribbean islands explored by Columbus, 1550s, reflecting the belief (or hope) that they were
western outliers of the Indies of Asia. Related: West Indian, which is from 1580s in reference to
the native inhabitants, 1650s in reference to European settlers there, and 1928 in reference to
people of West Indian ancestry.


origin (n.)

c.1400, ancestry, race, from Old French origine origin, race, and directly from Latin originem
(nominative origo) a rise, commencement, beginning, source; descent, lineage, birth, from stem of
oriri to rise, become visible, appear (see orchestra).


bogey (n.1)

World War II aviator slang for unidentified aircraft, presumably hostile, probably ultimately from
bogge, a variant of Middle English bugge a frightening specter (see bug (n.)). Thus it shares
ancestry with many dialect words, such as bog/bogge (attested 16c.-17c.), bogeyman (16c.), boggart
specter that haunts a gloomy spot (c.1570, in Westmoreland, Lancashire, Cheshire, and Yorkshire).
The earliest modern form appears to be Scottish bogle ghost, attested from c.1500 and popularized
c.1800 in English literature by Scott, Burns, etc.


strain (n.2)

line of descent, lineage, breed, ancestry, c.1200, from Old English strion, streon a gain,
acquisition, treasure; a begetting, procreation, from Proto-Germanic *streu-nam- to pile up, from
PIE root *stere- to spread, extend, stretch out (see structure (n.)). Hence race, stock, line (early
14c.). Applied to animal species from c.1600; usually involving fairly minor variations, but not
distinct from breed (n.). Normal sound development would have yielded *streen, but the word was
altered in late Middle English, apparently by influence of strain (n.1).


nation (n.)

c.1300, from Old French nacion birth, rank; descendants, relatives; country, homeland (12c.) and
directly from Latin nationem (nominative natio) birth, origin; breed, stock, kind, species; race of
people, tribe, literally that which has been born, from natus, past participle of nasci be born (Old
Latin gnasci; see genus). Political sense has gradually predominated, but earliest English examples
inclined toward the racial meaning large group of people with common ancestry. Older sense preserved
in application to North American Indian peoples (1640s). Nation-building first attested 1907
(implied in nation-builder).


guinea (n.)

former British coin, 1660s, from Guinea, region along the west coast of Africa, presumably from an
African word (perhaps Tuareg aginaw black people); the 20-shilling coins so called because they were
first minted for British trade with Guinea (but soon in domestic use) and with gold from Africa. The
original guinea (in use from 1663 to 1813) was based on the value of gold and by 1695 it was worth
30 shillings. William III then fixed its value at 21 shillings, 6 pence in 1698. The extra 6 pence
were lopped off in December 1717.    The Guinea hen (1570s) is a domestic fowl imported from there.
Guinea derogatory term for Italian (1896) was originally Guinea Negro (1740s) and meant black
person, person of mixed ancestry. It was applied to Italians c.1890 probably because of their dark
complexions relative to northern Europeans, and after 1911 was occasionally applied to Hispanics and
Pacific Islanders as well. New Guinea was so named 1546 by Spanish explorer Inigo Ortiz de Retes in
reference to the natives' dark skin and tightly curled hair.


stock (n.1)

Old English stocc stump, post, stake, tree trunk, log, also pillory (usually plural, stocks), from
Proto-Germanic *stukkaz tree trunk (cognates: Old Norse stokkr block of wood, trunk of a tree, Old
Saxon, Old Frisian stok, Middle Dutch stoc tree trunk, stump, Dutch stok stick, cane, Old High
German stoc tree trunk, stick, German Stock stick, cane; also Dutch stuk, German St&uuml;ck piece),
from PIE *(s)teu- (1) to push, stick, knock, beat (see steep (adj.)).    Meaning ancestry, family
(late 14c.) is a figurative use of the tree trunk sense (as in family tree). This is also the root
of the meaning heavy part of a tool, and part of a rifle held against the shoulder (1540s). Meaning
person as dull and senseless as a block or log is from c.1300; hence a dull recipient of action or
notice (1540s).    Meaning framework on which a boat was constructed (early 15c.) led to figurative
phrase on stocks planned and commenced (1660s). Taking stock making an inventory is attested from
1736. Stock, lock, and barrel the whole of a thing is recorded from 1817. Stock-still (late 15c.) is
literally as still as a tree trunk.


