anchorage (n.)

mid-14c., toll or charge for anchoring (see anchor (v.) + -age. Meaning act of dropping anchor,
being at anchor is from 1610s; that of place suitable for anchoring is from 1706. The Alaska city of
Anchorage was founded 1914.


anchor (n.)

Old English ancor, borrowed 9c. from Latin ancora anchor, from or cognate with Greek ankyra anchor,
hook (see ankle). A very early borrowing and said to be the only Latin nautical term used in the
Germanic languages. The -ch- form emerged late 16c., a pedantic imitation of a corrupt spelling of
the Latin word. The figurative sense of that which gives stability or security is from late 14c.
Meaning host or presenter of a TV or radio program is from 1965, short for anchorman.


anchor (v.)

c.1200, from anchor (n.). Related: Anchored; anchoring.


anchorman (n.)

last man of a tug-of-war team, 1909, from anchor + man (n.). Later, one who runs last in a relay
race (1934). Transferred sense host or presenter of a TV or radio program is from 1958.


painter (n.2)

mid-14c., rope or chain that holds an anchor to a ship's side, from Old French peintor, ultimately
from Latin pendere to weigh (see pendant).


fluke (n.1)

flat end of an arm of an anchor, 1560s, perhaps from fluke (n.3) on resemblance of shape, or from
Low German fl&uuml;gel wing. Meaning whale's tail (in plural, flukes) is 1725.


Buffalo

city in western New York state, U.S., of disputed origin (there never were buffalo thereabouts),
perhaps from the name of a native chief, or a corruption of French beau fleuve beautiful river.
Buffalo wings finger food so called because the recipe was invented in Buffalo (1964, at Frank &amp;
Teressa's Anchor Bar on Main Street).


anker (n.)

also anchor, liquid measure in North Sea and Baltic trade, early 14c., from Dutch, related to German
Anker, Swedish ankare, Medieval Latin anceria keg, vat, of unknown origin. That of Rotterdam, once
used in England, equaled 10 old wine or 8.5 imperial gallons.


Aldine (n.)

type font, 1837, from Aldus Manutius (1450-1515), Venetian printer who used it in his popular
editions of Greek and Roman classics. His name is a Latinized form of Italian Aldo Manuzio, the
first name short for Teobaldo (see Theobald), and, like so many Italian masc. given names, of
Germanic origin. The device characteristic of Aldine books is a figure of a dolphin on an anchor.


angora (n.)

type of wool, 1810, from Angora, city in central Turkey (ancient Ancyra, modern Ankara), which gave
its name to the goat (1745 in English), and to its silk-like wool, and to a cat whose fur resembles
it (1771 in English). The city name is from the Greek word for anchor, bend (see angle (n.)).


bitter end (n.)

In lexicons of sea language going back to 1759, the bitter end is the part of a cable which is round
about the bits (two great timbers used to belay cables) when the ship is at anchor.   Bitter end of
the Cable, the End which is wound about the Bitts. [The News-Readers Pocket-Book: Or, a Military
Dictionary, London, 1759]    See bit (n.1). So, when a cable is played out to the bitter end, there
is no more left to play. The term began to be used c.1835 in non-nautical use and with probable
influence of bitter (adj.).


sheet (n.1)

Old English sciete (West Saxon), scete (Mercian) cloth, covering, towel, shroud, from Proto-Germanic
*skautjon-, from *skauta- project (cognates: Old Norse skaut, Gothic skauts seam, hem of a garment;
Dutch schoot; German Scho&szlig; bosom, lap), from PIE root *skeud- to shoot, chase, throw (see
shoot (v.)).    Sense of piece of paper first recorded c.1500; that of any broad, flat surface (of
metal, open water, etc.) is from 1590s. Of falling rain from 1690s. Meaning a newspaper is first
recorded 1749. Sheet lightning is attested from 1794; sheet music is from 1857. Between the sheets
in bed (usually with sexual overtones) is attested from 1590s; to be white as a sheet is from 1751.
The first element in sheet-anchor (late 15c.) appears to be a different word, of unknown origin.


lachrymose (adj.)

1660s, tear-like, from Latin lacrimosus tearful, sorrowful, weeping, also causing tears, lamentable,
from lacrima tear, a dialect-altered borrowing of Greek dakryma tear, from dakryein to shed tears,
from dakry tear, from PIE *dakru- (see tear (n.1)). Meaning given to tears, tearful is first
attested 1727; meaning of a mournful character is from 1822.    The -d- to -l- alteration in Latin
is the so-called Sabine -L-; compare Latin olere smell, from root of odor, and Ulixes, the Latin
form of Greek Odysseus. The Medieval Latin practice of writing -ch- for -c- before Latin -r- also
altered anchor, pulchritude, sepulchre. The -y- is pedantic, from belief in a Greek origin. Middle
English had lacrymable tearful (mid-15c.).


talk (v.)

c.1200, talken, probably a diminutive or frequentative form related to Middle English tale story,
and ultimately from the same source as tale, with rare English formative -k (compare hark from hear,
stalk from steal, smirk from smile) and replacing that word as a verb. East Frisian has talken to
talk, chatter, whisper. Related: Talked; talking.    To talk (something) up discuss in order to
promote is from 1722. To talk shop is from 1854. To talk turkey is from 1824, supposedly from an
elaborate joke about a swindled Indian. To talk back answer impudently or rudely is from 1869.
Phrase talking head is by 1966 in the jargon of television production, an in-tight closeup of a
human head talking on television. In reference to a person who habitually appears on television in
talking-head shots (usually a news anchor), by 1970. The phrase is used earlier, in reference to the
well-known magic trick (such as Se&#241;or Wences's talking head-in-the-box Pedro on the Ed Sullivan
Show), and to actual talking heads in mythology around the world (Orpheus, Bran).


weigh (v.)

Old English wegan (class V strong verb, past tense w&#230;g, past participle w&#230;gon) find the
weight of, measure; have weight; lift, carry, support, sustain, bear; move, from Proto-Germanic
*wegan (cognates: Old Saxon wegan, Old Frisian wega, Dutch wegen to weigh, Old Norse vega, Old High
German wegan to move, carry, weigh, German wiegen to weigh), from PIE *wegh- to move (cognates:
Sanskrit vahati carries, conveys, vahitram vessel, ship; Avestan vazaiti he leads, draws; Greek
okhos carriage; Latin vehere to carry, convey; Old Church Slavonic vesti to carry, convey;
Lithuanian ve&#382;u to carry, convey; Old Irish fecht campaign, journey).    The original sense was
of motion, which led to that of lifting, then to that of measure the weight of. The older sense of
lift, carry survives in the nautical phrase weigh anchor. Figurative sense of to consider, ponder
(in reference to words, etc.) is recorded from mid-14c. To weigh in in the literal sense is from
1868, originally of jockeys; figurative meaning bring one's influence to bear is from 1909.


