anecdote (n.)

1670s, secret or private stories, from French anecdote (17c.) or directly from Greek anekdota things
unpublished, neuter plural of anekdotos, from an- not (see an-) + ekdotos published, from ek- out +
didonai to give (see date (n.1)).    Procopius' 6c. Anecdota, unpublished memoirs of Emperor
Justinian full of court gossip, gave the word a sense of revelation of secrets, which decayed in
English to brief, amusing stories (1761).


Oz

mythical land in L. Frank Baum's The Wonderful Wizard of Oz (1900) and sequels; according to an
anecdote written by Baum in 1903, inspired by a three-drawer desktop cabinet letter file, the last
drawer labeled O-Z. As Australian slang for Australia, attested by 1983.


anecdotage (n.)

anecdotes collectively, 1823, from anecdote + -age. As a jocular coinage meaning garrulous old age
it is recorded from 1835, and led to anecdotard.


anecdotal (adj.)

1794, from anecdote + -al (1). Related: Anecdotally. Anecdotical is attested from 1744.


lame duck (n.)

1761, any disabled person or thing; especially Stock Exchange slang for defaulter.    A lame duck is
a man who cannot pay his differences, and is said to waddle off. [Thomas Love Peacock, Gryll Grange,
1861]    Sometimes also in naval use for an old, slow ship. Modern sense of public official serving
out term after an election is recorded by 1878 in American English, from an anecdote published in
that year of President Lincoln, who is alleged to have said, [A] senator or representative out of
business is a sort of lame duck. He has to be provided for.


close (adj.)

late 14c., strictly confined, also secret, from Old French clos confined; concealed, secret;
taciturn (12c.), from Latin clausus close, reserved, past participle adjective from claudere stop
up, fasten, shut (see close (v.)); main sense shifting to near (late 15c.) by way of closing the gap
between two things. Related: Closely.    Meaning narrowly confined, pent up is late 14c. Meaning
near in a figurative sense, of persons, from 1560s. Meaning full of attention to detail is from
1660s. Of contests, from 1855. Close call is from 1866, in a quotation in an anecdote from 1863,
possibly a term from the American Civil War; close shave in the figurative sense is 1820, American
English. Close range is from 1814. Close-minded is attested from 1818. Close-fisted penurious,
miserly is from c.1600.


quiz (n.)

brief examination of a student on some subject, 1852, perhaps from quiz (v.), or from slang quiz odd
person (1782, perhaps originally university slang), via the notion of schoolboy prank or joke played
at the expense of a person deemed a quiz (a noun sense attested frequently 1840s).    A Quiz, in the
common acceptation of the word, signifies one who thinks, speaks, or acts differently from the rest
of the world in general. But, as manners and opinions are as various as mankind, it will be
difficult to say who shall be termed a Quiz, and who shall not: each person indiscriminately
applying the name of Quiz to every one who differs from himself .... [The London Magazine, November,
1783]     According to OED, the anecdote that credits this word to a bet by the Dublin theater-
manager Daly or Daley that he could coin a word is regarded by authorities as doubtful and the first
record of it appears to be in 1836 (in Smart's Walker Remodelled; the story is omitted in the
edition of 1840).    The word Quiz is a sort of a kind of a word  That people apply to some being
absurd;  One who seems, as t'were oddly your fancy to strike  In a sort of a fashion you somehow
don't like  A mixture of odd, and of queer, and all that  Which one hates, just, you know, as some
folks hate a cat;  A comical, whimsical, strange, droll -- that is,  You know what I mean; 'tis --
in short, -- 'tis a quiz!    [from Etymology of Quiz, Charles Dibdin, 1842]


cobbler (n.1)

late 13c., cobelere one who mends shoes, of uncertain origin. It and cobble (v.) evidently go
together etymologically [OED], but the historical record presents some difficulties. The cobbler
should stick to his last (ne sutor ultra crepidam) is from the anecdote of Greek painter Apelles.
On one occasion a cobbler noticed a fault in the painting of a shoe, and remarking upon it to a
person standing by, passed on. As soon as the man was out of sight Apelles came from his hiding-
place, examined the painting, found that the cobbler's criticism was just, and at once corrected the
error. ... The cobbler came by again and soon discovered that the fault he had pointed out had been
remedied; and, emboldened by the success of his criticism, began to express his opinion pretty
freely about the painting of the leg! This was too much for the patience of the artist, who rushed
from his hiding place and told the cobbler to stick to his shoes. [William Edward Winks, Lives of
Illustrious Shoemakers, London, 1883]    [The quote is variously reported: Pliny (Natural History
XXXV.x.36) has ne supra crepidam judicaret, while Valerius Maximus (VIII.xiii.3) gives supra plantam
ascendere vetuit.]


