anguish (v.)

early 14c., intransitive and reflexive; mid-14c., transitive, from Old French anguissier (Modern
French angoisser), from anguisse (see anguish (n.)). Related: Anguished; anguishing.


anguishous (adj.)

early 13c., from Old French angoissos, from angoisse (see anguish (n.)). Related: Anguishously.


anguish (n.)

c.1200, acute bodily or mental suffering, from Old French anguisse, angoisse choking sensation,
distress, anxiety, rage, from Latin angustia (plural angustiae) tightness, straitness, narrowness;
figuratively distress, difficulty, from ang(u)ere to throttle, torment (see anger (v.)).


torment (n.)

c.1300, the inflicting of torture, also state of great suffering, pain, distress, from Old French
torment torture, pain, anguish, suffering distress (11c., Modern French tourment), from Latin
tormentum twisted cord, sling; clothes-press; instrument for hurling stones, also instrument of
torture, a rack, figuratively anguish, pain, torment, from torquere to twist (see torque (n.)).


pressure (n.)

late 14c., suffering, anguish; act or fact of pressing on the mind or heart, from Old French
presseure oppression; torture; anguish; press (for wine or cheeses), instrument of torture (12c.)
and directly from Latin pressura action of pressing, from pressus, past participle of premere to
press (see press (v.1)).    Literal meaning act or fact of pressing in a physical sense is attested
from early 15c. Meaning moral or mental coercing force is from 1620s; meaning urgency is from 1812.
Scientific sense in physics is from 1650s. Pressure cooker is attested from 1915; figurative sense
is from 1958. Pressure point is attested from 1876. Pressure-treated, of woods, is from 1911.


bleeding heart (n.)

type of flowering plant, so called from 1690s. In the sense of person excessively sympathetic
(especially toward those the speaker deems not to deserve it) is attested by 1951, but said by many
to have been popularized with reference to liberals (especially Eleanor Roosevelt) in 1930s by
newspaper columnist Westbrook Pegler (1894-1969), though quotations are wanting; bleeding in a
figurative sense of generous is from late 16c., and the notion of one's heart bleeding as a figure
of emotional anguish is from late 14c., but the exact image here may be the bleeding heart of Jesus.


excruciate (v.)

1560s, from Latin excruciatus, past participle of excruciare to torture, torment, rack, plague;
figuratively to afflict, harass, vex, torment, from ex- out, thoroughly (see ex-) + cruciare cause
pain or anguish to, literally crucify, from crux (genitive crucis) cross.


heartache (n.)

Old English heortece, in the sense of a physical pain; c.1600 in sense of anguish of mind; from
heart + ache. Old English did, however, have heartsarnes grief, literally heart-soreness.


anxiety (n.)

1520s, from Latin anxietatem (nominative anxietas) anguish, anxiety, solicitude, noun of quality
from anxius (see anxious). Psychiatric use dates to 1904. Age of Anxiety is from Auden's poem
(1947). For anxiety, distress, Old English had angsumnes, Middle English anxumnesse.


anger (n.)

mid-13c., distress, suffering; anguish, agony, also hostile attitude, ill will, surliness, from Old
Norse angr distress, grief. sorrow, affliction, from the same root as anger (v.). Sense of rage,
wrath is early 14c. Old Norse also had angr-gapi rash, foolish person; angr-lauss free from care;
angr-lyndi sadness, low spirits.


cruciate (adj.)

cross-shaped, from Modern Latin cruciatus, from Latin crux (genitive crucis) cross (see cross (n.)).
Obsolete meaning tormented is 1530s, from Latin cruciat-, past participle stem of cruciare cause
pain or anguish to, literally crucify, from crux.


famish (v.)

c.1400, famyschen, alteration of famen (late 14c.), a shortening of Old French afamer, from Vulgar
Latin *affamare to bring to hunger, from ad famem, from Latin fames hunger (see famine).    Ending
changed mid-14c. to -ish under influence of ravish, anguish, etc. The intransitive sense is from
1520s. Related: Famished; famishing.


distress (n.)

late 13c., circumstance that causes anxiety or hardship, from Old French destresse, from Vulgar
Latin *districtia restraint, affliction, narrowness, distress, from Latin districtus, past
participle of distringere draw apart, hinder, also, in Medieval Latin compel, coerce, from dis-
apart (see dis-) + stringere draw tight, press together (see strain (v.)). Meaning anguish,
suffering; grief is from c.1300.


awe (n.)

c.1300, earlier aghe, c.1200, from a Scandinavian source, such as Old Norse agi fright; from Proto-
Germanic *agiz- (cognates: Old English ege fear, Old High German agiso fright, terror, Gothic agis
fear, anguish), from PIE *agh-es- (cognates: Greek akhos pain, grief), from root *agh- to be
depressed, be afraid (see ail). Current sense of dread mixed with veneration is due to biblical use
with reference to the Supreme Being. Awe-inspiring is recorded from 1814.


agony (n.)

late 14c., mental suffering (especially that of Christ in the Garden of Gethsemane), from Old French
agonie, agoine anguish, terror, death agony (14c.), and directly from Late Latin agonia, from Greek
agonia a (mental) struggle for victory, originally a struggle for victory in the games, from agon
assembly for a contest, from agein to lead (see act (n.)). Sense of extreme bodily suffering first
recorded c.1600.


anger (v.)

c.1200, to irritate, annoy, provoke, from Old Norse angra to grieve, vex, distress; to be vexed at,
take offense with, from Proto-Germanic *angus (cognates: Old English enge narrow, painful, Middle
Dutch enghe, Gothic aggwus narrow), from PIE root *angh- tight, painfully constricted, painful
(cognates: Sanskrit amhu- narrow, amhah anguish; Armenian anjuk narrow; Lithuanian ankstas narrow;
Greek ankhein to squeeze, ankhone a strangling; Latin angere to throttle, torment; Old Irish cum-ang
straitness, want). In Middle English, also of physical pain. Meaning excite to wrath, make angry is
from late 14c. Related: Angered; angering.


