animal (adj.)

late 14c., from animal (n.). Animal rights is attested from 1879; animal liberation from 1973.
Animal magnetism originally (1784) referred to mesmerism.


animalism (n.)

the doctrine that man is a mere animal, 1857, from animal + -ism. Earlier, exercise of animal
faculties; physical exercise (1831).


animalcule (n.)

very small animal, especially a microscopic one, 1590s, from Late Latin animalculum, diminutive of
Latin animal (see animal (n.)). Related: Animalcular.


animalistic (adj.)

1877; see animal (n.) + -istic.


animal (n.)

early 14c. (but rare before c.1600, and not in KJV, 1611), any living creature (including humans),
from Latin animale living being, being which breathes, neuter of animalis animate, living; of the
air, from anima breath, soul; a current of air (see animus, and compare deer). Drove out the older
beast in common usage. Used of brutish humans from 1580s.


deer (n.)

Old English deor animal, beast, from Proto-Germanic *deuzam, the general Germanic word for animal
(as opposed to man), but often restricted to wild animal (cognates: Old Frisian diar, Dutch dier,
Old Norse dyr, Old High German tior, German Tier animal, Gothic dius wild animal, also see
reindeer), from PIE *dheusom creature that breathes, from root *dheu- (1) cloud, breath (cognates:
Lithuanian dusti gasp, dvesti gasp, perish; Old Church Slavonic dychati breathe).    For prehistoric
sense development, compare Latin animal from anima breath). Sense specialization to a specific
animal began in Old English (usual Old English for what we now call a deer was heorot; see hart),
common by 15c., now complete. Probably via hunting, deer being the favorite animal of the chase
(compare Sanskrit mrga- wild animal, used especially for deer). Deer-lick is first attested 1778, in
an American context.


beast (n.)

c.1200, from Old French beste animal, wild beast, figuratively fool, idiot (11c., Modern French
b&ecirc;te), from Vulgar Latin *besta, from Latin bestia beast, wild animal, of unknown origin. Used
to translate Latin animal. Replaced Old English deor (see deer) as the generic word for wild
creature, only to be ousted 16c. by animal. Of persons felt to be animal-like in various senses from
early 13c. Of the figure in the Christian apocalypse story from late 14c.


mink (n.)

early 15c., skin or fur of the mink, from a Scandinavian source (compare Swedish menk a stinking
animal in Finland). Applied in English to the animal itself from 1620s.


zoon (n.)

animal form containing all elements of a typical organism of its group, 1864, from Greek zoion
animal (see zoo-).


political (adj.)

1550s, pertaining to a polity, civil affairs, or government; from Latin politicus of citizens or the
state (see politic (adj.)) + -al (1). Meaning taking sides in party politics (usually pejorative) is
from 1749. Political prisoner first recorded 1860; political science is from 1779 (first attested in
Hume). Political animal translates Greek politikon zoon (Aristotle, Politics, I.ii.9) an animal
intended to live in a city; a social animal.


pheromone (n.)

chemical released by an animal that causes a specific response when detected by another animal of
the same species, but the exact definition is much debated; 1959, coined (by Karlson &amp;
L&uuml;scher) from Greek pherein to carry (see infer) + ending as in hormone.


vet (v.)

to submit (an animal) to veterinary care, 1891, from veterinarian. The colloquial sense of subject
(something) to careful examination (as of an animal by a veterinarian, especially of a horse before
a race) is attested by 1901. Related: Vetted; vetting.


zoic (adj.)

pertaining to animal life, 1863, from Greek zoikos, from zoion animal (see zoo-).


treacle (n.)

mid-14c., medicinal compound, antidote for poison, from Old French triacle antidote, cure for snake-
bite (c.1200), from Vulgar Latin *triacula, from Latin theriaca, from Greek theriake (antidotos)
antidote for poisonous wild animals, from fem. of theriakos of a wild animal, from therion wild
animal, diminutive of ther (genitive theros) wild animal, from PIE root *ghwer- wild (see fierce).
Sense of molasses is first recorded 1690s (the connection may be from the use of molasses as a
laxative, or its use to disguise the bad taste of medicine); that of anything too sweet or
sentimental is from 1771. Related: Treacly.


bedbug (n.)

also bed-bug, 1772, from bed (n.) + bug (n.).    [The bed bug] is supposed to have been first
introduced to this country in the fir timber that was brought over to rebuild London after it had
suffered by the great fire; for it is generally said that Bugs were not known in England before that
time, and many of them were found almost immediately afterwards in the new-built houses. [the Rev.
W. Bingley, Animal Biography; or Anecdotes of the Lives, Manners, and Economy of the Animal
Creation, London, 1803]


insect (n.)

c.1600, from Latin (animal) insectum (animal) with a notched or divided body, literally cut into,
from neuter past participle of insectare to cut into, to cut up, from in- into (see in- (2)) +
secare to cut (see section (n.)). Pliny's loan-translation of Greek entomon insect (see entomology),
which was Aristotle's term for this class of life, in reference to their notched bodies.    First in
English in 1601 in Holland's translation of Pliny. Translations of Aristotle's term also form the
usual word for insect in Welsh (trychfil, from trychu cut + mil animal), Serbo-Croatian (zareznik,
from rezati cut), Russian (nasekomoe, from sekat cut), etc.


zoo-

word-forming element meaning animal, living being, from comb. form of Greek zoion an animal,
literally a living being, from PIE root *gwei- to live, life (source also of Greek bios life, Old
English cwicu living; see bio-).


oryx (n.)

late 14c., from Latin oryx, from Greek oryx (genitive orygos) North African antelope with pointed
horns, the digging animal, literally pick-axe. Used in Greek and Latin bibles to render Hebrew tho,
which early English Bibles misidentified as everything from a small hibernating animal to a wild
bull.


pet (n.1)

tamed animal, originally in Scottish and northern England dialect (and exclusively so until mid-
18c.), of unknown origin. Sense of indulged child (c.1500) is recorded slightly earlier than that of
animal kept as a favorite (1530s), but the latter may be the primary meaning. Probably associated
with or influenced by petty. As a term of endearment by 1849. Teacher's pet is attested from 1890.
Pet-shop from 1928.    Know nature's children all divide her care;  The fur that warms a monarch
warm'd a bear.  While man exclaims, 'See all things for my use!'  'See man for mine!' replies a
pamper'd goose:     [Alexander Pope, Essay on Man]


tetrapod (n.)

four-footed animal, quadruped, 1826, from Modern Latin tetrapodus, from Greek tetrapous four-footed,
as a noun, four-footed animal, from tetra- (see tetra-) + pous (see foot n.)).


territorial (adj.)

1620s, of or pertaining to a territory, from Late Latin territorialis, from territorium (see
territory). In reference to British regiments, from 1881. In reference to an area defended by an
animal, from 1920. Territorial waters is from 1841. Territorial army British home defense is from
1908. Territorial imperative animal need to claim and defend territory is from 1966.


fawn (n.)

young deer, mid-14c., from Anglo-French (late 13c.), Old French faon, feon young animal (12c.), from
Vulgar Latin *fetonem (nominative *feto), from Latin fetus an offspring (see fetus). Still used of
the young of any animal in King James I's private translation of the Psalms, but mainly of deer from
15c. Color use is 1881.


few (adj.)

Old English feawe (plural; contracted to fea) few, seldom, even a little, from Proto-Germanic *faw-,
from PIE root *pau- (1) few, little (cognates: Latin paucus few, little, paullus little, parvus
little, small, pauper poor; Greek pauros few, little, pais (genitive paidos) child; Latin puer
child, boy, pullus young animal; Oscan puklu child; Sanskrit potah a young animal, putrah son; Old
English fola young horse; Old Norse fylja young female horse; Old Church Slavonic puta bird;
Lithuanian putytis young animal, young bird). Always plural in Old English.    Phrase few and far
between attested from 1660s. Unusual ironic use in quite a few many (1883), earlier a good few
(1828). The noun is late 12c., fewe, from the adjective.  Never in the field of human conflict was
so much owed by so many to so few. [Winston Churchill, 1940]


veterinarian (n.)

animal doctor, 1640s, from Latin veterinarius of or having to do with beasts of burden, also, as a
noun, cattle doctor, from veterinum beast of burden, perhaps from vetus (genitive veteris) old (see
veteran), possibly from the notion of experienced, or of one year old (hence strong enough to draw
burdens). Another theory connects it to Latin vehere to draw, on notion of used as a draft animal.
Replaced native dog-leech (1520s).


male (n.)

late 14c., male human being; male fish or land animal, from Old French masle (adj.) masculine, male,
adult, also used as a noun (12c., Modern French m&acirc;le), from Latin masculus masculine, male,
worthy of a man (source also of Proven&ccedil;al mascle, Spanish macho, Italian maschio), diminutive
of mas (genitive maris) male person or animal, male.


prey (n.)

mid-13c., animal hunted for food, also that which is taken in war, from Old French preie booty,
animal taken in the chase (mid-12c., Modern French proie), from Latin praeda booty, plunder, game
hunted, earlier praeheda, literally something seized before, from PIE *prai-heda-; for first element
see prae-; second element related to the second element in prehendere to grasp, seize (see
prehensile).


dock (v.)

cut an animal's tail, late 14c., from dok (n.) fleshy part of an animal's tail (mid-14c.), related
to Old English -docca muscle, from Proto-Germanic *dokko something round, bundle (cognates: Old
Norse dokka bundle, girl, Danish dukke doll, German Docke small column, bundle, doll, smart girl).
Meaning to reduce (someone's) pay for some infraction is first recorded 1822. Related: Docked;
docking.


antelope (n.)

early 15c., from Old French antelop, from Medieval Latin ant(h)alopus (11c.), from Greek antholops
(attested in Eusebius of Antioch, c.336 C.E.), a fabulous animal haunting the banks of the
Euphrates, very savage, hard to catch and having long saw-like horns capable of cutting down trees.
Original sense and language unknown (it looks like Greek flower-eye, as if from anthos + ops, but
that may be a result of Greek folk etymology). A heraldic animal, also known in Medieval Latin as
talopus and calopus, the name was applied c.1600 to a living type of deer-like mammal. In the
western U.S., it is used in reference to the pronghorn.


muzzle (n.)

late 14c., device put over an animal's mouth to stop it from biting, eating, or rooting, from Old
French musel muzzle, also snout, nose (12c., Modern French museau), from muse muzzle, from Gallo-
Roman *musa snout (source also of Proven&ccedil;al mus, Old Spanish mus, Italian muso), of unknown
origin, possibly related to Latin morsus bite (but OED finds serious difficulties with this).
Meaning projecting part of the head of an animal is from early 15c. in English; sense of open end of
a firearm first recorded 1560s.


ox (n.)

Old English oxa ox (plural oxan), from Proto-Germanic *ukhson (cognates: Old Norse oxi, Old Frisian
oxa, Middle Dutch osse, Old Saxon, Old High German ohso, German Ochse, Gothic auhsa), from PIE *uks-
en- male animal, (cognates: Welsh ych ox, Middle Irish oss stag, Sanskrit uksa, Avestan uxshan- ox,
bull), said to be from root *uks- to sprinkle, related to *ugw- wet, moist. The animal word, then,
is literally besprinkler.


road kill (n.)

animal killed by vehicular traffic, 1972; the figurative sense is from 1992.


victim (n.)

late 15c., living creature killed and offered as a sacrifice to a deity or supernatural power, from
Latin victima person or animal killed as a sacrifice. Perhaps distantly connected to Old English wig
idol, Gothic weihs holy, German weihen consecrate (compare Weihnachten Christmas) on notion of a
consecrated animal. Sense of person who is hurt, tortured, or killed by another is recorded from
1650s; meaning person oppressed by some power or situation is from 1718. Weaker sense of person
taken advantage of is recorded from 1781.


fable (n.)

c.1300, falsehood, lie, pretense, from Old French fable (12c.) story, fable, tale; fiction, lie,
falsehood, from Latin fabula story, play, fable, narrative, account, tale, literally that which is
told, related to fari speak, tell, from PIE root *bha- (2) speak (see fame (n.)). Sense of animal
story (early 14c.) comes from Aesop. In modern folklore terms, defined as a short, comic tale making
a moral point about human nature, usually through animal characters behaving in human ways. Most
trace to Greece or India.


zodiac (n.)

late 14c., from Old French zodiaque, from Latin zodiacus zodiac, from Greek zodiakos (kyklos) zodiac
(circle), literally circle of little animals, from zodiaion, diminutive of zoion animal (see zoo).
Libra is not an animal, but it was not a zodiac constellation to the Greeks, who reckoned 11 but
counted Scorpio and its claws (including what is now Libra) as a double constellation. Libra was
figured back in by the Romans. In Old English the zodiac was twelf tacna the twelve signs, and in
Middle English also Our Ladye's Waye and the Girdle of the Sky.


bunyip (n.)

1848, fabulous swamp-dwelling animal (supposedly inspired by fossil bones), from an Australian
aborigine language.


foal (n.)

Old English fola foal, colt, from Proto-Germanic *fulon (cognates: Old Saxon folo, Middle Dutch and
Dutch veulen, Old Norse foli, Old Frisian fola, Old High German folo, German Fohlen, Gothic fula),
from PIE *pulo- young of an animal (cognates: Greek polos foal, Latin pullus a young animal,
Albanian pele mare), from root *pau- few, little (see few).


pester (v.)

1520s, to clog, entangle, encumber, probably a shortening of Middle French empestrer place in an
embarrassing situation (Modern French emp&ecirc;trer, Walloon epasturer), from Vulgar Latin
*impastoriare to hobble (an animal), from Latin im- in + Medieval Latin pastoria (chorda) (rope) to
hobble an animal, from Latin pastoria, fem. of pastorius of a herdsman, from pastor herdsman (see
pastor (n.)). Sense of annoy, trouble (1560s) is from influence of pest. Related: Pestered;
pestering.


sponge (n.)

Old English sponge, spunge, from Latin spongia a sponge, also sea animal from which a sponge comes,
from Greek spongia, related to spongos sponge, of unknown origin. The Latin word is the source of
Old Saxon spunsia, Middle Dutch spongie, Old French esponge, Spanish esponja, Italian spugna.    In
English in reference to the marine animal from 1530s. To throw in the sponge quit, submit (1860) is
from prizefighting, in reference to the sponges used to cleanse the faces of combatants between
rounds (compare later throw in the towel). Sponge-cake is attested from 1808.


umbles (n.)

edible inner parts of a deer or other animal, c.1400, see humble.


okapi (n.)

short-necked giraffe of central Africa, 1900, from the animal's name in Mbuba (Congo). Reported by
English explorer Sir Harry Johnston (1858-1927).


pika

rabbit-like animal of Siberia and North America, 1827, from Tunguse piika.


coda (n.)

concluding passage in a musical composition, 1753, from Latin cauda tail of an animal.


reindeer (n.)

c.1400, from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse hreindyri reindeer, from dyr animal (see deer)
+ hreinn, by itself the usual name for the animal, from Proto-Germanic *khrinda- (cognates: Old
English hran reindeer; German Renn reindeer, which was altered by folk etymology influence of rennen
to run; Swedish ren-ko female reindeer, with ko cow (n.)).    Probably from PIE *krei-, from base
*ker- (1) horn, head, with derivatives referring to horned animals (both male and female reindeer
have horns; those of the male are remarkable), and thus perhaps cognate with Greek krios ram (see
kerato-). Older sources connect it to words in Lapp or Finnish. French renne, Spanish reno, Italian
renna ultimately are from Germanic.


howler

1832, animal that howls, agent noun from howl (v.). Meaning glaring blunder, ridiculous mistake is
first recorded 1890.


schmoo (n.)

fabulous animal, ready to fulfill man's wants, 1948, invented by U.S. cartoonist Al Capp (Alfred
Caplin, 1909-1979); the name perhaps based on schmoe.


litter (n.)

c.1300, a bed, also bed-like vehicle carried on men's shoulders (early 14c.), from Anglo-French
litere portable bed, Old French litiere litter, stretcher, bier; straw, bedding, from Medieval Latin
lectaria litter (altered in French by influence of lit bed), from Latin lectus bed, couch, from PIE
*legh-to-, from root *legh- to lie (see lie (v.2)).    Meaning extended early 15c. to straw used for
bedding (early 14c. in Anglo-French) and late 15c. to offspring of an animal at one birth (in one
bed); sense of scattered oddments, disorderly debris is first attested 1730, probably from Middle
English verb literen provide with bedding (late 14c.), with notion of strewing straw. Litter by 19c.
had come to mean both the straw bedding and the animal waste in it after use.


fur (n.)

late 14c. trimming or lining of a garment (implied c.1300 in surname Furhode fur hood), probably
from Old French fourrer to line, sheathe, from fuerre sheath, covering, from Frankish *fodr or
another Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic *fodram sheath (cognates: Old Frisian foder coat
lining, Old High German fotar a lining, German Futter, Gothic fodr sword sheath).    Sense
transferred in English from the notion of a lining to the thing used in it. First applied early 15c.
to animal hair still on the animal.  I'le make the fur Flie 'bout the eares of the old Cur. [Butler,
Hudibras, 1663]  As a verb, from c.1300, from Old French fourrer. Related: Furred; furring.


hog (n.)

late 12c. (implied in hogaster), swine reared for slaughter (usually about a year old), also used by
stockmen for young sheep (mid-14c.) and for horse older than one year, suggesting the original sense
had something to do with an age, not a type of animal. Not evidenced in Old English, but it may have
existed. Possibility of British Celtic origin [Watkins, etc.] is regarded by OED as improbable.
Figurative sense of gluttonous person is first recorded early 15c. Meaning Harley-Davidson
motorcycle is attested from 1967.    To go hog wild is from 1904. Hog in armor awkward or clumsy
person in ill-fitting attire is from 1650s. Phrase to go the whole hog (1828) is sometimes said to
be from the butcher shop option of buying the whole slaughtered animal (at a discount) rather than
just the choice bits. But it is perhaps rather from the story (recorded in English from 1779) of
Muslim sophists, forbidden by the Quran from eating a certain unnamed part of the hog, who debated
which part was intended and managed to exempt the whole of it from the prohibition. Road hog is
attested from 1886.


colostrum (n.)

1570s, from Latin colostrum first milk from an animal, of unknown origin.


Dalmatia

region along the eastern Adriatic coast in what is now Croatia, of uncertain origin. Perhaps from a
derivative of PIE *dhal- to bloom, in a sense of young animal, in reference to the mountain
pastures.


