animus (n.)

1820, temper (usually in a hostile sense), from Latin animus rational soul, mind, life, mental
powers; courage, desire, related to anima living being, soul, mind, disposition, passion, courage,
anger, spirit, feeling, from PIE root *ane- to blow, to breathe (cognates: Greek anemos wind,
Sanskrit aniti breathes, Old Irish anal, Welsh anadl breath, Old Irish animm soul, Gothic uzanan to
exhale, Old Norse anda to breathe, Old English e&eth;ian to breathe, Old Church Slavonic vonja
smell, breath, Armenian anjn soul). It has no plural. As a term in Jungian psychology for the
masculine component of a feminine personality, it dates from 1923.


animosity (n.)

early 15c., vigor, from Middle French animosit&eacute; (14c.) or directly from Latin animositatem
(nominative animositas) boldness, vehemence, from animosus bold, spirited, from animus (see animus).
Sense of hostile feeling is first recorded c.1600, from a secondary sense in Latin (see animus).


anima (n.)

Jung's term for the inner part of the personality, or the female component of a masculine
personality, 1923, from fem. of Latin animus the rational soul; life; the mental powers,
intelligence (see animus).


longanimity (n.)

patience, mid-15c., from Late Latin longanimitas  long-suffering, patient, from longanimus, from
longus (see long (adj.)) + animus soul, spirit, mind (see animus).


equanimity (n.)

c.1600, fairness, impartiality, from French &eacute;quanimit&eacute;, from Latin aequanimitatem
(nominative aequanimitas) evenness of mind, calmness, from aequus even, level (see equal (adj.)) +
animus mind, spirit (see animus). Meaning evenness of temper in English is from 1610s.


unanimous (adj.)

1610s, from Latin unanimus of one mind, in union, from unus one (see one) + animus mind (see
animus). Related: Unanimously.


pusillanimous (adj.)

early 15c., from Late Latin pusillanimis having little courage (used in Church Latin to translate
Greek oligopsychos small-souled), from Latin pusillis very weak, little (diminutive of pullus young
animal; see foal (n.)) + animus spirit, courage (see animus). Related: Pusillanimously;
pusillanimousness.


animadversion (n.)

1590s, criticism, blame, also sometimes in early use simply notice, attention (now obsolete), from
Latin animadversionem (nominative animadversio) investigation, inquiry; perception, observation,
noun of action from past participle stem of animadverte to take cognizance of, literally to turn the
mind to, from animum, accusative of animus mind (see animus), + advertere to turn to (see
advertise). The sense of to take notice of as a fault was in Latin; in fact animadverto at times was
a euphemism for to punish with death.


magnanimity (n.)

mid-14c., loftiness of thought or purpose, from Old French magnanimit&#233; high-mindedness,
generosity of spirit, from Latin magnanimitatem (nominative magnanimitas) greatness of soul, high-
mindedness, from magnanimus having a great soul, from magnus great (see magnate) + animus mind,
soul, spirit (see animus). Probably a loan-translation of Greek megalopsykhos high-souled, generous
(Aristotle) or megathymus great-hearted.


Enid

fem. proper name, from Middle Welsh eneit, purity, literally soul, from PIE *ane-tyo-, from root
*ane- to breathe (see animus).


animal (n.)

early 14c. (but rare before c.1600, and not in KJV, 1611), any living creature (including humans),
from Latin animale living being, being which breathes, neuter of animalis animate, living; of the
air, from anima breath, soul; a current of air (see animus, and compare deer). Drove out the older
beast in common usage. Used of brutish humans from 1580s.


animate (v.)

1530s, to fill with boldness or courage, from Latin animatus past participle of animare give breath
to, also to endow with a particular spirit, to give courage to, from anima life, breath (see
animus). Sense of give life to in English attested from 1742. Related: Animated; animating.


anemone (n.)

flowering plant genus, 1550s, from Middle French anemone (16c.) and directly from Latin anemone,
from Greek anemone wind flower, literally daughter of the wind, from anemos wind (cognate with Latin
anima; see animus) + -one feminine patronymic suffix. According to Asa Gray, so called because it
was thought to open only when the wind blows. Klein suggests the flower name perhaps originally is
from Hebrew (compare na'aman, in nit'e na'amanim, literally plants of pleasantness, in Is. xvii:10,
from na'em was pleasant). Applied to a type of sea creature (sea anemone) from 1773.


animism (n.)

1866, reintroduced by English anthropologist Sir Edward Burnett Taylor (1832-1917), who defined it
(1871) as the theory of the universal animation of nature, from Latin anima life, breath, soul (see
animus) + -ism.    Earlier sense was of doctrine that animal life is produced by an immaterial soul
(1832), from German Animismus, coined c.1720 by physicist/chemist Georg Ernst Stahl (1660-1734)
based on the concept of the anima mundi. Animist is attested from 1819, in Stahl's sense; animisic
is first recorded 1871.


spirit (n.)

mid-13c., animating or vital principle in man and animals, from Anglo-French spirit, Old French
espirit spirit, soul (12c., Modern French esprit) and directly from Latin spiritus a breathing
(respiration, and of the wind), breath; breath of a god, hence inspiration; breath of life, hence
life; also disposition, character; high spirit, vigor, courage; pride, arrogance, related to spirare
to breathe, from PIE *(s)peis- to blow (cognates: Old Church Slavonic pisto to play on the flute).
Meaning supernatural immaterial creature; angel, demon; an apparition, invisible corporeal being of
an airy nature is attested from mid-14c.; from late 14c. as a ghost (see ghost (n.)). From c.1500 as
a nature, character; sense of essential principle of something (in a non-theological context, as in
Spirit of St. Louis) is attested from 1680s, common after 1800; Spirit of '76 in reference to the
qualities that sparked and sustained the American Revolution is attested by 1797 in William
Cobbett's Porcupine's Gazette and Daily Advertiser.    From late 14c. in alchemy as volatile
substance; distillate; from c.1500 as substance capable of uniting the fixed and the volatile
elements of the philosopher's stone. Hence spirits volatile substance; sense narrowed to strong
alcoholic liquor by 1670s. This also is the sense in spirit level (1768). Also from mid-14c. as
character, disposition; way of thinking and feeling, state of mind; source of a human desire; in
Middle English freedom of spirit meant freedom of choice. From late 14c. as divine substance, divine
mind, God; also Christ or His divine nature; the Holy Ghost; divine power; also, extension of divine
power to man; inspiration, a charismatic state; charismatic power, especially of prophecy. Also
essential nature, essential quality. From 1580s in metaphoric sense animation, vitality.
According to Barnhart and OED, originally in English mainly from passages in Vulgate, where the
Latin word translates Greek pneuma and Hebrew ruah. Distinction between soul and spirit (as seat of
emotions) became current in Christian terminology (such as Greek psykhe vs. pneuma, Latin anima vs.
spiritus) but is without significance for earlier periods [Buck]. Latin spiritus, usually in
classical Latin breath, replaces animus in the sense spirit in the imperial period and appears in
Christian writings as the usual equivalent of Greek pneuma. Spirit-rapping is from 1852.


