annals (n.)

1560s, from Latin annales libri chronicles, literally yearlies, yearly books, noun use of plural of
annalis pertaining to a year, from annus year (see annual (adj.)).


annalize (v.)

record in annals, 1610s, from annals + -ize. Related: Annalized; annalizing.


annal (n.)

rare singular of annals (q.v.).


annalist (n.)

one who keeps a chronicle of events by year, 1610s, from French analiste; see annals + -ist.


mechanization (n.)

1834, from mechanize + -ation.    In our country, the ancient languages are studied, to a sad
extent, as a mere exercise in the technics of etymology, syntax and prosody; and when thus pursued,
there can be no good reason for so great a sacrifice of time and labor, or for that mechanization
(if we may make a term) of mind which is the natural result. [American Annals of Education and
Instruction, December 1834]


conspicuous (adj.)

1540s, from Latin conspicuus visible, open to view, striking, from conspicere to look at, observe,
see, notice, from com-, intensive prefix (see com-), + specere (see scope (n.1)). Phrase conspicuous
by its absence (1859) is said to be from Tacitus (Annals iii.76), in a passage about certain images:
sed pr&aelig;fulgebant ... eo ipso quod effigies eorum non visebantur.


chronicle (n.)

c.1300, cronicle, from Anglo-French cronicle, from Old French cronique chronicle (Modern French
chronique), from Latin chronica (neuter plural mistaken for fem. singular), from Greek ta khronika
(biblia) the (books of) annals, chronology, neuter plural of khronikos of time, concerning time,
from khronos time (see chrono-). Ending modified in Anglo-French, perhaps by influence of article.
Old English had cranic chronicle, cranicwritere chronicler. The classical -h- was restored in
English from 16c.


bunk (n.2)

nonsense, 1900, short for bunkum, phonetic spelling of Buncombe, a county in North Carolina. The
usual story (by 1841) of its origin is this: At the close of the protracted Missouri statehood
debates, supposedly on Feb. 25, 1820, N.C. Representative Felix Walker (1753-1828) began what
promised to be a long, dull, irrelevant speech, and he resisted calls to cut it short by saying he
was bound to say something that could appear in the newspapers in the home district and prove he was
on the job. I shall not be speaking to the House, he confessed, but to Buncombe. Bunkum has been
American English slang for nonsense since 1841 (from 1838 as generic for a U.S. Representative's
home district).    MR. WALKER, of North Carolina, rose then to address the Committee on the question
[of Missouri statehood]; but the question was called for so clamorously and so perseveringly that
Mr. W. could proceed no farther than to move that the committee rise. [Annals of Congress, House of
Representatives, 16th Congress, 1st Session, p. 1539]


