annihilate (v.)

1520s, from an obsolete adjective meaning reduced to nothing (late 14c.), originally the past
participle of a verb, anihil, from Old French annichiler (14c.), from Late Latin annihilare to
reduce to nothing, from Latin ad- to (see ad-) + nihil nothing (see nil). Related: Annihilated;
annihilating.


lick (v.2)

to beat, 1535, perhaps from figurative use of lick (v.1) in the Coverdale bible that year in sense
of defeat, annihilate (an enemy's forces) in Num. xxii:4:Now shal this heape licke up all that is
about vs, euen as an oxe licketh vp the grasse in the field.But to lick (of) the whip taste
punishment is attested from mid-15c.


annihilation (n.)

1630s, from Middle French annihilation (restored from Old French anichilacion, 14c.), or directly
from Late Latin annihilationem (nominative annihilatio), noun of action from past participle stem of
annihilare (see annihilate).


eradication (n.)

early 15c., from Latin eradicationem (nominative eradicatio), noun of action from past participle
stem of eradicare root out, extirpate, annihilate, from ex- out (see ex-) + radix (genitive radicis)
root (see radish).


starvation (n.)

1778, hybrid noun of action from starve. Famously (but not certainly) introduced in English by Henry
Dundas during debate in the House of Commons in 1775 on American affairs. It earned him the nickname
Starvation Dundas, though sources disagree on whether this was given in objection to the harshness
of his suggestion of starving the rebels into submission or in derision at the barbarous formation
of the word. It is one of the earliest instances of -ation used with a native Germanic word
(flirtation is earlier).    As to Lord Chatham, the victories, conquests, extension of our empire
within these last five years, will annihilate his fame of course, and he may be replaced by
Starvation Dundas, whose pious policy suggested that the devil of rebellion could be expelled only
by fasting, though that never drove him out of Scotland. [Horace Walpole, letter to the Rev. William
Mason, April 25, 1781]


