annulment (n.)

late 15c., act of reducing to nothing; see annul + -ment. Meaning act of declaring invalid is
recorded from 1864.


annul (v.)

late 14c., from Old French anuller (13c.) or directly from Late Latin annullare to make to nothing,
from Latin ad- to (see ad-) + nullum, neuter of nullus nothing (see null). Related: Annulled;
annulling.


cashier (v.)

dismiss, 1590s, from Middle Dutch casseren, kaseeren to cast off, discharge, from French casser to
discharge, annul, from Late Latin cassare annul, from Latin cassus void, empty (see caste (n.)).
Related: Cashiered; cashiering.


quash (v.)

to make void, annul, early 14c., from Old French quasser, casser to annul, declare void, and
directly from Medieval Latin quassare, alteration of Late Latin cassare, from cassus null, void,
empty (see caste (n.)).    Meaning to break, crush, is early 14c., from Old French quasser, casser
to break, smash, injure, harm, weaken, from Latin quassare to shatter, frequentative of quatere
(past participle quassus) to shake, from PIE root *kwet- to shake (cognates: Greek passein to
sprinkle, Lithuanian kuteti to shake up, Old Saxon skuddian to move violently, German sch&#252;tteln
to shake, Old English scudan to hasten).    The words have influenced each other in form and sense
since Medieval Latin and now are somewhat grown together. Related: Quashed; quashing.


vacate (v.)

1640s, to make void, to annul, from Latin vacatus, past participle of vacare be empty, be void (see
vain). Meaning to leave, give up, quit (a place) is attested from 1791. Related: Vacated; vacating.


elide (v.)

1590s, a legal term, to annul, do away with, from Middle French elider (16c.), from Latin elidere
strike out, from ex- out (see ex-) + -lidere, comb. form of laedere to strike. Phonological sense is
first recorded 1796. Related: Elided; eliding.


abrogate (v.)

1520s, from Latin abrogatus, past participle of abrogare to annul, repeal (a law), from ab- away
(see ab-) + rogare propose a law, request (see rogation). Form abrogen, from Old French abroger, is
recorded from early 15c. Related: Abrogated; abrogating.


resign (v.)

late 14c., give up, surrender, abandon, submit; relinquish, from Old French resigner renounce,
relinquish (13c.), from Latin resignare to check off, annul, cancel, give back, give up, from re-
opposite (see re-) + signare to make an entry in an account book, literally to mark (see sign (v.)).
The sense is of making an entry (signum) opposite -- on the credit side -- balancing the former mark
and thus canceling the claim it represents. The specific meaning of give up a position is first
recorded late 14c. Sense of to give (oneself) up to some emotion or situation is from 1718. Related:
Resigned; resigning.


