anoint (v.)

c.1300 (implied in anointing), from Old French enoint smeared on, past participle of enoindre smear
on, from Latin inunguere to anoint, from in- on + unguere to smear (see unguent). Originally in
reference to grease or oil smeared on for medicinal purposes; its use in the Coverdale Bible in
reference to Christ (as in The Lord's Anointed; see chrism) has spiritualized the word. Related:
Anointed; anointing.


anointed (adj.)

late 14c., smeared with oil, past participle adjective from anoint (v.). Noun meaning a consecrated
one (as in Lord's Anointed) is recorded from 1520s.


unguent (n.)

ointment, early 15c., from Latin unguentem ointment, from stem of unguere to anoint or smear with
ointment, from PIE root *ongw- to salve, anoint (cognates: Sanskrit anakti anoints, smears, Armenian
aucanem I anoint, Old Prussian anctan butter, Old High German ancho, German anke butter, Old Irish
imb, Welsh ymenyn butter).


salve (v.1)

Old English sealfian anoint (a wound) with salve, from Proto-Germanic *salbojanan (cognates: Dutch
zalven, German salben, Gothic salbon to anoint), from the root of salve (n.). Figurative use from
c.1200. Related: Salved; salving.


preen (v.)

to trim, to dress up, late 14c., perhaps a variation of Middle English proynen, proinen trim the
feather with the beak (see prune (v.)); or perhaps from Old French poroindre anoint before, and Old
French proignier round off, prune. Middle English prene (from Old English preon, a general Germanic
word) meant to pin, and probably influenced the form of this word. Watkins, however, connects it
with Latin unguere to smear, anoint.    Because of the popularity of falconry, bird activities
formerly were more closely observed and words for them were more precise in English than today.Youre
hawke proynith and not pikith and she prenyth not bot whan she begynnyth at hir leggys, and fetcheth
moystour like oyle at hir taill. [Book of St. Albans, 1486]


smear (v.)

Old English smerian, smierwan to anoint or rub with grease, oil, etc., from Proto-Germanic *smerwjan
to spread grease on (cognates: Old Norse smyrja to anoint, rub with ointment, Danish sm&oslash;re,
Swedish sm&ouml;rja, Dutch smeren, Old High German smirwen apply salve, smear, German schmieren to
smear; Old Norse sm&#246;r butter), from PIE *smeru- grease (cognates: Greek myron unguent, balsam,
Old Irish smi(u)r marrow, Old English smeoru fat, grease, ointment, tallow, lard, suet, Lithuanian
smarsas fat).    Figurative sense of assault a public reputation with unsubstantiated charges is
from 1879. Related: Smeared; smearing. Smear-word, one used regardless of its literal meaning but
invested with invective, is from 1938.


unction (n.)

act of anointing as a religious rite, late 14c., from Latin unctionem (nominative unctio) anointing,
from unctus, past participle of ungere to anoint (see unguent).


chrism (n.)

oil mingled with balm, Old English chrisma, from Church Latin chrisma, from Greek khrisma an
unguent, anointing, unction, from khriein to anoint, from PIE root *ghrei- to rub (cognates:
Lithuanian griej&#249; to skim the cream off). Chrisom baptismal robe, is a c.1200 variant of this.
Related: Chrismal; chrismatory.


ointment (n.)

late 13c., from Old French oignement ointment, salve, unguent, from Vulgar Latin *unguimentum, from
Latin unguentum (see unguent). The first -t- emerged in Old French from oint, past participle of
verb oindre to anoint.


confirm (v.)

mid-13c., confirmyn to ratify, from Old French confermer (13c., Modern French confirmer) strengthen,
establish, consolidate; affirm by proof or evidence; anoint (a king), from Latin confirmare make
firm, strengthen, establish, from com-, intensive prefix (see com-), + firmare to strengthen, from
firmus (see firm (adj.)). Related: Confirmative; confirmatory.


messiah (n.)

c.1300, Messias, from Late Latin Messias, from Greek Messias, from Aramaic meshiha and Hebrew
mashiah the anointed (of the Lord), from mashah anoint. This is the word rendered in Septuagint as
Greek Khristos (see Christ). In Old Testament prophetic writing, it was used of an expected
deliverer of the Jewish nation. The modern English form represents an attempt to make the word look
more Hebrew, and dates from the Geneva Bible (1560). Transferred sense of an expected liberator or
savior of a captive people is attested from 1660s.


unctuous (adj.)

late 14c., oily, having a greasy or soapy feeling when touched, from Old French unctueus, from
Medieval Latin unctuosus greasy, from Latin unctus act of anointing, from past participle stem of
unguere to anoint (see unguent).    Figurative sense of blandly ingratiating is first recorded 1742,
perhaps in part with a literal sense, but in part a sarcastic usage from unction in the meaning deep
spiritual feeling (1690s), such as comes from having been anointed in the rite of unction. Related:
Unctuously; unctuousness.


macerate (v.)

late 15c., a back-formation from maceration or else from Latin maceratus, past participle of
macerare soften, make soft, soak, steep, related to maceria garden wall, originally of kneaded clay,
from PIE *mak-ero-, suffixed form of root *mag- to knead (cognates: Greek magis kneaded mass, cake,
mageus one who kneads, baker; Old Church Slavonic mazo to anoint, smear; Breton meza to knead;
Middle Irish maistir to churn), also to fashion, fit (compare make (v.)). Related: Macerated;
macerating.


Christ (n.)

title given to Jesus of Nazareth, Old English crist (by 830, perhaps 675), from Latin Christus, from
Greek khristos the anointed (translation of Hebrew mashiah; see messiah), noun use of verbal
adjective of khriein to rub, anoint (see chrism). The Latin term drove out Old English H&aelig;land
healer, savior, as the preferred descriptive term for Jesus.    A title, treated as a proper name in
Old English, but not regularly capitalized until 17c. Pronunciation with long -i- is result of Irish
missionary work in England, 7c.-8c. The ch- form, regular since c.1500 in English, was rare before.
Capitalization of the word begins 14c. but is not fixed until 17c. The 17c. mystical sect of the
Familists edged it toward a verb with Christed made one with Christ.


slime (n.)

Old English slim slime, from Proto-Germanic *slimaz (cognates: Old Norse slim, Old Frisian slym,
Dutch slijm slime, phlegm, German Schleim slime), probably related to Old English lim birdlime;
sticky substance, from PIE root *(s)lei- slimy, sticky, slippery (cognates: Sanskrit linati sticks,
stays, adheres to; slips into, disappears; Russian slimak snail; Old Church Slavonic slina spittle;
Old Irish sligim to smear, leinam I follow, literally I stick to; Welsh llyfn smooth; Greek leimax
snail, limne marsh, pool, lake, alinein to anoint, besmear; Latin limus slime, mud, mire, linere to
daub, besmear, rub out, erase). As an insult to a person from mid-15c. Slime-mold is from 1880.


sacred (adj.)

late 14c., past participle adjective from obsolete verb sacren to make holy (c.1200), from Old
French sacrer consecrate, anoint, dedicate (12c.) or directly from Latin sacrare to make sacred,
consecrate; hold sacred; immortalize; set apart, dedicate, from sacer (genitive sacri) sacred,
dedicated, holy, accursed, from Old Latin saceres, from PIE root *sak- to sanctify. Buck groups it
with Oscan sakrim, Umbrian sacra and calls it a distinctive Italic group, without any clear outside
connections. Related: Sacredness.    Nasalized form is sancire make sacred, confirm, ratify, ordain.
Sacred cow object of Hindu veneration, is from 1891; figurative sense of one who must not be
criticized is first recorded 1910, reflecting Western views of Hinduism. Sacred Heart the heart of
Jesus as an object of religious veneration is from 1765.


