dyke (n.)

1931, American English, perhaps a shortening of morphadike, dialectal garbling of hermaphrodite; but
bulldyker engage in lesbian activities is attested from 1921, and a source from 1896 lists dyke as
slang for the vulva.    [T]he word appears first in the long forms, bulldiker and bulldyking, both
used in the 1920s by American blacks. No African antecedents have been found for the term, however,
which leads to the possibility that this is basically just another backcountry, barnyard word,
perhaps a combination of BULL and DICK. [Rawson]


vice versa

the order being changed, c.1600, Latin, from vice, ablative of vicis a change, alternation,
alternate order (see vicarious) + versa, feminine ablative singular of versus, past participle of
vertere to turn, turn about (see versus). The phrase has the complete force of a proposition, being
as much as to say that upon a transposition of antecedents the consequents are also transposed
[Century Dictionary].


-re

word-ending that sometimes distinguish British from American English. In the U.S., the change from
-re to -er (to match pronunciation) in words such as fibre, centre, theatre began late 18c.; under
urging of Noah Webster (1804 edition of his speller, and especially the 1806 dictionary), it was
established over the next 25 years. The -re spelling, like -our, however, had the authority of
Johnson's dictionary behind it and remained in Britain, where it came to be a point of national
pride, contra the Yankees.    Despite Webster's efforts, -re was retained in words with -c- or -g-
(such as ogre, acre, the latter of which Webster insisted to the end of his days ought to be aker,
and it was so printed in editions of the dictionary during his lifetime). The -re spelling generally
is more justified by conservative etymology, based on French antecedents. It is met today in the
U.S. only in Theatre as an element in the proper names of entertainment showplaces, where it is
perhaps felt to inspire a perception of bon ton.


