anthropology (n.)

science of the natural history of man, 1590s, originally especially of the relation between
physiology and psychology, from Modern Latin anthropologia or coined independently in English from
anthropo- + -logy. In Aristotle, anthropologos is used literally, as speaking of man.


xanthous (adj.)

1829, fair-haired and light-complexioned, from Greek xanthos yellow, of unknown origin (see
xantho-). But the word also was used in 19c. anthropology as specifying the yellow or Mongoloid type
of mankind [Century Dictionary].


anthropological (adj.)

1825, from anthropology + -ical. Related: Anthropologically.


anthropologist (n.)

1798, from anthropology + -ist.


sacral (adj.)

1767, in anatomy, of or pertaining to the sacrum, from Modern Latin sacralis. In anthropology,
pertaining to religious rites, 1882, from Latin sacrum sacred thing, rite (see sacred). Related:
sacralization.


Semite (n.)

1847, a Jew, Arab, Assyrian, or Aramaean (an apparently isolated use from 1797 refers to the Semitic
language group), back-formation from Semitic or else from French S&#233;mite (1845), from Modern
Latin Semita, from Late Latin Sem Shem, one of the three sons of Noah (Gen. x:21-30), regarded as
the ancestor of the Semites (in old Bible-based anthropology), from Hebrew Shem. In modern sense
said to have been first used by German historian August Schl&#246;zer in 1781.


sex (n.)

late 14c., males or females collectively, from Latin sexus a sex, state of being either male or
female, gender, of uncertain origin. Commonly taken with seco as division or 'half' of the race
[Tucker], which would connect it to secare to divide or cut (see section (n.)). Meaning quality of
being male or female first recorded 1520s. Meaning sexual intercourse first attested 1929 (in
writings of D.H. Lawrence); meaning genitalia is attested from 1938. Sex appeal attested by 1904.
For the raw sex appeal of the burlesque shows there is no defense, either. These shows should be
under official supervision, at the least, and boys beneath the age of eighteen forbidden, perhaps,
to attend their performance, just as we forbid the sale of liquors to minors. [Walter Prichard
Eaton, At the New Theatre and Others: The American Stage, Its Problems and Performances, Boston,
1910]   Sex drive is from 1918; sex object is 1901; sex symbol is 1871 in anthropology; the first
person to whom the term was applied seems to have been Marilyn Monroe (1959). Sex therapist is from
1974.


fetish (n.)

1610s, fatisso, from Portuguese feiti&ccedil;o charm, sorcery, from Latin facticius made by art,
from facere to make (see factitious).    Latin facticius in Spanish has become hechizo magic,
witchcraft, sorcery. Probably introduced by Portuguese sailors and traders as a name for charms and
talismans worshipped by the inhabitants of the Guinea coast of Africa. Popularized in anthropology
by C. de Brosses' Le Culte des Dieux F&eacute;tiches (1760), which influenced the word's spelling in
English (French f&eacute;tiche, also from the Portuguese word). Figurative sense of something
irrationally revered is American English, 1837.    Any material image of a religious idea is an
idol; a material object in which force is supposed to be concentrated is a Fetish; a material
object, or a class of material objects, plants, or animals, which is regarded by man with
superstitious respect, and between whom and man there is supposed to exist an invisible but
effective force, is a Totem. [J. Fitzgerald Lee, The Greater Exodus, London, 1903]    For sexual
sense, see fetishism.


Teutonic (adj.)

1610s, of or pertaining to the Germanic languages and to peoples or tribes who speak or spoke them,
from Latin Teutonicus, from Teutones, Teutoni, name of a tribe that inhabited coastal Germany near
the mouth of the Elbe and devastated Gaul 113-101 B.C.E., probably via Celtic from Proto-Germanic
*theudanoz, from PIE *teuta-, the common word for people, tribe (cognates: Lithuanian tauto, Oscan
touto, Old Irish tuath, Gothic &thorn;iuda, Old English &thorn;eod people, race, nation).    Used in
English in anthropology to avoid the modern political association of German; but in this
anthropological sense French uses germanique and German uses germanisch, because neither uses its
form of German for the narrower national meaning (compare French allemand, for which see Alemanni;
and German deutsch, under Dutch).    The Teutonic Knights (founded c.1191) were a military order of
German knights formed for service in the Holy Land, but who later crusaded in then-pagan Prussia and
Lithuania. The Teutonic cross (1882) was the badge of the order.


sibling (n.)

brother or sister, 1903, modern revival (in anthropology) of Old English sibling relative, kinsman,
from sibb kinship, relationship; love, friendship, peace, happiness, from Proto-Germanic *sibja-
blood relation, relative, properly one's own (cognates: Old Saxon sibba, Old Frisian, Middle Dutch
sibbe, Old High German sippa, German Sippe, Gothic sibja kin, kindred), from PIE s(w)e-bh(o)-
(cognates: Old Church Slavonic sobistvo, Russian sob character, individuality), an enlargement of
the root *swe- self (see idiom). Related to the second element in gossip.  The word 'sib' or
'sibling' is coming into use in genetics in the English-speaking world, as an equivalent of the
convenient German term 'Geschwister' [E.&amp;C.; Paul, Human Heredity, 1930]    In Old English, sibb
and its compounds covered grounds of brotherly love, familial affection which tended later to lump
into love (n.), as in sibsumnes peace, concord, brotherly love, sibbian (v.) bring together,
reconcile, sibbecoss kiss of peace. Sibship, however, is a modern formation (1908). Sib persisted
through Middle English as a noun, adjective, and verb expressing kinship and relationship.


