anthemic (adj.)

of music, felt to resemble an anthem, 1841, from anthem + -ic. In reference to a type of acid, 1859,
so called because isolated from dog-fennel (Anthemis arvensis).


anthem (n.)

Old English ontemn, antefn, a composition (in prose or verse) sung antiphonally, from Late Latin
antefana, from Greek antiphona verse response (see antiphon). Sense evolved to a composition set to
sacred music (late 14c.), then song of praise or gladness (1590s). Used in reference to the English
national song (technically, as OED points out, a hymn) and extended to those of other nations.
Modern spelling is from late 16c., perhaps an attempt to make the word look more Greek.


antiphon (n.)

c.1500, a versicle sung responsively, from Middle French antiphone hymn or directly from Medieval
Latin antiphona, from Greek antiphona, from anti- over against (see anti-) + phone voice (see fame
(n.)). A re-adoption of the word which had become anthem in English and lost its original meaning.


national (adj.)

1590s, from Middle French national (from Old French nation), and also from nation + -al (1). As a
noun, citizen of a (particular) nation, from 1887. National anthem first recorded 1819, in Shelley.
Related: Nationally.


Matilda

fem. proper name, from French Mathilde, of Germanic origin, literally mighty in battle; compare Old
High German Mahthilda, from mahti might, power + hildi battle, from Proto-Germanic *hildiz battle,
from PIE *kel- (1) to strike, cut. The name also was late 19c. Australian slang for a traveller's
bundle or swag, hence the expression waltzing Matilda to travel on foot (by 1889).    In my
electorate nearly every man you meet who is not waltzing Matilda rides a bicycle. [Parliamentary
Debates, Australia, 1907]    The lyrics of the song of that name, sometimes called the unofficial
Australian national anthem, are said to date to 1893.


overcome (v.)

Old English ofercuman to reach, overtake, also to conquer, prevail over, from ofer (see over) +
cuman to come (see come (v.)). A common Germanic compound (Middle Dutch overkomen, Old High German
ubarqueman, German &uuml;berkommen). In reference to mental or chemical force, to overwhelm, render
helpless, it is in late Old English. Meaning to surmount (a difficulty or obstacle) is from c.1200.
The Civil Rights anthem We Shall Overcome was put together c.1950s from lyrics from Charles
Tindley's spiritual I'll Overcome Some Day (1901), and melody from pre-Civil War spiritual No More
Auction Block for Me. Related: Overcame; overcoming.


