anthology (n.)

1630s, collection of poetry, from Latin anthologia, from Greek anthologia collection of small poems
and epigrams by several authors, literally flower-gathering, from anthos a flower (see anther) +
logia collection, collecting, from legein gather (see lecture (n.)). Modern sense (which emerged in
Late Greek) is metaphoric, flowers of verse, small poems by various writers gathered together.


defloration (n.)

late 14c., culling of the finest passages from books, from Old French desfloracion (14c.), from
Latin deflorationem plucking of flowers, also taking of (a woman's) virginity, noun of action from
past participle stem of deflorare (see deflower). Compare also anthology. Also used in Middle
English with reference to virginity from c.1400.


anthologize (v.)

1889; see anthology + -ize. Related: Anthologized; anthologizing.


stroppy (adj.)

rebellious, by 1943, British nautical slang, perhaps a slang mangling of obstreperous. Sea Passages:
A Naval Anthology and Introduction to the Study of English [1943, Geoffrey Callender] quotes from a
letter:    Why Nobby should reckon that his raggie should blow the gaff, when there are crushers
everywhere, leaves me guessing; but there it is. In the last dog he rounded on me and called me a
white rat. I got stroppy and told him he was shooting a line: but all he said was, 'Oh! choke your
luff! I'm looking for another oppo you snivelling sand-catcher.' So that looks like paying off.
to which Callender adds, There is nothing in this letter which an active service rating could fail
to understand.


rosary (n.)

rose garden, mid-15c., from Latin rosarium rose garden, in Medieval Latin also garland; string of
beads; series of prayers, from noun use of neuter of rosarius of roses, from rosa rose (see rose
(n.1)).    The sense of series of prayers is 1540s, from Middle French rosaire, a figurative use of
the word meaning rose garden, on the notion of a garden of prayers. This probably embodies the
medieval conceit of comparing collections to bouquets (compare anthology and Medieval Latin hortulus
animae prayerbook, literally little garden of the soul). Sense transferred 1590s to the strings of
beads used as a memory aid in reciting the rosary.


