antiquity (n.)

late 14c., olden times, from Old French antiquitet (11c.; Modern French antiquit&eacute;) olden
times; great age; old age, from Latin antiquitatem (nominative antiquitas) ancient times, antiquity,
venerableness, noun of quality from antiquus (see antique (adj.)). Specific reference to ancient
Greece and Rome is from mid-15c.; meaning quality of being old is from about the same time.
Antiquities relics of ancient days is from 1510s.


dogfish (n.)

a name for various types of small shark, late 15c., dokefyche, from dog (n.) + fish (n.). Said to be
so called because they hunt in packs. This was the image of sharks in classical antiquity as well.
But in the Mediterranean, among the Greeks and Romans of antiquity, closer contact with sharks had
left an impression of vicious dogs of the sea. Thus, Pliny's canis marinus. The metaphor of the dog
spread to the North to dominate the European image of the shark, from the Italian pescecane and
French chien de mer to the German Meerhund and Hundfisch and English sea dog and dogfish. [Tom
Jones, The Xoc, the Sharke and the Sea Dogs, in Fifth Palenque Round Table, 1983, edited by Virginia
M. Field, 1985.]


Ogygian (adj.)

1843, of great antiquity or age, from Greek Ogygos, name of a mythical Attic or Boeotian king who
even in classical times was thought to have lived very long ago. Also sometimes with reference to a
famous flood said to have occurred in his day.


Antarctica

continent name attributed to Scottish cartographer John George Bartholomew (1860-1920), who used it
on a map published 1887. From antarctic (q.v.). Hypothetical southern continents had been imagined
since antiquity; first sighting of Antarctica by Europeans probably was 1820 (Lazarev and
Bellingshausen). Also compare Antipodes.


Arimasp (n.)

Latin Arimaspi (plural), from Greek Arimaspoi, mythical race of one-eyed people in Northern Europe
believed in antiquity to have carried off a hoard of gold which was under guardianship of griffins.
The name is said to be Scythian for one-eyed. Related: Arimaspian.


antiquarian (n.)

one who studies or is fond of antiquities, c.1600, from Latin antiquarius pertaining to antiquity,
from antiquus (see antique (adj.)) + -an. As an adjective from 1771.


classic (adj.)

1610s, of the highest class; approved as a model, from French classique (17c.), from Latin classicus
relating to the (highest) classes of the Roman people, hence, superior, from classis (see class).
Originally in English, of the first class; meaning belonging to standard authors of Greek and Roman
antiquity is attested from 1620s.


mustelid (n.)

1910, from Modern Latin Mustelidae, taken as a genus name by Linnaeus (1758), from Latin mustela
weasel, possibly related to mus mouse (see mouse (n.)). Tucker tentatively suggests *mus-ters-la
mouse harrier and Klein notes that the weasel was identified in antiquity as the catcher of mice.


gastronomy (n.)

1814, from French gastronomie, coined 1800 by Joseph de Berchoux (1762-1838) as title of poem on
good living, after Gastrologia, title of a now-lost poem of antiquity, quoted by Athenaeus (see
gastrology). Berchoux's word is from gaster + nomos arranging, regulating. Related: Gastronomer.


oracle (n.)

late 14c., a message from a god, expressed by divine inspiration, from Old French oracle temple,
house of prayer; oracle (12c.) and directly from Latin oraculum divine announcement, oracle; place
where oracles are given, from orare pray, plead (see orator), with material instrumental suffix
-culo-. In antiquity, the agency or medium of a god, also the place where such divine utterances
were given. This sense is attested in English from c.1400.


prae-

word-forming element meaning before, from Latin prae (adv.) before, from PIE *prai-, *prei-, from
root *per- (1) forward, through (see per; also see pre-). Reduced to pre- in Medieval Latin.
According to OED the full form prae- in Modern English appears usually only in words that are still
regarded as Latin, ... or that are terms of classical antiquity ....


falcon (n.)

mid-13c., from Old French faucon (12c.), from Late Latin falconem (nominative falco) falcon,
probably from Latin falx (genitive falcis) curved blade, pruning hook, sickle; the bird said to be
so called for the shape of its talons, legs, or beak, but also possibly from the shape of its spread
wings.    The other theory is that falx is of Germanic origin and means gray bird, which is
supported by the antiquity of the word in Germanic but opposed by those who point out that falconry
by all evidences was imported from the East, and the Germans got it from the Romans, not the other
way around.


Beltane (n.)

early 15c., from Lowland Scottish, from Gaelic bealltainn May 1, important Celtic religious rite
marking the start of summer, probably literally blazing fire, from PIE root *bhel- (1) to shine,
flash, burn (see bleach (v.)) + Old Irish ten fire, from PIE *tepnos, related to Latin tepidus warm.
But this derivation of the second element is hotly disputed by some on philological grounds, and
fires were equally important in the other Celtic holidays.    The rubbish about Baal, Bel, Belus
imported into the word from the Old Testament and classical antiquity, is outside the scope of
scientific etymology. [OED]    Also known as Old May Day, because after the 1752 calendar reform it
continued to be reckoned according to Old Style; it was one of the quarter-days of ancient Scotland.


adamant (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French adamant and directly from Latin adamantem (nominative adamas) adamant,
hardest iron, steel, also figuratively, of character, from Greek adamas (genitive adamantos)
unbreakable, inflexible metaphoric of anything unalterable, also the name of a hypothetical hardest
material, perhaps literally invincible, from a- not + daman to conquer, to tame (see tame (adj.)),
or else a word of foreign origin altered to conform to Greek.    Applied in antiquity to a metal
resembling gold (Plato), white sapphire, magnet (by Ovid, perhaps via confusion with Latin adamare
to love passionately), steel, emery stone, and especially diamond (see diamond). The name has thus
always been of indefinite and fluctuating sense [Century Dictionary]. The word was in Old English as
a&eth;amans a very hard stone.


brass (n.)

Old English br&aelig;s brass, bronze, originally in reference to an alloy of copper and tin (now
bronze), later and in modern use an alloy of two parts copper, one part zinc. A mystery word, with
no known cognates beyond English. Perhaps akin to French brasser to brew, because it is an alloy. It
also has been compared to Old Swedish brasa fire, but no sure connection can be made. Yet another
theory connects it with Latin ferrum iron, itself of obscure origin.    As brass was unknown in
antiquity, use of the word in Bible translations, etc., likely means bronze. The Romans were the
first to deliberately make it. Words for brass in other languages (such as German Messing, Old
English m&aelig;sling, French laiton, Italian ottone) also tend to be difficult to explain.    The
meaning effrontery, impudence is from 1620s. Slang sense of high officials is first recorded 1899.
The brass tacks that you get down to (1897) probably are the ones used to measure cloth on the
counter of a dry goods store, suggesting precision. Slang brass balls toughness, courage
(emphatically combining two metaphors for the same thing) attested by 1960s.


Hesperus

late 14c., poetic for the evening star, from Latin Hesperus, from Greek hesperos (aster) western
(star), from PIE *wes-pero- evening, night (see vesper). Hence also Hesperides (1590s), from Greek,
daughters of the West, the nymphs (variously numbered but originally three) who tended the garden
with the golden apples. Their name has been mistakenly transferred to the garden itself.    The
Hesperides were daughters of Atlas, an enormous giant, who, as the ancients believed, stood upon the
western confines of the earth, and supported the heavens on his shoulders. Their mother was
Hesperis, a personification of the region of the West, where the sun continued to shine after he had
set on Greece, and where, as travellers told, was an abundance of choice delicious fruits, which
could only have been produced by a special divine influence. The Gardens of the Hesperides with the
golden apples were believed to exist in some island in the ocean, or, as it was sometimes thought,
in the islands on the north or west coast of Africa. They were far-famed in antiquity; for it was
there that springs of nectar flowed by the couch of Zeus, and there that the earth displayed the
rarest blessings of the gods; it was another Eden. As knowledge increased with regard to western
lands, it became necessary to move this paradise farther and farther out into the Western Ocean.
[Alexander Murray, Manual of Mythology, 1888]


restaurant (n.)

1821, from French restaurant a restaurant, originally food that restores, noun use of present
participle of restaurer to restore or refresh, from Old French restorer (see restore).    In 1765 a
man by the name of Boulanger, also known as Champ d'Oiseaux or Chantoiseau, opened a shop near the
Louvre (on either the rue des Poulies or the rue Bailleul, depending on which authority one chooses
to believe). There he sold what he called restaurants or bouillons restaurants--that is, meat-based
consomm&#233;s intended to restore a person's strength. Ever since the Middle Ages the word
restaurant had been used to describe any of a variety of rich bouillons made with chicken, beef,
roots of one sort or another, onions, herbs, and, according to some recipes, spices, crystallized
sugar, toasted bread, barley, butter, and even exotic ingredients such as dried rose petals,
Damascus grapes, and amber. In order to entice customers into his shop, Boulanger had inscribed on
his window a line from the Gospels: Venite ad me omnes qui stomacho laboratis et ego vos restaurabo.
He was not content simply to serve bouillon, however. He also served leg of lamb in white sauce,
thereby infringing the monopoly of the caterers' guild. The guild filed suit, which to everyone's
astonishment ended in a judgment in favor of Boulanger. [Jean-Robert Pitte, The Rise of the
Restaurant, in Food: A Culinary History from Antiquity to the Present, English editor Albert
Sonnenfeld, transl. Clarissa Botsford, 1999, Columbia University Press]    Italian spelling
ristorante attested in English by 1925.


Hobbit (n.)

1937, coined in the fantasy tales of J.R.R. Tolkien (1892-1973).    On a blank leaf I scrawled: 'In
a hole in the ground there lived a hobbit.' I did not and do not know why.  [Tolkien, letter to W.H.
Auden, dated 1955]    The word also turns up in a very long list of folkloric supernatural creatures
in the writings of Michael Aislabie Denham (d.1859), printed in volume 2 of The Denham Tracts [ed.
James Hardy, London: Folklore Society, 1895], a compilation of Denham's scattered publications.
Denham was an early folklorist who concentrated on Northumberland, Durham, Westmoreland, Cumberland,
the Isle of Man, and Scotland.    What a happiness this must have been seventy or eighty years ago
and upwards, to those chosen few who had the good luck to be born on the eve of this festival of all
festivals; when the whole earth was so overrun with ghosts, boggles, bloody-bones, spirits, demons,
ignis fatui, brownies, bugbears, black dogs, specters, shellycoats, scarecrows, witches, wizards,
barguests, Robin-Goodfellows, hags, night-bats, scrags, breaknecks, fantasms, hobgoblins,
hobhoulards, boggy-boes, dobbies, hob-thrusts, fetches, kelpies, warlocks, mock-beggars, mum-pokers,
Jemmy-burties, urchins, satyrs, pans, fauns, sirens, tritons, centaurs, calcars, nymphs, imps,
incubuses, spoorns, men-in-the-oak, hell-wains, fire-drakes, kit-a-can-sticks, Tom-tumblers, melch-
dicks, larrs, kitty-witches, hobby-lanthorns, Dick-a-Tuesdays, Elf-fires, Gyl-burnt-tales, knockers,
elves, rawheads, Meg-with-the-wads, old-shocks, ouphs, pad-foots, pixies, pictrees, giants, dwarfs,
Tom-pokers, tutgots, snapdragons, sprets, spunks, conjurers, thurses, spurns, tantarrabobs,
swaithes, tints, tod-lowries, Jack-in-the-Wads, mormos, changelings, redcaps, yeth-hounds, colt-
pixies, Tom-thumbs, black-bugs, boggarts, scar-bugs, shag-foals, hodge-pochers, hob-thrushes, bugs,
bull-beggars, bygorns, bolls, caddies, bomen, brags, wraiths, waffs, flay-boggarts, fiends,
gallytrots, imps, gytrashes, patches, hob-and-lanthorns, gringes, boguests, bonelesses, Peg-powlers,
pucks, fays, kidnappers, gallybeggars, hudskins, nickers, madcaps, trolls, robinets, friars'
lanthorns, silkies, cauld-lads, death-hearses, goblins, hob-headlesses, bugaboos, kows, or cowes,
nickies, nacks necks, waiths, miffies, buckies, ghouls, sylphs, guests, swarths, freiths, freits,
gy-carlins Gyre-carling, pigmies, chittifaces, nixies, Jinny-burnt-tails, dudmen, hell-hounds,
dopple-gangers, boggleboes, bogies, redmen, portunes, grants, <b>hobbits</b>, hobgoblins, brown-men,
cowies, dunnies, wirrikows, alholdes, mannikins, follets, korreds, lubberkins, cluricauns, kobolds,
leprechauns, kors, mares, korreds, puckles korigans, sylvans, succubuses, blackmen, shadows,
banshees, lian-hanshees, clabbernappers, Gabriel-hounds, mawkins, doubles, corpse lights or candles,
scrats, mahounds, trows, gnomes, sprites, fates, fiends, sibyls, nicknevins, whitewomen, fairies,
thrummy-caps, cutties, and nisses, and apparitions of every shape, make, form, fashion, kind and
description, that there was not a village in England that had not its own peculiar ghost. Nay, every
lone tenement, castle, or mansion-house, which could boast of any antiquity had its bogle, its
specter, or its knocker. The churches, churchyards, and crossroads were all haunted. Every green
lane had its boulder-stone on which an apparition kept watch at night. Every common had its circle
of fairies belonging to it. And there was scarcely a shepherd to be met with who had not seen a
spirit!    [Emphasis added] It is curious that the name occurs nowhere else in folklore, and there
is no evidence that Tolkien ever saw this. The word also was recorded from 1835 as a term generally
used in Wales to express a quantity made up of four Welsh pecks. Hobbitry attested from 1947.


