antidote (n.)

remedy counteracting poison, 1510s (earlier in English as a Latin word), from Middle French antidot
and directly from Latin antidotum a remedy against poison, from Greek antidoton given as a remedy,
literally given against, verbal adjective of antididonai give in return, from anti- against +
didonai to give (see date (n.1)). Compare Middle English antidotarie treatise on drugs or medicines
(c.1400).


treacle (n.)

mid-14c., medicinal compound, antidote for poison, from Old French triacle antidote, cure for snake-
bite (c.1200), from Vulgar Latin *triacula, from Latin theriaca, from Greek theriake (antidotos)
antidote for poisonous wild animals, from fem. of theriakos of a wild animal, from therion wild
animal, diminutive of ther (genitive theros) wild animal, from PIE root *ghwer- wild (see fierce).
Sense of molasses is first recorded 1690s (the connection may be from the use of molasses as a
laxative, or its use to disguise the bad taste of medicine); that of anything too sweet or
sentimental is from 1771. Related: Treacly.


antidotal (adj.)

1640s, from antidote + -al (1).


mithridate (n.)

antidote against poison, from Medieval Latin mithridatum, from Late Latin mithridatium, neuter of
Mithridatius pertaining to Mithridates, king of Pontus, who made himself poison-proof.


remedy (n.)

c.1200, cure for a disease or disorder; means of counteracting an evil, from Anglo-French remedie,
Old French remede remedy, cure (12c., Modern French rem&#232;de) and directly from Latin remedium a
cure, remedy, medicine, antidote, that which restores health, from re-, intensive prefix (or perhaps
literally, again; see re-), + mederi to heal (see medical (adj.)). Figurative use from c.1300.


basil (n.)

aromatic shrubby plant, early 15c., from Old French basile (15c., Modern French basilic), from
Medieval Latin basilicum, from Greek basilikon (phyton) royal (plant), from basileus king (see
Basil). So called, probably, because it was believed to have been used in making royal perfumes. In
Latin, confused with basiliscus (see basilisk) because it was supposed to be an antidote to the
basilisk's venom.


bezoar (n.)

late 15c., ultimately from Arabic bazahr, from Persian pad-zahr counter-poison, from pad protecting,
guardian, master (from Iranian *patar-, source also of Avestan patar-, from PIE *pa-tor-, from root
*pa- to protect, feed; see food) + zahr poison (from Old Iranian *jathra, from PIE *gwhn-tro-, from
root *gwhen- to strike, kill; see bane). Originally antidote, later specifically in reference to a
concoction from solid matter found in the stomachs and intestines of ruminants, which was held to
have antidotal qualities (1570s).


