antique (n.)

an old and collectible thing, 1771, from antique (adj.).


antique (v.)

to give an antique appearance to, 1896, from antique (adj.). Related: Antiqued; antiquing.


antique (adj.)

1530s, aged, venerable, from Middle French antique old (14c.), from Latin antiquus (later anticus)
ancient, former, of olden times; old, long in existence, aged; venerable; old-fashioned, from PIE
*anti in sense of before (see ante) + *okw- appearance (see eye (n.)). Originally pronounced in
English like its parallel antic, but French pronunciation and spelling were adopted from c.1700.


Antigua

Caribbean island, from Spanish fem. of antiguo, literally ancient, antique (see antique); discovered
by Columbus in 1493 and named by him for the church of Santa Maria la Antigua (Old St. Mary's) in
Seville.


Wardour-street (n.)

affected pseudo-archaic diction of historical novels, 1888, from street in London lined with shops
selling imitation-antique furniture.    This is not literary English of any date; this is Wardour-
Street Early English -- a perfectly modern article with a sham appearance of the real antique about
it. [A. Ballantyne, Wardour-Street English, Longman's Magazine, October, 1888]


antic (n.)

1520s, grotesque or comical gesture, from Italian antico antique, from Latin antiquus old (see
antique). Originally (like grotesque) a 16c. Italian word referring to the strange and fantastic
representations on ancient murals unearthed around Rome (especially originally the Baths of Titus,
rediscovered 16c.); later extended to any bizarre thing or behavior, in which sense it first arrived
in English. As an adjective in English from 1580s, grotesque, bizarre.


olde

pseudo-archaic mock-antique variant of old, 1927.


antiquation (n.)

1640s, from Late Latin antiquationem (nominative antiquatio), noun of action from past participle
stem of antiquare (see antique (adj.)).


antiquarian (n.)

one who studies or is fond of antiquities, c.1600, from Latin antiquarius pertaining to antiquity,
from antiquus (see antique (adj.)) + -an. As an adjective from 1771.


Priscilla

fem. proper name, from Latin, fem. of Priscillus, diminutive of Priscus, from priscus antique, old-
fashioned, old, ancient, primitive, venerable; related to prior (see prior (adj.)).


antiquated (adj.)

1620s, past participle adjective from antiquate (1530s) to make old or obsolete, from Latin
antiquatus, past participle of antiquare (see antique (adj.)). An older adjective in the same sense
was antiquate (early 15c.), from Latin.


Laocoon

Trojan priest of Apollo, from Latin Laocoon, from Greek Laukoun, from laos people (see lay (adj.)) +
koeo I mark, perceive.   <b>Laoco&ouml;n</b>, n. A famous piece of antique sculpture representing a
priest of that time and his two sons in the folds of two enormous serpents. The skill and diligence
with which the old man and lads support the serpents and keep them up in their work have been justly
regarded as one of the noblest artistic illustrations of the mastery of human intelligence over
brute inertia. [Ambrose Bierce, Devil's Dictionary, 1911]


antiquity (n.)

late 14c., olden times, from Old French antiquitet (11c.; Modern French antiquit&eacute;) olden
times; great age; old age, from Latin antiquitatem (nominative antiquitas) ancient times, antiquity,
venerableness, noun of quality from antiquus (see antique (adj.)). Specific reference to ancient
Greece and Rome is from mid-15c.; meaning quality of being old is from about the same time.
Antiquities relics of ancient days is from 1510s.


cheer (n.)

c.1200, the face, especially as expressing emotion, from Anglo-French chere the face, Old French
chiere face, countenance, look, expression, from Late Latin cara face (source of Spanish cara),
possibly from Greek kara head, from PIE root *ker- (1) head (see horn (n.)). From mid-13c. as frame
of mind, state of feeling, spirit; mood, humor.    By late 14c. the meaning had extended
metaphorically to mood, mental condition, as reflected in the face. This could be in a good or bad
sense (The feend ... beguiled her with treacherye, and brought her into a dreerye cheere, Merline,
c.1500), but a positive sense (probably short for good cheer) has predominated since c.1400. Meaning
shout of encouragement first recorded 1720, perhaps nautical slang (compare earlier verbal sense, to
encourage by words or deeds, early 15c.). The antique English greeting what cheer (mid-15c.) was
picked up by Algonquian Indians of southern New England from the Puritans and spread in Indian
languages as far as Canada.


old (adj.)

Old English ald (Anglian), eald (West Saxon) aged, antique, primeval; elder, experienced, from
Proto-Germanic *althas grown up, adult (cognates: Old Frisian ald, Gothic al&thorn;eis, Dutch oud,
German alt), originally a past participle stem of a verb meaning grow, nourish (compare Gothic alan
to grow up, Old Norse ala to nourish), from PIE root *al- to grow, nourish (cognates: Greek aldaino
make grow, strengthen, althein,  althainein to get well; Latin alere to feed, nourish, bring up,
increase, altus high, literally grown tall, almus nurturing, nourishing, alumnus fosterling, step-
child; Old Irish alim I nourish).    The usual PIE root is *sen- (see senior (adj.)). A few Indo-
European languages distinguish words for old (vs. young) from words for old (vs. new), and some have
separate words for aged persons as opposed to old things. Latin senex was used of aged living
things, mostly persons, while vetus (literally having many years) was used of inanimate things.
Greek geraios was used mostly of humans; Greek palaios was used mostly of things, of persons only in
a derogatory sense. Greek also had arkhaios, literally belonging to the beginning, which parallels
French ancien, used mostly with reference to things of former times.    Old English also had fyrn
ancient, related to Old English feor far, distant (see far, and compare Gothic fairneis, Old Norse
forn old, of old, of former times, Old High German firni old, experienced). The original Old English
vowel is preserved in Scots auld, also in alderman. The original comparative and superlative (elder,
eldest) are retained in particular uses.    First record of old-timer is from 1860. Expression old
as the hills first recorded 1819. The good old days dates from 1828. Of old of old times is from
late 14c. Old Glory for the American flag is first attested 1862. Old maid woman who remains single
well beyond the usual marrying age is from 1520s; the card game is attested by that name from 1844.
Old man man who has lived long is from c.1200; sense of husband, father, boss is from 1854, earlier
(1830) it was military slang for commanding officer; old lady wife, mother is attested from c.1775.
Old English is attested from 1701, originally as a type of font. Old boy originally was a former
pupil of one of the English public schools. Old Testament attested from mid-14c.


