anvil (n.)

Old English anfilt, a Proto-Germanic compound (cognates: Middle Dutch anvilt, Old High German
anafalz, Dutch aanbeeld, Danish ambolt anvil) from *ana- on + *filtan hit (see felt (n.)). The ear
bone so called from 1680s. Anvil Chorus is based on the Gypsy Song that opens Act II of Giuseppe
Verdi's opera Il Trovatore, first performed in Teatro Apollo, Rome, Jan. 19, 1853.


Nome

city in Alaska, founded in the 1898 gold rush and originally Anvil City after the nearby Anvil
Creek, later renamed for nearby Cape Nome, which, according to one story is from a misreading of a
British cartographer's query, ?Name, written beside the peninsula on an 1849 map, and according to
another is from a supposed native no-me meaning I don't know, a plea of noncomprehension when asked
what the name of the place was.


incus (n.)

ear bone, 1660s, from Latin incus anvil, from incudere to forge with a hammer. So called by Belgian
anatomist Andreas Vesalius (1514-1564).


stet

direction to printer to disregard correction made to text, 1755, from Latin stet let it stand, third
person singular present subjunctive of stare to stand, stand upright, be stiff, from PIE root *sta-
to stand, set down, make or be firm, with derivatives meaning place or thing that is standing
(cognates: Sanskrit tisthati stands; Avestan histaiti to stand; Persian -stan country, literally
where one stands; Greek histemi put, place, cause to stand; weigh, stasis a standing still, statos
placed, stater a weight, coin, stylos pillar; Latin sistere stand still, stop, make stand, place,
produce in court, status manner, position, condition, attitude, stare to stand, statio station,
post; Lithuanian stojus place myself, statau place; Old Church Slavonic staja place myself, stanu
position; Gothic standan, Old English standan to stand, stede place, steall place where cattle are
kept; Old Norse ste&eth;i anvil, stallr pedestal for idols, altar; German Stall a stable; Old Irish
sessam the act of standing).


onion (n.)

early 12c., from Anglo-French union, Old French oignon onion (formerly also oingnon), and directly
from Latin unionem (nominative unio), colloquial rustic Roman for a kind of onion, also pearl (via
notion of a string of onions), literally one, unity; sense connection is the successive layers of an
onion, in contrast with garlic or cloves.    Old English had ynne (in ynne-leac), from the same
Latin source, which also produced Irish inniun, Welsh wynwyn and similar words in Germanic. In
Dutch, the ending in -n was mistaken for a plural inflection and new singular ui formed. The usual
Indo-European name is represented by Greek kromion, Irish crem, Welsh craf, Old English hramsa,
Lithuanian kremuse.    The usual Latin word was cepa, a loan from an unknown language; it is the
source of Old French cive, Old English cipe, and, via Late Latin diminutive cepulla, Italian
cipolla, Spanish cebolla, Polish cebula. German Zwiebel also is from this source, but altered by
folk etymology in Old High German (zwibolla) from words for two and ball. Onion ring is attested
from 1952.   Onion dome attested from 1956; onion grass from 1883; onion skin as a type of paper
from 1892. Onions, the surname, is attested from mid-12c. (Ennian), from Old Welsh Enniaun,
ultimately from Latin Annianus, which was associated with Welsh einion anvil.


