aphorism (n.)

1520s (especially in reference to the Aphorisms of Hippocrates), from Middle French aphorisme (14c.,
aufforisme), from Late Latin aphorismus, from Greek aphorismos definition, pithy sentence, from
aphorizein to mark off, divide, from apo- from (see apo-) + horizein to bound (see horizon).    An
aphorism is a short, pithy statement containing a truth of general import; an axiom is a statement
of self-evident truth; a theorem is a demonstrable proposition in science or mathematics; an epigram
is like an aphorism, but lacking in general import. Maxim and saying can be used as synonyms for
aphorism.


sentence (n.)

c.1200, doctrine, authoritative teaching; an authoritative pronouncement, from Old French sentence
judgment, decision; meaning; aphorism, maxim; statement of authority (12c.) and directly from Latin
sententia thought, way of thinking, opinion; judgment, decision, also a thought expressed; aphorism,
saying, from sentientem, present participle of sentire be of opinion, feel, perceive (see sense
(n.)). Loss of first -i- in Latin by dissimilation.    From early 14c. as judgment rendered by God,
or by one in authority; a verdict, decision in court; from late 14c. as understanding, wisdom;
edifying subject matter. From late 14c. as subject matter or content of a letter, book, speech,
etc., also in reference to a passage in a written work. Sense of grammatically complete statement is
attested from mid-15c. Meaning, then meaning expressed in words. Related: Sentential.


carpe diem

1786, Latin, enjoy the day, literally pluck the day (while it is ripe), an aphorism from Horace
(Odes I.xi), from PIE *kerp- to gather, pluck, harvest (see harvest (n.)).


aphoristic (adj.)

1753, from Greek aphoristikos (see aphorism). Aphoristically is from 1650s.


apothegm (n.)

pithy saying, 1550s, from Greek apophthegma terse, pointed saying, literally something clearly
spoken, from apophthengesthai to speak one's opinion plainly, from apo- from (see apo-) +
phthengesthai to utter. See aphorism for nuances of usage. Spelling apophthegm, restored by Johnson,
is preferred in England, according to OED.


unscramble (v.)

restore to order, 1911, from un- (2) reverse, opposite of + scramble (v.). The original use is in a
quip attributed to U.S. financier J.P. Morgan (1837-1913) about the impossibility of unscrambling an
omelet.    Mr. Morgan is credited with the aphorism that the recent trust decisions are like an
order to a cook to unscramble the eggs which have just been prepared. [Proceedings of the Academy of
Political Science, January 1912]    Related: Unscrambled; unscrambling.


