apology (n.)

early 15c., defense, justification, from Late Latin apologia, from Greek apologia a speech in
defense, from apologeisthai to speak in one's defense, from apologos an account, story, from apo-
from, off (see apo-) + logos speech (see lecture (n.)).    The original English sense of self-
justification yielded a meaning frank expression of regret for wrong done, first recorded 1590s, but
this was not the main sense until 18c. The old sense tends to emerge in Latin form apologia (first
attested in English 1784), especially since J.H. Newman's Apologia pro Vita Sua (1864).


apologia (n.)

see apology.


apological (adj.)

c.1600; see apology + -ical.


apologist (n.)

1630s, from French apologiste, from apologie (see apology).


excuse (n.)

late 14c., action of offering an apology, from Old French excuse, from excuser (see excuse (v.)).
The sense of that serves as a reason for being excused is recorded from late 15c.


apologize (v.)

1590s, to speak in defense of; see apology + -ize. Main modern sense to regretfully acknowledge is
attested by 1725. The Greek equivalent, apologizesthai, meant simply to give an account. Related:
Apologized; apologizing.


apologetic (adj.)

1640s, vindicatory, from French apolog&eacute;tique, from Latin apologeticus, from Greek
apologetikos defensible, from apologeisthai (see apology). Meaning regretfully acknowledging failure
is from 1855. As a noun, formal defense, from early 15c. Related: Apologetics (c.1753).


pace (prep.)

with the leave of, 1863, from Latin pace, ablative of pax peace, as in pace tua with all deference
to you; from PIE *pak- to fasten (see pax). Used chiefly as a courteous or ironical apology for a
contradiction or difference of opinion [OED].


purgation (n.)

late 14c., purification from sin, also discharge of waste, from Old French purgacion a cleansing,
medical or spiritual (12c., Modern French purgation) and directly from Latin purgationem (nominative
purgatio) a cleansing, purging, figuratively an apology, justification, noun of action from past
participle stem of purgare (see purge (v.)).


pardon (v.)

mid-15c., to forgive for offense or sin, from Old French pardoner (see pardon (n.)).  'I grant you
pardon,' said Louis XV to Charolais, who, to divert himself, had just killed a man; 'but I also
pardon whoever will kill you.' [Marquis de Sade, Philosophy in the Bedroom]Related: Pardoned;
pardoning. Pardon my French as exclamation of apology for obscene language is from 1895.


mention (v.)

1520s, from mention (n.) or else from Middle French mentionner, from Old French mencion. Related:
Mentioned; mentioning; mentionable. Don't mention it as a conventional reply to expressions of
gratitude or apology is attested from 1840.


excuse (v.)

early 13c., attempt to clear (someone) from blame, from Old French escuser (12c., Modern French
excuser) apologize, make excuses; pardon, exonerate, from Latin excusare excuse, make an excuse for,
release from a charge, from ex- out, away (see ex-) + causa accusation, legal action (see cause).
Meaning to obtain exemption or release is from mid-15c.; that of to accept another's plea of excuse
is from early 14c. Related: Excused; excusing. Excuse me as a mild apology or statement of polite
disagreement is from c.1600.


