apostrophe (n.)

mark indicating omitted letter, 1580s, from Middle French apostrophe, from Late Latin apostrophus,
from Greek apostrophos (prosoidia) (the accent of) turning away, thus, a mark showing where a letter
has been omitted, from apostrephein avert, turn away, from apo- from (see apo-) + strephein to turn
(see strophe).    In English, the mark often represents loss of -e- in -es, possessive ending. It
was being extended to all possessives, whether they ever had an -e- or not, by 18c. Greek also used
this word for a turning aside of an orator in speech to address some individual, a sense first
recorded in English 1530s.


&#039;s

suffix forming the possessive singular case of most Modern English nouns; its use gradually was
extended in Middle English from Old English -es, the most common genitive inflection of masculine
and neuter nouns (such as d&aelig;g day, genitive d&aelig;ges day's).    Old English also had
genitives in -e, -re, -an, as well as mutation-genitives (boc book, plural bec), and the -es form
never was used in plural (where -a, -ra, -na prevailed), thus avoiding the verbal ambiguity of words
like kings'.    In Middle English, both the possessive singular and the common plural forms were
regularly spelled es, and when the e was dropped in pronunciation and from the written word, the
habit grew up of writing an apostrophe in place of the lost e in the possessive singular to
distinguish it from the plural. Later the apostrophe, which had come to be looked upon as the sign
of the possessive, was carried over into the plural, but was written after the s to differentiate
that form from the possessive singular. By a process of popular interpretation, the 's was supposed
to be a contraction for his, and in some cases the his was actually restored. [Samuel C. Earle, et
al, Sentences and their Elements, New York: Macmillan, 1911]    As a suffix forming some adverbs, it
represents the genitive singular ending of Old English masculine and neuter nouns and some
adjectives.


its

neuter possessive pronoun; the modern word begins to appear in writing at the end of 16c., from it +
genitive/possessive ending 's (q.v.), and at first commonly written it's, a spelling retained by
some to the beginning of the 19c. [OED]. The apostrophe came to be omitted, perhaps because it's
already was established as a contraction of it is, or by general habit of omitting apostrophes in
personal pronouns (hers, yours, theirs, etc.).    The neuter genitive pronoun in Middle English was
his, but the clash between grammatical gender and sexual gender, or else the application of the word
to both human and non-human subjects, evidently made users uncomfortable. Restriction of his to the
masculine and avoidance of it as a neuter pronoun is evidenced in Middle English, and of it and
thereof (as in KJV) were used for the neuter possessive. Also, from c.1300, simple it was used as a
neuter possessive pronoun. But in literary use, his as a neuter pronoun continued into the 17c.


will (v.1)

Old English *willan, wyllan to wish, desire; be willing; be used to; be about to (past tense wolde),
from Proto-Germanic *willjan (cognates: Old Saxon willian, Old Norse vilja, Old Frisian willa, Dutch
willen, Old High German wellan, German wollen, Gothic wiljan to will, wish, desire, Gothic waljan to
choose).    The Germanic words are from PIE root *wel- (2) to wish, will (cognates: Sanskrit vrnoti
chooses, prefers, varyah to be chosen, eligible, excellent, varanam choosing; Avestan verenav- to
wish, will, choose; Greek elpis hope; Latin volo, velle to wish, will, desire; Old Church Slavonic
voljo, voliti to will, veljo, veleti to command; Lithuanian velyti to wish, favor, pa-velmi I will,
viliuos I hope; Welsh gwell better).    Compare also Old English wel well, literally according to
one's wish; wela well-being, riches. The use as a future auxiliary was already developing in Old
English. The implication of intention or volition distinguishes it from shall, which expresses or
implies obligation or necessity. Contracted forms, especially after pronouns, began to appear 16c.,
as in sheele for she will. The form with an apostrophe is from 17c.


