apothecary (n.)

mid-14c., shopkeeper, especially one who stores, compounds, and sells medicaments, from Old French
apotecaire (13c., Modern French apothicaire), from Late Latin apothecarius storekeeper, from Latin
apotheca storehouse, from Greek apotheke barn, storehouse, literally a place where things are put
away, from apo- away (see apo-) + tithenai to put, to place (see theme). Same root produced French
boutique and Spanish bodega. Cognate compounds produced Sanskrit apadha- concealment, Old Persian
apadana- palace.    Drugs and herbs being among the chief items of non-perishable goods, the meaning
narrowed 17c. to druggist (Apothecaries' Company of London separated from the Grocers' in 1617).
Apothecaries formerly were notorious for the assumed gravity and affectation of knowledge generally
put on by the gentlemen of this profession, who are commonly as superficial in their learning as
they are pedantic in their language [Francis Grose, A Classical Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue,
1796]. Hence, Apothecary's Latin, barbarously mangled, also known as Dog Latin.


bodega (n.)

1848, from Mexican Spanish, from Spanish bodega a wine shop; cellar, from Latin apotheca, from Greek
apotheke depot, store (see apothecary). The same word as boutique.


morphine (n.)

chief alkaloid of opium, 1828, from French morphine or German Morphin (1816), name coined by German
apothecary Friedrich Sert&#252;rner (1783-1840) in reference to Latin Morpheus, Ovid's name for the
god of dreams, from Greek morphe form, shape, beauty, outward appearance, perhaps from PIE *merph-,
a possible Greek root meaning form, of unknown origin. So called because of the drug's sleep-
inducing properties.


boutique (n.)

fashion shop, 1953, earlier small shop of any sort (1767), from French boutique (14c.), from Old
Proven&ccedil;al botica, from Latin apotheca storehouse (see apothecary). Latin apotheca directly
into French normally would have yielded *avouaie.


cocktail (n.)

first attested 1806; H.L. Mencken lists seven versions of its origin, perhaps the most durable
traces it to French coquetier egg-cup (15c.; in English cocktay). In New Orleans, c.1795, Antoine
Am&eacute;d&eacute;e Peychaud, an apothecary (and inventor of Peychaud bitters) held Masonic social
gatherings at his pharmacy, where he mixed brandy toddies with his own bitters and served them in an
egg-cup. On this theory, the drink took the name of the cup. Used from 1920s of any mix of
substances (fruit, Molotov). Cocktail party first attested 1928.


dram (n.)

mid-15c., small weight of apothecary's measure, a phonetic spelling, from Anglo-Latin dragma, Old
French drame, from Late Latin dragma, from Latin drachma drachma, from Greek drakhma measure of
weight, also, silver coin, literally handful (of six obols, the least valuable coins in ancient
Athens), akin to drassesthai to grasp. The fluid dram is one-eighth of a fluid ounce, hence a small
drink of liquor (1713); Hence dram shop (1725), where liquor was sold by the shot.


