apparent (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French aparant evident, obvious, visible, from Latin apparentem (nominative
apparens) visible, manifest, present participle of apparere (see appear). First attested in phrase
heir apparent (see heir). Meaning superficial is c.1400. Apparent magnitude in astronomy (how bright
a heavenly body looks from earth, as opposed to absolute magnitude, which is how bright it really
is) is attested from 1875.


apparently (adv.)

late 14c., visibly, openly, from apparent + -ly (2). Meaning evidently is from 1550s; that of to all
appearances (but not necessarily really) is from 1560s; meaning so far as can be judged, seemingly,
is from 1846. A gradual retreat from certainty.


heir (n.)

c.1300, from Anglo-French heir, Old French oir heir, successor, from Latin heredem (nominative
heres) heir, heiress (see heredity). Heir apparent (late 14c.) has the French order of noun-
adjective, though it was not originally so written in English. It is the heir of one still alive
whose right is clear. After death the heir apparent becomes the heir-at-law.


coincidence (n.)

c.1600, exact correspondence, from French coincidence, from coincider (see coincide). Meaning a
concurrence of events with no apparent connection is from 1680s.


tanist (n.)

elected heir of a Celtic chief, 1530s, from Gaelic tanaiste presumptive or apparent heir to a lord,
literally parallel, second, from Old Irish tanaise designated successor, from Celtic *tani-hessio-
one who is waited for.


luminosity (n.)

1630s, quality of being luminous, from French luminosit&#233; or else a native formation from
luminous + -ity. In astronomy, intrinsic brightness of a heavenly body (as distinguished from
apparent magnitude, which diminishes with distance), attested from 1906.


Tso

in Chinese restaurant dishes, a reference to General Tso Tsungtang  (1812-1885), military leader
during the late Qing dynasty who crushed the Taiping rebels in four provinces. The chicken dish that
bears his name (for no apparent reason) in Chinese restaurants apparently is modified from a
traditional Hunan chung ton gai and may have been named for the general c.1972 by a chef in New York
City during the time Hunan cuisine first became popular among Americans.


prompt (adj.)

early 15c., from Old French prompt and directly from Latin promptus brought forth, hence visible,
apparent, evident, past participle of promere to take or bring out or forth (see prompt
(v.)).Related: Promptly; promptitude.


rubbish (n.)

c.1400, robous, from Anglo-French rubouses (late 14c.), of unknown origin. No apparent cognates in
Old French; apparently somehow related to rubble (see OED). Spelling with -ish is from late 15c. The
verb sense of disparage, criticize harshly is first attested 1953 in Australian and New Zealand
slang. Related: Rubbished; rubbishing.


retrograde (adj.)

late 14c., originally of the apparent motions of planets, from Latin retrogradus going back, going
backward, from retrogradi move backward, from retro- backward (see retro-) + gradi to go, step (see
grade (n.)). General sense of tending to revert is recorded from 1530s.


ostensible (adj.)

1762, capable of being shown, presentable, from French ostensible, from Latin ostens-, past
participle stem of ostendere to show, expose to view; to stretch out, spread before; exhibit,
display, from ob in front of (see ob-) + tendere to stretch (see tenet). Meaning apparent, professed
is from 1771.


stationary (adj.)

late 14c., having no apparent motion (in reference to planets), from Middle French stationnaire
motionless and directly from Latin stationarius, from the stem of statio a standing, post, job,
position (see station (n.)). Meaning unmovable is from 1620s. In classical Latin, stationarius is
recorded only in the sense of a military station; the word for stationary, steady being statarius.


cubbyhole (n.)

1825, the first element possibly from a diminutive of cub stall, pen, cattle shed, coop, hutch
(1540s), a dialect word with apparent cognates in Low German (such as East Frisian kubbing, Dutch
kub). Or related to cuddy small room, cupboard (1793), originally small cabin in a boat (1650s),
from Dutch kajuit, from French cahute. Or perhaps simply a children's made-up word.


automatic (adj.)

self-acting, moving or acting on its own, 1812, from Greek automatos, used of the gates of Olympus
and the tripods of Hephaestus (also without apparent cause, by accident), from autos self (see
auto-) + matos thinking, animated (see automaton). Of involuntary animal or human actions, from
1748, first used in this sense by English physician and philosopher David Hartley (1705-1757). In
reference to a type of firearm, from 1877; specifically of machinery that imitates human-directed
action from 1940.


evident (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French evident and directly from Latin evidentem (nominative evidens)
perceptible, clear, obvious, apparent from ex- fully, out of (see ex-) + videntem (nominative
videns), present participle of videre to see (see vision).


messenger (n.)

c.1200, messager, from Old French messagier messenger, envoy, ambassador, from message (see message
(n.)). With parasitic -n- inserted by c.1300 for no apparent reason except that people liked to say
it that way (compare passenger, harbinger, scavenger).


presumptive (adj.)

speculative, mid-15c., from French pr&eacute;somptif (15c.), from Medieval Latin presumptivus, from
Late Latin praesumptivus, from Latin praesumpt- past participle stem of praesumere (see presume).
The heir presumptive (1620s) is presumed to be the heir if the heir apparent is unavailable.
Related: Presumptively.


superficial (adj.)

late 14c., in anatomical and mathematical uses, of or relating to a surface, from Late Latin
superficialis of or pertaining to the surface, from superficies surface, upper side, top, from super
above, over (see super-) + facies form, face (see face (n.)). Meaning not deep, without thorough
understanding, cursory, comprehending only what is apparent or obvious (of perceptions, thoughts,
etc.) first recorded early 15c. (implied in superficially not thoroughly).


arc (n.)

late 14c., originally in reference to the sun's apparent motion in the sky, from Old French arc bow,
arch, vault (12c.), from Latin arcus a bow, arch, from PIE root *arku- bowed, curved (cognates:
Gothic arhvazna arrow, Old English earh, Old Norse &ouml;r; also, via notion of supple, flexible,
Greek arkeuthos, Latvian ercis juniper, Russian rakita, Czech rokyta, Serbo-Croatian rakita brittle
willow). Electrical sense is from 1821.


deasil (adj.)

rightwise, turned toward the right; motion according to the apparent course of the sun, 1771, from
Gaelic deiseil, deiseal (adjective and adverb) toward the south, taken in sense of toward the right,
from deas right, right-hand; south, cognate with Irish deas, Old Irish dess, des, Welsh dehau, and
ultimately with Latin dexter (see dexterity). The second element of the Gaelic word is not explained
(one old guess, in the Century Dictionary (1902), is a proposed *iul direction, guidance).


plateau (n.)

1796, elevated tract of relatively level land, from French plateau table-land, from Old French
platel (12c.) flat piece of metal, wood, etc., diminutive of plat flat surface or thing, noun use of
adjective plat flat, stretched out (12c.), perhaps from Vulgar Latin *plattus, from Greek platys
flat, wide, broad (see plaice). Meaning stage at which no progress is apparent is attested from
1897, originally in psychology of learning. In reference to sexual stimulation from 1960.


planet (n.)

late Old English planete, from Old French planete (Modern French plan&egrave;te), from Late Latin
planeta, from Greek planetes, from (asteres) planetai wandering (stars), from planasthai to wander,
of unknown origin, possibly from PIE *pele- (2) flat, to spread on notion of spread out. So called
because they have apparent motion, unlike the fixed stars. Originally including also the moon and
sun; modern scientific sense of world that orbits a star is from 1630s.


fathom (n.)

Old English f&aelig;&eth;m length of the outstretched arm (a measure of about six feet), also arms,
grasp, and, figuratively power, from Proto-Germanic *fathmaz embrace (cognates: Old Norse fa&eth;mr
embrace, bosom, Old Saxon fathmos the outstretched arms, Dutch vadem a measure of six feet), from
PIE *pot(e)-mo-, from root *pete- to spread, stretch out (see pace (n.)). There are apparent
cognates in Old Frisian fethem, German faden thread, which OED explains by reference to spreading
out.


goal (n.)

1530s, end point of a race, of uncertain origin. The noun gol appears once before this, in a poem
from early 14c. and with an apparent sense of boundary, limit. Perhaps from Old English *gal
obstacle, barrier, a word implied by g&aelig;lan to hinder and also found in compounds (singal,
widgal); and compare Old Norse geil a narrow glen, a passage. Or from Old French gaule a pole, from
Germanic; or a figurative use of Middle English gale a way, course (mid-14c.) Sports sense of place
where the ball is put to score is attested from 1540s. Figurative sense of object of an effort is
from 1540s.


manifest (adj.)

late 14c., clearly revealed, from Old French manifest evident, palpable, (12c.), or directly from
Latin manifestus plainly apprehensible, clear, apparent, evident; of offenses, proved by direct
evidence; of offenders, caught in the act, probably from manus hand (see manual) + -festus struck
(compare second element of infest).  Other nations have tried to check ... the fulfillment of our
manifest destiny to overspread the Continent allotted by Providence for the free development of our
yearly multiplying millions. [John O'Sullivan (1813-1895), U.S. Magazine &amp; Democratic Review,
July 1845]  The phrase apparently is O'Sullivan's coinage; the notion is as old as the republic.


sidereal (adj.)

also siderial, 1630s, star-like; 1640s, of or pertaining to the stars, earlier sideral (1590s), from
French sidereal (16c.), from Latin sidereus starry, astral, of the constellations, from sidus
(genitive sideris) star, group of stars, constellation, probably from PIE root *sweid- to shine
(cognates: Lithuanian svidus shining, bright). Sidereal time is measured by the apparent diurnal
motion of the fixed stars. The sidereal day begins and ends with the passage of the vernal equinox
over the meridian and is about four minutes shorter than the solar day, measured by the passage of
the sun over the meridian.


roof (n.)

Old English hrof roof, ceiling, top, summit; heaven, sky, also figuratively, highest point of
something, from Proto-Germanic *khrofam (cognates: Old Frisian rhoof roof, Middle Dutch roof, rouf
cover, roof, Dutch roef deckhouse, cabin, coffin-lid, Middle High German rof penthouse, Old Norse
hrof boat shed).    No apparent connections outside Germanic. English alone has retained the word in
a general sense, for which the other languages use forms corresponding to OE. &thorn;&aelig;c thatch
[OED]. Roof of the mouth is from late Old English. Raise the roof create an uproar is attested from
1860, originally in U.S. Southern dialect.


natural (adj.)

c.1300, naturel, of one's inborn character; hereditary, by birth; early 14c. as of the world of
nature (especially as opposed to man), from Old French naturel of nature, conforming to nature; by
birth, and directly from Latin naturalis by birth, according to nature, from natura nature (see
nature).    From late 15c. as not miraculous, in conformity with nature. Meaning easy, free from
affectation is attested from c.1600. Of things, not artificially created, c.1600. As a euphemism for
illegitimate, bastard (of children), it is first recorded c.1400, on notion of blood kinship (but
not legal status).   Natural science is from late 14c.; natural law is from early 15c. Natural order
apparent order in nature is from 1690s. Natural childbirth first attested 1933. Natural life,
usually in reference to the duration of life, is from late 15c. Natural history is from 1560s (see
history). To die of natural causes is from 1570s.


scene (n.)

1530s, subdivision of an act of a play, also stage-setting, from Middle French sc&egrave;ne (14c.),
from Latin scaena, scena scene, stage of a theater, from Greek skene wooden stage for actors, also
that which is represented on stage, originally tent or booth, related to skia shadow, shade, via
notion of something that gives shade, from PIE root *skai- to shine, flicker, glimmer (see shine
(v.)).    Meaning material apparatus of a theatrical stage is from 1540s. Meaning place in which the
action of a literary work occurs is attested from 1590s; general (non-literary) sense of place where
anything is done or takes place is recorded from 1590s. Hence U.S. slang sense of setting or milieu
for a specific group or activity, attested from 1951 in Beat jargon. Meaning stormy encounter
between two or more persons is attested from 1761. Behind the scenes having knowledge of affairs not
apparent to the public (1660s) is an image from the theater, amid actors and stage machinery (out of
sight of the audience). Scene of the crime (1923) first attested in Agatha Christie.


meat (n.)

Old English mete food, item of food (paired with drink), from Proto-Germanic *mati (cognates: Old
Frisian mete, Old Saxon meti, Old Norse matr, Old High German maz, Gothic mats food, Middle Dutch,
Dutch metworst, German Mettwurst type of sausage), from PIE *mad-i-, from root *mad- moist, wet,
also with reference to food qualities, (cognates: Sanskrit medas- fat (n.), Old Irish mat pig; see
mast (n.2)).  Narrower sense of flesh used as food is first attested c.1300; similar sense evolution
in French viande meat, originally food. Figurative sense of essential part is from 1901. Dark meat,
white meat popularized 19c., supposedly as euphemisms for leg and breast, but earliest sources use
both terms without apparent embarrassment.    The choicest parts of a turkey are the side bones, the
breast, and the thigh bones. The breast and wings are called light meat; the thigh-bones and side-
bones dark meat. When a person declines expressing a preference, it is polite to help to both kinds.
[Lydia Maria Child, The American Frugal Housewife, Boston, 1835]    First record of meat loaf is
from 1876. Meat market place where one looks for sex partners is from 1896 (meat in various sexual
senses of penis, vagina, body regarded as a sex object, prostitute are attested from 1590s); meat
wagon ambulance is from 1920, American English slang, said to date from World War I (in a literal
sense by 1857). Meat-grinder in the figurative sense attested by 1951. Meat-hook in colloquial
transferred sense arm attested by 1919.


bad (adj.)

c.1200, inferior in quality; early 13c., wicked, evil, vicious, a mystery word with no apparent
relatives in other languages.* Possibly from Old English derogatory term b&aelig;ddel and its
diminutive b&aelig;dling effeminate man, hermaphrodite, pederast, probably related to b&aelig;dan to
defile. A rare word before 1400, and evil was more common in this sense until c.1700. Meaning
uncomfortable, sorry is 1839, American English colloquial.    Comparable words in the other Indo-
European languages tend to have grown from descriptions of specific qualities, such as ugly,
defective, weak, faithless, impudent, crooked, filthy (such as Greek kakos, probably from the word
for excrement; Russian plochoj, related to Old Church Slavonic plachu wavering, timid; Persian gast,
Old Persian gasta-, related to gand stench; German schlecht, originally level, straight, smooth,
whence simple, ordinary, then bad).    Comparative and superlative forms badder, baddest were common
14c.-18c. and used as recently as Defoe (but not by Shakespeare), but yielded to comparative worse
and superlative worst (which had belonged to evil and ill).    As a noun, late 14c., evil,
wickedness. In U.S. place names, sometimes translating native terms meaning supernaturally
dangerous. Ironic use as a word of approval is said to be at least since 1890s orally, originally in
Black English, emerging in print 1928 in a jazz context. It might have emerged from the ambivalence
of expressions like bad nigger, used as a term of reproach by whites, but among blacks sometimes
representing one who stood up to injustice, but in the U.S. West bad man also had a certain
ambivalence:    These are the men who do most of the killing in frontier communities, yet it is a
noteworthy fact that the men who are killed generally deserve their fate. [Farmer &amp; Henley]
*Farsi has bad in more or less the same sense as the English word, but this is regarded by linguists
as a coincidence. The forms of the words diverge as they are traced back in time (Farsi bad comes
from Middle Persian vat), and such accidental convergences exist across many languages, given the
vast number of words in each and the limited range of sounds humans can make to signify them. Among
other coincidental matches with English are Korean mani many, Chinese pei pay, Nahuatl (Aztecan)
huel well, Maya hol hole.


