apparition (n.)

c.1500, unclosing (of Heaven), from Anglo-French aparicion, Old French apparition, aparoison (15c.),
used in reference to the Epiphany (revealing of Christ child to the Wise Men), from Late Latin
apparitionem (nominative apparitio) an appearance, also attendants, in classical Latin service,
servants, noun of action from past participle stem of apparere appear (see appear). Meaning ghost
first recorded c.1600; the shade of sense differentiation between appearance and apparition is that
the latter tends to be unexpected or startling.


phantasm (n.)

early 13c., fantesme, from Old French fantosme a dream, illusion, fantasy; apparition, ghost,
phantom (12c.), and directly from Latin phantasma an apparition, specter, from Greek phantasma
image, phantom, apparition; mere image, unreality, from phantazein to make visible, display, from
stem of phainein to bring to light, make appear; come to light, be seen, appear; explain, expound,
inform against; appear to be so, from PIE root *bha- (1) to shine (cognates: Sanskrit bhati shines,
glitters, Old Irish ban white, light, ray of light). Spelling conformed to Latin from 16c. (see ph).
A spelling variant of phantom, differentiated, but so that the differences are elusive [Fowler].


spectrum (n.)

1610s, apparition, specter, from Latin spectrum (plural spectra) an appearance, image, apparition,
specter, from specere to look at, view (see scope (n.1)). Meaning visible band showing the
successive colors, formed from a beam of light passed through a prism first recorded 1670s.
Figurative sense of entire range (of something) is from 1936.


fetch (n.)

apparition, specter, a double, 1787, of unknown origin (see OED for discussion).


spook (n.)

1801, spectre, apparition, ghost, from Dutch spook, from Middle Dutch spooc spook, ghost, from a
common Germanic source (German Spuk ghost, apparition, Middle Low German spok spook, Swedish spok
scarecrow, Norwegian spjok ghost, specter, Danish sp&oslash;g joke), of unknown origin. According to
Klein's sources, possible outside connections include Lettish spigana dragon, witch, spiganis will
o' the wisp, Lithuanian spingu, spingeti to shine, Old Prussian spanksti spark.    Meaning
undercover agent is attested from 1942. The derogatory racial sense of black person is attested from
1940s, perhaps from notion of dark skin being difficult to see at night. Black pilots trained at
Tuskegee Institute during World War II called themselves the Spookwaffe.


wraith (n.)

1510s, ghost, Scottish, of uncertain origin. Weekley and Century Dictionary suggest Old Norse
vor&eth;r guardian in the sense of guardian angel. Klein points to Gaelic and Irish arrach specter,
apparition.


specter (n.)

c.1600, frightening ghost, from French spectre an image, figure, ghost (16c.), from Latin spectrum
appearance, vision, apparition (see spectrum). Figurative sense object of dread is from 1774.


sprite (n.)

c.1300, Holy Ghost, from Old French esprit spirit, from Latin spiritus (see spirit (n.)). From mid-
14c. as immaterial being; angel, demon, elf, fairy; apparition, ghost.


visitation (n.)

c.1300, a visit by an ecclesiastical representative to examine the condition of a parish, abbey,
etc., from Anglo-French visitacioun, Old French visitacion and directly from Latin visitationem
(nominative visitatio), noun of action from past participle stem of visitare (see visit (v.)). The
supernatural sense of a sight, apparition, a coming of God to a mortal is attested from mid-14c.


phantom (n.)

c.1300, fantum illusion, unreality, from Old French fantosme (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *fantauma,
from Latin phantasma an apparition (see phantasm). The ph- was restored in English late 16c. (see
ph). Meaning specter, spirit, ghost is attested from late 14c.; that of something having the form,
but not the substance, of a real thing is from 1707. As an adjective from early 15c.


phantasmagoria (n.)

1802, name of a magic lantern exhibition brought to London in 1802 by Parisian showman Paul de
Philipstal, the name an alteration of French phantasmagorie, said to have been coined 1801 by French
dramatist Louis-S&eacute;bastien Mercier as though to mean crowd of phantoms, from Greek phantasma
image, phantom, apparition (see phantasm) + second element probably a French form of Greek agora
assembly (but this may have been chosen more for the dramatic sound than any literal sense).
Transferred meaning shifting scene of many elements is attested from 1822. Related:
Phantasmagorical.


idol (n.)

mid-13c., image of a deity as an object of (pagan) worship, from Old French idole idol, graven
image, pagan god, from Late Latin idolum image (mental or physical), form, used in Church Latin for
false god, from Greek eidolon appearance, reflection in water or a mirror, later mental image,
apparition, phantom, also material image, statue, from eidos form (see -oid). Figurative sense of
something idolized is first recorded 1560s (in Middle English the figurative sense was someone who
is false or untrustworthy). Meaning a person so adored is from 1590s.


illustration (n.)

c.1400, a shining; early 15c., a manifestation; mid-15c., a spiritual illumination, from Old French
illustration apparition, appearance, and directly from Latin illustrationem (nominative illustratio)
vivid representation (in writing), literally an enlightening, from past participle stem of
illustrare light up, make light, illuminate; figuratively make clear, disclose, explain; adorn,
render distinguished, from assimilated form of in- in (see in- (2)) + lustrare make bright,
illuminate, related to lucere shine, lux light (see light (n.)). Mental sense of act of making clear
in the mind is from 1580s. Meaning an illustrative picture is from 1816.


sight (n.)

Old English sih&eth;, gesiht, gesih&eth; thing seen; faculty of sight; aspect; vision; apparition,
from Proto-Germanic *sekh(w)- (cognates: Danish sigte, Swedish sigt, Middle Dutch sicht, Dutch
zicht, Old High German siht, German Sicht, Gesicht), stem that also yielded Old English seon (see
see (v.)), with noun suffix -th (2), later -t.  Verily, truth is sight. Therefore if two people
should come disputing, saying, 'I have seen,' 'I have heard,' we should trust the one who says 'I
have seen.' [Brhadaranyaka Upanishad 5.14.4]  Meaning perception or apprehension by means of the
eyes is from early 13c. Meaning device on a firearm to assist in aiming is from 1580s. A show of
something, hence, colloquially, a great many; a lot (late 14c.). Sight for sore eyes welcome visitor
is attested from 1738; sight unseen without previous inspection is from 1892. Sight gag first
attested 1944. Middle English had sighty (late 14c.) visible, conspicuous; bright, shining;
attractive, handsome; c.1400 as keen-sighted; mid-15c. as discerning (compare German sichtig
visible).


dream (n.)

mid-13c. in the sense sequence of sensations passing through a sleeping person's mind (also as a
verb), probably related to Old Norse draumr, Danish dr&oslash;m, Swedish dr&ouml;m, Old Saxon drom
merriment, noise, Old Frisian dram dream, Dutch droom, Old High German troum, German traum dream,
perhaps from Proto-Germanic *draugmas deception, illusion, phantasm (cognates: Old Saxon bidriogan,
Old High German triogan, German tr&uuml;gen to deceive, delude, Old Norse draugr ghost, apparition).
Possible cognates outside Germanic are Sanskrit druh- seek to harm, injure, Avestan druz- lie,
deceive.    But Old English dream meant only joy, mirth, noisy merriment, also music. And much study
has failed to prove that Old English dream is the root of the modern word for sleeping vision,
despite being identical in spelling. Either the meaning of the word changed dramatically or vision
was an unrecorded secondary Old English meaning of dream, or there are two separate words here. OED
offers this theory: It seems as if the presence of dream 'joy, mirth, music,' had caused dream
'dream' to be avoided, at least in literature, and swefn, lit. 'sleep,' to be substituted ....
Words for sleeping vision in Old English were m&aelig;ting and swefn. Old English swefn originally
meant sleep, as did a great many Indo-European dream nouns, such as Lithuanian sapnas, Old Church
Slavonic sunu, and the Romanic words (French songe, Spanish sue&#241;o, Italian sogno all from Latin
somnium (from PIE *swep-no-; cognate with Greek hypnos; see somnolence; Old English swefn is from
the same root). Dream in the sense of ideal or aspiration is from 1931, from earlier sense of
something of dream-like beauty or charm (1888).


ghost (n.)

Old English gast soul, spirit, life, breath; good or bad spirit, angel, demon, from Proto-Germanic
*ghoizdoz (cognates: Old Saxon gest, Old Frisian jest, Middle Dutch gheest, Dutch geest, German
Geist spirit, ghost), from PIE root *gheis- to be excited, amazed, frightened (cognates: Sanskrit
hedah wrath; Avestan zaesha- horrible, frightful; Gothic usgaisjan, Old English g&aelig;stan to
frighten). This was the usual West Germanic word for supernatural being, and the primary sense seems
to have been connected to the idea of to wound, tear, pull to pieces. The surviving Old English
senses, however, are in Christian writing, where it is used to render Latin spiritus (see spirit
(n.)), a sense preserved in Holy Ghost. Modern sense of disembodied spirit of a dead person is
attested from late 14c. and returns the word toward its ancient sense.    Most Indo-European words
for soul, spirit also double with reference to supernatural spirits. Many have a base sense of
appearance (such as Greek phantasma; French spectre; Polish widmo, from Old Church Slavonic videti
to see; Old English scin, Old High German giskin, originally appearance, apparition, related to Old
English scinan, Old High German skinan to shine). Other concepts are in French revenant, literally
returning (from the other world), Old Norse aptr-ganga, literally back-comer. Breton bugelnoz is
literally night-child. Latin manes probably is a euphemism.    The gh- spelling appeared early 15c.
in Caxton, influenced by Flemish and Middle Dutch gheest, but was rare in English before mid-16c.
Sense of slight suggestion (in ghost image, ghost of a chance, etc.) is first recorded 1610s; that
in ghost writing is from 1884, but that term is not found until 1919. Ghost town is from 1908. To
give up the ghost die was in Old English. Ghost in the machine was Gilbert Ryle's term (1949) for
the mind viewed as separate from the body.


spirit (n.)

mid-13c., animating or vital principle in man and animals, from Anglo-French spirit, Old French
espirit spirit, soul (12c., Modern French esprit) and directly from Latin spiritus a breathing
(respiration, and of the wind), breath; breath of a god, hence inspiration; breath of life, hence
life; also disposition, character; high spirit, vigor, courage; pride, arrogance, related to spirare
to breathe, from PIE *(s)peis- to blow (cognates: Old Church Slavonic pisto to play on the flute).
Meaning supernatural immaterial creature; angel, demon; an apparition, invisible corporeal being of
an airy nature is attested from mid-14c.; from late 14c. as a ghost (see ghost (n.)). From c.1500 as
a nature, character; sense of essential principle of something (in a non-theological context, as in
Spirit of St. Louis) is attested from 1680s, common after 1800; Spirit of '76 in reference to the
qualities that sparked and sustained the American Revolution is attested by 1797 in William
Cobbett's Porcupine's Gazette and Daily Advertiser.    From late 14c. in alchemy as volatile
substance; distillate; from c.1500 as substance capable of uniting the fixed and the volatile
elements of the philosopher's stone. Hence spirits volatile substance; sense narrowed to strong
alcoholic liquor by 1670s. This also is the sense in spirit level (1768). Also from mid-14c. as
character, disposition; way of thinking and feeling, state of mind; source of a human desire; in
Middle English freedom of spirit meant freedom of choice. From late 14c. as divine substance, divine
mind, God; also Christ or His divine nature; the Holy Ghost; divine power; also, extension of divine
power to man; inspiration, a charismatic state; charismatic power, especially of prophecy. Also
essential nature, essential quality. From 1580s in metaphoric sense animation, vitality.
According to Barnhart and OED, originally in English mainly from passages in Vulgate, where the
Latin word translates Greek pneuma and Hebrew ruah. Distinction between soul and spirit (as seat of
emotions) became current in Christian terminology (such as Greek psykhe vs. pneuma, Latin anima vs.
spiritus) but is without significance for earlier periods [Buck]. Latin spiritus, usually in
classical Latin breath, replaces animus in the sense spirit in the imperial period and appears in
Christian writings as the usual equivalent of Greek pneuma. Spirit-rapping is from 1852.


Hobbit (n.)

1937, coined in the fantasy tales of J.R.R. Tolkien (1892-1973).    On a blank leaf I scrawled: 'In
a hole in the ground there lived a hobbit.' I did not and do not know why.  [Tolkien, letter to W.H.
Auden, dated 1955]    The word also turns up in a very long list of folkloric supernatural creatures
in the writings of Michael Aislabie Denham (d.1859), printed in volume 2 of The Denham Tracts [ed.
James Hardy, London: Folklore Society, 1895], a compilation of Denham's scattered publications.
Denham was an early folklorist who concentrated on Northumberland, Durham, Westmoreland, Cumberland,
the Isle of Man, and Scotland.    What a happiness this must have been seventy or eighty years ago
and upwards, to those chosen few who had the good luck to be born on the eve of this festival of all
festivals; when the whole earth was so overrun with ghosts, boggles, bloody-bones, spirits, demons,
ignis fatui, brownies, bugbears, black dogs, specters, shellycoats, scarecrows, witches, wizards,
barguests, Robin-Goodfellows, hags, night-bats, scrags, breaknecks, fantasms, hobgoblins,
hobhoulards, boggy-boes, dobbies, hob-thrusts, fetches, kelpies, warlocks, mock-beggars, mum-pokers,
Jemmy-burties, urchins, satyrs, pans, fauns, sirens, tritons, centaurs, calcars, nymphs, imps,
incubuses, spoorns, men-in-the-oak, hell-wains, fire-drakes, kit-a-can-sticks, Tom-tumblers, melch-
dicks, larrs, kitty-witches, hobby-lanthorns, Dick-a-Tuesdays, Elf-fires, Gyl-burnt-tales, knockers,
elves, rawheads, Meg-with-the-wads, old-shocks, ouphs, pad-foots, pixies, pictrees, giants, dwarfs,
Tom-pokers, tutgots, snapdragons, sprets, spunks, conjurers, thurses, spurns, tantarrabobs,
swaithes, tints, tod-lowries, Jack-in-the-Wads, mormos, changelings, redcaps, yeth-hounds, colt-
pixies, Tom-thumbs, black-bugs, boggarts, scar-bugs, shag-foals, hodge-pochers, hob-thrushes, bugs,
bull-beggars, bygorns, bolls, caddies, bomen, brags, wraiths, waffs, flay-boggarts, fiends,
gallytrots, imps, gytrashes, patches, hob-and-lanthorns, gringes, boguests, bonelesses, Peg-powlers,
pucks, fays, kidnappers, gallybeggars, hudskins, nickers, madcaps, trolls, robinets, friars'
lanthorns, silkies, cauld-lads, death-hearses, goblins, hob-headlesses, bugaboos, kows, or cowes,
nickies, nacks necks, waiths, miffies, buckies, ghouls, sylphs, guests, swarths, freiths, freits,
gy-carlins Gyre-carling, pigmies, chittifaces, nixies, Jinny-burnt-tails, dudmen, hell-hounds,
dopple-gangers, boggleboes, bogies, redmen, portunes, grants, <b>hobbits</b>, hobgoblins, brown-men,
cowies, dunnies, wirrikows, alholdes, mannikins, follets, korreds, lubberkins, cluricauns, kobolds,
leprechauns, kors, mares, korreds, puckles korigans, sylvans, succubuses, blackmen, shadows,
banshees, lian-hanshees, clabbernappers, Gabriel-hounds, mawkins, doubles, corpse lights or candles,
scrats, mahounds, trows, gnomes, sprites, fates, fiends, sibyls, nicknevins, whitewomen, fairies,
thrummy-caps, cutties, and nisses, and apparitions of every shape, make, form, fashion, kind and
description, that there was not a village in England that had not its own peculiar ghost. Nay, every
lone tenement, castle, or mansion-house, which could boast of any antiquity had its bogle, its
specter, or its knocker. The churches, churchyards, and crossroads were all haunted. Every green
lane had its boulder-stone on which an apparition kept watch at night. Every common had its circle
of fairies belonging to it. And there was scarcely a shepherd to be met with who had not seen a
spirit!    [Emphasis added] It is curious that the name occurs nowhere else in folklore, and there
is no evidence that Tolkien ever saw this. The word also was recorded from 1835 as a term generally
used in Wales to express a quantity made up of four Welsh pecks. Hobbitry attested from 1947.


