appease (v.)

c.1300 to reconcile, from Anglo-French apeser, Old French apaisier to pacify, make peace, appease,
be reconciled, placate (12c.), from the phrase a paisier bring to peace, from a to (see ad-) + pais,
from Latin pacem (nominative pax) peace (see peace). Related: Appeased; appeasing.


appeaser (n.)

mid-15c., agent noun from appease (v.). Political sense attested from 1940.


appeasement (n.)

mid-15c., pacification, from Middle French apeisement, Old French apaisement appeasement, calming,
noun of action from apaisier (see appease). First recorded 1919 in international political sense;
not pejorative until failure of Chamberlain's policy toward Germany in 1939 (Methods of appeasement
was Chamberlain's description of his policy).


expiation (n.)

early 15c., via Middle French expiation or directly from Latin expiationem (nominative expiatio)
satisfaction, atonement, noun of action from past participle stem of expiare make amends, from ex-
completely (see ex-) + piare propitiate, appease, from pius faithful, loyal, devout (see pious).The
sacrifice of expiation is that which tendeth to appease the wrath of God. [Thomas Norton,
translation of Calvin's Institutes of Christian Religion, 1561]


placatory (adj.)

1630s, from Latin placatorius pertaining to appeasing, from placat-, past participle stem of placare
to appease (see placate).


appeasable (adj.)

1540s; see appease + -able. Related: Appeasably.


placable (adj.)

c.1500, pleasing, from Middle French placable forgiving, conciliatory and directly from Latin
placabilis easily appeased or pacified, from placare to appease (see placate). From 1580s as capable
of being pleased. Related: Placably; placability.


pacify (v.)

late 15c., appease, allay the anger of (someone), from Middle French pacifier make peace, from Latin
pacificare to make peace; pacify, from pacificus (see pacific). Of countries or regions, to bring to
a condition of calm, c.1500, from the start with suggestions of submission and terrorization.
Related: Pacified; pacifying.


still (v.)

Old English stillan to be still, have rest; to quiet, calm, appease; to stop, restrain, from stille
at rest (see still (adj.)). Cognate with Old Saxon stillian, Old Norse stilla, Dutch, Old High
German, German stillen. Related: Stilled; stilling.


sop (n.)

Old English sopp- bread soaked in some liquid, (in soppcuppe cup into which sops are put), from
Proto-Germanic *supp-, related to Old English verb suppan (see sup (v.2)), probably reinforced by
Old French soupe (see soup (n.)). Meaning something given to appease is from 1660s, a reference to
the sops given by the Sibyl to Cerberus in the Aeneid.


propitiate (v.)

1580s, a back-formation from propritiation and in part from propitiate (adj.), from Latin
propitiatus, past participle of propitiare appease, propitiate (see propitiation). Related:
Propitiated; propitiating; propitiatingly; propitiable (1550s).


placate (v.)

1670s, a back-formation from placation or else from Latin placatus soothed, quiet, gentle, calm,
peaceful, past participle of placare to calm, appease, quiet, soothe, assuage, related to placere to
please (see please). Related: Placated; placating; placatingly.


smooth (v.)

late Old English smo&#254; to make smooth, replacing sme&#240;an to smooth, soften, polish; appease,
soothe; sme&#240;ian smoothen, become smooth, from the source of smooth (adj.). Meaning to make
smooth is c.1200. Related: Smoothed; smoothing. Middle English also had a verb form smoothen (mid-
14c.).


mollify (v.)

late 14c., to soften (a substance), from Old French mollifier or directly from Late Latin
mollificare make soft, mollify from mollificus softening, from Latin mollis soft (see melt (v.)) +
root of facere to make (see factitious). Transferred sense of soften in temper, appease, pacify is
recorded from early 15c. Related: Mollified; mollifying.


supple (adj.)

c.1300, soft, tender, from Old French souple, sople pliant, flexible; humble, submissive (12c.),
from Gallo-Roman *supples, from Latin supplex submissive, humbly begging, beseeching, kneeling in
entreaty, literally bending, kneeling down, perhaps an altered form of *supplacos humbly pleading,
appeasing, from sub under + placare appease (see placate). Meaning pliant is from late 14c.;
figurative sense of artfully obsequious, capable of adapting oneself to the wishes and opinions of
others is from c.1600. Supple-chapped (c.1600) was used of a flatterer. Related: Suppleness.


pay (v.)

c.1200, to appease, pacify, satisfy, from Old French paier to pay, pay up (12c., Modern French
payer), from Latin pacare to please, pacify, satisfy (in Medieval Latin especially satisfy a
creditor), literally make peaceful, from pax (genitive pacis) peace (see peace). Meaning to give
what is due for goods or services arose in Medieval Latin and was attested in English by early 13c.;
sense of please, pacify died out in English by 1500. Sense of suffer, endure (a punishment, etc.) is
first recorded late 14c. Related: Paid; paying.


propitiation (n.)

late 14c., from Late Latin propitiationem (nominative propitiatio) an atonement, noun of action from
past participle stem of Latin propitiare appease, propitiate, from propitius favorable, gracious,
kind, well-disposed, from pro- forward (see pro-) + stem related to petere to make for, go to; seek,
strive after; ask for, beg, beseech, request (see petition (n.)).    The sense in Latin is perhaps
because the word originally was religious, literally a falling or rushing toward, hence eager, and,
of the gods, well-disposed. Earliest recorded form of the word in English is propitiatorium the
mercy seat, place of atonement (c.1200), translating Greek hilasterion.


