appellation (n.)

late 15c., action of appealing (to a higher authority), from Old French apelacion (13c.), from Latin
appellationem (nominative appellatio) an addressing, accosting; an appeal; a name, title, noun of
action from past participle stem of appellare (see appeal). Meaning designation, name given to a
person, thing, or class is from mid-15c., from a sense also found in Middle French appeler.


roly-poly (adj.)

short and stout, 1820, probably a varied reduplication of roll (v.). As a noun, it was used as the
name of various ball games from 1713, and it was used as early as 1610s in the sense of rascal. As
an appellation of a short, stout person, from 1836.


carpetbagger (n.)

also carpet-bagger, 1868, American English, scornful appellation for Northerners who went South
after the fall of the CSA seeking private gain or political advancement. The name is based on the
image of men arriving with all their worldly goods in a big carpetbag. Sense later extended to any
opportunist from out of the area.


sire (n.)

c.1200, title placed before a name and denoting knighthood, from Old French sire lord (appellation),
sire, my lord, from Vulgar Latin *seior, from Latin senior older, elder (see senior (adj.)).
Standing alone and meaning your majesty it is attested from early 13c. General sense of important
elderly man is from mid-14c.; that of father, male parent is from mid-13c.


Walloon (adj.)

1520s, of a people of what is now souther and southeastern Belgium, also of their language, from
Middle French Wallon, literally foreigner, of Germanic origin (compare Old High German walh
foreigner). The people are of Gaulish origin and speak a French dialect. The name is a form of the
common appellation of Germanic peoples to Romanic-speaking neighbors. See Vlach, also Welsh. As a
noun from 1560s; as a language name from 1640s.


ariel

1382, in the Wyclif Bible, a word taken untranslated from the Vulgate, from Greek ariel (Sept.),
from Hebrew ariel; in later Bibles, translated as altar.    (Gesenius would here translate fire-
hearth of God, after Arab. arr; elsewhere in O.T. the same word occurs as a man's name, and
appellation of Jerusalem, where it is taken as = lion of God.) Ariel in T. Heywood and Milton is the
name of an angel, in Shakespeare of an Ayrie spirit; in Astron. of one of the satellites of Uranus.
[OED]    As the name of a species of gazelle found in the Middle East, 1832, from Arabic aryil,
variant of ayyil stag.


consul (n.)

late 14c., magistrate in ancient Rome, from Old French consule and directly from Latin consul
magistrate in ancient Rome, probably originally one who consults the Senate, from consulere to
deliberate, take counsel (see consultation).    Modern sense began with use as appellation of
various foreign officials and magistrates, a representative chosen by a community of merchants
living in a foreign country; an agent appointed by a government or ruler to represent the interests
of its subjects and traders in a foreign place (c.1600), an extended sense that developed 13c. in
the Spanish form of the word.


title (n.)

c.1300, inscription, heading, from Old French title title or chapter of a book; position; legal
permit (12c., Modern French titre, by dissimilation), and in part from Old English titul, both from
Latin titulus inscription, label, ticket, placard, heading; honorable appellation, title of honor,
of unknown origin. Meaning name of a book, play, etc. first recorded mid-14c. The sense of name
showing a person's rank in English is first attested 1580s. Sports championship sense attested from
1913 (originally in lawn tennis), hence titlist (1913).


bitch (n.)

Old English bicce female dog, probably from Old Norse bikkjuna female of the dog (also fox, wolf,
and occasionally other beasts), of unknown origin. Grimm derives the Old Norse word from Lapp
pittja, but OED notes that the converse is equally possible. As a term of contempt applied to women,
it dates from c.1400; of a man, c.1500, playfully, in the sense of dog. Used among male homosexuals
from 1930s. In modern (1990s, originally black English) slang, its use with reference to a man is
sexually contemptuous, from the woman insult.BITCH. A she dog, or doggess; the most offensive
appellation that can be given to an English woman, even more provoking than that of whore.
[Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, 1811] Bitch goddess coined 1906 by William James; the original one
was success.


sure (adj.)

early 13c., safe against attack, secure, later firm, reliable (c.1300); mentally certain, confident
(mid-14c.); firm, strong, resolute (c.1400), from Old French seur, sur safe, secure; undoubted,
dependable, trustworthy (12c.), from Latin securus free from care, untroubled, heedless, safe (see
secure (adj.)). Pronunciation development is that of sugar (n.).    As an affirmative meaning yes,
certainly it dates from 1803, from Middle English meanings firmly established; having no doubt, and
phrases like to be sure (1650s), sure enough (1540s), and for sure (1580s). The use as an adverb
meaning assuredly goes back to early 14c. Sure-footed is from 1630s, literal and figurative; sure
thing dates from 1836. In 16c.-17c., Suresby was an appellation for a person to be depended upon.


cottage (n.)

late 13c., from Old French cote hut, cottage + Anglo-French suffix -age (probably denoting the
entire property attached to a cote). Old French cot is probably from Old Norse kot hut, cognate of
Old English cot, cote cottage, hut, from Proto-Germanic *kutan (cognates: Middle Dutch cot, Dutch
kot).    Meaning small country residence (without suggestion of poverty or tenancy) is from 1765.
Modern French cottage is a 19c. reborrowing from English. Cottage industry is attested from 1921.
Cottage cheese is attested from 1831, American English, earliest in reference to Philadelphia:
There was a plate of rye-bread, and a plate of wheat, and a basket of crackers; another plate with
half a dozen paltry cakes that looked as if they had been bought under the old Court House; some
morsels of dried beef on two little tea-cup plates: and a small glass dish of that preparation of
curds, which in vulgar language is called smear-case, but whose nom de guerre is cottage-cheese, at
least that was the appellation given it by our hostess. [Miss Leslie, Country Lodgings, Godey's
Lady's Book, July 1831]


