appendage (n.)

1640s, from append + -age.


appendix (n.)

1540s, subjoined addition to a document or book, from Latin appendix an addition, continuation,
something attached, from appendere (see append). Used for small outgrowth of an internal organ from
1610s, especially in reference to the vermiform appendix. This sense perhaps from or influenced by
French appendix, where the term was in use from 1540s.


append (v.)

late 14c., to belong to as a possession or right, from Old French apendre (13c.) belong, be
dependent (on); attach (oneself) to; hang, hang up, and directly from Latin appendere to cause to
hang (from something), weigh, from ad- to (see ad-) + pendere hang (see pendant).    Meaning to hang
on, attach as a pendant is 1640s; that of attach as an appendix is recorded by 1843. OED says the
original word was obsolete by c.1500, and these later transitive senses represent a reborrowing from
Latin or French. Related: Appended; appending.


subjoin (v.)

add to the end of, 1570s, from Middle French subjoin-, past participle stem of subjoindre, from
Latin subjungere to affix, append (see subjunctive). Related: Subjoined; subjoining.


subjunctive (n.)

mood employed to denote an action or state as conceived and not as a fact, 1620s, from earlier
adjectival use of subjunctive (1520s), from Late Latin subiunctivus serving to join, connecting,
from subiunct-, past participle stem of Latin subiungere to append, add at the end, place under,
from sub under (see sub-) + iungere to join (see jugular). The Latin modus subiunctivus probably is
a grammarians' loan-translation of Greek hypotaktike enklisis subordinated, so called because the
Greek subjunctive mood is used almost exclusively in subordinate clauses.


penthouse (n.)

pendize, early 14c., from Anglo-French pentiz, a shortening of Old French apentis attached building,
appendage, from Medieval Latin appendicium, from Latin appendere to hang (see append). Modern
spelling is from c.1530, by folk etymology influence of Middle French pente slope, and English house
(the meaning at that time was attached building with a sloping roof or awning). Originally a simple
structure (Middle English homilies describe Jesus' birthplace in the manger as a penthouse); meaning
apartment or small house built on the roof of a skyscraper first recorded 1921, from which time
dates its association with luxury.


