applied (adj.)

put to practical use, (as opposed to abstract or theoretical), 1650s, from past participle of apply.
Earlier it was used in a sense of folded (c.1500).


Idaho

c.1860, as a place name, originally applied to part of what is now eastern Colorado (Idaho Territory
organized 1863; admitted as a state 1890); from Kiowa-Apache (Athabaskan) idaahe enemy, a name
applied by them to the Comanches.


dodo (n.)

1620s, from Portuguese doudo fool, simpleton, an insult applied by Portuguese sailors to the awkward
bird (Didus ineptus) they found on Mauritius island. The last record of a living one is from 1681.
Applied in English to stupid persons since 1886.


Anasazi

Name applied by their Navajo neighbors to modern Pueblo peoples of the U.S. southwest, and to
various landscape features associated with them, from Navajo anaasazi ancestors of the enemies. Said
to first have been applied to the ancient Pueblo ruins of southwestern United States in the Mesa
Verde region c.1889 by rancher and trader Richard Wetherill, who began exploration of the sites in
the area; established in archaeological terminology 1927.


locust (n.2)

North American tree, 1630s, originally carob tree (1610s), whose fruit supposedly resembled the
insect (see locust (n.1)). Greek akris locust often was applied in the Levant to carob pods. Soon
applied in English to other trees as well.


Adventist (n.)

one of a religious denomination that believes in or looks for the early second coming of Christ,
1843; see advent + -ist. Church Latin adventus was applied to the coming of the Savior, both the
first or the anticipated second, hence Adventist was a name applied to millenarian sects, especially
and originally the Millerites (U.S.).


loco-foco (n.)

self-igniting cigar or match, 1839 (but presumably older), American English, of unknown origin,
perhaps from a misapprehension of the meaning of the first element of locomotive as self- + Spanish
fuego fire. During one heated political meeting in N.Y., the lights went out and the delegates used
such matches to relight them, thence the name loco-foco entered U.S. political jargon (1837),
usually applied to a radical faction of the Democratic Party, but by the Whigs applied to all
Democrats.


Indies

1550s, plural of Indie, Indy, from Middle English Ynde (early 13c.) India, from the Old French form
of Latin India (see India). Commonly applied to Asia and the East, later applied to the Caribbean
basin, in a time of geographical confusion, which was distinguished from Asia proper by being called
the West Indies.


brake (n.1)

mid-15c., instrument for crushing or pounding, from Middle Dutch braeke flax brake, from breken to
break (see break (v.)). The word was applied to many crushing implements and to the ring through the
nose of a draught ox. It was influenced in sense by Old French brac, a form of bras an arm, thus a
lever or handle, which was being used in English from late 14c., and applied to a bridle or curb
from early 15c. One or the other or both took up the main modern meaning of stopping device for a
wheel, first attested 1772.


refugee (n.)

1680s, from French refugi&eacute;, noun use of past participle of refugier to take shelter, protect,
from Old French refuge (see refuge). First applied to French Huguenots who migrated after the
revocation (1685) of the Edict of Nantes. The word meant one seeking asylum, till 1914, when it
evolved to mean one fleeing home (first applied in this sense to civilians in Flanders heading west
to escape fighting in World War I). In Australian slang from World War II, reffo.


fascism (n.)

1922, originally used in English 1920 in its Italian form (see fascist). Applied to similar groups
in Germany from 1923; applied to everyone since the rise of the Internet.A form of political
behavior marked by obsessive preoccupation with community decline, humiliation or victimhood and by
compensatory cults of unity, energy and purity, in which a mass-based party of committed nationalist
militants, working in uneasy but effective collaboration with traditional elites, abandons
democratic liberties and pursues with redemptive violence and without ethical or legal restraints
goals of internal cleansing and external expansion. [Robert O. Paxton, The Anatomy of Fascism, 2004]


trash (n.)

late 14c., thing of little use or value, waste, refuse, dross, perhaps from a Scandinavian source
(compare Old Norse tros rubbish, fallen leaves and twigs, Norwegian dialectal trask lumber, trash,
baggage, Swedish trasa rags, tatters), of unknown origin. Applied to ill-bred persons or groups from
1604 (Othello), and especially of poor whites in the U.S. South by 1831. Applied to domestic refuse
or garbage from 1906 (American English). Trash-can attested from 1914. To trash-talk someone or
something is by 1989.


Puritan (n.)

1560s, opponent of Anglican hierarchy, later applied opprobriously to person in Church of England
who seeks further reformation (1570s), probably from purity. Largely historical from 19c. in literal
sense. After c.1590s, applied to anyone deemed overly strict in matters of religion and morals.
What [William] Perkins, and the whole Puritan movement after him, sought was to replace the personal
pride of birth and status with the professional's or craftsman's pride of doing one's best in one's
particular calling. The good Christian society needs the best of kings, magistrates, and citizens.
Perkins most emphasized the work ethic from Genesis: In the swaete of thy browe shalt thou eate thy
breade. [E. Digby Baltzell, Puritan Boston and Quaker Philadelphia, 1979]


pope (n.)

Old English papa (9c.), from Church Latin papa bishop, pope (in classical Latin, tutor), from Greek
papas patriarch, bishop, originally father. Applied to bishops of Asia Minor and taken as a title by
the Bishop of Alexandria c.250. In Western Church, applied especially to the Bishop of Rome since
the time of Leo the Great (440-461) and claimed exclusively by them from 1073 (usually in English
with a capital P-). Popemobile, his car, is from 1979. Papal, papacy, later acquisitions in English,
preserve the original vowel.


ellipse (n.)

1753, from French ellipse (17c.), from Latin ellipsis ellipse, also, a falling short, deficit, from
Greek elleipsis (see ellipsis). So called because the conic section of the cutting plane makes a
smaller angle with the base than does the side of the cone, hence, a falling short. The Greek word
was first applied by Apollonius of Perga (3c. B.C.E.). to the curve which had been previously called
the section of the acute-angled cone, but it had previously been technically applied to a rectangle
one of whose sides coincides with a part of a given line (Euclid, VI. 27).


jay (n.)

c.1300, common European bird (Garrulus glandarinus), from Old North French gai, Old French jai
magpie, jay, from Late Latin gaius a jay, probably echoic and supposedly influenced by Latin Gaius,
a common Roman proper name. For other bird names from proper names, compare martin and parrot.
Applied to the North American blue jay (Cyanocitta cristata) from 1709. Applied to humans in sense
of impertinent chatterer, flashy dresser from 1620s.


supper (n.)

mid-13c., soper, the last meal of the day, from Old French soper evening meal, noun use of
infinitive soper to eat the evening meal, which is of Germanic origin (see sup (v.1)).    Formerly,
the last of the three meals of the day (breakfast, dinner, and supper); now applied to the last
substantial meal of the day when dinner is taken in the middle of the day, or to a late meal
following an early evening dinner. Supper is usually a less formal meal than late dinner. [OED]
Applied since c.1300 to the last meal of Christ.


Huguenot

1562, from Middle French Huguenot, according to French sources originally political, not religious.
The name was applied in 1520s to Genevan partisans opposed to the Duke of Savoy (who joined Geneva
to the Swiss Confederation), and it is probably an alteration of Swiss German Eidgenoss confederate,
from Middle High German eitgenoze, from eit oath + genoze comrade (related to Old English geneat
comrade, companion). The form of the French word probably altered by association with Hugues
Besan&ccedil;on, leader of the Genevan partisans. In France, applied generally to French Protestants
because Geneva was a Calvinist center.


hoss (n.)

1815, representing U.S. dialectal variant pronunciation of horse, especially as applied to (large or
coarse) persons.


zipper (n.)

1925, probably an agent noun from zip (v.1). The trademark taken out on the name that year applied
to a boot with zippers, not to the lightning fastener itself, which was so called by 1927.


Shoshone

Uto-Aztecan people of the Great Basin; the name is of unknown origin, first applied 19c. to eastern
Shoshonis of Wyoming. Related: Shoshonean.


Louisiana

named 1682 by French explorer la Salle for Louis XIV of France. The name originally applied to the
entire Mississippi basin.


practical (adj.)

early 15c., practicale of or pertaining to matters of practice; applied, with -al (1) + earlier
practic (adj.) dealing with practical matters, applied, not merely theoretical (early 15c.), or
practic (n.) method, practice, use (late 14c.). In some cases directly from Old French practique
(adj.) fit for action, earlier pratique (13c.) and Medieval Latin practicalis, from Late Latin
practicus practical, active, from Greek praktikos fit for action, fit for business; business-like,
practical; active, effective, vigorous, from praktos done; to be done, verbal adjective of prassein,
prattein to do, act, effect, accomplish.


warbler (n.)

1610s, agent noun from warble (v.). Applied to Old World songbirds by 1773 and to North American
birds that look like them but sing little by 1783.


alley (n.)

mid-14c., passage in a house; open passage between buildings; walkway in a garden, from Old French
alee (13c., Modern French all&eacute;e) a path, passage, way, corridor, also a going, from fem. of
ale, past participle of aler to go, which ultimately may be a contraction of Latin ambulare to walk,
or from Gallo-Roman allari, a back-formation from Latin allatus having been brought to [Barnhart].
Compare sense evolution of gate. Applied by c.1500 to long narrow enclosure for playing at bowls,
skittles, etc. Used in place names from c.1500.    The word is applied in American English to what
in London is called a mews, and also is used there especially of a back-lane parallel to a main
street (1729). To be up someone's alley in someone's neighborhood (literally or figuratively) is
from 1931; alley-cat attested by 1890.


Minoan (adj.)

1894, from Minos, famous king of Crete; applied by British archaeologist Sir Arthur Evans to the
civilization that flourished there c.3000-1400 B.C.E.


Caledonia

Roman name of part of northern Britain, taken from the name of former inhabitants, of unknown
origin, perhaps Celtic; since 18c, applied poetically to Scotland or the Scottish Highlands.
Related: Caledonian.


shotten (adj.)

having shot its spawn, and accordingly of inferior value, mid-15c., past participle adjective from
shoot (v.). Originally of fish; applied to persons, with sense of exhausted by sickness, from 1590s.


bandicoot (n.)

1789, from Telugu pandi-kokku, literally pig-rat. Properly a large and destructive Indian rat;
applied from 1827 to a type of insectivorous Australian marsupial somewhat resembling it.


jihad (n.)

1869, from Arabic, usually translated as holy war, literally struggle, contest, effort, from
infinitive of jahada he waged war, he applied himself to. Used in English since c.1880 for any sort
of doctrinal crusade.


dhow (n.)

1799, original language unknown, single-masted native vessel used on Arabian Sea, later widely
applied to all Arab vessels. Klein suggests a relation to Persian dav running.


roach (n.2)

small freshwater fish, c.1200, from Old French roche (13c.), of uncertain origin, perhaps from a
Germanic source. Applied to similar-looking fish in North America.


apo koinu

Greek, literally in common. Applied to sentences with one subject and two predicates; a formation
rare in modern English, though it occurs more often in Old English. Compare koine.


delta (n.)

c.1200, Greek letter shaped like a triangle, equivalent to our D, the name from Phoenician daleth
tent door. Herodotus used it of the mouth of the Nile, and it was so used in English from 1550s;
applied to other river mouths from 1790.


Arkansas

organized as a U.S. territory 1819 (admitted as a state 1836), named for the Arkansas River, which
was named for a Siouan tribe.    The spelling of the term represents a French plural, Arcansas, of a
name applied to the Quapaw people who lived on the Arkansas River; their name was also written in
early times as Akancea, Acansea, Acansa (Dickinson, 1995). This was not the name used by the Quapaws
themselves, however. The term /akansa/ was applied to them by Algonquian speakers; this consists of
/a-/, an Algonquian prefix found in the names of ethnic groups, plus /kk&aacute;:ze, a Siouan term
refering to members of the Dhegiha branch of the Siouan family. This stem is also the origin for the
name of the Kansa tribe and of the state of Kansas; thus the placenames Arkansas and Kansas
indirectly have the same origin. [William Bright, Native American Placenames of the United States,
2004]


scent (n.)

late 14c., scent, smell, what can be smelled (as a means of pursuit by a hound), from scent (v.).
Almost always applied to agreeable odors.


solon (n.)

legislator, 1620s, from Greek Solon, name of early lawgiver of Athens, one of the seven sages.
Often, especially in U.S., applied (with perhaps a whiff of sarcasm) by journalists to Congressmen,
township supervisors, etc. It also is a useful short headline word.


Doric (adj.)

1560s, see Dorian; in reference to the architectural order, 1610s. The Doric dialect in ancient
Greek theater was broad and rustic, hence it has been applied in English to northern and Scots
dialects (1837).


cryselephantine (adj.)

1827, from Greek khryselephantinos of gold and ivory, applied to statues overlaid with gold and
ivory, such as Athene Parthenos and Olympian Zeus.


mandrel (n.)

miner's pick, 1510s, of unknown origin; perhaps borrowed from French mandrin, itself of unknown
origin. Also applied from 17c. to parts of a lathe or a circular saw.


mink (n.)

early 15c., skin or fur of the mink, from a Scandinavian source (compare Swedish menk a stinking
animal in Finland). Applied in English to the animal itself from 1620s.


guinea (n.)

former British coin, 1660s, from Guinea, region along the west coast of Africa, presumably from an
African word (perhaps Tuareg aginaw black people); the 20-shilling coins so called because they were
first minted for British trade with Guinea (but soon in domestic use) and with gold from Africa. The
original guinea (in use from 1663 to 1813) was based on the value of gold and by 1695 it was worth
30 shillings. William III then fixed its value at 21 shillings, 6 pence in 1698. The extra 6 pence
were lopped off in December 1717.    The Guinea hen (1570s) is a domestic fowl imported from there.
Guinea derogatory term for Italian (1896) was originally Guinea Negro (1740s) and meant black
person, person of mixed ancestry. It was applied to Italians c.1890 probably because of their dark
complexions relative to northern Europeans, and after 1911 was occasionally applied to Hispanics and
Pacific Islanders as well. New Guinea was so named 1546 by Spanish explorer Inigo Ortiz de Retes in
reference to the natives' dark skin and tightly curled hair.


Ironside

name given to a man of great hardihood or bravery, c.1300, first applied to Edmund II, king of
England (d.1016), later also to Oliver Cromwell and his troops. Old Ironsides as a nickname of
U.S.S. Constitution dates from that ship's defeat of H.M.S. Guerriere on Aug. 19, 1812, in the War
of 1812.


monk (n.)

Old English munuc monk (used also of women), from Proto-Germanic *muniko- (cognates: Old Frisian
munek, Middle Dutch monic, Old High German munih, German M&ouml;nch), an early borrowing from Vulgar
Latin *monicus (source of French moine, Spanish monje, Italian monaco), from Late Latin monachus
monk, originally religious hermit, from Ecclesiastical Greek monakhos monk, noun use of a classical
Greek adjective meaning solitary, from monos alone (see mono-). For substitution of -o- for -u-, see
come. In England, before the Reformation, the term was not applied to the members of the mendicant
orders, who were always called friars. From the 16th c. to the 19th c., however, it was usual to
speak of the friars as a class of monks. In recent times the distinction between the terms has been
carefully observed by well-informed writers. In French and Ger. the equivalent of monk is applied
equally to 'monks' and 'friars.' [OED]


Good Friday

late 13c., from good in Middle English sense of holy, also especially of holy days or seasons
observed by the church (early 15c.); the word also was applied to Christmas and Shrove Tuesday.


Maine

U.S. state, probably ultimately from French Maine, region in France (named for the river that runs
through it, which has a name of Gaulish origin). The name was applied to that part of coastal North
America by French explorers.


burner (n.)

late 13c., also as a surname, Brenner, person who makes bricks, agent noun from burn (v.)). As a
name for a part of a lamp where the flame is applied, from 1790. Of gas-cooking stoves, by 1885.


kahuna (n.)

1886, in a report in English by the Hawaiian government, which defines the word as doctor and
sorcerer, from Hawaiian, where it was applied as well to priests and navigators. In surfer slang,
for a god of surfing, it is attested from 1962 (but big kahuna in same sense is said to date from
1950s.


Biedermeier

1854, from German, from Gottlieb Biedermeier, name of a fictitious writer of stodgy poems (invented
by Ludwig Eichrodt as a satire on bourgeois taste); the name generally applied to styles prevalent
in Germany 1815-48; also conventional, bourgeois.


meeting (n.)

action of coming together, Old English gemeting, verbal noun from meet (v.). Meaning gathering of
people for discussion, etc. is from 1510s. In 17c., it was applied generally to worship assemblies
of nonconformists, but this now is retained mostly by Quakers.


