application (n.)

early 15c., the bringing of something to bear on something else, from Old French aplicacion (14c.),
from Latin applicationem (nominative applicatio) a joining to, an attaching oneself to, noun of
action from past participle stem of applicare (see apply). Meaning sincere hard effort is from
c.1600. Meaning a formal request to be hired for a job or paid position is by 1851.


parabola (n.)

1570s, from Modern Latin parabola, from Greek parabole parabola, comparison, analogy; application
(see parable), so called by Apollonius of Perga c.210 B.C.E. because it is produced by application
of a given area to a given straight line. It had a different sense in Pythagorean geometry. Related:
Parabolic.


study (n.)

c.1300, application of the mind to the acquisition of knowledge, intensive reading and contemplation
of a book, writings, etc., from Old French estudie care, attention, skill, thought; study, school
(Modern French &#233;tude), from Latin studium study, application (see study (v.)). Also from c.1300
as a state of deep thought or contemplation; a state of mental perplexity, doubt, anxiety; state of
amazement or wonder. From mid-14c. as careful examination, scrutiny. Sense of room furnished with
books is from late 14c. Meaning a subject of study is from late 15c. Study hall is attested from
1891, originally a large common room in a college.


app (n.)

computerese shorthand for application, attested by 1992.


applet (n.)

by 1995, a diminutive formation from application.


rip (n.1)

rough water, 1775, perhaps a special use of rip (v.). Originally of seas; application to rivers is
from 1828.


fender (n.)

late 13c., shortening of defender. Used of attachments to boats at first, of fireplaces since 1680s;
application to automobiles is 1919.


sabbat (n.)

witches' sabbath, 1650s, special application of the French form of sabbath.


aerosol (n.)

1919, from aero- air + first syllable in solution. A term in physics; modern commercial application
is from 1940s.


omnisexual (adj.)

by 1959, from omni- + sexual. Earliest application is to Walt Whitman.


cracker (n.1)

mid-15c., hard wafer, but the specific application to a thin, crisp biscuit is 1739; agent noun from
crack (v.). Cracker-barrel (adj.) emblematic of down-home ways and views is from 1877.


devaluation (n.)

1898; see de- + valuation. Specific application to currency is from 1914.


catwalk (n.)

1885, long, narrow footway, from cat (n.) + walk (n.); in reference to such narrowness of passage
one has to cross carefully, as a cat walks. Originally of ships and theatrical back-stages.
Application to fashion show runways is by 1942.


sedulity (n.)

1540s, from Latin sedulitas assiduity, application, noun of quality from sedulus (see sedulous).


spell-check (v.)

to use a computer's spell checker application on a document, by 1985. The applications themselves
date to the late 1970s. Related: Spell-checked; spell-checking.


lob (n.)

a word of widespread application to lumpish things, probably in Old English. Compare Middle Dutch,
Middle Low German lobbe, Old Norse lubba. From late 13c. as a surname; meaning pollack is from early
14c.; that of lazy lout is from late 14c.


biometrics (n.)

application of mathematics to biology, 1902, from biometric (also see -ics); slightly earlier in
this sense was biometry (1901), which was coined by Whewell and used by him and others with a sense
of calculation of life expectancy (1831).


cartouche (n.)

1610s, scroll-like ornament, also paper cartridge, from French cartouche, the French form of
cartridge (q.v.). Application to Egyptian hieroglyphics dates from 1830, on resemblance to rolled
paper cartridges.


cul-de-sac (n.)

1738, as an anatomical term, from French cul-de-sac, literally bottom of a sack, from Latin culus
bottom, backside, fundament. For second element, see sack (n.1). Application to streets and alleys
is from 1800.


railroad (n.)

1757, from rail (n.1) + road. Originally road laid with rails for heavy wagons (in mining). The
process itself (but not the word) seems to have been in use by late 17c. Application to passenger
and freight trains dates from 1825, though tending to be replaced in this sense in England by
railway.


attachment (n.)

c.1400, arrest of a person on judicial warrant (mid-13c. in Anglo-Latin), from French attachement,
from attacher (see attach). Application to property (including, later, wages) dates from 1590s;
meaning sympathy, devotion is recorded from 1704; that of something that is attached to something
else dates from 1797 and has become perhaps the most common use since the rise of e-mail.


apposition (n.)

application (of one thing to another), mid-15c., originally in grammatical sense, from Latin
appositionem (nominative appositio), noun of action from past participle stem of apponere to put to
(see apposite). General sense is from 1540s.


dark (adj.)

Old English deorc dark, obscure, gloomy; sad, cheerless; sinister, wicked, from Proto-Germanic
*derkaz (cognates: Old High German tarchanjan to hide, conceal). Absence of light especially at
night is the original meaning. Application to colors is 16c. Theater slang for closed is from 1916.


misapplication (n.)

c.1600, from mis- (1) + application.


brainstorm (n.)

brilliant idea, mental excitement, fit of mental application, 1849, from brain (n.) + figurative use
of storm (n.). As a verb, recorded from 1920s. Related: Brainstormed; brainstorming.


pundit (n.)

1670s, learned Hindu, especially one versed in Sanskrit lore, from Hindi payndit a learned man,
master, teacher, from Sanskrit payndita-s a learned man, scholar, of uncertain origin. Broader
application in English is first recorded 1816. Related: Punditry.


jive (adj.)

not acting right, 1969, U.S. black English, from jive (n.) (see jive (1)). Extended form jive-ass
(1964, adj.; 1969, n.) is defined in OED as A word of fluid meaning and application.


linkage (n.)

1874, from link (v.) + -age.     To understand the principle of Peaucellier's link-work, it is
convenient to consider previously certain properties of a linkage, (to coin a new and useful word of
general application), consisting of an arrangement of six links, obtained in the following manner
... (etc.). [Recent Discoveries in Mechanical Conservation of Motion, in Van Nostrand's Eclectic
Engineering Magazine, vol. XI, July-December 1874]


detergent (adj.)

1610s, from Latin detergentem (nominative detergens), present participle of detergere to wipe away,
cleanse, from de- off, away (see de-) + tergere to rub, polish, wipe. Originally a medical term,
application to chemical cleansing product is from 1938.


abolition (n.)

1520s, from Middle French abolition or directly from Latin abolitionem (nominative abolitio) an
abolition, noun of action from past participle stem of abolere destroy (see abolish). Specific
application to opposition to the black slave trade as a political question is first attested 1788.


diagnosis (n.)

1680s, medical Latin application of Greek diagnosis a discerning, distinguishing, from stem of
diagignoskein discern, distinguish, literally to know thoroughly, from dia- apart (see dia-) +
gignoskein to learn (see gnostic).


centrist (n.)

1872, from French centriste, from centre (see center (n.)). Originally in English with reference to
French politics; general application to other political situations is from 1890.    Where M. St.
Hilaire is seen to most advantage, however, is when quietly nursing one of that weak-kneed
congregation who sit in the middle of the House, and call themselves Centrists. A French Centrist is
--exceptis eoccipiendis--a man who has never been able to make up his mind, nor is likely to. [Men
of the Third Republic, London, 1873]


denim (n.)

1690s, from French serge de N&icirc;mes serge from N&icirc;mes, town in southern France. Application
to coarse cotton cloth is first recorded 1850 in American English. Denims pants made of denim
recorded from 1868. The place name is Roman Nemausus, said to be ultimately from Gaulish nemo
sanctuary.


practice (n.)

early 15c., practise, practical application, originally especially of medicine but also alchemy,
education, etc.; from Old French pratiser, from Medieval Latin practicare (see practice (v.)). From
early 15c. often assimilated in spelling to nouns in -ice. Also as practic, which survived in
parallel into 19c.


cookie (n.)

1703, American English, from Dutch koekje little cake, diminutive of koek cake, from Middle Dutch
koke (see cake (n.)). Slang application to persons attested since 1920. Phrase that's the way the
cookie crumbles that's the way things happen is from 1957.


swale (n.)

low, hollow place, often boggy, 1580s, special use of Scottish swaill low, hollow place, or East
Anglian dialectal swale shady place (mid-15c.); both probably from Old Norse svalr cool, from Proto-
Germanic *swalaz. A local word in England, in U.S. given broad application, especially to the lower
tracts of the prairie and recently to landscaping features in suburban developments.


locust (n.1)

grasshopper, early 14c., borrowed earlier in Old French form languste (c.1200), from Latin locusta
locust, lobster (see lobster).In the Hebrew Bible there are nine different names for the insect or
for particular species or varieties; in the English Bible they are rendered sometimes 'locust,'
sometimes 'beetle,' 'grasshopper,' 'caterpillar,' 'palmerworm,' etc. The precise application of
several names is unknown. [OED]


chattel (n.)

early 13c., chatel property, goods, from Old French chatel chattels, goods, wealth, possessions,
property; profit; cattle, from Late Latin capitale property (see cattle, which is the Old North
French form of the same word). Application to slaves (1640s) is a rhetorical figure of
abolitionists, etc.


calm (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French calme tranquility, quiet, traditionally from Old Italian calma, from Late
Latin cauma heat of the mid-day sun (in Italy, a time when everything rests and is still), from
Greek kauma heat (especially of the sun), from kaiein to burn (see caustic). Spelling influenced by
Latin calere to be hot. Figurative application to social or mental conditions is 16c.


Hispanic (adj.)

pertaining to Spain (especially ancient Spain) 1580s, from Latin Hispanicus, from Hispania Iberian
Peninsula, from Hispanus Spaniard (see Spaniard). Specific application to Spanish-speaking parts of
the New World is 1889, American English; especially applied since c.1972 to Spanish-speaking persons
of Latin American descent living in U.S.


tycoon (n.)

1857, title given by foreigners to the shogun of Japan (said to have been used by his supporters
when addressing foreigners, as an attempt to convey that the shogun was more important than the
emperor), from Japanese taikun great lord or prince, from Chinese tai great + kiun lord. Transferred
meaning important person is attested from 1861, in reference to U.S. president Abraham Lincoln (in
the diary of his secretary, John Hay); specific application to wealthy and powerful businessman is
post-World War I.


artifact (n.)

1821, artefact, anything made by human art, from Italian artefatto, from Latin arte by skill
(ablative of ars art; see art (n.)) + factum thing made, from facere to make, do (see factitious).
The spelling with -i- is by 1884, by influence of the Latin stem. Archaeological application dates
from 1890.


sonata (n.)

1690s, from Italian sonata piece of instrumental music, literally sounded (i.e. played on an
instrument, as opposed to cantata sung), fem. past participle of sonare to sound, from Latin sonare
to sound, from PIE *swene-, from root *swen- to sound (see sound (n.1)). Meaning narrowed by mid-
18c. toward application to large-scale works in three or four movements.


recur (v.)

late 14c., recover from illness or suffering; mid-15c., to return (to a place), from Latin recurrere
to return, run back, hasten back, figuratively revert, recur, from re- back, again (see re-) +
currere to run (see current (adj.)). Originally of persons; application to thoughts, ideas, etc. is
recorded from 1620s. Meaning happen again is from 1670s. Related: Recurred; recurring.


blue laws

1781, severe Puritanical code said to have been enacted 18c. in New Haven, Connecticut; of uncertain
origin, perhaps from one of the ground senses behind blues, or from notion of coldness. Or perhaps
connected to bluestocking in the sense of puritanically plain or mean (see bluestocking, which is a
different application of the same term; the parliament of 1653 was derisively called the
bluestocking parliament). The common explanation that they were written on blue paper is not
considered valid; pale blue paper was used for many old U.S. legal documents and there would have
been nothing notable about its use in this case.


foment (v.)

early 15c., apply hot liquids, from Old French fomenter (13c.) apply hot compress (to a wound), from
Late Latin fomentare, from Latin fomentum warm application, poultice, contraction of *fovimentum,
from fovere to warm; cherish, encourage (see fever). Extended sense of stimulate, instigate (1620s)
was in the French. Related: Fomented; fomenting.


colony (n.)

late 14c., ancient Roman settlement outside Italy, from Latin colonia settled land, farm, landed
estate, from colonus husbandman, tenant farmer, settler in new land, from colere to inhabit,
cultivate, frequent, practice, tend, guard, respect, from PIE root *kwel- (1) move around (source of
Latin -cola inhabitant; see cycle (n.)). Also used by the Romans to translate Greek apoikia people
from home. Modern application dates from 1540s.


lubricate (v.)

1620s, to make slippery or smooth (especially by the application of an oil), from Latin lubricatus,
past participle of lubricare to make slippery or smooth, from lubricus slippery (see lubricant
(adj.)). Related: Lubricated; lubricating. Earlier verb was lubrify (1610s), from Medieval Latin
lubrificare.


North Sea

Old English nor&eth;s&aelig;, usually meaning the Bristol Channel. The application to the body of
water presently so named (late 13c.) is from Dutch (Noordzee, Middle Dutch Noortzee); it lies to the
north of Holland, where it was contrasted with the inland Zuider Zee, literally Southern Sea). To
the Danes, it sometimes was Vesterhavet West Sea. In English, this had been typically called the
German Sea or German Ocean, which follows the Roman name for it, Oceanus Germanicus. German
persisted on some British maps at least into the 1830s.


remand (v.)

mid-15c., from Middle French remander send for again (12c.) or directly from Late Latin remandare to
send back word, repeat a command, from Latin re- back (see re-) + mandare to consign, order, commit
to one's charge (see mandate (n.)). Specifically in law, send back (a prisoner) on refusing an
application for discharge. Related: Remanded; remanding.


