appraiser (n.)

early 15c., agent noun from appraise (v.).


appraise (v.)

c.1400, to set a value on, from stem of Old French aprisier apraise, set a price on (14c., Modern
French appr&eacute;cier), from Late Latin appretiare value, estimate, from ad- to (see ad-) +
pretium price (see price (n.)). Original English spelling apprize altered by influence of praise.
Related: Appraised; appraising.


estimate (v.)

1530s, appraise the worth of, from Latin aestimatus, past participle of aestimare to value, appraise
(see esteem). Meaning form an approximate notion is from 1660s. Related: Estimated; estimates;
estimating.


appraisal (n.)

setting of a price, by 1784, American English, from appraise + -al (2). Figurative sense, act of
appraising (originally a term of literary criticism) is from 1817.


apprize (v.)

occasional legalese form of appraise, c.1400. Related: Apprized; apprizing.


censure (n.)

late 14c., originally ecclesiastical, from Latin censura judgment, opinion, also office of a censor,
from census, past participle of censere appraise, estimate, assess (see censor (n.)). General sense
of a finding of fault and an expression of condemnation is from c.1600.


appreciate (v.)

1650s, to esteem or value highly, from Late Latin appretiatus, past participle of appretiare to set
a price to (see appraise). Meaning to rise in value (intransitive) first recorded 1789. Related:
Appreciated; appreciating.


esteem (v.)

mid-15c., from Middle French estimer (14c.), from Latin aestimare to value, appraise, perhaps
ultimately from *ais-temos one who cuts copper, i.e. mints money (but de Vaan finds this not very
credible). At first used as we would now use estimate; sense of value, respect is 1530s. Related:
Esteemed; esteeming.


aim (v.)

early 14c., to estimate, calculate, also to intend, from Old French aesmer value, rate; count,
estimate, from Latin aestimare appraise (see estimation); current meaning apparently developed from
esteem, to calculate, to calculate with a view to action (c.1400), then to direct a missile, a blow,
etc. (1570s). Related: Aimed; aiming.


ponder (v.)

early 14c., to estimate the worth of, to appraise, from Old French ponderer to weigh, poise (14c.,
Modern French pond&eacute;rer) and directly from Latin ponderare ponder, consider, reflect,
literally to weigh, from pondus (genitive ponderis) weigh (see pound (n.1)). Meaning to weigh a
matter mentally is attested from late 14c. Related: Pondered; pondering; ponderation.


tome (n.)

1510s, a single volume of a multi-volume work, from Middle French tome (16c.), from Latin tomus
section of a book, tome, from Greek tomos volume, section of a book, originally a section, piece cut
off, from temnein to cut, from PIE *tem- to cut (cognates: second element in Latin aestimare to
value, appraise, Old Church Slavonic tina to cleave, split, Middle Irish tamnaim I cut off, Welsh
tam morsel). Sense of a large book is attested from 1570s.


guess (v.)

c.1300, gessen to estimate, appraise, originally take aim, probably from Scandinavian (compare
Middle Danish gitse, getze to guess, Old Norse geta guess, get), possibly influenced by Middle Dutch
gessen, Middle Low German gissen to guess, all from Proto-Germanic *getiskanan to get (see get).
Sense evolution is from to get, to to take aim at, to to estimate. Meaning to hit upon the right
answer is from 1540s. U.S. sense of calculate, recon is true to the oldest English meaning. Spelling
with gu- is late 16c., sometimes attributed to Caxton and his early experience as a printer in
Bruges. Related: Guessed; guessing. Guessing game attested from 1650s.


censor (n.)

1530s, Roman magistrate who took censuses and oversaw public morals, from Middle French censor and
directly from Latin censor, from censere to appraise, value, judge, from PIE root *kens- speak
solemnly, announce (cognates: Sanskrit &#347;amsati recites, praises, &#347;asa song of praise).
There were two of them at a time in classical times, usually patricians, and they also had charge of
public finances and public works. Transferred sense of officious judge of morals and conduct in
English is from 1590s. Roman censor also had a transferred sense of a severe judge; a rigid
moralist; a censurer. Of books, plays (later films, etc.), 1640s. By the early decades of the 19c.
the meaning of the English word had shaded into state agent charged with suppression of speech or
published matter deemed politically subversive. Related: Censorial.


