apprehend (v.)

mid-14c., to grasp in the senses or mind, from Old French aprendre (12c.) teach; learn; take, grasp;
acquire, or directly from Latin apprehendere to take hold of, grasp, from ad- to + prehendere to
seize (see prehensile). Metaphoric extension to seize with the mind took place in Latin, and was the
sole sense of cognate Old French aprendre (Modern French apprendre to learn, to be informed about;
also compare apprentice). Original sense returned in English in meaning to seize in the name of the
law, arrest, recorded from 1540s, which use probably was taken directly from Latin. Related:
Apprehended; apprehending.


unapprehended (adj.)

1590s, not understood; 1610s, not taken or arrested, from un- (1) not + past participle of apprehend
(v.).


apprehensible (adj.)

late 15c., from Latin apprehensibilis that can be seized, from apprehens-, past participle stem of
apprehendere (see apprehend).


apprise (v.)

to notify, 1690s, from French appris, past participle of apprendre to inform, teach, literally to
lay hold of (in the mind), another metaphoric meaning of Latin apprehendere (see apprehend).
Related: Apprised; apprising.


apprehension (n.)

perception, comprehension, late 14c., from Old French apprehension or directly from Latin
apprehensionem (nominative apprehensio), noun of action from past participle stem of apprehendere
(see apprehend). Sense of seizure on behalf of authority is 1570s; that of anticipation (usually
with dread) is recorded from c.1600.


misapprehend (v.)

1640s, from mis- (1) + apprehend. Related: Misapprehended; misapprehending.


apprehensive (adj.)

late 14c., capable of perceiving, fitted for mental impression, from Medieval Latin apprehensivus,
from Latin apprehensus, past participle of apprehendere (see apprehend). Meaning fearful of what is
to come is recorded from 1718, via notion of capable of grasping with the mind (c.1600). Related:
Apprehensively; apprehensiveness.


noumenon (n.)

1796, object of intellectual intuition (opposed to a phenomenon), term introduced by Kant, from
Greek noumenon that which is perceived, neuter passive present participle of noein to apprehend,
perceive by the mind (from noos mind). With passive suffix -menos.


apprentice (n.)

c.1300, from Old French aprentiz someone learning (13c., Modern French apprenti, taking the older
form as a plural), also as an adjective, unskilled, inexperienced, from aprendre (Modern French
apprendre) to learn; to teach, contracted from Latin apprehendere (see apprehend). Shortened form
prentice long was more usual in English.


catch (v.)

c.1200, to take, capture, from Anglo-French or Old North French cachier catch, capture (animals)
(Old French chacier hunt, pursue, drive (animals), Modern French chasser to hunt; making it a
doublet of chase (v.)), from Vulgar Latin *captiare try to seize, chase (also source of Spanish
cazar, Italian cacciare), from Latin captare to take, hold, frequentative of Latin capere to take,
hold (see capable).    Senses in early Middle English also included chase, hunt, which later went
with chase (v.). Of infections from 1540s; of fire from 1734; of sleep, etc., from early 14c.
Related: Catched (obsolete); catching; caught.    Meaning act as a catcher in baseball recorded from
1865. To catch on apprehend is 1884, American English colloquial. To catch (someone's) eye is first
attested 1813, in Jane Austen. Catch as catch can first attested late 14c.


