approach (n.)

mid-15c., from approach (v.). Figurative sense of means of handling a problem, etc. is first
attested 1905.


approach (v.)

c. 1300, from Anglo-French approcher, Old French aprochier approach, come closer (12c., Modern
French approcher), from Late Latin appropiare go nearer to, from Latin ad- to (see ad-) + Late Latin
propiare come nearer, comparative of Latin prope near (see propinquity). Replaced Old English
neahl&aelig;can.


approachable (adj.)

1570s, from approach (v.) + -able. Figurative sense, affable, friendly, is from 1610s. Related:
Approachably; approachability.


access (n.)

early 14c., an attack of fever, from Old French acces onslaught, attack; onset (of an illness)
(14c.), from Latin accessus a coming to, an approach, noun use of past participle of accedere to
approach (see accede). The later senses are directly from Latin. Meaning an entrance is from c.
1600. Meaning habit or power of getting into the presence of (someone or something) is from late
14c.


aggress (v.)

attack, 1714, back-formation from aggression, but used earlier with a sense of approach (1570s) and
in this sense from French aggresser, from Late Latin aggressare, frequentative of Latin aggredi to
approach, attack. Related: Aggressed; aggressing.


adit (n.)

entrance, c. 1600, from Latin aditus approach, entrance, a going to or drawing near, from past
participle stem of adire to approach, from ad- to (see ad-) + ire to go, from PIE root *ei- to go
(see ion).


avenue (n.)

c. 1600, a way of approach (originally a military word), from Middle French avenue way of access,
from Old French avenue act of approaching, arrival, noun use of fem. of avenu, past participle of
avenir to come to, arrive, from Latin advenire to come to, from ad- to (see ad-) + venire to come
(see venue). Meaning shifted to a way of approach to a country-house, usually bordered by trees,
hence, a broad, tree-lined roadway (1650s), then to wide, main street (by 1846, especially in U.S.).


address (n.)

1530s, dutiful or courteous approach, from address (v.) and from French adresse. Sense of formal
speech is from 1751. Sense of superscription of a letter is from 1712 and led to the meaning place
of residence (1888).


lighter (n.1)

barge, late 15c., agent noun from light (adj.1), with a sense of lightening a load, or else from
Dutch lichter, from lichten to lighten, unload, on the same notion. They are used in loading or
unloading ships that cannot approach a wharf.


accessory (adj.)

1550s, subordinate, from Late Latin accessorius, from accessor, agent noun from accedere to approach
(see accede). Meaning aiding in crime is from c. 1600.


accession (n.)

act of coming to a position, especially of a throne, 1640s, from Latin accessionem (nominative
accessio) a going to, joining, increase, noun of action from past participle stem of accedere
approach, enter upon (see accede).


aggressor (n.)

1670s, from Latin aggressor, agent noun from aggredi to approach, attack (see aggression).


aggressive (adj.)

1791, from Latin aggress-, past participle stem of aggredi to approach, attack (see aggression) +
-ive. In psychological use from 1913, first in translations of Freud. Related: Aggressively;
aggressiveness.


accessory (n.)

also accessary, early 15c. as a legal term in the criminal sense of one aiding in a crime; also that
which is subordinate to something else, from Late Latin accessorius, from accessor, agent noun from
accedere to approach (see accede). Attested from 1896 as woman's smaller articles of dress; hence
accessorize.


rapprochement (n.)

establishment of cordial relations, 1809, from French rapprochement reunion, reconciliation,
literally a bringing near, from rapprocher bring near, from re- back, again (see re-) + aprochier
(see approach (v.)).


sleigh (n.)

vehicle mounted on runners for use on ice and snow, 1703, American and Canadian English, from Dutch
slee, shortened from slede (see sled (n.)). As a verb from 1728. Related: Sleighing. Sleigh-ride is
first recorded 1770; sleigh-bells is from c. 1780; they originally were used to give warning of the
approach of a sleigh.


accessible (adj.)

c. 1400, affording access, from Middle French accessible, from Late Latin accessibilis, verbal
adjective from Latin accessus a coming near, approach (see access (n.)). Meaning easy to reach is
from 1640s; Of art or writing, able to be readily understood, 1961 (a term not needed in the years
before writing or art often deliberately was made not so).


liberal (n.)

1820, member of the Liberal party of Great Britain, from liberal (adj.). Used early 20c. of less
dogmatic Christian churches; in reference to a political ideology not conservative or fascist but
short of socialism, from c. 1920.    This is the attitude of mind which has come to be known as
liberal. It implies vigorous convictions, tolerance for the opinions of others, and a persistent
desire for sound progress. It is a method of approach which has played a notable and constructive
part in our history, and which merits a thorough trial today in the attack on our absorbingly
interesting American task. [Guy Emerson, The New Frontier, 1920]


joust (v.)

c. 1300, fight with a spear or lance on horseback with another knight; tilt in a tournament, from
Old French joster to joust, tilt, from Vulgar Latin *iuxtare to approach, come together, meet,
originally be next to, from Latin iuxta beside, near, related to iungere join together (see
jugular). Formerly spelled, and until modern times pronounced, just. Related: Jousted; jousting.


accede (v.)

early 15c., from Latin accedere approach, enter upon, from ad- to (see ad-) + cedere go, move (see
cede). Latin ad- usually became ac- before k sounds. Related: Acceded; acceding.


outrageous (adj.)

c. 1300, excessive, extravagant, from Old French outrageus, outrajos immoderate, excessive, violent,
lawless (Modern French outrageux), from outrage, oltrage (see outrage). Meaning flagrantly evil is
late 14c.; modern teen slang usages of it unwittingly approach the original and etymological sense
of outrage. Related: Outrageously; outrageousness.


advent (n.)

important arrival, 1742, an extended sense of  Advent season before Christmas (Old English), from
Latin adventus a coming, approach, arrival, in Church Latin the coming of the Savior, from past
participle stem of advenire arrive, come to, from ad- to (see ad-) + venire to come (see venue). In
English, also sometimes extended to the Pentecost.


aggression (n.)

1610s, unprovoked attack, from French aggression (16c.), from Latin aggressionem (nominative
aggressio) a going to, an attack, noun of action from past participle stem of aggredi to approach;
attack, from ad- to (see ad-) + gradi (past participle gressus) to step, from gradus a step (see
grade (n.)). Psychological sense of hostile or destructive behavior first recorded 1912 in A.A.
Brill's translation of Freud.


mackerel (n.)

edible fish, c. 1300, from Old French maquerel mackerel (Modern French maquereau), of unknown origin
but apparently identical with Old French maquerel pimp, procurer, broker, agent, intermediary, a
word from a Germanic source (compare Middle Dutch makelaer broker, from Old Frisian mek marriage,
from maken to make). The connection is obscure, but medieval people had imaginative notions about
the erotic habits of beasts. The fish approach the shore in shoals in summertime to spawn.
Exclamation holy mackerel is attested from 1876.


push (v.)

early 14c., from Old French poulser (Modern French pousser), from Latin pulsare to beat, strike,
push, frequentative of pellere (past participle pulsus) to push, drive, beat (see pulse (n.1)).
Meaning promote is from 1714; meaning approach a certain age is from 1937. For palatization of -s-,
OED compares brush (n.1); quash. Related: Pushed; pushing.    Pushing up the daisies now, said a
soldier of his dead comrade. [The American Florist, vol. XLVIII, No. 1504, March 31, 1917]    To
push (someone) around is from 1923. To push (one's) luck is from 1754. To push the envelope in
figurative sense is late 1980s. To push up daisies be dead and buried is from World War I.


greet (v.)

Old English gretan to come in contact with in any sense (attack, accost as well as salute, welcome,
and touch, take hold of, handle, as in hearpan gretan to play the harp), seek out, approach, from
West Germanic *grotjan (cognates: Old Saxon grotian, Old Frisian greta, Dutch groeten, Old High
German gruozen, German gr&uuml;&szlig;en to salute, greet), of uncertain origin.    In English,
German, and Dutch, the primary sense has become to salute, but the word once had much broader
meaning. Perhaps originally to resound (via notion of cause to speak), causative of Proto-Germanic
*gr&aelig;tanan, root of Old English gr&aelig;tan (Anglian gretan) weep, bewail, from PIE *gher- (2)
to call out. Greet still can mean cry, weep in Scottish &amp; northern England dialect, though this
might be from a different root. Gr&aelig;tan probably also is the source of the second element in
regret. Related: Greeted; greeting.


come (v.)

Old English cuman come, approach, land; come to oneself, recover; arrive; assemble (class IV strong
verb; past tense cuom, com, past participle cumen), from Proto-Germanic *kwem- (cognates: Old Saxon
cuman, Old Frisian kuma, Middle Dutch comen, Dutch komen, Old High German queman, German kommen, Old
Norse koma, Gothic qiman), from PIE root *gwa-, *gwem- to go, come (cognates: Sanskrit gamati he
goes, Avestan jamaiti goes, Tocharian kakmu come, Lithuanian gemu to be born, Greek bainein to go,
walk, step, Latin venire to come).    The substitution of Middle English -o- for Old English -u-
before -m-, -n-, or -r- was a scribal habit before minims to avoid misreading the letters in the old
style handwriting, which jammed letters. The practice similarly transformed some, monk, tongue,
worm. Modern past tense form came is Middle English, probably from Old Norse kvam, replacing Old
English cuom.    Remarkably productive with prepositions (NTC's Dictionary of Phrasal Verbs lists
198 combinations); consider the varied senses in come to regain consciousness, come over possess (as
an emotion), come at attack, come on (interj.) be serious, and come off occur. For sexual senses,
see cum.


abstract (adj.)

late 14c., originally in grammar (of nouns), from Latin abstractus drawn away, past participle of
abstrahere to drag away, detach, pull away, divert; also figuratively, from ab(s)- away (see ab-) +
trahere draw (see tract (n.1)).    Meaning withdrawn or separated from material objects or practical
matters is from mid-15c. That of difficult to understand, abstruse is from c. 1400. Specifically in
reference to modern art, it dates from 1914; abstract expressionism as an American-based uninhibited
approach to art exemplified by Jackson Pollock is from 1952, but the term itself had been used in
the 1920s of Kandinsky and others.    Oswald Herzog, in an article on Der Abstrakte Expressionismus
(Sturm, heft 50, 1919) gives us a statement which with equal felicity may be applied to the artistic
attitude of the Dadaists. Abstract Expressionism is perfect Expressionism, he writes. It is pure
creation. It casts spiritual processes into a corporeal mould. It does not borrow objects from the
real world; it creates its own objects .... The abstract reveals the will of the artist; it becomes
expression. ... [William A. Drake, The Life and Deeds of Dada, 1922]   <hr />   Then, that art we
have called abstract for want of any possible descriptive term, with which we have been patient,
and, even, appreciative, getting high stimulation by the new Guggenheim non-objective Art Museum, is
reflected in our examples of surrealism, dadaism, and what-not, to assert our acquaintance in every
art, fine or other. [Report of the Art Reference Department of Pratt Institute Free Library for year
ending June 30, 1937]


Valentine (n.)

mid-15c., sweetheart chosen on St. Valentine's Day, from Late Latin Valentinus, the name of two
early Italian saints (from Latin valentia strength, capacity; see valence). Choosing a sweetheart on
this day originated 14c. as a custom in English and French court circles. Meaning letter or card
sent to a sweetheart first recorded 1824. The romantic association of the day is said to be from it
being around the time when birds choose their mates.    For this was on seynt Volantynys day  Whan
euery bryd cometh there to chese his make.  [Chaucer, Parlement of Foules, c. 1381]    Probably the
date was the informal first day of spring in whatever French region invented the custom (many
surviving medieval calendars reckon the start of spring on the 7th or 22nd of February). No evidence
connects it with the Roman Lupercalia (an 18c. theory) or to any romantic or avian quality in either
of the saints. The custom of sending special cards or letters on this date flourished in England c.
1840-1870, declined around the turn of the 20th century, and revived 1920s.    To speak of the
particular Customs of the English Britons, I shall begin with Valentine's Day, Feb. 14. when young
Men and Maidens get their several Names writ down upon Scrolls of Paper rolled up, and lay 'em
asunder, the Men drawing the Maidens Names, and these the Mens; upon which, the Men salute their
chosen Valentines and present them with Gloves, &amp;c.; This Custom (which sometimes introduces a
Match) is grounded upon the Instinct of Animals, which about this Time of the Year, feeling a new
Heat by the approach of the Sun, begin to couple. [The Present State of Great Britain and Ireland
London, 1723]


science (n.)

mid-14c., what is known, knowledge (of something) acquired by study; information; also assurance of
knowledge, certitude, certainty, from Old French science knowledge, learning, application; corpus of
human knowledge (12c.), from Latin scientia knowledge, a knowing; expertness, from sciens (genitive
scientis) intelligent, skilled, present participle of scire to know, probably originally to separate
one thing from another, to distinguish, related to scindere to cut, divide, from PIE root *skei- to
cut, to split (cognates: Greek skhizein to split, rend, cleave, Gothic skaidan, Old English sceadan
to divide, separate; see shed (v.)).    From late 14c. in English as book-learning, also a
particular branch of knowledge or of learning; also skillfulness, cleverness; craftiness. From c.
1400 as experiential knowledge; also a skill, handicraft; a trade. From late 14c. as collective
human knowledge (especially that gained by systematic observation, experiment, and reasoning).
Modern (restricted) sense of body of regular or methodical observations or propositions concerning a
particular subject or speculation is attested from 1725; in 17c.-18c. this concept commonly was
called philosophy. Sense of non-arts studies is attested from 1670s.    Science, since people must
do it, is a socially embedded activity. It progresses by hunch, vision, and intuition. Much of its
change through time does not record a closer approach to absolute truth, but the alteration of
cultural contexts that influence it so strongly. Facts are not pure and unsullied bits of
information; culture also influences what we see and how we see it. Theories, moreover, are not
inexorable inductions from facts. The most creative theories are often imaginative visions imposed
upon facts; the source of imagination is also strongly cultural. [Stephen Jay Gould, introduction to
The Mismeasure of Man, 1981]   <hr />   In science you must not talk before you know. In art you
must not talk before you do. In literature you must not talk before you think. [John Ruskin, The
Eagle's Nest, 1872]    The distinction is commonly understood as between theoretical truth (Greek
episteme) and methods for effecting practical results (tekhne), but science sometimes is used for
practical applications and art for applications of skill. To blind (someone) with science confuse by
the use of big words or complex explanations is attested from 1937, originally noted as a phrase
from Australia and New Zealand.


