aptitude (n.)

early 15c., tendency, likelihood, from Middle French aptitude (14c.) or directly from Late Latin
aptitudo (genitive aptitudinis) fitness, noun of quality from Latin aptus joined, fitted (see apt).
Meaning natural capacity to learn is 1540s; that of quality of being fit (for a purpose or position)
is from 1640s.


SAT (n.)

1961, initialism (acronym) for Scholastic Aptitude Test.


inaptitude (n.)

1610s, from in- (1) not, opposite of + aptitude.


mimetic (adj.)

1630s, having an aptitude for mimicry, from Greek mimetikos imitative, good at imitating, from
mimetos, verbal adjective of mimeisthai to imitate. Originally of persons, attested of animals or
plants from 1851. Related: Mimetical (1610s); mimetically.


facility (n.)

early 15c., gentleness, from Middle French facilit&eacute;, from Latin facilitatem (nominative
facilitas) easiness, ease, fluency, willingness, from facilis easy (see facile). Its sense in
English moved from genteelness to opportunity (1510s), to aptitude, ease (1530s). Meaning place for
doing something, which makes the word so beloved of journalists and fuzzy writers, first recorded
1872.


ability (n.)

late 14c., from Old French ablet&eacute; expert at handling (something), from Latin habilitatem
(nominative habilitas) aptitude, noun of quality from habilis easy to manage, handy (see able). One
case where a Latin silent -h- failed to make a return in English (despite efforts of 16c.-17c.
scholars); see H.


flair (n.)

mid-14c., an odor, from Old French flair odor or scent, from flairer to smell, from Vulgar Latin
*flagrare, dissimilated from Latin fragrare emit (a sweet) odor (see fragrant). Sense of special
aptitude is American English, 1925, perhaps from notion of a hound's ability to track scent.


attitude (n.)

1660s, via French attitude (17c.), from Italian attitudine disposition, posture, also aptness,
promptitude, from Late Latin aptitudinem (nominative aptitudo; see aptitude). Originally 17c. a
technical term in art for the posture of a figure in a statue or painting; later generalized to a
posture of the body supposed to imply some mental state (1725). Sense of settled behavior reflecting
feeling or opinion is first recorded 1837. Connotations of antagonistic and uncooperative developed
by 1962 in slang.


industry (n.)

late 15c., cleverness, skill, from Old French industrie activity; aptitude (14c.) or directly from
Latin industria diligence, activity, zeal, fem. of industrius industrious, diligent, used as a noun,
from early Latin indostruus diligent, from indu in, within + stem of struere to build (see structure
(n.)). Sense of diligence, effort is from 1530s; meaning trade or manufacture first recorded 1560s;
that of systematic work is 1610s.


touch (n.)

c.1300, from Old French toche touch, a touching; a blow, attack; a test (Modern French touche), from
tocher to touch (see touch (v.)). Meaning slight attack (of an illness, etc.) is recorded from
1660s. Sense of communication (to be in or out of touch) is from 1884. Sense of skill or aptitude in
some topic is first recorded 1927, probably from music or the arts. Soft touch person easily
manipulated is recorded from 1940.


talent (n.)

late 13c., inclination, disposition, will, desire, from Old French talent (12c.), from Medieval
Latin talenta, plural of talentum inclination, leaning, will, desire (11c.), in classical Latin
balance, weight; sum of money, from Greek talanton a balance, pair of scales, hence weight, definite
weight, anything weighed, and in later times sum of money, from PIE *tele- to lift, support, weigh,
with derivatives referring to measured weights and thence money and payment [Watkins]; see extol.
An ancient denomination of weight, originally Babylonian (though the name is Greek), and varying
widely in value among different peoples and at different times. [Century Dictionary]    According to
Liddell &amp; Scott, as a monetary sum, considered to consist of 6,000 drachmae, or, in Attica,
57.75 lbs. of silver. Also borrowed in other Germanic languages and Celtic. Attested in Old English
as talente). The Medieval Latin and common Romanic sense developed from figurative use of the word
in the sense of money. Meaning special natural ability, aptitude, gift committed to one for use and
improvement developed by mid-15c., in part perhaps from figurative sense wealth, but mostly from the
parable of the talents in Matt. xxv:14-30. Meaning persons of ability collectively is from 1856.


