arbitrary (adj.)

early 15c., deciding by one's own discretion, from Old French arbitraire (14c.) or directly from
Latin arbitrarius depending on the will, uncertain, from arbiter (see arbiter). The original meaning
gradually descended to capricious and despotic (1640s). Related: Arbitrarily; arbitrariness.


roque

1899, arbitrary alteration of croquet [OED].


zillion (n.)

1942, arbitrary coinage with no definite numerical value; first recorded in Billboard.


flapdoodle (n.)

1833, originally the stuff they feed fools on [Marryat]; an arbitrary formation.


jillion (n.)

by 1939, arbitrary coinage, modeled on million, etc.


nite (n.)

arbitrary respelling of night, attested from 1931.


Piggly-Wiggly

chain of self-service grocery stores, started 1916 in Memphis. According to founder's reminiscence
from 1921 arbitrary coinage, simply something different from anything used before [Current Opinion].


doohickey (n.)

also doohicky, a name for something one doesn't know the name of, 1914, American English, arbitrary
formation.


shelta (n.)

secret language of Irish tinkers, 1876, of unknown origin. According to OED it mostly consists of
Irish or Gaelic words with inversion or arbitrary substitution of initial consonants.


grok (v.)

to understand empathically, 1961, arbitrary formation by U.S. science fiction writer Robert A.
Heinlein (1907-1988) in his book Stranger in a Strange Land. In popular use 1960s; perhaps obsolete
now except in internet technology circles.


Spandex (n.)

synthetic fiber, 1959, American English, proprietary name, an arbitrary formation from expand +
commercial suffix -ex.


Kleenex (n.)

1925, proprietary name, registered by Cellucotton Products Company, Neenah, Wisconsin, U.S.; later
Kimberly-Clark Corp. An arbitrary alteration of clean + brand-name suffix -ex.


Freon (n.)

refrigerant chemical, 1932, proprietary name in U.S. for fluorocarbons used in refrigeration
technology. The name was apparently constructed from fre(eze) + -on used as an arbitrary suffix
[Flood].


giga-

arbitrary word-forming element meaning billion in the metric system, 1947, from Greek gigas giant
(see giant).


Star Chamber (n.)

late 14c., apartment in the royal palace at Westminster in which members of the king's council sat
to exercise jurisdiction 14-15c., it evolved 15c. into a court of criminal jurisdiction, infamous
under James I and Charles I for arbitrary and oppressive proceedings. Abolished 1641. Supposedly so
called because gilt stars had been painted on the ceiling. Later there was a star on the door.


Fahrenheit

temperature scale, 1753, named for Gabriel Daniel Fahrenheit (1686-1736), Prussian physicist who
proposed the scale in 1714. The zero in it is arbitrary, based on the lowest temperature observed by
him in the winter of 1709. An abstract surname meaning literally experience.


Diazepam (n.)

1961, from (benzo)diazep(ine) + -am, apparently an arbitrary suffix. The element diazo- denotes two
nitrogen atoms combined with one hydrocarbon radical.


Teflon (n.)

commercially important synthetic polymer, 1945, proprietary name registered in U.S. by du Pont, from
chemical name (poly)te(tra)fl(uoroethylene) + arbitrary ending -on; popularized as a coating of non-
stick pans in 1960s; metaphoric extension, especially in reference to U.S. President Ronald Reagan,
is attested from an Aug. 2, 1983, speech on the floor of Congress by Pat Schroeder.


rhesus

1827, from Modern Latin genus name of a type of East Indian monkey (1799), given by French
naturalist Jean-Baptiste Audebert (1759-1800), said to be an arbitrary use of Latin Rhesus, name of
a legendary prince of Thrace, from Greek Rhesos.


whimwham (n.)

whimsical device, trifle, 1520s, of unknown origin; perhaps from Scandinavian (compare Old Norse
hvima to let the eyes wander, Norwegian kvima to flutter), or else an arbitrary native formation
(compare flim-flam).


sett (n.)

see set (n.1).    The extra t is an arbitrary addition in various technical senses, from a lawn-
tennis to a granite set. Each class of persons has doubtless added it to distinguish the special
sense that means most to it from all others ; but so many are the special senses that the
distinction is now no more distinctive than an Esq. after a man's name, &amp; all would do well to
discard it. [Fowler]


tiddlywinks (n.)

children's tile-flipping game, 1857, probably an arbitrary formation from baby talk, but perhaps
from slang tiddly-wink unlicensed drink shop (1844), from slang tiddly a drink, drunk.


tack (v.1)

late 14c., to attach with a nail, etc., from tack (n.1). Meaning to attach as a supplement (with
suggestion of hasty or arbitrary proceeding) is from 1680s. Related: Tacked; tacking.


Kodak

brand of camera, arbitrary coinage by U.S. inventor George Eastman (1854-1932), U.S. trademark
registered Sept. 4, 1888. In 1890s, practically synonymous with camera and also used as a verb.
Kodachrome, registered trademark for a method of color photography, 1915; the product was
discontinued in 2006.


Pyrex (n.)

1915, proprietary name (Corning Glass Works, Corning, N.Y.), arbitrary coinage, in which eager
etymologists see implications of Greek pyr fire and perhaps Latin rex king; but the prosaic
inventors say it was based on pie (n.1), because pie dishes were among the first products made from
it. The -r- is purely euphonious.


flabbergasted (adj.)

1772, mentioned (with bored) in a magazine article as a new vogue word, perhaps from some dialect
(in 1823 flabbergast was noted as a Sussex word), likely an arbitrary formation from flabby or
flapper and aghast.


rumbustious (adj.)

1778, an arbitrary formation perhaps suggested by rum (adj.) + boisterous, robustious, bumptious,
etc. Coined about the same time were rumbustical, rumgumptious.


trephine (n.)

an improved kind of trepan, 1620s, from French trephine, which is said to be from Latin tres fines
three ends, but perhaps rather an arbitrary diminutive of trepan. As a verb from 1804. Related:
Trephining; trephination.


tyrannical (adj.)

1530s, from Latin tyrannicus arbitrary, despotic, from Greek tyrannikos befitting a despot, from
tyrannos (see tyrant) + -al (1). Tyrannic was used in this sense from late 15c. Related:
Tyrannically.


Naugahyde

trademark name patented (U.S.) Dec. 7, 1937, by United States Rubber Products Inc., for an
artificial leather made from fabric base treated with rubber, etc. From Naugatuk, rubber-making town
in Connecticut, + hyde, an arbitrary variant of hide (n.). The town name is Southern New England
Algonquian *neguttuck one tree, from *negut- one + *-tugk tree.


strop (n.)

mid-14c., loop or strap on a harness, probably from Old French estrop, making it the older and more
correct form of strap (n.), replaced by it from 16c. Specific sense of leather strap used for
sharpening razors first recorded 1702. The verb in this sense is from 1841. Related: Stropped;
stropping. Distribution of senses between strap and strop is arbitrary.


whole nine yards (n.)

by 1970, of unknown origin; perhaps arbitrary (see cloud nine). Among the guesses that have been
made without real evidence: concrete mixer trucks were said to have dispensed in this amount. Or the
yard might be the word used in the slang sense of one hundred dollars. Several similar phrases
meaning everything arose in the 1940s (whole ball of wax, which is likewise of obscure origin, whole
schmear); older examples include whole hog (see hog (n.)) and whole shooting match (1896); whole
shebang (1895).


tangram (n.)

Chinese geometric puzzle, 1864, said to be an arbitrary formation based on anagram, etc. First
element perhaps Chinese t'an to extend, or t'ang, commonly used in Cantonese for Chinese. Some
suggest it is the name of the inventor, but no such person is known to Chinese scholars [OED].
Another theory involves the Tanka, an outcast aboriginal people of southern China, and Western
sailors who discovered the puzzle from their Tanka girlfriends. Perhaps from an obscure sense of
tram. The Chinese name is Ch'i ch'iao t'u seven ingenious plan.


sylph (n.)

1650s, air-spirit, from Modern Latin sylphes (plural), coined 16c. by Paracelsus (1493-1541),
originally referring to any race of spirits inhabiting the air, described as being mortal but
lacking a soul. Paracelsus' word seems to be an arbitrary coinage, but perhaps it holds a suggestion
of Latin silva and Greek nymph, or Greek silphe a kind of beetle, but French etymologists propose a
Gaulish origin. The Century Dictionary comments that, to occultists and quacks like Paracelsus words
spelled with -y- look more Greek and convincing. The meaning graceful girl first recorded 1838, on
the notion of slender figure and light, airy movement [OED].


ocean (n.)

late 13c., from Old French occean ocean (12c., Modern French oc&#233;an), from Latin oceanus, from
Greek okeanos, the great river or sea surrounding the disk of the Earth (as opposed to the
Mediterranean), of unknown origin. Personified as Oceanus, son of Uranus and Gaia and husband of
Tethys. In early times, when the only known land masses were Eurasia and Africa, the ocean was an
endless river that flowed around them. Until c.1650, commonly ocean sea, translating Latin mare
oceanum. Application to individual bodies of water began 14c.; there are usually reckoned to be five
of them, but this is arbitrary; also occasionally applied to smaller subdivisions, such as German
Ocean North Sea.


else (adj.)

Old English elles other, otherwise, different, from Proto-Germanic *aljaz (cognates: Gothic aljis
other, Old High German eli-lenti, Old English el-lende, both meaning in a foreign land; see also
Alsace), an adverbial genitive of the neuter of PIE root *al- (1) beyond (cognates: Greek allos
other, Latin alius; see alias (adv.)). Synonym of other, the nuances of usage are often arbitrary.
Productive of a number of handy compounds that somehow never got traction or have been suffered to
fall from use: elsehow (1660s) somehow or other; elsewards (adv.), 1882, somewhere else; Old English
elsewhat (pron.)  something else, anything else; elsewhen (adv.), early 15c., at another time;
elsewhence (c.1600); elsewho (1540s). Among the survivors are elsewhere, elsewise.


tyrant (n.)

c.1300, absolute ruler, especially one without legal right; cruel, oppressive ruler, from Old French
tiran, tyrant (12c.), from Latin tyrannus lord, master, monarch, despot, especially arbitrary ruler,
cruel governor, autocrat (source also of Spanish tirano, Italian tiranno), from Greek tyrannos lord,
master, sovereign, absolute ruler unlimited by law or constitution, a loan-word from a language of
Asia Minor (probably Lydian); Klein compares Etruscan Turan mistress, lady (surname of Venus).  In
the exact sense, a tyrant is an individual who arrogates to himself the royal authority without
having a right to it. This is how the Greeks understood the word 'tyrant': they applied it
indifferently to good and bad princes whose authority was not legitimate. [Rousseau, The Social
Contract]    Originally in Greek the word was not applied to old hereditary sovereignties
(basileiai) and despotic kings, but it was used of usurpers, even when popular, moderate, and just
(such as Cypselus of Corinth), however it soon became a word of reproach in the usual modern sense.
The spelling with -t arose in Old French by analogy with present participle endings in -ant. Fem.
form tyranness is recorded from 1590 (Spenser); Medieval Latin had tyrannissa (late 14c.).


shoot (v.)

Old English sceotan to hurl missiles, cast; strike, hit, push; run, rush; send forth swiftly; wound
with missiles (class II strong verb; past tense sceat, past participle scoten), from Proto-Germanic
*skeutanan (cognates: Old Saxon skiotan, Old Norse skjota to shoot with (a weapon); shoot, launch,
push, shove quickly, Old Frisian skiata, Middle Dutch skieten, Dutch schieten, Old High German
skiozan, German schie&szlig;en), from PIE root *skeud- to shoot, to chase, to throw, to project
(cognates: Sanskrit skundate hastens, makes haste, Old Church Slavonic iskydati to throw out,
Lithuanian skudrus quick, nimble).    In reference to pool playing, from 1926. Meaning to strive
(for) is from 1967, American English. Sense of descend (a river) quickly is from 1610s. Meaning to
inject by means of a hypodermic needle is attested from 1914. Meaning photograph (especially a
movie) is from 1890. As an interjection, an arbitrary euphemistic alteration of shit, it is recorded
from 1934. Shoot the breeze chat first recorded 1941. Shoot-'em-up (adj.) in reference to violent
entertainment (Western movies, etc.) is from 1942. Shoot to kill first attested 1867. Shoot the cat
to vomit is from 1785. To shoot the moon originally meant depart by night with ones goods to escape
back rent (1829).    O, 'tis cash makes such crowds to the gin shops roam, And 'tis cash often
causes a rumpus at home ;  'Tis when short of cash people oft shoot the moon ;  And 'tis cash always
keeps our pipes in tune.  Cash! cash! &amp;c.;  [The Melodist and Mirthful Olio, An Elegant
Collection of the Most Popular Songs, vol. IV, London, 1829]


tree (n.)

Old English  treo, treow tree (also timber, wood, beam, log, stake), from Proto-Germanic *treuwaz-
(cognates: Old Frisian tre, Old Saxon trio, Old Norse tre, Gothic triu tree), from PIE *drew-o-,
from *deru- oak (cognates: Sanskrit dru tree, wood, daru wood, log; Greek drys oak, drymos copse,
thicket, doru beam, shaft of a spear; Old Church Slavonic drievo tree, wood; Serbian drvo tree, drva
wood; Russian drevo tree, wood; Czech drva; Polish drwa wood; Lithuanian derva pine, wood; Old Irish
daur, Welsh derwen oak, Albanian drusk oak). This is from PIE *drew-o-, a suffixed form of the root
*deru- to be firm, solid, steadfast (see true), with specialized sense wood, tree and derivatives
referring to objects made of wood.    The line which divides trees from shrubs is largely arbitrary,
and dependent upon habit rather than size, the tree having a single trunk usually unbranched for
some distance above the ground, while a shrub has usually several stems from the same root and each
without a proper trunk. [Century Dictionary]    The widespread use of words originally meaning oak
in the sense tree probably reflects the importance of the oak to ancient Indo-Europeans. In Old
English and Middle English also thing made of wood, especially the cross of the Crucifixion and a
gallows (such as Tyburn tree, famous gallows outside London). Middle English also had plural treen,
adjective treen (Old English treowen of a tree, wooden). For Dutch boom, German Baum, the usual
words for tree, see beam (n.). Meaning framework of a saddle is from 1530s. Meaning representation
of familial relationships in the form of a tree is from c.1300. Tree-hugger, contemptuous for
environmentalist is attested by 1989.    Minc'd Pyes do not grow upon every tree,  But search the
Ovens for them, and there they be.  [Poor Robin, Almanack, 1669]


