arbiter (n.)

late 14c., from Old French arbitre or directly from Latin arbiter one who goes somewhere (as witness
or judge), in classical Latin used of spectators and eye-witnesses, in law, he who hears and decides
a case, a judge, umpire, mediator; from ad- to (see ad-) + baetere to come, go. The specific sense
of one chosen by two disputing parties to decide the matter is from 1540s. The earliest form of the
word attested in English is the fem. noun arbitress (mid-14c.) a woman who settles disputes.


arbitrator (n.)

early 15c., from Old French arbitratour (13c.), from Latin arbitrator a spectator, hearer, witness,
judge, agent noun from past participle stem of arbitrari, from arbiter (see arbiter). The legal form
of popular arbiter; in modern usage, an arbiter makes decisions of his own accord and is accountable
to no one but himself; an arbitrator (early 15c.) decides issues referred to him by the parties.


arbitrary (adj.)

early 15c., deciding by one's own discretion, from Old French arbitraire (14c.) or directly from
Latin arbitrarius depending on the will, uncertain, from arbiter (see arbiter). The original meaning
gradually descended to capricious and despotic (1640s). Related: Arbitrarily; arbitrariness.


arbitration (n.)

late 14c., absolute decision, from Old French arbitracion, from Latin arbitrationem (nominative
arbitratio) judgment, will, noun of action from past participle stem of arbitrari to be of an
opinion, give a decision, from arbiter (see arbiter). Meaning settlement of a dispute by a third
party is from 1630s.


arbitrate (v.)

1580s (arbitrable is recorded from 1530s), to give an authoritative decision, from Latin arbitratus,
past participle of arbitrari be of an opinion, give a decision, from arbiter (see arbiter). Meaning
to act as an arbitrator is from 1610s. Related: Arbitrated; arbitrating. The earlier verb form was
arbitren (early 15c.).


arbitrage (n.)

exercise of the function of an arbitrator, late 15c., from Old French arbitrage arbitration,
judgment, from arbitrer to arbitrate, judge, from Late Latin arbitrari, from Latin arbiter (see
arbiter).


compromise (n.)

early 15c., a joint promise to abide by an arbiter's decision, from Middle French compromis (13c.),
from Latin compromissus, past participle of compromittere to make a mutual promise (to abide by the
arbiter's decision), from com- together (see com-) + promittere (see promise). The main modern sense
of a coming to terms is from extension to the settlement itself (late 15c.).


