arcade (n.)

1731 (as arcado, from 1640s), from Italian arcata arch of a bridge, from arco arc, from Latin arcus
(see arc). Applied to passages formed by a succession of arches, avenues of trees, and ultimately to
any covered avenue, especially one lined with shops (1731) or amusements; hence arcade game (1977).


pong (n.)

by late 1960s as an abbreviation of ping-pong. The electronic arcade game (with capital P-) was
released 1972.


portico (n.)

c.1600, from Italian portico, from Latin porticus colonnade, arcade, covered walk, porch, from porta
gate (see port (n.1)). Especially of the Painted Porch in Athens.


janitor (n.)

1580s, an usher in a school, later doorkeeper (1620s), from Latin ianitor doorkeeper, porter, from
ianua door, entrance, gate, from ianus arched passageway, arcade (see Janus) + agent suffix -tor.
Meaning caretaker of a building first recorded 1708.


porch (n.)

c.1300, covered entrance, from Old French porche porch, vestibule, from Latin porticus covered
gallery, covered walk between columns, arcade, portico, porch, from porta gate, entrance, door (see
port (n.2)). The Latin word was borrowed directly into Old English as portic.


staple (n.2)

principal article grown or made in a country or district, early 15c., official market for some class
of merchandise, from Anglo-French estaple (14c.), Old French estaple counter, stall; regulated
market, depot, from a Germanic source akin to Middle Low German stapol, Middle Dutch stapel market,
literally pillar, foundation, from the same source as staple (n.1), the notion perhaps being of
market stalls behind pillars of an arcade, or else of a raised platform where the king's deputies
administered judgment.    The sense of principle article grown or made in a place is 1610s, short
for staple ware wares and goods from a market (early 15c.). Meaning principle element or ingredient
in anything is from 1826. Meaning fiber of any material used for spinning is late 15c., of uncertain
origin, and perhaps an unrelated word.


