arcane (adj.)

1540s, from Latin arcanus secret, hidden, private, concealed, from arcere close up, enclose,
contain, from arca chest, box, place for safe-keeping, from PIE *ark- to hold, contain, guard
(cognates: Greek arkos defense, arkein to ward off; Armenian argel obstacle; Lithuanian raktas key,
rakinti to shut, lock).


coerce (v.)

mid-15c., cohercen, from Middle French cohercer, from Latin coercere to control, restrain, shut up
together, from com- together (see co-) + arcere to enclose, confine, contain, ward off, from PIE
*ark- to hold, contain, guard (see arcane). Related: Coerced; coercing. No record of the word
between late 15c. and mid-17c.; its reappearance 1650s is perhaps a back-formation from coercion.


arcana (n.)

hidden things, mysteries, 1590s, a direct adoption of the Latin plural of arcanum a secret, a
mystery, from neuter of adjective arcanus secret, hidden, private, concealed (see arcane).
Occasionally mistaken for a singular and pluralized as arcanas because arcana is far more common
than arcanum.


ark (n.)

Old English earc, mainly meaning Noah's but also the Ark of the Covenant, from Latin arca large box,
chest (see arcane). Also borrowed in Old High German (arahha, Modern German Arche). From the
Noachian sense comes extended meaning place of refuge (17c.). As the name of a type of ship or boat,
from late 15c. In 19c. U.S., especially a large, flat-bottomed river boat to move produce,
livestock, etc. to market.


autarky (n.)

1610s, self-sufficiency, from Greek autarkeia sufficiency in oneself, independence, from autarkes
self-sufficient, having enough, independent of others (also used of countries), from autos self (see
auto-) + arkein to ward off, keep off, also to be strong enough, sufficient, from PIE root *ark- to
hold, contain, guard (see arcane). From a different Greek source than autarchy, and thus the
spelling. As a term in international economics, prominent late 1930s. Related: Autarkic.


exercise (n.)

mid-14c., condition of being in active operation; practice for the sake of training, from Old French
exercice (13c.) exercise, execution of power; physical or spiritual exercise, from Latin exercitium
training, exercise, from exercitare, frequentative of exercere keep busy, drive on, literally remove
restraint, from ex- off (see ex-) + arcere keep away, prevent, enclose, from PIE *ark- to hold,
contain, guard (see arcane).    Original sense may have been driving farm animals to the field to
plow. Meaning physical activity first recorded in English late 14c.; in reference to written
schoolwork from early 17c. The ending was abstracted for formations such as dancercise (1967);
jazzercise (1977); and boxercise (1985).


