archaeology (n.)

c.1600, ancient history, from French arch&eacute;ologie (16c.) or directly from Greek arkhaiologia
the study of ancient things; see archaeo- + -ology. Meaning scientific study of ancient peoples
recorded by 1825. Related: Archaeological; archaeologically.


mesolithic (adj.)

1866 in archaeology (somewhat earlier in geology); see meso- + lithic.


archeology (n.)

alternative spelling of archaeology. Also see ae.


archeological (adj.)

alternative spelling of archaeological (see archaeology). Also see ae.


archaeologist (n.)

1824; see archaeology + -ist.


Celtic (adj.)

also Keltic, 1650s, of archaeology or history, from French Celtique or Latin Celticus pertaining to
the Celts (see Celt). In reference to languages, from 1707; of other qualities, 19c. The Boston
basketball team was founded 1946. Celtic twilight is from Yeats's name for his collection of adapted
Irish folk tales (1893).


barn (n.)

Old English bere&aelig;rn barn, literally barley house, from bere barley (see barley) + aern house,
metathesized from *rann, *rasn (cognates: Old Norse rann, Gothic razn house, Old English rest
resting place; sealt&aelig;rn saltworks).    Barley was not always the only crop grown as the data
recovered at Bishopstone might suggest but it is always the most commonly represented, followed by
wheat and then rye and oats. [C.J. Arnold, An Archaeology of the Early Anglo-Saxon Kingdoms, 1988,
p.36]    Another word for barn in Old English was beretun, barley enclosure (from tun enclosure,
house), which accounts for the many Barton place names on the English map, and the common surname.
Barn door used figuratively for broad target and great size since 1540s.


kitchen (n.)

c.1200, from Old English cycene, from Proto-Germanic *kokina (cognates: Middle Dutch c&ouml;kene,
Old High German chuhhina, German K&uuml;che, Danish kj&oslash;kken), probably borrowed from Vulgar
Latin *cocina (source also of French cuisine, Spanish cocina), variant of Latin coquina kitchen,
from fem. of coquinus of cooks, from coquus cook, from coquere to cook (see cook (n.)).    The Old
English word might be directly from Vulgar Latin. Kitchen cabinet informal but powerful set of
advisors is American English slang, 1832, originally in reference to administration of President
Andrew Jackson. Kitchen midden (1863) in archaeology translates Danish kj&oslash;kken
m&oslash;dding. Surname Kitchener (one in charge of a monastic kitchen) is from early 14c. Old
English also had cycen&#240;enung service in the kitchen.


barrow (n.2)

mound, Old English beorg (West Saxon), berg (Anglian) barrow, mountain, hill, mound, from Proto-
Germanic *bergaz (cognates: Old Saxon, Old Frisian, Old High German berg mountain, Old North bjarg
rock), from PIE root *bhergh- (2) high, elevated (cognates: Old Church Slavonic bregu mountain,
height, Old Irish brigh mountain, Welsh bera stack, pyramid, Sanskrit b'rhant high, Avestan brzant-
high, Old Persian bard- be high, Greek Pergamos, name of the citadel of Troy). Obsolete except in
place-names and southwest England dialect by 1400; revived by modern archaeology.    In place-names
used of small continuously curving hills, smaller than a dun, with the summit typically occupied by
a single farmstead or by a village church with the village beside the hill, and also of burial
mounds. [Cambridge Dictionary of English Place-Names]  Meaning mound erected over a grave was a
specific sense in late Old English. Barrow-wight first recorded 1869 in Eirikr Magnusson and William
Morris's translation of the Icelandic saga of Grettir the Strong.


