ardor (n.)

early 15c., heat of passion or desire, from Old French ardure heat, glow; passion (12c.), from Latin
ardorem (nominative ardor) a flame, fire, burning, heat; also of feelings, etc., eagerness, zeal,
from ardere to burn (see ardent). In Middle English, used of base passions; since Milton's time, of
noble ones.


fervor (n.)

mid-14c., warmth or glow of feeling, from Old French fervor (Modern French ferveur) heat,
enthusiasm, ardor, passion, from Latin fervor a boiling, violent heat; passion, ardor, fury, from
fervere to boil (see brew (v.)).


zeal (n.)

passionate ardor in pursuit of an objective or course of action, late 14c., from Old French zel
(Modern French z&#232;le) and directly from Late Latin zelus zeal, emulation (source also of Italian
zelo, Spanish celo), a Church word, from Greek zelos ardor, eager rivalry, emulation, a noble
passion [Liddell &amp; Scott], but also jealousy; prom PIE *ya- to seek, request, desire. From mid-
15c. as devotion.


bawdry (n.)

obscenity, late 14c., probably from Old French bauderie boldness, ardor, elation, pride (see bawd).


ardurous (adj.)

full of ardor, 1770, a variant of arduous with overtones of amorous, generally useful only to poets
and first attested in Chatterton; perhaps, then, like his works, an instance of faux medievalism.


ardour (n.)

chiefly British English spelling of ardor (q.v.); for spelling, see -or.


dampen (v.)

1630s, to dull or deaden (of force, enthusiasm, ardor, etc.), from damp (adj.) + -en (1). Meaning to
moisten is recorded from 1827. Related: Dampened; dampening.


alacrity (n.)

mid-15c., from Latin alacritatem (nominative alacritas) liveliness, ardor, eagerness, from alacer
(genitive alacris) cheerful, brisk, lively; of uncertain origin, perhaps cognate with Gothic aljan
zeal, Old English ellen courage, zeal, strength, Old High German ellian.


cool (v.)

Old English colian, to lose warmth, also figuratively, to lose ardor, from the root of cool (adj.).
Meaning to cause to lose warmth is from late 14c. Related: Cooled; cooling.


fugue (n.)

1590s, fuge, from Italian fuga ardor, literally flight, from Latin fuga act of fleeing, from fugere
to flee (see fugitive). Current spelling (1660s) is from the French version of the Italian word.   A
Fugue is a composition founded upon one subject, announced at first in one part alone, and
subsequently imitated by all the other parts in turn, according to certain general principles to be
hereafter explained. The name is derived from the Latin word fuga, a flight, from the idea that one
part starts on its course alone, and that those which enter later are pursuing it. [Fugue, Ebenezer
Prout, 1891]


heat (n.)

Old English h&aelig;tu, h&aelig;to heat, warmth; fervor ardor, from Proto-Germanic *haita- heat
(cognates: Old Saxon hittia, Old Norse hiti, Old Frisian hete, German hitze heat, Gothic heito
fever), from PIE *kaid-, from root *kai- heat. The same root is the source of Old English hat hot
and h&aelig;&eth;a hot weather (see hot).    Meaning a single course in a race, especially a horse
race, is from 1660s, perhaps from earlier figurative sense of violent action; a single intense
effort (late 14c.), or meaning run given to a horse to prepare for a race (1570s). This later
expanded to division of a race or contest when there are too many contestants to run at once, the
winners of each heat then competing in a final race. Meaning sexual excitement in animals is from
1768. Meaning trouble with the police attested by 1920. Heat wave period of excessive hot weather
first attested 1890; earlier in reference to solar cycles.


bawd (n.)

a complicated word of uncertain history. First attested late 15c., lewd person (of either sex; since
c.1700 applied only to women), probably from baude-strote procurer of prostitutes (mid-14c.), which
may be from Middle English bawde (adj.) merry, joyous, from Old French baud gay, licentious (from
Frankish bald bold or some such Germanic source). It would not be the first time a word meaning
joyous had taken on a sexual sense. The sense evolution shading from bold to lewd is not difficult;
compare Old French baudise ardor, joy, elation, act of boldness, presumption; baudie elation, high
spirits, fole baudie bawdry, shamelessness. The Old French word also is the source of French baudet
donkey, in Picardy dialect loose woman.    The second element in baude-strote would be trot one who
runs errands, or Germanic *strutt (see strut). But OED doubts all this. There was an Old French
baudestrote, baudetrot of the same meaning (13c.), and this may be the direct source of Middle
English baude-strote. The obsolete word bronstrops procuress, frequently found in Middleton's
comedies, probably is an alteration of baude-strote.


