arduous (adj.)

1530s, hard to accomplish, difficult to do, from Latin arduus high, steep, also figuratively,
difficult, from PIE root *eredh- to grow, high (see ortho-). Literal sense of high, steep, difficult
to climb, attested in English from 1709.


ardurous (adj.)

full of ardor, 1770, a variant of arduous with overtones of amorous, generally useful only to poets
and first attested in Chatterton; perhaps, then, like his works, an instance of faux medievalism.


laborious (adj.)

late 14c., hard-working, industrious, from Old French laborios arduous, wearisome; hard-working
(12c., Modern French laborieux), from Latin laboriosus toilsome, wearisome, troublesome, from labor
(see labor (n.)). Meaning costing much labor, burdensome is from early 15c.; meaning resulting from
hard work is mid-15c. Related: Laboriousness.


travail (n.)

labor, toil, mid-13c., from Old French travail work, labor, toil, suffering or painful effort,
trouble; arduous journey (12c.), from travailler to toil, labor, originally to trouble, torture,
torment, from Vulgar Latin *tripaliare to torture, from *tripalium (in Late Latin trepalium)
instrument of torture, probably from Latin tripalis having three stakes (from tria three; see three
+ palus stake; see pale (n.)), which sounds ominous, but the exact notion is obscure. The verb is
recorded from late 13c. in English, from the verb in Old French.


strong (adj.)

Old English strang physically powerful, powerful in effect; forceful, severe, firm, bold, brave;
constant, resolute; arduous, violent, from Proto-Germanic *strangaz (cognates: Old Norse strangr
strong, Dutch streng strict, rigorous, Old High German strang strong, bold, hard, German streng
strict, rigorous), possibly from PIE *strenk- tight, narrow. Originally compared strenger, strengest
(compare old/elder/eldest).    Grammatical sense, of noun and verb inflections, is first attested
1841, translating German stark, used in a grammatical sense by J. Grimm (the terms strong and weak
better fit German inflections). Strong suit (1865) is from card-playing. Strong man man of great
strength (especially one who displays it professionally) is recorded from 1690s; meaning dominating
man in a political organization is from 1859.


ordeal (n.)

Old English ordel, ordal, trial by physical test, literally judgment, verdict, from Proto-Germanic
noun *uz-dailjam (cognates: Old Saxon urdeli, Old Frisian urdel, Dutch oordeel, German urteil
judgment), literally that which is dealt out (by the gods), from *uzdailijan share out, related to
Old English ad&aelig;lan to deal out (see deal (n.1)). Curiously absent in Middle English, and
perhaps reborrowed 16c. from Medieval Latin or Middle French, which got it from Germanic.    The
notion is of the kind of arduous physical test (such as walking blindfolded and barefoot between
red-hot plowshares) that was believed to determine a person's guilt or innocence by immediate
judgment of the deity, an ancient Teutonic mode of trial. English retains a more exact sense of the
word; its cognates in German, etc., have been generalized.    Metaphoric extension to anything which
tests character or endurance is attested from 1650s. The prefix or- survives in English only in this
word, but was common in Old English and other Germanic languages (Gothic ur-, Old Norse or-, etc.)
and originally was an adverb and preposition meaning out.


