argot (n.)

1860, from French argot (17c.) the jargon of Paris rogues and thieves, earlier the company of
beggars, from Middle French argot, group of beggars, origin unknown. Gamillscheg suggests a
connection to Old French argoter to cut off the stubs left in pruning, with a connecting sense of to
get a grip on. The best English equivalent is perhaps cant. The German equivalent is Rotwelsch,
literally Red Welsh, but the first element may be connected with Middle High German rot beggar.
Earlier in English was pedlar's French (1520s) language of thieves and vagabonds.


happening (n.)

mid-15c., chance, luck, from present participle of happen; meaning occurrence is 1550s. Sense of
spontaneous event or display is from 1959 in the argot of artists. Happenings events was noted by
Fowler as a vogue word from c.1905.


backdrop (n.)

1913, in U.S. theatrical argot, from back (adj.) + drop (n.).


shill (n.)

one who acts as a decoy for a gambler, auctioneer, etc., 1916, probably originally circus or
carnival argot, probably a shortened form of shillaber (1913) with the same meaning, origin unknown.
The verb is attested from 1914. Related: Shilled; shilling.


follow up (n.)

also follow-up, 1923, originally in the argot of personnel management, from verbal phrase follow up
(1847).


grotty (n.)

slang shortening of grotesque, it had a brief vogue 1964 as part of the argot popularized by The
Beatles in A Hard Day's Night. It unconsciously echoes Middle English groti muddy, slimy, from Old
English grotig earthy, from grot particle.


shenanigan (n.)

1855, of uncertain origin. Earliest records of it are in San Francisco and Sacramento, California,
U.S. Suggestions include Spanish chanada, a shortened form of charranada trick, deceit; or, less
likely, German Schenigelei, peddler's argot for work, craft, or the related German slang verb
schin&auml;glen. Another guess centers on Irish sionnach fox.


glitch (n.)

1962, American English, possibly from Yiddish glitsh a slip, from glitshn to slip, from German
glitschen, and related gleiten to glide (see glide). Perhaps directly from German; it began as
technical jargon in the argot of electronic hardware engineers, popularized and given a broader
meaning by U.S. space program.


ergot (n.)

fungal disease of rye and other grasses, 1680s, from French ergot, from Old French argot cock's spur
(12c.), of unknown origin. The blight so called from the shape the fungus forms on the diseased
grain. Ergotism disease caused by eating ergot-infected breadstuffs, first recorded 1853. An
alkaloid from the fungus, ergotamine (1921) is used to treat migraines.


quid (n.2)

one pound sterling, 1680s, British slang, possibly from quid that which is, essence, (c.1600, see
quiddity), as used in quid pro quo (q.v.), or directly from Latin quid what, something, anything.
Compare French quibus, noted in Barr&#234;re's dictionary of French argot (1889) for money, cash,
said to be short for quibus fiunt omnia.


bet

1590s, as both a verb and noun, in the argot of petty criminals, of unknown origin; probably a
shortening of abet or else from obsolete beet to make good, from Old English b&aelig;tan make
better, arouse, stimulate, from Proto-Germanic *baitjan, in which case the verb would be the
original. The original notion is perhaps to improve a contest by wagering on it, or it is from the
bait sense in abet. Used since 1852 in various American English slang assertions (compare you bet be
assured, 1857). Related: Betting.


