aria (n.)

from Italian aria, literally air (see air (n.1)).


air (n.3)

melody, tune, 1580s, from Italian aria (see aria).


malaria (n.)

1740, from Italian mal'aria, from mala aria, literally bad air, from mala bad (fem. of malo, from
Latin malus; see mal-) + aria air (see air (n.1)). Probably first used by Italian physician
Francisco Torti (1658-1741). The disease, now known to be mosquito-borne, once was thought to be
caused by foul air in marshy districts. Replaced native ague.


arioso

melodious, in a melodious way, 1742, from Italian aria melody (see aria).


-ary

adjective and noun suffix, in most cases from Latin -arius, -aria, -arium connected with, pertaining
to; the man engaged in, from PIE relational adjective suffix *-yo- of or belonging to. It appears in
words borrowed from Latin in Middle English. In later borrowings from Latin to French, it became
-aire and passed into Middle English as -arie, subsequently -ary.


Aryan

c.1600, as a term in classical history, from Latin Arianus, Ariana, from Greek Aria, Areia, names
applied in classical times to the eastern part of ancient Persia and to its inhabitants. Ancient
Persians used the name in reference to themselves (Old Persian ariya-), hence Iran. Ultimately from
Sanskrit arya- compatriot; in later language noble, of good family.    Also the name Sanskrit-
speaking invaders of India gave themselves in the ancient texts, from which early 19c. European
philologists (Friedrich Schlegel, 1819, who linked the word with German Ehre honor) applied it to
the ancient people we now call Indo-Europeans (suspecting that this is what they called themselves);
this use is attested in English from 1851. The term fell into the hands of racists, and in German
from 1845 it was specifically contrasted to Semitic (Lassen).    German philologist Max M&uuml;ller
(1823-1900) popularized the term in his writings on comparative linguistics, recommending it as the
name (replacing Indo-European, Indo-Germanic, Caucasian, Jshortened) for the group of related,
inflected languages connected with these peoples, mostly found in Europe but also including Sanskrit
and Persian. Arian was used in this sense from 1839 (and is more philologically correct), but this
spelling caused confusion with Arian, the term in ecclesiastical history.    Gradually replaced in
comparative linguistics c.1900 by Indo-European, except when used to distinguish Indo-European
languages of India from non-Indo-European ones. Used in Nazi ideology to mean member of a Caucasian
Gentile race of Nordic type. As an ethnic designation, however, it is properly limited to Indo-
Iranians (most justly to the latter) and has fallen from general academic use since the Nazi era.


