aristocracy (n.)

1560s, from Middle French aristocracie (Modern French aristocratie), from Late Latin aristocratia,
from Greek aristokratia government or rule of the best, from aristos best (originally most fitting,
from PIE *ar-isto-, superlative form of *ar- to fit together; see arm (n.1)) + kratos rule, power
(see -cracy).    At first in a literal sense of government by those who are the best citizens;
meaning rule by a privileged class (best-born or best-favored by fortune) is from 1570s and became
paramount 17c. Hence, the meaning patrician order (1650s). In early use contrasted with monarchy;
after French and American revolutions, with democracy.


aristocratic (adj.)

c.1600, pertaining to aristocracy, from French aristocratique, from Greek aristokratikos belonging
to the rule of the best, from aristokratia (see aristocracy). Meaning grand, stylish is from 1845.


arete (n.2)

important concept in Greek philosophy, virtue, excellence, especially of manly qualities; literally
that which is good. The comparative form is areion, the superlative is aristos (compare
aristocracy).


aristocrat (n.)

1789, from French aristocrate, a word of the Revolution, a back-formation from aristocratie (see
aristocracy).


kakistocracy (n.)

1829, government by the worst element of a society, coined on analogy of its opposite, aristocracy,
from Greek kakistos worst, superlative of kakos bad (which perhaps is related to the general IE word
for defecate; see caco-) + -cracy.


aristarchy (n.)

government by the best men, from Greek aristarkhia, from aristos best (see aristocracy) + -arkhia
(see -archy).


parliament (n.)

c.1300, consultation; formal conference, assembly, from Old French parlement (11c.), originally a
speaking, talk, from parler to speak (see parley (n.)); spelling altered c.1400 to conform with
Medieval Latin parliamentum.    Anglo-Latin parliamentum is attested from early 13c. Specific sense
representative assembly of England or Ireland emerged by mid-14c. from general meaning a conference
of the secular and/or ecclesiastical aristocracy summoned by a monarch.


junker (n.)

young German noble, 1550s, from German Junker, from Old High German juncherro, literally young lord,
from junc young (see young) + herro lord (see Herr). Pejorative sense of reactionary younger member
of the Prussian aristocracy (1865) dates from Bismarck's domestic policy.


mirepoix (n.)

in cookery, 1815, from French, evidently named for Charles Pierre Gaston Fran&#231;ois, duc de
Mirepoix (1699-1757), French diplomat. The concoction supposedly created by his head chef and named
in his honor during the reign of Louis XV, one of the grand epochs of French cookery, when it was
the style of the aristocracy to have dishes named in their honor.    MIREPOIX.--It is probable that
one of these days the common sense of mankind will rise in rebellion against this word and abolish
it. What is the Duke of Mirepoix to us because his wife was amiable to Louis XV.?    If she be not
fair to me,  What care I how fair she be?    The Duke of Mirepoix made himself convenient to the
king, and his name is now convenient to the people--the convenient name for the faggot of vegetables
that flavours a stew or a sauce. [Kettner's Book of the Table, London, 1877]


