aromatic (adj.)

c.1400, aromatyk, from Middle French aromatique (14c.), from Latin aromaticus, from Greek
aromatikos, from aroma (genitive aromatos) seasoning, sweet spice, of unknown origin.


vinaigrette (n.)

1690s, a type of condiment, from French vinaigrette (14c.), diminutive of vinaigre (aromatic)
vinegar (see vinegar). Use in reference to a type of dressing for salads or cold vegetables is
attested from 1877. From 1811 as small box or bottle for carrying aromatic vinegar.


vermouth (n.)

white wine flavored with aromatic herbs, 1806, from French vermouth (18c.), from German Wermuth
wormwood, from Middle High German wermuot, from Old High German wermuota (see wormwood), name of the
aromatic herb formerly used in the flavoring of the liqueur.


fumigation (n.)

late 14c., make aromatic smoke as part of a ceremony, from Old French fumigation, from Latin
fumigationem (nominative fumigatio) a smoking, noun of action from past participle stem of fumigare
to smoke, from fumus smoke, fume (see fume) + root of agere to drive (see act (n.)). Sense of
exposure (of someone or something) to aromatic fumes is c.1400, originally as a medicinal or
therapeutic treatment.


spice (n.)

c.1200, something added to food or drink to enhance the flavor, vegetable substance aromatic or
pungent to the taste, also a spice used as a medication or an alchemical ingredient, from Old French
espice (Modern French &#233;pice), from Late Latin species (plural) spices, goods, wares, in
classical Latin kind, sort (see species). From c.1300 as an aromatic spice, also spices as
commodities; from early 14c. as a spice-bearing plant. Figurative sense of attractive or enjoyable
variation is from 13c.; that of slight touch or trace of something is recorded from 1530s. Meaning
specimen, sample is from 1790. Early druggists recognized four types of spices: saffron, clove,
cinnamon, nutmeg.


balm (n.)

early 13c., basme, aromatic substance made from resins and oils, from Old French basme (Modern
French baume), from Latin balsamum, from Greek balsamon balsam, from Hebrew basam spice, related to
Aramaic busma, Arabic basham balsam, spice, perfume.    Spelling refashioned 15c.-16c. on Latin
model. Sense of healing or soothing influence (1540s) is from aromatic preparations from balsam (see
balsam). Biblical Balm of Gilead, however, began with Coverdale; the Hebrew word there is tsori,
which was rendered in Septuagint and Vulgate as resin (Greek rhetine, Latin resina).


Keziah

fem. proper name, biblical daughter of Job, from Hebrew Qetzi'ah, literally cassia, the aromatic
tree that produces cinnamon.


spikenard (n.)

mid-14c., aromatic substance from an Indian plant, famous perfumed unguent of the ancients, from
Medieval Latin spica nardi (see spike (n.2)), rendering Greek nardou stakhys, in which the other
element probably ultimately from Sanskrit nalada-, the name of the plant.


gum (v.)

early 14c., gommen, treat with (medicinal or aromatic) gums, from gum (n.1). In the transferred or
figurative sense of spoil, ruin (usually with up), it is first recorded 1901, probably from the
notion of machinery becoming clogged. Of infants, etc., to chew or gnaw (something) with the gums,
by 1907, from gum (n.2). Related: Gummed; gumming.


balsam (n.)

1570s, aromatic resin used for healing wounds and soothing pains, from Latin balsamum gum of the
balsam tree (see balm). There is an isolated Old English reference from c.1000, and Middle English
used basme, baume, from the French form of the word. As a type of flowering plant of the Impatiens
family, it is attested from 1741.


catnip (n.)

1712, American English, from cat (n.) + nip, from Old English nepte catnip, from Latin nepta, name
of an aromatic herb. The older name is Middle English catmint (mid-13c.).


nard (n.)

late 14c., from Old French narde (Modern French nard), from Latin nardus, from Greek nardos, of
Eastern origin (compare Hebrew ner'd, plural n'radim; Arabic and Persian nardin, Sanskrit narada,
nalada, name of an aromatic balsam).


savory (n.)

aromatic mint, late 14c., perhaps an alteration of Old English s&aelig;&thorn;erie, which is
ultimately from Latin satureia savory (n.), a foreign word in Latin. But early history of the word
suggests transmission via Old French savereie. In either case, the form of the word probably was
altered by influence of the Middle English or Old French form of savory (adj.).


mint (n.1)

aromatic herb, Old English minte (8c.), from West Germanic *minta (cognates: Old Saxon minta, Middle
Dutch mente, Old High German minza, German Minze), a borrowing from Latin menta, mentha mint, from
Greek minthe, personified as a nymph transformed into an herb by Proserpine, probably a loan-word
from a lost Mediterranean language.


citrus (adj.)

1825, from Modern Latin genus name, from Latin citrus citron tree, name of an African tree with
aromatic wood and lemon-like fruit, the first citrus fruit to become available in the West. The
name, like the tree, is probably of Asiatic origin [OED]. But Klein traces it to Greek kedros cedar,
and writes that the change of dr into tr shows that the word came from Greek into Latin through the
medium of the Etruscans. As a noun, tree of the genus Citrus, from 1885.


tarragon (n.)

Artemisia Dracunculus, Eastern European plant of the wormwood genus, 1530s, from Medieval Latin
tragonia, from Byzantine Greek tarchon, from Arabic tarkhon, from a non-Arabic source, perhaps Greek
drakon serpent, dragon (via drakontion dragonwort); see dragon. From the same source come Spanish
taragona, Italian targone, French estragon (with unetymological prefix). Its aromatic leaves long
have been used for flavoring (especially vinegar).


basil (n.)

aromatic shrubby plant, early 15c., from Old French basile (15c., Modern French basilic), from
Medieval Latin basilicum, from Greek basilikon (phyton) royal (plant), from basileus king (see
Basil). So called, probably, because it was believed to have been used in making royal perfumes. In
Latin, confused with basiliscus (see basilisk) because it was supposed to be an antidote to the
basilisk's venom.


nutmeg (n.)

hard aromatic seed of the East Indies, c.1300, from Old North French or Anglo-French *noiz mugue,
from Old French nois muguete, unexplained alteration of nois muscade nut smelling like musk, from
nois nut (from Latin nux) + Latin muscada, fem. of muscat musky (see muscat). Probably influenced in
English by Medieval Latin nux maga (compare unaltered Dutch muskaatnoot, German muscatnu&szlig;,
Swedish muskotn&ouml;t).    American English colloquial wooden nutmeg anything false or fraudulent
is from 1830. Connecticut is called the Nutmeg State in allusion to the story that wooden nutmegs
are there manufactured for exportation. [John Russell Bartlett, Dictionary of Americanisms, 1859]


