array (n.)

mid-14c., order, arrangement, from Anglo-French arrai, Old French aroi, from areer (see array (v.)).


array (v.)

early 14c., from stem of Old French areer to put in order, from Vulgar Latin *ar-redare (source of
Italian arredare), from Latin ad- to (see ad-) + Frankish *r&aelig;d- ready or some cognate Germanic
source, from Proto-Germanic *raidjan to place in order (cognates: Gothic garadis, Old English
ger&aelig;de ready; see ready (adj.)). Related: Arrayed; arraying.


raiment (n.)

c.1400, clothing, vesture (archaic), shortening of arayment clothing (late 14c.), from Anglo-French
araiement, from Old French areement, from areer to array (see array (v.)).


phalanx (n.)

1550s, line of battle in close ranks, from Latin phalanx compact body of heavily armed men in battle
array, or directly from Greek phalanx (genitive phalangos) line of battle, battle array, also finger
or toe bone, originally round piece of wood, trunk, log, of unknown origin. Perhaps from PIE root
*bhelg- plank, beam (source of Old English balca balk; see balk (n.)). The Macedonian phalanx
consisted of 50 close files of 16 men each. In anatomy, originally the whole row of finger joints,
which fit together like infantry in close order. Figurative sense of number of persons banded
together in a common cause is attested from 1600 (compare Spanish Falangist, member of a fascist
organization founded in 1933).


jingle (n.)

1590s, from jingle (v.). Meaning song in an advertisement first attested 1930, from earlier sense of
catchy array of words in prose or verse (1640s).


disarray (v.)

late 14c.; see dis- lack of + array. Perhaps formed on the analogy of Old French desareer.


taxis (n.)

operation whereby displaced parts are put back in their natural situation, 1758, medical Latin, from
Greek taxis arrangement, an arranging, the order or disposition of an army, battle array; order,
regularity, verbal noun of tassein arrange, from PIE root *tag- to set aright, set in order (see
tangent).


taxidermy (n.)

1820, from comb. form of Greek taxis arrangement, an arranging, the order or disposition of an army,
battle array; order, regularity (see tactics) + derma skin (see derma). Related: Taxidermist (1827).


panoply (n.)

1570s, from Greek panoplia complete suit of armor, from pan- all (see pan-) + hopla (plural), arms
of a hoplites (heavily armed soldier); see hoplite. Originally in English figurative, of spiritual
armor, etc. (a reference to Eph. vi); non-armorial sense of any splendid array first recorded 1829.


ap- (2)

patronymic prefix in Welsh names, earlier map son, cognate with Gaelic mac. Since 17c. merged into
surnames (Ap Rhys = Price, Ap Evan = Bevan, etc.).    It is said that a Welshman who evidently was
not willing to be surpassed in length of pedigree, when making out his genealogical tree, wrote near
the middle of his long array of 'aps' -- about this time Adam was born. [Origin and Significance of
our Names, The Chautauquan, Oct. 1887-July 1888]


diastole (n.)

1570s, from medical Latin diastole, from Greek diastole drawing asunder, dilation, from diastellein,
from dia- through, thoroughly, entirely (see dia-) + stellein to set in order, arrange, array,
equip, make ready, from PIE *stel-yo-, suffixed form of root *stel- to put, stand, with derivatives
referring to a standing object or place (see stall (n.1)).


tactics (n.)

1620s, science of arranging military forces for combat, from Modern Latin tactica (17c.), from Greek
taktike techne art of arrangement, noun use of fem. of taktikos of or pertaining to arrangement,
especially tactics in war, adjective to taxis arrangement, an arranging, the order or disposition of
an army, battle array; order, regularity, verbal noun of tassein arrange, from PIE root *tag- to set
aright, set in order (see tangent).


alphabet (n.)

1570s, from Late Latin alphabetum (Tertullian), from Greek alphabetos, from alpha + beta. Alphabet
soup first attested 1907. Words for it in Old English included st&aelig;fr&aelig;w, literally row of
letters, st&aelig;frof array of letters.    It was a wise though a lazy cleric whom Luther mentions
in his Table Talk,--the monk who, instead of reciting his breviary, used to run over the alphabet
and then say, O my God, take this alphabet, and put it together how you will. [William S. Walsh,
Handy-Book of Literary Curiosities, 1892]


matrix (n.)

late 14c., uterus, womb, from Old French matrice womb, uterus, from Latin matrix (genitive matricis)
pregnant animal, in Late Latin womb, also source, origin, from mater (genitive matris) mother (see
mother (n.1)). Sense of place or medium where something is developed is first recorded 1550s; sense
of embedding or enclosing mass first recorded 1640s. Logical sense of array of possible combinations
of truth-values is attested from 1914. As a verb from 1951.


dight (v.)

to adorn (archaic or poetic), Old English dihtan dictate, appoint, ordain; guide; compose, an early
borrowing from Latin dictare to dictate (see dictate (v.)).    The Latin word borrowed even earlier
into continental Germanic became Old High German dihton to write compose, German dichten to write
poetry. In Middle English, dight exploded to a vast array of meanings (including to rule, to handle,
to abuse, to have sex with, to kill, to clothe, to make ready, to repair) till it was one of the
most-used verbs in the language, but all senses have faded now into obscurity, dialect, or poetic
use.


stole (n.)

Old English stole long robe, scarf-like garment worn by clergymen, from Latin stola robe, vestment
(also source of Old French estole, Modern French &#233;tole, Spanish estola, Italian stola), from
Greek stole a long robe; originally garment, equipment, from root of stellein to place, array, with
a secondary sense of to put on robes, etc., from PIE root *stel- to put, stand (see stall (n.1)).
Meaning women's long garment of fur or feathers is attested from 1889.


cosmos (n.)

c.1200 (but not popular until 1848, as a translation of Humboldt's Kosmos), from Latinized form of
Greek kosmos order, good order, orderly arrangement, a word with several main senses rooted in those
notions: The verb kosmein meant generally to dispose, prepare, but especially to order and arrange
(troops for battle), to set (an army) in array; also to establish (a government or regime); to deck,
adorn, equip, dress (especially of women). Thus kosmos had an important secondary sense of ornaments
of a woman's dress, decoration (compare kosmokomes dressing the hair) as well as the universe, the
world.    Pythagoras is said to have been the first to apply this word to the universe, perhaps
originally meaning the starry firmament, but later it was extended to the whole physical world,
including the earth. For specific reference to the world of people, the classical phrase was he
oikoumene (ge) the inhabited (earth). Septuagint uses both kosmos and oikoumene. Kosmos also was
used in Christian religious writing with a sense of worldly life, this world (as opposed to the
afterlife), but the more frequent word for this was aion, literally lifetime, age.


stall (n.1)

place in a stable for animals, Old English steall standing place, position, state; place where
cattle are kept, fishing ground, from Proto-Germanic *stalla- (cognates: Old Norse stallr pedestal
for idols, altar; crib, manger, Old Frisian stal, Old High German stall stand, place, stable, stall,
German Stall stable, Stelle place), from PIE root *stel- to put, stand, with derivatives referring
to a standing object or place (cognates: Greek stele standing block, slab, stellein to set in order,
arrange, array, equip, make ready; Latin stolidus insensible, dull, brutish, properly unmovable).
Meaning partially enclosed seat in a choir is attested from c.1400; that of urinal in a men's room
is from 1967. Several meanings, including that of a stand for selling (mid-13c., implied in
stallage), probably are from (or influenced by) Anglo-French and Old French estal station, position;
stall of a stable; stall in a market; a standing still; a standing firm (12c., Modern French
&eacute;tal butcher's stall). This, along with Italian stallo place, stalla stable is a borrowing
from a Germanic source from the same root as the native English word.


