arrogance (n.)

c.1300, from Old French arrogance (12c.), from Latin arrogantia, from arrogantem (nominative
arrogans) assuming, overbearing, insolent, present participle of arrogare to claim for oneself,
assume, from ad- to (see ad-) + rogare ask, propose (see rogation).


brag (n.)

late 14c., pomp; arrogance, pride; see brag (v.); the exact relationship of the forms is uncertain.
Meaning that which is boasted is from 1530s. As a once-popular poker-like card game, from 1734.


boast (n.)

mid-13c., arrogance, presumption, pride, vanity; c.1300, a brag, boastful speech, from Anglo-French
bost ostentation, probably via Scandinavian (compare Norwegian baus proud, bold, daring), from
Proto-Germanic *bausia to blow up, puff up, swell (cognates: Middle High German bus swelling,
dialectal German baustern to swell; Middle Dutch bose, Dutch boos evil, wicked, angry, Old High
German bosi worthless, slanderous, German b&ouml;se evil, bad, angry), from PIE *bhou-, variant of
root *beu-, *bheu- to grow, swell (see bull (n.2)).    The notion apparently is of being puffed up
with pride; compare Old English belgan to become angry, offend, provoke, belg anger, arrogance, from
the same root as bellows and belly (n.). Related: Boasted; boasting. An Old English word for
boasting was micelsprecende, big talk.


yelp (n.)

Old English gielp boasting, pride, arrogance, from source of yelp (v.). Meaning quick, sharp bark or
cry is attested from early 16c.


swell (n.)

c.1200, a morbid swelling, from swell (v.). In reference to a rise of the sea, it is attested from
c.1600; of music, by 1803. The meaning wealthy, elegant person is first recorded 1786, connected to
the now-obsolete sense pompousness, arrogance (1724), both from the notion of puffed-up demeanor or
behavior.


supercilium (n.)

the eyebrow, 1670s, from Latin supercilium an eyebrow; a ridge, summit; figuratively haughtiness,
arrogance, pride (see supercilious).


insolence (n.)

late 14c., from Latin insolentia unusualness, haughtiness, arrogance, from insolentem (see
insolent).


arrogation (n.)

1580s, from Latin arrogationem (nominative arrogatio), noun of action from past participle stem of
arrogare to claim for oneself (see arrogance).


arrogate (v.)

1530s, from Latin arrogatus, past participle of arrogare to claim for oneself (see arrogance).
Related: Arrogated; arrogating.


arrogant (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French arrogant (14c.), from Latin arrogantem (nominative arrogans) assuming,
overbearing, insolent, present participle of arrogare (see arrogance). Related: Arrogantly.


hauteur (n.)

1620s, from French hauteur haughtiness, arrogance, literally height, from Old French hauture (12c.)
height, loftiness; grandeur, majesty, from haut (see haught).


fastidious (adj.)

mid-15c., full of pride, from Latin fastidiosus disdainful, squeamish, exacting, from fastidium
loathing, squeamishness, most likely from *fastu-taidiom, a compound of fastus contempt, arrogance
and taedium aversion, disgust. Early use in English was both in passive and active senses. Meaning
squeamish, over-nice emerged in English 1610s. Related: Fastidiously; fastidiousness.


surfeit (n.)

early 14c., excess quantity; late 14c., overindulgence, from Old French sorfet excess; arrogance
(Modern French surfait), noun use of past participle of surfaire overdo, from sur- over (see sur-
(1)) + faire do, from Latin facere to make (see factitious).


wl-

an initial sound cluster in words in Old English and early Middle English; among the Old English
words were wlanc stately, splendid; wl&#230;tung nausea; wlenc pride, arrogance (Middle English
wlonk); wlite brightness, beauty, splendor; wlitig radiant, physically beautiful (Middle English
wliti).


strenuous (adj.)

characterized by great effort, mid-15c. (implied in strenuously), from Latin strenuus active, brisk,
quick, nimble, prompt, vigorous, keen. Probably cognate with Greek strenes, strenos keen, strong,
strenos arrogance, eager desire, Old English stierne hard, severe, keen (see stern (adj.)). Mocked
by Ben Jonson as a pedantic neologism in Poetaster (1601). Sense of requiring much energy is first
recorded 1670s. Related: Strenuousness; strenuosity.


elation (n.)

late 14c., from Old French elacion elation, conceit, arrogance, vanity, from Latin elationem
(nominative elatio), noun of action from elatus elevated, form used as past participle of efferre,
from ex- out + latus (see oblate (n.)), past participle of ferre carry (see infer). Metaphoric sense
of lifting spirits was in Latin and has always been the principal meaning in English.


mood (n.1)

emotional condition, frame of mind, Old English mod heart, frame of mind, spirit; courage,
arrogance, pride; power, violence, from Proto-Germanic *motha- (cognates: Old Saxon mod mind,
courage, Old Frisian mod intellect, mind, intention, Old Norse mo&eth;r wrath, anger, Middle Dutch
moet, Dutch moed, Old High German muot, German Mut courage, Gothic mo&thorn;s courage, anger), of
unknown origin.    A much more vigorous word in Anglo-Saxon than currently, and used widely in
compounds (such as modcr&aelig;ftig intelligent, modful proud). To be in the mood willing (to do
something) is from 1580s. First record of mood swings is from 1942.


bias (n.)

1520s, from French biais slant, slope, oblique, also figuratively, expedient, means (13c.,
originally in Old French a past participle adjective, sideways, askance, against the grain), of
unknown origin, probably from Old Proven&ccedil;al biais, with cognates in Old Catalan and
Sardinian; possibly from Vulgar Latin *(e)bigassius, from Greek epikarsios athwart, crosswise, at an
angle, from epi- upon + karsios oblique, from PIE *krs-yo-, from root *(s)ker- (1) to cut (see shear
(v.)). It became a noun in Old French. [A] technical term in the game of bowls, whence come all the
later uses of the word [OED]. Transferred sense of predisposition, prejudice is from 1570s in
English.    For what a man had rather were true he more readily believes. Therefore he rejects
difficult things from impatience of research; sober things, because they narrow hope; the deeper
things of nature, from superstition; the light of experience, from arrogance and pride, lest his
mind should seem to be occupied with things mean and transitory; things not commonly believed, out
of deference to the opinion of the vulgar. Numberless in short are the ways, and sometimes
imperceptible, in which the affections colour and infect the understanding. [Francis Bacon, Novum
Organum, 1620]


punch (v.)

to thrust, push; jostle; also, prod, to drive (cattle, etc.) by poking and prodding, late 14c., from
Old French ponchonner to punch, prick, stamp, from ponchon pointed tool, piercing weapon (see punch
(n.1)). Meaning to pierce, emboss with a tool is from early 15c.; meaning to stab, puncture is from
mid-15c. To punch a ticket, etc., is from mid-15c. To punch the clock record one's arrival at or
departure from the workplace using an automated timing device is from 1900. Related: Punched;
punching.    Perhaps you are some great big chief, who has a lot to say.  Who lords it o'er the
common herd who chance to come your way;  Well, here is where your arrogance gets a dreadful shock,
When you march up, like a private, salute, and PUNCH THE CLOCK.  [from Punch the Clock, by The
Skipper, The Commercial Telegraphers' Journal, May 1912]    Specialized sense to hit with the fist
first recorded 1520s. Compare Latin pugnare to fight with the fists, from a root meaning to pierce,
sting. In English this was probably influenced by punish; punch or punsch for punish is found in
documents from 14c.-15c.:    punchyth me, Lorde, and spare my blyssyd wyff Anne. [Coventry Mystery
Plays, late 15c.]    To punch (someone) out beat up is from 1971.


belly (n.)

Old English belg, bylg (West Saxon), b&aelig;lg (Anglian) leather bag, purse, bellows, from Proto-
Germanic *balgiz bag (cognates: Old Norse belgr bag, bellows, bylgja billow, Gothic balgs wineskin),
from PIE *bholgh-, from root *bhelgh- to swell, an extension of *bhel- (2) to blow, swell (see
bole). Meaning shifted to body (late 13c.), then focused to abdomen (mid-14c.). Meaning bulging part
or concave surface of anything is 1590s. The West Germanic root had a figurative or extended sense
of anger, arrogance (as in Old English bolgenmod enraged; belgan (v.) to become angry).    Indo-
European languages commonly use the same word for both the external belly and the internal (stomach,
womb, etc.), but the distinction of external and internal is somewhat present in English
belly/stomach; Greek gastr- (see gastric) in classical language denoted the paunch or belly, while
modern science uses it only in reference to the stomach as an organ. Fastidious avoidance of belly
in speech and writing (compensated for by stretching the senses of imported stomach and abdomen,
baby-talk tummy and misappropriated midriff) began late 18c. and the word was banished from Bibles
in many early 19c. editions. Belly punch (n.) is attested from 1811.


spirit (n.)

mid-13c., animating or vital principle in man and animals, from Anglo-French spirit, Old French
espirit spirit, soul (12c., Modern French esprit) and directly from Latin spiritus a breathing
(respiration, and of the wind), breath; breath of a god, hence inspiration; breath of life, hence
life; also disposition, character; high spirit, vigor, courage; pride, arrogance, related to spirare
to breathe, from PIE *(s)peis- to blow (cognates: Old Church Slavonic pisto to play on the flute).
Meaning supernatural immaterial creature; angel, demon; an apparition, invisible corporeal being of
an airy nature is attested from mid-14c.; from late 14c. as a ghost (see ghost (n.)). From c.1500 as
a nature, character; sense of essential principle of something (in a non-theological context, as in
Spirit of St. Louis) is attested from 1680s, common after 1800; Spirit of '76 in reference to the
qualities that sparked and sustained the American Revolution is attested by 1797 in William
Cobbett's Porcupine's Gazette and Daily Advertiser.    From late 14c. in alchemy as volatile
substance; distillate; from c.1500 as substance capable of uniting the fixed and the volatile
elements of the philosopher's stone. Hence spirits volatile substance; sense narrowed to strong
alcoholic liquor by 1670s. This also is the sense in spirit level (1768). Also from mid-14c. as
character, disposition; way of thinking and feeling, state of mind; source of a human desire; in
Middle English freedom of spirit meant freedom of choice. From late 14c. as divine substance, divine
mind, God; also Christ or His divine nature; the Holy Ghost; divine power; also, extension of divine
power to man; inspiration, a charismatic state; charismatic power, especially of prophecy. Also
essential nature, essential quality. From 1580s in metaphoric sense animation, vitality.
According to Barnhart and OED, originally in English mainly from passages in Vulgate, where the
Latin word translates Greek pneuma and Hebrew ruah. Distinction between soul and spirit (as seat of
emotions) became current in Christian terminology (such as Greek psykhe vs. pneuma, Latin anima vs.
spiritus) but is without significance for earlier periods [Buck]. Latin spiritus, usually in
classical Latin breath, replaces animus in the sense spirit in the imperial period and appears in
Christian writings as the usual equivalent of Greek pneuma. Spirit-rapping is from 1852.


