artery (n.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French arterie, Old French artaire (13c.; Modern French art&egrave;re), and
directly from Latin arteria, from Greek arteria windpipe, also an artery, as distinct from a vein;
related to aeirein to raise (see aorta).    They were regarded by the ancients as air ducts because
the arteries do not contain blood after death; medieval writers took them for the channels of the
vital spirits, and 16c. senses of artery in English include trachea, windpipe. The word is used in
reference to artery-like systems of major rivers from 1805; of railways from 1850.


arterio-

word-forming element meaning arterial, from Latinized comb. form of Greek arteria windpipe; artery
(see artery).


arteriole (n.)

small artery, by 1808, from Modern Latin arteriola, diminutive of arteria (see artery).


trachea (n.)

late 14c., from Medieval Latin trachea (13c.), as in trachea arteria, from Late Latin trachia, from
Greek trakheia, in trakheia arteria windpipe, literally rough artery (so called from the rings of
cartilage that form the trachea), from fem. of trakhys rough, from PIE *dhre-gh-, suffixed form of
root *dher- (1). See artery for connection with windpipe in Greek science. Related: Tracheal.


arterial (adj.)

early 15c., from French art&eacute;rial (Modern French art&eacute;riel), from Latin arteria; see
artery.


aorta (n.)

1570s, from Medieval Latin aorta, from Greek aorte, term applied by Aristotle to the great artery of
the heart, literally what is hung up, from aeirein to lift, heave, raise, of uncertain origin;
related to the second element in meteor. Used earlier by Hippocrates of the bronchial tubes.
Related: Aortal; aortic.


coronary (adj.)

c.1600, suitable for garlands, from Latin coronarius of a crown, from corona crown (see crown (n.)).
Anatomical use is 1670s for structure of blood vessels that surround the heart like a crown. Short
for coronary thrombosis it dates from 1955. Coronary artery is recorded from 1741.


vein (n.)

c.1300, from Old French veine vein, artery, pulse (12c.), from Latin vena a blood vessel, also a
water course, a vein of metal, a person's natural ability or interest, of unknown origin. The mining
sense is attested in English from late 14c. (Greek phleps vein had the same secondary sense).
Figurative sense of strain or intermixture (of some quality) is recorded from 1560s; that of a humor
or mood, natural tendency is first recorded 1570s.


air (n.1)

c.1300, invisible gases that make up the atmosphere, from Old French air atmosphere, breeze, weather
(12c.), from Latin aerem (nominative aer) air, lower atmosphere, sky, from Greek aer (genitive
aeros) air (related to aenai to blow, breathe), of unknown origin, possibly from a base *awer- and
thus related to aeirein to raise and arteria windpipe, artery (see aorta) on notion of lifting, that
which rises. In Homer mostly thick air, mist; later air as one of the four elements.    Words for
air in Indo-European languages tend to be associated with wind, brightness, sky. In English, air
replaced native lyft, luft (see loft (n.)). To be in the air in general awareness is from 1875; up
in the air uncertain, doubtful is from 1752. To build castles in the air is from 1590s (in 17c.
English had airmonger one preoccupied with visionary projects). Broadcasting sense (as in on the
air) first recorded 1927. To give (someone) the air dismiss is from 1900. Air pollution is attested
by 1870.


