artful (adj.)

1610s, learned, well-versed in the (liberal) arts, also characterized by technical skill, from art
(n.) + -ful. Meaning skilled in adapting means to ends is from 1739. Related: Artfully; artfulness.


crafty (adj.)

mid-12c., crafti, from Old English cr&aelig;ftig strong, powerful, later skillful, ingenious,
degenerating by c.1200 to cunning, sly (but through 15c. also skillfully done or made; intelligent,
learned; artful, scientific) from craft (n.) + -y (2). Related: Craftily; craftiness.


insidious (adj.)

1540s, from Middle French insidieux (15c.) or directly from Latin insidiosus deceitful, cunning,
artful, from insidiae (plural) plot, snare, ambush, from insidere sit on, occupy, from in- in (see
in- (2)) + sedere to sit (see sedentary). Related: Insidiously; insidiousness.


maneuver (n.)

planned movement of troops or warship, 1758, from French manoeuvre manipulation, maneuver, from Old
French manovre manual labor 13c.), from Medieval Latin manuopera (source of Spanish maniobra,
Italian manovra), from manuoperare work with the hands, from Latin manu operari, from manu, ablative
of manus hand (see manual (adj.)) + operari to work, operate (see operation). The same word had been
borrowed from French into Middle English in a sense hand-labor (late 15c.). General meaning artful
plan, adroit movement is from 1774. Related: Maneuvers.


pretty (adj.)

Old English pr&aelig;ttig (West Saxon), pretti (Kentish), *prettig (Mercian) cunning, skillful,
artful, wily, astute, from pr&aelig;tt, *prett a trick, wile, craft, from Proto-Germanic *pratt-
(cognates: Old Norse prettr a trick, prettugr tricky; Frisian pret, Middle Dutch perte, Dutch pret
trick, joke, Dutch prettig sportive, funny, Flemish pertig brisk, clever), of unknown origin.
Connection between Old English and Middle English words is uncertain, but if they are the same,
meaning had shifted by c.1400 to manly, gallant, and later moved via attractive, skillfully made, to
fine, to beautiful in a slight way (mid-15c.). Ironical use from 1530s. For sense evolution, compare
nice, silly. Also used of bees (c.1400). After the OE. period the word is unknown till the 15th c.,
when it becomes all at once frequent in various senses, none identical with the OE., though
derivable from it [OED].     Meaning not a few, considerable is from late 15c. With a sense of
moderately, qualifying adjectives and adverbs, since 1560s. Pretty please as an emphatic plea is
attested from 1902. A pretty penny lot of money is first recorded 1768.


shark (n.)

1560s, of uncertain origin; apparently the word and the first specimen were brought to London by
Capt. John Hawkins's second expedition (landed 1565; see Hakluyt).  There is no proper name for it
that I knowe, but that sertayne men of Captayne Haukinses doth call it a 'sharke' [handbill
advertising an exhibition of the specimen, 1569]    The meaning dishonest person who preys on
others, though attested only from 1599 (sharker artful swindler in this sense is from 1594), may be
the original sense, later transferred to the large, voracious marine fish. If so, it is possibly
from German Schorck, a variant of Schurke scoundrel, villain, agent noun of Middle High German
sch&uuml;rgen (German sch&uuml;ren) to poke, stir.    But on another theory, the English word is
from a Mayan word, xoc, which might have meant shark. Northern Europeans seem not to have been
familiar with sharks before voyages to the tropics began. A slightly earlier name for it in English
was tiburon, via Spanish (where it is attested by 1520s), from the Carib name for the fish.    The
English word was applied (or re-applied) to voracious or predatory persons, on the image of the
fish, from 1707 (originally of pick-pockets); loan shark is attested from 1905. Sharkskin (1851) was
used for binding books, etc. As the name of a type of fabric held to resemble it, it is recorded
from 1932.    There is the ordinary Brown Shark, or sea attorney, so called by sailors; a grasping,
rapacious varlet, that in spite of the hard knocks received from it, often snapped viciously at our
steering oar. [Herman Melville, Mardi]


