Jew (n.)

late 12c. (in plural, giwis), from Anglo-French iuw, Old French giu, from Latin Iudaeum (nominative
Iudaeus), from Greek Ioudaios, from Aramaic jehudhai (Hebrew y'hudi) Jew, from Y'hudah Judah,
literally celebrated, name of Jacob's fourth son and of the tribe descended from him. Replaced Old
English Iudeas the Jews. Originally, Hebrew of the kingdom of Judah.   Jews' harp simple mouth harp
is from 1580s, earlier Jews' trump (1540s); the connection with Jewishness is obscure. Jew-baiting
first recorded 1853, in reference to German Judenhetze. In uneducated times, inexplicable ancient
artifacts were credited to Jews, based on the biblical chronology of history: such as Jews' money
(1570s) Roman coins found in England. In Greece, after Christianity had erased the memory of
classical glory, ruins of pagan temples were called Jews' castles, and in Cornwall, Jews' houses was
the name for the remains of ancient tin-smelting works.


true (adj.)

Old English triewe (West Saxon), treowe (Mercian) faithful, trustworthy, honest, steady in adhering
to promises, friends, etc., from Proto-Germanic *treuwaz- having or characterized by good faith
(cognates: Old Frisian triuwi, Dutch getrouw, Old High German gatriuwu, German treu, Old Norse
tryggr, Danish tryg, Gothic triggws faithful, trusty), from PIE *drew-o-, a suffixed form of the
root *deru-/*dreu- be firm, solid, steadfast (cognates: Lithuanian drutas firm, Welsh drud, Old
Irish dron strong, Welsh derw true, Old Irish derb sure), with specialized sense wood, tree and
derivatives referring to objects made of wood (see tree (n.)).    Sense of consistent with fact
first recorded c.1200; that of real, genuine, not counterfeit is from late 14c.; that of conformable
to a certain standard (as true north) is from c.1550. Of artifacts, accurately fitted or shaped it
is recorded from late 15c. True-love (n.) is Old English treowlufu. True-born (adj.) first attested
1590s. True-false (adj.) as a type of test question is recorded from 1923. To come true (of dreams,
etc.) is from 1819.


