articulate (adj.)

1580s in the speech sense (1570s as formulated in articles), from Latin articulatus (see articulate
(v.)). Literal meaning composed of segments united by joints is from c.1600; the general sense of
speaking accurately is short for articulate-speaking (1829). Related: Articulately.


articulated (adj.)

jointed, 1610s, past participle adjective from articulate (v.). Meaning made distinct is from 1855.


articulate (v.)

1590s, to divide speech into distinct parts (earlier to formally bring charges against, 1550s), from
Latin articulatus, past participle of articulare to separate into joints, also to utter distinctly,
from articulus joint (see article). Generalized sense of express in words is from 1690s. Literal
sense, to join, to attach by joints, is attested from 1610s. Earlier senses, to set forth in
articles, to bring a charge against (1560s) now are obsolete or nearly so. Related: Articulated;
articulating.


articular (adj.)

from Latin articularis pertaining to the joints, from articulus (see articulate (v.)).


disarticulate (adj.)

early 15c.; see dis- + articulate (adj.).


enunciate (v.)

1620s, declare, express, from Latin enuntiatus, past participle of enuntiare speak out, say,
express, assert; divulge, disclose, reveal, betray, from ex- out (see ex-) + nuntiare to announce
(see nuncio). Or perhaps a back-formation from enunciation. Meaning to articulate, pronounce is from
1759. Related: Enunciated; enunciating.


aphasia (n.)

loss of ability to speak, especially as result of brain injury or disorder, 1867, from Modern Latin
aphasia, from Greek aphasia speechlessness, from a- without (see a- (3)) + phasis utterance, from
phanai to speak, related to pheme voice, report, rumor (see fame (n.)).    APHASIA is the term which
has recently been given to the loss of the faculty of articulate language, the organs of phonation
and of articulation, as well as the intelligence, being unimpaired. The pathology of this affection
is at the present time the subject of much discussion in the scientific world; the French Academy
devoted several of their s&#233;ances during the year 1865 to its special elucidation, and the
Medical Journals of France and of our own country have lately contained a good deal of original
matter bearing upon this obscure feature in cerebral pathology. [Frederic Bateman, M.D., Aphasia,
London, 1868]


