artifice (n.)

1530s, workmanship, the making of anything by craft or skill, from Middle French artifice skill,
cunning (14c.), from Latin artificium a profession, trade, employment, craft; making by art, from
artifex (genitive artificis) craftsman, artist, from stem of ars art (see art (n.)) + facere do (see
factitious). Meaning device, trick (the usual modern sense) is from 1650s.


artificer (n.)

late 14c., one who makes by art or skill, agent noun from artifice. Military sense dates from 1758.


stratagem (n.)

artifice, trick, late 15c., from Middle French strattegeme, stratag&egrave;me trick, especially to
outwit an enemy (15c.), from Italian stratagemma, from Latin strategema artifice, stratagem, from
Greek strategema the act of a general; military stratagem, from strategein to be a general, command,
from strategos general (see strategy). Related: Stratagematic; stratagemical. The second -a- is a
Romanic misspelling (compare Spanish estratagema).


wrench (n.)

Old English wrenc a twisting, artifice, trick; see wrench (v.). The meaning tool with jaws at one
end for turning or holding is first recorded 1794.


politician (n.)

1580s, person skilled in politics, from politics + -ian. It quickly took on overtones, not typically
good ones. Johnson defines it as A man of artifice; one of deep contrivance.


supposititious (adj.)

put by artifice in place of another, 1610s, from Latin supposititius, from suppositus, past
participle of supponere (see suppose).


innocence (n.)

mid-14c., freedom from guilt, from Old French inocence innocence, purity, chastity (12c.), from
Latin innocentia, from innocens harmless, blameless (see innocent). Meaning lacking in guile or
artifice is from late 14c.


shifty (adj.)

1560s, able to manage for oneself, fertile in expedients, from shift (n.1) in secondary sense of
dodge, trick, artifice + -y (2). Meaning habitually using dishonest methods, characterized by
trickery first recorded 1837. In a sense prone to shifting, of the wind, used from 1884. Related:
Shiftily; shiftiness.


aposiopesis (n.)

rhetorical artifice wherein the speaker suddenly breaks off in the middle of a sentence, 1570s, from
Latin, from Greek aposiopesis a becoming silent, also as a rhetorical figure, from apo- (see apo-) +
siope silence.


gaud (n.)

late 14c., jest, joke, prank, trick; also fraud, deception, trick, artifice. Also large, ornamental
bead in a rosary (mid-14c.); a bauble, trinket, plaything (mid-15c.). In some senses, from gaudy
(n.) (see gaudy). In some, from Latin gaudium joy, gaude rejoice thou (in hymns), or from Old French
gaudie, noun of action from gaudir. As a verb, to furnish with gauds, from late 14c. Related:
Gauded; gauding.


wile (n.)

late Old English, wil stratagem, trick, sly artifice, perhaps from Old North French *wile (Old
French guile), or directly from a Scandinavian source (compare Old Norse vel trick, craft, fraud,
vela defraud). Perhaps ultimately related to Old English wicca wizard (see Wicca). Lighter sense of
amorous or playful trick is from c.1600.


artificial (adj.)

late 14c., in the phrase artificial day part of the day from sunrise to sunset, from Old French
artificial, from Latin artificialis of or belonging to art, from artificium (see artifice). Meaning
made by man (opposite of natural) is from early 15c. Applied to things that are not natural, whether
real (artificial light) or not (artificial flowers). Artificial insemination dates from 1897.
Artificial intelligence the science and engineering of making intelligent machines was coined in
1956.


work (n.)

Old English weorc, worc something done, discreet act performed by someone, action (whether voluntary
or required), proceeding, business; that which is made or manufactured, products of labor, also
physical labor, toil; skilled trade, craft, or occupation; opportunity of expending labor in some
useful or remunerative way; also military fortification, from Proto-Germanic *werkan (cognates: Old
Saxon, Old Frisian, Dutch werk, Old Norse verk, Middle Dutch warc, Old High German werah, German
Werk, Gothic gawaurki), from PIE *werg-o-, from root *werg- to do (see organ).    Work is less
boring than amusing oneself. [Baudelaire, Mon Coeur mis a nu, 1862]    In Old English, the noun also
had the sense of fornication. Meaning physical effort, exertion is from c.1200; meaning scholarly
labor or its productions is from c.1200; meaning artistic labor or its productions is from c.1200.
Meaning labor as a measurable commodity is from c.1300. Meaning embroidery, stitchery, needlepoint
is from late 14c. Work of art attested by 1774 as artistic creation, earlier (1728) artifice,
production of humans (as opposed to nature). Work ethic recorded from 1959. To be out of work
unemployed is from 1590s. To make clean work of is from c.1300; to make short work of is from 1640s.
Proverbial expression many hands make light work is from c.1300. To have (one's) work cut out for
one is from 1610s; to have it prepared and prescribed, hence, to have all one can handle. Work in
progress is from 1930 in a general sense, earlier as a specific term in accountancy and
parliamentary procedure.


