ascertainable (adj.)

1783, from ascertain + -able. Related: Ascertainably.


ascertain (v.)

early 15c., to inform, to give assurance, from Anglo-French acerteiner, Old French acertener to
assure, certify (13c.), from a to (see ad-) + certain certain (see certain). Modern meaning of find
out for sure by experiment or investigation is first attested 1794. Related: Ascertained;
ascertaining.


number (v.)

c.1300, to count, from Old French nombrer to count, reckon, from nombre (n.) number (see number
(n.)). Meaning to assign a number to is late 14c.; that of to ascertain the number of is from early
15c. Related: Numbered; numbering.


gauge (v.)

ascertain by exact measurements, mid-15c., from Anglo-French gauge (mid-14c.), from Old North French
gauger (Old French jauger), from gauge gauging rod, perhaps from Frankish *galgo rod, pole for
measuring or another Germanic source (compare Old Norse gelgja pole, perch, Old High German galgo;
see gallows). Related: Gauged; gauging. The figurative use is from 1580s.


measure (v.)

c.1300, to deal out by measure, from Old French mesurer measure; moderate, curb (12c.), from Late
Latin mensurare to measure, from Latin mensura a measuring, a measurement; thing to measure by, from
mensus, past participle of metiri to measure, from PIE *me- (2) to measure (see meter (n.2)).
Replaced Old English cognate m&aelig;&eth; measure. Meaning to ascertain spatial dimensions of is
mid-14c. To measure up have the necessary abilities is 1910, American English. Related: Measured;
measuring.


wit (v.)

to know (archaic), Old English witan (past tense wast, past participle witen) to know, beware of or
conscious of, understand, observe, ascertain, learn, from Proto-Germanic *witan to have seen, hence
to know (cognates: Old Saxon witan, Old Norse vita, Old Frisian wita, Middle Dutch, Dutch weten, Old
High German wizzan, German wissen, Gothic witan to know), from PIE *weid- (see wit (n.)). The phrase
to wit, almost the only surviving use of the verb, is first recorded 1570s, from earlier that is to
wit (mid-14c.), probably a loan-translation of Anglo-French cestasavoir, used to render Latin
videlicet (see viz.).


hoodlum (n.)

popularized 1871, American English, (identified throughout the 1870s as a California word) young
street rowdy, loafer, especially one involved in violence against Chinese immigrants, young
criminal, gangster; it appears to have been in use locally from a slightly earlier date and may have
begun as a specific name of a gang:    The police have recently been investigating the proceedings
of a gang of thieving boys who denominate themselves and are known to the world as the Hoodlum Gang.
[San Francisco Golden Era newspaper, Feb. 16, 1868, p.4]    Of unknown origin, though newspapers of
the day printed myriad fanciful stories concocted to account for it. A guess perhaps better than
average is that it is from German dialectal (Bavarian) Huddellump ragamuffin [Barnhart].    What the
derivation of the word hoodlum is we could never satisfactorily ascertain, though several
derivations have been proposed; and it would appear that the word has not been very many years in
use. But, however obscure the word may be, there is nothing mysterious about the thing; .... [Walter
M. Fisher, The Californians, London, 1876]


