askance (adv.)

1520s, sideways, asquint, of obscure origin. OED has separate listings for askance and obsolete
Middle English askance(s) and no indication of a connection, but Barnhart and others derive the
newer word from the older one. The Middle English word, recorded early 14c. as ase quances and found
later in Chaucer, meant in such a way that; even as; as if; and as an adverb insincerely,
deceptively. It has been analyzed as a compound of as and Old French quanses (pronounced kanses) how
if, from Latin quam how + si if.    The E[nglish] as is, accordingly, redundant, and merely added by
way of partial explanation. The M.E. askances means as if in other passages, but here means, as if
it were, i.e. possibly, perhaps; as said above. Sometimes the final s is dropped .... [Walter W.
Skeat, glossary to Chaucer's Man of Law's Tale, 1894]    Also see discussion in Leo Spitzer, Anglo-
French Etymologies, Philological Quarterly 24.23 (1945), and see OED entry for askance (adv.) for
discussion of the mysterious ask- word cluster in English. Other guesses about the origin of askance
include Old French a escone, from past participle of a word for hidden; Italian a scancio obliquely,
slantingly; or that it is a cognate of askew.


glance (v.)

mid-15c., of weapons, from glacen to graze, strike a glancing blow (c.1300), from Old French glacier
to slip, make slippery, from glace ice (see glacial). Sense of look quickly (first recorded 1580s)
probably was influenced in form and meaning by Middle English glenten look askance (see glint).
Related: Glanced; glancing.


leer (v.)

to look obliquely (now usually implying with a lustful or malicious intent), 1520s, probably from
Middle English noun ler cheek, from Old English hleor the cheek, the face, from Proto-Germanic
*khleuzas near the ear, from *kleuso- ear, from PIE root *kleu- to hear (see listen). The notion is
probably of looking askance (compare figurative development of cheek). Related: Leered; leering.


suspect (adj.)

early 14c., suspected of wrongdoing, under suspicion; mid-14c., regarded with mistrust, liable to
arouse suspicion, from Old French suspect (14c.), from Latin suspectus suspected, regarded with
suspicion or mistrust, past participle of suspicere look up at, look upward, figuratively look up
to, admire, respect; also look at secretly, look askance at, hence, figuratively, mistrust, regard
with suspicion, from assimilated form of sub up to (see sub-) + specere to look at (see scope
(n.1)). The notion behind the word is look at secretly, hence, look at distrustfully.


bias (n.)

1520s, from French biais slant, slope, oblique, also figuratively, expedient, means (13c.,
originally in Old French a past participle adjective, sideways, askance, against the grain), of
unknown origin, probably from Old Proven&ccedil;al biais, with cognates in Old Catalan and
Sardinian; possibly from Vulgar Latin *(e)bigassius, from Greek epikarsios athwart, crosswise, at an
angle, from epi- upon + karsios oblique, from PIE *krs-yo-, from root *(s)ker- (1) to cut (see shear
(v.)). It became a noun in Old French. [A] technical term in the game of bowls, whence come all the
later uses of the word [OED]. Transferred sense of predisposition, prejudice is from 1570s in
English.    For what a man had rather were true he more readily believes. Therefore he rejects
difficult things from impatience of research; sober things, because they narrow hope; the deeper
things of nature, from superstition; the light of experience, from arrogance and pride, lest his
mind should seem to be occupied with things mean and transitory; things not commonly believed, out
of deference to the opinion of the vulgar. Numberless in short are the ways, and sometimes
imperceptible, in which the affections colour and infect the understanding. [Francis Bacon, Novum
Organum, 1620]


