askew (adv.)

1570s, of uncertain etymology; perhaps literally on skew (see skew), or from the Old Norse form, a
ska. Earlier askoye is attested in the same sense (early 15c.).


cockeyed (adj.)

1821, squint-eyed, perhaps from cock (v.) in some sense + eye (n.). Figurative sense of absurd,
askew, crazy is from 1896; that of drunk is attested from 1926.


awry (adv.)

late 14c., crooked, askew, from a- (1) on + wry (adj.).


tip (v.1)

c.1300, to knock down, overturn, topple, knock askew (transitive), of uncertain origin, possibly
from Scandinavian (compare Swedish tippa to tip, dump), or from a special use of tip (n.).
Intransitive sense of to fall over, be overturned is from mid-15c. Related: Tipped; tipping. To tip
the scales at weigh (so much is from 1879. Tipping point attested by 1972. To tip (one's) hand
reveal one's intentions is from 1907, an image from poker-playing.


galleywest

as a destination where you knock something or someone, American English slang, by 1835; considered
by OED to be a corruption of western England dialectal collyweston, name of a village in
Northamptonshire (Colin's West Farmstead) that somehow came to signify askew, not right. But Farmer
calls it an Americanism and goes in for it as an indefinite superlative, and DAS also does not
consider the obscure English term to be the source. Early nautical references suggest it might
simply be what it looks like: a sailor's generic way of indicating something has been thrown pretty
far by impact.     Matter? why d--n my old shoes, Captain Williams, here is one of that bloody Don
Dego's shot gone right through the galley-door, and through the side of the big copper, and knocked
all the beef and hot water galley-west. ... [N.Ames, Old Sailor's Yarns, New York, 1835]


perverse (adj.)

mid-14c., wicked, from Old French pervers unnatural, degenerate; perverse, contrary (12c.) and
directly from Latin perversus turned away, contrary, askew, figuratively, turned away from what is
right, wrong, malicious, spiteful, past participle of pervertere to corrupt (see pervert (v.)). The
Latin word is glossed in Old English by forcerred, from past participle of forcyrran to avoid, from
cierran to turn, return. Meaning wrong, not in accord with what is accepted is from 1560s; sense of
obstinate, stubborn is from 1570s. It keeps the non-sexual senses of pervert (v.) and allows the
psychological ones to go with perverted. Related: Perversely; perverseness.


catawampus (adj.)

also catawampous, cattywampus, catiwampus, etc. (see Dictionary of American Slang for more),
American colloquial. First element perhaps from obsolete cater to set or move diagonally (see catty-
cornered); second element perhaps related to Scottish wampish to wriggle, twist, or swerve about. Or
perhaps simply the sort of jocular pseudo-classical formation popular in the slang of those times,
with the first element suggesting Greek kata-.    Earliest use seems to be in adverbial form,
catawampusly (1834), expressing no certain meaning but adding intensity to the action: utterly,
completely; with avidity, fiercely, eagerly. It appears as a noun from 1843, as a name for an
imaginary hobgoblin or fright, perhaps from influence of catamount. The adjective is attested from
the 1840s as an intensive, but this is only in British lampoons of American speech and might not be
authentic. It was used in the U.S. by 1864 in a sense of askew, awry, wrong and by 1873 (noted as a
peculiarity of North Carolina speech) as in a diagonal position, on a bias, crooked.


askance (adv.)

1520s, sideways, asquint, of obscure origin. OED has separate listings for askance and obsolete
Middle English askance(s) and no indication of a connection, but Barnhart and others derive the
newer word from the older one. The Middle English word, recorded early 14c. as ase quances and found
later in Chaucer, meant in such a way that; even as; as if; and as an adverb insincerely,
deceptively. It has been analyzed as a compound of as and Old French quanses (pronounced kanses) how
if, from Latin quam how + si if.    The E[nglish] as is, accordingly, redundant, and merely added by
way of partial explanation. The M.E. askances means as if in other passages, but here means, as if
it were, i.e. possibly, perhaps; as said above. Sometimes the final s is dropped .... [Walter W.
Skeat, glossary to Chaucer's Man of Law's Tale, 1894]    Also see discussion in Leo Spitzer, Anglo-
French Etymologies, Philological Quarterly 24.23 (1945), and see OED entry for askance (adv.) for
discussion of the mysterious ask- word cluster in English. Other guesses about the origin of askance
include Old French a escone, from past participle of a word for hidden; Italian a scancio obliquely,
slantingly; or that it is a cognate of askew.


