aspire (v.)

strive for, c.1400, from Old French aspirer aspire to; inspire; breathe, breathe on (12c.), from
Latin aspirare to breathe upon, blow upon, to breathe, also, in transferred senses, to be favorable
to, assist; to climb up to, to endeavor to obtain, to reach to, to seek to reach; infuse, from ad-
to (see ad-) + spirare to breathe (see spirit (n.)). The notion is of panting with desire, or
perhaps of rising smoke. Related: Aspired; aspiring.


aspirate (n.)

1725, sound of the letter 'H', especially at the beginning of a word, from Latin aspiratio a
breathing, exhalation; the pronunciation of the letter H (see aspire).


unaspiring (adj.)

1680s, from un- (1) not + present participle of aspire (v.).


aspirate (v.)

to pronounce with audible breath, 1700; perhaps a back-formation from aspiration (n.2), or from
French aspirer or directly from Latin aspiratus, past participle of aspirare (see aspire). Related:
Aspirated; aspirating.


aspirant (n.)

one who aspires, 1738, from French aspirant, from Latin aspirantem (nominative aspirans), present
participle of aspirare (see aspire).


snob (n.)

1781, a shoemaker, a shoemaker's apprentice, of unknown origin. It came to be used in Cambridge
University slang c.1796, often contemptuously, for townsman, local merchant, and passed then into
literary use, where by 1831 it was being used for person of the ordinary or lower classes. Meaning
person who vulgarly apes his social superiors is by 1843, popularized 1848 by William Thackeray's
Book of Snobs. The meaning later broadened to include those who insist on their gentility, in
addition to those who merely aspire to it, and by 1911 the word had its main modern sense of one who
despises those considered inferior in rank, attainment, or taste.


aspiration (n.1)

1530s, action of breathing into, from Latin aspirationem (nominative aspiratio) a breathing on, a
blowing upon; rough breathing; influence, noun of action from past participle stem of aspirare (see
aspire). Meaning steadfast longing for a higher goal, earnest desire for something above one is
recorded from c.1600 (sometimes collectively, as aspirations).


affect (v.2)

to make a pretense of, 1660s, earlier to assume the character of (someone) (1590s); originally in
English to aim at, aspire to, desire (early 15c.), from Middle French affecter (15c.), from Latin
affectare to strive after, aim at, frequentative of afficere (past participle affectus) to do
something to, act on (see affect (n.)). Related: Affected; affecting.


abeyance (n.)

1520s, from Anglo-French abeiance suspension, also expectation (especially in a lawsuit), from Old
French abeance aspiration, desire, noun of condition of abeer aspire after, gape from &agrave; at
(see ad-) + ba(y)er be open, from Latin *batare to yawn, gape (see abash).    Originally in French a
legal term, condition of a person in expectation or hope of receiving property; it turned around in
English law to mean condition of property temporarily without an owner (1650s). Root baer is also
the source of English bay (n.2) recessed space, as in bay window.


diligence (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French diligence attention, care; haste, speed, from Latin diligentia
attentiveness, carefulness, from diligentem (nominative diligens) attentive, assiduous, careful,
originally present participle of diligere single out, value highly, esteem, prize, love; aspire to,
be content with, appreciate, originally to pick out, select, from dis- apart (see dis-) + legere
choose, gather (see lecture (n.)).    Sense evolved from love through attentiveness to carefulness
to steady effort. From the secondary French sense comes the old useage of diligence for public stage
coach (1742; dilly for short), from a French shortening of carrosse de diligence.


till (v.)

cultivate (land) early 13c.; plow, late 14c., from Old English tilian cultivate, tend, work at, get
by labor, originally strive after, aim at, aspire to, related to till fixed point, goal, and til
good, useful, suitable, from Proto-Germanic *tilojan (cognates: Old Frisian tilia to get, cultivate,
Old Saxon tilian to obtain, Middle Dutch, Dutch telen to breed, raise, cultivate, cause, Old High
German zilon to strive, German zielen to aim, strive), from source of till (prep.).    For sense
development, compare expression work the land, Old Norse yrkja work, but especially cultivate (and
also to make verses); Old Church Slavonic delati work, also cultivate.  Related: Tilled; tilling.


