assert (v.)

c.1600, declare, from Latin assertus, past participle of asserere claim, maintain, affirm (see
assertion). Related: Asserted; asserting. To assert oneself stand up for one's rights is recorded
from 1879.


assertive (adj.)

1560s, declaratory, positive, full of assertion, from assert + -ive. Meaning insisting on one's
rights is short for self-assertive (1865).


re-assert (v.)

also also reassert, 1660s, from re- + assert. Related: Reasserted; reasserting; reassertion.


category (n.)

1580s, from Middle French cat&eacute;gorie, from Late Latin categoria, from Greek kategoria
accusation, prediction, category, verbal noun from kategorein to speak against; to accuse, assert,
predicate, from kata down to (or perhaps against; see cata-) + agoreuein to harangue, to declaim (in
the assembly), from agora public assembly (see agora). Original sense of accuse weakened to assert,
name by the time Aristotle applied kategoria to his 10 classes of things that can be named.
<b>category</b> should be used by no-one who is not prepared to state (1) that he does not mean
class, &amp; (2) that he knows the difference between the two .... [Fowler]


posit (v.)

to assert, 1690s, from Latin positus placed, situated, standing, planted, past participle of ponere
put, place (see position). Related: Posited; positing.


contradict (v.)

1570s, speak against, also assert the contrary (1580s), from Latin contradictus, past participle of
contradicere (see contradiction). Related: Contradicted; contradicting; contradictive.


re-affirm (v.)

also reaffirm, 1610s, to confirm anew, from re- back, again + affirm. Meaning to assert anew is
recorded from 1842. Related: Reaffirmed; reaffirming.


enunciate (v.)

1620s, declare, express, from Latin enuntiatus, past participle of enuntiare speak out, say,
express, assert; divulge, disclose, reveal, betray, from ex- out (see ex-) + nuntiare to announce
(see nuncio). Or perhaps a back-formation from enunciation. Meaning to articulate, pronounce is from
1759. Related: Enunciated; enunciating.


vengeance (n.)

c.1300, from Anglo-French vengeaunce, Old French vengeance, venjance revenge, retribution (12c.),
from vengier take revenge, from Latin vindicare assert a claim, claim as one's own; avenge, punish
(see vindicate).  Vengeance is mine, ... saith the Lord. Therefore if thine enemy hunger, feed him;
if he thirst, give him drink; for in so doing thou shalt heap coals of fire upon his head. [Paul to
the Romans, xii:19-20]


predicate (n.)

mid-15c., a term in logic, from Middle French predicat and directly from Medieval Latin predicatum,
from Latin praedicatum that which is said of the subject, noun use of neuter past participle of
praedicare assert, proclaim, declare publicly, from prae- forth, before (see pre-) + dicare
proclaim, from stem of dicere to speak, to say (see diction). Grammatical sense is from 1630s.
Related: Predicative; predicator; predicatory.


vindication (n.)

late 15c., act of avenging, revenge, from Old French vindicacion vengeance, revenge and directly
from Latin vindicationem (nominative vindicatio) act of claiming or avenging, noun of action from
past participle stem of vindicare lay claim to, assert; claim for freedom, set free; protect,
defend; avenge (related to vindicta revenge), probably from vim dicare to show authority, from vim,
accusative of vis force + root of dicere to say (see diction). Meaning justification by proof,
defense against censure is attested from 1640s.


cull (n.)

dupe, saphead, rogues' slang from late 16c., perhaps a shortening of cullion base fellow, originally
testicle (from French couillon, from Old French coillon testicle; worthless fellow, dolt, from Latin
coleus, literally strainer bag; see cojones), though another theory traces it to Romany (Gypsy)
chulai man. Also sometimes cully, though some authorities assert cully was the canting term for dupe
and cull was generic man, fellow, without implication of gullibility. Compare also gullible.


cloture (n.)

1871, the French word for closure, the action of closing, applied to debates in the French Assembly
(action of closing (debate) by will of a majority), then to the House of Commons and U.S. Congress,
from French cl&ocirc;ture, from Old French closture (see closure). It was especially used in English
by those opposed to the tactic.    In foreign countries the Cl&ocirc;ture has been used notoriously
to barricade up a majority against the pestilent criticism of a minority, and in this country every
whip and force is employed by the majority to re-assert its continued supremacy and to keep its
ranks intact whenever attacked. How this one-sided struggle to maintain solidarity can be construed
into good for all is inexplicable in the sense uttered. [The cl&ocirc;ture and the Recent Debate, a
Letter to Sir J. Lubbock, London, 1882]


pretend (v.)

late 14c., to profess, assert, maintain (a claim, etc.), to direct (one's) efforts, from Old French
pretendre to lay claim, from Latin praetendere stretch in front, put forward, allege, from prae
before (see pre-) + tendere to stretch, from PIE root *ten- to stretch (see tend).    Main modern
sense of feign, put forward a false claim is recorded from c.1400; the older sense of simply to
claim is behind the string of royal pretenders (1690s) in English history. Meaning to play, make
believe is recorded from 1865. In 17c. pretend also could mean make a suit of marriage for, from a
sense in French. Related: Pretended; pretending.


steer (v.)

guide the course of a vehicle, originally by a rudder or something like it, Old English steran
(Mercian), stieran (West Saxon) steer, guide, direct; govern, rule; restrain, correct, punish, from
Proto-Germanic *steurjan (cognates: Old Norse styra, Old Frisian stiora, Dutch sturen, Old High
German stiuren, German steuern to steer, Gothic stiurjan to establish, assert), related to *steuro a
rudder, a steering, from PIE *steu-ro- (cognates: Greek stauros stake, pole), extended form of root
*sta- to stand (see stet).    The notion is of a stiff, upright pillar or post used in steering, or
else perhaps establish, hence direct, steer. Intransitive sense also was in Old English. To steer
clear of in the figurative sense of to avoid completely is recorded from 1723. Related: Steered;
steering.


abstract (adj.)

late 14c., originally in grammar (of nouns), from Latin abstractus drawn away, past participle of
abstrahere to drag away, detach, pull away, divert; also figuratively, from ab(s)- away (see ab-) +
trahere draw (see tract (n.1)).    Meaning withdrawn or separated from material objects or practical
matters is from mid-15c. That of difficult to understand, abstruse is from c.1400. Specifically in
reference to modern art, it dates from 1914; abstract expressionism as an American-based uninhibited
approach to art exemplified by Jackson Pollock is from 1952, but the term itself had been used in
the 1920s of Kandinsky and others.    Oswald Herzog, in an article on Der Abstrakte Expressionismus
(Sturm, heft 50, 1919) gives us a statement which with equal felicity may be applied to the artistic
attitude of the Dadaists. Abstract Expressionism is perfect Expressionism, he writes. It is pure
creation. It casts spiritual processes into a corporeal mould. It does not borrow objects from the
real world; it creates its own objects .... The abstract reveals the will of the artist; it becomes
expression. ... [William A. Drake, The Life and Deeds of Dada, 1922]   <hr />   Then, that art we
have called abstract for want of any possible descriptive term, with which we have been patient,
and, even, appreciative, getting high stimulation by the new Guggenheim non-objective Art Museum, is
reflected in our examples of surrealism, dadaism, and what-not, to assert our acquaintance in every
art, fine or other. [Report of the Art Reference Department of Pratt Institute Free Library for year
ending June 30, 1937]


