assent (n.)

early 14c., consent, approval, from Old French assent, a back-formation from assentir (see assent
(v.)).


assent (v.)

c.1300, from Old French assentir agree; get used to (12c.), from Latin assentare to agree with,
frequentative of assentire, from ad- to (see ad-) + sentire to feel, think (see sense (n.)).
Related: Assented; assenting.


aye (interj.)

assent, 1570s, of unknown origin, perhaps a variant of I, meaning I assent; or an alteration of
Middle English yai yes (see yea), or from aye (adv.) always, ever.


om

mystical word in Hinduism, Buddhism; an utterance of assent, 1788.


approve (v.)

c.1300, to demonstrate, prove; mid-14c., to attest (something) with authority, from Old French
aprover (Modern French approuver) approve, agree to, from Latin approbare to assent to as good,
regard as good, from ad- to (see ad-) + probare to try, test something (to find if it is good), from
probus honest, genuine (see prove).    The meaning extended late 14c. to to sanction, endorse,
confirm formally then to assent to (something) as good (early 15c.), especially in reference to the
actions of authorities, parliaments, etc. Related: Approved; approving.


approbate (v.)

late 15c., from Latin approbatus, past participle of approbare to assent to (as good), favor (see
approve). Related: Approbated; approbating.


numen (n.)

divine spirit, presiding divinity, 1620s, from Latin numen divine will, divinity, literally a nod,
from nuere to nod (assent); see numinous.


congressional (adj.)

1690s, from Latin congressionem (from congressus, see congress) + -al (1). Originally sometimes
reviled as barbarous, Pickering (1816) quotes an unnamed English correspondent: The term Congress
belonging to America, the Americans may employ its derivatives, without waiting for the assent of
the English.


prorogue (v.)

early 15c., to prolong, extend, from Old French proroger, proroguer (14c.), from Latin prorogare,
literally to ask publicly, from pro before (see pro-) + rogare to ask (see rogation). Perhaps the
original sense in Latin was to ask for public assent to extending someone's term in office.
Legislative meaning discontinue temporarily is attested from mid-15c. Related: Prorogation.


disagree (v.)

late 15c., refuse to assent, from Old French desagreer (12c.), from des- (see dis-) + agreer (see
agree). Related: Disagreed; disagreeing.


addict (v.)

1530s (implied in addicted), from Latin addictus, past participle of addicere to deliver, award,
yield; give assent, make over, sell, figuratively to devote, consecrate; sacrifice, sell out, betray
from ad- to (see ad-) + dicere say, declare (see diction), but also adjudge, allot. Earlier in
English as an adjective, delivered, devoted (1520s). Related: Addicted; addicting.


subscribe (v.)

early 15c., to sign at the bottom of a document, from Latin subscribere write, write underneath,
sign one's name; register, also figuratively assent, agree to, approve, from sub underneath (see
sub-) + scribere write (see script (n.)). The meaning give one's consent (by subscribing one's name)
first recorded mid-15c.; that of contribute money to 1630s; and that of become a regular buyer of a
publication 1711, all originally literal. Related: Subscribed; subscribing.


plebiscite (n.)

direct vote of the people, 1860 (originally in reference to Italian unification), from French
pl&eacute;biscite (1776 in modern sense, originally with reference to Switzerland), from Latin
plebiscitum a decree or resolution of the people, from plebs (genitive plebis) the common people
(see plebeian (adj.)) + scitum decree, noun use of neuter past participle of sciscere to assent,
vote for, approve, inchoative of scire to know (see science). Used earlier (1530s) in a purely Roman
historical context. Related: Plebiscitary.


probation (n.)

early 15c., trial, experiment, test, from Old French probacion proof, evidence (14c., Modern French
probation) and directly from Latin probationem (nominative probatio) approval, assent; a proving,
trial, inspection, examination, noun of action from past participle stem of probare to test (see
prove). Meaning testing of a person's conduct (especially as a trial period for membership) is from
early 15c.; theological sense first recorded 1520s; criminal justice sense is recorded by 1866. As a
verb from 1640s. Related: Probationer; probationary.


satire (n.)

late 14c., work intended to ridicule vice or folly, from Middle French satire (14c.) and directly
from Latin satira satire, poetic medley, earlier satura, in lanx satura mixed dish, dish filled with
various kinds of fruit, literally full dish, from fem. of satur sated (see saturate).    First used
in the literary sense in Latin in reference to a collection of poems in various meters on a variety
of subjects by the late republican Roman poet Ennius. The matter of the little that survives of his
verse does not seem to be particularly satiric, but in classical Latin the word came to mean
especially a poem which assailed the prevailing vices, one after another. Altered in Latin by
influence of Greek satyr, on mistaken notion that the literary form is related to the Greek satyr
drama (see satyr).<b>Satire</b>, n. An obsolete kind of literary composition in which the vices and
follies of the author's enemies were expounded with imperfect tenderness. In this country satire
never had more than a sickly and uncertain existence, for the soul of it is wit, wherein we are
dolefully deficient, the humor that we mistake for it, like all humor, being tolerant and
sympathetic. Moreover, although Americans are 'endowed by their Creator' with abundant vice and
folly, it is not generally known that these are reprehensible qualities, wherefore the satirist is
popularly regarded as a sour-spirited knave, and his every victim's outcry for codefendants evokes a
national assent. [Ambrose Bierce, Devil's Dictionary, 1911]   <hr />   Proper satire is
distinguished, by the generality of the reflections, from a lampoon which is aimed against a
particular person, but they are too frequently confounded. [Johnson]   <hr />   [I]n whatever
department of human expression, wherever there is objective truth there is satire [Wyndham Lewis,
Rude Assignment, 1950]    For nuances of usage, see humor (n.).


