assiduous (adj.)

1530s, from Latin assiduus attending; continually present, incessant; busy; constant, from assidere
to sit down to, thus constantly occupied at one's work; from ad to (see ad-) + sedere to sit (see
sedentary). The word acquired a taint of servility in 18c. Related: Assiduously; assiduousness.


assiduity (n.)

early 15c., from Latin assiduatem continual presence, noun of quality from past participle stem of
assiduus (see assiduous).


devout (adj.)

early 13c., from Old French devot pious, devoted, assiduous, from Latin devotus given up by vow,
devoted, past participle of devovere dedicate by vow (see devotion).


diligent (adj.)

mid-14c., from Old French diligent (14c.), from Latin diligentem attentive, assiduous (see
diligence). Related: Diligently.


studious (adj.)

mid-14c. (implied in studiously) zealous, diligent, eager, from Latin studiosus devoted to study,
assiduous, zealous, from studium eagerness, zeal (see study). From late 14c. as eager to learn,
devoted to learning, also, as noun, those who study or read diligently. Related: Studiousness.


instant (n.)

late 14c., infinitely short space of time, from Old French instant (adj.) assiduous, at hand, from
Medieval Latin instantem (nominative instans), in classical Latin present, pressing, urgent,
literally standing near, present participle of instare to urge, to stand near, be present (to urge
one's case), from in- in (see in- (2)) + stare to stand, from PIE root *sta- to stand (see stet).
Elliptical use of the French adjective as a noun.


diligence (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French diligence attention, care; haste, speed, from Latin diligentia
attentiveness, carefulness, from diligentem (nominative diligens) attentive, assiduous, careful,
originally present participle of diligere single out, value highly, esteem, prize, love; aspire to,
be content with, appreciate, originally to pick out, select, from dis- apart (see dis-) + legere
choose, gather (see lecture (n.)).    Sense evolved from love through attentiveness to carefulness
to steady effort. From the secondary French sense comes the old useage of diligence for public stage
coach (1742; dilly for short), from a French shortening of carrosse de diligence.


