assurance (n.)

late 14c., formal or solemn pledge, promise, also certainty, from Old French asseurance (11c.,
Modern French assurance) assurance, promise; truce; certainty, safety, security, from asseurer (see
assure). The word had a negative tinge 18c., often suggesting impudence or presumption.


self-assurance (n.)

1590s, from self- + assurance.


surety (n.)

c.1300, a guarantee, promise, pledge, an assurance, from Old French seurt&eacute; a promise, pledge,
guarantee; assurance, confidence (12c., Modern French s&#251;ret&#233;), from Latin securitatem
(nominative securitas) freedom from care or danger, safety, security, from securus (see secure
(adj.)). From late 14c. as security, safety, stability; state of peace, also certainty, certitude;
confidence. Meaning one who makes himself responsible for another is from early 15c. Until 1966, the
French national criminal police department was the S&#251;ret&eacute; nationale.


con (adj.)

swindling, 1889, American English, from confidence man (1849), from the many scams in which the
victim is induced to hand over money as a token of confidence. Confidence with a sense of assurance
based on insufficient grounds dates from 1590s.


smoothie (n.)

1928, suave person, person of complete self-assurance and poise, especially in the company of the
opposite sex, college slang, from smooth (adj.) + -ie. As a type of blender drink, by 1983.


insurance (n.)

1550s, engagement to marry, a variant of ensurance (see ensure). Commercial sense of security
against loss or death in exchange for payment is from 1650s. Assurance was the older term for this
(late 16c.).


reassurance (n.)

also re-assurance, 1610s, from reassure + -ance.


face (v.)

confront with assurance, show a bold face, mid-15c., from face (n.) Related: Faced. To face the
music is theatrical.


affirmation (n.)

early 15c., assertion that something is true, from Old French afermacion (14c.), from Latin
affirmationem (nominative affirmatio) an affirmation, solid assurance, noun of action from past
participle stem of affirmare (see affirm). In law, as the Quaker alternative to oath-taking, it is
attested from 1690s.


sponsor (n.)

1650s, from Late Latin sponsor sponsor in baptism, in Latin a surety, guarantee, bondsman, from
sponsus, past participle of spondere give assurance, promise solemnly (see spondee). Sense of person
who pays for a radio (or, after 1947, TV) program is first recorded 1931.


aplomb (n.)

assurance, confidence, 1828, from French aplomb (16c.), literally perpendicularity, from phrase
&agrave; plomb poised upright, balanced, literally on the plumb line, from Latin plumbum (the metal)
lead (see plumb (n.)), of which the weight at the end of the line was made.


ascertain (v.)

early 15c., to inform, to give assurance, from Anglo-French acerteiner, Old French acertener to
assure, certify (13c.), from a to (see ad-) + certain certain (see certain). Modern meaning of find
out for sure by experiment or investigation is first attested 1794. Related: Ascertained;
ascertaining.


promise (n.)

c.1400, a pledge, vow, from Old French promesse promise, guarantee, assurance (13c.) and directly
from Latin promissum a promise, noun use of neuter past participle of promittere send forth; let go;
foretell; assure beforehand, promise, from pro- before (see pro-) + mittere to put, send (see
mission). The ground sense is declaration made about the future, about some act to be done or not
done.


confirmation (n.)

c.1300, confyrmacyoun, the Church rite, from Old French confirmacion (13c.) strengthening,
confirmation; proof; ratification, from Latin confirmationem (nominative confirmatio) a securing,
establishing; an assurance, encouragement, noun of action from confirmare (see confirm). As a legal
action, verification, proof, from late 14c.; as action of making sure, from late 15c.


Injun (n.)

1812 (from 1683 as Ingin), spelling representing American English colloquial pronunciation of Indian
(q.v.). Honest Injun as an asseveration of truthfuless first recorded 1868, from the notion of
assurance extracted from Indians of their lack of duplicity.    Honest Injun? inquired Mr. Wilder,
using a Western phrase equivalent to demanding of the narrator of a story whether he is strictly
adhering to the truth. [The Genial Showman, London, 1870]    The term honest Indian is attested from
1676.


effrontery (n.)

1715, from French effronterie, from effront&eacute; shameless, from Old French esfronte shameless,
brazen, probably from Late Latin effrontem (nominative effrons) barefaced, from Latin ex- out (see
ex-) + frontem (nominative frons) brow (see front (n.)).    Latin frontus had a sense of ability to
blush, but the literal sense of effrontery often has been taken to be putting forth the forehead.
Forehead in Johnson's Dictionary (1755) has a secondary sense of impudence; confidence; assurance;
audaciousness; audacity.


craze (v.)

late 14c., crasen, craisen to shatter, crush, break to pieces, probably Germanic and perhaps
ultimately from a Scandinavian source (such as Old Norse *krasa shatter), but entering English via
an Old French crasir (compare Modern French &eacute;craser). Original sense preserved in crazy quilt
pattern and in reference to cracking in pottery glazing (1815). Mental sense (by 1620s) perhaps
comes via transferred sense of be diseased or deformed (mid-15c.), or it might be an image. Related:
Crazed; crazing.    ... there is little assurance in reconciled enemies: whose affections (for the
most part) are like unto Glasse; which being once cracked, can neuer be made otherwise then crazed
and vnsound. [John Hayward, The Life and Raigne of King Henrie the IIII, 1599]


truce (n.)

mutually agreed-upon temporary intermission of hostilities, early 13c., triws, variant of trewes,
originally plural of trewe faith, assurance of faith, covenant, treaty, from Old English treow
faith, truth, fidelity; pledge, promise, agreement, treaty, from Proto-Germanic *treuwaz- (cognates:
Old Frisian triuwe, Middle Dutch trouwe, Dutch trouw, Old High German triuwa, German treue, Gothic
triggwa faith, faithfulness). Related to Old English treowe faithful (see true (adj.)). The Germanic
word was borrowed into Late Latin as tregua, hence French tr&egrave;ve, Italian tregua.


no

negative reply, early 13c., from Old English na (adv.) no, never, not at all, from ne not, no + a
ever. First element from Proto-Germanic *ne (cognates: Old Norse, Old Frisian, Old High German ne,
Gothic ni not), from PIE root *ne no, not (see un-). Second element from PIE *aiw- vital force,
life, long life, eternity (see aye (adv.)).    As an adjective meaning not any (c.1200) it is
reduced from Old English nan (see none), the final -n omitted first before consonants and then
altogether. As a noun from c.1300. Phrase no can do it is not possible is attested from 1827, a
locution of English-speaking Chinese noted 19c. in China, Australia and West Coast of U.S.    We
repeated our advice again and again, but got no answer but a loud horse-laugh, and their national
maxim of No can do: Europe fashion no do in China. [Reminiscences of a Voyage to and from China, in
Paxton's Horticultural Register, London, 1836]    Construction no X, no Y attested from 1530s (in no
peny no pardon). No problem as an interjection of assurance first attested 1963. No way as an
expression meaning it can't be done is attested by 1968 (no way by no means is from c.1400).


science (n.)

mid-14c., what is known, knowledge (of something) acquired by study; information; also assurance of
knowledge, certitude, certainty, from Old French science knowledge, learning, application; corpus of
human knowledge (12c.), from Latin scientia knowledge, a knowing; expertness, from sciens (genitive
scientis) intelligent, skilled, present participle of scire to know, probably originally to separate
one thing from another, to distinguish, related to scindere to cut, divide, from PIE root *skei- to
cut, to split (cognates: Greek skhizein to split, rend, cleave, Gothic skaidan, Old English sceadan
to divide, separate; see shed (v.)).    From late 14c. in English as book-learning, also a
particular branch of knowledge or of learning; also skillfulness, cleverness; craftiness. From
c.1400 as experiential knowledge; also a skill, handicraft; a trade. From late 14c. as collective
human knowledge (especially that gained by systematic observation, experiment, and reasoning).
Modern (restricted) sense of body of regular or methodical observations or propositions concerning a
particular subject or speculation is attested from 1725; in 17c.-18c. this concept commonly was
called philosophy. Sense of non-arts studies is attested from 1670s.    Science, since people must
do it, is a socially embedded activity. It progresses by hunch, vision, and intuition. Much of its
change through time does not record a closer approach to absolute truth, but the alteration of
cultural contexts that influence it so strongly. Facts are not pure and unsullied bits of
information; culture also influences what we see and how we see it. Theories, moreover, are not
inexorable inductions from facts. The most creative theories are often imaginative visions imposed
upon facts; the source of imagination is also strongly cultural. [Stephen Jay Gould, introduction to
The Mismeasure of Man, 1981]   <hr />   In science you must not talk before you know. In art you
must not talk before you do. In literature you must not talk before you think. [John Ruskin, The
Eagle's Nest, 1872]    The distinction is commonly understood as between theoretical truth (Greek
episteme) and methods for effecting practical results (tekhne), but science sometimes is used for
practical applications and art for applications of skill. To blind (someone) with science confuse by
the use of big words or complex explanations is attested from 1937, originally noted as a phrase
from Australia and New Zealand.


