assumption (n.)

c.1300, the reception, uncorrupted, of the Virgin Mary into Heaven, also the Church festival (Aug.
15) commemorating this, Feast of the Assumption, from Old French assumpcion and directly from Latin
assumptionem (nominative assumptio) a taking, receiving, noun of action from past participle stem of
assumere take up, take to oneself (see assume).    Meaning minor premise of a syllogism is late 14c.
Meaning appropriation of a right or possession is mid-15c. Meaning action of taking for oneself is
recorded from 1580s; that of something taken for granted is from 1620s.


supposition (n.)

early 15c., a term in logic, assumption, hypothesis, from Medieval Latin suppositionem (nominative
suppositio) assumption, hypothesis, a supposition, noun of action from past participle stem of
supponere (see suppose); influenced by Greek hypothesis. In classical Latin, a putting under,
substitution. Earlier in English in the same sense was supposal (late 14c.). Related: Suppositional;
suppositionally.


speciesism (n.)

discrimination against certain animals based on assumption of human superiority, first attested 1975
in Richard D. Ryder's Victims of Science, from species + -ism.


dilation (n.)

1590s, formed from dilate on the mistaken assumption that the -ate in that word was the Latin verbal
suffix (it is instead part of the stem); the proper form, dilatation, is older (c.1400).


Yahweh

1869, hypothetical reconstruction of the tetragrammaton YHWH (see Jehovah), based on the assumption
that the tetragrammaton is the imperfective of Hebrew verb hawah, earlier form of hayah was, in the
sense of the one who is, the existing.


lobbyist (n.)

1863, American English, from lobby (n.) in the political sense + -ist.    [A] strong lobbyist will
permit himself to lose heavily at the poker-table, under the assumption that the great Congressman
who wins the stake will look leniently upon the little appropriation he means to ask for. [George A.
Townsend, Events at the National Capital and the Campaign of 1876, Hartford, Conn., 1876]


whist (n.)

card game for four, 1660s, alteration of whisk, name of a kind of card game, alluded to as early as
1520s, perhaps so called from the notion of whisking up cards after each trick, and thus from whisk
(v.). Altered perhaps on assumption that the word was an interjection invoking silence, by influence
of whist silent (15c.).


jade (n.2)

worn-out horse, late 14c., cart horse, of uncertain origin. Barnhart suggests a variant of yaid,
yald whore, literally mare, from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse jalda mare, from Finno-
Ugric (compare Mordvin al'd'a mare). But OED finds the assumption of a Scandinavian connection
without reason. As a term of abuse for a woman, it dates from 1550s.


gallinaceous (adj.)

of or resembling domestic fowl, 1783, from Latin gallinaceus, from gallina hen, a fem. formation
from gallus cock, probably from PIE root *gal- (2) to call, shout (see call (v.)) as the calling
bird. But it also has an ancient association with Gaul (see Gallic), and some speculate that this is
the source of the word, on the assumption that the Romans became acquainted with the cock from Gaul,
where it was brought by the Phoenicians [Buck].


proposition (n.)

mid-14c., a setting forth as a topic for discussion, from Old French proposicion proposal,
submission, (philosophical) proposition (12c.), from Latin propositionem (nominative propositio) a
setting forth, statement, a presentation, representation; fundamental assumption, noun of action
from past participle stem of proponere (see propound). Meaning action of proposing something to be
done is from late 14c. General sense of matter, problem, undertaking recorded by 1877. Related:
Propositional.


aerie (n.)

eagle's nest, 1580s (attested in Anglo-Latin from early 13c.), from Old French aire nest, Medieval
Latin area nest of a bird of prey (12c.), perhaps from Latin area level ground, garden bed
[Littr&eacute;], though some doubt this [Klein]. Another theory connects it to atrium. Formerly
misspelled eyrie (1660s) on the mistaken assumption that it derived from Middle English ey egg.


octopus (n.)

1758, genus name of a type of eight-armed cephalopod mollusks, from Greek oktopous, literally eight-
footed, from okto eight (see eight) + pous foot (see foot (n.)). Proper plural is octopodes, though
octopuses probably works better in English. Octopi is from mistaken assumption that -us in this word
is the Latin noun ending that takes -i in plural.


foremost (adj.)

Old English fyrmest earliest, first, most prominent, from Proto-Germanic *formo- (related to Old
English fruma beginning), superlative of the root of fore + additional superlative suffix -est. See
-most, and similarly formed Old Frisian formest, Gothic frumists. Altered on the assumption that it
is a compound of fore and most.


bicycle (n.)

1868, coined from bi- two + Greek kyklos circle, wheel (see cycle (n.)), on the pattern of tricycle;
both the word and the vehicle superseding earlier velocipede. The English word probably is not from
French, though often said to be (many French sources say the French word is from English). The
assumption apparently is because Pierre Lallement, employee of a French carriage works, improved
Macmillan's 1839 pedal velocipede in 1865 and took the invention to America. See also pennyfarthing.
As a verb, from 1869.  That ne plus ultra of snobbishness -- bicyclism. [1876]


ache (v.)

Old English acan to ache, suffer pain, from Proto-Germanic *akanan, perhaps from a PIE root *ag-es-
fault, guilt, represented also in Sanskrit and Greek, perhaps imitative of groaning. The verb was
pronounced ake, the noun ache (as in speak/speech) but while the noun changed pronunciation to
conform to the verb, the spelling of both was changed to ache c.1700 on a false assumption of a
Greek origin (specifically Greek akhos pain, distress, which is rather a distant relation of awe
(n.)). Related: Ached; aching.


principle (n.)

late 14c., origin, source, beginning; rule of conduct; axiom, basic assumption; elemental aspect of
a craft or discipline, from Anglo-French principle, Old French principe origin, cause, principle,
from Latin principium (plural principia) a beginning, commencement, origin, first part, in plural
foundation, elements, from princeps (see prince). Used absolutely for (good or moral) principle from
1650s.It is often easier to fight for principles than to live up to them. [Adlai Stevenson, speech,
New York City, Aug. 27, 1952]  Scientific sense of general law of nature is recorded from 1802. The
English -l- apparently is by analogy of participle, etc.


flask (n.)

mid-14c., from Medieval Latin flasco container, bottle, from Late Latin flasconem bottle, perhaps
from a Germanic source (compare Old English flasce, Old High German flaska, Middle Dutch flasce,
German Flasche bottle), and if so, perhaps originally meaning a bottle plaited round, case bottle
(compare Old High German flechtan to weave, Old English fleohtan to braid, plait), from Proto-
Germanic base *fleh- (see flax).    Another theory traces it to a metathesis of Latin vasculum. The
assumption that the word is of Teut. origin is chronologically legitimate, and presents no
difficulty exc. the absence of any satisfactory etymology [OED].


minor (adj.)

early 13c., menour Franciscan (see minor (n.)), from Latin minor less, lesser, smaller, junior,
figuratively inferior, less important, formed as a masculine/feminine form of minus on the mistaken
assumption that minus was a neuter comparative, from PIE root *mei- (2) small (see minus).    Some
English usages are via Old French menor less, smaller, lower; underage, younger, from Latin minor.
Meaning underage is from 1570s. Meaning lesser in English is from early 15c.; that of less important
is from 1620s. The musical sense is from 1690s. In the baseball sense, minor league is from 1884;
the figurative extension is first recorded 1926.


OK

1839, only survivor of a slang fad in Boston and New York c.1838-9 for abbreviations of common
phrases with deliberate, jocular misspellings (such as K.G. for no go, as if spelled know go; N.C.
for 'nuff ced; K.Y. for know yuse). In the case of O.K., the abbreviation is of oll korrect.
Probably further popularized by use as an election slogan by the O.K. Club, New York boosters of
Democratic president Martin Van Buren's 1840 re-election bid, in allusion to his nickname Old
Kinderhook, from his birth in the N.Y. village of Kinderhook. Van Buren lost, the word stuck, in
part because it filled a need for a quick way to write an approval on a document, bill, etc. Spelled
out as okeh, 1919, by Woodrow Wilson, on assumption that it represented Choctaw okeh it is so (a
theory which lacks historical documentation); this was ousted quickly by okay after the appearance
of that form in 1929. Greek immigrants to America who returned home early 20c. having picked up U.S.
speech mannerisms were known in Greece as okay-boys, among other things.    The noun is first
attested 1841; the verb 1888. Okey-doke is student slang first attested 1932.


author (n.)

c.1300, autor father, from Old French auctor, acteor author, originator, creator, instigator (12c.,
Modern French auteur), from Latin auctorem (nominative auctor) enlarger, founder, master, leader,
literally one who causes to grow, agent noun from auctus, past participle of augere to increase (see
augment). Meaning one who sets forth written statements is from late 14c. The -t- changed to -th-
16c. on mistaken assumption of Greek origin.    ...[W]riting means revealing onesself to excess ....
This is why one can never be alone enough when one writes, why even night is not night enough. ... I
have often thought that the best mode of life for me would be to sit in the innermost room of a
spacious locked cellar with my writing things and a lamp. Food would be brought and always put down
far away from my room, outside the cellar's outermost door.  The walk to my food, in my dressing
gown, through the vaulted cellars, would be my only exercise. I would then return to my table, eat
slowly and with deliberation, then start writing again at once. And how I would write! From what
depths I would drag it up! [Franz Kafka]


gunsel (n.)

1914, American English, from hobo slang, a catamite; specifically a young male kept as a sexual
companion, especially by an older tramp, from Yiddish genzel, from German G&auml;nslein gosling,
young goose. The secondary, non-sexual meaning young hoodlum seems to be entirely traceable to
Dashiell Hammett, who sneaked it into The Maltese Falcon (1929) while warring with his editor over
the book's racy language.    Another thing, Spade repeated, glaring at the boy: Keep that gunsel
away from me while you're making up your mind. I'll kill him.    The context implies some connection
with gun and a sense of gunman, and evidently the editor bought it. The word was retained in the
script of the 1941 movie made from the book, so evidently the Motion Picture Production Code censors
didn't know it either.    The relationship between Kasper Gutman (Sidney Greenstreet) and his young
hit-man companion, Wilmer Cook (Elisha Cook, Jr.), is made fairly clear in the movie, but the overt
mention of sexual perversion would have been deleted if the censors hadn't made the same mistaken
assumption as Hammett's editor. [Hugh Rawson, Wicked Words, 1989, p.184]


sequoia (n.)

large American coniferous tree, 1857, from Modern Latin tree genus name given 1847 by Austrian
botanist Stephan Endlicher (1804-1849), originally to a different tree, the coast redwood,
apparently in honor of Sequoya (a.k.a. George Guess, 1760-1843), Cherokee man who invented a system
of writing for his people's language, whose name is from Cherokee (Iroquoian) Sikwayi, a word of
unknown etymology.    Endlicher was a specialist in conifers, and he also was a philologist. But he
never gave an etymology of this name and a search of his papers discovered no mention of Sequoya or
the Cherokee writing system, and the connection is an assumption that some botanists have
challenged, though no better candidate for a source has yet been found.    The giant sequoia was
unseen by Europeans until 1833 and unknown to scientists until 1852. In May 1855, a pair of American
botanists named it Taxodium giganteum, but that name was deemed inappropriate for several scientific
reasons. Meanwhile, English botanist John Lindley, who had never been to California, in 1853 named
it Wellingtonia in honor of the Duke of Wellington. As high as Wellington towers above his
contemporaries, as high towers this California tree above the forest surrounding it. Therefore, it
shall bear for all time to come the name Wellingtonia gigantea. This sat poorly with the Americans,
and much ink was spilled until a French botanist provided the solution by transferring Endlicher's
name. In Britain still popularly called Wellingtonia.


Australia

from Latin Terra Australis (16c.), from australis southern + -ia. A hypothetical southern continent,
known as terra australis incognita, had been proposed since 2c. Dutch explorers called the newfound
continent New Holland; the current name was suggested 1814 by Matthew Flinders as an improvement
over Terra Australis as being more agreeable to the ear, and an assimilation to the name of the
other great portions of the earth [Voyage to Terra Australis]. In 1817 Gov. Lachlan Macquarie,
having read Flinders' suggestion, began using it in official correspondence. The ultimate source is
Latin auster south wind, hence, the south country.    The Latin sense shift in australis, if it is
indeed the same word other Indo-European languages use for east (see aurora), for which Latin uses
oriens (see orient), perhaps is based on a false assumption about the orientation of the Italian
peninsula, with shift through 'southeast' explained by the diagonal position of the axis of Italy
[Buck]; see Walde, Alois, Lateinisches etymologisches W&ouml;rterbuch, 3rd. ed., vol. 1, p.87;
Ernout, Alfred, and Meillet, Alfred, Dictionnaire &eacute;tymologique de la langue latine, 2nd. ed.,
p.94. Or perhaps the connection is more ancient, and from PIE root *aus- to shine, source of aurora,
which also produces words for burning, with reference to the hot south wind that blows into Italy.
Thus auster (hot) south wind, metaphorically extended to south.


nigger (n.)

1786, earlier neger (1568, Scottish and northern England dialect), from French n&egrave;gre, from
Spanish negro (see Negro). From the earliest usage it was the term that carries with it all the
obloquy and contempt and rejection which whites have inflicted on blacks [cited in Gowers, 1965,
probably Harold R. Isaacs]. But as black inferiority was at one time a near universal assumption in
English-speaking lands, the word in some cases could be used without deliberate insult. More
sympathetic writers late 18c. and early 19c. seem to have used black (n.) and, after the American
Civil War, colored person.  You're a fool nigger, and the worst day's work Pa ever did was to buy
you, said Scarlett slowly. ... There, she thought, I've said nigger and Mother wouldn't like that at
all. [Margaret Mitchell, Gone With the Wind, 1936]  Also applied by English settlers to dark-skinned
native peoples in India, Australia, Polynesia. The reclamation of the word as a neutral or positive
term in black culture (not universally regarded as a worthwhile enterprise), often with a suggestion
of soul or style, is attested first in the U.S. South, later (1968) in the Northern, urban-based
Black Power movement.    Used in combinations (such as nigger-brown) since 1840s for various dark
brown or black hues or objects; euphemistic substitutions (such as Zulu) began to appear in these
senses c.1917. Brazil nuts were called nigger toes by 1896. Variant niggah, attested from 1925
(without the -h, from 1969), is found usually in situations where blacks use the word. Nigra (1944),
on the other hand, in certain uses reflects a pronunciation of negro meant to suggest nigger, and is
thus deemed (according to a 1960 slang dictionary) even more derog[atory] than 'nigger.'  Slang
phrase nigger in the woodpile attested by 1800; A mode of accounting for the disappearance of fuel;
an unsolved mystery [R.H. Thornton, American Glossary, 1912]. Nigger heaven the top gallery in a
(segregated) theater first attested 1878 in reference to Troy, N.Y.


hag (n.)

early 13c., ugly old woman, probably a shortening of Old English h&aelig;gtesse witch, fury (on
assumption that -tesse was a suffix), from Proto-Germanic *hagatusjon-, of unknown origin. Similar
shortening produced Dutch heks, German Hexe witch from cognate Middle Dutch haghetisse, Old High
German hagzusa.    First element is probably cognate with Old English haga enclosure, portion of
woodland marked off for cutting (see hedge). Old Norse had tunri&eth;a and Old High German zunritha,
both literally hedge-rider, used of witches and ghosts. Second element may be connected with
Norwegian tysja fairy; crippled woman, Gaulish dusius demon, Lithuanian dvasia spirit, from PIE
*dhewes- to fly about, smoke, be scattered, vanish.    One of the magic words for which there is no
male form, suggesting its original meaning was close to diviner, soothsayer, which were always
female in northern European paganism, and h&aelig;gtesse seem at one time to have meant woman of
prophetic and oracular powers (&AElig;lfric uses it to render the Greek pythoness, the voice of the
Delphic oracle), a figure greatly feared and respected. Later, the word was used of village wise
women.   Haga is also the haw- in hawthorn, which is an important tree in northern European pagan
religion. There may be several layers of folk etymology here. Confusion or blending with heathenish
is suggested by Middle English h&aelig;htis, h&aelig;gtis hag, witch, fury, etc., and haetnesse
goddess, used of Minerva and Diana.    If the h&aelig;gtesse was once a powerful supernatural woman
(in Norse it is an alternative word for Norn, any of the three weird sisters, the equivalent of the
Fates), it might originally have carried the hawthorn sense. Later, when the pagan magic was reduced
to local scatterings, it might have had the sense of hedge-rider, or she who straddles the hedge,
because the hedge was the boundary between the civilized world of the village and the wild world
beyond. The h&aelig;gtesse would have a foot in each reality. Even later, when it meant the local
healer and root collector, living in the open and moving from village to village, it may have had
the mildly pejorative sense of hedge- in Middle English (hedge-priest, etc.), suggesting an
itinerant sleeping under bushes, perhaps. The same word could have contained all three senses before
being reduced to its modern one.


