astrology (n.)

late 14c., from Latin astrologia astronomy, the science of the heavenly bodies, from Greek
astrologia telling of the stars, from astron star (see astro-) + -logia treating of (see -logy).
Originally identical with astronomy, it had also a special sense of practical astronomy, astronomy
applied to prediction of events. This was divided into natural astrology the calculation and
foretelling of natural phenomenon (tides, eclipses, etc.), and judicial astrology the art of judging
occult influences of stars on human affairs (also known as astromancy, 1650s). Differentiation
between astrology and astronomy began late 1400s and by 17c. this word was limited to reading
influences of the stars and their effects on human destiny.


Praesepe (n.)

loose (open) star cluster (M44) in Cancer, from Latin praesaepe the Roman name for the grouping,
literally enclosure, stall, manger, hive, from prae- (see pre-) + saepire to fence (see septum).
It is similar to the Hyades but more distant, about 600 light-years away, consists of about 1,000
stars, mostly older, the brightest of them around magnitude 6.5, thus not discernable to the naked
eye even on the clearest nights, but their collective light makes a visible fuzz of glow that the
ancients likened to a cloud (the original nebula); Galileo was the first to resolve it into stars
(1609). The modern name for it in U.S. and Britain, Beehive, seems no older than 1840. Greek names
included Nephelion Little Cloud and Akhlys Little Mist. In astrology, like all clusters, it
threatened mischief and blindness [Allen].    Manger to the Romans perhaps by influence of two
nearby stars, Gamma and Delta Cancri, dim and unspectacular but both for some reason figuring
largely in ancient astrology and weather forecasting, and known as the Asses (Latin Aselli),
supposedly those of Silenus.


querent (n.)

1590s, originally in astrology, from Latin quaerentem, present participle of quaerere (see query
(v.)).


culmination (n.)

1630s, from French culmination, noun of action from past participle stem of Late Latin culminare
(see culminate). Originally a term in astronomy/astrology; figurative use is from 1650s.


astrological (adj.)

1590s; see astrology + -ical. Related: Astrologically.


juncture (n.)

late 14c., place where two things are joined, from Latin iunctura a joining, uniting, a joint, from
iunctus, past participle of iungere to join (see jugular). Sense of point in time first recorded
1650s, probably from astrology.


indisposition (n.)

early 15c., unfavorable influence (in astrology); also in Middle English, ill health, disorder of
the mind or body; unfavorable disposition, hostility; inclination to evil; wickedness; public
disorder, lawlessness, from in- (1) not, opposite of + disposition.


astrologer (n.)

late 14c., from astrology + -er (1). Drove out French import astrologein, which, had it survived,
probably would have yielded *astrologian, as in Chaucer's The wise Astrologen. Earliest recorded
reference is to roosters as announcers of sunrise.


quintile (n.)

1610s, originally in astrology, from Latin quintus the fifth (see quinque-) + -ile, from quartile.
Use in statistics dates to 1951.


reception (n.)

late 14c., in astrology, effect of two planets on each other; sense of act of receiving is recorded
from late 15c., from Latin receptionem (nominative receptio) a receiving, noun of action from past
participle stem of recipere (see receive). Sense of ceremonial gathering is 1882, from French.


equation (n.)

late 14c., a term in astrology; meaning action of making equal is from 1650s; mathematical sense is
from 1560s, on notion of equalizing the expressions; from Latin aequationem (nominative aequatio) an
equal distribution, community, from past participle stem of aequare (see equal (adj.)). Chemistry
sense is from 1807.


decile (adj.)

1670s in astrology; 1882 in statistics; from French d&eacute;cile or Medieval Latin *decilis, from
Latin decem ten (see ten) on the model of quintilis, sextilis.


almagest (n.)

late 14c., title of a treatise on astronomy by Claudius Ptolemy of Alexandria, extended in Middle
English to other works on astrology or astronomy, from Old French almageste (13c.), from Arabic al
majisti, from al the + Greek megiste the greatest (composition), from fem. of megistos, superlative
of megas great (see mickle). Originally titled in Greek Megale syntaxis tes astronomios Great Work
on Astronomy; Arab translators in their admiration altered this.


occult (adj.)

1530s, secret, not divulged, from Middle French occulte and directly from Latin occultus hidden,
concealed, secret, past participle of occulere cover over, conceal, from ob over (see ob-) + a verb
related to celare to hide, from PIE root *kel- (2) to cover, conceal (see cell). Meaning not
apprehended by the mind, beyond the range of understanding is from 1540s. The association with the
supernatural sciences (magic, alchemy, astrology, etc.) dates from 1630s.


Bellatrix

bright star in the left shoulder of Orion, from Latin bellatrix a female warrior, frequently used as
an adjective, warlike, skilled in war, fem. of bellator to wage war, from bellum war (see
bellicose). The Latin name, from the Alfonsine Tables (mid-13c.), very loosely translates the Arabic
name for the star, Al Najid the conqueror.    In astrology it was the natal star of all destined to
great civil or military honors, and rendered women born under its influence lucky and loquacious; or
as old Thomas Hood said, Women born under this constellation shall have mighty tongues. [Allen]


astronomy (n.)

c.1200, from Old French astrenomie, from Latin astronomia, from Greek astronomia, literally star
arrangement, from astron star (see astro-) + nomos arranging, regulating, related to nemein to deal
out (see numismatic). Used earlier than astrology and originally including it.    &#222;er wes moni
god clarc to lokien in &#254;an leofte, to lokien i &#254;an steorren neh&#658;e and feorren.
&#254;e craft is ihate Astronomie. [Layamon, The Brut, c.1200]


sigil (n.)

a sign, mark, or seal, mid-15c., from Late Latin sigillum, from Latin sigilla (neuter plural)
statuettes, little images, seal, diminutive of signum sign (see sign (n.)). In astrology, an occult
device supposed to have great power (1650s).    When my mistress died, she had under her arm-hole a
small scarlet bag full of many things, which, one that was there delivered unto me. There was in
this bag several sigils, some of Jupiter in Trine, others of the nature of Venus, some of iron, and
one of gold, of pure angel-gold, of the bigness of a thirty-three shilling piece of King James's
coin. [The Antiquarian Repertory, London, 1780]


mercury (n.)

silver-white fluid metallic element, late 14c., from Medieval Latin mercurius, from Latin Mercurius
(see Mercury). Prepared from cinnabar, it was one of the seven metals (bodies terrestrial) known to
the ancients, which were coupled in astrology and alchemy with the seven known heavenly bodies. This
one probably so associated for its mobility. The others were Sun/gold, Moon/silver, Mars/iron,
Saturn/lead, Jupiter/tin, Venus/copper. The Greek name for it was hydrargyros liquid silver, which
gives the element its symbol, Hg. Compare quicksilver.


constellation (n.)

early 14c., from Old French constellacion constellation, conjuncture (of planets), from Late Latin
constellationem (nominative constellatio) set with stars, from constellatus, from Latin com- with
(see com-) + past participle of stellare to shine, from stella star (see star). Originally in
astrology, of position of planets (stars) in regard to one another on a given day, usually one's
birth day, as a determination of one's character. I folwed ay myn inclinacioun/By vertu of my
constillacioun (Chaucer, Wife's Prologue, c.1386). Modern astronomical sense is from 1550s.


consider (v.)

late 14c., from Old French considerer (13c.) reflect on, consider, study, from Latin considerare to
look at closely, observe, perhaps literally to observe the stars, from com- with (see com-) + sidus
(genitive sideris) constellation (see sidereal).    Perhaps a metaphor from navigation, but more
likely reflecting Roman obsession with divination by astrology. Tucker doubts the connection with
sidus, however, because it is quite inapplicable to desiderare, and suggests derivation instead from
the PIE root of English side meaning stretch, extend, and a sense for the full word of survey on all
sides or dwell long upon. Related: Considered; considering.


climate (n.)

late 14c., horizontal zone of the earth, Scottish, from Old French climat region, part of the earth,
from Latin clima (genitive climatis) region; slope of the Earth, from Greek klima region, zone,
literally an inclination, slope, thus slope of the Earth from equator to pole, from root of klinein
to slope, to lean (see lean (v.)).    The angle of sun on the slope of the Earth's surface defined
the zones assigned by early geographers. Early references in English, however, are in astrology
works, as each of the seven (then) climates was held to be under the influence of one of the
planets. Shift from region to weather associated with a region perhaps began in Middle English,
certainly by c.1600.


grammar (n.)

early 14c., gramarye (late 12c. in surnames), from Old French gramaire learning, especially Latin
and philology, grammar, (magic) incantation, spells, mumbo-jumbo, irregular semi-popular adoption
[OED] of Latin grammatica, from Greek grammatike tekhne art of letters, with a sense of both
philology and literature in the broadest sense, fem. adjective from gramma letter, from stem of
graphein to draw or write (see -graphy). An Old English word for it was st&aelig;fcr&aelig;ft (see
staff (n.)).    Form grammar is from late 14c. Restriction to rules of language is a post-classical
development, but as this type of study was until 16c. limited to Latin, Middle English gramarye also
came to mean learning in general, knowledge peculiar to the learned classes (early 14c.), which
included astrology and magic; hence the secondary meaning of occult knowledge (late 15c.), which
evolved in Scottish into glamor (q.v.).    A grammar school (late 14c.) originally was a school in
which the learned languages are grammatically taught [Johnson, who also has grammaticaster a mean
verbal pedant]. In U.S. (1842) the term was put to use in the graded system for a school between
primary and secondary where English grammar is taught.


