astronomical (adj.)

1550s, from astronomy + -ical. Popular meaning immense, concerning very large figures (as sizes and
distances in astronomy) is attested from 1899. Astronomical unit (abbreviation A.U.) mean distance
from Earth to Sun, used as a unit of measure of distance in space, is from 1909. Related:
Astronomically.


Schmidt (n.)

type of astronomical telescope lens used for photography, 1939, from Estonian-born German optician
Bernhard Voldemar Schmidt (1879-1935), who invented it.


photosphere (n.)

1660s, orb of light, from photo- + -sphere. Astronomical sense is from 1848.


observatory (n.)

building for observing astronomical phenomena, 1670s (in reference to Greenwich), from French
observatoire, from observer (v.); see observe.


nebular (adj.)

1821, pertaining to an (astronomical) nebula or nebulae, from nebula + -ar.


transit (v.)

mid-15c., from Latin transitus, past participle of transire go or cross over (see transient).
Astronomical sense is from 1680s. Related: Transited; transiting.


umbra (n.)

1590s, phantom, ghost, a figurative use from Latin umbra shade, shadow (see umbrage). Astronomical
sense of shadow cast by the earth or moon during an eclipse is first recorded 1670s. Meaning an
uninvited guest accompanying an invited one is from 1690s in English, from a secondary sense among
the Romans. Related: Umbral.


quartile (adj.)

mid-15c., 90 degrees apart (of astronomical measurements), from Middle French quartil, from Medieval
Latin quartilus of a quartile, from Latin quartus fourth (see quart).


nutation (n.)

1610s, action of nodding, from Latin nutationem (nominative nutatio), noun of action from past
participle stem of nutare to nod, from PIE *neu- to nod (see numinous). Astronomical use is from
1715. Related: Nutational.


orbit (n.)

late 14c., the eye socket, from Old French orbite or directly from Medieval Latin orbita,
transferred use of Latin orbita wheel track, beaten path, rut, course, orbit (see orb). Astronomical
sense first recorded 1690s in English; it was in classical Latin, revived in Gerard of Cremona's
translation of Avicenna.


ascension (n.)

c.1300, ascent of Christ into Heaven on the 40th day after the Resurrection, from Latin ascensionem
(nominative ascensio) a rising, noun of action from past participle stem of ascendere to mount,
ascend, go up (see ascend). Astronomical sense is recorded late 14c.; meaning action of ascending is
from 1590s. Related: Ascensional.


singularity (n.)

c.1400, unusual behavior, also singleness of aim or purpose, from Old French singulerte peculiarity
(12c., Modern French singularit&eacute;) or directly from Late Latin singularitatem (nominative
singularitas) a being alone, from singularis (see singular (adj.)). Meaning fact of being different
from others is c.1500. Mathematical sense of point at which a function takes an infinite value is
from 1893. Astronomical use is from 1965.


nebulous (adj.)

late 14c., cloudy, misty, from Latin nebulosus cloudy, misty, foggy, full of vapor, from nebula (see
nebula). The figurative sense of hazy, vague, formless is first attested 1831. Astronomical sense is
from 1670s. Related: Nebulously; nebulousness.


plage (n.)

a region, late 14c., from Old French plage (13c.), from Late Latin plagia a plain, shore, noun use
of adjective (plagia regio), from plaga a region, stretch of country (see pelagic). Astronomical
sense is from 1949.


limb (n.2)

late 14c., edge of a quadrant or other instrument, from Latin limbus border, hem, fringe, edge, of
uncertain origin. Klein suggests cognate with Sanskrit lambate hangs down, and English limp. But
Tucker writes that the sense appears to be that of something which twists, goes round, or binds ...
not of something which hangs loose, and suggests cognates in Lithuanian linta ribbon, Old Norse
linnr whether. Astronomical sense of edge of the disk of a heavenly body first attested 1670s.


almanac (n.)

late 14c., attested in Anglo-Latin from mid-13c., via Old French almanach or Medieval Latin
almanachus, of uncertain origin. It is sometimes said to be from a Spanish-Arabic al-manakh
calendar, almanac, but possibly ultimately from Late Greek almenichiakon calendar, which is said to
be of Coptic origin.    This word has been the subject of much speculation. Originally a book of
permanent tables of astronomical data; one-year versions, combined with ecclesiastical calendars,
date from 16c.; astrological and weather predictions appear in 16-17th c.; the 'useful statistics'
are a modern feature [OED].


nadir (n.)

late 14c., in astronomical sense, from Medieval Latin nadir, from Arabic nazir opposite to, in nazir
as-samt, literally opposite direction, from nazir opposite + as-samt road, path (see zenith).
Transferred sense of lowest point (of anything) is first recorded 1793.


orb (n.)

mid-15c., sphere, globe, something spherical or circular, from Old French orbe orb, globe (13c.) and
directly from Latin orbem (nominative orbis) circle, disk, ring, hoop, orbit, probably related to
orbita wheel track, rut, of unknown origin. Watkins suggests a connection with the root of orchid.
A three-dimensional extension of a word originally describing two-dimensional shapes. Astronomical
sense is in reference to the hollow spheres that carried the planets and stars in the Ptolemaic
system. As a verb from c.1600. Orb weaver spider is first recorded 1889.


constellation (n.)

early 14c., from Old French constellacion constellation, conjuncture (of planets), from Late Latin
constellationem (nominative constellatio) set with stars, from constellatus, from Latin com- with
(see com-) + past participle of stellare to shine, from stella star (see star). Originally in
astrology, of position of planets (stars) in regard to one another on a given day, usually one's
birth day, as a determination of one's character. I folwed ay myn inclinacioun/By vertu of my
constillacioun (Chaucer, Wife's Prologue, c.1386). Modern astronomical sense is from 1550s.


galaxy (n.)

late 14c., from Old French galaxie, from Late Latin galaxias Milky Way, from Greek galaxias (adj.),
in galaxias kyklos, literally milky circle, from gala (genitive galaktos) milk (see lactation). The
technical astronomical sense emerged 1848. Figurative sense of brilliant assembly of persons is from
1580s. Milky Way is a translation of Latin via lactea.See yonder, lo, the Galaxy&#235; Which men
clepeth the Milky Wey, For hit is whyt. [Chaucer, House of Fame]  Astronomers began to speculate by
mid-19c. that some of the spiral nebulae they could see in telescopes were actually immense and
immensely distant structures the size and shape of the Milky Way. But the matter was not settled
until the 1920s.


nebula (n.)

early 15c., nebule a cloud, mist, from Latin nebula mist, vapor, fog, smoke, exhalation,
figuratively darkness, obscurity, from PIE *nebh- cloud (cognates: Sanskrit nabhas- vapor, cloud,
mists, fog, sky; Greek nephele, nephos cloud; German nebel fog; Old English nifol dark, gloomy;
Welsh niwl cloud, fog; Slavic nebo).    Re-borrowed from Latin 1660s in sense of cataracts in the
eye; astronomical meaning cloud-like patch in the night sky first recorded c.1730. As early as
Hershel (1802) astronomers realized that some nebulae were star clusters, but certain distinction of
relatively nearby cosmic gas clouds from distant galaxies was not made until 1920s, using the new
100-inch Mt. Wilson telescope.


proper (adj.)

c.1300, adapted to some purpose, fit, apt; commendable, excellent (sometimes ironic), from Old
French propre own, particular; exact, neat, fitting, appropriate (11c.), from Latin proprius one's
own, particular to itself, from pro privo for the individual, in particular, from ablative of privus
one's own, individual (see private (adj.)) + pro for (see pro-). Related: Properly.    From early
14c. as belonging or pertaining to oneself; individual; intrinsic; from mid-14c. as pertaining to a
person or thing in particular, special, specific; distinctive, characteristic; also what is by the
rules, correct, appropriate, acceptable. From early 15c. as separate, distinct; itself. Meaning
socially appropriate, decent, respectable is first recorded 1704. Proper name name belonging to or
relating to the person or thing in question, is from late 13c., a sense also preserved in
astronomical proper motion (c.1300). Proper noun is from c.1500.


circle (n.)

c.1300, figure of a circle, from Old French cercle circle, ring (for the finger); hoop of a helmet
or barrel (12c.), from Latin circulus circular figure; small ring, hoop; circular orbit (also source
of Italian cerchio), diminutive of circus ring (see circus).    Replaced Old English trendel and
hring. Late Old English used circul, from Latin, but only in an astronomical sense. Meaning group of
persons surrounding a center of interest is from 1714 (it also was a secondary sense of Latin
circulus); that of coterie is from 1640s (a sense also found in Latin circulus). To come full circle
is in Shakespeare.


mathematic (n.)

late 14c. as singular noun, replaced by early 17c. by mathematics, from Latin mathematica (plural),
from Greek mathematike tekhne mathematical science, feminine singular of mathematikos (adj.)
relating to mathematics, scientific, astronomical; disposed to learn, from mathema (genitive
mathematos) science, knowledge, mathematical knowledge; a lesson, literally that which is learnt;
related to manthanein to learn, from PIE root *mendh- to learn (cognates: Greek menthere to care,
Lithuanian mandras wide-awake, Old Church Slavonic madru wise, sage, Gothic mundonsis to look at,
German munter awake, lively). As an adjective, 1540s, from French math&#233;matique or directly from
Latin mathematicus.


space (n.)

c.1300, extent or area; room (to do something), a shortening of Old French espace period of time,
distance, interval (12c.), from Latin spatium room, area, distance, stretch of time, of unknown
origin (also source of Spanish espacio, Italian spazio).    From early 14c. as a place, also amount
or extent of time. From mid-14c. as distance, interval of space; from late 14c. as ground, land,
territory; extension in three dimensions; distance between two or more points. From early 15c. as
size, bulk, also an assigned position. Typographical sense is attested from 1670s (typewriter space-
bar is from 1876, earlier space-key, 1860).    Astronomical sense of stellar depths apparently is
first recorded 1667 in Paradise Lost, common from 1890s. Space age is attested from 1946. Many
compounds first appeared in science fiction and speculative writing, such as spaceship (1894, A
Journey in Other Worlds, John Jacob Astor); spacecraft (1928, Popular Science); space travel (1931);
space station (1936, Rockets Through Space); spaceman (1942, Thrilling Wonder Stories). Space race
attested from 1959. Space shuttle attested by 1970.    Space isn't remote at all. It's only an
hour's drive away if your car could go straight upwards. [Sir Fred Hoyle, London Observer, 1979]


white (adj.)

Old English hwit bright, radiant; clear, fair, also as a noun (see separate entry), from Proto-
Germanic *hwitaz (cognates: Old Saxon and Old Frisian hwit, Old Norse hvitr, Dutch wit, Old High
German hwiz, German wei&szlig;, Gothic hveits), from PIE *kweid-o-, suffixed form of root *kweit-
white; to shine (cognates: Sanskrit svetah white; Old Church Slavonic sviteti to shine, svetu light;
Lithuanian &#353;viesti to shine, svaityti to brighten).    As a surname, originally with reference
to fair hair or complexion, it is one of the oldest in English, being well-established before the
Conquest. Meaning morally pure was in Old English. Association with royalist causes is late 18c.
Slang sense of honorable, fair is 1877, American English; in Middle English it meant gracious,
friendly, favorable. The racial sense of those races (chiefly European or of European extraction)
characterized by light complexion is recorded from c.1600; meaning characteristic of or pertaining
to white people is from 1852, American English. White supremacy attested from 1884, American
English; white flight is from 1966, American English.   White way brightly illuminated street in a
big city is from 1908. White flag of truce or surrender is from c.1600. White lie is attested from
1741. White Christmas is attested from 1847. White House as the name of the U.S. presidential
residence is recorded from 1811. White water river rapids is recorded from 1580s. White Russian
language of Byelorussia is recorded from 1850; the mixed drink is from c.1978. Astronomical white
dwarf is from 1924. White witch, one who used the power for good, is from 1620s.


