asunder (adv.)

mid-12c., contraction of Old English on sundran (see sunder). Middle English used to know asunder
for distinguish, tell apart.


intersection (n.)

act or fact of crossing, 1550s, from Middle French intersection (14c.) and directly from Latin
intersectionem (nominative intersectio) a cutting asunder, intersection, noun of action from past
participle stem of intersecare intersect, cut asunder, from inter- between (see inter-) + secare to
cut (see section). Originally a term in geometry; meaning crossroads is from 1864.


di- (2)

word-forming element meaning apart, asunder, form of dis- before certain voiced consonants.


dichotomy (n.)

c.1600, from Greek dichotomia a cutting in half, from dicha in two, asunder (related to dis twice) +
temnein to cut (see tome).


apo-

before vowels ap-, word-forming element meaning from, away from, separate, free from, from Greek apo
from, away from; after; in descent from, in compounds, from, asunder, away, off; finishing,
completing; ceasing from; back again, from PIE root *apo- off, away (cognates: Sanskrit apa away
from, Avestan apa away from, Latin ab away from, from, Gothic af, Old English of away from).


sundry (adj.)

Old English syndrig separate, apart, special, various, distinct, characteristic, from sundor
separately, apart, asunder (see sunder) + -y (2). Compare Old High German suntaric, Swedish
s&#246;ndrig broken, tattered. Meaning several is from 1375. As a noun, from mid-13c. with the sense
various ones. Phrase all and sundry is from late 14c.


disruption (n.)

early 15c., from Latin disruptionem (nominative disruptio) a breaking asunder, noun of action from
past participle stem of disrumpere break apart, split, shatter, break to pieces, from dis- apart
(see dis-) + rumpere to break (see rupture (n.)).


rive (v.)

tear in pieces, strike asunder, c.1200, from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse rifa to tear
apart (compare Swedish rifva, Danish rive scratch, tear), from PIE root *rei- to scratch, tear, cut
(see riparian).


distract (v.)

mid-14c., to draw asunder or apart, to turn aside (literal and figurative), from Latin distractus,
past participle of distrahere draw in different directions, from dis- away (see dis-) + trahere to
draw (see tract (n.1)).    Sense of to throw into a state of mind in which one knows not how to act
is from 1580s. Related: Distracted; distracting; distractedly; distractedness.


to-

particle expressing separation, putting asunder, from West Germanic *ti- (cognates: Old Frisian ti-,
Old High German zi-, German zer-), from Proto-Germanic *tiz-, cognate with Latin-derived dis-.
According to OED, some 125 compound verbs with this element are recorded in Old English; their
number declined rapidly in Middle English and disappeared by c.1500 except as conscious archaisms
(such as to-shiver break to pieces; all to-brast).


diastole (n.)

1570s, from medical Latin diastole, from Greek diastole drawing asunder, dilation, from diastellein,
from dia- through, thoroughly, entirely (see dia-) + stellein to set in order, arrange, array,
equip, make ready, from PIE *stel-yo-, suffixed form of root *stel- to put, stand, with derivatives
referring to a standing object or place (see stall (n.1)).


intersect (v.)

1610s, back-formation from intersection, or else from Latin intersectus, past participle of
intersecare intersect, cut asunder, from inter- between (see inter-) + secare to cut (see section
(n.)). Related: Intersected; intersecting.


dilapidation (n.)

early 15c., from Late Latin dilapidationem (nominative dilapidatio) a squandering, noun of action
from past participle stem of Latin dilapidare throw away, squander, waste, literally pelt with
stones (thus ruin, destroy) or else scatter like stones, from dis- asunder (see dis-) + lapidare
throw stones at, from lapis (genitive lapidis) stone. Taken in Eng. in a more literal sense than was
usual in Latin [OED].


descant (n.)

late 14c., from Old North French descant (Old French deschant), from Medieval Latin discantus
refrain, part-song, from Latin dis- asunder, apart (see dis-) + cantus song (see chant). Spelling
was partly Latinized 16c. Originally counterpoint.


discussion (n.)

mid-14c., examination, investigation, judicial trial, from Old French discussion discussion,
examination, investigation, legal trial, from Late Latin discussionem (nominative discussio)
examination, discussion, in classical Latin, a shaking, from discussus, past participle of discutere
strike asunder, break up, from dis- apart (see dis-) + quatere to shake (see quash). Meaning a
talking over, debating in English first recorded mid-15c. Sense evolution in Latin appears to have
been from smash apart to scatter, disperse, then in post-classical times (via the mental process
involved) to investigate, examine, then to debate.


dis-

(assimilated as dif- before -f-, to di- before most voiced consonants), word-forming element meaning
1. lack of, not (as in dishonest); 2. do the opposite of (as in disallow); 3. apart, away (as in
discard), from Old French des- or directly from Latin dis- apart, in a different direction, between,
figuratively not, un-, also exceedingly, utterly, from PIE *dis- apart, asunder (cognates: Old
English te-, Old Saxon ti-, Old High German ze-, German zer-).    The PIE root is a secondary form
of *dwis- and thus is related to Latin bis twice (originally *dvis) and to duo, on notion of two
ways, in twain.    In classical Latin, dis- paralelled de- and had much the same meaning, but in
Late Latin dis- came to be the favored form and this passed into Old French as des-, the form used
for new compound words formed in Old French, where it increasingly had a privative sense (not).
In English, many of these words eventually were altered back to dis-, while in French many have been
altered back to de-. The usual confusion prevails.


tear (v.1)

pull apart, Old English teran to tear, lacerate (class IV strong verb; past tense t&aelig;r, past
participle toren), from Proto-Germanic *teran (cognates: Old Saxon terian, Middle Dutch teren to
consume, Old High German zeran to destroy, German zehren, Gothic ga-tairan to tear, destroy), from
PIE *der- (2) to split, peel, flay, with derivatives referring to skin and leather (cognates:
Sanskrit drnati cleaves, bursts, Greek derein to flay, Armenian terem I flay, Old Church Slavonic
dera to burst asunder, Breton darn piece).    The Old English past tense survived long enough to get
into Bible translations as tare before giving place 17c. to tore, which is from the old past
participle toren. Sense of to pull by force (away from some situation or attachment) is attested
from late 13c. To be torn between two things (desires, loyalties, etc.) is from 1871.


with (prep.)

Old English wi&eth; against, opposite, from, toward, by, near, a shortened form related to
wi&eth;er, from Proto-Germanic *withro- against (cognates: Old Saxon withar against, Old Norse
vi&eth;r against, with, toward, at, Middle Dutch, Dutch weder, Dutch weer again, Gothic wi&thorn;ra
against, opposite), from PIE *wi-tero-, literally more apart, suffixed form of root *wi- separation
(cognates: Sanskrit vi, Avestan vi- asunder, Sanskrit vitaram further, farther, Old Church Slavonic
vutoru other, second).    Sense shifted in Middle English to denote association, combination, and
union, partly by influence of Old Norse vidh, and also perhaps by Latin cum with (as in pugnare cum
fight with). In this sense, it replaced Old English mid with, which survives only as a prefix (as in
midwife). Original sense of against, in opposition is retained in compounds such as withhold,
withdraw, withstand. Often treated as a conjunction by ungrammatical writers and used where and
would be correct. First record of with child pregnant is recorded from c.1200. With it cool is black
slang, recorded by 1931. French avec with was originally avoc, from Vulgar Latin *abhoc, from apud
hoc, literally with this.


twist (n.)

mid-14c., flat part of a hinge (now obsolete), probably from Old English -twist divided object;
fork; rope (as in m&aelig;sttwist mast rope, stay; candeltwist wick), from Proto-Germanic *twis-,
from PIE root *dwo- (see two). Original senses suggest dividing in two (cognates: cognate Old Norse
tvistra to divide, separate, Gothic twis- in two, asunder, Dutch twist, German zwist quarrel,
discord, though these senses have no equivalent in English), but later ones are of combining two
into one, hence the original sense of the word may be rope made of two strands.    Meaning thread or
cord composed of two or more fibers is recorded from 1550s. Meaning act or action of turning on an
axis is attested from 1570s. Sense of beverage consisting of two or more liquors is first attested
c.1700. Meaning thick cord of tobacco is from 1791. Meaning curled piece of lemon, etc., used to
flavor a drink is recorded from 1958. Sense of unexpected plot development is from 1941.    The
popular rock 'n' roll dance craze is from 1961, so called from the motion involved, but twist was
used to describe popular dances in 1894 and again in the 1920s. To get one's knickers in a twist be
unduly agitated is British slang first attested 1971.


Valentine (n.)

mid-15c., sweetheart chosen on St. Valentine's Day, from Late Latin Valentinus, the name of two
early Italian saints (from Latin valentia strength, capacity; see valence). Choosing a sweetheart on
this day originated 14c. as a custom in English and French court circles. Meaning letter or card
sent to a sweetheart first recorded 1824. The romantic association of the day is said to be from it
being around the time when birds choose their mates.    For this was on seynt Volantynys day  Whan
euery bryd cometh there to chese his make.  [Chaucer, Parlement of Foules, c.1381]    Probably the
date was the informal first day of spring in whatever French region invented the custom (many
surviving medieval calendars reckon the start of spring on the 7th or 22nd of February). No evidence
connects it with the Roman Lupercalia (an 18c. theory) or to any romantic or avian quality in either
of the saints. The custom of sending special cards or letters on this date flourished in England
c.1840-1870, declined around the turn of the 20th century, and revived 1920s.    To speak of the
particular Customs of the English Britons, I shall begin with Valentine's Day, Feb. 14. when young
Men and Maidens get their several Names writ down upon Scrolls of Paper rolled up, and lay 'em
asunder, the Men drawing the Maidens Names, and these the Mens; upon which, the Men salute their
chosen Valentines and present them with Gloves, &amp;c.; This Custom (which sometimes introduces a
Match) is grounded upon the Instinct of Animals, which about this Time of the Year, feeling a new
Heat by the approach of the Sun, begin to couple. [The Present State of Great Britain and Ireland
London, 1723]


