atonement (n.)

1510s, condition of being at one (with others), from atone + -ment. Meaning reconciliation
(especially of sinners with God) is from 1520s; that of propitiation of an offended party is from
1610s.


atone (v.)

1550s, from adverbial phrase atonen (c.1300) in accord, literally at one, a contraction of at and
one. It retains the older pronunciation of one. The phrase perhaps is modeled on Latin adunare
unite, from ad- to, at (see ad-) + unum one. Related: Atoned; atoning.


attune (v.)

1590s, from tune (v.), probably suggested by ATONE [OED]. Related: Attuned; attuning.


mend (v.)

c.1200, to repair, from a shortened form of Old French amender (see amend). Meaning to put right,
atone for, amend (one's life), repent is from c.1300; that of to regain health is from early 15c.
Related: Mended; mending.


expiate (v.)

c.1600 (OED entry has a typographical error in the earliest date), from Latin expiatus, past
participle of expiare to make amends, atone for (see expiation). Related: Expiable (1560s);
expiated; expiating.


satisfaction (n.)

early 14c., performance of an act set forth by a priest or other Church authority to atone for sin,
from Old French satisfaction (12c.), from Latin satisfactionem (nominative satisfactio) a satisfying
of a creditor, noun of action from past participle stem of satisfacere (see satisfy). Senses of
contentment, appeasement and action of gratifying first recorded late 14c.; the former not common
before 16c.


penal (adj.)

pertaining to punishment, mid-15c., from Old French peinal (12c., Modern French p&#233;nal) and
directly from Medieval Latin penalis, from Latin poenalis pertaining to punishment, from poena
punishment, from Greek poine blood-money, fine, penalty, punishment, from PIE *kwoina, from root
*kwei- to pay, atone, compensate (cognates: Greek time price, worth, honor, esteem, respect, tinein
to pay a price, punish, take vengeance; Sanskrit cinoti observes, notes; Avestan kaena punishment,
vengeance; Old Church Slavonic cena honor, price; Lithuanian kaina value, price).


pain (n.)

late 13c., punishment, especially for a crime; also condition one feels when hurt, opposite of
pleasure, from Old French peine difficulty, woe, suffering, punishment, Hell's torments (11c.), from
Latin poena punishment, penalty, retribution, indemnification (in Late Latin also torment, hardship,
suffering), from Greek poine retribution, penalty, quit-money for spilled blood, from PIE *kwei- to
pay, atone, compensate (see penal). The earliest sense in English survives in phrase on pain of
death.    Phrase to give (someone) a pain be annoying and irritating is from 1908; localized as pain
in the neck (1924) and pain in the ass (1934), though this last might have gone long unrecorded and
be the original sense and the others euphemisms. Pains great care taken (for some purpose) is first
recorded 1520s (in the singular in this sense, it is attested from c.1300). First record of pain-
killer is from 1853.


lose (v.)

Old English losian be lost, perish, from los destruction, loss, from Proto-Germanic *lausa-
(cognates: Old Norse los the breaking up of an army; Old English forleosan to lose, destroy, Old
Frisian forliasa, Old Saxon farliosan, Middle Dutch verliesen, Old High German firliosan, German
verlieren), from PIE root *leu- to loosen, divide, cut apart, untie, separate (cognates: Sanskrit
lunati cuts, cuts off, lavitram sickle; Greek lyein to loosen, untie, slacken, lysus a loosening;
Latin luere to loose, release, atone for, expiate).    Replaced related leosan (a class II strong
verb whose past participle loren survives in forlorn and lovelorn), from Proto-Germanic *leusanan
(cognates: Old High German virliosan, German verlieren, Old Frisian urliasa, Gothic fraliusan to
lose).    Transitive sense of to part with accidentally is from c.1200. Meaning fail to maintain is
from mid-15c. Meaning to be defeated (in a game, etc.) is from 1530s. Meaning to cause (someone) to
lose his way is from 1640s. To lose (one's) mind become insane is attested from c.1500. To lose out
fail is 1858, American English. Related: Lost; losing.


