attentiveness (n.)

mid-15c., from attentive + -ness.


attentive (adj.)

late 14c. (implied in attentively), from Old French attentif, from Vulgar Latin *attenditus, from
Latin attentus heedful, observant (see attend). Sense of actively ministering to the needs and wants
(of another person) is from early 16c. Related: Attentively.


intent (adj.)

very attentive, late 14c., from Latin intentus attentive, eager, waiting, strained, past participle
of intendere to strain, stretch (see intend). Related: Intently.


attendant (adj.)

late 14c., solicitous, attentive, see attendant (n.). Sense of serving under, accompanying in a
dependant position is from c.1400.


diligent (adj.)

mid-14c., from Old French diligent (14c.), from Latin diligentem attentive, assiduous (see
diligence). Related: Diligently.


inattentive (adj.)

1741, from in- (1) not, opposite of + attentive. Related: Inattentively; inattentiveness.


attent (adj.)

late 15c., attentive, from Latin attentus, past participle of  attendere (see attend). As a noun,
intention, aim (early 13c.), from Old French atente act of attending, from fem. of Latin attentus.


wistful (adj.)

1610s, closely attentive, perhaps from obsolete wistly intently (c.1500), of uncertain origin.
Perhaps formed on the model of wishful. Middle English wistful meant bountiful, well-supplied, from
Old English wist provisions. The meaning of longingly pensive, musing is by 1714. Related:
Wistfully; wistfulness.


sedulous (adj.)

1530s, from Latin sedulus attentive, painstaking, diligent, busy, zealous, probably from sedulo
(adv.) sincerely, diligently, from sedolo without deception or guile, from se- without, apart (see
secret) + dolo, ablative of dolus deception, guile, cognate with Greek dolos ruse, snare. Related:
Sedulously; sedulousness.


gallant (adj.)

mid-15c., showy, finely dressed; gay, merry, from Old French galant courteous, earlier amusing,
entertaining; lively, bold (14c.), present participle of galer rejoice, make merry, generally held
to be from Latinized verb form of Frankish *wala- good, well, from Proto-Germanic *wal- (source also
of Old High German wallon to wander, go on a pilgrimage), from PIE root *wel- (2) to wish, will (see
will (v.)), but the transition of sense offers difficulties that are not fully cleared up [OED].
Sense of politely attentive to women was adopted 17c. from French.


wary (adj.)

late 15c., with -y (2) + ware, from Old English w&aelig;r prudent, aware, alert, wary, from Proto-
Germanic *waraz (cognates: Old Norse varr attentive, Gothic wars cautious, Old Saxon giwar, Middle
Dutch gheware, Old High German giwar, German gewahr aware), from PIE root *wer- (4) to perceive,
watch out for (see ward (n.)). Related: Warily; wariness.


diligence (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French diligence attention, care; haste, speed, from Latin diligentia
attentiveness, carefulness, from diligentem (nominative diligens) attentive, assiduous, careful,
originally present participle of diligere single out, value highly, esteem, prize, love; aspire to,
be content with, appreciate, originally to pick out, select, from dis- apart (see dis-) + legere
choose, gather (see lecture (n.)).    Sense evolved from love through attentiveness to carefulness
to steady effort. From the secondary French sense comes the old useage of diligence for public stage
coach (1742; dilly for short), from a French shortening of carrosse de diligence.


