attire (n.)

c.1300, equipment of a man-at-arms; fine apparel, from attire (v.).


attire (v.)

c.1300, to fit out, equip; to dress in finery, to adorn, from Old French atirier to equip, ready,
prepare, from a- to + tire order, row, dress (see tier). Related: Attired; attiring.


foppery (n.)

1540s, foolish action, from fop + -ery. Meaning behavior and manner of a fop is from 1690s; meaning
foppish attire is from 1711.


modest (adj.)

1560s, having moderate self-regard, from Middle French modeste (14c.), from Latin modestus keeping
due measure (see modesty). Of women, not improper or lewd, 1590s; of female attire, 1610s. Of
demands, etc., c.1600. Related: Modestly.


apparel (n.)

personal outfit or attire, early 14c., also ship's rigging, from Old French apareil preparation,
from apareillier (see apparel (v.)). Earlier in same sense was apparelment (early 14c.).


garment (n.)

c.1400, variant of garnement (early 14c.), from Old French garnement garment, attire, clothes, from
garnir fit out, provide, adorn (see garnish (v.)).


boxer (n.)

fighter, late 15c., agent noun from box (v.2). The name of the breed of dog (1934), is from German
(the breed originated in Germany), itself taken from English boxer fighter; the dog so called for
its pugnaciousness. Boxer shorts (1943) so called from their resemblance to the attire worn in the
ring.


guise (n.)

late 13c., style or fashion of attire, from Old French guise manner, fashion, way, from Frankish
*wisa or some similar Germanic source (cognate with Old High German wisa manner, wise; see wise
(n.)). Sense of assumed appearance is from 1660s, from earlier meaning mask, disguise (c.1500).


gaiter (n.)

leather cover for the ankle, 1775, perhaps from French gu&ecirc;tre belonging to peasant attire,
from Middle French *guestre, probably from Frankish *wrist instep, from Proto-Germanic *wirstiz
(source also of German Rist instep; see wrist). Related: Gaiters.


sailor (n.)

c.1400, sailer, agent noun from sail (v.). Spelling with -o- arose 16c., probably by influence of
tailor, etc., and to distinguish the meaning seaman, mariner from thing that sails. It replaced much
older seaman and mariner (q.q.v.). Old English also had merefara sailor. Applied as an adjective
from 1870s to clothing styles and items based on a sailor's characteristic attire.


mob-cap (n.)

a type of woman's indoor cap, 1795 (as simply mob, 1748), from cap (n.) + obsolete mob (n.)
negligent attire (1660s), earlier a strumpet (earlier form mab, 1550s), related to obsolete verb mob
to tousle the hair, to dress untidily (1660s), and perhaps ultimately from mop, but influenced by
Mab as a female name. Dutch has a similar compound, mopmuts, but the relationship between it and the
English word is uncertain.


gala (n.)

1620s, festive dress or attire, from French en gala, perhaps from Old French gale merriment, from
galer rejoice, make merry (see gallant). Klein suggests the French word is from Italian gala (as in
phrase vestito di gala robe of state), perhaps from Arabic khil'a fine garment given as a
presentation. Sense of festive occasion (characterized by display of finery) first recorded 1777.


apparel (v.)

mid-13c., to equip (in any way), from Old French apareillier (12c.), from Vulgar Latin
*appariculare. This is either from Latin apparare prepare, make ready (see apparatus), or from
Vulgar Latin *ad-particulare to put things together. The meaning to attire in proper clothing is
from mid-14c. Cognate with Italian aparecchiare, Spanish aparejar, Portuguese aparelhar. Related:
Appareled; apparelled; appareling; apparelling.


G-string (n.)

1878, geestring, loincloth worn by American Indian, originally the string that holds it up,
etymology unknown. The spelling with G (1882) is perhaps from influence of violin string tuned to a
G (in this sense G string is first recorded 1831), the lowest and heaviest of the violin strings.
First used of women's attire 1936, with reference to strip-teasers.    I AM the spirit of the silver
G:  I am silvered sadness,  I am moonlit gladness,  I am that fine madness  Of reverence half, and
half of ecstasy  [from Spirit of the 'G' String, Alfred L. Donaldson, in Songs of My Violin, 1901]


broad (adj.)

Old English brad broad, flat, open, extended, from Proto-Germanic *braithaz (cognates: Old Frisian
bred, Old Norse brei&eth;r, Dutch breed, German breit, Gothic brou&thorn;s), of unknown origin. Not
found outside Germanic languages. No clear distinction in sense from wide. Related: Broadly. Broad-
brim as a style of hat (1680s, broad-brimmed) in 18c.-19c. suggested Quaker male from their
characteristic attire.


tire (n.)

late 15c., iron plates forming a rim of a carriage wheel, probably from tire equipment, dress,
covering (c.1300), a shortened form of attire (n.). The notion is of the tire as the dressing of the
wheel. The original spelling was tyre, which had shifted to tire in 17c.-18c., but since early 19c.
tyre has been revived in Great Britain and become standard there. Rubber ones, for bicycles (later
automobiles) are from 1877. A tire-iron originally was one of the iron plates; as a device for
separating a tire from a wheel, by 1909.


bluestocking (n.)

also blue-stocking, 1790, derisive word for a woman considered too learned, traces to a London
literary salon founded c.1750 by Elizabeth Montagu on the Parisian model, featuring intellectual
discussion instead of card games, and in place of ostentatious evening attire, simple dress,
including Benjamin Stillingfleet's blue-gray tradesman's hose which he wore in place of gentleman's
black silk, hence the term, first applied in derision to the whole set by Admiral Boscawen. None of
the ladies wore blue stockings. Borrowed by the neighbors in loan-translations, such as French bas-
bleu, Dutch blauwkous, German Blaustrumpf.


shroud (n.)

Old English scrud a garment, clothing, dress, from West Germanic *skruthan, from Proto-Germanic
*skrud- cut (cognates: Old Norse skru&eth; shrouds of a ship, tackle, gear; furniture of a church,
Danish, Swedish skrud dress, attire), from PIE *skreu- to cut (see shred (n.)).    Specific meaning
winding-sheet, cloth or sheet for burial, to which the word now is restricted, first attested 1560s.
Sense of strong rope supporting the mast of a ship (mid-15c.) is from the notion of clothing a spar
or mast; one without rigging was said to be naked.


vest (n.)

1610s, loose outer garment (worn by men in Eastern countries or in ancient times), from French veste
a vest, jacket (17c.), from Italian vesta, veste robe, gown, from Latin vestis clothing, from
vestire to clothe (see vest (v.)). The sleeveless garment worn by men beneath the coat was
introduced by Charles II in a bid to rein in men's attire at court, which had grown extravagant and
decadent in the French mode.    The King hath yesterday, in Council, declared his resolution of
setting a fashion for clothes .... It will be a vest, I know not well how; but it is to teach the
nobility thrift. [Pepys, Diary, Oct. 8, 1666]    Louis XIV of France is said to have mocked the
effort by putting his footmen in such vests.


smart (adj.)

late Old English smeart painful, severe, stinging; causing a sharp pain, related to smeortan (see
smart (v.)). Meaning executed with force and vigor is from c.1300. Meaning quick, active, clever is
attested from c.1300, from the notion of cutting wit, words, etc., or else keen in bargaining.
Meaning trim in attire first attested 1718, ascending from the kitchen to the drawing-room c.1880
[Weekley]. For sense evolution, compare sharp (adj.).    In reference to devices, the sense of
behaving as though guided by intelligence (as in smart bomb) first attested 1972. Smarts good sense,
intelligence, is first recorded 1968. Smart cookie is from 1948.


bracket (n.)

1570s, bragget, architectural support, probably from Middle French braguette codpiece armor (16c.),
from a fancied resemblance of architectural supports to that article of attire (Spanish cognate
bragueta meant both codpiece and bracket), diminutive of brague knee pants, ultimately from Gaulish
*braca pants, itself perhaps from Germanic (compare Old English broc garment for the legs and trunk;
see breeches). The sense might reflect the breeches sense, on the notion of two limbs or of
appliances used in pairs. The typographical bracket is first recorded 1750, so called for its
resemblance to double supports in carpentry (a sense attested from 1610s). Senses affected by Latin
brachium arm.


dress (v.)

early 14c., make straight; direct, guide, control, prepare for cooking, from Old French dresser,
drecier raise (oneself), address, prepare, lift, raise, hoist, set up, arrange, set (a table), serve
(food), straighten, put right, direct, from Vulgar Latin *directiare, from Latin directus direct,
straight (see direct (v.)).    Sense of decorate, adorn is late 14c., as is that of put on clothing.
Original sense survives in military meaning align columns of troops. Dress up attire elaborately is
from 1670s; dressing down wearing clothes less formal than expected is from 1960. To dress (someone)
down (1769) is ironical. Related: Dressed; dressing.


posh (adj.)

by 1914 (1903 as push), of uncertain origin; no evidence for the common derivation from an acronym
of port outward, starboard home, supposedly the shipboard accommodations of wealthy British
traveling to India on the P &amp; O Lines (to keep their cabins out of the sun); as per OED, see
objections outlined in G. Chowdharay-Best, Mariner's Mirror, Jan. 1971; also <b>see here</b>. More
likely from slang posh a dandy (1890), from thieves' slang meaning money (1830), originally coin of
small value, halfpenny, possibly from Romany posh half [Barnhart].    The cavalryman, far more than
the infantryman, makes a point of wearing posh clothing on every possible occasion -- posh being a
term used to designate superior clothing, or articles of attire other than those issued by and
strictly conforming to the regulations. [E. Charles Vivian, The British Army From Within, London,
1914]


fashion (n.)

c.1300, shape, manner, mode, from Old French fa&ccedil;on (12c.) face, appearance; construction,
pattern, design; thing done; beauty; manner, characteristic feature, from Latin factionem
(nominative factio) group of people acting together, literally a making or doing, from facere to
make (see factitious).    Sense of prevailing custom is from late 15c.; that of style of attire is
from 1520s.  To call a fashion wearable is the kiss of death. No new fashion worth its salt is
wearable. [Eugenia Sheppard, New York Herald Tribune, Jan. 13, 1960] Fashion plate (1851) originally
was full-page picture in a popular magazine showing the prevailing or latest style of dress, in
reference to the typographic plate from which it was printed. Transfered sense of well-dressed
person had emerged by 1920s.


hog (n.)

late 12c. (implied in hogaster), swine reared for slaughter (usually about a year old), also used by
stockmen for young sheep (mid-14c.) and for horse older than one year, suggesting the original sense
had something to do with an age, not a type of animal. Not evidenced in Old English, but it may have
existed. Possibility of British Celtic origin [Watkins, etc.] is regarded by OED as improbable.
Figurative sense of gluttonous person is first recorded early 15c. Meaning Harley-Davidson
motorcycle is attested from 1967.    To go hog wild is from 1904. Hog in armor awkward or clumsy
person in ill-fitting attire is from 1650s. Phrase to go the whole hog (1828) is sometimes said to
be from the butcher shop option of buying the whole slaughtered animal (at a discount) rather than
just the choice bits. But it is perhaps rather from the story (recorded in English from 1779) of
Muslim sophists, forbidden by the Quran from eating a certain unnamed part of the hog, who debated
which part was intended and managed to exempt the whole of it from the prohibition. Road hog is
attested from 1886.


purple (n., adj.)

Old English purpul, dissimilation (first recorded in Northumbrian, in Lindisfarne gospel) of purpure
purple dye, a purple garment, purpuren (adj.) purple, a borrowing by 9c. from Latin purpura purple
color, purple-dyed cloak, purple dye, also shellfish from which purple was made, and splendid attire
generally, from Greek porphyra purple dye, purple (see porphyry), of uncertain origin, perhaps
Semitic, originally the name for the shellfish (murex) from which it was obtained. Purpur continued
as a parallel form until 15c., and through 19c. in heraldry. As a color name, attested from early
15c. Tyrian purple, produced around Tyre, was prized as dye for royal garments.    Also the color of
mourning or penitence (especially in royalty or clergy). Rhetorical for splendid, gaudy (of prose)
from 1590s. Purple Heart, U.S. decoration for service members wounded in combat, instituted 1932;
originally a cloth decoration begun by George Washington in 1782. Hendrix' Purple Haze (1967) is
slang for LSD.


strut (v.)

walk in a vain, important manner, walk with affected dignity, 1590s, from Middle English strouten
display one's clothes proudly, vainly flaunt fine attire (late 14c.), earlier to stick out,
protrude, bulge, swell, from Old English strutian to stand out stiffly, swell or bulge out, from
Proto-Germanic *strut- (cognates: Danish strutte, German strotzen to be puffed up, be swelled,
German Strau&szlig; fight), from PIE root *ster- (1) strong, firm, stiff, rigid (see stereo-).
Originally of the air or the attitude; modern sense, focused on the walk, first recorded 1510s.
Related: Strutted; strutting. To strut (one's) stuff is first recorded 1926, from strut as the name
of a dance popular from c.1900. The noun meaning a vain and affectedly dignified manner of walking
is from c.1600.


habit (n.)

early 13c., characteristic attire of a religious or clerical order, from Old French habit, abit
(12c.) clothing, (ecclesiastical) habit; conduct, from Latin habitus condition, demeanor,
appearance, dress, originally past participle of habere to have, hold, possess; consider, think,
reason; manage, keep, from PIE root *ghabh- to seize, take, hold, have, give, receive (cognates:
Sanskrit gabhasti- hand, forearm; Old Irish gaibim I take, hold, I have, gabal act of taking;
Lithuanian gabana armful, gabenti to remove; Gothic gabei riches; Old English giefan, Old Norse gefa
to give).    Base sense probably to hold, which can be either in offering or in taking. Applied in
Latin to both inner and outer states of being, and taken over in both sense by English, though
meaning of dress is now restricted to monks and nuns. Meaning customary practice is early 14c. Drug
sense is from 1887.


butterfly (n.)

Old English buttorfleoge, evidently butter (n.) + fly (n.), but of obscure signification. Perhaps
based on the old notion that the insects (or witches disguised as butterflies) consume butter or
milk that is left uncovered. Or, less creatively, simply because the pale yellow color of many
species' wings suggests the color of butter. Another theory connects it to the color of the insect's
excrement, based on Dutch cognate boterschijte. An overview of words for butterfly in various
languages can be found here. Also see papillon.    Applied to persons from c.1600, originally in
reference to vain and gaudy attire; by 1806 in reference to transformation from early lowly state;
in reference to flitting tendencies by 1873. The swimming stroke so called from 1936. Butterflies
light stomach spasms caused by anxiety is from 1908.    The butterfly effect is a deceptively simple
insight extracted from a complex modern field. As a low-profile assistant professor in MIT's
department of meteorology in 1961, [Edward] Lorenz created an early computer program to simulate
weather. One day he changed one of a dozen numbers representing atmospheric conditions, from .506127
to .506. That tiny alteration utterly transformed his long-term forecast, a point Lorenz amplified
in his 1972 paper, Predictability: Does the Flap of a Butterfly's Wings in Brazil Set Off a Tornado
in Texas? [Peter Dizikes, The Meaning of the Butterfly, The Boston Globe, June 8, 2008]


