attribute (n.)

quality ascribed to someone, late 14c., from Latin attributum anything attributed, noun use of
neuter of attributus (see attribute (v.)). Distinguished from the verb by pronunciation.


attribute (v.)

late 14c., assign, bestow, from Latin attributus, past participle of attribuere assign to, add,
bestow; figuratively to attribute, ascribe, impute, from ad- to + tribuere assign, give, bestow (see
tribute). Related: Attributed; attributing.


attributes (n.)

qualities belonging to someone or something, c.1600; see attribute (n.).


adjunct (n.)

1580s, from Latin adiunctus closely connected, joined, united (as a noun, a characteristic,
essential attribute), past participle of adiungere join to (see adjoin).


margarite (n.)

a pearl, late Old English, from Late Latin margarita (see Margaret). Figuratively, that which is
precious or excellent, a priceless quality or attribute; also used as an epithet for Christ, Mary,
etc., late 13c. Also margerie (mid-14c.).


attributive (adj.)

c.1600, from French attributif, from stem of Latin attributus (see attribute (v.)). As a noun, in
grammar, from 1750. Related: Attributively; attributiveness.


attributable (adj.)

1660s, from attribute (v.) + -able.


self-sufficiency (n.)

1620s, originally an attribute of God (translating Greek autakreia), from self- + sufficiency. Of
mortals, self-sufficient able to supply one's own needs is recorded from 1580s.


personify (v.)

1727 to attribute personal form to things or abstractions (especially as an artistic or literary
technique), from person + -fy or from French personnifier (17c.), from personne. Meaning to
represent, embody attested from 1806. Related: Personified; personifying.


attribution (n.)

late 15c., action of bestowing or assigning, from Middle French attribution (14c.), from Latin
attributionem (nominative attributio) an assignment, attribution, noun of action from past
participle stem of attribuere (see attribute). Meaning thing attributed is recorded from 1580s.


attorn (v.)

late 13c., Anglo-French, to turn over to another, from Old French atorner to turn, turn to, assign,
attribute, dispose, from a- to (see ad-) + tourner to turn (see turn (v.)). In feudal law, to
transfer homage or allegiance to another lord.


ascribe (v.)

mid-14c., ascrive, from Old French ascrivre to inscribe; attribute, impute, from Latin ascribere to
write in, to add to in a writing, from ad- to (see ad-) + scribere to write (see script (n.)).
Spelling restored by 16c. Related: Ascribed; ascribing.


project (v.)

late 15c., to plan, from Latin proiectus, past participle of proicere (see project (n.)). Sense of
to stick out is from 1718. Meaning to cast an image on a screen is recorded from 1865.
Psychoanalytical sense, attribute to another (unconsciously) is from 1895 (implied in a use of
projective). Meaning convey to others by one's manner is recorded by 1955. Related: Projected;
projecting.


soul (n.2)

instinctive quality felt by black persons as an attribute, 1946, jazz slang, from soul (n.1). Also
from this sense are soul brother (1957), soul sister (1967), soul food (1957), etc. Soul music,
essentially gospel music with girl, etc., in place of Jesus, first attested 1961; William James used
the term in 1900, in a spiritual/romantic sense, but in reference to inner music.


refer (v.)

late 14c., to trace back (to a first cause), attribute, assign, from Old French referer (14c.) and
directly from Latin referre to relate, refer, literally to carry back, from re- back (see re-) +
ferre carry (see infer). Meaning to commit to some authority for a decision is from mid-15c.; sense
of to direct (someone) to a book, etc. is from c.1600. Related: Referred; referring.


qualify (v.)

mid-15c., to invest with a quality, from Middle French qualifier (15c.) and directly from Medieval
Latin qualificare attribute a quality to; make of a certain quality, from Latin qualis of what
sort?, correlative pronomial adjective (see quality) + facere to make (see factitious). Meaning to
limit, modify is from 1530s. Sense of be fit for a job first appeared 1580s. Related: Qualified;
qualifying.


hoar (adj.)

Old English har hoary, gray, venerable, old, the connecting notion being gray hair, from Proto-
Germanic *haira (cognates: Old Norse harr gray-haired, old, Old Saxon, Old High German her
distinguished, noble, glorious, German hehr), from PIE *kei-, source of color adjectives (see hue
(n.1)). German also uses the word as a title of respect, in Herr. Of frost, it is recorded in Old
English, perhaps expressing the resemblance of the white feathers of frost to an old man's beard.
Used as an attribute of boundary stones in Anglo-Saxon, perhaps in reference to being gray with
lichens, hence its appearance in place-names.


synecdoche (n.)

figure of speech in which a part is taken for the whole or vice versa, late 15c. correction of
synodoches (late 14c.), from Medieval Latin synodoche, alteration of Late Latin synecdoche, from
Greek synekdokhe the putting of a whole for a part; an understanding one with another, literally a
receiving together or jointly, from synekdekhesthai supply a thought or word; take with something
else, join in receiving, from syn- with (see syn-) + ek out (see ex-) + dekhesthai to receive,
related to dokein seem good (see decent). Typically an attribute or adjunct substituted for the
thing meant (head for cattle, hands for workmen, wheels for automobile, etc.). Compare metonymy.
Related: Synecdochical.


Three Rs (n.)

1824; said to have been given as a toast by Sir William Curtis (1752-1829), a beloved lord mayor of
London in the 1820s, who seems to have been a figure of fun to whom many mangled phrases were
attributed. Among the toasts he is alleged to have given at public dinners were The Female Ladies of
London; The three C's--Cox, King, and Curtis; and The three R's--Reading, Writing, and Rithmetic.
It has been very much the fashion amongst a class of persons to attribute to Sir W. C. ... a
vulgarity and ignorance of speech which are by no means consistent with his character and conduct.
The worthy and hospitable baronet has a rapid mode of speech, but it is always correct ; and
although some eccentricities are mixed up in his composition, he is highly honourable, and has been
a very useful member of society, particularly to his London constituents. [The Mirror, Jan. 29,
1825]    After listing some examples, the article continues:    It is, however, very certain, that
at a city festival some years ago, having indulged very freely, he fell asleep, when some wag,
choosing to consider him dead, wrote his epitaph, which was found next morning pinned to the
baronet's dress coat:--  Here lies the great Curtis,  Of London, Lord May'r:  He's left this here
world,  And gone to that there.


grim (adj.)

Old English grimm fierce, cruel, savage, dire, painful, from Proto-Germanic *grimmaz (cognates: Old
Saxon, Old Frisian, Old High German, German grimm, Old Norse grimmr, Swedish grym fierce, furious),
from PIE *ghrem- angry, perhaps imitative of the sound of rumbling thunder (compare Greek khremizein
to neigh, Old Church Slavonic vuzgrimeti to thunder, Russian gremet' thunder).    A weaker word now
than once it was; sense of dreary, gloomy first recorded late 12c. It also had a verb form in Old
English, grimman (class III strong verb; past tense gramm, p.p. grummen). Old English also had a
noun, grima goblin, specter, perhaps also a proper name or attribute-name of a god, hence its
appearance as an element in place names.   Grim reaper as a figurative way to say death is attested
by 1847 (the association of grim and death goes back at least to 17c.). A Middle English expression
for have recourse to harsh measures was to wend the grim tooth (early 13c.).


philosopher (n.)

from Old English philosophe, from Latin philosophus philosopher, from Greek philosophos philosopher,
sage, one who speculates on the nature of things and truth, literally lover of wisdom, from philos
loving (see -phile) + sophos wise, a sage (see sophist). Modern form with -r appears early 14c.,
from an Anglo-French or Old French variant of philosophe, with an agent-noun ending.  Pythagoras was
the first who called himself philosophos, instead of sophos, 'wise man,' since this latter term was
suggestive of immodesty. [Klein] Philosophy also was used of alchemy in Middle Ages, hence
Philosophers' stone (late 14c., translating Medieval Latin lapis philosophorum, early 12c.), a
reputed solid substance supposed by alchemists to change baser metals into gold or silver; also
identified with the elixir and thus given the attribute of prolonging life indefinitely and curing
wounds and disease. (French pierre philosophale, German der Stein der Weisen).


