augmented (adj.)

past participle adjective from augment, c.1600. Musical sense is attested from 1825.


augmentative (adj.)

c.1500, from Middle French augmentatif (14c.), from Latin augmentat-, stem of augmentare (see
augment).


augmentation (n.)

mid-15c., act of making greater, from Old French augmentacion increase, from Late Latin
augmentationem (nominative augmentatio), noun of action from past participle stem of augmentare (see
augment). Meaning amount by which something is increased is from 1520s. Musical sense is from 1590s.


augment (v.)

c.1400, from Old French augmenter increase, enhance (14c.), from Late Latin augmentare to increase,
from Latin augmentum an increase, from augere to increase, make big, enlarge, enrich, from PIE root
*aug- to increase (cognates: Sanskrit ojas- strength; Lithuanian augu to grow, aukstas high, of
superior rank; Greek auxo increase, auxein to increase; Gothic aukan to grow, increase; Old English
eacien to increase). Related: Augmented; augmenting. As a noun from early 15c.


auxin (n.)

plant growth hormone, 1934, from German (1931), from Greek auxein to increase (see augment) +
chemical suffix -in (2).


august (adj.)

1660s, from Latin augustus venerable, majestic, magnificent, noble, probably originally consecrated
by the augurs, with favorable auguries (see augur (n.)); or else that which is increased (see
augment).


auxiliary (adj.)

c.1600, from Latin auxiliaris helpful, from auxilium aid, help, support, related to auctus, past
participle of augere to increase (see augment).


amplify (v.)

early 15c., to enlarge or expand, from Middle French amplifier, from Latin amplificare to enlarge,
from amplificus splendid, from amplus large (see ample) + the root of facere make, do (see
factitious). Meaning augment in volume or amount is from 1570s. Restriction of use to sound seems to
have emerged in the electronic age, c.1915, in reference to radio technology.


cru (n.)

from French cru vineyard, literally growth (16c.), from Old French crois (12c.; Modern French
cro&icirc;t), from croiss-, stem of croistre growth, augment, increase, ultimately from Latin
crescere come forth, spring up, grow, thrive (see crescent).


aggrandize (v.)

1630s, to make larger, increase, from French agrandiss-, present participle stem of agrandir to
augment (16c.), ultimately from Latin ad to (see ad-) + grandire to make great, from grandis (see
grand (adj.)). The double -g- spelling in English is by analogy with Latin words in ad-. Related:
Aggrandized; aggrandizing.


auction (n.)

a sale by increase of bids, 1590s, from Latin auctionem (nominative auctio) an increasing sale,
auction, public sale, noun of action from past participle stem of augere to increase, from PIE root
*aug- to increase (see augment). In northern England and Scotland, called a roup. In the U.S.,
something is sold at auction; in England, by auction.


eke (v.)

c.1200, eken to increase, lengthen, north England and E. Midlands variant of echen from Old English
ecan, eacan, eacian to increase, probably from eaca an increase, from Proto-Germanic *aukan
(cognates: Old Norse auka, Old Frisian aka, Old High German ouhhon, Gothic aukan), from PIE *aug- to
increase (see augment).    Now mainly in phrase to eke out (1590s). It means to make something go
further or last longer; you can eke out your income by taking a second job, but you can't eke out
your existence. Related: Eked; eking.


augur (n.)

1540s, from Latin augur, a religious official in ancient Rome who foretold events by interpreting
omens, perhaps originally meaning an increase in crops enacted in ritual, in which case it probably
is from Old Latin *augos (genitive *augeris) increase, and is related to augere increase (see
augment). The more popular theory is that it is from Latin avis bird, because the flights, singing,
and feeding of birds, along with entrails from bird sacrifices, were important objects of divination
(compare auspicious). In that case, the second element would be from garrire to talk.


waist (n.)

late 14c., middle part of the body, also part of a garment fitted for the waist, portion of a
garment that covers the waist (but, due to fashion styles, often above or below it), probably from
Old English *w&aelig;st growth, hence, where the body grows, from Proto-Germanic *wahs-tu-
(cognates: Old English w&aelig;stm, Old Norse v&#246;xtr, Swedish v&auml;xt, Old High German wahst
growth, increase, Gothic wahstus stature, Old English weaxan to grow see wax (v.)), from PIE *wegs-,
extended form of root *aug- to increase (see augment).


wax (v.)

grow bigger or greater, Old English weaxan to increase, grow (class VII strong verb; past tense
weox, past participle weaxen), from Proto-Germanic *wahsan (cognates: Old Saxon, Old High German
wahsan, Old Norse vaxa, Old Frisian waxa, Dutch wassen, German wachsen, Gothic wahsjan to grow,
increase), from PIE *weg- (cognates: Sanskrit vaksayati cause to grow, Greek auxein to increase),
extended form of root *aug- to increase (see augment). Strong conjugation archaic after 14c.
Related: Waxed; waxing.


author (n.)

c.1300, autor father, from Old French auctor, acteor author, originator, creator, instigator (12c.,
Modern French auteur), from Latin auctorem (nominative auctor) enlarger, founder, master, leader,
literally one who causes to grow, agent noun from auctus, past participle of augere to increase (see
augment). Meaning one who sets forth written statements is from late 14c. The -t- changed to -th-
16c. on mistaken assumption of Greek origin.    ...[W]riting means revealing onesself to excess ....
This is why one can never be alone enough when one writes, why even night is not night enough. ... I
have often thought that the best mode of life for me would be to sit in the innermost room of a
spacious locked cellar with my writing things and a lamp. Food would be brought and always put down
far away from my room, outside the cellar's outermost door.  The walk to my food, in my dressing
gown, through the vaulted cellars, would be my only exercise. I would then return to my table, eat
slowly and with deliberation, then start writing again at once. And how I would write! From what
depths I would drag it up! [Franz Kafka]


