auspicious (adj.)

1590s, of good omen (implied in auspiciously), from Latin auspicium divination by observing the
flight of birds, from auspex (genitive auspicis) + -ous. Related: Auspiciously; auspiciousness.


ominously (adv.)

1590s, from ominous + -ly (2). In earliest use, of good omen, auspicious; meaning of evil omen first
attested 1640s, in Milton.


inauspicious (adj.)

1590s, from in- (1) not, opposite of + auspicious. Related: Inauspiciously; inauspiciousness.


augur (n.)

1540s, from Latin augur, a religious official in ancient Rome who foretold events by interpreting
omens, perhaps originally meaning an increase in crops enacted in ritual, in which case it probably
is from Old Latin *augos (genitive *augeris) increase, and is related to augere increase (see
augment). The more popular theory is that it is from Latin avis bird, because the flights, singing,
and feeding of birds, along with entrails from bird sacrifices, were important objects of divination
(compare auspicious). In that case, the second element would be from garrire to talk.


Yemen

southwestern region of Arabia, from Arabic Yemen, literally the country of the south, from yaman
right side (i.e., south side, if one is facing east). The right side regarded as auspicious, hence
Arabic yamana he was happy, literally he went to the right, and hence the Latin name for the region
in Roman times, Arabia Felix, lit, Happy Arabia. Related: Yemeni.


Benjamin

masc. proper name, in Old Testament, Jacob's youngest son (Gen. xxxv:18), from Hebrew Binyamin,
literally son of the south, though interpreted in Genesis as son of the right hand, from ben son of
+ yamin right hand, also south (in an East-oriented culture). Compare Arabic cognate yaman right
hand, right side, south; yamana he was happy, literally he turned to the right. The right was
regarded as auspicious (see left and dexterity). Also see Yemen, southpaw, and compare deasil
rightwise, turned toward the right, from Gaelic deiseil toward the south; toward the right, from
deas right, right-hand; south. Also compare Sanskrit dakshina right; south. Slang meaning money (by
1999) is from portrait of Benjamin Franklin on U.S. $100 bill.


Uranus

first planet discovered that was not known in ancient times, named for the god of Heaven, husband of
Gaia, the Earth, from Latin Uranus, from Greek Ouranos literally heaven, the sky; in Greek
cosmology, the god who personifies the heavens, father of the titans.    The planet was discovered
and identified as such in 1781 by Sir William Herschel (it had been observed before, but mistaken
for a star; in 1690 John Flamsteed cataloged it as 34 Tauri); Herschel proposed calling it Georgium
Sidus, literally George's Star, in honour of his patron, King George III of England.  I cannot but
wish to take this opportunity of expressing my sense of gratitude, by giving the name of Georgium
Sidus ... to a star which (with respect to us) first began to shine under His auspicious reign. [Sir
William Herschel, 1783]  The planet was known in English in 1780s as the Georgian Planet; French
astronomers began calling Herschel, and ultimately German astronomer Johann Bode proposed Uranus as
in conformity with other planet names. However, the name didn't come into common usage until c.1850.


fecund (adj.)

early 15c., from Middle French fecond, from Latin fecundus fruitful, fertile, productive, from *fe-
kwondo-, suffixed form of Latin root *fe-, corresponding to PIE *dhe(i)- to suck, suckle, also
produce, yield (cognates: Sanskrit dhayati sucks, dhayah nourishing; Greek thele mother's breast,
nipple, thelys female, fruitful; Old Church Slavonic dojiti to suckle, dojilica nurse, deti child;
Lithuanian dele leech; Old Prussian dadan milk; Gothic daddjan to suckle; Old Swedish dia suckle;
Old High German tila female breast; Old Irish denaim I suck, dinu lamb).    Also from the same Latin
root come felare to suck; femina woman (*fe-mna-, literally she who suckles); felix happy,
auspicious, fruitful; fetus offspring, pregnancy; fenum hay (probably literally produce); and
probably filia/filius daughter/son, assimilated from *felios, originally a suckling.


sinister (adj.)

early 15c., prompted by malice or ill-will, intending to mislead, from Old French senestre, sinistre
contrary, false; unfavorable; to the left (14c.), from Latin sinister left, on the left side
(opposite of dexter), of uncertain origin. Perhaps meaning properly the slower or weaker hand
[Tucker], but Klein and Buck suggest it's a euphemism (see left (adj.)) connected with the root of
Sanskrit saniyan more useful, more advantageous. With contrastive or comparative suffix -ter, as in
dexter (see dexterity).    The Latin word was used in augury in the sense of unlucky, unfavorable
(omens, especially bird flights, seen on the left hand were regarded as portending misfortune), and
thus sinister acquired a sense of harmful, unfavorable, adverse. This was from Greek influence,
reflecting the early Greek practice of facing north when observing omens. In genuine Roman auspices,
the augurs faced south and left was favorable. Thus sinister also retained a secondary sense in
Latin of favorable, auspicious, fortunate, lucky.    Meaning evil is from late 15c. Used in heraldry
from 1560s to indicate left, to the left. Bend (not bar) sinister in heraldry indicates illegitimacy
and preserves the literal sense of on or from the left side (though in heraldry this is from the
view of the bearer of the shield, not the observer of it).


monkey (n.)

1520s, likely from an unrecorded Middle Low German *moneke or Middle Dutch *monnekijn, a colloquial
word for monkey, originally a diminutive of some Romanic word, compare French monne (16c.); Middle
Italian monnicchio, from Old Italian monna; Spanish mona ape, monkey. In a 1498 Low German version
of the popular medieval beast story Roman de Renart (Reynard the Fox), Moneke is the name given to
the son of Martin the Ape; transmission of the word to English might have been via itinerant
entertainers from the German states.    The Old French form of the name is Monequin (recorded as
Monnekin in a 14c. version from Hainault), which could be a diminutive of some personal name, or it
could be from the general Romanic word, which may be ultimately from Arabic maimun monkey, literally
auspicious, a euphemistic usage because the sight of apes was held by the Arabs to be unlucky
[Klein]. The word would have been influenced in Italian by folk etymology from monna woman, a
contraction of ma donna my lady.  Monkey has been used affectionately for child since c.1600. As a
type of modern popular dance, it is attested from 1964. Monkey business attested from 1883. Monkey
suit fancy uniform is from 1886. Monkey wrench is attested from 1858; its figurative sense of
something that obstructs operations is from the notion of one getting jammed in the gears of
machinery (compare spanner in the works). To make a monkey of someone is attested from 1900. To have
a monkey on one's back be addicted is 1930s narcotics slang, though the same phrase in the 1860s
meant to be angry. There is a story in the Sinbad cycle about a tormenting ape-like creature that
mounts a man's shoulders and won't get off, which may be the root of the term. In 1890s British
slang, to have a monkey up the chimney meant to have a mortgage on one's house. The three wise
monkeys (see no evil, etc.) are attested from 1926.


