authoritative (adj.)

c.1600, dictatorial (a sense now restricted to authoritarian), from Medieval Latin authoritativus
(see authority). Meaning possessing authority is recorded from 1650s; that of proceeding from proper
authority is from 1809. Related: Authoritatively; authoritativeness.


sentence (n.)

c.1200, doctrine, authoritative teaching; an authoritative pronouncement, from Old French sentence
judgment, decision; meaning; aphorism, maxim; statement of authority (12c.) and directly from Latin
sententia thought, way of thinking, opinion; judgment, decision, also a thought expressed; aphorism,
saying, from sentientem, present participle of sentire be of opinion, feel, perceive (see sense
(n.)). Loss of first -i- in Latin by dissimilation.    From early 14c. as judgment rendered by God,
or by one in authority; a verdict, decision in court; from late 14c. as understanding, wisdom;
edifying subject matter. From late 14c. as subject matter or content of a letter, book, speech,
etc., also in reference to a passage in a written work. Sense of grammatically complete statement is
attested from mid-15c. Meaning, then meaning expressed in words. Related: Sentential.


summons (n.)

authoritative call to be at a certain place for a certain purpose, late 13c., from Old French
sumunse, noun use of fem. past participle of somondre (see summon (v.)). As a verb from 1650s.


authoritarian (adj.)

1862, favoring imposed order over freedom, from authority + -an. Compare authoritative, which
originally had this meaning to itself. Noun in the sense of one advocating or practicing such
governance is from 1859.


judgment (n.)

mid-13c., action of trying at law, trial, also capacity for making decisions, from Old French
jugement legal judgment; diagnosis; the Last Judgment (11c.), from jugier (see judge (v.)). From
late 13c. as penalty imposed by a court; early 14c. as any authoritative decision, verdict. From
c.1300 in referfence to the Last Judgment. Also from c.1300 as opinion. Sense of discernment is
first recorded 1530s.


fiat (n.)

authoritative sanction, 1630s, from Latin fiat let it be done (also used in the opening of Medieval
Latin proclamations and commands), third person singular present subjunctive of fieri, used as
passive of facere to make, do (see factitious). Also sometimes a reference to fiat lux let there be
light in the Book of Genesis.


termination (n.)

late 14c., authoritative resolution of a matter, from Old French terminacion (13c.) and directly
from Latin terminationem (nominative terminatio) a fixing of boundaries, a bounding, determining,
noun of action from past participle stem of terminare to limit, end (see terminus). Meaning end of a
person's employment is recorded from 1961; meaning artificial end of a pregnancy is attested from
1969; sense of assasination is recorded from 1975.


arbitrate (v.)

1580s (arbitrable is recorded from 1530s), to give an authoritative decision, from Latin arbitratus,
past participle of arbitrari be of an opinion, give a decision, from arbiter (see arbiter). Meaning
to act as an arbitrator is from 1610s. Related: Arbitrated; arbitrating. The earlier verb form was
arbitren (early 15c.).


instruction (n.)

c.1400, instruccioun, action or process of teaching, from Old French instruccion (14c.), from Latin
instructionem (nominative instructio) building, arrangement, teaching, from past participle stem of
instruere arrange, inform, teach, from in- on (see in- (2)) + struere to pile, build (see structure
(n.)). Meaning an authoritative direction telling someone what to do; a document giving such
directions, is early 15c. Related: Instructions.


ordinance (n.)

c.1300, an authoritative direction, decree, or command (narrower or more transitory than a law),
from Old French ordenance (Modern French ordonnance) or directly from Medieval Latin ordinantia,
from Latin ordinantem (nominative ordinans), present participle of ordinare put in order (see
ordain). By early 14c. senses had emerged of arrangement in ranks or rows (especially in order of
battle), also warlike provisions, equipment (a sense now in ordnance).


standard (n.2)

weight, measure, or instrument by which the accuracy of others is determined, late 14c., from
standard (n.1) military standard, banner, a particular use in English of this word, but the sense
evolution is somewhat obscure [OED]. The standard weights and measures were set by royal ordinance
and were known as the king's standard, so perhaps metaphoric, the royal standard coming to stand for
royal authority in matters like setting weights and measures. Hence the meaning authoritative or
recognized exemplar of quality or correctness (late 15c.). Meaning rule, principal or means of
judgment is from 1560s. That of definite level of attainment is attested from 1711 (as in standard
of living, 1903).


authentic (adj.)

mid-14c., authoritative, from Old French autentique (13c., Modern French authentique) authentic;
canonical, and directly from Medieval Latin authenticus, from Greek authentikos original, genuine,
principal, from authentes one acting on one's own authority, from autos self (see auto-) + hentes
doer, being, from PIE *sene- to accomplish, achieve. Sense of entitled to acceptance as factual is
first recorded mid-14c.    Traditionally (at least since the 18c.), authentic implies that the
contents of the thing in question correspond to the facts and are not fictitious; genuine implies
that the reputed author is the real one; though this distinction is not etymological and is not
always now recognized.


tuxedo (n.)

man's evening dress for semiformal occasions, 1889, named for Tuxedo Park, N.Y., a rural resort
development for wealthy New Yorkers and site of a country club where it first was worn, supposedly
in 1886. The name is an attractive subject for elaborate speculation, and connections with
Algonquian words for bear or wolf were proposed. The authoritative Bright, however, says the tribe's
name probably is originally a place name, perhaps Munsee Delaware (Algonquian) p'tuck-sepo crooked
river.    There was a hue and cry raised against the Tuxedo coat upon its first appearance because
it was erroneously considered and widely written of as intended to displace the swallow tail. When
the true import of the tailless dress coat came to be realized it was accepted promptly by swelldom,
and now is widely recognized as one of the staple adjuncts of the jeunesse dor&#233;e. [Clothier and
Furnisher, August, 1889]


Bible (n.)

early 14c., from Anglo-Latin biblia, Old French bible (13c.) the Bible, also any large book
generally, from Medieval and Late Latin biblia (neuter plural interpreted as feminine singular), in
phrase biblia sacra holy books, a translation of Greek ta biblia to hagia the holy books, from Greek
biblion paper, scroll, the ordinary word for book, originally a diminutive of byblos Egyptian
papyrus, possibly so called from Byblos (modern Jebeil, Lebanon), the name of the Phoenician port
from which Egyptian papyrus was exported to Greece (compare parchment). Or the place name might be
from the Greek word, which then would be probably of Egyptian origin. The Christian scripture was
referred to in Greek as Ta Biblia as early as c.223. Bible replaced Old English biblio&eth;ece (see
bibliothek) as the ordinary word for the Scriptures. Figurative sense of any authoritative book is
from 1804.    Walter Scott and Pope's Homer were reading of my own election, but my mother forced
me, by steady daily toil, to learn long chapters of the Bible by heart; as well as to read it every
syllable through, aloud, hard names and all, from Genesis to the Apocalypse, about once a year; and
to that discipline -- patient, accurate, and resolute -- I owe, not only a knowledge of the book,
which I find occasionally serviceable, but much of my general power of taking pains, and the best
part of my taste in literature. ... [O]nce knowing the 32nd of Deuteronomy, the 119th Psalm, the
15th of 1st Corinthians, the Sermon on the Mount, and most of the Apocalypse, every syllable by
heart, and having always a way of thinking with myself what words meant, it was not possible for me,
even in the foolishest times of youth, to write entirely superficial or formal English .... [John
Ruskin, Fors Clavigera, 1871]


