auxiliary (n.)

foreign troops in service of a nation at war, c.1600, from auxiliary (adj.). Related: Auxiliaries.


auxiliary (adj.)

c.1600, from Latin auxiliaris helpful, from auxilium aid, help, support, related to auctus, past
participle of augere to increase (see augment).


mun (v.)

auxiliary verb, now archaic or dialectal, must, c.1200, from Old Norse monu, a future tense
auxiliary verb ultimately meaning to intend and from the PIE root *men- to think (see mind (n.)).


paramedical (adj.)

related to medicine in an auxiliary capacity, 1908, from para- (1) + medical.


moped (n.)

1956, from Swedish (c.1952), from (trampcykel med) mo(tor och) ped(aler) pedal cycle with engine and
pedals (the earliest versions had auxiliary pedals). Compare obsolete English mo-bike (1925), from
motor bicycle.


subordinate (v.)

to bring into a subordinate position to something else, to make of less value, to make auxiliary or
dependent, 1590s, from Medieval Latin subordinatus (see subordinate (adj.)). Related: Subordinated;
subordinating.


done

past participle of do (v.); from Old English past participle gedon (a vestige of the prefix is in
ado). U.S. Southern use of done in phrases like he done gone to the store is attested from 1827,
according to OED: a perfective auxiliary or with adverbial force in the sense 'already; completely.'
Meaning finished is early 15c. Slang done for doomed is from 1842.


ought (v.)

Old English ahte owned, possessed, past tense of agan to own, possess, owe (see owe). As a past
tense of owe, it shared in that word's evolution and meant at times in Middle English possessed and
under obligation to pay. It has been detached from owe since 17c., though he aught me ten pounds is
recorded as active in East Anglian dialect from c.1825. As an auxiliary verb expressing duty or
obligation (late 12c., the main modern use), it represents the past subjunctive.


do (v.)

Middle English do, first person singular of Old English don make, act, perform, cause; to put, to
place, from West Germanic *don (cognates: Old Saxon duan, Old Frisian dua, Dutch doen, Old High
German tuon, German tun), from PIE root *dhe- to put, place, do, make (see factitious).    Use as an
auxiliary began in Middle English. Periphrastic form in negative sentences (They did not think)
replaced the Old English negative particles (Hie ne wendon). Slang meaning to do the sex act with or
to is from 1913. Expression do or die is attested from 1620s.  Compare does, did, done.


may (v.1)

Old English m&aelig;g am able (infinitive magan, past tense meahte, mihte), from Proto-Germanic root
*mag-, infinitive *maganan (Old Frisian mei/muga/machte have power, may; Old Saxon mag/mugan/mahte;
Middle Dutch mach/moghen/mohte; Dutch mag/mogen/mocht; Old High German mag/magan/mahta; German
mag/m&#246;gen/mochte; Old Norse ma/mega/matte; Gothic mag/magan/mahte to be able), from PIE *magh-
(1) to be able, have power (cognates: Greek mekhos, makhos means, instrument, Old Church Slavonic
mogo to be able, mosti power, force, Sanskrit mahan great). Also used in Old English as a auxiliary
of prediction.


two-step (n.)

dance style, 1893, from two + step (n.); so called for the time signature of the music (as
distinguished from the three-step waltz). But as the positions taken by the dancers involved direct
contact, it was highly scandalous in its day and enormously popular.    A certain Division of an
Auxiliary gave a dance not long since. I went and looked on. What did they dance? Two-step, two-step
and two-step. How did they dance? When we used to waltz, we clasped arms easily, took a nice,
respectable position, and danced in a poetry of motion. Now, girls, how do you two-step? In nine
cases out of ten the dear girl reposes her head on the young man's shoulder, or else their faces
press each other. He presses her to his breast as closely as possible, and actually carries her
around. Disgraceful? I should say so. Do you wonder at the ministers preaching on dancing as a sin,
when it looks like this to a woman like myself who believes in dancing and has danced all her life?
Mothers, as you love your girls, forbid them to dance after this manner. [letter in the ladies'
section of Locomotive Engineers' Monthly Journal, March 1898]   <hr />   To the Two Step may be
accredited, serious injury to the Waltz, awkward and immodest positions assumed in round dancing,
also as being a prominent factor in overcrowding the profession and causing a general depression in
the business of the legitimate Master of Dancing. [The Director, March 1898]


will (v.1)

Old English *willan, wyllan to wish, desire; be willing; be used to; be about to (past tense wolde),
from Proto-Germanic *willjan (cognates: Old Saxon willian, Old Norse vilja, Old Frisian willa, Dutch
willen, Old High German wellan, German wollen, Gothic wiljan to will, wish, desire, Gothic waljan to
choose).    The Germanic words are from PIE root *wel- (2) to wish, will (cognates: Sanskrit vrnoti
chooses, prefers, varyah to be chosen, eligible, excellent, varanam choosing; Avestan verenav- to
wish, will, choose; Greek elpis hope; Latin volo, velle to wish, will, desire; Old Church Slavonic
voljo, voliti to will, veljo, veleti to command; Lithuanian velyti to wish, favor, pa-velmi I will,
viliuos I hope; Welsh gwell better).    Compare also Old English wel well, literally according to
one's wish; wela well-being, riches. The use as a future auxiliary was already developing in Old
English. The implication of intention or volition distinguishes it from shall, which expresses or
implies obligation or necessity. Contracted forms, especially after pronouns, began to appear 16c.,
as in sheele for she will. The form with an apostrophe is from 17c.


have (v.)

Old English habban to own, possess; be subject to, experience, from Proto-Germanic *haben-
(cognates: Old Norse hafa, Old Saxon hebbjan, Old Frisian habba, German haben, Gothic haban to
have), from PIE *kap- to grasp (see capable). Not related to Latin habere, despite similarity in
form and sense; the Latin cognate is capere seize. Old English second person singular present
h&aelig;fst, third person singular present h&aelig;f&eth; became Middle English hast, hath, while
Old English -bb- became -v- in have. The past participle had developed from Old English
geh&aelig;fd.    Sense of possess, have at one's disposal (I have a book) is a shift from older
languages, where the thing possessed was made the subject and the possessor took the dative case (as
in Latin est mihi liber I have a book, literally there is to me a book). Used as an auxiliary in Old
English, too (especially to form present perfect tense); the word has taken on more functions over
time; Modern English he had better would have been Old English him (dative) w&aelig;re betere. To
have to for must (1570s) is from sense of possess as a duty or thing to be done (Old English).
Phrase have a nice day as a salutation after a commercial transaction attested by 1970, American
English. Phrase have (noun), will (verb) is from 1954, originally from comedian Bob Hope, in the
form Have tux, will travel; Hope described this as typical of vaudevillians' ads in Variety,
indicating a willingness to perform anywhere, any time.


