avenge (v.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French avenger, Old French avengier, from a- to (see ad-) + vengier take
revenge (Modern French venger), from Latin vindicare to claim, avenge, punish (see vindicate).
Related: Avenged; avenging.


avenger (n.)

1530s, agent noun from avenge (v.). Spenser (1596) has avengeress but no mention of Mrs. Peel.


venge (v.)

avenge, c.1300, from Old French vengier revenge, avenge, punish, from Latin vindicare avenge,
vindicate (see vindication). Related: Venged; venging.


revenge (v.)

late 14c., from Old French revengier, variant of revenchier take revenge, avenge (13c., Modern
French revancher), from re-, intensive prefix (see re-), + vengier take revenge, from Latin
vindicare to lay claim to, avenge, punish (see vindicate).To avenge is to get revenge or to take
vengeance; it suggests the administration of just punishment for a criminal or immoral act. Revenge
seems to stress the idea of retaliation a bit more strongly and implies real hatred as its
motivation. [The Columbia Guide to Standard American English, 1993]


wreak (v.)

Old English wrecan avenge, originally to drive, drive out, punish (class V strong verb; past tense
wr&aelig;c, past participle wrecen), from Proto-Germanic *wrekan (cognates: Old Saxon wrekan, Old
Norse reka, Old Frisian wreka, Middle Dutch wreken to drive, push, compel, pursue, throw, Old High
German rehhan, German r&auml;chen to avenge, Gothic wrikan to persecute), from PIE root *wreg- to
push, shove, drive, track down (see urge (v.)). Meaning inflict or take vengeance, with on, is
recorded from late 15c.; that of inflict or cause (damage or destruction) is attested from 1817.
Compare wrack (v.). Related: Wreaked; wreaking.


vindicate (v.)

1620s, to avenge or revenge, from Latin vindicatus, past participle of vindicare to stake a claim;
to liberate; to act as avenger (see vindication). Meaning to clear from censure or doubt, by means
of demonstration is recorded from 1630s. Related: Vindicated, vindicating.


vengeance (n.)

c.1300, from Anglo-French vengeaunce, Old French vengeance, venjance revenge, retribution (12c.),
from vengier take revenge, from Latin vindicare assert a claim, claim as one's own; avenge, punish
(see vindicate).  Vengeance is mine, ... saith the Lord. Therefore if thine enemy hunger, feed him;
if he thirst, give him drink; for in so doing thou shalt heap coals of fire upon his head. [Paul to
the Romans, xii:19-20]


vindication (n.)

late 15c., act of avenging, revenge, from Old French vindicacion vengeance, revenge and directly
from Latin vindicationem (nominative vindicatio) act of claiming or avenging, noun of action from
past participle stem of vindicare lay claim to, assert; claim for freedom, set free; protect,
defend; avenge (related to vindicta revenge), probably from vim dicare to show authority, from vim,
accusative of vis force + root of dicere to say (see diction). Meaning justification by proof,
defense against censure is attested from 1640s.


revanchist (n.)

a German seeking to avenge Germany's defeat in World War I and recover lost territory, 1926 (on
model of French revanchiste, used in reference to those seeking to reverse the results of the defeat
of France by Prussia in 1871), from revanche revenge, requital, especially in reference to a
national policy seeking return of lost territory, from French revanche revenge, from Middle French
revenche, back-formation from revenchier (see revenge (v.)). Related: Revanchism (1954).


laugh (v.)

late 14c., from Old English (Anglian) hl&aelig;hhan, earlier hlihhan, from Proto-Germanic *klakhjan
(cognates: Old Norse hl&aelig;ja, Danish le, Old Frisian hlakkia, Old Saxon hlahhian, Middle Dutch
and Dutch lachen, Old High German hlahhan, German lachen, Gothic hlahjan), from PIE *kleg-, of
imitative origin (compare Latin cachinnare to laugh aloud, Sanskrit kakhati laughs, Old Church
Slavonic chochotati laugh, Lithuanian klageti to cackle, Greek kakhazein). Originally with a hard
-gh- sound, as in Scottish loch; the spelling remained after the pronunciation shifted to -f.    If
I coveted nowe to avenge the injuries that you have done me, I myght laughe in my slyve. [John Daus,
Sleidanes Commentaries, 1560]    Related: Laughed; laughing.


twit (v.)

to blame, reproach, taunt, upbraid, 1520s, twite, shortened form of Middle English atwite, from Old
English &aelig;twitan to blame, reproach, from &aelig;t at + witan to blame, from Proto-Germanic
*witanan (cognates: Old English wite, Old Saxon witi, Old Norse viti punishment, torture; Old High
German wizzi punishment, wizan to punish; Dutch verwijten, Old High German firwizan, German
verweisen to reproach, reprove, Gothic fraweitan to avenge), from PIE root *weid- to see (see
vision). For sense evolution, compare Latin animadvertere, literally to give heed to, observe, later
to chastise, censure, punish. Related: Twitted; twitting. As a noun meaning a taunt from 1520s.


