aversion (n.)

a turning away from, 1590s; figurative sense of mental attitude of repugnance is from 1650s, from
Middle French aversion and directly from Latin aversionem (nominative aversio), noun of action from
past participle stem of aversus turned away, backwards, behind, hostile, itself past participle of
avertere (see avert). Earlier in the literal sense of a turning away from (1590s). Aversion therapy
in psychology is from 1950.


bete noire (n.)

insufferable person, 1844, from French b&ecirc;te noire personal aversion, as an adjective, stupid,
foolish; literally the black beast.


sitophobia (n.)

morbid aversion to food (or certain foods), 1882, from Greek sitos wheat, corn, meal; food, of
unknown origin, + -phobia. Related: Sitophobe; sitophobic.


hubbub (n.)

1550s, whobub confused noise, generally believed to be of Irish origin, perhaps from Gaelic ub!,
expression of aversion or contempt, or Old Irish battle cry abu, from buide victory.


ladybug (n.)

1690s, from lady + bug (n.). The lady is the Virgin Mary (compare German cognate Marienk&auml;fer).
In Britain, now usually ladybird beetle (1704), through aversion to the word bug, which there has
overtones of sodomy.


fastidious (adj.)

mid-15c., full of pride, from Latin fastidiosus disdainful, squeamish, exacting, from fastidium
loathing, squeamishness, most likely from *fastu-taidiom, a compound of fastus contempt, arrogance
and taedium aversion, disgust. Early use in English was both in passive and active senses. Meaning
squeamish, over-nice emerged in English 1610s. Related: Fastidiously; fastidiousness.


abhor (v.)

mid-15c., from Latin abhorrere shrink back from, have an aversion for, shudder at, from ab- away
(see ab-) + horrere tremble at, shudder, literally to bristle, be shaggy, from PIE *ghers- start
out, stand out, rise to a point, bristle (see horror). Related: Abhorred; abhorring.


repel (v.)

early 15c., to drive away, remove, from Old French repeller or directly from Latin repellere to
drive back, from re- back (see re-) + pellere to drive, strike (see pulse (n.1)). Meaning to affect
(a person) with distaste or aversion is from 1817. Related: Repelled; repelling.


enmity (n.)

late 14c., from Old French enemisti&eacute; enmity, hostile act, aversion, from Vulgar Latin
*inimicitatem (nominative *inimicitas), from Latin inimicitia enmity, hostility, from inimicus enemy
(see enemy). Related: Enmities.


hydrophobia (n.)

late 14c., idroforbia, a symptom of rabies in man (sometimes used for the disease itself), from Late
Latin hydrophobia (Celsius, 50 C.E.), from Greek hydrophobos dreading water, from hydr-, stem of
hydros water (see water (n.1)) + phobos dread, fear (see phobia). So called because human sufferers
show aversion to water and have difficulty swallowing it. In Old English as w&aelig;terfyrhtness.


risk (n.)

1660s, risque, from French risque (16c.), from Italian risco, riscio (modern rischio), from riscare
run into danger, of uncertain origin. The anglicized spelling first recorded 1728. Spanish riesgo
and German Risiko are Italian loan-words. With run (v.) from 1660s. Risk aversion is recorded from
1942; risk factor from 1906; risk management from 1963; risk taker from 1892.


phobia (n.)

irrational fear, horror, aversion, 1786, perhaps on model of similar use in French, abstracted from
compounds in -phobia, from Greek -phobia, from phobos fear, panic fear, terror, outward show of
fear; object of fear or terror, originally flight (still the only sense in Homer), but it became the
common word for fear via the notion of panic, fright (compare phobein put to flight, frighten), from
PIE root *bhegw- to run (cognates: Lithuanian begu to flee; Old Church Slavonic begu flight, bezati
to flee, run; Old Norse bekkr a stream). Psychological sense attested by 1895.


