avert (v.)

c.1400, from Old French avertir (12c.), turn, direct; avert; make aware, from Vulgar Latin
*advertire, from Latin avertere to turn away, to drive away, from ab- from, away (see ab-) + vertere
to turn (see versus). Related: Averted; averting.


averse (adj.)

mid-15c., turned away in mind or feeling, from Old French avers and directly from Latin aversus
turned away, turned back, past participle of avertere (see avert). Originally and usually in English
in the mental sense, while avert is used in a physical sense.


deprecation (n.)

c.1500, prayer to avert evil, from Middle French depr&eacute;cation, from Latin deprecationem
(nominative deprecatio), from past participle stem of deprecari plead in excuse, avert by prayer,
literally to pray (something) away, from de- away (see de-) + precari pray (see pray). Sense of
disapproval is first attested 1610s.


amulet (n.)

mid-15c., amalettys, from Latin amuletum (Pliny) thing worn as a charm against spells, disease,
etc., of uncertain origin, perhaps related to amoliri to avert, to carry away, remove. Not recorded
again in English until c.1600; the 15c. use may be via French.


mephitic (adj.)

1620s, of poisonous smell, from Late Latin mephiticus, from Latin mephitis, mefitis noxious vapor
(also personified as a goddess believed to have the power to avert it).


forfend (v.)

also forefend, late 14c., to protect, prohibit; to avert, prevent, a hybrid from for- + fend, from
Latin defendere to ward off.


apotropaic (adj.)

1883, with -ic + Greek apotropaios averting evil, from apotrepein to turn away, avert, from apo-
off, away (see apo-) + trepein to turn (see trope).


aversion (n.)

a turning away from, 1590s; figurative sense of mental attitude of repugnance is from 1650s, from
Middle French aversion and directly from Latin aversionem (nominative aversio), noun of action from
past participle stem of aversus turned away, backwards, behind, hostile, itself past participle of
avertere (see avert). Earlier in the literal sense of a turning away from (1590s). Aversion therapy
in psychology is from 1950.


scare (v.)

1590s, alteration of Middle English skerren (c.1200), from Old Norse skirra to frighten; to shrink
from, shun; to prevent, avert, related to skjarr timid, shy, afraid of, of unknown origin. In
Scottish also skair, skar, and in dialectal English skeer, skear, which seems to preserve the older
pronunciation. To scare up procure, obtain is first recorded 1846, American English, from notion of
rousing game from cover. Related: Scared; scaring.


a- (2)

prefix meaning not, from Latin a-, short for ab away from (as in avert), or its cognate, Greek a-,
short for apo away from, from, both cognate with Sanskrit apa away from, Gothic af, Old English of
(see apo-).


apostrophe (n.)

mark indicating omitted letter, 1580s, from Middle French apostrophe, from Late Latin apostrophus,
from Greek apostrophos (prosoidia) (the accent of) turning away, thus, a mark showing where a letter
has been omitted, from apostrephein avert, turn away, from apo- from (see apo-) + strephein to turn
(see strophe).    In English, the mark often represents loss of -e- in -es, possessive ending. It
was being extended to all possessives, whether they ever had an -e- or not, by 18c. Greek also used
this word for a turning aside of an orator in speech to address some individual, a sense first
recorded in English 1530s.


