aviary (n.)

1570s, from Latin aviarium place in which birds are kept, neuter of aviarius of birds, from avis
bird, from PIE *awi- bird (cognates: Sanskrit vih, Avestan vish bird, Greek aietos eagle).


avian (adj.)

pertaining to birds, 1870, from Latin avis bird (see aviary) + -an.


aviation (n.)

1866, from French aviation, noun of action from stem of Latin avis bird (see aviary). Coined 1863 by
French aviation pioneer Guillaume Joseph Gabriel de La Landelle (1812-1886) in Aviation ou
Navigation a&eacute;rienne.


aviator (n.)

aircraft pilot, 1887, from French aviateur, from Latin avis (see aviary) + -ateur. Also used c.1891
in a sense of aircraft. Feminine form aviatrix is from 1927; earlier aviatrice (1910), aviatress
(1911).


aviculture (n.)

1876, from French aviculture, from Latin avis bird (see aviary) + Latin cultura cultivation (see
culture).


ocarina (n.)

1877, from Italian ocarina, diminutive of oca goose (so called for its shape), from Vulgar Latin
*auca, from Latin avicula small bird, diminutive of avis bird (see aviary).


rara avis (n.)

c.1600, peculiar person, from Latin rara avis, literally strange bird, from rara, fem. of rarus rare
(see rare (adj.1)) + avis bird (see aviary). Latin plural is rar&aelig; aves. Horace's peacock (a
Roman delicacy), Juvenal's black swan (Rara avis in terris, nigroque simillima cygno).


auspex (n.)

1590s, one who observes flights of birds for the purpose of taking omens, from Latin auspex
interpreter of omens given by birds, from PIE *awi-spek- observer of birds, from *awi- bird (see
aviary) + *spek- to see (see scope (n.1)). Compare Greek oionos bird of prey, also bird of omen,
omen, and ornis bird, which also could mean omen.


stable (n.)

early 13c., building or enclosure where horses or cows are kept, building for domestic animals, from
Old French stable, estable a stable, stall (Modern French &#233;table), also applied to cowsheds and
pigsties, from Latin stabulum a stall, fold, aviary, beehive, lowly cottage, brothel, etc.,
literally a standing place, from PIE *ste-dhlo-, suffixed form of root *sta- to stand (see stet).
Meaning collection of horses belonging to one stable is attested from 1570s; transferred sense of
group of fighters under same management is from 1897; that of group of prostitutes working for the
same employer is from 1937.  For what the grete Stiede  Is stole, thanne he taketh hiede,  And makth
the stable dore fast.  [John Gower, Confessio Amantis, 1390]


ostrich (n.)

early 13c., from Old French ostruce ostrich (Modern French autruche) and Medieval Latin ostrica,
ostrigius, all from Vulgar Latin avis struthio, from Latin avis bird (see aviary) + Late Latin
struthio ostrich, from Greek strouthion ostrich, from strouthos megale big sparrow, perhaps from PIE
*trozdo- thrush (see thrush (n.1)). The Greeks also knew the bird as strouthokamelos camel-sparrow,
for its long neck. Among its proverbial peculiarities are indiscriminate voracity (especially a
habit of swallowing iron and stone to aid digestion), want of regard for its eggs, and a tendency to
hide its head in the sand when pursued.Like the Austridge, who hiding her little head, supposeth her
great body obscured. [1623, recorded in OED]Ostriches do put their heads in the sand, but ostrich
farmers say they do this in search of something to eat.


