awfully (adv.)

c.1300, so as to inspire reverence, from awful + -ly (2). Meaning dreadfully, so as to strike one
with awe is recorded from late 14c. As a simple intensifier, very, exceedingly, recorded from
c.1830.


awful (adj.)

c.1300, agheful worthy of respect or fear, from aghe, an earlier form of awe (n.), + -ful. Replaced
Old English egefull. Weakened sense very bad is from 1809; weakened sense of exceedingly is by 1818.


godawful (adj.)

terrible, 1878, from God + awful. The God might be an intensifier or the whole might be from the
frequent God's awful (vengeance, judgment, etc.) in religious literature.


tremendous (adj.)

1630s, awful, dreadful, terrible, from Latin tremendus fearful, to be dreaded, terrible, literally
to be trembled at, gerundive form of tremere to tremble (see tremble (v.)). Hyperbolic or intensive
sense of extraordinarily great or good, immense is attested from 1812, paralleling semantic changes
in terrific, terrible, dreadful, awful, etc. Related: Tremendously.


dire (adj.)

1560s, from Latin dirus fearful, awful, boding ill, of unknown origin; perhaps from Oscan and
Umbrian and perhaps cognate with Greek deinos, from PIE root *dwei-.


unholy (adj.)

Old English unhalig, impious, profane, wicked, from un- (1) not + halig (see holy). Similar
formation in Middle Dutch onheilich, Old Norse uheilagr, Danish unhellig, Swedish ohelig. In
reference to actions, it is attested from late 14c. Colloquial sense of awful, dreadful is recorded
from 1842.


hideous (adj.)

c.1300, terrifying, horrible, dreadful, from Anglo-French hidous, Old French hideus, earlier hisdos
hideous, horrible, awful, frightening (11c.; Modern French hideux), from hisda horror, fear, perhaps
of Germanic origin; or else from Vulgar Latin *hispidosus, from Latin hispidus shaggy, bristly,
[b]ut this presents numerous difficulties [OED]. Meaning repulsive is late 14c.


terrible (adj.)

late 14c., causing terror, awe, or dread; frightful, from Old French terrible (12c.), from Latin
terribilis frightful, from terrere fill with fear, from PIE root *tres- to tremble (cognates:
Sanskrit trasati trembles, Avestan tarshta feared, revered, Greek tre&#235;in to tremble, Lithuanian
tri&#353;eti to tremble, Old Church Slavonic treso I shake, Middle Irish tarrach timid). Weakened
sense of very bad, awful is first attested 1590s.


acid (n.)

1690s, from acid (adj.). Slang meaning LSD-25 first recorded 1966 (see LSD).    When I was on acid I
would see things that looked like beams of light, and I would hear things that sounded an awful lot
like car horns. [Mitch Hedberg, 1968-2005, U.S. stand-up comic]   Acid rock (type played by or
listen to by people using LSD) is also from 1966; acid house dance music style is 1988, probably
from acid in the hallucinogenic sense + house dance club DJ music style.


twitterpated (adj.)

1942, apparently first attested in the Walt Disney movie Bambi (there also was a song by that name
but it was not in the studio release of the film), a past participle adjective formed from twitter
in the tremulous excitement noun sense (1670s) + pate (n.2) head (compare flutterpated, 1894).
Thumper: Why are they acting that way?   Friend Owl: Why, don't you know? They're twitterpated.
Flower, Bambi, Thumper: Twitterpated?   Friend Owl: Yes. Nearly everybody gets twitterpated in the
springtime. For example: You're walking along, minding your own business. You're looking neither to
the left, nor to the right, when all of a sudden you run smack into a pretty face. Woo-woo! You
begin to get weak in the knees. Your head's in a whirl. And then you feel light as a feather, and
before you know it, you're walking on air. And then you know what? You're knocked for a loop, and
you completely lose your head!   Thumper: Gosh, that's awful.


monster (n.)

early 14c., malformed animal or human, creature afflicted with a birth defect, from Old French
monstre, mostre monster, monstrosity (12c.), and directly from Latin monstrum divine omen, portent,
sign; abnormal shape; monster, monstrosity, figuratively repulsive character, object of dread, awful
deed, abomination, from root of monere warn (see monitor (n.)). Abnormal or prodigious animals were
regarded as signs or omens of impending evil. Extended by late 14c. to imaginary animals composed of
parts of creatures (centaur, griffin, etc.). Meaning animal of vast size is from 1520s; sense of
person of inhuman cruelty or wickedness is from 1550s. As an adjective, of extraordinary size, from
1837. In Old English, the monster Grendel was an agl&aelig;ca, a word related to agl&aelig;c
calamity, terror, distress, oppression.


deep (adj.)

Old English deop profound, awful, mysterious; serious, solemn; deepness, depth, deope (adv.), from
Proto-Germanic *deupaz (cognates: Old Saxon diop, Old Frisian diap, Dutch diep, Old High German
tiof, German tief, Old Norse djupr, Danish dyb, Swedish djup, Gothic diups deep), from PIE *dheub-
deep, hollow (cognates: Lithuanian dubus deep, hollow, Old Church Slavonic duno bottom, foundation,
Welsh dwfn deep, Old Irish domun world, via sense development from bottom to foundation to earth to
world).    Figurative senses were in Old English; extended 16c. to color, sound. Deep pocket wealth
is from 1951. To go off the deep end lose control of oneself is slang first recorded 1921, probably
in reference to the deep end of a swimming pool, where a person on the surface can no longer touch
bottom. When 3-D films seemed destined to be the next wave and the biggest thing to hit cinema since
talkies, they were known as deepies (1953).


chain (n.)

c.1300, from Old French chaeine chain (12c., Modern French cha&icirc;ne), from Latin catena chain
(source also of Spanish cadena, Italian catena), of unknown origin, perhaps from PIE root *kat- to
twist, twine (cognates: Latin cassis hunting net, snare).    Figurative use from c.1600. As a type
of ornament worn about the neck, from late 14c. Chain of stores is American English, 1846. Chain
gang is from 1834; chain reaction is from 1916 in physics, specific nuclear physics sense is from
1938; chain mail first recorded 1822, in Scott, from mail (n.2). Before that, mail alone sufficed.
Chain letter recorded from 1892; usually to raise money at first; decried from the start as a
nuisance.Nine out of every ten givers are reluctant and unwilling, and are coerced into giving
through the awful fear of breaking the chain, so that the spirit of charity is woefully absent. [St.
Nicholas magazine, vol. XXVI, April 1899] Chain smoker is attested from 1886, originally of Bismarck
(who smoked cigars), thus probably a loan-translation of German Kettenraucher. Chain-smoking is from
1930.


