awry (adv.)

late 14c., crooked, askew, from a- (1) on + wry (adj.).


tort (n.)

mid-13c., injury, wrong, from Old French tort wrong, injustice, crime (11c.), from Medieval Latin
tortum injustice, noun use of neuter of tortus wrung, twisted, past participle of Latin torquere
turn, turn awry, twist, wring, distort (see torque (n.)). Legal sense of breach of a duty, whereby
someone acquires a right of action for damages is first recorded 1580s.


gauche (adj.)

awkward, tactless, 1751 (Chesterfield), from French gauche left (15c., replacing Old French senestre
in that sense), originally awkward, awry, from Middle French gauchir turn aside, swerve, from Proto-
Germanic *wankjan (cognates: Old High German wankon, Old Norse vakka to stagger, totter), from PIE
*weng- to bend, curve (see wink (v.)).


wry (adj.)

1520s, distorted, somewhat twisted to one side, from obsolete verb wry to contort, to twist or turn,
from Old English wrigian to turn, bend, move, go, from Proto-Germanic *wrig- (cognates: Old Frisian
wrigia to bend, Middle Low German wrich turned, twisted), from PIE *wreik- to turn (cognates: Greek
rhoikos crooked, Lithuanian raisas paralysed), from root *wer- (3) to turn, bend (see versus). Of
words, thoughts, etc., from 1590s. The original sense is preserved in awry.


torque (n.)

rotating force, 1882, from Latin torquere to twist, turn, turn about, twist awry, distort, torture,
from PIE *torkw-eyo-, causative of *terkw- to twist (see thwart (adv.)). The word also is used
(since 1834) by antiquarians and others as a term for the twisted metal necklace worn anciently by
Gauls, Britons, Germans, etc., from Latin torques collar of twisted metal, from torquere. Earlier it
had been called in English torques (1690s). Torque-wrench is from 1941.


varus (n.)

foot deformity in which the feet are extroverted, so that the inner ankle rests on the ground, while
the sole of the foot is more or less turned outwards, 1800, from Latin varus bent, bent outwards,
turned awry, crooked, specifically with legs bent inward, knock-kneed, of uncertain origin.    If
the original meaning was 'with the legs opened', varus might be compared with vanus and vastus, and
reflect *wa-ro- 'going apart, letting go'. In any case, none of the other etymologies proposed seems
plausible. [de Vaan]    The use of classical varus and valgus, which denoted deformities of the
legs, in modern medicine to describe deformities of the feet, was criticized by learned writers (see
Edinburgh Medical and Surgical Journal, July 1838).


slim (adj.)

1650s, thin, slight, slender, from Dutch slim bad, sly, clever, from Middle Dutch slim bad, crooked,
from Proto-Germanic *slembaz oblique, crooked (cognates: Middle High German slimp slanting, awry,
German schlimm bad, cunning, unwell). In English 17c. also sometimes with a sense sly, cunning,
crafty. Related: Slimly; slimness. With obsolete extended adjectival forms Slimsy flimsy,
unsubstantial (1845); slimikin small and slender (1745). Slim Jim attested from 1887 in sense of
very thin person; from 1902 as a type of slender cigar; from 1975 as a brand of meat snack.


catawampus (adj.)

also catawampous, cattywampus, catiwampus, etc. (see Dictionary of American Slang for more),
American colloquial. First element perhaps from obsolete cater to set or move diagonally (see catty-
cornered); second element perhaps related to Scottish wampish to wriggle, twist, or swerve about. Or
perhaps simply the sort of jocular pseudo-classical formation popular in the slang of those times,
with the first element suggesting Greek kata-.    Earliest use seems to be in adverbial form,
catawampusly (1834), expressing no certain meaning but adding intensity to the action: utterly,
completely; with avidity, fiercely, eagerly. It appears as a noun from 1843, as a name for an
imaginary hobgoblin or fright, perhaps from influence of catamount. The adjective is attested from
the 1840s as an intensive, but this is only in British lampoons of American speech and might not be
authentic. It was used in the U.S. by 1864 in a sense of askew, awry, wrong and by 1873 (noted as a
peculiarity of North Carolina speech) as in a diagonal position, on a bias, crooked.


