axiomatic (adj.)

1797, from Greek axiomatikos, from axioma (genitive axiomatos); see axiom. Form axiomatical is
attested from 1580s.


axiom (n.)

late 15c., from Middle French axiome, from Latin axioma, from Greek axioma authority, literally that
which is thought worthy or fit, from axioun to think worthy, from axios worthy, worth, of like
value, weighing as much, from PIE adjective *ag-ty-o- weighty, from root *ag- to drive, draw, move
(see act (n.)).    Axioms in philosophy are not axioms until they are proved upon our pulses.
[Keats, letter, May 3, 1818]


maxim (n.)

precept, principle, early 15c., from Middle French maxime, from Late Latin maxima, shortened from
phrases such as maxima propositio, maxima sententarium axiom, literally greatest premise, greatest
among propositions (one which is general and absolute), from fem. of maximus greatest (see maximum).


principle (n.)

late 14c., origin, source, beginning; rule of conduct; axiom, basic assumption; elemental aspect of
a craft or discipline, from Anglo-French principle, Old French principe origin, cause, principle,
from Latin principium (plural principia) a beginning, commencement, origin, first part, in plural
foundation, elements, from princeps (see prince). Used absolutely for (good or moral) principle from
1650s.It is often easier to fight for principles than to live up to them. [Adlai Stevenson, speech,
New York City, Aug. 27, 1952]  Scientific sense of general law of nature is recorded from 1802. The
English -l- apparently is by analogy of participle, etc.


aphorism (n.)

1520s (especially in reference to the Aphorisms of Hippocrates), from Middle French aphorisme (14c.,
aufforisme), from Late Latin aphorismus, from Greek aphorismos definition, pithy sentence, from
aphorizein to mark off, divide, from apo- from (see apo-) + horizein to bound (see horizon).    An
aphorism is a short, pithy statement containing a truth of general import; an axiom is a statement
of self-evident truth; a theorem is a demonstrable proposition in science or mathematics; an epigram
is like an aphorism, but lacking in general import. Maxim and saying can be used as synonyms for
aphorism.


