babble (n.)

idle talk, c.1500, from babble (v.). In 16c., commonly in reduplicated form bibble-babble.


babble (v.)

mid-13c., babeln to prattle, chatter, akin to other Western European words for stammering and
prattling (cognates: Swedish babbla, Old French babillier) attested from the same era, some of which
probably were borrowed from others, but etymologists cannot now determine which were original.
Probably imitative of baby-talk, in any case (compare Latin babulus babbler, Greek barbaros non-
Greek-speaking). No direct connexion with Babel can be traced; though association with that may have
affected the senses [OED]. Meaning to repeat oneself incoherently, speak foolishly is attested from
c.1400. Related: Babbled; babbler; babbling; babblement.


blabber (v.)

mid-14c., to speak as an infant speaks, frequentative of blabben, of echoic origin (compare Old
Norse blabbra, Danish blabbre babble, German plappern to babble). Meaning to talk excessively is
from late 14c. Related: Blabbered; blabbering.


balalaika (n.)

stringed instrument with a triangular body, 1788, from Russian balalaika, said to be related to
balabolit' to chatter, babble, an imitative word.


bobbin (n.)

1520s, from French bobine, small instrument used in sewing or tapestry-making, perhaps from Latin
balbus (see babble (v.)) for the stuttering, stammering noise it made.


chat (v.)

mid-15c., talk idly, babble, short for chatter (v.). Meaning to converse familiarly is from 1550s.
Sense of flirt with, ingratiate oneself with (in later use often with up (adv.)) is from 1898.
Related: Chatted; chatting.


psychobabble (n.)

1976, from psycho- (representing psychology) + babble (n.). Earlier was psychologese (1961).


blatant (adj.)

1596, in blatant beast, coined by Edmund Spenser in The Faerie Queen to describe a thousand-tongued
monster representing slander; probably suggested by Latin blatire to babble. It entered general use
1650s, as noisy in an offensive and vulgar way; the sense of obvious, glaringly conspicuous is from
1889. Related: Blatantly.


squabble (n.)

c.1600, probably from a Scandinavian source and of imitative origin (compare dialectal Swedish
skvabbel a quarrel, a dispute, dialectal German schwabbeln to babble, prattle). The verb also is
from c.1600. Related: Squabbled; squabbling.


charlatan (n.)

1610s, from French charlatan mountebank, babbler (16c.), from Italian ciarlatano a quack, from
ciarlare to prate, babble, from ciarla chat, prattle, perhaps imitative of ducks' quacking. Related:
Charlatanism; charlatanical; charlatanry.


la-la

nonsense refrain in songs, probably from Old English la, a common exclamation; but la-la is
imitative of babbling speech in many languages (compare Greek lalage babble, prattle, Sanskrit
lalalla imitation of stammering Latin lallare to sing to sleep, lull, German lallen to stammer,
Lithuanian laluoti to stammer).


dada

1920, from French dada hobbyhorse, child's nonsense word, selected 1916 by Romanian poet Tristan
Tzara (1896-1963), leader of the movement, for its resemblance to meaningless babble.Freedom: DADA
DADA DADA, the howl of clashing colors, the intertwining of all contradictions, grotesqueries,
trivialities: LIFE. [T. Tzara, Dada Manifesto, 1918]  Related: Dadaist; Dadaism.


tattle (v.)

late 15c., to stammer, prattle, in Caxton's translation of Reynard the Fox, probably from Middle
Flemish tatelen to stutter, parallel to Middle Dutch, Middle Low German, East Frisian tateren to
chatter, babble, possibly of imitative origin. The meaning tell tales or secrets is first recorded
1580s. Sense influenced by tittle. Related: Tattled; tattling. As a noun from 1520s. Tattler, the
name of the famous periodical by Addison and Steele (1709-1711), means idle talker, a gossip.


babe (n.)

late 14c., short for baban (early 13c.), which probably is imitative of baby talk (see babble),
however in many languages the cognate word means old woman (compare Russian babushka grandmother,
from baba peasant woman).    Crist crid in cradil, moder, baba! [John Audelay, c.1426]  Now mostly
superseded by its diminutive form baby. Used figuratively for a childish person from 1520s. Meaning
attractive young woman is 1915, college slang. Babe in the woods is from 1795.


Barbary

c.1300, foreign lands (especially non-Christian lands), from Latin barbaria (see barbarian). Meaning
Saracens living in coastal North Africa is attested from 1590s, via French (Old French barbarie),
from Arabic Barbar, Berber, ancient Arabic name for the inhabitants of North Africa beyond Egypt.
Perhaps a native name, perhaps an Arabic word, from barbara to babble confusedly, but this might be
ultimately from Greek barbaria. The actual relations (if any) of the Arabic and Gr[eek] words cannot
be settled; but in European langs. barbaria, Barbarie, Barbary, have from the first been treated as
identical with L. barbaria, Byzantine Gr[eek] barbaria land of barbarians [OED].


