bachelor (n.)

c.1300, young man; also youthful knight, novice in arms, from Old French bacheler, bachelor,
bachelier (11c.) knight bachelor, a young squire in training for knighthood, also young man;
unmarried man, and as a university title, of uncertain origin, perhaps from Medieval Latin
baccalarius vassal farmer, adult serf without a landholding, one who helps or tends a baccalaria
field or land in the lord's demesne (according to old French sources, perhaps from an alteration of
vacca a cow and originally grazing land [Kitchin]). Or from Latin baculum a stick, because the
squire would practice with a staff, not a sword. Perhaps several independent words have become
confused in form [Century Dictionary]. Meaning in English expanded early 14c. to young unmarried
man, late 14c. to one who has taken the lowest degree in a university. Bachelor party as a pre-
wedding ritual is from 1882.


bachelorette (n.)

1935, American English, from bachelor with French ending -ette. Replaced earlier bachelor-girl
(1895). Middle French had bachelette young girl; Modern French bacheli&egrave;re is found only in
the student sense.


baccalaureate (n.)

1620s, university degree of a bachelor, from Modern Latin baccalaureatus, from baccalaureus student
with the first degree, alteration of Medieval Latin baccalarius one who has attained the lowest
degree in a university, advanced student lecturing under his master's supervision but not yet having
personal license (altered by folk etymology or word-play, as if from bacca lauri laurel berry,
laurels being awarded for academic success).    The Medieval Latin word is of uncertain origin;
perhaps ultimately from Latin baculum staff (see bacillus), which the young student might carry. Or
it might be a re-Latinization of bachelor in its academic sense.     In modern U.S. usage,
baccalaureate usually is short for baccalaureate sermon (1864), a religious farewell address to a
graduating class at an American college, from the adjectival sense pertaining to the university
degree of bachelor.


toy (v.)

deal carelessly (with), trifle, 1520s, from toy (n.) in its older sense.    If he be merie and toy
with any,  His wife will frowne, and words geve manye.  [Song of the Bachelor's Life, 16c.]
Related: Toyed; toying.


bach (n.)

1845, American English, clipped form of bachelor (n.). Also in colloquial American English use as a
verb (1870) meaning to live as an unmarried man, especially to do one's own cooking and cleaning.
Related: Bached; baching.


chum (n.1)

friend, 1680s, originally university slang for roommate, from alternative spelling of cham, short
for chamber(mate); typical of the late-17c. fondness for clipped words. Among derived forms used
19c. were chumship; chummery shared bachelor quarters, chummage system of quartering more than one
to a room.


benedict (n.)

newly married man (especially one who had seemed a confirmed bachelor), 1821, from the character
Benedick in Much Ado About Nothing (1599). The name is from Late Latin Benedictus, literally
blessed, from Latin benedicte bless (you) (see benediction). This also produced the proper name
Bennet; hence also benet (late 14c.), the third of the four lesser orders of the Roman Catholic
Church, one of whose functions was to exorcize spirits.


-er (1)

English agent noun ending, corresponding to Latin -or. In native words it represents Old English
-ere (Old Northumbrian also -are) man who has to do with, from Proto-Germanic *-ari (cognates:
German -er, Swedish -are, Danish -ere), from Proto-Germanic *-arjoz. Some believe this root is
identical with, and perhaps a borrowing of, Latin -arius.    In words of Latin origin, verbs derived
from past participle stems of Latin ones (including most verbs in -ate) usually take the Latin
ending -or, as do Latin verbs that passed through French (such as governor), but there are many
exceptions (eraser, laborer, promoter, deserter, sailor, bachelor), some of which were conformed
from Latin to English in late Middle English.    The use of -or and -ee in legal language (such as
lessor/lessee) to distinguish actors and recipients of action has given the -or ending a tinge of
professionalism, and this makes it useful in doubling words that have both a professional and non-
professional sense (such as advisor/adviser, conductor/conducter, incubator/incubater,
elevator/elevater).


art (n.)

early 13c., skill as a result of learning or practice, from Old French art (10c.), from Latin artem
(nominative ars) work of art; practical skill; a business, craft, from PIE *ar-ti- (cognates:
Sanskrit rtih manner, mode; Greek arti just, artios complete, suitable, artizein to prepare; Latin
artus joint; Armenian arnam make; German art manner, mode), from root *ar- fit together, join (see
arm (n.1)).    In Middle English usually with a sense of skill in scholarship and learning (c.1300),
especially in the seven sciences, or liberal arts. This sense remains in Bachelor of Arts, etc.
Meaning human workmanship (as opposed to nature) is from late 14c. Sense of cunning and trickery
first attested c.1600. Meaning skill in creative arts is first recorded 1610s; especially of
painting, sculpture, etc., from 1660s. Broader sense of the word remains in artless.   Fine arts,
those which appeal to the mind and the imagination first recorded 1767. Expression art for art's
sake (1824) translates French l'art pour l'art. First record of art critic is from 1847. Arts and
crafts decorative design and handcraft first attested in the Arts and Crafts Exhibition Society,
founded in London, 1888.    Supreme art is a traditional statement of certain heroic and religious
truths, passed on from age to age, modified by individual genius, but never abandoned. The revolt of
individualism came because the tradition had become degraded, or rather because a spurious copy had
been accepted in its stead. [William Butler Yeats]


