badger (v.)

1790, from badger (n.), based on the behavior of the dogs in the medieval sport of badger-baiting,
still practiced in 18c. England. Related: Badgered; badgering.


badger (n.)

1520s, perhaps from bage badge (see badge) + -ard one who carries some action or possesses some
quality, suffix related to Middle High German -hart bold (see -ard). If so, the central notion is
the badge-like white blaze on the animal's forehead (as in French blaireau badger, from Old French
blarel, from bler marked with a white spot; also obsolete Middle English bauson badger, from Old
French bauzan, literally black-and-white spotted). But blaze (n.2) was the usual word for this.
An Old English name for the creature was the Celtic borrowing brock; also gr&aelig;g (Middle English
grei, grey). In American English, the nickname of inhabitants or natives of Wisconsin (1833).


altruism (n .)

1853, unselfishness, opposite of egoism, from French altruisme, coined or popularized 1830 by French
philosopher Auguste Comte (1798-1857), from autrui, from Old French altrui, of or to others, from
Latin alteri, dative of alter other (see alter). Apparently suggested to Comte by French legal
phrase l'autrui, or in full, le bien, le droit d'autrui. The -l- is perhaps a reinsertion from the
Latin word.    There is a fable that when the badger had been stung all over by bees, a bear
consoled him by a rhapsodic account of how he himself had just breakfasted on their honey. The
badger replied peevishly, The stings are in my flesh, and the sweetness is on your muzzle. The bear,
it is said, was surprised at the badger's want of altruism. [George Eliot, Theophrastus Such, 1879]


dachshund (n.)

1881, from German Dachshund (15c.), from Dachs (Old High German dahs, 11c.) badger (perhaps
literally builder; see texture) + Hund dog (see hound (n.)). Probably so called because the dogs
were used in badger hunts, their long, thin bodies bred to burrow into setts. French taisson,
Spanish texon, tejon, Italian tasso are Germanic loan words.


brock (n.)

Old English brocc badger, a borrowing from Celtic (compare Old Irish brocc, Welsh broch). After
c.1400, often with the adjective stinking, and meaning a low, dirty fellow.


wolfsbane (n.)

aconite (especially Aconitum lycoctonum), a somewhat poisonous plant, 1540s, from wolf + bane; a
translation of Latin lycoctonum, from Greek lykotonon, from lykos wolf + base of kteinein to kill.
Also known dialectally as badger's bane, hare's bane, bear's bane.


texture (n.)

early 15c., network, structure, from Middle French texture and directly from Latin textura web,
texture, structure, from stem of texere to weave, from PIE root *teks- to weave, to fabricate, to
make; make wicker or wattle framework (cognates: Sanskrit taksati he fashions, constructs, taksan
carpenter; Avestan ta&#353;a ax, hatchet, thwax&#353;- be busy; Old Persian tax&#353;- be active;
Latin tela web, net, warp of a fabric; Greek tekton carpenter, tekhne art; Old Church Slavonic tesla
ax, hatchet; Lithuanian tasau to carve; Old Irish tal cooper's ax; Old High German dahs, German
Dachs badger, literally builder; Hittite taksh- to join, unite, build). Meaning structural character
is recorded from 1650s. Related: Textural.


set (n.2)

act of setting; condition of being set (of a heavenly body), mid-14c., from set (v.) or its
identical past participle. Many disparate senses collect under this word because of the far-flung
meanings assigned to the verb:   Action of hardening, 1837; also manner or position in which
something is set (1530s), hence general movement, direction, tendency (1560s); build, form (1610s),
hence bearing, carriage (1855); action of fixing the hair in a particular style (1933).    Something
that has been set (1510s), hence the use in tennis (1570s) and the theatrical meaning scenery for an
individual scene in a play, etc., recorded from 1859. Other meanings OED groups under miscellaneous
technical senses include piece of electrical apparatus (1891, first in telegraphy); burrow of a
badger (1898). Old English had set seat, in plural camp; stable, but OED finds it doubtful whether
this survived beyond OE. Compare set (n.1).   Set (n.1) and set (n.2) are not always distinguished
in dictionaries; OED has them as two entries, Century Dictionary as one. The difference of opinion
seems to be whether the set meaning group, grouping (here (n.2)) is a borrowing of the unrelated
French word that sounds like the native English one, or a borrowing of the sense only, which was
absorbed into the English word.


coney (n.)

c.1200, from Anglo-French conis, plural of conil long-eared rabbit (Lepus cunicula) from Latin
cuniculus (source of Spanish conejo, Portuguese coelho, Italian coneglio), the small, Spanish
variant of the Italian hare (Latin lepus), the word perhaps from Iberian Celtic (classical writers
say it is Spanish).   Rabbit arose 14c. to mean the young of the species, but gradually pushed out
the older word 19c., after British slang picked up coney as a punning synonym for cunny cunt
(compare connyfogle to deceive in order to win a woman's sexual favors). The word was in the King
James Bible [Prov. xxx:26, etc.], however, so it couldn't be entirely dropped, and the solution was
to change the pronunciation of the original short vowel (rhyming with honey, money) to rhyme with
boney. In the Old Testament, the word translates Hebrew shaphan rock-badger. Rabbits not being
native to northern Europe, there was no Germanic or Celtic word for them.


