baited (adj.)

c.1600, furnished with bait, past participle adjective from bait (v.2). Hence, in a figurative
sense, exciting, alluring (1650s). For bated breath see bate (v.1).


bait (v.2)

to put food on a hook or in a trap, c.1300, probably from bait (n.). Related: Baited; baiting.


bait (n.)

food put on a hook or trap to lure prey, c.1300, from Old Norse beita food, related to Old Norse
beit pasture, Old English bat food, literally to cause to bite (see bait (v.)). Figurative sense
anything used as a lure is from c.1400.


bait (v.1)

to torment or goad (someone unable to escape, and to take pleasure in it), c.1300, beyten, a
figurative use from the literal sense of to set dogs on, from the medieval entertainment of setting
dogs on some ferocious animal to bite and worry it (the literal use is attested from c.1300); from
Old Norse beita to cause to bite, from Proto-Germanic *baitan (cognates: Old English b&aelig;tan to
cause to bite, Old High German beizzen to bait, Middle High German beiz hunting, German beizen to
hawk, to cauterize, etch), causative of *bitan (see bite (v.)); the causative word forked into the
two meanings of harass and food offered. Related: Baited; baiting.


jailbait (n.)

also jail bait, jail-bait, girl under the legal age of consent, 1930, from jail (n.) + bait (n.).


lure (n.)

early 14c., something which allures or entices, an attraction (a figurative use), also bait for
recalling hawks, from Anglo-French lure, Old French loirre device used to recall hawks, lure, from
Frankish *lo&thorn;r or some other Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic *lothran to call (cognates:
Middle High German luoder, Middle Low German loder lure, bait, German Luder lure, deceit, bait; also
Old English la&thorn;ian to call, invite, German laden).    Originally a bunch of feathers on a long
cord, from which the hawk is fed during its training. Used of means of alluring other animals
(especially fish) from c.1700. Technically, bait is something the animal can eat; lure is a more
general term. Also in 15c. a collective word for a group of young women.


abet (v.)

late 14c. (implied in abetting), from Old French abeter to bait, to harass with dogs, literally to
cause to bite, from a- to (see ad-) + beter to bait, from a Germanic source, perhaps Low Franconian
betan incite, or Old Norse beita cause to bite, from Proto-Germanic *baitjan, from PIE root *bheid-
to split (see fissure). Related: Abetted; abetting.


chum (n.2)

fish bait, 1857, perhaps from Scottish chum food.


gudgeon (n.1)

small freshwater fish, early 15c., from Middle French goujon, from Old French gojon (14c.), from
Latin gobionem (nominative gobio), alteration of gobius, from Greek kobios, a kind of fish, of
unknown origin. The figurative sense of a credulous person (one who will bite at bait) is from
1580s.


bet

1590s, as both a verb and noun, in the argot of petty criminals, of unknown origin; probably a
shortening of abet or else from obsolete beet to make good, from Old English b&aelig;tan make
better, arouse, stimulate, from Proto-Germanic *baitjan, in which case the verb would be the
original. The original notion is perhaps to improve a contest by wagering on it, or it is from the
bait sense in abet. Used since 1852 in various American English slang assertions (compare you bet be
assured, 1857). Related: Betting.


boat (n.)

Old English bat boat, ship, vessel, from Proto-Germanic *bait- (cognates: Old Norse batr, Dutch
boot, German Boot), possibly from PIE root *bheid- to split (see fissure), with the sense of making
a boat by hollowing out a tree trunk; or it may be an extension of the name for some part of a ship.
French bateau boat is from Old English or Norse. Spanish batel, Italian battello, Medieval Latin
batellus likewise probably are from Germanic.


earthworm (n.)

1590s, from earth + worm (n.). In this sense Old English had eor&eth;mata, also regnwyrm, literally
rain-worm. Old English also had angel-tw&aelig;cce earthworm used as bait (with second element from
root of twitch), sometimes used in medieval times as a medicament:    For the blake Jawndes take
angylltwacches, er &thorn;ei go in to the erth in the mornynge and fry hem. Take ix or x small
angyltwacches, and bray hem, and giff the syke to drynke fastynge, with stale ale, but loke
&thorn;at thei bene grounden so small that &thorn;e syke may nat se, ne witt what it is, for
lothynge. [Book of Medical Recipes in Medical Society of London Library, c.1450]


troll (v.)

late 14c., to go about, stroll, later (early 15c.) roll from side to side, trundle, probably from
Old French troller, a hunting term, wander, to go in quest of game without purpose (Modern French
tr&#244;ler), from a Germanic source (compare Old High German trollen to walk with short steps),
from Proto-Germanic *truzlanan.    Sense of sing in a full, rolling voice (first attested 1570s) and
that of fish with a moving line (c.1600) both are extended technical uses from the general sense of
roll, trundle, the former from sing in the manner of a catch or round, the latter perhaps confused
with trail or trawl. Figurative sense of to lure on as with a moving bait, entice, allure is from
1560s. Meaning to cruise in search of sexual encounters is recorded from 1967, originally in
homosexual slang.


