balk (v.)

late 14c., to leave an unplowed ridge when plowing, from balk (n.). Extended meaning to omit,
intentionally neglect is mid-15c. Most modern senses are figurative, from the notion of a balk in
the fields as a hindrance or obstruction: sense of stop short (as a horse confronted with an
obstacle) is late 15c.; that of to refuse is 1580s. Related: Balked; balking.


balk (n.)

Old English balca ridge, bank, from or influenced by Old Norse balkr ridge of land, especially
between two plowed furrows, both from Proto-Germanic *balkon- (cognates: Old Saxon balko, Danish
bjelke, Old Frisian balka, Old High German balcho, German Balken beam, rafter), from PIE *bhelg-
beam, plank (cognates: Latin fulcire to prop up, support, fulcrum bedpost; Lithuanian balziena
cross-bar; and possibly Greek phalanx trunk, log, line of battle). Modern senses are figurative,
representing the balk as a hindrance or obstruction (see balk (v.)). Baseball sense is first
attested 1845.


balky (adj.)

1847, from balk (n.) + -y (2). Related: Balkily; balkiness.


bulkhead (n.)

late 15c., with head (n.); the first element perhaps from bulk framework projecting in the front of
a shop (1580s), which is perhaps from Old Norse bolkr beam, balk (see balk (n.)).


debauch (v.)

1590s, from Middle French d&eacute;baucher entice from work or duty, from Old French desbaucher to
lead astray, supposedly literally to trim (wood) to make a beam (from bauch beam, from Frankish balk
or some other Germanic source akin to English balk (n.)). A sense of shaving something away,
perhaps, but the root is also said to be a word meaning workshop, which gets toward the notion of to
lure someone off the job; either way the sense evolution is unclear.


baulk

alternative spelling of balk, especially in billiards, in reference to a bad shot.


phalanx (n.)

1550s, line of battle in close ranks, from Latin phalanx compact body of heavily armed men in battle
array, or directly from Greek phalanx (genitive phalangos) line of battle, battle array, also finger
or toe bone, originally round piece of wood, trunk, log, of unknown origin. Perhaps from PIE root
*bhelg- plank, beam (source of Old English balca balk; see balk (n.)). The Macedonian phalanx
consisted of 50 close files of 16 men each. In anatomy, originally the whole row of finger joints,
which fit together like infantry in close order. Figurative sense of number of persons banded
together in a common cause is attested from 1600 (compare Spanish Falangist, member of a fascist
organization founded in 1933).


bilk (v.)

1650s, from or along with the noun (1630s), first used as a cribbage term; as a verb, to spoil
(someone's) score. Origin obscure, it was believed in 17c. to be a word signifying nothing; perhaps
it s a thinned form of balk to hinder. Meaning to defraud is first recorded 1670s. Related: Bilked;
bilking.


fulcrum (n.)

1670s, a prop, a support (on which a lever turns), from Latin fulcrum bedpost, from fulcire to prop
up, support (see balk).


balcony (n.)

1610s, from Italian balcone, from balco scaffold, from a Germanic source (perhaps Langobardic
*balko- beam, cognate with Old English balca beam, ridge; see balk (n.)) + Italian augmentative
suffix -one. Till c.1825, regularly accented on the second syllable.


block (n.)

solid piece, c.1300, from Old French bloc log, block of wood (13c.), via Middle Dutch bloc trunk of
a tree or Old High German bloh, from a common Germanic source, from PIE *bhlugo-, from *bhelg- a
thick plank, beam (see balk).    Meaning mould for a hat is from 1570s. Slang sense of head is from
1630s. Extended sense of obstruction is first recorded 1640s. In cricket from 1825; in U.S. football
from 1912. The meaning in city block is 1796, from the notion of a compact mass of buildings; slang
meaning fashionable promenade is 1869.    BLOCK. A term applied in America to a square mass of
houses included between four streets. It is a very useful one. [Bartlett]


