banality (n.)

1861, triteness, from French banalit&eacute; banality, commonplace, from banal (see banal).


banal (adj.)

trite, commonplace, 1840, from French banal, belonging to a manor, common, hackneyed, commonplace,
from Old French banel communal (13c.), from ban decree; legal control; announcement; authorization;
payment for use of a communal oven, mill, etc. (see ban (v.)). The modern sense evolved from the
word's use in designating things like ovens or mills that belonged to feudal serfs, or else
compulsory military service; in either case it was generalized in French through open to everyone to
commonplace, ordinary, to trite, petty.


doggerel

late 14c. (adj.); 1630s (n.), Any rhyming verse in which the meter is forced into metronomic
regularity by the stressing of normally unstressed syllables and in which rhyme is forced or banal
[Miller Williams, Patterns of Poetry]. probably from dog (n.) + pejorative suffix -rel and applied
to bad poetry perhaps with a suggestion of puppyish clumsiness, or being fit only for dogs. Attested
as a surname from mid-13c., but the sense is not evident.


schmaltz (n.)

banal or excessive sentimentalism, 1935, from Yiddish shmalts, literally melted fat, from Middle
High German smalz, from Old High German smalz animal fat, related to smelzan to melt (see smelt
(v.)). Modern German Schmalz fat, grease has the same figurative meaning. First mentioned in English
as a derogatory term used to describe straight jazz [Vanity Fair, Nov. 1935].


ban (v.)

Old English bannan to summon, command, proclaim, from Proto-Germanic *bannan proclaim, command,
forbid (cognates: Old High German bannan to command or forbid under threat of punishment, German
bannen banish, expel, curse), originally to speak publicly, from PIE root *bha- (2) to speak
(cognates: Old Irish bann law, Armenian ban word; see fame (n.)).     Main modern sense of to
prohibit (late 14c.) is from Old Norse cognate banna to curse, prohibit, and probably in part from
Old French ban, which meant outlawry, banishment, among other things (see banal) and was a borrowing
from Germanic. The sense evolution in Germanic was from speak to proclaim a threat to (in Norse,
German, etc.) curse.    The Germanic root, borrowed in Latin and French, has been productive:
banish, bandit, contraband, etc. Related: Banned; banning. Banned in Boston dates from 1920s, in
allusion to the excessive zeal and power of that city's Watch and Ward Society.


