banditry (n.)

1861, from bandit + -ry.


bandit (n.)

1590s, from Italian bandito (plural banditi) outlaw, past participle of bandire proscribe, banish,
from Vulgar Latin *bannire to proclaim, proscribe, from Proto-Germanic *bann (see ban (v.)).
*Bannire (or its Frankish cognate *bannjan) in Old French became banir-, which, with lengthened
stem, became English banish.


banish (v.)

late 14c., banischen, from banniss-, extended stem of Old French banir announce, proclaim; levy;
forbid; banish, proclaim an outlaw, from a Germanic source (perhaps Frankish *bannjan to order or
prohibit under penalty), or from Vulgar Latin cognate *bannire (see bandit). Related: Banished;
banishing.


larceny (n.)

late 15c., with -y (3) + Anglo-French larcin (late 13c.), from Old French larrecin, larcin theft,
robbery (11c.), from Latin latrocinium robbery, freebooting, highway-robbery, piracy, from latro
robber, bandit, also hireling, mercenary, ultimately from a Greek source akin to latron pay, hire,
wages, from a suffixed form of PIE root *le- (1) to get.


one (n.)

c.1200, from Old English an (adjective, pronoun, noun) one, from Proto-Germanic *ainaz (cognates:
Old Norse einn, Danish een, Old Frisian an, Dutch een, German ein, Gothic ains), from PIE *oi-no-
one, unique (cognates: Greek oinos ace (on dice); Latin unus one; Old Persian aivam; Old Church
Slavonic -inu, ino-; Lithuanian vienas; Old Irish oin; Breton un one).    Originally pronounced as
it still is in only, and in dialectal good 'un, young 'un, etc.; the now-standard pronunciation wun
began c.14c. in southwest and west England (Tyndale, a Gloucester man, spells it won in his Bible
translation), and it began to be general 18c. Use as indefinite pronoun influenced by unrelated
French on and Latin homo.   One and only sweetheart is from 1906. One of those things unpredictable
occurrence is from 1934. Slang one-arm bandit a type of slot machine is recorded by 1938. One-night
stand is 1880 in performance sense; 1963 in sexual sense. One of the boys ordinary amiable fellow is
from 1893. One-track mind is from 1927. Drinking expression one for the road is from 1950 (as a song
title).


ban (v.)

Old English bannan to summon, command, proclaim, from Proto-Germanic *bannan proclaim, command,
forbid (cognates: Old High German bannan to command or forbid under threat of punishment, German
bannen banish, expel, curse), originally to speak publicly, from PIE root *bha- (2) to speak
(cognates: Old Irish bann law, Armenian ban word; see fame (n.)).     Main modern sense of to
prohibit (late 14c.) is from Old Norse cognate banna to curse, prohibit, and probably in part from
Old French ban, which meant outlawry, banishment, among other things (see banal) and was a borrowing
from Germanic. The sense evolution in Germanic was from speak to proclaim a threat to (in Norse,
German, etc.) curse.    The Germanic root, borrowed in Latin and French, has been productive:
banish, bandit, contraband, etc. Related: Banned; banning. Banned in Boston dates from 1920s, in
allusion to the excessive zeal and power of that city's Watch and Ward Society.


