bane (n.)

Old English bana killer, slayer, murderer; the devil, from Proto-Germanic *banon, cognate with
*banja- wound (cognates: Old Frisian bona murderer, Old Norse bani, Old High German bana murder, Old
English benn wound, Gothic banja stroke, wound), from PIE root *gwhen- to strike, kill, wound
(cognates: Avestan banta ill).  Modern sense of that which causes ruin or woe is from 1570s.


wolfsbane (n.)

aconite (especially Aconitum lycoctonum), a somewhat poisonous plant, 1540s, from wolf + bane; a
translation of Latin lycoctonum, from Greek lykotonon, from lykos wolf + base of kteinein to kill.
Also known dialectally as badger's bane, hare's bane, bear's bane.


autobahn (n.)

1937, German, from auto motor car, automobile + bahn path, road, from Middle High German ban, bane
way, road, literally strike (as a swath cut through), from PIE *gwhen- to strike, kill (see bane).


Ate

Greek goddess of infatuation and evil, from ate infatuation, bane, ruin, mischief, of uncertain
origin.


Ares

Greek god of war, identified by Romans with their Mars; literally injurer, destroyer, from are bane,
ruin, perhaps cognate with Sanskrit irasya ill-will (see ire).


ratsbane (n.)

rat poison, arsenic, 1520s; see rat (n.) + bane.


pest (n.)

1550s (in imprecations, a pest upon ____, etc.), plague, pestilence, from Middle French peste
(1530s), from Latin pestis deadly contagious disease; a curse, bane, of uncertain origin. Meaning
noxious or troublesome person or thing first recorded c.1600.


aconite (n.)

poisonous plant (also known as monkshood and wolf's bane), 1570s, from French aconit, from Latin
aconitum, from Greek akoniton, of unknown origin.


mail-order (adj.)

1875, from mail (n.1) + order. Before television and the Internet, the bane of retailers and shop-
owners.    The origin, foundation and principle of mail order trading is universally recognized as
wrong. It was conceived in iniquity and brought forth in despair as the world's greatest destructive
medium. Mail Order Trading was born in the brain of knaves and thieves who fired their building for
insurance profits, then sold the salvaged and damaged stock to the unsuspecting sons of man in
distant territory. [Thomas J. Sullivan, Merchants and Manufacturers on Trial, Chicago, 1914]


defend (v.)

mid-13c., from Old French defendre (12c.) defend, resist, and directly from Latin defendere ward
off, protect, guard, allege in defense, from de- from, away (see de-) + -fendere to strike, push,
from PIE root *gwhen- to strike, kill (see bane). In the Mercian hymns, Latin defendet is glossed by
Old English gescilde&eth;. Related: Defended; defending.


gonfalon

1590s, variant of Middle English gonfanon (c.1300), from Old French gonfanon knight's pennon (12c.),
from Old High German guntfano battle flag, from Proto-Germanic *gunthja- war, from PIE *gwhen- to
strike, kill (see bane) + *fano banner (compare Gothic fana cloth). Cognate with Old English
gu&thorn;fana, Old Norse gunnfani. Change of -n- to -l- by dissimilation.


revenue (n.)

early 15c., income from property or possessions, from Middle French revenue, in Old French, a
return, noun use of fem. past participle of revenir come back (10c.), from Latin revenire return,
come back, from re- back (see re-) + venire come (see venue). Meaning public income is first
recorded 1680s; revenue sharing popularized from 1971. Revenuer U.S. Department of Revenue agent,
the bane of Appalachian moonshiners, first attested 1880.


bezoar (n.)

late 15c., ultimately from Arabic bazahr, from Persian pad-zahr counter-poison, from pad protecting,
guardian, master (from Iranian *patar-, source also of Avestan patar-, from PIE *pa-tor-, from root
*pa- to protect, feed; see food) + zahr poison (from Old Iranian *jathra, from PIE *gwhn-tro-, from
root *gwhen- to strike, kill; see bane). Originally antidote, later specifically in reference to a
concoction from solid matter found in the stomachs and intestines of ruminants, which was held to
have antidotal qualities (1570s).


antimony (n.)

brittle metallic element, early 15c., from Old French antimoine and directly from Medieval Latin
antimonium, an alchemist's term (used 11c. by Constantinus Africanus), origin obscure, probably a
Latinization of Greek stimmi powdered antimony, black antimony (a cosmetic used to paint the
eyelids), from some Arabic word (such as al 'othmud), unless the Arabic word is from the Greek or
the Latin is from Arabic; probably ultimately from Egyptian stm powdered antimony. In French folk
etymology, anti-moine monk's bane (from moine).    As the name of a pure element, it is attested in
English from 1788. Its chemical symbol Sb is for Stibium, the Latin name for black antimony, which
word was used also in English for black antimony.


gun (n.)

mid-14c., gunne an engine of war that throws rocks, arrows or other missiles, probably a shortening
of woman's name Gunilda, found in Middle English gonnilde cannon and in an Anglo-Latin reference to
a specific gun from a 1330 munitions inventory of Windsor Castle (...una magna balista de cornu quae
Domina Gunilda ...), from Old Norse Gunnhildr, woman's name, from gunnr + hildr, both meaning war,
battle. First element from PIE *gwhen- to strike, kill (see bane); for second, see Hilda.    The
identification of women with powerful weapons is common historically (such as Big Bertha, Brown
Bess, Mons Meg, etc.); meaning shifted with technology, from cannons to firearms as they developed
15c. Great guns (cannon, etc.) distinguished from small guns (such as muskets) from c.1400. Applied
to pistols and revolvers after 1744. Meaning thief, rascal is from 1858. For son of a gun, see son.
To jump the gun (1912, American English) is from track and field. Guns a woman's breasts (especially
if prominent) attested by 2006.


