bank (n.1)

financial institution, late 15c., from either Old Italian banca or Middle French banque (itself from
the Italian word), both meaning table (the notion is of the moneylender's exchange table), from a
Germanic source (compare Old High German bank bench); see bank (n.2).   Bank holiday is from 1871,
though the tradition is as old as the Bank of England. To cry all the way to the bank was coined
1956 by flamboyant pianist Liberace, after a Madison Square Garden concert that was packed with
patrons but panned by critics.


bank (v.)

to act as a banker, 1727, from bank (n.1). As to deposit in a bank from 1833. Figurative sense of to
rely on (i.e. to put money on) is from 1884, U.S. colloquial. Meaning to ascend, as of an incline,
is from 1892. In aeronautics, from 1911. Related: Banked; banking.


banker (n.)

keeper of a bank, 1530s, agent noun formed from bank (n.1), possibly modeled on French banquier
(16c.).


bankroll (n.)

roll of bank notes, 1887, from bank (n.1) + roll (n.). The verb is attested from 1928. Related:
Bankrolled; bankrolling.


banking (n.)

business of a banker, 1735, verbal noun from bank (v).


bank (n.2)

earthen incline, edge of a river, c.1200, probably in Old English but not attested in surviving
documents, from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse banki, Old Danish banke sandbank, from
Proto-Germanic *bangkon slope, cognate with *bankiz shelf (see bench (n.)).


bankrupt (adj.)

1560s, from Italian banca rotta, literally a broken bench,  from banca moneylender's shop, literally
bench (see bank (n.1)) + rotta broken, defeated, interrupted from (and remodeled on) Latin rupta,
fem. past participle of rumpere to break (see rupture (n.)). [S]o called from the habit of breaking
the bench of bankrupts [Klein]. Earlier in English as a noun, bankrupt person (1530s).


World Bank (n.)

1930, originally of the Bank for International Settlements, set up in Basel by the League of
Nations. The modern World Bank was created in 1944.


embankment (n.)

1786, from embank to enclose with a bank (1570s; see bank (n.2)) + -ment.


Radnor

place in eastern Wales, the name is Old English, literally at the red bank, from Old English read
(dative singular readan; see red (n.1) + ofer bank, slope.


piggy (n.)

a little pig, 1799, from pig (n.) + -y (3). Related: Piggies. Piggy bank attested from 1941 (pig
bank from 1937).


bench (n.)

Old English benc long seat, from Proto-Germanic *bankiz bank of earth, perhaps here man-made
earthwork, later bench, table (cognates: Old Frisian bank bench, Old Norse bekkr, Danish b&aelig;nk,
Middle Dutch banc, Old High German banch), from PIE root *bheg- to break. Used for office of a judge
since late 13c. Sporting sense reserve of players (in baseball, North American football, etc.) is by
1909, from literal sense of place where players sit when not in action (by 1889).


West Bank

in reference to the former Jordanian territory west of the River Jordan, 1967.


riparian (adj.)

of or pertaining to river banks, 1849, with -an + Latin riparius of a river bank, from riparia
shore, later used in reference to the stream flowing between the banks, from ripa (steep) bank of a
river, shore, probably literally break (and indicating the drop off from ground level to the stream
bed), or else that which is cut out by the river, from PIE root *rei- to scratch, tear, cut
(cognates: Greek ereipia ruins, eripne slope, precipice; Old Norse rifa break, to tear apart; Danish
rift breach, Middle High German rif riverbank, seashore; English riven, rift).


frozen (adj.)

mid-14c., past participle adjective from freeze (v.). Figurative use is from 1570s. Of assets, bank
accounts, etc., from 1922.


dogger (n.)

two-masted fishing boat, used in North Sea fishery, mid-14c., of unknown origin. It likely is the
source of the name Dogger Bank (1660s) for the great banks of shoals in the North Sea.


Vauxhall

popular pleasure garden on south bank of Thames in London, c.1661-1859; the name is Middle English
Faukeshale (late 13c.), Hall or manor of a man called Falkes, an Old French personal name.


Bremen

city in Germany, from Old Saxon bremo edge (related to English brim (n.)), in reference to its site
on a river bank.


Shiloh

village on the west bank of the Jordan River, perhaps from an alteration of Hebrew shalo to be
peaceful. The American Civil War battle (April 6-7, 1862) was so called for being fought around the
Shiloh church in Tennessee, which was destroyed in the battle.


yegg (n.)

also yegg-man, 1901, a word popular in the first decade of the 20th century and meaning vaguely hobo
burglar; safe-breaker; criminal beggar.    The great majority [of the Chicago criminal population]
are what certain detectives call Yegg-men, which is a term, by the way, that the detectives would do
well to define. As far as I can discover it means tramp-thieves, but the average tramp seldom uses
the word. Hoboes that break safes in country post-offices come under the Yegg-men classification.
[McClure's Magazine, Feb. 1901]    Popularized by the Pinkerton agency detectives. The 1900
Proceedings of the 26th annual convention of the American Bankers' Association, whose members were
protected by the Pinkerton's National Detective Agency, reported a letter dated Nov. 23 or 24, 1899,
returning $540, taken earlier that year, to the Scandinavian-American Bank of St. Paul, Minn.,
noting that the thieves had been so hounded by detectives that they gave up the gains and advised
the bank to advertise that it was a member of the American Bankers Association, because the American
Bankers Association is too tough for poor 'grafters.' The letter supposedly was signed John Yegg,
but this was said to be a pseudonym and the report identified the man arrested later in the case as
William Barrett.


river (n.)

early 13c., from Anglo-French rivere, Old French riviere river, riverside, river bank (12c.), from
Vulgar Latin *riparia riverbank, seashore, river (source also of Spanish ribera, Italian riviera),
noun use of fem. of Latin riparius of a riverbank (see riparian). Generalized sense of a copious
flow of anything is from late 14c. The Old English word was ea river, cognate with Gothic ahwa,
Latin aqua (see aqua-). Romanic cognate words tend to retain the sense river bank as the main one,
or else the secondary Latin sense coast of the sea (compare Riviera).    U.S. slang phrase up the
river in prison (1891) is originally in reference to Sing Sing prison, which was literally up the
(Hudson) river from New York City. Phrase down the river done for, finished perhaps echoes sense in
sell down the river (1851), originally of troublesome slaves, to sell from the Upper South to the
harsher cotton plantations of the Deep South.


teller (n.)

bank clerk who pays or receives money, late 15c., person who keeps accounts, agent noun from tell
(v.) in its secondary sense of count, enumerate, which is the primary sense of cognate words in many
Germanic languages. Earlier person who announces or narrates (c.1300).


ria (n.)

from Spanish ria estuary, river mouth (adopted as a geological term first in German, 1886), from
Latin ripa stream bank (see riparian).


berm (n.)

narrow ledge, 1729, from French berme (17c.), from Old Dutch baerm edge of a dike, probably related
to brim (q.v.). In U.S., 19c., also the name for the bank of a canal opposite the tow path.


snowbank (n.)

1779, from snow (n.) + bank (n.2).


greenback (n.)

U.S. dollar bill, 1862, so called from the time of their introduction, from green (adj.) + back
(n.); bank paper money printed in green ink had been called this since 1778 (as opposed to redbacks,
etc.).


banquette (n.)

1620s, raised platform in a fortification, from French banquette (15c.), from Italian banchetta,
diminutive of banca bench, shelf (see bank (n.1)).


passbook (n.)

also pass-book, 1828, from pass (v.) + book (n.); apparently the notion is of the document passing
between bank and customer.


quai (n.)

1870, public path beside a waterway, from French quai (12c., see quay). Often short for Quai
d'Orsay, the street on the south bank of the Seine in Paris, since mid-19c. site of the French
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and hence sometimes used metonymically for it (1922).


glacis (n.)

sloping bank (especially leading up to a fortification), 1670s, from French glacir to freeze, make
slippery, from Old French glacier to slip, glide, from Vulgar Latin *glaciare to make or turn into
ice, from glacies (see glacial).


key (n.2)

low island, 1690s, from Spanish cayo shoal, reef, from Taino cayo small island; spelling influenced
by Middle English key wharf (c.1300), from Old French kai sand bank (see quay).


bunker (n.)

1758, originally Scottish, seat, bench, of uncertain origin, possibly a variant of banker bench
(1670s; see bank (n.2)); possibly from a Scandinavian source (compare Old Swedish bunke boards used
to protect the cargo of a ship). Of golf courses, first recorded 1824, from extended sense earthen
seat (1805); meaning dug-out fortification probably is from World War I.


Riviera (n.)

Mediterranean seacoast around Genoa, 1630s, from Italian riviera, literally bank, shore (see river).
In extended use, the coast from Marseilles to La Spezia, which became popular 19c. as a winter
resort. Thence adopted (sometimes ironically) in reference to areas of other countries, as in
American Riviera (Florida, 1887); English Riviera (Devonshire coast, 1882).


Stafford

city in England, mid-11c., St&aelig;fford, literally ford by a landing-place, from Old English
st&aelig;&eth; river bank, shore + ford (n.). County town of Staffordshire, which, as a name for a
type of earthenware and porcelain made there is attested from 1765. The city was noted in medieval
England as a source of blue cloth.


Windsor

town in Berkshire, Old English Windlesoran (c.1060), literally bank or slope with a windlass (Old
English *windels). Site of a royal residence, hence Windsor chair (1724), Windsor tie (1895),
Windsor knot in a necktie (1953).


overflow (v.)

Old English oferfleow to flow across, flood, inundate, also to flow over (a brim or bank); see over-
+ flow (v.). Related: Overflowed; overflowing.


savings (n.)

money saved, 1737, plural of saving, vwerbal noun from save (v.). Related: Savings account attested
by 1882; savings bank, 1817. S &amp; L for savings and loan attested from 1951.


brink (n.)

early 13c., from Middle Low German brink edge, or Danish brink steepness, shore, bank, grassy edge,
from Proto-Germanic *brenkon, probably from PIE *bhreng-, variant of root *bhren- project, edge
(cognates: Lithuanian brinkti to swell).


counter (n.)

mid-14c., table where a money lender does business, from Old French contouer, comptoir (14c.)
counting room, table of a bank, from Medieval Latin computatorium place of accounts, from Latin
computatus, past participle of computare (see compute). Generalized 19c. from banks to shops, then
extended to display cases for goods. Phrase under the counter is from 1926.


sustainability (n.)

1907, in reference to a legal objection, from sustainable + -ity. General sense (in economics,
agriculture, ecology) by 1972.    Sustainability is defined as a requirement of our generation to
manage the resource base such that the average quality of life that we ensure ourselves can
potentially be shared by all future generations. ... Development is sustainable if it involves a
non-decreasing average quality of life. [Geir B. Asheim, Sustainability, The World Bank, 1994]


rand (n.)

rocky ridge overlooking a river valley, 1839, South African English, from Afrikaans, from Dutch rand
edge, margin, cognate with Old English rand brink, bank. As a unit of currency, adopted by the
Republic of South Africa in 1961 (see Krugerrand). Johnson's dictionary has rand Border; seam: as
the rand of a woman's shoe.


withdrawal (n.)

1820s, act of taking back, also retraction of a statement, from withdraw + -al (2). Earlier words in
the same sense were withdrawment (1640s); withdraught (mid-14c.). Meaning removal of money from a
bank, etc. is from 1861; psychological sense is from 1916; meaning physical reaction to the
cessation of an addictive substance is from 1929 (with an isolated use from 1897; withdrawal symptom
is from 1910). As a synonym for coitus interruptus from 1889.


brae (n.)

steep slope, in northern England especially the sides of a hill, early 14c., from Scottish, slope,
river bank, from Old Norse bra eyelash, cognate with Old English br&aelig;w eyelid, German Braue
eyebrow (see brow). The word must have passed through the sense of 'eye-brow' to 'brow of a hill',
supercilium (cf. OE. eaghill 'eye-hill'=eyebrow) [OED].


dock (n.1)

ship's berth, late 15c., from Middle Dutch or Middle Low German docke, perhaps ultimately (via Late
Latin *ductia aqueduct) from Latin ducere to lead (see duke (n.)); or possibly from a Scandinavian
word for low ground (compare Norwegian dokk hollow, low ground). Original sense perhaps furrow a
grounded vessel makes in a mud bank. As a verb from 1510s. Related: Docked; docking.


Stockholm

capital city of Sweden; it arose mid-13c. from a fishing village; the second element in the name is
holm island (see holm); the first is either st&auml;k bay or stock stake, pole. Related:
Stockholmer.   Stockholm Syndrome is from 1978, a psychologists' term; the name derives from the
Aug. 23, 1973, violent armed robbery of Sveriges Kreditbank in Stockholm, after which four bank
employees were held hostage in a vault for more than five days. The hostages developed a dramatic
attachment to their abuser, and a fear of would-be rescuers, that they could not explain.


Alsace

region between France and Germany (disputed by them 18c.-19c.), Medieval Latin Alsatia, from Old
High German *Ali-sazzo inhabitant of the other (bank of the Rhine), from Proto-Germanic *alja other
+ Old High German -sazzo inhabitant, literally one who sits. Alsatian was adopted 1917 by the Kennel
Club for German Shepherd dog to avoid the wartime associations of German; the breed has no
connection with Alsace.


bar (n.1)

late 12c., stake or rod of iron used to fasten a door or gate, from Old French barre (12c.) beam,
bar, gate, barrier, from Vulgar Latin *barra bar, barrier, which some suggest is from Gaulish
*barros the bushy end [Gamillscheg], but OED regards this as discredited because it in no way suits
the sense. Of soap, by 1833; of candy, by 1906 (the process itself dates to the 1840s). Meaning bank
of sand across a harbor or river mouth is from 1580s, probably so called because it was an
obstruction to navigation. Bar graph is attested from 1925. Bar code first recorded 1963. Behind
bars in prison is attested by 1934, U.S.


mountebank (n.)

a doctor that mounts a bench in the market, and boasts his infallible remedies and cures [Johnson],
1570s, from Italian montambanco, contraction of monta in banco quack, juggler, literally mount on
bench (to be seen by crowd), from monta, imperative of montare to mount (see mount (v.)) + banco,
variant of banca bench (see bank (n.2)). Figurative and extended senses from 1580s.


draft (n.)

c.1500, spelling variant of draught (q.v.) to reflect change in pronunciation. Among the senses that
have gone with this form of the word in American English, the meaning rough copy of a writing
(something drawn) is attested from 14c.; that of preliminary sketch from which a final copy is made
is from 1520s; that of flow of a current of air is from c.1770. Of beer from the 1830s, in reference
to the method of drawing it from the cask. Sense in bank draft is from 1745. The meaning a drawing
off a group for special duty is from 1703, in U.S. especially of military service; the verb in this
sense first recorded 1714. Related: Drafted; drafting.


sperm (n.)

male seminal fluid, late 14c., probably from Old French esperme seed, sperm (13c.) and directly from
Late Latin sperma seed, semen, from Greek sperma the seed of plants, also of animals, literally that
which is sown, from speirein to sow, scatter, from PIE *sper-mn-, from root *sper- (4) to strew (see
sprout (v.)). Sperm bank is attested from 1963. For sperm whale see spermaceti.


