bar (n.1)

late 12c., stake or rod of iron used to fasten a door or gate, from Old French barre (12c.) beam,
bar, gate, barrier, from Vulgar Latin *barra bar, barrier, which some suggest is from Gaulish
*barros the bushy end [Gamillscheg], but OED regards this as discredited because it in no way suits
the sense. Of soap, by 1833; of candy, by 1906 (the process itself dates to the 1840s). Meaning bank
of sand across a harbor or river mouth is from 1580s, probably so called because it was an
obstruction to navigation. Bar graph is attested from 1925. Bar code first recorded 1963. Behind
bars in prison is attested by 1934, U.S.


bar (v.)

c.1300, to fasten (a gate, etc.) with a bar, from bar (n.1); sense of to obstruct, prevent is
recorded by 1570s. Expression bar none without exception is recorded from 1866.


bar (n.2)

tavern, 1590s, so called in reference to the bars of the barrier or counter over which drinks or
food were served to customers (see bar (n.1)).


bar (n.3)

whole body of lawyers, the legal profession, 1550s, a sense which derives ultimately from the
railing that separated benchers from the hall in the Inns of Court. Students who had attained a
certain standing were called to it to take part in the important exercises of the house. After
c.1600, however, this was popularly assumed to mean the bar in a courtroom, which was the wooden
railing marking off the area around the judge's seat, where prisoners stood for arraignment and
where a barrister (q.v.) stood to plead. As the place where the business of court was done, bar in
this sense had become synonymous with court by early 14c.


bar (n.4)

unit of pressure, coined 1903 from Greek baros weight, related to barys heavy (see grave (adj.)).


Bar Mitzvah

1861, in Judaism, male person who has completed his 13th year and thus reached the age of religious
responsibility, from Hebrew, literally son of command. As a name for the ceremony itself, by 1941.


Barabbas

biblical masc. proper name, Greek Barabbas, from Aramaic barabba, son of the father, or son of the
master. In Hebrew, it would be ben abh.


barb (n.)

late 14c., barb of an arrow, from Old French barbe (11c.) beard, beardlike appendage, from Latin
barba beard, perhaps cognate with Old English beard (see beard (n.)).


barb (v.)

late 15c., to clip, mow; see barb (n.). Meaning to fit or furnish with barbs is from 1610s. Related:
Barbed; barbing.


Barbados

probably from Portuguese las barbados the bearded; the island so called because vines or moss hung
densely from the trees. An inhabitant was called a Barbadian (1732).


Barbara

fem. proper name, from Latin, fem. of barbarus strange, foreign, barbarous, from Greek barbaros (see
barbarian). For women, unlike men, the concept of alien presumably could be felt as exotic and thus
make an appealing name. Popularized as a Christian name by the legend of Saint Barbara, early 4c.
martyr, whose cult was popular from 7c. The common Middle English form was Barbary. A top 10 name in
popularity for girls born in the U.S. between 1927 and 1958.


barbarian (adj.)

mid-14c., from Medieval Latin barbarinus (source of Old French barbarin Berber, pagan, Saracen,
barbarian), from Latin barbaria foreign country, from Greek barbaros foreign, strange, ignorant,
from PIE root *barbar- echoic of unintelligible speech of foreigners (compare Sanskrit barbara-
stammering, also non-Aryan, Latin balbus stammering, Czech blblati to stammer).    Greek barbaroi
(n.) meant all that are not Greek, but especially the Medes and Persians. Originally not entirely
pejorative, its sense darkened after the Persian wars. The Romans (technically themselves barbaroi)
took up the word and applied it to tribes or nations which had no Greek or Roman accomplishments.
The noun is from late 14c., person speaking a language different from one's own, also (c.1400)
native of the Barbary coast; meaning rude, wild person is from 1610s.


barbaric (adj.)

late 15c., uncultured, uncivilized, unpolished, from French barbarique (15c.), from Latin barbaricus
foreign, strange, outlandish, from Greek barbarikos like a foreigner, from barbaros foreign, rude
(see barbarian). Meaning pertaining to barbarians is from 1660s.


barbarism (n.)

mid-15c., uncivilized or rude nature, from French barbarisme (13c.), from Latin barbarismus, from
Greek barbarismos foreign speech, from barbarizein to do as a foreigner does (see barbarian). Only
of speech in Greek, Latin, and French; sense extended in English to uncivilized condition.


barbarity (n.)

1560s, want of civilization, from Latin barbarus (see barbarian) + -ity. Meaning savage cruelty is
recorded from 1680s.


barbarous (adj.)

c.1400, uncivilized, uncultured, ignorant, from Latin barbarus, from Greek barbaros (see barbarian).
Meaning not Greek or Latin (of words or language) is from c.1500; that of savagely cruel is from
1580s.


Barbary

c.1300, foreign lands (especially non-Christian lands), from Latin barbaria (see barbarian). Meaning
Saracens living in coastal North Africa is attested from 1590s, via French (Old French barbarie),
from Arabic Barbar, Berber, ancient Arabic name for the inhabitants of North Africa beyond Egypt.
Perhaps a native name, perhaps an Arabic word, from barbara to babble confusedly, but this might be
ultimately from Greek barbaria. The actual relations (if any) of the Arabic and Gr[eek] words cannot
be settled; but in European langs. barbaria, Barbarie, Barbary, have from the first been treated as
identical with L. barbaria, Byzantine Gr[eek] barbaria land of barbarians [OED].


barbecue (n.)

1650s, framework for grilling meat, fish, etc., from American Spanish barbacoa, from Arawakan
(Haiti) barbakoa framework of sticks, the raised wooden structure the Indians used to either sleep
on or cure meat. Sense of outdoor meal of roasted meat or fish as a social entertainment is from
1733; modern popular noun sense of grill for cooking over an open fire is from 1931.


barbecue (v.)

1660s, from barbecue (n.). Related: Barbecued; barbecuing.


barbed wire (n.)

also barb wire, fencing wire with sharp edges or points, 1863, American English, from barb + wire
(n.).


barbell (n.)

1887, from bar (n.1) + ending from dumbbell.


barber (n.)

c.1300, from Anglo-French barbour (attested as a surname from early 13c.), from Old French barbeor,
barbieor (Modern French barbier, which has a more restricted sense than the English word), from
Vulgar Latin *barbatorem, from Latin barba beard (see barb (n.)). Originally also regular
practitioners of surgery, they were restricted to haircutting and dentistry under Henry VIII.


barber-shop (n.)

1570s, from barber + shop (n.). Earlier in same sense was barbery (c.1500). Barber-shop in reference
to close harmony male vocal quartets, it is attested from 1910; the custom of barber's keeping a
musical instrument in their shops so waiting customers could entertain themselves is an old one, but
the musical product had a low reputation and barber's music (c.1660) was wretched, poorly performed
music.


barbican (n.)

outer fortification of a city or castle, mid-13c., from Old French barbacane (12c.), a general
Romanic word, perhaps ultimately from Arabic or Persian (compare bab-khanah gate-house). Watkins
identifies it as from Old Iranian *pari-varaka protective, from *wor-o-, suffixed variant form of
PIE root *wer- (5) to cover (see wier).


Barbie

1959, trademark name (reg. U.S.). Supposedly named after the daughter of its creator, U.S.
businesswoman Ruth Handler (1916-2002); see Barbara.


barbiturate (n.)

1928 (morphine barbiturate is from 1918), from German, coined 1863 by chemist Adolf von Baeyer
(1835-1917) from Barbiturs&auml;ure barbituric acid, itself coined by Baeyer, perhaps from woman's
name Barbara, or perhaps from Latin barbata, in Medieval Latin usnea barbata, literally bearded
moss. Second element is because it was obtained from uric acid. With chemical ending -ate (3).


Barcelona

city in Spain, said to have been named for Carthaginian general Hamlicar Barca, who is supposed to
have founded it 3c. B.C.E.


bard (n.)

mid-15c., from Scottish, from Old Celtic bardos poet, singer, from PIE root *gwer- to lift up the
voice, praise. In historical times, a term of contempt among the Scots (who considered them
itinerant troublemakers), but one of great respect among the Welsh. All vagabundis, fulis, bardis,
scudlaris, and siclike idill pepill, sall be brint on the cheek. [local Scottish ordinance,
c.1500]Subsequently idealized by Scott in the more ancient sense of lyric poet, singer. Poetic use
of the word in English is from Greek bardos, Latin bardus, both from Gaulish.


bardic (adj.)

1775, from bard + -ic.


bardolatry (n.)

worship of Shakespeare (the 'Bard of Avon'), 1901, from bard + -latry.


bare (v.)

Old English barian, from bare (adj.). Related: Bared; baring.


bare (adj.)

Old English b&aelig;r naked, uncovered, unclothed, from Proto-Germanic *bazaz (cognates: German bar,
Old Norse berr, Dutch baar), from PIE *bhosos (cognates: Armenian bok naked; Old Church Slavonic
bosu, Lithuanian basas barefoot). Meaning sheer, absolute (c.1200) is from the notion of complete in
itself.


bareback (adj.)

1560s, of riding, from bare (adj.) + back (n.).


barefaced (adj.)

1580s, with face uncovered or shaven; see bare (adj.) + face (n.). Thus, unconcealed (c.1600), and,
in a bad sense, shameless (1670s). Compare effrontery. The half-French bare-vis (adj.) conveyed the
same sense in Middle English.


barefoot (adj.)

Old English b&aelig;rfot; see bare (adj.) + foot (n.).


barehanded (adj.)

also bare-handed, mid-15c., from bare (adj.) + handed.


barely (adv.)

Old English b&aelig;rlice openly, clear, public; see bare (adj.) + -ly (2). Meaning only, just is
recorded from late 15c.; that of merely, simply is from 1570s. In 15c. it also could mean naked.


bareness (n.)

early 15c., from bare (adj.) + -ness.


barf (v.)

to vomit or retch,1960, American English slang, probably imitative. Related: Barfed; barfing. As a
noun, from 1966. Barf bag air sickness pouch attested from 1966.


barfly (n.)

habitual drunkard, 1910, from bar (n.2) + fly (n.).


bargain (v.)

late 14c., from Old French bargaignier (12c., Modern French barguigner) to haggle over the price,
perhaps from Frankish *borganjan to lend or some other Germanic source, ultimately from Proto-
Germanic *borgan (cognates: Old High German borgen; Old English borgian, source of borrow). Another
suggestion is that the French word comes from Late Latin barca a barge, because it carries goods to
and fro. There are difficulties with both suggestions. Related: Bargained; bargaining.


bargain (n.)

mid-14c., business transaction or agreement, also that which is acquired by bargaining, from Old
French bargaine, from bargaignier (see bargain (v.)). Meaning article priced for special sale is
from 1899. A bargain basement (1899) originally was a basement floor in a store where bargains were
displayed.


barge (n.)

c.1300, small seagoing vessel with sails, from Old French barge, Old Proven&ccedil;al barca, from
Medieval Latin barga, perhaps from Celtic, or perhaps from Latin *barica, from Greek baris Egyptian
boat, from Coptic bari small boat. Meaning flat-bottomed freight boat dates from late 15c.


barge (v.)

to journey by barge, 1590s, from barge (n.). The form barge into and the sense crash heavily into,
in reference to the rough handling of barges, dates from 1830s, American English. Related: Barged;
barging.


bariatric (adj.)

1976, from Greek baros weight, related to barys heavy (see grave (adj.)) + -iatric.


barista (n.)

bartender in a coffee shop, as a purely English word in use by 1992, from Italian, where it is said
to derive ultimately from the English bar (n.2), as borrowed into Italian. The word is of generic
gender and may be applied with equal accuracy to women and men (it is said that the typical barista
in Italy is a man).


baritone (n.)

c.1600, from Italian baritono, from Greek barytonos deep-toned, deep-sounding, from barys heavy,
deep, also, of sound, strong, deep, bass (see grave (adj.)) + tonos tone (see tenet). Technically,
ranging from lower A in bass clef to lower F in treble clef. Meaning singer having a baritone voice
is from 1821. As a type of brass band instrument, it is attested from 1949.


barium (n.)

1808, coined in Modern Latin by its discoverer, English chemist Sir Humphrey Davy (1778-1829),
because it was present in the mineral barytes heavy spar (barium sulphate), so named by Lavoisier
from Greek barys heavy (see grave (adj.)). The metal is actually relatively light.


bark (n.1)

tree skin, c.1300, from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse borkr bark, from Proto-Germanic
*barkuz, which probably is related to birch and Low German borke. The native word was rind.


bark (n.2)

any small ship, early 15c., from Middle French barque (15c.), from Late Latin barca (c.400 C.E.),
probably cognate with Vulgar Latin *barica (see barge). More precise sense of three-masted ship
(17c.) often is spelled barque to distinguish it.


