bardolatry (n.)

worship of Shakespeare (the 'Bard of Avon'), 1901, from bard + -latry.


bardic (adj.)

1775, from bard + -ic.


bard (n.)

mid-15c., from Scottish, from Old Celtic bardos poet, singer, from PIE root *gwer- to lift up the
voice, praise. In historical times, a term of contempt among the Scots (who considered them
itinerant troublemakers), but one of great respect among the Welsh. All vagabundis, fulis, bardis,
scudlaris, and siclike idill pepill, sall be brint on the cheek. [local Scottish ordinance,
c.1500]Subsequently idealized by Scott in the more ancient sense of lyric poet, singer. Poetic use
of the word in English is from Greek bardos, Latin bardus, both from Gaulish.


Ossianic (adj.)

1808, in reference to Oisin, name of a legendary Gaelic bard, literally little fawn; James
Macpherson claimed to have collected and translated his works (1760-1763) under the name Ossian, and
the poetic prose sparked a Celtic revival and fascination with the glamor of the lost world of the
bards. The work turned out to be Macpherson's forgery, and the style later was regarded as
bombastic, but the resulting swerve in European literature was real.


weatherman (n.)

one who observes the weather, 1869, from weather (n.) + man (n.). Weather-prophet is from 1784 as
barometer; 1827 as person who predicts the weather.    Clerk of the Weather, I deplore  That all thy
greatness is no more,  As should a gentle bard;  That Nature, or that Nature's law  When you
politely called for thaw,  Gave frost was rather hard.  [from Consolatory Address to Mr. Murphy, the
Weather Prophet, Colburn's New Monthly Magazine, 1838]


vates (n.)

1620s, poet or bard, specifically Celtic divinely inspired poet (1728), from Latin vates sooth-
sayer, prophet, seer, from a Celtic source akin to Old Irish faith poet, Welsh gwawd poem, from PIE
root *wet- (1) to blow; inspire, spiritually arouse (cognates: Old English wod mad, frenzied, god-
name Woden; see wood (adj.)). Hence vaticination oracular prediction (c.1600).


Anacreontic (adj.)

of or in the manner of Anacreon, convivial bard of Greece (literally Up-lord), the celebrated Greek
lyrical poet (560-478 B.C.E.), born at Teos in Ionia. Also in reference to his lyric form (1706) of
a four-line stanza, rhymed alternately, each line with four beats (three trochees and a long
syllable), also convivial and amatory (1801); and an erotic poem celebrating love and wine (1650s).
Francis Scott Key in 1814 set or wrote his poem The Star-Spangled Banner to the melody of To
Anacreon in Heav'n, the drinking song of the popular London gentleman's club called The Anacreontic
Society, whose membership was dedicated to wit, harmony, and the god of wine. The tune is late 18c.
and may be the work of society member and court musician John Stafford Smith (1750-1836).


tongue-in-cheek (adv.)

1856, from phrase to speak with one's tongue in one's cheek to speak insincerely (1748), suggestive
of sly irony or humorous insincerity, perhaps a stage trick to convey irony to the audience.    Hem!
Pray, Sir, said he to the Bard, after thrusting his Tongue into a Corner of his Cheek, and rolling
his Eyes at Miss Willis, (Tricks which he had caught by endeavouring to take off a celebrated
Comedian) were these fine Tragedies of yours ever acted? [anonymous, Emily, or the History of a
Natural Daughter, 1761]   <hr />   This arietta, however, she no sooner began to perform, than he
and the justice fell asleep ; but the moment she ceased playing, the knight waked snorting, and
exclaimed,--'O cara! what d'ye think, gentlemen? Will you talk any more of your Pargolesi and your
Corelli ?'--At the same time, he thrust his tongue in one cheek, and leered with one eye at the
doctor and me, who sat on his left hand--He concluded the pantomime with a loud laugh, which he
could command at all times extempore. [Smollett, The Expedition of Humphrey Clinker, 1771]


barrow (n.2)

mound, Old English beorg (West Saxon), berg (Anglian) barrow, mountain, hill, mound, from Proto-
Germanic *bergaz (cognates: Old Saxon, Old Frisian, Old High German berg mountain, Old North bjarg
rock), from PIE root *bhergh- (2) high, elevated (cognates: Old Church Slavonic bregu mountain,
height, Old Irish brigh mountain, Welsh bera stack, pyramid, Sanskrit b'rhant high, Avestan brzant-
high, Old Persian bard- be high, Greek Pergamos, name of the citadel of Troy). Obsolete except in
place-names and southwest England dialect by 1400; revived by modern archaeology.    In place-names
used of small continuously curving hills, smaller than a dun, with the summit typically occupied by
a single farmstead or by a village church with the village beside the hill, and also of burial
mounds. [Cambridge Dictionary of English Place-Names]  Meaning mound erected over a grave was a
specific sense in late Old English. Barrow-wight first recorded 1869 in Eirikr Magnusson and William
Morris's translation of the Icelandic saga of Grettir the Strong.


