bargain (n.)

mid-14c., business transaction or agreement, also that which is acquired by bargaining, from Old
French bargaine, from bargaignier (see bargain (v.)). Meaning article priced for special sale is
from 1899. A bargain basement (1899) originally was a basement floor in a store where bargains were
displayed.


bargain (v.)

late 14c., from Old French bargaignier (12c., Modern French barguigner) to haggle over the price,
perhaps from Frankish *borganjan to lend or some other Germanic source, ultimately from Proto-
Germanic *borgan (cognates: Old High German borgen; Old English borgian, source of borrow). Another
suggestion is that the French word comes from Late Latin barca a barge, because it carries goods to
and fro. There are difficulties with both suggestions. Related: Bargained; bargaining.


stipulate (v.)

1620s, bargain, make a contract (intransitive), back-formation from stipulation, or else from Latin
stipulatus, past participle of stipulari exact (a promise), bargain for. Transitive sense of demand
as a condition is from 1640s. Related: Stipulated; stipulating.


chaffer (n.)

a bargain, early 13c., cheffare buying and selling, also (14c.) cheapfare, probably from Old English
ceap bargain, traffic, gain, sale (see cheap) + faru faring, going (see fare (n.)). In later use,
haggling. The verb is recorded from mid-14c.


chop (v.2)

shift quickly, 1530s, earlier to bargain (early 15c.), ultimately from Old English ceapian to
bargain (see cheap); here with a sense of changing back and forth, probably from common expressions
such as to chop and change barter. To chop logic is recorded from 1570s. Related: Chopped; chopping.


chapman (n.)

peddler, itinerant tradesman, Middle English form of Old English ceapman tradesman, from West
Germanic compound *kaupman- (cognates: Old High German choufman, German Kauffman, Middle Dutch and
Dutch koopman), formed with equivalents of man (n.) + West Germanic *kaup- (cognates: Old Saxon cop,
Old Frisian kap trade, purchase, Middle Dutch coop, Dutch koop trade, market, bargain, kauf trader,
Old English ceap barter, business; a purchase), from Proto-Germanic *kaupoz- (cognates: Danish
kj&oslash;b purchase, bargain, Old Norse kaup bargain, pay; compare also Old Church Slavonic kupiti
to buy, a Germanic loan-word), probably an early Germanic borrowing from Latin caupo (genitive
cauponis) petty tradesman, huckster, of unknown origin. Compare also cheap (adj.).


steal (n.)

1825, act or case of theft, from steal (v.). Meaning a bargain is attested by 1942, American English
colloquial. Baseball sense of a stolen base is from 1867.


needle (v.)

1715, to sew or pierce with a needle, from needle (n.). Meaning goad, provoke (1881) probably is
from earlier meaning haggle in making a bargain (1812). Related: Needled; needling.


creampuff (n.)

also cream puff, by 1859 as a kind of light confection, from cream (n.) + puff (n.). In figurative
sense of weakling, sissy, it is recorded from 1935.    I remember my first campaign. My opponent
called me a cream puff. That's what he said. Well, I rushed out and got the baker's union to endorse
me. [Sen. Claiborne Pell, D-R.I., 1987]    As a salesman's word, something that is a tremendous
bargain, it is from 1940s.


jew (v.)

to cheat, to drive a hard bargain, 1824, from Jew (n.) (compare gyp, welsh, etc.). The campaign to
eliminate it in early 20c. was so successful that people began to avoid the noun and adjective, too,
and started using Hebrew instead.Now I'll say 'a Jew' and just the word Jew sounds like a dirty word
and people don't know whether to laugh or not. [Lenny Bruce (1925-1966)]


dicker (v.)

haggle, bargain in a petty way, 1802, American English, perhaps from dicker (n.) a unit or package
of tens, especially hides (attested from late 13c.), perhaps from Latin decuria parcel of ten
(supposedly a unit of barter on the Roman frontier; compare German Decher set of ten things), from
decem ten (see ten) on model of centuria from centum.


sellout (n.)

also sell-out, corrupt bargain, 1862 (in Mary Chesnut's diary), from the verbal phrase (at that time
often meaning dispose of one's interests in a company, etc.), from sell (v.) + out (adv.). Meaning
event for which all tickets have been sold is attested from 1923. The verbal phrase sell out
prostitute one's ideals or talents is attested from 1888.


stipulation (n.)

1550s, a commitment or activity to do something (now obsolete), from Latin stipulationem (nominative
stipulatio), noun of action from past participle stem of stipulari exact a promise, engage, bargain,
of uncertain origin. Traditionally said to be from Latin stipula stalk, straw (see stipule) in
reference to some obscure symbolic act; this is rejected by most authorities, who, however, have not
come up with a better guess. Meaning act of specifying one of the terms of a contract or agreement
is recorded from 1750. Meaning that which is stipulated or agreed upon is from 1802.


lump (v.2)

endure (now usually in contrast to like), 1791, apparently an extended sense from an older meaning
to look sulky, dislike (1570s), of unknown origin, perhaps a symbolic sound (compare grump, harumph,
etc.). Related: Lumped; lumping.    LUMPING. Great. A lumping pennyworth; a great qualtity for the
money, a bargain. He has got a lumping pennyworth; frequently said of a man who marries a fat woman.
[Grose, Classical Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, 3rd edition, 1796]


champertous (adj.)

1640s, from champart, from French champart portion of produce received by a feudal lord from land
held in lease from him (13c.), from Old North French campart-, probably from Latin campi pars part
of the field (see campus + part (n.)). In later use often with reference to champerty (early 14c.),
the illegal act whereby a person makes a bargain to maintain a litigant in return for a share of the
gains if the case succeeds.


contract (n.)

early 14c., from Old French contract (Modern French contrat), from Latin contractus a contract,
agreement, from past participle of contrahere to draw together, metaphorically, to make a bargain,
from com- together (see com-) + trahere to draw (see tract (n.1)). U.S. underworld sense of
arrangement to kill someone first recorded 1940.


swap (v.)

c.1200, to strike, strike the hands together, of uncertain origin, possibly imitative of the sound
of hitting or slapping. The sense of to exchange, barter, trade is first recorded 1590s, possibly
from the notion of slapping hands together as a sign of agreement in bargaining (as in strike a
bargain). Related: Swapped; swapping. The noun in this sense is attested from 1620s; earlier a
striking, an act of striking (mid-13c.). Swap-meet attested from 1968, American English.


handle (v.)

Old English handlian to touch or move with the hands, also deal with, discuss; see handle (n.). Akin
to Old Norse h&ouml;ndla to seize, capture, Danish handle to trade, deal, German handeln to bargain,
trade. Related: Handled; handling. Meaning to act towards (someone) in a certain manner (usually
with hostility or roughness) is from c.1200. The commercial sense was weaker in English than in some
other Germanic languages, but it emerged in American English (1888) from the notion of something
passing through one's hands, and see handler.


treat (v.)

c.1300, negotiate, bargain, deal with, from Old French traitier deal with, act toward; set forth (in
speech or writing) (12c.), from Latin tractare manage, handle, deal with, conduct oneself toward,
originally drag about, tug, haul, pull violently, frequentative of trahere (past participle tractus)
to pull, draw (see tract (n.1)).    Meaning to entertain with food and drink without expense to the
recipient by way of compliment or kindness (or bribery) is recorded from c.1500. Sense of deal with,
handle, or develop in speech or writing (early 14c.) led to the use in medicine to attempt to heal
or cure, to manage in the application of remedies (1781). Related: Treated; treating.


deal (n.1)

from Old English d&aelig;l part, share, quantity, amount, from Proto-Germanic *dailaz (cognates: Old
Norse deild, Old Frisian del, Dutch deel, Old High German and German teil, Gothic dails part,
share), from PIE *dail- to divide (cognates: Old Church Slavonic delu part, Lithuanian dalis).
Business sense of transaction, bargain is 1837, originally slang. Meaning an amount is from 1560s.
New Deal is from F.D. Roosevelt speech of July 1932. Big deal is 1928; ironic use first recorded
1951 in Catcher in the Rye. Deal breaker is attested by 1975.


licence (n.)

mid-14c., liberty (to do something), leave, from Old French licence freedom, liberty, power,
possibility; permission, (12c.), from Latin licentia freedom, liberty, license, from licentem
(nominative licens). present participle of licere to be allowed, be lawful, from PIE root *leik- to
offer, bargain (cognates: Lettish likstu I come to terms). Meaning formal (usually written)
permission from authority to do something (marry, hunt, drive, etc.) is first attested early 15c.
Meaning excessive liberty, disregard of propriety is from mid-15c. No etymological justification for
the spelling with -s-; attempts to confine license to verbal use and licence to noun use (compare
advise/advice, devise/device) seem to have failed.


tally (n.)

mid-15c., stick marked with notches to indicate amount owed or paid, from Anglo-French tallie (early
14c., Old French taille notch in a piece of wood signifying a debt), Anglo-Latin talea (late 12c.),
from Medieval Latin tallia, from Latin talea a cutting, rod, stick (see tailor (n.), and compare
sense history of score). Meaning a thing that matches another first recorded 1650s, from practice of
splitting a tally lengthwise across the notches, debtor and creditor each retaining one of the
halves; the usual method of keeping accounts before writing became general (the size of the notches
varied with the amount). Sports sense of a total score is from 1856. Also in 19c. British provincial
verbal expression live tally, make a tally bargain live as husband and wife without marrying.


tight (adj.)

c.1400, tyght dense, close, compact, from Middle English thight, from Old Norse &thorn;ettr
watertight, close in texture, solid, and also from Old English -&thorn;iht (compare second element
in mete&thorn;iht stout from eating), both from Proto-Germanic *thinhta- (cognates: Middle High
German dihte dense, thick, German dicht dense, tight, Old High German gidigan, German gediegen
genuine, solid, worthy), from PIE root *tenk- (2) to become firm, curdle, thicken (cognates: Irish
techt curdled, coagulated, Lithuanian tankus close, tight, Persian tang tight, Sanskrit tanakti
draws together, contracts).    Sense of drawn, stretched is from 1570s; meaning fitting closely (as
of garments) is from 1779; that of evenly matched (of a contest, bargain, etc.) is from 1828,
American English; that of drunk is from 1830. Of persons, close, intimate, sympathetic from 1956.
From 1670s as an adverb; to sit tight is from 1738. Related: Tightly; tightness. Tight-assed
unwilling to relax is attested from 1903. Tight-laced is recorded from 1741 in both the literal and
figurative senses. Tight-lipped is first attested 1872.


cheap (adj.)

low in price, that may be bought at small cost, c.1500, ultimately from Old English noun ceap
traffic, a purchase, from ceapian (v.) trade, probably from an early Germanic borrowing from Latin
caupo petty tradesman, huckster (see chapman).    The sense evolution is from the noun meaning a
barter, a purchase to a purchase as rated by the buyer, hence adjectival meaning inexpensive, the
main modern sense, via Middle English phrases such as god chep favorable bargain (12c., a
translation of French a bon march&eacute;).    Sense of lightly esteemed, common is from 1590s
(compare similar evolution of Latin vilis). The meaning low in price was represented in Old English
by undeor, literally un-dear (but deop ceap, literally deep cheap, meant high price).    The word
also was used in Old English for market (as in ceapd&aelig;g market day), a sense surviving in place
names Cheapside, East Cheap, etc. Related: Cheaply. Expression on the cheap is first attested 1888.
Cheap shot originally was U.S. football jargon for a head-on tackle; extended sense unfair hit in
politics, etc. is by 1970. German billig cheap is from Middle Low German billik, originally fair,
just, with a sense evolution via billiger preis fair price, etc.


