barrister (n.)

1540s, a student of law who has been called to the bar, from bar (n.3) in the legal sense + -ster.
Also see attorney. The second element is obscure.


disbar (v.)

deprive of the privileges of a barrister, 1630s; see dis- opposite of + bar in the legal sense.
Related: Disbarred; disbarring; disbarment.


bar (n.3)

whole body of lawyers, the legal profession, 1550s, a sense which derives ultimately from the
railing that separated benchers from the hall in the Inns of Court. Students who had attained a
certain standing were called to it to take part in the important exercises of the house. After
c.1600, however, this was popularly assumed to mean the bar in a courtroom, which was the wooden
railing marking off the area around the judge's seat, where prisoners stood for arraignment and
where a barrister (q.v.) stood to plead. As the place where the business of court was done, bar in
this sense had become synonymous with court by early 14c.


advocate (n.)

mid-14c., one whose profession is to plead cases in a court of justice, a technical term from Roman
law, from Old French avocat barrister, advocate, spokesman, from Latin advocatus one called to aid;
a pleader, advocate, noun use of past participle of advocare to call (as witness or advisor) from
ad- to (see ad-) + vocare to call, related to vocem (see voice (n.)). Also in Middle English as one
who intercedes for another, and protector, champion, patron. Feminine forms advocatess, advocatrice
were in use in 15c.


attorney (n.)

early 14c. (mid-13c. in Anglo-Latin), from Old French atorn&eacute; (one) appointed, past participle
of aturner to decree, assign, appoint, from atorner (see attorn). The legal Latin form attornare
influenced the spelling in Anglo-French. The sense is of one appointed to represent another's
interests.    In English law, a private attorney was one appointed to act for another in business or
legal affairs (usually for pay); an attorney at law or public attorney was a qualified legal agent
in the courts of Common Law who prepared the cases for a barrister, who pleaded them (the equivalent
of a solicitor in Chancery). So much a term of contempt in England that it was abolished by the
Judicature Act of 1873 and merged with solicitor.Johnson observed that he did not care to speak ill
of any man behind his back, but he believed the gentleman was an attorney. [Boswell]The double -t-
is a mistaken 15c. attempt to restore a non-existent Latin original. Attorney general first recorded
1530s in sense of legal officer of the state (late 13c. in Anglo-French), from French, hence the odd
plural (subject first, adjective second).


