bastard (n.)

illegitimate child, early 13c., from Old French bastard (11c., Modern French b&acirc;tard),
acknowledged child of a nobleman by a woman other than his wife, probably from fils de bast
packsaddle son, meaning a child conceived on an improvised bed (saddles often doubled as beds while
traveling), with pejorative ending -art (see -ard). Alternative possibly is that the word is from
Proto-Germanic *banstiz barn, equally suggestive of low origin.    Not always regarded as a stigma;
the Conqueror is referred to in state documents as William the Bastard. Figurative sense of
something not pure or genuine is late 14c.; use as a vulgar term of abuse for a man is attested from
1830. As an adjective from late 14c. Among the bastard words in Halliwell-Phillipps' Dictionary of
Archaic and Provincial Words are avetrol, chance-bairn, by-blow, harecoppe, horcop, and gimbo (a
bastard's bastard).


bastardize (v.)

1610s, to identify as a bastard, from bastard (q.v.) + -ize. The figurative sense, to make
degenerate, debase is earlier (1580s), probably because bastard also was serving as a verb meaning
to declare illegitimate (1540s). Related: Bastardized; bastardizing; bastardization.


bastardy (n.)

early 14c., condition of illegitimacy, from Anglo-French and Old French bastardie, from bastard (see
bastard). As begetting of bastards, fornication from 1570s.


momzer (n.)

contemptible person, moocher, 1560s, from Hebrew, literally bastard (used in Vulgate), but modern
usage is a recent borrowing from Yiddish.


bort (n.)

waste diamonds, small chips from diamond-cutting, of unknown origin, perhaps related to Old French
bort bastard.


misbegotten (adj.)

bastard, illegitimate, 1550s, past participle adjective from obsolete misbeget (c.1300); see mis-
(1) + beget.


mamzer (n.)

bastard, 1560s, from Late Latin mamzer, from Hebrew mamzer, left untranslated in Deut. xxiii:2 in
the Vulgate.


lingua franca (n.)

1620s, from Italian, literally Frankish tongue. Originally a form of communication used in the
Levant, a stripped-down Italian peppered with Spanish, French, Greek, Arabic, and Turkish words. The
name is probably from the Arabic custom, dating back to the Crusades, of calling all Europeans
Franks (see Frank). Sometimes in 17c. English sources also known as Bastard Spanish.


-ard

also -art, from Old French -ard, -art, from German -hard, -hart hardy, forming the second element in
many personal names, often used as an intensifier, but in Middle High German and Dutch used as a
pejorative element in common nouns, and thus passing into Middle English in bastard, coward,
blaffard (one who stammers), etc. It thus became a living element in English, as in buzzard,
drunkard.


blend (v.)

c.1300, blenden, to mix, mingle, stir up a liquid, in northern writers, from or akin to rare Old
English blandan to mix, blondan (Mercian) or Old Norse blanda to mix, or a combination of the two;
from Proto-Germanic *blandan to mix, which comes via a notion of to make cloudy from an extended
Germanic form of the PIE root *bhel- (1) to shine, flash, burn (see bleach (v.); also blind (adj.)).
Compare Old Saxon and Old High German blantan, Gothic blandan, Middle High German blenden to mix;
German Blendling bastard, mongrel, and outside Germanic, Lithuanian blandus troubled, turbid, thick;
Old Church Slavonic blesti to go astray. Figurative use from early 14c. Related: Blended; blending.


natural (adj.)

c.1300, naturel, of one's inborn character; hereditary, by birth; early 14c. as of the world of
nature (especially as opposed to man), from Old French naturel of nature, conforming to nature; by
birth, and directly from Latin naturalis by birth, according to nature, from natura nature (see
nature).    From late 15c. as not miraculous, in conformity with nature. Meaning easy, free from
affectation is attested from c.1600. Of things, not artificially created, c.1600. As a euphemism for
illegitimate, bastard (of children), it is first recorded c.1400, on notion of blood kinship (but
not legal status).   Natural science is from late 14c.; natural law is from early 15c. Natural order
apparent order in nature is from 1690s. Natural childbirth first attested 1933. Natural life,
usually in reference to the duration of life, is from late 15c. Natural history is from 1560s (see
history). To die of natural causes is from 1570s.


son (n.)

Old English sunu son, descendant, from Proto-Germanic *sunuz (cognates: Old Saxon and Old Frisian
sunu, Old Norse sonr, Danish s&oslash;n, Swedish son, Middle Dutch sone, Dutch zoon, Old High German
sunu, German Sohn, Gothic sunus son). The Germanic words are from PIE *su(e)-nu- son (cognates:
Sanskrit sunus, Greek huios, Avestan hunush, Armenian ustr, Lithuanian sunus, Old Church Slavonic
synu, Russian and Polish syn son), a derived noun from root *seue- (1) to give birth (cognates:
Sanskrit sauti gives birth, Old Irish suth birth, offspring).   Son of _____ as the title of a
sequel to a book or movie is recorded from 1917 (Son of Tarzan). Most explanations for son of a gun
(1708) are more than a century after its appearance. Henley (1903) describes it as meaning
originally a soldier's bastard; Smyth's Sailor's Word-Book (1867) describes it as An epithet
conveying contempt in a slight degree, and originally applied to boys born afloat, when women were
permitted to accompany their husbands to sea ....


merry (adj.)

Old English myrge pleasing, agreeable, pleasant, sweet; pleasantly, melodiously, from Proto-Germanic
*murgijaz, which probably originally meant short-lasting, (compare Old High German murg short,
Gothic gamaurgjan to shorten), from PIE *mreghu- short (see brief (adj.)). The only exact cognate
for meaning outside English was Middle Dutch mergelijc joyful.    Connection to pleasure is likely
via notion of making time fly, that which makes the time seem to pass quickly (compare German
Kurzweil pastime, literally a short time; Old Norse skemta to amuse, entertain, amuse oneself, from
skamt, neuter of skammr short). There also was a verbal form in Old English, myrgan be merry,
rejoice. For vowel evolution, see bury (v.).Bot vchon enle we wolde were fyf, &thorn;e mo &thorn;e
myryer. [c.1300]The word had much wider senses in Middle English, such as pleasant-sounding (of
animal voices), fine (of weather), handsome (of dress), pleasant-tasting (of herbs). Merry-bout an
incident of sexual intercourse was low slang from 1780. Merry-begot illegitimate (adj.), bastard
(n.) is from 1785. Merrie England (now frequently satirical or ironic) is 14c. meri ingland,
originally in a broader sense of bountiful, prosperous. Merry Monday was a 16c. term for the Monday
before Shrove Tuesday (Mardi Gras).


potato (n.)

1560s, from Spanish patata, from a Carib language of Haiti batata sweet potato. Sweet potatoes were
first to be introduced to Europe; in cultivation in Spain by mid-16c.; in Virginia by 1648. Early
16c. Portuguese traders carried the crop to all their shipping ports and the sweet potato was
quickly adopted from Africa to India and Java.    The name later (1590s) was extended to the common
white potato, from Peru, which was at first (mistakenly) called Virginia potato, or, because at
first it was of minor importance compared to the sweet potato, bastard potato. Spanish invaders in
Peru began to use white potatoes as cheap food for sailors 1530s. The first potato from South
America reached Pope Paul III in 1540; grown in France at first as an ornamental plant. According to
popular tradition, introduced to Ireland 1565 by John Hawkins. Brought to England from Colombia by
Sir Thomas Herriot, 1586.  German kartoffel (17c.) is a dissimilation from tartoffel, ultimately
from Italian tartufolo (Vulgar Latin *territuberem), originally truffle. Frederick II forced its
cultivation on Prussian peasants in 1743. The French is pomme de terre, literally earth-apple; a
Swedish dialectal word for potato is jordp&auml;ron, literally earth-pear.    Colloquial
pronunciation tater is attested in print from 1759. Potato chip (n.) attested from 1879. To drop
(something) like a hot potato is from 1824. Children's counting-out rhyme that begins one potato,
two potato first recorded 1885 in Canada. Slang potato trap mouth attested from 1785.


fuck (v.)

until recently a difficult word to trace, in part because it was taboo to the editors of the
original OED when the F volume was compiled, 1893-97. Written form only attested from early 16c. OED
2nd edition cites 1503, in the form fukkit; earliest appearance of current spelling is 1535 --
Bischops ... may fuck thair fill and be vnmaryit [Sir David Lyndesay, Ane Satyre of the Thrie
Estaits], but presumably it is a much more ancient word than that, simply one that wasn't written in
the kind of texts that have survived from Old English and Middle English. Buck cites proper name
John le Fucker from 1278, but the surname could have other explanations. The word apparently is
hinted at in a scurrilous 15c. poem, titled Flen flyys, written in bastard Latin and Middle English.
The relevant line reads:Non sunt in celi quia fuccant uuiuys of heliThey [the monks] are not in
heaven because they fuck the wives of [the town of] Ely. Fuccant is pseudo-Latin, and in the
original it is written in cipher. The earliest examples of the word otherwise are from Scottish,
which suggests a Scandinavian origin, perhaps from a word akin to Norwegian dialectal fukka
copulate, or Swedish dialectal focka copulate, strike, push, and fock penis. Another theory traces
it to Middle English fyke, fike move restlessly, fidget, which also meant dally, flirt, and probably
is from a general North Sea Germanic word; compare Middle Dutch fokken, German ficken fuck, earlier
make quick movements to and fro, flick, still earlier itch, scratch; the vulgar sense attested from
16c. This would parallel in sense the usual Middle English slang term for have sexual intercourse,
swive, from Old English swifan to move lightly over, sweep (see swivel). But OED remarks these
cannot be shown to be related to the English word. Chronology and phonology rule out Shipley's
attempt to derive it from Middle English firk to press hard, beat.    Germanic words of similar form
(f + vowel + consonant) and meaning 'copulate' are numerous. One of them is G. ficken. They often
have additional senses, especially 'cheat,' but their basic meaning is 'move back and forth.' ...
Most probably, fuck is a borrowing from Low German and has no cognates outside Germanic. [Liberman]
French foutre and Italian fottere look like the English word but are unrelated, derived rather from
Latin futuere, which is perhaps from PIE root *bhau(t)- knock, strike off, extended via a figurative
use from the sexual application of violent action [Shipley; compare the sexual slang use of bang,
etc.]. Popular and Internet derivations from acronyms (and the pluck yew fable) are merely
<b>ingenious trifling</b>. The Old English word was h&aelig;man, from ham dwelling, home, with a
sense of take home, co-habit. Fuck was outlawed in print in England (by the Obscene Publications
Act, 1857) and the U.S. (by the Comstock Act, 1873). As a noun, it dates from 1670s. The word may
have been shunned in print, but it continued in conversation, especially among soldiers during World
War I.It became so common that an effective way for the soldier to express this emotion was to omit
this word. Thus if a sergeant said, 'Get your ----ing rifles!' it was understood as a matter of
routine. But if he said 'Get your rifles!' there was an immediate implication of urgency and danger.
[John Brophy, Songs and Slang of the British Soldier: 1914-1918, pub. 1930]The legal barriers broke
down in the 20th century, with the Ulysses decision (U.S., 1933) and Lady Chatterley's Lover (U.S.,
1959; U.K., 1960). Johnson excluded the word, and fuck wasn't in a single English language
dictionary from 1795 to 1965. The Penguin Dictionary broke the taboo in the latter year. Houghton
Mifflin followed, in 1969, with The American Heritage Dictionary, but it also published a Clean
Green edition without the word, to assure itself access to the lucrative public high school market.
The abbreviation F (or eff) probably began as euphemistic, but by 1943 it was being used as a cuss
word, too. In 1948, the publishers of The Naked and the Dead persuaded Norman Mailer to use the
euphemism fug instead. When Mailer later was introduced to Dorothy Parker, she greeted him with, So
you're the man who can't spell 'fuck'  [The quip sometimes is attributed to Tallulah Bankhead].
Hemingway used muck in For whom the Bell Tolls (1940). The major breakthrough in publication was
James Jones' From Here to Eternity (1950), with 50 fucks (down from 258 in the original manuscript).
Egyptian legal agreements from the 23rd Dynasty (749-21 B.C.E.) frequently include the phrase, If
you do not obey this decree, may a donkey copulate with you! [Reinhold Aman, Maledicta, Summer
1977]. Fuck-all nothing first recorded 1960.  Verbal phrase fuck up to ruin, spoil, destroy first
attested c.1916. A widespread group of Slavic words (such as Polish pierdoli&#263;) can mean both
fornicate and make a mistake. Fuck off attested from 1929; as a command to depart, by 1944. Flying
fuck originally meant have sex on horseback and is first attested c.1800 in broadside ballad New
Feats of Horsemanship. For the unkillable urban legend that this word is an acronym of some sort (a
fiction traceable on the Internet to 1995 but probably predating that) see here, and also here.
Related: Fucked; fucking. Agent noun fucker attested from 1590s in literal sense; by 1893 as a term
of abuse (or admiration).    DUCK F-CK-R. The man who has the care of the poultry on board a
&#383;hip of war. [Classical Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, 1796]


