battalion (n.)

1580s, from Middle French bataillon (16c.), from Italian battaglione battle squadron, from
diminutive of Vulgar Latin battalia battle, from Latin bauttere to beat (see batter (v.)). Specific
sense of part of a regiment is from 1708.Madame, lui r&eacute;pondit-il, ne vous y fiez pas: j'ay
t&ocirc;ujours v&#251; Dieu do cot&eacute; des gros Batallions. [E.Boursault, 1702]


Seabee (n.)

1942, from pronunciation of C.B., abbreviation of Construction Battalion, formed as a volunteer
branch of the Civil Engineer Corps of the U.S. Navy.


squadron (n.)

1560s, from Italian squadrone, augmentative of squadra battalion, literally square (see squad). As a
division of a fleet, from 1580s, of an air force, 1912.


squad (n.)

1640s, small number of military men detailed for some purpose, from French esquade, from Middle
French escadre, from Spanish escuadra or Italian squadra battalion, literally square, from Vulgar
Latin *exquadra (see square (n.)). Before the widespread use of of automatic weapons, infantry
troops tended to fight in a square formation to repel cavalry or superior forces. Extended to sports
1902, police work 1905.


gung ho

also gung-ho, gungho, 1942, slang motto of Carlson's Raiders (2nd Marine Raider Battalion, under Lt.
Col. Evans Carlson, 1896-1947), U.S. guerrilla unit operating in the Pacific in World War II, from
Chinese kung ho work together, cooperate. Widely adopted in American English c.1959.Borrowing an
idea from China, Carlson frequently has what he calls 'kung-hou' meetings .... Problems are threshed
out and orders explained. [New York Times Magazine, Nov. 8, 1942]


Hezbollah (n.)

extremist Shiite group active in Lebanon, founded c.1982, from Persian hezbollah, Arabic hizbullah,
literally Party of God, from hezb/hizb party + allah God. An adherent is a Hezbollahi. The name of
various Islamic groups in modern times, the name itself is attested in English by 1960 in referense
to an Indonesian guerilla battalion of 1945 that grew out of a similarly named organization formed
by the Japanese to give training in military drill to young Moslems.    In Modjokuto (like Masjumi
itself, Hizbullah was Indonesia-wide but, also like Masjumi, it had little effective central
organization) this group was led by the present head of Muhammadijah -- the same man who a year or
so before was going to Djakarta for propaganda training and studying to be a kamikaze. [Clifford
Geertz, The Religion of Java, Chicago, 1960]


