bearing (n.)

carrying of oneself, deportment, mid-13c., verbal noun from bear (v.). Mechanical sense of part of a
machine that bears the friction is from 1791.


Foraminifera

1835, Modern Latin, neuter plural of foraminifer bearing holes, from Latin foramen hole, opening,
orifice (see foramen) + -fer bearing, from ferre to bear (see infer). So called because the shells
usually are perforated by pores. Related: Foraminiferous.


auriferous (adj.)

containing gold, 1727, from Latin aurifer gold-bearing, from auri-, comb. form of aurum gold (see
aureate) + -fer producing, bearing (see infer).


Porifera (n.)

1843, Modern Latin, literally bearing pores, neuter plural of porifer, from Latin porus pore,
opening (see pore (n.)) + -fer bearing (see infer). Related: Poriferal; poriferous.


effete (adj.)

1620s, from Latin effetus (usually in fem. effeta) exhausted, unproductive, worn out (with bearing
offspring), past bearing, literally that has given birth, from a lost verb, *efferi, from ex- out
(see ex-) + fetus childbearing, offspring (see fetus). Figurative use is earliest in English;
literal use is rare. Sense of exhausted is 1660s; that of intellectually or morally exhausted (1790)
led to decadent (19c.).


conifer (n.)

1851, from Latin conifer cone-bearing, bearing conical fruit, from conus cone (see cone) + ferre to
bear (see infer).


Carboniferous (adj.)

1830 with reference the geological period, from a word formed in English in 1799 to mean coal-
bearing, from Latin carbo (genitive carbonis) coal (see carbon) + -ferous producing, containing,
bearing, from ferre to bear (see infer). The great coal beds of Europe were laid down during this
period. As a stand-alone noun (short for Carboniferous Period) from 1940s.


extol (v.)

also extoll, c.1400, to lift up, from Latin extollere to place on high, raise, elevate, figuratively
to exalt, praise, from ex- up (see ex-) + tollere to raise, from PIE *tele- to bear, carry, with
derivatives referring to measured weights and thence money and payment [Watkins] (cognates: Greek
talantos bearing, suffering, tolman to carry, bear, telamon broad strap for bearing something,
talenton a balance, pair of scales, Atlas the 'Bearer' of Heaven; Lithuanian tiltas bridge; Sanskrit
tula balance, tulayati lifts up, weighs; Latin tolerare to bear, support, latus borne; Old English
&thorn;olian to endure; Armenian tolum I allow). Figurative sense of praise highly in English is
first attested c.1500. Related: Extolled; extolling.


Telamon

in Greek mythology, father of Ajax, brother of Peleus, literally the Bearer, from Greek telamon
broad strap for bearing something.


portly (adj.)

early 15c., stately, dignified, from port (n.3) bearing, carriage + -ly (1). Meaning stout is first
recorded 1590s.


fennec (n.)

fox-like animal of Africa, 1790, from Arabic fenek, fanak a name vaguely applied to various fur-
bearing animals [OED].


homogamy (n.)

1805, condition of bearing flowers that do not differ sexually, from homo- (1) same + -gamy.


ecosphere (n.)

1953, the region around a star where conditions allow life-bearing planets to exist; see eco- +
sphere. Apparently coined by German-born U.S. physician and space medicine pioneer Hubertus
Strughold (1898-1986).


persea (n.)

sacred fruit-bearing tree of Egypt and Persia, c.1600, from Latin persea, from Greek persea. Used
from early 19c. of a genus of trees and shrubs in the West Indies.


-parous

word-forming element meaning bearing, producing, from Latin -parus (as in viviparus bringing forth
young alive), from parere to produce, bring forth (see pare).


designer (n.)

1640s, one who schemes; agent noun from design (v.). Meaning one who makes an artistic design or a
construction plan is from 1660s. In fashion, as an adjective, bearing the label of a famous clothing
designer (thus presumed to be expensive or prestigious), from 1966. Designer drug attested from
1983.


comportment (n.)

c.1600, from Middle French comportement bearing, behavior, from comporter (13c.) to be disposed,
arranged, laid out, from Latin comportare (see comport).


maintenance (n.)

mid-14c., bearing, deportment, from Old French maintenance upkeep; shelter, protection,: from
maintenir (see maintain). Meaning action of upholding or keeping in being is from early 15c. Action
of providing a person with the necessities of life is from late 14c.


chromatophore (n.)

pigment cell, 1864, from chromato- + Greek -phoros bearing, bearer, from pherein to carry (see
infer).


Beatlemania (n.)

1963; see Beatles + mania.The social phenomenon of Beatlemania, which finds expression in handbags,
balloons and other articles bearing the likeness of the loved ones, or in the hysterical screaming
of young girls whenever the Beatle Quartet performs in public. [London Times, Dec. 27, 1963]


flagship (n.)

1670s, ship bearing an admiral's flag, from flag (n.) + ship (n.). Figurative use by 1933.


legislation (n.)

1650s, from French l&eacute;gislation, from Late Latin legislationem (nominative legislatio),
properly two words, legis latio, proposing (literally 'bearing') of a law; see legislator.


patient (adj.)

mid-14c., enduring without complaint, from Old French pacient and directly from Latin patientem
bearing, supporting, suffering, enduring, permitting (see patience). Meaning pertaining to a medical
patient is late 14c., from the noun. Related: Patiently.


stele (n.)

upright slab, usually inscribed, 1820, from Greek stele standing block, slab, especially one bearing
an inscription, such as a gravestone, from PIE root *stel- to put, stand (see stall (n.1)). Related:
Stelar.


fertile (adj.)

mid-15c., from Middle French fertil and directly from Latin fertilis bearing in abundance, fruitful,
productive, from ferre to bear (see infer). Fertile Crescent (1914) was coined by U.S. archaeologist
James H. Breasted (1865-1935).


countenance (n.)

mid-13c., from Old French contenance demeanor, bearing, conduct, from Latin continentia restraint,
abstemiousness, moderation, literally way one contains oneself, from continentem, present participle
of continere (see contain). Meaning evolving Middle English from appearance to facial expression
betraying a state of mind, to face itself (late 14c.).


red cross (n.)

early 15c., national emblem of England (St. George's Cross), also the badge of the Order of the
Temple. Hence red-cross knight, one bearing such a marking on shield or crest. In 17c., a red cross
was the mark placed on the doors of London houses inflected with the plague. Red Cross (in Muslim
lands, red crescent) adopted as a symbol of ambulance service 1864 by the Geneva Conference.


cruciferous (adj.)

1650s, from Late Latin crucifer cross-bearing, from Latin crux (genitive crucis) stake, cross (see
cross (n.)). Originally in literal senses; botanical use (in reference to a symmetrical arrangement
of four petals) is from 1851.


child-bearing (n.)

also childbearing, bringing forth of a child, late 14c., from child + verbal noun of bear (v.). As
an adjective from late 14c.


support (n.)

late 14c., act of assistance, backing, help, aid, from support (v.). Meaning that which supports,
one who provides assistance, protection, backing, etc. is early 15c. Sense of bearing of expense is
mid-15c. Physical sense of that which supports is from 1560s. Meaning services which enable
something to fulfil its function and remain in operation (as in tech support) is from 1953.


gesture (n.)

early 15c., manner of carrying the body, from Medieval Latin gestura bearing, behavior, from Latin
gestus gesture, carriage, posture (see gest). Restricted sense of a movement of the body or a part
of it is from 1550s; figurative sense of action undertaken in good will to express feeling is from
1916.


port (n.3)

bearing, mien, c.1300, from Old French port, from porter to carry, from Latin portare (see port
(n.1)).


euphoria (n.)

1727, a physician's term for condition of feeling healthy and comfortable (especially when sick),
medical Latin, from Greek euphoria power of enduring easily, from euphoros, literally bearing well,
from eu well (see eu-) + pherein to carry (see infer). Non-technical use, now the main one, dates to
1882 and is perhaps a reintroduction.


Rotifera (n.)

class of microscopic freshwater organisms, 1830, Modern Latin, from Rotifer (Leeuwenhoek, 1702),
from Latin rota wheel (see rotary) + -fer bearing (see bear (v.)). The animalcules use rotary organs
to swim about.


vert (n.)

mid-15c., the color green (especially in heraldry), also trees and brush bearing green leaves (in
forest law), from Anglo-French and Old French vert foliage, greenery, green cloth, from Latin
viridem, viridis green (see verdure).


aquifer (n.)

1897, coined from Latin aqui-, comb. form of aqua water (see aqua-) + -fer bearing, from ferre to
bear (see infer).


puerperal (adj.)

1768, with -al (1) + Latin puerperus bringing forth children; bearing a child (as a noun, woman in
labor), from puer child, boy (see puerility) + parere to bear (see pare). Earlier puerperial
(1620s).


Christopher

masc. proper name, Church Latin Christophoros, from Ecclesiastical Greek khristophoros, literally
Christ-bearing; from phoros bearer, from pherein to carry (see infer). In medieval legend he was a
giant (one of the rare virtuous ones) who aided travellers by carrying them across a river.
Medallions with his image worn by travellers are known from the Middle Ages (Chaucer's Yeoman had
one). Not a common name in medieval England.


mien (n.)

facial expression, 1510s, probably a shortening of Middle English demean bearing, demeanor (see
demeanor) and influenced by Middle French mine appearance, facial expression, which is of unknown
origin, possibly Celtic (compare Breton min beak, muzzle, nose, Irish men mouth).


fruition (n.)

early 15c., act of enjoying, from Middle French fruition and directly from Late Latin fruitionem
(nominative fruitio) enjoyment, noun of action from Latin frui to use, enjoy. Sense of act or state
of bearing fruit is first recorded 1885 by mistaken association with fruit; figurative sense is from
1889.


medlar (n.)

small fruit-bearing tree, mid-14c. (in reference to the fruit itself), from Old French medler,
variant of mesple, from Latin mespila fruit of the medlar, from Greek mespilion, a foreign word of
unknown origin. The Old English name was open&#230;rs, literally open-arse.


odoriferous (adj.)

early 15c., that has a scent, with -ous + Latin odorifer spreading odor, fragrant, literally bearing
odor, from odor (see odor) + ferre to bear, carry (see infer). Usually in a positive sense.


dolphin (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French daulphin, from Medieval Latin dolfinus, from Latin delphinus dolphin, from
Greek delphis (genitive delphinos) dolphin, related to delphys womb, perhaps via notion of the
animal bearing live young, or from its shape, from PIE *gwelbh-. Popularly applied to the dorado
from late 16c.


progesterone (n.)

female steroid sex hormone which prepares the uterus for child-bearing, 1935, from German
Progesteron, from progestin (from which substance it was obtained), which had been coined 1930 from
pro- (see pro-) + Latin gestare, literally to carry about (see gestation), on notion of substance
which favors gestation. Also see -one.


tolerance (n.)

early 15c., endurance, fortitude (in the face of pain, hardship, etc.), from Old French tolerance
(14c.), from Latin tolerantia a bearing, supporting, endurance, from tolerans, present participle of
tolerare to bear, endure, tolerate (see toleration). Of individuals, with the sense tendency to be
free from bigotry or severity in judging other, from 1765. Meaning allowable amount of variation
dates from 1868; and physiological sense of ability to take large doses first recorded 1875.


pyrophoric (adj.)

1779, from Modern Latin pyrophorus, literally fire-bearing, from Greek pyrophoros, from pyro- (see
pyro-) + phoros bearer, from pherein to carry (see infer). Related: Pyrophorous; pyrophorus.


caviar (n.)

also caviare, 1550s, from French caviar (16c.), from Italian caviaro (modern caviale) or Turkish
khaviar, from Persian khaviyar, from khaya egg (from Middle Persian khayak egg, from Old Iranian
*qvyaka-, diminutive of *avya-, from PIE *owyo-/*oyyo- egg see egg (n.)) + dar bearing.


summer (n.2)

horizontal bearing beam, late 13c., from Anglo-French sumer, Old French somier main beam, originally
pack horse, from Vulgar Latin *saumarius, from Late Latin sagmarius pack horse, from sagma
packsaddle (see sumpter).


demarche (n.)

1650s, walk, step, from French d&eacute;marche (15c.) literally gait, walk, bearing, from
d&eacute;marcher (12c.) to march, from de- (see de-) + marcher (see march (v.)). Meaning a
diplomatic step attested from 1670s. A word never quite anglicized.


Krugerrand (n.)

also Kruger rand, 1967, South African gold coin (issued for investment purposes) bearing a portrait
of Transvaal President Stephanus Johannes Paulus Kruger (1825-1904); second element is rand, unit of
decimal currency introduced in Republic of South Africa 1961, named for The Rand, gold-mining area
in Transvaal, short for Witwatersrand (see rand).


