beatitude (n.)

early 15c., supreme happiness, from Middle French b&eacute;atitude (15c.) and directly from Latin
beatitudinem (nominative beatitudo) state of blessedness, from past participle stem of beare make
happy (see bene-). As a declaration of blessedness (usually plural, beatitudes, especially in
reference to the Sermon on the Mount) it is attested from 1520s.


benison (n.)

c.1300, blessing, beatitude, from Old French benei&ccedil;on blessing, benediction, from Latin
benedictionem (see benediction).


Beatrice

fem. proper name, from French B&eacute;atrice, from Latin beatrix, fem. of beatricem who makes
happy, from beatus happy, blessed, past participle of beare make happy, bless (see beatitude).


beatific (adj.)

1630s, from French b&eacute;atifique or directly from Late Latin beatificus, from Latin beatus
blessed, happy, past participle of beare make happy, bless (see beatitude). Related: Beatifical (c.
1600); beatifically.


beatnik (n.)

coined 1958 by San Francisco newspaper columnist Herb Caen during the heyday of -nik suffixes in the
wake of Sputnik. From Beat generation (1952), associated with beat (n.) in its meaning rhythm
(especially in jazz) as well as beat (past participle adjective) worn out, exhausted, but originator
Jack Kerouac (1922-1969) in 1958 connected it with beatitude.The origins of the word beat are
obscure, but the meaning is only too clear to most Americans. More than the feeling of weariness, it
implies the feeling of having been used, of being raw. It involves a sort of nakedness of the mind.
[New York Times Magazine, Oct. 2, 1952] <hr />   Beat is old carny slang. According to Beat Movement
legend (and it is a movement with a deep inventory of legend), Ginsberg and Kerouac picked it up
from a character named Herbert Huncke, a gay street hustler and drug addict from Chicago who began
hanging around Times Square in 1939 (and who introduced William Burroughs to heroin, an important
cultural moment). The term has nothing to do with music; it names the condition of being beaten
down, poor, exhausted, at the bottom of the world. [Louis Menand, New Yorker, Oct. 1, 2007]


