begetter (n.)

mid-15c., agent noun from beget.


beget (v.)

Old English begietan to get by effort, find, acquire, attain, seize (class V strong verb, past tense
begeat, past participle begeaton), from be- + get (v.). Sense of to procreate is from c.1200.
Related to Old High German pigezzan, Gothic bigitan to get, obtain. Related: Begot; begotten.


generate (v.)

c.1500, to beget (offspring), a back-formation from generation or else from Latin generatus, past
participle of generare to beget, produce (see generation); originally to beget; in reference to
natural forces, conditions, substances, etc., attested from 1560s. Related: Generated; generating.


engender (v.)

early 14c., beget, procreate, from Old French engendrer (12c.) engender, beget, bear; cause, bring
about, from Latin ingenerare to implant, engender, produce, from in- in (see in- (2)) + generare
beget, create (see generation). Meaning cause, produce is mid-14c. Related: Engendered; engendering.


progeny (n.)

early 14c., from Old French progenie (13c.) and directly from Latin progenies descendants,
offspring, lineage, race, family, from stem of progignere beget, from pro- forth (see pro-) +
gignere to produce, beget (see genus).


native (adj.)

late 14c., natural, hereditary, connected with something in a natural way, from Old French natif
native, born in; raw, unspoiled (14c.) and directly from Latin nativus innate, produced by birth,
from natus, past participle of nasci (Old Latin gnasci) be born, related to gignere beget, from PIE
root *gene-/*gen- to give birth, beget, with derivatives referring to familial and tribal groups
(see genus). From late 15c. as born in a particular place. From early 15c. as of one's birth, also
used from mid-15c. in sense of bound; born in servitude or serfdom, also, as a noun a bondsman,
serf. Native American attested from 1956.


begat (v.)

archaic past tense of beget.


begotten (adj.)

late 14c., past participle adjective from beget.


genus (n.)

(plural genera), 1550s as a term of logic, kind or class of things (biological sense dates from
c.1600), from Latin genus (genitive generis) race, stock, kind; family, birth, descent, origin,
cognate with Greek genos race, kind, and gonos birth, offspring, stock, from PIE root *gene-
produce, give birth, beget, with derivatives referring to family and tribal groups (cognates:
Sanskrit janati begets, bears, janah race, janman- birth, origin, jatah born; Avestan zizanenti they
bear; Greek gignesthai to become, happen; Latin gignere to beget, gnasci to be born, genius
procreative divinity, inborn tutelary spirit, innate quality, ingenium inborn character, germen
shoot, bud, embryo, germ; Lithuanian gentis kinsmen; Gothic kuni race; Old English cennan beget,
create; Old High German kind child; Old Irish ro-genar I was born; Welsh geni to be born; Armenian
chanim I bear, I am born).


get (v.)

c.1200, from Old Norse geta to obtain, reach; to beget; to guess right (past tense gatum, past
participle getenn), from Proto-Germanic *getan (cognates: Old Swedish gissa to guess, literally to
try to get), from PIE root *ghend- seize, take (cognates: Greek khandanein to hold, contain,
Lithuanian godetis be eager, second element in Latin prehendere to grasp, seize, Welsh gannu to
hold, contain, Old Church Slavonic gadati to guess, suppose).  Meaning to seize mentally, grasp is
from 1892.    Old English, as well as Dutch and Frisian, had the root only in compounds (such as
begietan to beget, see beget; forgietan to forget, see forget). Vestiges of Old English cognate
*gietan remain obliquely in past participle gotten and original past tense gat. The word and phrases
built on it take up 29 columns in the OED 2nd edition. Related: Getting.   Get wind of become
acquainted with is from 1840, from earlier to get wind to get out, become known (1722). Get out, as
a command to go away, is from 1711. Get-rich-quick (adj.) attested from 1904, first in O. Henry. To
get out of hand originally (1765) meant to advance beyond the need for guidance; sense of to break
free, run wild is from 1892, from horses. To get on (someone's) nerves is attested by 1970.


git (n.)

worthless person, 1946, British slang, a southern variant of Scottish get illegitimate child, brat,
which is related to beget.


misbegotten (adj.)

bastard, illegitimate, 1550s, past participle adjective from obsolete misbeget (c.1300); see mis-
(1) + beget.


procreant (adj.)

fruitful, 1580s, from Latin procreantem (nominative procreans), present participle of procreare to
beget (see procreation). As a noun from c.1600.


genital (adj.)

late 14c., in membres genytal the genitals, from Latin genitalis pertaining to generation or birth
(also a by-name of the goddess Diana), from genitus, past participle of gignere to beget (see
genus). As a noun meaning sex organ from mid-15c.


sire (v.)

to beget, to be the sire of, 1610s, from sire (n.). Used chiefly of beasts, especially of stallions.
Related: Sired; siring.


create (v.)

late 14c., from Latin creatus, past participle of creare to make, bring forth, produce, beget,
related to crescere arise, grow (see crescent). Related: Created; creating.


procreate (v.)

1530s, a back formation from procreation or else from Latin procreatus, past participle of procreare
to beget, bring forth (see procreation). Related: Procreated; procreating.


oncogene (n.)

1969, from onco- + -gene, from root of Greek gignere (perf. genui) beget, from PIE *gen- produce
(see genus). Related: Oncogenesis (1832).


congenital (adj.)

existing from birth, 1796, from Latin congenitus, from com- together, with (see com-) + genitus,
past participle of gignere to beget (see genus). The sense formerly belonged to congenial. Related:
Congenitally.


malign (adj.)

early 14c., from Old French maligne having an evil nature, from Latin malignus wicked, bad-natured,
from male badly (see mal-) + -gnus born, from gignere to bear, beget, from PIE root *gn- to bear
(see genus).


team (v.)

1550s, to harness beasts in a team, from team (n.). From 1841 as drive a team. The meaning to come
together as a team (usually with up) is attested from 1932. Transitive sense to use (something) in
conjunction (with something else) is from 1948. Related: Teamed; teaming. The Old English verb,
teaman, tieman, is attested only in the sense bring forth, beget, engender, propagate.


genuine (adj.)

1590s, natural, not acquired, from Latin genuinus native, natural, from root of gignere beget (see
genus), perhaps influenced in form by contrasting adulterinus spurious. [Alternative etymology is
from Latin genu knee, from a supposed ancient custom of a father acknowledging paternity of a
newborn by placing it on his knee.] Meaning really proceeding from its reputed source is from 1660s.
Related: Genuinely; genuineness.


genius (n.)

late 14c., tutelary god (classical or pagan), from Latin genius guardian deity or spirit which
watches over each person from birth; spirit, incarnation, wit, talent; also prophetic skill,
originally generative power, from root of gignere beget, produce (see kin), from PIE root *gen-
produce. Sense of characteristic disposition is from 1580s. Meaning person of natural intelligence
or talent and that of natural ability are first recorded 1640s.


ingenuous (adj.)

1590s, noble in nature, from Latin ingenuus with the virtues of freeborn people, of noble character,
frank, upright, candid, originally native, freeborn, from in- in (see in- (2)) + gen-, root of
gignere beget, produce (see genus). Sense of artless, innocent is 1670s, via evolution from high-
minded to honorably open, straightforward, to innocently frank. Related: Ingenuously; ingenuousness.


primogenitor (n.)

an ancestor, late 15c., from Medieval Latin primogenitor, from Latin primo (adv.) first in order of
time; at first, from primus first (see prime (adj.)) + genitor father, from genitus, past participle
of gignere to beget (see genus). Related: Primogenital; primogenitary. The fem. form is
primogenitrix (1875). The rights of a second son are secundogeniture.


indigenous (adj.)

1640s, from Late Latin indigenus born in a country, native, from Latin indigena sprung from the
land, as a noun, a native, literally in-born, or born in (a place), from Old Latin indu in, within
(earlier endo) + *gene-, root of gignere (perf. genui) beget, from PIE *gen- produce (see genus).


procreation (n.)

late 14c., process of begetting offspring, from Old French procreacion (14c., Modern French
pr&#243;creation) and directly from Latin procreationem (nominative procreatio) a begetting,
generation, noun of action from past participle stem of procreare bring forth (offspring), beget,
generate, produce, from pro- forth (see pro-) + creare create (see create).


primogeniture (n.)

right of succession of the first-born, c.1600, from French primogeniture and directly from Medieval
Latin primogenitura, from Late Latin primogenitus first-born, from Latin primo (adv.) first in order
of time, from primus first (see prime (adj.)) + genitus, past participle of gignere to beget (see
genus). Earlier it meant simply fact of being first-born (1590s).


neophyte (n.)

new convert, 1550s, from Ecclesiastical Latin neophytus, from Greek neophytos a new convert, noun
use of adjective meaning newly initiated, newly converted, literally newly planted, from neos new
(see new) + phytos grown; planted, verbal adjective of phyein cause to grow, beget, plant (see
physic). Church sense is from I Tim. iii:6. Rare before 19c. General sense of one who is new to any
subject is first recorded 1590s.


germ (n.)

mid-15c., bud, sprout; 1640s, rudiment of a new organism in an existing one, from Middle French
germe germ (of egg); bud, seed, fruit; offering, from Latin germen (genitive germinis) sprout, bud,
perhaps from PIE root *gen- to beget, bear (see genus). The older sense is preserved in wheat germ
and germ of an idea; sense of seed of a disease first recorded 1796 in English; that of harmful
microorganism dates from 1871. Germ warfare recorded from 1920.


german (adj.)

of the same parents or grandparents, c.1300, from Old French germain closely related (12c.), from
Latin germanus full, own (of brothers and sisters); one's own brother; genuine, real, related to
germen (genitive germinis) sprout, bud, dissimilated from PIE *gen(e)-men-, from root *gene- to give
birth, beget (see genus). Your cousin-german (also first cousin) is the son or daughter of an uncle
or aunt; your children and your first cousin's are second cousins to one another; to you, your first
cousin's children are first cousin once removed.


gentle (adj.)

early 13c., well-born, from Old French gentil high-born, noble, of good family (11c., in Modern
French nice, graceful, pleasing; fine pretty), from Latin gentilis of the same family or clan, from
gens (genitive gentis) race, clan, from root of gignere beget, from PIE root *gen- produce (see
genus). Sense of gracious, kind (now obsolete) first recorded late 13c.; that of mild, tender is
1550s. Older sense remains in gentleman.


teem (v.1)

abound, swarm, be prolific, Old English teman (Mercian), tieman (West Saxon) beget, give birth to,
bring forth, produce, propagate, from Proto-Germanic *tau(h)mjan (denominative), from PIE *deuk- to
lead (see duke (n.)). Related to team (n.) in its now-obsolete Old English sense of family, brood of
young animals. The meaning abound, swarm is first recorded 1590s, on the notion of be full of as if
ready to give birth. Related: Teemed; teeming.


benign (adj.)

early 14c., from Old French benigne (12c., kind, benign, merciful, gracious; Modern French
b&eacute;nin, fem. b&eacute;nigne), from Latin benignus kindly, kindhearted, friendly, generous,
literally well born, from bene well (see bene-) + gignere to bear, beget, from genus birth (see
genus). For similar sense evolution, compare gentle, kind (adj.), generous. Related: Benignly.


kind (n.)

class, sort, variety, from Old English gecynd kind, nature, race, related to cynn family (see kin),
from Proto-Germanic *kundjaz family, race, from PIE *gene- to give birth, beget (see genus).
&AElig;lfric's rendition of the Book of Genesis into Old English came out gecyndboc. The prefix
disappeared 1150-1250. No exact cognates beyond English, but it corresponds to adjective endings
such as Goth -kunds, Old High German -kund. Also in English as a suffix (mankind, etc.). Other
earlier, now obsolete, senses in English included character, quality derived from birth and manner
or way natural or proper to anyone. Use in phrase a kind of (1590s) led to colloquial extension as
adverb (1804) in phrases such as kind of stupid (a kind of stupid (person)).


nature (n.)

late 13c., restorative powers of the body, bodily processes; powers of growth; from Old French
nature nature, being, principle of life; character, essence, from Latin natura course of things;
natural character, constitution, quality; the universe, literally birth, from natus born, past
participle of nasci to be born, from PIE *gene- to give birth, beget (see genus).    From late 14c.
as creation, the universe; also heredity, birth, hereditary circumstance; essential qualities,
innate disposition (as in human nature); nature personified, Mother Nature. Specifically as material
world beyond human civilization or society from 1660s. Nature and nurture have been contrasted since
1874.  Nature should be avoided in such vague expressions as 'a lover of nature,' 'poems about
nature.' Unless more specific statements follow, the reader cannot tell whether the poems have to do
with natural scenery, rural life, the sunset, the untouched wilderness, or the habits of squirrels.
[Strunk &amp; White, The Elements of Style, 3rd ed., 1979]


thane (n.)

Old English &thorn;egn military follower, one who holds lands in exchange for military service, also
vassal, retainer, attendant, from Proto-Germanic *thegnas (cognates: Old Saxon thegan follower,
warrior, boy, Old Norse &thorn;egn thane, freeman, Old High German thegan, German Degen thane,
warrior, hero), from PIE *tek-no- (cognates: Sanskrit takman descendant, child, Greek teknon child),
from root *tek- to beget, give birth to (cognates: Greek tekos child, the young of animals, tokos
childbirth, offspring, produce of money, interest). Also used in Old English for disciple of Christ.
Specific sense of man who ranks between an earl and a freeman is late 15c.    The modern spelling is
from Scottish, where early 13c. it came to mean chief of a clan, king's baron, and it has
predominated in English probably due to the influence of Macbeth; normal orthographic changes from
Old English &eth;egn would have produced Modern English *thain. Some historians now use thegn to
distinguish Anglo-Saxon thanes from Scottish thanes.


