beguile (v.)

early 13c., from be- + guile (v.). Related: Beguiled; beguiling.


beguiling (adj.)

c.1400, present participle adjective from beguile.


jape (v.)

late 14c., to trick, beguile, jilt, perhaps from Old French japer to howl, bawl, scream, of echoic
origin, or from Old French gaber to mock, deride. Phonetics suits the former, but sense the latter
explanation. Took on a slang sense mid-15c. of have sex with, and disappeared from polite usage.
Revived in harmless Middle English sense of say or do something in jest by Scott, etc. Related:
Japed; japing.


deceive (v.)

c.1300, from Old French decevoir (12c., Modern French d&eacute;cevoir) to deceive, from Latin
decipere to ensnare, take in, beguile, cheat, from de- from or pejorative + capere to take (see
capable). Related: Deceived; deceiver; deceiving.


while (v.)

to cause (time) to pass (without dullness), 1630s, earlier to occupy or engage (someone or
something) for a period of time (c.1600), new formation from while (n.), not considered to be from
Middle English hwulen to have leisure, which is from a Germanic verb form of while (n.) (compare
German weilen to stay, linger). An association with phrases such as Shakespearean beguile the day,
Latin diem decipere, French tromper le temps has led to the substitution of WILE v by some modern
writers [OED] (see wile (v.)).


amuse (v.)

late 15c., to divert the attention, beguile, delude, from Middle French amuser divert, cause to
muse, from a at, to (but here probably a causal prefix) + muser ponder, stare fixedly (see muse
(v.)). Sense of divert from serious business, tickle the fancy of is recorded from 1630s, but
through 18c. the primary meaning was deceive, cheat by first occupying the attention. Bemuse retains
more of the original meaning. Related: Amused; amusing.


calumny (n.)

False &amp; malicious misrepresentation of the words or actions of others, calculated to injure
their reputation [Fowler], mid-15c., from Middle French calomnie (15c.), from Latin calumnia
trickery, subterfuge, misrepresentation, malicious charge, from calvi to trick, deceive, from PIE
root *kel- (6) to deceive, confuse (cognates: Greek kelein to bewitch, seduce, beguile, Gothic holon
to deceive, Old Norse hol praise, flattery, Old English hol slander, holian to slander).


