bellicose (adj.)

early 15c., from Latin bellicosus warlike, valorous, given to fighting, from bellicus of war, from
bellum war, Old Latin duellum, dvellum, of uncertain origin.


post-bellum (adj.)

also postbellum, used in U.S. South from 1874 in reference to American Civil War; see post- +
bellicose.


bellicosity (n.)

1857, from bellicose + -ity.


antebellum (adj.)

also ante-bellum, from Latin phrase ante bellum, literally before the war; see ante- +  bellicose.
In U.S., usually in reference to the American Civil War (1861-65); first attested in a June 14,
1862, entry in Mary Chesnut's diary.


belligerent (adj.)

1570s, from Latin belligerantem (nominative belligerans), past participle of belligerare to wage
war, from bellum war (see bellicose) + gerere to bear, to carry (see gest). The noun meaning party
or nation at war is from 1811. Related: Belligerently.


Parabellum (n.)

proprietary name for a type of automatic firearm, 1904 (Mauser &amp; Deutsche Waffen und
Munitionsfabriken), from Latin phrase si vis pacem, para bellum, from para, imperative of parare to
prepare (see para- (2)) + bellum war (see bellicose).


casus belli (n.)

1849, from Latin casus case (see case (n.1)) + belli, genitive of bellum war (see bellicose). An act
justifying war.


duel (n.)

1590s (from late 13c. in Latin form), from Medieval Latin duellum combat between two persons, by
association with Latin duo two, but originally from Latin duellum war, an Old Latin form of bellum
(see bellicose). Retained in poetic and archaic language and apparently given a special meaning in
Medieval or Late Latin of one-on-one combat on fancied connection with duo two.


Bellatrix

bright star in the left shoulder of Orion, from Latin bellatrix a female warrior, frequently used as
an adjective, warlike, skilled in war, fem. of bellator to wage war, from bellum war (see
bellicose). The Latin name, from the Alfonsine Tables (mid-13c.), very loosely translates the Arabic
name for the star, Al Najid the conqueror.    In astrology it was the natal star of all destined to
great civil or military honors, and rendered women born under its influence lucky and loquacious; or
as old Thomas Hood said, Women born under this constellation shall have mighty tongues. [Allen]


jingo (n.)

mindless, gung-ho patriot, 1878, picked up from the refrain of a music hall song written by G.W.
Hunt, and sung by Gilbert H. MacDermott (1845-1901), supporting aggressive British policy toward
Russia at a time of international tension. (We don't want to fight, But by Jingo! if we do, We've
got the ships, we've got the men, We've got the money too.)    Hunt's patriotic song of 1878, with a
swinging tune ... became at Macdermott's instigation the watchword of the popular supporters of
England's bellicose policy. The Daily News on 11 March 1878 first dubbed the latter 'Jingoes' in
derision .... [Dictionary of National Biography, London, 1912]    As an asseveration, it was in
colloquial use since 1690s, and is apparently yet another euphemism for Jesus, influenced by
conjurer's gibberish presto-jingo (1660s). The frequent suggestion that it somehow derives from
Basque Jinko god is not impossible, but as yet unsupported by evidence [OED].


