benevolent (adj.)

mid-15c., wishing to do good, kindly, from Middle French benivolent and directly from Latin
benevolentem (nominative benevolens) wishing (someone) well, benevolent, related to benevolentia
good feeling (see benevolence). Related: Benevolently.


Big Brother

ubiquitous and repressive but apparently benevolent authority first recorded 1949, from George
Orwell's novel Nineteen Eighty-Four.


kelpie (n.)

1747, Scottish, of unknown origin, perhaps related to Gaelic colpach heifer, steer, colt; colpa cow,
horse. The Lowland name of a demon in the shape of a horse that was reputed to haunt lakes and
rivers and to delight in causing drownings. But unlike its equivalents in Danish (n&oslash;kken) and
Icelandic (nykur), it occasionally was benevolent, especially to millers by keeping their streams
running.


gracious (adj.)

c.1300, filled with God's grace, from Old French gracios courteous, pleasing, kind, friendly (12c.,
Modern French gracieux), from Latin gratiosus enjoying favor, agreeable, obliging; popular,
acceptable, from gratia (see grace). Meaning merciful, benevolent is from late 14c. As an
exclamation, elliptically for gracious God, attested from 1713.


brownie (n.)

benevolent goblin supposed to haunt old farmhouses in Scotland, 1510s, diminutive of brown a wee
brown man (see brown (adj.)). The name for the junior branch of the Girl Guides or Girl Scouts is
1916, in reference to uniform color. Brownie point (1963) is sometimes associated with Brownie in
the Scouting sense but is perhaps rather from brown-nose.


auspices (n.)

plural (and now the usual form) of auspice; 1530s, observation of birds for the purpose of taking
omens, from French auspice (14c.), from Latin auspicum divination from the flight of birds; function
of an auspex (q.v.). Meaning any indication of the future (especially favorable) is from 1650s;
earlier (1630s) in extended sense of benevolent influence of greater power, influence exerted on
behalf of someone or something, originally in expression under the auspices of.


benefice (n.)

c.1300, a church living, from Old French benefice (13c.) and directly from Latin beneficium a favor,
service, generosity, kindness, benefit, from beneficus generous, kind, benevolent, obliging, from
bene- good, well (see bene-) + -ficus, from stem of -ficere, unstressed form of facere to do, to
make (see factitious).


frangipani (n.)

type of shrub, 1864; earlier frangipane, a type of perfume (1670s), from French frangipane (16c.),
said to be from Frangipani, the family name of the Italian inventor.    FRANGIPANI, an illustrious
and powerful Roman House, which traces its origin to the 7th c., and attained the summit of its
glory in the 11th and 12th centuries. ... The origin of the name Frangipani is attributed to the
family's benevolent distribution of bread in time of famine. [Chambers's Encyclop&aelig;dia, 1868]


meek (adj.)

c.1200, gentle, quiet, unaggressive; benevolent, kind; courteous, humble, unassuming; of a woman,
modest, from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse mjukr soft, pliant, gentle, from Proto-Germanic
*meukaz (cognates: Gothic muka-modei humility, Dutch muik soft), of uncertain origin, perhaps from
PIE *meug- slippery, slimy. In the Bible, it translates Latin mansuetus from Vulgate (see
mansuetude). Sense of submissive is from mid-14c.


asylum (n.)

early 15c., earlier asile (late 14c.), from Latin asylum sanctuary, from Greek asylon refuge, noun
use of neuter of asylos inviolable, safe from violence, especially of persons seeking protection,
from a- without + syle right of seizure. So literally an inviolable place. General sense of safe or
secure place is from 1640s; meaning benevolent institution to shelter some class of persons is from
1776.


Tammany

in 19c. American English political jargon synonymous with Democratic Party in New York City, hence,
late 19c., proverbial for political and municipal corruption, from Tammany Hall, on 14th Street,
headquarters of a social club incorporated 1789, named for Delaware Indian chief Tamanen, who sold
land to William Penn in 1683 and '97. Around the time of the American Revolution he was popularly
canonized as St. Tammany and taken as the patron saint of Pennsylvania and neighboring colonies,
sometimes of the whole of America. He was assigned a feast day (May 1 Old Style, May 12 New Style)
which was celebrated with festivities that raised money for charity, hence the easy transfer of the
name to what was, at first, a benevolent association. The club's symbol was a tiger.


elk (n.)

late Old English, from Old Norse elgr or from an alteration of Old English elh, eolh (perhaps via
French scribes), or possibly from Middle High German elch (OED's suggestion), all from Proto-
Germanic *elkh- (source also of Old High German elaho),    The Germanic words are related to the
general word for deer in Balto-Slavic (such as Russian losu, Czech los; also see eland), from PIE
*olki-, perhaps with reference to the reddish color from root *el- (2) red, brown (in animal and
tree names); compare Sanskrit harina- deer, from hari- reddish-brown. Greek alke and Latin alces
probably are Germanic loan-words. Benevolent and Protective Order of Elks founded N.Y.C. 1868,
originally a society of actors and writers.


uncle (n.)

late 13c., from Old French oncle, from Latin avunculus mother's brother (father's brother was
patruus), literally little grandfather, diminutive of avus grandfather, from PIE root *awo-
grandfather, adult male relative other than one's father (cognates: Armenian hav grandfather,
Lithuanian avynas maternal uncle, Old Church Slavonic uji uncle, Welsh ewythr uncle).    Replaced
Old English eam (usually maternal; paternal uncle was f&aelig;dera), which represents the Germanic
form of the root (cognates: Dutch oom, Old High German oheim maternal uncle, German Ohm uncle).
Also from French are German, Danish, Swedish onkel. As a familiar title of address to an old man,
attested by 1793; in the U.S. South, especially a kindly title for a worthy old negro [Century
Dictionary]. First record of Dutch uncle (and his blunt, stern, benevolent advice) is from 1838;
Welsh uncle (1747) was the male first cousin of one's parent. To say uncle as a sign of submission
in a fight is North American, attested from 1909, of uncertain signification.


aunt (n.)

c.1300, from Anglo-French aunte, Old French ante (Modern French tante, from a 13c. variant), from
Latin amita paternal aunt diminutive of *amma a baby-talk word for mother (cognates: Greek amma
mother, Old Norse amma grandmother, Middle Irish ammait old hag, Hebrew em, Arabic umm mother).
Extended senses include an old woman, a gossip (1580s); a procuress (1670s); and any benevolent
woman, in American English, where auntie was recorded since c.1790 as a term often used in accosting
elderly women. The French word also has become the word for aunt in Dutch, German (Tante), and
Danish. Swedish has retained the original Germanic (and Indo-European) custom of distinguishing
aunts by separate terms derived from father's sister (faster) and mother's sister (moster). The Old
English equivalents were fa&eth;u and modrige. In Latin, too, the formal word for aunt on mother's
side was matertera. Some languages have a separate term for aunts-in-law as opposed to blood
relations.


