beneficial (adj.)

mid-15c., helpful, advantageous, from Middle French b&eacute;n&eacute;ficial and directly from Latin
beneficialis pertaining to a favor, from beneficium (see benefice). Related: Beneficially.


constitutional (n.)

a constitutional walk, 1829, probably originally among university students, from constitutional
(adj.) in the beneficial to bodily health sense.


available (adj.)

mid-15c., beneficial, also valid, effective, capable of producing the desired effect, from avail +
-able. Meaning at one's disposal, capable of being made use of is recorded from 1827.


salutary (adj.)

late 15c., from Middle French salutaire beneficial, or directly from Latin salutaris healthful, from
salus (genitive salutis) good health (see salute).


commodious (adj.)

early 15c., beneficial, convenient, from Medieval Latin commodiosus convenient, useful, from Latin
commodus (see commode). Meaning roomy, spacious first attested 1550s. Related: Commodiously;
commodiousness.


utile (adj.)

late 15c., from Old French utile useful (13c.), from Latin utilis useful, beneficial, profitable,
from uti (see use (v.)).


expedient (adj.)

late 14c., advantageous, fit, proper, from Old French expedient (14c.) or directly from Latin
expedientem (nominative expediens) beneficial, present participle of expedire make fit or ready,
prepare (see expedite). The noun meaning a device adopted in an exigency, a resource is from 1650s.
Related: Expediential; expedientially (both 19c.)


constitutional (adj.)

1680s, pertaining to a person's (physical or mental) constitution, from constitution + -al (1).
Meaning beneficial to bodily constitution is from 1750. Meaning authorized or allowed by the
political constitution is from 1765. Constitutional monarchy is recorded from 1801, from French.
Related: Constitutionally.


ungainly (adj.)

1610s, unfit, improper, from Middle English ungeinliche, from ungein (late 14c.) inconvenient,
disagreeable, troublesome, from un- (1) not + gein kind, helpful; reliable; beneficial; suitable,
appropriate; convenient, from Old Norse gegn straight, direct, helpful, from Proto-Germanic *gagina
against (see again). Old English had ung&aelig;nge useless, vain.


virtuous (adj.)

c.1300, characterized by vigor or strength; having qualities befitting a knight; valiant, hardy,
courageous; from Old French vertuos righteous; potent; of good quality; mighty, valiant, brave
(12c.), from Late Latin virtuosus good, virtuous, from Latin virtus (see virtue). From mid-14c. in
English as having beneficial or efficacious properties; late 14c. (of persons) as having excellent
moral qualities; conforming to religious law. Related: Virtuously; virtuousness.


colonize (v.)

1620s, to settle with colonists, from stem of Latin colonus tiller of the soil, farmer (see colony);
in sense to make another place into a national dependency without regard for settlement there by
1790s (such as in reference to French activity in Egypt or British work in India), and probably
directly from colony.    No principle ought ever to be tolerated or acted upon, that does not
proceed on the basis of India being considered as the temporary residence of a great British
Establishment, for the good government of the country, upon steady and uniform principles, and of a
large British factory, for the beneficial management of its trade, upon rules applicable to the
state and manners of the country. [Henry Dundas, Chairman of the East-India Company, letter, April
2, 1800]    Related: Colonized; colonizing.


serve (v.)

late 12c., to render habitual obedience to, also minister, give aid, give help, from Old French
servir to do duty toward, show devotion to; set table, serve at table; offer, provide with, from
Latin servire be a servant, be in service, be enslaved; figuratively be devoted; be governed by;
comply with; conform; flatter, originally be a slave, related to servus slave, perhaps from Etruscan
(compare Etruscan proper names Servi, Serve, Latinized as Servius).    By c.1200 also as to be in
the service of, perform a service for; attend upon, be personal servant to; be a slave; owe
allegiance to; officiate at Mass or other religious rites; from early 13c. as set food at table;
mid-14c. as to wait on (customers). From late 14c. as treat (someone or something) in some fashion.
To serve (someone) right to treat as he deserves is recorded from 1580s.    He no schuld neuer wond
To seruen him fro fot to hond  [Amis and Amiloun, c.1330]    Sense of be useful, be beneficial, be
suitable for a purpose or function is from early 14c.; that of take the place or meet the needs of,
be equal to the task is from late 14c.; that of suffice is from mid-15c. Meaning render active
military service is from 1510s. Sporting sense, in tennis, badminton, etc., first recorded 1580s.
Legal sense present (a writ, warrant,etc.), give legal notice of is from early 15c.


