benefit (v.)

late 15c., from benefit (n.). Related: Benefited; benefiting.


benefits (n.)

financial support (especially for medical expenses) to which one is entitled through employment or
membership, 1895, plural of benefit (n.).


benefit (n.)

late 14c., good or noble deed, also advantage, profit, from Anglo-French benfet well-done, from
Latin benefactum good deed, from bene facere (see benefactor). Meaning performance or entertainment
to raise money for some charitable cause is from 1680s.


commodity (n.)

early 15c., benefit, profit, welfare; later a convenient or useful product, from Middle French
commodit&eacute; benefit, profit, from Latin commoditatem (nominative commoditas) fitness,
adaptation, convenience, advantage, from commodus suitable, convenient (see commode). General sense
property possession is from c.1500.


profit (v.)

early 14c., to advance, benefit, gain, from profit (n.) and from Old French prufiter, porfiter to
benefit, from prufit (see profit (n.)). Related: Profited; profiting.


behoof (n.)

c.1200, use, benefit, advantage; Old English had bihoflic useful, implying *bihof advantage,
utility; from Proto-Germanic *bi-hof that which binds, requirement, obligation (cognates: Old
Frisian bihof advantage, Dutch behoef, Middle High German bihuof useful thing, German Behuf benefit,
use, advantage). In the common Germanic compound, the first element, likely intensive, is cognate
with be- and the second with Old English hof, past tense of hebban to raise (see heave (v.)). The
original sense is perhaps, then, taking up (for oneself).


merit (n.)

c.1200, spiritual credit (for good works, etc.); c.1300, spiritual reward, from Old French merite
wages, pay, reward; thanks; merit, moral worth, that which assures divine pity, and directly from
Latin meritum a merit, service, kindness, benefit, favor; worth, value, importance, neuter of
meritus, past participle of merere, meriri to earn, deserve, acquire, gain, from PIE root *(s)mer-
to allot, assign (cognates: Greek meros part, lot, moira share, fate, moros fate, destiny, doom,
Hittite mark to divide a sacrifice).    Sense of worthiness, excellence is from early 14c.; from
late 14c. as condition or conduct that deserves either reward or punishment; also a reward, benefit.
Related: Merits. Merit system attested from 1880. Merit-monger was in common use 16c.-17c. in a
sense roughly of do-gooder.


malpractice (n.)

1670s, hybrid coined from mal- + practice (n.). Also used in law for illegal action by which a
person seeks a benefit for himself while in a position of trust (1758).


good (n.)

Old English g&#333;d that which is good, goodness; advantage, benefit; gift; virtue; property; from
good (adj.).


cohabit (v.)

euphemism since 1530s to describe a couple living together without benefit of marriage; back-
formation from cohabitation. Related: Cohabited; cohabiting.


beadsman (n.)

one who prays for another's benefit, early 13c.; see bead (n.) + man (n.).


self-seeking (n.)

a seeking after one's own benefit (before those of others), 1580s, from self + seeking, verbal noun
from seek. As an adjective, from 1620s.


placebo (n.)

early 13c., name given to the rite of Vespers of the Office of the Dead, so called from the opening
of the first antiphon, I will please the Lord in the land of the living (Psalm cxiv:9), from Latin
placebo I shall please, future indicative of placere to please (see please). Medical sense is first
recorded 1785, a medicine given more to please than to benefit the patient. Placebo effect attested
from 1900.


expedience (n.)

mid-15c., advantage, benefit, from Old French expedience, from Late Latin expedientia, from
expedientem (see expedient). Related: Expediency (1610s).


profitable (adj.)

c.1300, yielding benefit, useful, from profit (v.) + -able or from Old French profitable,
porfitable. Specific sense of money-making is attested from 1758. Related: Profitably.


wholesome (adj.)

c.1200, of benefit to the soul, from whole (adj.) in the healthy sense + -some (1). Physical sense
first attested late 14c. Related: Wholesomely; wholesomeness. Old English had halwende.


jocund (adj.)

late 14c., from Latin iocundus (source of Spanish jocunde, Italian giocondo), variant (influenced by
iocus joke) of Latin iucundus pleasant, originally helpful, contraction of *iuvicundus, from iuvare
to please, benefit, help (see adjutant).


cui bono

a Latin phrase from Cicero. It means to whom for a benefit, or who profits by it? not to what good
purpose? as is often erroneously claimed. From cui to? for whom?, an old form preserved here in the
dative form of the interrogative pronoun quis who? (see who) + bono good (see bene-).


profit (n.)

mid-13c., income; c.1300, benefit, advantage;from Old French prufit, porfit profit, gain (mid-12c.),
from Latin profectus profit, advance, increase, success, progress, noun use of past participle of
proficere (see proficiency). As the opposite of loss, it replaced Old English gewinn. Profit margin
attested from 1853.


trade-off (n.)

also tradeoff, sacrifice of one benefit for another, 1959, from verbal phrase to trade off; see
trade (v.) + off (adv.).


batten (v.1)

to improve; to fatten, 1590s, probably representing an English dialectal survival of Old Norse batna
improve (cognates: Old English batian, Old Frisian batia, Old High German bazen, Gothic gabatnan to
become better, avail, benefit, Old English bet better; also see boot (v.)). Related: Battened;
battening.


benefice (n.)

c.1300, a church living, from Old French benefice (13c.) and directly from Latin beneficium a favor,
service, generosity, kindness, benefit, from beneficus generous, kind, benevolent, obliging, from
bene- good, well (see bene-) + -ficus, from stem of -ficere, unstressed form of facere to do, to
make (see factitious).


frame (n.)

c.1200, profit, benefit; mid-13c. composition, plan, from frame (v.) and in part from Scandinavian
(Old Norse frami advancement). In late 14c. it also meant the rack.    Meaning building is from
early 15c.; that of border or case for a picture or pane of glass is from c.1600. The meaning
established order, plan and that of human body are both first recorded 1590s. Of bicycles, from
1871; of motor cars, from 1900. Frame of mind is from 1711. Frame of reference is 1897, from
mechanics and graphing; the figurative sense is attested from 1924.


oblige (v.)

c.1300, to bind by oath, from Old French obligier engage one's faith, commit (oneself), pledge
(13c.), from Latin obligare to bind, bind up, bandage, figuratively put under obligation, from ob to
(see ob-) + ligare to bind, from PIE root *leig- to bind (see ligament). Main modern meaning to make
(someone) indebted by conferring a benefit or kindness is from 1560s. Related: obliged; obliging.


visit (v.)

c.1200, come to (a person) to comfort or benefit, from Old French visiter to visit; inspect,
examine; afflict (12c.) and directly from Latin visitare to go to see, come to inspect,
frequentative of visere behold, visit (a person or place), from past participle stem of videre to
see, notice, observe (see vision). Originally of the deity, later of pastors and doctors (c.1300),
general sense of pay a call is from mid-13c. Meaning come upon, afflict (in reference to sickness,
punishment, etc.) is recorded in English from mid-14c. Related: Visited; visiting.


deceit (n.)

c.1300, from Old French deceite, fem. past participle of deceveir (see deceive).   Deceit is a
shorter and more energetic word for deceitfulness, indicating the quality; it is also, but more
rarely, used to express the act or manner of deceiving. The reverse is true of deception, which is
properly the act or course by which one deceives, and not properly the quality; it may express the
state of being deceived. Fraud is an act or series of acts of deceit by which one attempts to
benefit himself at the expense of others. It is generally a breaking of the law; the others are not.
[entry for deceit in The Century Dictionary and Cyclopedia, 1902]


symbiosis (n.)

1876, as a biological term, union for life of two different organisms based on mutually benefit,
from Greek symbiosis a living together, from symbioun live together, from symbios (one) living
together (with another), partner, companion, husband or wife, from assimilated form of syn- together
(see syn-) + bios life (see bio-). Given a wider (non-biological) sense by 1921. An earlier sense of
communal or social life is found in 1620s. A back-formed verb symbiose is recorded from 1960.


junket (n.)

late 14c., basket in which fish are caught or carried, from Medieval Latin iuncata rush basket,
perhaps from Latin iuncus rush. Shifted meaning by 1520s to feast, banquet, probably via notion of a
picnic basket, which led to extended sense of pleasure trip (1814), and then to tour by government
official at public expense for no discernable public benefit (by 1886, American English). Compare
Italian cognate giuncata cream cheese (originally made in a rush basket), a sense of junket also
found in Middle English and preserved lately in dialects.


bee (n.)

stinging insect, Old English beo bee, from Proto-Germanic *bion (cognates: Old Norse by, Old High
German bia, Middle Dutch bie), possibly from PIE root *bhi- quiver. Used metaphorically for busy
worker since 1530s.    Sense of meeting of neighbors to unite their labor for the benefit of one of
their number, 1769, American English, probably is from comparison to the social activity of the
insect; this was extended to other senses (such as spelling bee, first attested 1809; Raising-bee
(1814) for building construction; also hanging bee a lynching). To have a bee in (one's) bonnet
(1825), said of one who is harebrained or has an intense new notion or fancy, is said in Jamieson to
be Scottish, perhaps from earlier expressions such as head full of bees (1510s), denoting mad mental
activity.


enjoy (v.)

late 14c., rejoice, be glad (intransitive), from Old French enjoir to give joy, rejoice, take
delight in, from en- make (see en- (1)) + joir enjoy, from Latin gaudere rejoice (see joy); Sense of
have the use or benefit of first recorded early 15c. (replacing Old English brucan; see brook (v.)).
Meaning take pleasure in is mid-15c. In modern use it has a tendency to lose its connection with
pleasure: newspaper photo captions say someone enjoys an ice cream cone, etc., when all she is doing
is eating it, and Wright's English Dialect Dictionary (1900) reports widespread use in north and
west England of the phrase to enjoy bad health for one who has ailments. Related: Enjoyed; enjoying;
enjoys.


frame (v.)

Old English framian to profit, be helpful, avail, benefit, from fram active, vigorous, bold,
originally going forward, from fram forward; from (see from).    Influenced by related Old English
fremman help forward, promote, further, do, perform, accomplish, and by Old Norse fremja to further,
execute. Sense focused in Middle English from make ready (mid-13c.) to prepare timber for building
(late 14c.). Meaning compose, devise is first attested 1540s.    The criminal slang sense of blame
an innocent person (1920s) is probably from earlier sense of plot in secret (1900), perhaps
ultimately from meaning fabricate a story with evil intent, first attested 1510s. Related: Framed;
framing.


Druid (n.)

1560s, from French druide, from Latin druidae (plural), from Gaulish Druides, from Celtic compound
*dru-wid-, probably representing Old Celtic *derwos true/PIE *dru- tree (especially oak; see tree
(n.)) + *wid- to know (see vision). Hence, literally, perhaps, they who know the oak (perhaps in
allusion to divination from mistletoe). Anglo-Saxon, too, used identical words to mean tree and
truth (treow).    The English form comes via Latin, not immediately from Celtic. The Old Irish form
was drui (dative and accusative druid; plural druad); Modern Irish and Gaelic draoi, genitive druadh
magician, sorcerer. Not to be confused with United Ancient Order of Druids, secret benefit society
founded in London 1781.


help (v.)

Old English helpan (class III strong verb; past tense healp, past participle holpen) help, support,
succor; benefit, do good to; cure, amend, from Proto-Germanic *helpan (cognates: Old Norse hjalpa,
Old Frisian helpa, Middle Dutch and Dutch helpen, Old High German helfan, German helfen), from PIE
root *kelb- to help (cognates: Lithuanian selpiu to support, help).    Recorded as a cry of distress
from late 14c. Sense of serve someone with food at table (1680s) is translated from French servir to
help, stead, avail, and led to helping portion of food. Related: Helped (c.1300). The Middle English
past participle holpen survives in biblical and U.S. dialectal use.


stead (n.)

Old English stede place, position; standing, firmness, stability, fixity, from Proto-Germanic
*stadiz (cognates: Old Saxon stedi, Old Norse sta&eth;r place, spot; stop, pause; town, Swedish
stad, Dutch stede place, Old High German stat, German Stadt town, Gothic sta&thorn;s place), from
PIE *steti-, suffixed form of root *sta- to stand (see stet). Related to stand.    Now chiefly in
compounds or phrases. Meaning assistance, use, benefit, advantage is from c.1300. Meaning frame on
which a bed is laid is from c.1400. The German use of Stadt for town, city is a late development
from c.1200 when the term began to replace Burg [Cambridge Dictionary of English Place-Names]. The
Steads was 16c. English for the Hanseatic cities.


interest (n.)

mid-15c., legal claim or right; concern; benefit, advantage; earlier interesse (late 14c.), from
Anglo-French interesse what one has a legal concern in, from Medieval Latin interesse compensation
for loss, noun use of Latin interresse to concern, make a difference, be of importance, literally to
be between, from inter- between (see inter-) + esse to be (see essence).    Compare German
Interesse, from the same Medieval Latin source. Form in English influenced 15c. by French interest
damage, from Latin interest it is of importance, it makes a difference, third person singular
present of interresse. Financial sense of money paid for the use of money lent (1520s) earlier was
distinguished from usury (illegal under Church law) by being in reference to compensation due from a
defaulting debtor. Meaning curiosity is first attested 1771. Interest group is attested from 1907;
interest rate by 1868.


public (adj.)

late 14c., open to general observation, from Old French public (c.1300) and directly from Latin
publicus of the people; of the state; done for the state, also common, general, public; ordinary,
vulgar, and as a noun, a commonwealth; public property, altered (probably by influence of Latin
pubes adult population, adult) from Old Latin poplicus pertaining to the people, from populus people
(see people (n.)).    Early 15c. as pertaining to the people. From late 15c. as pertaining to public
affairs; meaning open to all in the community is from 1540s in English. An Old English adjective in
this sense was folclic. Public relations first recorded 1913 (after an isolated use by Thomas
Jefferson in 1807).   Public office position held by a public official is from 1821; public service
is from 1570s; public interest from 1670s.   Public-spirited is from 1670s. Public enemy is attested
from 1756. Public sector attested from 1949.   Public school is from 1570s, originally, in Britain,
a grammar school endowed for the benefit of the public, but most have evolved into boarding-schools
for the well-to-do. The main modern meaning in U.S., school (usually free) provided at public
expense and run by local authorities, is attested from 1640s. For public house, see pub.


