bent (n.1)

mental inclination, 1570s, probably from earlier literal sense condition of being deflected or
turned (1530s), from bent (adj.) not straight (q.v.).


bent (adj.)

not straight, late 14c. (earlier ibent, c.1300, from past participle of bend (v.). Meaning turned or
inclined in some direction is from 1530s, probably as a translation of Latin inclinatio. Meaning
directed in a course is from 1690s. Figurative phrase bent out of shape extremely upset is 1960s
U.S. Air Force and college student slang.


bent (n.2)

stiff grass, Old English beonet, from West Germanic *binut- rush, marsh grass (cognates: Old Saxon
binet, Old High German binuz, German Binse rush, reed), of unknown origin. An obsolete word, but
surviving in place names (such as Bentley, from Old English Beonet-leah; Bentham).    The verdure of
the plain lies buried deep  Beneath the dazzling deluge; and the bents,  And coarser grass,
upspearing o'er the rest,  Of late unsightly and unseen, now shine  Conspicuous, and, in bright
apparel clad  And fledg'd with icy feathers, nod superb.    [Cowper, The Winter-Morning Walk, from
The Task]


varus (n.)

foot deformity in which the feet are extroverted, so that the inner ankle rests on the ground, while
the sole of the foot is more or less turned outwards, 1800, from Latin varus bent, bent outwards,
turned awry, crooked, specifically with legs bent inward, knock-kneed, of uncertain origin.    If
the original meaning was 'with the legs opened', varus might be compared with vanus and vastus, and
reflect *wa-ro- 'going apart, letting go'. In any case, none of the other etymologies proposed seems
plausible. [de Vaan]    The use of classical varus and valgus, which denoted deformities of the
legs, in modern medicine to describe deformities of the feet, was criticized by learned writers (see
Edinburgh Medical and Surgical Journal, July 1838).


hellbent (adj.)

also hell-bent, 1835, U.S., originally slang, from hell + bent (1).


retort (n.2)

vessel used in chemistry for distilling or effecting decomposition by the aid of heat, c.1600, from
Middle French retorte, from Medieval Latin *retorta a retort, a vessel with a bent neck, literally a
thing bent or twisted, from past participle stem of Latin retorquere (see retort (v.)).


prone (adj.)

c.1400, naturally inclined to something, apt, liable, from Latin pronus bent forward, leaning
forward, bent over, figuratively inclined to, disposed, perhaps from adverbial form of pro- before,
for, instead of (see pro-) + ending as in infernus, externus. Meaning lying face-down is first
recorded 1570s. Literal and figurative senses both were in Latin; figurative is older in English.
Related: Proneness.


dog leg (n.)

something bent like a dog's hind leg, 1703. Originally of a type of staircase.


cramp (n.1)

muscle contraction, late 14c., from Old French crampe, from a Frankish or other Germanic word
(compare Old High German krapmhe cramp, spasm, related to kramph bent, crooked), from a Proto-
Germanic root forming many words for bent, crooked, including, via French, crampon. Writer's cramp
is first attested 1842 as the name of a physical affliction of the hand, in reference to
translations of German medical papers (Stromeyer); also known as scrivener's palsy.


angle (n.)

space between intersecting lines, late 14c., from Old French angle angle, corner, and directly from
Latin angulus an angle, corner, a diminutive form from PIE root *ang-/*ank- to bend (cognates: Greek
ankylos bent, crooked, Latin ang(u)ere to compress in a bend, fold, strangle; Old Church Slavonic
aglu corner; Lithuanian anka loop; Sanskrit ankah hook, bent, angam limb; Old English ancleo ankle;
Old High German ango hook). Angle bracket is 1875 in carpentry; 1956 in typography.


bow (v.)

Old English bugan to bend, to bow down, to bend the body in condescension, also to turn back (class
II strong verb; past tense beag, past participle bogen), from Proto-Germanic *bugon (cognates: Dutch
buigen, Middle Low German bugen, Old High German biogan, German biegen, Gothic biugan to bend, Old
Norse boginn bent), from *beugen, from PIE root *bheug- (3) to bend, with derivatives referring to
bent, pliable, or curved objects (cognates: Sanskrit bhujati bends, thrusts aside; Old High German
boug, Old English beag a ring). The noun in this sense is first recorded 1650s. Related: Bowed;
bowing. Bow out withdraw is from 1942.


corrugated (adj.)

1620s, wrinkled (of skin, etc.), past participle adjective from corrugate. Meaning bent into curves
or folds (of iron, cardboard, etc., for elasticity and strength) is from 1853.


clinch (n.)

1620s, method of fastening, from clinch (v.). Meaning a fastening by bent nail is from 1650s. In
pugilism, from 1875.


bend (n.1)

a bending or curving, 1590s; thing of bent shape, c.1600, from bend (v.). Earlier act of drawing a
bow (mid-15c.). The bends decompression pain first attested 1894.


unbowed (adj.)

late 14c., not bent, also figuratively not subdued, from un- (1) not + past participle of bow (v.).


nook (n.)

c.1300, noke, of unknown origin. Possibly connected with Norwegian dialectal nokke hook, bent
figure, or Old English hnecca neck, but the sense evolution would be difficult.


crampon (n.)

metal bar bent at the ends for fastening, c.1300, from Old French crampoun, from Germanic (see cramp
(n.1); also compare cramp (n.2)).


arcuate (adj.)

bent like a bow, 1620s, from Latin arcuatus bow-like, arched, past participle of arcuare to bend
like a bow, from arcus bow (see arc (n.)).


lordosis (n.)

curvature of the spine, 1704, Modern Latin, from Greek lordosis, from lordos bent backwards.
Related: Lordotic.


cramp (n.2)

metal bar bent at both ends, early 15c., from Middle Dutch crampe or Middle Low German krampe, both
from the same Proto-Germanic root that yielded cramp (n.1). Metaphoric sense of something that
confines or hinders first recorded 1719.


winch (n.)

late 13c., from Old English wince winch, pulley, from Proto-Germanic *winkja-, from PIE *weng- to
bend, curve (see wink (v.)). Perhaps so called in reference to the bent handle.


camber (n.)

1610s, nautical term, from Old French cambre, chambre bent, from Latin camurum (nominative camur)
crooked, arched; related to camera.


crouch (v.)

late 14c., probably from Old French crochir become bent, crooked, from croche hook (see crochet).
Related: Crouched; crouching. As a noun, from 1590s.


akimbo

c.1400, in kenebowe, of unknown origin, perhaps from Middle English phrase in keen bow at a sharp
angle, or from a Scandinavian word akin to Icelandic kengboginn bow-bent, but this seems not to have
been used in this exact sense. Many languages use a teapot metaphor for this, such as French faire
le pot a deux anses to play the pot with two handles.


clinch (v.)

1560s, clasp, interlock, especially with a bent nail, variant of clench. The sense of settle
decisively is first recorded 1716, from the notion of clinching the point of a nail to keep it fast.
Boxing sense is from 1860. Related: Clinched; clinching.


crumple (v.)

c.1300, crumplen, frequentative of crumpen to curl up (from Old English crump bent, crooked).
Related: Crumpled; crumpling.


cromlech (n.)

c.1600, from Welsh, from crom, fem. of crwm crooked, bent, concave + llech (flat) stone. Applied in
Wales and Cornwall to what in Brittany is a dolmen; a cromlech there is a circle of standing stones.


alcove (n.)

1670s, vaulted recess, from French alc&ocirc;ve (17c.), from Spanish alcoba, from Arabic al-qobbah
the vaulted chamber, from Semitic base q-b-b to be bent, crooked, vaulted.


Rambo

used allusively from 1985, in reference to John Rambo, hero of David Morrell's novel First Blood
(1972), popularized as portrayed by Sylvester Stallone in Hollywood movie version (1982), a U.S.
Vietnam veteran, macho and self-sufficient, and bent on violent retribution [OED]. The family name
is an old one in New Jersey and Pennsylvania, originally Swedish, sometimes said to represent
Swedish place name Ramberget, or to be from French Huguenots who took refuge in Sweden.


flexible (adj.)

early 15c., from Middle French flexible or directly from Latin flexibilis that may be bent, pliant,
flexible, yielding; figuratively tractable, inconstant, from flexus, past participle of flectere to
bend, of uncertain origin. Related: Flexibly.


sinus (n.)

hollow curve or cavity in the body, early 15c., from Medieval Latin sinus, from Latin sinus bend,
fold, curve, a bent surface; a bay, bight, gulf; a fold in land; also fold of the toga about the
breast, hence bosom, and figuratively love, affection, intimacy; interior, inmost part; of unknown
origin.


varicose (adj.)

early 15c., from Latin varicosus with dilated veins, from varix (genitive varicis) dilated vein,
probably related to varus bent outward, bow-legged (see varus).


curve (v.)

early 15c. (implied in curved), from Latin curvus crooked, curved, bent, and curvare to bend, both
from PIE root *(s)ker- (2) to turn, bend (see ring (n.)).


ferrule (n.)

metal cap on a rod, 1610s, ferule, earlier verrel (early 15c.), from Old French virelle, from Latin
viriola bracelet, diminutive of viriae bracelets, from a Gaulish word (compare Old Irish fiar bent,
crooked); spelling influenced by Latin ferrum iron.


cringe (v.)

early 13c., from causative of Old English cringan give way, fall (in battle), become bent, from
Proto-Germanic *krank- bend, curl up (cognates: Old Norse kringr, Dutch kring, German Kring circle,
ring). Related: Cringed; cringing. As a noun from 1590s.


woo (v.)

Old English wogian to woo, court, marry, of uncertain origin and with no known cognates; perhaps
related to woh, wog- bent, inclined, as with affection. Related: Wooed; wooing; wooer.


scoliosis (n.)

lateral curvature of the spine, 1706, medical Latin, from Greek skoliosis crookedness, from skolios
bent, curved, from PIE root *skel- (3) crooked, curved, with derivatives referring to crooked parts
of the body (as in Greek skelos leg, limb). Related: Scoliotic.


inflexible (adj.)

late 14c., incapable of being bent, physically rigid, also figuratively, unbending in temper or
purpose, from Middle French inflexible and directly from Latin inflexibilis, from inflexus, past
participle of inflectere (see inflect). In early 15c. an identical word had an opposite sense,
capable of being swayed or moved, from in- in, on. Related: Inflexibly.


circumflex (n.)

1570s, from Latin (accentus) circumflexus, bent around, past participle of circumflectere to bend
around, of a charioteer, turn around (from circum around; see circum-, + flectere to bend; see
flexible); used as a loan-translation of Greek (prosodia) perispomenos (Dionysius of Halicarnassus),
literally drawn-around, with reference to shape.


retroversion (n.)

1580s, a tilting or turning backward, noun of action or state from Latin retroversus turned or bent
backwards, from retro (see retro-) + versus turned (see versus).


gibbet (n.)

early 13c., gallows, from Old French gibet gallows; a bent stick, diminutive of gibe club, perhaps
from Frankish *gibb forked stick. The verb meaning to kill by hanging is from 1590s. Related:
Gibbeted; gibbeting. Originally synonymous with GALLOWS sb., but in later use signifying an upright
post with projecting arm from which the bodies of criminals were hung in chains or irons after
execution [OED].


oblique (adj.)

early 15c., from Middle French oblique (14c.) and directly from Latin obliquus slanting, sidelong,
indirect, from ob against (see ob-) + root of licinus bent upward, from PIE root *lei- to bend, be
movable (see limb (n.1)). As a type of muscles, in reference to the axis of the body, 1610s (adj.),
1800 (n.). Related: Obliquely; obliqueness.


colon (n.1)

punctuation mark, 1540s, from Latin colon part of a poem, from Greek kolon (with a long initial -o-)
part of a verse, literally limb, member (especially the leg, but also of a tree limb), also,
figuratively, a clause of a sentence, from PIE root *(s)kel- (3) bent, crooked (see scoliosis).
Meaning evolved from independent clause to punctuation mark that sets it off.


crook (n.)

early 13c., hook-shaped instrument or weapon, from Old Norse krokr hook, corner, cognate with Old
High German kracho hooked tool, of obscure origin but perhaps related to a widespread group of
Germanic kr- words meaning bent, hooked. Meaning swindler is American English, 1879, from crooked in
figurative sense of dishonest (1708). Crook dishonest trick was in Middle English.


valgus (adj.)

deformity in which a bone or joint is twisted outward from the center of the body; form of club-
foot, 1800, from Latin valgus bandy-legged, bow-legged, having the legs bent outward. Said to be
probably related to Sanskrit valgati to move up and down, Old English wealcan to roll, move to and
fro (see walk (v.)), perhaps on the notion of go irregularly or to and fro [Tucker]. Yet the main
characteristic of 'bow-legged' is the crookedness of the legs, not 'going up and down' or 'to and
fro' [de Vaan] and there are phonetic difficulties. A classical word used in a different sense in
modern medicine; also see varus.


supine (adj.)

c.1500, lying on the back, from Latin supinus bent backwards, thrown backwards, lying on the back,
figuratively inactive, indolent, from PIE *(s)up- (see sub-). The grammatical use for Latin verbal
noun formed from the past participle stem (mid-15c.) is from Late Latin supinum verbum supine verb,
perhaps so called because, though furnished with a noun case ending, it falls back on the verb.
Related: Supinely.


scowl (v.)

mid-14c., from a Scandinavian source (compare Norwegian skule look furtively, squint, look
embarrassed, Danish skule to scowl, cast down the eyes). Probably related to Old English sceolh wry,
oblique, Old High German scelah curved, German scheel squint-eyed; from PIE root *sqel- crooked,
curved, bent. Related: Scowled; scowling.


trollop

1610s, slovenly woman, often with implications of moral looseness, probably from troll (v.) in sense
of roll about, wallow.[A] certain Anne Hayward, wife of Gregory Hayward of Beighton, did in the
parishe church of Beighton aforesaid in the time of Divine Service or Sermon there, and when the
Minister was reading &amp; praying, violently &amp; boisterously presse &amp; enter into the seat or
place where one Elizabeth, wife of Robert Spurlinir, was quietly at her Devotion &amp; Duty to
Almighty God and then and there did quarrel chide &amp; braule &amp; being evilly &amp; inalitiously
bent did use then and there many rayleing opprobrious Speeches &amp; Invectives against the said
Elizabeth calling her Tripe &amp; Trallop, to the great disturbance both of the Minister and
Congregation. [Archdeaconry of Sudbury, Suffolk, Court Proceedings, 1682]


bagel (n.)

1919, from Yiddish beygl, from Middle High German boug- ring, bracelet, from Old High German boug a
ring, related to Old English beag ring (in poetry, an Anglo-Saxon lord was beaggifa ring-giver),
from Proto-Germanic *baugaz-, from PIE root *bheug- (3) to bend, with derivatives referring to bent,
pliable, or curved objects (such as Old High German biogan to bend; see bow (v.)).


bight (n.)

Old English byht bend, angle, corner (related to bow), from Proto-Germanic *buhtiz (cognates: Middle
Low German bucht, German Bucht, Dutch bocht, Danish bught bight, bay), from PIE root *bheug- (3) to
bend, with derivatives referring to bent, pliable, or curved objects (cognates: Old English beag,
Old High German boug ring; see bow (v.)). Sense of indentation on a coastline is from late 15c.


