bequeath (v.)

Old English becwe&eth;an to say, speak to, exhort, blame, also leave by will; from be- + cwe&eth;an
to say, from Proto-Germanic *kwithan, from PIE *gwet- to say, speak.    Original sense of say, utter
died out 13c., leaving legal sense of transfer by will. Closely related to bequest. An old word kept
alive in wills [OED 1st ed.]. Old English beque&eth;ere meant interpreter, translator. Related:
Bequeathed; bequeathing.


bequest (n.)

c.1300, act of bequeathing, from be- + *cwis, *cwiss saying (related to quoth; from Proto-Germanic
*kwessiz; see bequeath), with excrescent -t. Meaning that which is bequeathed is recorded from late
15c.


legate (n.)

mid-12c., authorized representative of the Pope, from Old French legat and directly from Latin
legatus ambassador, envoy, originally provided with a commission, past participle of legare send as
a deputy, send with a commission, bequeath, from lex (genitive legis) contract, law (see legal).
General sense of ambassador, delegate, messenger is from late 14c.


lease (n.)

late 14c., legal contract conveying property, usually for a fixed period of time and with a fixed
compensation, from Anglo-French les (late 13c.), from lesser to let, let go, from Old French
laissier to let, allow, permit; bequeath, leave, from Latin laxare loosen, open, make wide, from
laxus loose (see lax). Modern French equivalent legs is altered by erroneous derivation from Latin
legatum bequest, legacy.


quoth (v.)

Old English cw&aelig;&eth;, third person singular past tense of cwe&eth;an to say, speak; name,
call; declare, proclaim (Middle English quethan), from Proto-Germanic *kwithan (cognates: Old Saxon
quethan, Old Norse kve&eth;a, Old Frisian quetha, Old High German quedan, Gothic qi&thorn;an), from
PIE root *gwet- to say, speak (see bequeath). Compare also archaic quotha said he (1510s) for Old
English cw&aelig;&eth;e ge think you?


let (v.)

Old English l&aelig;tan to allow to remain; let go, leave, depart from; leave undone; to allow;
bequeath, also to rent (class VII strong verb; past tense let, past participle l&aelig;ten), from
Proto-Germanic *letan (cognates: Old Saxon latan, Old Frisian leta, Dutch laten, German lassen,
Gothic letan to leave, let), from PIE *le- (2) to let go, slacken (cognates: Latin lassus faint,
weary, Lithuanian leisti to let, to let loose; see lenient). If that derivation is correct, the
primary sense would be let go through weariness, neglect.    Of blood, from late Old English. To let
(something) slip originally (1520s) was a reference to hounds on a leash; figurative use from 1540s.
To let (someone) off allow to go unpunished is from 1814. To let on reveal, divulge is from 1725; to
let up cease, stop is from 1787. Let alone not to mention is from 1812.


leave (v.)

Old English l&aelig;fan to let remain; remain; have left; bequeath, from Proto-Germanic *laibijan
(cognates: Old Frisian leva to leave, Old Saxon farlebid left over), causative of *liban remain,
(source of Old English belifan, German bleiben, Gothic bileiban to remain), from root *laf- remnant,
what remains, from PIE *leip- to stick, adhere; also fat.    The Germanic root has only the sense
remain, continue, which also is in Greek lipares persevering, importunate. But this usually is
regarded as a development from the primary PIE sense of adhere, be sticky (compare Lithuanian lipti,
Old Church Slavonic lipet to adhere, Greek lipos grease, Sanskrit rip-/lip- to smear, adhere to.
Seemingly contradictory meaning of depart (early 13c.) comes from notion of to leave behind (as in
to leave the earth to die; to leave the field retreat).


