bereavement (n.)

1731, from bereave + -ment.


bereave (v.)

Old English bereafian to deprive of, take away, seize, rob, from be + reafian rob, plunder, from
Proto-Germanic *raubojanan, from PIE *reup- to snatch (see rapid). A common Germanic formation
(compare Old Frisian birava despoil, Old Saxon biroban, Dutch berooven, Old High German biroubon,
German berauben, Gothic biraubon). Since mid-17c., mostly in reference to life, hope, loved ones,
and other immaterial possessions. Past tense forms bereaved and bereft have co-existed since 14c.,
now slightly differentiated in meaning, the former applied to loss of loved ones, the latter to
circumstances.


bereft (adj.)

late 14c., past participle adjective from bereave (v.).


rob (v.)

late 12c., from Old French rober rob, steal, pillage, ransack, rape, from West Germanic *rauba booty
(cognates: Old High German roubon to rob, roub spoil, plunder; Old English reafian, source of the
reave in bereave), from Proto-Germanic *raubon to rob, from PIE *reup-, *reub- to snatch (see rip
(v.)).Lord, hou schulde God approve &thorn;at &thorn;ou robbe Petur, and gif &thorn;is robbere to
Poule in &thorn;e name of Crist? [Wyclif, c.1380]To rob the cradle is attested from 1864 in
reference to drafting young men in the American Civil War; by 1949 in reference to seductions or
romantic relationships with younger persons. Related: Robbed; robbing.


step-

Old English steop-, with connotations of loss, in combinations like steopcild orphan, related to
astiepan, bestiepan to bereave, to deprive of parents or children, from Proto-Germanic *steupa-
bereft (cognates: Old Frisian stiap-, Old Norse stjup-, Swedish styv-, Middle Low German stef-,
Dutch stief-, Old High German stiof-, German stief-), literally pushed out, from PIE *steup-, from
root *(s)teu- (1) to push, stick, knock, with derivatives referring to fragments (see steep (adj.)).
Barnhart suggests the forms in -f- are by assimilation of the first sound in following words for
father.    Etymologically, a stepfather or stepmother is one who becomes father or mother to an
orphan, but the notion of orphanage faded in 20c. and came to denote simply relation through
marriage. For sense evolution, compare Latin privignus stepson, related to privus deprived. Compare
orphan (n.).


