bereft (adj.)

late 14c., past participle adjective from bereave (v.).


orphan (n.)

c.1300, from Late Latin orphanus parentless child (source of Old French orfeno, Italian orfano),
from Greek orphanos orphaned, without parents, fatherless, literally deprived, from orphos bereft,
from PIE *orbho- bereft of father, also deprived of free status, from root *orbh- to change
allegiance, to pass from one status to another (cognates: Hittite harb- change allegiance, Latin
orbus bereft, Sanskrit arbhah weak, child, Armenian orb orphan, Old Irish orbe heir, Old Church
Slavonic rabu slave, rabota servitude (see robot), Gothic arbja, German erbe, Old English ierfa
heir, Old High German arabeit, German Arbeit work, Old Frisian arbed, Old English earfo&eth;
hardship, suffering, trouble). As an adjective from late 15c.


hermit (n.)

early 12c., religious recluse, from Old French (h)eremite, from Late Latin ermita, from Greek
eremites, literally person of the desert, from eremia desert, solitude, from eremos uninhabited,
empty, desolate, bereft, from PIE *ere- (2) to separate (cognates: Latin rete net, Lithuanian retis
sieve). Transferred sense of person living in solitude is from 1799. The hermit crab (1735) was so
called for its solitary habits.


bereave (v.)

Old English bereafian to deprive of, take away, seize, rob, from be + reafian rob, plunder, from
Proto-Germanic *raubojanan, from PIE *reup- to snatch (see rapid). A common Germanic formation
(compare Old Frisian birava despoil, Old Saxon biroban, Dutch berooven, Old High German biroubon,
German berauben, Gothic biraubon). Since mid-17c., mostly in reference to life, hope, loved ones,
and other immaterial possessions. Past tense forms bereaved and bereft have co-existed since 14c.,
now slightly differentiated in meaning, the former applied to loss of loved ones, the latter to
circumstances.


step-

Old English steop-, with connotations of loss, in combinations like steopcild orphan, related to
astiepan, bestiepan to bereave, to deprive of parents or children, from Proto-Germanic *steupa-
bereft (cognates: Old Frisian stiap-, Old Norse stjup-, Swedish styv-, Middle Low German stef-,
Dutch stief-, Old High German stiof-, German stief-), literally pushed out, from PIE *steup-, from
root *(s)teu- (1) to push, stick, knock, with derivatives referring to fragments (see steep (adj.)).
Barnhart suggests the forms in -f- are by assimilation of the first sound in following words for
father.    Etymologically, a stepfather or stepmother is one who becomes father or mother to an
orphan, but the notion of orphanage faded in 20c. and came to denote simply relation through
marriage. For sense evolution, compare Latin privignus stepson, related to privus deprived. Compare
orphan (n.).


widow (n.)

Old English widewe, wuduwe, from Proto-Germanic *widuwo (cognates: Old Saxon widowa, Old Frisian
widwe, Middle Dutch, Dutch weduwe, Dutch weeuw, Old High German wituwa, German Witwe, Gothic
widuwo), from PIE adjective *widhewo (cognates: Sanskrit vidhuh lonely, solitary, vidhava widow;
Avestan vithava, Latin vidua, Old Church Slavonic vidova, Russian vdova, Old Irish fedb, Welsh
guedeu widow; Persian beva, Greek eitheos unmarried man; Latin viduus bereft, void), from root
*weidh- to separate (source of second element in Latin di-videre to divide; see with).    Extended
to woman separated from or deserted by her husband from mid-15c. (usually in a combination, such as
grass widow). As a prefix to a name, attested from 1570s. Meaning short line of type (especially at
the top of a column) is 1904 print shop slang. Widow's mite is from Mark xii:43. Widow's peak is
from the belief that hair growing to a point on the forehead is an omen of early widowhood,
suggestive of the peak of a widow's hood. The widow bird (1747) so-called in reference to the long
black tail feathers of the males, suggestive of widows' veils.


