beseech (v.)

late 12c., bisecen to beseech, beg urgently, from be- + Middle English secen to seek (see seek).
German cognate besuchen is merely to visit. Related: Besought; beseeching.


beseeching (n.)

supplication, prayer, c.1300, verbal noun from beseech. Related: Beseechingly; beseechingness.


supplicate (v.)

early 15c., beg for, beseech, back-formation from  supplication or else from Latin supplicatus, past
participle of supplicare plead humbly, beseech, kneel down. Related: Supplicated; supplicating.


besought

Middle English besohte, past tense and past participle of beseech.


implore (v.)

c.1500, from Middle French implorer and directly from Latin implorare call for help, beseech,
originally invoke with weeping, from assimilated form of in- on, upon (see in- (2)) + plorare to
weep, cry out. Related: Implored; imploring; imploringly.


obsecration (n.)

late 14c., from Latin obsecrationem (nominative obsecratio) a beseeching, imploring, supplication,
entreaty, noun of action from past participle stem of obsecrare to beseech, entreat (on religious
grounds), from ob- (see ob-) + sacrare to make or declare sacred (see sacred).


suppliant (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French suppliant, noun use of present participle of supplier to plead
humbly, entreat, beg, pray, (Old French souploier, 12c.), from Latin supplicare beg, beseech (see
supplication). Originally in English especially at law; sense of humble petitioner is from mid-16c.
As an adjective, supplicating, entreating from 1580s. Related: Suppliance; suppliantly.


petulant (adj.)

1590s, immodest, wanton, saucy, from Middle French petulant (mid-14c.), from Latin petulantem
(nominative petulans) wanton, froward, saucy, insolent, present participle of petere to attack,
assail; strive after; ask for, beg, beseech (see petition (n.)). Meaning peevish, irritable first
recorded 1775, probably by influence of pet (n.2). Related: Petulantly.


entreat (v.)

mid-14c., to enter into negotiations; early 15c., to treat (someone) in a certain way, also to plead
for (someone), from Anglo-French entretier, Old French entraiter to treat, from en- make (see en-
(1)) + traiter to treat (see treat (v.)). Meaning to beseech, implore is first attested c.1500.
Related: Entreated; entreating.


repeat (v.)

late 14c., to say what one has already said, from Old French repeter say or do again, get back,
demand the return of (13c., Modern French r&#233;p&#233;eter), from Latin repetere do or say again;
attack again, from re- again (see re-) + petere to go to; attack; strive after; ask for, beseech
(see petition (n.)).    Meaning say what another has said is from 1590s. As an emphatic word in
radio broadcasts, 1938. Meaning do over again is from 1550s; specific meaning to take a course of
education over again is recorded from 1945, American English. Related: Repeated; repeating.


adore (v.)

late 14c., aouren, to worship, pay divine honors to, bow down before, from Old French aorer to
adore, worship, praise (10c.), from Latin adorare speak to formally, beseech, ask in prayer, in Late
Latin to worship, from ad- to (see ad-) + orare speak formally, pray (see orator). Meaning to honor
very highly is attested from 1590s; weakened sense of to be very fond of emerged by 1880s. Related:
Adored; adoring.


propitiation (n.)

late 14c., from Late Latin propitiationem (nominative propitiatio) an atonement, noun of action from
past participle stem of Latin propitiare appease, propitiate, from propitius favorable, gracious,
kind, well-disposed, from pro- forward (see pro-) + stem related to petere to make for, go to; seek,
strive after; ask for, beg, beseech, request (see petition (n.)).    The sense in Latin is perhaps
because the word originally was religious, literally a falling or rushing toward, hence eager, and,
of the gods, well-disposed. Earliest recorded form of the word in English is propitiatorium the
mercy seat, place of atonement (c.1200), translating Greek hilasterion.


seek (v.)

Old English secan inquire, search for; pursue; long for, wish for, desire; look for, expect from,
influenced by Old Norse soekja, both from Proto-Germanic *sokjan (cognates: Old Saxon sokian, Old
Frisian seka, Middle Dutch soekan, Old High German suohhan, German suchen, Gothic sokjan), from PIE
*sag-yo-, from root *sag- to track down, seek out (cognates: Latin sagire to perceive quickly or
keenly, sagus presaging, predicting, Old Irish saigim seek). The natural modern form of the Anglo-
Saxon word as uninfluenced by Norse is in beseech. Related: Sought; seeking.


petition (n.)

early 14c., a supplication or prayer, especially to a deity, from Old French peticion request,
petition (12c., Modern French p&#233;tition) and directly from Latin petitionem (nominative petitio)
a blow, thrust, attack, aim; a seeking, searching, in law a claim, suit, noun of action from past
participle stem of petere to make for, go to; attack, assail; seek, strive after; ask for, beg,
beseech, request; fetch; derive; demand, require, from PIE root *pet-, also *pete- to rush; to fly
(cognates: Sanskrit pattram wing, feather, leaf, patara- flying, fleeting; Hittite pittar wing;
Greek piptein to fall, potamos rushing water, pteryx wing; Old English fe&eth;er feather; Latin
penna feather, wing; Old Church Slavonic pero feather; Old Welsh eterin bird). Meaning formal
written request to a superior (earthly) is attested from early 15c.


bid (v.)

probably a merger of two old words: The sense in bid farewell is from Old English biddan to ask,
entreat, pray, beseech; order; beg (class V strong verb, past tense b&aelig;d, past participle
beden), from Proto-Germanic *bidjan to pray, entreat (source also of German bitten to ask, attested
from 8c.), which, according to Kluge and Watkins is from a PIE root *gwhedh- to ask, pray (see bead
(n.)).    To bid at an auction, meanwhile, is from Old English beodan offer, proclaim (class II
strong verb; past tense bead, past participle boden), from Proto-Germanic *beudan to stretch out,
reach out, offer, present, (source also of German bieten to offer), from PIE root *bheudh- to be
aware, make aware (cognates: Sanskrit bodhati is awake, is watchful, observes, buddhah awakened,
enlightened; Old Church Slavonic bljudo to observe; Lithuanian budeti to be awake; Old Irish buide
contentment, thanks). As a noun, 1788, from the verb.


