bestowal (n.)

1773, from bestow + -al (2).


bestow (v.)

early 14c., bistowen give (as alms, etc.), from be- + stowen to place (see stow). Related: Bestowed;
bestowing; bestower.


attribute (v.)

late 14c., assign, bestow, from Latin attributus, past participle of attribuere assign to, add,
bestow; figuratively to attribute, ascribe, impute, from ad- to + tribuere assign, give, bestow (see
tribute). Related: Attributed; attributing.


deal (v.)

Old English d&aelig;lan to divide, distribute, separate, share, bestow, dispense, from the source of
deal (n.). Meaning to distribute cards before a game is from 1520s. To deal with handle is attested
from mid-15c. Related: Dealt; dealing.


reify (v.)

make into a thing; make real or material; consider as a thing, 1854, back-formation from
reification, or else from re-, stem of  Latin res thing, object, matter, affair, event,
circumstance, condition, from PIE *re- to bestow, endow + -fy. Related: Reified; reifying.


gratify (v.)

c.1400, to bestow grace upon; 1530s, to show gratitude to, from French gratifier (16c.) or directly
from Latin gratificari to do favor to, oblige, gratify, from gratus pleasing (see grace (n.)) + root
of facere make, do, perform (see factitious). Meaning to give pleasure to is from 1560s. Related:
Gratified; gratifying.


endow (v.)

late 14c., indowen provide an income for, from Anglo-French endover, from en- in + Old French douer
endow, from Latin dotare bestow (see dowry). Related: Endowed; endowing.


present (v.)

c.1300, introduce (someone or something) formally or ceremonially; also make a formal presentation
of; give as a gift or award; bestow, from Old French presenter (11c., Modern French pr&#233;senter)
and directly from Latin praesentare to place before, show, exhibit, from stem of praesens (see
present (adj.)). From late 14c. as exhibit (something), offer for inspection, display; also, in law,
make a formal complaint or charge of wrongdoing. From c.1400 asrepresent, portray. Related:
Presented; presenting.


reward (v.)

c.1300 to grant, bestow; early 14c. to give as compensation, from Old North French rewarder to
regard, reward (Old French regarder) take notice of, regard, watch over, from re-, intensive prefix
(see re-), + warder look, heed, watch, from Germanic (see warder). Originally any form of requital.
A doublet of regard. Related: Rewarded; rewarding.


entitle (v.)

late 14c., to give a title to a chapter, book, etc., from Anglo-French entitler, Old French
entiteler (Modern French intituler), from Late Latin intitulare, from in- in (see in- (2)) + titulus
title (see title (n.)).    Meaning to bestow (on a person) a rank or office is mid-15c. Sense of to
give (someone) 'title' to an estate or property, hence to give that person a claim to possession or
privilege, is mid-15c.; this now is used mostly in reference to circumstances and actions. Related:
Entitled; entitling.


offer (v.)

Old English ofrian to offer, show, exhibit, sacrifice, bring an oblation, from Latin offerre to
present, bestow, bring before (in Late Latin to present in worship), from ob to (see ob-) + ferre to
bring, to carry (see infer). The Latin word was borrowed elsewhere in Germanic: Old Frisian offria,
Middle Dutch offeren, Old Norse offra. Non-religious sense reinforced by Old French offrir to offer,
from Latin offerre. Related: Offered; offering.


seize (v.)

mid-13c., from Old French seisir to take possession of, take by force; put in possession of, bestow
upon (Modern French saisir), from Late Latin sacire, which is generally held to be from a Germanic
source, but the exact origin is uncertain. Perhaps from Frankish *sakjan lay claim to (compare
Gothic sokjan, Old English secan to seek; see seek). Or perhaps from Proto-Germanic *satjan to place
(see set (v.)).    Originally a legal term in reference to feudal property holdings or offices.
Meaning to grip with the hands or teeth is from c.1300; that of to take possession by force or
capture (of a city, etc.) is from mid-14c. Figurative use, with reference to death, disease, fear,
etc. is from late 14c. Meaning to grasp with the mind is attested from 1855. Of engines or other
mechanisms, attested from 1878. Related: Seized; seizing.


stall (n.2)

pretense or evasive story to avoid doing something, 1812, from earlier sense thief's assistant
(1590s, also staller), from a variant of stale bird used as a decoy to lure other birds (mid-15c.),
from Anglo-French estale decoy, pigeon used to lure a hawk (13c., compare stool pigeon), literally
standstill, from Old French estal place, stand, stall, from Frankish *stal- position, ultimately
from Germanic and cognate with Old English steall (see stall (n.1)). Compare Old English
st&aelig;lhran decoy reindeer, German stellvogel decoy bird. Figurative sense of deception, means of
allurement is first recorded 1520s. Also see stall (v.2).    The stallers up are gratified with such
part of the gains acquired as the liberality of the knuckling gentlemen may prompt them to bestow.
[J.H. Vaux, Flash Dictionary, 1812]


give (v.)

Old English giefan (West Saxon) to give, bestow; allot, grant; commit, devote, entrust, class V
strong verb (past tense geaf, past participle giefen), from Proto-Germanic *geban (cognates: Old
Frisian jeva, Middle Dutch gheven, Dutch geven, Old High German geban, German geben, Gothic giban),
from PIE *ghabh- to take, hold, have, give (see habit). It became yiven in Middle English, but
changed to guttural g by influence of Old Norse gefa to give, Old Danish giv&aelig;. Meaning to
yield to pressure is from 1570s.   Give in yield is from 1610s; give out is mid-14c., publish,
announce; meaning run out, break down is from 1520s. Give up surrender is mid-12c. To give (someone)
a cold seems to reflect the old belief that one could be cured of disease by deliberately infecting
others. What gives? what is happening? is attested from 1940. Give-and-take (n.) is originally from
horse racing (1769) and refers to races in which bigger horses were given more weight to carry,
lighter ones less. General sense attested by 1778.


allow (v.)

early 14c., allouen, to commend, praise; approve of, be pleased with; appreciate the value of; also,
take into account or give credit for, also, in law and philosophy, recognize, admit as valid (a
privilege, an excuse, a statement, etc.). From late 14c. as sanction or permit; condone; in business
use from early 15c.    The Middle English word is from Anglo-French alouer, Old French aloer,
alloiier (13c.) allot, apportion, bestow, assign, from Latin allocare (see allocate). This word in
Old French was confused and ultimately merged with aloer; alloer to praise, commend, from Latin
allaudare, adlaudare, compound of ad- to (see ad-) + laudare to praise (see laud). From the first
word came the sense preserved in allowance as money granted; from the second came its meaning
permission based on approval.    Between the two primary significations there naturally arose a
variety of uses blending them in the general idea of assign with approval, grant, concede a thing
claimed or urged, admit a thing offered, permit, etc., etc. [OED].    Related: Allowed; allowing.


