betrothed (adj.)

1530s, past participle adjective from betroth (v.). As a noun, in use by 1580s.


betrothal (n.)

1844, from betroth + -al (2). Earlier in same sense were betrothment (1580s), betrothing (14c.).


betroth (v.)

c.1300, betrouthen, from bi-, here probably with a sense of thoroughly, + Middle English treow&eth;e
truth, from Old English treow&eth;e truth, a pledge (see troth). Related: Betrothed; betrothing.


fasten (v.)

Old English f&aelig;stnian make fast, firm, also ratify, betroth, from Proto-Germanic *fastinon to
make firm or fast (cognates: Old Frisian festnia to make firm, bind fast, Old Saxon fastnon, Old
High German fastnion, Old Norse fastna to pledge, betroth), from *fastuz (see fast (adj.)). Related:
Fastened; fastener; fastening.


wed (v.)

Old English weddian to pledge oneself, covenant to do something, vow; betroth, marry, also unite
(two other people) in a marriage, conduct the marriage ceremony, from Proto-Germanic *wadi-
(cognates: Old Norse ve&eth;ja, Danish vedde to bet, wager, Old Frisian weddia to promise, Gothic
ga-wadjon to betroth), from PIE root *wadh- (1) to pledge, to redeem a pledge (cognates: Latin vas,
genitive vadis bail, security, Lithuanian vaduoti to redeem a pledge).    The sense has remained
closer to pledge in other Germanic languages (such as German Wette a bet, wager); development to
marry is unique to English. Originally 'make a woman one's wife by giving a pledge or earnest
money', then used of either party [Buck]. Passively, of two people, to be joined as husband and
wife, from c.1200. Related: Wedded; wedding.


fiance (n.)

man to whom one is betrothed, 1864, from French fianc&eacute;, past participle of fiancer to betroth
(see fiancee).


troth (n.)

truth, verity, late 12c., from a phonetic variant of Old English treow&eth; faithfulness, veracity,
truth (see truth). Restricted to Midlands and Northern England dialect after 16c., and to certain
archaic phrases (such as plight one's troth). Also see betroth.


handfast (v.)

betroth, bind in wedlock, mid-12c., from Old English handf&aelig;sten, from hand (n.) + fast (see
fasten). Related: Handfasted; handfasting.


fiancee (n.)

woman to whom one is betrothed, 1853, from French fiance&eacute;, fem. of fianc&eacute;, past
participle of fiancer to betroth, from fiance a promise, trust, from fier to trust, from Vulgar
Latin *fidare (see affiance). Has all but expelled native betrothed. The verb fiance, now obsolete,
was used c.1450-1600 for to engage to be married.


nuptial (adj.)

late 15c., from Middle French nuptial, or directly from Latin nuptialis pertaining to marriage, from
nuptiae wedding, from nupta, fem. past participle of nubere to marry, wed, take as a husband,
related to Greek nymphe bride, from PIE *sneubh- to marry, wed (cognates: Old Church Slavonic
snubiti to love, woo, Czech snoubiti to seek in marriage, Slovak zasnubit to betroth). Related:
Nuptially.


