betray (v.)

late 13c., bitrayen mislead, deceive, betray, from be- + obsolete Middle English tray, from Old
French traine betrayal, deception, deceit, from trair (Modern French trahir) betray, deceive, from
Latin tradere hand over, from trans- across (see trans-) + dare to give (see date (n.1)). Related:
Betrayed; betraying.


betrayer (n.)

1520s, agent noun from betray (v.).


betrayal (n.)

1816; from betray + -al (2). Earlier in the same sense were betrayment (1540s), betraying (late
14c.).


job (v.)

1660s, to buy and sell as a broker, from job (n.). Meaning to cheat, betray is from 1903. Related:
Jobbed; jobbing.


two-time (v.)

to deceive, cheat, betray, 1924, perhaps from notion of to have two at a time. An earlier reference
(1922) in a Kentucky criminal case involves a double-cross or betrayal without a romance angle.
Related: two-timing (adj.); two-timer.


giveaway (n.)

also give-away, act of giving away, 1872, from phrase give away, c.1400 (of brides, from 1719); see
give (v.) + away (adv.). Meaning to betray, expose, reveal is 1878, originally U.S. slang.


manifest (v.)

late 14c., to spread (one's fame), to show plainly, from manifest (adj.) or else from Latin
manifestare to discover, disclose, betray (see manifest (adj.)). Meaning to display by actions is
from 1560s; reflexive sense, of diseases, etc., to reveal as in operation is from 1808. Related:
Manifested; manifesting.


stool pigeon (n.)

police informer, 1859, American English; earlier one who betrays the unwary (or is used to betray
them), 1821, originally a decoy bird (1812); said to be from decoys being fastened to stools to lure
other pigeons. But perhaps related to stall decoy bird (c.1500), especially a pigeon used to entice
a hawk into the net (see stall (n.2)). Also see pigeon.


enunciate (v.)

1620s, declare, express, from Latin enuntiatus, past participle of enuntiare speak out, say,
express, assert; divulge, disclose, reveal, betray, from ex- out (see ex-) + nuntiare to announce
(see nuncio). Or perhaps a back-formation from enunciation. Meaning to articulate, pronounce is from
1759. Related: Enunciated; enunciating.


addict (v.)

1530s (implied in addicted), from Latin addictus, past participle of addicere to deliver, award,
yield; give assent, make over, sell, figuratively to devote, consecrate; sacrifice, sell out, betray
from ad- to (see ad-) + dicere say, declare (see diction), but also adjudge, allot. Earlier in
English as an adjective, delivered, devoted (1520s). Related: Addicted; addicting.


discover (v.)

c.1300, divulge, reveal, disclose, from Old French descovrir uncover, unroof, unveil, reveal,
betray, from Late Latin discooperire, from Latin dis- opposite of (see dis-) + cooperire to cover up
(see cover). At first with a sense of betrayal or malicious exposure (discoverer originally meant
informant); the meaning to obtain knowledge or sight of what was not known is from 1550s. Related:
Discovered; discovering.


lie (v.1)

speak falsely, tell an untruth, late 12c., from Old English legan, ligan, earlier leogan deceive,
belie, betray (class II strong verb; past tense leag, past participle logen), from Proto-Germanic
*leugan (cognates: Old Norse ljuga, Danish lyve, Old Frisian liaga, Old Saxon and Old High German
liogan, German l&uuml;gen, Gothic liugan), from PIE root *leugh- to tell a lie.


treason (n.)

c.1200, betraying; betrayal of trust; breech of faith, from Anglo-French treson, from Old French
traison treason, treachery (11c.; Modern French trahison), from Latin traditionem (nominative
traditio) a handing over, delivery, surrender (see tradition). Old French form influenced by the
verb trair betray. In old English law, high treason is violation by a subject of his allegiance to
his sovereign or to the state; distinguished from petit treason, treason against a subject, such as
murder of a master by his servant. Constructive treason was a judicial fiction whereby actions
carried out without treasonable intent, but found to have the effect of treason, were punished as
though they were treason itself. The protection against this accounts for the careful wording of the
definition of treason in the U.S. Constitution.


trap (n.)

contrivance for catching unawares, late Old English tr&aelig;ppe, treppe snare, trap, from Proto-
Germanic *trep- (cognates: Middle Dutch trappe trap, snare), related to Germanic words for stair,
step, tread (Middle Dutch, Middle Low German trappe, treppe, German Treppe step, stair, English
tread (v.)), and probably literally that on or into which one steps, from PIE *dreb-, extended form
of root *der- (1), an assumed base of words meaning to run, walk, step. Probably akin to Old French
trape, Spanish trampa trap, pit, snare, but the exact relationship is uncertain.    Sense of
deceitful practice, device or contrivance to betray one is first recorded c.1400. Meaning U-shaped
section of a drain pipe is from 1833. Slang meaning mouth is from 1776. Speed trap recorded from
1908. Trap door door in a floor or ceiling (often hidden and leading to a passageway or secret
place) is first attested late 14c.


poker (n.2)

card game, 1834, American English, of unknown origin, perhaps from the first element of German
Pochspiel, name of a card game similar to poker, from pochen to brag as a bluff, literally to knock,
rap (see poke (v.)). A popular alternative theory traces the word to French poque, also said to have
been a card game resembling poker. [B]ut without documentation these explanations are mere
speculation [Barnhart]. The earlier version of the game in English was called brag. Slang poker face
(n.) deadpan is from 1874.    A good player is cautious or bold by turns, according to his estimate
of the capacities of his adversaries, and to the impression he wants to make on them. 7. It follows
that the possession of a good poker face is an advantage. No one who has any pretensions to good
play will betray the value of his hand by gesture, change of countenance, or any other symptom.
[Cavendish, Round Games at Cards, dated 1875]   <hr />   To any one not very well up in these games,
some parts of the book are at first sight rather puzzling. It follows, we read in one passage, that
the possession of a good poker face (the italics are the author's) is an advantage. If this had been
said by a Liverpool rough of his wife, the meaning would have been clear to every one. Cavendish,
however, does not seem to be writing especially for Lancashire. [review of above, Saturday Review,
Dec. 26, 1874]


school (n.1)

place of instruction, Old English scol, from Latin schola intermission of work, leisure for
learning; learned conversation, debate; lecture; meeting place for teachers and students, place of
instruction; disciples of a teacher, body of followers, sect, from Greek skhole spare time, leisure,
rest ease; idleness; that in which leisure is employed; learned discussion; also a place for
lectures, school; originally a holding back, a keeping clear, from skhein to get (from PIE root
*segh- to hold, hold in one's power, to have; see scheme (n.)) + -ole by analogy with bole a throw,
stole outfit, etc.    The original notion is leisure, which passed to otiose discussion (in Athens
or Rome the favorite or proper use for free time), then place for such discussion. The Latin word
was widely borrowed (Old French escole, French &eacute;cole, Spanish escuela, Italian scuola, Old
High German scuola, German Schule, Swedish skola, Gaelic sgiol, Welsh ysgol, Russian shkola).
Translated in Old English as larhus, literally lore house, but this seems to have been a glossary
word only.    Meaning students attending a school in English is attested from c.1300; sense of
school building is first recorded 1590s. Sense of people united by a general similarity of
principles and methods is from 1610s; hence school of thought (1864). School of hard knocks rough
experience in life is recorded from 1912 (in George Ade); to tell tales out of school betray
damaging secrets is from 1540s. School bus is from 1908. School days is from 1590s. School board
from 1870.


