beware (v.)

c.1200, probably from a conflation of be ware (though the compound bewarian defend existed in Old
English). See ware (v.).


ware (v.)

to take heed of, beware, Old English warian to guard against, beware; protect, defend, from Proto-
Germanic *waraz (cognates: Old Frisian waria, Old Norse vara), from PIE *war-o- to guard, watch,
from root *wer- (4) to perceive, watch out for (see ward (n.)).


caveat (n.)

1540s, from Latin, literally let him beware, 3rd person singular present subjunctive of cavere to
beware, take heed, watch, guard against, from PIE root *skeue- to pay attention, perceive (cognates:
Sanskrit kavih wise, sage, seer, poet; Lithuanian kavoti tend, safeguard; Armenian cucanem I show;
Latin cautio wariness; Greek koein to mark, perceive, hear, kydos glory, fame, literally that which
is heard of; Old Church Slavonic chujo to feel, perceive, hear, cudo wonder, literally that which is
heard of; Czech (z)koumati to perceive, be aware of; Serbian chuvati watch, heed; Old English
sceawian to look at (source of show (v.)); Middle Dutch schoon beautiful, bright, properly showy;
Gothic hausjan hear).


caveat emptor

Latin, literally let the buyer beware; see caveat and second element of exempt (adj.).


wit (v.)

to know (archaic), Old English witan (past tense wast, past participle witen) to know, beware of or
conscious of, understand, observe, ascertain, learn, from Proto-Germanic *witan to have seen, hence
to know (cognates: Old Saxon witan, Old Norse vita, Old Frisian wita, Middle Dutch, Dutch weten, Old
High German wizzan, German wissen, Gothic witan to know), from PIE *weid- (see wit (n.)). The phrase
to wit, almost the only surviving use of the verb, is first recorded 1570s, from earlier that is to
wit (mid-14c.), probably a loan-translation of Anglo-French cestasavoir, used to render Latin
videlicet (see viz.).


garnish (v.)

late 14c., from Old French garniss-, present participle stem of garnir provide, furnish; fortify,
reinforce, from a Germanic stem related to Proto-Germanic *warnejan be cautious, guard, provide for
(cognates: Old High German warnon to take heed, Old English warnian to take warning, beware; see
warn). Sense evolution is from arm oneself to fit out to embellish, which was the earliest meaning
in English, though the others also were used in Middle English. Culinary sense of to decorate a dish
for the table predominated after c.1700. Older meaning survives in legal sense of warning of
attachment of funds (1570s). Related: Garnished; garnishing.


borrow (v.)

Old English borgian to lend, be surety for, from Proto-Germanic *borg pledge (cognates: Old English
borg pledge, security, bail, debt, Old Norse borga to become bail for, guarantee, Middle Dutch
borghen to protect, guarantee, Old High German boragen to beware of, German borgen to borrow; to
lend), from PIE root *bhergh- (1) to hide, protect (see bury). Sense shifted in Old English to
borrow, apparently on the notion of collateral deposited as security for something borrowed.
Related: Borrowed; borrowing.


