bewitched (adj.)

late 14c. in the literal sense, past participle adjective from  bewitch; figurative use from 1570s.


bewitch (v.)

c.1200, biwicchen, from be- + Old English wiccian to enchant, to practice witchcraft (see witch).
Literal at first, figurative sense of to fascinate is from 1520s. *Bewiccian may well have existed
in Old English, but it is not attested. Related: Bewitched; bewitching; bewitchingly.


fascinate (v.)

1590s, bewitch, enchant, from Middle French fasciner (14c.), from Latin fascinatus, past participle
of fascinare bewitch, enchant, fascinate, from fascinus spell, witchcraft, of uncertain origin.
Possibly from Greek baskanos bewitcher, sorcerer, with form influenced by Latin fari speak (see fame
(n.)).    The Greek word might be from a Thracian equivalent of Greek phaskein to say; compare also
enchant, and German besprechen to charm, from sprechen to speak. Earliest used of witches and of
serpents, who were said to be able to cast a spell by a look that rendered one unable to move or
resist. Sense of delight, attract is first recorded 1815. Related: Fascinated; fascinating.


incantation (n.)

late 14c., from Old French incantacion spell, exorcism (13c.), from Latin incantationem (nominative
incantatio) art of enchanting, noun of action from past participle stem of incantare bewitch, charm,
literally sing spells (see enchantment).


enchant (v.)

late 14c., literal and figurative, from Old French enchanter bewitch, charm, cast a spell (12c.),
from Latin incantare (see enchantment). Or perhaps a back-formation from enchantment. Related:
Enchanting; enchantingly. Enchanted in weakened sense of delighted is from 1590s.


enchantment (n.)

late 13c., from Old French encantement, from enchanter bewitch, charm, from Latin incantare,
literally enchant, cast a (magic) spell upon, from in- upon, into (see in- (2)) + cantare to sing
(see chant (v.)). Figurative sense of alluring is from 1670s. Compare Old English galdor song, also
spell, enchantment, from galan to sing, source of the second element in nightingale.


calumny (n.)

False &amp; malicious misrepresentation of the words or actions of others, calculated to injure
their reputation [Fowler], mid-15c., from Middle French calomnie (15c.), from Latin calumnia
trickery, subterfuge, misrepresentation, malicious charge, from calvi to trick, deceive, from PIE
root *kel- (6) to deceive, confuse (cognates: Greek kelein to bewitch, seduce, beguile, Gothic holon
to deceive, Old Norse hol praise, flattery, Old English hol slander, holian to slander).


troll (n.1)

supernatural being in Scandinavian mythology and folklore, 1610s (with an isolated use mid-14c.),
from Old Norse troll giant being not of the human race, evil spirit, monster. Some speculate that it
originally meant creature that walks clumsily, and derives from Proto-Germanic *truzlan, from
*truzlanan (see troll (v.)). But it seems to have been a general supernatural word, such as Swedish
trolla to charm, bewitch; Old Norse trolldomr witchcraft.    The old sagas tell of the troll-bull, a
supernatural being in the form of a bull, as well as boar-trolls. There were troll-maidens, troll-
wives, and troll-women; the trollman, a magician or wizard, and the troll-drum, used in Lappish
magic rites. The word was popularized in literary English by 19c. antiquarians, but it has been
current in the Shetlands and Orkneys since Viking times. The first record of the word in modern
English is from a court document from the Shetlands, regarding a certain Catherine, who, among other
things, was accused of airt and pairt of witchcraft and sorcerie, in hanting and seeing the Trollis
ryse out of the kyrk yeard of Hildiswick.    Originally conceived as a race of malevolent giants,
they have suffered the same fate as the Celtic Danann and by 19c. were regarded by peasants in in
Denmark and Sweden as dwarfs and imps supposed to live in caves or under the ground.    They are
obliging and neighbourly; freely lending and borrowing, and elsewise keeping up a friendly
intercourse with mankind. But they have a sad propensity to thieving, not only stealing provisions,
but even women and children. [Thomas Keightley, The Fairy Mythology, London, 1850]


