billow (n.)

1550s, perhaps older in dialectal use, from Old Norse bylgja a wave, a billow, from Proto-Germanic
*bulgjan (cognates: Middle High German bulge billow, bag), from PIE *bhelgh- to swell (see belly
(n.)).


billow (v.)

1590s, from billow (n.). Related: Billowed; billowing.


billowy (adj.)

1610s, from billow (n.) + -y (2). Related: Billowiness.


wave (n.)

moving billow of water, 1520s, alteration (by influence of wave (v.)) of Middle English waw, which
is from Old English wagian to move to and fro (cognates: Old Saxon, Old High German wag, Old Frisian
weg, Old Norse vagr water in motion, wave, billow, Gothic wegs tempest; see wag (v.)). The usual Old
English word for moving billow of water was y&eth;.    The hand motion meaning is recorded from
1680s; meaning undulating line is recorded from 1660s. Of people in masses, first recorded 1852; in
physics, from 1832. Sense in heat wave is from 1843. The crowd stunt in stadiums is attested under
this name from 1984, the thing itself said to have been done first Oct. 15, 1981, at the Yankees-A's
AL championship series game in the Oakland Coliseum; soon picked up and popularized at University of
Washington. To make waves cause trouble is attested from 1962.


fluctuation (n.)

mid-15c., from Middle French fluctuation (12c.) or directly from Latin fluctuationem (nominative
fluctuatio) a wavering, vacillation, noun of action from past participle stem of fluctuare to
undulate, to move in waves, from fluctus wave, billow, surge, from past participle of fluere to flow
(see fluent).


undine (n.)

female water spirit, 1821, from Modern Latin Undina (1650s), coined by Paracelsus (De Nymphis) in
his alchemical system, from Latin unda a wave, billow (see water (n.1)). Popularized by German
romance Undine, eine Erz&auml;hlung (1811) by Baron F.H.C. La Motte Fouqu&eacute;. Undinism (1928)
was coined by sex researcher Havelock Ellis to describe the fetish for urine (which Ellis had);
nowadays it would be called urophilia.


vogue (n.)

1570s, the vogue, height of popularity or accepted fashion, from Middle French vogue fashion,
success; also drift, swaying motion (of a boat) literally a rowing, from Old French voguer to row,
sway, set sail (15c.), probably from a Germanic source. Compare Old High German wagon to float,
fluctuate, literally to balance oneself; German Wege wave, billow, wogen fluctuate, float (see
weigh).    Perhaps the notion is of being borne along on the waves of fashion. Italian voga a
rowing, Spanish boga rowing, but colloquially fashion, reputation also probably are from the same
Germanic source. Phrase in vogue having a prominent place in popular fashion first recorded 1643.
The fashion magazine began publication in 1892.


belly (n.)

Old English belg, bylg (West Saxon), b&aelig;lg (Anglian) leather bag, purse, bellows, from Proto-
Germanic *balgiz bag (cognates: Old Norse belgr bag, bellows, bylgja billow, Gothic balgs wineskin),
from PIE *bholgh-, from root *bhelgh- to swell, an extension of *bhel- (2) to blow, swell (see
bole). Meaning shifted to body (late 13c.), then focused to abdomen (mid-14c.). Meaning bulging part
or concave surface of anything is 1590s. The West Germanic root had a figurative or extended sense
of anger, arrogance (as in Old English bolgenmod enraged; belgan (v.) to become angry).    Indo-
European languages commonly use the same word for both the external belly and the internal (stomach,
womb, etc.), but the distinction of external and internal is somewhat present in English
belly/stomach; Greek gastr- (see gastric) in classical language denoted the paunch or belly, while
modern science uses it only in reference to the stomach as an organ. Fastidious avoidance of belly
in speech and writing (compensated for by stretching the senses of imported stomach and abdomen,
baby-talk tummy and misappropriated midriff) began late 18c. and the word was banished from Bibles
in many early 19c. editions. Belly punch (n.) is attested from 1811.


