bit (n.1)

small piece, c.1200; related Old English bite act of biting, and bita piece bitten off, probably are
the source of the modern words meaning boring-piece of a drill (1590s), mouthpiece of a horse's
bridle (mid-14c.), and a piece bitten off, morsel (c.1000). All from Proto-Germanic *biton
(cognates: Old Saxon biti, Old Norse bit, Old Frisian bite, Middle Dutch bete, Old High German bizzo
biting, German Bissen a bite, morsel), from PIE root *bheid- to split (see fissure).    Meaning
small piece, fragment is from c.1600. Sense of short space of time is 1650s. Theatrical bit part is
from 1909. Money sense in two bits, etc. is originally from Southern U.S. and West Indies, in
reference to silver wedges cut or stamped from Spanish dollars (later Mexican reals); transferred to
eighth of a dollar.


greenhead (n.)

1580s, young, untrained intellect, from green (adj.) + head (n.). As a type of biting fly, by 1837.


vitriolic (adj.)

1660s, from French vitriolique (16c.) or from vitriol + -ic. Figurative sense biting, caustic, very
severe is by 1841.


hickie (n.)

love bite; mark on skin made by biting or sucking during foreplay or sex, 1934; earlier pimple, skin
lesion (c.1915); perhaps a sense extension and spelling variation from earlier word meaning small
gadget, device; any unspecified object (1909, see doohickey, still used in this sense).


nippy (adj.)

1898, in reference to a biting chill in the air, from nip (n.2) + -y (2). Related: Nippiness.


mordacious (adj.)

given to biting, 1640s (originally figurative), from Latin mordac-, stem of mordax, from mordere to
bite, perhaps from PIE root mer- (2) to rub, harm (see smart (v.)). Related: Mordacity.


hard-bitten (adj.)

tough, tough in a fight, literally given to hard biting, 1715, originally of dogs, from hard +
bitten, with the past participle used actively (as in ill-spoken).


stingy (adj.)

niggardly, penurious, extremely tight-fisted, 1650s, of uncertain origin, perhaps a dialectal
alteration of earlier stingy biting, sharp, stinging (1610s), from sting (v.). Back-formation stinge
a stingy person is recorded from 1905. Related: Stingily; stinginess.


beetle (n.1)

type of insect, Old English bitela beetle, literally little biter, from bitel biting, related to
bitan to bite (see bite). As a nickname for the original Volkswagen car, 1946, translating German
K&auml;fer.


backbiting (n.)

c.1200, bacbitunge, from back (adj. or n.) + biting. Related: back-bite (v.), early 14c.; back-biter
(c.1200).


morsel (n.)

late 13c., a bite, mouthful; small piece, fragment, from Old French morsel (Modern French morceau)
small bite, portion, helping, diminutive of mors a bite, from Latin morsus biting, a bite, neuter
past participle of mordere to bite (see mordant).


beetle (v.)

project, overhang, c.1600, back-formation from bitelbrouwed grim-browed, sullen (mid-14c.), from
bitel sharp-edged, sharp (c.1200), probably a compound from Old English *bitol biting, sharp,
related to bite, + brow, which in Middle English meant eyebrow, not forehead. Meaning to overhang
dangerously (of cliffs, etc.) is from c.1600. Related: Beetled; beetling.


mordant (adj.)

late 15c., caustic (of words, speech), from Middle French mordant, literally biting, present
participle of mordre to bite, from Latin mordere to bite, bite into; nip, sting; figuratively to
pain, cause hurt, perhaps from PIE root mer- (2) to rub away, harm (see smart (v.)). Related:
Mordantly. The noun sense in dyeing is first recorded 1791; the adjective in this sense is from
1902. Related: Mordancy; mordantly.


muzzle (n.)

late 14c., device put over an animal's mouth to stop it from biting, eating, or rooting, from Old
French musel muzzle, also snout, nose (12c., Modern French museau), from muse muzzle, from Gallo-
Roman *musa snout (source also of Proven&ccedil;al mus, Old Spanish mus, Italian muso), of unknown
origin, possibly related to Latin morsus bite (but OED finds serious difficulties with this).
Meaning projecting part of the head of an animal is from early 15c. in English; sense of open end of
a firearm first recorded 1560s.


gnat (n.)

Old English gn&aelig;tt gnat, midge, mosquito, earlier gneat, used of various small, flying insects,
from Proto-Germanic *gnattaz (cognates: Low German gnatte, German Gnitze); perhaps literally biting
insect and related to gnaw.    The gnatte is a litil fflye, and hatte culex..he souke&thorn; blood
and ha&thorn; in his mou&thorn; a pipe, as hit were a pricke..And is a-countid a-mong volatiles..and
greue&thorn; slepinge men wi&thorn; noyse &amp; wi&thorn; bytinge and wake&thorn; hem of here reste.
[John of Trevisa, transl. of Bartholomew de Glanville's De proprietatibus rerum, 1398]


bitter (adj.)

Old English biter bitter, sharp, cutting; angry, embittered; cruel, from Proto-Germanic *bitras-
(cognates: Old Saxon bittar, Old Norse bitr, Dutch bitter, Old High German bittar, German bitter,
Gothic baitrs bitter), from PIE root *bheid- to split (cognates: Old English bitan to bite; see bite
(v.)). Evidently the meaning drifted in prehistoric times from biting, of pungent taste, to acrid-
tasting. Used figuratively in Old English of states of mind and words. Related: Bitterly.


midget (n.)

as a type of tiny biting insect, 1839, American English, from midge, perhaps with diminutive suffix
-et.    Dr. Webster is in error in saying the word midge is not in use at the present day. In the
neighboring Green mountain districts, one or more most annoying species of Simulium that there
abound, are daily designated in common conversation as the midges, or, as the name is often
corrupted, the midgets. From Dr. Harris' treatise it appears that the same name is in popular use
for the same insects in Maine. The term is limited in this country, we believe, exclusively to those
minute insects, smaller than the musketoe, which suck the blood of other animals. [Transactions of
the New-York State Agricultural Society, vol. VI, Albany, 1847]    Transferred sense of very small
person is attested by 1854. It is also noted mid-19c. as a pet form of Margaret.


venom (n.)

mid-13c., venim, venym, poison secreted by some animals and transferred by biting, from Anglo-French
and Old French venim, venin poison; malice, from Vulgar Latin *venimen (source also of Italian
veleno, Spanish veneno), from Latin venenum poison, earlier (pre-classical) drug, medical potion,
also charm, seduction, probably originally love potion, from PIE *wenes-no-, from root *wen- (1) to
strive after, wish, desire (see Venus). Variously deformed in post-Latin languages, apparently by
dissimilation. Modern spelling in English from late 14c. The meaning bitter, virulent feeling or
language is first recorded c.1300.


tongs (n.)

Old English tange, tang tongs, pincers, foreceps, instrument for holding and lifting, from Proto-
Germanic *tango (cognates: Old Saxon tanga, Old Norse t&ouml;ng, Swedish t&#229;ng, Old Frisian
tange, Middle Dutch tanghe, Dutch tang, Old High German zanga, German Zange tongs), literally that
which bites, from PIE root *denk- to bite (cognates: Sanskrit dasati biter; Greek daknein to bite,
dax biting). For sense evolution, compare French mordache tongs, from mordre to bite.


gorilla (n.)

1847, applied to the apes (Troglodytes gorills) by U.S. missionary Thomas Savage, from Greek
gorillai, plural of name given to wild, hairy people in a Greek translation of Carthaginian
navigator Hanno's account of his voyage along the N.W. coast of Africa, c.500 B.C.E. Allegedly an
African word.    In its inmost recess was an island similar to that formerly described, which
contained in like manner a lake with another island, inhabited by a rude description of people. The
females were much more numerous than the males, and had rough skins: our interpreters called them
Gorillae. We pursued but could take none of the males; they all escaped to the top of precipices,
which they mounted with ease, and threw down stones; we took three of the females, but they made
such violent struggles, biting and tearing their captors, that we killed them, and stripped off the
skins, which we carried to Carthage: being out of provisions we could go no further. [Hanno,
Periplus]    Of persons perceived as being gorilla-like, from 1884.


hot (adj.)

Old English hat hot, flaming, opposite of cold, also fervent, fierce, intense, excited, from Proto-
Germanic *haita- (cognates: Old Saxon and Old Frisian het, Old Norse heitr, Middle Dutch and Dutch
heet, German hei&szlig; hot, Gothic heito heat of a fever), from PIE root *kai- heat (cognates:
Lithuanian kaistu to grow hot).    The association of hot with sexuality dates back to c.1500. Taste
sense of pungent, acrid, biting is from 1540s. Sense of exciting, remarkable, very good is 1895;
that of stolen is first recorded 1925 (originally with overtones of easily identified and difficult
to dispose of); that of radioactive is from 1942.   Hot flashes in the menopausal sense attested
from 1887. Hot air unsubstantiated statements, boastful talk is from 1900. Hot stuff for anything
good or excellent is by 1889. Hot potato in figurative sense is from 1846. The hot and cold in hide-
and-seek or guessing games are from hunting (1640s), with notion of tracking a scent.


sharp (adj.)

Old English scearp having a cutting edge; pointed; intellectually acute, active, shrewd; keen (of
senses); severe; biting, bitter (of tastes), from Proto-Germanic *skarpaz, literally cutting
(cognates: Old Saxon scarp, Old Norse skarpr, Old Frisian skerp, Dutch scherp, German scharf sharp),
from PIE *(s)ker- (1) to cut (cognates: Lettish skarbs sharp, Middle Irish cerb cutting; see shear
(v.)).    The figurative meaning acute or penetrating in intellect or perception was in Old English;
hence keenly alive to one's own interests, quick to take advantage (1690s). Of words or talk,
cutting, sarcastic, from early 13c. Meaning distinct in contour is from 1670s. The adverbial meaning
abruptly is from 1836; that of promptly is first attested 1840. The musical meaning half step above
(a given tone) is from 1570s. Meaning stylish is from 1944, hepster slang, from earlier general
slang sense of excellent (1940). Phrase sharp as a tack first recorded 1912 (sharp as a needle has
been around since Old English). Sharp-shinned attested from 1704 of persons, 1813 of hawks.


nail (n.)

Old English negel metal pin, n&aelig;gl fingernail (handn&aelig;gl), toenail, from Proto-Germanic
*naglaz (cognates: Old Norse nagl fingernail, nagli metal nail; Old Saxon and Old High German nagel,
Old Frisian neil, Middle Dutch naghel, Dutch nagel, German Nagel fingernail, small metal spike),
from PIE root *(o)nogh nail (cognates: Greek onyx claw, fingernail; Latin unguis nail, claw; Old
Church Slavonic noga foot, noguti nail, claw; Lithuanian naga hoof, nagutis fingernail; Old Irish
ingen, Old Welsh eguin nail, claw).    The fingernail sense seems to be the original one. Nail
polish attested from 1891. To bite one's nails as a sign of anxiety is attested from 1570s. Nail-
biting is from 1805. Hard as nails is from 1828. To hit the nail on the head say or do just the
right thing is first recorded 1520s. Phrase on the nail on the spot, exactly is from 1590s, of
obscure origin; OED says it is not even certain it belongs to this sense of nail.


sheep (n.)

ruminant mammal, Old English sceap, scep, from West Germanic *sk&aelig;pan (cognates: Old Saxon
scap, Old Frisian skep, Middle Low German schap, Middle Dutch scaep, Dutch schaap, Old High German
scaf, German Schaf), of unknown origin. Not found in Scandinavian (Danish has faar for sheep) or
Gothic (which uses lamb), and with no known cognates outside Germanic. The more usual Indo-European
word for the animal is represented in English by ewe.    The plural form was leveled with the
singular in Old English, but Old Northumbrian had a plural scipo. Used since Old English as a type
of timidity and figuratively of those under the guidance of God. The meaning stupid, timid person is
attested from 1540s. The image of the wolf in sheep's clothing was in Old English (from Matt.
vii:15); that of separating the sheep from the goats is from Matt. xxv:33. To count sheep in a bid
to induce sleep is recorded from 1854 but seems not to have been commonly written about until 1870s.
It might simply be a type of a tedious activity, but an account of shepherd life from Australia from
1849 [Sidney's Emigrant's Journal] describes the night-shepherd (hut-keeper) taking a count of the
sheep regularly at the end of his shift to protect against being answerable for any animals later
lost or killed.    Sheep's eyes loving looks is attested from 1520s (compare West Frisian
skiepseach, Dutch schaapsoog, German Schafsauge). A sheep-biter was a dog that worries sheep
(1540s); a mutton-monger (1590s); and a whore-monger (1610s, i.e. one who chases mutton); hence
Shakespeare's sheep-biting thieving, sneaky.


