bitter end (n.)

In lexicons of sea language going back to 1759, the bitter end is the part of a cable which is round
about the bits (two great timbers used to belay cables) when the ship is at anchor.   Bitter end of
the Cable, the End which is wound about the Bitts. [The News-Readers Pocket-Book: Or, a Military
Dictionary, London, 1759]    See bit (n.1). So, when a cable is played out to the bitter end, there
is no more left to play. The term began to be used c.1835 in non-nautical use and with probable
influence of bitter (adj.).


bitter (adj.)

Old English biter bitter, sharp, cutting; angry, embittered; cruel, from Proto-Germanic *bitras-
(cognates: Old Saxon bittar, Old Norse bitr, Dutch bitter, Old High German bittar, German bitter,
Gothic baitrs bitter), from PIE root *bheid- to split (cognates: Old English bitan to bite; see bite
(v.)). Evidently the meaning drifted in prehistoric times from biting, of pungent taste, to acrid-
tasting. Used figuratively in Old English of states of mind and words. Related: Bitterly.


bittersweet

also bitter-sweet, late 14c. as a noun; used especially in Middle English of a type of apple, from
bitter (adj.) + sweet (adj.). As an adjective, attested from 1610s.


bitters (n.)

1713, from bitter. So called for its taste.


bitterness (n.)

Old English biternys bitterness, grief; see bitter + -ness. Figurative sense (of feelings, etc.) is
attested earlier than literal sense (of taste), which will surprise no one who reads any amount of
Anglo-Saxon literature.


morello (n.)

kind of bitter cherry, 1640s, of uncertain origin, perhaps ultimately from Latin amarus bitter.
Earlier form was morell (1610s).


maraschino (n.)

1791, cherry liqueur, from Italian maraschino strong, sweet liqueur made from juice of the marasca
(a bitter black cherry), a shortening of amarasca, from amaro bitter, from Latin amarus sour, from
PIE root *om- raw, bitter. Maraschino cherry, one preserved in real or imitation maraschino, first
recorded 1820.


alum (n.)

late 14c., whitish mineral salt used as an astringent, dye, etc., from Old French alum, from Latin
alumen alum, literally bitter salt, cognate with Greek aludoimos bitter and perhaps with English
ale.


acerbity (n.)

1570s, from Middle French acerbit&eacute;, from Latin acerbitatem (nominative acerbitas) harshness,
sharpness, bitterness, from acerbus bitter to taste, sharp, sour, tart (related to acer sharp;
compare Latin superbus haughty, from super above), from Proto-Italic *akro-po- sharp, from PIE *ak-
sharp (see acrid). Earliest use in English is figurative, of sharp and bitter persons. Of tastes,
from 1610s.


eager (adj.)

late 13c., strenuous, ardent, fierce, angry, from Old French aigre sour, acid; harsh, bitter, rough;
eager greedy; lively, active, forceful, from Latin acrem (nominative acer) keen, sharp, pointed,
piercing; acute, ardent, zealous (see acrid).    Meaning full of keen desire (early 14c.) seems to
be peculiar to English. The English word kept an alternative meaning of pungent, sharp-edged till
19c. (as in Shakespeare's The bitter clamour of two eager tongues, in Richard II). Related: Eagerly;
eagerness.


orange (n.)

c.1300, of the fruit, from Old French orange, orenge (12c., Modern French orange), from Medieval
Latin pomum de orenge, from Italian arancia, originally narancia (Venetian naranza), alteration of
Arabic naranj, from Persian narang, from Sanskrit naranga-s orange tree, of uncertain origin. Not
used as a color word until 1540s.    Loss of initial n- probably due to confusion with definite
article (as in une narange, una narancia), but perhaps influenced by French or gold. The name of the
town of Orange in France (see Orangemen) perhaps was deformed by the name of the fruit. Orange juice
is attested from 1723.    The tree's original range probably was northern India. The Persian orange,
grown widely in southern Europe after its introduction in Italy 11c., was bitter; sweet oranges were
brought to Europe 15c. from India by Portuguese traders and quickly displaced the bitter variety,
but only Modern Greek still seems to distinguish the bitter (nerantzi) from the sweet (portokali
Portuguese) orange. Portuguese, Spanish, Arab, and Dutch sailors planted citrus trees along trade
routes to prevent scurvy. On his second voyage in 1493, Christopher Columbus brought the seeds of
oranges, lemons and citrons to Haiti and the Caribbean. Introduced in Florida (along with lemons) in
1513 by Spanish explorer Juan Ponce de Leon. Introduced to Hawaii 1792.


taunt (n.)

1520s, bitter invective, probably from taunt (v.).


acrid (adj.)

1712, formed irregularly from Latin acer (fem. acris) sharp, pungent, bitter, eager, fierce, from
PIE *akri- sharp, from root *ak- be sharp, rise (out) to a point, pierce (cognates: Oscan akrid
(ablative singular) sharply; Greek akis sharp point, akros at the farthest point, highest,
outermost, akantha thorn, akme summit, edge; also oxys sharp, bitter; Sanskrit acri- corner, edge,
acani- point of an arrow, asrih edge; Lithuanian a&#353;muo sharpness, akstis sharp stick; Old
Lithuanian a&#353;tras, Lithuanian a&#353;trus sharp; Old Church Slavonic ostru, Russian &#243;stryj
sharp; Old Irish er high; Welsh ochr edge, corner, border; Old Norse eggja goad; Old English ecg
sword). The -id suffix probably is in imitation of acid. Acrious (1670s) is a correct formation, but
seldom seen.


alkaloid (n.)

1831, from alkali (q.v.) + -oid. A general term applied to basic compounds of vegetable origin,
bitter in taste, and having powerful effects on the animal system [Flood]. As an adjective by 1859.


embitter (v.)

c.1600, from em- + bitter. Now rare in its literal sense; figurative meaning first attested 1630s.
Related: Embittered.


horse-chestnut (n.)

1590s, from horse + chestnut. A tree probably native to Asia, introduced in England c.1550; the name
also was extended to similar North American species such as the buckeye. Said to have been so called
because it was food for horses. The nut resembles that of the edible chestnut but is bitter to the
taste.


crabbed (adj.)

late 14c., peevish, angry, ill-tempered, from crab (n.1), from the crab's combative disposition;
mid-15c. as resembling a crab in reference to crookedness. Of taste bitter, harsh, late 14c., from
crab (n.2).


acerbic (adj.)

1865, originally, and usually, figurative: sour, harsh, severe (of speech, manners, etc.), from
Latin acerbus harsh to the taste, sharp, bitter, sour (see acerbity) + -ic.


rue (n.1)

perennial evergreen shrub, late 14c., from Old French rue (13c.), earlier rude, from Latin ruta rue,
probably from Greek rhyte, of uncertain etymology, originally a Peloponnesian word. The bitter taste
of its leaves led to many punning allusions to rue (n.2.).


mother-in-law (n.)

mid-15c., mother of one's spouse, from mother (n.1) + in-law. Also in early use, stepmother. In
British slang c.1884, mother-in-law was a mixture of ales old and bitter.


moxie (n.)

courage, 1930, from Moxie, brand name of a bitter, non-alcoholic drink, 1885, perhaps as far back as
1876 as the name of a patent medicine advertised to build up your nerve; despite legendary origin
stories put out by the company that made it, it is perhaps ultimately from a New England Indian word
(it figures in river and lake names in Maine, where it is apparently from Abenaki and means dark
water). Much-imitated in its day; in 1917 the Moxie Company won an infringement suit against a
competitor's beverage marketed as Proxie.


philippic (n.)

1590s, bitter invective discourse, from Middle French philippique, from Latin (orationes)
Philippic&aelig;, translation of Greek Philippikoi (logoi), the speeches made in Athens by
Demosthenes in 351-341 B.C.E. urging Greeks to unite and fight the rising power of Philip II of
Macedon. The Latin phrase was used of the speeches made by Cicero against Marc Antony in 44 and 43
B.C.E.


exacerbation (n.)

c.1400, from Late Latin exacerbationem (nominative exacerbatio), noun of action from past participle
stem Latin exacerbare exasperate, irritate, provoke, from ex- thoroughly (see ex-) + acerbus harsh,
bitter, from acer sharp, keen (see acrid).


chocolate (n.)

c.1600, from Nahuatl (Aztecan) xocolatl, possibly from xocolia to make bitter + atl water. Brought
to Spain by 1520, from thence to the rest of Europe. Originally a drink; as a paste or cake made of
ground, roasted, sweetened cacao seeds, 1640s.  To a Coffee-house, to drink jocolatte, very good
[Pepys, Diary, Nov. 24, 1664].  As a color from 1776. Chocolate chip is from 1940; chocolatier is
attested from 1888.


myrrh (n.)

Old English myrre, from Latin myrrha (also source of Dutch mirre, German Myrrhe, French myrrhe,
Italian, Spanish mirra), from Greek myrrha, from a Semitic source (compare Akkadian murru, Hebrew
mor, Arabic murr myrrh), from a root meaning was bitter.


austere (adj.)

early 14c., from Old French austere (Modern French aust&egrave;re) and directly from Latin austerus
dry, harsh, sour, tart, from Greek austeros bitter, harsh, especially making the tongue dry
(originally used of fruits, wines), metaphorically austere, harsh, from PIE *saus- dry (cognates:
Greek auos dry, auein to dry). Use in English is figurative: stern, severe, very simple. Related:
Austerely.


wormwood (n.)

c.1400, folk etymology of Old English wermod wormwood, absinthe, related to vermouth, but the
ultimate etymology is unknown. Compare Old Saxon wermoda, Dutch wermoet, Old High German werimuota,
German Wermut. Weekley suggests wer man + mod courage, from its early use as an aphrodisiac.
Figurative use, however, is usually in reference to its proverbial bitter aftertaste. Perhaps
because of the folk etymology, it formerly was used to protect clothes and bedding from moths and
fleas. A medecyne for an hawke that hath mites. Take the Iuce of wormewode and put it ther thay be
and thei shall dye. [Book of St. Albans, 1486]


aloe (n.)

Old English alewe fragrant resin of an East Indian tree, a Biblical usage, from Latin aloe, from
Greek aloe, translating Hebrew ahalim (plural, perhaps ultimately from a Dravidian language).    The
Greek word probably was chosen for resemblance of sound to the Hebrew, because the Greek and Latin
words referred originally to a genus of plants with spiky flowers and bitter juice, used as a
purgative drug, a sense which appeared in English late 14c. The word was then misapplied to the
American agave plant in 1680s. The true aloe consequently is called aloe vera.


vitriol (n.)

late 14c., sulphate of iron, from Old French vitriol (13c.), from Medieval Latin vitriolum vitriol,
noun use of neuter of vitriolus, variant of Late Latin vitreolus of glass, from Latin vitreus of
glass, glassy, from vitrum glass (see vitreous). So called from its glassy appearance in certain
states. Meaning bitter or caustic feelings first attested 1769, in reference to the corrosive
properties of vitriol (when heated it produces sulfuric acid, formerly called oil of vitriol).


foe (n.)

Old English gefa foe, enemy, adversary in a blood feud (the prefix denotes mutuality), from fah at
feud, hostile, from Proto-Germanic *fakhaz (cognates: Old High German fehan to hate, Gothic faih
deception), probably from PIE root *peig- (2) evil-minded, treacherous, hostile (cognates: Sanskrit
pisunah malicious, picacah demon; Greek pikros bitter; Latin piget it irks, troubles, displeases,
piger reluctant, lazy; Lithuanian piktas wicked, angry, pekti to blame). Weaker sense of adversary
is first recorded c.1600.


bergamot (n.)

type of citrus tree, also its fruit, both similar to bitter orange, and the essence prepared from
the oil of the rind of the fruit, 1690s, from French bergamote (17c.), from Italian bergamotta,
named for Bergamo, town in Italy. The name is Roman Bergamum, from a Celtic or Ligurian berg
mountain, cognate with the identical Germanic word.    Earlier (1610s) as a kind of pear deemed
especially luscious, in this sense ultimately a Romanic folk-etymologization from Turkish beg-armudi
prince's pear or prince of pears, influenced in form by the other word, but probably not from it
(the town is on the opposite end of the peninsula from where the pear grows). Also used of garden
plants of the mint order with a smell like that of oil of bergamot.


venom (n.)

mid-13c., venim, venym, poison secreted by some animals and transferred by biting, from Anglo-French
and Old French venim, venin poison; malice, from Vulgar Latin *venimen (source also of Italian
veleno, Spanish veneno), from Latin venenum poison, earlier (pre-classical) drug, medical potion,
also charm, seduction, probably originally love potion, from PIE *wenes-no-, from root *wen- (1) to
strive after, wish, desire (see Venus). Variously deformed in post-Latin languages, apparently by
dissimilation. Modern spelling in English from late 14c. The meaning bitter, virulent feeling or
language is first recorded c.1300.


sardonic (adj.)

apparently but not really proceeding from gaiety, 1630s, from French sardonique (16c.), from Latin
sardonius (but as if from Latin *sardonicus) in Sardonius risus, loan-translation of Greek sardonios
(gelos) of bitter or scornful (laughter), altered from Homeric sardanios (of uncertain origin) by
influence of Sardonios Sardinian, because the Greeks believed that eating a certain plant they
called sardonion (literally plant from Sardinia, see Sardinia) caused facial convulsions resembling
those of sardonic laughter, usually followed by death. For nuances of usage, see humor. Earlier in
same sense sardonian (1580s), from Latin sardonius. Related: Sardonically.


sour (adj.)

Old English sur sour, tart, acid, fermented, from Proto-Germanic *sura- sour (cognates: Old Norse
surr, Middle Dutch suur, Dutch zuur, Old High German sur, German Sauer), from PIE root *suro- sour,
salty, bitter (cognates: Old Church Slavonic syru, Russian syroi moist, raw; Lithuanian suras salty,
suris cheese).    Meaning having a peevish disposition is from early 13c. Sense in whisky sour
(1885) is with lemon added (1862). Sour cream is attested from 1855. French sur sour, tart (12c.) is
a Germanic loan-word.


vicious (adj.)

late 14c., unwholesome, impure, of the nature of vice, wicked, corrupting, pernicious, harmful; of a
text, erroneous, corrupt, from Anglo-French vicious, Old French vicios wicked, cunning, underhand;
defective, illegal (Modern French vicieux), from Latin vitiosus (Medieval Latin vicious) faulty,
full of faults, defective, corrupt; wicked, depraved, from vitium fault (see vice (n.1)).    Meaning
inclined to be savage or dangerous is first recorded 1711 (originally of animals, especially
horses); that of full of spite, bitter, severe is from 1825. In law, marred by some inherent fault
(late 14c.), hence also this sense in logic (c.1600), as in vicious circle in reasoning (c.1792,
Latin circulus vitiosus), which was given a general sense of a situation in which action and
reaction intensify one another by 1839. Related: Viciously (mid-14c., sinfully); viciousness.


taste (v.)

c.1300, to touch, to handle, from Old French taster to taste, sample by mouth; enjoy (13c.), earlier
to feel, touch, pat, stroke (12c., Modern French t&#226;ter), from Vulgar Latin *tastare, apparently
an alteration (perhaps by influence of gustare) of taxtare, a frequentative form of Latin taxare
evaluate, handle (see tax (v.)). Meaning to take a little food or drink is from c.1300; that of to
perceive by sense of taste is recorded from mid-14c. Of substances, to have a certain taste or
flavor, it is attested from 1550s (replaced native smack (v.3) in this sense). For another PIE root
in this sense, see gusto.    The Hindus recognized six principal varieties of taste with sixty-three
possible mixtures ... the Greeks eight .... These included the four that are now regarded as
fundamental, namely 'sweet,' 'bitter,' 'acid,' 'salt.' ... The others were 'pungent' (Gk. drimys,
Skt. katuka-), 'astringent' (Gk. stryphnos, Skt. kasaya-), and, for the Greeks, 'rough, harsh'
(austeros), 'oily, greasy' (liparos), with the occasional addition of 'winy' (oinodes). [Buck]
Sense of to know by experience is from 1520s. Related: Tasted; tasting. Taste buds is from 1879;
also taste goblets.


sharp (adj.)

Old English scearp having a cutting edge; pointed; intellectually acute, active, shrewd; keen (of
senses); severe; biting, bitter (of tastes), from Proto-Germanic *skarpaz, literally cutting
(cognates: Old Saxon scarp, Old Norse skarpr, Old Frisian skerp, Dutch scherp, German scharf sharp),
from PIE *(s)ker- (1) to cut (cognates: Lettish skarbs sharp, Middle Irish cerb cutting; see shear
(v.)).    The figurative meaning acute or penetrating in intellect or perception was in Old English;
hence keenly alive to one's own interests, quick to take advantage (1690s). Of words or talk,
cutting, sarcastic, from early 13c. Meaning distinct in contour is from 1670s. The adverbial meaning
abruptly is from 1836; that of promptly is first attested 1840. The musical meaning half step above
(a given tone) is from 1570s. Meaning stylish is from 1944, hepster slang, from earlier general
slang sense of excellent (1940). Phrase sharp as a tack first recorded 1912 (sharp as a needle has
been around since Old English). Sharp-shinned attested from 1704 of persons, 1813 of hawks.


ale (n.)

Old English ealu ale, beer, from Proto-Germanic *aluth- (cognates: Old Saxon alo, Old Norse
&ouml;l), perhaps from PIE root meaning bitter (cognates: Latin alumen alum), or from PIE *alu-t
ale, from root *alu-, which has connotations of sorcery, magic, possession, intoxication. The word
was borrowed from Germanic into Lithuanian (alus) and Old Church Slavonic (olu).  In the fifteenth
century, and until the seventeenth, ale stood for the unhopped fermented malt liquor which had long
been the native drink of these islands. Beer was the hopped malt liquor introduced from the Low
Countires in the fifteenth century and popular first of all in the towns. By the eighteenth century,
however, all malt liquor was hopped and there had been a silent mutation in the meaning of the two
terms. For a time the terms became synonymous, in fact, but local habits of nomenclature still
continued to perpetuate what had been a real difference: 'beer' was the malt liquor which tended to
be found in towns, 'ale' was the term in general use in the country districts. [Peter Mathias, The
Brewing Industry in England, Cambridge University Press, 1959]Meaning festival or merry-meeting at
which much ale was drunk was in Old English (see bridal).


wrong (adj.)

late Old English, twisted, crooked, wry, from Old Norse rangr, earlier *wrangr crooked, wry, wrong,
from Proto-Germanic *wrang- (cognates: Danish vrang crooked, wrong, Middle Dutch wranc, Dutch wrang
sour, bitter, literally that which distorts the mouth), from PIE *wrengh-, variant of *wergh- to
turn (see wring).    Sense of not right, bad, immoral, unjust developed by c.1300. Wrong thus is
etymologically a negative of right (adj.1), which is from Latin rectus, literally straight. Latin
pravus was literally crooked, but most commonly wrong, bad; and other words for crooked also have
meant wrong in Italian and Slavic. Compare French tort wrong, injustice, from Latin tortus twisted.
As an adverb from c.1200. Wrong-headed first recorded 1732. To get up on the wrong side (of the bed)
be in a bad mood is recorded from 1801, according to OED, from its supposed influence on one's
temper; it appears in Halliwell's Dictionary of Archaic and Provincial Words in 1846, but doesn't
seem to have been used much generally before late 1870s. To be on the wrong side of a given age,
older than, is from 1660s. Wrong side of the road (that reservbed for oncoming traffic) is by 1838.
To be from (or on) the wrong side of the tracks from the poor part of town is from 1921, American
English.


