bleak (adj.)

c.1300, pale, from Old Norse bleikr pale, whitish, blond, from Proto-Germanic *blaika- shining,
white, from PIE root *bhel- (1) to shine, flash, burn (see bleach (v.)). Later bare, windswept
(1530s). Sense of cheerless is c.1719 figurative extension. The same Germanic root produced Old
English blac pale, but this died out, probably from confusion with bl&aelig;c black; however bleak
persisted, with a sense of bare as well as pale.


bleakness (n.)

c.1600, from bleak + -ness.


bleakly (adv.)

1530s, from bleak (adj.) + -ly (2).


educrat (n.)

1968, usually pejorative; first element from education, second from bureaucrat. Said to have been
coined by Claude R. Kirk Jr. (b.1926), governor of Florida.    While political leaders and corporate
CEOs, focusing as usual on the quarterly return, call for workers for the new economy, their
educational reforms are producing just that: students with a grab-bag of minor skills and
competencies and minds that are sadly uneventful, incapable of genuine intellectual achievement and
lacking any sense of continuity with the historical and cultural traditions of our society. Their
world is small, bleak, and limited; their world will become ours. [David Solway, The Turtle
Hypodermic of Sickenpods, Quebec, 2000]


east (n.)

Old English east east, easterly, eastward, from Proto-Germanic *aus-to-, *austra- east, toward the
sunrise (cognates: Old Frisian ast east, aster eastward, Dutch oost Old Saxon ost, Old High German
ostan, German Ost, Old Norse austr from the east), from PIE *aus- (1) to shine, especially dawn
(cognates: Sanskrit ushas dawn; Greek aurion morning; Old Irish usah, Lithuanian auszra dawn; Latin
aurora dawn, auster south), literally to shine (see aurora). The east is the direction in which dawn
breaks. For theory of shift in sense in Latin, see Australia.    Meaning the eastern part of the
world (from Europe) is from c.1300. French est, Spanish este are borrowings from Middle English,
originally nautical. The east wind in Biblical Palestine was scorching and destructive (as in Ezek.
xvii:10); in New England it is bleak, wet, unhealthful.    Cold War use of East for communist states
first recorded 1951. Natives of eastern Germany and the Baltics were known as easterlings 16c.-18c.
East End of London so called by 1846; East Side of Manhattan so called from 1882; East Indies (India
and Southeast Asia) so called 1590s to distinguish them from the West Indies.


