blemish (n.)

1520s, from blemish (v.).


blemish (v.)

early 14c., to hurt, damage, from Old French blemiss- to turn pale, extended stem of blemir, blesmir
to make pale; stain, discolor, also to injure (13c., Modern French bl&ecirc;mir), probably from
Frankish *blesmjan to cause to turn pale, or some other Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic *blas
shining, white, from PIE root *bhel- (1) to shine, flash, burn (see bleach (v.)).    The order of
appearance of senses in Middle English is hurt, damage; impair morally, sully (late 14c.); mar,
spoil, injure (early 15c.); to mar the beauty or soundness of (mid-15c.). Related: Blemished;
blemishing.


amend (v.)

early 13c., to free from faults, rectify, from Old French amender (12c.), from Latin emendare to
correct, free from fault, from ex- out (see ex-) + menda fault, blemish, from PIE *mend- physical
defect, fault (cognates: Sanskrit minda physical blemish, Old Irish mennar stain, blemish, Welsh
mann sign, mark).    Supplanted in senses of repair, cure by its shortened offspring mend (v.).
Meaning to add to legislation (ostensibly to correct or improve it) is recorded from 1777. Related:
Amended; amending.


measles (n.)

infectious disease, early 14c., plural of Middle English masel, perhaps from Middle Dutch masel
blemish (in plural measles) or Middle Low German masele, from Proto-Germanic *mas- spot, blemish
(cognates: Old High German masla blood-blister, German Masern measles).    There might have been an
Old English cognate, but if so it has not been recorded. Form probably influenced by Middle English
mesel leprous (late 13c.).


naeve (n.)

spot, blemish, 1610s, from Latin naevus mole, birthmark, wart, from *gnaevus birthmark, literally
born in.


unblemished (adj.)

c.1300, from un- (1) not + past participle of blemish (v.). Originally in moral sense; material
sense is attested from mid-15c.


mail (n.2)

metal ring armor, c.1300, from Old French maille link of mail, mesh of net, from Latin macula mesh
in a net, originally spot, blemish, on notion that the gaps in a net or mesh looked like spots.


vitiligo (n.)

1650s, from Latin vitiglio a kind of cutaneous eruption, tetter (Celsus), perhaps with an original
sense of blemish, from PIE *wi-tu-, from root *wei- (3) vice, fault, guilt (see vice (n.1)).


blot (n.)

late 14c., originally blemish, perhaps from Old Norse blettr blot, stain, or from Old French blot,
variant of bloc block, or blestre blister, lump, clump of earth.


vitiate (v.)

1530s, from Latin vitiatus, past participle of vitiare to make faulty, injure, spoil, corrupt, from
vitium fault, defect, blemish, crime, vice (see vice (n.1)). Related: Vitiated; vitiating.


macule (n.)

blemish, spot, late 15c., from Latin macula (see macula), perhaps via French macule.


stigmatize (v.)

1580s, to brand or tattoo, from Medieval Latin stigmatizare, from Greek stigmatizein, from stigmat-,
stem of stigma (see stigma). Meaning to blemish is from 1610s (figurative), 1630s (literal).
Related: Stigmatized; stigmatizing.


emend (v.)

c.1400, from Latin emendare to free from fault, from ex- out (see ex-) + mendum (nominative menda)
fault, blemish (see amend). Related: Emended; emending.


immaculate (adj.)

early 15c., free from mental or moral pollution, pure, from a figurative use of Latin immaculatus
unstained, from assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + maculatus spotted, defiled,
past participle of maculare to spot, from macula spot, blemish. The literal sense of spotlessly
clean or neat in English is first attested 1735. Immaculate Conception is late 15c., from Middle
French conception immacul&eacute;e (late 15c.); declared to be an article of faith in 1854.


challenge (n.)

early 14c., something one can be accused of, a fault, blemish; mid-14c., false accusation, malicious
charge; accusation of wrong-doing, also act of laying claim (to something), from Anglo-French
chalenge, Old French chalonge calumny, slander; demand, opposition, in legal use, accusation, claim,
dispute, from Anglo-French chalengier, Old French chalongier to accuse, to dispute (see challenge
(v.)). Accusatory connotations died out 17c. Meanings an objection in law, etc.; a calling to fight
are from mid-15c. Meaning difficult task is from 1954.


mole (n.1)

spot on skin, Old English mal spot, mark, blemish, especially on cloth or linen, from Proto-Germanic
*mailan spot, mark (cognates: Old High German meil, German Mal, Gothic mail wrinkle), from PIE root
*mai- to stain, defile (cognates: Greek miainein to stain, defile, see miasma). Specifically of dark
marks on human skin from late 14c.


fault (n.)

late 13c., faute, deficiency, from Old French faute (12c.) opening, gap; failure, flaw, blemish;
lack, deficiency, from Vulgar Latin *fallita a shortcoming, falling, noun use of fem. past
participle, from Latin falsus deceptive, feigned, spurious, past participle of fallere deceive,
disappoint (see fail (v.)).    The -l- was restored 16c., probably in imitation of Latin, but was
not pronounced till 18c. Sense of physical defect is from early 14c.; that of moral culpability is
first recorded late 14c. Geological sense is from 1796. The use in tennis (c.1600) is closer to the
etymological sense.


pure (adj.)

c.1300 (late 12c. as a surname, and Old English had purlamb lamb without a blemish), unmixed, also
absolutely, entirely, from Old French pur pure, simple, absolute, unalloyed, figuratively simple,
sheer, mere (12c.), from Latin purus clean, clear; unmixed; unadorned; chaste, undefiled, from PIE
root *peue- to purify, cleanse (cognates: Latin putus clear, pure; Sanskrit pavate purifies,
cleanses, putah pure; Middle Irish ur fresh, new; Old High German fowen to sift).    Replaced Old
English hlutor. Meaning free from moral corruption is first recorded mid-14c. In reference to
bloodlines, attested from late 15c.


stain (v.)

late 14c., damage or blemish the appearance of, probably representing a merger of Old Norse steina
to paint, color, stain, and a shortened form of Middle English disteynen to discolor or stain, from
Old French desteign-, stem of desteindre to remove the color (Modern French d&#233;teindre), from
des- (from Latin dis- remove; see dis-) + Old French teindre to dye, from Latin tingere (see
tincture). Meaning to color (fabric, wood, etc.) is from 1650s. Intransitive sense to become
stained, take stain is from 1877. Related: Stained; staining. Stained glass is attested from 1791.


vice (n.1)

moral fault, wickedness, c.1300, from Old French vice fault, failing, defect, irregularity,
misdemeanor (12c.), from Latin vitium defect, offense, blemish, imperfection, in both physical and
moral senses (in Medieval Latin also vicium; source also of Italian vezzo usage, entertainment),
from PIE *wi-tio-, from root *wei- (3) vice, fault, guilt.  Horace and Aristotle have already spoken
to us about the virtues of their forefathers and the vices of their own times, and through the
centuries, authors have talked the same way.  If all this were true, we would be bears today.
[Montesquieu]   Vice squad special police unit targeting prostitution, narcotics, gambling, etc., is
attested from 1905, American English. Vice anglais fetish for corporal punishment, literally the
English vice, is attested from 1942, from French. In Old French, the seven deadly sins were les set
vices.


smite (v.)

to hit, strike, beat, mid-12c., from Old English smitan, which however is attested only as to daub,
smear on; soil, pollute, blemish, defile (strong verb, past tense smat, past participle smiten),
from Proto-Germanic *smitan (cognates: Swedish smita, Danish smide to smear, fling, Old Frisian
smita, Middle Low German and Middle Dutch smiten to cast, fling, Dutch smijten to throw, Old High
German smizan to rub, strike, German schmei&szlig;en to cast, fling, Gothic bismeitan to spread,
smear). The development of the various senses is not quite clear, but that of throwing is perh. the
original one [OED]. Watkins suggests the semantic channel may have been slapping mud on walls in
wattle and daub construction and connects it with PIE *sme- to smear; Klein's sources also say this.
Sense of slay in combat (c.1300) is from Biblical expression smite to death, first attested c.1200.
Meaning visit disastrously is mid-12c., also Biblical. Meaning strike with passion or emotion is
from c.1300.


beauty (n.)

early 14c., physical attractiveness, also goodness, courtesy, from Anglo-French beute, Old French
biaut&eacute; beauty, seductiveness, beautiful person (12c., Modern French beaut&eacute;), earlier
beltet, from Vulgar Latin bellitatem (nominative bellitas) state of being handsome, from Latin
bellus pretty, handsome, charming, in classical Latin used especially of women and children, or
ironically or insultingly of men, perhaps from PIE *dw-en-elo-, diminutive of root *deu- (2) to do,
perform; show favor, revere (see bene-). Famously defined by Stendhal as la promesse de bonheur the
promise of happiness.    [I]t takes the one hundred men in ten million who understand beauty, which
isn't imitation or an improvement on the beautiful as already understood by the common herd, twenty
or thirty years to convince the twenty thousand next most sensitive souls after their own that this
new beauty is truly beautiful. [Stendhal, Life of Henry Brulard]    Replaced Old English wlite.
Concrete meaning a beautiful woman is first recorded late 14c. Beauty sleep sleep before midnight is
attested by 1850. Beauty spot is from 1650s. Beauty parlor is from 1894.    The sudden death of a
young woman a little over a week ago in a down-town beauty parlor has served to direct public
attention to those institutions and their methods. In this case, it seems, the operator painted on
or injected into the patron's facial blemish a 4-per-cent cocaine solution and then applied an
electrode, the sponge of which was saturated with carbolized water. [The Western Druggist, October
1894]   Beaut&eacute; du diable (literally devil's beauty) is used as a French phrase in English
from 1825.


