bliss (v.)

often with out, by 1973, U.S. colloquial, from bliss (n.).


bliss (n.)

Old English blis, also bli&eth;s bliss, merriment, happiness, grace, favor, from Proto-Germanic
*blithsjo (cognates: Old Saxon blidsea, blizza), from *blithiz gentle, kind + *-tjo noun suffix.
Originally mostly of earthly happiness; influenced by association with bless and blithe.


blissful (adj.)

late 12c., blisfulle, from bliss + -ful. Related: Blissfully; blissfulness.


ananda (n.)

in Hindu theology, bliss, from Sanskrit ananda- joy, happiness, bliss, from stem of nandati he
rejoices, of unknown origin.


Byronic (adj.)

1823, pertaining to or resembling British poet George Gordon, 6th Baron Byron (1788-1824).
Perfect she was, but as perfection is  Insipid in this naughty world of ours,  Where our first
parents never learn'd to kiss  Till they were exiled from their earlier bowers,  Where all was
peace, and innocence, and bliss  (I wonder how they got through the twelve hours),  Don Jose like a
lineal son of Eve,  Went plucking various fruit without her leave.  [from Don Juan]


siddha (n.)

in Indian religion, one who has attained perfection and bliss, 1846, from Sanskrit siddhah
accomplished, achieved, successful, possessing supernatural power, sorcerer, saint, related to
sidhyati reaches his goal, succeeds, sadhuh right, skilled, excellent, a holy man.


nirvana (n.)

1836, from Sanskrit nirvana-s extinction, disappearance (of the individual soul into the universal),
literally to blow out, a blowing out (not transitively, but as a fire ceases to draw; a literal
Latinization would be de-spiration), from nis-, nir- out + va- to blow (see wind (n.1)). Figurative
sense of perfect bliss is from 1895.


exultation (n.)

early 15c., from Old French exultacion, from Latin exultationem/exsultationem, noun of action from
past participle stem of exultare/exsultare, frequentative of exsilire leap out or up (see exult).
Notion is of leaping or dancing for joy. An Old English word for it was heahbliss high bliss.


beatify (v.)

1530s, to make very happy, from Middle French b&eacute;atifer, from Late Latin beatificare make
happy, make blessed, from Latin beatus supremely happy, blessed (past participle of beare make
happy, bless) + -ficare, from stem of facere to make, do (see factitious). The Roman Catholic Church
sense of to pronounce as being in heavenly bliss (1620s) is the first step toward canonization.
Related: Beatified; beatifying.


bless (v.)

Old English bletsian, bledsian, Northumbrian bloedsian to consecrate, make holy, give thanks, from
Proto-Germanic *blodison hallow with blood, mark with blood, from *blotham blood (see blood).
Originally a blood sprinkling on pagan altars. This word was chosen in Old English bibles to
translate Latin benedicere and Greek eulogein, both of which have a ground sense of to speak well
of, to praise, but were used in Scripture to translate Hebrew brk to bend (the knee), worship,
praise, invoke blessings. Meaning shifted in late Old English toward pronounce or make happy, by
resemblance to unrelated bliss. No cognates in other languages. Related: Blessed; blessing.


