blissful (adj.)

late 12c., blisfulle, from bliss + -ful. Related: Blissfully; blissfulness.


Ethiop

late 14c., from Latin &AElig;thiops Ethiopian, negro, from Greek Aithiops, perhaps from aithein to
burn + ops face (compare aithops fiery-looking, later sunburned).Who the Homeric &AElig;thiopians
were is a matter of doubt. The poet elsewhere speaks of two divisions of them, one dwelling near the
rising, the other near the setting of the sun, both having imbrowned visages from their proximity to
that luminary, and both leading a blissful existence, because living amid a flood of light; and, as
a natural concomitant of a blissful existence, blameless, and pure, and free from every kind of
moral defilement. [Charles Anthon, note to The First Six Books of Homer's Iliad, 1878]


Scilly

isles off Cornwall, of unknown origin. Pliny has Silumnus, Silimnis. Perhaps connected with the
Roman god Sulis (compare Aquae sulis Bath). The -y might be Old Norse ey island The -c- added
16c.-17c. [A]bout the only certain thing that can be said is that the c of the modern spelling is
not original but was added for distinction from ModE silly as this word developed in meaning from
'happy, blissful' to 'foolish.' [Victor Watts, Cambridge Dictionary of English Place-Names, 2004].


silly (adj.)

Old English ges&aelig;lig happy, fortuitous, prosperous (related to s&aelig;l happiness), from
Proto-Germanic *s&aelig;ligas (cognates: Old Norse s&aelig;ll happy, Old Saxon salig, Middle Dutch
salich, Old High German salig, German selig blessed, happy, blissful, Gothic sels good,
kindhearted), from PIE *sele- of good mood; to favor, from root *sel- (2) happy, of good mood; to
favor (cognates: Latin solari to comfort, Greek hilaros cheerful, gay, merry, joyous).    This is
one of the few instances in which an original long e (ee) has become shortened to i. The same change
occurs in breeches, and in the American pronunciation of been, with no change in spelling. [Century
Dictionary]    The word's considerable sense development moved from happy to blessed to pious, to
innocent (c.1200), to harmless, to pitiable (late 13c.), weak (c.1300), to feeble in mind, lacking
in reason, foolish (1570s). Further tendency toward stunned, dazed as by a blow (1886) in knocked
silly, etc. Silly season in journalism slang is from 1861 (August and September, when newspapers
compensate for a lack of hard news by filling up with trivial stories). Silly Putty trademark claims
use from July 1949.


