blithesome (adj.)

1724, from blithe + -some (1). An adjective from an adjective. Related: Blithesomely;
blithesomeness.


blithe (adj.)

Old English bli&thorn;e joyous, kind, cheerful, pleasant, from Proto-Germanic *blithiz gentle, kind
(cognates: Old Saxon bli&eth;i bright, happy, Middle Dutch blide, Dutch blijde, Old Norse bli&eth;r
mild, gentle, Old High German blidi gay, friendly, Gothic blei&thorn;s kind, friendly, merciful).
Rare since 16c. No cognates outside Germanic. The earlier application was to the outward expression
of kindly feeling, sympathy, affection to others, as in Gothic and ON.; but in OE. the word had come
more usually to be applied to the external manifestation of one's own pleased or happy frame of
mind, and hence even to the state itself. [OED]


bliss (n.)

Old English blis, also bli&eth;s bliss, merriment, happiness, grace, favor, from Proto-Germanic
*blithsjo (cognates: Old Saxon blidsea, blizza), from *blithiz gentle, kind + *-tjo noun suffix.
Originally mostly of earthly happiness; influenced by association with bless and blithe.


happy (adj.)

late 14c., lucky, favored by fortune, prosperous; of events, turning out well, from hap (n.) chance,
fortune + -y (2). Sense of very glad first recorded late 14c. Ousted Old English eadig (from ead
wealth, riches) and ges&aelig;lig, which has become silly. Meaning greatly pleased and content is
from 1520s. Old English bli&eth;e happy survives as blithe. From Greek to Irish, a great majority of
the European words for happy at first meant lucky. An exception is Welsh, where the word used first
meant wise.    Used in World War II and after as a suffix (as in bomb-happy, flak-happy) expressing
dazed or frazzled from stress. Happy medium is from 1778. Happy ending in the literary sense
recorded from 1756. Happy as a clam (1630s) was originally happy as a clam in the mud at high tide,
when it can't be dug up and eaten. Happy hunting ground, the reputed Indian paradise, is attested
from 1840, American English. Related: Happier; happiest.


