blue (v.)

to make blue, c.1600, from blue (1).


blueprint (n.)

also blue-print, 1882, from blue (1) + print (n.). The process uses blue on white, or white on blue.
Figurative sense of detailed plan is attested from 1926. As a verb by 1939.


blueing (n.)

substance which makes (something) blue, 1660s, verbal noun from blue (v.).


bluegrass (n.)

also blue-grass, music style, 1958, in reference to the Blue Grass Boys, country music band
1940s-'50s, from the blue grass (Poa pratensis) characteristic of Kentucky, the grass so called from
1751. Kentucky has been called the Bluegrass State since at least 1872; see blue (n.) + grass.


blue collar (adj.)

also blue-collar, 1949, from blue (1) + collar (n.). From the common color of men's work shirts.


bluebird (n.)

also blue-bird, North American warbler-like bird, 1680s, from blue (1) in reference to its plumage +
bird (n.1). Figurative use in bluebird of happiness is from 1909 play romance l'Oiseau bleu,
literally The Blue Bird, by Belgian dramatist and poet Maurice Maeterlinck (1862-1949).


blue laws

1781, severe Puritanical code said to have been enacted 18c. in New Haven, Connecticut; of uncertain
origin, perhaps from one of the ground senses behind blues, or from notion of coldness. Or perhaps
connected to bluestocking in the sense of puritanically plain or mean (see bluestocking, which is a
different application of the same term; the parliament of 1653 was derisively called the
bluestocking parliament). The common explanation that they were written on blue paper is not
considered valid; pale blue paper was used for many old U.S. legal documents and there would have
been nothing notable about its use in this case.


blue jeans

from 1843 as a type of fabric; see jean. As short for blue jeans trousers, from 1878.


blue chip (adj.)

also blue-chip, in reference to the high-value poker counter, from 1904 in the figurative sense of
valuable; stock exchange sense, in reference to shares considered a reliable investment, is first
recorded 1929; especially of stocks that saw spectacular rises in value in the four years or so
before the Wall Street crash of that year.


blue (2)

lewd, indecent recorded from 1840 (in form blueness, in an essay of Carlyle's); the sense connection
is unclear, and is opposite to that in blue laws (q.v.). John Mactaggart's Scottish Gallovidian
Encyclopedia (1824) containing odd words he had learned while growing up in Galloway and elsewhere
in Scotland, has an entry for Thread o'Blue, any little smutty touch in song-singing, chatting, or
piece of writing. Farmer [Slang and Its Analogues Past and Present, 1890] offers the theory that
this meaning derives from the blue dress uniforms issued to harlots in houses of correction, but he
writes that the earlier slang authority John Camden Hotten suggests it as coming from the French
Biblioth&egrave;que Bleu, a series of books of very questionable character, and adds, from Hotten,
that, Books or conversation of an entirely opposite nature are said to be Brown or Quakerish, i.e.,
serious, grave, decent.


bluestocking (n.)

also blue-stocking, 1790, derisive word for a woman considered too learned, traces to a London
literary salon founded c.1750 by Elizabeth Montagu on the Parisian model, featuring intellectual
discussion instead of card games, and in place of ostentatious evening attire, simple dress,
including Benjamin Stillingfleet's blue-gray tradesman's hose which he wore in place of gentleman's
black silk, hence the term, first applied in derision to the whole set by Admiral Boscawen. None of
the ladies wore blue stockings. Borrowed by the neighbors in loan-translations, such as French bas-
bleu, Dutch blauwkous, German Blaustrumpf.


blue moon (n.)

1821 as a specific term in the sense very rarely, perhaps suggesting something that, in fact, never
happens (compare at the Greek calends, and the native in the reign of Queen Dick and Saint
Geoffrey's Day Never, there being no saint of that name, reported in Grose (1788)); suggested
earliest in this couplet from 1528:Yf they say the mone is blewe,We must beleve that it is true.
Though this might refer to calendrical calculations by the Church, so that the general sense of the
term and the specific one (commonly misinterpreted as second full moon in a calendar month, but
actually a quarterly calculation) are difficult to disentangle. In either case, the sense of blue is
obscure. Literal blue moons do sometimes occur under extreme atmospheric conditions.


blue (1)

c.1300, bleu, blwe, etc., from Old French blo pale, pallid, wan, light-colored; blond; discolored;
blue, blue-gray, from Frankish *blao or some other Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic
*bl&aelig;waz (cognates: Old English blaw, Old Saxon and Old High German blao, Danish blaa, Swedish
bl&#229;, Old Frisian blau, Middle Dutch bla, Dutch blauw, German blau blue), from PIE *bhle-was
light-colored, blue, blond, yellow, from PIE root bhel- (1) to shine, flash (see bleach (v.)).
The same PIE root yielded Latin flavus yellow, Old Spanish blavo yellowish-gray, Greek phalos white,
Welsh blawr gray, Old Norse bla livid (the meaning in black and blue), showing the usual slippery
definition of color words in Indo-European The present spelling is since 16c., from French influence
(Modern French bleu).    The exact color to which the Gmc. term applies varies in the older
dialects; M.H.G. bla is also 'yellow,' whereas the Scandinavian words may refer esp. to a deep,
swarthy black, e.g. O.N. blama&eth;r, N.Icel. blama&eth;ur 'Negro' [Buck]   <hr />   Few words enter
more largely into the composition of slang, and colloquialisms bordering on slang, than does the
word BLUE. Expressive alike of the utmost contempt, as of all that men hold dearest and love best,
its manifold combinations, in ever varying shades of meaning, greet the philologist at every turn.
[John S. Farmer, Slang and Its Analogues Past and Present, 1890, p.252]    The color of constancy
since Chaucer at least, but apparently for no deeper reason than the rhyme in true blue (c.1500).
From early times blue was the distinctive color of the dress of servants, which may be the reason
police uniforms are blue, a tradition Farmer dates to Elizabethan times. For blue ribbon see cordon
bleu under cordon. Blue whale attested from 1851, so called for its color. The flower name blue bell
is recorded by 1570s. Blue streak, of something resembling a bolt of lightning (for quickness,
intensity, etc.) is from 1830, U.S. Western slang.    Many Indo-European languages seem to have had
a word to describe the color of the sea, encompasing blue and green and gray; such as Irish glass
(see Chloe); Old English h&aelig;wen blue, gray, related to har (see hoar); Serbo-Croatian sinji
gray-blue, sea-green; Lithuanian &#353;yvas, Russian sivyj gray.


blue blood

1834, translating Spanish sangre azul, claimed by certain families of Castile as uncontaminated by
Moorish or Jewish admixture, probably from the notion of the visible veins of people of fair
complexion.


blues (n.)

as a music form featuring flatted thirds and sevenths, possibly c.1895 (though officially 1912, in
W.C. Handy's Memphis Blues); meaning depression, low spirits goes back to 1741, from adjectival blue
low-spirited, late 14c.


blueberry (n.)

c.1775, from blue (1) + berry.


cyan (n.)

1889, short for cyan blue (1879), from Greek kyanos dark blue, dark blue enamel, lapis lazuli,
probably a non-Indo-European word, but perhaps akin to, or from, Hittite *kuwanna(n)- copper blue.


cyanosis (n.)

blue disease, the blue jaundice of the ancients, 1820, Medical Latin, from Greek kyanosis, from
kyanos dark blue color (see cyan) + -osis.


cerulean (adj.)

1660s, with -an + Latin caeruleus blue, dark blue, blue-green, perhaps dissimilated from caelulum,
diminutive of caelum heaven, sky, of uncertain origin (see celestial). The Latin word was applied by
Roman authors to the sky, the Mediterranean, and occasionally to leaves or fields. As a noun, from
1756.


bice (n.)

pale blue color, early 15c., shortened from blew bis blue bice, from French bis swarthy, brownish-
gray (12c.), cognate with Italian bigio; of unknown origin. Via French combinations azur bis, vert
bis the word came into English with a sense of blue or green.


Prussian

1550s (n.), 1560s (adj.), from Prussia + -an. Prussian blue pigment (1724) came to English from
French bleu de Prusse, so called for being discovered in Berlin, the Prussian capital.    All in
all, it seems that Prussian blue was synthesised for the first time around 1706 by the Swiss
immigrant Johann Jacob Diesbach in Berlin. [Jens Bartoll and B&auml;rbel Jackisch, Prussian Blue: A
Chronology of the Early Years, Zeitschrift f&uuml;r Kunsttechnologie und Konservierung 24, No. 1,
2010]    Early German sources refer to it as Preu&szlig;isches Ultra-Marin and berliner blau.
Prussic acid (1790), is from French acide prussique, so called in reference to prussian blue
pigment, to which it is chemically related.


bleu

French form of blue (1), used from c.1890 in names of various French blue cheeses (French fromage
bleu) marketed in Britain and U.S.


perse (adj.)

late 14c., blue, bluish-gray, later purplish-black, from Old French pers (dark) blue, livid; wan,
pale, from Late Latin persus, perhaps a back-formation from one of the early European forms of
Persia.


hyacinth (n.)

1550s, the plant hyacinth; re-Greeked from earlier jacinth (late 14c.) hyacinth; blue cornflower,
earlier a precious stone blue (rarely red) in color (c.1200), from Old French jacinte and Medieval
Latin jacintus, ultimately from Greek hyakinthos, probably ultimately from a non-Indo-European
Mediterranean language. Used in ancient Greece of a blue gem, perhaps sapphire, and of a purple or
deep red flower, but exactly which one is unknown (gladiolus, iris, and larkspur have been
suggested). Fabled to have sprouted from the blood of Hyakinthos, youth beloved by Apollo and
accidentally slain by him. The flower is said to have the letters AI or AIAI on its petals. The
modern use in reference to a particular flowering plant genus is from 1570s.


cesium (n.)

also caesium, rare alkaline metal, 1861, coined by Bunsen and Kirchhoff in 1860 in Modern Latin
(caesium), from Latin caesius blue-gray (especially of eyes), in reference to the two prominent blue
lines in its spectrum, by which it was first identified.


dahlia (n.)

1804, named 1791 by Spanish botanist Antonio Jos&eacute; Cavanilles for Anders Dahl (1751-1789),
Swedish botanist and pupil of Linnaeus, who discovered it in Mexico in 1788. The likelihood that a
true blue variety of the flower never could be cultivated was first proposed by French-Swiss
botanist Augustin Pyramus de Candolle, and noted in English by 1835; hence blue dahlia, figurative
expression for something impossible or unattainable (1866).


litmus (n.)

blue dye-stuff obtained from certain lichens, early 14c., from Middle Dutch lijkmoes (Dutch
lakmoes), from lac (see lac) + moes pulp. Another theory is that it represents Old Norse litmose,
literally lichen for dying, from Old Norse lita to dye, to stain, from litr color, dye (see lit
(n.1)) + mos moss. Yet another idea connects the first element to Middle Dutch leken to drip, leak
(see leak (v.)).    Whichever was the original word, it probably was influenced by the others. The
dye is obtained from certain lichens. It is naturally blue but turns red in acid and is restored to
blue by alkalis. Figurative use of litmus test is first attested 1957, from scientific use of
litmus-treated paper as a chemical indicator. Litmus paper with this meaning is from 1803.


cyanide (n.)

a salt of hydrocyanic acid, 1826, coined from cyan-, comb. form for carbon and nitrogen compounds,
from Greek kyanos dark blue (see cyan) + chemical ending -ide, on analogy of chloride. So called
because it first had been obtained by heating the dye pigment powder known as Prussian blue (see
Prussian).


cobalt (n.)

1680s, from German kobold household goblin, Harz Mountains silver miners' term for rock laced with
arsenic and sulfur (so called because it degraded the ore and made the miners ill), from Middle High
German kobe hut, shed + *holt goblin, from hold gracious, friendly, a euphemistic word for a
troublesome being. The metallic element was extracted from this rock. It was known to Paracelsus,
but discovery is usually credited to the Swede George Brandt (1733), who gave it the name. Extended
to a blue color 1835 (a mineral containing it had been used as a blue coloring for glass since
16c.). Compare nickel.


gun-metal

commonly an alloy of copper and zinc; used attributively of a dull blue-gray color since 1905.


sloe (n.)

fruit of the blackthorn, Old English slah (plural slan), from Proto-Germanic *slaikhwon (cognates:
Middle Dutch sleeu, Dutch slee, Old High German sleha, German Schlehe), from PIE *sleie- blue,
bluish, blue-black (see livid).    The vowel has been influenced by that in the old plural form,
which according to OED persisted into the 17c. Scottish slae preserves the older vowel. Sloe-eyed is
attested from 1804; sloe gin first recorded 1878.


cordon (n.)

mid-15c., cord or ribbon worn as an ornament, from Middle French cordon ribbon, diminutive of Old
French corde cord (see cord). Sense of a line of people or things guarding something is 1758.
Original sense preserved in cordon bleu (1727) the highest distinction, literally blue ribbon, for
the sky-blue ribbon worn by the Knights-grand-cross of the Holy Ghost (highest order of chivalry);
extended figuratively to other persons of distinction, especially, jocularly, to a first-rate cook.
Cordon sanitaire (1857), from French, a guarded line between infected and uninfected districts.


glass (n.)

Old English gl&aelig;s glass, a glass vessel, from Proto-Germanic *glasam (cognates: Old Saxon glas,
Middle Dutch and Dutch glas, German Glas, Old Norse gler glass, looking glass, Danish glar), from
PIE *ghel- (2) to shine, with derivatives referring to bright materials and gold (cognates: Latin
glaber smooth, bald, Old Church Slavonic gladuku, Lithuanian glodus smooth), with derivatives
referring to colors and bright materials, a word that is the root of widespread words for gray,
blue, green, and yellow (such as Old English gl&aelig;r amber, Latin glaesum amber, Old Irish glass
green, blue, gray, Welsh glas blue; see glass). Sense of drinking glass is early 13c.    The glass
slipper in Cinderella is perhaps an error by Charles Perrault, translating in 1697, mistaking Old
French voir ermine, fur for verre glass. In other versions of the tale it is a fur slipper. The
proverb about people in glass houses throwing stones is attested by 1779, but earlier forms go back
to 17c.:    Who hath glass-windows of his own must take heed how he throws stones at his house. ...
He that hath a body made of glass must not throw stones at another. [John Ray, Handbook of Proverbs,
1670]


tanzanite (n.)

violet-blue gemstone, 1968, named by Henry B. Platt, vice president of Tiffany &amp; Co., because
the stone was discovered in the African nation of Tanzania.


gorgonzola

type of blue cheese, 1878, named for Gorgonzola, village near Milan where it first was made.


Massachusetts

plural, originally (1614) a name for the Algonquian native people who lived around the bay, from
Algonquian Massachusett at the large hill, in reference to Great Blue Hill, southwest of Boston.


jacinth (n.)

c.1200, a blue gem (occasionally a red one), from Old French jacinte hyacinth; jacinth (see
hyacinth). In modern use, a reddish-orange gem.


Agent Orange (n.)

powerful defoliant used by U.S. military in the Vietnam War, attested from 1971, said to have been
used from 1961; so called from the color strip on the side of the container, which distinguished it
from Agent Blue, Agent White, etc., other herbicides used by the U.S. military. Banned from April
1970.


ultramarine (n.)

1590s, blue pigment made from lapis lazuli, from Medieval Latin ultramarinus, literally beyond the
sea, from ultra- beyond + marinus of the sea (see marine (adj.)). Said to be so called because the
mineral was imported from Asia.


Flavius

masc. proper name, from Latin Flavius, a Roman gens name, related to flavus golden-yellow, blond
(see blue), and probably originally meaning yellow-haired.


aqua (n.)

water, late 14c.; see aqua-. Used in late Middle English in combinations to mean decoction, solution
(as in aqua regia, a mix of concentrated acids, literally royal water, so called for its power to
dissolve gold and other noble metals). As the name of a light greenish-blue color, 1936.


bluish (adj.)

late 14c., blewysh; see blue + -ish.


teal (n.)

small freshwater duck, early 14c., of uncertain origin, probably from an unrecorded Old English word
cognate with Middle Dutch teling teal, Middle Low German telink, from West Germanic *taili. As the
name of a shade of dark greenish-blue resembling the color patterns on the fowl's head and wings, it
is attested from 1923 in clothing advertisements.


Kali

a name of Devi, the Hindu mother-goddess, in her death-goddess aspect, 1798, from Sanskrit kali,
literally the black one, fem. of kalah blue-black, black, from a Dravidian language. Also taken as
the fem. of kala time (as destroyer). She is portrayed as black-skinned, blood-smeared, and wearing
a necklace of skulls and a girdle of snakes.


tuckahoe (n.)

edible plant root of eastern U.S., 1610s, American English, from Powhatan (Algonquian) tockawhouge
(compare Mohegan tquogh, Shawnee tukwhah), perhaps related to Cree (Algonquian) pitikwaw made round.
From early 19c. a name applied in Virginia to those east of the Blue Ridge Mountains by the settlers
west of them, who called themselves Cohees.


violet (n.)

small wild plant with purplish-blue flowers, c.1300, from Old French violete (12c.), diminutive of
viole violet, from Latin viola the violet, a violet color, cognate with Greek ion (see iodine),
probably from a pre-Indo-European Mediterranean language. The color sense (late 14c.) developed from
the flower.


Stafford

city in England, mid-11c., St&aelig;fford, literally ford by a landing-place, from Old English
st&aelig;&eth; river bank, shore + ford (n.). County town of Staffordshire, which, as a name for a
type of earthenware and porcelain made there is attested from 1765. The city was noted in medieval
England as a source of blue cloth.


riboflavin (n.)

growth-promoting substance known as vitamin B2, 1935, from German Riboflavin (1935), from comb. form
of ribose + flavin, from Latin flavus yellow (see blue (1)); so called from its color. Also
sometimes known as lactoflavine, as it is found in milk.


madder (n.)

type of plant (in modern use Rubia tinctorum) used for making dyes, Old English m&aelig;dere, from
PIE *modhro- dye plant (cognates: Old Norse ma&eth;ra, Old High German matara madder, Polish modry,
Czech modry blue).


sacre bleu (interj.)

stereotypical French oath, 1869, from French sacr&eacute; bleu, literally holy blue, a euphemism for
sacr&eacute; Dieu (1768), holy God. From Old French sacrer, from Latin sacrare (see sacred).


