baby (n.)

late 14c., babi, diminutive of baban (see babe + -y (3)). Meaning childish adult person is from
c.1600. Meaning youngest of a group is from 1897. As a term of endearment for one's lover it is
attested perhaps as early as 1839, certainly by 1901; its popularity perhaps boosted by baby vamp a
popular girl, student slang from c.1922. As an adjective, by 1750.   Baby food is from 1833. Baby
blues for blue eyes recorded by 1892 (the phrase also was used for postpartum depression 1950s-60s).
To empty the baby out with the bath (water) is first recorded 1909 in G.B. Shaw (compare German das
Kind mit dem Bade aussch&uuml;tten). Baby's breath (noted for sweet smell, which also was supposed
to attract cats) as a type of flower is from 1897. French b&eacute;b&eacute; (19c.) is from English.


crayon (n.)

1640s, from French crayon pencil (16c.), originally chalk pencil, from craie chalk, from Latin creta
chalk, pipe-clay, of unknown origin. Not now considered to mean Cretan earth, as once was believed.


cyanide (n.)

a salt of hydrocyanic acid, 1826, coined from cyan-, comb. form for carbon and nitrogen compounds,
from Greek kyanos dark blue (see cyan) + chemical ending -ide, on analogy of chloride. So called
because it first had been obtained by heating the dye pigment powder known as Prussian blue (see
Prussian).


dahlia (n.)

1804, named 1791 by Spanish botanist Antonio Jos&eacute; Cavanilles for Anders Dahl (1751-1789),
Swedish botanist and pupil of Linnaeus, who discovered it in Mexico in 1788. The likelihood that a
true blue variety of the flower never could be cultivated was first proposed by French-Swiss
botanist Augustin Pyramus de Candolle, and noted in English by 1835; hence blue dahlia, figurative
expression for something impossible or unattainable (1866).


jacinth (n.)

c.1200, a blue gem (occasionally a red one), from Old French jacinte hyacinth; jacinth (see
hyacinth). In modern use, a reddish-orange gem.


jay (n.)

c.1300, common European bird (Garrulus glandarinus), from Old North French gai, Old French jai
magpie, jay, from Late Latin gaius a jay, probably echoic and supposedly influenced by Latin Gaius,
a common Roman proper name. For other bird names from proper names, compare martin and parrot.
Applied to the North American blue jay (Cyanocitta cristata) from 1709. Applied to humans in sense
of impertinent chatterer, flashy dresser from 1620s.


blue jeans

from 1843 as a type of fabric; see jean. As short for blue jeans trousers, from 1878.


Kali

a name of Devi, the Hindu mother-goddess, in her death-goddess aspect, 1798, from Sanskrit kali,
literally the black one, fem. of kalah blue-black, black, from a Dravidian language. Also taken as
the fem. of kala time (as destroyer). She is portrayed as black-skinned, blood-smeared, and wearing
a necklace of skulls and a girdle of snakes.


madder (n.)

type of plant (in modern use Rubia tinctorum) used for making dyes, Old English m&aelig;dere, from
PIE *modhro- dye plant (cognates: Old Norse ma&eth;ra, Old High German matara madder, Polish modry,
Czech modry blue).


mako (n.)

large blue shark, listed as 1727 in OED, from The History of Japan, English translation of Engelbert
Kaempfer's German manuscript; however this is claimed by some to be an error, and some say
Kaempfer's word represents Japanese makk&ocirc;(-kujira) sperm whale. But the description in the
text fits neither the shark nor the whale. The word is ultimately from Maori mako shark, shark's
tooth, which is of uncertain etymology. If the 1727 citation is an error, the earliest attested use
is 1820, from a book on New Zealand languages.


navy (n.)

early 14c., fleet of ships, especially for purposes of war, from Old French navie fleet, ship, from
Latin navigia, plural of navigium vessel, boat, from navis ship (see naval). Meaning a nation's
collective, organized sea power is from 1530s. The Old English words were sciphere (usually of
Viking invaders) and scipfierd (usually of the home defenses). Navy blue was the color of the
British naval uniform. Navy bean attested from 1856, so called because they were grown to be used by
the Navy.


Prussian

1550s (n.), 1560s (adj.), from Prussia + -an. Prussian blue pigment (1724) came to English from
French bleu de Prusse, so called for being discovered in Berlin, the Prussian capital.    All in
all, it seems that Prussian blue was synthesised for the first time around 1706 by the Swiss
immigrant Johann Jacob Diesbach in Berlin. [Jens Bartoll and B&auml;rbel Jackisch, Prussian Blue: A
Chronology of the Early Years, Zeitschrift f&uuml;r Kunsttechnologie und Konservierung 24, No. 1,
2010]    Early German sources refer to it as Preu&szlig;isches Ultra-Marin and berliner blau.
Prussic acid (1790), is from French acide prussique, so called in reference to prussian blue
pigment, to which it is chemically related.


Stafford

city in England, mid-11c., St&aelig;fford, literally ford by a landing-place, from Old English
st&aelig;&eth; river bank, shore + ford (n.). County town of Staffordshire, which, as a name for a
type of earthenware and porcelain made there is attested from 1765. The city was noted in medieval
England as a source of blue cloth.


sapphire (n.)

precious stone next in hardness to a diamond, mid-13c., from Old French saphir (12c.) and directly
from Latin sapphirus (source also of Spanish zafir, Italian zaffiro), from Greek sappheiros blue
stone (the gem meant apparently was not the one that now has the name, but perhaps rather lapis
lazuli, the modern sapphire being perhaps signified by Greek hyakinthos), from a Semitic source
(compare Hebrew sappir sapphire), but probably not ultimately from Semitic. Some linguists propose
an origin in Sanskrit sanipriya, a dark precious stone (perhaps sapphire or emerald), literally
sacred to Saturn, from Sani Saturn + priyah precious. In Renaissance lapidaries, it was said to cure
anger and stupidity. As an adjective from early 15c. Related: Sapphiric; sapphirine.


ultramarine (n.)

1590s, blue pigment made from lapis lazuli, from Medieval Latin ultramarinus, literally beyond the
sea, from ultra- beyond + marinus of the sea (see marine (adj.)). Said to be so called because the
mineral was imported from Asia.


yellow (adj.)

Old English geolu, geolwe, yellow, from Proto-Germanic *gelwaz (cognates: Old Saxon, Old High German
gelo, Middle Dutch ghele, Dutch geel, Middle High German gel, German gelb, Old Norse gulr, Swedish
gul yellow), from PIE *ghel- (2) to shine, with derivatives referring to bright materials and gold
(see glass).    Occasionally in Middle English used of a color closer to blue-gray or gray, of frogs
or hazel eyes, and to translate Latin caeruleus, glauco. Also as a noun in Old English. Meaning
light-skinned (of blacks) first recorded 1808. Applied to Asiatics since 1787, though the first
recorded reference is to Turkish words for inhabitants of India. Yellow peril translates German die
gelbe gefahr. Sense of cowardly is 1856, of unknown origin; the color was traditionally associated
rather with jealousy and envy (17c.). Yellow-bellied cowardly is from 1924, probably a semi-rhyming
reduplication of yellow; earlier yellow-belly was a sailor's name for a half-caste (1867) and a
Texas term for Mexican soldiers (1842, based on the color of their uniforms). Yellow dog mongrel is
attested from c.1770; slang sense of contemptible person first recorded 1881. Yellow fever attested
from 1748, American English (jaundice is a symptom).


afraid (adj.)

early 14c., originally past participle of afray frighten, from Anglo-French afrayer, from Old French
esfreer (see affray (n.)). A rare case of an English adjective that never stands before a noun.
Because it was used in A.V. Bible, it acquired independent standing and thrived while affray faded,
chasing out the once more common afeared. Sense in I'm afraid I regret to say, I suspect (without
implication of fear) is first recorded 1590s.Her blue affrayed eyes wide open shone [Keats, The Eve
of St. Agnes, 1820]


delirium tremens (n.)

1813, medical Latin, literally trembling delirium, introduced 1813 by British physician Thomas
Sutton, for that form of delirium which is rendered worse by bleeding, but improved by opium. By
Rayer and subsequent writers it has been almost exclusively applied to delirium resulting from the
abuse of alcohol [Sydenham Society Lexicon of Medicine]. As synonyms, Farmer lists barrel-fever,
gallon distemper, blue Johnnies, bottle ache, pink spiders, quart-mania snakes in the boots,
triangles, uglies, etc.


glass (n.)

Old English gl&aelig;s glass, a glass vessel, from Proto-Germanic *glasam (cognates: Old Saxon glas,
Middle Dutch and Dutch glas, German Glas, Old Norse gler glass, looking glass, Danish glar), from
PIE *ghel- (2) to shine, with derivatives referring to bright materials and gold (cognates: Latin
glaber smooth, bald, Old Church Slavonic gladuku, Lithuanian glodus smooth), with derivatives
referring to colors and bright materials, a word that is the root of widespread words for gray,
blue, green, and yellow (such as Old English gl&aelig;r amber, Latin glaesum amber, Old Irish glass
green, blue, gray, Welsh glas blue; see glass). Sense of drinking glass is early 13c.    The glass
slipper in Cinderella is perhaps an error by Charles Perrault, translating in 1697, mistaking Old
French voir ermine, fur for verre glass. In other versions of the tale it is a fur slipper. The
proverb about people in glass houses throwing stones is attested by 1779, but earlier forms go back
to 17c.:    Who hath glass-windows of his own must take heed how he throws stones at his house. ...
He that hath a body made of glass must not throw stones at another. [John Ray, Handbook of Proverbs,
1670]


indigo (n.)

1550s, from Spanish indico, Portuguese endego, and Dutch (via Portuguese) indigo, all from Latin
indicum indigo, from Greek indikon blue dye from India, literally Indian (substance), neuter of
indikos Indian, from India (see India). As the color of indigo from 1620s. Replaced Middle English
ynde (late 13c., from Old French inde, from Latin indicum). Earlier name in Mediterranean languages
was annil, anil (see aniline).


lead (n.1)

heavy metal, Old English lead, from West Germanic *loudhom (cognates: Old Frisian lad, Middle Dutch
loot, Dutch lood lead, German Lot weight, plummet). The name and the skill in using the metal seem
to have been borrowed from the Celts (compare Old Irish luaide), probably from PIE root *plou(d)- to
flow.    Figurative of heaviness since at least early 14c. Black lead was an old name for graphite,
hence lead pencil (1680s) and the colloquial figurative phrase to have lead in one's pencil be
possessed of (especially male sexual) vigor, attested by 1902. Lead balloon a failure, American
English slang, attested by 1957 (as a type of something heavy that can be kept up only with effort,
from 1904). Lead-footed slow is from 1896; opposite sense of fast emerged 1940s in trucker's jargon,
from notion of a foot heavy on the gas pedal.


-or

word-forming element making nouns of quality, state, or condition, from Middle English -our, from
Old French -our (Modern French -eur), from Latin -orem (nominative -or), a suffix added to pp.
verbal stems. Also in some cases from Latin -atorem (nominative -ator).    In U.S., via Noah
Webster, -or is nearly universal (but not in glamour, curious, generous), while in Britain -our is
used in most cases (but with many exceptions: author, error, senator, ancestor, horror etc.). The
-our form predominated after c.1300, but Mencken reports that the first three folios of
Shakespeare's plays used both spellings indiscriminately and with equal frequency; only in the
Fourth Folio of 1685 does -our become consistent.    A partial revival of -or on the Latin model
took place from 16c. (governour began to lose its -u- 16c. and it was gone by 19c.), and also among
phonetic spellers in both England and America (John Wesley wrote that -or was a fashionable
impropriety in England in 1791).    Webster criticized the habit of deleting -u- in -our words in
his first speller (A Grammatical Institute of the English Language, commonly called the Blue-Black
Speller) in 1783. His own deletion of the -u- began with the revision of 1804, and was enshrined in
the influential Comprehensive Dictionary of the English Language (1806), which also established in
the U.S. -ic for British -ick and -er for -re, along with many other attempts at reformed spelling
which never caught on (such as masheen for machine). His attempt to justify them on the grounds of
etymology and the custom of great writers does not hold up.    Fowler notes the British drop the -u-
when forming adjectives ending in -orous (humorous) and derivatives in -ation and -ize, in which
cases the Latin origin is respected (such as vaporize). When the Americans began to consistently
spell it one way, however, the British reflexively hardened their insistence on the other. The
American abolition of -our in such words as honour and favour has probably retarded rather than
quickened English progress in the same direction. [Fowler]


red (adj.1)

Old English read red, from Proto-Germanic *rauthaz (cognates: Old Norse rau&eth;r, Danish
r&oslash;d, Old Saxon rod, Old Frisian rad, Middle Dutch root, Dutch rood, German rot, Gothic
rau&thorn;s). As a noun from mid-13c.    The Germanic words are from PIE root *reudh- red, ruddy
(cognates: Latin ruber, also dialectal rufus light red, mostly of hair; Greek erythros; Sanskrit
rudhira-; Avestan raoidita-; Old Church Slavonic rudru, Polish rumiany, Russian rumjanyj flushed,
red, of complexions, etc.; Lithuanian raudas; Old Irish ruad, Welsh rhudd, Breton ruz red). The only
color for which a definite common PIE root word has been found. The initial -e- in the Greek word is
because Greek tends to avoid beginning words with -r-.    Along with dead, bread (n.), lead (n.1),
the vowel shortened in Middle English. The surname Read/Reid retains the original Old English long
vowel pronunciation and is the corresponding surname to Brown-, Black, White.    The color
designation of Native Americans in English from 1580s. The color as characteristic of British
possessions on a map is attested from 1885. Red-white-and-blue in reference to American patriotism,
from the colors of the flag, is from 1840; in a British context, in reference to the Union flag,
1852. The red flag was used as a symbol of defiance in battle on land or sea from c.1600. To see red
get angry is an American English expression first recorded 1898. Red rover, the children's game,
attested from 1891. Red light as a sign to stop is from 1849, long before traffic signals. As the
sign of a brothel, it is attested from 1899. As a children's game (in reference to the traffic light
meaning) it is recorded from 1953.   Red-letter day (late 14c.) was originally a saint's day, marked
on church calendars in red letters. Red ball signifying express in railroad jargon is 1904,
originally (1899) a system of moving and tracking freight cars. Red dog, type of U.S. football pass
rush, is recorded from 1959. Red meat is from 1808. Red shift in spectography is first recorded
1923. Red carpet sumptuous welcome is from 1934, but the custom for dignitaries is described as far
back as Aeschylus (Agamemnon); it also was the name of a type of English moth.


teal (n.)

small freshwater duck, early 14c., of uncertain origin, probably from an unrecorded Old English word
cognate with Middle Dutch teling teal, Middle Low German telink, from West Germanic *taili. As the
name of a shade of dark greenish-blue resembling the color patterns on the fowl's head and wings, it
is attested from 1923 in clothing advertisements.


violet (n.)

small wild plant with purplish-blue flowers, c.1300, from Old French violete (12c.), diminutive of
viole violet, from Latin viola the violet, a violet color, cognate with Greek ion (see iodine),
probably from a pre-Indo-European Mediterranean language. The color sense (late 14c.) developed from
the flower.


Agent Orange (n.)

powerful defoliant used by U.S. military in the Vietnam War, attested from 1971, said to have been
used from 1961; so called from the color strip on the side of the container, which distinguished it
from Agent Blue, Agent White, etc., other herbicides used by the U.S. military. Banned from April
1970.


celestial (adj.)

late 14c., pertaining to heaven, from Old French celestial celestial, heavenly, sky-blue, from Latin
caelestis heavenly, pertaining to the sky, from caelum heaven, sky; abode of the gods; climate, of
uncertain origin; perhaps from PIE *kaid-slo-, perhaps from a root also found in Germanic and Baltic
meaning bright, clear (compare Lithuanian skaidrus shining, clear; Old English hador, German heiter
clear, shining, cloudless, Old Norse hei&#240; clear sky).    The Latin word is the source of the
usual word for sky in most of the Romance languages, such as French ciel, Spanish cielo, Italian
cielo. General sense of heavenly, very delightful in English is from early 15c.


cerulean (adj.)

1660s, with -an + Latin caeruleus blue, dark blue, blue-green, perhaps dissimilated from caelulum,
diminutive of caelum heaven, sky, of uncertain origin (see celestial). The Latin word was applied by
Roman authors to the sky, the Mediterranean, and occasionally to leaves or fields. As a noun, from
1756.


cesium (n.)

also caesium, rare alkaline metal, 1861, coined by Bunsen and Kirchhoff in 1860 in Modern Latin
(caesium), from Latin caesius blue-gray (especially of eyes), in reference to the two prominent blue
lines in its spectrum, by which it was first identified.


Flavius

masc. proper name, from Latin Flavius, a Roman gens name, related to flavus golden-yellow, blond
(see blue), and probably originally meaning yellow-haired.


gorgonzola

type of blue cheese, 1878, named for Gorgonzola, village near Milan where it first was made.


graft (n.1)

shoot inserted into another plant, late 15c. alteration of Middle English graff (late 14c.), from
Old French graife grafting knife, carving tool, stylus, from Latin graphium stylus, from Greek
grapheion stylus, from graphein to write (see -graphy). So called probably on resemblance of a
stylus to the pencil-shaped shoots used in grafting. The terminal -t- in the English word is not
explained. Surgical sense is from 1871.


hell (n.)

Old English hel, helle, nether world, abode of the dead, infernal regions, from Proto-Germanic
*haljo the underworld (cognates: f. Old Frisian helle, Dutch hel, Old Norse hel, German H&ouml;lle,
Gothic halja hell) the underworld, literally concealed place (compare Old Norse hellir cave,
cavern), from PIE *kel- (2) to cover, conceal (see cell).    The English word may be in part from
Old Norse Hel (from Proto-Germanic *halija one who covers up or hides something), in Norse mythology
the name of Loki's daughter, who rules over the evil dead in Niflheim, the lowest of all worlds
(nifl mist). Transfer of a pagan concept and word to a Christian idiom. In Middle English, also of
the Limbus Patrum, place where the Patriarchs, Prophets, etc. awaited the Atonement. Used in the KJV
for Old Testament Hebrew Sheol and New Testament Greek Hades, Gehenna. Used figuratively for state
of misery, any bad experience since at least late 14c. As an expression of disgust, etc., first
recorded 1670s.    Expression Hell in a handbasket is attested by 1867, in a context implying use
from a few years before, and the notion of going to Heaven in a handbasket is from 1853, with a
sense of easy passage to the destination. Hell or high water (1874) apparently is a variation of
between the devil and the deep blue sea. To wish someone would go to hell is in Shakespeare
(Merchant of Venice). Snowball's chance in hell no chance is from 1931; till hell freezes over never
is from 1832. To ride hell for leather is from 1889, originally with reference to riding on
horseback. Hell on wheels is said to be from 1843 in DAS; popularity dates from 1869 in reference to
the temporary workers' towns along the U.S. transcontinental railroad and their vices.


lilac (n.)

1620s, from French lilac shrub of genus Syringa with mauve flowers, from Spanish lilac, from Arabic
lilak, from Persian lilak, variant of nilak bluish, from nil indigo (compare Sanskrit nilah dark
blue), of uncertain origin. As a color name, attested from 1791; as a scent, from 1895. As an
adjective, pale pinkish-purple, from 1801. Related: Lilaceous.


Massachusetts

plural, originally (1614) a name for the Algonquian native people who lived around the bay, from
Algonquian Massachusett at the large hill, in reference to Great Blue Hill, southwest of Boston.


woad (n.)

Old English wad woad, also the blue dye made from its leaves, from Proto-Germanic *waido- (cognates:
Danish vaid, Old Frisian wed, Middle Dutch wede, Dutch wede, Old High German weit, German Waid
woad), perhaps cognate with Latin vitrium glass (see vitreous). Formerly much cultivated; since
superseded by indigo. French gu&egrave;de, Italian guado are Germanic loan-words.


Chloe

fem. proper name, Latin, from Greek Khloe, literally young green shoot; related to khloros greenish-
yellow, from PIE *ghlo- variant of root *ghel- (2) to shine, with derivatives referring to bright
materials and gold, and bile or gall (such as Latin helvus yellowish, bay, Gallo-Latin gilvus light
bay; Lithuanian geltonas yellow; Old Church Slavonic zlutu, Polish &#380;&oacute;&#322;ty, Russian
zeltyj yellow; Sanskrit harih yellow, tawny yellow, hiranyam gold; Avestan zari yellow; Old English
geolu, geolwe, Modern English yellow, German gelb yellow) and green (such as Latin galbus greenish-
yellow; Greek khloros greenish-yellow color, kholos bile; Lithuanian zalias green, zelvas greenish;
Old Church Slavonic zelenu, Polish zielony, Russian zelenyj green; Old Irish glass, Welsh and Breton
glas green, also gray, blue).    Buck says the interchange of words for yellow and green is perhaps
because they were applied to vegetation like grass, cereals, etc., which changed from green to
yellow. It is possible that this whole group of yellow-green words is related to PIE root *ghlei- to
shine, glitter, glow, be warm (see gleam (n.)).


eraser (n.)

thing that erases writing, 1790, American English, agent noun from erase. Originally a knife for
scraping off the ink. As a rubber product for removing pencil marks, from 1858.


iodine (n.)

1814, formed by English chemist Sir Humphrey Davy (1778-1829) from French iode iodine, coined 1812
by French chemist Joseph Louis Gay-Lussac from Greek ioeides violet-colored, from ion the violet;
dark blue flower, + eidos appearance (see -oid). Davy added the chemical suffix -ine (2) to make it
analogous with chlorine and fluorine. So called from the color of the vapor given off when the
crystals are heated.


litmus (n.)

blue dye-stuff obtained from certain lichens, early 14c., from Middle Dutch lijkmoes (Dutch
lakmoes), from lac (see lac) + moes pulp. Another theory is that it represents Old Norse litmose,
literally lichen for dying, from Old Norse lita to dye, to stain, from litr color, dye (see lit
(n.1)) + mos moss. Yet another idea connects the first element to Middle Dutch leken to drip, leak
(see leak (v.)).    Whichever was the original word, it probably was influenced by the others. The
dye is obtained from certain lichens. It is naturally blue but turns red in acid and is restored to
blue by alkalis. Figurative use of litmus test is first attested 1957, from scientific use of
litmus-treated paper as a chemical indicator. Litmus paper with this meaning is from 1803.


livid (adj.)

early 15c., of a bluish-leaden color, from Middle French livide and directly from Latin lividus of a
bluish color, black and blue, figuratively envious, spiteful, malicious, from livere be bluish,
earlier *slivere, from PIE *sliwo-, suffixed form of root *(s)leie- bluish (cognates: Old Church
Slavonic and Russian sliva plum; Lithuanian slywas plum; Old Irish li, Welsh lliw color, splendor,
Old English sla sloe). The sense of furiously angry (1912) is from the notion of being livid with
rage.


melanin (n.)

dark brown or black pigment found in animal bodies, 1832, Modern Latin, with chemical suffix -in
(2); first element from Greek melas (genitive melanos) black, from PIE root *mel- (2) of darkish
color (cognates: Sanskrit malinah dirty, stained, black, Lithuanian melynas blue, Latin mulleus
reddish). Related: Melanism; melanistic.


pencil (n.)

early 14c., an artist's fine brush of camel hair, from Old French pincel artist's paintbrush (13c.,
Modern French pinceau), from Latin penicillus painter's brush, hair-pencil, literally little tail,
diminutive of peniculus brush, itself a diminutive of penis tail (see penis). Small brushes formerly
were used for writing before modern lead or chalk pencils; meaning graphite writing implement
apparently evolved late 16c. Derogatory slang pencil-pusher office worker is from 1881; pencil neck
weak person first recorded 1973.


penicillin (n.)

1929, coined in English by Alexander Fleming (1881-1955), who first recognized its antibiotic
properties, from Modern Latin Penicillium notatum (1867), the name of the mould from which it was
first obtained, from Latin penicillus paintbrush (see pencil (n.)), in reference to the shape of the
mould cells.


tick (v.)

early 13c., to touch or pat, perhaps from an Old English verb corresponding to tick (n.2), and
perhaps ultimately echoic. Compare Old High German zeckon to pluck, Dutch tikken to pat, Norwegian
tikke touch lightly. Meaning make a ticking sound is from 1721. Related: Ticked; ticking.    To tick
(someone) off is from 1915, originally to reprimand, scold. The verbal phrase tick off was in use in
several senses at the time: as what a telegraph instrument does when it types out a message (1873),
as what a clock does in marking the passage of time (1777), to enumerate on one's fingers (1899),
and in accountancy, etc., make a mark beside an item on a sheet with a pencil, etc., often
indicating a sale (by 1881, from tick (n.2) in sense small mark or dot). This last might be the
direct source of the phrase, perhaps via World War I military bureaucratic sense of being marked off
from a list as dismissed or ineligible. Meaning to annoy is recorded by 1971.


tick-tack-toe (n.)

children's three-in-a-row game with Xs and Os, so called by 1892, earlier tit-tat-toe (by 1852, in
reminiscences of earlier years), also called noughts and crosses (1852). Probably from the sound of
the pencil on the slate with which it originally was played by schoolboys. Also the name of a
children's counting rhyme played on slate (also originally tit-tat-toe, by 1842), and compare tick-
tack (1580s), a form of backgammon, possibly from Middle French trictrac, perhaps imitative of the
sound of tiles on the board.


aniline (n.)

chemical base used in making colorful dyes, 1843, coined 1841 by German chemist Carl Julius
Fritzsche (1808-1871) and adopted by Hofmann, ultimately from Portuguese anil the indigo shrub, from
Arabic an-nil the indigo, assimilated from al-nil, from Persian nila, ultimately from Sanskrit nili
indigo, from nilah dark blue. With suffix -ine indicating derived substance (see -ine (1); also see
-ine (2) for the later, more precise, use of the suffix in chemistry).


blue (1)

c.1300, bleu, blwe, etc., from Old French blo pale, pallid, wan, light-colored; blond; discolored;
blue, blue-gray, from Frankish *blao or some other Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic
*bl&aelig;waz (cognates: Old English blaw, Old Saxon and Old High German blao, Danish blaa, Swedish
bl&#229;, Old Frisian blau, Middle Dutch bla, Dutch blauw, German blau blue), from PIE *bhle-was
light-colored, blue, blond, yellow, from PIE root bhel- (1) to shine, flash (see bleach (v.)).
The same PIE root yielded Latin flavus yellow, Old Spanish blavo yellowish-gray, Greek phalos white,
Welsh blawr gray, Old Norse bla livid (the meaning in black and blue), showing the usual slippery
definition of color words in Indo-European The present spelling is since 16c., from French influence
(Modern French bleu).    The exact color to which the Gmc. term applies varies in the older
dialects; M.H.G. bla is also 'yellow,' whereas the Scandinavian words may refer esp. to a deep,
swarthy black, e.g. O.N. blama&eth;r, N.Icel. blama&eth;ur 'Negro' [Buck]   <hr />   Few words enter
more largely into the composition of slang, and colloquialisms bordering on slang, than does the
word BLUE. Expressive alike of the utmost contempt, as of all that men hold dearest and love best,
its manifold combinations, in ever varying shades of meaning, greet the philologist at every turn.
[John S. Farmer, Slang and Its Analogues Past and Present, 1890, p.252]    The color of constancy
since Chaucer at least, but apparently for no deeper reason than the rhyme in true blue (c.1500).
From early times blue was the distinctive color of the dress of servants, which may be the reason
police uniforms are blue, a tradition Farmer dates to Elizabethan times. For blue ribbon see cordon
bleu under cordon. Blue whale attested from 1851, so called for its color. The flower name blue bell
is recorded by 1570s. Blue streak, of something resembling a bolt of lightning (for quickness,
intensity, etc.) is from 1830, U.S. Western slang.    Many Indo-European languages seem to have had
a word to describe the color of the sea, encompasing blue and green and gray; such as Irish glass
(see Chloe); Old English h&aelig;wen blue, gray, related to har (see hoar); Serbo-Croatian sinji
gray-blue, sea-green; Lithuanian &#353;yvas, Russian sivyj gray.


bluebird (n.)

also blue-bird, North American warbler-like bird, 1680s, from blue (1) in reference to its plumage +
bird (n.1). Figurative use in bluebird of happiness is from 1909 play romance l'Oiseau bleu,
literally The Blue Bird, by Belgian dramatist and poet Maurice Maeterlinck (1862-1949).


blue blood

1834, translating Spanish sangre azul, claimed by certain families of Castile as uncontaminated by
Moorish or Jewish admixture, probably from the notion of the visible veins of people of fair
complexion.


