bluff (n.2)

1844 as an alternative name for poker; from bluff (v.). As an act of bluffing by 1864.


bluff (n.1)

broad, vertical cliff, 1680s, from bluff (adj.) with a broad, flat front (1620s), a sailors' word,
probably from Dutch blaf flat, broad. Apparently a North Sea nautical term for ships with flat
vertical bows, later extended to landscape features.


bluffing (n.)

1845, in the poker sense, verbal noun from bluff (v.).


bluffs (n.)

see bluff (n.1).


bluff (v.)

1839, American English, poker term, perhaps from Dutch bluffen to brag, boast, or verbluffen to
baffle, mislead. An identical word meant blindfold, hoodwink in 1670s, but the sense evolution and
connection are unclear; OED calls it one of the numerous cant terms ... which arose between the
Restoration and the reign of Queen Anne. Extended or figurative sense by 1854. Related: Bluffed;
bluffing.


four-flusher (n.)

cheat, dishonest person, 1900, from verb four-flush to bluff a poker hand, claim a flush (n.) while
holding only four cards in the suit (1896).


blind (adj.)

Old English blind blind, also dark, enveloped in darkness, obscure; unintelligent, lacking mental
perception, probably from Proto-Germanic *blinda- blind (cognates: Dutch and German blind, Old Norse
blindr, Gothic blinds blind), perhaps, via notion of to make cloudy, deceive, from an extended
Germanic form of the PIE root *bhel- (1) to shine, flash, burn (see bleach (v.)). Compare Lithuanian
blendzas blind, blesti to become dark. The original sense would be not sightless but rather
confused, which perhaps underlies such phrases as blind alley (Chaucer's lanes blynde), which is
older than the sense of closed at one end (1610s).  The twilight, or rather the hour between the
time when one can no longer see to read and the lighting of the candles, is commonly called
blindman's holiday. [Grose, 1796]    In reference to doing something without seeing it first, by
1840. Of aviators flying without instruments or without clear observation, from 1919. Related:
Blinded; blinding. Blindman's bluff is from 1580s.


poker (n.2)

card game, 1834, American English, of unknown origin, perhaps from the first element of German
Pochspiel, name of a card game similar to poker, from pochen to brag as a bluff, literally to knock,
rap (see poke (v.)). A popular alternative theory traces the word to French poque, also said to have
been a card game resembling poker. [B]ut without documentation these explanations are mere
speculation [Barnhart]. The earlier version of the game in English was called brag. Slang poker face
(n.) deadpan is from 1874.    A good player is cautious or bold by turns, according to his estimate
of the capacities of his adversaries, and to the impression he wants to make on them. 7. It follows
that the possession of a good poker face is an advantage. No one who has any pretensions to good
play will betray the value of his hand by gesture, change of countenance, or any other symptom.
[Cavendish, Round Games at Cards, dated 1875]   <hr />   To any one not very well up in these games,
some parts of the book are at first sight rather puzzling. It follows, we read in one passage, that
the possession of a good poker face (the italics are the author's) is an advantage. If this had been
said by a Liverpool rough of his wife, the meaning would have been clear to every one. Cavendish,
however, does not seem to be writing especially for Lancashire. [review of above, Saturday Review,
Dec. 26, 1874]


