blunt (n.)

street slang for marijuana and tobacco cigar (easier to pass around, easier to disguise, and the
stimulant in the tobacco enhances the high from the pot) surfaced c.1993, but is said to have
originated among Jamaicans in New York City in the early 1980s; from Phillies Blunt brand cigars;
see blunt (adj.), which has been used of certain cigars since 19c.Users say that the Phillies Blunt
brand produces less harsh-tasting or sweeter smoke. The leaf wrapper of a Phillies Blunt is strong
enough to hold together through the manipulations of making a blunt. Other brands fall apart.
[http://nepenthes.lycaeum.org/Drugs/THC/Smoke/blunts.html]


blunt (v.)

late 14c., from blunt (adj.). Related: Blunted; blunting.


blunt (adj.)

c.1200, dull, obtuse, perhaps from or related to Old Norse blundra (see blunder (v.)). Of tools or
weapons, late 14c. Meaning abrupt of speech or manner is from 1580s.


bluntness (n.)

late 15c., stupidity, from blunt (adj.) + -ness. Meaning rudeness is from c.1600.


bluntly (adv.)

1550s, stupidly, from blunt (adj.) + -ly (2). Meaning directly is from 1570s.


slow (adj.)

Old English slaw inactive, sluggish, torpid, lazy, also not clever, from Proto-Germanic
*sl&aelig;waz (cognates: Old Saxon sleu blunt, dull, Middle Dutch slee, Dutch sleeuw sour, tart,
blunt, Old High German sleo blunt, dull, Old Norse sljor, Danish sl&oslash;v, Swedish sl&ouml;
blunt, dull). Meaning taking a long time is attested from early 13c. Meaning dull, tedious is from
1841. As an adverb c.1500. The slows imaginary disease to account for lethargy is from 1843.


plump (adj.)

late 15c., blunt, dull (in manners), from Dutch plomp blunt, thick, massive, stumpy, probably
related to plompen fall or drop heavily (see plump (v.)). Meaning fleshy, of rounded form is from
1540s in English. Danish and Swedish plump rude, coarse, clumsy are from the Low German word and
represent a different sense development.


stint (v.)

to be sparing or frugal, 1722, earlier to limit, restrain (1510s), cause to cease, put an end to
(mid-14c.), cease, desist (intransitive), c.1200, from Old English styntan to blunt, make dull,
probably originally make short, from Proto-Germanic *stuntijanan (cognates: Old Norse stuttr short,
scant, Middle High German stunz blunt, short, German stutzen to cut short, curtail, stop, hesitate),
from PIE root *(s)teu- (1) to push, stick, knock, beat (see steep (adj.)). The English word perhaps
was influenced by its Scandinavian cognates. Sense of be careful in expenditure is from 1848.
Related: Stinted; stinting. The noun is attested from c.1300.


pointless (adj.)

early 14c., blunt, from point (n.) + -less. Meaning of no effect, to no purpose is from 1726.
Related: Pointlessly; pointlessness.


hebetude (n.)

1620s, from Latin hebetudo, noun of quality from hebes blunt, dull, of unknown origin. Related:
Hebetate (v.); hebetation; hebetudinous.


obtund (v.)

c.1400, (transitive) to render dead, make dull, used occasionally in English, especially in medical
jargon; from Latin obtundere to blunt, make dull, weaken, exhaust, literally to beat against (see
obtuse). Related: Obtundation; obtunded.


amblyopia (n.)

1706, weakening of the eyesight, medical Latin, from Greek amblyopia dim-sightedness, noun of action
from amblys dulled, blunt + ops eye (see eye (n.)). Related: Amblyopic.


chuff

pleased, happy, c.1860, British dialect, from obsolete chuff swollen with fat (1520s). A second
British dialectal chuff has an opposite meaning, displeased, gruff (1832), from chuff rude fellow,
or, as Johnson has it, a coarse, fat-headed, blunt clown (mid-15c.), of unknown origin. Related:
Chuffed.


mozzarella (n.)

1911, Italian cheese originally made in Naples area, from Italian mozzarella, diminutive of mozza, a
kind of cheese, from mozzare to cut off, from mozzo blunt, from Vulgar Latin *mutius cut off,
blunted.


butt (n.1)

thick end, c.1400, butte, which probably is related to Middle Dutch and Dutch bot, Low German butt
blunt, dull, Old Norse bauta (see beat (v.)). Or related somehow to Old English buttuc end, small
piece of land, and Old Norse butr short. In sense of human posterior it is recorded from mid-15c.
Meaning remainder of a smoked cigarette first recorded 1847.


gentleman (n.)

well-born man, early 13c., from gentle + man.    The Gentleman is always truthful and sincere; will
not agree for the sake of complaisance or out of weakness ; will not pass over that of which he
disapproves. He has a clear soul, and a fearless, straightforward tongue. On the other hand he is
not blunt and rude. His truth is courteous; his courtesy, truthful; never a humbug, yet, where he
truthfully can, he prefers to say pleasant things. [J.R. Vernon, Contemporary Review, 1869]
Related: Gentlemen. Gentleman's agreement is first attested 1929. Gentleman farmer recorded from
1749.


stump (n.)

part of a tree trunk left in the ground after felling, mid-15c. (implied from late 13c. in
surnames); from mid-14c. as remaining part of a severed arm or leg; from or cognate with Middle Low
German stump (from adjective meaning mutilated, blunt, dull), Middle Dutch stomp stump, from Proto-
Germanic *stamp- (cognates: Old Norse stumpr, Old High German stumph, German stumpf stump, German
Stummel piece cut off), from PIE *stebh- post, stem; to support  (see step (v.).


dull (adj.)

c.1200, stupid; early 13c., blunt, not sharp; rare before mid-14c., apparently from Old English dol
dull-witted, foolish, or an unrecorded parallel word, or from Middle Low German dul slow-witted,
both from Proto-Germanic *dulaz (cognates: Old Frisian and Old Saxon dol foolish, Old High German
tol, German toll mad, wild, Gothic dwals foolish), from PIE *dheu- (1) dust, vapor, smoke (and
related notions of defective perception or wits). Of color from early 15c.; of pain or other
sensations from 1725. Sense of boring first recorded 1580s.    dull. (8) Not exhilarating; not
delightful; as to make dictionaries is dull work. [Johnson]   Dullsville, slang for town where
nothing happens, attested from 1960.


spade (n.1)

tool for digging, Old English spadu spade, from Proto-Germanic *spadan (cognates: Old Frisian spada
a spade, Middle Dutch spade a sword, Old Saxon spado, Middle Low German spade, German Spaten), from
PIE *spe-dh-, from root *spe- (2) long, flat piece of wood (cognates: Greek spathe wooden blade,
paddle, Old English spon chip of wood, splinter, Old Norse spann shingle, chip; see spoon (n.)).
A spade differs from a two-handed shovel chiefly in the form and thickness of the blade [Century
Dictionary]. To call a spade a spade use blunt language, call things by right names (1540s)
translates a Greek proverb (known to Lucian), ten skaphen skaphen legein to call a bowl a bowl, but
Erasmus mistook Greek skaphe trough, bowl for a derivative of the stem of skaptein to dig, and the
mistake has stuck [see OED].


uncle (n.)

late 13c., from Old French oncle, from Latin avunculus mother's brother (father's brother was
patruus), literally little grandfather, diminutive of avus grandfather, from PIE root *awo-
grandfather, adult male relative other than one's father (cognates: Armenian hav grandfather,
Lithuanian avynas maternal uncle, Old Church Slavonic uji uncle, Welsh ewythr uncle).    Replaced
Old English eam (usually maternal; paternal uncle was f&aelig;dera), which represents the Germanic
form of the root (cognates: Dutch oom, Old High German oheim maternal uncle, German Ohm uncle).
Also from French are German, Danish, Swedish onkel. As a familiar title of address to an old man,
attested by 1793; in the U.S. South, especially a kindly title for a worthy old negro [Century
Dictionary]. First record of Dutch uncle (and his blunt, stern, benevolent advice) is from 1838;
Welsh uncle (1747) was the male first cousin of one's parent. To say uncle as a sign of submission
in a fight is North American, attested from 1909, of uncertain signification.


