blush (n.)

mid-14c., a look, a glance (sense preserved in at first blush), also a gleam, a gleaming (late
14c.), from blush (v.). As a reddening of the face from 1590s. Meaning a rosy color is 1590s.


blush (v.)

mid-14c., bluschen, blischen, probably from Old English blyscan blush, become red, glow (glossing
Latin rutilare), akin to blyse torch, from Proto-Germanic *blisk- to shine, burn, which also yielded
words in Low German (Dutch blozen to blush) and Scandinavian (Danish blusse to blaze; to blush);
ultimately from PIE *bhel- (1) to shine, flash, burn (see bleach (v.)).    For vowel evolution, see
bury. Earliest recorded senses were to shine brightly; to look, stare. Sense of turn red in the face
(with shame, modesty, etc.) is from c.1400. Related: Blushed; blushing.


ashamed (adj.)

Old English asceamed feeling shame, filled with shame, past participle of ascamian to feel shame,
from a- intensive prefix + scamian be ashamed, blush; cause shame (see shame (v.)). The verb is
obsolete, but the past participle lives on. Meaning reluctant through fear of shame is c.1300.


rouge (n.)

1753, in cosmetic sense, blush, from French rouge red coloring matter, noun use of adjective red
(12c.), from Latin rubeus, related to ruber red (see red). Replaced native paint in this sense. The
verb is attested from 1777. Related: Rouged; rouging. The same word had been borrowed from French in
Middle English with the sense red color; red (early 15c.).


shame (v.)

Old English scamian be ashamed, blush, feel shame; cause shame, from the root of shame (n.). Compare
Old Saxon scamian, Dutch schamen, Old High German scamen, Danish skamme, Gothic skaman, German
sch&auml;men sich. Related: Shamed; shaming.


effrontery (n.)

1715, from French effronterie, from effront&eacute; shameless, from Old French esfronte shameless,
brazen, probably from Late Latin effrontem (nominative effrons) barefaced, from Latin ex- out (see
ex-) + frontem (nominative frons) brow (see front (n.)).    Latin frontus had a sense of ability to
blush, but the literal sense of effrontery often has been taken to be putting forth the forehead.
Forehead in Johnson's Dictionary (1755) has a secondary sense of impudence; confidence; assurance;
audaciousness; audacity.


shame (n.)

Old English scamu, sceomu feeling of guilt or disgrace; confusion caused by shame; disgrace,
dishonor, insult, loss of esteem or reputation; shameful circumstance, what brings disgrace;
modesty; private parts, from Proto-Germanic *skamo (cognates: Old Saxon skama, Old Norse sk&ouml;mm,
Swedish skam, Old Frisian scome, Dutch schaamte, Old High German scama, German Scham). The best
guess is that this is from PIE *skem-, from *kem- to cover (covering oneself being a common
expression of shame).    Until modern times English had a productive duplicate form in shand. An Old
Norse word for it was kinnro&eth;i, literally cheek-redness, hence, blush of shame. Greek
distinguished shame in the bad sense of disgrace, dishonor (aiskhyne) from shame in the good sense
of modesty, bashfulness (aidos). To put (someone or something) to shame is mid-13c. Shame culture
attested by 1947.


bloom (n.1)

blossom of a plant, c.1200, a northern word, from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse blomi
flower, blossom, also collectively flowers and foliage on trees; from Proto-Germanic *blomon
(cognates: Old Saxon blomo, Middle Dutch bloeme, Dutch bloem, Old High German bluomo, German Blume,
Gothic bloma), from PIE *bhle- (cognates: Old Irish blath blossom, flower, Latin flos flower,
florere to blossom, flourish), extended form of *bhel- (2) to blow, inflate, swell (see bole).
Related to Old English blowan to flower (see blow (v.2)).    Transferred sense, of persons, is from
c.1300; meaning state of greatest loveliness is from early 14c.; that of blush on the cheeks is from
1752. Old English had cognate bloma, but only in the figurative sense of state of greatest beauty;
the main word in Old English for flower was blostm (see blossom).


bury (v.)

Old English byrgan to raise a mound, hide, bury, inter, akin to beorgan to shelter, from Proto-
Germanic *burzjan- protection, shelter (cognates: Old Saxon bergan, Dutch bergen, Old Norse bjarga,
Swedish berga, Old High German bergan protect, shelter, conceal, German bergen, Gothic bairgan to
save, preserve), from PIE root *bhergh- (1) to hide, protect (cognates: Old Church Slavonic brego I
preserve, guard). Related: Buried; burying. Burying-ground cemetery attested from 1711.    The Old
English -y- was a short oo sound, like modern French -u-. Under normal circumstances it transformed
into Modern English -i- (as in bridge, kiss, listen, sister), but in bury and a few other words (as
in merry, knell) it retained a Kentish change to e that took place in the late Old English period.
In the West Midlands, meanwhile, the Old English -y- sound persisted, slightly modified over time,
giving the standard modern pronunciation of blush, much, church.


