bog (n.)

c.1500, from Gaelic and Irish bogach bog, from adjective bog soft, moist, from PIE *bhugh-, from
root *bheugh- to bend (see bow (v.)). Bog-trotter applied to the wild Irish from 1670s.


bog (v.)

to sink (something or someone) in a bog, c.1600, from bog (n.). Intransitive use from c.1800.
Related: Bogged; bogging.


bogart (v.)

1969, to keep a joint in your mouth, dangling from the lip like Humphrey Bogart's cigarette in the
old movies, instead of passing it on. First attested in Easy Rider. The word was also used 1960s
with notions of get something by intimidation, be a tough guy (again with reference to the actor and
the characters he typically played). In old drinking slang, Captain Cork was a man slow in passing
the bottle.


bogey (n.1)

World War II aviator slang for unidentified aircraft, presumably hostile, probably ultimately from
bogge, a variant of Middle English bugge a frightening specter (see bug (n.)). Thus it shares
ancestry with many dialect words, such as bog/bogge (attested 16c.-17c.), bogeyman (16c.), boggart
specter that haunts a gloomy spot (c.1570, in Westmoreland, Lancashire, Cheshire, and Yorkshire).
The earliest modern form appears to be Scottish bogle ghost, attested from c.1500 and popularized
c.1800 in English literature by Scott, Burns, etc.


bogey (n.2)

in golfing, c.1891, originally number of strokes a good player is supposed to need for a given hole
or course; later, score one over par (1946); from the same source as bogey (n.1), on the notion of a
phantom opponent, represented by the ground score. The word was in vogue at the time in Britain
because of the popularity of a music hall tune Hush, Hush, Hush, Here Comes the Bogey Man.One
popular song at least has left its permanent effect on the game of golf. That song is 'The Bogey
Man.' In 1890 Dr. Thos. Browne, R.N., the hon. secretary of the Great Yarmouth Club, was playing
against a Major Wellman, the match being against the 'ground score,' which was the name given to the
scratch value of each hole. The system of playing against the 'ground score' was new to Major
Wellman, and he exclaimed, thinking of the song of the moment, that his mysterious and well-nigh
invincible opponent was a regular 'bogey-man.' The name 'caught on' at Great Yarmouth, and to-day
'Bogey' is one of the most feared opponents on all the courses that acknowledge him. [1908, cited in
OED]  Other early golfing sources give it an American origin. As a verb, attested by 1948.


bogeyman (n.)

16c.; see bogey (n.1) + man (n.).


boggle (v.)

1590s, to start with fright (as a startled horse does), from Middle English bugge specter (among
other things, supposed to scare horses at night); see bug (n.); also compare bogey (n.1). The
meaning to raise scruples, hesitate is from 1630s. Related: Boggled; boggling.


boggy (adj.)

1580s, from bog (n.) + -y (2). Related: Bogginess.


bogus

1838, counterfeit money, spurious coin, American English, apparently from a slang word applied
(according to some sources first in Ohio in 1827) to a counterfeiter's apparatus.    One bogus or
machine impressing dies on the coin, with a number of dies, engraving tools, bank bill paper,
spurious coin, &amp;c.; &amp;c.; making in all a large wagon load, was taken into possession by the
attorney general of Lower Canada. [Niles' Register, Sept. 7, 1833, quoting from Concord, New
Hampshire, Statesman, Aug. 24]     Some trace this to tantrabobus, also tantrabogus, a late 18c.
colloquial Vermont word for any odd-looking object, in later 19c. use the devil, which might be
connected to tantarabobs, recorded as a Devonshire name for the devil. Others trace it to the same
source as bogey (n.1).


ibogaine (n.)

nerve stimulant, 1901, from French ibogaine, from iboga, Congolese name of the shrub from which the
chemical is extracted, + chemical suffix -ine (2).


mind-boggling (adj.)

1964; see mind (n.) + present participle of boggle.


toboggan (n.)

long, flat-bottomed sled, 1829, from Canadian French tabagane, from an Algonquian language, such as
Maleseet /thapaken/. The verb is recorded from 1846. As American English colloquial for a type of
long woolen cap, it is recorded from 1929 (earlier toboggan cap, 1928), presumably because one wore
such a cap while tobogganing.


