bohemian (n.)

a gypsy of society, 1848, from French bohemi&eacute;n (1550s), from the country name (see Bohemia).
The modern sense is perhaps from the use of this country name since 15c. in French for gypsy (they
were wrongly believed to have come from there, though their first appearance in Western Europe may
have been directly from there), or from association with 15c. Bohemian heretics. It was popularized
by Henri Murger's 1845 story collection Scenes de la Vie de Boheme, the basis of Puccini's La
Boh&egrave;me. Used in English 1848 in Thackary's Vanity Fair.The term 'Bohemian' has come to be
very commonly accepted in our day as the description of a certain kind of literary gipsey, no matter
in what language he speaks, or what city he inhabits .... A Bohemian is simply an artist or
litt&eacute;rateur who, consciously or unconsciously, secedes from conventionality in life and in
art. [Westminster Review, 1862]


Hussite

1530s, follower of John Huss, Bohemian religious reformer burnt in 1415. His name is an abbreviation
of the name of his native village, Husinec, literally goose-pen.


Bohunk (n.)

1903, U.S. derogatory slang for lower class immigrant from Central or Eastern Europe, probably from
Bohemian + a distortion of Hungarian.


hobo (n.)

1889, Western U.S., of unknown origin. Barnhart compares early 19c. English dialectal hawbuck lout,
clumsy fellow, country bumpkin. Or possibly from ho, boy, a workers' call on late 19c. western U.S.
railroads. Facetious formation hobohemia, community or life of hobos, is from 1923 (see bohemian).


howitzer (n.)

1680s, via Dutch houwitser (1660s), German Haubitze from Bohemian houfnice a catapult, from houf
heap, crowd, a loan-word from Middle High German hufe heap. Introduced to German during the Hussite
wars, 14c.


bourgeois (adj.)

1560s, of the French middle class, from French bourgeois, from Old French burgeis, borjois town
dweller (see bourgeoisie). Sense of socially or aesthetically conventional is from 1764; in
communist and socialist writing, as a noun, a capitalist (1883).It is better to be a good ordinary
bourgeois than a bad ordinary bohemian. [Aldous Huxley, 1930]


Bloomsbury

1910, in reference to the set of Bohemian writers, artists, and intellectuals (including E.M.
Forster, Virginia Woolf, Vanessa and Clive Bell, John Maynard Keynes) centered on Lytton Strachey;
so called from the London neighborhood where several lived and worked.Women in love with buggers and
buggers in love with womanizers, I don't know what the world is coming to. [Lytton Strachey]  The
place name is recorded 1291 as Blemondesberi manor held by the Blemond family, from Bl&eacute;mont
in France. It was laid out for housing in 17c., fashionable from 18c.


Bohemia

central European kingdom, mid-15c., Beeme, from Middle French Boheme Bohemia, from Latin Boiohaemum
(Tacitus), from Boii, the Celtic people who settled in what is now Bohemia (and were driven from it
by the Germanic Marcomans early 1c.; singular Boius, fem. Boia, perhaps literally warriors) + Proto-
Germanic *haimaz home (see home (n.)). Attested from 1861 in meaning community of artists and social
Bohemians or in reference to the district where they live (see bohemian).


booth (n.)

mid-12c., from Old Danish bo&thorn; temporary dwelling, from East Norse *boa to dwell, from Proto-
Germanic *bowan-, from PIE root *bheue- to be, exist, grow (see be). See also bound (adj.2). Compare
German Bude booth, stall, Middle Dutch boode, Lithuanian butas house, Old Irish both hut, Bohemian
bouda, Polish buda, some probably borrowed from East Norse, some formed from the PIE root.


ape (n.)

Old English apa ape, monkey, from Proto-Germanic *apan (cognates: Old Saxon apo, Old Norse api,
Dutch aap, German affe), perhaps borrowed in Proto-Germanic from Celtic (compare Old Irish apa) or
Slavic (compare Old Bohemian op, Slovak opitza), perhaps ultimately from a non-Indo-European
language.    Apes were noted in medieval times for mimicry of human action, hence, perhaps, the
other figurative use of the word, to mean a fool. To go ape (in emphatic form, go apeshit) go crazy
is 1955, U.S. slang. To lead apes in hell (1570s) was the fancied fate of one who died an old maid.


droog (n.)

gang member, young ruffian, a transliteration of the Russian word for friend, introduced by English
novelist Anthony Burgess in A Clockwork Orange (1962). The Russian word comes from Old Church
Slavonic drugu companion, friend, other (source of Bohemian drug companion, Serbo-Croatian drugi
other), which belongs to a group of related Indo-European words (such as Lithuanian draugas friend,
traveling companion; Gothic driugan do military service, ga-drauhts soldier; Old Norse drott, Old
English dryht, Old High German truht multitude, people, army) apparently with an original sense of
companion.


defenestration (n.)

1620, the action of throwing out of a window, from Latin fenestra window (see fenestration). A word
invented for one incident: the Defenestration of Prague, May 21, 1618, when two Catholic deputies to
the Bohemian national assembly and a secretary were tossed out the window (into a moat) of the
castle of Hradshin by Protestant radicals. It marked the start of the Thirty Years War. Some
linguists link fenestra with Greek verb phainein to show; others see in it an Etruscan borrowing,
based on the suffix -(s)tra, as in Latin loan-words aplustre the carved stern of a ship with its
ornaments, genista the plant broom, lanista trainer of gladiators. Related: Defenestrate (1915);
defenestrated (1620).


Gypsy

also gipsy, c.1600, alteration of gypcian, a worn-down Middle English dialectal form of egypcien
Egyptian, from the supposed origin of these people. As an adjective, from 1620s.    Cognate with
Spanish Gitano and close in sense to Turkish and Arabic Kipti gypsy, literally Coptic; but in Middle
French they were Boh&eacute;mien (see bohemian), and in Spanish also Flamenco from Flanders. The
gipsies seem doomed to be associated with countries with which they have nothing to do [Weekley].
Zingari, the Italian and German name, is of unknown origin. Romany is from the people's own
language, a plural adjective form of rom man. Gipsy is the prefered spelling in England.


year (n.)

Old English gear (West Saxon), ger (Anglian) year, from Proto-Germanic *jeram year (cognates: Old
Saxon, Old High German jar, Old Norse ar, Danish aar, Old Frisian ger, Dutch jaar, German Jahr,
Gothic jer year), from PIE *yer-o-, from root *yer- year, season (cognates: Avestan yare (nominative
singular) year; Greek hora year, season, any part of a year, also any part of a day, hour; Old
Church Slavonic jaru, Bohemian jaro spring; Latin hornus of this year; Old Persian du&#353;iyaram
famine, literally bad year). Probably originally that which makes [a complete cycle], and from
verbal root *ei- meaning to do, make.


polka (n.)

1844, from French polka, German Polka, probably from Czech polka, the dance, literally Polish woman
(Polish Polka), fem. of Polak a Pole. The word might also be an alteration of Czech pulka half, for
the half-steps of Bohemian peasant dances. Or it could be a merger of the two. The dance was in
vogue first in Prague, 1835; it reached London by the spring of 1842.   Vous n'en &#234;tes encore
qu'au galop, vieil arri&#233;r&#233;, et nous en sommes &#224; la polka! Oui, c'est la polka que
nous avons dans&#233;e &#224; ce fameux bal Valenlino. Vous demandez ce que c'est que la polka,
homme de l ann&#233;e derni&#232;re! La contredanse a v&#233;cu; le galop, rococo; la valse &#224;
deux temps, dans le troisi&#232;me dessous; il n'y a plus que la polka, la sublime, l'enivrante
polka, dont les salons raffolent, que les femmes de la haute, les banqui&#233;res les plus cossues
et les comtesses les plus choenosophoses &#233;tudient jour et nuit. [La France Dramatique, Paris,
1841]    As a verb by 1846 (polk also was tried).


waltz (n.)

round dance performed to music in triple time, extraordinarily popular as a fashionable dance from
late 18c. to late 19c., the dance itself probably of Bohemian origin, 1781, from German Waltzer,
from walzen to roll, dance, from Old High German walzan to turn, roll, from Proto-Germanic *walt-
(cognate with Old Norse velta), from PIE root *wel- (3) to turn, revolve (see volvox). Described in
1825 as a riotous and indecent German dance [Walter Hamilton, A Hand-Book or Concise Dictionary of
Terms Used in the Arts and Sciences].    The music struck up a beautiful air, and the dancers
advanced a few steps, when suddenly, to my no small horror and amazement, the gentlemen seized the
ladies round the waist, and all, as if intoxicated by this novel juxtaposition, began to whirl about
the room, like a company of Bacchanalians dancing round a statue of the jolly god. A waltz!
exclaimed I, inexpressibly shocked, have I lived to see Scotch women waltz? [The Edinburgh Magazine,
April, 1820]


right (adj.2)

opposite of left, early 12c., riht, from Old English riht, which did not have this sense but meant
good, proper, fitting, straight (see right (adj.1)). The notion is of the right hand as the correct
hand. The usual Old English word for this was swi&thorn;ra, literally stronger.  The history of
words for 'right' and 'left' shows that they were used primarily with reference to the hands [Buck].
Similar sense evolution in Dutch recht, German recht right (not left), from Old High German reht,
which meant only straight, just.    The usual PIE root (*dek-) is represented by Latin dexter (see
dexterity). Other derivations on a similar pattern to English right are French droit, from Latin
directus straight; Lithuanian labas, literally good; and Slavic words (Bohemian pravy, Polish prawy,
Russian pravyj) from Old Church Slavonic pravu, literally straight, from PIE *pro-, from root *per-
(1) forward, through (see per).    The political sense of conservative is first recorded 1794
(adj.), 1825 (n.), a translation of French Droit the Right, Conservative Party in the French
National Assembly (1789; see left (adj.)).


king (n.)

Old English cyning king, ruler, from Proto-Germanic *kuninggaz (cognates: Dutch koning, Old Norse
konungr, Danish konge, Old Saxon and Old High German kuning, Middle High German k&uuml;nic, German
K&ouml;nig). Possibly related to Old English cynn family, race (see kin), making a king originally a
leader of the people; or from a related root suggesting noble birth, making a king originally one
who descended from noble birth. The sociological and ideological implications render this a topic of
much debate.    Finnish kuningas king, Old Church Slavonic kunegu prince (Russian knyaz, Bohemian
knez), Lithuanian kunigas clergyman are loans from Germanic.  As leon is the king of bestes. [John
Gower, Confessio Amantis, 1390]  In Old English, used for names of chiefs of Anglian and Saxon
tribes or clans, then of the states they founded. Also extended to British and Danish chiefs they
fought. The chess piece so called from early 15c.; the playing card from 1560s; use in
checkers/draughts first recorded 1820. Applied in nature to species deemed remarkably big or
dominant (such as king crab, 1690s). In marketing, king-size is from 1939, originally of cigarettes.
[I]t was [Eugene] Field who haunted the declining years of Creston Clarke with his review of that
actor's Lear. ... Said he, Mr. Clarke played the King all the evening as though under constant fear
that someone else was about to play the Ace. [Theatre Magazine, January 1922]


whore (n.)

1530s spelling alteration (see wh-) of Middle English hore, from Old English hore prostitute,
harlot, from Proto-Germanic *horaz (fem. *horon-) one who desires (cognates: Old Norse hora
adulteress, Danish hore, Swedish hora, Dutch hoer, Old High German huora whore; in Gothic only in
the masc. hors adulterer, fornicator, also as a verb, horinon commit adultery), from PIE *ka- to
like, desire, a base that has produced words in other languages for lover (cognates: Latin carus
dear; Old Irish cara friend; Old Persian kama desire; Sanskrit Kama, name of the Hindu god of love,
kamah love, desire, the first element in Kama Sutra).   Whore itself is perhaps a Germanic euphemism
for a word that has not survived. The Old English vowel naturally would have yielded *hoor, which is
the pronunciation in some dialects; it might have shifted by influence of Middle English homonym
hore physical filth, slime, also moral corruption, sin, from Old English horh. The wh- form became
current 16c. A general term of abuse for an unchaste or lewd woman (without regard to money) from at
least c.1200. Of male prostitutes from 1630s. Whore of Babylon is from Rev. xvii:1, 5, etc. In
Middle English with occasional plural forms horen, heoranna.    The word, with its derivatives, is
now avoided polite speech; its survival in literature, so as it survives, is due to the fact that it
is a favorite word with Shakspere (who uses it, with its derivatives, 99 times) and is common in the
authorized English version of the Bible ... though the American revisers recommended the
substitution of harlot as less gross .... [Century Dictionary]     Some equivalent words in other
languages also derive from sources not originally pejorative, such as Bohemian nevestka, diminutive
of nevesta bride; Dutch deern, German dirne originally girl, lass, wench; also perhaps Old French
pute, perhaps literally girl, fem. of Vulgar Latin *puttus (but perhaps rather from Latin putidus
stinking; see poontang). Welsh putain whore is from French, probably via Middle English. Among other
languages, Greek porne prostitute is related to pernemi sell, with an original notion probably of a
female slave sold for prostitution; Latin meretrix is literally one who earns wages (source of Irish
mertrech, Old English miltestre whore, prostitute).    The vulgar Roman word was scortum, literally
skin, hide. Another term was lupa, literally she-wolf (preserved in Spanish loba, Italian lupa,
French louve; see wolf (n.)). And of course there was prostituta, literally placed in front, thus
publicly exposed, from the fem. past participle of prostituere (see prostitute (n.)). Another Old
Norse term was sk&aelig;kja, which yielded Danish sk&oslash;ge, Swedish sk&ouml;ka; probably from
Middle Low German schoke, which is perhaps from schode foreskin of a horse's penis, perhaps with the
sense of skin (compare Latin scortum) or perhaps via an intermediary sense of vagina. Spanish
ramera, Portuguese ramiera are from fem. form of ramero young bird of prey, literally little branch,
from ramo branch. Breton gast is cognate with Welsh gast bitch, of uncertain origin. Compare also
strumpet, harlot.    Old Church Slavonic ljubodejica is from ljuby dejati fornicate, a compound from
ljuby love + dejati put, perform. Russian bljad whore derives from Old Church Slavonic bladinica,
from bladu fornication. Polish nierz&#261;dnica is literally disorderly woman. Sanskrit vecya is a
derivation of veca- house, dwelling, especially house of ill-repute, brothel. Another term,
pumccali, means literally one who runs after men. Avestan jahika is literally woman, but only of
evil creatures; another term is kunairi, from pejorative prefix ku- + nairi woman.


