boisterous (adj.)

late 15c., unexplained alteration of Middle English boistous (c.1300) rough, coarse (as of food),
clumsy, violent, of unknown origin, perhaps from Anglo-French bustous rough (road), which is perhaps
from Old French boisteos curved, lame; uneven, rough (Modern French boiteux), itself of obscure
origin. Another guess traces it via Celtic to Latin bestia. Used of persons from 1560s. Related:
Boisterously; boisterousness.


hijinks (n.)

also hi-jinks, high jinks, boisterous capers, lively or boisterous sport, 1842, from name of games
played at drinking parties (1690s). See jink.


ramp (n.2)

rude, boisterous girl or woman, mid-15c., perhaps from ramp (v.). Compare romp in Johnson's
Dictionary (1755): a rude, awkward, boisterous, untaught girl.


rant (n.)

boisterous, empty declamation; fierce or high-sounding language without much meaning or dignity of
thought; bombast; a ranting speech, 1640s, from rant (v.).


revelry (n.)

act of reveling; merrymaking, boisterous festivity, amusement, early 15c., from revel (n.) + -ery.


randy (adj.)

1690s, Scottish, aggressive, boisterous, probably from rand to rave, an obsolete variant of rant
(v.). In the original sense especially of beggars, and probably implying vagrant habits as well as
rude behavior [OED]. Sense of lewd, lustful first recorded 1847. Related: Randiness.


rumpus (n.)

1764, of unknown origin, prob. a fanciful formation [OED], possibly an alteration of robustious
boisterous, noisy (1540s; see robust). First record of rumpus room play room for children in a
family home is from 1938.


Toby

familiar form of masc. proper name Tobias, in various colloquial usages, such as jug (1840),
drinking mug in the form of a stout old man; as a type of collar (1882) it refers to that worn by
the dog Toby in 19c. Punch and Judy shows. Also in Toby show (by 1942, American English) comedy act
based on the stock character of a boisterous, blundering yokel.


hoyden (n.)

1590s, of unknown origin; perhaps from Dutch heiden rustic, uncivilized man, from Middle Dutch
heiden heathen (see heathen). Originally in English rude, boorish fellow; sense of ill-bred,
boisterous female first recorded 1670s.


rumbustious (adj.)

1778, an arbitrary formation perhaps suggested by rum (adj.) + boisterous, robustious, bumptious,
etc. Coined about the same time were rumbustical, rumgumptious.


turbulent (adj.)

early 15c., disorderly, tumultuous, unruly (of persons), from Middle French turbulent (12c.), from
Latin turbulentus full of commotion, restless, disturbed, boisterous, stormy, figuratively troubled,
confused, from turba turmoil, crowd (see turbid). In reference to weather, from 1570s. Related:
Turbulently.


tomboy (n.)

1550s, rude, boisterous boy, from Tom + boy; meaning wild, romping girl, girl who acts like a
spirited boy is first recorded 1590s. It also could mean strumpet, bold or immodest woman (1570s).
Compare tomrig rude, wild girl. Related: Tomboyish.


rant (v.)

c.1600, to be jovial and boisterous, also to talk bombastically, from Dutch randten (earlier ranten)
talk foolishly, rave, of unknown origin (compare German rantzen to frolic, spring about). Related:
Ranted; ranting. Ranters antinomian sect which arose in England c.1645 is attested from 1651;
applied 1823 to early Methodists. A 1700 slang dictionary has rantipole a rude wild Boy or Girl
(also as a verb and adjective); to ride rantipole meant The woman uppermost in the amorous congress
[Grose].


ruffian (n.)

1530s, a boisterous, brutal fellow, one ready to commit any crime, from Middle French rufian a pimp
(15c.), from Italian ruffiano a pander, pimp, of uncertain origin, perhaps from a Germanic source
related to rough (adj.), but Dutch roffiaan, German Ruffian are said to be from French. English
meaning might have been influenced by similarity of sound to rough. Related: Ruffianly.    The
Romanic words (such as Medieval Latin ruffianus, Proven&ccedil;al rufian, Catalan rufia, Spanish
rufian) preserve the sense of protector or owner of whores. For sense evolution in English, compare
bully (n.).


