bolt (n.)

Old English bolt short, stout arrow with a heavy head; also crossbow for throwing bolts, from Proto-
Germanic *bultas (cognates: Old Norse bolti, Danish bolt, Dutch bout, German Bolzen), perhaps from
PIE root *bheld- to knock, strike (cognates: Lithuanian beldu I knock, baldas pole for striking).
Applied since Middle English to other short metal rods (especially those with knobbed ends). From
the notion of an arrow's flight comes the lightning bolt (1530s). A bolt of canvas (c.1400) was so
called for its shape. Adverbial phrase bolt upright is from late 14c.


bolt (v.)

from bolt (n.) in its various senses; from a crossbow arrow's quick flight comes the meaning to
spring, to make a quick start (early 13c.). Via the notion of runaway horses, this came to mean to
leave suddenly (early 19c.). Meaning to gulp down food is from 1794. The meaning to secure by means
of a bolt is from 1580s. Related: Bolted; bolting.


shacklebolt (n.)

bolt which passes through the eyes of a shackle, 1680s, from shackle (n.), which has been used
specifically of the bar of a padlock from mid-14c., + bolt (n.).


slot (n.2)

bar or bolt used to fasten a door, window, etc., c.1300, from Middle Dutch or Middle Low German slot
(compare Old Norse slot, Old High German sloz, German Schloss bolt, bar, lock, castle; Old Saxon
slutil key, Dutch slot a bolt, lock, castle), from Proto-Germanic stem *slut- to close (cognates:
Old Frisian sluta, Dutch sluiten, Old High German sliozan, German schliessen to shut, close, bolt,
lock), from PIE root *klau- hook, peg (cognates: Greek kleis key; Latin claudere to shut, close,
clavis key, clavus nail; see close (v.)). Wooden pegs seem to have been the original keys.


toggle (n.)

1769, pin passed through the eye of a rope, strap, or bolt to hold it in place, a nautical word of
uncertain origin, perhaps a frequentative form of tog tug. As a kind of wall fastener it is recorded
from 1934. Toggle bolt is from 1794; toggle switch, the up-and-down sort, first attested 1938. In
computing by 1979, in reference to a key which alternates the function between on and off when
struck.


quarrel (n.2)

square-headed bolt for a crossbow, mid-13c., from Old French quarel, carrel bolt, arrow, from Vulgar
Latin *quadrellus, diminutive of Late Latin quadrus (adj.) square, related to quattuor four (see
four). Now-archaic sense of square or diamond-shaped plane of glass first recorded mid-15c.


serried (adj.)

pressed close together, 1667 (in Paradise Lost), probably a  past participle adjective from serry to
press close together (1580s), a military term, from Middle French serre close, compact (12c.), past
participle of serrer press close, fasten, from Vulgar Latin *serrare to bolt, lock up, from Latin
serare, from sera a bolt, bar, cross-bar, perhaps from PIE *ser- (3) to line up (see series). Modern
use is due to the popularity of Scott, who used it with phalanx.


shut (v.)

Old English scyttan to put (a bolt) in place so as to fasten a door or gate, bolt, shut to;
discharge, pay off, from West Germanic *skutjan (cognates: Old Frisian schetta, Middle Dutch
schutten to shut, shut up, obstruct), from PIE *skeud- to shoot, chase, throw (see shoot (v.)).
Related: Shutting.    Meaning to close by folding or bringing together is from mid-14c. Meaning
prevent ingress and egress is from mid-14c. Sense of to set (someone) free (from) (c.1500) is
obsolete except in dialectal phrases such as to get shut of. To shut (one's) mouth desist from
speaking is recorded from mid-14c.


clevis (n.)

U-shaped iron bar with holes for a bolt or pin, used as a fastener, 1590s, of unknown origin,
perhaps from the root of cleave (v.2). Also uncertain is whether it is originally a plural or a
singular.


cotter (n.)

1640s, perhaps a shortened form of cotterel, a dialectal word for cotter pin or bolt, bracket to
hang a pot over a fire (1560s), itself of uncertain origin.


close (v.)

c.1200, to shut, cover in, from Old French clos- (past participle stem of clore to shut, to cut off
from), 12c., from Latin clausus, past participle of claudere to shut, close; to block up, make
inaccessible; put an end to; shut in, enclose, confine (always -clusus, -cludere in compounds).
The Latin word might be from the possible PIE root *klau- hook, peg, crooked or forked branch (used
as a bar or bolt in primitive structures); cognates: Latin clavis key, clavus nail, claustrum bar,
bolt, barrier, claustra dam, wall, barricade, stronghold; Greek kleidos (genitive) bar, bolt, key,
klobos cage; Old Irish clo nail, Middle Irish clithar hedge, fence; Old Church Slavonic klju&#269;i
hook, key, klju&#269;iti shut; Lithuanian kliuti to catch, be caught on, kliaudziu check, hinder,
kliuvu clasp, hang; Old High German sliozan shut, German schlie&szlig;en to shut, Schl&uuml;ssel
key.    Also partly from Old English beclysan close in, shut up. Intransitive sense become shut is
from late 14c. Meaning draw near to is from 1520s. Intransitive meaning draw together, come together
is from 1550s, hence the idea in military verbal phrase close ranks (mid-17c.), later with
figurative extensions. Meaning bring to an end, finish is from c.1400; intransitive sense come to an
end is from 1826. Of stock prices, from 1860. Meaning bring together the parts of (a book, etc.) is
from 1560s. Related: Closed; closing.


tacky (adj.2)

in poor taste, 1888, from earlier sense of shabby, seedy (1862), adjectival use of tackey (n.) ill-
fed or neglected horse (1800), later extended to persons in like condition, hillbilly, cracker
(1888), of uncertain origin. Related: Tackiness.    The word tacky is a Southern colloquialism. It
was coined by a wealthier or more refined and educated class for general application to those who
were not sheltered by the branches of a family tree, who were tainted. Those who were wealthy and
yet had no great-grandfathers were tackies. The word was used both in contempt and in derision. It
is now nearly obsolete in both senses. There are no aristocrats in the South now, and therefore no
tackies. No man who has the instincts of a gentleman is spoken of as a tacky, whether he can
remember the name of his grandfather's uncle or not. But it has its uses. It is employed in
describing persons of low ideas and vulgar manners, whether rich or poor. It may mean an absence of
style. In dress, anything that is tawdry is tacky. A ribbon on the shopkeeper's counter, a curtain
in the bolt, a shawl or bonnet, a bolt of cloth fresh from the loom may be tacky, because it is
cheap and yet pretentious. In Louisiana the inferior grade of Creole ponies are known as tackies.
[Horace Ingraham, Charleston, S.C., in American Notes and Queries, Feb. 15, 1890]


chassepot (n.)

bolt-action breechloading rifle used by French forces in the Franco-Prussian War, 1870, named for
French inventor Antonine-Alphonse Chassepot (1833-1905).


Lee-Enfield

1902, named for J.P. Lee (1831-1904), U.S. designer of bolt action + Enfield (q.v.).


thunderbolt (n.)

mid-15c., from thunder (n.) + bolt (n.) arrow, projectile.


slot (v.2)

1560s, to bolt a door, from slot (n.2). Related: Slotted; slotting.


anschluss (n.)

1924, from German Anschlu&#223;, connection; addition; junction, literally joining, union, from
anschlie&#223;en to join, annex, from an at, to, toward + schlie&#223;en to shut, close, lock, bolt;
contract (a marriage); see slot (n.2). Specifically the proposal to unite Germany and Austria,
accomplished in 1938.


clique (n.)

1711, a party of persons; a small set, especially one associating for exclusivity, from obsolete
French clique, originally (14c.) a sharp noise, also latch, bolt of a door, from Old French cliquer
click, clatter, crackle, clink, 13c., echoic. Apparently this word was at one time treated in French
as the equivalent of claque (q.v.) and partook of that word's theatrical sense.


locket (n.)

mid-14c., iron cross-bar of a window, from Old French loquet door-handle, bolt, latch, diminutive of
loc lock, latch, from Frankish or some other Germanic source (compare Old Norse lok fastening, lock;
see lock (n.1)). Meaning ornamental case with hinged cover (containing a lock of hair, miniature
portrait, etc.) first recorded 1670s.


bayonet (n.)

1610s, originally a type of dagger; as a steel stabbing weapon fitted to the muzzle of a firearm,
from 1670s, from French baionnette (16c.), said to be from Bayonne, city in Gascony where supposedly
they first were made; or perhaps it is a diminutive of Old French bayon crossbow bolt. The city name
is from Late Latin baia bay + Basque on good. As a verb from c.1700.


kingpin (n.)

also king-pin, 1801 as the name of the large pin in the game of kayles (similar to bowls except a
club or stick was thrown instead of a ball; see Games, Gaming and Gamesters' Laws, Frederick Brandt,
London, 1871), from king with a sense of chief + pin (n.). The modern use is mainly figurative and
is perhaps from the word's use as another name for the king-bolt (itself from 1825) in a machinery,
though the figurative use is attested earlier (1867) than the literal.


hyperbole (n.)

early 15c., from Latin hyperbole, from Greek hyperbole exaggeration, extravagance, related to
hyperballein to throw over or beyond, from hyper- beyond + bole a throwing, a casting, the stroke of
a missile, bolt, beam, from bol-, nominative stem of ballein to throw (see ballistics). Rhetorical
sense is found in Aristotle and Isocrates.


rail (n.1)

horizontal bar passing from one post or support to another, c.1300, from Old French reille bolt,
bar, from Vulgar Latin *regla, from Latin regula straight stick, diminutive form related to regere
to straighten, guide (see regal). Used figuratively for thinness from 1872. To be off the rails in a
figurative sense is from 1848, an image from the railroads. In U.S. use, A piece of timber, cleft,
hewed, or sawed, inserted in upright posts for fencing [Webster, 1830].


claustrophobia (n.)

morbid fear of being shut up in a confined space, coined 1879 (in article by Italian-born, French-
naturalized Swiss-English physician Dr. Benjamin Ball (1834-1892)) from Latin claustrum a bolt, a
means of closing; a place shut in, confined place, frontier fortress (in Medieval Latin cloister),
past participle of claudere to close (see close (v.)) + -phobia fear.


clavicle (n.)

collarbone, 1610s, from Middle French clavicule collarbone (16c.), also small key, from Medieval
Latin clavicula collarbone (used c.980 in a translation of Avicenna), special use of classical Latin
clavicula, literally small key, bolt, diminutive of clavis key (see slot (n.2)); in the anatomical
sense a loan-translation of Greek kleis key, collarbone. So called supposedly from its function as
the fastener of the shoulder. Related: Clavicular.


gnarled (adj.)

the source of the group of words that includes gnarl (v.), gnarl (n.), gnarly is Shakespeare's use
of gnarled in 1603:    Thy sharpe and sulpherous bolt Splits the vn-wedgable and gnarled Oke.
[Measure for Measure, II.ii.116]    OED and Barnhart call it a variant of knurled, from Middle
English knar knot in wood (late 14c.), originally a rock, a stone; of uncertain origin. (Gnarled)
occurs in one passage of Shakes. (for which the sole authority is the folio of 1623), whence it came
into general use in the nineteenth century [OED].


hook (n.)

Old English hoc hook, angle, perhaps related to Old English haca bolt, from Proto-Germanic
*hokaz/*hakan- (cognates: Old Frisian hok, Middle Dutch hoek, Dutch haak, German Haken hook), from
PIE *keg- hook, tooth (cognates: Russian kogot claw). For spelling, see hood (n.1).    Boxing sense
of short, swinging blow with the elbow bent is from 1898. Figurative sense was in Middle English
(see hooker). By hook or by crook (late 14c.) probably alludes to tools of professional thieves.
Hook, line, and sinker completely is 1838, a metaphor from angling.


cloister (n.)

early 13c., from Old French cloistre monastery, convent; enclosure (12c., Modern French
clo&icirc;tre), from Medieval Latin claustrum portion of monastery closed off to laity, from Latin
claustrum (usually in plural, claustra) place shut in, enclosure; bar, bolt, means of shutting in,
from past participle stem of claudere (see close (v.)).    The original purpose of cloisters was to
afford a place in which the monks could take exercise and recreation [Century Dictionary]. Spelling
in French influenced by cloison partition. Old English had clustor, clauster in the sense prison,
lock, barrier, directly from Latin, and compare, from the same source, Dutch klooster, German
Kloster, Polish klasztor.


symbol (n.)

early 15c., creed, summary, religious belief, from Late Latin symbolum creed, token, mark, from
Greek symbolon token, watchword, sign by which one infers; ticket, a permit, license (the word was
applied c.250 by Cyprian of Carthage to the Apostles' Creed, on the notion of the mark that
distinguishes Christians from pagans), literally that which is thrown or cast together, from
assimilated form of syn- together (see syn-) + bole a throwing, a casting, the stroke of a missile,
bolt, beam, from bol-, nominative stem of ballein to throw (see ballistics).    The sense evolution
in Greek is from throwing things together to contrasting to comparing to token used in comparisons
to determine if something is genuine. Hence, outward sign of something. The meaning something which
stands for something else first recorded 1590 (in Faerie Queene). As a written character, 1610s.


nut (n.)

hard seed, Old English hnutu, from Proto-Germanic *hnut- (cognates: Old Norse hnot, Dutch noot, Old
High German hnuz, German nu&szlig; nut), from PIE *kneu- nut (cognates: Latin nux; see nucleus).
Sense of testicle is attested from 1915. Nut-brown is from c.1300 of animals; c.1500 of complexions
of women.    Meaning crazy person, crank is attested from 1903 (British form nutter first attested
1958; nut-case is from 1959); see nuts. American English slang sense of amount of money required for
something is first recorded 1912. The nut that goes onto a bolt is first recorded 1610s (used of
other small mechanical pieces since early 15c.). Nuts and bolts fundamentals is from 1960.


lock (n.1)

means of fastening, Old English loc bolt, fastening; barrier, enclosure, from Proto-Germanic *lukan
(cognates: Old Norse lok fastening, lock, Gothic usluks opening, Old High German loh dungeon, German
Loch opening, hole, Dutch luik shutter, trapdoor). The great diversity of meaning in the Teut. words
seems to indicate two or more independent but formally identical substantival formations from the
root.    The Old English sense barrier, enclosure led to the specific meaning barrier on a river
(c.1300), and the more specific sense gate and sluice system on a water channel used as a means of
raising and lowering boats (1570s). Wrestling sense is from c.1600. Phrase under lock and key
attested from early 14c.


pin (n.)

late Old English pinn peg, bolt, from Proto-Germanic *penn- jutting point or peak (cognates: Old
Saxon pin peg, Old Norse pinni peg, tack, Middle Dutch pin pin, peg, Old High German pfinn, German
Pinne pin, tack) from Latin pinna a feather, plume; in plural a wing; also fin, scoop of a water
wheel; also a pinnacle; a promontory, cape; battlement (as in Luke iv:9 in Vulgate) and so applied
to points of various sorts, from PIE *pet- (see pen (n.1)).    Latin pinna and penna a feather,
plume, in plural a wing, are treated as identical in Watkins, etc., but regarded as separate (but
confused) Latin words by Tucker and others, who derive pinna from PIE *spei- sharp point (see spike
(n.1)) and see the feather/wing sense as secondary.    The modern slender wire pin is first attested
by this name late 14c. Transferred sense of leg is recorded from 1520s and hold the older sense.
Pin-money annual sum allotted to a woman for personal expenses on dress, etc. is attested from
1620s. Pins and needles tingling sensation is from 1810. The sound of a pin dropping as a type of
something all but silent is from 1775.


structure (n.)

mid-15c., action or process of building or construction; 1610s, that which is constructed, a
building or edifice; from Latin structura a fitting together, adjustment; a building, mode of
building; figuratively, arrangement, order, from structus, past participle of struere to pile, place
together, heap up; build, assemble, arrange, make by joining together, related to strues heap, from
PIE *stere- to spread, extend, stretch out.    The widespread descendants of this ancient root are
believed to include: Sanskrit strnoti strews, throws down; Avestan star- to spread out, stretch out;
Greek stronymi strew, stroma bedding, mattress, sternon breast, breastbone; Latin sternere to
stretch, extend; Old Church Slavonic stira, streti spread, strama district; Russian stroji order;
Gothic straujan, Old High German strouwen, Old English streowian to sprinkle, strew; Old English
streon strain, streaw straw, that which is scattered; Old High German stirna forehead, strala arrow,
lightning bolt; Old Irish fo-sernaim spread out, srath a wide river valley; Welsh srat plain.


blue (1)

c.1300, bleu, blwe, etc., from Old French blo pale, pallid, wan, light-colored; blond; discolored;
blue, blue-gray, from Frankish *blao or some other Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic
*bl&aelig;waz (cognates: Old English blaw, Old Saxon and Old High German blao, Danish blaa, Swedish
bl&#229;, Old Frisian blau, Middle Dutch bla, Dutch blauw, German blau blue), from PIE *bhle-was
light-colored, blue, blond, yellow, from PIE root bhel- (1) to shine, flash (see bleach (v.)).
The same PIE root yielded Latin flavus yellow, Old Spanish blavo yellowish-gray, Greek phalos white,
Welsh blawr gray, Old Norse bla livid (the meaning in black and blue), showing the usual slippery
definition of color words in Indo-European The present spelling is since 16c., from French influence
(Modern French bleu).    The exact color to which the Gmc. term applies varies in the older
dialects; M.H.G. bla is also 'yellow,' whereas the Scandinavian words may refer esp. to a deep,
swarthy black, e.g. O.N. blama&eth;r, N.Icel. blama&eth;ur 'Negro' [Buck]   <hr />   Few words enter
more largely into the composition of slang, and colloquialisms bordering on slang, than does the
word BLUE. Expressive alike of the utmost contempt, as of all that men hold dearest and love best,
its manifold combinations, in ever varying shades of meaning, greet the philologist at every turn.
[John S. Farmer, Slang and Its Analogues Past and Present, 1890, p.252]    The color of constancy
since Chaucer at least, but apparently for no deeper reason than the rhyme in true blue (c.1500).
From early times blue was the distinctive color of the dress of servants, which may be the reason
police uniforms are blue, a tradition Farmer dates to Elizabethan times. For blue ribbon see cordon
bleu under cordon. Blue whale attested from 1851, so called for its color. The flower name blue bell
is recorded by 1570s. Blue streak, of something resembling a bolt of lightning (for quickness,
intensity, etc.) is from 1830, U.S. Western slang.    Many Indo-European languages seem to have had
a word to describe the color of the sea, encompasing blue and green and gray; such as Irish glass
(see Chloe); Old English h&aelig;wen blue, gray, related to har (see hoar); Serbo-Croatian sinji
gray-blue, sea-green; Lithuanian &#353;yvas, Russian sivyj gray.


