boon (adj.)

in boon companion (1560s), only real survival of Middle English boon good (early 14c.), from Old
French bon (see bon).


boon (n.)

late 12c., bone petition, from Old Norse bon a petition, prayer, from Proto-Germanic *boniz
(cognates: Old English ben prayer, petition, bannan to summon; see ban).


bean (n.)

Old English bean bean, pea, legume, from Proto-Germanic *bauno (cognates: Old Norse baun, Middle
Dutch bone, Dutch boon, Old High German bona, German Bohne), perhaps from a PIE reduplicated base
*bha-bha- and related to Latin faba bean.    As a metaphor for something of small value it is
attested from c.1300. Meaning head is U.S. baseball slang c.1905 (in bean-ball a pitch thrown at the
head); thus slang verb bean meaning to hit on the head, attested from 1910.    The notion of lucky
or magic beans in English folklore is from the exotic beans or large seeds that wash up occasionally
in Cornwall and western Scotland, carried from the Caribbean or South America by the Gulf Stream.
They were cherished, believed to ward off the evil eye and aid in childbirth.    Slang bean-counter
accountant recorded by 1971. To not know beans (American English, 1933) is perhaps from the of
little worth sense, but may have a connection to colloquial expression recorded around Somerset, to
know how many beans make five be a clever fellow.


skin (n.)

c.1200, animal hide (usually dressed and tanned), from Old Norse skinn animal hide, fur, from Proto-
Germanic *skintha- (cognates: Old English scinn (rare), Old High German scinten, German schinden to
flay, skin; German dialectal schind skin of a fruit, Flemish schinde bark), from PIE *sken- to cut
off (cognates: Breton scant scale of a fish, Irish scainim I tear, I burst), from root *sek- to cut
(see section (n.)).    Ful of fleissche Y was to fele, Now ... Me is lefte But skyn &amp; boon.
[hymn, c.1430]    The usual Anglo-Saxon word is hide (n.1). Meaning epidermis of a living animal or
person is attested from early 14c.; extended to fruits, vegetables, etc. late 14c. Jazz slang sense
of drum is from 1927. Meaning a skinhead is from 1970. As an adjective, it formerly had a slang
sense of cheating (1868); sense of pornographic is attested from 1968. Skin deep is first attested
in this:    All the carnall beauty of my wife, Is but skin-deep. [Sir Thomas Overbury, A Wife, 1613;
the poem was a main motive for his murder]    The skin of one's teeth as the narrowest of margins is
attested from 1550s in the Geneva Bible literal translation of the Hebrew text in Job xix:20. To get
under (someone's) skin annoy is from 1896. Skin-graft is from 1871. Skin merchant recruiting officer
is from 1792.


