boorish (adj.)

1560s, from boor (n.) + -ish.  Related: Boorishly; boorishness.


galoot (n.)

awkward or boorish man, 1812, nautical, raw recruit, green hand, apparently originally a sailor's
contemptuous word for soldiers or marines, of uncertain origin. Dictionary of American Slang
proposes galut, Sierra Leone creole form of Spanish galeoto galley slave.


clownish (adj.)

1560s, rustic; 1580s, boorish, ungainly, awkward, from clown (n.) + -ish. Related: Clownishly;
clownishness.


hoyden (n.)

1590s, of unknown origin; perhaps from Dutch heiden rustic, uncivilized man, from Middle Dutch
heiden heathen (see heathen). Originally in English rude, boorish fellow; sense of ill-bred,
boisterous female first recorded 1670s.


lumpenproletariat (n.)

1897, from German Lumpenproletariat (1850), from Karl Marx, who coined it to mean rabble, poorest of
the working class, from German lump ragamuffin + proletariat. Secondary sense of boorish, stupid
people led to lumpen- being taken as a suffix meaning unenlightened.


killjoy (n.)

also kill-joy, 1776, from kill (v.) + joy. Formerly used with other stems (such as kill-courtesy
boorish person, kill-cow bully, big man, etc.).


roister (v.)

bluster, swagger, be bold, noisy, vaunting, or turbulent, 1580s, from an obsolete noun roister noisy
bully (1550s, displaced by 19c. by roisterer), from Middle French ruistre ruffian, from Old French
ruiste boorish, gross, uncouth, from Latin rusticus (see rustic (adj.)). Related: Roistered;
roistering. Ralph Royster-Doyster is the title and lead character of what is sometimes called the
first English comedy (Udall, 1555).


boor (n.)

13c., from Old French bovier herdsman, from Latin bovis, genitive of bos cow, ox. Re-introduced 16c.
from Dutch boer, from Middle Dutch gheboer fellow dweller, from Proto-Germanic *buram dweller,
especially farmer, from PIE *bhu-, from root *bheue- (see be). Original meaning was peasant farmer
(compare German Bauer, Dutch boer, Danish bonde), and in English it was at first applied to
agricultural laborers in or from other lands, as opposed to the native yeoman; negative connotation
attested by 1560s (in boorish), from notion of clownish rustics. Related: Boorishness.


clown (n.)

1560s, clowne, also cloyne, rustic, boor, peasant, origin uncertain. Perhaps from Scandinavian
dialect (compare Icelandic klunni clumsy, boorish fellow; Swedish kluns a hard knob; a clumsy
fellow, Danish klunt log, block), or akin to North Frisian kl&ouml;nne clumsy person. Or, less
likely, from Latin colonus colonist, farmer, though awareness of this word might have influenced the
sense development in English.    Meaning professional fool, professional or habitual jester is
c.1600. The pantomime clown represents a blend of the Shakes[pearean] rustic with one of the stock
types of the It. comedy [Weekley]. Meaning contemptible person is from 1920s. Fem. form clowness
attested from 1801.


