boorish (adj.)

1560s, from boor (n.) + -ish.  Related: Boorishly; boorishness.


boor (n.)

13c., from Old French bovier herdsman, from Latin bovis, genitive of bos cow, ox. Re-introduced 16c.
from Dutch boer, from Middle Dutch gheboer fellow dweller, from Proto-Germanic *buram dweller,
especially farmer, from PIE *bhu-, from root *bheue- (see be). Original meaning was peasant farmer
(compare German Bauer, Dutch boer, Danish bonde), and in English it was at first applied to
agricultural laborers in or from other lands, as opposed to the native yeoman; negative connotation
attested by 1560s (in boorish), from notion of clownish rustics. Related: Boorishness.


trog (n.)

obnoxious person, boor, lout, 1956, short for troglodyte.


klutz (n.)

1967, American English, from Yiddish klots clumsy person, blockhead, literally block, lump, from
Middle High German klotz lump, ball. Compare German klotz boor, clod, literally wooden block (see
clot).


gavotte (n.)

lively dance, 1690s, from French gavotte (17c.), from Old Proven&ccedil;al gavoto mountaineer's
dance, from gavot, a local name for an Alpine resident, literally boor, glutton, from gaver to
stuff, force-feed poultry, from Old Proven&ccedil;al gava crop. From the same source is French
gavache coward, dastard.


Boer (n.)

Dutch colonist in South Africa, 1824, from Dutch boer farmer, from Middle Dutch, cognate with Old
English gebur dweller, farmer, peasant, and thus related to bower, German Bauer, and the final
syllable of neighbor (see boor). Boer War (1899-1902) was technically the Second Boer War, there
having been a brief preview 1880-1881.


villain (n.)

c.1300 (late 12c. as a surname), base or low-born rustic, from Anglo-French and Old French vilain
peasant, farmer, commoner, churl, yokel (12c.), from Medieval Latin villanus farmhand, from Latin
villa country house, farm (see villa).  The most important phases of the sense development of this
word may be summed up as follows: 'inhabitant of a farm; peasant; churl, boor; clown; miser; knave,
scoundrel.' Today both Fr. vilain and Eng. villain are used only in a pejorative sense. [Klein]
Meaning character in a novel, play, etc. whose evil motives or actions help drive the plot is from
1822.


clown (n.)

1560s, clowne, also cloyne, rustic, boor, peasant, origin uncertain. Perhaps from Scandinavian
dialect (compare Icelandic klunni clumsy, boorish fellow; Swedish kluns a hard knob; a clumsy
fellow, Danish klunt log, block), or akin to North Frisian kl&ouml;nne clumsy person. Or, less
likely, from Latin colonus colonist, farmer, though awareness of this word might have influenced the
sense development in English.    Meaning professional fool, professional or habitual jester is
c.1600. The pantomime clown represents a blend of the Shakes[pearean] rustic with one of the stock
types of the It. comedy [Weekley]. Meaning contemptible person is from 1920s. Fem. form clowness
attested from 1801.


churl (n.)

Old English ceorl peasant, freeman, man without rank, from Proto-Germanic *kerlaz, *karlaz
(cognates: Old Frisian zerl man, fellow, Middle Low German kerle, Dutch kerel freeman of low degree,
German Kerl man, husband, Old Norse karl old man, man).    It had various meaning in early Middle
English, including man of the common people, a country man, husbandman, free peasant; by 1300, it
meant bondman, villain, also fellow of low birth or rude manners. For words for common man that
acquire an insulting flavor over time, compare boor, villain. In this case, however, the same word
also has come to mean king in many languages (such as Lithuanian karalius, Czech kral, Polish
kr&#243;l) via Charlemagne.


