boost (v.)

1815, literal and figurative, American English, of unknown origin. Related: Boosted; boosting. As a
noun by 1825.


booster (n.)

1890, one who boosts something, agent noun from boost (v.). Electrical sense is recorded from 1894.
Young child's booster chair is attested under that name from 1960.


anarchist (n.)

1670s; see anarchy + -ist. The word  got a boost into modernity from the French Revolution.


leg up (n.)

aid, boost, 1837, from leg (n.) + up.


red (adj.2)

Bolshevik, 1917, from red (adj.1), the color they adopted for themselves. Association in Europe of
red with revolutionary politics (on notion of blood and violence) is from at least 1297, but got a
boost 1793 with adoption of the red Phrygian cap (French bonnet rouge) as symbol of the French
Revolution. First specific political reference in English was 1848 (adj.), in news reports of the
Second French Republic (a.k.a. Red Republic). Red China is from 1934. The noun meaning radical,
communist is from 1851.


Aquarius

faint constellation and 11th zodiac sign, late Old English, from Latin aquarius, literally water
carrier, properly an adjective, pertaining to water (see aquarium); a loan-translation of Greek
Hydrokhoos the water-pourer, old Greek name of this constellation.   Aquarians were a former
Christian sect that used water instead of wine at the Lord's Supper. Age of Aquarius (1940) is an
astrological epoch supposed to have begun in the 1960s, embodying the traits of this sign and
characterized by world peace and human brotherhood. The term and the concept probably got a boost in
popular use when An Aquarian Exposition was used as the sub-name of the Woodstock Music &amp; Art
Fair (1969).


stealth (n.)

mid-13c., theft, action or practice of stealing, from a probable Old English *st&aelig;l&thorn;,
which is related to stelen (see steal (v.)), from Proto-Germanic *st&aelig;litho (cognates: Old
Norse stul&thorn;r), with Proto-Germanic abstract noun suffix *-itho (see -th (2)).    Compare
heal/health, weal/wealth. Sense of secret action developed c.1300, but the word also retained its
etymological sense into 18c. Got a boost as an adjective from stealth fighter, stealth bomber,
radar-evading U.S. military aircraft, activated 1983.


gay (adj.)

late 14c., full of joy, merry; light-hearted, carefree; also wanton, lewd, lascivious (late 12c. as
a surname, Philippus de Gay), from Old French gai joyful, happy; pleasant, agreeably charming;
forward, pert (12c.; compare Old Spanish gayo, Portuguese gaio, Italian gajo, probably French loan-
words). Ultimate origin disputed; perhaps from Frankish *gahi (related to Old High German wahi
pretty), though not all etymologists accept this. Meaning stately and beautiful; splendid and
showily dressed is from early 14c. The word gay by the 1890s had an overall tinge of promiscuity --
a gay house was a brothel. The suggestion of immorality in the word can be traced back at least to
the 1630s, if not to Chaucer:    But in oure bed he was so fressh and gay  Whan that he wolde han my
bele chose.    Slang meaning homosexual (adj.) begins to appear in psychological writing late 1940s,
evidently picked up from gay slang and not always easily distinguished from the older sense:
After discharge A.Z. lived for some time at home. He was not happy at the farm and went to a Western
city where he associated with a homosexual crowd, being gay, and wearing female clothes and makeup.
He always wished others would make advances to him. [Rorschach Research Exchange and Journal of
Projective Techniques, 1947, p.240]    The association with (male) homosexuality likely got a boost
from the term gay cat, used as far back as 1893 in American English for young hobo, one who is new
on the road, also one who sometimes does jobs.    A Gay Cat, said he, is a loafing laborer, who
works maybe a week, gets his wages and vagabonds about hunting for another 'pick and shovel' job. Do
you want to know where they got their monica (nickname) 'Gay Cat'? See, Kid, cats sneak about and
scratch immediately after chumming with you and then get gay (fresh). That's why we call them 'Gay
Cats'. [Leon Ray Livingston (America's Most Celebrated Tramp), Life and Adventures of A-no. 1, 1910]
Quoting a tramp named Frenchy, who might not have known the origin. Gay cats were severely and
cruelly abused by real tramps and bums, who considered them an inferior order of beings who begs of
and otherwise preys upon the bum -- as it were a jackal following up the king of beasts [Prof. John
J. McCook, Tramps, in The Public Treatment of Pauperism, 1893], but some accounts report certain
older tramps would dominate a gay cat and employ him as a sort of slave. In Sociology and Social
Research (1932-33) a paragraph on the gay cat phenomenon notes, Homosexual practices are more common
than rare in this group, and gey cat homosexual boy is attested in N. Erskine's 1933 dictionary of
Underworld &amp; Prison Slang (gey is a Scottish variant of gay).    The Dictionary of American
Slang reports that gay (adj.) was used by homosexuals, among themselves, in this sense since at
least 1920. Rawson [Wicked Words] notes a male prostitute using gay in reference to male homosexuals
(but also to female prostitutes) in London's notorious Cleveland Street Scandal of 1889. Ayto [20th
Century Words] calls attention to the ambiguous use of the word in the 1868 song The Gay Young Clerk
in the Dry Goods Store, by U.S. female impersonator Will S. Hays, but the word evidently was not
popularly felt in this sense by wider society until the 1950s at the earliest.    Gay (or gai) is
now widely used in French, Dutch, Danish, Japanese, Swedish, and Catalan with the same sense as the
English. It is coming into use in Germany and among the English-speaking upper classes of many
cosmopolitan areas in other countries. [John Boswell, Christianity, Social Tolerance, and
Homosexuality, 1980]   Gay as a noun meaning a (usually male) homosexual is attested from 1971; in
Middle English it meant excellent person, noble lady, gallant knight, also something gay or bright;
an ornament or badge (c.1400). As a slang word meaning bad, inferior, undesirable, from 2000.


