bouillon (n.)

1650s, from French bouillon (11c.), noun use of past participle of bouillir to boil, from Old French
bolir (see boil (v.)).


worthy (adj.)

mid-13c., having merit, from worth (n.) + -y (2). Old English had weor&thorn;ful in this sense.
Attested from late 14c. as a noun meaning person of merit (especially in Nine Worthies, famous men
of history and legend: Joshua, David, Judas Maccab&aelig;us, Hector, Alexander, Julius C&aelig;sar,
Arthur, Charlemagne, Godfrey of Bouillon -- three Jews, three gentiles, three Christians). Related:
Worthily; worthiness.


restaurant (n.)

1821, from French restaurant a restaurant, originally food that restores, noun use of present
participle of restaurer to restore or refresh, from Old French restorer (see restore).    In 1765 a
man by the name of Boulanger, also known as Champ d'Oiseaux or Chantoiseau, opened a shop near the
Louvre (on either the rue des Poulies or the rue Bailleul, depending on which authority one chooses
to believe). There he sold what he called restaurants or bouillons restaurants--that is, meat-based
consomm&#233;s intended to restore a person's strength. Ever since the Middle Ages the word
restaurant had been used to describe any of a variety of rich bouillons made with chicken, beef,
roots of one sort or another, onions, herbs, and, according to some recipes, spices, crystallized
sugar, toasted bread, barley, butter, and even exotic ingredients such as dried rose petals,
Damascus grapes, and amber. In order to entice customers into his shop, Boulanger had inscribed on
his window a line from the Gospels: Venite ad me omnes qui stomacho laboratis et ego vos restaurabo.
He was not content simply to serve bouillon, however. He also served leg of lamb in white sauce,
thereby infringing the monopoly of the caterers' guild. The guild filed suit, which to everyone's
astonishment ended in a judgment in favor of Boulanger. [Jean-Robert Pitte, The Rise of the
Restaurant, in Food: A Culinary History from Antiquity to the Present, English editor Albert
Sonnenfeld, transl. Clarissa Botsford, 1999, Columbia University Press]    Italian spelling
ristorante attested in English by 1925.


