bountiful (adj.)

late 15c., from bounty + -ful. Related: Bountifully.


large (adj.)

c.1200, bountiful, inclined to give or spend freely, also, of areas, great in expanse, from Old
French large broad, wide; generous, bounteous, from Latin largus abundant, copious, plentiful;
bountiful, liberal in giving, of unknown origin. Main modern meanings extensive; big in overall size
emerged 14c. An older sense of liberated, free from restraining influence is preserved in at large
(late 14c.). Adjective phrase larger-than-life first attested 1937 (bigger than life is from 1640s).


bounteous (adj.)

late 14c., from bounty + -ous; originally full of goodness, but always shading toward generous in
bestowing, a sense which logically might have been left to bountiful. Related: Bounteously;
bounteousness.


munificent (adj.)

1580s, back-formation from munificence, or else from Latin munificent-, stem of munificus bountiful,
liberal, generous (see munificence).


wistful (adj.)

1610s, closely attentive, perhaps from obsolete wistly intently (c.1500), of uncertain origin.
Perhaps formed on the model of wishful. Middle English wistful meant bountiful, well-supplied, from
Old English wist provisions. The meaning of longingly pensive, musing is by 1714. Related:
Wistfully; wistfulness.


munificence (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French munificence, from Latin munificentia bountifulness, liberality,
generosity, from stem of munificus generous, bountiful, liberal, literally present-making, from
munus gift or service, duty, office (see municipal) + unstressed stem of facere to do (see
factitious).


Alma Mater (n.)

late 14c., Latin, literally bountiful mother, a title Romans gave to goddesses, especially Ceres and
Cybele, from alma, fem. of almus nourishing, from alere to nourish (see old) + mater mother (see
mother (n.1)). First used 1710 in sense of one's university or school in reference to British
universities.


profuse (adj.)

early 15c., lavish, extravagant, from Latin profusus spread out, lavish, extravagant, literally
poured forth, noun use of past participle of profundere pour forth, from pro- forth (see pro-) +
fundere to pour (see found (v.2)). Meaning bountiful is from c.1600. Related: Profusely;
profuseness.


merry (adj.)

Old English myrge pleasing, agreeable, pleasant, sweet; pleasantly, melodiously, from Proto-Germanic
*murgijaz, which probably originally meant short-lasting, (compare Old High German murg short,
Gothic gamaurgjan to shorten), from PIE *mreghu- short (see brief (adj.)). The only exact cognate
for meaning outside English was Middle Dutch mergelijc joyful.    Connection to pleasure is likely
via notion of making time fly, that which makes the time seem to pass quickly (compare German
Kurzweil pastime, literally a short time; Old Norse skemta to amuse, entertain, amuse oneself, from
skamt, neuter of skammr short). There also was a verbal form in Old English, myrgan be merry,
rejoice. For vowel evolution, see bury (v.).Bot vchon enle we wolde were fyf, &thorn;e mo &thorn;e
myryer. [c.1300]The word had much wider senses in Middle English, such as pleasant-sounding (of
animal voices), fine (of weather), handsome (of dress), pleasant-tasting (of herbs). Merry-bout an
incident of sexual intercourse was low slang from 1780. Merry-begot illegitimate (adj.), bastard
(n.) is from 1785. Merrie England (now frequently satirical or ironic) is 14c. meri ingland,
originally in a broader sense of bountiful, prosperous. Merry Monday was a 16c. term for the Monday
before Shrove Tuesday (Mardi Gras).


