bourgeois (adj.)

1560s, of the French middle class, from French bourgeois, from Old French burgeis, borjois town
dweller (see bourgeoisie). Sense of socially or aesthetically conventional is from 1764; in
communist and socialist writing, as a noun, a capitalist (1883).It is better to be a good ordinary
bourgeois than a bad ordinary bohemian. [Aldous Huxley, 1930]


bourgeoise (adj.)

proper French fem. of bourgeois (q.v.).


bourgeoisie (n.)

1707, body of freemen in a French town; the French middle class, from French bourgeois, from Old
French burgeis, borjois (12c.) town dweller (as distinct from peasant), from borc town, village,
from Frankish *burg city (see borough). Communist use for the capitalist class generally attested
from 1886.


Biedermeier

1854, from German, from Gottlieb Biedermeier, name of a fictitious writer of stodgy poems (invented
by Ludwig Eichrodt as a satire on bourgeois taste); the name generally applied to styles prevalent
in Germany 1815-48; also conventional, bourgeois.


burgess (n.)

c.1200, burgeis citizen of a borough, from Old French borjois (Modern French bourgeois), from Late
Latin burgensis (see bourgeois). Applied from late 15c. to borough representatives in Parliament and
used later in Virginia and other colonies used to denote members of the legislative body, while in
Pennsylvania, etc., it meant member of the governing council of a borough.


burgeois

obsolete form of bourgeois.


white bread (n.)

c.1300, as opposed to darker whole-grain type, from white (adj.) + bread (n.). Its popularity among
middle-class America led to the slang adjectival sense of conventional, bourgeois (c.1980). Old
English had hwitehlaf.


petit (adj.)

mid-14c., trifling, from Old French petit small, little, young, few in numbers (11c.), probably from
stem of Late Latin pitinnus small, of uncertain origin; it corresponds to no known Latin form and
perhaps is from a Celtic root pett- part, piece, bit also found in Italian pezza, English piece.
Attested as a surname from 1086. Replaced by petty in most usages, except in established forms such
as petit bourgeois conventional middle-class (1832; used in English by Charlotte Bront&#235; earlier
than by Marx or Engels); petit mal (1842, literally little evil, mild form of epilepsy), and petit
four (1884), which in French means little oven, from Old French four oven, from Latin furnus.


