bout (n.)

1540s, from Middle English bught, probably from an unrecorded Old English variant of byht a bend,
from Proto-Germanic *bukhta- (see bight (n.)). Sense evolved from a circuit of any kind (as of a
plow) to a round at any kind of exercise (1570s), a round at fighting (1590s), a fit of drinking
(1660s).


bender (n.)

late 15c., instrument for bending, agent noun from bend (v.). Slang meaning drinking bout is
American English, attested from 1846, perhaps from the Scottish sense of a hard drinker (1728).


set-to (n.)

bout, fight, 1743, originally pugilistic slang, from verbal phrase; see set (v.) + to.


go-round (n.)

act of going around, originally especially a merry-go-round, 1886, from go (v.) + round (adv.).
Figurative sense of argument, bout, fight, etc. is from 1891.


carousal (n.)

1735, from carouse (v.) + -al (2). The earlier noun was simply carouse a drinking bout (1550s).


row (n.2)

noisy commotion, 1746, Cambridge University slang, of uncertain origin, perhaps related to rousel
drinking bout (c.1600), a shortened form of carousal. Klein suggests a back-formation from rouse
(n.), mistaken as a plural (compare pea from pease).


binge (n.)

1854, drinking bout, also (v.) drink heavily, soak up alcohol; dialectal use of binge soak (a wooden
vessel). Noted originally as a Northampton dialect word. Sense extended c. World War I to include
eating as well as drinking. Related: Binged; binging.


workout (n.)

1909, boxing bout for training, from work (v.) + out (adv.). General sense of spell of strenuous
physical exercise is attested by 1922. Verbal phrase work out solve (a problem, etc.) is from 1848.
Sense of succeed attested by 1909.


bevy (n.)

early 15c., collective noun of quails and ladies, from Anglo-French bev&eacute;e, of unknown origin.
One supposed definition of the word is a drinking bout, but this is perhaps a misprint of bever,
from Old French beivre (see beverage). Still, it's possible that the original sense could be a
company of birds gathered at a puddle or pool for drinking or bathing.


hiccups (n.)

a bout of hiccupping, by 1723; see hiccup (n.). This often also was called hiccup or the hiccup. An
earlier word for it (noun and verb) was yex, imitative, from Old English gesca, geosca.


abut (v.)

mid-13c., to end at, to border on, from Old French aboter join end to end, touch upon (13c.), from
&agrave; to (see ad-) + bout end (see butt (n.3)). Related: Abutted; abutting.


butt (n.3)

target of a joke, 1610s, originally target for shooting practice (mid-14c.), from Old French but
aim, goal, end, target (of an arrow, etc.), 13c., which seems to be a fusion of Old French words for
end (bout) and aim, goal (but), both ultimately from Germanic. The latter is from Frankish *but
stump, stock, block, or some other Germanic source (compare Old Norse butr log of wood), which would
connect it with butt (n.1).


Scilly

isles off Cornwall, of unknown origin. Pliny has Silumnus, Silimnis. Perhaps connected with the
Roman god Sulis (compare Aquae sulis Bath). The -y might be Old Norse ey island The -c- added
16c.-17c. [A]bout the only certain thing that can be said is that the c of the modern spelling is
not original but was added for distinction from ModE silly as this word developed in meaning from
'happy, blissful' to 'foolish.' [Victor Watts, Cambridge Dictionary of English Place-Names, 2004].


alive (adj.)

c.1200, from Old English on life in living. The fuller form on live was still current 17c. Alive and
kicking alert, vigorous, attested from 1859; The allusion is to a child in the womb after quickening
[Farmer]. Used emphatically, especially with man; as in:    [A]bout a thousand gentlemen having
bought his almanacks for this year, merely to find what he said against me, at every line they read
they would lift up their eyes, and cry out betwixt rage and laughter, they were sure no man alive
ever writ such damned stuff as this. [Jonathan Swift, Bickerstaff's Vindication, 1709]    Thus
abstracted as an expletive, man alive! (1845).


distance (n.)

late 13c., quarrel, estrangement, discord, strife, from Old French destance (13c.), from Latin
distantia a standing apart, from distantem (nominative distans) standing apart, separate, distant,
present participle of distare stand apart, from dis- apart, off (see dis-) + stare to stand (see
stet).    Meaning remoteness, space between things or places is late 14c. The figurative sense of
aloofness is the same as in stand-offish. Phrase go the distance (1930s) seems to be originally from
the prize ring, where the word meant scheduled length of a bout.


blow (n.1)

hard hit, mid-15c., blowe, from northern and East Midlands dialects, perhaps from Middle Dutch
blouwen to beat, a common Germanic word of unknown origin (compare German bleuen, Gothic bliggwan to
strike). Influenced in English by blow (v.1). In reference to descriptions or accounts, blow-by-blow
is recorded from 1921, American English, originally of prize-fight broadcasts.    LIKE a hungry
kitten loves its saucer of warm milk, so do radio fans joyfully listen to the blow-by-blow broadcast
description of a boxing bout. [The Wireless Age, December 1922]


bolt (n.)

Old English bolt short, stout arrow with a heavy head; also crossbow for throwing bolts, from Proto-
Germanic *bultas (cognates: Old Norse bolti, Danish bolt, Dutch bout, German Bolzen), perhaps from
PIE root *bheld- to knock, strike (cognates: Lithuanian beldu I knock, baldas pole for striking).
Applied since Middle English to other short metal rods (especially those with knobbed ends). From
the notion of an arrow's flight comes the lightning bolt (1530s). A bolt of canvas (c.1400) was so
called for its shape. Adverbial phrase bolt upright is from late 14c.


round (n.)

early 14c., a spherical body, from round (adj.) and Old French roond. Compare Dutch rond, Danish and
Swedish rund, German runde, all nouns from adjectives. Meaning large round piece of beef is recorded
from 1650s. Theatrical sense (in phrase in the round) is recorded from 1944. Sense of circuit
performed by a sentinel is from 1590s; that of recurring course of time is from 1710. Meaning song
sung by two or more, beginning at different times is from 1520s. Golfing sense attested from 1775.
Meaning quantity of liquor served to a company at one time is from 1630s; that of single bout in a
fight or boxing match is from 1812; single discharge of a firearm is from 1725. Sense of recurring
session of meetings or negotiations is from 1964.


potion (n.)

c.1300, pocioun medicinal drink, from Old French pocion potion, draught, medicine (12c.), from Latin
potionem (nominative potio) a potion, a drinking, also poisonous draught, magic potion, from potus,
irregular past participle of potare to drink, from PIE root *po(i)- to drink (cognates: Sanskrit
pati drinks, panam beverage; Greek pinein to drink, poton that which one drinks, potos drinking
bout; Old Church Slavonic piti to drink, pivo beverage). Potus as a past participle adjective in
Latin meant drunken.


fur (n.)

late 14c. trimming or lining of a garment (implied c.1300 in surname Furhode fur hood), probably
from Old French fourrer to line, sheathe, from fuerre sheath, covering, from Frankish *fodr or
another Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic *fodram sheath (cognates: Old Frisian foder coat
lining, Old High German fotar a lining, German Futter, Gothic fodr sword sheath).    Sense
transferred in English from the notion of a lining to the thing used in it. First applied early 15c.
to animal hair still on the animal.  I'le make the fur Flie 'bout the eares of the old Cur. [Butler,
Hudibras, 1663]  As a verb, from c.1300, from Old French fourrer. Related: Furred; furring.


achieve (v.)

early 14c., from Old French achever (12c.) to finish, accomplish, complete, from phrase &agrave;
chef (venir) at an end, finished, or Vulgar Latin *accapare, from Late Latin ad caput (venire); both
the French and Late Latin phrases meaning literally to come to a head, from stem of Latin caput head
(see capitulum).    The Lat. caput, towards the end of the Empire, and in Merov[ingian] times, took
the sense of an end, whence the phrase ad caput venire, in the sense of to come to an end ....
Venire ad caput naturally produced the Fr. phrase venir &agrave; chef = venir &agrave; bout. ...
From this chief, O.Fr. form of chef (q.v.) in sense of term, end, comes the Fr. compd. achever =
venir &agrave; chef, to end, finish. [Auguste Brachet, An Etymological Dictionary of the French
Language, transl. G.W. Kitchin, Oxford, 1878]    Related: Achieved; achieving.


spree (n.)

a frolic, drinking bout, 1804, slang, earliest use in Scottish dialect works, of uncertain origin.
Perhaps [Barnhart] an alteration of French esprit lively wit (see esprit). According to Klein, Irish
spre seems to be a loan-word from Old Norse sprakr. Watkins proposes a possible origin as an
alteration of Scots spreath cattle raid, from Gaelic spr&#233;dh, spr&#233;, cattle; wealth, from
Middle Irish preit, preid, booty, ultimately from Latin praeda plunder, booty (see prey (n.)).
The splore is a frolic, a merry meeting. In the slang language of the inhabitants of St Giles's, in
London, it is called a spree or a go. [Note in Select Scottish Songs, Ancient and Modern, vol. II,
London, 1810]    In Foote's comedy The Maid of Bath (1794) the word appears as a Scottish dialect
pronunciation of spry:  'When I intermarried with Sir Launcelot Coldstream, I was en siek a spree
lass as yoursel; and the baronet bordering upon his grand climacteric;'  etc.


merry (adj.)

Old English myrge pleasing, agreeable, pleasant, sweet; pleasantly, melodiously, from Proto-Germanic
*murgijaz, which probably originally meant short-lasting, (compare Old High German murg short,
Gothic gamaurgjan to shorten), from PIE *mreghu- short (see brief (adj.)). The only exact cognate
for meaning outside English was Middle Dutch mergelijc joyful.    Connection to pleasure is likely
via notion of making time fly, that which makes the time seem to pass quickly (compare German
Kurzweil pastime, literally a short time; Old Norse skemta to amuse, entertain, amuse oneself, from
skamt, neuter of skammr short). There also was a verbal form in Old English, myrgan be merry,
rejoice. For vowel evolution, see bury (v.).Bot vchon enle we wolde were fyf, &thorn;e mo &thorn;e
myryer. [c.1300]The word had much wider senses in Middle English, such as pleasant-sounding (of
animal voices), fine (of weather), handsome (of dress), pleasant-tasting (of herbs). Merry-bout an
incident of sexual intercourse was low slang from 1780. Merry-begot illegitimate (adj.), bastard
(n.) is from 1785. Merrie England (now frequently satirical or ironic) is 14c. meri ingland,
originally in a broader sense of bountiful, prosperous. Merry Monday was a 16c. term for the Monday
before Shrove Tuesday (Mardi Gras).


