braggart (n.)

1570s, from French bragard (16c.), with pejorative ending (see -ard) + Middle French braguer to
flaunt, brag, perhaps originally to show off clothes, especially breeches, from brague breeches (see
bracket). There may be an element of codpiece-flaunting in all this.    The word in English has been
at least influenced by brag (v.), even if, as some claim, it is unrelated to it. Bragger arrogant or
boastful person, agent noun from brag (v.), attested in English from late 14c.


blowhard (n.)

also blow-hard, 1840, a sailor's word (from 1790 as a nickname for a sailor), perhaps not originally
primarily meaning braggart; from blow (v.1) + hard (adv.). An adjective sense of boastful appeared
c.1855, and may be a separate formation leading to a modified noun use.


bouncer (n.)

mid-19c. in various senses, noun derivative of bounce (v.) in its original sense of thump, hit.
Earliest attested is boaster, bully, braggart (1833); also large example of its kind (1842);
enforcer of order in a bar or saloon (1865, American English, originally colloquial).  The Bouncer
is merely the English chucker out. When liberty verges on license and gaiety on wanton delirium, the
Bouncer selects the gayest of the gay, and -- bounces him! [London Daily News, July 26, 1883]


nugatory (adj.)

trifling, of no value, c.1600, from Latin nugatorius worthless, trifling, futile, from nugator
jester, trifler, braggart, from nugatus, past participle of nugari to trifle, jest, play the fool,
from nug&aelig; jokes, jests, trifles, of unknown origin.


fanfare (n.)

c.1600, from French fanfare, from fanfarer blow a fanfare, perhaps echoic, or perhaps borrowed (with
Spanish fanfarron braggart, and Italian fanfano babbler) from Arabic farfar chatterer, of imitative
origin.


scaramouche (n.)

1660s, name of a cowardly braggart (supposed by some to represent a Spanish don) in traditional
Italian comedy, from Italian Scaramuccia, literally skirmish, from schermire to fence, from a
Germanic source (such as Old High German skirmen defend); see skirmish (n.). According to OED, a
vogue word in late 17c. London due to the popularity of Italian actor Tiberio Fiurelli (1608-1694)
in the part.


brag (v.)

mid-14c., braggen to make a loud sound, also to talk boastfully, of obscure origin, perhaps related
to bray of a trumpet, or related to the Middle English adjective brag ostentatious, proud; spirited,
brave (early 14c.), which probably is from Celtic. Other sources suggest Old Norse bragr the best,
the toast (of anything), also poetry. Also see braggart for another possibility. Related: Bragged;
bragging.


wiseacre (n.)

1590s, partial translation of Middle Dutch wijssegger soothsayer (with no derogatory connotation),
probably altered by association with Middle Dutch segger sayer from Old High German wizzago prophet,
from wizzan to know, from Proto-Germanic *wit- to know (see wit (v.)). The deprecatory sense of one
who pretends to know everything may have come through confusion with obsolete English segger sayer,
which also had a sense of braggart (mid-15c.).


out (adv.)

Old English ut out, without, outside, common Germanic (Old Norse, Old Frisian, Old Saxon, Gothic ut,
Middle Dutch uut, Dutch uit, Old High German uz, German aus), from PIE root *ud- up, out, up away
(cognates: Sanskrit ut up, out, uttarah higher, upper, later, northern; Avestan uz- up, out, Old
Irish ud- out, Latin usque all the way to, without interruption, Greek hysteros the latter, Russian
vy- out). Meaning into public notice is from 1540s. As an adjective from c.1200. Meaning unconscious
is attested from 1898, originally in boxing. Sense of not popular or modern is from 1966. As a
preposition from mid-13c.    Sense in baseball (1860) was earlier in cricket (1746). Adverbial
phrase out-and-out thoroughly is attested from early 14c.; adjective usage is attested from 1813;
out-of-the-way (adj.) remote, secluded is attested from late 15c. Out-of-towner one not from a
certain place is from 1911. Shakespeare's It out-herods Herod (Hamlet) reflects Herod as stock
braggart and bully in old religious drama and was widely imitated 19c. Out to lunch insane is
student slang from 1955; out of this world excellent is from 1938; out of sight excellent, superior
is from 1891.


