brag (n.)

late 14c., pomp; arrogance, pride; see brag (v.); the exact relationship of the forms is uncertain.
Meaning that which is boasted is from 1530s. As a once-popular poker-like card game, from 1734.


braggart (n.)

1570s, from French bragard (16c.), with pejorative ending (see -ard) + Middle French braguer to
flaunt, brag, perhaps originally to show off clothes, especially breeches, from brague breeches (see
bracket). There may be an element of codpiece-flaunting in all this.    The word in English has been
at least influenced by brag (v.), even if, as some claim, it is unrelated to it. Bragger arrogant or
boastful person, agent noun from brag (v.), attested in English from late 14c.


brag (v.)

mid-14c., braggen to make a loud sound, also to talk boastfully, of obscure origin, perhaps related
to bray of a trumpet, or related to the Middle English adjective brag ostentatious, proud; spirited,
brave (early 14c.), which probably is from Celtic. Other sources suggest Old Norse bragr the best,
the toast (of anything), also poetry. Also see braggart for another possibility. Related: Bragged;
bragging.


braggadocio (n.)

Spenser's coinage, 1590, as a name for his personification of vainglory, from brag, with
augmentative ending by analogy to the Italian words then in vogue in England. In general use by 1594
for an empty swaggerer; of the talk of such persons, from 1734.


poker (n.2)

card game, 1834, American English, of unknown origin, perhaps from the first element of German
Pochspiel, name of a card game similar to poker, from pochen to brag as a bluff, literally to knock,
rap (see poke (v.)). A popular alternative theory traces the word to French poque, also said to have
been a card game resembling poker. [B]ut without documentation these explanations are mere
speculation [Barnhart]. The earlier version of the game in English was called brag. Slang poker face
(n.) deadpan is from 1874.    A good player is cautious or bold by turns, according to his estimate
of the capacities of his adversaries, and to the impression he wants to make on them. 7. It follows
that the possession of a good poker face is an advantage. No one who has any pretensions to good
play will betray the value of his hand by gesture, change of countenance, or any other symptom.
[Cavendish, Round Games at Cards, dated 1875]   <hr />   To any one not very well up in these games,
some parts of the book are at first sight rather puzzling. It follows, we read in one passage, that
the possession of a good poker face (the italics are the author's) is an advantage. If this had been
said by a Liverpool rough of his wife, the meaning would have been clear to every one. Cavendish,
however, does not seem to be writing especially for Lancashire. [review of above, Saturday Review,
Dec. 26, 1874]


boast (v.)

early 14c., to brag, speak arrogantly; from the same source as boast (n.). Related: Boasted;
boasting.


swagger (v.)

1580s, to strut in a defiant or insolent manner; earliest recorded usages are in Shakespeare
(Midsummer Night's Dream, 2 Henry IV, King Lear), probably a frequentative form of swag (v.) to
sway. Meaning to boast or brag is from 1590s. Related: Swaggered; swaggering. The noun is attested
from 1725.


carp (v.)

complain, early 13c., originally to talk, from Old Norse karpa to brag, of unknown origin; meaning
turned toward find fault with (late 14c.), probably by influence of Latin carpere to slander,
revile, literally to pluck (see harvest (n.)). Related: Carped; carping.


glory (v.)

mid-14c., rejoice, from Old French gloriier and directly from Latin gloriari to boast, vaunt, brag,
pride oneself, from gloria (see glory). Related: Gloried; glorying.


brasserie (n.)

1864, brewery, from French brasserie, from Middle French brasser to brew, from Latin brace grain
used to prepare malt, said by Pliny to be a Celtic word (compare Welsh brag malt).


bluff (v.)

1839, American English, poker term, perhaps from Dutch bluffen to brag, boast, or verbluffen to
baffle, mislead. An identical word meant blindfold, hoodwink in 1670s, but the sense evolution and
connection are unclear; OED calls it one of the numerous cant terms ... which arose between the
Restoration and the reign of Queen Anne. Extended or figurative sense by 1854. Related: Bluffed;
bluffing.


braid (n.)

in part from stem found in Old English gebr&#230;gd craft, fraud, gebregd commotion, Old Norse
brag&#240; deed, trick, and in part from or influenced by related braid (v.). Earliest senses are a
deceit, stratagem, trick (c.1200), sudden or quick movement (c.1300); meaning anything plaited or
entwined (especially hair) is from 1520s.


gasconade

1709 (n.); 1727 (v.), from French gasconade (see Gascon + -ade); from gasconner (16c.) to boast,
brag, literally to talk like a Gascon.


bravado (n.)

1580s, from French bravade bragging, boasting, from Italian bravata bragging, boasting (16c.), from
bravare brag, boast, be defiant, from bravo (see brave (adj.)). The English word was influenced in
form by Spanish words ending in -ado.


quack (n.1)

medical charlatan, 1630s, short for quacksalver (1570s), from obsolete Dutch quacksalver (modern
kwakzalver), literally hawker of salve, from Middle Dutch quacken to brag, boast, literally to croak
(see quack (v.)) + salf salve, salven to rub with ointment (see salve (v.)). As an adjective from
1650s. The oldest attested form of the word in this sense in English is as a verb, to play the quack
(1620s). The Dutch word also is the source of German Quacksalber, Danish kvaksalver, Swedish
kvacksalvare.


boast (n.)

mid-13c., arrogance, presumption, pride, vanity; c.1300, a brag, boastful speech, from Anglo-French
bost ostentation, probably via Scandinavian (compare Norwegian baus proud, bold, daring), from
Proto-Germanic *bausia to blow up, puff up, swell (cognates: Middle High German bus swelling,
dialectal German baustern to swell; Middle Dutch bose, Dutch boos evil, wicked, angry, Old High
German bosi worthless, slanderous, German b&ouml;se evil, bad, angry), from PIE *bhou-, variant of
root *beu-, *bheu- to grow, swell (see bull (n.2)).    The notion apparently is of being puffed up
with pride; compare Old English belgan to become angry, offend, provoke, belg anger, arrogance, from
the same root as bellows and belly (n.). Related: Boasted; boasting. An Old English word for
boasting was micelsprecende, big talk.


