braid (n.)

in part from stem found in Old English gebr&#230;gd craft, fraud, gebregd commotion, Old Norse
brag&#240; deed, trick, and in part from or influenced by related braid (v.). Earliest senses are a
deceit, stratagem, trick (c.1200), sudden or quick movement (c.1300); meaning anything plaited or
entwined (especially hair) is from 1520s.


braid (v.)

to plait, knit, weave, twist together, c.1200, breidan, from Old English bregdan to move quickly,
pull, shake, swing, throw (in wrestling), draw (a sword); bend, weave, knit, join together; change
color, vary; scheme, feign, pretend (class III strong verb, past tense br&aelig;gd, past participle
brogden), from Proto-Germanic *bregthan make sudden jerky movements from side to side (compare Old
Norse breg&eth;a to brandish, turn about, braid; Old Saxon bregdan to weave; Dutch breien to knit;
Old High German brettan to draw, weave, braid), from PIE root *bherek- to gleam, flash (compare
Sanskrit bhrasate flames, blazes, shines). In English the verb survives only in the narrow
definition of plait hair. Related: Braided; braiding.


braids (n.)

1520s; see braid (n.).


ply (v.1)

work with, use, late 14c., shortened form of applien join to, apply (see apply). The core of this is
Latin plicare to lay, fold, twist, from PIE root *plek- to plait, twist (cognates: Greek plekein to
plait, twine, plektos twisted; Latin plectere (past participle plexus) to plait, braid, intertwine;
Old Church Slavonic plesti to braid, plait, twist; Gothic flahta braid; Old English fleax cloth made
with flax, linen).    Sense of travel regularly is first 1803, perhaps from earlier sense steer a
course (1550s). Related: Plied; plies; plying.


hypnotism (n.)

1843, short for neuro-hypnotism (1842), coined by Dr. James Braid of Manchester, England, from
hypnotic + -ism. In the same work (1843) Braid coined the verb hypnotize.


tress (n.)

c.1300, long lock of hair, from Old French tresse a plait or braid of hair (12c.), of uncertain
origin, perhaps from Vulgar Latin *trichia braid, rope, from Greek trikhia rope, from thrix
(genitive trikhos) hair. Related: Tresses.


plexus (n.)

1680s, Modern Latin, literally braid, network, noun use of past participle of Latin plectere to
twine, braid, fold (see complex (adj.)); used of a network, such as solar plexus network of nerves
in the abdomen (see solar). Related: Plexal.


boondoggle (n.)

1935, American English, of uncertain origin, popularized during the New Deal as a contemptuous word
for make-work projects for the unemployed. Said to have been a pioneer word for gadget; it also was
by 1932 a Boy Scout term for a kind of woven braid.


pigtail (n.)

1680s, tobacco in a twisted roll, from pig (n.) + tail (n.). So called from resemblance. Meaning
braid of hair is from 1753, when it was a fashion among soldiers and sailors. Applied variously to
other objects or parts thought to resemble this in appearance.


jute (n.)

plant fiber, 1746, from Bengali jhuto, from Sanskrit juta-s twisted hair, related to jata braid of
hair, of unknown origin, probably from a non-Indo-European language.


bridle (n.)

Old English bridel bridle, rein, curb, restraint, related to bregdan move quickly, from Proto-
Germanic *bregdilaz (see braid (v.)).


queue (v.)

to stand in a line, 1893, from queue (n.). Earlier put hair up in a braid (1777). Related: Queued;
queueing. Churchill is said to have coined Queuetopia (1950), to describe Britain under Labour or
Socialist rule.


upbraid (v.)

Old English upbregdan bring forth as a ground for censure, from up (adv.) + bregdan move quickly,
intertwine (see braid (v.)). Similar formation in Middle Swedish upbrygdha. Meaning scold is first
attested late 13c. Related: Upbraided; upbraiding.


plait (v.)

late 14c., to fold, gather in pleats, also to braid or weave, from Old French pleir to fold, variant
of ploier, ployer to fold, bend, from Latin plicare to fold (see ply (v.1)). Related: Plaited;
plaiting.


bream (n.)

freshwater fish, late 14c., from Old French braisme bream, from Frankish *brahsima, from West
Germanic *brahsm- (compare Old High German brahsima), perhaps from Proto-Germanic base *brehwan to
shine, glitter, sparkle, from PIE *bherek- (see braid (v.)).


embroider (v.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French enbrouder, from en- in (see en- (1)) + broisder embroider, from
Frankish *brozdon, from Proto-Germanic *bruzdajan. Spelling with -oi- is from c.1600, perhaps by
influence of broiden, irregular alternative Middle English past participle of braid (v.). Related:
Embroidered; embroidering.


hypnotic (adj.)

1620s, inducing sleep, originally used of drugs, from French hypnotique (16c.) inclined to sleep,
soporific, from Late Latin hypnoticus, from Greek hypnotikos inclined to sleep, putting to sleep,
sleepy, from hypnoun put to sleep, from hypnos sleep (see somnolence). Modern sense of pertaining to
an induced trance first recorded in English 1843, along with hypnotist, hypnotize, both coined by
Dr. James Braid. Related: Hypnotical; hypnotically.


complex (adj.)

1650s, composed of parts, from French complexe complicated, complex, intricate (17c.), from Latin
complexus surrounding, encompassing, past participle of complecti to encircle, embrace, in
transferred use, to hold fast, master, comprehend, from com- with (see com-) + plectere to weave,
braid, twine, entwine, from PIE *plek-to-, from root *plek- to plait (see ply (v.1)). The meaning
not easily analyzed is first recorded 1715. Complex sentence is attested from 1881.


queue (n.)

late 15c., band attached to a letter with seals dangling on the free end, from French queue a tail,
from Old French cue, coe tail (12c., also penis), from Latin coda (dialectal variant or alternative
form of cauda) tail, of unknown origin. Also in literal use in 16c. English, tail of a beast,
especially in heraldry. The Middle English metaphoric extension to line of dancers (c.1500) led to
extended sense of line of people, etc. (1837). Also used 18c. in sense of braid of hair hanging down
behind (first attested 1748).


perplex (v.)

late 14c. as an adjective, perplexed, puzzled, bewildered, from Latin perplexus involved, confused,
intricate; but Latin had no corresponding verb *perplectere. The Latin compound would be per through
(see per) + plexus entangled, past participle of plectere to twine, braid, fold (see complex
(adj.)).    The form of the English adjective shifted to perplexed by late 15c., probably to conform
to other past participle adjectives. The verb is latest attested of the group, in 1590s, evidently a
back-formation from the adjective. Related: Perplexing, which well describes the history of the
word.


flask (n.)

mid-14c., from Medieval Latin flasco container, bottle, from Late Latin flasconem bottle, perhaps
from a Germanic source (compare Old English flasce, Old High German flaska, Middle Dutch flasce,
German Flasche bottle), and if so, perhaps originally meaning a bottle plaited round, case bottle
(compare Old High German flechtan to weave, Old English fleohtan to braid, plait), from Proto-
Germanic base *fleh- (see flax).    Another theory traces it to a metathesis of Latin vasculum. The
assumption that the word is of Teut. origin is chronologically legitimate, and presents no
difficulty exc. the absence of any satisfactory etymology [OED].


text (n.)

late 14c., wording of anything written, from Old French texte, Old North French tixte text, book;
Gospels (12c.), from Medieval Latin textus the Scriptures, text, treatise, in Late Latin written
account, content, characters used in a document, from Latin textus style or texture of a work,
literally thing woven, from past participle stem of texere to weave, to join, fit together, braid,
interweave, construct, fabricate, build, from PIE root *teks- to weave, to fabricate, to make; make
wicker or wattle framework (see texture (n.)).    An ancient metaphor: thought is a thread, and the
raconteur is a spinner of yarns -- but the true storyteller, the poet, is a weaver. The scribes made
this old and audible abstraction into a new and visible fact. After long practice, their work took
on such an even, flexible texture that they called the written page a textus, which means cloth.
[Robert Bringhurst, The Elements of Typographic Style]


spin (v.)

Old English spinnan (transitive) draw out and twist fibers into thread, strong verb (past tense
spann, past participle spunnen), from Proto-Germanic *spenwan (cognates: Old Norse and Old Frisian
spinna, Danish spinde, Dutch spinnen, Old High German spinnan, German spinnen, Gothic spinnan), from
PIE *spen-wo-, from root *(s)pen- to draw, stretch, spin (cognates: Armenian henum I weave; Greek
patos garment, literally that which is spun; Lithuanian pinu I plait, braid, spandau I spin; Middle
Welsh cy-ffiniden spider; see span (v.)).    Intransitive senses of to form threads from fibrous
stuff; to twist, writhe developed in late Old English. Transitive sense of cause to turn rapidly is
from 1610s; intransitive meaning revolve, turn around rapidly first recorded 1660s. Meaning attempt
to influence reporters' minds after an event has taken place but before they have written about it
seems to have risen to popularity in the 1984 U.S. presidential campaign; as in spin doctor, first
attested 1984.


