brandish (v.)

mid-14c., from Old French brandiss-, present participle stem of brandir to flourish (a sword)
(12c.), from brant blade of a sword, prow of a ship, of Frankish origin (see brand (n.)). Related:
Brandished; brandishing.


flourish (v.)

c.1300, to blossom, grow, from Old French floriss-, stem of florir blossom, flower, bloom, flourish,
from Latin florere to bloom, blossom, flower, figuratively to flourish, be prosperous, from flos a
flower (see flora).    Metaphoric sense of thrive is mid-14c. Meaning to brandish (a weapon) first
attested late 14c. Related: Flourished; flourishing.


ventilate (v.)

early 15c., to scatter, disperse (as the wind does), from Latin ventilatus, past participle of
ventilare to brandish, toss in the air, winnow, fan, agitate, set in motion, from ventulus a breeze,
diminutive of ventus wind (see wind (n.1)). Original notion is of cleaning grain by tossing it in
the air and letting the wind blow away the chaff. Meaning supply a room with fresh air first
recorded 1743 (see ventilation). Formerly with diverse slang senses, including shoot (someone),
recorded from 1875. Related: Ventilated; ventilating.


pulse (n.1)

a throb, a beat, early 14c., from Old French pous, pulse (late 12c., Modern French pouls) and
directly from Latin pulsus (in pulsus venarum beating from the blood in the veins), past participle
of pellere to push, drive, from PIE *pel- (6) to thrust, strike, drive (cognates: Greek pallein to
wield, brandish, swing, pelemizein to shake, cause to tremble). Extended usages from 16c. Figurative
use for life, vitality, essential energy is from 1530s.


swoop (v.)

1560s, to move or walk in a stately manner, apparently from a dialectal survival of Old English
swapan to sweep, brandish, dash, from Proto-Germanic *swaip-, from PIE root *swei- (2) to bend, turn
(see swivel (n.)). Meaning pounce upon with a sweeping movement first recorded 1630s (see swoop
(n.)). Spelling with -oo- may have been influenced by Scottish and northern England dialectal soop
to sweep, from Old Norse sopa to sweep. Related: Swooped; swooping.


skirmish (n.)

late 14c., from Old French escarmouche skirmish, from Italian scaramuccia, earlier schermugio,
probably from a Germanic source (compare Old High German skirmen to protect, defend), with a
diminutive or depreciatory suffix, from Proto-Germanic *skerm-, from PIE *(s)ker- (1) to cut (see
shear (v.)).    Influenced in Middle English by a separate verb skirmysshen to brandish a weapon,
from Old French eskirmiss-, stem of eskirmir to fence, from Frankish *skirmjan, from the same
Germanic source. Compare scrimmage. Other modern Germanic forms have an additional diminutive affix:
German scharm&#252;tzel, Dutch schermutseling, Danish skj&#230;rmydsel. Skirmish-line attested by
1864.


Shakespeare

surname recorded from 1248; it means a spearman. This was a common type of English surname
(Shakelance (1275), Shakeshaft (1332)). Shake (v.) in the sense of to brandish or flourish (a
weapon) is attested from late Old English  Heo sc&aelig;ken on heore honden speren swi&eth;e
stronge.  [Laymon, Brut, c. 1205]  Compare also shake-buckler a swaggerer, a bully; shake-rag ragged
fellow, tatterdemalion. Never a name in English nomenclature so simple or so certain in origin. It
is exactly what it looks -- Shakespear [Bardsley, Dictionary of English and Welsh Surnames, 1901].
Nevertheless, speculation flourishes. The name was variously written in contemporary records, also
Shakespear, Shakespere, the last form being the one adopted by the New Shakespere Society of London
and the first edition of the OED. Related: Shakespearian (1753); Shakesperean (1796); Shakesperian
(1755).


braid (v.)

to plait, knit, weave, twist together, c.1200, breidan, from Old English bregdan to move quickly,
pull, shake, swing, throw (in wrestling), draw (a sword); bend, weave, knit, join together; change
color, vary; scheme, feign, pretend (class III strong verb, past tense br&aelig;gd, past participle
brogden), from Proto-Germanic *bregthan make sudden jerky movements from side to side (compare Old
Norse breg&eth;a to brandish, turn about, braid; Old Saxon bregdan to weave; Dutch breien to knit;
Old High German brettan to draw, weave, braid), from PIE root *bherek- to gleam, flash (compare
Sanskrit bhrasate flames, blazes, shines). In English the verb survives only in the narrow
definition of plait hair. Related: Braided; braiding.


wind (v.1)

move by turning and twisting, Old English windan to turn, twist, plait, curl, brandish, swing (class
III strong verb; past tense wand, past participle wunden), from Proto-Germanic *windan to wind
(cognates: Old Saxon windan, Old Norse vinda, Old Frisian winda, Dutch winden, Old High German
wintan, German winden, Gothic windan to wind), from PIE *wendh- to turn, wind, weave (cognates:
Latin viere twist, plait, weave, vincire bind; Lithuanian vyti twist, wind).    Related to wend,
which is its causative form, and to wander. The past tense and past participle merged in Middle
English. Meaning to twine, entwine oneself around is from 1590s; transitive sense of turn or twist
round and round (on something) is from c.1300. Meaning set a watch, clockwork, etc. in operating
mode by tightening its spring is from c.1600. Wind down come to a conclusion is recorded from 1952;
wind up come to a conclusion is from 1825; earlier in transitive sense put (affairs) in order in
advance of a final settlement (1780). Winding sheet shroud of a corpse is attested from early 15c.


shake (v.)

Old English sceacan move (something) quickly to and fro, brandish; move the body or a part of it
rapidly back and forth; also go, glide, hasten, flee, depart (related to sceacdom flight); of
persons or parts of the body, to tremble especially from fever, cold, fear (class VI strong verb;
past tense scoc, past participle scacen), from Proto-Germanic *skakanan (cognates: Old Norse,
Swedish skaka, Danish skage to shift, turn, veer). No certain cognates outside Germanic, but some
suggest a possible connection to Sanskrit khaj to agitate, churn, stir about, Old Church Slavonic
skoku a leap, bound, Welsh ysgogi move.    Of the earth in earthquakes, c.1300. Meaning seize and
shake (someone or something else) is from early 14c. In reference to mixing ingredients, etc., by
shaking a container from late 14c. Meaning to rid oneself of by abrupt twists is from c.1200, also
in Middle English in reference to evading responsibility, etc. Meaning weaken, impair is from late
14c., on notion of make unstable.    To shake hands dates from 1530s. Shake a (loose) leg hurry up
first recorded 1904; shake a heel (sometimes foot) was an old way to say to dance (1660s); to shake
(one's) elbow (1620s) meant to gamble at dice. Phrase more _____ than you can shake a stick at is
attested from 1818, American English. To shake (one's) head as a sign of disapproval is recorded
from c.1300.


