brave (v.)

to face with bravery, 1776, from French braver, from brave (see brave (adj.)). Related: Braved;
braving.


brave (adj.)

late 15c., from Middle French brave, splendid, valiant, from Italian bravo brave, bold, originally
wild, savage, possibly from Medieval Latin bravus cutthroat, villain, from Latin pravus crooked,
depraved; a less likely etymology being from Latin barbarus (see barbarous). A Celtic origin (Irish
breagh, Cornish bray) also has been suggested.    Old English words for this, some with overtones of
rashness, included modig (now moody), beald (bold), cene (keen), dyrstig (daring). Brave new world
is from the title of Aldous Huxley's 1932 satirical utopian novel; he lifted the phrase from
Shakespeare (Tempest v.i.183).


brave (n.)

North American Indian warrior, c.1600, from brave (adj.), and compare bravo.


bravery (n.)

1540s, daring, defiance, boasting, from French braverie, from braver to brave (see brave) or else
from cognate Italian braveria, from bravare.    No Man is an Atheist, however he pretend it and
serve the Company with his Braveries. [Donne, 1631]    As a good quality, attested from 1580s.
Meaning fine clothes is from 1560s and holds the older sense.


prowess (n.)

late 13c., prouesse, from Old French proece prowess, courage, brave deed (Modern French prouesse),
from prou, later variant of prud brave, valiant, from Vulgar Latin *prodem (source also of Spanish
proeza, Italian prodezza; see proud). Prow was in Middle English as a noun meaning advantage,
profit, also as a related adjective (valiant, brave), but it has become obsolete. In 15-17th c.
often a monosyllable [OED].


earl (n.)

Old English eorl brave man, warrior, leader, chief (contrasted with ceorl churl), from Proto-
Germanic *erlo-z, of uncertain origin. In Anglo-Saxon poetry, a warrior, a brave man; in later Old
English, nobleman, especially a Danish under-king (equivalent of cognate Old Norse jarl), then one
of the viceroys under the Danish dynasty in England. After 1066 adopted as the equivalent of Latin
comes (see count (n.)).


bravo

as an exclamation, well done!, 1761, from Italian bravo, literally brave (see brave (adj.)). Earlier
it was used as a noun meaning desperado, hired killer (1590s). Superlative form is bravissimo.It is
held by some philologists that as Bravo! is an exclamation its form should not change, but remain
bravo under all circumstances. Nevertheless bravo is usually applied to a male, brava to a female
artist, and bravi to two or more. [Elson's Music Dictionary, 1905]


keen (adj.)

c.1200, from Old English cene bold brave, later clever, wise, from Proto-Germanic *kan- be able to
(see can). Original prehistoric senses seem to have been both brave and skilled; cognate with Old
Norse k&aelig;nn skillful, wise, Middle Dutch coene bold, Dutch koen, Old High German kuon
pugnacious, strong, German k&uuml;hn bold, daring. Sense of eager is from mid-14c. The meaning sharp
is peculiar to English: of blades and edges early 13c., of sounds c.1400, of eyesight c.1720. A
popular word of approval in teenager and student slang from c.1900.


braw

Scottish formation and pronunciation of brave.


Mongol

1738 (n.); 1763 (adj.), native name, said to be from mong brave.


valiant (adj.)

early 14c. (late 12c. in surnames), brave, courageous, intrepid in danger, from Anglo-French
vaylant, and Old French vaillant stalwart, brave, present participle adjective from valoir be
worthy, originally be strong, from Latin valere be strong, be well, be worth, have power, be able,
be in health, from PIE root *wal- be strong (cognates: Old English wealdan to rule, Old High German
-walt, -wald power (in personal names), Old Norse valdr ruler, Old Church Slavonic vlasti to rule
over, Lithuanian valdyti to have power, Celtic *walos- ruler, Old Irish flaith dominion, Welsh gallu
to be able). As a noun, valiant person, from c.1600. Related: Valiantly.


bravura (n.)

1788, piece of music requiring great skill, from Italian bravura bravery, spirit (see brave (adj.)).
Sense of display of brilliancy, dash is from 1813.


manful (adj.)

late 14c., courageous, brave, resolute, from man (n.) + -ful.


Carib (n.)

1550s, from Spanish Caribe, from Arawakan kalingo or kalino, said to mean brave ones or else strong
men. As an adjective by 1881.


game (adj.2)

brave, spirited, 1725, especially in game-cock bird for fighting, from game (n.). Middle English had
gamesome (adj.) joyful, playful, sportive.


fortitude (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French fortitude, from Latin fortitudo strength, force, firmness, from
fortis strong, brave (see fort).


foolhardy (adj.)

early 13c., from fool (n.) + Middle English hardi bold; hence foolishly brave (see hardy). Compare
Old French fol hardi.


soma (n.)

name of an intoxicant used in ancient Vedic ritual, prepared from the juice of some East Indian
plant, 1785, from Sanskrit soma, from PIE *seu- juice, from root *seue- (2) to take liquid (see sup
(v.2)). In Brave New World (1932), the name of a state-dispensed narcotic producing euphoria and
hallucination.


poilu (n.)

French private soldier, 1914, from French poilu, literally hairy, from poil hair, not of the head,
but of beards, animal coats, etc., from Latin pilus (see pile (n.3)). In 19c. French the adjective
had a secondary sense of strong, brave, courageous (Balzac).


proud (adj.)

late Old English  prud, prute excellent, splendid; arrogant, haughty, probably from Old French prud,
oblique case of adjective prouz brave, valiant (11c., Modern French preux; compare prud'homme brave
man), from Late Latin prode advantageous, profitable (source also of Italian prode valiant), a back-
formation from Latin prodesse be useful, from pro- before, for, instead of (see pro-) + esse to be
(see essence). Also see pride (n.), prowess.    Meaning elated by some act, fact, or thing is from
mid-13c. To do (someone) proud attested by 1819. Related: Proudness. The -d- in prodesse is probably
due to the influence of forms like red-eo-, 'I go back,' red-imo- 'I buy back,' etc. [OED]. The Old
English form with -te probably is from or influenced by pride.    The sense of have a high opinion
of oneself, not found in Old French, might reflect the Anglo-Saxons' opinion of the Norman knights
who called themselves proud. Old Norse pru&eth;r, probably from the same French source, had only the
sense brave, gallant, magnificent, stately (compare Icelandic pru&eth;ur, Middle Swedish prudh,
Middle Danish prud). Likewise a group of pride words in the Romance languages -- such as French
orgueil, Italian orgoglio, Spanish orgullo -- are borrowings from Germanic, where they had positive
senses (Old High German urgol distinguished).    Most Indo-European languages use the same word for
proud in its good and bad senses, but in many the bad sense seems to be the earlier one. The usual
way to form the word is by some compound of terms for over or high and words for heart, mood,
thought, or appearance; such as Greek hyperephanos, literally over-appearing; Gothic
hauh&thorn;uhts, literally high-conscience. Old English had ofermodig over-moody (mood in Anglo-
Saxon was a much more potent word than presently) and heahheort high-heart. Words for proud in other
Indo-European languages sometimes reflect a physical sense of being swollen or puffed up; such as
Welsh balch, probably from a root meaning to swell, and Modern Greek kamari, from ancient Greek
kamarou furnish with a vault or arched cover, with a sense evolution via make an arch, to puff out
the chest, to be puffed up (compare English slang chesty).


bizarre (adj.)

1640s, from French bizarre odd, fantastic (16c.), originally handsome, brave, perhaps from Basque
bizar a beard (the notion being of bearded Spanish soldiers making a strange impression on the
French); alternative etymology traces it to Italian bizarro angry, fierce, irascible, from bizza fit
of anger.


sexploitation (n.)

1942, from sex (n.) + exploitation. Other similar coinages include sexpert (1924); sexcapade (1953);
sexational (1927); and sexophone in Brave New World.


Kenelm

masc. proper name, Old English Cenhelm, from cene brave, bold (see keen (adj.)) + helm helmet (see
helmet).


bravado (n.)

1580s, from French bravade bragging, boasting, from Italian bravata bragging, boasting (16c.), from
bravare brag, boast, be defiant, from bravo (see brave (adj.)). The English word was influenced in
form by Spanish words ending in -ado.


Howard

proper name, from Old French Huard, from a Germanic source similar to Old High German *Hugihard
heart-brave, or *Hoh-weard, literally high defender; chief guardian. Also probably in some cases a
confusion with cognate Old Norse Haward, and as a surname also with unrelated Hayward. In some rare
cases from Old English eowu hierde ewe herd.


hourglass (n.)

1510s, from hour + glass. Used 19c. in a variety of technical and scientific senses to describe the
shape; reference to women's bodies is attested by 1897.    Men condemn corsets in the abstract, and
are sometimes brave enough to insist that the women of their households shall be emancipated from
them; and yet their eyes have been so generally educated to the approval of the small waist, and the
hourglass figure, that they often hinder women who seek a hygienic style of dress. [Mary Ashton Rice
Livermore, The Story of My Life, 1898]


dapper (adj.)

mid-15c., elegant, from Middle Dutch or Middle Low German dapper bold, strong, sturdy, later quick,
nimble, from Proto-Germanic *dapraz, perhaps with ironical shift of meaning (cognates: Old High
German tapfar heavy, German tapfer brave), from PIE root *dheb- dense, firm, compressed.


moody (adj.)

Old English modig brave, proud, high-spirited, impetuous, arrogant, from Proto-Germanic *modago-
(cognates: Old Saxon modag, Dutch moedig, German mutig, Old Norse mo&#240;ugr); see mood (1) + -y
(2). Meaning subject to gloomy spells is first recorded 1590s (via a Middle English sense of angry).


brag (v.)

mid-14c., braggen to make a loud sound, also to talk boastfully, of obscure origin, perhaps related
to bray of a trumpet, or related to the Middle English adjective brag ostentatious, proud; spirited,
brave (early 14c.), which probably is from Celtic. Other sources suggest Old Norse bragr the best,
the toast (of anything), also poetry. Also see braggart for another possibility. Related: Bragged;
bragging.


audacious (adj.)

1540s, confident, intrepid, from Middle French audacieux, from audace boldness, from Latin audacia
daring, boldness, courage, from audax brave, bold, daring, but more often bold in a bad sense,
audacious, rash, foolhardy, from audere to dare, be bold. Bad sense of shameless is attested from
1590s in English. Related: Audaciously.


Reynard (n.)

quasi-proper name for a fox, c.1300, from Old French Renart, Reynard name of the fox in Roman de
Renart, from Old High German personal name Reginhart strong in counsel, literally counsel-brave. The
first element is related to reckon, the second to hard. The tales were so popular that the name
became the word for fox in Old French. Old French also had renardie craftiness.


virtuous (adj.)

c.1300, characterized by vigor or strength; having qualities befitting a knight; valiant, hardy,
courageous; from Old French vertuos righteous; potent; of good quality; mighty, valiant, brave
(12c.), from Late Latin virtuosus good, virtuous, from Latin virtus (see virtue). From mid-14c. in
English as having beneficial or efficacious properties; late 14c. (of persons) as having excellent
moral qualities; conforming to religious law. Related: Virtuously; virtuousness.


Valkyrie (n.)

1768, one of 12 war-maidens who escorted the brave dead to Valhalla, from Old Norse valkyrja,
literally chooser of the slain, from valr those slain in battle (see Valhalla) + kyrja chooser, from
ablaut root of kjosa to choose, from Proto-Germanic *keusan, from PIE *geus- to taste, choose (see
gusto). Old English form was W&aelig;lcyrie, but they seem not to have figured as largely in Anglo-
Saxon tales as in Scandinavian. German Walk&uuml;re (Wagner) is from Norse. Related: Valkyrian.


man (n.)

Old English man, mann human being, person (male or female); brave man, hero; servant, vassal, from
Proto-Germanic *manwaz (cognates: Old Saxon, Swedish, Dutch, Old High German man, German Mann, Old
Norse ma&eth;r, Danish mand, Gothic manna man), from PIE root *man- (1) man (cognates: Sanskrit
manuh, Avestan manu-, Old Church Slavonic mozi, Russian muzh man, male).    Plural men (German
M&auml;nner) shows effects of i-mutation. Sometimes connected to root *men- to think (see mind),
which would make the ground sense of man one who has intelligence, but not all linguists accept
this. Liberman, for instance, writes, Most probably man 'human being' is a secularized divine name
from Mannus [Tacitus, Germania, chap. 2], believed to be the progenitor of the human race.    So I
am as he that seythe, `Come hyddr John, my man.' [1473]    Sense of adult male is late (c.1000); Old
English used wer and wif to distinguish the sexes, but wer began to disappear late 13c. and was
replaced by man. Universal sense of the word remains in mankind and manslaughter. Similarly, Latin
had homo human being and vir adult male human being, but they merged in Vulgar Latin, with homo
extended to both senses. A like evolution took place in Slavic languages, and in some of them the
word has narrowed to mean husband. PIE had two stems: *uiHro freeman (source of Sanskrit vira-,
Lithuanian vyras, Latin vir, Old Irish fer, Gothic wair) and *hner man, a title more of honor than
*uiHro (source of Sanskrit nar-, Armenian ayr, Welsh ner, Greek aner).    MANTRAP, a woman's
commodity. [Grose, Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, London, 1785]   Man also was in Old English as
an indefinite pronoun, one, people, they. The chess pieces so called from c.1400. As an interjection
of surprise or emphasis, first recorded c.1400, but especially popular from early 20c. Man-about-
town is from 1734; the Man the boss is from 1918. To be man or mouse be brave or be timid is from
1540s. Men's Liberation first attested 1970.At the kinges court, my brother, Ech man for himself.
[Chaucer, Knight's Tale, c.1386]


bold (adj.)

Old English beald (West Saxon), bald (Anglian) bold, brave, confident, strong, from Proto-Germanic
*balthaz (cognates: Old High German bald bold, swift, in names such as Archibald, Leopold, Theobald;
Gothic bal&thorn;ei boldness; Old Norse ballr frightful, dangerous), perhaps from PIE *bhol-to-
suffixed form of *bhel- (2) to blow, swell (see bole).    Of flavors (coffee, etc.) from 1829. The
noun meaning those who are bold is from c.1300. Old French and Proven&ccedil;al baut bold, Italian
baldo bold, daring, fearless are Germanic loan-words.


prude (n.)

1704, woman who affects or upholds modesty in a degree considered excessive, from French prude
excessively prim or demure woman, first recorded in Moli&egrave;re. Perhaps a false back-formation
or an ellipsis of preudefemme a discreet, modest woman, from Old French prodefame noblewoman,
gentlewoman; wife, consort, fem. equivalent of prudhomme a brave man (see proud); or perhaps a
direct noun use of the French adjective prude prudish, from Old French prude, prode, preude good,
virtuous, modest, a feminine form of the adjective preux. Also occasionally as an adjective in
English 18c.


whet (v.)

Old English hwettan to whet, sharpen, figuratively incite, encourage, from Proto-Germanic *hwatjan
(cognates: Old Norse hvetja to sharpen, encourage, Middle Low German, Middle Dutch wetten, Old High
German wezzan, German wetzen to sharpen, Gothic ga-hvatjan to sharpen, incite), from PIE root *kwed-
to sharpen (cognates: Sanskrit codati incites, literally sharpens; Old English hw&aelig;t brave,
bold, Old Saxon hwat sharp).


victor (n.)

mid-14c., from Anglo-French, Old French victor conqueror, and directly from Latin victorem
(nominative victor) a conqueror, agent noun from past participle stem of vincere to conquer,
overcome, defeat, from PIE root *weik- (5) to fight, conquer (cognates: Lithuanian apveikiu to
subdue, overcome, Old Church Slavonic veku strength, power, age, Old Norse vigr able in battle, Old
English wigan fight, Welsh gwych brave, energetic, Old Irish fichim I fight, second element in
Celtic Ordovices those who fight with hammers). Fem. formations include victrice (late 14c.),
victress (c.1600), victrix (1650s).


stout (adj.)

c.1300, proud, valiant, strong, from Old French estout brave, fierce, proud, earlier estolt strong,
from a Germanic source from West Germanic *stult- proud, stately, strutting (cognates: Middle Low
German stolt stately, proud, German stolz proud, haughty, arrogant, stately), from PIE root *stel-
to put, stand (see stall (n.1)). Meaning strong in body, powerfully built is attested from late
14c., but has been displaced by the (often euphemistic) meaning thick-bodied, fat and large, bulky
in figure, which is first recorded 1804. Original sense preserved in figurative phrase stout-hearted
(1550s). Related: Stoutly; stoutness.


fierce (adj.)

mid-13c., proud, noble, bold, from Old French fers, nominative form of fer, fier strong,
overwhelming, violent, fierce, wild; proud, mighty, great, impressive (Modern French fier proud,
haughty), from Latin ferus wild, untamed, from PIE root *ghwer- wild, wild animal (cognates: Greek
ther, Old Church Slavonic zveri, Lithuanian zveris wild beast).    Original English sense of brave,
proud died out 16c., but caused the word at first to be commonly used as an epithet, which accounts
for the rare instance of a French word entering English in the nominative case. Meaning ferocious,
wild, savage is from c.1300. Related: Fiercely; fierceness.


dare (v.)

from first and third person singular of Old English durran to brave danger, dare; venture, presume,
from Proto-Germanic *ders- (cognates: Old Norse dearr, Old High German giturran, Gothic gadaursan),
from PIE *dhers- to dare, be courageous (cognates: Sanskrit dadharsha to be bold; Old Persian
dar&#353;- to dare; Greek thrasys bold; Old Church Slavonic druzate to be bold, dare; Lithuanian
dristi to dare, drasus courageous).    An Old English irregular preterite-present verb: darr,
dearst, dear were first, second and third person singular present indicative; mostly regularized
16c., though past tense dorste survived as durst, but is now dying, persisting mainly in northern
English dialect. Meaning to challenge or defy (someone) is first recorded 1570s.


lion (n.)

late 12c., from Old French lion lion, figuratively hero, from Latin leonem (nominative leo) lion;
the constellation leo, from Greek leon (genitive leontos), from a non-Indo-European language,
perhaps Semitic (compare Hebrew labhi lion, plural lebaim; Egyptian labai, lawai lioness).    A
general Germanic borrowing from Latin (compare Old English leo, Anglian lea; Old Frisian lawa;
Middle Dutch leuwe, Dutch leeuw; Old High German lewo, German L&ouml;we); it is found in most
European languages, often via Germanic (Old Church Slavonic livu, Polish lew, Czech lev, Old Irish
leon, Welsh llew). Used figuratively from c.1200 in an approving sense, one who is fiercely brave,
and a disapproving one, tyrannical leader, greedy devourer. Lion's share the greatest portion is
attested from 1701.


strong (adj.)

Old English strang physically powerful, powerful in effect; forceful, severe, firm, bold, brave;
constant, resolute; arduous, violent, from Proto-Germanic *strangaz (cognates: Old Norse strangr
strong, Dutch streng strict, rigorous, Old High German strang strong, bold, hard, German streng
strict, rigorous), possibly from PIE *strenk- tight, narrow. Originally compared strenger, strengest
(compare old/elder/eldest).    Grammatical sense, of noun and verb inflections, is first attested
1841, translating German stark, used in a grammatical sense by J. Grimm (the terms strong and weak
better fit German inflections). Strong suit (1865) is from card-playing. Strong man man of great
strength (especially one who displays it professionally) is recorded from 1690s; meaning dominating
man in a political organization is from 1859.


tall (adj.)

high in stature, 1520s, probably from Middle English tal handsome, good-looking; valiant; lively in
speech; large, big; humble, meek, from Old English get&aelig;l prompt, active, from Germanic
*(ge)-tala- (cognates: Old High German gi-zal quick, Gothic un-tals indocile). Main modern sense
being of more than average height (and slim in proportion to height) probably evolved out of earlier
meanings brave, valiant, seemly, proper (c.1400), attractive, handsome (late 14c.).    Sense
evolution is remarkable [OED], but adjectives applied to persons can wander far in meaning (such as
pretty, buxom, German klein small, little, which in Middle High German meant the same as its English
cognate clean (adj.)). Meaning having a (defined) height, whether lofty or not is from 1580s.
Meaning exaggerated (as in tall tale) is American English colloquial attested by 1846. Phrase tall,
dark, and handsome is recorded from 1906. Related: Tallness.


straight (adj.1)

late 14c., direct, undeviating; not crooked, not bent or curved, of a person, direct, honest;
properly stretched, adjectival use of Old English streht (earlier streaht), past participle of
streccan to stretch (see stretch (v.)). Related: Straightly; straightness.    Meaning true, direct,
honest is from 1520s. Of communication, clear, unambiguous, from 1862. Sense of undiluted,
uncompromising (as in straight whiskey, 1874) is American English, first recorded 1856. As an adverb
from c.1300, in a straight line, without swerving or deviating. Theatrical sense of serious (as
opposed to popular or comic) is attested from 1895; vaudeville slang straight man first attested
1923.   Go straight in the underworld slang sense is from 1919; straighten up become respectable is
from 1907. To play it straight is from 1906 in theater, 1907 in sports (play fair), with figurative
extension; later perhaps also from jazz. Straight arrow decent, conventional person is 1969, from
archetypal Native American brave name. Straight shooter is from 1928. Straight As top grades is from
1920.


California

name of an imaginary realm in Las sergas de Esplandi&aacute;n (Exploits of Esplad&aacute;n), a
romance by Spanish writer Garci Ord&oacute;&ntilde;ez de Montalvo, published in 1510. It was a
sequel to his Amadis de Gaula, and was said to have been influential among Spanish explorers of the
New World. It could have led them to misidentify Baja California as this mythical land and to
mistake it for an island. The Amadis tales are the Iberian equivalent of the Arthurian romances;
they are older than 1510 (traces of them have been found mid-14c.) and were wildly popular. That
conquistadors and sailors would have known the story in all its imaginative detail is hardly
surprising.   Amadis de Gaula ... set a fashion: all later Spanish writers of books of chivalry
adopted the machinery of Amadis de Gaula. Later knights were not less brave (they could not be
braver than) Amadis; heroines were not less lovely (they could not be lovelier) than Oriana; there
was nothing for it but to make the dragons more appalling, the giants larger, the wizards craftier,
the magic castles more inaccessible, the enchanted lakes deeper. Subsequent books of chivalry are
simple variants of the types in Amadis de Gaula: Cervantes made his barber describe it as 'the best
of all books of this kind.' This verdict is essentially just. Amadis de Gaula was read everywhere,
especially in the French version of Herberay des Essarts. It was done into Hebrew during the
sixteenth century, and attracted readers as different as St Ignatius of Loyola and Henry of Navarre.
Its vogue perhaps somewhat exceeded its merit, but its merits are not inconsiderable. [James
Fitzmaurice-Kelly, Spanish Literature, 1922 edition]    Where Montalvo got the name and what it
means, if anything, is a mystery. Californian is attested from 1785. The element Californium (1950)
was named in reference to University of California, where it was discovered.


