brawl (n.)

mid-15c., from brawl (v.).


brawl (v.)

late 14c., braulen to cry out, scold, quarrel, probably related to Dutch brallen to boast, or from
French brailler to shout noisily, frequentative of braire to bray (see bray (v.)). Meaning quarrel,
wrangle, squabble is from early 15c. Related: Brawled; brawling.


free-for-all (n.)

mass brawl (one in which all may participate), 1881.


dogfight (n.)

aerial combat, World War I air forces slang, from earlier meaning riotous brawl (1880s); from dog
(n.) + fight (n.). The literal sense of a fight among or between dogs is from 1650s.


fray (n.)

mid-14c., feeling of alarm, shortening of affray (q.v.; see also afraid). Meaning a brawl, a fight
is from early 15c. (but late 14c. in Anglo-Latin). Fraymaker fighter, brawler is an excellent word
from a 1530s statute.


in-fighting (n.)

1812, from pugilism, the practice of getting at close quarters with an opponent; see in + fighting.
Old English infiht (n.) meant brawl within a house or between members of a household.


scrap (v.2)

to fight, brawl, box, 1867, colloquial, from scrap (n.2). Related: Scrapped; scrapping.


brigade (n.)

subdivision of an army, 1630s, from French brigade body of soldiers (14c.), from Italian brigata
troop, crowd, gang, from brigare brawl, fight, from briga strife, quarrel, perhaps of Celtic
(compare Gaelic brigh, Welsh bri power) or Germanic origin.


melee (n.)

1640s, from French m&ecirc;l&eacute;e, from Old French meslee brawl, confused fight; mixture, blend
(12c.), noun use of fem. past participle of mesler to mix, mingle (see meddle). See also medley.
Borrowed in Middle English as melle but lost and then reborrowed 17c.


broil (v.2)

early 15c., to quarrel, brawl, also mix up, present in disorder, from Anglo-French broiller mix up,
confuse, Old French brooillier to mix, mingle, figuratively to have sexual intercourse (13c., Modern
French brouiller), perhaps from breu, bro stock, broth, brew, from Frankish or another Germanic
source (compare Old High German brod broth) akin to broth (see brew (v.)); also compare imbroglio.


baloney (n.)

1894, variant of bologna sausage (q.v.). As slang for nonsense, 1922, American English (popularized
1930s by N.Y. Gov. Alfred E. Smith; in this sense sometimes said to have been one of the coinages of
legendary Variety staffer Jack Conway), from earlier sense of idiot (by 1915), perhaps influenced by
blarney, but usually regarded as being from the sausage, as a type traditionally made from odds and
ends. It also was ring slang early 20c. for an inferior fighter.    The aristocratic Kid's first
brawl for sugar was had in Sandusky, Odryo, with a boloney entitled Young Du Fresne. He gave the
green and nervous Kid a proper pastin' for six rounds and the disgusted Dummy sold me his find for a
hundred bucks, leavin' the clubhouse just in time to miss seein' the boy get stung, get mad, and win
by a knockout. [H.C. Witwer, The Leather Pushers, Colliers, Oct. 16, 1920]


noise (n.)

early 13c., loud outcry, clamor, shouting, from Old French noise din, disturbance, uproar, brawl
(11c., in modern French only in phrase chercher noise to pick a quarrel), also rumor, report, news,
apparently from Latin nausea disgust, annoyance, discomfort, literally seasickness (see nausea).
Another theory traces the Old French word to Latin noxia hurting, injury, damage. OED considers that
the sense of the word is against both suggestions, but nausea could have developed a sense in Vulgar
Latin of unpleasant situation, noise, quarrel (compare Old Proven&ccedil;al nauza noise, quarrel).
Meaning loud or unpleasant sound is from c.1300. Replaced native gedyn (see din).


