breach (n.)

Old English bryce breach, fracture, a breaking, from brecan (see break), influenced by Old French
breche breach, opening, gap, from Frankish; both from Proto-Germanic *brecho, *br&aelig;ko broken,
from PIE root *bhreg- to break (see fraction). Figurative sense of a breaking of rules, etc. was in
Old English Breach of contract is at least from 1660s.


breach (v.)

1570s, from breach (n.). Related: Breached; breaching.


rift (n.)

early 14c., a split, act of splitting, from a Scandinavian source (compare Danish and Norwegian rift
a cleft, Old Icelandic ript (pronounced rift) breach; related to Old Norse ripa to break a contract
(see riven). Figurative use from 1620s. Geological sense from 1921. As a verb, c.1300.


fracture (n.)

early 15c., a breaking of a bone, from Middle French fracture (14c.), from Latin fractura a breach,
break, cleft, from fractus, past participle of frangere to break (see fraction).


brash (adj.)

1824, of obscure origin, originally American English; perhaps akin to 16c. Scottish brash attack,
assault, or French breche fragments, especially of ice, from a Germanic source (compare Old High
German brehha breach, from brehhan to break), or to German brechen to vomit.


tort (n.)

mid-13c., injury, wrong, from Old French tort wrong, injustice, crime (11c.), from Medieval Latin
tortum injustice, noun use of neuter of tortus wrung, twisted, past participle of Latin torquere
turn, turn awry, twist, wring, distort (see torque (n.)). Legal sense of breach of a duty, whereby
someone acquires a right of action for damages is first recorded 1580s.


offense (n.)

late 14c., hurt, harm, injury, pain, from Old French ofense offense, insult, wrong (13c.) and
directly from Latin offensa an offense, injury, affront, crime, literally a striking against, noun
use of fem. past participle of offendere (see offend). Meaning action of attacking and feeling of
being hurt are both first recorded c.1400. Sense of breach of the law, transgression is first
recorded late 14c. Sporting sense first recorded 1894.


honor (v.)

mid-13c., honuren, to do honor to, from Old French honorer, from Latin honorare, from honor (see
honor (n.)). In the commercial sense of accept a bill due, etc., it is recorded from 1706. Related:
Honored; honoring.   A custom more honoured in the breach than the observance. Whoever will look up
the passage (Hamlet I. iv. 16) will see that it means, beyond a doubt, a custom that one deserves
more honour for breaking than for keeping: but it is often quoted in the wrong &amp; very different
sense of a dead letter or rule more often broken than kept. [Fowler]


spouse (n.)

c.1200, a married person, either one of a married pair, but especially a married woman in relation
to her husband, also Christ or God as the spiritual husband of the soul, the church, etc., also
marriage, the wedded state, from Old French spous (fem. spouse) marriage partner, variant of
espous/espouse (Modern French &#233;pous/&#233;pouse), from Latin sponsus bridegroom (fem. sponsa
bride), literally betrothed, from masc. and fem. past participle of spondere to bind oneself,
promise solemnly, from PIE *spend- to make an offering, perform a rite (see spondee). Spouse-breach
(early 13c.) was an old name for adultery.


adultery (n.)

voluntary violation of the marriage bed, c.1300, avoutrie, from Old French avouterie (12c.), noun of
condition from avoutre, from Latin adulterare to corrupt (see adulteration). Modern spelling, with
the re-inserted -d-, is from early 15c. (see ad-).    In Middle English, also sex between husband
and wife for recreational purposes; idolatry, perversion, heresy. Classified as single adultery
(with an unmarried person) and double adultery (with a married person). Old English word was
&aelig;wbryce breach of law(ful marriage) (compare German Ehebruch). Adultery Dune in Arizona
corresponds to Navajo sei adilehe adultery sand, where illicit lovers met privately.


petard (n.)

1590s, small bomb used to blow in doors and breach walls, from French p&eacute;tard (late 16c.),
from Middle French p&eacute;ter break wind, from Old French pet a fart, from Latin peditum, noun use
of neuter past participle of pedere to break wind, from PIE root *pezd- to fart (see feisty).
Surviving in phrase hoist with one's own petard (or some variant) blown up with one's own bomb,
which is ultimately from Shakespeare (1605):For tis the sport to haue the enginer Hoist with his
owne petar (Hamlet III.iv.207).See hoist.


faucet (n.)

c.1400, from Old French fausset (14c.) breach, spigot, stopper, peg (of a barrel), of unknown
origin; perhaps diminutive of Latin faux, fauces upper part of the throat, pharynx, gullet. Barnhart
and others suggest the Old French word is from fausser to damage, break into, from Late Latin
falsare (see false).   Spigot and faucet was the name of an old type of tap for a barrel or cask,
consisting of a hollow, tapering tube, which was driven at the narrow end into a barrel, and a screw
into the tube which regulated the flow of the liquid. Properly, it seems, the spigot was the tube,
the faucet the screw, but the senses have merged or reversed over time. Faucet is now the common
word in American English for the whole apparatus.


gate (n.)

opening, entrance, Old English geat (plural geatu) gate, door, opening, passage, hinged framework
barrier, from Proto-Germanic *gatan (cognates: Old Norse gat opening, passage, Old Saxon gat eye of
a needle, hole, Old Frisian gat hole, opening, Dutch gat gap, hole, breach, German Gasse street), of
unknown origin. Meaning money collected from selling tickets dates from 1896 (short for gate money,
1820). Gate-crasher is from 1927. Finnish katu, Lettish gatua street are Germanic loan-words.


riparian (adj.)

of or pertaining to river banks, 1849, with -an + Latin riparius of a river bank, from riparia
shore, later used in reference to the stream flowing between the banks, from ripa (steep) bank of a
river, shore, probably literally break (and indicating the drop off from ground level to the stream
bed), or else that which is cut out by the river, from PIE root *rei- to scratch, tear, cut
(cognates: Greek ereipia ruins, eripne slope, precipice; Old Norse rifa break, to tear apart; Danish
rift breach, Middle High German rif riverbank, seashore; English riven, rift).


affray (n.)

c.1300, state of alarm produced by a sudden disturbance, from Old French effrei, esfrei disturbance,
fright, from esfreer (v.) to worry, concern, trouble, disturb, from Vulgar Latin *exfridare,
literally to take out of peace, from Latin ex- out of (see ex-) + Frankish *frithu peace, from
Proto-Germanic *frithuz peace, consideration, forbearance (cognates: Old Saxon frithu, Old English
fri&eth;u, Old High German fridu peace, truce), from PIE root *pri- to be friendly, love (see free
(adj.)). Meaning breach of the peace, riotous fight in public is from late 15c. Related verb afrey
(early 14c.) survives almost exclusively in its past participle, afraid (q.v.).


