breadth (n.)

1520s, alteration of brede breadth, from Old English br&aelig;du breadth, width, extent, from
br&aelig;d; probably by analogy of long/length.


hairbreadth (n.)

also hairsbreadth, hairs-breadth, hair's breadth, mid-15c., said to have been formerly a formal unit
of measure equal to one-forty-eighth of an inch. From hair + breadth.


latitude (n.)

late 14c., breadth, from Old French latitude (13c.) and directly from Latin latitudo breadth, width,
extent, size, from latus wide, from PIE root *stele- to spread (cognates: Old Church Slavonic steljo
to spread out, Armenian lain broad). Geographical sense also is from late 14c., literally breadth of
a map of the known world. Figurative sense of allowable degree of variation is early 15c. Related:
Latitudinal.


width (n.)

1620s, formed from wide on model of breadth, and replacing wideness (Old English widnes). Johnson
(1755) calls it a low word. Related: Widthwise.


broad-minded (adj.)

1590s; see broad (adj.) + minded. This abstract mental sense of broad existed in Old English; for
example in bradnes breadth, also liberality.


capacity (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French capacit&eacute; ability to hold (15c.), from Latin capacitatem
(nominative capacitas) breadth, capacity, capability of holding much, noun of state from capax
(genitive capacis) able to hold much, from capere to take (see capable). Meaning largest audience a
place can hold is 1908.


duodenum (n.)

late 14c., from Medieval Latin duodenum digitorium space of twelve digits, from Latin duodeni twelve
each. Coined by Gerard of Cremona (d.1187), who translated Canon Avicennae, a loan-translation of
Greek dodekadaktylon, literally twelve fingers long, the intestine part so called by Greek physician
Herophilus (c.353-280 B.C.E.) for its length, about equal to the breadth of twelve fingers.


depth (n.)

late 14c., apparently formed in Middle English on model of length, breadth; from Old English deop
deep (see deep) + -th (2). Replaced older deopnes deepness. Though the English word is relatively
recent, the formation is in Proto-Germanic, *deupitho-, and corresponds to Old Saxon diupitha, Dutch
diepte, Old Norse dyp&eth;, Gothic diupi&thorn;a.


finger (n.)

Old English fingor, from Proto-Germanic *fingraz (cognates: Old Saxon fingar, Old Frisian finger,
Old Norse fingr, Dutch vinger, German Finger, Gothic figgrs), with no cognates outside Germanic;
perhaps connected with PIE *penkwe-, the root meaning five.    As a unit of measure (Middle English)
it represents the breadth of a finger, about three-quarters of an inch. They generally are numbered
from the thumb, and named index finger, fool's finger, leech- or physic-finger, and ear-finger.


beam (n.)

Old English beam originally living tree, but by late 10c. also rafter, post, ship's timber, from
Proto-Germanic *baumaz (cognates: Old Norse ba&eth;mr, Old Frisian bam tree, gallows, beam, Middle
Dutch boom, Old High German boum, German Baum tree, Gothic bagms), perhaps from PIE verb root
*bheue- to grow (see be). The shift from *-au- to -ea- is regular in Old English.    Meaning ray of
light developed in Old English, probably because it was used by Bede to render Latin columna lucis,
the Biblical pillar of fire. Nautical sense of one of the horizontal transverse timbers holding a
ship together is from early 13c., hence greatest breadth of a ship, and slang broad in the beam
wide-hipped (of persons). To be on the beam (1941) was originally an aviator's term for to follow
the course indicated by a radio beam.


vaudeville (n.)

1735, a country song, especially one for the stage, from French vaudeville (16c.), alteration (by
influence of ville town) of Middle French vaudevire, said to be from (chanson du) Vau de Vire (song
of the) valley of Vire, in the Calvados region of Normandy, first applied to the popular satirical
songs of Olivier Basselin, a 15c. poet who lived in Vire. The alternative explanation is that
vaudevire derives from Middle French dialectal vauder to go + virer to turn. From the popularity of
the songs in France grew a form of theatrical entertainment based on parodies of popular opera and
drama, interspersed with songs.    The Th&#233;atre du Vaudeville is rich in parodies, which follow
rapidly upon every new piece given at the Opera, or at the Th&#233;atre Fran&ccedil;ais. Their
parody upon Hamlet is too ludicrous for description, but irresistibly laughable; and the elegaut
light ballet of La Colombe Retrouv&#233;e [The Dove found again], I saw parodied at the Vaudeville
as La Maison Retrouv&#233;e [The House found again], with a breadth of farce quite beyond the genius
of Sadler's Wells. Some of the acting here, particularly that of the men, is exquisite; and the
orchestra like all the orchestras in Paris is full and excellent. [France in 1816, by Lady Morgan]
As a sort of popular stage variety entertainment show suitable for families, from c.1881 in U.S.,
displaced by movies after c.1914, considered dead from 1932.


