breed (n.)

race, lineage, stock (originally of animals), 1550s, from breed (v.). Of persons, from 1590s.
Meaning kind, species is from 1580s.


breeding (n.)

late 14c., hatching, incubation; also formation, development, growth, verbal noun from breed (v.).
Meaning good manners is from 1590s.


breeder (n.)

1570s, one who produces or originates, agent noun from breed (v.). Meaning one who breeds cattle or
some other animal is recorded from 1530s. Of nuclear reactors, from 1948. As a scornful homosexual
term for heterosexual person, attested from 1986.


breed (v.)

Old English bredan bring young to birth, carry, also cherish, keep warm, from West Germanic *brodjan
(cognates: Old High German bruoten, German br&uuml;ten to brood, hatch), from *brod- fetus,
hatchling, from PIE *bhreue- burn, heat (see brood (n.)). Original notion of the word was
incubation, warming to hatch. Sense of grow up, be reared (in a clan, etc.) is late 14c. Related:
Bred; breeding.


thoroughbred (adj.)

1701, of persons, thoroughly accomplished, from thorough + past tense of breed. In reference to
horses, of pure breed or stock, from 1796; the noun is first recorded 1842.


boxer (n.)

fighter, late 15c., agent noun from box (v.2). The name of the breed of dog (1934), is from German
(the breed originated in Germany), itself taken from English boxer fighter; the dog so called for
its pugnaciousness. Boxer shorts (1943) so called from their resemblance to the attire worn in the
ring.


spaniel (n.)

late 13c., as a surname meaning Spaniard; as a name for a breed of dog supposedly of Spanish origin,
late 14c., from Old French (chien) espagneul, literally Spanish (dog), from Vulgar Latin
*Hispaniolus of Spain, diminutive of Latin Hispanus Spanish, Hispanic (see Spaniard). Used
originally to start game; the breed was much-developed in England in 17c. Whether it is actually
originally Spanish is uncertain.


strain (n.2)

line of descent, lineage, breed, ancestry, c.1200, from Old English strion, streon a gain,
acquisition, treasure; a begetting, procreation, from Proto-Germanic *streu-nam- to pile up, from
PIE root *stere- to spread, extend, stretch out (see structure (n.)). Hence race, stock, line (early
14c.). Applied to animal species from c.1600; usually involving fairly minor variations, but not
distinct from breed (n.). Normal sound development would have yielded *streen, but the word was
altered in late Middle English, apparently by influence of strain (n.1).


Chihuahua (n.)

dog breed, 1858, from the city and state in Mexico, said to be from a lost native word that meant
dry place.


Jack Russell

type of terrier (not recognized as a distinct breed), 1907, named for the Rev. John Russell
(1795-1883) of Devonshire, the sporting parson.


Shetland

group of islands north of Scotland, from Old Norse Hjaltland; in reference to a type of pony, 1801;
as a breed of sheep, 1794.


Angus

masc. proper name, Scottish, related to Irish Aonghus, a compound that may be rendered in English as
one choice. Also the name of a county in Scotland, hence a breed of cattle (1842) associated with
that region.


half-breed (n.)

person of mixed race, 1760; as an adjective by 1762. Half-blooded in this sense is from c.1600.


bred

past tense and past participle of breed (v.).


Morgan

surname, a very old Celtic name. As a type of horse, 1840, named for Justin Morgan (1747-1798),
Vermont horse-breeder and music teacher; the breed was developed from a stallion he owned.


white feather (n.)

as a symbol of cowardice, 1785, supposedly from game-cocks, where having a white feather, is proof
he is not of the true game breed [Grose].


underbred (adj.)

of inferior breeding, vulgar, 1640s, from under + past participle of breed (v.). Of animals, not
pure bred, attested from 1890.


Weimaraner (n.)

dog breed, 1943, from Weimar, german city, + German suffix -aner indicating of this place.
Originally bred as a hunting dog in the Weimar region.


Shanghai

Chinese seaport, literally by the sea, from Shang on, above + hai sea. In 19c., a long-legged breed
of hens, supposed to have come from there; hence U.S. slang senses relating to long, tall persons or
things.


Dalmatian

1810, spotted dog, presumably named for Dalmatia, but dog breeders argue over whether there is a
Croatian ancestry for the breed, which seems to be represented in Egyptian bas-reliefs and Hellenic
friezes. Popular in early 1800s as a carriage dog, to trot alongside carriages and guard them in
owner's absence. Even fire departments nowadays tend to spell it *Dalmation.


Labrador

large province of eastern Canada, probably from Portuguese lavrador landholder, perhaps in reference
to 15c. Portuguese explorer Joao Fernandes, a landholder in the Azores. The name was first applied
to Greenland. The breed of retriever dog so called from 1815. Related: Labradorian.


malamute (n.)

also malemute, Eskimo dog, 1874, from name of Alaska Eskimo tribe in northwestern Alaska that
developed the breed. The native form is malimiut.


Clydesdale

breed of heavy draught horses, 1786, so called because they were bred in the valley of the Clyde in
Scotland. The river name is perhaps literally cleansing, from a Celtic root akin to Latin cloaca
(see cloaca).


broody (adj.)

1510s, apt to breed, from brood (v.) + -y (2). Figuratively, of persons, from 1851. Also, in modern
use, sometimes full of maternal yearning. Related: Broodily; broodiness.


Holstein

breed of cattle, 1865; so called because originally raised in nearby Friesland. The place name is
literally woodland settlers, from the roots of German Holz wood (see holt) and siedeln to settle,
altered by influence of Stein stone. Since 15c. it has been united with the Duchy of Schleswig.


Spitz (n.)

breed of small Pomeranian dog, 1842, from German Spitz, Spitzhund, from spitz pointed (see spit
(n.2)). So called from the tapering shape of its muzzle.


Leghorn

breed of fowl, 1869, from Leghorn, city in Italy (modern Livorno, 16c.-17c. Legorno), from Latin
Liburnus, from the native people name Liburni, which is of unknown signification.


interbreed (v.)

1859, from inter- + breed. Related: Interbred; interbreeding.


mongrel (n.)

late 15c., mixed-breed dog, from obsolete mong mixture, from Old English gemong mingling (base of
among), from Proto-Germanic *mangjan to knead together (see mingle). With pejorative suffix -rel.
Meaning person not of pure race is from 1540s. As an adjective from 1570s.


jersey (n.)

1580s as a type of knitted cloth; 1842 as a breed of cattle; both from Jersey, one of the Channel
Islands. Its name is said to be a corruption of Latin Caesarea, the Roman name for the island (or
another near it), influenced by Old English ey island; but perhaps rather a Viking name (perhaps
meaning Geirr's island). The meaning woolen knitted close-fitting tunic, especially one worn during
sporting events, is from 1836.


pit (v.)

mid-15c., to put into a pit, from pit (n.1); especially for purposes of fighting (of cocks, dogs,
pugilists) from 1760. Figurative sense of to set in rivalry is from 1754. Meaning to make pits in is
from late 15c. Related: Pitted; pitting. Compare Pit-bull as a dog breed attested from 1922, short
for pit-bull terrier (by 1912). This also is the notion behind the meaning the part of a theater on
the floor of the house (1640s).


chow (n.)

food, 1856, American English (originally in California), from Chinese pidgin English chow-chow
(1795) food, reduplication of Chinese cha or tsa mixed. The dog breed of the same name is from 1886,
of unknown origin, but some suggest a link to the Chinese tendency to see dogs as edible.


Appaloosa

breed of horses favored by Indian tribes in U.S. West, 1849, either from Opelousa in Louisiana or
from Palouse Indians, who lived near the river of that name in Idaho, in which case it probably is a
Nez Perc&eacute; word. Opelousa is perhaps from Choctaw api losa black body; while Palouse is from
Sahaptin palou:s what is standing up in the water.


schnauzer (n.)

breed of terrier, 1923, from German Schnauzer, literally growler, from schnauzen to snarl, growl,
from Schnauze snout, muzzle, which is related to Middle English snute, snoute snout (see snout).


Guernsey

breed of cattle, 1834, from the Channel Island where it was bred; the island name is Viking. Like
neighboring Jersey, it was also taken as the name for a coarse, close-fitting vest of wool (1839),
and in Australia the word supplies many of the usages of jersey in U.S. The second element of the
name is Old Norse ey island; the first element uncertain, traditionally meaning green, but perhaps
rather representing a Viking personal name, such as Grani.


Afghan

name of the people of Afghanistan, technically only correctly applied to the Durani Afghans; Old
Afghan chronicles trace the name to an Afghana, son of Jeremiah, sone of Israelite King Saul, from
whom they claimed descent, but this is a legend. The name is first attested in Arabic in al-'Utbi's
History of Sultan Mahmud written c.1030 C.E. and was in use in India from 13c. Attested from 1833 as
a type of blanket or wrap (in full, Afghan shawl); 1973 as a style of sheepskin coat; 1877 as a type
of carpet; 1895 as a breed of hunting dog.


Durham

c.1000, Dunholm city on a hill, a merger of Old English dun hill (see down (n.2)) and Scandinavian
holmr (see holm). The change from -n- to -r- is a result of Norman confusion (see Shrewsbury). As a
breed of cattle, by 1810.


Conestoga

1690s, name of an Indian tribe in southcentral Pennsylvania, probably from some Iroquoian language
and sometimes said to mean people of the cabin pole; later a place in Lancaster County,
Pennsylvania. A characteristic type of covered wagon, called Conestoga wagon, was built there from
1750 (about three years before the last of the Conestoga Indians were massacred), but it already was
an established term, as the first reference is to the name of a Philadelphia tavern, and probably
originally meant the type of wagon farmers used on the road from the city to Conestoga. Also a breed
of horses (1824) and a type of boot and cigar (see stogie).


shih-tzu (n.)

also shih tzu, breed of small long-haired dog, 1921, from Chinese shizigou, from shi lion + zi son +
gou dog.


mastiff (n.)

large, powerful breed of dog, early 14c., from Old French mastin great cur, mastiff (Modern French
m&#226;tin) or Proven&ccedil;al mastis, both from Vulgar Latin *mansuetinus domesticated, tame, from
Latin mansuetus tame, gentle (see mansuetude). Probably originally meaning a dog that stays in the
house, thus a guard-dog or watchdog. Form in English perhaps influenced by Old French mestif
mongrel.


multiply (v.)

mid-12c., multeplier, to cause to become many, from Old French multiplier, mouteplier (12c.)
increase, get bigger; flourish; breed; extend, enrich, from Latin multiplicare to increase, from
multiplex (genitive multiplicis) having many folds, many times as great in number, from comb. form
of multus (see multi-) + -plex -fold, from PIE *plek- to plait (see ply (v.1.)). Mathematical sense
is attested from late 14c. Related: Multiplied; multiplying.


propagation (n.)

mid-15c., from Old French propagacion offshoot, offspring (13c.) and directly from Latin
propagationem (nominative propagatio) a propagation, extension, enlargement, noun of action from
past participle stem of propagare set forward, extend, spread, increase; multiply plants by layers,
breed, from propago (genitive propaginis) that which propagates, offspring, from pro- forth (see
pro-) + *pag-, root of pangere to fasten (see pact).


Alsace

region between France and Germany (disputed by them 18c.-19c.), Medieval Latin Alsatia, from Old
High German *Ali-sazzo inhabitant of the other (bank of the Rhine), from Proto-Germanic *alja other
+ Old High German -sazzo inhabitant, literally one who sits. Alsatian was adopted 1917 by the Kennel
Club for German Shepherd dog to avoid the wartime associations of German; the breed has no
connection with Alsace.


papillon (n.)

1907, as a breed of dog, from French papillon, literally butterfly, from Latin papilionem
(nominative papilio) butterfly, perhaps from a reduplicated form of PIE root *pal- to touch, feel,
shake.    The Latin word is cognate with Old English fifealde butterfly, Old Saxon fifoldara, Old
Norse fifrildi, Old High German vivaltra, German Falter. The dog so called for the shape of the
ears.


merino (n.)

fine-wool breed of sheep, 1781, from Spanish merino, possibly from Arabic Merini, a Berber family or
tribe of sheep farmers in northwest Africa whose animals were imported into Spain 14c.-15c. to
improve local breeds. Or from or influenced by Latin majorinus, from major greater, either in
reference to size of the animals or from Spanish derivative merino (n.) overseer of cattle pastures,
also a title of judicial officers. Applied from early 19c. to the wool itself and to various
articles made from it.


broad (adj.)

Old English brad broad, flat, open, extended, from Proto-Germanic *braithaz (cognates: Old Frisian
bred, Old Norse brei&eth;r, Dutch breed, German breit, Gothic brou&thorn;s), of unknown origin. Not
found outside Germanic languages. No clear distinction in sense from wide. Related: Broadly. Broad-
brim as a style of hat (1680s, broad-brimmed) in 18c.-19c. suggested Quaker male from their
characteristic attire.


Dane (n.)

native of Denmark, from Danish Daner (replacing Old English Dene (plural)); used in Old English of
Northmen generally. Perhaps ultimately from a source related to Old High German tanar sand bank, in
reference to their homeland; or from Proto-Germanic *den- low ground, for the same reason.
Applied 1774 to a breed of large dogs. Danegeld not known by that name in Old English, or until
1086, long after the end of the Viking depredations. Supposedly originally a tax to pay for
protection from the Northmen (either to outfit defensive armies or to buy peace). Danelaw (c.1050)
was the Danish law in force over that large part of England under Viking rule after c.878; the
application to the land itself is modern (1837).


publish (v.)

mid-14c., make publicly known, reveal, divulge, announce; alteration of publicen (early 14c.) by
influence of banish, finish, etc.; from extended stem of Old French publier make public, spread
abroad, communicate, from Latin publicare make public, from publicus public (see public). Meaning
issue (a book, etc.) to the public is from late 14c., also to disgrace, put to shame; denounce
publicly. Related: Published; publishing. In Middle English the verb also meant to people, populate;
to multiply, breed (late 14c.), for example ben published of be descended from.


halcyon (adj.)

1540s, in halcyon dayes (Latin alcyonei dies, Greek alkyonides hemerai), 14 days of calm weather at
the winter solstice, when a mythical bird (identified with the kingfisher) was said to breed in a
nest floating on calm seas. From halcyon (n.), late 14c., from Latin halcyon, from Greek halkyon,
variant (perhaps a misspelling) of alkyon kingfisher, from hals sea, salt (see halo-) + kyon
conceiving, present participle of kyein to conceive, literally to swell, from PIE root *keue- to
swell. Identified in mythology with Halcyone, daughter of Aeolus, who when widowed threw herself
into the sea and became a kingfisher.


nation (n.)

c.1300, from Old French nacion birth, rank; descendants, relatives; country, homeland (12c.) and
directly from Latin nationem (nominative natio) birth, origin; breed, stock, kind, species; race of
people, tribe, literally that which has been born, from natus, past participle of nasci be born (Old
Latin gnasci; see genus). Political sense has gradually predominated, but earliest English examples
inclined toward the racial meaning large group of people with common ancestry. Older sense preserved
in application to North American Indian peoples (1640s). Nation-building first attested 1907
(implied in nation-builder).


