brevity (n.)

c.1500, from Latin brevitatem (nominative brevitas) shortness in space or time, from brevis short
(see brief (adj.)).


sundries (n.)

various small things, 1755, plural of sundry (adj.) used as a noun. [A] comprehensive term used for
brevity, especially in accounts [Century Dictionary].


laconic (adj.)

concise, abrupt, 1580s, probably via Latin Laconicus, from Greek Lakonikos, from Lakon person from
Lakonia, the district around Sparta in southern Greece in ancient times, whose inhabitants were
famously proud of their brevity of speech. When Philip of Macedon threatened them with, If I enter
Laconia, I will raze Sparta to the ground, the Spartans' reply was, If. An earlier form was
laconical (1570s). Related: Laconically.


Sparta

capital of Laconia in ancient Greece, famed for severity of its social order, the frugality of its
people, the valor of its arms, and the brevity of its speech. Also for dirty boys, men vain of their
long hair, boxing girls, iron money, and insufferable black broth. The name is said to be from Greek
sparte cord made from spartos, a type of broom, from PIE *spr-to-, from root *sper- (2) to turn,
twist (see spiral (adj.)). Perhaps the reference is to the cords laid as foundation markers for the
city. Or the whole thing could be folk etymology.


evolution (n.)

1620s, an opening of what was rolled up, from Latin evolutionem (nominative evolutio) unrolling (of
a book), noun of action from evolvere (see evolve).    Used in medicine, mathematics, and general
writing in various senses including growth to maturity and development of an individual living thing
(1660s). Modern use in biology, of species, first attested 1832 in works of Scottish geologist
Charles Lyell. Charles Darwin used the word only once, in the closing paragraph of The Origin of
Species (1859), and preferred descent with modification, in part because evolution already had been
used in the 18c. homunculus theory of embryological development (first proposed under this name by
Bonnet, 1762) and in part because it carried a sense of progress not found in Darwin's idea. But
Victorian belief in progress prevailed (along with brevity), and Herbert Spencer and other
biologists popularized evolution.


