bridle (v.)

to control, dominate, c.1200, from Old English bridlian to fit with a bridle, from bridel (see
bridle (n.)). Meaning to throw up the head (as a horse does when reined in) is from mid-15c.
Related: Bridled; bridling.


bridle (n.)

Old English bridel bridle, rein, curb, restraint, related to bregdan move quickly, from Proto-
Germanic *bregdilaz (see braid (v.)).


refrain (v.)

mid-14c., from Old French refraigner restrain, repress, keep in check (12c., Modern French
R&#233;fr&#233;ner), from Latin refrenare to bridle, hold in with a bit, check, curb, keep down,
control, from re- back (see re-) + frenare restrain, furnish with a bridle, from frenum a bridle.
Related: Refrained; refraining.


debridement (n.)

removal of damaged tissue from a wound, 1839, from French d&eacute;bridement, literally an
unbridling, from d&eacute;- (see de-) + bride bridle, from a Germanic source akin to Middle High
German bridel (see bridle). Related: debride, debriding.


unbridled (adj.)

late 14c., originally in figurative sense of unrestrained, ungoverned, from un- (1) not + bridled
(see bridle (v.)). Similar formation in Middle Dutch ongebreidelt. Literal sense of not fitted with
a bridle (of horses) is not recorded before 1550s. The verb unbridle (see un- (2)) is attested from
c.1400 in the literal sense; mid-15c. in the figurative sense.


rein (n.)

c.1300, strap fastened to a bridle, from Old French rene, resne reins, bridle strap, laces (Modern
French r&#234;ne), probably from Vulgar Latin *retina a bond, check, back-formation from Latin
retinere hold back (see retain). To give something free rein is originally of horses.


team (n.)

Old English team descendant, family, race, line; child-bearing, brood; company, band; set of draft
animals yoked together, from Proto-Germanic *tau(h)maz (cognates: Old Norse taumr, Old Frisian tam
bridle; progeny, line of descent, Dutch toom, Old High German zoum, German Zaum bridle), probably
literally that which draws, from PIE *douk-mo-, from root *deuk- to pull (see duke (n.)).    Applied
in Old English to groups of persons working together for some purpose, especially group of people
acting together to bring suit; modern sense of persons associated in some joint action is from
1520s. Team spirit is recorded from 1928. Team player attested from 1886, originally in baseball.


grommet (n.)

1620s, ring or wreath of rope, from obsolete French gromette curb of a bridle (Modern French
gourmette), from gourmer to curb, of uncertain origin. Extended sense of metal eyelet first recorded
1769.


hackamore (n.)

halter for breaking horses, 1850, American English, of uncertain origin. OED and Klein suggests a
corruption of Spanish jaquima (earlier xaquima) halter, headstall of a horse, which Klein suggests
is from Arabic shakimah bit of a bridle, curb, restraint.


snaffle (n.)

simple bridle-bit, 1530s, of uncertain origin, perhaps from or related to Dutch snavel beak, bill;
compare German Schnabel beak, face, Old English nebb, Old Norse neff beak, nose (see neb).


lorimer (n.)

c.1200 (mid-12c. as surname), maker of bits for bridles and saddles, worker in small ironware, from
Old French loremier saddler, harness-maker, military leatherworker (Modern French lormier), from
loraim, from Latin lorum strap, thong, rein of a bridle, from PIE root *wel- (3) to turn (see
volvox).


Auriga

northern constellation, from Latin auriga a charioteer, driver, from aureae bridle of a horse (from
os, genitive oris, mouth; see oral) + agere set in motion, drive, lead (see act (n.)).


brake (n.1)

mid-15c., instrument for crushing or pounding, from Middle Dutch braeke flax brake, from breken to
break (see break (v.)). The word was applied to many crushing implements and to the ring through the
nose of a draught ox. It was influenced in sense by Old French brac, a form of bras an arm, thus a
lever or handle, which was being used in English from late 14c., and applied to a bridle or curb
from early 15c. One or the other or both took up the main modern meaning of stopping device for a
wheel, first attested 1772.


restrain (v.)

mid-14c., from stem of Old French restreindre press, push together; curb, bridle; bandage (12c.),
from Latin restringere draw back tightly, confine, check (see restriction). Related: Restrained;
restraining.    That which we restrain we keep within limits; that which we restrict we keep within
certain definite limits; that which we repress we try to put out of existence. [Century Dictionary,
1902]


tester (n.2)

canopy over a four-post bed, mid-14c., from Medieval Latin testerium, from testera head-stall of the
bridle of a horse, extended use and form of Late Latin testa skull, in Vulgar Latin head (see tete).
From Medieval Latin testa as head also come tester in obsolete senses of piece of armor for the head
(late 14c., via Old French testiere) and coin of Henry VIII (1546), the first English coin to bear a
true portrait.


hem (n.)

Old English hem a border, especially of cloth or a garment, from Proto-Germanic *hamjam (cognates:
Old Norse hemja to bridle, curb, Swedish h&auml;mma to stop, restrain, Old Frisian hemma to hinder,
Middle Dutch, German hemmen to hem in, stop, hinder), from PIE *kem- to compress. Apparently the
same root yielded Old English hamm, common in place names (where it means enclosure, land hemmed in
by water or high ground, land in a river bend). In Middle English, hem also was a symbol of pride or
ostentation.    If &thorn;ei wer &thorn;e first &thorn;at schuld puplysch &thorn;ese grete myracles
of her mayster, men myth sey of hem, as Crist ded of &thorn;e Pharisees, &thorn;at &thorn;ei
magnified her owne hemmys. [John Capgrave, Life of Saint Gilbert of Sempringham, 1451]


bit (n.1)

small piece, c.1200; related Old English bite act of biting, and bita piece bitten off, probably are
the source of the modern words meaning boring-piece of a drill (1590s), mouthpiece of a horse's
bridle (mid-14c.), and a piece bitten off, morsel (c.1000). All from Proto-Germanic *biton
(cognates: Old Saxon biti, Old Norse bit, Old Frisian bite, Middle Dutch bete, Old High German bizzo
biting, German Bissen a bite, morsel), from PIE root *bheid- to split (see fissure).    Meaning
small piece, fragment is from c.1600. Sense of short space of time is 1650s. Theatrical bit part is
from 1909. Money sense in two bits, etc. is originally from Southern U.S. and West Indies, in
reference to silver wedges cut or stamped from Spanish dollars (later Mexican reals); transferred to
eighth of a dollar.


