brine (n.)

Old English bryne brine, origin unknown; no known cognates beyond Dutch brijn, Flemish brijne.


silt (n.)

mid-15c., originally sediment deposited by seawater, probably from a Scandinavian source (compare
Norwegian and Danish sylt salt marsh), or from Middle Low German or Middle Dutch silte, sulte salt
marsh, brine, from Proto-Germanic *sultjo- (cognates: Old English sealt, Old High German sulza
saltwater, German Sulze brine), from PIE *sal- (see salt (n.)).


briny (adj.)

c.1600, from brine + -y (2). Used earlier of tears than of the ocean (1610s). Related: Brininess.


sea monkey (n.)

1909 as a heraldic animal, 1964 as a U.S. proprietary name for brine shrimp (Artemia salina), which
had been used as food for aquarium fish till they began to be marketed as pets by U.S. inventor
Harold von Braunhut (d.2003), who also invented X-Ray Specs and popularized pet hermit crabs. He
began marketing them in comic book advertisements in 1960 as Instant Life, and changed the name to
Sea Monkeys in 1964, so called for their long tails.


marinade (n.)

1704, from French marinade spiced vinegar or brine for pickling, from mariner to pickle (see
marinate). As a verb from 1680s. Related: Marinaded; marinading.


marinate (v.)

1640s, from French mariner to pickle in (sea) brine, from Old French marin (adj.) of the sea, from
Latin marinus (see marine (adj.)). Related: Marinated; marinating.


heartburn (n.)

mid-13c., herte-brine lust, later heartburn, indigestion (mid-15c.); also herte-brenning anger,
bitterness (c.1400), also heartburn (mid-15c.). See heart + burn (n.). Also see cardiac for
confusion of heart and stomach.


souse (v.)

late 14c., to pickle, steep in vinegar, from Old French sous (adj.) preserved in salt and vinegar,
from Frankish *sultja or some other Germanic source (compare Old Saxon sultia salt water, Old High
German sulza brine), from Proto-Germanic *salt- (see salt (n.)). Related: Soused; sousing.


salad (n.)

late 14c., from Old French salade (14c.), from Vulgar Latin *salata, literally salted, short for
herba salata salted vegetables (vegetables seasoned with brine, a popular Roman dish), from fem.
past participle of *salare to salt, from Latin sal (genitive salis) salt (see salt (n.)).    Dutch
salade, German Salat, Swedish salat, Russian salat are from Romanic languages. Salad days time of
youthful inexperience (perhaps on notion of green) is first recorded 1606 in Shakespeare and
probably owes its survival, if not its existence, to him. Salad bar first attested 1940, American
English.


pickle (n.)

c.1400, probably from Middle Dutch pekel pickle, brine, or related words in Low German and East
Frisian (Dutch pekel, East Frisian p&auml;kel, German p&ouml;kel), of uncertain origin or original
meaning. Klein suggests the name of a medieval Dutch fisherman who developed the process. Originally
a sauce served with meat or fowl; meaning cucumber preserved in pickle first recorded 1707, via use
of the word for the salty liquid in which meat, etc. was preserved (c.1500). Figurative sense of
sorry plight first recorded 1560s, from the time when the word still meant a sauce served on meat
about to be eaten. Meaning troublesome boy is from 1788, perhaps from the notion of being imbued
with roguery.


ketchup (n.)

1711, said to be from Malay kichap, but probably not original to Malay. It might have come from
Chinese koechiap brine of fish, which, if authentic, perhaps is from the Chinese community in
northern Vietnam [Terrien de Lacouperie, in Babylonian and Oriental Record, 1889, 1890]. Catsup
(earlier catchup, 1680s) is a failed attempt at Englishing, still in use in U.S., influenced by cat
and sup.    Originally a fish sauce, the word came to be used in English for a wide variety of
spiced gravies and sauces; Apicius Redivivus; or, the Cook's Oracle, by William Kitchiner, London,
1817, devotes 7 pages to recipes for different types of catsup (his book has 1 spelling of ketchup,
72 of catsup), including walnut, mushroom, oyster, cockle and mussel, tomata, white (vinegar and
anchovies figure in it), cucumber, and pudding catsup. Chambers's Encyclopaedia (1870) lists
mushroom, walnut, and tomato ketchup as the three most esteemed kinds. Tomato ketchup emerged c.1800
in U.S. and predominated from early 20c.


