brink (n.)

early 13c., from Middle Low German brink edge, or Danish brink steepness, shore, bank, grassy edge,
from Proto-Germanic *brenkon, probably from PIE *bhreng-, variant of root *bhren- project, edge
(cognates: Lithuanian brinkti to swell).


brinkmanship (n.)

also brinksmanship, with parasitic -s- and construction based on salesmanship, sportsmanship, etc.;
from brink (the image of the brink of war dates to at least 1840).    Associated with the policies
advocated by John Foster Dulles (1888-1959), U.S. Secretary of State 1953-1959. The word springs
from Dulles' philosophy as outlined in a magazine interview [with Time-Life Washington bureau chief
James Shepley] early 1956:    The ability to get to the verge without getting into the war is the
necessary art. If you cannot master it, you inevitably get into war. If you try to run away from it,
if you are scared to go to the brink, you are lost.    The quote was widely criticized by the
Eisenhower Administration's opponents, and the first attested use of brinkmanship seems to have been
in such a context, a few weeks after the magazine appeared, by Democratic presidential candidate
Adlai Stevenson criticizing Dulles for boasting of his brinkmanship, ... the art of bringing us to
the edge of the nuclear abyss.


rand (n.)

rocky ridge overlooking a river valley, 1839, South African English, from Afrikaans, from Dutch rand
edge, margin, cognate with Old English rand brink, bank. As a unit of currency, adopted by the
Republic of South Africa in 1961 (see Krugerrand). Johnson's dictionary has rand Border; seam: as
the rand of a woman's shoe.


margin (n.)

mid-14c., edge of a sea or lake; late 14c., space between a block of text and the edge of a page,
from Latin marginem (nominative margo) edge, brink, border, margin, from PIE *merg- edge, border,
boundary (see mark (n.1)). General sense of boundary space; rim or edge of anything is from late
14c. Meaning comfort allowance, cushion is from 1851; margin of safety first recorded 1888. Stock
market sense of sum deposited with a broker to cover risk of loss is from 1848. Related: Margins.


cant (n.2)

slope, slant, late 14c., Scottish, edge, brink, from Old North French cant corner (perhaps via
Middle Low German kante or Middle Dutch kant), from Vulgar Latin *canthus, from Latin cantus iron
tire of a wheel, possibly from a Celtic word meaning rim of wheel, edge (compare Welsh cant
bordering of a circle, tire, edge, Breton cant circle), from PIE *kam-bo- corner, bend, from root
*kemb- to bend, turn, change (cognates: Greek kanthos corner of the eye, Russian kutu corner).


