bristle (n.)

Old English byrst bristle, with metathesis of -r-, from Proto-Germanic *bursti- (cognates: Middle
Dutch borstel, German borste), from PIE *bhrsti- from root *bhars- point, bristle (cognates:
Sanskrit bhrstih point, spike). With -el, diminutive suffix.


bristle (v.)

c.1200 (implied in past participle adjective bristled) set or covered with bristles, from bristle
(n.). Meaning become angry or excited is 1540s, from the way animals show fight. Related: Bristling.


hirsute (adj.)

hairy, 1620s, from Latin hirsutus rough, shaggy, bristly, figuratively rude, unpolished, related to
hirtus shaggy, and possibly to horrere to bristle with fear, from PIE *ghers-tu-, from root *ghers-
to bristle (see horror).


abhor (v.)

mid-15c., from Latin abhorrere shrink back from, have an aversion for, shudder at, from ab- away
(see ab-) + horrere tremble at, shudder, literally to bristle, be shaggy, from PIE *ghers- start
out, stand out, rise to a point, bristle (see horror). Related: Abhorred; abhorring.


brad (n.)

small wire nail, late 13c., brod, from Old Norse broddr spike, point, arrow, from Proto-Germanic
*brozda- (cognates: Old English brord point, prick, blade of grass, Old High German brort point,
edge, crown), from PIE *bhrs-dh-, from root *bhars- projectile, point, bristle (see bristle (n.)).


barley (n.)

Old English b&aelig;rlic, originally an adjective, of barley, from bere barley (from Proto-Germanic
*bariz, *baraz) + -lic body, like. First element is related to Old Norse barr barley, and cognate
with Latin far (genitive farris) coarse grain, meal; probably from PIE *bhars- bristle, point,
projection (see bristle (n.)).


bur (n.)

prickly seed vessel of some plants, c.1300, burre, from a Scandinavian source (compare Danish borre,
Swedish hard-borre, Old Norse burst bristle), from PIE *bhars- (see bristle (n.)). Transferred 1610s
to rough edge on metal, which might be the source of the sense rough sound of the letter -r- (see
burr).


horror (n.)

early 14c., from Old French horror (12c., Modern French horreur) and directly from Latin horror
dread, veneration, religious awe, a figurative use, literally a shaking, trembling, shudder, chill,
from horrere to bristle with fear, shudder, from PIE root *ghers- to bristle (cognates: Sanskrit
harsate bristles, Avestan zarshayamna- ruffling one's feathers, Latin eris (genitive) hedgehog,
Welsh garw rough). As a genre in film, 1934. Chamber of horrors originally (1849) was a gallery of
notorious criminals in Madame Tussaud's wax exhibition.


bass (n.)

freshwater fish, early 15c. corruption of Old English b&aelig;rs a fish, perch, from Proto-Germanic
base *bars- sharp (cognates: Middle Dutch baerse, Middle High German bars, German Barsch perch,
German barsch rough), from PIE root *bhar- point, bristle (see bristle (n.)). The fish was so called
for its dorsal fins. For loss of -r-, see ass (n.2).


hair (n.)

Old English h&aelig;r hair, a hair, from Proto-Germanic *kh&aelig;ran (cognates: Old Saxon, Old
Norse, Old High German har, Old Frisian her, Dutch and German haar hair), perhaps from PIE *ghers-
to stand out, to bristle, rise to a point (cognates: Lithuanian serys bristle; see horror).
Spelling influenced by Old Norse har and Old English haire haircloth, from Old French haire, from
Frankish *harja or some other Germanic source (see above). To let one's hair down become familiar is
first recorded 1850. Phrase hair of the dog that bit you (1540s), homeopathic remedy, is in Pliny.


bristly (adj.)

1590s, from bristle (n.) + -y (2). Figurative sense is recorded from 1872. Related: Bristliness.


horrendous (adj.)

1650s, from Latin horrendus dreadful, fearful, terrible, literally to be shuddered at, gerundive of
horrere to bristle with fear, shudder (see horror). Earlier form in English was horrend (mid-15c.).


Huron

the North American lake is named for the Indian people, whose name is from obsolete French huron
bristle-haired (the French word frequently was used in reference to head-dresses, and that might be
its original sense here), from Old French hur&eacute; bristly, unkempt, shaggy, of uncertain origin,
but French sources indicate it probably is from Germanic.


chaeto-

before vowels chaet-, word-forming element meaning hair, also, in scientific use, spine, bristle,
from Latinized form of Greek khaite long, flowing hair  (of persons, also of horses, lions), related
to Avestan  gaesa- curly hair.


chaetophobia (n.)

fear of hair, from chaeto- hair; bristle + -phobia fear.


horrible (adj.)

c.1300, from Old French horrible, orrible (12c.) horrible, repugnant, terrifying, from Latin
horribilis terrible, fearful, dreadful, from horrere to bristle with fear, shudder (see horror).
Used as a mere intensifier from mid-15c.


seta (n.)

plural setae, 1793, from Latin seta bristle, from PIE root *sai- to tie, bind (see sinew). Related:
Setaceous.


rocket (n.1)

garden plant of the cabbage family, c.1500, from Middle French roquette (16c.), from Italian
rochetta, diminutive of ruca a kind of cabbage, from Latin eruca colewort, perhaps so called for its
downy stems and related to ericus hedgehog, also a beam set with spikes, from PIE *ghers- to bristle
(see horror).


horripilation (n.)

from Late Latin horripilationem (nominative horripilatio), noun of action from past participle stem
of horripilare, from stem of horrere to bristle (see horror) + pilus hair (see pile (n.3)).


horrific (adj.)

causing horror, 1650s, from French horrifique or directly from Latin horrificus dreadful, exciting
terror, literally making the hair stand on end, from horrere to bristle, to stand on end (see
horror) + -ficus, from stem of facere to make, do (see factitious). Related: Horrifically.


gorse (n.)

Old English gors gorse, furze, from Proto-Germanic *gorst- (cognates: Old Saxon, Old High German
gersta, Middle Dutch gherste, Dutch gerst, German gerste barley), from PIE *ghers- to bristle
(source also of Latin hordeum barley; see horror).


horrid (adj.)

early 15c., hairy, shaggy, bristling, from Latin horridus bristly, prickly, rough, horrid,
frightful, from horrere to bristle with fear, shudder (see horror). Meaning horrible, causing horror
is from c.1600. Sense weakened 17c. to unpleasant, offensive.    [W]hile both [horrible and horrid]
are much used in the trivial sense of disagreeable, horrible is still quite common in the graver
sense inspiring horror, which horrid tends to lose .... [Fowler]    Related: Horridly.


arugula (n.)

edible cruciform plant (Eruca sativa) used originally in the Mediterranean region as a salad; the
American English and Australian form of the name is (via Italian immigrants) from dialectal variant
of Italian ruchetta, a diminutive form of ruca-, from Latin eruca, a name of some cabbage-like
plant, from PIE *gher(s)-uka-, from root *ghers- to bristle (see horror).    In England, the usual
name is rocket (see rocket (n.1)), which is from Italian ruchetta via French roquette. It also
sometimes is called hedge mustard.


urchin (n.)

c.1300, yrichon hedgehog, from Old North French *irechon (cognates: Picard irechon, Walloon ireson,
Hainaut hirchon), from Old French herichun hedgehog (Modern French h&eacute;risson), formed with
diminutive suffix -on + Vulgar Latin *hericionem, from Latin ericius hedgehog, enlarged form of er,
originally *her, from PIE root *ghers- to bristle (cognates: Greek kheros hedgehog; see horror).
Still used for hedgehog in non-standard speech in Cumbria, Yorkshire, Shropshire. Applied throughout
16c. to people whose appearance or behavior suggested hedgehogs, from hunchbacks (1520s) to goblins
(1580s) to bad girls (1530s); meaning poorly or raggedly clothed youngster emerged 1550s, but was
not in frequent use until after c.1780. Sea urchin is recorded from 1590s (a 19c. Newfoundland name
for them was whore's eggs); Johnson describes it as a kind of crabfish that has prickles instead of
feet.


silk (n.)

c.1300, from Old English seoloc, sioloc silk, silken cloth, from Latin sericum silk, plural serica
silken garments, silks, literally Seric stuff, neuter of Sericus, from Greek Serikos silken;
pertaining to the Seres, an oriental people of Asia from whom the Greeks got silks. Western
cultivation began 552 C.E., when agents from Byzantium impersonating monks smuggled silkworms and
mulberry leaves out of China.    Chinese si silk, Manchurian sirghe, Mongolian sirkek have been
compared to this and the people name in Greek might be a rendering via Mongolian of the Chinese word
for silk, but this is uncertain.    Also found in Old Norse as silki but not elsewhere in Germanic.
The more common Germanic form is represented by Middle English say, from Old French seie, with
Spanish seda, Italian seta, Dutch zijde, German Seide  is from Medieval Latin seta  silk, perhaps
elliptical for seta serica, or else a particular use of seta bristle, hair (see seta (n.)).
According to some sources [Buck, OED], the use of -l- instead of -r- in the Balto-Slavic form of the
word (Old Church Slavonic &#353;elku, Lithuanian &#353;ilkai) passed into English via the Baltic
trade and may reflect a Chinese dialectal form, or a Slavic alteration of the Greek word. But the
Slavic linguist Vasmer dismisses that, based on the initial sh- in the Slavic words, and suggests
the Slavic words are from Scandinavian rather than the reverse.    As an adjective from mid-14c. In
reference to the hair of corn, 1660s, American English. Figurative use of silk-stocking (n.) is from
1590s; as an adjective meaning wealthy it is attested from 1798, American English (silk stockings,
especially worn by men, being regarded as extravagant and reprehensible, indicative of luxurious
habits). Silk-screen (n.) is first attested 1930; as a verb from 1961. Silk road so called in
English from 1931.


