brittle (adj.)

late 14c., britel, perhaps from an unrecorded Old English adjective *brytel, related to brytan to
crush, pound, to break to pieces, from Proto-Germanic stem *brutila- brittle, from *breutan to break
up (cognates: Old Norse brjota to break, Old High German brodi fragile), from PIE *bhreu- to cut,
break up (see bruise (v.)). With -le, suffix forming adjectives with meaning liable to.


crispy (adj.)

late 14c., curly, from crisp (adj.) + -y (2). Meaning brittle is recorded from 1610s.


crisp (v.)

late 14c., to curl, from crisp (adj.). Meaning to become brittle is from 1805. Related: Crisped;
crisping.


frivolous (adj.)

mid-15c., from Latin frivolus silly, empty, trifling, worthless, brittle, diminutive of *frivos
broken, crumbled, from friare break, rub away, crumble. Related: Frivolously; frivolousness.


fragility (n.)

late 14c., moral weakness, from Old French fragilit&eacute; debility, frailty (12c.), from Latin
fragilitatem (nominative fragilitas) brittleness, from fragilis brittle, easily broken, from root of
frangere to break (see fraction). Meaning quality of being easily broken first recorded in English
late 15c.


crisp (adj.)

Old English crisp curly, from Latin crispus curled, wrinkled, having curly hair, from PIE root
*(s)ker- (3) to turn, bend (see ring (n.)). It began to mean brittle 1520s, for obscure reasons,
perhaps based on what happens to flat things when they are cooked. Figurative sense of neat, brisk
is from 1814; perhaps a separate word. As a noun, from late 14c. Potato crisps (the British version
of U.S. potato chips) is from 1929.


arc (n.)

late 14c., originally in reference to the sun's apparent motion in the sky, from Old French arc bow,
arch, vault (12c.), from Latin arcus a bow, arch, from PIE root *arku- bowed, curved (cognates:
Gothic arhvazna arrow, Old English earh, Old Norse &ouml;r; also, via notion of supple, flexible,
Greek arkeuthos, Latvian ercis juniper, Russian rakita, Czech rokyta, Serbo-Croatian rakita brittle
willow). Electrical sense is from 1821.


peanut (n.)

1807, earlier ground nut, ground pea (1769). The plant is native to S.America. Portuguese traders
took peanuts from Brazil and Peru to Africa by 1502 and it is known to have been cultivated in
Chekiang Province in China by 1573, probably arriving with Portuguese sailors who made stops in
Brazil en route to the Orient. Peanut butter attested by 1892; peanut brittle is from 1894. Peanut
gallery topmost rows of a theater is from 1874, American English; peanuts trivial sum is from 1934.


brothel (n.)

bawdy house, 1590s, shortened from brothel-house, from brothel prostitute (late 15c.), earlier vile,
worthless person of either sex (14c.), from Old English bro&eth;en past participle of breo&eth;an
deteriorate, go to ruin, from Proto-Germanic *breuthan to be broken up, related to *breutan to break
(see brittle). In 16c. brothel-house was confused with unrelated bordel (see bordello) and the word
shifted meaning from a person to a place.


lime (n.1)

chalky mineral used in making mortar, from Old English lim sticky substance, birdlime, mortar,
cement, gluten, from Proto-Germanic *leimaz (cognates: Old Saxon, Old Norse, Danish lim, Dutch lijm,
German Leim birdlime), from PIE root *(s)lei- slime, slimy, sticky (cognates: Latin limus slime,
mud, mire, linere to smear; see slime (n.)). Lime is made by putting limestone or shells in a red
heat, which burns off the carbonic acid and leaves a brittle white solid which dissolves easily in
water. Hence lime-kiln (late 13c.), lime-burner (early 14c.). As a verb, c.1200, from the noun.


antimony (n.)

brittle metallic element, early 15c., from Old French antimoine and directly from Medieval Latin
antimonium, an alchemist's term (used 11c. by Constantinus Africanus), origin obscure, probably a
Latinization of Greek stimmi powdered antimony, black antimony (a cosmetic used to paint the
eyelids), from some Arabic word (such as al 'othmud), unless the Arabic word is from the Greek or
the Latin is from Arabic; probably ultimately from Egyptian stm powdered antimony. In French folk
etymology, anti-moine monk's bane (from moine).    As the name of a pure element, it is attested in
English from 1788. Its chemical symbol Sb is for Stibium, the Latin name for black antimony, which
word was used also in English for black antimony.


