brood (v.)

sit on eggs, hatch, mid-15c., from brood (n.). The figurative meaning (to incubate in the mind) is
first recorded 1570s, from notion of nursing one's anger, resentment, etc. Related: Brooded;
brooding.


brood (n.)

Old English brod brood, fetus, hatchling, from Proto-Germanic *brod (cognates: Middle Dutch broet,
Old High German bruot, German Brut brood), literally that which is hatched by heat, from *bro- to
warm, heat, from PIE *bhre- burn, heat, incubate, from root *bhreue- to boil, bubble, effervesce,
burn (see brew (v.)).


brooding (adj.)

1640s, hovering, overhanging (as a mother bird does her nest), from present participle of brood
(v.); meaning that dwells moodily first attested 1818 (in Frankenstein).


brooding (n.)

action of incubating, c.1400, verbal noun from brood (v.). Figuratively (of weather, etc.) from
1805; of mental fixations by 1873. Related: Broodingly.


broody (adj.)

1510s, apt to breed, from brood (v.) + -y (2). Figuratively, of persons, from 1851. Also, in modern
use, sometimes full of maternal yearning. Related: Broodily; broodiness.


covey (n.)

mid-14c., brood of partridges, from Middle French cov&eacute;e brood (Modern French couv&eacute;e),
from Gallo-Roman *cubata, literally hatchling, from past participle stem of Latin cubare to sit,
incubate, hatch (see incubation).


breed (v.)

Old English bredan bring young to birth, carry, also cherish, keep warm, from West Germanic *brodjan
(cognates: Old High German bruoten, German br&uuml;ten to brood, hatch), from *brod- fetus,
hatchling, from PIE *bhreue- burn, heat (see brood (n.)). Original notion of the word was
incubation, warming to hatch. Sense of grow up, be reared (in a clan, etc.) is late 14c. Related:
Bred; breeding.


spawn (n.)

late 15c., fish eggs, from spawn (v.); figurative sense of brood, offspring, and, insultingly, of
persons, is from 1580s.


grubelsucht (n.)

1876, from German Gr&uuml;belsucht, psychiatric term for a form of obsession in which even the
simplest facts are compulsively queried, from gr&uuml;beln to brood (see grub (v.)) + sucht mania.


clutch (n.3)

a brood, a nest in reference to chickens, eggs, 1721, from clekken to hatch (c.1400). Said by OED to
be apparently a southern England dialect word. Compare batch/bake. Probably from a Scandinavian
source (such as Old Norse klekja to hatch), perhaps of imitative origin (compare cluck (v.)).


incubate (v.)

1640s, to brood upon, watch jealously (which also was a figurative sense of Latin incubare); 1721 as
to sit on eggs to hatch them, from Latin incubatus, past participle of incubare to lie in or upon
(see incubation). Related: Incubated; incubating.


scone (n.)

thin, flat soft cake, 1510s, Scottish, probably shortened from Dutch schoon brood fine bread, from
Middle Dutch schoonbroot, from schoon, scone bright, beautiful (see sheen) + broot (see bread (n.)).


penis (n.)

1670s, perhaps from French p&eacute;nis or directly from Latin penis penis, earlier tail, from PIE
*pes- penis (cognates: Sanskrit pasas-, Greek peos, posthe penis, probably also Old English
f&aelig;sl progeny, offspring, Old Norse f&ouml;sull, German Fasel young of animals, brood). The
proper plural is penes. The adjective is penial. In psychological writing, penis envy is attested
from 1924.


colt (n.)

Old English colt colt, originally young ass, in Biblical translations also used for young camel,
perhaps from Proto-Germanic *kultaz (cognates: Swedish dialectal kult young boar, piglet; boy,
Danish kuld offspring, brood) and akin to child. Applied to persons from early 13c.    COLT'S TOOTH
An old fellow who marries, or keeps a young girl, is &#383;aid to have a colt's tooth in his head.
[Classical Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, 1796]


fetus (n.)

late 14c., the young while in the womb or egg, from Latin fetus (often, incorrectly, foetus) the
bearing, bringing forth, or hatching of young, from Latin base *fe- to generate, bear, also to suck,
suckle (see fecund).    In Latin, fetus sometimes was transferred figuratively to the newborn
creature itself, or used in a sense of offspring, brood (as in Horace's Germania quos horrida
parturit Fetus), but this was not the basic meaning. Also used of plants, in the sense of fruit,
produce, shoot. The spelling foetus is sometimes attempted as a learned Latinism, but it is not
historic.


teem (v.1)

abound, swarm, be prolific, Old English teman (Mercian), tieman (West Saxon) beget, give birth to,
bring forth, produce, propagate, from Proto-Germanic *tau(h)mjan (denominative), from PIE *deuk- to
lead (see duke (n.)). Related to team (n.) in its now-obsolete Old English sense of family, brood of
young animals. The meaning abound, swarm is first recorded 1590s, on the notion of be full of as if
ready to give birth. Related: Teemed; teeming.


bairn (n.)

child (of any age), Old English bearn child, son, descendant, probably related to beran (to bear,
carry, give birth; see bear (v.)). Originally not chiefly Scottish, but felt as such from c.1700.
This was the English form of the original Germanic word for child (see child). Dutch, Old High
German kind, German Kind are from a prehistoric *gen-to-m born, from the same root as Latin gignere.
Middle English had bairn-team brood of children.


nest (n.)

Old English nest bird's nest, snug retreat, also young bird, brood, from Proto-Germanic *nistaz
(cognates: Middle Low German, Middle Dutch nest, German Nest), from PIE *nizdo- (cognates: Sanskrit
nidah resting place, nest, Latin nidus nest, Old Church Slavonic gnezdo, Old Irish net, Welsh nyth,
Breton nez nest), probably from *ni down + *sed- (1) to sit (see sedentary).    Used since Middle
English in reference to various accumulations of things (such as a nest of drawers, early 18c.).
Nest egg retirement savings is from 1700, originally a real or artificial egg left in a nest to
induce the hen to go on laying there (c.1600).


team (n.)

Old English team descendant, family, race, line; child-bearing, brood; company, band; set of draft
animals yoked together, from Proto-Germanic *tau(h)maz (cognates: Old Norse taumr, Old Frisian tam
bridle; progeny, line of descent, Dutch toom, Old High German zoum, German Zaum bridle), probably
literally that which draws, from PIE *douk-mo-, from root *deuk- to pull (see duke (n.)).    Applied
in Old English to groups of persons working together for some purpose, especially group of people
acting together to bring suit; modern sense of persons associated in some joint action is from
1520s. Team spirit is recorded from 1928. Team player attested from 1886, originally in baseball.


seethe (v.)

Old English seo&thorn;an to boil, also figuratively, be troubled in mind, brood (class II strong
verb; past tense sea&thorn;, past participle soden), from Proto-Germanic *seuthan (cognates: Old
Norse sjo&eth;a, Old Frisian siatha, Dutch zieden, Old High German siodan, German sieden to seethe),
from PIE root *seut- to seethe, boil.    Driven out of its literal meaning by boil (v.); it survives
largely in metaphoric extensions. Figurative use, of persons or populations, to be in a state of
inward agitation is recorded from 1580s (implied in seething). It had wider figurative uses in Old
English, such as to try by fire, to afflict with cares. Now conjugated as a weak verb, and past
participle sodden (q.v.) is no longer felt as connected.


pare (v.)

to trim by cutting close, c.1300, from Old French parer arrange, prepare; trim, adorn, and directly
from Latin parare make ready, prepare, furnish, provide, arrange, order; contrive, design, intend,
resolve; procure, acquire, obtain, get; get with money, buy, purchase (related to parere produce,
bring forth, give birth to), from PIE *par-a-, suffixed form of root *pere- (1) produce, procure,
bring forward, bring forth, and derived words in diverse senses (cognates: Lithuanian pariu to
brood, Greek poris calf, bull, Old High German farro, German Farre bullock, Old English fearr bull,
Sanskrit prthukah child, calf, young of an animal, Czech spratek brat, urchin, premature calf).
Generalized meaning to reduce something little by little is from 1520s. Related: Pared; paring.


bird (n.1)

Old English bird, rare collateral form of bridd, originally young bird, nestling (the usual Old
English for bird being fugol), of uncertain origin with no cognates in any other Germanic language.
The suggestion that it is related by umlaut to brood and breed is rejected by OED as quite
inadmissible. Metathesis of -r- and -i- was complete 15c.    Middle English, in which bird referred
to various young animals and even human beings, may have preserved the original meaning of this
word. Despite its early attestation, bridd is not necessarily the oldest form of bird. It is usually
assumed that -ir- from -ri- arose by metathesis, but here, too, the Middle English form may go back
to an ancient period. [Liberman]    Figurative sense of secret source of information is from 1540s.
Bird dog (n.) attested from 1832, a gun dog used in hunting game birds; hence the verb (1941)
meaning to follow closely. Bird-watching attested from 1897. Bird's-eye view is from 1762. For the
birds recorded from 1944, supposedly in allusion to birds eating from droppings of horses and
cattle.A byrde yn honde ys better than three yn the wode. [c.1530]


bread (n.)

Old English bread bit, crumb, morsel; bread, cognate with Old Norse brau&eth;, Danish br&oslash;d,
Old Frisian brad, Middle Dutch brot, Dutch brood, German Brot. According to one theory [Watkins,
etc.] from Proto-Germanic *brautham, which would be from the root of brew (v.) and refer to the
leavening.    But OED argues at some length for the basic sense being not cooked food but piece of
food, and the Old English word deriving from a Proto-Germanic *braudsmon- fragments, bits (cognate
with Old High German brosma crumb, Old English breotan to break in pieces) and being related to the
root of break (v.). It cites  Slovenian kruh bread, literally a piece.    Either way, by c.1200 it
had replaced the usual Old English word for bread, which was hlaf (see loaf (n.)). Slang meaning
money dates from 1940s, but compare breadwinner. Bread-and-butter in the figurative sense of basic
needs is from 1732. Bread and circuses (1914) is from Latin, in reference to food and entertainment
provided by governments to keep the populace happy. Duas tantum res anxius optat, Panem et circenses
[Juvenal, Sat. x.80].


