Brooklyn

New York City borough, named for village founded there 1646 and named for Dutch township of
Breukelen near Utrecht; from Old High German bruoh moor, marshland; spelling of U.S. place name
influenced by brook (n.), which probably is distantly related.


brook (n.)

small stream, Old English broc flowing stream, torrest, of obscure origin, probably from Proto-
Germanic *broka- which yielded words in German (Bruch) and Dutch (broek) that have a sense of marsh.
In Sussex and Kent, it means water-meadow, and in plural, low, marshy ground.


brook (v.)

to endure, Old English brucan use, enjoy, possess; eat; cohabit with, from Proto-Germanic *bruk- to
make use of, enjoy (cognates: Old Saxon brukan, Old Frisian bruka, Old High German bruhhan, German
brauchen to use, Gothic brukjan), from PIE root *bhrug- to make use of, have enjoyment of (cognates:
Latin fructus). Sense of use applied to food led to be able to digest, and by 16c. to tolerate.


rill (n.)

small brook, rivulet, 1530s, from or related to Dutch and Frisian ril, Low German rille groove,
furrow, running stream, probably from Proto-Germanic *ril- (cognates: Old English ri&eth;,
ri&thorn;e brook, stream, which survives only in dialects), a diminutive form from PIE root *reie-
to run, flow (see Rhine).


rival (n.)

1570s, from Latin rivalis a rival, adversary in love; neighbor, originally, of the same brook, from
rivus brook (see rivulet). One who is in pursuit of the same object as another. The sense evolution
seems to be based on the competitiveness of neighbors: one who uses the same stream, or one on the
opposite side of the stream A secondary sense in Latin and sometimes in English was associate,
companion in duty, from the notion of one having a common right or privilege with another. As an
adjective 1580s from the noun.


rivulet (n.)

1580s, from Italian rivoletto, diminutive of rivolo, itself a diminutive of rivo brook, from Latin
rivus stream, brook, from PIE *reiwos, literally that which flows, from root *reie- to flow, run
(see Rhine).


Mayfair

fashionable district of London, developed 18c., built on Brook fields, where an annual May fair had
been held 17c.


Rhine

principal river in western Germany, from German Rhein, from Middle High German Rin, ultimately from
Gaulish Renos, literally that which flows, from PIE root *reie- to move, flow, run (cognates:
Sanskrit rinati causes to flow, ritih stream, course; Latin rivus stream; Old Church Slavonic reka
river; Middle Irish rian river, way; Gothic rinnan run, flow, rinno brook; Middle Low German ride
brook; Old English ri&thorn; stream; Old English rinnan, Old Norse rinna to run, Dutch ril running
stream). The spelling with -h- (also in Latin Rhenus; French Rhin) is from influence of the Greek
form of the name, Rhenos.


rio (n.)

a river, from Spanish rio, from Latin rivus brook, stream (see rivulet).


function (n.)

1530s, proper work or purpose, from Middle French fonction (16c.) and directly from Latin functionem
(nominative functio) performance, execution, noun of action from functus, past participle of fungi
perform, execute, discharge, from PIE root *bheug- (2) to use, enjoy (see brook (v.)). Use in
mathematics probably begun by Leibnitz (1692).


pond (n.)

c.1300 (mid-13c. in compounds), artificially banked body of water, variant of pound enclosed place
(see pound (n.2)). Applied locally to natural pools and small lakes from late 15c. Jocular reference
to the Atlantic Ocean dates from 1640s. Pond scum (Spirogyra) is from 1864 (also called frog-spittle
and brook-silk. As figurative for someone extremely repulsive, from 1984.


serum (n.)

1670s, watery animal fluid, from Latin serum watery fluid, whey, from PIE root *ser- (2) to run,
flow (cognates: Greek oros whey; Sanskrit sarah flowing, sarit brook, river). First applied 1893 to
blood serum used in medical treatments.


defunct (adj.)

1590s, from Old French defunct (14c., Modern French defunt) or directly from Latin defunctus dead,
literally off-duty, from past participle of defungi to discharge, finish, from de- off, completely
(see de-) + fungi perform or discharge duty, from PIE root *bheug- (2) to enjoy (see brook (v.)).


use (v.)

c.1200, employ for a purpose, from Old French user employ, make use of, practice, frequent, from
Vulgar Latin *usare use, frequentative form of past participle stem of Latin uti make use of, profit
by, take advantage of, enjoy, apply, consume, in Old Latin oeti use, employ, exercise, perform, of
uncertain origin. Related: Used; using. Replaced Old English brucan (see brook (v.)). From late 14c.
as take advantage of.


bourn (n.1)

also bourne, small stream, especially of the winter torrents of the chalk downs, Old English brunna,
burna brook, stream, from Proto-Germanic *brunnoz spring, fountain (cognates: Old High German
brunno, Old Norse brunnr, Old Frisian burna, German Brunnen fountain, Gothis brunna well),
ultimately from PIE root *bhreue- to boil, bubble, effervesce, burn (see brew (v.)).


groove (n.)

c.1400, cave, mine, pit (late 13c. in place names), from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse
grod pit, or from Middle Dutch groeve furrow, ditch, both from Proto-Germanic *grobo (cognates: Old
Norse grof brook, river bed, Old High German gruoba ditch, Gothic groba pit, cave, Old English
gr&aelig;f ditch), related to grave (n.). Sense of long, narrow channel or furrow is 1650s. Meaning
spiral cut in a phonograph record is from 1902. Figurative sense of routine is from 1842, often
deprecatory at first, a rut.


fruit (n.)

late 12c., from Old French fruit fruit, fruit eaten as dessert; harvest; virtuous action (12c.),
from Latin fructus an enjoyment, delight, satisfaction; proceeds, produce, fruit, crops, from frug-,
stem of frui to use, enjoy, from PIE *bhrug- agricultural produce, also to enjoy (see brook (v.)).
Classical sense preserved in fruits of one's labor. Originally in English meaning vegetables as
well. Modern narrower sense is from early 13c. Meaning odd person, eccentric is from 1910; that of
male homosexual is from 1935. The term also is noted in 1931 as tramp slang for a girl or woman
willing to oblige, probably from the fact of being easy picking. Fruit salad recorded from 1861.


enjoy (v.)

late 14c., rejoice, be glad (intransitive), from Old French enjoir to give joy, rejoice, take
delight in, from en- make (see en- (1)) + joir enjoy, from Latin gaudere rejoice (see joy); Sense of
have the use or benefit of first recorded early 15c. (replacing Old English brucan; see brook (v.)).
Meaning take pleasure in is mid-15c. In modern use it has a tendency to lose its connection with
pleasure: newspaper photo captions say someone enjoys an ice cream cone, etc., when all she is doing
is eating it, and Wright's English Dialect Dictionary (1900) reports widespread use in north and
west England of the phrase to enjoy bad health for one who has ailments. Related: Enjoyed; enjoying;
enjoys.


creek (n.)

mid-15c., creke narrow inlet in a coastline, altered from kryk (early 13c.; in place names from
12c.), probably from Old Norse kriki corner, nook, perhaps influenced by Anglo-French crique, itself
from a Scandinavian source via Norman. Perhaps ultimately related to crook and with an original
notion of full of bends and turns (compare dialectal Swedish krik corner, bend; creek, cove).
Extended to inlet or short arm of a river by 1570s, which probably led to use for small stream,
brook in American English (1620s). Also used there and in Canada, Australia, New Zealand for branch
of a main river, possibly from explorers moving up main rivers and seeing and noting mouths of
tributaries without knowing they often were extensive rivers of their own. Slang phrase up the creek
in trouble, often especially pregnant, first recorded 1941, perhaps originally armed forces slang
for lost while on patrol.


rheum (n.)

mucous discharge, late 14c., from Old French reume a cold (13c., Modern French rhume), from Latin
rheuma, from Greek rheuma discharge from the body, flux; a stream, current, flood, a flowing,
literally that which flows, from rhein to flow, from PIE root *sreu- to flow (cognates: Sanskrit
sravati flows, srotah stream; Avestan thraotah- stream, river, Old Persian rauta river; Greek rheos
a flowing, stream, rhythmos rhythm, rhytos fluid, liquid; Old Irish sruaim, Irish sruth stream,
river; Welsh ffrwd stream; Old Norse straumr, Old English stream, Old High German strom (second
element in maelstrom); Lettish strauma stream, river; Lithuanian sraveti to trickle, ooze; Old
Church Slavonic struja river, o-strovu island, literally that which is surrounded by a river; Polish
strumie&#324; brook).


