bruise (n.)

1540s, from bruise (v.).


bruise (v.)

Old English brysan to crush, bruise, pound, from Proto-Germanic *brusjan, from PIE root *bhreu- to
smash, cut, break up (cognates: Old Irish bronnaim I wrong, I hurt; Breton brezel war, Vulgar Latin
brisare to break). Merged by 17c. with Anglo-French bruiser to break, smash, from Old French
bruisier to break, shatter, perhaps from Gaulish *brus-, from the same PIE root. Related: Bruised;
bruising.


bruiser (n.)

a pugilist, 1744, agent noun from bruise (v.).


kibble (n.)

ground-up meat used as dog food, etc., apparently from the verb meaning to bruise or grind coarsely,
attested from 1790, first in milling, but of unknown origin. The same or an identical word was used
in the coal trade in the late 19c. and in mining from the 1670s for bucket used to haul up ore or
waste.


frustum (n.)

1650s, from Latin frustum piece broken off, from PIE *bhrus-to-, from root *bhreu- to cut, break up
(see bruise (v.)).


pound (v.)

hit repeatedly, from Middle English pounen, from Old English punian crush, pulverize, beat, bruise,
from West Germanic *puno- (cognates: Low German pun, Dutch puin fragments). With intrusive -d- from
16c. Sense of beat, thrash is from 1790. Related: Pounded; pounding.


infringe (v.)

mid-15c., enfrangen, to violate, from Latin infringere to damage, break off, break, bruise, from in-
in (see in- (2)) + frangere to break (see fraction). Meaning of encroach first recorded c.1760.
Related: Infringed; infringing.


brittle (adj.)

late 14c., britel, perhaps from an unrecorded Old English adjective *brytel, related to brytan to
crush, pound, to break to pieces, from Proto-Germanic stem *brutila- brittle, from *breutan to break
up (cognates: Old Norse brjota to break, Old High German brodi fragile), from PIE *bhreu- to cut,
break up (see bruise (v.)). With -le, suffix forming adjectives with meaning liable to.


macaroni (n.)

tube-shaped food made of dried wheaten paste [Klein], 1590s, from southern Italian dialectal
maccaroni (Italian maccheroni), plural of maccarone, name for a kind of pasty food, possibly from
maccare bruise, batter, crush, of unknown origin, or from late Greek makaria food made from barley.
Used after c.1764 to mean a fop, a dandy; typical of elegant young men (as in Yankee Doodle) because
it was an exotic dish at a time when certain young men who had traveled the continent were affecting
French and Italian fashions and accents. There is said to have been a Macaroni Club in Britain,
which was the immediate source of this usage in English.


mallet (n.)

late 14c., from Old French maillet mallet, small wooden hammer, door-knocker, diminutive of mail,
from Latin malleus a hammer, from PIE *mal-ni-, from root *mel- (1) soft, with derivatives referring
to softened material and tools for grinding (cognates: Hittite mallanzi they grind; Armenian malem I
crush, bruise; Greek malakos soft, mylos millstone; Latin molere to grind, mola millstone, mill,
milium millet; Old English melu meal, flour; Albanian miel meal, flour; Old Church Slavonic meljo,
Lithuanian malu to grind; Old Church Slavonic mlatu, Russian molotu hammer).


