bugaboo (n.)

1843, earlier buggybow (1740), probably an alteration of bugbear (also see bug (n.)), but connected
by Chapman [Dictionary of American Slang] with Bugibu, demon in the Old French poem Aliscans from
1141, which is perhaps of Celtic origin (compare Cornish bucca-boo, from bucca bogle, goblin).


jigaboo (n.)

insulting name for a black person, 1909, perhaps from jig (q.v.), which had been applied insultingly
to persons since late 18c., and ending from bugaboo.


bug (n.)

insect, 1620s (earliest reference is to bedbugs), of unknown origin, probably but not certainly from
or influenced by Middle English bugge something frightening, scarecrow (late 14c.), a meaning
obsolete since the insect sense arose except in bugbear (1570s) and bugaboo (q.v.).    Probably
connected with Scottish bogill goblin, bugbear, or obsolete Welsh bwg ghost, goblin (compare Welsh
bwgwl threat, earlier fear, Middle Irish bocan&#225;ch supernatural being). Some speculate that
these words are from a root meaning goat (see buck (n.1)) and represent originally a goat-like
spectre. Compare also bogey (n.1) and German b&ouml;gge, b&ouml;ggel-mann goblin. Perhaps influenced
in meaning by Old English -budda used in compounds for beetle (compare Low German budde louse, grub,
Middle Low German buddech thick, swollen).     In the United States bug is not confined, as in
England, to the domestic pest, but is applied to all insects of the Coleoptera order, which includes
what in this country are generally called beetles. [Farmer &amp; Henley, Dictionary of Slang and
Colloquial English, 1912 abridged edition]    Meaning defect in a machine (1889) may have been
coined c.1878 by Thomas Edison (perhaps with the notion of an insect getting into the works).
Meaning person obsessed by an idea (such as firebug) is from 1841, perhaps from notion of
persistence. Sense of microbe, germ is from 1919. Bugs crazy is from c.1900. Bug juice as a slang
name for drink is from 1869, originally bad whiskey. The 1811 slang dictionary has bug-hunter an
upholsterer. Bug-word word or words meant to irritate and vex is from 1560s.


