bully (n.)

1530s, originally sweetheart, applied to either sex, from Dutch boel lover; brother, probably a
diminutive of Middle Dutch broeder brother (compare Middle High German buole brother, source of
German Buhle lover; see brother (n.)).    Meaning deteriorated 17c. through fine fellow and
blusterer to harasser of the weak (1680s, from bully-ruffian, 1650s). Perhaps this was by influence
of bull (n.1), but a connecting sense between lover and ruffian may be in protector of a prostitute,
which was one sense of bully (though not specifically attested until 1706). The expression meaning
worthy, jolly, admirable (especially in 1864 U.S. slang bully for you!) is first attested 1680s, and
preserves an earlier, positive sense of the word.


bully (v.)

1710, from bully (n.). Related: Bullied; bullying.


bully pulpit (n.)

1904, coined by U.S. president Teddy Roosevelt, in reference to the White House.


bullying (n.)

1802, verbal noun from bully (v.).


bullied (adj.)

1851, past participle adjective from bully (v.).


slasher (n.)

1550s, a bully, a fighter; 1815, weapon for slashing, agent noun from slash (v.). As violent movie
by 1978.


bouncer (n.)

mid-19c. in various senses, noun derivative of bounce (v.) in its original sense of thump, hit.
Earliest attested is boaster, bully, braggart (1833); also large example of its kind (1842);
enforcer of order in a bar or saloon (1865, American English, originally colloquial).  The Bouncer
is merely the English chucker out. When liberty verges on license and gaiety on wanton delirium, the
Bouncer selects the gayest of the gay, and -- bounces him! [London Daily News, July 26, 1883]


sandbag (v.)

1860, furnish with sandbags, from sandbag (n.). Meaning pretend weakness, 1970s perhaps is extended
from poker-playing sense of refrain from raising at the first opportunity in hopes of raising more
steeply later (1940), which perhaps is from sandbagger in the sense of bully or ruffian who uses a
sandbag as a weapon to knock his intended victim unconscious (1882). Hence to fell or stun with a
blow from a sandbag (1887). Related: Sandbagged; sandbagging.


Mohammed

former common English transliteration of Muhammad.    The worst of letting the learned gentry bully
us out of our traditional Mahometan &amp; Mahomet ... is this: no sooner have we tried to be good
&amp; learnt to say, or at least write, Mohammed than they are fired with zeal to get us a step or
two further on the path of truth, which at present seems likely to end in Muhammad with a dot under
the h .... [H.W. Fowler, A Dictionary of Modern English Usage, 1926]


browbeat (v.)

to bully, originally to bear down with stern or arrogant looks, 1580s, from brow + beat (v.).
[I]t appears from the earliest quotations ... that the brow in question was that of the beater, not
of the beaten party; but it is not evident whether the meaning was 'to beat with one's (frowning)
brows,' or 'to beat (?lower) one's brows at.' [OED]    Related: Browbeaten; browbeating.


killjoy (n.)

also kill-joy, 1776, from kill (v.) + joy. Formerly used with other stems (such as kill-courtesy
boorish person, kill-cow bully, big man, etc.).


roister (v.)

bluster, swagger, be bold, noisy, vaunting, or turbulent, 1580s, from an obsolete noun roister noisy
bully (1550s, displaced by 19c. by roisterer), from Middle French ruistre ruffian, from Old French
ruiste boorish, gross, uncouth, from Latin rusticus (see rustic (adj.)). Related: Roistered;
roistering. Ralph Royster-Doyster is the title and lead character of what is sometimes called the
first English comedy (Udall, 1555).


ruffian (n.)

1530s, a boisterous, brutal fellow, one ready to commit any crime, from Middle French rufian a pimp
(15c.), from Italian ruffiano a pander, pimp, of uncertain origin, perhaps from a Germanic source
related to rough (adj.), but Dutch roffiaan, German Ruffian are said to be from French. English
meaning might have been influenced by similarity of sound to rough. Related: Ruffianly.    The
Romanic words (such as Medieval Latin ruffianus, Proven&ccedil;al rufian, Catalan rufia, Spanish
rufian) preserve the sense of protector or owner of whores. For sense evolution in English, compare
bully (n.).


Shakespeare

surname recorded from 1248; it means a spearman. This was a common type of English surname
(Shakelance (1275), Shakeshaft (1332)). Shake (v.) in the sense of to brandish or flourish (a
weapon) is attested from late Old English  Heo sc&aelig;ken on heore honden speren swi&eth;e
stronge.  [Laymon, Brut, c. 1205]  Compare also shake-buckler a swaggerer, a bully; shake-rag ragged
fellow, tatterdemalion. Never a name in English nomenclature so simple or so certain in origin. It
is exactly what it looks -- Shakespear [Bardsley, Dictionary of English and Welsh Surnames, 1901].
Nevertheless, speculation flourishes. The name was variously written in contemporary records, also
Shakespear, Shakespere, the last form being the one adopted by the New Shakespere Society of London
and the first edition of the OED. Related: Shakespearian (1753); Shakesperean (1796); Shakesperian
(1755).


barratry (n.)

early 15c., sale of ecclesiastical or state offices, from Old French baraterie deceit, guile,
trickery, from barat malpractice, fraud, deceit, trickery, of unknown origin, perhaps from Celtic.
In marine law, wrongful conduct by a ship's crew or officer, resulting in loss to owners, from
1620s. Meaning offense of habitually starting legal suits is from 1640s. Sense somewhat confused
with that of Middle English baratri combat, fighting (c.1400), from Old Norse baratta fight, contest
strife. This was an active word in Middle English, with forms such as baraten to disturb the peace
(mid-15c.); baratour inciter to riot, bully (late 14c., mid-13c. as a surname). Barataria Bay,
Louisiana, U.S., is from Spanish baratear to cheat, deceive, cognate of the French word; the bay so
called in reference to the difficulty of its entry passages.


coward (n.)

mid-13c., from Old French coart coward (no longer the usual word in French, which has now in this
sense poltron, from Italian, and l&acirc;che), from coe tail, from Latin coda, popular dialect
variant of cauda tail, of uncertain origin + -ard, an agent noun suffix denoting one that carries on
some action or possesses some quality, with derogatory connotation (see -ard).    The word probably
reflects an animal metaphoric sense still found in expressions like turning tail and tail between
legs. Coart was the name of the hare in Old French versions of Reynard the Fox. Italian codardo,
Spanish cobarde are from French.    The identification of coward &amp; bully has gone so far in the
popular consciousness that persons &amp; acts in which no trace of fear is to be found are often
called coward(ly) merely because advantage has been taken of superior strength or position ....
[Fowler]    As a surname (attested from 1255) it represents Old English cuhyrde cow-herd. Farmer has
coward's castle a pulpit, Because a clergyman may deliver himself therefrom without fear of
contradiction or argument.


out (adv.)

Old English ut out, without, outside, common Germanic (Old Norse, Old Frisian, Old Saxon, Gothic ut,
Middle Dutch uut, Dutch uit, Old High German uz, German aus), from PIE root *ud- up, out, up away
(cognates: Sanskrit ut up, out, uttarah higher, upper, later, northern; Avestan uz- up, out, Old
Irish ud- out, Latin usque all the way to, without interruption, Greek hysteros the latter, Russian
vy- out). Meaning into public notice is from 1540s. As an adjective from c.1200. Meaning unconscious
is attested from 1898, originally in boxing. Sense of not popular or modern is from 1966. As a
preposition from mid-13c.    Sense in baseball (1860) was earlier in cricket (1746). Adverbial
phrase out-and-out thoroughly is attested from early 14c.; adjective usage is attested from 1813;
out-of-the-way (adj.) remote, secluded is attested from late 15c. Out-of-towner one not from a
certain place is from 1911. Shakespeare's It out-herods Herod (Hamlet) reflects Herod as stock
braggart and bully in old religious drama and was widely imitated 19c. Out to lunch insane is
student slang from 1955; out of this world excellent is from 1938; out of sight excellent, superior
is from 1891.


ragtime (n.)

also rag-time, syncopated, jazzy piano music, 1897, perhaps from rag dance ball (1895, American
English dialect), or a shortening of ragged, in reference to the syncopated melody. Rag (n.) ragtime
dance tune is from 1899.    If rag-time was called tempo di raga or rague-temps it might win honor
more speedily. ... What the derivation of the word is[,] I have not the faintest idea. The negroes
call their clog-dancing ragging and the dance a rag. [Rupert Hughes, Boston Musical Record, April
1900]   <hr />   Conceive the futility of trying to reduce the intangible ragness to a strict system
of misbegotten grace notes and untimely rests! In attempting to perfect, and simplify, art is
destroying the unhampered spirit in which consists the whole beauty of rag-time music. The very
essence of rag-time is that it shall lack all art, depending for the spirit to be infused more upon
the performer than upon the composer himself. [Yale Literary Magazine, June, 1899]   <hr />   Her
first rag-time was The Bully, in which she made great sport by bringing a little coloured boy on the
stage with her. Miss [May] Irwin says the way to learn to sing rag-time is to catch a negro and
study him. [Lewis C. Strang, Famous Actresses of the Day in America, Boston, 1899]


