bungle (n.)

1650s, from bungle (v.).


bungler (n.)

1530s, agent noun from bungle (v.).


bungle (v.)

1520s, origin obscure. OED suggests imitative; perhaps a mix of boggle and bumble, or more likely
from a Scandinavian word akin to Swedish bangla to work ineffectually, Old Swedish bunga to strike
(related to German Bengel cudgel, also rude fellow). Related: Bungled; bungling.


bungling (n.)

1660s, verbal noun from bungle (v.).


bungling (adj.)

1580s, past participle adjective from bungle (v.). Related: Bunglingly.


clusterfuck (n.)

bungled or confused undertaking, 1969, U.S. military slang, from cluster + fuck, probably in the
bungle sense. Earlier the compound meant orgy (1966).


bollix (v.)

bungle, respelling (perhaps euphemistic) of bollocks, plural of bollock testicle, from Old English
beallucas testicles, from Proto-Germanic *ball-, from PIE *bhel- (2) to inflate, swell (see bole).
Related: Bollixed; bollixing.


muff (v.)

to bungle, 1827, pugilism slang, probably related to muff (n.) awkward person (1837), perhaps from
muff (n.) on notion of someone clumsy because his hands are in a muff. Related: Muffed; muffing.


muddle (v.)

1590s, destroy the clarity of (a transferred sense); literal sense (to bathe in mud) is from c.1600;
perhaps frequentative formation from mud, or from Dutch moddelen to make (water) muddy, from the
same Proto-Germanic source. Sense of to make muddy is from 1670s; that of make confused first
recorded 1680s. Meaning to bungle is from 1885. Related: Muddled; muddling.


ferhoodle (v.)

to confuse, perplex, from Pennsylvania German verhuddle to confuse, tangle, related to German
verhudeln to bungle, botch. Related: Ferhoodled; ferhoodling.


bitch (v.)

to complain, attested at least from 1930, perhaps from the sense in bitchy, perhaps influenced by
the verb meaning to bungle, spoil, which is recorded from 1823. But bitched in this sense seems to
echo Middle English bicched cursed, bad, a general term of opprobrium (as in Chaucer's bicched bones
unlucky dice), which despite the hesitation of OED, seems to be a derivative of bitch (n.).


blow (v.1)

move air, Old English blawan blow, breathe, make an air current; kindle; inflate; sound a wind
instrument (class VII strong verb; past tense bleow, past participle blawen), from Proto-Germanic
*bl&aelig;-anan (source of Old High German blaen, German bl&auml;hen), from PIE *bhle- to swell,
blow up (source of Latin flare to blow), possibly identical with *bhel- (2) to blow, swell (see
bole).    Meaning to squander (of money) is from 1874. Sense of depart suddenly is from 1902. Slang
do fellatio on sense is from 1933, as blow (someone) off, originally among prostitutes (compare blow
job). This usage probably is not connected to the colloquial imprecation (1781, associated with
sailors, as in Popeye's well, blow me down!), which has past participle blowed. Meaning to spend
(money) foolishly and all at once is 1890s; that of bungle an opportunity is from 1943. To blow over
pass is from 1610s, originally of storms. To blow (someone's) mind was in use by 1967; there is a
song title Blow Your Mind released in a 1965 Mirawood recording by a group called The Gas Company.


sabotage (n.)

1907 (from 1903 as a French word in English), from French sabotage, from saboter to sabotage,
bungle, literally walk noisily, from sabot wooden shoe (13c.), altered (by association with Old
French bot boot) from Middle French savate old shoe, from an unidentified source that also produced
similar words in Old Proven&ccedil;al, Portuguese, Spanish (zapata), Italian (ciabatta), Arabic
(sabbat), and Basque (zapata).    In French, and at first in English, the sense of deliberately and
maliciously destroying property originally was in reference to labor disputes, but the oft-repeated
story (as old as the record of the word in English) that the modern meaning derives from strikers'
supposed tactic of throwing shoes into machinery is not supported by the etymology. Likely it was
not meant as a literal image; the word was used in French in a variety of bungling senses, such as
to play a piece of music badly. This, too, was the explanation given in some early usages.
SABOTAGE [chapter heading] The title we have prefixed seems to mean scamping work. It is a device
which, we are told, has been adopted by certain French workpeople as a substitute for striking. The
workman, in other words, purposes to remain on and to do his work badly, so as to annoy his
employer's customers and cause loss to his employer. [The Liberty Review, January 1907]   <hr />
You may believe that sabotage is murder, and so forth, but it is not so at all. Sabotage means
giving back to the bosses what they give to us. Sabotage consists in going slow with the process of
production when the bosses go slow with the same process in regard to wages. [Arturo M. Giovannitti,
quoted in report of the Sagamore Sociological Conference, June 1907]   <hr />   In English,
malicious mischief would appear to be the nearest explicit definition of sabotage, which is so much
more expressive as to be likely of adoption into all languages spoken by nations suffering from this
new force in industry and morals. Sabotage has a flavor which is unmistakable even to persons
knowing little slang and no French .... [Century Magazine, November 1910]


