burlesque (n.)

1660s, derisive imitation, grotesque parody, from French burlesque (16c.), from Italian burlesco,
from burla joke, fun, mockery, possibly ultimately from Late Latin burra trifle, nonsense, literally
flock of wool. Modern sense of variety show featuring striptease is American English, 1870.
Originally (1857) the sketches at the end of minstrel shows. As a verb, from 1670s.


amphigory (n.)

1809, burlesque nonsense writing or verse, from French amphigouri, of unknown origin, perhaps from
Greek amphi- (see amphi-) + gyros circle, thus circle on both sides, or second element may be from
Greek -agoria speech (compare allegory, category). Related: Amphigoric.


banana (n.)

1590s, borrowed by Spanish or Portuguese from a West African word, possibly Wolof banana. The plant
was introduced to the New World from Africa in 1516. Top banana, second banana, etc. are 1950s, from
show business slang use of banana for comedian, especially in a burlesque show. Banana split first
attested 1920. Banana oil nonsense is slang from c.1910.


travesty (n.)

1670s, literary burlesque of a serious work, from adjective meaning dressed so as to be made
ridiculous, parodied, burlesqued (1660s), from French travesti dressed in disguise, past participle
of travestir to disguise (1590s), from Italian travestire to disguise, from Latin trans- over (see
trans-) + vestire to clothe (see wear (v.)).


parody (n.)

1590s (first recorded use in English is in Ben Jonson), from or in imitation of Latin parodia
parody, from Greek paroidia burlesque song or poem, from para- beside, parallel to (see para- (1),
in this case, mock-) + oide song, ode (see ode). The meaning poor or feeble imitation is from 1830.
Related: Parodic; parodical.


clever (adj.)

1580s, handy, dexterous, apparently from East Anglian dialectal cliver expert at seizing, perhaps
from East Frisian kl&#252;fer skillful, or Norwegian dialectic klover ready, skillful, and perhaps
influenced by Old English clifer claw, hand (early usages seem to refer to dexterity). Or perhaps
akin to Old Norse kleyfr easy to split and from a root related to cleave to split. Extension to
intellect is first recorded 1704.    This is a low word, scarcely ever used but in burlesque or
conversation; and applied to any thing a man likes, without a settled meaning. [Johnson, 1755]
The meaning has narrowed since, but clever also often in old use and dialect meant well-shaped,
attractive-looking and in 19c. American English sometimes good-natured, agreeable. Related:
Cleverly; cleverness.


sex (n.)

late 14c., males or females collectively, from Latin sexus a sex, state of being either male or
female, gender, of uncertain origin. Commonly taken with seco as division or 'half' of the race
[Tucker], which would connect it to secare to divide or cut (see section (n.)). Meaning quality of
being male or female first recorded 1520s. Meaning sexual intercourse first attested 1929 (in
writings of D.H. Lawrence); meaning genitalia is attested from 1938. Sex appeal attested by 1904.
For the raw sex appeal of the burlesque shows there is no defense, either. These shows should be
under official supervision, at the least, and boys beneath the age of eighteen forbidden, perhaps,
to attend their performance, just as we forbid the sale of liquors to minors. [Walter Prichard
Eaton, At the New Theatre and Others: The American Stage, Its Problems and Performances, Boston,
1910]   Sex drive is from 1918; sex object is 1901; sex symbol is 1871 in anthropology; the first
person to whom the term was applied seems to have been Marilyn Monroe (1959). Sex therapist is from
1974.


comedy (n.)

late 14c., from Old French comedie (14c., a poem, not in the theatrical sense), from Latin comoedia,
from Greek komoidia a comedy, amusing spectacle, probably from komodios actor or singer in the
revels, from komos revel, carousal, merry-making, festival, + aoidos singer, poet, from aeidein to
sing, related to oide (see ode).    The passage on the nature of comedy in the Poetic of Aristotle
is unfortunately lost, but if we can trust stray hints on the subject, his definition of comedy
(which applied mainly to Menander) ran parallel to that of tragedy, and described the art as a
purification of certain affections of our nature, not by terror and pity, but by laughter and
ridicule. [Rev. J.P. Mahaffy, A History of Classical Greek Literature, London, 1895]    The
classical sense of the word, then, was amusing play or performance, which is similar to the modern
one, but in the Middle Ages the word came to mean poems and stories generally (albeit ones with
happy endings), and the earliest English sense is narrative poem (such as Dante's Commedia).
Generalized sense of quality of being amusing dates from 1877.   Comedy aims at entertaining by the
fidelity with which it presents life as we know it, farce at raising laughter by the outrageous
absurdity of the situation or characters exhibited, &amp; burlesque at tickling the fancy of the
audience by caricaturing plays or actors with whose style it is familiar. [Fowler]


fool (n.)

late 13c., silly or stupid person, from Old French fol madman, insane person; idiot; rogue; jester,
also blacksmith's bellows, also an adjective meaning mad, insane (12c., Modern French fou), from
Latin follis bellows, leather bag (see follicle); in Vulgar Latin used with a sense of windbag,
empty-headed person. Compare also Sanskrit vatula- insane, literally windy, inflated with wind.
The word has in mod.Eng. a much stronger sense than it had at an earlier period; it has now an
implication of insulting contempt which does not in the same degree belong to any of its synonyms,
or to the derivative foolish. [OED]    Meaning jester, court clown first attested late 14c., though
it is not always possible to tell whether the reference is to a professional entertainer or an
amusing lunatic on the payroll. As the name of a kind of custard dish, it is attested from 1590s
(the food also was called trifle, which may be the source of the name).    There is no foole to the
olde foole [Heywood, 1546] Feast of Fools (early 14c.), from Medieval Latin festum stultorum) refers
to the burlesque festival celebrated in some churches on New Year's Day in medieval times. Fool's
gold iron pyrite is from 1829. Fool's paradise state of illusory happiness is from mid-15c.
Foolosopher, a most useful insult, turns up in a 1549 translation of Erasmus. Fool's ballocks is
described in OED as an old name for the green-winged orchid.


