cadet (n.)

c.1610, younger son or brother, from French cadet military student officer, noun use of adjective,
younger (15c.), from Gascon capdet captain, chief, youth of a noble family, from Late Latin
capitellum, literally little chief, hence, inferior head of a family, diminutive of Latin caput head
(see capitulum). The eldest son being regarded as the first head of the family, the second son the
cadet, or little head [Kitchin].    Apparently younger sons from Gascon noble families were sent to
French court to serve as officers, which gave the word its military meaning. In English, the meaning
gentleman entering the military as a profession is from 1650s, and that of student at a military
college is from 1775.


caddie (n.)

1630s, Scottish form of French cadet (see cadet). Originally person who runs errands; meaning of
golfer's assistant is 1851. A letter from Edinburgh c.1730 describes the city's extensive and semi-
organized Cawdys, a very useful Black-Guard, who attend ... publick Places to go at Errands; and
though they are Wretches, that in Rags lye upon the Stairs and in the Streets at Night, yet are they
often considerably trusted .... This Corps has a kind of Captain ... presiding over them, whom they
call the Constable of the Cawdys.


space (v.)

1540s, to make of a certain extent; 1680s in typography; 1703 as to arrange at set intervals, from
space (n.). Meaning to be in a state of drug-induced euphoria is recorded from 1968. Space cadet
eccentric person disconnected with reality (often implying an intimacy with hallucinogenic drugs) is
a 1960s phrase, probably traceable to 1950s U.S. sci-fi television program Tom Corbett, Space Cadet,
which was watched by many children who dreamed of growing up to be one and succeeded. Related:
Spaced; spacing.


cad (n.)

1730, shortening of cadet (q.v.); originally used of servants, then (1831) of town boys by students
at British universities and public schools (though at Cambridge it meant snob). Meaning person
lacking in finer feelings is from 1838.A cad used to be a jumped-up member of the lower classes who
was guilty of behaving as if he didn't know that his lowly origin made him unfit for having sexual
relationships with well-bred women. [Anthony West, H.G. Wells: Aspects of a Life, 1984]


newbie (n.)

newcomer, new person to an existing situation, by 1969, from new with diminutive or derogatory
suffix. Perhaps originally U.S. military slang. Compare noob. Middle English had newing a new thing
(early 15c.); new was used as a noun meaning naval cadet during first training on a ship (1909); and
newie new thing is recorded from 1947.


snooker (n.)

1889, the game and the word said in an oft-told story to have been invented in India by British
officers as a diversion from billiards. The name is perhaps a reference (with regard to the rawness
of play by a fellow officer) to British slang snooker newly joined cadet, first-term student at the
R.M. Academy (1872). Tradition ascribes the coinage to Col. Sir Neville Chamberlain (not the later
prime minister of the same name), at the time subaltern in the Devonshire Regiment in Jubbulpore.
One of the first descriptions of the game is in A.W. Drayson's The Art  of Practical Billiards for
Amateurs (1889), which states in a footnote The rules of the game of snooker are the copyright of
Messrs. Burroughes &amp; Watts, from whom they may be obtained, they being manufacturers of billiard
tables.


