cadence (n.)

late 14c., flow of rhythm in verse or music, from Middle French cadence, from Old Italian cadenza
conclusion of a movement in music, literally a falling, from Vulgar Latin *cadentia, from neuter
plural of Latin cadens, present participle of cadere to fall (see case (n.1)). In 16c., sometimes
used literally for an act of falling. A doublet of chance (n.).


cadenza (n.)

ornamental passage near the close of a song or solo, 1836, from Italian cadenza (see cadence).


lilt (v.)

1510s, to lift up (the voice), probably from late 14c. West Midlands dialect lulten to sound an
alarm, of unknown origin. Possible relatives include Norwegian lilla to sing and Low German lul
pipe. It is possible that the whole loose group is imitative. Sense of sing in a light manner is
first recorded 1786. Related: Lilted; lilting. As a noun, 1728, lilting song, from the verb. As
rhythmical cadence, 1840.


decadence (n.)

1540s, from Middle French d&eacute;cadence (early 15c.), from Medieval Latin decadentia decay, from
decadentem (nominative decadens) decaying, present participle of decadere to decay, from Latin de-
apart, down (see de-) + cadere to fall (see case (n.1)). Used of periods in art since 1852, on
French model.


zilch (n.)

nothing, 1957; insignificant person, 1933, from use of Zilch as a generic comical-sounding surname
for an insignificant person (especially Joe Zilch). There was a Mr. Zilch (1931), comic character in
the magazine Ballyhoo, and the use perhaps originated c.1922 in U.S. college or theater slang.
Probably a nonsense syllable, suggestive of the end of the alphabet, but Zilch is an actual German
surname of Slavic origin.    The [Cadence] agency aims to have each album cover actually promote the
record, on the theory that the day of pretty, boffy, zoomy and zingy covers for the sake of zilch is
no more. [Billboard, Oct. 28, 1957]


decadent (adj.)

in a state of decline or decay (from a former condition of excellence), 1837, from French
d&eacute;cadent, back-formation from d&eacute;cadence (see decadence). In reference to literary
(later, other artistic) schools that believed, or affected to believe, they lived in an age of
artistic decadence, 1885 in French, 1888 in English. Usually in a bad sense:    Bread, supposedly
the staff of life, has become one of our most decadent foods -- doughy, gummy, and without the
aroma, flavor, texture, taste and appearance that is typical of good bread. [College and University
Business 1960]    Beckoning sense of desirable and satisfying to self-indulgence begins c.1970 in
commercial publications in reference to desserts.


