calamity (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French calamite (14c.), from Latin calamitatem (nominative calamitas)
damage, loss, failure; disaster, misfortune, adversity, origin obscure. Early etymologists
associated it with calamus straw (see shawm); but it is perhaps from a lost root preserved in
incolumis uninjured, from PIE *kle-mo-, from base *kel- (1) to strike, cut (see holt).


onset (n.)

1530s, attack, assault, from on + set (n.); compare verbal phrase to set (something) on (someone).
Weaker sense of beginning, start first recorded 1560s. Figurative use in reference to a calamity,
disease, etc. is from 1580s.


mischance (n.)

c.1300, from Old French mescheance misfortune, mishap, accident; wickedness, malice, from Vulgar
Latin *minuscadentiam; see mis- (2) + chance (n.). Now usually bad luck; formerly much stronger:
calamity, disaster.


calamitous (adj.)

1540s, from French calamiteux (16c.), from Latin calamitosus causing loss, destructive, from
calamitas (see calamity). Related: Calamitously; calamitousness.


grief (n.)

early 13c., hardship, suffering, pain, bodily affliction, from Old French grief wrong, grievance,
injustice, misfortune, calamity (13c.), from grever afflict, burden, oppress, from Latin gravare to
cause grief, make heavy, from gravis weighty (see grave (adj.)). Meaning mental pain, sorrow is from
c.1300.


disaster (n.)

1590s, from Middle French d&eacute;sastre (1560s), from Italian disastro ill-starred, from dis-,
here merely pejorative (see dis-) + astro star, planet, from Latin astrum, from Greek astron (see
star (n.)). The sense is astrological, of a calamity blamed on an unfavorable position of a planet.


adversity (n.)

c.1200, aduersite misfortune, hardship, difficulty, from Old French aversit&eacute; adversity,
calamity, misfortune; hostility, wickedness, malice (Modern French adversit&eacute;), from Latin
adversitatem (nominative adversitas) opposition, from adversus (see adverse).


pathos (n.)

quality that arouses pity or sorrow, 1660s, from Greek pathos suffering, feeling, emotion, calamity,
literally what befalls one, related to paskhein to suffer, and penthos grief, sorrow; from PIE root
*kwent(h)- to suffer, endure (cognates: Old Irish cessaim I suffer, Lithuanian ken&#269;iu to
suffer, pakanta patience).


inconvenience (n.)

c.1400, harm, damage, danger, also a harmful incident, misfortune, affliction, from Old French
inconvenience misfortune, calamity; impropriety (Modern French inconvenance), from Late Latin
inconvenientia lack of consistency, incongruity, noun of quality from inconvenientem (see
inconvenient). Later impropriety, unfitness; an improper act or utterance (early 15c.). Meaning
quality of being inconvenient is from 1650s.


perdition (n.)

mid-14c., fact of being lost or destroyed, from Old French perdicion loss, calamity, perdition of
souls (11c.) and directly from Late Latin perditionem (nominative perditio) ruin, destruction, noun
of action from past participle stem of Latin perdere do away with, destroy; lose, throw away,
squander, from per- through (here perhaps with intensive or completive force, to destruction) + dare
to put (see date (n.1)). Special theological sense of condition of damnation, spiritual ruin, state
of souls in Hell (late 14c.) has gradually extinguished the general use of the word.


hate (v.)

Old English hatian to hate, from Proto-Germanic *haton (cognates: Old Saxon haton, Old Norse hata,
German hassen, Gothic hatan to hate), from PIE root *kad- sorrow, hatred (cognates: Avestan sadra-
grief, sorrow, calamity, Greek kedos care, trouble, sorrow, Welsh cas pain, anger). Related: Hated;
hating. French haine (n.), hair (v.) are Germanic. Hate crime attested from 1988.


fear (n.)

Old English f&aelig;r calamity, sudden danger, peril, from Proto-Germanic *feraz danger (cognates:
Old Saxon far ambush, Old Norse far harm, distress, deception, Dutch gevaar, German Gefahr danger),
from PIE verbal root *per- (3) to try, risk (source also of Greek peira trial, attempt, experience,
Latin periculum trial, risk, danger), related to *per- (1) forward, through (see per).    Sense of
uneasiness caused by possible danger developed late 12c. Old English words for fear as we now use it
were ege, fyrhto; as a verb, ondr&aelig;dan.


monster (n.)

early 14c., malformed animal or human, creature afflicted with a birth defect, from Old French
monstre, mostre monster, monstrosity (12c.), and directly from Latin monstrum divine omen, portent,
sign; abnormal shape; monster, monstrosity, figuratively repulsive character, object of dread, awful
deed, abomination, from root of monere warn (see monitor (n.)). Abnormal or prodigious animals were
regarded as signs or omens of impending evil. Extended by late 14c. to imaginary animals composed of
parts of creatures (centaur, griffin, etc.). Meaning animal of vast size is from 1520s; sense of
person of inhuman cruelty or wickedness is from 1550s. As an adjective, of extraordinary size, from
1837. In Old English, the monster Grendel was an agl&aelig;ca, a word related to agl&aelig;c
calamity, terror, distress, oppression.


plague (n.)

late 14c., plage, affliction, calamity, evil, scourge; early 15c., malignant disease, from Old
French plage (14c.), from Late Latin plaga, used in Vulgate for pestilence, from Latin plaga stroke,
wound, probably from root of plangere to strike, lament (by beating the breast), from or cognate
with Greek (Doric) plaga blow, from PIE *plak- (2) to strike, to hit (cognates: Greek plazein to
drive away, plessein to beat, strike; Old English flocan to strike, beat; Gothic flokan to bewail;
German fluchen, Old Frisian floka to curse).    The Latin word also is the source of Old Irish plag
(genitive plaige) plague, pestilence, German Plage, Dutch plaage. Meaning epidemic that causes many
deaths is from 1540s; specifically in reference to bubonic plague from c.1600. Modern spelling
follows French, which had plague from 15c. Weakened sense of anything annoying is from c.1600.


