calculated (adj.)

1863, devised beforehand, past participle adjective from calculate. Earlier, suited, apt (1722).


bottom line (n.)

figurative sense is attested from 1967, from profit and loss accounting, where the final figure
after both are calculated is the bottom line on the page. Also (especially as an adjective)
bottomline.


pro rata

1570s, from Latin pro rata (parte) according to the calculated (share), from pro for (see pro-) +
rata, ablative singular of ratus, past participle of reri to count, reckon (see rate (n.)).


consumer (n.)

early 15c., one who squanders or wastes, agent noun from consume. In economic sense, one who uses up
goods or articles (opposite of producer) from 1745. Consumer goods is attested from 1890. In U.S.,
consumer price index calculated since 1919, tracking changes in the prices paid by urban consumers
for a representative basket of goods and services [Bureau of Labor Statistics]; abbreviation CPI is
attested by 1971.


calumny (n.)

False &amp; malicious misrepresentation of the words or actions of others, calculated to injure
their reputation [Fowler], mid-15c., from Middle French calomnie (15c.), from Latin calumnia
trickery, subterfuge, misrepresentation, malicious charge, from calvi to trick, deceive, from PIE
root *kel- (6) to deceive, confuse (cognates: Greek kelein to bewitch, seduce, beguile, Gothic holon
to deceive, Old Norse hol praise, flattery, Old English hol slander, holian to slander).


dog days (n.)

1530s, from Latin dies caniculares, from Greek; so called because they occur around the time of the
heliacal rising of Sirius, the Dog Star (kyon seirios). Noted as the hottest and most unwholesome
time of the year; usually July 3 to Aug. 11, but variously calculated, depending on latitude and on
whether the greater Dog-star (Sirius) or the lesser one (Procyon) is reckoned.    The heliacal
rising of Sirius has shifted down the calendar with the precession of the equinoxes; in ancient
Egypt c.3000 B.C.E. it coincided with the summer solstice, which also was the new year and the
beginning of the inundation of the Nile. The dog association apparently began here (the star's
hieroglyph was a dog), but the reasons for it are obscure.


treadmill (n.)

invented (and named) 1822; originally an instrument of prison discipline; from tread (v.) + mill
(n.1). Treadwheel as a similar method of driving machinery is from 1570s.    As a corrective
punishment, the discipline of the stepping mill has had a most salutary effect upon the prisoners,
and is not likely to be easily forgotten, while it is an occupation which by no means interferes
with, nor is calculated to lessen the value of, those branches of prison regulation which provide
for the moral and religious improvement of the criminal. [Description of the Tread Mill Invented by
Mr. William Cubitt of Ipswich for the Employment of Prisoners, London, 1822]    By later generations
regarded as a path to physical fitness.


month (n.)

Old English mona&eth;, from Proto-Germanic *menoth- (cognates: Old Saxon manoth, Old Frisian monath,
Middle Dutch manet, Dutch maand, Old High German manod, German Monat, Old Norse mana&eth;r, Gothic
meno&thorn;s month), related to *menon- moon (see moon (n.); the month was calculated from lunar
phases). Its cognates mean only month in the Romance languages, but in Germanic generally continue
to do double duty. Phrase a month of Sundays a very long time is from 1832 (roughly 7 and a half
months, but never used literally).


creationism (n.)

1847, originally a Christian theological position that God immediately created a soul for each
person born; from creation + -ism. As a name for the religious reaction to Darwin, opposed to
evolution, it is attested from 1880.  James Ussher (1581-1656), Archbishop of Armagh, Primate of All
Ireland, and Vice-Chancellor of Trinity College in Dublin was highly regarded in his day as a
churchman and as a scholar. Of his many works, his treatise on chronology has proved the most
durable. Based on an intricate correlation of Middle Eastern and Mediterranean histories and Holy
writ, it was incorporated into an authorized version of the Bible printed in 1701, and thus came to
be regarded with almost as much unquestioning reverence as the Bible itself. Having established the
first day of creation as Sunday 23 October 4004 B.C. ... Ussher calculated the dates of other
biblical events, concluding, for example, that Adam and Eve were driven from Paradise on Monday 10
November 4004 BC, and that the ark touched down on Mt Ararat on 5 May 1491 BC on a Wednesday.
[Craig, G.Y., and E.J. Jones, A Geological Miscellany, Princeton University Press, 1982.]


number (n.)

c.1300, sum, aggregate of a collection, from Anglo-French noumbre, Old French nombre and directly
from Latin numerus a number, quantity, from PIE root *nem- to divide, distribute, allot (related to
Greek nemein to deal out; see nemesis). Meaning symbol or figure of arithmetic value is from late
14c. Meaning single (numbered) issue of a magazine is from 1795. Meaning dialing combination to
reach a particular telephone receiver is from 1879; hence wrong number (1886). The modern meaning
musical selection (1885) is from vaudeville theater programs, where acts were marked by a number.
Earlier numbers meant Harmony; proportion calculated by number, and Verses, poetry [Johnson].
Number one oneself is from 1704 (mock-Italian form numero uno attested from 1973); the biblical Book
of Numbers (c.1400, Latin Numeri, Greek Arithmoi) so called because it begins with a census of the
Israelites. Slang number one and number two for urination and defecation attested from 1902. Number
cruncher is 1966, of machines; 1971, of persons. To get or have (someone's) number have someone
figured out is attested from 1853. The numbers illegal lottery is from 1897, American English.


