caliber (n.)

1560s, degree of merit or importance, a figurative use from Middle French calibre (late 15c.),
apparently ultimately from Arabic qalib a mold for casting. Arabic also used the word in the sense
mold for casting bullets, which is the oldest literal meaning in English. Meaning inside diameter of
a gun barrel is attested from 1580s. Barnhart remarks that Spanish calibre, Italian calibro appear
too late to act as intermediate forms between the Arabic word and the French.


Dreadnought (n.)

battleship, literally fearing nothing, from dread (v.) + nought (n.). Mentioned as the name of a
ship in the Royal Navy c.1596, but modern sense is from the name of the first of a new class of
British battleships mainly armed with big guns of one caliber, launched Feb. 18, 1906.


caliper (n.)

1620s, short for calliper compass (1580s), a device used to measure caliber (q.v.). Related:
Calipers.


calibre (n.)

chiefly British English spelling of caliber (q.v.); for spelling, see -re.


calibrate (v.)

1839, verb formed from caliber + -ate (2). Related: calibrated; calibrating.


heavy (adj.)

Old English hefig heavy, having much weight; important, grave; oppressive; slow, dull, from Proto-
Germanic *hafiga containing something; having weight (cognates: Old Saxon, Old High German hebig,
Old Norse hofugr, Middle Dutch hevich, Dutch hevig), from PIE *kap- to grasp (see capable). Jazz
slang sense of profound, serious is from 1937 but would have been comprehensible to an Anglo-Saxon.
Heavy industry recorded from 1932. Heavy metal attested by 1839 in chemistry; in nautical jargon
from at least 1744 in sense large-caliber guns on a ship.    While we undervalue the nicely-balanced
weight of broadsides which have lately been brought forward with all the grave precision of Cocker,
we are well aware of the decided advantages of heavy metal. [United Services Journal, London, 1830]
As a type of rock music, from 1972.


Saturday (n.)

seventh day of the week, Old English s&aelig;terd&aelig;g, s&aelig;ternesd&aelig;g, literally day of
the planet Saturn, from S&aelig;ternes (genitive of S&aelig;tern; see Saturn) + Old English
d&aelig;g (see day). Partial loan-translation of Latin Saturni dies Saturn's day (compare Dutch
Zaterdag, Old Frisian Saterdi, Middle Low German Satersdach; Irish dia Sathuirn, Welsh dydd Sadwrn).
The Latin word itself is a loan-translation of Greek kronou hemera, literally the day of Cronus.
Unlike other day names, no god substitution seems to have been attempted, perhaps because the
northern European pantheon lacks a clear corresponding figure to Roman Saturn. A homely ancient
Nordic custom, however, seems to be preserved in Old Norse laugardagr, Danish l&oslash;rdag, Swedish
l&ouml;rdag Saturday, literally bath day (Old Norse laug bath).    German Samstag (Old High German
sambaztag) appears to be from a Greek *sambaton, a nasalized colloquial form of sabbaton sabbath,
also attested in Old Church Slavonic sabota, Polish sobota, Russian subbota, Hungarian szombat,
French samedi.   Saturday night has been used figuratively to suggest drunkenness and looseness in
relations between the young men and young women since at least mid-19c. Saturday-night special
cheap, low-caliber handgun is American English, attested from 1976 (earlier Saturday-night pistol,
1929).


