calm (n.)

late 14c., from Old French calme, carme stillness, quiet, tranquility, from the adjective (see calm
(adj.)).


calm (v.)

late 14c., from Old French calmer or from calm (adj.). Related: Calmed; calming.


calmness (n.)

1510s, from calm (adj.) + -ness.


calmly (adv.)

1590s, from calm (adj.) + -ly (2).


calmative (adj.)

by 1831, from French calmatif; see calm (adj.) + -ative. A hybrid word; purists prefer sedative. The
Latinic suffix is here defensible on the ground of It. and Sp. calmar, F. calmer .... [OED].


calm (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French calme tranquility, quiet, traditionally from Old Italian calma, from Late
Latin cauma heat of the mid-day sun (in Italy, a time when everything rests and is still), from
Greek kauma heat (especially of the sun), from kaiein to burn (see caustic). Spelling influenced by
Latin calere to be hot. Figurative application to social or mental conditions is 16c.


serenade (n.)

1640s, musical performance at night in open air (especially one given by a lover under the window of
his lady), from French s&eacute;r&eacute;nade (16c.), from Italian serenata an evening song,
literally calm sky, from sereno the open air, noun use of sereno clear, calm, from Latin serenus
peaceful, calm, serene. Sense influenced by Italian sera evening, from Latin sera, fem. of serus
late. Meaning piece of music suitable for a serenade is attested from 1728.


sedate (adj.)

calm, quiet, 1660s, from Latin sedatus composed, moderate, quiet, tranquil, past participle of
sedare to settle, calm, causative of sedere to sit (see sedentary). Related: Sedately.


serene (adj.)

mid-15c., clear, calm, from Latin serenus peaceful, calm, clear (of weather), figuratively cheerful,
glad, tranquil, of uncertain origin; perhaps from a suffixed variant of PIE *ksero- dry, source of
Greek xeros dry (see xerasia). In English, applied to persons since 1630s. Related: Serenely.


placate (v.)

1670s, a back-formation from placation or else from Latin placatus soothed, quiet, gentle, calm,
peaceful, past participle of placare to calm, appease, quiet, soothe, assuage, related to placere to
please (see please). Related: Placated; placating; placatingly.


Korea

from Chinese Gao li, name of a dynasty founded 918, literally high serenity. Japanese Chosen is from
Korean Choson, literally land of morning calm, from cho morning + son calm. Related: Korean (1610s).


halcyon (adj.)

1540s, in halcyon dayes (Latin alcyonei dies, Greek alkyonides hemerai), 14 days of calm weather at
the winter solstice, when a mythical bird (identified with the kingfisher) was said to breed in a
nest floating on calm seas. From halcyon (n.), late 14c., from Latin halcyon, from Greek halkyon,
variant (perhaps a misspelling) of alkyon kingfisher, from hals sea, salt (see halo-) + kyon
conceiving, present participle of kyein to conceive, literally to swell, from PIE root *keue- to
swell. Identified in mythology with Halcyone, daughter of Aeolus, who when widowed threw herself
into the sea and became a kingfisher.


lenient (adj.)

1650s, relaxing, soothing, from Middle French lenient, from Latin lenientem (nominative leniens),
present participle of lenire to soften, alleviate, mitigate, allay, calm, from lenis mild, gentle,
calm, probably from PIE root *le- to leave, yield, let go, slacken (cognates: Lithuanian lenas
quiet, tranquil, tame, slow, Old Church Slavonic lena lazy, Latin lassus faint, weary, Old English
l&aelig;t sluggish, slow, l&aelig;tan to leave behind). Sense of mild, merciful (of persons) first
recorded 1787. In earlier use was lenitive, attested from early 15c. of medicines, 1610s of persons.


mouton enrage (n.)

1932, from French mouton enrag&#233;, literally angry sheep. A normally calm person who has become
suddenly enraged or violent [OED].


still (n.2)

c.1200, a calm, from still (adj.). Sense of quietness, the silent part is from c.1600 (in still of
the night). Meaning a photograph (as distinguished from a motion picture) is attested from 1916.


Honolulu

chief city of Hawaii, from Hawaiian hono port + lulu calm.


composed (adj.)

calm, tranquil, c.1600, past participle adjective frome compose (v.). Related: Composedly;
composedness.


sedate (v.)

treat with sedatives, 1945, a back-formation from the noun derivative of sedative (adj.). The word
also existed 17c. in a sense make calm or quiet. Related: Sedated; sedating.


tranquil (adj.)

mid-15c., a back-formation from tranquility or else from Latin tranquillus quiet, calm, still.
Related: Tranquilly.


sedation (n.)

early 15c., alleviation of pain; 1540s, act of making calm, from Middle French s&#233;dation and
directly from Latin sedationem (nominative sedatio) a quieting, assuaging, a calming, noun of action
from past participle stem of sedare (see sedate (adj.)).


malacia (n.)

from Latin malacia a calm at sea, from Greek malakia softness, delicacy, effeminacy, from malakos
soft (see mallet).


placid (adj.)

1620s, from French placide (15c.) and directly from Latin placidus pleasing, peaceful, quiet,
gentle, still, calm, from placere to please (see please). Related: Placidly; placidness.


temper (n.)

late 14c., due proportion of elements or qualities, from temper (v.). The sense of characteristic
state of mind, inclination, disposition is first recorded 1590s; that of calm state of mind,
tranquility in c.1600; and that of angry state of mind (for bad temper) in 1828. Meaning degree of
hardness and resiliency in steel is from late 15c.


sedative (adj.)

tending to calm or soothe, early 15c., from Medieval Latin sedativus calming, allaying, from sedat-,
past participle stem of sedare, causative of sedere to sit (see sedentary). The noun derivative
meaning a sedative drug is attested from 1785. Hence, whatever soothes or allays.


quietism (n.)

1680s, from Italian quietismo, literally passiveness, from quieto calm, at rest, from Latin quietus
(see quiet (adj.)). Originally in reference to the mysticism of Miguel Molinos (1640-1697), Spanish
priest in Rome, whose Guida spirituale was published 1675 and condemned by the Inquisition in 1685.
Related: Quietist.


composure (n.)

c.1600, composition (also, in early use, with many senses now given to compound), from compose +
-ure. Sense of tranquility, calmness is first recorded 1660s, from composed calm (1620s). For sense,
compare colloquial to fall apart to lose one's composure.


becalm (v.)

1550s, from be- + calm. Related: Becalmed; becalming.


tranquility (n.)

also tranquillity, late 14c., from Old French tranquilite peace, happiness (12c.), from Latin
tranquillitatem (nominative tranquillitas) quietness, stillness; serenity, from tranquillus quiet,
calm, still, perhaps from trans- over (here in its intensive sense of exceedingly) + a root possibly
related to quies rest (see quiet (n.)).


peaceful (adj.)

early 14c., inclined to peace, friendly, pacific, from peace + -ful. Meaning tranquil, calm, full of
peace is from mid-14c. In reference to nonviolent methods of effecting social change, it is attested
from 1876. Related: Peacefully; peacefulness. Peaceful coexistence (1920) originally was in regard
to Soviet policy toward the capitalist West.


pacify (v.)

late 15c., appease, allay the anger of (someone), from Middle French pacifier make peace, from Latin
pacificare to make peace; pacify, from pacificus (see pacific). Of countries or regions, to bring to
a condition of calm, c.1500, from the start with suggestions of submission and terrorization.
Related: Pacified; pacifying.


still (v.)

Old English stillan to be still, have rest; to quiet, calm, appease; to stop, restrain, from stille
at rest (see still (adj.)). Cognate with Old Saxon stillian, Old Norse stilla, Dutch, Old High
German, German stillen. Related: Stilled; stilling.


quiet (adj.)

late 14c., peaceable, at rest, restful, tranquil, from Old French quiet and directly from Latin
quietus calm, at rest, free from exertion, from quies (genitive quietis) rest (see quiet (n.)). As
an adverb from 1570s. Related: Quietly; quietness.


Kyoto

city in Japan, from kyo + to, both meaning capital. Founded 794 as Heionkyo Capital of Calm and
Peace, it also has been known as Miyako and Saikyo. Kyoto Protocol so called because it was
initially adopted Dec. 11, 1997, in the Japanese city.


temperate (adj.)

late 14c., of persons, modest, forbearing, self-restrained, not swayed by passion; of climates or
seasons, not liable to excessive heat or cold, from Latin temperatus restrained, regulated, limited,
moderate, sober, calm, steady, from past participle of temperare to moderate, regulate (see temper
(v.)). Related: Temperately; temperateness. Temperate zone is attested from 1550s.


quit (adj.)

c.1200, free, clear (of debt, etc.), from Old French quite, quitte free, clear, entire, at liberty;
discharged; unmarried, from Medieval Latin quitus, quittus, from Latin quietus free (in Medieval
Latin free from war, debts, etc.), also calm, resting (see quiet (adj.)).


assure (v.)

late 14c., from Old French asseurer (12c., Modern French assurer) to reassure, calm, protect, to
render sure, from Vulgar Latin *assecurar, from Latin ad- to (see ad-) + securus safe, secure (see
secure (adj.)). Related: Assured; assuring.


pacific (adj.)

1540s, tending to make peace, from Middle French pacifique, from Latin pacificus peaceful, peace-
making, from pax (genitive pacis) peace (see peace) + root of facere to make (see factitious).
Meaning peaceful, calm is first recorded 1630s. Related: Pacifical (mid-15c.); pacifically.


sober (adj.)

mid-14c., moderate in desires or actions, temperate, restrained, especially abstaining from strong
drink, also calm, quiet, not overcome by emotion, from Old French sobre decent; sober (12c.), from
Latin sobrius not drunk, temperate, moderate, sensible, from a variant of se- without (see se-) +
ebrius drunk, of unknown origin. Meaning not drunk at the moment is from late 14c.; also
appropriately solemn, serious, not giddy. Related: Soberly; soberness. Sobersides sedate, serious-
minded person is recorded from 1705.


phlegmatic (adj.)

cool, calm, self-possessed, and in a more pejorative sense, cold, dull, apathetic, 1570s, from
literal sense abounding in phlegm (as a bodily humor) (mid-14c., fleumatik), from Old French
fleumatique (13c., Modern French flegmatique), from Late Latin phlegmaticus, from Greek phlegmatikos
abounding in phlegm (see phlegm).A verry flewmatike man is in the body lustles, heuy and slow. [John
of Trevisa, translation of Bartholomew de Glanville's De proprietatibus rerum, 1398]


ratiocination (n.)

process of reasoning, 1520s, from Latin ratiocinationem (nominative ratiocinatio) a reasoning, calm
reasoning, from past participle stem of ratiocinare to calculate, deliberate, from ratio (see ratio)
+ -cinari, which probably is related to conari to try (see conation).    Most writers make
ratiocination synonymous with reasoning. J.S. Mill and others hold that the word is usually limited
to necessary reasoning. [Century Dictionary]


assuage (v.)

c.1300, from Anglo-French assuager, Old French assoagier soften, moderate, alleviate, calm, soothe,
pacify, from Vulgar Latin *adsuaviare, from Latin ad- to (see ad-) + suavis sweet, agreeable (see
sweet (adj.)). For sound development in French, compare deluge from Latin diluvium, abridge from
abbreviare. Related: Assuaged; assuaging.


quiet (n.)

c.1300, freedom from disturbance or conflict; calm, stillness, from Old French quiete rest, repose,
tranquility and directly from Latin quies (genitive quietis) a lying still, rest, repose, peace,
from PIE root *kweie- (2) to rest, be quiet (cognates: Old Persian shiyati-, Avestan shaiti- well-
being; Avestan shyata- happy; Gothic hveila, Old English hwil space of time; see while (n.)). Late
14c. as inactivity, rest, repose.


whistle (v.)

Old English hwistlian to whistle, from Proto-Germanic *hwis-, of imitative origin (cognates: Old
Norse hvisla to whisper, Danish hvisle to hiss; see whisper (v.)). Used also in Middle English of
the hissing of serpents; in 17c. it also could mean whisper. Transitive use from late 15c. Related:
Whistled; whistling. At public events, often an expression of support or encouragement in U.S., but
often derisive in Britain. To whistle for (with small prospect of getting) is perhaps from nautical
whistling for a wind, an old sailor's superstition during a calm. Such men will not whistle during a
storm [Century Dictionary]. To whistle Dixie is from 1940.


smooth (adj.)

Old English smo&#240; smooth, serene, calm, variant of sme&#240;e free from roughness, not harsh,
polished; soft; suave; agreeable, of unknown origin and with no known cognates. Of words, looks,
pleasant, polite, sincere late 14c., but later flattering, insinuating (mid-15c.). Slang meaning
superior, classy, clever is attested from 1893. Sense of stylish is from 1922.   Smooth-bore in
reference to guns is from 1812. smooth talk (v.) is recorded from 1950. A 1599 dictionary has
smoothboots a flatterer, a faire spoken man, a cunning tongued fellow. The usual Old English form
was sme&#240;e, and there is a dialectal smeeth found in places names, such as Smithfield, Smedley.


clemency (n.)

1550s, mildness or gentleness shown in exercise of authority, from Latin clementia calmness,
gentleness, from clemens calm, mild, related to clinare to lean (see lean (v.)) + participial suffix
-menos (also in alumnus). For sense evolution, compare inclined in secondary meaning disposed
favorably. Earlier in same sense was clemence (late 15c.).    Meaning mildness of weather or climate
is 1660s (a sense also in Latin); clement (adj.) is older in both senses, late 15c. and 1620s
respectively, but now is used only in negation and only of the weather.


lucid (adj.)

1590s, bright, shining, from Latin lucidus light, bright, clear, figuratively perspicuous, lucid,
clear, from lucere to shine, from lux (genitive lucis) light, from PIE root *leuk- to shine, be
bright (see light (n.)). Sense of easy to understand first recorded 1786. Lucid interval period of
calm or temporary sanity (1580s) is from Medieval Latin lucida intervalla (plural), which was common
in medieval English legal documents (non est compos mentis, sed gaudet lucidis intervallis).
Related: Lucidly; lucidness (1640s).


even (adj.)

Old English efen level, also equal, like; calm, harmonious; quite, fully; namely, from Proto-
Germanic *ebnaz (cognates: Old Saxon eban, Old Frisian even level, plain, smooth, Dutch even, Old
High German eban, German eben, Old Norse jafn, Danish j&aelig;vn, Gothic ibns).    Etymologists are
uncertain whether the original sense was level or alike. Used extensively in Old English compounds,
with a sense of fellow, co- (as in efeneald of the same age; Middle English even-sucker foster-
brother). Of numbers, from 1550s. Modern adverbial sense (introducing an extreme case of something
more generally implied) seems to have arisen 16c. from use of the word to emphasize identity (Who,
me? Even you, etc.) Sense of on an equal footing is from 1630s. Rhyming reduplication phrase even
steven is attested from 1866; even break first recorded 1911. Even-tempered from 1875.


patience (n.)

c.1200, quality of being willing to bear adversities, calm endurance of misfortune, suffering, etc.,
from Old French pacience patience; sufferance, permission (12c.) and directly from Latin patientia
patience, endurance, submission, also indulgence, leniency; humility; submissiveness; submission to
lust; literally quality of suffering. It is an abstract noun formed from the adjective patientem
(nominative patiens) bearing, supporting; suffering, enduring, permitting; tolerant, but also firm,
unyielding, hard, used of persons as well as of navigable rivers, present participle of pati to
suffer, endure, from PIE root *pe(i)- to damage, injure, hurt (see passion).<b>Patience</b>, n. A
minor form of despair, disguised as a virtue. [Ambrose Bierce, Devil's Dictionary, 1911]Meaning
constancy in effort is attested from 1510s. Meaning card game for one person is from 1816.


still (adj.)

Old English stille motionless, stable, fixed, stationary, from Proto-Germanic *stilli- (cognates:
Old Frisian, Middle Low German, Middle Dutch stille, Dutch stil, Old High German stilli, German
still), from PIE root *stel- to put, stand, with derivatives referring to a standing object or place
(see stall (n.1)). Meaning quiet, calm, gentle, silent emerged in later Old English. Euphemistic for
dead in stillborn, etc. Still small voice is from KJV:    And he said, Go forth, and stand upon the
mount before the LORD. And, behold, the LORD passed by, and a great and strong wind rent the
mountains, and brake in pieces the rocks before the LORD; but the LORD was not in the wind: and
after the wind an earthquake; but the LORD was not in the earthquake: and after the earthquake a
fire; but the LORD was not in the fire: and after the fire a still small voice. [1 Kings 19:11-13]
Used as a conjunction from 1722.


meditation (n.)

c.1200, contemplation; devout preoccupation; devotions, prayer, from Old French meditacion thought,
reflection, study, and directly from Latin meditationem (nominative meditatio) a thinking over,
meditation, noun of action from past participle stem of meditari to meditate, think over, reflect,
consider, frequentative form from PIE root *med- to measure, limit, consider, advise, take
appropriate measures (cognates: Greek medesthai think about, medon ruler; Latin modus measure,
manner, modestus moderate, modernus modern, mederi to heal, medicus physician; Sanskrit midiur I
judge, estimate; Welsh meddwl mind, thinking; Gothic miton, Old English metan to measure; also see
medical).    Meaning discourse on a subject is early 14c.; meaning act of meditating, continuous
calm thought upon some subject is from late 14c. The Latin verb also had stronger senses: plan,
devise, practice, rehearse, study.


