calumny (n.)

False &amp; malicious misrepresentation of the words or actions of others, calculated to injure
their reputation [Fowler], mid-15c., from Middle French calomnie (15c.), from Latin calumnia
trickery, subterfuge, misrepresentation, malicious charge, from calvi to trick, deceive, from PIE
root *kel- (6) to deceive, confuse (cognates: Greek kelein to bewitch, seduce, beguile, Gothic holon
to deceive, Old Norse hol praise, flattery, Old English hol slander, holian to slander).


calumnious (adj.)

late 15c., from Latin calumniosus, from calumnia (see calumny). Related: Calumniously.


calumniate (v.)

1550s, from Latin calumniatus, past participle of calumniari to accuse falsely, from calumnia
slander, false accusation (see calumny). Related: Calumniated; calumniating.


cavil (v.)

1540s, from Middle French caviller to mock, jest, from Latin cavillari to jeer, mock; satirize,
argue scoffingly (also source of Italian cavillare, Spanish cavilar), from cavilla jest, jeering,
related to calumnia (see calumny).


challenge (n.)

early 14c., something one can be accused of, a fault, blemish; mid-14c., false accusation, malicious
charge; accusation of wrong-doing, also act of laying claim (to something), from Anglo-French
chalenge, Old French chalonge calumny, slander; demand, opposition, in legal use, accusation, claim,
dispute, from Anglo-French chalengier, Old French chalongier to accuse, to dispute (see challenge
(v.)). Accusatory connotations died out 17c. Meanings an objection in law, etc.; a calling to fight
are from mid-15c. Meaning difficult task is from 1954.


challenge (v.)

c.1200, to rebuke, from Old French chalongier complain, protest; haggle, quibble, from Vulgar Latin
calumniare to accuse falsely, from Latin calumniari to accuse falsely, misrepresent, slander, from
calumnia trickery (see calumny).    From late 13c. as to object to, take exception to; c.1300 as to
accuse, especially to accuse falsely, also to call to account; late 14c. as to call to fight. Also
used in Middle English with sense claim, take to oneself. Related: Challenged; challenging.


