camp (n.)

place where an army lodges temporarily, 1520s, from French camp, from Italian campo, from Latin
campus open field, level space (also source of French champ; see campus), especially open space for
military exercise.    A later reborrowing of the Latin word, which had been taken up in early West
Germanic as *kampo-z and appeared originally in Old English as camp contest, battle, fight, war.
This was obsolete by mid-15c. Transferred to non-military senses 1550s. Meaning body of adherents of
a doctrine or cause is 1871. Camp-follower first attested 1810. Camp-meeting is from 1809,
originally usually in reference to Methodists. Camp-fever (1758) is any epidemic fever incident to
life in a camp, especially typhus or typhoid.


Camp David

U.S. presidential retreat near Thurmont, Maryland, built 1939 as Hi-Catoctin, in reference to the
name of the mountains around it; called Shangri-La by F.D. Roosevelt, after the mythical hard-to-
get-to land in the novel Lost Horizon; named Camp David by Eisenhower in 1953 for his grandson, born
1947. The Camp David Accords were signed there Sept. 17, 1978.


camper (n.)

1630s, soldier, agent noun from camp (v.). Meaning attendee at a camp meeting is from 1806; meaning
one who sleeps in temporary quarters outdoors is from 1856; that of motor vehicle with sleeping
quarters is from 1960. Extended use of happy camper is from c.1987.


camp (adj.)

tasteless, 1909, homosexual slang, of uncertain origin, perhaps from mid-17c. French camper to
portray, pose (as in se camper put oneself in a bold, provocative pose); popularized 1964 by Susan
Sontag's essay Notes on Camp. Campy is attested from 1959.


camp (v.)

to encamp, 1540s, from camp (n.). Related: Camped; camping. Camping out is attested from 1834,
American English.


campfire (n.)

also camp-fire, 1835, from camp (n.) + fire (n.).


aide (n.)

1777, short for aide-de-camp (1660s), French, literally camp assistant (see aid (n.)).


logrolling (n.)

also log-rolling, in the legislative vote-trading sense, 1823, American English, from the notion of
neighbors on the frontier helping one another with the heavy work of clearing land and building
cabins (as in phrase you roll my log and I'll roll yours); see log (n.1) + rolling.    LOG-ROLLING.
1. In the lumber regions of Maine it is customary for men of different logging camps to appoint days
for helping each other in rolling the logs to the river, after they are felled and trimmed -- this
rolling being about the hardest work incident to the business. Thus the men of three or four camps
will unite, say on Monday, to roll for camp No. 1, -- on Tuesday for camp No. 2, -- on Wednesday for
camp No. 3, -- and so on, through the whole number of camps within convenient distance of each
other. [Bartlett]


stalag (n.)

German POW camp, 1940, from German Stalag, short for stammlager main camp, from Old High German stam
stem, from Proto-Germanic *stamniz (see stem (n.)).


Urdu

official language of Pakistan, 1796, from Hindustani urdu camp, from Turkish ordu (source of horde);
short for zaban-i-urdu language of the camp. Compare Dzongkha, a variant of Tibetan and the official
language of Bhutan, literally the language of the fortress. So named because it grew up since the
eleventh century in the camps of the Mohammedan conquerors of India as a means of communication
between them and the subject population of central Hindustan. [Century Dictionary]


bivouac (n.)

1702, from French bivouac (17c.), ultimately from Swiss/Alsatian biwacht night guard, from bei-
double, additional + wacht guard (see wait (v.)). Original meaning was an army that stayed up on
night watch; sense of outdoor camp is 1853. Not a common word in English before the Napoleonic Wars.
Italian bivacco is from French. As a verb, 1809, to post troops in the night; meaning camp out of
doors is from 1814.


concentration camp (n.)

1901, compound for noncombatants in a war zone (see concentration); a term for a controversial idea
in the second Boer War (1899-1902), and the term emerged with a bad odor.    The concentration camp
now definitely taken its place side by side with Black Hole of Calcutta as one of those of horror at
which humanity will never cease shudder. [The Review of Reviews, London, March 1902]    It also was
used 1902 in reference to then-current U.S. policies in the Philippines, and retroactively in
reference to Spanish policies in Cuba during the insurrection there of 1896-98. The phrase was used
in U.S. during the Spanish-American war, but in reference to designated rendezvous points for U.S.
troops headed overseas. In reference to prisons for dissidents and minorities in Nazi Germany from
1934, in Soviet Russia from 1935.


beleaguer (v.)

1580s, from Dutch or Low German belegeren to besiege, from be- around (see be-) + legeren to camp,
from leger bed, camp, army, lair, from Proto-Germanic *leg-raz-, from PIE *legh-to- lie (see lie
(v.2)). A word from the Flemish Wars (cognates: Swedish bel&auml;gra, Dutch belegeren besiege,
German Belagerung siege). Spelling influenced by league. Related: Beleaguered; beleaguering.


Dachau

town in Bavaria, Germany, from Old High German daha clay + ouwa island, describing its situation on
high ground by the Amper River. Infamous as the site of a Nazi concentration camp nearby, opened in
1933 as a detention site for political prisoners and surrendered to the U.S. Army April 29, 1945.
Not a death camp per se, but as it was one of the places where inmates from other camps were sent as
the Reich collapsed at the end of the war, and as it was one of the few large camps overrun by
British or American forces, it has come to symbolize Nazi atrocities in many minds in the West.
Arbeit Macht Frei was spelled out in metal on the gate (as it was on other concentration camps, such
as Gross-Rosen, Sachsenhausen, Theresienstadt).


lair (n.)

Old English leger bed, couch, grave; act or place of lying down, from Proto-Germanic *legraz
(cognates: Old Norse legr grave, also nuptials (a lying down); Old Frisian leger situation, Old
Saxon legar bed, Middle Dutch legher act or place of lying down, Dutch leger bed, camp, Old High
German legar bed, a lying down, German Lager bed, lair, camp, storehouse, Gothic ligrs place of
lying), from PIE *legh- to lie, lay (see lie (v.2)). Meaning animal's den is from early 15c.


boot camp (n.)

by 1941, U.S. Marines slang, said to be from boot (n.) as slang for recruit, which supposedly dates
from the Spanish-American War and is a synecdoche from boots, leggings worn by U.S. sailors.


death camp (n.)

1944, in reference to the Nazis, probably translating German Todeslager; they also were known as
extermination camps (German Vernichtungslager); historians usually count six of them: Auschwitz-
Birkenau, Che&#322;mno, Be&#322;&#380;ec, Majdanek, Sobib&oacute;r, Treblinka.


Luxor

place in Egypt, from Arabic al-Kusur, literally the palaces, from plural of kasr, which is from
Latin castrum fortified camp (see castle). There are remains of Roman camps nearby.


zek (n.)

Russian condemned person in a prison or labor camp, 1968, from Russian zek, probably representing a
vocalization of z/k, abbreviation of zaklyuchennyi prisoner.


tent (v.)

to camp in a tent, 1856, from tent (n.). Earlier to pitch a tent (1550s). Related: Tented; tenting.


doolally (adj.)

insane, eccentric, British slang, by 1917 in the armed services and in full doolally tap (with Urdu
word for fever), from Deolali, near Bombay, India, which was a military camp (established 1861) with
a large barracks and a chief staging point for British troops on their way to or from India; the
reference is to men whose enlistments had expired who waited there impatiently for transport home.


sentry (n.)

1610s, originally watchtower; perhaps a shortened variant of sentinel, which had a variant form
centrinel (1590s); or perhaps worn down from sanctuary, on notion of shelter for a watchman. Meaning
military guard posted around a camp is first attested 1630s. Sentry-box is from 1728.


horde (n.)

1550s, from West Turkic (compare Tatar urda horde, Turkish ordu camp, army), to English via Polish,
French, or Spanish. The initial -h- seems to have been acquired in Polish. Transferred sense of
uncivilized gang is from 1610s. Related: Hordes.


quintain (n.)

target for tilting and jousting practice, c.1400 (in Anglo-Latin from mid-13c.), from Old French
quintaine or directly from Medieval Latin quintana; perhaps from Latin quintana of the fifth (see
quinque-), which as a noun meant the business part of a camp, on the supposition that this was where
military exercises were done [OED].


internment (n.)

1870, from intern (v.) + -ment. Compare French internement. Internment camp is attested from 1916.


encamp (v.)

1560s, from en- (1) make, put in + camp (v.). Related: Encamped; encamping.


canteen (n.)

c.1710, store in a military camp, from French cantine sutler's shop (17c.), from Italian cantina
wine cellar, vault, which is perhaps another of the many meanings that were attached to Latin canto
corner; in this case, perhaps corner for storage. A Gaulish origin also has been proposed. Extended
to refreshment room at a military base, school, etc. from 1870. Meaning small tin for water or
liquor, carried by soldiers on the march, campers, etc. is from 1744, from a sense in French.


lascar (n.)

East Indian sailor, 1620s, from Portuguese lachar, from Hindi lashkari soldier, native sailor, from
lashkar army, camp, from Persian lashkar. Compare Arabic al-'askar the army, perhaps from Persian.


latrine (n.)

c.1300, probably from Latin latrina, contraction of lavatrina washbasin, washroom, from lavatus,
past participle of lavare to wash (see lave) + -trina, suffix denoting workplace. Its reappearance
in 1640s is probably a re-borrowing from French; especially of a privy of a camp, barracks, college,
hospital, etc. Latrine rumor baseless gossip (of the kind that spreads in conversations in latrines)
is military slang, first recorded 1918.


decamp (v.)

1670s, from French d&eacute;camper (17c.), earlier descamper, from des- (see dis-) + camper (see
camp (n.)). Non-military use is from 1751. Related: Decamped; decamping.


Bedouin (n.)

c.1400, from Old French bed&uuml;in (Modern French b&eacute;douin), from colloquial Arabic badawin
desert-dwellers, plural of badawi, from badw desert, camp. The Arabic plural suffix was mistaken for
part of the word. A word from the Crusades, it probably was lost in English and then reborrowed from
French c.1600. As an adjective from 1844.


lodge (v.)

c.1200, loggen, to encamp, set up camp; c. 1300 to put in a certain place, from Old French logier
lodge; find lodging for (Modern French loger), from loge (see lodge (n.)). From late 14c. as to
dwell, live; to have temporary accomodations; to provide (someone) with sleeping quarters; to get
lodgings. Sense of to get a thing in the intended place, to make something stick is from 1610s.
Related: Lodged; lodging.


patrol (n.)

1660s, action of going the rounds (of a military camp, etc.), from French patrouille a night watch
(1530s), from patrouiller go the rounds to watch or guard, originally tramp through the mud,
probably soldiers' slang, from Old French patouiller paddle in water, probably from pate paw, foot
(see patten). Compare paddlefoot, World War II U.S. Army slang for infantry soldier. Meaning those
who go on a patrol is from 1660s. Sense of detachment of soldiers sent out to scout the countryside,
the enemy, etc. is attested from 1702.


lavender (n.)

fragrant plant of the mint family, c.1300, from Anglo-French lavendre, Old French lavendre, from
Medieval Latin lavendula lavender (10c.), perhaps from Latin lividus bluish, livid. Associated with
French lavande, Italian lavanda a washing (from Latin lavare to wash; see lave) because it was used
to scent washed fabrics and as a bath perfume. (An identical Middle English word meant laundress,
washerwoman; also, apparently, prostitute, whore; camp follower and is attested as a surname from
early 13c.). The adjective meaning pale purple color is from 1840.


harlot (n.)

c.1200 (late 12c. in surnames), vagabond, man of no fixed occupation, idle rogue, from Old French
herlot, arlot vagabond, tramp (usually male in Middle English and Old French), with forms in Old
Proven&ccedil;al (arlot), Old Spanish (arlote), and Italian (arlotto); of unknown origin. Used in
both positive and pejorative senses by Chaucer; applied in Middle English to jesters, buffoons,
jugglers, later to actors. Sense of prostitute, unchaste woman probably had developed by 14c.,
certainly by early 15c., but this was reinforced by use as euphemism for strumpet, whore in 16c.
translations of the Bible. The word may be Germanic, with an original sense of camp follower, if the
first element is hari army, as some suspect.


knucklehead (n.)

stupid person, 1890, American English, from knuckle (n.) + head (n.).    That infernal knuckle-head
at the camp ought to have reported before now, he thought to himself, as he smoked. [Charles H.
Shinn, The Quicksands of Toro, in Belford's Magazine, vol. V, June-November 1890, New York]    From
1869 as the name of a part in a type of mechanical coupling device. Popularized in the stupid person
sense from 1942, from character R.F. Knucklehead, star of Don't posters hung up at U.S. Army Air
Force training fields.    Everything Knucklehead does is wrong and ends in disaster. He endures one
spectacular crash after another so that the students at the Gulf Coast Air Force Training Center may
profit by his mistakes, and it looks now as if there will be no let-up in his agony. [Life, May 25,
1942]


sutler (n.)

formerly also suttler, person who follows an army to sell food to soldiers, 1580s, from Middle Dutch
soeteler small tradesman, peddler, victualer, camp cook (Dutch zoetelaar), cognate with Middle Low
German suteler, sudeler person who performs dirty tasks, Middle High German sudelen to cook badly,
Middle Dutch soetelen to cook badly. Probably also related to Dutch zieder, German sieden to seethe,
from Proto-Germanic *suth-, from PIE root *seut- to seethe, boil (see seethe).


summer (n.1)

hot season of the year, Old English sumor summer, from Proto-Germanic *sumur- (cognates: Old Saxon,
Old Norse, Old High German sumar, Old Frisian sumur, Middle Dutch somer, Dutch zomer, German
Sommer), from PIE root *sem- (2) summer (cognates: Sanskrit sama season, half-year, Avestan hama in
summer, Armenian amarn summer, Old Irish sam, Old Welsh ham, Welsh haf summer).    As an adjective
from c.1300. Summer camp as an institution for youth is attested from 1886; summer resort is from
1823; summer school first recorded 1810; theatrical summer stock is attested from 1941 (see stock
(n.2)). Old Norse sumarsdag, first day of summer, was the Thursday that fell between April 9 and 15.


set (n.2)

act of setting; condition of being set (of a heavenly body), mid-14c., from set (v.) or its
identical past participle. Many disparate senses collect under this word because of the far-flung
meanings assigned to the verb:   Action of hardening, 1837; also manner or position in which
something is set (1530s), hence general movement, direction, tendency (1560s); build, form (1610s),
hence bearing, carriage (1855); action of fixing the hair in a particular style (1933).    Something
that has been set (1510s), hence the use in tennis (1570s) and the theatrical meaning scenery for an
individual scene in a play, etc., recorded from 1859. Other meanings OED groups under miscellaneous
technical senses include piece of electrical apparatus (1891, first in telegraphy); burrow of a
badger (1898). Old English had set seat, in plural camp; stable, but OED finds it doubtful whether
this survived beyond OE. Compare set (n.1).   Set (n.1) and set (n.2) are not always distinguished
in dictionaries; OED has them as two entries, Century Dictionary as one. The difference of opinion
seems to be whether the set meaning group, grouping (here (n.2)) is a borrowing of the unrelated
French word that sounds like the native English one, or a borrowing of the sense only, which was
absorbed into the English word.


typhus (n.)

acute infectious fever, usually accompanied by prostration, delirium, and small reddish spots, 1785,
from medical Latin, from Greek typhos stupor caused by fever, literally smoke, from typhein to
smoke, related to typhos blind, typhon whirlwind, from PIE *dheubh-, perhaps an extended form of
root *dheu- (1) to fly about like dust.    The Greek term [typhos] (smoke, mist, fog) was employed
by Hippocrates to define a confused state of the intellect, with a tendency to stupor (stupor
attonitus); and in this sense it is aptly applied to typhus fever with its slow cerebration and
drowsy stupor. Boissier de Sauvages first (in 1760) called this fever typhus, and the name was
adopted by Cullen of Edinburgh in 1769. Previous to the time of de Sauvages typhus was known as
Pestilential or Putrid Fever, or by some name suggested by the eruption, or expressive of the
locality in which it appeared, as Camp, Jail, Hospital, or Ship Fever (Murchison). [Thomas Clifford,
ed., A System of Medicine, New York, 1897]    Related: typhous (adj.).


shebang (n.)

1862, hut, shed, shelter, popularized among soldiers in the U.S. Civil War, but like other Civil War
slang (such as skedaddle) of uncertain origin. Perhaps an alteration of shebeen (q.v.), but shebang
in the sense tavern, a seemingly necessary transitional sense, is not attested before 1878 and
shebeen seems to have been not much used in the U.S. Bartlett's 1877 edition describes it as A
strange word that had its origin during the late civil war. It is applied alike to a room, a shop,
or a hut, a tent, a cabin; an engine house. Phrase the whole shebang first recorded 1869, but
relation to the earlier use of the word is obscure. Either or both senses also might be mangled
pronunciations of French char-&agrave;-banc, a bus-like wagon with many seats. For an older guess:
[Shebang] used even yet by students of Yale College and elsewhere to designate their rooms, or a
theatrical or other performance in a public hall, has its origin probably in a corruption of the
French cabane, a hut, familiar to the troops that came from Louisiana, and constantly used in the
Confederate camp for the simple huts, which they built with such alacrity and skill for their winter
quarters. The constant intercourse between the outposts soon made the term familiar to the Federal
army also. [Americanisms: The English of the New World,  Maximillian Schele De Vere, New York,
Charles Scribner &amp; Co., 1872.]


store (n.)

c.1300, supplies or provisions for a household, camp, etc., from store (v.) or else from Old French
estore provisions; a fleet, navy, army, from estorer or from Medieval Latin staurum, instaurum
store. General sense of sufficient supply is attested from late 15c. The meaning place where goods
are kept for sale is first recorded 1721 in American English (British English prefers shop (n.)),
from the sense place where supplies and provisions are kept (1660s).    The word store is of larger
signification than the word shop. It not only comprehends all that is embraced in the word shop,
when that word is used to designate a place in which goods or merchandise are sold, but more, a
place of deposit, a store house. In common parlance the two words have a distinct meaning. We speak
of shops as places in which mechanics pursue their trades, as a carpenter's shop a blacksmith's shop
a shoemaker's shop. While, if we refer to a place where oods and merchandise are bought and sold,
whether by wholesale or retail, we speak of it as a store. [C.J. Brickell, opinion in Sparrenberger
v. The State of Alabama, December term, 1875]   Stores articles and equipment for an army is from
1630s. In store laid up for future use (also of events, etc.) is recorded from late 14c. Store-
bought is attested from 1912, American English; earlier store-boughten (1872).


Viking (n.)

Scandinavian pirate, 1801, vikingr, in The History of the Anglo-Saxons by English historian Sharon
H. Turner (1768-1847); he suggested the second element might be connected to king:    The name by
which the pirates were at first distinguished was Vikingr, which perhaps originally meant kings of
the bays. It was in bays that they ambushed, to dart upon the passing voyager.     But this later
was dismissed as incorrect. The form viking is attested in 1820, in Jamieson's notes to The Bruce.
The word is a historians' revival; it was not used in Middle English, but it was reintroduced from
Old Norse vikingr freebooter, sea-rover, pirate, viking, which usually is explained as meaning
properly one who came from the fjords, from vik creek, inlet, small bay (cognates: Old English wic,
Middle High German wich bay, and second element in Reykjavik). But Old English wicing and Old
Frisian wizing are almost 300 years older than the earliest attestation of the Old Norse word, and
probably derive from wic village, camp (large temporary camps were a feature of the Viking raids),
related to Latin vicus village, habitation (see villa).    The connection between the Norse and Old
English words is still much debated. The period of Viking activity was roughly 8c. to 11c. In the
Anglo-Saxon Chronicle, the raiding armies generally were referred to as &thorn;a Deniscan the Danes,
while those who settled in England were identified by their place of settlement. Old Norse viking
(n.) meant freebooting voyage, piracy; one would go on a viking (fara &#237; viking).


town (n.)

Old English tun enclosure, garden, field, yard; farm, manor; homestead, dwelling house, mansion;
later group of houses, village, farm, from Proto-Germanic *tunaz, *tunan fortified place (cognates:
Old Saxon, Old Norse, Old Frisian tun fence, hedge, Middle Dutch tuun fence, Dutch tuin garden, Old
High German zun, German Zaun fence, hedge), an early borrowing from Celtic *dunon hill, hill-fort
(cognates: Old Irish dun, Welsh din fortress, fortified place, camp, dinas city, Gaulish-Latin
-dunum in place names), from PIE *dhu-no- enclosed, fortified place, hill-fort, from root *dheue- to
close, finish, come full circle (see down (n.2)).    Meaning inhabited place larger than a village
(mid-12c.) arose after the Norman conquest from the use of this word to correspond to French ville.
The modern word is partially a generic term, applicable to cities of great size as well as places
intermediate between a city and a village; such use is unusual, the only parallel is perhaps Latin
oppidium, which occasionally was applied even to Rome or Athens (each of which was more properly an
urbs).    First record of town hall is from late 15c. Town ball, version of baseball, is recorded
from 1852. Town car (1907) originally was a motor car with an enclosed passenger compartment and
open driver's seat. On the town living the high life is from 1712. Go to town do (something)
energetically is first recorded 1933. Man about town one constantly seen at public and private
functions is attested from 1734.


