canine (adj.)

c.1600, of teeth, from canine (n.) or Latin caninus. Meaning pertaining to a dog or dogs is from
1620s.


canine (n.)

pointed tooth, late 14c., from Latin caninus of the dog, genitive of canis dog (source of Italian
cane, French chien), from PIE root *kwon- dog (cognates: Greek kyon, Old English hund, Old High
German hunt, Old Irish cu, Welsh ci, Sanskrit svan-, Avestan spa, Russian sobaka (apparently from an
Iranian source, such as Median spaka), Armenian shun, Lithuanian &#353;uo). The noun meaning dog is
first recorded 1869.


canaille (n.)

rabble, from French canaille (16c.), from Italian canaglia, literally a pack of dogs, from cane dog
(see canine).


chenille (n.)

velvety cord, 1738, from French chenille, properly caterpillar, literally little dog (13c.), from
Latin canicula a dog (also a violent woman; the star Sirius; the worst throw in dice), diminutive of
canis dog (see canine (n.)). So called for its furry look. Compare caterpillar.


dog (n.)

Old English docga, a late, rare word used of a powerful breed of canine. It forced out Old English
hund (the general Germanic and Indo-European word; see canine) by 16c. and subsequently was picked
up in many continental languages (French dogue (16c.), Danish dogge), but the origin remains one of
the great mysteries of English etymology.    Many expressions -- a dog's life (c.1600), go to the
dogs (1610s), etc. -- reflect earlier hard use of the animals as hunting accessories, not pampered
pets. In ancient times, the dog was the worst throw in dice (attested in Greek, Latin, and Sanskrit,
where the word for the lucky player was literally the dog-killer), which plausibly explains the
Greek word for danger, kindynas, which appears to be play the dog.    Slang meaning ugly woman is
from 1930s; that of sexually aggressive man is from 1950s. Adjectival phrase dog-eat-dog attested by
1850s. Dog tag is from 1918. To dog-ear a book is from 1650s; dog-eared in extended sense of worn,
unkempt is from 1894. Notwithstanding, as a dog hath a day, so may I perchance have time to declare
it in deeds. [Princess Elizabeth, 1550]  Phrase put on the dog get dressed up (1934) may look back
to the stiff stand-up shirt collars that in the 1890s were the height of male fashion (and were
known as dog-collars at least from 1883), with reference to collars worn by dogs. The common Spanish
word for dog, perro, also is a mystery word of unknown origin, perhaps from Iberian. A group of
Slavic dog words (Old Church Slavonic pisu, Polish pies, Serbo-Croatian pas) likewise are of unknown
origin.


canid (n.)

member of the Canidae family (dogs, wolves, foxes, jackals), 1889, from Modern Latin Canidae, from
Latin canis dog (see canine (n.)) + -idae.


canicular (adj.)

late 14c., in reference to the dog days, from Latin canicularis pertaining to the dog days, from
canicula little dog, also the Dog Star, diminutive of canis (see canine). Also see heliacal; Sirius.
In literal use (pertaining to a dog) historically only as attempt at humor.


Procyon (n.)

bright star in constellation Canis Minoris, 1650s, from Latin, from Greek prokyon, from pro before
(see pro-) + kyon dog (see canine (n.)); so called from its rising just before the Dog Star, Sirius.
By Roman astronomers, sometimes Latinized as Antecanis.


kennel (n.)

c.1300, from Anglo-French *kenil, Old French chenil, from Vulgar Latin *canile, from Latin canem
(nominative canis) dog (see canine (n.)). With suffix as in ovile sheepfold from ovus, equile horse-
stable from equus, etc. As a verb, 1550s, from the noun.


corgi (n.)

1926, from Welsh corgi, from cor dwarf + ci dog (see canine).


hound (n.)

Old English hund dog, from Proto-Germanic *hundas (cognates: Old Saxon and Old Frisian hund, Old
High German hunt, German Hund, Old Norse hundr, Gothic hunds), from PIE *kuntos, dental enlargement
of root *kwon- dog (see canine). Meaning narrowed 12c. to dog used for hunting.


cynosure (n.)

1590s, from Middle French cynosure (16c.), from Latin Cynosura, literally dog's tail, the
constellation (now Ursa Minor) containing the North Star, the focus of navigation, from Greek
kynosoura, literally dog's tail, from kyon (genitive kynos; see canine) + oura tail (see arse).


cynic (n.)

mid-16c., in reference to the ancient philosophy, from Greek kynikos a follower of Antisthenes,
literally dog-like, from kyon (genitive kynos) dog (see canine). Supposedly from the sneering
sarcasm of the philosophers, but more likely from Kynosarge Gray Dog, name of the gymnasium outside
ancient Athens (for the use of those who were not pure Athenians) where the founder, Antisthenes (a
pupil of Socrates), taught. Diogenes was the most famous. Popular association even in ancient times
was dog-like (Lucian has kyniskos a little cynic, literally puppy). Meaning sneering sarcastic
person is from 1590s.


quinsy (n.)

severe sore throat, late 14c., qwinaci, from Old French quinancie (Modern French esquinacie), from
Late Latin cynanche, from Greek kynankhe sore throat, also dog collar, literally dog-choking, from
kyon (genitive kynos) dog (see canine) + ankhein to strangle, cognate with Latin angere (see anger
(v.)).


canary (n.)

type of small songbird, 1650s (short for Canary-bird, 1570s), from French canarie, from Spanish
canario canary bird, literally of the Canary Islands, from Latin Insula Canaria Canary Island,
largest of the Fortunate Isles, literally island of dogs (canis, genitive canarius; see canine
(n.)), so called because large dogs lived there. The name was extended to the whole island group
(Canari&aelig; Insul&aelig;) by the time of Arnobius (c.300). As a type of wine (from the Canary
Islands) from 1580s.


fang (n.)

Old English fang prey, spoils, plunder, booty; a seizing or taking, from gefangen, past participle
of fon seize, take, capture, from Proto-Germanic *fango- (cognates: Old Frisian fangia, Middle Dutch
and Dutch vangen, Old Norse fanga, German fangen, Gothic fahan), from PIE root *pag- to make firm,
fix; connected to Latin pax (genitive pacis) peace (see pact).    The sense of canine tooth (1550s)
probably developed from Old English fengto&eth;, literally catching- or grasping-tooth. Transferred
to the venom tooth of a serpent, etc., by 1800.


