canon (n.1)

church law, Old English canon, from Old French canon or directly from Late Latin canon Church law,
in classical Latin, measuring line, rule, from Greek kanon any straight rod or bar; rule; standard
of excellence, perhaps from kanna reed (see cane (n.)). Taken in ecclesiastical sense for decree of
the Church. General sense of standard of judging is from c.1600. Harold Bloom writes that The
secular canon, with the word meaning a catalog of approved authors, does not actually begin until
the middle of the eighteenth century .... [The Western Canon, 1994]. Related: Canonicity.


canonize (v.)

late 14c., to place in the canon or calendar of saints, from Old French cannonisier and directly
from Medieval Latin canonizare, from Late Latin canon church rule (see canon (n.1)). Related:
Canonized; cannonizing.


canon (n.2)

clergyman, c.1200, from Anglo-French canun, from Old North French canonie (Modern French chanoine),
from Church Latin canonicus clergyman living under a rule, noun use of Latin adjective canonicus
according to rule (in ecclesiastical use, pertaining to the canon), from Greek kanonikos, from kanon
rule (see canon (n.1)).


canonical (adj.)

early 15c., according to ecclesiastical law, from Medieval Latin canonicalis, from Late Latin
canonicus according to rule, in Church Latin, pertaining to the canon (see canon (n.1)). Earlier was
canonial (early 13c.).


cannon (n.)

c.1400, tube for projectiles, from Anglo-French canon, Old French canon (14c.), from Italian cannone
large tube, barrel, augmentative of Latin canna reed, tube (see cane (n.)). Meaning large ordnance
piece, the main modern sense, is from 1520s. Spelling not differentiated from canon till c.1800.
Cannon fodder (1891) translates German kanonenfutter (compare Shakespeare's food for powder in I
Hen. IV).


kir (n.)

white wine and cr&egrave;me de cassis, 1966 (popular in U.S. 1980s), from Canon Felix Kir
(1876-1968), mayor of Dijon, who is said to have invented the recipe.


Copernicus

Latinized form of name of Mikolaj Koppernigk (1473-1543), physician and canon of the cathedral of
Frauenburg. His great work was De Revolutionibus Orbium Coelestium.


in-law (n.)

1894, anyone of a relationship not natural, abstracted from father-in-law, etc.The position of the
'in-laws' (a happy phrase which is attributed ... to her Majesty, than whom no one can be better
acquainted with the article) is often not very apt to promote happiness. [Blackwood's Magazine,
1894]The earliest recorded use of the phrase is in brother-in-law (13c.); the law is Canon Law,
which defines degrees of relationship within which marriage is prohibited.


Pali

1690s, Middle High Indian dialect used in sacred Buddhist writings (the lingua franca of northern
India from c. 6c. B.C.E.-2c. B.C.E.), from Sanskrit Pali, from pali bhasa language of the canonical
books, from pali line, role, canon + bhasa language.


leonine (adj.)

lion-like, late 14c., from Old French leonin or directly from Latin leoninus belonging to or
resembling a lion, from leo (genitive leonis) lion. Weekley thinks that Leonine verse (1650s),
rhymed in the middle as well as the end of the line, probably is from the name of some medieval
poet, perhaps Leo, Canon of St. Victor, Paris, 12c.


extravagant (adj.)

late 14c., from Medieval Latin extravagantem, originally a word in Canon Law for uncodified papal
decrees, present participle of extravagari wander outside or beyond, from Latin extra outside of
(see extra-) + vagari wander, roam (see vague). Extended sense of excessive, extreme first recorded
1590s; that of wasteful, lavish 1711. Related: Extravagantly.


memento (n.)

c.1400, Psalm cxxxi in the Canon of the Mass (which begins with the Latin word Memento and in which
the dead are commemorated), from Latin memento remember, imperative of meminisse to remember,
recollect, think of, bear in mind, a reduplicated form, related to mens mind (see mind (n.)).
Meaning reminder, object serving as a warning is from 1580s; sense of keepsake is first recorded
1768.


duodenum (n.)

late 14c., from Medieval Latin duodenum digitorium space of twelve digits, from Latin duodeni twelve
each. Coined by Gerard of Cremona (d.1187), who translated Canon Avicennae, a loan-translation of
Greek dodekadaktylon, literally twelve fingers long, the intestine part so called by Greek physician
Herophilus (c.353-280 B.C.E.) for its length, about equal to the breadth of twelve fingers.


litany (n.)

c.1200, from Old French letanie and directly from Medieval Latin letania, Late Latin litania (source
also of Spanish letania, Italian litania), from Greek litaneia litany, an entreating, from lite
prayer, supplication, entreaty, of unknown origin. From notion of monotonous enumeration of
petitions in Christian prayer services came generalized sense of repeated series, early 19c.,
borrowed from French.    For those who know the Greek words, a litany is a series of prayers, a
liturgy is a canon of public service; the latter in practice includes prayer, but does not say so.
[Fowler]


regular (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French reguler ecclesiastical (Modern French r*#233;gulier), from Late Latin
regularis containing rules for guidance, from Latin regula rule, from PIE *reg- move in a straight
line (see regal).    Earliest sense was of religious orders (the opposite of secular). Extended from
late 16c. to shapes, etc., that followed predictable or uniform patterns; sense of normal is from
1630s; meaning real, genuine is from 1821. Old English borrowed Latin regula and nativized it as
regol rule, regulation, canon, law, standard, pattern; hence regolsticca ruler (instrument);
regollic (adj.) canonical, regular.


