cant (n.1)

insincere talk, 1709, earlier it was slang for whining of beggars (1640s), from the verb in this
sense (1560s), from Old North French canter (Old French chanter) to sing, chant, from Latin cantare,
frequentative of canere to sing (see chant (v.)). Sense in English developed after 1680 to mean the
jargon of criminals and vagabonds, thence applied contemptuously by any sect or school to the
phraseology of its rival.    ... Slang is universal, whilst Cant is restricted in usage to certain
classes of the community: thieves, vagrom men, and -- well, their associates. ... Slang boasts a
quasi-respectability denied to Cant, though Cant is frequently more enduring, its use continuing
without variation of meaning for many generations. [John S. Farmer, Forewords to Musa Pedestris,
1896]


cant (n.2)

slope, slant, late 14c., Scottish, edge, brink, from Old North French cant corner (perhaps via
Middle Low German kante or Middle Dutch kant), from Vulgar Latin *canthus, from Latin cantus iron
tire of a wheel, possibly from a Celtic word meaning rim of wheel, edge (compare Welsh cant
bordering of a circle, tire, edge, Breton cant circle), from PIE *kam-bo- corner, bend, from root
*kemb- to bend, turn, change (cognates: Greek kanthos corner of the eye, Russian kutu corner).


cantabile        (adj.)

1724, from Italian, literally singable, that can be sung, from cantare to sing (see chant (v.)).


Cantabrigian (adj.)

pertaining to Cambridge, 1540s, from Medieval Latin Cantabrigia (see Cambridge) + -an.


cantaloupe (n.)

also cantaloup, 1739, from French, from Italian, from Cantalupo, name of a former Papal summer
estate near Rome, where the melons first were grown in Europe after their introduction (supposedly
from Armenia). The place name seems to be singing wolf and might refer to a spot where wolves
gathered, but this might be folk etymology.


cantankerous (adj.)

1772, said to be a Wiltshire word, probably from an alteration (influenced by raucous) of Middle
English contakour troublemaker (c.1300), from Anglo-French contec discord, strife, from Old French
contechier (Old North French contekier), from con- with + teche, related to atachier hold fast (see
attach). With -ous. Related: Cantankerously; cantankerousness.


cantata (n.)

1724, from Italian cantata, literally that which is sung, past participle of cantare to sing (see
chant (v.)).


canteen (n.)

c.1710, store in a military camp, from French cantine sutler's shop (17c.), from Italian cantina
wine cellar, vault, which is perhaps another of the many meanings that were attached to Latin canto
corner; in this case, perhaps corner for storage. A Gaulish origin also has been proposed. Extended
to refreshment room at a military base, school, etc. from 1870. Meaning small tin for water or
liquor, carried by soldiers on the march, campers, etc. is from 1744, from a sense in French.


canter (v.)

1706, from a contraction of Canterbury gallop (1630s), easy pace at which pilgrims ride to
Canterbury (q.v.). Related: Cantered; cantering.


canter (n.)

1755, from canter (v.).


Canterbury

Old English Cantware-buruh fortified town of the Kentish people, from Cant-ware the people of Kent
(see Kent). The Roman name was Duroverno, from Romano-British *duro- walled town.    Pope Gregory
the Great intended to make London, as the largest southern Anglo-Saxon city, the metropolitan see of
southern England, but Christianity got a foothold first in the minor kingdom of Kent, whose heathen
ruler Ethelbert had married a Frankish Christian princess. London was in the Kingdom of Essex and
out of reach of the missionaries at first. Therefore, in part perhaps to flatter Ethelbert, his
capital was made the cathedral city. Related: Canterburian.


canticle (n.)

short hymn, early 13c., from Latin canticulum a little song, diminutive of canticum song (also a
scene in Roman comedy enacted by one person and accompanied by music and dancing), from cantus (see
chant (v.)).


cantilever (n.)

1660s, probably from cant (n.2) + lever, but earliest form (c.1610) was cantlapper. First element
also might be Spanish can dog, architect's term for an end of timber jutting out of a wall, on which
beams rested. Related: Cantilevered.


cantina (n.)

bar room, saloon, 1892, Texas and U.S. southwest dialect, from Spanish and Italian form of canteen.


cantle (n.)

early 14c., a part, a portion, also a section cut out of anything (mid-15c.), from Old North French
cantel corner, piece (Old French chantel, Modern French chanteau), from Medieval Latin cantellus,
diminutive of cantus corner (see cant (n.2)).


canto (n.)

1580s, from Italian canto song, from Latin cantus song (see chant (v.)). As a section of a long
poem, used in Italian by Dante, in English first by Spenser.


canton (n.)

1530s, corner, angle, from Middle French canton piece, portion of a country (13c.), from Italian
(Lombard dialect) cantone region, especially in the mountains, augmentative of Latin canto section
of a country, literally corner (see cant (n.2)). Originally in English a term in heraldry and flag
descriptions; applied to the sovereign states of the Swiss republic from 1610s. Related: Cantoned.


Cantonese (n.)

1816, from Canton, former transliteration of the name of the Chinese region now known in English as
Guangzhou. The older form of the name is from the old British-run, Hong Kong-based Chinese postal
system. As an adjective from 1840.


cantonment (n.)

1756, military quarters, from French cantonnement, from  cantonner to divide into cantons (14c.),
from canton (see canton). Meaning action of quartering troops is from 1757.


cantor (n.)

1530s, church song-leader, from Latin cantor singer, poet, actor, agent noun from past participle
stem of canere to sing (see chant (v.)). Applied in English to the Hebrew chazan from 1893.


cantrip (n.)

magical spell, 1719, a Scottish word of uncertain origin; despite much speculation it is unclear
even where the word is divided, whether the second element is rope (perhaps a reference to knotted
cords as magical devices) or trappa a step or some other thing.


acanthus (n.)

1660s, from Latin acanthus, from Greek akanthos, from ake point, thorn (see acrid) + anthos flower
(see anther). So called for its large spiny leaves. A conventionalized form of the leaf is used in
Corinthian capitals.


applicant (n.)

one who applies, late 15c., from Latin applicantem (nominative applicans), present participle of
applicare (see apply).


bel canto

1894, Italian, literally fine song.


coelacanth (n.)

1857, from Modern Latin Coelacanthus (genus name, 1839, Agassiz), from Greek koilos hollow (from PIE
root *kel- (2); see cell) + akantha spine (see acrid). So called from the hollow fin rays supporting
the tail. Known only as a fossil, the most recent one from 70 million years ago, until discovered
living in the sea off the east coast of South Africa Dec. 22, 1938. The specimen was described by
Marjorie Courtney-Latimer, who wrote about it to S.African ichthyologist J.L.B. Smith.    I stared
and stared, at first in puzzlement. I did not know any fish of our own, or indeed of any seas like
that; it looked more like a lizard. And then a bomb seemed to burst in my brain, and beyond that
sketch and the paper of the letter, I was looking at a series of fishy creatures that flashed up as
on a screen, fishes no longer here, fishes that had lived in dim past ages gone, and of which only
fragmentary remains in rock are known. [J.L.B. Smith, Old Fourlegs: The Story of the Coelacanth,
1956]


cosecant (n.)

1706, from co, short for complement, + secant.


decant (v.)

1630s, pour off the clear liquid from a solution by gently tipping the vessel, originally an
alchemical term, from French d&eacute;canter, perhaps from Medieval Latin decanthare to pour from
the edge of a vessel, from de- + Medieval Latin canthus corner, lip of a jug, from Latin cantus,
canthus iron rim around a carriage wheel. Related: Decanted; decanting.


decanter (n.)

vessel for decanting liquors, 1715, agent noun from decant.


descant (n.)

late 14c., from Old North French descant (Old French deschant), from Medieval Latin discantus
refrain, part-song, from Latin dis- asunder, apart (see dis-) + cantus song (see chant). Spelling
was partly Latinized 16c. Originally counterpoint.


descant (v.)

mid-15c.; see descant (n.). Sense of to comment at length is first attested 1640s.


incantation (n.)

late 14c., from Old French incantacion spell, exorcism (13c.), from Latin incantationem (nominative
incantatio) art of enchanting, noun of action from past participle stem of incantare bewitch, charm,
literally sing spells (see enchantment).


insignificant (adj.)

1650s, from in- (1) not, opposite of + significant. Related: Insignificantly.


intoxicant (n.)

liquor, 1863; see intoxicate.


lubricant (n.)

1828, probably from lubricant (adj.), or from Latin lubricantem.


lubricant (adj.)

reducing friction, 1809, from Latin lubricantem (nominative lubricans), present participle of
lubricare to make slippery or smooth, from lubricus slippery; easily moved, sliding, gliding;
figuratively uncertain, hazardous, dangerous; seductive, from PIE *sleubh- to slip, slide (see
sleeve).


lycanthrope (n.)

1620s in the classical sense; 1825 in the modern sense, from Modern Latin lycanthropus, from Greek
lykanthropos wolf-man (see lycanthropy).


lycanthropy (n.)

1580s, a form of madness (described by ancient writers) in which the afflicted thought he was a
wolf, from Greek lykanthropia, from lykanthropos wolf-man, from lykos wolf (see wolf (n.)) +
anthropos man (see anthropo-). Originally a form of madness (described by ancient writers) in which
the afflicted thought he was a wolf; applied to actual transformations of persons (especially
witches) into wolves since 1830 (see werewolf).


mendicant (adj.)

late 14c., from Latin mendicantem (nominative mendicans) present participle of mendicare to beg, ask
alms, from mendicus beggar, originally cripple (connection via cripples who must beg), from menda
fault, physical defect (see mendacious). As an adjective from 1540s. Also in Middle English was
mendinant (mid-14c.), from Old French mendinant, present participle of mendiner to beg, from the
same Latin source.


mendicant (n.)

a beggar, mid-15c., from mendicant (adj.) or from Latin mendicantem (nominative mendicans), noun use
of present participle of mendicare.


mercantile (adj.)

1640s, from French mercantile (17c.), from Italian mercantile, from Medieval Latin mercantile, from
Latin mercantem (nominative mercans) a merchant, also trading, present participle of mercari to
trade, from merx (see market (n.)). Mercantile system first appears in Adam Smith (1776).


mercantilism (n.)

1834, from French mercantilisme; see mercantile + -ism. Related: mercantilist.


peccant (adj.)

c.1600, from Latin peccantem (nominative pecans) sinful, present participle of peccare to sin (see
peccadillo). As a noun from 1620s. Related: Peccancy.


pithecanthropus (n.)

genus of extinct primates, 1895, from Modern Latin, literally monkey-man, from Greek pithekos ape +
anthropos man (see anthropo-). Coined 1868 by Haeckel as a name for a hypothetical link between apes
and men (attested in English in this sense from 1876); applied by Dr. Eug&egrave;ne Dubois
(1858-1940), physician of the Dutch army in Java, to remains he found there in 1891.


pyracanth (n.)

thorny shrub of the apple family, 1660s, from Modern Latin genus name Pyracantha, from Greek
pyrakantha (Dioscorides), a plant named but not described, from pyr- fire (see fire (n.)) + akantha
thorn, thorny plant, from PIE root *ak- sharp, pointed (see acrid).


radicant (adj.)

bringing forth roots, 1735, from Latin radicantem (nominative radicans), present participle of
radicare, from radix root (see radish).


recant (v.)

1530s, from Latin recantare recall, revoke, from re- back (see re-) + cantare to chant (see chant
(v.)). A word from the Reformation. Loan-translation of Greek palinoidein recant, from palin back +
oeidein to sing. Related: Recanted; recanting.


recantation (n.)

1540s, noun of action from recant.


scant (adj.)

mid-14c., from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse skamt, neuter of skammr short, brief, from
Proto-Germanic *skamma- (cognates: Old English scamm short, Old High German skemmen to shorten),
perhaps ultimately hornless, from PIE *kem- (see hind (n.)). Also in Middle English as a noun, scant
supply, scarcity, from Old Norse. As a verb and adverb from mid-15c.


scantily (adv.)

1774; see scanty + -ly (2).


scantling (adj.)

1520s, measured or prescribed size, altered from scantlon, scantiloun dimension (c.1400), earlier a
type of mason's tool for measuring thickness (c.1300), a shortening of Old French escantillon
(Modern French &#233;chantillon sample pattern), of uncertain origin; perhaps ultimately from Latin
scandere to climb (see scan (v.)). Sense influenced by scant. Meaning small wooden beam is 1660s.
Related: Scantlings.


