canto (n.)

1580s, from Italian canto song, from Latin cantus song (see chant (v.)). As a section of a long
poem, used in Italian by Dante, in English first by Spenser.


canton (n.)

1530s, corner, angle, from Middle French canton piece, portion of a country (13c.), from Italian
(Lombard dialect) cantone region, especially in the mountains, augmentative of Latin canto section
of a country, literally corner (see cant (n.2)). Originally in English a term in heraldry and flag
descriptions; applied to the sovereign states of the Swiss republic from 1610s. Related: Cantoned.


bel canto

1894, Italian, literally fine song.


Roman holiday (n.)

occasion on which entertainment or profit is derived from injury or death, 1860, originally in
reference to holidays for gladiatorial combat; the expression seems to be entirely traceable to an
oft-quoted passage on a dying barbarian gladiator from the fourth canto (1818) of Byron's Childe
Harold's Pilgrimage:    But where his rude hut by the Danube lay  There were his young barbarians
all at play,  There was their Dacian mother. He, their sire,  Butcher'd to make a Roman holiday!


canteen (n.)

c.1710, store in a military camp, from French cantine sutler's shop (17c.), from Italian cantina
wine cellar, vault, which is perhaps another of the many meanings that were attached to Latin canto
corner; in this case, perhaps corner for storage. A Gaulish origin also has been proposed. Extended
to refreshment room at a military base, school, etc. from 1870. Meaning small tin for water or
liquor, carried by soldiers on the march, campers, etc. is from 1744, from a sense in French.


rhapsody (n.)

1540s, epic poem, from Middle French rhapsodie, from Latin rhapsodia, from Greek rhapsoidia verse
composition, recitation of epic poetry; a book, a lay, a canto, from rhapsodos reciter of epic
poems, literally one who stitches or strings songs together, from rhaptein to stitch, sew, weave
(see wrap (v.)) + oide song (see ode). Meaning exalted enthusiastic feeling or expression is from
1630s. Meaning sprightly musical composition is first recorded 1850s.


alto (n.)

1784, man with an alto voice, from Italian alto (canto), from Latin altus high (see old). Originally
a high man's voice, now more commonly applied to the lower range of women's voices (which is more
strictly the contralto), an extension first recorded in 1881.    The alto in a man is totally
distinct from the contralto in a woman. The tone is utterly different -- the best notes of the one
are certainly not the best notes of the other; and although in certain cases a contralto may sing
with good effect music written for a male alto (e.g. in some oratorios), yet the converse is
scarcely ever true. [How to Sing, 1890]    As a type of saxophone, from 1869.


tenor (n.)

c.1300, general meaning, prevailing course, purpose, drift, from Old French tenor substance,
contents, meaning, sense; tenor part in music (13c. Modern French teneur), from Latin tenorem
(nominative tenor) a course, originally continuance, uninterrupted course, a holding on, from tenere
to hold (see tenet). The musical sense of high male voice is attested from late 14c. in English, so-
called because the sustained melody (canto fermo) was carried by the tenor's part. Meaning singer
with a tenor voice is from late 15c. As an adjective in this sense from 1520s.


