capacity (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French capacit&eacute; ability to hold (15c.), from Latin capacitatem
(nominative capacitas) breadth, capacity, capability of holding much, noun of state from capax
(genitive capacis) able to hold much, from capere to take (see capable). Meaning largest audience a
place can hold is 1908.


valence (n.)

early 15c., extract, preparation, from Latin valentia strength, capacity, from valentem (nominative
valens) strong, stout, vigorous, powerful, present participle of valere be strong (see valiant).
Meaning relative combining capacity of an element is recorded from 1884, from German Valenz (1868),
from the Latin word. Related: Valency.


capacitor (n.)

device which stores electricity, 1926, from capacity with Latinate agent-noun ending.


omer (n.)

Hebrew measure of capacity (a little over 5 pints), from Hebrew 'omer.


under-employed (adj.)

1908, not used to optimum capacity, originally in reference to working persons, from under + past
participle of employ (v.).


farad (n.)

unit of electric capacity, suggested 1861, first used 1868, named for English physicist Michael
Faraday (1791-1867). Related: Faradic.


natural (n.)

person with a natural gift or talent, 1925, originally in prizefighting, from natural (adj.). In
Middle English, the word as a noun meant natural capacity, physical ability or power (early 14c.),
and it was common in sense a native of a place in Shakespeare's day. Also in 17c., a mistress.


paramedical (adj.)

related to medicine in an auxiliary capacity, 1908, from para- (1) + medical.


-ile

suffix denoting ability, capacity, from French -il or directly from Latin -ilis.


feeling (n.)

late 12c., act of touching, sense of touch, verbal noun from feel (v.). Meaning emotion is mid-14c.
Meaning what one feels (about something), opinion is from mid-15c. Meaning capacity to feel is from
1580s. Related: Feelingly.


sui juris

1610s, of full legal age and capacity, in ancient Rome, of the status of one not subject to the
patria potestas. For first element, see sui generis; for second element, see jurist.


uptake (n.)

capacity for understanding, perceptive power, 1816, from up (adv.) + take (v.). Compare Middle
English verb uptake to pick or take up (c.1300). Meaning pipe leading up from the smoke box of a
steam boiler to the chimney is from 1839.


capacitance (n.)

1893, from capacity + -ance.


intellect (n.)

late 14c. (but little used before 16c.), from Old French intellecte intellectual capacity (13c.),
and directly from Latin intellectus discernment, a perception, understanding, from noun use of past
participle of intelligere to understand, discern (see intelligence).


spirometer (n.)

contrivance for measuring lung capacity, 1846, formed irregularly from Latin spirare to breathe (see
spirit (n.)) + -meter. Related: Spirometry.


qua

as, in the capacity of, from Latin qua where? on which side? at which place? which way? in what
direction? figuratively how? in what manner? by what method?; to what extent? in what degree?
correlative pronomial adverb of place, from PIE *kwo-, stem of relative and interrogative pronouns
(source also of Old English hwa who; see who).


Arian (adj.)

1530s, pertaining to the doctrines of Arius, priest in Alexandria early 4c., who posed the question
of Christ's nature in terms which appeared to debase the Savior's relation to God (denial of
consubstantiation). Besides taking an abstract view of Christ's nature, he reaffirmed man's capacity
for perfection. The dissention was widespread and split the Church for about a century during a
crucial time.


tonnage (n.)

early 15c., tax or duty on wine imported in tuns, from ton (n.1) + -age, and from Old French tonnage
duty levied on wine in casks (c.1300). Meaning carrying capacity of a ship is from 1718.


judgment (n.)

mid-13c., action of trying at law, trial, also capacity for making decisions, from Old French
jugement legal judgment; diagnosis; the Last Judgment (11c.), from jugier (see judge (v.)). From
late 13c. as penalty imposed by a court; early 14c. as any authoritative decision, verdict. From
c.1300 in referfence to the Last Judgment. Also from c.1300 as opinion. Sense of discernment is
first recorded 1530s.


virility (n.)

period of manhood, 1580s, from Middle French virilit&#233;, from Latin virilitatem (nominative
virilitas) manhood, from virilis (see virile). Meaning power of procreation, capacity for sexua
intercourse is from 1590s; sense of manly strength is recorded from c.1600.


capacitate (v.)

1650s, from Latin capacitas (see capacity) + -ate (2). Related: Capacitation.


-ability

word-forming element expressing ability, fitness, or capacity, from Latin -abilitas, forming nouns
from adjectives ending in -abilis (see -able). Not etymologically related to ability, though
popularly connected with it.


mobility (n.)

early 15c., capacity for motion, from Old French mobilit&eacute; changeableness, inconsistency,
fickleness, from Latin mobilitatem (nominative mobilitas) activity, speed, figuratively
changeableness, fickleness, inconstancy, from mobilis (see mobile (adj.)). Socio-economics sense is
from 1900 and writers in sociology.


motility (n.)

capacity of movement, 1827, from French motilit&#233; (1827), from Latin mot-, stem of movere to
move (see move (v.)).


sensibility (n.)

late 14c., capability of being perceived by the senses; ability to sense or perceive, from Old
French sensibilite, from Late Latin sensibilitatem (nominative sensibilitas), from sensibilis (see
sensible). Rarely recorded until the emergence of the meaning emotional consciousness, capacity for
higher feelings or refined emotion (1751). Related: Sensibilities.


deadly (adj.)

Old English deadlic mortal, subject to death, also causing death; see dead + -ly (1). Meaning having
the capacity to kill is from late 14c. (Old English words for this included dea&eth;b&aelig;rlic,
dea&eth;berende).


activity (n.)

c.1400, active or secular life, from Old French activit&eacute;, from Medieval Latin activitatem
(nominative activitas), a word in Scholastic philosophy, from Latin activus (see active). Meaning
state of being active, briskness, liveliness recorded from 1520s; that of capacity for acting on
matter is from 1540s.


aptitude (n.)

early 15c., tendency, likelihood, from Middle French aptitude (14c.) or directly from Late Latin
aptitudo (genitive aptitudinis) fitness, noun of quality from Latin aptus joined, fitted (see apt).
Meaning natural capacity to learn is 1540s; that of quality of being fit (for a purpose or position)
is from 1640s.


liter (n.)

1797, from French litre (1793), from litron, obsolete French measure of capacity for grain, from
Medieval Latin litra, from Greek litra pound, apparently from the same Sicilian Italic source as
Latin libra.


I.Q.

1922, abbreviation of intelligence quotient, a 1921 translation of German Intelligenz-quotient,
coined 1912 by German psychologist William L. Stern (1871-1938).    Intelligence is a general
capacity of an individual consciously to adjust his thinking to new requirements: it is general
mental adaptability to new problems and conditions of life. [Stern, The Psychological Methods of
Testing Intelligence, 1914]


sensuality (n.)

mid-14c., the part of man that is concerned with the senses, from Old French sensualite the five
senses; impression, from Late Latin sensualitatem (nominative sensualitas) capacity for sensation,
from  Latin sensualis endowed with feeling, sensitive, from sensus feeling (see sense (n.)). Chiefly
animal instincts and appetites, hence the lower nature regarded as a source of evil, lusts of the
flesh (1620s).


pickup (n.)

also pick-up, that which is picked up, 1848; see pick up (v.). As act of picking up from 1882.
Meaning capacity for acceleration is from 1909; that of recovery is from 1916. In reference to a
game between informal teams chosen on the spot, from 1905 (as an adjective in this sense by 1936).
Meaning small truck used for light loads, 1937, is shortened from pickup truck (pickup body is
attested from 1928). The notion probably being of a vehicle for use to pick up (feed, lumber, etc.)
and deliver it where it was needed.


annex (v.)

late 14c., to connect with, from Old French annexer to join (13c.), from Medieval Latin annexare,
frequentative of Latin annecetere to bind to, from ad- to (see ad-) + nectere to tie, bind (see
nexus). Almost always meaning to join in a subordinate capacity. Of nations or territories, c.1400.
Related: Annexed; annexing.


knowledge (n.)

early 12c., cnawlece acknowledgment of a superior, honor, worship; for first element see know.
Second element obscure, perhaps from Scandinavian and cognate with the -lock action, process, found
in wedlock. Meaning capacity for knowing, understanding; familiarity; fact of knowing is late 14c.
Sense of an organized body of facts or teachings is from c.1400, as is that of sexual intercourse.
Also a verb in Middle English, knoulechen acknowledge (c.1200), later find out about; recognize, and
to have sexual intercourse with (c.1300).


ingenuity (n.)

1590s, honor, nobility, from Middle French ing&eacute;nuit&eacute; and directly from Latin
ingenuitatem (nominative ingenuitas) condition of a free-born man, figuratively generosity, noble-
mindedness, from ingenuus (see ingenuous). Etymologically, this word belongs to ingenuous, but in
17c. ingenious and ingenuous so often were confused (even by Shakespeare) that ingenuity has
acquired the meaning capacity for invention or construction (first attested 1640s).


vital (adj.)

late 14c., of or manifesting life, from Latin vitalis of or belonging to life, from vita life,
related to vivere to live, from PIE root *gweie- (1) to live (see bio-). The sense of necessary or
important is from 1610s, via the notion of essential to life (late 15c.). Vital capacity recorded
from 1852. Related: Vitally.


bushel (n.)

early 14c., measure of capacity containing four pecks or eight gallons, from Old French boissel
bushel (13c., Modern French boisseau), probably from boisse, a grain measure based on Gallo-Roman
*bostia handful, from Gaulish *bosta palm of the hand (compare Irish bass, Breton boz the hollow of
the hand). The exact measure varied from place to place and according to commodity, and since late
14c. it has been used loosely to mean a large quantity or number.


Munchkin (n.)

1900, coined by U.S. author L. Frank Baum (1856-1919) in The Wonderful Wizard of Oz. He never
explained how he got the word. The word most like it is perhaps mutchkin, an old Scottish measure of
capacity for liquids, which was used by Scott. (It comes from Middle Dutch mutseken, originally a
little cap, from mutse cap, earlier almutse amice, hood, headdress, from Latin amictus mantle,
cloak, noun use of past participle of amicire to wrap, throw around, a compound from ambi- (see
ambi-) + iacere (see jet (v.).)


burden (n.1)

a load, Old English byr&eth;en a load, weight, charge, duty; also a child; from Proto-Germanic
*burthinjo- that which is borne (cognates: Old Norse byr&eth;r, Old Saxon burthinnia, German
b&uuml;rde, Gothic baur&thorn;ei), from PIE root *bher- (1) to bear, to carry; give birth (see
infer).    The shift from -th- to -d- took place beginning 12c. (compare murder (n.)). Archaic
burthen is occasionally retained for the specific sense of capacity of a ship. Burden of proof is
recorded from 1590s.


carry (v.)

early 14c., from Anglo-French carier to transport in a vehicle or Old North French carrier to cart,
carry (Modern French charrier), from Gallo-Roman *carrizare, from Late Latin carricare, from Latin
carrum (see car).    Meaning take by force is from 1580s. Sense of gain victory in an election is
from 1610s. Of sound, to be heard at a distance by 1896. Carrying capacity is attested from 1836.
Carry on continue to advance is from 1640s; carryings-on questionable doings is from 1660s. Carry-
castle (1590s) was an old descriptive term for an elephant.


leisure (n.)

early 14c., leisir, opportunity to do something (as in phrase at (one's) leisure), also time at
one's disposal, from Old French leisir (Modern French loisir) capacity; permission; leisure, spare
time; free will; idleness, inactivity, noun use of infinitive leisir be permitted, from Latin licere
be permitted (see licence). The -u- appeared 16c., probably on analogy of words like pleasure.
Phrase leisured class attested by 1836.


remembrance (n.)

c.1300, a memory, recollection, from Old French remembrance (11c.), from remembrer (see remember).
From late 14c. as consideration, reflection; present consciousness of a past event; store of
personal experiences available to recollection, capacity to recall the past. Also late 14c. as
memento, keepsake, souvenir, and a commemoration, remembering, ritual of commemoration. Meaning
faculty of memory, capability of remembering is early 15c.    British Remembrance Day, the Sunday
nearest Nov. 11 (originally in memory of the dead of World War I) is attested from 1921. A
remembrancer (early 15c.) was a royal official of the Exchequer tasked with recording and collecting
debts due to the Crown; hence also, figuratively Death (late 15c.).


bisexual (adj.)

1824, having both sexes in one being, hermaphroditic, from bi- + sexual. Meaning attracted to both
sexes is from 1914; the noun in this sense is attested from 1922, and compare bisexuality. Not in
general use until 1950s. Ambisexual was proposed in this sense early 20c.    I suggest that the term
ambisexuality be used in psychology instead of the expression bisexual predisposition. This would
connote that we understand by this predisposition, not the presence of male and female material in
the organism (Fliess), nor of male and female sex hunger in the mind, but the child's psychical
capacity for bestowing his erotism, originally objectless, on either the male or the female sex, or
on both. [S. Ferenczi, Sex in Psycho-Analysis, transl. Ernest Jones, Boston, 1916]


-able

word-forming element expressing ability, capacity, fitness, from French, from Latin -ibilis,
-abilis, forming adjectives from verbs, from PIE *-tro-, a suffix used to form nouns of instrument.
In Latin, infinitives in -are took -abilis, others -ibilis; in English, -able tends to be used with
native (and other non-Latin) words, -ible with words of obvious Latin origin (but there are
exceptions). The Latin suffix is not etymologically connected with able, but it long has been
popularly associated with it, and this has contributed to its survival as a living suffix. It is
related to the second syllable of rudder and saddle.


ingenious (adj.)

early 15c., intellectual, talented, from Middle French ing&eacute;nieux clever, ingenious (Old
French engeignos), from Latin ingeniosus of good capacity, full of intellect; clever, gifted with
genius, from ingenium innate qualities, ability, literally that which is inborn, from in- in (see
in- (2)) + gignere, from PIE *gen- produce (see genus). Sense of skillful, clever at contrivance
first recorded 1540s. In a sense of crafty, clever, skillful Middle English had enginous (mid-14c.),
from Old French engeignos. Related: Ingeniously; ingeniousness.


mouth (n.)

Old English mu&thorn; mouth, opening, door, gate, from Proto-Germanic *munthaz (cognates: Old Saxon,
Old Frisian muth, Old Norse munnr, Danish mund, Middle Dutch mont, Dutch mond, Old High German mund,
German Mund, Gothic mun&thorn;s mouth), with characteristic loss of nasal consonant in Old English
(compare tooth, goose), from PIE *mnto-s (cognates: Latin mentum chin). In the sense of outfall of a
river it is attested from late Old English; as the opening of anything with capacity (a bottle,
cave, etc.) it is recorded from c.1200. Mouth-organ attested from 1660s.


candle (n.)

Old English candel lamp, lantern, candle, an early ecclesiastical borrowing from Latin candela a
light, torch, candle made of tallow or wax, from candere to shine, from PIE root *kand- to glow, to
shine, to shoot out light (cognates: Sanskrit cand- to give light, shine, candra- shining, glowing,
moon; Greek kandaros coal; Welsh cann white; Middle Irish condud fuel).    Candles were unknown in
ancient Greece (where oil lamps sufficed), but common from early times among Romans and Etruscans.
Candles on birthday cakes seems to have been originally a German custom. To hold a candle to
originally meant to help in a subordinate capacity, from the notion of an assistant or apprentice
holding a candle for light while the master works (compare Old English taporberend acolyte). To burn
the candle at both ends is recorded from 1730.


wit (n.)

mental capacity, Old English wit, witt, more commonly gewit understanding, intellect, sense;
knowledge, consciousness, conscience, from Proto-Germanic *wit- (cognates: Old Saxon wit, Old Norse
vit, Danish vid, Swedish vett, Old Frisian wit, Old High German wizzi knowledge, understanding,
intelligence, mind, German Witz wit, witticism, joke, Gothic unwiti ignorance), from PIE *weid- to
see, metaphorically to know (see vision). Related to Old English witan to know (source of wit (v.)).
Meaning ability to connect ideas and express them in an amusing way is first recorded 1540s; that of
person of wit or learning is from late 15c. For nuances of usage, see humor.    A witty saying
proves nothing. [Voltaire, Diner du Comte de Boulainvilliers]   <hr />   Wit ought to be five or six
degrees above the ideas that form the intelligence of an audience. [Stendhal, Life of Henry Brulard]
Witjar was old slang (18c.) for head, skull. Witling (1690s) was a pretender to wit.


K

Roman letter, from Greek kappa, ultimately from Phoenician and general Semitic kaph, said to be
literally hollow of the hand, so called for its shape. For more on the history of its use, see see
C. As a symbol for potassium, it represents Latin kalium potash. Slang meaning one thousand dollars
is 1970s, from kilo-. K as a measure of capacity (especially in computer memory) meaning one
thousand also is an abbreviation of kilo-. As an indication of strikeout in baseball scorekeeping it
dates from 1874, said to be from last letter of struck, perhaps because first letter already was
being used as abbreviation for sacrifice. The invention of the scorecard symbols is attributed to
U.S. newspaperman Henry Chadwick (1824-1908) of the old New York Clipper.    Smith was the first
striker, and went out on three strikes, which is recorded by the figure 1 for the first out, and the
letter K to indicate how put out, K being the last letter of the word struck. The letter K is used
in this instance as being easier to remember in connection with the word struck than S, the first
letter, would be. [Henry Chadwick, Chadwick's Base Ball Manual, London, 1874]


power (n.)

c.1300, ability; ability to act or do; strength, vigor, might, especially in battle; efficacy;
control, mastery, lordship, dominion; legal power or authority; authorization; military force, an
army, from Anglo-French pouair, Old French povoir, noun use of the infinitive, to be able, earlier
podir (9c.), from Vulgar Latin *potere, from Latin potis powerful (see potent).    Whatever some
hypocritical ministers of government may say about it, power is the greatest of all pleasures. It
seems to me that only love can beat it, and love is a happy illness that can't be picked up as
easily as a Ministry. [Stendhal de l'Amour, 1822]    Meaning one who has power is late 14c. Meaning
specific ability or capacity is from early 15c. Meaning a state or nation with regard to
international authority or influence [OED] is from 1726. Used for a large number of from 1660s.
Meaning energy available for work is from 1727. Sense of electrical supply is from 1896.    Phrase
the powers that be is from Rom. xiii:1. As a statement wishing good luck, more power to (someone) is
recorded from 1842. A power play in ice hockey so called by 1940. Power failure is from 1911; power
steering from 1921.


