career (v.)

1590s, to charge at a tournament, from career (n.). The meaning move rapidly, run at full speed
(1640s) is from the image of a horse passing a career on the jousting field, etc. Related: Careered;
careering.


careerist (n.)

1917, from career (n.) + -ist.


career (n.)

1530s, a running (usually at full speed), a course (especially of the sun, etc., across the sky),
from Middle French carriere road, racecourse (16c.), from Old Proven&ccedil;al or Italian carriera,
from Vulgar Latin *(via) cararia carriage (road), track for wheeled vehicles, from Latin carrus
chariot (see car). Sense of course of a working life first attested 1803.


careen (v.)

1590s, to turn a ship on its side (with the keel exposed), from French cariner, literally to expose
a ship's keel, from Middle French carene keel (16c.), from Italian (Genoese dialect) carena, from
Latin carina keel of a ship, originally nutshell, possibly from PIE root *kar- hard (see hard
(adj.)).     Intransitive sense of to lean, to tilt is from 1763, specifically of ships; in general
use by 1883. In sense to rush headlong, confused with career (v.) since at least 1923. [To career is
to move rapidly; to careen is to lurch from side to side (often while moving rapidly).] Earlier
figurative uses of careen were to be laid up; to rest. Related: Careened; careening.


superwoman (n.)

1906, as female equivalent of superman in the Nietzschean sense. From 1976 in the sense of one who
successfully combines career and motherhood.


bork (v.)

1987, to discredit a candidate for some position by savaging his or her career and beliefs, from
name of U.S. jurist Robert H. Bork (1927-2012), whose Supreme Court nomination in 1987 was rejected
after an intense counter-campaign.


guidance (n.)

1530s, the process of directing conduct, hybrid from guide + -ance; replacing 15c. guying. In
reference to direction in school, career, marriage, etc., from 1927.


conscientious objector (n.)

1896, in reference to those with religious scruples about mandatory vaccination. Military sense
predominated from World War I.    After a chequered career full of startling episodes and reversals,
the Vaccination Bill becomes virtually the Vaccination Act. In Parliament the hottest of the contest
centred round the conscientious objector. [The Lancet, Aug. 13, 1898]


gyrus (n.)

convolution between grooves, 1842, from Latin gyrus circle, circuit, career, from Greek gyros ring,
circle (see gyre).


curriculum (n.)

1824, from Modern Latin transferred use of classical Latin curriculum a running, course, career
(also a fast chariot, racing car), from currere (see current (adj.)). Used in English as a Latin
word since 1630s at Scottish universities.


lechery (n.)

c.1200, from Old French lecherie impertinence, deceit, from lecheor (see lecher).    The priests had
excellent cause to forbid us lechery: this injunction, by reserving to them acquaintance with and
absolution for these private sins, gave them an incredible ascendancy over women, and opened up to
them a career of lubricity whose scope knew no limits. [Marquis de Sade, Philosophy in the Bedroom]


start (n.)

late 14c., an involuntary movement of the body, a sudden jump, from start (v.). Meaning act of
beginning to move or act is from 1560s. Meaning act of beginning to build a house is from 1946. That
of opportunity at the beginning of a career or course of action is from 1849. Paired with finish
(n.) at least from 1839. False start first attested 1850.


obstetric (adj.)

1742, from Modern Latin obstetricus pertaining to a midwife, from obstetrix (genitive obstetricis)
midwife, literally one who stands opposite (the woman giving birth), from obstare stand opposite to
(see obstacle). The true adjective would be obstetricic, but only pedantry would take exception to
obstetric at this stage of its career. [Fowler]. Related: Obstetrical.


resume (n.)

also r&eacute;sum&eacute;, 1804, a summary, from French r&eacute;sum&eacute;, noun use of past
participle of Middle French resumer to sum up, from Latin resumere (see resume (v.)). Meaning
biographical summary of a person's career is 1940s.


Uncle Tom (n.)

servile black man, 1922, somewhat inaccurately in reference to the humble, pious, but strong-willed
main character in Harriet Beecher Stowe's novel, Uncle Tom's Cabin (1852). The image implied in the
insult perhaps is more traceable to the late 19c. minstel show versions of the story, which reached
a far wider audience than the book.    I don't recall anyone in the 1920s using the term 'Uncle Tom'
as an epithet. But what's amazing is how fast it caught on (in the 1930s). Black scholars picked up
(the term) and just started throwing it at each other. [Ernest Allen, quoted in Hamilton, Kendra,
The Strange Career of Uncle Tom, Black Issues in Higher Education, June 2002]    As a verb, attested
from 1937.


josh (v.)

to make fun of, to banter, 1845, American English, probably from the familiar version of the proper
name Joshua, but just which Joshua, or why, is long forgotten. Perhaps it was taken as a typical
name of an old farmer. The word was in use earlier than the career of U.S. humorist Josh Billings,
pseudonym of Henry Wheeler Shaw (1818-1885), who did not begin to write and lecture until 1860; but
his popularity after 1869 may have influence that of the word.About the most originality that any
writer can hope to achieve honestly is to steal with good judgment. [Josh Billings]  Related:
Joshed; joshing.


apply (v.)

late 14c., to put (one's faculties, etc.) to some task or career, late 14c., from Old French
aploiier apply, use, attach (12c., Modern French appliquer), from Latin applicare attach to, join,
connect; figuratively, devote (oneself) to, give attention, from ad- to (see ad-) + plicare fold
(see ply (v.1)). The etymological sense is bring things in contact with one another. Of lotions,
from early 15c. Meaning seek a job by submitting an application for one is from 1851. A by-form
applicate is recorded from 1530s. Related: Applied; applying.


surfing (n.)

1955, verbal noun from surf (v.). The surfing craze went nationwide in U.S. from California in 1963.
Surf-board is from 1826, originally in a Hawaiian and Polynesian context. Surf music attested from
1963.    It is highly amusing to a stranger to go out into the south part of this town, some day
when the sea is rolling in heavily over the reef, and to observe there the evolutions and rapid
career of a company of surf-players. The sport is so attractive and full of wild excitement to
Hawaiians, and withal so healthful, that I cannot but hope it will be many years before civilization
shall look it out of countenance, or make it disreputable to indulge in this manly, though it be
dangerous, exercise. [the Rev. Henry T. Cheever, Life in the Sandwich Islands, New York, 1851]   <hr
/>   The basis of surfing music is a rock and roll bass beat figuration, coupled with a raunch-type
weird-sounding lead guitar plus wailing saxes. Surfing music has to sound untrained with a certain
rough flavor to appeal to the teenagers. [music publisher Murray Wilson, quoted in Billboard, June
29, 1963]


