carnal (adj.)

c.1400, physical, human, mortal, from Old French carnal and directly from Medieval Latin carnalis
natural, of the same blood, from Latin carnis of the flesh, genitive of caro flesh, meat (see
carnage). Meaning sensual is from early 15c.; that of worldly, sinful is from mid-15c. Carnal
knowledge is attested from early 15c. and was in legal use by 1680s.


carnalite (n.)

worldly minded man, one addicted to fleshly practices, 1570s, from carnal + -ite (1).


carnally (adv.)

late 15c., sexually; 1530s, corporeally, from carnal + -ly (2).


carnalize (v.)

despiritualize, sensualize, 1680s, from carnal + -ize.


carnality (n.)

early 15c., sensuality, from Late Latin carnalitas, from Latin carnalis (see carnal). Meaning state
of being flesh, fleshliness is from mid-15c.


Casanova (n.)

man of carnal adventures, connoisseur of seduction, 1888, from Giacomo Girolamo Casanova de Seignalt
(1725-1798), the infamous debaucher. His name could be Englished as Jacob Jerome Newhouse, which is
somewhat less romantic.


sensual (adj.)

early 15c., carnal, unspiritual; mid-15c., of or pertaining to the senses, from Middle French
sensuel (15c.) and directly from Late Latin sensualis endowed with feeling (see sensuality). Meaning
connected with gratification of the senses, especially lewd, unchaste is attested from late 15c.


agape (n.)

c.1600, from Greek agape brotherly love, charity, from agapan greet with affection, love, of unknown
origin. Agape was used by early Christians for their love feast held in connection with the Lord's
Supper. In modern use, often in simpler sense of Christian love (1856, frequently opposed to eros as
carnal or sensual love).


fellowship (n.)

c.1200, feolahschipe companionship, from fellow + -ship. In Middle English it was at times a
euphemism for sexual intercourse (carnal fellowship).   To fellowship with is to hold communion
with; to unite with in doctrine and discipline. This barbarism now appears with disgusting frequency
in the reports of ecclesiastical conventions, and in the religious newspapers generally. [Bartlett,
Dictionary of Americanisms, 1848]


charnel (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French charnel (12c.) fleshly, from Late Latin carnale graveyard, properly
neuter of adjective carnalis (see carnal). As an adjective from 1813. The Late Latin word was
glossed in Old English as fl&aelig;schus flesh-house. Charnel house is attested from 1550s.


can (v.1)

Old English 1st &amp; 3rd person singular present indicative of cunnan know, have power to, be able,
(also to have carnal knowledge), from Proto-Germanic *kunnan to be mentally able, to have learned
(cognates: Old Norse kenna to know, make known, Old Frisian kanna to recognize, admit, German kennen
to know, Gothic kannjan to make known), from PIE root *gno- (see know).    Absorbing the third sense
of to know, that of to know how to do something (in addition to to know as a fact and to be
acquainted with something or someone). An Old English preterite-present verb, its original past
participle, couth, survived only in its negation (see uncouth), but see also could. The present
participle has spun off as cunning.


sensible (adj.)

late 14c., capable of sensation or feeling; also capable of being sensed or felt, perceptible to the
senses, hence easily understood; logical, reasonable, from Late Latin sensibilis having feeling,
perceptible by the senses, from sensus, past participle of sentire perceive, feel (see sense (n.)).
Of persons, aware, cognizant (of something) early 15c.; having good sense, capable of reasoning,
discerning, clever, mid-15c. Of clothes, shoes, etc., practical rather than fashionable it is
attested from 1855.    Other Middle English senses included susceptible to injury or pain (early
15c., now gone with sensitive); worldly, temporal, outward (c.1400); carnal, unspiritual (early
15c., now gone with sensual). Related: Sensibleness.


strumpet (n.)

harlot; bold, lascivious woman, early 14c., of uncertain origin. One theory connects it with Latin
stuprata, fem. past participle of stuprare have illicit sexual relations with, or Late Latin strupum
dishonor, violation. But evidence for this is wanting and others suggest Middle Dutch strompe a
stocking, or strompen to stride, to stalk (as a prostitute might a customer). The major sources
don't seem to give much preference to any of these. Weekley notes Gregory's Chronicle (c.1450) has
streppett in same sense. In 18c.-early 19c., often abbreviated as strum and also used as a verb,
which led to some odd dictionary entries:    TO STRUM: to have carnal knowledge of a woman, also to
play badly on the harpsichord or any other stringed instrument. [Capt. Francis Grose, A Classical
Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, 1785]


