carnage (n.)

c.1600, from Middle French carnage (16c.), from Old Italian carnaggio slaughter, murder, from
Medieval Latin carnaticum flesh, from Latin carnaticum slaughter of animals, from carnem (nominative
caro) flesh, originally a piece of flesh, from PIE root *(s)ker- (1) to cut (see shear (v.)). In
English always used more of slaughters of men than beasts. Southey (1795) tried to make a verb of
it.


massacre (n.)

1580s, from Middle French massacre wholesale slaughter, carnage, from Old French macacre, macecle
slaughterhouse, butchery, of unknown origin; perhaps related to Latin macellum provisions store,
butcher shop.


carnivorous (adj.)

1640s, from Latin carnivorus flesh-eating, feeding on flesh, from caro (genitive carnis) flesh (see
carnage) + vorare to devour (see voracity).


massacre (v.)

1580s, from Middle French massacrer to slaughter (16c.), from massacre (n.) wholesale slaughter,
carnage (see massacre (n.)). Related: Massacred; massacring.


carnal (adj.)

c.1400, physical, human, mortal, from Old French carnal and directly from Medieval Latin carnalis
natural, of the same blood, from Latin carnis of the flesh, genitive of caro flesh, meat (see
carnage). Meaning sensual is from early 15c.; that of worldly, sinful is from mid-15c. Carnal
knowledge is attested from early 15c. and was in legal use by 1680s.


incarnation (n.)

c.1300, embodiment of God in the person of Christ, from Old French incarnacion (12c.), from Late
Latin incarnationem (nominative incarnatio), act of being made flesh (used by Church writers
especially of God in Christ), noun of action from past participle stem of Latin incarnare to make
flesh, from in- in (see in- (2)) + caro (genitive carnis) flesh (see carnage).


carrion (n.)

early 13c., carione, from Anglo-French carogne (Old North French caroigne; Old French charogne,
12c., carrion, corpse, Modern French charogne), from Vulgar Latin *caronia carcass (source of
Italian carogna, Spanish carro&ntilde;a carrion), from Latin caro meat (see carnage).


carnival (n.)

1540s, time of merrymaking before Lent, from French carnaval, from Italian carnevale Shrove Tuesday,
from older Italian forms such as Milanese *carnelevale, Old Pisan carnelevare to remove meat,
literally raising flesh, from Latin caro flesh (see carnage) + levare lighten, raise, remove (see
lever (n.)). Folk etymology is from Medieval Latin carne vale  'flesh, farewell!'  Meaning a circus
or fair is attested by 1931 in North America.


charcuterie (n.)

1858, from French charcuterie, literally pork-butcher's shop, from charcuter (16c.), from obsolete
char (Modern French chair) cuite cooked flesh, from chair meat (Old French char, from Latin carnem;
see carnage) + cuit, past participle of cuire to cook. Compare French charcutier pork butcher; meat
roaster, seller of cooked (not raw) meat.


carnation (n.)

Dianthus Caryophyllus, commonly also called pink, herbaceous perennial flowering plant native to
southern Europe and abundant in Normandy, 1530s, of uncertain origin. The early forms are confused;
perhaps (on evidence of early spellings) it is a corruption of coronation, from the flower's being
used in chaplets or from the toothed crown-like look of the petals.    Or it might be called for its
pinkness and derive from Middle French carnation person's color or complexion (15c.), which probably
is from Italian dialectal carnagione flesh color, from Late Latin carnationem (nominative carnatio)
fleshiness, from Latin caro flesh (see carnage). This carnation had been borrowed separately into
English as color of human flesh (1530s) and as an adjective meaning flesh-colored (1560s; the
earliest use of the word in English was to mean the incarnation of Christ, mid-14c.). OED points out
that not all the flowers are this color.


