carousal (n.)

1735, from carouse (v.) + -al (2). The earlier noun was simply carouse a drinking bout (1550s).


row (n.2)

noisy commotion, 1746, Cambridge University slang, of uncertain origin, perhaps related to rousel
drinking bout (c.1600), a shortened form of carousal. Klein suggests a back-formation from rouse
(n.), mistaken as a plural (compare pea from pease).


rumba (n.)

1919, from Cuban Spanish rumba, originally spree, carousal, derived from Spanish rumbo spree, party,
earlier ostentation, pomp, leadership, perhaps originally the course of a ship, from rombo rhombus,
in reference to the compass, which is marked with a rhombus. The verb is recorded from 1932.
Related: Rumbaed; rumbaing.


wassail

mid-12c., from Old Norse ves heill be healthy, a salutation, from ves, imperative of vesa to be (see
was) + heill healthy, from Proto-Germanic *haila- (see health). Use as a drinking phrase appears to
have arisen among Danes in England and spread to native inhabitants.    A similar formation appears
in Old English wes &thorn;u hal, but this is not recorded as a drinking salutation. Sense extended
c.1300 to liquor in which healths were drunk, especially spiced ale used in Christmas Eve
celebrations. Meaning a carousal, reveling first attested c.1600. Wassailing custom of going
caroling house to house at Christmas time is recorded from 1742.


comedy (n.)

late 14c., from Old French comedie (14c., a poem, not in the theatrical sense), from Latin comoedia,
from Greek komoidia a comedy, amusing spectacle, probably from komodios actor or singer in the
revels, from komos revel, carousal, merry-making, festival, + aoidos singer, poet, from aeidein to
sing, related to oide (see ode).    The passage on the nature of comedy in the Poetic of Aristotle
is unfortunately lost, but if we can trust stray hints on the subject, his definition of comedy
(which applied mainly to Menander) ran parallel to that of tragedy, and described the art as a
purification of certain affections of our nature, not by terror and pity, but by laughter and
ridicule. [Rev. J.P. Mahaffy, A History of Classical Greek Literature, London, 1895]    The
classical sense of the word, then, was amusing play or performance, which is similar to the modern
one, but in the Middle Ages the word came to mean poems and stories generally (albeit ones with
happy endings), and the earliest English sense is narrative poem (such as Dante's Commedia).
Generalized sense of quality of being amusing dates from 1877.   Comedy aims at entertaining by the
fidelity with which it presents life as we know it, farce at raising laughter by the outrageous
absurdity of the situation or characters exhibited, &amp; burlesque at tickling the fancy of the
audience by caricaturing plays or actors with whose style it is familiar. [Fowler]


