Antarctica

continent name attributed to Scottish cartographer John George Bartholomew (1860-1920), who used it
on a map published 1887. From antarctic (q.v.). Hypothetical southern continents had been imagined
since antiquity; first sighting of Antarctica by Europeans probably was 1820 (Lazarev and
Bellingshausen). Also compare Antipodes.


cartography (n.)

1843, from French cartographie, from Medieval Latin carta (see card (n.)) + French -graphie, from
Greek -graphein to write, to draw (see -graphy). Related: Cartographer; cartographic.


Nome

city in Alaska, founded in the 1898 gold rush and originally Anvil City after the nearby Anvil
Creek, later renamed for nearby Cape Nome, which, according to one story is from a misreading of a
British cartographer's query, ?Name, written beside the peninsula on an 1849 map, and according to
another is from a supposed native no-me meaning I don't know, a plea of noncomprehension when asked
what the name of the place was.


America

1507, in Cartographer Martin Waldseem&uuml;ller's treatise Cosmographiae Introductio, from Modern
Latin Americanus, after Amerigo Vespucci (1454-1512) who made two trips to the New World as a
navigator and claimed to have discovered it. His published works put forward the idea that it was a
new continent, and he was first to call it Novus Mundus New World. Amerigo is more easily Latinized
than Vespucci.    The name Amerigo is Germanic, said to derive from Gothic Amalrich, literally work-
ruler. The Old English form of the name has come down as surnames Emmerich, Emery, etc. The Italian
fem. form merged into Amelia.    Colloquial pronunciation Ameri-kay, not uncommon 19c., goes back to
at least 1643 and a poem that rhymed the word with away. Amerika U.S. society viewed as racist,
fascist, oppressive, etc. first attested 1969; the spelling is German, but may also suggest the KKK.
It is interesting to remember that the song which is essentially Southern -- Dixie -- and that which
is essentially Northern -- Yankee Doodle -- never really had any serious words to them. [The
Bookman, June 1910]   <hr />   FREDONIA, FREDONIAN, FREDE, FREDISH, &amp;c.; &amp;c.;    These
extraordinary words, which have been deservedly ridiculed here as well as in England, were proposed
sometime ago, and countenanced by two or three individuals, as names for the territory and people of
the United States. The general term American is now commonly understood (at least in all places
where the English language is spoken,) to mean an inhabitant of the United States; and is so
employed, except where unusual precision of language is required. [Pickering, 1816]


