caste (n.)

1550s, a race of men, from Latin castus chaste, from castus cut off, separated; pure (via notion of
cut off from faults), past participle of carere to be cut off from (and related to castration), from
PIE *kas-to-, from root *kes- to cut (cognates: Latin cassus empty, void). Originally spelled cast
in English and later often merged with cast (n.) in its secondary sense sort, kind, style.
Application to Hindu social groups was picked up by English in India 1610s from Portuguese casta
breed, race, caste, earlier casta ra&ccedil;a, unmixed race, from the same Latin word. The current
spelling of of the English word is from this reborrowing. Caste system is first recorded 1840.


outcast (n.)

mid-14c., a person cast out or rejected, originally past participle of Middle English outcasten,
from out + casten to cast (see cast (v.)). The adjective is attested from late 14c. In an Indian
context, outcaste one who has been expelled from his caste is from 1876; see caste.


Magus (n.)

member of the ancient Persian priestly caste, late 14c., singular of magi (q.v.).


Karen (1)

Mongoloid people of Burma, 1759, from Burmese ka-reng wild, dirty, low-caste man [OED].


mustee (n.)

octoroon, offspring of a white and a quadroon, also half-caste, 1690s, a corruption of Spanish
mestizo (q.v.).


ethno-

word-forming element meaning race, culture, from Greek ethnos people, nation, class, caste, tribe; a
number of people accustomed to live together (see ethnic). Used to form modern compounds in the
social sciences.


caret (n.)

mark in writing to show where something is to be inserted, 1680s, from Latin caret there is lacking,
3rd person singular indicative of carere to lack (see caste).


dharma (n.)

1796, in secular sense, caste custom, right behavior; in Buddhism and Hinduism, moral law, from
Sanskrit, law, right, justice, related to dharayati holds, and cognate with Latin firmus, all from
PIE root *dher- (2) to hold firmly, support (see firm (adj.)).


untouchable (adj.)

1560s, immaterial, from un- (1) not + touchable (see touch (v.)). Meaning that legally cannot be
interfered with is recorded from 1734. Meaning too loathsome or defiling to be touched is recorded
from 1873. The noun, in reference to a hereditary low caste of India, is attested from 1909; the
term and the restrictions were made illegal in India in 1947.


brahmin (n.)

member of Boston's upper class, 1823, figurative use of Brahman member of the highest priestly Hindu
caste, late 15c., from Sanskrit brahmana-s, from brahman- prayer, also the universal soul, the
Absolute, of uncertain origin. Related to Brahma.


coolie (n.)

name given by Europeans to hired laborers in India and China, c.1600, from Hindi quli hired servant,
probably from kuli, name of an aboriginal tribe or caste in Gujarat. The name was picked up by the
Portuguese, who used it in southern India (where by coincidence kuli in Tamil meant hire) and in
China.


castration (n.)

early 15c., castracioun, from Latin castrationem (nominative castratio), noun of action from past
participle stem of castrare to castrate, emasculate, supposedly from a noun *castrum knife,
instrument that cuts, from PIE root *kes- to cut (see caste). Freud's castration complex is attested
from 1914 in English (translating German Kastrationsangst).


cashier (v.)

dismiss, 1590s, from Middle Dutch casseren, kaseeren to cast off, discharge, from French casser to
discharge, annul, from Late Latin cassare annul, from Latin cassus void, empty (see caste (n.)).
Related: Cashiered; cashiering.


Romany (n.)

a gypsy; the Gypsy language, 1812, romani, fem. of romano (adj.) Gypsy, from rom, the Romany word
for man, husband, male, Gypsy (plural roma), from Sanskrit domba-s (with initial cerebral d, which
confuses with r [Klein]) male member of a low caste of musicians.


chaste (adj.)

c.1200, virtuous, pure from unlawful sexual intercourse (as defined by the Church), from Old French
chaste morally pure (12c.), from Latin castus clean, pure, morally pure (see caste). Transferred
sense of sexually pure is by 15c., perhaps by influence of chastity, though chaste as a noun meaning
virgin person is recorded from early 14c. Related: Chastely.


chastity (n.)

c.1200, chastete, sexual purity (as defined by the Church), including but not limited to virginity
or celibacy, from Old French chastete chastity, purity (12c., Modern French chastet&eacute;), from
Latin castitatem (nominative castitas) purity, chastity from castus (see caste).


castigate (v.)

c.1600, from Latin castigatus, past participle of castigare to correct, set right; purify; chastise,
punish, from castus pure (see caste) + agere to do (see act (n.)). The notion behind the word is
make someone pure by correcting or reproving him.If thou didst put this soure cold habit on To
castigate thy pride, 'twere well. [Shakespeare, Timon IV.iii (1607)]  Related: Castigated;
castigating; castigator; castigatory.


incest (n.)

c.1200, the crime of sexual intercourse between near kindred, from Old French inceste and directly
from Latin incestum unchastity, impious unchastity, also specifically sex between close relatives,
noun use of neuter adjective incestus unchaste, impure, from in- not (see in- (1)) + castus pure
(see caste). In early use also in reference to sexual relations or marriage with one under a vow of
chastity (sometimes distinguished as spiritual incest). Old English had sibleger incest, literally
kin-lying.


truant (n.)

c.1200, beggar, vagabond, from Old French truant beggar, rogue (12c.), as an adjective, wretched,
miserable, of low caste, from Gaulish *trougant- (compare Breton *truan, later truant vagabond,
Welsh truan wretch, Gaelic truaghan wretched), of uncertain origin. Compare Spanish truhan buffoon,
from same source. Meaning one who wanders from an appointed place, especially a child who stays away
from school without leave is first attested mid-15c.


rajah (n.)

also raja, king or prince in India, 1550s, from Hindi, from Sanskrit rajan king, related to raj
kingdom, kingship, rajati he rules, and cognate with Latin rex, Old Irish rig king (see regal).
Related: Rajput, member of the ruling caste in northern India (1590s), from Sanskrit rajaputrah
prince, literally king's son, from putrah son, boy (see puerile).


quash (v.)

to make void, annul, early 14c., from Old French quasser, casser to annul, declare void, and
directly from Medieval Latin quassare, alteration of Late Latin cassare, from cassus null, void,
empty (see caste (n.)).    Meaning to break, crush, is early 14c., from Old French quasser, casser
to break, smash, injure, harm, weaken, from Latin quassare to shatter, frequentative of quatere
(past participle quassus) to shake, from PIE root *kwet- to shake (cognates: Greek passein to
sprinkle, Lithuanian kuteti to shake up, Old Saxon skuddian to move violently, German sch&#252;tteln
to shake, Old English scudan to hasten).    The words have influenced each other in form and sense
since Medieval Latin and now are somewhat grown together. Related: Quashed; quashing.


castle (n.)

late Old English castel village (this sense from a biblical usage in Vulgar Latin); later large
fortified building, stronghold, in this sense from Old North French castel (Old French chastel,
12c.; Modern French ch&acirc;teau), from Latin castellum a castle, fort, citadel, stronghold;
fortified village, diminutive of castrum fort, from Proto-Italic *kastro- part, share; cognate with
Old Irish cather, Welsh caer town (and perhaps related to castrare via notion of cut off; see
caste). In early bibles, castle was used to translate Greek kome village.    This word also had come
to Old English as ceaster and formed the -caster and -chester in place names. Spanish alcazar castle
is from Arabic al-qasr, from Latin castrum. Castles in Spain translates 14c. French chastel en
Espaigne (the imaginary castles sometimes stood in Brie, Asia, or Albania) and probably reflects the
hopes of landless knights to establish themselves abroad. The statement that an (English) man's home
is his castle is from 16c.


yellow (adj.)

Old English geolu, geolwe, yellow, from Proto-Germanic *gelwaz (cognates: Old Saxon, Old High German
gelo, Middle Dutch ghele, Dutch geel, Middle High German gel, German gelb, Old Norse gulr, Swedish
gul yellow), from PIE *ghel- (2) to shine, with derivatives referring to bright materials and gold
(see glass).    Occasionally in Middle English used of a color closer to blue-gray or gray, of frogs
or hazel eyes, and to translate Latin caeruleus, glauco. Also as a noun in Old English. Meaning
light-skinned (of blacks) first recorded 1808. Applied to Asiatics since 1787, though the first
recorded reference is to Turkish words for inhabitants of India. Yellow peril translates German die
gelbe gefahr. Sense of cowardly is 1856, of unknown origin; the color was traditionally associated
rather with jealousy and envy (17c.). Yellow-bellied cowardly is from 1924, probably a semi-rhyming
reduplication of yellow; earlier yellow-belly was a sailor's name for a half-caste (1867) and a
Texas term for Mexican soldiers (1842, based on the color of their uniforms). Yellow dog mongrel is
attested from c.1770; slang sense of contemptible person first recorded 1881. Yellow fever attested
from 1748, American English (jaundice is a symptom).


