catapult (v.)

1848, to throw with a catapult, from catapult (n.). Intransitive sense by 1928. Related: Catapulted;
catapulting.


catapult (n.)

1570s, from Middle French catapulte and directly from Latin catapulta war machine for throwing, from
Greek katapeltes, from kata against (see cata-) + base of pallein to toss, hurl (see pulse (n.1)).
As an airplane-launching device on an aircraft-carrier by 1927.


bombard (n.)

early 15c., catapult, military engine for throwing large stones, from Middle French bombarde mortar,
catapult (14c.), from bombe (see bomb (n.)). The same word, from the same source, was used in
English and French late 14c. in reference to the bass shawm, a bassoon-like musical instrument,
preserving the buzzing sense in the Latin.


bombard (v.)

1590s, from French bombarder, from bombarde mortar, catapult (see bombard (n.)). Figurative sense by
1765. Related: Bombarded; bombarding.


howitzer (n.)

1680s, via Dutch houwitser (1660s), German Haubitze from Bohemian houfnice a catapult, from houf
heap, crowd, a loan-word from Middle High German hufe heap. Introduced to German during the Hussite
wars, 14c.


cata-

word-forming element from Latinized form of Greek kata-, before vowels kat-, from kata down from,
down to. Its principal sense is down, but occasionally it has senses of against (catapult)or wrongly
(catachresis). Also sometimes used as an intensive or with a sense of completion of action
(catalogue). Very active in ancient Greek, this prefix is found in English mostly in words borrowed
through Latin after c.1500.


arbalest (n.)

crossbow, c.1300, from Old French arbaleste large crossbow with a crank (12c., Modern French
arbal&egrave;te), from Vulgar Latin arbalista, from Late Latin arcuballista catapult, from Latin
arcus bow (see arc (n.)) + ballista machine for throwing projectiles (see ballistic). German
armbrust is from the same French word but mangled by folk etymology.


vise (n.)

early 14c., a winch, crane, from Anglo-French vice, Old French vis, viz screw, from Latin vitis
vine, tendril of a vine, literally that which winds, from root of viere to bind, twist (see withy).
Also in Middle English, device like a screw or winch for bending a crossbow or catapult; spiral
staircase; the screw of a press; twisted tie for fastening a hood under the chin. The modern meaning
clamping tool with two jaws closed by a screw is first recorded c.1500.


mangonel (n.)

military engine for hurling stones, mid-13c., from Old French mangonel catapult, war engine for
throwing stones, etc. (Modern French mangonneau), diminutive of Medieval Latin mangonum, from Vulgar
Latin *manganum machine, from Greek manganon any means of tricking or bewitching, from PIE *mang- to
embellish, dress, trim (cognates: Old Prussian manga whore, Middle Irish meng craft, deception).
Attested from c.1200 in Anglo-Latin.


afflict (v.)

late 14c., to cast down, from Old French aflicter, from Latin afflictare to damage, harass, torment,
frequentative of affligere (past participle afflictus) to dash down, overthrow, from ad- to (see
ad-) + fligere (past participle flictus) to strike, from PIE root *bhlig- to strike (cognates: Greek
phlibein to press, crush, Czech blizna scar, Welsh blif catapult). Transferred meaning of trouble,
distress, is first recorded 1530s. Related: Afflicted; afflicting.


