caterer (n.)

mid-15c., earlier simply cater (see cater (v.)). With redundant -er (compare poulterer, sorcerer,
upholsterer).


caterwaul (v.)

late 14c., caterwrawen, perhaps from Low German katerwaulen cry like a cat, or formed in English
from cater, from Middle Dutch cater tomcat + Middle English waul to yowl, apparently from Old
English *wrag, *wrah angry, of uncertain origin but all somehow imitative. Related: Caterwauled;
caterwauling.


cater (v.)

provide food for, c.1600, from Middle English catour (n.) buyer of provisions (c.1400; late 13c. as
a surname), a shortening of Anglo-French achatour buyer (Old North French acatour, Old French
achatour, 13c., Modern French acheteur), from Old French achater to buy, originally to buy
provisions, perhaps from Vulgar Latin *accaptare, from Latin ad- to + captare to take, hold,
frequentative of capere to take (see capable).    Or else from Vulgar Latin *accapitare to add to
one's capital, with second element from verbal stem of Latin caput (genitive capitis); see capital
(adj.). Figuratively from 1650s. Related: Catered; catering.


catty-cornered (adj., adv.)

1838, earlier cater-cornered (1835, American English), from now-obsolete cater to set or move
diagonally (1570s), from Middle French catre four, from Latin quattuor (see four). Compare
carrefour.


popularize (v.)

to make a complex topic intelligible to the people, 1833, from popular + -ize. Earlier to cater to
popular taste (1590s); to make popular (1797). Related: Popularized; popularizing.


catawampus (adj.)

also catawampous, cattywampus, catiwampus, etc. (see Dictionary of American Slang for more),
American colloquial. First element perhaps from obsolete cater to set or move diagonally (see catty-
cornered); second element perhaps related to Scottish wampish to wriggle, twist, or swerve about. Or
perhaps simply the sort of jocular pseudo-classical formation popular in the slang of those times,
with the first element suggesting Greek kata-.    Earliest use seems to be in adverbial form,
catawampusly (1834), expressing no certain meaning but adding intensity to the action: utterly,
completely; with avidity, fiercely, eagerly. It appears as a noun from 1843, as a name for an
imaginary hobgoblin or fright, perhaps from influence of catamount. The adjective is attested from
the 1840s as an intensive, but this is only in British lampoons of American speech and might not be
authentic. It was used in the U.S. by 1864 in a sense of askew, awry, wrong and by 1873 (noted as a
peculiarity of North Carolina speech) as in a diagonal position, on a bias, crooked.


