Catholic (n.)

member of the Roman Catholic church, 1560s, from Catholic (adj.).


Catholicism (n.)

faith and practice of the Catholic church, 1610s, from Catholic + -ism.


catholicity (n.)

1830, catholicism, from catholic + -ity. Meaning quality of being inclusive or comprehensive is by
1843.


catholic (adj.)

mid-14c., of the doctrines of the ancient Church, literally universally accepted, from French
catholique, from Church Latin catholicus universal, general, from Greek katholikos, from phrase
kath' holou on the whole, in general, from kata about + genitive of holos whole (see safe (adj.)).
Applied to the Church in Rome c.1554, after the Reformation began. General sense of of interest to
all, universal is from 1550s.


Protestant (n., adj.)

1539, from German or French protestant, from Latin protestantem (nominative protestans), present
participle of protestari (see protest (n.)). Originally used of German princes and free cities who
declared their dissent from (protested) the decision of the Diet of Speyer (1529), which reversed
the liberal terms allowed Lutherans in 1526.    When forced to make their choice between obedience
to God and obedience to the Emperor, they were compelled to choose the former. [Thomas M. Lindsay, A
History of the Reformation, New York, 1910]  The word was taken up by the Lutherans in Germany
(Swiss and French preferred Reformed). It became the general word for adherents of the Reformation
in Germany, then member of any Western church outside the Roman communion; a sense first attested in
English in 1553.In the 17c., 'protestant' was primarily opposed to 'papist,' and thus accepted by
English Churchmen generally; in more recent times, being generally opposed to 'Roman Catholic,' or
... to 'Catholic,' ... it is viewed with disfavour by those who lay stress on the claim of the
Anglican Church to be equally Catholic with the Roman. [OED]Often contemptuous shortened form Prot
is from 1725, in Irish English. Protestant (work) ethic (1926) is taken from Max Weber's work Die
protestantische Ethik und der 'Geist' des Kapitalismus (1904). Protestant Reformation attested by
1680s.


charter school

older uses refer to schools in Ireland begun 1733 by the Charter Society to provide Protestant
education to poor Catholic children. Modern use in U.S. began c.1988, as an alternative to state-run
public education.


nihil (n.)

Latin, literally nothing (see nil). Phrase nihil obstat nothing stands in the way printed on first
pages of a Catholic work indicates its official approval.


Maronite

1510s, from Late Latin Maronita, from Maron, name of the founder. A sect of Syrian Christians (4c.),
originally Monothelites, subsequently (1216) united with the Catholic Church.


Jansenism (n.)

1650s, in reference to doctrine of Cornelius Jansen (1585-1638), Catholic bishop of Ypres, who
maintained the perverseness and inability for good of the natural human will. Related: Jansenist.


Romish (adj.)

Roman-Catholic, 1530s, from Rome + -ish.


imprimatur (n.)

1640, Modern Latin, literally let it be printed, the formula of a book licenser, third person
singular present subjunctive passive of Latin imprimere to print (see impress). Originally of state
license to print books, later only of Roman Catholic Church.


zucchetto (n.)

small, round skull-cap worn by dignitaries in the Catholic Church, 1853, from Italian zucchetta a
cap, originally diminutive of zucca gourd, head, perhaps from Late Latin cucutia, of unknown origin.


ex (n.)

1827, originally short for ex-Catholic; ultimately from Latin ex (see ex-). Since 1929 as
abbreviation for ex-wife, ex-husband, etc. Also used in some commercial senses for from, out of.


biretta (n.)

square cap worn by Catholic clergy, 1590s, from Italian beretta, from Late Latin birrus, birrum
large cloak with hood; perhaps of Gaulish origin, or from Greek pyrros flame-colored, yellow.


Douai

or Douay, name of town in northern France, used elliptically in reference to the English translation
of the Bible begun there late 16c., sanctioned by Roman Catholic Church. [Also called Rheims-Douai
translation because it was published in Rheims in 1582]. It uses more Latinate words than the KJV.


Jesuit

1540s, from Modern Latin Jesuita, member of the Society of Jesus, founded 1533 by Ignatius Loyola to
combat Protestantism. Their enemies (in both Catholic and Protestant lands) accused them of belief
that ends justify means, hence the sense a dissembling person (1630s), and jesuitical deceitful
(1610s).


celibate (n.)

1610s, state of celibacy (especially as mandated to clergy in the Catholic church) from French
c&eacute;libat (16c.), from Latin caelibatus (see celibacy). This was the only sense until early
19c. The adjective meaning unmarried, sworn to remain single is recorded from 1825. As a noun, one
who is sworn to such a condition, from 1838.


Ursula

fem. proper name, from Latin Ursula, diminutive of ursa she-bear (see ursine). The Ursuline order of
Catholic women was founded as Brescia in 1537 and named for Saint Ursula.


breviary (n.)

1540s, brief statement; sense of short prayer book used by Catholic priests is from 1610s, from
Latin breviarium summary, noun use of neuter of adjective breviarius abridged, from breviare to
shorten, abbreviate, from brevis short (see brief (adj.)).


soutane (n.)

long, buttoned gown or frock with sleeves, outer garment of Roman Catholic ecclesiastics, 1838, from
French soutane, from Old French sotane undershirt, from Medieval Latin subtana an under-cassock,
from Latin subtus beneath, under, below (see sub-).


Kulturkampf (n.)

1879, originally in reference to the struggle between the German government and the Catholic Church
over control of educational and ecclesiastical appointments, 1872-86, German, literally struggle for
culture, from Kultur + Kampf combat, fight, struggle, from Latin campus field, battlefield (see
campus).


benedict (n.)

newly married man (especially one who had seemed a confirmed bachelor), 1821, from the character
Benedick in Much Ado About Nothing (1599). The name is from Late Latin Benedictus, literally
blessed, from Latin benedicte bless (you) (see benediction). This also produced the proper name
Bennet; hence also benet (late 14c.), the third of the four lesser orders of the Roman Catholic
Church, one of whose functions was to exorcize spirits.


propaganda (n.)

1718, committee of cardinals in charge of Catholic missionary work, short for Congregatio de
Propaganda Fide congregation for propagating the faith, a committee of cardinals established 1622 by
Gregory XV to supervise foreign missions. The word is properly the ablative fem. gerundive of Latin
propagare (see propagation). Hence, any movement to propagate some practice or ideology (1790).
Modern political sense dates from World War I, not originally pejorative. Meaning material or
information propagated to advance a cause, etc. is from 1929.


sodality (n.)

companionship, fellowship, association with others, c.1600, from Middle French sodalit&eacute; or
directly from Latin sodalitatem (nominative sodalitas) companionship, a brotherhood, association,
fellowship, from sodalis companion, perhaps literally one's own, relative, related to suescere to
accustom, from PIE *swedh-, extended form of root *s(w)e-, pronoun of the third person and reflexive
(see idiom). Especially of religious guilds in the Catholic Church.


supererogation (n.)

1520s, performance of more than duty requires, in Catholic theology, from Late Latin
supererogationem (nominative supererogatio) a payment in addition, noun of action from past
participle stem of supererogare pay or do additionally, from Latin super above, over (see super-) +
erogare pay out, from ex- out (see ex-) + rogare ask, request (see rogation).


Asperges (n.)

sprinkling ritual of the Catholic church, 1550s, from Late Latin asperges, noun use of 2nd person
singular future indicative of Latin aspergere to scatter, strew upon, sprinkle, from ad to (see ad-)
+ spargere to sprinkle (see sparse). The word is taken from the phrase Asperges me, Domine, hyssopo
et mundabor, from  Psalm 51 (Vulgate), sung during the rite of sprinkling a congregation with holy
water.


beatify (v.)

1530s, to make very happy, from Middle French b&eacute;atifer, from Late Latin beatificare make
happy, make blessed, from Latin beatus supremely happy, blessed (past participle of beare make
happy, bless) + -ficare, from stem of facere to make, do (see factitious). The Roman Catholic Church
sense of to pronounce as being in heavenly bliss (1620s) is the first step toward canonization.
Related: Beatified; beatifying.


iconoclast (n.)

breaker or destroyer of images, 1590s, from French iconoclaste and directly from Medieval Latin
iconoclastes, from Late Greek eikonoklastes, from eikon (genitive eikonos) image + klastes breaker,
from klas- past tense stem of klan to break (see clastic). Originally those in the Eastern Church in
8c. and 9c. whose mobs of followers destroyed icons and other religious objects on the grounds that
they were idols. Applied to 16c.-17c. Protestants in Netherlands who vandalized former Catholic
churches on similar grounds. Extended sense of one who attacks orthodox beliefs or institutions is
first attested 1842.


defenestration (n.)

1620, the action of throwing out of a window, from Latin fenestra window (see fenestration). A word
invented for one incident: the Defenestration of Prague, May 21, 1618, when two Catholic deputies to
the Bohemian national assembly and a secretary were tossed out the window (into a moat) of the
castle of Hradshin by Protestant radicals. It marked the start of the Thirty Years War. Some
linguists link fenestra with Greek verb phainein to show; others see in it an Etruscan borrowing,
based on the suffix -(s)tra, as in Latin loan-words aplustre the carved stern of a ship with its
ornaments, genista the plant broom, lanista trainer of gladiators. Related: Defenestrate (1915);
defenestrated (1620).


vandal (n.)

1660s, willful destroyer of what is beautiful or venerable, from Vandals, name of the Germanic tribe
that sacked Rome in 455 under Genseric, from Latin Vandalus (plural Vandali), from the tribe's name
for itself (Old English Wendlas), perhaps from Proto-Germanic *wandljaz wanderer. The literal
historical sense in English is recorded from 1550s.    There does not seem to be in the story of the
capture of Rome by the Vandals any justification for the charge of willful and objectless
destruction of public buildings which is implied in the word 'vandalism.' It is probable that this
charge grew out of the fierce persecution which was carried on by [the Vandal king] Gaiseric and his
son against the Catholic Christians, and which is the darkest stain on their characters.
[Encyclopaedia Britannica, 13th ed., 1926]


vicar (n.)

early 14c., from Anglo-French vicare, Old French vicaire deputy, second in command, also in the
ecclesiastical sense (12c.), from Latin vicarius a substitute, deputy, proxy, noun use of adjective
vicarius substituted, delegated, from vicis change, interchange, succession; a place, position (see
vicarious). The original notion is of earthly representative of God or Christ; but also used in
sense of person acting as parish priest in place of a real parson (early 14c.).    The original
Vicar of Bray (in figurative use from 1660s) seems to have been Simon Allen, who held the benefice
from c.1540 to 1588, thus serving from the time of Henry VIII to Elizabeth I, being twice a Catholic
and twice a Protestant but always vicar of Bray. The village is near Maidenhead in Berkshire.


jubilee (n.)

late 14c., in the Old Testament sense, from Old French jubileu jubille; anniversary; rejoicing, from
Late Latin jubilaeus the jubilee year, originally an adjective, of the jubilee, altered (by
association with Latin jubilare to shout with joy) from Greek iabelaios, from iobelos, from Hebrew
yobhel jubilee, formerly a trumpet, ram's horn, literally ram.    The original notion was of a year
of emancipation of slaves and restoration of lands, to be celebrated every 50th year (Levit. xxv:9);
it was proclaimed by the sounding of a ram's horn on the Day of Atonement. The Catholic Church sense
of a period for remission of sin penalties in exchange for pilgrimages, alms, etc. was begun in 1300
by Boniface VIII. The general sense of season of rejoicing is first recorded mid-15c., though
through early 20c. the word kept its specific association with 50th anniversaries. As a type of
African-American folk song, it is attested from 1872.


Roman (n.)

Old English, from Latin Romanus of Rome, Roman, from Roma Rome (see Rome). The adjective is c.1300,
from Old French Romain. The Old English adjective was romanisc, which yielded Middle English
Romanisshe.    As a type of numeral (usually contrasted to Arabic) it is attested from 1728; as a
type of lettering (based on the upright style typical of Roman inscriptions, contrasted to Gothic,
or black letter, and italic) it is recorded from 1510s. Roman nose is from 1620s. Roman candle as a
type of fireworks is recorded from 1834. Roman Catholic is attested from c.1600, a conciliatory
formation from the time of the Spanish Match, replacing Romanist, Romish which by that time had the
taint of insult in Protestant England.


Tory (n.)

1566, an outlaw, specifically one of a class of Irish robbers noted for outrages and savage cruelty,
from Irish toruighe plunderer, originally pursuer, searcher, from Old Irish toirighim I pursue, from
toir pursuit, from Celtic *to-wo-ret- a running up to, from PIE root *ret- to run, roll (see
rotary).    About 1646, it emerged as a derogatory term for Irish Catholics dispossessed of their
land (some of whom subsequently turned to outlawry); c.1680 applied by Exclusioners to supporters of
the Catholic Duke of York (later James II) in his succession to the throne of England. After 1689,
Tory was the name of a British political party at first composed of Yorkist Tories of 1680.
Superseded c.1830 by Conservative, though it continues to be used colloquially. In American history,
Tory was the name given after 1769 to colonists who remained loyal to George III of England; it
represents their relative position in the pre-revolutionary English political order in the colonies.
As an adjective from 1680s.


knight (n.)

Old English cniht boy, youth; servant, attendant, common West Germanic (cognates: Old Frisian
kniucht, Dutch knecht, Middle High German kneht boy, youth, lad, German Knecht servant, bondman,
vassal), of unknown origin. The plural in Middle English sometimes was knighten. Meaning military
follower of a king or other superior is from c.1100. Began to be used in a specific military sense
in Hundred Years War, and gradually rose in importance until it became a rank in the nobility 16c.
The chess piece so called from mid-15c. Knight in shining armor in figurative sense is from 1917,
from the man who rescues the damsel in distress in romantic dramas (perhaps especially Lohengrin).
Knights of Columbus, society of Catholic men, founded 1882 in New Haven, Connecticut, U.S.; Knights
of Labor, trade union association, founded in Philadelphia, 1869; Knights of Pythias, secret order,
founded in Washington, 1864.


kindergarten (n.)

1852, from German, literally children's garden, from Kinder children (plural of Kind child; see kin
(n.)) + Garten garden (see yard (n.1)). Coined 1840 by German educator Friedrich Fr&ouml;bel
(1782-1852) in reference to his method of developing intelligence in young children.   Kindergarten
means a garden of children, and Froebel, the inventor of it, or rather, as he would prefer to
express it, the discoverer of the method of Nature, meant to symbolize by the name the spirit and
plan of treatment. How does the gardener treat his plants? He studies their individual natures, and
puts them into such circumstances of soil and atmosphere as enable them to grow, flower, and bring
forth fruit,-- also to renew their manifestation year after year. [Mann, Horace, and Elizabeth P.
Peabody, Moral Culture of Infancy and Kindergarten Guide, Boston, 1863]    The first one in England
was established 1850 by Johannes Ronge, German Catholic priest; in America, 1868, by Elizabeth
Peabody of Boston, Mass. Taken into English untranslated, whereas other nations that borrowed the
institution nativized the name (Danish b&ouml;rnehave, Modern Hebrew gan yeladim, literally garden
of children). Sometimes partially anglicized as kindergarden (attested by 1879).


charity (n.)

mid-12c., benevolence for the poor, from Old French charit&eacute; (Christian) charity, mercy,
compassion; alms; charitable foundation (12c., Old North French carit&eacute;), from Latin caritatem
(nominative caritas) costliness, esteem, affection (in Vulgate often used as translation of Greek
agape love -- especially Christian love of fellow man -- perhaps to avoid the sexual suggestion of
Latin amor), from carus dear, valued, from PIE *karo-, from root *ka- to like, desire (see whore
(n.)).    Vulgate also sometimes translated agape by Latin dilectio, noun of action from diligere to
esteem highly, to love (see diligence).  Wyclif and the Rhemish version regularly rendered the
Vulgate dilectio by 'love,' caritas by 'charity.' But the 16th c. Eng. versions from Tindale to
1611, while rendering agape sometimes 'love,' sometimes 'charity,' did not follow the dilectio and
caritas of the Vulgate, but used 'love' more often (about 86 times), confining 'charity' to 26
passages in the Pauline and certain of the Catholic Epistles (not in I John), and the Apocalypse
.... In the Revised Version 1881, 'love' has been substituted in all these instances, so that it now
stands as the uniform rendering of agape. [OED]  Sense of charitable foundation or institution in
English attested by 1690s.


Nazi

1930, noun and adjective, from German Nazi, abbreviation of German pronunciation of
Nationalsozialist (based on earlier German sozi, popular abbreviation of socialist), from
Nationalsozialistische Deutsche Arbeiterpartei National Socialist German Workers' Party, led by
Hitler from 1920.    The 24th edition of Etymologisches W&ouml;rterbuch der deutschen Sprache (2002)
says the word Nazi was favored in southern Germany (supposedly from c.1924) among opponents of
National Socialism because the nickname Nazi, Naczi (from the masc. proper name Ignatz, German form
of Ignatius) was used colloquially to mean a foolish person, clumsy or awkward person. Ignatz was a
popular name in Catholic Austria, and according to one source in World War I Nazi was a generic name
in the German Empire for the soldiers of Austria-Hungary.    An older use of Nazi for national-
sozial is attested in German from 1903, but EWdS does not think it contributed to the word as
applied to Hitler and his followers. The NSDAP for a time attempted to adopt the Nazi designation as
what the Germans call a despite-word, but they gave this up, and the NSDAP is said to have generally
avoided the term. Before 1930, party members had been called in English National Socialists, which
dates from 1923. The use of Nazi Germany, Nazi regime, etc., was popularized by German exiles
abroad. From them, it spread into other languages, and eventually was brought back to Germany, after
the war. In the USSR, the terms national socialist and Nazi were said to have been forbidden after
1932, presumably to avoid any taint to the good word socialist. Soviet literature refers to
fascists.


