causal (adj.)

1530s, from Latin causalis relating to a cause, from causa (see cause (n.)).


causality (n.)

c.1600, from causal + -ity.


amuse (v.)

late 15c., to divert the attention, beguile, delude, from Middle French amuser divert, cause to
muse, from a at, to (but here probably a causal prefix) + muser ponder, stare fixedly (see muse
(v.)). Sense of divert from serious business, tickle the fancy of is recorded from 1630s, but
through 18c. the primary meaning was deceive, cheat by first occupying the attention. Bemuse retains
more of the original meaning. Related: Amused; amusing.


shrink (v.)

Old English scrincan to draw in the limbs, contract, shrivel up; wither, pine away (class III strong
verb; past tense scranc, past participle scruncen), from Proto-Germanic *skrink- (cognates: Middle
Dutch schrinken), probably from PIE root *(s)ker- (3) to turn, bend (see ring (n.1)).    Originally
with causal shrench (compare drink/drench). Sense of become reduced in size recorded from late 13c.
The meaning draw back, recoil (early 14c.) perhaps was suggested by the behavior of snails.
Transitive sense, cause to shrink is from late 14c. Shrink-wrap is attested from 1961 (shrinking-
wrap from 1959). Shrinking violet shy person attested from 1882.


show (v.)

Old English sceawian to look at, see, gaze, behold, observe; inspect, examine; look for, choose,
from Proto-Germanic *skauwojan (cognates: Old Saxon skauwon to look at, Old Frisian skawia, Dutch
schouwen, Old High German scouwon to look at; Dutch schoon, Gothic skaunjai beautiful, originally
conspicuous), from Proto-Germanic root *skau- behold, look at, from PIE *skou-, variant of root
*skeue- to pay attention, perceive (see caveat).    Causal meaning let be seen; put in sight, make
known evolved c.1200 for unknown reasons and is unique to English (German schauen still means look
at). Spelling shew, popular 18c. and surviving into early 19c., represents obsolete pronunciation
(rhymes with view). Horse racing sense is from 1903, perhaps from an earlier sense in card-playing.


spring (v.)

Old English springan to leap, burst forth, fly up; spread, grow, (class III strong verb; past tense
sprang, past participle sprungen), from Proto-Germanic *sprengan (cognates: Old Norse, Old Frisian
springa, Middle Dutch springhen, Dutch Related: springen, Old Saxon and Old High German springan,
German springen), from PIE *sprengh-, nasalized form of root *spergh- to move, hasten, spring
(cognates: Sanskrit sprhayati desires eagerly, Greek sperkhesthai to hurry).    In Middle English,
it took on the role of causal sprenge, from Old English sprengan (as still in to spring a trap,
etc.). Meaning to cause to work or open, by or as by a spring mechanism, is from 1828.Meaning to
announce suddenly (usually with on) is from 1876. Meaning to release (from imprisonment) is from
1900. Slang meaning to pay (for a treat, etc.) is recorded from 1906.


