caustic (adj.)

c.1400, burning, corrosive, from Latin causticus burning, caustic, from Greek kaustikos capable of
burning; corrosive, from kaustos combustible; burnt, verbal adjective from kaiein, the Greek word
for to burn (transitive and intransitive) in all periods, of uncertain origin with no certain
cognates outside Greek. Figurative sense of sarcastic is attested from 1771. As a noun, early 15c.,
from the adjective.


snark (n.)

imaginary animal, coined 1876 by Lewis Carroll in The Hunting of the Snark. In 1950s, name of a type
of U.S. cruise missile and in 1980s of a type of sailboat. Meaning caustic, opinionated, critical
rhetoric is from c.2002 (see snarky) and not directly related, if at all.


vitriolic (adj.)

1660s, from French vitriolique (16c.) or from vitriol + -ic. Figurative sense biting, caustic, very
severe is by 1841.


sodium (n.)

metallic alkaline element, 1807, coined by English chemist Humphry Davy from soda; so called because
the element was isolated from caustic soda (sodium hydroxide). The chemical symbol Na is from
natrium, alternative name for the element proposed by Berzelius from natron, a name of a type of
soda.


cauterize (v.)

c.1400, from Old French cauterisier, from Late Latin cauterizare to burn or brand with a hot iron,
from Greek kauteriazein, from kauter burning or branding iron, from kaiein to burn (see caustic).
Related: Cauterized; cauterizing.


calm (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French calme tranquility, quiet, traditionally from Old Italian calma, from Late
Latin cauma heat of the mid-day sun (in Italy, a time when everything rests and is still), from
Greek kauma heat (especially of the sun), from kaiein to burn (see caustic). Spelling influenced by
Latin calere to be hot. Figurative application to social or mental conditions is 16c.


encaustic

c.1600 (n.); 1650s (adj.), from Greek enkaustikos, from enkaiein to burn in from en (see en- (2)) +
kaiein to burn (see caustic).


mordant (adj.)

late 15c., caustic (of words, speech), from Middle French mordant, literally biting, present
participle of mordre to bite, from Latin mordere to bite, bite into; nip, sting; figuratively to
pain, cause hurt, perhaps from PIE root mer- (2) to rub away, harm (see smart (v.)). Related:
Mordantly. The noun sense in dyeing is first recorded 1791; the adjective in this sense is from
1902. Related: Mordancy; mordantly.


ink (n.)

the black liquor with which men write [Johnson], mid-13c., from Old French enque dark writing fluid
(11c.), from Late Latin encaustum, from Greek enkauston purple or red ink, used by the Roman
emperors to sign documents, originally a neuter adjective form of enkaustos burned in, from stem of
enkaiein to burn in, from en- in + kaiein to burn (see caustic). The word is from a Greek method of
applying colored wax and fixing it with heat. The Old English word for it was simply bl&aelig;c,
literally black. Ink-blot test attested from 1928.


vitriol (n.)

late 14c., sulphate of iron, from Old French vitriol (13c.), from Medieval Latin vitriolum vitriol,
noun use of neuter of vitriolus, variant of Late Latin vitreolus of glass, from Latin vitreus of
glass, glassy, from vitrum glass (see vitreous). So called from its glassy appearance in certain
states. Meaning bitter or caustic feelings first attested 1769, in reference to the corrosive
properties of vitriol (when heated it produces sulfuric acid, formerly called oil of vitriol).


