cavalier (adj.)

disdainful, 1650s, from cavalier (n.). Earlier it meant gallant (1640s). Related: Cavalierly.


cavalier (n.)

1580s, from Italian cavalliere mounted soldier, knight; gentleman serving as a lady's escort, from
Late Latin caballarius horseman, from Vulgar Latin caballus, the common Vulgar Latin word for horse
(and source of Italian cavallo, French cheval, Spanish caballo, Irish capall, Welsh ceffyl),
displacing Latin equus (see equine).    Sense advanced in 17c. to knight, then courtly gentleman
(but also, pejoratively, swaggerer), which led to the adjectival senses, especially disdainful
(1650s). Meaning Royalist adherent of Charles I is from 1641. Meaning one who devotes himself solely
to attendance on a lady is from 1817, roughly translating Italian cavaliere-servente. In classical
Latin caballus was work horse, pack horse, sometimes, disdainfully, hack, nag. Not a native Lat.
word (as the second -a- would show), though the source of the borrowing is uncertain [Tucker].
Perhaps from some Balkan or Anatolian language, and meaning, originally, gelding. The same source is
thought to have yielded Old Church Slavonic kobyla.


cavalry (n.)

1540s, from Middle French cavalerie (16c.), from Italian cavalleria mounted militia, from cavaliere
(see cavalier (n.)). An Old English word for it was horshere.


cheval de frise (n.)

1680s, from French, literally horse of Frisia, supposedly because it was first employed there as a
defense against cavalry; from French cheval horse (see cavalier (n.)). Plural chevaux de frise.


caballero (n.)

1877, a Spanish gentleman, from Spanish caballero, from Latin caballarius, from caballus a pack-
horse, nag, hack (see cavalier (n.)). Equivalent of French chevalier, Italian cavaliere.


cavalcade (n.)

1590s, via Middle French cavalcade (15c.), from Italian cavalcata, from cavalcare to ride on
horseback, from Vulgar Latin *caballicare (also source of Spanish cabalgada, Portuguese cavalgata),
from Latin caballus (see cavalier). Literally, a procession on horseback; in 20c. -cade came to be
regarded as a suffix and taken to form motorcade (1913), etc.


chivalry (n.)

c.1300, body or host of knights; knighthood in the feudal social system; bravery in war, warfare as
an art, from Old French chevalerie knighthood, chivalry, nobility, cavalry, art of war, from
chevaler knight, from Medieval Latin caballarius horseman, from Latin caballus nag, pack-horse (see
cavalier). From late 14c. as the nobility as one of the estates of the realm, also as the word for
an ethical code emphasizing honor, valor, generosity and courtly manners. Modern use for social and
moral code of medieval feudalism probably is an 18c. historical revival.


chevalier (n.)

late 13c., Anglo-French chivaler mounted knight, Old French chevalier knight, horseman, knight in
chess (12c., Modern French chevaler), from Late Latin caballarius horseman (source of
Proven&ccedil;al cavallier, Spanish caballero, Portuguese cavalleiro, Italian cavaliere; see
cavalier (n.)). The word formerly was nativized, but has been given a French pronunciation since
16c.


