celestial (adj.)

late 14c., pertaining to heaven, from Old French celestial celestial, heavenly, sky-blue, from Latin
caelestis heavenly, pertaining to the sky, from caelum heaven, sky; abode of the gods; climate, of
uncertain origin; perhaps from PIE *kaid-slo-, perhaps from a root also found in Germanic and Baltic
meaning bright, clear (compare Lithuanian skaidrus shining, clear; Old English hador, German heiter
clear, shining, cloudless, Old Norse hei&#240; clear sky).    The Latin word is the source of the
usual word for sky in most of the Romance languages, such as French ciel, Spanish cielo, Italian
cielo. General sense of heavenly, very delightful in English is from early 15c.


Arctic Circle

1550s, in reference to a celestial circle, a line around the sky which, in any location, bounds the
stars which   are ever-visible from that latitude (in the Northern Hemisphere, this is focused on
the celestial north pole); the concept goes back to the ancient Greeks, for whom this set of
constellations included most prominently the two bears (arktoi), hence the name for the circle (see
arctic). Of Earth, the circle 66 degrees 32 minutes north of the equator, marking the southern
extremity of the polar day, it is recorded from 1620s.


equator (n.)

late 14c., from Medieval Latin aequator diei et noctis equalizer of day and night (when the sun is
on the celestial equator, twice annually, day and night are of equal length), agent noun from Latin
aequare make equal (see equate). Sense of celestial equator is earliest, extension to terrestrial
line midway between the poles first recorded in English 1610s.


heavenly (adj.)

Old English heofonlic celestial; chaste; see heaven + -ly (1). Meaning beautiful, divinely lovely is
late 14c., often (though not originally) with reference to the celestial music of the spheres;
weakened sense of excellent, enjoyable is first recorded 1874. The heavenly bodies (stars, planets,
etc.) attested from late 14c. Related: Heavenliness.


revolution (n.)

late 14c., originally of celestial bodies, from Old French revolucion course, revolution (of
celestial bodies) (13c.), or directly from Late Latin revolutionem (nominative revolutio) a
revolving, noun of action from past participle stem of Latin revolvere turn, roll back (see
revolve).    General sense of instance of great change in affairs is recorded from mid-15c.
Political meaning overthrow of an established political system first recorded c.1600, derived from
French, and was especially applied to the expulsion of the Stuart dynasty under James II in 1688 and
transfer of sovereignty to William and Mary.


tropical (adj.)

1520s, pertaining to the celestial tropics, from tropic + -al (1). In reference to the torrid zones
of the earth, from 1690s. Meaning hot and lush like the climate of the tropics is first attested
1834.


aureole (n.)

early 13c., from Latin aureola (corona), fem. diminutive of aureus golden (see aureate). In medieval
Christianity, the celestial crown worn by martyrs, virgins, etc., as victors over the flesh.


Celeste

fem. proper name, from French c&eacute;leste (11c.) sky, heaven, from Latin caelestis heavenly (see
celestial).


stardom (n.)

1860 in reference to celebrity, from star (n.) + -dom. From 1856 in reference to the celestial sort.


Selina

fem. proper name, nativized form of French C&#233;line, from Latin caelina heavenly, from caelum
(see celestial).


meteorologist (n.)

1620s, from meteorology + -ist. Earlier was meteorologician (1570s). Greek meteorologos meant one
who deals with celestial phenomena, astronomer.


Urania

name of the Muse of astronomy and celestial forces, from Latin Urania, from Greek Ourania, fem. of
ouranios, literally heavenly, from ouranos (see Uranus).


perihelion (n.)

point at which a celestial body is nearest the Sun, 1680s, coined in Modern Latin (perihelium) by
Kepler (1596) from Latinizations of Greek peri near (see peri-) + helios sun (see sol). Subsequently
re-Greeked.


cerulean (adj.)

1660s, with -an + Latin caeruleus blue, dark blue, blue-green, perhaps dissimilated from caelulum,
diminutive of caelum heaven, sky, of uncertain origin (see celestial). The Latin word was applied by
Roman authors to the sky, the Mediterranean, and occasionally to leaves or fields. As a noun, from
1756.


terrestrial (adj.)

late 14c., of or pertaining to the earth, with + -al (1) + from Latin terrestris earthly, of the
earth, on land, from terra earth (see terrain). Originally opposed to celestial; natural history
sense of living on land is attested from 1630s. The noun meaning a human being, a mortal is recorded
from 1590s.


meteorology (n.)

science of the atmosphere, weather forecasting, 1610s, from French m&eacute;t&eacute;orologie and
directly from Greek meteorologia treatise on celestial phenomena, discussion of high things, from
meteoron, literally thing high up (see meteor), + -logia treatment of (see -logy).


supernal (adj.)

mid-15c., heavenly, divine, from Old French supernal supreme (12c.), formed from Latin supernus
situated above, that is above; celestial (from super above, over; see super-) as a contrast to
infernal.


hemisphere (n.)

late 14c., hemysperie, in reference to the celestial sphere, from Latin hemisphaerium, from Greek
hemisphairion, from hemi- half (see hemi-) + sphaira sphere (see sphere). Spelling reformed 16c. Of
the Earth, from 1550s; of the brain, 1804.


aphelion (n.)

point farthest from the sun (of a celestial body's orbit), 1670s, a Grecianized form of Modern Latin
aphelium, altered by Johannes Kepler based on Greek apo heliou away from the sun, from apo away from
(see apo-) + heliou, genitive of helios sun (see sol). The whole was formed on the model of
Ptolemaic apogaeum (see apogee) to reflect the new helio-centric model of the universe.


perigee (n.)

point at which a celestial body is nearest the Earth, 1590s, from Modern Latin perigeum (15c.), from
Late Greek peregeion, used by Ptolemy as a noun, properly neuter of adjective perigeios near the
earth, from peri ges, from peri near (see peri-) + ges, genitive of ge earth  (see Gaia).


astro-

element active in English word formation from mid-18c. and meaning star or celestial body; outer
space, from Greek astro-, stem and comb. form of astron star, related to aster star (see star (n.)).
In ancient Greek, aster typically was a star and astron mostly in plural, the stars. In singular it
mostly meant Sirius (the brightest star).


zone (n.)

late 14c., from Latin zona geographical belt, celestial zone, from Greek zone a belt, the girdle
worn by women at the hips, related to zonnynai to gird, from PIE root *yos- to gird (cognates:
Avestan yasta- girt, Lithuanian juosiu to gird, Old Church Slavonic po-jasu girdle). The 10c. Anglo-
Saxon treatise on astronomy translates Latin quinque zonas as fyf gyrdlas.    Originally one of the
five great divisions of the earth's surface (torrid, temperate, frigid; separated by tropics of
Cancer and Capricorn and Arctic and Antarctic circles); meaning any discrete region is first
recorded 1822. Zone defense in team sports is recorded from 1927.


tropic (n.)

late 14c., either of the two circles in the celestial sphere which describe the northernmost and
southernmost points of the ecliptic, from Late Latin tropicus of or pertaining to the solstice (as a
noun, one of the tropics), from Latin tropicus pertaining to a turn, from Greek tropikos of or
pertaining to a turn or change; of or pertaining to the solstice (as a noun, the solstice, short for
tropikos kyklos), from trope a turning (see trope).    The notion is of the point at which the sun
turns back after reaching its northernmost or southernmost point in the sky. Extended 1520s to the
corresponding latitudes on the earth's surface (23 degrees 28 minutes north and south); meaning
region between the tropics of Cancer and Capricorn is from 1837.


meteor (n.)

late 15c., any atmospheric phenomenon, from Middle French meteore (13c.) and directly from Medieval
Latin meteorum (nominative meteora), from Greek ta meteora the celestial phenomena, things in heaven
above, plural of meteoron, literally thing high up, noun use of neuter of meteoros (adj.) high up,
raised from the ground, hanging, from meta- over, beyond (see meta-) + -aoros lifted, hovering in
air, related to aeirein to raise (see aorta).    Specific sense of fireball, shooting star is
attested from 1590s. Atmospheric phenomena were formerly classified as aerial meteors (wind),
aqueous meteors (rain, snow, hail), luminous meteors (aurora, rainbows), and igneous meteors
(lightning, shooting stars).


ceiling (n.)

mid-14c., celynge, act of paneling a room, noun formed (with -ing) from Middle English verb ceil put
a cover or ceiling over, later cover (walls) with wainscoting, panels, etc. (early 15c.); probably
from Middle French celer to conceal, also cover with paneling (12c.), from Latin celare (see cell).
Probably influenced by Latin caelum heaven, sky (see celestial).    Extended to the paneling itself
from late 14c. The meaning top surface of a room is attested by 1530s. Figurative sense upper limit
is from 1934. Colloquial figurative phrase hit the ceiling lose one's temper, get explosively angry
attested by 1908; earlier it meant to fail (by 1900, originally U.S. college slang). Glass ceiling
in the figurative sense of invisible barrier that prevents women from advancing in management, etc.,
is attested from 1988.


sphere (n.)

mid-15c., Latinized spelling of Middle English spere (c.1300) cosmos; space, conceived as a hollow
globe about the world, from Anglo-French espiere, Old French espere (13c., Modern French
sph&#232;re), from Latin sphaera globe, ball, celestial sphere (Medieval Latin spera), from Greek
sphaira globe, ball, playing ball, terrestrial globe, of unknown origin.    From late 14c. in
reference to any of the supposed concentric, transparent, hollow, crystalline globes of the cosmos
believed to revolve around the earth and contain the planets and the fixed stars; the supposed
harmonious sound they made rubbing against one another was the music of the spheres (late 14c.).
Also from late 14c. as a globe; object of spherical form, a ball, and the geometric sense solid
figure with all points equidistant from the center. Meaning range of something, place or scene of
activity is first recorded c.1600 (as in sphere of influence, 1885, originally in reference to
Anglo-German colonial rivalry in Africa).


