cemetery (n.)

late 14c., from Old French cimetiere graveyard (12c.), from Late Latin coemeterium, from Greek
koimeterion sleeping place, dormitory, from koiman to put to sleep, keimai I lie down, from PIE root
*kei- to lie, rest, also bed, couch, hence secondary sense of beloved, dear (cognates: Greek
keisthai to lie, lie asleep, Old Church Slavonic semija family, domestic servants, Lithuanian
&#353;eima domestic servants, Lettish sieva wife, Old English hiwan members of a household, higid
measure of land, Latin cunae a cradle,  Sanskrit Sivah propitious, gracious). Early Christian
writers were the first to use it for burial ground, though the Greek word also had been anciently
used in reference to the sleep of death. An Old English word for cemetery was licburg.


ceilidh (n.)

1875, from Irish c&#233;ilidhe, from Old Irish c&#233;le companion, from PIE *kei-liyo-, from root
*kei- beloved, dear, primarily to lie; bed, couch (see cemetery).


necropolis (n.)

large cemetery of an ancient or modern city, 1803, from Late Latin, literally city of the dead, from
Greek Nekropolis, a burial place near Alexandria, from nekros (see necro-) + polis city (see polis).


Siva (n.)

also Shiva, one of the three supreme gods of Hinduism, lord of destruction and reproduction, 1788,
from Hindi Shiva, from Sanskrit Sivah, literally propitious, gracious, from PIE *ki-wo-, from root
*kei- beloved, dear (connected with Latin civis citizen, literally member of a household), also to
lie, couch (compare cemetery). But by some this is said to be a euphemism. Related: Sivaism;
Sivaistic.


hide (n.2)

measure of land (obsolete), Old English hid hide of land, earlier higid, from hiw- family (related
to hiwan household, hiwo a husband, master of a household), from Proto-Germanic *hiwido-, from PIE
*keiwo- (source also of Latin civis citizen), from root *kei- to lie; bed, couch; beloved, dear (see
cemetery, and compare city).    The notion was of amount of land needed to feed one free family and
dependents, usually 100 or 120 acres, but the amount could be as little as 60, depending on the
quality of the land. Often also defined as as much land as could be tilled by one plow in a year.
Translated in Latin as familia.


sleep (n.)

Old English sl&aelig;p sleep, sleepiness, inactivity, from Proto-Germanic *slepaz, from the root of
sleep (v.); compare cognate Old Saxon slap, Old Frisian slep, Middle Dutch sl&aelig;p, Dutch slaap,
Old High German slaf, German Schlaf, Gothic sleps.    Personified in English from late 14c., on
model of Latin Somnus), Greek Hypnos. Figurative use for repose of death was in Old English; to put
(an animal) to sleep kill painlessly is recorded from 1923 (a similar imagery is in cemetery). Sleep
deprivation attested from 1906. Sleep-walker somnambulist is attested from 1747; sleep-walking is
from 1840. To be able to do something in (one's) sleep easily is recorded from 1953.


oe

found in Greek borrowings into Latin, representing Greek -oi-. Words with -oe- that came early into
English from Old French or Medieval Latin usually already had been levelled to -e- (economic, penal,
cemetery), but later borrowings directly from Latin or Greek tended to retain it at first (oestrus,
diarrhoea, amoeba) as did proper names (Oedipus, Phoebe, Phoenix) and purely technical terms.
British English tends to be more conservative with it than American, which has done away with it in
all but a few instances.    It also occurred in some native Latin words (foedus treaty, league,
foetere to stink, hence occasionally in English foetid, foederal, which was the form in the original
publications of the Federalist papers). In these it represents an ancient -oi- in Old Latin (for
example Old Latin oino, Classical Latin unus), which apparently passed through an -oe- form before
being leveled out but was preserved into Classical Latin in certain words, especially those
belonging to the realms of law (such as foedus) and religion, which, along with the vocabulary of
sailors, are the most conservative branches of any language in any time, through a need for
precision, immediate comprehension, demonstration of learning, or superstition. But in foetus it was
an unetymological spelling in Latin that was picked up in English and formed the predominant
spelling of fetus into the early 20c.


bury (v.)

Old English byrgan to raise a mound, hide, bury, inter, akin to beorgan to shelter, from Proto-
Germanic *burzjan- protection, shelter (cognates: Old Saxon bergan, Dutch bergen, Old Norse bjarga,
Swedish berga, Old High German bergan protect, shelter, conceal, German bergen, Gothic bairgan to
save, preserve), from PIE root *bhergh- (1) to hide, protect (cognates: Old Church Slavonic brego I
preserve, guard). Related: Buried; burying. Burying-ground cemetery attested from 1711.    The Old
English -y- was a short oo sound, like modern French -u-. Under normal circumstances it transformed
into Modern English -i- (as in bridge, kiss, listen, sister), but in bury and a few other words (as
in merry, knell) it retained a Kentish change to e that took place in the late Old English period.
In the West Midlands, meanwhile, the Old English -y- sound persisted, slightly modified over time,
giving the standard modern pronunciation of blush, much, church.


city (n.)

early 13c., in medieval usage a cathedral town, but originally any settlement, regardless of size
(distinction from town is 14c., though in English it always seems to have ranked above borough),
from Old French cite town, city (10c., Modern French cit&eacute;), from earlier citet, from Latin
civitatem (nominative civitas; in Late Latin sometimes citatem) originally citizenship, condition or
rights of a citizen, membership in the community, later community of citizens, state, commonwealth
(used, for instance of the Gaulish tribes), from civis townsman, from PIE root *kei- to lie; bed,
couch; homestead; beloved, dear (see cemetery).    The sense has been transferred from the
inhabitants to the place. The Latin word for city was urbs, but a resident was civis. Civitas seems
to have replaced urbs as Rome (the ultimate urbs) lost its prestige. Loss of Latin -v- is regular in
French in some situations (compare alleger from alleviare; neige from nivea; jeune from juvenis. A
different sound evolution from the Latin word yielded Italian citta, Catalan ciutat, Spanish ciudad,
Portuguese cidade.    Replaced Old English burh (see borough). London is the city from 1550s. As an
adjective from c.1300. City hall first recorded 1670s to fight city hall is 1913, American English;
city slicker first recorded 1916 (see slick); both American English. City limits is from 1825. The
newspaper city desk attested from 1878. Inner city first attested 1968. City state (also city-state)
is attested from 1877.


