censure (v.)

1580s, from censure (n.) or else  from French censurer, from censure (n.). Related: Censured;
censuring.    Such men are so watchful to censure, that the have seldom much care to look for
favourable interpretations of ambiguities, to set the general tenor of life against single failures,
or to know how soon any slip of inadvertency has been expiated by sorrow and retractation; but let
fly their fulminations, without mercy or prudence, against slight offences or casual temerities,
against crimes never committed, or immediately repented. [Johnson, Life of Sir Thomas Browne, 1756]


censure (n.)

late 14c., originally ecclesiastical, from Latin censura judgment, opinion, also office of a censor,
from census, past participle of censere appraise, estimate, assess (see censor (n.)). General sense
of a finding of fault and an expression of condemnation is from c.1600.


animadvert (v.)

early 15c., to take notice of, from Latin animadvertere to notice, to take cognizance of, also to
censure, blame, punish, literally to turn the mind to (see animadversion). Sense of to criticize,
blame, censure in English is from 1660s. Related: Animadverted; animadverting.


tax (v.)

c.1300, impose a tax on, from Old French taxer impose a tax (13c.) and directly from Latin taxare
evaluate, estimate, assess, handle, also censure, charge, probably a frequentative form of tangere
to touch (see tangent (adj.)). Sense of to burden, put a strain on first recorded early 14c.; that
of censure, reprove is from 1560s. Its use in Luke ii for Greek apographein to enter on a list,
enroll is due to Tyndale. Related: Taxed; taxing.


reproof (n.)

mid-14c., a shame, a disgrace, also a censure, a rebuke, from Old French reprove reproach,
rejection, verbal noun from reprover to blame, accuse (see reprove).


criticize (v.)

1640s, to pass judgment on something (usually unfavorable), from critic + -ize. Meaning to discuss
critically is from 1660s; that of to censure is from 1704. Related: Criticized; criticizing.


censurable (adj.)

1630s, from censure + -able. Related: Censurability.


vindicate (v.)

1620s, to avenge or revenge, from Latin vindicatus, past participle of vindicare to stake a claim;
to liberate; to act as avenger (see vindication). Meaning to clear from censure or doubt, by means
of demonstration is recorded from 1630s. Related: Vindicated, vindicating.


reprehension (n.)

late 14c., from Old French reprehension (12c.) or directly from Latin reprehensionem (nominative
reprehensio) blame, a censure, reprimand, literally a taking again, noun of action from past
participle stem of reprehendere (see reprehend).


upbraid (v.)

Old English upbregdan bring forth as a ground for censure, from up (adv.) + bregdan move quickly,
intertwine (see braid (v.)). Similar formation in Middle Swedish upbrygdha. Meaning scold is first
attested late 13c. Related: Upbraided; upbraiding.


syndicate (v.)

1889, form into a syndicate, from syndicate (n.). Meaning sell for simultaneous publication is from
1889. Earlier it meant to judge, censure (1610s), from Medieval Latin syndicatus, past participle of
syndicare. Related: Syndicated; syndicating.


muster (n.)

late 14c., action of showing, manifestation, from Old French mostre illustration, proof;
examination, inspection (13c., Modern French montre), literally that which is shown, from mostrer
(see muster (v.)). Meaning act of gathering troops is from c.1400. To pass musters (1570s)
originally meant to undergo military review without censure.


lampoon (n.)

A personal satire; abuse; censure written not to reform but to vex [Johnson], 1640s, from French
lampon (17c.), of unknown origin, said by French etymologists to be from lampons let us drink,
popular refrain for scurrilous 17c. songs, from lamper to drink, guzzle, a nasalized form of laper
to lap, from a Germanic source akin to lap (v.). Also see -oon.


reprehend (v.)

mid-14c., from Latin reprehendere blame, censure, rebuke; seize, restrain, literally pull back, hold
back, from re- back (see re-) + prehendere to grasp, seize (see prehensile).


excoriate (v.)

early 15c., from Late Latin excoriatus, past participle of excoriare flay, strip off the hide, from
Latin ex- off (see ex-) + corium hide, skin (see corium). Figurative sense of denounce, censure
first recorded in English 1708. Related: Excoriated; excoriating.


condemn (v.)

early 14c., condempner to blame, censure, from Old French condamner to condemn (11c.), from Latin
condemnare to sentence, doom, blame, disapprove, from com-, intensive prefix (see com-), + damnare
to harm, damage (see damn). Replaced Old English fordeman. Related: Condemned; condemning.


blacklist (n.)

also black-list, black list, list of persons who have incurred suspicion, 1610s, from black (adj.),
here indicative of disgrace, censure, punishment (attested from 1590s, in black book) + list (n.).
Specifically of employers' list of workers considered troublesome (usually for union activity) is
from 1888. As a verb, from 1718. Related: Blacklisted; blacklisting.


lacerate (v.)

early 15c., from Latin laceratus, past participle of lacerare tear to pieces, mangle, figuratively,
to slander, censure, abuse, from lacer torn, mangled, from PIE root *lek- to rend, tear (cognates:
Greek lakis tatter, rag, lakizein to tear to pieces; Russian lochma rag, tatter, scrap; Albanian
l'akur naked). Related: Lacerated; lacerating.


inculpate (v.)

1799, to accuse, bring charges against, from Medieval Latin inculpatus, past participle of inculpare
to reproach, blame, censure, from Latin in- in (see in- (2)) + culpare to blame, from culpa fault.
But inculpable (late 15c.) means not culpable, free from blame, from Latin in- not (see in- (1)) +
culpare.


vindication (n.)

late 15c., act of avenging, revenge, from Old French vindicacion vengeance, revenge and directly
from Latin vindicationem (nominative vindicatio) act of claiming or avenging, noun of action from
past participle stem of vindicare lay claim to, assert; claim for freedom, set free; protect,
defend; avenge (related to vindicta revenge), probably from vim dicare to show authority, from vim,
accusative of vis force + root of dicere to say (see diction). Meaning justification by proof,
defense against censure is attested from 1640s.


fulminate (v.)

early 15c., publish a 'thundering' denunciation, from Latin fulminatus, past participle of fulminare
hurl lightning, lighten, from fulmen (genitive fulminis) lightning flash, related to fulgere to
shine, flash, from PIE *bhleg- to shine, flash, from root *bhel- (1) to shine, flash, burn (see
bleach (v.)). Metaphoric sense (the original sense in English) is via its use in reference to a
formal ecclesiastical censure. Related: Fulminated; fulminating.


reproach (n.)

mid-14c., a rebuke, blame, censure; also object of scorn or contempt; c.1400, as disgrace, state of
disgrace, from Old French reproche blame, shame, disgrace (12c.), from reprochier to blame, bring up
against, said by some French etymologists to be from Vulgar Latin *repropiare, from Latin re-
opposite of + prope near (see propinquity), with suggestions of bring near to as in modern get in
(someone's) face. But others would have it from *reprobicare, from Latin reprobus/reprobare (see
reprobate (adj.)).


twit (v.)

to blame, reproach, taunt, upbraid, 1520s, twite, shortened form of Middle English atwite, from Old
English &aelig;twitan to blame, reproach, from &aelig;t at + witan to blame, from Proto-Germanic
*witanan (cognates: Old English wite, Old Saxon witi, Old Norse viti punishment, torture; Old High
German wizzi punishment, wizan to punish; Dutch verwijten, Old High German firwizan, German
verweisen to reproach, reprove, Gothic fraweitan to avenge), from PIE root *weid- to see (see
vision). For sense evolution, compare Latin animadvertere, literally to give heed to, observe, later
to chastise, censure, punish. Related: Twitted; twitting. As a noun meaning a taunt from 1520s.


