centaury (n.)

small plant with red flowers (now usually erythraea Centaureum), late 14c., from Medieval Latin
centaurea, from Latin centaureum, from Greek kentaureion, from kentauros centaur (see centaur), so
called according to Pliny because the plant's medicinal properties were discovered by Chiron the
centaur.    German Tausendg&uuml;ldenkraut is based on a mistranslation of the Latin word, as if
from centum + aurum (the similarity might be the result of Roman folk etymology).


centaur (n.)

late 14c., from Latin centaurus, from Greek Kentauros, origin disputed. In early Greek literature
they were a savage, horse-riding tribe from Thessaly; later they were monsters half horse, half man.
The southern constellation of Centaurus is attested in English from 1550s but was known by that name
to the Romans and known as a centaur to the Greeks. It has often been confused since classical times
with Sagittarius.


Sagittarius (n.)

zodiac constellation, late Old English, from Latin, literally archer, properly pertaining to arrows,
from sagitta arrow, which probably is from a pre-Latin Mediterranean language. Meaning person born
under Sagittarius (properly Sagittarian) is attested from 1940. It represents a centaur drawing a
bow, but to modern observers unfamiliar with either it looks vaguely like a teapot.


monster (n.)

early 14c., malformed animal or human, creature afflicted with a birth defect, from Old French
monstre, mostre monster, monstrosity (12c.), and directly from Latin monstrum divine omen, portent,
sign; abnormal shape; monster, monstrosity, figuratively repulsive character, object of dread, awful
deed, abomination, from root of monere warn (see monitor (n.)). Abnormal or prodigious animals were
regarded as signs or omens of impending evil. Extended by late 14c. to imaginary animals composed of
parts of creatures (centaur, griffin, etc.). Meaning animal of vast size is from 1520s; sense of
person of inhuman cruelty or wickedness is from 1550s. As an adjective, of extraordinary size, from
1837. In Old English, the monster Grendel was an agl&aelig;ca, a word related to agl&aelig;c
calamity, terror, distress, oppression.


