cerebral (adj.)

1816, pertaining to the brain, from French c&eacute;r&eacute;bral (16c.), from Latin cerebrum the
brain (also the understanding), from PIE *keres-, from root *ker- (1) top of the head (see horn
(n.)). Meaning intellectual, clever is from 1929. Cerebral palsy attested from 1824, originally a
general term for cases of paralysis that seemed to be traceable to a morbid state of the encephalon.
Later used in a more specific sense from c.1860, based on the work of English surgeon Dr. William
Little.


cerebrum (n.)

1610s, from Latin cerebrum brain (see cerebral).


saveloy (n.)

1837, corruption of French cervelas, from Italian cervellata, from cervello brain, from Latin
cerebrum (see cerebral). So called because it originally was made of pigs' brains.


cerebrovascular (adj.)

1935, from cerebro-, comb. form of Latin cerebrum (see cerebral) + vascular.


cerebration (n.)

1853, coined by English physiologist Dr. William B. Carpenter (1813-1885) from Latin cerebrum brain
(see cerebral) + -ation. Related: Cerebrate (v.); cerebrated.


cerebellum (n.)

1560s, from Latin cerebellum a small brain, diminutive of cerebrum brain (see cerebral).


Romany (n.)

a gypsy; the Gypsy language, 1812, romani, fem. of romano (adj.) Gypsy, from rom, the Romany word
for man, husband, male, Gypsy (plural roma), from Sanskrit domba-s (with initial cerebral d, which
confuses with r [Klein]) male member of a low caste of musicians.


aphasia (n.)

loss of ability to speak, especially as result of brain injury or disorder, 1867, from Modern Latin
aphasia, from Greek aphasia speechlessness, from a- without (see a- (3)) + phasis utterance, from
phanai to speak, related to pheme voice, report, rumor (see fame (n.)).    APHASIA is the term which
has recently been given to the loss of the faculty of articulate language, the organs of phonation
and of articulation, as well as the intelligence, being unimpaired. The pathology of this affection
is at the present time the subject of much discussion in the scientific world; the French Academy
devoted several of their s&#233;ances during the year 1865 to its special elucidation, and the
Medical Journals of France and of our own country have lately contained a good deal of original
matter bearing upon this obscure feature in cerebral pathology. [Frederic Bateman, M.D., Aphasia,
London, 1868]


