cession (n.)

late 14c., a relinquishing, from Old French cession cession; death (13c.), from Latin cessionem
(nominative cessio) a giving up, surrendering, noun of action from past participle stem of cedere to
go away, yield (see cede). Related: Cessionary.


recession (n.)

1640s, act of receding, a going back, from French r&#233;cession a going backward, a withdrawing,
and directly from Latin  recessionem (nominative recessio) a going back, noun of action from past
participle stem of recedere (see recede).    Sense of temporary decline in economic activity, 1929,
noun of action from recess (q.v.): The material prosperity of the United States is too firmly based,
in our opinion, for a revival in industrial activity -- even if  we have to face an immediate
recession of some magnitude -- to be long delayed. [Economist, Nov. 2, 1929]Ayto notes, There was
more than a hint of euphemism in the coining of this term.


Munich

Bavarian capital, German M&uuml;nchen, from root of M&ouml;nch monk (see monk); founded 1158 as a
market town by Benedictine monks. In allusions to appeasement it is from the meeting of German,
British, French and Italian representatives there in Sept. 29, 1938, which resulted in the cession
of Sudetenland to Germany in exchange for Hitler's pledges.    During the flight Daladier sat silent
and morose, worried about the reception he would receive at Le Bourget, about how the French would
react to his having betrayed Czechoslovakia and France's promises. As the plane circled for landing,
he and others saw a massive crowd awaiting them. Expecting jeers, hisses, rotten fruit, and maybe
worse, Daladier declared stolidly: 'They are going to mob me, I suppose. ... I appreciate their
feelings,' and insisted on absorbing their wrath by being the first off the plane. But as he stood
dumbfounded on the gangplank, thousands surged forward carrying flags and flowers, shouting 'Hurrah
for France! Hurrah for England! Hurrah for peace!' Daladier turned back to L&eacute;ger and cursed,
'The God-damned fools!' [Benjamin F. Martin, France in 1938]


