chafe (v.)

early 14c., chaufen, c.1300, be provoked; late 14c. in literal sense to make warm, to heat, also
intransitive, to grow warm or hot, especially (early 15c.) to warm by rubbing, from Old French
chaufer heat, warm up, become warm (12c., Modern French chauffer), from Vulgar Latin *calefare, from
Latin calefacere to make hot, make warm, from calere be warm (see calorie) + facere to make, do (see
factitious).    Figurative sense from late 14c. include now-obsolete kindle (joy), inspire, make
passionate as well as provoke, vex, anger. Sense of make sore by rubbing first recorded 1520s.
Related: Chafed; chafing.


chauffer (n.)

small portable stove, 1825, variant of chafer a vessel for heating, agent noun from chafe; form
influenced by French chauffoir a heater, from chauffer to heat, which also is ultimately from chafe
(see chauffeur).


chauffeur (n.)

1896, originally a motorist, from French chauffeur, literally stoker, operator of a steam engine,
French nickname for early motorists, from chauffer to heat, from Old French chaufer to heat, warm
up; to become hot (see chafe). The first motor-cars were steam-driven. Sense of professional or paid
driver of a private motor car is from 1902.    The '95 Duryea wagon, which won the Chicago contest
Fall, was exhibited at the Detroit Horse Show last week. Charles B. King, treasurer of the American
Motor League, acted as chauffeur, as the French say. [The Horseless Age, April 1896]


dwarf (n.)

Old English dweorh, dweorg (West Saxon), duerg (Mercian), very short human being, from Proto-
Germanic *dweraz (cognates: Old Frisian dwerch, Old Saxon dwerg, Old High German twerg, German
Zwerg, Old Norse dvergr), perhaps from PIE *dhwergwhos something tiny, but with no established
cognates outside Germanic. The mythological sense is 1770, from German (it seems never to have
developed independently in English).    Whilst in this and other ways the dwarfs do at times have
dealings with mankind, yet on the whole they seem to shrink from man; they give the impression of a
downtrodden afflicted race, which is on the point of abandoning its ancient home to new and more
powerful invaders. There is stamped on their character something shy and something heathenish, which
estranges them from intercourse with christians. They chafe at human faithlessness, which no doubt
would primarily mean the apostacy from heathenism. In the poems of the Mid. Ages, Laurin is
expressly set before us as a heathen. It goes sorely against the dwarfs to see churches built, bell-
ringing ... disturbs their ancient privacy; they also hate the clearing of forests, agriculture, new
fangled pounding-machinery for ore. [Teutonic Mythology, Jacob Grimm, transl. Stallybrass, 1883]
The shift of the Old English guttural at the end of the word to modern -f is typical (compare
enough, draft). Old English plural dweorgas became Middle English dwarrows, later leveled down to
dwarfs. The use of dwarves for the legendary race was popularized by J.R.R. Tolkien. As an
adjective, from 1590s.


