chaffinch (n.)

Fringilla c&aelig;lebs, Old English ceaffinc, literally chaff-finch, so called for its habit of
eating waste grain among the chaff on farms. See chaff + finch.


chaff (n.)

husks, Old English ceaf chaff, probably from Proto-Germanic *kaf- to gnaw, chew (cognates: Middle
Dutch and Dutch kaf, German Kaff), from PIE root *gep(h)- jaw, mouth (see jowl (n.1)). Used
figuratively for worthless material from late 14c.


pallet (n.1)

mattress, late 14c., from Anglo-French paillete straw, bundle of straw, Old French paillet chaff,
bundle of straw, from paille straw (12c.), from Latin palea chaff, perhaps cognate with Sanskrit
palavah, Old Church Slavonic pleva, Russian peleva, Lithuanian pelus.


crap (v.)

defecate, 1846, from one of a cluster of words generally applied to things cast off or discarded
(such as weeds growing among corn (early 15c.), residue from renderings (late 15c.), underworld
slang for money (18c.), and in Shropshire, dregs of beer or ale), all probably from Middle English
crappe grain that was trodden underfoot in a barn, chaff (mid-15c.), from Middle French crape
siftings, from Old French crappe, from Medieval Latin crappa, crapinum chaff.  Related: Crapped;
crapping.    Despite folk etymology insistence, not from Thomas Crapper (1837-1910) who was,
however, a busy plumber and may have had some minor role in the development of modern toilets. The
name Crapper is a northern form of Cropper (attested from 1221), an occupational surname, obviously,
but the exact reference is unclear. Crap (v.) as a variant of crop (v.) was noted early 19c, as a
peculiarity of speech in Scotland and the U.S. Southwest (Arkansas, etc.).    Draw out yere sword,
thou vile South'ron!  Red wat wi' blude o' my kin!  That sword it crapped the bonniest flower  E'er
lifted its head to the sun!   [Allan Cunningham (1784-1842), The Young Maxwell]


Della Crusca

1796, from Italian Accademia della Crusca, literally Academy of the Chaff, the name of an Academy
established at Florence in 1582, mainly with the object of sifting and purifying the Italian
language; whence its name, and its emblem, a sieve [OED].


atheroma (n.)

encysted tumor, 1706, medical Latin, from Greek atheroma, from athere groats, porridge (related to
ather chaff), in reference to what is inside. For ending, see -oma.


spray (v.)

sprinkle liquid in drops, 1520s, from Middle Dutch sprayen, from Proto-Germanic *sprewjan (cognates:
German spr&uuml;hen to sparkle, drizzle, Spreu chaff, literally that which flies about), from
extended form of PIE root *sper- (4) to sow, scatter (see sprout (v.)). Related: Sprayed; spraying.


fan (n.1)

device to make an air current, Old English fann (West Saxon) a basket or shovel for winnowing grain
(by tossing it in the air), from Latin vannus, perhaps related to ventus wind (see wind (n.1)), or
from PIE root *wet- (1) to blow (also to inspire, spiritually arouse; see wood (adj.)).    The
chaff, being lighter, would blow off. Sense of device for moving air first recorded late 14c.; the
hand-held version is first attested 1550s. A fan-light (1819) was shaped like a lady's fan.


strawberry (n.)

Old English streawberige, streaberie; see straw + berry. There is no corresponding compound in other
Germanic languages; the reason for the name is uncertain, but perhaps it is in reference to the tiny
chaff-like external seeds which cover the fruit. A cognate Old English name was eor&eth;berge earth-
berry (compare Modern German erdbeere). As a color adjective from 1670s. Strawberry blonde is
attested from 1884. Strawberry mark (1847) so called for its resemblance.


awn (n.)

bristly fibers on grain of plants, c.1300, from Old Norse &ouml;gn, from Proto-Germanic *agano
(cognates: Old English egenu, Old High German agana, German Ahne, Gothic ahana), from PIE *ak-ona-
(cognates: Sanskrit asani- arrowhead, Greek akhne husk of wheat, Latin acus chaff, Lithuanian
akuotas beard, awn); suffixed form of PIE root *ak- sharp (see acrid).


ventilate (v.)

early 15c., to scatter, disperse (as the wind does), from Latin ventilatus, past participle of
ventilare to brandish, toss in the air, winnow, fan, agitate, set in motion, from ventulus a breeze,
diminutive of ventus wind (see wind (n.1)). Original notion is of cleaning grain by tossing it in
the air and letting the wind blow away the chaff. Meaning supply a room with fresh air first
recorded 1743 (see ventilation). Formerly with diverse slang senses, including shoot (someone),
recorded from 1875. Related: Ventilated; ventilating.


frazzle (v.)

c.1825, to unravel (of clothing), from East Anglian variant of 17c. fasel to unravel, fray (as the
end of a rope), from Middle English facelyn to fray (mid-15c.), from fasylle fringe, frayed edge,
diminutive of Old English f&aelig;s fringe. Related: Frazzled, frazzling. Compare German Faser
thread, fiber, filament, Middle Dutch vese fringe, fiber, chaff. Probably influenced in form by fray
(v.). As a noun, from 1865, American English.


threshold (n.)

Old English &thorn;rescold, &thorn;&aelig;rscwold, &thorn;erxold, etc., door-sill, point of
entering, probably literally something to tread upon, with first element related to Old English
&thorn;rescan (see thresh), with its original sense of tread, trample. Second element of unknown
origin and much transformed in all the Germanic languages, suggesting its literal sense was lost
even in ancient times. In English it probably has been altered to conform to hold, but the oft-
repeated story that the threshold was a barrier placed at the doorway to hold the chaff flooring in
the room is mere folk etymology. Cognates include Old Norse &thorn;reskjoldr, Swedish tr&ouml;skel,
Old High German driscufli, German dialectal drischaufel. Figurative use was in Old English.


