chancellor (n.)

early 12c., from Old French chancelier (12c.), from Late Latin cancellarius keeper of the barrier,
secretary, usher of a law court, so called because he worked behind a lattice (Latin cancellus) at a
basilica or law court (see chancel). In the Roman Empire, a sort of court usher; the post gradually
gained importance in the Western kingdoms. A variant form, canceler, existed in Old English, from
Old North French, but was replaced by this central French form.


chancery (n.)

late 14c., court of the Lord Chancellor of England, contracted from chancellery (c.1300), from Old
French chancelerie (12c.), from Medieval Latin cancellaria (see chancellor).


Bismarck

drink of champagne and stout (also called a black velvet), 1910, named for the German chancellor
(1815-1898), who was said to have been fond of it. The surname is said to be short for Biscofsmark
bishop's boundary.


clarendon (n.)

a thickened Roman type face, 1845, evidently named for the Clarendon press at Oxford University,
which was set up 1713 in the Clarendon Building, named for university Chancellor Edward Hyde, 1st
Earl of Clarendon.


creationism (n.)

1847, originally a Christian theological position that God immediately created a soul for each
person born; from creation + -ism. As a name for the religious reaction to Darwin, opposed to
evolution, it is attested from 1880.  James Ussher (1581-1656), Archbishop of Armagh, Primate of All
Ireland, and Vice-Chancellor of Trinity College in Dublin was highly regarded in his day as a
churchman and as a scholar. Of his many works, his treatise on chronology has proved the most
durable. Based on an intricate correlation of Middle Eastern and Mediterranean histories and Holy
writ, it was incorporated into an authorized version of the Bible printed in 1701, and thus came to
be regarded with almost as much unquestioning reverence as the Bible itself. Having established the
first day of creation as Sunday 23 October 4004 B.C. ... Ussher calculated the dates of other
biblical events, concluding, for example, that Adam and Eve were driven from Paradise on Monday 10
November 4004 BC, and that the ark touched down on Mt Ararat on 5 May 1491 BC on a Wednesday.
[Craig, G.Y., and E.J. Jones, A Geological Miscellany, Princeton University Press, 1982.]


