chant (n.)

1670s, from chant (v.), or else from French chant (12c.), from Latin cantus song, a singing; bird-
song, from past participle stem of canere.


chanteuse (n.)

female singer of popular songs, 1888, from French chanteuse (16c.), fem. agent noun of chanter to
sing (see chant (v.)). In Old French, the word was chanteresse.


chanter (n.)

singer, composer, late 14c., from Old French chanteor (Modern French chanteur), from Latin cantorem
singer, from cantare to sing (see chant (v.)).


chanty (n.)

1856, also shanty, chantey; probably an alteration of French chanter to sing (see chant (v.));
perhaps from French chantez, imperative of chanter.


chanticleer (n.)

a cock, c.1300, from Old French Chantecler sing-loud (Modern French Chanteclair), name of the cock
in medieval stories of Reynard the Fox; from chanter to sing (see chant (v.)) + cler (see clear
(adj.)).


chant (v.)

late 14c., from Old French chanter to sing, celebrate (12c.), from Latin cantare to sing, originally
frequentative of canere sing (which it replaced), from PIE root *kan- to sing (cognates: Greek
eikanos cock, Old English hana cock, both literally bird who sings for sunrise; Old Irish caniaid
sings, Welsh canu sing). The frequentative quality of the word was no longer felt in Latin, and by
the time French emerged the word had entirely displaced canere. Related: Chanted; chanting.


recant (v.)

1530s, from Latin recantare recall, revoke, from re- back (see re-) + cantare to chant (see chant
(v.)). A word from the Reformation. Loan-translation of Greek palinoidein recant, from palin back +
oeidein to sing. Related: Recanted; recanting.


cant (n.1)

insincere talk, 1709, earlier it was slang for whining of beggars (1640s), from the verb in this
sense (1560s), from Old North French canter (Old French chanter) to sing, chant, from Latin cantare,
frequentative of canere to sing (see chant (v.)). Sense in English developed after 1680 to mean the
jargon of criminals and vagabonds, thence applied contemptuously by any sect or school to the
phraseology of its rival.    ... Slang is universal, whilst Cant is restricted in usage to certain
classes of the community: thieves, vagrom men, and -- well, their associates. ... Slang boasts a
quasi-respectability denied to Cant, though Cant is frequently more enduring, its use continuing
without variation of meaning for many generations. [John S. Farmer, Forewords to Musa Pedestris,
1896]


intone (v.)

late 14c., entunen sing, chant, recite, from Old French entoner sing, chant (13c.), from Medieval
Latin intonare sing according to tone, from Latin in- in (see in- (2)) + tonus tone, from Greek
tonos (see tenet). A different verb intone was in use 17c.18c., from Latin intonare to thunder,
resound, figuratively to cry out vehemently, from tonare to thunder. Related: Intoned; intoning.


cantabile        (adj.)

1724, from Italian, literally singable, that can be sung, from cantare to sing (see chant (v.)).


sing (v.)

Old English singan to chant, sing, celebrate, or tell in song, also used of birds (class III strong
verb; past tense sang, past participle sungen), from Proto-Germanic *sengwan (cognates: Old Saxon
singan, Old Frisian sionga, Middle Dutch singhen, Dutch zingen, Old High German singan, German
singen, Gothic siggwan, Old Norse syngva, Swedish sjunga), from PIE root *sengwh- to sing, make an
incantation. The criminal slang sense of to confess to authorities is attested from 1610s.    No
related forms in other languages, unless perhaps it is connected to Greek omphe voice (especially of
a god), oracle; and Welsh dehongli explain, interpret. The typical Indo-European root is represented
by Latin canere (see chant (v.)). Other words meaning sing derive from roots meaning cry, shout, but
Irish gaibim is literally take, seize, with sense evolution via take up a song or melody.


Hare Krishna

1968, title of a Hindu chant or mantra, from Hindi hare O God! + Krishna, name of an incarnation of
the god Vishnu.


cantata (n.)

1724, from Italian cantata, literally that which is sung, past participle of cantare to sing (see
chant (v.)).


sis-boom-bah

cheerleading chant, originally (1867) an echoic phrase imitating the sound of a skyrocket flight
(sis), the burst of the fireworks (boom), and the reaction of the crowd ((b)ah).


canticle (n.)

short hymn, early 13c., from Latin canticulum a little song, diminutive of canticum song (also a
scene in Roman comedy enacted by one person and accompanied by music and dancing), from cantus (see
chant (v.)).


cantor (n.)

1530s, church song-leader, from Latin cantor singer, poet, actor, agent noun from past participle
stem of canere to sing (see chant (v.)). Applied in English to the Hebrew chazan from 1893.


canto (n.)

1580s, from Italian canto song, from Latin cantus song (see chant (v.)). As a section of a long
poem, used in Italian by Dante, in English first by Spenser.


chanson (n.)

c.1600, from French chanson, from Old French chan&#231;on song, epic poem (12c.), from Latin
cantionem (nominative cantio) song, from past participle stem of canere (see chant (v.)).


canzone (n.)

1580s, from Italian canzone, from Latin cantionem (nominative cantio) singing, song (also source of
Spanish cancion, French chanson), noun of action from past participle stem of canere to sing (see
chant (v.)). In Italian or Proven&ccedil;al, a song resembling the madrigal but less strict in
style.


plain-song (n.)

also plainsong, plain-song, 1510s, translating Latin cantus planus, French plain chant.


paean (n.)

1590s, from Latin paean hymn of deliverance, from Greek paian hymn, chant, hymn to Apollo, from
Paian, a name of the god of healing; originally the physician of the gods (in Homer), later merged
with Apollo; literally one who touches (i.e. one who heals by a touch), from paio to touch, strike.


concent (n.)

harmony, 1580s, from Latin concentus a singing together, harmony, from concinere to sing or sound
together, from com- with, together (see com-) + canere to sing (see chant (v.)). Often misspelled
consent or confused with that word.


precentor (n.)

1610s, from Late Latin praecentor a leader in singing, from Latin praecantare to sing before, from
prae before (see pre-) + canere to sing (see chant (v.)). For change of vowel, see biennial.


descant (n.)

late 14c., from Old North French descant (Old French deschant), from Medieval Latin discantus
refrain, part-song, from Latin dis- asunder, apart (see dis-) + cantus song (see chant). Spelling
was partly Latinized 16c. Originally counterpoint.


enchantment (n.)

late 13c., from Old French encantement, from enchanter bewitch, charm, from Latin incantare,
literally enchant, cast a (magic) spell upon, from in- upon, into (see in- (2)) + cantare to sing
(see chant (v.)). Figurative sense of alluring is from 1670s. Compare Old English galdor song, also
spell, enchantment, from galan to sing, source of the second element in nightingale.


accent (n.)

late 14c., particular mode of pronunciation, from Middle French accent, from Old French acent
(13c.), from Latin accentus song added to speech, from ad- to (see ad-) + cantus a singing, past
participle of canere to sing (see chant (v.)). Loan-translation of Greek prosoidia, from pros- to +
oide song, which apparently described the pitch scheme in Greek verse. The decorating sense of
something that emphasizes or highlights is from 1972.


chorale (n.)

1828, sacred choral song, from German Choral metrical hymn in Reformed church, shortened from
Choralgesang choral song, translating Medieval Latin cantus choralis, from Latin cantus (see chant
(v.)) + choralis (see choral). The -e was added to indicate stress. Meaning group of singers is
1942.


incentive (n.)

early 15c., from Late Latin incentivum, noun use of neuter of Latin adjective incentivus setting the
tune (in Late Latin inciting), from past participle stem of incinere strike up, from in- in, into
(see in- (2)) + canere sing (see chant (v.)). Sense influenced by association with incendere to
kindle. The adjective use, in reference to a system of rewards meant to encourage harder work, first
attested 1943 in jargon of the U.S. war economy; as a noun, in this sense, from 1948.


heave (v.)

Old English hebban to lift, raise; lift up, exalt (class VI strong verb; past tense hof, past
participle hafen), from Proto-Germanic *hafjan (cognates: Old Norse hefja, Dutch heffen, German
heben, Gothic hafjan to lift, raise), from PIE *kap-yo-, from root *kap- to grasp (see capable).
Related to Old English habban to hold, possess. Intransitive use by c.1200. Meaning to throw is from
1590s. Sense of retch, make an effort to vomit is first attested c.1600. Related: Heaved; heaving.
Nautical heave-ho was a chant in lifting (c.1300, hevelow).


charm (n.)

c.1300, incantation, magic charm, from Old French charme (12c.) magic charm, magic, spell;
incantation, song, lamentation, from Latin carmen song, verse, enchantment, religious formula, from
canere to sing (see chant (v.)), with dissimilation of -n- to -r- before -m- in intermediate form
*canmen (for a similar evolution, see Latin germen germ, from *genmen). The notion is of chanting or
reciting verses of magical power.    A yet stronger power than that of herb or stone lies in the
spoken word, and all nations use it both for blessing and cursing. But these, to be effective, must
be choice, well knit, rhythmic words (verba concepta), must have lilt and tune; hence all that is
strong in the speech wielded by priest, physician, magician, is allied to the forms of poetry.
[Jacob Grimm, Teutonic Mythology (transl. Stallybrass), 1883]    Sense of pleasing quality evolved
17c. Meaning small trinket fastened to a watch-chain, etc. first recorded 1865. Quantum physics
sense is from 1964. To work like a charm (figuratively) is recorded by 1824.


hen (n.)

Old English henn, from West Germanic *hannjo (cognates: Old Frisian henn, Middle Dutch henne, Old
High German henna), fem. of *han(e)ni male fowl, cock (source of Old English hana cock), literally
bird who sings (for sunrise), from PIE root *kan- to sing (see chant).    The original masculine
word survives in German (Hahn cock), Swedish, Danish, etc. German also has a generic form, Huhn, for
either gender of the bird. Extension to female of any bird species is early 14c. in English. Hen as
slang for woman dates from 1620s; hence hen party gathering of women, first recorded 1887. To be mad
as a wet hen is from 1823, but the figure was used to indicate other states:    Some, on the
contrary, are viciously opposite to these, who act so tamely and so coldly, that when they ought to
be angry, to thunder and lighten, as one may say, they are no fuller of Heat, than a wet Hen, as the
Saying is; .... [Life of Mr. Thomas Betterton, London, 1710]   <hr />   Orth. Out upon you for a
dastardly Fellow; you han't the Courage of a wet Hen. [A Sermon Preached at St. Mary-le-Bow, March
27, 1704]   As wanton as a wet hen is in Scots Proverbs (1813). Among Middle English proverbial
expressions was nice as a nonne hen over-refined, fastidiously wanton (c.1500); to singen so hen in
snowe sing miserably, literally sing like a hen in snow (c.1200). Hen's teeth as a figure of
scarceness is attested by 1838.


