chaperon (v.)

act as a chaperon, 1792, also chaperone, from chaperon (n.), or from French chaperonner, from
chaperon (n.). Related: Chaperoned; chaperoning.


chaperon (n.)

1720, woman accompanying a younger, unmarried lady in public, from French chaperon protector,
especially female companion to a young woman, earlier head covering, hood (c.1400), from Old French
chaperon hood, cowl (12c.), diminutive of chape cape (see cap (n.)). ... English writers often
erroneously spell it chaperone, app. under the supposition that it requires a fem. termination
[OED]. The notion is of covering the socially vulnerable one.  May I ask what is a chaperon?    A
married lady; without whom no unmarried one can be seen in public. If the damsel be five and forty,
she cannot appear without the matron; and if the matron be fifteen, it will do.    [Catharine
Hutton, The Welsh Mountaineer, London, 1817]    The word had been used in Middle English in the
literal sense hooded cloak.


caparison        (n.)

1570s, cloth spread over a saddle, also personal dress and ornaments, from Middle French caparasson
(15c., Modern French capara&ccedil;on), from Spanish caparaz&#243;n, perhaps from augmentative of
Old Proven&ccedil;al caparasso a mantle with a hood, or Medieval Latin caparo, the name of a type of
cape worn by women, literally chaperon (see chaperon). Past participle adjective caparisoned is
attested from c.1600, from a verb caparison (1590s), from French capara&ccedil;onner, from
capara&ccedil;on.


shammy (n.)

1650s, phonetic spelling of chamois. Other bungled spellings include shambo (1610s), shamois,
shamoys, shammies. Compare shay from chaise; shappo (1700) for chapeau; shapperoon (1620s) for
chaperon.


duenna (n.)

1660s, chief lady in waiting upon the queen of Spain, also an elderly woman in charge of girls from
a Spanish family, from Spanish due&ntilde;a married lady, mistress (fem. of due&ntilde;o master),
from Latin domina (see dame). Sense extended in English to any elderly woman chaperon of a younger
woman (1708).


hood (n.1)

covering, Old English hod hood, from Proto-Germanic *hodaz (cognates: Old Saxon, Old Frisian hod
hood, Middle Dutch hoet, Dutch hoed hat, Old High German huot helmet, hat, German Hut hat, Old
Frisian hode guard, protection), from PIE *kadh- cover (see hat).    Modern spelling is early 1400s
to indicate a long vowel, which is no longer pronounced as such. Meaning removable cover for an
automobile engine attested by 1905. Little Red Riding Hood (1729) translates Charles Perrault's
Petit Chaperon Rouge (Contes du Temps Pass&eacute; 1697).


