chapel (n.)

early 13c., from Old French chapele (12c., Modern French chapelle), from Medieval Latin cappella
chapel, sanctuary for relics, literally little cape, diminutive of Late Latin cappa cape (see cap
(n.)); by tradition, originally in reference to the sanctuary in France in which the miraculous cape
of St. Martin of Tours, patron saint of France, was preserved; meaning extended in most European
languages to any sanctuary. (While serving Rome as a soldier deployed in Gaul, Martin cut his
military coat in half to share it with a ragged beggar. That night, Martin dreamed Christ wearing
the half-cloak; the half Martin kept was the relic.)


a capella

1876, earlier alla capella (1847), from Italian, in the manner of the chapel, literally according to
the chapel, from cappella chapel (see chapel). Originally in reference to older church music
(pre-1600) which was written for unaccompanied voices; applied 20c. to unaccompanied vocal music
generally.


kapellmeister (n.)

conductor, 1838, German, literally chapel master, from Kapelle chapel (also the name given to a band
or orchestra) + Meister master.


chaplain (n.)

mid-14c., minister of a chapel, from Old French chapelein clergyman (Modern French chapelain), from
Medieval Latin cappellanus clergyman, originally custodian of St. Martin's cloak (see chapel).
Replaced Old English capellane (from the same Medieval Latin source) clergyman who conducts private
religious services, originally in great households, later in military regiments, prisons, etc.


Ebenezer

masc. proper name, sometimes also the name of a Protestant chapel or meeting house, from name of a
stone raised by Samuel to commemorate a victory over the Philistines at Mizpeh (I Sam. vii:12), from
Hebrew ebhen ezar stone of help, from ebhen stone + ezer help.


Salem

place mentioned in Gen. xiv:18, from Hebrew Shalem, usually said to be another word for Jerusalem
and to mean peace (compare Hebrew shalom, Arabic salaam). Common as a Baptist and Methodist
meetinghouse name, so much so that by mid-19c. it (along with Bethel and Ebenezer) had come to be
used in Britain generically to mean non-conformist chapel.


dedication (n.)

late 14c., action of dedicating, from Old French dedicacion (14c., Modern French d&eacute;dication)
consecration of a church or chapel, or directly from Latin dedicationem, noun of action from
dedicare (see dedicate). Meaning the giving of oneself to some purpose is c.1600; as an inscription
in a book, etc., from 1590s.


oratory (n.2)

small chapel, c.1300, from Old French oratorie and directly from Late Latin oratorium place of
prayer (especially the Oratory of St. Philip Neri in Rome, where musical services were presented),
noun use of an adjective, as in oratorium templum, from neuter of Latin oratorius of or for praying,
from orare to pray, plead, speak (see orator).


Sistine (adj.)

1769, literally pertaining to Pope Sixtus, from Italian sistino, from Sixtus, name of five popes,
from Latin sextus sixth (see Sextus). The chapel is named for Sixtus IV (Francesco della Rovere),
pope 1471-84, who had it built. The painting by Raphael known as the Sistine Madonna is so called
because it also shows Sixtus II, a 3c. martyr and saint; it is better known now for the two cherubs
at the bottom of the picture who by 1900 were well-known in isolation from the rest of the picture
in engravings, etc.


maestro (n.)

master of music, great teacher or composer, 1797, from Italian maestro, literally master, from Latin
magisterium, accusative of magister (see master (n.)). Applied in Italian to eminent musical
composers. Meaning conductor, musical director is short for maestro di cappella (1724), literally
master of the chapel (compare German kapellmeister).


bonnet (n.)

late 14c., Scottish bonat brimless hat for men, from Old French bonet, short for chapel de bonet,
from bonet (12c., Modern French bonnet) kind of cloth used as a headdress, from Medieval Latin
bonitum material for hats, perhaps a shortening of Late Latin abonnis a kind of cap (7c.), which is
perhaps from a Germanic source.


crypt (n.)

early 15c., grotto, cavern, from Latin crypta vault, cavern, from Greek krypte (short for krypte
kamara hidden vault), fem. of kryptos hidden, verbal adjective from kryptein to hide, from PIE
*krau- to conceal, hide (cognates: Old Church Slavonic kryjo, kryti to hide). Meaning underground
burial vault or chapel in a church first attested 1789.


faggot (n.2)

male homosexual, 1914, American English slang (shortened form fag is from 1921), probably from
earlier contemptuous term for woman (1590s), especially an old and unpleasant one, in reference to
faggot (n.1) bundle of sticks, as something awkward that has to be carried (compare baggage
worthless woman, 1590s). It may also be reinforced by Yiddish faygele homosexual, literally little
bird. It also may have roots in British public school slang fag a junior who does certain duties for
a senior (1785), with suggestions of catamite, from fag (v.). This also was used as a verb.He [the
prefect] used to fag me to blow the chapel organ for him. [Boy's Own Paper, 1889]Other obsolete
senses of faggot were man hired into military service simply to fill out the ranks at muster (1700)
and vote manufactured for party purposes (1817).    The oft-reprinted assertion that male
homosexuals were called faggots because they were burned at the stake as punishment is an
etymological urban legend. Burning was sometimes a punishment meted out to homosexuals in Christian
Europe (on the suggestion of the Biblical fate of Sodom and Gomorrah), but in England, where
parliament had made homosexuality a capital offense in 1533, hanging was the method prescribed. Any
use of faggot in connection with public executions had long become an English historical obscurity
by the time the word began to be used for male homosexual in 20th century American slang, whereas
the contemptuous slang word for woman (and the other possible sources or influences listed here) was
in active use. It was used in this sense in early 20c. by D.H. Lawrence and James Joyce, among
others.


