charter (v.)

early 15c., provide with a charter, from charter (n.). Meaning to hire is attested from 1806.
Related: Chartered; chartering.


charter school

older uses refer to schools in Ireland begun 1733 by the Charter Society to provide Protestant
education to poor Catholic children. Modern use in U.S. began c.1988, as an alternative to state-run
public education.


charter (n.)

c.1200, from Old French chartre (12c.) charter, letter, document, covenant, from Latin chartula,
literally little paper, diminutive of charta, carta paper, document (see chart (n.)).


Chartism (n.)

1839 in English political history, in reference to the reform party active 1836-48, from The
People's Charter, which contained their principles. Related: Chartist (1838).


unchartered (adj.)

1805, from un- (1) not + past participle of charter (v.).


chartulary (n.)

collection of charters, from Medieval Latin chartularium, from Latin chartula (see charter (n.)).


Magna Carta

also Magna Charta, 1560s, Medieval Latin, literally great charter (of English personal and political
liberty), attested in Anglo-Latin from 1279; obtained from King John, June 15, 1215. See magnate,
card (n.).


Baltimore

city in Maryland, U.S., founded 1729, named for Cecilius Calvert (1605-1675), 2nd baron Baltimore,
who held the charter for Maryland colony; from a small port town in southern Ireland where the
family had its seat, from Irish Baile na Tighe Mor, literally townland of the big house. In old
baseball slang, a Baltimore chop was a hit right in front of the plate that bounced high.


book (v.)

Old English bocian to grant or assign by charter, from book (n.). Meaning to enter into a book,
record is early 13c. Meaning to enter for a seat or place, issue (railway) tickets is from 1841; to
engage a performer as a guest is from 1872. Related: Booked; booking.


A.D.

1570s, from Latin Anno Domini Year of the Lord. First put forth by Dionysius Exiguus in 527 or 533
C.E., but at first used only for Church business. Introduced in Italy in 7c., France (partially) in
8c. In England, first found in a charter of 680 C.E. Ordained for all ecclesiastical documents in
England by the Council of Chelsea, July 27, 816.    The resistance to it in part might have come
because Dionysius chose 754 A.U.C. as the birth year of Jesus, while many early Christians would
have thought it was 750 A.U.C. [See John J. Bond, Handy-Book of Rules and Tables for Verifying Dates
With the Christian Era, 4th ed., London: George Bell &amp; Sons, 1889] A.C., for Anno Christi, also
was common 17c.


patroon (n.)

1660s, variant of patron used in foreign contexts, from Dutch patroon (a French loan-word) or French
patron master, patron, from Old French (see patron; also see -oon); used from 1758 in parts of New
York and New Jersey colonies for landholder, especially one with certain manorial privileges
(abolished c.1850) under the old Dutch governments by the charter of 1629.


freedom (n.)

Old English freodom freedom, state of free will; charter, emancipation, deliverance; see free (adj.)
+ -dom. Freedom-rider recorded 1961, in reference to civil rights activists in U.S. trying to
integrate bus lines.    It has been said by some physicians, that life is a forced state. The same
may be said of freedom. It requires efforts, it presupposes mental and moral qualities of a high
order to be generally diffused in the society where it exists. [John C. Calhoun, speech, U.S. House
of Representatives, Jan. 31, 1816]   <hr />   Freedom Rider Situation Cuts Into Montgomery Juke,
Game Revenues [headline, Billboard, July 24, 1961]   Freedom fighter attested by 1903 (originally
with reference to Cuba).


gallery (n.)

c.1500, from Middle French galerie a long portico (14c.), from Medieval Latin galeria, of uncertain
origin, perhaps an alteration of galilea church porch, which is probably from Latin Galilaea
Galilee, the northernmost region of Palestine (see Galilee); church porches sometimes were so called
from being at the far end of the church.  Super altare Beat&aelig; Mari&aelig; in occidentali porte
ejusdem ecclesi&aelig; qu&aelig; Galil&aelig; a vocatur. [c.1186 charter in Durham Cathedral]  Sense
of building to house art first recorded 1590s; that of people who occupy a (theater) gallery
(contrasted with gentlemen of the pit) first by Lovelace, 1640s, hence to play to the gallery
(1867).


toga (n.)

c.1600, from Latin toga cloak or mantle, from PIE *tog-a- covering, from root *(s)teg- to cover (see
stegosaurus). The outer garment of a Roman citizen in time of peace.    The toga as the Roman
national dress was allowed to be worn by free citizens only. A stranger not in full possession of
the rights of a Roman citizen could not venture to appear in it. Even banished Romans were in
imperial times precluded from wearing it. The appearance in public in a foreign dress was considered
as contempt of the majesty of the Roman people. Even boys appeared in the toga, called, owing to the
purple edge attached to it (a custom adopted from the Etruscans) toga praetexta. On completing his
sixteenth, afterward his fifteenth, year (tirocinium fori), the boy exchanged the toga praetexta for
the toga virilis, pura, or libera--a white cloak without the purple edge. Roman ladies (for these
also wore the toga) abandoned the purple edge on being married. [Guhl &amp; Koner, The Life of the
Greeks and Romans, transl. Francis Hueffer, 1876]    Breeches, like the word for them (Latin bracae)
were alien to the Romans, being the dress of Persians, Germans, and Gauls, so that bracatus wearing
breeches was a term in Roman geography meaning north of the Alps. College fraternity toga party was
re-popularized by movie Animal House (1978), but this is set in 1962 and the custom seems to date
from at least the mid-1950s.    Down on Prospect Street, Campus Club held a toga party, at which
everyone wore togas. Charter held a come-as-you-are party, at which everyone wore what they happened
to have on, and Cloister held a party called A Night in Tahiti, at which we'd hate to guess what
everyone wore. The borough police reported that only one false alarm was turned in. [Princeton
Alumni Weekly, March 19, 1954]


