charabanc (n.)

British for sightseeing bus, 1811, originally in a Continental context (especially Swiss), from
French char-&agrave;-bancs, literally benched carriage, from char wagon, from Latin carrus (see car)
+ &agrave; to (see ad-) + banc bench (see bench (n.)).


charcuterie (n.)

1858, from French charcuterie, literally pork-butcher's shop, from charcuter (16c.), from obsolete
char (Modern French chair) cuite cooked flesh, from chair meat (Old French char, from Latin carnem;
see carnage) + cuit, past participle of cuire to cook. Compare French charcutier pork butcher; meat
roaster, seller of cooked (not raw) meat.


char (v.)

to reduce to charcoal, 1670s, probably a back-formation from charcoal (q.v.). Related: Charred;
charring.


chariot (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French charriot wagon (13c.), augmentative of char car, from Late Latin carrum
chariot (see car).


charwoman (n.)

1590s, from Middle English char, cherre turn of work (see chore) + woman. An Alicia Charwoman
appears in the Borough of Nottingham records in 1379.


Charlotte

fem. proper name, from the French fem. of Charlot, a diminutive of Charles. Meaning apple marmalade
covered with bread-crumbs is attested from 1796, presumably from French (where, however, the dessert
name is attested only from 1804), possibly from the fem. proper name, but the connection is obscure.
Perhaps from some French dialect word. Compare Middle English charlette (mid-14c.) dish containing
meat, eggs, milk, etc., said to be probably from Old French char lait&#233; meat with milk.    The
city in North Carolina, U.S., was settled c.1750 and named for Princess Charlotte Sophia
(1744-1818), who married George III of England in 1761; Charlottetown, Prince Edward Island, Canada,
also was named for her (1763).


ajar

1718, perhaps from Scottish dialectal a char slightly open, earlier on char (early 16c.), from
Middle English char, from Old English cier a turn.


chore (n.)

1751, American English, variant of char, from Middle English cherre odd job, from Old English cerr,
cierr turn, change, time, occasion, affair business.   Chore, a corruption of char, is an English
word, still used in many parts of England, as a char-man, a char-woman; but in America, it is
perhaps confined to New England. It signifies small domestic jobs of work, and its place cannot be
supplied by any other single word in the language. [Noah Webster, Dissertations on the English
Language, 1789]


car (n.)

c.1300, wheeled vehicle, from Anglo-French carre, Old North French carre, from Vulgar Latin *carra,
related to Latin carrum, carrus (plural carra), originally two-wheeled Celtic war chariot, from
Gaulish karros, a Celtic word (compare Old Irish and Welsh carr cart, wagon, Breton karr chariot),
from PIE *krsos, from root *kers- to run (see current (adj.)).    From 16th to 19th c. chiefly
poetic, with associations of dignity, solemnity, or splendour ... [OED]. Used in U.S. by 1826 of
railway freight carriages and of passenger coaches on a railway by 1830; by 1862 of a streetcar or
tramway car. Extension to automobile is by 1896, but from 1831 to the first decade of 20c. the cars
meant railroad train. Car bomb first 1972, in reference to Northern Ireland. The Latin word also is
the source of Italian and Spanish carro, French char.


shebang (n.)

1862, hut, shed, shelter, popularized among soldiers in the U.S. Civil War, but like other Civil War
slang (such as skedaddle) of uncertain origin. Perhaps an alteration of shebeen (q.v.), but shebang
in the sense tavern, a seemingly necessary transitional sense, is not attested before 1878 and
shebeen seems to have been not much used in the U.S. Bartlett's 1877 edition describes it as A
strange word that had its origin during the late civil war. It is applied alike to a room, a shop,
or a hut, a tent, a cabin; an engine house. Phrase the whole shebang first recorded 1869, but
relation to the earlier use of the word is obscure. Either or both senses also might be mangled
pronunciations of French char-&agrave;-banc, a bus-like wagon with many seats. For an older guess:
[Shebang] used even yet by students of Yale College and elsewhere to designate their rooms, or a
theatrical or other performance in a public hall, has its origin probably in a corruption of the
French cabane, a hut, familiar to the troops that came from Louisiana, and constantly used in the
Confederate camp for the simple huts, which they built with such alacrity and skill for their winter
quarters. The constant intercourse between the outposts soon made the term familiar to the Federal
army also. [Americanisms: The English of the New World,  Maximillian Schele De Vere, New York,
Charles Scribner &amp; Co., 1872.]


