charm (n.)

c.1300, incantation, magic charm, from Old French charme (12c.) magic charm, magic, spell;
incantation, song, lamentation, from Latin carmen song, verse, enchantment, religious formula, from
canere to sing (see chant (v.)), with dissimilation of -n- to -r- before -m- in intermediate form
*canmen (for a similar evolution, see Latin germen germ, from *genmen). The notion is of chanting or
reciting verses of magical power.    A yet stronger power than that of herb or stone lies in the
spoken word, and all nations use it both for blessing and cursing. But these, to be effective, must
be choice, well knit, rhythmic words (verba concepta), must have lilt and tune; hence all that is
strong in the speech wielded by priest, physician, magician, is allied to the forms of poetry.
[Jacob Grimm, Teutonic Mythology (transl. Stallybrass), 1883]    Sense of pleasing quality evolved
17c. Meaning small trinket fastened to a watch-chain, etc. first recorded 1865. Quantum physics
sense is from 1964. To work like a charm (figuratively) is recorded by 1824.


charm (v.)

c.1300, to recite or cast a magic spell, from Old French charmer (13c.) to enchant, to fill
(someone) with desire (for something); to protect, cure, treat; to maltreat, harm, from Late Latin
carminare, from Latin carmen (see charm (n.)). In Old French used alike of magical and non-magical
activity. In English, to win over by treating pleasingly, delight from mid-15c. Related: Charmed;
charming. Charmed (short for I am charmed) as a conventional reply to a greeting or meeting is
attested by 1825.


delight (n.)

c.1200, delit, from Old French delit pleasure, delight, sexual desire, from delitier please greatly,
charm, from Latin delectare to allure, delight, charm, please, frequentative of delicere entice (see
delicious). Spelled delite until 16c. when it changed under influence of light, flight, etc.


terato-

before vowels terat-, word-forming element meaning marvel, monster, from comb. form of Greek teras
(genitive teratos) marvel, sign, wonder, monster, from PIE *kewr-es-, from root *kwer- to make, form
(cognates: Sanskrit krta- make, do, perform, Lithuanian keras charm, Old Church Slavonic &#269;aru
charm).


mascot (n.)

talisman, charm, 1881, from provincial French mascotte sorcerer's charm, 'faerie friend,' good luck
piece (19c.), of uncertain origin, perhaps from or related to Proven&ccedil;al mascoto sorcery,
fetish (a Narbonnese manuscript of 1233 has mascotto procuress, enchantment, bewitchment in
gambling), from masco witch, from Old Proven&ccedil;al masca, itself of unknown origin, perhaps from
Medieval Latin masca mask, specter, nightmare (see mask (n.)). Popularized by French composer Edmond
Audran's 1880 comic operetta La Mascotte, about a household fairy who gives luck to an Italian
peasant, performed in a toned-down translation in England from fall 1881.


philtrum (n.)

dimple in the middle of the upper lip, 1703, medical Latin, from Greek philtron, literally love
charm (see philtre).


obeah (n.)

sorcery, witchcraft among blacks in Africa and the W.Indies, 1760, from a West African word, such as
Efik (southern Nigeria) ubio a thing or mixture left as a charm to cause sickness or death, Twi
ebayifo witch, wizard, sorcerer.


idyllic (adj.)

full of natural, simple charm, 1831, literally suitable for an idyll (late 18c. in sense pertaining
to an idyll); from idyll + -ic.


amulet (n.)

mid-15c., amalettys, from Latin amuletum (Pliny) thing worn as a charm against spells, disease,
etc., of uncertain origin, perhaps related to amoliri to avert, to carry away, remove. Not recorded
again in English until c.1600; the 15c. use may be via French.


fascinous (adj.)

1660s, caused by witchcraft, from Latin fascinum charm, enchantment, witchcraft (see fascinate) +
-ous.


magnetism (n.)

1610s, from Modern Latin magnetismus (see magnet + -ism). Figurative sense of personal charm is from
1650s; in the hypnotic sense it is from Mesmer (see mesmerize). Meaning science of magnetics is
recorded from early 19c.


hand of glory (n.)

1707, originally a piece of mandrake root, translation of French maindeglorie, from a corruption of
Latin mandragora mandrake (see mandrake). The dead man's hand charm is described from mid-15c., but
not by this name.


incantation (n.)

late 14c., from Old French incantacion spell, exorcism (13c.), from Latin incantationem (nominative
incantatio) art of enchanting, noun of action from past participle stem of incantare bewitch, charm,
literally sing spells (see enchantment).


mantra (n.)

1808, that part of the Vedas which contains hymns, from Sanskrit mantra-s sacred message or text,
charm, spell, counsel, literally instrument of thought, related to manyate thinks, from PIE root
*men- to think (see mind (n.)). Sense of special word used for meditation is first recorded in
English 1956.


graceless (adj.)

late 14c., not in a state of grace, from grace (n.) + -less. Meaning wanting charm or elegance is
from 1630s. Related: Gracelessly; gracelessness.


Carmen (n.)

French opera by Georges Bizet (1838-1875), premiered in Paris March 3, 1875. As a proper name, it
can represent (especially in Italian and Spanish) a diminutive of Carmel/Carmelo or Latin carmen
song, poem, incantation, oracle (see charm (n.)).


yours (pron.)

absolutive form of your, c.1300, on model of his, ours, etc. Yours truly myself is from 1833, from
the common subscription of letters.    It is difficult to say what will succeed, and still more to
pronounce what will not. I am at this moment in that uncertainty (on our own score,) and it is no
small proof of the author's powers to be able to charm and fix a mind's attention on similar
subjects and climates in such a predicament. That he may have the same effect upon all his readers
is very sincerely the wish, and hardly the doubt, of yours truly,  B.  [Lord Byron to John Murray,
Dec. 4, 1813]


enchant (v.)

late 14c., literal and figurative, from Old French enchanter bewitch, charm, cast a spell (12c.),
from Latin incantare (see enchantment). Or perhaps a back-formation from enchantment. Related:
Enchanting; enchantingly. Enchanted in weakened sense of delighted is from 1590s.


decor (n.)

1897, from French d&eacute;cor (18c.), back-formation from d&eacute;corer to decorate (14c.), from
Latin decorare (see decorate). It thus duplicates Latin decor beauty, elegance, charm, grace,
ornament. Originally a theater term in English; general use is since 1926.


oscillation (n.)

1650s, from French oscillation, from Latin oscillationem (nominative oscillatio), noun of action
from past participle stem of oscillare to swing, supposed to be from oscillum little face, literally
little mouth, a mask of open-mouthed Bacchus hung up in vineyards as a charm (the sense evolution
would be via the notion of swing in the breeze); from PIE *os- mouth (see oral).


captivate (v.)

1520s, to enthrall with charm, from Late Latin captivatus, past participle of captivare to take,
capture, from captivus (see captive). Literal sense (1550s) is rare or obsolete in English, which
uses capture (q.v.). Latin captare to take, hold also had a transferred sense of to entice, entrap,
allure. Related: Captivated; captivating; captivatingly.


philtre (n.)

also philter, love potion, 1580s, from Middle French philtre (1560s), from Latin philtrum (plural
philtra) love potion, from Greek philtron a love-charm, literally to make oneself beloved, from
philein to love (from philos loving; see philo-) + instrumental suffix -tron.


enchantment (n.)

late 13c., from Old French encantement, from enchanter bewitch, charm, from Latin incantare,
literally enchant, cast a (magic) spell upon, from in- upon, into (see in- (2)) + cantare to sing
(see chant (v.)). Figurative sense of alluring is from 1670s. Compare Old English galdor song, also
spell, enchantment, from galan to sing, source of the second element in nightingale.


pharmacy (n.)

late 14c., a medicine, from Old French farmacie a purgative (13c.), from Medieval Latin pharmacia,
from Greek pharmakeia use of drugs, medicines, potions, or spells; poisoning, witchcraft; remedy,
cure, from pharmakeus (fem. pharmakis) preparer of drugs, poisoner, sorcorer from pharmakon drug,
poison, philter, charm, spell, enchantment. Meaning use or administration of drugs is attested from
c.1400; that of place where drugs are prepared and dispensed is first recorded 1833. The ph- was
restored 16c. in French, 17c. in English (see ph).


favor (n.)

c.1300, attractiveness, charm, from Old French favor (13c., Modern French faveur) favor, approval,
partiality, from Latin favorem (nominative favor) good will, inclination, partiality, support,
coined by Cicero from stem of favere to show kindness to, from PIE *ghow-e- to honor, revere,
worship. Meaning act of kindness is from late 14c. Meaning thing given as a mark of favor is from
1580s. Phrase in favor of recorded from 1560s.


delicious (adj.)

c.1300 (implied in deliciously), from Old French delicios (Modern French d&eacute;licieux), from
Late Latin deliciosus delicious, delicate, from Latin delicia (plural deliciae) a delight,
allurement, charm, from delicere to allure, entice, from de- away (see de-) + lacere lure, deceive
(related to laqueus noose, snare; see lace). As a name of a type of apple, attested from 1903, first
grown by Jesse Hiatt of Iowa, U.S.A. Colloquial shortening delish is attested from 1920.


jinx (n.)

1911, American English, originally baseball slang; perhaps ultimately from jyng a charm, a spell
(17c.), originally wryneck, a bird used in witchcraft and divination, from Latin iynx wryneck, from
Greek iynx.    Most mysterious of all in the psychics of baseball is the jinx, that peculiar hoodoo
which affects, at times, a man, at other times a whole team. Let a man begin to think that there is
a jinx about, and he is done for for the time being. [Technical World Magazine, 1911]    The verb is
1912 in American English, from the noun. Related: Jinxed; jinxing.


medal (n.)

1580s, from Middle French m&eacute;daille (15c.), from Italian medaglia a medal, according to OED
from Vulgar Latin *metallea (moneta) metal (coin), from Latin metallum (see metal). The other theory
[Klein, Barnhart, Watkins] is that medaglia originally meant coin worth half a denarius, and is from
Vulgar Latin *medalia, from Late Latin medialia little halves, neuter plural of medialis of the
middle (see medial (adj.)). Originally a trinket or charm; as a reward for merit, proficiency, etc.,
attested from 1751.


venom (n.)

mid-13c., venim, venym, poison secreted by some animals and transferred by biting, from Anglo-French
and Old French venim, venin poison; malice, from Vulgar Latin *venimen (source also of Italian
veleno, Spanish veneno), from Latin venenum poison, earlier (pre-classical) drug, medical potion,
also charm, seduction, probably originally love potion, from PIE *wenes-no-, from root *wen- (1) to
strive after, wish, desire (see Venus). Variously deformed in post-Latin languages, apparently by
dissimilation. Modern spelling in English from late 14c. The meaning bitter, virulent feeling or
language is first recorded c.1300.


rococo (adj.)

1836, old-fashioned, from French rococo (19c.), apparently a humorous alteration of rocaille
shellwork, pebble-work from Middle French roche rock, from Vulgar Latin *rocca stone. Specifically
of furniture or architecture of the time of Louis Quatorze and Louis Quinze, from 1841. If this is
correct, the reference is to the excessive use of shell designs in this lavish style. For
differentiation, see baroque. The general sense of tastelessly florid or ornate is from 1844.
Much of the painting, engraving, porcelain-work, etc., of the time has ... a real decorative charm,
though not of a very high order in art. Hence rococo is used attributively in contempt to note
anything feebly pretentious and tasteless in art or literature. [Century Dictionary, 1902]


hortatory (adj.)

1580s, from Middle French hortatoire and directly from Late Latin hortatorius encouraging, cheering,
from hortatus, past participle of hortari exhort, encourage, urge, incite, instigate, intensive of
horiri urge, incite, encourage, from PIE root *gher- (5) to like, want (cognates: Old English
giernan to strive, desire, yearn; Gothic gairnei desire; Greek khresthai to lack, want; use, make
use of, kharis grace, favor, khairein to rejoice, delight in; Sanskrit haryati finds pleasure,
likes, harsate is aroused; Avestan zara effort, aim; Russian zhariti awake desire, charm).


fascinate (v.)

1590s, bewitch, enchant, from Middle French fasciner (14c.), from Latin fascinatus, past participle
of fascinare bewitch, enchant, fascinate, from fascinus spell, witchcraft, of uncertain origin.
Possibly from Greek baskanos bewitcher, sorcerer, with form influenced by Latin fari speak (see fame
(n.)).    The Greek word might be from a Thracian equivalent of Greek phaskein to say; compare also
enchant, and German besprechen to charm, from sprechen to speak. Earliest used of witches and of
serpents, who were said to be able to cast a spell by a look that rendered one unable to move or
resist. Sense of delight, attract is first recorded 1815. Related: Fascinated; fascinating.


glamour (n.)

1720, Scottish, magic, enchantment (especially in phrase to cast the glamor), a variant of Scottish
gramarye magic, enchantment, spell, alteration of English grammar (q.v.) with a medieval sense of
any sort of scholarship, especially occult learning, the latter sense attested from c.1500 in
English but said to have been more common in Medieval Latin. Popularized by the writings of Sir
Walter Scott (1771-1832). Sense of magical beauty, alluring charm first recorded 1840. Jamieson's
1825 supplement to his Etymological Dictionary of the Scottish Language has glamour-gift the power
of enchantment; metaph. applied to female fascination. Jamieson's original edition (1808) looks to
Old Norse for the source of the word. Zoega's Old Icelandic dictionary has gl&#225;m-s&#253;ni
illusion.


charisma (n.)

gift of leadership, power of authority, c.1930, from German, used in this sense by Max Weber
(1864-1920) in Wirtschaft u. Gesellschaft (1922), from Greek kharisma favor, divine gift, from
kharizesthai to show favor to, from kharis grace, beauty, kindness (Charis was the name of one of
the three attendants of Aphrodite) related to khairein to rejoice at, from PIE root *gher- (5) to
desire, like (see hortatory). More mundane sense of personal charm recorded by 1959.    Earlier, the
word had been used in English with a sense of grace, talent from God (1875), directly from Latinized
Greek; and in the form charism (plural charismata) it is attested with this sense in English from
1640s. Middle English, meanwhile, had karisme spiritual gift, divine grace (c.1500).


spell (n.1)

Old English spell story, saying, tale, history, narrative, fable; discourse, command, from Proto-
Germanic *spellam (see spell (v.1)). Compare Old Saxon spel, Old Norse spjall, Old High German spel,
Gothic spill report, discourse, tale, fable, myth; German Beispiel example. From c.1200 as an
utterance, something said, a statement, remark; meaning set of words with supposed magical or occult
powers, incantation, charm first recorded 1570s; hence any means or cause of enchantment.    The
term 'spell' is generally used for magical procedures which cause harm, or force people to do
something against their will -- unlike charms for healing, protection, etc. [Oxford Dictionary of
English Folklore]    Also in Old English, doctrine; a sermon; religious instruction or teaching; the
gospel; a book of the Bible; compare gospel.


grace (n.)

late 12c., God's favor or help, from Old French grace pardon, divine grace, mercy; favor, thanks;
elegance, virtue (12c.), from Latin gratia favor, esteem, regard; pleasing quality, good will,
gratitude (source of Italian grazia, Spanish gracia), from gratus pleasing, agreeable, from PIE root
*gwere- (3) to favor (cognates: Sanskrit grnati sings, praises, announces, Lithuanian giriu to
praise, celebrate, Avestan gar- to praise).    Sense of virtue is early 14c., that of beauty of form
or movement, pleasing quality is mid-14c. In classical sense, one of the three sister goddesses
(Latin Grati&aelig;, Greek Kharites), bestowers of beauty and charm, it is first recorded in English
1579 in Spenser. The short prayer that is said before or after a meal (early 13c.; until 16c.
usually graces) has a sense of gratitude.


rune (n.)

Old English run, rune secret, mystery, dark mysterious statement, (secret) council, also a runic
letter (runst&#230;f), from Proto-Germanic *runo (cognates: Old Norse run a secret, magic sign,
runic character, Old High German runa a secret conversation, whisper, Gothic runa), from PIE *ru-
no-, source of technical terms of magic in Germanic and Celtic (cognates: Gaelic run a secret,
mystery, craft, deceit, purpose, intention, desire, Welsh rhin a secret, charm, virtue). Also see
Runnymede.    The word entered Middle English as roun and by normal evolution would have become
Modern English *rown, but it died out mid-15c. when the use of runes did. The modern usage is from
late 17c., from German philologists who had reintroduced the word in their writings from a
Scandinavian source (such as Danish rune, from Old Norse run). The runic alphabet is believed to
have developed by 2c. C.E. from contact with Greek writing, with the letters modified to be more
easily cut into wood or stone.


fetish (n.)

1610s, fatisso, from Portuguese feiti&ccedil;o charm, sorcery, from Latin facticius made by art,
from facere to make (see factitious).    Latin facticius in Spanish has become hechizo magic,
witchcraft, sorcery. Probably introduced by Portuguese sailors and traders as a name for charms and
talismans worshipped by the inhabitants of the Guinea coast of Africa. Popularized in anthropology
by C. de Brosses' Le Culte des Dieux F&eacute;tiches (1760), which influenced the word's spelling in
English (French f&eacute;tiche, also from the Portuguese word). Figurative sense of something
irrationally revered is American English, 1837.    Any material image of a religious idea is an
idol; a material object in which force is supposed to be concentrated is a Fetish; a material
object, or a class of material objects, plants, or animals, which is regarded by man with
superstitious respect, and between whom and man there is supposed to exist an invisible but
effective force, is a Totem. [J. Fitzgerald Lee, The Greater Exodus, London, 1903]    For sexual
sense, see fetishism.


Venus

late Old English, from Latin Venus (plural veneres), in ancient Roman mythology, the goddess of
beauty and love, especially sensual love, from venus love, sexual desire; loveliness, beauty, charm;
a beloved object, from PIE root *wen- (1) to strive after, wish, desire (cognates: Sanskrit veti
follows after, vanas- desire, vanati desires, loves, wins; Avestan vanaiti he wishes, is victorious,
vayeiti hunts; Lithuanian veju to hunt, pursue; Old Church Slavonic voji warrior; Old English
wa&thorn; hunting, wynn joy, wunian to dwell, wenian to accustom, train, wean, wyscan to wish; Old
Norse vei&eth;r chase, hunting, fishing). Applied by the Romans to Greek Aphrodite, Egyptian Hathor,
etc.    Applied in English to any beautiful, attractive woman by 1570s. As the name of the most
brilliant planet from late 13c., from this sense in Latin (Old English called it morgensteorra and
&aelig;fensteorra). The venus fly-trap (Dion&aelig;a muscipula) was discovered 1760 by Gov. Arthur
Dobbs in North Carolina and description sent to Collinson in England. The Central Atlantic Coast
Algonquian name for the plant, /titipiwitshik/, yielded regional American English tippity wichity.


rabbit (n.)

late 14c., young of the coney, from Walloon rob&egrave;te or a similar French dialect word,
diminutive of Flemish or Middle Dutch robbe rabbit, of unknown origin. A Germanic noun with a French
suffix [Liberman]. The adult was a coney (q.v.) until 18c.Zoologically speaking, there are no native
rabbits in the United States; they are all hares. But the early colonists, for some unknown reason,
dropped the word hare out of their vocabulary, and it is rarely heard in American speech to this
day. When it appears it is almost always applied to the so-called Belgian hare, which, curiously
enough, is not a hare at all, but a true rabbit. [Mencken, The American Language]Rabbit punch chop
on the back of the neck so called from resemblance to a gamekeeper's method of dispatching an
injured rabbit. Pulling rabbits from a hat as a conjurer's trick recorded by 1843. Rabbit's foot
good luck charm first attested 1879, in U.S. Southern black culture. Earlier references are to its
use as a tool to apply cosmetic powders.    [N]ear one of them was the dressing-room of the
principal danseuse of the establishment, who was at the time of the rising of the curtain consulting
a mirror in regard to the effect produced by the application of a rouge-laden rabbit's foot to her
cheeks, and whose toilet we must remark, passim, was not entirely completed. [New York Musical
Review and Gazette, Nov. 29, 1856]   Rabbit ears dipole television antenna is from 1950. Grose's
1785 Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue has RABBIT CATCHER. A midwife.


troll (n.1)

supernatural being in Scandinavian mythology and folklore, 1610s (with an isolated use mid-14c.),
from Old Norse troll giant being not of the human race, evil spirit, monster. Some speculate that it
originally meant creature that walks clumsily, and derives from Proto-Germanic *truzlan, from
*truzlanan (see troll (v.)). But it seems to have been a general supernatural word, such as Swedish
trolla to charm, bewitch; Old Norse trolldomr witchcraft.    The old sagas tell of the troll-bull, a
supernatural being in the form of a bull, as well as boar-trolls. There were troll-maidens, troll-
wives, and troll-women; the trollman, a magician or wizard, and the troll-drum, used in Lappish
magic rites. The word was popularized in literary English by 19c. antiquarians, but it has been
current in the Shetlands and Orkneys since Viking times. The first record of the word in modern
English is from a court document from the Shetlands, regarding a certain Catherine, who, among other
things, was accused of airt and pairt of witchcraft and sorcerie, in hanting and seeing the Trollis
ryse out of the kyrk yeard of Hildiswick.    Originally conceived as a race of malevolent giants,
they have suffered the same fate as the Celtic Danann and by 19c. were regarded by peasants in in
Denmark and Sweden as dwarfs and imps supposed to live in caves or under the ground.    They are
obliging and neighbourly; freely lending and borrowing, and elsewise keeping up a friendly
intercourse with mankind. But they have a sad propensity to thieving, not only stealing provisions,
but even women and children. [Thomas Keightley, The Fairy Mythology, London, 1850]


dream (n.)

mid-13c. in the sense sequence of sensations passing through a sleeping person's mind (also as a
verb), probably related to Old Norse draumr, Danish dr&oslash;m, Swedish dr&ouml;m, Old Saxon drom
merriment, noise, Old Frisian dram dream, Dutch droom, Old High German troum, German traum dream,
perhaps from Proto-Germanic *draugmas deception, illusion, phantasm (cognates: Old Saxon bidriogan,
Old High German triogan, German tr&uuml;gen to deceive, delude, Old Norse draugr ghost, apparition).
Possible cognates outside Germanic are Sanskrit druh- seek to harm, injure, Avestan druz- lie,
deceive.    But Old English dream meant only joy, mirth, noisy merriment, also music. And much study
has failed to prove that Old English dream is the root of the modern word for sleeping vision,
despite being identical in spelling. Either the meaning of the word changed dramatically or vision
was an unrecorded secondary Old English meaning of dream, or there are two separate words here. OED
offers this theory: It seems as if the presence of dream 'joy, mirth, music,' had caused dream
'dream' to be avoided, at least in literature, and swefn, lit. 'sleep,' to be substituted ....
Words for sleeping vision in Old English were m&aelig;ting and swefn. Old English swefn originally
meant sleep, as did a great many Indo-European dream nouns, such as Lithuanian sapnas, Old Church
Slavonic sunu, and the Romanic words (French songe, Spanish sue&#241;o, Italian sogno all from Latin
somnium (from PIE *swep-no-; cognate with Greek hypnos; see somnolence; Old English swefn is from
the same root). Dream in the sense of ideal or aspiration is from 1931, from earlier sense of
something of dream-like beauty or charm (1888).


witch (n.)

Old English wicce female magician, sorceress, in later use especially a woman supposed to have
dealings with the devil or evil spirits and to be able by their cooperation to perform supernatural
acts, fem. of Old English wicca sorcerer, wizard, man who practices witchcraft or magic, from verb
wiccian to practice witchcraft (compare Low German wikken, wicken to use witchcraft, wikker, wicker
soothsayer).    OED says of uncertain origin; Liberman says None of the proposed etymologies of
witch is free from phonetic or semantic difficulties. Klein suggests connection with Old English
wigle divination, and wig, wih idol. Watkins says the nouns represent a Proto-Germanic *wikkjaz
necromancer (one who wakes the dead), from PIE *weg-yo-, from *weg- (2) to be strong, be lively (see
wake (v.)).    That wicce once had a more specific sense than the later general one of female
magician, sorceress perhaps is suggested by the presence of other words in Old English describing
more specific kinds of magical craft. In the Laws of &AElig;lfred (c.890), witchcraft was
specifically singled out as a woman's craft, whose practitioners were not to be suffered to live
among the West Saxons:    &ETH;a f&aelig;mnan &thorn;e gewunia&eth; onfon gealdorcr&aelig;ftigan
&amp; scinl&aelig;can &amp; wiccan, ne l&aelig;t &thorn;u &eth;a libban.    The other two words
combined with it here are gealdricge, a woman who practices incantations, and scinl&aelig;ce female
wizard, woman magician, from a root meaning phantom, evil spirit. Another word that appears in the
Anglo-Saxon laws is lybl&aelig;ca wizard, sorcerer, but with suggestions of skill in the use of
drugs, because the root of the word is lybb drug, poison, charm. Lybbestre was a fem. word meaning
sorceress, and lybcorn was the name of a certain medicinal seed (perhaps wild saffron). Weekley
notes possible connection to Gothic weihs holy and German weihan consecrate, and writes, the priests
of a suppressed religion naturally become magicians to its successors or opponents. In Anglo-Saxon
glossaries, wicca renders Latin augur (c.1100), and wicce stands for pythoness, divinatricem. In the
Three Kings of Cologne (c.1400) wicca translates Magi:    &THORN;e paynyms ... cleped &thorn;e iij
kyngis Magos, &thorn;at is to seye wicchis.    The glossary translates Latin necromantia (demonum
invocatio) with galdre, wiccecr&aelig;ft. The Anglo-Saxon poem called Men's Crafts has
wiccr&aelig;ft, which appears to be the same word, and by its context means skill with horses. In a
c.1250 translation of Exodus, witches is used of the Egyptian midwives who save the newborn sons of
the Hebrews: &ETH;e wicches hidden hem for-&eth;an, Biforen pharaun nolden he ben. Witch in
reference to a man survived in dialect into 20c., but the fem. form was so dominant by 1601 that
men-witches or he-witch began to be used. Extended sense of old, ugly, and crabbed or malignant
woman is from early 15c; that of young woman or girl of bewitching aspect or manners is first
recorded 1740. Witch doctor is from 1718; applied to African magicians from 1836.    At this day it
is indifferent to say in the English tongue, 'she is a witch,' or 'she is a wise woman.' [Reginald
Scot, The Discoverie of Witchcraft, 1584]


