chaste (adj.)

c.1200, virtuous, pure from unlawful sexual intercourse (as defined by the Church), from Old French
chaste morally pure (12c.), from Latin castus clean, pure, morally pure (see caste). Transferred
sense of sexually pure is by 15c., perhaps by influence of chastity, though chaste as a noun meaning
virgin person is recorded from early 14c. Related: Chastely.


chasten (v.)

1520s, with -en (1) + the word it replaced, obsolete verb chaste to correct (someone's) behavior
(Middle English chastien, c.1200), from Old French chastiier to punish (see chastise). Related:
Chastened; chastening.


virgin (n.)

c.1200, unmarried or chaste woman noted for religious piety and having a position of reverence in
the Church, from Anglo-French and Old French virgine virgin; Virgin Mary, from Latin virginem
(nominative virgo) maiden, unwedded girl or woman, also an adj., fresh, unused, probably related to
virga young shoot. For sense evolution, compare Greek talis a marriageable girl, cognate with Latin
talea rod, stick, bar.    Meaning young woman in a state of inviolate chastity is recorded from
c.1300. Also applied since early 14c. to a chaste man. Meaning naive or inexperienced person is
attested from 1953. The adjective is recorded from 1550s in the literal sense; figurative sense of
pure, untainted is attested from c.1300. The Virgin Islands were named (in Spanish) by Columbus for
St. Ursula and her 11,000 martyred virgin companions.


vestal (adj.)

chaste, pure, virgin, 1590s, originally (early 15c.) belonging to or dedicated to Vesta, Roman
goddess of hearth and home, from Latin vestalis. The noun is recorded from 1570s, short for Vestal
virgin, one of four (later six) priestesses (Latin virgines Vestales) in charge of the sacred fire
in the temple of Vesta in Rome. From 1580s in reference to any virgin or chaste woman.    They
entered the service of the goddess at from six to ten years of age, their term of service lasting
thirty years. They were then permitted to retire and to marry, but few did so, for, as vestals, they
were treated with great honor, and had important public privileges. Their persons were inviolable,
any offense against them being punished with death, and they were treated in all their relations
with the highest distinction and reverence. A vestal who broke her vow of chastity was immured alive
in an underground vault amid public mourning. There were very few such instances; in one of them,
under Domitian, the chief of the vestals was put to death under a false charge trumped up by the
emperor.


unchaste (adj.)

late 14c., from un- (1) not + chaste.


continent (adj.)

late 14c., self-restraining, from Old French continent and directly from Latin continentem
(nominative continens) holding together, continuous, present participle of continere hold together
(see contain). Meaning moved from exercising self-restraint to chaste 14c., and to bowel and bladder
control 19c.


hagiology (n.)

study of saints' lives, 1807, from Greek hagios holy, devoted to the gods + -ology. First element
perhaps from PIE *yag- to worship, reverence, and cognate with Greek agnos chaste, Sanskrit yajati
reveres (a god) with sacrifices, worships, Old Persian ayadana temple. Related: Hagiologist (1805).


heavenly (adj.)

Old English heofonlic celestial; chaste; see heaven + -ly (1). Meaning beautiful, divinely lovely is
late 14c., often (though not originally) with reference to the celestial music of the spheres;
weakened sense of excellent, enjoyable is first recorded 1874. The heavenly bodies (stars, planets,
etc.) attested from late 14c. Related: Heavenliness.


Sophronia

fem. proper name, from Greek sophronia, from sophron (genitive sophronos) discreet, prudent,
sensible, having control over sensual desires, moderate, chaste, literally of sound mind, from sos
safe, sound, whole + phren midriff, heart, mind (see phreno-).


virginal (adj.)

early 15c., from Old French virginal virginal, pure, chaste, or directly from Latin virginalis of a
maiden, of a virgin, from virgin (see virgin). The keyed musical instrument so called from 1520s
(see virginals).


purity (n.)

c.1200, from Old French purete simple truth, earlier purte (12c., Modern French puret&#233;), from
Late Latin puritatem (nominative puritas) cleanness, pureness, from Latin purus clean, pure,
unmixed; chaste, undefiled (see pure (adj.)).


Agnes

fem. proper name, mid-12c., from Old French Agnes, from Greek Hagne pure, chaste, from fem. of
hagnos holy, from PIE *yag- to worship, reverence (see hagiology). St. Agnes, martyred 303 C.E., is
patron saint of young girls, hence the folk connection of St. Agnes' Eve (Jan. 20-21) with love
divinations. In Middle English, frequently phonetically as Annis, Annys. In U.S., among the top 50
names for girls born between 1887 and 1919.


pure (adj.)

c.1300 (late 12c. as a surname, and Old English had purlamb lamb without a blemish), unmixed, also
absolutely, entirely, from Old French pur pure, simple, absolute, unalloyed, figuratively simple,
sheer, mere (12c.), from Latin purus clean, clear; unmixed; unadorned; chaste, undefiled, from PIE
root *peue- to purify, cleanse (cognates: Latin putus clear, pure; Sanskrit pavate purifies,
cleanses, putah pure; Middle Irish ur fresh, new; Old High German fowen to sift).    Replaced Old
English hlutor. Meaning free from moral corruption is first recorded mid-14c. In reference to
bloodlines, attested from late 15c.


caste (n.)

1550s, a race of men, from Latin castus chaste, from castus cut off, separated; pure (via notion of
cut off from faults), past participle of carere to be cut off from (and related to castration), from
PIE *kas-to-, from root *kes- to cut (cognates: Latin cassus empty, void). Originally spelled cast
in English and later often merged with cast (n.) in its secondary sense sort, kind, style.
Application to Hindu social groups was picked up by English in India 1610s from Portuguese casta
breed, race, caste, earlier casta ra&ccedil;a, unmixed race, from the same Latin word. The current
spelling of of the English word is from this reborrowing. Caste system is first recorded 1840.


clean (adj.)

Old English cl&aelig;ne free from dirt or filth; pure, chaste, innocent; open, in the open, of
beasts, ritually safe to eat, from West Germanic *klainoz clear, pure (cognates: Old Saxon kleni
dainty, delicate, Old Frisian klene small, Old High German kleini delicate, fine, small, German
klein small; English preserves the original Germanic sense), from PIE root *gel- bright, gleaming
(cognates: Greek glene eyeball, Old Irish gel bright).    Largely replaced by clear, pure in the
higher senses [Weekley], but as a verb (mid-15c.) it has largely usurped what once belonged to
cleanse. Meaning whole, entire is from c.1300 (clean sweep in the figurative sense is from 1821).
Sense of innocent is from c.1300; that of not lewd is from 1867; that of not carrying anything
forbidden is from 1938; that of free of drug addiction is from 1950s. To come clean confess is from
1919, American English.


ch

digraph used in Old French for the tsh sound. In some French dialects, including that of Paris (but
not that of Picardy), Latin ca- became French tsha. This was introduced to English after the Norman
Conquest, in words borrowed from Old French such as chaste, charity, chief (adj.). Under French
influence, -ch- also was inserted into Anglo-Saxon words that had the same sound (such as bleach,
chest, church) which in Old English still was written with a simple -c-, and into those that had
formerly been spelled with a -c- and pronounced k such as chin and much.    As French evolved, the t
sound dropped out of it, so in later loan-words from France ch- has only the sound sh- (chauffeur,
machine (n.), chivalry, etc.).    It turns up as well in words from classical languages (chaos,
echo, etc.). Most uses of -ch- in Roman Latin were in words from Greek, which would be pronounced
correctly as k + h, as in blockhead, but most Romans would have said merely k. Sometimes ch- is
written to keep -c- hard before a front vowel, as still in modern Italian.    In some languages
(Welsh, Spanish, Czech) ch- can be treated as a separate letter and words in it are alphabetized
after -c- (or, in Czech and Slovak, after -h-). The sound also is heard in more distant languages
(as in cheetah, chintz), and the digraph also is used to represent the sound in Scottish loch.


swan (n.)

Old English swan swan, from Proto-Germanic *swanaz singer (cognates: Old Saxon swan, Old Norse
svanr, Danish svane, Swedish svan, Middle Dutch swane, Dutch zwaan, Old High German swan, German
Schwan), probably literally the singing bird, from PIE root *swen- to sing, make sound (see sound
(n.1)); thus related to Old English geswin melody, song and swinsian to make melody.    In classical
mythology, sacred to Apollo and to Venus. The singing of swans before death was alluded to by
Chaucer (late 14c.), but swan-song (1831) is a translation of German Schwanengesang. The ancient
Indo-European mythical swan-maiden so called by mythographers from 1829. Swan dive is recorded from
1898. A black swan was proverbial for something extremely rare or non-existent (late 14c.), after
Juvenal [Sat. vi. 164], but later they turned up in Australia (Chenopsis atratus).    Do you say no
worthy wife is to be found among all these crowds? Well, let her be handsome, charming, rich and
fertile; let her have ancient ancestors ranged about her halls; let her be more chaste than all the
dishevelled Sabine maidens who stopped the war--a prodigy as rare upon the earth as a black swan!
yet who could endure a wife that possessed all perfections?  I would rather have a Venusian wench
for my wife than you, O Cornelia, mother of the Gracchi, if, with all your virtues, you bring me a
haughty brow, and reckon up Triumphs as part of your marriage portion. [Juvenal]


