chase (n.1)

mid-13c., chace, a hunt, from Old French chace a hunt, a chase; hunting ground (12c.), from chacier
(see chase (v.)). Meaning a pursuit (of an enemy, etc.) is early 14c.


chaser (n.)

c.1300, horse trained for chasing, agent noun from chase (v.), probably in some cases from Old
French chaceor huntsman, hunter. Meaning water or mild beverage taken after a strong drink is 1897,
U.S. colloquial. French had chasse (from chasser to chase) a drink of liquor taken (or said to be
taken) to kill the aftertaste of coffee or tobacco, used in English from c.1800.


chase (v.)

c.1300, chacen to hunt; to cause to go away; put to flight, from Old French chacier to hunt, ride
swiftly, strive for (12c., Modern French chasser), from Vulgar Latin *captiare (source of Italian
cacciare, Catalan casar, Spanish cazar, Portuguese ca&ccedil;ar to chase, hunt; see catch (v.)).
Meaning run after developed mid-14c. Related: Chased; chasing. Older European words for pursue often
also cover persecute (Greek dioko, Old English ehtan); modern ones often derive from words used
primarily for the hunting of animals.


chase (n.2)

bore of a gun barrel, 1640s, from French chas eye of a needle; enclosure, from Vulgar Latin *capsum,
variant of Latin capsa box (see case (n.2)).


chivvy (v.)

harass, 1918, from alternative form of chevy (1830) to chase, from a noun chevy (1824, also used as
a hunting cry, c.1785), from chevy chase a running pursuit, probably from the Ballad of Chevy Chase,
popular song from 15c. describing a hunting party on the borderland that turned into a battle
between the English and the Scots (the incident probably late 14c.). The place is probably
originally Cheviot Chase.    The old song of Chevy-Chase is the favourite ballad of the common
people of England, and Ben Jonson used to say, he had rather have been the author of it than of all
his works. [Addison, spectator No. 70, May 21, 1711]


chasse (n.)

from French chass&eacute; chase, chasing, past participle of chasser to chase, hunt (see chase
(v.)); borrowed 19c. in a variety of senses and expressions, such as chaser (in the drinking sense),
short for chasse-caf&eacute;, literally coffee-chaser. Also as a dance step (1867).


cacciatore (adj.)

by 1973, from Italian, literally hunter, from past participle of cacciare to hunt, chase (see chase
(v.)).


venery (n.2)

hunting, the sports of the chase, early 14c., from Old French venerie, from Medieval Latin venaria
beasts of the chase, game, from Latin venari to hunt, pursue (see venison).


chasseur (n.)

mobile foot-soldier, 1796, French, literally huntsman, from Old French chaceor huntsman, hunter,
from chacier to chase (see chase (v.)).


catch (v.)

c.1200, to take, capture, from Anglo-French or Old North French cachier catch, capture (animals)
(Old French chacier hunt, pursue, drive (animals), Modern French chasser to hunt; making it a
doublet of chase (v.)), from Vulgar Latin *captiare try to seize, chase (also source of Spanish
cazar, Italian cacciare), from Latin captare to take, hold, frequentative of Latin capere to take,
hold (see capable).    Senses in early Middle English also included chase, hunt, which later went
with chase (v.). Of infections from 1540s; of fire from 1734; of sleep, etc., from early 14c.
Related: Catched (obsolete); catching; caught.    Meaning act as a catcher in baseball recorded from
1865. To catch on apprehend is 1884, American English colloquial. To catch (someone's) eye is first
attested 1813, in Jane Austen. Catch as catch can first attested late 14c.


sashay (v.)

1836, mangled Englishing of French chass&eacute; gliding step (in square dancing), literally chased,
past participle of chasser to chase, from Old French chacier to hunt, from Vulgar Latin *captiare
(see capable, and compare chase, catch). Related: Sashayed; sashaying. The noun is attested from
1900.


catchpoll (n.)

Old English *k&aelig;cepol tax-gatherer, from Old North French cachepol (Old French chacepol), from
Medieval Latin cacepollus a tax gatherer, literally chase-chicken. For first element see chase (v.),
for second see pullet. In lieu of taxes they would confiscate poultry. Later in English more
specifically as a sheriff's officer whose duty was to make arrests for debt. Compare Old French
chacipolerie tax paid to a nobleman by his subjects allowing them and their families to shelter in
his castle in wartime.


yacht (n.)

1550s, yeaghe a light, fast-sailing ship, from Norwegian jaght or early Dutch jaght, both from
Middle Low German jacht, shortened form of jachtschip fast pirate ship, literally ship for chasing,
from jacht chase, from jagen to chase, hunt, from Old High German jagon, from Proto-Germanic *yago-,
from PIE root *yek- (2) to hunt (cognates: Hittite ekt- hunting net). Related: Yachting; yachtsman.


purchase (v.)

c.1300, acquire, obtain; get, receive; procure, provide, also accomplish or bring about; instigate;
cause, contrive, plot; recruit, hire, from Anglo-French purchaser go after, Old French porchacier
search for, procure; purchase; aim at, strive for, pursue eagerly (11c., Modern French pourchasser),
from pur- forth (possibly used here as an intensive prefix; see pur-) + Old French chacier run
after, to hunt, chase (see chase (v.)).    Originally to obtain or receive as due in any way,
including through merit or suffering; specific sense of acquire for money, pay money for, buy is
from mid-14c., though the word continued to be used for to get by conquest in war, obtain as booty
up to 17c. Related: Purchased; purchasing.


steeplechase (n.)

1793 (earlier steeplehunt, 1772), from steeple + chase (n.). Originally an open-country horse race
with a visible church steeple as a goal.


yaw (v.)

to fall away from the line of a course, 1580s (as a noun 1540s), perhaps ultimately from Old Norse
jaga, Old Danish j&aelig;ge to drive, chase, from Middle Low German jagen (see yacht).


wild goose chase (n.)

1592, first attested in Romeo and Juliet, where it evidently is a figurative use of an earlier (but
unrecorded) literal sense in reference to a kind of follow-the-leader steeplechase. Wild goose (as
opposed to a domesticated one) is attested in late Old English (wilde gos).


sick (v.)

to chase, set upon (as in command sick him!), 1845, dialectal variant of seek. Used as an imperative
to incite a dog to attack a person or animal; hence cause to pursue. Related: Sicked; sicking.


womanize (v.)

1590s, to make effeminate, from woman + -ize. Sense of to chase women, to go wenching is attested
from 1893. Related: Womanized; womanizer; womanizing.


tree (v.)

to chase up a tree, 1700, from tree (n.). Meaning take a tree-like form is from 1884. Related:
Treed; treeing.


prosecute (v.)

early 15c., follow up, pursue (some course or action), from Latin prosecutus, past participle of
prosequi follow after, accompany; chase, pursue; attack, assail, abuse (see pursue). Meaning bring
to a court of law is first recorded 1570s. Meaning go into detail is from 1530s.


pursuant (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French poursuiant, porsivant, present participle of porsuir, porsivre chase,
pursue (see pursue). Meaning carrying out; following, according is from 1690s.


ketch (n.)

kind of small sailing vessel, 1650s, earlier catch (mid-15c.), cache (late 14c.), probably from
Middle English cacchen to capture, ensnare, chase (see catch (v.)). Compare the sense development in
yacht.


overtake (v.)

to come up to, to catch in pursuit, early 13c., from over- + take (v.). According to OED, originally
the running down and catching of a fugitive or beast of chase; it finds the sense of over- in this
word not so clear. Related: Overtaken; overtaking. Old English had oferniman to take away, carry
off, seize, ravish.


cruiser (n.)

1670s, agent noun from cruise (v.), or, probably, borrowed from similar words in neighboring
languages (such as Dutch kruiser, French croiseur), originally a warship built to cruise and protect
commerce or chase hostile ships (but in 18c. often applied to privateers); meaning one who cruises
for sex partners is from 1903, in later use mostly of homosexuals; as a boxing weight class, from
1920; meaning police patrol car is 1929, American English.


skittish (adj.)

early 15c., very lively, frivolous, perhaps from Scandinavian base *skyt- (stem of Old Norse skjota
to shoot, launch, move quickly), from PIE root *skeud- to shoot, to chase, to throw, to project (see
shoot (v.)). Sense of shy, nervous, apt to run first recorded c.1500, of horses. Related:
Skittishly; skittishness.


hallo

shout to call attention, 1781, earlier hollo, holla (see hello). Halow as a shipman's cry to incite
effort is from mid-15c.; Halloo as a verb, to pursue with shouts, to shout in the chase, from late
14c. Compare also harou, cry of distress, late 13c., from French.


scut (n.1)

short, erect tail (of a rabbit, hare, deer, etc.), 1520s; earlier a hare (mid-15c.), perhaps from
Old Norse skjota to shoot (with a weapon), launch, push, shove quickly (compare Norwegian skudda to
shove, push), from PIE *skeud- to shoot, chase, throw (see shoot (v.)).


venison (n.)

c.1300, from Old French venesoun meat of large game, especially deer or boar, also a hunt, from
Latin venationem (nominative venatio) a hunt, hunting, the chase, also game as the product of the
hunt, from venatus, past participle of venari to hunt, pursue, probably from PIE *wen-a-, from root
*wen- (1) to strive for, desire (see Venus).


Octavian

masc. proper name, from Latin, from Octavius, from octavus eighth, from octo (see eight).    But
although we find so marked differences in the use of the numerals as names, it is impossible to
believe that this use did not arise in the same way for all; that is, that they were at first used
to distinguish children by the order of birth. But when we find them as praenomina in historical
times it is evident that they no longer referred to order of birth. [George Davis Chase, The Origin
of Roman Praenomina, Harvard Studies in Classical Philology, 1897]


venery (n.1)

pursuit of sexual pleasure, mid-15c., from Medieval Latin veneria sexual intercourse, from Latin
venus (genitive veneris) sexual love, sexual desire (see Venus). In earlier use it may have been
felt as a play on now obsolete homonym venery (n.2) practice or sport of hunting, the chase.
Related: Venereous.


hunt (v.)

Old English huntian chase game, related to hentan to seize, from Proto-Germanic *huntojan (cognates:
Gothic hin&thorn;an to seize, capture, Old High German hunda booty), from PIE *kend-.    General
sense of search diligently (for anything) is first recorded c.1200. Related: Hunted; hunting. Happy
hunting-grounds Native American afterlife paradise is from Last of the Mohicans (1826).


paper (n.)

mid-14c., from Anglo-French paper, Old French papier paper, document, from Latin papyrus paper,
paper made of papyrus stalks (see papyrus).    Meaning paper money attested from 1722. As shortened
form of newspaper, first attested 1640s. In plural, collection of papers to establish one's
identity, credentials, etc., it is attested from 1680s. Paper chase is British slang from 1932.


prey (n.)

mid-13c., animal hunted for food, also that which is taken in war, from Old French preie booty,
animal taken in the chase (mid-12c., Modern French proie), from Latin praeda booty, plunder, game
hunted, earlier praeheda, literally something seized before, from PIE *prai-heda-; for first element
see prae-; second element related to the second element in prehendere to grasp, seize (see
prehensile).


relay (n.)

late 14c., hounds placed along a line of chase, from Middle French relai reserve pack of hounds or
other animals (13c.), from Old French relaier to exchange tired animals for fresh, literally leave
behind, from re- back (see re-) + laier to leave (see delay (v.)). The etymological sense is to
leave (dogs) behind (in order to take fresh ones). Of horses, 1650s. Electromagnetic sense first
recorded 1860. As a type of foot-race, it is attested from 1898.


cede (v.)

1630s, from French c&#233;der or directly from Latin cedere to yield, give place; to give up some
right or property, originally to go from, proceed, leave, from Proto-Italic *kesd-o- to go away,
avoid, from PIE root *sed- (2) to go, yield (cognates: Sanskrit sedhati to drive; chase away;
Avestan apa-had- turn aside, step aside; Greek hodos way, hodites wanderer, wayfarer; Old Church
Slavonic chodu a walking, going, choditi to go). Related: Ceded; ceding. The sense evolution in
Latin is via the notion of to go away, withdraw, give ground.


shut (v.)

Old English scyttan to put (a bolt) in place so as to fasten a door or gate, bolt, shut to;
discharge, pay off, from West Germanic *skutjan (cognates: Old Frisian schetta, Middle Dutch
schutten to shut, shut up, obstruct), from PIE *skeud- to shoot, chase, throw (see shoot (v.)).
Related: Shutting.    Meaning to close by folding or bringing together is from mid-14c. Meaning
prevent ingress and egress is from mid-14c. Sense of to set (someone) free (from) (c.1500) is
obsolete except in dialectal phrases such as to get shut of. To shut (one's) mouth desist from
speaking is recorded from mid-14c.


shuttle (n.)

Old English scytel a dart, arrow, from Proto-Germanic *skutilaz (cognates: Old Norse skutill
harpoon), from PIE *skeud- to shoot, to chase, to throw, to project (see shoot (v.)). The original
sense in English is obsolete; the weaving instrument so called (mid-14c.) from being shot across the
threads. Sense of train that runs back and forth is first recorded 1895, from image of the weaver's
instrument's back-and-forth movement over the warp; extended to aircraft 1942, to spacecraft 1969.
In some other languages, the weaving instrument takes its name from its resemblance to a boat (Latin
navicula, French navette, German weberschiff).


quarry (n.1)

what is hunted, early 14c., quirre entrails of deer placed on the hide and given to dogs of the
chase as a reward, from Anglo-French quirreie, Old French cuiriee the spoil, quarry (Modern French
cur&#233;e), altered (by influence of Old French cuir skin, from Latin corium hide), from Old French
cor&eacute;e viscera, entrails, from Vulgar Latin *corata entrails, from Latin cor heart (see
heart). Sense of anything chased in hunt is first recorded 1610s; earlier bird targeted by a hawk or
other raptor (late 15c.).


quest (n.)

c.1300, an inquest; early 14c., a search for something (especially of judicial inquiries or hounds
seeking game), from Old French queste search, quest, chase, hunt, pursuit; inquest, inquiry (12c.,
Modern French qu&ecirc;te), properly the act of seeking, and directly from Medieval Latin questa
search, inquiry, alteration of Latin quaesitus (fem. quaesita) sought-out, select, past participle
of quaerere seek, gain, ask (see query (n.)). Romance sense of adventure undertaken by a knight
(especially the search for the Grail) is attested from late 14c. Johnson's dictionary has
questmonger Starter of lawsuits or prosecutions.


scot-free (adj.)

Old English scotfreo exempt from royal tax, from scot royal tax, from Old Norse skot contribution,
literally a shooting, shot; thing shot, missile, from PIE *skeud- to shoot, chase, throw (see shoot
(v.); the Old Norse verb form, skjota, has a secondary sense of transfer to another; pay) + freo
(see free (adj.)). First element related to Old English sceotan to pay, contribute, Dutch schot,
German Scho&szlig; tax, contribution. French &eacute;cot share (Old French escot) is from Germanic.


tremble (v.)

c.1300, shake from fear, cold, etc., from Old French trembler tremble, fear (11c.), from Vulgar
Latin *tremulare (source also of Italian tremolare, Spanish temblar), from Latin tremulus trembling,
shaking, quaking, from tremere to tremble, shiver, quake, from PIE *trem- to tremble (cognates:
Greek tremein to shiver, tremble, to quake, to fear, Lithuanian trimu to chase away, Old Church
Slavonic treso to shake, Gothic &thorn;ramstei grasshopper). A native word for this was Old English
bifian. Related: Trembled; trembling. The noun is recorded from c.1600.


pursue (v.)

late 13c., to follow with hostile intent, from Anglo-French pursuer and directly from Old French
poursuir (Modern  French poursuivre), variant of porsivre to chase, pursue, follow; continue, carry
on, from Vulgar Latin *prosequare, from Latin prosequi follow, accompany, attend; follow after,
escort; follow up, pursue, from pro- forward (see pro-) + sequi follow (see sequel). Meaning to
proceed, to follow (a path, etc.), usually figurative (a course of action, etc.), is from late 14c.
This sense also was in Latin. Related: Pursued; pursuing. For sense, compare prosecute.


sheet (n.1)

Old English sciete (West Saxon), scete (Mercian) cloth, covering, towel, shroud, from Proto-Germanic
*skautjon-, from *skauta- project (cognates: Old Norse skaut, Gothic skauts seam, hem of a garment;
Dutch schoot; German Scho&szlig; bosom, lap), from PIE root *skeud- to shoot, chase, throw (see
shoot (v.)).    Sense of piece of paper first recorded c.1500; that of any broad, flat surface (of
metal, open water, etc.) is from 1590s. Of falling rain from 1690s. Meaning a newspaper is first
recorded 1749. Sheet lightning is attested from 1794; sheet music is from 1857. Between the sheets
in bed (usually with sexual overtones) is attested from 1590s; to be white as a sheet is from 1751.
The first element in sheet-anchor (late 15c.) appears to be a different word, of unknown origin.


swim (v.)

Old English swimman to move in or on the water, float (class III strong verb; past tense swamm, past
participle swummen), from Proto-Germanic *swimjan (cognates: Old Saxon and Old High German swimman,
Old Norse svimma, Dutch zwemmen, German schwimmen), from PIE root *swem- to be in motion.    The
root is sometimes said to be restricted to Germanic, but according to OED possible cognates are
Welsh chwyf motion, Old Irish do-sennaim I hunt, Lithuanian sundyti to chase. For the usual Indo-
European word, see natatorium. Transitive sense of cross by swimming is from 1590s. Sense of reel or
move unsteadily first recorded 1670s; of the head or brain, from 1702. Figurative phrase sink or
swim is attested from mid-15c., in early use often with reference to ordeals of suspected witches.


deer (n.)

Old English deor animal, beast, from Proto-Germanic *deuzam, the general Germanic word for animal
(as opposed to man), but often restricted to wild animal (cognates: Old Frisian diar, Dutch dier,
Old Norse dyr, Old High German tior, German Tier animal, Gothic dius wild animal, also see
reindeer), from PIE *dheusom creature that breathes, from root *dheu- (1) cloud, breath (cognates:
Lithuanian dusti gasp, dvesti gasp, perish; Old Church Slavonic dychati breathe).    For prehistoric
sense development, compare Latin animal from anima breath). Sense specialization to a specific
animal began in Old English (usual Old English for what we now call a deer was heorot; see hart),
common by 15c., now complete. Probably via hunting, deer being the favorite animal of the chase
(compare Sanskrit mrga- wild animal, used especially for deer). Deer-lick is first attested 1778, in
an American context.


act (n.)

late 14c., a thing done, from Old French acte (official) document, and directly from Latin actus a
doing, a driving, impulse; a part in a play, act, and actum a thing done, originally a legal term,
both from agere to do, set in motion, drive, urge, chase, stir up, from PIE root *ag- to drive, draw
out or forth, move (cognates: Greek agein to lead, guide, drive, carry off, agon assembly, contest
in the games, agogos leader; Sanskrit ajati drives, ajirah moving, active; Old Norse aka to drive;
Middle Irish ag battle).    Theatrical (part of a play, 1510s) and legislative (early 15c.) senses
of the word also were in Latin. Meaning display of exaggerated behavior is from 1928. In the act in
the process is from 1590s, perhaps originally from the 16c. sense of the act as sexual intercourse.
Act of God uncontrollable natural force recorded by 1726.    An act of God is an accident which
arises from a cause which operates without interference or aid from man (1 Pars. on Cont. 635); the
loss arising wherefrom cannot be guarded against by the ordinary exertions of human skill and
prudence so as to prevent its effect. [William Wait, General Principles of the Law, Albany, 1879]


Venus

late Old English, from Latin Venus (plural veneres), in ancient Roman mythology, the goddess of
beauty and love, especially sensual love, from venus love, sexual desire; loveliness, beauty, charm;
a beloved object, from PIE root *wen- (1) to strive after, wish, desire (cognates: Sanskrit veti
follows after, vanas- desire, vanati desires, loves, wins; Avestan vanaiti he wishes, is victorious,
vayeiti hunts; Lithuanian veju to hunt, pursue; Old Church Slavonic voji warrior; Old English
wa&thorn; hunting, wynn joy, wunian to dwell, wenian to accustom, train, wean, wyscan to wish; Old
Norse vei&eth;r chase, hunting, fishing). Applied by the Romans to Greek Aphrodite, Egyptian Hathor,
etc.    Applied in English to any beautiful, attractive woman by 1570s. As the name of the most
brilliant planet from late 13c., from this sense in Latin (Old English called it morgensteorra and
&aelig;fensteorra). The venus fly-trap (Dion&aelig;a muscipula) was discovered 1760 by Gov. Arthur
Dobbs in North Carolina and description sent to Collinson in England. The Central Atlantic Coast
Algonquian name for the plant, /titipiwitshik/, yielded regional American English tippity wichity.


suit (n.)

c.1300, sute, also suete, suite, seute, a band of followers; a retinue, company; also set of
matching garments worn by such persons, matching livery or uniform; hence  kind, sort; the same
kind, a match; also pursuit, chase, and in law, obligation (of a tenant) to attend court; attendance
at court, from Anglo-French suit, siwete, from Old French suite, sieute pursuit, act of following,
hunt; retinue; assembly (12c., Modern French suite), from Vulgar Latin *sequita, fem. of *sequitus,
from Latin secutus, past participle of sequi to attend, follow (see sequel).    Legal sense of
lawsuit; legal action is from mid-14c. Meaning the wooing of a woman is from late 15c. Meaning set
of clothes to be worn together is attested from late 14c., also matching material or fabric, from
notion of the livery or uniform of court attendants. As a derisive term for businessman, it dates
from 1979. Meaning matched set of objects, number of objects of the same kind or pattern used
together is from late 14c., as is that of row, series, sequence. Meaning set of playing cards
bearing the same symbol is first attested 1520s, also ultimately from the notion of livery. To
follow suit (1670s) is from card-playing.


park (n.)

mid-13c., enclosed preserve for beasts of the chase, from Old French parc enclosed wood or heath
land used as a game preserve (12c.), probably ultimately from West Germanic *parruk enclosed tract
of land (cognates: Old English pearruc, root of paddock (n.2), Old High German pfarrih fencing
about, enclosure, German pferch fold for sheep, Dutch park).    Internal evidence suggests the West
Germanic word is pre-4c. and originally meant the fencing, not the place enclosed. Found also in
Medieval Latin as parricus enclosure, park (8c.), which likely is the direct source of the Old
French word, as well as Italian parco, Spanish parque, etc. Some claim the Medieval Latin word as
the source of the West Germanic, but the reverse seems more likely. Some later senses in English
represent later borrowings from French. OED discounts notion of a Celtic origin. Welsh parc, Gaelic
pairc are from English.    Meaning enclosed lot in or near a town, for public recreation is first
attested 1660s, originally in reference to London; the sense evolution is via royal parks in the
original, hunting sense being overrun by the growth of London and being opened to the public.
Applied to sporting fields in American English from 1867.    New York's Park Avenue as an adjective
meaning luxurious and fashionable (1956) was preceded in the same sense by London's Park Lane
(1880). As a surname, Parker keeper of a park is attested in English from mid-12c. As a vehicle
transmission gear, park (n.) is attested from 1949.


