chastise (v.)

c.1300, chastisen, from Old French chastiier to warn, advise, instruct; chastise, admonish; punish;
dominate, tame (12c., Modern French ch&acirc;tier), from Latin castigare to set or keep right, to
reprove, chasten, to punish, literally to make pure (see castigate). Or perhaps from Middle English
chastien (see chasten) + -ise, though this would be early for such a native formation. The form of
the modern word is not easily accounted for [OED]. Related: Chastised; chastising.  He alone may
chastise who loves. [Rabindranath Tagore, The Crescent Moon, 1913]


chastisement (n.)

c.1300, from chastise + -ment.


punitive (adj.)

1620s, inflicting or involving punishment, from French punitif (16c.) or directly from Medieval
Latin punitivus, from Latin punitus, past participle of punire to punish, correct, chastise (see
punish).


chasten (v.)

1520s, with -en (1) + the word it replaced, obsolete verb chaste to correct (someone's) behavior
(Middle English chastien, c.1200), from Old French chastiier to punish (see chastise). Related:
Chastened; chastening.


punish (v.)

c.1300, from Old French puniss-, extended present participle stem of punir to punish, from Latin
punire punish, correct, chastise; take vengeance for; inflict a penalty on, cause pain for some
offense, earlier poenire, from poena penalty, punishment (see penal). Colloquial meaning to inflict
heavy damage or loss is first recorded 1801, originally in boxing. Related: Punished; punishing.


castigate (v.)

c.1600, from Latin castigatus, past participle of castigare to correct, set right; purify; chastise,
punish, from castus pure (see caste) + agere to do (see act (n.)). The notion behind the word is
make someone pure by correcting or reproving him.If thou didst put this soure cold habit on To
castigate thy pride, 'twere well. [Shakespeare, Timon IV.iii (1607)]  Related: Castigated;
castigating; castigator; castigatory.


twit (v.)

to blame, reproach, taunt, upbraid, 1520s, twite, shortened form of Middle English atwite, from Old
English &aelig;twitan to blame, reproach, from &aelig;t at + witan to blame, from Proto-Germanic
*witanan (cognates: Old English wite, Old Saxon witi, Old Norse viti punishment, torture; Old High
German wizzi punishment, wizan to punish; Dutch verwijten, Old High German firwizan, German
verweisen to reproach, reprove, Gothic fraweitan to avenge), from PIE root *weid- to see (see
vision). For sense evolution, compare Latin animadvertere, literally to give heed to, observe, later
to chastise, censure, punish. Related: Twitted; twitting. As a noun meaning a taunt from 1520s.


