cheerful (adj.)

c.1400, full of cheer, from cheer (n.) + -ful. Meaning elevating the spirits is from mid-15c.
Related: Cheerfully; cheerfulness.


exhilarate (v.)

1530s, from Latin exhilaratus cheerful, merry, past participle of exhilarare gladden, cheer, from
ex- thoroughly (see ex-) + hilarare make cheerful, from hilarus cheerful (see hilarity). Related:
Exhilarated; exhilarating.


hilarious (adj.)

1823, cheerful, from Latin hilaris cheerful, of good cheer (see hilarity) + -ous. Meaning
boisterously joyful is from 1830s. Related: Hilariously.


allegro

1680s as a musical term, from Italian allegro cheerful, gay, from Latin alacrem (nominative alacer)
lively, cheerful, brisk (see alacrity).


hilarity (n.)

mid-15c., from Latin hilaritatem (nominative hilaritas) cheerfulness, gaiety, merriment, from
hilaris cheerful, gay, from Greek hilaros cheerful, gay, merry, joyous, related to hilaos graceful,
kindly. In ancient Rome, Hilaria (neuter plural of hilaris) were a class of holidays, times of pomp
and rejoicing; there were public ones in honor of Cybele at the spring equinoxes as well as private
ones on the day of a marriage or a son's birth.


sunbeam (n.)

Old English sunnebeam; see sun (n.) + beam (n.). As cheerful person from 1886.


lighten (v.1)

to make less heavy, figuratively to make cheerful, mid-14c., from light (adj.1) + -en (1). Related:
Lightened; lightening.


serene (adj.)

mid-15c., clear, calm, from Latin serenus peaceful, calm, clear (of weather), figuratively cheerful,
glad, tranquil, of uncertain origin; perhaps from a suffixed variant of PIE *ksero- dry, source of
Greek xeros dry (see xerasia). In English, applied to persons since 1630s. Related: Serenely.


genial (adj.)

1560s, pertaining to marriage, from Latin genialis pleasant, festive, literally pertaining to
marriage rites, from genius guardian spirit (see genius). Originally used in the Latin literal
sense; meaning cheerful, friendly first recorded 1746. Related: Genially.


alacrity (n.)

mid-15c., from Latin alacritatem (nominative alacritas) liveliness, ardor, eagerness, from alacer
(genitive alacris) cheerful, brisk, lively; of uncertain origin, perhaps cognate with Gothic aljan
zeal, Old English ellen courage, zeal, strength, Old High German ellian.


cheery (adj.)

mid-15c., from cheer (n.) + -y (2). The colloquial alternative to cheerful. Related: Cheerily;
cheeriness.


neocon (n.)

by 1987, abbreviation for neo-conservative in the U.S. political sense.  Neoconservatism is the
first variant of American conservatism in the past century that is in the 'American grain.' It is
hopeful, not lugubrious; forward-looking, not nostalgic; and its general tone is cheerful, not grim
or dyspeptic. Its 20th-century heroes tend to be TR, FDR, and Ronald Reagan. Such Republican and
conservative worthies as Calvin Coolidge, Herbert Hoover, Dwight Eisenhower, and Barry Goldwater are
politely overlooked. [Irving Kristol, The Neoconservative Persuasion, in The Weekly Standard, Aug.
25, 2003]


rosy (adj.)

late 14c., of a color, from rose (n.1) + -y (2), probably modeled on Old French rose. From 1590s of
healthy complexions; 1775 in the sense cheerful; meaning promising is from 1887. Similar formation
in Middle Dutch rosich, Dutch rozig, German rosig.


fain (adj.)

Old English f&aelig;gen, fagen glad, cheerful, happy, joyful, rejoicing, from a common Germanic root
(cognates: Old Saxon fagan, Old Norse feginn glad, Old High German faginon, Gothic faginon to
rejoice), perhaps from PIE *pek- (1) to make pretty. As an adverb, from c.1200.


Euphrosyne

name of one of the three Graces in Greek mythology, from Latin, from Greek Euphrosyne, literally
mirth, merriment, from euphron cheerful, merry, of a good mind, from eu well (see eu-) + phren
(genitive phrenos) mind, of unknown origin.


enliven (v.)

1630s, give life to (enlive in same sense is from 1590s); see en- (1) make, put in + life + -en (1).
Meaning make lively or cheerful is from 1690s. Related: Enlivened; enlivening.


joyous (adj.)

c.1300, from Anglo-French joyous, Old French joios happy, cheerful, merry, glad (12c., Modern French
joyeux), from joie (see joy). Related: Joyously; joyousness.


sanguine (adj.)

blood-red, late 14c. (late 12c. as a surname), from Old French sanguin (fem. sanguine), from Latin
sanguineus of blood, also bloody, bloodthirsty, from sanguis (genitive sanguinis) blood (see
sanguinary). Meaning cheerful, hopeful, confident first attested c.1500, because these qualities
were thought in medieval physiology to spring from an excess of blood as one of the four humors.
Also in Middle English as a noun, type of red cloth (early 14c.).


lustful (adj.)

Old English lustfull wishful, desirous, having an eager desire; see lust (n.) + -ful. Specifically
of sexual desire from 1570s. Related: Lustfully; lustfulness. Middle English also had lustsome,
which was used in a sense of voluptuous, lustful from c.1400. Old English had lustb&#230;re
desirable, pleasant, cheerful, joyous.


Hilary

masc. proper name, from Late Latin Hilarius, literally cheerful, from Latin hilaris (see hilarity).
The name was more popular in France than in England. The woman's name (Middle English Hillaria)
seems to be merged with this from Eulalia, name of the patron saint of Barcelona, a Latinization of
Greek eulalos sweetly speaking. The Hilary sessions of British High Court and universities (1577)
are from St. Hilarius, Bishop of Poitiers, obit. C.E. 368, whose feast day is Jan. 13.


light-hearted (adj.)

also lighthearted, cheerful, c.1400, from light (adj.1) + hearted. Related: Light-heartedly; light-
heartedness.


blithe (adj.)

Old English bli&thorn;e joyous, kind, cheerful, pleasant, from Proto-Germanic *blithiz gentle, kind
(cognates: Old Saxon bli&eth;i bright, happy, Middle Dutch blide, Dutch blijde, Old Norse bli&eth;r
mild, gentle, Old High German blidi gay, friendly, Gothic blei&thorn;s kind, friendly, merciful).
Rare since 16c. No cognates outside Germanic. The earlier application was to the outward expression
of kindly feeling, sympathy, affection to others, as in Gothic and ON.; but in OE. the word had come
more usually to be applied to the external manifestation of one's own pleased or happy frame of
mind, and hence even to the state itself. [OED]


sunny (adj.)

full of sun, early 14c., from sun (n.) + -y (2). Compare Dutch zonnig, German sonnig. Figurative
sense of cheerful is attested from 1540s. Sunny side in reference to optimistic outlook is from
1831. Eggs served sunny side up first attested 1887, in lunch counter slang, in reference to
appearance when served.    Young Man (in Park Row coffee-and-cake saloon)--Waiter, I want a
beefsteak, unpeeled potatoes, and a couple of eggs fried on one side only!    Waiter
(vociferously)--Slaughter in the pan, a Murphy with his coat on, an' two white wings with the sunny
side up! [Puck, April 27, 1887]     Related: Sunnily; sunniness. As a noun meaning sunfish from
1835.


silly (adj.)

Old English ges&aelig;lig happy, fortuitous, prosperous (related to s&aelig;l happiness), from
Proto-Germanic *s&aelig;ligas (cognates: Old Norse s&aelig;ll happy, Old Saxon salig, Middle Dutch
salich, Old High German salig, German selig blessed, happy, blissful, Gothic sels good,
kindhearted), from PIE *sele- of good mood; to favor, from root *sel- (2) happy, of good mood; to
favor (cognates: Latin solari to comfort, Greek hilaros cheerful, gay, merry, joyous).    This is
one of the few instances in which an original long e (ee) has become shortened to i. The same change
occurs in breeches, and in the American pronunciation of been, with no change in spelling. [Century
Dictionary]    The word's considerable sense development moved from happy to blessed to pious, to
innocent (c.1200), to harmless, to pitiable (late 13c.), weak (c.1300), to feeble in mind, lacking
in reason, foolish (1570s). Further tendency toward stunned, dazed as by a blow (1886) in knocked
silly, etc. Silly season in journalism slang is from 1861 (August and September, when newspapers
compensate for a lack of hard news by filling up with trivial stories). Silly Putty trademark claims
use from July 1949.


sad (adj.)

Old English s&aelig;d sated, full, having had one's fill (of food, drink, fighting, etc.), weary of,
from Proto-Germanic *sathaz (cognates: Old Norse sa&eth;r, Middle Dutch sat, Dutch zad, Old High
German sat, German satt, Gothic sa&thorn;s satiated, sated, full), from PIE *seto- (cognates: Latin
satis enough, sufficient, Greek hadros thick, bulky, Old Church Slavonic sytu, Lithuanian sotus
satiated, Old Irish saith satiety, sathach sated), from root *sa- to satisfy (cognates: Sanskrit
a-sinvan insatiable).    Sense development passed through the meaning heavy, ponderous (i.e. full
mentally or physically), and weary, tired of before emerging c.1300 as unhappy. An alternative
course would be through the common Middle English sense of steadfast, firmly established, fixed (as
in sad-ware tough pewter vessels) and serious to grave. In the main modern sense, it replaced Old
English unrot, negative of rot cheerful, glad.    Meaning very bad is from 1690s. Slang sense of
inferior, pathetic is from 1899; sad sack is 1920s, popularized by World War II armed forces
(specifically by cartoon character invented by Sgt. George Baker, 1942, and published in U.S. Armed
Forces magazine Yank), probably a euphemistic shortening of common military slang phrase sad sack of
shit.


