cherub (n.)

late 14c. as an order of angels, from Late Latin cherub, from Greek cheroub, from Hebrew kerubh
(plural kerubhim) winged angel, perhaps related to Akkadian karubu to bless, karibu one who blesses,
an epithet of the bull-colossus. Old English had cerubin, from the Greek plural.    The cherubim, a
common feature of ancient Near Eastern mythology, are not to be confused with the round-cheeked
darlings of Renaissance iconography. The root of the terms either means hybrid or, by an inversion
of consonants, mount, steed, and they are winged beasts, probably of awesome aspect, on which the
sky god of the old Canaanite myths and of the poetry of Psalms goes riding through the air. [Robert
Alter, The Five Books of Moses, 2004, commentary on Gen. iii:24]


cherubic (adj.)

1620s, from cherub + -ic. Earlier was cherubical (c.1600).


seraph (n.)

1667, first used by Milton (probably on analogy of cherub/cherubim), back-formed singular from Old
English seraphim (plural), from Late Latin seraphim, from Greek seraphim, from Hebrew seraphim (only
in Isa. vi), plural of *saraph (which does not occur in the Bible), probably literally the burning
one, from saraph it burned. Seraphs were traditionally regarded as burning or flaming angels, though
the word seems to have some etymological sense of flying, perhaps from confusion with the root of
Arabic sharafa be lofty. Some scholars identify it with a word found in other passages interpreted
as fiery flying serpent.


griffin (n.)

c.1200 (as a surname), from Old French grifon a bird of prey, also fabulous bird of Greek mythology
(with head and wings of an eagle, body and hind quarters of a lion, believed to inhabit Scythia and
guard its gold), from Late Latin gryphus, misspelling of grypus, variant of gryps (genitive grypos),
from Greek gryps (genitive grypos) curved, hook-nosed, in reference to its beak.    Klein suggests a
Semitic source, through the medium of the Hittites, and cites Hebrew kerubh a winged angel, Akkad.
karibu, epithet of the bull-colossus (see cherub). The same or an identical word was used, with
uncertain connections, in mid-19c. Louisiana to mean mulatto (especially one one-quarter or two-
fifths white) and in India from late 18c. to mean newly arrived European.


