chide (v.)

late 12c., scold, nag, rail, originally intransitive, from Old English cidan to contend, quarrel,
complain. Not found outside Old English (though Liberman says it is probably related to OHG
*k&icirc;dal 'wedge,' with a sense evolution from brandishing sticks to scold, reprove). Past tense,
past participle can be chided or chid or even (past participle) chidden (Shakespeare used it);
present participle is chiding.


pedantic (adj.)

formed in English c.1600, from pedant + -ic. The French equivalent is p&eacute;dantesque. Perhaps
first attested in John Donne's Sunne Rising, where he bids the morning sun let his love and him
linger in bed, telling it, Sawcy pedantique wretch, goe chide Late schooleboyes. Related: Pedantical
(1580s); pedantically.


objurgate (v.)

1610s, from Latin obiurgatus, past participle of obiurgare to chide, rebuke, from ob- (see ob-) +
iurgare to quarrel, scold, from phrase iure agere to deal in a lawsuit, from ablative of ius right;
law; suit (see just (adj.)) + agere to do, act, set in motion (see act (n.)). Related: Objurgatory.


snub (v.)

mid-14c., to check, reprove, rebuke, from Old Norse snubba to curse, chide, snub, scold, reprove.
The ground sense is perhaps to cut off, and the word probably is related to snip. Compare Swedish
snobba lop off, snuff (a candle), Old Norse snubbotr snubbed, nipped, with the tip cut off. Meaning
treat coldly appeared early 18c. Related: Snubbed; snubbing.


rebuff (v.)

1580s, from obsolete French rebuffer to check, snub, from Italian ribuffare to check, chide, snide,
from ribuffo a snub, from ri- back (from Latin re-, see re-) + buffo a puff, of imitative origin
(compare buffet (v.)). Related: Rebuffed; rebuffing.


rebuke (v.)

early 14c., to reprimand, reprove; chide, scold, from Anglo-French rebuker to repel, beat back, Old
French rebuchier, from re- back (see re-) + buschier to strike, chop wood, from busche (French
bÃ&fnof;Â»che) wood, from Proto-Germanic *busk- (see bush (n.)). Related: Rebuked; rebuking.


trollop

1610s, slovenly woman, often with implications of moral looseness, probably from troll (v.) in sense
of roll about, wallow.[A] certain Anne Hayward, wife of Gregory Hayward of Beighton, did in the
parishe church of Beighton aforesaid in the time of Divine Service or Sermon there, and when the
Minister was reading &amp; praying, violently &amp; boisterously presse &amp; enter into the seat or
place where one Elizabeth, wife of Robert Spurlinir, was quietly at her Devotion &amp; Duty to
Almighty God and then and there did quarrel chide &amp; braule &amp; being evilly &amp; inalitiously
bent did use then and there many rayleing opprobrious Speeches &amp; Invectives against the said
Elizabeth calling her Tripe &amp; Trallop, to the great disturbance both of the Minister and
Congregation. [Archdeaconry of Sudbury, Suffolk, Court Proceedings, 1682]


