childlike (adj.)

1580s, proper to a child, from child + like (adj.). Meaning like a child in a good sense
(distinguished from childish) is from 1738.


child-bearing (n.)

also childbearing, bringing forth of a child, late 14c., from child + verbal noun of bear (v.). As
an adjective from late 14c.


childish (adj.)

Old English cildisc proper to a child; see child + -ish. Meaning puerile, immature, like a child in
a bad sense is from early 15c. Related: Childishly; childishness.


child (n.)

Old English cild fetus, infant, unborn or newly born person, from Proto-Germanic *kiltham (cognates:
Gothic kil&thorn;ei womb, inkil&thorn;o pregnant; Danish kuld children of the same marriage; Old
Swedish kulder litter; Old English cildhama womb, lit. child-home); no certain cognates outside
Germanic. App[arently] originally always used in relation to the mother as the 'fruit of the womb'
[Buck]. Also in late Old English, a youth of gentle birth (archaic, usually written childe). In
16c.-17c. especially girl child.     The wider sense young person before the onset of puberty
developed in late Old English. Phrase with child pregnant (late 12c.) retains the original sense.
The sense extension from infant to child also is found in French enfant, Latin infans. Meaning one's
own child; offspring of parents is from late 12c. (the Old English word was bearn; see bairn).
Figurative use from late 14c. Most Indo-European languages use the same word for a child and one's
child, though there are exceptions (such as Latin liberi/pueri).    The difficulty with the plural
began in Old English, where the nominative plural was at first cild, identical with the singular,
then c.975 a plural form cildru (genitive cildra) arose, probably for clarity's sake, only to be re-
pluraled late 12c. as children, which is thus a double plural. Middle English plural cildre survives
in Lancashire dialect childer and in Childermas.   Child abuse is attested by 1963; child-molester
from 1950. Child care is from 1915. Child's play, figurative of something easy, is in Chaucer (late
14c.).


childbed (n.)

also child-bed, c.1200, state of being in labor, from child + bed (n.). In reference to a bed, real
or metaphorical, on which something is born, from 1590s.


child-proof (adj.)

1933, from child (n.) + proof (n.). As a verb by 1951.


childbirth (n.)

also child-birth, mid-15c., from child + birth (n.).


children (n.)

plural of child (q.v.)


childe (n.)

youth of gentle birth, used as a kind of title, late Old English, variant spelling of child (q.v.).


Childermas (n.)

festival of the Holy Innocents (Dec. 28), late Old English *cildram&aelig;sse (c.1000), from
obsolete plural of child (q.v.) + mass (n.2).


childhood (n.)

period of life from birth to puberty, Old English cildhad; see child + -hood.


childless (adj.)

c.1200, from child (n.) + -less. Related: Childlessness.


pregnant (adj.1)

with child, early 15c., from Latin praegnantem (nominative praegnans, originally praegnas) with
child, literally before birth, probably from prae- before (see pre-) + root of gnasci be born (see
genus).    Retained its status as a taboo word until c.1950; modern euphemisms include anticipating,
enceinte, expecting, in a family way, in a delicate (or interesting) condition. Old English terms
included mid-bearne, literally with child; bearn-eaca, literally child-adding or child-increasing;
and geacnod increased. Among c.1800 slang terms for pregnant was poisoned (in reference to the
swelling).


tot (n.)

little child, 1725, Scottish, of uncertain origin, perhaps a shortened form of totter, or related to
Old Norse tottr, nickname of a dwarf (compare Swedish tutte little child, Danish tommel-tot little
child, in which the first element means thumb). Tot-lot play ground for young children is recorded
from 1944.


enfant terrible (n.)

1851, French, literally terrible child (see infant + terrible). One whose unorthodox or shocking
speech or manners embarrass his associates as a naughty child embarrasses his elders. French also
has enfant g&acirc;t&eacute;, spoiled child, hence person given excessive adulation.


bairn (n.)

child (of any age), Old English bearn child, son, descendant, probably related to beran (to bear,
carry, give birth; see bear (v.)). Originally not chiefly Scottish, but felt as such from c.1700.
This was the English form of the original Germanic word for child (see child). Dutch, Old High
German kind, German Kind are from a prehistoric *gen-to-m born, from the same root as Latin gignere.
Middle English had bairn-team brood of children.


love child (n.)

child born out of wedlock, 1805, from love (n.) + child. Earlier was love brat (17c.).


manchild (n.)

also man-child, male child, male infant, c.1400, from man (n.) + child.


wunderkind (n.)

child prodigy (especially in music), 1883 in English (earlier as a German word in German contexts),
from German Wunderkind, literally wonder-child.


poster (n.)

bill, placard, thing posted, 1838, from post (v.1). Poster boy/girl/child someone given prominence
in certain causes is attested by 1990, in reference to fund-raising drives for charities associated
with disability, featuring child sufferers, a feature since 1930s.


pupil (n.1)

student, late 14c., originally orphan child, ward, from Old French pupille (14c.) and directly from
Latin pupillus (fem. pupilla) orphan child, ward, minor, diminutive of pupus boy (fem. pupa girl),
probably related to puer child, possibly from PIE *pup-, from root *pu- to swell, inflate. Meaning
disciple, student first recorded 1560s. Related: Pupillary.


godchild (n.)

child one sponsors at baptism, c.1200, from God + child.


Topsy

slave-girl character in Uncle Tom's Cabin (1852), immortal in cliche for her response to a question
about her origin put to her by the pious Northern abolitionist Miss Ophelia:    Have you ever heard
anything about God, Topsy?  The child looked bewildered, but grinned, as usual.  Do you know who
made you?  Nobody as I knows on, said the child, with a short laugh.  The idea appeared to amuse her
considerably; for her eyes twinkled, and she added--  I spect I grow'd. Don't think nobody never
made me.    In addition to being often misquoted by the addition of a just (or jes'), the line is
sometimes used inappropriately in 20c. writing to indicate something that got large without anyone
intending it to.


adopt (v.)

c.1500, a back-formation from adoption or else from Middle French adopter or directly from Latin
adoptare take by choice, choose for oneself, select, choose (especially a child). Originally in
English also of friends, fathers, citizens, etc. Sense of to legally take as one's own child and
that of to embrace, espouse a practice, method, etc. are from c.1600. Related: Adopted; adopting.


puerperal (adj.)

1768, with -al (1) + Latin puerperus bringing forth children; bearing a child (as a noun, woman in
labor), from puer child, boy (see puerility) + parere to bear (see pare). Earlier puerperial
(1620s).


chopping (adj.)

large and thriving, 1560s, past participle adjective from chop (v.). Compare strapping, whopping in
similar sense.   <b>chopping</b>. An epithet frequently applied to infants, by way of ludicrous
commendation: imagined by Skinner to signify lusty, from cas Sax. by others to mean a child that
would bring money at a market. Perhaps a greedy, hungry child, likely to live. [Johnson]


brain child (n.)

also brainchild, idea, creation of one's own, 1881, from brain (n.) + child. Earlier was the more
alliterative brain-brat (1630).


bastard (n.)

illegitimate child, early 13c., from Old French bastard (11c., Modern French b&acirc;tard),
acknowledged child of a nobleman by a woman other than his wife, probably from fils de bast
packsaddle son, meaning a child conceived on an improvised bed (saddles often doubled as beds while
traveling), with pejorative ending -art (see -ard). Alternative possibly is that the word is from
Proto-Germanic *banstiz barn, equally suggestive of low origin.    Not always regarded as a stigma;
the Conqueror is referred to in state documents as William the Bastard. Figurative sense of
something not pure or genuine is late 14c.; use as a vulgar term of abuse for a man is attested from
1830. As an adjective from late 14c. Among the bastard words in Halliwell-Phillipps' Dictionary of
Archaic and Provincial Words are avetrol, chance-bairn, by-blow, harecoppe, horcop, and gimbo (a
bastard's bastard).


pedo-

before vowels ped-, word-forming element meaning boy, child, from Greek pedo-, comb. form of pais
boy, child, especially a son, from PIE root *peu- small, little, few, young (see few (adj.)). The
British form paed- is better because it avoids confusion with ped-.


brat (n.)

c.1500, slang, beggar's child, originally northern, Midlands and western England dialect word for
makeshift or ragged garment; probably the same word as Old English bratt cloak, which is from a
Celtic source (compare Old Irish bratt cloak, cloth). The modern meaning is perhaps from notion of
child's apron. Hollywood Brat Pack (modeled on 1950s Rat Pack) is from 1985.


infant (n.)

late 14c., child during earliest period of life (sometimes extended to age 7 and sometimes including
a fetus), from Latin infantem (nominative infans) young child, babe in arms, noun use of adjective
meaning not able to speak, from in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + fans, present participle of
fari speak (see fame (n.)). As an adjective, 1580s, from the noun.


puerility (n.)

late 15c., from Middle French pu&eacute;rilit&eacute; (15c.), from Latin puerilitatem (nominative
puerilitas) childishness, from puerilis boyish, youthful; childish, trivial, silly, from puer child,
boy, from PIE *pau- (1) few, little, with sense extended to small, young (cognates: Latin putus boy,
Sanskrit putrah son, boy, Avestan puthra- son, child; see few (adj.)).


Spock

half-alien character in the Star Trek U.S. entertainment franchise, developed and named 1964 by
series creator Gene Roddenberry, who later said he was searching for an alien-sounding word and not
thinking of U.S. physician and child-care specialist Benjamin M. Spock (1903-1998), whose name is of
Dutch origin. The doctor wrote the enormously popular Common Sense Book of Baby and Child Care
(1946) and is the source of the first element in Spock-marked (1967), defined in OED as (Adversely)
affected by an upbringing held to be in accordance with the principles of Dr. Spock ....


few (adj.)

Old English feawe (plural; contracted to fea) few, seldom, even a little, from Proto-Germanic *faw-,
from PIE root *pau- (1) few, little (cognates: Latin paucus few, little, paullus little, parvus
little, small, pauper poor; Greek pauros few, little, pais (genitive paidos) child; Latin puer
child, boy, pullus young animal; Oscan puklu child; Sanskrit potah a young animal, putrah son; Old
English fola young horse; Old Norse fylja young female horse; Old Church Slavonic puta bird;
Lithuanian putytis young animal, young bird). Always plural in Old English.    Phrase few and far
between attested from 1660s. Unusual ironic use in quite a few many (1883), earlier a good few
(1828). The noun is late 12c., fewe, from the adjective.  Never in the field of human conflict was
so much owed by so many to so few. [Winston Churchill, 1940]


chick (n.)

mid-14c. shortening of chicken (n.). Extended to human offspring (often in alliterative pairing
chick and child) and thence used as a term of endearment. As slang for young woman it is first
recorded 1927 (in Elmer Gantry), supposedly from U.S. black slang. In British use in this sense by
c.1940; popularized by Beatniks late 1950s. Chicken in this sense is from 1711. Sometimes
c.1600-1900 chicken was taken as a plural, chick as a singular (compare child/children) for the
domestic fowl.


stepchild (n.)

also step-child, Old English steopcild; see step- + child (n.). Old English also had steopbearn.
Similar formation in German Stiefkind.


thane (n.)

Old English &thorn;egn military follower, one who holds lands in exchange for military service, also
vassal, retainer, attendant, from Proto-Germanic *thegnas (cognates: Old Saxon thegan follower,
warrior, boy, Old Norse &thorn;egn thane, freeman, Old High German thegan, German Degen thane,
warrior, hero), from PIE *tek-no- (cognates: Sanskrit takman descendant, child, Greek teknon child),
from root *tek- to beget, give birth to (cognates: Greek tekos child, the young of animals, tokos
childbirth, offspring, produce of money, interest). Also used in Old English for disciple of Christ.
Specific sense of man who ranks between an earl and a freeman is late 15c.    The modern spelling is
from Scottish, where early 13c. it came to mean chief of a clan, king's baron, and it has
predominated in English probably due to the influence of Macbeth; normal orthographic changes from
Old English &eth;egn would have produced Modern English *thain. Some historians now use thegn to
distinguish Anglo-Saxon thanes from Scottish thanes.


kiddo (n.)

1893, familiar form of kid (n.) in the child sense.


nana

child's word for grandmother or, sometimes, nurse, first recorded c.1844 (see nanny).


Peck&#039;s bad boy

unruly or mischievous child, 1883, from fictional character created by George Wilbur Peck
(1840-1916).


wight (n.)

Old English wiht living being, creature, person; something, anything, from Proto-Germanic *wihti-
(cognates: Old Saxon wiht thing, demon, Dutch wicht a little child, Old High German wiht thing,
creature, demon, German Wicht creature, little child, Old Norse vettr thing, creature, Swedish
v&auml;tte spirit of the earth, gnome, Gothic waihts something), from PIE *wekti- thing, creature
(source also of Old Church Slavonic ve&#353;ti a thing). Not related to the Isle of Wight, which is
from Latin Vectis (c.150), originally Celtic, possibly meaning place of the division.


papoose (n.)

1630s, from Narragansett papoos child, or a similar New England Algonquian word; said to mean
literally very young.


encyclopedia (n.)

1530s, course of instruction, from Modern Latin encyclopaedia (c.1500), thought to be a false
reading by Latin authors of Greek enkyklios paideia taken as general education, but literally
training in a circle, i.e. the circle of arts and sciences, the essentials of a liberal education;
from enkyklios circular, also general (from en in + kyklos circle) + paideia education, child-
rearing, from pais (genitive paidos) child (see pedo-).    Modern sense of reference work arranged
alphabetically is from 1640s, often applied specifically to the French Encyclop&eacute;die ou
Dictionnaire raisonn&eacute; des Sciences, des Arts, et des M&eacute;tiers (1751-65).


stroller (n.)

c.1600, strolling player; 1670s, one who strolls, a wanderer, agent noun from stroll (v.). Meaning
child's push-chair is from 1920.


wench (n.)

late 13c., wenche  girl, young woman, especially if unmarried, also female infant, shortened from
wenchel child, also in Middle English girl, maiden, from Old English wencel, probably related to
wancol unsteady, fickle, weak, from Proto-Germanic *wankila- (cognates: Old Norse vakr child, weak
person, Old High German wanchal fickle), from PIE *weng- to bend, curve (see wink (v.)).    The
wenche is nat dead, but slepith. [Wyclif, Matt. ix:24, c.1380]    In Middle English occasionally
with disparaging suggestion, and secondary sense of concubine, strumpet is attested by mid-14c. Also
serving-maid, bondwoman, young woman of a humble class (late 14c.). It retained this in the 19c.
U.S. South in reference to slave women of any age.


conkers (n.)

child's game played with horse chestnuts, originally with snail shells, 1847, probably a variant of
conquer. The goal was to break the other player's item by hitting it with yours.


mignon (adj.)

delicately formed, 1550s, French, literally delicate, charming, pretty; see minion. As a noun,
pretty child, from 1827.


rattle (n.)

c.1500, rapid succession of short, sharp sounds, from rattle (v.). As a child's toy, recorded from
1510s. As a sound made in the throat (especially of one near death) from 1752.


choo-choo (n.)

Child's name for steam-engine locomotive, 1895, echoic (choo-choo cars is attested from 1891).


bye (2)

shortened form of good-bye. Reduplication bye-bye is recorded from 1709, though as a sound used to
lull a child to sleep it is attested from 1630s.


