chip (v.)

early 15c., to chip (intransitive, of stone); from Old English forcippian to pare away by cutting,
cut off, verbal form of cipp small piece of wood (see chip (n.)). Transitive meaning to cut up, cut
or trim is from late 15c. Sense of break off fragments is 18c. To chip in contribute (1861) is
American English, perhaps from card-playing. Related: Chipped; chipping. Chipped beef attested from
1826.


chip (n.2)

break caused by chipping, 1889, from chip (v.).


chip (n.1)

Old English cipp piece of wood, perhaps from PIE root *keipo- sharp post (cognates: Dutch kip small
strip of wood, Old High German kipfa wagon pole, Old Norse keppr stick, Latin cippus post, stake,
beam; the Germanic words perhaps borrowed from Latin).    Meaning counter used in a game of chance
is first recorded 1840; electronics sense is from 1962. Used for thin slices of foodstuffs
(originally fruit) since 1769; specific reference to potatoes is found by 1859 (in A Tale of Two
Cities); potato chip is attested by 1879. Meaning piece of dried dung first attested 1846, American
English.   Chip of the old block is used by Milton (1642); earlier form was chip of the same block
(1620s); more common modern phrase with off in place of of is early 20c. To have a chip on one's
shoulder is 1830, American English, from the custom of a boy determined to fight putting a wood chip
on his shoulder and defying another to knock it off.


chipmunk (n.)

1829 (also chitmunk, 1832), from Algonquian, probably Ojibwa ajidamoo (in the Ottawa dialect
ajidamoonh) red squirrel, literally head first, or one who descends trees headlong (containing ajid-
upside down), probably influenced by English chip and mink. Other early names for it included ground
squirrel and striped squirrel.


blue chip (adj.)

also blue-chip, in reference to the high-value poker counter, from 1904 in the figurative sense of
valuable; stock exchange sense, in reference to shares considered a reliable investment, is first
recorded 1929; especially of stocks that saw spectacular rises in value in the four years or so
before the Wall Street crash of that year.


spoon (n.)

Old English spon chip, sliver, shaving, splinter of wood, from Proto-Germanic *spe-nu- (cognates:
Old Norse spann, sponn chip, splinter, Swedish sp&#229;n a wooden spoon, Old Frisian spon, Middle
Dutch spaen, Dutch spaan, Old High German span, German Span chip, splinter), from PIE *spe- (2)
long, flat piece of wood (cognates: Greek spathe spade, also possibly Greek sphen wedge).    As the
word for a type of eating utensil, c.1300 in English (in Old English such a thing might be a
metesticca), in this sense supposed to be from Old Norse sponn, which meant spoon as well as chip,
tile. The eating utensil sense is specific to Middle English and Scandinavian, though Middle Low
German spon also meant wooden spatula. To be born with a silver spoon in one's mouth is from at
least 1719 (Goldsmith, 1765, has: one man is born with a silver spoon in his mouth, and another with
a wooden ladle).


spick-and-span (adj.)

also spic-and-span, 1660s, from spick-and-span-new (1570s), literally new as a recently made spike
and chip of wood, from spick nail (see spike (n.1)) + span-new very new (c.1300), from Old Norse
span-nyr, from spann chip (see spoon (n.)) + nyr new. Imitation of Dutch spiksplinter nieuw spike-
splinter new.


punnet (n.)

small, round chip basket, 1822, chiefly British, of obscure origin.


spall (n.)

chip of stone, mid-15c., from Middle English verb spald to split open.


spade (n.1)

tool for digging, Old English spadu spade, from Proto-Germanic *spadan (cognates: Old Frisian spada
a spade, Middle Dutch spade a sword, Old Saxon spado, Middle Low German spade, German Spaten), from
PIE *spe-dh-, from root *spe- (2) long, flat piece of wood (cognates: Greek spathe wooden blade,
paddle, Old English spon chip of wood, splinter, Old Norse spann shingle, chip; see spoon (n.)).
A spade differs from a two-handed shovel chiefly in the form and thickness of the blade [Century
Dictionary]. To call a spade a spade use blunt language, call things by right names (1540s)
translates a Greek proverb (known to Lucian), ten skaphen skaphen legein to call a bowl a bowl, but
Erasmus mistook Greek skaphe trough, bowl for a derivative of the stem of skaptein to dig, and the
mistake has stuck [see OED].


microchip (n.)

integrated circuit, 1975, from micro- + chip (n.1).


flinders (n.)

mid-15c., Scottish flendris, probably related to Norwegian flindra chip, splinter, or Dutch flenter
fragment; ultimately from the same PIE root that produced flint.


chiffon (n.)

feminine finery, sheer silk fabric, 1765, from French chiffon (17c.), diminutive of chiffe a rag,
piece of cloth (17c.), of unknown origin, perhaps a variant of English chip (n.1) or one of its
Germanic cousins. Klein suggests Arabic. Extension to pastry is attested by 1929.


mote (n.)

particle of dust, Old English mot, of unknown origin; perhaps related to Dutch mot dust from turf,
sawdust, grit, Norwegian mutt speck, mote, splinter, chip. Many references are to Matt. vii:3.


spheno-

before vowels sphen-, word-forming element meaning wedge, from comb. form of Greek sphen a wedge,
probably cognate with Old Norse spann splinter, Old English spon chip of wood (see spoon (n.)).


silicon (n.)

nonmetallic element, 1817, coined by British chemist Thomas Thomson from silica (silicon dioxide),
from which it was isolated. The name is patterned on carbon, etc. Silicon chip first attested 1965;
Silicon Valley for the Santa Clara Valley south of San Francisco, U.S., first attested 1974, from
the concentration of manufacturers of silicon chips used in computers, watches, etc.


chocolate (n.)

c.1600, from Nahuatl (Aztecan) xocolatl, possibly from xocolia to make bitter + atl water. Brought
to Spain by 1520, from thence to the rest of Europe. Originally a drink; as a paste or cake made of
ground, roasted, sweetened cacao seeds, 1640s.  To a Coffee-house, to drink jocolatte, very good
[Pepys, Diary, Nov. 24, 1664].  As a color from 1776. Chocolate chip is from 1940; chocolatier is
attested from 1888.


spald (v.)

c.1400, to splinter, chip (transitive; spalding-knife is from mid-14c.), of uncertain origin,
perhaps from Middle Dutch spalden, cognate with Middle Low German spalden, Old High German spaltan,
German spalten to split (see spill (v.)). The later form of the verb is spall (1758), from or by
influence of the noun. Related: Spalled; spalling.


slab (n.)

late 13c., large, flat mass, of unknown origin, possibly related to Old French escopel, escalpe thin
fragment of wood, which according to Klein is possibly a Gaulish word (compare Breton scolp, Welsh
ysgolp splinter, chip). But OED rejects this on formal grounds. Meaning rectangular block of pre-
cast concrete used in building is from 1927. Slab-sided is having flat sides like slabs, hence tall
and lank (1817, American English).


frippery (n.)

1560s, old clothes, cast-off garments, from Middle French friperie old clothes, an old clothes shop,
from Old French freperie, feuperie old rags, rubbish (13c.), from frepe, feupe fringe; rags, old
clothes, from Late Latin faluppa chip, splinter, straw, fiber. The notion is of things worn down,
clothes rubbed to rags. The ironic meaning finery (but with overtones of tawdriness) dates from
1630s.


slat (n.)

late 14c., earlier sclat (c.1300), a roofing slate, a thin, flat stone, from Old French esclat split
piece, chip, splinter (Modern French &#233;clat), back-formation from esclater to break, splinter,
burst, probably from Frankish *slaitan to tear, slit or some other Germanic source (compare Old High
German slizan, Old English slitan; see slit (v.)). Meaning long, thin, narrow piece of wood or metal
attested from 1764.


shiver (n.1)

small piece, splinter, fragment, chip, c.1200, perhaps from an unrecorded Old English word, related
to Middle Low German schever schiver splinter, Old High German scivero, from Proto-Germanic *skif-
split (cognates: Old High German skivaro splinter, German Schiefer splinter, slate), from PIE *skei-
to cut, split (see shed (v.)). Commonly in phrases to break to shivers break into bits (mid-15c.).
Also, shiver is still dialectal for a splinter in Norfolk and Lincolnshire.


terminus (n.)

1550s, goal, end, final point, from Latin terminus (plural termini) end, boundary line, from PIE
*ter-men-, from root *ter-, base of words meaning peg, post, boundary, marker, goal (cognates:
Sanskrit tarati passes over, crosses over, tarantah sea; Hittite tarmaizzi he limits; Greek terma
boundary, end, limit; Gothic &#254;airh, Old English &#254;urh through; Old English &#254;yrel hole;
Old Norse &#254;r&#246;mr edge, chip, splinter).    In ancient Rome, Terminus was the name of the
deity who presided over boundaries and landmarks, focus of the important Roman festival of
Terminalia (held Feb. 23, the end of the old Roman year). Meaning either end of a transportation
line is first recorded 1836.


cleric (n.)

1620s (also in early use as an adjective), from Church Latin clericus clergyman, priest, noun use of
adjective meaning priestly, belonging to the clerus; from Ecclesiastical Greek klerikos pertaining
to an inheritance, but in Greek Christian jargon by 2c., of the clergy, belonging to the clergy, as
opposed to the laity; from kleros a lot, allotment; piece of land; heritage, inheritance, originally
a shard or wood chip used in casting lots, related to klan to break (see clastic).   Kleros was used
by early Greek Christians for matters relating to ministry, based on Deut. xviii:2 reference to
Levites as temple assistants: Therefore shall they have no inheritance among their brethren: the
Lord is their inheritance, kleros being used as a translation of Hebrew nahalah inheritance, lot. Or
else it is from the use of the word in Acts i:17. A word taken up in English after clerk (n.)
shifted to its modern meaning.


shell (n.)

Old English sciell, scill, Anglian scell seashell, eggshell, related to Old English scealu shell,
husk, from Proto-Germanic *skaljo piece cut off; shell; scale (cognates: West Frisian skyl peel,
rind, Middle Low German schelle pod, rind, egg shell, Gothic skalja tile), with the shared notion of
covering that splits off, from PIE root *(s)kel- (1) to cut, cleave (cognates: Old Church Slavonic
skolika shell, Russian skala bark, rind; see scale (n.1)). Italian scaglia chip is from Germanic.
Sense of mere exterior is from 1650s; that of hollow framework is from 1791. Meaning structure for a
band or orchestra is attested from 1938. Military use (1640s) was first of hand grenades, in
reference to the metal case in which the gunpowder and shot were mixed; the notion is of a hollow
object filled with explosives. Hence shell shock, first recorded 1915. Shell game a swindle is from
1890, from a version of three-card monte played with a pea and walnut shells.


lot (n.)

Old English hlot object (anything from dice to straw, but often a chip of wood with a name inscribed
on it) used to determine someone's share, also what falls to a person by lot, from Proto-Germanic
*khlutom (cognates: Old Norse hlutr lot, share, Old Frisian hlot lot, Old Saxon hlot, Middle Dutch,
Dutch lot, Old High German hluz share of land, German Los; Old English hleotan to cast lots, to
foretell), of unknown origin. The object was placed with others in a receptacle, which was shaken,
the winner being the one that fell out first. Hence, to cast lots. In some cases the lots were drawn
by hand. The word was adopted from Germanic into the Romanic languages (compare lottery, lotto).
Meaning choice resulting from the casting of lots first attested c.1200.    Sense of plot of land is
first recorded 1630s (distribution of the best property in new settlements often determined by
casting lots), that of group, collection is 1725, from notion of auction lots. The generalized sense
of great many is first attested in 1812. To cast (one's) lot with another is to agree to share
winnings.


potato (n.)

1560s, from Spanish patata, from a Carib language of Haiti batata sweet potato. Sweet potatoes were
first to be introduced to Europe; in cultivation in Spain by mid-16c.; in Virginia by 1648. Early
16c. Portuguese traders carried the crop to all their shipping ports and the sweet potato was
quickly adopted from Africa to India and Java.    The name later (1590s) was extended to the common
white potato, from Peru, which was at first (mistakenly) called Virginia potato, or, because at
first it was of minor importance compared to the sweet potato, bastard potato. Spanish invaders in
Peru began to use white potatoes as cheap food for sailors 1530s. The first potato from South
America reached Pope Paul III in 1540; grown in France at first as an ornamental plant. According to
popular tradition, introduced to Ireland 1565 by John Hawkins. Brought to England from Colombia by
Sir Thomas Herriot, 1586.  German kartoffel (17c.) is a dissimilation from tartoffel, ultimately
from Italian tartufolo (Vulgar Latin *territuberem), originally truffle. Frederick II forced its
cultivation on Prussian peasants in 1743. The French is pomme de terre, literally earth-apple; a
Swedish dialectal word for potato is jordp&auml;ron, literally earth-pear.    Colloquial
pronunciation tater is attested in print from 1759. Potato chip (n.) attested from 1879. To drop
(something) like a hot potato is from 1824. Children's counting-out rhyme that begins one potato,
two potato first recorded 1885 in Canada. Slang potato trap mouth attested from 1785.


