chiseler (n.)

1824, one who works with a chisel, agent noun from chisel (v.). In slang sense of swindler, attested
from 1918.


chisel (v.)

c.1500, to break with a chisel, from chisel (n.). Slang sense of to cheat, defraud is first recorded
in 1808 as chizzel; origin and connection to the older word are obscure (compare slang sense of
gouge); chiseler in this sense is from 1918. Related: Chiseled; chiseling.


chisel (n.)

early 14c., from Anglo-French cisel, Old French cisel chisel, in plural, scissors, shears (12c.,
Modern French ciseau), from Vulgar Latin *cisellum cutting tool, from Latin caesellum, diminutive of
caesus, past participle of caedere to cut (see -cide). Related: Chiseled; chiseling.


chiseled (adj.)

having sharp outlines, 1821, figurative past participle adjective from chisel (v.).


gouge (n.)

mid-14c., chisel with a concave blade, from Old French gouge, from Late Latin gubia, alteration of
gulbia hollow beveled chisel, probably from Gaulish (compare Old Irish gulban prick, prickle, Welsh
gylfin beak).


delve (v.)

Old English delfan to dig (class III strong verb; past tense dealf, past participle dolfen), common
West Germanic verb (cognates: Old Saxon delban, Dutch delven, Middle High German telben to dig),
from PIE root *dhelbh- (cognates: Lithuanian delba crowbar, Russian dolbit', Czech dlabati, Polish
d&#322;uba&#263; to chisel; Russian dolot&oacute;, Czech dlato, Polish d&#322;uto chisel). Weak
inflections emerged 14c.-16c. Related: Delved; delving.


celt (n.)

stone chisel, 1715, from a Latin ghost word (apparently a misprint of certe) in Job xix:24 in
Vulgate: stylo ferreo, et plumbi lamina, vel celte sculpantur in silice; translated, probably
correctly, in KJV as, That they were graven with an iron pen and lead in the rock for ever. But
assumed by others to be a genuine carving tool, partly because it was in the Bible, and thereafter
adapted by archaeologists as a name for a class of prehistoric implements.


scalpel (n.)

1742, from Latin scalpellum a surgical knife, diminutive of scalprum knife, chisel, tool for
scraping or cutting, from scalpere to carve, cut, related to sculpere to carve, from PIE root
*(s)kel- to cut, cleave (see scale (n.1)).


smith (n.)

Old English smi&#240; blacksmith, armorer, one who works in metal (jewelers as well as blacksmiths),
more broadly, handicraftsman, practitioner of skilled manual arts (also including carpenters), from
Proto-Germanic *smithaz skilled worker (cognates: Old Saxon smith, Old Norse smi&#240;r, Danish
smed, Old Frisian smith, Old High German smid, German Schmied, Gothic -smi&thorn;a, in aiza-
smi&#254;a coppersmith), from PIE root *smi- to cut, work with a sharp instrument (cognates: Greek
smile knife, chisel). Attested as a surname since at least c.975.


