chivalrous (adj.)

mid-14c., from Old French chevaleros knightly, noble, chivalrous, from chevalier (see chevalier;
also compare chivalry). According to OED, obsolete in English and French from mid-16c. Not revived
in French, but brought back in English late 18c. by romantic writers fond of medieval settings.


gentile (n.)

late 14c., chivalrous person; member of the nobility; see gentile (adj.). Also used during 14c. to
mean both one who is not a Christian and one who is not a Jew. The Latin word was used in Vulgate to
translate Greek ethnikos, from ta ethne the nations, which translated Hebrew ha goyim the (non-
Jewish) nations.


unchivalrous (adj.)

1814, from un- (1) not + chivalrous. Related: Unchivalrously; unchivalric.


quixotic (adj.)

extravagantly chivalrous, 1791, from Don Quixote, romantic, impractical hero of Cervantes' satirical
novel Don Quixote de la Mancha (1605; English translation by 1620). His name literally means thigh,
also a cuisse (a piece of armor for the thigh), in Modern Spanish quijote, from Latin coxa hip.
Related: Quixotical; quixotically.


emprise (n.)

c.1300, chivalrous endeavor, from Old French emprise (12c.) enterprise, venture, adventure,
undertaking, from Vulgar Latin *imprensa (source of Proven&ccedil;al empreza, Spanish empresa,
Italian impresa), from *imprendere to undertake, from in- + prehendere to take (see prehensile).
Archaic in English; in French now with a literal sense a hold, a grip.


joust (n.)

c.1300, from Old French joustes, from joster (see joust (v.)). The sport was popular with Anglo-
Norman knights.  These early tournaments were very rough affairs, in every sense, quite unlike the
chivalrous contests of later days; the rival parties fought in groups, and it was considered not
only fair but commendable to hold off until you saw some of your adversaries getting tired and then
to join in the attack on them; the object was not to break a lance in the most approved style, but
frankly to disable as many opponents as possible for the sake of obtaining their horses, arms, and
ransoms. [L.F. Salzman, English Life in the Middle Ages, Oxford, 1950]


lady (n.)

c.1200, lafdi, lavede, from Old English hl&aelig;fdige mistress of a household, wife of a lord,
literally one who kneads bread, from hlaf bread (see loaf) + -dige maid, related to d&aelig;ge maker
of dough (see dey (n.1); also compare lord (n.)). The medial -f- disappeared 14c. Not found outside
English except where borrowed from it.    Sense of woman of superior position in society is c.1200;
woman whose manners and sensibilities befit her for high rank in society is from 1861 (ladylike in
this sense is from 1580s, and ladily from c.1400). Meaning woman as an object of chivalrous love is
from early 14c. Used commonly as an address to any woman since 1890s. Applied in Old English to the
Holy Virgin, hence many extended usages in plant names, place names, etc., from genitive singular
hl&aelig;fdigan, which in Middle English merged with the nominative, so that lady- often represents
(Our) Lady's, as in ladybug. Ladies' man first recorded 1784. Lady of pleasure recorded from 1640s.


