choir (n.)

c.1300, queor part of the church where the choir sings, from Old French cuer, quer choir of a church
(architectural); chorus of singers (13c., Modern French choeur), from Latin chorus choir (see
chorus). Meaning band of singers is c.1400, quyre. Re-spelled mid-17c. on Latin model.


choir-boy (n.)

also choir boy, 1769, from choir + boy. As a type of innocence, by 1885.


quire (n.2)

early form and later variant spelling of choir (q.v.).


recessional (adj.)

1858, from recession + -al (1). As a noun, hymn sung while the clergy and choir are leaving church,
1864, with -al (2).


clerestory (n.)

early 15c., probably from clere clear, in a sense light, lighted (see clear (adj.)), and story
(n.2), though this sense of that word is not otherwise found so early. Originally the upper part of
the nave, transepts, and choir of a large church; so called because pierced with windows. Related:
Clerestorial.


console (n.)

1706, a cabinet; an ornamental base structure, from French console a bracket (16c.), of uncertain
origin, possibly from Middle French consolateur, literally one who consoles, word used for carved
human figures supporting cornices, shelves or rails in choir stalls. Another guess connects it to
Latin consolidare. Sense evolved to body of a musical organ (1881), radio cabinet (1925), then
cabinet for a TV, stereo, etc. (1944).


chancel (n.)

c.1300, part of the church around the altar, from Old French chancel, from Late Latin cancellus
lattice, from Latin cancelli (plural) grating, bars (see cancel); sense extended in Late Latin from
the lattice-work that separated the choir from the nave in a church to the space itself.


choral (adj.)

1580s, from Middle French choral or directly from Medieval Latin choralis belonging to a chorus or
choir, from Latin chorus (see chorus).


chorister (n.)

member of a choir, mid-14c., queristre, from Anglo-French cueriste, French choriste, from Church
Latin chorista, from Latin chorus (see chorus) + -ster. Modern form is from late 16c.


decay (v.)

late 15c., to decrease, from Anglo-French decair, Old North French decair (Old French decheoir,
12c., Modern French d&eacute;choir) to fall, set (of the sun), weaken, decline, decay, from Vulgar
Latin *decadere to fall off, from de- (see de-) + Latin cadere to fall (see case (n.1)). Meaning
decline, deteriorate is c.1500; that of to decompose, rot is from 1570s. Related: Decayed; decaying.


preach (v.)

at first in late Old English predician, a loan word from Church Latin; reborrowed 12c. as preachen,
from Old French preechier to preach, give a sermon (11c., Modern French pr&#233;cher), from Late
Latin praedicare to proclaim publicly, announce (in Medieval Latin to preach), from Latin prae
before (see pre-) + dicare to proclaim, to say (see diction). Related: Preached; preaching. To
preach to the converted is recorded from 1867 (form preach to the choir attested from 1979).


contrive (v.)

early 14c., from Old French controver (Modern French controuver) to find out, contrive, imagine,
from Late Latin contropare to compare (via a figure of speech), from Latin com- with (see com-) +
tropus song, musical mode, from Greek tropos figure of speech (see trope).    Sense evolution (in
French) was from invent with ingenuity to invent falsely. Spelled contreve until unexplained 15c.
sound change that also affected briar, friar, choir. Related: Contrived; contriving.


chorus (n.)

1560s, from Latin chorus a dance in a circle, the persons singing and dancing, the chorus of a
tragedy, from Greek khoros band of dancers or singers, dance, dancing ground, perhaps from PIE
*gher- to grasp, enclose, if the original sense of the Greek word is enclosed dancing floor.
Extension from dance to voice is because Attic drama arose from tales inserted in the intervals of
the dance. In Attic tragedy, the khoros (of 12 or 15 (tragic) or 24 (comedic) persons) gave
expression, between the acts, to the moral and religious sentiments evoked by the actions of the
play.    When a Poet wished to bring out a piece, he asked a Chorus from the Archon, and the
expenses, being great, were defrayed by some rich citizen (the khoregos): it was furnished by the
Tribe and trained originally by the Poet himself [Liddell &amp; Scott]  Originally in English used
in theatrical sense; meaning of a choir first attested 1650s. Meaning the refrain of a song (which
the audience joins in singing) is 1590s. As a verb, 1703, from the noun. Chorus girl is 1894.


stall (n.1)

place in a stable for animals, Old English steall standing place, position, state; place where
cattle are kept, fishing ground, from Proto-Germanic *stalla- (cognates: Old Norse stallr pedestal
for idols, altar; crib, manger, Old Frisian stal, Old High German stall stand, place, stable, stall,
German Stall stable, Stelle place), from PIE root *stel- to put, stand, with derivatives referring
to a standing object or place (cognates: Greek stele standing block, slab, stellein to set in order,
arrange, array, equip, make ready; Latin stolidus insensible, dull, brutish, properly unmovable).
Meaning partially enclosed seat in a choir is attested from c.1400; that of urinal in a men's room
is from 1967. Several meanings, including that of a stand for selling (mid-13c., implied in
stallage), probably are from (or influenced by) Anglo-French and Old French estal station, position;
stall of a stable; stall in a market; a standing still; a standing firm (12c., Modern French
&eacute;tal butcher's stall). This, along with Italian stallo place, stalla stable is a borrowing
from a Germanic source from the same root as the native English word.


