choice (n.)

mid-14c., that which is choice, from choice (adj.) blended with earlier chois (n.) action of
selecting (c.1300); power of choosing (early 14c.), someone or something chosen (late 14c.), from
Old French chois one's choice; fact of having a choice (12c., Modern French choix), from verb
choisir to choose, distinguish, discern; recognize, perceive, see, from a Germanic source related to
Old English ceosan to choose, taste, try; see choose. Late Old English chis fastidious, choosy, from
or related to ceosan, probably also contributed to the development of choice.   Replaced Old English
cyre choice, free will, from the same base, probably because the imported word was closer to choose
[see note in OED].


choice (adj.)

worthy to be chosen, distinguished, excellent, mid-14c., from choice (n.). Related: Choiceness.


Hobson&#039;s choice (n.)

English university slang term, supposedly a reference to Thomas Hobson (c.1544-1631), Cambridge
stable manager who let horses and gave customers a choice of the horse next in line or none at all.
Phrase popularized c.1660 by Milton, who was at Cambridge from 1625-29.


pro-choice (adj.)

favoring a right to abortion, 1975, from pro- + choice.


option (n.)

c.1600, action of choosing, from French option (Old French opcion), from Latin optionem (nominative
optio) choice, free choice, liberty to choose, from root of optare to desire, choose, from PIE root
*op- (2) to choose, prefer. Meaning thing that may be chosen is attested from 1885. Commercial
transaction sense first recorded 1755 (the verb in this sense is from 1934). As a North American
football play, it is recorded from 1954.


pro-life (adj.)

opposed to abortion, first attested 1976, from pro- + life. Hostile alternative anti-choice attested
1978 in Ms. magazine (see pro-choice).    What hypocrisy to call such anti-humanitarian people 'pro-
life.' Call them what they are -- antichoice. [Ms., Oct. 8, 1978]


Angus

masc. proper name, Scottish, related to Irish Aonghus, a compound that may be rendered in English as
one choice. Also the name of a county in Scotland, hence a breed of cattle (1842) associated with
that region.


wording (n.)

choice of words, manner in which something is expressed, apparently coined by Milton in
Eikonoklastes (1649). From present participle of word (v.).


anti-choice (adj.)

also antichoice, 1978; see pro-life.


Hennessey

Irish surname, from O'(h)Aonghusa descendant of Aonghus (one-choice).


radar (n.)

electronic system for locating objects by means of radio waves, 1941, acronym (more or less) from
radio detecting and ranging. The U.S. choice, it won out over British radiolocation. Figurative from
1950.


will (v.2)

Old English willian to determine by act of choice, from will (n.). From mid-15c. as dispose of by
will or testament. Often difficult to distinguish from will (v.1).


dainty (adj.)

c.1300, deinte, delightful, pleasing, from dainty (n.). Meaning evolved in Middle English to choice,
excellent (late 14c.) to delicately pretty. Related: Daintiness.


elective (adj.)

early 15c., from Late Latin electivus, from electus, past participle of eligere (see election). In
reference to school subjects studied at the student's choice, first recorded 1847. As a noun, from
1701.


bucko (n.)

term of address, originally (1883) nautical and with a sense of swaggering, domineering fellow.
Probably from buck (n.1) in the slang sense of a blood or choice spirit.There are in London divers
lodges or societies of Bucks, formed in imitation of the Free Masons: one was held at the Rose, in
Monkwell-street, about the year 1705. The president is styled the Grand Buck. [Dictionary of the
Vulgar Tongue, 1811]


vote (n.)

mid-15c., formal expression of one's wish or choice with regard to a proposal, candidate, etc., from
Latin votum a vow, wish, promise to a god, solemn pledge, dedication, noun use of neuter of votus,
past participle of vovere to promise, dedicate (see vow (n.)). Meaning totality of voters of a
certain class or type is from 1888.


flu (n.)

1839, flue, shortening of influenza. Spelling flu attested from 1893. For choice of middle syllable,
not a common method of shortening in English, Weekley compares tec for detective, scrip for
subscription.


alternative (adj.)

1580s, offering one or the other of two, from Medieval Latin alternativus, from Latin alternatus,
past participle of alternare (see alternate (v.)). Meaning purporting to be a superior choice to
what is in general use was current by 1970 (earliest reference is to the media). Alternative energy
is from 1975. Related: Alternatively.


adopt (v.)

c.1500, a back-formation from adoption or else from Middle French adopter or directly from Latin
adoptare take by choice, choose for oneself, select, choose (especially a child). Originally in
English also of friends, fathers, citizens, etc. Sense of to legally take as one's own child and
that of to embrace, espouse a practice, method, etc. are from c.1600. Related: Adopted; adopting.


analects (n.)

1650s, literary gleanings, from Latinized form of Greek analekta, literally things chosen, neuter
plural of analektos select, choice, verbal adjective of analegein to gather up, collect, from ana-
up (see ana-) + legein to gather, also to choose words, hence to speak (see lecture (n.)).


adoption (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French adopcion or directly from Latin adoptionem (nominative adoptio), noun of
action from past participle stem of adoptare chose for oneself, take by choice, select, adopt,
especially to take into a family, adopt as a child, from ad- to (see ad-) + optare choose, wish,
desire (see option (n.)).


elite (n.)

1823, from French &eacute;lite selection, choice, from Old French eslite (12c.), fem. past
participle of elire, elisre pick out, choose, from Latin eligere choose (see election). Borrowed in
Middle English as chosen person (late 14c.), especially a bishop-elect; died out mid-15c.; re-
introduced by Byron's Don Juan. As an adjective by 1852. As a typeface, first recorded 1920.


selection (n.)

1620s, act of selecting, from Latin selectionem (nominative selectio) a choosing out, choice,
selection, noun of action from past participle stem of seligere (see select (adj.)). Meaning thing
selected is from 1805. Biological sense is from 1837; applied to actions of breeders (methodical
selection), hence its use by Darwin (natural selection; 1857). French s&#233;lection is a 19c.
borrowing from English.


elegant (adj.)

late 15c., from Middle French &eacute;l&eacute;gant (15c.), from Latin elegantem (nominative
elegans) choice, fine, tasteful, collateral form of present participle of eligere select with care,
choose. Elegans was originally a term of reproach, dainty, fastidious; the notion of tastefully
refined emerged in classical Latin. Related: Elegantly.


select (adj.)

1560s, from Latin selectus, past participle of seligere choose out, single out, select; separate,
cull, from se- apart (see secret (n.)) + legere to gather, select (see lecture (n.)). The noun
meaning a selected person or thing, that which is choice is recorded from c.1600. New England
selectman first recorded 1640s.


inelegant (adj.)

c.1500, from French in&eacute;l&eacute;gant (15c.), from Latin inelegantem (nominative inelegans)
not choice, without taste, without judgment, from in- not (see in- (1)) + elegans (see elegant).
Related: Inelegantly; inelegance.


Fergus

masc. proper name, from Gaelic Fearghus or Old Irish Fergus man-ability, first element cognate with
Latin vir man, second from Old Irish gus ability, excellence, strength, inclination, from Celtic
root *gustu- choice, from PIE root *geus- to taste (see gusto).


ordnance (n.)

cannon, artillery, 1540s, a clipped form of ordinance (q.v.) which was attested from late 14c. in
the sense of military materials, provisions of war; a sense now obsolete but which led to those of
engines for discharging missiles (early 15c.) and branch of the military concerned with stores and
materials (late 15c.). The shorter word was established in these distinct senses by 17c. Ordnance
survey (1833), official survey of Great Britain and Ireland, was undertaken by the government under
the direction of the Master-General of the Ordnance (a natural choice, because gunners have to be
skilled at surveying ranges and distances).


alternate (adj.)

1510s, from Latin alternatus one after the other, past participle of alternare to do first one thing
then the other; exchange parts, from alternus one after the other, alternate, in turns, reciprocal,
from alter the other (see alter). Alternate means by turns; alternative means offering a choice.
Both imply two kinds or things.


multiple (adj.)

1640s, involving many parts, from French multiple (14c.), from Late Latin multiplus manifold, from
Latin multi- many, much (see multi-) + -plus -fold (see -plus). The noun is from 1680s, in
mathematics, from the adjective. Multiple choice as a type of question attested from 1828. Multiple
exposure first recorded 1923.


election (n.)

late 13c., from Anglo-French eleccioun, Old French elecion choice, election, selection (12c.), from
Latin electionem (nominative electio), noun of action from past participle stem of eligere pick out,
select, from ex- out (see ex-) + -ligere, comb. form of legere to choose, read (see lecture (n.)).
Theological sense is from late 14c.


either (adj.)

Old English &aelig;g&eth;er, contraction of &aelig;ghw&aelig;&eth;er each of two, both, from a
always (see aye (adv.)) + ge- collective prefix + hw&aelig;&eth;er which of two, whether (see
whether).    Cognate with Dutch ieder, Old High German eogiwedar, German jeder either, each, every).
Modern sense of one or the other of two is late 13c. Use of either-or to suggest an unavoidable
choice between alternatives (1931) in some cases reflects Danish enten-eller, title of an 1843 book
by Kierkegaard.


vanilla (n.)

1660s, pod of the vanilla plant, from Spanish vainilla vanilla plant, literally little pod,
diminutive of vaina sheath, from Latin vagina sheath of an ear of grain, hull of a plant (see
vagina). So called from the shape of the pods. European discovery 1521 by Hernando Cortes' soldiers
on reconnaissance in southeastern Mexico. Meaning flavoring extracted from the vanilla bean is
attested by 1728. Meaning conventional, of ordinary sexual preferences is 1970s, from notion of
whiteness and the common choice of vanilla ice cream.


exquisite (adj.)

early 15c., carefully selected, from Latin exquisitus carefully sought out, thus, choice, from past
participle of exquirere search out thoroughly, from ex- out (see ex-) + quaerere to seek (see query
(v.)).    Of any thing (good or bad, torture as well as art) brought to a highly wrought condition,
sometimes shading into disapproval. A vogue word 15c.-18c., given wide extensions of meaning, none
of which survives. The main modern sense of of consummate and delightful excellence is first
attested 1579, in Lyly's Euphues. Related: Exquisitely; exquisiteness. The noun meaning a dandy, fop
is from 1819.


mohair (n.)

1610s, earlier mocayre, 1560s, fine hair of the Angora goat, also a fabric made from this, from
Middle French mocayart (16c.), Italian mocaiarro, both from Arabic mukhayyar cloth of goat hair,
literally selected, choice, from khayyara he chose. Spelling influenced in English by association
with hair. Moire watered silk (1650s) probably represents English mohair borrowed into French and
back into English.


prerogative (n.)

special right or privilege granted to someone, late 14c. (in Anglo-Latin from late 13c.), from Old
French prerogative (14c.), Medieval Latin prerogativa special right, from Latin praerogativa
prerogative, previous choice or election, originally (with tribus, centuria) unit of 100 voters who
by lot voted first in the Roman comita, noun use of fem. of praerogativus (adj.) chosen to vote
first, from praerogere ask before others, from prae- before (see pre-) + rogare to ask (see
rogation).


creation (n.)

late 14c., action of creating, a created thing, from Old French creacion (14c., Modern French
cr&eacute;ation) creation, coming into being, from Latin creationem (nominative creatio) a creating,
a producing, in classical use an electing, appointment, choice, noun of action from past participle
stem of creare (see create). Meaning that which God has created, the world and all in it is from
1610s. The native word in the Biblical sense was Old English frum-sceaft. Of fashion costumes,
desserts, etc., from 1870s, from French. Creation science is attested by 1970.


rugged (adj.)

c.1300, rough, shaggy, careworn (originally of animals), from Old Norse rogg shaggy tuft (see rug).
The precise relationship to ragged is not quite clear, but the stem is no doubt ultimately the same
[OED]. Meaning vigorous, strong, robust is American English, by 1848.We were challenged with a
peace-time choice between the American system of rugged individualism and a European philosophy of
diametrically opposed doctrines -- doctrines of paternalism and state socialism. [Herbert Hoover,
speech in New York, Oct. 22, 1928]  Hoover said the phrase was not his own, and it is attested from
1897, though not in a patriotic context. Related: Ruggedly; ruggedness.


welcome (n.)

Old English wilcuma welcome! exclamation of kindly greeting, from earlier wilcuma (n.) welcome
guest, literally one whose coming suits another's will or wish, from willa pleasure, desire, choice
(see will (n.)) + cuma guest, related to cuman (see come). Similar formation in Old High German
willicomo, Middle Dutch wellecome. Meaning entertainment or public reception as a greeting is
recorded from 1530. The adjective is from Old English wilcuma. You're welcome as a formulaic
response to thank you is attested from 1907. Welcome mat is from 1908; welcome wagon is attested
from 1940.


helmet (n.)

mid-15c., perhaps a diminutive of Old English helm protection, covering; crown, helmet (see helm
(n.2)). But Barnhart says from Middle French helmet (Modern French heaume), diminutive of helme
helmet, from the same Germanic source as helm (n.2). Middle English Dictionary points to both
without making a choice. Old English helm never became an active term in the standard vocabulary of
English. [Barnhart]


doubt (v.)

early 13c., to dread, fear, from Old French doter doubt, be doubtful; be afraid, from Latin dubitare
to doubt, question, hesitate, waver in opinion (related to dubius uncertain; see dubious),
originally to have to choose between two things.    The sense of fear developed in Old French and
was passed on to English. Meaning to be uncertain is attested in English from c.1300. The -b- was
restored 14c. by scribes in imitation of Latin. Replaced Old English tweogan (noun twynung), from
tweon two, on notion of of two minds or the choice of two implied in Latin dubitare (compare German
Zweifel doubt, from zwei two).


luxury (n.)

c.1300, sexual intercourse; mid-14c., lasciviousness, sinful self-indulgence, from Old French
luxurie debauchery, dissoluteness, lust (Modern French luxure), from Latin luxuria excess, luxury,
extravagance, profusion; delicacy (source also of Spanish lujuria, Italian lussuria), from luxus
excess, extravagance, magnificence, probably a figurative use of luxus (adj.) dislocated, which is
related to luctari wrestle, strain (see reluctance).    Meaning sensual pleasure is late 14c. Lost
its pejorative taint 17c. Meaning habit of indulgence in what is choice or costly is from 1630s;
that of sumptuous surroundings is from 1704; that of something enjoyable or comfortable beyond
life's necessities is from 1780. Used as an adjective from 1916.


scientific (adj.)

1580s, from Middle French scientifique, from Medieval Latin scientificus pertaining to science, from
Latin scientia knowledge (see science) + -ficus making + facere to make (see factitious). Originally
used to translate Greek epistemonikos making knowledge in Aristotle's Ethics.   Sciential (mid-15c.,
based on knowledge, from Latin scientialis) is the classical purists' choice for an adjective based
on science. Scientic (1540s) and scient (late 15c.) also have been used. First record of scientific
revolution is from 1803; scientific method is from 1854; scientific notation is from 1961. Related:
Scientifical; scientifically.


or (conj.)

c.1200, from Old English conjunction o&thorn;&thorn;e either, or, related to Old Frisian ieftha,
Middle Dutch ofte, Old Norse e&eth;a, Old High German odar, German oder, Gothic ai&thorn;&thorn;au
or. This was extended in early Middle English (and Old High German) with an -r ending, perhaps by
analogy with choice between alternative words that ended thus (such as either, whether), then
reduced to o&thorn;&thorn;r, at first in unstressed situations (commonly thus in Northern and
Midlands English by 1300), and finally reduced to or, though other survived in this sense until 16c.
The contraction took place in the second term of an alternative, such as either ... or, a common
construction in Old English, where both words originally were o&thorn;&thorn;e (see nor).


heresy (n.)

an opinion of private men different from that of the catholick and orthodox church [Johnson],
c.1200, from Old French heresie (12c.), from Latin h&aelig;resis, school of thought, philosophical
sect, used by Christian writers for unorthodox sect or doctrine, from Greek hairesis a taking or
choosing, a choice, from haireisthai take, seize, middle voice of hairein to choose, of unknown
origin, perhaps from PIE *ser- (5) to seize (cognates: Hittite &#353;aru booty, Welsh herw booty).
The Greek word was used in the New Testament in reference to the Sadducees, Pharisees, and even the
Christians, as sects of Judaism, but in English bibles it usually is translated sect. Meaning
religious belief opposed to the orthodox doctrines of the Church evolved in Late Latin. Transferred
(non-religious) use from late 14c.


anarchy (n.)

1530s, from French anarchie or directly from Medieval Latin anarchia, from Greek anarkhia lack of a
leader, the state of people without a government (in Athens, used of the Year of Thirty Tyrants, 404
B.C., when there was no archon), noun of state from anarkhos rulerless, from an- without (see an-
(1)) + arkhos leader (see archon).    Either the State for ever, crushing individual and local life,
taking over in all fields of human activity, bringing with it its wars and its domestic struggles
for power, its palace revolutions which only replace one tyrant by another, and inevitably at the
end of this development there is ... death! Or the destruction of States, and new life starting
again in thousands of centers on the principle of the lively initiative of the individual and groups
and that of free agreement. The choice lies with you! [Prince Peter Kropotkin (1842-1921)]


hog (n.)

late 12c. (implied in hogaster), swine reared for slaughter (usually about a year old), also used by
stockmen for young sheep (mid-14c.) and for horse older than one year, suggesting the original sense
had something to do with an age, not a type of animal. Not evidenced in Old English, but it may have
existed. Possibility of British Celtic origin [Watkins, etc.] is regarded by OED as improbable.
Figurative sense of gluttonous person is first recorded early 15c. Meaning Harley-Davidson
motorcycle is attested from 1967.    To go hog wild is from 1904. Hog in armor awkward or clumsy
person in ill-fitting attire is from 1650s. Phrase to go the whole hog (1828) is sometimes said to
be from the butcher shop option of buying the whole slaughtered animal (at a discount) rather than
just the choice bits. But it is perhaps rather from the story (recorded in English from 1779) of
Muslim sophists, forbidden by the Quran from eating a certain unnamed part of the hog, who debated
which part was intended and managed to exempt the whole of it from the prohibition. Road hog is
attested from 1886.


choose (v.)

Old English ceosan choose, seek out, select; decide, test, taste, try; accept, approve (class II
strong verb; past tense ceas, past participle coren), from Proto-Germanic *keus- (cognates: Old
Frisian kiasa, Old Saxon kiosan, Dutch kiezen, Old High German kiosan, German kiesen, Old Norse
kjosa, Gothic kiusan choose, Gothic kausjan to taste, test), from PIE root *geus- to taste, relish
(see gusto). Only remotely related to choice. Variant spelling chuse is Middle English, very
frequent 16c.-18c. The irregular past participle leveled out to chosen by 1200.


liberty (n.)

late 14c., free choice, freedom to do as one chooses, from Old French libert&eacute; freedom,
liberty, free will (14c.), from Latin libertatem (nominative libertas) freedom, condition of a free
man; absence of restraint; permission, from liber free (see liberal)The spirit of liberty is the
spirit which is not too sure it is right. [Learned Hand, 1944]Nautical sense of leave of absence is
from 1758. To take liberties go beyond the bounds of propriety is from 1620s. Sense of privileges by
grant (14c.) led to sense of a person's private land (mid-15c.), which yielded sense in 18c. in both
England and America of a district within a county but having its own justice of the peace, and also
a district adjacent to a city and in some degree under its municipal jurisdiction (as in Northern
Liberties of Philadelphia). Also compare Old French libert&eacute;s local rights, laws, taxes.


lot (n.)

Old English hlot object (anything from dice to straw, but often a chip of wood with a name inscribed
on it) used to determine someone's share, also what falls to a person by lot, from Proto-Germanic
*khlutom (cognates: Old Norse hlutr lot, share, Old Frisian hlot lot, Old Saxon hlot, Middle Dutch,
Dutch lot, Old High German hluz share of land, German Los; Old English hleotan to cast lots, to
foretell), of unknown origin. The object was placed with others in a receptacle, which was shaken,
the winner being the one that fell out first. Hence, to cast lots. In some cases the lots were drawn
by hand. The word was adopted from Germanic into the Romanic languages (compare lottery, lotto).
Meaning choice resulting from the casting of lots first attested c.1200.    Sense of plot of land is
first recorded 1630s (distribution of the best property in new settlements often determined by
casting lots), that of group, collection is 1725, from notion of auction lots. The generalized sense
of great many is first attested in 1812. To cast (one's) lot with another is to agree to share
winnings.


