Christian (n., adj.)

16c., forms replacing earlier Christen, from Old English cristen (noun and adjective), from a West
Germanic borrowing of Church Latin christianus, from Ecclesiastical Greek christianos, from Christos
(see Christ). First used in Antioch, according to Acts xi:25-26. Christian Science as the name of a
religious sect is from 1863.


Christianity (n.)

c.1300, cristente, Christians as a whole; state of being a Christian, from Old French
crestient&eacute; Christendom; spiritual authority; baptism (Modern French
chr&eacute;tient&eacute;), from Church Latin christianitatem (nominative christianitas), noun of
state from christianus (see Christian). Gradually respelled to conform with Latin. Christendom is
the older word for it. Old English also had cristennes.


Christianism (n.)

1560s, Christianity, from Christian + -ism. From c.2004 in reference to politicized fundamentalist
Christianity in the U.S. Related: Christianist.


christianize (v.)

1590s, from Christian + -ize. Originally intransitive as well as transitive. Related: Christianized;
christianizing; christianization.


christen (v.)

c.1200, from Old English cristnian to baptize, literally to make Christian, from cristen Christian
(see Christian). General meaning of to name is attested from mid-15c. Related: Christened;
christening.


infidel

mid-15c. (adjective and noun), from Middle French infid&egrave;le, from Latin infidelis unfaithful,
not to be trusted, later unbelieving, from in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + fidelis faithful
(see fidelity). In 15c. a non-Christian (especially a Saracen); later one who does not believe in
religion (1520s). Also used to translate Arabic qafir, which is from a root meaning to disbelieve,
to deny, strictly referring to all non-Muslims but virtually synonymous with Christian; hence, from
a Muslim or Jewish point of view, a Christian (1530s; see kaffir).


unchristian (adj.)

1550s, not professing Christianity (of persons), from un- (1) not + Christian (adj.). Meaning at
variance with Christian principles (of actions) is recorded from 1580s.


C.E.

as an abbreviation for Common Era or Christian Era, and a non-Christian alternative to A.D.,
attested from 1838 in works on Jewish history. Companion B.C.E. is attested from 1881.


Nazarene (n.)

c.1200, holy man; early 13c., a native or resident of Nazareth, childhood home of Jesus, from Late
Latin Nazarenus, from Greek Nazarenos, from Hebrew Natzerath. As an adjective from late 13c. As a
follower of Jesus from late 14c. In Talmudic Hebrew notzri, literally of Nazareth, meant a
Christian; likewise Arabic Nasrani (plural Nasara). In Christian use, however, it can be a nickname
for Jesus, or refer to an early Jewish Christian sect (1680s in English), or, in modern use, to a
member of the Church of the Nazarene, a U.S.-based Protestant denomination (1898 in this sense).


Sabbatarian (n.)

1610s, a Christian unusually strict about Sabbath observation, from Latin Sabbatarius (adj.), from
Sabbatum (see Sabbath). Meaning member of a Christian sect which maintained the Sabbath should be
observed on the seventh day is attested from 1640s; earlier sabbatary (1590s). Related:
Sabbatartianism.


Christendom (n.)

Old English cristendom Christianity, state of being a Christian, from cristen (see Christian) +
-dom, suffix of condition or quality. The native formation, crowded out by Latinate Christianity
except for sense lands where Christianity is the dominant religion (late 14c.). Similar formations
in Scandinavian languages.


Cristina

fem. proper name, the native form of Latin Christiana, fem. of Christianus (see Christian). In the
Middle Ages, the masculine form of the name (Cristian) was less popular in England than the
feminine, though Christian was common in Brittany. Surnames Christie, Chrystal, etc. represent
common Northern and Scottish pet forms of the names.


baptize (v.)

c.1300, from Old French batisier (11c.), from Latin baptizare, from Greek baptizein immerse, dip in
water, also figuratively, be over one's head (in debt, etc.), to be soaked (in wine); in Greek
Christian usage, baptize; from baptein to dip, steep, dye, color, from PIE root *gwabh- to dip,
sink. Christian baptism originally consisted in full immersion. Related: Baptized; baptizing.


antichristian (adj.)

1530s, pertaining to the antichrist, from antichrist + -ian; as hostile or opposed to to
Christianity or Christians (also anti-Christian), 1580s, from anti- + Christian (adj.).


unitarian (n.)

1680s, one who rejects the doctrine of the Trinity, from Modern Latin unitarius (1650s), from Latin
unitas (see unity) + -ian. Applied to Muslims and other non-Christian monotheists, but especially
(and with a capital -u-) of a Christian body originally founded upon the doctrine of unipersonality.
The American Unitarian Association formed in 1825. As an adjective from 1680s.


Bible-thumper (n.)

strict Christian, by 1843.


theism (n.)

1670s, belief in a deity or deities, (as opposed to atheism); by 1711 as belief in one god (as
opposed to polytheism); by 1714 as belief in the existence of God as creator and ruler of the
universe (as opposed to deism), the usual modern sense; see theist + -ism.    Theism assumes a
living relation of God to his creatures, but does not define it. It differs from deism in that the
latter is negative and involves a denial of revelation, while the former is affirmative, and
underlies Christianity. One may be a theist and not be a Christian, but he cannot be a Christian and
not be a theist. [Century Dictionary]


A-line (adj.)

descriptive of a dress or skirt flared in shape of a letter A, 1955, in reference to the designs of
Christian Dior (1905-1957).


Prester John

c.1300, Prestre Johan, legendary medieval Christian king and priest, said to have ruled either in
the Far East or Ethiopia. From Vulgar Latin *prester, a transition between Latin presbyter and
English priest. First mentioned in the West by mid-12c. chronicler Otto of Freising, who told how
Johannes Presbyter won a great victory over the Persians and the Medes. Between 1165 and 1177 a
forged letter purporting to be from him circulated in Europe. All this recalls the time when the
Christian West was culturally backwards and militarily threatened, dreaming of a mythical deliverer.
Compare Old French prestre Jehan (13c.), Italian prete Gianni.


dove (n.)

probably from Old English dufe- (found only in compounds), from Proto-Germanic *dubon (cognates: Old
Saxon duba, Old Norse dufa, Swedish duva, Middle Dutch duve, Dutch duif, Old High German tuba,
German Taube, Gothic -dubo), perhaps related to words for dive, in reference to its flight.
Originally applied to all pigeons, now mostly restricted to the turtle dove. A symbol of gentleness
from early Christian times, also of the Holy Spirit (as in Gen. viii:8-12), and of peace and
deliverance from anxiety; political meaning person who advocates peace attested by 1917, from the
Christian dove of peace.


Vanessa

fem. proper name, also the name of a butterfly genus. As a name, not much used in U.S. before 1950.
It appears to have been coined by Swift c.1711 as a pseudonym for Esther Vanhomrigh, who was
romantically attached to him, and composed of elements of her name. He used it in private
correspondence and published it in the poem Cadenus and Vanessa (1713).    The name Cadenus is an
anagram of Decanus; that of Vanessa is formed much in the same way, by placing the first syllable of
her sir-name before her christian-name, Hessy. [William Monck Mason, History and Antiquities of the
Collegiate and Cathedral Church of St. Patrick, Near Dublin, 1820]    As the name of a genus of
butterflies that includes the Red Admiral and the Painted Lady, it dates to 1808, chosen by Danish
entomologist Johan Christian Fabricius (1745-1808) for unknown reasons. He has no obvious connection
to Swift, and the theory that it was intended for *Phanessa, from Greek phanes a mystical divinity
in the Orphic system does no honor to his classical learning.


Anne

alternative form of the fem. proper name Anna (q.v.). In Christian tradition, the name of the mother
of the Virgin Mary.


kami

Japanese for superior, lord, a title given to governors, also used of deities; the word was chosen
by Japanese converts and Protestant missionaries to refer to the Christian god.


mister

as a title of courtesy before a man's Christian name, mid-15c., unaccented variant of master. As a
form of address, without a name and with a tinge of rudeness, from 1760.


Ephesians (n.)

New Testament epistle, late 14c., addressed to Christian residents of the Greek city of Ephesus, in
what is now western Turkey.


SCLC (n.)

initialism (acronym) of Southern Christian Leadership Conference, founded 1957 by the Rev. Martin
Luther King Jr., Bayard Rustin, and others.


evangelist (n.)

late 12c., Matthew, Mark, Luke or John, from Old French evangelist and directly from Late Latin
evangelista, from Greek euangelistes preacher of the gospel, literally bringer of good news, from
euangelizesthai bring good news, from eu- good (see eu-) + angellein announce, from angelos
messenger (see angel).    In early Greek Christian texts, the word was used of the four supposed
authors of the narrative gospels. Meaning itinerant preacher was another early Church usage, revived
in Middle English (late 14c.). Classical Greek euangelion meant the reward of good tidings; sense
transferred in Christian use to the glad tidings themselves. In Late Latin, Greek eu- regularly was
consonantized to ev- before vowels.


Sharps (n.)

type of breech-loading single-shot rifle, 1850, from J. Christian Sharps (1811-1874), U.S. gunsmith.


heathen (n.)

Old English h&aelig;&eth;en not Christian or Jewish, also as a noun, heathen man (especially of the
Danes), merged with Old Norse hei&eth;inn (adj.) heathen, pagan; perhaps literally pertaining to one
inhabiting uncultivated land; see heath + -en (2).    But historically assumed to be from Gothic
hai&thorn;no gentile, heathen woman, used by Ulfilas in the first translation of the Bible into a
Germanic language (as in in Mark vii:26, for Greek); if so it could be a derivative of Gothic
hai&thorn;i dwelling on the heath, but this sense is not recorded. It may have been chosen on model
of Latin paganus, with its root sense of rural (see pagan), or for resemblance to Greek ethne (see
gentile), or it may be a literal borrowing of that Greek word, perhaps via Armenian hethanos [Sophus
Bugge]. Like other basic words for exclusively Christian ideas (such as church) it likely would have
come first into Gothic and then spread to other Germanic languages.


church (n.)

Old English cirice, circe church, public place of worship; Christians collectively, from Proto-
Germanic *kirika (cognates: Old Saxon kirika, Old Norse kirkja, Old Frisian zerke, Middle Dutch
kerke, Dutch kerk, Old High German kirihha, German Kirche), probably [see note in OED] from Greek
kyriake (oikia), kyriakon doma Lord's (house), from kyrios ruler, lord, from PIE root *keue- to
swell (swollen, hence strong, powerful); see cumulus. Phonetic spelling from c.1200, established by
16c. For vowel evolution, see bury. As an adjective from 1570s.    Greek kyriakon (adj.) of the Lord
was used of houses of Christian worship since c.300, especially in the East, though it was less
common in this sense than ekklesia or basilike. An example of the direct Greek-to-Germanic progress
of many Christian words, via the Goths; it probably was used by West Germanic people in their pre-
Christian period.    Also picked up by Slavic, probably via Germanic (Old Church Slavonic criky,
Russian cerkov). Finnish kirkko, Estonian kirrik are from Scandinavian. Romance and Celtic languages
use variants of Latin ecclesia (such as French &eacute;glise, 11c.).   Church-bell was in late Old
English. Church-goer is from 1680s. Church key is early 14c.; slang use for can or bottle opener is
by 1954, probably originally U.S. college student slang. Church-mouse, proverbial in many languages
for its poverty, is 1731 in English.


B.C.E.

initialism (acronym) for Before Common Era or Before Christian Era, 1881; see C.E. A secular
alternative to B.C.


redeemer (n.)

early 15c., agent noun from redeem. Originally in the Christian sense, Savior of the world, Jesus
Christ; it replaced earlier redemptor.


humanitarianism (n.)

by 1794 as a Christian theological position, from humanitarian + -ism. Sense related to ethical
benevolence attested by 1838.


Christer (n.)

overly-zealous Christian, 1910, originally sailors' slang, from Christ + -er (1).


Donatist (n.)

mid-15c., adherent of a Christian sect in 4c. North Africa, from Medieval Latin Donatista, from
Donatus name of two of the principal men in it. The schism had more to do with episcopal succession
in Carthage than with doctrine. The name is literally bestowed, given.


YWCA (n.)

also Y.W.C.A., 1874, initialism (acronym) of Young Women's Christian Association.


Marcionite (n.)

1540, early Christian sect, named for Gnostic Marcion of Sinope (c.140), who denied any connection
between the Old Testament and the New. They contrasted the barbaric and incompetent creator in the
Old Testament, who favored bandits and killers, with the higher god of Christ. They also emphasized
virginity and rejection of marriage. They flourished, especially in the East, until late 4c.


YMCA (n.)

also Y.M.C.A., 1868, initialism (acronym) of Young Men's Christian Association.


skepticism (n.)

also scepticism, 1640s, from skeptic + -ism. Specifically regarding Christian religion, from 1800.


universalism (n.)

1805 in theology, the doctrine of universal salvation, from universal (adj.) + -ism. Universalist
one who, professing the Christian faith, believes in the eventual redemption of all humanity is
attested from 1620s.


precisian (n.)

one devoted to precision, 1570s, from precise + -ian on model of Christian, etc.


monism (n.)

the philosophical doctrine that there is only one principle, 1862, from Modern Latin monismus, from
Greek monos alone (see mono-). First used in German by German philosopher Baron Christian von Wolff
(1679-1754).


Mozarab (n.)

assimilated Christian in Moorish Spain, one who was allowed to continue practicing his religion in
exchange for political allegiance, from Spanish Mozarabe would-be Arab, from Arabic mostarib, from a
desiderative verbal form of Arab.


charity (n.)

mid-12c., benevolence for the poor, from Old French charit&eacute; (Christian) charity, mercy,
compassion; alms; charitable foundation (12c., Old North French carit&eacute;), from Latin caritatem
(nominative caritas) costliness, esteem, affection (in Vulgate often used as translation of Greek
agape love -- especially Christian love of fellow man -- perhaps to avoid the sexual suggestion of
Latin amor), from carus dear, valued, from PIE *karo-, from root *ka- to like, desire (see whore
(n.)).    Vulgate also sometimes translated agape by Latin dilectio, noun of action from diligere to
esteem highly, to love (see diligence).  Wyclif and the Rhemish version regularly rendered the
Vulgate dilectio by 'love,' caritas by 'charity.' But the 16th c. Eng. versions from Tindale to
1611, while rendering agape sometimes 'love,' sometimes 'charity,' did not follow the dilectio and
caritas of the Vulgate, but used 'love' more often (about 86 times), confining 'charity' to 26
passages in the Pauline and certain of the Catholic Epistles (not in I John), and the Apocalypse
.... In the Revised Version 1881, 'love' has been substituted in all these instances, so that it now
stands as the uniform rendering of agape. [OED]  Sense of charitable foundation or institution in
English attested by 1690s.


Uniate

pertaining to an Eastern Christian church that acknowledges the supremacy of the Pope, 1833, from
Russian uniyat, from unia unity, union, from Latin unus one (see one).


Dracula (n.)

the vampire, from in Bram Stoker's novel (1897). It was a surname of Prince Vlad II of Wallachia
(d.1476), and means in Romanian son of Dracul, literally the dragon, from the name and emblem taken
by Vlad's father, also named Vlad, c.1431 when he joined the Order of the Dragon, founded 1418 by
Sigismund the Glorious of Hungary to defend the Christian religion from the Turks and crush heretics
and schismatics.


muumuu (n.)

also muu-muu, 1923, from Hawaiian mu'u mu'u, literally cut off, name given to the local adaptation
of the dresses given to Island women by early 19c. Christian missionaries in the early days when a
few flowers sufficed for a garment [Don Blanding, Hula Moons, 1930]. So called because the native
style hangs from the shoulder and omits the high neck and the train.


gnosis (n.)

special knowledge of spiritual mysteries, 1703, from Greek gnosis investigation, knowledge, in
Christian writers, higher knowledge of spiritual things (see gnostic (adj.)).


Montanist (n.)

mid-15c., millenarian and severely ascetic sect that believed in continual direct inspiration of the
spirit and offered prominent church roles to women, from Montanus, Christian-inspired prophet in the
wilds of Phrygia c.160 C.E. The heresy persisted into the 6c. and helped bring prophecy into
disrepute in the established Church. Related: Montanism.


shut-eye (n.)

colloquial for sleep, 1899, from shut (v.) + eye (n.). Hans Christian Andersen's Ole Shut-eye, about
a being who makes children sleepy, came out 1842; The Shut-Eye Train popular children's poem by
Eugene Field, is from 1896.


