chronicle (n.)

c.1300, cronicle, from Anglo-French cronicle, from Old French cronique chronicle (Modern French
chronique), from Latin chronica (neuter plural mistaken for fem. singular), from Greek ta khronika
(biblia) the (books of) annals, chronology, neuter plural of khronikos of time, concerning time,
from khronos time (see chrono-). Ending modified in Anglo-French, perhaps by influence of article.
Old English had cranic chronicle, cranicwritere chronicler. The classical -h- was restored in
English from 16c.


chronicle (v.)

c.1400, croniclen, from chronicle (n.). Related: Chronicled; chronicling.


chronicler (n.)

early 15c., agent noun from chronicle (v.).


annalist (n.)

one who keeps a chronicle of events by year, 1610s, from French analiste; see annals + -ist.


coracle (n.)

round boat of wicker, coated with skins, 1540s (the thing is described, but not named, in the Anglo-
Saxon Chronicle from 9c.), from Welsh corwgl, from corwg, cognate with Gaelic curachan, Middle Irish
curach boat, which probably is the source of Middle English currock coracle (mid-15c.). The name is
perhaps from the hides that cover it (see corium).


hayseed (n.)

1570s in the literal sense of grass seed shaken out of hay, from hay + seed (n.). In U.S. slang
sense of comical rustic it dates from 1875. To have hayseed in (one's) hair was a common mid-19c.
way in U.S. to indicate a country person.    The opinion of the court was delivered by Justice Hunt;
the chief justice, in whose hair the Ohio hayseed still lingers, delivering a dissenting opinion
(etc.) [The Chronicle, New York, Nov. 12, 1874]


Hastings

Old English H&aelig;stingas The Hastings; settlement of the family or followers of a man called
*H&aelig;sta; literally H&aelig;sta's People.    The H&aelig;stingas were an important tribal group
referred to in an 8th cent. Northumbrian chronicle as the gens Hestingorum which seems to have kept
a separate identity as late as the early 11th cent. [Cambridge Dictionary of English Place-Names]


sweat (v.)

Old English sw&aelig;tan perspire, also work hard, from Proto-Germanic *swaitjan to sweat, from the
source of sweat (n.). Compare Frisian swette, Dutch zweeten, Danish svede, German schwitzen. Meaning
to be worried, vexed is recorded from c.1400. Transitive sense is from late 14c. Related: Sweated;
sweating. Sweating sickness was a sudden, often-fatal fever, accompanied by intense sweating, that
struck England 1485 and returned periodically through mid-16c., described in the original citation
(a chronicle from 1502) as a grete deth and hasty.


dentist (n.)

1759, from French dentiste, from dent tooth, from Latin dens (see tooth) + -ist.  Dentist figures it
now in our newspapers, and may do well enough for a French puffer, but we fancy Rutter is content
with being called a tooth-drawer [Edinburgh Chronicle, Sept. 15, 1759].   Tooth-drawer is attested
from late 14c.


Xmas (n.)

Christmas, 1551, X'temmas, wherein the X is an abbreviation for Christ in Christmas, English letter
X being identical in form (but not sound signification) to Greek chi, the first letter of Greek
Christos Christ (see Christ). The earlier way to abbreviate the word in English was Xp- or Xr-
(corresponding to the Chr- in Greek &#935;&#961;&#953;&#963;&#964;&#959;&#962;), and the form Xres
m&aelig;sse for Christmas appears in the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle (c.1100).


giant (n.)

c.1300, from Old French geant, earlier jaiant (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *gagantem (nominative
gagas), from Latin gigas giant, from Greek gigas (genitive gigantos), one of a race of savage
beings, sons of Gaia and Uranus, eventually destroyed by the gods, probably from a pre-Greek
language. Replaced Old English ent, eoten, also gigant. The Greek word was used in Septuagint to
refer to men of great size and strength, hence the expanded use in modern languages. Of very tall
persons from 1550s; of persons who have any quality in extraordinary degree, from 1530s.  In
&thorn;at tyme wer here non hauntes Of no men bot of geauntes. [Wace's Chronicle, c.1330]


ant (n.)

c.1500, from Middle English ampte (late 14c.), from Old English &aelig;mette ant, from West Germanic
*amaitjo (cognates: Old High German ameiza, German Ameise) from a compound of bases *ai- off, away +
*mai- cut, from PIE *mai- to cut (cognates: maim). Thus the insect's name is, etymologically, the
biter off.  As &thorn;ycke as ameten crepe&thorn; in an amete hulle [chronicle of Robert of
Gloucester, 1297] Emmet survived into 20c. as an alternative form. White ant termite is from 1729.
To have ants in one's pants be nervous and fidgety is from 1934, made current by a popular song;
antsy embodies the same notion.


goblin (n.)

early 14c., a devil, incubus, fairy, from Old French gobelin (12c., as Medieval Latin Gobelinus, the
name of a spirit haunting the region of Evreux, in chronicle of Ordericus Vitalis), of uncertain
origin, perhaps related to German kobold (see cobalt), or from Medieval Latin cabalus, from Greek
kobalos rogue, knave, kobaloi wicked spirits invoked by rogues, of unknown origin. Another
suggestion is that it is a diminutive of the proper name Gobel.    Though French gobelin was not
recorded until almost 250 years after appearance of the English term, it is mentioned in the
Medieval Latin text of the 1100's, and few people who believed in folk magic used Medieval Latin.
[Barnhart]


flee (v.)

Old English fleon take flight, fly from, avoid, escape (contracted class II strong verb; past tense
fleah, past participle flogen), from Proto-Germanic *fleuhan (cognates: Old High German fliohan, Old
Norse fl&ouml;ja, Old Frisian flia, Dutch vlieden, German fliehen, Gothic &thorn;liuhan to flee),
possibly from PIE *pleu- to flow (see pluvial).    Weak past tense and past participle fled emerged
Middle English, under influence of Scandinavian. Old English had a transitive form, geflieman put to
flight, which came in handy in the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle. Related: Fleeing.


strumpet (n.)

harlot; bold, lascivious woman, early 14c., of uncertain origin. One theory connects it with Latin
stuprata, fem. past participle of stuprare have illicit sexual relations with, or Late Latin strupum
dishonor, violation. But evidence for this is wanting and others suggest Middle Dutch strompe a
stocking, or strompen to stride, to stalk (as a prostitute might a customer). The major sources
don't seem to give much preference to any of these. Weekley notes Gregory's Chronicle (c.1450) has
streppett in same sense. In 18c.-early 19c., often abbreviated as strum and also used as a verb,
which led to some odd dictionary entries:    TO STRUM: to have carnal knowledge of a woman, also to
play badly on the harpsichord or any other stringed instrument. [Capt. Francis Grose, A Classical
Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, 1785]


snow (v.)

c.1300, from the noun, replacing Old English sniwan, which would have yielded modern snew (which
existed as a parallel form until 17c. and, in Yorkshire, even later), from the root of snow (n.).
The Old English verb is cognate with Middle Dutch sneuuwen, Dutch sneeuwen, Old Norse snjova,
Swedish sn&#246;ga.  Also &thorn;ikke as snow &thorn;at snew,  Or al so hail &thorn;at stormes blew.
[Robert Mannyng of Brunne, transl. Wace's Chronicle, c.1330]    The figurative sense of overwhelm;
surround, cover, and imprison (as deep snows can do to livestock) is 1880, American English, in
phrase to snow (someone) under. Snow job strong, persistent persuasion in a dubious cause is World
War II armed forces slang, probably from the same metaphoric image.


story (n.1)

connected account or narration of some happening, c.1200, originally narrative of important events
or celebrated persons of the past, from Old French estorie, estoire story, chronicle, history, from
Late Latin storia, shortened from Latin historia history, account, tale, story (see history).
Meaning recital of true events first recorded late 14c.; sense of narrative of fictitious events
meant to entertain is from c.1500. Not differentiated from history till 1500s. As a euphemism for a
lie it dates from 1690s. Meaning newspaper article is from 1892. Story-line first attested 1941.
That's another story that requires different treatment is attested from 1818. Story of my life sad
truth first recorded 1938, from typical title of an autobiography.


toe (n.)

Old English ta toe (plural tan), contraction of *tahe (Mercian tah&aelig;), from Proto-Germanic
*taihwo (cognates: Old Norse ta, Old Frisian tane, Middle Dutch te, Dutch teen (perhaps originally a
plural), Old High German zecha, German Zehe toe). Perhaps originally meaning fingers as well (many
PIE languages still use one word to mean both fingers and toes), and thus from PIE root *deik- to
show (see diction).    &#222;o stode hii I-armed fram heued to &#254;e ton. [Robert of Gloucester,
Chronicle, c.1300]    The old plural survived regionally into Middle English as tan, ton. To be on
(one's) toes alert, eager is recorded from 1921. To step on (someone's) toes in the figurative sense
give offense is from late 14c. Toe-hold support for the toe of a boot in climbing is from 1880.


army (n.)

late 14c., armed expedition, from Old French arm&eacute;e (14c.) armed troop, armed expedition, from
Medieval Latin armata armed force, from Latin armata, fem. of armatus armed, equipped, in arms, past
participle of armare to arm, literally act of arming, related to arma tools, arms (see arm (n.2)).
Originally used of expeditions on sea or land; the specific meaning land force first recorded 1786.
Transferred meaning host, multitude is c.1500.    The Old English words were here (still preserved
in derivatives like harrier), from PIE *kor- people, crowd; and fierd, with an original sense of
expedition, from faran travel. In spite of etymology, in the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle, here generally
meant invading Vikings and fierd was used for the local militias raised to fight them.


history (n.)

late 14c., relation of incidents (true or false), from Old French estoire, estorie chronicle,
history, story (12c., Modern French histoire), from Latin historia narrative of past events,
account, tale, story, from Greek historia a learning or knowing by inquiry; an account of one's
inquiries, history, record, narrative, from historein inquire, from histor wise man, judge, from PIE
*wid-tor-, from root *weid- to know, literally to see (see vision).    Related to Greek idein to
see, and to eidenai to know. In Middle English, not differentiated from story; sense of record of
past events probably first attested late 15c. As a branch of knowledge, from 1842. Sense of
systematic account (without reference to time) of a set of natural phenomena (1560s) is now obsolete
except in natural history.    One difference between history and imaginative literature ... is that
history neither anticipates nor satisfies our curiosity, whereas literature does. [Guy Davenport,
Wheel Ruts, 1996]


harry (v.)

Old English hergian make war, lay waste, ravage, plunder, the word used in the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle
for what the Vikings did to England, from Proto-Germanic *harjon (cognates: Old Frisian urheria lay
waste, ravage, plunder, Old Norse herja to make a raid, to plunder, Old Saxon and Old High German
herion, German verheeren to destroy, lay waste, devastate), from *harjaz an armed force (cognates:
Old English here, Old Norse herr crowd, great number; army, troop, Old Saxon and Old Frisian heri,
Dutch heir, Old High German har, German Heer host, army, Gothic harjis), from PIE root *koro- war
also war-band, hose, army (cognates: Lithuanian karas war, quarrel, karias host, army; Old Church
Slavonic kara strife; Middle Irish cuire troop; Old Persian kara host, people, army; Greek koiranos
ruler, leader, commander). Weakened sense of worry, goad, harass is from c.1400. Related: Harried;
harrying.


Viking (n.)

Scandinavian pirate, 1801, vikingr, in The History of the Anglo-Saxons by English historian Sharon
H. Turner (1768-1847); he suggested the second element might be connected to king:    The name by
which the pirates were at first distinguished was Vikingr, which perhaps originally meant kings of
the bays. It was in bays that they ambushed, to dart upon the passing voyager.     But this later
was dismissed as incorrect. The form viking is attested in 1820, in Jamieson's notes to The Bruce.
The word is a historians' revival; it was not used in Middle English, but it was reintroduced from
Old Norse vikingr freebooter, sea-rover, pirate, viking, which usually is explained as meaning
properly one who came from the fjords, from vik creek, inlet, small bay (cognates: Old English wic,
Middle High German wich bay, and second element in Reykjavik). But Old English wicing and Old
Frisian wizing are almost 300 years older than the earliest attestation of the Old Norse word, and
probably derive from wic village, camp (large temporary camps were a feature of the Viking raids),
related to Latin vicus village, habitation (see villa).    The connection between the Norse and Old
English words is still much debated. The period of Viking activity was roughly 8c. to 11c. In the
Anglo-Saxon Chronicle, the raiding armies generally were referred to as &thorn;a Deniscan the Danes,
while those who settled in England were identified by their place of settlement. Old Norse viking
(n.) meant freebooting voyage, piracy; one would go on a viking (fara &#237; viking).


