chronology (n.)

1590s, from Middle French chronologie or directly from Modern Latin chronologia; see chrono- +
-logy. Related: Chronologer (1570s).


dendrochronology (n.)

dating by tree rings, 1928; see dendro- + chronology.


B.C.

abbreviation of Before Christ, in chronology, attested by 1823. The phrase itself, Before Christ, in
dating, with exact years, is in use by 1660s.


glottochronology (n.)

1953, from glotto- + chronology.


geochronology (n.)

1893, from geo- + chronology.


chronological (adj.)

arranged in order by time, 1610s, from chronology + -ical. Chronological order is attested by 1754.
Related: Chronologic (1610s); chronologically.


era (n.)

1716, earlier aera (1610s), from Late Latin aera, era an era or epoch from which time is reckoned,
probably identical with Latin aera counters used for calculation, plural of aes (genitive aeris)
brass, copper, money (see ore, also compare copper).    The Latin word's use in chronology said to
have begun in 5c. Spain (where, for some reason unknown to historians, the local era, aera
Hispanica, began 38 B.C.E.; some say it was because of a tax levied that year). Like epoch, in
English it originally meant the starting point of an age; meaning system of chronological notation
is c.1640s; that of historical period is from 1741, as in the U.S. Era of Good Feeling (which was
anything but) in reference to the Monroe Administration (1817-24), attested from 1817.


chronicle (n.)

c.1300, cronicle, from Anglo-French cronicle, from Old French cronique chronicle (Modern French
chronique), from Latin chronica (neuter plural mistaken for fem. singular), from Greek ta khronika
(biblia) the (books of) annals, chronology, neuter plural of khronikos of time, concerning time,
from khronos time (see chrono-). Ending modified in Anglo-French, perhaps by influence of article.
Old English had cranic chronicle, cranicwritere chronicler. The classical -h- was restored in
English from 16c.


Prussian

1550s (n.), 1560s (adj.), from Prussia + -an. Prussian blue pigment (1724) came to English from
French bleu de Prusse, so called for being discovered in Berlin, the Prussian capital.    All in
all, it seems that Prussian blue was synthesised for the first time around 1706 by the Swiss
immigrant Johann Jacob Diesbach in Berlin. [Jens Bartoll and B&auml;rbel Jackisch, Prussian Blue: A
Chronology of the Early Years, Zeitschrift f&uuml;r Kunsttechnologie und Konservierung 24, No. 1,
2010]    Early German sources refer to it as Preu&szlig;isches Ultra-Marin and berliner blau.
Prussic acid (1790), is from French acide prussique, so called in reference to prussian blue
pigment, to which it is chemically related.


creationism (n.)

1847, originally a Christian theological position that God immediately created a soul for each
person born; from creation + -ism. As a name for the religious reaction to Darwin, opposed to
evolution, it is attested from 1880.  James Ussher (1581-1656), Archbishop of Armagh, Primate of All
Ireland, and Vice-Chancellor of Trinity College in Dublin was highly regarded in his day as a
churchman and as a scholar. Of his many works, his treatise on chronology has proved the most
durable. Based on an intricate correlation of Middle Eastern and Mediterranean histories and Holy
writ, it was incorporated into an authorized version of the Bible printed in 1701, and thus came to
be regarded with almost as much unquestioning reverence as the Bible itself. Having established the
first day of creation as Sunday 23 October 4004 B.C. ... Ussher calculated the dates of other
biblical events, concluding, for example, that Adam and Eve were driven from Paradise on Monday 10
November 4004 BC, and that the ark touched down on Mt Ararat on 5 May 1491 BC on a Wednesday.
[Craig, G.Y., and E.J. Jones, A Geological Miscellany, Princeton University Press, 1982.]


Jew (n.)

late 12c. (in plural, giwis), from Anglo-French iuw, Old French giu, from Latin Iudaeum (nominative
Iudaeus), from Greek Ioudaios, from Aramaic jehudhai (Hebrew y'hudi) Jew, from Y'hudah Judah,
literally celebrated, name of Jacob's fourth son and of the tribe descended from him. Replaced Old
English Iudeas the Jews. Originally, Hebrew of the kingdom of Judah.   Jews' harp simple mouth harp
is from 1580s, earlier Jews' trump (1540s); the connection with Jewishness is obscure. Jew-baiting
first recorded 1853, in reference to German Judenhetze. In uneducated times, inexplicable ancient
artifacts were credited to Jews, based on the biblical chronology of history: such as Jews' money
(1570s) Roman coins found in England. In Greece, after Christianity had erased the memory of
classical glory, ruins of pagan temples were called Jews' castles, and in Cornwall, Jews' houses was
the name for the remains of ancient tin-smelting works.


fuck (v.)

until recently a difficult word to trace, in part because it was taboo to the editors of the
original OED when the F volume was compiled, 1893-97. Written form only attested from early 16c. OED
2nd edition cites 1503, in the form fukkit; earliest appearance of current spelling is 1535 --
Bischops ... may fuck thair fill and be vnmaryit [Sir David Lyndesay, Ane Satyre of the Thrie
Estaits], but presumably it is a much more ancient word than that, simply one that wasn't written in
the kind of texts that have survived from Old English and Middle English. Buck cites proper name
John le Fucker from 1278, but the surname could have other explanations. The word apparently is
hinted at in a scurrilous 15c. poem, titled Flen flyys, written in bastard Latin and Middle English.
The relevant line reads:Non sunt in celi quia fuccant uuiuys of heliThey [the monks] are not in
heaven because they fuck the wives of [the town of] Ely. Fuccant is pseudo-Latin, and in the
original it is written in cipher. The earliest examples of the word otherwise are from Scottish,
which suggests a Scandinavian origin, perhaps from a word akin to Norwegian dialectal fukka
copulate, or Swedish dialectal focka copulate, strike, push, and fock penis. Another theory traces
it to Middle English fyke, fike move restlessly, fidget, which also meant dally, flirt, and probably
is from a general North Sea Germanic word; compare Middle Dutch fokken, German ficken fuck, earlier
make quick movements to and fro, flick, still earlier itch, scratch; the vulgar sense attested from
16c. This would parallel in sense the usual Middle English slang term for have sexual intercourse,
swive, from Old English swifan to move lightly over, sweep (see swivel). But OED remarks these
cannot be shown to be related to the English word. Chronology and phonology rule out Shipley's
attempt to derive it from Middle English firk to press hard, beat.    Germanic words of similar form
(f + vowel + consonant) and meaning 'copulate' are numerous. One of them is G. ficken. They often
have additional senses, especially 'cheat,' but their basic meaning is 'move back and forth.' ...
Most probably, fuck is a borrowing from Low German and has no cognates outside Germanic. [Liberman]
French foutre and Italian fottere look like the English word but are unrelated, derived rather from
Latin futuere, which is perhaps from PIE root *bhau(t)- knock, strike off, extended via a figurative
use from the sexual application of violent action [Shipley; compare the sexual slang use of bang,
etc.]. Popular and Internet derivations from acronyms (and the pluck yew fable) are merely
<b>ingenious trifling</b>. The Old English word was h&aelig;man, from ham dwelling, home, with a
sense of take home, co-habit. Fuck was outlawed in print in England (by the Obscene Publications
Act, 1857) and the U.S. (by the Comstock Act, 1873). As a noun, it dates from 1670s. The word may
have been shunned in print, but it continued in conversation, especially among soldiers during World
War I.It became so common that an effective way for the soldier to express this emotion was to omit
this word. Thus if a sergeant said, 'Get your ----ing rifles!' it was understood as a matter of
routine. But if he said 'Get your rifles!' there was an immediate implication of urgency and danger.
[John Brophy, Songs and Slang of the British Soldier: 1914-1918, pub. 1930]The legal barriers broke
down in the 20th century, with the Ulysses decision (U.S., 1933) and Lady Chatterley's Lover (U.S.,
1959; U.K., 1960). Johnson excluded the word, and fuck wasn't in a single English language
dictionary from 1795 to 1965. The Penguin Dictionary broke the taboo in the latter year. Houghton
Mifflin followed, in 1969, with The American Heritage Dictionary, but it also published a Clean
Green edition without the word, to assure itself access to the lucrative public high school market.
The abbreviation F (or eff) probably began as euphemistic, but by 1943 it was being used as a cuss
word, too. In 1948, the publishers of The Naked and the Dead persuaded Norman Mailer to use the
euphemism fug instead. When Mailer later was introduced to Dorothy Parker, she greeted him with, So
you're the man who can't spell 'fuck'  [The quip sometimes is attributed to Tallulah Bankhead].
Hemingway used muck in For whom the Bell Tolls (1940). The major breakthrough in publication was
James Jones' From Here to Eternity (1950), with 50 fucks (down from 258 in the original manuscript).
Egyptian legal agreements from the 23rd Dynasty (749-21 B.C.E.) frequently include the phrase, If
you do not obey this decree, may a donkey copulate with you! [Reinhold Aman, Maledicta, Summer
1977]. Fuck-all nothing first recorded 1960.  Verbal phrase fuck up to ruin, spoil, destroy first
attested c.1916. A widespread group of Slavic words (such as Polish pierdoli&#263;) can mean both
fornicate and make a mistake. Fuck off attested from 1929; as a command to depart, by 1944. Flying
fuck originally meant have sex on horseback and is first attested c.1800 in broadside ballad New
Feats of Horsemanship. For the unkillable urban legend that this word is an acronym of some sort (a
fiction traceable on the Internet to 1995 but probably predating that) see here, and also here.
Related: Fucked; fucking. Agent noun fucker attested from 1590s in literal sense; by 1893 as a term
of abuse (or admiration).    DUCK F-CK-R. The man who has the care of the poultry on board a
&#383;hip of war. [Classical Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, 1796]


