church (v.)

to bring or lead to church, mid-14c., from church (n.). Related: Churched.


church (n.)

Old English cirice, circe church, public place of worship; Christians collectively, from Proto-
Germanic *kirika (cognates: Old Saxon kirika, Old Norse kirkja, Old Frisian zerke, Middle Dutch
kerke, Dutch kerk, Old High German kirihha, German Kirche), probably [see note in OED] from Greek
kyriake (oikia), kyriakon doma Lord's (house), from kyrios ruler, lord, from PIE root *keue- to
swell (swollen, hence strong, powerful); see cumulus. Phonetic spelling from c.1200, established by
16c. For vowel evolution, see bury. As an adjective from 1570s.    Greek kyriakon (adj.) of the Lord
was used of houses of Christian worship since c.300, especially in the East, though it was less
common in this sense than ekklesia or basilike. An example of the direct Greek-to-Germanic progress
of many Christian words, via the Goths; it probably was used by West Germanic people in their pre-
Christian period.    Also picked up by Slavic, probably via Germanic (Old Church Slavonic criky,
Russian cerkov). Finnish kirkko, Estonian kirrik are from Scandinavian. Romance and Celtic languages
use variants of Latin ecclesia (such as French &eacute;glise, 11c.).   Church-bell was in late Old
English. Church-goer is from 1680s. Church key is early 14c.; slang use for can or bottle opener is
by 1954, probably originally U.S. college student slang. Church-mouse, proverbial in many languages
for its poverty, is 1731 in English.


churchyard (n.)

early 12c., from church + yard (n.1).


churchman (n.)

mid-13c., from church (n.) + man (n.).


antidisestablishmentarianism (n.)

opposition to disestablishment of the Church of England, 1838, said by Weekley to be first recorded
in Gladstone's Church and State, from dis- + establishment in the sense of the ecclesiastical system
established by law; the Church of England (1731). Hence, establishmentarianism the principle of a
state church, and disestablish (1590s) to deprive (a church) of especial state patronage and support
(first used specifically of Christian churches in 1806), which are married in this word. Rarely used
at all now except in examples of the longest words, amongst which it has been counted at least since
1901.


kirk (n.)

c.1200, northern England and Scottish dialectal form of church, from a Scandinavian source such as
Old Norse kirkja church, from Old English cirice (see church).


unchurched (adj.)

1680s, from un- (1) not + churched committed or belonging to a church (see church (v.)). A verb,
unchurch to remove or exclude (someone) from membership in a church is recorded from 1610s.


schism (n.)

late 14c., scisme, dissention within the church, from Old French scisme, cisme a cleft, split
(12c.), from Church Latin schisma, from Greek skhisma (genitive skhismatos) division, cleft, in New
Testament applied metaphorically to divisions in the Church (I Cor. xii.25), from stem of skhizein
to split (see shed (v.)). Spelling restored 16c., but pronunciation unchanged. Often in reference to
the Great Schism (1378-1417) in the Western Church.


Dunkirk

city on the northeast coast of France, French dunkerque, literally dune church, from Middle Dutch
dune (see dune) + kerke (see church (n.)); in reference to the 7c. church of St. Eloi.


parson (n.)

late 12c., from Anglo-French and Old French persone curate, parson, holder of Church office (12c.),
from Medieval Latin persona parson (see person). Ecclesiastical use is obscure; it might refer to
the person legally holding church property, or it may be an abbreviation of persona ecclesiae person
of the church.


catholic (adj.)

mid-14c., of the doctrines of the ancient Church, literally universally accepted, from French
catholique, from Church Latin catholicus universal, general, from Greek katholikos, from phrase
kath' holou on the whole, in general, from kata about + genitive of holos whole (see safe (adj.)).
Applied to the Church in Rome c.1554, after the Reformation began. General sense of of interest to
all, universal is from 1550s.


at (prep.)

Old English &aelig;t, from Proto-Germanic *at (cognates: Old Norse, Gothic at, Old Frisian et, Old
High German az), from PIE *ad- to, near, at (cognates: Latin ad to, toward Sanskrit adhi near; see
ad-).    Lost in German and Dutch, which use their equivalent of to; in Scandinavian, however, to
has been lost and at fills its place. In choosing between at church, in church, etc. at is properly
distinguished from in or on by involving some practical connection; a worshipper is at church; a
tourist is in the church.    The colloquial use of at after where (where it's at) is attested from
1859. At last is recorded from late 13c.; adverbial phrase at least was in use by 1775. At in Middle
English was used freely with prepositions (as in at after, which is in Shakespeare), but this has
faded with the exception of at about, which was used in modern times by Trollope, Virginia Woolfe,
D.H. Lawrence, and Evelyn Waugh, but nonetheless is regarded as a sign of incompetent writing by my
copy editor bosses.


Montanist (n.)

mid-15c., millenarian and severely ascetic sect that believed in continual direct inspiration of the
spirit and offered prominent church roles to women, from Montanus, Christian-inspired prophet in the
wilds of Phrygia c.160 C.E. The heresy persisted into the 6c. and helped bring prophecy into
disrepute in the established Church. Related: Montanism.


Lateran

c.1300, popular name of cathedral church of St. John Lateran at Rome, which is built on the site of
the palace of the Plautii Laterani, a Roman family. As a papal headquarters, it was the site of five
general councils of the Western Church.


malignant (adj.)

1560s, in reference to diseases, from Middle French malignant and directly from Late Latin
malignantem (nominative malignans) acting from malice, present participle of malignare injure
maliciously (see malign (v.)). Earlier in the church malignant followers of the antichrist, from
Latin ecclesiam malignantum in early Church writing, applied by Protestant writers to the Church in
Rome (1540s). As an adjective, Middle English used simple malign (early 14c.). Related: Malignantly.


peal (n.)

mid-14c., a ringing of a bell especially as a call to church service, generally considered a
shortened form of appeal (n.), with the notion of a bell that summons people to church (compare
similar evolution in peach (v.)). Extended sense of loud ringing of bells is first recorded 1510s.


eremite (n.)

c.1200, learned form of hermit (q.v.), from Church Latin eremita. Since mid-17c. in poetic or
rhetorical use only, except in reference to specific examples in early Church history. Related:
Eremitic; eremitical.


canon (n.1)

church law, Old English canon, from Old French canon or directly from Late Latin canon Church law,
in classical Latin, measuring line, rule, from Greek kanon any straight rod or bar; rule; standard
of excellence, perhaps from kanna reed (see cane (n.)). Taken in ecclesiastical sense for decree of
the Church. General sense of standard of judging is from c.1600. Harold Bloom writes that The
secular canon, with the word meaning a catalog of approved authors, does not actually begin until
the middle of the eighteenth century .... [The Western Canon, 1994]. Related: Canonicity.


presbytery (n.)

part of a church reserved for the clergy, early 15c., from Church Latin presbyterium, from Greek
presbyterion, from presbyteros an elder (see Presbyterian). Meaning body of elders in the
Presbyterian system is recorded from 1570s.


gallery (n.)

c.1500, from Middle French galerie a long portico (14c.), from Medieval Latin galeria, of uncertain
origin, perhaps an alteration of galilea church porch, which is probably from Latin Galilaea
Galilee, the northernmost region of Palestine (see Galilee); church porches sometimes were so called
from being at the far end of the church.  Super altare Beat&aelig; Mari&aelig; in occidentali porte
ejusdem ecclesi&aelig; qu&aelig; Galil&aelig; a vocatur. [c.1186 charter in Durham Cathedral]  Sense
of building to house art first recorded 1590s; that of people who occupy a (theater) gallery
(contrasted with gentlemen of the pit) first by Lovelace, 1640s, hence to play to the gallery
(1867).


episcopal (adj.)

mid-15c., from Middle French &eacute;piscopal (14c.), from Late Latin episcopalis, from Latin
episcopus an overseer (see bishop). Reference to a church governed by bishops is 1752. With a
capital E-, the ordinary designation of the Anglican church in the U.S. and Scotland.


Anglican (adj.)

1630s, of the reformed Church of England (opposed to Roman), from Medieval Latin Anglicanus, from
Anglicus of the English people, of England (see anglicize). The noun meaning adherent of the
reformed Church of England is first recorded 1797.


cathedral (n.)

1580s, church of a bishop, from phrase cathedral church (c.1300), partially translating Late Latin
ecclesia cathedralis church of a bishop's seat, from Latin cathedra an easy chair (principally used
by ladies), also metonymically, as in cathedrae molles luxurious women; also a professor's chair;
from Greek kathedra seat, bench, from kata down (see cata-) + hedra seat, base, chair, face of a
geometric solid, from PIE root *sed- (1) to sit (see sedentary).    It was born an adjective, and
attempts to cobble further adjectivization onto it in 17c. yielded cathedraical (1670s), cathedratic
(1660s), cathedratical (1660s), after which the effort seems to have been given up.


nave (1)

main part of a church, 1670s, from Medieval Latin navem (nominative navis) nave of a church, from
Latin navis ship (see naval), on some fancied resemblance in shape.


sexton (n.)

c.1300, sekesteyn, person in charge of the sacred objects of a church, from Old French segrestien,
from Medieval Latin sacristanus (see sacristan). Sense of custodian of a church first recorded
1580s. Fem. forms sextress, sextrice are recorded 15c., but the usual form is sextoness (early
15c.).


parish (n.)

c.1300, district with its own church; members of such a church, from Anglo-French paroche, parosse
(late 11c.), Old French paroisse, from Late Latin parochia a diocese, alteration of Late Greek
paroikia a diocese or parish, from paroikos a sojourner (in Christian writers), in classical Greek,
neighbor, from para- near (see para- (1)) + oikos house (see villa).    Sense development unclear,
perhaps from sojourner as epithet of early Christians as spiritual sojourners in the material world.
In early Church writing the word was used in a more general sense than Greek diokesis, though by
13c. they were synonymous. Replaced Old English preostscyr, literally priest-shire.


chancel (n.)

c.1300, part of the church around the altar, from Old French chancel, from Late Latin cancellus
lattice, from Latin cancelli (plural) grating, bars (see cancel); sense extended in Late Latin from
the lattice-work that separated the choir from the nave in a church to the space itself.


Llanfair

common in Welsh place names, literally St. Mary's Church, from Welsh llan church (see land (n.)) +
Mair Mary, with lentition of m- to f-.


Natalie

fem. proper name, from French Natalie, from Church Latin Natalia, from Latin (dies) natalis
birthday, in Church Latin, Christmas Day, so probably originally a name for one born on Christmas.


oratorio (n.)

long musical composition, usually with a text based on Scripture, 1727 (in English from 1640s in
native form oratory), from Italian oratorio (late 16c.), from Church Latin oratorium (see oratory
(n.2)), in reference to musical services in the church of the Oratory of St. Philip Neri in Rome,
where old mystery plays were adapted to religious services.


kil

first element in many Celtic place names, literally cell (of a hermit), church, burial place, from
Gaelic and Irish -cil, from cill, gradational variant of ceall cell, church, burial place, from
Latin cella (see cell).


steeple (n.)

Old English stepel (Mercian), stiepel (West Saxon) high tower, related to steap high, lofty, from
Proto-Germanic *staupilaz (see steep (adj.)). Also the name of a lofty style of women's head-dress
from the 14th century. Steeple-house (1640s) was the old Quaker way of referring to a church
edifice, to avoid in that sense using church, which had with them a more restricted meaning.


Presbyterian (adj., n.)

1640, in reference to the Scottish church governed by elders (as opposed to bishops), from presbyter
an elder in a church (1590s), from Late Latin presbyter an elder, from Greek presbyteros an elder,
also an adjective meaning older, comparative of presbys old (see presby-).   Presbyterial was used
from c.1600 in the sense of or pertaining to a presbytery; also from 1590s as presbyterian (adj.).


pluralism (n.)

1818, as a term in church administration, from plural + -ism. Attested from 1882 as a term in
philosophy for a theory which recognizes more than one ultimate principle. In political science,
attested from 1919 (in Harold J. Laski) in sense theory which opposes monolithic state power.
General sense of toleration of diversity within a society or state is from 1933. Related: Pluralist
(1620s, in the church sense); pluralistic.


ecclesiastic (adj.)

late 15c., from Middle French eccl&eacute;siastique and directly from Late Latin ecclesiasticus,
from Greek ekklesiastikos of the (ancient Athenian) assembly, later, of the church, from
ekklesiastes speaker in an assembly or church, preacher, from ekkalein to call out, from ek out (see
ex-) + kalein to call (see claim (v.)).


incumbent (n.)

early 15c., person holding a church position, from Medieval Latin incumbentem (nominative incumbens)
holder of a church position, noun use of present participle of incumbere to obtain or possess, from
Latin incumbere recline on, figuratively apply oneself to, from in- on (see in- (2)) + -cumbere lie
down, related to cubare to lie (see cubicle). Extended to holders of any office from 1670s.


Mir

late 20c. space station, from Russian, literally peace, world, also village, community, from Old
Church Slavonic miru peace, from Proto-Slavic *miru commune, joy, peace (possibly borrowed from
Iranian [Watkins]), from PIE root *mei- to bind (see mitre). Old Church Slavonic miru was used in
Christian terminology as a collective 'community of peace'  [Buck], translating Greek kosmos. Hence,
the known world, mankind.


crypt (n.)

early 15c., grotto, cavern, from Latin crypta vault, cavern, from Greek krypte (short for krypte
kamara hidden vault), fem. of kryptos hidden, verbal adjective from kryptein to hide, from PIE
*krau- to conceal, hide (cognates: Old Church Slavonic kryjo, kryti to hide). Meaning underground
burial vault or chapel in a church first attested 1789.


choir (n.)

c.1300, queor part of the church where the choir sings, from Old French cuer, quer choir of a church
(architectural); chorus of singers (13c., Modern French choeur), from Latin chorus choir (see
chorus). Meaning band of singers is c.1400, quyre. Re-spelled mid-17c. on Latin model.


go-to-meeting (adj.)

suitable for use in a church or on Sundays, 1790, especially of clothes but the earliest recorded
reference is to music.


pope (n.)

Old English papa (9c.), from Church Latin papa bishop, pope (in classical Latin, tutor), from Greek
papas patriarch, bishop, originally father. Applied to bishops of Asia Minor and taken as a title by
the Bishop of Alexandria c.250. In Western Church, applied especially to the Bishop of Rome since
the time of Leo the Great (440-461) and claimed exclusively by them from 1073 (usually in English
with a capital P-). Popemobile, his car, is from 1979. Papal, papacy, later acquisitions in English,
preserve the original vowel.


agnostic (n.)

1870, one who professes that the existence of a First Cause and the essential nature of things are
not and cannot be known [Klein]; coined by T.H. Huxley (1825-1895), supposedly in September 1869,
from Greek agnostos unknown, unknowable, from a- not + gnostos (to be) known (see gnostic).
Sometimes said to be a reference to Paul's mention of the altar to the Unknown God, but according to
Huxley it was coined with reference to the early Church movement known as Gnosticism (see Gnostic).I
... invented what I conceived to be the appropriate title of 'agnostic,' ... antithetic to the
'Gnostic' of Church history who professed to know so much about the very things of which I was
ignorant. [T.H. Huxley, Science and Christian Tradition, 1889]  The adjective is first recorded
1870.


-th (1)

word-forming element making ordinal numbers (fourth, tenth, etc.), Old English -&eth;a, from Proto-
Germanic *-tha- (cognates: Gothic -da, -ta, Old High German -do, -to, Old Norse -di, -ti), from PIE
*-to-, also *-eto-, *-oto-, suffix forming adjectives marking the accomplishment of the notion of
the base [Watkins]. Cognate with Sanskrit thah, Greek -tos, Latin -tus; Sanskrit ta-, Lithuanian and
Old Church Slavonic to, Greek to the, Latin talis such; Greek telikos so old, Old Church Slavonic
toli so, toliku so much, Russian toliko only; also see -ed.


paint (v.)

early 13c., represent in painting or drawing, portray; early 14c., paint the surface of, color,
stain; from Old French peintier to paint, from peint, past participle of peindre to paint, from
Latin pingere to paint, represent in a picture, stain; embroider, tattoo, from PIE root *peig- (1),
also *peik- to cut (cognates: Sanskrit pimsati hews out, cuts, carves, adorns, Old Church Slavonic
pila file, saw, Lithuanian pela file).    Sense evolution between PIE and Latin was, presumably,
from decorate with cut marks to decorate to decorate with color. Compare Sanskrit pingah reddish,
pesalah adorned, decorated, lovely, Old Church Slavonic pegu variegated; Greek poikilos variegated;
Old High German fehjan to adorn; Old Church Slavonic pisati, Lithuanian piesiu to write. Probably
also representing the cutting branch of the family is Old English feol (see file (n.)).    To paint
the town (red) go on a spree first recorded 1884; to paint (someone or something) black represent it
as wicked or evil is from 1590s. Adjective paint-by-numbers simple is attested by 1970; the art-for-
beginners kits themselves date to c.1953.


establishmentarian (n.)

adherent of the principle of an established church, 1846, from establishment.


Moonie (n.)

1974, a member of the Unification Church, headed by Sun Myung Moon.


cathedra (n.)

seat of a bishop in his church, Latin, literally chair (see cathedral).


filoque

Latin, and from the son (see filial). Clause in Nicene Creed which separates Eastern Church from
Western [Weekley].


lascivious (adj.)

mid-15c., from Middle French lascivieux or directly from Late Latin lasciviosus (used in a scolding
sense by Isidore and other early Church writers), from Latin lascivia lewdness, playfulness,
frolicsomeness, jolity, from lascivus lewd, playful, frolicsome, wanton, from PIE *las-ko-, from
*las- to be eager, wanton, or unruly (cognates: Sanskrit -lasati yearns, lasati plays, frolics,
Hittite ilaliya- to desire, covet, Greek laste harlot, Old Church Slavonic laska flattery, Slovak
laska love, Old Irish lainn greedy, Gothic lustus, Old English lust lust). Related: Lasciviously;
lasciviousness. In 17c. also with a verbal form, lasciviate.


mensa (n.)

altar top, 1848, Latin, literally table, also meal, supper, and altar, sacrificial table, hence used
in Church Latin for upper slab of a church altar (see mesa). With a capital M-, the name of an
organization for people of IQs of 148 or more founded in England in 1946, the name chosen, according
to the organization, to suggest a round table type group. The constellation was originally Mons
Mensae Table Mountain.    La Caille, who did so much for our knowledge of the southern heavens,
formed the figure from stars under the Greater Cloud, between the poles of the equator and the
ecliptic, just north of the polar Octans; the title being suggested by the fact that the Table
Mountain, back of Cape Town, which had witnessed his nightly vigils and daily toils, also was
frequently capped by a cloud. [Richard Hinckley Allen, Star Names and Their Meanings, London: 1899]


