cipher (v.)

to do arithmetic (with Arabic numerals), 1520s, from cipher (n.). Meaning to write in code is from
1560s. Related: Ciphered; ciphering.


cipher (n.)

late 14c., arithmetical symbol for zero, from Old French cifre nought, zero, Medieval Latin cifra,
with Spanish and Italian cifra, ultimately from Arabic sifr zero, literally empty, nothing, from
safara to be empty; loan-translation of Sanskrit sunya-s empty. The word came to Europe with Arabic
numerals. Originally in English zero, then any numeral (early 15c.), then (first in French and
Italian) secret way of writing; coded message (a sense first attested in English 1520s), because
early codes often substituted numbers for letters. Klein says Modern French chiffre is from Italian
cifra.


zero (n.)

figure which stands for naught in the Arabic notation, also the absence of all quantity considered
as quantity, c.1600, from French z&#233;ro or directly from Italian zero, from Medieval Latin
zephirum, from Arabic sifr cipher, translation of Sanskrit sunya-m empty place, desert, naught (see
cipher (n.)).    A brief history of the invention of zero can be found here. Meaning worthless
person is recorded from 1813. As an adjective from 1810. Zero tolerance first recorded 1972,
originally U.S. political language. Zero-sum in game theory is from 1944 (von Neumann), indicating
that if one player wins X amount the other or others must lose X amount.


decipher (v.)

1520s, from de- + cipher. Perhaps in part a loan-translation from Middle French d&eacute;chiffrer.
Related: Deciphered; deciphering.


nought (n.)

Old English nowiht nothing, variant of nawiht (see naught). Meaning zero, cipher is from early 15c.
Expression for nought in vain is late 13c. To come to nought is from 1590s.


code (n.)

c.1300, systematic compilation of laws, from Old French code system of laws, law-book (13c.), from
Latin codex, earlier caudex book, book of laws, literally tree trunk, hence, book made up of wooden
tablets covered with wax for writing. Meaning cipher (the sense in secret code) is from 1808.


ought (n.)

zero, cipher, 1844, probably a misdivision of a nought (see nought; for misdivision, see N); meaning
probably influenced by aught anything.


slang (n.)

1756, special vocabulary of tramps or thieves, later jargon of a particular profession (1801), of
uncertain origin, the usual guess being that it is from a Scandinavian source, such as Norwegian
slengenamn nickname, slengja kjeften to abuse with words, literally to sling the jaw, related to Old
Norse slyngva to sling. But OED, while admitting some approximation in sense, discounts this
connection based on date and early associations. Liberman also denies it, as well as any connection
with French langue (or language or lingo). Rather, he derives it elaborately from an old slang word
meaning narrow piece of land, itself of obscure origin. Century Dictionary says there is no evidence
to establish a Gipsy origin. Sense of very informal language characterized by vividness and novelty
first recorded 1818.    [S]lang is a conscious offence against some conventional standard of
propriety. A mere vulgarism is not slang, except when it is purposely adopted, and acquires an
artificial currency, among some class of persons to whom it is not native. The other distinctive
feature of slang is that it is neither part of the ordinary language, nor an attempt to supply its
deficiencies. The slang word is a deliberate substitute for a word of the vernacular, just as the
characters of a cipher are substitutes for the letters of the alphabet, or as a nickname is a
substitute for a personal name. [Henry Bradley, from Slang, in Encyclopedia Britannica, 11th ed.]
A word that ought to have survived is slangwhanger (1807, American English) noisy or abusive talker
or writer.


fuck (v.)

until recently a difficult word to trace, in part because it was taboo to the editors of the
original OED when the F volume was compiled, 1893-97. Written form only attested from early 16c. OED
2nd edition cites 1503, in the form fukkit; earliest appearance of current spelling is 1535 --
Bischops ... may fuck thair fill and be vnmaryit [Sir David Lyndesay, Ane Satyre of the Thrie
Estaits], but presumably it is a much more ancient word than that, simply one that wasn't written in
the kind of texts that have survived from Old English and Middle English. Buck cites proper name
John le Fucker from 1278, but the surname could have other explanations. The word apparently is
hinted at in a scurrilous 15c. poem, titled Flen flyys, written in bastard Latin and Middle English.
The relevant line reads:Non sunt in celi quia fuccant uuiuys of heliThey [the monks] are not in
heaven because they fuck the wives of [the town of] Ely. Fuccant is pseudo-Latin, and in the
original it is written in cipher. The earliest examples of the word otherwise are from Scottish,
which suggests a Scandinavian origin, perhaps from a word akin to Norwegian dialectal fukka
copulate, or Swedish dialectal focka copulate, strike, push, and fock penis. Another theory traces
it to Middle English fyke, fike move restlessly, fidget, which also meant dally, flirt, and probably
is from a general North Sea Germanic word; compare Middle Dutch fokken, German ficken fuck, earlier
make quick movements to and fro, flick, still earlier itch, scratch; the vulgar sense attested from
16c. This would parallel in sense the usual Middle English slang term for have sexual intercourse,
swive, from Old English swifan to move lightly over, sweep (see swivel). But OED remarks these
cannot be shown to be related to the English word. Chronology and phonology rule out Shipley's
attempt to derive it from Middle English firk to press hard, beat.    Germanic words of similar form
(f + vowel + consonant) and meaning 'copulate' are numerous. One of them is G. ficken. They often
have additional senses, especially 'cheat,' but their basic meaning is 'move back and forth.' ...
Most probably, fuck is a borrowing from Low German and has no cognates outside Germanic. [Liberman]
French foutre and Italian fottere look like the English word but are unrelated, derived rather from
Latin futuere, which is perhaps from PIE root *bhau(t)- knock, strike off, extended via a figurative
use from the sexual application of violent action [Shipley; compare the sexual slang use of bang,
etc.]. Popular and Internet derivations from acronyms (and the pluck yew fable) are merely
<b>ingenious trifling</b>. The Old English word was h&aelig;man, from ham dwelling, home, with a
sense of take home, co-habit. Fuck was outlawed in print in England (by the Obscene Publications
Act, 1857) and the U.S. (by the Comstock Act, 1873). As a noun, it dates from 1670s. The word may
have been shunned in print, but it continued in conversation, especially among soldiers during World
War I.It became so common that an effective way for the soldier to express this emotion was to omit
this word. Thus if a sergeant said, 'Get your ----ing rifles!' it was understood as a matter of
routine. But if he said 'Get your rifles!' there was an immediate implication of urgency and danger.
[John Brophy, Songs and Slang of the British Soldier: 1914-1918, pub. 1930]The legal barriers broke
down in the 20th century, with the Ulysses decision (U.S., 1933) and Lady Chatterley's Lover (U.S.,
1959; U.K., 1960). Johnson excluded the word, and fuck wasn't in a single English language
dictionary from 1795 to 1965. The Penguin Dictionary broke the taboo in the latter year. Houghton
Mifflin followed, in 1969, with The American Heritage Dictionary, but it also published a Clean
Green edition without the word, to assure itself access to the lucrative public high school market.
The abbreviation F (or eff) probably began as euphemistic, but by 1943 it was being used as a cuss
word, too. In 1948, the publishers of The Naked and the Dead persuaded Norman Mailer to use the
euphemism fug instead. When Mailer later was introduced to Dorothy Parker, she greeted him with, So
you're the man who can't spell 'fuck'  [The quip sometimes is attributed to Tallulah Bankhead].
Hemingway used muck in For whom the Bell Tolls (1940). The major breakthrough in publication was
James Jones' From Here to Eternity (1950), with 50 fucks (down from 258 in the original manuscript).
Egyptian legal agreements from the 23rd Dynasty (749-21 B.C.E.) frequently include the phrase, If
you do not obey this decree, may a donkey copulate with you! [Reinhold Aman, Maledicta, Summer
1977]. Fuck-all nothing first recorded 1960.  Verbal phrase fuck up to ruin, spoil, destroy first
attested c.1916. A widespread group of Slavic words (such as Polish pierdoli&#263;) can mean both
fornicate and make a mistake. Fuck off attested from 1929; as a command to depart, by 1944. Flying
fuck originally meant have sex on horseback and is first attested c.1800 in broadside ballad New
Feats of Horsemanship. For the unkillable urban legend that this word is an acronym of some sort (a
fiction traceable on the Internet to 1995 but probably predating that) see here, and also here.
Related: Fucked; fucking. Agent noun fucker attested from 1590s in literal sense; by 1893 as a term
of abuse (or admiration).    DUCK F-CK-R. The man who has the care of the poultry on board a
&#383;hip of war. [Classical Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, 1796]


