cistern (n.)

mid-13c., from Old French cisterne cistern; dungeon, underground prison (12c., Modern French
citerne), from Latin cisterna underground reservoir for water, from cista chest, box, from Greek
kiste box, chest (see chest).


tank (n.)

1610s, pool or lake for irrigation or drinking water, a word originally brought by the Portuguese
from India, from a Hindi source, such as Gujarati tankh cistern, underground reservoir for water,
Marathi tanken, or tanka reservoir of water, tank. Perhaps ultimately from Sanskrit tadaga-m pond,
lake pool, and reinforced in later sense of large artificial container for liquid (1680s) by
Portuguese tanque reservoir, from estancar hold back a current of water, from Vulgar Latin
*stanticare (see stanch). But other sources say the Portuguese word is the source of the Indian
ones. Meaning fuel container is recorded from 1902. Slang meaning detention cell is from 1912.
Railroad tank-car is from 1874.    In military use, armored, gun-mounted vehicle moving on
continuous articulated tracks, the word originated late 1915. In Tanks in the Great War [1920],
Brevet Col. J.F.C. Fuller quotes a memorandum of the Committee of Imperial Defence dated Dec. 24,
1915, recommending the proposed caterpillar machine-gun destroyer machines be entrusted to an
organization which, for secrecy, shall be called the 'Tank Supply Committee,' ... In a footnote,
Fuller writes, This is the first appearance of the word 'tank' in the history of the machine. He
writes that cistern and reservoir also were put forth as possible cover names, all of which were
applicable to the steel-like structure of the machines in the early stages of manufacture. Because
it was less clumsy and monosyllabic, the name 'tank' was decided on. They were first used in action
at Pozieres ridge, on the Western Front, Sept. 15, 1916, and the name was quickly picked up by the
soldiers. Tank-trap attested from 1920.


vat (n.)

c.1200, large tub or cistern, especially one for holding liquors in an immature state [Century
Dictionary], southern variant (see V) of Old English f&aelig;t container, vat, from Proto-Germanic
*fatan (cognates: Old Saxon, Old Norse fat, Old Frisian fet, Middle Dutch, Dutch vat, Old High
German faz, German fa&szlig;), from PIE root *ped- (2) container (cognates: Lithuanian puodas pot).


cesspool (n.)

also cess-pool, 1670s, the first element perhaps an alteration of cistern, perhaps a shortened form
of recess [Klein]; or the whole may be an alteration of suspiral (c.1400), drainpipe, from Old
French sospiral a vent, air hole, from sospirer breathe, from Latin suspirare breathe deep
[Barnhart]. Meaning extended to tank at the end of the pipe, which would account for a possible
folk-etymology change in final syllable.    Other possible etymologies: Italian cesso privy, from
Latin secessus place of retirement (in Late Latin privy, drain); dialectal suspool, from suss, soss
puddle; or cess a bog on the banks of a tidal river.


mere (n.)

Old English mere sea, ocean; lake, pool, pond, cistern, from Proto-Germanic *mari (cognates: Old
Norse marr, Old Saxon meri sea, Middle Dutch maer, Dutch meer lake, sea, pool, Old High German mari,
German Meer sea, Gothic marei sea, mari-saiws lake), from PIE *mori- sea (cognates: Latin mare, Old
Church Slavonic morje, Russian more, Lithuanian mares, Old Irish muir, Welsh mor sea, Gaulish Are-
morici people living near the sea).


lake (n.1)

body of water, early 12c., from Old French lack and directly from Latin lacus pond, lake, also
basin, tank, related to lacuna hole, pit, from PIE *laku- (cognates: Greek lakkos pit, tank, pond,
Old Church Slavonic loky pool, puddle, cistern, Old Irish loch lake, pond). The common notion is
basin. There was a Germanic form of the word, which yielded cognate Old Norse l&ouml;gr sea flood,
water, Old English lacu stream, lagu sea flood, water, leccan to moisten (see leak (v.)). In Middle
English, lake, as a descendant of the Old English word, also could mean stream; river gully; ditch;
marsh; grave; pit of hell, and this might have influenced the form of the borrowed word. The North
American Great Lakes so called from 1660s.


brew (v.)

Old English breowan to brew (class II strong verb, past tense breaw, past participle browen), from
Proto-Germanic *breuwan to brew (cognates: Old Norse brugga, Old Frisian briuwa, Middle Dutch
brouwen, Old High German briuwan, German brauen to brew), from PIE root *bhreue- to bubble, boil,
effervesce (cognates: Sanskrit bhurnih violent, passionate, Greek phrear well, spring, cistern,
Latin fervere to boil, foam, Thracian Greek brytos fermented liquor made from barley, Russian bruja
current, Old Irish bruth heat; Old English beorma yeast; Old High German brato roast meat), the
original sense thus being make a drink by boiling. Related: Brewed; brewing.


