citadel (n.)

1580s, fortress commanding a city, from Middle French citadelle (15c.), from Italian cittadella,
diminutive of Old Italian cittade city (Modern Italian citta), from Latin civitatem (nominative
civitas; also source of Portuguese citadella, Spanish ciuadela; see city).


Kremlin

1660s, Cremelena, from Old Russian kremlinu, later kremlin (1796), from kreml' citadel, fortress,
perhaps of Tartar origin. Originally the citadel of any Russian city, now especially the one in
Moscow. Used metonymically for government of the U.S.S.R. from 1933. The modern form of the word in
English might be via French.


polis (n.)

ancient Greek city-state, 1894, from Greek polis city, one's city; the state, citizens, from PIE
*pele- citadel, enclosed space, often on high ground (cognates: Sanskrit pur, puram city, citadel,
Lithuanian pilis fortress).


palladium (n.1)

safeguard, c.1600, originally (late 14c.) sacred image of Pallas Athene, from Latin palladium, from
Greek Palladion, noun use of neuter of Palladios of Pallas. It stood in the citadel of Troy and the
safety of the city was believed to depend on it.


acropolis (n.)

1660s, from Greek akropolis citadel (especially that of Athens), from akros highest, upper (see
acrid) + polis city (see polis).


Castile

medieval Spanish county and later kingdom, from Vulgar Latin castilla, from Latin castella, plural
of castellum castle, fort, citadel, stronghold (see castle (n.)); so called in reference to the many
fortified places there during the Moorish wars. The name in Spanish is said to date back to c.800.
Related: Castilian. As a fine kind of soap, in English from 1610s.


Singapore

from Sanskrit Simhapuram Lion City, from simhah lion + puram city, from PIE *pele- citadel,
fortified high place (see polis (n.)). The name is perhaps metaphoric of something, as no lions are
found there. Singapore sling attested from 1930; said on the island to have been invented there 1915
by a barman named Ngian Tong Dron.


Capitol (n.)

building where U.S. Congress meets, 1793 (in writings of Thomas Jefferson), from Latin Capitolium,
temple of Jupiter Optimus Maximus on the Capitoline Hill in ancient Rome. Used earlier of Virginia
state houses (1699). Its use in American public architecture deliberately evokes Roman republican
imagery. With reference to the Roman citadel, it is recorded in English from late 14c., via Old
North French capitolie. Relationship of Capitoline to capital is likely but not certain.


tower (n.1)

Old English torr tower, watchtower, from Latin turris a tower, citadel, high structure (also source
of Old French tor, 11c.; Spanish, Italian torre tower), possibly from a pre-Indo-European
Mediterranean language. Meaning lofty pile or mass is recorded from mid-14c. Also borrowed
separately 13c. as tour, from Old French tur; the modern spelling (1520s) represents a merger of the
two forms.


burgher (n.)

1560s, freeman of a burgh, from Middle Dutch burgher or German B&#252;rger, from Middle High German
burger, from Old High German burgari inhabitant of a fortress, from burg fortress, citadel (see
borough). Burgh, as a native variant of borough, persists in Scottish English (as in Edinburgh).


down (n.2)

Old English dun down, moor; height, hill, mountain, from Proto-Germanic *dunaz- (cognates: Middle
Dutch dunen sandy hill, Dutch duin), probably a pre-insular loan-word from Celtic [Cambridge
Dictionary of English Place-Names], in other words, borrowed at a very early period, before the
Anglo-Saxon migration, from PIE root *dheue- to close, finish, come full circle. Meaning elevated
rolling grassland is from c.1300.    The non-English Germanic words tend to mean dune, sand bank
(see dune), while the Celtic cognates tend to mean hill, citadel (compare Old Irish dun hill, hill
fort; Welsh din fortress, hill fort; and second element in place names London, Verdun, etc.). German
D&uuml;ne, French dune, Italian, Spanish duna are said to be loan-words from Dutch.


borough (n.)

Old English burg, burh a dwelling or dwellings within a fortified enclosure, from Proto-Germanic
*burgs hill fort, fortress (cognates: Old Frisian burg castle, Old Norse borg wall, castle, Old High
German burg, buruc fortified place, citadel, German Burg castle, Gothic baurgs city), from PIE root
*bhergh- (2) high, with derivatives referring to hills, hill forts, fortified elevations (source
also of Old English beorg hill; see barrow (n.2)).    In German and Old Norse, chiefly as fortress,
castle; in Gothic, town, civic community. Meaning shifted in Middle English from fortress, to
fortified town, to simply town (especially one possessing municipal organization or sending
representatives to Parliament). In U.S. (originally Pennsylvania, 1718) often an incorporated town;
in Alaska, however, it is the equivalent of a county. The Scottish form is burgh. The Old English
dative singular byrig survives in many place names as -bury.


castle (n.)

late Old English castel village (this sense from a biblical usage in Vulgar Latin); later large
fortified building, stronghold, in this sense from Old North French castel (Old French chastel,
12c.; Modern French ch&acirc;teau), from Latin castellum a castle, fort, citadel, stronghold;
fortified village, diminutive of castrum fort, from Proto-Italic *kastro- part, share; cognate with
Old Irish cather, Welsh caer town (and perhaps related to castrare via notion of cut off; see
caste). In early bibles, castle was used to translate Greek kome village.    This word also had come
to Old English as ceaster and formed the -caster and -chester in place names. Spanish alcazar castle
is from Arabic al-qasr, from Latin castrum. Castles in Spain translates 14c. French chastel en
Espaigne (the imaginary castles sometimes stood in Brie, Asia, or Albania) and probably reflects the
hopes of landless knights to establish themselves abroad. The statement that an (English) man's home
is his castle is from 16c.


barrow (n.2)

mound, Old English beorg (West Saxon), berg (Anglian) barrow, mountain, hill, mound, from Proto-
Germanic *bergaz (cognates: Old Saxon, Old Frisian, Old High German berg mountain, Old North bjarg
rock), from PIE root *bhergh- (2) high, elevated (cognates: Old Church Slavonic bregu mountain,
height, Old Irish brigh mountain, Welsh bera stack, pyramid, Sanskrit b'rhant high, Avestan brzant-
high, Old Persian bard- be high, Greek Pergamos, name of the citadel of Troy). Obsolete except in
place-names and southwest England dialect by 1400; revived by modern archaeology.    In place-names
used of small continuously curving hills, smaller than a dun, with the summit typically occupied by
a single farmstead or by a village church with the village beside the hill, and also of burial
mounds. [Cambridge Dictionary of English Place-Names]  Meaning mound erected over a grave was a
specific sense in late Old English. Barrow-wight first recorded 1869 in Eirikr Magnusson and William
Morris's translation of the Icelandic saga of Grettir the Strong.


