cite (v.)

mid-15c., to summon, from Old French citer to summon (14c.), from Latin citare to summon, urge,
call; put in sudden motion, call forward; rouse, excite, frequentative of ciere to move, set in
motion, stir, rouse, call, invite from PIE root *keie- to set in motion, to move to and fro
(cognates: Sanskrit cyavate stirs himself, goes; Greek kinein to move, set in motion; change, stir
up, kinymai move myself; Gothic haitan call, be called; Old English hatan command, call). Sense of
calling forth a passage of writing is first attested 1530s. Related: Cited; citing.


summon (v.)

c.1200, call, send for, ask the presence of, especially call, cite, or notify by authority to be at
a certain place at a certain time (late 13c.), from Anglo-French sumunre and directly from Old
French somonre, variant of sumundre, somondre summon, from Vulgar Latin *summundre to call, cite,
from Latin summonere hint to, remind privately, from sub under (see sub-) + monere warn, advise (see
monitor (n.)). In part also from Medieval Latin use of summonere. Meaning arouse, excite to action
is from 1580s. Related: Summoned; summoning.


phishing (n.)

in the cyber scam sense, by 2000 (some sources cite usage from 1995); alteration of fishing (n.);
perhaps by influence of phreak and the U.S. rock band Phish, which had been performing since 1983.


kinase (n.)

1902, from Greek kinein to move (see cite) + chemical suffix -ase.


kinesis (n.)

physical movement, 1819, from Greek kinesis movement, motion (see cite).


kinesics (n.)

study of body language, 1952, from Greek kinesis movement, motion (see cite) + -ics. Related:
kinesic.


oscitant (adj.)

yawning, from Latin oscitans listless, sluggish, lazy, present participle of oscitare to gape, yawn,
from os citare to move the mouth (see oral and cite).


kino-

before vowels, kin-, word-forming element meaning motion, from Greek kino-, from kinein to move (see
cite).


kinesthesia (n.)

also kinaesthesia, 1888, Modern Latin compound of Greek kinein to set in motion; to move (see cite)
+ aisthesis perception (see anaesthesia).


kinematics (n.)

science of motion, 1840, from French cin&eacute;matique (Amp&egrave;re, 1834), from Greek kinesis
movement, motion (see cite). Related: Kinematic (1864); kinematical.


kinesiology (n.)

1894, from kinesi-, comb. form of Greek kinesis movement, motion (see cite) + -ology. Related:
Kinesiological; kinesiologically.


kinesthetic (adj.)

also kinaesthetic, pertaining to kinesthesia, 1880, coined by British neurologist Henry Charlton
Bastian (1837-1915) from Greek kinein to move (see cite) + aisthesis sensation (see anaesthesia).
Perhaps on model of aesthetic, prosthetic.


object (v.)

c.1400, to bring forward in opposition, from Old French objecter and directly from Latin obiectus,
past participle of obiectare to cite as grounds for disapproval, set against, oppose, literally to
put or throw before or against, frequentative of obicere (see object (n.)). Related: Objected;
objecting.


incite (v.)

mid-15c., from Middle French enciter (14c.), from Latin incitare to put into rapid motion,
figuratively rouse, urge, encourage, stimulate, from in- into, in, on, upon (see in- (2)) + citare
move, excite (see cite). Related: Incited; inciting.


telekinesis (n.)

1890, said in early references to have been coined by Alexander N. Aksakof (1832-1903) Imperial
Councilor to the Czar, in Modern Latin, literally motion at a distance, from tele- +  Greek kinesis
movement, motion, from PIE root *keie- to set in motion (see cite). Translates German Fernwirkung.
Related: Telekinetic.


citation (n.)

c.1300, summons, written notice to appear, from Old French citation or directly from Latin
citationem (nominative citatio) a command, noun of action from past participle stem of citare to
summon, urge, call; put in sudden motion, call forward; rouse, excite (see cite). Meaning passage
cited, quotation is from 1540s. From 1918 as a mention in an official dispatch.


recite (v.)

early 15c., from Old French reciter (12c.) and directly from Latin recitare read aloud, read out,
repeat from memory, declaim, from re- back, again (see re-) + citare to summon (see cite). Related:
Recited; reciting.


excite (v.)

mid-14c., to move, stir up, instigate, from Old French esciter (12c.) or directly from Latin
excitare rouse, call out, summon forth, produce, frequentative of exciere call forth, instigate,
from ex- out (see ex-) + ciere set in motion, call (see cite). Of feelings, from late 14c. Of bodily
organs or tissues, from 1831. Main modern sense of emotionally agitate is first attested 1821.


behest (n.)

Old English beh&aelig;s a vow, perhaps from behatan to promise (from be- + hatan command, call; see
cite) and confused with obsolete hest command, which may account for the parasitic -t as well as the
Middle English shift in meaning to command, injunction (late 12c.).


kinetic (adj.)

relating to motion, 1841, from Greek kinetikos moving, putting in motion, from kinetos moved, verbal
adjective of kinein to move (see cite).    Buster Keaton's subject was kinetic man, a being he
approached with the almost metaphysical awe we reserve for a Doppelg&auml;nger. This being was,
eerily, himself, played by himself, then later in a projection room, watched by himself: an
experience never possible to any generation of actors in the previous history of the world. [Hugh
Kenner, The Counterfeiters, 1968]    Related: Kinetical; kinetically.


resuscitate (v.)

early 15c., revive, restore, from Latin resuscitatus, past participle of resuscitare rouse again,
revive, from re- again (see re-) + suscitare to raise, revive, from sub (up from) under (see sub-) +
citare to summon (see cite). Intransitive use from 1650s. Related: Resuscitated; resuscitating.
Earlier was resuscen restore (someone) to life, resurrect (c.1400).


cinema (n.)

1899, a movie hall, from French cin&eacute;ma, shortened from cin&eacute;matographe motion picture
projector and camera, coined 1890s by Lumiere brothers, who invented it, from Latinized form of
Greek kinemat-, comb. form of kinema movement, from kinein to move (see cite) + graphein to write
(see -graphy). Meaning movies collectively, especially as an art form recorded by 1914.
Cin&eacute;ma v&eacute;rit&eacute; is 1963, from French.


quote (v.)

late 14c., coten, to mark (a book) with chapter numbers or marginal references, from Old French
coter, from Medieval Latin quotare distinguish by numbers, number chapters, from Latin quotus which
in order? what number (in sequence)?, from quot how many, from PIE *kwo-ti-, from pronomial root
*kwo- (see who).    The sense development is via to give as a reference, to cite as an authority
(1570s) to to copy out or repeat exact words (1670s). Modern spelling with qu- is from early 15c.
The business sense of to state the price of a commodity (1866) revives the etymological meaning.
Related: Quoted; quoting.


hight (v.)

named, called (archaic), from levelled past participle of Middle English highte, from Old English
hatte I am called (passive of hatan to call, name, command) merged with heht called, active past
tense of the same verb. Hatte was the only survival in Old English of the old Germanic synthetic
passive tense. The word is related to Old Norse heita, Dutch heten, German hei&szlig;en, Gothic
haitan to call, be called, command (see cite).


citizen (n.)

early 14c., inhabitant of a city, from Anglo-French citezein (spelling subsequently altered,
probably by influence of denizen), from Old French citeien city-dweller, town-dweller, citizen
(12c., Modern French citoyen), from cite (see city) + -ain (see -ian). Replaced Old English
burhsittend and ceasterware. Sense of inhabitant of a country is late 14c. Citizen's arrest recorded
from 1941; citizen's band (radio) from 1947. Citizen of the world (late 15c.) translates Greek
kosmopolites.


solicit (v.)

early 15c., to disturb, trouble, from Middle French soliciter (14c.), from Latin sollicitare to
disturb, rouse, trouble, harass; stimulate, provoke, from sollicitus agitated, from sollus whole,
entire + citus aroused, past participle of ciere shake, excite, set in motion (see cite). Related:
Solicited; soliciting.    Meaning entreat, petition is from 1520s. Meaning to further (business
affairs) evolved mid-15c. from Middle French sense of manage affairs. The sexual sense (often in
reference to prostitutes) is attested from 1710, probably from a merger of the business sense and an
earlier sense of to court or beg the favor of (a woman), attested from 1590s.


city (n.)

early 13c., in medieval usage a cathedral town, but originally any settlement, regardless of size
(distinction from town is 14c., though in English it always seems to have ranked above borough),
from Old French cite town, city (10c., Modern French cit&eacute;), from earlier citet, from Latin
civitatem (nominative civitas; in Late Latin sometimes citatem) originally citizenship, condition or
rights of a citizen, membership in the community, later community of citizens, state, commonwealth
(used, for instance of the Gaulish tribes), from civis townsman, from PIE root *kei- to lie; bed,
couch; homestead; beloved, dear (see cemetery).    The sense has been transferred from the
inhabitants to the place. The Latin word for city was urbs, but a resident was civis. Civitas seems
to have replaced urbs as Rome (the ultimate urbs) lost its prestige. Loss of Latin -v- is regular in
French in some situations (compare alleger from alleviare; neige from nivea; jeune from juvenis. A
different sound evolution from the Latin word yielded Italian citta, Catalan ciutat, Spanish ciudad,
Portuguese cidade.    Replaced Old English burh (see borough). London is the city from 1550s. As an
adjective from c.1300. City hall first recorded 1670s to fight city hall is 1913, American English;
city slicker first recorded 1916 (see slick); both American English. City limits is from 1825. The
newspaper city desk attested from 1878. Inner city first attested 1968. City state (also city-state)
is attested from 1877.


