civil (adj.)

late 14c., relating to civil law or life; pertaining to the internal affairs of a state, from Old
French civil civil, relating to civil law (13c.) and directly from Latin civilis relating to a
citizen, relating to public life, befitting a citizen, hence by extension popular, affable,
courteous; alternative adjectival derivation of civis townsman (see city).    The sense of polite
was in classical Latin, from the courteous manners of citizens, as opposed to those of soldiers. But
English did not pick up this nuance of the word until late 16c. Courteous is thus more commonly said
of superiors, civil of inferiors, since it implies or suggests the possibility of incivility or
rudeness [OED]. Civil case (as opposed to criminal) is recorded from 1610s. Civil liberty is by
1640s. Civil service is from 1772, originally in reference to the East India Company.


civil disobedience (n.)

coined 1866 by Thoreau as title of an essay originally published (1849) as Resistance to Civil
Government.


civil service (n.)

c.1785, originally in reference to non-military staff of the East India Company. Civil servant is
from 1800.


civilian (n.)

late 14c., judge or authority on civil law, from Old French civilien of the civil law, created from
Latin civilis relating to a citizen, relating to public life, befitting a citizen; popular, affable,
courteous (see civil). Sense of non-military person is attested by 1819 (earlier in this sense was
civilian, attested from c.1600 as non-soldier). The adjective is from 1640s.


civil war (n.)

battles among fellow citizens or within a community, from civil in a sense of occurring among fellow
citizens attested from late 14c. in batayle ciuile civil battle, etc. The exact phrase civil war is
attested from late 15c. (the Latin phrase was bella civicus).    Early use typically was in
reference to ancient Rome. Later, in England, to the struggle between Parliament and Charles I
(1641-1651); in U.S., to the War of Secession (1861-1865), an application often decried as wholly
inaccurate but in use (among other names) in the North during the war and boosted by the use of the
term in the popular Battles and Leaders of the Civil War series published 1884-87 in Century
Magazine.    The war between the States, which a good many Southerners prefer, is both bookish and
inexact. Civil war is an utter misnomer. It was used and is still used by courteous people, the same
people who are careful to say Federal and Confederate. War of the rebellion, which begs the very
question at issue, has become the official designation of the struggle, but has found no acceptance
with the vanquished. To this day no Southerner uses it except by way of quotation .... The war of
secession is still used a good deal in foreign books, but it has no popular hold. The war, without
any further qualification, served the turn of Thucydides and Aristophanes for the Peloponnesian war.
It will serve ours, let it be hoped, for some time to come. [Basil L. Gildersleeve, The Creed of the
Old South, 1915]


civilly (adv.)

1550s, with reference to citizenship or civil matters, also in a well-bred manner; from civil + -ly
(2).


civilize (v.)

c.1600, to bring out of barbarism, from French civiliser, verb from Old French civil (adj.), from
Latin civilis relating to a citizen, relating to public life, befitting a citizen; popular, affable,
courteous (see civil). Meaning become civilized is from 1868. Related: Civilized; civilizing.


civil rights (n.)

1721, American English; specifically of black U.S. citizens from 1866.


civil union (n.)

by 2000, the usual U.S. term for legally recognized same-sex unions short of marriage.


civility (n.)

late 14c., status of a citizen, from Old French civilite (14c.), from Latin civitatem (nominative
civitas) the art of governing; courteousness, from cvilis relating to a citizen, relating to public
life, befitting a citizen; popular, affable, courteous (see civil). Later especially good
citizenship (1530s). Also state of being civilized (1540s); behavior proper to civilized persons
(1560s).


civilization (n.)

1704, law which makes a criminal process civil, from civilize + -ation. Sense of civilized condition
first recorded 1772, probably from French civilisation, to be an opposite to barbarity and a
distinct word from civility. Sense of a particular human society in a civilized condition,
considered as a whole over time, is from 1857. Related: Civilizational.


sedition (n.)

mid-14c., rebellion, uprising, revolt, concerted attempt to overthrow civil authority; violent
strife between factions, civil or religious disorder, riot; rebelliousness against authority, from
Old French sedicion (14c., Modern French s&#233;dition) and directly from Latin seditionem
(nominative seditio) civil disorder, dissention, strife; rebellion, mutiny, literally a going apart,
separation, from se- apart (see secret) + itio a going, from past participle of ire to go (see ion).
Meaning conduct or language inciting to rebellion against a lawful government is from 1838. An Old
English word for it was folcslite. Less serious than treason, as wanting an overt act, But it is not
essential to the offense of sedition that it threaten the very existence of the state or its
authority in its entire extent [Century Dictionary].


incivility (n.)

1580s, want of civilized behavior, rudeness, from French incivilit&eacute; (early 15c.), from Late
Latin incivilitatem (nominative incivilitas), from incivilis not civil, from in- not, opposite of
(see in- (1)) + civilis relating to a citizen, relating to public life, befitting a citizen;
popular, affable, courteous (see civil). Meaning an act of rudeness is from 1650s. Incivil not
conducive to common good is from mid-15c.


policy (n.1)

way of management, late 14c., policie, study or practice of government; good government; from Old
French policie (14c.) political organization, civil administration, from Late Latin politia the
state, civil administration, from Greek politeia state, administration, government, citizenship,
from polites citizen, from polis city, state (see polis). Meaning plan of action, way of management
first recorded c.1400.


shebang (n.)

1862, hut, shed, shelter, popularized among soldiers in the U.S. Civil War, but like other Civil War
slang (such as skedaddle) of uncertain origin. Perhaps an alteration of shebeen (q.v.), but shebang
in the sense tavern, a seemingly necessary transitional sense, is not attested before 1878 and
shebeen seems to have been not much used in the U.S. Bartlett's 1877 edition describes it as A
strange word that had its origin during the late civil war. It is applied alike to a room, a shop,
or a hut, a tent, a cabin; an engine house. Phrase the whole shebang first recorded 1869, but
relation to the earlier use of the word is obscure. Either or both senses also might be mangled
pronunciations of French char-&agrave;-banc, a bus-like wagon with many seats. For an older guess:
[Shebang] used even yet by students of Yale College and elsewhere to designate their rooms, or a
theatrical or other performance in a public hall, has its origin probably in a corruption of the
French cabane, a hut, familiar to the troops that came from Louisiana, and constantly used in the
Confederate camp for the simple huts, which they built with such alacrity and skill for their winter
quarters. The constant intercourse between the outposts soon made the term familiar to the Federal
army also. [Americanisms: The English of the New World,  Maximillian Schele De Vere, New York,
Charles Scribner &amp; Co., 1872.]


overcome (v.)

Old English ofercuman to reach, overtake, also to conquer, prevail over, from ofer (see over) +
cuman to come (see come (v.)). A common Germanic compound (Middle Dutch overkomen, Old High German
ubarqueman, German &uuml;berkommen). In reference to mental or chemical force, to overwhelm, render
helpless, it is in late Old English. Meaning to surmount (a difficulty or obstacle) is from c.1200.
The Civil Rights anthem We Shall Overcome was put together c.1950s from lyrics from Charles
Tindley's spiritual I'll Overcome Some Day (1901), and melody from pre-Civil War spiritual No More
Auction Block for Me. Related: Overcame; overcoming.


rebel (n.)

person who makes war on his country for political motives, mid-14c., from rebel (adj.). Meaning
supporter of the American cause in the War of Independence is from 1775; sense of supporter of the
Southern cause in the American Civil War is attested from April 15, 1861. Rebel yell in an American
Civil War context attested from 1862, but the thing itself is older and was said to have been picked
up by southwestern men in their periodic wars against the Indians.  The Southern troops, when
charging or to express their delight, always yell in a manner peculiar to themselves. The Yankee
cheer is more like ours; but the Confederate officers declare that the rebel yell has a particular
merit, and always produces a salutary and useful effect upon their adversaries. A corps is sometimes
spoken of as a 'good yelling regiment.' [A.J.L. Fremantle, The Battle of Gettysburg and the Campaign
in Pennsylvania, in Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine, Sept. 1863]


reb (n.)

abbreviation of rebel (n.), 1862, in U.S. Civil War context.


Roundhead (n.)

adherent of the Parliamentary party in the English Civil War, 1641, so called for their custom of
wearing the hair close-cropped, in contrast to the flowing curls of the cavaliers.


raider (n.)

1863, agent noun from raid (v.). A word from the American Civil War.


toleration (n.)

1510s, permission granted by authority, license, from Middle French tol&eacute;ration (15c.), from
Latin tolerationem (nominative toleratio) a bearing, supporting, enduring, noun of action from past
participle stem of tolerare to endure, sustain, support, suffer, literally to bear, from PIE *tele-
to bear, carry (see extol).    Meaning forbearance, sufferance is from 1580s. The specific religious
sense is from 1609; as in Act of Toleration (1689), statute granting freedom of religious worship
(with conditions) to dissenting Protestants in England. In this it means recognition of the right of
private judgment in matters of faith and worship; liberty granted by the government to preach and
worship as one pleases; equality under the law without regard to religion.    If any man err from
the right way, it is his own misfortune, no injury to thee; nor therefore art thou to punish him in
the things of this life because thou supposest he will be miserable in that which is to come.
Nobody, therefore, in fine, neither single persons nor churches, nay, nor even commonwealths, have
any just title to invade the civil rights and worldly goods of each other upon pretence of religion.
[John Locke, Letter Concerning Toleration, 1689]   <hr />   Before any man can be considered as a
member of Civil Society, he must be considered as a subject of the Governour of the Universe: And if
a member of Civil Society, do it with a saving of his allegiance to the Universal Sovereign. We
maintain therefore that in matters of Religion, no man's right is abridged by the institution of
Civil Society and that Religion is wholly exempt from its cognizance. [James Madison, Memorial and
Remonstrance Against Religious Assessments, 1785]   <hr />   Unlimited tolerance must lead to the
disappearance of tolerance. If we extend unlimited tolerance even to those who are intolerant, if we
are not prepared to defend a tolerant society against the onslaught of the intolerant, then the
tolerant will be destroyed, and tolerance with them. [Karl Popper, The Open Society and Its Enemies,
1962]


Memorial Day

used in a general sense is from 1830s; as a specific holiday commemorating U.S. war dead (originally
Northern soldiers killed in the Civil War) it began informally in late 1860s. officially from 1869
among veterans' organizations.


police (n.)

c.1530, at first essentially the same word as policy (n.1); from Middle French police (late 15c.),
from Latin politia civil administration, from Greek polis city (see polis).    Until mid-19c. used
in England for civil administration; application to administration of public order (1716) is from
French (late 17c.), and originally in English referred to France or other foreign nations. The first
force so-named in England was the Marine Police, set up 1798 to protect merchandise at the Port of
London. Police state state regulated by means of national police first recorded 1865, with reference
to Austria. Police action in the international sense of military intervention short of war,
ostensibly to correct lawlessness is from 1933. Police officer is attested from 1800. Police station
is from 1817.


Antietam

place name, eastern U.S., from an Algonquian word perhaps meaning swift water; the name occurrs in
Pennsylvania and Ohio, but the best-known is a creek near Sharpsburg in Washington County, Maryland,
site of a bloody Civil War battle Sept. 17, 1862.


contestant (n.)

one who contests, from contestant (adj.). Popularized in U.S. Civil War, when it was a journalist's
term for the combatants on either side.


snick (n.)

1962, American English, from common pronunciation of SNCC, initialism (acronym) for Student Non-
violent Co-ordinating Committee, black civil rights organization.


fifth column (n.)

1936, from Gen. Emilio Mola's comment at the siege of Madrid during the Spanish Civil War that he
would take the city with his four columns of troops outside it and his fifth column (quinta columna)
in the city.


Shiloh

village on the west bank of the Jordan River, perhaps from an alteration of Hebrew shalo to be
peaceful. The American Civil War battle (April 6-7, 1862) was so called for being fought around the
Shiloh church in Tennessee, which was destroyed in the battle.


Seabee (n.)

1942, from pronunciation of C.B., abbreviation of Construction Battalion, formed as a volunteer
branch of the Civil Engineer Corps of the U.S. Navy.


grapevine (n.)

1736, from grape + vine. Meaning rumor source is 1862, U.S. Civil War slang for telegraph wires.


royalist (n.)

1640s, from royal + -ist. In England, a partisan of Charles I and II during the Civil War; in the
U.S., an adherent of British government during the Revolution; in France, a supporter of the
Bourbons.


Coney Island

community in Brooklyn, N.Y., so called for the rabbits once found there (see coney) and was known to
the Dutch as Konijn Eiland, from which the English name probably derives. It emerged as a resort and
amusement park center after the U.S. Civil War.


uncivil (adj.)

1550s, barbarous, from un- (1) not + civil (adj.). Meaning impolite is 1590s.


redcoat (n.)

British soldier, 1510s, from red (adj.1) + coat (n.). In Britain, especially of Cromwellian troops
in the English Civil War; in the U.S., of British soldiers in the American Revolution.


parliamentarian (n.)

1640s as a designation of one of the sides in the English Civil War; meaning one versed in
parliamentary procedure dates from 1834. See parliamentary + -ian.


reconstruction (n.)

1791, action or process of reconstructing, from re- + construction. In U.S. political history sense
(usually with a capital R-), from 1865. It had been used during the American Civil War in reference
to reconstitution of the union.


butternut (n.)

also butter-nut, 1753, nut of the white walnut, a North American tree; transferred to the tree
itself from 1783. The nut's color was a brownish-gray, hence the word was used (1861) to describe
the warm gray color of the Southern army uniforms in the American Civil War.


secularist (n.)

1846, one who theoretically rejects and ignores all forms of religion based on revelation; see
secularism + -ist. From 1851 as one who maintains that public education and civil policy should be
conducted without the introduction of a religious element. Related: Secularistic.


conscript (v.)

1813, American English, from conscript (n.). A word from the militia drafts in the War of 1812.
Popularized (or unpopularized) during U.S. Civil War, when both sides resorted to it in 1862.
Related: Conscripted; conscripting.


Appomattox

eccentric spelling of plural of Appomattoc, name of a local subgroup of the Powhatan (Algonquian)
confederacy in Virginia (first attested as Apamatic, 1607). Site of last battle for Army of Northern
Virginia (CSA) in the American Civil War, and of Lee's surrender to Grant in Wilmer McLean house,
April 9, 1865.


unreconstructed (adj.)

1867, not reconciled to the outcome of the American Civil War, from un- (1) not + past participle of
reconstruct (v.). See Reconstruction.


Sherman

type of U.S. medium tank used in World War II, 1942, named for U.S. Civil War Gen. William T.
Sherman (1820-1891). The surname is from Old English scearra shears + mann man; hence shearer of
woolen garments.


burnsides (n.)

style of facial hair consisting of side whiskers and a mustache (but clean-shaven chin), 1875
(singular; plural form from 1878; many early uses are in college and university magazines), a
reference to U.S. Army Gen. Ambrose E. Burnside (1824-1881) of Civil War fame, who wore them and
inspired the style. Compare sideburns.


yellow ribbon

The American folk custom of wearing or displaying a yellow ribbon to signify solidarity with loved
ones or fellow citizens at war originated during the U.S. embassy hostage crisis in Iran in 1979. It
does not have a connection to the American Civil War, beyond the use of the old British folk song
Round Her Neck She Wore A Yellow Ribbon in the John Wayne movie of the same name, with a Civil War
setting, released in 1949. The story of a ribbon tied to a tree as a signal to a convict returning
home that his loved ones have forgiven him is attested from 1959, but the ribbon in that case was
white.    The ribbon color seems to have changed to yellow first in a version retold by newspaper
columnist Pete Hamill in 1971. The story was dramatized in June 1972 on ABC-TV (James Earl Jones
played the ex-con). Later that year, Irwin Levine and L. Russell Brown copyrighted the song Tie a
Yellow Ribbon Round the Ole Oak Tree, which became a pop hit in early 1973 and sparked a lawsuit by
Hamill, later dropped.    In 1975, the wife of a Watergate conspirator put out yellow ribbons when
her husband was released from jail, and news coverage of that was noted and remembered by Penne
Laingen, whose husband was U.S. ambassador to Iran in 1979 and one of the Iran hostages taken in the
embassy on Nov. 4. Her yellow ribbon in his honor was written up in the Dec. 10, 1979, Washington
Post. When the hostage families organized as the Family Liaison Action Group (FLAG), they took the
yellow ribbon as their symbol. The ribbons revived in the 1991 Gulf War and again during the 2000s
wars in Afghanistan and Iraq.


post-bellum (adj.)

also postbellum, used in U.S. South from 1874 in reference to American Civil War; see post- +
bellicose.


taps (n.)

U.S. military signal for lights out in soldiers' quarters (played 15 minutes after tattoo), 1824,
from tap (v.), on the notion of drum taps (it originally was played on a drum, later on a bugle). As
a soldier's last farewell, played over his grave, it may date to the American Civil War. The tune
was revised several times in mid-19c.


unpleasantness (n.)

1540s, state or quality of being unpleasant, from unpleasant + -ness. By 1835 as a slight quarrel, a
minor misunderstanding. The late unpleasantness as a humorously polite Southern description of the
American Civil War is attested from 1868.


jack-knife (v.)

1776, to stab, from jack-knife (n.). Intransitive meaning to fold or bend the body is said to date
from the time of the American Civil War. The truck accident verbal sense is from 1949. Related:
Jackknifed; jackknifing.


Thammuz (n.)

1530s, from Hebrew tammuz, tenth month of the Jewish civil year, fourth of the sacred, covering
parts of June and July; also the name of a Syrian deity equivalent to Phoenician Adon, whose
festival began with the new moon of this month (compare Tammuz).


mudsill (n.)

1680s, lowest sill of a house, from mud + sill. The word entered U.S. political history in a speech
by James M. Hammond of South Carolina, March 4, 1858, in U.S. Senate, alluding scornfully to the
very mudsills of society, and the term subsequently was embraced by Northern workers in the pre-
Civil War sectional rivalry.


