clandestine (adj.)

1560s, from Latin clandestinus secret, hidden, from clam secretly, from adverbial derivative of base
of celare to hide (see cell), perhaps on model of intestinus internal. Related: Clandestinely. As a
noun form, there is awkward clandestinity (clandestineness apparently being a dictionary word).


Lenin

pseudonym or alias chosen c.1902 (for publishing clandestine political works in exile) by Russian
revolutionary Vladimir Il'ich Ulyanov (1870-1924). Related: Leninist (1917); Leninism (1918).


surreptitious (adj.)

mid-15c., from Latin surrepticius stolen, furtive, clandestine, from surreptus, past participle of
surripere seize secretly, take away, steal, plagiarize, from assimilated form of sub from under
(hence, secretly; see sub-) + rapere to snatch (see rapid). Related: Surreptitiously.


paramour (n.)

c.1300, noun use of adverbial phrase par amour (c.1300) passionately, with strong love or desire,
from Anglo-French and Old French par amour, from accusative of amor love, from amare to love (see
Amy). Originally a term for Christ (by women) or the Virgin Mary (by men), it came to mean darling,
sweetheart (mid-14c.) and mistress, concubine, clandestine lover (late 14c.).


samizdat (n.)

illegal and clandestine copying and sharing of literature, 1967, from Russian samizdat, literally
self-publishing, from sam self (see same) + izdatel'stvo publishing (from iz from, out of, from PIE
*eghs; see ex-; + dat' to give, from PIE *do-; see date (n.1)). Said to be a word-play on Gosizdat,
the former state publishing house of the U.S.S.R. One who took part in it was a samizdatchik (plural
samizdatchiki). Later and less common was tamizdat writings published abroad and smuggled back into
the U.S.S.R., from tam there.


terrorist (n.)

in the modern sense, 1944, especially in reference to Jewish tactics against the British in
Palestine -- earlier it was used of extremist revolutionaries in Russia who attempted to demoralize
the government by terror (1866); and Jacobins during the French Revolution (1795) -- from French
terroriste; see terror + -ist (also see terrorism).    The term now usually refers to a member of a
clandestine or expatriate organization aiming to coerce an established government by acts of
violence against it or its subjects. [OED]    The tendency of one party's terrorist to be another's
guerilla or freedom fighter was noted in reference to the British action in Cyprus (1956) and the
war in Rhodesia (1973). The word terrorist has been applied, at least retroactively, to the Maquis
resistance in occupied France in World War II (as in in the Spectator, Oct. 20, 1979).


