clapper (n.)

late 13c., agent noun from clap (v.). Meaning tongue of a bell is from late 14c. Old English had
clipur. Meaning hinged board snapped in front of a camera at the start of filming to synchronize
picture and sound is from 1940.


clap (n.2)

gonorrhea, 1580s, of unknown origin, perhaps from Middle English clapper rabbit-hole, from Old
French clapoire (Modern French clapier), originally rabbit burrow (of uncertain origin), but given a
slang extension to brothel and also the name of a disease of some sort. In English originally also a
verb, to infect with clap. Related: Clap-doctor.


bummer (n.)

loafer, idle person, 1855, possibly an extension of the British word for backside (similar
development took place in Scotland by 1540), but more probably from German slang bummler loafer,
agent noun from bummeln go slowly, waste time.    According to Kluge, the German word is from 17c.,
and the earliest sense of it is oscillate back and forth; possibly connected to words in German for
dangle (baumeln), via back-and-forth motion of a bell clapper, transferred to going back and forth,
hence doing nothing. Meaning bad experience is 1968 slang.


timbre (n.)

characteristic quality of a musical sound, 1849, from French timbre quality of a sound, earlier
sound of a bell, from Old French, bell without a clapper, originally small drum, probably via
Medieval Greek *timbanon, from Greek tympanon kettledrum (see tympanum). Timbre was used in Old
French (13c.) and Middle English (14c.) to render Latin tympanum in Ps. 150.


golf (n.)

mid-15c., Scottish gouf, usually taken as an alteration of Middle Dutch colf, colve stick, club,
bat, from Proto-Germanic *kulth- (cognates: Old Norse kolfr clapper of a bell, German Kolben mace,
club). The game is from 14c., the word is first mentioned (along with fut-bol) in a 1457 Scottish
statute on forbidden games. Golf ball attested from 1540s. <b>Despite what you read on the Internet,
golf is not an acronym</b>. Golf widow is from 1890.    Oh! who a golfer's bride would be,  Fast
mated with a laddie  Who every day goes out to tee And with him takes the caddie.  [The Golf Widow's
Lament, in Golf, Oct. 31, 1890]


