clap (n.1)

loud noise, c.1200, from clap (v.). Of thunder, late 14c. Meaning sudden blow is from c.1400;
meaning noise made by slapping the palms of the hands together is from 1590s.


clap (n.2)

gonorrhea, 1580s, of unknown origin, perhaps from Middle English clapper rabbit-hole, from Old
French clapoire (Modern French clapier), originally rabbit burrow (of uncertain origin), but given a
slang extension to brothel and also the name of a disease of some sort. In English originally also a
verb, to infect with clap. Related: Clap-doctor.


clap (v.)

Old English cl&aelig;ppan to throb, beat, common Germanic, echoic (cognate with Old Frisian klapa to
beat, Old Norse klappa, Old High German klaphon, German klappen, Old Saxon klapunga). Meaning to
strike or knock is from c.1300. Meaning to make a sharp noise is late 14c. Of hands, to beat them
together to get attention or express joy, from late 14c. To clap (someone) on the back is from
1520s. Related: Clapped; clapping.


claptrap (n.)

c.1730, trick to 'catch' applause, a stage term; from clap (v.) + trap (n.). Extended sense of
cheap, showy language is from 1819; hence nonsense, rubbish.


clapper (n.)

late 13c., agent noun from clap (v.). Meaning tongue of a bell is from late 14c. Old English had
clipur. Meaning hinged board snapped in front of a camera at the start of filming to synchronize
picture and sound is from 1940.


clapperclaw (v.)

to fight at arm's length with the hands and nails, 1590s, from clap (v.) + claw (v.). Related:
Clapperclawed; clapperclawing.


klatsch (n.)

1953, from German Klatsch gossip, which is said in German sources to be imitative (compare klatschen
clap hands, klatsch a single clap of the hands). Also see clap (v.), which in Middle English also
had a sense of talk noisily or too much, chatter (late 14c.).


applaud (v.)

late 15c. (implied in applauding), to express agreement or approval; to praise, from Latin
applaudere to clap the hands in approbation, to approve by clapping hands; to strike upon, beat,
from ad to (see ad-) + plaudere to clap (see plaudit). Sense of express approval of is from 1590s;
that of to clap the hands is from 1590s. Figurative sense arrived in English before literal.
Related: Applauded; applauding.


thunderclap (n.)

also thunder-clap, late 14c., from thunder (n.) + clap (n.1).


claque (n.)

1860, from French claque band of claqueurs, agent noun from claquer to clap (16c.), echoic (compare
clap (v.)). Modern sense of band of political followers is transferred from that of organized
applause at theater. Claqueur audience memeber who gives pre-arranged responses in a theater
performance is in English from 1837.    This method of aiding the success of public performances is
very ancient; but it first became a permanent system, openly organized and controlled by the
claquers themselves, in Paris at the beginning of the nineteenth century. [Century Dictionary]


clack (v.)

mid-13c., not in Old English, from Old Norse klaka to chatter, of echoic origin; compare Dutch
klakken to clack, crack, Old High German kleken, French claquer to clap, crack (see claque).
Related: Clacked; clacking.


clash (v.)

c.1500, to make a loud, sharp sound, of imitative origin, or a blend of clap and crash. Compare
Dutch kletsen splash, clash, German klatschen, Danish klaske clash, knock about. Figurative sense,
in reference to non-physical strife or battle, is first attested 1620s. Of things, to come into
collision, from 1650s; of colors, to go badly together, first recorded 1894. Related: Clashed;
clashing.


plaudit (n.)

1620s, short for plaudite an actor's request for applause (1560s), from Latin plaudite! applaud!
second person plural imperative of plaudere to clap, strike, beat; applaud, approve, of unknown
origin (also in applaud, explode). This was the customary appeal for applause that Roman actors made
at the end of a play. In English, the -e went silent then was dropped.


rap (n.)

c.1300, a quick, light blow, stroke, also a fart (late 15c.), native or borrowed from a Scandinavian
source (compare Danish rap, Swedish rapp light blow); either way probably of imitative origin
(compare slap, clap).    Slang meaning rebuke, blame, responsibility is from 1777; specific meaning
criminal indictment (as in rap sheet, 1960) is from 1903. To beat the rap is from 1927. Meaning
music with improvised words first in New York City slang, 1979 (see rap (v.2)).


explode (v.)

1530s, to reject with scorn, from Latin explodere drive out or off by clapping, hiss off, hoot off,
originally theatrical, to drive an actor off the stage by making noise, hence drive out, reject (a
sense surviving in an exploded theory), from ex- out (see ex-) + plaudere to clap the hands,
applaud, of uncertain origin. Athenian audiences were highly demonstrative. clapping and shouting
approval, stamping, hissing, and hooting for disapproval. The Romans seem to have done likewise.
At the close of the performance of a comedy in the Roman theatre one of the actors dismissed the
audience, with a request for their approbation, the expression being usually plaudite, vos plaudite,
or vos valete et plaudite. [William Smith, A First Latin Reading Book, 1890]    English used it to
mean drive out with violence and sudden noise (1650s), later, go off with a loud noise (American
English, 1790); sense of to burst with destructive force is first recorded 1882; of population,
1959. Related: Exploded; exploding.


cry (v.)

early 13c., beg, implore, from Old French crier, from Vulgar Latin *critare, from Latin quiritare to
wail, shriek (source of Italian gridare, Old Spanish cridar, Spanish and Portuguese gritar), of
uncertain origin; perhaps a variant of quirritare to squeal like a pig, from *quis, echoic of
squealing, despite ancient folk etymology that traces it to call for the help of the Quirites, the
Roman constabulary. The meaning was extended 13c. to weep, which it largely replaced by 16c.
Related: Cried; crying.    Most languages, in common with English, use the general word for cry out,
shout, wail to also mean weep, shed tears to express pain or grief. Romance and Slavic, however, use
words for this whose ultimate meaning is beat (the breast), compare French pleurer, Spanish llorar,
both from Latin plorare cry aloud, but probably originally plodere beat, clap the hands. Also
Italian piangere (cognate with French plaindre lament, pity) from Latin plangere, originally beat,
but especially of the breast, as a sign of grief. U.S. colloquial for crying out loud is 1924,
probably another euphemism for for Christ's sake.


hooker (n.)

prostitute, often traced to the disreputable morals of the Army of the Potomac (American Civil War)
under the tenure of Gen. Fighting Joe Hooker (early 1863), and the word might have been popularized
by this association at that time (though evidence is wanting). But it is reported to have been in
use in North Carolina c.1845 ([I]f he comes by way of Norfolk he will find any number of pretty
Hookers in the Brick row not far from French's hotel. Take my advice and touch nothing in the shape
of a prostitute when you come through Raleigh, for in honest truth the clap is there of luxuriant
growth. letter quoted in Norman E. Eliason, Tarheel Talk, 1956).    One early theory traces it to
Corlear's Hook, a section of New York City.    HOOKER. A resident of the Hook, i.e. a strumpet, a
sailor's trull. So called from the number of houses of ill-fame frequented by sailors at the Hook
(i.e. Corlear's Hook) in the city of New York. [John Russell Bartlett, Dictionary of Americanisms,
1859]    Perhaps related to hooker thief, pickpocket (1560s), but most likely a reference to
prostitutes hooking or snaring clients. Hook in the figurative sense of that by which anyone is
attracted or caught is recorded from early 15c.; and hook (v.) in the figurative sense of catch hold
of and draw in is attested from 1570s; in reference to fishing for a husband or a wife, it was in
common use from c.1800. All of which makes the modern sense seem a natural step.  Compare French
accrocheuse, raccrocheuse, common slang term for street-walker, prostitute, literally hooker of men.
The family name Hooker (attested from c.975 C.E.) would mean maker of hooks, or else refer to an
agricultural laborer who used a hook (compare Old English weodhoc weed-hook).


