classical (adj.)

1590s, of the highest rank (originally in literature), from classic + -al (1). Classical music
(1836) was defined originally against romantic music.    [I]n general, as now used, the term
classical includes the composers active in instrumental music from somewhere about 1700 to say 1830.
Hence the list includes among the great names those of Bach, his sons, Haydn, Mozart, Beethoven,
Clementi, Dussek, Pleyel, Cramer, etc. The next step beyond the term classical is modern romantic,
the composers of which school may be taken to include all the writers for pianoforte from about 1829
(when Mendelssohn published the first Songs without Words) down to the present. The term romantic in
this sense means strongly marked, extraordinary, intending to tell stories and the like. [Music, Its
Ideals and Methods, W.S.B. Mathews, 1897]    But already by 1880s it was acknowledged the term had a
double sense: Music that had withstood the test of time, as well as music of a style contrasted to
romantic. Later (early 20c.) it was contrasted to jazz (in this sense more often with reference to
the orchestras than to the music itself). Still later in contrast to popular music generally (mid-
20c.).


neo-classical

also neoclassical, style of art, architecture, etc., influenced by classical patterns, 1859,
especially in reference to 18th century English literature; from neo- + classical. Related: Neo-
classicism/neoclassicism.


modernism (n.)

1737, deviation from the ancient and classical manner [Johnson, who calls it a word invented by
Swift], from modern + -ism. From 1830 as modern ways and styles. Used in theology since 1901. As a
movement in the arts (away from classical or traditional modes), from 1929.


ileum (n.)

lowest part of the small intestine, 1680s, medical Latin, from ileum, singular created from
classical Latin plural ilia groin, flank, in classical Latin, belly, the abdomen below the ribs,
poetically, entrails, guts. Sense restriction and form apparently from confusion with Greek eileos
(see ileus). Earlier in English ylioun (late 14c.), from Medieval Latin ileon. Related: Ileitis.


post-classical (adj.)

1845, from post- + classical.


blank verse (n.)

1580s; the thing itself is attested in English poetry from mid-16c. and is classical in origin.


attic (n.)

top story under the roof of a house, 1855, shortened from attic storey (1724). The term Attic order
in classical architecture meant a small, square decorative column of the type often used in a low
story above a building's main facade, a feature associated with the region around Athens (see
Attic). The word then was applied by architects to a low decorative facade above the main story of a
building (1690s in English) to convey a classical heritage where none exists, and it came to mean
the space enclosed by such a structure. The modern use is via French attique. An attic is upright, a
garret is in a sloping roof [Weekley].


discussion (n.)

mid-14c., examination, investigation, judicial trial, from Old French discussion discussion,
examination, investigation, legal trial, from Late Latin discussionem (nominative discussio)
examination, discussion, in classical Latin, a shaking, from discussus, past participle of discutere
strike asunder, break up, from dis- apart (see dis-) + quatere to shake (see quash). Meaning a
talking over, debating in English first recorded mid-15c. Sense evolution in Latin appears to have
been from smash apart to scatter, disperse, then in post-classical times (via the mental process
involved) to investigate, examine, then to debate.


atria (n.)

classical plural of atrium.


old hat (adj.)

out of date, first recorded 1911. As a noun phrase, however, it had different sense previously. The
Classical Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue (1796) defines it as, a woman's privities, because
frequently felt.


retro-

word-forming element meaning backwards; behind, from Latin retro (prep.) backward, back, behind,
also of time, formerly, in past times, probably originally the ablative form of *reteros, based on
re- back (see re-).    L. retro stands to re- as intro, in, within; to in, in, and as citro, hither,
stands to cis, on this side. [Klein]  Common in combinations in post-classical Latin (the classical
equivalent was post-). Active in English as a word-forming element from mid-20c.


Ogygian (adj.)

1843, of great antiquity or age, from Greek Ogygos, name of a mythical Attic or Boeotian king who
even in classical times was thought to have lived very long ago. Also sometimes with reference to a
famous flood said to have occurred in his day.


Syracuse

city in Sicily, founded as a Corinthian colony, and with a name traceable to 8c. B.C.E., from a pre-
Hellenic word, perhaps Phoenician serah to feel ill, in reference to its location near a swamp. The
city in New York, U.S., was named 1825 for the classical city.


daimon (n.)

transliteration of Greek daimon lesser god, guiding spirit, tutelary deity, 1852; see demon.
Employed to avoid the post-classical associations of that word.


oe

found in Greek borrowings into Latin, representing Greek -oi-. Words with -oe- that came early into
English from Old French or Medieval Latin usually already had been levelled to -e- (economic, penal,
cemetery), but later borrowings directly from Latin or Greek tended to retain it at first (oestrus,
diarrhoea, amoeba) as did proper names (Oedipus, Phoebe, Phoenix) and purely technical terms.
British English tends to be more conservative with it than American, which has done away with it in
all but a few instances.    It also occurred in some native Latin words (foedus treaty, league,
foetere to stink, hence occasionally in English foetid, foederal, which was the form in the original
publications of the Federalist papers). In these it represents an ancient -oi- in Old Latin (for
example Old Latin oino, Classical Latin unus), which apparently passed through an -oe- form before
being leveled out but was preserved into Classical Latin in certain words, especially those
belonging to the realms of law (such as foedus) and religion, which, along with the vocabulary of
sailors, are the most conservative branches of any language in any time, through a need for
precision, immediate comprehension, demonstration of learning, or superstition. But in foetus it was
an unetymological spelling in Latin that was picked up in English and formed the predominant
spelling of fetus into the early 20c.


simpliciter (adv.)

not relatively; in the full sense of the word, a Latin adverb (from stem of simplex simple; see
simplex) meaning, in classical Latin, simply, plainly, directly, straightforwardly.


circulator (n.)

one who puts (something) in circulation, 1755, agent noun in Latin form from circulate (v.).
Classical Latin circulator meant peddler, hawker, a sense attested occasionally in English 17c. and
after.


arr (v.)

to growl like a dog, late 15c., imitative. In classical times, the letter R was called littera
canina the dog letter (Persius).


bipedal (adj.)

c.1600, from biped + -al (1). Classical Latin bipedalis meant two feet long or thick.


capital (n.1)

early 15c., a capital letter, from capital (adj.). The meaning capital city is first recorded 1660s
(the Old English word was heafodstol). The financial sense is from 1610s (Middle English had chief
money principal fund, mid-14c.), from Medieval Latin capitale stock, property, noun use of neuter of
capitalis capital, chief, first. (The noun use of this adjective in classical Latin was for a
capital crime.)    [The term capital] made its first appearance in medieval Latin as an adjective
capitalis (from caput, head) modifying the word pars, to designate the principal sum of a money
loan. The principal part of a loan was contrasted with the usury--later called interest--the payment
made to the lender in addition to the return of the sum lent. This usage, unknown to classical
Latin, had become common by the thirteenth century and possibly had begun as early as 1100 A.D., in
the first chartered towns of Europe. [Frank A. Fetter, Reformulation of the Concepts of Capital and
Income in Economics and Accounting, 1937, in Capital, Interest, &amp; Rent, 1977]    Also see
cattle, and compare sense development of fee, pecuniary.


classicism (n.)

classical style in art or literature, 1830, from classic + -ism. Related: Classicist.


atomistic (adj.)

1809, in reference to the classical philosophical doctrine of atomism (1670s); modern philosophical
sense (logical atomism) traces to 1914 and Bertrand Russell.


humanistic

1845 (humanistical is from 1716), in reference to Renaissance or classical humanism; from humanist +
-ic. From 1904 in reference to a modern philosophy that concerns itself with the interests of the
human race.


ventriloquist (n.)

1650s in the classical sense, from ventriloquy + -ist. In the modern sense from c.1800.
Ventriloquists in ancient Greece were Pythones, a reference to the Delphic Oracle.


amoebae

classical plural of amoeba; see -ae.


bone (v.)

especially in bone up study, 1880s student slang, probably from Bohn's Classical Library, a popular
series in higher education published by German-born English publisher Henry George Bohn (1796-1884)
as part of a broad series of libraries he issued from 1846, totaling 766 volumes, continued after
1864 by G. Bell &amp; Sons.


hair-raising (adj.)

exciting, 1837, from hair + raise (v.). In 19c. works, sometimes as jocular mock-classical
tricopherous.


necessary (n.)

mid-14c., needed, required, or useful things; the necessities of life; actions determined by right
or law, perhaps from Old French necessaire (n.) private parts, genitalia; lavatory, and directly
from Latin necessarius (n.), in classical Latin a relation, relative, kinsman; friend, client,
patron; see necessary (adj.).


Colosseum (n.)

1560s, Medieval Latin name for the classical Amphitheatrum Flavium (begun c.70 C.E.), noun use of
neuter of adjective colosseus gigantic; perhaps a reference to the colossal statue of Nero that long
stood nearby (see colossus).


conch (n.)

type of shell, early 15c., from Latin concha shellfish, mollusk, from Greek konkhe mussel, shell,
from PIE root *konkho-. The name for natives of Florida Keys since at least 1833; the prefered
pronunciation there (kongk) preserves the classical one.


comedy (n.)

late 14c., from Old French comedie (14c., a poem, not in the theatrical sense), from Latin comoedia,
from Greek komoidia a comedy, amusing spectacle, probably from komodios actor or singer in the
revels, from komos revel, carousal, merry-making, festival, + aoidos singer, poet, from aeidein to
sing, related to oide (see ode).    The passage on the nature of comedy in the Poetic of Aristotle
is unfortunately lost, but if we can trust stray hints on the subject, his definition of comedy
(which applied mainly to Menander) ran parallel to that of tragedy, and described the art as a
purification of certain affections of our nature, not by terror and pity, but by laughter and
ridicule. [Rev. J.P. Mahaffy, A History of Classical Greek Literature, London, 1895]    The
classical sense of the word, then, was amusing play or performance, which is similar to the modern
one, but in the Middle Ages the word came to mean poems and stories generally (albeit ones with
happy endings), and the earliest English sense is narrative poem (such as Dante's Commedia).
Generalized sense of quality of being amusing dates from 1877.   Comedy aims at entertaining by the
fidelity with which it presents life as we know it, farce at raising laughter by the outrageous
absurdity of the situation or characters exhibited, &amp; burlesque at tickling the fancy of the
audience by caricaturing plays or actors with whose style it is familiar. [Fowler]


quadruplex (adj.)

1875, in reference to telegraph systems in which four messages can be wired simultaneously, from
quadru- + plex. In classical Latin, quadruplex meant fourfold, quadruple, as a noun, a fourfold
amount.


automation (n.)

1948, in the manufacturing sense, coined by Ford Motor Co. Vice President Delmar S. Harder, from
automatic + -ion. Earlier (1838) was automatism, which meant quality of being automatic in the
classical sense.


Corinthian

1650s as an architectural order, from Corinth, the ancient Greek city-state. In classical times
Corinth was notorious for its luxury and licentiousness among the Greek states (and for not scorning
trade and profit); hence Corinthian, noun and adjective, in various slang or colloquial sense in
English, especially a swell, a man about town (early to mid-19c. but especially in the 1820s).


product (n.)

early 15c., mathematical quantity obtained by multiplication, from Medieval Latin productum, in
classical Latin something produced, noun use of neuter past participle of producere bring forth (see
produce (v.)). General sense of anything produced is attested in English from 1570s.


lycanthrope (n.)

1620s in the classical sense; 1825 in the modern sense, from Modern Latin lycanthropus, from Greek
lykanthropos wolf-man (see lycanthropy).


intercession (n.)

early 15c., act of interceding, from Latin intercessionem (nominative intercessio) a going between,
noun of action from past participle stem of intercedere (see intercede). The modern sense was not in
classical Latin.


modernist (n.)

1580s, a modern person, from modern + -ist. Later, a supporter of the modern (as opposed to the
classical), c.1700. As a follower of a movement in the arts (modernism), attested from 1927.


ephemeris (n.)

table showing predicted positions of heavenly bodies, 1550s, Modern Latin, from Greek ephemeris
diary, calendar, from ephemeros daily (see ephemera). The classical plural is ephemerides.


curriculum (n.)

1824, from Modern Latin transferred use of classical Latin curriculum a running, course, career
(also a fast chariot, racing car), from currere (see current (adj.)). Used in English as a Latin
word since 1630s at Scottish universities.


Callisto

fourth moon of Jupiter; in classical mythology a nymph, mother of Arcas by Zeus, turned to a bear by
Hera, from Greek kallistos, superlative of kalos beautiful, from PIE *kal- (2) beautiful. Feminized
as proper name Callista.


iambic

1570s (n.); 1580s (adj.), from Latin iambicus, from Greek iambikos, from iambos metrical foot of one
unaccented followed by one accented syllable, from iaptein to assail (in words), literally to put
forth. The meter of invective and lampoon in classical Greek from the time it was used for such by
Archilochos, 7c. B.C.E.


romanticism (n.)

1803, a romantic idea, from romantic + -ism. In literature, 1823 in reference to a movement toward
medieval forms (especially in reaction to classical ones) it has an association now more confined to
Romanesque. The movement began in German and spread to England and France. Generalized sense of a
tendency toward romantic ideas is first recorded 1840.


longhair (n.)

also long-hair, cat with long hair, 1893, from long (adj.) + hair. As intellectual, especially in
musical tastes, devotee of classical music, 1920. Sense of hippie attested from 1969.


mime (n.)

c.1600, a buffoon who practices gesticulations [Johnson], from French mime (16c.) and directly from
Latin mimus, from Greek mimos imitator, mimic, actor, mime, buffoon, of unknown origin. In reference
to a performance, 1640s in a classical context; 1932 as a pantomime.


stator (n.)

stationary part of a generator (opposed to rotor), 1895, from Latin stator, agent noun from stare to
stand (see stay (v.)). In classical Latin it meant an orderly, attendant upon a proconsul.


elocution (n.)

mid-15c., from Late Latin elocutionem (nominative elocutio) voice production, manner of expression,
in classical Latin, oratorical expression, noun of action from past participle stem of eloqui speak
out (see eloquence).


-ite (1)

from French -ite and directly from Latin -ita, from Greek -ites (fem. -itis), forming adjectives and
nouns meaning connected with or belonging to. Especially used in classical times to form ethnic and
local designations (for example in Septuagint translations of Hebrew names in -i) and for names of
gems and minerals.


instructor (n.)

mid-15c., from Old French instructeur and directly from Medieval Latin instructor teacher (in
classical Latin, preparer), agent noun from instruere (see instruct).


educator (n.)

1560s, one who nourishes or rears; 1670s, one who trains or instructs, from Latin educator (in
classical Latin, a foster father as well as a tutor), agent noun from past participle stem of
educare (see educate). Latin educatrix meant a nurse.


