clasp (n.)

c.1300, claspe, metal catch or hook used to hold things together, perhaps a metathesis of clapse,
and thus from or related to Old English clyppan clasp (see clip (v.2)).


clasp (v.)

late 14c., from clasp (n.). Related: Clasped; clasping.


clasp-hook (n.)

1841, from clasp (n.) + hook (n.).


fibula (n.)

1670s, clasp, buckle, brooch; 1706 as smaller bone in the lower leg, from Latin fibula clasp,
brooch, related to figere to fasten, fix (see fix (v.)).    Used in reference to the outer leg bone
as a loan-translation of Greek perone small bone in the lower leg, originally clasp, brooch;
anything pointed for piercing or pinning; the bone was so called because it resembles a clasp like a
modern safety pin.


spangle (n.)

early 15c., small piece of glittering metal, diminutive of spang glittering ornament, spangle,
probably from Middle Dutch spange brooch, clasp, cognate with Old English spang buckle, clasp, from
Proto-Germanic *spango, from an extended form of the root of span (v.).


infibulate (v.)

1620s, from Latin infibulatus, past participle of infibulare to close with a clasp, from in- not,
opposite of (see in- (1)) + fibula a clasp, pin (see fibula). Related: Infibulated.


hank (n.)

late 13c., probably from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse honk, hank clasp, hank, related to
hang (v.).


clinch (v.)

1560s, clasp, interlock, especially with a bent nail, variant of clench. The sense of settle
decisively is first recorded 1716, from the notion of clinching the point of a nail to keep it fast.
Boxing sense is from 1860. Related: Clinched; clinching.


unclasp (v.)

1520s, from un- (2) reverse, opposite of + clasp (v.). Related: Unclasped; unclasping.


synapse (n.)

junction between two nerve cells, 1899, medical Latin, from Greek synapsis conjunction, from or
related to synaptein to clasp, join together, tie or bind together, be connected with, from syn-
together (see syn-) + haptein to fasten (see apse). Introduced by English physiologist Sir Michael
Foster (1836-1907) at the suggestion of English classical scholar Arthur Woollgar Verral
(1851-1912).


switchblade (n.)

also switch-blade, type of folding pocket knife, 1932, from switch (n.) + blade. So called for the
switch which is pressed to spring the knife open. Earlier a similar tool was known as an Arkansas
toothpick (1837) and a clasp-knife (1755).


embrace (v.)

mid-14c., from Old French embracer (12c., Modern French embrasser) clasp in the arms, enclose;
covet, handle, cope with, from en- in (see en- (1)) + brace, braz the arms, from Latin bracchium
(neuter plural brachia); see brace (n.). Related: Embraced; embracing; embraceable. Replaced Old
English clyppan, also f&aelig;&eth;m.


tassel (n.)

c.1300, mantle fastener, from Old French tassel tassel, fringe, hem; a fastening, clasp (12c.,
Modern French tasseau), from Vulgar Latin *tassellus, said to be from Latin taxillus small die or
cube, a diminutive of talus knucklebone (used as a die in gaming), ankle (see talus (n.1)). But OED
finds this doubtful and calls attention to the variant form tossel and suggests association with
toss (v.). Meaning hanging bunch of small cords is first recorded late 14c.


press (v.1)

push against, early 14c., to clasp, embrace; mid-14c. to squeeze out; also to cluster, gather in a
crowd;  late 14c., to press against, exert pressure, also assault, assail; also forge ahead, push
one's way, move forward, from Old French presser squeeze, press upon; torture (13c.), from Latin
pressare to press, frequentative formation from pressus, past participle of premere to press, hold
fast, cover, crowd, compress, from PIE *per- (4) to strike. Related: Pressed; pressing. Figurative
sense is from late 14c. Meaning to urge, argue for is from 1590s.


clip (v.2)

fasten, hold together by pressure, also (mostly archaic) to embrace, from Old English clyppan to
embrace, clasp; surround; prize, honor, cherish; related to Old Frisian kleppa to embrace, love, Old
High German klaftra, German klafter fathom (on notion of outstretched arms). Also compare Lithuanian
glebys armful, globiu to embrace, support. Meaning to fasten, bind is early 14c. Meaning to fasten
with clips is from 1902. Related: Clipped; clipping. Original sense of the verb is preserved in U.S.
football clipping penalty.


harpoon (n.)

1610s, from French harpon, from Old French harpon cramp iron, clamp, clasp (described as a mason's
tool for fastening stones together), from harper to grapple, grasp, possibly of Germanic origin; or
from Latin harpa- hook (related to harpagonem grappling hook), from Greek harpe sickle, from PIE
root *serp- (1) sickle, hook. Earlier harping-iron (mid-15c.). Sense and spelling perhaps influenced
by Dutch (Middle Dutch harpoen) or Basque, the language of the first whaling peoples, who often
accompanied English sailors on their early expeditions. Also see -oon.


clamp (n.)

device for fastening, c.1300, probably from clamb, perhaps originally past tense of climb (v.), or
from Middle Dutch clampe (Dutch klamp), from West Germanic *klamp- clamp, cleat; cognate with Middle
Low German klampe clasp, hook, Old High German klampfer clip, clamp; also probably related to Middle
Dutch klamme a clamp, hook, grapple, Danish klamme a clamp, cramp, Old English clamm fetter; see
clam (n.).


tack (n.1)

clasp, hook, fastener, also a nail of some kind, c.1400, from Old North French taque nail, pin, peg
(Old French tache, 12c., nail, spike, tack; pin brooch), probably from a Germanic source (compare
Middle Dutch tacke twig, spike, Frisian tak a tine, prong, twig, branch, Low German takk tine,
pointed thing, German Zacken sharp point, tooth, prong), from Proto-Germanic *tag-. Meaning small,
sharp nail with a flat head is attested from mid-15c. The meaning rope to hold the corner of a sail
in place is first recorded late 15c.


strain (v.)

c.1300, tie, bind, fasten, gird, from present participle stem of Old French estreindre bind tightly,
clasp, squeeze, from Latin stringere (2) draw tight, bind tight, compress, press together, from PIE
root *streig- to stroke, rub, press (cognates: Lithuanian stregti congeal, freeze, become stiff;
Greek strangein twist; Old High German strician mends nets; Old English streccian to stretch; German
stramm, Dutch stram stiff).    From late 14c. as tighten; make taut, also exert oneself; overexert
(a body part), Sense of press through a filter, put (a liquid) through a strainer is from early 14c.
(implied in strainer); that of to stress beyond measure, carry too far, make a forced interpretation
of is from mid-15c. Related: Strained; straining.


span (v.)

Old English spannan to join, link, clasp, fasten, bind, connect; stretch, span, from Proto-Germanic
*spannan (cognates: Old Norse spenna, Old Frisian spanna, Middle Dutch spannen, Dutch spannan
stretch, bend, hoist, hitch, Old High German spannan, German spannen to join, fasten, extend,
connect), from PIE root *(s)pen- to draw, stretch, spin (cognates: Latin pendere to hang, to cause
to hang, pondus weight (perhaps the notion is the weight of a thing measured by how much it
stretches a cord), pensare to weigh, consider; Greek ponos toil, ponein to toil; Lithuanian spendziu
lay a snare; Old Church Slavonic peti stretch, strain, pato fetter, pina I span; Old English spinnan
to spin; for other cognates, see spin (v.)).    The meaning to encircle with the hand(s) is from
1781; in the sense of to form an arch over (something) it is first recorded 1630s. Related: Spanned;
spanning.


close (v.)

c.1200, to shut, cover in, from Old French clos- (past participle stem of clore to shut, to cut off
from), 12c., from Latin clausus, past participle of claudere to shut, close; to block up, make
inaccessible; put an end to; shut in, enclose, confine (always -clusus, -cludere in compounds).
The Latin word might be from the possible PIE root *klau- hook, peg, crooked or forked branch (used
as a bar or bolt in primitive structures); cognates: Latin clavis key, clavus nail, claustrum bar,
bolt, barrier, claustra dam, wall, barricade, stronghold; Greek kleidos (genitive) bar, bolt, key,
klobos cage; Old Irish clo nail, Middle Irish clithar hedge, fence; Old Church Slavonic klju&#269;i
hook, key, klju&#269;iti shut; Lithuanian kliuti to catch, be caught on, kliaudziu check, hinder,
kliuvu clasp, hang; Old High German sliozan shut, German schlie&szlig;en to shut, Schl&uuml;ssel
key.    Also partly from Old English beclysan close in, shut up. Intransitive sense become shut is
from late 14c. Meaning draw near to is from 1520s. Intransitive meaning draw together, come together
is from 1550s, hence the idea in military verbal phrase close ranks (mid-17c.), later with
figurative extensions. Meaning bring to an end, finish is from c.1400; intransitive sense come to an
end is from 1826. Of stock prices, from 1860. Meaning bring together the parts of (a book, etc.) is
from 1560s. Related: Closed; closing.


