cleave (v.2)

to adhere, Middle English cleven, clevien, cliven, from Old English clifian, cleofian, from West
Germanic *klibajan (cognates: Old Saxon klibon, Old High German kliban, Dutch kleven, Old High
German kleben, German kleben to stick, cling, adhere), from PIE *gloi- to stick (see clay). The
confusion was less in Old English when cleave (v.1) was a class 2 strong verb; but it has grown
since cleave (v.1) weakened, which may be why both are largely superseded by stick (v.) and split
(v.).


cleave (v.1)

to split, Old English cleofan, cleven, cliven to split, separate (class II strong verb, past tense
cleaf, past participle clofen), from Proto-Germanic *kleuban (cognates: Old Saxon klioban, Old Norse
kljufa, Danish kl&ouml;ve, Dutch kloven, Old High German klioban, German klieben to cleave, split),
from PIE root *gleubh- to cut, slice (see glyph).    Past tense form clave is recorded in Northern
writers from 14c. and was used with both verbs (see cleave (v.2)), apparently by analogy with other
Middle English strong verbs. Clave was common to c.1600 and still alive at the time of the KJV; weak
past tense cleaved for this verb also emerged in 14c.; cleft is still later. The past participle
cloven survives, though mostly in compounds.


cleaver (n.)

late 15c., one who splits, agent noun from cleave (v.1). Originally one who splits boards with a
wedge instead of sawing; attested as part of a surname from mid-14c. Meaning butcher's chopper is
from mid-15c.    This last [Marrowbones and Cleaver] is a sign in Fetter Lane, originating from a
custom, now rapidly dying away, of the butcher boys serenading newly married couples with these
professional instruments. Formerly, the band would consist of four cleavers, each of a different
tone, or, if complete, of eight, and by beating their marrowbones skilfully against these, they
obtained a sort of music somewhat after the fashion of indifferent bell-ringing. When well
performed, however, and heard from a proper distance, it was not altogether unpleasant. ... The
butchers of Clare market had the reputation of being the best performers. ... This music was once so
common that Tom Killigrew called it the national instrument of England.  [Larwood &amp; Hotten, The
History of Signboards from the Earliest Times to the Present Day, London, 1867]


sliver (n.)

splinter of wood, late 14c., from obsolete verb sliven to split, cleave, from Old English toslifan
to split, cleave (see sleave).


clove (n.2)

slice of garlic, Old English clufu clove (of garlic), bulb, tuber, from Proto-Germanic *klubo cleft,
thing cloven, from PIE *gleubh- to tear apart, cleave (see cleave (v.1)). Its Germanic cognates
mostly lurk in compounds that translate as clove-leek, such as Old Saxon clufloc, Old High German
chlobilouh. Dissimilation produced Dutch knoflook, German knoblauch.


fissure (n.)

c.1400, from Old French fissure (13c.) and directly from Latin fissura a cleft, from root of findere
to split, cleave, from PIE *bhi-n-d-, from root *bheid- to split (cognates: Sanskrit bhinadmi I
cleave, Old High German  bizzan to bite, Old English  bita a piece bitten off,  morsel, Old Norse
beita to  hunt with dogs, beita  pasture, food).


clevis (n.)

U-shaped iron bar with holes for a bolt or pin, used as a fastener, 1590s, of unknown origin,
perhaps from the root of cleave (v.2). Also uncertain is whether it is originally a plural or a
singular.


cloven (adj.)

divided, split, Old English clofen, past participle adjective from cleave (v.1).


cleft (adj.)

late 14c., past participle adjective from cleave (v.1)). Cleft palate attested from 1828.


dybbuk (n.)

malevolent spirit of a dead person possessing the body of a living one, 1903, from Jewish folklore,
from Hebrew dibbuk, from dabak to cling, cleave to.


slip (n.1)

mid-15c., edge of a garment; 1550s, narrow strip, probably from Middle Low German or Middle Dutch
slippe cut, slit, possibly related to Old English toslifan to split, cleave. Sense of narrow piece
of paper (as in pink slip) in 1680s.


adhere (v.)

1590s, from Middle French adh&eacute;rer (15c.) or directly from Latin adhaerare to stick to (see
adherent (adj.)). Originally often of persons, to cleave to a leader, cause, party, etc. (compare
adherent (n.), which still often retains this sense). Related: Adhered; adhering.


scalpel (n.)

1742, from Latin scalpellum a surgical knife, diminutive of scalprum knife, chisel, tool for
scraping or cutting, from scalpere to carve, cut, related to sculpere to carve, from PIE root
*(s)kel- to cut, cleave (see scale (n.1)).


sculpture (n.)

late 14c., from Latin sculptura sculpture, from past participle stem of sculpere to carve, engrave,
back-formation from compounds such as exculpere, from scalpere to carve, cut, from PIE root *(s)kel-
(1) to cut, cleave (see scale (n.1)).


cohere (v.)

1590s, from Latin cohaerere to cleave together, in transferred use, be coherent or consistent, from
com- together (see co-) + haerere to stick (see hesitation). Related: Cohered; cohering.


schizo-

word-forming element meaning division; split, cleavage, from Latinized form of Greek skhizo-, comb.
form of skhizein to split, cleave, part, separate, from PIE root *skei- to cut, separate, divide,
part, split (see shed (v.)).


glyph (n.)

1727, ornamental groove in architecture, from French glyphe (1701), from Greek glyphe a carving,
from glyphein to hollow out, cut out with a knife, engrave, carve, from PIE root *gleubh- to cut,
slice (cognates: Latin glubere to peel, shell, strip, Old English cleofan to cleave). Meaning
sculpted mark or symbol (as in hieroglyph) is from 1825.


eclat (n.)

1670s, showy brilliance, from French &eacute;clat splinter, fragment (12c.), also flash of
brilliance, from eclater burst out, splinter, from Old French esclater smash, shatter into pieces,
of uncertain origin, perhaps from a West Germanic word related to slit or to Old High German sleizen
tear to pieces; to split, cleave. Extended sense of conspicuous success is first recorded in English
in 1741.


sleave (v.)

to separate or divide (threads, strands, fibers), Old English -sl&#230;fan, from stem of -slifan to
separate, split, cleave, from Proto-Germanic *slifanan, perhaps related to the root of slip (v.).
Compare German Schleife a loop, knot, noose. Related: Sleaved; sleaving. As a noun, knotted, tangled
silk or thread, 1590s, from the verb; this is the word in Shakespeare's rauel'd Sleeue of Care
(Macbeth).


spool (n.)

early 14c., wheel for winding thread upon, from Old North French spole, espole a spool (13c.), from
Middle Dutch spoele a spool, from Proto-Germanic *spolon (cognates: Norwegian and Swedish spole, Old
High German spuola, German Spule a spool, bobbin), from PIE root *spel- to cleave, split (see spoil
(v.)).


shingle (n.1)

thin piece of wood, c.1200, scincle, from Late Latin scindula (also the source of German Schindel),
altered (by influence of Greek schidax lath or schindalmos splinter) from Latin scandula roof tile,
from scindere to cleave, split, from PIE root *sked- to split. Meaning small signboard is first
attested 1842. Sense of woman's short haircut is from 1924; the verb meaning to cut the hair so as
to give the impression of overlapping shingles is from 1857.


cleavage (n.)

1816, in geology, action of splitting (rocks or gems) along natural fissures, from cleave (v.1) +
-age. General meaning action or state of cleaving or being cleft is from 1867.    The sense of cleft
between a woman's breasts in low-cut clothing is first recorded 1946, defined in a Time magazine
article [Aug. 5] as the Johnston Office trade term for the shadowed depression dividing an actress'
bosom into two distinct sections; traditionally first used in this sense by U.S. publicist Joseph I.
Breen (1888-1965), head of the Production Code Administration (replaced 1945 by Eric Johnston),
enforcers of Hollywood self-censorship, in reference to Jane Russell's costumes and poses in The
Outlaw.


flint (n.)

Old English flint flint, rock, common Germanic (cognates Middle Dutch vlint, Old High German flins,
Danish flint), from PIE *splind- to split, cleave, from root *(s)plei- to splice, split (cognates:
Greek plinthos brick, tile, Old Irish slind brick), perhaps a variant of *spel- (1) to split, break
off. Transferred senses were in Old English.


cleft (n.)

1570s, alteration (by influence of cleft, new weak past participle of cleave (v.1)), of Middle
English clift (early 14c.), from Old English geclyft (adj.) split, cloven, from Proto-Germanic
*kluftis (cognates: Old High German and German kluft, Danish kl&oslash;ft cleft), from PIE *gleubh-
(see glyph). In Middle English anatomy, it meant the parting of the thighs (early 14c.).


divide (v.)

early 14c., from Latin dividere to force apart, cleave, distribute, from dis- apart (see dis-) +
-videre to separate, from PIE root *weidh- to separate (see widow; also see with).    Mathematical
sense is from early 15c. Divide and rule (c.1600) translates Latin divide et impera, a maxim of
Machiavelli. Related: Divided; dividing.


tome (n.)

1510s, a single volume of a multi-volume work, from Middle French tome (16c.), from Latin tomus
section of a book, tome, from Greek tomos volume, section of a book, originally a section, piece cut
off, from temnein to cut, from PIE *tem- to cut (cognates: second element in Latin aestimare to
value, appraise, Old Church Slavonic tina to cleave, split, Middle Irish tamnaim I cut off, Welsh
tam morsel). Sense of a large book is attested from 1570s.


shelf (n.)

late 14c., from Middle Low German schelf shelf, set of shelves, or from Old English cognate scylfe,
which perhaps meant shelf, ledge, floor, and scylf peak, pinnacle, from Proto-Germanic *skelf-
split, possibly from the notion of a split piece of wood (compare Old Norse skj&ouml;lf bench), from
PIE root *(s)kel- (1) to cut, cleave (see scale (n.1)).   Shelf life first recorded 1927. Phrase on
the shelf out of the way, inactive is attested from 1570s; of unmarried women with no prospects from
1839. Off the shelf ready-made is from 1936. Meaning ledge of rock is from 1809, perhaps from or
influenced by shelf (n.2). Related: Shelves.


shear (v.)

Old English sceran, scieran (class IV strong verb; past tense scear, past participle scoren) to
cleave, hew, cut with a sharp instrument; cut (hair); shear (sheep), from Proto-Germanic *sker- to
cut (cognates: Old Norse and Old Frisian skera, Dutch scheren, German scheren to shear), from PIE
*(s)ker- (1) to cut, to scrape, to hack (cognates: Sanskrit krnati hurts, wounds, kills, krntati
cuts; Hittite karsh- to cut off; Greek keirein to cut, shear; Latin curtus short; Lithuanian skiriu
to separate; Old Irish scaraim I separate; Welsh ysgar to separate, ysgyr fragment).


clever (adj.)

1580s, handy, dexterous, apparently from East Anglian dialectal cliver expert at seizing, perhaps
from East Frisian kl&#252;fer skillful, or Norwegian dialectic klover ready, skillful, and perhaps
influenced by Old English clifer claw, hand (early usages seem to refer to dexterity). Or perhaps
akin to Old Norse kleyfr easy to split and from a root related to cleave to split. Extension to
intellect is first recorded 1704.    This is a low word, scarcely ever used but in burlesque or
conversation; and applied to any thing a man likes, without a settled meaning. [Johnson, 1755]
The meaning has narrowed since, but clever also often in old use and dialect meant well-shaped,
attractive-looking and in 19c. American English sometimes good-natured, agreeable. Related:
Cleverly; cleverness.


clay (n.)

Old English cl&aelig;g stiff, sticky earth; clay, from Proto-Germanic *klaijaz (cognates: Old High
German kliwa bran, German Kleie, Old Frisian klai clay, Old Saxon klei, Middle Dutch clei, Danish
kl&aelig;g clay; also Old English cl&aelig;man, Old Norse kleima, Old High German kleiman to cover
with clay), from PIE root *glei- clay (cognates: Greek gloios sticky matter; Latin gluten glue; Old
Church Slavonic glina clay, glenu slime, mucus; Old Irish glenim I cleave, adhere).    in Scripture,
the stuff from which the body of the first man was formed; hence human body (especially when dead).
Clay pigeon is from 1888. Feet of clay fundamental weakness is from Dan. ii:33.


schedule (n.)

late 14c., sedule, cedule ticket, label, slip of paper with writing on it, from Old French cedule
(Modern French c&#233;dule), from Late Latin schedula strip of paper (in Medieval Latin also a note,
schedule), diminutive of Latin scheda, scida one of the strips forming a papyrus sheet, from Greek
skhida splinter, from stem of skhizein to cleave, split (see shed (v.)). Also from the Latin word
are Spanish c&#233;dula, German Zettel.    The notion is of slips of paper attached to a document as
an appendix (a sense maintained in U.S. tax forms). The specific meaning printed timetable is first
recorded 1863 in railway use. Modern spelling is a 15c. imitation of Latin, but pronunciation
remained sed-yul for centuries afterward; the modern British pronunciation (shed-yul) is from French
influence, while the U.S. pronunciation (sked-yul) is from the practice of Webster, based on the
Greek original.


shell (n.)

Old English sciell, scill, Anglian scell seashell, eggshell, related to Old English scealu shell,
husk, from Proto-Germanic *skaljo piece cut off; shell; scale (cognates: West Frisian skyl peel,
rind, Middle Low German schelle pod, rind, egg shell, Gothic skalja tile), with the shared notion of
covering that splits off, from PIE root *(s)kel- (1) to cut, cleave (cognates: Old Church Slavonic
skolika shell, Russian skala bark, rind; see scale (n.1)). Italian scaglia chip is from Germanic.
Sense of mere exterior is from 1650s; that of hollow framework is from 1791. Meaning structure for a
band or orchestra is attested from 1938. Military use (1640s) was first of hand grenades, in
reference to the metal case in which the gunpowder and shot were mixed; the notion is of a hollow
object filled with explosives. Hence shell shock, first recorded 1915. Shell game a swindle is from
1890, from a version of three-card monte played with a pea and walnut shells.


scale (n.1)

skin plates on fish or snakes, c.1300, from Old French escale cup, scale, shell pod, husk (12c.,
Modern French &eacute;cale) scale, husk, from Frankish *skala or some other Germanic source, from
Proto-Germanic *sk&aelig;lo split, divide (cognates: Dutch schaal a scale, husk, Old High German
scala shell, Gothic skalja tile, Old English scealu shell, husk), from PIE root *(s)kel- (1) to cut,
cleave, split (cognates: Latin culter knife, scalpere to cut, scrape; Old Church Slavonic skolika
mussel, shell, Russian skala rind, bark, Lithuanian skelti split, Old English scell shell, scalu
drinking cup, bowl, scale of a balance).    In reference to humans, as a condition of certain skin
diseases, it is attested from c.1400. As what falls from one's eye when blindness ends (usually
figurative), it echoes Acts ix:18 (Latin tanquam squam&aelig;, Greek hosei lepides).


key (n.1)

metal piece that works a lock, from Old English c&aelig;g key, of unknown origin, with no certain
cognates other than Old Frisian kei. Perhaps related to Middle Low German keie lance, spear on
notion of tool to cleave with, from Proto-Germanic *ki- to cleaver, split (cognates: German Keil
wedge, Gothic us-kijans come forth, said of seed sprouts, keinan to germinate). But Liberman writes,
The original meaning of *kaig-jo- was presumably '*pin with a twisted end.' Words with the root
*kai- followed by a consonant meaning 'crooked, bent; twisted' are common only in the North Germanic
languages. Modern pronunciation is a northern variant predominating from c.1700; earlier it was
often spelled and pronounced kay.    Figurative sense of that which serves to open or explain was in
Old English; meaning that which holds together other parts is from 1520s. As answer to a test, it is
from chess, short for key move, first move in a solution to a set problem. Musical sense of tone,
note is 15c., but modern sense of scale is 1580s, probably as a translation of Latin clavis or
French clef (see clef; also see keynote). Extended c.1500 to mechanism on a musical instrument. As a
verb meaning to scratch (a car's paint job) with a key it is recorded by 1986.


spill (v.)

Old English spillan destroy, mutilate, kill, also in late Old English to waste, variant of spildan
destroy, from Proto-Germanic *spilthjan (cognates: Old High German spildan to spill, Old Saxon
spildian destroy, kill, Old Norse spilla to destroy, Danish spilde lose, spill, waste, Middle Dutch
spillen to waste, spend), from PIE *spel- (1) to split, break off (cognates: Middle Dutch spalden,
Old High German spaltan to split; Greek aspalon skin, hide, spolas flayed skin; Lithuanian spaliai
shives of flax; Old Church Slavonic rasplatiti to cleave, split; Middle Low German spalden, Old High
German spaltan to split; Sanskrit sphatayati splits).    Sense of let (liquid) fall or run out
developed mid-14c. from use of the word in reference to shedding blood (early 14c.). Intransitive
sense to run out and become wasted is from 1650s. Spill the beans recorded by 1910 in a sense of
spoil the situation; 1919 as reveal a secret. To cry for spilt milk (usually with negative) is
attested from 1738. Related: Spilled; spilt; spilling.


science (n.)

mid-14c., what is known, knowledge (of something) acquired by study; information; also assurance of
knowledge, certitude, certainty, from Old French science knowledge, learning, application; corpus of
human knowledge (12c.), from Latin scientia knowledge, a knowing; expertness, from sciens (genitive
scientis) intelligent, skilled, present participle of scire to know, probably originally to separate
one thing from another, to distinguish, related to scindere to cut, divide, from PIE root *skei- to
cut, to split (cognates: Greek skhizein to split, rend, cleave, Gothic skaidan, Old English sceadan
to divide, separate; see shed (v.)).    From late 14c. in English as book-learning, also a
particular branch of knowledge or of learning; also skillfulness, cleverness; craftiness. From
c.1400 as experiential knowledge; also a skill, handicraft; a trade. From late 14c. as collective
human knowledge (especially that gained by systematic observation, experiment, and reasoning).
Modern (restricted) sense of body of regular or methodical observations or propositions concerning a
particular subject or speculation is attested from 1725; in 17c.-18c. this concept commonly was
called philosophy. Sense of non-arts studies is attested from 1670s.    Science, since people must
do it, is a socially embedded activity. It progresses by hunch, vision, and intuition. Much of its
change through time does not record a closer approach to absolute truth, but the alteration of
cultural contexts that influence it so strongly. Facts are not pure and unsullied bits of
information; culture also influences what we see and how we see it. Theories, moreover, are not
inexorable inductions from facts. The most creative theories are often imaginative visions imposed
upon facts; the source of imagination is also strongly cultural. [Stephen Jay Gould, introduction to
The Mismeasure of Man, 1981]   <hr />   In science you must not talk before you know. In art you
must not talk before you do. In literature you must not talk before you think. [John Ruskin, The
Eagle's Nest, 1872]    The distinction is commonly understood as between theoretical truth (Greek
episteme) and methods for effecting practical results (tekhne), but science sometimes is used for
practical applications and art for applications of skill. To blind (someone) with science confuse by
the use of big words or complex explanations is attested from 1937, originally noted as a phrase
from Australia and New Zealand.


