cleft (adj.)

late 14c., past participle adjective from cleave (v.1)). Cleft palate attested from 1828.


cleft (n.)

1570s, alteration (by influence of cleft, new weak past participle of cleave (v.1)), of Middle
English clift (early 14c.), from Old English geclyft (adj.) split, cloven, from Proto-Germanic
*kluftis (cognates: Old High German and German kluft, Danish kl&oslash;ft cleft), from PIE *gleubh-
(see glyph). In Middle English anatomy, it meant the parting of the thighs (early 14c.).


schism (n.)

late 14c., scisme, dissention within the church, from Old French scisme, cisme a cleft, split
(12c.), from Church Latin schisma, from Greek skhisma (genitive skhismatos) division, cleft, in New
Testament applied metaphorically to divisions in the Church (I Cor. xii.25), from stem of skhizein
to split (see shed (v.)). Spelling restored 16c., but pronunciation unchanged. Often in reference to
the Great Schism (1378-1417) in the Western Church.


cleavage (n.)

1816, in geology, action of splitting (rocks or gems) along natural fissures, from cleave (v.1) +
-age. General meaning action or state of cleaving or being cleft is from 1867.    The sense of cleft
between a woman's breasts in low-cut clothing is first recorded 1946, defined in a Time magazine
article [Aug. 5] as the Johnston Office trade term for the shadowed depression dividing an actress'
bosom into two distinct sections; traditionally first used in this sense by U.S. publicist Joseph I.
Breen (1888-1965), head of the Production Code Administration (replaced 1945 by Eric Johnston),
enforcers of Hollywood self-censorship, in reference to Jane Russell's costumes and poses in The
Outlaw.


Pisgah

1640s, name of the mountain east of the River Jordan, whence Moses was allowed to view the Promised
Land he could not enter (Deut. iii:27); with figurative extension. From Hebrew, literally cleft.


fissile (adj.)

1660s, from Latin fissilis that which may be cleft or split, from fissus, past participle of findere
(see fissure).


pharynx (n.)

1690s, from Greek pharynx (genitive pharyngos) windpipe, throat, related to pharanx cleft, chasm.


trifid (adj.)

divided into three lobes, 1620s, from Latin trifidus cleft in three, from tri- three (see tri-) +
-fid. This adjective probably inspired triffid, the name of the three-legged walking poisonous
plants in John Wyndham's novel The Day of the Triffids (1951).


split (n.)

1590s, narrow cleft, crack, fissure, from split (v.). Meaning piece of wood formed by splitting is
from 1610s. Meaning an act of separation, a divorce is from 1729. From 1861 as the name of the
acrobatic feat. Meaning a drink composed of two liquors is from 1882; that of sweet dish of sliced
fruit with ice cream is attested from 1920, American English. Slang meaning share of the take is
from 1889. Meaning a draw in a double-header is from 1920.


rift (n.)

early 14c., a split, act of splitting, from a Scandinavian source (compare Danish and Norwegian rift
a cleft, Old Icelandic ript (pronounced rift) breach; related to Old Norse ripa to break a contract
(see riven). Figurative use from 1620s. Geological sense from 1921. As a verb, c.1300.


fracture (n.)

early 15c., a breaking of a bone, from Middle French fracture (14c.), from Latin fractura a breach,
break, cleft, from fractus, past participle of frangere to break (see fraction).


rail (n.1)

horizontal bar passing from one post or support to another, c.1300, from Old French reille bolt,
bar, from Vulgar Latin *regla, from Latin regula straight stick, diminutive form related to regere
to straighten, guide (see regal). Used figuratively for thinness from 1872. To be off the rails in a
figurative sense is from 1848, an image from the railroads. In U.S. use, A piece of timber, cleft,
hewed, or sawed, inserted in upright posts for fencing [Webster, 1830].


clove (n.2)

slice of garlic, Old English clufu clove (of garlic), bulb, tuber, from Proto-Germanic *klubo cleft,
thing cloven, from PIE *gleubh- to tear apart, cleave (see cleave (v.1)). Its Germanic cognates
mostly lurk in compounds that translate as clove-leek, such as Old Saxon clufloc, Old High German
chlobilouh. Dissimilation produced Dutch knoflook, German knoblauch.


fissure (n.)

c.1400, from Old French fissure (13c.) and directly from Latin fissura a cleft, from root of findere
to split, cleave, from PIE *bhi-n-d-, from root *bheid- to split (cognates: Sanskrit bhinadmi I
cleave, Old High German  bizzan to bite, Old English  bita a piece bitten off,  morsel, Old Norse
beita to  hunt with dogs, beita  pasture, food).


shard (n.)

also sherd, Old English sceard incision, cleft, gap; potshard, a fragment, broken piece, from Proto-
Germanic *skardas (cognates: Middle Dutch schaerde a fragment, a crack, Dutch schaard a flaw, a
fragment, German Scharte a notch, Danish skaar chink, potsherd), a past participle from the root of
Old English sceran to cut (see shear). Meaning fragment of broken earthenware developed in late Old
English. Used late 14c. as scale of a dragon. French &eacute;charde prickle, splinter is a Germanic
loan-word.


cliff (n.)

Old English clif rock, promontory, steep slope, from Proto-Germanic *kliban (cognates: Old Saxon
clif, Old Norse klif, Middle Dutch klippe, Dutch klip, Old High German klep, German Klippe cliff,
promontory, steep rock).   Clift has been a variant spelling since 15c. and was common in early
Modern English, influenced by or merged with clift, a variant of cleft (n.). Cliff-dweller first
attested 1889, American English.


cleave (v.1)

to split, Old English cleofan, cleven, cliven to split, separate (class II strong verb, past tense
cleaf, past participle clofen), from Proto-Germanic *kleuban (cognates: Old Saxon klioban, Old Norse
kljufa, Danish kl&ouml;ve, Dutch kloven, Old High German klioban, German klieben to cleave, split),
from PIE root *gleubh- to cut, slice (see glyph).    Past tense form clave is recorded in Northern
writers from 14c. and was used with both verbs (see cleave (v.2)), apparently by analogy with other
Middle English strong verbs. Clave was common to c.1600 and still alive at the time of the KJV; weak
past tense cleaved for this verb also emerged in 14c.; cleft is still later. The past participle
cloven survives, though mostly in compounds.


smock (n.)

Old English smoc garment worn by women, corresponding to the shirt on men, from Proto-Germanic
*smukkaz (cognates: Old Norse smokkr a smock, but this is perhaps from Old English; Old High German
smoccho smock, a rare word; North Frisian smok woman's shift, but this, too, perhaps from English).
Klein's sources, Barnhart and the OED see this as connected to a group of Germanic sm- words having
to do with creeping or pressing close, such as Old Norse smjuga to creep (through an opening), to
put on (a garment), smuga narrow cleft to creep through; small hole; Old Swedish smog a round hole
for the head; Old English smugan, smeogan to creep, smygel a burrow. Compare also German schmiegen
to cling to, press close, nestle; and Schmuck jewelry, adornments, from schmucken to adorn,
literally to dress up.    Watkins, however, traces it to a possible Germanic base *(s)muk- wetness,
figuratively slipperiness, from PIE root*meug- slimy, slippery (see mucus). Either way, the original
notion, then, seems generally to have been garment one creeps or slips into, by the same pattern
that produced sleeve and slip (n.2).    Now replaced by euphemistic shift (n.2); smock was the
common word down to 18c., and was emblematic of womanhood generally, as in verb smock to render (a
man) effeminate or womanish (1610s); smocker man who consorts with women (18c.); smock-face person
having a pale, effeminate face (c.1600). A smock-race (1707) was an old country pastime, a foot-race
for women and girls with a smock as a prize. Modern meaning woman's or child's loose dress or blouse
is from 1907; sense of loose garment worn by artists over other clothes is from 1938.


