climax (v.)

1835, to reach the highest point, from climax (n.). Related: Climaxed; climaxing.


climax (n.)

1580s, in the rhetorical sense (a chain of reasoning in graduating steps from weaker to stronger),
from Late Latin climax (genitive climacis), from Greek klimax propositions rising in effectiveness,
literally ladder, from root of klinein to slope, from PIE root *klei- to lean (see lean (v.)).
The rhetorical meaning evolved in English through series of steps by which a goal is achieved, to
escalating steps, to (1789) high point of intensity or development, a usage credited by the OED to
popular ignorance. The meaning sexual orgasm is recorded by 1880 (also in terms such as climax of
orgasm), said to have been promoted from c.1900 by birth-control pioneer Marie Stopes (1880-1958)
and others as a more accessible word than orgasm (n.).


climactic (adj.)

pertaining to a climax, 1832, from climax, apparently on the analogy of syntax/syntactic. Related:
Climactical.


gradation (n.)

1530s, climax, from Middle French gradation (16c.) and directly from Latin gradationem (nominative
gradatio) ascent by steps, a climax, noun of action from gradus step, degree (see grade (n.)).
Meaning gradual change is from 1540s. Related: Gradational.


anticlimax (n.)

the addition of a particular which suddenly lowers the effect, 1701, from anti- + climax (n.).


eschaton (n.)

divinely ordained climax of history, 1935, coined by Protestant theologian Charles Harold Dodd
(1884-1973) from Greek eskhaton, neuter of eskhatos (see eschatology).


orgasm (v.)

1973, originally and usually in reference to a woman's sexual climax, from orgasm (n.). Related:
Orgasmed; orgasming.


climacteric

c.1600 (adj.), 1620s (n.), from Latin climactericus, from Greek klimakterikos of a critical period,
from klimakter rung of a ladder (see climax (n.)). A critical stage in human life, a period supposed
to be especially liable to change. By some, held to be the years that are multiples of 7 (7, 14, 21,
etc.), by others only the odd multiples (7, 21, 35, etc.), and by still others the multiples of 9.
The Great Climacteric was the 63rd year (7x9), supposed to be especially critical.


orgasm (n.)

1680s, sexual climax, from French orgasme or Modern Latin orgasmus, from Greek orgasmos excitement,
swelling, from organ be in heat, become ripe for, literally to swell, be excited, related to orge
impulse, excitement, anger, from PIE root *wrog- to burgeon, swell with strength (cognates: Sanskrit
urja a nourishment, sap, vigor, Old Irish ferc, ferg anger). Also used 17c. of other violent
excitements of emotion or other bodily functions.


blow job (n.)

also blowjob, 1961, from blow + job. Exactly which blow is meant is the subject of some debate; the
word might have begun as a euphemism for suck (thus from blow (v.1)), or it might refer to the
explosive climax of an orgasm (thus blow (v.2)). Unlike much sex slang, its date of origin probably
is pretty close to the date it first is attested in print: as recently as the early 1950s, military
pilots could innocently talk of their jet planes as blow jobs according to the Thesaurus of American
Slang. Compare blow (v.1).


Prince Charming

1837, from French Roi Charmant, name of the hero of Comtesse d'Aulnoy's L'Oiseau Bleu (1697). In
English he was adopted into native fairy tales including Sleeping Beauty and Cinderella.    As for
me, I have always agreed with the fairy books that the moment when Prince Charming arrives is the
perfect climax. Everything that goes before in the life of a girl simply leads up to that moment,
and everything that comes after dates from it; and while the girl of the twentieth century, sallying
forth in search of adventure, may not hope to meet at the next turn a knight in shining armor, or a
sighing troubadour, she does hope, if she is normal and has the normal dreams of a girl, to find her
hero in some of the men who pass her way. [Temple Bailey, Adventures in Girlhood, Philadelphia,
1919]


clitoris (n.)

erectile organ of female mammals, 1610s, coined in Modern Latin from Late Greek kleitoris, a
diminutive, but the exact sense intended by the coiners is uncertain. Perhaps from Greek kleiein to
sheathe, also to shut, in reference to its being covered by the labia minora. The related Greek noun
form kleis has a second meaning of a key, a latch or hook (to close a door); see close (v.), and
compare slot (n.2).    Alternatively, perhaps related to Greek kleitys, a variant of klitys side of
a hill, itself related to klinein to slope, from the same root as climax (see lean (v.)), and with a
sense of little hill. Some ancient medical sources give a supposed Greek verb kleitoriazein to touch
or titillate lasciviously, to tickle (compare German slang der Kitzler clitoris, literally the
tickler), but the verb is likely from the anatomy in this case.    The anatomist Mateo Renaldo
Colombo (1516-1559), professor at Padua, claimed to have discovered it (De re anatomica, 1559, p.
243). He called it amor Veneris, vel dulcedo the love or sweetness of Venus. It had been known
earlier to women.


