clipper (n.)

late 14c., sheepshearer; early 15c., a barber; c.1300 as a surname; agent noun from Middle English
clippen shorten (see clip (v.1)). The type of fast sailing ship so called from 1823 (in Cooper's The
Pilot), probably from clip (v.1) in sense of to move or run rapidly, hence early 19c. sense person
or animal who looks capable of fast running. Perhaps originally simply fast ship, regardless of
type:    Well, you know, the Go-along-Gee was one o' your flash Irish cruisers -- the first o' your
fir-built frigates -- and a clipper she was! Give her a foot o' the sheet, and she'd go like a witch
--but somehow o'nother, she'd bag on a bowline to leeward. [Naval Sketch-Book, by An officer of
rank, London, 1826]    The early association of the ships was with Baltimore, Maryland. Perhaps
influenced by Middle Dutch klepper swift horse, echoic (Clipper appears as the name of an English
race horse in 1831). In late 18c., the word principally meant one who cuts off the edges of coins
for the precious metal.


buzz-cut (n.)

by 1973, American English, from buzz (n.), perhaps from the sound of the barber's electric clipper,
+ cut (n.) in the haircut sense.


clip (n.2)

mid-15c., shears, from clip (v.1). Meaning act of clipping is from 1825, originally of sheep-
shearing, later of haircuts. Meaning rate of speed is 1867 (compare clipper). Meaning an extract
from a movie is from 1958.


tonsorial (adj.)

pertaining to barbers, 1765, from -al (1) + Latin tonsorius of or pertaining to shearing or shaving,
from tonsor a shaver, barber, shearer, clipper, from tonsus, past participle of tondere to shear,
shave (see tonsure). Generally used in an attempt at humor. Tonsorious in the same sense is attested
from 1650s.


K

Roman letter, from Greek kappa, ultimately from Phoenician and general Semitic kaph, said to be
literally hollow of the hand, so called for its shape. For more on the history of its use, see see
C. As a symbol for potassium, it represents Latin kalium potash. Slang meaning one thousand dollars
is 1970s, from kilo-. K as a measure of capacity (especially in computer memory) meaning one
thousand also is an abbreviation of kilo-. As an indication of strikeout in baseball scorekeeping it
dates from 1874, said to be from last letter of struck, perhaps because first letter already was
being used as abbreviation for sacrifice. The invention of the scorecard symbols is attributed to
U.S. newspaperman Henry Chadwick (1824-1908) of the old New York Clipper.    Smith was the first
striker, and went out on three strikes, which is recorded by the figure 1 for the first out, and the
letter K to indicate how put out, K being the last letter of the word struck. The letter K is used
in this instance as being easier to remember in connection with the word struck than S, the first
letter, would be. [Henry Chadwick, Chadwick's Base Ball Manual, London, 1874]


