cloister (v.)

c.1400 (implied in cloistered), from cloister (n.). Figurative use from c.1600. Related: Cloistered;
cloistering.


cloister (n.)

early 13c., from Old French cloistre monastery, convent; enclosure (12c., Modern French
clo&icirc;tre), from Medieval Latin claustrum portion of monastery closed off to laity, from Latin
claustrum (usually in plural, claustra) place shut in, enclosure; bar, bolt, means of shutting in,
from past participle stem of claudere (see close (v.)).    The original purpose of cloisters was to
afford a place in which the monks could take exercise and recreation [Century Dictionary]. Spelling
in French influenced by cloison partition. Old English had clustor, clauster in the sense prison,
lock, barrier, directly from Latin, and compare, from the same source, Dutch klooster, German
Kloster, Polish klasztor.


claustration (n.)

1863, act of shutting up in a cloister, as if from a noun of action formed in Latin from Latin
claustrare, from claustrum (see cloister).


claustral (adj.)

resembling a cloister, early 15c., from Middle French claustral (15c.) and directly from Medieval
Latin claustralis pertaining to a claustrum (see cloister).


carrel (n.)

1590s, study in a cloister, from Medieval Latin carula small study in a cloister, of unknown origin;
perhaps from Latin corolla little crown, garland, used in various senses of ring (for example, a
c.1330 description of Stonehenge: &thorn;is Bretons renged about &thorn;e feld, &thorn;e karole of
&thorn;e stones beheld); extended to precincts and spaces enclosed by rails, etc. Specific sense of
private cubicle in a library is from 1919.


cloistral (adj.)

c.1600, from cloister + -al (1).


cenobite (n.)

also coenobite, member of a communal religious order, 1630s, from Church Latin coenobita a cloister
brother, from coenobium a convent, from Greek koinobion life in community, monastery, from koinos
common (see coeno-) + bios life (see bio-).


lobby (n.)

1530s, cloister, covered walk, from Medieval Latin laubia, lobia covered walk in a monastery, from a
Germanic source (compare Old High German louba hall, roof; see lodge (n.)). Meaning large entrance
hall in a public building is from 1590s. Political sense of those who seek to influence legislation
is attested by 1790s in American English, in reference to the custom of influence-seekers gathering
in large entrance-halls outside legislative chambers.


claustrophobia (n.)

morbid fear of being shut up in a confined space, coined 1879 (in article by Italian-born, French-
naturalized Swiss-English physician Dr. Benjamin Ball (1834-1892)) from Latin claustrum a bolt, a
means of closing; a place shut in, confined place, frontier fortress (in Medieval Latin cloister),
past participle of claudere to close (see close (v.)) + -phobia fear.


twat (n.)

female pudendum, 1650s, of unknown origin. A general term of abuse since 1920s.    The T-word
occupies a special niche in literary history, however, thanks to a horrible mistake by Robert
Browning, who included it in 'Pippa Passes' (1841) without knowing its true meaning. 'The owls and
bats,/Cowls and twats,/Monks and nuns,/In a cloister's moods.' Poor Robert! He had been misled into
thinking the word meant 'hat' by its appearance in 'Vanity of Vanities,' a poem of 1660, containing
the treacherous lines: 'They'd talk't of his having a Cardinalls Hat,/They'd send him as soon an Old
Nuns Twat.' (There is a lesson here about not using words unless one is very sure of their meaning.)
[Hugh Rawson, Wicked Words, 1989]


toga (n.)

c.1600, from Latin toga cloak or mantle, from PIE *tog-a- covering, from root *(s)teg- to cover (see
stegosaurus). The outer garment of a Roman citizen in time of peace.    The toga as the Roman
national dress was allowed to be worn by free citizens only. A stranger not in full possession of
the rights of a Roman citizen could not venture to appear in it. Even banished Romans were in
imperial times precluded from wearing it. The appearance in public in a foreign dress was considered
as contempt of the majesty of the Roman people. Even boys appeared in the toga, called, owing to the
purple edge attached to it (a custom adopted from the Etruscans) toga praetexta. On completing his
sixteenth, afterward his fifteenth, year (tirocinium fori), the boy exchanged the toga praetexta for
the toga virilis, pura, or libera--a white cloak without the purple edge. Roman ladies (for these
also wore the toga) abandoned the purple edge on being married. [Guhl &amp; Koner, The Life of the
Greeks and Romans, transl. Francis Hueffer, 1876]    Breeches, like the word for them (Latin bracae)
were alien to the Romans, being the dress of Persians, Germans, and Gauls, so that bracatus wearing
breeches was a term in Roman geography meaning north of the Alps. College fraternity toga party was
re-popularized by movie Animal House (1978), but this is set in 1962 and the custom seems to date
from at least the mid-1950s.    Down on Prospect Street, Campus Club held a toga party, at which
everyone wore togas. Charter held a come-as-you-are party, at which everyone wore what they happened
to have on, and Cloister held a party called A Night in Tahiti, at which we'd hate to guess what
everyone wore. The borough police reported that only one false alarm was turned in. [Princeton
Alumni Weekly, March 19, 1954]


