cloud nine (n.)

by 1950, sometimes also cloud seven (1956, perhaps by confusion with seventh heaven), American
English, of uncertain origin or significance. Some connect the phrase with the 1895 International
Cloud-Atlas (Hildebrandsson, Riggenbach and Teisserenc de Bort), long the basic source for cloud
shapes, in which, of the ten cloud types, cloud No. 9, cumulonimbus, was the biggest, puffiest, most
comfortable-looking. Shipley suggests the sense in this and other expressions might be because, As
the largest one-figure integer, nine is sometimes used for emphasis. The phrase might appear in the
1935 aviation-based play Ceiling Zero by Frank Wilbur Wead.


cloud (n.)

Old English clud mass of rock, hill, related to clod. Metaphoric extension to raincloud, mass of
evaporated water in the sky is attested by c.1200 based on similarity of cumulus clouds and rock
masses. The usual Old English word for cloud was weolcan. In Middle English, skie also originally
meant cloud.    The four fundamental types of cloud classification (cirrus, cumulus, stratus,
nimbus) were proposed by British amateur meteorologist Luke Howard (1772-1864) in 1802.
Figuratively, as something that casts a shadow, from early 15c.; hence under a cloud (c.1500). In
the clouds removed from earthly things; obscure, fanciful, unreal is from 1640s. Cloud-compeller
translates (poetically) Greek nephelegereta, a Homeric epithet of Zeus.


cloud (v.)

early 15c., overspread with clouds, cover, darken, from cloud (n.). From 1510s as to render dim or
obscure; 1590s as to overspread with gloom. Intransitive sense of become cloudy is from 1560s.
Related: Clouded; clouding.


cloudburst (n.)

also cloud-burst, 1817, American English, from cloud (n.) + burst (n.). Parallels German
Wolkenbruch.


Cloud Cuckoo Land

Imaginary city built in air, translating Aristophanes' Nephelokokkygia in The Birds (414 B.C.E.).


cloudlet (n.)

1788, from cloud (n.) + diminutive suffix -let.


cloudless (adj.)

1590s, from cloud (n.) + -less.


cloudy (adj.)

Old English cludig rocky, hilly, full of cliffs; see cloud (n.). Meaning of the nature of clouds is
recorded from c.1300; meaning full of clouds is late 14c.; that of not clear is from 1580s.
Figurative sense of gloomy is late 14c. Related: Cloudiness; cloudily.


nimbus (n.)

1610s, bright cloud surrounding a god, from Latin nimbus cloud, perhaps related to nebula cloud,
mist (see nebula). Meaning halo is first recorded c.1730. Meteorological sense of a rain cloud is
from 1803.


pussy (n.1)

cat, 1726, diminutive of puss (n.1), also used of a rabbit (1715). As a term of endearment for a
girl or woman, from 1580s (also used of effeminate men). To play pussy was World War II RAF slang
for to take advantage of cloud cover, jumping from cloud to cloud to shadow a potential victim or
avoid recognition.


silver lining

a bright side which proverbially accompanies even the darkest trouble; by 1843, apparently from oft-
quoted lines from Milton's Comus, where the silver lining is the light of the moon shining from
behind the cloud.    Was I deceived? or did a sable cloud  Turn forth her silver lining on the
night?  I did not err, there does a sable cloud,  Turn out her silver lining on the night  And casts
a gleam over this tufted grove.    To which Thomas Warton added the commentary: When all succour
&#383;eems to be lost, Heaven unexpectedly presents the &#383;ilver lining o&#383; a &#383;able
cloud to the virtuous.


nebula (n.)

early 15c., nebule a cloud, mist, from Latin nebula mist, vapor, fog, smoke, exhalation,
figuratively darkness, obscurity, from PIE *nebh- cloud (cognates: Sanskrit nabhas- vapor, cloud,
mists, fog, sky; Greek nephele, nephos cloud; German nebel fog; Old English nifol dark, gloomy;
Welsh niwl cloud, fog; Slavic nebo).    Re-borrowed from Latin 1660s in sense of cataracts in the
eye; astronomical meaning cloud-like patch in the night sky first recorded c.1730. As early as
Hershel (1802) astronomers realized that some nebulae were star clusters, but certain distinction of
relatively nearby cosmic gas clouds from distant galaxies was not made until 1920s, using the new
100-inch Mt. Wilson telescope.


sky (n.)

c.1200, a cloud, from Old Norse sky cloud, from Proto-Germanic *skeujam cloud, cloud cover
(cognates: Old English sceo, Old Saxon scio cloud, region of the clouds, sky; Old High German scuwo,
Old English scua, Old Norse skuggi shadow; Gothic skuggwa mirror), from PIE root *(s)keu- to cover,
conceal (see hide (n.1)).    Meaning upper regions of the air is attested from c.1300; replaced
native heofon in this sense (see heaven). In Middle English, the word can still mean both cloud and
heaven, as still in the skies, originally the clouds. Sky-high is from 1812; phrase the sky's the
limit is attested from 1908. Sky-dive first recorded 1965; sky-writing is from 1922.


Oort cloud (n.)

in reference to the hypothetical cloud of small objects beyond Pluto that become comets, proposed
1949 by Dutch astronomer Jan Hendrick Oort (1900-1992), and named for him by 1968.


Neptune

late 14c., god of the sea, from Latin Neptunus, son of Saturn, brother of Jupiter, the Roman god of
the sea (later identified with Greek Poseidon), probably from PIE root *nebh- cloud (source of Latin
nebula fog, mist, cloud; see nebula), via a sense of moist, wet. The planet so named was discovered
by Galle in 1846. Until the identification of Pluto in 1930, it was the most distant planet known.


rain-cloud (n.)

also raincloud, 1800, from rain (n.) + cloud (n.).


imbrication (n.)

1640s, from French imbrication, from Latin imbricare to cover with tiles, from imbricem (nominative
imbrex) curved roof tile used to draw off rain, from imber (genitive imbris) rain, from PIE *ombh-
ro- rain (cognates: Sanskrit abhra cloud, thunder-cloud, rainy weather, Greek ombros rain), from
root *nebh- moist, water (see nebula).


nuance (n.)

1781, from French nuance slight difference, shade of color (17c.), from nuer to shade, from nue
cloud, from Gallo-Roman *nuba, from Latin nubes a cloud, mist, vapor, from PIE *sneudh- fog
(cognates: Avestan snaoda clouds, Latin obnubere to veil, Welsh nudd fog, Greek nython, in Hesychius
dark, dusky). According to Klein, a reference to the different colors of the clouds.


welkin (n.)

sky (poetic), Old English wolcen cloud, also sky, heavens, from Proto-Germanic *welk- (cognates: Old
Saxon wolkan, Old Frisian wolken, Middle Dutch wolke, Dutch wolk, Old High German wolka, German
Wolke cloud, from PIE *welg- wet (cognates: Lithuanian vilgyti to moisten, Old Church Slavonic vlaga
moisture, Czech vlhky damp).


skyscraper (n.)

very tall urban building, 1888, in a Chicago context, from sky (n.) + agent noun of scrape (v.).
Used earlier for ornament atop a building (1883), very tall man (1857), high-flying bird (1840),
light sail at the top of a mast (1794), and the name of a racehorse (1789). Compare cognate French
gratte-ciel, from gratter to scrape + ciel sky; German Wolkenkratzer, from Wolke cloud + Kratzer
scraper.    cloud-cleaver, an imaginary sail jokingly assumed to be carried by Yankee ships. [W.
Clark Russell, Sailors' Word Book, 1883]


skewbald (adj.)

1650s, having white and brown (or some other color) patches, spotted in an irregular manner (used
especially of horses), from skued skewbald (mid-15c.), of unknown origin, + bald having white
patches (see bald). First element said to be unconnected with skew (v.) (but Klein's sources say it
is); OED suggests perhaps from Old French escu shield, but also notes a close resemblance in form
and sense with Icelandic skjottr, the history of which is equally obscure. Watkins says it is
Scandinavian and akin to Old Norse sky cloud on the resemblance of the markings to cloud cover.
When the white is mixed with black it is called 'pie-bald,' with bay the name of 'skew-bald' is
given to it. [Youatt's 'The Horse,'  1866]    As a noun meaning skewbald horse from 1863.


mensa (n.)

altar top, 1848, Latin, literally table, also meal, supper, and altar, sacrificial table, hence used
in Church Latin for upper slab of a church altar (see mesa). With a capital M-, the name of an
organization for people of IQs of 148 or more founded in England in 1946, the name chosen, according
to the organization, to suggest a round table type group. The constellation was originally Mons
Mensae Table Mountain.    La Caille, who did so much for our knowledge of the southern heavens,
formed the figure from stars under the Greater Cloud, between the poles of the equator and the
ecliptic, just north of the polar Octans; the title being suggested by the fact that the Table
Mountain, back of Cape Town, which had witnessed his nightly vigils and daily toils, also was
frequently capped by a cloud. [Richard Hinckley Allen, Star Names and Their Meanings, London: 1899]


Praesepe (n.)

loose (open) star cluster (M44) in Cancer, from Latin praesaepe the Roman name for the grouping,
literally enclosure, stall, manger, hive, from prae- (see pre-) + saepire to fence (see septum).
It is similar to the Hyades but more distant, about 600 light-years away, consists of about 1,000
stars, mostly older, the brightest of them around magnitude 6.5, thus not discernable to the naked
eye even on the clearest nights, but their collective light makes a visible fuzz of glow that the
ancients likened to a cloud (the original nebula); Galileo was the first to resolve it into stars
(1609). The modern name for it in U.S. and Britain, Beehive, seems no older than 1840. Greek names
included Nephelion Little Cloud and Akhlys Little Mist. In astrology, like all clusters, it
threatened mischief and blindness [Allen].    Manger to the Romans perhaps by influence of two
nearby stars, Gamma and Delta Cancri, dim and unspectacular but both for some reason figuring
largely in ancient astrology and weather forecasting, and known as the Asses (Latin Aselli),
supposedly those of Silenus.


down (n.1)

soft feathers, late 14c., from Old Norse dunn, perhaps ultimately from PIE root *dheu- (1) to fly
about (like dust), to rise in a cloud.


thunderhead (n.)

high-piled cumulus cloud, one likely to develop into a thunderstorm, 1861, from thunder (n.) + head
(n.).


unclouded (adj.)

1590s, from un- (1) not + past participle of cloud (v.).


hide (n.1)

skin of a large animal, Old English hyd hide, skin, from Proto-Germanic *hudiz (cognates: Old Norse
hu&eth;, Old Frisian hed, Middle Dutch huut, Dutch huid, Old High German hut, German Haut skin),
related to Old English verb hydan to hide, the common notion being of covering.    All of this is
from PIE root *(s)keu- to cover, conceal (cognates: Sanskrit kostha enclosing wall, skunati covers;
Armenian ciw roof; Latin cutis skin, scutum shield, ob-scurus dark; Greek kytos a hollow, vessel,
keutho to cover, to hide, skynia eyebrows; Russian kishka gut, literally sheath; Lithuanian kiautas
husk, kutis stall; Old Norse sky cloud; Old English sceo cloud; Middle High German hode scrotum; Old
High German scura, German Scheuer barn; Welsh cuddio to hide).    The alliterative pairing of hide
and hair (often negative, hide nor hair) was in Middle English (early 15c.), but earlier and more
common was hide ne hewe, literally skin and complexion ('hue') (c.1200).


stratus (n.)

a low layer of cloud, 1803, from Latin stratus a spreading, from noun use of past participle of
sternere (see stratum).


Nubia

ultimately from a local word, said to be related to Coptic noubti to weave, or from Nubian nub gold.
In the fashion sense woman's light scarf it is from French, from Latin nubes cloud (see nuance).


becloud (v.)

1590s, from be- + cloud. Figurative sense of to obscure is recorded from 1610s. Related: Beclouded;
beclouding.


haze (n.)

1706, probably a back-formation of hazy. Sense of confusion, vagueness is 1797. The English
differentiation of haze, mist, fog (and other dialectal words) is unmatched in other tongues, where
the same word generally covers all three and often cloud as well, and this may be seen as an effect
of the English climate on the language.


herringbone

also herring-bone, 1650s in literal sense and also as a type of stitch, from herring + bone (n.).
From 1905 as a type of cirrocumulus cloud.


unknowing (adj.)

c.1300, without knowledge, ignorant, from un- (1) not + present participle of know (v.). Noun
meaning ignorance is mid-14c., especially in phrase cloud of unknowing, title of a medieval book of
Christian mysticism. Related: Unknowingly. A verb unknow fail to recognize is attested from late
14c.


overcloud (v.)

1590s, from over- + cloud (v.). Related: Overclouded; overclouding.


obscure (v.)

early 15c., to cover (something), cloud over, from obscure (adj.) or else from Middle French
obscurer, from Latin obscurare to make dark, darken, obscure, from obscurus. Related: Obscured;
obscuring.


cape (n.2)

promontory, late 14c., from Middle French cap cape; head, from Latin caput headland, head (see
capitulum). The Cape of Good Hope in southern Africa has been the Cape since 1660s. Sailors called
low cloud banks that could be mistaken for landforms on the horizon Cape fly-away (1769).


nimbostratus (n.)

1932 (earlier use from late 19c. refers to different cloud types), from Modern Latin nimbus (see
nimbus) + connecting element -o- + stratus (see stratus).


obnubilate (v.)

1580s, from Latin obnibulatus, past participle of obnubilare to cover with clouds or fog, from ob-
(see ob-) + verb from Latin nubes cloud (see nuance). Related: Obnubilated; obnubilating;
obnubilation.


thyme (n.)

plant of the mint family, late 14c., from Old French thym, tym (13c.) and directly from Latin
thymum, from Greek thymon, from PIE *dheu- (1), base of words meaning to rise in a cloud (see fume
(n.)); thus thyme might be the plant having a strong odor, or it might be related to thyein burn as
a sacrifice, which would indicate the plant was used as incense. Related: Thymic.


whole nine yards (n.)

by 1970, of unknown origin; perhaps arbitrary (see cloud nine). Among the guesses that have been
made without real evidence: concrete mixer trucks were said to have dispensed in this amount. Or the
yard might be the word used in the slang sense of one hundred dollars. Several similar phrases
meaning everything arose in the 1940s (whole ball of wax, which is likewise of obscure origin, whole
schmear); older examples include whole hog (see hog (n.)) and whole shooting match (1896); whole
shebang (1895).


correspondent (n.)

one who communicates with another by letters, 1620s, from correspondent (adj.). The newspaper sense
is from 1711.    THE life of a newspaper correspondent, as may naturally be supposed, is one of
alternate cloud and sunshine--one day basking in an Andalusian balcony, playing a rubber at the club
on the off-nights of the Opera, being very musical when the handsome Prima Donna sings, and very
light fantastic toeish when the lively Prima Ballerina dances; another day roughing it over the
Balkan, amid sleet and snow, or starving at the tail of an ill-conditioned army, and receiving
bullets instead of billets-doux. [New Monthly Magazine, vol. 95, 1852, p.284]


reek (n.)

Old English rec (Anglian), riec (West Saxon), smoke from burning material, probably from a
Scandinavian source such as Old Norse reykr, Danish r&#511;g, Swedish r&#246;k smoke, steam,  from
Proto-Germanic *raukiz (cognates: Old Frisian rek, Middle Dutch rooc, Old High German rouh, German
Rauch smoke, steam), from PIE *reug- to vomit, belch; also smoke, cloud. Sense of stench is attested
1650s, via the notion of that which rises (compare reek (v.)).


fume (n.)

late 14c., from Old French fum smoke, steam, vapor, breath, from Latin fumus smoke, steam, fume
(source of Italian fumo, Spanish humo), from PIE *dheu- (1) dust, vapor, smoke; to rise in a cloud,
to fly about (like dust) (cognates: Sanskrit dhumah, Old Church Slavonic dymu, Lithuanian dumai, Old
Prussian dumis smoke, Middle Irish dumacha fog, Greek thymos spirit, mind, soul).


alb (n.)

late Old English albe, from Late Latin alba (in tunica alba or vestis alba white vestment), fem. of
albus white, from PIE root *albho- white (cognates: Greek alphos white leprosy, alphiton barley
meal; Old High German albiz, Old English elfet swan, literally the white bird; Old Church Slavonic
and Russian lebedi, Polish &#322;ab&#281;d&#378; swan; Hittite alpash cloud).


rack (n.3)

clouds driven before the wind, c.1300, also rush of wind, collision, crash, originally a northern
word, possibly from Old English racu cloud (or an unrecorded Scandinavian cognate of it), reinforced
by Old Norse rek wreckage, jetsam, or by influence of Old English wr&aelig;c something driven; from
Proto-Germanic *wrakaz, from PIE root *wreg- to push, shove, drive (see urge (v.)). Often confused
with wrack (n.), especially in phrase rack and ruin (1590s). The distinction is that rack is driven
clouds; wrack is seaweed cast up on shore.


dizzy (adj.)

Old English dysig foolish, stupid, from Proto-Germanic *dusijaz (cognates: Low German d&uuml;sig
dizzy, Dutch duizelen to be dizzy, Old High German dusig foolish, German Tor fool, Old English
dw&aelig;s, Dutch dwaas foolish), perhaps from PIE *dheu- (1) dust, vapor, smoke; to rise in a cloud
(and related notions of defective perception or wits).    Meaning having a whirling sensation is
from mid-14c.; that of giddy is from c.1500 and seems to merge the two earlier meanings. Used of the
foolish virgins in early translations of Matthew xxv; used especially of blondes since 1870s.
Related: Dizzily.


tornado (n.)

1550s, ternado, navigator's word for violent windy thunderstorm in the tropical Atlantic, probably a
mangled borrowing from Spanish tronada thunderstorm, from tronar to thunder, from Latin tonare to
thunder (see thunder (n.)). Also in 17c. spelled tornatho, tornathe, turnado; modern spelling by
1620s. Metathesis of -o- and -r- in modern spelling influenced by Spanish tornar to twist, turn,
from Latin tornare to turn. Meaning extremely violent whirlwind is first found 1620s; specifically
destructive rotary funnel cloud (especially in the U.S. Midwest) from 1849. Related: Tornadic.


swarm (n.)

cloud of bees or other insects, Old English swearm swarm, multitude, from Proto-Germanic *swarmaz
(cognates: Old Saxon, Middle Low German swarm, Danish sv&#230;rm a swarm, Swedish sv&auml;rm, Middle
Dutch swerm, Old High German swaram, German Schwarm swarm; Old Norse svarmr tumult), by Watkins,
etc., derived from PIE imitative root *swer- (2) to buzz, whisper (see susurration) on notion of
humming sound, and thus probably originally of bees. But OED suggests possible connection with base
of swerve and ground sense of agitated, confused, or deflected motion. General sense large, dense
throng is from early 15c.


mist (n.)

Old English mist dimness (of eyesight), mist (earliest in compounds, such as misthleo&eth;u misty
cliffs, w&aelig;lmist mist of death), from Proto-Germanic *mikhstaz (cognates: Middle Low German
mist, Dutch mist, Icelandic mistur, Norwegian and Swedish mist), perhaps from PIE *meigh- to urinate
(cognates: Greek omikhle, Old Church Slavonic migla, Sanskrit mih, megha cloud, mist; see
micturition).Sometimes distinguished from fog, either as being less opaque or as consisting of drops
large enough to have a perceptible downward motion. [OED]Also in Old English in sense of dimness of
the eyes, either by illness or tears, and in figurative sense of things that obscure mental vision.


mask (n.)

1530s, from Middle French masque covering to hide or guard the face (16c.), from Italian maschera,
from Medieval Latin masca mask, specter, nightmare, of uncertain origin, perhaps from Arabic
maskharah buffoon, mockery, from sakhira be mocked, ridiculed. Or via Proven&ccedil;al mascarar,
Catalan mascarar, Old French mascurer to black (the face), perhaps from a Germanic source akin to
English mesh (q.v.). But compare Occitan mascara to blacken, darken, derived from mask- black, which
is held to be from a pre-Indo-European language, and Old Occitan masco witch, surviving in dialects;
in Beziers it means dark cloud before the rain comes. [See Walther von Wartburg, Franz&ouml;sisches
Etymologisches W&ouml;rterbuch: Eine Darstellung galloromanischen sprachschatzes]. Figurative use by
1570s.


