clown (v.)

c.1600, to play the clown onstage, from clown (n.); colloquial sense of to behave inappropriately
(as in clown around, 1932) attested by 1928, perhaps from theatrical slang sense of play a (non-
comical) part farcically or comically (1891). Related: Clowned; clowning.


clownage (n.)

function or manners of a clown or jester, 1580s, from clown (n.) + -age.


clowning (n.)

1861, verbal noun from clown (v.).


clown (n.)

1560s, clowne, also cloyne, rustic, boor, peasant, origin uncertain. Perhaps from Scandinavian
dialect (compare Icelandic klunni clumsy, boorish fellow; Swedish kluns a hard knob; a clumsy
fellow, Danish klunt log, block), or akin to North Frisian kl&ouml;nne clumsy person. Or, less
likely, from Latin colonus colonist, farmer, though awareness of this word might have influenced the
sense development in English.    Meaning professional fool, professional or habitual jester is
c.1600. The pantomime clown represents a blend of the Shakes[pearean] rustic with one of the stock
types of the It. comedy [Weekley]. Meaning contemptible person is from 1920s. Fem. form clowness
attested from 1801.


clownish (adj.)

1560s, rustic; 1580s, boorish, ungainly, awkward, from clown (n.) + -ish. Related: Clownishly;
clownishness.


clownery (n.)

1580s, from clown (n.) + -ery.


clownify (v.)

1610s, from clown (n.) + -ify. Related: Clownified; clownifying.


coulrophobia (n.)

morbid fear of clowns, by 2001 (said in Web sites to date from 1990s or even 1980s), a popular term,
not from psychology, possibly facetious, though the phenomenon is real enough; said to be built from
Greek kolon limb, with some supposed sense of stilt-walker, hence clown + -phobia.    Ancient Greek
words for clown were skl&ecirc;ro-paikt&ecirc;s, from paizein to play (like a child); or
deikeliktas; other classical words used for theatrical clowns were related to rustic, peasant
(compare Latin fossor clown, literally laborer, digger, related to fossil).    The whole creation
looks suspiciously like the sort of thing idle pseudo-intellectuals invent on the Internet and which
every smarty-pants takes up thereafter; perhaps it is a mangling of Modern Greek klooun clown, which
is the English word borrowed into Greek.


Hob (n.)

clown, prankster, short for hobgoblin (q.v.). Hence, to play (the) hob make mischief (by 1834).


clumperton (n.)

clown, clodhopper, 1530s, from clump (n.), probably on model of simpleton.


loris (n.)

small primate of Sri Lanka, 1774, from French loris (Buffon), of unknown origin, said to be from
obsolete Dutch loeris booby, clown.


hobbledehoy (n.)

clumsy or awkward youth, 1530s, of uncertain origin and the subject of much discussion. First
element is probably hob in its sense of clown, prankster (see hobgoblin), the second element perhaps
is Middle French de haye worthless, untamed, wild, literally of the hedge.


bozo (n.)

muscular low-I.Q. male, c.1910, perhaps from Spanish bozal, used in the slave trade and also to mean
one who speaks Spanish poorly. Bozo the clown was created 1940 at Capitol Records as the voice in a
series of story-telling records for children [Wall Street Journal, Oct. 31, 1983].


buffoon (n.)

1540s, type of pantomime dance; 1580s, clown, from Middle French bouffon (16c.), from Italian
buffone jester, from buffa joke, jest, pleasantry, from buffare to puff out the cheeks, a comic
gesture, of echoic origin. Also see -oon.


clumpy (adj.)

1820, from clump (n.) + -y (2). Also noted 1881 in an Isle of Wight glossary as a noun meaning a
stupid fellow. Related: Clumpily; clumpiness. Compare also clumperton clown, clodhopper (1530s).


tom-fool (n.)

also tom-fool, buffoon, clown, 1640s, from Middle English Thom Foole, personification of a mentally
deficient man (mid-14c.), see Tom + fool (n.).


chuff

pleased, happy, c.1860, British dialect, from obsolete chuff swollen with fat (1520s). A second
British dialectal chuff has an opposite meaning, displeased, gruff (1832), from chuff rude fellow,
or, as Johnson has it, a coarse, fat-headed, blunt clown (mid-15c.), of unknown origin. Related:
Chuffed.


patch (n.2)

fool, clown, 1540s, perhaps from Italian pazzo fool, of unknown origin. Possibly from Old High
German barzjan to rave [Klein].  But Buck says pazzo is originally euphemistic, and from Latin
patiens suffering, in medical use, the patient. Form perhaps influenced by folk etymology derivation
from patch (n.1), on notion of a fool's patched garb.


zany (n.)

comic performer, 1580s, from French zani, from Italian zani, zanni a zany, clown, originally Zanni,
Venetian dialect variant of Gianni, pet form of Giovanni John; thus equivalent to English Jack. A
stock character in old comedies, he aped the principal actors.


slapstick (n.)

also slap-stick, originally (1896) a device consisting of two sticks fastened together so as to slap
loudly when a clown or actor hits somebody with it, or to make a sound-effect offstage; from slap
and stick (n.). As an adjective by 1906. Meaning farcical physical comedy, horseplay (1916) is short
for slapstick comedy or humor.


lob (v.)

send up in a slow, high arc, 1824 (implied in lobbing), but the word existed 16c. in various senses
suggesting heavy, pendant, or floppy things, and  probably is ultimately from an unrecorded Old
English word; compare East Frisian lobbe hanging lump of flesh, Dutch lob hanging lip, ruffle,
hanging sleeve, Danish lobbes clown, bumpkin. Related: Lobbed; lobbing. The noun in this sense is
from 1875, from the verb.


droll (adj.)

1620s, from French dr&ocirc;le odd, comical, funny (1580s), in Middle French a noun meaning a merry
fellow, possibly from Middle Dutch drol fat little fellow, goblin, or Middle High German trolle
clown, ultimately from Old Norse troll giant, troll (see troll (n.)). Related: Drolly; drollish.


goof (n.)

1916, American English, stupid person, perhaps a variant of English dialect goff foolish clown
(1869), from 16c. goffe, probably from Middle French goffe awkward, stupid, of uncertain origin. Or
English goffe may be from Middle English goffen speak in a frivolous manner, possibly from Old
English gegaf buffoonery, and gaffetung scolding. Sense of a blunder is c.1954, probably influenced
by gaffe.


lout (n.)

1540s, awkward fellow, clown, bumpkin, perhaps from a dialectal survival of Middle English louten
(v.) bow down (c.1300), from Old English lutan bow low, from Proto-Germanic *lut- to bow, bend,
stoop (cognates: Old Norse lutr stooping, which might also be the source of the modern English
word), from PIE *leud- to lurk (cognates: Gothic luton to deceive, Old English lot deceit), also to
be small (see little). Non-Germanic cognates probably include Lithuanian liudeti to mourn; Old
Church Slavonic luditi to deceive, ludu foolish. Sense of cad is first attested 1857 in British
schoolboy slang.


villain (n.)

c.1300 (late 12c. as a surname), base or low-born rustic, from Anglo-French and Old French vilain
peasant, farmer, commoner, churl, yokel (12c.), from Medieval Latin villanus farmhand, from Latin
villa country house, farm (see villa).  The most important phases of the sense development of this
word may be summed up as follows: 'inhabitant of a farm; peasant; churl, boor; clown; miser; knave,
scoundrel.' Today both Fr. vilain and Eng. villain are used only in a pejorative sense. [Klein]
Meaning character in a novel, play, etc. whose evil motives or actions help drive the plot is from
1822.


fool (n.)

late 13c., silly or stupid person, from Old French fol madman, insane person; idiot; rogue; jester,
also blacksmith's bellows, also an adjective meaning mad, insane (12c., Modern French fou), from
Latin follis bellows, leather bag (see follicle); in Vulgar Latin used with a sense of windbag,
empty-headed person. Compare also Sanskrit vatula- insane, literally windy, inflated with wind.
The word has in mod.Eng. a much stronger sense than it had at an earlier period; it has now an
implication of insulting contempt which does not in the same degree belong to any of its synonyms,
or to the derivative foolish. [OED]    Meaning jester, court clown first attested late 14c., though
it is not always possible to tell whether the reference is to a professional entertainer or an
amusing lunatic on the payroll. As the name of a kind of custard dish, it is attested from 1590s
(the food also was called trifle, which may be the source of the name).    There is no foole to the
olde foole [Heywood, 1546] Feast of Fools (early 14c.), from Medieval Latin festum stultorum) refers
to the burlesque festival celebrated in some churches on New Year's Day in medieval times. Fool's
gold iron pyrite is from 1829. Fool's paradise state of illusory happiness is from mid-15c.
Foolosopher, a most useful insult, turns up in a 1549 translation of Erasmus. Fool's ballocks is
described in OED as an old name for the green-winged orchid.


thee (pron.)

Old English &thorn;e (accusative and dative singular of &thorn;u thou), from Proto-Germanic *theke
(cognates: Old Frisian thi, Middle Dutch di, Old High German dih, German dich, Old Norse &thorn;ik,
Norwegian deg, Gothic &thorn;uk), from PIE *tege-, accusative of root *tu-, second person singular
pronoun (see thou). The verb meaning to use the pronoun 'thee' to someone is recorded from 1662, in
connection with the rise of Quakerism.    In Middle English, people began to use plural forms in all
cases, at first as a sign of respect to superiors, then as a courtesy to equals. By the 1600s, the
singular forms had come to represent familiarity and lack of status, and fell from use except in the
case of a few dialects, notably in the north of England. People in Lancashire north of the
Rossendale Forest and Yorkshire formerly were noted for use of the singular second person pronouns
tha (nom.) and thee (acc.). For religious reasons (Christian equality of persons, but also justified
as grammatically correct), the Quakers also retained the familiar forms.    Thou and Thee was a sore
cut to proud flesh and them that sought self-honour, who, though they would say it to God and
Christ, could not endure to have it said to themselves. So that we were often beaten and abused, and
sometimes in danger of our lives, for using those words to some proud men, who would say, What! you
ill-bred clown, do you Thou me? as though Christian breeding consisted in saying You to one; which
is contrary to all their grammar and teaching books, by which they instructed their youth. [George
Fox's journal, 1661]   <hr />   While the Quakers originally adopted thee and thou on account of
their grammatical correctness, they soon fell into the careless habit of using thee, the objective,
instead of thou, the nominative. Common illustrations are: How does thee do? or Will thee, etc.
[George Fox Tucker, A Quaker Home, Boston, 1891]


