cock (n.2)

in various mechanical senses, such as cock of a faucet (early 15c.) is of uncertain connection with
cock (n.1), but German has hahn cock in many of the same senses. The cock of an old matchlock
firearm is 1560s, hence half-cocked with the cock lifted to the first catch, at which position the
trigger does not act (by 1809).


cock (v.)

mid-12c., cocken, to fight; 1570s, to swagger; seeming contradictory modern senses of to stand up
(as in cock one's ear), c.1600, and to bend (1898) are from the two cock nouns. The first is
probably in reference to the posture of the bird's head or tail, the second to the firearm position.
To cock ones hat carries the notion of defiant boastfulness.


cockerel (n.)

young cock, mid-15c. (late 12c. as a surname), apparently a diminutive of cock (n.1). Despite the
form, no evidence that it is from French.


cocksure (adj.)

1520s, certain, from cock (n.1) + sure (adj.). Probably as assured as a cock. The word was
originally perfectly dignified, and habitually used in the most solemn connexions [OED].


cock (n.1)

male chicken, Old English cocc male bird, Old French coc (12c., Modern French coq), Old Norse kokkr,
all of echoic origin. Old English cocc was a nickname for one who strutted like a cock, thus a
common term in the Middle Ages for a pert boy, used of scullions, apprentices, servants, etc.    A
common personal name till c.1500, it was affixed to Christian names as a pet diminutive, as in
Wilcox, Hitchcock, etc. Slang sense of penis is attested since 1610s (but compare pillicock penis,
from c.1300); cock-teaser is from 1891. A cocker spaniel (1823) was trained to start woodcocks.
Cock-and-bull is first recorded 1620s, perhaps an allusion to Aesop's fables, with their incredible
talking animals, or to a particular story, now forgotten. French has parallel expression
coq-&agrave;-l'&acirc;ne.


cockscomb (n.)

c.1400, comb or crest of a cock, from possessive of cock (n.1) + comb (n.). Meaning cap worn by a
professional fool is from 1560s; hence conceited fool (1560s), a sense passing into the derivative
coxcomb. As a plant name, from 1570s.


cockney (n.)

c.1600, usually said to be from rare Middle English cokenei, cokeney spoiled child, milksop (late
14c.), originally cokene-ey cock's egg (mid-14c.). Most likely disentangling of the etymology is to
start from Old English cocena cock's egg -- genitive plural of coc cock + &aelig;g egg -- medieval
term for runt of a clutch, extended derisively c.1520s to town dweller, gradually narrowing
thereafter to residents of a particular neighborhood in the East End of London. Liberman, however,
disagrees:    [I]n all likelihood, not the etymon of ME cokeney 'milksop, simpleton; effeminate man;
Londoner,' which is rather a reshaping of [Old French] acoquin&eacute; 'spoiled' (participle).
However, this derivation poses some phonetic problems that have not been resolved.    The accent so
called from 1890, but the speech peculiarities were noted from 17c. As an adjective in this sense,
from 1630s.


cockatrice (n.)

late 14c., from Old French cocatriz, altered (by influence of coq) from Late Latin *calcatrix, from
Latin calcare to tread (from calx (1) heel), as translation of Greek ikhneumon, literally tracker,
tracer.    In classical writings, an Egyptian animal of some sort, the mortal enemy of the
crocodile, which it tracks down and kills. This vague sense became hopelessly confused in the
Christian West, and in England the word ended up applied to the equivalent of the basilisk. A
serpent hatched from a cock's egg, it was fabled to kill by its glance and could be slain only by
tricking it into seeing its own reflection. Belief in them persisted even among the educated because
the word was used in the KJV several times to translate a Hebrew word for serpent. In heraldry, a
beast half cock, half serpent.


cockpit (n.)

1580s, a pit for fighting cocks, from cock (n.1) + pit (n.1). Used in nautical sense (1706) for
midshipmen's compartment below decks; transferred to airplanes (1914) and to cars (1930s).


cockeyed (adj.)

1821, squint-eyed, perhaps from cock (v.) in some sense + eye (n.). Figurative sense of absurd,
askew, crazy is from 1896; that of drunk is attested from 1926.


cocky (adj.)

arrogantly pert, 1768; originally lecherous (1540s); from cock (n.1) + -y (2). Related: Cockiness.


cockchaffer (n.)

from cock (n.1), in reference to its size, + chaffer.


cocksucker (n.)

1890s, one who does fellatio (especially a male homosexual); 1920s as contemptible person, American
English, from cock (n.1) in phallic sense + sucker (n.). Used curiously for aggressively obnoxious
men; the ancients would have recoiled at this failure to appreciate the difference between passive
and active roles; Catullus, writing of his boss, employs the useful Latin insult irrumator, which
means someone who forces others to give him oral sex, hence one who treats people with contempt.


cock-a-doodle-doo

1570s, imitative; compare French cocorico, German kikeriki, Latin cucurire, Russian kikareku,
Vietnamese cuc-cu, Arabic ko-ko, etc.


cockade (n.)

1709, earlier cockard (1650s), from French cocarde (16c.), fem. of cocard (Old French cocart)
foolishly proud, cocky, as a noun, idiot, fool; an allusive extension from coq (see cock (n.1)).


cockatoo (n.)

1610s, from Dutch kaketoe, from Malay kakatua, possibly echoic, or from kakak elder brother or
sister + tua old. Also cockatiel (1880), from Dutch diminutive kaketielje (1850), which is perhaps
influenced by Portuguese. Spelling influenced by cock (n.1).


cockroach (n.)

1620s, folk etymology (as if from cock + roach) of Spanish cucaracha chafer, beetle, from cuca kind
of caterpillar. Folk etymology also holds that the first element is from caca excrement.A certaine
India Bug, called by the Spaniards a Cacarootch, the which creeping into Chests they eat and defile
with their ill-sented dung [Capt. John Smith, Virginia, 1624].


alectryomancy (n.)

divination by means of a cock and grains of corn, 1680s, from Latinized form of Greek alektryon cock
+ manteia oracle (see -mancy). The first element is literally warder-off, fighter, related to
alexein to ward off, drive or keep off (see Alexander, and compare Alekto, name of one of the three
Furies). Perhaps originally a personal name, applied at first to the fighting cock, then to cocks
generally.


petcock (n.)

also pet-cock, 1864, from cock (n.2); the signification of the first element is uncertain.


alectryomachy (n.)

cock-fighting, 1650s, from Greek alektryon cock (see alectryomancy) + -machy.


game-cock

1670s, from game (adj.) in the sporting sense + cock (n.1). Figurative use by 1727.


rooster (n.)

1772, agent noun from roost (v.); earlier roost cock, c.1600, in sense of the roosting bird. Favored
in the U.S. originally as a puritan alternative to cock (n.) after it had acquired the secondary
sense penis (and compare roach).


coquet (n.)

amorous, flirtatious person, 1690s, originally of both sexes (as it was in French), from French
coquet (17c.), diminutive of coq cock (see cock (n.1)). A figurative reference to its strut or its
lust. The distinction of fem. coquette began c.1700, and use in reference to males has faded out
since.


chanticleer (n.)

a cock, c.1300, from Old French Chantecler sing-loud (Modern French Chanteclair), name of the cock
in medieval stories of Reynard the Fox; from chanter to sing (see chant (v.)) + cler (see clear
(adj.)).


gallinaceous (adj.)

of or resembling domestic fowl, 1783, from Latin gallinaceus, from gallina hen, a fem. formation
from gallus cock, probably from PIE root *gal- (2) to call, shout (see call (v.)) as the calling
bird. But it also has an ancient association with Gaul (see Gallic), and some speculate that this is
the source of the word, on the assumption that the Romans became acquainted with the cock from Gaul,
where it was brought by the Phoenicians [Buck].


capon (n.)

a castrated cock, late Old English capun, from Latin caponem (nominative capo) castrated cock (also
source of French chapon, Spanish capon, Italian cappone), perhaps literally to strike off, from PIE
root *(s)kep- to cut (see hatchet (n.)). Probably reinforced in Middle English by cognate Old North
French capon.


chant (v.)

late 14c., from Old French chanter to sing, celebrate (12c.), from Latin cantare to sing, originally
frequentative of canere sing (which it replaced), from PIE root *kan- to sing (cognates: Greek
eikanos cock, Old English hana cock, both literally bird who sings for sunrise; Old Irish caniaid
sings, Welsh canu sing). The frequentative quality of the word was no longer felt in Latin, and by
the time French emerged the word had entirely displaced canere. Related: Chanted; chanting.


Gallic (adj.)

1670s, from Latin Gallicus pertaining to Gaul or the Gauls, from Latin Gallia Gaul and Gallus a Gaul
from a native Celtic name (see Gaelic), though some connect the word with prehistoric West Germanic
*walkhoz foreigners (see Welsh). Originally used in English rhetorically or mockingly for French.
The cock as a symbol of France is based on the pun of Gallus a Gaul and Latin gallus cock (see
gallinaceous).    It means not simply 'French,' but 'characteristically', 'delightfully',
'distressingly', or 'amusingly' 'French' ... not 'of France', but 'of the typical Frenchman'.
[Fowler]


peacock (n.)

c.1300, poucock, from Middle English po peacock + coc (see cock (n.)).   Po is from Old English pawa
peafowl (cock or hen), from Latin pavo (genitive pavonis), which, with Greek taos said to be
ultimately from Tamil tokei (but perhaps is imitative; Latin represented the peacock's sound as
paupulo).    The Latin word also is the source of Old High German pfawo, German Pfau, Dutch pauw,
Old Church Slavonic pavu. Used as the type of a vainglorious person from late 14c. Its flesh
superstitiously was believed to be incorruptible (even St. Augustine credits this). When he sees his
feet, he screams wildly, thinking that they are not in keeping with the rest of his body.
[Epiphanus]


hen (n.)

Old English henn, from West Germanic *hannjo (cognates: Old Frisian henn, Middle Dutch henne, Old
High German henna), fem. of *han(e)ni male fowl, cock (source of Old English hana cock), literally
bird who sings (for sunrise), from PIE root *kan- to sing (see chant).    The original masculine
word survives in German (Hahn cock), Swedish, Danish, etc. German also has a generic form, Huhn, for
either gender of the bird. Extension to female of any bird species is early 14c. in English. Hen as
slang for woman dates from 1620s; hence hen party gathering of women, first recorded 1887. To be mad
as a wet hen is from 1823, but the figure was used to indicate other states:    Some, on the
contrary, are viciously opposite to these, who act so tamely and so coldly, that when they ought to
be angry, to thunder and lighten, as one may say, they are no fuller of Heat, than a wet Hen, as the
Saying is; .... [Life of Mr. Thomas Betterton, London, 1710]   <hr />   Orth. Out upon you for a
dastardly Fellow; you han't the Courage of a wet Hen. [A Sermon Preached at St. Mary-le-Bow, March
27, 1704]   As wanton as a wet hen is in Scots Proverbs (1813). Among Middle English proverbial
expressions was nice as a nonne hen over-refined, fastidiously wanton (c.1500); to singen so hen in
snowe sing miserably, literally sing like a hen in snow (c.1200). Hen's teeth as a figure of
scarceness is attested by 1838.


claim (v.)

c.1300, to call, call out; to ask or demand by virtue of right or authority, from accented stem of
Old French clamer to call, name, describe; claim; complain; declare, from Latin clamare to cry out,
shout, proclaim, from PIE *kele- (2) to shout, imitative (compare Sanskrit usakala cock, literally
dawn-calling; Latin calare to announce solemnly, call out; Middle Irish cailech cock; Greek kalein
to call, kelados noise, kledon report, fame; Old High German halan to call; Old English hlowan to
low, make a noise like a cow; Lithuanian kalba language). Related: Claimed; claiming.    Meaning to
maintain as true is from 1864; specific sense to make a claim (on an insurance company) is from
1897. Claim properly should not stray too far from its true meaning of to demand recognition of a
right.


pillock (n.)

1530s, dialectal variant of Middle English pillicock (see cock (n.1)). Meaning stupid person is
attested by 1967.


tease (n.)

1690s, act of teasing, from tease (v.). Meaning one who teases is from 1852. Specifically as short
for cock-teaser, it was in use by 1976.


gallium (n.)

metalic element, discovered by spectral lines in 1875 by French chemist Lecoq de Boisbaudran
(1838-1912), who named it apparently in honor of his homeland (see Gallic), but it has been
suggested that he also punned on his own name (compare Latin gallus cock).


gobbler (n.)

1737, turkey cock, agent noun from gobble (v.2). As one who eats greedily 1755, from gobble (v.1).


shuttlecock (n.)

1570s, from shuttle (v.) + cock (n.2).


game (adj.2)

brave, spirited, 1725, especially in game-cock bird for fighting, from game (n.). Middle English had
gamesome (adj.) joyful, playful, sportive.


Cox

surname, from early 16c., earlier Cocks (c.1300), in many cases from cock (n.1), which apparently
was used as a personal name in Old English, also as a familiar term for a boy, later used of
apprentices, servants, etc. Perhaps in some cases for the sign of an inn. In some cases perhaps from
cook (n.), or Welsh coch red.


plectrum (n.)

something used to pluck the strings of a musical instrument, 1620s, from Latin plectrum, from Greek
plektron thing to strike with (pick for a lyre, cock's spur, spear point, etc.), from plek-, root of
plessein to strike (see plague (n.)).


coax (v.)

1580s, originally in slang phrase to make a coax of, from earlier noun coax, cox, cokes a fool,
ninny, simpleton (1560s); modern spelling is 1706. Origin obscure, perhaps related to cock (n.1).
Related: Coaxed; coaxing.


crest (n.)

early 14c., from Old French creste tuft, comb (Modern French cr&ecirc;te), from Latin crista tuft,
plume, perhaps related to word for hair (such as crinis), but it also was used for crest of a cock
or a helmet. Replaced Old English hris.


coxswain (n.)

early 14c., officer in charge of a ship's boat and its crew, from cock ship's boat (from Old French
coque canoe) + swain boy, from Old Norse sveinn boy, servant (see swain).


ergot (n.)

fungal disease of rye and other grasses, 1680s, from French ergot, from Old French argot cock's spur
(12c.), of unknown origin. The blight so called from the shape the fungus forms on the diseased
grain. Ergotism disease caused by eating ergot-infected breadstuffs, first recorded 1853. An
alkaloid from the fungus, ergotamine (1921) is used to treat migraines.


chafer (n.)

kind of beetle, Old English ceafor beetle, cock-chafer, from Proto-Germanic *kabraz- (cognates: Old
Saxon kevera, Dutch kever, Old High German chevar, German K&auml;fer), literally gnawer, from PIE
*gep(h)- jaw, mouth (see jowl (n.1)).


woodcock (n.)

Old English wuducoc, from wudu (see wood (n.)) + coc (see cock (n.1)).


mot (n.)

a witty saying, 1580s, from French mot (12c.) remark, short speech, literally word, cognate of
Italian motto, from Latin mutum grunt, murmur (see mutter). Mot juste (1912) is French, literally
exact word, the precisely appropriate expression in some situation.The mot juste is an expression
which readers would like to buy of writers who use it, as one buys one's neighbour's bantam cock for
the sake of hearing its voice no more. [Fowler]


hackle (n.)

Old English hacele cloak, mantle (cognate with Old High German hachul, Gothic hakuls cloak; Old
Norse hekla hooded frock), of uncertain origin. Sense of bird plumage is first recorded early 15c.,
though this might be from unrelated Middle English hackle flax comb (see heckle (n.)) on supposed
resemblance of comb to ruffled feathers. Metaphoric extension found in raise one's hackles (as a
cock does when angry) is first recorded 1881.


spar (v)

late 14c., go quickly, rush, dart, spring; c.1400, to strike or thrust, perhaps from Middle French
esparer to kick (Modern French &#233;parer), from Italian sparare to fling, from Latin ex- (see ex-)
+ parare make ready, prepare, hence ward off, parry (see pare). Etymologists consider a connection
with spur unlikely. Used in 17c. in reference to preliminary actions in a cock fight; figurative
sense of to dispute, bandy with words is from 1690s. Extension to humans, in a literal sense, with
meaning to engage in or practice boxing is attested from 1755. Related: Sparred; sparring.


John Hancock

colloquial for signature, 1903 (sometimes, through some unexplainable error, John Henry), from the
Boston merchant and rebel (1736-1793), signer of the U.S. Declaration of Independence. The extended
sense is from his signing that dangerous document first or most flamboyantly.    John Hancock,
president of Congress, was the first to sign the Declaration of Independence, writing his name in
large, plain letters, and saying: There; John Bull can read my name without spectacles. Now let him
double the price on my head, for this is my defiance. [H&eacute;l&egrave;ne Adeline Guerber, The
Story of the Thirteen Colonies, New York, 1898]    The family name is attested from 1276 in
Yorkshire, a diminutive (see cock) of Hann, a very common given name in 13c. Yorkshire as a pet form
of Henry or John.


felon (n.)

late 13c., from Old French felon evil-doer, scoundrel, traitor, rebel, the Devil (9c.), from
Medieval Latin fellonem (nominative fello) evil-doer, of uncertain origin, perhaps from Frankish
*fillo, *filljo person who whips or beats, scourger (source of Old High German fillen to whip); or
from Latin fel gall, poison, on the notion of one full of bitterness.    Another theory (advanced by
Professor R. Atkinson of Dublin) traces it to Latin fellare to suck (see fecund), which had an
obscene secondary meaning in classical Latin (well-known to readers of Martial and Catullus), which
would make a felon etymologically a cock-sucker. OED inclines toward the gall explanation, but finds
Atkinson's most plausible of the others.


