coercion (n.)

early 15c., from Old French cohercion (Modern French coercion), from Medieval Latin coercionem, from
Latin coerctionem, earlier coercitionem, noun of action from past participle stem of coercere (see
coerce).


enforcement (n.)

late 15c., from Old French enforcement strengthening, fortification; rape, compulsion, coercion;
from enforcer; see enforce + -ment.


voluntarism (n.)

1838, theory or principal of using voluntary action rather than coercion (in politics, religion,
etc.), from voluntary + -ism. (Voluntaryism in the religious sense, as opposed to
establishmentarianism, is recorded from 1835.) In philosophy, theory that the will is the basic
principle, 1896, from German Voluntarismus (T&#246;nnies, 1883).


duress (n.)

early 14c., harsh or severe treatment, from Old French duresse, from Latin duritia hardness, from
durus hard (see endure). The Old French suffix -esse is from Latin -itia, added to adjectives to
form nouns of quality (compare riches, largesse). Sense of coercion, compulsion is from 1590s.


coerce (v.)

mid-15c., cohercen, from Middle French cohercer, from Latin coercere to control, restrain, shut up
together, from com- together (see co-) + arcere to enclose, confine, contain, ward off, from PIE
*ark- to hold, contain, guard (see arcane). Related: Coerced; coercing. No record of the word
between late 15c. and mid-17c.; its reappearance 1650s is perhaps a back-formation from coercion.


constraint (n.)

late 14c., distress, oppression, from Old French constreinte binding, constraint, compulsion (Modern
French contrainte), fem. noun from constreint, past participle of constreindre, from Vulgar Latin
*constrinctus, from Latin constrictus (see constrain). Meaning coercion, compulsion is from 1530s.


threat (n.)

Old English &thorn;reat crowd, troop, also oppression, coercion, menace, related to &thorn;reotan to
trouble, weary, from Proto-Germanic *thrautam (cognates: Dutch verdreiten, German verdrie&szlig;en
to vex), from PIE *treud- to push, press squeeze (cognates: Latin trudere to press, thrust, Old
Church Slavonic trudu oppression, Middle Irish trott quarrel, conflict, Middle Welsh cythrud
torture, torment, afflict). Sense of conditional declaration of hostile intention was in Old
English.


screw (n.)

cylinder of wood or metal with a spiral ridge round it; hole in which a screw turns, c.1400, from
Middle French escroue nut, cylindrical socket, screwhole, of uncertain etymology; not found in other
Romanic languages. Perhaps via Gallo-Roman *scroba or West Germanic *scruva from Vulgar Latin
scrobis screw-head groove, in classical Latin ditch, trench, also vagina (Diez, though OED finds
this phonologically impossible).    Kluge, Watkins and others trace it to Latin scrofa breeding sow,
perhaps based on the shape of a pig's penis (compare Portuguese porca, Spanish perca a female screw,
from Latin porca sow). Latin scrofa is literally digger, rooter, from PIE root *(s)ker- (1) to cut
(see shear (v.)). A group of apparently cognate Germanic words (Middle Low German, Middle Dutch
schruve, Dutch schroef, German Schraube, Swedish skrufva screw) are said to be French loan-words.
Sense of means of pressure or coercion is from 1640s, probably in reference to instruments of
torture (such as thumbscrews). Meaning prison guard, warden is 1812 in underworld slang, originally
in reference to the key they carried (screw as slang for key attested from 1795). Slang meaning an
act of copulation is recorded from 1929 (meaning a prostitute is attested from 1725). To have a
screw loose have a dangerous (usually mental) weakness is recorded from 1810.


