cognizance (n.)

mid-14c., from Anglo-French conysance recognition, later, knowledge, from Old French conoissance
acquaintance, recognition; knowledge, wisdom (Modern French connaissance), from past participle of
conoistre to know, from Latin cognoscere to get to know, recognize, from com- together (see co-) +
gnoscere to know (see notice (n.)). The -g- was restored in English spelling 15c. and has gradually
affected the pronunciation, which was always con-. The old pronunciation lingered longest in legal
use.


cognizant (adj.)

1820, back-formation from cognizance.


cognoscence (n.)

mid-15c., from Latin cognoscere to know (see cognizance).


cognizable (adj.)

1670s, capable of being known, also liable to be tried in a given court or jurisdiction, from stem
of cognizance + -able.


cognize (v.)

1650s, back-formation from cognizance. Related: Cognized; cognizing.


cognisance (n.)

alternative spelling of cognizance (q.v.); also see -ize.


cognition (n.)

mid-15c., ability to comprehend, from Latin cognitionem (nominative cognitio) a getting to know,
acquaintance, knowledge, noun of action from past participle stem of cognoscere (see cognizance).


cognitive (adv.)

1580s, from Latin cognit-, past participle stem of cognoscere (see cognizance) + -ive. Taken over by
psychologists and sociologists after c.1940. Related: Cognitively.


animadvert (v.)

early 15c., to take notice of, from Latin animadvertere to notice, to take cognizance of, also to
censure, blame, punish, literally to turn the mind to (see animadversion). Sense of to criticize,
blame, censure in English is from 1660s. Related: Animadverted; animadverting.


cognoscente (n.)

connoisseur, 1778, from Italian cognoscente, Latinized from conoscente connoisseur, literally
knowing man, from Latin cognoscentum (nominative cognoscens), present participle of cognoscere to
know (see cognizance).


precognition (n.)

foreknowledge, mid-15c., from Late Latin praecognitionem (nom. praecognitio), noun of action from
past participle stem of Latin praecognoscere to foreknow, from prae before (see pre-) + cognoscere
to know (see cognizance).


perception (n.)

late 14c., receiving, collection, from Latin perceptionem (nominative perceptio) perception,
apprehension, a taking, from percipere perceive (see perceive). First used in the more literal sense
of the Latin word; in secondary sense, the taking cognizance of, it is recorded in English from
1610s. Meaning intuitive or direct recognition of some innate quality is from 1827.


incognito (adj./adv.)

1640s, from Italian incognito unknown, especially in connection with traveling, from Latin
incognitus unknown, from in- not, opposite of, without (see in- (1)) + cognitus, past participle of
cognoscere to get to know (see cognizance). Fem. form incognita was maintained through 19c. by those
scrupulous about Latin. Incog was a common 18c. colloquial abbreviation.


recognize (v.)

early 15c., resume possession of land, back-formation from recognizance, or else from Old French
reconoiss-, stem of reconoistre to know again, identify, recognize, from Latin recognoscere
acknowledge, recall to mind, know again; examine; certify, from re- again (see re-) + cognoscere
know (see cognizance). Meaning know again, recall or recover the knowledge of, perceive an identity
with something formerly known or felt first recorded 1530s. Related: Recognized; recognizing.


quaint (adj.)

c.1200, cointe, cunning, ingenious; proud, from Old French cointe knowledgeable, well-informed;
clever; arrogant, proud; elegant, gracious, from Latin cognitus known, approved, past participle of
cognoscere get or come to know well (see cognizance). Modern spelling is from early 14c.    Later in
English, elaborate, skillfully made (c.1300); strange and clever (mid-14c.). Sense of old-fashioned
but charming is first attested 1795, and could describe the word itself, which had become rare after
c.1700 (though it soon recovered popularity in this secondary sense).  Related: Quaintly;
quaintness.


animadversion (n.)

1590s, criticism, blame, also sometimes in early use simply notice, attention (now obsolete), from
Latin animadversionem (nominative animadversio) investigation, inquiry; perception, observation,
noun of action from past participle stem of animadverte to take cognizance of, literally to turn the
mind to, from animum, accusative of animus mind (see animus), + advertere to turn to (see
advertise). The sense of to take notice of as a fault was in Latin; in fact animadverto at times was
a euphemism for to punish with death.


toleration (n.)

1510s, permission granted by authority, license, from Middle French tol&eacute;ration (15c.), from
Latin tolerationem (nominative toleratio) a bearing, supporting, enduring, noun of action from past
participle stem of tolerare to endure, sustain, support, suffer, literally to bear, from PIE *tele-
to bear, carry (see extol).    Meaning forbearance, sufferance is from 1580s. The specific religious
sense is from 1609; as in Act of Toleration (1689), statute granting freedom of religious worship
(with conditions) to dissenting Protestants in England. In this it means recognition of the right of
private judgment in matters of faith and worship; liberty granted by the government to preach and
worship as one pleases; equality under the law without regard to religion.    If any man err from
the right way, it is his own misfortune, no injury to thee; nor therefore art thou to punish him in
the things of this life because thou supposest he will be miserable in that which is to come.
Nobody, therefore, in fine, neither single persons nor churches, nay, nor even commonwealths, have
any just title to invade the civil rights and worldly goods of each other upon pretence of religion.
[John Locke, Letter Concerning Toleration, 1689]   <hr />   Before any man can be considered as a
member of Civil Society, he must be considered as a subject of the Governour of the Universe: And if
a member of Civil Society, do it with a saving of his allegiance to the Universal Sovereign. We
maintain therefore that in matters of Religion, no man's right is abridged by the institution of
Civil Society and that Religion is wholly exempt from its cognizance. [James Madison, Memorial and
Remonstrance Against Religious Assessments, 1785]   <hr />   Unlimited tolerance must lead to the
disappearance of tolerance. If we extend unlimited tolerance even to those who are intolerant, if we
are not prepared to defend a tolerant society against the onslaught of the intolerant, then the
tolerant will be destroyed, and tolerance with them. [Karl Popper, The Open Society and Its Enemies,
1962]


