cognate (adj.)

1640s, from Latin cognatus of common descent, from com- together (see co-) + gnatus, past participle
of gnasci, older form of nasci to be born (see genus). Words that are cognates are cousins, not
siblings. As a noun, from 1754.


steep (v.)

to soak in a liquid, early 14c., of uncertain origin, originally in reference to barley or malt,
probably cognate with Old Norse steypa to pour out, throw (perhaps from an unrecorded Old English
cognate), from Proto-Germanic *staupijanan. Related: Steeped; steeping.


Eisteddfod (n.)

annual assembly of Welsh bards, 1822, from Welsh, literally session, from eistedd to sit (from sedd
seat, cognate with Latin sedere; see sedentary) + bod to be (cognate with Old English beon; see be).


holm (n.)

late Old English, from Old Norse holmr small island, especially in a bay or river, also meadow by a
shore, or cognate Old Danish hulm low lying land, from Proto-Germanic *hul-maz, from PIE root *kel-
(4) to rise, be elevated, be prominent; hill (see hill). Obsolete, but preserved in place names.
Cognate Old English holm (only attested in poetic language) meant sea, ocean, wave.


fartlek (n.)

1952, Swedish, from fart speed (cognate with Old Norse fara to go, move; see fare (v.)) + lek play
(cognate with Old Norse leika play; see lark (v.)).


Mac-

common element in Scottish and Irish names, from Old Celtic *makko-s son. Cognate root *makwos son
produced Old Welsh map, Welsh mab, ap son; also probably cognate with Old English mago son,
attendant, servant, Old Norse m&ouml;gr son, Gothic magus boy, servant, Old English m&aelig;g&eth;
maid (see maiden).


hake (n.)

type of sea fish, c.1300, probably from Old English haca a hook, door-fastening (related to hacod
pike the fish), or from cognate Old Norse haki hook; in either case the fish so called from the
shape of its jaw; both from Proto-Germanic *hakan- (cognate with Dutch hake hook), from PIE root
*keg- hook, tooth (see hook (n.)).


yammer (v.)

late 15c., to lament, probably from Middle Dutch jammeren and cognate Middle English yeoumeren, to
mourn, complain, from Old English geomrian to lament, from geomor sorrowful, probably of imitative
origin. Cognate with Old Saxon jamar sad, sorrowful, German Jammer lamentation, misery. Meaning to
make loud, annoying noise is attested from 1510s. Related: Yammered; yammering.


seersucker (n.)

1722, from Hindi sirsakar, East Indian corruption of Persian shir o shakkar striped cloth, literally
milk and sugar, a reference to the alternately smooth and puckered surfaces of the stripes. From
Persian shir (cognate with Sanskrit ksiram milk) + shakar (cognate with Pali sakkhara, Sanskrit
sarkara gravel, grit, sugar; see sugar (n.)).


frolic

1530s, as an adjective, joyous, merry, from Middle Dutch vrolyc (adj.) happy, from vro- merry, glad
+ lyc like (see like (adj.)). Cognate with German fr&ouml;hlich happy. The stem is cognate with Old
Norse frar swift, Middle English frow hasty, from PIE *preu- (see frog (n.1)), giving the whole an
etymological sense akin to jumping for joy. The verb is first attested 1580s. Related: Frolicked;
frolicking. As a noun, from 1610s.


a- (2)

prefix meaning not, from Latin a-, short for ab away from (as in avert), or its cognate, Greek a-,
short for apo away from, from, both cognate with Sanskrit apa away from, Gothic af, Old English of
(see apo-).


hobble (v.)

c.1300, hoblen to rock back and forth, toss up and down, probably related to its Dutch cognate
hobbelen (which, however, is not recorded before late 15c.).    Meaning to walk lamely is from
c.1400. Transitive sense of tie the legs (of an animal) first recorded 1831, probably an alteration
of 16c. hopple, cognate with Flemish hoppelen to rock, jump, which also is related to Dutch
hobbelen. Sense of hamper, hinder is c.1870. Related: Hobbled; hobbling. The noun is 1727, from the
verb.


chalice (n.)

early 14c., from Anglo-French chalice, from Old French chalice, collateral form of calice (Modern
French calice), from Latin calicem (nominative calix) cup, cognate with Greek kylix cup, drinking
cup, cup of a flower, from PIE root *kal- (1) cup. Ousted Old English cognate c&aelig;lic, an
ecclesiastical borrowing of the Latin word, and earlier Middle English caliz, from Old North French.


together (adv.)

Old English tog&aelig;dere so as to be present in one place, in a group, in an accumulated mass,
from to (see to) + g&aelig;dere together (adv.), apparently a variant of the adverb geador together,
from Proto-Germanic *gaduri- in a body, from PIE *ghedh- to unite, join, fit (see good, and compare
gather).    In reference to single things, so as to be unified or integrated, from c.1300. Adjective
meaning self-assured, free of emotional difficulties is first recorded 1966. German cognate zusammen
has as second element the Old High German verbal cognate of English same (Old English also had
tosamne together).


provost (n.)

Old English profost, reinforced by Old French cognate provost, both from Late Latin propositus
(reinforced by Old French cognate provost), from Latin propositus/praepositus a chief, prefect
(source of Old Proven&ccedil;al probost, Old High German probost, German Propst), literally placed
before, in charge of, from past participle of praeponere put before (see preposition). Provost
marshal first recorded 1510s.


smell (v.)

late 12c., emit or perceive an odor, not found in Old English, perhaps cognate with Middle Dutch
smolen, Low German smelen to smolder (see smolder). However, OED says no doubt of Old English
origin, but not recorded, and not represented in any of the cognate languages. Related: Smelled or
smelt; smelling.   Smelling salts (1840), used to revive the woozy, typically were a scented
preparation of carbonate of ammonia. Smell-feast (n.) one who finds and frequents good tables, one
who scents out where free food is to be had is from 1510s (very common c.1540-1700, OED). Smell-
smock licentious man was in use c.1550-c.1900. To smell a rat be suspicious is from 1540s.


wand (n.)

c.1200, from Old Norse vondr rod, switch (cognate with Gothic wandus rod, Middle Swedish vander),
from Proto-Germanic *wend- to turn, see wind (v.)). The notion is of a bending, flexible stick.
Compare cognate Old Norse veggr, Old English wag wall, Old Saxon, Dutch wand, Old High German want,
German Wand wall, originally wickerwork for making walls, or wall made of wattle-work (an insight
into early Germanic domestic architecture). Magic wand is attested from c.1400 and shows the
etymological sense of suppleness already had been lost.


cabana (n.)

1898, western U.S., from American Spanish cognate of cabin (q.v.).


ye (pron.)

Old English ge, nominative plural of 2nd person pronoun &thorn;u (see thou); cognate with Old
Frisian ji, Old Saxon gi, Middle Dutch ghi, Dutch gij. Cognate with Lithuanian jus, Sanskrit yuyam,
Avestan yuzem, Greek hymeis.    Altered, by influence of we, from an earlier form that was similar
to Gothic jus you (plural) (see you). The -r- in Old Norse er, German ihr probably is likewise from
influence of their respective 1st person plural pronouns (Old Norse ver, German wir).


finances (n.)

pecuniary resources, 1730, modeled on the French cognate, from plural of finance (n.).


neck (n.)

Old English hnecca neck, nape, back of the neck (a fairly rare word) from Proto-Germanic *hnekk- the
nape of the neck (cognates: Old Frisian hnekka, Middle Dutch necke, Dutch nek, Old Norse hnakkr, Old
High German hnach, German Nacken neck), with no certain cognates outside Germanic, though Klein's
sources suggest PIE *knok- high point, ridge (source of Old Irish cnocc, Welsh cnwch, Old Breton
cnoch hill).    The more usual Old English words were hals (the general Germanic word, cognate with
Gothic, Old Norse, Danish, Swedish, Dutch, German hals), cognate with Latin collum (see collar
(n.)); and sweora, swira neck, nape, probably also from a PIE root meaning column (cognate with Old
English swer column, Sanskrit svaru- post).    Transferred senses attested from c.1400. Phrase neck
of the woods (American English) is attested from 1780 in the sense of narrow stretch of woods; 1839
with meaning settlement in a wooded region. To stick one's neck out take a risk is first recorded
1919, American English. Horses running neck and neck is attested from 1799.


pose (n.)

act of posing the body, 1818, from pose (v.1), in a sense developed in the French cognate.
Figuratively from 1884.


human (adj.)

mid-15c., humain, humaigne, from Old French humain, umain (adj.) of or belonging to man (12c.), from
Latin humanus of man, human, also humane, philanthropic, kind, gentle, polite; learned, refined,
civilized, probably related to homo (genitive hominis) man (see homunculus) and to humus earth, on
notion of earthly beings, as opposed to the gods (compare Hebrew adam man, from adamah ground).
Cognate with Old Lithuanian zmuo (accusative zmuni) man, male person.    As a noun, from 1530s. Its
Old English cognate guma (from Proto-Germanic *guman-) survives only in disguise in bridegroom.
Related: Humanness. Human rights attested by 1680s; human being by 1690s. Human relations is from
1916; human resources attested by 1907, American English, apparently originally among social
Christians and drawn from natural resources.


pliers (n.)

pincers, 1560s, plural agent noun from ply (n.). French cognate plieur meant folder.


Bel

heaven-and-earth god of Babylonian religion, from Akkadian Belu, literally lord, owner, master,
cognate with Hebrew ba'al.


smaik (n.)

mean or contemptible fellow, mid-15c., Scottish, now archaic, current c.1450-c.1900, perhaps cognate
with Old High German smeichari, from smeken to flatter.


gnathic (adj.)

pertaining to the jaw, 1882, from Greek gnathos jaw, cheek, properly the lower jaw, cognate with
Lithuanian &#382;andas jaw.


Lent (n.)

late 14c., short for Lenten (n.) forty days before Easter (early 12c.), from Old English lencten
springtime, spring, the season, also the fast of Lent, from West Germanic *langa-tinaz long-days
(cognate with Old Saxon lentin, Middle Dutch lenten, Old High German lengizin manoth), from *lanngaz
(root of Old English lang long; see long (adj.)) + *tina-, a root meaning day (compare Gothic sin-
teins daily), cognate with Old Church Slavonic dini, Lithuanian diena, Latin dies day (see diurnal).
the compound probably refers to the increasing daylight. Compare similar form evolution in Dutch
lente (Middle Dutch lentin), German Lenz (Old High German lengizin) spring. Church sense of period
between Ash Wednesday and Easter is peculiar to English.


river (n.)

early 13c., from Anglo-French rivere, Old French riviere river, riverside, river bank (12c.), from
Vulgar Latin *riparia riverbank, seashore, river (source also of Spanish ribera, Italian riviera),
noun use of fem. of Latin riparius of a riverbank (see riparian). Generalized sense of a copious
flow of anything is from late 14c. The Old English word was ea river, cognate with Gothic ahwa,
Latin aqua (see aqua-). Romanic cognate words tend to retain the sense river bank as the main one,
or else the secondary Latin sense coast of the sea (compare Riviera).    U.S. slang phrase up the
river in prison (1891) is originally in reference to Sing Sing prison, which was literally up the
(Hudson) river from New York City. Phrase down the river done for, finished perhaps echoes sense in
sell down the river (1851), originally of troublesome slaves, to sell from the Upper South to the
harsher cotton plantations of the Deep South.


teller (n.)

bank clerk who pays or receives money, late 15c., person who keeps accounts, agent noun from tell
(v.) in its secondary sense of count, enumerate, which is the primary sense of cognate words in many
Germanic languages. Earlier person who announces or narrates (c.1300).


sinter (n.)

1780, from German Sinter, cognate with English cinder.


dumdum bullet

1897, named for Dum-Dum arsenal in Bengal, where the British made them to use against fanatical
charges by tribesmen. Outlawed by international declaration, 1899. The place name is literally hill,
mound, battery, cognate with Persian damdama.


cog (n.)

c.1300, cog wheel; late 14c., tooth on a wheel, probably a borrowing from a Scandinavian language
(compare Norwegian kugg cog) and cognate with Middle High German kugel ball.


lek (v.)

to engage in courtship displays of certain animals, 1871, probably from Swedish leka to play,
cognate of English dialectal verb lake (see lark (v.)).


Ares

Greek god of war, identified by Romans with their Mars; literally injurer, destroyer, from are bane,
ruin, perhaps cognate with Sanskrit irasya ill-will (see ire).


quale (n.)

death, destruction, Old English cwalu, cognate with Old Norse kval torment, torture, from a variant
of the root of quell.


lech (n.1)

Celtic monumental stone, 1768, from Welsh llech, cognate with Gaelic and Irish leac (see cromlech).


-cene

word-forming element in geology, introduced by Sir Charles Lyell (1797-1875), from Greek kainos new,
cognate with Latin recens (see recent).


overmuch (adj.)

too great in amount, c.1300, over- + much (q.v.). As an adverb from late 14c. Old English had
cognate ofermicel.


leak (n.)

late 15c., from leak (v.) or Old Norse cognate leki. Sense of revelation of secret information is
from 1950. Meaning act of urination is attested from 1934 (Tropic of Cancer); but the verb meaning
to piss is from 1590s: Why, you will allow vs ne're a Iourden, and then we leake in your Chimney. [I
Hen. IV, II.i.22]


dire (adj.)

1560s, from Latin dirus fearful, awful, boding ill, of unknown origin; perhaps from Oscan and
Umbrian and perhaps cognate with Greek deinos, from PIE root *dwei-.


sike (n.)

also syke, small stream, a Scottish and Northern word, from Old English sic or cognate Old Norse sik
a ditch, trench.


bast (n.)

inner bark of the linden tree, Old English b&aelig;st, a general Germanic word (cognate with Old
Norse, Old Saxon, Middle Dutch, Old High German, German bast), of uncertain origin.


jackal (n.)

c.1600, from Turkish &ccedil;akal, from Persian shaghal, from or cognate with Sanskrit srgala-s,
literally the howler. Figurative sense of skulking henchman is from the old belief that jackals
stirred up game for lions.


nesh (adj.)

tender, delicate, weak, now a Northern England dialect word, from Old English hnesce soft in texture
(cognate with early modern Dutch nesch, Gothic hnasqus), of unknown origin.


bread (n.)

Old English bread bit, crumb, morsel; bread, cognate with Old Norse brau&eth;, Danish br&oslash;d,
Old Frisian brad, Middle Dutch brot, Dutch brood, German Brot. According to one theory [Watkins,
etc.] from Proto-Germanic *brautham, which would be from the root of brew (v.) and refer to the
leavening.    But OED argues at some length for the basic sense being not cooked food but piece of
food, and the Old English word deriving from a Proto-Germanic *braudsmon- fragments, bits (cognate
with Old High German brosma crumb, Old English breotan to break in pieces) and being related to the
root of break (v.). It cites  Slovenian kruh bread, literally a piece.    Either way, by c.1200 it
had replaced the usual Old English word for bread, which was hlaf (see loaf (n.)). Slang meaning
money dates from 1940s, but compare breadwinner. Bread-and-butter in the figurative sense of basic
needs is from 1732. Bread and circuses (1914) is from Latin, in reference to food and entertainment
provided by governments to keep the populace happy. Duas tantum res anxius optat, Panem et circenses
[Juvenal, Sat. x.80].


Golgotha

hill near Jerusalem, via Latin and Greek, from Aramaic gulgulta, literally (place of the) skull,
cognate with Hebrew gulgoleth skull. So called in reference to its shape (see Calvary).


shoal (n.2)

large number (especially of fish), 1570s, apparently identical with Old English scolu band, troop,
crowd of fish (see school (n.2)); but perhaps rather a 16c. adoption of cognate Middle Dutch schole.


codpiece (n.)

mid-15c., a bagged appendage to the front of the breeches; often conspicuous [OED], from Old English
codd a bag, pouch, husk, in Middle English, testicles (cognate with Old Norse koddi pillow, scrotum)
+ piece (n.).


fungo (n.)

1867, baseball slang, perhaps from dialectal fonge catch, a relic of Old English fon seize (see
fang), or possibly from the German cognate fangen. Not in OED 2nd ed. (1989).


