cognomen (n.)

1809, from Latin com- with (see co-) + (g)nomen name (see name (n.)). Third or family name of a
Roman citizen (Caius Julius C&aelig;sar).


caesarian (n.)

1923, shortening of Caesarian section (1610s); supposedly from Caius Julius Caesar, who was said to
have been delivered surgically, thus legend traces his cognomen to Latin caesus past participle of
caedere to cut (see -cide).    But if this is the etymology of the name, it was likely an ancestor
who was so born (Caesar's mother lived to see his triumphs and such operations would have been fatal
to the woman in ancient times). And Pliny derives his cognomen from caesaries head of hair, because
the future dictator was born with a full one. Caesarian section may come directly from caesus.


Augustus

masc. proper name, from Latin augustus venerable (see august). The name originally was a cognomen
applied to Gaius Julius Caesar Octavianus as emperor, with a sense something like his majesty.


Caligula

cognomen of the third Roman emperor (12 C.E.-41 C.E.), born Gaius Caesar. The nickname is Latin,
literally little boot, given when he joined his father on military campaigns when still a toddler,
in full, child-sized military gear; diminutive of caliga heavy military shoe, of unknown origin.


Shafi&#039;i (n.)

member of one of the four principal schools of Sunni Muslims, 1704, from Arabic, from ash-Shafi'i,
cognomen of founder Abu Abdallah Muhammad ibn Idris (767-819). Related: Shafi'ite.


Camilla

fem. proper name, from Latin, fem. of Camillus, cognomen of several members of the gens Furia, from
camillus noble youth attending at sacrifices, perhaps from Etruscan.


Ciceronian (adj.)

eloquent, a reference to Roman statesman and orator Marcus Tullius Cicero (106-43 B.C.E.); also
often known as Tully in early Modern English writers; Cicero being a cognomen of the genus Tullia.


crispin (n.)

1640s, shoemaker, in literary use only, from Ss. Crispin and Crispinian (martyred at Soissons, c.285
C.E.), patrons of shoemakers. French hagiographers make the brothers noble Romans who, while they
preached in Gaul, worked as shoemakers to avoid living on the alms of the faithful. The name is
Crispinus, a Roman cognomen, from Latin crispus curly (probably with reference to hair; see crisp).


base (adj.)

late 14c., low, of little height, from Old French bas low, lowly, mean, from Late Latin bassus
thick, stumpy, low (used only as a cognomen in classical Latin, humilis being there the usual word
for low in stature or position), possibly from Oscan, or Celtic, or related to Greek basson,
comparative of bathys deep. Figurative sense of low in the moral scale is first attested 1530s in
English, earlier servile (1520s). Base metals (c.1600) were worthless in contrast to noble or
precious metals.


Cincinnati

city on the Ohio River in Ohio, U.S., founded 1789 and first called Losantiville, name changed 1790
by territorial Gov. Arthur St. Clair, in honor of the Society of the Cincinnati, a fraternal
veterans' organization founded 1783 by former Revolutionary War officers (St. Clair was a member)
and named for Lucius Quinctius Cincinnatus, 5c. B.C.E. Roman hero who saved the city from crisis and
then retired to his farm rather than rule. His name is a cognomen in the gens Quinctia, literally
with curly hair, from Latin cincinnus curl, curly hair. Related: Cincinnatian.


kaiser (n.)

an emperor, Old English casere, fallen from use after Middle English, but revived 1858 in reference
to the German emperors of Austria and, after 1870, Germany, from German Kaiser, from Bavarian and
Austrian spelling of Middle High German keisar, from Old High German keisar emperor, an early
borrowing of Latin cognomen Caesar. The Germanic and Slavic peoples seem to have called all Roman
emperors caesar (compare Old English casere, Old Norse keisari). Said to be the earliest Latin loan
word in Germanic.


