cohabit (v.)

euphemism since 1530s to describe a couple living together without benefit of marriage; back-
formation from cohabitation. Related: Cohabited; cohabiting.


concubine (n.)

c.1300, from Latin concubina (fem.), from concumbere to lie with, to lie together, to cohabit, from
com- with (see com-) + cubare to lie down (see cubicle). Recognized by law among polygamous peoples
as a secondary wife.


succumb (v.)

late 15c., from Old French succomber succumb, die, lose one's (legal) case, and directly from Latin
succumbere submit, surrender, yield, be overcome; sink down; lie under; cohabit with, from sub down
(see sub-) + -cumbere take a reclining position, related to cubare lie down (see cubicle).
Originally transitive; sense of sink under pressure is first recorded c.1600. As a euphemism for to
die, from 1849. Related: Succumbed; succumbing.


brook (v.)

to endure, Old English brucan use, enjoy, possess; eat; cohabit with, from Proto-Germanic *bruk- to
make use of, enjoy (cognates: Old Saxon brukan, Old Frisian bruka, Old High German bruhhan, German
brauchen to use, Gothic brukjan), from PIE root *bhrug- to make use of, have enjoyment of (cognates:
Latin fructus). Sense of use applied to food led to be able to digest, and by 16c. to tolerate.


shack (n.)

1878, American English and Canadian English, of unknown origin, perhaps from Mexican Spanish jacal,
from Nahuatl (Aztecan) xacalli wooden hut. Or perhaps a back-formation from dialectal English
shackly shaky, rickety (1843), a derivative of shack, a dialectal variant of shake (v.). Another
theory derives shack from ramshackle.    Slang meaning house attested by 1910. In early radio
enthusiast slang, it was the word for a room or office set aside for wireless use, 1919, perhaps
from earlier U.S. Navy use (1917). As a verb, 1891 in the U.S. West in reference to men who hole up
for the winter; from 1927 as to put up for the night; phrase shack up cohabit first recorded 1935
(in Zora Neale Hurston).


lie (v.2)

rest horizontally, early 12c., from Old English licgan (class V strong verb; past tense l&aelig;g,
past participle legen) be situated, reamin; be at rest, lie down, from Proto-Germanic *legjan
(cognates: Old Norse liggja, Old Frisian lidzia, Middle Dutch ligghen, Dutch liggen, Old High German
ligen, German liegen, Gothic ligan), from PIE *legh- to lie, lay (cognates: Hittite laggari falls,
lies, Greek lekhesthai to lie down, Latin lectus bed, Old Church Slavonic lego to lie down,
Lithuanian at-lagai fallow land, Old Irish laigim I lie down, Irish luighe couch, grave). To lie
with have sexual intercourse is from c.1300, and compare Old English licgan mid cohabit with. To
take (something) lying down passively, submissively is from 1854.


live (v.)

Old English lifian (Anglian), libban (West Saxon) to be, to live, have life; to experience, also to
supply oneself with food, to pass life (in some condition), from Proto-Germanic *liben (cognates:
Old Norse lifa to live, remain, Old Frisian libba, German leben, Gothic liban to live), from PIE
root *leip- to remain, continue (source also of Greek liparein to persist, persevere; see leave).
Meaning to make a residence, dwell is from c.1200. Related: Lived; living.According to the Dutch
Prouerbe ... Leuen ende laetan leuen, To liue and to let others liue. [Malynes, 1622]To live it up
live gaily and extravagantly is from 1903. To live up to act in accordance with is 1690s, from
earlier live up live on a high (moral or mental) level (1680s). To live (something) down outwear
(some slander or embarrassment) is from 1842. To live with cohabit as husband and wife is attested
from 1749; sense of to put up with is attested from 1937. Expression live and learn is attested from
c.1620.


sin (n.)

Old English synn moral wrongdoing, injury, mischief, enmity, feud, guilt, crime, offense against
God, misdeed, from Proto-Germanic *sun(d)jo- sin (cognates: Old Saxon sundia, Old Frisian sende,
Middle Dutch sonde, Dutch zonde, German S&uuml;nde sin, transgression, trespass, offense, extended
forms), probably ultimately it is true, i.e. the sin is real (compare Gothic sonjis, Old Norse sannr
true), from PIE *snt-ya-, a collective form from *es-ont- becoming, present participle of root *es-
to be (see is).    The semantic development is via notion of to be truly the one (who is guilty), as
in Old Norse phrase ver&eth; sannr at be found guilty of, and the use of the phrase it is being in
Hittite confessional formula. The same process probably yielded the Latin word sons (genitive
sontis) guilty, criminal from present participle of sum, esse to be, that which is. Some
etymologists believe the Germanic word was an early borrowing directly from the Latin genitive. Also
see sooth.   Sin-eater is attested from 1680s. To live in sin cohabit without marriage is from 1838;
used earlier in a more general sense. Ice hockey slang sin bin penalty box is attested from 1950.


affair (n.)

c.1300, what one has to do, from Anglo-French afere, Old French afaire (12c., Modern French affaire)
business, event; rank, estate, from the infinitive phrase &agrave; faire to do, from Latin ad to
(see ad-) + facere to do, make (see factitious).    A Northern word originally, brought into general
use and given a French spelling by Caxton (15c.). General sense of vague proceedings (in romance,
war, etc.) first attested 1702. Meaning an affair of the heart; a passionate episode is from French
affaire de coeur (itself attested in English from 1809); to have an affair with someone in this
sense is by 1726, earlier have an affair of love:    'Tis manife&#383;tly contrary to the Law of
Nature, that one Woman &#383;hould cohabit or have an Affair of Love with more than one Man at the
&#383;ame time. [Pufendorf's Law of Nature and Nations, transl. J. Spavan, London, 1716]   <hr />
Thus, in our dialect, a vicious man is a man of pleasure, a sharper is one that plays the whole
game, a lady is said to have an affair, a gentleman to be a gallant, a rogue in business to be one
that knows the world. By this means, we have no such things as sots, debauchees, whores, rogues, or
the like, in the beau monde, who may enjoy their vices without incurring disagreeable appellations.
[George Berkeley, Alciphron or the Minute Philosopher, 1732]


