cohort (n.)

early 15c., company of soldiers, from Middle French cohorte (14c.) and directly from Latin cohortem
(nominative cohors) enclosure, meaning extended to infantry company in Roman army (a tenth part of a
legion) through notion of enclosed group, retinue, from com- with (see co-) + root akin to hortus
garden, from PIE *ghr-ti-, from root *gher- (1) to grasp, enclose (see yard (n.1)). Sense of
accomplice is first recorded 1952, American English, from meaning group united in common cause
(1719).


cahoots (n.)

1829, American English, of unknown origin; said to be perhaps from French cahute cabin, hut (12c.),
but U.S. sources credit it to French cohorte (see cohort), a word said to have been in use in the
U.S. South and West with a sense of companions, confederates.


pendragon (n.)

Welsh warlord (mainly known now in Arthurian Uther Pendragon), late 15c., title of a chief leader in
war of ancient Britain or Wales, from pen head (see pen-) + dragon, which figured on the standard of
a cohort.


court (n.)

late 12c., from Old French cort (11c., Modern French cour) king's court, princely residence, from
Latin cortem, accusative of cors (earlier cohors) enclosed yard, and by extension (and perhaps by
association with curia sovereign's assembly), those assembled in the yard; company, cohort, from
com- together (see com-) + stem hort- related to hortus garden, plot of ground (see yard (n.1)).
Sporting sense is from 1510s, originally of tennis. Legal meaning is from late 13c. (early
assemblies for justice were overseen by the sovereign personally).


curtain (n.)

c.1300, from Old French cortine curtain, tapestry, drape, blanket, from Late Latin cortina curtain,
but in classical Latin round vessel, cauldron, from Latin cortem (older cohortem) enclosure,
courtyard (see cohort). The confusion apparently begins in using cortina as a loan-translation for
Greek aulaia (curtain) in the Vulgate (to render Hebrew yeriah in Exodus xxvi:1, etc.) because the
Greek word was connected to aule court, perhaps because the door of a Greek house that led out to
the courtyard was a hung cloth. The figurative sense in curtain call is from 1884. Curtains the end
is 1912, originally from stage plays.


