coincidence (n.)

c.1600, exact correspondence, from French coincidence, from coincider (see coincide). Meaning a
concurrence of events with no apparent connection is from 1680s.


squint (n.)

non-coincidence of the optic axes, 1650s, from squint (adj.). Meaning sidelong glance is from 1660s.


consilience (n.)

1840, concurrence, coincidence, literally a jumping together, formed on model of resilience from
Latin consilient-, from com- together (see com-) + salire to leap (see salient (adj.)).


coolie (n.)

name given by Europeans to hired laborers in India and China, c.1600, from Hindi quli hired servant,
probably from kuli, name of an aboriginal tribe or caste in Gujarat. The name was picked up by the
Portuguese, who used it in southern India (where by coincidence kuli in Tamil meant hire) and in
China.


Murphy

Gaelic Murchadh sea-warrior. The Celtic sea element is also in names Muriel (q.v.), Murdoch (Old
Irish Muireadhach, Old Welsh Mordoc mariner), etc. Murphy bed (1925) is named for U.S. inventor
William Lawrence Murphy (1876-1959). By happy coincidence, Murphy was an illiterate 18c.-19c.
perversion of Morpheus, god of sleep.


ilk (adj.)

Old English ilca same (n. and adj.), from Proto-Germanic *ij-lik, in which the first element is from
the PIE demonstrative particle *i- (see yon) and the second is that in Old English -lic form (see
like). Of similar formation are which and such. Phrase of that ilk implies coincidence of name and
estate, as in Lundie of Lundie; applied usually to families, so by c.1790 it began to be used with
meaning family, then broadening to type, sort.


palanquin (n.)

a covered litter, 1580s, from Portuguese palanquim (early 16c.), from Malay and Javanese palangki
litter, sedan, ultimately from Sanskrit palyanka-s couch, bed, litter, from pari around + ancati it
bends, curves, related to anka-s a bend, hook, angle, and meaning, perhaps, that which bends around
the body. Some have noted the curious coincidence of Spanish palanca, from Latin phalanga pole to
carry a burden.


bad (adj.)

c.1200, inferior in quality; early 13c., wicked, evil, vicious, a mystery word with no apparent
relatives in other languages.* Possibly from Old English derogatory term b&aelig;ddel and its
diminutive b&aelig;dling effeminate man, hermaphrodite, pederast, probably related to b&aelig;dan to
defile. A rare word before 1400, and evil was more common in this sense until c.1700. Meaning
uncomfortable, sorry is 1839, American English colloquial.    Comparable words in the other Indo-
European languages tend to have grown from descriptions of specific qualities, such as ugly,
defective, weak, faithless, impudent, crooked, filthy (such as Greek kakos, probably from the word
for excrement; Russian plochoj, related to Old Church Slavonic plachu wavering, timid; Persian gast,
Old Persian gasta-, related to gand stench; German schlecht, originally level, straight, smooth,
whence simple, ordinary, then bad).    Comparative and superlative forms badder, baddest were common
14c.-18c. and used as recently as Defoe (but not by Shakespeare), but yielded to comparative worse
and superlative worst (which had belonged to evil and ill).    As a noun, late 14c., evil,
wickedness. In U.S. place names, sometimes translating native terms meaning supernaturally
dangerous. Ironic use as a word of approval is said to be at least since 1890s orally, originally in
Black English, emerging in print 1928 in a jazz context. It might have emerged from the ambivalence
of expressions like bad nigger, used as a term of reproach by whites, but among blacks sometimes
representing one who stood up to injustice, but in the U.S. West bad man also had a certain
ambivalence:    These are the men who do most of the killing in frontier communities, yet it is a
noteworthy fact that the men who are killed generally deserve their fate. [Farmer &amp; Henley]
*Farsi has bad in more or less the same sense as the English word, but this is regarded by linguists
as a coincidence. The forms of the words diverge as they are traced back in time (Farsi bad comes
from Middle Persian vat), and such accidental convergences exist across many languages, given the
vast number of words in each and the limited range of sounds humans can make to signify them. Among
other coincidental matches with English are Korean mani many, Chinese pei pay, Nahuatl (Aztecan)
huel well, Maya hol hole.


