coin (v.)

to coin money, mid-14c., from coin (n.). Related: Coined; coining. To coin a phrase is late 16c. A
Middle English word for minter was coin-smiter.


coinage (n.)

late 14c., currency, money, from Old French coignage, from coignier to coin (see coin (n.)). Meaning
act or proces of coining money is from early 15c.; sense deliberate formation of a new word is from
1690s, from a general sense of something invented (c.1600).


coin (n.)

c.1300, a wedge, from Old French coing (12c.) a wedge; stamp; piece of money; corner, angle, from
Latin cuneus a wedge. The die for stamping metal was wedge-shaped, and the English word came to mean
thing stamped, a piece of money by late 14c. (a sense that already had developed in French). Compare
quoin, which split off from this word 16c. Modern French coin is corner, angle, nook. Coins were
first struck in western Asia Minor in 7c. B.C.E.; Greek tradition and Herodotus credit the Lydians
with being first to make and use coins of silver and gold.


picayune (n.)

1804, coin of small value, probably from Louisiana French picaillon coin worth 5 cents, earlier the
French name of an old copper coin of Savoy (1750), from Proven&ccedil;al picaioun small copper coin,
from picaio money, of uncertain origin. Adjectival figurative sense of paltry, mean recorded from
1813.


solidus (n.)

late 14c., plural solidi, used of both English shilling and Roman gold coin, from Late Latin
solidus, an imperial Roman coin (worth about 25 denarii), from nummus solidus, literally solid coin,
properly a coin of thick or solid metal, not of thin plate (see solid (adj.)).


stater (n.)

ancient coin, late 14c., from Greek stater, from histanai to fix, to place in a balance, hence to
weigh; literally to cause to stand (see stet). Once the name of a specific issue of coin, in ancient
Greece it became a general name for the principal or standard coin in any place.


denier (n.)

French coin, early 15c., from Old French dener, a small coin of slight value, roughly equivalent to
the English penny, in use in France from the time of Charlemagne to early modern times, from Latin
denarium, from denarius, name of a Roman coin (source also of Spanish dinero; see denarius).


sequin (n.)

1610s, name of a former Italian and Turkish gold coin, from French sequin (17c.), from Italian
zecchino, name of a Venetian coin, from zecca a mint, from Arabic sikkah a minting die. Meaning
ornamental disc or spangle is first recorded 1882, from resemblance to a gold coin. Related:
Sequined (1890).


groschen (n.)

1610s, small silver coin formerly used in Germany and Austria, from German groschen, altered from
Czech gro&#353;, name of a coin (about one-thirtieth of a thaler), from Medieval Latin (denarius)
grossus, literally a thick coin, from Latin grossus thick (see gross, and compare groat).


numismatic (adj.)

1765, pertaining to historical coins and coinage, from French numismatique (late 16c.), from Latin
numismat-, stem of numisma coin, currency, from Greek nomisma current coin, money, usage, literally
what has been sanctioned by custom or usage, from nomizein have in use, adopt a custom, from nomos
custom, law, usage, from PIE root *nem- to divide, distribute, allot (see nemesis). Related:
Numismatical (1716). Earlier in the same sense was nummary (1650s), from Latin nummarius, from
nummus a coin.


rupee (n.)

Indian coin, 1610s, from Hindi or Urdu rupiyah, from Sanskrit rupyah wrought silver, perhaps
originally something provided with an image, a coin, from rupah shape, likeness, image.


jitney (n.)

bus which carries passengers for a fare, 1915, short for jitney bus (1906), American English, from
gitney, said to be slang for any small coin, especially a nickel, because the buses' fare typically
was a nickel, the coin name perhaps via New Orleans from French jeton coin-sized metal disk, slug,
counter, from Old French jeter to calculate, literally to throw (see jet (v.)).    I'll give a
nickel for a kiss,  Said Cholly to a pretty miss.  Skiddo, she cried, you stingy cuss,  You're
looking for a jitney buss.     [Jitney Jingle, 1915]    The origin and signification of the word was
much discussed when the buses first appeared. Some reports say the slang word for nickel comes from
the bus; most say the reverse, but there does not seem to be much record of jitney in a coin sense
before the buses came along (a writer in The Hub, August 1915, claims to have heard and used it as a
small boy in San Francisco, and reported hearsay that It has been in use there since the days of
'49. In some sources it is said to be a St. Louis word, but most credit it to the U.S. West,
especially California, though others trace it to southern negroes, especially in Memphis [The
Pacific, Feb. 7, 1915].


bogus

1838, counterfeit money, spurious coin, American English, apparently from a slang word applied
(according to some sources first in Ohio in 1827) to a counterfeiter's apparatus.    One bogus or
machine impressing dies on the coin, with a number of dies, engraving tools, bank bill paper,
spurious coin, &amp;c.; &amp;c.; making in all a large wagon load, was taken into possession by the
attorney general of Lower Canada. [Niles' Register, Sept. 7, 1833, quoting from Concord, New
Hampshire, Statesman, Aug. 24]     Some trace this to tantrabobus, also tantrabogus, a late 18c.
colloquial Vermont word for any odd-looking object, in later 19c. use the devil, which might be
connected to tantarabobs, recorded as a Devonshire name for the devil. Others trace it to the same
source as bogey (n.1).


bezant (n.)

gold coin, c.1200, from Old French besant (12c.), from Latin byzantius, short for Byzantius nummus
coin of Byzantium.


sou (n.)

small French coin, 1550s, back-formation from sous, plural of Old French soul, formerly a coin worth
one-twentieth of a livre, from Latin solidus (see solidus).


denarius (n.)

ancient Roman silver coin, 1570s, from Latin denarius, noun use of adjective meaning containing ten,
and short for denarius nummus the coin containing ten (aces), from deni- by tens, from decem ten
(see ten).


ecu (n.)

old French silver coin, 1704, from French &eacute;cu, from Old French escu (12c.) shield, coat of
arms, also the name of a coin, from Latin scutum shield (see hide (n.1)). First issued by Louis IX
(1226-1270); so called because the shield of France was imprinted on them.


guilder (n.)

Dutch coin, late 15c., probably from a mispronunciation of Middle Dutch gulden, literally golden, in
gulden (florijn) or some similar name for a golden coin (see golden).


florin (n.)

c.1300, from Old French florin, from Italian fiorino, from fiore flower, from Latin florem flower
(see flora). The 13c. gold Florentine coin was stamped on the obverse with the image of a lily, the
symbol of the city. As the name of an English gold coin, from late 15c.


plaque (n.)

1848, ornamental plate or tablet, from French plaque metal plate, coin (15c.), perhaps through
Flemish placke small coin, from Middle Dutch placke disk, patch, stain, related to German Placken
spot, patch (compare placard). Meaning deposit on walls of arteries is first attested 1891; that of
bacteria deposits on teeth is 1898.


two bits (n.)

quarter dollar, 1730, in reference to the Mexican real, a large coin that was divided into eight
bits; see bit (n.1). Compare piece of eight (see piece (n.)). Two bits thus would have equaled a
quarter of the coin. Hence two-bit (adj.) cheap, tawdry, first recorded 1929.


mark (n.2)

unit of money or weight, late Old English marc, a unit of weight (chiefly for gold or silver) equal
to about eight ounces, probably from Old Norse m&ouml;rk unit of weight, cognate with German Mark,
probably ultimately a derivative of mark (n.1), perhaps in sense of imprinted weight or coin. Used
from 18c. in reference to various continental coinages, especially. the silver coin of Germany first
issued 1875.


laundromat (n.)

automatic coin-operated public laundry, 1946, originally (1942) a proprietary name by Westinghouse
for a type of automatic washing machine; from laundry + ending probably suggested by automat. Also
used for public clothes-washing places in U.S. were washateria (1935), laundrette (1945). The
Westinghouse machine was popular after the war and was available with coin chutes and timers.


specie (n.)

coin, money in the form of coins, metallic money as a medium of exchange (as opposed to paper money
or bullion), 1670s, from phrase in specie in the real or actual form (1550s), from Latin in specie
in kind (in Medieval Latin, in coin), from ablative of species kind, form, sort (see species).


doubloon (n.)

1620s, from French doublon (16c.) and directly from Spanish doblon a gold coin, augmentative of
doble double (coin so called because it was worth twice as much as the Spanish gold pistole), from
Latin duplus double (see double (adj.)). Also see -oon.


pistole (n.)

former Spanish coin (not called that in Spanish), 1590s, from French pistole, from Italian piastola,
diminutive of piastra plate or leaf of metal (see piaster). Compare earlier pistolet (1550s) foreign
coin, which OED says is from French pistolet short firearm (see pistol) and so called for being
smaller and thinner than other coins.


tester (n.2)

canopy over a four-post bed, mid-14c., from Medieval Latin testerium, from testera head-stall of the
bridle of a horse, extended use and form of Late Latin testa skull, in Vulgar Latin head (see tete).
From Medieval Latin testa as head also come tester in obsolete senses of piece of armor for the head
(late 14c., via Old French testiere) and coin of Henry VIII (1546), the first English coin to bear a
true portrait.


piaster (n.)

also piastre, 1620s, Spanish dollar, piece of eight, also used as the name of a monetary unit and
coin of Turkey (1610s, in Turkish called ghurush, but originally debased Spanish dollars), from
French piastre, from Italian piastra thin metal plate, short for impiastro plaster, from Latin
emplastrum, from Greek emplastron (see plaster). The Italian word was applied to the Spanish silver
peso, later to the Turkish coin based on it. Compare shinplaster.


medal (n.)

1580s, from Middle French m&eacute;daille (15c.), from Italian medaglia a medal, according to OED
from Vulgar Latin *metallea (moneta) metal (coin), from Latin metallum (see metal). The other theory
[Klein, Barnhart, Watkins] is that medaglia originally meant coin worth half a denarius, and is from
Vulgar Latin *medalia, from Late Latin medialia little halves, neuter plural of medialis of the
middle (see medial (adj.)). Originally a trinket or charm; as a reward for merit, proficiency, etc.,
attested from 1751.


cash (n.)

1590s, money box; also money in hand, coin, from Middle French caisse money box (16c.), from
Proven&ccedil;al caissa or Italian cassa, from Latin capsa box (see case (n.2)); originally the
money box, but the secondary sense of the money in it became sole meaning 18c. Cash crop is attested
from 1831; cash flow from 1954; the mechanical cash register from 1878.    Like many financial terms
in English (bankrupt, etc.), ultimately from Italian. Not related to (but influencing the form of)
the colonial British cash Indian monetary system, Chinese coin, etc., which is from Tamil kasu,
Sanskrit karsha, Sinhalese kasi.


thaler (n.)

old German silver coin; see dollar.


quoin (n.)

1530s, a cornerstone, variant spelling of coin (n.); in early use also in other senses of that word,
including a wedge.


gazette (n.)

newspaper, c.1600, from French gazette (16c.), from Italian gazzetta, Venetian dialectal gazeta
newspaper, also the name of a small copper coin, literally little magpie, from gazza; applied to the
monthly newspaper (gazeta de la novit&agrave;) published in Venice by the government, either from
its price or its association with the bird (typical of false chatter), or both.  First used in
English 1665 for the paper issued at Oxford, whither the court had fled from the plague.    The coin
may have been so called for its marking; Gamillscheg writes the word is from French gai (see jay).
The general story of the origin of the word is broadly accepted, but there are many variations in
the details:    We are indebted to the Italians for the idea of newspapers. The title of their
gazettas was, perhaps, derived from gazzera, a magpie or chatterer; or, more probably, from a
farthing coin, peculiar to the city of Venice, called gazetta, which was the connom price of the
newspapers. Another etymologist is for deriving it from the Latin gaza, which would colloquially
lengthen into gazetta, and signify a little treasury of news. The Spanish derive it from the Latin
gaza, and likewise their gazatero, and our gazetteer, for a writer of the gazette and, what is
peculiar to themselves, gazetista, for a lover of the gazette. [Isaac Disraeli, Curiosities of
Literature, 1835]   <hr />  <b>Gazzetta</b> It., Sp. gazeta, Fr. E. gazette; prop. the name of a
Venetian coin (from gaza), so in Old English. Others derive gazette from gazza a magpie, which, it
is alleged, was the emblem figured on the paper; but it does not appear on any of the oldest
Venetian specimens preserved at Florence. The first newspapers appeared at Venice about the middle
of the 16th century during the war with Soliman II, in the form of a written sheet, for the
privilege of reading which a gazzetta (= a crazia) was paid. Hence the name was transferred to the
news-sheet. [T.C. Donkin, Etymological Dictionary of the Romance Languages (based on Diez), 1864]
<hr />   GAZETTE. A paper of public intelligence and news of divers countries, first printed at
Venice, about the year 1620, and so called (some say) because una gazetta, a small piece of Venetian
coin, was given to buy or read it. Others derive the name from gazza, Italian for magpie,  i.e.
chatterer.--Trusler. A gazette was printed in France in 1631; and one in Germany in 1715. [Haydn's
Dictionary of Dates, 1857]


angel (n.)

14c. fusion of Old English engel (with hard -g-) and Old French angele, both from Latin angelus,
from Greek angelos messenger, envoy, one that announces, possibly related to angaros mounted
courier, both from an unknown Oriental word (Watkins compares Sanskrit ajira- swift; Klein suggests
Semitic sources). Used in Scriptural translations for Hebrew mal'akh (yehowah) messenger (of
Jehovah), from base l-'-k to send. An Old English word for it was aerendgast, literally errand-
spirit.    Of persons, loving; lovely, by 1590s. The medieval gold coin (a new issue of the noble,
first struck 1465 by Edward VI) was so called for the image of archangel Michael slaying the dragon,
which was stamped on it. It was the coin given to patients who had been touched for the King's Evil.
Angel food cake is from 1881; angel dust phencyclidine is from 1968.


noble (n.)

man of rank, c.1300, from noble (adj.). The same noun sense also is in Old French and Latin. Late
14c. as the name of an English coin first issued in reign of Edward III.


franc (n.)

French coin, late 14c., from Medieval Latin Francorum Rex King of the Franks, inscribed on gold
coins first made during the reign of Jean le Bon (1350-64). An official monetary unit of France from
1795.


toss (n.)

an act of throwing, 1630s, from toss (v.). Meaning a coin toss is from 1798.


plate (n.)

mid-13c., flat sheet of gold or silver, also flat, round coin, from Old French plate thin piece of
metal (late 12c.), from Medieval Latin plata plate, piece of metal, perhaps via Vulgar Latin
*plattus, formed on model of Greek platys flat, broad (see plaice (n.)). The cognate in Spanish
(plata) and Portuguese (prata) has become the usual word for silver, superseding argento via
shortening of *plata d'argento plate of silver, coin. Meaning table utensils (originally of silver
or gold only) is from Middle English. Meaning shallow dish for food, now usually of china or
earthenware, originally of metal or wood, is from mid-15c. Baseball sense is from 1857. Geological
sense is first attested 1904; plate tectonics first recorded 1969. Plate-glass first recorded 1727.


scudo (n.)

old Italian silver coin, Italian, literally shield (in reference to the device it bore), from Latin
scutum (see hide (n.1)).


simoleon (n.)

slang for a dollar, 1895, American English, of unknown origin. Related sambolio is attested from
1886; perhaps this was altered based on Napoleon, name of a late 19c. French gold coin.


homophile (n.)

1960, from homo- (2) homosexual + -phile. An attempt to coin a word for a homosexual person as part
of a social group, rather than a sexual deviant.


toss-up (n.)

even matter, 1809, from earlier sense of a flipping of a coin to arrive at a decision (c.1700), from
verbal phrase, from toss (v.) + up (adv.).


mint (adj.)

perfect (like a freshly minted coin), 1887 (in mint condition), from mint (n.2).


chink (n.3)

sharp sound (especially of coin), 1580s, probably imitative. As a verb from 1580s. Related: Chinked;
chinking.


Wurlitzer (n.)

type of musical instrument (originally a player piano popular in silent movie theaters, later a type
of jukebox), 1925, named for The Wurlitzer Company, founded near Cincinnati, Ohio, 1856 by Rudolph
Wurlitzer (1831-1914), Saxon immigrant to U.S. An importer at first, he started production of pianos
in 1880; coin-operated pianos in 1896.


piece (n.)

c.1200, fixed amount, measure, portion, from Old French piece piece, bit portion; item; coin (12c.),
from Vulgar Latin *pettia, probably from Gaulish *pettsi (compare Welsh peth thing, Breton pez
piece, a little), perhaps from an Old Celtic base *kwezd-i-, from PIE root *kwezd- a part, piece
(cognates: Russian chast' part). Related: Pieces.    Sense of portable firearm first recorded 1580s;
that of chessman is from 1560s. Meaning person regarded as a sex object is first recorded 1785
(compare piece of ass, human beings colloquially called piece of flesh from 1590s; also compare
Latin scortum bimbo, anyone available for a price, literally skin). Meaning a portion of a distance
is from 1610s; that of literary composition dates from 1530s. Piece of (one's) mind is from 1570s.
Piece of work remarkable person echoes Hamlet. Piece as a coin is attested in English from 1570s,
hence Piece of eight, old name for the Spanish dollar (c.1600) of the value of 8 reals.    PIECE. A
wench. A damned good or bad piece; a girl who is more or less active and skilful in the amorous
congress. Hence the (Cambridge) toast, may we never have a PIECE (peace) that will injure the
constitution. [Dictionary of Buckish Slang, University Wit and Pickpocket Eloquence, London, 1811]


numismatist (n.)

student of coins and coinage, 1799, from French numismatiste, from Latin numismat-, stem of numisma
current coin (see numismatic).


obol (n.)

ancient Greek small coin and weight, 1660s, from Latin obolus, from Greek obolos, identical with
obelos a spit, needle. From the original shape.


shekel (n.)

early 13c., sicle, via Old French and Latin, from Hebrew sheqel, from shaqal he weighed. Chief
silver coin of ancient Hebrews, also a unit of weight. Modern form in English dates from mid-16c. As
slang for money, it dates from 1871.


tizzy (n.)

1922, American English colloquial, of uncertain origin, perhaps related to slang tizzy sixpence
piece (1804), a corruption of tester, a name for the coin (see tester (n.2)).


