tosh (n.)

valuables collected from drains, 1852, London slang, of unknown origin.


Harleian

1744, from Latinized form of surname of Robert Harley, Earl of Oxford (1661-1724) and his son
Edward, in reference to the library of books and MSS they collected and sold in 1753 to the British
Museum.


concentration (n.)

1630s, action of bringing to a center, noun of action from verb concentrate (v.). Meaning a mass so
collected is from 1670s; continuous focus of mental activity is from 1846.


Knesset

Israeli parliament, 1949, from Mishnaic Hebrew keneseth gathering, assembly, from stem of Hebrew
kanas he gathered, assembled, collected.


collectible (adj.)

also collectable, 1650s, that may be collected, from collect + -ible. Meaning sought-after by
collectors of relics, souveniers, etc. is recorded from 1888.


ligni-

word-forming element meaning wood, from Latin lignum wood, firewood, from PIE *leg-no-, literally
that which is collected, from root *leg- to collect (see lecture (n.)).


hadith (n.)

collected Islamic tradition, 1817, from Arabic, literally tradition, related to hadith new, young,
hadatha it happened, occurred, and Hebrew hadash new.


Ossianic (adj.)

1808, in reference to Oisin, name of a legendary Gaelic bard, literally little fawn; James
Macpherson claimed to have collected and translated his works (1760-1763) under the name Ossian, and
the poetic prose sparked a Celtic revival and fascination with the glamor of the lost world of the
bards. The work turned out to be Macpherson's forgery, and the style later was regarded as
bombastic, but the resulting swerve in European literature was real.


postage (n.)

1580s, sending of mail by post; 1650s as cost of sending something by mail, from post (n.3) + -age.
Postage stamp is attested from 1840; they were recorded as being collected in albums by 1862.


congeries (n.)

1610s, from Latin congeries heap, pile, collected mass, from congerere to carry together (see
congest). False singular congery is from 1866.    Man should have some sense of responsibility to
the human congeries. As a matter of observation, very few men have any such sense. No social order
can exist very long unless a few, at least a few, men have such a sense. [Ezra Pound, ABC of
Economics, 1933]


re-collect (v.)

to collect or gather again, c.1600, from re- + collect (v.). Earlier simply to collect (1510s).
Related: Re-collected; re-collecting.


azure (n.)

early 14c., from Old French azur, asur, a color name, from a false separation of Arabic
(al)-lazaward lapis lazuli, as though the -l- were the French article l'. The Arabic name is from
Persian lajward, from Lajward, a place in Turkestan, mentioned by Marco Polo, where the stone was
collected.


collect (v.)

early 15c. (transitive), from Old French collecter to collect (late 14c.), from Latin collectus,
past participle of colligere gather together, from com- together (see com-) + legere to gather (see
lecture (n.)). The intransitive sense is attested from 1794. Related: Collected; collecting. As an
adjective meaning paid by the recipient it is attested from 1893, originally with reference to
telegrams.


slush (n.)

1640s, melting snow, snow and water, perhaps from a Scandinavian source (compare Norwegian and
Swedish slask slushy ground; obsolete Danish slus sleet), all probably imitative of the sound of
sloshing. Slush fund is first attested 1839, from an earlier sense of slush refuse fat (1756); the
money from the sale of a ship's slush was distributed among the officers, which was the original
sense of the phrase. The extended meaning money collected for bribes and to buy influence is first
recorded 1874, no doubt with suggestions of greasing palms.


commentator (n.)

late 14c., writer of commentaries, agent noun in Latin form from comment or commentary (Latin
commentator meant inventor, author). Middle English also had a noun commentate, attested from early
15c. Meaning writer of notes or expository comments is from 1640s; sense of one who gives commentary
(originally in sports) is from 1928.    Well, Jem, what is a commentator?[]--Why, was Jem's reply, I
suppose it must be the commonest of all taturs. [Smart Sayings of Bright Children, collected by
Howard Paul, 1886]


honorable (adj.)

early 14c. (mid-13c. as a surname), from Old French honorable, from Latin honorabilis that procures
honor, estimable, honorable, from honorare to honor (see honor (n.)). Related: Honorably.    Now,
George, you must divide the cake honorably with your brother Charlie.--George: What is 'honorably,'
mother? It means that you must give him the largest piece.--George: Then, mother, I should rather
Charlie would cut it. [Smart Sayings of Bright Children, collected by Howard Paul, 1886]


farm (n.)

c.1300, fixed payment (usually in exchange for taxes collected, etc.), fixed rent, from Old French
ferme rent, lease, from Medieval Latin firma fixed payment, from Latin firmare to fix, settle,
confirm, strengthen, from firmus firm (see firm (adj.)).    Sense of tract of leased land is first
recorded early 14c.; that of cultivated land (leased or not) is 1520s. Phrase buy the farm die in
battle, is at least from World War II, perhaps a cynical reference to the draftee's dream of getting
out of the war and going home, in many cases to a peaceful farmstead. But fetch the farm is prisoner
slang from at least 1879 for get sent to the infirmary, with reference to the better diet and
lighter duties there.


statistics (n.)

1770, science dealing with data about the condition of a state or community [Barnhart], from German
Statistik, popularized and perhaps coined by German political scientist Gottfried Aschenwall
(1719-1772) in his Vorbereitung zur Staatswissenschaft (1748), from Modern Latin statisticum
(collegium) (lecture course on) state affairs, from Italian statista one skilled in statecraft, from
Latin status (see state (n.2)). OED points out that the context shows that [Aschenwall] did not
regard the term as novel, but current use of it seems to trace to him. Sir John Sinclair is credited
with introducing it in English use. Meaning numerical data collected and classified is from 1829;
hence the study of any subject by means of extensive enumeration. Abbreviated form stats first
recorded 1961.


gate (n.)

opening, entrance, Old English geat (plural geatu) gate, door, opening, passage, hinged framework
barrier, from Proto-Germanic *gatan (cognates: Old Norse gat opening, passage, Old Saxon gat eye of
a needle, hole, Old Frisian gat hole, opening, Dutch gat gap, hole, breach, German Gasse street), of
unknown origin. Meaning money collected from selling tickets dates from 1896 (short for gate money,
1820). Gate-crasher is from 1927. Finnish katu, Lettish gatua street are Germanic loan-words.


cum

verb and noun, by 1973, apparently a variant of the sexual sense of come that originated in
pornographic writing, perhaps first in the noun sense. This experience sexual orgasm slang meaning
of come (perhaps originally come off) is attested from 1650, in Walking In A Meadowe Greene, in a
folio of loose songs collected by Bishop Percy.    They lay soe close together, they made me much to
wonder;  I knew not which was wether, until I saw her under.  Then off he came, and blusht for shame
soe soon that he had endit;  Yet still she lies, and to him cryes, one more and none can mend it.
As a noun meaning semen or other product of orgasm it is on record from the 1920s. The sexual cum
seems to have no connection with Latin cum, the preposition meaning with, together with, which is
occasionally used in English in local names of combined parishes or benifices (such as Chorlton-cum-
Hardy), in popular Latin phrases (such as cum laude), or as a combining word to indicate a dual
nature or function (such as slumber party-cum-bloodbath).


purse (n.)

Old English pursa little bag made of leather, especially for carrying money, from Medieval Latin
bursa leather purse (source also of Old French borse, 12c., Modern French bourse; see bourse), from
Late Latin bursa, variant of byrsa hide, from Greek byrsa hide, leather. Change of b- to p- perhaps
by influence of Old English pusa, Old Norse posi bag.    Meaning woman's handbag is attested from
1951. Meaning sum of money collected as a prize in a race, etc., is from 1640s. Purse-strings,
figurative for control of money, is from early 15c. Purse-snatcher first attested 1902 (earlier
purse-picker, 1540s). The notion of drawn together by a thong also is behind purse-net (c.1400).


trivia (n.)

trivialities, bits of information of little consequence, by 1932, from the title of a popular book
by U.S.-born British aphorist Logan Pearsall Smith (1865-1946) first published in 1902 but
popularized in 1918 (with More Trivia following in 1921 and a collected edition including both in
1933), containing short essays often tied to observation of small things and commonplace moments.
Trivia is Latin, plural of trivium place where three roads meet; in transferred use, an open place,
a public place. The adjectival form of this, trivialis, meant public, hence common, commonplace (see
trivial). The Romans also had trivius dea, the goddess of three ways, another name for Hecate,
perhaps originally in her triple aspect (Selene/Diana/Proserpine), but also as the especial divinity
of crossroads (Virgil has Nocturnisque hecate triviis ululata per urbes). John Gay took this
arbitrarily as the name of a goddess of streets and roads for his mock Georgic Trivia: Or, the Art
of Walking the Streets of London (1716); Smith writes in his autobiography that he got the title
from Gay.    I KNOW too much; I have stuffed too many of the facts of History and Science into my
intellectuals. My eyes have grown dim over books; believing in geological periods, cave dwellers,
Chinese Dynasties, and the fixed stars has prematurely aged me. [Trivia, 1918 edition]    Then noted
c.1965 as an informal fad game among college students wherein one asked questions about useless bits
of information from popular culture (What was Donald Duck's address?) and others vied to answer
first.    Nobody really wins in this game which concentrates on sports, comics and television.
Everyone knows that Amos's wife on the Amos 'n' Andy Show is Ruby, but who knows that she is from
Marietta, Georgia? Trivia players do. They also know the fourth man in the infield of Tinker-to-
Evers-to-Chance, the Canadian who shot down Baron Von Richtofen, and can name ten Hardy Boy books.
[Princeton Alumni Weekly, Nov. 9, 1965]    The board game Trivial Pursuit was released 1982 and was
a craze in U.S. for several years thereafter.


