collateral (n.)

16c., colleague, associate, from collateral (adj.). Meaning thing given as security is from 1832,
American English, from phrase collateral security (1720).


collateral (adj.)

late 14c., accompanying, also descended from the same stock, from Old French collateral (13c.), from
Medieval Latin collateralis accompanying, literally side by side, from Latin com- together (see
com-) + lateralis of the side, from latus a side (see oblate (n.)). Literal sense of parallel, along
the side of attested in English from mid-15c.  Related: Collaterally.


collateral damage (n.)

by 1873 in legal cases; in modern use, generally a euphemism for the coincidental killing of
civilians, U.S. coinage, c.1968, at first generally with reference to nuclear weapons.


podgy (adj.)

1846, later collateral form of pudgy (q.v.).


Polly

fem. proper name, a rhyming collateral form of Molly, pet form of Mary.


Jethro

masc. proper name, biblical father-in-law of Moses, from Hebrew Yithro, collateral form of Yether,
literally abundance, from base y-t-r to be left over, to remain.


Ignatius

masc. proper name, from Latin Ignatius, collateral form of Egnatius.


Ptolemy

ancient masc. proper name, from Greek Ptolemaios, literally warlike, from ptolemos, collateral form
of polemos war. Also see Ptolemaic.


lictor (n.)

late 14c., from Latin lictor, literally binder, from past participle stem of *ligere to bind,
collect, collateral form of ligare (see ligament).


feal (adj.)

faithful, 1560s, from Old French feal, collateral form of feeil, from Latin fidelis loyal (see
fidelity).


tapetum (n.)

of the eye, 1713, from Medieval Latin tapetum, from Latin tapete, collateral form of tapes carpet,
heavy cloth with inwrought figures (see tapestry).


liniment (n.)

early 15c., from Late Latin linimentum a soft ointment, from Latin linire, collateral form of
earlier linere to daub, smear, from PIE root *(s)lei- slime, slimy, sticky (see slime (n.)).


Marian

fem. proper name, collateral form of Marion, a diminutive of French Marie (see Mary), but often
taken for a compound of Mary and Anne.


grant (n.)

c.1200, allowance, consent, permission, from Anglo-French graunter, from Old French granter,
collateral variant of creanter to promise, guarantee, confirm, authorize, from Latin credentem
(nominative credens), present participle of credere to believe, to trust (see credo).


interpellation (n.)

late 15c., an appeal, from Latin interpellationem, noun of action from past participle stem of
interpellare to interrupt by speaking, from inter between (see inter-) + pellare, collateral form of
pellere to drive (see pulse (n.1)).


andron (n.)

men's apartment in a house, from Greek andron, collateral form of andronitis men's apartment, from
aner (genitive andros) man (see anthropo-).


vex (v.)

early 15c., from Old French vexer vex, harass (14c.), from Latin vexare to shake, jolt, toss
violently; figuratively attack, harass, trouble, annoy, from vexus, collateral form of vectus, past
participle of vehere to draw, carry (see vehicle). Related: Vexed; vexing.


monstrosity (n.)

1550s, abnormality of growth, from Late Latin monstrositas strangeness, from Latin monstrosus, a
collateral form of monstruosus (source of French monstruosit&eacute;); see monster. Earlier form was
monstruosity (c.1400). Sense of quality of being monstrous is first recorded 1650s. Meaning a
monster is attested from 1640s.


column (n.)

mid-15c., vertical division of a page, also a pillar, post, from Old French colombe (12c., Modern
French colonne column, pillar), from Latin columna pillar, collateral form of columen top, summit,
from PIE root *kel- (4) to project, be prominent (see hill). Sense of matter written for a newspaper
dates from 1785.


elegant (adj.)

late 15c., from Middle French &eacute;l&eacute;gant (15c.), from Latin elegantem (nominative
elegans) choice, fine, tasteful, collateral form of present participle of eligere select with care,
choose. Elegans was originally a term of reproach, dainty, fastidious; the notion of tastefully
refined emerged in classical Latin. Related: Elegantly.


persiflage (n.)

1757, from French persiflage, from persifler to banter (18c.), from Latin per- through (see per) +
French siffler to whistle, hiss, from collateral form of Latin sibilare to hiss, possibly of
imitative origin. Said to have been introduced in English by Chesterfield.


mange (n.)

skin disease of animals, early 15c., from Old French manjue the itch, also hunger, appetite;
itching, longing, literally the eating, verbal noun from a collateral form of Old French mangier to
eat (Modern French manger) to eat, from Late Latin manducare to chew, eat, from manducus glutton,
from Latin mandere to chew (see mandible).


those (pron.)

c.1300, Midlands and southern variant of Old English &thorn;as, nominative and accusative plural of
&thorn;es, &thorn;eos this (see this). A collateral form of these, now used as the plural of that.


se-

word-forming element, from Latin se-, collateral form of sed- without, apart, aside, on one's own,
related to sed, Latin reflexive pronoun (accusative and ablative), from PIE *sed-, extended form of
root *s(w)e-, pronoun of the third person and reflexive (source also of German sich; see idiom).


therefore (adv.)

Old English &thorn;&aelig;rfore; from there + fore, Old English and Middle English collateral form
of for. Since c.1800, therefor has been used in sense of for that, by reason of that; and therefore
in sense of in consequence of that. Similar formation in Dutch daarfoor, German daf&#252;r, Danish
derfor.


impostor (n.)

1580s, from Middle French imposteur (16c.), from Late Latin impostor, agent noun from impostus,
collateral form of impositus, past participle of imponere place upon, impose upon, deceive, from
assimilated form of in- into, in, on, upon (see in- (2)) + ponere to put place (see position).


Zenobia

fem. proper name, from Greek Zenobia, literally the force of Zeus, from Zen, collateral form of
Zeus, + bia strength, force, cognate with Sanskrit jya force, power (see Jain).


Gaia

Earth as a goddess, from Greek Gaia, spouse of Uranus, mother of the Titans, personification of gaia
earth, as opposed to heaven, land, as opposed to sea, a land, country, soil, a collateral form of ge
(Dorian ga) earth, of unknown origin, perhaps pre-Indo-European. The Roman equivalent goddess of the
earth was Tellus (see tellurian), sometimes used in English poetically or rhetorically for Earth
personified or the Earth as a planet.


clod (n.)

lump of earth or clay, Old English clod- (in clodhamer the fieldfare, a kind of thrush, literally
field-goer), from Proto-Germanic *kludda-, from PIE *gleu- (see clay).    Synonymous with collateral
clot until meaning differentiated 18c. Meaning person (mere lump of earth) is from 1590s; that of
blockhead is from c.1600 (compare clodpate, clodpoll, etc.). It also was a verb in Middle English,
meaning both to coagulate, form into clods and to break up clods after plowing.


chalice (n.)

early 14c., from Anglo-French chalice, from Old French chalice, collateral form of calice (Modern
French calice), from Latin calicem (nominative calix) cup, cognate with Greek kylix cup, drinking
cup, cup of a flower, from PIE root *kal- (1) cup. Ousted Old English cognate c&aelig;lic, an
ecclesiastical borrowing of the Latin word, and earlier Middle English caliz, from Old North French.


pike (n.4)

pick used in digging, Middle English pik, pyk, collateral (long-vowel) form of pic  (source of pick
(n.1)), from Old English piic pointed object, pickaxe, perhaps from a Celtic source (compare Gaelic
pic pickaxe, Irish pice pike, pitchfork). Extended early 13c. to pointed tip of anything. Pike,
pick, and pitch formerly were used indifferently in English. Pike position in diving, gymnastics,
etc., attested from 1928, perhaps on the notion of tapering to a point.


parchment (n.)

c.1300, parchemin (c.1200 as a surname), from Old French parchemin (11c., Old North French
parcamin), from Late Latin pergamena parchment, noun use of adjective (as in pergamena charta,
Pliny), from Late Greek pergamenon of Pergamon, from Pergamon Pergamum (modern Bergama), city in
Mysia in Asia Minor where parchment supposedly first was adopted as a substitute for papyrus, 2c.
B.C.E. Possibly influenced in Vulgar Latin by Latin parthica (pellis) Parthian (leather). Altered in
Middle English by confusion with nouns in -ment and by influence of Medieval Latin collateral form
pergamentum.


borrow (v.)

Old English borgian to lend, be surety for, from Proto-Germanic *borg pledge (cognates: Old English
borg pledge, security, bail, debt, Old Norse borga to become bail for, guarantee, Middle Dutch
borghen to protect, guarantee, Old High German boragen to beware of, German borgen to borrow; to
lend), from PIE root *bhergh- (1) to hide, protect (see bury). Sense shifted in Old English to
borrow, apparently on the notion of collateral deposited as security for something borrowed.
Related: Borrowed; borrowing.


shave (v.)

Old English sceafan (strong verb, past tense scof, past participle scafen), to scrape, shave,
polish, from Proto-Germanic *skaban (cognates: Old Norse skafa, Middle Dutch scaven, German schaben,
Gothic skaban scratch, shave, scrape), from PIE *skabh-, collateral form of root *(s)kep- to cut, to
scrape, to hack (see scabies). Related: Shaved; shaving. Original strong verb status is preserved in
past tense form shaven. Specifically in reference to cutting the hair close from mid-13c. Figurative
sense of to strip (someone) of money or possessions is attested from late 14c.


sambo (n.2)

stereotypical name for male black person (now only derogatory), 1818, American English, probably a
different word from sambo (n.1); like many such words (Cuffy, Rastus, etc.) a common personal name
among U.S. blacks in the slavery days (first attested 1704 in Boston), probably from an African
source, such as Foulah sambo uncle, or a similar Hausa word meaning second son.    It could be used
without conscious racism or contempt until circa World War II. When the word fell from polite usage,
collateral casualties included the enormously popular children's book The Story of Little Black
Sambo (by Helen Bannerman), which is about an East Indian child, and the Sambo's Restaurant chain, a
U.S. pancake-specialty joint originally opened in Santa Barbara, Calif., in 1957 (the name
supposedly from a merging of the names of the founders, Sam Battistone and Newell Bo Bohnett, but
the chain's decor and advertising leaned heavily on the book), which once counted 1,200 units coast-
to-coast. Civil rights agitation against it began in 1970s and the chain collapsed, though the
original restaurant still is open. Many of the defunct restaurants were taken over by rival Denny's.


frog (n.1)

Old English frogga, a diminutive of frox, forsc, frosc frog, from Proto-Germanic *fruska-z
(cognates: Old Norse froskr, Middle Dutch vorsc, German Frosch frog), probably literally hopper,
from PIE root *preu- to hop (cognates: Sanskrit provate hops, Russian prygat to hop, jump).    The
Latin word (rana) is imitative of croaking. Collateral Middle English forms frude, froud are from
Old Norse frau&eth;r frog, and frosk frog survived in English dialects into the 19c.    I always eat
fricasseed frogs regretfully; they remind one so much of miniature human thighs, and make one feel
cannibalistic and horrid .... [H. Ellen Brown, A Girl's Wanderings in Hungary, 1896]     As a
derogatory term for Frenchman, 1778 (short for frog-eater), but before that (1650s) it meant Dutch
(from frog-land marshy land). To have a frog in the throat be hoarse is from 1892, from the croaking
sound.


slight (adj.)

early 14c., flat, smooth; hairless, probably from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse slettr
smooth, sleek, from Proto-Germanic *slikhtaz (cognates: Old Saxon slicht; Low German slicht smooth,
plain common; Old English -sliht level, attested in eor&eth;slihtes level with the ground; Old
Frisian sliucht smooth, slight, Middle Dutch sleht even, plain, Old High German sleht, Gothic
slaihts smooth), probably from a collateral form of PIE *sleig- to smooth, glide, be muddy, from
root *(s)lei- slimy (see slime (n.)).    Sense evolution probably is from smooth (c.1300), to slim,
slender; of light texture, hence not good or strong; insubstantial, trifling, inferior,
insignificant (early 14c.). Meaning small in amount is from 1520s. Sense of German cognate schlecht
developed from smooth, plain, simple to bad, mean, base, and as it did it was replaced in the
original senses by schlicht, a back-formation from schlichten to smooth, to plane, a derivative of
schlecht in the old sense [Klein].


bird (n.1)

Old English bird, rare collateral form of bridd, originally young bird, nestling (the usual Old
English for bird being fugol), of uncertain origin with no cognates in any other Germanic language.
The suggestion that it is related by umlaut to brood and breed is rejected by OED as quite
inadmissible. Metathesis of -r- and -i- was complete 15c.    Middle English, in which bird referred
to various young animals and even human beings, may have preserved the original meaning of this
word. Despite its early attestation, bridd is not necessarily the oldest form of bird. It is usually
assumed that -ir- from -ri- arose by metathesis, but here, too, the Middle English form may go back
to an ancient period. [Liberman]    Figurative sense of secret source of information is from 1540s.
Bird dog (n.) attested from 1832, a gun dog used in hunting game birds; hence the verb (1941)
meaning to follow closely. Bird-watching attested from 1897. Bird's-eye view is from 1762. For the
birds recorded from 1944, supposedly in allusion to birds eating from droppings of horses and
cattle.A byrde yn honde ys better than three yn the wode. [c.1530]


