comely (adj.)

beautiful, handsome, c.1400, probably from Old English cymlic lovely, splendid, finely made, from
cyme exquisite, glorious, delicate, from West Germanic *kumi- delicate, feeble (cognates: Old High
German chumo with difficulty, chumig weak, delicate; German kaum hardly, scarcely). Or perhaps the
modern word is from Middle English bicumelic (c.1200) suitable, exquisite, literally becomely
(compare becoming).


Kenneth

masc. proper name, Scottish, from Gaelic Caioneach, literally handsome, comely.


uncomely (adj.)

c.1200, improper, unseemly, indecent, from un- (1) not + comely. Related: Uncomeliness.


goodly

Old English godlic goodly, excellent; comely fair; see good (adj.) + -ly (1).


centerfold (n.)

also center-fold, fold-out center spread of a magazine or newspaper, 1950, from center (n.) + fold
(n.2). Playboy debuted December 1953, and the word came to be used especially for illustrations of
comely women, hence woman who poses as a centerfold model (by 1965).


Phyllis

fem. proper name, generic proper name for a comely rustic maiden in pastoral poetry (1630s), from
Latin Phyllis, a girl's name in Virgil, Horace, etc., from Greek Phyllis, female name, literally
foliage of a tree, from phyllon leaf, from PIE *bholyo- leaf, from root *bhel- (3) to thrive, bloom,
possibly identical with *bhel- (2) to blow, inflate, swell (see bole). In English, often spelled
Phillis, probably from influence of phil- loving. Her sweetheart usually was Philander.


buxom (adj.)

late 12c., buhsum humble, obedient, from Proto-Germanic *buh- stem of Old English bugen to bow  (see
bow (v.)) + -som, for a total meaning capable of being bent. Meaning progressed from compliant,
obliging, through lively, jolly, healthily plump, vigorous, to (in women, and perhaps influenced by
lusty) plump, comely (1580s). In Johnson [1755] the primary meaning still is obedient, obsequious.
Used often of breasts, and by 1950s it had begun to be used more narrowly for bosomy and could be
paired with slim (adj.). Dutch buigzaam, German biegsam flexible, pliable hew closer to the original
sense of the English cognate.


