commonplace (n.)

1540s, a statement generally accepted, literal translation of Latin locus communis, from Greek
koinos topos general topic. See common (adj.) + place (n.). The adjectival sense of having nothing
original dates from c.1600.


banal (adj.)

trite, commonplace, 1840, from French banal, belonging to a manor, common, hackneyed, commonplace,
from Old French banel communal (13c.), from ban decree; legal control; announcement; authorization;
payment for use of a communal oven, mill, etc. (see ban (v.)). The modern sense evolved from the
word's use in designating things like ovens or mills that belonged to feudal serfs, or else
compulsory military service; in either case it was generalized in French through open to everyone to
commonplace, ordinary, to trite, petty.


trivial (adj.)

ordinary (1580s); insignificant, trifling (1590s), from Latin trivialis common, commonplace, vulgar,
literally of or belonging to the crossroads, from trivium place where three roads meet, in
transferred use, an open place, a public place, from tri- three (see three) + via road (see via).
The sense connection is public, hence common, commonplace.    The earliest use of the word in
English was early 15c., a separate borrowing in the academic sense of the trivium (the first three
liberal arts -- grammar, rhetoric, and logic); from Medieval Latin use of trivialis in the sense of
the first three liberal arts, from trivium, neuter of the Latin adjective trivius of three roads, of
the crossroads. Related: Trivially. For sense evolution to pertaining to useless information, see
trivia.


ornery (adj.)

1816, American English dialectal contraction of ordinary (adj.). Commonplace, hence of poor quality,
coarse, ugly. By c.1860 the sense had evolved to mean, cantankerous. Related: Orneriness.


stock (adj.)

in reference to conversation, literature, recurring, commonplace (as in stock phrase), 1738,
figurative use from sense kept in store for constant use (1620s), from stock (n.2).


trite (adj.)

used till so common as to have lost its novelty and interest, 1540s, from Latin tritus worn, oft-
trodden, of language much-used, familiar, commonplace, past participle adjective from terere to rub,
wear down (see throw (v.)). Related: Tritely; triteness.


banality (n.)

1861, triteness, from French banalit&eacute; banality, commonplace, from banal (see banal).


hack (v.2)

illegally enter a computer system, by 1984; apparently a back-formation from hacker. Related:
Hacked; hacking. Earlier verb senses were to make commonplace (1745), make common by everyday use
(1590s), use (a horse) for ordinary riding (1560s), all from hack (n.2).


obvious (adj.)

1580s, frequently met with, from Latin obvius that is in the way, presenting itself readily, open,
exposed, commonplace, from obviam (adv.) in the way, from ob against (see ob-) + viam, accusative of
via way (see via). Meaning plain to see, evident is first recorded 1630s. Related: Obviously;
obviousness.


platitude (n.)

1812, dullness, from French platitude flatness, vapidness (late 17c.), from Old French plat flat
(see plateau (n.)); formed on analogy of latitude, etc. Meaning a flat, dull, or commonplace remark
is recorded from 1815. Related: Platitudinous. Hence platitudinarian (n.), 1855; platitudinize
(1867).


quotidian (adj.)

mid-14c., everyday, daily, from Old French cotidian (Modern French quotidien), from Latin
quotidianus daily, from Latin quotus how many? which in order or number? (see quote (v.)) + dies day
(see diurnal). Meaning ordinary, commonplace, trivial is from mid-15c.


muslin (n.)

c.1600, delicately woven cotton fabric, from French mousseline (17c.), from Italian mussolina, from
Mussolo, Italian name of Mosul, city in northern Mesopotamia (modern Iraq) where muslin was made.
Like many fabric names, it has changed meaning over the years, in this case from luxurious to
commonplace. In 13c. French, mosulin meant cloth of silk and gold. The meaning everyday cotton
fabric for shirts, bedding, etc. is first attested 1872 in American English.


trivia (n.)

trivialities, bits of information of little consequence, by 1932, from the title of a popular book
by U.S.-born British aphorist Logan Pearsall Smith (1865-1946) first published in 1902 but
popularized in 1918 (with More Trivia following in 1921 and a collected edition including both in
1933), containing short essays often tied to observation of small things and commonplace moments.
Trivia is Latin, plural of trivium place where three roads meet; in transferred use, an open place,
a public place. The adjectival form of this, trivialis, meant public, hence common, commonplace (see
trivial). The Romans also had trivius dea, the goddess of three ways, another name for Hecate,
perhaps originally in her triple aspect (Selene/Diana/Proserpine), but also as the especial divinity
of crossroads (Virgil has Nocturnisque hecate triviis ululata per urbes). John Gay took this
arbitrarily as the name of a goddess of streets and roads for his mock Georgic Trivia: Or, the Art
of Walking the Streets of London (1716); Smith writes in his autobiography that he got the title
from Gay.    I KNOW too much; I have stuffed too many of the facts of History and Science into my
intellectuals. My eyes have grown dim over books; believing in geological periods, cave dwellers,
Chinese Dynasties, and the fixed stars has prematurely aged me. [Trivia, 1918 edition]    Then noted
c.1965 as an informal fad game among college students wherein one asked questions about useless bits
of information from popular culture (What was Donald Duck's address?) and others vied to answer
first.    Nobody really wins in this game which concentrates on sports, comics and television.
Everyone knows that Amos's wife on the Amos 'n' Andy Show is Ruby, but who knows that she is from
Marietta, Georgia? Trivia players do. They also know the fourth man in the infield of Tinker-to-
Evers-to-Chance, the Canadian who shot down Baron Von Richtofen, and can name ten Hardy Boy books.
[Princeton Alumni Weekly, Nov. 9, 1965]    The board game Trivial Pursuit was released 1982 and was
a craze in U.S. for several years thereafter.


wist (v.)

to know (archaic), c.1500, from Old English past tense of witan to know (cognates: German wusste,
past tense of wissen to know); see wit. Had-I-wiste was used c.1400-1550 in sense regret for
something done rashly or heedlessly; see wist. Proverbial in expression Had-I-wiste cometh ever too
late.    Haddywyst comyth euer to late Whan lewyd woordis beth owte y-spronge. [Commonplace book in
Trinity College, Cambridge, c.1500]


uranian (adj.)

homosexual, 1893, from the reference to Aphrodite in Plato's Symposium; Urania Heavenly (Greek
Ourania; see Uranus) being an epithet of Aphrodite as born of Uranus and also as distinguished from
the vulgar Venus of commonplace lust.    But the son of the heavenly Aphrodite is sprung from a
mother in whose birth the female has no part, but she is from the male only; this is that love which
is of youths only, and the goddess being older has nothing of wantonness. Those who are inspired by
this love turn to the male, and delight in him who is the more valiant and intelligent nature; any
one may recognize the pure enthusiasts in the very character of their attachments. [B. Jowett,
transl., 1874]    Also as a noun, a homosexual person (1908). Related uranism homosexuality (1893).


modern (adj.)

c.1500, now existing; 1580s, of or pertaining to present or recent times; from Middle French moderne
(15c.) and directly from Late Latin modernus modern (Priscian, Cassiodorus), from Latin modo just
now, in a (certain) manner, from modo (adv.) to the measure, ablative of modus manner, measure (see
mode (n.1)). Extended form modern-day attested from 1909.    In Shakespeare, often with a sense of
every-day, ordinary, commonplace. Slang abbreviation mod first attested 1960. Modern art is from
1807 (by contrast to ancient); modern dance first attested 1912; first record of modern jazz is from
1954. Modern conveniences first recorded 1926.


prose (n.)

c.1300, story, narration, from Old French prose (13c.), from Latin prosa oratio straightforward or
direct speech (without the ornaments of verse), from prosa, fem. of prosus, earlier prorsus
straightforward, direct, from Old Latin provorsus (moving) straight ahead, from pro- forward (see
pro-) + vorsus turned, past participle of vertere to turn (see verse).    Good prose, to say nothing
of the original thoughts it conveys, may be infinitely varied in modulation. It is only an extension
of metres, an amplification of harmonies, of which even the best and most varied poetry admits but
few. [Walter Savage Landor, Imaginary Conversations]    Meaning prose writing; non-poetry is from
mid-14c. The sense of dull or commonplace expression is from 1680s, out of earlier sense plain
expression (1560s). Those who lament the want of an English agent noun to correspond to poet might
try prosaist (1776), proser (1620s), or Frenchified prosateur (1880), though the first two in their
day also acquired in English the secondary sense dull writer.


schmuck (n.)

also shmuck, contemptible person, 1892, from East Yiddish shmok, literally penis, probably from Old
Polish smok grass snake, dragon, and likely not the same word as German Schmuck jewelry, adornments,
which is related to Low German smuck supple, tidy, trim, elegant, and to Old Norse smjuga slip, step
through (see smock).    In Jewish homes, the word was regarded as so vulgar as to be taboo [Leo
Rosten, The Joys of Yiddish, 1968] and Lenny Bruce wrote that saying it on stage got him arrested on
the West Coast by a Yiddish undercover agent who had been placed in the club several nights running
to determine if my use of Yiddish terms was a cover for profanity. Euphemized as schmoe, which was
the source of Al Capp's cartoon strip creature the shmoo.    [A]dditional associative effects from
German schmuck 'jewels, decoration' cannot be excluded (cross-linguistically commonplace slang: cf.
Eng. 'family jewels') [Mark R.V. Southern, Contagious Couplings: Transmission of Expressives in
Yiddish Echo Phrases, 2005]. But the English phrase refers to the testicles and is a play on words,
the family element being the essential ones. Words for decoration seem not to be among the
productive sources of European penis slang terms.


boy (n.)

mid-13c., boie servant, commoner, knave, boy, of unknown origin. Possibly from Old French embuie one
fettered, from Vulgar Latin *imboiare, from Latin boia leg iron, yoke, leather collar, from Greek
boeiai dorai ox hides. (Words for boy double as servant, attendant across the Indo-European map --
compare Italian ragazzo, French gar&ccedil;on, Greek pais, Middle English knave, Old Church Slavonic
otroku -- and often it is difficult to say which meaning came first.)    But it also appears to be
identical with East Frisian boi young gentleman, and perhaps with Dutch boef knave, from Middle
Dutch boeve, perhaps from Middle Low German buobe. This suggests a gradational relationship to babe.
For a different conjecture:    In Old English, only the proper name Boia has been recorded. ME boi
meant 'churl, servant' and (rarely) 'devil.' In texts, the meaning 'male child' does not antedate
1400. ModE boy looks like a semantic blend of an onomatopoeic word for an evil spirit (*boi) and a
baby word for 'brother' (*bo). [Liberman]   <hr />   A noticable number of the modern words for
'boy', 'girl', and 'child' were originally colloquial nicknames, derogatory or whimsical, in part
endearing, and finally commonplace. These, as is natural, are of the most diverse, and in part
obscure, origin. [Buck]    Used slightingly of young men in Middle English; meaning male negro slave
or Asian personal servant of any age attested from c.1600. Exclamation oh, boy attested from 1892.


