communal (adj.)

1811 in reference to communes; 1843 in reference to communities, from French communal (Old French
comunal, 12c.), from Late Latin communalis, from communa (see commune (n.)).


communalism (n.)

1871 (in reference to Paris), from communal + -ism.


banal (adj.)

trite, commonplace, 1840, from French banal, belonging to a manor, common, hackneyed, commonplace,
from Old French banel communal (13c.), from ban decree; legal control; announcement; authorization;
payment for use of a communal oven, mill, etc. (see ban (v.)). The modern sense evolved from the
word's use in designating things like ovens or mills that belonged to feudal serfs, or else
compulsory military service; in either case it was generalized in French through open to everyone to
commonplace, ordinary, to trite, petty.


naturist (n.)

participant in the movement for communal nudity, 1929, from nature + -ist.


cenobite (n.)

also coenobite, member of a communal religious order, 1630s, from Church Latin coenobita a cloister
brother, from coenobium a convent, from Greek koinobion life in community, monastery, from koinos
common (see coeno-) + bios life (see bio-).


patio (n.)

1818, inner court open to the sky, from Spanish patio probably from Old Proven&ccedil;al patu, pati
untilled land, communal pasture, from Latin pactum agreement (see pact). Another theory traces the
Spanish word to Latin patere to lie open. Meaning paved and enclosed terrace beside a building first
recorded 1941. Patio furniture is attested from 1969.


symbiosis (n.)

1876, as a biological term, union for life of two different organisms based on mutually benefit,
from Greek symbiosis a living together, from symbioun live together, from symbios (one) living
together (with another), partner, companion, husband or wife, from assimilated form of syn- together
(see syn-) + bios life (see bio-). Given a wider (non-biological) sense by 1921. An earlier sense of
communal or social life is found in 1620s. A back-formed verb symbiose is recorded from 1960.


mess (n.)

c.1300, food for one meal, pottage, from Old French mes portion of food, course at dinner, from Late
Latin missus course at dinner, literally a placing, a putting (on a table, etc.), from past
participle of mittere to put, place, in classical Latin to send, let go (see mission).    Meaning
communal eating place (especially a military one) is first attested 1530s, from earlier sense of
company of persons eating together (early 15c.), originally a group of four. Sense of mixed food,
especially for animals, (1738) led to contemptuous use for jumble, mixed mass (1828) and figurative
sense of state of confusion (1834), as well as condition of untidiness (1851). General use for a
quantity of anything is attested by 1830. Meaning excrement (of animals) is from 1903.


