compound (n.2)

a compound thing, mid-15c., from compound (adj.).


compound (adj.)

late 14c., originally compouned, past participle of compounen (see compound (v.)). Compound eye is
attested from 1836; compound sentence is from 1772.


compound (n.1)

1670s, via Dutch (kampoeng) or Portuguese, from Malay kampong village, group of buildings. Spelling
influenced by compound (v.). Originally, the enclosure for a factory or settlement of Europeans in
the East, later used of South African diamond miners' camps (1893), then of large fenced-in spaces
generally (1946).


compound (v.)

to put together, late 14c., compounen to mix, combine, from Old French compondre, componre arrange,
direct, from Latin componere to put together (see composite). The -d appeared 1500s in English on
model of expound, etc. Related: Compounded; compounding.


nitrous (adj.)

c.1600, from Latin nitrosus, from nitrum (see nitre). Originally of nitre, pertaining to nitre; more
precise use in chemistry (designating a compound in which the nitrogen has a lower valence than the
corresponding nitric compound) is from 1780s. Nitrous oxide attested from 1800.


also (adv.)

Old English eallswa just as, even as, as if, so as, likewise, compound of all + so. The
demonstrative sense of similarly weakened to in addition to in 12c., replacing eke. The compound has
parallel forms in German also, Dutch alzoo.


cataract (n.)

early 15c., a waterfall, floodgate, from Latin cataracta waterfall, from Greek katarhaktes
waterfall, broken water; a kind of portcullis, noun use of an adjective compound meaning swooping,
down-rushing, from kata down (see cata-). The second element is traced either to arhattein to strike
hard (in which case the compound is kat-arrhattein), or to rhattein to dash, break.    Its
alternative sense in Latin of portcullis probably was passed through French to form the English
meaning eye disease (early 15c.), on the notion of obstruction (to eyesight).


Hedwig

fem. proper name, German, from Old High German Haduwig, a compound of two words both of which mean
strife, struggle.


Angus

masc. proper name, Scottish, related to Irish Aonghus, a compound that may be rendered in English as
one choice. Also the name of a county in Scotland, hence a breed of cattle (1842) associated with
that region.


Tylenol (n.)

introduced 1955 as the name of an elixir for children, trade name originally registered by McNeil
Laboratories, Philadelphia, Pa., from elements abstracted from N-acetyl-para-aminophenol, the
chemical name of its active compound.


roach (n.1)

shortened form of cockroach, 1837, on mistaken notion that it was a compound. In contemporary
writing said to be from a polite desire to avoid the sexual connotation in the first syllable.
Meaning butt of a marijuana cigarette is first recorded 1938, perhaps from resemblance to the
insect, but perhaps a different word entirely.


Godiva

died 1067, Lady of Coventry and wife of Leofric, Earl of Mercia. Her legend is first recorded 100
years after her death, by Roger of Wendover. Peeping Tom aspect added by 1659. The name is a typical
Anglo-Saxon compound, apparently *God-gifu good gift.


aetio-

word-forming element used in chemistry and indicating a fundamental degradation product of a complex
organic compound [Flood], from Latinized comb. form of Greek aitia a cause, an origin (see
etiology).


hisself (pron.)

see himself. The shift in felt meaning  of the first element of this compound from dative to
gentitive created this new word c.1400, whereas the same process did not change herself.


amino-

1887, as an element in compound words involving chemicals, from comb. form of amine. Amino acid is
attested from 1898.


OxyContin

brand name of an oxycodone compound marketed in U.S. from 1996. Second element from continuous (i.e.
time-released).


clusterfuck (n.)

bungled or confused undertaking, 1969, U.S. military slang, from cluster + fuck, probably in the
bungle sense. Earlier the compound meant orgy (1966).


Flanders

probably a compound of roots represented by Flemish vlakte plain + wanderen to wander.


halide (n.)

a compound of a halogen and a metal radical, 1876, from halo- + chemical suffix -ide.


common (adj.)

c.1300, belonging to all, general, from Old French comun common, general, free, open, public (9c.,
Modern French commun), from Latin communis in common, public, shared by all or many; general, not
specific; familiar, not pretentious, from PIE *ko-moin-i- held in common, compound adjective formed
from *ko- together + *moi-n-, suffixed form of root *mei- (1) change, exchange (see mutable), hence
literally shared by all.    Second element of the compound also is the source of Latin munia duties,
public duties, functions, those related to munia office. Perhaps reinforced in Old French by the
Germanic form of PIE *ko-moin-i- (compare Old English gem&aelig;ne common, public, general,
universal; see mean (adj.)), which came to French via Frankish.    Used disparagingly of women and
criminals since c.1300. Common pleas is 13c., from Anglo-French communs plets, hearing civil actions
by one subject against another as opposed to pleas of the crown. Common prayer is contrasted with
private prayer. Common stock is attested from 1888.


agribusiness (n.)

1955, compound formed from agriculture + business.


glyceride (n.)

compound of glycerol and organic acids; see glycerin + -ide.


chemo-

before vowels chem-, word-forming element denoting relation to chemical action or chemicals, from
comb. form of chemical (adj.), used to form scientific compound words from c.1900.


TNT

1915, abbreviation of trinitrotoluene (1908), from trinitro- indicating three nitro- groups in place
of three hydrogen atoms in a compound, + toluene.


amine (n.)

compound in which one of the hydrogen atoms of ammonia is replaced by a hydrocarbon radical, 1863,
from ammonia + chemical suffix -ine (2).


Franco-

word-forming element meaning French, from Medieval Latin comb. form of Franci the Franks, hence, by
extension, the French (see Frank). Used in forming English compound words from early 18c.


uncompounded (adj.)

1580s, from un- (1) not + past participle of compound (v.).


nightshade (n.)

Old English nihtscada, literally shade of night, perhaps in allusion to the poisonous berries. A
common Germanic compound, cognates: Dutch nachtschade, German Nachtschatten.


Spackle (n.)

proprietary name for a surfacing compound, 1927, probably based on German spachtel putty knife,
mastic, filler. The verb is attested from 1940. Related: Spackled; spackling.


-gram

suffix from telegram (1852), first abstracted 1979 (in Gorillagram, a proprietary name in U.S.), and
put to wide use in forming new words, such as stripagram (1981). The construction violates Greek
grammar, as an adverb could not properly form part of a compound noun.


Weimar (adj.)

in reference to the pre-1933 democratic government of Germany, 1932, from name of city in Thuringia
where German constitution was drawn up in 1919. The place name is a compound of Old High German wih
holy + mari lake (see mere (n.)).


Miocene (adj.)

pertaining to the geological period between the Oligocene and Pliocene, 1831, irregular formation
from Greek meion less + -cene.  A typical example of the monstrosities with which scientific men in
want of a label for something, and indifferent to all beyond their own province, defile the
language. The elements of the word are Greek, but not the way they are put together, nor the meaning
demanded of the compound. [Fowler]


mademoiselle

mid-15c., unmarried Frenchwoman, from French mademoiselle (12c.), from a compound of ma dameisele
(see damsel), literally young mistress.


medicament (n.)

mid-15c., medical skill; a medicinal compound, from Middle French m&eacute;dicament (15c.), from
Latin medicamentum drug, remedy, literally means of healing, from medicare to heal, cure (see
medication).


saccharin (n.)

white crystalline compound used as a sugar substitute, 1885, from German, coined 1879 by Russian-
born chemist Constantin Fahlberg (1850-1910), who discovered it by accident, from Latin saccharon
(see saccharine). Marketed from 1887 as saccharine.


beware (v.)

c.1200, probably from a conflation of be ware (though the compound bewarian defend existed in Old
English). See ware (v.).


fluoride (n.)

1826, binary compound of fluorine with another element, from fluorine + -ide.


urea (n.)

compound found in the urine of animals, 1806, Latinized from French ur&eacute;e (1803), from Greek
ouron urine (see urine).


harum-scarum

1670s (adv.), probably a compound of obsolete hare (v.) harry + scare (v.), with 'um as a reduced
form of them. As an adjective from 1751; as a noun from 1784.


beyond (prep.)

Old English begeondan beyond, from the farther side, from be- by, here probably indicating position,
+ geond yonder (prep.); see yond. A compound not found elsewhere in Germanic.


chloride (n.)

compound of chlorine and another element, 1812, coined by Sir Humphrey Davy (1778-1829) from
chlorine + -ide on the analogy of oxide.


another (adj.)

early 13c., merger of an other. Old English used simply o&thorn;er. Originally a second of two.
Compound reciprocal pronoun one another is recorded from 1520s.


homesickness (n.)

1756, translating German heimweh, from Heim home + Weh woe, pain; the compound is from Swiss
dialect, expressing the longing for the mountains. The word was introduced to other European
languages 17c. by Swiss mercenaries. Also see nostalgia.


chipotle (n.)

smoke-dried jalape&ntilde;o chili, from Mexican Spanish, ultimately a Nahuatl (Aztecan) word, said
to be a compound of chilli chili pepper (see chili) + poctli smoke.


bouillabaisse (n.)

fish stew, 1845, from French bouillabaisse (19c.), from Proven&ccedil;al bouiabaisso, boulh-abaisso,
a compound of two verbs corresponding to English boil-abase (the latter in the original sense of to
lower).


chloro-

before vowels chlor-, word-forming element used in chemistry, usually indicating the presence of
chlorine in a compound, but sometimes green, from Latinized comb. form of Greek khloros (see Chloe);
also compare chlorine.


dragoman (n.)

early 14c., from Old French drugemen, from late Greek dragoumanos, from Arabic targuman interpreter,
from targama interpret. Treated in English as a compound, with plural -men.


Nahuatl

1822, from Spanish, from Nahuatl (Aztecan) Nahuatl, the people's name, something that makes an
agreeable sound; someone who speaks well or speaks one's own language. As a language name, usually
in the compound form nahuatlahotol-li.


bromide (n.)

compound of bromine and another metal or radical, 1836, from bromine, the pungent, poisonous
element, + -ide. Used as a sedative; figurative sense of dull, conventional person or trite saying
popularized by U.S. humorist Frank Gelett Burgess (1866-1951) in his book Are You a Bromide? (1906).
Related: Bromidic.


carbide (n.)

compound formed by combination of carbon and another element, 1848, from carb-, comb. form of carbon
+ chemical suffix -ide. The earlier word was carburet.


