component (n.)

1640s, constitutional element (earlier one of a group of persons, 1560s), from Latin componentem
(nominative componens), present participle of componere to put together (see composite). As an
adjective, from 1660s.


componentry (n.)

1956, from component + -ry.


anima (n.)

Jung's term for the inner part of the personality, or the female component of a masculine
personality, 1923, from fem. of Latin animus the rational soul; life; the mental powers,
intelligence (see animus).


Mexico

from Spanish, from Nahuatl (Aztecan) mexihco, the name of the ancient Aztec capital.  The etymology
of this is opaque. Because of the difference in vowel length, it cannot be derived from ME-TL
'maguey.' The sequence XIH also differs in vowel length from XIC-TLI 'navel,' which has been
proposed as a component element. The final element is locative -C(O). [Kartunnen]


add-on (n.)

additional component, 1941, from add (v.) + on.


ribonucleic (adj.)

1931, from ribo-, comb. form of ribose, the sugar component, + nucleic acid.


element (n.)

c.1300, earth, air, fire, or water, from Old French element (10c.), from Latin elementem rudiment,
first principle, matter in its most basic form (translating Greek stoikheion), origin unknown.
Meaning simplest component of a complex substance is late 14c. Modern sense in chemistry is from
1813. Elements atmospheric force is 1550s.


dimension (n.)

late 14c., measurement, size, from Latin dimensionem (nominative dimensio) a measuring, noun of
action from past participle stem of dimetri to measure out, from dis- (see dis-) + metiri to measure
(see measure). Meaning any component of a situation is from 1929. Related: Dimensional; dimensions.


branch (n.)

c.1300, braunch, limb of a tree (also used of things analogous to it, especially geographic
features), from Old French branche branch, bough, twig; branch of a family (12c.), from Late Latin
branca footprint, later a claw, paw, of unknown origin, probably from Gaulish. The connecting notion
would be the shape (compare pedigree). Replaced native bough. Meaning local office of a business is
first recorded 1817, from earlier sense of component part of a system (1690s).


abaft (adv.)

in or at the back part of a ship (opposed to forward), 1590s, from Middle English on baft (Old
English on b&aelig;ftan) backwards. The second component is itself a compound of be by (see by) and
&aelig;ftan aft (see aft). The word has been saved by the sailors (the stern being the after part of
a vessel), the rest of the language having left it in Middle English.


animus (n.)

1820, temper (usually in a hostile sense), from Latin animus rational soul, mind, life, mental
powers; courage, desire, related to anima living being, soul, mind, disposition, passion, courage,
anger, spirit, feeling, from PIE root *ane- to blow, to breathe (cognates: Greek anemos wind,
Sanskrit aniti breathes, Old Irish anal, Welsh anadl breath, Old Irish animm soul, Gothic uzanan to
exhale, Old Norse anda to breathe, Old English e&eth;ian to breathe, Old Church Slavonic vonja
smell, breath, Armenian anjn soul). It has no plural. As a term in Jungian psychology for the
masculine component of a feminine personality, it dates from 1923.


scheme (n.)

1550s, figure of speech, from Medieval Latin schema shape, figure, form, appearance; figure of
speech; posture in dancing, from Greek skhema (genitive skhematos) figure, appearance, the nature of
a thing, related to skhein to get, and ekhein to have, from PIE root *segh- to hold, to hold in
one's power, to have (cognates: Sanskrit sahate he masters, overcomes, sahah power, victory; Avestan
hazah power, victory; Greek ekhein to have, hold; Gothic sigis, Old High German sigu, Old Norse
sigr, Old English sige victory).    The sense program of action first is attested 1640s. Unfavorable
overtones (selfish, devious) began to creep in early 18c. Meaning complex unity of coordinated
component elements is from 1736. Color scheme is attested from 1884.


guild (n.)

early 13c., yilde (spelling later influenced by Old Norse gildi guild, brotherhood), a semantic
fusion of Old English gegyld guild and gild, gyld payment, tribute, compensation, from Proto-
Germanic *gelth- pay (cognates: Old Frisian geld money, Old Saxon geld payment, sacrifice, reward,
Old High German gelt payment, tribute; see yield (v.)).    The connecting sense is of a tribute or
payment to join a protective or trade society. But some see the root in its alternative sense of
sacrifice, as if in worship, and see the word as meaning a combination for religious purposes,
either Christian or pagan. The Anglo-Saxon guilds had a strong religious component; they were burial
societies that paid for masses for the souls of deceased members as well as paying fines in cases of
justified crime. The continental custom of guilds of merchants arrived after the Conquest, with
incorporated societies of merchants in each town or city holding exclusive rights of doing business
there. In many cases they became the governing body of a town (compare Guildhall, which came to be
the London city hall). Trade guilds arose 14c., as craftsmen united to protect their common
interest.


elf (n.)

one of a race of powerful supernatural beings in Germanic folklore, Old English elf (Mercian,
Kentish), &aelig;lf (Northumbrian), ylfe (plural, West Saxon), from Proto-Germanic *albiz (cognates:
Old Saxon alf, Old Norse alfr, German alp evil spirit, goblin, incubus), origin unknown, possibly
from PIE *albho- white. Used figuratively for mischievous person from 1550s.    In addition to
elf/&aelig;lf (masc.), Old English had parallel form *elfen (fem.), the plural of which was
*elfenna, -elfen, from Proto-Germanic *albinjo-. Both words survived into Middle English and were
active there, the former as elf (with the vowel of the plural), plural elves, the latter as elven,
West Midlands dialect alven (plural elvene).    The Germanic elf originally was dwarfish and
malicious (compare Old English &aelig;lfadl nightmare, &aelig;lfsogo&eth;a hiccup, thought to be
caused by elves); in the Middle Ages they were confused to some degree with faeries; the more noble
version begins with Spenser. Nonetheless a popular component in Anglo-Saxon names, many of which
survive as modern given names and surnames, such as &AElig;lfr&aelig;d Elf-counsel (Alfred),
&AElig;lfwine Elf-friend (Alvin), &AElig;lfric Elf-ruler (Eldridge), also women's names such as
&AElig;lffl&aelig;d Elf-beauty. Elf Lock hair tangled, especially by Queen Mab, which it was not
fortunate to disentangle [according to Robert Nares' glossary of Shakespeare] is from 1592.


