complaint (n.)

late 14c., lamentation, grief, from Old French complainte (12c.) complaint, lament, noun use of fem.
past participle of complaindre (see complain). Meaning bodily ailment is from 1705 (often in U.S.
colloquial use generalized as complaints).


complainant (n.)

early 15c., from Old French complaignant, present participle of complaindre (see complain). The
present participle also was used as a noun in Middle French.


complain (v.)

late 14c., find fault, lament, from stem of Old French complaindre to lament (12c.), from Vulgar
Latin *complangere, originally to beat the breast, from Latin com-, intensive prefix (see com-), +
plangere to strike, beat the breast (see plague (n.)). Older sense of lament died out 17c. Related:
Complained; complaining.


beef (v.)

to complain, slang, 1888, American English, from noun meaning complaint (1880s). The noun meaning
argument is recorded from 1930s. The origin and signification are unclear; perhaps it traces to the
common late 19c. complaint of U.S. soldiers about the quantity or quality of beef rations.


uncomplaining (adj.)

1744, from un- (1) not + past participle of complain (v.).


kvetch (v.)

to complain, whine, 1953 (implied in kvetching), from Yiddish kvetshn, literally squeeze, press,
from German quetsche crusher, presser. As a noun, from 1936 as a term of abuse for a person.


grudge (v.)

mid-15c., to murmur, complain, variant of grutch. Meaning to begrudge is c.1500. Related: Grudged;
grudges; grudging; grudgingly. The noun is mid-15c., from the verb.


carp (v.)

complain, early 13c., originally to talk, from Old Norse karpa to brag, of unknown origin; meaning
turned toward find fault with (late 14c.), probably by influence of Latin carpere to slander,
revile, literally to pluck (see harvest (n.)). Related: Carped; carping.


moan (n.)

c.1200, lamentation, mourning, weeping; complaining, the expressing of complaints; a complaint;
lover's complaint; accusation, charge, probably from an unrecorded Old English *man complaint,
related to Old English m&aelig;nan complain, moan, also tell, intend, signify (see mean (v.1)); but
OED discounts this connection. Meaning long, low inarticulate murmur from some prolonged pain is
first recorded 1670s, with onomatopoeic suggestion [OED].


querulous (adj.)

c.1400, from Old French querelos quarrelsome, argumentative and directly from Late Latin querulosus,
from Latin querulus full of complaints, complaining, from queri to complain. Retains the original
vowel of quarrel (n.1). Related: Querulously; querulousness.


crab (n.2)

fruit of the wild apple tree, c.1300, crabbe, perhaps from Scandinavian (compare Swedish
krabb&auml;pple), of obscure origin. The combination of bad-tempered, combative and sour in the two
nouns crab naturally yielded a verb meaning of to vex, irritate (c.1400), later to complain
irritably, find fault (c.1500). The noun meaning sour person is from 1570s.


whine (v.)

Old English hwinan to whiz, hiss, or whistle through the air (only of arrows), also hwinsian to
whine (of dogs), ultimately of imitative origin (compare Old Norse hvina to whiz, German wiehern to
neigh). Meaning to complain in a feeble way is first recorded 1520s. Related: Whined; whining.


quarrel (n.1)

angry dispute, mid-14c., originally ground for complaint, from Old French querele matter, concern,
business; dispute, controversy (Modern French querelle), from Latin querella complaint, accusation;
lamentation, from queri to complain, lament. Replaced Old English sacan. Sense of contention between
persons is from 1570s.


bellyache (n.)

also belly-ache, 1590s, from belly (n.) + ache (n.). The verb in the slang sense of complain is
first recorded 1888, American English; it appears not to have been used earlier than that, if ever,
in a literal sense. Related: bellyached; bellyaching.


bitch (v.)

to complain, attested at least from 1930, perhaps from the sense in bitchy, perhaps influenced by
the verb meaning to bungle, spoil, which is recorded from 1823. But bitched in this sense seems to
echo Middle English bicched cursed, bad, a general term of opprobrium (as in Chaucer's bicched bones
unlucky dice), which despite the hesitation of OED, seems to be a derivative of bitch (n.).


grouse (v.)

complain, 1885 (implied in grouser), British Army slang, of uncertain origin but perhaps from Norman
French dialectal groucer, from Old French groucier to murmur, grumble, of imitative origin (compare
Greek gru a grunt, gruzein to grumble). Related: Groused; grousing. As a noun from 1918, from the
verb.


whinge (v.)

to complain peevishly, British, informal or dialectal, ultimately from the northern form of Old
English hwinsian, from Proto-Germanic *hwinison (cognates: Old High German winison, German winseln),
from root of Old English hwinan to whine (see whine (v.)). Related: Whinged; whinging.


groan (v.)

Old English granian to groan, murmur, lament, from Proto-Germanic *grain- (cognates: Old Norse
grenja to howl), of imitative origin, or related to grin. Meaning complain is from early 13c.,
especially in Middle English phrase grutchen and gronen. Related: Groaned; groaning.


rail (v.1)

complain, mid-15c., from Middle French railler to tease or joke (15c.), perhaps from Old
Proven&ccedil;al ralhar scoff, to chat, to joke, from Vulgar Latin *ragulare to bray (source also of
Italian ragghiare to bray), from Late Latin ragere to roar, probably of imitative origin. See rally
(v.2). Related: Railed; railing.


grutch (v.)

c.1200, grucchen, to murmur, complain, from Old French grouchier to murmur, to grumble, of unknown
origin, probably ultimately imitative. Meaning to begrudge is c.1400. Compare gruccild (early 13c.)
woman who complains, from grutch + suffix of unknown origin. Related: Grutched; grutching. As a noun
from c.1400.


chide (v.)

late 12c., scold, nag, rail, originally intransitive, from Old English cidan to contend, quarrel,
complain. Not found outside Old English (though Liberman says it is probably related to OHG
*k&icirc;dal 'wedge,' with a sense evolution from brandishing sticks to scold, reprove). Past tense,
past participle can be chided or chid or even (past participle) chidden (Shakespeare used it);
present participle is chiding.


nag (v.)

annoy by scolding, 1828, originally a dialectal word meaning to gnaw (1825), probably ultimately
from a Scandinavian source (compare Old Norse gnaga to complain, literally to bite, gnaw, dialectal
Swedish and Norwegian nagga to gnaw), from Proto-Germanic *gnagan, related to Old English gnagan to
gnaw (see gnaw). Related: Nagged; nagger; nagging.


yammer (v.)

late 15c., to lament, probably from Middle Dutch jammeren and cognate Middle English yeoumeren, to
mourn, complain, from Old English geomrian to lament, from geomor sorrowful, probably of imitative
origin. Cognate with Old Saxon jamar sad, sorrowful, German Jammer lamentation, misery. Meaning to
make loud, annoying noise is attested from 1510s. Related: Yammered; yammering.


challenge (v.)

c.1200, to rebuke, from Old French chalongier complain, protest; haggle, quibble, from Vulgar Latin
calumniare to accuse falsely, from Latin calumniari to accuse falsely, misrepresent, slander, from
calumnia trickery (see calumny).    From late 13c. as to object to, take exception to; c.1300 as to
accuse, especially to accuse falsely, also to call to account; late 14c. as to call to fight. Also
used in Middle English with sense claim, take to oneself. Related: Challenged; challenging.


bespeak (v.)

Old English besprecan speak about, speak against, complain, from be- + sprecan to speak (see speak
(v.)). A common Germanic compound (cognates: Old Saxon bisprecan, Dutch bespreken, Old High German
bisprehhan, German besprechen); originally to call out, it evolved a wide range of meaning in
English, including speak up, oppose, request, discuss, arrange, and to order (goods) (1580s).    The
connection of the senses is very loose; some of them appear to have arisen quite independently of
each other from different applications of BE- pref. [OED]


mean (v.1)

intend, have in mind, Old English m&aelig;nan to mean, intend, signify; tell, say; complain, lament,
from West Germanic *mainijan (cognates: Old Frisian mena to signify, Old Saxon menian to intend,
signify, make known, Dutch menen, German meinen think, suppose, be of the opinion), from PIE *meino-
opinion, intent (cognates: Old Church Slavonic meniti to think, have an opinion, Old Irish mian
wish, desire, Welsh mwyn enjoyment), perhaps from root *men- think (see mind (n.)). Conversational
question you know what I mean? attested by 1834.


gripe (v.)

Old English gripan grasp at, lay hold, attack, take, seek to get hold of, from Proto-Germanic
*gripan (cognates: Old Saxon gripan, Old Norse gripa, Dutch grijpen, Gothic greipan, Old High German
grifan, German greifen to seize), from PIE root *ghreib- to grip (cognates: Lithuanian griebiu to
seize). Figurative sense of complain, grouse is first attested 1932, probably from earlier meaning
gripping pain in the bowels (c.1600; compare bellyache). Related: Griped; griping.


weep (v.)

Old English wepan shed tears, cry; bewail, mounr over; complain (class VII strong verb; past tense
weop, past participle wopen), from Proto-Germanic *wopjan (cognates: Old Norse op, Old High German
wuof shout, shouting, crying, Old Saxon wopian, Gothic wopjan to shout, cry out, weep), from PIE
*wab- to cry, scream (cognates: Latin vapulare to be flogged; Old Church Slavonic vupiti to call,
vypu gull). Of water naturally forming on stones, walls, etc., from c.1400. Related: Wept; weeping;
weeper.


kick (v.)

late 14c., to strike out with the foot (earliest in biblical phrase now usually rendered as kick
against the pricks), of uncertain origin, perhaps from Old Norse kikna bend backwards, sink at the
knees. The doubts OED has about the Scandinavian origin of kick are probably unfounded [Liberman].
Related: Kicked; kicking.    Figurative sense of complain, protest, rebel against (late 14c.)
probably is from the Bible verse. Slang sense of die is attested from 1725 (kick the wind was slang
for be hanged, 1590s; see also bucket). Meaning to end one's drug habit is from 1936. Kick in
contribute is from 1908; kick out expel is from 1690s. To kick oneself in self-reproach is from
1891. The children's game of kick the can is attested from 1891.


sluggard (n.)

late 14c., late 13c. as a surname, habitually lazy person, from Middle English sluggi sluggish,
indolent, probably from a Scandinavian word such as dialectal Norwegian slugga be sluggish,
dialectal Norwegian sluggje heavy, slow person, dialectal Swedish slogga to be slow or sluggish.
Adjective sluggy is attested in English from early 13c.    'Tis the voice of a sluggard -- I heard
him complain:  You have wak'd me too soon, I must slumber again.  [Isaac Watts, 1674-1748]   <hr />
'Tis the voice of the Lobster: I heard him declare  You have baked me too brown, I must sugar my
hair.  [Lewis Carroll (Charles L. Dodgson), 1832-1898]     As an adjective meaning sluggish, lazy
from 1590s. Related: Sluggardly.


claim (v.)

c.1300, to call, call out; to ask or demand by virtue of right or authority, from accented stem of
Old French clamer to call, name, describe; claim; complain; declare, from Latin clamare to cry out,
shout, proclaim, from PIE *kele- (2) to shout, imitative (compare Sanskrit usakala cock, literally
dawn-calling; Latin calare to announce solemnly, call out; Middle Irish cailech cock; Greek kalein
to call, kelados noise, kledon report, fame; Old High German halan to call; Old English hlowan to
low, make a noise like a cow; Lithuanian kalba language). Related: Claimed; claiming.    Meaning to
maintain as true is from 1864; specific sense to make a claim (on an insurance company) is from
1897. Claim properly should not stray too far from its true meaning of to demand recognition of a
right.


