comparative (adj.)

mid-15c., from Middle French comparatif, from Latin comparativus pertaining to comparison, from
comparat-, past participle stem of comparare (see comparison). Originally grammatical; general sense
is from c.1600; meaning involving different branches of a subject is from 1670s. Related:
Comparatively.


former (adj.)

earlier in time, mid-12c., comparative of forme first, patterned on formest foremost (see foremost).
An unusual case of a comparative formed from a superlative (the -m- is a superlative element).


exterior (adj.)

1520s, from Latin exterior, comparative of exterus on the outside, outward, outer, of another
country, foreign, itself a comparative of ex out of (see ex-). As a noun from 1590s.


inner (adj.)

c.1400, from Old English inra, comparative of inne (adv.) inside (see in). Similar formation in Old
High German innaro, German inner. An unusual evolution for a comparative, it has not been used with
than since Middle English. Inner tube in the pneumatic tire sense is from 1894. Inner city, in
reference to poverty and crime, is attested from 1968.


farther (adj.)

c.1300, variant of further (q.v.), by 17c. it replaced ferrer as comparative of the descendant of
Old English fierr far (itself a comparative but no longer felt as one). Vowel change influenced by
the root vowel, and confusion with Middle English fer&thorn;eren to assist, promote, advance (see
forth). There is no historical basis for the notion that farther is of physical distance and further
of degree or quality.


further (adv., adj.)

Old English fur&eth;or (adv.), fur&eth;ra (adj.), etymologically representing either forth-er or
fore-ther. The former would be from fur&eth;um (see forth) + comparative suffix *-eron-, *-uron-
(see also inner, outer).    Alternative etymology traces it to Proto-Germanic *fur&thorn;eron-, from
PIE *pr-tero (source also of Greek proteros former), from root of fore + comparative suffix also
found in after, other. Senses of in addition, to a greater extent are later metaphoric developments.


near (adv.)

Old English near closer, nearer, comparative of neah, nehnigh. Influenced by Old Norse naer near, it
came to be used as a positive form mid-13c., and new comparative nearer developed 1500s (see nigh).
As an adjective from c.1300. Originally an adverb but now supplanted in most such senses by nearly;
it has in turn supplanted correct nigh as an adjective. Related: Nearness. In near and dear (1620s)
it refers to nearness of kinship. Near East first attested 1891, in Kipling. Near beer low-alcoholic
brew is from 1908.


-er (2)

comparative suffix, from Old English -ra (masc.), -re (fem., neuter), from Proto-Germanic *-izon,
*-ozon (cognates: Gothic -iza, Old Saxon -iro, Old Norse -ri, Old High German -iro, German -er),
originally also with umlaut change in stem, but this was mostly lost in Old English by historical
times and has now vanished (except in better and elder).    For most comparatives of one or two
syllables, use of -er seems to be fading as the oral element in our society relies on more before
adjectives to express the comparative; thus prettier is more pretty, cooler is more cool [Barnhart].


less

Old English l&aelig;s (adv.), l&aelig;ssa (adj.), comparative of l&aelig;s small; from Proto-
Germanic *lais-izo smaller (cognates: Old Saxon, Old Frisian les less; Middle Dutch lise soft,
gentle, German leise soft), from PIE root *leis- (2) small (cognates: Lithuanian liesas thin).
Formerly also younger, as a translation of Latin minor, a sense now obsolete except in James the
Less. Used as a comparative of little, but not related to it. The noun is Old English l&aelig;sse.


whether (conj.)

Old English hw&aelig;&eth;er, hwe&eth;er which of two, whether, from Proto-Germanic *gihwatharaz
(cognates Old Saxon hwedar, Old Norse hvarr, Gothic hua&thorn;ar, Old High German hwedar which of
the two, German weder neither), from interrogative base *khwa- who (see who) + comparative suffix
*-theraz (cognate compounds in Sanskrit katarah, Avestan katara-, Greek poteros, Latin uter which of
the two, either of two, Lithuanian katras which of the two, Old Church Slavonic koteru which). Its
comparative form is either. Also in Old English as a pronoun and adjective. Phrase whether or not
(also whether or no) recorded from 1650s.


than (conj.)

Old English &thorn;an, conjunctive particle used after a comparative adjective or adverb, from
&thorn;anne, &thorn;&aelig;nne, &thorn;onne then (see then). Developed from the adverb then, and not
distinguished from it by spelling until c.1700.    The earliest use is in West Germanic comparative
forms introducing the second member, i.e. bigger than (compare Dutch dan, German denn), which
suggests a semantic development from the demonstrative sense of then: A is bigger than B, evolving
from A is bigger, then (after that) B. Or the word may trace to Old English &thorn;onne when, when
as, such as When as B is big, A is more (so).


badder (adj.)

obsolete or colloquial comparative of bad, common 14c.-18c.


larger

comparative of large (q.v.).


bigger (adj.)

comparative of big.


nigh (adv.)

near, Old English neah (West Saxon), neh (Anglian), common Germanic (cognates: Old Saxon nah, Old
Frisian nei, Middle Dutch, Dutch na, Old High German nah, German nah, Gothic nehwa), with no
cognates outside Germanic. The Old English progression was neah - near - niehsta, for nigh - near -
next. But the comparative near and the superlative nehst (see next) gradually evolved into separate
words not felt as related to nigh. New comparative and superlative forms nigher, nighest developed
14c. as phonetic changes obscured the original relationships. As an adjective from Middle English.


worse (adj.)

Old English wiersa, wyrsa worse, from Proto-Germanic *wers-izon- (cognates: Old Saxon wirs, Old
Norse verri, Swedish v&auml;rre, Old Frisian wirra, Old High German wirsiro, Gothic wairsiza worse),
comparative of PIE *wers- (1) to confuse, mix up (cognates: Old High German werra strife, Old Saxon
werran to entangle, compound; see war (n.)). Used as a comparative of bad, evil, ill or as the
opposite of better. The adverb is Old English wyrs; the noun is Old English wyrsa. Phrase for better
or for worse is attested from late 14c. (for bet, for wers); to change for the worse is recorded
from c.1400.


later

comparative of late. Meaning farewell is from 1954, U.S. slang, short for see you later.


best (adj.)

Old English beste, reduced by assimilation of -t- from earlier Old English betst best, first, in the
best manner, originally superlative of bot remedy, reparation, the root word now only surviving in
to boot (see boot (n.2)), though its comparative, better, and superlative, best, have been
transferred to good (and in some cases well). From Proto-Germanic root *bat-, with comparative
*batizon and superlative *batistaz (cognates: Old Frisian, Old Saxon, Middle Dutch best, Old High
German bezzist, German best, Old Norse beztr, Gothic batists).    The best-laid schemes o' mice an'
men  Gang aft agley,  An' lea'e us nought but grief an' pain,  For promis'd joy!  [Burns]   Best-
seller as short for best-selling book is from 1902, apparently originally in the publishing trade;
best friend was in Chaucer (late 14c.). Best girl is first attested 1881, American English; best man
is 1814, originally Scottish, replacing groomsman. To be able to do something with the best of them
is recorded by 1748.


worser (adj.)

double comparative; see worse + -er (2). Attested from late 15c. and common 16c.-17c. Noun worsers
(one's) inferiors is from 1580s.


arete (n.2)

important concept in Greek philosophy, virtue, excellence, especially of manly qualities; literally
that which is good. The comparative form is areion, the superlative is aristos (compare
aristocracy).


greater

Old English gryttra, Anglian *gretra; comparative of great.


mayor (n.)

c.1300, from Old French maire head of a city or town government (13c.), originally greater, superior
(adj.), from Latin maior, major, comparative of magnus great (see magnum).


anterior (adj.)

1610s, Latin, literally former, comparative of ante before (see ante). Related: Anteriority.


presbyter (n.)

elder of the Christian church, 1590s, from Late Latin presbyter, used for a priest in Jerome and
Prudentius, from Greek presbyteros older, comparative of presbys old; old man (see presby-).


henotheism (n.)

1860, from Greek henos, neuter of eis one (from PIE *sem- one, as one) + theism. Devotion to a
single god without asserting that he is the only god. Coined by (Friedrich) Max M&uuml;ller
(1823-1900), professor of comparative philology at Oxford. Related: Henotheist.


freer (adj.)

comparative of  free. See -er (2).


major (adj.)

c.1300, from Latin maior (earlier *magjos), irregular comparative of magnus large, great (see
magnate). Used in music (of modes, scales, or chords) since 1690s, on notion of an interval a half-
tone greater than the minor.


preter-

also praeter-, word-forming element meaning beyond, from Latin praeter (adverb and preposition)
beyond, before, above, more than, properly comparative of prae before (see pre-).


lower (adj.)

c.1200, lahre, comparative of lah (see low (adj.)).


magnificent (adj.)

mid-15c., from Old French magnificent, a back-formation from Latin magnificentior, comparative of
magnificus great, elevated, noble, distinguished, literally doing great deeds (see magnificence).


lesser (adj.)

early 13c., a double comparative, from less + -er (2). Johnson calls it a barbarous corruption of
less, formed by the vulgar from the habit of terminating comparatives in -er. As an adverb from
1590s; now generally poetic or obsolete except in expression lesser-known (1813).


exoteric (adj.)

1650s, from Late Latin exotericus, from Greek exoterikos, from exotero, comparative of exo (see
exo-).


enteric (adj.)

pertaining to the intestines, 1869, from Greek enterikos intestinal, first used in this sense by
Aristotle, from entera (plural; singular enteron) intestines, from PIE *enter-, comparative of *en
in (see inter-).


posterior (adj.)

1530s, later, from Latin posterior after, later, behind, comparative of posterus coming after,
subsequent, from post after (see post-). Meaning situated behind is from 1630s.


excelsior

Latin excelsior higher, comparative of excelsus (adj.) high, elevated, lofty, past participle of
excellere (see excel). Taken 1778 as motto of New York State, where it apparently was mistaken for
an adverb. Popularized 1841 as title of a poem by Longfellow. As a trade name for thin shavings of
soft wood used for stuffing cushions, etc., first recorded 1868, American English.


back (adj.)

Middle English, from back (n.) and back (adv.). Formerly with comparative backer (c.1400), also
backermore. To be on the back burner in the figurative sense is from 1960, from the image of a cook
keeping a pot there to simmer while he or she works on another concoction at the front of the stove.


ulterior (adj.)

1640s, on the other side of, from Latin ulterior more distant, more remote, farther, on the farther
side, comparative of *ulter beyond (see ultra-). The sense not at present in view or consideration
(as in ulterior motives) is attested from 1735.


esoteric (adj.)

1650s, from Greek esoterikos belonging to an inner circle, from esotero more within, comparative
adverb of eso within, related to eis into, en in (see en- (2)).    In English, originally of
Pythagorean doctrines. According to Lucian, the division of teachings into exoteric and esoteric
originated with Aristotle.


latter (adj.)

Old English l&aelig;tra slower, comparative of l&aelig;t late (see late (adj.)). Sense of second of
two first recorded 1550s. The modern later is a formation from mid-15c.


extra-

only recorded in classical Latin in extraordinarius, but much used in Medieval Latin and modern
formations; it represents Latin extra (adv.) on the outside, without, except, the old fem. ablative
singular of exterus outward, outside, comparative of ex out of (see ex-).


inferior (adj.)

early 15c., of land, low, lower, from Latin inferior lower, further down (also used figuratively),
comparative of inferus (adj.) that is below or beneath, from infra below (see infra-). Meaning lower
in degree, rank, or importance is from 1530s; also in an absolute sense, of low quality or rank.


elder (adj.)

more old, Old English (Mercian) eldra, comparative of eald, ald (see old); only English survival of
umlaut in comparison. Superseded by older since 16c. Elder statesman (1921) originally was a
translation of Japanese genro (plural).


Aryan

c.1600, as a term in classical history, from Latin Arianus, Ariana, from Greek Aria, Areia, names
applied in classical times to the eastern part of ancient Persia and to its inhabitants. Ancient
Persians used the name in reference to themselves (Old Persian ariya-), hence Iran. Ultimately from
Sanskrit arya- compatriot; in later language noble, of good family.    Also the name Sanskrit-
speaking invaders of India gave themselves in the ancient texts, from which early 19c. European
philologists (Friedrich Schlegel, 1819, who linked the word with German Ehre honor) applied it to
the ancient people we now call Indo-Europeans (suspecting that this is what they called themselves);
this use is attested in English from 1851. The term fell into the hands of racists, and in German
from 1845 it was specifically contrasted to Semitic (Lassen).    German philologist Max M&uuml;ller
(1823-1900) popularized the term in his writings on comparative linguistics, recommending it as the
name (replacing Indo-European, Indo-Germanic, Caucasian, Jshortened) for the group of related,
inflected languages connected with these peoples, mostly found in Europe but also including Sanskrit
and Persian. Arian was used in this sense from 1839 (and is more philologically correct), but this
spelling caused confusion with Arian, the term in ecclesiastical history.    Gradually replaced in
comparative linguistics c.1900 by Indo-European, except when used to distinguish Indo-European
languages of India from non-Indo-European ones. Used in Nazi ideology to mean member of a Caucasian
Gentile race of Nordic type. As an ethnic designation, however, it is properly limited to Indo-
Iranians (most justly to the latter) and has fallen from general academic use since the Nazi era.


outer (adj.)

late 14c., comparative of out (on analogy of inner), replacing by 18c. forms descended from Old
English uttera (comp. of Old English ut out) which developed into utter and was no longer felt as
connected with out. Outer space first attested 1901 in writings of H.G. Wells.


contra

mid-14c., from Latin contra (prep. and adv.) against, originally in comparison with, ablative
singular feminine of *com-teros, from Old Latin com with, together (see com-) + -tr, zero degree of
the comparative suffix -ter-.


ex-

word-forming element, in English meaning mainly out of, from, but also upwards, completely, deprive
of, without, and former; from Latin ex out of, from within, from PIE *eghs out (cognates: Gaulish
ex-, Old Irish ess-, Old Church Slavonic izu, Russian iz). In some cases also from Greek cognate ex,
ek. PIE *eghs had comparative form *eks-tero and superlative *eks-t(e)r-emo-.


prior (adj.)

earlier, 1714, from Latin prior former, previous, first; figuratively superior, better; as a noun
forefather; superior rank; comparative of Old Latin pri before, from PIE *prai-, *prei-, from root
*per- (1) forward, through (see per).


Menshevik (adj.)

1907, from Russian men'shevik, from men'she lesser (comparative of malo little, from PIE root *mei-
(2) small; see minus) + -evik one that is. So called by Lenin because they were a minority in the
party. Earlier used in reference to the minority faction of the Social-Democratic Party, when it
split in 1903. As a noun from 1917. Russian plural mensheviki occasionally was used in English.


majesty (n.)

c.1300, greatness, glory, from Old French majeste grandeur, nobility (12c.), from Latin maiestatem
(nominative maiestas) greatness, dignity, elevation, honor, excellence, from stem of maior (neuter
maius), comparative of magnus great (see magnate). Earliest English us is with reference to God; as
a title, in reference to kings and queens (late 14c.), it is from Romance languages and descends
from the Roman Empire.


yonder (adv.)

within sight but not near, c.1300, from Old English geond throughout, up to, as far as (see yond) +
comparative suffix -er (2). Cognate with Middle Low German ginder, Middle Dutch gender, Dutch
ginder, Gothic jaindre. Now replaced except in poetic usage by ungrammatical that.


