comprehend (v.)

mid-14c., to understand, from Latin comprehendere to take together, to unite; include; seize (of
catching fire or the arrest of criminals); also to comprehend, perceive (to seize or take in the
mind), from com- completely (see com-) + prehendere to catch hold of, seize (see prehensile).
Related: Comprehended; comprehending.


comprehendible (adj.)

1814 (rare), from comprehend + -ible; a native formation alongside comprehensible.


uncomprehending (adj.)

1795, from un- (1) not + present participle of comprehend (v.). Related: Uncomprehendingly.


cognition (n.)

mid-15c., ability to comprehend, from Latin cognitionem (nominative cognitio) a getting to know,
acquaintance, knowledge, noun of action from past participle stem of cognoscere (see cognizance).


understand (v.)

Old English understandan comprehend, grasp the idea of, probably literally stand in the midst of,
from under + standan to stand (see stand (v.)). If this is the meaning, the under is not the usual
word meaning beneath, but from Old English under, from PIE *nter- between, among (cognates: Sanskrit
antar among, between, Latin inter between, among, Greek entera intestines; see inter-). Related:
Understood; understanding   That is the suggestion in Barnhart, but other sources regard the among,
between, before, in the presence of sense of Old English prefix and preposition under as other
meanings of the same word. Among seems to be the sense in many Old English compounds that resemble
understand, such as underniman to receive, undersecan examine, investigate, scrutinize (literally
underseek), under&eth;encan consider, change one's mind, underginnan to begin. It also seems to be
the sense still in expressions such as under such circumstances.    Perhaps the ultimate sense is be
close to; compare Greek epistamai I know how, I know, literally I stand upon. Similar formations are
found in Old Frisian (understonda), Middle Danish (understande), while other Germanic languages use
compounds meaning stand before (German verstehen, represented in Old English by forstanden). For
this concept, most Indo-European languages use figurative extensions of compounds that literally
mean put together, or separate, or take, grasp (see comprehend). Old English oferstandan, Middle
English overstonden, literally over-stand seem to have been used only in literal senses. For to
stand under in a physical sense, Old English had undergestandan.


comprehensible (adj.)

1520s, able to be contained, from Latin comprehensibilis, from comprehensus, past participle of
comphrehendere (see comprehend). Meaning able to be understood is from c.1600. Related:
Comprehensibly; comprehensibility.


comprehension (n.)

mid-15c., from Middle French compreh&eacute;nsion (15c.), from Latin comprehensionem (nominative
comprehensio) a seizing, laying hold of, arrest, figuratively perception, comprehension, noun of
action from past participle stem of comprehendere (see comprehend). In reading education, from 1921.


comprise (v.)

early 15c., to include, from Old French compris, past participle of comprendre to contain, comprise
(12c.), from Latin comprehendere (see comprehend). Related: Comprised; comprising.


comprehensive (adj.)

containing much, 1610s, from French compreh&eacute;nsif, from Late Latin comprehensivus, from
comprehens-, past participle stem of Latin comprehendere (see comprehend). Related: Comprehensively
(mid-15c.); comprehensiveness.


humanism (n.)

along with humanist used in a variety of philosophical and theological senses 16c.-18c., especially
ones imitating Latin humanitas education befitting a cultivated man. See human + -ism. Main modern
sense in reference to revival of interest in the Classics traces to c.1860; as a pragmatic system of
thought, defined 1907 by co-founder F.C.S. Schiller as: The perception that the philosophical
problem concerns human beings striving to comprehend a world of human experience by the resources of
human minds.


complex (adj.)

1650s, composed of parts, from French complexe complicated, complex, intricate (17c.), from Latin
complexus surrounding, encompassing, past participle of complecti to encircle, embrace, in
transferred use, to hold fast, master, comprehend, from com- with (see com-) + plectere to weave,
braid, twine, entwine, from PIE *plek-to-, from root *plek- to plait (see ply (v.1)). The meaning
not easily analyzed is first recorded 1715. Complex sentence is attested from 1881.


concern (v.)

early 15c., perceive, distinguish, also refer to, relate to, from Middle French concerner, from
Medieval Latin concernere concern, touch, belong to, figurative use of Late Latin concernere to
sift, mix, as in a sieve, from Latin com- with (see com-) + cernere to sift, hence perceive,
comprehend (see crisis). Apparently the sense of the prefix shifted to intensive in Medieval Latin.
Meaning worry is 17c. Related: Concerned; concerning. Letter opening to whom it may concern attested
by 1740.


intelligence (n.)

late 14c., faculty of understanding, from Old French intelligence (12c.), from Latin intelligentia,
intellegentia understanding, power of discerning; art, skill, taste, from intelligentem (nominative
intelligens) discerning, present participle of intelligere to understand, comprehend, from inter-
between (see inter-) + legere choose, pick out, read (see lecture (n.)).    Meaning superior
understanding, sagacity is from early 15c. Sense of information, news first recorded mid-15c.,
especially secret information from spies (1580s). Intelligence quotient first recorded 1921 (see
I.Q.).


perceive (v.)

c.1300, via Anglo-French parceif, Old North French *perceivre (Old French per&ccedil;oivre)
perceive, notice, see; recognize, understand, from Latin percipere obtain, gather, seize entirely,
take possession of, also, figuratively, to grasp with the mind, learn, comprehend, literally to take
entirely, from per thoroughly (see per) + capere to grasp, take (see capable).    Replaced Old
English ongietan. Both the Latin senses were in Old French, though the primary sense of Modern
French percevoir is literal, to receive, collect (rents, taxes, etc.), while English uses the word
almost always in the metaphorical sense. Related: Perceived; perceiving.


capable (adj.)

1560s, from Middle French capable or directly from Late Latin capabilis receptive; able to grasp or
hold, used by theologians, from Latin capax able to hold much, broad, wide, roomy; also receptive,
fit for; adjectival form of capere to grasp, lay hold, take, catch; undertake; take in, hold; be
large enough for; comprehend, from PIE *kap- to grasp (cognates: Sanskrit kapati two handfuls; Greek
kaptein to swallow, gulp down; Lettish kampiu seize; Old Irish cacht servant-girl, literally
captive; Welsh caeth captive, slave; Gothic haban have, hold; Old English h&aelig;ft handle, habban
to have, hold, Modern English have). Related: Capably.


