compress (n.)

1590s in the surgical sense, from compress (v.).


compress (v.)

late 14c., to press (something) together, from Old French compresser compress, put under pressure,
from Latin compressare to press together, frequentative of comprimere to squeeze, from com- together
(see com-) + premere to press (see press (v.1)). Related: Compressed; compressing.


compressor (n.)

1839, from Latin compressor, agent noun from comprimere (see compress (v.)). As a type of surgical
instrument, from 1870. As short for air compressor, from 1874.


compression (n.)

c.1400, from Middle French compression (14c.), from Latin compressionem (nominative compressio) a
pressing together, noun of action from past participle stem of comprimere (see compress (v.)).
Related: Compressional. Compressional wave is attested from 1887.


constriction (n.)

c.1400, from Latin constrictionem (nominative constrictio), noun of action from past participle stem
of constringere compress (see constrain).


stringent (adj.)

c.1600, astringent, especially with reference to taste, from Latin stringentem (nominative
stringens), present participle of stringere (2) to compress, contract, bind or draw tight (see
strain (v.)). Of regulations, procedures, etc., 1846.


cramp (v.2)

to bend or twist, early 14c., from cramp (n.2) and Old French crampir. Later compress forcibly
(1550s), and, figuratively, to restrict (1620s). Related: Cramped; cramping.


stipule (n.)

small appendage at the base of the petiole of a leaf, 1793, from French stipule, from Latin stipula
stalk (of hay), straw, from PIE *stip-ola-, from root *steip- to stick, compress (see stiff (adj.)).


compile (v.)

early 14c., from Old French compiler compile, collect (13c.), from Latin compilare to plunder, rob,
probably originally bundle together, heap up; hence to pack up and carry off, from com- together
(see com-) + pilare to compress, ram down. Related: Compiled; compiling.


decompress (v.)

1905, from de- + compress (v.). Related: Decompressed; decompressing.


stipple (v.)

paint with dots, 1670s, from Dutch stippelen to make points, frequentative of stippen to prick,
speckle, from stip a point, perhaps ultimately from PIE root *st(e)ig- pointed (see stick (v.)), or
from *steip- to stick, compress. Related: Stippled; stippling.


constrict (v.)

early 15c., from Latin constrictus, past participle of constringere compress (see constrain). A
direct borrowing from Latin of the same word which, via French, became constrain. Related:
Constricted; constricting.


foment (v.)

early 15c., apply hot liquids, from Old French fomenter (13c.) apply hot compress (to a wound), from
Late Latin fomentare, from Latin fomentum warm application, poultice, contraction of *fovimentum,
from fovere to warm; cherish, encourage (see fever). Extended sense of stimulate, instigate (1620s)
was in the French. Related: Fomented; fomenting.


cache (n.)

1797, hiding place, from French Canadian trappers' slang, hiding place for stores (1660s), a back-
formation from French cacher to hide, conceal (13c., Old French cachier), from Vulgar Latin
*coacticare store up, collect, compress, frequentative of Latin coactare constrain, from coactus,
past participle of cogere to collect (see cogent). Sense extended by 1830s to anything stored in a
hiding place.


squat (v.)

mid-14c., to crush; early 15c., crouch on the heels, from Old French esquatir, escatir compress,
press down, lay flat, crush, from es- out (see ex-) + Old French quatir press down, flatten, from
Vulgar Latin *coactire press together, force, from Latin coactus, past participle of cogere to
compel, curdle, collect (see cogent). Meaning to settle on land without any title or right is from
1800. Related: Squatted; squatting.


press (v.1)

push against, early 14c., to clasp, embrace; mid-14c. to squeeze out; also to cluster, gather in a
crowd;  late 14c., to press against, exert pressure, also assault, assail; also forge ahead, push
one's way, move forward, from Old French presser squeeze, press upon; torture (13c.), from Latin
pressare to press, frequentative formation from pressus, past participle of premere to press, hold
fast, cover, crowd, compress, from PIE *per- (4) to strike. Related: Pressed; pressing. Figurative
sense is from late 14c. Meaning to urge, argue for is from 1590s.


angle (n.)

space between intersecting lines, late 14c., from Old French angle angle, corner, and directly from
Latin angulus an angle, corner, a diminutive form from PIE root *ang-/*ank- to bend (cognates: Greek
ankylos bent, crooked, Latin ang(u)ere to compress in a bend, fold, strangle; Old Church Slavonic
aglu corner; Lithuanian anka loop; Sanskrit ankah hook, bent, angam limb; Old English ancleo ankle;
Old High German ango hook). Angle bracket is 1875 in carpentry; 1956 in typography.


hem (n.)

Old English hem a border, especially of cloth or a garment, from Proto-Germanic *hamjam (cognates:
Old Norse hemja to bridle, curb, Swedish h&auml;mma to stop, restrain, Old Frisian hemma to hinder,
Middle Dutch, German hemmen to hem in, stop, hinder), from PIE *kem- to compress. Apparently the
same root yielded Old English hamm, common in place names (where it means enclosure, land hemmed in
by water or high ground, land in a river bend). In Middle English, hem also was a symbol of pride or
ostentation.    If &thorn;ei wer &thorn;e first &thorn;at schuld puplysch &thorn;ese grete myracles
of her mayster, men myth sey of hem, as Crist ded of &thorn;e Pharisees, &thorn;at &thorn;ei
magnified her owne hemmys. [John Capgrave, Life of Saint Gilbert of Sempringham, 1451]


strain (v.)

c.1300, tie, bind, fasten, gird, from present participle stem of Old French estreindre bind tightly,
clasp, squeeze, from Latin stringere (2) draw tight, bind tight, compress, press together, from PIE
root *streig- to stroke, rub, press (cognates: Lithuanian stregti congeal, freeze, become stiff;
Greek strangein twist; Old High German strician mends nets; Old English streccian to stretch; German
stramm, Dutch stram stiff).    From late 14c. as tighten; make taut, also exert oneself; overexert
(a body part), Sense of press through a filter, put (a liquid) through a strainer is from early 14c.
(implied in strainer); that of to stress beyond measure, carry too far, make a forced interpretation
of is from mid-15c. Related: Strained; straining.


turf (n.)

Old English turf, tyrf slab of soil and grass, sod, also surface of grassland, from Proto-Germanic
*turb- (cognates: Old Norse torf, Danish t&oslash;rv, Old Frisian turf, Old High German zurba,
German Torf), from PIE root *drebh- to wind, compress (cognates: Sanskrit darbhah tuft of grass).
Especially the race course, hence the turf the profession of racing horses (1755). French tourbe
turf is a Germanic loan-word. The Old English plural was identical with the singular, but in Middle
English turves sometimes was used. Slang meaning territory claimed by a gang is attested from 1953
in Brooklyn, N.Y.; earlier it had a jive talk sense of the street, the sidewalk (1930s), which is
attested in hobo use from 1899, and before that the work and venue of a prostitute (1860). Turf war
is recorded from 1962.


