compulsion (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French compulsion, from Latin compulsionem (nominative compulsio) a driving,
urging, noun of action from past participle stem of compellere compel (see compel). Psychological
sense is from 1909 in A.A. Brill's translation of Freud's Selected Papers on Hysteria, where German
Zwangsneurose is rendered as compulsion neurosis.


constraint (n.)

late 14c., distress, oppression, from Old French constreinte binding, constraint, compulsion (Modern
French contrainte), fem. noun from constreint, past participle of constreindre, from Vulgar Latin
*constrinctus, from Latin constrictus (see constrain). Meaning coercion, compulsion is from 1530s.


need (n.)

Old English nied (West Saxon), ned (Mercian) necessity, compulsion, duty; hardship, distress;
errand, business, originally violence, force, from Proto-Germanic *nauthis (cognates: Old Saxon nod,
Old Norse nau&eth;r, Old Frisian ned, Middle Dutch, Dutch nood, Old High German not, German Not,
Gothic nau&thorn;s need), probably cognate with Old Prussian nautin need, and perhaps with Old
Church Slavonic nazda, Russian nuzda, Polish n&#281;dza misery, distress, from PIE *nau- (1) death,
to be exhausted (see narwhal).    The more common Old English word for need, necessity, want was
&eth;earf, but they were connected via a notion of trouble, pain, and the two formed a compound,
nied&eth;earf need, necessity, compulsion, thing needed. Nied also might have been influenced by Old
English neod desire, longing, which often was spelled the same. Common in Old English compounds,
such as niedfaru compulsory journey, a euphemism for death; niedh&aelig;med rape, the second element
being an Old English word meaning sexual intercourse; niedling slave. Meaning extreme poverty,
destitution is from c.1200.


enforcement (n.)

late 15c., from Old French enforcement strengthening, fortification; rape, compulsion, coercion;
from enforcer; see enforce + -ment.


stress (v.)

c.1300, to subject (someone) to force or compulsion, from Middle French estrecier, from Vulgar Latin
*strictiare, from Latin stringere draw tight, which also is the source of stress (n.). The
figurative meaning put emphasis on is first recorded 1896, from notion of laying pressure on
something by relying on it. Related: Stressed; stressing.


duress (n.)

early 14c., harsh or severe treatment, from Old French duresse, from Latin duritia hardness, from
durus hard (see endure). The Old French suffix -esse is from Latin -itia, added to adjectives to
form nouns of quality (compare riches, largesse). Sense of coercion, compulsion is from 1590s.


force (n.)

c.1300, physical strength, from Old French force (12c.) force, strength, courage, fortitude;
violence, power, compulsion, from Vulgar Latin *fortia (source also of Spanish fuerza, Italian
forza), noun use of neuter plural of Latin fortis strong (see fort). Meaning body of armed men, army
first recorded late 14c. (also in Old French). Physics sense is from 1660s; force field attested by
1920.


necessity (n.)

late 14c., constraining power of circumstances, from Old French necessit&eacute; need, necessity;
privation, poverty; distress, torment; obligation, duty (12c.), from Latin necessitatem (nominative
necessitas) compulsion, need for attention, unavoidableness, destiny, from necesse (see necessary).
Meaning condition of being in need in English is from late 15c.    Necessity is the Mother of
Invention. [Richard Franck, c.1624-1708, English author and angler, Northern Memoirs, 1658]    To
maken vertu of necessite is in Chaucer. Related: Necessities.


