compassion (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French compassion sympathy, pity (12c.), from Late Latin compassionem (nominative
compassio) sympathy, noun of state from past participle stem of compati to feel pity, from com-
together (see com-) + pati to suffer (see passion).    Latin compassio is an ecclesiastical loan-
translation of Greek sympatheia (see sympathy). An Old English loan-translation of compassion was
efen&eth;rowung.


compassionate (adj.)

1580s, from compassion + -ate (1). Related: Compassionately. Phrase compassionate conservatism in
American political language recorded by 1992, popularized, if not coined, by Marvin Olasky,
University of Texas at Austin instructor.


bowel (n.)

c.1300, from Old French boele intestines, bowels, innards (12c., Modern French boyau), from Medieval
Latin botellus small intestine, originally sausage, diminutive of botulus sausage, a word borrowed
from Oscan-Umbrian, from PIE *gwet-/*geut- intestine (cognates: Latin guttur throat, Old English
cwi&eth;, Gothic qi&thorn;us belly, womb, German kutteln guts, chitterlings).    Greek splankhnon
(from the same PIE root as spleen) was a word for the principal internal organs, which also were
felt in ancient times to be the seat of various emotions. Greek poets, from Aeschylus down, regarded
the bowels as the seat of the more violent passions such as anger and love, but by the Hebrews they
were seen as the seat of tender affections, especially kindness, benevolence, and compassion.
Splankhnon was used in Septuagint to translate a Hebrew word, and from thence early Bibles in
English rendered it in its literal sense as bowels, which thus acquired in English a secondary
meaning of pity, compassion (late 14c.). But in later editions the word often was translated as
heart. Bowel movement is attested by 1874.


ruthless (adj.)

early 14c., from reuthe pity, compassion (see ruth) + -less. Ruthful (early 13c.) has fallen from
use since late 17c. except as a deliberate archaism. Related: Ruthlessly; ruthlessness.


compatible (adj.)

mid-15c., from Middle French compatible (15c.), from Medieval Latin compatibilis, from Late Latin
compati (see compassion). Related: Compatibility.


pittance (n.)

c.1200, pious donation to a religious house or order to provide extra food; the extra food provided,
also a small portion, scanty rations, from Old French pitance pity, mercy, compassion; refreshment,
nourishment; portion of food allowed a monk or poor person by a pious bequest, apparently literally
pity, from piti&eacute; (see pity). Meaning small amount, portion first recorded 1560s.


Miserere (n.)

51st Psalm (one of the Penitential Psalms), 13c., from Miserere mei Deus Have mercy upon me, O God,
opening line, from Latin miserere feel pity, have compassion, commiserate, imperative of misereri to
have mercy, from miser (see miser). From 15c.-17c. used as an informal measure of time, the time it
takes to recite the Miserere. Also in miserere mei kind of severe colic ('iliac passion')
accompanied by excruciating cramps and vomiting of excrement (1610s), literally have mercy on me.


piety (n.)

early 14c. (late 12c. as a surname), mercy, tenderness, pity, from Old French piete piety, faith;
pity, compassion (12c.), from Latin pietatem (nominative pietas) dutiful conduct, sense of duty;
religiousness, piety; loyalty, patriotism; faithfulness to natural ties, in Late Latin gentleness,
kindness, pity; from pius kind (see pious). Meaning piousness attested in English from c.1600. Also
see pity (n.).


piteous (adj.)

c.1300, from Anglo-French pitous, Old French pitos pious; merciful, compassionate, moved to pity;
pitiful (12c., Modern French piteux), from Medieval Latin pietosus merciful, pitiful, in Vulgar
Latin dutiful, from Latin pietas dutiful conduct, compassion (see piety). Related: Piteously;
piteousness.


pity (n.)

early 13c., from Old French pite, pitet pity, mercy, compassion, care, tenderness; pitiful state,
wretched condition (11c., Modern French piti&eacute;), from Latin pietatem (nominative pietas)
piety, loyalty, duty (see piety). Replaced Old English mildheortness, literally mild-heartness,
itself a loan-translation of Latin misericordia. English pity and piety were not fully distinguished
until 17c. Transferred sense of grounds or cause for pity is from late 14c.


thought (n.)

Old English &thorn;oht, ge&thorn;oht process of thinking, a thought; compassion, from stem of
&thorn;encan to conceive of in the mind, consider (see think). Cognate with the second element in
German Ged&auml;chtnis memory, Andacht attention, devotion, Bedacht consideration, deliberation.
Second thought later consideration is recorded from 1640s. Thought-crime is from Nineteen Eighty-
Four (1949); thought police is attested from 1945, originally in reference to war-time Japanese
Special Higher Police (Tokubetsu Koto Keisatsu).


remorse (n.)

late 14c., from Old French remors (Modern French remords), from Medieval Latin remorsum, noun use of
neuter past participle of Latin remordere to vex, disturb, literally to bite back, from re- back
(see re-) + mordere to bite (see mordant).    The sense evolution was via the Medieval Latin phrase
remorsus conscienti&aelig; (translated into Middle English as ayenbite of inwit). Middle English
also had a verb, remord to strike with remorse, touch with compassion, prick one's conscience.


sympathy (n.)

1570s, affinity between certain things, from Middle French sympathie (16c.) and directly from Late
Latin sympathia community of feeling, sympathy, from Greek sympatheia fellow-feeling, community of
feeling, from sympathes having a fellow feeling, affected by like feelings, from assimilated form of
syn- together (see syn-) + pathos feeling (see pathos).    In English, almost a magical notion at
first; used in reference to medicines that heal wounds when applied to a cloth stained with blood
from the wound. Meaning conformity of feelings is from 1590s; sense of fellow feeling, compassion is
first attested c.1600. An Old English loan-translation of sympathy was efensargung.


feel (v.)

Old English felan to touch, perceive, from Proto-Germanic *foljan (cognates: Old Saxon gifolian, Old
Frisian fela, Dutch voelen, Old High German vuolen, German f&uuml;hlen to feel, Old Norse falma to
grope), from PIE root *pal- to touch, feel, shake, strike softly (cognates: Greek psallein to pluck
(the harp), Latin palpare to touch softly, stroke, palpitare to move quickly), perhaps ultimately
imitative.    The sense in Old English was to perceive through senses which are not referred to any
special organ. Sense of be conscious of a sensation or emotion developed by late 13c.; that of to
have sympathy or compassion is from c.1600. To feel like want to attested from 1829.


mercy (n.)

late 12c., God's forgiveness of his creatures' offenses, from Old French mercit, merci (9c.) reward,
gift; kindness, grace, pity, from Latin mercedem (nominative merces) reward, wages, pay hire (in
Vulgar Latin favor, pity), from merx (genitive mercis) wares, merchandise (see market (n.)). In
Church Latin (6c.) applied to the heavenly reward of those who show kindness to the helpless.
Meaning disposition to forgive or show compassion is attested from early 13c. As an interjection,
attested from mid-13c. In French largely superseded by mis&eacute;ricorde except as a word of
thanks. Seat of mercy golden covering of the Ark of the Covenant (1530) is Tyndale's loan-
translation of Luther's gnadenstuhl, an inexact rendering of Hebrew kapporeth, literally
propitiatory.


charity (n.)

mid-12c., benevolence for the poor, from Old French charit&eacute; (Christian) charity, mercy,
compassion; alms; charitable foundation (12c., Old North French carit&eacute;), from Latin caritatem
(nominative caritas) costliness, esteem, affection (in Vulgate often used as translation of Greek
agape love -- especially Christian love of fellow man -- perhaps to avoid the sexual suggestion of
Latin amor), from carus dear, valued, from PIE *karo-, from root *ka- to like, desire (see whore
(n.)).    Vulgate also sometimes translated agape by Latin dilectio, noun of action from diligere to
esteem highly, to love (see diligence).  Wyclif and the Rhemish version regularly rendered the
Vulgate dilectio by 'love,' caritas by 'charity.' But the 16th c. Eng. versions from Tindale to
1611, while rendering agape sometimes 'love,' sometimes 'charity,' did not follow the dilectio and
caritas of the Vulgate, but used 'love' more often (about 86 times), confining 'charity' to 26
passages in the Pauline and certain of the Catholic Epistles (not in I John), and the Apocalypse
.... In the Revised Version 1881, 'love' has been substituted in all these instances, so that it now
stands as the uniform rendering of agape. [OED]  Sense of charitable foundation or institution in
English attested by 1690s.


