compulsory (adj.)

1580s, from Medieval Latin compulsorius, from Latin compulsus, past participle of compellere (see
compel).


janizary (n.)

elite Turkish infantry, 1520s, from French janissaire (15c.), from Italian giannizzero, from Turkish
yenicheri, literally new troops, from yeni new + cheri soldiery. Formed 1362 from slaves and
prisoners of war, until late 17c. largely recruited from compulsory conscripts and converts taken
from Christian subjects. In later times Turks and other Muslims joined the corps because of the
various privileges attached to it; abolished 1826.


banal (adj.)

trite, commonplace, 1840, from French banal, belonging to a manor, common, hackneyed, commonplace,
from Old French banel communal (13c.), from ban decree; legal control; announcement; authorization;
payment for use of a communal oven, mill, etc. (see ban (v.)). The modern sense evolved from the
word's use in designating things like ovens or mills that belonged to feudal serfs, or else
compulsory military service; in either case it was generalized in French through open to everyone to
commonplace, ordinary, to trite, petty.


conscription (n.)

late 14c., a putting in writing, from Middle French conscription, from Latin conscriptionem
(nominative conscriptio) a drawing up of a list, enrollment, a levying of soldiers, from conscribere
to enroll, from com- with (see com-) + scribere to write (see script (n.)).    Meaning enlistment of
soldiers is from 1520s; the sense compulsory enlistment for military service (1800) is traceable to
the French Republic act of Sept. 5, 1798. Technically, a conscription is the enrollment of a fixed
number by lot, with options of providing a substitute.


robot (n.)

1923, from English translation of 1920 play R.U.R. (Rossum's Universal Robots), by Karel Capek
(1890-1938), from Czech robotnik slave, from robota forced labor, compulsory service, drudgery, from
robotiti to work, drudge, from an Old Czech source akin to Old Church Slavonic rabota servitude,
from rabu slave, from Old Slavic *orbu-, from PIE *orbh- pass from one status to another (see
orphan). The Slavic word thus is a cousin to German Arbeit work (Old High German arabeit). According
to Rawson the word was popularized by Karel Capek's play, but was coined by his brother Josef (the
two often collaborated), who used it initially in a short story.


need (n.)

Old English nied (West Saxon), ned (Mercian) necessity, compulsion, duty; hardship, distress;
errand, business, originally violence, force, from Proto-Germanic *nauthis (cognates: Old Saxon nod,
Old Norse nau&eth;r, Old Frisian ned, Middle Dutch, Dutch nood, Old High German not, German Not,
Gothic nau&thorn;s need), probably cognate with Old Prussian nautin need, and perhaps with Old
Church Slavonic nazda, Russian nuzda, Polish n&#281;dza misery, distress, from PIE *nau- (1) death,
to be exhausted (see narwhal).    The more common Old English word for need, necessity, want was
&eth;earf, but they were connected via a notion of trouble, pain, and the two formed a compound,
nied&eth;earf need, necessity, compulsion, thing needed. Nied also might have been influenced by Old
English neod desire, longing, which often was spelled the same. Common in Old English compounds,
such as niedfaru compulsory journey, a euphemism for death; niedh&aelig;med rape, the second element
being an Old English word meaning sexual intercourse; niedling slave. Meaning extreme poverty,
destitution is from c.1200.


