comprehensive (adj.)

containing much, 1610s, from French compreh&eacute;nsif, from Late Latin comprehensivus, from
comprehens-, past participle stem of Latin comprehendere (see comprehend). Related: Comprehensively
(mid-15c.); comprehensiveness.


sundries (n.)

various small things, 1755, plural of sundry (adj.) used as a noun. [A] comprehensive term used for
brevity, especially in accounts [Century Dictionary].


catholicity (n.)

1830, catholicism, from catholic + -ity. Meaning quality of being inclusive or comprehensive is by
1843.


incomprehensive (adj.)

1650s, from in- (1) not, opposite of + comprehensive.


reprehensive (adj.)

1580s, from Latin stem of reprehend + -ive, perhaps on model of comprehensive.


panorama (n.)

1796, a painting on a revolving cylindrical surface, coined c.1789 by inventor, Irish artist Robert
Barker, literally a complete view, from pan- all + Greek horama sight, spectacle, that which is
seen, from horan to look, see, possibly from PIE root *wer- (4) to perceive (see ward (n.)). Meaning
comprehensive survey is 1801.


leprosy (n.)

1530s (earlier lepruse, mid-15c.), from leprous; see leper. First used in Coverdale Bible, where it
renders Hebrew cara'ath, which apparently was a comprehensive term for skin diseases. Because of
pejorative associations, the use of the word in medical context has been banned by the World Health
Organization and replaced by Hansen's disease, named for Norwegian physician Armauer Hansen
(1841-1912) who in 1871 discovered the bacillus that causes it.


general (adj.)

c.1200, comprehensive, inclusive, full, from Latin generalis relating to all, of a whole class
(contrasted with specialis), from genus (genitive generis) stock, kind (see genus). General store
attested by 1810, American English; a general hospital (1737) is one not restricted to one class of
persons or type of disease.


synoptic (adj.)

1763, pertaining to synopsis, from Modern Latin synopticus, from Late Latin synopsis (see synopsis).
Greek synoptikos meant taking a general or comprehensive view, and the sense affording a general
view in English emerged by mid-19c. Specifically of the first three Gospels from 1841, on notion of
giving an account of events from the same point of view. Related Synoptical (1660s).


Moses

masc. proper name, name of Hebrew prophet and lawgiver, from Latin, from Greek Mouses, from Hebrew
Mosheh, of unknown origin.Most scholars see in it the Hebraization of Egyptian mes, mesu 'child,
son,' which is often used in theophorous names. According to this derivation the words of Pharaoh's
daughter in Ex. 2:10, 'For out of the water I drew him' are not the explanation of the Hebrew name
Mosheh, but express the idea that the Egyptian name given by Pharaoh's daughter resembles in sound,
and therefore, reminds us of, the Hebrew verb mashah 'he drew out,' which is suggestive of the words
spoken by Pharaoh's daughter. [Dr. Ernest Klein, A Comprehensive Etymological Dictionary of the
English Language]  As an expletive or oath, 1840.


shore (n.)

land bordering a large body of water, c.1300, from an Old English word or from Middle Low German
schor shore, coast, headland, or Middle Dutch scorre land washed by the sea, all probably from
Proto-Germanic *skur-o- cut, from PIE *(s)ker- (1) to cut (see shear (v.)).    According to
etymologists originally with a sense of division between land and water. But if the word began on
the North Sea coast of the continent, it might as well have meant originally land 'cut off' from the
mainland by tidal marshes (compare Old Norse skerg an isolated rock in the sea, related to sker to
cut, shear). Old English words for coast, shore were strand (n.), waro&thorn;, ofer. Few Indo-
European languages have such a single comprehensive word for land bordering water (Homer uses one
word for sandy beaches, another for rocky headlands). General application to country near a seacoast
is attested from 1610s.


evil (adj.)

Old English yfel (Kentish evel) bad, vicious, ill, wicked, from Proto-Germanic *ubilaz (cognates:
Old Saxon ubil, Old Frisian and Middle Dutch evel, Dutch euvel, Old High German ubil, German
&uuml;bel, Gothic ubils), from PIE *upelo-, from root *wap- (cognates: Hittite huwapp- evil).    In
OE., as in all the other early Teut. langs., exc. Scandinavian, this word is the most comprehensive
adjectival expression of disapproval, dislike or disparagement [OED]. Evil was the word the Anglo-
Saxons used where we would use bad, cruel, unskillful, defective (adj.), or harm, crime, misfortune,
disease (n.). The meaning extreme moral wickedness was in Old English, but did not become the main
sense until 18c. Related: Evilly. Evil eye (Latin oculus malus) was Old English eage yfel. Evilchild
is attested as an English surname from 13c.


-or

word-forming element making nouns of quality, state, or condition, from Middle English -our, from
Old French -our (Modern French -eur), from Latin -orem (nominative -or), a suffix added to pp.
verbal stems. Also in some cases from Latin -atorem (nominative -ator).    In U.S., via Noah
Webster, -or is nearly universal (but not in glamour, curious, generous), while in Britain -our is
used in most cases (but with many exceptions: author, error, senator, ancestor, horror etc.). The
-our form predominated after c.1300, but Mencken reports that the first three folios of
Shakespeare's plays used both spellings indiscriminately and with equal frequency; only in the
Fourth Folio of 1685 does -our become consistent.    A partial revival of -or on the Latin model
took place from 16c. (governour began to lose its -u- 16c. and it was gone by 19c.), and also among
phonetic spellers in both England and America (John Wesley wrote that -or was a fashionable
impropriety in England in 1791).    Webster criticized the habit of deleting -u- in -our words in
his first speller (A Grammatical Institute of the English Language, commonly called the Blue-Black
Speller) in 1783. His own deletion of the -u- began with the revision of 1804, and was enshrined in
the influential Comprehensive Dictionary of the English Language (1806), which also established in
the U.S. -ic for British -ick and -er for -re, along with many other attempts at reformed spelling
which never caught on (such as masheen for machine). His attempt to justify them on the grounds of
etymology and the custom of great writers does not hold up.    Fowler notes the British drop the -u-
when forming adjectives ending in -orous (humorous) and derivatives in -ation and -ize, in which
cases the Latin origin is respected (such as vaporize). When the Americans began to consistently
spell it one way, however, the British reflexively hardened their insistence on the other. The
American abolition of -our in such words as honour and favour has probably retarded rather than
quickened English progress in the same direction. [Fowler]


