compute (v.)

1630s, from French computer, from Latin computare to count, sum up, reckon together, from com- with
(see com-) + putare to reckon, originally to prune (see pave). Related: Computed; computing.


computer (n.)

1640s, one who calculates, agent noun from compute (v.). Meaning calculating machine (of any type)
is from 1897; in modern use, programmable digital electronic computer (1945 under this name;
theoretical from 1937, as Turing machine). ENIAC (1946) usually is considered the first. Computer
literacy is recorded from 1970; an attempt to establish computerate (adjective, on model of
literate) in this sense in the early 1980s didn't catch on. Computerese the jargon of programmers is
from 1960, as are computerize and computerization.    WASHINGTON (AP) -- A New York Congressman says
the use of computers to record personal data on individuals, such as their credit background, is
just frightening to me. [news article, March 17, 1968]


computation (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French computation, from Latin computationem (nominative computatio), noun
of action from past participle stem of computare to sum up, reckon, compute (see compute).


calculate (v.)

1560s, to compute, to estimate by mathematical means, from Latin calculatus, past participle of
calculare to reckon, compute, from calculus (see calculus). Meaning to plan, devise is from 1650s.
Replaced earlier calculen (mid-14c.), from Old French calculer. Related: Calculable.


deem (v.)

Old English deman to judge, condemn, think, compute, from root of dom (see doom (n.)). Originally to
pronounce judgment as well as to form an opinion. The two judges of the Isle of Man were called
deemsters in 17c., a title formerly common throughout England and Scotland and preserved in the
surname Dempster.


calculation (n.)

late 14c., from Late Latin calculationem (nominative calculatio), noun of action from past
participle stem of calculare to reckon, compute, from Latin calculus reckoning, account, originally
pebble used in counting, diminutive of calx (genitive calcis) limestone (see chalk (n.)).


counter (n.)

mid-14c., table where a money lender does business, from Old French contouer, comptoir (14c.)
counting room, table of a bank, from Medieval Latin computatorium place of accounts, from Latin
computatus, past participle of computare (see compute). Generalized 19c. from banks to shops, then
extended to display cases for goods. Phrase under the counter is from 1926.


calculator (n.)

late 14c., mathematician, one who calculates, from Latin calculator, from calculatus, past
participle of calculare to reckon, compute, from calculus (see calculus). Of mechanical adding
machine contraptions, from 1784. Of electronic ones, from 1946.    Electronic calculator uses 18,000
tubes to solve complex problems [Scientific American headline, June 1946]


count (v.)

mid-14c., from Old French conter add up, but also tell a story, from Latin computare (see compute).
Related: Counted; counting. Modern French differentiates compter to count and conter to tell, but
they are cognates.


syllogism (n.)

late 14c., from Old French silogisme a syllogism, scholastic argument based on a formula or proof
(13c., Modern French syllogisme), from Latin syllogismus, from Greek syllogismos a syllogism,
originally inference, conclusion; computation, calculation, from syllogizesthai bring together
before the mind, compute, conclude, literally think together, from assimilated form of syn- together
(see syn-) + logizesthai to reason, count, from logos a reckoning, reason (see logos).


account (n.)

c.1300, reckoning of money received and paid, from Old French acont account, reckoning, terminal
payment, from a to (see ad-) + cont counting, reckoning of money to be paid, from Late Latin
computus a calculation, from Latin computare calculate (see compute).    Meaning sum of (one's)
money in a bank is from 1833. Sense of narration is first attested 1610s. Plural accounts used as a
collective or singular in phrases such as to give accounts (of something), is from mid-13c. Phrase
by all accounts is attested from 1798.


tell (v.)

Old English tellan to reckon, calculate, number, compute; consider, think, esteem, account (past
tense tealde, past participle teald), from Proto-Germanic *taljan to mention in order (cognates: Old
Saxon tellian tell, Old Norse telja to count, number; to tell, say, Old Frisian tella to count; to
tell, Middle Dutch and Dutch tellen, Old Saxon talon to count, reckon, Danish tale to speak, Old
High German zalon, German z&auml;hlen to count, reckon), from PIE root *del- (2) to count, reckon
(see tale).    Meaning to narrate, announce, relate in English is from c.1000; that of to make known
by speech or writing, announce is from early 12c. Sense of to reveal or disclose is from c.1400;
that of to act as an informer, to 'peach'  is recorded from 1901. Meaning to order (someone to do
something) is from 1590s. To tell (someone) off reprimand is from 1919.    Original sense in teller
and phrase to tell time. For sense evolution, compare French conter to count, raconter to recount;
Italian contare, Spanish contar to count, recount, narrate; German z&auml;hlen to count,
erz&auml;hlen to recount, narrate. Klein also compares Hebrew saphar he counted, sipper he told.


