compact (n.2)

make-up case, 1921, from compact (adj.), based on its containing compacted face powder.


compact (adj.)

late 14c., from Middle French compact (14c.) or directly from Latin compactus concentrated, past
participle of compingere to fasten together, construct, from com- with, together (see com-) +
pangere to fix, fasten (see pact). Compact car is 1960. Compact disc is from 1979.


compact (v.)

early 15c., from Latin compactus, past participle of compingere to fasten together (see compact
(adj.)). Related: Compacted; compacting.


compaction (n.)

late 14c., from Old French compaction, from Latin compactionem (nominative compactio) a putting or
joining together, noun of action from past participle stem of compingere (see compact (adj.)).


compact (n.1)

agreement, 1590s, from Latin compactum agreement, noun use of neuter past participle of compacisci
come to agreement, from com- together (see com-) + pacisci to covenant, contract (see pact).


CD

1979 as an abbreviation of compact disc as a system of information storage.


solid (adj.)

late 14c., not empty or hollow, from Old French solide firm, dense, compact, from Latin solidus
firm, whole, undivided, entire, figuratively sound, trustworthy, genuine, from PIE *sol-ido-,
suffixed form of root *sol- whole (cognates: Greek holos whole, Latin salus health, salvus safe; see
safe (adj.)).    Meaning firm, hard, compact is from 1530s. Meaning entirely of the same stuff is
from 1710. Of qualities, well-established, considerable c.1600. As a mere intensifier, 1830. Slang
sense of wonderful, remarkable first attested 1920 among jazz musicians. As an adverb, solidly,
completely, 1650s. Solid South in U.S. political history is attested from 1858. Solid state as a
term in physics is recorded from 1953; meaning employing solid transistors (as opposed to vacuum
tubes) is from 1959. Related: Solidly.


ame damnee (n.)

devoted adherent, toady, 1823, from French &acirc;me damn&eacute;e familiar spirit, literally damned
soul, originally a soul damned by compact with a controlling demon.


CD-ROM

1983, in computer jargon; also cd-rom; from compact disc read-only memory.


disc (n.)

Latinate spelling preferred in British English for most uses of disk (q.v.). American English tends
to use it in the musical recording sense; originally of phonograph records, recently of compact
discs. Hence, discophile enthusiast for gramophone recordings (1940).


spissitude (n.)

density, thickness, compactness, mid-15c., from Latin spissitudo thickness, density, from spissus
thick, dense, compact, close (source of Italian spesso, Spanish espeso, Old French espes, French
&eacute;pais). Related: Spissated.


snug (adj.)

1590s, compact, trim (of a ship), especially protected from the weather, perhaps from a Scandinavian
source such as Old Norse snoggr short-haired, Old Swedish snygg, Old Danish sn&oslash;g neat, tidy,
perhaps from PIE *kes- (1) to scratch (see xyster). Sense of in a state of ease or comfort first
recorded 1620s. Meaning fit closely is first found 1838. Expression snug as a bug in a rug attested
by 1769; earlier snug as a bee in a box (1706).


tallow (n.)

hard animal fat, used to make soap, candles, etc., mid-14c., talwgh, from a source (perhaps an
unrecorded Old English word) cognate with Middle Low German talg tallow, Middle Dutch talch, from
Proto-Germanic *talga-, meaning perhaps originally firm, compact material (compare Gothic tulgus
firm, solid). OED says related Scandinavian words probably are from continental Germanic.


consolidate (v.)

1510s, to compact into one body, from Latin consolidatus, past participle of consolidare to make
solid, from com- together (see com-) + solidare to make solid (see solid). Meaning to make firm or
strong is from mid-16c. Related: Consolidated; consolidating.


relax (v.)

late 14c., to make (something) less compact or dense, from Old French relaschier set free; soften;
reduce (14c.), from Latin relaxare relax, loosen, open, stretch out, widen again; make loose, from
re- back (see re-) + laxare loosen, from laxus loose (see lax). Of persons, to become less formal,
from 1837. Meaning decrease tension is from early 15c.; intransitive sense of to become less tense
is recorded from 1935. Related: Relaxed; relaxing.


serried (adj.)

pressed close together, 1667 (in Paradise Lost), probably a  past participle adjective from serry to
press close together (1580s), a military term, from Middle French serre close, compact (12c.), past
participle of serrer press close, fasten, from Vulgar Latin *serrare to bolt, lock up, from Latin
serare, from sera a bolt, bar, cross-bar, perhaps from PIE *ser- (3) to line up (see series). Modern
use is due to the popularity of Scott, who used it with phalanx.


pact (n.)

early 15c., from Old French pacte agreement, treaty, compact (14c.), from Latin pactum agreement,
contract, covenant, noun use of neuter past participle of pacisci to covenant, to agree, make a
treaty, from PIE root *pag- fix, join together, unite, make firm (cognates: Sanskrit pasa- cord,
rope, Avestan pas- to fetter, Greek pegnynai to fix, make firm, fast or solid, Latin pangere to fix,
to fasten, Slavonic pa&#382; wooden partition, Old English fegan to join, fon to catch seize).


block (n.)

solid piece, c.1300, from Old French bloc log, block of wood (13c.), via Middle Dutch bloc trunk of
a tree or Old High German bloh, from a common Germanic source, from PIE *bhlugo-, from *bhelg- a
thick plank, beam (see balk).    Meaning mould for a hat is from 1570s. Slang sense of head is from
1630s. Extended sense of obstruction is first recorded 1640s. In cricket from 1825; in U.S. football
from 1912. The meaning in city block is 1796, from the notion of a compact mass of buildings; slang
meaning fashionable promenade is 1869.    BLOCK. A term applied in America to a square mass of
houses included between four streets. It is a very useful one. [Bartlett]


dough (n.)

Old English dag dough, from Proto-Germanic *daigaz something kneaded (cognates: Old Norse deig,
Swedish deg, Middle Dutch deech, Dutch deeg, Old High German teic, German Teig, Gothic daigs dough),
from PIE *dheigh- to build, to form, to knead (cognates: Sanskrit dehah body, literally that which
is formed, dih- to besmear; Greek teikhos wall; Latin fingere to form, fashion, figura a shape,
form, figure; Gothic deigan to smear; Old Irish digen firm, solid, originally kneaded into a compact
mass). Meaning money is from 1851.


phalanx (n.)

1550s, line of battle in close ranks, from Latin phalanx compact body of heavily armed men in battle
array, or directly from Greek phalanx (genitive phalangos) line of battle, battle array, also finger
or toe bone, originally round piece of wood, trunk, log, of unknown origin. Perhaps from PIE root
*bhelg- plank, beam (source of Old English balca balk; see balk (n.)). The Macedonian phalanx
consisted of 50 close files of 16 men each. In anatomy, originally the whole row of finger joints,
which fit together like infantry in close order. Figurative sense of number of persons banded
together in a common cause is attested from 1600 (compare Spanish Falangist, member of a fascist
organization founded in 1933).


shelter (n.)

1580s, structure affording protection, possibly an alteration of Middle English sheltron, sheldtrume
roof or wall formed by locked shields, from Old English scyldtruma, from scield shield (see shield
(n.)) + truma troop, related to Old English trum firm, strong (see trim).    If so, the original
notion is of a compact body of men protected by interlocking shields. OED finds this untenable and
proposed derivation from shield + -ture. Figurative sense is recorded from 1580s; meaning temporary
lodging for homeless poor is first recorded 1890 in Salvation Army jargon; sense of temporary home
for animals is from 1971. Related: Shelterless.


warlock (n.)

Old English w&aelig;rloga traitor, liar, enemy, devil, from w&aelig;r faith, fidelity; a compact,
agreement, covenant, from Proto-Germanic *wera- (cognates: Old High German wara truth, Old Norse
varar solemn promise, vow), from PIE *were-o- true, trustworthy (see very, also Varangian). Second
element is an agent noun related to leogan to lie (see lie (v.1); and compare Old English wordloga
deceiver, liar).    Original primary sense seems to have been oath-breaker; given special
application to the devil (c.1000), but also used of giants and cannibals. Meaning one in league with
the devil is recorded from c.1300. Ending in -ck (1680s) and meaning male equivalent of a witch
(1560s) are from Scottish. Related: Warlockery.


very (adj.)

late 13c., verray true, real, genuine, later actual, sheer (late 14c.), from Anglo-French verrai,
Old French verai true, truthful, sincere; right, just, legal, from Vulgar Latin *veracus, from Latin
verax (genitive veracis) truthful, from verus true (source also of Italian vero), from PIE root
*were-o- true, trustworthy (cognates: Old English w&aelig;r a compact, Old Dutch, Old High German
war, Dutch waar, German wahr true; Welsh gwyr, Old Irish fir true; Old Church Slavonic vera faith,
Russian viera faith, belief). Meaning greatly, extremely is first recorded mid-15c. Used as a pure
intensive since Middle English.


bide (v.)

Old English bidan to stay, continue, live, remain, also to trust, rely (cognate with Old Norse
bi&eth;a, Old Saxon bidan, Old Frisian bidia, Middle Dutch biden, Old High German bitan, Gothic
beidan to wait), apparently from PIE *bheidh-, an extended stem of one root of Old English biddan
(see bid (v.)), the original sense of which was to command, and to trust (compare Greek peithein to
persuade, pistis faith; Latin fidere to trust, foedus compact, treaty, Old Church Slavonic beda
need). Perhaps the sense evolved in prehistoric times through endure, and endure a wait, to to wait.
Preserved in Scotland and northern England, replaced elsewhere by abide in all senses except to bide
one's time. Related: Bided; biding.


tenet (n.)

principle, opinion, or dogma maintained as true by a person, sect, school, etc., properly a thing
held (to be true), early 15c., from Latin tenet he holds, third person singular present indicative
of tenere to hold, grasp, keep, have possession, maintain, also reach, gain, acquire, obtain; hold
back, repress, restrain; figuratively hold in mind, take in, understand.    The Latin word is from
PIE root *ten- to stretch (cognates: Sanskrit tantram loom, tanoti stretches, lasts; Persian tar
string; Lithuanian tankus compact, i.e. tightened; Greek teinein to stretch, tasis a stretching,
tension, tenos sinew, tetanos stiff, rigid, tonos string, hence sound, pitch; Latin tendere to
stretch, tenuis thin, rare, fine; Old Church Slavonic tento cord; Old English &thorn;ynne thin).
Connecting notion between stretch and hold is cause to maintain. The modern sense is probably
because tenet was used in Medieval Latin to introduce a statement of doctrine.


Taurus (n.)

zodiac constellation, late Old English, from Latin taurus bull, bullock, steer, also the name of the
constellation, from PIE *tau-ro- bull (cognates: Greek tauros, Old Church Slavonic turu bull, steer;
Lithuanian tauras aurochs; Old Prussian tauris bison); from PIE *tauro- bull, from root *(s)taeu-
stout, standing, strong (cognates: Sanskrit sthura- thick, compact, Avestan staora- big cattle,
Middle Persian stor horse, draft animal, Gothic stiur young bull, Old English steor, see steer
(n.)); extended form of root *sta- to stand (see stet).    Klein proposes a Semitic origin (compare
Aramaic tora ox, bull, steer, Hebrew shor, Arabic thor, Ethiopian sor). Meaning person born under
the sign of the bull is recorded from 1901.    At midnight revels when the gossips met,  He was the
theme of their eternal chat:  This ask'd what form great Jove would next devise,  And when his
godship would again Taurise?  [William Somerville, The Wife, 1727]    The Taurid meteors (peaking
Nov. 20) so called from 1878.


tight (adj.)

c.1400, tyght dense, close, compact, from Middle English thight, from Old Norse &thorn;ettr
watertight, close in texture, solid, and also from Old English -&thorn;iht (compare second element
in mete&thorn;iht stout from eating), both from Proto-Germanic *thinhta- (cognates: Middle High
German dihte dense, thick, German dicht dense, tight, Old High German gidigan, German gediegen
genuine, solid, worthy), from PIE root *tenk- (2) to become firm, curdle, thicken (cognates: Irish
techt curdled, coagulated, Lithuanian tankus close, tight, Persian tang tight, Sanskrit tanakti
draws together, contracts).    Sense of drawn, stretched is from 1570s; meaning fitting closely (as
of garments) is from 1779; that of evenly matched (of a contest, bargain, etc.) is from 1828,
American English; that of drunk is from 1830. Of persons, close, intimate, sympathetic from 1956.
From 1670s as an adverb; to sit tight is from 1738. Related: Tightly; tightness. Tight-assed
unwilling to relax is attested from 1903. Tight-laced is recorded from 1741 in both the literal and
figurative senses. Tight-lipped is first attested 1872.


peace (n.)

mid-12c., freedom from civil disorder, from Anglo-French pes, Old French pais peace, reconciliation,
silence, permission (11c., Modern French paix), from Latin pacem (nominative pax) compact,
agreement, treaty of peace, tranquility, absence of war (source of Proven&ccedil;al patz, Spanish
paz, Italian pace), from PIE *pag-/*pak- fasten, related to pacisci to covenant or agree (see pact).
Replaced Old English fri&eth;, also sibb, which also meant happiness. Modern spelling is 1500s,
reflecting vowel shift. Sense in peace of mind is from c.1200. Used in various greetings from
c.1300, from Biblical Latin pax, Greek eirene, which were used by translators to render Hebrew
shalom, properly safety, welfare, prosperity.    Sense of quiet is attested by 1300; meaning absence
or cessation of war or hostility is attested from c.1300. As a type of hybrid tea rose (developed
1939 in France by Francois Meilland), so called from 1944. Native American peace pipe is first
recorded 1760. Peace-officer attested from 1714. Peace offering is from 1530s. Phrase peace with
honor first recorded 1607 (in Coriolanus). The U.S. Peace Corps was set up March 1, 1962. Peace
sign, both the hand gesture and the graphic, attested from 1968.


