compelling (adj.)

c.1600, present participle adjective from compel. Meaning irresistible is from 1901. Related:
Compellingly.


pressing (adj.)

exerting pressure, mid-14c., present participle adjective from press (v.1). Sense of urgent,
compelling, forceful is from 1705. Related: Pressingly.


necessary (adj.)

late 14c. needed, required, essential, indispensable, from Old French necessaire necessary, urgent,
compelling (13c.), and directly from Latin necessarius unavoidable, indispensable, necessary, from
necesse unavoidable, indispensable, originally no backing away, from ne- not + cedere to withdraw,
go away, yield (see cede). The root sense is of that from which there is no evasion, that which is
inevitable. Necessary house privy is from c.1600. Necessary evil is from 1540s (the original
reference was to woman).


compel (v.)

mid-14c., from Old French compellir, from Latin compellere to drive together, drive to one place (of
cattle), to force or compel (of persons), from com- together (see com-) + pellere to drive (see
pulse (n.1)). Related: Compelled; compelling.


capillary (adj.)

1650s, of or pertaining to the hair, from Latin capillaris of hair, from capillus hair (of the
head); perhaps related to caput head (but de Vaan finds this difficult on the formal side and far
from compelling, since capillus is a diminutive, and would mean 'little head', which hardly amounts
to 'hair'). Borrowed earlier as capillar (14c.). Meaning taking place in capillary vessels is from
1809. Capillary attraction attested from 1813. As a noun, capillary blood vessel, from 1660s.


pregnant (adj.2)

convincing, weighty, pithy, late 14c., cogent, convincing, compelling (of evidence, an argument,
etc.); sense of full of meaning is from c.1400. According to OED from Old French preignant, present
participle of preindre press, squeeze, stamp, crush, from earlier priembre, from Latin premere to
press (see press (v.1)). But Watkins has it from Latin praehendere to grasp, seize, and in Barnhart
it is from Latin praegnans with child, literally before birth and thus identical with pregnant
(adj.1).


