compromise (v.)

mid-15c., from compromise (n.). Related: Compromised; compromising.


compromise (n.)

early 15c., a joint promise to abide by an arbiter's decision, from Middle French compromis (13c.),
from Latin compromissus, past participle of compromittere to make a mutual promise (to abide by the
arbiter's decision), from com- together (see com-) + promittere (see promise). The main modern sense
of a coming to terms is from extension to the settlement itself (late 15c.).


uncompromised (adj.)

1775, from un- (1) not + past participle of compromise (v.).


uncompromising (adj.)

1799, from un- (1) not + present participle of compromise (v.). Related: Uncompromisingly.


modus vivendi (n.)

1879, Latin, literally way of living or getting along (see modus).   Modus vivendi is any temporary
compromise that enables parties to carry on pending settlement of a dispute that would otherwise
paralyse their activities. [Fowler]


last-ditch (adj.)

on the last line of defense, 1715, attributed to William of Orange; if so, originally in a Dutch
context.    We have no space to enter into the detail of the heroic struggle maintained by the young
stadtholder and his faithful Dutchmen; how they laid their country under water, and successfully
kept the powerful invader at bay. Once the contest seemed utterly hopeless. William was advised to
compromise the matter, and yield up Holland as the conquest of Louis XIV. No, replied he; I mean to
die in the last ditch. A speech alone sufficient to render his memory immortal. [Agnes Strickland,
Lives of the Queens of England, London, 1847]


plight (v.)

to pledge (obsolete except in archaic plight one's troth), from Old English pligtan, plihtan to
endanger, imperil, compromise, verb form of pliht (n.) danger, risk (see plight (n.2)). Related:
Plighted; plighting.


doughface (n.)

contemptuous nickname in U.S. politics for Northern Democrats who worked in the interest of the
South before the Civil War; it was taken to mean man who allows himself to be moulded. The source is
an 1820 speech by John Randolph of Roanoke, in the wake of the Missouri Compromise.    Randolph,
mocking the northerners intimidated by the South, referred to a children's game in which the players
daubed their faces with dough and then looked in a mirror and scared themselves. [Daniel Walker
Howe, What Hath God Wrought, 2007]   Mask of dough is recorded from 1809, and the same image
Randolph used is attested in another context by 1833.


