composure (n.)

c.1600, composition (also, in early use, with many senses now given to compound), from compose +
-ure. Sense of tranquility, calmness is first recorded 1660s, from composed calm (1620s). For sense,
compare colloquial to fall apart to lose one's composure.


cool (n.)

c.1400, coldness, coolness, from cool (adj.). Meaning one's self-control, composure (the thing you
either keep or lose) is from 1966.


abash (v.)

perplex, embarrass, early 15c., earlier lose one's composure, be upset (late 14c.), from Old French
esbaiss-, present stem of esbaer gape with astonishment, from es out (see ex-) + ba(y)er to be open,
gape, from Latin *batare to yawn, gape, from root *bat, possibly imitative of yawning. Related:
Abashed; abashing. Bashful is a 16c. derivative.


sang-froid (n.)

presence of mind, composure, 1712, from French sang froid, literally cool blood, from sang blood
(from Latin sanguis; see sanguinary) + froid cold (from Latin frigidus; see frigid).


err (v.)

c.1300, from Old French errer go astray, lose one's way; make a mistake; transgress, from Latin
errare wander, go astray, be in error, from PIE root *ers- (1) be in motion, wander around
(cognates: Sanskrit arsati flows; Old English ierre angry, straying; Old Frisian ire angry; Old High
German irri angry, irron astray; Gothic airzi&thorn;a error, deception; the Germanic words
reflecting the notion of anger as a straying from normal composure). Related: Erred; erring.


poise (n.)

early 15c., weight, quality of being heavy, later significance, importance (mid-15c.), from Old
French pois weight, balance, consideration (12c., Modern French poids), from Medieval Latin pesum
weight, from Latin pensum something weighted or weighed, (source of Proven&ccedil;al and Catalan
pes, Spanish, Portuguese, Italian peso), noun use of neuter past participle of pendere to weigh (see
pendant).    The sense of steadiness, composure first recorded 1640s, from notion of being equally
weighted on either side (1550s). Meaning balance is from 1711; meaning way in which the body is
carried is from 1770.


hocus-pocus

1620s, Hocas Pocas, common name of a magician or juggler, a sham-Latin invocation used in tricks,
probably based on a perversion of the sacramental blessing from the Mass, Hoc est corpus meum This
is my body. The first to make this speculation on its origin apparently was English prelate John
Tillotson (1630-1694).I will speak of one man ... that went about in King James his time ... who
called himself, the Kings Majesties most excellent Hocus Pocus, and so was called, because that at
the playing of every Trick, he used to say, Hocus pocus, tontus tabantus, vade celeriter jubeo, a
dark composure of words, to blinde the eyes of the beholders, to make his Trick pass the more
currantly without discovery. [Thomas Ady, A Candle in the Dark, 1655]


