compilation (n.)

early 15c., that which is compiled, also action of compiling, from Middle French compilation, from
Latin compilationem (nominative compilatio) a compilation, literally a pillaging, noun of action
from compilare (see compile).


code (n.)

c.1300, systematic compilation of laws, from Old French code system of laws, law-book (13c.), from
Latin codex, earlier caudex book, book of laws, literally tree trunk, hence, book made up of wooden
tablets covered with wax for writing. Meaning cipher (the sense in secret code) is from 1808.


Hobbit (n.)

1937, coined in the fantasy tales of J.R.R. Tolkien (1892-1973).    On a blank leaf I scrawled: 'In
a hole in the ground there lived a hobbit.' I did not and do not know why.  [Tolkien, letter to W.H.
Auden, dated 1955]    The word also turns up in a very long list of folkloric supernatural creatures
in the writings of Michael Aislabie Denham (d.1859), printed in volume 2 of The Denham Tracts [ed.
James Hardy, London: Folklore Society, 1895], a compilation of Denham's scattered publications.
Denham was an early folklorist who concentrated on Northumberland, Durham, Westmoreland, Cumberland,
the Isle of Man, and Scotland.    What a happiness this must have been seventy or eighty years ago
and upwards, to those chosen few who had the good luck to be born on the eve of this festival of all
festivals; when the whole earth was so overrun with ghosts, boggles, bloody-bones, spirits, demons,
ignis fatui, brownies, bugbears, black dogs, specters, shellycoats, scarecrows, witches, wizards,
barguests, Robin-Goodfellows, hags, night-bats, scrags, breaknecks, fantasms, hobgoblins,
hobhoulards, boggy-boes, dobbies, hob-thrusts, fetches, kelpies, warlocks, mock-beggars, mum-pokers,
Jemmy-burties, urchins, satyrs, pans, fauns, sirens, tritons, centaurs, calcars, nymphs, imps,
incubuses, spoorns, men-in-the-oak, hell-wains, fire-drakes, kit-a-can-sticks, Tom-tumblers, melch-
dicks, larrs, kitty-witches, hobby-lanthorns, Dick-a-Tuesdays, Elf-fires, Gyl-burnt-tales, knockers,
elves, rawheads, Meg-with-the-wads, old-shocks, ouphs, pad-foots, pixies, pictrees, giants, dwarfs,
Tom-pokers, tutgots, snapdragons, sprets, spunks, conjurers, thurses, spurns, tantarrabobs,
swaithes, tints, tod-lowries, Jack-in-the-Wads, mormos, changelings, redcaps, yeth-hounds, colt-
pixies, Tom-thumbs, black-bugs, boggarts, scar-bugs, shag-foals, hodge-pochers, hob-thrushes, bugs,
bull-beggars, bygorns, bolls, caddies, bomen, brags, wraiths, waffs, flay-boggarts, fiends,
gallytrots, imps, gytrashes, patches, hob-and-lanthorns, gringes, boguests, bonelesses, Peg-powlers,
pucks, fays, kidnappers, gallybeggars, hudskins, nickers, madcaps, trolls, robinets, friars'
lanthorns, silkies, cauld-lads, death-hearses, goblins, hob-headlesses, bugaboos, kows, or cowes,
nickies, nacks necks, waiths, miffies, buckies, ghouls, sylphs, guests, swarths, freiths, freits,
gy-carlins Gyre-carling, pigmies, chittifaces, nixies, Jinny-burnt-tails, dudmen, hell-hounds,
dopple-gangers, boggleboes, bogies, redmen, portunes, grants, <b>hobbits</b>, hobgoblins, brown-men,
cowies, dunnies, wirrikows, alholdes, mannikins, follets, korreds, lubberkins, cluricauns, kobolds,
leprechauns, kors, mares, korreds, puckles korigans, sylvans, succubuses, blackmen, shadows,
banshees, lian-hanshees, clabbernappers, Gabriel-hounds, mawkins, doubles, corpse lights or candles,
scrats, mahounds, trows, gnomes, sprites, fates, fiends, sibyls, nicknevins, whitewomen, fairies,
thrummy-caps, cutties, and nisses, and apparitions of every shape, make, form, fashion, kind and
description, that there was not a village in England that had not its own peculiar ghost. Nay, every
lone tenement, castle, or mansion-house, which could boast of any antiquity had its bogle, its
specter, or its knocker. The churches, churchyards, and crossroads were all haunted. Every green
lane had its boulder-stone on which an apparition kept watch at night. Every common had its circle
of fairies belonging to it. And there was scarcely a shepherd to be met with who had not seen a
spirit!    [Emphasis added] It is curious that the name occurs nowhere else in folklore, and there
is no evidence that Tolkien ever saw this. The word also was recorded from 1835 as a term generally
used in Wales to express a quantity made up of four Welsh pecks. Hobbitry attested from 1947.


