concord (n.)

early 14c., from Old French concorde (12c.) concord, harmony, agreement, treaty, from Latin
concordia agreement, union, from concors (genitive concordis) of the same mind, literally hearts
together, from com- together (see com-) + cor heart (see heart).


Concorde (n.)

supersonic passenger airliner, operating from 1976 to 2003, from French concorde, literally harmony,
agreement (see concord), reflecting the Anglo-French collaborative agreement that produced it.


concordant (adj.)

late 15c. of persons, 1510s of things, 1550s of music, from French concordant, from Latin
concordantem, present participle of concordare (see concord). Related: Concordantly.


concordance (n.)

late 14c., alphabetical arrangement of all the words in a book (especially the Bible), from Old
French concordance (12c.) agreement, harmony, from Late Latin concordantia, from concordantem
(nominative concordans; see concord). Originally a citation of parallel passages. Literal meaning
fact of agreeing attested in English from mid-15c.


concordat (n.)

agreement between church and state on a mutual matter, 1610s, from French concordat (16c.), from
Medieval Latin concordatum, noun use of Latin concordatum, neuter past participle of concordare to
agree, from concors (genitive concordis) of one mind (see concord).


harmony (n.)

late 14c., from Old French armonie harmony, also the name of a musical instrument (12c.), from Latin
harmonia, from Greek harmonia agreement, concord of sounds, also as a proper name, the
personification of music, literally means of joining, used of ship-planks, etc., also settled
government, order, related to harmos fastenings of a door; shoulder, from PIE *ar-ti-, from *ar- to
fit together (see arm (n.1)). Musical sense is oldest in English; that of agreement of feeling,
concord is from late 14c.


accordion (n.)

1831, from German Akkordion, from Akkord musical chord, concord of sounds, be in tune (compare
Italian accordare to attune an instrument); ultimately from same source as English accord (v.), with
suffix on analogy of clarion, etc. Invented 1829 by piano-maker Cyrill Demian (1772-1847) of Vienna.


unanimity (n.)

mid-15c., from Old French unanimite (14c.), from Late Latin unanimitatem (nominative unanimitas)
unanimity, concord, from unanimus (see unanimous).


bogus

1838, counterfeit money, spurious coin, American English, apparently from a slang word applied
(according to some sources first in Ohio in 1827) to a counterfeiter's apparatus.    One bogus or
machine impressing dies on the coin, with a number of dies, engraving tools, bank bill paper,
spurious coin, &amp;c.; &amp;c.; making in all a large wagon load, was taken into possession by the
attorney general of Lower Canada. [Niles' Register, Sept. 7, 1833, quoting from Concord, New
Hampshire, Statesman, Aug. 24]     Some trace this to tantrabobus, also tantrabogus, a late 18c.
colloquial Vermont word for any odd-looking object, in later 19c. use the devil, which might be
connected to tantarabobs, recorded as a Devonshire name for the devil. Others trace it to the same
source as bogey (n.1).


symphony (n.)

c.1300, a name given to various types of musical instruments, from Old French simphonie, sifonie,
simfone musical harmony; stringed instrument (12c., Modern French symphonie) and directly from Latin
symphonia a unison of sounds, harmony, from Greek symphonia harmony, concord of sounds, from
symphonos harmonious, agreeing in sound, from assimilated form of syn- together (see syn-) + phone
voice, sound (see fame (n.)).    Meaning harmony of sounds in English is attested from late 14c.;
sense of music in parts is from 1590s. It was only after the advent of Haydn that this word began to
mean a sonata for full orchestra. Before that time it meant a prelude, postlude, or interlude, or
any short instrumental work. [Elson's Music Dictionary] Meaning elaborate orchestral composition
first attested 1789. Elliptical for symphony orchestra from 1926. Diminutive symphonette is recorded
from 1947.


puke (n.)

1737, a medicine which excites vomiting; 1966 as material thrown up in vomiting, from puke (v.).
U.S. colloquial meaning native of Missouri (1835) might be a different word, of unknown origin.
It is well known, that the inhabitants of the several western States are called by certain
nicknames. Those of Michigan are called wolverines; of Indiana, hooshers; of Illinois, suckers; of
Ohio, buckeyes; of Kentucky, corn-crackers; of Missouri pukes, &amp;c.; To call a person by his
right nickname, is always taken in good part, and gives no offence; but nothing is more offensive
than to mis-nickname--that is, were you to call a hoosher a wolverine, his blood would be up in a
moment, and he would immediately show fight. [A.A. Parker, Trip to the West and Texas, Concord,
N.H., 1835]    Bartlett (1859) has A nickname for a native of Missouri as the second sense of puke
(n.), the first being A mean, contemptible fellow. The association of the state nickname with the
vomit word is at least from 1858, and folk etymology talks of the old state literally vomiting forth
immigrants to California.


sibling (n.)

brother or sister, 1903, modern revival (in anthropology) of Old English sibling relative, kinsman,
from sibb kinship, relationship; love, friendship, peace, happiness, from Proto-Germanic *sibja-
blood relation, relative, properly one's own (cognates: Old Saxon sibba, Old Frisian, Middle Dutch
sibbe, Old High German sippa, German Sippe, Gothic sibja kin, kindred), from PIE s(w)e-bh(o)-
(cognates: Old Church Slavonic sobistvo, Russian sob character, individuality), an enlargement of
the root *swe- self (see idiom). Related to the second element in gossip.  The word 'sib' or
'sibling' is coming into use in genetics in the English-speaking world, as an equivalent of the
convenient German term 'Geschwister' [E.&amp;C.; Paul, Human Heredity, 1930]    In Old English, sibb
and its compounds covered grounds of brotherly love, familial affection which tended later to lump
into love (n.), as in sibsumnes peace, concord, brotherly love, sibbian (v.) bring together,
reconcile, sibbecoss kiss of peace. Sibship, however, is a modern formation (1908). Sib persisted
through Middle English as a noun, adjective, and verb expressing kinship and relationship.


patriot (n.)

1590s, compatriot, from Middle French patriote (15c.) and directly from Late Latin patriota fellow-
countryman (6c.), from Greek patriotes fellow countryman, from patrios of one's fathers, patris
fatherland, from pater (genitive patros) father (see father (n.)); with -otes, suffix expressing
state or condition. Liddell &amp; Scott write that patriotes was applied to barbarians who had only
a common [patris], [politai] being used of Greeks who had a common [polis] (or free-state).
Meaning loyal and disinterested supporter of one's country is attested from c.1600, but became an
ironic term of ridicule or abuse from mid-18c. in England, so that Johnson, who at first defined it
as one whose ruling passion is the love of his country, in his fourth edition added, It is sometimes
used for a factious disturber of the government.The name of patriot had become [c.1744] a by-word of
derision. Horace Walpole scarcely exaggerated when he said that ... the most popular declaration
which a candidate could make on the hustings was that he had never been and never would be a
patriot. [Macaulay, Horace Walpole, 1833]Somewhat revived in reference to resistance movements in
overrun countries in World War II, it has usually had a positive sense in American English, where
the phony and rascally variety has been consigned to the word patrioteer (1928). Oriana Fallaci [The
Rage and the Pride, 2002] marvels that Americans, so fond of patriotic, patriot, and patriotism,
lack the root noun and are content to express the idea of patria by cumbersome compounds such as
homeland. (Joyce, Shaw, and H.G. Wells all used patria as an English word early 20c., but it failed
to stick.) Patriots' Day (April 19, anniversary of the 1775 skirmishes at Lexington and Concord
Bridge) was observed as a legal holiday in Maine and Massachusetts from 1894.


