conclusively (adv.)

1550s, in conclusion, from conclusive + -ly (2). Meaning decisively is recorded from 1748.


conclusive (adj.)

1610s, occurring at the end, from French conclusif, from Late Latin conclusivus, from conclus-, past
participle stem of concludere (see conclude). Meaning definitive, decisive, convincing (putting an
end to debate) is from 1640s. Related: Conclusiveness.


clincher (n.)

early 14c., person or thing that clinches (i.e., secures nails by bending down or riveting the
pointed end), late 15c. as a class of shipyard worker; agent noun from clinch (v.). As a type of
nail, from 1735; as a conclusive statement, argument, etc., 1737.


conclusory (adj.)

1846, pertaining to a conclusion, from stem of conclusion + -ory. Probably coined because the
secondary decisive sense had come to predominate in conclusive.


cod (n.)

large sea fish, mid-14c. (late 13c. in a surname, Thomas cotfich), of unknown origin; despite
similarity of form it has no conclusive connection to the widespread Germanic word for bag
(represented by Old English codd, preserved in codpiece). Cod-liver oil known since at least 1610s,
was recommended medicinally since 1783, but not popular as a remedy until after 1825.


inconclusive (adj.)

1680s (implied in inconclusiveness), from in- (1) not, opposite of + conclusive. Related:
Inconclusively.


sockdolager (n.)

1830, a decisive blow (also, figuratively a conclusive argument), fanciful formation from sock (v.1)
hit hard, perhaps via a comical mangling of doxology, on a notion of finality. The meaning something
exceptional is attested from 1838.   Sockdologising likely was nearly the last word President
Abraham Lincoln heard. During the performance of Tom Taylor's Our American Cousin, assassin John
Wilkes Booth (who knew the play well) waited for the laugh-line Well, I guess I know enough to turn
you inside out, you sockdologising old man-trap. Amid the noise as the audience responded, Booth
fired the fatal shot.


insoluble (adj.)

late 14c., unable to be loosened, from Latin insolubilis that cannot be loosened, from in- not (see
in- (1)) + solubilis (see soluble). Figurative use, of problems, etc., is from late 14c.It was a
tacit conviction of the learned during the Middle Ages that no such thing as an insoluble question
existed. There might be matters that presented serious difficulties, but if you could lay them
before the right man -- some Arab in Spain, for instance, omniscient by reason of studies into the
details of which it was better not to inquire -- he would give you a conclusive answer. The real
trouble was only to find your man. [Gertrude Bell, The Desert and the Sown, 1907]


