concentric (adj.)

c.1400, from Middle French concentrique, from Medieval Latin concentricus, from com- together (see
com-) + centrum circle, center (see center (n.)).


target (n.)

c.1300, shield, diminutive of late Old English targe, from Old French targe light shield (12c.),
from Frankish *targa shield, from Proto-Germanic *targ- (cognates: Old High German zarga edging,
border, German zarge border, edge, frame, Old English targe, Old Norse targa shield, buckler),
perhaps originally edge of a shield. Meaning round object to be aimed at in shooting first recorded
1757, originally in archery, perhaps suggested by the concentric circles in both. Target-practice is
from 1801. Target audience is by 1951; early reference is to Cold War psychological warfare.


eccentric (n.)

early 15c., eccentric circle or orbit, originally a term in Ptolemaic astronomy, circle or orbit not
having the Earth precisely at its center, from Middle French eccentrique and directly from Medieval
Latin eccentricus (noun and adjective), from Greek ekkentros out of the center (as opposed to
concentric), from ek out (see ex-) + kentron center (see center (n.)). Meaning odd or whimsical
person attested by 1824.    June 4 [1800].--Died in the streets in Newcastle, William Barron, an
eccentric, well known for many years by the name of   Billy Pea-pudding. [John Sykes, Local Records,
or Historical Register of Remarkable Events which have Occurred Exclusively in the Counties of
Durham and Northumberland, Town and County of Newcastle Upon Tyne, and Berwick Upon Tweed,
Newcastle, 1824]


sphere (n.)

mid-15c., Latinized spelling of Middle English spere (c.1300) cosmos; space, conceived as a hollow
globe about the world, from Anglo-French espiere, Old French espere (13c., Modern French
sph&#232;re), from Latin sphaera globe, ball, celestial sphere (Medieval Latin spera), from Greek
sphaira globe, ball, playing ball, terrestrial globe, of unknown origin.    From late 14c. in
reference to any of the supposed concentric, transparent, hollow, crystalline globes of the cosmos
believed to revolve around the earth and contain the planets and the fixed stars; the supposed
harmonious sound they made rubbing against one another was the music of the spheres (late 14c.).
Also from late 14c. as a globe; object of spherical form, a ball, and the geometric sense solid
figure with all points equidistant from the center. Meaning range of something, place or scene of
activity is first recorded c.1600 (as in sphere of influence, 1885, originally in reference to
Anglo-German colonial rivalry in Africa).


