conciseness (n.)

expression of much in few words, 1650s, from concise + -ness.    [Conciseness] is the English word
familiar to the ordinary man: concision is the LITERARY CRITIC'S WORD, more recent in English, used
by writers under French influence &amp; often requiring the reader to stop &amp; think whether he
knows its meaning. [Fowler]


concise (adj.)

1580s, from Latin concisus cut off, brief, past participle of concidere to cut off, cut up, cut
through, cut to pieces, from com-, intensive prefix (see com-), + caedere to cut (see -cide).
Related: Concisely.


terse (adj.)

1590s (implied in tersely), clean-cut, burnished, neat, from French ters clean, and directly from
Latin tersus wiped off, clean, neat, from past participle of tergere to rub, polish, wipe. Sense of
concise or pithy in style or language is from 1777, which led to a general sense of neatly concise.
The pejorative meaning brusque is a fairly recent development. Related: Terseness.


concision (n.)

late 14c., cutting away, mutilation, also, from 16c., circumcision, from Latin concisionem a
separation into divisions, literally a cutting up, noun of action from past participle stem of
concidere to cut up (see concise). From 18c. it began to be used in the sense of conciseness (q.v.).


compendious (adj.)

concise, late 14c., from Old French compendieux, from Latin compendiosus advantageous, abridged,
brief, from compendium (see compendium).


manual (n.)

early 15c., service book used by a priest, from Old French manuel handbook (also plow-handle), from
Late Latin manuale case or cover of a book, handbook, noun use of neuter of Latin manualis (see
manual (adj.)). Meaning a concise handbook of any sort is from 1530s.


laconic (adj.)

concise, abrupt, 1580s, probably via Latin Laconicus, from Greek Lakonikos, from Lakon person from
Lakonia, the district around Sparta in southern Greece in ancient times, whose inhabitants were
famously proud of their brevity of speech. When Philip of Macedon threatened them with, If I enter
Laconia, I will raze Sparta to the ground, the Spartans' reply was, If. An earlier form was
laconical (1570s). Related: Laconically.


succinct (adj.)

early 15c., having one's belt fastened tightly, from Middle French succincte, from Latin succinctus
prepared, ready; contracted, short, past participle of succingere tuck up (clothes for action), gird
from below, from assimilated form of sub up from under (see sub-) + cingere to gird (see cinch
(n.)). Sense of brief, concise first recorded 1530s. Related: Succinctness.


P

a rare letter in the initial position in Germanic, in part because by Grimm's Law PIE p- became
Germanic f-; even with the early Latin borrowings in Old English, -p- takes up a little over 4 pages
in J.R. Clark Hall's Concise Anglo-Saxon Dictionary, compared to 31 pages for B and more than 36 for
F. But it now is the third-most-common initial letter in the English vocabulary, and with C and S
comprises nearly a third of the dictionary, a testimony to the flood of words that have entered the
language since 1066 from Latin, Greek, and French.    To mind one's Ps and Qs (1779), possibly is
from confusion of these letters among children learning to write. Another theory traces it to old-
time tavern-keepers tracking their patrons' bar tabs in pints and quarts. But see also to be P and Q
(1610s), to be excellent, a slang phrase said to derive from prime quality.


waltz (n.)

round dance performed to music in triple time, extraordinarily popular as a fashionable dance from
late 18c. to late 19c., the dance itself probably of Bohemian origin, 1781, from German Waltzer,
from walzen to roll, dance, from Old High German walzan to turn, roll, from Proto-Germanic *walt-
(cognate with Old Norse velta), from PIE root *wel- (3) to turn, revolve (see volvox). Described in
1825 as a riotous and indecent German dance [Walter Hamilton, A Hand-Book or Concise Dictionary of
Terms Used in the Arts and Sciences].    The music struck up a beautiful air, and the dancers
advanced a few steps, when suddenly, to my no small horror and amazement, the gentlemen seized the
ladies round the waist, and all, as if intoxicated by this novel juxtaposition, began to whirl about
the room, like a company of Bacchanalians dancing round a statue of the jolly god. A waltz!
exclaimed I, inexpressibly shocked, have I lived to see Scotch women waltz? [The Edinburgh Magazine,
April, 1820]


swamp (n.)

c.1500 (implied in swampwatyr swamp-water), of uncertain origin, perhaps [Barnhart] a dialectal
survival from an Old English cognate of Old Norse sv&ouml;ppr sponge, fungus, from Proto-Germanic
*swampuz; but traditionally connected with Middle English sompe morass, swamp, which probably is
from Middle Dutch somp or Middle Low German sump swamp (see sump). All of these likely are
ultimately related to each other, from PIE *swombho- spongy; mushroom, via the notion of spongy
ground.    [B]y swamps then in general is to be understood any low grounds subject to inundations,
distinguished from marshes, in having a large growth of timber, and much underwood, canes, reeds,
wythes, vines, briers, and such like, so matted together, that they are in a great measure
impenetrable to man or beast .... [Bernard Romans, A Concise History of East and West Florida, 1775]
More popular in U.S. (swamp (n.) by itself is first attested 1624 in Capt. John Smith's description
of Virginia). Swamp-oak is from 1680s, American English. Swamp Yankee rural, rustic New Englander is
attested from 1941. Thornton's American Glossary (1912) has swamp-angel dweller in a swamp, swamp-
law might makes right.


