conception (n.)

early 14c., act of conceiving, from Old French concepcion (Modern French conception) conception,
grasp, comprehension, from Latin conceptionem (nominative conceptio) a comprehending, conception,
noun of action from stem of concipere (see conceive). Originally in the womb sense (also with
reference to Conception Day in the Church calendar); mental sense process of forming concepts is
late 14c. Meaning that which is conceived in the mind is from 1520s; general notion is from 1785.


notion (n.)

late 14c., from Latin notionem (nominative notio) concept, conception, idea, notice, noun of action
from past participle stem of noscere come to know (see know). Coined by Cicero as a loan-translation
of Greek ennoia act of thinking, notion, conception, or prolepsis previous notion, previous
conception.


mola (n.2)

false conception, c.1600, from Latin mola false conception, from earlier sense salt cake; literally
millstone (see molar).


immaculate (adj.)

early 15c., free from mental or moral pollution, pure, from a figurative use of Latin immaculatus
unstained, from assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + maculatus spotted, defiled,
past participle of maculare to spot, from macula spot, blemish. The literal sense of spotlessly
clean or neat in English is first attested 1735. Immaculate Conception is late 15c., from Middle
French conception immacul&eacute;e (late 15c.); declared to be an article of faith in 1854.


contraception (n.)

birth control, coined 1886 from Latin contra (see contra) + ending from conception.


misconception (n.)

1660s, from mis- (1) + conception. Related: Misconceptions.


preconception (n.)

1620s, from pre- + conception. Related: Preconceptions.


conceptual (adj.)

1820, pertaining to mental conception (there is an isolated use from 1662), from Medieval Latin
conceptualis, from Latin conceptus a collecting, gathering, conceiving, past participle of concipere
(see conceive). Related: Conceptualism; conceptualist.


satyr (n.)

woodland deity, companion of Bacchus, late 14c., from Latin satyrus, from Greek satyros, of unknown
origin. In pre-Roman Greek art, a man-like being with the tail and ears of a horse; the modern
conception of a being part man, part goat is from Roman sculptors, who seem to have assimilated them
to the fauns of native mythology. In some English bibles used curiously to translate Hebrew se'irim,
a type of hairy monster superstitiously believed to inhabit deserts.


suffragette (n.)

female supporter of the cause of women's voting rights, 1906, from suffrage, with French fem. ending
-ette, but not in the sense in which it was in vogue at the time.   <b>suffragette</b>. A more
regrettable formation than others such as leaderette &amp; flannelette, in that it does not even
mean a sort of suffrage as they mean a sort of leader &amp; of flannel, &amp; therefore tends to
vitiate the popular conception of the termination's meaning. The word itself may now be expected to
die, having lost its importance; may its influence on word-making die with it! [Fowler, 1926]
Compare suffragist.


post-modern (adj.)

also post-modern, post modern, by 1919, in frequent use from 1949, from post- + modern.    But it
has been only during the later decades of the modern era -- during that time interval that might
fairly be called the post-modern era -- that this mechanistic conception of things has begun
seriously to affect the current system of knowledge and belief; and it has not hitherto seriously
taken effect except in technology and in the material sciences. [Thorstein Veblen, The Vested
Interests and the Common Man, 1919]   <hr />   So much for the misapplied theory which has helped
set the artist's nerves a-quiver and incited him to the extremes of post modern art, literary and
other. [Wilson Follett, Literature and Bad Nerves, Harper's, June 1921]    Of architecture from
1940s; specific sense in the arts emerged 1960s (see postmodernism).


theory (n.)

1590s, conception, mental scheme, from Late Latin theoria (Jerome), from Greek theoria
contemplation, speculation; a looking at, viewing; a sight, show, spectacle, things looked at, from
theorein to consider, speculate, look at, from theoros spectator, from thea a view (see theater) +
horan to see, possibly from PIE root *wer- (4) to perceive (see ward (n.)).    Earlier in this sense
was theorical (n.), late 15c. Sense of principles or methods of a science or art (rather than its
practice) is first recorded 1610s (as in music theory, which is the science of musical composition,
apart from practice or performance). Sense of an intelligible explanation based on observation and
reasoning is from 1630s.


abortion (n.)

1540s, originally of both deliberate and unintended miscarriages; from Latin abortionem (nominative
abortio) miscarriage; abortion, noun of action from past participle stem of aboriri (see abortive).
Earlier noun in English was simple abort (early 15c.) miscarriage. In 19c. some effort was made to
distinguish abortion expulsion of the fetus between 6 weeks and 6 months from miscarriage (the same
within 6 weeks of conception) and premature labor (delivery after 6 months but before due time). The
deliberate miscarriage was criminal abortion. This broke down late 19c. as abortion came to be used
principally for intentional miscarriages, probably via phrases such as procure an abortion.
Foeticide (n.) appears 1823 as a forensic medical term for deliberate premature fatal expulsion of
the fetus; also compare prolicide. Abortion was a taboo word for much of early 20c., disguised in
print as criminal operation (U.S.) or illegal operation (U.K.), and replaced by miscarriage in film
versions of novels.


home (n.)

Old English ham dwelling, house, estate, village, from Proto-Germanic *haimaz (cognates: Old Frisian
hem home, village, Old Norse heimr residence, world, heima home, Danish hjem, Middle Dutch heem,
German heim home, Gothic haims village), from PIE root *tkei- to settle, dwell, be home (cognates:
Sanskrit kseti abides, dwells, Armenian shen inhabited, Greek kome, Lithuanian kaimas village; Old
Church Slavonic semija domestic servants).  'Home' in the full range and feeling of [Modern English]
home is a conception that belongs distinctively to the word home and some of its Gmc. cognates and
is not covered by any single word in most of the IE languages. [Buck]   Home stretch (1841) is
originally a reference from horse racing. Home base in baseball attested by 1859 (home plate by
1867; home as the goal in a sport or game is from 1778). Home economics first attested 1899. Slang
phrase make (oneself) at home become comfortable in a place one does not live dates from 1892. To
keep the home fires burning is from a song title from 1914. To be nothing to write home about
unremarkable is from 1907. Home movie is from 1919; home computer is from 1967.


