concave (adj.)

early 15c., from Old French concave (14c.) or directly from Latin concavus hollow, arched, vaulted,
curved, from com-, intensive prefix (see com-), + cavus hollow (see cave (n.)).


cromlech (n.)

c.1600, from Welsh, from crom, fem. of crwm crooked, bent, concave + llech (flat) stone. Applied in
Wales and Cornwall to what in Brittany is a dolmen; a cromlech there is a circle of standing stones.


gouge (n.)

mid-14c., chisel with a concave blade, from Old French gouge, from Late Latin gubia, alteration of
gulbia hollow beveled chisel, probably from Gaulish (compare Old Irish gulban prick, prickle, Welsh
gylfin beak).


concavity (n.)

c.1400, from Old French concavit&eacute; hollow, concavity (14c.) or directly from Latin
concavitatem (nominative concavitas), from Latin concavus hollow (see concave).


dish (n.)

Old English disc plate, bowl, platter, from Latin discus dish, platter, quoit, from Greek diskos
disk, platter (see disk (n.)). A common West Germanic borrowing; Old High German borrowed the word
as tisc plate, but German tisch now means table, in common with other later Romanic forms (such as
Italian desco, French dais). Meaning particular variety of food served is first recorded mid-15c.
Meaning what one likes is c.1900; that of attractive woman is 1920s. Meaning concave reflector or
antenna attested from 1948.


belly (n.)

Old English belg, bylg (West Saxon), b&aelig;lg (Anglian) leather bag, purse, bellows, from Proto-
Germanic *balgiz bag (cognates: Old Norse belgr bag, bellows, bylgja billow, Gothic balgs wineskin),
from PIE *bholgh-, from root *bhelgh- to swell, an extension of *bhel- (2) to blow, swell (see
bole). Meaning shifted to body (late 13c.), then focused to abdomen (mid-14c.). Meaning bulging part
or concave surface of anything is 1590s. The West Germanic root had a figurative or extended sense
of anger, arrogance (as in Old English bolgenmod enraged; belgan (v.) to become angry).    Indo-
European languages commonly use the same word for both the external belly and the internal (stomach,
womb, etc.), but the distinction of external and internal is somewhat present in English
belly/stomach; Greek gastr- (see gastric) in classical language denoted the paunch or belly, while
modern science uses it only in reference to the stomach as an organ. Fastidious avoidance of belly
in speech and writing (compensated for by stretching the senses of imported stomach and abdomen,
baby-talk tummy and misappropriated midriff) began late 18c. and the word was banished from Bibles
in many early 19c. editions. Belly punch (n.) is attested from 1811.


