confounded (adj.)

as an intensive execration, odious, detestable, damned, 1650s, from past participle of confound, in
its older English sense of overthrow utterly.


confound (v.)

c.1300, make uneasy, abash, from Anglo-French confoundre, Old French confondre (12c.) crush, ruin,
disgrace, throw into disorder, from Latin confundere to confuse, literally to pour together, mix,
mingle, from com- together (see com-) + fundere to pour (see found (v.2)).    The figurative sense
of confuse, fail to distinguish, mix up emerged in Latin, passed into French and thence into Middle
English, where it is mostly found in Scripture; the sense of destroy utterly is recorded in English
from c.1300. Meaning perplex is late 14c. The Latin past participle confusus, meanwhile, became
confused (q.v.).


confuse (v.)

1550s, in literal sense mix or mingle things so as to render the elements indistinguishable;
attested from mid-18c. in active, figurative sense of discomfit in mind or feeling; not in general
use until 19c., taking over senses formerly belonging to confound, dumbfound, flabbergast etc. The
past participle confused (q.v.) is attested much earlier (serving as an alternative past tense to
confound), and the verb here might be a back-formation from it. Related: Confusing.


dumbfound (v.)

1650s, from dumb (adj.) + ending from confound.


confusticate (v.)

mid-19c., a fantastical American English coinage from confound or confuse, perhaps originally in
minstrel show comedy, along with confubuscate, conflabberated, etc.


floor (v.)

early 15c., to furnish with a floor, from floor (n.). Sense of puzzle, confound is 1830, from notion
of knock down to the floor (1640s). Related: Floored; flooring.


puzzle (v.)

1590s, pusle bewilder, confound, possibly frequentative of pose (v.) in obsolete sense of perplex
(compare nuzzle from nose). Related: Puzzled; puzzling.


maze (n.)

c.1300, delusion, bewilderment (also as a verb, stupefy, daze), possibly from Old English
*m&aelig;s, which is suggested by the compound amasod amazed and verb amasian to confound, confuse
(see amaze). Perhaps related to Norwegian dialectal mas exhausting labor, Swedish masa to be slow or
sluggish. Meaning labyrinth first recorded late 14c.


spiffy (adj.)

1853, of uncertain origin, probably related to spiff well-dressed man. Uncertain relationship to
spiff (n.) percentage allowed by drapers to their young men when they effect sale of old fashioned
or undesirable stock (1859), or to spiflicate confound, overcome completely, a cant word from 1749
that was common in the 19th century [OED], preserved in American English and yielded slang
spiflicated drunk, first recorded in that sense 1902.


confusion (n.)

late 13c., overthrow, ruin, from Old French confusion (11c.) disorder, confusion, shame, from Latin
confusionem (nominative confusio) a mingling, mixing, blending; confusion, disorder, noun of action
from confundere to pour together, also to confuse (see confound). Sense of a putting to shame (a
sort of mental overthrow) is late 14c. in English, while that of mental perplexity is from 1590s.


haze (v.)

subject to cruel horseplay, 1850, American English student slang, from earlier nautical sense of
punish by keeping at unpleasant and unnecessary hard work (1840), perhaps from hawze terrify,
frighten, confound (1670s), from Middle French haser irritate, annoy (mid-15c.), of unknown origin.
Related: Hazed; hazing.    All hands were called to come up and see it rain, and kept on deck hour
after hour in a drenching rain, standing round the deck so far apart as to prevent our talking with
one another, with our tarpaulins and oil-cloth jackets on, picking old rope to pieces or laying up
gaskets and robands. This was often done, too, when we were lying in port with two anchors down, and
no necessity for more than one man on deck as a look-out. This is what is called hazing a crew, and
working their old iron up. [Dana, Two Years before the Mast, 1842]


confused (adj.)

early 14c., discomfited, routed, defeated (of groups), serving at first as an alternative past
participle of confound, as Latin confusus was the past participle of confundere to pour together,
mix, mingle; to join together; hence, figuratively, to throw into disorder; to trouble, disturb,
upset. The Latin past participle also was used as an adjective, with reference to mental states,
troubled, embarrassed, and this passed into Old French as confus dejected, downcast, undone,
defeated, discomfited in mind or feeling, which passed to Middle English as confus (14c.; for
example Chaucer's I am so confus, that I may not seye), which then was assimilated to the English
past participle pattern by addition of -ed. Of individuals, discomfited in mind, perplexed, from
mid-14c.; of ideas, speech, thought, etc., from 1610s. By mid-16c., the word seems to have been felt
as a pure adj., and it evolved a back-formed verb in confuse. Few English etymologies are more
confused.


