confiscate (v.)

1550s, originally, to appropriate for the treasury, from Latin confiscatus, past participle of
confiscare, from com- together (see com-) + fiscus public treasury, literally money basket (see
fiscal). Related: Confiscated; confiscating.


confiscation (n.)

1540s, from Middle French confiscation, from Latin confiscationem (nominative confiscatio), noun of
action from past participle stem of confiscare (see confiscate).


catchpoll (n.)

Old English *k&aelig;cepol tax-gatherer, from Old North French cachepol (Old French chacepol), from
Medieval Latin cacepollus a tax gatherer, literally chase-chicken. For first element see chase (v.),
for second see pullet. In lieu of taxes they would confiscate poultry. Later in English more
specifically as a sheriff's officer whose duty was to make arrests for debt. Compare Old French
chacipolerie tax paid to a nobleman by his subjects allowing them and their families to shelter in
his castle in wartime.


sequester (v.)

late 14c., remove something, quarantine, isolate (someone); excommunicate; also intransitive,
separate oneself from, from Old French sequestrer (14c.), from Late Latin sequestrare to place in
safekeeping, from Latin sequester trustee, mediator, noun use of an adjective meaning intermediate,
which probably is related to sequi to follow (see sequel). Meaning seize by authority, confiscate is
first attested 1510s. Alternative sequestrate (v.) is early 15c., from Latin sequestratus. Related:
Sequestered; sequestering.


cheat (v.)

mid-15c., to escheat, a shortening of Old French escheat, legal term for revision of property to the
state when the owner dies without heirs, literally that which falls to one, past participle of
escheoir befall by chance, happen, devolve, from Vulgar Latin *excadere to fall away, from Latin ex-
out (see ex-) + cadere to fall (see case (n.1)). Also compare escheat. The royal officers evidently
had a low reputation. Meaning evolved through confiscate (mid-15c.) to deprive unfairly (1580s). To
cheat on (someone) be sexually unfaithful first recorded 1934. Related: Cheated; cheating.


