confidence (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French confidence or directly from Latin confidentia, from confidentem
(nominative confidens) firmly trusting, bold, present participle of confidere to have full trust or
reliance, from com-, intensive prefix (see com-), + fidere to trust (see faith). For sense of
swindle see con (adj.).


con (adj.)

swindling, 1889, American English, from confidence man (1849), from the many scams in which the
victim is induced to hand over money as a token of confidence. Confidence with a sense of assurance
based on insufficient grounds dates from 1590s.


diffidence (n.)

c.1400, from Latin diffidentia mistrust, distrust, want of confidence, from diffidere to mistrust,
lack confidence, from dis- away (see dis-) + fidere to trust (see faith). Modern sense is of
distrusting oneself (1650s). The original sense was the opposite of confidence.


self-confidence (n.)

also self confidence, 1650s, from self- + confidence.


over-confidence (n.)

c.1700, from over- + confidence.


faith (n.)

mid-13c., duty of fulfilling one's trust, from Old French feid, foi faith, belief, trust,
confidence, pledge, from Latin fides trust, faith, confidence, reliance, credence, belief, from root
of fidere to trust, from PIE root *bheidh- (source also of Greek pistis; see bid). For sense
evolution, see belief. Theological sense is from late 14c.; religions called faiths since c.1300.


surety (n.)

c.1300, a guarantee, promise, pledge, an assurance, from Old French seurt&eacute; a promise, pledge,
guarantee; assurance, confidence (12c., Modern French s&#251;ret&#233;), from Latin securitatem
(nominative securitas) freedom from care or danger, safety, security, from securus (see secure
(adj.)). From late 14c. as security, safety, stability; state of peace, also certainty, certitude;
confidence. Meaning one who makes himself responsible for another is from early 15c. Until 1966, the
French national criminal police department was the S&#251;ret&eacute; nationale.


trust (n.)

c.1200, reliance on the veracity, integrity, or other virtues of someone or something; religious
faith, from Old Norse traust help, confidence, protection, support, from Proto-Germanic abstract
noun *traustam (cognates: Old Frisian trast, Dutch troost comfort, consolation, Old High German
trost trust, fidelity, German Trost comfort, consolation, Gothic trausti agreement, alliance), from
Proto-Germanic *treuwaz-, source of Old English treowian to believe, trust, and treowe faithful,
trusty (see true (adj.)).    from c.1300 as reliability, trustworthiness; trustiness, fidelity,
faithfulness; from late 14c. as confident expectation and that on which one relies. From early 15c.
in legal sense of confidence placed in a one who holds or enjoys the use of property entrusted to
him by its legal owner; mid-15c. as condition of being legally entrusted. Meaning businesses
organized to reduce competition is recorded from 1877. Trust-buster is recorded from 1903.


Maginot Line

fortifications built along the north and east borders of France before World War II, in which the
French placed unreasonable confidence, named for Andr&eacute; Maginot (1877-1932), French Minister
of War in late 1920s, early 1930s.


unbosom (v.)

disclose in confidence (secret opinions or feelings), 1580s, from un- (1) + bosom.


grifter (n.)

confidence trickster, 1906, carnival and circus slang, probably an alteration of grafter (see graft
(n.2); also compare grift). Gradually extended to any non-violent criminal.


credulity (n.)

early 15c., from Old French credulit&eacute; (12c.), from Latin credulitatem (nominative credulitas)
easiness of belief, rash confidence, noun of quality from credulus (see credulous).


smart aleck (n.)

1865, of unknown origin, perhaps in reference to Aleck Hoag, notorious pimp, thief, and confidence
man in New York City in early 1840s [Barnhart]. See smart (adj.). Related: Smart-alecky.


misplace (v.)

1550s, to assign a wrong position to; see mis- (1) + place (v.). Of affections, confidence, etc., to
give to a wrong object, it is recorded from 1630s. Related: Misplaced; misplacing.


reassure (v.)

restore (someone) to confidence, 1590s, from re- back, again + assure. Related: Reassured;
reassuring.


United Nations

1942, the Allied nations at war with the Axis powers; the international body (officially the United
Nations Organization) was chartered in 1945.    Such negotiation as may occur in New York is not
conducted within the walls of the tall building by the East River: it is carried out elsewhere, in
accordance with those principles of courtesy, confidence and discretion which must for ever remain
the only principles conducive to the peaceful settlement of disputes. [Harold Nicholson, The
Evolution of Diplomatic Method, 1954]


credentials (n.)

letters entitling the bearer to certain credit or confidence, 1670s, from Medieval Latin
credentialis, from credentia (see credence). Probably immediately as a shortening of letters
credential (1520s, with French word order); earlier was letter of credence (mid-14c.).


confide (v.)

mid-15c., to trust or have faith, from Latin confidere to trust in, rely firmly upon, believe (see
confidence). Meaning to share a secret with is from 1735; phrase confide in (someone) is from 1888.
Related: Confided; confiding.


aplomb (n.)

assurance, confidence, 1828, from French aplomb (16c.), literally perpendicularity, from phrase
&agrave; plomb poised upright, balanced, literally on the plumb line, from Latin plumbum (the metal)
lead (see plumb (n.)), of which the weight at the end of the line was made.


confidential (adj.)

1759, from Latin confidentia (see confidence) + -al (1). Related: Confidentiality; confidentially.


confident (adj.)

1570s, self-reliant, sure of oneself, from Middle French confident, from Latin confidentem
(nominative confidens) firmly trusting, reliant, self-confident, bold, daring, present participle of
confidere (see confidence). Related: Confidently.


confidant (n.)

1610s, confident, (male) person trusted with private affairs, from French confident (16c.), from
Italian confidente a trusty friend, literally confident, trusty, from Latin confidentem (nominative
confidens), present participle of confidere to trust, confide (see confidence). The spelling with
-a- came to predominate 18c. and might reflect the French pronunciation.


affiance (v.)

1520s, to promise, from Old French afiancier to pledge, promise, give one's word, from afiance (n.)
confidence, trust, from afier to trust, from Late Latin affidare, from ad- to (see ad-) + fidare to
trust, from fidus (see affidavit). From mid-16c. especially to promise in marriage. Related:
Affianced; affiancing.


morale (n.)

1752, moral principles or practice, from French morale morality, good conduct, from fem. of Old
French moral moral (see moral (adj.)). Meaning confidence (especially in a military context) first
recorded 1831, from confusion with French moral (French distinguishes le moral temperament and la
morale morality).


courage (n.)

c.1300, from Old French corage (12c., Modern French courage) heart, innermost feelings; temper, from
Vulgar Latin *coraticum (source of Italian coraggio, Spanish coraje), from Latin cor heart (see
heart) which remains a common metaphor for inner strength.    In Middle English, used broadly for
what is in one's mind or thoughts, hence bravery, but also wrath, pride, confidence, lustiness, or
any sort of inclination. Replaced Old English ellen, which also meant zeal, strength.


presumption (n.)

mid-13c., seizure and occupation without right, also taking upon oneself more than is warranted,
from Old French presumcion (12c., Modern French pr&#233;somption) and directly from Late Latin
praesumptionem (nominative praesumptio) confidence, audacity, in classical Latin, a taking for
granted, anticipation, noun of action from past participle stem of praesumere to take beforehand,
from prae before (see pre-) + sumere to take (see exempt (adj.)). In English, the meaning the taking
of something for granted is attested from c.1300. Presumptuous preserves the older sense.


certain (adj.)

c.1300, determined, fixed, from Old French certain reliable, sure, assured (12c.), from Vulgar Latin
*certanus, from Latin certus sure, fixed, settled, determined (also source of Italian certo, Spanish
cierto), originally a variant past participle of cernere to distinguish, decide, literally to sift,
separate (see crisis).    Of persons, full of confidence in one's knowledge or judgment, from mid-
14c. Euphemistic use (of a certain age, etc.) attested from mid-18c. Certainer, certainest were
common to c.1750, but have fallen from proper use for some reason. Expression for certain assuredly
is attested by early 14c.


effrontery (n.)

1715, from French effronterie, from effront&eacute; shameless, from Old French esfronte shameless,
brazen, probably from Late Latin effrontem (nominative effrons) barefaced, from Latin ex- out (see
ex-) + frontem (nominative frons) brow (see front (n.)).    Latin frontus had a sense of ability to
blush, but the literal sense of effrontery often has been taken to be putting forth the forehead.
Forehead in Johnson's Dictionary (1755) has a secondary sense of impudence; confidence; assurance;
audaciousness; audacity.


secure (adj.)

1530s, without care, dreading no evil, from Latin securus, of persons, free from care, quiet, easy,
also in a bad sense, careless, reckless; of things, tranquil; free from danger, safe, from *se cura,
from se free from (see secret (n.)) + cura care (see cure (n.)).    In English, of places, free from
danger, unexposed, from 1580s. Meaning firmly fixed (of material things) is from 1841, on notion of
affording grounds for confidence. Of telephones, not wiretapped, from 1961. Replaced Middle English
siker, from Old English sicor, from the Latin word. Related: Securely.


thug (n.)

1810, member of a gang of murderers and robbers in India who strangled their victims, from Marathi
thag, thak cheat, swindler, Hindi thag, perhaps from Sanskrit sthaga-s cunning, fraudulent, from
sthagayati (he) covers, conceals, perhaps from PIE root *(s)teg- (2) to cover (see stegosaurus).
The thugs roamed about the country in bands of from 10 to 100, usually in the disguise of peddlers
or pilgrims, gaining the confidence of other travelers, whom they strangled, when a favorable
opportunity presented itself, with a handkerchief, an unwound turban, or a noosed cord. The shedding
of blood was seldom resorted to. The motive of the thugs was not so much lust of plunder as a
certain religious fanaticism. The bodies of their victims were hidden in graves dug with a
consecrated pickax, and of their spoil one third was devoted to the goddess Kali, whom they
worshiped. [Century Dictionary]    The more correct Indian name is phanseegur (from phansi noose),
and the activity was described in English as far back as c.1665. Rigorously prosecuted by the
British from 1831, they were driven from existence by century's end. Transferred sense of ruffian,
cutthroat, violent lowbrow is from 1839.


