confidential (adj.)

1759, from Latin confidentia (see confidence) + -al (1). Related: Confidentiality; confidentially.


secretary (n.)

late 14c., person entrusted with secrets, from Medieval Latin secretarius clerk, notary,
confidential officer, confidant, a title applied to various confidential officers, noun use of
adjective meaning private, secret, pertaining to private or secret matters (compare Latin
secretarium a council-chamber, conclave, consistory), from Latin secretum a secret, a hidden thing
(see secret (n.)).    Meaning person who keeps records, write letters, etc., originally for a king,
first recorded c.1400. As title of ministers presiding over executive departments of state, it is
from 1590s. The word also is used in both French and English to mean a private desk, sometimes in
French form secretaire. The South African secretary bird so called (1786) in reference to its crest,
which, when smooth, resembles a pen stuck over the ear. Compare Late Latin silentiarius privy
councilor, 'silentiary, from Latin silentium a being silent.


tete-a-tete (n.)

a private meeting, from French t&#234;te-&#224;-t&#234;te, literally head-to-head, from Old French
teste head (see tete). The adjective, private, confidential, with none present but the persons
concerned is recorded from 1728; as an adverb from 1790.


trout (n.)

Old English truht trout, in part from Old French truite, both from Late Latin tructa, perhaps from
Greek troktes a kind of sea fish, literally nibbler, from trogein to gnaw, from PIE *tro-, from root
*tere- (1) (see throw (v.)). In late 17c. slang, trusty trout was used in a sense of confidential
friend.


eminence (n.)

c.1400, projection, protuberance; early 15c., high or exalted position, from Old French eminence or
directly from Latin eminentia prominence, eminence, from eminentem (nominative eminens) excellent,
prominent (see eminent).    As a title of honor (now only of cardinals) it is attested from 1650s.
The original &Eacute;minence grise (French, literally gray eminence) was Fran&ccedil;ois Leclerc du
Trembley (1577-1638), confidential agent of Richelieu.


tip (v.2)

give a small present of money to, c.1600, originally to give, hand, pass, thieves' cant, perhaps
from tip (v.3) to tap. The meaning give a gratuity to is first attested 1706. The noun in this sense
is from 1755; the noun meaning piece of confidential information is from 1845; and the verb in the
sense give private information to is from 1883.    The word's supposed origin as an acronym is
highly unlikely and the story seems to be no older than an editorial in Life magazine from July 15,
1946, claiming the restaurant server's word tip probably comes from a London coffeehouse custom of
two centuries ago when the words 'To Insure Promptness' were written on notes to the waiter, with
coins attached. Later just the initials T.I.P. were used. There is no historical evidence for this.
Also <b>see here</b>.


