confusion (n.)

late 13c., overthrow, ruin, from Old French confusion (11c.) disorder, confusion, shame, from Latin
confusionem (nominative confusio) a mingling, mixing, blending; confusion, disorder, noun of action
from confundere to pour together, also to confuse (see confound). Sense of a putting to shame (a
sort of mental overthrow) is late 14c. in English, while that of mental perplexity is from 1590s.


perturbation (n.)

late 14c., from Old French perturbacion disturbance, confusion (14c.) and directly from Latin
perturbationem (nominative perturbatio) confusion, disorder, disturbance, noun of action from past
participle stem of perturbare (see perturb).


consternation (n.)

1610s, from French consternation dismay, confusion, from Latin consternationem (nominative
consternatio) confusion, dismay, from consternat-, past participle stem of consternare overcome,
confuse, dismay, perplex, terrify, alarm, probably related to consternere throw down, prostrate,
from com-, intensive prefix (see com-), + sternere to spread out (see stratum).


seduction (n.)

1520s, from Middle French s&eacute;duction, from Latin seductionem (nominative seductio), noun of
action from past participle stem of seducere (see seduce). Originally with reference to actions or
beliefs; sexual sense is from 1769, originally always with women as the objects. Earlier appearance
of the word in Middle English with a sense treason, treachery probably is a confusion with sedition,
which confusion also is found in Old French seducion treason, betrayal.


unhinged (adj.)

thrown into confusion, 1719, past participle adjective from unhinge.


hurdy-gurdy

1749, perhaps imitative of its sound and influenced by c. 1500 hirdy-girdy uproar, confusion.


tumble (n.)

accidental fall, 1716, from tumble (v.). Earlier as disorder, confusion (1630s).


welter (n.)

1590s, confusion, from welter (v.). The meaning confused mass is first recorded 1851.


clutter (n.)

1570s, things lying in heaps or confusion, from clutter (v.); the litter sense is from 1660s.


disarray (n.)

early 15c., disorder, confusion; see disarray (v.).


co-op (n.)

1861, abbreviation of cooperative. The hyphen is needed to avoid confusion with coop (n.).


chaos (n.)

late 14c., gaping void, from Old French chaos (14c.) or directly from Latin chaos, from Greek khaos
abyss, that which gapes wide open, is vast and empty, from *khnwos, from PIE root *gheu- to gape,
yawn (cognates: Greek khaino I yawn, Old English ginian, Old Norse ginnunga-gap; see yawn (v.)).
Meaning utter confusion (c. 1600) is extended from theological use of chaos for the void at the
beginning of creation in Vulgate version of Genesis (1530s in English). The Greek for disorder was
tarakhe, however the use of chaos here was rooted in Hesiod (Theogony), who describes khaos as the
primeval emptiness of the Universe, begetter of Erebus and Nyx (Night), and in Ovid (Metamorphoses),
who opposes Khaos to Kosmos, the ordered Universe. Meaning orderless confusion in human affairs is
from c. 1600. Chaos theory in the modern mathematical sense is attested from c. 1977.


Caius

variant of Gaius, common Roman praenomen. Both forms have the abbreviation C., and the confusion
reflects the early Roman uncertainty about the use of gamma (see C).


mean (adj.1)

low-quality, c. 1200, shared by all, from imene, from Old English gem&aelig;ne common, public,
general, universal, shared by all, from Proto-Germanic *ga-mainiz possessed jointly (cognates: Old
Frisian mene, Old Saxon gimeni, Middle Low German gemeine, Middle Dutch gemene, Dutch gemeen, German
gemein, Gothic gamains common), from PIE *ko-moin-i- held in common, a compound adjective formed
from collective prefix *ko- together (Proto-Germanic *ga-) + *moi-n-, suffixed form of PIE root
*mei- (1) to change, exchange (see mutable). Compare second element in common (adj.), a word with a
sense evolution parallel to that of this word.  Of things, inferior, second-rate, from late 14c. (a
secondary sense in Old English was false, wicked). Notion of so-so, mediocre led to confusion with
mean (n.). Meaning inferior in rank or status (of persons) emerged early 14c.; that of ordinary from
late 14c.; that of stingy, nasty first recorded 1660s; weaker sense of disobliging, pettily
offensive is from 1839, originally American English slang. Inverted sense of remarkably good (i.e.
plays a mean saxophone) first recorded c. 1900, perhaps from phrase no mean _______ not inferior
(1590s, also, not average, reflecting further confusion with mean (n.)).


trunk (n.2)

elephant's snout, 1560s, apparently from trunk (n.1), perhaps from confusion with trump (n.2), short
for trumpet.


wheal (n.)

mark made on the skin by a whip, 1808, perhaps an alteration of wale, possibly by confusion with
weal welt, and obsolete wheal pimple, pustule (mid-15c.), from Old English verb hwelian to form pus,
bring to a head.


meander (v.)

flow in a winding course (of rivers), 1610s, from meander (n.). Of a person, to wander aimlessly
(1831), originally of persons traveling on a river (1821), perhaps influenced by confusion with
maunder [OED]. Related: Meandered; meandering.


bondsman (n.)

one who stands surety by bond, 1754, from bond (n.) + man (n.), with genitive -s- added probably in
part to avoid confusion with bondman.


ti

seventh note of the musical scale, 1842, earlier te (1839), replacing si to avoid confusion with so,
sol (see gamut).


haze (n.)

1706, probably a back-formation of hazy. Sense of confusion, vagueness is 1797. The English
differentiation of haze, mist, fog (and other dialectal words) is unmatched in other tongues, where
the same word generally covers all three and often cloud as well, and this may be seen as an effect
of the English climate on the language.


adversarial (adj.)

by 1892, from adversary + -al (1). Probably coined to avoid confusion which might arise with use of
adversary (adj.), which is attested from late 14c. Related: Adversarially.


clonus (n.)

violent muscular spasms, 1817, from Modern Latin, from Greek klonos turmoil, any violent motion;
confusion, tumult, press of battle, from PIE *kel- to drive, set in motion. Related: Clonic;
clonicity.


gridiron (n.)

cooking utensil for broiling over a fire, early 14c., griderne, alteration (by association with
iron) of gridire (late 13c.), a variant of gridil (see griddle). Confusion of l and r was common in
Norman dialect. Also a medieval instrument of torture by fire. As the word for a U.S. football
field, by 1896, for its lines.


poleax (n.)

kind of axe used as a weapon or by butchers, c. 1300, pollax, from pol head (see poll (n.)) + ax
(n.). From notion of beheading or head-splitting, or perhaps from the shape of the ax. Spelling
altered 17c. by confusion with pole (n.1)).


dustup (n.)

fight, 1897, from dust + up; perhaps from dust confusion, disturbance (1590s). To dust (someone's)
coat was ironical for to beat (someone) soundly (1680s).


wile (v.)

late 14c., to deceive, from wile (n.). Related: Wiled; wiling. Sense of cause (time, etc.) to pass
pleasantly, divert attention pleasantly is by 1796, from confusion with while (v.).


Emma

fem. proper name, from German Emma, from Erma, contraction of Ermentrude or some similar name. With
lower-case -e-, as British telephone and radio enunciation of M to avoid confusion with N, attested
by 1891.


rabble (n.1)

c. 1300, pack of animals, possibly related to Middle English rablen to gabble, speak in a rapid,
confused manner, probably imitative of hurry, noise, and confusion (compare Middle Dutch rabbelen,
Low German rabbeln to chatter). Meaning tumultuous crowd of vulgar, noisy people is from late 14c.;
applied contemptuously to the common or low part of any populace from 1550s.


ataxia (n.)

also anglicized as ataxy, irregularity of bodily functions, 1610s, confusion, disorder, medical
Latin, from Greek ataxia, from a-, privative prefix, + taxis arrangement, order, from stem of
tassein to arrange (see tactics). Pathological sense is attested from 1660s.


sinistrorse (adj.)

1856, a word wanted by the botanists to describe the direction of spiral structures in nature, from
Latin sinistrorsus toward the left side, from sinister left (see sinister). It was paired with
dextrorse but confusion over what was the proper point of view to reckon leftward or rightward
spiraling prevented the word being as useful as it might have been.


mix-up (n.)

confusion, 1841, from mix (v.) + up.


bedlam (n.)

scene of mad confusion, 1660s, from colloquial pronunciation of Hospital of Saint Mary of Bethlehem
in London, founded 1247 as a priory, mentioned as a hospital 1330 and as a lunatic hospital 1402;
converted to a state lunatic asylum on dissolution of the monasteries in 1547. It was spelled Bedlem
in a will from 1418, and Betleem is recorded as a spelling of Bethlehem in Judea from 971.


chord (n.1)

related notes in music, 1590s, ultimately a shortening of accord (or borrowed from a similar
development in French) and influenced by Latin chorda catgut, a string of a musical instrument (see
cord (n.)). Spelling with an -h- first recorded c. 1600, from confusion with chord (n.2). Originally
two notes; of three or more from 18c.


Brythonic (adj.)

of the Britons, Welsh, 1884, from Welsh Brython, cognate with Latin Britto (see Briton). Introduced
by Welsh Celtic scholar Professor John Rhys (1840-1915) to avoid the confusion of using
Briton/British with reference to ancient peoples, religions, and languages.


cocoa (n.)

powder from cacao seeds, 1707, corruption (by influence of coco) of cacao. The printing of Johnson's
dictionary ran together the entries for coco and cocoa, fostering a confusion that never has been
undone.


meander (n.)

1570s, confusion, intricacies, from Latin meander a winding course, from Greek Maiandros, name of a
river in Caria noted for its winding course (the Greeks used the name figuratively for winding
patterns). In reference to river courses, in English, from 1590s. Adjectival forms are meandrine
(1846); meandrous (1650s).


cormorant (n.)

early 14c., from Old French cormarenc (12c., Modern French cormoran), from Late Latin corvus marinus
sea raven + Germanic suffix -enc, -ing. The -t in English probably is from confusion with words in
-ant. It has a reputation for voracity.


turbid (adj.)

1620s, from Latin turbidus muddy, full of confusion, from turbare to confuse, bewilder, from turba
turmoil, crowd, probably from Greek tyrbe turmoil, tumult, disorder, from PIE *(s)twer- (1) to turn,
whirl (see storm (n.)). Related: Turbidly; turbidness.


Howard

proper name, from Old French Huard, from a Germanic source similar to Old High German *Hugihard
heart-brave, or *Hoh-weard, literally high defender; chief guardian. Also probably in some cases a
confusion with cognate Old Norse Haward, and as a surname also with unrelated Hayward. In some rare
cases from Old English eowu hierde ewe herd.


tumultuous (adj.)

1540s, from Middle French tumultuous (Modern French tumultueux), from Latin tumultuosus full of
bustle or confusion, disorderly, turbulent, from tumultus (see tumult). Related: Tumultuously;
tumultuousness.


mean (n.)

that which is halfway between extremes, early 14c., from Old French meien middle, means,
intermediary, noun use of adjective from Latin medianus of or that is in the middle (see mean
(adj.2)). Oldest sense is musical; mathematical sense is from c. 1500. Some senes reflect confusion
with mean (adj.1). This is the mean in by no means (late 15c.).


embarrassment (n.)

1670s, state of being impeded, obstructed, or entangled (of affairs, etc.), from embarrass + -ment,
or from French embarrassement, from embarrasser.    As a mental state of unease, from 1774. Meaning
thing which embarrasses is from 1729. Earlier words expressing much the same idea include baishment
embarrassment, confusion (late 14c.); baishednesse (mid-15c.).


tempt (v.)

c. 1200, of the devil, flesh, etc., draw or entice to evil or sin, lure (someone) from God's law; be
alluring or seductive, from Old French tempter (12c.), from Latin temptare to feel, try out, attempt
to influence, test, a variant of tentare handle, touch, try, test. The Latin alteration is
explainable only as an ancient error due to some confusion [Century Dictionary]. From late 14c. as
to provoke, defy (God, fate, etc.). Related: Tempted; tempting.


allegiance (n.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French legaunce loyalty of a liege-man to his lord, from Old French legeance,
from liege (see liege); erroneously associated with Latin ligare to bind; corrupted in spelling by
confusion with the now-obsolete legal term allegeance alleviation. General figurative sense of
recognition of claims to respect or duty is attested from 1732.


obeisance (n.)

late 14c., act or fact of obeying, from Old French obeissance obedience, service, feudal duty
(13c.), from obeissant, present participle of obeir obey, from Latin oboedire (see obey). Sense in
English altered late 14c. to bending or prostration of the body as a gesture of submission or
respect by confusion with abaisance. Related: Obeisant.


insipient (adj.)

foolish, mid-15c., from Latin insipientem (nominative insipiens) unwise, foolish, from in- not (see
in- (1)) + sapientem (see sapient). Now mostly, or wholly, disused to avoid confusion with incipient
[OED].


obscurity (n.)

late 15c., absence of light; 1610s with meaning condition of being unknown; from obscure (adj.) +
-ity; or else from Middle French obscurit&#233;, variant of Old French oscuret&#233; darkness,
gloom; vagueness, confusion; insignificance (14c.), from Latin obscuritatem (nominative obscuritas)
darkness, indistinctness, uncertainty, from obscurus.


rumble (v.)

late 14c., make a deep, heavy, continuous sound, also move with a rolling, thundering sound, also
create disorder and confusion, probably related to Middle Dutch rommelen to rumble, Middle High
German rummeln, Old Norse rymja to shout, roar, all of imitative origin. Related: Rumbled; rumbling.


Durham

c. 1000, Dunholm city on a hill, a merger of Old English dun hill (see down (n.2)) and Scandinavian
holmr (see holm). The change from -n- to -r- is a result of Norman confusion (see Shrewsbury). As a
breed of cattle, by 1810.


Indies

1550s, plural of Indie, Indy, from Middle English Ynde (early 13c.) India, from the Old French form
of Latin India (see India). Commonly applied to Asia and the East, later applied to the Caribbean
basin, in a time of geographical confusion, which was distinguished from Asia proper by being called
the West Indies.


