conformity (n.)

early 15c., conformyte, from Middle French conformit&eacute; (14c.), from Late Latin conformitatem
(nominative conformitas), from conformis similar in shape, from conformare (see conform). Modern
form is from 17c.


non-conformity (n.)

also nonconformity, 1610s, coined in English from non- + conformity. Originally of Church of England
clergymen who refused to conform on certain ceremonies.


agreement (n.)

late 14c., mutual conformity of things; c.1400, mutual understanding (among persons), also (of
things) mutual conformity, from Old French agrement, noun of action from agreer to please (see
agree).


unconformity (n.)

c.1600, from un- (1) not + conformity. Geological sense is from 1829.


convenience (n.)

late 14c., agreement, conformity, from Latin convenientia meeting together, agreement, harmony, from
conveniens, present participle of convenire (see convene). Meaning suitable, adapted to existing
conditions is from c.1600; that of personally not difficult is from 1703.


propriety (n.)

mid-15c., proper character, disposition, from Old French propriet&eacute; individuality,
peculiarity; property (12c.), from Latin proprietatem (nominative proprietas) appropriateness, also
ownership (see property). Meaning fitness, appropriateness is attested from 1610s; sense of
conformity to good manners is from 1782.


accordance (n.)

c.1300, compliance; early 14c., agreement, concurrence, from Old French acordance agreeing,
reconciliation, harmony, noun of action from acorder (see accord). Of things, conformity,
compatibility, harmony, late 14c. Phrase in accordance with is attested from c.1810 (in Middle
English, in accordance of was the usual form).


equity (n.)

early 14c., from Old French equite (13c.), from Latin aequitatem (nominative aequitas) equality,
conformity, symmetry, fairness, from aequus even, just, equal (see equal (adj.)). As the name of a
system of law, 1590s, from Roman naturalis aequitas, the general principles of justice which
corrected or supplemented the legal codes.


irregular (adj.)

late 14c., not in conformity with Church rules, from Old French irreguler (13c., Modern French
irr&eacute;gulier), from Medieval Latin irregularis, from assimilated form of in- not, opposite of
(see in- (1)) + Latin regularis (see regular (adj.)). General sense is from late 15c.


dissent (v.)

early 15c., from Latin dissentire differ in sentiments, disagree, be at odds, contradict, quarrel,
from dis- differently (see dis-) + sentire to feel, think (see sense (n.)). Related: Dissented;
dissenting. The noun is 1580s, from the verb.  Has there ever been a society which has died of
dissent? Several have died of conformity in our lifetime. [Jacob Bronowski Science and Human Values,
1956]


ad-

word-forming element expressing direction toward or in addition to, from Latin ad to, toward in
space or time; with regard to, in relation to, as a prefix, sometimes merely emphatic, from PIE *ad-
to, near, at (cognate with Old English &aelig;t; see at). Simplified to a- before sc-, sp- and st-;
modified to ac- before many consonants and then re-spelled af-, ag-, al-, etc., in conformity with
the following consonant (as in affection, aggression). In Old French, reduced to a- in all cases (an
evolution already underway in Merovingian Latin), but written forms in French were refashioned after
Latin in 14c. and English did likewise 15c. in words it had picked up from Old French. In many cases
pronunciation followed the shift.


sympathy (n.)

1570s, affinity between certain things, from Middle French sympathie (16c.) and directly from Late
Latin sympathia community of feeling, sympathy, from Greek sympatheia fellow-feeling, community of
feeling, from sympathes having a fellow feeling, affected by like feelings, from assimilated form of
syn- together (see syn-) + pathos feeling (see pathos).    In English, almost a magical notion at
first; used in reference to medicines that heal wounds when applied to a cloth stained with blood
from the wound. Meaning conformity of feelings is from 1590s; sense of fellow feeling, compassion is
first attested c.1600. An Old English loan-translation of sympathy was efensargung.


normal (adj.)

c.1500, typical, common; 1640s, standing at a right angle, from Late Latin normalis in conformity
with rule, normal, from Latin normalis made according to a carpenter's square, from norma rule,
pattern, literally carpenter's square (see norm). Meaning conforming to common standards, usual is
from 1828, but probably older than the record [Barnhart].    As a noun meaning usual state or
condition, from 1890. Sense of normal person or thing is from 1894. Normal school (1834) is from
French &eacute;cole normale (1794), a republican foundation. The city of Normal, Illinois, U.S., was
named 1857 for the normal school established there.


natural (adj.)

c.1300, naturel, of one's inborn character; hereditary, by birth; early 14c. as of the world of
nature (especially as opposed to man), from Old French naturel of nature, conforming to nature; by
birth, and directly from Latin naturalis by birth, according to nature, from natura nature (see
nature).    From late 15c. as not miraculous, in conformity with nature. Meaning easy, free from
affectation is attested from c.1600. Of things, not artificially created, c.1600. As a euphemism for
illegitimate, bastard (of children), it is first recorded c.1400, on notion of blood kinship (but
not legal status).   Natural science is from late 14c.; natural law is from early 15c. Natural order
apparent order in nature is from 1690s. Natural childbirth first attested 1933. Natural life,
usually in reference to the duration of life, is from late 15c. Natural history is from 1560s (see
history). To die of natural causes is from 1570s.


Uranus

first planet discovered that was not known in ancient times, named for the god of Heaven, husband of
Gaia, the Earth, from Latin Uranus, from Greek Ouranos literally heaven, the sky; in Greek
cosmology, the god who personifies the heavens, father of the titans.    The planet was discovered
and identified as such in 1781 by Sir William Herschel (it had been observed before, but mistaken
for a star; in 1690 John Flamsteed cataloged it as 34 Tauri); Herschel proposed calling it Georgium
Sidus, literally George's Star, in honour of his patron, King George III of England.  I cannot but
wish to take this opportunity of expressing my sense of gratitude, by giving the name of Georgium
Sidus ... to a star which (with respect to us) first began to shine under His auspicious reign. [Sir
William Herschel, 1783]  The planet was known in English in 1780s as the Georgian Planet; French
astronomers began calling Herschel, and ultimately German astronomer Johann Bode proposed Uranus as
in conformity with other planet names. However, the name didn't come into common usage until c.1850.


