conjure (v.)

late 13c., command on oath, from Old French conjurer invoke, conjure (12c.), from Latin coniurare to
swear together; conspire, from com- together (see com-) + iurare to swear (see jury (n.)). Magical
sense is c.1300, for constraining by spell a demon to do one's bidding. Related: Conjured;
conjuring. Phrase conjure up cause to appear in the mind (as if by magic) attested from 1580s.


conjurer (n.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French conjurour, Old French conjureur conjurer, magician, exorcist, from
Latin coniurator, from coniurare (see conjure).


Lapland

1570s, from Lapp, the Swedish name for this Finnic people (their name for themselves was Sabme),
which probably originally was an insulting coinage (compare Middle High German lappe simpleton). In
English traditionally the home of witches and wizards who had power to conjure winds and tempests.
Related: Laplander.


conjuration (n.)

late 14c., coniuracioun, conspiracy (now obsolete), also a calling upon something supernatural, from
Old French conjuracion spell, incantation, formula used in exorcism, from Latin coniurationem
(nominative coniuratio) a swearing together, conspiracy, noun of action from coniurare (see
conjure).


divine (v.)

to conjure, to guess, originally to make out by supernatural insight, mid-14c., from Old French
deviner, from Vulgar Latin *devinare, dissimilated from *divinare, from Latin divinus (see divine
(adj.)), which also meant soothsayer. Related: Divined; diviner; divining. Divining rod (or wand)
attested from 1650s.


leech (n.2)

obsolete for physician, from Old English l&aelig;ce, probably from Old Danish l&aelig;ke, from
Proto-Germanic *lekjaz enchanter, one who speaks magic words; healer, physician (cognates: Old
Frisian letza, Old Saxon laki, Old Norse l&aelig;knir, Old High German lahhi, Gothic lekeis
physician), literally one who counsels, perhaps connected with a root found in Celtic (compare Irish
liaig charmer, exorcist, physician) and Slavic (compare Serbo-Croatian lijekar, Polish lekarz), from
PIE *lep-agi conjurer, from root *leg- to collect, with derivatives meaning to speak (see lecture
(n.)).    For sense development, compare Old Church Slavonic baliji doctor, originally conjurer,
related to Serbo-Croatian bajati enchant, conjure; Old Church Slavonic vra&#269;i, Russian vra&#269;
doctor, related to Serbo-Croatian vra&#269; sorcerer, fortune-teller. The form merged with leech
(n.1) in Middle English, apparently by folk etymology. In 17c., leech usually was applied only to
veterinary practitioners. The fourth finger of the hand, in Old English, was l&aelig;cfinger,
translating Latin digitus medicus, Greek daktylus iatrikos, supposedly because a vein from that
finger stretches straight to the heart.


