conjecture (v.)

early 15c., from conjecture (n.). In Middle English also with a parallel conjecte (n.), conjecten
(v.). Related: Conjectured; conjecturing.


conjecture (n.)

late 14c., interpretation of signs and omens, from Old French conjecture surmise, guess, or directly
from Latin coniectura conclusion, interpretation, guess, inference, literally a casting together (of
facts, etc.), from coniectus, past participle of conicere to throw together, from com- together (see
com-) + iacere to throw (see jet (v.)). Sense of forming of opinion without proof is 1530s.


conjectural (adj.)

1550s, from Latin conjecturalis belonging to conjecture, from conjectura (see conjecture). Related:
Conjecturally (mid-15c.).


stochastic (adj.)

1660s, pertaining to conjecture, from Greek stokhastikos able to guess, conjecturing, from
stokhazesthai to guess, aim at, conjecture, from stokhos a guess, aim, target, mark, literally
pointed stick set up for archers to shoot at, from PIE *stogh-, variant of root *stegh- to stick,
prick; pointed (see sting (v.)). The sense of randomly determined is from 1934, from German
stochastik (1917).


conject (v.)

late 14c., obsolete verb replaced by conjecture (v.). Also in form congette.


speculate (v.)

1590s, view mentally, contemplate (transitive), back-formation from speculation. Also formerly view
as from a watchtower (1610s). Intransitive sense of pursue truth by conjecture or thinking is from
1670s. Meaning to invest money upon risk for the sake of profit is from 1785. Related: Speculated;
speculating.


opine (v.)

express an opinion, mid-15c., from Middle French opiner (15c.) and directly from Latin opinari have
an opinion, be of opinion, suppose, conjecture, think, judge, perhaps related to optare to desire,
choose (see option). Related: Opined; opining.


opinion (n.)

c.1300, from Old French opinion opinion, view, judgements founded upon probabilities (12c.), from
Latin opinionem (nominative opinio) opinion, conjecture, fancy, belief, what one thinks;
appreciation, esteem, from stem of opinari think, judge, suppose, opine, from PIE *op- (2) to choose
(see option).    Where there is much desire to learn, there of necessity will be much arguing, much
writing, many opinions; for opinion in good men is but knowledge in the making. [Milton,
Areopagitica]


ogre (n.)

man-eating giant, 1713, hogre (in a translation of a French version of the Arabian Nights), from
French ogre, first used in Perrault's Contes, 1697, and perhaps formed by him from Italian orco
demon, monster, from Latin Orcus Hades, perhaps via an Italian dialect. In English, more literary
than colloquial. The conjecture that it is from Byzantine Ogur Hungarian or some other version of
that people's name (perhaps via confusion with the bloodthirsty Huns), lacks historical evidence.
Related: Ogrish; ogrishness.


deadbeat (n.)

worthless sponging idler, 1863, American English slang, perhaps originally Civil War slang, from
dead (adj.) + beat. Earlier used colloquially as an adjectival expression to mean completely beaten
(1821), and perhaps the base notion is of worn out, good for nothing. It is noted in a British
source from 1861 as a term for a pensioner.    In England dead beat means worn out, used up. ... But
here, dead beat is used, as a substantive, to mean a scoundrel, a shiftless, swindling vagabond. We
hear it said that such a man is a beat or a dead beat. The phrase thus used is not even good slang.
It is neither humorous nor descriptive. There is not in it even a perversion of the sense of the
words of which it is composed. Its origin is quite beyond conjecture. [Americanisms, in The Galaxy,
January 1878]    It also was used of a kind of regulating mechanism in pendulum clocks.


speculation (n.)

late 14c., intelligent contemplation, consideration; act of looking, from Old French speculacion
close observation, rapt attention, and directly from Late Latin speculationem (nominative
speculatio) contemplation, observation, noun of action from Latin speculatus, past participle of
speculari observe, from specere to look at, view (see scope (n.1)).    Meaning pursuit of the truth
by means of thinking is from mid-15c. Disparaging sense of mere conjecture is recorded from 1570s.
Meaning buying and selling in search of profit from rise and fall of market value is recorded from
1774; short form spec is attested from 1794.


sedan (n.)

1630s, covered chair on poles, possibly from a southern Italian dialect derivative of Italian sede
chair (compare Italian seggietta, 1590s; the thing itself was said to have been introduced from
Naples), from Latin sedes, related to sedere sit (see sedentary). Since Johnson's conjecture, often
derived from the town of Sedan in France, where it was said to have been made or first used, but
historical evidence for this is lacking.    Introduced in England by Sir Sanders Duncombe in 1634
and first called a covered chair. In Paris the sedan-chair man was usually an Auvergnat, in London
an Irishman [Encyclopaedia Britannica, 1929]. Meaning closed automobile seating four or more first
recorded 1912, American English.


intend (v.)

c.1300, direct one's attention to, from Old French entendre, intendre to direct one's attention (in
Modern French principally to hear), from Latin intendere turn one's attention, strain, literally
stretch out, extend, from in- toward (see in- (2)) + tendere to stretch (see tenet). Sense of have
as a plan (late 14c.) was present in Latin. A Germanic word for this was ettle, from Old Norse
&aelig;tla to think, conjecture, propose, from Proto-Germanic *ahta consideration, attention
(cognates: Old English eaht, German acht). Intended (n.) one's intended husband or wife is from
1767.


riddle (n.1)

A word game or joke, comprising a question or statement couched in deliberately puzzling terms,
propounded for solving by the hearer/reader using clues embedded within that wording [Oxford
Dictionary of English Folklore], early 13c., from Old English r&aelig;dels riddle; counsel;
conjecture; imagination; discussion, common Germanic (Old Frisian riedsal riddle, Old Saxon radisli,
Middle Dutch raetsel, Dutch raadsel, Old High German radisle, German R&auml;tsel riddle).    The
first element is from Proto-Germanic *redaz-, from PIE *re-dh-, from PIE *re(1)- to reason, count
(cognates: Old English r&aelig;dan to advise, counsel, read, guess; see read (v.)). The ending is
Old English noun suffix -els, the -s of which later was mistaken for a plural affix and stripped
off. Meaning anything which puzzles or perplexes is from late 14c.


suspicion (n.)

c.1300, act of suspecting; unverified conjecture of wrongdoing; mistrust, distrust, from Anglo-
French suspecioun, corresponding to Old French suspicion, sospe&ccedil;on mistrust, suspicion
(Modern French soup&ccedil;on), from Late Latin suspectionem (nominative suspectio) mistrust,
suspicion, fear, awe, noun of state from past participle stem of Latin suspicere look up at (see
suspect (adj.)). Spelling in English influenced 14c. by learned Old French forms closer to Latin
suspicionem. Used as a verb meaning to suspect, it figures in literary representations of U.S.
Western (Kentucky) slang from 1830s.    Suspicion words in other Indo-European languages also tend
to be words for think or look with prefixes meaning under, behind; such as Greek hypopsia (hypo
under, opsis sight), hyponoia (noein to think); Lettish aizduomas (aiz behind, duomat think);
Russian podozrenie (Slavic podu under, Old Church Slavonic zireti see, look); Dutch achterdocht
(achter behind, denken to think).


boy (n.)

mid-13c., boie servant, commoner, knave, boy, of unknown origin. Possibly from Old French embuie one
fettered, from Vulgar Latin *imboiare, from Latin boia leg iron, yoke, leather collar, from Greek
boeiai dorai ox hides. (Words for boy double as servant, attendant across the Indo-European map --
compare Italian ragazzo, French gar&ccedil;on, Greek pais, Middle English knave, Old Church Slavonic
otroku -- and often it is difficult to say which meaning came first.)    But it also appears to be
identical with East Frisian boi young gentleman, and perhaps with Dutch boef knave, from Middle
Dutch boeve, perhaps from Middle Low German buobe. This suggests a gradational relationship to babe.
For a different conjecture:    In Old English, only the proper name Boia has been recorded. ME boi
meant 'churl, servant' and (rarely) 'devil.' In texts, the meaning 'male child' does not antedate
1400. ModE boy looks like a semantic blend of an onomatopoeic word for an evil spirit (*boi) and a
baby word for 'brother' (*bo). [Liberman]   <hr />   A noticable number of the modern words for
'boy', 'girl', and 'child' were originally colloquial nicknames, derogatory or whimsical, in part
endearing, and finally commonplace. These, as is natural, are of the most diverse, and in part
obscure, origin. [Buck]    Used slightingly of young men in Middle English; meaning male negro slave
or Asian personal servant of any age attested from c.1600. Exclamation oh, boy attested from 1892.


