connoisseur (n.)

1714, from French connoisseur (Modern French connaiseur), from Old French conoisseor an expert, a
judge, one well-versed, from conoistre to know, from Latin cognoscere to know, to become well-
acquainted with, from com- with (see com-) + gnoscere recognize (see notice (v.)).


cognoscente (n.)

connoisseur, 1778, from Italian cognoscente, Latinized from conoscente connoisseur, literally
knowing man, from Latin cognoscentum (nominative cognoscens), present participle of cognoscere to
know (see cognizance).


Casanova (n.)

man of carnal adventures, connoisseur of seduction, 1888, from Giacomo Girolamo Casanova de Seignalt
(1725-1798), the infamous debaucher. His name could be Englished as Jacob Jerome Newhouse, which is
somewhat less romantic.


sharp (n.)

a cheat at games, 1797, short for sharper (1680s) in this sense. Meaning expert, connoisseur is
attested from 1840, and likely is from sharp (adj.). Music sense is from 1570s. The noun was used
14c. as a sharp weapon, edge of a sword.


virtuoso (n.)

1610s, scholar, connoisseur, from Italian virtuoso (plural virtuosi), noun use of adjective meaning
skilled, learned, of exceptional worth, from Late Latin virtuosus (see virtuous). Meaning person
with great skill, one who is a master of the mechanical part of a fine art (as in music) is first
attested 1743.


gourmet (n.)

connoisseur in eating and drinking, 1820, from French gourmet, altered (by influence of Middle
French gourmant glutton) from Old French groume, originally wine-taster, wine merchant's servant (in
13c. a lad generally), of uncertain origin. As an adjective from 1900. See gourmand.


gourmand (n.)

late 15c., glutton, from Middle French gourmant glutton, originally an adj., gluttonous, of
uncertain origin. Not connected with gourmet. Meaning one fond of good eating is from 1758.    The
gourmand is one whose chief pleasure is eating; but a gourmet is a connoisseur of food and wines. In
England the difference is this: a gourmand regards quantity more than quality, a gourmet quality
more than quantity. [Brewer, Dictionary of Phrase and Fable, Philadelphia, 1898]


