connotation (n.)

1530s, from Medieval Latin connotationem (nominative connotatio), from connotat-, past participle
stem of connotare signify in addition to the main meaning, a term in logic, literally to mark along
with, from Latin com- together (see com-) + notare to mark (see note).    A word denotes its primary
meaning, its barest adequate definition -- father denotes one that has begotten. A word connotes the
attributes commonly associated with it -- father connotes male sex, prior existence, greater
experience, affection, guidance.


roach (n.1)

shortened form of cockroach, 1837, on mistaken notion that it was a compound. In contemporary
writing said to be from a polite desire to avoid the sexual connotation in the first syllable.
Meaning butt of a marijuana cigarette is first recorded 1938, perhaps from resemblance to the
insect, but perhaps a different word entirely.


denotation (n.)

1530s, indication, from Late Latin denotationem (nominative denotatio), noun of action from past
participle stem of denotare (see denote). As a term in logic, from 1843 (contrasted with
connotation).


connote (v.)

1660s, from Medieval Latin connotare to mark along with, (see connotation). A common word in
medieval logic. Related: Connoted; connoting.


notorious (adj.)

1540s, publicly known, from Medieval Latin notorius well-known, commonly known, from Latin notus
known, past participle of noscere come to know (see know). Negative connotation arose 17c. from
frequent association with derogatory nouns. Related: Notoriously.


dilettante (n.)

1733, borrowing of Italian dilettante lover of music or painting, from dilettare to delight, from
Latin delectare (see delight (n.)). Originally without negative connotation, devoted amateur, the
pejorative sense emerged late 18c. by contrast with professional.


ultramontane (adj.)

1590s, from Middle French ultramontain beyond the mountains (especially the Alps), from Old French
(early 14c.), from Latin ultra beyond (see ultra-) + stem of mons (see mount (n.)). Used especially
of papal authority, though connotation varies according to the position of the speaker or writer.
[Weekley]


unless (conj.)

mid-15c., earlier onlesse, from on lesse (than) on a less condition (than); see less. The first
syllable originally on, but the negative connotation and the lack of stress changed it to un-.
Except could once be used as a synonym for unless, but the words have now drawn entirely apart
[Century Dictionary].


buzzard (n.)

c.1300, from Old French buisart buzzard, harrier, inferior hawk, from buson, buison, from Latin
buteonem (nominative buteo) a kind of hawk, perhaps with -art suffix for one that carries on some
action or possesses some quality, with derogatory connotation (see -ard).


wiseacre (n.)

1590s, partial translation of Middle Dutch wijssegger soothsayer (with no derogatory connotation),
probably altered by association with Middle Dutch segger sayer from Old High German wizzago prophet,
from wizzan to know, from Proto-Germanic *wit- to know (see wit (v.)). The deprecatory sense of one
who pretends to know everything may have come through confusion with obsolete English segger sayer,
which also had a sense of braggart (mid-15c.).


glaucous (adj.)

bluish-green, gray, 1670s, from Latin glaucus bluish-green, of uncertain origin; used in Homer of
the sea as gleaming, silvery (apparently without a color connotation); used by later writers with a
sense of bluish-green, gray, of olive leaves and eyes. Homer's glauk-opis Athene probably originally
was a bright-eyed, not a gray-eyed goddess. Greek for owl was glaux from its bright, staring eyes.


sensuous (adj.)

1640s, pertaining to the senses apparently coined by Milton to recover the original meaning of
sensual and avoid the lascivious connotation that the older word had acquired, but by 1870 sensuous,
too, had begun down the same path and come to mean alive to the pleasures of the senses. Rare before
Coleridge popularized it To express in one word all that appertains to the perception, considered as
passive and merely recipient .... (1814). From Latin sensus (see sense (n.)) + -ous. Related:
Sensuously; sensuousness.


solace (v.)

comfort, console in grief, late 13c.; also in Middle English entertain, amuse, please, from Old
French solacier comfort, console (often with a sexual connotation) and directly from Medieval Latin
solatiare give solace, console (source also of Spanish solazar, Italian sollazzare), from Latin
solacium (see solace (n.)). Related: Solaced; solacing.


boor (n.)

13c., from Old French bovier herdsman, from Latin bovis, genitive of bos cow, ox. Re-introduced 16c.
from Dutch boer, from Middle Dutch gheboer fellow dweller, from Proto-Germanic *buram dweller,
especially farmer, from PIE *bhu-, from root *bheue- (see be). Original meaning was peasant farmer
(compare German Bauer, Dutch boer, Danish bonde), and in English it was at first applied to
agricultural laborers in or from other lands, as opposed to the native yeoman; negative connotation
attested by 1560s (in boorish), from notion of clownish rustics. Related: Boorishness.


creole (n.)

c.1600, from French cr&eacute;ole (17c.), from Spanish criollo person native to a locality, from
Portuguese crioulo, diminutive of cria person (especially a servant) raised in one's house, from
criar to raise or bring up, from Latin creare to produce, create (see create).    The exact sense
varies with local use. Originally with no connotation of color or race; Fowler (1926) writes: Creole
does not imply mixture of race, but denotes a person either of European or (now rarely) of negro
descent born and naturalized in certain West Indian and American countries. In U.S. use, applied to
descendants of French and Spanish settlers in Louisiana from at least 1792. Of languages, from 1879.
As an adjective, from 1748.


twilight (n.)

light from the sky when the sun is below the horizon at morning and evening, late 14c.
(twilighting), a compound of twi- + light (n.) Cognate with Middle Flemish twilicht, Dutch tweelicht
(16c.), Middle High German twelicht, German zwielicht. Exact connotation of twi- in this word is
unclear, but it appears to refer to half light, rather than the fact that twilight occurs twice a
day. Compare also Sanskrit samdhya twilight, literally a holding together, junction, Middle High
German zwischerliecht, literally tweenlight. Originally and most commonly in English with reference
to evening twilight but occasionally used of morning twilight (a sense first attested mid-15c.).
Figurative extension recorded from c.1600.   Twilight zone is from 1901 in a literal sense, a part
of the sky lit by twilight; from 1909 in extended senses in references to topics or cases where
authority or behavior is unclear. In the 1909 novel In the Twilight Zone, the reference is to
mulatto heritage. She was in the twilight zone between the races where each might claim her .... The
U.S. TV series of that name is from 1959.


coward (n.)

mid-13c., from Old French coart coward (no longer the usual word in French, which has now in this
sense poltron, from Italian, and l&acirc;che), from coe tail, from Latin coda, popular dialect
variant of cauda tail, of uncertain origin + -ard, an agent noun suffix denoting one that carries on
some action or possesses some quality, with derogatory connotation (see -ard).    The word probably
reflects an animal metaphoric sense still found in expressions like turning tail and tail between
legs. Coart was the name of the hare in Old French versions of Reynard the Fox. Italian codardo,
Spanish cobarde are from French.    The identification of coward &amp; bully has gone so far in the
popular consciousness that persons &amp; acts in which no trace of fear is to be found are often
called coward(ly) merely because advantage has been taken of superior strength or position ....
[Fowler]    As a surname (attested from 1255) it represents Old English cuhyrde cow-herd. Farmer has
coward's castle a pulpit, Because a clergyman may deliver himself therefrom without fear of
contradiction or argument.


kiss (v.)

Old English cyssan to kiss, from Proto-Germanic *kussjan (cognates: Old Saxon kussian, Old Norse
kyssa, Old Frisian kessa, Middle Dutch cussen, Dutch, Old High German kussen, German k&uuml;ssen,
Norwegian and Danish kysse, Swedish kyssa), from *kuss-, probably ultimately imitative of the sound.
Related: Kissed; kissing. For vowel evolution, see bury. There appears to be no common Indo-European
root word for kiss, though suggestions of a common ku- sound may be found in the Germanic root and
Greek kynein to kiss, Hittite kuwash-anzi they kiss, Sanskrit cumbati he kisses.Kissing, as an
expression of affection or love, is unknown among many races, and in the history of mankind seems to
be a late substitute for the more primitive rubbing of noses, sniffing, and licking. [Buck,
p.1113]Some languages make a distinction between the kiss of affection and that of erotic love
(compare Latin saviari erotic kiss, vs. osculum, literally little mouth). French embrasser kiss, but
literally embrace, came about in 17c. when the older word baiser (from Latin basiare) acquired an
obscene connotation. Insulting invitation kiss my ass is at least from 1705, but probably much older
(see The Miller's Tale).


