constitutional (adj.)

1680s, pertaining to a person's (physical or mental) constitution, from constitution + -al (1).
Meaning beneficial to bodily constitution is from 1750. Meaning authorized or allowed by the
political constitution is from 1765. Constitutional monarchy is recorded from 1801, from French.
Related: Constitutionally.


constitution (n.)

mid-14c., law, regulation, edict, from Old French constitucion (12c.) constitution, establishment,
and directly from Latin constitutionem (nominative constitutio) act of settling, settled condition,
anything arranged or settled upon, regulation, order, ordinance, from constitut-, past participle
stem of constituere (see constitute).    Meaning action of establishing is from 1580s; that of way
in which a thing is constituted is from c.1600; that of physical health, strength and vigor of the
body is from 1550s; of the mind, temperament, character from 1580s. Sense of mode of organization of
a state is from c.1600; that of system of principles by which a community is governed dates from
1730s; especially of a document of written laws since the U.S. and French constitutions, late 18c.


constitutionality (n.)

1787, quality of being in accord with a constitution, from constitutional (adj.) + -ity.


complexion (n.)

mid-14c., bodily constitution, from Old French complexion, complession combination of humors, hence
temperament, character, make-up, from Latin complexionem (nominative complexio) combination (in Late
Latin, physical constitution), from complexus (see complex (adj.)). Meaning appearance of the skin
of the face is first recorded mid-15c. In medieval physiology, the color of the face indicated
temperament or health.


Ironside

name given to a man of great hardihood or bravery, c.1300, first applied to Edmund II, king of
England (d.1016), later also to Oliver Cromwell and his troops. Old Ironsides as a nickname of
U.S.S. Constitution dates from that ship's defeat of H.M.S. Guerriere on Aug. 19, 1812, in the War
of 1812.


federalist (n.)

member or supporter of the Federal party in U.S. politics, originally of supporters of the
Philadelphia constitution, 1787, American English, from federal + -ist. General sense of one who
supports federal union is from 1792.


delicacy (n.)

late 14c., delightfulness; fastidiousness; quality of being addicted to sensuous pleasure, from
delicate + -cy. Meaning fineness, softness, tender loveliness is from 1580s; that of weakness of
constitution is from 1630s. Meaning fine food, a dainty viand is from early 15c.


Weimar (adj.)

in reference to the pre-1933 democratic government of Germany, 1932, from name of city in Thuringia
where German constitution was drawn up in 1919. The place name is a compound of Old High German wih
holy + mari lake (see mere (n.)).


appropriation (n.)

late 14c., taking (something) as private property, from Late Latin appropriationem (nominative
appropriatio) a making one's own, noun of action from past participle stem of appropriare (see
appropriate). Meaning setting aside for some purpose (especially of money) first attested 1789 in
U.S. Constitution.


genotype (n.)

genetic constitution of an individual, 1910, from German Genotypus (Wilhelm Johannsen, 1909); see
gene + type. Earlier the same word was used with a sense of type species of a genus (1897); in this
case, the first element is from genus.


constructionist (n.)

1844, in reference to the U.S. Constitution, from construction + -ist. Usually with strict or loose.


idiosyncrasy (n.)

c.1600, from French idiosyncrasie, from Greek idiosynkrasia a peculiar temperament, from idios one's
own (see idiom) + synkrasis temperament, mixture of personal characteristics, from syn together (see
syn-) + krasis mixture (see rare (adj.2)). Originally in English a medical term meaning physical
constitution of an individual. Mental sense first attested 1660s.


affection (n.)

early 13c., an emotion of the mind, passion, lust as opposed to reason, from Old French afection
(12c.) emotion, inclination, disposition; love, attraction, enthusiasm, from Latin affectionem
(nominative affectio) a relation, disposition; a temporary state; a frame, constitution, noun of
state from past participle stem of afficere to do something to, act on (see affect (n.)). Sense
developed from disposition to good disposition toward (late 14c.). Related: Affections.


mold (n.1)

also mould, hollow shape, c.1200, originally fashion, form; nature, native constitution, character,
metathesized from Old French modle model, plan, copy; way, manner (12c., Modern French moule), from
Latin modulum (nominative modulus) measure, model, diminutive of modus manner (see mode (1)). From
c.1300 as pattern or model by which something is shaped or made. To break the mold render impossible
the creation of another is from 1560s.


vice-president (n.)

also vice president, 1570s, one who acts as a deputy for a president, from vice- + president. Made
into an official rank and given a different meaning (vice = next in rank to) in the U.S.
Constitution (1787).    There seems to be no doubt of my election as V[ice] Pres[iden]t. It will
have at least one advantage, that of permitting me to devote more of my time to my private affairs.
[John C. Calhoun, letter to wife, Nov. 12, 1824]    Related: vice presidential; vice presidency.


oppress (v.)

mid-14c., from Old French opresser oppress, afflict; torment, smother (13c.), from Medieval Latin
oppressare, frequentative of Latin opprimere press against, press together, press down; figuratively
crush, put down, subdue, prosecute relentlessly (in Late Latin to rape), from ob against (see ob-) +
premere to press, push (see press (v.1)).    It is the due [external] restraint and not the
moderation of rulers that constitutes a state of liberty; as the power to oppress, though never
exercised, does a state of slavery. [St. George Tucker, View of the Constitution of the United
States, 1803]    Related: Oppressed; oppressing.


treason (n.)

c.1200, betraying; betrayal of trust; breech of faith, from Anglo-French treson, from Old French
traison treason, treachery (11c.; Modern French trahison), from Latin traditionem (nominative
traditio) a handing over, delivery, surrender (see tradition). Old French form influenced by the
verb trair betray. In old English law, high treason is violation by a subject of his allegiance to
his sovereign or to the state; distinguished from petit treason, treason against a subject, such as
murder of a master by his servant. Constructive treason was a judicial fiction whereby actions
carried out without treasonable intent, but found to have the effect of treason, were punished as
though they were treason itself. The protection against this accounts for the careful wording of the
definition of treason in the U.S. Constitution.


suffrage (n.)

late 14c., intercessory prayers or pleas on behalf of another, from Old French sofrage plea,
intercession (13c.) and directly from Medieval Latin suffragium, from Latin suffragium support,
ballot, vote; right of voting; a voting tablet, from suffragari lend support, vote for someone,
conjectured to be a compound of sub under (see sub-) + fragor crash, din, shouts (as of approval),
related to frangere to break (see fraction). On another theory (Watkins, etc.) the second element is
frangere itself and the notion is use a broken piece of tile as a ballot (compare ostracism).
Meaning a vote for or against anything is from 1530s. The meaning political right to vote in English
is first found in the U.S. Constitution, 1787.


fourth estate (n.)

the press, by 1824, and especially from 1831, British English. For the other three, see estate.
Earlier the term had been applied in various senses that did not stick, including the mob (1752),
the lawyers (1825). The extension to the press is perhaps an outgrowth of the former.  Hence,
through the light of letters and the liberty of the press, public opinion has risen to the rank of a
fourth estate in our constitution; in times of quiet and order, silent and still, but in the
collisions of the different branches of our government, deciding as an umpire with unbounded
authority. [Memoir of James Currie, M.D., 1831]   <hr />   [Newspapers] began to assume some degree
of political importance, during the civil wars of the seventeenth century, in England; but it is not
until within the last fifty years that they have become, -- as they are now justly styled, -- a
Fourth Estate, exercising a more powerful influence on the public affairs of the countries in which
they are permitted to circulate freely, than the other three put together. [Alexander H. Everett,
Address to the Phi Beta Kappa Society of Bowdoin College, 1834]


president (n.)

late 14c., appointed governor of a province; chosen leader of a body of persons, from Old French
president and directly from Latin praesidentum (nominative praesidens) president, governor, noun use
of present participle of praesidere to act as head or chief (see preside).    In Middle English of
heads of religious houses, hospitals, colleges and universities. First use for chief executive
officer of a republic is in U.S. Constitution (1787), from earlier American use for officer in
charge of the Continental Congress (1774), a sense derived from that of chosen head of a meeting or
group of persons, which is from Middle English. It had been used of chief officers of banks from
1781, of individual colonies since 1608 (originally Virginia) and heads of colleges since mid-15c.
Slang shortening prez is recorded from 1883. Fem. form presidentess is attested from 1763.


nature (n.)

late 13c., restorative powers of the body, bodily processes; powers of growth; from Old French
nature nature, being, principle of life; character, essence, from Latin natura course of things;
natural character, constitution, quality; the universe, literally birth, from natus born, past
participle of nasci to be born, from PIE *gene- to give birth, beget (see genus).    From late 14c.
as creation, the universe; also heredity, birth, hereditary circumstance; essential qualities,
innate disposition (as in human nature); nature personified, Mother Nature. Specifically as material
world beyond human civilization or society from 1660s. Nature and nurture have been contrasted since
1874.  Nature should be avoided in such vague expressions as 'a lover of nature,' 'poems about
nature.' Unless more specific statements follow, the reader cannot tell whether the poems have to do
with natural scenery, rural life, the sunset, the untouched wilderness, or the habits of squirrels.
[Strunk &amp; White, The Elements of Style, 3rd ed., 1979]


tyrant (n.)

c.1300, absolute ruler, especially one without legal right; cruel, oppressive ruler, from Old French
tiran, tyrant (12c.), from Latin tyrannus lord, master, monarch, despot, especially arbitrary ruler,
cruel governor, autocrat (source also of Spanish tirano, Italian tiranno), from Greek tyrannos lord,
master, sovereign, absolute ruler unlimited by law or constitution, a loan-word from a language of
Asia Minor (probably Lydian); Klein compares Etruscan Turan mistress, lady (surname of Venus).  In
the exact sense, a tyrant is an individual who arrogates to himself the royal authority without
having a right to it. This is how the Greeks understood the word 'tyrant': they applied it
indifferently to good and bad princes whose authority was not legitimate. [Rousseau, The Social
Contract]    Originally in Greek the word was not applied to old hereditary sovereignties
(basileiai) and despotic kings, but it was used of usurpers, even when popular, moderate, and just
(such as Cypselus of Corinth), however it soon became a word of reproach in the usual modern sense.
The spelling with -t arose in Old French by analogy with present participle endings in -ant. Fem.
form tyranness is recorded from 1590 (Spenser); Medieval Latin had tyrannissa (late 14c.).


state (n.1)

c.1200, circumstances, position in society, temporary attributes of a person or thing, conditions,
from Old French estat position, condition; status, stature, station, and directly from Latin status
a station, position, place; way of standing, posture; order, arrangement, condition, figuratively
standing, rank; public order, community organization, noun of action from past participle stem of
stare to stand from PIE root *sta- to stand (see stet). Some Middle English senses are via Old
French estat (French &eacute;tat; see estate).    The Latin word was adopted into other modern
Germanic languages (German, Dutch staat) but chiefly in the political senses only. Meaning physical
condition as regards form or structure is attested from late 13c. Meaning mental or emotional
condition is attested from 1530s (phrase state of mind first attested 1749); colloquial sense of
agitated or perturbed state is from 1837.     He [the President] shall from time to time give to the
Congress Information of the State of the Union, and recommend to their Consideration such Measures
as he shall judge necessary and expedient. [U.S. Constitution, Article II, Section iii]


piece (n.)

c.1200, fixed amount, measure, portion, from Old French piece piece, bit portion; item; coin (12c.),
from Vulgar Latin *pettia, probably from Gaulish *pettsi (compare Welsh peth thing, Breton pez
piece, a little), perhaps from an Old Celtic base *kwezd-i-, from PIE root *kwezd- a part, piece
(cognates: Russian chast' part). Related: Pieces.    Sense of portable firearm first recorded 1580s;
that of chessman is from 1560s. Meaning person regarded as a sex object is first recorded 1785
(compare piece of ass, human beings colloquially called piece of flesh from 1590s; also compare
Latin scortum bimbo, anyone available for a price, literally skin). Meaning a portion of a distance
is from 1610s; that of literary composition dates from 1530s. Piece of (one's) mind is from 1570s.
Piece of work remarkable person echoes Hamlet. Piece as a coin is attested in English from 1570s,
hence Piece of eight, old name for the Spanish dollar (c.1600) of the value of 8 reals.    PIECE. A
wench. A damned good or bad piece; a girl who is more or less active and skilful in the amorous
congress. Hence the (Cambridge) toast, may we never have a PIECE (peace) that will injure the
constitution. [Dictionary of Buckish Slang, University Wit and Pickpocket Eloquence, London, 1811]


