constituent (n.)

1620s, one who appoints or elects a representative, from Latin constituentem (nominative
constituens), present participle of constituere (see constitute). The notion is to make up or
compose a body by appointing or electing a representative. As an adjective, essential,
characteristic, from 1660s; that appoints or elects a representative to a body, from 1714.


constituency (n.)

body of constituents, 1806, from constituent + -cy.


casein (n.)

principal protein-constituent of milk, forming the basis of cheese, 1841, from French
cas&eacute;ine, from Latin caseus cheese (see cheese (n.1)) + chemical suffix -ine (2).


pewter (n.)

early 14c., any of various alloys having tin as their main constituent (the usual form is one part
lead to four parts tin), from Old French peautre (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *peltrum pewter (source
of Spanish peltre, Italian peltro), of uncertain origin. Related: Pewterer.


proton (n.)

1920 in physics, coined by English physicist Ernest Rutherford (1871-1937) from noun use of Greek
proton, neuter of protos first (see proto-), on analogy of electron; supposedly because hydrogen was
hypothesized as a constituent of all the elements. The word was used earlier in embryology (1893) as
a translation of German anlage (fundamental thing) based on Aristotle's phrase he prote ousia to
proton.


pectin (n.)

polysaccharide found in fruit and vegetables, crucial in forming jellies and jams, 1838, from French
pectine, coined early 1830s by French chemist Henri Braconnot (1781-1855) from acide pectique pectic
acid, a constituent of fruit jellies, from Greek pektikos curdling, congealing, from pektos curdled,
congealed, from pegnynai to make stiff or solid, from PIE root *pag-/*pak- to join together (see
pact). Related: Pectic.


member (n.)

late 13c., sex organ (compare Latin membrum virile, but in English originally of women as well as
men), also, body part or organ (in plural, the body), from Old French membre part, portion; topic,
subject; limb, member of the body; member (of a group, etc.), 11c., from Latin membrum limb, member
of the body, part, probably from PIE *mems-ro, from root *mems- flesh, meat (cognates: Sanskrit
mamsam flesh; Greek meninx membrane, meros thigh (the fleshy part); Gothic mimz flesh). In English,
sense of person belonging to a group is first attested early 14c., from notion of constituent part
of a complex structure. Meaning one who has been elected to parliament is from early 15c.


