consecrate (v.)

late 14c., from Latin consecratus, past participle of consecrare to make holy, devote, from com-
together (see com-) + sacrare (see sacred). Related: Consecrated; consecrating.


sacred (adj.)

late 14c., past participle adjective from obsolete verb sacren to make holy (c.1200), from Old
French sacrer consecrate, anoint, dedicate (12c.) or directly from Latin sacrare to make sacred,
consecrate; hold sacred; immortalize; set apart, dedicate, from sacer (genitive sacri) sacred,
dedicated, holy, accursed, from Old Latin saceres, from PIE root *sak- to sanctify. Buck groups it
with Oscan sakrim, Umbrian sacra and calls it a distinctive Italic group, without any clear outside
connections. Related: Sacredness.    Nasalized form is sancire make sacred, confirm, ratify, ordain.
Sacred cow object of Hindu veneration, is from 1891; figurative sense of one who must not be
criticized is first recorded 1910, reflecting Western views of Hinduism. Sacred Heart the heart of
Jesus as an object of religious veneration is from 1765.


consecration (n.)

late 14c., from Latin consecrationem (nominative consecratio), noun of action from consecrat-, past
participle stem of consecrare (see consecrate).


desecrate (v.)

1670s, formed from de- do the opposite of (see de-) + stem of consecrate. Old French had dessacrer
to profane, and there is a similar formation in Italian; but Latin desecrare meant to make holy,
with de- in this case having a completive sense. Related: Desecrated; desecrating.


dedicate (v.)

early 15c. (of churches), from Latin dedicatus, past participle of dedicare consecrate, proclaim,
affirm, set apart, from de- away (see de-) + dicare proclaim, from stem of dicere to speak, to say
(see diction). Dedicated devoted to one's aims or vocation is first attested 1944.


execration (n.)

late 14c., from Latin execrationem (nominative execratio), noun of action from past participle stem
of execrari to hate, curse, from ex- out (see ex-) + sacrare to devote to holiness or to
destruction, consecrate, from sacer sacred (see sacred).


addict (v.)

1530s (implied in addicted), from Latin addictus, past participle of addicere to deliver, award,
yield; give assent, make over, sell, figuratively to devote, consecrate; sacrifice, sell out, betray
from ad- to (see ad-) + dicere say, declare (see diction), but also adjudge, allot. Earlier in
English as an adjective, delivered, devoted (1520s). Related: Addicted; addicting.


inauguration (n.)

1560s, from French inauguration installation, consecration, and directly from Latin inaugurationem
(nominative inauguratio) consecration, installment under good omens, noun of action from past
participle stem of inaugurare take omens from the flight of birds; consecrate or install when such
omens are favorable, from in- on, in (see in- (2)) + augurare to act as an augur, predict (see
augur).


commence (v.)

c.1300, from Old French comencier to begin, start (10c., Modern French commencer), from Vulgar Latin
*cominitiare, originally to initiate as priest, consecrate, from Latin com- together (see com-) +
initiare to initiate, from initium (see initial (adj.)). Spelling with double -m- began in French
and was established in English by 1500. Related: Commenced; commencing.


ordain (v.)

late 13c., to appoint or admit to the ministry of the Church, from stem of Old French ordener place
in order, arrange, prepare; consecrate, designate (Modern French ordonner) and directly from Latin
ordinare put in order, arrange, dispose, appoint, from ordo (genitive ordinis) order (see order
(n.)). The notion is to confer holy orders upon. Meaning to decree, enact is from c.1300; sense of
to set (something) that will continue in a certain order is from early 14c. Related: Ordained;
ordaining.


hallow (v.)

Old English halgian to make holy, to honor as holy, consecrate, ordain, related to halig holy, from
Proto-Germanic *haila-ga- (cognates: Old Saxon helagon, Middle Dutch heligen, Old Norse helga), from
PIE root *kailo- whole, uninjured, of good omen (see health). Used in Christian translations to
render Latin sanctificare. Also used since Old English as a noun meaning holy person, saint.
Related: Hallowed; hallowing.


victim (n.)

late 15c., living creature killed and offered as a sacrifice to a deity or supernatural power, from
Latin victima person or animal killed as a sacrifice. Perhaps distantly connected to Old English wig
idol, Gothic weihs holy, German weihen consecrate (compare Weihnachten Christmas) on notion of a
consecrated animal. Sense of person who is hurt, tortured, or killed by another is recorded from
1650s; meaning person oppressed by some power or situation is from 1718. Weaker sense of person
taken advantage of is recorded from 1781.


sacrament (n.)

outward and visible sign of inward and spiritual grace, also the eucharist, c.1200, from Old French
sacrament consecration; mystery (12c., Modern French sacrement) and directly from Latin sacramentum
a consecrating (also source of Spanish sacramento, German Sakrament, etc.), from sacrare to
consecrate (see sacred); a Church Latin loan-translation of Greek mysterion (see mystery).
Meaning a holy mystery in English is from late 14c. The seven sacraments are baptism, penance,
confirmation, holy orders, the Eucharist, matrimony, and anointing of the sick (extreme unction).


sanctify (v.)

late 14c., seintefie to consecrate, from Old French saintefier sanctify (12c.,   Modern French
sanctifier), from Late Latin sanctificare to make holy, from sanctus holy (see saint (n.)) + root of
facere to make (see factitious). Form altered in English c.1400 to conform with Latin. Meaning to
render holy or legitimate by religious sanction is from c.1400; transferred sense of to render
worthy of respect is from c.1600. Related: Sanctified; sanctifying.


bless (v.)

Old English bletsian, bledsian, Northumbrian bloedsian to consecrate, make holy, give thanks, from
Proto-Germanic *blodison hallow with blood, mark with blood, from *blotham blood (see blood).
Originally a blood sprinkling on pagan altars. This word was chosen in Old English bibles to
translate Latin benedicere and Greek eulogein, both of which have a ground sense of to speak well
of, to praise, but were used in Scripture to translate Hebrew brk to bend (the knee), worship,
praise, invoke blessings. Meaning shifted in late Old English toward pronounce or make happy, by
resemblance to unrelated bliss. No cognates in other languages. Related: Blessed; blessing.


saint (n.)

early 12c., from Old French saint, seinte a saint; a holy relic, displacing or altering Old English
sanct, both from Latin sanctus holy, consecrated (used as a noun in Late Latin; also source of
Spanish santo, santa, Italian san, etc.), properly past participle of sancire consecrate (see
sacred). Adopted into most Germanic languages (Old Frisian sankt, Dutch sint, German Sanct).
Originally an adjective prefixed to the name of a canonized person; by c.1300 it came to be regarded
as a noun. Meaning person of extraordinary holiness is recorded from 1560s.  <b>Saint</b>, n. A dead
sinner revised and edited. The Duchess of Orleans relates that the irreverent old calumniator,
Marshal Villeroi, who in his youth had known St. Francis de Sales, said, on hearing him called
saint: 'I am delighted to hear that Monsieur de Sales is a saint. He was fond of saying indelicate
things, and used to cheat at cards. In other respects he was a perfect gentleman, though a fool.'
[Ambrose Bierce, Devil's Dictionary, 1911]   <hr />   Perhaps you have imagined that this humility
in the saints is a pious illusion at which God smiles. That is a most dangerous error. It is
theoretically dangerous, because it makes you identify a virtue (i.e., a perfection) with an
illusion (i.e., an imperfection), which must be nonsense. It is practically dangerous because it
encourages a man to mistake his first insights into his own corruption for the first beginnings of a
halo round his own silly head. No, depend upon it; when the saints say that they--even they--are
vile, they are recording truth with scientific accuracy. [C.S. Lewis, The Problem of Pain, 1940]
Saint Bernard, the breed of mastiff dogs (1839), so called because the monks of the hospice of the
pass of St. Bernard (between Italy and Switzerland) sent them to rescue snowbound travelers; St.
Elmo's Fire corposant (1560s) is from Italian fuoco di Sant'Elmo, named for the patron saint of
Mediterranean sailors, a corruption of the name of St. Erasmus, an Italian bishop martyred in 303.


witch (n.)

Old English wicce female magician, sorceress, in later use especially a woman supposed to have
dealings with the devil or evil spirits and to be able by their cooperation to perform supernatural
acts, fem. of Old English wicca sorcerer, wizard, man who practices witchcraft or magic, from verb
wiccian to practice witchcraft (compare Low German wikken, wicken to use witchcraft, wikker, wicker
soothsayer).    OED says of uncertain origin; Liberman says None of the proposed etymologies of
witch is free from phonetic or semantic difficulties. Klein suggests connection with Old English
wigle divination, and wig, wih idol. Watkins says the nouns represent a Proto-Germanic *wikkjaz
necromancer (one who wakes the dead), from PIE *weg-yo-, from *weg- (2) to be strong, be lively (see
wake (v.)).    That wicce once had a more specific sense than the later general one of female
magician, sorceress perhaps is suggested by the presence of other words in Old English describing
more specific kinds of magical craft. In the Laws of &AElig;lfred (c.890), witchcraft was
specifically singled out as a woman's craft, whose practitioners were not to be suffered to live
among the West Saxons:    &ETH;a f&aelig;mnan &thorn;e gewunia&eth; onfon gealdorcr&aelig;ftigan
&amp; scinl&aelig;can &amp; wiccan, ne l&aelig;t &thorn;u &eth;a libban.    The other two words
combined with it here are gealdricge, a woman who practices incantations, and scinl&aelig;ce female
wizard, woman magician, from a root meaning phantom, evil spirit. Another word that appears in the
Anglo-Saxon laws is lybl&aelig;ca wizard, sorcerer, but with suggestions of skill in the use of
drugs, because the root of the word is lybb drug, poison, charm. Lybbestre was a fem. word meaning
sorceress, and lybcorn was the name of a certain medicinal seed (perhaps wild saffron). Weekley
notes possible connection to Gothic weihs holy and German weihan consecrate, and writes, the priests
of a suppressed religion naturally become magicians to its successors or opponents. In Anglo-Saxon
glossaries, wicca renders Latin augur (c.1100), and wicce stands for pythoness, divinatricem. In the
Three Kings of Cologne (c.1400) wicca translates Magi:    &THORN;e paynyms ... cleped &thorn;e iij
kyngis Magos, &thorn;at is to seye wicchis.    The glossary translates Latin necromantia (demonum
invocatio) with galdre, wiccecr&aelig;ft. The Anglo-Saxon poem called Men's Crafts has
wiccr&aelig;ft, which appears to be the same word, and by its context means skill with horses. In a
c.1250 translation of Exodus, witches is used of the Egyptian midwives who save the newborn sons of
the Hebrews: &ETH;e wicches hidden hem for-&eth;an, Biforen pharaun nolden he ben. Witch in
reference to a man survived in dialect into 20c., but the fem. form was so dominant by 1601 that
men-witches or he-witch began to be used. Extended sense of old, ugly, and crabbed or malignant
woman is from early 15c; that of young woman or girl of bewitching aspect or manners is first
recorded 1740. Witch doctor is from 1718; applied to African magicians from 1836.    At this day it
is indifferent to say in the English tongue, 'she is a witch,' or 'she is a wise woman.' [Reginald
Scot, The Discoverie of Witchcraft, 1584]


