consistency (n.)

1590s, firmness of matter, from Medieval Latin consistentia or directly from Latin consistentem,
from consistere (see consist). Meaning state of being in agreement or harmony (with something) is
from 1650s; meaning self-consistent is from 1716.


lima bean (n.)

1756, associated with Lima, Peru, from which region the plant (Phaseolus lunatus) was introduced to
Europe c.1500. Among the earliest New World crops to be known in the Old World, Simmonds' Dictionary
of Trade (1858) describes it as esteemed, but it has the consistency of a diseased dog kidney.


inconsistency (n.)

1640s, from in- (1) not, opposite of + consistency. Related: Inconsistencies.


homogenize (v.)

make similar, 1742, from homogenous + -ize. Sense of render milk uniform in consistency is from
1901. Related: Homogenized; homogenizing.


cornea (n.)

late 14c., from Medieval Latin cornea tela horny web or sheath, from Latin cornu (genitive cornus)
horn (see horn (n.)). So called for its consistency. Related: Corneal.


consistent (adj.)

1570s, standing firm, standing still, from Latin consistentem (nominative consistens), present
participle of consistere (see consist). Modern sense of agreeing (with with) is first attested
1640s. Older sense survives in consistency. Related: Consistently.


inconvenience (n.)

c.1400, harm, damage, danger, also a harmful incident, misfortune, affliction, from Old French
inconvenience misfortune, calamity; impropriety (Modern French inconvenance), from Late Latin
inconvenientia lack of consistency, incongruity, noun of quality from inconvenientem (see
inconvenient). Later impropriety, unfitness; an improper act or utterance (early 15c.). Meaning
quality of being inconvenient is from 1650s.


attenuate (v.)

to make thin, to make less, 1520s, from Latin attenuatus enfeebled, weak, past participle of
attenuare to make thin, lessen, diminish, from ad- to (see ad-) + tenuare make thin, from tenuis
thin (see tenet). Related: Attenuated; attenuating. Earlier was Middle English attenuen to make thin
(in consistency), early 15c.


mash (n.)

soft mixture, late Old English *masc (in masc-wyrt mash-wort, infused malt), from Proto-Germanic
*maisk- (cognates: Swedish m&auml;sk grains for pigs, German Maisch crushed grapes, infused malt,
Old English meox dung, filth), from PIE *meik- to mix (see mix (v.)). Originally a word in brewing;
general sense of anything reduced to a soft pulpy consistency is recorded from 1590s, as is the
figurative sense confused mixture, muddle. Short for mashed potatoes it is attested from 1904.


subtle (adj.)

c.1300 (mid-13c. as a surname), sotil, penetrating; ingenious; refined (of the mind); sophisticated,
intricate, abstruse (of arguments), from Old French sotil, soutil, subtil adept, adroit; cunning,
wise; detailed; well-crafted (12c., Modern French subtil), from Latin subtilis fine, thin, delicate,
finely woven; figuratively precise, exact, accurate, in taste or judgment, fine, keen, of style,
plain, simple, direct, from sub under (see sub-) + -tilis, from tela web, net, warp of a fabric (see
texture (n.)).     From early 14c. in reference to things, of thin consistency; in reference to
craftsmen, cunning, skilled, clever; Depreciative sense insidious, treacherously cunning; deceitful
is from mid-14c. Material senses of not dense or viscous, light; pure; delicate, thin, slender;
fine, consisting of small particles are from late 14c. sotil wares were goods sold in powdered form
or finely ground. Partially re-Latinized in spelling, and also by confusion with subtile.


magpie (n.)

the common European bird, known for its chattering, c.1600, earlier simply pie (early 13c.); first
element from Mag, nickname for Margaret, long used in proverbial and slang English for qualities
associated generally with women, especially in this case idle chattering (as in Magge tales tall
tales, nonsense, early 15c.; also compare French margot magpie, from Margot, pet form of
Marguerite).    Second element, pie, is the earlier name of the bird, from Old French pie, from
Latin pica magpie, fem. of picus woodpecker, from PIE root *(s)peik- woodpecker, magpie (cognates:
Umbrian peica magpie, Sanskrit pikah Indian cuckoo, Old Norse sp&aelig;tr, German Specht
woodpecker); possibly from PIE root *pi-, denoting pointedness, of the beak, perhaps, but the magpie
also has a long, pointed tail. The birds are proverbial for pilfering and hoarding, can be taught to
speak, and have been regarded since the Middle Ages as ill omens.Whan pyes chatter vpon a house it
is a sygne of ryghte euyll tydynges. [1507]Divination by number of magpies is attested from c.1780
in Lincolnshire; the rhyme varies from place to place, the only consistency being that one is bad,
two are good.


