conscience (n.)

early 13c., from Old French conscience conscience, innermost thoughts, desires, intentions; feelings
(12c.), from Latin conscientia knowledge within oneself, sense of right, a moral sense, from
conscientem (nominative consciens), present participle of conscire be (mutually) aware, from com-
with, or thoroughly (see com-) + scire to know (see science).    Probably a loan-translation of
Greek syneidesis, literally with-knowledge. Sometimes nativized in Old English/Middle English as
inwit. Russian also uses a loan-translation, so-vest, conscience, literally with-knowledge.


conscionable (adj.)

1540s, from conscioned having a conscience (from conscience) + -able; obsolete from early 18c. but
fossilized in its negative, unconscionable.


scruple (n.)

moral misgiving, pang of conscience, late 14c., from Old French scrupule (14c.), from Latin
scrupulus uneasiness, anxiety, pricking of conscience, literally small sharp stone, diminutive of
scrupus sharp stone or pebble, used figuratively by Cicero for a cause of uneasiness or anxiety,
probably from the notion of having a pebble in one's shoe. The word in the more literal Latin sense
of small unit of weight or measurement is attested in English from late 14c.


casuist (n.)

c.1600, one who studies and resolves cases of conscience, from French casuiste (17c.) or Spanish
casuista (the French word also might be from Spanish), Italian casista, all from Latin casus (see
case (n.1)) in its Medieval Latin sense case of conscience. Often since 17c. in a sinister or
contemptuous sense. Related: Casuistic; casuistical; casuistically; casuistry.  Casuistry ...
destroys, by distinctions and exceptions, all morality, and effaces the essential difference between
right and wrong. [Bolingbroke, 1736]


unconscionable (adj.)

1560s, showing no regard for conscience, from un- (1) + now rare conscionable conscientious.
Related: Unconscionably.


conscient (adj.)

c.1600, conscious, from Latin conscientem, present participle of conscire to be conscious (see
conscience). Also with meaning a conscious being (c.1770).


conscious (adj.)

c.1600, knowing, privy to, from Latin conscius knowing, aware, from conscire (see conscience);
probably a loan-translation of Greek syneidos. A word adopted from the Latin poets and much mocked
at first. Sense of active and awake is from 1837.


conscientious (adj.)

1610s, from Middle French conscientieux (16c.; Modern French consciencieux), from Medieval Latin
conscientiosus, from conscientia (see conscience). Related: Conscientiously; conscientiousness.


guilty (adj.)

Old English gyltig, from gylt (see guilt (n.)). Of conscience, feelings, etc., 1590s. Meaning person
who is guilty is from 1540s. To plead not guilty is from 15c.; to plead guilty is 19c., though, as
OED notes, Guilty is technically not a plea, but a confession.


compunction (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French compunction (12c., Modern French componction), from Late Latin
compunctionem (nominative compunctio) remorse; a pricking (of conscience), noun of action from past
participle stem of Latin compungere to severely prick, sting, from com-, intensive prefix (see
com-), + pungere to prick (see pungent). Used in figurative sense by early Church writers.
Originally a much more intense feeling, similar to remorse, or contrition.


inwit (n.)

Middle English word meaning conscience (early 13c.), reason, intellect (c.1300), from in (adv.) +
wit (n.). Not related to Old English inwit, which meant deceit. Joyce's use in Ulysses (1922), which
echoes the 14c. work Ayenbite of Inwyt, is perhaps the best-known example of the modern use of the
word as a conscious archaism.&THORN;ese ben also &thorn;y fyve inwyttys: Wyl, Resoun, Mynd,
Ymaginacioun, and Thoght [Wyclif, c.1380]   <hr />   If ... such good old English words as inwit and
wanhope should be rehabilitated (and they have been pushing up their heads for thirty years), we
should gain a great deal. [Robert Bridges, 1922]


remorse (n.)

late 14c., from Old French remors (Modern French remords), from Medieval Latin remorsum, noun use of
neuter past participle of Latin remordere to vex, disturb, literally to bite back, from re- back
(see re-) + mordere to bite (see mordant).    The sense evolution was via the Medieval Latin phrase
remorsus conscienti&aelig; (translated into Middle English as ayenbite of inwit). Middle English
also had a verb, remord to strike with remorse, touch with compassion, prick one's conscience.


qualm (n.)

Old English cwealm (West Saxon) death, murder, slaughter; disaster; plague; torment, utcualm
(Anglian) utter destruction, probably related to cwellan to kill, murder, execute, cwelan to die
(see quell). Sense softened to feeling of faintness 1520s; figurative meaning uneasiness, doubt is
from 1550s; that of scruple of conscience is 1640s.    Evidence of a direct path from the Old
English to the modern senses is wanting, but it is plausible, via the notion of fit of sickness. The
other suggested etymology, less satisfying, is to take the fit of uneasiness sense from Dutch kwalm
steam, vapor, mist (cognate with German Qualm smoke, vapor, stupor), which also might be ultimately
from the same Germanic root as quell.


wit (n.)

mental capacity, Old English wit, witt, more commonly gewit understanding, intellect, sense;
knowledge, consciousness, conscience, from Proto-Germanic *wit- (cognates: Old Saxon wit, Old Norse
vit, Danish vid, Swedish vett, Old Frisian wit, Old High German wizzi knowledge, understanding,
intelligence, mind, German Witz wit, witticism, joke, Gothic unwiti ignorance), from PIE *weid- to
see, metaphorically to know (see vision). Related to Old English witan to know (source of wit (v.)).
Meaning ability to connect ideas and express them in an amusing way is first recorded 1540s; that of
person of wit or learning is from late 15c. For nuances of usage, see humor.    A witty saying
proves nothing. [Voltaire, Diner du Comte de Boulainvilliers]   <hr />   Wit ought to be five or six
degrees above the ideas that form the intelligence of an audience. [Stendhal, Life of Henry Brulard]
Witjar was old slang (18c.) for head, skull. Witling (1690s) was a pretender to wit.


shit (v.)

Old English scitan, from Proto-Germanic *skit- (cognates: North Frisian skitj, Dutch schijten,
German scheissen), from PIE *skei- to cut, split, divide, separate (see shed (v.)). The notion is of
separation from the body (compare Latin excrementum, from excernere to separate, Old English scearn
dung, muck, from scieran to cut, shear; see sharn). It is thus a cousin to science and conscience.
<b>Shit is not an acronym</b>. The notion that it is a recent word might be partly because it was
taboo from c.1600 and rarely appeared in print (neither Shakespeare nor the KJV has it), and even in
vulgar publications of the late 18c. it is disguised by dashes. It drew the wrath of censors as late
as 1922 (Ulysses and The Enormous Room), scandalized magazine subscribers in 1957 (a Hemingway story
in Atlantic Monthly) and was omitted from some dictionaries as recently as 1970 (Webster's New
World).    Extensive slang usage; meaning to lie, to tease is from 1934; that of to disrespect is
from 1903. Shite, now a jocular or slightly euphemistic and chiefly British variant of the noun,
formerly a dialectal variant, reflects the vowel in the Old English verb (compare German scheissen);
the modern verb has been influenced by the noun. Shat is a humorous past tense form, not
etymological, first recorded 18c. To shit bricks be very frightened attested by 1961. The connection
between fear and involuntary defecation has generated expressions in English since 14c. (the image
also is in Latin), and probably also is behind scared shitless (1936).  Alle &thorn;e fil&thorn; of
his magh ['maw'] salle breste out atte his fondament for drede. [Cursor Mundi, early 14c.]


proud (adj.)

late Old English  prud, prute excellent, splendid; arrogant, haughty, probably from Old French prud,
oblique case of adjective prouz brave, valiant (11c., Modern French preux; compare prud'homme brave
man), from Late Latin prode advantageous, profitable (source also of Italian prode valiant), a back-
formation from Latin prodesse be useful, from pro- before, for, instead of (see pro-) + esse to be
(see essence). Also see pride (n.), prowess.    Meaning elated by some act, fact, or thing is from
mid-13c. To do (someone) proud attested by 1819. Related: Proudness. The -d- in prodesse is probably
due to the influence of forms like red-eo-, 'I go back,' red-imo- 'I buy back,' etc. [OED]. The Old
English form with -te probably is from or influenced by pride.    The sense of have a high opinion
of oneself, not found in Old French, might reflect the Anglo-Saxons' opinion of the Norman knights
who called themselves proud. Old Norse pru&eth;r, probably from the same French source, had only the
sense brave, gallant, magnificent, stately (compare Icelandic pru&eth;ur, Middle Swedish prudh,
Middle Danish prud). Likewise a group of pride words in the Romance languages -- such as French
orgueil, Italian orgoglio, Spanish orgullo -- are borrowings from Germanic, where they had positive
senses (Old High German urgol distinguished).    Most Indo-European languages use the same word for
proud in its good and bad senses, but in many the bad sense seems to be the earlier one. The usual
way to form the word is by some compound of terms for over or high and words for heart, mood,
thought, or appearance; such as Greek hyperephanos, literally over-appearing; Gothic
hauh&thorn;uhts, literally high-conscience. Old English had ofermodig over-moody (mood in Anglo-
Saxon was a much more potent word than presently) and heahheort high-heart. Words for proud in other
Indo-European languages sometimes reflect a physical sense of being swollen or puffed up; such as
Welsh balch, probably from a root meaning to swell, and Modern Greek kamari, from ancient Greek
kamarou furnish with a vault or arched cover, with a sense evolution via make an arch, to puff out
the chest, to be puffed up (compare English slang chesty).


