consort (v.)

1580s, from consort (n.). Related: Consorted; consorting. Confused in form and sense with concert
since 1580s.


consort (n.)

early 15c., partner, from Middle French consort colleague, partner, wife (14c., Old French
consorte), from Latin consortem (nominative consors) partner, comrade; wife, brother, sister, noun
use of adjective meaning having the same lot, of the same fortune, from com- with (see com-) + sors
a share, lot (see sort (n.)). Sense of husband or wife (partner in marriage) is 1630s in English.


consortium (n.)

1829, from Latin consortium fellowship, participation, society, from consors (genitive consortis;
see consort (n.)). Earlier, in British law, a term for right of husband's access to his wife.


Marie Antoinette

queen consort of Louis XVI (1755-1793); as a decorative style, from 1925.


Tethys

name for the sea that anciently lay between Eurasia and Africa-Arabia, coined 1893 by German
geologist Eduard Suess (1831-1914), from Tethys, name of a Greek sea goddess, sister and consort of
Oceanus.


Aspasia

beautiful and capable Milesian consort of Pericles, proper name from fem. of Greek aspasios welcome,
related to aspazesthai to welcome, of uncertain origin.


make (n.)

match, mate, companion (now archaic or dialectal), from Old English gemaca mate, equal; one of a
pair, comrade; consort, husband, wife, from Proto-Germanic *gamakon-, related to Old English
gem&aelig;cc well-matched, suitable, macian to make (see make (v.)). Meaning manner in which
something is made, design, construction is from c.1300. Phrase on the make intent on profit or
advancement is from 1869.


Prince Albert

piercing that consists of a ring which goes through the urethra and out behind the glans, mid-20c.,
supposedly so-called from the modern legend that Albert of Saxe-Coburg-Gotha (1819-1861), prince
consort of Queen Victoria, had one.    But the term seems to be not older than bodyart maven Doug
Malloy and his circle, and the stories about the prince may be fantastical inventions. Perhaps there
is some connection with Albert underworld/pawnshop slang for gold watch chain (1861), which probably
is from the common portraits of the prince in which he is shown with a conspicuous gold watch chain.
Many fashions in male dress made popular by him bore his name late 19c.


prude (n.)

1704, woman who affects or upholds modesty in a degree considered excessive, from French prude
excessively prim or demure woman, first recorded in Moli&egrave;re. Perhaps a false back-formation
or an ellipsis of preudefemme a discreet, modest woman, from Old French prodefame noblewoman,
gentlewoman; wife, consort, fem. equivalent of prudhomme a brave man (see proud); or perhaps a
direct noun use of the French adjective prude prudish, from Old French prude, prode, preude good,
virtuous, modest, a feminine form of the adjective preux. Also occasionally as an adjective in
English 18c.


run (v.)

the modern verb is a merger of two related Old English words, in both of which the first letters
sometimes switched places. The first is intransitive rinnan, irnan to run, flow, run together (past
tense ran, past participle runnen), cognate with Middle Dutch runnen, Old Saxon, Old High German,
Gothic rinnan, German rinnen to flow, run.    The second is Old English transitive weak verb
&aelig;rnan, earnan ride, run to, reach, gain by running (probably a metathesis of *rennan), from
Proto-Germanic *rannjanan, causative of the root *ren- to run. This is cognate with Old Saxon
renian, Old High German rennen, German rennen, Gothic rannjan.    Both are from PIE *ri-ne-a-,
nasalized form of root *reie- to flow, run  (see Rhine).    Of streams, etc., from c.1200; of
machinery, from 1560s. Meaning be in charge of is first attested 1861, originally American English.
Meaning seek office in an election is from 1826, American English. Phrase run for it take flight is
attested from 1640s. Many figurative uses are from horseracing or hunting (such as to run
(something) into the ground, 1836, American English).    To run across meet is attested from 1855,
American English. To run short exhaust one's supply is from 1752; to run out of in the same sense is
from 1713. To run around with consort with is from 1887. Run away flee in the face of danger is from
late 14c. To run late is from 1954.


