consonant (adj.)

early 15c., from Old French consonant (13c.), from Latin consonantem (nominative consonans), present
participle of consonare (see consonant (n.)).


consonant (n.)

early 14c., sound other than a vowel, from Latin consonantem (nominative consonans), present
participle of consonare to sound together, sound aloud, from com- with (see com-) + sonare to sound
(see sonata). Consonants were thought of as sounds that are only produced together with vowels.


riding (n.2)

one of the three districts into which Yorkshire was divided, late 13c., from late Old English
*&thorn;ri&eth;ing, a relic of Viking rule, from Old Norse &eth;ri&eth;jungr third part, from
&eth;ri&eth;i third (see third). The initial consonant merged with final consonant of preceding
north, west, or east.


pt-

An initial consonant combination common in Greek; the p- is typically silent in English words that
have it but pronounced in French, German, etc.


pn-

consonant sound in some English words derived from Greek. The p- typically is silent in English but
pronounced in French, German, Spanish, etc.


kn-

Germanic consonant cluster; the sound is still evident in most sister languages but in English it
has been reduced to n- in standard pronunciation since before 1750, and for about a century before
that it had been pronounced hn-, dn-, tn-. It was fully voiced in Old and Middle English.


liquid (n.)

a liquid substance, 1709, from liquid (adj.). Earlier it meant sound of a liquid consonant (1520s).


Garrett

surname, from mid-13c., from Gerald or Gerard, with loss of consonant.


splutter (n.)

1670s, perhaps a variant of sputter, intensified by the consonant cluster of splash, splatter, etc.


tobacconist (n.)

dealer in tobacco, 1650s, from tobacco + -ist + abnormal inserted consonant; earlier meaning was
person addicted to tobacco (1590s).


spirant (n.)

breathy consonant, 1862, from Latin spirantem (nominative spirans) breathing, present participle of
spirare to breathe, blow (see spirit (n.)).


cn-

consonant group used in Old English (the Clark Hall dictionary has 82 entries under cn-) but in
Middle English all lost or turned to kn-. Also common in Greek, and retained in the spelling of some
English words from Greek but not now admitted in speech, the n- only being sounded.


jerkin (n.)

1510s, of uncertain origin, perhaps related to Dutch jurk a frock, but this is a modern word, itself
of unknown origin, and the initial consonant presents difficulties (Dutch -j- typically becomes
English -y-).


republican (adj.)

1712, belonging to a republic, of the nature of a republic, consonant to the principles of a
republic, from republic + -an. The French republican calendar was in use from Nov. 26, 1793 to Dec.
31, 1805.


consonance (n.)

early 15c., agreement among persons, from Old French consonance (12c.) consonance, rhyme, from Latin
consonantia harmony, agreement, from consonantem (nominative consonans) (see consonant). Meaning
correspondence of sounds is from 1580s.


Ruthenian (adj.)

1850, of or pertaining to the Ukrainian people (earlier Ruthene, 1540s), from Medieval Latin Rutheni
the Little Russians, a derivative of Russi (see Russia). For consonant change, compare Medieval
Latin Prut(h)eni, from Prussi Prussians. Another word in the same sense was Russniak.


darling

Old English deorling darling, favorite minion, double diminutive of deor dear (see dear (adj.)). The
vowel shift from -e- to -a- (16c.) is usual for -er- followed by a consonant. It is better to be An
olde mans derlyng, than a yong mans werlyng (1562).


in- (1)

prefix meaning not, opposite of, without (also im-, il-, ir- by assimilation of -n- with following
consonant), from Latin in- not, cognate with Greek an-, Old English un-, from PIE *ne not (see un-
(1)).


crane (n.)

Old English cran large wading bird, common Germanic (cognates: Old Saxon krano, Old High German
krano, German Kranich, and, with unexplained change of consonant, Old Norse trani), from PIE *gere-
(cognates: Greek geranos, Latin grus, Welsh garan, Lithuanian garnys heron, stork), perhaps echoic
of its cry. Metaphoric use for machine with a long arm is first attested late 13c. (a sense also in
equivalent words in German and Greek).


udder (n.)

Old English udder milk gland of a cow, goat, etc., from Proto-Germanic *udr- (cognates: Old Frisian
uder, Middle Dutch uyder, Dutch uijer, Old High German utar, German Euter, and, with unexplained
change of consonant, Old Norse jugr), from PIE *eue-dh-r udder (cognates: Sanskrit udhar, Greek
outhar, Latin uber udder, breast).


in- (2)

element meaning into, in, on, upon (also im-, il-, ir- by assimilation of -n- with following
consonant), from Latin in- in (see in). In Old French this often became en-, which usually was
respelled in English to conform with Latin, but not always, which accounts for pairs like
enquire/inquire. There was a native form, which in West Saxon usually appeared as on- (as in Old
English onliehtan to enlighten), and some verbs survived into Middle English (such as inwrite to
inscribe), but all now seem to be extinct. Not related to in- (1) not, which also was a common
prefix in Latin: to the Romans impressus could mean pressed or unpressed.


ad-

word-forming element expressing direction toward or in addition to, from Latin ad to, toward in
space or time; with regard to, in relation to, as a prefix, sometimes merely emphatic, from PIE *ad-
to, near, at (cognate with Old English &aelig;t; see at). Simplified to a- before sc-, sp- and st-;
modified to ac- before many consonants and then re-spelled af-, ag-, al-, etc., in conformity with
the following consonant (as in affection, aggression). In Old French, reduced to a- in all cases (an
evolution already underway in Merovingian Latin), but written forms in French were refashioned after
Latin in 14c. and English did likewise 15c. in words it had picked up from Old French. In many cases
pronunciation followed the shift.


W

not in the Roman alphabet, but the Modern English sound it represents is close to the devocalized
consonant expressed by Roman -U- or -V-. In Old English, this originally was written -uu-, but by
8c. began to be expressed by the runic character wyn (Kentish wen), which looked like this: &#447;
(the character is a late addition to the online font set and doesn't display properly on many
computers, so it's something like a combination of lower-case -p- and a reversed -y-). In 11c.,
Norman scribes introduced -w-, a ligatured doubling of Roman -u- which had been used on the
continent for the Germanic w sound, and wyn disappeared c.1300. -W- is not properly a letter in the
modern French alphabet, and it is used there only in borrowed foreign words, such as wagon, weekend,
Western, whisky, wombat.


-ed

past participle suffix of weak verbs, from Old English -ed, -ad, -od (leveled to -ed in Middle
English), from Proto-Germanic *-do- (cognates: Old High German -ta, German -t, Old Norse -&thorn;a,
Gothic -da, -&thorn;s), from PIE *-to- (cognates: Sanskrit -tah, Greek -tos, Latin -tus; see -th
(1)).    Originally fully pronounced, as still in beloved (which, with blessed, accursed, and a few
others retains the full pronunciation through liturgical readings). In 16c.-18c. often written -t
when so pronounced (usually after a consonant or short vowel), and still so where a long vowel in
the stem is short in the past participle (as in crept, slept, etc.). In some older words both forms
exist, with different shades of meaning, as in gilded/gilt, burned/burnt.


mouth (n.)

Old English mu&thorn; mouth, opening, door, gate, from Proto-Germanic *munthaz (cognates: Old Saxon,
Old Frisian muth, Old Norse munnr, Danish mund, Middle Dutch mont, Dutch mond, Old High German mund,
German Mund, Gothic mun&thorn;s mouth), with characteristic loss of nasal consonant in Old English
(compare tooth, goose), from PIE *mnto-s (cognates: Latin mentum chin). In the sense of outfall of a
river it is attested from late Old English; as the opening of anything with capacity (a bottle,
cave, etc.) it is recorded from c.1200. Mouth-organ attested from 1660s.


J

the letter is a late modification of Roman -i-, originally a scribal creation in continental
Medieval Latin to distinguish small -i- in cursive writing from the strokes of other letters,
especially in the final positions of words. But in English, -y- was used for this, and -j- was
introduced c.1600-1640 to take up the consonantal sound that had evolved from -i- since Late Latin
times. This usage first was attested in Spanish, where it was in place before 1600. English
dictionaries continued to lump together words beginning in -i- and -j- until 19c., and -j- formerly
was skipped when letters were used to express serial order.    Used in modern writing to represent
Latin -i- before a, e, o, u in the same syllable, which in Latin was sounded as the consonant in
Modern English you, yam, etc., but the custom is controversial among Latinists:    The character J,
j, which represents the letter sound in some school-books, is an invention of the seventeenth
century, and is not found in MSS., nor in the best texts of the Latin authors. [Lewis]


fight (v.)

Old English feohtan to fight (class III strong verb; past tense feaht, past participle fohten), from
Proto-Germanic *fehtan (cognates: Old High German fehtan, German fechten, Middle Dutch and Dutch
vechten, Old Frisian fiuhta to fight), from PIE *pek- (2) to pluck out (wool or hair), apparently
with a notion of pulling roughly (cognates: Greek pekein to comb, shear, pekos fleece, wool; Persian
pashm wool, down, Latin pectere to comb, Sanskrit paksman- eyebrows, hair).    Spelling substitution
of -gh- for a hard H sound was a Middle English scribal habit, especially before -t-. In some late
Old English examples, the middle consonant was represented by a yogh. To fight back resist is
recorded from 1890.


boo

expression meant to startle, early 15c., boh, A combination of consonant and vowel especially fitted
to produce a loud and startling sound [OED, which compares Latin boare, Greek boaein to cry aloud,
roar, shout.]; as an expression of disapproval, 1801 (n.), 1816 (v.); hence, the verb meaning shower
someone with boos (1893).    Booing was common late 19c. among London theater audiences and at
British political events; In Italy, Parma opera-goers were notorious boo-birds, but the custom seems
to have been little-known in America till c.1910.    To say boo open one's mouth, speak, originally
was to say boo to a goose.    To be able to say Bo! to a goose is to be not quite destitute of
courage, to have an inkling of spirit, and was probably in the first instance used of children. A
little boy who comes across some geese suddenly will find himself hissed at immediately, and a great
demonstration of defiance made by them, but if he can pluck up heart to cry 'bo!' loudly and advance
upon them, they will retire defeated. The word 'bo' is clearly selected for the sake of the
explosiveness of its first letter and the openness and loudness of its vowel. [Walter W. Skeat, Cry
Bo to a Goose, Notes and Queries, 4th series vi Sept. 10, 1870]


V

In Middle English, -u- and -v- were used interchangeably, though with a preference for v- as the
initial letter (vnder, vain, etc.) and -u- elsewhere (full, euer, etc.). The distinction into
consonant and vowel identities was established in English by 1630, under influence of continental
printers, but into 19c. some dictionaries and other catalogues continued to list -u- and -v- words
as a single series.    No native Anglo-Saxon words begin in v- except those (vane, vat, vixen)
altered by the southwestern England habit of replacing initial f- with v- (and initial s- with z-).
Confusion of -v- and -w- also was a characteristic of 16c. Cockney accents.    As a Roman numeral,
five. In German rocket weapons systems of World War II, it stood for Vergeltungswaffe reprisal
weapon. V-eight as a type of motor engine is recorded from 1929 (V-engine is attested from 1909), so
called for the arrangement. The V for victory hand sign was conceived January 1941 by Belgian
politician and resistance leader Victor de Laveleye, to signify French victoire and Flemish vrijheid
(freedom). It was broadcast into Europe by Radio Belgi&#235;/Radio Belgique and popularized by the
BBC by June 1941, from which time it became a universal allied gesture.


belief (n.)

late 12c., bileave, replacing Old English geleafa belief, faith, from West Germanic *ga-laubon to
hold dear, esteem, trust (cognates: Old Saxon gilobo, Middle Dutch gelove, Old High German giloubo,
German Glaube), from *galaub- dear, esteemed, from intensive prefix *ga- + *leubh- to care, desire,
like, love (see love (v.)). The prefix was altered on analogy of the verb believe. The distinction
of the final consonant from that of believe developed 15c.    The be-, which is not a natural prefix
of nouns, was prefixed on the analogy of the vb. (where it is naturally an intensive) .... [OED]
Belief used to mean trust in God, while faith meant loyalty to a person based on promise or duty (a
sense preserved in keep one's faith, in good (or bad) faith and in common usage of faithful,
faithless, which contain no notion of divinity). But faith, as cognate of Latin fides, took on the
religious sense beginning in 14c. translations, and belief had by 16c. become limited to mental
acceptance of something as true, from the religious use in the sense of things held to be true as a
matter of religious doctrine (a sense attested from early 13c.).


key (n.1)

metal piece that works a lock, from Old English c&aelig;g key, of unknown origin, with no certain
cognates other than Old Frisian kei. Perhaps related to Middle Low German keie lance, spear on
notion of tool to cleave with, from Proto-Germanic *ki- to cleaver, split (cognates: German Keil
wedge, Gothic us-kijans come forth, said of seed sprouts, keinan to germinate). But Liberman writes,
The original meaning of *kaig-jo- was presumably '*pin with a twisted end.' Words with the root
*kai- followed by a consonant meaning 'crooked, bent; twisted' are common only in the North Germanic
languages. Modern pronunciation is a northern variant predominating from c.1700; earlier it was
often spelled and pronounced kay.    Figurative sense of that which serves to open or explain was in
Old English; meaning that which holds together other parts is from 1520s. As answer to a test, it is
from chess, short for key move, first move in a solution to a set problem. Musical sense of tone,
note is 15c., but modern sense of scale is 1580s, probably as a translation of Latin clavis or
French clef (see clef; also see keynote). Extended c.1500 to mechanism on a musical instrument. As a
verb meaning to scratch (a car's paint job) with a key it is recorded by 1986.


Shrewsbury

one of the most etymologically complex of English place names, it illustrates the changes wrought in
Old English words by Anglo-French scribes who could not pronounce them. Recorded 1016 as
Scrobbesbyrig, it originally may have meant the fortified place in (a district called) The Scrub.
The initial consonant cluster was impossible for the scribes, who simplified it to sr-, then added a
vowel (sar-) to make it easier still.    The name was also changed by Anglo-French loss or
metathesis of liquids in words containing -l-, -n-, or -r- (also evident in the derivatives of Old
French Berengier bear-spear -- Old High German Beringar -- name of one of the paladins in the
Charlemagne romances and a common given name in England 12c. and 13c., which has come down in
surnames as Berringer, Bellanger, Benger, etc.). Thus Sarop- became Salop- and in the 12c. and 13c.
the overwhelming spelling in government records was Salopesberie, which accounts for the
abbreviation Salop for the modern county.    During all this, the Anglo-Saxon inhabitants (as
opposed to the French scribes) still pronounced it properly, and regular sound evolutions probably
produced a pronunciation something like Shrobesbury (which turns up on a 1327 patent roll). After a
predictable -b- to -v- (a vowel in the Middle Ages) to -u- shift, the modern spelling begins to
emerge 14c. and is fully established 15c.   Shrewsbury clock, for some reason, became proverbial for
exactness, and thus, naturally, proverbial as indicating exaggeration of accuracy (1590s).


girl (n.)

c.1300, gyrle child (of either sex), of unknown origin; current scholarship [OED says] leans toward
an unrecorded Old English *gyrele, from Proto-Germanic *gurwilon-, diminutive of *gurwjoz
(apparently also represented by Low German g&aelig;re boy, girl, Norwegian dialectal gorre, Swedish
dialectal gurre small child, though the exact relationship, if any, between all these is obscure),
from PIE *ghwrgh-, also found in Greek parthenos virgin. But this is highly conjectural. And
Liberman (2008) writes:   Girl does not go back to any Old English or Old Germanic form. It is part
of a large group of Germanic words whose root begins with a g or k and ends in r. The final
consonant in girl is a diminutive suffix. The g-r words denote young animals, children, and all
kinds of creatures considered immature, worthless, or past their prime.    Another candidate is Old
English gierela garment (for possible sense evolution in this theory, compare brat). Like boy, lass,
lad it is of obscure origin. Probably most of them arose as jocular transferred uses of words that
had originally different meaning [OED]. Specific meaning of female child is late 14c. Applied to any
young unmarried woman since mid-15c. Meaning sweetheart is from 1640s. Girl next door as a type of
unflashy attractiveness is recorded by 1953.    Doris [Day] was a big vocalist even before she hit
the movies in 1948. There, as the latest movie colony girl next door, sunny-faced Doris soon became
a leading movie attraction as well as the world's top female recording star. She's the girl next
door, all right, said one Hollywood admirer. Next door to the bank. [Life magazine, Dec. 22, 1958]
Girl Friday is from 1940, a reference to Robinson Crusoe.


fuck (v.)

until recently a difficult word to trace, in part because it was taboo to the editors of the
original OED when the F volume was compiled, 1893-97. Written form only attested from early 16c. OED
2nd edition cites 1503, in the form fukkit; earliest appearance of current spelling is 1535 --
Bischops ... may fuck thair fill and be vnmaryit [Sir David Lyndesay, Ane Satyre of the Thrie
Estaits], but presumably it is a much more ancient word than that, simply one that wasn't written in
the kind of texts that have survived from Old English and Middle English. Buck cites proper name
John le Fucker from 1278, but the surname could have other explanations. The word apparently is
hinted at in a scurrilous 15c. poem, titled Flen flyys, written in bastard Latin and Middle English.
The relevant line reads:Non sunt in celi quia fuccant uuiuys of heliThey [the monks] are not in
heaven because they fuck the wives of [the town of] Ely. Fuccant is pseudo-Latin, and in the
original it is written in cipher. The earliest examples of the word otherwise are from Scottish,
which suggests a Scandinavian origin, perhaps from a word akin to Norwegian dialectal fukka
copulate, or Swedish dialectal focka copulate, strike, push, and fock penis. Another theory traces
it to Middle English fyke, fike move restlessly, fidget, which also meant dally, flirt, and probably
is from a general North Sea Germanic word; compare Middle Dutch fokken, German ficken fuck, earlier
make quick movements to and fro, flick, still earlier itch, scratch; the vulgar sense attested from
16c. This would parallel in sense the usual Middle English slang term for have sexual intercourse,
swive, from Old English swifan to move lightly over, sweep (see swivel). But OED remarks these
cannot be shown to be related to the English word. Chronology and phonology rule out Shipley's
attempt to derive it from Middle English firk to press hard, beat.    Germanic words of similar form
(f + vowel + consonant) and meaning 'copulate' are numerous. One of them is G. ficken. They often
have additional senses, especially 'cheat,' but their basic meaning is 'move back and forth.' ...
Most probably, fuck is a borrowing from Low German and has no cognates outside Germanic. [Liberman]
French foutre and Italian fottere look like the English word but are unrelated, derived rather from
Latin futuere, which is perhaps from PIE root *bhau(t)- knock, strike off, extended via a figurative
use from the sexual application of violent action [Shipley; compare the sexual slang use of bang,
etc.]. Popular and Internet derivations from acronyms (and the pluck yew fable) are merely
<b>ingenious trifling</b>. The Old English word was h&aelig;man, from ham dwelling, home, with a
sense of take home, co-habit. Fuck was outlawed in print in England (by the Obscene Publications
Act, 1857) and the U.S. (by the Comstock Act, 1873). As a noun, it dates from 1670s. The word may
have been shunned in print, but it continued in conversation, especially among soldiers during World
War I.It became so common that an effective way for the soldier to express this emotion was to omit
this word. Thus if a sergeant said, 'Get your ----ing rifles!' it was understood as a matter of
routine. But if he said 'Get your rifles!' there was an immediate implication of urgency and danger.
[John Brophy, Songs and Slang of the British Soldier: 1914-1918, pub. 1930]The legal barriers broke
down in the 20th century, with the Ulysses decision (U.S., 1933) and Lady Chatterley's Lover (U.S.,
1959; U.K., 1960). Johnson excluded the word, and fuck wasn't in a single English language
dictionary from 1795 to 1965. The Penguin Dictionary broke the taboo in the latter year. Houghton
Mifflin followed, in 1969, with The American Heritage Dictionary, but it also published a Clean
Green edition without the word, to assure itself access to the lucrative public high school market.
The abbreviation F (or eff) probably began as euphemistic, but by 1943 it was being used as a cuss
word, too. In 1948, the publishers of The Naked and the Dead persuaded Norman Mailer to use the
euphemism fug instead. When Mailer later was introduced to Dorothy Parker, she greeted him with, So
you're the man who can't spell 'fuck'  [The quip sometimes is attributed to Tallulah Bankhead].
Hemingway used muck in For whom the Bell Tolls (1940). The major breakthrough in publication was
James Jones' From Here to Eternity (1950), with 50 fucks (down from 258 in the original manuscript).
Egyptian legal agreements from the 23rd Dynasty (749-21 B.C.E.) frequently include the phrase, If
you do not obey this decree, may a donkey copulate with you! [Reinhold Aman, Maledicta, Summer
1977]. Fuck-all nothing first recorded 1960.  Verbal phrase fuck up to ruin, spoil, destroy first
attested c.1916. A widespread group of Slavic words (such as Polish pierdoli&#263;) can mean both
fornicate and make a mistake. Fuck off attested from 1929; as a command to depart, by 1944. Flying
fuck originally meant have sex on horseback and is first attested c.1800 in broadside ballad New
Feats of Horsemanship. For the unkillable urban legend that this word is an acronym of some sort (a
fiction traceable on the Internet to 1995 but probably predating that) see here, and also here.
Related: Fucked; fucking. Agent noun fucker attested from 1590s in literal sense; by 1893 as a term
of abuse (or admiration).    DUCK F-CK-R. The man who has the care of the poultry on board a
&#383;hip of war. [Classical Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, 1796]


