conspiracy (n.)

mid-14c., from Anglo-French conspiracie, Old French conspiracie conspiracy, plot, from Latin
conspirationem (nominative conspiratio) agreement, union, unanimity, noun of action from conspirare
(see conspire); earlier in same sense was conspiration (early 14c.), from French conspiration
(13c.), from Latin conspirationem. An Old English word for it was facengecwis. As a term in law,
from 1863. Conspiracy theory is from 1909.


conjuration (n.)

late 14c., coniuracioun, conspiracy (now obsolete), also a calling upon something supernatural, from
Old French conjuracion spell, incantation, formula used in exorcism, from Latin coniurationem
(nominative coniuratio) a swearing together, conspiracy, noun of action from coniurare (see
conjure).


gunpowder (n.)

early 15c., from gun (n.) + powder (n.). The Gunpowder Plot was the conspiracy to blow up the Houses
of Parliament on Nov. 5, 1605, while the King, Lords and Commons were assembled there.


guy (n.2)

fellow, 1847, originally American English; earlier (1836) grotesquely or poorly dressed person,
originally (1806) effigy of Guy Fawkes, leader of the Gunpowder Plot to blow up British king and
Parliament (Nov. 5, 1605), paraded through the streets by children on the anniversary of the
conspiracy. The male proper name is from French, related to Italian Guido.


machination (n.)

late 15c., a plotting, intrigue, from Old French machinacion plot, conspiracy, scheming, intrigue,
from Latin machinationem (nominative machinatio) device, contrivance, machination, noun of action
from past participle stem of machinari contrive skillfully, to design; to scheme, to plot, from
machina (see machine (n.)). Related: Machinations.


SWAK

acronym for sealed with a kiss, attested from 1911, in a legal publication quoting a letter from
1909:    ... Well Kid I don't know nothing else to say only that I hope to see your sweet face Sat.
Good by from your Dear Husban to his sweet little wife. P. S. excuse bad writing and mispelled words
take all mistakes as kisses. S.W.A.K. * * * This letter was postmarked at Des Moines October 20,
1909, addressed to Carrie Sprague at Jefferson, Iowa, and reached the latter place October 21, 1909.
[State v. Manning (a conspiracy-to-lure-women-to-prostitution case), Supreme Court of Iowa, Nov. 16,
1910, reported in Northwestern Reporter, Volume 128, 1911]    Popularized in soldiers' letters home
in World War I. It probably is meant also to echo the sound of a kiss. Compare Middle English swack
a hard blow (late 14c.).


