contest (n.)

1640s, from contest (v.).


contested (adj.)

1670s, past participle adjective from contest (v.). Of elections, from 1771, American English.


contestation (n.)

1540s, from Latin contestationem (nominative contestatio), an attesting, testimony, noun of action
from past participle stem of contestari (see contest (v.)).


contestant (adj.)

1660s, from French contestant, present participle of contester (see contest (v.)).


contest (v.)

c.1600, from French contester dispute, oppose, from Middle French, from Latin contestari (litem) to
call to witness, bring action, from com- together (see com-) + testari to bear witness, from testis
a witness, (see testament). Calling witnesses as the first step in a legal combat. Related:
Contestable; contested; contesting.


pentathlon (n.)

athletic contest of five events, 1852, from Greek pentathlon the contest of five exercises, from
pente five (see five) + athlon prize, contest, of uncertain origin. Earlier in English in Latin form
pentathlum (1706). The Greek version consisted of jumping, sprinting, discus and spear throwing, and
wrestling. The modern version (1912) consists of horseback riding, fencing, shooting, swimming, and
cross-country running.


tug (n.)

mid-14c., in reference to some part of a harness; c.1500 as act of pulling or dragging, from tug
(v.). Meaning small, powerful vessel for towing other vessels is recorded from 1817. Phrase tug of
war (1670s) was originally figurative, the decisive contest, the real struggle, from the noun in the
sense supreme effort, strenuous contest of forces (1650s). As an actual athletic event, from 1876.


tournament (n.)

medieval martial arts contest, c.1200 (figurative), c.1300 (literal), from Old French tornement
contest between groups of knights on horseback (12c.), from tornoier to joust, tilt, take part in
tournaments (see tourney). Modern use, in reference to games of skill, is recorded from 1761.


scofflaw (n.)

1924, from scoff (v.) + law (n.). The winning entry in a national contest during Prohibition to coin
a word to characterize a person who drinks illegally, chosen from more than 25,000 entries; the $200
winning prize was split between two contestants who sent in the word separately: Henry Irving Dale
and Miss Kate L. Butler. Other similar attempts did not stick, such as pitilacker (1926), winning
entry in a contest by the Pennsylvania Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals to establish
a scolding word for one who mistreats animals (submitted by Mrs. M. McIlvaine Bready of Mickleton,
N.J.).


protagonist (n.)

1670s, principal character in a story, drama, etc., from Greek protagonistes actor who plays the
chief or first part, from protos first (see proto-) + agonistes actor, competitor, from agon contest
(see act (n.)). Meaning leading person in any cause or contest is from 1889. Mistaken sense of
advocate, supporter (1935) is from misreading of Greek protos as Latin pro- for.


athlete (n.)

early 15c., from Latin athleta a wrestler, athlete, combatant in public games, from Greek athletes
prizefighter, contestant in the games, agent noun from athlein to contest for a prize, related to
athlos a contest and athlon a prize, of unknown origin. Before 1750, usually in Latin form. In this
sense, Old English had plegmann play-man. Athlete's foot first recorded 1928, for an ailment that
has been around much longer.


La-Z-Boy

brand of recliner chair, named 1929, Floral City Furniture Co., Monroe, Michigan, U.S. According to
company lore, chosen from names submitted in a contest.


jihad (n.)

1869, from Arabic, usually translated as holy war, literally struggle, contest, effort, from
infinitive of jahada he waged war, he applied himself to. Used in English since c.1880 for any sort
of doctrinal crusade.


scramble (n.)

1670s, an eager, rude contest or struggle, from scramble (v.). Meaning a walk or ramble involving
clambering and struggling with obstacles is from 1755. Meaning rapid take-off first recorded 1940,
R.A.F. slang.


win (n.)

Old English winn labor, toil; strife, conflict; profit, gain, from the source of win (v.). Modern
sense of a victory in a game or contest is first attested 1862, from the verb.


decathlon (n.)

1912, from deca ten (see ten) + Greek athlon contest, prize, of uncertain origin. A modern Olympic
event consisting of 10 challenges.


rematch (n.)

1941, from re- back, again + match (n.) contest.


conscientious objector (n.)

1896, in reference to those with religious scruples about mandatory vaccination. Military sense
predominated from World War I.    After a chequered career full of startling episodes and reversals,
the Vaccination Bill becomes virtually the Vaccination Act. In Parliament the hottest of the contest
centred round the conscientious objector. [The Lancet, Aug. 13, 1898]


biathlon (n.)

1956, from bi- + Greek athlon contest, abstracted from pentathlon.


debate (n.)

early 14c., a quarrel, dispute, disagreement, from Old French debat; see debate (v.). Sense of a
formal dispute, a debating contest is perhaps from early 15c.


challenger (n.)

late 13c., a claimant; mid-14c., one who makes false charges; mid-15c., one who disputes something,
objector, from Anglo-French chalengeour (Old French chalongeor slanderer, petitioner, plaintiff),
agent noun from challenge (v.). Specific sense of one who calls out another in a contest is from
1510s.


draw (n.)

game or contest that ends without a winner, attested first in drawn match (1610s), of uncertain
origin; some speculate it is from withdraw. Draw-game is from 1825. As a verb, to leave undecided,
from 1837.


pwned (adj.)

dominated, humiliatingly defeated, taken over, by 2001, leetspeak slang, probably from the common
typographical mistake for owned (the -p- and -o- keys being adjacent on standard English keyboards)
in the gamer slang sense completely dominated by another (in a contest).


prioritize (v.)

1972, apparently coined during the U.S. presidential contest that year, from root of priority +
-ize. Related: Prioritized; prioritizing.


nightcap (n.)

also night-cap, late 14c., covering for the head, worn in bed, from night + cap (n.). In the
alcoholic sense, it is attested from 1818. American English sense of final event in a sporting
contest (especially the second game of a baseball double-header) is from 1939.


concours (n.)

from French concours (16c.) assemblage of things brought together, also contest (see concourse).
Usually in English in phrase concours d'elegance.


rink (n.)

late 14c., Scottish dialect, probably from Old French renc, reng row, line, from Frankish and
ultimately connected with ring (n.1). Probably confused in meaning with ring (n.1) in sense of area
marked out for a sporting contest. From 1787 in curling; ice hockey sense first attested 1896.


romp (v.)

1709, to play, sport, frolic; 1734, piece of lively play; perhaps a variant of ramp (v.); but also
see romp (n.). Meaning to win (a contest) with great ease first attested 1888. Related: Romped;
romping.


popularity (n.)

fact or condition of being beloved by the people, c.1600, from French popularit&#233; (15c.), from
popular + -ity. Classical Latin popularitas meant fellow-citizenship. Popularity contest is from
1880.


competition (n.)

c.1600, action of competing, from Latin competitionem (nominative competitio) agreement, rivalry,
noun of action from past participle stem of competere (see compete). Meaning a contest for something
is from 1610s. Sense of rivalry in the marketplace attested from 1793; that of entity or entities
with which one competes is from 1961, especially in business.


last-ditch (adj.)

on the last line of defense, 1715, attributed to William of Orange; if so, originally in a Dutch
context.    We have no space to enter into the detail of the heroic struggle maintained by the young
stadtholder and his faithful Dutchmen; how they laid their country under water, and successfully
kept the powerful invader at bay. Once the contest seemed utterly hopeless. William was advised to
compromise the matter, and yield up Holland as the conquest of Louis XIV. No, replied he; I mean to
die in the last ditch. A speech alone sufficient to render his memory immortal. [Agnes Strickland,
Lives of the Queens of England, London, 1847]


-machy

word-forming element meaning battle, war, contest, from Greek -makhia, from makhe a battle, fight,
related to makhesthai to fight, from PIE root *magh- (2) to fight.


comparison (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French comparaison (12c.), from Latin comparationem (nominative comparatio), noun
of action from past participle stem of comparare make equal with, liken, bring together for a
contest, literally to couple together, to form in pairs, from com- with (see com-) + parare prepare
(see pare).


sweepstakes (n.)

prize won in a race or contest, 1773, from Middle English swepestake one who sweeps or wins all the
stakes in a game (late 14c. as a surname or nickname; late 15c. as the name of one of the King's
ships), from swepen to sweep (see sweep (v.)) + stake (n.2). Meaning any race for stakes contributed
is from 1862.


final (adj.)

early 14c., from Old French final and directly from Latin finalis of or pertaining to an end,
concluding, final, from finis end (see finish (v.)). As a noun, late 14c., that which comes last;
meaning final contest in a sporting sense is from 1880. As a shortening of final examination, from
1880.


Thermos (n.)

trademark registered in Britain 1907, invented by Sir James Dewar (patented 1904 but not named
then), from Greek thermos hot (see thermal). Dewar built the first one in 1892, but it was first
manufactured commercially in Germany in 1904, when two glass blowers formed Thermos GmbH. Supposedly
the company sponsored a contest to name the thing, and a Munich resident won with a submission of
Thermos.


tourney (n.)

c.1300, from Anglo-French turnei, Old French tornei contest of armed men (12c., Modern French
tournoi), from tornoier to joust, tilt (see tourney (v.)).


triathlon (n.)

1970, from tri- three + Greek athlon contest; formed on model of decathlon, biathlon, etc.
Originally of various combinations of events; one of the earliest so called combined clay-pigeon
shooting, fly-fishing, and horse-jumping; another was cross-country skiing, target shooting, and a
giant slalom run; and a third connected to the U.S. Army involved shooting, swimming, and running.
Applied to the combination of a long swim, a bicycle-race, and a marathon by 1981.


bowl (v.)

to roll a ball on the ground, typically as part of a game or contest, mid-15c., from bowl wooden
ball (see bowls). Specifically of cricket from 1755; cricket use is source of late 19c. expressions
bowl over, etc. Related: Bowled; bowling.


score (v.)

to cut with incisions or notches, c.1400; to record by means of notches (late 14c.); see score (n.).
Meanings to keep record of the scores in a game, etc. and to make or add a point for one's side in a
game, etc. both attested from 1742. The slang sense, in reference to men, achieve intercourse first
recorded 1960. Meaning to be scorekeeper, to keep the score in a game or contest is from 1846. In
the musical sense from 1839. Related: Scored; scoring.


demolition (n.)

1540s, from Old French demolition (14c.) demolition; defeat, rout, from Latin demolitionem
(nominative demolitio), noun of action from past participle stem of demoliri (see demolish). Mencken
noted demolition engineer for house-wrecker by 1936. Demolition derby is recorded from 1956,
American English, defined by OED as a contest in which old cars are battered into one another, the
last one running being declared the winner.


integrate (v.)

1630s, to render (something) whole, from Latin integratus, past participle of integrare make whole,
from integer whole (see integer). Meaning to put together parts or elements and combine them into a
whole is from 1802. Integrate in the racially desegregate sense is a back-formation from
integration, dating to the 1948 U.S. presidential contest. Related: Integrated; integrating.


spelling (n.)

mid-15c., action of reading letter by letter, verbal noun from spell (v.1). Meaning manner of
forming words with letters is from 1660s; meaning a way a word has been spelled is from 1731.
Spelling bee is from 1878 (see bee; earlier spelling match, 1845; the act of winning such a
schoolroom contest is described 1854 as to spell (someone) down).


irrefragable (adj.)

that cannot be refuted, 1530s, from Late Latin irrefragabilis, from assimilated form of in- not,
opposite of (see in- (1)) + Latin refragari to oppose, contest, from re- back (see re-) + frag-,
base of frangere to break (see fraction). Related: irrefragably; irrefragability.


antagonist (n.)

1590s, from French antagoniste (16c.) or directly from Late Latin antagonista, from Greek
antagonistes competitor, opponent, rival, agent noun from antagonizesthai to struggle against,
oppose, be a rival, from anti- against (see anti-) + agonizesthai to contend for a prize, from agon
contest (see agony). Originally in battle or sport, extended 1620s to any sphere of human activity.


victory (n.)

c.1300, military supremacy, victory in battle or a physical contest, from Anglo-French and Old
French victorie (12c.) and directly from Latin victoria victory, from past participle stem of
vincere (see victor). V.E. (victory in Europe) and V.J. (victory in Japan) days in World War II were
first used Sept. 2, 1944, by James F. Byrne, U.S. director of War Mobilization [Washington Post,
Sept. 10, 1944].


dozen (n.)

c.1300, from Old French dozaine a dozen, from doze (12c.) twelve, from Latin duodecim twelve, from
duo two + decem ten (see ten).    The Old French fem. suffix -aine is characteristically added to
cardinals to form collectives in a precise sense (exactly 12, not about 12). The dozens invective
contest (1928) originated in slave culture, the custom probably African, the word probably from
bulldoze (q.v.) in its original sense of a whipping, a thrashing.


tension (n.)

1530s, a stretched condition, from Middle French tension (16c.) or directly from Latin tensionem
(nominative tensio) a stretching (in Medieval Latin a struggle, contest), noun of state from tensus,
past participle of tendere to stretch, from PIE root *ten- stretch (see tenet). The sense of nervous
strain is first recorded 1763. The meaning stress along lines of electromotive force (as in high-
tension wires) is recorded from 1785.


bet

1590s, as both a verb and noun, in the argot of petty criminals, of unknown origin; probably a
shortening of abet or else from obsolete beet to make good, from Old English b&aelig;tan make
better, arouse, stimulate, from Proto-Germanic *baitjan, in which case the verb would be the
original. The original notion is perhaps to improve a contest by wagering on it, or it is from the
bait sense in abet. Used since 1852 in various American English slang assertions (compare you bet be
assured, 1857). Related: Betting.


miss (n.2)

the term of honour to a young girl [Johnson], originally (c.1600) a shortened form of mistress. By
1640s as prostitute, concubine; sense of title for a young unmarried woman, girl first recorded
1660s. In the 1811 reprint of the slang dictionary, Miss Laycock is given as an underworld euphemism
for the monosyllable. Miss America is from 1922 as the title bestowed on the winner of an annual
nationwide U.S. beauty/talent contest. Earlier it meant young American women generally or the United
States personified as a young woman, and it also was the name of a fast motor boat.


