contiguous (adj.)

1610s, from Latin contiguus near, touching, bordering upon, from root of contingere to touch upon
(see contact). Earlier form, now obsolete, was contiguate (mid-15c.).


marrowsky (n.)

1863, said to derive from the proper name of a Polish count. A deformed language in which the
initial consonants of contiguous words are transposed [OED]. Compare spoonerism.


malapropism (n.)

1826, from Mrs. Malaprop, character in Sheridan's play The Rivals (1775), noted for her ridiculous
misuse of large words (such as contagious countries for contiguous countries), her name coined from
malapropos.


contiguity (n.)

1640s, from French contiguit&eacute; from Latin contiguitas, from contiguus (see contiguous).


apposite (adj.)

1620s, well-put or applied, appropriate, from Latin appositus contiguous, neighboring; figuratively
fit, proper, suitable, past participle of apponere apply to, put near, from ad- near (see ad-) +
ponere to place (see position (n.)).


adjoin (v.)

c.1300, unite, ally from Old French ajoin- stem of ajoindre join together, unite, from Latin
adiungere fasten on, harness, join to, from ad- to (see ad-) + iungere to bind together (see
jugular). Meaning be contiguous with, be adjacent to is from late 14c. Related: Adjoined; adjoining.


touch (v.)

late 13c., make deliberate physical contact with, from Old French tochier to touch, hit, knock;
mention, deal with (11c., Modern French toucher), from Vulgar Latin *toccare to knock, strike as a
bell (source also of Spanish tocar, Italian toccare), perhaps of imitative origin. Related: Touched;
touching.    From c.1300 in transitive sense bring into physical contact, also pertain to. Other
senses attested from 14c. are perceive by physical contact, examine by sense of touch, also be or
come into physical contact with; come to rest on; border on, be contiguous with; also use the sense
of touch, and mention, describe. From early 14c. as affect or move mentally or emotionally, with
notion of to touch the heart or mind. Also from early 14c. as have sexual contact with. Meaning to
get or borrow money first recorded 1760. Touch-and-go (adj.) is recorded from 1812, apparently from
the name of a tag-like game, first recorded 1650s. Touch football is first attested 1933. Touch-me-
not (1590s) translates Latin noli-me-tangere.


