contemptible (adj.)

late 14c., from Latin contemptibilis worthy of scorn, from contempt-, past participle stem of
contemnere (see contempt). Related: Contemptibility; contemptibly.


contempt (n.)

late 14c., from Latin contemptus scorn, from past participle of contemnere to scorn, despise, from
com-, intensive prefix (see com-), + *temnere to slight, scorn, of uncertain origin. Phrase contempt
of court is attested from 19c., though the idea is several centuries older.


contemptuous (adj.)

1590s, from Latin contemptus (see contempt). Related: Contemptuously.


despite

c.1300, originally a noun, from Old French despit (12c., Modern French d&eacute;pit), from Latin
despectus a looking down on, scorn, contempt, from past participle of despicere (see despise).
The preposition (early 15c.) is short for in despite of (late 13c.), a loan-translation of Old
French en despit de in contempt of. Almost became despight during 16c. spelling reform.


pish

exclamation of contempt, attested from 1590s.


pshaw (interj.)

exclamation of contempt or rejection, by 1670s.


scut (n.2)

term of contempt for a person, 1873, of unknown origin.


tut (interj.)

1520s, along with tush (mid-15c.), a natural interjection expressing impatient or dismissive
contempt.


scorn (n.)

c.1200, a shortening of Old French escarn mockery, derision, contempt, a common Romanic word
(Spanish escarnio, Italian scherno) of Germanic origin, from Proto-Germanic *skarnjan mock, deride
(cognates: Old High German skern mockery, jest, sport, Middle High German scherzen to jump with
joy).    Probably influenced by Old French escorne affront, disgrace, which is a back-formation from
escorner, literally to break off (someone's) horns, from Vulgar Latin *excornare (source of Italian
scornare treat with contempt), from Latin ex- without (see ex-) + cornu horn (see horn (n.)).


sophist (n.)

one who makes use of fallacious arguments, mid-15c., earlier sophister (late 14c.), from Latin
sophista, sophistes, from Greek sophistes a master of one's craft; a wise or prudent man, one clever
in matters of daily life, from sophizesthai to become wise or learned, from sophos skilled in a
handicraft, cunning in one's craft; clever in matters of everyday life, shrewd; skilled in the
sciences, learned; clever; too clever, of unknown origin. Greek sophistes came to mean one who gives
intellectual instruction for pay, and at Athens, contrasted with philosopher, it became a term of
contempt.    Sophists taught before the development of logic and grammar, when skill in reasoning
and in disputation could not be accurately distinguished, and thus they came to attach great value
to quibbles, which soon brought them into contempt. [Century Dictionary]


poppet (n.)

small human figure used in witchcraft and sorcery, c.1300, early form of puppet (n.). Meaning small
or dainty person is recorded from late 14c.; later a term of endearment but also in other cases one
of contempt.


sirrah

1520s, term of address used to men or boys expressing anger or contempt, archaic extended form of
sir (in U.S., siree, attested from 1823).


white trash (n.)

1824, originally Southern U.S. black slang.    The slaves themselves entertain the very highest
contempt for white servants, whom they designate as 'poor white trash.' [Fanny Kemble, journal, Jan.
6, 1833]


walk-over (n.)

easy victory, 1838, such as one that happens in the absence of competitors, when the solitary
starter, being obliged to complete the event, can traverse the course at a walk. Transferred sense
of anything accomplished with great ease is attested from 1902. To walk (all) over (someone) treat
with contempt is from 1851.


giaour (n.)

1560s, Turkish term of contempt for non-Muslims, from Persian gaur, variant of gabr fire-worshipper,
originally applied to the adherents of the Zoroastrian religion.


slight (n.)

1550s, small amount or weight, from slight (v.). Meaning act of intentional neglect or ignoring out
of displeasure or contempt is from 1701, probably via 17c. phrase make a slight of (1610s).


phooey

expression of contempt, 1929, from Yiddish, from German pfui (attested in English from 1866);
popularized by Walter Winchell. Phoo vocalic gesture expressing contemptuous rejection is recorded
from 1640s.


lounge (n.)

comfortable drawing room, 1881, from lounge (v.); in the sense of couch on which one can lie at full
length, it is attested from 1830. Lounge lizard is by 1917, perhaps from 1912, a term of contempt,
originally in reference to men who hung around in tea rooms to flirt.


contemn (v.)

mid-15c., from Old French contemner (15c.), from Latin contemnere to despise, scorn (see contempt).


tarbrush (n.)

1711, from tar (n.1) + brush (n.1). To have a touch of the tarbrush have a dash of African ancestry
visible in the skin tone (1796) was a term of contempt from the West Indies [Century Dictionary].


Marrano (n.)

Jew or Moor converted to Christianity, 1580s, from Spanish, probably literally pig, swine, an
expression of contempt, from Arabic muharram forbidden thing (eating of pork is forbidden by Muslim
and Jewish religious law), from haruma was forbidden (see harem).


tosser (n.)

term of contempt in British slang, by 1977, probably from slang toss off act of masturbation (1735).
Agent noun from toss (v.). Compare jerk (n.).


hubbub (n.)

1550s, whobub confused noise, generally believed to be of Irish origin, perhaps from Gaelic ub!,
expression of aversion or contempt, or Old Irish battle cry abu, from buide victory.


sniff (v.)

mid-14c., of imitative origin; possibly related to snyvelen (see snivel). As an expression of scorn
or contempt from 1729. As a synonym for smell (v.) it dates from 1845. In reference to cocaine from
1925. Related: Sniffed; sniffing.


landlubber (n.)

also land-lubber, sailor's term of contempt for a landsman, c.1700, from land (n.) + lubber (q.v.).


cocksucker (n.)

1890s, one who does fellatio (especially a male homosexual); 1920s as contemptible person, American
English, from cock (n.1) in phallic sense + sucker (n.). Used curiously for aggressively obnoxious
men; the ancients would have recoiled at this failure to appreciate the difference between passive
and active roles; Catullus, writing of his boss, employs the useful Latin insult irrumator, which
means someone who forces others to give him oral sex, hence one who treats people with contempt.


bah

exclamation of contempt, 1817, perhaps c.1600, probably from French bah, Old French ba, expressing
surprise, scorn, dismay. Perhaps simply a natural exclamation in such situations; compare Greek
babai!, an exclamation of surprise.


snort (v.)

late 14c., to snore, probably related to snore (v.). Meaning breathe through the nose with a harsh
sound first recorded 1520s. Sense of express contempt is from 1818. Meaning to inhale cocaine is
first attested 1935. Related: Snorted; snorting. American English snorter something fierce or
furious is from 1833.


indignity (n.)

1580s, unworthiness, also unworthy treatment; act intended to expose someone to contempt, from Latin
indignitatem (nominative indignitas) unworthiness, meanness, baseness, also unworthy conduct, an
outrage, noun of quality from indignus unworthy (see indignation). Related: Indignities.


disdain (n.)

mid-14c., desdegne scorn, contempt, earlier dedeyne offended dignity (c.1300), from Old French
desdeigne, from desdeignier (see disdain (v.)). Sometimes in early Modern English shortened to
sdain, sdainful. Related: disdainful; disdainfully.


bird (n.3)

middle finger held up in a rude gesture, slang derived from 1860s expression give the big bird to
hiss someone like a goose, kept alive in vaudeville slang with sense of to greet someone with boos,
hisses, and catcalls (1922), transferred 1960s to the up yours hand gesture (the rigid finger
representing the hypothetical object to be inserted) on notion of defiance and contempt. Gesture
itself seems to be much older (the human anatomy section of a 12c. Latin bestiary in Cambridge
describes the middle finger as that by means of which the pursuit of dishonour is indicated).


fastidious (adj.)

mid-15c., full of pride, from Latin fastidiosus disdainful, squeamish, exacting, from fastidium
loathing, squeamishness, most likely from *fastu-taidiom, a compound of fastus contempt, arrogance
and taedium aversion, disgust. Early use in English was both in passive and active senses. Meaning
squeamish, over-nice emerged in English 1610s. Related: Fastidiously; fastidiousness.


spite (n.)

c.1300, shortened form of despit malice (see despite). Corresponding to Middle Dutch spijt, Middle
Low German spyt, Middle Swedish spit. In 17c. commonly spelled spight. Phrase in spite of is
recorded from c.1400, literally in defiance or contempt of, hence notwithstanding. Spite-fence
barrier erected to cause annoyance is from 1889.


wolfram (n.)

1757, from German Wolfram, wolform iron tungstate (1562), of obscure etymology. It looks like wolf-
cream (from rahm cream), but the second element might be Middle High German ram (German Rahm) dirty
mark, soot; if so, perhaps so called in sign of contempt because it was regarded of lesser value
than tin and caused a considerable loss of tin during the smelting process in the furnace [Klein].
Or perhaps the word is originally a personal name, wolf-raven.


jack-knife (n.)

also jackknife, large pocket knife, 1711, probably American English, perh[aps] associated with some
sense of JACK sb.1, but compare jackleg knife [OED]; see jack + knife (n.). Jackleg was a U.S.
colloquial term of contempt from c.1850. On another theory, so called because it originally was
associated with sailors. As a kind of swimming dive, from 1922. As a type of tractor-trailer
accident, 1966. Both from the notion of folding, as the knife does.


spit (v.1)

expel saliva, Old English spittan (Anglian), sp&aelig;tan (West Saxon), transitive and intransitive,
past tense *spytte, from Proto-Germanic *spitjan, from PIE *sp(y)eu-, of imitative origin (see spew
(v.)). Not the usual Old English word for this; sp&aelig;tlan (see spittle) and spiwan are more
common; all are from the same root. To spit as a gesture of contempt (especially at someone) is in
Old English. Related: Spat; spitting.


bard (n.)

mid-15c., from Scottish, from Old Celtic bardos poet, singer, from PIE root *gwer- to lift up the
voice, praise. In historical times, a term of contempt among the Scots (who considered them
itinerant troublemakers), but one of great respect among the Welsh. All vagabundis, fulis, bardis,
scudlaris, and siclike idill pepill, sall be brint on the cheek. [local Scottish ordinance,
c.1500]Subsequently idealized by Scott in the more ancient sense of lyric poet, singer. Poetic use
of the word in English is from Greek bardos, Latin bardus, both from Gaulish.


stuff (v.)

mid-14c., furnish with (goods, provisions, etc.), also reinforce (troops), from Old French estofer
pad, upholster, fit out (Modern French &#233;toffer), from estoffe, and probably also in part from
stuff (n.).    From c.1400 as fill, cram full; fill (the belly) with food or drink, gorge; from
early 15c. as to clog (the sinuses, etc.); from late 14c. as fill (a mattress, etc.) with padding,
line with padding; also in the cookery sense, in reference to filing the interior of a pastry or the
cavity of a fowl or beast. The ballot-box sense is attested from 1854, American English; in
expressions of contempt and suggestive of bodily orifices, it dates from 1952.


reproach (n.)

mid-14c., a rebuke, blame, censure; also object of scorn or contempt; c.1400, as disgrace, state of
disgrace, from Old French reproche blame, shame, disgrace (12c.), from reprochier to blame, bring up
against, said by some French etymologists to be from Vulgar Latin *repropiare, from Latin re-
opposite of + prope near (see propinquity), with suggestions of bring near to as in modern get in
(someone's) face. But others would have it from *reprobicare, from Latin reprobus/reprobare (see
reprobate (adj.)).


prejudice (n.)

c.1300, despite, contempt, from Old French prejudice prejudice, damage (13c.), from Medieval Latin
prejudicium injustice, from Latin praeiudicium prior judgment, from prae- before (see pre-) +
iudicium judgment, from iudex (genitive iudicis) a judge (see judge (v.)). Meaning injury, physical
harm is mid-14c., as is legal sense detriment or damage caused by the violation of a legal right.
Meaning preconceived opinion (especially but not necessarily unfavorable) is from late 14c. in
English.


bitch (n.)

Old English bicce female dog, probably from Old Norse bikkjuna female of the dog (also fox, wolf,
and occasionally other beasts), of unknown origin. Grimm derives the Old Norse word from Lapp
pittja, but OED notes that the converse is equally possible. As a term of contempt applied to women,
it dates from c.1400; of a man, c.1500, playfully, in the sense of dog. Used among male homosexuals
from 1930s. In modern (1990s, originally black English) slang, its use with reference to a man is
sexually contemptuous, from the woman insult.BITCH. A she dog, or doggess; the most offensive
appellation that can be given to an English woman, even more provoking than that of whore.
[Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, 1811] Bitch goddess coined 1906 by William James; the original one
was success.


rococo (adj.)

1836, old-fashioned, from French rococo (19c.), apparently a humorous alteration of rocaille
shellwork, pebble-work from Middle French roche rock, from Vulgar Latin *rocca stone. Specifically
of furniture or architecture of the time of Louis Quatorze and Louis Quinze, from 1841. If this is
correct, the reference is to the excessive use of shell designs in this lavish style. For
differentiation, see baroque. The general sense of tastelessly florid or ornate is from 1844.
Much of the painting, engraving, porcelain-work, etc., of the time has ... a real decorative charm,
though not of a very high order in art. Hence rococo is used attributively in contempt to note
anything feebly pretentious and tasteless in art or literature. [Century Dictionary, 1902]


carpet (n.)

late 13c., coarse cloth; mid-14c., tablecloth, bedspread; from Old French carpite heavy decorated
cloth, carpet, from Medieval Latin or Old Italian carpita thick woolen cloth, probably from Latin
carpere to card, pluck, probably so called because it was made from unraveled, shreded, plucked
fabric; from PIE *kerp- to gather, pluck, harvest (see harvest (n.)). Meaning shifted 15c. to floor
coverings.    From 16c.-19c. as an adjective often with a tinge of contempt, when used of men (as in
carpet-knight, 1570s) by association with luxury, ladies' boudoirs, and drawing rooms. On the carpet
summoned for reprimand is 1900, U.S. colloquial (but compare carpet (v.) call (someone) to be
reprimanded, 1823, British servants' slang). To sweep or push something under the carpet in the
figurative sense is first recorded 1953.


fudge (v.)

put together clumsily or dishonestly, 1610s, perhaps an alteration of fadge make suit, fit (1570s),
of unknown origin. As an interjection meaning lies, nonsense from 1766; the noun meaning nonsense is
1791. It could be a natural extension from the verb. But Farmer suggests provincial French fuche,
feuche, an exclamation of contempt from Low German futsch = begone.  The traditional English story
traces fudge in this sense to a sailor's retort to anything considered lies or nonsense, from
Captain Fudge, who always brought home his owners a good cargo of lies [Isaac Disraeli, 1791, citing
a pamphlet from 1700]. It seems there really was a late 17c. Captain Fudge, called Lying Fudge, and
perhaps his name reinforced this form of fadge in the sense of contrive without the necessary
materials. The surname is from Fuche, a pet form of the masc. proper name Fulcher, from Germanic and
meaning literally people-army.


tacky (adj.2)

in poor taste, 1888, from earlier sense of shabby, seedy (1862), adjectival use of tackey (n.) ill-
fed or neglected horse (1800), later extended to persons in like condition, hillbilly, cracker
(1888), of uncertain origin. Related: Tackiness.    The word tacky is a Southern colloquialism. It
was coined by a wealthier or more refined and educated class for general application to those who
were not sheltered by the branches of a family tree, who were tainted. Those who were wealthy and
yet had no great-grandfathers were tackies. The word was used both in contempt and in derision. It
is now nearly obsolete in both senses. There are no aristocrats in the South now, and therefore no
tackies. No man who has the instincts of a gentleman is spoken of as a tacky, whether he can
remember the name of his grandfather's uncle or not. But it has its uses. It is employed in
describing persons of low ideas and vulgar manners, whether rich or poor. It may mean an absence of
style. In dress, anything that is tawdry is tacky. A ribbon on the shopkeeper's counter, a curtain
in the bolt, a shawl or bonnet, a bolt of cloth fresh from the loom may be tacky, because it is
cheap and yet pretentious. In Louisiana the inferior grade of Creole ponies are known as tackies.
[Horace Ingraham, Charleston, S.C., in American Notes and Queries, Feb. 15, 1890]


sambo (n.2)

stereotypical name for male black person (now only derogatory), 1818, American English, probably a
different word from sambo (n.1); like many such words (Cuffy, Rastus, etc.) a common personal name
among U.S. blacks in the slavery days (first attested 1704 in Boston), probably from an African
source, such as Foulah sambo uncle, or a similar Hausa word meaning second son.    It could be used
without conscious racism or contempt until circa World War II. When the word fell from polite usage,
collateral casualties included the enormously popular children's book The Story of Little Black
Sambo (by Helen Bannerman), which is about an East Indian child, and the Sambo's Restaurant chain, a
U.S. pancake-specialty joint originally opened in Santa Barbara, Calif., in 1957 (the name
supposedly from a merging of the names of the founders, Sam Battistone and Newell Bo Bohnett, but
the chain's decor and advertising leaned heavily on the book), which once counted 1,200 units coast-
to-coast. Civil rights agitation against it began in 1970s and the chain collapsed, though the
original restaurant still is open. Many of the defunct restaurants were taken over by rival Denny's.


attorney (n.)

early 14c. (mid-13c. in Anglo-Latin), from Old French atorn&eacute; (one) appointed, past participle
of aturner to decree, assign, appoint, from atorner (see attorn). The legal Latin form attornare
influenced the spelling in Anglo-French. The sense is of one appointed to represent another's
interests.    In English law, a private attorney was one appointed to act for another in business or
legal affairs (usually for pay); an attorney at law or public attorney was a qualified legal agent
in the courts of Common Law who prepared the cases for a barrister, who pleaded them (the equivalent
of a solicitor in Chancery). So much a term of contempt in England that it was abolished by the
Judicature Act of 1873 and merged with solicitor.Johnson observed that he did not care to speak ill
of any man behind his back, but he believed the gentleman was an attorney. [Boswell]The double -t-
is a mistaken 15c. attempt to restore a non-existent Latin original. Attorney general first recorded
1530s in sense of legal officer of the state (late 13c. in Anglo-French), from French, hence the odd
plural (subject first, adjective second).


son (n.)

Old English sunu son, descendant, from Proto-Germanic *sunuz (cognates: Old Saxon and Old Frisian
sunu, Old Norse sonr, Danish s&oslash;n, Swedish son, Middle Dutch sone, Dutch zoon, Old High German
sunu, German Sohn, Gothic sunus son). The Germanic words are from PIE *su(e)-nu- son (cognates:
Sanskrit sunus, Greek huios, Avestan hunush, Armenian ustr, Lithuanian sunus, Old Church Slavonic
synu, Russian and Polish syn son), a derived noun from root *seue- (1) to give birth (cognates:
Sanskrit sauti gives birth, Old Irish suth birth, offspring).   Son of _____ as the title of a
sequel to a book or movie is recorded from 1917 (Son of Tarzan). Most explanations for son of a gun
(1708) are more than a century after its appearance. Henley (1903) describes it as meaning
originally a soldier's bastard; Smyth's Sailor's Word-Book (1867) describes it as An epithet
conveying contempt in a slight degree, and originally applied to boys born afloat, when women were
permitted to accompany their husbands to sea ....


pig (n.)

probably from Old English *picg, found in compounds, ultimate origin unknown. Originally young pig
(the word for adults was swine). Apparently related to Low German bigge, Dutch big (but the
phonology is difficult -- OED). The meaning oblong piece of metal is first attested 1580s, on the
notion of large mass. Applied to persons, usually in contempt, since 1540s; the derogatory slang
meaning police officer has been in underworld slang since at least 1811.    The pigs frisked my
panney, and nailed my screws; the officers searched my house, and seized my picklock keys.
[Dictionary of Buckish Slang, University Wit and Pickpocket Eloquence, London, 1811]     Another Old
English word for pig was fearh, related to furh furrow, from PIE *perk- dig, furrow (source also of
Latin porc-us pig, see pork). This reflects a widespread IE tendency to name animals from typical
attributes or activities [Lass]. Synonyms grunter, porker are from sailors' and fishermen's
euphemistic avoidance of uttering the word pig at sea, a superstition perhaps based on the fate of
the Gadarene swine, who drowned. The image of a pig in a poke is attested from 1520s (see poke
(n.3)). Flying pigs as a type of something unreal is from 1610s.


son of a bitch

1707 as a direct phrase, but implied much earlier, and Old Norse had bikkju-sonr. Abbreviated form
SOB from 1918; form sumbitch attested in writing by 1969.    Abide &thorn;ou &thorn;ef malicious!
Biche-sone &thorn;ou drawest amis  &thorn;ou schalt abigge it ywis!  [Of Arthour &amp; of Merlin,
c.1330]    Probably the most common American vulgarity from about the middle of the eighteenth
century to the middle of the twentieth [Rawson].     Our maid-of-all-work in that department
[indecency] is son-of-a-bitch, which seems as pale and ineffectual to a Slav or a Latin as fudge
does to us. There is simply no lift in it, no shock, no sis-boom-ah. The dumbest policeman in
Palermo thinks of a dozen better ones between breakfast and the noon whistle. [H.L. Mencken, The
American Language, 4th ed., 1936, p.317-8]    Elsewhere, complaining of the tepidity of the American
vocabulary of profanity, Mencken writes that the toned-down form son-of-a-gun is so lacking in punch
that the Italians among us have borrowed it as a satirical name for an American: la sanemagogna is
what they call him, and by it they indicate their contempt for his backwardness in the art that is
one of their great glories.    It was in 1934 also that the New York Daily News, with commendable
frankness, in reporting a hearing in Washington at which Senator Huey P. Long featured, forsook the
old-time dashes and abbreviations and printed the complete epithet son of a bitch. [Stanley Walker,
City Editor, 1934]


