contrive (v.)

early 14c., from Old French controver (Modern French controuver) to find out, contrive, imagine,
from Late Latin contropare to compare (via a figure of speech), from Latin com- with (see com-) +
tropus song, musical mode, from Greek tropos figure of speech (see trope).    Sense evolution (in
French) was from invent with ingenuity to invent falsely. Spelled contreve until unexplained 15c.
sound change that also affected briar, friar, choir. Related: Contrived; contriving.


devise (v.)

early 13c., to form, fashion; c.1300, to plan, contrive, from Old French deviser dispose in
portions, arrange, plan, contrive (in modern French, to chat, gossip), from Vulgar Latin *divisare,
frequentative of Latin dividere to divide (see divide). Modern sense is from to arrange a division
(especially via a will), a meaning present in the Old French word. Related: Devised; devising.


engineer (v.)

1843 (but see engineering), from engineer (n.). Figurative sense of arrange, contrive is attested
from 1864, originally in a political context. Related: Engineered.


machinator (n.)

1610s, from Latin machinator, agent noun from past participle stem of machinari design, contrive,
plot (see machine (n.)).


contrivance (n.)

1620s, from contrive + -ance.


malign (v.)

to slander, mid-15c., from earlier more literal sense of to plot, to contrive (early 15c.), from Old
French malignier to plot, deceive, pervert, from Late Latin malignare to do maliciously, from
malignus (see malign (adj.)). Related: Maligned; maligning.


forecast (v.)

late 14c., to scheme, from fore- before + casten in the sense of contrive, plan, prepare (late 14c.;
see cast (v.)). Meaning predict events first attested late 15c. (cast (v.) to perceive, notice is
from late 14c.). Related: Forecasted; forecasting.


machination (n.)

late 15c., a plotting, intrigue, from Old French machinacion plot, conspiracy, scheming, intrigue,
from Latin machinationem (nominative machinatio) device, contrivance, machination, noun of action
from past participle stem of machinari contrive skillfully, to design; to scheme, to plot, from
machina (see machine (n.)). Related: Machinations.


comment (n.)

late 14c., from Old French coment commentary or directly from Late Latin commentum comment,
interpretation, in classical Latin invention, fabrication, fiction, neuter past participle of
comminisci to contrive, devise, from com-, intensive prefix (see com-), + base of meminisse to
remember, related to mens (genitive mentis) mind (see mind (n.)). The Latin word meaning something
invented was taken by Isidore and other Christian theologians for interpretation, annotation. No
comment as a stock refusal to answer a journalist's question is first recorded 1950, from Truman's
White House press secretary, Charles Ross.


purchase (v.)

c.1300, acquire, obtain; get, receive; procure, provide, also accomplish or bring about; instigate;
cause, contrive, plot; recruit, hire, from Anglo-French purchaser go after, Old French porchacier
search for, procure; purchase; aim at, strive for, pursue eagerly (11c., Modern French pourchasser),
from pur- forth (possibly used here as an intensive prefix; see pur-) + Old French chacier run
after, to hunt, chase (see chase (v.)).    Originally to obtain or receive as due in any way,
including through merit or suffering; specific sense of acquire for money, pay money for, buy is
from mid-14c., though the word continued to be used for to get by conquest in war, obtain as booty
up to 17c. Related: Purchased; purchasing.


fudge (v.)

put together clumsily or dishonestly, 1610s, perhaps an alteration of fadge make suit, fit (1570s),
of unknown origin. As an interjection meaning lies, nonsense from 1766; the noun meaning nonsense is
1791. It could be a natural extension from the verb. But Farmer suggests provincial French fuche,
feuche, an exclamation of contempt from Low German futsch = begone.  The traditional English story
traces fudge in this sense to a sailor's retort to anything considered lies or nonsense, from
Captain Fudge, who always brought home his owners a good cargo of lies [Isaac Disraeli, 1791, citing
a pamphlet from 1700]. It seems there really was a late 17c. Captain Fudge, called Lying Fudge, and
perhaps his name reinforced this form of fadge in the sense of contrive without the necessary
materials. The surname is from Fuche, a pet form of the masc. proper name Fulcher, from Germanic and
meaning literally people-army.


weave (v.1)

Old English wefan to weave, form by interlacing yarn, figuratively devise, contrive, arrange  (class
V strong verb; past tense w&aelig;f, past participle wefen), from Proto-Germanic *weban (cognates:
Old Norse vefa, Middle Low German, Middle Dutch, Dutch weven, Old High German weban, German weben to
weave), from PIE *webh- to weave; also to move quickly (cognates: Sanskrit ubhnati he laces
together, Persian baftan to weave, Greek hyphe, hyphos web, Old English webb web).    The form of
the past tense altered in Middle English from wave to wove. Extended sense of combine into a whole
is from late 14c.; meaning go by twisting and turning is from 1640s. Related: Wove; woven; weaving.


pare (v.)

to trim by cutting close, c.1300, from Old French parer arrange, prepare; trim, adorn, and directly
from Latin parare make ready, prepare, furnish, provide, arrange, order; contrive, design, intend,
resolve; procure, acquire, obtain, get; get with money, buy, purchase (related to parere produce,
bring forth, give birth to), from PIE *par-a-, suffixed form of root *pere- (1) produce, procure,
bring forward, bring forth, and derived words in diverse senses (cognates: Lithuanian pariu to
brood, Greek poris calf, bull, Old High German farro, German Farre bullock, Old English fearr bull,
Sanskrit prthukah child, calf, young of an animal, Czech spratek brat, urchin, premature calf).
Generalized meaning to reduce something little by little is from 1520s. Related: Pared; paring.


