contrivance (n.)

1620s, from contrive + -ance.


shifter (n.)

1550s, one who shifts in any way; agent noun from shift (v.). As a mechanical contrivance, from
1869; specifically of the gear-changing mechanism in a motor-vehicle, from 1910.


trap (n.)

contrivance for catching unawares, late Old English tr&aelig;ppe, treppe snare, trap, from Proto-
Germanic *trep- (cognates: Middle Dutch trappe trap, snare), related to Germanic words for stair,
step, tread (Middle Dutch, Middle Low German trappe, treppe, German Treppe step, stair, English
tread (v.)), and probably literally that on or into which one steps, from PIE *dreb-, extended form
of root *der- (1), an assumed base of words meaning to run, walk, step. Probably akin to Old French
trape, Spanish trampa trap, pit, snare, but the exact relationship is uncertain.    Sense of
deceitful practice, device or contrivance to betray one is first recorded c.1400. Meaning U-shaped
section of a drain pipe is from 1833. Slang meaning mouth is from 1776. Speed trap recorded from
1908. Trap door door in a floor or ceiling (often hidden and leading to a passageway or secret
place) is first attested late 14c.


politician (n.)

1580s, person skilled in politics, from politics + -ian. It quickly took on overtones, not typically
good ones. Johnson defines it as A man of artifice; one of deep contrivance.


dolly (n.)

c.1600, Dolly, a fem. nickname (see doll); 1790 as child's doll; applied from 1792 to any
contrivance fancied to resemble a dolly in some sense, especially a small platform on rollers
(1901). Doesn't look like one to me, either, but that's what they say.


machine (n.)

1540s, structure of any kind, from Middle French machine device, contrivance, from Latin machina
machine, engine, military machine; device, trick; instrument (source also of Spanish maquina,
Italian macchina), from Greek makhana, Doric variant of mekhane device, means, related to mekhos
means, expedient, contrivance, from PIE *maghana- that which enables, from root *magh- (1) to be
able, have power (cognates: Old Church Slavonic mogo be able, Old English m&aelig;g I can; see may
(v.)).    Main modern sense of device made of moving parts for applying mechanical power (1670s)
probably grew out of mid-17c. senses of apparatus, appliance and military siege-tower. In late 19c.
slang the word was used for both penis and vagina, one of the few so honored. Political sense is
U.S. slang, first recorded 1876. Machine age is attested by 1851:    The idea of remodelling society
at public meetings is one of the least reasonable which ever entered the mind of an agitator: and
the notion that the relations of the sexes can be re-arranged and finally disposed of by preamble
and resolution, is one of the latest, as it should have been the last, vagary of a machine age. [The
Literary World, Nov. 1, 1851]   Machine for living (in) house translates Le Corbusier's machine
&agrave; habiter (1923).


spirometer (n.)

contrivance for measuring lung capacity, 1846, formed irregularly from Latin spirare to breathe (see
spirit (n.)) + -meter. Related: Spirometry.


machinery (n.)

1680s; from machine (n.) + -ery. Originally theatrical, devices for creating stage effects (which
also was a sense of Greek mekhane); meaning machines collectively is attested from 1731. Middle
English had machinament a contrivance (early 15c.).


gin (n.2)

machine for separating cotton from seeds, 1796, American English, used earlier of various other
machineries, from Middle English gin ingenious device, contrivance (c.1200), from Old French gin
machine, device, scheme, shortened form of engin, from Latin ingenium (see engine). The verb in this
sense is recorded from 1789.


machination (n.)

late 15c., a plotting, intrigue, from Old French machinacion plot, conspiracy, scheming, intrigue,
from Latin machinationem (nominative machinatio) device, contrivance, machination, noun of action
from past participle stem of machinari contrive skillfully, to design; to scheme, to plot, from
machina (see machine (n.)). Related: Machinations.


sieve (n.)

Old English sife sieve, from Proto-Germanic *sib (cognates: Middle Dutch seve, Dutch zeef, Old High
German sib, German Sieb), from PIE *seib- to pour out, sieve, drip, trickle (see soap (n.)). Related
to sift. The Sieve of Eratosthenes (1803) is a contrivance for finding prime numbers. Sieve and
shears formerly were used in divinations.


yoke (n.)

Old English geoc contrivance for fastening a pair of draft animals, earlier geoht pair of draft
animals (especially oxen), from Proto-Germanic *yukam (cognates: Old Saxon juk, Old Norse ok, Danish
aag, Middle Dutch joc, Dutch juk, Old High German joh, German joch, Gothic juk yoke), from PIE root
*yeug- to join (see jugular). Figurative sense of heavy burden, oppression, servitude was in Old
English.


ingenious (adj.)

early 15c., intellectual, talented, from Middle French ing&eacute;nieux clever, ingenious (Old
French engeignos), from Latin ingeniosus of good capacity, full of intellect; clever, gifted with
genius, from ingenium innate qualities, ability, literally that which is inborn, from in- in (see
in- (2)) + gignere, from PIE *gen- produce (see genus). Sense of skillful, clever at contrivance
first recorded 1540s. In a sense of crafty, clever, skillful Middle English had enginous (mid-14c.),
from Old French engeignos. Related: Ingeniously; ingeniousness.


purchase (n.)

c.1300, purchas, acquisition, gain; also, something acquired or received, a possession; property,
goods; especially booty, spoil; goods gained by pillage or robbery (to make purchase was to seize by
robbery). Also mercenary soldier, one who fights for booty. From Anglo-French purchace, Old French
porchaz acquisition, gain, profit; seizing, plunder; search pursuit, effort, from Anglo-French
purchaser, Old French porchacier (see purchase (v.)).    From early 14c. as endeavor, effort,
exertion; instigation, contrivance; late 14c. as act of acquiring, procurement. Meaning that which
is bought is from 1580s. The sense of hold or position for advantageously applying power (1711) is
extended from the nautical verb meaning to haul or draw (especially by mechanical power), often used
in reference to hauling up anchors, attested from 1560s. Wif of purchase (early 14c.) was a term for
concubine.


