contender (n.)

1540s, agent noun from contend.


contend (v.)

mid-15c., from Old French contendre, from Latin contendere to stretch out, strive after, from com-,
intensive prefix (see com-), + tendere to stretch (see tenet). Related: Contended; contending.


dispute (v.)

c.1300, from Old French desputer (12c.) dispute, fight over, contend for, discuss, from Latin
disputare weigh, examine, discuss, argue, explain, from dis- separately (see dis-) + putare to
count, consider, originally to prune (see pave).    Used in Vulgate in sense of to argue, contend
with words. Related: Disputable; disputed; disputing. The noun is not certainly recorded before
1590s (disputacioun in that sense is from late 14c.).


vie (v.)

1560s, to bet, make a bet, (literally make a vie, the noun attested from 1530s in cards), especially
in card-playing, to wager the value of one's hand against an opponent's, shortened form of Middle
English envie make a challenge, from Old French envier compete (against), provoke; invite, summon,
subpoena; in gambling, put down a stake, up the bet; from Latin invitare to invite, also to summon,
challenge (see invitation). Sense of to contend (with) in rivalry in English is from 1560s; that of
to contend, compete, strive for superiority is from c.1600.


nolo contendere

Latin, literally I do not wish to contend. A plea that admits no guilt but subjects the defendant to
judgment.


concert (n.)

1660s, agreement, accord, harmony, from French concert (16c.), from Italian concerto concert,
harmony, from concertare bring into agreement, in Latin to contend, contest, dispute, from com- with
(see com-) + certare to contend, strive, frequentative of certus, variant past participle of cernere
separate, decide (see crisis).    Before the word entered English, meaning shifted from to strive
against to to strive alongside. Sense of public musical performance is 1680s. But Klein considers
this too much of a stretch and suggests Latin concentare to sing together (from con- + cantare to
sing) as the source of the Italian word in the musical sense.


altercate (v.)

1520s, to contend with words, from Latin altercatus, past participle of altercari (see altercation).


flyte (v.)

Old English flitan to contend, struggle, quarrel; related to German flei&szlig;, Dutch vlijt
diligence, industry.


contentious (adj.)

c.1500, from Middle French contentieux, from Latin contentiosus obstinate, quarrelsome, from
contentionem (see contend). Related: Contentiously; contentiousness.


agonize (v.)

1580s, to torture, from Middle French agoniser or directly from Medieval Latin agonizare, from Greek
agonizesthai to contend in the struggle (see agony). Intransitive sense of to suffer physical pain
is recorded from 1660s. That of to worry intensely is from 1853. Related: Agonized; agonizing.


quarrel (v.)

late 14c., to raise an objection; 1520s as to contend violently, to fall out, from quarrel (n.1) and
in part from Old French quereler (Modern French quereller). Related: Quarrelled; quarrelling.


contention (n.)

late 14c., strife, from Old French contention, from Latin contentionem (nominative contentio), from
content-, past participle stem of contendere (see contend).


bate (v.2)

c.1300, to contend with blows or arguments, from Old French batre to hit, beat, strike, from Late
Latin battere, from Latin batuere to beat, knock (see batter (v.)). In falconry, to beat the wings
impatiently and flutter away from the perch. Figurative sense of to flutter downward attested from
1580s.


jostle (v.)

1540s, justle, to knock against, formed from jousten (see joust) + frequentative suffix -tle. The
usual spelling 17c.-18c. was justle. An earlier meaning of the word was to have sex with (c.1400).
Meaning to contend for the best position or place is from 1610s. Related: Jostled; jostling. As a
noun from c.1600.


strive (v.)

c.1200, quarrel, contend, from Old French estriver to quarrel, dispute, resist, struggle, put up a
fight, compete, from estrif, estrit quarrel (see strife). It became a strong verb (past tense
strove) by rhyming association with drive, dive, etc. Meaning try hard is from early 14c. Related:
Striving.


antagonist (n.)

1590s, from French antagoniste (16c.) or directly from Late Latin antagonista, from Greek
antagonistes competitor, opponent, rival, agent noun from antagonizesthai to struggle against,
oppose, be a rival, from anti- against (see anti-) + agonizesthai to contend for a prize, from agon
contest (see agony). Originally in battle or sport, extended 1620s to any sphere of human activity.


chide (v.)

late 12c., scold, nag, rail, originally intransitive, from Old English cidan to contend, quarrel,
complain. Not found outside Old English (though Liberman says it is probably related to OHG
*k&icirc;dal 'wedge,' with a sense evolution from brandishing sticks to scold, reprove). Past tense,
past participle can be chided or chid or even (past participle) chidden (Shakespeare used it);
present participle is chiding.


pugnacious (adj.)

1640s, a back-formation from pugnacity or else from Latin pugnacis, genitive of pugnax combative,
fond of fighting, from pugnare to fight, especially with the fists, contend against, from pugnus a
fist, from PIE *pung-, nasalized form of root *peuk-, *peug- to stick, stab, to prick (cognates:
Greek pyx with clenched fist, pygme fist, boxing, pyktes boxer; Latin pungere to pierce, prick).


contrast (v.)

1690s, from French contraster (Old French contrester), modified by or from Italian contrastare stand
out against, strive, contend, from Vulgar Latin *contrastare to withstand, from Latin contra against
(see contra) + stare to stand, from PIE root *sta- to stand (see stet).    Middle English had
contrest to fight against, to withstand, which became extinct. Modern word re-introduced as an art
term. Related: Contrasted; contrasting; contrastive.


match (n.2)

one of a pair, an equal, Old English m&aelig;cca, companion, mate, one of a pair, wife, husband, one
suited to another, an equal, from gem&aelig;cca, from Proto-Germanic *gamakon fitting well together
(cognates: Old Saxon gimaco fellow, equal, Old High German gimah comfort, ease, Middle High German
gemach comfortable, quiet, German gemach easy, leisurely), from PIE root *mak-/*mag- to fit (see
make (v.)). Middle English sense of matching adversary, person able to contend with another (c.1300)
led to sporting meaning contest, first attested 1540s.


stride (v.)

Old English stridan (past tense strad, past participle striden), to straddle, mount (a horse), from
Proto-Germanic *stridanan (cognates: Middle Low German strede stride, strive; Old Saxon stridian,
Danish stride, Swedish strida to fight, Dutch stridjen, Old High German stritan, German etreiten to
fight, contend, struggle, Old Norse stri&eth;r strong, hard, stubborn, severe).    The sense
connection in the various Germanic forms is perhaps strive, make a strong effort; the senses having
to do with walking and standing are found only in English and Low German. Meaning to walk with long
or extended steps is from c.1200. Cognate words in most Germanic languages mean to fight, struggle;
the notion behind the English usage might be the effort involved in making long strides, striving
forward.


