contention (n.)

late 14c., strife, from Old French contention, from Latin contentionem (nominative contentio), from
content-, past participle stem of contendere (see contend).


stride (n.)

a step in walking, especially a long one, from Old English stride a stride, a step, from the root of
stride (v.). Compare Dutch strijd, Old High German strit, German Streit fight, contention, combat,
Swedish and Danish strid combat, contention. From c.1300 as a measure of distance roughly the length
of a stride. Figurative meaning advance rapidly, make progress is from c.1600. Of animals
(especially horses) from early 17c. To take (something) in stride (1832), i.e. without change of
gait, originally is of horses leaping hedges in the hunting-field; figurative sense attested from
1902. To hit (one's) stride is from horse-racing. Jazz music stride tempo is attested from 1938.
Meaning a standing with the legs apart, a straddle is from 1590s.


logomachy (n.)

contention about, or with, words, 1560s, from logo- + -machy.


quarrel (n.1)

angry dispute, mid-14c., originally ground for complaint, from Old French querele matter, concern,
business; dispute, controversy (Modern French querelle), from Latin querella complaint, accusation;
lamentation, from queri to complain, lament. Replaced Old English sacan. Sense of contention between
persons is from 1570s.


argument (n.)

early 14c., statements and reasoning in support of a proposition, from Old French arguement
reasoning, opinion; accusation, charge (13c.), from Latin argumentum evidence, ground, support,
proof; a logical argument, from arguere to argue (see argue). Sense passed through subject of
contention to a quarrel, a sense formerly attached to argumentation.


regatta (n.)

1650s, name of a boat race among gondoliers held on the Grand Canal in Venice, from Italian
(Venetian dialect) regatta, literally contention for mastery, from rigattare to compete, haggle,
sell at retail. [Klein's sources, however, suggest a source in Italian riga row, rank, from a
Germanic source and related to English row (v.).] The general meaning of boat race, yacht race is
usually considered to have begun with a race on the Thames by that name June 23, 1775 (see OED), but
there is evidence that it was used as early as 1768.


toil (n.1)

hard work, c.1300, originally turmoil, contention, dispute, from Anglo-French toil (13c.), from
toiler agitate, stir up, entangle, writhe about, from Old French toeillier drag about, make dirty
(12c.), usually said to be from Latin tudiculare crush with a small hammer, from tudicula mill for
crushing olives, instrument for crushing, from Latin tudes hammer, from PIE *tud-, variant of
*(s)teu- to push, stroke, knock, beat (see obtuse). Sense of hard work, labor (1590s) is from the
related verb (see toil (v.)).


feud (n.)

c.1300, fede enmity, hatred, hostility, northern English and Scottish; perhaps from an unrecorded
Old English word or else from Old French fede, which is from Germanic (compare Old High German
fehida contention, quarrel, feud), from Proto-Germanic *faihitho noun of state from adjective
*faiho- (cognates: Old English f&aelig;h&eth; enmity, fah hostile; German Fehde feud; Old Frisian
feithe enmity), from PIE root *peig- (2), also *peik- evil-minded, hostile (see foe). Sense of
vendetta is early 15c. Alteration of spelling in 16c. is unexplained.


