contentious (adj.)

c.1500, from Middle French contentieux, from Latin contentiosus obstinate, quarrelsome, from
contentionem (see contend). Related: Contentiously; contentiousness.


bickering (adj.)

1808 in the sense of contentious, present participle adjective from bicker (v.). Earlier it was used
to mean flashing, quivering (1660s).


litigious (adj.)

late 14c., fond of disputes, from Middle French litigieux and directly from Latin litigiosus
contentious, quarrelsome, from litigium dispute, strife, related to litigare (see litigation).
Meaning fond of engaging in lawsuits is from 1620s. Earlier in English than litigate or litigation.
Related: Litigiousness.


fundamentalist (adj.)

1920 in the religious sense (as is fundamentalism), from fundamental + -ist. Coined in American
English to name a movement among Protestants c.1920-25 based on scriptural inerrancy, etc., and
associated with William Jennings Bryan, among others.   Fundamentalist is said (by George McCready
Price) to have been first used in print by Curtis Lee Laws (1868-1946), editor of The Watchman
Examiner, a Baptist newspaper. The movement may have roots in the Presbyterian General Assembly of
1910, which drew up a list of five defining qualities of true believers which other evangelicals
published in a mass-circulation series of books called The Fundamentals. A World's Christian
Fundamentals Association was founded in 1918. The words reached widespread use in the wake of the
contentious Northern Baptist Convention of 1922 in Indianapolis.    Fundamentalism is a protest
against that rationalistic interpretation of Christianity which seeks to discredit supernaturalism.
This rationalism, when full grown, scorns the miracles of the Old Testament, sets aside the virgin
birth of our Lord as a thing unbelievable, laughs at the credulity of those who accept many of the
New Testament miracles, reduces the resurrection of our Lord to the fact that death did not end his
existence, and sweeps away the promises of his second coming as an idle dream. It matters not by
what name these modernists are known. The simple fact is that, in robbing Christianity of its
supernatural content, they are undermining the very foundations of our holy religion. They boast
that they are strengthening the foundations and making Christianity more rational and more
acceptable to thoughtful people. Christianity is rooted and grounded in supernaturalism, and when
robbed of supernaturalism it ceases to be a religion and becomes an exalted system of ethics. [Laws,
Herald &amp; Presbyter, July 19, 1922]    The original opposition to fundamentalist (within the
denominations) was modernist.    A new word has been coined into our vocabulary -- two new words --
'Fundamentalist' and 'Fundamentalism.' They are not in the dictionaries as yet -- unless in the very
latest editions. But they are on everyone's tongue. [Address Delivered at the Opening of the
Seminary, Sept. 20, 1922, by Professor Harry Lathrop Reed, Auburn Seminary Record]    Applied to
other religions, especially Islam, since 1957.


