content (n.)

that which is contained, early 15c., from Latin contentum, contenta, noun use of past participle of
continere (see contain). Meaning satisfaction is from 1570s; heart's content is from 1590s
(Shakespeare).


content (adj.)

c.1400, from Old French content, satisfied, from Latin contentus contained, satisfied, past
participle of continere (see contain). Related:  Contently (largely superseded by contentedly).


content (v.)

early 15c., from Middle French contenter, from content (adj.) satisfied, from Latin contentus
contained, satisfied, past participle of continere (see contain). Sense evolved through contained,
restrained, to satisfied, as the contented person's desires are bound by what he or she already has.
Related: Contented; contentedly.


contention (n.)

late 14c., strife, from Old French contention, from Latin contentionem (nominative contentio), from
content-, past participle stem of contendere (see contend).


contentment (n.)

mid-15c., from Old French contentment, from contenter (see content (v.)).


wont (adj.)

accustomed, Middle English contraction of Old English wunod, past participle of wunian to dwell,
inhabit, exist; be accustomed, be used to, from Proto-Germanic *wunen to be content, to rejoice
(cognates: Old Saxon wunon, Old Frisian wonia to dwell, remain, be used to, Old High German wonen,
German wohnen to dwell; related to Old English winnan, gewinnan to win (see win (v.)) and to wean;
from PIE *wen- (1) strive for, desire. The original meaning of the Germanic verbs was be content,
rejoice.


settle (v.)

come to rest, Old English setlan cause to sit, place, put, from setl a seat (see settle (n.)).
Related: Settling. Compare German siedeln to settle, colonize.     From c.1300 of birds, etc., to
alight. From early 14c. as sink down, descend; cave in. Early 15c. in reference to suspended
particles in a liquid. Sense of establish a permanent residence first recorded 1620s; that of decide
is 1620s. Meaning secure title to by deed is from 1660s.    Meaning reconcile (a quarrel,
differences, etc.) perhaps is influenced by Middle English sahtlen to reconcile, from Old English
saht reconciliation, from Old Norse satt reconciliation. To settle down become content is from 1853;
transitive sense from 1520s; as what married couples do in establishing domesticity, from 1718. To
settle for content oneself with is from 1943.


small beer (n.)

1560s, originally weak beer; used figuratively of small things or trifling matters. Small with the
meaning of low alcoholic content is attested from mid-15c.


matter (n.)

c.1200, materie, subject of thought, speech, or expression, from Anglo-French matere, Old French
matere subject, theme, topic; substance, content, material; character, education (12c., Modern
French mati&#232;re), from Latin materia substance from which something is made, also hard inner
wood of a tree (source also of Portuguese madeira wood), from mater origin, source, mother (see
mother (n.1)). Or, on another theory, it represents *dmateria, from PIE root *dem-/*dom- (source of
Latin domus house, English timber). With sense development in Latin influenced by Greek hyle, of
which it was the equivalent in philosophy.    Meaning physical substance generally, matter, material
is early 14c.; that of substance of which some specific object is made or consists of is attested
from late 14c. That of piece of business, affair, activity, situation, circumstance is from late
14c. From mid-14c. as subject of a literary work, content of what is written, main theme. Also in
Middle English as cause, reasons, ground; essential character; field of investigation.   Matter of
course something expected attested from 1739. For that matter attested from 1670s. What is the
matter what concerns (someone), the cause of the difficulty is attested from mid-15c. To make no
matter be no difference to also is mid-15c.


stick-in-the-mud (n.)

1852, from verbal phrase, stick (v.) on notion of one who sticks in the mud, hence one who is
content to remain in an abject condition. The phrase appears in 1730, in city of London court
records, as the alias of an accused named John Baker, who with two other men received a death
sentence at the Old Bailey in December 1733 for breaking open the House of Mr. Thomas Rayner, a
Silversmith, and stealing thence Plate to a great Value.


panem et circenses

Latin, literally bread and circuses, supposedly coined by Juvenal and describing the cynical formula
of the Roman emperors for keeping the masses content with ample food and entertainment.   Duas
tantum res anxius optat, Panem et circenses [Juvenal, Sat. x.80].


discontent (n.)

state or condition of discontent, 1580s, from dis- + content (n.). Winter of our discontent is from
Richard III.


ease (v.)

c.1300, to help, assist, see ease (n.). Meaning to give ease is from mid-14c.; the sense of to relax
one's efforts is from 1863. Farmer reports ease in a slang sense of â&euro;&oelig;to content a
womanâ&euro;? sexually, with an 1861 date. Related: Eased; easing.


discontent (adj.)

mid-15c., from dis- + content (adj.).


discontent (v.)

late 15c., from dis- not + content (v.). Related: Discontented; discontentedly; discontentment;
discontentedness.


malcontent

1580s, noun and adjective, from French malcontent; see mal- + content (adj.). Related: Malcontented;
malcontentedly; malcontentedness.


dentist (n.)

1759, from French dentiste, from dent tooth, from Latin dens (see tooth) + -ist.  Dentist figures it
now in our newspapers, and may do well enough for a French puffer, but we fancy Rutter is content
with being called a tooth-drawer [Edinburgh Chronicle, Sept. 15, 1759].   Tooth-drawer is attested
from late 14c.


diligence (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French diligence attention, care; haste, speed, from Latin diligentia
attentiveness, carefulness, from diligentem (nominative diligens) attentive, assiduous, careful,
originally present participle of diligere single out, value highly, esteem, prize, love; aspire to,
be content with, appreciate, originally to pick out, select, from dis- apart (see dis-) + legere
choose, gather (see lecture (n.)).    Sense evolved from love through attentiveness to carefulness
to steady effort. From the secondary French sense comes the old useage of diligence for public stage
coach (1742; dilly for short), from a French shortening of carrosse de diligence.


sentence (n.)

c.1200, doctrine, authoritative teaching; an authoritative pronouncement, from Old French sentence
judgment, decision; meaning; aphorism, maxim; statement of authority (12c.) and directly from Latin
sententia thought, way of thinking, opinion; judgment, decision, also a thought expressed; aphorism,
saying, from sentientem, present participle of sentire be of opinion, feel, perceive (see sense
(n.)). Loss of first -i- in Latin by dissimilation.    From early 14c. as judgment rendered by God,
or by one in authority; a verdict, decision in court; from late 14c. as understanding, wisdom;
edifying subject matter. From late 14c. as subject matter or content of a letter, book, speech,
etc., also in reference to a passage in a written work. Sense of grammatically complete statement is
attested from mid-15c. Meaning, then meaning expressed in words. Related: Sentential.


happy (adj.)

late 14c., lucky, favored by fortune, prosperous; of events, turning out well, from hap (n.) chance,
fortune + -y (2). Sense of very glad first recorded late 14c. Ousted Old English eadig (from ead
wealth, riches) and ges&aelig;lig, which has become silly. Meaning greatly pleased and content is
from 1520s. Old English bli&eth;e happy survives as blithe. From Greek to Irish, a great majority of
the European words for happy at first meant lucky. An exception is Welsh, where the word used first
meant wise.    Used in World War II and after as a suffix (as in bomb-happy, flak-happy) expressing
dazed or frazzled from stress. Happy medium is from 1778. Happy ending in the literary sense
recorded from 1756. Happy as a clam (1630s) was originally happy as a clam in the mud at high tide,
when it can't be dug up and eaten. Happy hunting ground, the reputed Indian paradise, is attested
from 1840, American English. Related: Happier; happiest.


text (n.)

late 14c., wording of anything written, from Old French texte, Old North French tixte text, book;
Gospels (12c.), from Medieval Latin textus the Scriptures, text, treatise, in Late Latin written
account, content, characters used in a document, from Latin textus style or texture of a work,
literally thing woven, from past participle stem of texere to weave, to join, fit together, braid,
interweave, construct, fabricate, build, from PIE root *teks- to weave, to fabricate, to make; make
wicker or wattle framework (see texture (n.)).    An ancient metaphor: thought is a thread, and the
raconteur is a spinner of yarns -- but the true storyteller, the poet, is a weaver. The scribes made
this old and audible abstraction into a new and visible fact. After long practice, their work took
on such an even, flexible texture that they called the written page a textus, which means cloth.
[Robert Bringhurst, The Elements of Typographic Style]


restaurant (n.)

1821, from French restaurant a restaurant, originally food that restores, noun use of present
participle of restaurer to restore or refresh, from Old French restorer (see restore).    In 1765 a
man by the name of Boulanger, also known as Champ d'Oiseaux or Chantoiseau, opened a shop near the
Louvre (on either the rue des Poulies or the rue Bailleul, depending on which authority one chooses
to believe). There he sold what he called restaurants or bouillons restaurants--that is, meat-based
consomm&#233;s intended to restore a person's strength. Ever since the Middle Ages the word
restaurant had been used to describe any of a variety of rich bouillons made with chicken, beef,
roots of one sort or another, onions, herbs, and, according to some recipes, spices, crystallized
sugar, toasted bread, barley, butter, and even exotic ingredients such as dried rose petals,
Damascus grapes, and amber. In order to entice customers into his shop, Boulanger had inscribed on
his window a line from the Gospels: Venite ad me omnes qui stomacho laboratis et ego vos restaurabo.
He was not content simply to serve bouillon, however. He also served leg of lamb in white sauce,
thereby infringing the monopoly of the caterers' guild. The guild filed suit, which to everyone's
astonishment ended in a judgment in favor of Boulanger. [Jean-Robert Pitte, The Rise of the
Restaurant, in Food: A Culinary History from Antiquity to the Present, English editor Albert
Sonnenfeld, transl. Clarissa Botsford, 1999, Columbia University Press]    Italian spelling
ristorante attested in English by 1925.


patriot (n.)

1590s, compatriot, from Middle French patriote (15c.) and directly from Late Latin patriota fellow-
countryman (6c.), from Greek patriotes fellow countryman, from patrios of one's fathers, patris
fatherland, from pater (genitive patros) father (see father (n.)); with -otes, suffix expressing
state or condition. Liddell &amp; Scott write that patriotes was applied to barbarians who had only
a common [patris], [politai] being used of Greeks who had a common [polis] (or free-state).
Meaning loyal and disinterested supporter of one's country is attested from c.1600, but became an
ironic term of ridicule or abuse from mid-18c. in England, so that Johnson, who at first defined it
as one whose ruling passion is the love of his country, in his fourth edition added, It is sometimes
used for a factious disturber of the government.The name of patriot had become [c.1744] a by-word of
derision. Horace Walpole scarcely exaggerated when he said that ... the most popular declaration
which a candidate could make on the hustings was that he had never been and never would be a
patriot. [Macaulay, Horace Walpole, 1833]Somewhat revived in reference to resistance movements in
overrun countries in World War II, it has usually had a positive sense in American English, where
the phony and rascally variety has been consigned to the word patrioteer (1928). Oriana Fallaci [The
Rage and the Pride, 2002] marvels that Americans, so fond of patriotic, patriot, and patriotism,
lack the root noun and are content to express the idea of patria by cumbersome compounds such as
homeland. (Joyce, Shaw, and H.G. Wells all used patria as an English word early 20c., but it failed
to stick.) Patriots' Day (April 19, anniversary of the 1775 skirmishes at Lexington and Concord
Bridge) was observed as a legal holiday in Maine and Massachusetts from 1894.


fundamentalist (adj.)

1920 in the religious sense (as is fundamentalism), from fundamental + -ist. Coined in American
English to name a movement among Protestants c.1920-25 based on scriptural inerrancy, etc., and
associated with William Jennings Bryan, among others.   Fundamentalist is said (by George McCready
Price) to have been first used in print by Curtis Lee Laws (1868-1946), editor of The Watchman
Examiner, a Baptist newspaper. The movement may have roots in the Presbyterian General Assembly of
1910, which drew up a list of five defining qualities of true believers which other evangelicals
published in a mass-circulation series of books called The Fundamentals. A World's Christian
Fundamentals Association was founded in 1918. The words reached widespread use in the wake of the
contentious Northern Baptist Convention of 1922 in Indianapolis.    Fundamentalism is a protest
against that rationalistic interpretation of Christianity which seeks to discredit supernaturalism.
This rationalism, when full grown, scorns the miracles of the Old Testament, sets aside the virgin
birth of our Lord as a thing unbelievable, laughs at the credulity of those who accept many of the
New Testament miracles, reduces the resurrection of our Lord to the fact that death did not end his
existence, and sweeps away the promises of his second coming as an idle dream. It matters not by
what name these modernists are known. The simple fact is that, in robbing Christianity of its
supernatural content, they are undermining the very foundations of our holy religion. They boast
that they are strengthening the foundations and making Christianity more rational and more
acceptable to thoughtful people. Christianity is rooted and grounded in supernaturalism, and when
robbed of supernaturalism it ceases to be a religion and becomes an exalted system of ethics. [Laws,
Herald &amp; Presbyter, July 19, 1922]    The original opposition to fundamentalist (within the
denominations) was modernist.    A new word has been coined into our vocabulary -- two new words --
'Fundamentalist' and 'Fundamentalism.' They are not in the dictionaries as yet -- unless in the very
latest editions. But they are on everyone's tongue. [Address Delivered at the Opening of the
Seminary, Sept. 20, 1922, by Professor Harry Lathrop Reed, Auburn Seminary Record]    Applied to
other religions, especially Islam, since 1957.


