convivial (adj.)

1660s, pertaining to a feast, from Late Latin convivialis, from Latin convivium a feast, from
convivere to carouse together, from com- together (see com-) + vivere to live (see vital). Meaning
sociable is from 18c. Related: Conviviality.


convival (adj.)

1640s, from Latin convivalis, from conviva, from convivere (see convivial). Has been replaced in
most uses by convivial.


Anacreontic (adj.)

of or in the manner of Anacreon, convivial bard of Greece (literally Up-lord), the celebrated Greek
lyrical poet (560-478 B.C.E.), born at Teos in Ionia. Also in reference to his lyric form (1706) of
a four-line stanza, rhymed alternately, each line with four beats (three trochees and a long
syllable), also convivial and amatory (1801); and an erotic poem celebrating love and wine (1650s).
Francis Scott Key in 1814 set or wrote his poem The Star-Spangled Banner to the melody of To
Anacreon in Heav'n, the drinking song of the popular London gentleman's club called The Anacreontic
Society, whose membership was dedicated to wit, harmony, and the god of wine. The tune is late 18c.
and may be the work of society member and court musician John Stafford Smith (1750-1836).


convive (n.)

1640s, from French convive, from Latin conviva one who feasts with others, from convivere (see
convivial). In mid-19c., also woman 'who lives in the same house with a number of others.'


symposium (n.)

1580s, account of a gathering or party, from Latin symposium drinking party, symposium, from Greek
symposion drinking party, convivial gathering of the educated (related to sympotes drinking
companion), from assimilated form of syn- together (see syn-) + posis a drinking, from a stem of
Aeolic ponen to drink, cognate with Latin potare to drink (see potion).    The symposium usually
followed a dinner, for the Greeks did not drink at meals. Its enjoyment was heightened by
intellectual or agreeable conversation, by the introduction of music or dancers, and by other
amusements. [Century Dictionary]  The sense of a meeting on some subject is from 1784. Reflecting
the Greek fondness for mixing wine and intellectual discussion, the modern sense is especially from
the word being used as a title for one of Plato's dialogues. Greek plural is symposia, and the
leader of one is a symposiarch (c.1600 in English). Related: Symposiac (adj.); symposial.


