conveyance (n.)

mid-15c., act of conveying, from convey + -ance. Meaning document by which something is legally
conveyed is from 1570s; sense means of transportation is attested from 1590s. Related: Conveyanced;
conveyancing.


vehicle (n.)

1610s, a medium through which a drug or medicine is administered, also any means of conveying or
transmitting, from French v&eacute;hicule (16c.), from Latin vehiculum means of transport, vehicle,
carriage, conveyance, from vehere to bear, carry, convey, from PIE *wegh- to go, transport in a
vehicle (cognates: Old English wegan to carry; Old Norse vegr, Old High German weg way; Middle Dutch
wagen wagon; see wagon). Sense of cart or other conveyance in English first recorded 1650s.


transport (n.)

mid-15c., originally mental exaltation; sense of means of transportation, carriage, conveyance is
recorded from 1690s; from transport (v.).


transfer (n.)

1670s, conveyance of property, from transfer (v.).


transportation (n.)

1530s, act of transporting, noun of action from transport (v.). Middle English used verbal noun
transporting (early 15c.). In the sense of means of conveyance it is first recorded 1853.


reconveyance (n.)

1714; see re- + conveyance.


transmission (n.)

1610s, conveyance from one place to another, from Latin transmissionem (nominative transmissio) a
sending over or across, passage, noun of action from past participle stem of transmittere send over
or across (see transmit). Meaning part of a motor vehicle that regulates power from the engine to
the axle is first recorded 1894.


drayage (n.)

1791, conveyance by dray, from dray + -age. Later also in reference to the fee for such.


vascular (adj.)

1670s, in anatomy, pertaining to conveyance or circulation of fluids, from Modern Latin vascularis
of or pertaining to vessels or tubes, from Latin vasculum a small vessel, diminutive of vas vessel.


ship (v.)

c.1300, to send or transport (merchandise, people) by ship; to board a ship; to travel by ship,
sail, set sail, also figurative, from ship (n.). Old English scipian is attested only in the senses
take ship, embark; be furnished with a ship. Transferred to other means of conveyance (railroad,
etc.) from 1857, originally American English. Related: Shipped; shipping.


aqueduct (n.)

1530s, from Latin aquaeductus conveyance of water, from aquae, genitive of aqua water (see aqua-), +
ductus a leading, conducting, past participle of ducere to lead (see duke (n.)).


omnibus (n.)

1829, four-wheeled public vehicle with seats for passengers, from French (voiture) omnibus
(carriage) for all, common (conveyance), from Latin omnibus for all, dative plural of omnis all (see
omni-). Introduced by Jacques Lafitte in Paris in 1819 or '20, in London from 1829. In reference to
legislation, the word is recorded from 1842. Meaning man or boy who assists a waiter at a restaurant
is attested from 1888 (compare busboy). As an adjective in English from 1842.


fare (n.)

Old English f&aelig;r journey, road, passage, expedition, strong neuter of faran to journey (see
fare (v.)); merged with faru journey, expedition, companions, baggage, strong fem. of faran.
Original sense is obsolete, except in compounds (wayfarer, sea-faring, etc.) Meaning food provided
is c.1200; that of conveyance appears in Scottish early 15c. and led to sense of payment for passage
(1510s).


carriage (n.)

late 14c., act of carrying, means of conveyance; wheeled vehicles collectively, from Anglo-French
and Old North French cariage cart, carriage, action of transporting in a vehicle (Old French
charriage, Modern French charriage), from carier to carry (see carry (v.)). Meaning individual
wheeled vehicle is c.1400; specific sense of horse-drawn, wheeled vehicle for hauling people first
attested 1706; extended to railway cars by 1830. Meaning way of carrying one's body is 1590s.
Carriage-house attested from 1761.


mortgage (n.)

late 14c., morgage, conveyance of property as security for a loan or agreement, from Old French
morgage (13c.), mort gaige, literally dead pledge (replaced in modern Frech by hypoth&egrave;que),
from mort dead (see mortal (adj.)) + gage pledge (see wage (n.)). So called because the deal dies
either when the debt is paid or when payment fails. Old French mort is from Vulgar Latin *mortus
dead, from Latin mortuus, past participle of mori to die (see mortal (adj.)). The -t- restored in
English based on Latin.


station (n.)

late 13c., place which one normally occupies, from Old French stacion, estacion site, location;
station of the Cross; stop, standstill, from Latin stationem (nominative statio) a standing,
standing firm; a post, job, position; military post; a watch, guard, sentinel; anchorage, port
(related to stare to stand), from PIE *ste-ti-, suffixed form of root *sta- to stand (see stet).
Meaning each of a number of holy places visited in succession by pilgrims is from late 14c., as in
Station of the Cross (1550s). Meaning fixed uniform distance in surveying is from 1570s. Sense of
status, rank is from c.1600. Meaning military post in English is from c.1600. The meaning place
where people are stationed for some special purpose (as in polling station) is first recorded 1823.
Radio station is from 1912; station break, pause in broadcasting to give the local station a chance
to identify itself, is from 1942.    The meaning regular stopping place is first recorded 1797, in
reference to coach routes; applied to railroads 1830. Station-master is from 1836. Station wagon in
the automobile sense is first recorded 1929, from earlier use for a horse-drawn conveyance that took
passengers to and from railroad stations (1894). Station house police station is attested from 1836.


