convene (v.)

early 15c., from Middle French convenir to suit, agree, from Latin convenire unite, be suitable,
agree, assemble, from com- together (see com-) + venire to come (see venue). Related: Convened;
convener; convening.


convenor (n.)

variant of convener (see convene).


convenient (adj.)

late 14c., from Latin convenientem (nominative conveniens), present participle of convenire (see
convene).


convenience (n.)

late 14c., agreement, conformity, from Latin convenientia meeting together, agreement, harmony, from
conveniens, present participle of convenire (see convene). Meaning suitable, adapted to existing
conditions is from c.1600; that of personally not difficult is from 1703.


convenance (n.)

late 15c., from French convenance convention, agreement, convenience, from convenant, present
participle of convenir to come together (see convene).


convention (n.)

early 15c., agreement, from Middle French convention and directly from Latin conventionem
(nominative conventio) meeting, assembly, covenant, noun of action from past participle stem of
convenire (see convene).


reconvene (v.)

1640s, from re- + convene and from Medieval Latin reconvenire. Related: Reconvened; reconvening;
reconvention.


covenant (n.)

c.1300, from Old French covenant agreement, originally present participle of covenir agree, meet,
from Latin convenire come together (see convene). Applied in Scripture to God's arrangements with
man as a translation of Latin testamentum, Greek diatheke, both rendering Hebrew berith (though
testament also is used for the same word in different places).


convent (n.)

c.1200, covent, cuvent, from Anglo-French covent, from Old French convent, from Latin conventus
assembly, used in Medieval Latin for religious house, originally past participle of convenire come
together (see convene). Not exclusively feminine until 18c. The form with restored Latin -n- emerged
early 15c. The Middle English form remains in London's Covent Garden district (notorious late 18c.
for brothels), so called because it had been the garden of a defunct monastery.    COVENT GARDEN
ABBESS. A bawd.  COVENT GARDEN AGUE. The venereal di&#383;ea&#383;e.  [Classical Dictionary of the
Vulgar Tongue, 1796]


