conventional (adj.)

late 15c., of the nature of an agreement, from Late Latin conventionalis pertaining to convention or
agreement, from Latin conventionem (see convention). Meaning of the nature of a convention is from
1812, now rare; established by social convention is from 1761; that of following tradition is from
1831; that of non-nuclear is from 1955. Realted: Conventionality; conventionally.


convention (n.)

early 15c., agreement, from Middle French convention and directly from Latin conventionem
(nominative conventio) meeting, assembly, covenant, noun of action from past participle stem of
convenire (see convene).


de rigueur

1849, French, literally of strictness, thus according to obligation of convention. See rigor.


are (n.)

square unit of 10 meters on each side, 1819, from French, formed 1795 by decree of the French
National Convention, from Latin area vacant piece of ground (see area).


convenance (n.)

late 15c., from French convenance convention, agreement, convenience, from convenant, present
participle of convenir to come together (see convene).


legionnaire (n.)

1818, from French l&eacute;gionnaire, from l&eacute;gion (see legion). Legionnaires' Disease, caused
by Legionella pneumophilia, was named after the lethal outbreak of July 1976 at the American Legion
convention in Philadelphia's Bellevue Stratford Hotel. Hence Legionella as the name of the bacterium
that causes it.


hectare (n.)

1810, from French hectare a hundred ares, formed from Greek hekaton hundred (see hecatomb) + Latin
area vacant piece of ground (see area). A superficial measure containing 100 ares, coined by decree
of the French National Convention in 1795.


stampede (n.)

1844 (earlier stampedo, 1839), A general scamper of animals on the Western prairies, generally
caused by a fright [Bartlett] from Mexican Spanish estampida, from Spanish, an uproar, from estamper
to stamp, press, pound, from Proven&ccedil;al estampier to stamp, from the same Germanic root that
yielded English stamp (v.). The political sense is first recorded 1846 (in reference to the U.S.
Democratic Party convention of 1844). As the name of an annual exhibition of cowboy skills in
Calgary, Alberta, Canada, it is attested from 1912.


Geneva

city in Switzerland, from Latin Genava, perhaps from a PIE root meaning estuary or one meaning bend;
in either case a reference to its situation. The city was the headquarters of the League of Nations
from 1920.   The original Geneva Convention to introduce humanitarian conduct in modern warfare
dates from 1864; the most recent update was in 1949. The Geneva Protocol is a League of Nations
document meant to settle international disputes; it dates from 1924. Earlier the city was associated
with Calvinism. Meaning gin is from 1706 (see gin (n.1)).


surveillance (n.)

1802, from French surveillance oversight, supervision, a watch, noun of action from surveiller
oversee, watch (17c.), from sur- over (see sur- (1)) + veiller to watch, from Latin vigilare, from
vigil watchful (see vigil). Seemingly a word that came to English from the Terror in France
(surveillance committees were formed in every French municipality in March 1793 by order of the
Convention to monitor the actions and movements of suspect persons, outsiders, and dissidents).


junta (n.)

1620s, Spanish legislative council, from Spanish and Portuguese junta council, meeting, convention,
from Medieval Latin iuncta joint, from Latin iuncta, fem. past participle of iungere to join (see
jugular).    Meaning political or military group in power first recorded 1640s as junto (from
confusion with Spanish nouns ending in -o), originally with reference to the Cabinet Council of
Charles I. Modern spelling in this sense is from 1714; popularized 1808 in connection with councils
formed across Spain to resist Napoleon.


terrorism (n.)

1795, in specific sense of government intimidation during the Reign of Terror in France (March
1793-July 1794), from French terrorisme, from Latin terror (see terror).    If the basis of a
popular government in peacetime is virtue, its basis in a time of revolution is virtue and terror --
virtue, without which terror would be barbaric; and terror, without which virtue would be impotent.
[Robespierre, speech in French National Convention, 1794]    General sense of systematic use of
terror as a policy is first recorded in English 1798 (in reference to the Irish Rebellion of that
year). At one time, a word for a certain kind of mass-destruction terrorism was dynamitism (1883);
and during World War I frightfulness (translating German Schrecklichkeit) was used in Britain for
deliberate policy of terrorizing enemy non-combatants.


date (n.1)

time, early 14c., from Old French date (13c.) date, day; time, from Medieval Latin data, noun use of
fem. singular of Latin datus given, past participle of dare to give, grant, offer, from PIE root
*do- to give (cognates: Sanskrit dadati gives, danam offering, present; Old Persian dadatuv let him
give, Old Church Slavonic dati give, dani tribute; Latin donum gift; Greek didomi, didonai, to give,
offer, doron gift; Lithuanian duonis gift, Old Irish dan gift, endowment, talent, Welsh dawn gift).
The Roman convention of closing every article of correspondence by writing given and the day and
month -- meaning perhaps given to messenger -- led to data becoming a term for the time (and place)
stated. (a Roman letter would include something along the lines of datum Romae pridie Kalendas Maias
-- given at Rome on the last day of April.


Realtor (n.)

1916, real estate agent, American English, coined by real estate agent Charles N. Chadbourn of
Minneapolis, Minn., to distinguish the legitimate section of the business; popularized 1920s;
patented as Realtor by the National Association of Real Estate Boards.    The 1916 Convention of the
National Association of Real Estate Boards (NAREB) approved the adoption of the term as the official
designation of an active member of the Association. In 1920 the District Court of Hennepin County,
Minnesota, decided in favor of the Realtors in a case against a telephone directory publisher that
had indiscriminately used the word in listings. The court asserted that the word had never been used
in any way whatsoever until so invented and could thus be used only by those duly licensed by the
National Association of Real Estate Boards. Until the Lanham Acts of 1948 changed federal patent
regulations to allow protection for registered collective marks, the National Association fought and
won sixteen cases on the local and state levels to protect its symbolic property. [Jeffrey M.
Hornstein, The Rise of Realtor, in The Middling Sorts: Explorations in the History of the American
Middle Class, New York, 2001]


yegg (n.)

also yegg-man, 1901, a word popular in the first decade of the 20th century and meaning vaguely hobo
burglar; safe-breaker; criminal beggar.    The great majority [of the Chicago criminal population]
are what certain detectives call Yegg-men, which is a term, by the way, that the detectives would do
well to define. As far as I can discover it means tramp-thieves, but the average tramp seldom uses
the word. Hoboes that break safes in country post-offices come under the Yegg-men classification.
[McClure's Magazine, Feb. 1901]    Popularized by the Pinkerton agency detectives. The 1900
Proceedings of the 26th annual convention of the American Bankers' Association, whose members were
protected by the Pinkerton's National Detective Agency, reported a letter dated Nov. 23 or 24, 1899,
returning $540, taken earlier that year, to the Scandinavian-American Bank of St. Paul, Minn.,
noting that the thieves had been so hounded by detectives that they gave up the gains and advised
the bank to advertise that it was a member of the American Bankers Association, because the American
Bankers Association is too tough for poor 'grafters.' The letter supposedly was signed John Yegg,
but this was said to be a pseudonym and the report identified the man arrested later in the case as
William Barrett.


week (n.)

Old English wucu, wice, etc., from Proto-Germanic *wikon (cognates: Old Norse vika, Old Frisian
wike, Middle Dutch weke, Old High German wecha, German woche), probably originally with the sense of
a turning or succession (compare Gothic wikon in the course of, Old Norse vika sea-mile, originally
change of oar, Old English wican yield, give way), from PIE root *weik- (4) to bend, wind (see
vicarious). The vowel sound seems to have been uncertain in Old and Middle English and -e-, -i-,
-o-, -u-, -y-, and various diphthongs are attested for it.    Meaning primarily 'change,
alteration,' the word may once have denoted some earlier time division, such as the 'change of moon,
half month,' ... but there is no positive evidence of this [Buck]. No evidence of a native Germanic
week before contact with the Romans. The seven-day week is ancient, probably originating from the
28-day lunar cycle, divisible into four periods of seven day, at the end of each of which the moon
enters a new phase. Reinforced during the spread of Christianity by the ancient Jewish seven-day
week.    As a Roman astrological convention it was borrowed by other European peoples; the Germanic
tribes substituting their own deities for those of the Romans, without regard to planets. The
Coligny calendar suggests a Celtic division of the month into halves; the regular Greek division of
the month was into three decades; and the Romans also had a market week of nine days.    Greek
planetary names [for the days of the week] ... are attested for the early centuries of our era, but
their use was apparently restricted to certain circles; at any rate they never became popular. In
Rome, on the other hand, the planetary names became the established popular terms, too strongly
intrenched to be displaced by the eccl[esiastical] names, and spreading through most of western
Europe. [Buck]    Phrase a week, as in eight days a week recorded by 1540s; see a- (1).


fundamentalist (adj.)

1920 in the religious sense (as is fundamentalism), from fundamental + -ist. Coined in American
English to name a movement among Protestants c.1920-25 based on scriptural inerrancy, etc., and
associated with William Jennings Bryan, among others.   Fundamentalist is said (by George McCready
Price) to have been first used in print by Curtis Lee Laws (1868-1946), editor of The Watchman
Examiner, a Baptist newspaper. The movement may have roots in the Presbyterian General Assembly of
1910, which drew up a list of five defining qualities of true believers which other evangelicals
published in a mass-circulation series of books called The Fundamentals. A World's Christian
Fundamentals Association was founded in 1918. The words reached widespread use in the wake of the
contentious Northern Baptist Convention of 1922 in Indianapolis.    Fundamentalism is a protest
against that rationalistic interpretation of Christianity which seeks to discredit supernaturalism.
This rationalism, when full grown, scorns the miracles of the Old Testament, sets aside the virgin
birth of our Lord as a thing unbelievable, laughs at the credulity of those who accept many of the
New Testament miracles, reduces the resurrection of our Lord to the fact that death did not end his
existence, and sweeps away the promises of his second coming as an idle dream. It matters not by
what name these modernists are known. The simple fact is that, in robbing Christianity of its
supernatural content, they are undermining the very foundations of our holy religion. They boast
that they are strengthening the foundations and making Christianity more rational and more
acceptable to thoughtful people. Christianity is rooted and grounded in supernaturalism, and when
robbed of supernaturalism it ceases to be a religion and becomes an exalted system of ethics. [Laws,
Herald &amp; Presbyter, July 19, 1922]    The original opposition to fundamentalist (within the
denominations) was modernist.    A new word has been coined into our vocabulary -- two new words --
'Fundamentalist' and 'Fundamentalism.' They are not in the dictionaries as yet -- unless in the very
latest editions. But they are on everyone's tongue. [Address Delivered at the Opening of the
Seminary, Sept. 20, 1922, by Professor Harry Lathrop Reed, Auburn Seminary Record]    Applied to
other religions, especially Islam, since 1957.


