converse (adj.)

exact opposite, 1560s, from Latin conversus turn around, past participle of convertere to turn about
(see convert). Originally mathematical. The noun is attested from 1550s in mathematics. Related:
Conversely.


converse (v.)

to communicate (with), 1590s; earlier to move about, live, dwell (mid-14c.), from Old French
converser to talk (12c.), from Latin conversari (see conversation). Related: Conversed; conversing.


contrary (adj.)

mid-14c., from Anglo-French contrarie, from Latin contrarius opposite, opposed, from contra against
(see contra).    If we take the statement All men are mortal, its contrary is Not all men are
mortal, its converse is All mortal beings are men, &amp; its opposite is No men are mortal. The
contrary, however, does not exclude the opposite, but includes it as its most extreme form. Thus
This is white has only one opposite, This is black, but many contraries, as This is not white, This
is coloured, This is dirty, This is black; &amp; whether the last form is called the contrary, or
more emphatically the opposite, is usually indifferent. But to apply the opposite to a mere contrary
(e.g. to I did not hit him in relation to I hit him, which has no opposite), or to the converse
(e.g. to He hit me in relation to I hit him, to which it is neither contrary nor opposite), is a
looseness that may easily result in misunderstanding; the temptation to go wrong is intelligible
when it is remembered that with certain types of sentence (A exceeds B) the converse &amp; the
opposite are identical (B exceeds A). [Fowler]    As a noun from late 13c. Related: Contrarily;
contrariwise.


conversate (v.)

by 1994, apparently a back-formation from conversation or an elaboration of converse. According to
some, from U.S. black English.


dally (v.)

c.1300, to talk, converse, possibly from Anglo-French dalier to amuse oneself, of uncertain origin.
Sense of waste time emerged by late 14c. Related: Dallied; dallying.


chat (v.)

mid-15c., talk idly, babble, short for chatter (v.). Meaning to converse familiarly is from 1550s.
Sense of flirt with, ingratiate oneself with (in later use often with up (adv.)) is from 1898.
Related: Chatted; chatting.


diverse (adj.)

c.1300, spelling variant of divers (q.v.), perhaps by analogy with converse, traverse, etc. In some
cases directly from Latin diversus, and since c.1700 restricted to the meaning different in
character or quality. Related: Diversely.


conversant (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French conversant, present participle of converser (see converse (v.)).


confabulate (v.)

1610s, from confabulatus, past participle of Latin confabulari to converse together, from com-
together (see com-) + fabulari to talk, chat, from fabula a tale (see fable). Psychiatric sense is
from 1924.


dialect (n.)

1570s, form of speech of a region or group, from Middle French dialecte, from Latin dialectus local
language, way of speaking, conversation, from Greek dialektos talk, conversation, speech; also the
language of a country, dialect, from dialegesthai converse with each other, from dia- across,
between (see dia-) + legein speak (see lecture (n.)).


confer (v.)

1530s, from Middle French conf&eacute;rer (14c.) to give, converse, compare, from Latin conferre to
bring together, figuratively to compare; consult, deliberate, talk over, from com- together (see
com-) + ferre to bear (see infer). Sense of taking counsel led to conference. The meaning compare
(common 1530-1650) is largely obsolete, but the abbreviation cf. still is used in this sense.
Related: Conferred; conferring.


alto (n.)

1784, man with an alto voice, from Italian alto (canto), from Latin altus high (see old). Originally
a high man's voice, now more commonly applied to the lower range of women's voices (which is more
strictly the contralto), an extension first recorded in 1881.    The alto in a man is totally
distinct from the contralto in a woman. The tone is utterly different -- the best notes of the one
are certainly not the best notes of the other; and although in certain cases a contralto may sing
with good effect music written for a male alto (e.g. in some oratorios), yet the converse is
scarcely ever true. [How to Sing, 1890]    As a type of saxophone, from 1869.


dialogue (n.)

early 13c., literary work consisting of a conversation between two or more persons, from Old French
dialoge, from Latin dialogus, from Greek dialogos conversation, dialogue, related to dialogesthai
converse, from dia- across (see dia-) + legein speak (see lecture (n.)).    Sense broadened to a
conversation c.1400. Mistaken belief that it can only mean conversation between two persons is from
confusion of dia- and di- (1); the error goes back to at least 1532, when trialogue was coined
needlessly for a conversation between three persons. A word that has been used for conversation
between two persons is the hybrid duologue (1864).


bitch (n.)

Old English bicce female dog, probably from Old Norse bikkjuna female of the dog (also fox, wolf,
and occasionally other beasts), of unknown origin. Grimm derives the Old Norse word from Lapp
pittja, but OED notes that the converse is equally possible. As a term of contempt applied to women,
it dates from c.1400; of a man, c.1500, playfully, in the sense of dog. Used among male homosexuals
from 1930s. In modern (1990s, originally black English) slang, its use with reference to a man is
sexually contemptuous, from the woman insult.BITCH. A she dog, or doggess; the most offensive
appellation that can be given to an English woman, even more provoking than that of whore.
[Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, 1811] Bitch goddess coined 1906 by William James; the original one
was success.


prolicide (n.)

killing of one's child or children, 1824, introduced by Dr. John Gordon Smith in the 2nd edition of
his Principles of Forensic Medicine; from Latin proles offspring (see prolific) + -cide.    It is
hoped that this word will be considered entitled to reception, on the score of analogy. We have long
had parricide, fratricide, and infanticide, all (if I may use the figure of speech,) of the same
family; and recently the very appropriate term foeticide has been introduced into Forensic Medicine.
In both these last crimes there is a peculiarity arising from the person accused being, in almost
every instance, the parent .... In this relation to the beings destroyed, the general term of
murderer, or murder of offspring seems to be the fair converse of parricide; and will suit well the
purpose of the Medico-legal writer, who considers the two cases as parts of one subject, for the
designation of which collectively a proper term was wanting. [Smith]


