conventional (adj.)

late 15c., of the nature of an agreement, from Late Latin conventionalis pertaining to convention or
agreement, from Latin conventionem (see convention). Meaning of the nature of a convention is from
1812, now rare; established by social convention is from 1761; that of following tradition is from
1831; that of non-nuclear is from 1955. Realted: Conventionality; conventionally.


straight (adj.2)

conventional, especially heterosexual, 1941, a secondary sense evolved from straight (adj.1),
probably suggested by straight and narrow path course of conventional morality and law-abiding
behavior, which is based on a misreading of Matt. vii:14 (where the gate is actually strait), and
the other influence seems to be from strait-laced.


rube (n.)

1896, reub, from shortened form of masc. proper name Reuben (q.v.), which is attested from 1804 as a
conventional type of name for a country man.


beaux arts (n.)

the fine arts, 1821, from French; also in reference to Ecole des Beaux-Arts, Paris, and the widely
imitated conventional type of art and architecture advocated there.


Biedermeier

1854, from German, from Gottlieb Biedermeier, name of a fictitious writer of stodgy poems (invented
by Ludwig Eichrodt as a satire on bourgeois taste); the name generally applied to styles prevalent
in Germany 1815-48; also conventional, bourgeois.


outsider (n.)

1800, from outside; figurative sense of a person isolated from conventional society is first
recorded 1907. The sense of race horses outside the favorites is from 1836; hence outside chance
(1909).


gangsta

rap style generally credited to West Philly hip hop artist Schoolly D, but his Gangster Boogie
(1984) used the conventional spelling; NWA was spelling it gangsta by 1988.


way-out (adj.)

1868, far off, from way (adv.), short for away,  + out. Sense of original, bold, is jazz slang from
1940s, probably suggesting far off from what is conventional or expected.


unconventional (adj.)

1832, from un- (1) not + conventional (adj.). A 19 cent. epithet for a certain type of affectation.
[Weekley] Related: Unconventionally.


straight (n.)

1640s, a level position, from straight (adj.1). From 1864 as straight part of a race track. Poker
sense attested from 1841. Meaning conventional person is first recorded 1967, from straight (adj.2).


white bread (n.)

c.1300, as opposed to darker whole-grain type, from white (adj.) + bread (n.). Its popularity among
middle-class America led to the slang adjectival sense of conventional, bourgeois (c.1980). Old
English had hwitehlaf.


bromide (n.)

compound of bromine and another metal or radical, 1836, from bromine, the pungent, poisonous
element, + -ide. Used as a sedative; figurative sense of dull, conventional person or trite saying
popularized by U.S. humorist Frank Gelett Burgess (1866-1951) in his book Are You a Bromide? (1906).
Related: Bromidic.


Babbitt (n.)

conventional, complacent, materialistic American businessman, 1923, from George Babbitt, title
character of Sinclair Lewis' novel (1922).    His name was George F. Babbitt. He was forty-six years
old now, in April 1920, and he made nothing in particular, neither butter nor shoes nor poetry, but
he was nimble in the selling of houses for more money than people could afford to pay. [Sinclair
Lewis, Babbitt, 1922]


puss (n.1)

cat, 1520s, but probably much older than the record, perhaps imitative of the hissing sound commonly
used to get a cat's attention. A conventional name for a cat in Germanic languages and as far off as
Afghanistan; it is the root of the principal word for cat in Rumanian (pisica) and secondary words
in Lithuanian (puz), Low German (puus), Swedish dialect katte-pus, etc. Applied to a girl or woman
from c.1600, originally in a negative sense, implying unpleasant cat-like qualities; but by mid-19c.
in affectionate use.


-oon

spelling conventional in 15c.-17c. English to add emphasis to borrowed French nouns ending in
stressed -on; also used to represent Italian -one, Spanish &#243;n; all from Latin -onem. Used in
rare cases to form English words, such as spittoon, octaroon.


macaroon (n.)

1610s, small sweet cake consisting largely of ground almonds, from French macaron (16c.), from
dialectal Italian maccarone (see macaroni). French meaning said to have been invented 1552 by
Rabelais. The -oon ending was conventional in 15c.-17c. English to add emphasis to borrowings of
French nouns ending in stressed -on.


bourgeois (adj.)

1560s, of the French middle class, from French bourgeois, from Old French burgeis, borjois town
dweller (see bourgeoisie). Sense of socially or aesthetically conventional is from 1764; in
communist and socialist writing, as a noun, a capitalist (1883).It is better to be a good ordinary
bourgeois than a bad ordinary bohemian. [Aldous Huxley, 1930]


mention (v.)

1520s, from mention (n.) or else from Middle French mentionner, from Old French mencion. Related:
Mentioned; mentioning; mentionable. Don't mention it as a conventional reply to expressions of
gratitude or apology is attested from 1840.


middlebrow

1911 (adj.), 1912 (n.), from middle + brow (compare highbrow, lowbrow).    [T]here is an alarmingly
wide chasm, I might almost say a vacuum, between the high-brow, who considers reading either as a
trade or as a form of intellectual wrestling, and the low-brow, who is merely seeking for gross
thrills. It is to be hoped that culture will soon be democratized through some less conventional
system of education, giving rise to a new type that might be called the middle-brow, who will
consider books as a source of intellectual enjoyment. [The Nation, Jan, 25, 1912]


strait (n.)

mid-14c., narrow, confined space or place, specifically of bodies of water from late 14c., from Old
French estreit, estrait narrow part, pass, defile, narrow passage of water, noun use of adjective
(see strait (adj.)). Sense of difficulty, plight (usually straits) first recorded 1540s. Strait and
narrow conventional or wisely limited way of life is recorded from mid-14c. (compare straight
(adj.2)).


vanilla (n.)

1660s, pod of the vanilla plant, from Spanish vainilla vanilla plant, literally little pod,
diminutive of vaina sheath, from Latin vagina sheath of an ear of grain, hull of a plant (see
vagina). So called from the shape of the pods. European discovery 1521 by Hernando Cortes' soldiers
on reconnaissance in southeastern Mexico. Meaning flavoring extracted from the vanilla bean is
attested by 1728. Meaning conventional, of ordinary sexual preferences is 1970s, from notion of
whiteness and the common choice of vanilla ice cream.


charm (v.)

c.1300, to recite or cast a magic spell, from Old French charmer (13c.) to enchant, to fill
(someone) with desire (for something); to protect, cure, treat; to maltreat, harm, from Late Latin
carminare, from Latin carmen (see charm (n.)). In Old French used alike of magical and non-magical
activity. In English, to win over by treating pleasingly, delight from mid-15c. Related: Charmed;
charming. Charmed (short for I am charmed) as a conventional reply to a greeting or meeting is
attested by 1825.


emancipate (v.)

1620s, from Latin emancipatus, past participle of emancipare declare (someone) free, give up one's
authority over, in Roman law, the freeing of a son or wife from the legal authority (patria
potestas) of the pater familias, to make his or her own way in the world; from ex- out, away (see
ex-) + mancipare deliver, transfer or sell, from mancipum ownership, from manus hand (see manual) +
capere take (see capable). Related: Emancipated; emancipating. Adopted in the cause of religious
toleration (17c.), then anti-slavery (1776). Also used in reference to women who free themselves
from conventional customs (1850).


petit (adj.)

mid-14c., trifling, from Old French petit small, little, young, few in numbers (11c.), probably from
stem of Late Latin pitinnus small, of uncertain origin; it corresponds to no known Latin form and
perhaps is from a Celtic root pett- part, piece, bit also found in Italian pezza, English piece.
Attested as a surname from 1086. Replaced by petty in most usages, except in established forms such
as petit bourgeois conventional middle-class (1832; used in English by Charlotte Bront&#235; earlier
than by Marx or Engels); petit mal (1842, literally little evil, mild form of epilepsy), and petit
four (1884), which in French means little oven, from Old French four oven, from Latin furnus.


protocol (n.)

1540s, as prothogall draft of a document, from Middle French prothocole (c.1200, Modern French
protocole), from Medieval Latin protocollum draft, literally the first sheet of a volume (on which
contents and errata were written), from Greek protokollon first sheet glued onto a manuscript, from
protos first (see proto-) + kolla glue.    Sense developed in Medieval Latin and French from
official account to official record of a transaction, to diplomatic document, and finally, in
French, to formula of diplomatic etiquette. Meaning diplomatic rules of etiquette in English first
recorded 1896, from French; general sense of conventional proper conduct is from 1952. Protocols of
the (Learned) Elders of Zion, Russian anti-Semitic forgery purporting to reveal Jewish plan for
world domination, first published in English 1920 under title The Jewish Peril.


straight (adj.1)

late 14c., direct, undeviating; not crooked, not bent or curved, of a person, direct, honest;
properly stretched, adjectival use of Old English streht (earlier streaht), past participle of
streccan to stretch (see stretch (v.)). Related: Straightly; straightness.    Meaning true, direct,
honest is from 1520s. Of communication, clear, unambiguous, from 1862. Sense of undiluted,
uncompromising (as in straight whiskey, 1874) is American English, first recorded 1856. As an adverb
from c.1300, in a straight line, without swerving or deviating. Theatrical sense of serious (as
opposed to popular or comic) is attested from 1895; vaudeville slang straight man first attested
1923.   Go straight in the underworld slang sense is from 1919; straighten up become respectable is
from 1907. To play it straight is from 1906 in theater, 1907 in sports (play fair), with figurative
extension; later perhaps also from jazz. Straight arrow decent, conventional person is 1969, from
archetypal Native American brave name. Straight shooter is from 1928. Straight As top grades is from
1920.


slang (n.)

1756, special vocabulary of tramps or thieves, later jargon of a particular profession (1801), of
uncertain origin, the usual guess being that it is from a Scandinavian source, such as Norwegian
slengenamn nickname, slengja kjeften to abuse with words, literally to sling the jaw, related to Old
Norse slyngva to sling. But OED, while admitting some approximation in sense, discounts this
connection based on date and early associations. Liberman also denies it, as well as any connection
with French langue (or language or lingo). Rather, he derives it elaborately from an old slang word
meaning narrow piece of land, itself of obscure origin. Century Dictionary says there is no evidence
to establish a Gipsy origin. Sense of very informal language characterized by vividness and novelty
first recorded 1818.    [S]lang is a conscious offence against some conventional standard of
propriety. A mere vulgarism is not slang, except when it is purposely adopted, and acquires an
artificial currency, among some class of persons to whom it is not native. The other distinctive
feature of slang is that it is neither part of the ordinary language, nor an attempt to supply its
deficiencies. The slang word is a deliberate substitute for a word of the vernacular, just as the
characters of a cipher are substitutes for the letters of the alphabet, or as a nickname is a
substitute for a personal name. [Henry Bradley, from Slang, in Encyclopedia Britannica, 11th ed.]
A word that ought to have survived is slangwhanger (1807, American English) noisy or abusive talker
or writer.


