copious (adj.)

mid-14c., from Latin copiosus plentiful, from copia an abundance, ample supply, profusion, plenty,
from com- with (see com-) + ops (genitive opis) power, wealth, resources, from PIE root *op- (1) to
work, produce in abundance, (see opus). Related: Copiously.


spread (n.)

1620s, act of spreading; 1690s, extent or expanse of something, from spread (v.). Meaning copious
meal dates from 1822; sense of food for spreading (butter, jam, etc.) is from 1812. Sense of bed
cover is recorded from 1848, originally American English. Meaning degree of variation is attested
from 1929. Meaning ranch for raising cattle is attested from 1927.


copy (n.)

early 14c., written account or record, from Old French copie (13c.), from Medieval Latin copia
reproduction, transcript, from Latin copia plenty, means (see copious). Sense extended 15c. to any
specimen of writing (especially MS for a printer) and any reproduction or imitation. Related:
Copyist.


cornucopia (n.)

c.1500, from Late Latin cornucopia, from Latin cornu copiae horn of plenty, originally the horn of
the goat Amalthea, who nurtured the infant Zeus. See horn (n.) and copious.


affluence (n.)

mid-14c., a plentiful flowing, an abundance, from Old French affluence, from Latin affluentia a
flowing to, figuratively affluence, abundance, noun of state from affluentem (nominative affluens)
flowing toward, abounding, rich, copious (see affluent). Sense of wealth attested from c.1600, from
notion of a plentiful flow (of the gifts of fortune).


affluent (adj.)

mid-15c., flowing, from Middle French affluent (14c.) or directly from Latin affluentem (nominative
affluens) flowing toward, abounding, rich, copious, present participle of affluere flow toward, from
ad- to (see ad-) + fluere to flow (see fluent).


large (adj.)

c.1200, bountiful, inclined to give or spend freely, also, of areas, great in expanse, from Old
French large broad, wide; generous, bounteous, from Latin largus abundant, copious, plentiful;
bountiful, liberal in giving, of unknown origin. Main modern meanings extensive; big in overall size
emerged 14c. An older sense of liberated, free from restraining influence is preserved in at large
(late 14c.). Adjective phrase larger-than-life first attested 1937 (bigger than life is from 1640s).


many (adj.)

Old English monig, manig many, many a, much, from Proto-Germanic *managaz (cognates: Old Saxon
manag, Swedish m&aring;ngen, Old Frisian manich, Dutch menig, Old High German manag, German manch,
Gothic manags), from PIE *menegh- copious (cognates: Old Church Slavonic munogu much, many, Old
Irish menicc, Welsh mynych frequent, Old Irish magham gift). Pronunciation altered by influence of
any (see manifold).


rank (adj.)

Old English ranc proud, overbearing, showy, from Proto-Germanic *rankaz (cognates: Danish rank
right, upright, German rank slender, Old Norse rakkr straight, erect), perhaps from PIE *reg- to
stretch, straighten (see right (adj.)). In reference to plant growth, vigorous, luxuriant, abundant,
copious it is recorded from c.1300. Related: Rankly; rankness.    Sense evolved in Middle English to
large and coarse (c.1300), then, via notion of excessive and unpleasant, to corrupt, loathsome, foul
(mid-14c.), perhaps from influence of Middle French rance rancid. In 17c. also lewd, lustful.
Much used 16c. as a pejorative intensive (as in rank folly). This is possibly the source of the verb
meaning to reveal another's guilt (1929, underworld slang), and that of to harass, abuse, 1934, U.S.
black dialect, though this also may be from the role of the activity in establishing social
hierarchy (from rank (n.)).


river (n.)

early 13c., from Anglo-French rivere, Old French riviere river, riverside, river bank (12c.), from
Vulgar Latin *riparia riverbank, seashore, river (source also of Spanish ribera, Italian riviera),
noun use of fem. of Latin riparius of a riverbank (see riparian). Generalized sense of a copious
flow of anything is from late 14c. The Old English word was ea river, cognate with Gothic ahwa,
Latin aqua (see aqua-). Romanic cognate words tend to retain the sense river bank as the main one,
or else the secondary Latin sense coast of the sea (compare Riviera).    U.S. slang phrase up the
river in prison (1891) is originally in reference to Sing Sing prison, which was literally up the
(Hudson) river from New York City. Phrase down the river done for, finished perhaps echoes sense in
sell down the river (1851), originally of troublesome slaves, to sell from the Upper South to the
harsher cotton plantations of the Deep South.


