corpus (n.)

(plural corpora), late 14c., from Latin corpus, literally body (see corporeal). The sense of body of
a person (mid-15c. in English) and collection of facts or things (1727 in English) both were present
in Latin. Corpus Christi (late 14c.), feast of the Blessed Sacrament, is the Thursday after Trinity
Sunday. Also used in various medical phrases, such as corpus callosum (1706, literally tough body),
corpus luteum (1788, literally yellow body).


corpus delicti

1832, Latin, literally body of the offense; not the murder victim's body, but the basic elements
that make up a crime; in the case of a murder, including the body of the murdered person.


corpuscle (n.)

1650s, any small particle, from Latin corpusculum a puny body; an atom, particle, diminutive of
corpus body (see corporeal). First applied to blood cells 1845. Related: Corpuscular.


habeas corpus (n.)

writ requiring a person to be brought before a court, mid-15c., Latin, literally (you should) have
the person, in phrase habeas corpus ad subjiciendum produce or have the person to be subjected to
(examination), opening words of writs in 14c. Anglo-French documents to require a person to be
brought before a court or judge, especially to determine if that person is being legally detained.
From habeas, second person singular present subjunctive of habere to have, to hold (see habit (n.))
+ corpus person, literally body (see corporeal). In reference to more than one person, habeas
corpora.


corse (n.)

mid-13c., from Old French cors, from Latin corpus body (see corps for history and development).
Archaic from 16c.


luteal (adj.)

pertaining to the corpus luteum, 1906, from Latin luteus yellow (see luteous). Luteal phase is
attested by 1932.


callosal (adj.)

pertaining to the corpus callosum, from Latin callosus (see callous) + -al (1).


corporate (adj.)

early 15c., united in one body, from Latin corporatus, past participle of corporare form into a
body, from corpus (genitive corporis) body (see corporeal).


corpulent (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French corpulent stout, fat, from Latin corpulentus fleshy, fat, from corpus
body (see corporeal) + -ulentus full of. Leigh Hunt was sent to prison for two years for calling the
Prince Regent corpulent in print in 1812.


incorporate (v.)

late 14c., to put (something) into the body or substance of (something else), from Late Latin
incorporatus, past participle of incorporare unite into one body, from Latin in- into, in, on, upon
(see in- (2)) + corpus (genitive corporis) body (see corporeal). Meaning to legally form a body
politic is from 1460s. Related: Incorporated; incorporating.


corporal (adj.)

of or belonging to the body, late 14c., from Old French corporal (12c., Modern French corporel) of
the body, physical, strong, from Latin corporalis pertaining to the body, from corpus (genitive
corporis) body (see corps). Corporal punishment punishment of the body (as opposed to fine or loss
of rank or privilege) is from 1580s. Related: Corporality.


incorporeal (adj.)

1530s, with -al (1) and Latin incorporeus without body, from in- not (see in- (1)) + corpus
(genitive corporis) body (see corporal).


corporeal (adj.)

early 15c., with adjectival suffix -al (1) + Latin corporeus of the nature of a body, from corpus
body (living or dead), from PIE *kwrpes, from root *kwrep- body, form, appearance, probably from a
verbal root meaning to appear (cognates: Sanskrit krp- form, body, Avestan kerefsh form, body, Old
English hrif belly, Old High German href womb, belly, abdomen).


leprechaun (n.)

c.1600, from Irish lupracan, metathesis from Old Irish luchorpan literally a very small body, from
lu little (from PIE *legwh- having little weight; see light (adj.)) + corpan, diminutive of corp
body, from Latin corpus body (see corporeal). Commonly spelled lubrican in 17c. English. Leithbragan
is Irish folk etymology, from leith half + brog brogue, because the spirit was supposed to be always
employed in making or mending a single shoe.


hocus-pocus

1620s, Hocas Pocas, common name of a magician or juggler, a sham-Latin invocation used in tricks,
probably based on a perversion of the sacramental blessing from the Mass, Hoc est corpus meum This
is my body. The first to make this speculation on its origin apparently was English prelate John
Tillotson (1630-1694).I will speak of one man ... that went about in King James his time ... who
called himself, the Kings Majesties most excellent Hocus Pocus, and so was called, because that at
the playing of every Trick, he used to say, Hocus pocus, tontus tabantus, vade celeriter jubeo, a
dark composure of words, to blinde the eyes of the beholders, to make his Trick pass the more
currantly without discovery. [Thomas Ady, A Candle in the Dark, 1655]


corps (n.)

late 13c., cors body, from Old French cors body, person, corpse, life (9c.), from Latin corpus body
(see corporeal). Sense in English evolved from dead body (13c.) to live body (14c.) to body of
citizens (15c.) to band of knights (mid-15c.). The modern military sense (1704) is from French corps
d'arm&eacute;e (16c.), picked up in English during Marlborough's campaigns.    French restored the
Latin -p- in 14c., and English followed 15c., but the pronunciation remained corse at first and
corse persisted as a parallel formation. After the -p- began to be sounded (16c. in English), corse
became archaic or poetic only.


science (n.)

mid-14c., what is known, knowledge (of something) acquired by study; information; also assurance of
knowledge, certitude, certainty, from Old French science knowledge, learning, application; corpus of
human knowledge (12c.), from Latin scientia knowledge, a knowing; expertness, from sciens (genitive
scientis) intelligent, skilled, present participle of scire to know, probably originally to separate
one thing from another, to distinguish, related to scindere to cut, divide, from PIE root *skei- to
cut, to split (cognates: Greek skhizein to split, rend, cleave, Gothic skaidan, Old English sceadan
to divide, separate; see shed (v.)).    From late 14c. in English as book-learning, also a
particular branch of knowledge or of learning; also skillfulness, cleverness; craftiness. From
c.1400 as experiential knowledge; also a skill, handicraft; a trade. From late 14c. as collective
human knowledge (especially that gained by systematic observation, experiment, and reasoning).
Modern (restricted) sense of body of regular or methodical observations or propositions concerning a
particular subject or speculation is attested from 1725; in 17c.-18c. this concept commonly was
called philosophy. Sense of non-arts studies is attested from 1670s.    Science, since people must
do it, is a socially embedded activity. It progresses by hunch, vision, and intuition. Much of its
change through time does not record a closer approach to absolute truth, but the alteration of
cultural contexts that influence it so strongly. Facts are not pure and unsullied bits of
information; culture also influences what we see and how we see it. Theories, moreover, are not
inexorable inductions from facts. The most creative theories are often imaginative visions imposed
upon facts; the source of imagination is also strongly cultural. [Stephen Jay Gould, introduction to
The Mismeasure of Man, 1981]   <hr />   In science you must not talk before you know. In art you
must not talk before you do. In literature you must not talk before you think. [John Ruskin, The
Eagle's Nest, 1872]    The distinction is commonly understood as between theoretical truth (Greek
episteme) and methods for effecting practical results (tekhne), but science sometimes is used for
practical applications and art for applications of skill. To blind (someone) with science confuse by
the use of big words or complex explanations is attested from 1937, originally noted as a phrase
from Australia and New Zealand.


