corporate (adj.)

early 15c., united in one body, from Latin corporatus, past participle of corporare form into a
body, from corpus (genitive corporis) body (see corporeal).


corporatism (n.)

1890, from corporate + -ism. Used over the years in various senses of corporate, in 1920s-30s often
with reference to fascist collectivism.


swoosh (n.)

1860, sound made by something (originally a fishing rod during a cast) moving rapidly through the
air; imitative. As a verb from 1867. The Nike corporate logo so called from 1989.


corporative (adj.)

1833, from Late Latin corporativus pertaining to the forming of a body, from past participle stem of
corporare (see corporate).


takeover (n.)

1917, an act of taking over, from verbal phrase take over (1884), from take (v.) + over (adv.).
Attested from 1958 in the corporate sense.


spinoff (n.)

also spin-off, 1951 of corporate entities;  by 1967 of television shows, from spin + off. As a
figurative verbal phrase, by 1957. As an adjective, from 1966.


chairman (n.)

1650s, occupier of a chair of authority, from chair (n.) + man (n.). Meaning member of a corporate
body chosen to preside at meetings is from c.1730. Chairwoman in this sense first attested 1752;
chairperson 1971.


director (n.)

late 15c., a guide, from Anglo-French directour, French directeur, agent noun from Latin dirigere
(see direct (v.)). Corporate sense is from 1630s; theatrical sense from 1911.


corporation (n.)

mid-15c., persons united in a body for some purpose, from such use in Anglo-Latin, from Late Latin
corporationem (nominative corporatio), noun of action from past participle stem of Latin corporare
to embody (see corporate). Meaning legally authorized entity (including municipal governments and
modern business companies) is from 1610s.


college (n.)

body of scholars and students within a university, late 14c., from Old French college collegiate
body (14c.), from Latin collegium community, society, guild, literally association of collegae (see
colleague). At first meaning any corporate group, the sense of academic institution attested from
1560s became the principal sense in 19c. via use at Oxford and Cambridge.


rotogravure (n.)

1913, from German Rotogravur (originally, in full, Deutsche Tiefdr&uuml;ck Gesellschaft), said to
blend two corporate names, Rotophot and Deutsche Photogravur A.G. Etymologically, the roots are
Latin rota wheel, roller (see rotary) and French gravure engraving (see gravure). The process was
used for printing photo sections of newspapers and magazines, so that the word came to be used for
these.


educrat (n.)

1968, usually pejorative; first element from education, second from bureaucrat. Said to have been
coined by Claude R. Kirk Jr. (b.1926), governor of Florida.    While political leaders and corporate
CEOs, focusing as usual on the quarterly return, call for workers for the new economy, their
educational reforms are producing just that: students with a grab-bag of minor skills and
competencies and minds that are sadly uneventful, incapable of genuine intellectual achievement and
lacking any sense of continuity with the historical and cultural traditions of our society. Their
world is small, bleak, and limited; their world will become ours. [David Solway, The Turtle
Hypodermic of Sickenpods, Quebec, 2000]


black (n.)

Old English bl&aelig;c the color black, also ink, from noun use of black (adj.). From late 14c. as
dark spot in the pupil of the eye. The meaning black person, African is from 1620s (perhaps late
13c., and blackamoor is from 1540s). To be in the black (1922) is from the accounting practice of
recording credits and balances in black ink.    For years it has been a common practice to use red
ink instead of black in showing a loss or deficit on corporate books, but not until the heavy losses
of 1921 did the contrast in colors come to have a widely understood meaning. [Saturday Evening Post,
July 22, 1922]


incorporation (n.)

late 14c., incorporacioun, act or process of combining of substances; absorption of light or
moisture, from Old French incorporacion or directly from Late Latin incorporationem (nominative
incorporatio), noun of action from past participle stem of incorporare (see incorporate). Meaning
the formation of a corporate body (such as a guild) is from early 15c.   <b>Incorporation</b>, n.
The act of uniting several persons into one fiction called a corporation, in order that they may be
no longer responsible for their actions. A, B and C are a corporation. A robs, B steals and C (it is
necessary that there be one gentleman in the concern) cheats. It is a plundering, thieving,
swindling corporation. But A, B and C, who have jointly determined and severally executed every
crime of the corporation, are blameless. [Ambrose Bierce, 1885]


plunder (v.)

1630s, from German pl&#252;ndern, from Middle High German plunderen to plunder, originally to take
away household furniture, from plunder (n.) household goods, clothes, also lumber, baggage (14c.;
compare Modern German Plunder lumber, trash), which is related to Middle Dutch plunder household
goods; Frisian and Dutch plunje clothes. A word acquired by English via the Thirty Years War and
applied in native use after the outbreak of the English Civil War in 1642. Related: Plundered;
plundering. Plunderbund was a U.S. colloquial word from 1914 referring to a corrupt alliance of
corporate and financial interests, with German Bund alliance, league.


person (n.)

early 13c., from Old French persone human being, anyone, person (12c., Modern French personne) and
directly from Latin persona human being, person, personage; a part in a drama, assumed character,
originally mask, false face, such as those of wood or clay worn by the actors in later Roman
theater. OED offers the general 19c. explanation of persona as related to Latin personare to sound
through (i.e. the mask as something spoken through and perhaps amplifying the voice), but the long o
makes a difficulty .... Klein and Barnhart say it is possibly borrowed from Etruscan phersu mask.
Klein goes on to say this is ultimately of Greek origin and compares Persephone.    Of corporate
entities from mid-15c. The use of -person to replace -man in compounds and avoid alleged sexist
connotations is first recorded 1971 (in chairperson). In person by bodily presence is from 1560s.
Person-to-person first recorded 1919, originally of telephone calls.


