corporeal (adj.)

early 15c., with adjectival suffix -al (1) + Latin corporeus of the nature of a body, from corpus
body (living or dead), from PIE *kwrpes, from root *kwrep- body, form, appearance, probably from a
verbal root meaning to appear (cognates: Sanskrit krp- form, body, Avestan kerefsh form, body, Old
English hrif belly, Old High German href womb, belly, abdomen).


corpuscle (n.)

1650s, any small particle, from Latin corpusculum a puny body; an atom, particle, diminutive of
corpus body (see corporeal). First applied to blood cells 1845. Related: Corpuscular.


corporate (adj.)

early 15c., united in one body, from Latin corporatus, past participle of corporare form into a
body, from corpus (genitive corporis) body (see corporeal).


corpulent (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French corpulent stout, fat, from Latin corpulentus fleshy, fat, from corpus
body (see corporeal) + -ulentus full of. Leigh Hunt was sent to prison for two years for calling the
Prince Regent corpulent in print in 1812.


incorporate (v.)

late 14c., to put (something) into the body or substance of (something else), from Late Latin
incorporatus, past participle of incorporare unite into one body, from Latin in- into, in, on, upon
(see in- (2)) + corpus (genitive corporis) body (see corporeal). Meaning to legally form a body
politic is from 1460s. Related: Incorporated; incorporating.


leprechaun (n.)

c.1600, from Irish lupracan, metathesis from Old Irish luchorpan literally a very small body, from
lu little (from PIE *legwh- having little weight; see light (adj.)) + corpan, diminutive of corp
body, from Latin corpus body (see corporeal). Commonly spelled lubrican in 17c. English. Leithbragan
is Irish folk etymology, from leith half + brog brogue, because the spirit was supposed to be always
employed in making or mending a single shoe.


corpus (n.)

(plural corpora), late 14c., from Latin corpus, literally body (see corporeal). The sense of body of
a person (mid-15c. in English) and collection of facts or things (1727 in English) both were present
in Latin. Corpus Christi (late 14c.), feast of the Blessed Sacrament, is the Thursday after Trinity
Sunday. Also used in various medical phrases, such as corpus callosum (1706, literally tough body),
corpus luteum (1788, literally yellow body).


midriff (n.)

Old English midhrif, from mid mid (see mid) + hrif belly, from Proto-Germanic *hrefiz- (cognates:
Old High German href, Old Frisian hrif belly), from PIE *kwrep- body, form, appearance (see
corporeal). More or less obsolete after 18c. except in phrase to tickle (one's) midriff to cause
laughter, the word revived 1941 in fashion usage for portion of a woman's garment that covers the
belly, as a euphemistic avoidance of belly; sense inverted and extended 1970 to a belly-baring style
of women's top.


physical (adj.)

early 15c., of or pertaining to material nature (in medicine, opposed to surgical), from Medieval
Latin physicalis of nature, natural, from Latin physica study of nature (see physic). Meaning
pertaining to matter is from 1590s; meaning having to do with the body, corporeal is attested from
1780. Meaning characterized by bodily attributes or activities is attested from 1970. Physical
education first recorded 1838; abbreviated form phys ed is from 1955. Physical therapy is from 1922.
Related: Physically.


habeas corpus (n.)

writ requiring a person to be brought before a court, mid-15c., Latin, literally (you should) have
the person, in phrase habeas corpus ad subjiciendum produce or have the person to be subjected to
(examination), opening words of writs in 14c. Anglo-French documents to require a person to be
brought before a court or judge, especially to determine if that person is being legally detained.
From habeas, second person singular present subjunctive of habere to have, to hold (see habit (n.))
+ corpus person, literally body (see corporeal). In reference to more than one person, habeas
corpora.


corps (n.)

late 13c., cors body, from Old French cors body, person, corpse, life (9c.), from Latin corpus body
(see corporeal). Sense in English evolved from dead body (13c.) to live body (14c.) to body of
citizens (15c.) to band of knights (mid-15c.). The modern military sense (1704) is from French corps
d'arm&eacute;e (16c.), picked up in English during Marlborough's campaigns.    French restored the
Latin -p- in 14c., and English followed 15c., but the pronunciation remained corse at first and
corse persisted as a parallel formation. After the -p- began to be sounded (16c. in English), corse
became archaic or poetic only.


substance (n.)

c.1300, essential nature, real or essential part, from Old French sustance, substance goods,
possessions; nature, composition (12c.), from Latin substantia being, essence, material, from
substans, present participle of substare stand firm, stand or be under, be present, from sub up to,
under (see sub-) + stare to stand, from PIE root *sta- to stand (see stet). Latin substantia
translates Greek ousia that which is one's own, one's substance or property; the being, essence, or
nature of anything. Meaning any kind of corporeal matter is first attested mid-14c. Sense of the
matter of a study, discourse, etc. first recorded late 14c.


abstract (adj.)

late 14c., originally in grammar (of nouns), from Latin abstractus drawn away, past participle of
abstrahere to drag away, detach, pull away, divert; also figuratively, from ab(s)- away (see ab-) +
trahere draw (see tract (n.1)).    Meaning withdrawn or separated from material objects or practical
matters is from mid-15c. That of difficult to understand, abstruse is from c.1400. Specifically in
reference to modern art, it dates from 1914; abstract expressionism as an American-based uninhibited
approach to art exemplified by Jackson Pollock is from 1952, but the term itself had been used in
the 1920s of Kandinsky and others.    Oswald Herzog, in an article on Der Abstrakte Expressionismus
(Sturm, heft 50, 1919) gives us a statement which with equal felicity may be applied to the artistic
attitude of the Dadaists. Abstract Expressionism is perfect Expressionism, he writes. It is pure
creation. It casts spiritual processes into a corporeal mould. It does not borrow objects from the
real world; it creates its own objects .... The abstract reveals the will of the artist; it becomes
expression. ... [William A. Drake, The Life and Deeds of Dada, 1922]   <hr />   Then, that art we
have called abstract for want of any possible descriptive term, with which we have been patient,
and, even, appreciative, getting high stimulation by the new Guggenheim non-objective Art Museum, is
reflected in our examples of surrealism, dadaism, and what-not, to assert our acquaintance in every
art, fine or other. [Report of the Art Reference Department of Pratt Institute Free Library for year
ending June 30, 1937]


spirit (n.)

mid-13c., animating or vital principle in man and animals, from Anglo-French spirit, Old French
espirit spirit, soul (12c., Modern French esprit) and directly from Latin spiritus a breathing
(respiration, and of the wind), breath; breath of a god, hence inspiration; breath of life, hence
life; also disposition, character; high spirit, vigor, courage; pride, arrogance, related to spirare
to breathe, from PIE *(s)peis- to blow (cognates: Old Church Slavonic pisto to play on the flute).
Meaning supernatural immaterial creature; angel, demon; an apparition, invisible corporeal being of
an airy nature is attested from mid-14c.; from late 14c. as a ghost (see ghost (n.)). From c.1500 as
a nature, character; sense of essential principle of something (in a non-theological context, as in
Spirit of St. Louis) is attested from 1680s, common after 1800; Spirit of '76 in reference to the
qualities that sparked and sustained the American Revolution is attested by 1797 in William
Cobbett's Porcupine's Gazette and Daily Advertiser.    From late 14c. in alchemy as volatile
substance; distillate; from c.1500 as substance capable of uniting the fixed and the volatile
elements of the philosopher's stone. Hence spirits volatile substance; sense narrowed to strong
alcoholic liquor by 1670s. This also is the sense in spirit level (1768). Also from mid-14c. as
character, disposition; way of thinking and feeling, state of mind; source of a human desire; in
Middle English freedom of spirit meant freedom of choice. From late 14c. as divine substance, divine
mind, God; also Christ or His divine nature; the Holy Ghost; divine power; also, extension of divine
power to man; inspiration, a charismatic state; charismatic power, especially of prophecy. Also
essential nature, essential quality. From 1580s in metaphoric sense animation, vitality.
According to Barnhart and OED, originally in English mainly from passages in Vulgate, where the
Latin word translates Greek pneuma and Hebrew ruah. Distinction between soul and spirit (as seat of
emotions) became current in Christian terminology (such as Greek psykhe vs. pneuma, Latin anima vs.
spiritus) but is without significance for earlier periods [Buck]. Latin spiritus, usually in
classical Latin breath, replaces animus in the sense spirit in the imperial period and appears in
Christian writings as the usual equivalent of Greek pneuma. Spirit-rapping is from 1852.


