cosmology (n.)

1650s, from Modern Latin cosmologia, from Greek kosmos (see cosmos) + -logia discourse (see -logy).
Related: Cosmological; cosmologist.    They cannot scare me with their empty spaces  Between stars--
on stars where no human race is.  I have it in me so much nearer home  To scare myself with my own
desert places.    [Robert Frost, from Desert Places, 1936]


cosmological (adj.)

1825, from cosmology + -ical.


sublunary (adj.)

1590s, situated under the moon, hence earthly, mundane (old cosmology), from Modern Latin
sublunaris, from sub- (see sub-) + lunaris (see lunar).


Atlas

1580s, Titan, son of Iapetus and Clymene, supposed to uphold the pillars of heaven, which was his
punishment for being the war leader of the Titans in the struggle with the Olympian gods. The name
in Greek perhaps means The Bearer (of the Heavens), from a-, copulative prefix, + stem of tlenai to
bear, from PIE root *tele- to lift, support, weigh. Mount Atlas, in Mauritania, was important in
Greek cosmology as a support of the heavens.


intelligent (adj.)

c.1500, a back-formation from intelligence or else from Latin intelligentem (nominative
intelligens), present participle of intelligere, earlier intellegere (see intelligence). Intelligent
design, as a name for an alternative to atheistic cosmology and the theory of evolution, is from
1999. Related: Intelligently.


Midgard

in Germanic cosmology, world inhabited by men (opposed to Asgard, the abode of the gods), 1882, from
Old Norse mi&eth;gar&eth;r, from mi&eth; mid (see mid) + Proto-Germanic *gardoz enclosure, tract
(see yard (n.1)). The Old English cognate was middangeard, which later was folk-etymologized as
middle earth (late 13c.).


empyrean (n.)

mid-14c. (as empyre), from Greek empyros fiery, from en (see en- (2)) + pyr fire (see fire (n.));
confused by early writers with imperial. In Greek cosmology, the highest heaven, the sphere of pure
fire; later baptized with a Christian gloss as the abode of God and the angels.


ether (n.)

late 14c., upper regions of space, from Old French ether and directly from Latin aether the upper
pure, bright air, from Greek aither upper air; bright, purer air; the sky, from aithein to burn,
shine, from PIE root *aidh- to burn (see edifice).    In ancient cosmology, the element that filled
all space beyond the sphere of the moon, constituting the substance of the stars and planets.
Conceived of as a purer form of fire or air, or as a fifth element. From 17c.-19c., it was the
scientific word for an assumed frame of reference for forces in the universe, perhaps without
material properties. The concept was shaken by the Michelson-Morley experiment (1887) and discarded
after the Theory of Relativity won acceptance, but before it went it gave rise to the colloquial use
of ether for the radio (1899).    The name also was bestowed c.1730 (Frobenius; in English by 1757)
on a volatile chemical compound known since 14c. for its lightness and lack of color (its anesthetic
properties weren't fully established until 1842).


Uranus

first planet discovered that was not known in ancient times, named for the god of Heaven, husband of
Gaia, the Earth, from Latin Uranus, from Greek Ouranos literally heaven, the sky; in Greek
cosmology, the god who personifies the heavens, father of the titans.    The planet was discovered
and identified as such in 1781 by Sir William Herschel (it had been observed before, but mistaken
for a star; in 1690 John Flamsteed cataloged it as 34 Tauri); Herschel proposed calling it Georgium
Sidus, literally George's Star, in honour of his patron, King George III of England.  I cannot but
wish to take this opportunity of expressing my sense of gratitude, by giving the name of Georgium
Sidus ... to a star which (with respect to us) first began to shine under His auspicious reign. [Sir
William Herschel, 1783]  The planet was known in English in 1780s as the Georgian Planet; French
astronomers began calling Herschel, and ultimately German astronomer Johann Bode proposed Uranus as
in conformity with other planet names. However, the name didn't come into common usage until c.1850.


world (n.)

Old English woruld, worold human existence, the affairs of life, also a long period of time, also
the human race, mankind, humanity, a word peculiar to Germanic languages (cognates: Old Saxon
werold, Old Frisian warld, Dutch wereld, Old Norse verold, Old High German weralt, German Welt),
with a literal sense of age of man, from Proto-Germanic *wer man (Old English wer, still in
werewolf; see virile) + *ald age (see old).    Originally life on earth, this world (as opposed to
the afterlife), sense extended to the known world, then to the physical world in the broadest sense,
the universe (c.1200). In Old English gospels, the commonest word for the physical world, was
Middangeard (Old Norse Midgard), literally the middle enclosure (see yard (n.1)), which is rooted in
Germanic cosmology. Greek kosmos in its ecclesiastical sense of world of people sometimes was
rendered in Gothic as manase&thorn;s, literally seed of man. The usual Old Norse word was heimr,
literally abode (see home). Words for world in some other Indo-European languages derive from the
root for bottom, foundation (such as Irish domun, Old Church Slavonic duno, related to English
deep); the Lithuanian word is pasaulis, from pa- under + saule sun.    Original sense in world
without end, translating Latin saecula saeculorum, and in worldly. Latin saeculum can mean both age
and world, as can Greek aion. Meaning a great quantity or number is from 1580s. Out of this world
surpassing, marvelous is from 1928; earlier it meant dead. World Cup is by 1951; U.S. baseball World
Series is by 1893 (originally often World's Series). World power in the geopolitical sense first
recorded 1900. World-class is attested from 1950, originally of Olympic athletes.


