countenance (v.)

late 15c., to behave or act, from countenance (n.). Sense of to favor, patronize is from 1560s, from
notion of to look upon with sanction or smiles. Related: Countenanced; countenancing.


countenance (n.)

mid-13c., from Old French contenance demeanor, bearing, conduct, from Latin continentia restraint,
abstemiousness, moderation, literally way one contains oneself, from continentem, present participle
of continere (see contain). Meaning evolving Middle English from appearance to facial expression
betraying a state of mind, to face itself (late 14c.).


phiz (n.)

1680s, jocular abbreviation of physiognomy; hence face, countenance, facial expression.


face (n.)

late 13c., front of the head, from Old French face (12c.) face, countenance, look, appearance, from
Vulgar Latin *facia (source also of Italian faccia), from Latin facies appearance, form, figure, and
secondarily visage, countenance; probably related to facere to make (see factitious).    Replaced
Old English andwlita (from root of wlitan to see, look) and ansyn, the usual word (from the root of
seon see). In French, the use of face for front of the head was given up 17c. and replaced by visage
(older vis), from Latin visus sight. To lose face (or save face), 1876, is said to be from Chinese
tu lien. Face value was originally (1878) of bank notes, postage stamps, etc.


discountenance (v.)

put to shame, 1570s, from Middle French descontenancer (16c.) to abash, from des- (see dis-) +
contenancer (see countenance).


aspect (n.)

late 14c., an astrological term, relative position of the planets as they appear from earth (i.e.,
how they look at one another); later also way of viewing things, from Latin aspectus a seeing,
looking at, sight, view, countenance, appearance, from past participle of aspicere to look at, from
ad- to (see ad-) + specere to look (see scope (n.1)). Meaning the look one wears, the appearance of
things attested by early 15c.


neb (n.)

beak or bill of a bird, Old English nebb beak, nose; face, countenance; beak-shaped thing, common
Germanic (cognates: Old Norse nef beak, nose, Middle Dutch nebbe beak, Old High German snabul,
German Schnabel beak, Old Frisian snavel mouth), of uncertain origin.


feature (n.)

early 14c., make, form, fashion, from Anglo-French feture, from Old French faiture deed, action;
fashion, shape, form; countenance, from Latin factura a formation, a working, from past participle
stem of facere make, do, perform (see factitious). Sense of facial characteristic is mid-14c.; that
of any distinctive part first recorded 1690s. Entertainment sense is from 1801; in journalism by
1855. Meaning a feature film is from 1913.


physiognomy (n.)

late 14c., art of judging characters from facial features, from Old French phizonomie and directly
from Late Latin physiognomia, from Greek physiognomia the judging of a person's nature by his
features, from physio- (see physio-) + gnomon (genitive gnomonos) judge, indicator (see gnomon).
Meaning face, countenance, features is from c.1400. Related: Physiognomical.


surfing (n.)

1955, verbal noun from surf (v.). The surfing craze went nationwide in U.S. from California in 1963.
Surf-board is from 1826, originally in a Hawaiian and Polynesian context. Surf music attested from
1963.    It is highly amusing to a stranger to go out into the south part of this town, some day
when the sea is rolling in heavily over the reef, and to observe there the evolutions and rapid
career of a company of surf-players. The sport is so attractive and full of wild excitement to
Hawaiians, and withal so healthful, that I cannot but hope it will be many years before civilization
shall look it out of countenance, or make it disreputable to indulge in this manly, though it be
dangerous, exercise. [the Rev. Henry T. Cheever, Life in the Sandwich Islands, New York, 1851]   <hr
/>   The basis of surfing music is a rock and roll bass beat figuration, coupled with a raunch-type
weird-sounding lead guitar plus wailing saxes. Surfing music has to sound untrained with a certain
rough flavor to appeal to the teenagers. [music publisher Murray Wilson, quoted in Billboard, June
29, 1963]


cheer (n.)

c.1200, the face, especially as expressing emotion, from Anglo-French chere the face, Old French
chiere face, countenance, look, expression, from Late Latin cara face (source of Spanish cara),
possibly from Greek kara head, from PIE root *ker- (1) head (see horn (n.)). From mid-13c. as frame
of mind, state of feeling, spirit; mood, humor.    By late 14c. the meaning had extended
metaphorically to mood, mental condition, as reflected in the face. This could be in a good or bad
sense (The feend ... beguiled her with treacherye, and brought her into a dreerye cheere, Merline,
c.1500), but a positive sense (probably short for good cheer) has predominated since c.1400. Meaning
shout of encouragement first recorded 1720, perhaps nautical slang (compare earlier verbal sense, to
encourage by words or deeds, early 15c.). The antique English greeting what cheer (mid-15c.) was
picked up by Algonquian Indians of southern New England from the Puritans and spread in Indian
languages as far as Canada.


poker (n.2)

card game, 1834, American English, of unknown origin, perhaps from the first element of German
Pochspiel, name of a card game similar to poker, from pochen to brag as a bluff, literally to knock,
rap (see poke (v.)). A popular alternative theory traces the word to French poque, also said to have
been a card game resembling poker. [B]ut without documentation these explanations are mere
speculation [Barnhart]. The earlier version of the game in English was called brag. Slang poker face
(n.) deadpan is from 1874.    A good player is cautious or bold by turns, according to his estimate
of the capacities of his adversaries, and to the impression he wants to make on them. 7. It follows
that the possession of a good poker face is an advantage. No one who has any pretensions to good
play will betray the value of his hand by gesture, change of countenance, or any other symptom.
[Cavendish, Round Games at Cards, dated 1875]   <hr />   To any one not very well up in these games,
some parts of the book are at first sight rather puzzling. It follows, we read in one passage, that
the possession of a good poker face (the italics are the author's) is an advantage. If this had been
said by a Liverpool rough of his wife, the meaning would have been clear to every one. Cavendish,
however, does not seem to be writing especially for Lancashire. [review of above, Saturday Review,
Dec. 26, 1874]


