counterpart (n.)

mid-15c., originally countre part duplicate of a legal document, from Middle French contrepartie,
from contre facing, opposite (see contra-) + partie copy of a person or thing, originally fem. past
participle of partir to divide (see party (n.)).


Rube Goldberg (adj.)

1940, from the U.S. cartoonist Reuben Lucius Goldberg (1883-1970) who devised fantastically complex
gadgetry to accomplish simple tasks. His British counterpart was Heath Robinson (1872-1944).


Ishtar

ancient Sumero-Babylonian goddess of love and fertility, counterpart of Phoenician Astarte (q.v.),
from Akkad. Ishtar.


hymie (n.)

Jewish male (derogatory), by early 1980s, apparently originally among black Americans, from common
Jewish masc. proper name Hymie, a pet form of Hyman, from Hebrew, literally life (the masc.
counterpart of Eve).


indenture (n.)

contract for services, late 14c., from Anglo-French endenture, Old French endenteure indentation,
from endenter (see indent). Such contracts (especially between master craftsmen and apprentices)
were written in full identical versions on a sheet of parchment, which was then cut apart in a
zigzag, or notched line. Each party took one, and the genuineness of a document of indenture could
be proved by juxtaposition with its counterpart. As a verb, 1650s, from the noun.


Abigail

fem. proper name, in Old Testament, Abigail the Carmelitess, a wife of David, from Hebrew Abhigayil,
literally my father is rejoicing, from abh father + gil to rejoice. Used in general sense of lady's
maid (1660s) from character of that name in Beaumont &amp; Fletcher's The Scornful Lady. The waiting
maid association perhaps begins with I Sam. xxv, where David's wife often calls herself a handmaid.
Her male counterpart was Andrew.


dandy (n.)

c.1780, of uncertain origin; it first appeared in a Scottish border ballad:I've heard my granny
crackO' sixty twa years backWhen there were sic a stock of Dandies Oetc. In that region, Dandy is
diminutive of Andrew (as it was in Middle English generally). The word was in vogue in London
c.1813-1819. His female counterpart was a dandizette (1821) with French-type ending. The adjective
dandy first recorded 1792; very popular c.1880-1900. Related: Dandified; dandify.


pair (n.)

mid-13c., two of a kind coupled in use, from Old French paire pair, couple, and directly from
Medieval Latin paria equals, neuter plural of Latin par (genitive paris) a pair, counterpart, equal,
noun use of par (adj.) equal, equal-sized, well-matched (see par (n.)). Originally of things. Of
persons from late 14c. Meaning a woman's breasts is attested from 1922. Pair bond (v.) is first
attested 1940, in reference to birds mating.


