coup d&#039;etat (n.)

1640s, from French coup d'&eacute;tate, literally stroke of the state (see coup). Technically any
sudden, decisive political act but popularly restricted to the overthrow of a government.


coup de grace (n.)

1690s, from French coup de gr&acirc;ce, literally stroke of grace; the merciful death-blow that ends
another's suffering (see coup).


coup de foudre (n.)

1779, from French coup de foudre, literally stroke of lightning, also love at first sight (see
coup).


coup (n.)

c.1400, from Old French coup, colp a blow, strike (12c.), from Medieval Latin colpus, from Vulgar
Latin colapus, from Latin colaphus a cuff, box on the ear, from Greek kolaphos a blow, slap. Meaning
a sudden decisive act is 1852, short for coup d'etat. In Modern French the word is a workhorse,
describing everything from a pat on the back to a whipping, and is used as well of thunder, gusts of
wind, gunshots, and chess moves.


coupon (n.)

1822, certificate of interest due on a bond (which could be cut from the bond and presented for
payment), from French coupon, literally piece cut off, from couper to cut, from coup a blow (see
coup). Meaning widened to discount ticket 1860s by British travel agent Thomas Cook. The specific
advertising sense is from 1906.    COUPON. A financial term, which, together with the practice, is
borrowed from France. In the United States, the certificates of State stocks drawing interest are
accompanied by coupons, which are small tickets attached to the certificates. At each term when the
interest falls due, one of these coupons is cut off (whence the name); and this being presented to
the State treasurer or to a bank designated by him, entitles the holder to receive the interest.
[Bartlett]


coupe (n.)

1834, from French coupe (18c.), noun use of past participle of couper to cut (in half); see coup.
Modern use is from early 19c. carrosse coupe cut-off carriage, a shorter version of the berlin,
minus the back seat. First applied to closed two-door automobiles 1908.


recoup (v.)

1620s, from French recouper to cut back (12c.), from Old French re- back (see re-) + couper to cut,
from coup a blow (see coup). Originally a legal term meaning to deduct; sense of to recompense for
loss or expense first recorded 1660s. Related: Recouped; recouping.


beaucoup

French, literally a great heap, from beau fine, great (see beau (n.)) + coup a stroke, also a throw,
hence, a heap (see coup (n.)). Compare Spanish golpe multitude.


sunstroke (n.)

1807, from sun (n.) + stroke (n.); translating French coup de soleil. Related: Sun-stricken;
sunstruck.


coppice (n.)

late 14c., small thicket of trees grown for cutting, from Old French copeiz, coupeiz a cut-over
forest, from Vulgar Latin *colpaticium having been cut, ultimately from Latin colaphus a blow with
the fist, from Greek kolaphos blow, cuff (see coup).


cope (v.)

late 14c., come to blows with, from Old French couper, earlier colper hit, punch, from colp a blow
(see coup). Meaning evolved 17c. into handle successfully, perhaps influenced by obsolete cope to
traffic (15c.-17c.), a word in North Sea trade, from the Flemish version of the Germanic source of
English cheap. Related: Coped; coping.


