couple (n.)

late 13c., from Old French cople married couple, lovers (12c., Modern French couple), from Latin
copula tie, connection, from PIE *ko-ap-, from *ko(m)- together + *ap- to take, reach. Meaning
broadened mid-14c. to any two things.


couplet (n.)

1570s, in poetry, from French couplet (mid-14c.), a diminutive of couple (see couple (n.)). In
music, from 1876.


couple (v.)

c.1200, from Old French copler, from cople (see couple (n.)). Related: Coupled; coupling.


bracket (v.)

1797, of printed matter, to enclose in brackets, from bracket (n.). Also, to couple or connect with
a brace (1827), also figurative, to couple one thing with another in writing (1807). Artillery
rangefinding sense is from 1903, from the noun (1891) in the specialized sense distance between the
ranges of two shells, one under and one over the object. Related: Bracketed; bracketing. In home-
building and joinery, bracketed is attested by 1801.


thermocouple (n.)

also thermo-couple, 1862, from thermo-electric + couple (n.).


Darby and Joan

1735, characteristic name of an old, happily married couple.


shmoo (n.)

(plural shmoon), comic strip creature, 1948; see schmuck. It was a U.S. fad for a couple of years
after its debut.


cohabit (v.)

euphemism since 1530s to describe a couple living together without benefit of marriage; back-
formation from cohabitation. Related: Cohabited; cohabiting.


mate (v.1)

c.1500, to equal, rival, 1590s as to match, couple, marry, join in marriage, from mate (n.1). Also,
of animals, to pair for the purpose of breeding. Related: Mated; mating.


link (v.)

bind, fasten, to couple, late 14c., believed to be from link (n.), though it is attested earlier.
Related: Linked; linking.


callithumpian (adj.)

1836, U.S. colloquial, probably a fanciful construction. The English Dialect Dictionary reports
Gallithumpians as a Dorset and Devon word from 1790s for a society of radical social reformers, and
also in reference to noisy disturbers of elections and meetings (1770s). The U.S. reference is most
commonly a band of discordant instruments or bangers on pots and pans, especially to serenade a
newlywed couple to show disapproval of one or the other or the match.


femme (n.)

French, literally woman, from Old French feme, from Latin femina (see feminine). Slang meaning
passive and more feminine partner in a lesbian couple attested by 1961.


twin (v.)

to combine two things closely, join, couple, late 14c., from twin (adj.). Related: Twinned;
twinning. In Middle English, the verb earlier and typically meant to part, part with, separate from,
estrange, etc. (c.1200), on the notion of making two what was one.


tweedledum (n.)

paired with tweedledee to signify two things or persons nearly alike, differing in name, 1725,
coined by English poet John Byrom (1692-1767) in his satire On the Feud Between Handel and
Bononcini, a couple of competing musicians, from tweedle to sing, to whistle (1680s), of imitative
origin. The -dum and -dee perhaps suggest low and high sounds respectively.


uncouple (v.)

c.1300, from un- (2) opposite of + couple (v.). Similar formation in Middle Dutch ontcoppelen.
Related: Uncoupled; uncoupling.


cakewalk (n.)

1863, American English, from cake (n.) + walk (n.), probably in reference to the cake given as a
prize for the fanciest steps in a procession in a Southern black custom (explained by Thornton,
1912, as, A walking competition among negroes, in which the prize cake goes to the couple who put on
most style). Its figurative meaning of something easy (1863) is recorded before the literal one
(1879). As a verb, from 1909. This may also be the source of the phrase to take the cake (1847).


comparison (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French comparaison (12c.), from Latin comparationem (nominative comparatio), noun
of action from past participle stem of comparare make equal with, liken, bring together for a
contest, literally to couple together, to form in pairs, from com- with (see com-) + parare prepare
(see pare).


copulate (v.)

early 15c., to join, from Latin copulatus, past participle of copulare join together, couple, bind,
link, unite, from copula band, tie, link, from PIE *ko-ap-, from *ko(m)- together + *ap- (1) to
take, reach (see apt). Sexual sense attested from 1630s. Related: Copulated; copulating.


flitch (n.)

side of bacon, Middle English flicche (early 13c.), from Old English flicce, related to Old Norse
flikki, Middle Low German vlicke piece of flesh. Not immediately connected to flesh (n.), but
perhaps from the same PIE root. A flitch was presented every year at Dunmow, in Essex, to any
married couple who could prove they had lived together without quarreling for a year and a day, a
custom mentioned as far back as mid-14c.


Rebecca

fem. proper name, biblical wife of Isaac, mother of Jacob and Esau, from Late Latin Rebecca, from
Greek Rhebekka, from Hebrew Ribhqeh, literally connection (compare ribhqah team), from Semitic base
r-b-q to tie, couple, join (compare Arabic rabaqa he tied fast). Rebekah, the form of the name in
Authorized Version, was taken as the name of a society of women (founded 1851 in Indiana, U.S.) as a
complement to the Odd Fellows.


pair (n.)

mid-13c., two of a kind coupled in use, from Old French paire pair, couple, and directly from
Medieval Latin paria equals, neuter plural of Latin par (genitive paris) a pair, counterpart, equal,
noun use of par (adj.) equal, equal-sized, well-matched (see par (n.)). Originally of things. Of
persons from late 14c. Meaning a woman's breasts is attested from 1922. Pair bond (v.) is first
attested 1940, in reference to birds mating.


assemble (v.)

earlly 14c., transitive and intransitive, from Old French assembler come together, join, unite;
gather (11c.), from Latin assimulare to make like, liken, compare; copy, imitate; feign, pretend,
later to gather together, from ad- to (see ad-) + simulare to make like (see simulation). In Middle
English and in Old French it also was a euphemism for to couple sexually. Meaning to put parts
together in manufacturing is from 1852. Related: Assembled; assembling. Assemble together is
redundant.


brace (n.)

early 14c., piece of armor for the arms, also thong, strap for fastening, from Old French brace,
braz arms, also length measured by two arms (12c., Modern French bras arm, power; brasse fathom,
armful, breaststroke), from Latin bracchia, plural of bracchium an arm, a forearm, from Greek
brakhion an arm (see brachio-). Applied to various devices for fastening and tightening on notion of
clasping arms. Of dogs, a couple, a pair from c.1400.


decouple (v.)

c.1600, from French d&eacute;coupler to uncouple, from de- (see de-) + coupler (Old French copler;
see couple (v.)). Related: Decoupled; decoupling.


separation (n.)

c.1400, from Old French separacion (Modern French s&#233;paration), from Latin separationem
(nominative separatio) noun of action from past participle stem of separare (see separate (v.)).
Specific sense of sundering of a married couple is attested from c.1600. Sense in photography is
from 1922. Separation of powers first recorded 1788, in Federalist (Hamilton), from French
s&eacute;par&eacute;e de la puissance (Montesquieu, 1748). Separation anxiety first attested 1943.


honeymoon (n.)

1540s, hony moone, but probably much older, indefinite period of tenderness and pleasure experienced
by a newly wed couple, from honey (n.) in reference to the new marriage's sweetness, and moon (n.)
in reference to how long it would probably last, or from the changing aspect of the moon: no sooner
full than it begins to wane. French has cognate lune de miel, but German version is flitterwochen
(plural), from flitter tinsel + wochen week. In figurative use from 1570s. Specific sense of post-
wedding holiday attested from c.1800; as a verb in this sense from 1821. Related: Honeymooned;
honeymooning.


item

late 14c. (adv.) moreover, in addition, from Latin item (adv.) likewise, just so, moreover, used to
introduce a new fact or statement, probably from ita thus, id it (see id) + adverbial ending -tem
(compare idem the same). Thus a statement or maxim (of the kind formerly introduced by the word
item), first recorded 1560s. Meaning detail of information (especially in a newspaper) is from 1819;
item sexually linked unmarried couple is 1970, probably from notion of being an item in the gossip
columns. Noun sense of an article of any kind (1570s) developed from adverbial sense of moreover, in
addition, which was used before every article in a list (such as an inventory or bill).


meiosis (n.)

division of a cell nucleus, 1905, from Greek meiosis a lessening, from meioun to lessen, from meion
less, from PIE root *mei- (2) small (see minus).    Earlier (1580s) it was a rhetorical term, a
figure of speech weak or negative expression used for a positive and forcible one, so that it may be
made all the more emphatic, as when one says not bad meaning very good or don't mind if I do meaning
I really would like to, or this example from Mark Twain:    YOUNG AUTHOR. -- Yes Agassiz does
recommend authors to eat fish, because the phosphorus in it makes brains. So far you are correct.
But I cannot help you to a decision about the amount you need to eat,--at least, not with certainty.
If the specimen composition you send is about your fair usual average, I should judge that perhaps a
couple of whales would be all you would want for the present. Not the largest kind, but simply good,
middling-sized whales.    Related: meiotic; meiotically.


sunny (adj.)

full of sun, early 14c., from sun (n.) + -y (2). Compare Dutch zonnig, German sonnig. Figurative
sense of cheerful is attested from 1540s. Sunny side in reference to optimistic outlook is from
1831. Eggs served sunny side up first attested 1887, in lunch counter slang, in reference to
appearance when served.    Young Man (in Park Row coffee-and-cake saloon)--Waiter, I want a
beefsteak, unpeeled potatoes, and a couple of eggs fried on one side only!    Waiter
(vociferously)--Slaughter in the pan, a Murphy with his coat on, an' two white wings with the sunny
side up! [Puck, April 27, 1887]     Related: Sunnily; sunniness. As a noun meaning sunfish from
1835.


shoe (n.)

Old English scoh shoe, from Proto-Germanic *skokhaz (cognates: Old Norse skor, Danish and Swedish
sko, Old Frisian skoch, Old Saxon skoh, Middle Dutch scoe, Dutch schoen, Old High German scuoh,
German Schuh, Gothic skoh). No known cognates outside Germanic, unless it somehow is connected with
PIE root *skeu- cover (cognates: second element in Latin ob-scurus).    Old plural form shoon lasted
until 16c. Meaning metal plate to protect a horse's hoof is attested from late 14c. Distinction
between shoe and boot (n.) is attested from c.1400. To stand in someone's shoes see things from his
or her point of view is attested from 1767. Old shoe as a type of something worthless is attested
from late 14c.    Shoes tied to the fender of a newlywed couple's car preserves the old custom
(mentioned from 1540s) of throwing an old shoe at or after someone to wish them luck. Perhaps the
association is with dirtiness, on the muck is luck theory.


Valentine (n.)

mid-15c., sweetheart chosen on St. Valentine's Day, from Late Latin Valentinus, the name of two
early Italian saints (from Latin valentia strength, capacity; see valence). Choosing a sweetheart on
this day originated 14c. as a custom in English and French court circles. Meaning letter or card
sent to a sweetheart first recorded 1824. The romantic association of the day is said to be from it
being around the time when birds choose their mates.    For this was on seynt Volantynys day  Whan
euery bryd cometh there to chese his make.  [Chaucer, Parlement of Foules, c.1381]    Probably the
date was the informal first day of spring in whatever French region invented the custom (many
surviving medieval calendars reckon the start of spring on the 7th or 22nd of February). No evidence
connects it with the Roman Lupercalia (an 18c. theory) or to any romantic or avian quality in either
of the saints. The custom of sending special cards or letters on this date flourished in England
c.1840-1870, declined around the turn of the 20th century, and revived 1920s.    To speak of the
particular Customs of the English Britons, I shall begin with Valentine's Day, Feb. 14. when young
Men and Maidens get their several Names writ down upon Scrolls of Paper rolled up, and lay 'em
asunder, the Men drawing the Maidens Names, and these the Mens; upon which, the Men salute their
chosen Valentines and present them with Gloves, &amp;c.; This Custom (which sometimes introduces a
Match) is grounded upon the Instinct of Animals, which about this Time of the Year, feeling a new
Heat by the approach of the Sun, begin to couple. [The Present State of Great Britain and Ireland
London, 1723]


wife (n.)

Old English wif (neuter) woman, female, lady, also, but not especially, wife, from Proto-Germanic
*wiban (cognates: Old Saxon, Old Frisian wif, Old Norse vif, Danish and Swedish viv, Middle Dutch,
Dutch wijf, Old High German wib, German Weib), of uncertain origin, not found in Gothic.
Apparently felt as inadequate in its basic sense, leading to the more distinctive formation wifman
(source of woman). Dutch wijf now means, in slang, girl, babe, having softened somewhat from earlier
sense of bitch. German cognate Weib also tends to be slighting or derogatory and has been displaced
by Frau.    The more usual Indo-European word is represented in English by queen/quean. Words for
woman also double for wife in some languages. Some proposed PIE roots for wife include *weip- to
twist, turn, wrap, perhaps with sense of veiled person (see vibrate); and more recently  *ghwibh-, a
proposed root meaning shame, also pudenda, but the only examples of it would be the Germanic words
and Tocharian (a lost IE language of central Asia) kwipe, kip female pudenda.    The modern sense of
female spouse began as a specialized sense in Old English; the general sense of woman is preserved
in midwife, old wives' tale, etc. Middle English sense of mistress of a household survives in
housewife; and the later restricted sense of tradeswoman of humble rank in fishwife. By 1883 as
passive partner in a homosexual couple. Wife-swapping is attested from 1954.


