courtesan (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French courtisane, from Italian cortigiana prostitute, literally woman of
the court, fem. of cortigiano one attached to a court, from corte court, from Latin cortem (see
court (n.)).


court (v.)

woo, offer homage, as one does at court, 1570s; see court (n.). Related: Courted; courting.


courtier (n.)

early 13c., from Anglo-French *corteour, from Old French cortoiier to be at court, live at court
(see court (n.)).


courtly (adj.)

mid-15c., having manners befitting a court, from court (n.) + -ly (1). Meaning pertaining to the
court is from late 15c. Courtly love highly conventionalized medieval chivalric love (amour
courtois) is attested from 1896.


court martial (n.)

also court-martial, 1650s (plural courts martial), originally martial court (1570s), from court +
martial. As a verb, from 1859.


courtship (n.)

1570s, behavior of a courtier, from court (n.) + -ship. Meaning  paying court to a woman with
intention of marriage is from 1590s.


courteous (adj.)

mid-14c., earlier curteis (c.1300), from Old French curteis (Modern French courtois) having courtly
bearing or manners, from curt court (see court (n.)) + -eis, from Latin -ensis.    Rare before
c.1500. In feudal society, also denoting a man of good education (hence the name Curtis). Medieval
courts were associated with good behavior and also beauty; compare German h&uuml;bsch beautiful,
from Middle High German h&uuml;besch beautiful, originally courteous, well-bred, from Old Franconian
hofesch, from hof court. Related: Courteously (mid-14c., kurteis-liche).


court (n.)

late 12c., from Old French cort (11c., Modern French cour) king's court, princely residence, from
Latin cortem, accusative of cors (earlier cohors) enclosed yard, and by extension (and perhaps by
association with curia sovereign's assembly), those assembled in the yard; company, cohort, from
com- together (see com-) + stem hort- related to hortus garden, plot of ground (see yard (n.1)).
Sporting sense is from 1510s, originally of tennis. Legal meaning is from late 13c. (early
assemblies for justice were overseen by the sovereign personally).


courthouse (n.)

late 15c., from court (n.) + house (n.). In Virginia and the Upper South, it also can mean county
seat.


courtroom (n.)

1670s, from court (n.) + room (n.).


courtyard (n.)

1550s, from court (n.) + yard (n.1).


bar (n.3)

whole body of lawyers, the legal profession, 1550s, a sense which derives ultimately from the
railing that separated benchers from the hall in the Inns of Court. Students who had attained a
certain standing were called to it to take part in the important exercises of the house. After
c.1600, however, this was popularly assumed to mean the bar in a courtroom, which was the wooden
railing marking off the area around the judge's seat, where prisoners stood for arraignment and
where a barrister (q.v.) stood to plead. As the place where the business of court was done, bar in
this sense had become synonymous with court by early 14c.


chancellor (n.)

early 12c., from Old French chancelier (12c.), from Late Latin cancellarius keeper of the barrier,
secretary, usher of a law court, so called because he worked behind a lattice (Latin cancellus) at a
basilica or law court (see chancel). In the Roman Empire, a sort of court usher; the post gradually
gained importance in the Western kingdoms. A variant form, canceler, existed in Old English, from
Old North French, but was replaced by this central French form.


curtilage (n.)

early 14c., from Anglo-French curtilage, from Old French cortil little court, walled garden, yard,
from Medieval Latin cortile court, yard, from Latin cortis (see court (n.)).


curia (n.)

c.1600, one of the ten divisions of each of the three ancient Roman tribes; also the Senate-house of
Rome, from Latin curia court, perhaps from *co-wiria community of men. Transferred to the Papal
court (1840).


cortege (n.)

1640s, train of attendants, from French cort&egrave;ge (16c.), from Italian corteggio retinue, from
corte court, from Latin cohortem (see court (n.)).


assize (n.)

session of a law court, c.1300 (attested from mid-12c. in Anglo-Latin), from Old French assise
session, sitting of a court (12c.), properly fem. past participle of asseoir to cause to sit, from
Latin assidere (see assess). Originally all legal proceedings of the nature of inquests or
recognitions; hence sessions held periodically in each county of England to administer civil and
criminal justice.


atrium (n.)

1570s, from Latin atrium central court or main room of an ancient Roman house, room which contains
the hearth, sometimes said (on authority of Varro, De Lingua Latina) to be an Etruscan word, but
perhaps from PIE *ater- fire, on notion of place where smoke from the hearth escapes (through a hole
in the roof). Anatomical sense of either of the upper cavities of the heart first recorded 1870.
Meaning skylit central court in a public building first attested 1967.


prothonotary (n.)

also protonotary, mid-15c., principal clerk of a court, from Late Latin prothonotarius, from Greek
protonotarios first scribe, originally the recorder of the court of the Byzantine empire, from
protos first (see proto-) + Latin notarius (see notary). The -h- appeared in Medieval Latin


plead (v.)

mid-13c., make a plea in court, from Anglo-French pleder, Old French plaidier, plead at court
(11c.), from Medieval Latin placitare, from Late Latin placitum (see plea). Sense of request, beg
first recorded late 14c. Related: Pleaded; pleading; pleadingly.


oyer (n.)

early 15c., a hearing of causes, from Anglo-French oyer, Old French oir, from Latin audire to hear
(see audience). Especially in phrase oyer and terminer (early 15c., but from late 13c. in Anglo-
Latin and Anglo-French), literally a hearing and determining, in England a court of judges of
assize, in U.S. a higher criminal court.


hustings (n.)

Old English husting meeting, court, tribunal, from Old Norse hus&eth;ing council, from hus house
(see house (n.)) + &eth;ing assembly (see thing); so called because it was a meeting of the men who
formed the household of a nobleman or king. The native Anglo-Saxon word for this was folc-gemot. The
plural became the usual form c.1500; sense of temporary platform for political speeches developed by
1719, apparently from London's Court of Hustings, presided over by the Lord Mayor, which was held on
a platform in the Guildhall. This sense broadened to encompass the whole election process.


bailey (n.)

wall enclosing an outer court, early 14c. (c.1200 in Anglo-Latin), baylle, variant of bail, from Old
French bail stake, palisade, brace, of unknown origin, perhaps ultimately connected to Latin bacula
sticks, on notion of stakes, palisade fence. Old Bailey, seat of Central Criminal Court in London,
was so called because it stood within the ancient bailey of the city wall. The surname Bailey
usually is from Old French bailli, a later form of baillif (see bailiff).


amicus curiae

1610s, Latin, literally friend of the court; plural is amici curiae. From Latin amicus friend,
related to amare to love (see Amy) + curia court (see curia).


habeas corpus (n.)

writ requiring a person to be brought before a court, mid-15c., Latin, literally (you should) have
the person, in phrase habeas corpus ad subjiciendum produce or have the person to be subjected to
(examination), opening words of writs in 14c. Anglo-French documents to require a person to be
brought before a court or judge, especially to determine if that person is being legally detained.
From habeas, second person singular present subjunctive of habere to have, to hold (see habit (n.))
+ corpus person, literally body (see corporeal). In reference to more than one person, habeas
corpora.


sue (v.)

c.1200, continue, persevere, from Anglo-French suer follow after, continue, Old French suir, sivre
pursue, follow after, sue in court (Modern French suivre), from Vulgar Latin *sequere follow, from
Latin sequi follow (see sequel). Sense of start a lawsuit against first recorded c.1300, on notion
of following up a matter in court. Sometimes short for ensue or pursue. Meaning make entreaty,
petition, plead (usually with for) is from late 14c. Related: Sued; suing.


cort (n.)

obsolete form of court.


hearing (n.)

perception by ear, early 13c., from present participle of hear. Meaning a listening to evidence in a
court of law is from 1570s.


flamenco (n.)

1896, from Spanish flamenco, first used of Gypsy dancing in Andalusia. The word means Fleming,
native of Flanders (Dutch Vlaming) and also flamingo.    Speculation are varied and colorful about
the connection between the bird, the people, and the gypsy dance of Andalusia. Spain ruled Flanders
for many years, and King Carlos I brought with him to Madrid an entire Flemish court. One etymology
suggests the dance was so called from the bright costumes and energetic movements, which the Spanish
associated with Flanders; another is that Spaniards, especially Andalusians, like to name things by
their opposites, and because the Flemish were tall and blond and the gypsies short and dark, the
gypsies were called Flemish; others hold that flamenco was the general Spanish word for all
foreigners, gypsies included; or that Flemish noblemen, bored with court life, took to partying with
the gypsies.


suit (n.)

c.1300, sute, also suete, suite, seute, a band of followers; a retinue, company; also set of
matching garments worn by such persons, matching livery or uniform; hence  kind, sort; the same
kind, a match; also pursuit, chase, and in law, obligation (of a tenant) to attend court; attendance
at court, from Anglo-French suit, siwete, from Old French suite, sieute pursuit, act of following,
hunt; retinue; assembly (12c., Modern French suite), from Vulgar Latin *sequita, fem. of *sequitus,
from Latin secutus, past participle of sequi to attend, follow (see sequel).    Legal sense of
lawsuit; legal action is from mid-14c. Meaning the wooing of a woman is from late 15c. Meaning set
of clothes to be worn together is attested from late 14c., also matching material or fabric, from
notion of the livery or uniform of court attendants. As a derisive term for businessman, it dates
from 1979. Meaning matched set of objects, number of objects of the same kind or pattern used
together is from late 14c., as is that of row, series, sequence. Meaning set of playing cards
bearing the same symbol is first attested 1520s, also ultimately from the notion of livery. To
follow suit (1670s) is from card-playing.


ruling (n.)

determination by a judge or court on a point arising in the course of a trial or hearing, 1550s,
verbal noun from rule (v.).


pleading (n.)

late 13c., the carrying on of a suit at court, verbal noun from plead (v.). Meaning supplication,
intercession is from early 15c.


dock (n.2)

where accused stands in court, 1580s, originally rogue's slang, from Flemish dok pen or cage for
animals, origin unknown.


alleged (adj.)

mid-15c., quoted, past participle adjective from allege. Attested from 1610s in sense of brought
forth in court; 1670s as asserted but not proved.


foolscap (n.)

literally fool's cap; cap worn by jesters, 1630s; c.1700 as a type of paper, so called because this
type of paper originally was watermarked with a court jester's cap.


kangaroo (n.)

1770, used by Capt. Cook and botanist Joseph Banks, supposedly an aborigine word from northeast
Queensland, Australia, usually said to be unknown now in any native language. However, according to
Australian linguist R.M.W. Dixon (The Languages of Australia, Cambridge, 1980), the word probably is
from Guugu Yimidhirr (Endeavour River-area Aborigine language) /gaNurru/ large black kangaroo.In
1898 the pioneer ethnologist W.E. Roth wrote a letter to the Australasian pointing out that gang-oo-
roo did mean 'kangaroo' in Guugu Yimidhirr, but this newspaper correspondence went unnoticed by
lexicographers. Finally the observations of Cook and Roth were confirmed when in 1972 the
anthropologist John Haviland began intensive study of Guugu Yimidhirr and again recorded /gaNurru/.
[Dixon] Kangaroo court is American English, first recorded 1850 in a Southwestern context (also
mustang court), from notion of proceeding by leaps.


Miranda (2)

criminal suspects' arrest rights in U.S., 1967, in reference to Fifth Amendment cases ruled on by
U.S. Supreme Court June 13, 1966, under heading Ernesto A. Miranda v. the State of Arizona.


purge (n.)

1560s, that which purges, from purge (v.). Meaning a purgative, an act of purging is from 1590s.
Political sense from 1730. Earliest sense in English was the now-obsolete one examination in a legal
court (mid-15c.).


Realtor (n.)

1916, real estate agent, American English, coined by real estate agent Charles N. Chadbourn of
Minneapolis, Minn., to distinguish the legitimate section of the business; popularized 1920s;
patented as Realtor by the National Association of Real Estate Boards.    The 1916 Convention of the
National Association of Real Estate Boards (NAREB) approved the adoption of the term as the official
designation of an active member of the Association. In 1920 the District Court of Hennepin County,
Minnesota, decided in favor of the Realtors in a case against a telephone directory publisher that
had indiscriminately used the word in listings. The court asserted that the word had never been used
in any way whatsoever until so invented and could thus be used only by those duly licensed by the
National Association of Real Estate Boards. Until the Lanham Acts of 1948 changed federal patent
regulations to allow protection for registered collective marks, the National Association fought and
won sixteen cases on the local and state levels to protect its symbolic property. [Jeffrey M.
Hornstein, The Rise of Realtor, in The Middling Sorts: Explorations in the History of the American
Middle Class, New York, 2001]


bork (v.)

1987, to discredit a candidate for some position by savaging his or her career and beliefs, from
name of U.S. jurist Robert H. Bork (1927-2012), whose Supreme Court nomination in 1987 was rejected
after an intense counter-campaign.


Rasputin

acquired name (Russian, literally debauchee) of Grigory Yefimovich Novykh (c.1872-1916), mystic and
faith healer who held sway over court of Nicholas II of Russia. His nickname is from his doctrine of
rebirth through sin, that true holy communion must be preceded by immersion in sin. His name used
figuratively in English from 1937 for anyone felt to have an insidious and corrupting influence.


appealing

mid-15c. as a noun, action of petitioning a higher court or authority, verbal noun from appeal (v.).
Adjectival sense of attractive attested by 1892. Related: Appealingly.


voucher (n.)

1520s, originally summoning of a person into court to warrant the title to a property, a calling to
vouch; see vouch. Meaning receipt from a business transaction is first attested 1690s; sense of
document which can be exchanged for goods or services is attested from 1947.


Byzantine (adj.)

1770, from Latin Byzantinus (see Byzantium); originally used of art style; later in reference to the
complex, devious, and intriguing character of the royal court of Constantinople (1937). As a noun
from 1770.


Star Chamber (n.)

late 14c., apartment in the royal palace at Westminster in which members of the king's council sat
to exercise jurisdiction 14-15c., it evolved 15c. into a court of criminal jurisdiction, infamous
under James I and Charles I for arbitrary and oppressive proceedings. Abolished 1641. Supposedly so
called because gilt stars had been painted on the ceiling. Later there was a star on the door.


cognizable (adj.)

1670s, capable of being known, also liable to be tried in a given court or jurisdiction, from stem
of cognizance + -able.


mandamus (n.)

1530s, writ from a superior court to an inferior one, specifying that something be done, (late 14c.
in Anglo-French), from Latin, literally we order, first person plural present indicative of mandare
to order (see mandate (n.)).


register (n.2)

assistant court officer in administrative or routine function, 1530s, now chiefly U.S., alteration
of registrar (q.v) due to influence of register.


cortes (n.)

1660s, legislative houses of Spain or Portugal, from Spanish and Portuguese plural of corte, from
Latin cortem (see court (n.)).


tipstaff (n.)

1540s, tipped staff (truncheon with a tip or cap of metal) carried as an emblem of office, from tip
(n.) + staff (n.). As the name of an official who carries one (especially a sheriff's officer,
bailiff, constable, court crier, etc.) it is recorded from 1560s.


