courier (n.)

mid-14c., from Anglo-French courrier, from Old French coreor, ultimately an agent noun from Latin
currere to run (see current (adj.)).


lackey (n.)

1520s, footman, running footman, valet, from Middle French laquais foot soldier, footman, servant
(15c.), of unknown origin; perhaps from Old Proven&ccedil;al lacai, from lecai glutton, covetous,
from lecar to lick. Alternative etymology is via French from Catalan alacay, from Arabic al-qadi the
judge. Yet another guess traces it through Spanish lacayo, from Italian lacch&egrave;, from Modern
Greek oulakes, from Turkish ulak runner, courier. This suits the original sense better, but OED says
Italian lacch&egrave; is from French. Sense of servile follower appeared 1580s. As a political term
of abuse it dates from 1939 in communist jargon.


mule (n.1)

offspring of donkey and horse, from Old English mul, Old French mul mule, hinny (12c., fem. mule),
both from Latin mulus (fem. mula) a mule, probably from a pre-Latin Mediterranean language.The mule
combines the strength of the horse with the endurance and surefootedness of the ass, and is
extensively bred for certain employments for which it is more suited than either; it is ordinarily
incapable of procreation. With no good grounds, the mule is a proverbial type of obstinacy.
[OED]Properly, the offspring of a he-ass and a mare; that of a she-ass and a stallion is technically
a hinny. Used allusively of hybrids and things of mixed nature. As a type of spinning machine,
attested from 1797 (so called because a hybrid of distinct warp and woof machines). Meaning
obstinate, stupid, or stubborn person is from 1470s; that of narcotics smuggler or courier first
attested 1935.


angel (n.)

14c. fusion of Old English engel (with hard -g-) and Old French angele, both from Latin angelus,
from Greek angelos messenger, envoy, one that announces, possibly related to angaros mounted
courier, both from an unknown Oriental word (Watkins compares Sanskrit ajira- swift; Klein suggests
Semitic sources). Used in Scriptural translations for Hebrew mal'akh (yehowah) messenger (of
Jehovah), from base l-'-k to send. An Old English word for it was aerendgast, literally errand-
spirit.    Of persons, loving; lovely, by 1590s. The medieval gold coin (a new issue of the noble,
first struck 1465 by Edward VI) was so called for the image of archangel Michael slaying the dragon,
which was stamped on it. It was the coin given to patients who had been touched for the King's Evil.
Angel food cake is from 1881; angel dust phencyclidine is from 1968.


Whig

British political party, 1657, in part perhaps a disparaging use of whigg a country bumpkin (1640s);
but mainly a shortened form of Whiggamore (1649) one of the adherents of the Presbyterian cause in
western Scotland who marched on Edinburgh in 1648 to oppose Charles I. Perhaps originally a horse
drover, from dialectal verb whig to urge forward + mare. In 1689 the name was first used in
reference to members of the British political party that opposed the Tories. American Revolution
sense of colonist who opposes Crown policies is from 1768. Later it was applied to opponents of
Andrew Jackson (as early as 1825), and taken as the name of a political party (1834) that merged
into the Republican Party in 1854-56.    [I]n the spring of 1834 Jackson's opponents adopted the
name Whig, traditional term for critics of executive usurpations. James Watson Webb, editor of the
New York Courier and Enquirer, encouraged use of the name. [Henry] Clay gave it national currency in
a speech on April 14, 1834, likening the whigs of the present day to those who had resisted George
III, and by summer it was official. [Daniel Walker Howe, What Hath God Wrought, 2007, p.390]   Whig
historian is recorded from 1924. Whig history is the tendency in many historians ... to emphasise
certain principles of progress in the past and to produce a story which is the ratification if not
the glorification of the present. [Herbert Butterfield, The Whig Interpretation of History, 1931]


