covenant (v.)

c.1300, from covenant (n.). Related: Covenanted; covenanting. Covenanter (1638) was used especially
in reference to Scottish Presbyterians who signed the Solemn League and Covenant (1643) for the
defense and furtherance of their cause.


covenant (n.)

c.1300, from Old French covenant agreement, originally present participle of covenir agree, meet,
from Latin convenire come together (see convene). Applied in Scripture to God's arrangements with
man as a translation of Latin testamentum, Greek diatheke, both rendering Hebrew berith (though
testament also is used for the same word in different places).


B&#039;nai B&#039;rith (n.)

Jewish fraternal organization founded in New York City in 1843, Hebrew, literally Sons of the
Covenant, from bene, state construct of banim, plural of ben son, + brith covenant.


pact (n.)

early 15c., from Old French pacte agreement, treaty, compact (14c.), from Latin pactum agreement,
contract, covenant, noun use of neuter past participle of pacisci to covenant, to agree, make a
treaty, from PIE root *pag- fix, join together, unite, make firm (cognates: Sanskrit pasa- cord,
rope, Avestan pas- to fetter, Greek pegnynai to fix, make firm, fast or solid, Latin pangere to fix,
to fasten, Slavonic pa&#382; wooden partition, Old English fegan to join, fon to catch seize).


bris (n.)

Yiddish word for the circumcision ceremony, from bris milah, Ashkenazi pronunciation of brit milah
covenant of circumcision.


convention (n.)

early 15c., agreement, from Middle French convention and directly from Latin conventionem
(nominative conventio) meeting, assembly, covenant, noun of action from past participle stem of
convenire (see convene).


charter (n.)

c.1200, from Old French chartre (12c.) charter, letter, document, covenant, from Latin chartula,
literally little paper, diminutive of charta, carta paper, document (see chart (n.)).


shrine (n.)

Old English scrin ark (of the covenant); chest, coffer; case for relics, from Latin scrinium case or
box for keeping papers, of unknown origin. From late 14c. as a tomb of a saint (usually elaborate
and large). A widespread word, compare Dutch schrijn, German Schrein, French &#233;crin, Russian
skrynya, Lithuanian skrine.


compact (n.1)

agreement, 1590s, from Latin compactum agreement, noun use of neuter past participle of compacisci
come to agreement, from com- together (see com-) + pacisci to covenant, contract (see pact).


synallagmatic (adj.)

expressing reciprocal obligations, from Greek synallagmatikos, from synallagma a covenant, contract,
from syn- together with (see syn-) + allagma thing taken in exchange, from stem of allassein to
exchange, barter, from allos another (see alias (adv.)).


federation (n.)

1721, union by agreement, from French f&eacute;d&eacute;ration, from Late Latin foederationem
(nominative foederatio), noun of action from Latin foederare league together, from foedus covenant,
league (genitive foederis); see federal.


ark (n.)

Old English earc, mainly meaning Noah's but also the Ark of the Covenant, from Latin arca large box,
chest (see arcane). Also borrowed in Old High German (arahha, Modern German Arche). From the
Noachian sense comes extended meaning place of refuge (17c.). As the name of a type of ship or boat,
from late 15c. In 19c. U.S., especially a large, flat-bottomed river boat to move produce,
livestock, etc. to market.


federal (adj.)

1640s, as a theological term, from French f&eacute;d&eacute;ral, from Latin foedus (genitive
foederis) covenant, league, treaty, alliance, related to fides faith (see faith).    Meaning
pertaining to a treaty (1650s) led to political sense  of state formed by agreement among
independent states (1707), from phrases like federal union union based on a treaty, popularized by
formation of U.S.A. 1776-1787.


Beelzebub

Old English Belzebub, Philistine god worshipped at Ekron (2 Kings i:2), from Latin, used in Vulgate
for New Testament Greek beelzeboub, from Hebrew ba'al-z'bub lord of the flies, from ba'al lord (see
Baal) + z'bhubh fly. By later Christian writers often taken as another name for Satan, though Milton
made him one of the fallen angels. Baal being originally a title, it was applied by the Hebrews to
neighboring divinities based on their attributes; other examples include Baal-berith the covenant
lord, god of the Shechemites; Baal-peor lord of the opening, a god of Moab and Midian.


verb (n.)

late 14c., from Old French verbe word; word of God; saying; part of speech that expresses action or
being (12c.) and directly from Latin verbum verb, originally a word, from PIE root *were- (3) to
speak (cognates: Avestan urvata- command; Sanskrit vrata- command, vow; Greek rhetor public speaker,
rhetra agreement, covenant, eirein to speak, say; Hittite weriga- call, summon; Lithuanian vardas
name; Gothic waurd, Old English word word).


truce (n.)

mutually agreed-upon temporary intermission of hostilities, early 13c., triws, variant of trewes,
originally plural of trewe faith, assurance of faith, covenant, treaty, from Old English treow
faith, truth, fidelity; pledge, promise, agreement, treaty, from Proto-Germanic *treuwaz- (cognates:
Old Frisian triuwe, Middle Dutch trouwe, Dutch trouw, Old High German triuwa, German treue, Gothic
triggwa faith, faithfulness). Related to Old English treowe faithful (see true (adj.)). The Germanic
word was borrowed into Late Latin as tregua, hence French tr&egrave;ve, Italian tregua.


testament (n.)

late 13c., last will disposing of property, from Latin testamentum a last will, publication of a
will, from testari make a will, be witness to, from testis witness, from PIE *tri-st-i- third person
standing by, from root *tris- three (see three) on the notion of third person, disinterested
witness.    Use in reference to the two divisions of the Bible (early 14c.) is from Late Latin vetus
testamentum and novum testamentum, loan-translations of Greek palaia diatheke and kaine diatheke.
Late Latin testamentum in this case was a confusion of the two meanings of Greek diatheke, which
meant both covenant, dispensation and will, testament, and was used in the former sense in the
account of the Last Supper (see testimony) but subsequently was interpreted as Christ's last will.


warlock (n.)

Old English w&aelig;rloga traitor, liar, enemy, devil, from w&aelig;r faith, fidelity; a compact,
agreement, covenant, from Proto-Germanic *wera- (cognates: Old High German wara truth, Old Norse
varar solemn promise, vow), from PIE *were-o- true, trustworthy (see very, also Varangian). Second
element is an agent noun related to leogan to lie (see lie (v.1); and compare Old English wordloga
deceiver, liar).    Original primary sense seems to have been oath-breaker; given special
application to the devil (c.1000), but also used of giants and cannibals. Meaning one in league with
the devil is recorded from c.1300. Ending in -ck (1680s) and meaning male equivalent of a witch
(1560s) are from Scottish. Related: Warlockery.


mercy (n.)

late 12c., God's forgiveness of his creatures' offenses, from Old French mercit, merci (9c.) reward,
gift; kindness, grace, pity, from Latin mercedem (nominative merces) reward, wages, pay hire (in
Vulgar Latin favor, pity), from merx (genitive mercis) wares, merchandise (see market (n.)). In
Church Latin (6c.) applied to the heavenly reward of those who show kindness to the helpless.
Meaning disposition to forgive or show compassion is attested from early 13c. As an interjection,
attested from mid-13c. In French largely superseded by mis&eacute;ricorde except as a word of
thanks. Seat of mercy golden covering of the Ark of the Covenant (1530) is Tyndale's loan-
translation of Luther's gnadenstuhl, an inexact rendering of Hebrew kapporeth, literally
propitiatory.


wed (v.)

Old English weddian to pledge oneself, covenant to do something, vow; betroth, marry, also unite
(two other people) in a marriage, conduct the marriage ceremony, from Proto-Germanic *wadi-
(cognates: Old Norse ve&eth;ja, Danish vedde to bet, wager, Old Frisian weddia to promise, Gothic
ga-wadjon to betroth), from PIE root *wadh- (1) to pledge, to redeem a pledge (cognates: Latin vas,
genitive vadis bail, security, Lithuanian vaduoti to redeem a pledge).    The sense has remained
closer to pledge in other Germanic languages (such as German Wette a bet, wager); development to
marry is unique to English. Originally 'make a woman one's wife by giving a pledge or earnest
money', then used of either party [Buck]. Passively, of two people, to be joined as husband and
wife, from c.1200. Related: Wedded; wedding.


truth (n.)

Old English triew&eth; (West Saxon), treow&eth; (Mercian) faith, faithfulness, fidelity, loyalty;
veracity, quality of being true; pledge, covenant, from triewe, treowe faithful (see true (adj.)),
with Proto-Germanic abstract noun suffix *-itho (see -th (2)).    Sense of something that is true is
first recorded mid-14c. Meaning accuracy, correctness is from 1560s. English and most other IE
languages do not have a primary verb for for speak the truth, as a contrast to lie (v.). Truth squad
in U.S. political sense first attested in the 1952 U.S. presidential election campaign.    At
midweek the Republican campaign was bolstered by an innovation--the truth squad ..., a team of
senators who trailed whistle-stopping Harry Truman to field what they denounced as his wild pitches.
[Life, Oct. 13, 1952]   <hr />   Let [Truth] and Falsehood grapple; who ever knew Truth put to the
worse, in a free and open encounter. [Milton, Areopagitica, 1644]


peace (n.)

mid-12c., freedom from civil disorder, from Anglo-French pes, Old French pais peace, reconciliation,
silence, permission (11c., Modern French paix), from Latin pacem (nominative pax) compact,
agreement, treaty of peace, tranquility, absence of war (source of Proven&ccedil;al patz, Spanish
paz, Italian pace), from PIE *pag-/*pak- fasten, related to pacisci to covenant or agree (see pact).
Replaced Old English fri&eth;, also sibb, which also meant happiness. Modern spelling is 1500s,
reflecting vowel shift. Sense in peace of mind is from c.1200. Used in various greetings from
c.1300, from Biblical Latin pax, Greek eirene, which were used by translators to render Hebrew
shalom, properly safety, welfare, prosperity.    Sense of quiet is attested by 1300; meaning absence
or cessation of war or hostility is attested from c.1300. As a type of hybrid tea rose (developed
1939 in France by Francois Meilland), so called from 1944. Native American peace pipe is first
recorded 1760. Peace-officer attested from 1714. Peace offering is from 1530s. Phrase peace with
honor first recorded 1607 (in Coriolanus). The U.S. Peace Corps was set up March 1, 1962. Peace
sign, both the hand gesture and the graphic, attested from 1968.


wage (n.)

c.1300, a payment for services rendered, reward, just deserts; mid-14c., salary paid to a provider
of service, from Anglo-French and Old North French wage (Old French gage) pledge, pay, reward, from
Frankish *wadja- or another Germanic source (compare Old English wedd pledge, agreement, covenant,
Gothic wadi pledge), from Proto-Germanic *wadi- (see wed (v.)).    Also from mid-14c., a pledge,
guarantee, surety (usually in plural), and (c.1400) a promise or pledge to meet in battle. The
payment for service sense by late 14c. extended to allotments of money paid at regular intervals for
continuous or repeated service. Traditionally in English wages were payment for manual or mechanical
labor and somewhat distinguished from salary or fee. Modern French cognate gages (plural) means
wages of a domestic, one of a range of French pay words distinguished by class, such as traitement
(university professor), paye, salaire (workman), solde (soldier), r&eacute;compense, prix. The Old
English word was lean, related to loan and representing the usual Germanic word (Gothic laun, Dutch
loon, German lohn). Wage-earner attested from 1871.


