cow (n.)

Old English cu cow, from Proto-Germanic *kwon (cognates: Old Frisian ku, Middle Dutch coe, Dutch
koe, Old High German kuo, German Kuh, Old Norse kyr, Danish, Swedish ko), earlier *kwom, from PIE
*gwous (cognates Sanskrit gaus, Greek bous, Latin bov-, Old Irish bo, Latvian guovs, Armenian gaus
cow, Slovak hovado ox), perhaps ultimately imitative of lowing (compare Sumerian gu, Chinese ngu,
ngo ox). In Germanic and Celtic, of females only; in most other languages, of either gender. Other
cow words sometimes are from roots meaning horn, horned, such as Lithuanian karve, Old Church
Slavonic krava.


cow (v.)

intimidate, c.1600, probably from Old Norse kuga oppress, of unknown origin, but perhaps having
something to do with cow (n.) on the notion of easily herded. Related: Cowed; cowing.


cowabunga (interj.)

1954, American English, from exclamation of surprise and anger by Chief Thunderthud in The Howdy
Doody Show, 1950s children's TV show; used by surfers 1960s as a shout of triumph, and spread
worldwide 1990 by use in the TV cartoon Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles.


coward (n.)

mid-13c., from Old French coart coward (no longer the usual word in French, which has now in this
sense poltron, from Italian, and l&acirc;che), from coe tail, from Latin coda, popular dialect
variant of cauda tail, of uncertain origin + -ard, an agent noun suffix denoting one that carries on
some action or possesses some quality, with derogatory connotation (see -ard).    The word probably
reflects an animal metaphoric sense still found in expressions like turning tail and tail between
legs. Coart was the name of the hare in Old French versions of Reynard the Fox. Italian codardo,
Spanish cobarde are from French.    The identification of coward &amp; bully has gone so far in the
popular consciousness that persons &amp; acts in which no trace of fear is to be found are often
called coward(ly) merely because advantage has been taken of superior strength or position ....
[Fowler]    As a surname (attested from 1255) it represents Old English cuhyrde cow-herd. Farmer has
coward's castle a pulpit, Because a clergyman may deliver himself therefrom without fear of
contradiction or argument.


cowardice (n.)

c.1300, from Old French coardise (13c.), from coard, coart (see coward) + noun suffix -ise.
Cowardice, as distinguished from panic, is almost always simply a lack of ability to suspend the
functioning of the imagination. [Ernest Hemingway, Men at War, 1942]


cowardly (adj.)

1550s, from coward + -ly (1). The adverb (late 14c.) is much older than the adjective:    Yit had I
levir do what I may Than here to dye thus cowerdelye [Le Morte d'Arthur, c.1450]    An Old English
word for cowardly was earg, which also meant slothful. Related: Cowardliness.


cowbell (n.)

1650s, American English, from cow (n.1) + bell (n.).


cowboy (n.)

1725, boy who tends to cows, from cow (n.) + boy. Sense in Western U.S. is from 1849; in figurative
use by 1942 for brash and reckless young man (as an adjective meaning reckless, from 1920s). Cowhand
is first attested 1852 in American English (see hand (n.)). Cowpoke (said to be 1881, not in popular
use until 1940s) was said to be originally restricted to the cowboys who prodded cattle onto
railroad cars with long poles.


cower (v.)

c.1300, probably from Middle Low German *kuren lie in wait (Modern German kauern), or similar
Scandinavian words meaning to squat and to doze (such as Old Norse kura, Danish, Norwegian kure,
Swedish kura). Thus unrelated to coward. Related: Cowered; cowering.


cowl (n.)

Old English cule, from earlier cugele, from Late Latin cuculla monk's cowl, variant of Latin
cucullus hood, cowl, of uncertain origin. Cowling is 1917 in the aircraft sense.


cowlick (n.)

1590s, from cow (n.) + lick (n.). Because it looks like a cow licked your head.


coworker (n.)

also co-worker, 1640s, from co- + worker (n.).


Cowper&#039;s gland (n.)

1738, so called because discovered by anatomist William Cowper (1666-1709); see Cooper.


cowrie (n.)

small shell, used as money in parts of Asia, 1660s, from Hindi and Urdu kauri, from Mahrati kavadi,
from Sanskrit kaparda, perhaps related to Tamil kotu shell.


cowslip (n.)

Old English cu-slyppe, apparently from cu cow (see cow (n.)) + slyppe slop, slobber, dung (see slop
(n.1)).


Moscow

Russian capital, named for Moskva River, of unknown origin. Moscow mule, vodka cocktail, attested
from 1950.


scow (n.)

large flat-bottomed boat, 1780, from Dutch schouw a ferry boat, punt, from Middle Dutch scouwe,
related to Old English scaldan, Old Saxon scaldan to push (a boat) from shore.


scowl (v.)

mid-14c., from a Scandinavian source (compare Norwegian skule look furtively, squint, look
embarrassed, Danish skule to scowl, cast down the eyes). Probably related to Old English sceolh wry,
oblique, Old High German scelah curved, German scheel squint-eyed; from PIE root *sqel- crooked,
curved, bent. Related: Scowled; scowling.


scowl (n.)

c.1500, from scowl (v.).


