crabbed (adj.)

late 14c., peevish, angry, ill-tempered, from crab (n.1), from the crab's combative disposition;
mid-15c. as resembling a crab in reference to crookedness. Of taste bitter, harsh, late 14c., from
crab (n.2).


crabby (adj.)

1520s, in now-obsolete sense crooked, gnarled, rough, from extended sense of crab (n.1) + -y (2).
Meaning disagreeable, sour, peevish is attested from 1776, American English. Both senses were found
earlier in crabbed.


shrewd (adj.)

c.1300, wicked, evil, from shrewe wicked man (see shrew). Compare crabbed from crab (n.), dogged
from dog (n.), wicked from witch (n.). The sense of cunning is first recorded 1510s. Related:
Shrewdly; shrewdness. Strutt's Sports and Pastimes of the People of England (1801) has a shrewdness
of apes for a company or group of them. Shrewdie cunning person is from 1916.


witch (n.)

Old English wicce female magician, sorceress, in later use especially a woman supposed to have
dealings with the devil or evil spirits and to be able by their cooperation to perform supernatural
acts, fem. of Old English wicca sorcerer, wizard, man who practices witchcraft or magic, from verb
wiccian to practice witchcraft (compare Low German wikken, wicken to use witchcraft, wikker, wicker
soothsayer).    OED says of uncertain origin; Liberman says None of the proposed etymologies of
witch is free from phonetic or semantic difficulties. Klein suggests connection with Old English
wigle divination, and wig, wih idol. Watkins says the nouns represent a Proto-Germanic *wikkjaz
necromancer (one who wakes the dead), from PIE *weg-yo-, from *weg- (2) to be strong, be lively (see
wake (v.)).    That wicce once had a more specific sense than the later general one of female
magician, sorceress perhaps is suggested by the presence of other words in Old English describing
more specific kinds of magical craft. In the Laws of &AElig;lfred (c.890), witchcraft was
specifically singled out as a woman's craft, whose practitioners were not to be suffered to live
among the West Saxons:    &ETH;a f&aelig;mnan &thorn;e gewunia&eth; onfon gealdorcr&aelig;ftigan
&amp; scinl&aelig;can &amp; wiccan, ne l&aelig;t &thorn;u &eth;a libban.    The other two words
combined with it here are gealdricge, a woman who practices incantations, and scinl&aelig;ce female
wizard, woman magician, from a root meaning phantom, evil spirit. Another word that appears in the
Anglo-Saxon laws is lybl&aelig;ca wizard, sorcerer, but with suggestions of skill in the use of
drugs, because the root of the word is lybb drug, poison, charm. Lybbestre was a fem. word meaning
sorceress, and lybcorn was the name of a certain medicinal seed (perhaps wild saffron). Weekley
notes possible connection to Gothic weihs holy and German weihan consecrate, and writes, the priests
of a suppressed religion naturally become magicians to its successors or opponents. In Anglo-Saxon
glossaries, wicca renders Latin augur (c.1100), and wicce stands for pythoness, divinatricem. In the
Three Kings of Cologne (c.1400) wicca translates Magi:    &THORN;e paynyms ... cleped &thorn;e iij
kyngis Magos, &thorn;at is to seye wicchis.    The glossary translates Latin necromantia (demonum
invocatio) with galdre, wiccecr&aelig;ft. The Anglo-Saxon poem called Men's Crafts has
wiccr&aelig;ft, which appears to be the same word, and by its context means skill with horses. In a
c.1250 translation of Exodus, witches is used of the Egyptian midwives who save the newborn sons of
the Hebrews: &ETH;e wicches hidden hem for-&eth;an, Biforen pharaun nolden he ben. Witch in
reference to a man survived in dialect into 20c., but the fem. form was so dominant by 1601 that
men-witches or he-witch began to be used. Extended sense of old, ugly, and crabbed or malignant
woman is from early 15c; that of young woman or girl of bewitching aspect or manners is first
recorded 1740. Witch doctor is from 1718; applied to African magicians from 1836.    At this day it
is indifferent to say in the English tongue, 'she is a witch,' or 'she is a wise woman.' [Reginald
Scot, The Discoverie of Witchcraft, 1584]


