craft (v.)

Old English cr&aelig;ftan to exercise a craft, build, from the same source as craft (n.). Meaning to
make skilfully is from early 15c., obsolete from 16c., but revived c.1950s, largely in U.S.
advertising and commercial senses. Related: Crafted; crafting.


craftsman (n.)

mid-14c., craftes man, originally a member of a craft guild, from genitive of craft (n.) + man
(n.1). Written as one word from late 14c. Old English had cr&aelig;ftiga in this sense. Related:
Craftsmanship.


craft (n.)

Old English cr&aelig;ft (West Saxon, Northumbrian), -creft (Kentish), originally power, physical
strength, might, from Proto-Germanic *krab-/*kraf- (cognates: Old Frisian kreft, Old High German
chraft, German Kraft strength, skill; Old Norse kraptr strength, virtue). Sense expanded in Old
English to include skill, dexterity; art, science, talent (via a notion of mental power), which led
by late Old English to the meaning trade, handicraft, calling, also something built or made. The
word still was used for might, power in Middle English.    Use for small boat is first recorded
1670s, probably from a phrase similar to vessels of small craft and referring either to the trade
they did or the seamanship they required, or perhaps it preserves the word in its original sense of
power.


crafty (adj.)

mid-12c., crafti, from Old English cr&aelig;ftig strong, powerful, later skillful, ingenious,
degenerating by c.1200 to cunning, sly (but through 15c. also skillfully done or made; intelligent,
learned; artful, scientific) from craft (n.) + -y (2). Related: Craftily; craftiness.


techno-

word-forming element meaning art, craft, skill, later technical, technology, from Latinized form of
Greek tekhno-, combining form of tekhne art, skill, craft in work; method, system, an art, a system
or method of making or doing, from PIE *teks-na- craft (of weaving or fabricating), from suffixed
form of root *teks- to weave, fabricate, make (cognates: Sanskrit taksan carpenter, Greek tekton
carpenter, Latin texere to weave; see texture (n.)).


stagecraft (n.)

also stage-craft, 1848, from stage (n.) + craft (n.).


artifice (n.)

1530s, workmanship, the making of anything by craft or skill, from Middle French artifice skill,
cunning (14c.), from Latin artificium a profession, trade, employment, craft; making by art, from
artifex (genitive artificis) craftsman, artist, from stem of ars art (see art (n.)) + facere do (see
factitious). Meaning device, trick (the usual modern sense) is from 1650s.


subtract (v.)

1530s, withdraw, withhold, take away, deduct, a back-formation from subtraction (q.v.), or else from
Latin subtractus, past participle of subtrahere take away, draw off. Related: Subtracted;
subtracting. Mathematical calculation sense is from 1550s. Earlier verb form was subtraien (early
15c. in the mathematical sense), which is directly from the Latin verb.    Here he teches &thorn;e
Craft how &thorn;ou schalt know, whan &thorn;ou hast subtrayd, whe&thorn;er &thorn;ou hast wel ydo
or no. [Craft of Numbering, c.1425]


sophist (n.)

one who makes use of fallacious arguments, mid-15c., earlier sophister (late 14c.), from Latin
sophista, sophistes, from Greek sophistes a master of one's craft; a wise or prudent man, one clever
in matters of daily life, from sophizesthai to become wise or learned, from sophos skilled in a
handicraft, cunning in one's craft; clever in matters of everyday life, shrewd; skilled in the
sciences, learned; clever; too clever, of unknown origin. Greek sophistes came to mean one who gives
intellectual instruction for pay, and at Athens, contrasted with philosopher, it became a term of
contempt.    Sophists taught before the development of logic and grammar, when skill in reasoning
and in disputation could not be accurately distinguished, and thus they came to attach great value
to quibbles, which soon brought them into contempt. [Century Dictionary]


hyperdrive (n.)

by 1955, an invented word of science fiction writers to describe anything that can power a space
craft faster than the speed of light. See hyper- + drive (n.).


checkpoint (n.)

1940, from check (v.) + point (n.). Originally an aviator's term for landforms or structures of
known height against which the craft's altitude could be visually checked. The vehicle stop sense is
recorded from 1950.


hovercraft

1959, from hover + craft. A proprietary name after 1961.


songcraft (n.)

Old English sangcr&#230;ft art of singing, composing poetry, or playing an instrument, from song
(n.) + craft (n.). Modern use (1855) is a re-formation.


priestcraft (n.)

late 15c., business of being a priest, from priest + craft (n.). After rise of Protestantism and the
Enlightenment, it acquired a pejorative sense of arts and devices of ambitious priests for attaining
and holding temporal power and social control (1680s).


statecraft (n.)

the art of government, 1640s, from state (n.2) + craft (n.).


warcraft (n.)

military science, c.1400, from war (n.) + craft (n.).


wordcraft (n.)

Old English wordcr&#230;ft poetic art, eloquence; see word (n.) + craft (n.).


Metis

first wife of Zeus, from Greek Metis, literally advice, wisdom, counsel; cunning, skill, craft, from
PIE root *me- to measure (see meter (n.2)).


marina (n.)

1805, a promenade by the sea, from Spanish or Italian marina shore, coast, from Latin marinus (see
marine (adj.)). Meaning dock or basin with moorings for yachts and small craft is 1935, American
English.


spacecraft (n.)

1928, from space (n.) + craft (n.).


technetium (n.)

1947, coined in Modern Latin from Greek tekhnetos artificial, from tekhne art, skill, craft (see
techno-) + metallic element ending -ium.


leechcraft (n.)

art of healing, Old English l&#230;cecr&#230;ft; see leech (2) + craft (n.).


deipnosophist (n.)

gourmand, 1650s, from Greek deipnosophistes one learned in the mysteries of the kitchen, from
deipnon chief meal, dinner (of unknown origin) + sophistes master of a craft (see sophist). the word
has come down thanks to Deipnosophistai, 3c. work on gastronomy by Athenaeus.


technic (adj.)

1610s, technical, from Latin technicus, from Greek tekhnikos of or pertaining to art, made by art,
from tekhne art, skill, craft (see techno-). As a noun, performance method of an art, 1855, a
nativization of technique.


aircraft (n.)

1851, originally in reference to airships and balloons, from air (n.1) + craft (n.); a term from
boating, as were many early aviation words. Of airplanes from 1907 and since 1930s exclusively of
them. Aircraft carrier is attested from 1919 (H.M.S. Hermes, launched September 1919, was the first
ship to be built from the hull up as an aircraft carrier).


technique (n.)

1817, at first especially in criticism of art and music, from French technique formal practical
details in artistic expression (18c.), noun use of technique (adj.) of art, technical, from Greek
tekhnikos pertaining to art, from tekhne art, skill, craft in work (see techno-).


probe (n.)

early 15c., instrument for exploring wounds, etc., also an examination, from Medieval Latin proba
examination, in Late Latin a test, proof, from Latin probare (see prove). Meaning act of probing is
1890, from the verb; figurative sense of penetrating investigation is from 1903. Meaning small,
unmanned exploratory craft is attested from 1953.


journeyman (n.)

qualified worker at a craft or trade who works for wages for another (a position between apprentice
and master), early 15c., from journey (n.), preserving the etymological sense of the word, + man
(n.). Figurative depricatory sense of hireling, drudge is from 1540s. Its American English
colloquial shortening jour (adj.) is attested from 1835.


submersible (adj.)

1862, from submerse or from Latin submers-, past participle stem of submergere + -ible. As a noun,
from 1900, a submersible craft. Alternative adjective submergible is attested from 1820, from
submerge.


braid (n.)

in part from stem found in Old English gebr&#230;gd craft, fraud, gebregd commotion, Old Norse
brag&#240; deed, trick, and in part from or influenced by related braid (v.). Earliest senses are a
deceit, stratagem, trick (c.1200), sudden or quick movement (c.1300); meaning anything plaited or
entwined (especially hair) is from 1520s.


hiker (n.)

1913, agent noun from hike (v.). Earlier as a type of boat:    The hiker or tuck-up as it is more
generally termed, is a craft peculiar to the Delaware River, and is to the youth residing along the
banks of that stream what the racing shell is to the Torontonian .... The origin of the name hiker
is veiled in mystery. No member of the clubs engaged in sailing these boats can give anything like a
satisfactory derivation of the word. The most common explanation is that it is corrupted from the
local verb to hike, which means to run or fly swiftly. [Harper's Young People, 1885]


shenanigan (n.)

1855, of uncertain origin. Earliest records of it are in San Francisco and Sacramento, California,
U.S. Suggestions include Spanish chanada, a shortened form of charranada trick, deceit; or, less
likely, German Schenigelei, peddler's argot for work, craft, or the related German slang verb
schin&auml;glen. Another guess centers on Irish sionnach fox.


engine (n.)

c.1300, mechanical device, also skill, craft, from Old French engin skill, cleverness, also trick,
deceit, stratagem; war machine (12c.), from Latin ingenium inborn qualities, talent (see ingenious).
At first meaning a trick or device, or any machine (especially military); sense of device that
converts energy to mechanical power is 18c., especially of steam engines.


witchcraft (n.)

Old English wiccecr&aelig;ft witchcraft, magic, from wicce (see witch) + cr&aelig;ft power, skill
(see craft). Witchcraft was declared a crime in English law in 1542; trials there peaked in 1580s
and 1640s but fell sharply after 1660. The last, in 1717, ended in acquittal. The Witchcraft Act was
repealed 1736.


handicraft (n.)

Old English handcr&aelig;ft skill of the hand, from hand (n.) + craft (n.). Later h&aelig;ndecraft
(c.1200), perhaps from influence of handiwork.


writing (n.)

Old English writing action of forming letters and characters, verbal noun from write (v.). From
c.1200 as text; body of poetry, narrative, etc. in written form; written material. From c.1300 as a
particular text; mid-14c. as act of composing a written text. From late 14c. as craft of writing;
also one's own handwriting or penmanship. Also late 14c. as act of sending a letter; a letter,
message. Writing-desk is from 1610s.


artist (n.)

1580s, one who cultivates one of the fine arts, from Middle French artiste (14c.), from Italian
artista, from Medieval Latin artista, from Latin ars (see art (n.)).    Originally used especially
of the arts presided over by the Muses (history, poetry, comedy, tragedy, music, dancing,
astronomy), but also used 17c. for one skilled in any art or craft (including professors, surgeons,
craftsmen, cooks). Now especially of one who practices the arts of design or visual arts (a sense
first attested 1747).


crave (v.)

Old English crafian ask, implore, demand by right, from North Germanic *krabojan (cognates: Old
Norse krefja to demand, Danish kr&aelig;ve, Swedish kr&auml;va); perhaps related to craft in its
base sense of power. Current sense to long for is c.1400, probably through intermediate meaning to
ask very earnestly (c.1300). Related: Craved; craving.


technology (n.)

1610s, a discourse or treatise on an art or the arts, from Greek tekhnologia systematic treatment of
an art, craft, or technique, originally referring to grammar, from tekhno- (see techno-) + -logy.
The meaning study of mechanical and industrial arts (Century Dictionary, 1902, gives examples of
spinning, metal-working, or brewing) is first recorded 1859. High technology attested from 1964;
short form high-tech is from 1972.


wile (n.)

late Old English, wil stratagem, trick, sly artifice, perhaps from Old North French *wile (Old
French guile), or directly from a Scandinavian source (compare Old Norse vel trick, craft, fraud,
vela defraud). Perhaps ultimately related to Old English wicca wizard (see Wicca). Lighter sense of
amorous or playful trick is from c.1600.


arsenal (n.)

c.1500, dockyard, dock with naval stores, from Italian arzenale, from Arabic dar as-sina'ah
workshop, literally house of manufacture, from dar house + sina'ah art, craft, skill, from sana'a he
made.    Applied by the Venetians to a large wharf in their city, which was the earliest reference
of the English word. Sense of public place for making or storing weapons and ammunition is from
1570s. The London football club (1886) was named for the Royal Arsenal, Woolwich, where the original
players worked.


technical (adj.)

1610s, skilled in a particular art or subject, formed in English from technic + -al (1), or in part
from Greek tekhnikos of art; systematic, in reference to persons skillful, artistic, from tekhne
art, skill, craft (see techno-).    The sense narrowed to having to do with the mechanical arts
(1727). Basketball technical foul (one which does not involve contact between opponents) is recorded
from 1934. Boxing technical knock-out (one in which the loser is not knocked out) is recorded from
1921; abbreviation TKO is from 1940s. Technical difficulty is from 1805.


mangonel (n.)

military engine for hurling stones, mid-13c., from Old French mangonel catapult, war engine for
throwing stones, etc. (Modern French mangonneau), diminutive of Medieval Latin mangonum, from Vulgar
Latin *manganum machine, from Greek manganon any means of tricking or bewitching, from PIE *mang- to
embellish, dress, trim (cognates: Old Prussian manga whore, Middle Irish meng craft, deception).
Attested from c.1200 in Anglo-Latin.


rakish (adj.)

1706, debauched, disreputable, from rake (n.2) + -ish. Related: Rakishly; rakishness.    The meaning
smart, jaunty, dashing (1824) is said to be a different word, probably from rake slant, slope
(1620s), used especially in reference to a ship's hull or sails, of uncertain origin, perhaps from
Scandinavian (compare Old Swedish raka project, reach; Danish rage protrude, project) related to Old
English reccan stretch. The piratical craft of former times were distinguished for their rakish
build [Century Dictionary].


mystery (n.2)

handicraft, trade, art (archaic), late 14c., from Medieval Latin misterium, alteration of Latin
ministerium service, occupation, office, ministry (see ministry), influenced in form by Medieval
Latin mysterium (see mystery (n.1)) and in sense by maistrie mastery. Now only in mystery play, in
reference to the medieval performances, which often were staged by members of craft guilds. The two
senses of mystery formed a common pun in (secular) Tudor theater.


astronomy (n.)

c.1200, from Old French astrenomie, from Latin astronomia, from Greek astronomia, literally star
arrangement, from astron star (see astro-) + nomos arranging, regulating, related to nemein to deal
out (see numismatic). Used earlier than astrology and originally including it.    &#222;er wes moni
god clarc to lokien in &#254;an leofte, to lokien i &#254;an steorren neh&#658;e and feorren.
&#254;e craft is ihate Astronomie. [Layamon, The Brut, c.1200]


arithmetic (n.)

mid-13c., arsmetike, from Old French arsmetique (12c.), from Latin arithmetica, from Greek
arithmetike (tekhne) (the) counting (art), fem. of arithmetikos of or for reckoning, arithmetical,
from arithmos number, counting, amount, from PIE root *re(i)- to reason, count (cognates: Old
English, Old High German rim number; Old Irish rim number, dorimu I count; Latin ritus religious
custom; see read).    Originally in English also arsmetrik, on folk etymology from Medieval Latin
ars metrica; spelling corrected early 16c. Replaced native t&aelig;lcr&aelig;ft, literally tell-
craft.


principle (n.)

late 14c., origin, source, beginning; rule of conduct; axiom, basic assumption; elemental aspect of
a craft or discipline, from Anglo-French principle, Old French principe origin, cause, principle,
from Latin principium (plural principia) a beginning, commencement, origin, first part, in plural
foundation, elements, from princeps (see prince). Used absolutely for (good or moral) principle from
1650s.It is often easier to fight for principles than to live up to them. [Adlai Stevenson, speech,
New York City, Aug. 27, 1952]  Scientific sense of general law of nature is recorded from 1802. The
English -l- apparently is by analogy of participle, etc.


baker (n.)

Old English b&aelig;cere baker, agent noun from bacan to bake (see bake (v.)). In the Middle Ages,
the craft had two divisions, braun-bakeres and whit-bakeres.    White bakers shall bake no hors
brede..broune bakers shall bake whete brede as it comyth grounde fro the mylle withoute ony bultyng
of the same. Also the seid broune bakers shall bake hors brede of clene benys and pesyn, And also
brede that is called housholdersbrede. [Letterbook in the City of London Records Office, Guildhall,
1441]   Baker's dozen thirteen is from 1590s.  These dealers [hucksters] ... on purchasing their
bread from the bakers, were privileged by law to receive thirteen batches for twelve, and this would
seem to have been the extent of their profits. Hence the expression, still in use, A baker's dozen.
[H.T. Riley, Liber Albus, 1859]


ship (n.)

Old English scip ship, boat, from Proto-Germanic *skipam (cognates: Old Norse, Old Saxon, Old
Frisian, Gothic skip, Danish skib, Swedish skepp, Middle Dutch scip, Dutch schip, Old High German
skif, German Schiff), Germanic noun of obscure origin [Watkins]. Others suggest perhaps originally
tree cut out or hollowed out, and derive it from PIE root *skei- to cut, split.    Now a vessel of
considerable size, adapted to navigation; the Old English word was used for small craft as well, and
definitions changed over time; in 19c., distinct from a boat in having a bowsprit and three masts,
each with a lower, top, and topgallant mast. French esquif, Italian schifo are Germanic loan-words.
Phrase ships that pass in the night is from Longfellow's poem Elizabeth in Tales of a Wayside Inn
(1863). Figurative use of nautical runs a tight ship (i.e., one that does not leak) is attested from
1965.


