creed (n.)

Old English creda article or statement of Christian belief, from Latin credo I believe (see credo).
Broadening 17c. to mean any statement of belief.


symbol (n.)

early 15c., creed, summary, religious belief, from Late Latin symbolum creed, token, mark, from
Greek symbolon token, watchword, sign by which one infers; ticket, a permit, license (the word was
applied c.250 by Cyprian of Carthage to the Apostles' Creed, on the notion of the mark that
distinguishes Christians from pagans), literally that which is thrown or cast together, from
assimilated form of syn- together (see syn-) + bole a throwing, a casting, the stroke of a missile,
bolt, beam, from bol-, nominative stem of ballein to throw (see ballistics).    The sense evolution
in Greek is from throwing things together to contrasting to comparing to token used in comparisons
to determine if something is genuine. Hence, outward sign of something. The meaning something which
stands for something else first recorded 1590 (in Faerie Queene). As a written character, 1610s.


filoque

Latin, and from the son (see filial). Clause in Nicene Creed which separates Eastern Church from
Western [Weekley].


Nicene (adj.)

early 15c., in reference to Nicaea (Greek Nikaia, modern Turkish Isnik), city in Bithynia where
ecclesiastical council of 325 C.E. dealt with the Arian schism and produced the Nicene Creed. A
second council held there (787) considered the question of images.


credo (n.)

late 12c., from Latin, literally I believe, first word of the Apostles' and Nicene Creeds, first
person singular present indicative of credere to believe, perhaps from PIE compound *kerd-dhe- to
believe, literally to put one's heart (cognates: Old Irish cretim, Irish creidim, Welsh credu I
believe, Sanskrit &#347;rad-dh&#257;- faith). The nativized form is creed. General sense of formula
or statement of belief is from 1580s.


persuasion (n.)

late 14c., action of inducing (someone) to believe (something); argument to persuade, inducement,
from Old French persuasion (14c.) and directly from Latin persuasionem (nominative persuasio) a
convincing, persuading, noun of action from past participle stem of persuadere persuade, convince,
from per- thoroughly, strongly (see per) + suadere to urge, persuade, from PIE *swad- sweet,
pleasant (see sweet (adj.)). Meaning religious belief, creed is from 1620s.


article (n.)

c.1200, separate parts of anything written (such as the statements in the Apostles' Creed, the
clauses of a statute or contract), from Old French article (13c.), from Latin articulus, diminutive
of artus a joint (from PIE *ar-tu-, from *ar- to fit together; (see arm (n.1)).    Meaning extended
to a small division, then generalized to item, thing. Older sense preserved in Articles of War
military regulations (1716) and Articles of Confederation (U.S. history). Meaning literary
composition in a journal, etc. (independent, but part of a larger work) first recorded 1712. Meaning
piece of property (clothing, etc.) first attested 1796, originally in rogue's cant.


show (n.)

c.1300, act of exhibiting to view, from show (v.). Sense of appearance put on with intention to
deceive is recorded from 1520s. Meaning display, spectacle is first recorded 1560s; that of
ostentatious display is from 1713 (showy is from 1712). Sense of entertainment program on radio or
TV is first recorded 1932. Meaning third place in a horse race is from 1925, American English (see
the verb).   Show of hands is attested from 1789; Phrase for show for appearance's sake is from
c.1700. Show business is attested from 1850; shortened form show biz used in Billboard from 1942.
Actor's creed the show must go on is attested from 1890. Show-stopper is from 1926; show trial first
recorded 1937.


civil war (n.)

battles among fellow citizens or within a community, from civil in a sense of occurring among fellow
citizens attested from late 14c. in batayle ciuile civil battle, etc. The exact phrase civil war is
attested from late 15c. (the Latin phrase was bella civicus).    Early use typically was in
reference to ancient Rome. Later, in England, to the struggle between Parliament and Charles I
(1641-1651); in U.S., to the War of Secession (1861-1865), an application often decried as wholly
inaccurate but in use (among other names) in the North during the war and boosted by the use of the
term in the popular Battles and Leaders of the Civil War series published 1884-87 in Century
Magazine.    The war between the States, which a good many Southerners prefer, is both bookish and
inexact. Civil war is an utter misnomer. It was used and is still used by courteous people, the same
people who are careful to say Federal and Confederate. War of the rebellion, which begs the very
question at issue, has become the official designation of the struggle, but has found no acceptance
with the vanquished. To this day no Southerner uses it except by way of quotation .... The war of
secession is still used a good deal in foreign books, but it has no popular hold. The war, without
any further qualification, served the turn of Thucydides and Aristophanes for the Peloponnesian war.
It will serve ours, let it be hoped, for some time to come. [Basil L. Gildersleeve, The Creed of the
Old South, 1915]


