creep (v.)

Old English creopan to creep (class II strong verb; past tense creap, past participle cropen), from
Proto-Germanic *kreupan (cognates: Old Frisian kriapa, Middle Dutch crupen, Old Norse krjupa to
creep), perhaps from a PIE root *g(e)r- crooked [Watkins]. Related: Crept; creeping.


creeper (n.)

Old English creopera one who creeps, agent noun from creep (v.). Also see creep (n.). Meaning lice
is from 1570s; of certain birds from 1660s; of certain plants from 1620s.


creep (n.)

a creeping motion, 1818, from creep (v.). Meaning despicable person is 1935, American English slang,
perhaps from earlier sense of sneak thief (1914). Creeper a gilded rascal is recorded from c.1600,
and the word also was used of certain classes of thieves, especially those who robbed customers in
brothels. The creeps a feeling of dread or revulsion first attested 1849, in Dickens.


creepy (adj.)

1794, characterized by creeping, from creep + -y (2). Meaning having a creeping feeling in the flesh
is from 1831; that of producing such a feeling, the main modern sense, is from 1858. Creepy-crawly
is from 1858.


serpent (n.)

c.1300, limbless reptile, also the tempter in Gen. iii:1-5, from Old French serpent, sarpent snake,
serpent (12c.), from Latin serpentem (nominative serpens) snake; creeping thing, also the name of a
constellation, from present participle of serpere to creep, from PIE *serp- to crawl, creep
(cognates: Sanskrit sarpati creeps, sarpah serpent; Greek herpein to creep, herpeton serpent;
Albanian garper serpent).    Used figuratively of things spiral or regularly sinuous, such as a type
of musical instrument (1730). Serpent's tongue as figurative of venomous or stinging speech is from
mistaken medieval notion that the serpent's tongue was its sting. Serpent's tongue also was a name
given to fossil shark's teeth (c.1600).


herpes (n.)

late 14c., inflammatory, spreading skin condition (used of shingles, gangrene, etc.), from Latin
herpes a spreading skin eruption, from Greek herpes, the name for the disease shingles, literally
creeping, from herpein to creep (cognate with Latin serpere to creep; see serpent). The condition
was not distinguished into specific diseases until early 19c.


sneak (v.)

1550s (implied in sneakish), perhaps from some dialectal survival of Middle English sniken to creep,
crawl (c.1200), related to Old English snican to sneak along, creep, crawl, from Proto-Germanic
*sneikanan, which is related to the root of snake (n.). Of feelings, suspicions, etc., from 1748.
Transitive sense, to partake of surreptitiously is from 1883. Related: Sneaking. Sneak-thief first
recorded 1859; sneak-preview is from 1938.


reptile (n.)

late 14c., creeping or crawling animal, from Old French reptile (early 14c.) and directly from Late
Latin reptile, noun use of neuter of reptilis (adj.) creping, crawling, from rept-, past participle
stem of repere to crawl, creep, from PIE root *rep- to creep, crawl (cognates: Lithuanian replioju
to creep). Used of persons of low character from 1749.    Precise scientific use began to develop
mid-18c., but the word was used as well at first of animals now known as amphibians, including
toads, frogs, salamanders; separation of Reptilia (1835 as a distinct class) and Amphibia took place
early 19c.; popular use lagged, and reptile still was used late 18c. with sense An animal that
creeps upon many feet [Johnson, who calls the scorpion a reptile], sometimes excluding serpents.
And the terrestrial animals may be divided into quadrupeds or beasts, reptiles, which have many
feet, and serpents, which have no feet at all. [Locke, Elements of Natural Philosophy, 1689]   <hr
/>   An inadvertent step may crush the snail  That crawls at ev'ning in the public path ;  But he
that has humanity, forewarn'd,  Will tread aside, and let the reptile live.  [Cowper, The Task,
1785]    The Old English word for reptile was slincend, related to slink.


crept

past tense and past participle of creep (v.).


smock (n.)

Old English smoc garment worn by women, corresponding to the shirt on men, from Proto-Germanic
*smukkaz (cognates: Old Norse smokkr a smock, but this is perhaps from Old English; Old High German
smoccho smock, a rare word; North Frisian smok woman's shift, but this, too, perhaps from English).
Klein's sources, Barnhart and the OED see this as connected to a group of Germanic sm- words having
to do with creeping or pressing close, such as Old Norse smjuga to creep (through an opening), to
put on (a garment), smuga narrow cleft to creep through; small hole; Old Swedish smog a round hole
for the head; Old English smugan, smeogan to creep, smygel a burrow. Compare also German schmiegen
to cling to, press close, nestle; and Schmuck jewelry, adornments, from schmucken to adorn,
literally to dress up.    Watkins, however, traces it to a possible Germanic base *(s)muk- wetness,
figuratively slipperiness, from PIE root*meug- slimy, slippery (see mucus). Either way, the original
notion, then, seems generally to have been garment one creeps or slips into, by the same pattern
that produced sleeve and slip (n.2).    Now replaced by euphemistic shift (n.2); smock was the
common word down to 18c., and was emblematic of womanhood generally, as in verb smock to render (a
man) effeminate or womanish (1610s); smocker man who consorts with women (18c.); smock-face person
having a pale, effeminate face (c.1600). A smock-race (1707) was an old country pastime, a foot-race
for women and girls with a smock as a prize. Modern meaning woman's or child's loose dress or blouse
is from 1907; sense of loose garment worn by artists over other clothes is from 1938.


Proserpina

daughter of Ceres and wife of Pluto, Latin (or Etruscan) modification of Greek Persephone, perhaps
influenced by Latin proserpere to creep forth on notion of the germination of plants.


snake (n.)

Old English snaca, from Proto-Germanic *snakon (cognates: Old Norse snakr snake, Swedish snok,
German Schnake ring snake), from PIE root *sneg- to crawl, creeping thing (cognates: Old Irish
snaighim to creep, Lithuanian snake snail, Old High German snahhan to creep). In Modern English,
gradually replacing serpent in popular use.    Traditionally applied to the British serpent, as
distinguished from the poisonous adder. Meaning treacherous person first recorded 1580s (compare Old
Church Slavonic gadu reptile, gadinu foul, hateful). Applied from 17c. to various snake-like devices
and appliances. Snakes! as an exclamation is from 1839.   Snake eyes in crap-shooting sense is from
1919. Snake oil is from 1927. Snake-bitten unlucky is sports slang from 1957, from a literal sense,
perhaps suggesting one doomed by being poisoned. The game of Snakes and Ladders is attested from
1907. Snake charmer is from 1813. Snake pit is from 1883, as a supposed primitive test of truth or
courage; figurative sense is from 1941. Phrase snake in the grass is from Virgil's Latet anguis in
herba [Ecl. III:93].


herpetology (n.)

study of reptiles, 1816, from French herp&eacute;tologie (18c.), coined from Greek herpeton reptile,
literally creeping thing, from herpein to creep (see serpent) + logia (see -logy). Related:
Herpetologist.


slink (v.)

Old English slincan to creep, crawl (of reptiles), from Proto-Germanic *slinkan (cognates: Swedish
slinka to glide, Dutch slinken to shrink, shrivel; related to sling (v.)). Of persons, attested from
late 14c. Related: Slinked; slinking.


cripple (n.)

Old English crypel, related to cryppan to crook, bend, from Proto-Germanic *krupilaz (cognates: Old
Frisian kreppel, Middle Dutch cropel, German kr&uuml;ppel, Old Norse kryppill). Possibly also
related to Old English creopan to creep (creopere, literally creeper, was another Old English word
for crippled person).


smug (adj.)

1550s, trim, neat, spruce, smart, possibly an alteration of Low German smuk trim, neat, from Middle
Low German sm&uuml;cken to adorn (originally to dress, secondary sense of words meaning to creep or
slip into), from the same source as smock. The meaning having a self-satisfied air is from 1701, an
extension of the sense of smooth, sleek (1580s), which was commonly used of attractive women and
girls. Related: Smugly; smugness.


insinuate (v.)

1520s, from Latin insinuatus, past participle of insinuare to throw in, push in, make a way; creep
in, intrude, bring in by windings and curvings, wind one's way into, from in- in (see in- (2)) +
sinuare to wind, bend, curve, from sinus a curve, winding (see sinus). Sense of to introduce
tortuously or indirectly is from 1640s. Related: Insinuated; insinuating; insinuatingly.


scree (n.)

pile of debris at the base of a cliff, 1781, back-formation from screes (plural) pebbles, small
stones, from Old Norse skri&eth;a landslide, from skri&eth;a to creep, crawl; of a ship, to sail,
glide, also to slide (on snow-shoes), from Proto-Germanic *skrithanan (cognates: Old English
scri&thorn;an to go, glide, Old Saxon skridan, Dutch schrijden, Old High German scritan, German
schreiten to stride).


ramp (v.)

c.1300, to climb; to stand on the hind legs (of animals), from Old French ramper to climb, scale,
mount (12c., in Modern French to creep, crawl), perhaps from Frankish *rampon to contract oneself
(compare Old High German rimpfan to wrinkle, Old English hrimpan to fold, wrinkle), via notion of
the bodily contraction involved in climbing [Klein], from Proto-Germanic *hrimp- to contract
oneself. Related: Ramped; ramping.


slick (v.)

Old English -slician (in nigslicod newly made sleek), from Proto-Germanic *slikojan, from base
*slikaz (cognates: Old Norse slikr smooth, Old High German slihhan to glide, German schleichen to
creep, crawl, sneak, Dutch slijk mud, mire), from PIE *sleig- to smooth, glide, be muddy, from root
*(s)lei- slimy (see slime (n.)). Related: Slicked; slicking.


smuggler (n.)

1660s, from Low German smuggeln or Dutch smokkelen to transport (goods) illegally, apparently a
frequentative formation of a word meaning to sneak (from Proto-Germanic *smuganan; cognates: Dutch
smuigen to eat secretly; Swedish smyg a lurking-hole, Danish smughandel contraband trade, Norwegian
smjuga, Old English smeogan to creep), perhaps literally to slip (contraband through), from Proto-
Germanic *(s)muk- (see smock).


grovel (v.)

1590s, Shakespearian back-formation of groveling (Middle English), regarded as a present participle
but really an adverb, from Old Norse grufe prone + obsolete adverbial suffix -ling (which survives
also as the -long in headlong, sidelong); first element from Old Norse a grufu on proneness. Perhaps
related to creep. Related: Groveled; grovelled; groveling; grovelling.


swerve (v.)

c.1200, to depart, go make off; turn away or aside; c.1300, to turn aside, deviate from a straight
course; in form from Old English sweorfan to rub, scour, file away, grind away, but sense
development is difficult to trace. The Old English word is from Proto-Germanic *swerb- (cf Old Norse
sverfa to scour, file, Old Saxon swebran to wipe off), from PIE root *swerbh- to turn; wipe off.
Cognate words in other Germanic languages (cognates: Old Frisian swerva to creep, Middle Dutch
swerven to rove, roam, stray) suggests the sense of go off, turn aside might have existed in Old
English, though unrecorded. Related: Swerved; swerving.


snail (n.)

Old English sn&aelig;gl, from Proto-Germanic *snagila (cognates: Old Saxon snegil, Old Norse
snigill, Danish snegl, Swedish snigel, Middle High German snegel, dialectal German Schnegel, Old
High German snecko, German Schnecke snail), from *snog-, variant of PIE root *sneg- to crawl, creep;
creeping thing (see snake (n.)). The word essentially is a diminutive form of Old English snaca
snake, which literally means creeping thing. Also formerly used of slugs. Symbolic of slowness since
at least c.1000; snail's pace is attested from c.1400.


sling (v.)

c.1200, to knock down using a sling, later to throw (mid-13c.), especially with a sling, from Old
Norse slyngva, from Proto-Germanic *slingwanan (cognates: Old High German slingan, German schlingen
to swing to and fro, wind, twist; Old English slingan to creep, twist; Old Frisian slinge, Middle
Dutch slinge, Old High German slinga, German Schlinge sling; Middle Swedish slonga noose, knot,
snare), from PIE *slengwh to slide, make slide; sling, throw. Meaning to hang from one point to
another (as a hammock) is from 1690s. Related: Slung; slinging.


scheme (n.)

1550s, figure of speech, from Medieval Latin schema shape, figure, form, appearance; figure of
speech; posture in dancing, from Greek skhema (genitive skhematos) figure, appearance, the nature of
a thing, related to skhein to get, and ekhein to have, from PIE root *segh- to hold, to hold in
one's power, to have (cognates: Sanskrit sahate he masters, overcomes, sahah power, victory; Avestan
hazah power, victory; Greek ekhein to have, hold; Gothic sigis, Old High German sigu, Old Norse
sigr, Old English sige victory).    The sense program of action first is attested 1640s. Unfavorable
overtones (selfish, devious) began to creep in early 18c. Meaning complex unity of coordinated
component elements is from 1736. Color scheme is attested from 1884.


