crest (v.)

late 14c., provide with a crest, from Old French crester, from creste (see crest (n.)). Meaning to
come over the top of is from 1832. Related: Crested; cresting.


crest (n.)

early 14c., from Old French creste tuft, comb (Modern French cr&ecirc;te), from Latin crista tuft,
plume, perhaps related to word for hair (such as crinis), but it also was used for crest of a cock
or a helmet. Replaced Old English hris.


crease (n.)

1660s, altered from creaste a ridge, perhaps a variant of crest (n.), via meaning a fold in a length
of cloth (mid-15c.) which produced a crest. In sports, first in cricket (1779), where it was
originally cut into the ground. As a verb, from 1580s. Related: Creased; creasing.


basilisk (n.)

c.1300, from Latin basiliscus, from Greek basiliskos little king, diminutive of  basileus king (see
Basil); said by Pliny to have been so called because of a crest or spot on its head resembling a
crown.The basilisk has since the fourteenth century been confused with the Cockatrice, and the
subject is now a complicated one. [T.H. White, The Bestiary. A Book of Beasts, 1954]Its breath and
glance were said to be fatal. The South American lizard so called (1813) because it, like the
mythical beast, has a crest. Also used of a type of large cannon, throwing shot of 200 lb., from
1540s.


Andes

from Quechua andi high crest.


arete (n.1)

sharp crest of a mountain, 1862, from Swiss French ar&#234;te, from Latin arista ear of grain, the
top of an ear, which probably is of Etruscan origin. The figure is of something jagged.


surf (v.)

ride the crest of a wave, 1917, from surf (n.). Related: Surfed; surfing. In the Internet sense,
first recorded 1993.


red cross (n.)

early 15c., national emblem of England (St. George's Cross), also the badge of the Order of the
Temple. Hence red-cross knight, one bearing such a marking on shield or crest. In 17c., a red cross
was the mark placed on the doors of London houses inflected with the plague. Red Cross (in Muslim
lands, red crescent) adopted as a symbol of ambulance service 1864 by the Geneva Conference.


cockscomb (n.)

c.1400, comb or crest of a cock, from possessive of cock (n.1) + comb (n.). Meaning cap worn by a
professional fool is from 1560s; hence conceited fool (1560s), a sense passing into the derivative
coxcomb. As a plant name, from 1570s.


man-of-war (n.)

late 14c., a soldier, from man (n.) + war. Meaning vessel equipped for warfare is from late 15c. Man
in the sense of a ship is attested from late 15c. in combinations (such as merchantman). The sea
creature known as the Portuguese man-of-war (1707) is so called for its sail-like crest.


wren (n.)

small, migratory singing bird, Old English wrenna, metathesis variation of earlier werna, a Germanic
word of uncertain origin. Compare Icelandic rindill, Old High German wrendo, wrendilo wren. The
bird's name in other languages usually denotes royalty (such as Latin regulus), in reference to its
golden crest.


tuft (n.)

bunch of soft and flexible things fixed at the base with the upper ends loose, late 14c., of
uncertain origin, perhaps from Old French touffe tuft of hair (14c.), which is either from Late
Latin tufa a kind of crest on a helmet (also found in Late Greek toupha), or from a Germanic source
(compare Old High German zopf, Old Norse toppr tuft, summit; see top (n.1)). As a verb from 1530s.
Related: Tufted.


hat (n.)

Old English h&aelig;t hat, head covering, from Proto-Germanic *hattuz hood, cowl (cognates: Frisian
hat, Old Norse hattr), from PIE root *kadh- cover, protect (cognates: Lithuanian kudas tuft or crest
of a bird, Latin cassis helmet). Now, head covering with a more or less horizontal brim. To throw
one's hat in the ring was originally (1847) to take up a challenge in prize-fighting. To eat one's
hat is said to have been originally To eat Old Rowley's [Charles II's] hat.


chameleon (n.)

mid-14c., camelion, from Old French cam&eacute;l&eacute;on, from Latin chamaeleon, from Greek
khamaileon the chameleon, from khamai on the ground (also dwarf), akin to chthon earth (see
chthonic) + leon lion (see lion). Perhaps the large head-crest on some species was thought to
resemble a lion's mane. The classical -h- was restored in English early 18c. Figurative sense of
variable person is 1580s. It formerly was supposed to live on air (as in Hamlet III.ii.98).


ridge (n.)

Old English hrycg back of a man or beast, probably reinforced by Old Norse hryggr back, ridge, from
Proto-Germanic *khrugjaz (cognates: Old Frisian hregg, Old Saxon hruggi, Dutch rug, Old High German
hrukki, German R&uuml;cken the back), of uncertain origin. Also in Old English, the top or crest of
anything, especially when long and narrow. The connecting notion is of the ridge of the backbone.
Spelling with -dg- is from late 15c. Ridge-runner Southern Appalachian person first recorded 1917.


comb (n.)

Old English camb comb, crest, honeycomb (later Anglian comb), from Proto-Germanic *kambaz (cognates:
Old Saxon and Old High German camb, German Kamm, Middle Dutch cam, Dutch kam, Old Norse kambr),
literally toothed object, from PIE *gombhos, from root *gembh- to bite, tooth (cognates: Greek
gomphos a molar tooth, Sanskrit gambha-s tooth).


secretary (n.)

late 14c., person entrusted with secrets, from Medieval Latin secretarius clerk, notary,
confidential officer, confidant, a title applied to various confidential officers, noun use of
adjective meaning private, secret, pertaining to private or secret matters (compare Latin
secretarium a council-chamber, conclave, consistory), from Latin secretum a secret, a hidden thing
(see secret (n.)).    Meaning person who keeps records, write letters, etc., originally for a king,
first recorded c.1400. As title of ministers presiding over executive departments of state, it is
from 1590s. The word also is used in both French and English to mean a private desk, sometimes in
French form secretaire. The South African secretary bird so called (1786) in reference to its crest,
which, when smooth, resembles a pen stuck over the ear. Compare Late Latin silentiarius privy
councilor, 'silentiary, from Latin silentium a being silent.


top (n.1)

highest point, Old English top summit, crest, tuft, from Proto-Germanic *tuppaz (cognates: Old Norse
toppr tuft of hair, Old Frisian top tuft, Old Dutch topp, Dutch top, Old High German zopf end, tip,
tuft of hair, German Zopf tuft of hair); no certain connections outside Germanic except a few
Romanic words probably borrowed from Germanic.    Few Indo-European languages have a word so
generic, which can be used of the upper part or surface of just about anything. More typical is
German, which has Spitze for sharp peaks (mountains), oberfl&auml;che for the upper surface of flat
things (such as a table). Meaning highest position is from 1620s; meaning best part is from 1660s.
To go over the top is World War I slang for start an attack, in reference to the top of the
trenches; as beyond reasonable limits, too far it is recorded from 1968. Top of the world as
position of greatest eminence is from 1670s. Top-of-the-line (adj.) is by 1950.


