cross (adj.)

ill-tempered, 1630s, probably from 16c. sense of contrary, athwart, especially with reference to
winds and sailing ships, from cross (n.). Cross-purposes contradictory intentions is from 1660s.


cross (v.)

c.1200, make the sign of a cross, from cross (n.). Sense of to go across is from c.1400; that of to
cancel by drawing lines over is from mid-15c. Related: Crossed; crossing.


cross-examination (n.)

also cross examination; 1827, an examination of a witness by the other side, to 'check' the effects
of previous questioning, from cross (adj.) + examination. Related: Cross-examine (1660s).


cross-section (n.)

also cross section, 1748, originally in engineering sketches, from cross (adj.) + section (n.).
Figurative sense of representative sample is from 1903.


cross-eye

also crosseye, 1770 (implied in cross-eyed), from cross (adj.) + eye.


cross-over (n.)

also crossover, 1795, as a noun, a term in textiles, from cross (v.) + over (adv.). From 1884 in
railroading; from 1912 in biology. As a general adjective from 1893; specifically of musicians and
genres from 1971.


cross-country (adj.)

also cross country, crosscountry; 1767, of roads, from cross (v.) + country, or short for across-
country. Of flights, from 1909.


cross-patch (n.)

peevish person, usually female, c.1700, from cross (adj.) + patch (n.1) piece.


cross-dressing (n.)

also crossdressing, cross dressing, 1911, from cross (adj.) + dressing; a translation of German
Transvestismus (see transvestite).


cross-pollination (n.)

also cross pollination, 1882, from cross (adj.) + pollination.


cross-reference (n.)

also crossreference, cross reference, 1834, from cross (adj.) + reference (n.). As a verb by 1902.


cross-stitch (n.)

1710, from cross (adj.) + stitch (v.). As a verb from 1794.


crossword puzzle

January 1914, from cross (adj.) + word + puzzle. The first one ran in the New York World newspaper
Dec. 21, 1913, but was called word-cross.


cross-fire (n.)

also crossfire, 1860, from cross (adj.) + fire (n.).


cross (n.)

Old English cros (mid-10c.), from Old Irish cros, probably via Scandinavian, from Latin crux
(accusative crucem, genitive crucis) stake, cross on which criminals were impaled or hanged, hence,
figuratively, torture, trouble, misery; originally a tall, round pole; possibly of Phoenician
origin. Replaced Old English rood. Also from Latin crux are Italian croce, French croix, Spanish and
Portuguese cruz, Dutch kruis, German Kreuz.


crossroad (n.)

1719, from cross (adj.) + road.


crossbow (n.)

mid-15c., from cross (n.) + bow (n.1).


red cross (n.)

early 15c., national emblem of England (St. George's Cross), also the badge of the Order of the
Temple. Hence red-cross knight, one bearing such a marking on shield or crest. In 17c., a red cross
was the mark placed on the doors of London houses inflected with the plague. Red Cross (in Muslim
lands, red crescent) adopted as a symbol of ambulance service 1864 by the Geneva Conference.


crucial (adj.)

1706, cross-shaped, from French crucial, a medical term for ligaments of the knee (which cross each
other), from Latin crux (genitive crucis) cross (see cross (n.)). The meaning decisive, critical
(1830) is extended from a logical term, Instantias Crucis, adopted by Francis Bacon (1620); the
notion is of cross fingerboard signposts at forking roads, thus a requirement to choose.


crozier (n.)

late 13c., from Old French crocier, from Medieval Latin crociarius bearer of a cross, from crocia
cross; also from Old French croisier one who bears or has to do with a cross (see cross (n.)). The
two words merged in Middle English. Technically, the bearer of a bishop's pastoral staff;
erroneously applied to the staff itself since 1733.


crisscross (v.)

1818, from Middle English crist(s)-crosse Christ's cross (late 15c.), earlier cros-kryst (late
14c.), referring to the mark of a cross formerly written before the alphabet in hornbooks. The mark
itself stood for the phrase Christ-cross me speed ('May Christ's cross give me success'), a formula
said before reciting the alphabet [Barnhart]. Used today without awareness of origin. As an
adjective, 1846; as a noun, 1848.


cruciferous (adj.)

1650s, from Late Latin crucifer cross-bearing, from Latin crux (genitive crucis) stake, cross (see
cross (n.)). Originally in literal senses; botanical use (in reference to a symmetrical arrangement
of four petals) is from 1851.


cruise (v.)

1650s, from Dutch kruisen to cross, sail to and fro, from kruis cross, from Latin crux. Compare the
sense evolution in cognate cross (v.). Related: Cruised; cruising. As a noun from 1706.


crux (n.)

1814, cross, from Latin crux cross (see cross (n.)). Figurative use for a central difficulty, is
older, from 1718; perhaps from Latin crux interpretum a point in a text that is impossible to
interpret, in which the literal sense is something like crossroads of interpreters. Extended sense
of central point is from 1888.


saltire (n.)

c.1400, an ordinary that resembles a St. Andrew's Cross on a shield or flag, consisting of a bend
dexter and a bend sinister crossing each other, from Middle French saultoir, literally stirrup, from
Medieval Latin saltatorium, properly neuter of Latin saltatorius pertaining to leaping, from salire
to leap (see salient (adj.)). The connection between a stirrup and the diagonal cross is perhaps the
two deltoid shapes that comprise the cross.


cruciate (adj.)

cross-shaped, from Modern Latin cruciatus, from Latin crux (genitive crucis) cross (see cross (n.)).
Obsolete meaning tormented is 1530s, from Latin cruciat-, past participle stem of cruciare cause
pain or anguish to, literally crucify, from crux.


Union Jack

1670s, from union + jack (n.); properly a small British union flag flown as the jack of a ship, but
it has long been in use as a general name for the union flag. The Union flag (1630s) was introduced
to symbolize the union of the crowns of England and Scotland (in 1603) and was formed of a
combination of the cross saltire of St. Andrew and the cross of St. George. The cross saltire of St.
Patrick was added 1801 upon the union of parliaments of Great Britain and Ireland.


sain (v.)

to cross oneself; to mark with the sign of the cross, Old English segnian, from Latin signare to
sign (in Church Latin to make the sign of the Cross); see sign (n.). A common Germanic borrowing,
cognate with Old Saxon segnon, Dutch zegenen, Old High German seganon, German segnen to bless, Old
Norse signa.


crucify (v.)

c.1300, from Old French crucifer (12c., Modern French crucifier), from Vulgar Latin *crucificare,
from Late Latin crucifigere to fasten to a cross, from cruci, dative of Latin crux cross (see cross
(n.)) + figere fasten (see fix (v.)). An ancient mode of capital punishment considered especially
ignominious by the Romans. Figurative sense of to torment is 1620s. Related: Crucified; crucifying.


motocross

also moto-cross, by 1956, from motorcycle + cross-country.


cruciverbalist (n.)

maker of crossword puzzles, by 1990, coined in English from Latin cruci-, comb. form of crux cross
(see cross (n.)) + verbum word (see verb).


double-cross (n.)

1834, from double (adj.) + cross (n.) in the sense of pre-arranged swindle or fix. Originally to win
a race after promising to lose it. As a verb from 1903, American English. Related: Double-crossed;
double-crossing.


swastika (n.)

Greek cross with arms bent at right angles, 1871 (in English specifically as emblem of the Nazi
party from 1932), from Sanskrit svastika-s, literally being fortunate, from svasti-s well-being,
luck, from su- well (from PIE *(e)su- good) + as-, root of asti (he) is, which is from the same PIE
root as Latin esse to be (see essence).    Also known as gammadion (Byzantine), cross cramponnee
(heraldry), Thor's hammer, and, perhaps, fylfot. Originally an ancient cosmic or religious symbol
thought to bring good luck. Use in reference to the Nazi emblem first recorded in English in 1932.
The German word was Hakenkreuz, literally hook-cross.


gallows (n.)

c.1300, plural of Middle English galwe gallows (mid-13c.), from Old Norse galgi gallows, or from Old
English galga (Mercian), gealga (West Saxon) gallows; all from Proto-Germanic *galgon- pole
(cognates: Old Frisian galga, Middle High German galge gallows, cross, German Galgen gallows, Gothic
galga cross), from PIE *ghalgh- branch, rod (cognates: Lithuanian zalga pole, perch, Armenian dzalk
pole). In Old English, also used of the cross of the crucifixion. Plural because made of two poles.


across (adv.)

early 14c., acros, earlier a-croiz (c.1300), from Anglo-French an cros in a crossed position,
literally on cross (see cross (n.)). Prepositional meaning from one side to another is first
recorded 1590s; meaning on the other side (as a result of crossing) is from 1750. Phrase across the
board originally is from horse-racing, in reference to a bet of the same amount of money on a horse
to win, place, or show.


trans-

word-forming element meaning across, beyond, through, on the other side of, to go beyond, from Latin
trans-, from trans (prep.) across, over, beyond, perhaps originally present participle of a verb
*trare-, meaning to cross, from PIE *tra-, variant of root *tere- (2) to cross over (see through).
In chemical use indicating a compound in which two characteristic groups are situated on opposite
sides of an axis of a molecule [Flood].


traverse (v.)

early 14c., pass across, over, or through, from Old French traverser to cross, place across (11c.),
from Vulgar Latin *traversare, from Latin transversare to cross, throw across, from Latin
transversus turn across (see transverse). As an adjective from early 15c. Related: Traversed;
traversing.


crusade (n.)

1706, respelling of croisade (1570s), from Middle French croisade (16c.), Spanish cruzada, both from
Medieval Latin cruciata, past participle of cruciare to mark with a cross, from Latin crux (genitive
crucis) cross. Other Middle English forms were croiserie, creiserie. Figurative sense of campaign
against a public evil is from 1786.


cruciform (adj.)

1660s, from Modern Latin cruciformis, from Latin crux (genitive crucis) stake, cross (see cross
(n.)) + forma form (see form (n.)).


cancel (v.)

late 14c., cross out with lines, from Anglo-French canceler, from Latin cancellare to make resemble
a lattice, which in Late Latin took on a sense cross out something written by marking it with
crossed lines, from cancelli, plural of cancellus lattice, grating, diminutive of cancer crossed
bars, lattice, a variant of carcer prison (see incarceration). Figurative use, to nullify an
obligation is from mid-15c. Related: Canceled (also cancelled); cancelling.


Maltese

from Malta + -ese. Maltese cat is attested from 1830; Maltese cross is from 1754 (earlier Malta
cross, 1650s).


invention (n.)

c.1400, devised method of organization, from Old French invencion (13c.) and directly from Latin
inventionem (nominative inventio) faculty of invention; a finding, discovery, noun of action from
past participle stem of invenire devise, discover, find, from in- in, on (see in- (2)) + venire to
come (see venue).    Meaning finding or discovering of something is early 15c. in English; sense of
thing invented is first recorded 1510s. Etymological sense preserved in Invention of the Cross,
Church festival (May 3) celebrating the reputed finding of the Cross of the Crucifixion by Helena,
mother of Constantine, in 326 C.E.


rood (n.)

Old English rod pole, varying from 6 to 8 yards; also cross, especially that upon which Christ
suffered; crucifix, especially a large one; also a measure of land, properly 40 square poles or
perches, from Proto-Germanic *rod- (cognates: Old Saxon ruoda stake, pile, cross, Old Frisian rode,
Middle Dutch roede, Old High German ruota, German Rute rod), from PIE *ret- post (cognates: Latin
ratis raft, retae trees standing on the bank of a stream; Old Church Slavonic ratiste spear, staff;
Lithuanian rekles scaffolding). Probably not connected with rod.


trespass (v.)

c.1300, transgress in some active manner, commit an aggressive offense, to sin, from Old French
trespasser pass beyond or across, cross, traverse; infringe, violate, from tres- beyond (from Latin
trans-; see trans-) + passer go by, pass (see pass (v.)). Meaning enter unlawfully is first attested
in forest laws of Scottish Parliament (c.1455). The Modern French descendant of Old French
trespasser, tr&eacute;passer, has come to be used euphemistically for to die (compare euphemistic
use of cross over, and obituary). Related: Trespassed; trespassing.


x (v.)

cross out with an 'X', 1942, from X.


cranky (adj.)

cross-tempered, irritable, 1807, from crank (n.) + -y (2). The evolution would be from earlier
senses of crank, such as a twist or fanciful turn of speech (1590s); inaccessible hole or crevice
(1560s). Grose's 1787 Provincial Glossary has Cranky. Ailing sickly from the dutch crank, sick, and
identifies it as a Northern word. Jamieson's Scottish dictionary (1825) has crank in a secondary
sense of hard, difficult, as in crank word, a word hard to be understood; crank job, a work attended
with difficulty, or requiring ingenuity in the execution. Related: Crankily; crankiness.   Ben. Dang
it, don't you spare him--A cross grain'd cranky toad as ever crawl'd. (etc.) [Richard Cumberland,
Lovers Resolutions, Act I, 1813]


Iron Cross

from German das eiserne kreuz, instituted by Frederick Wilhelm III of Prussia, originally for
distinguished military service in the wars against Napoleon.


Travis

masc. proper name, also a surname (late 12c.), from an Old French word meaning to cross over,
related to traverse (v.). Probably a name for a gatekeeper or the toll collector of a bridge.


check (n.2)

pattern of squares, cross-like pattern, c.1400, short for checker (n.1).


Veronica

fem. proper name, French Veronique, a variant of Greek Berenike (see Berenice). The popular Saint
Veronica (not in the Roman Martyrology) traditionally was a pious woman who wiped the face of Christ
when he fell carrying the cross to Calvary. The image of his face remained on the cloth, and the
veil of Veronica has been preserved in Rome from the 8c. Her popularity rose with the propagation of
the Stations of the Cross, and this connection led to the folk-etymology derivation of the name from
Latin vera true + Greek eikon image. Some also identified her with the woman with the issue of
blood, cured by Christ, as in the East this woman was identified from an early date by the name
Berenike. Hence vernicle (mid-14c.) picture of the face of Christ, from Old French veronicle,
variant of veronique St. Veronica's cloth.


