Crustacea (n.)

1814, Modern Latin neuter plural of crustaceus (animalia), literally having a crust or shell, from
Latin crusta crust, rind, bark, hard shell (see crust (n.)). Taken as a zoological classification by
Lamarck, 1801; Cuvier (1798) had les insectes crustac&eacute;es.


crust (n.)

early 14c., hard outer part of bread, from Old French crouste (13c., Modern French cro&#251;te) and
directly from Latin crusta rind, crust, shell, bark, from PIE *krus-to- that which has been
hardened, from root *kreus- to begin to freeze, form a crust (cognates: Sanskrit krud- make hard,
thicken; Avestan xruzdra- hard; Greek krystallos ice, crystal, kryos icy cold, frost; Lettish
kruwesis frozen mud; Old High German hrosa ice, crust; Old English hruse earth; Old Norse hro&eth;r
scurf). Meaning outer shell of the earth is from 1550s.


crust (v.)

late 14c.; see crust (n.). Related: Crusted; crusting.


crustation (n.)

mid-17c., noun of action from crust (v.).


crusty (adj.)

c.1400, from crust (n.) + -y (2). Figurative use, of persons, short-tempered, is from 1560s.


custard (n.)

mid-14c., meat or fruit pie, crustade, from Middle French croustade (Modern French coutarde), from
Old Proven&ccedil;al croustado fruit tart, literally something covered with crust, from crosta
crust, from Latin crusta (see crust (n.)). Modern meaning is c.1600. Spelling change perhaps by
influence of mustard.


gratin (n.)

light crust over a dish, 1806 (in au gratin), from French gratin crust (16c.), from gratter to
scrape, scratch (see grate (v.)).


crouton (n.)

1806, from French cro&#251;ton small piece of toasted bread, from cro&#251;te crust, from Old French
crouste (13c.), from Latin crusta (see crust (n.)).


encrust (v.)

1640s, from French incruster, from Latin incrustare to cover with crust, from in- (see in- (2)) +
crusta (see crust). Related: Encrusted; encrusting.


upper (adj.)

c.1300, originally comparative of up (adj.). Similar formation in Middle Dutch upper, Dutch opper,
Low German upper, Norwegian yppare. Upper hand advantage is late 15c., probably from wrestling.
Upperclassman is recorded from 1871.   Upper crust is attested from mid-15c. in reference to the top
crust of a loaf of bread, 1836 in reference to society. Upper middle class (adj.) is recorded from
1835. Upper ten thousand (1844) was common mid-19c. for wealthier and more aristocratic part of a
large community; hence uppertendom.


incrustation (n.)

also encrustation, 1640s, from Late Latin incrustationem (nominative incrustatio) a covering with
crust, noun of action from past participle stem of incrustare.


beastly (adj.)

c.1200, brutish, sensual, debased; late 14c., in the manner of a beast, from beast + -ly (1).
Weakened in British upper crust use to awfully, exceedingly by mid-19c. Beastly drunk is from 1803.


cryo-

word-forming element meaning very cold, freezing, from Latinized form of Greek kryo-, comb. form of
kryos icy cold, related to kryeros chilling (see crust (n.)).


tectonic (adj.)

1650s, of or relating to building or construction, from Late Latin tectonicus, from Greek tektonikos
pertaining to building, from tekton (genitive tektonos) builder, carpenter, woodworker; master in
any art (sculpture, metal-work, writing), from PIE root *teks- to make (see texture (n.)). The
geological sense, pertaining to the structure of the Earth's crust, is recorded from 1887.


stucco (n.)

fine plaster used as a wall coating, 1590s, from Italian stucco, from a Germanic source (compare Old
High German stukki crust, piece, fragment), from Proto-Germanic *stukkjam, from PIE root *(s)teu-
(1) to push, stick, knock, beat (see stock (n.1)). The verb is attested from 1726. Related:
Stuccoed; stuccoing.


rend (v.)

Old English rendan, hrendan to tear, cut down, from West Germanic *randijan (cognates: Old Frisian
renda to cut, break, Middle Low German rende anything broken, German Rinde bark, crust), probably
related to rind. Related: Rended; rent; rending.


plutonic (adj.)

pertaining to or involving intense heat deep in the earth's crust, 1796, coined by Irish scientist
Richard Kirwin (1733-1812) from comb. form of Pluto (as god of the underworld) + -ic. Especially in
reference to early 19c. geological theory (championed by Hutton) that attributed most of the earth's
features to action of internal heat, a theory which triumphed over its rival, neptunism, which
attributed them to water. Related: Plutonism; Plutonist.


scruff (n.)

nape of the neck, 1790, altered (by influence of scruff crust) from scuft (1787), probably related
to North Frisian skuft back of the neck of a horse and Dutch schoft withers of a horse, from a
common Germanic source (compare Old Norse skopt hair of the head, Gothic skuft, Middle High German
schopf, German Schopf). Another theory holds it to be a variant of scurf.


mermaid (n.)

mid-14c., mermayde, literally maid of the sea, from Middle English mere sea, lake (see mere (n.)) +
maid. Old English had equivalent merewif water-witch (see wife), meremenn mermaid, siren. Tail-less
in northern Europe; the fishy form is a medieval influence from classical sirens. A favorite sign of
taverns and inns since at least early 15c. (in reference to the inn on Bread Street, Cheapside,
London). Mermaid pie (1660s) was a sucking pig baked whole in a crust.


rind (n.)

Old English rinde bark, crust, later peel of a fruit or vegetable (c.1400), from Proto-Germanic
*rind- (cognates: Old Saxon rinda, Middle Dutch and Dutch rinde bark of a tree, Old High German
rinda, German Rinde), probably related to Old English rendan (see rend (v.)).


coffin (n.)

early 14c., chest or box for valuables, from Old French cofin sarcophagus, earlier basket, coffer
(12c., Modern French coffin), from Latin cophinus basket, hamper (source of Italian cafano, Spanish
cuebano basket), from Greek kophinos a basket, of uncertain origin.    Funeral sense in English is
1520s; before that it was the literal Latin one and had also a meaning of pie crust (late 14c.).
Meaning vehicle regarded as unsafe is from 1830s. Coffin nail cigarette is slang from 1880; nail in
(one's) coffin thing that contributes to one's death is from 1792.


crystal (n.)

Old English cristal clear ice, clear mineral, from Old French cristal (12c., Modern French crystal),
from Latin crystallus crystal, ice, from Greek krystallos, from kryos frost, from PIE root *kru(s)-
hard, hard outer surface (see crust). Spelling adopted the Latin form 15c.-17c. The mineral has been
so-called since Old English; it was regarded by the ancients as a sort of fossilized ice. As a
shortened form of crystal-glass it dates from 1590s. As an adjective, from late 14c.


stratosphere (n.)

1908, from French stratosph&egrave;re, literally sphere of layers, coined by French meteorologist
L&eacute;on-Philippe Teisserenc de Bort (1855-1913) from Latin stratus a spreading out (from past
participle stem of sternere to spread out; see structure (n.)) + French -sph&egrave;re, as in
atmosph&egrave;re (see sphere).    The region where the temperature increases or remains steady as
you go higher. An earlier stratosphere, attested in English 1908 and coined in German 1901, was a
geological term for part of the Earth's crust. It is now obsolete. Related: Stratospheric.


mantle (n.)

Old English mentel loose, sleeveless cloak, from Latin mantellum cloak (source of Italian mantello,
Old High German mantal, German Mantel, Old Norse m&#246;tull), perhaps from a Celtic source.
Reinforced and altered 12c. by cognate Old French mantel cloak, mantle; bedspread, cover (Modern
French manteau), also from the Latin source. Figurative sense that which enshrouds is from c.1300.
Allusive use for symbol of literary authority or artistic pre-eminence is from Elijah's mantle [2
Kings ii:13]. As a layer of the earth between the crust and core (though not originally
distinguished from the core) it is attested from 1940.


scab (n.)

mid-13c., skin disease, developed from Old English sceabb scab, itch (related to scafan to shave,
scrape, scratch) and from Old Norse skabb scab, itch, both from Proto-Germanic *skab- scratch,
shave, from PIE *(s)kep- to cut, scrape, hack (see scabies). Sense reinforced by cognate Latin
scabies scab, itch, mange (from scabere to scratch).    Meaning crust which forms over a wound or
sore is first attested c.1400. Meaning strikebreaker first recorded 1806, from earlier sense of
person who refuses to join a trade union (1777), probably from meaning despicable person (1580s),
possibly borrowed in this sense from Middle Dutch.


sauerkraut (n.)

1630s, from German Sauerkraut, literally sour cabbage, from sauer sour (from Proto-Germanic *sura-;
see sour (adj.)) + Kraut vegetable, cabbage, from Old High German krut, from Proto-Germanic
*kruthan.They pickle it [cabbage] up in all high Germany, with salt and barberies, and so keepe it
all the yeere, being commonly the first dish you have served in at table, which they call their
sawerkrant. [James Hart, Klinike, or the diet of the diseased, 1633]In U.S. slang, figurative use
for a German dates from 1858 (compare kraut). The effort to substitute liberty-cabbage for
sauerkraut, made by professional patriots in 1918, was a complete failure. [Mencken]. French
choucroute (19c.) is from Alsatian German surkrut (corresponding to German Sauerkraut), with folk
etymology alteration based on chou cabbage + cro&#251;te crust (n.).


resurrection (n.)

c.1300, originally the name of a Church festival commemorating Christ's rising from death, from
Anglo-French resurrectiun, Old French resurrection the Resurrection of Christ (12c.) and directly
from Church Latin resurrectionem (nominative resurrectio) a rising again from the dead, noun of
action from past participle stem of Latin resurgere rise again, appear again (see resurgent).
Replaced Old English &aelig;riste.    Generalized sense of revival is from 1640s. Also used in
Middle English of the rising again of the dead on the Last Day (c.1300). Resurrectionist, euphemism
for grave-robber is attested from 1776. Resurrection pie was mid-19c. English schoolboy slang for a
pie made from leftovers of previous meals; first attested 1831 as a Sheffield dialect term.    There
was a dreadful pie for dinner every Monday; a meat-pie with a stony crust that did not break; but
split into scaly layers, with horrible lumps of gristle inside, and such strings of sinew
(alternated by lumps of flabby fat) as a ghoule might use as a rosary. We called it kitten pie--
resurrection pie--rag pie--dead man's pie. We cursed it by night we cursed it by day; we wouldn't
stand it, we said; we would write to our friends; we would go to sea. [How I Went to Sea, Harper's
Magazine, December 1852]


