crux (n.)

1814, cross, from Latin crux cross (see cross (n.)). Figurative use for a central difficulty, is
older, from 1718; perhaps from Latin crux interpretum a point in a text that is impossible to
interpret, in which the literal sense is something like crossroads of interpreters. Extended sense
of central point is from 1888.


cruciate (adj.)

cross-shaped, from Modern Latin cruciatus, from Latin crux (genitive crucis) cross (see cross (n.)).
Obsolete meaning tormented is 1530s, from Latin cruciat-, past participle stem of cruciare cause
pain or anguish to, literally crucify, from crux.


cross (n.)

Old English cros (mid-10c.), from Old Irish cros, probably via Scandinavian, from Latin crux
(accusative crucem, genitive crucis) stake, cross on which criminals were impaled or hanged, hence,
figuratively, torture, trouble, misery; originally a tall, round pole; possibly of Phoenician
origin. Replaced Old English rood. Also from Latin crux are Italian croce, French croix, Spanish and
Portuguese cruz, Dutch kruis, German Kreuz.


crucible (n.)

early 15c., from Medieval Latin crucibulum melting pot for metals, originally night lamp. First
element might be Middle High German kruse earthen pot. Or perhaps it is from Latin crux on some
fancied resemblance to a cross. Used of any severe test or trial since 1640s.


ankh (n.)

tau cross with an oval at the top, Egyptian symbol of life, 1873, from Egyptian ankh, literally
life, soul. Also known as crux ansata.


Rosicrucian (n.)

1620s, from Modern Latin rosa crucis (DuCange) or crux, Latinization of German Rosenkreuz, French
rosecroix, from the secret society's reputed founder Christian Rosenkreuz, said to date from 1484,
but not mentioned before 1614. As an adjective from 1660s.


cruciferous (adj.)

1650s, from Late Latin crucifer cross-bearing, from Latin crux (genitive crucis) stake, cross (see
cross (n.)). Originally in literal senses; botanical use (in reference to a symmetrical arrangement
of four petals) is from 1851.


cruciverbalist (n.)

maker of crossword puzzles, by 1990, coined in English from Latin cruci-, comb. form of crux cross
(see cross (n.)) + verbum word (see verb).


cruise (v.)

1650s, from Dutch kruisen to cross, sail to and fro, from kruis cross, from Latin crux. Compare the
sense evolution in cognate cross (v.). Related: Cruised; cruising. As a noun from 1706.


excruciate (v.)

1560s, from Latin excruciatus, past participle of excruciare to torture, torment, rack, plague;
figuratively to afflict, harass, vex, torment, from ex- out, thoroughly (see ex-) + cruciare cause
pain or anguish to, literally crucify, from crux (genitive crucis) cross.


crucial (adj.)

1706, cross-shaped, from French crucial, a medical term for ligaments of the knee (which cross each
other), from Latin crux (genitive crucis) cross (see cross (n.)). The meaning decisive, critical
(1830) is extended from a logical term, Instantias Crucis, adopted by Francis Bacon (1620); the
notion is of cross fingerboard signposts at forking roads, thus a requirement to choose.


crusade (n.)

1706, respelling of croisade (1570s), from Middle French croisade (16c.), Spanish cruzada, both from
Medieval Latin cruciata, past participle of cruciare to mark with a cross, from Latin crux (genitive
crucis) cross. Other Middle English forms were croiserie, creiserie. Figurative sense of campaign
against a public evil is from 1786.


cruciform (adj.)

1660s, from Modern Latin cruciformis, from Latin crux (genitive crucis) stake, cross (see cross
(n.)) + forma form (see form (n.)).


crucify (v.)

c.1300, from Old French crucifer (12c., Modern French crucifier), from Vulgar Latin *crucificare,
from Late Latin crucifigere to fasten to a cross, from cruci, dative of Latin crux cross (see cross
(n.)) + figere fasten (see fix (v.)). An ancient mode of capital punishment considered especially
ignominious by the Romans. Figurative sense of to torment is 1620s. Related: Crucified; crucifying.


Charles&#039;s Wain (n.)

Old English Carles w&aelig;gn, a star-group associated in medieval times with Charlemagne, but
originally with the nearby bright star Arcturus, which is linked by folk etymology to Latin Arturus
Arthur. Which places the seven-star asterism at the crux of the legendary association (or confusion)
of Arthur and Charlemagne. Evidence from Dutch (cited in Grimm, Teutonic Mythology) suggests that it
might originally have been Woden's wagon. More recent names for it are the Plough (by 15c., chiefly
British) and the Dipper (19c., chiefly American).    The seven brights stars in the modern
constellation Ursa Major have borne a dual identity in Western history at least since Homer's time,
being seen as both a wagon and a bear: as in Latin plaustrum freight-wagon, ox cart and arctos bear,
both used of the seven-star pattern, as were equivalent Greek amaxa (Attic hamaxa) and arktos.
The identification with a wagon is easy to see, with four stars as the body and three as the pole.
The identification with a bear is more difficult, as the figure has a tail longer than its body. As
Allen writes, The conformation of the seven stars in no way resembles the animal,--indeed the
contrary .... But he suggests the identification may have arisen from Aristotle's idea that its
prototype was the only creature that dared invade the frozen north. The seven stars never were below
the horizon in the latitude of the Mediterranean in Homeric and classical times (though not today,
due to precession of the equinoxes). See also Arctic for the identification of the bear and the
north in classical times.     A variety of French and English sources from the early colonial period
independently note that many native North American tribes in the northeast had long seen the seven-
star group as a bear tracked by three hunters (or a hunter and his two dogs).    Among the Teutonic
peoples, it seems to have been only a wagon, not a bear. A 10c. Anglo-Saxon astronomy manual uses
the Greek-derived Aretos, but mentions that the unlearned call it Charles's Wain:    Arheton hatte
an tungol on nor&eth; d&aelig;le, se haef&eth; seofon steorran, &amp; is for &eth;i o&thorn;rum
naman ge-hatan septemtrio, &thorn;one hata&eth; l&aelig;wede meon carles-w&aelig;n. [Anglo-Saxon
Manual of Astronomy]    [Septemtrio, the seven oxen, was another Roman name.] The star picture was
not surely identified as a bear in English before late 14c.    The unlearned of today are corrected
that the seven stars are not the Great Bear but form only a part of that large constellation. But
those who applied the name Bear apparently did so originally only to these seven stars, and from
Homer's time down to Thales, the Bear meant just the seven stars. From Rome to Anglo-Saxon England
to Arabia to India, ancient astronomy texts mention a supposed duplicate constellation to the
northern bear in the Southern Hemisphere, never visible from the north. This perhaps is based on
sailors' tales of the Southern Cross.


