cubicle (n.)

mid-15c., bedroom, from Latin cubiculum bedroom, from cubare to lie down, originally bend oneself,
from PIE root *keu(b)- to bend, turn. With Latin -clom, suffix denoting place. Obsolete from 16c.
but revived 19c. for dormitory sleeping compartment, sense of any partitioned space (such as a
library carrel or, later, office work station) is first recorded 1926.


concubine (n.)

c.1300, from Latin concubina (fem.), from concumbere to lie with, to lie together, to cohabit, from
com- with (see com-) + cubare to lie down (see cubicle). Recognized by law among polygamous peoples
as a secondary wife.


carrel (n.)

1590s, study in a cloister, from Medieval Latin carula small study in a cloister, of unknown origin;
perhaps from Latin corolla little crown, garland, used in various senses of ring (for example, a
c.1330 description of Stonehenge: &thorn;is Bretons renged about &thorn;e feld, &thorn;e karole of
&thorn;e stones beheld); extended to precincts and spaces enclosed by rails, etc. Specific sense of
private cubicle in a library is from 1919.


incubation (n.)

1610s, brooding, from Latin incubationem (nominative incubatio) a laying upon eggs, noun of action
from past participle stem of incubare to hatch, literally to lie on, rest on, from in- on (see in-
(2)) + cubare to lie (see cubicle). The literal sense of sitting on eggs to hatch them first
recorded in English 1640s.


succumb (v.)

late 15c., from Old French succomber succumb, die, lose one's (legal) case, and directly from Latin
succumbere submit, surrender, yield, be overcome; sink down; lie under; cohabit with, from sub down
(see sub-) + -cumbere take a reclining position, related to cubare lie down (see cubicle).
Originally transitive; sense of sink under pressure is first recorded c.1600. As a euphemism for to
die, from 1849. Related: Succumbed; succumbing.


succubus (n.)

late 14c., alteration (after incubus, giving a masc. form to a word generally felt as of female
meaning) of Late Latin succuba strumpet, applied to a fiend (generally in female form) having sexual
connection with men in their sleep, from succubare to lie under, from sub- under (see sub-) + cubare
to lie down (see cubicle). Related: Succubine (adj.).


incumbent (n.)

early 15c., person holding a church position, from Medieval Latin incumbentem (nominative incumbens)
holder of a church position, noun use of present participle of incumbere to obtain or possess, from
Latin incumbere recline on, figuratively apply oneself to, from in- on (see in- (2)) + -cumbere lie
down, related to cubare to lie (see cubicle). Extended to holders of any office from 1670s.


