culinary (adj.)

1630s, of the kitchen, from Latin culinarius pertaining to the kitchen, from culina kitchen, food
(see kiln). Meaning of cookery is from 1650s.


milk of magnesia (n.)

1880, proprietary name for white suspension of magnesium hydroxide in water, taken as an antacid,
invented by U.S. chemist Charles Henry Phillips. Herbal or culinary preparations resembling milk had
been similarly named (for example milk of almond) since early 15c.


polonaise (n.)

1773, woman's overdress (from fancied resemblance to Polish costume); 1797, stately dance, from
French (danse) polonaise a Polish (dance), fem. of polonais (adj.) Polish, from Pologne Poland, from
Medieval Latin Polonia Poland (see Poland). In the culinary sense, applied to dishes supposed to be
cooked in Polish style, attested from 1889.


garnish (v.)

late 14c., from Old French garniss-, present participle stem of garnir provide, furnish; fortify,
reinforce, from a Germanic stem related to Proto-Germanic *warnejan be cautious, guard, provide for
(cognates: Old High German warnon to take heed, Old English warnian to take warning, beware; see
warn). Sense evolution is from arm oneself to fit out to embellish, which was the earliest meaning
in English, though the others also were used in Middle English. Culinary sense of to decorate a dish
for the table predominated after c.1700. Older meaning survives in legal sense of warning of
attachment of funds (1570s). Related: Garnished; garnishing.


leek (n.)

culinary herb, Old English l&aelig;c (Mercian), leac (West Saxon) leek, onion, garlic, from Proto-
Germanic *lauka- (cognates: Old Norse laukr leek, garlic, Danish l&oslash;g, Swedish l&ouml;k onion,
Old Saxon lok leek, Middle Dutch looc, Dutch look leek, garlic, Old High German louh, German Lauch
leek). No known cognates; Finnish laukka, Russian luk-, Old Church Slavonic luku are borrowed from
Germanic.


kaffeeklatsch (n.)

gossip over cups of coffee, 1877, from German Kaffeeklatsch, from kaffee coffee (see coffee) +
klatsch gossip (see klatsch).    THE living-room in a German household always contains a large sofa
at one side of the room, which is the seat of honor accorded a guest. At a Kaffeeklatsch (literally,
coffee gossip) the guests of honor are seated on this sofa, and the large round table is wheeled up
before them. The other guests seat themselves in chairs about the table. [Mary Alden Hopkins, A
'Kaffeeklatsch,' Boston Cooking-School Magazine of Culinary Science and Domestic Economics, May
1905]


restaurant (n.)

1821, from French restaurant a restaurant, originally food that restores, noun use of present
participle of restaurer to restore or refresh, from Old French restorer (see restore).    In 1765 a
man by the name of Boulanger, also known as Champ d'Oiseaux or Chantoiseau, opened a shop near the
Louvre (on either the rue des Poulies or the rue Bailleul, depending on which authority one chooses
to believe). There he sold what he called restaurants or bouillons restaurants--that is, meat-based
consomm&#233;s intended to restore a person's strength. Ever since the Middle Ages the word
restaurant had been used to describe any of a variety of rich bouillons made with chicken, beef,
roots of one sort or another, onions, herbs, and, according to some recipes, spices, crystallized
sugar, toasted bread, barley, butter, and even exotic ingredients such as dried rose petals,
Damascus grapes, and amber. In order to entice customers into his shop, Boulanger had inscribed on
his window a line from the Gospels: Venite ad me omnes qui stomacho laboratis et ego vos restaurabo.
He was not content simply to serve bouillon, however. He also served leg of lamb in white sauce,
thereby infringing the monopoly of the caterers' guild. The guild filed suit, which to everyone's
astonishment ended in a judgment in favor of Boulanger. [Jean-Robert Pitte, The Rise of the
Restaurant, in Food: A Culinary History from Antiquity to the Present, English editor Albert
Sonnenfeld, transl. Clarissa Botsford, 1999, Columbia University Press]    Italian spelling
ristorante attested in English by 1925.


