cull (n.)

dupe, saphead, rogues' slang from late 16c., perhaps a shortening of cullion base fellow, originally
testicle (from French couillon, from Old French coillon testicle; worthless fellow, dolt, from Latin
coleus, literally strainer bag; see cojones), though another theory traces it to Romany (Gypsy)
chulai man. Also sometimes cully, though some authorities assert cully was the canting term for dupe
and cull was generic man, fellow, without implication of gullibility. Compare also gullible.


cull (v.)

c.1200, originally put through a strainer, from Old French coillir (12c., Modern French cueillir)
collect, gather, pluck, select, from Latin colligere gather together, collect, originally choose,
select (see collect). Related: Culled; culling. As a noun, from 1610s.


cuddle (v.)

early 16c. (implied in cudlyng), perhaps a variant of obsolete cull, coll to embrace (see collar
(n.)); or perhaps from Middle English *couthelen, from couth known, hence comfortable with. It has a
spotty early history and seems to have been a nursery word at first. Related: Cuddled; cuddling.


select (adj.)

1560s, from Latin selectus, past participle of seligere choose out, single out, select; separate,
cull, from se- apart (see secret (n.)) + legere to gather, select (see lecture (n.)). The noun
meaning a selected person or thing, that which is choice is recorded from c.1600. New England
selectman first recorded 1640s.


try (v.)

c.1300, examine judiciously, discover by evaluation, test; mid-14c., sit in judgment of, also
attempt to do, from Anglo-French trier (13c.), from Old French trier to pick out, cull (12c.), from
Gallo-Roman *triare, of unknown origin. The ground sense is separate out (the good) by examination.
Sense of subject to some strain (of patience, endurance, etc.) is recorded from 1530s. To try on
test the fit of a garment is from 1690s; to try (something) on for size in the figurative sense is
recorded by 1946. Try and instead of try to is recorded from 1680s.


triage (n.)

1727, action of assorting according to quality, from French triage a picking out, sorting (14c.),
from Old French trier to pick, cull (see try (v.)). There seems to be some influence from or
convergence with Latin tria three (as in triage for coffee beans of the third or lowest quality). In
World War I, adopted for the sorting of wounded soldiers into groups according to the severity of
their injuries, from French use.    First of all, the wounded man, or bless&#233;, is carried into
the first of the so-called Salles de Triage or sorting wards. Here his name and regimental number,
and if he is in condition to give it, the address of his family are taken; .... Then a hasty look-
over from the surgeon sends him into one of the two other Salles de Triage -- that of the Petits
Bless&#233;s if he is only slightly wounded and that of the Grands Bless&#233;s if he is more
severely so. [Woods Hutchinson, M.D., The Doctor in War, Boston, 1918]


pluck (v.)

late Old English ploccian, pluccian pull off, cull, from West Germanic *plokken (cognates: Middle
Low German plucken, Middle Dutch plocken, Dutch plukken, Flemish plokken, German pfl&#252;cken),
perhaps from Vulgar Latin *piluccare (source of Old French peluchier, late 12c.; Italian piluccare),
a frequentative, ultimately from Latin pilare pull out hair, from pilus hair (see pile (n.3)). But
despite the similarities, OED finds difficulties with this and cites gaps in historical evidence.
Related: Plucked; plucking.  To pluck a rose, an expression said to be used by women for going to
the necessary house, which in the country usually stands in the garden. [F. Grose, Classical
Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, 1785]This euphemistic use is attested from 1610s. To pluck up
summon up is from c.1300.


