cunning (adj.)

early 14c., learned, skillful, present participle of cunnen to know (see can (v.1)). Sense of
skillfully deceitful is probably late 14c. As a noun from c.1300. Related: Cunningly.


sly (adj.)

c.1200, skillful, clever, dexterous, from Old Norse sloegr cunning, crafty, sly, from Proto-Germanic
*slogis (cognates: Low German slu cunning, sly, German schlau), probably from base *slak- to strike,
hit (see slay (v.)), with an original notion of able to hit. Compare German verschlagen cunning,
crafty, sly, schlagfertig quick-witted, literally strike-ready, from schlagen to strike. A non-
pejorative use of the word lingered in northern English dialect until 20c. On the sly in secret is
recorded from 1812. Sly-boots a seeming Silly, but subtil Fellow is in the 1700 Dictionary of the
Canting Crew.


Medea

famous sorceress, daughter of the king of Colchis, from Latin Medea, from Greek Medeia, literally
cunning, related to medos counsel, plan, device, cunning, medein to protect, rule over, from PIE
root *med- to measure, limit, consider (see meditation).


wily (adj.)

subtle, cunning, crafty, early 14c., from wile (n.) + -ly (1). Related: Wiliness. In 16c. English
had wily-pie cunning fellow.


sleight (n.)

cunning, early 14c. alteration of sleahthe (c.1200), from Old Norse sloeg&eth; cleverness, cunning,
slyness, from sloegr (see sly). Meaning skill, cleverness, dexterity is from late 14c. Meaning feat
or trick requiring quickness and nimbleness of the hands is from 1590s. Term sleight of hand is
attested from c.1400.


shrewd (adj.)

c.1300, wicked, evil, from shrewe wicked man (see shrew). Compare crabbed from crab (n.), dogged
from dog (n.), wicked from witch (n.). The sense of cunning is first recorded 1510s. Related:
Shrewdly; shrewdness. Strutt's Sports and Pastimes of the People of England (1801) has a shrewdness
of apes for a company or group of them. Shrewdie cunning person is from 1916.


canny (adj.)

1630s, Scottish and northern English formation from can (v.1) in its sense of know how to, + -y (2).
Knowing, hence, careful. A doublet of cunning that flowed into distinct senses. Often used
superciliously of Scots by their southern neighbors (and their American cousins).    The Canny Scot
is so well known as scarcely to require description. He carries caution, cunning, and selfishness to
excess. Deceitful when a purpose is to be accomplished, he is not habitually deceitful. One thing he
never loses sight of--his own interest. But of his own interest he is not the most enlightened
judge. [The Natural History of Scotsmen, in The Argosy, December 1865]    Related: Cannily;
canniness.


subtle (adj.)

c.1300 (mid-13c. as a surname), sotil, penetrating; ingenious; refined (of the mind); sophisticated,
intricate, abstruse (of arguments), from Old French sotil, soutil, subtil adept, adroit; cunning,
wise; detailed; well-crafted (12c., Modern French subtil), from Latin subtilis fine, thin, delicate,
finely woven; figuratively precise, exact, accurate, in taste or judgment, fine, keen, of style,
plain, simple, direct, from sub under (see sub-) + -tilis, from tela web, net, warp of a fabric (see
texture (n.)).     From early 14c. in reference to things, of thin consistency; in reference to
craftsmen, cunning, skilled, clever; Depreciative sense insidious, treacherously cunning; deceitful
is from mid-14c. Material senses of not dense or viscous, light; pure; delicate, thin, slender;
fine, consisting of small particles are from late 14c. sotil wares were goods sold in powdered form
or finely ground. Partially re-Latinized in spelling, and also by confusion with subtile.


slim (adj.)

1650s, thin, slight, slender, from Dutch slim bad, sly, clever, from Middle Dutch slim bad, crooked,
from Proto-Germanic *slembaz oblique, crooked (cognates: Middle High German slimp slanting, awry,
German schlimm bad, cunning, unwell). In English 17c. also sometimes with a sense sly, cunning,
crafty. Related: Slimly; slimness. With obsolete extended adjectival forms Slimsy flimsy,
unsubstantial (1845); slimikin small and slender (1745). Slim Jim attested from 1887 in sense of
very thin person; from 1902 as a type of slender cigar; from 1975 as a brand of meat snack.


wise (adj.)

Old English wis learned, sagacious, cunning; sane; prudent, discreet; experienced; having the power
of discerning and judging rightly, from Proto-Germanic *wissaz (cognates: Old Saxon, Old Frisian
wis, Old Norse viss, Dutch wijs, German weise wise), from past participle adjective *wittos of PIE
root *weid- to see, hence to know (see vision). Modern slang meaning aware, cunning first attested
1896. Related to the source of Old English witan to know, wit.  A wise man has no extensive
knowledge; He who has extensive knowledge is not a wise man. [Lao-tzu, Tao te Ching, c.550 B.C.E.]
Wise man was in Old English. Wise guy is attested from 1896, American English; wise-ass (n.) by
1966, American English (probably a literal sense is intended by the phrase in the 1607 comedy
Westward Hoe by Dekker and Webster). Wisenheimer, with mock German or Yiddish surname suffix, first
recorded 1904.


snide (adj.)

1859, thieves' slang, counterfeit, sham, bad, spurious, of unknown origin. Of persons, cunning,
sharp, from 1883. Sense of sneering is first attested 1933, perhaps via sense of hypocrisy,
malicious gossip (1902). Related: Sneeringly.


Daedalus

father of Icarus in Greek mythology, builder of the Cretan labyrinth, from Greek Daidalos, literally
the cunning worker, from daidallein to work artfully.


loopy (adj.)

full of loops, 1856, from loop + -y (2). Slang sense crazy is attested from 1923. Earlier figurative
sense was cunning, deceitful (by 1825).


foxy (adj.)

1520s, crafty, cunning, from fox (n.) + -y (2). Of colors, stains, tints, etc. from 18c. Meaning
attractive is 1895, American English slang. Related: Foxiness.


Metis

first wife of Zeus, from Greek Metis, literally advice, wisdom, counsel; cunning, skill, craft, from
PIE root *me- to measure (see meter (n.2)).


subtility (n.)

late 14c., acuteness, skill, cunning, alteration of subtlety (q.v.) on model of subtile, or else
from Old French subtilite, from Latin subtilitas fineness, simplicity.


buffet (n.2)

c.1200, blow struck with a fist or weapon, from Old French bufet slap, punch, diminutive of bufe a
blow, slap, punch; puff of wind, figuratively cunning trick, probably echoic of the sound of
something soft being hit.


Machiavellian (adj.)

cunning, deceitful, unscrupulous, 1570s, from Niccolo Machiavelli (1469-1527), Florentine statesman
and author of Del Principe, a work advising rulers to place advantage above morality. A word of
abuse in English well before his works were translated (The Discourses 1636, The Prince 1640), in
part because his books were Indexed by the Church, in part because of French attacks on him (such as
Gentillet's, translated into English 1602).


Ganymede

Trojan youth whom Zeus made his cup-bearer, from Greek Ganymedes, literally rejoicing in his
virility, from ganymai I rejoice, am glad + medea (plural) counsels, plans, cunning (see Medea), but
here taken by many to mean genitals. Used figuratively of serving-boys (c.1600) and catamites
(1590s).


daedal (adj.)

1580s, skillful, cunning, from Latin daedalus, from Greek daidalos skillful, cunningly wrought. Also
an anglicized form of the name Daedalus from Greek mythology (1610s).


crafty (adj.)

mid-12c., crafti, from Old English cr&aelig;ftig strong, powerful, later skillful, ingenious,
degenerating by c.1200 to cunning, sly (but through 15c. also skillfully done or made; intelligent,
learned; artful, scientific) from craft (n.) + -y (2). Related: Craftily; craftiness.


astute (adj.)

1610s, from Latin astutus crafty, wary, shrewd; sagacious, expert, from astus cunning, cleverness,
adroitness, of uncertain origin, perhaps from Greek asty town, a word borrowed into Latin and with
an overtone of city sophistication (compare asteism). Related: Astutely; astuteness.


pie (n.2)

magpie, mid-13c. (late 12c. as a surname), from Old French pie (13c.), from Latin pica magpie (see
magpie). In 16c., a wily pie was a cunning person.


Diomedes

Greek hero in the Trojan War, literally advised by Zeus, from Dios, genitive of Zeus (see Zeus) +
medos counsel, plan, device, cunning (see Medea).


Ladino (n.)

1889, Spanish mixed with Hebrew, Arabic, and other elements, written in Hebrew characters, spoken by
Sephardim in Turkey, Greece, etc. From Spanish Ladino sagacious, cunning crafty, originally knowing
Latin, Latin, from Latin Latinus. The Spanish word also has appeared in 19c. American English in its
senses vicious horse and, in Central America, mestizo, white person.


Pratt

the surname apparently is from Old English *pr&aelig;tt (adj.) cunning, astute; related to late Old
English noun pr&aelig;tt a trick (see pretty). As a type of pottery, named for Staffordshire pottery
manufacturer Felix Pratt (1780-1859).


experiment (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French esperment practical knowledge, cunning, enchantment; trial, proof,
example, lesson, from Latin experimentum a trial, test, proof, experiment, noun of action from
experiri to test, try (see experience (n.)).


acute (adj.)

late 14c., originally of fevers and diseases, coming and going quickly (opposed to a chronic), from
Latin acutus sharp, pointed, figuratively shrill, penetrating; intelligent, cunning, past participle
of acuere sharpen (see acuity). Meaning sharp, irritating is from early 15c. Meaning intense is from
1727. Related: Acutely; acuteness.


insidious (adj.)

1540s, from Middle French insidieux (15c.) or directly from Latin insidiosus deceitful, cunning,
artful, from insidiae (plural) plot, snare, ambush, from insidere sit on, occupy, from in- in (see
in- (2)) + sedere to sit (see sedentary). Related: Insidiously; insidiousness.


Andromeda

constellation, 1667 (earlier Andromece, mid-15c.); in classical mythology the daughter of Cepheus
and Cassiopeia, from Greek, literally mindful of her husband, from andros, genitive of aner man (see
anthropo-) + medesthai to be mindful of, think on, related to medea (neuter plural) counsels, plans,
devices, cunning (and source of the name Medea).


Brit (n.)

U.S. colloquial shortening of Britisher or Briton, 1901, formerly (in common with Britisher) highly
offensive to Englishmen traveling in the States, who regarded it as yet another instance of the
odious vulgarism of the Americans, but Bret and Bryt were common Old English words for the (Celtic)
Britons and survived until c.1300. In Old French, Bret as an adjective meant British, Breton;
cunning, crafty; simple-minded, stupid.


Sophia

fem. proper name, from Greek sophia skill, knowledge of, acquaintance with; sound judgement,
practical wisdom; cunning, shrewdness; philosophy, also wisdom personified, abstract noun from
sophos wise (see sophist). Saint Sophia in ancient church names and place names in the East is not
necessarily a reference to a person; the phrase also is the English translation of the Greek for
divine wisdom, holy wisdom, to which churches were dedicated.


fickle (adj.)

c.1200, probably from Old English ficol deceitful, cunning, tricky, related to befician deceive, and
to facen deceit, treachery. Common Germanic (compare Old Saxon fekan deceit, Old High German feihhan
deceit, fraud, treachery), from PIE *peig- (2) evil-minded, treacherous, hostile (see foe). Sense of
changeable is first recorded late 13c. Related: Fickleness.


artifice (n.)

1530s, workmanship, the making of anything by craft or skill, from Middle French artifice skill,
cunning (14c.), from Latin artificium a profession, trade, employment, craft; making by art, from
artifex (genitive artificis) craftsman, artist, from stem of ars art (see art (n.)) + facere do (see
factitious). Meaning device, trick (the usual modern sense) is from 1650s.


subtlety (n.)

c.1300, sotilte, skill, ingenuity, from Old French sotilte skillfulness, cunning (Modern French
subtilit&#233;), from Latin subtilitatem (nominative subtilitas) fineness; simplicity, slenderness,
noun of quality from subtilis fine, thin, delicate (see subtle). From late 14c. as cleverness,
shrewdness; trickery, guile, craftiness, also thinness, slenderness, smallness; rarity. The -b-
begins to appear late 14c. in English, in imitation of Latin.


quaint (adj.)

c.1200, cointe, cunning, ingenious; proud, from Old French cointe knowledgeable, well-informed;
clever; arrogant, proud; elegant, gracious, from Latin cognitus known, approved, past participle of
cognoscere get or come to know well (see cognizance). Modern spelling is from early 14c.    Later in
English, elaborate, skillfully made (c.1300); strange and clever (mid-14c.). Sense of old-fashioned
but charming is first attested 1795, and could describe the word itself, which had become rare after
c.1700 (though it soon recovered popularity in this secondary sense).  Related: Quaintly;
quaintness.


curry favor (v.)

early 16c., altered by folk etymology from curry favel (c.1400) from Old French correier fauvel to
be false, hypocritical, literally to curry the chestnut horse, which in medieval French allegories
was a symbol of cunning and deceit. See curry (v.). Old French fauvel is from a Germanic source and
ultimately related to fallow (adj.); the sense here is entangled with that of similar-sounding Old
French favele lying, deception, from Latin fabella, diminutive of fabula (see fable (n.)).


can (v.1)

Old English 1st &amp; 3rd person singular present indicative of cunnan know, have power to, be able,
(also to have carnal knowledge), from Proto-Germanic *kunnan to be mentally able, to have learned
(cognates: Old Norse kenna to know, make known, Old Frisian kanna to recognize, admit, German kennen
to know, Gothic kannjan to make known), from PIE root *gno- (see know).    Absorbing the third sense
of to know, that of to know how to do something (in addition to to know as a fact and to be
acquainted with something or someone). An Old English preterite-present verb, its original past
participle, couth, survived only in its negation (see uncouth), but see also could. The present
participle has spun off as cunning.


smooth (adj.)

Old English smo&#240; smooth, serene, calm, variant of sme&#240;e free from roughness, not harsh,
polished; soft; suave; agreeable, of unknown origin and with no known cognates. Of words, looks,
pleasant, polite, sincere late 14c., but later flattering, insinuating (mid-15c.). Slang meaning
superior, classy, clever is attested from 1893. Sense of stylish is from 1922.   Smooth-bore in
reference to guns is from 1812. smooth talk (v.) is recorded from 1950. A 1599 dictionary has
smoothboots a flatterer, a faire spoken man, a cunning tongued fellow. The usual Old English form
was sme&#240;e, and there is a dialectal smeeth found in places names, such as Smithfield, Smedley.


sophist (n.)

one who makes use of fallacious arguments, mid-15c., earlier sophister (late 14c.), from Latin
sophista, sophistes, from Greek sophistes a master of one's craft; a wise or prudent man, one clever
in matters of daily life, from sophizesthai to become wise or learned, from sophos skilled in a
handicraft, cunning in one's craft; clever in matters of everyday life, shrewd; skilled in the
sciences, learned; clever; too clever, of unknown origin. Greek sophistes came to mean one who gives
intellectual instruction for pay, and at Athens, contrasted with philosopher, it became a term of
contempt.    Sophists taught before the development of logic and grammar, when skill in reasoning
and in disputation could not be accurately distinguished, and thus they came to attach great value
to quibbles, which soon brought them into contempt. [Century Dictionary]


vicious (adj.)

late 14c., unwholesome, impure, of the nature of vice, wicked, corrupting, pernicious, harmful; of a
text, erroneous, corrupt, from Anglo-French vicious, Old French vicios wicked, cunning, underhand;
defective, illegal (Modern French vicieux), from Latin vitiosus (Medieval Latin vicious) faulty,
full of faults, defective, corrupt; wicked, depraved, from vitium fault (see vice (n.1)).    Meaning
inclined to be savage or dangerous is first recorded 1711 (originally of animals, especially
horses); that of full of spite, bitter, severe is from 1825. In law, marred by some inherent fault
(late 14c.), hence also this sense in logic (c.1600), as in vicious circle in reasoning (c.1792,
Latin circulus vitiosus), which was given a general sense of a situation in which action and
reaction intensify one another by 1839. Related: Viciously (mid-14c., sinfully); viciousness.


thug (n.)

1810, member of a gang of murderers and robbers in India who strangled their victims, from Marathi
thag, thak cheat, swindler, Hindi thag, perhaps from Sanskrit sthaga-s cunning, fraudulent, from
sthagayati (he) covers, conceals, perhaps from PIE root *(s)teg- (2) to cover (see stegosaurus).
The thugs roamed about the country in bands of from 10 to 100, usually in the disguise of peddlers
or pilgrims, gaining the confidence of other travelers, whom they strangled, when a favorable
opportunity presented itself, with a handkerchief, an unwound turban, or a noosed cord. The shedding
of blood was seldom resorted to. The motive of the thugs was not so much lust of plunder as a
certain religious fanaticism. The bodies of their victims were hidden in graves dug with a
consecrated pickax, and of their spoil one third was devoted to the goddess Kali, whom they
worshiped. [Century Dictionary]    The more correct Indian name is phanseegur (from phansi noose),
and the activity was described in English as far back as c.1665. Rigorously prosecuted by the
British from 1831, they were driven from existence by century's end. Transferred sense of ruffian,
cutthroat, violent lowbrow is from 1839.


spider (n.)

late 14c., spydyr, from earlier spi&#254;re, spi&#254;ur, spi&#254;er (14c.), from Old English
spi&#240;ra, from Proto-Germanic *spin-thron- (cognate with Danish spinder), literally the spinner,
from *spen-wo- to spin (see spin (v.)) + formative or agential *-thro. The connection with the root
is more transparent in other Germanic cognates (such as Middle Low German, Middle Dutch, Middle High
German, German spinne, Dutch spin spider).    The male is commonly much smaller than the female, and
in impregnating the female runs great risk of being devoured. The difference in sizes is as if the
human female should be some 60 or 70 feet tall. [Century Dictionary]    Not the common word in Old
English, which identified the creatures as loppe, lobbe, also atorcoppe, and, from Latin, renge.
Another Old English word was gangewifre a weaver as he goes, and Middle English had araine spider
(14c.-15c., from French). In literature, often a figure of cunning, skill, and industry as well as
poisonous predation. As the name for a type of two-pack solitaire, it is attested from 1890. Spider
plant is from 1852; spider crab is from 1710, used of various species; spider monkey is from 1764,
so called for its long limbs.


pretty (adj.)

Old English pr&aelig;ttig (West Saxon), pretti (Kentish), *prettig (Mercian) cunning, skillful,
artful, wily, astute, from pr&aelig;tt, *prett a trick, wile, craft, from Proto-Germanic *pratt-
(cognates: Old Norse prettr a trick, prettugr tricky; Frisian pret, Middle Dutch perte, Dutch pret
trick, joke, Dutch prettig sportive, funny, Flemish pertig brisk, clever), of unknown origin.
Connection between Old English and Middle English words is uncertain, but if they are the same,
meaning had shifted by c.1400 to manly, gallant, and later moved via attractive, skillfully made, to
fine, to beautiful in a slight way (mid-15c.). Ironical use from 1530s. For sense evolution, compare
nice, silly. Also used of bees (c.1400). After the OE. period the word is unknown till the 15th c.,
when it becomes all at once frequent in various senses, none identical with the OE., though
derivable from it [OED].     Meaning not a few, considerable is from late 15c. With a sense of
moderately, qualifying adjectives and adverbs, since 1560s. Pretty please as an emphatic plea is
attested from 1902. A pretty penny lot of money is first recorded 1768.


art (n.)

early 13c., skill as a result of learning or practice, from Old French art (10c.), from Latin artem
(nominative ars) work of art; practical skill; a business, craft, from PIE *ar-ti- (cognates:
Sanskrit rtih manner, mode; Greek arti just, artios complete, suitable, artizein to prepare; Latin
artus joint; Armenian arnam make; German art manner, mode), from root *ar- fit together, join (see
arm (n.1)).    In Middle English usually with a sense of skill in scholarship and learning (c.1300),
especially in the seven sciences, or liberal arts. This sense remains in Bachelor of Arts, etc.
Meaning human workmanship (as opposed to nature) is from late 14c. Sense of cunning and trickery
first attested c.1600. Meaning skill in creative arts is first recorded 1610s; especially of
painting, sculpture, etc., from 1660s. Broader sense of the word remains in artless.   Fine arts,
those which appeal to the mind and the imagination first recorded 1767. Expression art for art's
sake (1824) translates French l'art pour l'art. First record of art critic is from 1847. Arts and
crafts decorative design and handcraft first attested in the Arts and Crafts Exhibition Society,
founded in London, 1888.    Supreme art is a traditional statement of certain heroic and religious
truths, passed on from age to age, modified by individual genius, but never abandoned. The revolt of
individualism came because the tradition had become degraded, or rather because a spurious copy had
been accepted in its stead. [William Butler Yeats]


