curb (v.)

1520s, of horses, to lead to a curb, from curb (n.). Figurative use from 1580s. Related: Curbed;
curbing.


curb (n.)

late 15c., strap passing under the jaw of a horse (used to restrain the animal), from Old French
courbe (12c.) curb on a horse, from Latin curvus, from curvare to bend (see curve (v.)). Meaning
enclosed framework is from 1510s, probably originally with a notion of curved; extended to margins
of garden beds 1731; to margin of stone between a sidewalk and road 1791 (sometimes spelled kerb).
Figurative sense of a check, a restraint is from 1610s.


curbstone (n.)

1791, from curb (n.) + stone (n.).


grommet (n.)

1620s, ring or wreath of rope, from obsolete French gromette curb of a bridle (Modern French
gourmette), from gourmer to curb, of uncertain origin. Extended sense of metal eyelet first recorded
1769.


kerb (n.)

1660s, a variant of curb (n.). The preferred British English spelling in certain specialized senses,
especially edging of stone on a pavement (1805).


uncurbed (adj.)

1590s, from un- (1) not + past participle of curb (v.).


bridle (n.)

Old English bridel bridle, rein, curb, restraint, related to bregdan move quickly, from Proto-
Germanic *bregdilaz (see braid (v.)).


hackamore (n.)

halter for breaking horses, 1850, American English, of uncertain origin. OED and Klein suggests a
corruption of Spanish jaquima (earlier xaquima) halter, headstall of a horse, which Klein suggests
is from Arabic shakimah bit of a bridle, curb, restraint.


brake (n.1)

mid-15c., instrument for crushing or pounding, from Middle Dutch braeke flax brake, from breken to
break (see break (v.)). The word was applied to many crushing implements and to the ring through the
nose of a draught ox. It was influenced in sense by Old French brac, a form of bras an arm, thus a
lever or handle, which was being used in English from late 14c., and applied to a bridle or curb
from early 15c. One or the other or both took up the main modern meaning of stopping device for a
wheel, first attested 1772.


restrain (v.)

mid-14c., from stem of Old French restreindre press, push together; curb, bridle; bandage (12c.),
from Latin restringere draw back tightly, confine, check (see restriction). Related: Restrained;
restraining.    That which we restrain we keep within limits; that which we restrict we keep within
certain definite limits; that which we repress we try to put out of existence. [Century Dictionary,
1902]


refrain (v.)

mid-14c., from Old French refraigner restrain, repress, keep in check (12c., Modern French
R&#233;fr&#233;ner), from Latin refrenare to bridle, hold in with a bit, check, curb, keep down,
control, from re- back (see re-) + frenare restrain, furnish with a bridle, from frenum a bridle.
Related: Refrained; refraining.


measure (v.)

c.1300, to deal out by measure, from Old French mesurer measure; moderate, curb (12c.), from Late
Latin mensurare to measure, from Latin mensura a measuring, a measurement; thing to measure by, from
mensus, past participle of metiri to measure, from PIE *me- (2) to measure (see meter (n.2)).
Replaced Old English cognate m&aelig;&eth; measure. Meaning to ascertain spatial dimensions of is
mid-14c. To measure up have the necessary abilities is 1910, American English. Related: Measured;
measuring.


repress (v.)

late 14c., to check, restrain, from Latin repressus, past participle of reprimere hold back, curb,
figuratively check, confine, restrain, refrain, from re- back (see re-) + premere to push (see press
(v.1)).    Used of feelings or desires from late 14c.; in the purely psychological sense, it
represents German verdr&auml;ngen (Freud, 1893), first attested 1904 (implied in repressed). Meaning
to put down (a rebellion, etc.) is from late 15c. Related: Repressed; repressing.


cloy (v.)

weary by too much, fill to loathing, surfeit, 1520s, from Middle English cloyen hinder movement,
encumber (late 14c.), a shortening of accloyen (early 14c.), from Old French encloer to fasten with
a nail, grip, grasp, figuratively to hinder, check, stop, curb, from Late Latin inclavare drive a
nail into a horse's foot when shoeing, from Latin clavus a nail (see slot (n.2)).    Accloye is a
hurt that cometh of shooing, when a Smith driveth a nail in the quick, which make him to halt.
[Edward Topsell, The History of Four-footed Beasts, 1607]    The figurative meaning fill to a
satiety, overfill is attested for accloy from late 14c. Related: Cloyed; cloying.


hem (n.)

Old English hem a border, especially of cloth or a garment, from Proto-Germanic *hamjam (cognates:
Old Norse hemja to bridle, curb, Swedish h&auml;mma to stop, restrain, Old Frisian hemma to hinder,
Middle Dutch, German hemmen to hem in, stop, hinder), from PIE *kem- to compress. Apparently the
same root yielded Old English hamm, common in place names (where it means enclosure, land hemmed in
by water or high ground, land in a river bend). In Middle English, hem also was a symbol of pride or
ostentation.    If &thorn;ei wer &thorn;e first &thorn;at schuld puplysch &thorn;ese grete myracles
of her mayster, men myth sey of hem, as Crist ded of &thorn;e Pharisees, &thorn;at &thorn;ei
magnified her owne hemmys. [John Capgrave, Life of Saint Gilbert of Sempringham, 1451]


