curtail (v.)

late 15c., from Middle French courtault made short, from court short (Old French cort, from Latin
curtus; see curt) + -ault pejorative suffix of Germanic origin. Originally curtal; used of horses
with docked tails, which probably influenced the spelling in general use; curtal is retained in
poetics to describe a shortened stanza or poem. Related: Curtailed; curtailing.


resect (v.)

1650s, from Latin resectus, past participle of resecare to cut off, cut loose, curtail, from re-,
intensive prefix (see re-), + secare to cut (see section (n.)). Surgical sense is from 1846.
Related: Resected; resecting.


stint (v.)

to be sparing or frugal, 1722, earlier to limit, restrain (1510s), cause to cease, put an end to
(mid-14c.), cease, desist (intransitive), c.1200, from Old English styntan to blunt, make dull,
probably originally make short, from Proto-Germanic *stuntijanan (cognates: Old Norse stuttr short,
scant, Middle High German stunz blunt, short, German stutzen to cut short, curtail, stop, hesitate),
from PIE root *(s)teu- (1) to push, stick, knock, beat (see steep (adj.)). The English word perhaps
was influenced by its Scandinavian cognates. Sense of be careful in expenditure is from 1848.
Related: Stinted; stinting. The noun is attested from c.1300.


break (v.)

Old English brecan to break, shatter, burst; injure, violate, destroy, curtail; break into, rush
into; burst forth, spring out; subdue, tame (class IV strong verb; past tense br&aelig;c, past
participle brocen), from Proto-Germanic *brekan (cognates: Old Frisian breka, Dutch breken, Old High
German brehhan, German brechen, Gothic brikan), from PIE root *bhreg- to break (see fraction). Most
modern senses were in Old English. In reference to the heart from early 13c. Meaning to disclose is
from early 13c.   Break bread share food (with) is from late 14c. Break the ice is c.1600, in
reference to the coldness of encounters of strangers. Break wind first attested 1550s. To break
(something) out (1890s) probably is an image from dock work, of freeing cargo before unloading it.
Ironic theatrical good luck formula break a leg has parallels in German Hals- und Beinbruch break
your neck and leg, and Italian in bocca al lupo. Evidence of a highly superstitious craft (see
Macbeth).


