cynical (adj.)

1580s, resembling Cynic philosophers, from cynic + -al (1). By late 17c. the meaning had shaded into
the general one of critical, disparaging the motives of others, captious, sneering, peevish.
Related: Cynically.


cynicism (n.)

1670s, philosophy of the Cynics, from cynic + -ism. Meaning cynical character is from 1847. For
nuances of usage of cynicism, see humor.


panem et circenses

Latin, literally bread and circuses, supposedly coined by Juvenal and describing the cynical formula
of the Roman emperors for keeping the masses content with ample food and entertainment.   Duas
tantum res anxius optat, Panem et circenses [Juvenal, Sat. x.80].


finicky (adj.)

1825, dainty, mincing, from finical too particular (1590s), perhaps from fine (adj.) + -ical as in
cynical, ironical. The -k- between the final -c- and a suffix beginning in -i, -y, or -e is an
orthographic rule to mark the pronunciation of -c- as k (compare picnicking, trafficking, panicky,
shellacked).


made (adj.)

late 14c., from Middle English maked, from Old English macod made, past participle of macian to make
(see make). Made up invented is from 1789; of minds, settled, decided, from 1873. To be a made man
is in Marlowe's Faust (1590). To have it made (1955) is American English colloquial. Grose's
dictionary of slang and cant (1785) has for this word what might be the shortest and most cynical
definition ever penned: MADE. Stolen. Cant.


farm (n.)

c.1300, fixed payment (usually in exchange for taxes collected, etc.), fixed rent, from Old French
ferme rent, lease, from Medieval Latin firma fixed payment, from Latin firmare to fix, settle,
confirm, strengthen, from firmus firm (see firm (adj.)).    Sense of tract of leased land is first
recorded early 14c.; that of cultivated land (leased or not) is 1520s. Phrase buy the farm die in
battle, is at least from World War II, perhaps a cynical reference to the draftee's dream of getting
out of the war and going home, in many cases to a peaceful farmstead. But fetch the farm is prisoner
slang from at least 1879 for get sent to the infirmary, with reference to the better diet and
lighter duties there.


