damage (n.)

late 13c., from Old French damage (12c., Modern French dommage) loss caused by injury, from dam
damage, from Latin damnum loss, hurt, damage (see damn).


damage (v.)

early 14c., from Old French damagier, from damage (see damage (n.)). Related: Damaged; damaging.


indemnity (n.)

mid-15c., from Middle French indemnit&eacute; (14c.), from Late Latin indemnitatem (nominative
indemnitas) security for damage, from Latin indemnis unhurt, undamaged, from in- not, opposite of,
without (see in- (1)) + damnum damage (see damn).


average (n.)

late 15c., financial loss incurred through damage to goods in transit, from French avarie damage to
ship, and Italian avaria; a word from 12c. Mediterranean maritime trade (compare Spanish averia;
other Germanic forms, Dutch avarij, German haferei, etc., also are from Romanic languages), of
uncertain origin. Sometimes traced to Arabic 'arwariya damaged merchandise. Meaning shifted to equal
sharing of such loss by the interested parties. Transferred sense of statement of a medial estimate
is first recorded 1735. The mathematical extension is from 1755.


prejudice (n.)

c.1300, despite, contempt, from Old French prejudice prejudice, damage (13c.), from Medieval Latin
prejudicium injustice, from Latin praeiudicium prior judgment, from prae- before (see pre-) +
iudicium judgment, from iudex (genitive iudicis) a judge (see judge (v.)). Meaning injury, physical
harm is mid-14c., as is legal sense detriment or damage caused by the violation of a legal right.
Meaning preconceived opinion (especially but not necessarily unfavorable) is from late 14c. in
English.


blemish (v.)

early 14c., to hurt, damage, from Old French blemiss- to turn pale, extended stem of blemir, blesmir
to make pale; stain, discolor, also to injure (13c., Modern French bl&ecirc;mir), probably from
Frankish *blesmjan to cause to turn pale, or some other Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic *blas
shining, white, from PIE root *bhel- (1) to shine, flash, burn (see bleach (v.)).    The order of
appearance of senses in Middle English is hurt, damage; impair morally, sully (late 14c.); mar,
spoil, injure (early 15c.); to mar the beauty or soundness of (mid-15c.). Related: Blemished;
blemishing.


schadenfreude (n.)

malicious joy in the misfortunes of others, 1922, German Schadenfreude, literally damage-joy, from
schaden damage, harm, injury (see scathe) + freude, from Old High German frewida joy, from fro
happy, literally hopping for joy, from Proto-Germanic *frawa- (see frolic).What a fearful thing is
it that any language should have a word expressive of the pleasure which men feel at the calamities
of others; for the existence of the word bears testimony to the existence of the thing. And yet in
more than one such a word is found. ... In the Greek epikhairekakia, in the German, 'Schadenfreude.'
[Richard C. Trench, On the Study of Words, 1852]


collateral damage (n.)

by 1873 in legal cases; in modern use, generally a euphemism for the coincidental killing of
civilians, U.S. coinage, c.1968, at first generally with reference to nuclear weapons.


scathe (v.)

c.1200, from Old Norse ska&eth;a to hurt, harm, damage, injure, from Proto-Germanic *skath-
(cognates: Old English scea&thorn;ian to hurt, injure, Old Saxon skathon, Old Frisian skethia,
Middle Dutch scaden, Dutch schaden, Old High German scadon, German schaden, Gothic sca&thorn;jan to
injure, damage), from PIE root *sket- to injure. Only cognate outside Germanic seems to be in Greek
a-skethes unharmed, unscathed.    It survives mostly in its negative form, unscathed, and in
figurative meaning sear with invective or satire (1852, usually as scathing) which developed from
the sense of scar, scorch used by Milton in Paradise Lost i.613 (1667).


burst (n.)

1610s, act of bursting, from burst (v.). Meaning a spurt (of activity, etc.) is from 1862. The
earlier noun berst (early Middle English) meant damage, injury, harm.


breakage (n.)

1813, action of breaking, from break (v.) + -age. Meaning loss or damage done by breaking is from
1848.


worst (v.)

damage, inflict loss upon, c.1600, from worst (adj.). Meaning defeat in argument is from 1650s.
Related: Worsted; worsting.


mayhem (n.)

late 15c., from Anglo-French maihem (13c.), from Old French mahaigne injury, wrong, a hurt, harm,
damage; related to mahaignier to injure, wound, mutilate, cripple (see maim). Originally, in law,
the crime of maiming a person to make him less able to defend himself or annoy his adversary [OED].


lesion (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French lesion, from Latin laesionem (nominative laesio) injury, from past
participle stem of laedere to strike, hurt, damage, of unknown origin. Originally with reference to
any sort of hurt, whether physical or not.


rehabilitate (v.)

1570s, to bring back to a former condition after decay or damage, back-formation from rehabilitation
and in part from Medieval Latin rehabilitatus, past participle of rehabilitare. Meaning to restore
one's reputation or character in the eyes of others is from 1847. Related: Rehabilitated;
rehabilitating.


lese-majesty (n.)

offense against sovereign authority, treason, 1530s (mid-15c. as an Anglo-French word), from French
l&egrave;se-majest&eacute;, from Latin laesa majestos violated majesty, from laesus, past participle
of laedere to hurt, injure, damage, offend, insult, of unknown origin.


maul (v.)

mid-13c., meallen strike with a heavy weapon, from Middle English mealle (mid-13c.) mace, wooden
club, heavy hammer (see maul (n.). The meaning damage seriously, mangle is first recorded 1690s.
Related: Mauled; mauling.


violence (n.)

late 13c., physical force used to inflict injury or damage, from Anglo-French and Old French
violence (13c.), from Latin violentia vehemence, impetuosity, from violentus vehement, forcible,
probably related to violare (see violation). Weakened sense of improper treatment is attested from
1590s.


noxious (adj.)

c.1500, from Latin noxius hurtful, injurious, from noxa injury, hurt, damage entailing liability
(related to nocere to hurt, and to nex slaughter), from PIE *nek-ro-, causative form of root *nek-
(1) death (see necro-).


detriment (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French d&eacute;triment or directly from Latin detrimentum a rubbing off; a
loss, damage, defeat, from past participle stem of detere to wear away, figuratively to weaken,
impair, from de- away (see de-) + terere to rub, wear (see throw (v.)).


calamity (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French calamite (14c.), from Latin calamitatem (nominative calamitas)
damage, loss, failure; disaster, misfortune, adversity, origin obscure. Early etymologists
associated it with calamus straw (see shawm); but it is perhaps from a lost root preserved in
incolumis uninjured, from PIE *kle-mo-, from base *kel- (1) to strike, cut (see holt).


injury (n.)

late 14c., harm, damage, loss; a specific injury, from Anglo-French injurie wrongful action, from
Latin injuria wrong, hurt, injustice, insult, noun use of fem. of injurius wrongful, unjust, from
in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + ius (genitive iuris) right, law (see jurist).


infringe (v.)

mid-15c., enfrangen, to violate, from Latin infringere to damage, break off, break, bruise, from in-
in (see in- (2)) + frangere to break (see fraction). Meaning of encroach first recorded c.1760.
Related: Infringed; infringing.


nuisance (n.)

c.1400, injury, hurt, harm, from Anglo-French nusaunce, Old French nuisance harm, wrong, damage,
from past participle stem of nuire to harm, from Latin nocere to hurt (see noxious). Sense has
softened over time, to anything obnoxious to a community (bad smells, pests, eyesores), 1660s, then
source of annoyance, something personally disagreeable (1831). Applied to persons from 1690s.


lack (n.)

c.1300, absence, want; shortage, deficiency, perhaps from an unrecorded Old English *lac, or else
borrowed from Middle Dutch lak deficiency, fault; in either case from Proto-Germanic *laka-
(cognates: Old Frisian lek disadvantage, damage, Old Norse lakr lacking), from PIE *leg- to dribble,
trickle (see leak (v.)). Middle English also had lackless without blame or fault.


inconvenience (n.)

c.1400, harm, damage, danger, also a harmful incident, misfortune, affliction, from Old French
inconvenience misfortune, calamity; impropriety (Modern French inconvenance), from Late Latin
inconvenientia lack of consistency, incongruity, noun of quality from inconvenientem (see
inconvenient). Later impropriety, unfitness; an improper act or utterance (early 15c.). Meaning
quality of being inconvenient is from 1650s.


condemn (v.)

early 14c., condempner to blame, censure, from Old French condamner to condemn (11c.), from Latin
condemnare to sentence, doom, blame, disapprove, from com-, intensive prefix (see com-), + damnare
to harm, damage (see damn). Replaced Old English fordeman. Related: Condemned; condemning.


outrage (n.)

c.1300, evil deed, offense, crime; affront, indignity, from Old French outrage harm, damage; insult;
criminal behavior; presumption, insolence, overweening (12c.), earlier oltrage (11c.), from Vulgar
Latin *ultraticum excess, from Latin ultra beyond (see ultra-). Etymologically, the passing beyond
reasonable bounds in any sense; meaning narrowed in English toward violent excesses because of folk
etymology from out + rage. Of injuries to feelings, principles, etc., from 1769.


punish (v.)

c.1300, from Old French puniss-, extended present participle stem of punir to punish, from Latin
punire punish, correct, chastise; take vengeance for; inflict a penalty on, cause pain for some
offense, earlier poenire, from poena penalty, punishment (see penal). Colloquial meaning to inflict
heavy damage or loss is first recorded 1801, originally in boxing. Related: Punished; punishing.


waste (n.)

c.1200, desolate regions, from Anglo-French and Old North French wast waste, damage, destruction;
wasteland, moor (Old French gast), from Latin vastum, neuter of vastus waste (see waste (v.)).
Replaced or merged with Old English westen, woesten a desert, wilderness, from the Latin word.
Meanings consumption, depletion, also useless expenditure are from c.1300; sense of refuse matter is
attested from c.1400. Waste basket first recorded 1850.


persecution (n.)

mid-14c., oppression for the holding of a belief or opinion, from Old French persecucion
persecution, damage, affliction, suffering (12c.) and directly from Latin persecutionem (nominative
persecutio), noun of action from past participle stem of persequi follow, pursue, hunt down; proceed
against, prosecute, start a legal action, from per- through (see per) + sequi follow (see sequel).
Psychological persecution complex is recorded from 1961; earlier persecution mania (1892).


afflict (v.)

late 14c., to cast down, from Old French aflicter, from Latin afflictare to damage, harass, torment,
frequentative of affligere (past participle afflictus) to dash down, overthrow, from ad- to (see
ad-) + fligere (past participle flictus) to strike, from PIE root *bhlig- to strike (cognates: Greek
phlibein to press, crush, Czech blizna scar, Welsh blif catapult). Transferred meaning of trouble,
distress, is first recorded 1530s. Related: Afflicted; afflicting.


plight (n.2)

pledge, mid-13c., pledge, promise, usually involving risk or loss in default, from Old English pliht
danger, risk, peril, damage, from Proto-Germanic *pleg- (cognates: Old Frisian plicht danger,
concern, care, Middle Dutch, Dutch plicht obligation, duty, Old High German pfliht, German Pflicht
obligation, duty (see plight (v.)). Compare Old English plihtere look-out man at the prow of a ship,
plihtlic perilous, dangerous.


obnoxious (adj.)

1580s, subject to the authority of another, from Latin obnoxiosus hurtful, injurious, from obnoxius
subject, exposed to harm, from ob to, toward (see ob-) + noxa injury, hurt, damage entailing
liability (see noxious). Meaning subject to something harmful is 1590s; meaning offensive, hateful
is first recorded 1670s, influenced by noxious.Obnoxious has two very different senses, one of which
(exposed or open or liable to attack or injury) requires notice because its currency is now so
restricted that it is puzzling to the uninstructed. It is the word's rightful or de jure meaning,
and we may hope that scholarly writers will keep it alive. [Fowler]  Related: Obnoxiously;
obnoxiousness.


faucet (n.)

c.1400, from Old French fausset (14c.) breach, spigot, stopper, peg (of a barrel), of unknown
origin; perhaps diminutive of Latin faux, fauces upper part of the throat, pharynx, gullet. Barnhart
and others suggest the Old French word is from fausser to damage, break into, from Late Latin
falsare (see false).   Spigot and faucet was the name of an old type of tap for a barrel or cask,
consisting of a hollow, tapering tube, which was driven at the narrow end into a barrel, and a screw
into the tube which regulated the flow of the liquid. Properly, it seems, the spigot was the tube,
the faucet the screw, but the senses have merged or reversed over time. Faucet is now the common
word in American English for the whole apparatus.


stain (v.)

late 14c., damage or blemish the appearance of, probably representing a merger of Old Norse steina
to paint, color, stain, and a shortened form of Middle English disteynen to discolor or stain, from
Old French desteign-, stem of desteindre to remove the color (Modern French d&#233;teindre), from
des- (from Latin dis- remove; see dis-) + Old French teindre to dye, from Latin tingere (see
tincture). Meaning to color (fabric, wood, etc.) is from 1650s. Intransitive sense to become
stained, take stain is from 1877. Related: Stained; staining. Stained glass is attested from 1791.


noise (n.)

early 13c., loud outcry, clamor, shouting, from Old French noise din, disturbance, uproar, brawl
(11c., in modern French only in phrase chercher noise to pick a quarrel), also rumor, report, news,
apparently from Latin nausea disgust, annoyance, discomfort, literally seasickness (see nausea).
Another theory traces the Old French word to Latin noxia hurting, injury, damage. OED considers that
the sense of the word is against both suggestions, but nausea could have developed a sense in Vulgar
Latin of unpleasant situation, noise, quarrel (compare Old Proven&ccedil;al nauza noise, quarrel).
Meaning loud or unpleasant sound is from c.1300. Replaced native gedyn (see din).


wreak (v.)

Old English wrecan avenge, originally to drive, drive out, punish (class V strong verb; past tense
wr&aelig;c, past participle wrecen), from Proto-Germanic *wrekan (cognates: Old Saxon wrekan, Old
Norse reka, Old Frisian wreka, Middle Dutch wreken to drive, push, compel, pursue, throw, Old High
German rehhan, German r&auml;chen to avenge, Gothic wrikan to persecute), from PIE root *wreg- to
push, shove, drive, track down (see urge (v.)). Meaning inflict or take vengeance, with on, is
recorded from late 15c.; that of inflict or cause (damage or destruction) is attested from 1817.
Compare wrack (v.). Related: Wreaked; wreaking.


spoil (v.)

c.1300, to strip (someone) of clothes, strip a slain enemy, from Old French espillier to strip,
plunder, pillage, from Latin spoliare to strip, uncover, lay bare; strip of clothing, rob, plunder,
pillage, from spolia, plural of spolium arms taken from an enemy, booty; originally skin stripped
from a killed animal, from PIE *spol-yo-, perhaps from root *spel- to split, to break off (see spill
(v.)).    From late 14c. in English as strip with violence, rob, pillage, plunder, dispossess;
impoverish with excessive taxation. Used c.1400 as the verb to describe Christ's harrowing of Hell.
Sense of destroy, ruin, damage so as to render useless is from 1560s; that of to over-indulge (a
child, etc.) is from 1640s (implied in spoiled). Intransitive sense of become tainted, go bad, lose
freshness is from 1690s. To be spoiling for (a fight, etc.) is from 1865, from notion that one will
spoil if he doesn't get it.


patience (n.)

c.1200, quality of being willing to bear adversities, calm endurance of misfortune, suffering, etc.,
from Old French pacience patience; sufferance, permission (12c.) and directly from Latin patientia
patience, endurance, submission, also indulgence, leniency; humility; submissiveness; submission to
lust; literally quality of suffering. It is an abstract noun formed from the adjective patientem
(nominative patiens) bearing, supporting; suffering, enduring, permitting; tolerant, but also firm,
unyielding, hard, used of persons as well as of navigable rivers, present participle of pati to
suffer, endure, from PIE root *pe(i)- to damage, injure, hurt (see passion).<b>Patience</b>, n. A
minor form of despair, disguised as a virtue. [Ambrose Bierce, Devil's Dictionary, 1911]Meaning
constancy in effort is attested from 1510s. Meaning card game for one person is from 1816.


wrack (n.)

late 14c., wrecked ship, shipwreck, probably from Middle Dutch wrak wreck, from Proto-Germanic
*wrakaz-, from root *wreg- to push, shove drive (see wreak). The root sense perhaps is that which is
cast ashore. Sense perhaps influenced by Old English wr&aelig;c misery, punishment, and wrecan to
punish, drive out (source of modern wreak). The meaning damage, disaster, destruction (in wrack and
ruin) is from c.1400, from the Old English word, but conformed in spelling to this one. Sense of
seaweed, etc., cast up on shore is recorded from 1510s, probably an alteration of wreck (n.) in this
sense (mid-15c.). Wrack, wreck, rack and wretch were utterly tangled in spelling and somewhat in
sense in Middle and early modern English.


damn (v.)

late 13c., to condemn, from Old French damner damn, condemn; convict, blame; injure, derivative of
Latin damnare to adjudge guilty; to doom; to condemn, blame, reject, from noun damnum damage, hurt,
harm; loss, injury; a fine, penalty, possibly from an ancient religious term from PIE *dap- to
apportion in exchange [see Watkins]. The Latin word evolved a legal meaning of pronounce judgment
upon. Theological sense is first recorded early 14c.; the optative expletive use likely is as old.
Damn and its derivatives generally were avoided in print from 18c. to c.1930s (the famous line in
the film version of Gone with the Wind was a breakthrough and required much effort by the studio).
The noun is recorded from 1610s; to be not worth a damn is from 1817. The adjective is 1775, short
for damned; Damn Yankee, characteristic Southern U.S. term for Northerner, is attested from 1812.
Related: Damning.


ride (v.)

Old English ridan sit or be carried on (as on horseback), move forward; rock; float, sail (class I
strong verb; past tense rad, past participle riden), from Proto-Germanic *ridan (cognates: Old Norse
ri&eth;a, Old Saxon ridan, Old Frisian rida to ride, Middle Dutch riden, Dutch rijden, Old High
Germn ritan, German reiten), from PIE *reidh- to ride (cognates: Old Irish riadaim I travel, Old
Gaulish reda chariot). Common to Celtic and Germanic, perhaps a loan word from one to the other.
Meaning heckle is from 1912; that of have sex with (a woman) is from mid-13c.; that of dominate
cruelly is from 1580s. To ride out endure (a storm, etc.) without great damage is from 1520s. To
ride shotgun is 1963, from custom of having an armed man beside the driver on the stagecoach in Old
West movies to ward off trouble. To ride shank's mare walk is from 1846 (see shank (n.)).


interest (n.)

mid-15c., legal claim or right; concern; benefit, advantage; earlier interesse (late 14c.), from
Anglo-French interesse what one has a legal concern in, from Medieval Latin interesse compensation
for loss, noun use of Latin interresse to concern, make a difference, be of importance, literally to
be between, from inter- between (see inter-) + esse to be (see essence).    Compare German
Interesse, from the same Medieval Latin source. Form in English influenced 15c. by French interest
damage, from Latin interest it is of importance, it makes a difference, third person singular
present of interresse. Financial sense of money paid for the use of money lent (1520s) earlier was
distinguished from usury (illegal under Church law) by being in reference to compensation due from a
defaulting debtor. Meaning curiosity is first attested 1771. Interest group is attested from 1907;
interest rate by 1868.


wear (v.)

Old English werian to clothe, put on, cover up, from Proto-Germanic *wazjan (cognates: Old Norse
verja, Old High German werian, Gothic gawasjan to clothe), from PIE *wos-eyo-, from root *wes- (4)
to clothe (cognates: Sanskrit vaste he puts on, vasanam garment; Avestan vah-; Greek esthes
clothing, hennymi to clothe, eima garment; Latin vestire to clothe; Welsh gwisgo, Breton gwiska; Old
English w&aelig;stling sheet, blanket; Hittite washshush garments, washanzi they dress).    The
Germanic forms were homonyms of the vb. for 'prevent, ward off, protect' (Goth. warjan, O.E. werian,
etc.), and this was prob. a factor in their early displacement in most of the Gmc. languages [Buck].
Shifted from a weak verb (past tense and past participle wered) to a strong one (past tense wore,
past participle worn) in 14c. on analogy of rhyming strong verbs such as bear and tear. Secondary
sense of use up, gradually damage (late 13c.) is from effect of continued use on clothes. To wear
down (transitive) overcome by steady force is from 1843. To wear off diminish by attrition or use is
from 1690s.


