damn (v.)

late 13c., to condemn, from Old French damner damn, condemn; convict, blame; injure, derivative of
Latin damnare to adjudge guilty; to doom; to condemn, blame, reject, from noun damnum damage, hurt,
harm; loss, injury; a fine, penalty, possibly from an ancient religious term from PIE *dap- to
apportion in exchange [see Watkins]. The Latin word evolved a legal meaning of pronounce judgment
upon. Theological sense is first recorded early 14c.; the optative expletive use likely is as old.
Damn and its derivatives generally were avoided in print from 18c. to c.1930s (the famous line in
the film version of Gone with the Wind was a breakthrough and required much effort by the studio).
The noun is recorded from 1610s; to be not worth a damn is from 1817. The adjective is 1775, short
for damned; Damn Yankee, characteristic Southern U.S. term for Northerner, is attested from 1812.
Related: Damning.


damnation (n.)

c.1300, condemnation to Hell by God, also fact of being condemned by judicial sentence, from Old
French damnation, from Latin damnationem (nominative damnatio), noun of action from past participle
stem of damnare (see damn). As an imprecation, attested from c.1600.    Damnation follows death in
other men,  But your damn'd Poet lives and writes agen.  [Pope, letter to Henry Cromwell, 1707 or
1708]


damnedest (adj.)

also damndest, originally damnedst, 1830, superlative of damned (see damn).


damnable (adj.)

mid-14c., from Old French damnable or directly from Late Latin damnabilis, from Latin damnare (see
damn). Related: Damnably.


dammit (interj.)

representation of the exclamation damn it! as it usually is sounded, attested from 1908.


dang (interj.)

1781 (in Sophia Lee's comedy A Chapter of Accidents, which was acted first in 1780), euphemism for
damn.


ame damnee (n.)

devoted adherent, toady, 1823, from French &acirc;me damn&eacute;e familiar spirit, literally damned
soul, originally a soul damned by compact with a controlling demon.


dem

representing pronunciation of them in Jamaican speech, from 1868. As a minced form of damn, attested
from late 14c.


P.D.Q.

also pdq, initialism (acronym) for pretty damn quick, attested from 1875.


goddamn

late 14c., from god + damn.   Mais, fussent-ils [les anglais] cent mille Goddem de plus qu'a
present, ils n'auront pas ce royaume. [Joan of Arc, 1431, quoted in Prosper de Barante's Histoire
des ducs de Bourgogne]   Goddammes was the nickname given by Puritans to Cavaliers, in consequence
of the latter's supposed frequent employment of that oath.


tinker (n.)

mender of kettles, pots, pans, etc., late 14c. (mid-13c. as a surname), of uncertain origin. Some
connect the word with the sound made by light hammering on metal. Tinker's damn something slight and
worthless is from 1824, probably preserving tinkers' reputation for free and casual use of
profanity; the plain and simple etymology is not good enough for some writers, and since 1877 an
ingeniously elaborate but baseless derivation has been circulated claiming the second word is really
dam.


darn (interj.)

tame curse word, 1781, American English euphemism for damn, said to have originated in New England
when swearing was a punishable offense; if so, its spread was probably influenced by 'tarnal, short
for Eternal, as in By the Eternal (God), favorite exclamation of Andrew Jackson, among others (see
tarnation). Related: darned (past participle adjective, 1806); darndest (superlative, 1844).


blamed (adv.)

confoundedly 1833, later also as an adjective, from past participle of blame (v.), as a euphemistic
evasion of the horrible word damn. [Bartlett, Dictionary of Americanisms, 1848].    This adjective
'blamed' is the virtuous oath by which simple people, who are improving their habits, cure
themselves of a stronger epithet. [Edward Everett Hale, If, Yes, and Perhaps, 1868]    Compare also
blamenation (1837) as an expletive. The imprecation blame me is attested from 1830.


indemnity (n.)

mid-15c., from Middle French indemnit&eacute; (14c.), from Late Latin indemnitatem (nominative
indemnitas) security for damage, from Latin indemnis unhurt, undamaged, from in- not, opposite of,
without (see in- (1)) + damnum damage (see damn).


damage (n.)

late 13c., from Old French damage (12c., Modern French dommage) loss caused by injury, from dam
damage, from Latin damnum loss, hurt, damage (see damn).


condemn (v.)

early 14c., condempner to blame, censure, from Old French condamner to condemn (11c.), from Latin
condemnare to sentence, doom, blame, disapprove, from com-, intensive prefix (see com-), + damnare
to harm, damage (see damn). Replaced Old English fordeman. Related: Condemned; condemning.


celery (n.)

1660s, from French c&eacute;leri (17c., originally sceleri d'Italie), said by French sources to be
from Italian (Lombard dialect) seleri (singular selero), from Late Latin selinon, from Greek selinon
parsley, of uncertain origin.    [O]ne day, in a weak and hungry moment, my roommate and I succumbed
to a bit of larceny. A greengrocer's truck had parked down the street and was left unattended. We
grabbed the first crate we could off the back. It turned out to be celery. For two days we ate
nothing but celery and used up more calories chewing than we realized in energy. Damn it, I said to
my roommate, What're we going to do? We can't starve. That's funny, he replied. I thought we could.
[Chuck Jones, Chuck Amuck, 1989]


