dart (v.)

late 14c., to pierce with a dart, from dart (n.). Meaning to move like a dart is attested from
1610s. Related: Darted; darter; darting.


dart (n.)

early 14c., from Old French dart throwing spear, arrow, from Proto-Germanic *darothuz cognates: Old
English daro&eth;, Old High German tart, Old Norse darra&thorn;r dart). Italian and Spanish dardo
are said to be from Germanic by way of Old Proven&ccedil;al.


dace (n.)

small, freshwater fish, early 15c., from Old French darz, nominative or plural of dart dart (see
dart (n.)). So called for its movements. But another theory traces it to a Medieval Latin darsus,
said to be of Gaulish origin.


Methusela

also Methuselah, son of Enoch in the Old Testament, he was said to have lived 969 years, the oldest
lifespan recorded in Old Testament. Used from late 14c. as the type of a very long life or long-
lived person. The name is Hebrew Methushelah, which appears to be man of the dart, from singular of
methim man + shelah dart.


ejaculate (v.)

1570s, emit semen, from Latin eiaculatus, past participle of eiaculari to throw out, shoot out, from
ex- out (see ex-) + iaculari to throw, hurl, cast, dart, from iaculum javelin, dart, from iacere to
throw (see jet (v.)). Only other surviving sense is exclaim suddenly (1660s). Related: Ejaculated;
ejaculating.


arrowroot (n.)

1690s, from arrow + root (n.). So called because it was used to absorb toxins from poison-dart
wounds.


Australopithecus (n.)

1925, coined by Australian anthropologist Raymond A. Dart (1893-1988) from Latin australis southern
(see Australia) + Greek pithekos ape. So called because first discovered in South Africa.


skive (v.2)

evade duty, usually with off, 1919, probably from earlier sense move lightly and quickly, dart
(1854), of unknown origin. Related: Skived; skiving.


skitter (v.)

to run rapidly, 1845, frequentative of skite to dart, run quickly (1721), perhaps from a
Scandinavian source (compare Old Norse skjota to shoot, launch, move quickly, avoid (a blow);
Norwegian dialectal skutla glide rapidly); see skittish. As a noun from 1905.


sprint (v.)

1560s, to spring, dart, probably an alteration of sprenten to leap, spring (early 14c.), from a
Scandinavian source such as Old Norse spretta to jump up (cognate with Swedish spritta to start,
startle). Meaning to run a short distance at full speed first recorded 1871. Related: Sprinted;
sprinting.


tunny (n.)

large sea-fish of the mackerel order, 1520s, probably from Middle French thon (14c.), from Old
Proven&ccedil;al ton and directly from Latin thunnus a tuna, tunny, from Greek thynnos a tuna,
tunny, possibly with a literal sense of darter, from thynein dart along.


elan (n.)

1877, from French &eacute;lan (16c.), spring, bound, impetus, noun derived from &eacute;lancer to
rush, dart, from Old French elancer, from e- out (see ex-) + lancer to throw, originally to throw a
lance, from Late Latin lanceare, from Latin lancea (see lance (n.)).


spar (v)

late 14c., go quickly, rush, dart, spring; c.1400, to strike or thrust, perhaps from Middle French
esparer to kick (Modern French &#233;parer), from Italian sparare to fling, from Latin ex- (see ex-)
+ parare make ready, prepare, hence ward off, parry (see pare). Etymologists consider a connection
with spur unlikely. Used in 17c. in reference to preliminary actions in a cock fight; figurative
sense of to dispute, bandy with words is from 1690s. Extension to humans, in a literal sense, with
meaning to engage in or practice boxing is attested from 1755. Related: Sparred; sparring.


ballistics (n.)

1753, art of throwing; science of projectiles, with -ics + Latin ballista ancient military machine
for hurling stones, from Greek ballistes, from ballein to throw, to throw so as to hit, also in a
looser sense, to put, place, lay; from PIE root *gwele- (1) to throw, reach, in extended senses to
pierce (cognates: Sanskrit apa-gurya swinging, balbaliti whirls, twirls; Greek bole a throw, beam,
ray, belemnon dart, javelin, belone needle). Here, too, probably belongs Greek ballizein to dance,
literally to throw one's body, ancient Greek dancing being highly athletic.


shuttle (n.)

Old English scytel a dart, arrow, from Proto-Germanic *skutilaz (cognates: Old Norse skutill
harpoon), from PIE *skeud- to shoot, to chase, to throw, to project (see shoot (v.)). The original
sense in English is obsolete; the weaving instrument so called (mid-14c.) from being shot across the
threads. Sense of train that runs back and forth is first recorded 1895, from image of the weaver's
instrument's back-and-forth movement over the warp; extended to aircraft 1942, to spacecraft 1969.
In some other languages, the weaving instrument takes its name from its resemblance to a boat (Latin
navicula, French navette, German weberschiff).


Viking (n.)

Scandinavian pirate, 1801, vikingr, in The History of the Anglo-Saxons by English historian Sharon
H. Turner (1768-1847); he suggested the second element might be connected to king:    The name by
which the pirates were at first distinguished was Vikingr, which perhaps originally meant kings of
the bays. It was in bays that they ambushed, to dart upon the passing voyager.     But this later
was dismissed as incorrect. The form viking is attested in 1820, in Jamieson's notes to The Bruce.
The word is a historians' revival; it was not used in Middle English, but it was reintroduced from
Old Norse vikingr freebooter, sea-rover, pirate, viking, which usually is explained as meaning
properly one who came from the fjords, from vik creek, inlet, small bay (cognates: Old English wic,
Middle High German wich bay, and second element in Reykjavik). But Old English wicing and Old
Frisian wizing are almost 300 years older than the earliest attestation of the Old Norse word, and
probably derive from wic village, camp (large temporary camps were a feature of the Viking raids),
related to Latin vicus village, habitation (see villa).    The connection between the Norse and Old
English words is still much debated. The period of Viking activity was roughly 8c. to 11c. In the
Anglo-Saxon Chronicle, the raiding armies generally were referred to as &thorn;a Deniscan the Danes,
while those who settled in England were identified by their place of settlement. Old Norse viking
(n.) meant freebooting voyage, piracy; one would go on a viking (fara &#237; viking).


