daub (v.)

late 14c. (Dauber as a surname is recorded from mid-13c.), from Old French dauber to whitewash,
plaster (13c.), perhaps from Latin dealbare, from de- thoroughly + albare to whiten, from albus
white (see alb). Painting sense is from 1620s. Related: Daubed; daubing. As a noun, from mid-15c.


smite (v.)

to hit, strike, beat, mid-12c., from Old English smitan, which however is attested only as to daub,
smear on; soil, pollute, blemish, defile (strong verb, past tense smat, past participle smiten),
from Proto-Germanic *smitan (cognates: Swedish smita, Danish smide to smear, fling, Old Frisian
smita, Middle Low German and Middle Dutch smiten to cast, fling, Dutch smijten to throw, Old High
German smizan to rub, strike, German schmei&szlig;en to cast, fling, Gothic bismeitan to spread,
smear). The development of the various senses is not quite clear, but that of throwing is perh. the
original one [OED]. Watkins suggests the semantic channel may have been slapping mud on walls in
wattle and daub construction and connects it with PIE *sme- to smear; Klein's sources also say this.
Sense of slay in combat (c.1300) is from Biblical expression smite to death, first attested c.1200.
Meaning visit disastrously is mid-12c., also Biblical. Meaning strike with passion or emotion is
from c.1300.


liniment (n.)

early 15c., from Late Latin linimentum a soft ointment, from Latin linire, collateral form of
earlier linere to daub, smear, from PIE root *(s)lei- slime, slimy, sticky (see slime (n.)).


bedaub (v.)

1550s, from be- + daub (v). Related: Bedaubed; bedaubing.


slubberdegullion (n.)

a slobbering or dirty fellow, a worthless sloven, 1610s, from slubber to daub, smear; behave
carelessly or negligently (1520s), probably from Dutch or Low German (compare slobber (v.)). Second
element appears to be an attempt to imitate French; or perhaps it is French, related to Old French
goalon a sloven. Century Dictionary speculates the -de- means insignificant or else is from
hobbledehoy.


wattle (n.1)

stakes interlaced with twigs and forming the framework of the wall of a building, Old English watol
hurdle, in plural twigs, thatching, tiles, related to we&eth;el bandage, from Proto-Germanic
*wadlaz, from PIE *au- (3) to weave (see weeds). Surviving in wattle-and-daub building material for
huts, etc. (1808).


delete (v.)

late 15c., destroy, eradicate, from Latin deletus, past participle of delere destroy, blot out,
efface, from delevi, originally perfective tense of delinere to daub, erase by smudging (as of the
wax on a writing table), from de- from, away (see de-) + linere to smear, wipe (see lime (n.1)). In
English, specifically of written matter, from c.1600. Related: Deleted; deleting.


dab (v.)

c.1300, dabben to strike, of unknown origin, perhaps imitative. Modern sense of strike with a
slight, quick pressure developed by mid-16c., influenced by French dauber (see daub). Related:
Dabbed; dabbing. As a noun from c.1300, heavy blow with a weapon. Dab hand is British slang, 1828,
from dab expert (1690s), said to be school slang, of unknown origin, perhaps from dab in the strike
lightly sense.


slime (n.)

Old English slim slime, from Proto-Germanic *slimaz (cognates: Old Norse slim, Old Frisian slym,
Dutch slijm slime, phlegm, German Schleim slime), probably related to Old English lim birdlime;
sticky substance, from PIE root *(s)lei- slimy, sticky, slippery (cognates: Sanskrit linati sticks,
stays, adheres to; slips into, disappears; Russian slimak snail; Old Church Slavonic slina spittle;
Old Irish sligim to smear, leinam I follow, literally I stick to; Welsh llyfn smooth; Greek leimax
snail, limne marsh, pool, lake, alinein to anoint, besmear; Latin limus slime, mud, mire, linere to
daub, besmear, rub out, erase). As an insult to a person from mid-15c. Slime-mold is from 1880.


