daze (n.)

a dazed condition, 1825, from daze (v.).


muzzy (adj.)

confused, dazed, 1720s, perhaps from mossy, or from dialectal mosey (adj.) moldy, hazy; stupefied
with drink, dull, stupid.


damp (adj.)

1580s, dazed, from damp (n.). Meaning slightly wet is from 1706. Related: Dampness.


woozy (adj.)

muddled or dazed, as with drink, 1897, American English colloquial, variant of oozy muddy, or an
alteration of boozy. It is recorded in 1896 as student slang, but with a sense foolish, behind the
times, also pleasant, delightful.


dastard (n.)

mid-15c., one who is lazy or dull; an English formation on a French model, probably from *dast,
dazed, past participle of dasen to daze (see daze (v.)) + deprecatory suffix -ard. Meaning one who
shirks from danger is late 15c.


dolt (n.)

1540s, perhaps a variant of dold dull, foolish, influenced by dulte, dolte, past participle forms of
Middle English dullen to dull, make or become dazed or stupid (see dull (adj.)). Related: Doltish;
doltishly; doltishness.


daze (v.)

early 14c., dasen, perhaps from Old Norse *dasa (compare dasask to become weary, with reflexive
suffix -sk). Or perhaps from Middle Dutch dasen act silly. Perhaps originally to make weary with
cold, which is the sense of Icelandic dasask (from the Old Norse word). Related: Dazed.


sturdy (adj.)

c.1300, hard to manage, reckless, violent, from Old French estordi (11c., Modern French
&#233;tourdi) violent, originally dazed, past participle of estordiir to daze, stun, stupefy, from
Vulgar Latin *exturdire, which some presume to be from Latin intensive prefix ex- + turdus thrush.
Barnhart suggests the notion is of thrushes eating grape remnants at wineries and behaving as if
drunk (Italian tordo thrush also means simpleton, and French has the expression so&#251;l comme une
grive drunk as a thrush). OED, however, regards all this as open to grave objection. Century
Dictionary compares Latin torpidus dull.    Sense of solidly built, strong and hardy first recorded
late 14c. Related: Sturdily; sturdiness. Sturdy-boots obstinate person is from 1762; a sturdy beggar
in old language was one capable of work (c.1400).


happy (adj.)

late 14c., lucky, favored by fortune, prosperous; of events, turning out well, from hap (n.) chance,
fortune + -y (2). Sense of very glad first recorded late 14c. Ousted Old English eadig (from ead
wealth, riches) and ges&aelig;lig, which has become silly. Meaning greatly pleased and content is
from 1520s. Old English bli&eth;e happy survives as blithe. From Greek to Irish, a great majority of
the European words for happy at first meant lucky. An exception is Welsh, where the word used first
meant wise.    Used in World War II and after as a suffix (as in bomb-happy, flak-happy) expressing
dazed or frazzled from stress. Happy medium is from 1778. Happy ending in the literary sense
recorded from 1756. Happy as a clam (1630s) was originally happy as a clam in the mud at high tide,
when it can't be dug up and eaten. Happy hunting ground, the reputed Indian paradise, is attested
from 1840, American English. Related: Happier; happiest.


darnel (n.)

weed growing in grainfields, c.1300, from northern dialectal French darnelle; according to one
theory, the the second element is Old French neelle (Modern French nielle) cockle, from Vulgar Latin
nigella black-seeded, from fem. of Latin nigellus blackish.    But perhaps rather the word is
related to Middle Dutch verdaernt, verdarnt stunned, dumbfounded, angry, Walloon darne, derne
stunned, dazed, drunk, the plant so called from its well-known inebriating property. Long noted for
its poisonous properties (actually caused by fungus growing on the plant); The French word for it is
ivraie, from Latin ebriacus intoxicated, and the botanical name, Lolium temulentum, is from Latin
temulent drunken, though this sometimes is said to be from the heavy seed heads lolling over under
their own weight.    In some parts of continental Europe it appears the seeds of darnel have the
reputation of causing intoxication in men, beasts, and birds, the effects being sometimes so violent
as to produce convulsions. In Scotland the name of Sleepies, is applied to darnel, from the seeds
causing narcotic effects. [Gouverneur Emerson, The American Farmer's Encyclopedia, New York, 1860.
It also mentions that Haller speaks of them as communicating these properties to beer.]


silly (adj.)

Old English ges&aelig;lig happy, fortuitous, prosperous (related to s&aelig;l happiness), from
Proto-Germanic *s&aelig;ligas (cognates: Old Norse s&aelig;ll happy, Old Saxon salig, Middle Dutch
salich, Old High German salig, German selig blessed, happy, blissful, Gothic sels good,
kindhearted), from PIE *sele- of good mood; to favor, from root *sel- (2) happy, of good mood; to
favor (cognates: Latin solari to comfort, Greek hilaros cheerful, gay, merry, joyous).    This is
one of the few instances in which an original long e (ee) has become shortened to i. The same change
occurs in breeches, and in the American pronunciation of been, with no change in spelling. [Century
Dictionary]    The word's considerable sense development moved from happy to blessed to pious, to
innocent (c.1200), to harmless, to pitiable (late 13c.), weak (c.1300), to feeble in mind, lacking
in reason, foolish (1570s). Further tendency toward stunned, dazed as by a blow (1886) in knocked
silly, etc. Silly season in journalism slang is from 1861 (August and September, when newspapers
compensate for a lack of hard news by filling up with trivial stories). Silly Putty trademark claims
use from July 1949.


