daze (n.)

a dazed condition, 1825, from daze (v.).


daze (v.)

early 14c., dasen, perhaps from Old Norse *dasa (compare dasask to become weary, with reflexive
suffix -sk). Or perhaps from Middle Dutch dasen act silly. Perhaps originally to make weary with
cold, which is the sense of Icelandic dasask (from the Old Norse word). Related: Dazed.


dastard (n.)

mid-15c., one who is lazy or dull; an English formation on a French model, probably from *dast,
dazed, past participle of dasen to daze (see daze (v.)) + deprecatory suffix -ard. Meaning one who
shirks from danger is late 15c.


dazzle (v.)

late 15c., frequentative of Middle English dasen (see daze (v.)). Originally intransitive; the
transitive sense is from 1530s. Related: Dazzled; dazzling.


stun (v.)

early 14c., to daze or render unconscious (from a blow, powerful emotion, etc.), probably a
shortening of Old French estoner to stun (see astonish). Related: Stunned; stunning.


maze (n.)

c.1300, delusion, bewilderment (also as a verb, stupefy, daze), possibly from Old English
*m&aelig;s, which is suggested by the compound amasod amazed and verb amasian to confound, confuse
(see amaze). Perhaps related to Norwegian dialectal mas exhausting labor, Swedish masa to be slow or
sluggish. Meaning labyrinth first recorded late 14c.


astonish (v.)

c.1300, astonien, from Old French estoner to stun, daze, deafen, astound, from Vulgar Latin
*extonare, from Latin ex- out + tonare to thunder (see thunder); so, literally to leave someone
thunderstruck. The modern form (influenced by English verbs in -ish, such as distinguish, diminish)
is attested from c.1530.    No wonder is thogh that she were astoned [Chaucer, Clerk's Tale]
Related: Astonished; astonishing; astonishingly.


sturdy (adj.)

c.1300, hard to manage, reckless, violent, from Old French estordi (11c., Modern French
&#233;tourdi) violent, originally dazed, past participle of estordiir to daze, stun, stupefy, from
Vulgar Latin *exturdire, which some presume to be from Latin intensive prefix ex- + turdus thrush.
Barnhart suggests the notion is of thrushes eating grape remnants at wineries and behaving as if
drunk (Italian tordo thrush also means simpleton, and French has the expression so&#251;l comme une
grive drunk as a thrush). OED, however, regards all this as open to grave objection. Century
Dictionary compares Latin torpidus dull.    Sense of solidly built, strong and hardy first recorded
late 14c. Related: Sturdily; sturdiness. Sturdy-boots obstinate person is from 1762; a sturdy beggar
in old language was one capable of work (c.1400).


