dazzle (v.)

late 15c., frequentative of Middle English dasen (see daze (v.)). Originally intransitive; the
transitive sense is from 1530s. Related: Dazzled; dazzling.


razzle-dazzle (n.)

1886, American English slang, varied reduplication of dazzle (q.v.).    My confr&#232;re, The
Chevalier, last month gave a new name to the scarfs of disjointed pattern when he called them the
razzle-dazzle. The name was evidently a hit of the most patent character, for in several avenue and
Broadway stores the clerks have thrown out a display of broken figures before me and explained that
the ruling style at present was the razzle-dazzle, and the word seems to have been equally effective
with the public, for when it is quoted by the live salesman, the customer, I am told is at once
interested and caught by it. [Clothier and Furnisher magazine, Jan. 1889]    Meaning state of
confusion is from 1889.


blench (v.)

Old English blencan deceive, cheat, from Proto-Germanic *blenk- to shine, dazzle, blind, from PIE
root *bhel- (1) to shine, flash, burn (see bleach (v.)). Sense of move suddenly, wince, dodge is
from c.1300. Related: Blenched; blenching.


bedazzle (v.)

1590s, from be- + dazzle (v.). Related: Bedazzled; bedazzling.


prestigious (adj.)

1540s, practicing illusion or magic, deceptive, from Latin praestigious full of tricks, from
praestigiae juggler's tricks, probably altered by dissimilation from praestrigiae, from
praestringere to blind, blindfold, dazzle, from prae before (see pre-) + stringere to tie or bind
(see strain (v.)). Derogatory until 19c.; meaning having dazzling influence is attested from 1913
(see prestige). Related: Prestigiously; prestigiousness.


hoochy koochy (n.)

also hoochie-coochie, hootchy kootchy, erotic suggestive women's dance (involving a lot of hip-
grinding), 1898, of obscure origin, usually associated, without evidence, with the Chicago world's
fair of 1893 and belly-dancer Little Egypt (who might not even have been there), but the word itself
is attested from 1890, as the stage name of minstrel singer Hoochy-Coochy Rice, though its meaning
there is unclear, perhaps a nonsense word.    To-day, however, in place of the danse du ventre or
the coochie-coochie we have the loop-the-loop or the razzle-dazzle, which latter, while not exactly
edifying at least do not serve to deprave public taste. [The Redemption of 'Old Coney,' in Broadway
Magazine, April 1904]


blank (adj.)

early 13c., white, pale, colorless, from Old French blanc white, shining, from Frankish *blank
white, gleaming, or some other West Germanic source (compare Old Norse blakkr, Old English blanca
white horse; Old High German blanc, blanch; German blank shining, bright), from Proto-Germanic
*blangkaz to shine, dazzle, extended form of PIE root *bhel- (1) to shine, flash, burn (see bleach
(v.)).    Meaning having empty spaces evolved c.1400. Sense of void of expression (a blank look) is
from 1550s. Spanish blanco, Italian bianco are said to be from Germanic. Related: Blankly,
blankness.


camouflage

1917, noun, verb, and adjective, from French camoufler, Parisian slang, to disguise, from Italian
camuffare to disguise, of uncertain origin, perhaps a contraction of capo muffare to muffle the
head. Probably altered by influence of French camouflet puff of smoke, on the notion of blow smoke
in someone's face. The British navy in World War I called it dazzle-painting.    Since the war
started the POPULAR SCIENCE MONTHLY has published photographs of big British and French field pieces
covered with shrubbery, railway trains painted out of the landscape, and all kinds of devices to
hide the guns, trains, and the roads from the eyes of enemy aircraft.    Until recently there was no
one word in any language to explain this war trick. Sometimes a whole paragraph was required to
explain this military practice. Hereafter one word, a French word, will save all this needless
writing and reading. Camouflage is the new word, and it means fooling the enemy. [Popular Science
Monthly, August 1917]


