deception (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French d&eacute;ception (13c., decepcion) or directly from Late Latin
deceptionem (nominative deceptio) a deceiving, from Latin decept-, past participle stem of decipere
(see deceive).


fraud (n.)

mid-14c., criminal deception (mid-13c. in Anglo-Latin); from Old French fraude deception, fraud
(13c.), from Latin fraudem (nominative fraus) a cheating, deceit, of persons a cheater, deceiver.
Not in Watkins; perhaps ultimately from PIE *dhreugh- to deceive (cognates: Sanskrit dhruti-
deception; error). Meaning a fraudulent production, something intended to deceive is from 1650s. The
meaning impostor, deceiver, pretender; humbug is attested from 1850. Pious fraud (1560s) is properly
deception practiced for the sake of what is deemed a good purpose; colloquially used as person who
talks piously but is not pious at heart.


sedulous (adj.)

1530s, from Latin sedulus attentive, painstaking, diligent, busy, zealous, probably from sedulo
(adv.) sincerely, diligently, from sedolo without deception or guile, from se- without, apart (see
secret) + dolo, ablative of dolus deception, guile, cognate with Greek dolos ruse, snare. Related:
Sedulously; sedulousness.


fallacy (n.)

late 15c., deception, false statement, from Latin fallacia deception, deceit, trick, artifice, noun
of quality from fallax (genitive fallacis) deceptive, from fallere deceive (see fail (v.)). Specific
sense in logic, false syllogism, invalid argumentation, dates from 1550s. An earlier form was
fallace (c.1300), from Old French fallace.


self-deception (n.)

1670s, from self- + deception.


illusion (n.)

mid-14c., act of deception, from Old French illusion a mocking, deceit, deception (12c.), from Latin
illusionem (nominative illusio) a mocking, jesting, irony, from illudere mock at, literally to play
with, from assimilated form of in- at, upon (see in- (2)) + ludere to play (see ludicrous). Sense of
deceptive appearance developed in Church Latin and was attested in English by late 14c. Related:
Illusioned full of illusions (1920).


humbug (n.)

1751, student slang, trick, jest, hoax, deception, also as a verb, of unknown origin. A vogue word
of the early 1750s; its origin was a subject of much whimsical speculation even then.


spoof (n.)

hoax, deception, 1889, from spouf (1884), name of a game invented by British comedian Arthur Roberts
(1852-1933). Sense of a parody, satirical skit or play is first recorded 1958, from verb in this
sense (1914).


slick (adj.)

early 14c., smooth, glossy, sleek (of skin or hair); sense of clever in deception is first recorded
1590s; that of first-class, excellent is from 1833. Related: Slickly; slickness.


undeceive (v.)

to free from deception, 1590s, from un- (2) opposite of + deceive (v.).


put-on (n.)

ruse, deception, 1937, from earlier adjectival meaning assumed, feigned (1620s), a figurative
extension of the notion of putting on costumes or disguises; from put (v.) + on (adv.). The
expression put (someone) on play a trick on seems to be a back-formation from the noun.


contraption (n.)

1825, western England dialect, origin obscure, perhaps from con(trive) + trap, or deception.


self-abuse (n.)

c.1600, self-deception, from self- + abuse (n.). As a synonym for masturbation, it is recorded from
1728; an earlier term was self-pollution (1620s).


smoke-screen (n.)

1915, as a form of military camouflage, from smoke (n.1) + screen (n.); 1926 in the figurative
sense. The association of smoke with deception, deliberate obscurity dates back to at least 1560s.


frustration (n.)

act of frustrating, 1550s, from Latin frustrationem (nominative frustratio) a deception, a
disappointment, noun of action from past participle stem of frustrari (see frustrate). Earlier (mid-
15c.) with a now-obsolete sense of nullification.


trifle (n.)

c.1200, trufle false or idle tale, later matter of little importance (c.1300), from Old French
trufle mockery, diminutive of truffe deception, of uncertain origin. As a type of light confection
from 1755.


hanky-panky (n.)

also hanky panky, 1841, trickery, British slang, possibly a variant of hoky-poky deception, fraud,
altered from hocus-pocus.


elusion (n.)

deception, escape by artifice or deceit, 1540s, noun of action from elude, or from Medieval Latin
elusionem (nominative elusio), noun of action from past participle stem of Latin eludere.


bull (n.3)

false talk, fraud, Middle English, apparently from Old French bole deception, trick, scheming,
intrigue, and perhaps connected to modern Icelandic bull nonsense.  Sais christ to ypocrites ... yee
ar ... all ful with wickednes, tresun and bull. [Cursor Mundi, early 14c.]  There also was a verb
bull meaning to mock, cheat, which dates from 1530s.


knack (n.)

mid-14c., deception, trick, device, of uncertain origin, probably from a Low German word meaning a
sharp sounding blow (compare Middle English knak, late 14c.; German knacken to crack), of imitative
origin. Sense of special skill is first recorded 1580s, if this is in fact the same word. In old
slang (mid-18c.-mid-19c.) nacky meant full of knacks; ingenious, dexterous.


deceit (n.)

c.1300, from Old French deceite, fem. past participle of deceveir (see deceive).   Deceit is a
shorter and more energetic word for deceitfulness, indicating the quality; it is also, but more
rarely, used to express the act or manner of deceiving. The reverse is true of deception, which is
properly the act or course by which one deceives, and not properly the quality; it may express the
state of being deceived. Fraud is an act or series of acts of deceit by which one attempts to
benefit himself at the expense of others. It is generally a breaking of the law; the others are not.
[entry for deceit in The Century Dictionary and Cyclopedia, 1902]


mangonel (n.)

military engine for hurling stones, mid-13c., from Old French mangonel catapult, war engine for
throwing stones, etc. (Modern French mangonneau), diminutive of Medieval Latin mangonum, from Vulgar
Latin *manganum machine, from Greek manganon any means of tricking or bewitching, from PIE *mang- to
embellish, dress, trim (cognates: Old Prussian manga whore, Middle Irish meng craft, deception).
Attested from c.1200 in Anglo-Latin.


patsy (n.)

fall guy, victim of a deception, 1903, of uncertain origin, possibly an alteration of Italian pazzo
madman (see patch (n.2)), or south Italian dialectal paccio fool. Another theory traces it to Patsy
Bolivar, character created by Billy B. Van in an 1890s vaudeville skit who was blamed whenever
anything went wrong.    Poor Rogers, Vincent said, still smiling, he is always the 'Patsy Bolivar'
of the school.    Yes, Frank answered, if there are any mistakes to be made or trouble to fall into,
Rogers seems to be always the victim. [Anthony Yorke, A College Boy, 1899]


betray (v.)

late 13c., bitrayen mislead, deceive, betray, from be- + obsolete Middle English tray, from Old
French traine betrayal, deception, deceit, from trair (Modern French trahir) betray, deceive, from
Latin tradere hand over, from trans- across (see trans-) + dare to give (see date (n.1)). Related:
Betrayed; betraying.


err (v.)

c.1300, from Old French errer go astray, lose one's way; make a mistake; transgress, from Latin
errare wander, go astray, figuratively be in error, from PIE root *ers- (1) be in motion, wander
around (cognates: Sanskrit arsati flows; Old English ierre angry; straying; Old Frisian ire angry;
Old High German irri angry, irron astray; Gothic airzi&thorn;a error; deception; the Germanic words
reflecting the notion of anger as a straying from normal composure). Related: Erred; erring.


foe (n.)

Old English gefea, gefa foe, enemy, adversary in a blood feud (the prefix denotes mutuality), from
adjective fah at feud, hostile, also guilty, criminal, from Proto-Germanic *faihaz (cognates: Old
High German fehan to hate, Gothic faih deception), probably from PIE root *peig- (2) evil-minded,
treacherous, hostile (cognates: Sanskrit pisunah malicious, picacah demon; Greek pikros bitter;
Latin piget it irks, troubles, displeases, piger reluctant, lazy; Lithuanian piktas wicked, angry,
pekti to blame). Weaker sense of adversary is first recorded c.1600.


gaud (n.)

early 15c., a bauble, trinket, earlier a large, ornamental bead in a rosary (mid-14c.), probably
mistakenly taken as singular of earlier gaudy (n.) large, ornamental rosary bead (early 14c., in
plural form gaudeez), later ornamentation generally (late 14c.), which is from Medieval Latin gaudia
and Old French gaudie joy, pleasure, playfulness; a piece of showy finery, a flashy trinket, from
Latin gaudium joy, gaude rejoice thou (in hymns), from gaudere rejoice (see joy (n.), and compare
jewel (n.)).    Also in Middle English a jest, prank, trick (late 14c.); a deception, fraud,
artifice (mid-14c.). As a verb, to furnish with gauds, from late 14c. Related: Gauded; gauding;
gaudful; gaudless.


curry favor

verbal phrase, early 16c., altered by folk etymology from curry favel (c.1400) from Old French
correier fauvel to be false, hypocritical, literally to curry the chestnut horse, which in medieval
French allegories was a symbol of cunning and deceit. For the verb, see curry (v.). Old French
fauvel (later fauveau) fallow, dun, though the exact color intended in the early uses is vague, is a
diminutive of fauve fawn-colored horse, dark-colored thing, dull, for which see Fauvist. The
secondary sense here is entangled with similar-sounding Old French favele lying, deception, from
Latin fabella, diminutive of fabula (see fable (n.)). In Middle English, favel was a common name for
a horse.


stall (n.2)

pretense or evasive story to avoid doing something, 1812, from earlier sense thief's assistant
(1590s, also staller), from a variant of stale bird used as a decoy to lure other birds (mid-15c.),
from Anglo-French estale decoy, pigeon used to lure a hawk (13c., compare stool pigeon), literally
standstill, from Old French estal place, stand, stall, from Frankish *stal- position, ultimately
from Germanic and cognate with Old English steall (see stall (n.1)). Compare Old English
st&aelig;lhran decoy reindeer, German stellvogel decoy bird. Figurative sense of deception, means of
allurement is first recorded 1520s. Also see stall (v.2).    The stallers up are gratified with such
part of the gains acquired as the liberality of the knuckling gentlemen may prompt them to bestow.
[J.H. Vaux, Flash Dictionary, 1812]


fiction (n.)

early 15c., ficcioun, that which is invented or imagined in the mind, from Old French ficcion
dissimulation, ruse; invention, fabrication (13c.) and directly from Latin fictionem (nominative
fictio) a fashioning or feigning, noun of action from past participle stem of fingere to shape,
form, devise, feign, originally to knead, form out of clay, from PIE *dheigh- to build, form, knead
(source also of Old English dag dough; see dough).    Meaning prose works (not dramatic) of the
imagination is from 1590s, at first often including plays and poems. Narrower sense of the part of
literature comprising novels and short stories based on imagined scenes or characters is by early
19c. The legal sense (fiction of law) is from 1580s. A writer of fiction could be a fictionist
(1827). The related Latin words included the literal notion worked by hand, as well as the
figurative senses of invented in the mind; artificial, not natural: Latin fictilis made of clay,
earthen; fictor molder, sculptor (also borrowed 17c. in English), but also of Ulysses as master of
deceit; fictum a deception, falsehood; fiction.


fear (n.)

Middle English fere, from Old English f&aelig;r calamity, sudden danger, peril, sudden attack, from
Proto-Germanic *feraz danger (cognates: Old Saxon far ambush, Old Norse far harm, distress,
deception, Dutch gevaar, German Gefahr danger), from PIE *per- to try, risk, a form of verbal root
*per- (3) to lead, pass over (cognates: Latin periculum trial, risk, danger; Greek peria trial,
attempt, experience, Old Irish aire vigilance, Gothic ferja watcher); related to *per- (1) forward,
through (see per).    Sense of state of being afraid, uneasiness caused by possible danger developed
by late 12c. Some Old English words for fear as we now use it were fyrhto, fyrhto; as a verb,
ondr&aelig;dan. Meaning feeling of dread and reverence for God is from c.1400. To put the fear of
God (into someone) intimidate, cause to cower is by 1888, from the common religious phrase; the
extended use was often at first in colonial contexts:    Thus then we seek to put the fear of God
into the natives at the point of the bayonet, and excuse ourselves for the bloody work on the plea
of the benefits which we intend to confer afterwards. [Felix Adler, The Religion of Duty, 1905]


folk (n.)

Old English folc common people, laity; men; people, nation, tribe; multitude; troop, army, from
Proto-Germanic *folkam (cognates: Old Saxon folc, Old Frisian folk, Middle Dutch volc, Dutch volk,
Old High German folc, German Volk people). Perhaps originally host of warriors: Compare Old Norse
folk people, also army, detachment; and Lithuanian pulkas crowd, Old Church Slavonic pluku division
of an army, both believed to have been borrowed from Proto-Germanic. Old English folcstede could
mean both dwelling-place and battlefield. According to Watkins, from PIE *ple-go-, suffixed form of
root *pele- (1) to fill, which would make it cognate with Greek plethos people, multitude.
Superseded in most senses by people. Generally a collective noun in Middle English, however plural
folks is attested from 15c.    Old English folc was commonly used in forming compounds (59 are
listed in the Clark Hall dictionary), such as folccwide popular saying, folcgemot town or district
meeting; folcwoh deception of the public. Modern use of folk as an adjective is from c.1850 (see
folklore).


dream (n.)

mid-13c. in the sense sequence of sensations passing through a sleeping person's mind (also as a
verb), probably related to Old Norse draumr, Danish dr&oslash;m, Swedish dr&ouml;m, Old Saxon drom
merriment, noise, Old Frisian dram dream, Dutch droom, Old High German troum, German traum dream,
perhaps from Proto-Germanic *draugmas deception, illusion, phantasm (cognates: Old Saxon bidriogan,
Old High German triogan, German tr&uuml;gen to deceive, delude, Old Norse draugr ghost, apparition).
Possible cognates outside Germanic are Sanskrit druh- seek to harm, injure, Avestan druz- lie,
deceive.    But Old English dream meant only joy, mirth, noisy merriment, also music. And much study
has failed to prove that Old English dream is the root of the modern word for sleeping vision,
despite being identical in spelling. Either the meaning of the word changed dramatically or vision
was an unrecorded secondary Old English meaning of dream, or there are two separate words here. OED
offers this theory: It seems as if the presence of dream 'joy, mirth, music,' had caused dream
'dream' to be avoided, at least in literature, and swefn, lit. 'sleep,' to be substituted ....
Words for sleeping vision in Old English were m&aelig;ting and swefn. Old English swefn originally
meant sleep, as did a great many Indo-European dream nouns, such as Lithuanian sapnas, Old Church
Slavonic sunu, and the Romanic words (French songe, Spanish sue&#241;o, Italian sogno all from Latin
somnium (from PIE *swep-no-; cognate with Greek hypnos; see somnolence; Old English swefn is from
the same root). Dream in the sense of ideal or aspiration is from 1931, from earlier sense of
something of dream-like beauty or charm (1888).


