decree (v.)

late 14c., from decree (n.). Related: Decreed; decreeing.


decree (n.)

early 14c., from Old French decre, variant of decret (12c., Modern French d&eacute;cret), from Latin
decretum, neuter of decretus, past participle of decernere to decree, decide, pronounce a decision,
from de- (see de-) + cernere to separate (see crisis).


infralapsarian (adj.)

1731, from infra- + Latin lapsus a fall (see lapse (n.)) + ending from unitarian, etc. In reference
to the Calvinist doctrine that god's election of some to everlasting life was consequent to his
decree to allow the Fall of man, and was thus a remedial measure. Contrasted to supralapsarian, in
reference to the belief that He always meant to consign most of mankind to eternal fire and that the
decision to create some men to be damned was his first decree. There's also a moderate sublapsarian
view. Here the decree to elect those who would believe and leave those who do not believe to
damnation also comes after the decree to allow the fall, but the decree to provide salvation for man
comes immediately after the decree to elect.


sanction (n.)

early 15c., confirmation or enactment of a law, from Latin sanctionem (nominative sanctio) act of
decreeing or ordaining, also decree, ordinance, noun of action from past participle stem of sancire
to decree, confirm, ratify, make sacred (see saint (n.)). Originally especially of ecclesiastical
decrees.


ukase (n.)

decree issued by a Russian emperor, 1729, from Russian ukaz edict, back-formation from from ukazat'
to show, decree, to order, from Old Church Slavonic ukazati, from u- away, perhaps here an intensive
prefix, from PIE *au- (2) off, away + kazati to show, order, from Slavic *kaz- (related to the first
element of Casimir), from PIE root *kwek- to appear, show.


plebiscite (n.)

direct vote of the people, 1860 (originally in reference to Italian unification), from French
pl&eacute;biscite (1776 in modern sense, originally with reference to Switzerland), from Latin
plebiscitum a decree or resolution of the people, from plebs (genitive plebis) the common people
(see plebeian (adj.)) + scitum decree, noun use of neuter past participle of sciscere to assent,
vote for, approve, inchoative of scire to know (see science). Used earlier (1530s) in a purely Roman
historical context. Related: Plebiscitary.


plea (n.)

early 13c., lawsuit, from Anglo-French plai (late 12c.), Old French plait lawsuit, decision, decree
(9c.), from Medieval Latin placitum lawsuit, in classical Latin, opinion, decree, literally that
which pleases, thing which is agreed upon, properly neuter past participle of placere (see please).
Sense development seems to be from something pleasant, to something that pleases both sides, to
something that has been decided. Meaning a pleading, an agreement in a suit is attested from late
14c. Plea-bargaining is first attested 1963. Common pleas (early 13c.) originally were legal
proceedings over which the Crown did not claim exclusive jurisdiction (as distinct from pleas of the
Crown); later actions brought by one subject against another.


are (n.)

square unit of 10 meters on each side, 1819, from French, formed 1795 by decree of the French
National Convention, from Latin area vacant piece of ground (see area).


proscription (n.)

late 14c., decree of condemnation, outlawry, from Latin proscriptionem (nominative proscriptio) a
public notice (of sale); proscription, outlawry, confiscation, noun of action from past participle
stem of proscribere (see proscribe).


Ronald

masc. proper name, from Old Norse R&ouml;gnvaldr Having the Gods' Power, from r&ouml;gn gods,
literally decreeing powers (plural of regin decree) + valdr ruler (see wield).


interdict (v.)

late 13c., from Old French entredit, past participle of entredire forbid by decree, from Latin
interdicere interpose by speech, prohibit, from inter- between (see inter-) + dicere to speak, to
say (see diction). Related: Interdicted; interdicting.


statute (n.)

late 13c., from Old French statut, estatut (royal) promulgation, (legal) statute, from Late Latin
statutum a law, decree, noun use of neuter past participle of Latin statuere enact, establish, from
status condition, position (see status).


hectare (n.)

1810, from French hectare a hundred ares, formed from Greek hekaton hundred (see hecatomb) + Latin
area vacant piece of ground (see area). A superficial measure containing 100 ares, coined by decree
of the French National Convention in 1795.


bill (n.1)

written statement, mid-14c., from Anglo-French bille, Anglo-Latin billa list, from Medieval Latin
bulla decree, seal, sealed document, in classical Latin bubble, boss, stud, amulet for the neck
(hence seal; see bull (n.2)). Sense of account, invoice first recorded c.1400; that of order to pay
(technically bill of exchange) is from 1570s; that of paper money is from 1660s. Meaning draft of an
act of Parliament is from 1510s.


banal (adj.)

trite, commonplace, 1840, from French banal, belonging to a manor, common, hackneyed, commonplace,
from Old French banel communal (13c.), from ban decree; legal control; announcement; authorization;
payment for use of a communal oven, mill, etc. (see ban (v.)). The modern sense evolved from the
word's use in designating things like ovens or mills that belonged to feudal serfs, or else
compulsory military service; in either case it was generalized in French through open to everyone to
commonplace, ordinary, to trite, petty.


ordinance (n.)

c.1300, an authoritative direction, decree, or command (narrower or more transitory than a law),
from Old French ordenance (Modern French ordonnance) or directly from Medieval Latin ordinantia,
from Latin ordinantem (nominative ordinans), present participle of ordinare put in order (see
ordain). By early 14c. senses had emerged of arrangement in ranks or rows (especially in order of
battle), also warlike provisions, equipment (a sense now in ordnance).


ordain (v.)

late 13c., to appoint or admit to the ministry of the Church, from stem of Old French ordener place
in order, arrange, prepare; consecrate, designate (Modern French ordonner) and directly from Latin
ordinare put in order, arrange, dispose, appoint, from ordo (genitive ordinis) order (see order
(n.)). The notion is to confer holy orders upon. Meaning to decree, enact is from c.1300; sense of
to set (something) that will continue in a certain order is from early 14c. Related: Ordained;
ordaining.


doom (n.)

Old English dom law, judgment, condemnation, from Proto-Germanic *domaz (cognates: Old Saxon and Old
Frisian dom, Old Norse domr, Old High German tuom, Gothic doms judgment, decree), from PIE root
*dhe- (cognates: Sanskrit dhaman- law, Greek themis law, Lithuanian dome attention), literally to
set, put (see factitious). A book of laws in Old English was a dombec. Modern sense of fate, ruin,
destruction is c.1600, from the finality of the Christian Judgment Day.


canon (n.1)

church law, Old English canon, from Old French canon or directly from Late Latin canon Church law,
in classical Latin, measuring line, rule, from Greek kanon any straight rod or bar; rule; standard
of excellence, perhaps from kanna reed (see cane (n.)). Taken in ecclesiastical sense for decree of
the Church. General sense of standard of judging is from c.1600. Harold Bloom writes that The
secular canon, with the word meaning a catalog of approved authors, does not actually begin until
the middle of the eighteenth century .... [The Western Canon, 1994]. Related: Canonicity.


shrive (v.)

Old English scrifan assign, prescribe, ordain, decree; impose penance, hear confession; have regard
for, care for, apparently originally to write (strong, past tense scraf, past participle scrifen),
from Proto-Germanic *skriban (cognates: Old Saxon scriban, Old Frisian skriva write; impose penance;
Old Dutch scrivan, Dutch schrijven, German schreiben to write, draw, paint; Danish skrifte confess),
an early borrowing from Latin scribere to write (see script (n.)), which in Old English and
Scandinavian developed further to confess, hear confession.


release (v.)

c.1300, to withdraw, revoke (a decree, etc.), cancel, lift; remit, from Old French relaissier,
relesser to relinquish, quit, let go, leave behind, abandon, acquit, variant of relacher release,
relax, from Latin relaxare loosen, stretch out (see relax), source also of Spanish relajar, Italian
relassare.    Meaning alleviate, ease is mid-14c., as is sense of free from (duty, etc.); exonerate.
From late 14c. as grant remission, forgive; set free from imprisonment, military service, etc. Also
give up, relinquish, surrender. In law, c.1400, to grant a release of property. Of press reports,
attested from 1904; of motion pictures, from 1912; of music recordings, from 1962. As a euphemism
for to dismiss, fire from a job it is attested in American English since 1904. Related: Released;
releasing.


roll (n.)

early 13c., rolled-up piece of parchment or paper (especially one inscribed with an official
record), from Old French rolle document, parchment scroll, decree (12c.), from Medieval Latin
rotulus a roll of paper (source also of Spanish rollo, Italian ruollo), from Latin rotula small
wheel, diminutive of rota wheel (see rotary).    Meaning a register, list, catalogue is from late
14c., common from c.1800. Meaning dough which is rolled before baking is first recorded mid-15c.
Sense of act of rolling is from 1743. Meaning quantity of material rolled up is from late 14c.;
meaning quantity of paper money is from 1846; sense of quantity of (rolled) film is from 1890.
Meaning act of sexual intercourse is attested from 1942 (roll in the hay), from roll (v.). Dutch
rol, German Rolle, Danish rulle, etc. are from French.


attorney (n.)

early 14c. (mid-13c. in Anglo-Latin), from Old French atorn&eacute; (one) appointed, past participle
of aturner to decree, assign, appoint, from atorner (see attorn). The legal Latin form attornare
influenced the spelling in Anglo-French. The sense is of one appointed to represent another's
interests.    In English law, a private attorney was one appointed to act for another in business or
legal affairs (usually for pay); an attorney at law or public attorney was a qualified legal agent
in the courts of Common Law who prepared the cases for a barrister, who pleaded them (the equivalent
of a solicitor in Chancery). So much a term of contempt in England that it was abolished by the
Judicature Act of 1873 and merged with solicitor.Johnson observed that he did not care to speak ill
of any man behind his back, but he believed the gentleman was an attorney. [Boswell]The double -t-
is a mistaken 15c. attempt to restore a non-existent Latin original. Attorney general first recorded
1530s in sense of legal officer of the state (late 13c. in Anglo-French), from French, hence the odd
plural (subject first, adjective second).


lesbian (adj.)

1590s, pertaining to the island of Lesbos, from Latin Lesbius, from Greek lesbios of Lesbos, Greek
island in northeastern Aegean Sea (the name originally may have meant wooded), home of Sappho, great
lyric poet whose erotic and romantic verse embraced women as well as men, hence meaning relating to
homosexual relations between women (1890; lesbianism in this sense is attested from 1870) and the
noun, first recorded 1925. Her particular association in English with erotic love between women
dates to at least 1825, though the words formed from it are later. Before this, the principal
figurative use (common in 17c.) was lesbian rule (c.1600) a mason's rule of lead, of a type used on
Lesbos, which could be bent to fit the curves of a molding; hence, pliant morality or judgment.And
this is the nature of the equitable, a correction of law where it is defective owing to its
universality. ... For when the thing is indefinite the rule also is indefinite, like the leaden rule
used in making the Lesbian moulding; the rule adapts itself to the shape of the stone and is not
rigid, and so too the decree is adapted to the facts. [Aristotle, Nicomachean Ethics]  See also
tribadism. Greek had a verb lesbiazein to imitate the Lesbians, which implied sexual initiative and
shamelessness among women, but not necessarily female homosexuality.


alchemy (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French alchimie (14c.), alquemie (13c.), from Medieval Latin alkimia, from Arabic
al-kimiya, from Greek khemeioa (found c.300 C.E. in a decree of Diocletian against the old writings
of the Egyptians), all meaning alchemy. Perhaps from an old name for Egypt (Khemia, literally land
of black earth, found in Plutarch), or from Greek khymatos that which is poured out, from khein to
pour, related to khymos juice, sap [Klein, citing W. Muss-Arnolt, calls this folk etymology]. The
word seems to have elements of both origins.Mahn ... concludes, after an elaborate investigation,
that Gr. khymeia was probably the original, being first applied to pharmaceutical chemistry, which
was chiefly concerned with juices or infusions of plants; that the pursuits of the Alexandrian
alchemists were a subsequent development of chemical study, and that the notoriety of these may have
caused the name of the art to be popularly associated with the ancient name of Egypt. [OED]The al-
is the Arabic definite article, the. The art and the name were adopted by the Arabs from
Alexandrians and thence returned to Europe via Spain. Alchemy was the chemistry of the Middle Ages
and early modern times; since c.1600 the word has been applied distinctively to the pursuit of the
transmutation of baser metals into gold, which, along with the search for the universal solvent and
the panacea, were the chief occupations of early chemistry.


script (n.)

late 14c., something written, earlier scrite (c.1300), from Old French escrit piece of writing,
written paper; credit note, IOU; deed, bond (Modern French &eacute;crit) from Latin scriptum a
writing, book; law; line, mark, noun use of neuter past participle of scribere to write, from PIE
*skribh- to cut, separate, sift (cognates: Greek skariphasthai to scratch an outline, sketch,
Lettish skripat scratch, write, Old Norse hrifa scratch), from root *(s)ker- (1) to cut (see shear
(v.)) on the notion of carving marks in stone, wood, etc.    Meaning handwriting is recorded from
1860. Theatrical use, short for manuscript, is attested from 1884. The importance of Rome to the
spread of civilization in Europe is attested by the fact that the word for write in Celtic and
Germanic (as well as Romanic) languages derives from scribere (French &eacute;crire, Irish
scriobhaim, Welsh ysgrifennu, German schreiben). The cognate Old English scrifan means to allot,
assign, decree (see shrive; also compare Old Norse skript penance) and Modern English uses write
(v.) to express this action.


fuck (v.)

until recently a difficult word to trace, in part because it was taboo to the editors of the
original OED when the F volume was compiled, 1893-97. Written form only attested from early 16c. OED
2nd edition cites 1503, in the form fukkit; earliest appearance of current spelling is 1535 --
Bischops ... may fuck thair fill and be vnmaryit [Sir David Lyndesay, Ane Satyre of the Thrie
Estaits], but presumably it is a much more ancient word than that, simply one that wasn't written in
the kind of texts that have survived from Old English and Middle English. Buck cites proper name
John le Fucker from 1278, but the surname could have other explanations. The word apparently is
hinted at in a scurrilous 15c. poem, titled Flen flyys, written in bastard Latin and Middle English.
The relevant line reads:Non sunt in celi quia fuccant uuiuys of heliThey [the monks] are not in
heaven because they fuck the wives of [the town of] Ely. Fuccant is pseudo-Latin, and in the
original it is written in cipher. The earliest examples of the word otherwise are from Scottish,
which suggests a Scandinavian origin, perhaps from a word akin to Norwegian dialectal fukka
copulate, or Swedish dialectal focka copulate, strike, push, and fock penis. Another theory traces
it to Middle English fyke, fike move restlessly, fidget, which also meant dally, flirt, and probably
is from a general North Sea Germanic word; compare Middle Dutch fokken, German ficken fuck, earlier
make quick movements to and fro, flick, still earlier itch, scratch; the vulgar sense attested from
16c. This would parallel in sense the usual Middle English slang term for have sexual intercourse,
swive, from Old English swifan to move lightly over, sweep (see swivel). But OED remarks these
cannot be shown to be related to the English word. Chronology and phonology rule out Shipley's
attempt to derive it from Middle English firk to press hard, beat.    Germanic words of similar form
(f + vowel + consonant) and meaning 'copulate' are numerous. One of them is G. ficken. They often
have additional senses, especially 'cheat,' but their basic meaning is 'move back and forth.' ...
Most probably, fuck is a borrowing from Low German and has no cognates outside Germanic. [Liberman]
French foutre and Italian fottere look like the English word but are unrelated, derived rather from
Latin futuere, which is perhaps from PIE root *bhau(t)- knock, strike off, extended via a figurative
use from the sexual application of violent action [Shipley; compare the sexual slang use of bang,
etc.]. Popular and Internet derivations from acronyms (and the pluck yew fable) are merely
<b>ingenious trifling</b>. The Old English word was h&aelig;man, from ham dwelling, home, with a
sense of take home, co-habit. Fuck was outlawed in print in England (by the Obscene Publications
Act, 1857) and the U.S. (by the Comstock Act, 1873). As a noun, it dates from 1670s. The word may
have been shunned in print, but it continued in conversation, especially among soldiers during World
War I.It became so common that an effective way for the soldier to express this emotion was to omit
this word. Thus if a sergeant said, 'Get your ----ing rifles!' it was understood as a matter of
routine. But if he said 'Get your rifles!' there was an immediate implication of urgency and danger.
[John Brophy, Songs and Slang of the British Soldier: 1914-1918, pub. 1930]The legal barriers broke
down in the 20th century, with the Ulysses decision (U.S., 1933) and Lady Chatterley's Lover (U.S.,
1959; U.K., 1960). Johnson excluded the word, and fuck wasn't in a single English language
dictionary from 1795 to 1965. The Penguin Dictionary broke the taboo in the latter year. Houghton
Mifflin followed, in 1969, with The American Heritage Dictionary, but it also published a Clean
Green edition without the word, to assure itself access to the lucrative public high school market.
The abbreviation F (or eff) probably began as euphemistic, but by 1943 it was being used as a cuss
word, too. In 1948, the publishers of The Naked and the Dead persuaded Norman Mailer to use the
euphemism fug instead. When Mailer later was introduced to Dorothy Parker, she greeted him with, So
you're the man who can't spell 'fuck'  [The quip sometimes is attributed to Tallulah Bankhead].
Hemingway used muck in For whom the Bell Tolls (1940). The major breakthrough in publication was
James Jones' From Here to Eternity (1950), with 50 fucks (down from 258 in the original manuscript).
Egyptian legal agreements from the 23rd Dynasty (749-21 B.C.E.) frequently include the phrase, If
you do not obey this decree, may a donkey copulate with you! [Reinhold Aman, Maledicta, Summer
1977]. Fuck-all nothing first recorded 1960.  Verbal phrase fuck up to ruin, spoil, destroy first
attested c.1916. A widespread group of Slavic words (such as Polish pierdoli&#263;) can mean both
fornicate and make a mistake. Fuck off attested from 1929; as a command to depart, by 1944. Flying
fuck originally meant have sex on horseback and is first attested c.1800 in broadside ballad New
Feats of Horsemanship. For the unkillable urban legend that this word is an acronym of some sort (a
fiction traceable on the Internet to 1995 but probably predating that) see here, and also here.
Related: Fucked; fucking. Agent noun fucker attested from 1590s in literal sense; by 1893 as a term
of abuse (or admiration).    DUCK F-CK-R. The man who has the care of the poultry on board a
&#383;hip of war. [Classical Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, 1796]


