defect (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French defect and directly from Latin defectus failure, revolt, falling
away, noun use of past participle of deficere to fail, desert (see deficient).


defect (v.)

1570s, from Latin defectus, past participle of deficere to fail, desert (see defect (n.)). Related:
Defected; defecting.


defective (adj.)

mid-14c., from Middle French d&eacute;fectif (14c.) and directly from Late Latin defectivus, from
defect-, past participle stem of deficere (see deficient). A euphemism for mentally ill from 1898 to
c.1935. Related: Defectively; defectiveness.


defector (n.)

1660s, agent noun in Latin form from defect, or else from Latin defector revolter, agent noun from
deficere (see deficient).


mendacious (adj.)

1610s, from Middle French mendacieux, from Latin mendacium a lie, untruth, falsehood, fiction, from
mendax (genitive mendacis) lying, deceitful, from menda fault, defect, carelessness in writing, from
PIE root *mend- physical defect, fault (see amend (v.)). The sense evolution of Latin mendax was
influenced by mentiri to speak falsely, lie, deceive. Related: Mendaciously; mendaciousness.


failing (n.)

defect, fault, 1580s, verbal noun from fail (v.).


vice (n.1)

moral fault, wickedness, c.1300, from Old French vice fault, failing, defect, irregularity,
misdemeanor (12c.), from Latin vitium defect, offense, blemish, imperfection, in both physical and
moral senses (in Medieval Latin also vicium; source also of Italian vezzo usage, entertainment),
from PIE *wi-tio-, from root *wei- (3) vice, fault, guilt.  Horace and Aristotle have already spoken
to us about the virtues of their forefathers and the vices of their own times, and through the
centuries, authors have talked the same way.  If all this were true, we would be bears today.
[Montesquieu]   Vice squad special police unit targeting prostitution, narcotics, gambling, etc., is
attested from 1905, American English. Vice anglais fetish for corporal punishment, literally the
English vice, is attested from 1942, from French. In Old French, the seven deadly sins were les set
vices.


wrinkle (n.)

fold or crease in the extenal body, late 14c.; in cloth or clothing from early 15c., probably from
wrinkle (v.). Meaning defect, problem first recorded 1640s; that of idea, device, notion (especially
a new one) is from 1817.


flaw (n.)

early 14c., a flake (of snow), also in Middle English a spark of fire; a splinter, from Old Norse
flaga stone slab, flake (see flagstone); sense of defect, fault first recorded 1580s, first of
character, later (c.1600) of material things; probably via notion of a fragment broken off.


far-sighted (adj.)

also farsighted, 1640s, forecasting, prescient; 1878 as a defect of the eyes (hypermetropic); see
far + sight. Related: Farsightedness.


debug (v.)

1945, of machine systems, from de- + bug (n.) glitch, defect in a machine. Meaning to remove a
concealed microphone is from 1964. Related: Debugged; debugging.


mongoloid

in reference to the genetic defect causing mental retardation (mongolism), 1899, from Mongoloid. So
called for facial appearance. See Down's Syndrome. Such people were called Mongolian from 1866.


vitiate (v.)

1530s, from Latin vitiatus, past participle of vitiare to make faulty, injure, spoil, corrupt, from
vitium fault, defect, blemish, crime, vice (see vice (n.1)). Related: Vitiated; vitiating.


caries (n.)

1630s, from Latin caries rottenness, decay, from Proto-Italic *kas-, usually said to be from PIE
root *kere- to injure, break apart (cognates: Greek ker death, destruction, Old Irish krin withered,
faded). Related: Carious. But de Vaan writes that semantically, caries may just as well belong to
careocared 'to lack' as 'defect, state of defectiveness' ....


apostate (n.)

mid-14c., one who forsakes his religion or faith, from Old French apostate (Modern French apostat)
and directly from Late Latin apostata, from Greek apostasia defection, desertion, rebellion, from
apostenai to defect, literally to stand off, from apo- away from (see apo-) + stenai to stand. Used
in non-religious situations (politics, etc.) from mid-14c.


ellipsis (n.)

1560s, an ellipse, from Latin ellipsis, from Greek elleipsis a falling short, defect, ellipse, from
elleipein to fall short, leave out, from en- in + leipein to leave (see relinquish). Grammatical
sense first recorded 1610s.


error (n.)

also, through 18c., errour, c.1300, from Old French error mistake, flaw, defect, heresy, from Latin
errorem (nominative error) a wandering, straying, mistake, from errare to wander (see err).    Words
for error in most Indo-European languages originally meant wander, go astray (but Irish has dearmad
error, from dermat a forgetting).


mendicant (adj.)

late 14c., from Latin mendicantem (nominative mendicans) present participle of mendicare to beg, ask
alms, from mendicus beggar, originally cripple (connection via cripples who must beg), from menda
fault, physical defect (see mendacious). As an adjective from 1540s. Also in Middle English was
mendinant (mid-14c.), from Old French mendinant, present participle of mendiner to beg, from the
same Latin source.


default (n.)

early 13c., offense, crime, sin, later (late 13c.) failure, failure to act, from Old French defaute
(12c.) fault, defect, failure, culpability, lack, privation, from Vulgar Latin *defallita a
deficiency or failure, past participle of *defallere, from Latin de- away (see de-) + fallere to
deceive, to cheat; to put wrong, to lead astray, cause to be mistaken; to escape notice of, be
concealed from (see fail (v.)). The financial sense is first recorded 1858; the computing sense is
from 1966.


vituperation (n.)

mid-15c., but rare before early 19c., from Latin vituperationem (nominative vituperatio) blame, a
blaming, censuring, from  past participle stem of vituperare disparage, find fault with, from
vitiperos having faults, from vitium fault, defect (see vice (n.1)) + parare prepare, provide,
procure (see pare). Vituperatio was stronger than either Latin reprehensio or Modern English
vituperation.


fault (n.)

late 13c., faute, deficiency, from Old French faute (12c.) opening, gap; failure, flaw, blemish;
lack, deficiency, from Vulgar Latin *fallita a shortcoming, falling, noun use of fem. past
participle, from Latin falsus deceptive, feigned, spurious, past participle of fallere deceive,
disappoint (see fail (v.)).    The -l- was restored 16c., probably in imitation of Latin, but was
not pronounced till 18c. Sense of physical defect is from early 14c.; that of moral culpability is
first recorded late 14c. Geological sense is from 1796. The use in tennis (c.1600) is closer to the
etymological sense.


amend (v.)

early 13c., to free from faults, rectify, from Old French amender (12c.), from Latin emendare to
correct, free from fault, from ex- out (see ex-) + menda fault, blemish, from PIE *mend- physical
defect, fault (cognates: Sanskrit minda physical blemish, Old Irish mennar stain, blemish, Welsh
mann sign, mark).    Supplanted in senses of repair, cure by its shortened offspring mend (v.).
Meaning to add to legislation (ostensibly to correct or improve it) is recorded from 1777. Related:
Amended; amending.


monster (n.)

early 14c., malformed animal or human, creature afflicted with a birth defect, from Old French
monstre, mostre monster, monstrosity (12c.), and directly from Latin monstrum divine omen, portent,
sign; abnormal shape; monster, monstrosity, figuratively repulsive character, object of dread, awful
deed, abomination, from root of monere warn (see monitor (n.)). Abnormal or prodigious animals were
regarded as signs or omens of impending evil. Extended by late 14c. to imaginary animals composed of
parts of creatures (centaur, griffin, etc.). Meaning animal of vast size is from 1520s; sense of
person of inhuman cruelty or wickedness is from 1550s. As an adjective, of extraordinary size, from
1837. In Old English, the monster Grendel was an agl&aelig;ca, a word related to agl&aelig;c
calamity, terror, distress, oppression.


sound (adj.)

free from special defect or injury, c.1200, from Old English gesund sound, safe, having the organs
and faculties complete and in perfect action, from Proto-Germanic *sunda-, from Germanic root *swen-
to- healthy, strong (cognates: Old Saxon gisund, Old Frisian sund, Dutch gezond, Old High German
gisunt, German gesund healthy, as in the post-sneezing interjection gesundheit; also Old English
swi&eth; strong, Gothic swin&thorn;s strong, German geschwind fast, quick), with connections in
Indo-Iranian and Balto-Slavic. Meaning right, correct, free from error is from mid-15c. Meaning
financially solid or safe is attested from c.1600; of sleep, undisturbed, from 1540s. Sense of
holding accepted opinions is from 1520s.


bug (n.)

insect, 1620s (earliest reference is to bedbugs), of unknown origin, probably but not certainly from
or influenced by Middle English bugge something frightening, scarecrow (late 14c.), a meaning
obsolete since the insect sense arose except in bugbear (1570s) and bugaboo (q.v.).    Probably
connected with Scottish bogill goblin, bugbear, or obsolete Welsh bwg ghost, goblin (compare Welsh
bwgwl threat, earlier fear, Middle Irish bocan&#225;ch supernatural being). Some speculate that
these words are from a root meaning goat (see buck (n.1)) and represent originally a goat-like
spectre. Compare also bogey (n.1) and German b&ouml;gge, b&ouml;ggel-mann goblin. Perhaps influenced
in meaning by Old English -budda used in compounds for beetle (compare Low German budde louse, grub,
Middle Low German buddech thick, swollen).     In the United States bug is not confined, as in
England, to the domestic pest, but is applied to all insects of the Coleoptera order, which includes
what in this country are generally called beetles. [Farmer &amp; Henley, Dictionary of Slang and
Colloquial English, 1912 abridged edition]    Meaning defect in a machine (1889) may have been
coined c.1878 by Thomas Edison (perhaps with the notion of an insect getting into the works).
Meaning person obsessed by an idea (such as firebug) is from 1841, perhaps from notion of
persistence. Sense of microbe, germ is from 1919. Bugs crazy is from c.1900. Bug juice as a slang
name for drink is from 1869, originally bad whiskey. The 1811 slang dictionary has bug-hunter an
upholsterer. Bug-word word or words meant to irritate and vex is from 1560s.


