deference (n.)

1640s, from French d&eacute;f&eacute;rence (16c.), from d&eacute;f&eacute;rer (see defer (v.2)).


respects (n.)

expressions or signs of esteem, deference, or compliment, 1610s; see respect (n.). Earlier (late
14c.) as aspects, particular respects.


sundae (n.)

1897, American English, thought to be an alteration of Sunday, perhaps re-spelled in deference to
religious feelings; but the reason for the name is uncertain; perhaps ice cream left over from
Sunday, on sale later. For a fuller account of the speculations, see H.L. Mencken, The American
Language, Supplement I (1945), pp.376-7.


pace (prep.)

with the leave of, 1863, from Latin pace, ablative of pax peace, as in pace tua with all deference
to you; from PIE *pak- to fasten (see pax). Used chiefly as a courteous or ironical apology for a
contradiction or difference of opinion [OED].


bias (n.)

1520s, from French biais slant, slope, oblique, also figuratively, expedient, means (13c.,
originally in Old French a past participle adjective, sideways, askance, against the grain), of
unknown origin, probably from Old Proven&ccedil;al biais, with cognates in Old Catalan and
Sardinian; possibly from Vulgar Latin *(e)bigassius, from Greek epikarsios athwart, crosswise, at an
angle, from epi- upon + karsios oblique, from PIE *krs-yo-, from root *(s)ker- (1) to cut (see shear
(v.)). It became a noun in Old French. [A] technical term in the game of bowls, whence come all the
later uses of the word [OED]. Transferred sense of predisposition, prejudice is from 1570s in
English.    For what a man had rather were true he more readily believes. Therefore he rejects
difficult things from impatience of research; sober things, because they narrow hope; the deeper
things of nature, from superstition; the light of experience, from arrogance and pride, lest his
mind should seem to be occupied with things mean and transitory; things not commonly believed, out
of deference to the opinion of the vulgar. Numberless in short are the ways, and sometimes
imperceptible, in which the affections colour and infect the understanding. [Francis Bacon, Novum
Organum, 1620]


