defiance (n.)

c.1300, from Old French desfiance challenge, declaration of war, from desfiant, present participle
of desfier (see defy).


yah (interj.)

exclamation of defiance or dismissal, from 1812. Extended form yah-boo by 1910.


nertz (interj.)

1932, originally American English college slang, colloquial or euphemistic pronunciation of nuts as
a slang retort of defiance or dismissal (1931).


facing (n.)

c.1400, disfiguring, from face. Meaning defiance is from 1520s; that of front of a garment is 1560s;
coating is from 1580s; front or outer part of a wall, building, etc., is from 1823.


Geronimo

cry made in jumping, apparently from the story of the Apache leader Geronimo making a daring leap to
escape U.S. cavalry pursuers at Medicine Bluffs, Oklahoma (and supposedly shouting his name in
defiance as he did). Adopted as battle cry by 82nd Airborne U.S. paratroopers in World War II, who
perhaps had seen it in the 1939 Paramount Studios movie Geronimo. The name is the Italian and
Spanish form of Jerome, from Greek Hieronomos, literally sacred name.


bravery (n.)

1540s, daring, defiance, boasting, from French braverie, from braver to brave (see brave) or else
from cognate Italian braveria, from bravare.    No Man is an Atheist, however he pretend it and
serve the Company with his Braveries. [Donne, 1631]    As a good quality, attested from 1580s.
Meaning fine clothes is from 1560s and holds the older sense.


bird (n.3)

middle finger held up in a rude gesture, slang derived from 1860s expression give the big bird to
hiss someone like a goose, kept alive in vaudeville slang with sense of to greet someone with boos,
hisses, and catcalls (1922), transferred 1960s to the up yours hand gesture (the rigid finger
representing the hypothetical object to be inserted) on notion of defiance and contempt. Gesture
itself seems to be much older (the human anatomy section of a 12c. Latin bestiary in Cambridge
describes the middle finger as that by means of which the pursuit of dishonour is indicated).


confront (v.)

1560s, to stand in front of, from Middle French confronter (15c.), from Medieval Latin confrontare
assign limits, adjoin, from Latin com- together (see com-) + frontem (nominative frons) forehead
(see front (n.)). Sense of to face in defiance or hostility is late 16c. Related: Confronted;
confronting.


spite (n.)

c.1300, shortened form of despit malice (see despite). Corresponding to Middle Dutch spijt, Middle
Low German spyt, Middle Swedish spit. In 17c. commonly spelled spight. Phrase in spite of is
recorded from c.1400, literally in defiance or contempt of, hence notwithstanding. Spite-fence
barrier erected to cause annoyance is from 1889.


kriegspiel (n.)

war games played with pieces on maps, 1811 as a German word in English, from German Kriegsspiel,
literally war game, from Krieg war, from Middle High German kriec, combat, mostly exertion, effort;
opposition, enmity, resistance, from Old High German chreg stubbornness, defiance, obsinancy,
perhaps from PIE *gwere- (2) heavy (see grave (adj.)) or cognate with Greek hybris violence (see
hubris; also see war (n.)). For second element, see spiel (n.). Introduced 1870s as officer training
in British army.


John Hancock

colloquial for signature, 1903 (sometimes, through some unexplainable error, John Henry), from the
Boston merchant and rebel (1736-1793), signer of the U.S. Declaration of Independence. The extended
sense is from his signing that dangerous document first or most flamboyantly.    John Hancock,
president of Congress, was the first to sign the Declaration of Independence, writing his name in
large, plain letters, and saying: There; John Bull can read my name without spectacles. Now let him
double the price on my head, for this is my defiance. [H&eacute;l&egrave;ne Adeline Guerber, The
Story of the Thirteen Colonies, New York, 1898]    The family name is attested from 1276 in
Yorkshire, a diminutive (see cock) of Hann, a very common given name in 13c. Yorkshire as a pet form
of Henry or John.


boo

expression meant to startle, early 15c., boh, A combination of consonant and vowel especially fitted
to produce a loud and startling sound [OED, which compares Latin boare, Greek boaein to cry aloud,
roar, shout.]; as an expression of disapproval, 1801 (n.), 1816 (v.); hence, the verb meaning shower
someone with boos (1893).    Booing was common late 19c. among London theater audiences and at
British political events; In Italy, Parma opera-goers were notorious boo-birds, but the custom seems
to have been little-known in America till c.1910.    To say boo open one's mouth, speak, originally
was to say boo to a goose.    To be able to say Bo! to a goose is to be not quite destitute of
courage, to have an inkling of spirit, and was probably in the first instance used of children. A
little boy who comes across some geese suddenly will find himself hissed at immediately, and a great
demonstration of defiance made by them, but if he can pluck up heart to cry 'bo!' loudly and advance
upon them, they will retire defeated. The word 'bo' is clearly selected for the sake of the
explosiveness of its first letter and the openness and loudness of its vowel. [Walter W. Skeat, Cry
Bo to a Goose, Notes and Queries, 4th series vi Sept. 10, 1870]


red (adj.1)

Old English read red, from Proto-Germanic *rauthaz (cognates: Old Norse rau&eth;r, Danish
r&oslash;d, Old Saxon rod, Old Frisian rad, Middle Dutch root, Dutch rood, German rot, Gothic
rau&thorn;s). As a noun from mid-13c.    The Germanic words are from PIE root *reudh- red, ruddy
(cognates: Latin ruber, also dialectal rufus light red, mostly of hair; Greek erythros; Sanskrit
rudhira-; Avestan raoidita-; Old Church Slavonic rudru, Polish rumiany, Russian rumjanyj flushed,
red, of complexions, etc.; Lithuanian raudas; Old Irish ruad, Welsh rhudd, Breton ruz red). The only
color for which a definite common PIE root word has been found. The initial -e- in the Greek word is
because Greek tends to avoid beginning words with -r-.    Along with dead, bread (n.), lead (n.1),
the vowel shortened in Middle English. The surname Read/Reid retains the original Old English long
vowel pronunciation and is the corresponding surname to Brown-, Black, White.    The color
designation of Native Americans in English from 1580s. The color as characteristic of British
possessions on a map is attested from 1885. Red-white-and-blue in reference to American patriotism,
from the colors of the flag, is from 1840; in a British context, in reference to the Union flag,
1852. The red flag was used as a symbol of defiance in battle on land or sea from c.1600. To see red
get angry is an American English expression first recorded 1898. Red rover, the children's game,
attested from 1891. Red light as a sign to stop is from 1849, long before traffic signals. As the
sign of a brothel, it is attested from 1899. As a children's game (in reference to the traffic light
meaning) it is recorded from 1953.   Red-letter day (late 14c.) was originally a saint's day, marked
on church calendars in red letters. Red ball signifying express in railroad jargon is 1904,
originally (1899) a system of moving and tracking freight cars. Red dog, type of U.S. football pass
rush, is recorded from 1959. Red meat is from 1808. Red shift in spectography is first recorded
1923. Red carpet sumptuous welcome is from 1934, but the custom for dignitaries is described as far
back as Aeschylus (Agamemnon); it also was the name of a type of English moth.


