defilement (n.)

1570s, from defile (v.) + -ment.


defile (n.)

narrow passage, 1640s, especially in a military sense, a narrow passage down which troops can march
only in single file, from French d&eacute;fil&eacute;, noun use of past participle of d&eacute;filer
march by files (17c.), from de- off (see de-) + file row, from Latin filum thread (see file (v.)).
The verb in this sense is 1705, from French d&eacute;filer.


defile (v.)

c.1400, to desecrate, profane; mid-15c., to make foul or dirty, alteration of earlier defoulen, from
Old French defouler trample down, violate, also ill-treat, dishonor, from de- down (see de-) + foler
to tread, from Latin fullo person who cleans and thickens cloth by stamping on it  (see foil (v.)).
The alteration (or re-formation) in English is from influence of Middle English filen (v.) to render
foul; make unclean or impure, literal and figurative, from Old English fylen (trans.), related to
Old English fulian (intrans.) to become foul, rot, from the source of foul (adj.). Compare befoul,
which also had a parallel form befilen. Related: Defiled; defiling.


pollute (v.)

late 14c., to defile, a back formation from pollution, or else from Latin pollutus, past participle
of polluere to defile, pollute, contaminate. Related: Polluted; polluting. Meaning make physically
foul is from 1540s; specific sense contaminate the environment emerged from late 19c.


mole (n.1)

spot on skin, Old English mal spot, mark, blemish, especially on cloth or linen, from Proto-Germanic
*mailan spot, mark (cognates: Old High German meil, German Mal, Gothic mail wrinkle), from PIE root
*mai- to stain, defile (cognates: Greek miainein to stain, defile, see miasma). Specifically of dark
marks on human skin from late 14c.


undefiled (adj.)

c.1300, undefylde, from un- (1) not + past participle of defile (v.). Originally of morals; sexual
sense is attested from mid-15c. Physical sense of not made dirty is from 1580s.


Miocene (adj.)

pertaining to the geological period between the Oligocene and Pliocene, 1831, irregular formation
from Greek meion less + -cene.  A typical example of the monstrosities with which scientific men in
want of a label for something, and indifferent to all beyond their own province, defile the
language. The elements of the word are Greek, but not the way they are put together, nor the meaning
demanded of the compound. [Fowler]


pass (n.1)

mountain defile, c.1300, from Old French pas step, track, passage, from Latin passus step, pace (see
pace (n.)).


defilade (n.)

1828, from defile (n.) + -ade.


cockroach (n.)

1620s, folk etymology (as if from cock + roach) of Spanish cucaracha chafer, beetle, from cuca kind
of caterpillar. Folk etymology also holds that the first element is from caca excrement.A certaine
India Bug, called by the Spaniards a Cacarootch, the which creeping into Chests they eat and defile
with their ill-sented dung [Capt. John Smith, Virginia, 1624].


contaminate (v.)

early 15c., from Old French contaminer, from Latin contaminatus, past participle of contaminare to
defile, from contamen contact, pollution, from com- together (see com-) + *tag-, base of tangere to
touch (see tangent (adj.)). Related: Contaminant (1934); contaminable.


strait (n.)

mid-14c., narrow, confined space or place, specifically of bodies of water from late 14c., from Old
French estreit, estrait narrow part, pass, defile, narrow passage of water, noun use of adjective
(see strait (adj.)). Sense of difficulty, plight (usually straits) first recorded 1540s. Strait and
narrow conventional or wisely limited way of life is recorded from mid-14c. (compare straight
(adj.2)).


miasma (n.)

1660s, from Modern Latin miasma noxious vapors, from Greek miasma (genitive miasmatos) stain,
pollution, defilement, taint of guilt, from stem of miainein to pollute, from possible PIE root
*mai- to stain, soil, defile (source of Old English mal stain, mark, see mole (n.1)). Earlier form
was miasm (1640s), from French miasme. Related: Miasmatic; miasmal.


soil (v.)

early 13c., to defile or pollute with sin, from Old French soillier to splatter with mud, to foul or
make dirty, originally to wallow (12c., Modern French souillier), from souil tub, wild boar's
wallow, pigsty, which is from either Latin solium tub for bathing; seat, or Latin suculus little
pig, from sus pig. Literal meaning to make dirty, begrime is attested from c.1300 in English.
Related: Soiled; soiling.


smut (n.)

1660s, black mark, stain, from verb smutten debase, defile (late 14c.), later stain or mark with
soot, etc. (1580s), cognate with Middle High German smotzen make dirty, from West Germanic *smutt-
(cognates: Middle High German smuz grease, dirt; German Schmutz dirt, schmutzen to make dirty). The
meaning indecent or obscene language is first attested 1660s.


pollution (n.)

mid-14c., discharge of semen other than during sex, later, desecration, defilement (late 14c.), from
Late Latin pollutionem (nominative pollutio) defilement, noun of action from past participle stem of
Latin polluere to soil, defile, contaminate, from por- before + -luere smear, from PIE root *leu-
dirt; make dirty (cognates: Latin lutum mud, mire, clay, lues filth; Greek lyma filth, dirt,
disgrace, lymax rubbish, refuse; Old Irish loth mud, dirt; Lithuanian lutynas pool, puddle). Sense
of contamination of the environment first recorded c.1860, but not common until c.1955.


masturbation (n.)

1711 (earlier as mastupration, 1620s), from French masturbation and directly from Modern Latin
masturbationem (nominative masturbatio), noun of action from past participle stem of Latin
masturbari to masturbate. The long-standing speculation is that this Latin word is altered (probably
by influence of turbare to stir up) from *manstuprare, from manu, ablative of manus hand (see
manual) + stuprare defile (oneself), from stuprum defilement, dishonor, related to stupere to be
stunned, stupefied (see stupid). But perhaps the first element represents an unattested *mazdo-
penis [OED]. An earlier technical word for this was Onanism. Related: Masturbational.


rape (v.)

late 14c., seize prey; abduct, take by force, from rape (n.) and from Anglo-French raper (Old French
rapir) to seize, abduct, a legal term, probably from past participle of Latin rapere seize, carry
off by force, abduct (see rapid).    Latin rapere was used for sexually violate, but only very
rarely; the usual Latin word being stuprare to defile, ravish, violate, related to stuprum (n.),
literally disgrace. Meaning to abduct (a woman), ravish; also seduce (a man) is from early 15c. in
English. Related: Raped; raping. Uncertain connection to Low German and Dutch rapen in the same
sense.


smite (v.)

to hit, strike, beat, mid-12c., from Old English smitan, which however is attested only as to daub,
smear on; soil, pollute, blemish, defile (strong verb, past tense smat, past participle smiten),
from Proto-Germanic *smitan (cognates: Swedish smita, Danish smide to smear, fling, Old Frisian
smita, Middle Low German and Middle Dutch smiten to cast, fling, Dutch smijten to throw, Old High
German smizan to rub, strike, German schmei&szlig;en to cast, fling, Gothic bismeitan to spread,
smear). The development of the various senses is not quite clear, but that of throwing is perh. the
original one [OED]. Watkins suggests the semantic channel may have been slapping mud on walls in
wattle and daub construction and connects it with PIE *sme- to smear; Klein's sources also say this.
Sense of slay in combat (c.1300) is from Biblical expression smite to death, first attested c.1200.
Meaning visit disastrously is mid-12c., also Biblical. Meaning strike with passion or emotion is
from c.1300.


bad (adj.)

c.1200, inferior in quality; early 13c., wicked, evil, vicious, a mystery word with no apparent
relatives in other languages.* Possibly from Old English derogatory term b&aelig;ddel and its
diminutive b&aelig;dling effeminate man, hermaphrodite, pederast, probably related to b&aelig;dan to
defile. A rare word before 1400, and evil was more common in this sense until c.1700. Meaning
uncomfortable, sorry is 1839, American English colloquial.    Comparable words in the other Indo-
European languages tend to have grown from descriptions of specific qualities, such as ugly,
defective, weak, faithless, impudent, crooked, filthy (such as Greek kakos, probably from the word
for excrement; Russian plochoj, related to Old Church Slavonic plachu wavering, timid; Persian gast,
Old Persian gasta-, related to gand stench; German schlecht, originally level, straight, smooth,
whence simple, ordinary, then bad).    Comparative and superlative forms badder, baddest were common
14c.-18c. and used as recently as Defoe (but not by Shakespeare), but yielded to comparative worse
and superlative worst (which had belonged to evil and ill).    As a noun, late 14c., evil,
wickedness. In U.S. place names, sometimes translating native terms meaning supernaturally
dangerous. Ironic use as a word of approval is said to be at least since 1890s orally, originally in
Black English, emerging in print 1928 in a jazz context. It might have emerged from the ambivalence
of expressions like bad nigger, used as a term of reproach by whites, but among blacks sometimes
representing one who stood up to injustice, but in the U.S. West bad man also had a certain
ambivalence:    These are the men who do most of the killing in frontier communities, yet it is a
noteworthy fact that the men who are killed generally deserve their fate. [Farmer &amp; Henley]
*Farsi has bad in more or less the same sense as the English word, but this is regarded by linguists
as a coincidence. The forms of the words diverge as they are traced back in time (Farsi bad comes
from Middle Persian vat), and such accidental convergences exist across many languages, given the
vast number of words in each and the limited range of sounds humans can make to signify them. Among
other coincidental matches with English are Korean mani many, Chinese pei pay, Nahuatl (Aztecan)
huel well, Maya hol hole.


