defunct (adj.)

1590s, from Old French defunct (14c., Modern French defunt) or directly from Latin defunctus dead,
literally off-duty, from past participle of defungi to discharge, finish, from de- off, completely
(see de-) + fungi perform or discharge duty, from PIE root *bheug- (2) to enjoy (see brook (v.)).


brunch

1896, British student slang merger of breakfast and lunch.To be fashionable nowadays we must
'brunch'. Truly an excellent portmanteau word, introduced, by the way, last year, by Mr. Guy
Beringer, in the now defunct Hunter's Weekly, and indicating a combined breakfast and lunch. [Punch,
Aug. 1, 1896]


convent (n.)

c.1200, covent, cuvent, from Anglo-French covent, from Old French convent, from Latin conventus
assembly, used in Medieval Latin for religious house, originally past participle of convenire come
together (see convene). Not exclusively feminine until 18c. The form with restored Latin -n- emerged
early 15c. The Middle English form remains in London's Covent Garden district (notorious late 18c.
for brothels), so called because it had been the garden of a defunct monastery.    COVENT GARDEN
ABBESS. A bawd.  COVENT GARDEN AGUE. The venereal di&#383;ea&#383;e.  [Classical Dictionary of the
Vulgar Tongue, 1796]


sambo (n.2)

stereotypical name for male black person (now only derogatory), 1818, American English, probably a
different word from sambo (n.1); like many such words (Cuffy, Rastus, etc.) a common personal name
among U.S. blacks in the slavery days (first attested 1704 in Boston), probably from an African
source, such as Foulah sambo uncle, or a similar Hausa word meaning second son.    It could be used
without conscious racism or contempt until circa World War II. When the word fell from polite usage,
collateral casualties included the enormously popular children's book The Story of Little Black
Sambo (by Helen Bannerman), which is about an East Indian child, and the Sambo's Restaurant chain, a
U.S. pancake-specialty joint originally opened in Santa Barbara, Calif., in 1957 (the name
supposedly from a merging of the names of the founders, Sam Battistone and Newell Bo Bohnett, but
the chain's decor and advertising leaned heavily on the book), which once counted 1,200 units coast-
to-coast. Civil rights agitation against it began in 1970s and the chain collapsed, though the
original restaurant still is open. Many of the defunct restaurants were taken over by rival Denny's.


