deliberate (adj.)

early 15c., done with careful consideration, from Latin deliberatus resolved upon, determined, past
participle of deliberare (see deliberation). Meaning slow, consciously unhurried is attested by
1590s. Related: Deliberately.


deliberate (v.)

1540s, from Latin deliberatus, past participle of deliberare (see deliberation). Related:
Deliberated; deliberating.


abortion (n.)

1540s, originally of both deliberate and unintended miscarriages; from Latin abortionem (nominative
abortio) miscarriage; abortion, noun of action from past participle stem of aboriri (see abortive).
Earlier noun in English was simple abort (early 15c.) miscarriage. In 19c. some effort was made to
distinguish abortion expulsion of the fetus between 6 weeks and 6 months from miscarriage (the same
within 6 weeks of conception) and premature labor (delivery after 6 months but before due time). The
deliberate miscarriage was criminal abortion. This broke down late 19c. as abortion came to be used
principally for intentional miscarriages, probably via phrases such as procure an abortion.
Foeticide (n.) appears 1823 as a forensic medical term for deliberate premature fatal expulsion of
the fetus; also compare prolicide. Abortion was a taboo word for much of early 20c., disguised in
print as criminal operation (U.S.) or illegal operation (U.K.), and replaced by miscarriage in film
versions of novels.


measured (adj.)

late 14c., deliberate, restrained, adjective from past participle of measure (v.). Meaning uniform,
regular is from c.1400.


Salisbury steak (n.)

1897, from J.H. Salisbury (1823-1905), U.S. physician and food specialist, who promoted it.
Incorrect use for hamburger traces to World War I and the deliberate attempt to purify American
English of German loan words.


smoke-screen (n.)

1915, as a form of military camouflage, from smoke (n.1) + screen (n.); 1926 in the figurative
sense. The association of smoke with deception, deliberate obscurity dates back to at least 1560s.


perpensity (n.)

attention, 1704, from Latin perpensus deliberate, past participle of perpendere balance carefully
(see perpendicular) + -ity. Noted as obsolete by late 19c.


read (v.)

Old English r&aelig;dan (West Saxon), redan (Anglian) to advise, counsel, persuade; discuss,
deliberate; rule, guide; arrange, equip; forebode; read, explain; learn by reading; put in order
(related to r&aelig;d, red advice), from Proto-Germanic *redan (cognates: Old Norse ra&eth;a, Old
Frisian reda, Dutch raden, Old High German ratan, German raten to advise, counsel, guess), from PIE
root *re(i)- to reason, count (cognates: Sanskrit radh- to succeed, accomplish, Greek arithmos
number amount, Old Church Slavonic raditi to take thought, attend to, Old Irish im-radim to
deliberate, consider). Words from this root in most modern Germanic languages still mean counsel,
advise.    Sense of make out the character of (a person) is attested from 1610s. Connected to riddle
via notion of interpret. Transference to understand the meaning of written symbols is unique to Old
English and (perhaps under English influence) Old Norse ra&eth;a. Most languages use a word rooted
in the idea of gather up as their word for read (such as French lire, from Latin legere). Read up
study is from 1842; read out (v.) expel by proclamation (Society of Friends) is from 1788. read-only
in computer jargon is recorded from 1961.


considerate (adj.)

1570s, marked by deliberation, from Latin consideratus, past participle of considerare (see
consider). Of persons, deliberate, prudent, 1580s; meaning showing consideration for others is from
c.1700. Related: Considerately; considerateness.


plaguey (adj.)

1570s, pertaining to a plague, from plague (n.) + -y (2). Figurative meaning vexatious, troublesome
is from 1610s. As an adverb (properly it would be plaguily) it is attested from 1580s, often with
deliberate attempt at humor. Johnson also has woundy excessive.


coinage (n.)

late 14c., currency, money, from Old French coignage, from coignier to coin (see coin (n.)). Meaning
act or proces of coining money is from early 15c.; sense deliberate formation of a new word is from
1690s, from a general sense of something invented (c.1600).


show-off (n.)

1776, a display; see show (v.) + off (adv.). From 1801 as a deliberate and ostentatious display; in
reference to the person who makes such a display, attested from 1924. The verbal phrase is first
recorded 1793 as make a conspicuous and obvious display. Noun showing-off is from 1874.


advise (v.)

late 13c., avisen to view, consider, from Old French aviser deliberate, reflect, consider (13c.),
from avis opinion (see advice). Meaning to give counsel to is late 14c. Related: Advised; advising.


leman (n.)

sweetheart, paramour (archaic), late 13c., from Middle English leofman (c.1200), from Old English
leof dear (see lief) + man human being, person (see man (n.)). Originally of either gender, though
deliberate archaic usage tends to limit it to women.


prudent (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French prudent with knowledge, deliberate (c.1300), from Latin prudentem
(nominative prudens) knowing, skilled, sagacious, circumspect; rarely in literal sense foreseeing;
contraction of providens, present participle of providere to foresee (see provide). Related:
Prudently.


cold shoulder (n.)

1816, in the figurative sense of icy reception, first in Sir Walter Scott, probably originally a
literal figure, but commonly used with a punning reference to cold shoulder of mutton, considered a
poor man's dish and thus, perhaps, something one would set out for an unwanted guest with deliberate
intention to convey displeasure.    How often have we admired the poor knight, who, to avoid the
snares of bribery and dependence, was found making a second dinner from a cold shoulder of mutton,
above the most affluent courtier, who had sold himself to others for a splendid pension! [No
Fiction, 1820]


ruthless (adj.)

early 14c., from reuthe pity, compassion (see ruth) + -less. Ruthful (early 13c.) has fallen from
use since late 17c. except as a deliberate archaism. Related: Ruthlessly; ruthlessness.


debate (v.)

late 14c., to quarrel, dispute, also discuss, deliberate upon the pros and cons of, from Old French
debatre (13c., Modern French d&eacute;battre), originally to fight, from de- down, completely (see
de-) + batre to beat (see battery). Related: Debated; debating.


destruct (v.)

to destroy, 1958, probably a back-formation from destruction in the jargon of U.S. aerospace and
defense workers to refer to deliberate destruction of a missile in flight by a friendly agent;
popularized 1966 in form self-destruct in the voice-over at the beginning of popular TV spy drama
Mission Impossible. OED records an isolated use of destruct from 17c., in this case probably from
Latin destruct-, past participle stem of destruere.


typecast (v.)

also type-cast, with reference to actors, 1937 (implied in typecasting), from type (n.) in the
general character sense (perhaps a deliberate pun on the verbal phrase in the printing sense to
found types in molds, attested from 1847). See type (n.) + cast (v.).


circumspect (adj.)

early 15c., from Latin circumspectus deliberate, guarded, well-considered, past participle of
circumspicere look around, take heed, from circum- around (see circum-) + specere to look (see scope
(n.1)). Related: Circumspectly; circumspectness.


moratorium (n.)

1875, originally a legal term for authorization to a debtor to postpone payment, from neuter of Late
Latin moratorius tending to delay, from Latin morari to delay, from mora pause, delay, from PIE
*mere- to hinder, delay. The word didn't come out of italics until 1914. General sense of a
postponement, deliberate temporary suspension is first recorded 1932. Related: Moratorial.


consultation (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French consultation, from Latin consultationem (nominative consultatio),
from past participle stem of consultare consult, ask counsel of; reflect, consider maturely,
frequentative of consulere to deliberate, consider, originally probably to call together, as in
consulere senatum to gather the senate (to ask for advice), from com- with (see com-) + *selere
take, gather (the Senate) together, from PIE root *sal- to take, seize.


confer (v.)

1530s, from Middle French conf&eacute;rer (14c.) to give, converse, compare, from Latin conferre to
bring together, figuratively to compare; consult, deliberate, talk over, from com- together (see
com-) + ferre to bear (see infer). Sense of taking counsel led to conference. The meaning compare
(common 1530-1650) is largely obsolete, but the abbreviation cf. still is used in this sense.
Related: Conferred; conferring.


consul (n.)

late 14c., magistrate in ancient Rome, from Old French consule and directly from Latin consul
magistrate in ancient Rome, probably originally one who consults the Senate, from consulere to
deliberate, take counsel (see consultation).    Modern sense began with use as appellation of
various foreign officials and magistrates, a representative chosen by a community of merchants
living in a foreign country; an agent appointed by a government or ruler to represent the interests
of its subjects and traders in a foreign place (c.1600), an extended sense that developed 13c. in
the Spanish form of the word.


slur (n.)

deliberate slight, disparaging or slighting remark, c.1600, from dialectal slur thin or fluid mud,
from Middle English slore (mid-15c.), cognate with Middle Low German sluren, Middle Dutch sloren to
trail in mud. Related to East Frisian sluren to go about carelessly, Norwegian slora to be careless.
Literal sense of a mark, stain, smear is from 1660s in English. The musical sense (1746) is from the
notion of sliding. Meaning act or habit of slurring in speech is from 1882.


initialism (n.)

word formed from the first letters of other words or a phrase, 1957, from initial (n.) + -ism. The
distinction from acronym is not universally agreed-upon; in general, words such as NATO, where the
letters form a word, are regarded as acronyms, those such as FBI, where the letters sound as
letters, are initialisms. The use of acronym in entries in this dictionary that are technically
initialisms is a deliberate error, because many people only know to search for all such words under
acronym.


ratiocination (n.)

process of reasoning, 1520s, from Latin ratiocinationem (nominative ratiocinatio) a reasoning, calm
reasoning, from past participle stem of ratiocinare to calculate, deliberate, from ratio (see ratio)
+ -cinari, which probably is related to conari to try (see conation).    Most writers make
ratiocination synonymous with reasoning. J.S. Mill and others hold that the word is usually limited
to necessary reasoning. [Century Dictionary]


abortive (adj.)

late 14c., born prematurely or dead, from Latin abortivus pertaining to miscarriage; causing
abortion, from abort-, past participle stem of aboriri disappear, miscarry, from ab- amiss (see ab-)
+ oriri appear, be born, arise (see orchestra); the compound word used in Latin for deaths,
miscarriages, sunsets, etc. The Latin verb for to produce an abortion was abigo, literally to drive
away. Not originally used to imply forced or deliberate miscarriage; from 14c.-18c. stillborn
children or domestic animals were said to be abortive. Also see abortion. Related: Abortiveness.


ye (article)

old or quaintly archaic way of writing the, in which the -y- is a 16c. graphic alteration of
&thorn;, an Old English character (generally called thorn, originally a Germanic rune; see th-) that
represented the -th- sound (as at the beginning of thorn). The characters for -y- and -&thorn;- so
closely resembled each other in Old English and early Middle English handwriting that a dot had to
be added to the -y- to keep them distinct. In late 15c., early printers in English, whose types were
founded on the continent, did not have a &thorn; in their sets, so they substituted y as the letter
that looked most like it when setting type. But in such usages it was not meant to be pronounced
with any of the sounds associated with -y-, but still as -th-. Ye for the (and yt for that)
continued in manuscripts through 18c. Revived 19c. as a deliberate antiquarianism; the Ye Olde _____
construction was being mocked by 1896.


y-

perfective prefix, in yclept, etc.; a deliberate archaism, introduced by Spenser and his imitators,
representing an authentic Middle English prefix, from Old English ge-, originally meaning with,
together but later a completive or perfective element, from Proto-Germanic *ga- together, with (also
a collective and intensive prefix), from PIE *kom beside, near, by, with (cognate with Sanskrit ja-,
Latin com-, cum-; see com-). It is still living in German and Dutch ge-, and survives, disguised, in
some English words (such as alike, aware, handiwork).    Among hundreds of Middle English words it
formed are yfallen, yhacked (completely hacked, probably now again useful), yknow, ymarried,
ywrought.


terrorism (n.)

1795, in specific sense of government intimidation during the Reign of Terror in France (March
1793-July 1794), from French terrorisme, from Latin terror (see terror).    If the basis of a
popular government in peacetime is virtue, its basis in a time of revolution is virtue and terror --
virtue, without which terror would be barbaric; and terror, without which virtue would be impotent.
[Robespierre, speech in French National Convention, 1794]    General sense of systematic use of
terror as a policy is first recorded in English 1798 (in reference to the Irish Rebellion of that
year). At one time, a word for a certain kind of mass-destruction terrorism was dynamitism (1883);
and during World War I frightfulness (translating German Schrecklichkeit) was used in Britain for
deliberate policy of terrorizing enemy non-combatants.


jukebox (n.)

1937, jook organ, from jook joint roadhouse (1935), Black English slang, from juke, joog wicked,
disorderly, in Gullah (the creolized English of the coastlands of South Carolina, Georgia, and
northern Florida), probably from Wolof and Bambara dzug unsavory. Said to have originated in central
Florida (see A Note on Juke, Florida Review, vol. VII, no. 3, spring 1938). The spelling with a -u-
might represent a deliberate attempt to put distance between the word and its origins.    For a long
time the commercial juke trade resisted the name juke box and even tried to raise a big publicity
fund to wage a national campaign against it, but juke box turned out to be the biggest advertising
term that could ever have been invented for the commercial phonograph and spread to the ends of the
world during the war as American soldiers went abroad but remembered the juke boxes back home.
[Billboard, Sept. 15, 1945]


crack (n.)

a split, an opening, mid-15c., earlier a splitting sound; a fart; the sound of a trumpet (late
14c.), probably from crack (v.). Meaning rock cocaine is first attested 1985. The superstition that
it is bad luck to step on sidewalk cracks has been traced to c.1890. Meaning try, attempt first
attested 1830, nautical, probably a hunting metaphor, from slang sense of fire a gun.    At their
head, apart from the rest, was a black bull, who appeared to be their leader; he came roaring along,
his tail straight an end, and at times tossing up the earth with his horns. I never felt such a
desire to have a crack at any thing in all my life. He drew nigh the place where I was standing; I
raised my beautiful Betsey to my shoulder, took deliberate aim, blazed away, and he roared, and
suddenly stopped. [A Narrative of the Life of David Crockett, Written by Himself, Philadelphia,
1834]    Adjectival meaning top-notch, superior (as in a crack shot) is slang from 1793, perhaps
from earlier verbal sense of do any thing with quickness or smartness (Johnson). Grose (1796) has
THE CRACK, or ALL THE CRACK. The fashionable theme, the go.


terror (n.)

early 15c., something that intimidates, an object of fear, from Old French terreur (14c.), from
Latin terrorem (nominative terror) great fear, dread, alarm, panic; object of fear, cause of alarm;
terrible news, from terrere fill with fear, frighten, from PIE root *tres- to tremble (see
terrible).    Meaning quality of causing dread is attested from 1520s. Sense of a person fancied as
a source of terror (often with deliberate exaggeration, as of a naughty child) is recorded from
1883. Terror bombing first recorded 1941, with reference to German air attack on Rotterdam. Terror-
stricken is from 1831. The Reign of Terror in French history (March 1793-July 1794) was the period
when the nation was ruled by a faction whose leaders made policy of killing by execution anyone
deemed an impediment to their measures; so called in English from 1801. Old English words for terror
included broga and egesa.


OK

1839, only survivor of a slang fad in Boston and New York c.1838-9 for abbreviations of common
phrases with deliberate, jocular misspellings (such as K.G. for no go, as if spelled know go; N.C.
for 'nuff ced; K.Y. for know yuse). In the case of O.K., the abbreviation is of oll korrect.
Probably further popularized by use as an election slogan by the O.K. Club, New York boosters of
Democratic president Martin Van Buren's 1840 re-election bid, in allusion to his nickname Old
Kinderhook, from his birth in the N.Y. village of Kinderhook. Van Buren lost, the word stuck, in
part because it filled a need for a quick way to write an approval on a document, bill, etc. Spelled
out as okeh, 1919, by Woodrow Wilson, on assumption that it represented Choctaw okeh it is so (a
theory which lacks historical documentation); this was ousted quickly by okay after the appearance
of that form in 1929. Greek immigrants to America who returned home early 20c. having picked up U.S.
speech mannerisms were known in Greece as okay-boys, among other things.    The noun is first
attested 1841; the verb 1888. Okey-doke is student slang first attested 1932.


touch (v.)

late 13c., make deliberate physical contact with, from Old French tochier to touch, hit, knock;
mention, deal with (11c., Modern French toucher), from Vulgar Latin *toccare to knock, strike as a
bell (source also of Spanish tocar, Italian toccare), perhaps of imitative origin. Related: Touched;
touching.    From c.1300 in transitive sense bring into physical contact, also pertain to. Other
senses attested from 14c. are perceive by physical contact, examine by sense of touch, also be or
come into physical contact with; come to rest on; border on, be contiguous with; also use the sense
of touch, and mention, describe. From early 14c. as affect or move mentally or emotionally, with
notion of to touch the heart or mind. Also from early 14c. as have sexual contact with. Meaning to
get or borrow money first recorded 1760. Touch-and-go (adj.) is recorded from 1812, apparently from
the name of a tag-like game, first recorded 1650s. Touch football is first attested 1933. Touch-me-
not (1590s) translates Latin noli-me-tangere.


suicide (n.)

deliberate killing of oneself, 1650s, from Modern Latin suicidium suicide, from Latin sui of oneself
(genitive of se self), from PIE *s(u)w-o- one's own, from root *s(w)e- (see idiom) + -cidium a
killing (see -cide). Probably an English coinage; much maligned by Latin purists because it may as
well seem to participate of sus, a sow, as of the pronoun sui [Phillips]. The meaning person who
kills himself deliberately is from 1728. In Anglo-Latin, the term for one who commits suicide was
felo-de-se, literally one guilty concerning himself.    Even in 1749, in the full blaze of the
philosophic movement, we find a suicide named Portier dragged through the streets of Paris with his
face to the ground, hung from a gallows by his feet, and then thrown into the sewers; and the laws
were not abrogated till the Revolution, which, having founded so many other forms of freedom,
accorded the liberty of death. [W.E.H. Lecky, History of European Morals, 1869]    In England,
suicides were legally criminal if of age and sane, but not if judged to have been mentally deranged.
The criminal ones were mutilated by stake and given degrading burial in highways until 1823. Suicide
blonde (one who has dyed by her own hand) first attested 1921. Baseball suicide squeeze is attested
from 1937.


slang (n.)

1756, special vocabulary of tramps or thieves, later jargon of a particular profession (1801), of
uncertain origin, the usual guess being that it is from a Scandinavian source, such as Norwegian
slengenamn nickname, slengja kjeften to abuse with words, literally to sling the jaw, related to Old
Norse slyngva to sling. But OED, while admitting some approximation in sense, discounts this
connection based on date and early associations. Liberman also denies it, as well as any connection
with French langue (or language or lingo). Rather, he derives it elaborately from an old slang word
meaning narrow piece of land, itself of obscure origin. Century Dictionary says there is no evidence
to establish a Gipsy origin. Sense of very informal language characterized by vividness and novelty
first recorded 1818.    [S]lang is a conscious offence against some conventional standard of
propriety. A mere vulgarism is not slang, except when it is purposely adopted, and acquires an
artificial currency, among some class of persons to whom it is not native. The other distinctive
feature of slang is that it is neither part of the ordinary language, nor an attempt to supply its
deficiencies. The slang word is a deliberate substitute for a word of the vernacular, just as the
characters of a cipher are substitutes for the letters of the alphabet, or as a nickname is a
substitute for a personal name. [Henry Bradley, from Slang, in Encyclopedia Britannica, 11th ed.]
A word that ought to have survived is slangwhanger (1807, American English) noisy or abusive talker
or writer.


nigger (n.)

1786, earlier neger (1568, Scottish and northern England dialect), from French n&egrave;gre, from
Spanish negro (see Negro). From the earliest usage it was the term that carries with it all the
obloquy and contempt and rejection which whites have inflicted on blacks [cited in Gowers, 1965,
probably Harold R. Isaacs]. But as black inferiority was at one time a near universal assumption in
English-speaking lands, the word in some cases could be used without deliberate insult. More
sympathetic writers late 18c. and early 19c. seem to have used black (n.) and, after the American
Civil War, colored person.  You're a fool nigger, and the worst day's work Pa ever did was to buy
you, said Scarlett slowly. ... There, she thought, I've said nigger and Mother wouldn't like that at
all. [Margaret Mitchell, Gone With the Wind, 1936]  Also applied by English settlers to dark-skinned
native peoples in India, Australia, Polynesia. The reclamation of the word as a neutral or positive
term in black culture (not universally regarded as a worthwhile enterprise), often with a suggestion
of soul or style, is attested first in the U.S. South, later (1968) in the Northern, urban-based
Black Power movement.    Used in combinations (such as nigger-brown) since 1840s for various dark
brown or black hues or objects; euphemistic substitutions (such as Zulu) began to appear in these
senses c.1917. Brazil nuts were called nigger toes by 1896. Variant niggah, attested from 1925
(without the -h, from 1969), is found usually in situations where blacks use the word. Nigra (1944),
on the other hand, in certain uses reflects a pronunciation of negro meant to suggest nigger, and is
thus deemed (according to a 1960 slang dictionary) even more derog[atory] than 'nigger.'  Slang
phrase nigger in the woodpile attested by 1800; A mode of accounting for the disappearance of fuel;
an unsolved mystery [R.H. Thornton, American Glossary, 1912]. Nigger heaven the top gallery in a
(segregated) theater first attested 1878 in reference to Troy, N.Y.


