delirium tremens (n.)

1813, medical Latin, literally trembling delirium, introduced 1813 by British physician Thomas
Sutton, for that form of delirium which is rendered worse by bleeding, but improved by opium. By
Rayer and subsequent writers it has been almost exclusively applied to delirium resulting from the
abuse of alcohol [Sydenham Society Lexicon of Medicine]. As synonyms, Farmer lists barrel-fever,
gallon distemper, blue Johnnies, bottle ache, pink spiders, quart-mania snakes in the boots,
triangles, uglies, etc.


delirium (n.)

1590s, from Latin delirium madness, from deliriare be crazy, rave, literally go off the furrow, a
plowing metaphor, from phrase de lire, from de off, away (see de-) + lira furrow, earth thrown up
between two furrows, from PIE *leis- (1) track, furrow (see learn).


D.T.

1858, abbreviation of delirium tremens.


delirious (adj.)

1703, from stem of delirium + -ous. Figurative use attested from 1791. Related: Deliriously.


frenzy (n.)

mid-14c., delirium, insanity, from Old French frenesie, from Medieval Latin phrenesia, from
phrenesis, back-formation from Latin phreneticus delirious (see frenetic). Meaning excited state of
mind is from c.1400.


bouncer (n.)

mid-19c. in various senses, noun derivative of bounce (v.) in its original sense of thump, hit.
Earliest attested is boaster, bully, braggart (1833); also large example of its kind (1842);
enforcer of order in a bar or saloon (1865, American English, originally colloquial).  The Bouncer
is merely the English chucker out. When liberty verges on license and gaiety on wanton delirium, the
Bouncer selects the gayest of the gay, and -- bounces him! [London Daily News, July 26, 1883]


rave (v.)

early 14c., to show signs of madness or delirium, from Old French raver, variant of resver to dream;
wander here and there, prowl; behave madly, be crazy, of unknown origin (compare reverie). The
identical (in form) verb meaning to wander, stray, rove first appeared c.1300 in Scottish and
northern dialect, and is probably from an unrelated Scandinavian word (such as Icelandic rafa).
Sense of talk enthusiastically about first recorded 1704. Related: Raved; raving.


reverie (n.)

mid-14c., reuerye, wild conduct, frolic, from Old French reverie, resverie revelry, raving, delirium
(Modern French r&#234;verie), from resver to dream, wander, rave (12c., Modern French r&#234;ver),
of uncertain origin (also the root of rave). Meaning daydream is first attested 1650s, a reborrowing
from French. As a type of musical composition, it is attested from 1880. Related: Reverist.


typhus (n.)

acute infectious fever, usually accompanied by prostration, delirium, and small reddish spots, 1785,
from medical Latin, from Greek typhos stupor caused by fever, literally smoke, from typhein to
smoke, related to typhos blind, typhon whirlwind, from PIE *dheubh-, perhaps an extended form of
root *dheu- (1) to fly about like dust.    The Greek term [typhos] (smoke, mist, fog) was employed
by Hippocrates to define a confused state of the intellect, with a tendency to stupor (stupor
attonitus); and in this sense it is aptly applied to typhus fever with its slow cerebration and
drowsy stupor. Boissier de Sauvages first (in 1760) called this fever typhus, and the name was
adopted by Cullen of Edinburgh in 1769. Previous to the time of de Sauvages typhus was known as
Pestilential or Putrid Fever, or by some name suggested by the eruption, or expressive of the
locality in which it appeared, as Camp, Jail, Hospital, or Ship Fever (Murchison). [Thomas Clifford,
ed., A System of Medicine, New York, 1897]    Related: typhous (adj.).


