delightful (adj.)

c.1400, from delight (n.) + -ful. Related: Delightfully.


delicate (adj.)

late 14c., self-indulgent, loving ease; delightful; sensitive, easily hurt; feeble, from Latin
delicatus alluring, delightful, dainty, also addicted to pleasure, luxurious, effeminate; of
uncertain origin; related by folk etymology (and perhaps genuinely) to deliciae a pet, and delicere
to allure, entice (see delicious). Meaning easily broken is recorded from 1560s.


dilly (n.)

delightful or excellent person or thing (often used ironically), 1935, American English, from an
earlier adjective (1909), perhaps from the first syllable of delightful or delicious, or related to
the nursery word for duck. Dilly was also slang for a stagecoach (1818), from French carrosse de
diligence (see diligence).


suave (adj.)

early 15c., gracious, kindly, pleasant, delightful, from Latin suavis agreeable, sweet, pleasant (to
the senses), delightful, from PIE root *swad- sweet, pleasant (see sweet (adj.)). In reference to
persons, sense of smoothly agreeable first recorded 1815 (implied in suavity). Related: Suavely.


woozy (adj.)

muddled or dazed, as with drink, 1897, American English colloquial, variant of oozy muddy, or an
alteration of boozy. It is recorded in 1896 as student slang, but with a sense foolish, behind the
times, also pleasant, delightful.


dainty (adj.)

c.1300, deinte, delightful, pleasing, from dainty (n.). Meaning evolved in Middle English to choice,
excellent (late 14c.) to delicately pretty. Related: Daintiness.


Eden (n.)

early 13c., delightful place, figurative use of the place described in Genesis, usually referred to
Hebrew edhen pleasure, delight, but perhaps from Ugaritic base 'dn and meaning a place that is well-
watered throughout (see also Aden).


mynah (n.)

type of passerine bird of India and the East, talking starling, 1769, from Hindi maina a starling,
from Sanskrit madana- delightful, joyful, related to madati it gladdens, literally it bubbles, from
PIE root *mad- moist, wet (see mast (n.2).


priceless (adj.)

having a value beyond price, 1590s, from price (n.) + -less. Colloquial sense of delightful attested
from 1907. Related: Pricelessly; pricelessness.


adorable (adj.)

1610s, from French adorable, from Latin adorabilis worthy of worship, from adorare (see adore).
Weakened sense of delightful, charming is recorded from 1710. Related: Adorably; adorableness.


delectable (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French delectable, from Latin delectabilis delightful, from delectare (see
delight (n.)). Related: Delectably.


glucose (n.)

1840, from French glucose (1838), said to have been coined by French professor Eug&egrave;ne
Melchior P&#233;ligot (1811-1890) from Greek gleukos must, sweet wine, related to glykys sweet,
delightful, dear, from *glku-, dissimilated in Greek from PIE *dlk-u- sweet (source also of Latin
dulcis). It first was obtained from grape sugar.


melodious (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French melodios melodious; delightful (French m&eacute;lodieux), from Medieval
Latin melodiosus, from Latin melodia (see melody). Related: Melodiously; melodiousness.


ambrosia (n.)

1550s, favored food or drink of the gods, from Latin ambrosia, from Greek ambrosia food of the gods,
fem. of ambrosios, probably literally of the immortals, from a- not (see a- (3)) + mbrotos, related
to mortos mortal, from PIE *mer- to die (see mortal (adj.)). Applied to certain herbs by Pliny and
Dioscorides; used of various foods for mortals since 1680s (originally of fruit drinks); used
figuratively for anything delightful by 1731.


voluptuous (adj.)

late 14c., of or pertaining to desires or appetites, from Old French voluptueux, volumptueuse and
directly from Latin voluptuosus full of pleasure, delightful, from voluptas pleasure, delight,
enjoyment, satisfaction, from volup pleasurably, perhaps ultimately related to velle to wish, from
PIE *wel- (2) to wish, will (see will (v.)). Meaning addicted to sensual pleasure is recorded from
mid-15c. Sense of suggestive of sensual pleasure is attested from 1816 (Byron); especially in
reference to feminine beauty from 1839. Related: Voluptuously; voluptuousness.


exquisite (adj.)

early 15c., carefully selected, from Latin exquisitus carefully sought out, thus, choice, from past
participle of exquirere search out thoroughly, from ex- out (see ex-) + quaerere to seek (see query
(v.)).    Of any thing (good or bad, torture as well as art) brought to a highly wrought condition,
sometimes shading into disapproval. A vogue word 15c.-18c., given wide extensions of meaning, none
of which survives. The main modern sense of of consummate and delightful excellence is first
attested 1579, in Lyly's Euphues. Related: Exquisitely; exquisiteness. The noun meaning a dandy, fop
is from 1819.


dull (adj.)

c.1200, stupid; early 13c., blunt, not sharp; rare before mid-14c., apparently from Old English dol
dull-witted, foolish, or an unrecorded parallel word, or from Middle Low German dul slow-witted,
both from Proto-Germanic *dulaz (cognates: Old Frisian and Old Saxon dol foolish, Old High German
tol, German toll mad, wild, Gothic dwals foolish), from PIE *dheu- (1) dust, vapor, smoke (and
related notions of defective perception or wits). Of color from early 15c.; of pain or other
sensations from 1725. Sense of boring first recorded 1580s.    dull. (8) Not exhilarating; not
delightful; as to make dictionaries is dull work. [Johnson]   Dullsville, slang for town where
nothing happens, attested from 1960.


celestial (adj.)

late 14c., pertaining to heaven, from Old French celestial celestial, heavenly, sky-blue, from Latin
caelestis heavenly, pertaining to the sky, from caelum heaven, sky; abode of the gods; climate, of
uncertain origin; perhaps from PIE *kaid-slo-, perhaps from a root also found in Germanic and Baltic
meaning bright, clear (compare Lithuanian skaidrus shining, clear; Old English hador, German heiter
clear, shining, cloudless, Old Norse hei&#240; clear sky).    The Latin word is the source of the
usual word for sky in most of the Romance languages, such as French ciel, Spanish cielo, Italian
cielo. General sense of heavenly, very delightful in English is from early 15c.


nice (adj.)

late 13c., foolish, stupid, senseless, from Old French nice (12c.) careless, clumsy; weak; poor,
needy; simple, stupid, silly, foolish, from Latin nescius ignorant, unaware, literally not-knowing,
from ne- not (see un-) + stem of scire to know (see science). The sense development has been
extraordinary, even for an adj. [Weekley] -- from timid (pre-1300); to fussy, fastidious (late
14c.); to dainty, delicate (c.1400); to precise, careful (1500s, preserved in such terms as a nice
distinction and nice and early); to agreeable, delightful (1769); to kind, thoughtful (1830).    In
many examples from the 16th and 17th centuries it is difficult to say in what particular sense the
writer intended it to be taken. [OED]    By 1926, it was pronounced too great a favorite with the
ladies, who have charmed out of it all its individuality and converted it into a mere diffuser of
vague and mild agreeableness. [Fowler]I am sure, cried Catherine, I did not mean to say anything
wrong; but it is a nice book, and why should I not call it so?  Very true, said Henry, and this is a
very nice day, and we are taking a very nice walk; and you are two very nice young ladies. Oh! It is
a very nice word indeed! It does for everything. [Jane Austen, Northanger Abbey, 1803]


