aha

exclamation of surprise or delighted discovery, late 14c., from ah + ha.They crieden out! ... A ha
the fox! and after him thay ran. [Chaucer]


Micawber (n.)

as a type of a childishly impractical man living in optimistic fantasy, from the character of
Wilkins Micawber in Dickens' David Copperfield (1850).    I am at present, my dear Copperfield,
engaged in the sale of corn upon commission. It is not an avocation of a remunerative description --
in other words it does not pay -- and some temporary embarrassments of a pecuniary nature have been
the consequence. I am however delighted to add that I have now an immediate prospect of something
turning up ....


enchant (v.)

late 14c., literal and figurative, from Old French enchanter bewitch, charm, cast a spell (12c.),
from Latin incantare (see enchantment). Or perhaps a back-formation from enchantment. Related:
Enchanting; enchantingly. Enchanted in weakened sense of delighted is from 1590s.


delight (v.)

c.1200, deliten, from Old French delitier (see delight (n.)). Related: Delighted; delighting.


Ionian (adj.)

of Ionia, the districts of ancient Greece inhabited by the Ionians (including Attica and the north
coast of the Peloponnesus, but especially the coastal strip of Asia Minor, including the islands of
Samos and Chios). The name (which Herodotus credits to an ancestral Ion, son of Apollo and Creusa)
probably is pre-Greek, perhaps related to Sanskrit yoni womb, vulva, and a reference to goddess-
worshipping people.    Also used of the sea that lies between Italy and the northern Peloponnesus
(1630s). The musical Ionian mode (1844) corresponds to our basic major scale but was characterized
by the Greeks as soft and effeminate, as were the Ionians generally.  The Ionians delighted in
wanton dances and songs more than the rest of the Greeks ... and wanton gestures were proverbially
termed Ionic motions. [Thomas Robinson, Arch&aelig;ologica Gr&aelig;ca, 1807]


saint (n.)

early 12c., from Old French saint, seinte a saint; a holy relic, displacing or altering Old English
sanct, both from Latin sanctus holy, consecrated (used as a noun in Late Latin; also source of
Spanish santo, santa, Italian san, etc.), properly past participle of sancire consecrate (see
sacred). Adopted into most Germanic languages (Old Frisian sankt, Dutch sint, German Sanct).
Originally an adjective prefixed to the name of a canonized person; by c.1300 it came to be regarded
as a noun. Meaning person of extraordinary holiness is recorded from 1560s.  <b>Saint</b>, n. A dead
sinner revised and edited. The Duchess of Orleans relates that the irreverent old calumniator,
Marshal Villeroi, who in his youth had known St. Francis de Sales, said, on hearing him called
saint: 'I am delighted to hear that Monsieur de Sales is a saint. He was fond of saying indelicate
things, and used to cheat at cards. In other respects he was a perfect gentleman, though a fool.'
[Ambrose Bierce, Devil's Dictionary, 1911]   <hr />   Perhaps you have imagined that this humility
in the saints is a pious illusion at which God smiles. That is a most dangerous error. It is
theoretically dangerous, because it makes you identify a virtue (i.e., a perfection) with an
illusion (i.e., an imperfection), which must be nonsense. It is practically dangerous because it
encourages a man to mistake his first insights into his own corruption for the first beginnings of a
halo round his own silly head. No, depend upon it; when the saints say that they--even they--are
vile, they are recording truth with scientific accuracy. [C.S. Lewis, The Problem of Pain, 1940]
Saint Bernard, the breed of mastiff dogs (1839), so called because the monks of the hospice of the
pass of St. Bernard (between Italy and Switzerland) sent them to rescue snowbound travelers; St.
Elmo's Fire corposant (1560s) is from Italian fuoco di Sant'Elmo, named for the patron saint of
Mediterranean sailors, a corruption of the name of St. Erasmus, an Italian bishop martyred in 303.


