delta (n.)

c.1200, Greek letter shaped like a triangle, equivalent to our D, the name from Phoenician daleth
tent door. Herodotus used it of the mouth of the Nile, and it was so used in English from 1550s;
applied to other river mouths from 1790.


deltoid (adj.)

1741, in deltoid muscle, so called for its shape, from Greek deltoeides triangular, literally shaped
like the letter delta; see delta + -oid.


Hiroshima

city in Japan, literally broad island, from Japanese hiro broad + shima island. So called in
reference to its situation on the delta of the Ota River.


Cepheid (n.)

type of variable star, 1904, from Delta Cephi, the name of the first such star identified, which is
in the dim northern constellation Cephus, named for Greek Kepheus, a mythical king. With -id.


Athabascan

1846, Athapaskan, from the name of the North American Indian people, from Lake Athabaska in northern
Alberta, Canada, from Woods Cree (Algonquian) Athapaskaw, said by Webster to mean literally grass or
reeds here and there, referring to the delta region west of the lake. Also in reference to their
language group.


D

fourth letter of the Roman alphabet, from Greek delta, from Phoenician and Hebrew daleth, pausal
form of deleth door, so called from its shape. The sign for 500 in Roman numerals. 3-D for three-
dimensional is attested from 1953.


sorority (n.)

1530s, a society of women, body of women united for some purpose, from Medieval Latin sororitas
sisterhood, of or pertaining to sisters, from Latin soror sister (see sister). Sense of women's
society in a college or university attested by 1887 (Alpha Delta Pi claims founding in 1851).


Egypt

Old English Egipte, from French Egypte, from Greek Aigyptos the river Nile, Egypt, from Amarna
Hikuptah, corresponding to Egyptian Ha(t)-ka-ptah temple of the soul of Ptah, the creative god
associated with Memphis, the ancient city of Egypt.    Strictly one of the names of Memphis, it was
taken by the Greeks as the name of the whole country. The Egyptian name, Kemet, means black country,
possibly in reference to the rich delta soil. The Arabic is Misr, which is derived from Mizraim, the
name of a son of Biblical Ham.


Praesepe (n.)

loose (open) star cluster (M44) in Cancer, from Latin praesaepe the Roman name for the grouping,
literally enclosure, stall, manger, hive, from prae- (see pre-) + saepire to fence (see septum).
It is similar to the Hyades but more distant, about 600 light-years away, consists of about 1,000
stars, mostly older, the brightest of them around magnitude 6.5, thus not discernable to the naked
eye even on the clearest nights, but their collective light makes a visible fuzz of glow that the
ancients likened to a cloud (the original nebula); Galileo was the first to resolve it into stars
(1609). The modern name for it in U.S. and Britain, Beehive, seems no older than 1840. Greek names
included Nephelion Little Cloud and Akhlys Little Mist. In astrology, like all clusters, it
threatened mischief and blindness [Allen].    Manger to the Romans perhaps by influence of two
nearby stars, Gamma and Delta Cancri, dim and unspectacular but both for some reason figuring
largely in ancient astrology and weather forecasting, and known as the Asses (Latin Aselli),
supposedly those of Silenus.


