delude (v.)

c.1400, from Latin deludere to play false; to mock, deceive, from de- down, to one's detriment (see
de-) + ludere to play (see ludicrous). Related: Deluded; deluding.


sophisticate (v.)

c.1400, make impure by admixture, from Medieval Latin sophisticatus, past participle of sophisticare
(see sophistication). From c.1600 as corrupt, delude by sophistry; from 1796 as deprive of
simplicity. Related: Sophisticated; sophisticating. As a noun meaning sophisticated person from
1921.


inveigle (v.)

late 15c., to blind (someone's) judgment, alteration of Middle French aveugler delude, make blind,
from Vulgar Latin *aboculus without sight, blind, from Latin ab- without (see ab-) + oculus eye (see
eye (n.)). Loan-translation of Greek ap ommaton without eyes. Meaning to win over by deceit, seduce
is 1530s.


self-deluded (adj.)

1766, from self- + deluded (see delude).


elude (v.)

1530s, delude, make a fool of, from Latin eludere escape from, make a fool of, win from at play,
from ex- out, away (see ex-) + ludere to play (see ludicrous). Sense of evade is first recorded
1610s in a figurative sense, 1630s in a literal one. Related: Eluded; eludes; eluding.


amuse (v.)

late 15c., to divert the attention, beguile, delude, from Middle French amuser divert, cause to
muse, from a at, to (but here probably a causal prefix) + muser ponder, stare fixedly (see muse
(v.)). Sense of divert from serious business, tickle the fancy of is recorded from 1630s, but
through 18c. the primary meaning was deceive, cheat by first occupying the attention. Bemuse retains
more of the original meaning. Related: Amused; amusing.


delusion (n.)

act of misleading someone, early 15c.; as a form of mental derangement, 1550s, from Latin delusionem
(nominative delusio) a deceiving, noun of action from past participle stem of deludere (see delude).
Technically, delusion is a belief that, though false, has been surrendered to and accepted by the
whole mind as a truth; illusion is an impression that, though false, is entertained provisionally on
the recommendation of the senses or the imagination, but awaits full acceptance and may not
influence action. Delusions of grandeur, the exact phrase, is recorded from 1840, though the two
words were in close association for some time before that.


dream (n.)

mid-13c. in the sense sequence of sensations passing through a sleeping person's mind (also as a
verb), probably related to Old Norse draumr, Danish dr&oslash;m, Swedish dr&ouml;m, Old Saxon drom
merriment, noise, Old Frisian dram dream, Dutch droom, Old High German troum, German traum dream,
perhaps from Proto-Germanic *draugmas deception, illusion, phantasm (cognates: Old Saxon bidriogan,
Old High German triogan, German tr&uuml;gen to deceive, delude, Old Norse draugr ghost, apparition).
Possible cognates outside Germanic are Sanskrit druh- seek to harm, injure, Avestan druz- lie,
deceive.    But Old English dream meant only joy, mirth, noisy merriment, also music. And much study
has failed to prove that Old English dream is the root of the modern word for sleeping vision,
despite being identical in spelling. Either the meaning of the word changed dramatically or vision
was an unrecorded secondary Old English meaning of dream, or there are two separate words here. OED
offers this theory: It seems as if the presence of dream 'joy, mirth, music,' had caused dream
'dream' to be avoided, at least in literature, and swefn, lit. 'sleep,' to be substituted ....
Words for sleeping vision in Old English were m&aelig;ting and swefn. Old English swefn originally
meant sleep, as did a great many Indo-European dream nouns, such as Lithuanian sapnas, Old Church
Slavonic sunu, and the Romanic words (French songe, Spanish sue&#241;o, Italian sogno all from Latin
somnium (from PIE *swep-no-; cognate with Greek hypnos; see somnolence; Old English swefn is from
the same root). Dream in the sense of ideal or aspiration is from 1931, from earlier sense of
something of dream-like beauty or charm (1888).


