delusive (adj.)

c.1600; see delusion + -ive.


shoddy (adj.)

1862, having a delusive appearance of high quality, a Northern word from the American Civil War in
reference to the quality of government supplies for the armies, from earlier noun meaning rag-wool,
wool made of woolen waste and old rags (1832), perhaps a Yorkshire provincial word, of uncertain
origin.    Originally used for padding, English manufacturers began making coarse wearing clothes
from it, and when new it looked like broad-cloth but the gloss quickly wore off, giving the stuff a
bad reputation as a cheat. The 1860 U.S. census of manufactures notes import of more than 6 million
pounds of it, which was much used in the manufacture of army and navy cloths and blankets in the
United States according to an 1865 government report.    The Days of Shoddy, as the reader will
readily anticipate, are the opening months of the present war, at which time the opprobrious name
first came into general use as a designation for swindling and humbug of every character; and
nothing more need be said to indicate the scope of this novel. [Henry Morford, The Days of Shoddy: A
Novel of the Great Rebellion in 1861, Philadelphia, 1863]    Related: Shoddily; shoddiness.


marriage (n.)

c.1300, action of marrying, entry into wedlock; also state or condition of being husband and wife,
matrimony, wedlock; from Old French mariage marriage; dowry (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *maritaticum
(11c.), from Latin maritatus, past participle of maritatre to wed, marry, give in marriage (see
marry (v.)). The Vulgar Latin word also is the source of Italian maritaggio, Spanish maridaje.
Meaning a union of a man and woman for life by marriage, a particular matrimonial union is early
14c. Meanings the marriage vow, formal declaration or contract by which two join in wedlock; also a
wedding, celebration of a marriage; the marriage ceremony are from late 14c. Figurative use (non-
theological) intimate union, a joining as if by marriage is from early 15c.[W]hen two people are
under the influence of the most violent, most insane, most delusive, and most transient of passions,
they are required to swear that they will remain in that excited, abnormal, and exhausting condition
until death do them part. [G.B. Shaw, preface to Getting Married, 1908]Marriage counseling recorded
by 1939. Marriage bed, figurative of marital intercourse generally, is attested from 1580s (bed of
marriage is from early 15c.).


