delusion (n.)

act of misleading someone, early 15c.; as a form of mental derangement, 1550s, from Latin delusionem
(nominative delusio) a deceiving, noun of action from past participle stem of deludere (see delude).
Technically, delusion is a belief that, though false, has been surrendered to and accepted by the
whole mind as a truth; illusion is an impression that, though false, is entertained provisionally on
the recommendation of the senses or the imagination, but awaits full acceptance and may not
influence action. Delusions of grandeur, the exact phrase, is recorded from 1840, though the two
words were in close association for some time before that.


delusional (adj.)

1871, from delusion + -al (1).


delusive (adj.)

c.1600; see delusion + -ive.


enthusiastic (adj.)

c.1600, pertaining to possession by a deity, from Greek enthousiastikos inspired, from enthousiazein
(see enthusiasm). Meaning pertaining to irrational delusion in religion is from 1690s. The main
modern sense, in reference to feelings or persons, intensely eager, rapturous, is from late 18c.
Related: Enthusiastically.


prestige (n.)

1650s, trick, from French prestige (16c.) deceit, imposture, illusion (in Modern French, illusion,
magic, glamour), from Latin praestigium delusion, illusion (see prestigious). Derogatory until 19c.;
sense of dazzling influence first applied 1815, to Napoleon.


maze (n.)

c.1300, delusion, bewilderment (also as a verb, stupefy, daze), possibly from Old English
*m&aelig;s, which is suggested by the compound amasod amazed and verb amasian to confound, confuse
(see amaze). Perhaps related to Norwegian dialectal mas exhausting labor, Swedish masa to be slow or
sluggish. Meaning labyrinth first recorded late 14c.


pyromania (n.)

1840, from pyro- fire + mania madness, frenzy. Used in German in the 1830s.    The propensity which
leads an insane person to accomplish his purpose by burning, has been considered to merit particular
notice, and to constitute a variety of monomania. Dr. Marc, of France, has published a memoir on the
subject; he gives the name of pyromania to it, and considers that, like other insane propensities,
it may be the result of instinct, or it may be the result of delusion--reasoning upon erroneous
principles. [Alexander Morrison, M.D., The Physiognomy of Mental Diseases, London, 1840]    An older
word for it was incendiarism.


mania (n.)

late 14c., mental derangement characterized by excitement and delusion, from Late Latin mania
insanity, madness, from Greek mania madness, frenzy; enthusiasm, inspired frenzy; mad passion, fury,
related to mainesthai to rage, go mad, mantis seer, menos passion, spirit, all from PIE *men- to
think, to have one's mind aroused, rage, be furious (see mind (n.)). Sense of fad, craze is 1680s,
from French manie in this sense. Sometimes nativized in Middle English as manye. Used since 1500s
(in imitation of Greek) as the second element in compounds expressing particular types of madness
(such as nymphomania, 1775; kleptomania, 1830; megalomania, 1890).


