delve (v.)

Old English delfan to dig (class III strong verb; past tense dealf, past participle dolfen), common
West Germanic verb (cognates: Old Saxon delban, Dutch delven, Middle High German telben to dig),
from PIE root *dhelbh- (cognates: Lithuanian delba crowbar, Russian dolbit', Czech dlabati, Polish
d&#322;uba&#263; to chisel; Russian dolot&oacute;, Czech dlato, Polish d&#322;uto chisel). Weak
inflections emerged 14c.-16c. Related: Delved; delving.


Delft

town in Holland,named from its chief canal, from Dutch delf, literally ditch, canal; which is
related to Old English d&aelig;lf and modern delve. As a short form of delftware, attested from
1714.


delf (n.)

late Old English d&aelig;lf trench, ditch, quarry, from gedelf digging, a digging, from delfan to
dig (see delve).


dig (v.)

early 14c. (diggen), of uncertain origin, perhaps related to dike and ditch, either via Old French
diguer (ultimately from a Germanic source), or directly from an unrecorded Old English word. Native
words were deolfan (see delve), grafan (see grave (v.)).    Slang sense of understand first recorded
1934 in Black English, probably based on the notion of excavate. A slightly varied sense of
appreciate emerged 1939. Strong past participle dug appeared 16c., but is not etymological. Related:
Digging.


hoist (v.)

1540s, to raise, earlier hoise (c.1500), probably originally past tense of Middle English hysse
(late 15c.), which is probably from Middle Dutch hyssen (Dutch hijsen) to hoist, related to Low
German hissen and Old Norse hissa upp raise. A nautical word found in most European languages
(French hisser, Italian issare, Spanish izar), but it is uncertain which had it first. Related:
Hoisted; hoisting. In phrase hoist with one's own petard, it is the past participle.    For 'tis the
sport, to have the engineer  Hoist with his own petar: and it shall go hard  But I will delve one
yard below their mines,  And blow them at the moon: O 'tis most sweet,  When in one line two crafts
directly meet.  [Hamlet, Act III, Scene iv]    Meaning to lift and remove was prevalent c.1550-1750.
As a noun, 1650s, from the verb.


