demeanor (n.)

late 15c., from obsolete Middle English demean handle, manage, conduct, later behave in a certain
way (early 14c.), from Old French demener (11c.) to guide, conduct; to live, dwell, from de-
completely (see de-) + mener to lead, direct, from Latin minare to threaten, in Late Latin to drive
(a herd of animals); see menace. Sense in English evolved from notion of conduct, manage (oneself).
Spelling changed by influence of nouns in -or, -our.


mien (n.)

facial expression, 1510s, probably a shortening of Middle English demean bearing, demeanor (see
demeanor) and influenced by Middle French mine appearance, facial expression, which is of unknown
origin, possibly Celtic (compare Breton min beak, muzzle, nose, Irish men mouth).


swell (n.)

c.1200, a morbid swelling, from swell (v.). In reference to a rise of the sea, it is attested from
c.1600; of music, by 1803. The meaning wealthy, elegant person is first recorded 1786, connected to
the now-obsolete sense pompousness, arrogance (1724), both from the notion of puffed-up demeanor or
behavior.


demeanour

chiefly British English spelling of demeanor; for suffix, see -or.


countenance (n.)

mid-13c., from Old French contenance demeanor, bearing, conduct, from Latin continentia restraint,
abstemiousness, moderation, literally way one contains oneself, from continentem, present participle
of continere (see contain). Meaning evolving Middle English from appearance to facial expression
betraying a state of mind, to face itself (late 14c.).


misdemeanor (n.)

also misdemeanour, legal class of indictable offenses, late 15c.; from mis- (1) wrong + Middle
English demenure (see demeanor). Related: Misdemeanors; misdemeanours.


demean (v.)

lower in dignity, c.1600, perhaps from de- down + mean (adj.) and modeled on debase.
Indistinguishable in some uses from obsolete demean (see demeanor) which influenced it and may be
its true source. Related: Demeaned; demeaning.


prim

1680s (v.) to assume a formal, precise demeanor, perhaps from French prim thin, small, delicate,
from Old French prim fine, delicate, from Latin primus finest, literally first (see prime (adj.)).
Later, deck out, dress to effect (1721). Attested as a noun from 1700. The adjective, the sole
surviving sense, is from 1709. A cant word at first. Related: Primly; primness.


semblance (n.)

c.1300, fact of appearing to view, from Old French semblance, from semblant likeness, appearance,
present participle of sembler to seem, appear, from Latin simulare to resemble, imitate, from
similis like (see similar (adj.)). Meaning person's appearance or demeanor is attested from c.1400;
that of false, assumed or deceiving appearance is from 1590s. Meaning person or thing that resembles
another is attested from 1510s.


presence (n.)

mid-14c., fact of being present, from Old French presence (12c., Modern French pr&#233;sence), from
Latin praesentia a being present, from praesentem (see present (n.)). Meaning carriage, demeanor,
aspect (especially if impressive) is from 1570s; that of divine, spiritual, or incorporeal being
felt as present is from 1660s. Presence of mind (1660s) is a loan-translation of French
pr&eacute;sence d'esprit, Latin praesentia animi.


habit (n.)

early 13c., characteristic attire of a religious or clerical order, from Old French habit, abit
(12c.) clothing, (ecclesiastical) habit; conduct, from Latin habitus condition, demeanor,
appearance, dress, originally past participle of habere to have, hold, possess; consider, think,
reason; manage, keep, from PIE root *ghabh- to seize, take, hold, have, give, receive (cognates:
Sanskrit gabhasti- hand, forearm; Old Irish gaibim I take, hold, I have, gabal act of taking;
Lithuanian gabana armful, gabenti to remove; Gothic gabei riches; Old English giefan, Old Norse gefa
to give).    Base sense probably to hold, which can be either in offering or in taking. Applied in
Latin to both inner and outer states of being, and taken over in both sense by English, though
meaning of dress is now restricted to monks and nuns. Meaning customary practice is early 14c. Drug
sense is from 1887.


supercilious (adj.)

1520s, lofty with pride, haughtily contemptuous, from Latin superciliosus haughty, arrogant, from
supercilium haughty demeanor, pride, literally eyebrow (via notion of raising the eyebrow to express
haughtiness), from super above (see super-) + second element akin to cilium eyelid, related to
celare to cover, hide, from PIE root *kel- (2) to conceal (see cell).    Since cilium is more recent
than supercilium, the former can be interpreted as a back-formation to the latter .... If indeed
derived from the root *kel- 'to hide', we must still assume that a noun *kilium 'eyelid' existed,
since the eyelid can 'hide' the eye, whereas the eyebrow does not have such a function. Thus,
supercilium may originally have meant 'what is above the cilium'. [Michiel de Vaan, Etymological
Dictionary of Latin and the other Italic Languages, Leiden, 2008]    Related: Superciliously;
superciliousness.


