demotic (adj.)

1822, from Greek demotikos of or for the common people, in common use, from demos common people,
originally district, from PIE *da-mo- division, from root *da- to divide (see tide). In contrast to
hieratic. Originally of the simpler of two forms of ancient Egyptian writing; broader sense is from
1831; used of Greek since 1927.


demography (n.)

1880, from Greek demos people (see demotic) + -graphy.


demiurge (n.)

1670s, from Latinized form of Greek demiourgos, literally public or skilled worker (from demos
common people; see demotic + ergos work; see organ).    The title of a magistrate in some
Peloponnesian city-states and the Ach&aelig;an League; taken in Platonic philosophy as a name for
the maker of the world. In the Gnostic system, conceived as a being subordinate to the Supreme
Being, and sometimes as the author of evil [OED].


Rosetta Stone (n.)

discovered 1798 at Rosetta, Egypt; now in British Museum. Dating to 2c. B.C.E., its trilingual
inscription helped Jean-Fran&ccedil;ois Champollion decipher Egyptian demotic and hieroglyphics in
1822, which opened the way to study of all early Egyptian records. Hence, figurative use of the term
to mean something which provides the key to previously unattainable understanding (1902). The place
name is the European form of Rashid, a name given because it was founded c.800 C.E. by Caliph Harun
ar-Rashid.


pandemic (adj.)

1660s, from Late Latin pandemus, from Greek pandemos pertaining to all people; public, common, from
pan- all (see pan-) + demos people (see demotic). Modeled on epidemic. The noun is first recorded
1853, from the adjective.


endemic (n.)

1660s, from Greek endemos native, dwelling in (a place), of or belonging to a people (from en in;
see en- (2) + demos people, district; see demotic) + -ic. From 1759 as an adjective. Endemical is
attested from 1650s.


chaotic (adj.)

1713, in a state of primordial chaos, irregularly formed in English from chaos + -ic, probably on
model of eros/erotic, demos/demotic, hypnos/hypnotic, etc. Transferred or figurative meaning
confused, disordered is from 1747.


demagogue (n.)

1640s, from Greek demagogos popular leader, also leader of the mob, from demos people (see demotic)
+ agogos leader, from agein to lead (see act (n.)). Often a term of disparagement since the time of
its first use, in Athens, 5c. B.C.E. Form perhaps influenced by French demagogue (mid-14c.).


democracy (n.)

1570s, from Middle French d&eacute;mocratie (14c.), from Medieval Latin democratia (13c.), from
Greek demokratia popular government, from demos common people, originally district (see demotic), +
kratos rule, strength (see -cracy).    Democracy implies that the man must take the responsibility
for choosing his rulers and representatives, and for the maintenance of his own 'rights' against the
possible and probable encroachments of the government which he has sanctioned to act for him in
public matters. [Ezra Pound, ABC of Economics, 1933]


Damocles

courtier of Dionysius I, tyrant of Syracuse; his name in Greek means literally fame of the people,
from demos, damos people (see demotic) + -kles fame, a common ending in Greek proper names (as in
Sophocles, Pericles), from PIE *klew-es, from root *kleu- to hear (see listen). To teach Damocles
how a tyrant lives, Dionysius seated him at a banquet with a sword suspended above his head by a
single hair.


epidemic (adj.)

c.1600, from French &eacute;pid&eacute;mique, from &eacute;pidemi&eacute; an epidemic disease, from
Medieval Latin epidemia, from Greek epidemia prevalence of an epidemic disease (especially the
plague), from epi among, upon (see epi-) + demos people, district (see demotic).


