denounce (v.)

early 14c., announce, from Old French denoncier (12c., Modern French d&eacute;noncer), from Latin
denuntiare to announce, proclaim; denounce, menace; command, order, from de- down + nuntiare
proclaim, announce, from nuntius messenger (see nuncio). Negative sense in English via meaning to
declare or proclaim something as cursed, excommunicated, forgiven, removed from office. Related:
Denounced; denouncing.


denunciate (v.)

1590s, from Latin   denunciatus, past participle of denuntiare (see denounce). The same word as
denounce, but directly from Latin. Not widely used except in its noun form, denunciation.


denunciation (n.)

early 15c., act of declaring or stating something, from Latin denuntiationem (nominative
denuntiatio), noun of action from past participle stem of denuntiare (see denounce). Meaning a
charge is mid-15c.


excoriate (v.)

early 15c., from Late Latin excoriatus, past participle of excoriare flay, strip off the hide, from
Latin ex- off (see ex-) + corium hide, skin (see corium). Figurative sense of denounce, censure
first recorded in English 1708. Related: Excoriated; excoriating.


detest (v.)

early 15c., to curse, to call God to witness and abhor, from Middle French d&eacute;tester, from
Latin detestari to curse, execrate, abominate, express abhorrence for, literally denounce with one's
testimony, from de- from, down (see de-) + testari be a witness, from testis witness (see
testament). Related: Detested; detesting.


publish (v.)

mid-14c., make publicly known, reveal, divulge, announce; alteration of publicen (early 14c.) by
influence of banish, finish, etc.; from extended stem of Old French publier make public, spread
abroad, communicate, from Latin publicare make public, from publicus public (see public). Meaning
issue (a book, etc.) to the public is from late 14c., also to disgrace, put to shame; denounce
publicly. Related: Published; publishing. In Middle English the verb also meant to people, populate;
to multiply, breed (late 14c.), for example ben published of be descended from.


misprision (n.)

wrong action, a failure on the part of authority, early 15c., from Anglo-French mesprisioun mistake,
error, wrong action or speech, from Old French mesprision mistake, wrongdoing, fault, blame, crime,
from mespris, past participle of mesprendre to mistake, act wrongly, trespass, transgress, break a
law, from mes- wrongly (see mis- (2)) + prendre take, from Latin prendere, contracted from
prehendere seize (see prehensile).    In 16c., misprision of treason was used for lesser degrees of
guilt (those not subject to capital punishment), especially for knowing of treasonable actions or
plots but not informing the authorities. This led to the common supposition in legal writers that
the word means failure to denounce a crime.


