denominational (adj.)

1838; see denomination + -al (1).


denomination (n.)

late 14c., a naming, act of giving a name to, from Old French denominacion nominating, naming, from
Latin denominationem (nominative denominatio) a calling by anything other than the proper name,
metonymy, from denominare to name, from de- completely (see de-) + nominare to name (see nominate).
Meaning a class is from mid-15c. Monetary sense is 1650s; meaning religious sect is 1716.


subdenomination (n.)

also sub-denomination, 1620s, from sub- + denomination.


denominator (n.)

1540s, in mathematics, from Medieval Latin denominator, agent noun from past participle stem of
denominare (see denomination).


shinplaster (n.)

also shin-plaster, piece of paper soaked in vinegar and used to treat sore legs, from shin (n.) +
plaster (n.). In U.S. history, jocularly or as a term of abuse for devalued low-denomination paper
currency (1824).


denominate (v.)

1550s, from Latin denominatus, past participle of denominare to name (see denomination). Related:
Denominated; denominating.


Adventist (n.)

one of a religious denomination that believes in or looks for the early second coming of Christ,
1843; see advent + -ist. Church Latin adventus was applied to the coming of the Savior, both the
first or the anticipated second, hence Adventist was a name applied to millenarian sects, especially
and originally the Millerites (U.S.).


penny (n.)

Old English pening, penig, Northumbrian penning penny, from Proto-Germanic *panninggaz (cognates:
Old Norse penningr, Swedish p&auml;nning, Danish penge, Old Frisian panning, Old Saxon pending,
Middle Dutch pennic, Dutch penning, Old High German pfenning, German Pfennig, not recorded in
Gothic, where skatts is used instead), of unknown origin.    Offa's reformed coinage on light, broad
flans is likely to have begun c.760-5 in London, with an awareness of developments in Francia and
East Anglia. ... The broad flan penny established by Offa remained the principal denomination, with
only minor changes, until the fourteenth century. [Anna Gannon, The Iconography of Early Anglo-Saxon
Coinage, Oxford, 2003]    The English coin was originally set at one-twelfth of a shilling and was
of silver, later copper, then bronze. There are two plural forms: pennies of individual coins, pence
collectively. In translations it rendered various foreign coins of small denomination, especially
Latin denarius, whence comes its abbreviation d.   As American English colloquial for cent, it is
recorded from 1889. Penny-a-liner writer for a journal or newspaper is attested from 1834. Penny
dreadful cheap and gory fiction dates from c.1870. Phrase penny-wise and pound-foolish is recorded
from c.1600. Penny-pincher miserly person is recorded from 1906 (as an adjective penny-pinching is
recorded from 1858, American English). Penny loafers attested from 1960.


Nazarene (n.)

c.1200, holy man; early 13c., a native or resident of Nazareth, childhood home of Jesus, from Late
Latin Nazarenus, from Greek Nazarenos, from Hebrew Natzerath. As an adjective from late 13c. As a
follower of Jesus from late 14c. In Talmudic Hebrew notzri, literally of Nazareth, meant a
Christian; likewise Arabic Nasrani (plural Nasara). In Christian use, however, it can be a nickname
for Jesus, or refer to an early Jewish Christian sect (1680s in English), or, in modern use, to a
member of the Church of the Nazarene, a U.S.-based Protestant denomination (1898 in this sense).


talent (n.)

late 13c., inclination, disposition, will, desire, from Old French talent (12c.), from Medieval
Latin talenta, plural of talentum inclination, leaning, will, desire (11c.), in classical Latin
balance, weight; sum of money, from Greek talanton a balance, pair of scales, hence weight, definite
weight, anything weighed, and in later times sum of money, from PIE *tele- to lift, support, weigh,
with derivatives referring to measured weights and thence money and payment [Watkins]; see extol.
An ancient denomination of weight, originally Babylonian (though the name is Greek), and varying
widely in value among different peoples and at different times. [Century Dictionary]    According to
Liddell &amp; Scott, as a monetary sum, considered to consist of 6,000 drachmae, or, in Attica,
57.75 lbs. of silver. Also borrowed in other Germanic languages and Celtic. Attested in Old English
as talente). The Medieval Latin and common Romanic sense developed from figurative use of the word
in the sense of money. Meaning special natural ability, aptitude, gift committed to one for use and
improvement developed by mid-15c., in part perhaps from figurative sense wealth, but mostly from the
parable of the talents in Matt. xxv:14-30. Meaning persons of ability collectively is from 1856.


