department store (n.)

1878; a store that sells a variety of items, organized by department.    The Department Store is the
outgrowth of the cheap counter business originated by Butler Brothers in Boston about ten years ago.
The little Five Cent Counter then became a cornerstone from which the largest of all the world's
branches of merchandising was to be reared. It was the Cheap Counter which proved to the progressive
merchant his ability to sell all lines of wares under one roof. It was the Five Cent Counter
epidemic of '77 and '78 which rushed like a mighty whirlwind from the Atlantic to the Pacific and
all along its path transformed old time one line storekeepers into the wide-awake merchant princes
of the present day. It was this same epidemic which made possible the world famed Department Stores
of Houghton, of Boston; Macy, of New York; Wanamaker, of Philadelphia; and Lehman, of Chicago.
[American Storekeeper, 1885]


departmental (adj.)

1791, pertaining to a French department, from French d&eacute;partmental, from d&eacute;partement
(see department). Meaning of departmental systems generally from 1832.


department (n.)

mid-15c., a going away, act of leaving, from Old French departement (12c.) division, sharing out;
divorce, parting, from Late Latin departire (see depart). French department meant group of people
(as well as departure), from which English borrowed the sense of separate division, separate
business assigned to someone in a larger organization (c.1735). Meaning separate division of a
government is from 1769. As an administrative district in France, from 1792.


air force (n.)

1917, from air (n.1) + force (n.); first attested with creation of the Royal Air Force. There was no
United States Air Force until after World War II. The Air Corps was an arm of the U.S. Army. In
1942, the War Department reorganized it and renamed it Army Air Forces. The National Security Act of
1947 created the Department of the Air Force, headed by a Secretary of the Air Force, and the
U.S.A.F.


COBOL (n.)

1960, U.S. Defense Department acronym, from Common Business-Oriented Language.


portfolio (n.)

1722, porto folio; 1719 as port folio, from Italian portafoglio a case for carrying loose papers,
from porta, imperative of portare to carry (see port (n.1)) + foglio sheet, leaf, from Latin folium
(see folio). Meaning official documents of a state department is from 1835. A minister without
portfolio is one not in charge of a particular department. Meaning collection of securities held is
from 1930; portfolio investment is from 1955.


Cro Magnon

1869, from the name of a hill in Dordogne department of France, where in a cave prehistoric human
remains were found in 1868.


Denver

city in Colorado, U.S., founded 1858 as Auraria (golden), renamed 1859 for Gen. James W. Denver
(1817-1892), governor of the territory. The family name is from the place of that name in Norfolk,
literally ford or passage used by the Danes, from Old English Dena (genitive plural) + f&aelig;r.
The Denver boot or shoe as the name for a wheel clamp for illegally parked vehicles, supposedly was
invented 1953 by Frank Marugg, pattern-maker and violinist with the Denver Symphony Orchestra. He
was a friend of politicians and police department officials, and the city sheriff's department came
to him for help in making a device to immobilize vehicles whose owners didn't pay parking tickets.


dept.

abbreviation of department, attested from 1869.


MI5

1939, from abbreviation of Military Intelligence, followed by the department number.


Brie (n.)

type of soft cheese, 1848, from name of district in department Seine-et-Marne, southeast of Paris,
famous for its cheeses. The name is from Gaulish briga hill, height.


ARPANET

acronym from Advanced Research Projects Agency Network, set up in 1969 by a branch of the U.S.
Department of Defense in partnership with four universities; acknowledged as the world's first
operational packet switching network and predecessor of the Internet.


Vichy (adj.)

in reference to collaborationist government of France, 1940, from the name of the city in department
of Allier in central France, famous for mineral springs, seat 1940-44 of the French government
formed under Nazi occupation and headed by P&eacute;tain. The place name is of uncertain origin.


Internet (n.)

1985, the linked computer networks of the U.S. Defense Department, shortened from internetwork, from
inter- + network (n.).


Beaujolais (n.)

type of Burgundy, 1863, from name of a district in the department of Lyonnais, France, which is
named for the town of Beaujeu, from French beau beautiful + Latin jugum hill.


Vendee

department of western France, French Vend&#233;e, named for the river through it, which is perhaps
from Gaulish vindos white. Especially in reference to the insurrection there against the Republic in
1793. Related: Vendean.


Xerox

1952, trademark taken out by Haloid Co. of Rochester, N.Y., for a copying device, from xerography.
The verb is first attested 1965, from the noun, despite strenuous objection from the Xerox copyright
department. Related: Xeroxed; Xeroxing.


checker (n.2)

table covered with a checked cloth, specialized sense of checker (n.1), late 14c. (in Anglo-Latin
from c.1300); especially a table for counting money or keeping accounts (revenue reckoned with
counters); later extended to the fiscal department of the English Crown; the Exchequer (mid-14c.; in
Anglo-Latin from late 12c.).


foggy (adj.)

1540s, perhaps from a Scandinavian source, or formed from fog (n.1) + -y (2). Foggy Bottom U.S.
Department of State, from the name of a marshy region of Washington, D.C., where many federal
buildings are (also with a suggestion of political murkiness) popularized 1947 by James Reston in
New York Times, but he said it had been used earlier by Edward Folliard of The Washington Post.


post office (n.)

1650s, public department in charge of letter-carrying, from post (n.3) + office. Meaning building
where postal business is carried on is from 1650s. In slang or euphemistic sense of a sexual game it
refers to an actual parlor game first attested early 1850s in which pretend letters were paid for by
kisses.


scullery (n.)

mid-15c. (early 14c. as a surname), household department concerned with the care of kitchen
utensils, from Old French escuelerie office of the servant in charge of plates, etc., from escuelier
keeper of the dishes, from escuele dish (12c., Modern French &#233;cuelle), from Latin scutella
serving platter, silver (see scuttle (n.)).


treasury (n.)

c.1300, room for treasure, from Old French tresorie treasury (11c.), from tresor (see treasure
(n.)). Meaning department of state that controls public revenue is recorded from late 14c. An Old
English word for room for treasure was ma&eth;m-hus.


Ellis Island

sandy island in mouth of Hudson River, said to have been called Gull Island by local Indians and
Oyster Island by the Dutch, renamed Gull Island after the British took over, then Gibbet Island
because pirates were hanged there. Sold to Samuel Ellis in 1785, who made it a picnic spot and gave
it his name. Sold by his heirs in 1808 to New York State and acquired that year by the U.S. War
Department for coastal defenses. Vacant after the American Civil War until the government opened an
immigration station there in 1892 to replace Castle Island.


arrondissement (n.)

1807, administrative subdivision of a French department, from French, literally a rounding, from
stem of arrondir to make round, from a- to (see ad-) + rond round (see round (adj.)).


faculty (n.)

late 14c., ability, means, resources, from Old French facult&eacute; (14c.) skill, accomplishment,
learning, and directly from Latin facultatem (nominative facultas) power, ability, wealth, from
*facli-tat-s, from facilis (see facile).    Academic sense branch of knowledge probably was the
earliest in English (attested in Anglo-Latin from late 12c.), on notion of ability in knowledge.
Originally each department was a faculty; the use in reference to the whole teaching staff of a
college dates from 1767.


interior (adj.)

late 15c., from Middle French int&eacute;rieur and directly from Latin interior inner, interior,
middle, comparative adjective of inter within (see inter-). Meaning of the interior parts of a
country is from 1777; meaning internal affairs of a country or state (as in U.S. Department of the
Interior) is from 1838. Interior decoration first attested 1807. Interior design from 1927.


Gatling gun

1870, named for designer Dr. Richard Jordan Gatling (1818-1903); patented by 1862 but not used in
American Civil War until the Petersburg campaign of June 1864 as an independent initiative by U.S.
Gen. Ben Butler.    For the first time in this war, the Gatling gun was used by Butler in repelling
one of Beauregard's midnight attacks. Dispatches state that it was very destructive, and rebel
prisoners were very curious to know whether it was loaded all night and fired all day. ... Gatling,
like Mann, has found it very difficult to get fair trials of his gun, and to have it introduced by
the War Department, for the Government leaves all such things to the Ordnance Office, and that
office is under the control of old fogies, who work by red tape, and who are slow to perceive the
value of ordnance improvements, and still slower to introduce them into practice. [Scientific
American, June 18, 1864]


revenue (n.)

early 15c., income from property or possessions, from Middle French revenue, in Old French, a
return, noun use of fem. past participle of revenir come back (10c.), from Latin revenire return,
come back, from re- back (see re-) + venire come (see venue). Meaning public income is first
recorded 1680s; revenue sharing popularized from 1971. Revenuer U.S. Department of Revenue agent,
the bane of Appalachian moonshiners, first attested 1880.


phreak (n.)

1972, originally in phone phreak, one of a set of technically creative people who electronically
hacked or defrauded telephone companies of the day.    The phreaks first appeared on the US scene in
the early 1960s, when a group of MIT students were found to have conducted a late night dialling
experiment on the Defense Department's secret network. They were rewarded with jobs when they
explained their system to Bell investigators. ... The name phone phreak identified the enthisiasts
with the common underground usage of freak as someone who was cool and used drugs. [New Scientist,
Dec. 13, 1973]    The ph- in phone may have suggested the alteration, and this seems to be the
original of the 1990s slang fad for substituting ph- for f- (as in phat).


larder (n.)

c.1300, supply of salt pork, bacon, and other meats, later in reference to the room for processing
and storing such (late 14c.), from Anglo-French larder, Old French lardier a place for meats, from
Medieval Latin lardarium a room for meats, from Latin lardum lard, bacon (see lard (n.)). Meaning
department of the royal household or of a monastic house in charge of stored meats is mid-15c.
Surname Lardner person in charge of a larder is attested from mid-12c.


surety (n.)

c.1300, a guarantee, promise, pledge, an assurance, from Old French seurt&eacute; a promise, pledge,
guarantee; assurance, confidence (12c., Modern French s&#251;ret&#233;), from Latin securitatem
(nominative securitas) freedom from care or danger, safety, security, from securus (see secure
(adj.)). From late 14c. as security, safety, stability; state of peace, also certainty, certitude;
confidence. Meaning one who makes himself responsible for another is from early 15c. Until 1966, the
French national criminal police department was the S&#251;ret&eacute; nationale.


hamper (n.1)

large basket, early 14c., contraction of Anglo-French hanaper (Anglo-Latin hanepario), from Old
French hanepier case for holding a large goblet or cup; in medical use skull, also helmet; armored
leather cap, from hanap goblet, from Frankish or some other Germanic source (cognates: Old Saxon
hnapp cup, bowl; Old High German hnapf, German Napf, Old English hn&aelig;pp). The word also meant
(15c.) the department of Chancery into which fees were paid for sealing and enrolling charters, etc.
The first -a- may be a French attempt to render Germanic hn- into an acceptable Romanic form.


warrant (n.)

c.1200, protector, defender, from Old North French warant defender; surety, pledge; justifying
evidence (Old French garant), from Frankish *warand, from Proto-Germanic *war- to warn, guard,
protect (cognates: Old High German werento guarantor, noun use of present participle of weren to
authorize, warrant; German gew&auml;hren to grant), from PIE root *wer- (5) to cover (see weir).
Sense evolved via notion of permission from a superior which protects one from blame or
responsibility (early 14c.) to document conveying authority (1510s). A warrant officer in the
military is one who holds office by warrant (as from a government department), rather than by
commission (from a head of state).


veep (n.)

1949, American English, apparently coined from V.P., abbreviation of vice president, perhaps modeled
on jeep, which was then in vogue. Introduced by Alben W. Barkley (1877-1956), Harry Truman's vice
president. According to the Saturday Evening Post, his grandchildren, finding Vice-President too
long, call him that. The magazines quickly picked it up, especially when the 71-year-old Barkley
married a 38-year-old widow (dubbed the Veepess).    Barkley says word Veep is not copyrighted, and
any vice president who wants to can use it. But he hopes not many will. [U.S. Department of State
wireless bulletin, 1949]    Time, tongue in cheek, suggested the president should be Peep, the
Secretary of State Steep, and the Secretary of Labor Sleep.


buzz (n.)

a busy rumour [Rowe], 1620s (earlier a fancy, c.1600), figurative use from buzz (v.). Literal sense
of humming sound is from 1640s. A buzz was the characteristic sound of an airplane in early 20c.;
hence verbal sense to fly swiftly, by 1928; by 1940 especially in military use, to fly low over a
surface as a warning signal (for example that target practice is about to begin):    The patrol
aircraft shall employ the method of warning known as buzzing which consists of low flight by the
airplane and repeated opening and closing of the throttle. [1941 Supplement to the Code of Federal
Regulations of the United States of America, Chap. II, Corps of Engineers, War Department, p. 3434,
etc. ]    Meaning pleasant sense of intoxication first recorded 1935. The children's game of
counting off with 7 or multiples of it replaced by buzz is attested from 1864 and is mentioned in
Little Women (1868). To give (someone) a buzz (by 1922) is from the buzz that announced a call on
old telephone systems.


Coca-Cola

invented 1886 in Atlanta, Georgia, U.S., by druggist Dr. John S. Pemberton. So called because
original ingredients were derived from coca leaves and cola nuts. It contained minute amounts of
cocaine until 1909.  Drink the brain tonic and intellectual soda fountain beverage Coca-Cola.
[Atlanta Evening Journal, June 30, 1887] Coca-colanization, also Coca-colonization coined 1950
during an attempt to ban the beverage in France, led by the communist party and the wine-growers.
France's Communist press bristled with warnings against US Coca-Colonization. Coke salesmen were
described as agents of the OSS and the U.S. State Department. Tremble, roared Vienna's Communist Der
Abend, Coca-Cola is on the march! [Time Magazine, 1950]   Coca-colonialism attested by 1956.


son of a bitch

1707 as a direct phrase, but implied much earlier, and Old Norse had bikkju-sonr. Abbreviated form
SOB from 1918; form sumbitch attested in writing by 1969.    Abide &thorn;ou &thorn;ef malicious!
Biche-sone &thorn;ou drawest amis  &thorn;ou schalt abigge it ywis!  [Of Arthour &amp; of Merlin,
c.1330]    Probably the most common American vulgarity from about the middle of the eighteenth
century to the middle of the twentieth [Rawson].     Our maid-of-all-work in that department
[indecency] is son-of-a-bitch, which seems as pale and ineffectual to a Slav or a Latin as fudge
does to us. There is simply no lift in it, no shock, no sis-boom-ah. The dumbest policeman in
Palermo thinks of a dozen better ones between breakfast and the noon whistle. [H.L. Mencken, The
American Language, 4th ed., 1936, p.317-8]    Elsewhere, complaining of the tepidity of the American
vocabulary of profanity, Mencken writes that the toned-down form son-of-a-gun is so lacking in punch
that the Italians among us have borrowed it as a satirical name for an American: la sanemagogna is
what they call him, and by it they indicate their contempt for his backwardness in the art that is
one of their great glories.    It was in 1934 also that the New York Daily News, with commendable
frankness, in reporting a hearing in Washington at which Senator Huey P. Long featured, forsook the
old-time dashes and abbreviations and printed the complete epithet son of a bitch. [Stanley Walker,
City Editor, 1934]


abstract (adj.)

late 14c., originally in grammar (of nouns), from Latin abstractus drawn away, past participle of
abstrahere to drag away, detach, pull away, divert; also figuratively, from ab(s)- away (see ab-) +
trahere draw (see tract (n.1)).    Meaning withdrawn or separated from material objects or practical
matters is from mid-15c. That of difficult to understand, abstruse is from c.1400. Specifically in
reference to modern art, it dates from 1914; abstract expressionism as an American-based uninhibited
approach to art exemplified by Jackson Pollock is from 1952, but the term itself had been used in
the 1920s of Kandinsky and others.    Oswald Herzog, in an article on Der Abstrakte Expressionismus
(Sturm, heft 50, 1919) gives us a statement which with equal felicity may be applied to the artistic
attitude of the Dadaists. Abstract Expressionism is perfect Expressionism, he writes. It is pure
creation. It casts spiritual processes into a corporeal mould. It does not borrow objects from the
real world; it creates its own objects .... The abstract reveals the will of the artist; it becomes
expression. ... [William A. Drake, The Life and Deeds of Dada, 1922]   <hr />   Then, that art we
have called abstract for want of any possible descriptive term, with which we have been patient,
and, even, appreciative, getting high stimulation by the new Guggenheim non-objective Art Museum, is
reflected in our examples of surrealism, dadaism, and what-not, to assert our acquaintance in every
art, fine or other. [Report of the Art Reference Department of Pratt Institute Free Library for year
ending June 30, 1937]


port (n.1)

harbor, Old English port harbor, haven, reinforced by Old French port harbor, port; mountain pass;
Old English and Old French words both from Latin portus port, harbor, originally entrance, passage,
figuratively place of refuge, assylum, from PIE *prtu- a going, a passage, from root *per- (2) to
lead, pass over (cognates: Sanskrit parayati carries over; Greek poros journey, passage, way,
peirein to pierce, run through; Latin porta gate, door, portare passage, peritus experienced;
Avestan peretush passage, ford, bridge; Armenian hordan go forward; Welsh rhyd ford; Old Church
Slavonic pariti to fly; Old English faran to go, journey, Old Norse fj&ouml;r&eth;r inlet, estuary).
Meaning left side of a ship (looking forward from the stern) is attested from 1540s, from notion of
the side facing the harbor (when a ship is docked). It replaced larboard in common usage to avoid
confusion with starboard; officially so by Admiralty order of 1844 and U.S. Navy Department notice
of 1846. Figurative sense place of refuge is attested from early 15c.; phrase any port in a storm
first recorded 1749. A port of call (1810) is one paid a scheduled visit by a ship.


butterfly (n.)

Old English buttorfleoge, evidently butter (n.) + fly (n.), but of obscure signification. Perhaps
based on the old notion that the insects (or witches disguised as butterflies) consume butter or
milk that is left uncovered. Or, less creatively, simply because the pale yellow color of many
species' wings suggests the color of butter. Another theory connects it to the color of the insect's
excrement, based on Dutch cognate boterschijte. An overview of words for butterfly in various
languages can be found here. Also see papillon.    Applied to persons from c.1600, originally in
reference to vain and gaudy attire; by 1806 in reference to transformation from early lowly state;
in reference to flitting tendencies by 1873. The swimming stroke so called from 1936. Butterflies
light stomach spasms caused by anxiety is from 1908.    The butterfly effect is a deceptively simple
insight extracted from a complex modern field. As a low-profile assistant professor in MIT's
department of meteorology in 1961, [Edward] Lorenz created an early computer program to simulate
weather. One day he changed one of a dozen numbers representing atmospheric conditions, from .506127
to .506. That tiny alteration utterly transformed his long-term forecast, a point Lorenz amplified
in his 1972 paper, Predictability: Does the Flap of a Butterfly's Wings in Brazil Set Off a Tornado
in Texas? [Peter Dizikes, The Meaning of the Butterfly, The Boston Globe, June 8, 2008]


medicine (n.)

c.1200, medical treatment, cure, remedy, also used figuratively, of spiritual remedies, from Old
French medecine (Modern French m&#233;dicine) medicine, art of healing, cure, treatment, potion,
from Latin medicina the healing art, medicine; a remedy, also used figuratively, perhaps originally
ars medicina the medical art, from fem. of medicinus (adj.) of a doctor, from medicus a physician
(see medical); though OED finds evidence for this is wanting. Meaning a medicinal potion or plaster
in English is mid-14c.    To take (one's) medicine submit to something disagreeable is first
recorded 1865. North American Indian medicine-man shaman is first attested 1801, from American
Indian adoption of the word medicine in sense of magical influence. The U.S.-Canadian boundary they
called Medicine Line (first attested 1910), because it conferred a kind of magic protection:
punishment for crimes committed on one side of it could be avoided by crossing over to the other.
Medicine show traveling show meant to attract a crowd so patent medicine can be sold to them is
American English, 1938. Medicine ball stuffed leather ball used for exercise is from 1889.    It is
called a medicine ball and it got that title from Prof. Roberts, now of Springfield, whose fame is
widespread, and whose bright and peculiar dictionary of terms for his prescription department in
physical culture is taught in every first-class conducted Y.M.C.A. gymnasium in America. Prof.
Roberts calls it a medicine ball because playful exercise with it invigorates the body, promotes
digestion, and restores and preserves one's health. [Scientific American Supplement, March 16, 1889]


satire (n.)

late 14c., work intended to ridicule vice or folly, from Middle French satire (14c.) and directly
from Latin satira satire, poetic medley, earlier satura, in lanx satura mixed dish, dish filled with
various kinds of fruit, literally full dish, from fem. of satur sated (see saturate).    First used
in the literary sense in Latin in reference to a collection of poems in various meters on a variety
of subjects by the late republican Roman poet Ennius. The matter of the little that survives of his
verse does not seem to be particularly satiric, but in classical Latin the word came to mean
especially a poem which assailed the prevailing vices, one after another. Altered in Latin by
influence of Greek satyr, on mistaken notion that the literary form is related to the Greek satyr
drama (see satyr).<b>Satire</b>, n. An obsolete kind of literary composition in which the vices and
follies of the author's enemies were expounded with imperfect tenderness. In this country satire
never had more than a sickly and uncertain existence, for the soul of it is wit, wherein we are
dolefully deficient, the humor that we mistake for it, like all humor, being tolerant and
sympathetic. Moreover, although Americans are 'endowed by their Creator' with abundant vice and
folly, it is not generally known that these are reprehensible qualities, wherefore the satirist is
popularly regarded as a sour-spirited knave, and his every victim's outcry for codefendants evokes a
national assent. [Ambrose Bierce, Devil's Dictionary, 1911]   <hr />   Proper satire is
distinguished, by the generality of the reflections, from a lampoon which is aimed against a
particular person, but they are too frequently confounded. [Johnson]   <hr />   [I]n whatever
department of human expression, wherever there is objective truth there is satire [Wyndham Lewis,
Rude Assignment, 1950]    For nuances of usage, see humor (n.).


dollar (n.)

1550s, from Low German daler, from German taler (1530s, later thaler), abbreviation of
Joachimstaler, literally (gulden) of Joachimstal, coin minted 1519 from silver from mine opened 1516
near Joachimstal, town in Erzgebirge Mountains in northwest Bohemia. German Tal is cognate with
English dale.    The thaler was a large silver coin of varying value in the German states (and a
unit of the German monetary union of 1857-73 equal to three marks); it also served as a currency
unit in Denmark and Sweden. English colonists in America used the word in reference to Spanish
pieces of eight. Continental Congress July 6, 1785, adopted dollar when it set up U.S. currency, on
suggestion of Gouverneur Morris and Thomas Jefferson, because the term was widely known but not
British. But none were circulated until 1794.    When William M. Evarts was Secretary of State he
accompanied Lord Coleridge on an excursion to Mount Vernon. Coleridge remarked that he had heard it
said that Washington, standing on the lawn, could throw a dollar clear across the Potomac. Mr.
Evarts explained that a dollar would go further in those days than now. [Walsh]    Phrase dollars to
doughnuts attested from 1890; dollar diplomacy is from 1910. The dollar sign ($) is said to derive
from the image of the Pillars of Hercules, stamped with a scroll, on the Spanish piece of eight.
However, according to the <b>Bureau of Engraving and Printing</b> of the U.S. Department of the
Treasury:    [T]he most widely accepted explanation is that the symbol is the result of evolution,
independently in different places, of the Mexican or Spanish P's for pesos, or piastres, or pieces
of eight. The theory, derived from a study of old manuscripts, is that the S gradually came to be
written over the P, developing a close equivalent of the $ mark. It was widely used before the
adoption of the United States dollar in 1785.


