depth (n.)

late 14c., apparently formed in Middle English on model of length, breadth; from Old English deop
deep (see deep) + -th (2). Replaced older deopnes deepness. Though the English word is relatively
recent, the formation is in Proto-Germanic, *deupitho-, and corresponds to Old Saxon diupitha, Dutch
diepte, Old Norse dyp&eth;, Gothic diupi&thorn;a.


benthos (n.)

life forms of the deep ocean and sea floor, 1891, coined by Haeckel from Greek benthos depth of the
sea, related to bathos depth, bathys deep, of unknown origin. Adjective benthic is attested from
1902.


profundity (n.)

early 15c., bottom of the sea, from Old French profundite (Modern French profondit&eacute;) and
directly from Late Latin profunditatem (nominative profunditas) depth, intensity, immensity, from
profundus deep, vast (see profound). Meaning depth of intellect in English is from c.1500.


intensity (n.)

formed in English 1660s from intense + -ity. Earlier was intenseness (1610s). Sense of extreme depth
of feeling first recorded 1830.


bathos (n.)

anticlimax, a descent from the sublime to the ridiculous, 1727, from Greek bathos depth, related to
bathys deep (see benthos). Introduced by Pope.


thickness (n.)

Old English &thorn;icness density, viscosity, hardness; depth; anything thick or heavy; darkness;
thicket; see thick + -ness.


abysmal (adj.)

1650s, formed in English from abysm + -al (1). Weakened sense of extremely bad is first recorded
1904, perhaps from abysmal ignorance (suggestive of its depth), an expression attested from 1847.
Related: Abysmally.


batholith (n.)

1903, from German batholith (1892), coined by German geologist Eduard Suess (1831-1914) from Greek
bathos depth (see benthos) + -lith stone.


sound (v.2)

fathom, probe, measure the depth of, mid-14c. (implied in sounding), from Old French sonder, from
sonde sounding line, perhaps from the same Germanic source that yielded Old English sund water, sea
(see sound (n.2)). Barnhart dismisses the old theory that it is from Latin subundare. Figurative use
from 1570s.


abyss (n.)

late 14c., earlier abime (c.1300, from a form in Old French), from Late Latin abyssus bottomless
pit, from Greek abyssos (limne) bottomless (pool), from a- without (see a- (2)) + byssos bottom,
possibly related to bathos depth.


precipice (n.)

steep face of rock, 1630s, from Middle French pr&eacute;cipice, from Latin praecipitium a steep
place, literally a fall or leap, from praeceps (genitive praecipitis) steep, headlong, headfirst,
from prae before, forth (see pre-) + caput head (see head (n.)). Earlier in English as a verb
(1590s) meaning fall to great depth.


deep six (n.)

place where something is discarded, by 1921 (in phrase give (something) the deep six), originally in
motorboating slang, perhaps from earlier underworld noun sense of the grave (1929), which is perhaps
a reference to the usual grave depth of six feet. But the phrase (in common with mark twain) also
figured in the sailing jargon of sounding, for a measure of six fathoms:    As the water deepened
under her keel the boyish voice rang out from the chains: By the mark five--and a quarter less six--
by the deep six--and a half seven--by the deep eight--and a quarter eight. [Learning the Road to
Sea, in Outing magazine, Feb. 1918]     In general use by 1940s. As a verb from 1953.


profound (adj.)

c.1300, characterized by intellectual depth, from Old French profund (12c., Modern French profond),
from Latin profundus deep, bottomless, vast, also obscure; profound; immoderate, from pro- forth
(see pro-) + fundus bottom (see fund (n.)). The literal and figurative senses both were in Latin,
but English, having already deep, employed this word primarily in its figurative sense. Related:
Profoundly.


twain

Old English twegen two (masc. nominative and accusative), from Proto-Germanic *twa- two (see two).
It corresponds to Old Frisian twene, Dutch twee, Old High German zwene, Danish tvende. The word
outlasted the breakdown of gender in Middle English and survived as a secondary form of two,
especially in cases where the numeral follows a noun. Its continuation into modern times was aided
by its use in KJV and the Marriage Service, in poetry (where it is a useful rhyme word), and in oral
use where it is necessary to be clear that two and not to or too is meant. In U.S. nautical use as a
depth of two fathoms from 1799.


perspective (n.)

late 14c., science of optics, from Old French perspective and directly from Medieval Latin
perspectiva ars science of optics, from fem. of perspectivus of sight, optical from Latin perspectus
clearly perceived, past participle of perspicere inspect, look through, look closely at, from per-
through (see per) + specere look at (see scope (n.1)). Sense of art of drawing objects so as to give
appearance of distance or depth is first found 1590s, influenced by Italian prospettiva, an artists'
term. The figurative meaning mental outlook over time is first recorded 1762.


base (n.)

bottom, foundation, pedestal, early 14c., from Old French bas depth (12c.), from Latin basis
foundation, from Greek basis step, pedestal, from bainein to step (see come). The military sense is
from 1860. The chemical sense (1810) was introduced in French 1754 by French chemist Guillaume-
Fran&ccedil;ois Rouelle (1703-1770). Sporting sense of starting point ia from 1690s, also
destination of a runner (1812). As a safe spot in a tag-like game, suggested from mid-15c. (as the
name of the game later called prisoner's base).


-th (2)

suffix forming nouns of action, state, or quality from verbs or adjectives (such as depth, strength,
truth), from Old English -&eth;u, -&eth;, from Proto-Germanic *-itho (cognates: Old Norse -&#254;,
Old High German -ida, Gothic -i&#254;a), abstract noun suffix, from PIE *-ita (cognates: Sanskrit
-tati-; Greek -tet-; Latin -tati-, as in libertatem liberty from liber free). Sometimes in English
reduced to -t, especially after -h- (as in height).


gulf (n.)

late 14c., profound depth; geographic sense is c.1400; from Old French golf a gulf, whirlpool, from
Italian golfo a gulf, a bay, from Late Latin colfos, from Greek kolpos bay, gulf, earlier trough
between waves, fold of a garment, originally bosom, the common notion being curved shape, from PIE
*kwelp- to arch, to vault (compare Old English hwealf, a-hwielfan to overwhelm). Latin sinus
underwent the same development, being used first for bosom, later for gulf. Replaced Old English
s&aelig;-earm. Figurative sense of a wide interval is from 1550s. The Gulf Stream (1775) takes its
name from the Gulf of Mexico.


pachyderm (n.)

1838, from French pachyderme (c.1600), adopted as a biological term 1797 by French naturalist
Georges L&eacute;opole Chr&eacute;tien Fr&eacute;d&eacute;ric Dagobert, Baron Cuvier (1769-1832),
from Greek pachydermos thick-skinned, from pachys thick, large, massive, from PIE *bhengh- thick,
fat (cognates: Sanskrit bahu- much, numerous Avestan bazah- height, depth, Hittite pankush large,
Old Norse bingr heap, Old High German bungo a bulb, Lithuanian biess thick) + derma skin (see
derma).


two (adj.)

Old English twa two, fem. and neuter form of twegen two (see twain), from Proto-Germanic *twa
(cognates: Old Saxon and Old Frisian twene, twa, Old Norse tveir, tvau, Dutch twee, Old High German
zwene, zwo, German zwei, Gothic twai), from PIE *duwo, variant of dwo two (cognates: Sanskrit dvau,
Avestan dva, Greek duo, Latin duo, Old Welsh dou, Lithuanian dvi, Old Church Slavonic duva two,
first element in Hittite ta-ugash two years old).   Two-fisted is from 1774. Two cheers for _____,
expressing qualified enthusiasm first recorded 1951 in E.M. Forster's title Two Cheers for
Democracy. Two-dimensional is recorded from 1883; figurative sense of lacking substance or depth is
attested from 1934.


deep (adj.)

Old English deop profound, awful, mysterious; serious, solemn; deepness, depth, deope (adv.), from
Proto-Germanic *deupaz (cognates: Old Saxon diop, Old Frisian diap, Dutch diep, Old High German
tiof, German tief, Old Norse djupr, Danish dyb, Swedish djup, Gothic diups deep), from PIE *dheub-
deep, hollow (cognates: Lithuanian dubus deep, hollow, Old Church Slavonic duno bottom, foundation,
Welsh dwfn deep, Old Irish domun world, via sense development from bottom to foundation to earth to
world).    Figurative senses were in Old English; extended 16c. to color, sound. Deep pocket wealth
is from 1951. To go off the deep end lose control of oneself is slang first recorded 1921, probably
in reference to the deep end of a swimming pool, where a person on the surface can no longer touch
bottom. When 3-D films seemed destined to be the next wave and the biggest thing to hit cinema since
talkies, they were known as deepies (1953).


high (adj.)

Old English heh (Anglian), heah (West Saxon) of great height, lofty, tall, exalted, high-class, from
Proto-Germanic *haukhaz (cognates: Old Saxon hoh, Old Norse har, Danish h&oslash;i, Swedish
h&ouml;g, Old Frisian hach, Dutch hoog, Old High German hoh, German hoch, Gothic hauhs high; also
German H&uuml;gel hill, Old Norse haugr mound), perhaps related to Lithuanian kaukara hill. Spelling
with -gh represents a final guttural sound in the original word, lost since 14c.    Of sound pitch,
late 14c. Of roads, most frequented or important, c.1200. Meaning euphoric or exhilarated from
alcohol is first attested 1620s, of drugs, 1932. Sense of proud, haughty, arrogant, supercilious
(c.1200) is reflected in high hand (late 14c.) and high horse. High seas first attested late 14c.,
with sense (also found in the Latin cognate) of deep as well as tall (cognates: Old English heahflod
deep water, also Old Persian bar&#353;an height, depth). Of an evil or a punishment, grave, serious,
severe (as in high treason), c.1200 (Old English had heahsynn deadly sin, crime).   High pressure
(adj.) is from 1824, of engines, 1891, of weather systems, 1933, of sales pitches. A child's high
chair is from 1848. High school school for advanced studies attested from late 15c. in Scotland; by
1824 in U.S. High time fully time, the fullness of time, is from late 14c. High noon is from early
14c.; the sense is full, total, complete. High and mighty is c.1200 (heh i mahhte). High finance
(1905) is that concerned with large sums. High and dry of beached things (especially ships) is from
1783. High-water mark is what is left by a flood or highest tide (1550s); figurative use by 1814.


