deranged (adj.)

c.1790, insane; of things, out of order, from 1796; past participle adjective from derange (v.).


certifiable (adj.)

1846, from certify + -able. Meaning so deranged as to be certifiably insane is recorded from 1912.


redwood (n.)

1610s, wood that has a red hue, from red (adj.1) + wood (n.). Of various types of New World trees
that yield such wood, from 1716; specifically of the California Sequoia sempervirens from 1819. In
Scottish English 16c.-18c. the same word as an adjective meant completely deranged, raving, stark
mad, from wood (adj.).


mental (adj.)

early 15c., pertaining to the mind, from Middle French mental, from Late Latin mentalis of the mind,
from Latin mens (genitive mentis) mind, from PIE root *men- to think (cognates: Sanskrit matih
thought, mind, Gothic gamunds, Old English gemynd memory, remembrance; see mind (n.)). Meaning
crazy, deranged is from 1927, probably from combinations such as mental hospital.


ire (n.)

c.1300, from Old French ire anger, wrath, violence (11c.), from Latin ira anger, wrath, rage,
passion, from PIE root *eis-, forming various words denoting passion cognates: Greek hieros filled
with the divine, holy, oistros gadfly, originally thing causing madness; Sanskrit esati drives on,
yasati boils; Avestan aesma anger).    Old English irre in a similar sense is from an adjective irre
wandering, straying, angry, cognate with Old Saxon irri angry, Old High German irri wandering,
deranged, also angry; Gothic airzeis astray, and Latin errare wander, go astray, angry (see err
(v.)).


suicide (n.)

deliberate killing of oneself, 1650s, from Modern Latin suicidium suicide, from Latin sui of oneself
(genitive of se self), from PIE *s(u)w-o- one's own, from root *s(w)e- (see idiom) + -cidium a
killing (see -cide). Probably an English coinage; much maligned by Latin purists because it may as
well seem to participate of sus, a sow, as of the pronoun sui [Phillips]. The meaning person who
kills himself deliberately is from 1728. In Anglo-Latin, the term for one who commits suicide was
felo-de-se, literally one guilty concerning himself.    Even in 1749, in the full blaze of the
philosophic movement, we find a suicide named Portier dragged through the streets of Paris with his
face to the ground, hung from a gallows by his feet, and then thrown into the sewers; and the laws
were not abrogated till the Revolution, which, having founded so many other forms of freedom,
accorded the liberty of death. [W.E.H. Lecky, History of European Morals, 1869]    In England,
suicides were legally criminal if of age and sane, but not if judged to have been mentally deranged.
The criminal ones were mutilated by stake and given degrading burial in highways until 1823. Suicide
blonde (one who has dyed by her own hand) first attested 1921. Baseball suicide squeeze is attested
from 1937.


