derivative

early 15c. (adj.); mid-15c. (n.), from Middle French d&eacute;rivatif (15c.), from Late Latin
derivat-, past participle stem of Latin derivare (see derive). Mathematical sense is from 1670s.


matting (n.2)

ornamental border of a picture, 1864 from verbal derivative of mat (n.2).


Dulcinea

sweetheart, 1748, from the name of Don Quixote's mistress in Cervantes' romance, the name a Spanish
fem. derivative of Latin dulce sweet.


Dalmatia

region along the eastern Adriatic coast in what is now Croatia, of uncertain origin. Perhaps from a
derivative of PIE *dhal- to bloom, in a sense of young animal, in reference to the mountain
pastures.


hove (v.1)

wait, linger, hover, mid-13c., of unknown origin. Chiefly nautical at first, of ships standing off a
coast, also of birds in the air. Common 13c.-16c., then superseded by its derivative, hover.


shewel (n.)

something hung up to keep wild animals away, mid-13c., perhaps in Old English, from the same source
as shy (adj.); a derivative of the verb which in German became scheuen to scare.


unman (v.)

1590s, to deprive of the attributes of a human being, from un- (2) + verbal derivative of man (n.).
Meaning to deprive of manly courage is attested from c.1600; that of to emasculate is from 1680s.


spinnaker (n.)

large triangular sail, 1866, either a derivative of spin in the sense of go rapidly or a corrupt
pronunciation of Sphinx, which was the name of the first yacht known to carry this type of sail.


unoriginal (adj.)

1660s, uncreated, without an origin, from un- (1) not + original (adj.). Meaning derivative, second-
hand is recorded from 1774. Related: Unoriginality.


sedate (v.)

treat with sedatives, 1945, a back-formation from the noun derivative of sedative (adj.). The word
also existed 17c. in a sense make calm or quiet. Related: Sedated; sedating.


offshoot (n.)

1670s, in figurative sense, of family trees; 1801 in general sense of a derivative; 1814 in literal
sense, in reference to plants. From off + shoot (n.).


fellate (v.)

1968, verbal derivative of fellatio. Related: Fellated; fellating.


Ephraim

masc. personal name, in Old Testament, younger son of Joseph; also the tribe descended from him,
sometimes used figuratively for Kingdom of Israel; Greek form of Hebrew Ephrayim, a derivative of
parah was fruitful (related to Aramaic pera fruit).


peptide (n.)

1906, from German peptid; see peptone + -ide, probably indicating a derivative.


acetone (n.)

colorless volatile liquid, 1839, literally a derivative of acetic acid, from Latin acetum vinegar
(see acetic) + Greek-based chemical suffix -one, which owes its use in chemistry to this word.


peloton (n.)

1706, small body of soldiers, platoon, from French peleton, derivative of pelote ball, heap, platoon
(11c.); see platoon.


sulfa

1942, short name for the group of drugs derived from sulfanilamide (amide of sulfanilic acid, 1937,
which is so called because it is a sulphonic derivative of the dye-stuff aniline), and shortened
from that word. The usual British English spelling is sulpha.


hermeneutic (adj.)

interpretive, 1670s, from Greek hermeneutikos interpreting, from hermeneutes interpreter, from
hermeneuein to interpret, of unknown origin (formerly considered ultimately a derivative of Hermes,
as the tutelary divinity of speech, writing, and eloquence).


dray (n.)

mid-14c., Middle English noun derivative of Old English dragan to draw, originally meaning a cart
without wheels that has to be dragged (compare Old Norse draga timber dragged behind a horse); see
drag (v.).


squall (n.)

sudden, violent gust of wind, 1719, originally nautical, probably from a Scandinavian source
(compare Norwegian skval sudden rush of water, Swedish skvala to gush, pour down), probably
ultimately a derivative of squall (v.).


cabriolet (n.)

light two-wheeled chaise, 1766, from French cabriolet (18c.), derivative of cabriole (see cab). So
called from its light, leaping motion.


-one

chemical suffix, from Greek -one, female patronymic (as in anemone, daughter of the wind, from
anemos); in chemical use denoting a weaker derivative. Its use in forming acetone (1830s) gave rise
to the specialized chemical sense.


baby boom (n.)

coined 1941, from baby (n.) + boom (n.); derivative baby-boomer (member of the one that began 1945)
recorded by 1974.


ptosis (n.)

1743, from Greek ptosis, literally falling, a fall, also the case of a noun, nominal derivative of
piptein to fall (see symptom). In English, especially of the eyelid. Related: Ptotic.


Martin

masc. proper name, from Latin Martinus, derivative of Mars (genitive Martis), Roman god of war (see
Mars).


deal (n.2)

plank or board of pine, c.1400, from Low German (compare Middle Low German dele), from Proto-
Germanic *theljon, from PIE root *tel- ground, floor. An Old English derivative was &thorn;elu hewn
wood, board, flooring.


methamphetamine (n.)

1949, from methyl + amphetamine; so called because it was a methyl derivative of amphetamine.


sedative (adj.)

tending to calm or soothe, early 15c., from Medieval Latin sedativus calming, allaying, from sedat-,
past participle stem of sedare, causative of sedere to sit (see sedentary). The noun derivative
meaning a sedative drug is attested from 1785. Hence, whatever soothes or allays.


bouncer (n.)

mid-19c. in various senses, noun derivative of bounce (v.) in its original sense of thump, hit.
Earliest attested is boaster, bully, braggart (1833); also large example of its kind (1842);
enforcer of order in a bar or saloon (1865, American English, originally colloquial).  The Bouncer
is merely the English chucker out. When liberty verges on license and gaiety on wanton delirium, the
Bouncer selects the gayest of the gay, and -- bounces him! [London Daily News, July 26, 1883]


smart money (n.)

money bet by those in the know, 1926, from smart (adj.). The same phrase earlier meant money paid to
sailors, soldiers, workers, etc., who have been disabled while on the job (1690s), from a noun
derivative of smart (v.). Also money paid to obtain the discharge of a recruit (1760), hence money
paid to escape some unpleasant situation (1818). Sometimes in legal use, damages in excess of injury
done.


fuddle (v.)

1580s, originally to get drunk, later to confuse as though with drink (c.1600), of uncertain origin,
perhaps from Low German fuddeln work in a slovenly manner (as if drunk), from fuddle worthless
cloth. The more common derivative befuddle appeared 1887. Related: Fuddled; fuddling.


cockscomb (n.)

c.1400, comb or crest of a cock, from possessive of cock (n.1) + comb (n.). Meaning cap worn by a
professional fool is from 1560s; hence conceited fool (1560s), a sense passing into the derivative
coxcomb. As a plant name, from 1570s.


Petronilla

also Petronella, fem. proper name, a feminine diminutive of Latin Petronius. Also the name of a
saint much-invoked against fevers and regarded as a daughter of St. Peter. The name was accordingly
regarded to be a derivative of Peter and became one of the most popular of girls' names, the
vernacular Parnell being still used as a proper name as late as the 18th century in Cornwall
[Reaney].


clandestine (adj.)

1560s, from Latin clandestinus secret, hidden, from clam secretly, from adverbial derivative of base
of celare to hide (see cell), perhaps on model of intestinus internal. Related: Clandestinely. As a
noun form, there is awkward clandestinity (clandestineness apparently being a dictionary word).


chemical (adj.)

1570s, relating to chemistry, from chemic of alchemy (a worn-down derivative of Medieval Latin
alchimicus; see alchemy) + -al (1). In early use also of alchemy. Related: Chemically.


bobby sox

1943, from diminutive of bob (n.2) + sox. So called because they are shortened compared to knee-
socks. Derivative bobby-soxer first attested 1944.    Months ago colored bobby sox folded at the top
were decreed, not by anyone or any group but, as usual, by a sudden mysterious and universal
acceptance of the new idea. Now no teen-ager dares wear anything but pure white socks without a
fold. [Life magazine, Dec. 11, 1944]


Lucian

masc. proper name, from Latin Lucianus (source also of French Lucien), a derivative of Roman Lucius,
from lux (genitive lucis) light (see light (n.)). The Hellenistic Greek writer (his name Latinized
from Greek Loukianos) was noted as the type of a scoffing wit.


brio (n.)

liveliness, vivacity, 1734, from Italian brio, literally mettle, fire, life, perhaps a shortened
derivative of Latin ebrius drunk. Or via Proven&ccedil;al briu vigor, from Celtic *brig-o- strength,
from PIE *gwere- (2) heavy (see grave (adj.)). Probably entered English via musical instruction con
brio.


brief (n.)

from Latin breve (genitive brevis), noun derivative of adjective brevis (see brief (adj.)) which
came to mean letter, summary, specifically a letter of the pope (less ample and solemn than a bull),
and thus came to mean letter of authority, which yielded the modern, legal sense of summary of the
facts of a case (1630s).


Ruthenian (adj.)

1850, of or pertaining to the Ukrainian people (earlier Ruthene, 1540s), from Medieval Latin Rutheni
the Little Russians, a derivative of Russi (see Russia). For consonant change, compare Medieval
Latin Prut(h)eni, from Prussi Prussians. Another word in the same sense was Russniak.


ramble (v.)

mid-15c., perhaps frequentative of romen to walk, go (see roam), perhaps via romblen (late 14c.) to
ramble. The vowel change perhaps by influence of Middle Dutch rammelen, a derivative of rammen
copulate, used of the night wanderings of the amorous cat [Weekley]. Meaning to talk or write
incoherently is from 1630s. Related: Rambled; rambling.


drown (v.)

c.1300, transitive  and intransitive, perhaps from an unrecorded derivative word of Old English
druncnian (Middle English druncnen) be swallowed up by water (originally of ships as well as living
things), probably from the base of drincan to drink.    Modern form is from northern England
dialect, probably influenced by Old Norse drukna be drowned. Related: Drowned; drowning.


filth (n.)

Old English fyl&eth; uncleanness, impurity, from Proto-Germanic *fulitho (cognates: Old Saxon
fulitha foulness, filth, Dutch vuilte, Old High German fulida), noun derivative of *fulo- foul (see
foul (adj.)). A classic case of i-mutation.


bitch (v.)

to complain, attested at least from 1930, perhaps from the sense in bitchy, perhaps influenced by
the verb meaning to bungle, spoil, which is recorded from 1823. But bitched in this sense seems to
echo Middle English bicched cursed, bad, a general term of opprobrium (as in Chaucer's bicched bones
unlucky dice), which despite the hesitation of OED, seems to be a derivative of bitch (n.).


caffeine (n.)

trimethyl-derivative of xanthine, 1830, from German Kaffein, coined by chemist F.F. Runge
(1795-1867), apparently from German Kaffee coffee (see coffee) + chemical suffix -ine (2) (German
-in). The form of the English word may be via French caf&eacute;ine.


Jacob

masc. proper name, name of Old Testament patriarch, son of Isaac and Rebecca and father of the
founders of the twelve tribes, from Late Latin Iacobus, from Greek Iakobos, from Hebrew Ya'aqobh,
literally one that takes by the heel (Gen. xxviii:12), a derivative of 'aqebh heel. The most popular
name for boys born in the U.S. from 1999 through 2008. Jacob's ladder, in various transferred uses
from 1733, is from Gen. xxviii:12.


violation (n.)

c.1400, from Old French violacion and directly from Latin violationem (nominative violatio) an
injury, irreverence, profanation, from past participle stem of violare to treat with violence,
outrage, dishonor, perhaps an irregular derivative of vis strength, force, power, energy, from PIE
root *weie- to go after, pursue with vigor or desire, with noun derivatives meaning force, desire
(see venison).


gasp (v.)

late 14c., gaspen, of uncertain origin, perhaps from Old Norse geispa to yawn, or its Danish
derivative gispe gasp, which probably are related to Old Norse gapa (see gape). Related: Gasped;
gasping.


Gregory

masc. proper name, common in England and Scotland by mid-12c. (Pope Gregory I sent the men who
converted the English to Christianity), from Late Latin Gregorius, from Greek gregorios, a
derivative of gregoros to be watchful, from PIE root *ger- to be awake (cognates: Sanskrit jagarti
he is awake, Avestan agarayeiti wakes up, rouses). At times confused with Latin gregarius (see
gregarious).


minaret (n.)

1680s, from French minaret, from Turkish minare a minaret, from Arabic manarah, manarat lamp,
lighthouse, minaret, related to manar candlestick, derivative of nar fire; compare Hebrew ner lamp
(see menorah).


