deride (v.)

1520s, from Middle French derider, from Latin deridere to ridicule, laugh to scorn (see derision).
Related: Derided; deriding.


derisory (adj.)

1610s, from Latin derisorius, from derisor derider, agent noun from deridere (see deride).


razz (v.)

to hiss or deride, 1920, shortened and altered variant of raspberry (q.v.) in its rhyming slang
sense. Related: Razzed; razzing. As a noun, in to give the razz, from 1919.


jeer (v.)

1550s, gyr, to deride, to mock, of uncertain origin; perhaps from Dutch gieren to cry or roar, or
German scheren to plague, vex, literally to shear. OED finds the suggestion that it is an ironical
use of cheer plausible and phonetically feasible, ... but ... beyond existing evidence. Related:
Jeered; jeering.


jape (v.)

late 14c., to trick, beguile, jilt, perhaps from Old French japer to howl, bawl, scream, of echoic
origin, or from Old French gaber to mock, deride. Phonetics suits the former, but sense the latter
explanation. Took on a slang sense mid-15c. of have sex with, and disappeared from polite usage.
Revived in harmless Middle English sense of say or do something in jest by Scott, etc. Related:
Japed; japing.


mock (v.)

early 15c., to deceive; mid-15c. make fun of, from Old French mocquer deride, jeer, of unknown
origin, perhaps from Vulgar Latin *muccare to blow the nose (as a derisive gesture), from Latin
mucus; or possibly from Middle Dutch mocken to mumble or Middle Low German mucken grumble. Or
perhaps simply imitative of such speech. Related: Mocked; mocking; mockingly. Replaced Old English
bysmerian. Sense of imitating, as in mockingbird and mock turtle (1763), is from notion of derisive
imitation.


scorn (n.)

c.1200, a shortening of Old French escarn mockery, derision, contempt, a common Romanic word
(Spanish escarnio, Italian scherno) of Germanic origin, from Proto-Germanic *skarnjan mock, deride
(cognates: Old High German skern mockery, jest, sport, Middle High German scherzen to jump with
joy).    Probably influenced by Old French escorne affront, disgrace, which is a back-formation from
escorner, literally to break off (someone's) horns, from Vulgar Latin *excornare (source of Italian
scornare treat with contempt), from Latin ex- without (see ex-) + cornu horn (see horn (n.)).


