derivation (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French d&eacute;rivation (14c.), from Latin derivationem (nominative
derivatio) a leading off, turning away, noun of action from past participle stem of derivare (see
derive). Grammatical sense is older; general meaning origination, descent is from c.1600.


complected (adj.)

1806, American English, complexioned, a variant derivation from complexion, which, intentionally or
not, shows the Latin root.


Acheron

1580s, fabled river of the Lower World in Greek mythology. The name perhaps means marsh-like
(compare Greek akherousai marshlike water); the derivation from Greek akhos woe is considered folk
etymology.


varvel (n.)

metal ring attached to the end of a hawk's jess and connecting it to the leash, 1530s, from Old
French vervelle falcon's leg fetter (14c.), from Vulgar Latin derivation of Latin vertibulum joint.
Related: Varvels.


planxty (n.)

in Irish music, harp tune of a sportive and animated character [OED], 1790, of unknown origin,
evidently not a native Irish word; some suggest ultimate derivation from Latin plangere to strike,
beat  (see plague (n.)). See also [Katrin Thier, Of Picts and Penguins -- Celtic Languages in the
New Edition of the OED, in The Celtic Languages in Contact, 2007.


abdomen (n.)

1540s, belly fat, from Latin abdomen belly, of unknown origin, perhaps from abdere conceal, with a
sense of concealment of the viscera, or else what is concealed by proper dress. De Vaan, however,
finds this derivation unfounded. Purely anatomical sense is from 1610s. Zoological sense of
posterior division of the bodies of arthropods first recorded 1788.


sanderling (n.)

wading bird (Crocethia alba), c.1600, probably from sand (n.) + a diminutive suffix, but OED
suggests possible derivation from Old English *sand-yr&eth;ling, with second element yr&eth;ling
plowman (literally earthling).


dickens

exclamation, 1590s, apparently a substitute for devil; probably altered from Dickon, nickname for
Richard and source of the surnames Dickens and Dickenson, but exact derivation and meaning are
unknown.


Cambrian (adj.)

1650s, from or of Wales or the Welsh, from Cambria, variant of Cumbria, Latinized derivation of
Cymry, the name of the Welsh for themselves, from Old Celtic Combroges compatriots. Geological sense
(of rocks first studied in Wales and Cumberland) is from 1836.


tinker (n.)

mender of kettles, pots, pans, etc., late 14c. (mid-13c. as a surname), of uncertain origin. Some
connect the word with the sound made by light hammering on metal. Tinker's damn something slight and
worthless is from 1824, probably preserving tinkers' reputation for free and casual use of
profanity; the plain and simple etymology is not good enough for some writers, and since 1877 an
ingeniously elaborate but baseless derivation has been circulated claiming the second word is really
dam.


thrust (v.)

late 12c., from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse &thorn;rysta to thrust, force, press, from
Proto-Germanic *thrustijanan, perhaps from PIE *treud- push, press (see threat), but OED finds this
derivation doubtful. Related: Thrusting.


Cholo

Indian or mixed-race person of Latin America (fem. Chola), 1851, from American Spanish (c.1600),
said to be from Nahuatl (Aztecan) xolotl dog, mutt. Proposed derivation from Mexican city of Cholula
seems too late, if this is the same word. In U.S., used of lower-class Mexican immigrants, but by
1970s the word began to be embraced in Latino gang slang in a positive sense.


barren (adj.)

c.1200, from Old French baraigne, baraing sterile, barren (12c.), perhaps originally brahain, of
obscure derivation, perhaps from a Germanic language. In England, originally used of women, of land
in France. Of land in English from late 14c. As a noun, mid-13c., a barren woman; later of land.
BARRENS. Elevated lands, or plains upon which grow small trees, but never timber. [Bartlett,
Dictionary of Americanisms, 1848]


hiker (n.)

1913, agent noun from hike (v.). Earlier as a type of boat:    The hiker or tuck-up as it is more
generally termed, is a craft peculiar to the Delaware River, and is to the youth residing along the
banks of that stream what the racing shell is to the Torontonian .... The origin of the name hiker
is veiled in mystery. No member of the clubs engaged in sailing these boats can give anything like a
satisfactory derivation of the word. The most common explanation is that it is corrupted from the
local verb to hike, which means to run or fly swiftly. [Harper's Young People, 1885]


cranny (n.)

mid-15c., possibly from a diminutive of Middle French cran notch, fissure (14c.), from crener to
notch, split, from Medieval Latin crenare, possibly from Latin cernere to separate, sift (see
crisis). But OED casts doubt on this derivation.


civic (adj.)

1540s, originally mostly in civic crown (Latin corona civica), a chaplet of oak leaves awarded to
one who saved the life of a fellow citizen in battle, from Latin civicus of a citizen, adjectival
derivation of civis townsman (see city). Sense of having to do with citizens is from 1790.


Africa

Latin Africa (terra) African land, Libya, the Carthaginian territory, fem. of Africus, from Afer an
African. Originally only in reference to the region around modern Tunisia, it gradually was extended
to the whole continent. Derivation from Arabic afar dust, earth is tempting, but the early date
seems to argue against it. The Middle English word was Affrike.


pillory (n.)

late 13c. (attested in Anglo-Latin from late 12c.), from Old French pilori pillory (mid-12c.),
related to Medieval Latin pilloria, of uncertain origin, perhaps a diminutive of Latin pila pillar,
stone barrier (see pillar), but OED finds this proposed derivation phonologically unsuitable.


panther (n.)

early 13c., from Old French pantere panther (12c.), from Latin panthera, from Greek panther panther,
leopard, probably of Oriental origin. Folk etymology derivation from Greek pan- all + ther beast led
to many curious fables.


fog (n.2)

long grass, c.1300, probably of Scandinavian origin; compare Norwegian fogg long grass in a moist
hollow, Icelandic fuki rotten sea grass. The connection to fog (n.1), via a notion of long grass
growing in moist dells of northern Europe, is tempting but not proven. Watkins suggests derivation
from PIE *pu- to rot, decay.


patch (n.2)

fool, clown, 1540s, perhaps from Italian pazzo fool, of unknown origin. Possibly from Old High
German barzjan to rave [Klein].  But Buck says pazzo is originally euphemistic, and from Latin
patiens suffering, in medical use, the patient. Form perhaps influenced by folk etymology derivation
from patch (n.1), on notion of a fool's patched garb.


veer (v.)

1580s, to change direction (originally of the wind; 1610s of a ship), from Middle French virer to
turn (12c.), of uncertain origin, perhaps (Diez) from the Latin stem vir- in viriae (plural)
bracelets. Gamillscheg finds von Wartburg's derivation of it from a Vulgar Latin contraction of
Latin vibrare to shake to be nicht m&#246;glich. Related: veered, veering.


pucelle (n.)

maid, mid-15c., especially in reference to Joan of Arc (called in Old French la pucelle from
c.1423), according to French sources from Vulgar Latin *pulicella maid (source also of Italian
pulcella), diminutive of Latin pulla, fem. of pullus young animal, especially a chicken (see foal
(n.)), but there are difficulties with this derivation. Also, in 16c. English, a drab, a slut.


sham (n.)

1670s, a trick, a hoax, a fraud, also as a verb and an adjective, of uncertain origin; the words
burst into use in 1677. Perhaps from sham, a northern dialectal variant of shame (n.); a derivation
OED finds not impossible. Sense of something meant to be mistaken for something else is from 1728.
The meaning false front in pillow-sham (1721) is from the notion of counterfeit. Related: Shammed;
shamming; shammer. Shamateur amateur sportsman who acts like a professional is from 1896.


cadastral (adj.)

1858, from French cadastral, from cadastre register of the survey of lands (16c.), from Old Italian
catastico, from Late Greek katastikhos register, literally by the line (see cata-, stair).
Gamillscheg dismisses derivation from Late Latin capitastrum register of the poll tax.


fustian (n.)

thick cotton cloth, c.1200, from Old French fustaigne, from Medieval Latin fustaneum, probably from
Latin fustis staff, stick of wood, probably a loan-translation of Greek xylina lina linens of wood
(i.e. cotton), but the Medieval Latin word also is sometimes said to be from Fostat, town near Cairo
where this cloth was manufactured. [Klein finds this derivation untenable.] Figurative sense of
pompous, inflated language recorded by 1590s.


lease (n.)

late 14c., legal contract conveying property, usually for a fixed period of time and with a fixed
compensation, from Anglo-French les (late 13c.), from lesser to let, let go, from Old French
laissier to let, allow, permit; bequeath, leave, from Latin laxare loosen, open, make wide, from
laxus loose (see lax). Modern French equivalent legs is altered by erroneous derivation from Latin
legatum bequest, legacy.


talus (n.2)

slope, 1640s, from French talus (16c.), from Old French talu slope, mound, small hill (12c.),
probably from Gallo-Roman *talutum, from Latin talutium a slope or outcrop of rock debris, perhaps
of Celtic origin (compare Welsh, Breton tal forehead, brow).    OED, however, suggests derivation
from root of talus (n.1) in the sense of heel which developed in its Romanic descendants. Mainly
used of military earthwork at first; meaning sloping mass of rocky fragments that has fallen from a
cliff is first recorded 1830.


marmoset (n.)

small monkey, late 14c., from Old French marmoset grotesque figurine; fool, jester (late 13c.),
perhaps a variant of marmote long-tailed monkey, ape, then, as a term of endearment, little child;
said to be from marmonner, marmotter to mutter, mumble, probably of imitative origin. Some French
authorities suggest a derivation of marmoset from marmor marble, as if little marble figurine.


Eskimo (n.)

1580s, from Danish Eskimo or Middle French Esquimaux (plural), both probably from an Algonquian
word, such as Abenaki askimo (plural askimoak), Ojibwa ashkimeq, traditionally said to mean
literally eaters of raw meat, from Proto-Algonquian *ask- raw + *-imo eat. Research from 1980s in
linguistics of the region suggests this derivation, though widely credited there, might be
inaccurate or incomplete, and the word might mean snowshoe-netter. See also Innuit. Eskimo pie
chocolate-coated ice cream bar introduced 1921.


snipe (n.)

long-billed marsh bird, early 14c., from Old Norse -snipa in myrisnipa moor snipe; perhaps a common
Germanic term (compare Old Saxon sneppa, Middle Dutch snippe, Dutch snip, Old High German snepfa,
German Schnepfe snipe, Swedish sn&#228;ppa sandpiper), perhaps originally snipper. The Old English
name was snite, which is of uncertain derivation. An opprobrious term (see guttersnipe) since
c.1600.


Sabian (n.)

an adherent of a religious sect mentioned thrice in the Qu'ran (in which they are classified with
Christians, and Jews as true believers worth of toleration by Muslims), 1610s, from Arabic, of
uncertain origin. As an adjective from 1748.    Perhaps the reference is to a Gnostic sect akin to
the later Mand&aelig;ans (if the word derives, as some think it does, from Arabic ch'bae to baptize,
Aramaic tzebha he dipped, dyed); but it has the appearance of derivation from the Semitic root of
Hebrew tzabha host (see Sabaoth), and as the Sabians were thought in the Middle Ages to have been
star-worshippers, it was interpreted as referring to the host of heaven. Related: Sabaism.


sheldrake (n.)

early 14c., from sheld- variegated + drake male duck. First element cognate with Middle Dutch
schillede separated, variegated, West Flemish schilde, from schillen (Dutch verschillen to make
different), from Proto-Germanic *skeli-, from PIE root *(s)kel- (1) to cut (see scale (n.1)). This
is the origin considered most likely, though English sheld by itself is a dialect word attested only
from c.1500. OED finds derivation from  shield (n.), on resemblance to the patterns on shields,
improbable.


scion (n.)

c.1300, a shoot or twig, especially one for grafting, from Old French sion, cion descendant; shoot,
twig; offspring (12c., Modern French scion, Picard chion), of uncertain origin. OED rejects
derivation from Old French scier to saw. Perhaps a diminutive from Frankish *kid-, from Proto-
Germanic *kidon-, from PIE *geie- to sprout, split, open (see chink (n.1)). Figurative use is
attested from 1580s in English; meaning an heir, a descendant is from 1814, from the family tree
image.


sophomore (n.)

1680s, student in the second year of university study, literally arguer, altered from sophumer
(1650s, from sophume, archaic variant form of sophism), probably by influence of folk etymology
derivation from Greek sophos wise + moros foolish, dull. The original reference might be to the
dialectic exercises that formed a large part of education in the middle years. At Oxford and
Cambridge, a sophister (from sophist with spurious -er as in philosopher) was a second- or third-
year student (what Americans would call a junior might be a senior sophister).


consider (v.)

late 14c., from Old French considerer (13c.) reflect on, consider, study, from Latin considerare to
look at closely, observe, perhaps literally to observe the stars, from com- with (see com-) + sidus
(genitive sideris) constellation (see sidereal).    Perhaps a metaphor from navigation, but more
likely reflecting Roman obsession with divination by astrology. Tucker doubts the connection with
sidus, however, because it is quite inapplicable to desiderare, and suggests derivation instead from
the PIE root of English side meaning stretch, extend, and a sense for the full word of survey on all
sides or dwell long upon. Related: Considered; considering.


fromage (n.)

French for cheese, from French fromage, formage (13c.), from Medieval Latin formaticum (source also
of Italian formaggio), a derivation from Latin forma shape, form, mold (cf Medieval Latin casei
forma; see form (v.)).


fallow (n.)

c.1300, from Old English fealh fallow land, from Proto-Germanic *falgo (cognates: Old High German
felga harrow, German Felge plowed-up fallow land, East Frisian falge fallow, falgen to break up
ground), perhaps from a derivation of PIE root *pel- (3) to turn, fold. Assimilated in English to
fallow (adj.) because of the color of plowed earth. Originally plowed land, then land plowed but not
planted (1520s). As an adjective, from late 14c.


skull (n.)

bony framework of the head, c.1200, probably from Old Norse skalli a bald head, skull, a general
Scandinavian word (compare Swedish skulle, Norwegian skult), probably related to Old English scealu
husk (see shell (n.)). But early prominence in southwestern texts suggests rather origin from a
Dutch or Low German cognate (such as Dutch schol turf, piece of ice, but the sense of head bone
framework is wanting). Derivation from Old French escuelle seems unlikely on grounds of sound and
sense. Old English words for skull include heafod-bolla.


Moses

masc. proper name, name of Hebrew prophet and lawgiver, from Latin, from Greek Mouses, from Hebrew
Mosheh, of unknown origin.Most scholars see in it the Hebraization of Egyptian mes, mesu 'child,
son,' which is often used in theophorous names. According to this derivation the words of Pharaoh's
daughter in Ex. 2:10, 'For out of the water I drew him' are not the explanation of the Hebrew name
Mosheh, but express the idea that the Egyptian name given by Pharaoh's daughter resembles in sound,
and therefore, reminds us of, the Hebrew verb mashah 'he drew out,' which is suggestive of the words
spoken by Pharaoh's daughter. [Dr. Ernest Klein, A Comprehensive Etymological Dictionary of the
English Language]  As an expletive or oath, 1840.


mutt (n.)

1901, stupid or foolish person, probably a shortening of muttonhead (1803) in the same sense; see
mutton and compare meathead, etc. Mutt was used by 1898 of a dog, especially a stupid one, and
perhaps this is the same word formed independently (muttonhead also was used of stupid animals), or
else a separate word of unknown derivation. Wright's English Dialect Dictionary (1900) has Mutton!
used in scolding a dog, prob. in allusion to the offence of sheep-worrying.    That dog ain't no
mutt, McManus would say as he stood behind the bar opening oysters; no an he ain't no rube! Say!
he's in it all the time when Charley trims the steaks. [Robert W. Chambers, The Haunts of Men, 1898]
Used by 1910 in dog fancier publications to refer to a non-purebred animal.


Beltane (n.)

early 15c., from Lowland Scottish, from Gaelic bealltainn May 1, important Celtic religious rite
marking the start of summer, probably literally blazing fire, from PIE root *bhel- (1) to shine,
flash, burn (see bleach (v.)) + Old Irish ten fire, from PIE *tepnos, related to Latin tepidus warm.
But this derivation of the second element is hotly disputed by some on philological grounds, and
fires were equally important in the other Celtic holidays.    The rubbish about Baal, Bel, Belus
imported into the word from the Old Testament and classical antiquity, is outside the scope of
scientific etymology. [OED]    Also known as Old May Day, because after the 1752 calendar reform it
continued to be reckoned according to Old Style; it was one of the quarter-days of ancient Scotland.


hoodlum (n.)

popularized 1871, American English, (identified throughout the 1870s as a California word) young
street rowdy, loafer, especially one involved in violence against Chinese immigrants, young
criminal, gangster; it appears to have been in use locally from a slightly earlier date and may have
begun as a specific name of a gang:    The police have recently been investigating the proceedings
of a gang of thieving boys who denominate themselves and are known to the world as the Hoodlum Gang.
[San Francisco Golden Era newspaper, Feb. 16, 1868, p.4]    Of unknown origin, though newspapers of
the day printed myriad fanciful stories concocted to account for it. A guess perhaps better than
average is that it is from German dialectal (Bavarian) Huddellump ragamuffin [Barnhart].    What the
derivation of the word hoodlum is we could never satisfactorily ascertain, though several
derivations have been proposed; and it would appear that the word has not been very many years in
use. But, however obscure the word may be, there is nothing mysterious about the thing; .... [Walter
M. Fisher, The Californians, London, 1876]


adjust (v.)

late 14c., ajusten, to correct, remedy; reborrowed by c.1600 in sense arrange, settle, compose, from
Middle French adjuster, Old French ajouter to join (12c.), from Late Latin adiuxtare to bring near,
from Latin ad- to (see ad-) + iuxta next, related to iungere to join (see jugular).    Influenced by
folk etymology derivation from Latin iustus just, equitable, fair. Meaning to arrange (something) so
as to conform with (a standard or another thing) is from 1660s. Insurance sense is from 1755.
Meaning to get used to first recorded 1924. Related: Adjusted; adjusting.


Rome

capital of Italy; seat of an ancient republic and empire; city of the Papacy, Old English, from Old
French Rome, from Latin Roma, a word of uncertain origin. The original Roma quadrata was the
fortified enclosure on the Palatine hill, according to Tucker, who finds no probability in
derivation from *sreu- flow, and suggests the name is most probably from *urobsma (urbs, robur) and
otherwise, but less likely from *urosma hill (compare Sanskrit varsman- height, point, Lithuanian
virsus upper). Another suggestion [Klein] is that it is from Etruscan (compare Rumon, former name of
Tiber River).    Common in proverbs, such as Rome was not buylt in one daye (1540s); for when a man
doth to Rome come, he must do as there is done (1590s); All roads alike conduct to Rome (1806).


traffic (n.)

c.1500, trade, commerce, from Middle French trafique (15c.), from Italian traffico (14c.), from
trafficare carry on trade, of uncertain origin, perhaps from a Vulgar Latin *transfricare to rub
across, from Latin trans- across (see trans-) + fricare to rub (see friction), with the original
sense of the Italian verb being touch repeatedly, handle.    Or the second element may be an
unexplained alteration of Latin facere to make, do. Klein suggests ultimate derivation of the
Italian word from Arabic tafriq distribution. Meaning people and vehicles coming and going first
recorded 1825. Traffic jam is 1917, ousting earlier traffic block (1895). Traffic circle is from
1938.


haggard (adj.)

1560s, wild, unruly (originally in reference to hawks), from Middle French haggard, probably from
Old French faulcon hagard wild falcon, literally falcon of the woods, from Middle High German hag
hedge, copse, wood, from Proto-Germanic *hagon-, from PIE root *kagh- to catch, seize; also
wickerwork, fence (see hedge). OED, however, finds this whole derivation very doubtful. Sense
perhaps reinforced by Low German hager gaunt, haggard. Sense of with a haunted expression first
recorded 1690s, that of careworn first recorded 1853. Sense influenced by association with hag.
Related: Haggardly; haggardness.


fetch (v.)

Old English feccan, apparently a variant of fetian, fatian to fetch, bring near, bring back, obtain;
induce; to marry, probably from Proto-Germanic *fetan (cognates: Old Frisian fatia to grasp, seize,
contain, Old Norse feta to find one's way, Middle Dutch vatten, Old High German sih faggon to mount,
climb, German fassen to grasp, contain), from PIE verbal root *ped- to walk, from root *ped- (1)
foot (see foot (n.)). Variant form fet, a derivation of the older Old English version of the word,
survived as a competitor until 17c. Related: Fetched; fetching.


cockney (n.)

c.1600, usually said to be from rare Middle English cokenei, cokeney spoiled child, milksop (late
14c.), originally cokene-ey cock's egg (mid-14c.). Most likely disentangling of the etymology is to
start from Old English cocena cock's egg -- genitive plural of coc cock + &aelig;g egg -- medieval
term for runt of a clutch, extended derisively c.1520s to town dweller, gradually narrowing
thereafter to residents of a particular neighborhood in the East End of London. Liberman, however,
disagrees:    [I]n all likelihood, not the etymon of ME cokeney 'milksop, simpleton; effeminate man;
Londoner,' which is rather a reshaping of [Old French] acoquin&eacute; 'spoiled' (participle).
However, this derivation poses some phonetic problems that have not been resolved.    The accent so
called from 1890, but the speech peculiarities were noted from 17c. As an adjective in this sense,
from 1630s.


posh (adj.)

by 1914 (1903 as push), of uncertain origin; no evidence for the common derivation from an acronym
of port outward, starboard home, supposedly the shipboard accommodations of wealthy British
traveling to India on the P &amp; O Lines (to keep their cabins out of the sun); as per OED, see
objections outlined in G. Chowdharay-Best, Mariner's Mirror, Jan. 1971; also <b>see here</b>. More
likely from slang posh a dandy (1890), from thieves' slang meaning money (1830), originally coin of
small value, halfpenny, possibly from Romany posh half [Barnhart].    The cavalryman, far more than
the infantryman, makes a point of wearing posh clothing on every possible occasion -- posh being a
term used to designate superior clothing, or articles of attire other than those issued by and
strictly conforming to the regulations. [E. Charles Vivian, The British Army From Within, London,
1914]


