derision (n.)

c.1400, from Old French derision derision, mockery (13c.), from Latin derisionem (nominative
derisio), noun of action from past participle stem of deridere ridicule, from de- down (see de-) +
ridere to laugh.


derisive (adj.)

1620s, characterized by derision, from Latin deris-, past participle stem of deridere (see derision)
+ -ive. Meaning ridiculous is from 1896. Related: Derisively.


schm-

substituted for the initial sound of a word and reduplicated with it to convey derision (as in
Oedipus schmoedipus in the punchline of the old joke about the Jewish mother and the psychiatrist),
1929, from the numerous Yiddish words that begin with this sound.


deride (v.)

1520s, from Middle French derider, from Latin deridere to ridicule, laugh to scorn (see derision).
Related: Derided; deriding.


pietism (n.)

also Pietism, 1690s, from German Pietismus, originally applied in derision to the movement to revive
personal piety in the Lutheran Church, begun in Frankfurt c.1670 by Philipp Jakob Spener
(1635-1705). See piety + -ism.


thumb (v.)

to go through (especially of printed material), 1930, from thumb (n.), though the related sense of
soil or wear by handling dates from 1640s. Earlier as a verb it meant to play (a musical instrument)
with the thumb (1590s). Meaning to hitchhike is 1939; originally the thumb pointed in the direction
one wished to travel. Related: Thumbed; thumbing. To thumb (one's) nose as an expression of derision
is recorded from 1903.


loaf (v.)

1835, American English, back-formation from loafer (1830). Related: Loafed; loafing.    The term
loafing is, of course, very vague. Its meaning, like that of its opposite, work, depends largely on
the user. The highly successful quarterback with an E in Greek is a loafer in his professor's eyes,
while the idea of the professor's working, in spite of his voluminous researches on Mycenean Table
Manners, would excite hoots of derision from the laborer that lays the drains before his study
window. [Yale Literary Magazine, May 1908]


hey

c.1200, variously, in Middle English, hei, hai, ai, he, heh, expressing challenge, rebuttal, anger,
derision, sorrow, or concern; also a shout of encouragement to hunting dogs. Possibly a natural
expression (compare Roman eho, Greek eia, German hei).    &THORN;a onswerede &thorn;e an swi&eth;e
prudeliche, `Hei! hwuch wis read of se icudd keiser!' [St. Katherine of Alexandria, c.1200]    In
Latin, hei was a cry of grief or fear; but heia, eia was an interjection denoting joy.


scoff (v.)

mid-14c., jest, make light of something; mid-15c., make fun of, mock, from the noun meaning
contemptuous ridicule (c.1300), from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse skaup, skop mockery,
ridicule, Middle Danish skof jest, mockery; perhaps from Proto-Germanic *skub-, *skuf- (cognates:
Old English scop poet, Old High German scoph fiction, sport, jest, derision), from PIE *skeubh- to
shove (see shove (v.)).


bluestocking (n.)

also blue-stocking, 1790, derisive word for a woman considered too learned, traces to a London
literary salon founded c.1750 by Elizabeth Montagu on the Parisian model, featuring intellectual
discussion instead of card games, and in place of ostentatious evening attire, simple dress,
including Benjamin Stillingfleet's blue-gray tradesman's hose which he wore in place of gentleman's
black silk, hence the term, first applied in derision to the whole set by Admiral Boscawen. None of
the ladies wore blue stockings. Borrowed by the neighbors in loan-translations, such as French bas-
bleu, Dutch blauwkous, German Blaustrumpf.


starvation (n.)

1778, hybrid noun of action from starve. Famously (but not certainly) introduced in English by Henry
Dundas during debate in the House of Commons in 1775 on American affairs. It earned him the nickname
Starvation Dundas, though sources disagree on whether this was given in objection to the harshness
of his suggestion of starving the rebels into submission or in derision at the barbarous formation
of the word. It is one of the earliest instances of -ation used with a native Germanic word
(flirtation is earlier).    As to Lord Chatham, the victories, conquests, extension of our empire
within these last five years, will annihilate his fame of course, and he may be replaced by
Starvation Dundas, whose pious policy suggested that the devil of rebellion could be expelled only
by fasting, though that never drove him out of Scotland. [Horace Walpole, letter to the Rev. William
Mason, April 25, 1781]


jingo (n.)

mindless, gung-ho patriot, 1878, picked up from the refrain of a music hall song written by G.W.
Hunt, and sung by Gilbert H. MacDermott (1845-1901), supporting aggressive British policy toward
Russia at a time of international tension. (We don't want to fight, But by Jingo! if we do, We've
got the ships, we've got the men, We've got the money too.)    Hunt's patriotic song of 1878, with a
swinging tune ... became at Macdermott's instigation the watchword of the popular supporters of
England's bellicose policy. The Daily News on 11 March 1878 first dubbed the latter 'Jingoes' in
derision .... [Dictionary of National Biography, London, 1912]    As an asseveration, it was in
colloquial use since 1690s, and is apparently yet another euphemism for Jesus, influenced by
conjurer's gibberish presto-jingo (1660s). The frequent suggestion that it somehow derives from
Basque Jinko god is not impossible, but as yet unsupported by evidence [OED].


scorn (n.)

c.1200, a shortening of Old French escarn mockery, derision, contempt, a common Romanic word
(Spanish escarnio, Italian scherno) of Germanic origin, from Proto-Germanic *skarnjan mock, deride
(cognates: Old High German skern mockery, jest, sport, Middle High German scherzen to jump with
joy).    Probably influenced by Old French escorne affront, disgrace, which is a back-formation from
escorner, literally to break off (someone's) horns, from Vulgar Latin *excornare (source of Italian
scornare treat with contempt), from Latin ex- without (see ex-) + cornu horn (see horn (n.)).


tacky (adj.2)

in poor taste, 1888, from earlier sense of shabby, seedy (1862), adjectival use of tackey (n.) ill-
fed or neglected horse (1800), later extended to persons in like condition, hillbilly, cracker
(1888), of uncertain origin. Related: Tackiness.    The word tacky is a Southern colloquialism. It
was coined by a wealthier or more refined and educated class for general application to those who
were not sheltered by the branches of a family tree, who were tainted. Those who were wealthy and
yet had no great-grandfathers were tackies. The word was used both in contempt and in derision. It
is now nearly obsolete in both senses. There are no aristocrats in the South now, and therefore no
tackies. No man who has the instincts of a gentleman is spoken of as a tacky, whether he can
remember the name of his grandfather's uncle or not. But it has its uses. It is employed in
describing persons of low ideas and vulgar manners, whether rich or poor. It may mean an absence of
style. In dress, anything that is tawdry is tacky. A ribbon on the shopkeeper's counter, a curtain
in the bolt, a shawl or bonnet, a bolt of cloth fresh from the loom may be tacky, because it is
cheap and yet pretentious. In Louisiana the inferior grade of Creole ponies are known as tackies.
[Horace Ingraham, Charleston, S.C., in American Notes and Queries, Feb. 15, 1890]


patriot (n.)

1590s, compatriot, from Middle French patriote (15c.) and directly from Late Latin patriota fellow-
countryman (6c.), from Greek patriotes fellow countryman, from patrios of one's fathers, patris
fatherland, from pater (genitive patros) father (see father (n.)); with -otes, suffix expressing
state or condition. Liddell &amp; Scott write that patriotes was applied to barbarians who had only
a common [patris], [politai] being used of Greeks who had a common [polis] (or free-state).
Meaning loyal and disinterested supporter of one's country is attested from c.1600, but became an
ironic term of ridicule or abuse from mid-18c. in England, so that Johnson, who at first defined it
as one whose ruling passion is the love of his country, in his fourth edition added, It is sometimes
used for a factious disturber of the government.The name of patriot had become [c.1744] a by-word of
derision. Horace Walpole scarcely exaggerated when he said that ... the most popular declaration
which a candidate could make on the hustings was that he had never been and never would be a
patriot. [Macaulay, Horace Walpole, 1833]Somewhat revived in reference to resistance movements in
overrun countries in World War II, it has usually had a positive sense in American English, where
the phony and rascally variety has been consigned to the word patrioteer (1928). Oriana Fallaci [The
Rage and the Pride, 2002] marvels that Americans, so fond of patriotic, patriot, and patriotism,
lack the root noun and are content to express the idea of patria by cumbersome compounds such as
homeland. (Joyce, Shaw, and H.G. Wells all used patria as an English word early 20c., but it failed
to stick.) Patriots' Day (April 19, anniversary of the 1775 skirmishes at Lexington and Concord
Bridge) was observed as a legal holiday in Maine and Massachusetts from 1894.


