derogatory (adj.)

c.1500, from Late Latin derogatorius, from Latin derogatus, past participle of derogare to take
away, detract from, diminish, also repeal partly, restrict, modify, from de- away (see de-) + rogare
ask, question, propose (see rogation).


dink (n.)

derogatory for Vietnamese, 1969, U.S. military slang, of uncertain origin.


Hebe (2)

derogatory word for a Jew, 1932, shortened from Hebrew


mick (n.)

derogatory slang for Irishman, 1856, from nickname of common Irish name Michael (q.v.).


arrant (adj.)

late 14c., variant of errant (q.v.); at first merely derogatory, wandering, vagrant; then (1540s)
acquiring a meaning thoroughgoing, downright, notorious.


pinko (n.)

1936, derogatory slang form of pink (n.), used of people whose social or political views have a
tendency toward 'red;'  a metaphor that had existed since at least 1837. As an adjective by 1957.


Yid (n.)

generally derogatory term for a Jew, 1874 (Hotten, apparently originally British English), from
Yiddish use, where it was complimentary (see Yiddish).


slope (n.)

1610s, inclination, from slope (v.). Meaning an incline, a slant (of ground) is from 1620s.
Derogatory slang meaning Oriental person is attested from 1948.


panties (n.)

1845, drawers for men (derogatory), diminutive of pants; meaning underpants for women or children
first recorded 1908. Panty raid first attested 1952.


Canuck (n.)

1835, perhaps a cross between Canada and Chinook, the native people in the Columbia River region. In
U.S., often but not always derogatory. As an adjective from 1853.


nappy (adj.)

downy, late 15c., from nap (n.1) + -y (2). Meaning fuzzy, kinky, used in colloquial or derogatory
reference to the hair of black people, is from 1950.


Rastus

also 'Rastus, masc. proper name, short for Erastus. As a stereotypical name of an American slave or
derogatory for black man, 1881, probably from use in stories of Joel Chandler Harris.


planner (n.)

1716, one who plans, agent noun from plan (v.). Derogatory variant planster attested from 1945.
Meaning book or device that enables one to plan is from 1971.


Bohunk (n.)

1903, U.S. derogatory slang for lower class immigrant from Central or Eastern Europe, probably from
Bohemian + a distortion of Hungarian.


Oreo (n.)

derogatory word for black person felt to have a 'white' mentality, 1968, black American English,
from the snack cookies, which consist of dark chocolate wafers and white sugar cream filling (hence
brown outside, white inside). The cookies (made by Nabisco) date from 1912; the source of the name
has been forgotten.


greaser (n.)

early 14c. (as a surname), one who smears salve on a sheep, agent noun from grease (v.). As
derogatory American English slang for native Mexican or Latin American, first attested 1849, so
called from appearance. Greaseball in same sense from 1934.


derogate (v.)

early 15c., impair (authority); disparage (reputation), from Latin derogatus, past participle of
derogare diminish (see derogatory).


slant (n.)

1650s, an oblique direction or plane (originally of landforms), from slant (v.). Meaning a way of
regarding something is from 1905. Derogatory slang sense of a slant-eyed Asian person is recorded
from 1943, from earlier slant-eyes (1929).


noob (n.)

c.2000 in gamer slang, variant of newbie; often used interchangeably with it, but also often with a
more derogatory shade of meaning; newbies owe their clueless behavior to lack of experience and can
improve, while the fundamental characteristic of noobs is incorrigible obnoxiousness or stupidity.


bigot (n.)

1590s, sanctimonious person, religious hypocrite, from French bigot (12c.), of unknown origin.
Earliest French use of the word is as the name of a people apparently in southern Gaul, which led to
the now-doubtful, on phonetic grounds, theory that the word comes from Visigothus. The typical use
in Old French seems to have been as a derogatory nickname for Normans, the old theory (not
universally accepted) being that it springs from their frequent use of the Germanic oath bi God. But
OED dismisses in a three-exclamation-mark fury one fanciful version of the by god theory as absurdly
incongruous with facts. At the end, not much is left standing except Spanish bigote mustache, which
also has been proposed but not explained, and the chief virtue of which as a source seems to be
there is no evidence for or against it.    In support of the by God theory, as a surname Bigott,
Bygott are attested in Normandy and in England from the 11c., and French name etymology sources
(such as Dauzat) explain it as a derogatory name applied by the French to the Normans and
representing by god. The English were known as goddamns 200 years later in Joan of Arc's France, and
during World War I Americans serving in France were said to be known as les sommobiches (see also
son of a bitch). But the sense development in bigot is difficult to explain. According to Donkin,
the modern use first appears in French 16c. This and the earliest English sense, religious
hypocrite, especially a female one, might have been influenced by beguine and the words that cluster
around it. Sense extended 1680s to other than religious opinions.


chink (n.2)

a Chinaman, 1901, derogatory, perhaps derived somehow from China, or else from chink (n.1) with
reference to eye shape.


gawky (adj.)

awkward, ungainly, 1724, from gawk hand left hand (1703), perhaps a contraction of gaulick, thus
gaulish hand, derogatory slang that could have originated during some period of strained Anglo-
French relations, i.e. most of recorded history.


spic (n.)

derogatory for Latino person, 1913, from cliche protestation, No spick English. Earlier spiggoty
(1910 speak-a the ...); the term is said to have originated in Panama during the canal construction.
But it also was applied from an early date to Italians, and some have suggested an alteration of
spaghetti.


derogative (adj.)

late 15c., from Middle French derogatif, from Latin *derogativus, from past participle stem of
derogare (see derogatory).


chinky (adj.)

full of chinks, 1640s, from chink (n.1) + -y (2). As a noun by 1879, variant of chink (n.2),
derogatory term for Chinese person; chiefly British.


bumpkin (n.)

awkward country fellow, 1560s, probably from Middle Dutch bommekijn little barrel, diminutive of
boom tree (see beam (n.)). Apparently, though itself Dutch, it began as a derogatory reference to
Dutch people as short and dumpy.


politico (n.)

politician, political agent, usually in a derogatory sense, 1620s, from Italian or Spanish politico,
noun use of adjective meaning political, from Latin politicus (see politic (adj.)).


squaw (n.)

American Indian woman, 1630s, from Massachuset (Algonquian) squa woman (cognate with Narraganset
squaws woman). Over the years it has come to have a derogatory sense and is now considered offensive
by many Native Americans [Bright]. Widespread in U.S. place names, sometimes as a translation of a
local native word for woman.


derogation (n.)

mid-15c., from Old French d&eacute;rogacion (14c.), from Latin derogationem (nominative derogatio),
noun of action from past participle stem of derogare (see derogatory).


spaz (n.)

also spazz, by 1965, U.S. teen slang put-down, apparently a derogatory shortening of spastic (n.).
Also used as a verb. Related: Spazzed; spazzing (often with out (adv.)).


hymie (n.)

Jewish male (derogatory), by early 1980s, apparently originally among black Americans, from common
Jewish masc. proper name Hymie, a pet form of Hyman, from Hebrew, literally life (the masc.
counterpart of Eve).


notorious (adj.)

1540s, publicly known, from Medieval Latin notorius well-known, commonly known, from Latin notus
known, past participle of noscere come to know (see know). Negative connotation arose 17c. from
frequent association with derogatory nouns. Related: Notoriously.


prestige (n.)

1650s, trick, from French prestige (16c.) deceit, imposture, illusion (in Modern French, illusion,
magic, glamour), from Latin praestigium delusion, illusion (see prestigious). Derogatory until 19c.;
sense of dazzling influence first applied 1815, to Napoleon.


puff (n.)

c.1200, perhaps Old English, puf, puffe short, quick blast; act of puffing, from puff (v.). Meaning
type of light pastry is recorded from late 14c.; that of small pad for applying powder to skin or
hair is from 1650s. Figurative sense of flattery, inflated praise is first recorded 1732. Derogatory
use for homosexual male is recorded by 1902.


honky (n.)

also honkey, derogatory slang word for white person, by 1967, black slang, of unknown origin,
perhaps from late 19c. hunky East-Central European immigrant, a colloquial shortening of Hungarian.
Honky in the sense of factory hand is attested from 1946.


arch (adj.)

1540s, chief, principal, from prefix arch-; used in 12c. archangel, etc., but extended to so many
derogatory uses (arch-rogue, arch-knave, etc.) that by mid-17c. it acquired a meaning of roguish,
mischievous, since softened to saucy. Also found in archwife (late 14c.), variously defined as a
wife of a superior order or a dominating woman, virago.


newbie (n.)

newcomer, new person to an existing situation, by 1969, from new with diminutive or derogatory
suffix. Perhaps originally U.S. military slang. Compare noob. Middle English had newing a new thing
(early 15c.); new was used as a noun meaning naval cadet during first training on a ship (1909); and
newie new thing is recorded from 1947.


buzzard (n.)

c.1300, from Old French buisart buzzard, harrier, inferior hawk, from buson, buison, from Latin
buteonem (nominative buteo) a kind of hawk, perhaps with -art suffix for one that carries on some
action or possesses some quality, with derogatory connotation (see -ard).


shine (n.)

1520s, brightness, from shine (v.). Meaning polish given to a pair of boots is from 1871. Derogatory
meaning black person is from 1908 (perhaps from glossiness of skin or, on another guess, from
frequent employment as shoeshines). Phrase to take a shine to fancy is American English slang from
1839, perhaps from shine up to attempt to please as a suitor. Shiner is from late 14c. as something
that shines; sense of black eye first recorded 1904.


wop (n.)

derogatory for Italian, 1912, American English slang, apparently from southern Italian dialect
guappo dandy, dude, stud, a greeting among male Neapolitans, said to be from Spanish guapo bold,
dandy, which is from Latin vappa sour wine, also worthless fellow; related to vapidus (see vapid).
It is probably <b>not an acronym</b>, and the usual story that it is one seems to date only to
c.1985.


innuendo (n.)

1670s, oblique hint, indiscreet suggestion, usually a deprecatory one, from Latin innuendo by
meaning, pointing to, literally giving a nod to, ablative of gerund of innuere to mean, signify,
literally to nod to, from in- at + nuere to nod (see numinous). Originally a legal phrase (1560s)
from Medieval Latin, with the sense of to wit. It often introduced the derogatory meaning alleged in
libel cases, which influenced its broader meaning. As a verb, from 1706.


hussy (n.)

1520s, mistress of a household, housewife, alteration of Middle English husewif (see housewife).
Gradually broadened to mean any woman or girl, and by 1650 was being applied to a woman or girl who
shows casual or improper behavior, and a general derogatory sense had overtaken the word by late
18c. It is common to use housewife in a good, and huswife or hussy in a bad sense [Johnson].


schmaltz (n.)

banal or excessive sentimentalism, 1935, from Yiddish shmalts, literally melted fat, from Middle
High German smalz, from Old High German smalz animal fat, related to smelzan to melt (see smelt
(v.)). Modern German Schmalz fat, grease has the same figurative meaning. First mentioned in English
as a derogatory term used to describe straight jazz [Vanity Fair, Nov. 1935].


scalawag (n.)

also scallawag, disreputable fellow, 1848, American English, originally in trade union jargon, of
uncertain origin; perhaps an alteration (by influence of wag habitual joker) of Scottish scallag
farm servant, rustic, itself an alteration of Scalloway, one of the Shetland Islands, wit the
reference being to little Shetland ponies (An early recorded sense of scalawag was undersized or
worthless animal, 1854). In U.S. history, used from 1862 as a derogatory term for anti-Confederate
native white Southerners.


prestigious (adj.)

1540s, practicing illusion or magic, deceptive, from Latin praestigious full of tricks, from
praestigiae juggler's tricks, probably altered by dissimilation from praestrigiae, from
praestringere to blind, blindfold, dazzle, from prae before (see pre-) + stringere to tie or bind
(see strain (v.)). Derogatory until 19c.; meaning having dazzling influence is attested from 1913
(see prestige). Related: Prestigiously; prestigiousness.


wiseacre (n.)

1590s, partial translation of Middle Dutch wijssegger soothsayer (with no derogatory connotation),
probably altered by association with Middle Dutch segger sayer from Old High German wizzago prophet,
from wizzan to know, from Proto-Germanic *wit- to know (see wit (v.)). The deprecatory sense of one
who pretends to know everything may have come through confusion with obsolete English segger sayer,
which also had a sense of braggart (mid-15c.).


cheesy (adj.)

cheese-like, late 14c., from cheese (n.1) + -y (2). Meaning cheap, inferior is attested from 1896,
perhaps originally U.S. student slang, along with cheese (n.) an ignorant, stupid person. In late
19c. British slang, cheesy was fine, showy (1858), probably from cheese (n.2) and some suggest the
modern derogatory use is an ironic reversal of this. The word was in common use in medical writing
in the late 19c. to describe morbid substances found in tubers, decaying flesh, etc.


schvartze (n.)

also schvartzer, black person (somewhat derogatory), 1961, Yiddish, from schvarts black (see
swarthy). Perhaps originally a code word to refer to black servants when they were within earshot,
as German cognate Schwarze appears to have been used mid-19c.:    In Baltimore in the 80s of the
last century, the German-speaking householders, when they had occasion to speak of Negro servants in
their presence, called them die Blaue (blues). In the 70s die Schwartze (blacks) had been used, but
it was believed that the Negroes had fathomed it. [H.L. Mencken, The American Language, Supplement
I, 1945]


enthusiasm (n.)

c.1600, from Middle French enthousiasme (16c.) and directly from Late Latin enthusiasmus, from Greek
enthousiasmos divine inspiration, from enthousiazein be inspired or possessed by a god, be rapt, be
in ecstasy, from entheos divinely inspired, possessed by a god, from en in (see en- (2)) + theos god
(see theo-). Acquired a derogatory sense of excessive religious emotion (1650s) under the Puritans;
generalized sense of fervor, zeal (the main modern sense) is first recorded 1716.


Jim Crow

black person, 1838, American English, originally the name of a black minstrel character in a popular
song-and-dance act by T.D. Rice (1808-1860) that debuted 1828 and attained national popularity by
1832:    Wheel about, an' turn about, an' do jis so;  Eb'ry time I wheel about, I jump Jim Crow.
Where and how Rice got it, or wrote it, is a mystery. Even before that, crow (n.) had been a
derogatory term for a black man. Association with segregation dates from 1842, in reference to a
railroad car for blacks. Modern use as a type of racial discrimination is from 1943. In mid-19c.,
Jim Crow also could be a reference to someone's change of (political) principles (from the jump in
the song).


