descriptive (adj.)

1751, from Late Latin descriptivus, from descript-, past participle stem of describere (see
description). Related: Descriptively; descriptiveness.


A-line (adj.)

descriptive of a dress or skirt flared in shape of a letter A, 1955, in reference to the designs of
Christian Dior (1905-1957).


Roosevelt

the family in America originally bore the name Van Roosevelt, of the field of roses, descriptive of
their estates in Holland. Claes Martenszen Van Rosenvelt, born August 1649, emigrated to New
Amsterdam. His son (1653) and all his descendants dropped the Van. Related: Rooseveltian.


quango (n.)

1973, acronym for quasi-non-governmental organization (a descriptive phrase itself attested from
1967). Related: Quangocracy; quangocrat.


designation (n.)

late 14c., action of pointing out, from Old French designacion or directly from Latin designationem
(nominative designatio) a marking out, specification, noun of action from past participle stem of
designare (see design (v.)). Meaning descriptive name is from 1824.


starry (adj.)

late 14c., from star (n.) + -y (2). Starry-eyed unrealistically optimistic is attested from 1884;
earlier descriptive of bright eyes. Related: Starrily; starriness.


idyll (n.)

also idyl, c.1600, picturesque pastoral poem, from Latin idyllium, from Greek eidyllion short,
descriptive poem, usually of rustic or pastoral type, literally a little picture, diminutive of
eidos form (see -oid).


rigmarole (n.)

1736, a long, rambling discourse, apparently from an altered, Kentish colloquial survival of ragman
roll long list or catalogue (1520s), in Middle English a long roll of verses descriptive of personal
characters, used in a medieval game of chance called Rageman, perhaps from Anglo-French Ragemon le
bon Ragemon the good, which was the heading on one set of the verses, referring to a character by
that name. Sense transferred to foolish activity or commotion by 1939.


epithet (n.)

1570s, descriptive name for a person or thing, from Middle French &eacute;pith&egrave;te or directly
from Latin epitheton, from Greek epitheton something added, adjective often used as noun, from
neuter of epithetos attributed, added, from epitithenai to add on, from epi in addition (see epi-) +
tithenai to put (see theme).


junk (v.)

1803, to cut off in lumps, from junk (n.1). The meaning to throw away as trash, to scrap is from
1908. Related: Junked; junking.    New settlers (who should always be here as early in the spring as
possible) begin to cut down the wood where they intend to erect their first house. As the trees are
cut the branches are to be lopped off, and the trunks cut into lengths of 12 or 14 feet. This
operation they call junking them; if they are not junked before fire is applied, they are much worse
to junk afterwards. [letter dated Charlotte Town, Nov. 29, 1820, in A Series of Letters Descriptive
of Prince Edward Island, 1822]


-graphy

word-forming element meaning process of writing or recording or a writing, recording, or
description, from French or German -graphie, from Greek -graphia description of, from graphein
write, express by written characters, earlier to draw, represent by lines drawn, originally to
scrape, scratch (on clay tablets with a stylus), from PIE root *gerbh- to scratch, carve (see
carve). In modern use, especially in forming names of descriptive sciences.


rocky (adj.)

full of rocks, c.1400, from rock (n.1) + -y (2); unsteady, 1737, from rock (v.1). Meaning difficult,
hard is recorded from 1873, and may represent a bit of both.    The Rocky Mountains so called by
1802, translating French Montagnes Rocheuses, first applied to the Canadian Rockies. The name is not
directly self-descriptive but is an approximate translation of the name of the former Native
American people here known as the Assiniboin .... The mountains are in fact not noticeably rocky
[Room]. Bright notes that These Indians were called /assiniipwaan/, lit. 'stone Sioux', by their
Cree (Algonkian) neighbors.


wuthering (adj.)

making a sullen roar (as the wind does), Northern England dialectal variant of Scottish and
dialectal whithering rushing, whizzing, blustering, from a verb whither (late 14c.) which was used
in reference to gusts of wind and coughing fits, from Old Norse *hvi&eth;ra (related to Norwegian
kvidra to go quickly to and fro, Old English hwi&thorn;a air, breeze).    Wuthering Heights is the
name of Mr. Heathcliff's dwelling. 'Wuthering' being a significant provincial adjective, descriptive
of the atmospheric tumult to which its station is exposed, in stormy weather. [Emily Bront&#235;,
Wuthering Heights, 1847]    Charlotte also used forms of the word in her novels.


casino (n.)

1744, public room for music or dancing, from Italian casino, literally a little house, diminutive of
casa house, from Latin casa hut, cottage, cabin, of uncertain origin. The card game (also cassino)
is attested by that name from 1792. Specifically as building for aristocratic gambling by 1820,
first in an Italian context.    [T]he term Casino [is] indiscriminately applied to a set of farm
offices, a country-seat, a gambling house, and a game of cards ... [Jane Waldie Watts, Sketches
Descriptive of Italy in the Years 1816 and 1817, London 1820]


carry (v.)

early 14c., from Anglo-French carier to transport in a vehicle or Old North French carrier to cart,
carry (Modern French charrier), from Gallo-Roman *carrizare, from Late Latin carricare, from Latin
carrum (see car).    Meaning take by force is from 1580s. Sense of gain victory in an election is
from 1610s. Of sound, to be heard at a distance by 1896. Carrying capacity is attested from 1836.
Carry on continue to advance is from 1640s; carryings-on questionable doings is from 1660s. Carry-
castle (1590s) was an old descriptive term for an elephant.


deadbeat (n.)

worthless sponging idler, 1863, American English slang, perhaps originally Civil War slang, from
dead (adj.) + beat. Earlier used colloquially as an adjectival expression to mean completely beaten
(1821), and perhaps the base notion is of worn out, good for nothing. It is noted in a British
source from 1861 as a term for a pensioner.    In England dead beat means worn out, used up. ... But
here, dead beat is used, as a substantive, to mean a scoundrel, a shiftless, swindling vagabond. We
hear it said that such a man is a beat or a dead beat. The phrase thus used is not even good slang.
It is neither humorous nor descriptive. There is not in it even a perversion of the sense of the
words of which it is composed. Its origin is quite beyond conjecture. [Americanisms, in The Galaxy,
January 1878]    It also was used of a kind of regulating mechanism in pendulum clocks.


Spenserian (adj.)

1817, from Edmund Spenser (c.1552-1599), Elizabethan poet (for the origin of the surname, see
Spencer). Spenserian stanza, which he employed in the Faerie Queen, consists of eight decasyllabic
lines and a final Alexandrine, with rhyme scheme ab ab bc bcc.    The measure soon ceases to be
Spenser's except in its mere anatomy of rhyme-arrangement [Elton, Survey of English Literature
1770-1880, 1920]; it is the meter in Butler's Hudibras, Scott's Lady of the Lake, and notably the
Childe Harold of Byron, who found (quoting Beattie) that it allowed him to be either droll or
pathetic, descriptive or sentimental, tender or satirical, as the humour strikes me; for, if I
mistake not, the measure which I have adopted admits equally of all these kinds of composition.


flora (n.)

1777, the plant life of a region or epoch, from Latin Flora, Roman goddess of flowers, from flos
(genitive floris) flower, from *flo-s-, Italic suffixed form of PIE *bhle- to blossom, flourish
(cognates: Middle Irish blath, Welsh blawd blossom, flower, Old English blowan to flower, bloom),
extended form of *bhel- (3) to thrive, bloom, possibly identical with *bhel- (2) to blow, swell (see
bole). Used as the title of descriptive plant catalogues since 1640s, but popularized by Linnaeus in
his 1745 study of Swedish plants, Flora Suecica.


Christ (n.)

title given to Jesus of Nazareth, Old English crist (by 830, perhaps 675), from Latin Christus, from
Greek khristos the anointed (translation of Hebrew mashiah; see messiah), noun use of verbal
adjective of khriein to rub, anoint (see chrism). The Latin term drove out Old English H&aelig;land
healer, savior, as the preferred descriptive term for Jesus.    A title, treated as a proper name in
Old English, but not regularly capitalized until 17c. Pronunciation with long -i- is result of Irish
missionary work in England, 7c.-8c. The ch- form, regular since c.1500 in English, was rare before.
Capitalization of the word begins 14c. but is not fixed until 17c. The 17c. mystical sect of the
Familists edged it toward a verb with Christed made one with Christ.


whitey (n.)

'white' person, person of European descent, 1828, also whity, from white (adj.) + -y (2) and -y (3).
Earlier as an adjective, and Whitey-brown was a 19c. descriptive color name, used to describe, among
other things, mulatto skin.    Negro troops doing provost duty in Norfolk; keeping the white people
in order. On a visit to Norfolk one can see white Southerners, arrested for sundry misdemeanors,
working on the public streets, under negro guards. ... It is quite a change to see, in Norfolk,
negroes forcing white men to work, at the point of the bayonet; calling out to them: No loaf'n dar!
Move quicker, Sah! Hurry up dar, Old Whitey! and similar orders. Tables turned! [diary of Lieut. S.
Millett Thompson, 13th New Hampshire Volunteer regiment, U.S. Army, Jan. 25, 1864; diary published
1888 by Houghton, Mifflin &amp; Co.]


boll (n.)

Old English bolla bowl, cup, pot, merged with Middle Dutch bolle round object, borrowed 13c., both
from Proto-Germanic *bul-, from PIE *bhel- (2) to blow, inflate, swell (see bole). Influenced in
meaning by Latin bulla bubble, ball, ultimately from the same PIE root. Extended c.1500 to round
seed pod of flax or cotton. Boll weevil is 1895, American English.    In south Texas, among Spanish-
speaking people, the insect is generally known as the 'picudo,' a descriptive name which refers to
the snout or beak of the insect. English-speaking planters generally referred to the insect at first
as 'the sharpshooter,' a term which for many years has been applied to any insect which causes
through its punctures the shedding of the squares or the rotting of the bolls. As there are several
native insects that are commonly called sharpshooters and which, though injurious, are by no means
to be compared with this insect, it becomes necessary to discourage in every way the use of the word
sharpshooter as applied to this weevil. The adoption of the term 'Mexican cotton-boll weevil' for
the new pest is recommended. [New Mexico College of Agriculture and the Mechanic Arts Agricultural
Experiment Station Bulletin No. 19, April 1896]    A case of entomology meddling in etymology.


bishop (n.)

Old English bisceop bishop, high priest (Jewish or pagan), from Late Latin episcopus, from Greek
episkopos watcher, overseer, a title for various government officials, later taken over in a Church
sense, from epi- over (see epi-) + skopos one that watches, one that looks after; a guardian,
protector (see scope (n.1)). Given a specific sense in the Church, but the word also was used in the
New Testament as a descriptive title for elders, and continues as such in some non-hierarchical
Christian sects.    A curious example of word-change, as effected by the genius of different
tongues, is furnished by the English bishop and the French &#233;v&#234;que. Both are from the same
root, furnishing, perhaps the only example of two words from a common stem so modifying themselves
in historical times as not to have a letter in common. (Of course many words from a far off Aryan
stem are in the same condition.) The English strikes off the initial and terminal syllables, leaving
only piscop, which the Saxon preference for the softer labial and hissing sounds modified into
bishop. &#201;v&#234;que (formerly evesque) merely softens the p into v and drops the last syllable.
[William S. Walsh, Handy-Book of Literary Curiosities, Philadelphia, J.B. Lippincott, 1892]    Late
Latin episcopus in Spanish became obispo. Cognate with Old Saxon biscop, Old High German biscof. The
chess piece (formerly archer, before that alfin) was so called from 1560s.


abstract (adj.)

late 14c., originally in grammar (of nouns), from Latin abstractus drawn away, past participle of
abstrahere to drag away, detach, pull away, divert; also figuratively, from ab(s)- away (see ab-) +
trahere draw (see tract (n.1)).    Meaning withdrawn or separated from material objects or practical
matters is from mid-15c. That of difficult to understand, abstruse is from c.1400. Specifically in
reference to modern art, it dates from 1914; abstract expressionism as an American-based uninhibited
approach to art exemplified by Jackson Pollock is from 1952, but the term itself had been used in
the 1920s of Kandinsky and others.    Oswald Herzog, in an article on Der Abstrakte Expressionismus
(Sturm, heft 50, 1919) gives us a statement which with equal felicity may be applied to the artistic
attitude of the Dadaists. Abstract Expressionism is perfect Expressionism, he writes. It is pure
creation. It casts spiritual processes into a corporeal mould. It does not borrow objects from the
real world; it creates its own objects .... The abstract reveals the will of the artist; it becomes
expression. ... [William A. Drake, The Life and Deeds of Dada, 1922]   <hr />   Then, that art we
have called abstract for want of any possible descriptive term, with which we have been patient,
and, even, appreciative, getting high stimulation by the new Guggenheim non-objective Art Museum, is
reflected in our examples of surrealism, dadaism, and what-not, to assert our acquaintance in every
art, fine or other. [Report of the Art Reference Department of Pratt Institute Free Library for year
ending June 30, 1937]


