satyr (n.)

woodland deity, companion of Bacchus, late 14c., from Latin satyrus, from Greek satyros, of unknown
origin. In pre-Roman Greek art, a man-like being with the tail and ears of a horse; the modern
conception of a being part man, part goat is from Roman sculptors, who seem to have assimilated them
to the fauns of native mythology. In some English bibles used curiously to translate Hebrew se'irim,
a type of hairy monster superstitiously believed to inhabit deserts.


mirage (n.)

optical illusion of water in sandy deserts, 1812, from French mirage, from se mirer to be reflected,
from Latin mirare (see mirror). Or the French word is from Latin mirus wonderful (see miracle).


sirocco (n.)

hot wind blowing from the Libyan deserts, 1610s, from Italian sirocco, from vulgar Arabic shoruq the
east wind, from Arabic sharqi eastern, east wind, from sharq east, from sharaqa to rise (in
reference to the sun).


mescal (n.)

plant of the genus Agave, found in deserts of Mexico and southwestern U.S., especially the American
aloe, or maguey plant, 1702, from Mexican Spanish, from Nahuatl (Aztecan) mexcalli fermented drink
made from agave, from metl agave + ixcalli stew. Meaning intoxicating liquor from fermented juice of
the agave is attested in English from 1828. Also the name of a small desert cactus (peyote) found in
northern Mexico and southern Texas (1885).


anchorite (n.)

mid-15c., hermit (especially those of the Eastern deserts), recluse, one who withdraws from the
world for religious reasons, from Medieval Latin anchorita, from Greek anakhoretes, literally one
who has retired, agent noun from anakhorein to retreat, go back, retire, from ana- back (see ana-) +
khorein withdraw, give place, from khoros place, space, free space, room. Replaced Old English
ancer, from Late Latin anchoreta.


Saracen (n.)

Old English, an Arab (in Greek and Roman translations), also, mid-13c., generally, non-Christian,
heathen, pagan, from Old French saracin, from Late Latin saracenus, from Greek sarakenos, usually
said to be from Arabic sharquiyin, accusative plural of sharqiy eastern, from sharq east, sunrise,
but this is not certain. In medieval times the name was associated with that of Biblical Sarah
(q.v.).Peple &thorn;at cleped hem self Saracenys, as &thorn;ogh &thorn;ey were i-come of Sarra [John
of Trevisa, translation of Higdon's Polychronicon, 1387]The name Greeks and Romans gave to the
nomads of the Syrian and Arabian deserts. Specific sense of Middle Eastern Muslim is from the
Crusades. From c.1300 as an adjective. Related: Saracenic; and compare sarsen.


wage (n.)

c.1300, a payment for services rendered, reward, just deserts; mid-14c., salary paid to a provider
of service, from Anglo-French and Old North French wage (Old French gage) pledge, pay, reward, from
Frankish *wadja- or another Germanic source (compare Old English wedd pledge, agreement, covenant,
Gothic wadi pledge), from Proto-Germanic *wadi- (see wed (v.)).    Also from mid-14c., a pledge,
guarantee, surety (usually in plural), and (c.1400) a promise or pledge to meet in battle. The
payment for service sense by late 14c. extended to allotments of money paid at regular intervals for
continuous or repeated service. Traditionally in English wages were payment for manual or mechanical
labor and somewhat distinguished from salary or fee. Modern French cognate gages (plural) means
wages of a domestic, one of a range of French pay words distinguished by class, such as traitement
(university professor), paye, salaire (workman), solde (soldier), r&eacute;compense, prix. The Old
English word was lean, related to loan and representing the usual Germanic word (Gothic laun, Dutch
loon, German lohn). Wage-earner attested from 1871.


