despot (n.)

1560s, absolute ruler, from Old French despot (14c.), from Medieval Latin despota, from Greek
despotes master of a household, lord, absolute ruler, from PIE *dems-pota- house-master; for first
element see domestic (adj.); second element cognate with Latin potis, potens (see potent).
Faintly pejorative in Greek, progressively more so as used in various languages for Roman emperors,
Christian rulers of Ottoman provinces, and Louis XVI during the French Revolution. The female
equivalent was despoina lady, queen, mistress, source of the proper name Despina.


despotism (n.)

mid-18c., from French despotisme; see despot + -ism.    All education is despotism. [William Godwin,
Enquirer, 1797]


despotic (adj.)

1640s, from French despotique (14c.), from Greek despotikos, from despotes (see despot). Related:
Despotical; despotically.


tyrannical (adj.)

1530s, from Latin tyrannicus arbitrary, despotic, from Greek tyrannikos befitting a despot, from
tyrannos (see tyrant) + -al (1). Tyrannic was used in this sense from late 15c. Related:
Tyrannically.


tyrant (n.)

c.1300, absolute ruler, especially one without legal right; cruel, oppressive ruler, from Old French
tiran, tyrant (12c.), from Latin tyrannus lord, master, monarch, despot, especially arbitrary ruler,
cruel governor, autocrat (source also of Spanish tirano, Italian tiranno), from Greek tyrannos lord,
master, sovereign, absolute ruler unlimited by law or constitution, a loan-word from a language of
Asia Minor (probably Lydian); Klein compares Etruscan Turan mistress, lady (surname of Venus).  In
the exact sense, a tyrant is an individual who arrogates to himself the royal authority without
having a right to it. This is how the Greeks understood the word 'tyrant': they applied it
indifferently to good and bad princes whose authority was not legitimate. [Rousseau, The Social
Contract]    Originally in Greek the word was not applied to old hereditary sovereignties
(basileiai) and despotic kings, but it was used of usurpers, even when popular, moderate, and just
(such as Cypselus of Corinth), however it soon became a word of reproach in the usual modern sense.
The spelling with -t arose in Old French by analogy with present participle endings in -ant. Fem.
form tyranness is recorded from 1590 (Spenser); Medieval Latin had tyrannissa (late 14c.).


