desperado (n.)

c.1600, a person in despair, mock-Spanish version of desperate (n.) reckless criminal (1560s),  from
Latin desperatus (see desperation). There was an adjective desperado in Old Spanish, meaning out of
hope, desperate, but apparently it never was used as a noun and it probably has nothing to do with
the English word. Meaning a desperate or reckless man is recorded from 1640s.


-ado

in commando, desperado, tornado, and other words of Spanish and Portuguese origin, person or group
participating in an action, from Latin -atus, past participle suffix of verbs of the first
conjugation (see -ade).


bravo

as an exclamation, well done!, 1761, from Italian bravo, literally brave (see brave (adj.)). Earlier
it was used as a noun meaning desperado, hired killer (1590s). Superlative form is bravissimo.It is
held by some philologists that as Bravo! is an exclamation its form should not change, but remain
bravo under all circumstances. Nevertheless bravo is usually applied to a male, brava to a female
artist, and bravi to two or more. [Elson's Music Dictionary, 1905]


bowery (n.)

farm, plantation, from Dutch bowerij homestead farm (from the same source as bower); a Dutch word
probably little used in America outside New York, and there soon limited to one road, The Bowery,
that ran from the built-up part of the city out to the plantations in middle Manhattan, attested
from 1787; the city's growth soon overran it, and it was noted by 1840 as a commercial district
notorious for squalor, rowdiness, and low life.   <b>Bowery Boy</b>, the typical New York tough of a
generation or two ago, named from the street which he chiefly affected .... He rather prided himself
on his uncouthness, his ignorance, and his desperado readiness to fight, but he also loved to have
attention called to his courage, his gallantry to women, his patriotic enthusiasm, and his innate
tenderness of heart. A fire and a thrilling melodrama called out all his energies and emotions.
[Walsh, 1892]


-ade

word-forming element denoting an action or product of an action, from Latin -ata (source of French
-ade, Spanish -ada, Italian -ata), fem. pp. ending used in forming nouns. A living prefix in French,
from which many words have come into English (such as lemonade). Latin -atus, past participle suffix
of verbs of the 1st conjugation also became -ade in French (Spanish -ado, Italian -ato) and came to
be used as a suffix denoting persons or groups participating in an action (such as brigade,
desperado).


