despoil (v.)

c.1300, from Old French despoillier (12c., Modern French d&eacute;pouiller) to strip, rob, deprive
of, steal, borrow, from Latin despoliare to rob, despoil, plunder, from de- entirely (see de-) +
spoliare to strip of clothing, rob, from spolium armor, booty (see spoil (v.)). Related: Despoiled;
despoiling.


unspoiled (adj.)

c.1500, not plundered, from un- (1) not + past participle of spoil (v.). Meaning not deteriorated is
attested from 1732. A verb unspoil is attested from c.1400, but it meant despoil.


despoliation (n.)

1650s, from Late Latin despoliationem (nominative despoliatio), noun of action from Latin
despoliatus, past participle of despoliare (see despoil).


pillage (v.)

plunder, despoil, 1590s, from pillage (n.). Related: Pillaged; pillaging. The earlier verb in
English was simply pill (late Old English), which probably is from Latin pilare.


bereave (v.)

Old English bereafian to deprive of, take away, seize, rob, from be + reafian rob, plunder, from
Proto-Germanic *raubojanan, from PIE *reup- to snatch (see rapid). A common Germanic formation
(compare Old Frisian birava despoil, Old Saxon biroban, Dutch berooven, Old High German biroubon,
German berauben, Gothic biraubon). Since mid-17c., mostly in reference to life, hope, loved ones,
and other immaterial possessions. Past tense forms bereaved and bereft have co-existed since 14c.,
now slightly differentiated in meaning, the former applied to loss of loved ones, the latter to
circumstances.


strip (v.)

make bare, early 13c., from Old English -striepan, -strypan to plunder, despoil (as in West Saxon
bestrypan to plunder), from Proto-Germanic *straupijan (cognates: Middle Dutch stropen to strip off,
to ramble about plundering, Old High German stroufen to strip off, plunder, German streifen strip
off, touch upon, to ramble, roam, rove). Meaning to unclothe is recorded from early 13c.
Intransitive sense from late 14c. Of screw threads, from 1839; of gear wheels, from 1873. Meaning
perform a strip-tease is from 1929. Related: Stripped; stripping. Strip poker is attested from 1916,
in a joke in The Technology Monthly and Harvard Engineering Journal:    Say, Bill how, did the game
come out?  It ended in a tie.  Oh, were you playing strip poker?    strip search is from 1947, in
reference to World War II prison camps.


