destitute (adj.)

late 14c., abandoned, forsaken, from Latin destitutus abandoned, past participle of destituere
forsake, from de- away + statuere put, place, causative of stare to stand, from PIE root *sta- to
stand (see stet). Originally literal; sense of lacking resources, impoverished is 1530s.


unhuman (adj.)

1540s, inhumane, cruel, from un- (1) not + human (adj.). Meaning destitute of human qualities;
superhuman is from 1782.


penniless (adj.)

destitute, early 14c., penyles, from penny + -less.


destitution (n.)

early 15c., from Old French destitution and directly from Latin destitutionem (nominative
destitutio) a forsaking, deserting, from destitutus, past participle of destituere (see destitute).


pauper (n.)

1510s, person destitute of property or means of livelihood, from Latin pauper poor, not wealthy, of
small means (see poor (adj.)). Originally in English a legal word, from Latin phrase in forma
pauperis (late 15c.) in the character of a poor person, thus allowed to sue in court without legal
fees.


poor (adj.)

c.1200, lacking money or resources, destitute; needy, indigent; small, scanty, from Old French povre
poor, wretched, dispossessed; inadequate; weak, thin (Modern French pauvre), from Latin pauper poor,
not wealthy, from pre-Latin *pau-paros producing little; getting little, a compound from the roots
of paucus little (see paucity) and parare to produce, bring forth (see pare).    Replaced Old
English earm. Figuratively from early 14c. Meaning of inferior quality is from c.1300. Of inhabited
places from c.1300; of soil, etc., from late 14c. The poor boy sandwich, made of simple but filling
ingredients, was invented and named in New Orleans in 1921. To poor mouth deny one's advantages is
from 1965 (to make a poor mouth whine is Scottish dialect from 1822). Slang poor man's ________ the
cheaper alternative to _______, is from 1854.


boo

expression meant to startle, early 15c., boh, A combination of consonant and vowel especially fitted
to produce a loud and startling sound [OED, which compares Latin boare, Greek boaein to cry aloud,
roar, shout.]; as an expression of disapproval, 1801 (n.), 1816 (v.); hence, the verb meaning shower
someone with boos (1893).    Booing was common late 19c. among London theater audiences and at
British political events; In Italy, Parma opera-goers were notorious boo-birds, but the custom seems
to have been little-known in America till c.1910.    To say boo open one's mouth, speak, originally
was to say boo to a goose.    To be able to say Bo! to a goose is to be not quite destitute of
courage, to have an inkling of spirit, and was probably in the first instance used of children. A
little boy who comes across some geese suddenly will find himself hissed at immediately, and a great
demonstration of defiance made by them, but if he can pluck up heart to cry 'bo!' loudly and advance
upon them, they will retire defeated. The word 'bo' is clearly selected for the sake of the
explosiveness of its first letter and the openness and loudness of its vowel. [Walter W. Skeat, Cry
Bo to a Goose, Notes and Queries, 4th series vi Sept. 10, 1870]


simple (adj.)

c.1200, free from duplicity, upright, guileless; blameless, innocently harmless, also ignorant,
uneducated; unsophisticated; simple-minded, foolish, from Old French simple (12c.) plain, decent;
friendly, sweet; naive, foolish, stupid, hence wretched, miserable, from Latin simplus, variant of
simplex simple, uncompounded, literally onefold (see simplex). Sense of free from pride, humble,
meek is mid-13c. As consisting of only one substance or ingredient (opposite of composite or
compounded) it dates from late 14c.; as easily done (opposite of complicated) it dates from late
15c.    From mid-14c. as unqualified; mere; sheer; also clear, straightforward; easily understood.
From late 14c. as single, individual; whole. From late 14c. of clothing, etc., modest, plain,
unadorned, and of food, plain, not sumptuous. In medicine, of fractures, etc., lacking
complications, late 14c. As a law term, lacking additional legal stipulations, unlimited, from mid-
14c.    In Middle English with wider senses than recently, such as inadequate, insufficient; weak,
feeble; mere; few; sad, downcast; mournful; of little value; low in price; impoverished, destitute;
of hair, straight, not curly. As noun, an innocent or a guileless person; a humble or modest person
(late 14c.), also an uncompounded substance. From c.1500 as ignorant people.


