semi-detached (adj.)

in reference to houses, 1845, from semi- + past participle of detach (v.).    The Detached House
bears its peculiar characteristic on its front; it stands alone, and nothing more can be said about
it; but with the semi-detached house there is a subtle mystery, much to be marvelled at. Semi-
detached! Have the party-walls between two houses shrunk, or is there a bridge connecting the two,
as in Mr. Beckford's house in Landsdown Crescent, Bath? A semi-detached house may be a house with a
field on one side and a bone-boiling factory on the other. Semi-detached may mean half-tumbling to
pieces. I must inquire into it. [Houses to Let, in Household Words, March 20, 1852]


dicky (n.)

detached shirt front, 1811; a small bird, 1851; diminutive of dick, but the applications are obscure
in both cases.


outlier (n.)

c.1600, stone quarried and removed but left unused, from out + lie (v.2). Transferred meaning
outsider is recorded from 1680s; anything detached from its main body is from 1849; geological sense
is from 1833.


outpost (n.)

1757, military position detached from the main body of troops, from out + post (n.2). Originally in
George Washington's letters. Commercial sense of trading settlement near a frontier is from 1802.
Phrase outpost of Empire (by 1895) in later use often echoes Kipling.


outstanding (adj.)

1610s, projecting, prominent, detached, present participle adjective from outstand (v.) endure
successfully, hold out against, from out (adv.) + stand (v.). Figurative sense of conspicuous,
striking is first recorded 1830. Meaning unpaid, unsettled is from 1797. Related: Outstandingly.


insulate (v.)

1530s, make into an island, from Latin insulatus, from insula (see insular). Sense of cause a person
or thing to be detached from surroundings is from 1785. Electrical/chemical sense of block from
electricity or heat is from 1742. Related: Insulated; insulating.


stoa (n.)

portico, c.1600, from Greek stoa colonnade, corridor, from PIE *sta- to stand (see stet). A name
given in Athens to several public buildings. The ancient stoa was usually a detached portico, often
of considerable extent, generally near a public place to afford opportunity for walking or
conversation under shelter [Century Dictionary].


out-building (n.)

a detached or subordinate building, 1620s, from out + building (n.).


thwaite (n.)

cleared land, 1620s, from Old Norse or Old Danish &thorn;veit a clearing, meadow, paddock, literally
a cutting, cut-piece (related to Old English &thorn;witan to cut, cut off; see whittle). Always a
rare word and now obsolete, but frequently encountered in place names, but It is unclear whether the
base meaning was 'something cut off, detached piece of land,' or 'something cut down, felled tree'
... [Cambridge Dictionary of English Place-Names].


staccato (adj.)

1724, from Italian staccato, literally detached, disconnected, past participle of staccare to
detach, shortened form of distaccare separate, detach, from Middle French destacher, from Old French
destachier to detach (see detach). As an adverb from 1844. Related: Staccatissimo.


wig (v.)

1826, supply with a wig, from wig (n.). The meaning to behave hysterically (usually with out) is
attested from 1955, perhaps from notion in flip one's wig. Compare dash my wig!, a former mild
imprecation (1797), also wigs on the green (1856), Irish colloquial for a fight or rumble (because
wigs are likely to get detached from owners in such an event). The verb also had a colloquial sense
of scold severely, attested by 1829, perhaps related to these. Related: Wigged; wigging.


ought (v.)

Old English ahte owned, possessed, past tense of agan to own, possess, owe (see owe). As a past
tense of owe, it shared in that word's evolution and meant at times in Middle English possessed and
under obligation to pay. It has been detached from owe since 17c., though he aught me ten pounds is
recorded as active in East Anglian dialect from c.1825. As an auxiliary verb expressing duty or
obligation (late 12c., the main modern use), it represents the past subjunctive.


detach (v.)

1680s, from French d&eacute;tacher to detach, untie, from Old French destachier, from des- apart +
attachier attach (see attach). Related: Detached; detaching.


belfry (n.)

c.1400, siege tower (late 13c. in Anglo-Latin with a sense bell tower), from Old North French
berfroi movable siege tower (Modern French beffroi), from Middle High German bercfrit protecting
shelter, literally that which watches over peace, from bergen to protect (see bury) + frid peace.
Originally a wooden siege tower on wheels (free to move); it came to be used for chime towers (mid-
15c.), which at first often were detached from church buildings (as the Campanile on Plaza San Marco
in Venice). Spelling altered by dissimilation or by association with bell (n.).


absolute (adj.)

late 14c., unrestricted; complete, perfect; also not relative to something else (mid-15c.), from
Middle French absolut (14c., Old French asolu, Modern French absolu), from Latin absolutus, past
participle of absolvere to set free, make separate (see absolve).    Most of the current senses also
were in the Latin word. Sense evolution was detached, disengaged, thus perfect, pure. Meaning
despotic (1610s) is from notion of absolute in position. Absolute monarchy is recorded from 1735
(absolute king is recorded from 1610s); scientific absolute magnitude (1902), absolute value (1907)
are from early 20c. In metaphysics, the absolute that which is absolute is from 1809.


separate (adj.)

detached, kept apart, c.1600, from separate (v.) or from Latin separatus. Separate but equal in
reference to U.S. segregation policies on railroads is attested from 1888. Separate development,
official name of apartheid in South Africa, is from 1955. Related: Separately (1550s); separateness.
Frequently the colored coach is little better than a cattle car. Generally one half the smoking car
is reserved for the colored car. Often only a cloth curtain or partition run half way up separates
this so-called colored car from the smoke, obscene language, and foul air of the smokers' half of
the car. All classes and conditions of colored humanity, from the most cultured and refined to the
most degraded and filthy, without regard to sex, good breeding or ability to pay for better
accommodation, are crowded into this separate, but equal (?) half car. [Rev. Norman B. Wood, The
White Side of a Black Subject, 1897]


aisle (n.)

late 14c., ele, lateral division of a church (usually separated by a row of pillars), from Old
French ele wing (of a bird or an army), side of a ship (12c., Modern French aile), from Latin ala,
related to axilla wing, upper arm, armpit; wing of an army, from PIE *aks- axis (see axis), via a
suffixed form *aks-la-. The root meaning in turning connects it with axle and axis.    Confused 15c.
with unrelated ile island (perhaps from notion of a detached part of a church), and so it took an
-s- when isle did, c.1700; by 1750 it had acquired an a-, on the model of French cognate aile. The
word also was confused with alley, which gave it the sense of passage between rows of pews or seats
(1731), which was thence extended to railway cars, theaters, etc.


other (adj.)

Old English o&thorn;er the second (adj.), also as a pronoun, one of the two, other, from Proto-
Germanic *antharaz (cognates: Old Saxon athar, Old Frisian other, Old Norse annarr, Middle Dutch and
Dutch ander, Old High German andar, German ander, Gothic an&thorn;ar other).    These are from PIE
*an-tero-, variant of *al-tero- the other of two (source of Lithuanian antras, Sanskrit antarah
other, foreign, Latin alter), from root *al- (1) beyond (see alias (adv.)) + adjectival comparative
suffix *-tero-. The Old English, Old Saxon, and Old Frisian forms show a normal loss of n before
fricatives [Barnhart]. Meaning different is mid-13c.    Sense of second was detached from this word
in English (which uses second, from Latin) and German (zweiter, from zwei two) to avoid ambiguity.
In Scandinavian, however, the second floor is still the other floor (Swedish andra, Danish anden).
Also compare Old English o&thorn;ergeara next year.   The other woman a woman with whom a man begins
a love affair while he is already committed is from 1855. The other day originally (mid-12c.) was
the next day; later (c.1300) yesterday; and now, loosely, a day or two ago (early 15c.). Phrase
other half in reference to either the poor or the rich, is recorded from c.1600.La moiti&eacute; du
monde ne s&ccedil;ayt comment l'aultre vit. [Rabelais, Pantagruel, 1532]


loose (adj.)

early 13c., not securely fixed; c.1300, unbound, from Old Norse lauss loose, free, vacant,
dissolute, cognate with Old English leas devoid of, false, feigned, incorrect, from Proto-Germanic
*lausaz (cognates: Danish l&oslash;s loose, untied, Swedish l&#246;s loose, movable, detached,
Middle Dutch, German los loose, free, Gothic laus empty, vain), from PIE *leu- to loosen, divide,
cut apart (see lose). Meaning not clinging, slack is mid-15c. Meaning not bundled is late 15c. Sense
of unchaste, immoral is recorded from late 15c. Meaning at liberty, free from obligation is 1550s.
Sense of rambling, disconnected is from 1680s. Figurative sense of loose cannon was in use by 1896,
probably from celebrated image in a popular story by Hugo:    You can reason with a bull dog,
astonish a bull, fascinate a boa, frighten a tiger, soften a lion; no resource with such a monster
as a loose cannon. You cannot kill it, it is dead; and at the same time it lives. It lives with a
sinister life which comes from the infinite. It is moved by the ship, which is moved by the sea,
which is moved by the wind. This exterminator is a plaything. [Victor Hugo, Ninety Three]   Loose
end in reference to something unfinished, undecided, unguarded is from 1540s; to be at loose ends is
from 1807. Phrase on the loose free, unrestrained is from 1749 (upon the loose).


