determination (n.)

mid-14c., decision, sentence, from Old French d&eacute;terminacion (14c.) determination, settlement,
definition, from Latin determinationem (nominative determinatio) conclusion, boundary, noun of
action from past participle stem of determinare (see determine).    As a bringing to an end
(especilly of a suit at law), late 15c. As fixed direction toward a goal, from 1650s, originally in
physics or anatomy; metaphoric sense fixation of will is from 1680s; that of quality of being
resolute is from 1822.


self-determination (n.)

1680s, determination of mind, from self- + determination. Political sense is attested from 1911,
popularized by U.S. President Woodrow Wilson (1856-1924).


resolve (n.)

determination, firmness or fixedness of purpose; a determination, 1590s, from resolve (v.).


ruling (n.)

determination by a judge or court on a point arising in the course of a trial or hearing, 1550s,
verbal noun from rule (v.).


assessment (n.)

1540s, value of property for tax purposes, from assess + -ment. Meaning determination or adjustment
of tax rate is from 1540s; general sense of estimation is recorded from 1620s. In education jargon
from 1956.


identification (n.)

1640s, treating of a thing as the same as another, from French identification, probably from
identifier (see identify). Sense of becoming or feeling oneself one with another is from 1857. Sense
of determination of identity is from 1859. Meaning object or document which marks identity is from
1947 (short for identification tag, card, etc.).


resolute (adj.)

early 15c., dissolved, of loose structure, also morally lax, from Latin resolutus, past participle
of resolvere untie, unfasten, loose, loosen (see resolution). Meaning determined, decided, absolute,
final is from c.1500, especially in resolute answer, a phrase common in 16th c. [OED]. From 1530s of
persons. The notion is of breaking (something) into parts as the way to arrive at the truth of it
and thus make the final determination (compare resolution). Related: Resolutely; resoluteness.


will (n.)

Old English will, willa mind, determination, purpose; desire, wish, request; joy, delight, from
Proto-Germanic *wiljon- (cognates: Old Saxon willio, Old Norse vili, Old Frisian willa, Dutch wil,
Old High German willio, German Wille, Gothic wilja will), related to *willan to wish (see will
(v.1)). The meaning written document expressing a person's wishes about disposition of property
after death is first recorded late 14c.


constellation (n.)

early 14c., from Old French constellacion constellation, conjuncture (of planets), from Late Latin
constellationem (nominative constellatio) set with stars, from constellatus, from Latin com- with
(see com-) + past participle of stellare to shine, from stella star (see star). Originally in
astrology, of position of planets (stars) in regard to one another on a given day, usually one's
birth day, as a determination of one's character. I folwed ay myn inclinacioun/By vertu of my
constillacioun (Chaucer, Wife's Prologue, c.1386). Modern astronomical sense is from 1550s.


personality (n.)

late 14c., quality or fact of being a person, from Medieval Latin personalitatem (nominative
personalitas), from Late Latin personalis (see personal). Sense of a distinctive character is first
recorded 1795, from French personnalit&eacute;.Personality is the supreme realization of the innate
idiosyncrasy of a living being. It is an act of courage flung in the face of life, the absolute
affirmation of all that constitutes the individual, the most successful adaptation to the universal
conditions of existence, coupled with the greatest possible freedom of self-determination. [C.G.
Jung, 1875-1961]Meaning person whose character stands out from that of others is from 1889.
Personality cult is attested from 1956.


