devious (adj.)

1590s, out of the way, from Latin devius out of the way, remote, off the main road, from de via (see
deviate). Originally in the Latin literal sense; figurative sense of deceitful is first recorded
1630s. Related: Deviously; deviousness. Figurative senses of the Latin word were retired,
sequestered, wandering in the byways, foolish, inconsistent.


Byzantine (adj.)

1770, from Latin Byzantinus (see Byzantium); originally used of art style; later in reference to the
complex, devious, and intriguing character of the royal court of Constantinople (1937). As a noun
from 1770.


catty (adj.)

1886, devious and spiteful, from cat (n.) + -y (2). Slightly earlier was cattish. Meaning pertaining
to cats is from 1902. Related: Cattily; cattiness.


seductive (adj.)

1740, from Latin seduct-, past participle stem of seducere (see seduce) + -ive. Related:
Seductively; seductiveness. Middle English had seducious deceitful, devious (mid-15c.).


backdoor (adj.)

also back-door, devious, shady, illegal, 1640s. The notion is of business done out of public view.
The noun back door in the literal sense is from 1520s, from back (adj.) + door. The association with
sodomy is at least from 19c.; compare also back-door man a married woman's lover, black slang, early
20c.


scheme (n.)

1550s, figure of speech, from Medieval Latin schema shape, figure, form, appearance; figure of
speech; posture in dancing, from Greek skhema (genitive skhematos) figure, appearance, the nature of
a thing, related to skhein to get, and ekhein to have, from PIE root *segh- to hold, to hold in
one's power, to have (cognates: Sanskrit sahate he masters, overcomes, sahah power, victory; Avestan
hazah power, victory; Greek ekhein to have, hold; Gothic sigis, Old High German sigu, Old Norse
sigr, Old English sige victory).    The sense program of action first is attested 1640s. Unfavorable
overtones (selfish, devious) began to creep in early 18c. Meaning complex unity of coordinated
component elements is from 1736. Color scheme is attested from 1884.


