deviate (v.)

1630s, from Late Latin deviatus, past participle of deviare to turn out of the way (see deviant).
Related: Deviated; deviating. The noun meaning sexual pervert is attested from 1912.


decline (v.)

late 14c., to turn aside, deviate, from Old French decliner to sink, decline, degenerate, turn
aside, from Latin declinare to lower, avoid, deviate, to bend from, inflect, from de- from (see de-)
+ clinare to bend, from PIE *klei-n-, suffixed form of *klei- to lean (see lean (v.)). Sense has
been altered since c.1400 by interpretation of de- as downward. Meaning not to consent, politely
refuse, is from 1630s. Related: Declined; declining.


deviation (n.)

1640s, noun of action from deviate (v.). Statistical sense is from 1858. Related: Deviational.


undeviating (adj.)

1732, from un- (1) not + present participle of deviate.


undeviating (adj.)

1732, from un- (1) not + present participle of deviate (v.).


sheer (v.)

1620s, deviate from course (of a ship), of obscure origin, perhaps from Dutch scheren to move aside,
withdraw, depart, originally to separate (see shear (v.)). Related: Sheered; shearing. As a noun
from 1660s.


digression (n.)

late 14c., from Latin digressionem (nominative digressio) a going away, departing, noun of action
from past participle stem of digredi to deviate, from dis- apart, aside (see dis-) + gradi to step,
go (see grade (n.)).


square (v.)

late 14c. of stones, from Old French esquarrer, escarrer to cut square, from Vulgar Latin
*exquadrare (see square (adj.)). Meaning regulate according to standard is from 1530s; sense of to
accord with is from 1590s. With reference to accounts from 1815. In 15c.-17c. the verb also could
mean to deviate, vary, digress, fall out of order. Related: Squared; squaring.


devious (adj.)

1590s, out of the way, from Latin devius out of the way, remote, off the main road, from de via (see
deviate). Originally in the Latin literal sense; figurative sense of deceitful is first recorded
1630s. Related: Deviously; deviousness. Figurative senses of the Latin word were retired,
sequestered, wandering in the byways, foolish, inconsistent.


kabuki (n.)

1896, from Japanese, popular theater (as opposed to shadow puppet-plays or lyrical Noh dramas),
literally art of song and dance, from ka song + bu dance + ki art, skill [Barnhart, OED].
Alternative etymology (in Webster's) is from nominal form of kabuku to be divergent, to deviate,
from early opinion of this form of drama. Since c.1650, all parts are played by males.


prevaricate (v.)

1580s, to transgress, a back formation from prevarication, or else from Latin praevaricatus, past
participle of praevaricari to make a sham accusation, deviate, literally walk crookedly; in Church
Latin, to transgress (see prevarication). Meaning to speak evasively is from 1630s. Related:
Prevaricated; prevaricating.


exorbitant (adj.)

mid-15c., a legal term, deviating from rule or principle, eccentric; from Latin exorbitantem
(nominative exorbitans), present participle of exorbitare deviate, go out of the track, from ex- out
of (see ex-) + orbita wheel track (see orb). Sense of excessive, immoderate is from 1620s; of
prices, rates, etc., from 1660s. Related: Exorbitantly.


deviant (adj.)

c.1400, from Late Latin deviantem (nominative devians), present participle of deviare turn aside,
from Latin phrase de via, from de off (see de-) + via way (see via). The noun meaning one that
deviates is from late 15c.; in the sexual sense, from 1952; also deviate (n.), recorded since 1912.


prevarication (n.)

late 14c., divergence from a right course, transgression, from Old French prevaricacion breaking of
God's laws, disobedience (to the Faith) (12c., Modern French pr&#233;varication) and directly from
Latin praevaricationem (nominative praevaricatio) duplicity, collusion, a stepping out of line (of
duty or behavior), noun of action from past participle stem of praevaricari to make a sham
accusation, deviate, literally walk crookedly, in Church Latin, to transgress, from prae before (see
pre-) + varicare to straddle, from varicus straddling, from varus bowlegged, knock-kneed (see
varus). Meaning evasion, quibbling is attested from 1650s.


swerve (v.)

c.1200, to depart, go make off; turn away or aside; c.1300, to turn aside, deviate from a straight
course; in form from Old English sweorfan to rub, scour, file away, grind away, but sense
development is difficult to trace. The Old English word is from Proto-Germanic *swerb- (cf Old Norse
sverfa to scour, file, Old Saxon swebran to wipe off), from PIE root *swerbh- to turn; wipe off.
Cognate words in other Germanic languages (cognates: Old Frisian swerva to creep, Middle Dutch
swerven to rove, roam, stray) suggests the sense of go off, turn aside might have existed in Old
English, though unrecorded. Related: Swerved; swerving.


bloviate (v.)

1857, American English, a Midwestern word for to talk aimlessly and boastingly; to indulge in 'high
falutin', according to Farmer (1890), who seems to have been the only British lexicographer to
notice it. He says it was based on blow (v.) on the model of deviate, etc.    It seems to have been
felt as outdated slang already by late 19c. (It was a leasure for him to hear the Doctor talk, or,
as it was inelegantly expressed in the phrase of the period, 'bloviate' .... [Overland Monthly, San
Francisco, 1872, describing a scene from 1860]), but it enjoyed a revival early 1920s during the
presidency of Warren G. Harding, who wrote a notoriously ornate and incomprehensible prose (e.e.
cummings eulogized him as The only man, woman or child who wrote a simple declarative sentence with
seven grammatical errors) at which time the word took on its connection with political speech; it
faded again thereafter, but, with its derivative, bloviation, it enjoyed a revival in the 2000 U.S.
election season that continued through the era of blogging.


