devise (v.)

early 13c., to form, fashion; c.1300, to plan, contrive, from Old French deviser dispose in
portions, arrange, plan, contrive (in modern French, to chat, gossip), from Vulgar Latin *divisare,
frequentative of Latin dividere to divide (see divide). Modern sense is from to arrange a division
(especially via a will), a meaning present in the Old French word. Related: Devised; devising.


device (n.)

late 13c., from Old French devis division, separation, disposition, wish, desire; coat of arms,
emblem; last will, from deviser to divide, distribute (see devise). Sense of method by which
something is divided arose in French and led to modern meaning.


compass (v.)

c.1300, to devise, plan; early 14c. as to surround, contain, envelop, enclose; from Anglo-French
cumpasser, from compass (n.). Related: Compassed; compassing.


scheme (v.)

devise a scheme, 1767 (earlier reduce to a scheme, 1716), from scheme (n.). Related: Schemed;
scheming.


feign (v.)

c.1300, from Old French feign-, present participle stem of feindre pretend, represent, imitate,
shirk (12c.), from Latin fingere to touch, handle; devise; fabricate, alter, change (see fiction).
Related: Feigned; feigning.


invent (v.)

late 15c., find, discover, a back-formation from invention or else from Latin inventus, past
participle of invenire â&euro;&oelig;to come upon; devise, discoverâ&euro;? (see invention).
Meaning make up, think up is from 1530s, as is that of produce by original thought. Related:
Invented; inventing.


calculate (v.)

1560s, to compute, to estimate by mathematical means, from Latin calculatus, past participle of
calculare to reckon, compute, from calculus (see calculus). Meaning to plan, devise is from 1650s.
Replaced earlier calculen (mid-14c.), from Old French calculer. Related: Calculable.


fiction (n.)

late 14c., something invented, from Old French ficcion (13c.) dissimulation, ruse; invention, and
directly from Latin fictionem (nominative fictio) a fashioning or feigning, noun of action from past
participle stem of fingere to shape, form, devise, feign, originally to knead, form out of clay,
from PIE *dheigh- to build, form, knead (source also of Old English dag dough; see dough). As a
branch of literature, 1590s.


design (v.)

1540s, from Latin designare mark out, devise, choose, designate, appoint, from de- out (see de-) +
signare to mark, from signum a mark, sign (see sign (n.)). Originally in English with the meaning
now attached to designate; many modern uses of design are metaphoric extensions. Related: Designed;
designing.


invention (n.)

c.1400, devised method of organization, from Old French invencion (13c.) and directly from Latin
inventionem (nominative inventio) faculty of invention; a finding, discovery, noun of action from
past participle stem of invenire devise, discover, find, from in- in, on (see in- (2)) + venire to
come (see venue).    Meaning finding or discovering of something is early 15c. in English; sense of
thing invented is first recorded 1510s. Etymological sense preserved in Invention of the Cross,
Church festival (May 3) celebrating the reputed finding of the Cross of the Crucifixion by Helena,
mother of Constantine, in 326 C.E.


-ize

word-forming element used to make verbs, Middle English -isen, from Old French -iser, from Late
Latin -izare, from Greek -izein.    English picked up the French form, but partially reverted to the
correct Greek -z- spelling from late 16c. In Britain, despite the opposition (at least formerly) of
OED, Encyclopaedia Britannica, the Times of London, and Fowler, -ise remains dominant. Fowler thinks
this is to avoid the difficulty of remembering the short list of common words not from Greek which
must be spelled with an -s- (such as advertise, devise, surprise).


comment (n.)

late 14c., from Old French coment commentary or directly from Late Latin commentum comment,
interpretation, in classical Latin invention, fabrication, fiction, neuter past participle of
comminisci to contrive, devise, from com-, intensive prefix (see com-), + base of meminisse to
remember, related to mens (genitive mentis) mind (see mind (n.)). The Latin word meaning something
invented was taken by Isidore and other Christian theologians for interpretation, annotation. No
comment as a stock refusal to answer a journalist's question is first recorded 1950, from Truman's
White House press secretary, Charles Ross.


frame (v.)

Old English framian to profit, be helpful, avail, benefit, from fram active, vigorous, bold,
originally going forward, from fram forward; from (see from).    Influenced by related Old English
fremman help forward, promote, further, do, perform, accomplish, and by Old Norse fremja to further,
execute. Sense focused in Middle English from make ready (mid-13c.) to prepare timber for building
(late 14c.). Meaning compose, devise is first attested 1540s.    The criminal slang sense of blame
an innocent person (1920s) is probably from earlier sense of plot in secret (1900), perhaps
ultimately from meaning fabricate a story with evil intent, first attested 1510s. Related: Framed;
framing.


licence (n.)

mid-14c., liberty (to do something), leave, from Old French licence freedom, liberty, power,
possibility; permission, (12c.), from Latin licentia freedom, liberty, license, from licentem
(nominative licens). present participle of licere to be allowed, be lawful, from PIE root *leik- to
offer, bargain (cognates: Lettish likstu I come to terms). Meaning formal (usually written)
permission from authority to do something (marry, hunt, drive, etc.) is first attested early 15c.
Meaning excessive liberty, disregard of propriety is from mid-15c. No etymological justification for
the spelling with -s-; attempts to confine license to verbal use and licence to noun use (compare
advise/advice, devise/device) seem to have failed.


trump (v.2)

fabricate, devise, 1690s, from trump deceive, cheat (1510s), from Middle English trumpen (late
14c.), from Old French tromper to deceive, of uncertain origin. Apparently from se tromper de to
mock, from Old French tromper to blow a trumpet. Brachet explains this as to play the horn, alluding
to quacks and mountebanks, who attracted the public by blowing a horn, and then cheated them into
buying .... The Hindley Old French dictionary has baillier la trompe blow the trumpet as act the
fool, and Donkin connects it rather to trombe waterspout, on the notion of turning (someone) around.
Connection with triumph also has been proposed. Related: Trumped; trumping. Trumped up false,
concocted first recorded 1728.


trace (v.)

late 14c., follow (a course); draw a line, make an outline of something, also figurative; ponder,
investigate, from Old French tracier look for, follow, pursue (12c., Modern French tracer), from
Vulgar Latin *tractiare delineate, score, trace (source also of Spanish trazar to trace, devise,
plan out, Italian tracciare to follow by foot), a frequentative form from Latin tractus track,
course, literally a drawing out, from past participle stem of trahere to pull, draw (see tract
(n.1)).    Meaning move along, pass over (a path, etc.) is attested from c.1400; that of track down,
follow the trail of is early 15c. Meaning copy a drawing on a transparent sheet laid over it is
recorded from 1762. Related: Traced; tracing.


weave (v.1)

Old English wefan to weave, form by interlacing yarn, figuratively devise, contrive, arrange  (class
V strong verb; past tense w&aelig;f, past participle wefen), from Proto-Germanic *weban (cognates:
Old Norse vefa, Middle Low German, Middle Dutch, Dutch weven, Old High German weban, German weben to
weave), from PIE *webh- to weave; also to move quickly (cognates: Sanskrit ubhnati he laces
together, Persian baftan to weave, Greek hyphe, hyphos web, Old English webb web).    The form of
the past tense altered in Middle English from wave to wove. Extended sense of combine into a whole
is from late 14c.; meaning go by twisting and turning is from 1640s. Related: Wove; woven; weaving.


meditation (n.)

c.1200, contemplation; devout preoccupation; devotions, prayer, from Old French meditacion thought,
reflection, study, and directly from Latin meditationem (nominative meditatio) a thinking over,
meditation, noun of action from past participle stem of meditari to meditate, think over, reflect,
consider, frequentative form from PIE root *med- to measure, limit, consider, advise, take
appropriate measures (cognates: Greek medesthai think about, medon ruler; Latin modus measure,
manner, modestus moderate, modernus modern, mederi to heal, medicus physician; Sanskrit midiur I
judge, estimate; Welsh meddwl mind, thinking; Gothic miton, Old English metan to measure; also see
medical).    Meaning discourse on a subject is early 14c.; meaning act of meditating, continuous
calm thought upon some subject is from late 14c. The Latin verb also had stronger senses: plan,
devise, practice, rehearse, study.


Taurus (n.)

zodiac constellation, late Old English, from Latin taurus bull, bullock, steer, also the name of the
constellation, from PIE *tau-ro- bull (cognates: Greek tauros, Old Church Slavonic turu bull, steer;
Lithuanian tauras aurochs; Old Prussian tauris bison); from PIE *tauro- bull, from root *(s)taeu-
stout, standing, strong (cognates: Sanskrit sthura- thick, compact, Avestan staora- big cattle,
Middle Persian stor horse, draft animal, Gothic stiur young bull, Old English steor, see steer
(n.)); extended form of root *sta- to stand (see stet).    Klein proposes a Semitic origin (compare
Aramaic tora ox, bull, steer, Hebrew shor, Arabic thor, Ethiopian sor). Meaning person born under
the sign of the bull is recorded from 1901.    At midnight revels when the gossips met,  He was the
theme of their eternal chat:  This ask'd what form great Jove would next devise,  And when his
godship would again Taurise?  [William Somerville, The Wife, 1727]    The Taurid meteors (peaking
Nov. 20) so called from 1878.


