devoid (adj.)

c.1400, shortening of devoided, past participle of obsolete verb devoiden to remove, void, vacate
(c.1300), from Old French desvuidier (12c., Modern French d&eacute;vider) to empty out, flush game
from, unwind, let loose (an arrow), from des- out, away + voider to empty, from voide empty (see
void (adj.)).


matterless (adj.)

late 14c., insubstantial, immaterial, without physical substance, from matter (n.) + -less. From
1610s as devoid of sense or meaning.


senseless (adj.)

1550s, without sensation, from sense (n.) + -less. Of actions, etc., devoid of purpose, proceeding
from lack of intelligence, it is attested from 1570s. Related: Senselessly; senselessness.


cheerless (adj.)

devoid of comfort, 1570s, from cheer (n.) + -less. Related: Cheerlessly; cheerlessness.


white (n.)

Old English hwit whiteness, white food, white of an egg, from white (adj.). Also in late Old English
a highly luminous color devoid of chroma. Meaning white part of the eyeball is from c.1400. Meaning
white man, person of a race distinguished by light complexion is from 1670s; white man in this sense
is from 1690s. White man's burden is from Kipling's 1899 poem.    Take up the White Man's burden--
The savage wars of peace--  Fill full the mouth of Famine  And bid the sickness cease;  And when
your goal is nearest  The end for others sought,  Watch sloth and heathen Folly  Bring all your
hopes to nought.


-less

word-forming element meaning lacking, cannot be, does not, from Old English -leas, from leas free
(from), devoid (of), false, feigned, from Proto-Germanic *lausaz (cognates: Dutch -loos, German -los
-less, Old Norse lauss loose, free, vacant, dissolute, Middle Dutch los, German los loose, free,
Gothic laus empty, vain). Related to loose and lease.


unfeeling (adj.)

late Old English had unfelende, having no sensation. Middle English had a verb unfeel be insensible,
fail to feel (early 14c.) as well as unfeelingness insensibility, loss of sensation, and unfeelingly
without understanding or direct knowledge (late 14c.), and a verbal noun unfeeling loss of
sensation, lack of feeling. However the word in its main modern meaning devoid of kindly or tender
feelings is from 1590s, from un- (1) not + past participle of feel (v.). Related: Unfeelingly.


vacuum (n.)

1540s, emptiness of space, from Latin vacuum an empty space, vacant place, a void, noun use of
neuter of vacuus empty, unoccupied, devoid of, figuratively free, unoccupied, related to vacare be
empty (see vain). Properly a loan-translation of Greek kenon, literally that which is empty. Meaning
a space emptied of air is attested from 1650s. Vacuum tube glass thermionic device is attested from
1859. Vacuum cleaner is from 1903; shortened form vacuum (n.) first recorded 1910.    The
metaphysicians of Elea, Parmenides and Melissus, started the notion that a vacuum was impossible,
and this became a favorite doctrine with Aristotle. All the scholastics upheld the maxim that nature
abhors a vacuum. [Century Dictionary]


vain (adj.)

c.1300, devoid of real value, idle, unprofitable, from Old French vain, vein worthless, void,
invalid, feeble; conceited (12c.), from Latin vanus empty, void, figuratively idle, fruitless, from
PIE *wa-no-, from root *eue- to leave, abandon, give out (cognates: Old English wanian to lessen,
wan deficient; Old Norse vanta to lack; Latin vacare to be empty, vastus empty, waste; Avestan va-
lack, Persian vang empty, poor; Sanskrit una- deficient, Armenian unain empty).    Meaning
conceited, elated with a high opinion of oneself first recorded 1690s in English; earlier silly,
idle, foolish (late 14c.). Phrase in vain to no effect (c.1300, after Latin in vanum) preserves the
original sense. Related: Vainly; vainness. Compare also vainglory.


loose (adj.)

early 13c., not securely fixed; c.1300, unbound, from Old Norse lauss loose, free, vacant,
dissolute, cognate with Old English leas devoid of, false, feigned, incorrect, from Proto-Germanic
*lausaz (cognates: Danish l&oslash;s loose, untied, Swedish l&#246;s loose, movable, detached,
Middle Dutch, German los loose, free, Gothic laus empty, vain), from PIE *leu- to loosen, divide,
cut apart (see lose). Meaning not clinging, slack is mid-15c. Meaning not bundled is late 15c. Sense
of unchaste, immoral is recorded from late 15c. Meaning at liberty, free from obligation is 1550s.
Sense of rambling, disconnected is from 1680s. Figurative sense of loose cannon was in use by 1896,
probably from celebrated image in a popular story by Hugo:    You can reason with a bull dog,
astonish a bull, fascinate a boa, frighten a tiger, soften a lion; no resource with such a monster
as a loose cannon. You cannot kill it, it is dead; and at the same time it lives. It lives with a
sinister life which comes from the infinite. It is moved by the ship, which is moved by the sea,
which is moved by the wind. This exterminator is a plaything. [Victor Hugo, Ninety Three]   Loose
end in reference to something unfinished, undecided, unguarded is from 1540s; to be at loose ends is
from 1807. Phrase on the loose free, unrestrained is from 1749 (upon the loose).


