devout (adj.)

early 13c., from Old French devot pious, devoted, assiduous, from Latin devotus given up by vow,
devoted, past participle of devovere dedicate by vow (see devotion).


heartful (adj.)

devout, earnest, mid-14c., from heart + -ful. Related: Heartfully.


pious (adj.)

mid-15c., from Latin pius dutiful, devout, conscientious, religious; faithful to kindred; inspired
by friendship, prompted by natural affections, perhaps [Klein] related to Latin purus pure, clean
(see pure). Often coupled with fraud (n.) from at least 1630s. Related: Piously; piousness.


religious (adj.)

c.1200, devout, pious, imbued with or expressive of religious devotion, from Anglo-French religius,
Old French religious (12c., Modern French religieux) and directly from Latin religiosus, from
religio (see religion). Meaning pertaining to religion is from 1530s. Transferred sense of
scrupulous, exact is recorded from 1590s. Related: Religiousness.


expiation (n.)

early 15c., via Middle French expiation or directly from Latin expiationem (nominative expiatio)
satisfaction, atonement, noun of action from past participle stem of expiare make amends, from ex-
completely (see ex-) + piare propitiate, appease, from pius faithful, loyal, devout (see pious).The
sacrifice of expiation is that which tendeth to appease the wrath of God. [Thomas Norton,
translation of Calvin's Institutes of Christian Religion, 1561]


stigma (n.)

1590s (earlier stigme, c.1400), mark made on skin by burning with a hot iron, from Latin stigma
(plural stigmata), from Greek stigma (genitive stigmatos) mark of a pointed instrument, puncture,
tattoo-mark, brand, from root of stizein to mark, tattoo, from PIE root *steig- to stick; pointed
(see stick (v.)).    Figurative meaning a mark of disgrace in English is from 1610s. Stigmas marks
resembling the wounds on the body of Christ, appearing supernaturally on the bodies of the devout is
from 1630s; earlier stigmate (late 14c.), from Latin stigmata.


solemn (adj.)

mid-14c., performed with due religious ceremony or reverence, sacred, devoted to religious
observances, also, of a vow, etc., made under religious sanction, binding, from Old French solempne
(12c., Modern French solennel) and directly from Latin sollemnis annual, established, religiously
fixed, formal, ceremonial, traditional, perhaps related to sollus whole (see safe (adj.)).    The
explanation that Latin sollemnis was formed from sollus whole + annus year is not considered valid
[Barnhart], but some assimilation via folk-etymology is possible. In Middle English also famous,
important; imposing, grand, hence Chaucer's friar, a ful solempne man. Meaning marked by seriousness
or earnestness is from late 14c.; sense of fitted to inspire devout reflection is from c.1400.
Related: Solemnly.


meditation (n.)

c.1200, contemplation; devout preoccupation; devotions, prayer, from Old French meditacion thought,
reflection, study, and directly from Latin meditationem (nominative meditatio) a thinking over,
meditation, noun of action from past participle stem of meditari to meditate, think over, reflect,
consider, frequentative form from PIE root *med- to measure, limit, consider, advise, take
appropriate measures (cognates: Greek medesthai think about, medon ruler; Latin modus measure,
manner, modestus moderate, modernus modern, mederi to heal, medicus physician; Sanskrit midiur I
judge, estimate; Welsh meddwl mind, thinking; Gothic miton, Old English metan to measure; also see
medical).    Meaning discourse on a subject is early 14c.; meaning act of meditating, continuous
calm thought upon some subject is from late 14c. The Latin verb also had stronger senses: plan,
devise, practice, rehearse, study.


