phago-

word-forming element meaning eating, from Greek phago- eating, devouring, (see -phagous).


omnivorous (adj.)

1650s, from Latin omnivorus all-devouring, from omnis all (see omni-) + vorare devour, swallow (see
voracity). Related: Omnivorously; omnivorousness.


phagocyte (n.)

1884, from German phagocyten (plural), coined in German in 1884 by Dr. Elias Metchnikoff (1845-1916)
from Greek phago- eating, devouring (see -phagous) + -cyte (see cyto-). Related: Phagocytosis.


orc (n.)

ogre, devouring monster, Old English orc&thorn;yrs, orcneas (plural), perhaps from a Romanic source
akin to ogre, and ultimately from Latin Orcus Hell, a word of unknown origin. Revived by J.R.R.
Tolkien (1892-1973) as the name of a brutal race in Middle Earth.But Orcs and Trolls spoke as they
would, without love of words or things; and their language was actually more degraded and filthy
than I have shown it. [Return of the King, 1955]


afanc (n.)

cattle-devouring aquatic monster in Celtic countries, from Celtic *abankos water-creature, from *ab-
water (cognates: Welsh afon, Breton aven river, Latin amnis stream, river, which is of Italo-Celtic
origin).


moth (n.)

Old English mo&eth;&eth;e (Northumbrian moh&eth;e), common Germanic (Old Norse motti, Middle Dutch
motte, Dutch mot, German Motte moth), perhaps related to Old English ma&eth;a maggot, or from the
root of midge (q.v.). Until 16c. used mostly of the larva and usually in reference to devouring
clothes (see Matt. vi:20).


devour (v.)

early 14c., from Old French devorer (12c.) devour, swallow up, engulf, from Latin devorare swallow
down, accept eagerly, from de- down (see de-) + vorare to swallow (see voracity). Related: Devoured;
devouring.


cranberry (n.)

1640s, American English adaptation of Low German kraanbere, from kraan crane (see crane (n.)) +
Middle Low German bere berry (see berry). Perhaps so called from a resemblance between the plants'
stamens and the beaks of cranes.    Upon the Rocks and in the Moss, grew a Shrub whose fruit was
very sweet, full of red juice like Currans, perhaps 'tis the same with the New England Cranberry, or
Bear-Berry, (call'd so from the Bears devouring it very greedily;) with which we make Tarts. [An
Account of Several Late Voyages &amp; Discoveries, London, 1694]    German and Dutch settlers in the
New World apparently recognized the similarity between the European berries (Vaccinium oxycoccos)
and the larger North American variety (V. macrocarpum) and transferred the name. In England, they
were marshwort or fenberries, but the North American berries, and the name, were brought over late
17c. The native Algonquian name for the plant is represented by West Abenaki popokwa.


