dexterous (adj.)

c.1600, convenient, suitable, formed in English from Latin dexter (see dexterity) + -ous. Meaning
skillful, clever is from 1620s.


dextrous (adj.)

1620s, alternative spelling of dexterous; this version is more conformable to Latin but less common
in English.


grenadier (n.)

1670s, originally a word for soldiers who were dexterous in flinging hand-granados [Evelyn], from
French grenadier (15c.), from Middle French grenade grenade (see grenade); later the tallest and
finest men in the regiment [OED].


subtile (adj.)

late 14c., clever, dexterous, crafty; not dense, thin, rarefied, from Old French subtil (14c.), a
learned Latinized reformation of earlier sotil (12c.), source of subtle (q.v.). Still used in some
Bible translations in Gen. iii:1, and it survived after 17c. as a parallel formation to subtle in
some material senses (fine, delicate, thin).


adroit (adj.)

1650s, dexterous, originally rightly, from French adroit, from phrase &agrave; droit according to
right, from Old French &agrave; to (see ad-) + droit right, from Late Latin directum right, justice,
accusative of Latin directus straight (see direct (v.)). Related: Adroitly; adroitness.


sly (adj.)

c.1200, skillful, clever, dexterous, from Old Norse sloegr cunning, crafty, sly, from Proto-Germanic
*slogis (cognates: Low German slu cunning, sly, German schlau), probably from base *slak- to strike,
hit (see slay (v.)), with an original notion of able to hit. Compare German verschlagen cunning,
crafty, sly, schlagfertig quick-witted, literally strike-ready, from schlagen to strike. A non-
pejorative use of the word lingered in northern English dialect until 20c. On the sly in secret is
recorded from 1812. Sly-boots a seeming Silly, but subtil Fellow is in the 1700 Dictionary of the
Canting Crew.


clever (adj.)

1580s, handy, dexterous, apparently from East Anglian dialectal cliver expert at seizing, perhaps
from East Frisian kl&#252;fer skillful, or Norwegian dialectic klover ready, skillful, and perhaps
influenced by Old English clifer claw, hand (early usages seem to refer to dexterity). Or perhaps
akin to Old Norse kleyfr easy to split and from a root related to cleave to split. Extension to
intellect is first recorded 1704.    This is a low word, scarcely ever used but in burlesque or
conversation; and applied to any thing a man likes, without a settled meaning. [Johnson, 1755]
The meaning has narrowed since, but clever also often in old use and dialect meant well-shaped,
attractive-looking and in 19c. American English sometimes good-natured, agreeable. Related:
Cleverly; cleverness.


