diabolical (adj.)

c.1500, pertaining to the devil, from diabolic + -al (1). Meaning befitting the devil is from 1540s.
Related: Diabolically.


satanic (adj.)

1667 (in Paradise Lost), pertaining to Satan, from Satan + -ic. Meaning diabolical is from 1793.
Related: Satanical (1540s).


turtle (n.1)

tortoise, c.1600, originally marine tortoise, from French tortue, tortre (13c.) turtle, tortoise
(often associated with diabolical beasts), of unknown origin. The English word perhaps is a sailors'
mauling of the French one, influenced by the similar sounding turtle (n.2). Later extended to land
tortoises; sea-turtle is attested from 1610s.


fiend (n.)

Old English feond enemy, foe, originally present participle of feogan to hate, from Proto-Germanic
*fijand- hating, hostile (cognates: Old Frisian fiand enemy, Old Saxon fiond, Middle Dutch viant,
Dutch vijand enemy, Old Norse fjandi, Old High German fiant, Gothic fijands), from suffixed form of
PIE root *pe(i)- to hurt (source also of Gothic faian to blame; see passion).    As spelling
suggests, it was originally the opposite of friend, but the word began to be used in Old English for
Satan (as the enemy of mankind), which shifted its sense to diabolical person (early 13c.). The old
sense of the word devolved to foe, then to the imported word enemy. For spelling with -ie- see
field. Meaning devotee (of whatever is indicated), as in dope fiend, is from 1865.


devil (n.)

Old English deofol evil spirit, a devil, the devil, false god, diabolical person, from Late Latin
diabolus (also the source of Italian diavolo, French diable, Spanish diablo; German Teufel is Old
High German tiufal, from Latin via Gothic diabaulus).    The Late Latin word is from Ecclesiastical
Greek diabolos, in Jewish and Christian use, Devil, Satan (scriptural loan-translation of Hebrew
satan), in general use accuser, slanderer, from diaballein to slander, attack, literally throw
across, from dia- across, through + ballein to throw (see ballistics). Jerome re-introduced Satan in
Latin bibles, and English translators have used both in different measures.    In Vulgate, as in
Greek, diabolus and d&aelig;mon (see demon) were distinct, but they have merged in English and other
Germanic languages.    Playful use for clever rogue is from c.1600. Meaning sand spout, dust storm
is from 1835. In U.S. place names, the word often represents a native word such as Algonquian
manito, more properly spirit, god. Phrase a devil way (c.1300) was originally Hell-ward, to Hell,
but by late 14c. as an expression of irritation.   Devil's books playing cards is from 1729, but the
cited quote says they've been called that time out of mind (the four of clubs is the devil's
bedposts); devil's coach-horse is from 1840, the large rove-beetle, which is defiant when disturbed.
Talk of the Devil, and he's presently at your elbow [1660s].


