dicky (n.)

detached shirt front, 1811; a small bird, 1851; diminutive of dick, but the applications are obscure
in both cases.


dickhead (n.)

stupid, contemptible person, by 1969, from dick in the penis sense + head.


Dick Whittington

The story is an old one, told under other names throughout Europe, of a poor boy who sends a cat he
had bought for a penny as his stake in a trading voyage; the captain sells it on his behalf for a
fortune to a foreign king whose palace is overrun by rats. The hero devotes part of his windfall to
charity, which may be why the legend attached in England since 16c. to Sir Richard Whittington
(d.1423), three times Lord Mayor of London, who died childless and devoted large sums in his will to
churches, almshouses, and St. Bartholomew's Hospital.


dick (n.)

fellow, lad, man, 1550s, rhyming nickname for Rick, short for Richard, one of the commonest English
names, it has long been a synonym for fellow, and so most of the slang senses are probably very old,
but naturally hard to find in the surviving records. The meaning penis is attested from 1891 in
Farmer's slang dictionary (possibly British army slang). Meaning detective is recorded from 1908,
perhaps as a shortened variant of detective.


high-five

originally U.S. basketball slang, 1980 as a noun, 1981 as a verb, though the greeting itself seems
to be older (Dick Shawn in The Producers, 1968). In reference to the five fingers of the hand.


dork (n.)

stupid person, 1967, originally U.S. student slang, perhaps from earlier meaning penis (1964),
itself probably an alteration of dick. Related: Dorky; dorkiness.


pissant (n.)

1660s, an ant, from first element of pismire (q.v.) + ant. Meaning contemptible, insignificant
person is from 1903.    [B]y sun-down [the gals] come pourin out of the woods like pissants out of
an old log when tother end's afire. [Dick Harlan's Tennessee Frolic, in collection A Quarter Race in
Kentucky, Philadelphia, 1846]


Yippie

1968, acronym from fictitious Youth International Party, modeled on hippie.    On December 31, 1967,
Abbie [Hoffman], Jerry [Rubin], Paul Krassner, Dick Gregory, and friends decided to pronounce
themselves the Yippies. (The name came first, then the acronym that would satisfy literal-minded
reporters: Youth International Party.) [Todd Gitlin, The Sixties, 1987, p.235]


scrimshaw (n.)

1864, A nautical word of unstable orthography [Century Dictionary], back-formation from scrimshander
(Moby Dick, 1851), scrimshonting (1825), American English, of unknown origin. Scrimshaw is an
English surname, attested from mid-12c., from Old French escremisseor fencing-master.


Cetacea (n.)

order of marine mammals containing whales, 1830, Modern Latin, from Latin cetus any large sea
creature (whales, seals, dolphins), from Greek ketos a whale, a sea monster, which is of unknown
origin, + -acea. Hence cetology the study of whales, first attested 1851 in Moby Dick.


spot (v.)

mid-13c., to mark or stain with spots; late 14c. as to stain, sully, tarnish, from spot (n.).
Meaning to see and recognize, is from 1718, originally colloquial and applied to a criminal or
suspected person; the general sense is from 1860. Related: Spotted; spotting. Spotted dick suet
pudding with currants and raisins is attested from 1849.


flop (n.)

1823, act of flopping; any action that produces the sound 'flop;' the sound itself, from flop (v.).
Figurative sense of a failure; that which is a failure is by 1893, from the notion of a sudden
break-down or collapse. Extended form flopperoo attested from 1936. The Fosbury flop high-jumping
technique (1968) is so called in reference to U.S. athlete Dick Fosbury (b.1947), who used it to win
the 1968 Olympic gold medal.


dyke (n.)

1931, American English, perhaps a shortening of morphadike, dialectal garbling of hermaphrodite; but
bulldyker engage in lesbian activities is attested from 1921, and a source from 1896 lists dyke as
slang for the vulva.    [T]he word appears first in the long forms, bulldiker and bulldyking, both
used in the 1920s by American blacks. No African antecedents have been found for the term, however,
which leads to the possibility that this is basically just another backcountry, barnyard word,
perhaps a combination of BULL and DICK. [Rawson]


every (adj.)

early 13c., contraction of Old English &aelig;fre &aelig;lc each of a group, literally ever each
(Chaucer's everich), from each with ever added for emphasis. The word still is felt to want
emphasis; as in Modern English every last ..., every single ..., etc.    Also a pronoun to Chaucer,
Shakespeare, Spenser. Compare everybody, everything, etc. The word everywhen is attested from 1843
but never caught on; neither did everyhow (1837). Slang phrase every Tom, Dick, and Harry every man,
everyone dates from at least 1734, from common English given names.


nuts (adj.)

crazy, 1846, from earlier be nutts upon be very fond of (1785), which is possibly from nuts (plural
noun) any source of pleasure (1610s), from nut (q.v.). Sense influenced probably by metaphoric
application of nut to head (1846, as in to be off one's nut be insane, 1860). Nuts as a derisive
retort is attested from 1931.    Connection with the slang testicle sense has tended to nudge it
toward taboo. On the N.B.C. network, it is forbidden to call any character a nut; you have to call
him a screwball. [New Yorker, Dec. 23, 1950] Please eliminate the expression 'nuts to you' from
Egbert's speech. [Request from the Hays Office regarding the script of The Bank Dick, 1940] This
desire for avoidance accounts for the euphemism nerts (c. 1925).


blue moon (n.)

1821 as a specific term in the sense very rarely, perhaps suggesting something that, in fact, never
happens (compare at the Greek calends, and the native in the reign of Queen Dick and Saint
Geoffrey's Day Never, there being no saint of that name, reported in Grose (1788)); suggested
earliest in this couplet from 1528:Yf they say the mone is blewe,We must beleve that it is true.
Though this might refer to calendrical calculations by the Church. Thus the general rareness sense
of the term is difficult to disentangle from the specific calendrical one (commonly misinterpreted
as second full moon in a calendar month, but actually a quarterly calculation). In either case, the
sense of blue here is obscure. Literal blue moons do sometimes occur under extreme atmospheric
conditions.


Tom

familiar shortening of masc. proper name Thomas, used by late 14c. as a type of a nickname for a
common man (as in Tom, Dick, and Harry, 1734). Applied 17c. as a nickname for several exceptionally
large bells. Short for Uncle Tom in the sense of black man regarded as too servile to whites is
recorded from 1959. Tom Walker, U.S. Southern colloquial for the devil is recorded from 1833. Tom
and Jerry is first attested 1828 and later used in many extended senses, originally were the names
of the two chief characters (Corinthian Tom and Jerry Hawthorn) in Pierce Egan's Life in London
(1821); the U.S. cat and mouse cartoon characters debuted 1940 in Puss Gets the Boot. Tom Thumb
(1570s) was a miniature man in popular tradition before P.T. Barnum took the name for a dwarf he
exhibited. Tom-tit titmouse is from 1709. Compare tomcat.


thick (adj.)

Old English &thorn;icce dense, viscous, solid, stiff; numerous, abundant; deep, also as an adverb,
thickly, closely, often, frequently, from Proto-Germanic *thiku- (cognates: Old Saxon thikki, Old
High German dicchi, German dick, Old Norse &thorn;ykkr, Old Frisian thikke), from PIE *tegu- thick
(cognates: Gaelic tiugh). Secondary Old English sense of close together is preserved in thickset and
proverbial phrase thick as thieves (1833). Meaning stupid is first recorded 1590s. Related: Thickly.
As a noun, the thick part (of anything), from mid-13c. Phrase through thick and thin, indicating
rough or smooth going, hence unwaveringly, is in Chaucer (late 14c.); thick-skinned is attested from
1540s; in figurative sense from c. 1600. To be in the thick of some action, etc., to be at the most
intense moment is from 1680s, from a Middle English noun sense.


race (n.2)

people of common descent, a word from the 16th century, from Middle French race, earlier razza race,
breed, lineage, family (16c.), possibly from Italian razza, of unknown origin (cognate with Spanish
and Portuguese raza). Etymologists say no connection with Latin radix root, though they admit this
might have influenced the tribe, nation sense.    Original senses in English included wines with
characteristic flavor (1520), group of people with common occupation (c. 1500), and generation
(1540s). Meaning tribe, nation, or people regarded as of common stock is by 1560s. Modern meaning of
one of the great divisions of mankind based on physical peculiarities is from 1774 (though as OED
points out, even among anthropologists there never has been an accepted classification of
these).Just being a Negro doesn't qualify you to understand the race situation any more than being
sick makes you an expert on medicine. [Dick Gregory, 1964]  In mid-20c. U.S. music catalogues,
Negro. Klein suggests these derive from Arabic ra's head, beginning, origin (compare Hebrew rosh).
Old English &thorn;eode meant both race, folk, nation and language; as a verb, ge&thorn;eodan, it
meant to unite, to join.


Hobbit (n.)

1937, coined in the fantasy tales of J.R.R. Tolkien (1892-1973).    On a blank leaf I scrawled: 'In
a hole in the ground there lived a hobbit.' I did not and do not know why.  [Tolkien, letter to W.H.
Auden, dated 1955]    The word also turns up in a very long list of folkloric supernatural creatures
in the writings of Michael Aislabie Denham (d.1859), printed in volume 2 of The Denham Tracts [ed.
James Hardy, London: Folklore Society, 1895], a compilation of Denham's scattered publications.
Denham was an early folklorist who concentrated on Northumberland, Durham, Westmoreland, Cumberland,
the Isle of Man, and Scotland.    What a happiness this must have been seventy or eighty years ago
and upwards, to those chosen few who had the good luck to be born on the eve of this festival of all
festivals; when the whole earth was so overrun with ghosts, boggles, bloody-bones, spirits, demons,
ignis fatui, brownies, bugbears, black dogs, specters, shellycoats, scarecrows, witches, wizards,
barguests, Robin-Goodfellows, hags, night-bats, scrags, breaknecks, fantasms, hobgoblins,
hobhoulards, boggy-boes, dobbies, hob-thrusts, fetches, kelpies, warlocks, mock-beggars, mum-pokers,
Jemmy-burties, urchins, satyrs, pans, fauns, sirens, tritons, centaurs, calcars, nymphs, imps,
incubuses, spoorns, men-in-the-oak, hell-wains, fire-drakes, kit-a-can-sticks, Tom-tumblers, melch-
dicks, larrs, kitty-witches, hobby-lanthorns, Dick-a-Tuesdays, Elf-fires, Gyl-burnt-tales, knockers,
elves, rawheads, Meg-with-the-wads, old-shocks, ouphs, pad-foots, pixies, pictrees, giants, dwarfs,
Tom-pokers, tutgots, snapdragons, sprets, spunks, conjurers, thurses, spurns, tantarrabobs,
swaithes, tints, tod-lowries, Jack-in-the-Wads, mormos, changelings, redcaps, yeth-hounds, colt-
pixies, Tom-thumbs, black-bugs, boggarts, scar-bugs, shag-foals, hodge-pochers, hob-thrushes, bugs,
bull-beggars, bygorns, bolls, caddies, bomen, brags, wraiths, waffs, flay-boggarts, fiends,
gallytrots, imps, gytrashes, patches, hob-and-lanthorns, gringes, boguests, bonelesses, Peg-powlers,
pucks, fays, kidnappers, gallybeggars, hudskins, nickers, madcaps, trolls, robinets, friars'
lanthorns, silkies, cauld-lads, death-hearses, goblins, hob-headlesses, bugaboos, kows, or cowes,
nickies, nacks necks, waiths, miffies, buckies, ghouls, sylphs, guests, swarths, freiths, freits,
gy-carlins Gyre-carling, pigmies, chittifaces, nixies, Jinny-burnt-tails, dudmen, hell-hounds,
dopple-gangers, boggleboes, bogies, redmen, portunes, grants, <b>hobbits</b>, hobgoblins, brown-men,
cowies, dunnies, wirrikows, alholdes, mannikins, follets, korreds, lubberkins, cluricauns, kobolds,
leprechauns, kors, mares, korreds, puckles korigans, sylvans, succubuses, blackmen, shadows,
banshees, lian-hanshees, clabbernappers, Gabriel-hounds, mawkins, doubles, corpse lights or candles,
scrats, mahounds, trows, gnomes, sprites, fates, fiends, sibyls, nicknevins, whitewomen, fairies,
thrummy-caps, cutties, and nisses, and apparitions of every shape, make, form, fashion, kind and
description, that there was not a village in England that had not its own peculiar ghost. Nay, every
lone tenement, castle, or mansion-house, which could boast of any antiquity had its bogle, its
specter, or its knocker. The churches, churchyards, and crossroads were all haunted. Every green
lane had its boulder-stone on which an apparition kept watch at night. Every common had its circle
of fairies belonging to it. And there was scarcely a shepherd to be met with who had not seen a
spirit!    [Emphasis added] It is curious that the name occurs nowhere else in folklore, and there
is no evidence that Tolkien ever saw this. The word also was recorded from 1835 as a term generally
used in Wales to express a quantity made up of four Welsh pecks. Hobbitry attested from 1947.


