diligence (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French diligence attention, care; haste, speed, from Latin diligentia
attentiveness, carefulness, from diligentem (nominative diligens) attentive, assiduous, careful,
originally present participle of diligere single out, value highly, esteem, prize, love; aspire to,
be content with, appreciate, originally to pick out, select, from dis- apart (see dis-) + legere
choose, gather (see lecture (n.)).    Sense evolved from love through attentiveness to carefulness
to steady effort. From the secondary French sense comes the old useage of diligence for public stage
coach (1742; dilly for short), from a French shortening of carrosse de diligence.


dilly (n.)

delightful or excellent person or thing (often used ironically), 1935, American English, from an
earlier adjective (1909), perhaps from the first syllable of delightful or delicious, or related to
the nursery word for duck. Dilly was also slang for a stagecoach (1818), from French carrosse de
diligence (see diligence).


industry (n.)

late 15c., cleverness, skill, from Old French industrie activity; aptitude (14c.) or directly from
Latin industria diligence, activity, zeal, fem. of industrius industrious, diligent, used as a noun,
from early Latin indostruus diligent, from indu in, within + stem of struere to build (see structure
(n.)). Sense of diligence, effort is from 1530s; meaning trade or manufacture first recorded 1560s;
that of systematic work is 1610s.


flyte (v.)

Old English flitan to contend, struggle, quarrel; related to German flei&szlig;, Dutch vlijt
diligence, industry.


diligent (adj.)

mid-14c., from Old French diligent (14c.), from Latin diligentem attentive, assiduous (see
diligence). Related: Diligently.


dildo (n.)

1590s, perhaps a corruption of Italian deletto delight, from Latin dilectio, noun of action from
diligere to esteem highly, to love (see diligence). Or (less likely) of English diddle. Curse Eunuke
dilldo, senceless counterfet [Choise of Valentines or the Merie Ballad of Nash his Dildo, T. Nashe,
c.1593]


Laocoon

Trojan priest of Apollo, from Latin Laocoon, from Greek Laukoun, from laos people (see lay (adj.)) +
koeo I mark, perceive.   <b>Laoco&ouml;n</b>, n. A famous piece of antique sculpture representing a
priest of that time and his two sons in the folds of two enormous serpents. The skill and diligence
with which the old man and lads support the serpents and keep them up in their work have been justly
regarded as one of the noblest artistic illustrations of the mastery of human intelligence over
brute inertia. [Ambrose Bierce, Devil's Dictionary, 1911]


-ance

word-forming element attached to verbs to form abstract nouns of process or fact (convergence from
converge), or of state or quality (absence from absent); ultimately from Latin -antia and -entia,
which depended on the vowel in the stem word.    As Old French evolved from Latin, these were
leveled to -ance, but later French borrowings from Latin (some of them subsequently passed to
English) used the appropriate Latin form of the ending, as did words borrowed by English directly
from Latin (diligence, absence).    English thus inherited a confused mass of words from French and
further confused it since c.1500 by restoring -ence selectively in some forms of these words to
conform with Latin. Thus dependant, but independence, etc.


charity (n.)

mid-12c., benevolence for the poor, from Old French charit&eacute; (Christian) charity, mercy,
compassion; alms; charitable foundation (12c., Old North French carit&eacute;), from Latin caritatem
(nominative caritas) costliness, esteem, affection (in Vulgate often used as translation of Greek
agape love -- especially Christian love of fellow man -- perhaps to avoid the sexual suggestion of
Latin amor), from carus dear, valued, from PIE *karo-, from root *ka- to like, desire (see whore
(n.)).    Vulgate also sometimes translated agape by Latin dilectio, noun of action from diligere to
esteem highly, to love (see diligence).  Wyclif and the Rhemish version regularly rendered the
Vulgate dilectio by 'love,' caritas by 'charity.' But the 16th c. Eng. versions from Tindale to
1611, while rendering agape sometimes 'love,' sometimes 'charity,' did not follow the dilectio and
caritas of the Vulgate, but used 'love' more often (about 86 times), confining 'charity' to 26
passages in the Pauline and certain of the Catholic Epistles (not in I John), and the Apocalypse
.... In the Revised Version 1881, 'love' has been substituted in all these instances, so that it now
stands as the uniform rendering of agape. [OED]  Sense of charitable foundation or institution in
English attested by 1690s.


