dire (adj.)

1560s, from Latin dirus fearful, awful, boding ill, of unknown origin; perhaps from Oscan and
Umbrian and perhaps cognate with Greek deinos, from PIE root *dwei-.


voir dire

1670s, from Old French voir true (from Latin verus true; see very) + dire to say (see diction).


dinosaur (n.)

1841, coined in Modern Latin by Sir Richard Owen, from comb. form of Greek deinos terrible (see
dire) + sauros lizard (see -saurus). Figurative sense of person or institution not adapting to
change is from 1952.


saying (n.)

utterance, recitation, action of the verb 'say,'  c.1300, verbal noun from say (v.); meaning
something that has been said (usually by someone thought important) is from c.1300; sense of a
proverb is first attested mid-15c.   <b>&#199;a va sans dire</b>, a familiar French locution, whose
English equivalent might be that is a matter of course, or that may be taken for granted. But
recently it has become the tendency to translate it literally, that goes without saying, and these
words, though originally uncouth and almost unmeaning to the unpractised ear, are gradually
acquiring the exact meaning of the French. [Walsh, 1892]


soi-disant (adj.)

self-named, so-called, would-be, 1752 (in Chesterfield), French, from soi oneself (from Latin se,
see se-) + present participle of dire to say (see diction).


ditto

1620s, Tuscan dialectal ditto (in) the said (month or year), literary Italian detto, past participle
of dire to say, from Latin dicere (see diction).    Originally used in Italian to avoid repetition
of month names in a series of dates; generalized meaning of same as above first recorded in English
1670s. Dittohead, self-description of followers of U.S. radio personality Rush Limbaugh, attested by
1995. dittoship is from 1869.


odium (n.)

c.1600, fact of being hated, from Latin odium ill-will, hatred, grudge, animosity; offense,
offensive conduct, related to odi I hate (infinitive odisse), from PIE root *od- to hate (cognates:
Armenian ateam I hate, Old Norse atall, Old English atol dire, horrid, loathsome). Meaning hatred,
detestation is from 1650s. Often in an extended form, such as odium theologicum hatred which is
proverbially characteristic of theological disputes (1670s).


verdict (n.)

1530s, alteration of Middle English verdit (c.1300), a jury's decision in a case, from Anglo-French
verdit (Old French voirdit) sworn testimony, affidavit; judgment, written record of a verdict,
literally a true saying or report, from ver, veir true (see very) + dit, past participle of dire to
say (see diction). Spelling influenced by Medieval Latin verdictum a verdict.


diction (n.)

1540s, a word; 1580s, expression of ideas in words, from Late Latin dictionem (nominative dictio) a
saying, expression, word, noun of action from dic-, past participle stem of Latin dicere speak,
tell, say (source of French dire to say), related to dicare proclaim, dedicate, from PIE root *deik-
to point out (cognates: Sanskrit dic- point out, show, Greek deiknynai to prove, Latin digitus
finger, Old High German zeigon, German zeigen to show, Old English teon to accuse, t&aelig;can to
teach).


baleful (adj.)

Old English bealu-full dire, wicked, cruel, from bealu harm, injury, ruin, evil, mischief,
wickedness, a noxious thing, from Proto-Germanic *balwom (cognates: Old Saxon balu, Old Frisian balu
evil, Old High German balo destruction, Old Norse bol, Gothic balwjan to torment), from PIE root
*bhelu- to harm. During Anglo-Saxon times, the noun was in poetic use only (in compounds such as
bealubenn mortal wound, bealu&eth;onc evil thought), and for long baleful has belonged exclusively
to poets. Related: Balefully.


grim (adj.)

Old English grimm fierce, cruel, savage, dire, painful, from Proto-Germanic *grimmaz (cognates: Old
Saxon, Old Frisian, Old High German, German grimm, Old Norse grimmr, Swedish grym fierce, furious),
from PIE *ghrem- angry, perhaps imitative of the sound of rumbling thunder (compare Greek khremizein
to neigh, Old Church Slavonic vuzgrimeti to thunder, Russian gremet' thunder).    A weaker word now
than once it was; sense of dreary, gloomy first recorded late 12c. It also had a verb form in Old
English, grimman (class III strong verb; past tense gramm, p.p. grummen). Old English also had a
noun, grima goblin, specter, perhaps also a proper name or attribute-name of a god, hence its
appearance as an element in place names.   Grim reaper as a figurative way to say death is attested
by 1847 (the association of grim and death goes back at least to 17c.). A Middle English expression
for have recourse to harsh measures was to wend the grim tooth (early 13c.).


go (v.)

Old English gan to go, advance, depart; happen; conquer; observe, from West Germanic
*gai-/*g&aelig;- (cognates: Old Saxon, Old Frisian gan, Middle Dutch gaen, Dutch gaan, Old High
German gan, German gehen), from PIE *ghe- to release, let go (cognates: Sanskrit jihite goes away,
Greek kikhano I reach, meet with), but there is not general agreement on cognates.    The Old
English past tense was eode, of uncertain origin but evidently once a different word (perhaps
connected to Gothic iddja); it was replaced 1400s by went, formerly past tense of wenden to direct
one's way (see wend). In northern England and Scotland, however, eode tended to be replaced by gaed,
a construction based on go. In modern English, only be and go take their past tenses from entirely
different verbs.    The word in its various forms and combinations takes up 45 columns of close
print in the OED. Verbal meaning say emerged 1960s in teen slang. Colloquial meaning urinate or
defecate attested by 1926. Go for broke is from 1951, American English colloquial; go down on
perform oral sex on is from 1916. That goes without saying (1878) translates French cela va sans
dire. As an adjective, in order, from 1951, originally in aerospace jargon.


