discriminate (v.)

1620s, from Latin discriminatus, past participle of discriminare to divide, separate, from discrimen
(genitive discriminis) interval, distinction, difference, derived noun from discernere (see
discern). The adverse (usually racial) sense is first recorded 1866, American English. Positive
sense remains in discriminating. Related: Discriminated. Also used 17c. and after as an adjective
meaning distinct.


discrimination (n.)

1640s, the making of distinctions, from Late Latin discriminationem (nominative discriminatio), noun
of action from past participle stem of discriminare (see discriminate). Especially in a prejudicial
way, based on race, 1866, American English. Meaning discernment is from 1814.  It especially annoys
me when racists are accused of 'discrimination.' The ability to discriminate is a precious facility;
by judging all members of one 'race' to be the same, the racist precisely shows himself incapable of
discrimination. [Christopher Hitchens]


discriminating (adj.)

possessing discernment, 1792, present participle adjective from discriminate (v.).


indiscriminate (adj.)

1640s, from in- (1) not, opposite of + discriminate (adj.).


discriminatory (adj.)

1828; see discriminate + -ory.


shed (v.)

cast off, Old English sceadan, scadan to divide, separate, part company; discriminate, decide;
scatter abroad, cast about, strong verb (past tense scead, past participle sceadan), from Proto-
Germanic *skaithan (cognates: Old Saxon skethan, Old Frisian sketha, Middle Dutch sceiden, Dutch
scheiden, Old High German sceidan, German scheiden part, separate, distinguish, Gothic skaidan
separate), from *skaith divide, split.    According to Klein's sources, this probably is related to
PIE root *skei- to cut, separate, divide, part, split (cognates: Sanskrit chid-, Greek skhizein,
Latin scindere to split; Lithuanian skedzu I make thin, separate, divide; Old Irish scian knife;
Welsh chwydu to break open). Related: Shedding. A shedding-tooth (1799) was a milk-tooth or baby-
tooth.     In reference to animals, to lose hair, feathers, etc. recorded from c.1500; of trees
losing leaves from 1590s; of clothes, 1858. This verb was used in Old English to gloss Late Latin
words in the sense to discriminate, to decide that literally mean to divide, separate (compare
discern). Hence also scead (n.) separation, distinction; discretion, understanding, reason;
sceadwisnes discrimination, discretion.


biographer (n.)

1715; see biography + -er (1). Earlier was biographist (1660s).    Of every great and eminent
character, part breaks forth into public view, and part lies hid in domestic privacy. Those
qualities which have been exerted in any known and lasting performances may, at any distance of
time, be traced and estimated; but silent excellencies are soon forgotten; and those minute
peculiarities which discriminate every man from all others, if the are not recorded by those whom
personal knowledge enabled to observe them, are irrecoverably lost. [Johnson, Life of Sir Thomas
Browne, 1756]


differentiate (v.)

1816, from Medieval Latin differentiatus, past participle of differentiare, from Latin differentia
(see difference).    Originally a mathematical term; transitive and non-technical sense of
discriminate between is from 1876. Earlier, difference had been used as a verb in this sense.
Related: Differentiated; differentiating; differentiation.


crisis (n.)

early 15c., from Latinized form of Greek krisis turning point in a disease (used as such by
Hippocrates and Galen), literally judgment, result of a trial, selection, from krinein to separate,
decide, judge, from PIE root *krei- to sieve, discriminate, distinguish (cognates: Greek krinesthai
to explain; Old English hriddel sieve; Latin cribrum sieve, crimen judgment, crime, cernere (past
participle cretus) to sift, separate; Old Irish criathar, Old Welsh cruitr sieve; Middle Irish crich
border, boundary). Transferred non-medical sense is 1620s in English. A German term for mid-life
crisis is Torschlusspanik, literally shut-door-panic, fear of being on the wrong side of a closing
gate.


