disclose (v.)

late 14c., from Old French desclos open, exposed, plain, explicit, past participle of desclore
(Modern French d&eacute;clore) open, break open, unlock, reveal, from des- (see dis-) + clore to
close (see close (v.)). Related: Disclosed; disclosing.


unbosom (v.)

disclose in confidence (secret opinions or feelings), 1580s, from un- (1) + bosom.


undisclosed (adj.)

1560s, from un- (1) not + past participle of disclose (v.).


disclosure (n.)

1590s; see disclose + -ure. Formed in English, perhaps on model of closure.


manifest (v.)

late 14c., to spread (one's fame), to show plainly, from manifest (adj.) or else from Latin
manifestare to discover, disclose, betray (see manifest (adj.)). Meaning to display by actions is
from 1560s; reflexive sense, of diseases, etc., to reveal as in operation is from 1808. Related:
Manifested; manifesting.


unfold (v.)

Old English unfealdan, to open or unwrap the folds of, also figuratively, to disclose, reveal,
explain, from un- (2) opposite of + fold (v.). Similar formation in Middle Dutch ontvouden, German
entfalten. Intransitive sense is attested from late 14c. Related: Unfolded; unfolding.


detect (v.)

early 15c., from Latin detectus, past participle of detegere uncover, expose, figuratively discover,
reveal, disclose, from de- un-, off (see de-) + tegere to cover (see stegosaurus). Related:
Detected; detecting.


evolve (v.)

1640s, to unfold, open out, expand, from Latin evolvere to unroll, especially of books; figuratively
to make clear, disclose; to produce, develop, from ex- out (see ex-) + volvere to roll (see volvox).
Meaning to develop by natural processes to a higher state is from 1832. Related: Evolved; evolving.


enunciate (v.)

1620s, declare, express, from Latin enuntiatus, past participle of enuntiare speak out, say,
express, assert; divulge, disclose, reveal, betray, from ex- out (see ex-) + nuntiare to announce
(see nuncio). Or perhaps a back-formation from enunciation. Meaning to articulate, pronounce is from
1759. Related: Enunciated; enunciating.


declare (v.)

early 14c., from Old French declarer explain, elucidate, or directly from Latin declarare make
clear, reveal, disclose, announce, from de- intensive prefix (see de-) + clarare clarify, from
clarus clear (see clear (adj.)). Related: Declared; declaring.


out (v.)

Old English utian expel, put out (see out (adv.)); used in many senses over the years. Meaning to
expose as a closet homosexual is first recorded 1990 (as an adjective meaning openly avowing one's
homosexuality it dates from 1970s; see closet); sense of disclose to public view, reveal, make known
has been present since mid-14c.    Eufrosyne preyde &THORN;at god schulde not outen hire to nowiht.
[Legendary of St. Euphrosyne, c.1350]    Related: Outed; outing.


fart (v.)

Old English feortan, ultimately from PIE *perd- (cognates: Old High German ferzan, Old Norse freta,
Sanskrit pard, Greek perdein, Lithuanian perdzu, Russian perdet), of imitative origin. Related:
Farted; farting. As a noun, from late 14c.    Clatterer or clatterfart, which wyl disclose anye
light secreate. [Richard Huloet, Abecedarium Anglo-Latinum, 1552.]


accuse (v.)

c.1300, charge (with an offense, etc.), impugn, blame, from Old French acuser to accuse, indict,
reproach, blame (13c.), earlier announce, report, disclose (12c.), or directly from Latin accusare
to call to account, from ad- against (see ad-) + causari give as a cause or motive, from causa
reason (see cause (n.)). Related: Accused; accusing; accusingly.


discover (v.)

c.1300, divulge, reveal, disclose, from Old French descovrir uncover, unroof, unveil, reveal,
betray, from Late Latin discooperire, from Latin dis- opposite of (see dis-) + cooperire to cover up
(see cover). At first with a sense of betrayal or malicious exposure (discoverer originally meant
informant); the meaning to obtain knowledge or sight of what was not known is from 1550s. Related:
Discovered; discovering.


reveal (v.)

late 14c., from Old French reveler reveal (14c.), from Latin revelare reveal, uncover, disclose,
literally unveil, from re- opposite of (see re-) + velare to cover, veil, from velum a veil (see
veil (n.)). Related: Revealed; revealing.


open (v.)

Old English openian to open, open up, disclose, reveal, also intransitive, become manifest, be open
to or exposed to, from Proto-Germanic *opanojan (cognates: Old Saxon opanon, Old Norse opna to open,
Middle Dutch, Dutch openen, Old High German offanon, German &#246;ffnen), from the source of open
(adj.), but etymology suggests the adjective is older. Open up cease to be secretive is from 1921.
Related: Opened; opening.


apocalypse (n.)

late 14c., revelation, disclosure, from Church Latin apocalypsis revelation, from Greek apokalyptein
uncover, disclose, reveal, from apo- from (see apo-) + kalyptein to cover, conceal (see Calypso).
The Christian end-of-the-world story is part of the revelation in John of Patmos' book Apokalypsis
(a title rendered into English as Apocalypse c.1230 and Revelations by Wyclif c.1380).    Its
general sense in Middle English was insight, vision; hallucination; meaning a cataclysmic event is
modern. As agent nouns, apocalypst (1829), apocalypt (1834), and apocalyptist (1835) have been
tried.


illustration (n.)

c.1400, a shining; early 15c., a manifestation; mid-15c., a spiritual illumination, from Old French
illustration apparition, appearance, and directly from Latin illustrationem (nominative illustratio)
vivid representation (in writing), literally an enlightening, from past participle stem of
illustrare light up, make light, illuminate; figuratively make clear, disclose, explain; adorn,
render distinguished, from assimilated form of in- in (see in- (2)) + lustrare make bright,
illuminate, related to lucere shine, lux light (see light (n.)). Mental sense of act of making clear
in the mind is from 1580s. Meaning an illustrative picture is from 1816.


utter (v.)

speak, say, c.1400, in part from Middle Dutch uteren or Middle Low German utern to turn out, show,
speak, from uter outer, comparative adjective from ut out  (see utter (adj.)); in part from Middle
English verb outen to disclose, from Old English utan to put out, from ut (see out (v.)). Compare
German &auml;ussern to utter, express, from aus out; and colloquial phrase out with it speak up!
Formerly also used as a commercial verb (as release is now). Related: Uttered; uttering.


break (v.)

Old English brecan to break, shatter, burst; injure, violate, destroy, curtail; break into, rush
into; burst forth, spring out; subdue, tame (class IV strong verb; past tense br&aelig;c, past
participle brocen), from Proto-Germanic *brekan (cognates: Old Frisian breka, Dutch breken, Old High
German brehhan, German brechen, Gothic brikan), from PIE root *bhreg- to break (see fraction). Most
modern senses were in Old English. In reference to the heart from early 13c. Meaning to disclose is
from early 13c.   Break bread share food (with) is from late 14c. Break the ice is c.1600, in
reference to the coldness of encounters of strangers. Break wind first attested 1550s. To break
(something) out (1890s) probably is an image from dock work, of freeing cargo before unloading it.
Ironic theatrical good luck formula break a leg has parallels in German Hals- und Beinbruch break
your neck and leg, and Italian in bocca al lupo. Evidence of a highly superstitious craft (see
Macbeth).


tell (v.)

Old English tellan to reckon, calculate, number, compute; consider, think, esteem, account (past
tense tealde, past participle teald), from Proto-Germanic *taljan to mention in order (cognates: Old
Saxon tellian tell, Old Norse telja to count, number; to tell, say, Old Frisian tella to count; to
tell, Middle Dutch and Dutch tellen, Old Saxon talon to count, reckon, Danish tale to speak, Old
High German zalon, German z&auml;hlen to count, reckon), from PIE root *del- (2) to count, reckon
(see tale).    Meaning to narrate, announce, relate in English is from c.1000; that of to make known
by speech or writing, announce is from early 12c. Sense of to reveal or disclose is from c.1400;
that of to act as an informer, to 'peach'  is recorded from 1901. Meaning to order (someone to do
something) is from 1590s. To tell (someone) off reprimand is from 1919.    Original sense in teller
and phrase to tell time. For sense evolution, compare French conter to count, raconter to recount;
Italian contare, Spanish contar to count, recount, narrate; German z&auml;hlen to count,
erz&auml;hlen to recount, narrate. Klein also compares Hebrew saphar he counted, sipper he told.


