discord (v.)

c.1300, from Old French discorder (13c.), from Latin discordare (see discord (n.)).


discordance (n.)

mid-14c.; see discord (v.) + -ance.


discordant (adj.)

late 14c., discordaunt, from Old French descordant, present participle of descorder (see discord
(n.)). Related: Discordantly.


discord (n.)

early 13c., descorde, unfriendly feeling, ill will; also dissention, strife, from Old French
descorde (12c.) disagreement, from Latin discordia, from discors (genitive discordis) disagreeing,
disagreement, from dis- apart (see dis-) + cor (genitive cordis) heart (see heart). Musical sense is
late 14c.


Eris

goddess of discord, from Greek eris strife, discord, of uncertain origin. Related: Eristic.


seditious (adj.)

mid-15c., from Middle French seditieux, from Latin seditiosus full of discord, factious, mutinous,
from seditio (see sedition). Related: Seditiously; seditiousness.


dissension (n.)

early 14c., from Old French dissension (12c.) and directly from Latin dissensionem (nominative
dissensio) disagreement, difference of opinion, discord, strife, noun of action from past participle
stem of dissentire disagree (see dissent).


fractious (adj.)

1725, from fraction in an obsolete sense of a brawling, discord (c.1500) + -ous; probably on model
of captious. Related: Fractiously; fractiousness.


divisive (adj.)

c.1600, having a quality of dividing, from Latin divis-, past participle stem of dividere (see
divide (v.)) + -ive. Meaning producing discord is from 1640s. Related: Divisively; divisiveness.


Erinys (n.)

(plural erinyes), one of the three avenging spirits (Alecto, Tisiphone, Megaera) in Greek religion,
of unknown origin, perhaps the angry spirit (compare Arcadian erinein to be angry, Greek orinein to
raise, stir, excite, eris strife, discord). Related: Erinnic.


cantankerous (adj.)

1772, said to be a Wiltshire word, probably from an alteration (influenced by raucous) of Middle
English contakour troublemaker (c.1300), from Anglo-French contec discord, strife, from Old French
contechier (Old North French contekier), from con- with + teche, related to atachier hold fast (see
attach). With -ous. Related: Cantankerously; cantankerousness.


strife (n.)

c.1200, quarrel, fight, discord, from Old French estrif fight, battle, combat, conflict; torment,
distress; dispute, quarrel, variant of estrit quarrel, dispute, impetuosity, probably from Frankish
*strid strife, combat or another Germanic source (compare Old High German strit quarrel, dispute),
related to Old High German stritan to fight; see stride (v.).


distance (n.)

late 13c., quarrel, estrangement, discord, strife, from Old French destance (13c.), from Latin
distantia a standing apart, from distantem (nominative distans) standing apart, separate, distant,
present participle of distare stand apart, from dis- apart, off (see dis-) + stare to stand (see
stet).    Meaning remoteness, space between things or places is late 14c. The figurative sense of
aloofness is the same as in stand-offish. Phrase go the distance (1930s) seems to be originally from
the prize ring, where the word meant scheduled length of a bout.


apple (n.)

Old English &aelig;ppel apple; any kind of fruit; fruit in general, from Proto-Germanic *ap(a)laz
(cognates: Old Saxon, Old Frisian, Dutch appel, Old Norse eple, Old High German apful, German
Apfel), from PIE *ab(e)l apple (cognates: Gaulish avallo fruit; Old Irish ubull, Lithuanian obuolys,
Old Church Slavonic jabloko apple), but the exact relation and original sense of these is uncertain
(compare melon).  A roted eppel amang &thorn;e holen, make&thorn; rotie &thorn;e yzounde. [Ayenbite
of Inwit, 1340]    In Middle English and as late as 17c., it was a generic term for all fruit other
than berries but including nuts (such as Old English finger&aelig;ppla dates, literally finger-
apples; Middle English appel of paradis banana, c.1400). Hence its grafting onto the unnamed fruit
of the forbidden tree in Genesis. Cucumbers, in one Old English work, are eor&thorn;&aelig;ppla,
literally earth-apples (compare French pomme de terre potato, literally earth-apple; see also
melon). French pomme is from Latin pomum apple; fruit (see Pomona).    As far as the forbidden fruit
is concerned, again, the Quran does not mention it explicitly, but according to traditional
commentaries it was not an apple, as believed by Christians and Jews, but wheat. [The Heart of
Islam: Enduring Values for Humanity, Seyyed Hossein Nasr, 2002]   Apple of Discord (c.1400) was
thrown into the wedding of Thetis and Peleus by Eris (goddess of chaos and discord), who had not
been invited, and inscribed kallisti To the Prettiest One. Paris, elected to choose which goddess
should have it, gave it to Aphrodite, offending Hera and Athene, with consequences of the Trojan
War, etc.   Apple of one's eye (Old English), symbol of what is most cherished, was the pupil,
supposed to be a globular solid body. Apple-polisher one who curries favor first attested 1928 in
student slang. The image of something that upsets the apple cart is attested from 1788. Road apple
horse dropping is from 1942.


twist (n.)

mid-14c., flat part of a hinge (now obsolete), probably from Old English -twist divided object;
fork; rope (as in m&aelig;sttwist mast rope, stay; candeltwist wick), from Proto-Germanic *twis-,
from PIE root *dwo- (see two). Original senses suggest dividing in two (cognates: cognate Old Norse
tvistra to divide, separate, Gothic twis- in two, asunder, Dutch twist, German zwist quarrel,
discord, though these senses have no equivalent in English), but later ones are of combining two
into one, hence the original sense of the word may be rope made of two strands.    Meaning thread or
cord composed of two or more fibers is recorded from 1550s. Meaning act or action of turning on an
axis is attested from 1570s. Sense of beverage consisting of two or more liquors is first attested
c.1700. Meaning thick cord of tobacco is from 1791. Meaning curled piece of lemon, etc., used to
flavor a drink is recorded from 1958. Sense of unexpected plot development is from 1941.    The
popular rock 'n' roll dance craze is from 1961, so called from the motion involved, but twist was
used to describe popular dances in 1894 and again in the 1920s. To get one's knickers in a twist be
unduly agitated is British slang first attested 1971.


