discerning

action of perceiving, late 14c., verbal noun from discern. As a present participle adjective,
attested from c.1600.


discreet (adj.)

mid-14c., morally discerning, prudent, circumspect, from Old French discret discreet, sensible,
intelligent, wise, from Latin discretus separated, distinct, in Medieval Latin discerning, careful,
past participle of discernere distinguish (see discern). Meaning separate, distinct in English is
late 14c.    Spellings discrete and nativized discreet co-existed until after c.1600, when discreet
became the common word for careful, prudent, and discrete was maintained in philosophy, medicine,
music and other disciplines that remembered Latin and made effort to obey it. Related: Discreetly.


intelligence (n.)

late 14c., faculty of understanding, from Old French intelligence (12c.), from Latin intelligentia,
intellegentia understanding, power of discerning; art, skill, taste, from intelligentem (nominative
intelligens) discerning, present participle of intelligere to understand, comprehend, from inter-
between (see inter-) + legere choose, pick out, read (see lecture (n.)).    Meaning superior
understanding, sagacity is from early 15c. Sense of information, news first recorded mid-15c.,
especially secret information from spies (1580s). Intelligence quotient first recorded 1921 (see
I.Q.).


long-headed (adj.)

discerning, c.1700, from long (adj.) + head (n.).


diagnosis (n.)

1680s, medical Latin application of Greek diagnosis a discerning, distinguishing, from stem of
diagignoskein discern, distinguish, literally to know thoroughly, from dia- apart (see dia-) +
gignoskein to learn (see gnostic).


clairvoyant (adj.)

having psychic gifts, 1837, earlier having insight (1670s), from special use of French clairvoyant
clear-sighted, discerning, judicious (13c.), from clair (see clear (adj.)) + voyant seeing, present
participle of voir, from Latin videre to see (see vision).


discern (v.)

late 14c., from Old French discerner (13c.) distinguish (between), separate (by sifting), and
directly from Latin discernere to separate, set apart, divide, distribute; distinguish, perceive,
from dis- off, away (see dis-) + cernere distinguish, separate, sift (see crisis). Related:
Discerned; discerning.


sensible (adj.)

late 14c., capable of sensation or feeling; also capable of being sensed or felt, perceptible to the
senses, hence easily understood; logical, reasonable, from Late Latin sensibilis having feeling,
perceptible by the senses, from sensus, past participle of sentire perceive, feel (see sense (n.)).
Of persons, aware, cognizant (of something) early 15c.; having good sense, capable of reasoning,
discerning, clever, mid-15c. Of clothes, shoes, etc., practical rather than fashionable it is
attested from 1855.    Other Middle English senses included susceptible to injury or pain (early
15c., now gone with sensitive); worldly, temporal, outward (c.1400); carnal, unspiritual (early
15c., now gone with sensual). Related: Sensibleness.


taste (n.)

early 14c., act of tasting, from Old French tast sense of touch (Modern French t&acirc;t), from
taster (see taste (v.)). From late 14c. as a small portion given; also faculty or sense by which the
flavor of a thing is discerned; also savor, sapidity, flavor.    Meaning aesthetic judgment, faculty
of discerning and appreciating what is excellent is first attested 1670s (compare French go&#251;t,
German geschmack, Russian vkus, etc.).    Of all the five senses, 'taste' is the one most closely
associated with fine discrimination, hence the familiar secondary uses of words for 'taste, good
taste' with reference to aesthetic appreciation. [Buck]   <hr />  Taste is active, deciding,
choosing, changing, arranging, etc.; sensibility is passive, the power to feel, susceptibility of
impression, as from the beautiful. [Century Dictionary]


wise (adj.)

Old English wis learned, sagacious, cunning; sane; prudent, discreet; experienced; having the power
of discerning and judging rightly, from Proto-Germanic *wissaz (cognates: Old Saxon, Old Frisian
wis, Old Norse viss, Dutch wijs, German weise wise), from past participle adjective *wittos of PIE
root *weid- to see, hence to know (see vision). Modern slang meaning aware, cunning first attested
1896. Related to the source of Old English witan to know, wit.  A wise man has no extensive
knowledge; He who has extensive knowledge is not a wise man. [Lao-tzu, Tao te Ching, c.550 B.C.E.]
Wise man was in Old English. Wise guy is attested from 1896, American English; wise-ass (n.) by
1966, American English (probably a literal sense is intended by the phrase in the 1607 comedy
Westward Hoe by Dekker and Webster). Wisenheimer, with mock German or Yiddish surname suffix, first
recorded 1904.


sight (n.)

Old English sih&eth;, gesiht, gesih&eth; thing seen; faculty of sight; aspect; vision; apparition,
from Proto-Germanic *sekh(w)- (cognates: Danish sigte, Swedish sigt, Middle Dutch sicht, Dutch
zicht, Old High German siht, German Sicht, Gesicht), stem that also yielded Old English seon (see
see (v.)), with noun suffix -th (2), later -t.  Verily, truth is sight. Therefore if two people
should come disputing, saying, 'I have seen,' 'I have heard,' we should trust the one who says 'I
have seen.' [Brhadaranyaka Upanishad 5.14.4]  Meaning perception or apprehension by means of the
eyes is from early 13c. Meaning device on a firearm to assist in aiming is from 1580s. A show of
something, hence, colloquially, a great many; a lot (late 14c.). Sight for sore eyes welcome visitor
is attested from 1738; sight unseen without previous inspection is from 1892. Sight gag first
attested 1944. Middle English had sighty (late 14c.) visible, conspicuous; bright, shining;
attractive, handsome; c.1400 as keen-sighted; mid-15c. as discerning (compare German sichtig
visible).


