discordant (adj.)

late 14c., discordaunt, from Old French descordant, present participle of descorder (see discord
(n.)). Related: Discordantly.


callithumpian (adj.)

1836, U.S. colloquial, probably a fanciful construction. The English Dialect Dictionary reports
Gallithumpians as a Dorset and Devon word from 1790s for a society of radical social reformers, and
also in reference to noisy disturbers of elections and meetings (1770s). The U.S. reference is most
commonly a band of discordant instruments or bangers on pots and pans, especially to serenade a
newlywed couple to show disapproval of one or the other or the match.


jangle (n.)

late 13c., gossip, slanderous conversation, dispute, from Old French jangle, from jangler (see
jangle (v.)). Meaning discordant sound is from 1795.


charivari (n.)

rough music, especially as a community way of expressing disapproval of a marriage match, 1735, from
French charivari, from Old French chalivali discordant noise made by pots and pans (14c.), from Late
Latin caribaria a severe headache, from Greek karebaria headache, from kare head + barys heavy (see
grave (adj.)).


reconcile (v.)

mid-14c., of persons, from Old French reconcilier (12c.) and directly from Latin reconcilare to
bring together again; regain; win over again, conciliate, from re- again (see re-) + concilare make
friendly (see conciliate). Reflexive sense is recorded from 1530s. Meaning to make (discordant facts
or statements) consistent is from late 14c. Intransitive sense of become reconciled is from 1660s.
Related: Reconciled; reconciling.


wanton (adj.)

early 14c., wan-towen, resistant to control; willful, from Middle English privative word-forming
element wan- wanting, lacking, deficient, from Old English wan-, which was used interchangeably with
un- (1), and is cognate with German wahn- (as in wahnglaube superstition, wahnschaffen misshapen,
wahnwitzig mad, foolish), Dutch wan- (as in wanbestuur misgovernment, wanluid discordant sound),
Swedish and Danish van-, from Proto-Germanic *wano- (see wane). Common in Old and Middle English,
still present in 18c. glossaries of Scottish and Northern English; this word is its sole modern
survival.    Second element is Middle English towen, from Old English togen, past participle of teon
to train, discipline; literally to pull, draw, from Proto-Germanic *teuhan (cognates: Old High
German ziohan to pull; see tug (v.)). The basic notion perhaps is ill-bred, poorly brought up;
compare German ungezogen ill-bred, rude, haughty, literally unpulled. Especially of sexual
indulgence from late 14c. Meaning inhumane, merciless is from 1510s. Related: Wantonly; wantonness.
As Flies to wanton Boyes are we to th' Gods, They kill vs for their sport. [Shakespeare, Lear, 1605]


