discretion (n.)

c.1300, dyscrecyun, moral discernment, from Old French discrecion or directly from Late Latin
discretionem (nominative discretio) discernment, power to make distinctions, in classical Latin
separation, distinction, noun of state from past participle stem of discernere to separate,
distinguish (see discern). Phrase at (one's) discretion attested from 1570s, from sense of power to
decide or judge (late 14c.); the age of discretion (late 14c.) in English law was 14.


discretionary (adj.)

1680s (implied in discretionarily); see discretion + -ary.


indiscretion (n.)

mid-14c., want of discretion, from Old French indiscr&eacute;cion foolishness, imprudence (12c.),
from Late Latin indiscretionem (nominative indiscretio) lack of discernment, from in- (see in- (1))
+ discretionem (see discretion). Meaning indiscreet act is from c.1600.


sophrosyne (n.)

the quality of wise moderation; Greek, prudence, moderation in desires, discretion, temperance, from
sophron of sound mind, prudent, temperate (see Sophronia).


salesmanship (n.)

1853, from salesman + -ship.    The modern system of salesmanship has become so much like
persecution reduced to a science, that it is quite a luxury to be allowed the use of your own
discretion, without being dragooned, by a shopkeeper's deputy, into looking at what you do not care
to see, or buying what you would not have. A man in his sane mind, with the usual organs of speech,
has a right to be treated as if he knows what he wants, and is able to ask for it. [The Literary
World, Feb. 26, 1853]


shed (v.)

cast off, Old English sceadan, scadan to divide, separate, part company; discriminate, decide;
scatter abroad, cast about, strong verb (past tense scead, past participle sceadan), from Proto-
Germanic *skaithan (cognates: Old Saxon skethan, Old Frisian sketha, Middle Dutch sceiden, Dutch
scheiden, Old High German sceidan, German scheiden part, separate, distinguish, Gothic skaidan
separate), from *skaith divide, split.    According to Klein's sources, this probably is related to
PIE root *skei- to cut, separate, divide, part, split (cognates: Sanskrit chid-, Greek skhizein,
Latin scindere to split; Lithuanian skedzu I make thin, separate, divide; Old Irish scian knife;
Welsh chwydu to break open). Related: Shedding. A shedding-tooth (1799) was a milk-tooth or baby-
tooth.     In reference to animals, to lose hair, feathers, etc. recorded from c.1500; of trees
losing leaves from 1590s; of clothes, 1858. This verb was used in Old English to gloss Late Latin
words in the sense to discriminate, to decide that literally mean to divide, separate (compare
discern). Hence also scead (n.) separation, distinction; discretion, understanding, reason;
sceadwisnes discrimination, discretion.


United Nations

1942, the Allied nations at war with the Axis powers; the international body (officially the United
Nations Organization) was chartered in 1945.    Such negotiation as may occur in New York is not
conducted within the walls of the tall building by the East River: it is carried out elsewhere, in
accordance with those principles of courtesy, confidence and discretion which must for ever remain
the only principles conducive to the peaceful settlement of disputes. [Harold Nicholson, The
Evolution of Diplomatic Method, 1954]


arbitrary (adj.)

early 15c., deciding by one's own discretion, from Old French arbitraire (14c.) or directly from
Latin arbitrarius depending on the will, uncertain, from arbiter (see arbiter). The original meaning
gradually descended to capricious and despotic (1640s). Related: Arbitrarily; arbitrariness.


prudence (n.)

mid-14c. (c.1200 as a surname), mid-14c., intelligence; discretion, foresight; wisdom to see what is
suitable or profitable; also one of the four cardinal virtues, wisdom to see what is virtuous; from
Old French prudence (13c.) and directly from Latin prudentia a foreseeing, foresight, sagacity,
practical judgment, contraction of providentia foresight (see providence). Secondary sense of wisdom
(late 14c.) is preserved in jurisprudence.


temperance (n.)

mid-14c., self-restraint, moderation, from Anglo-French temperaunce (mid-13c.), from Latin
temperantia moderation, sobriety, discretion, self-control, from temperans, present participle of
temperare to moderate (see temper (v.)). Latin temperantia was used by Cicero to translate Greek
sophrosyne moderation. In English, temperance was used to render Latin continentia or abstinentia,
specifically in reference to drinking alcohol and eating; hence by early 1800s it had come to mean
abstinence from alcoholic drink.


abandon (v.)

late 14c., to give up, surrender (oneself or something), give over utterly; to yield (oneself)
utterly (to religion, fornication, etc.), from Old French abandoner (12c.), from adverbial phrase
&agrave; bandon at will, at discretion, from &agrave; at, to (see ad-) + bandon power, jurisdiction,
from Latin bannum, proclamation, from a Frankish word related to ban (v.).   Mettre sa forest
&agrave; bandon was a feudal law phrase in the 13th cent. = mettre sa for&ecirc;t &agrave;
permission, i.e. to open it freely to any one for pasture or to cut wood in; hence the later sense
of giving up one's rights for a time, letting go, leaving, abandoning. [Auguste Brachet, An
Etymological Dictionary of the French Language, transl. G.W. Kitchin, Oxford, 1878]
Etymologically, the word carries a sense of put someone under someone else's control. Meaning to
give up absolutely is from late 14c. Related: Abandoned; abandoning.


oat (n.)

Old English ate (plural atan) grain of the oat plant, wild oats, of uncertain origin, possibly from
Old Norse eitill nodule, denoting a single grain, of unknown origin. The English word has cognates
in Frisian and some Dutch dialects. Famously defined by Johnson as, A grain, which in England is
generally given to horses, but in Scotland supports the people.    The usual Germanic name is
derived from Proto-Germanic *khabran (cognates: Old Norse hafri, Dutch haver, source of haversack).
Wild oats, crop that one will regret sowing, is first attested 1560s, in reference to the folly of
sowing these instead of good grain.That wilfull and vnruly age, which lacketh rypenes and
discretion, and (as wee saye) hath not sowed all theyr wyeld Oates. [Thomas Newton, Lemnie's
Touchstone of complexions, 1576]   <hr />   Fred Sanford: I still want to sow some wild oats!
Lamont Sanford: At your age, you don't have no wild oats, you got shredded wheat.  [Sanford and Son]
Hence, to feel (one's) oats be lively, 1831, originally American English.


