discourse (v.)

1540s, from discourse (n.). Related: Discoursed; discoursing.


discourse (n.)

late 14c., process of understanding, reasoning, thought, from French discours, from Latin discursus
a running about, in Late Latin conversation, from past participle stem of discurrere run about, from
dis- apart (see dis-) + currere to run (see current (adj.)). Sense of formal speech or writing is
first recorded 1580s.


dialectic (n.)

1580s, earlier dialatik (late 14c.), from Old French dialectique (12c.), from Latin dialectica, from
Greek dialektike (techne) (art of) philosophical discussion or discourse, fem. of dialektikos of
conversation, discourse, from dialektos discourse, conversation (see dialect). Originally synonymous
with logic; in modern philosophy refined by Kant, then by Hegel, who made it mean process of
resolving or merging contradictions in character. Related: Dialectics.


sermon (n.)

c.1200, sarmun, a discourse upon a text of scripture; what is preached, from Anglo-French sermun,
Old French sermon speech, words, discourse; church sermon, homily (10c.), from Latin sermonem
(nominative sermo) continued speech, conversation; common talk, rumor; learned talk, discourse;
manner of speaking, literary style, originally a stringing together of words, from PIE *ser-mo-,
suffixed form of root *ser- (3) to line up, join (see series).    Main modern sense in English and
French is elliptical for Latin sermo religiosus. In transferred (non-religious) use from 1590s. The
Sermon on the Mount is in 5,6,7 Matt. and 6 Luke. Related: Sermonic; sermonical; sermonish.


oration (n.)

late 14c., prayer, from Late Latin orationem (nominative oratio) a speaking, speech, discourse;
language, faculty of speech, mode of expressing; prayer, noun of action from past participle stem of
Latin orare to pray, plead, speak before an assembly (see orator). Meaning formal speech, discourse
first recorded c.1500.


diatribe (n.)

1640s (in Latin form in English from 1580s), discourse, critical dissertation, from French diatribe
(15c.), from Latin diatriba learned discussion, from Greek diatribe employment, study, in Plato,
discourse, literally a wearing away (of time), from dia- away (see dia-) + tribein to wear, rub,
from PIE root *tere- (1) to rub, turn, twist (see throw (v.)). Sense of invective is 1804,
apparently from French.


spell (n.1)

Old English spell story, saying, tale, history, narrative, fable; discourse, command, from Proto-
Germanic *spellam (see spell (v.1)). Compare Old Saxon spel, Old Norse spjall, Old High German spel,
Gothic spill report, discourse, tale, fable, myth; German Beispiel example. From c.1200 as an
utterance, something said, a statement, remark; meaning set of words with supposed magical or occult
powers, incantation, charm first recorded 1570s; hence any means or cause of enchantment.    The
term 'spell' is generally used for magical procedures which cause harm, or force people to do
something against their will -- unlike charms for healing, protection, etc. [Oxford Dictionary of
English Folklore]    Also in Old English, doctrine; a sermon; religious instruction or teaching; the
gospel; a book of the Bible; compare gospel.


thematic (adj.)

1690s, in logic, from Greek thematikos, from thema (genitive thematos; see theme). From 1871 of
writing or discourse. Related: Thematical; thematically.


-logy

word-forming element meaning a speaking, discourse, treatise, doctrine, theory, science, from Greek
-logia (often via French -logie or Medieval Latin -logia), from root of legein to speak; thus, the
character or deportment of one who speaks or treats of (a certain subject); see lecture (n.).


discursive (adj.)

1590s, from Middle French discursif, from Medieval Latin discursivus, from Latin discursus a running
about (see discourse). Related: Discursively.


talk (n.)

late 15c., speech, discourse, conversation, from talk (v.). Meaning informal lecture or address is
from 1859. Meaning a subject of gossip is from 1620s (in talk of the town). Talk show first recorded
1965; talk radio is from 1985.


cheese (v.)

stop (what one is doing), run off, 1812, thieves' slang, of uncertain origin. Meaning to smile is
from 1930 (see cheese (n.1)). For meaning to annoy, see cheesed.    CHEESE IT. Be silent, be quiet,
don't do it. Cheese it, the coves are fly; be silent, the people understand our discourse.
[Dictionary of Buckish Slang, University Wit, and Pickpocket Eloquence, London, 1811]


philippic (n.)

1590s, bitter invective discourse, from Middle French philippique, from Latin (orationes)
Philippic&aelig;, translation of Greek Philippikoi (logoi), the speeches made in Athens by
Demosthenes in 351-341 B.C.E. urging Greeks to unite and fight the rising power of Philip II of
Macedon. The Latin phrase was used of the speeches made by Cicero against Marc Antony in 44 and 43
B.C.E.


colloquy (n.)

mid-15c., discourse, from Latin colloquium conference, conversation, literally a speaking together,
from com- together (see com-) + -loquium speaking, from loqui to speak (see locution). Meaning
conversation is attested in English from 1580s.


rigmarole (n.)

1736, a long, rambling discourse, apparently from an altered, Kentish colloquial survival of ragman
roll long list or catalogue (1520s), in Middle English a long roll of verses descriptive of personal
characters, used in a medieval game of chance called Rageman, perhaps from Anglo-French Ragemon le
bon Ragemon the good, which was the heading on one set of the verses, referring to a character by
that name. Sense transferred to foolish activity or commotion by 1939.


dissertation (n.)

1610s, discussion, debate, from Latin dissertationem (nominative dissertatio) discourse, noun of
action from past participle stem of dissertare debate, argue, examine, harangue, frequentative of
disserere discuss, examine, from dis- apart (see dis-) + serere to arrange words (see series). Sense
of formal, written treatise is 1650s.


locution (n.)

style of speech, early 15c., from Latin locutionem (nominative locutio) a speaking, speech,
discourse; way of speaking, noun of action from past participle stem of loqui to speak, from PIE
root *tolk(w)- (cognates: Old Irish ad-tluch- to thank, to-tluch- to ask; Old Church Slavonic tloko
interpretation, explanation). Related: Locutionary.


titties (n.)

1746, tetties (plural), a nursery or dialect diminutive variant of teats (see teat).   Margery.
Come, be quite;--be quite, es zey, a grabbling o' wone's Tetties.---Es wont ha' ma Tetties a
grabbled zo ; ner es wont be mullad and foulad.---Stand azide; come, gi' o'er. [Exmoor Courtship,
or, A Suitoring Discourse, in the Devonshire Dialect and Mode, near the forest of Exmoor, 1746]


prologue (n.)

early 14c., from Old French prologue (12c.) and directly from Latin prologus, from Greek prologos
preface to a play, speaker of a prologue, literally a speech beforehand, from pro- before (see pro-)
+ logos discourse, speech, from legein to speak (see lecture (n.)).


sermocination (n.)

1510s, a talk, from Latin sermonationem (nominative sermonatio), noun of action from past participle
stem of sermonari talk, discourse, harangue, from sermo (see sermon). From 1753 in rhetoric, a form
of prosopopoeia in which the speaker, having addressed a real or imaginary hearer with a remark or
especially a question, immediately answers for the hearer. Related: Sermocinator, agent noun;
sermocinatrix a female talker (1620s).


reason (v.)

early 14c., resunmen, to question (someone), also to challenge, from Old French raisoner speak,
discuss; argue; address; speak to, from Late Latin rationare to discourse, from ratio (see reason
(n.)). Intransitive sense of to think in a logical manner is from 1590s; transitive sense of employ
reasoning (with someone) is from 1847. Related: Reasoned; reasoning.


technology (n.)

1610s, a discourse or treatise on an art or the arts, from Greek tekhnologia systematic treatment of
an art, craft, or technique, originally referring to grammar, from tekhno- (see techno-) + -logy.
The meaning study of mechanical and industrial arts (Century Dictionary, 1902, gives examples of
spinning, metal-working, or brewing) is first recorded 1859. High technology attested from 1964;
short form high-tech is from 1972.


explain (v.)

early 15c., from Latin explanare to make level, smooth out; also to explain, make clear (see
explanation).    Originally explane, spelling altered by influence of plain. Also see plane (v.2).
In 17c., occasionally used more literally, of the unfolding of material things: Evelyn has buds that
explain into leaves [Sylva, or, A discourse of forest-trees, and the propagation of timber in His
Majesties dominions, 1664]. Related: Explained; explaining; explains.


parole (n.)

1610s, word of honor, especially promise by a prisoner of war not to escape, from French parole
word, speech (in parole d'honneur word of honor) from Vulgar Latin *paraula speech, discourse, from
Latin parabola (see parable). Sense of conditional release of a prisoner before full term is first
attested 1908 in criminal slang.


cosmology (n.)

1650s, from Modern Latin cosmologia, from Greek kosmos (see cosmos) + -logia discourse (see -logy).
Related: Cosmological; cosmologist.    They cannot scare me with their empty spaces  Between stars--
on stars where no human race is.  I have it in me so much nearer home  To scare myself with my own
desert places.    [Robert Frost, from Desert Places, 1936]


parley (n.)

conference, speech, especially with an enemy, mid-15c., from Middle French parl&eacute;e, from fem.
past participle of Old French parler to speak (11c.), from Vulgar Latin *paraulare, from Late Latin
parabolare to speak (in parables), from parabola speech, discourse, from Latin parabola comparison
(see parable).


palaver (n.)

1733 (implied in palavering), talk, conference, discussion, sailors' slang, from Portuguese palavra
word, speech, talk, traders' term for negotiating with the natives in West Africa, metathesis of
Late Latin parabola speech, discourse, from Latin parabola comparison (see parable). Meaning idle
talk first recorded 1748. The verb is 1733, from the noun. Related: Palavering.


-logue

word-forming element meaning one who is immersed in or driven by, mostly from French-derived words,
ultimately from Greek -logos, -logon. Now mostly superseded by -loger, -logist except in ideologue
and a few others. As a combining element meaning kind of discourse, it is from French -logue, from
Greek -logos.


paragraph (n.)

late 15c., from Middle French paragraphe division of text (13c., Old French paragrafe), from
Medieval Latin paragraphus sign for start of a new section of discourse (the sign looked something
like a stylized letter -P-), from Greek paragraphos short stroke in the margin marking a break in
sense, also a passage so marked, literally anything written beside, from paragraphein write by the
side, from para- beside (see para- (1)) + graphein to write (see -graphy).


logos (n.)

1580s, Logos, the divine Word, second person of the Christian Trinity, from Greek logos word,
speech, discourse, also reason, from PIE root *leg- to collect (with derivatives meaning to speak,
on notion of to pick out words; see lecture (n.)); used by Neo-Platonists in various metaphysical
and theological senses and picked up by New Testament writers.    Other English formations from
logos include logolatry worship of words, unreasonable regard for words or verbal truth (1810 in
Coleridge); logomania (1870); logophobia (1923).


saw (n.2)

proverb, saying, maxim, Old English sagu saying, discourse, speech, study, tradition, tale, from
Proto-Germanic *saga-, *sagon- (cognates: Middle Low German, Middle Dutch sage, zage, German Sage
legend, fable, saga, myth, tradition, Old Norse saga story, tale, saga), from PIE root *sek(w)- to
say, utter (see say (v.)).


centralize (v.)

1795, to bring to a center; 1800, come to a center, from central + -ize, on model of French
centraliser (1790). A word from the French Revolution. Related: Centralized; centralizing.
Government should have a central point throughout its whole periphery. The state of the monthly
expences amounted to four hundred millions; but within these seven months, it is reduced to one
hundred and eighty millions. Such is the effect of the centralization of government; and the more we
centralize it, the more we shall find our expenses decrease. [Saint-Just, Discourse on the State of
the Finances]


homily (n.)

late 14c., omelye, from Old French omelie (12c., Modern French hom&eacute;lie), from Church Latin
homilia a homily, sermon, from Greek homilia conversation, discourse, used in New Testament Greek
for sermon, from homilos an assembled crowd, from homou together (from PIE *somo-, from root *sem-
(1) one, as one, together with; see same) + ile troop (cognate with Sanskrit melah assembly, Latin
miles soldier). Latinate form restored in English 16c.


style (n.)

early 14c., stile, writing instrument, pen, stylus; piece of written discourse, a narrative,
treatise; also characteristic rhetorical mode of an author, manner or mode of expression, and way of
life, manner, behavior, conduct, from Old French stile, estile style, fashion, manner; a stake,
pale, from Latin stilus stake, instrument for writing, manner of writing, mode of expression,
perhaps from the same source as stick (v.)). Spelling modified incorrectly by influence of Greek
stylos pillar, which probably is not directly related. As distinguished from substance, 1570s.
Meaning mode of dress is from 1814.


substance (n.)

c.1300, essential nature, real or essential part, from Old French sustance, substance goods,
possessions; nature, composition (12c.), from Latin substantia being, essence, material, from
substans, present participle of substare stand firm, stand or be under, be present, from sub up to,
under (see sub-) + stare to stand, from PIE root *sta- to stand (see stet). Latin substantia
translates Greek ousia that which is one's own, one's substance or property; the being, essence, or
nature of anything. Meaning any kind of corporeal matter is first attested mid-14c. Sense of the
matter of a study, discourse, etc. first recorded late 14c.


lecture (n.)

late 14c., action of reading, that which is read, from Medieval Latin lectura a reading, lecture,
from Latin lectus, past participle of legere to read, originally to gather, collect, pick out,
choose (compare election), from PIE *leg- to pick together, gather, collect (cognates: Greek legein
to say, tell, speak, declare, originally, in Homer, to pick out, select, collect, enumerate; lexis
speech, diction; logos word, speech, thought, account; Latin lignum wood, firewood, literally that
which is gathered).    To read is to pick out words. Meaning action of reading (a lesson) aloud is
from 1520s. That of a discourse on a given subject before an audience for purposes of instruction is
from 1530s.


speech (n.)

Old English sp&aelig;c act of speaking; power of speaking; manner of speaking; statement, discourse,
narrative, formal utterance; language, variant of spr&aelig;c, from Proto-Germanic *sprek-, *spek-
(cognates: Danish sprog, Old Saxon spraca, Old Frisian spreke, Dutch spraak, Old High German
sprahha, German Sprache speech; see speak (v.))    The spr- forms were extinct in English by 1200.
Meaning address delivered to an audience first recorded 1580s.    And I honor the man who is willing
to sink  Half his present repute for the freedom to think,  And, when he has thought, be his cause
strong or weak,  Will risk t' other half for the freedom to speak,  Caring naught for what vengeance
the mob has in store,  Let that mob be the upper ten thousand or lower.   [James Russell Lowell, A
Fable for Critics, 1848]


atmosphere (n.)

1630s, atmosphaera (modern form from 1670s), from Modern Latin atmosphaera, from atmo-, comb. form
of Greek atmos vapor, steam + spharia sphere (see sphere). Greek atmos is from PIE *awet-mo-, from
root *wet- (1) to blow (also to inspire, spiritually arouse; see wood (adj.)). First used in English
in connection with the Moon, which, as it turns out, practically doesn't have one.  It is observed
in the solary eclipses, that there is sometimes a great trepidation about the body of the moon, from
which we may likewise argue an atmosphaera, since we cannot well conceive what so probable a cause
there should be of such an appearance as this, Quod radii solares a vaporibus lunam ambitntibus
fuerint intercisi, that the sun-beams were broken and refracted by the vapours that encompassed the
moon. [Rev. John Wilkins, Discovery of New World or Discourse tending to prove that it probable
there may be another World in the Moon,  1638]     Figurative sense of surrounding influence, mental
or moral environment is c.1800.


meditation (n.)

c.1200, contemplation; devout preoccupation; devotions, prayer, from Old French meditacion thought,
reflection, study, and directly from Latin meditationem (nominative meditatio) a thinking over,
meditation, noun of action from past participle stem of meditari to meditate, think over, reflect,
consider, frequentative form from PIE root *med- to measure, limit, consider, advise, take
appropriate measures (cognates: Greek medesthai think about, medon ruler; Latin modus measure,
manner, modestus moderate, modernus modern, mederi to heal, medicus physician; Sanskrit midiur I
judge, estimate; Welsh meddwl mind, thinking; Gothic miton, Old English metan to measure; also see
medical).    Meaning discourse on a subject is early 14c.; meaning act of meditating, continuous
calm thought upon some subject is from late 14c. The Latin verb also had stronger senses: plan,
devise, practice, rehearse, study.


tale (n.)

Old English talu series, calculation, also story, tale, statement, deposition, narrative, fable,
accusation, action of telling, from Proto-Germanic *talo (cognates: Dutch taal speech, language,
Danish tale speech, talk, discourse, German Erz&#228;hlung story, Gothic talzjan to teach), from PIE
root *del- (2) to recount, count. The secondary Modern English sense of number, numerical reckoning
(c.1200) probably was the primary one in Germanic; see tell (v.), teller and Old Frisian tale,
Middle Dutch tal, Old Saxon tala, Danish tal, Old High German zala, German Zahl number.    The
ground sense of the Modern English word in its main meaning, then, might have been an account of
things in their due order. Related to talk (v.) and tell (v.). Meaning things divulged that were
given secretly, gossip is from mid-14c.; first record of talebearer tattletale is late 15c.


spell (v.1)

early 14c., read letter by letter, write or say the letters of; c.1400, form words by means of
letters, apparently a French word that merged with or displaced a native Old English one; both are
from the same Germanic root, but the French word had evolved a different sense. The native word is
Old English spellian to tell, speak, discourse, talk, from Proto-Germanic *spellam (cognates: Old
High German spellon to tell, Old Norse spjalla, Gothic spillon to talk, tell), from PIE *spel- (2)
to say aloud, recite.    But the current senses seem to come from Anglo-French espeller, Old French
espelir mean, signify, explain, interpret, also spell out letters, pronounce, recite, from Frankish
*spellon to tell or some other Germanic source, ultimately identical with the native word.
Related: Spelled; spelling. In early Middle English still to speak, preach, talk, tell, hence such
expressions as hear spell hear (something) told or talked about, spell the wind talk in vain (both
15c.). Meaning form words with proper letters is from 1580s. Spell out explain step-by-step is first
recorded 1940, American English. Shakespeare has spell (someone) backwards reverse the character of,
explain in a contrary sense, portray with determined negativity.


speak (v.)

Old English specan, variant of sprecan to speak, utter words; make a speech; hold discourse (with
others) (class V strong verb; past tense spr&aelig;c, past participle sprecen), from Proto-Germanic
*sprek-, *spek- (cognates: Old Saxon sprecan, Old Frisian spreka, Middle Dutch spreken, Old High
German sprehhan, German sprechen to speak, Old Norse spraki rumor, report), from PIE root *spreg-
(1) to speak, perhaps identical with PIE root *spreg- (2) to strew, on notion of speech as a
scattering of words.    The -r- began to drop out in Late West Saxon and was gone by mid-12c.,
perhaps from influence of Danish spage crackle, also used in a slang sense of speak (compare crack
(v.) in slang senses having to do with speech, such as wisecrack, cracker, all it's cracked up to
be). Elsewhere, rare variant forms without -r- are found in Middle Dutch (speken), Old High German
(spehhan), dialectal German (sp&#228;chten speak).    Not the primary word for to speak in Old
English (the Beowulf author prefers ma&thorn;elian, from m&aelig;&thorn;el assembly, council, from
root of metan to meet; compare Greek agoreuo to speak, explain, originally speak in the assembly,
from agora assembly).


