discount (n.)

1620s, abatement, alteration of 16c. French descompte, from Medieval Latin discomputus (source of
Italian disconto), from discomputare (see discount (v.)). Meaning deduction for early payment is
from 1680s; meaning reduction in the price of goods attested by 1837.


discount (v.)

1620s, reckon as an abatement or deduction, from Old French desconter (13c., Modern French
d&eacute;compter), from Medieval Latin discomputare, from dis- (see dis-) + computare to count (see
count (v.)). Hence, to abate, deduct (1650s), and figurative sense to leave out of account,
disregard (1702).  Related: Discounted; discounting.


happy hour

early evening period of discount drinks and free hors-d'oeuvres at a bar, first recorded 1961.


boss (n.1)

overseer, 1640s, American English, from Dutch baas a master, Middle Dutch baes, of obscure origin.
If original sense was uncle, perhaps it is related to Old High German basa aunt, but some sources
discount this theory. The Dutch form baas is attested in English from 1620s as the standard title of
a Dutch ship's captain. The word's popularity in U.S. may reflect egalitarian avoidance of master
(n.) as well as the need to distinguish slave from free labor. The slang adjective meaning excellent
is recorded in 1880s, revived, apparently independently, in teen and jazz slang in 1950s.


five (n.)

Old English fif, from Proto-Germanic *fimfe (cognates: Old Frisian and Old Saxon fif, Dutch vijf,
Old Norse fimm, Old High German funf, Gothic fimf), from PIE *penkwe- (cognates: Sanskrit panca,
Greek pente, Latin quinque, Old Church Slavonic peti, Lithuanian penke, Old Welsh pimp). The sound
shift that removed the *-m- is a regular development involving Old English, Old Frisian, and Old
Saxon (as in thought, from stem of think; couth from  *kunthaz; us from *uns.    Slang five-finger
discount theft is from 1966. Five o'clock shadow attested by 1937. The original five-year plan was
1928 in the U.S.S.R.


coupon (n.)

1822, certificate of interest due on a bond (which could be cut from the bond and presented for
payment), from French coupon, literally piece cut off, from couper to cut, from coup a blow (see
coup). Meaning widened to discount ticket 1860s by British travel agent Thomas Cook. The specific
advertising sense is from 1906.    COUPON. A financial term, which, together with the practice, is
borrowed from France. In the United States, the certificates of State stocks drawing interest are
accompanied by coupons, which are small tickets attached to the certificates. At each term when the
interest falls due, one of these coupons is cut off (whence the name); and this being presented to
the State treasurer or to a bank designated by him, entitles the holder to receive the interest.
[Bartlett]


hog (n.)

late 12c. (implied in hogaster), swine reared for slaughter (usually about a year old), also used by
stockmen for young sheep (mid-14c.) and for horse older than one year, suggesting the original sense
had something to do with an age, not a type of animal. Not evidenced in Old English, but it may have
existed. Possibility of British Celtic origin [Watkins, etc.] is regarded by OED as improbable.
Figurative sense of gluttonous person is first recorded early 15c. Meaning Harley-Davidson
motorcycle is attested from 1967.    To go hog wild is from 1904. Hog in armor awkward or clumsy
person in ill-fitting attire is from 1650s. Phrase to go the whole hog (1828) is sometimes said to
be from the butcher shop option of buying the whole slaughtered animal (at a discount) rather than
just the choice bits. But it is perhaps rather from the story (recorded in English from 1779) of
Muslim sophists, forbidden by the Quran from eating a certain unnamed part of the hog, who debated
which part was intended and managed to exempt the whole of it from the prohibition. Road hog is
attested from 1886.


folk (n.)

Old English folc common people, laity; men; people, nation, tribe; multitude; troop, army, from
Proto-Germanic *folkom (cognates: Old Frisian folk, Middle Dutch volc, German Volk people), from
Proto-Germanic *fulka-, perhaps originally host of warriors; compare Old Norse folk people, also
army, detachment; and Lithuanian pulkas crowd, Old Church Slavonic pluku division of an army, both
believed to have been borrowed from Proto-Germanic. Old English folcstede could mean both dwelling-
place and battlefield.    Some have attempted to link the word to Greek plethos multitude; Latin
plebs people, mob, populus people or vulgus; OED and Klein discount this theory but it is accepted
in Watkins. The plural form has been usual since 17c. Superseded in most senses by people. Old
English folc was commonly used in forming compounds, such as folccwide popular saying, folcgemot
town or district meeting; folcwoh deception of the public. Folk-etymology is attested from 1890.
By Folk-etymology is meant the influence exercised upon words, both as to their form and meaning, by
the popular use and misuse of them. In a special sense, it is intended to denote the corruption
which words undergo, owing either to false ideas about their derivation, or to a mistaken analogy
with other words to which they are supposed to be related. [The Rev. A. Smythe Palmer, Folk-
Etymology, 1890]


