dishonor (n.)

c.1300, from Old French deshonor (12c.); see dishonor (v.).


dishonor (v.)

mid-13c., from Old French deshonorer (12c.), from Late Latin dishonorare (reformed from classical
Latin dehonestare), from dis- opposite of (see dis-) + honorare (see honor). Related: Dishonored;
dishonoring.


shame (n.)

Old English scamu, sceomu feeling of guilt or disgrace; confusion caused by shame; disgrace,
dishonor, insult, loss of esteem or reputation; shameful circumstance, what brings disgrace;
modesty; private parts, from Proto-Germanic *skamo (cognates: Old Saxon skama, Old Norse sk&ouml;mm,
Swedish skam, Old Frisian scome, Dutch schaamte, Old High German scama, German Scham). The best
guess is that this is from PIE *skem-, from *kem- to cover (covering oneself being a common
expression of shame).    Until modern times English had a productive duplicate form in shand. An Old
Norse word for it was kinnro&eth;i, literally cheek-redness, hence, blush of shame. Greek
distinguished shame in the bad sense of disgrace, dishonor (aiskhyne) from shame in the good sense
of modesty, bashfulness (aidos). To put (someone or something) to shame is mid-13c. Shame culture
attested by 1947.


opprobrium (n.)

1680s, from Latin opprobrium disgrace, infamy, scandal, dishonor, from opprobare (see opprobrious).


violate (v.)

early 15c., to break (an oath, etc.), from Latin violatus, past participle of violare treat with
violence, dishonor, outrage (see violation). Sense of ravish is first recorded mid-15c. Related:
Violated; violating.


ignominy (n.)

1530s, back-formation from ignominious or else from Middle French ignominie (15c.), from Latin
ignominia disgrace, dishonor (see ignominious). Also sometimes shortened to ignomy.


dishonesty (n.)

late 14c., disgrace, shame, want of honor, from Old French deshonest&eacute; (13c.) dishonor,
impropriety, from des- (see dis-) + Latin honestatem honorableness (see honesty). Meaning want of
honesty is recorded from 1590s.


injure (v.)

mid-15c., do an injustice to, dishonor, probably a back-formation from injury, or else from Middle
French injuriier, from Latin injurare. Injury also served as a verb (late 15c.). Related: Injured;
injuring.


blacken (v.)

c.1200, become black or dark; early 14c., make black, darken, dye (hair); see black + -en (1).
Figurative sense of to besmirch (with dishonor, etc.) is from early 15c. Related: Blackened;
blackening.


snape (v.)

also sneap, to be hard upon, rebuke, revile, snub, early 14c., from Old Norse sneypa to outrage,
dishonor, disgrace, probably related to similar-sounding words meaning cut (compare snip (v.)).
Verbal meaning bevel the end (of a timber) to fit an inclined surface is of uncertain origin or
connection. Snaiping rebuking, reproaching, reviling is attested from early 14c.


dishonour

chiefly British English spelling of dishonor; also see  -or. Related: Dishonoured; dishonouring;
dishonourable; dishonourably.


infamy (n.)

early 15c., from Old French infamie (14c.), earlier infame, and directly from Latin infamia ill
fame, bad repute, dishonor, from infamis of ill fame, from in- not, without + fama reputation (see
fame (n.)).


violation (n.)

c.1400, from Old French violacion and directly from Latin violationem (nominative violatio) an
injury, irreverence, profanation, from past participle stem of violare to treat with violence,
outrage, dishonor, perhaps an irregular derivative of vis strength, force, power, energy, from PIE
root *weie- to go after, pursue with vigor or desire, with noun derivatives meaning force, desire
(see venison).


smirch (v.)

late 15c., to discolor, to make dirty, of uncertain origin, perhaps from Old French esmorcher to
torture, perhaps also befoul, stain, from es- out (see ex-) + morcher to bite, from Latin morsus,
past participle of mordere to bite (see mordant). Sense perhaps influenced by smear. Sense of
dishonor, disgrace, discredit first attested 1820.


disparage (v.)

early 14c., degrade socially, from Old French desparagier (Modern French d&eacute;parager) reduce in
rank, degrade, devalue, depreciate, originally to marry unequally, and thus by extension the
disgrace or dishonor involved in this, from des- away (see dis-) + parage rank, lineage (see peer
(n.)). Sense of belittle first recorded 1530s. Related: Disparaged; disparaging; disparagingly.


slander (n.)

late 13c., state of impaired reputation, disgrace or dishonor; c.1300, a false tale; the fabrication
and dissemination of false tales, from Anglo-French esclaundre, Old French esclandre scandalous
statement, alteration (with interloping l [Century Dictionary]) of escandle, escandre scandal, from
Latin scandalum cause of offense, stumbling block, temptation (see scandal). From late 14c. as bad
situation, evil action; a person causing such a state of affairs.


traduce (v.)

1530s, alter, change over, transport, from Latin traducere change over, convert, also lead in
parade, make a show of, dishonor, disgrace, originally lead along or across, bring through, transfer
(source also of French traduire, Spanish traducir, Italian tradurre), from trans- across (see
trans-) + ducere to lead (see duke (n.)). Sense of defame, slander in English is from 1580s, from
Latin traducere in the sense of scorn or disgrace, a figurative use from the notion of to lead along
as a spectacle. Related: Traduced; traducing.


defile (v.)

c.1400, to desecrate, profane; mid-15c., to make foul or dirty, alteration of earlier defoulen, from
Old French defouler trample down, violate, also ill-treat, dishonor, from de- down (see de-) + foler
to tread, from Latin fullo person who cleans and thickens cloth by stamping on it  (see foil (v.)).
The alteration (or re-formation) in English is from influence of Middle English filen (v.) to render
foul; make unclean or impure, literal and figurative, from Old English fylen (trans.), related to
Old English fulian (intrans.) to become foul, rot, from the source of foul (adj.). Compare befoul,
which also had a parallel form befilen. Related: Defiled; defiling.


masturbation (n.)

1711 (earlier as mastupration, 1620s), from French masturbation and directly from Modern Latin
masturbationem (nominative masturbatio), noun of action from past participle stem of Latin
masturbari to masturbate. The long-standing speculation is that this Latin word is altered (probably
by influence of turbare to stir up) from *manstuprare, from manu, ablative of manus hand (see
manual) + stuprare defile (oneself), from stuprum defilement, dishonor, related to stupere to be
stunned, stupefied (see stupid). But perhaps the first element represents an unattested *mazdo-
penis [OED]. An earlier technical word for this was Onanism. Related: Masturbational.


strumpet (n.)

harlot; bold, lascivious woman, early 14c., of uncertain origin. One theory connects it with Latin
stuprata, fem. past participle of stuprare have illicit sexual relations with, or Late Latin strupum
dishonor, violation. But evidence for this is wanting and others suggest Middle Dutch strompe a
stocking, or strompen to stride, to stalk (as a prostitute might a customer). The major sources
don't seem to give much preference to any of these. Weekley notes Gregory's Chronicle (c.1450) has
streppett in same sense. In 18c.-early 19c., often abbreviated as strum and also used as a verb,
which led to some odd dictionary entries:    TO STRUM: to have carnal knowledge of a woman, also to
play badly on the harpsichord or any other stringed instrument. [Capt. Francis Grose, A Classical
Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, 1785]


