disinterested (adj.)

1610s, unconcerned, the sense we now would ascribe to uninterested, with the sense of impartial
going to disinteressed (c.1600). See dis- + interest. Modern sense of disinterested is first
attested 1650s. As things now stand, disinterested means free from personal bias, while uninterested
means caring nothing for the matter in question. Related: Disinterestedly; disinterestedness.


uninterested (adj.)

1640s, unbiased, from un- (1) not + past participle of interest (v.). It later meant disinterested
(1660s); sense of unconcerned, indifferent is recorded from 1771. This is the correct word for what
often is miscalled disinterested.


testament (n.)

late 13c., last will disposing of property, from Latin testamentum a last will, publication of a
will, from testari make a will, be witness to, from testis witness, from PIE *tri-st-i- third person
standing by, from root *tris- three (see three) on the notion of third person, disinterested
witness.    Use in reference to the two divisions of the Bible (early 14c.) is from Late Latin vetus
testamentum and novum testamentum, loan-translations of Greek palaia diatheke and kaine diatheke.
Late Latin testamentum in this case was a confusion of the two meanings of Greek diatheke, which
meant both covenant, dispensation and will, testament, and was used in the former sense in the
account of the Last Supper (see testimony) but subsequently was interpreted as Christ's last will.


patriot (n.)

1590s, compatriot, from Middle French patriote (15c.) and directly from Late Latin patriota fellow-
countryman (6c.), from Greek patriotes fellow countryman, from patrios of one's fathers, patris
fatherland, from pater (genitive patros) father (see father (n.)); with -otes, suffix expressing
state or condition. Liddell &amp; Scott write that patriotes was applied to barbarians who had only
a common [patris], [politai] being used of Greeks who had a common [polis] (or free-state).
Meaning loyal and disinterested supporter of one's country is attested from c.1600, but became an
ironic term of ridicule or abuse from mid-18c. in England, so that Johnson, who at first defined it
as one whose ruling passion is the love of his country, in his fourth edition added, It is sometimes
used for a factious disturber of the government.The name of patriot had become [c.1744] a by-word of
derision. Horace Walpole scarcely exaggerated when he said that ... the most popular declaration
which a candidate could make on the hustings was that he had never been and never would be a
patriot. [Macaulay, Horace Walpole, 1833]Somewhat revived in reference to resistance movements in
overrun countries in World War II, it has usually had a positive sense in American English, where
the phony and rascally variety has been consigned to the word patrioteer (1928). Oriana Fallaci [The
Rage and the Pride, 2002] marvels that Americans, so fond of patriotic, patriot, and patriotism,
lack the root noun and are content to express the idea of patria by cumbersome compounds such as
homeland. (Joyce, Shaw, and H.G. Wells all used patria as an English word early 20c., but it failed
to stick.) Patriots' Day (April 19, anniversary of the 1775 skirmishes at Lexington and Concord
Bridge) was observed as a legal holiday in Maine and Massachusetts from 1894.


