dispenser (n.)

c.1400, one who administers (a household, etc.), c.1200 in surnames, from Anglo-French dispensour,
Old French despenseor, from Latin dispensatorem, agent noun from dispensare (see dispense). Meaning
a container that dispenses in fixed measure is from 1918.


dispense (v.)

early 14c., from Old French dispenser give out (13c.), from Latin dispensare disburse, administer,
distribute (by weight), frequentative of dispendere pay out, from dis- out (see dis-) + pendere to
pay, weigh (see pendant).    In Medieval Latin, dispendere was used in the ecclesiastical sense of
grant license to do what is forbidden or omit what is required (a power of popes, bishops, etc.),
and thus acquired a sense of grant remission from punishment or exemption from law, hence to do away
with (1570s), do without (c.1600). Older sense is preserved in dispensary. Related: Dispensed;
dispensing.


dispensary (n.)

place for weighing out medicines, 1690s, from Medieval Latin dispensarius one who dispenses, from
Latin dispensare (see dispense).


dispensable (adj.)

1530s, subject to dispensation, from Medieval Latin dispensabilis, from dispensare (see dispense).
Meaning that can be done without is from 1640s. Related: Dispensability.


deal (v.)

Old English d&aelig;lan to divide, distribute, separate, share, bestow, dispense, from the source of
deal (n.). Meaning to distribute cards before a game is from 1520s. To deal with handle is attested
from mid-15c. Related: Dealt; dealing.


dispensation (n.)

late 14c., from Old French despensacion (12c., Modern French dispensation), or directly from Latin
dispensationem (nominative dispensatio) management, charge, noun of action from past participle stem
of dispensare (see dispense). Theological sense is from the use of the word to translate Greek
oikonomoia office, method of administration.


mens sana in corpore sano

c.1600, Latin, literally a sound mind in a sound body, a line found in Juvenal, Satires, x.356.
Mens sana in corpore sano is a contradiction in terms, the fantasy of a Mr. Have-your-cake-and-eat-
it. No sane man can afford to dispense with debilitating pleasures; no ascetic can be considered
reliably sane. Hitler was the archetype of the abstemious man. When the other krauts saw him drink
water in the Beer Hall they should have known he was not to be trusted. [A.J. Liebling, Between
Meals, 1962]


Spencer (n.)

surname attested from late 13c. (earlier le Despenser, c.1200), literally one who dispenses or has
charge of provisions in a household. Middle English spence meant larder, pantry, and is short for
Old French despense (French d&eacute;pense) expense, from despenser to distribute (see dispense).
Another form of the word is spender, which also has become a surname.    As a type of repeating
rifle used in the American Civil War, 1863, named for U.S. gunsmith Christopher Spencer, who, with
Luke Wheelock, manufactured them in Boston, Mass.


livery (n.)

c.1300, household allowance of any kind (food, provisions, clothing) to retainers or servants, from
Anglo-French livere (late 13c.), Old French livr&eacute;e, allowance, ration, pay, originally
(clothes) delivered by a master to his retinue, from fem. past participle of livrer to dispense,
deliver, hand over, from Latin liberare (see liberate). The sense later was reduced to servants'
rations and provender for horses (mid-15c.). The former led to the meaning distinctive clothing
given to servants (early 14c.); the latter now is obsolete except in livery stable (1705). Related:
Liveried.


spare (v.)

Old English sparian to refrain from harming, be indulgent to, allow to go free; use sparingly, from
the source of Old English sp&aelig;r sparing, frugal, from Proto-Germanic *sparaz (cognates: Old
Saxon sparon, Old Frisian sparia, Old Norse spara, Dutch sparen, Old High German sparon, German
sparen to spare). Meaning to dispense from one's own stock, give or yield up, is recorded from early
13c. Related: Spared; sparing.


eschew (v.)

mid-14c., from Old French eschiver shun, eschew, avoid, dispense with, from Frankish *skiuhan dread,
avoid, shun, from Proto-Germanic *skeukhwaz (cognates: Old High German sciuhen to avoid, escape,
German scheuen to fear, shun, shrink from, scheu shy, timid); see shy (v.). Related: Eschewed;
eschewing. Italian schivare to avoid, shun, protect from, schivo shy, bashful also are loan words
from West Germanic.


