disparate (adj.)

c.1600, unlike in kind, from Latin disparatus, past participle of disparare divide, separate, from
dis- apart (see dis-) + parare get ready, prepare (see pare); meaning influenced by Latin dispar
unequal, unlike. Related: Disparately; disparateness.


set (v.)

Old English settan (transitive) cause to sit, put in some place, fix firmly; build, found; appoint,
assign, from Proto-Germanic *(bi)satjan to cause to sit, set (cognates: Old Norse setja, Swedish
s&#228;tta, Old Saxon settian, Old Frisian setta, Dutch zetten, German setzen, Gothic satjan),
causative form of PIE *sod-, variant of *sed- (1) to sit (see sit (v.)). Also see set (n.2).
Intransitive sense from c.1200, be seated. Used in many disparate senses by Middle English; sense of
make or cause to do, act, or be; start and that of mount a gemstone attested by mid-13c. Confused
with sit since early 14c. Of the sun, moon, etc., to go down, recorded from c.1300, perhaps from
similar use of the cognates in Scandinavian languages. To set (something) on incite to attack
(c.1300) originally was in reference to hounds and game.


mulatto (n.)

1590s, offspring of a European and a black African, from Spanish or Portuguese mulato of mixed
breed, literally young mule, from mulo mule, from Latin mulus (fem. mula) mule (see mule (n.1));
possibly in reference to hybrid origin of mules. As an adjective from 1670s. Fem. mulatta is
attested from 1620s; mulattress from 1805.    American culture, even in its most rigidly segregated
precincts, is patently and irrevocably composite. It is, regardless of all the hysterical
protestations of those who would have it otherwise, incontestibly mulatto. Indeed, for all their
traditional antagonisms and obvious differences, the so-called black and so-called white people of
the United States resemble nobody else in the world so much as they resemble each other. [Albert
Murray, The Omni-Americans: Black Experience &amp; American Culture, 1970]    Old English had
sunderboren born of disparate parents.


set (n.2)

act of setting; condition of being set (of a heavenly body), mid-14c., from set (v.) or its
identical past participle. Many disparate senses collect under this word because of the far-flung
meanings assigned to the verb:   Action of hardening, 1837; also manner or position in which
something is set (1530s), hence general movement, direction, tendency (1560s); build, form (1610s),
hence bearing, carriage (1855); action of fixing the hair in a particular style (1933).    Something
that has been set (1510s), hence the use in tennis (1570s) and the theatrical meaning scenery for an
individual scene in a play, etc., recorded from 1859. Other meanings OED groups under miscellaneous
technical senses include piece of electrical apparatus (1891, first in telegraphy); burrow of a
badger (1898). Old English had set seat, in plural camp; stable, but OED finds it doubtful whether
this survived beyond OE. Compare set (n.1).   Set (n.1) and set (n.2) are not always distinguished
in dictionaries; OED has them as two entries, Century Dictionary as one. The difference of opinion
seems to be whether the set meaning group, grouping (here (n.2)) is a borrowing of the unrelated
French word that sounds like the native English one, or a borrowing of the sense only, which was
absorbed into the English word.


