disperse (v.)

late 14c., from Latin dispersus, past participle of dispergere to scatter, from dis- apart, in every
direction (see dis-) + spargere to scatter (see sparse). The Latin word is glossed in Old English by
tostregdan. Related: Dispersed; dispersing.


dispersal (n.)

1821; see disperse + -al (2).


dispersion (n.)

late 14c., from Old French dispersion (13c.), from Latin dispersionem (nominative dispersio) a
scattering, noun of action from past participle stem of dispergere (see disperse).


disassemble (v.)

1610s, to disperse; see dis- + assemble. Meaning to take apart is from 1922. Related: Disassembled;
disassembling; disassembly.


defer (v.1)

to delay, late 14c., differren, deferren, from Old French differer (14c.), from Latin differre carry
apart, scatter, disperse; also be different, differ; also defer, put off, postpone, (see differ).
Etymologically identical with differ; the spelling and pronunciation differentiated from 15c.,
perhaps partly by association of this word with delay.


evaporation (n.)

late 14c., from Old French &eacute;vaporation and directly from Latin evaporationem (nominative
evaporatio), noun of action from past participle stem of evaporare disperse in vapor or steam, from
ex- out (see ex-) + vapor steam (see vapor).


dissipate (v.)

early 15c., from Latin dissipatus, past participle of dissipare to spread abroad, scatter, disperse;
squander, disintegrate, from dis- apart (see dis-) + supare to throw, scatter, from PIE *swep- to
throw, sling, cast (cognates: Lithuanian supu to swing, rock, Old Church Slavonic supo to strew).
Related: Dissipated; dissipates; dissipating.


diaspora (n.)

1876, from Greek diaspora dispersion, from diaspeirein to scatter about, disperse, from dia- about,
across (see dia-) + speirein to scatter (see sprout). The Greek word was used in Septuagint in Deut.
xxviii:25. A Hebrew word for it is galuth exile. Related: Diasporic.


ventilate (v.)

early 15c., to scatter, disperse (as the wind does), from Latin ventilatus, past participle of
ventilare to brandish, toss in the air, winnow, fan, agitate, set in motion, from ventulus a breeze,
diminutive of ventus wind (see wind (n.1)). Original notion is of cleaning grain by tossing it in
the air and letting the wind blow away the chaff. Meaning supply a room with fresh air first
recorded 1743 (see ventilation). Formerly with diverse slang senses, including shoot (someone),
recorded from 1875. Related: Ventilated; ventilating.


solve (v.)

late 14c., to disperse, dissipate, loosen, from Latin solvere to loosen, dissolve; untie, release,
detach; depart; unlock; scatter; dismiss; accomplish, fulfill; explain; remove, from PIE *se-lu-,
from reflexive pronoun *s(w)e- (see idiom) + root *leu- to loosen, divide, cut apart (see lose). The
meaning explain, answer is attested from 1530s; for sense evolution, see solution. Mathematical use
is attested from 1737. Related: Solved; solving.


discussion (n.)

mid-14c., examination, investigation, judicial trial, from Old French discussion discussion,
examination, investigation, legal trial, from Late Latin discussionem (nominative discussio)
examination, discussion, in classical Latin, a shaking, from discussus, past participle of discutere
strike asunder, break up, from dis- apart (see dis-) + quatere to shake (see quash). Meaning a
talking over, debating in English first recorded mid-15c. Sense evolution in Latin appears to have
been from smash apart to scatter, disperse, then in post-classical times (via the mental process
involved) to investigate, examine, then to debate.


louver (n.)

also louvre, early 14c., domed turret-like structure atop a building to disperse smoke and admit
light, from Old French lovier, of uncertain origin. One theory connects it to Medieval Latin
*lodarium, which might be from a Germanic source (compare Old High German louba upper room, roof;
see lobby). Another suggests it is from French l'ouvert, literally the open place, from le, definite
article, + past participle of ouvrir to open. Meaning overlapping strips in a window (to let in air
but keep out rain) first recorded 1550s. The form has been influenced by apparently unrelated French
Louvre, the name of the palace in Paris, which is said to be so named because its builder, Philip
Augustus, intended it as a wolf kennel. Related: Louvered.


