dispatcher (n.)

mid-16c., agent noun from dispatch (v.).


dispatch (v.)

1510s, to send off in a hurry, from a word in Spanish (despachar expedite, hasten) or Italian
(dispacciare to dispatch). For first element, see dis-. The exact source of the second element has
been proposed as Vulgar Latin *pactare to fasten, fix or *pactiare, or as Latin -pedicare to entrap
(from Latin pedica shackle; see impeach); and the Spanish and Italian words seem to be related to
(perhaps opposites of) Old Proven&ccedil;al empachar impede. See OED for full discussion. Meaning to
get rid of by killing is attested from 1520s. Related: Dispatched; dispatching. As a noun, from
1540s, originally dismissal; sense of a message sent speedily is first attested 1580s.


depeche (n.)

a dispatch, from French d&eacute;p&ecirc;che (15c.), from d&eacute;p&ecirc;cher to dispatch, from
Old French despeechier, from des- (see des-) + stem of empeechier to hinder (see impeach). Not
directly related to dispatch.


telegram (n.)

telegraphic dispatch, according to Bartlett's 1859 edition a coinage of E. Peshine Smith of
Rochester, N.Y., from tele-, as in telegraph + -gram, and introduced in the Albany Evening Journal
of April 6, 1852. Damned in the cradle by purists who pointed out that the correct formation would
be telegrapheme (which is close to the Modern Greek word).  May I suggest to such as are not
contented with 'Telegraphic Dispatch' the rightly constructed word 'telegrapheme'? I do not want it,
but ... I protest against such a barbarism as 'telegram.' [Richard Shilleto, Cambridge Greek
scholar, in the London Times, Oct. 15, 1857]    Related: Telegrammic.


despatch

18c. variant of dispatch (q.v.), apparently the result of an error in the printing of Johnson's
dictionary.


invoice (n.)

1550s, apparently from Middle French envois, plural of envoi dispatch (of goods), literally a
sending, from envoyer to send (see envoy). As a verb, 1690s, from the noun.


citation (n.)

c.1300, summons, written notice to appear, from Old French citation or directly from Latin
citationem (nominative citatio) a command, noun of action from past participle stem of citare to
summon, urge, call; put in sudden motion, call forward; rouse, excite (see cite). Meaning passage
cited, quotation is from 1540s. From 1918 as a mention in an official dispatch.


thirty (adj.)

late 14c. metathesis of thritti, from Old English &thorn;ritig, from &thorn;ri, &thorn;reo three
(see three) + -tig group of ten (see -ty (1)). Similar formation in Old Frisian thritich, Old Saxon
thritig, Dutch dertig, Old High German drizzug, German dreissig.    The Thirty Years' War (1842) was
a religious power struggle waged 1618-48, mainly on German soil. The symbol -30- as printer and
telegrapher's code to indicate the last sheet or line of copy or a dispatch is recorded from 1895.
In 20c. jargon of newspaper journalism, it came to be a traditional sign-off signal and slang word
for the end.


mission (n.)

1590s, a sending abroad, originally of Jesuits, from Latin missionem (nominative missio) act of
sending, a despatching; a release, a setting at liberty; discharge from service, dismissal, noun of
action from past participle stem of mittere to send, oldest form probably *smittere, of unknown
origin.    Diplomatic sense of body of persons sent to a foreign land on commercial or political
business is from 1620s. In American English, sometimes an embassy (1805). Meaning dispatch of an
aircraft on a military operation (1929, American English) later extended to spacecraft flights
(1962), hence, mission control (1964). As a style of furniture, said to be imitative of furniture in
the buildings of original Spanish missions to North America, it is attested from 1900.


epistle (n.)

Old English epistol, from Old French epistle, epistre (Modern French &eacute;pitre), from Latin
epistola letter, from Greek epistole message, letter, command, commission, whether verbal or in
writing, from epistellein send to, from epi to (see epi-) + stellein in its secondary sense of to
dispatch, send from PIE *stel-yo-, suffixed form of root *stel- to put, stand, with derivatives
referring to a standing object or place (see stall (n.1)).    Also acquired in Old English directly
from Latin as pistol. Specific sense of letter from an apostle forming part of canonical scripture
is c.1200.


