dissertation (n.)

1610s, discussion, debate, from Latin dissertationem (nominative dissertatio) discourse, noun of
action from past participle stem of dissertare debate, argue, examine, harangue, frequentative of
disserere discuss, examine, from dis- apart (see dis-) + serere to arrange words (see series). Sense
of formal, written treatise is 1650s.


nymphomania (n.)

1775, in English translation of Nymphomania, or a Dissertation Concerning the Furor Uterinus, by
French doctor M.D.T. Bienville, coined from Greek nymphe bride (see nymph) + mania madness (see
mania). Perhaps influenced by earlier French nymphomanie. Defined as a female disease characterized
by morbid and uncontrollable sexual desire. Compare also nympholepsy.


thesis (n.)

late 14c., unaccented syllable or note, from Latin thesis unaccented syllable in poetry, later (and
more correctly) stressed part of a metrical foot, from Greek thesis a proposition, also downbeat (in
music), originally a setting down, a placing, an arranging; position, situation, from root of
tithenai to place, put, set, from PIE root *dhe- to set, to put (see factitious). Sense in logic of
a formulation in advance of a proposition to be proved is first recorded 1570s; that of dissertation
presented by a candidate for a university degree is from 1650s.


diatribe (n.)

1640s (in Latin form in English from 1580s), discourse, critical dissertation, from French diatribe
(15c.), from Latin diatriba learned discussion, from Greek diatribe employment, study, in Plato,
discourse, literally a wearing away (of time), from dia- away (see dia-) + tribein to wear, rub,
from PIE root *tere- (1) to rub, turn, twist (see throw (v.)). Sense of invective is 1804,
apparently from French.


nostalgia (n.)

1770, severe homesickness considered as a disease, Modern Latin, coined 1668 in a dissertation on
the topic at the University of Basel by scholar Johannes Hofer (1669-1752) as a rendering of German
heimweh (for which see home + woe). From Greek algos pain, grief, distress (see -algia) + nostos
homecoming, from PIE *nes- to return safely home (cognate with Old Norse nest food for a journey,
Sanskrit nasate approaches, joins, German genesen to recover, Gothic ganisan to heal, Old English
genesen to recover). French nostalgie is in French army medical manuals by 1754.    Originally in
reference to the Swiss and said to be peculiar to them and often fatal, whether by its own action or
in combination with wounds or disease. By 1830s the word was used of any intense homesickness: that
of sailors, convicts, African slaves. The bagpipes produced the same effects sometimes in the Scotch
regiments while serving abroad [Penny Magazine, Nov. 14, 1840]. It is listed among the endemic
diseases in the Cyclopaedia of Practical Medicine [London, 1833, edited by three M.D.s], which
defines it as The concourse of depressing symptoms which sometimes arise in persons who are absent
from their native country, when they are seized with a longing desire of returning to their home and
friends and the scenes their youth .... It was a military medical diagnosis principally, and was
considered a serious medical problem by the North in the American Civil War:    In the first two
years of the war, there were reported 2588 cases of nostalgia, and 13 deaths from this cause. These
numbers scarcely express the real extent to which nostalgia influenced the sickness and mortality of
the army. To the depressing influence of home-sickness must be attributed the fatal result in many
cases which might otherwise have terminated favorably. [Sanitary Memoirs of the War, U.S. Sanitary
Commission, N.Y.: 1867]    Transferred sense (the main modern one) of wistful yearning for the past
first recorded 1920, perhaps from such use of nostalgie in French literature. The longing for a
distant place also necessarily involves a separation in time.


