dissection (n.)

1580s, from Middle French dissection, from Medieval Latin dissectionem (nominative dissectio), noun
of action from past participle stem of Latin dissecare cut in pieces, from dis- apart (see dis-) +
secare to cut (see section).


vivisection (n.)

dissection of a living animal, 1694, from Latin vivus alive (see vivid) + ending from dissection).
Related: Vivisectionist.


dissect (v.)

c.1600, from Latin dissectus, past participle of dissecare to cut to pieces (see dissection). Or
perhaps a back-formation from dissection. Related: Dissected; dissecting.


anatomy (n.)

late 14c., study of the structure of living beings; c.1400, anatomical structures, from Old French
anatomie, from Late Latin anatomia, from Greek anatomia, from anatome dissection, from ana- up (see
ana-) + temnein to cut (see tome). Dissection (1540s), mummy (1580s), and skeleton (1590s) were
primary senses of this word in Shakespeare's day; meaning the science of the structure of organized
bodies predominated from 17c. Often mistakenly divided as an atomy or a natomy.The scyence of the
Nathomy is nedefull and necessarye to the Cyrurgyen [1541]


anatomize (v.)

to dissect, investigate by dissection, early 15c., from Medieval Latin anatomizare or French
anatomiser (16c.), from Greek anatomia (see anatomy). Related: Anatomized; anatomizing.


autopsy (n.)

1650s, an eye-witnessing, from Modern Latin autopsia, from Greek autopsia a seeing with one's own
eyes, from autos- self (see auto-) + opsis a sight (see eye (n.)). Sense of dissection of a body to
determine cause of death is first recorded 1670s, probably from the same sense in French autopsie
(1570s).


Burke (v.)

family name (first recorded 1066), from Anglo-Norman pronunciation of Old English burgh. Not common
in England itself, but it took root in Ireland, where William de Burgo went in 1171 with Henry II
and later became Earl of Ulster. As shorthand for a royalty reference book, it represents A General
and Heraldic Dictionary of the Peerage and Baronetage of the United Kingdom, first issued 1826,
compiled by John Burke (1787-1848). As a verb meaning murder by smothering, it is abstracted from
William Burk, executed in Edinburgh 1829 for murdering several persons to sell their bodies for
dissection.


