dissolution (n.)

late 14c., separation into parts, also frivolity, moral laxness, dissolute living, from Old French
dissolution (12c.) and directly from Latin dissolutionem (nominative dissolutio) a dissolving,
destroying, interruption, dissolution, noun of action from past participle stem of dissolvere (see
dissolve).


-lysis

scientific/medical word-forming element meaning loosening, dissolving, dissolution, from Greek lysis
a loosening, setting free, releasing, dissolution, from lyein to unfasten, loose, loosen, untie (see
lose).


catalysis (n.)

1650s, dissolution, from Latinized form of Greek katalysis dissolution, a dissolving (of
governments, military units, etc.), from katalyein to dissolve, from kata- down (or completely), see
cata-, + lyein to loosen (see lose). Chemical sense change caused by an agent which itself remains
unchanged is attested from 1836, introduced by Swedish chemist J&ouml;ns Jakob Berzelius
(1779-1848).


lysol (n.)

brown oily coal-tar solution used as a disinfectant, 1890, coined, perhaps in German, from Greek
lysis dissolution (see lysis) + -ol, element indicating oil.


hydrolysis (n.)

chemical decomposition by water, 1880, formed in English from hydro- + Greek lysis a loosening, a
dissolution, from lyein to loosen, dissolve (see lose).


lysis (n.)

dissolution of cells, bacteria, etc., 1902, from Latin lysis, from Greek lysis a loosening, from
lyein to unfasten, loose, loosen, untie (see lose).


divorce (n.)

late 14c., from Old French divorce (14c.), from Latin divortium separation, dissolution of marriage,
from divertere to separate, leave one's husband, turn aside (see divert). Not distinguished in
English from legal separation until mid-19c.


dialysis (n.)

1580s, from Latin, from Greek dialysis dissolution, separation (of the disbanding of troops, a
divorce, etc.), from dialyein dissolve, separate, from dia- apart + lyein loosen (see lose). Used
originally in logic and grammar; chemistry sense is first recorded 1861, medicine 1914. Related:
Dialytic.


bedlam (n.)

scene of mad confusion, 1660s, from colloquial pronunciation of Hospital of Saint Mary of Bethlehem
in London, founded 1247 as a priory, mentioned as a hospital 1330 and as a lunatic hospital 1402;
converted to a state lunatic asylum on dissolution of the monasteries in 1547. It was spelled Bedlem
in a will from 1418, and Betleem is recorded as a spelling of Bethlehem in Judea from 971.


repudiate (v.)

1540s, to cast off by divorce,     from Latin repudiatus, past participle of repudiare to cast off,
put away, divorce, reject, scorn, disdain, from repudium divorce, rejection, a putting away,
dissolution of marriage, from re- back, away (see re-) + pudium, probably related to pes-/ped- foot
[Barnhart]. If this is so, the original notion may be of kicking something away, but folk etymology
commonly connects it with pudere cause shame to. Of opinions, conduct, etc., to refuse to
acknowledge, attested from 1824. Earliest in English as an adjective meaning divorced, rejected,
condemned (mid-15c.). Related: Repudiated; repudiating.


