dissent (v.)

early 15c., from Latin dissentire differ in sentiments, disagree, be at odds, contradict, quarrel,
from dis- differently (see dis-) + sentire to feel, think (see sense (n.)). Related: Dissented;
dissenting. The noun is 1580s, from the verb.  Has there ever been a society which has died of
dissent? Several have died of conformity in our lifetime. [Jacob Bronowski Science and Human Values,
1956]


dissenter (n.)

1630s, in 17c. especially of religions (with a capital D- from 1670s); agent noun from dissent.


prohibition (n.)

late 14c., act of prohibiting, a forbidding by authority, from Anglo-French and Old French
prohibition (early 13c.), from Latin prohibitionem (nominative prohibitio) a hindering, forbidding;
legal prohibition, noun of action from past participle stem of prohibere hold back, restrain,
hinder, prevent, from pro- away, forth (see pro-) + habere to hold (see habit (n.)). Meaning forced
alcohol abstinence is 1851, American English; in effect nationwide in U.S. as law 1920-1933 under
the Volstead Act.    People whose youth did not coincide with the twenties never had our reverence
for strong drink. Older men knew liquor before it became the symbol of a sacred cause. Kids who
began drinking after 1933 take it as a matter of course. ... Drinking, we proved to ourselves our
freedom as individuals and flouted Congress. We conformed to a popular type of dissent -- dissent
from a minority. It was the only period during which a fellow could be smug and slopped
concurrently. [A.J. Liebling, Between Meals, 1959]    Related: Prohibitionist.


Aesopic (adj.)

1927, in reference to Soviet literary censorship: obscure or ambiguous writing, often allegorical,
which disguises dissent, from Aesop + -ic. The term (Russian ezopovskii, 1875) arose under the Tsars
and the style was used by Russian communists. Once they took power the word was applied by them as a
charge against their own dissidents.


dissension (n.)

early 14c., from Old French dissension (12c.) and directly from Latin dissensionem (nominative
dissensio) disagreement, difference of opinion, discord, strife, noun of action from past participle
stem of dissentire disagree (see dissent).


protest (n.)

c.1400, avowal, pledge, solemn declaration, from Old French protest (Modern French pr&#244;tet),
from preotester, and directly from Latin protestari declare publicly, testify, protest, from pro-
forth, before (see pro-) + testari testify, from testis witness (see testament).    Meaning
statement of disapproval first recorded 1751; adjectival sense of expressing of dissent from, or
rejection of, prevailing mores is from 1953, in reference to U.S. civil rights movement. First
record of protest march is from 1959.


Protestant (n., adj.)

1539, from German or French protestant, from Latin protestantem (nominative protestans), present
participle of protestari (see protest (n.)). Originally used of German princes and free cities who
declared their dissent from (protested) the decision of the Diet of Speyer (1529), which reversed
the liberal terms allowed Lutherans in 1526.    When forced to make their choice between obedience
to God and obedience to the Emperor, they were compelled to choose the former. [Thomas M. Lindsay, A
History of the Reformation, New York, 1910]  The word was taken up by the Lutherans in Germany
(Swiss and French preferred Reformed). It became the general word for adherents of the Reformation
in Germany, then member of any Western church outside the Roman communion; a sense first attested in
English in 1553.In the 17c., 'protestant' was primarily opposed to 'papist,' and thus accepted by
English Churchmen generally; in more recent times, being generally opposed to 'Roman Catholic,' or
... to 'Catholic,' ... it is viewed with disfavour by those who lay stress on the claim of the
Anglican Church to be equally Catholic with the Roman. [OED]Often contemptuous shortened form Prot
is from 1725, in Irish English. Protestant (work) ethic (1926) is taken from Max Weber's work Die
protestantische Ethik und der 'Geist' des Kapitalismus (1904). Protestant Reformation attested by
1680s.


