distort (v.)

1580s, from Latin distortus, past participle of distorquere to twist different ways, distort, from
dis- completely + torquere to twist (see torque (n.)). Related: Distorted; distorting.


distortion (n.)

1580s, action of distorting, from Latin distortionem (nominative distortio), noun of action from
past participle stem of distorquere (see distort). Figurative use (of words, etc.) from 1640s.


freak (v.)

change, distort, 1911, from freak (n.). Earlier, to streak or fleck randomly (1630s). Related:
Freaked; freaking.


deprave (v.)

late 14c., corrupt, lead astray, pervert, from Old French depraver (14c.) or directly from Latin
depravare distort, disfigure; figuratively to pervert, seduce, corrupt, from de- completely (see
de-) + pravus crooked. Related: Depraved; depraving.


buckle (v.2)

distort, warp, bend out of shape 1520s, bokelen to arch the body, from Middle French boucler to
bulge, from Old French bocler to bulge, from bocle boss of a shield (see buckle (n.)). Meaning bend
under strong pressure is from 1590s (figurative from 1640s) . Related: Buckled; buckling.


tort (n.)

mid-13c., injury, wrong, from Old French tort wrong, injustice, crime (11c.), from Medieval Latin
tortum injustice, noun use of neuter of tortus wrung, twisted, past participle of Latin torquere
turn, turn awry, twist, wring, distort (see torque (n.)). Legal sense of breach of a duty, whereby
someone acquires a right of action for damages is first recorded 1580s.


tortuous (adj.)

late 14c., full of twists and turns, from Anglo-French tortuous (12c.), Old French tortuos, from
Latin tortuosus full of twists, winding, from tortus a twisting, winding, from stem of torquere to
twist, wring, distort (see torque (n.)). Related: Tortuously; tortuousness.


torsion (n.)

early 15c., wringing pain in the bowels, from Old French torsion colic (early 14c.), from Late Latin
torsionem (nominative torsio) a wringing or gripping, from Latin tortionem (nominative tortio)
torture, torment, noun of action from past participle stem of torquere to twist, distort, torture
(see torque (n.)). Meaning act or effect of twisting as by opposing forces is first recorded 1540s.


skew (v.)

late 15c., to turn aside (intransitive), from Old North French eskiuer shy away from, avoid, Old
French eschiver (see eschew). Transitive sense of turn (something) aside is from 1570s. Meaning
depict unfairly first recorded 1872, on notion of being give oblique direction to, hence to distort,
to make slant. Statistical sense dates from 1929. Related: Skewed; skewing. The adjectival meaning
slanting, turned to one side is recorded from c.1600, from the verb; noun meaning slant, deviation
first attested 1680s.


freak out (n.)

also freakout bad psychedelic drug trip or something comparable to one, 1966 (despite an amusing
coincidental appearance of the phrase dug up by the OED in Fanny Hill from 1749), from verbal phrase
freak out, attested from 1965 in the drug sense (from 1902 in a sense change, distort, come out of
alignment); see freak (n.). Freak (n.) drug user is attested from 1945.    She had had her freak
out, and had pretty plentifully drowned her curiosity in a glut of pleasure .... [Cleland, Memoirs
of a Woman of Pleasure, 1749]


torque (n.)

rotating force, 1882, from Latin torquere to twist, turn, turn about, twist awry, distort, torture,
from PIE *torkw-eyo-, causative of *terkw- to twist (see thwart (adv.)). The word also is used
(since 1834) by antiquarians and others as a term for the twisted metal necklace worn anciently by
Gauls, Britons, Germans, etc., from Latin torques collar of twisted metal, from torquere. Earlier it
had been called in English torques (1690s). Torque-wrench is from 1941.


garble (v.)

early 15c., to inspect and remove refuse from (spices), from Anglo-French garbeler to sift (late
14c.), from Medieval Latin and Italian garbellare, from Arabic gharbala to sift and select spices,
related to kirbal sieve, perhaps from Late Latin cribellum, diminutive of Latin cribrum sieve (see
crisis). Apparently a widespread word among Mediterranean traders (compare Italian garbellare,
Spanish garbillo); sense of mix up, confuse, distort language (by selecting some things and omitting
others) first recorded 1680s. Related: Garbled; garbling.


torture (n.)

early 15c., contortion, twisting, distortion; a disorder characterized by contortion, from Old
French torture infliction of great pain; great pain, agony (12c.), and directly from Late Latin
tortura a twisting, writhing, in Medieval Latin pain inflicted by judicial or ecclesiastical
authority as a means of punishment or persuasion, from stem of Latin torquere to twist, turn, wind,
wring, distort (see torque (n.)). The meaning infliction of severe bodily pain as a means of
punishment or persuasion in English is from 1550s. The theory behind judicial torture was that a
guilty person could be made to confess, but an innocent one could not, by this means. Macaulay
writes that it was last inflicted in England in May 1640.


warp (v.)

to bend, twist, distort, Old English weorpan to throw, throw away, hit with a missile, from Proto-
Germanic *werpan to fling by turning the arm (cognates: Old Saxon werpan, Old Norse verpa to throw,
Swedish v&auml;rpa to lay eggs, Old Frisian werpa, Middle Low German and Dutch werpen, German
werfen, Gothic wairpan to throw), from PIE *werp- to turn, wind, bend (cognates: Latin verber whip,
rod; Greek rhabdos rod, rhombos magic wheel), from root *wer- (3) to turn, bend (see versus).
Connection between turning and throwing is perhaps in the notion of rotating the arm in the act of
throwing; compare Old Church Slavonic vre&#353;ti to throw, from the same PIE root. The meaning
twist out of shape is first recorded c.1400; intransitive sense is from mid-15c. Related: Warped;
warping.


