distant (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French distant (14c.), from Latin distantem (nominative distans), present
participle of distare to stand apart, be remote (see distance (n.)). Related: Distantly.


offing (n.)

in phrase in the offing, 1779, from nautical term offing the more distant part of the sea as seen
from the shore (1620s), from off (q.v.) + noun suffix -ing (1). Originally the phrase meant in the
distant future; modern sense of impending developed 1914.


removed (adj.)

distant in relationship (by some expressed degree), 1540s, from past participle of remove (v.).
Meaning remote, separated, secluded is from 1610s.


interior (n.)

part of a country distant from the coast, 1796, from interior (adj.); meaning inside of a building
or room is from 1829.


Timbuktu

city on the southern edge of the Sahara desert, older spelling Timbuctoo, used allusively in English
for most distant place imaginable from at least 1863. The name is from Songhai, literally hollow, in
reference to the depression in which it stands.


tilapia (n.)

1849, formed in Modern Latin, perhaps from Greek tilon, name of a fish in Aristotle, + apios
distant.


far out (adj.)

also far-out, 1887, remote, distant; from far + out. Slang sense of excellent, wonderful, is from
1954, originally in jazz talk.


unapproachable (adj.)

1580s, of places, from un- (1) not + approachable. Of persons, distant, aloof, attested from 1848.
Related: Unapproachably.


longinquity (n.)

remoteness, 1540s, from Latin longinquitas length, extent, duration, from longinquus long,
extensive, remote, distant, from longus (see long (adj.)) -inquus.


Soho

district in New York city, 1969, from South of Houston Street, but probably also echoing the name of
the London neighborhood (famous for vice by early 19c.), which was so called since at least 1630s,
originally So Ho, a hunting cry (c.1300) used in calling from a distant place to alert hounds and
other hunters; the West End district was so called from earlier association of this area with
hunting.


equidistant (adj.)

1560s, from French &eacute;quidistant (14c.), from Late Latin aequidistantem (nominative
aequidistans), from aequi- (see equal) + distantem (see distant). In reference to a type of map
projection, from 1866.


ulterior (adj.)

1640s, on the other side of, from Latin ulterior more distant, more remote, farther, on the farther
side, comparative of *ulter beyond (see ultra-). The sense not at present in view or consideration
(as in ulterior motives) is attested from 1735.


distal (adj.)

1808, formed from distant + -al (1) on model of central, dorsal, ventral, etc.


Neptune

late 14c., god of the sea, from Latin Neptunus, son of Saturn, brother of Jupiter, the Roman god of
the sea (later identified with Greek Poseidon), probably from PIE root *nebh- cloud (source of Latin
nebula fog, mist, cloud; see nebula), via a sense of moist, wet. The planet so named was discovered
by Galle in 1846. Until the identification of Pluto in 1930, it was the most distant planet known.


remote (adj.)

mid-15c., from Middle French remot or directly from Latin remotus afar off, remote, distant in
place, past participle of removere move back or away (see remove (v.)). Related: Remotely;
remoteness. Remote control fact of controlling from a distance is recorded from 1904; as a device
which allows this from 1920.


ultimate (adj.)

1650s, from Late Latin ultimatus, past participle of ultimare to be final, come to an end, from
Latin ultimus (fem. ultima) last, final, farthest, most distant, extreme, superlative of *ulter
beyond (see ultra-). As a noun from 1680s. Ultimate Frisbee is attested by 1972.


pilgrimage (n.)

late 13c., pelrimage; from pilgrim + -age and also from Old French pelrimage, pelerinage pilgrimage,
distant journey, crusade, from peleriner to go on a pilgrimage. Modern spelling from early 14c.


mail-order (adj.)

1875, from mail (n.1) + order. Before television and the Internet, the bane of retailers and shop-
owners.    The origin, foundation and principle of mail order trading is universally recognized as
wrong. It was conceived in iniquity and brought forth in despair as the world's greatest destructive
medium. Mail Order Trading was born in the brain of knaves and thieves who fired their building for
insurance profits, then sold the salvaged and damaged stock to the unsuspecting sons of man in
distant territory. [Thomas J. Sullivan, Merchants and Manufacturers on Trial, Chicago, 1914]


Messier

in reference to a catalogue of about 100 nebulae, star clusters and galaxies begun in 1758 by French
astronomer and comet-hunter Charles Messier (1730-1817), who found his telescopic searches deceived
by fuzzy objects that resembled distant comets but turned out to be fixed.    What caused me to
undertake the catalog was the nebula I discovered above the southern horn of Taurus on September 12,
1758, whilst observing the comet of that year. This nebula had such a resemblance to a comet in its
form and brightness that I endeavored to find others, so that astronomers would no more confuse
these same nebulae with comets just beginning to appear. [Messier, 1800]    The first version of the
catalogue was published 1771, and the fuller version in 1781.


prospect (n.)

early 15c., act of looking into the distance, from Latin prospectus distant view, look out; sight,
faculty of sight, noun use of past participle of prospicere look out on, look forward, from pro-
forward (see pro-) + specere look at (see scope (n.1)). Meaning extensive view of the landscape is
from 1530s; transferred sense of mental view or survey is from 1620s. Sense of person or thing
considered promising is from 1922. Prospects expectations, things looked forward to is from 1660s.


strange (adj.)

late 13c., from elsewhere, foreign, unknown, unfamiliar, from Old French estrange foreign, alien,
unusual, unfamiliar, curious; distant; inhospitable; estranged, separated (Modern French
&eacute;trange), from Latin extraneus foreign, external, from without (source also of Italian strano
strange, foreign, Spanish estra&#241;o), from extra outside of (see extra). In early use also
strounge, straunge. Sense of queer, surprising is attested from late 14c. In nuclear physics, from
1956.


distance (n.)

late 13c., quarrel, estrangement, discord, strife, from Old French destance (13c.), from Latin
distantia a standing apart, from distantem (nominative distans) standing apart, separate, distant,
present participle of distare stand apart, from dis- apart, off (see dis-) + stare to stand (see
stet).    Meaning remoteness, space between things or places is late 14c. The figurative sense of
aloofness is the same as in stand-offish. Phrase go the distance (1930s) seems to be originally from
the prize ring, where the word meant scheduled length of a bout.


redoubt (n.)

also redout, small, enclosed military work, c.1600, from French redoute (17c.), from Italian
ridotto, earlier ridotta, place of retreat, from Medieval Latin reductus place of refuge, retreat,
noun use of past participle of reducere to lead or bring back (see reduce). The -b- was added by
influence of unrelated English redoubt (v.) to dread, fear (see redoubtable). As an adjective, Latin
reductus meant withdrawn, retired; remote, distant.


far (adj.)

Old English feorr far, remote, distant, to a great distance, long ago, from Proto-Germanic *ferro
(cognates: Old Saxon ferr, Old Frisian fer, Old Norse fjarre, Dutch ver, Old High German ferro,
German fern, Gothic fairra), from PIE *per- through, across, beyond (cognates: Sanskrit parah
farther, remote, ulterior, Hittite para outside of, Greek pera across, beyond, Latin per through,
Old Irish ire farther). Far East China, Japan, and surrounding regions is from 1838.


rare (adj.1)

unusual, late 14c., thin, airy, porous; mid-15c., few in number and widely separated, sparsely
distributed, seldom found; from Old French rere sparse (14c.), from Latin rarus thinly sown, having
a loose texture; not thick; having intervals between, full of empty spaces, from PIE *ra-ro-, from
root *ere- to separate; adjoin (cognates: Sanskrit rte besides, except, viralah distant, tight,
rare; Old Church Slavonic rediku rare, Old Hittite arha&#353; border, Lithuanian irti to be
dissolved). Few in number, hence, unusual. Related: Rareness. In chemistry, rare earth is from 1818.


ache (v.)

Old English acan to ache, suffer pain, from Proto-Germanic *akanan, perhaps from a PIE root *ag-es-
fault, guilt, represented also in Sanskrit and Greek, perhaps imitative of groaning. The verb was
pronounced ake, the noun ache (as in speak/speech) but while the noun changed pronunciation to
conform to the verb, the spelling of both was changed to ache c.1700 on a false assumption of a
Greek origin (specifically Greek akhos pain, distress, which is rather a distant relation of awe
(n.)). Related: Ached; aching.


galaxy (n.)

late 14c., from Old French galaxie, from Late Latin galaxias Milky Way, from Greek galaxias (adj.),
in galaxias kyklos, literally milky circle, from gala (genitive galaktos) milk (see lactation). The
technical astronomical sense emerged 1848. Figurative sense of brilliant assembly of persons is from
1580s. Milky Way is a translation of Latin via lactea.See yonder, lo, the Galaxy&#235; Which men
clepeth the Milky Wey, For hit is whyt. [Chaucer, House of Fame]  Astronomers began to speculate by
mid-19c. that some of the spiral nebulae they could see in telescopes were actually immense and
immensely distant structures the size and shape of the Milky Way. But the matter was not settled
until the 1920s.


mooch (v.)

mid-15c., pretend poverty, probably from Old French muchier, mucier to hide, sulk, conceal, hide
away, keep out of sight, of uncertain origin, perhaps from Celtic or Germanic (Liberman prefers the
latter, Klein the former). Or the word may be a variant of Middle English mucchen to hoard, be
stingy (c.1300), probably originally to keep coins in one's nightcap, from mucche nightcap, from
Middle Dutch muste cap, nightcap, ultimately from Medieval Latin almucia, of unknown origin. Sense
of sponge off others first recorded 1857.    Whatever the distant origin of mooch, the verb *mycan
and its cognates have been part of European slang for at least two millennia. [Liberman]    Related:
Mooched; mooching. As a noun meaning a moocher, from 1914.


nebula (n.)

early 15c., nebule a cloud, mist, from Latin nebula mist, vapor, fog, smoke, exhalation,
figuratively darkness, obscurity, from PIE *nebh- cloud (cognates: Sanskrit nabhas- vapor, cloud,
mists, fog, sky; Greek nephele, nephos cloud; German nebel fog; Old English nifol dark, gloomy;
Welsh niwl cloud, fog; Slavic nebo).    Re-borrowed from Latin 1660s in sense of cataracts in the
eye; astronomical meaning cloud-like patch in the night sky first recorded c.1730. As early as
Hershel (1802) astronomers realized that some nebulae were star clusters, but certain distinction of
relatively nearby cosmic gas clouds from distant galaxies was not made until 1920s, using the new
100-inch Mt. Wilson telescope.


legion (n.)

c.1200, from Old French legion Roman legion (3,000 to 6,000 men, under Marius usually with attached
cavalry), from Latin legionem (nominative legio) body of soldiers, from legere to choose, gather,
also to read (see lecture (n.)).    Generalized sense of a large number is due to translations of
allusive phrase in Mark v:9. American Legion, U.S. association of ex-servicemen, founded in 1919.
Legion of Honor is French l&eacute;gion d'honneur, an order of distinction founded by Napoleon in
1802. Foreign Legion is French l&eacute;gion &eacute;trang&egrave;re body of foreign volunteers in a
modern army, originally Polish, Belgian, etc. units in French army; they traditionally served in
colonies or distant expeditions.


deadline (n.)

time limit, 1920, American English newspaper jargon, from dead (adj.) + line (n.). Perhaps
influenced by earlier use (1864) to mean the do-not-cross line in Civil War prisons, which figured
in the Wirz trial.And he, the said Wirz, still wickedly pursuing his evil purpose, did establish and
cause to be designated within the prison enclosure containing said prisoners a dead line, being a
line around the inner face of the stockade or wall enclosing said prison and about twenty feet
distant from and within said stockade; and so established said dead line, which was in many places
an imaginary line, in many other places marked by insecure and shifting strips of [boards nailed]
upon the tops of small and insecure stakes or posts, he, the said Wirz, instructed the prison guard
stationed around the top of said stockade to fire upon and kill any of the prisoners aforesaid who
might touch, fall upon, pass over or under [or] across the said dead line .... [Trial of Henry Wirz,
Report of the Secretary of War, Oct. 31, 1865]


suburb (n.)

early 14c., area outside a town or city, whether agricultural or residential but most frequently
residential, from Old French suburbe suburb of a town, from Latin suburbium an outlying part of a
city (especially Rome), from sub below, near (see sub-) + urbs (genitive urbis) city (see urban).
Glossed in Old English as underburg. Just beyond the reach of municipal jurisdiction, suburbs had a
bad reputation in 17c. England, especially those of London, and suburban had a sense of inferior,
debased, licentious (as in suburban sinner, slang for loose woman, prostitute). By 1817, the tinge
had shifted to of inferior manners and narrow views. Compare also French equivalent faubourg.
[T]he growth of the metropolis throws vast numbers of people into distant dormitories where ... life
is carried on without the discipline of rural occupations and without the cultural resources that
the Central District of the city still retains. [Lewis Mumford, 1922]


Praesepe (n.)

loose (open) star cluster (M44) in Cancer, from Latin praesaepe the Roman name for the grouping,
literally enclosure, stall, manger, hive, from prae- (see pre-) + saepire to fence (see septum).
It is similar to the Hyades but more distant, about 600 light-years away, consists of about 1,000
stars, mostly older, the brightest of them around magnitude 6.5, thus not discernable to the naked
eye even on the clearest nights, but their collective light makes a visible fuzz of glow that the
ancients likened to a cloud (the original nebula); Galileo was the first to resolve it into stars
(1609). The modern name for it in U.S. and Britain, Beehive, seems no older than 1840. Greek names
included Nephelion Little Cloud and Akhlys Little Mist. In astrology, like all clusters, it
threatened mischief and blindness [Allen].    Manger to the Romans perhaps by influence of two
nearby stars, Gamma and Delta Cancri, dim and unspectacular but both for some reason figuring
largely in ancient astrology and weather forecasting, and known as the Asses (Latin Aselli),
supposedly those of Silenus.


ch

digraph used in Old French for the tsh sound. In some French dialects, including that of Paris (but
not that of Picardy), Latin ca- became French tsha. This was introduced to English after the Norman
Conquest, in words borrowed from Old French such as chaste, charity, chief (adj.). Under French
influence, -ch- also was inserted into Anglo-Saxon words that had the same sound (such as bleach,
chest, church) which in Old English still was written with a simple -c-, and into those that had
formerly been spelled with a -c- and pronounced k such as chin and much.    As French evolved, the t
sound dropped out of it, so in later loan-words from France ch- has only the sound sh- (chauffeur,
machine (n.), chivalry, etc.).    It turns up as well in words from classical languages (chaos,
echo, etc.). Most uses of -ch- in Roman Latin were in words from Greek, which would be pronounced
correctly as k + h, as in blockhead, but most Romans would have said merely k. Sometimes ch- is
written to keep -c- hard before a front vowel, as still in modern Italian.    In some languages
(Welsh, Spanish, Czech) ch- can be treated as a separate letter and words in it are alphabetized
after -c- (or, in Czech and Slovak, after -h-). The sound also is heard in more distant languages
(as in cheetah, chintz), and the digraph also is used to represent the sound in Scottish loch.


cousin (n.)

mid-12c., from Old French cosin (12c., Modern French cousin) nephew, kinsman, cousin, from Latin
consobrinus cousin, originally mother's sister's son, from com- together (see com-) + sobrinus
(earlier *sosrinos) cousin on mother's side, from soror (genitive sororis) sister.    Italian
cugino, Danish kusine, Polish kuzyn also are from French. German vetter is from Old High German
fetiro uncle, perhaps on the notion of child of uncle. Words for cousin tend to drift to nephew on
the notion of father's nephew.    Many IE languages (including Irish, Sanskrit, Slavic, and some of
the Germanic tongues) have or had separate words for some or all of the eight possible cousin
relationships, such as Latin, which along with consobrinus had consobrina mother's sister's
daughter, patruelis father's brother's son, atruelis mother's brother's son, amitinus father's
sister's son, etc. Old English distinguished f&aelig;deran sunu father's brother's son, modrigan
sunu mother's sister's son, etc.    Used familiarly as a term of address since early 15c.,
especially in Cornwall. Phrase kissing cousin is Southern U.S. expression, 1940s, apparently
denoting those close enough to be kissed in salutation; Kentish cousin (1796) is an old British term
for distant relative.


nostalgia (n.)

1770, severe homesickness considered as a disease, Modern Latin, coined 1668 in a dissertation on
the topic at the University of Basel by scholar Johannes Hofer (1669-1752) as a rendering of German
heimweh (for which see home + woe). From Greek algos pain, grief, distress (see -algia) + nostos
homecoming, from PIE *nes- to return safely home (cognate with Old Norse nest food for a journey,
Sanskrit nasate approaches, joins, German genesen to recover, Gothic ganisan to heal, Old English
genesen to recover). French nostalgie is in French army medical manuals by 1754.    Originally in
reference to the Swiss and said to be peculiar to them and often fatal, whether by its own action or
in combination with wounds or disease. By 1830s the word was used of any intense homesickness: that
of sailors, convicts, African slaves. The bagpipes produced the same effects sometimes in the Scotch
regiments while serving abroad [Penny Magazine, Nov. 14, 1840]. It is listed among the endemic
diseases in the Cyclopaedia of Practical Medicine [London, 1833, edited by three M.D.s], which
defines it as The concourse of depressing symptoms which sometimes arise in persons who are absent
from their native country, when they are seized with a longing desire of returning to their home and
friends and the scenes their youth .... It was a military medical diagnosis principally, and was
considered a serious medical problem by the North in the American Civil War:    In the first two
years of the war, there were reported 2588 cases of nostalgia, and 13 deaths from this cause. These
numbers scarcely express the real extent to which nostalgia influenced the sickness and mortality of
the army. To the depressing influence of home-sickness must be attributed the fatal result in many
cases which might otherwise have terminated favorably. [Sanitary Memoirs of the War, U.S. Sanitary
Commission, N.Y.: 1867]    Transferred sense (the main modern one) of wistful yearning for the past
first recorded 1920, perhaps from such use of nostalgie in French literature. The longing for a
distant place also necessarily involves a separation in time.


old (adj.)

Old English ald (Anglian), eald (West Saxon) aged, antique, primeval; elder, experienced, from
Proto-Germanic *althas grown up, adult (cognates: Old Frisian ald, Gothic al&thorn;eis, Dutch oud,
German alt), originally a past participle stem of a verb meaning grow, nourish (compare Gothic alan
to grow up, Old Norse ala to nourish), from PIE root *al- to grow, nourish (cognates: Greek aldaino
make grow, strengthen, althein,  althainein to get well; Latin alere to feed, nourish, bring up,
increase, altus high, literally grown tall, almus nurturing, nourishing, alumnus fosterling, step-
child; Old Irish alim I nourish).    The usual PIE root is *sen- (see senior (adj.)). A few Indo-
European languages distinguish words for old (vs. young) from words for old (vs. new), and some have
separate words for aged persons as opposed to old things. Latin senex was used of aged living
things, mostly persons, while vetus (literally having many years) was used of inanimate things.
Greek geraios was used mostly of humans; Greek palaios was used mostly of things, of persons only in
a derogatory sense. Greek also had arkhaios, literally belonging to the beginning, which parallels
French ancien, used mostly with reference to things of former times.    Old English also had fyrn
ancient, related to Old English feor far, distant (see far, and compare Gothic fairneis, Old Norse
forn old, of old, of former times, Old High German firni old, experienced). The original Old English
vowel is preserved in Scots auld, also in alderman. The original comparative and superlative (elder,
eldest) are retained in particular uses.    First record of old-timer is from 1860. Expression old
as the hills first recorded 1819. The good old days dates from 1828. Of old of old times is from
late 14c. Old Glory for the American flag is first attested 1862. Old maid woman who remains single
well beyond the usual marrying age is from 1520s; the card game is attested by that name from 1844.
Old man man who has lived long is from c.1200; sense of husband, father, boss is from 1854, earlier
(1830) it was military slang for commanding officer; old lady wife, mother is attested from c.1775.
Old English is attested from 1701, originally as a type of font. Old boy originally was a former
pupil of one of the English public schools. Old Testament attested from mid-14c.


