distinctly (adv.)

late 14c., from distinct + -ly (2).   <b>[D]istinctly</b>, in the sense really quite, is the badge
of the superior person indulgently recognizing unexpected merit in something that we are to
understand is not quite worthy of his notice. [Fowler]


distinctive (adj.)

early 15c., from Old French distinctif and directly from Medieval Latin distinctivus, from Latin
distinct-, past participle of distinguere (see distinguish). Meaning markedly individual is from
1580s. Related: Distinctively; distinctiveness.


distinct (adj.)

late 14c., originally past participle of distincten (c.1300) to distinguish, from Old French
distincter, from Latin distinctus, past participle of distinguere (see distinguish). Related:
Distinctness.


indistinct (adj.)

c.1400 (implied in indistinctly equally, alike), from Latin indistinctus not distinct, confused,
from in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + distinctus (see distinct). Related: Indistinctly;
indistinctness.


twice (adv.)

late Old English twies, from Old English twiga, twigea two times, from Proto-Germanic *twiyes
(cognates: Old Frisian twia, Old Saxon tuuio), from PIE *dwis-, adverbial form of *dwo- two (see
two). Spelling with -ce reflects the voiceless pronunciation.    Life is as tedious as a twice-told
tale  Vexing the dull ear of a drowsy man.  [King John, III.iv.]   Think twice, then speak was an
old Prouerbe by 1623. At twice, though less common than at once, means at two distinct times; by two
distinct operations.


South Africa

1815 as a name for a distinct region that had been partly settled by Europeans; 1910 as the name of
a nation.


enemy (n.)

early 13c., from Old French enemi (12c.), earlier inimi (9c.) enemy, adversary, foe, demon, the
Devil, from Latin inimicus hostile, unfriendly; an enemy (source of Italian nemico, Catalan enamic,
Spanish enemigo, Portuguese inimigo), from in- not (see in- (1)) + amicus friend related to amare to
love (see Amy).    Most words for personal enemy cover also enemy in war, but certain languages have
special terms for the latter, such as Greek polemioi (distinct from ekhthroi), Latin hostis,
originally stranger (distinct from inimicus), Russian neprijatel' (distinct from vrag).    Russian
vrag (Old Church Slavonic vragu) is cognate with Lithuanian vargas misery (see urge (v.)), and
probably is related to Proto-Germanic *wargoz, source of Old Norse vargr outlaw, hence wolf;
Icelandic vargur fox, Old English wearg criminal, felon; which likely were the inspirations for
J.R.R. Tolkien's warg a kind of large ferocious wolf in The Hobbit (1937) and Lord of the Rings.
Related: Enemies.


clear (adj.)

late 13c., bright, from Old French cler clear (of sight and hearing), light, bright, shining; sparse
(12c., Modern French clair), from Latin clarus clear, loud, of sounds; figuratively manifest, plain,
evident, in transferred use, of sights, bright, distinct; also illustrious, famous, glorious (source
of Italian chiaro, Spanish claro), from PIE *kle-ro-, from root *kele- (2) to shout (see claim
(v.)).    The sense evolution involves an identification of the spreading of sound and the spreading
of light (compare English loud, used of colors; German hell clear, bright, shining, of pitch,
distinct, ringing, high). Of complexion, from c.1300; of the weather, from late 14c.; of meanings or
explanations, manifest to the mind, comprehensible, c.1300. (An Old English word for this was
sweotol distinct, clear, evident.) Sense of free from encumbrance, apparently nautical, developed
c.1500. Phrase in the clear attested from 1715. Clear-sighted is from 1580s (clear-eyed is from
1529s); clear-headed is from 1709.


discreet (adj.)

mid-14c., morally discerning, prudent, circumspect, from Old French discret discreet, sensible,
intelligent, wise, from Latin discretus separated, distinct, in Medieval Latin discerning, careful,
past participle of discernere distinguish (see discern). Meaning separate, distinct in English is
late 14c.    Spellings discrete and nativized discreet co-existed until after c.1600, when discreet
became the common word for careful, prudent, and discrete was maintained in philosophy, medicine,
music and other disciplines that remembered Latin and made effort to obey it. Related: Discreetly.


articulated (adj.)

jointed, 1610s, past participle adjective from articulate (v.). Meaning made distinct is from 1855.


Jack Russell

type of terrier (not recognized as a distinct breed), 1907, named for the Rev. John Russell
(1795-1883) of Devonshire, the sporting parson.


Silver Star

U.S. military decoration awarded for gallantry in action, originally (1918) a small badge worn on
the ribbon of a campaign medal; as a distinct medal, it was established Aug. 8, 1932.


brooch (n.)

early 13c., from Old French broche long needle (see broach (n.)). Specialized meaning led 14c. to
distinct spelling.


connector (n.)

1795, tube for connecting other materials, agent noun in Latin form from connect and usefully
distinct from connecter.


undistinguished (adj.)

1590s, not kept distinct, from un- (1) not + distinguished. Meaning not elevated above others is
attested from c.1600.


Athens

city of ancient Attica, capital of modern Greece, from Greek Athenai (plural because the city had
several distinct parts), traditionally derived from Athena, but probably assimilated from a lost
name in a pre-Hellenic language.


frond (n.)

1785, from Latin frons (genitive frondis) leafy branch, green bough, foliage. Adopted by
Linn&aelig;us in a sense distinct from folium.


Nestorian (n.)

in Church history (mid-15c.), a follower of Nestorius (Latinized form of Nestor), 5c. patriarch of
Constantinople, whose doctrine attributed distinct divine and human persons to Christ and was
condemned as heresy. As an adjective from 1560s. Related: Nestorianism.


idio-

word-forming element meaning one's own, personal, distinct, from Greek idio-, comb. form of idios
own, personal, private, one's own (see idiom).


somatic (adj.)

pertaining to the body (as distinct from the soul, spirit, or mind), 1775, from French somatique and
directly from Greek somatikos of the body, from soma (genitive somatos) the body (see somato-).


macrocosm (n.)

c.1600, the great world (the universe, as distinct from the little world of man), from Old French
macrocosme (c.1300) and directly from Medieval Latin macrocosmus, from Greek makros large, long (see
macro-) + kosmos (see cosmos).


pavan (n.)

slow, stately dance, 1530s, from French pavane (1520s), probably from Spanish pavana, from pavo
peacock (from Latin pavo), in reference to the bird's courting movements. But some see an Italian
origin and trace the name to Padovana Paduan. Possibly there was a merger of two distinct dance
words.


hallucination (n.)

in the pathological/psychological sense of seeing or hearing something which is not there, 1640s,
from Latin hallucinationem (nominative hallucinatio), from past participle stem of hallucinari (see
hallucinate). Hallucination is distinct from illusion in not necessarily involving a false belief.
Related: Hallucinations.


sundry (adj.)

Old English syndrig separate, apart, special, various, distinct, characteristic, from sundor
separately, apart, asunder (see sunder) + -y (2). Compare Old High German suntaric, Swedish
s&#246;ndrig broken, tattered. Meaning several is from 1375. As a noun, from mid-13c. with the sense
various ones. Phrase all and sundry is from late 14c.


vivid (adj.)

1630s, from French vivide and perhaps also directly from Latin vividus spirited, animated, lively,
full of life, from vivus alive, from PIE *gweie- (1) to live (see bio-). Extension to colors is from
1660s. Sense of strong, distinct (as of memories, etc.) is from 1680s; that of very active or
intense (as of imagination, interest, etc.) is from 1853. Related: Vividly; vividness.


repentance (n.)

c.1300, from Old French repentance penitence (12c.), from present participle stem of repentir (see
repent).   Repentance goes beyond feeling to express distinct purposes of turning from sin to
righteousness; the Bible word most often translated repentance means a change of mental and
spiritual attitude toward sin. [Century Dictionary]


leech (n.1)

bloodsucking aquatic worm, from Old English l&aelig;ce (Kentish lyce), of unknown origin (with a
cognate in Middle Dutch lake). Commonly regarded as a transferred use of leech (n.2), but the Old
English forms suggest a distinct word, which has been assimilated to leech (n.2) by folk etymology
[see OED]. Figuratively applied to human parasites since 1784.


indiscreet (adj.)

imprudent, not discrete (early 15c.) and  indiscrete not containing distinct parts (c.1600) are both
from Latin indiscretus unseparated; indistinguishable, not known apart, the former via an Old French
or Medieval Latin secondary sense. From in- not (see in- (1)) + discreet. Related: Indiscreetly;
indiscreetness.


humane (adj.)

mid-15c., variant of human (compare german/germane, urban/urbane), used interchangeably with it
until early 18c., by which time it had become a distinct word with sense of having qualities
befitting human beings. But inhuman still can be the opposite of humane. The Royal Humane Society
(founded 1774) was originally to rescue drowning persons. Such societies had turned to animal care
by late 19c.


bourgeoisie (n.)

1707, body of freemen in a French town; the French middle class, from French bourgeois, from Old
French burgeis, borjois (12c.) town dweller (as distinct from peasant), from borc town, village,
from Frankish *burg city (see borough). Communist use for the capitalist class generally attested
from 1886.


militia (n.)

1580s, system of military discipline, from Latin militia military service, warfare, from miles
soldier (see military). Sense of citizen army (as distinct from professional soldiers) is first
recorded 1690s, perhaps from a sense in French cognate milice. In U.S. history, the whole body of
men declared by law amenable to military service, without enlistment, whether armed and drilled or
not (1777).


civilization (n.)

1704, law which makes a criminal process civil, from civilize + -ation. Sense of civilized condition
first recorded 1772, probably from French civilisation, to be an opposite to barbarity and a
distinct word from civility. Sense of a particular human society in a civilized condition,
considered as a whole over time, is from 1857. Related: Civilizational.


vibrato

1861 (adv.), 1870 (n.), tremulous effect in music, from Italian vibrato, from Latin vibratus, past
participle of vibrare to vibrate (see vibrate).    Strictly, the vibrato is distinct from the
tremolo, in that the latter involves a perceptible variation in pitch; but in common usage the terms
are made synonymous. [Century Dictionary]


sch-

this letter group can represent five distinct sounds in English; it first was used by Middle English
writers to render Old English sc-, a sound now generally pronounced (and spelled) -sh-. Sometimes it
was miswritten for -ch-. It also was taken in from German (schnapps) and Yiddish (schlemiel). In
words derived from classical languages, it represents Latin sch-, Greek skh-, but in some of these
words the spelling is a restoration and the pronunciation does not follow it (as in schism).


sepal (n.)

leaf of the calyx, 1821, from French s&eacute;pal, from Modern Latin sepalum (H.J. de Necker, 1790),
coined from Latin separatus separate, distinct (see separate (v.)) + petalum petal (see petal).


discriminate (v.)

1620s, from Latin discriminatus, past participle of discriminare to divide, separate, from discrimen
(genitive discriminis) interval, distinction, difference, derived noun from discernere (see
discern). The adverse (usually racial) sense is first recorded 1866, American English. Positive
sense remains in discriminating. Related: Discriminated. Also used 17c. and after as an adjective
meaning distinct.


Claire

fem. proper name, from French claire, fem. of clair literally light, bright, from Latin clarus
clear, bright, distinct (see clear (adj.); also compare Clara).


ordnance (n.)

cannon, artillery, 1540s, a clipped form of ordinance (q.v.) which was attested from late 14c. in
the sense of military materials, provisions of war; a sense now obsolete but which led to those of
engines for discharging missiles (early 15c.) and branch of the military concerned with stores and
materials (late 15c.). The shorter word was established in these distinct senses by 17c. Ordnance
survey (1833), official survey of Great Britain and Ireland, was undertaken by the government under
the direction of the Master-General of the Ordnance (a natural choice, because gunners have to be
skilled at surveying ranges and distances).


divers (adj.)

mid-13c., not alike (sense now in diverse); late 13c., separate, distinct; various, from Old French
divers (11c.) different, various, singular, odd, exceptional, wretched, treacherous, perverse, from
Latin diversus turned different ways, in Late Latin various, past participle of divertere (see
divert).    Sense of several, numerous is recorded from c.1300, referring originally and in form to
the variety of objects; but, as variety implies number, becoming an indefinite numeral word
expressing multiplicity [OED], a sense that emerged by c.1400.


articulate (v.)

1590s, to divide speech into distinct parts (earlier to formally bring charges against, 1550s), from
Latin articulatus, past participle of articulare to separate into joints, also to utter distinctly,
from articulus joint (see article). Generalized sense of express in words is from 1690s. Literal
sense, to join, to attach by joints, is attested from 1610s. Earlier senses, to set forth in
articles, to bring a charge against (1560s) now are obsolete or nearly so. Related: Articulated;
articulating.


cast (n.)

mid-13c., a throw, an act of throwing, from cast (v.). In early use especially of dice, hence
figurative uses relating to fortune or fate. Meaning that which is cast is from c.1550s. Meaning
dash or shade of color is from c.1600. The sense of a throw carried an idea of the form the thing
takes after it has been thrown, which led to widespread and varied meanings, such as group of actors
in a play (1630s). OED finds 42 distinct noun meaning and 83 verbal ones, with many sub-definitions.
Many of the figurative senses converged in a general meaning sort, kind, style (mid-17c.). A cast in
the eye (early 14c.) preserves the older verbal sense of warp, turn.


toadstool (n.)

late 14c., apparently just what it looks like: a fanciful name from Middle English tadde toad (see
toad) + stole stool (see stool). Toads themselves were regarded as highly poisonous, and this word
is popularly restricted to poisonous or inedible fungi, as distinct from edible mushrooms [OED].
Compare toad-cheese, a poisonous fungi; toad's meat (1886), a rustic term for toadstool.


-sch-

this letter group can represent five distinct sounds in English; it first was used by Middle English
writers to render Old English sc-, the pronunciation of which then simplified to -sh- (an evolution
that also took place in Middle Dutch and Middle High German). Sometimes it was miswritten for -ch-.
It also was taken in from German (schnapps) and Yiddish (schlemiel). In words derived from classical
languages, it represents Latin sch-, Greek skh- but in some of these words (such as schism) the
English spelling is a restoration and the pronunciation does not follow it.


cleavage (n.)

1816, in geology, action of splitting (rocks or gems) along natural fissures, from cleave (v.1) +
-age. General meaning action or state of cleaving or being cleft is from 1867.    The sense of cleft
between a woman's breasts in low-cut clothing is first recorded 1946, defined in a Time magazine
article [Aug. 5] as the Johnston Office trade term for the shadowed depression dividing an actress'
bosom into two distinct sections; traditionally first used in this sense by U.S. publicist Joseph I.
Breen (1888-1965), head of the Production Code Administration (replaced 1945 by Eric Johnston),
enforcers of Hollywood self-censorship, in reference to Jane Russell's costumes and poses in The
Outlaw.


species (n.)

late 14c. as a classification in logic, from Latin species a particular sort, kind, or type (opposed
to genus), originally a sight, look, view, appearance, hence also a spectacle; mental appearance,
idea, notion; a look; a pretext; a resemblance; a show or display, typically in passive senses; in
Late Latin, a special case; related to specere to look at, to see, behold, from PIE *spek- (see
scope (n.1)). From 1550s as appearance, outward form; 1560s as distinct class (of something) based
on common characteristics. Biological sense is from c.1600. Endangered species first attested 1964.


spruce (n.)

1660s, evergreen tree, fir, from spruse (adj.) made of spruce wood (early 15c.), literally from
Prussia, from Spruce, Sprws (late 14c.), unexplained alterations of Pruce Prussia, from an Old
French form of Prussia.   Spruce seems to have been a generic term for commodities brought to
England by Hanseatic merchants (especially beer, boards and wooden chests, and leather), and the
tree thus was believed to be particular to Prussia, which for a time was figurative in England as a
land of luxuries. Compare spruce (adj.). As a distinct species of fir, from 1731.


artery (n.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French arterie, Old French artaire (13c.; Modern French art&egrave;re), and
directly from Latin arteria, from Greek arteria windpipe, also an artery, as distinct from a vein;
related to aeirein to raise (see aorta).    They were regarded by the ancients as air ducts because
the arteries do not contain blood after death; medieval writers took them for the channels of the
vital spirits, and 16c. senses of artery in English include trachea, windpipe. The word is used in
reference to artery-like systems of major rivers from 1805; of railways from 1850.


panel (n.)

early 14c., from Old French panel piece of cloth, piece, saddle cushion (Modern French panneau),
from Vulgar Latin *pannellus, diminutive of Latin pannus piece of cloth (see pane). Anglo-French
legalese sense of piece of parchment (cloth) listing jurors led by late 14c. to meaning jury.
General sense of persons called on to advise, judge, discuss, etc. is from 1570s. Sense of distinct
part of surface of a wall, door, etc. is first recorded c.1600.


terra firma (n.)

c.1600, part of the Italian mainland ruled by Venice, from Modern Latin terra firma, literally firm
land, from Latin terra earth, land  (see terrain) + firma firm, fem. of firmus (see firm (adj.)).
Meaning the land (as distinct from the sea) is first attested 1690s.


strain (n.2)

line of descent, lineage, breed, ancestry, c.1200, from Old English strion, streon a gain,
acquisition, treasure; a begetting, procreation, from Proto-Germanic *streu-nam- to pile up, from
PIE root *stere- to spread, extend, stretch out (see structure (n.)). Hence race, stock, line (early
14c.). Applied to animal species from c.1600; usually involving fairly minor variations, but not
distinct from breed (n.). Normal sound development would have yielded *streen, but the word was
altered in late Middle English, apparently by influence of strain (n.1).


