diurnal (adj.)

late 14c., from Late Latin diurnalis daily, from Latin dies day + -urnus, an adjectival suffix
denoting time (compare hibernus wintery). Dies day is from PIE root *dyeu- to shine (cognates:
Sanskrit diva by day, Welsh diw, Breton deiz day; Armenian tiw; Lithuanian diena; Old Church
Slavonic dini, Polish dzie&#324;, Russian den), literally to shine (compare Greek delos clear; Latin
deus, Sanskrit deva god, literally shining one; Avestan dava- spirit, demon; Lithuanian devas, Old
Norse tivar gods; Old English Tig, genitive Tiwes, see Tuesday).


Dies Irae

literally day of wrath, first words of Latin hymn of Last Judgment, attributed to Thomas of Celano
(c.1250). See diurnal + ire.


sine die

indefinitely, Latin, literally without (fixed) day, from sine without (see sans) + ablative singular
of dies day (see diurnal).


diary (n.)

1580s, from Latin diarium daily allowance, later a journal, neuter of diarius daily, from dies day
(see diurnal); also see -ary. Earliest sense was a daily record of events; sense of the book in
which such are written is said to be first attested in Ben Jonson's Volpone (1605).


journey (n.)

c.1200, a defined course of traveling; one's path in life, from Old French journee day's work or
travel (12c.), from Vulgar Latin diurnum day, noun use of neuter of Latin diurnus of one day (see
diurnal). Meaning act of traveling by land or sea is c.1300. In Middle English it also meant a day
(c.1400); a day's work (mid-14c.); distance traveled in one day (mid-13c.), and as recently as
Johnson (1755) the primary sense was still the travel of a day.


Zeus

supreme god of the ancient Greeks and master of the others, 1706, from Greek, from PIE *dewos- god
(cognates: Latin deus god, Old Persian daiva- demon, evil god, Old Church Slavonic deivai, Sanskrit
deva-), from root *dyeu- to gleam, to shine; also the root of words for sky and day (see diurnal).
The god-sense is originally shining, but whether as originally sun-god or as lightener is not now
clear.


per diem

Latin, literally by the day, from per (see per) + diem, accusative singular of dies day (see
diurnal). As a noun from 1809.


Jove

Roman god of the bright sky, late 14c., from Latin Iovis, from PIE *dyeu- to shine, with derivatives
referring to the sky, heavens, a god (see diurnal, and compare Zeus). In classical Latin, the
compound Iuppiter replaced Old Latin Iovis as the god's name.


circadian (adj.)

coined 1959 from Latin circa about (see circa) + diem, accusative singular of dies day (see
diurnal). The original use is in circadian rhythm.


quotidian (adj.)

mid-14c., everyday, daily, from Old French cotidian (Modern French quotidien), from Latin
quotidianus daily, from Latin quotus how many? which in order or number? (see quote (v.)) + dies day
(see diurnal). Meaning ordinary, commonplace, trivial is from mid-15c.


diet (n.2)

assembly, mid-15c., from Medieval Latin dieta, variant of diaeta daily office (of the Church), daily
duty, assembly, meeting of counselors, from Greek diaita (see diet (n.1)), but associated with Latin
dies day (see diurnal).


dial (n.)

early 15c., sundial, earlier dial of a compass (mid-14c.), apparently from Medieval Latin dialis
daily, from Latin dies day (see diurnal).    The word perhaps was abstracted from a phrase such as
Medieval Latin rota dialis daily wheel, and evolved to mean any round plate over which something
rotates. Telephone sense is from 1879, which led to dial tone (1921), the signal to begin dialing,
which term soon might be the sole relic of the rotary phone.


Midi

southern France, 1883, from French midi south, literally midday (12c.), from mi middle (from Latin
medius middle; see medial (adj.)) + di day (from Latin dies; see diurnal). Also compare meridian.


adjourn (v.)

early 14c., ajournen, assign a day (for convening or reconvening), from Old French ajourner (12c.)
meet (at an appointed time), from the phrase &agrave; jorn to a stated day (&agrave; to + journ day,
from Latin diurnus daily; see diurnal).    The sense is to set a date for a re-meeting. Meaning to
close a meeting (with or without intention to reconvene) is from early 15c. Meaning to go in a body
to another place (1640s) is colloquial. The -d- was added 16c. but is unwarranted, as the compound
is not from Latin. Related: Adjourned; adjourning.


psychedelic (adj.)

occasionally psychodelic, 1956, of drugs, suggested by British-born Canadian psychiatrist Humphry
Osmond (1917-2004) in a letter to Aldous Huxley and used by Osmond in a scientific paper published
the next year; from Greek psykhe- mind (see psyche) + deloun make visible, reveal, from delos
visible, clear, from PIE root *dyeu- to shine (see diurnal). In popular use from 1965 with reference
to anything producing effects similar to that of a psychedelic drug or enhancing the effects of such
a drug. As a noun from 1956.


sojourn (v.)

late 13c., stay temporarily, reside for a time; visit; also reside permanently, dwell; from Old
French sojorner stay or dwell for a time, from Vulgar Latin *subdiurnare to spend the day (source
also of Italian soggiornare), from Latin sub- under, until (see sub-) + diurnare to last long, from
diurnus of a day, from diurnum day (see diurnal). Modern French s&eacute;journer formed via vowel
dissimilation. Related: Sojourned; sojourning.


journal (n.)

mid-14c., book of church services, from Anglo-French jurnal a day, from Old French jornel, day,
time; day's work, noun use of adjective meaning daily, from Late Latin diurnalis daily (see
diurnal). Meaning book for inventories and daily accounts is late 15c.; that of personal diary is
c.1600, from a sense found in French. Meaning daily publication is from 1728. Initial -d- in Latin
usually remains in French, but according to Brachet, when it is followed by an -iu-, the -i- becomes
consonantized as a -j- and eventually ejects the d. He also cites jusque from de-usque.


sidereal (adj.)

also siderial, 1630s, star-like; 1640s, of or pertaining to the stars, earlier sideral (1590s), from
French sidereal (16c.), from Latin sidereus starry, astral, of the constellations, from sidus
(genitive sideris) star, group of stars, constellation, probably from PIE root *sweid- to shine
(cognates: Lithuanian svidus shining, bright). Sidereal time is measured by the apparent diurnal
motion of the fixed stars. The sidereal day begins and ends with the passage of the vernal equinox
over the meridian and is about four minutes shorter than the solar day, measured by the passage of
the sun over the meridian.


dismal (adj.)

c.1400, from Anglo-French dismal (mid-13c.), from Old French (li) dis mals (the) bad days, from
Medieval Latin dies mali evil or unlucky days (also called dies &AElig;gyptiaci), from Latin dies
days (see diurnal) + mali, plural of malus bad (see mal-).    Through the Middle Ages, calendars
marked two days of each month as unlucky, supposedly based on the ancient calculations of Egyptian
astrologers (Jan. 1, 25; Feb. 4, 26; March 1, 28; April 10, 20; May 3, 25; June 10, 16; July 13, 22;
Aug. 1, 30; Sept. 3, 21; Oct. 3, 22; Nov. 5, 28; Dec. 7, 22). Modern sense of gloomy, dreary first
recorded in English 1590s, in reference to sounds. Related: Dismally.


meridian (n.)

mid-14c., noon, from Old French meridien of the noon time, midday; the Meridian; southerner (12c.),
and directly from Latin meridianus of midday, of noon, southerly, to the south, from meridies noon,
south, from meridie at noon, altered by dissimilation from pre-Latin *medi die, locative of medius
mid- (see medial (adj.)) + dies day (see diurnal). Cartographic sense first recorded late 14c.
Figurative uses tend to suggest point of highest development or fullest power.    The city in
Mississippi, U.S., was settled 1854 (as Sowashee Station) at a railway junction and given its
current name in 1860, supposedly by people who thought meridian meant junction (they perhaps
confused the word with median).


day (n.)

Old English d&aelig;g day, also lifetime, from Proto-Germanic *dagaz (cognates: Old Saxon, Middle
Dutch, Dutch dag, Old Frisian dei, Old High German tag, German Tag, Old Norse dagr, Gothic dags),
from PIE *dhegh-.    Not considered to be related to Latin dies (see diurnal), but rather to
Sanskrit dah to burn, Lithuanian dagas hot season, Old Prussian dagis summer. Meaning originally, in
English, the daylight hours; expanded to mean the 24-hour period in late Anglo-Saxon times. The day
formerly began at sunset, hence Old English Wodnesniht was what we would call Tuesday night. Names
of the weekdays were not regularly capitalized in English until 17c. Day off first recorded 1883;
day-tripper first recorded 1897. The days in nowadays, etc. is a relic of the Old English and Middle
English use of the adverbial genitive.


Tuesday (n.)

third day of the week, Old English tiwesd&aelig;g, from Tiwes, genitive of Tiw Tiu, from Proto-
Germanic *Tiwaz god of the sky, the original supreme deity of ancient Germanic mythology,
differentiated specifically as Tiu, ancient Germanic god of war, from PIE *deiwos god, from root
*dyeu- to shine (see diurnal). Compare Old Frisian tiesdei, Old Norse tysdagr, Swedish tisdag, Old
High German ziestag.    The day name (second element d&aelig;g, see day) is a translation of Latin
dies Martis (source of Italian martedi, French Mardi) Day of Mars, from the Roman god of war, who
was identified with Germanic Tiw (though etymologically Tiw is related to Zeus), itself a loan-
translation of Greek Areos hemera. In cognate German Dienstag and Dutch Dinsdag, the first element
would appear to be Germanic ding, &thorn;ing public assembly, but it is now thought to be from
Thinxus, one of the names of the war-god in Latin inscriptions.


Lent (n.)

late 14c., short for Lenten (n.) forty days before Easter (early 12c.), from Old English lencten
springtime, spring, the season, also the fast of Lent, from West Germanic *langa-tinaz long-days
(cognate with Old Saxon lentin, Middle Dutch lenten, Old High German lengizin manoth), from *lanngaz
(root of Old English lang long; see long (adj.)) + *tina-, a root meaning day (compare Gothic sin-
teins daily), cognate with Old Church Slavonic dini, Lithuanian diena, Latin dies day (see diurnal).
the compound probably refers to the increasing daylight. Compare similar form evolution in Dutch
lente (Middle Dutch lentin), German Lenz (Old High German lengizin) spring. Church sense of period
between Ash Wednesday and Easter is peculiar to English.


