diverse (adj.)

c.1300, spelling variant of divers (q.v.), perhaps by analogy with converse, traverse, etc. In some
cases directly from Latin diversus, and since c.1700 restricted to the meaning different in
character or quality. Related: Diversely.


diversify (v.)

late 15c., from Old French diversifier (13c.) to make diverse, from Medieval Latin diversificare,
from Latin diversus (see diverse). Economic sense is from 1939. Related: Diversified; diversifying.


various (adj.)

early 15c., characterized by variety, from Middle French varieux and directly from Latin varius
changing, different, diverse (see vary). Meaning different from one another, having a diversity of
features is recorded from 1630s. Related: Variously.


bioethics (n.)

also bio-ethics, coined 1970 by U.S. biochemist Van Rensselaer Potter II (1911-2001), who defined it
as Biology combined with diverse humanistic knowledge forging a science that sets a system of
medical and environmental priorities for acceptable survival. From bio- + ethics.


medley (n.)

c.1300, hand-to-hand combat, from Old French medlee, variant of meslee (see meddle). Meaning
combination, mixture is from mid-15c.; that of musical combination consisting of diverse parts is
from 1620s.


variorum (adj.)

an edition (especially of the complete works of a classical author) with notes of various
commentators or editors, 1728, genitive masculine plural of Latin varius different, diverse (see
vary), in phrase editio cum notis variorum. Its use with reference to an edition of an author's
works containing variant readings (1955) is deplored by some scholars [OED].


varify (v.)

to make varied, c.1600, from Latin vari-, stem of varius different, diverse (see vary) + -fy.
Related: Varified; varifying.


diversion (n.)

early 15c., diverse condition; c.1600 act of diverting, from Middle French diversion, from Late
Latin diversionem (nominative diversio), noun of action from past participle stem of Latin divertere
(see divert).    Sense of amusement, entertainment is first recorded 1640s. Hence, divertimento
(1823), from the Italian form; originally a musical composition designed primarily for
entertainment.


eclectic (adj.)

1680s, originally in reference to a group of ancient philosophers who selected doctrines from every
system; from French eclectique (1650s), from Greek eklektikos selective, literally picking out, from
eklektos selected, from eklegein pick out, select, from ek out (see ex-) + legein gather, choose
(see lecture (n.)). Broader sense of borrowed from diverse sources is first recorded 1847. As a noun
from 1817.


divers (adj.)

mid-13c., not alike (sense now in diverse); late 13c., separate, distinct; various, from Old French
divers (11c.) different, various, singular, odd, exceptional, wretched, treacherous, perverse, from
Latin diversus turned different ways, in Late Latin various, past participle of divertere (see
divert).    Sense of several, numerous is recorded from c.1300, referring originally and in form to
the variety of objects; but, as variety implies number, becoming an indefinite numeral word
expressing multiplicity [OED], a sense that emerged by c.1400.


ventilate (v.)

early 15c., to scatter, disperse (as the wind does), from Latin ventilatus, past participle of
ventilare to brandish, toss in the air, winnow, fan, agitate, set in motion, from ventulus a breeze,
diminutive of ventus wind (see wind (n.1)). Original notion is of cleaning grain by tossing it in
the air and letting the wind blow away the chaff. Meaning supply a room with fresh air first
recorded 1743 (see ventilation). Formerly with diverse slang senses, including shoot (someone),
recorded from 1875. Related: Ventilated; ventilating.


several (adj.)

early 15c., existing apart, from Anglo-French several, from Middle French seperalis separate, from
Medieval Latin separalis, from Latin separ separate, different, back-formation from separare to
separate (see separate (v.)). Meaning various, diverse, different is attested from c.1500; that of
more than one is from 1530s, originally in legal use.    Here we are all, by day; by night we're
hurled  By dreams, each one into a several world  [Herrick, 1648]  Related: Severalty. Jocular
ordinal form severalth attested from 1902 in American English dialect (see -th (2)).


pare (v.)

to trim by cutting close, c.1300, from Old French parer arrange, prepare; trim, adorn, and directly
from Latin parare make ready, prepare, furnish, provide, arrange, order; contrive, design, intend,
resolve; procure, acquire, obtain, get; get with money, buy, purchase (related to parere produce,
bring forth, give birth to), from PIE *par-a-, suffixed form of root *pere- (1) produce, procure,
bring forward, bring forth, and derived words in diverse senses (cognates: Lithuanian pariu to
brood, Greek poris calf, bull, Old High German farro, German Farre bullock, Old English fearr bull,
Sanskrit prthukah child, calf, young of an animal, Czech spratek brat, urchin, premature calf).
Generalized meaning to reduce something little by little is from 1520s. Related: Pared; paring.


mis- (1)

prefix meaning bad, wrong, from Old English mis-, from Proto-Germanic *missa- divergent, astray
(cognates: Old Frisian and Old Saxon mis-, Middle Dutch misse-, Old High German missa-, German
mi&szlig;-, Old Norse mis-, Gothic missa-), perhaps literally in a changed manner, and with a root
sense of difference, change (compare Gothic misso mutually), and thus from PIE *mit-to-, from root
*mei- (1) to change (see mutable); see Watkins.    Others [Barnhart] see in Proto-Germanic *missa-
the stem of an ancient past participle, related to Old English missan fail to hit (see miss (v.)),
which is from the same PIE root.    Productive as word-forming element in Old English (as in
misl&#230;ran to give bad advice, teach amiss). In 14c.-16c. in a few verbs its sense began to be
felt as unfavorably and was used as an intensive prefix with verbs already expressing negative
feeling (as in misdoubt). Practically a separate word in Old and early Middle English (and often
written as such). Old English also had an adjective (mislic diverse, unlike, various) and an adverb
(mislice in various directions, wrongly, astray) derived from it, corresponding to German misslich
(adj.).


diversity (n.)

mid-14c., quality of being diverse, mostly in a neutral sense, from Old French diversit&eacute;
(12c.) difference, diversity, unique feature, oddness: also wickedness, perversity, from Latin
diversitatem (nominative diversitas) contrariety, contradiction, disagreement; also, as a secondary
sense, difference, diversity, from diversus turned different ways (in Late Latin various), past
participle of divertere (see divert).    Negative meaning, being contrary to what is agreeable or
right; perversity, evil existed in English from late 15c. but was obsolete from 17c. Diversity as a
virtue in a nation is an idea from the rise of modern democracies in the 1790s, where it kept one
faction from arrogating all power (but this was not quite the modern sense, as ethnicity, gender,
sexual identity, etc. were not the qualities in mind):    The dissimilarity in the ingredients which
will compose the national government, and still more in the manner in which they will be brought
into action in its various branches, must form a powerful obstacle to a concert of views in any
partial scheme of elections. There is sufficient diversity in the state of property, in the genius,
manners, and habits of the people of the different parts of the Union, to occasion a material
diversity of disposition in their representatives towards the different ranks and conditions in
society. [Federalist #60, Feb. 26, 1788 (Hamilton)]    Specific focus (in a positive sense) on race,
gender, etc. is from 1992.


boy (n.)

mid-13c., boie servant, commoner, knave, boy, of unknown origin. Possibly from Old French embuie one
fettered, from Vulgar Latin *imboiare, from Latin boia leg iron, yoke, leather collar, from Greek
boeiai dorai ox hides. (Words for boy double as servant, attendant across the Indo-European map --
compare Italian ragazzo, French gar&ccedil;on, Greek pais, Middle English knave, Old Church Slavonic
otroku -- and often it is difficult to say which meaning came first.)    But it also appears to be
identical with East Frisian boi young gentleman, and perhaps with Dutch boef knave, from Middle
Dutch boeve, perhaps from Middle Low German buobe. This suggests a gradational relationship to babe.
For a different conjecture:    In Old English, only the proper name Boia has been recorded. ME boi
meant 'churl, servant' and (rarely) 'devil.' In texts, the meaning 'male child' does not antedate
1400. ModE boy looks like a semantic blend of an onomatopoeic word for an evil spirit (*boi) and a
baby word for 'brother' (*bo). [Liberman]   <hr />   A noticable number of the modern words for
'boy', 'girl', and 'child' were originally colloquial nicknames, derogatory or whimsical, in part
endearing, and finally commonplace. These, as is natural, are of the most diverse, and in part
obscure, origin. [Buck]    Used slightingly of young men in Middle English; meaning male negro slave
or Asian personal servant of any age attested from c.1600. Exclamation oh, boy attested from 1892.


family (n.)

early 15c., servants of a household, from Latin familia family servants, domestics collectively, the
servants in a household, thus also members of a household, the estate, property; the household,
including relatives and servants, from famulus servant, of unknown origin. The Latin word rarely
appears in the sense parents with their children, for which domus (see domestic) was used.    In
English, sense of collective body of persons who form one household under one head and one domestic
government, including parents, children, and servants, and as sometimes used even lodgers or
boarders [Century Dictionary] is from 1540s. From 1660s as parents with their children, whether they
dwell together or not, also in a more general sense, persons closely related by blood, including
aunts, uncles, cousins; and in the most general sense those who descend from a common progenitor
(1580s). Meaning those claiming descent from a common ancestor, a house, a lineage is early 15c.
Hence, any group of things classed as kindred based on common distinguishing characteristics
(1620s); as a scientific classification, between genus and order, from 1753.    I have certainly
known more men destroyed by the desire to have wife and child and to keep them in comfort than I
have seen destroyed by drink and harlots. [William Butler Yeats, Autobiography]    Replaced Old
English hiwscipe. As an adjective from c.1600; with the meaning suitable for a family, by 1807.
Family values first recorded 1966. Phrase in a family way pregnant is from 1796. Family circle is
1809; family man man devoted to wife and children, man inclined to lead a domestic life is 1856
(earlier it meant thief, 1788, from family in a slang sense of the fraternity of thieves).
<b>Happy family</b> an assemblage of animals of diverse habits and propensities living amicably, or
at least quietly, together in one cage. [Century Dictionary, 1902]    The phrase is attested from
1844.


