divergence (n.)

1650s, from Modern Latin divergentia, from divergens (see diverge). Related: Divergency.


divergent (adj.)

1690s, from Modern Latin divergentem (nominative divergens), present participle of divergere (see
diverge). Related: Divergently.


diverge (v.)

1660s, from Modern Latin divergere go in different directions, from dis- apart (see dis-) + vergere
to bend, turn (see verge (v.)). Originally a term in optics; the figurative sense is 19c. Related:
Diverged; diverging.


price (n.)

c.1200, pris value, worth; praise, later cost, recompense, prize (mid-13c.), from Old French pris
price, value, wages, reward, also honor, fame, praise, prize (Modern French prix), from Late Latin
precium, from Latin pretium reward, prize, value, worth, from PIE *pret-yo-,   from root *per- (5)
to traffic in, to sell (cognates: Sanskrit aprata without recompense, gratuitously; Greek porne
prostitute, originally bought, purchased, pernanai to sell; Lithuanian perku I buy).   Praise,
price, and prize began to diverge in Old French, with praise emerging in Middle English by early
14c. and prize being evident by late 1500s with the rise of the -z- spelling. Having shed the extra
Old French and Middle English senses, the word now again has the base sense of the Latin original.
To set (or put) a price on someone, offer a reward for capture is from 1766.


bad (adj.)

c.1200, inferior in quality; early 13c., wicked, evil, vicious, a mystery word with no apparent
relatives in other languages.* Possibly from Old English derogatory term b&aelig;ddel and its
diminutive b&aelig;dling effeminate man, hermaphrodite, pederast, probably related to b&aelig;dan to
defile. A rare word before 1400, and evil was more common in this sense until c.1700. Meaning
uncomfortable, sorry is 1839, American English colloquial.    Comparable words in the other Indo-
European languages tend to have grown from descriptions of specific qualities, such as ugly,
defective, weak, faithless, impudent, crooked, filthy (such as Greek kakos, probably from the word
for excrement; Russian plochoj, related to Old Church Slavonic plachu wavering, timid; Persian gast,
Old Persian gasta-, related to gand stench; German schlecht, originally level, straight, smooth,
whence simple, ordinary, then bad).    Comparative and superlative forms badder, baddest were common
14c.-18c. and used as recently as Defoe (but not by Shakespeare), but yielded to comparative worse
and superlative worst (which had belonged to evil and ill).    As a noun, late 14c., evil,
wickedness. In U.S. place names, sometimes translating native terms meaning supernaturally
dangerous. Ironic use as a word of approval is said to be at least since 1890s orally, originally in
Black English, emerging in print 1928 in a jazz context. It might have emerged from the ambivalence
of expressions like bad nigger, used as a term of reproach by whites, but among blacks sometimes
representing one who stood up to injustice, but in the U.S. West bad man also had a certain
ambivalence:    These are the men who do most of the killing in frontier communities, yet it is a
noteworthy fact that the men who are killed generally deserve their fate. [Farmer &amp; Henley]
*Farsi has bad in more or less the same sense as the English word, but this is regarded by linguists
as a coincidence. The forms of the words diverge as they are traced back in time (Farsi bad comes
from Middle Persian vat), and such accidental convergences exist across many languages, given the
vast number of words in each and the limited range of sounds humans can make to signify them. Among
other coincidental matches with English are Korean mani many, Chinese pei pay, Nahuatl (Aztecan)
huel well, Maya hol hole.


