diversion (n.)

early 15c., diverse condition; c.1600 act of diverting, from Middle French diversion, from Late
Latin diversionem (nominative diversio), noun of action from past participle stem of Latin divertere
(see divert).    Sense of amusement, entertainment is first recorded 1640s. Hence, divertimento
(1823), from the Italian form; originally a musical composition designed primarily for
entertainment.


amusement (n.)

c.1600, diversion of attention, especially in military actions, from French amusement, noun of
action from amuser (see amuse).    And because all bold and irreverent Speeches touching matters of
high nature, and all malicious and false Reports tending to Sedition, or to the Amusement of Our
People, are punishable ... (etc.) [Charles II, Proclamation of Oct. 26, 1688]  Meaning a pastime,
play, game, anything which pleasantly diverts the attention (from duty, work, etc.) is from 1670s,
originally depreciative; meaning pleasurable diversion attested from 1690s. Amusement hall is from
1862; amusement park first recorded 1897.


saunter (n.)

a leisurely stroll, 1828, from saunter (v.). Earlier it meant idle occupation, diversion (1728).


slum (v.)

visit slums of a city, especially for diversion or amusement, often under guise of philanthropy,
1884, from slum (n.). Pastime popularized by East End novels. Earlier it meant to visit slums for
disreputable purposes or in search of vice (1860). Related: Slumming.


sniper (n.)

sharpshooter; one who shoots from a hidden place, 1824, agent noun from snipe (v.). The birds were
considered a challenging target for an expert shooter:    Snipe Shooting is a good trial of the
gunner's skill, who often engages in this diversion, without the assistance of a dog of any kind; a
steady pointer, however, is a good companion. [Sportsman's Calendar, London, December 1818]


sideshow (n.)

also side-show, 1855, minor exhibition alongside or near a principal one, apparently a coinage of
P.T. Barnum's, from side (adj.) + show (n.). Hence, any diversion or distracting event.


avocation (n.)

1520s, a calling away from one's occupation, from Latin avocationem (nominative avocatio) a calling
away, distraction, diversion, noun of action from past participle stem of avocare, from ab- off,
away from (see ab-) + vocare to call (see voice (n.)).


fun (n.)

diversion, amusement, 1727, earlier a cheat, trick (c.1700), from verb fun (1680s) to cheat, hoax,
of uncertain origin, probably a variant of Middle English fonnen befool (c.1400; see fond).
Stigmatized by Johnson as a low cant word. Older sense is preserved in phrase to make fun of (1737)
and funny money counterfeit bills (1938, though this may be more for the sake of the rhyme). See
also funny.


snooker (n.)

1889, the game and the word said in an oft-told story to have been invented in India by British
officers as a diversion from billiards. The name is perhaps a reference (with regard to the rawness
of play by a fellow officer) to British slang snooker newly joined cadet, first-term student at the
R.M. Academy (1872). Tradition ascribes the coinage to Col. Sir Neville Chamberlain (not the later
prime minister of the same name), at the time subaltern in the Devonshire Regiment in Jubbulpore.
One of the first descriptions of the game is in A.W. Drayson's The Art  of Practical Billiards for
Amateurs (1889), which states in a footnote The rules of the game of snooker are the copyright of
Messrs. Burroughes &amp; Watts, from whom they may be obtained, they being manufacturers of billiard
tables.


pastime (n.)

late 15c., passe tyme recreation, diversion, amusement, sport, from pass (v.) + time (n.). Formed on
model of Middle French passe-temps (15c.), from passe, imperative of passer to pass + temps time.


ruse (n.)

early 15c., dodging movements of a hunted animal; 1620s, a trick, from Old French ruse, reuse
diversion, switch in flight; trick, jest (14c.), back-formed noun from reuser to dodge, repel,
retreat; deceive, cheat, from Latin recusare deny, reject, oppose, from re-, intensive prefix (see
re-), + causari plead as a reason, object, allege, from causa reason, cause (see cause (n.)). It
also has been proposed that the French word may be from Latin rursus backwards, or a Vulgar Latin
form of refusare. Johnson calls it, A French word neither elegant nor necessary. The verb ruse was
used in Middle English.


