divine (n.)

c.1300, soothsayer, from Old French devin, from Latin divinus (adj.); see divine (adj.). Meaning
ecclesiastic, theologian is from late 14c.


divine (v.)

to conjure, to guess, originally to make out by supernatural insight, mid-14c., from Old French
deviner, from Vulgar Latin *devinare, dissimilated from *divinare, from Latin divinus (see divine
(adj.)), which also meant soothsayer. Related: Divined; diviner; divining. Divining rod (or wand)
attested from 1650s.


divine (adj.)

c.1300, from Old French devin (12c.), from Latin divinus of a god, from divus a god, related to deus
god, deity (see Zeus). Weakened sense of excellent had evolved by late 15c.


divinely (adv.)

1580s, from divine (adj.) + -ly (2).


divinity (n.)

c.1300, science of divine things; late 14c., quality of being divine, also a divine being, from Old
French devinit&eacute; (12c.), from Latin divinitatem (nominative divinitas), from divinus (see
divine (adj.)).


numinous (adj.)

divine, spiritual, 1640s, from Latin numen (genitive numinis) divine will, properly divine approval
expressed by nodding the head, from nuere to nod, from PIE *neu- to nod (cognates: Greek neuein to
nod) + -ous.


oracle (n.)

late 14c., a message from a god, expressed by divine inspiration, from Old French oracle temple,
house of prayer; oracle (12c.) and directly from Latin oraculum divine announcement, oracle; place
where oracles are given, from orare pray, plead (see orator), with material instrumental suffix
-culo-. In antiquity, the agency or medium of a god, also the place where such divine utterances
were given. This sense is attested in English from c.1400.


numen (n.)

divine spirit, presiding divinity, 1620s, from Latin numen divine will, divinity, literally a nod,
from nuere to nod (assent); see numinous.


Dives

traditional name for a rich man, late 14c., from Latin dives rich (man); see Dis. Used in Luke xvi
in Vulgate and commonly mistaken as the proper name of the man in the parable. Related to divus
divine, and originally meaning favored by the gods (see divine (adj.)).


providential (adj.)

1610s, pertaining to foresifght (implied in providentially); 1640s as pertaining to divine
providence, from Latin providentia (see providence) + -al (1). Meaning by divine interposition is
recorded from 1719.


diva (n.)

distinguished woman singer, prima donna, 1883, from Italian diva goddess, fine lady, from Latin diva
goddess, fem. of divus divine (one); see divine (adj.).


deity (n.)

c.1300, divine nature; late 14c., a god, from Old French deit&eacute;, from Late Latin deitatem
(nominative deitas) divine nature, coined by Augustine from Latin deus god, from PIE *deiwos (see
Zeus).


providence (n.)

late 14c., foresight, prudent anticipation, from Old French providence divine providence, foresight
(12c.) and directly from Latin providentia foresight, precaution, foreknowledge, from providentem
(nominative providens), present participle of providere (see provide).   Providence (usually
capitalized) God as beneficent caretaker, first recorded c.1600, from earlier use of the word for
God's beneficient care or guidance (14c.), short for divine providence, etc. The noun in Latin
occasionally had a similar sense.


supernatural (adj.)

early 15c. of or given by God, from Medieval Latin supernaturalis above or beyond nature, divine,
from Latin super above (see super-) + natura nature (see nature (n.)). Originally with more of a
religious sense, of or given by God, divine; heavenly; association with ghosts, etc., has
predominated since 19c. Related: Supernaturalism.    That is supernatural, whatever it be, that is
either not in the chain of natural cause and effect, or which acts on the chain of cause and effect,
in nature, from without the chain. [Horace Bushnell, Nature and the Supernatural, 1858]


deva (n.)

god, good spirit in Hindu religion, from Sanskrit deva a god, originally a shining one, from *div-
to shine, thus cognate with Greek dios divine and Zeus, and Latin deus god (Old Latin deivos); see
Zeus.    Fem. form devi is used for goddess, also (with capital D-) for the mother goddess in
Hinduism. Hence, also, devadasi temple dancing girl, literally female servant of a god, from dasi
slave girl. Also Devanagari, the formal alphabet of Sanskrit writings, perhaps originally divine
city script, from nagara city.


myth (n.)

1830, from French Mythe (1818) and directly from Modern Latin mythus, from Greek mythos speech,
thought, story, myth, anything delivered by word of mouth, of unknown origin.Myths are stories about
divine beings, generally arranged in a coherent system; they are revered as true and sacred; they
are endorsed by rulers and priests; and closely linked to religion. Once this link is broken, and
the actors in the story are not regarded as gods but as human heroes, giants or fairies, it is no
longer a myth but a folktale. Where the central actor is divine but the story is trivial ... the
result is religious legend, not myth. [J. Simpson &amp; S. Roud, Dictionary of English Folklore,
Oxford, 2000, p.254]General sense of untrue story, rumor is from 1840.


nymph (n.)

late 14c., class of semi-divine female beings, from Old French nimphe (13c.), from Latin nympha
nymph, demi-goddess; bride, mistress, young woman, from Greek nymphe bride, young wife, later
beautiful young woman, then semi-divine being in the form of a beautiful maiden; related to Latin
nubere to marry, wed (see nuptial). Sub-groups include dryads, hamadryads, naiads, nereids, and
oreads. Sense in English of young woman, girl is attested from 1580s. Meaning insect stage between
larva and adult is recorded from 1570s. Related: Nymphal; nymphean.


theosophy (n.)

1640s (implied in theosophical), knowledge of divine things obtained through mystic study, from
Medieval Latin theosophia (c.880), from Late Greek theosophia (c.500) wisdom concerning God or
things divine, from Greek theosophos one wise about God, from theos god (see theo-) + sophia skill,
knowledge of, acquaintance with; philosophy, from sophos wise, learned (see sophist).    Applied
variously over the years, including to the followers of Swedenborg. Taken as the name of a modern
philosophical system (sometimes called Esoteric Buddhism), founded in New York 1875 as Theosophical
Society by Madame Blavatsky and others, which has elements of Hinduism and Buddhism and claims
supernatural knowledge of the divinity and his words deeper than that obtained from empiricism.
Related: Theosophist.


charisma (n.)

gift of leadership, power of authority, c.1930, from German, used in this sense by Max Weber
(1864-1920) in Wirtschaft u. Gesellschaft (1922), from Greek kharisma favor, divine gift, from
kharizesthai to show favor to, from kharis grace, beauty, kindness (Charis was the name of one of
the three attendants of Aphrodite) related to khairein to rejoice at, from PIE root *gher- (5) to
desire, like (see hortatory). More mundane sense of personal charm recorded by 1959.    Earlier, the
word had been used in English with a sense of grace, talent from God (1875), directly from Latinized
Greek; and in the form charism (plural charismata) it is attested with this sense in English from
1640s. Middle English, meanwhile, had karisme spiritual gift, divine grace (c.1500).


kamikaze (n.)

suicide flier, 1945, Japanese, literally divine wind, from kami god, providence, divine (see kami) +
kaze wind. Originally the name given in folklore to a typhoon which saved Japan from Mongol invasion
by wrecking Kublai Khan's fleet (August 1281). The attacks began in October 1944 off the
Philippines.    As an aside, at war's end, the Japanese had, by actual count, a total of 16,397
aircraft still available for service, including 6,374 operational fighters and bombers, and if they
had used only the fighters and bombers for kamikaze missions, they might have realized,
additionally, 900 ships sunk or damaged and 22,000 sailors killed or injured. In fact, however, the
Japanese had outfitted many aircraft, including trainers, as potential suicide attackers. As
intelligence estimates indicated, the Japanese believed they could inflict at least 50,000
casualties to an invasion force by kamikaze attacks alone. [Richard P. Hallion, Military Technology
and the Pacific War, 1995]    As an adjective by 1946.


spirit (n.)

mid-13c., animating or vital principle in man and animals, from Anglo-French spirit, Old French
espirit spirit, soul (12c., Modern French esprit) and directly from Latin spiritus a breathing
(respiration, and of the wind), breath; breath of a god, hence inspiration; breath of life, hence
life; also disposition, character; high spirit, vigor, courage; pride, arrogance, related to spirare
to breathe, from PIE *(s)peis- to blow (cognates: Old Church Slavonic pisto to play on the flute).
Meaning supernatural immaterial creature; angel, demon; an apparition, invisible corporeal being of
an airy nature is attested from mid-14c.; from late 14c. as a ghost (see ghost (n.)). From c.1500 as
a nature, character; sense of essential principle of something (in a non-theological context, as in
Spirit of St. Louis) is attested from 1680s, common after 1800; Spirit of '76 in reference to the
qualities that sparked and sustained the American Revolution is attested by 1797 in William
Cobbett's Porcupine's Gazette and Daily Advertiser.    From late 14c. in alchemy as volatile
substance; distillate; from c.1500 as substance capable of uniting the fixed and the volatile
elements of the philosopher's stone. Hence spirits volatile substance; sense narrowed to strong
alcoholic liquor by 1670s. This also is the sense in spirit level (1768). Also from mid-14c. as
character, disposition; way of thinking and feeling, state of mind; source of a human desire; in
Middle English freedom of spirit meant freedom of choice. From late 14c. as divine substance, divine
mind, God; also Christ or His divine nature; the Holy Ghost; divine power; also, extension of divine
power to man; inspiration, a charismatic state; charismatic power, especially of prophecy. Also
essential nature, essential quality. From 1580s in metaphoric sense animation, vitality.
According to Barnhart and OED, originally in English mainly from passages in Vulgate, where the
Latin word translates Greek pneuma and Hebrew ruah. Distinction between soul and spirit (as seat of
emotions) became current in Christian terminology (such as Greek psykhe vs. pneuma, Latin anima vs.
spiritus) but is without significance for earlier periods [Buck]. Latin spiritus, usually in
classical Latin breath, replaces animus in the sense spirit in the imperial period and appears in
Christian writings as the usual equivalent of Greek pneuma. Spirit-rapping is from 1852.


demon (n.)

c.1200, from Latin daemon spirit, from Greek daimon deity, divine power; lesser god; guiding spirit,
tutelary deity (sometimes including souls of the dead); one's genius, lot, or fortune; from PIE
*dai-mon- divider, provider (of fortunes or destinies), from root *da- to divide (see tide (n.)).
Used (with daimonion) in Christian Greek translations and Vulgate for god of the heathen and unclean
spirit. Jewish authors earlier had employed the Greek word in this sense, using it to render shedim
lords, idols in the Septuagint, and Matt. viii:31 has daimones, translated as deofol in Old English,
feend or deuil in Middle English. Another Old English word for this was hellcniht, literally hell-
knight.    The original mythological sense is sometimes written daemon for purposes of distinction.
The Demon of Socrates was a daimonion, a divine principle or inward oracle. His accusers, and later
the Church Fathers, however, represented this otherwise. The Demon Star (1895) is Algol.


demigod (n.)

1520s, from demi- + god, rendering Latin semideus. The child of sexual intercourse between a deity
and a mortal, a man raised to divine rank, or a minor god.


ambrosial (adj.)

1590s, immortal, divine, from Latin ambrosius, from Greek ambrosios (see ambrosia).


Nestorian (n.)

in Church history (mid-15c.), a follower of Nestorius (Latinized form of Nestor), 5c. patriarch of
Constantinople, whose doctrine attributed distinct divine and human persons to Christ and was
condemned as heresy. As an adjective from 1560s. Related: Nestorianism.


enthusiast (n.)

1560s, pejorative, one who believes himself possessed of divine revelations or special communication
from God, from Greek enthousiastes a person inspired, from enthousiazein (see enthusiasm). General
sense (not always entirely pejorative) is from mid-18c.


Socinian

1640s (n.); 1690s (adj.), in reference to followers or doctrines of Faustus Socinus, Latinized name
of Fausto Sozzini (1539-1604), Italian anti-trinitarian theologian who held Christ to be human, if
divinely endowed, and the Holy Spirit to be divine energy, not a person. He broke with the Church
and organized the Polish Brethren.


seer (n.)

late 14c., one to whom divine revelations are made, agent noun from see (v.). Originally rendering
Latin videns, Greek bleptor (from Hebrew roeh) in Bible translations (such as I Kings ix:9). Literal
sense of one who sees is attested from early 15c.


superhuman (adj.)

1630s, from Medieval Latin superhumanus; see super- + human (adj.). In early use often divine, since
19c. typically above the powers or nature of man. Related: Superhumanly.


Jehovist (n.)

the presumed authnor or authors of the parts of the Hexateuch in which the divine name is written
Yhwh (see Jehovah) + -ist. Opposed to the Elohist.


mantic (adj.)

1850, from Greek mantikos prophetic, oracular, of or for a soothsayer, from mantis prophet,
literally one touched by divine madness (see mantis). Related: Mantical (1580s).


grotto (n.)

1610s, from Italian grotta, ultimately from Latin crypta vault, cavern, from Greek krypte hidden
place (see crypt). Terminal -o may be from its being spelled that way in many translations of
Dante's Divine Comedy.


synergism (n.)

1650s, theological doctrine that human will cooperates with divine grace in regeneration (implying
that the fall did not cost the soul all inclination toward holiness), from Modern Latin synergismus,
from Greek synergos working together (see synergy). Used in non-theological sense a working
together, cooperation by 1910 (first of medicines).


nationalism (n.)

1844, devotion to one's country; see nationalist + -ism; in some usages from French nationalisme.
Earlier it was used in a theological sense of the doctrine of divine election of nations (1836).
Later it was used in a sense of doctrine advocating nationalization of a country's industry (1892).


religion (n.)

c.1200, state of life bound by monastic vows, also conduct indicating a belief in a divine power,
from Anglo-French religiun (11c.), Old French religion piety, devotion; religious community, and
directly from Latin religionem (nominative religio) respect for what is sacred, reverence for the
gods; conscientiousness, sense of right, moral obligation; fear of the gods; divine service,
religious observance; a religion, a faith, a mode of worship, cult; sanctity, holiness, in Late
Latin monastic life (5c.).    According to Cicero derived from relegere go through again (in reading
or in thought), from re- again (see re-) + legere read (see lecture (n.)). However, popular
etymology among the later ancients (Servius, Lactantius, Augustine) and the interpretation of many
modern writers connects it with religare to bind fast (see rely), via notion of place an obligation
on, or bond between humans and gods. In that case, the re- would be intensive. Another possible
origin is religiens careful, opposite of negligens. In English, meaning particular system of faith
is recorded from c.1300; sense of recognition of and allegiance in manner of life (perceived as
justly due) to a higher, unseen power or powers is from 1530s.   To hold, therefore, that there is
no difference in matters of religion between forms that are unlike each other, and even contrary to
each other, most clearly leads in the end to the rejection of all religion in both theory and
practice. And this is the same thing as atheism, however it may differ from it in name. [Pope Leo
XIII, Immortale Dei, 1885]


divination (n.)

late 14c., from Old French divination (13c.), from Latin divinationem (nominative divinatio) the
power of foreseeing, prediction, noun of action from past participle stem of divinare, literally to
be inspired by a god (see divine (adj.)).


ophidian (adj.)

pertaining to snakes, 1883, from Greek ophidion, diminutive of ophis serpent (see ophio-). Hence,
ophiolatry serpent-worship (1862), and the 2c. sect of the Ophit&aelig;, who revered the serpent as
the symbol of divine wisdom.


wildfire (n.)

late Old English wilde fyr destructive fire (perhaps caused by lightning); also erysipelas,
spreading skin disease; see from wild (adj.) + fire (n.). From c.1300 as Greek fire, also fire
rained down from the sky as divine retribution. Figurative sense from late 14c. By 1795 as sheet
lightning.


Osmond

masc. proper name, from Old English Osmund, literally divine protection, from os a god (see Oscar) +
-mund (see mount (n.)).


sibyl (n.)

woman supposed to possess powers of prophecy, female soothsayer, c.1200, from Old French sibile,
from Latin Sibylla, from Greek Sibylla, name for any of several prophetesses consulted by ancient
Greeks and Romans, of uncertain origin. Said to be from Doric Siobolla, from Attic Theoboule divine
wish.


Quirinal

royal palace in Rome, 1838, from Mons Quirinalis in Rome (one of the seven hills, site of a former
Papal palace), from Quirinus, said to be the divine name of Romulus, but really one of the original
trinity of Roman gods, representing Mars. His feast (Quirinalia) was Feb. 17. Used metonymically for
the Italian civil government (1917), especially as distinguished from the Vatican.


charismatic (adj.)

1851, in Bible commentary and theology, in reference to the operation of the Holy Spirit and
prophetic ecstasy in the early Church (from the use of Greek kharismata in Rom. xii), from Latin
stem of charisma + -ic. As a movement in modern Christian churches which believes in divine gifts of
healing, etc., attested by 1936, reflecting the older sense of charisma.


meritorious (adj.)

early 15c., deserving of divine grace, from Latin meritorius that for which money is paid, that by
which money is earned, from meritus, past participle of merere to earn (see merit (n.)). Related:
Meritoriously; meritoriousness.


Dis

Roman underworld god, from Latin Dis, contracted from dives rich, which is related to divus divine,
god, hence favored by god. Compare Pluto and Old Church Slavonic bogatu rich, from bogu god.


theocrat (n.)

1827, a ruler in the name of God, from Greek theos god (see theo-) + -crat, from aristocrat, etc.
From 1843 as one who favors a system of theocracy. Theocratist was the name of a publication begun
in 1828 to maintain the essential relation which subsists between religion and politics, and might
be used in the sense one who emphasizes divine authority over reason and individual freedom and who
explains social order as a revelation from God.


thanksgiving (n.)

1530s, the giving of thanks, from thanks (n.) + present participle of give (v.). In the specific
sense of public celebration acknowledging divine favors thanksgiving dates from 1630s (the first one
in America was held October 1621 by Plymouth Colony Pilgrims in appreciation of assistance from
members of the Massasoit tribe and celebration of the first harvest); though Thanksgiving Day itself
is not attested until 1670s.


godhead (n.)

c.1200, from god + Middle English -hede, cognate with -hood and German -heit. Along with maidenhead,
this is the sole survival of this form of the suffix. Old English had godhad divine nature.


tetragrammaton (n.)

c.1400, from Greek (to) tetragrammaton (the word) of four letters, from tetra- four (see four) +
gramma (genitive grammatos) letter, something written (see grammar). The Hebrew divine name,
transliterated as YHWH, usually vocalized in English as Jehovah or Yahweh.


Anselm

masc. proper name, from Latin Anselmus, from Old High German Ansehelm, literally having a divine
helmet, from ansi god (see Asgard) + helm (see helm (n.2)).


supernal (adj.)

mid-15c., heavenly, divine, from Old French supernal supreme (12c.), formed from Latin supernus
situated above, that is above; celestial (from super above, over; see super-) as a contrast to
infernal.


