doctrine (n.)

late 14c., from Old French doctrine (12c.) teaching, doctrine, and directly from Latin doctrina
teaching, body of teachings, learning, from doctor teacher (see doctor (n.)).


nationalism (n.)

1844, devotion to one's country; see nationalist + -ism; in some usages from French nationalisme.
Earlier it was used in a theological sense of the doctrine of divine election of nations (1836).
Later it was used in a sense of doctrine advocating nationalization of a country's industry (1892).


doctrinaire (n.)

1820, from French doctrinaire impractical person, originally adherent of doctrines (14c.), from
Latin doctrina (see doctrine).    At first used in the context of French politics, contemptuously
applied by rival factions to those who tried to reconcile liberty with royal authority after 1815.
Hence, anyone who applies doctrine without making allowance for practical considerations (1831). As
an adjective, from 1834.


unitarian (n.)

1680s, one who rejects the doctrine of the Trinity, from Modern Latin unitarius (1650s), from Latin
unitas (see unity) + -ian. Applied to Muslims and other non-Christian monotheists, but especially
(and with a capital -u-) of a Christian body originally founded upon the doctrine of unipersonality.
The American Unitarian Association formed in 1825. As an adjective from 1680s.


lore (n.)

Old English lar learning, what is taught, knowledge, science, doctrine, art of teaching, from Proto-
Germanic *laizo (Old Saxon lera, Old Frisian lare, Middle Dutch lere, Dutch leer, Old High German
lera, German Lehre teaching, precept, doctrine), from PIE *leis- (1) track, furrow (see learn).


Monroe Doctrine

1848, in reference to principles of policy contained in the message of U.S. President James Monroe
to Congress on Dec. 2, 1823.


pervert (n.)

1660s, one who has forsaken a doctrine or system regarded as true, apostate, from pervert (v.).
Psychological sense of one who has a perversion of the sexual instinct is attested from 1897
(Havelock Ellis), originally especially of homosexuals.


Rasputin

acquired name (Russian, literally debauchee) of Grigory Yefimovich Novykh (c.1872-1916), mystic and
faith healer who held sway over court of Nicholas II of Russia. His nickname is from his doctrine of
rebirth through sin, that true holy communion must be preceded by immersion in sin. His name used
figuratively in English from 1937 for anyone felt to have an insidious and corrupting influence.


stare decisis (n.)

the legal doctrine of being bound by precedents, Latin, literally to stand by things decided (see
stet + decisive).


secularism (n.)

doctrine that morality should be based on the well-being of man in the present life, without regard
to religious belief or a hereafter, 1846, from secular + -ism.


fatalist (n.)

1640s, in reference to the philosophical doctrine that all things are determined by fate; from fatal
+ -ist. General sense of one who accepts every event as inevitable is from 1734.


naturalistic (adj.)

1840, in reference to the doctrine of naturalism; from natural + -istic. From 1849 as aiming for
realism.


equalitarian (adj.)

1799, in reference to the doctrine that all mankind are equal, from equality on model of
humanitarian, etc.


synergist (n.)

1650s, in theology, one who holds the doctrine of synergism (q.v.); from 1876 in medicine. For
ending, see -ist.


Donatist (n.)

mid-15c., adherent of a Christian sect in 4c. North Africa, from Medieval Latin Donatista, from
Donatus name of two of the principal men in it. The schism had more to do with episcopal succession
in Carthage than with doctrine. The name is literally bestowed, given.


Jansenism (n.)

1650s, in reference to doctrine of Cornelius Jansen (1585-1638), Catholic bishop of Ypres, who
maintained the perverseness and inability for good of the natural human will. Related: Jansenist.


agathism (n.)

the doctrine that all things tend toward the good, 1830, from agathist + -ism.


sensualism (n.)

1803, the philosophical doctrine that the senses are the sole source of knowledge, from sensual +
-ism. From 1813 as addiction to sensual indulgence.


activist (n.)

one who advocates a doctrine of direct action, 1915; from active + -ist. Originally in reference to
political forces in Sweden advocating abandonment of neutrality in World War I and active support
for the Central Powers.


objectivism (n.)

1854 in philosophical sense, the doctrine that knowledge is based on objective reality, from
objective (adj.) + -ism.


utilitarianism (n.)

1827, from utilitarian + -ism. The doctrine that the end of all action should be the greatest
happiness of the greatest number.


Nestorian (n.)

in Church history (mid-15c.), a follower of Nestorius (Latinized form of Nestor), 5c. patriarch of
Constantinople, whose doctrine attributed distinct divine and human persons to Christ and was
condemned as heresy. As an adjective from 1560s. Related: Nestorianism.


atomistic (adj.)

1809, in reference to the classical philosophical doctrine of atomism (1670s); modern philosophical
sense (logical atomism) traces to 1914 and Bertrand Russell.


mutualism (n.)

1849, in reference to the doctrine of French anarchist/socialist Pierre-Joseph Proudhon (1809-1865),
from French mutuellisme. In biology, from 1876, from mutual + -ism.


universalism (n.)

1805 in theology, the doctrine of universal salvation, from universal (adj.) + -ism. Universalist
one who, professing the Christian faith, believes in the eventual redemption of all humanity is
attested from 1620s.


rationalist (n.)

one who follows reason and not authority in thought or speculation, originally especially physician
whose treatment is based on reason, 1620s, from rational + -ist. Applied to a philosophical doctrine
1640s. Related: Rationalism.


monism (n.)

the philosophical doctrine that there is only one principle, 1862, from Modern Latin monismus, from
Greek monos alone (see mono-). First used in German by German philosopher Baron Christian von Wolff
(1679-1754).


determinism (n.)

1846, in theology (lack of free will); 1876 in general sense of doctrine that everything  happens by
a necessary causation, from French d&eacute;terminisme, from German Determinismus, perhaps a back-
formation from Praedeterminismus (see determine).


aspheterism (n.)

doctrine that there ought to be no private property, 1794, from Greek a- not, privative prefix (see
a- (3)), + spheteros one's own, from sphetrisomos appropriation.


post-millennial (adj.)

also postmillennial, 1831, from post- after + millennial; chiefly in reference to the Protestant
doctrine that the second coming of Christ will occur after, not at, the Christian millennium.


utilitarian (n.)

1781, coined by Jeremy Bentham (1748-1832) from utility + -arian on the model of + unitarian, etc.
One guided by the doctrine of the greatest happiness for the greatest number. From 1802 as an
adjective; in the general sense having regard to utility rather than beauty, from 1847.


non-conformist (n.)

also nonconformist, 1610s, originally one who adhered to Church of England doctrine but not its
practice, from non- + conformist. After their ejection under the Act of Uniformity (1662) the name
passed to the separate churches they joined or formed. In general use from 1670s as one who does not
participate in a practice or course of action.  As an adjective from 1640s.


animalism (n.)

the doctrine that man is a mere animal, 1857, from animal + -ism. Earlier, exercise of animal
faculties; physical exercise (1831).


doctrinal (adj.)

pertaining to doctrines, 1560s, from Late Latin doctrinalis, from doctrina (see doctrine). Attested
from mid-15c. as the title of a text book (from Middle French doctrinal).


synergism (n.)

1650s, theological doctrine that human will cooperates with divine grace in regeneration (implying
that the fall did not cost the soul all inclination toward holiness), from Modern Latin synergismus,
from Greek synergos working together (see synergy). Used in non-theological sense a working
together, cooperation by 1910 (first of medicines).


tantra (n.)

type of Hindu religious book, 1799, from Sanskrit tantram, literally loom, warp, hence,
figuratively, groundwork, system, doctrine, from tan to stretch, extend, from PIE root *ten- to
stretch, extend (see tenet).


libertarian (n.)

1789, one who holds the doctrine of free will (opposed to necessitarian), from liberty (q.v.) on
model of unitarian, etc. Political sense of person advocating liberty in thought and conduct is from
1878. As an adjective by 1882. U.S. Libertarian Party founded in Colorado, 1971.


-ism

suffix forming nouns of action, state, condition, doctrine, from French -isme or directly from Latin
-isma, -ismus, from Greek -isma, from stem of verbs in -izein. Used as an independent word, chiefly
disparagingly, from 1670s.


-logy

word-forming element meaning a speaking, discourse, treatise, doctrine, theory, science, from Greek
-logia (often via French -logie or Medieval Latin -logia), from root of legein to speak; thus, the
character or deportment of one who speaks or treats of (a certain subject); see lecture (n.).


indoctrinate (v.)

1620s, to teach, from in- (2) in + Latin doctrina teaching (see doctrine). Meaning to imbue with an
idea or opinion first recorded 1832. Related: Indoctrinated; indoctrinating. The earlier verb was
indoctrine (c.1500).


typology (n.)

doctrine of symbols, 1845, from Greek typos (see type (n.)) + -logy. Related: Typological;
typologically.


Pelagian

1530s (n.); 1570s (adj.), from Medieval Latin Pelagianus, from Pelagius, Latinized form of the name
of 4c. British monk who denied the doctrine of original sin. Combated by Augustine, condemned by
Pope Zosimus in 418 C.E. His name in Welsh was said to have been Morgan, literally sea-dweller
(hence his Church name, from Greek pelagos sea; see pelagic). Related: Pelagianism.


Shinto (n.)

native religious system of Japan, 1727, from Chinese shin tao way of the gods, from shin god, gods,
spirit + tao way, path, doctrine. Related: Shintoism.


chiliasm (n.)

c.1600, from Latinized form of Greek khiliasmos, from khilias, from khilioi a thousand, the number
1,000, of unknown origin; supposed by some to be related to Latin mille. The doctrine of the
millennium, the opinion that Christ will reign in bodily presence on earth for 1,000 years. Related:
Chiliast; chiliastic.


pragmatism (n.)

matter-of-fact treatment, 1825, from Greek pragmat-, stem of pragma that which has been done (see
pragmatic) + -ism. As a philosophical doctrine, 1898, said to be from 1870s; probably from German
Pragmatismus. As a name for a political theory, from 1951. Related: Pragmatist (1630s as busybody;
1892 as adherent of a pragmatic philosophy).


anabaptism (n.)

1640s (as a Christian doctrine, with capital A-, from 1570s), from Medieval Latin anabaptismus, from
Late Greek anabaptismos, from ana- up (in place or time), back again, anew (see ana-) + baptismos
baptism (see baptism).


fellowship (n.)

c.1200, feolahschipe companionship, from fellow + -ship. In Middle English it was at times a
euphemism for sexual intercourse (carnal fellowship).   To fellowship with is to hold communion
with; to unite with in doctrine and discipline. This barbarism now appears with disgusting frequency
in the reports of ecclesiastical conventions, and in the religious newspapers generally. [Bartlett,
Dictionary of Americanisms, 1848]


Gnostic (n.)

1580s, believer in a mystical religious doctrine of spiritual knowledge, from Late Latin Gnosticus,
from Late Greek Gnostikos, noun use of adj. gnostikos knowing, able to discern, from gnostos
knowable, from gignoskein to learn, to come to know (see know). Applied to various early Christian
sects that claimed direct personal knowledge beyond the Gospel or the Church hierarchy.


self-interest (n.)

also self interest, 1640s, from self- + interest (n.). Related: Self-interested.    [Self-interest]
is a doctrine not very lofty, but clear and sure. It does not seek to attain great objects; but it
attains those it aims for without too much effort. ... [It] does not produce great devotion; but it
suggests little sacrifices each day; by itself it cannot make a man virtuous; but it forms a
multitude of citizens who are regulated, temperate, moderate, farsighted, masters of themselves; and
if it does not lead directly to virtue through the will, it brings them near to it insensibly
through habits. [Alexis de Tocqueville, Democracy in America]


realism (n.)

1794, from real (adj.) + -ism; after French r&eacute;alisme or German Realismus; from Late Latin
realis real. Opposed to idealism in philosophy, art, etc. In reference to scholastic doctrine of
Thomas Aquinas (opposed to nominalism) it is recorded from 1826. Meaning close resemblance to the
scene (in art, literature, etc., often with reference to unpleasant details) is attested from 1856.


