doctor (v.)

1590s, to confer a degree on, from doctor (n.). Meaning to treat medically is from 1712; sense of
alter, disguise, falsify is from 1774. Related: Doctored; doctoring.


doctorate (n.)

degree of a doctor, 1670s; see doctor (n.) + -ate (1).


doctor (n.)

c.1300, Church father, from Old French doctour, from Medieval Latin doctor religious teacher,
adviser, scholar, in classical Latin teacher, agent noun from docere to show, teach, cause to know,
originally make to appear right, causative of decere be seemly, fitting (see decent).    Meaning
holder of highest degree in university is first found late 14c.; as is that of medical professional
(replacing native leech (n.2)), though this was not common till late 16c. The transitional stage is
exemplified in Chaucer's Doctor of phesike (Latin physica came to be used extensively in Medieval
Latin for medicina). Similar usage of the equivalent of doctor is colloquial in most European
languages: Italian dottore, French docteur, German doktor, Lithuanian daktaras, though these are
typically not the main word in those languages for a medical healer. For similar evolution, see
Sanskrit vaidya- medical doctor, literally one versed in science. German Arzt, Dutch arts are from
Late Latin archiater, from Greek arkhiatros chief healer, hence court physician. French
m&eacute;decin is a back-formation from m&eacute;dicine, replacing Old French miege, from Latin
medicus.


Doctor Martens

type of heavy walking boots, 1977 (use claimed from 1965), trademark name taken out by Herbert Funck
and Klaus Martens of West Germany.


M.D.

1755, abbreviation of Latin Medicin&aelig; Doctor doctor of medicine.


Ph.D

attested from 1869; abbreviation of Latin Philosophiae Doctor Doctor of Philosophy.


D.D.

abbreviation of Latin Divinitatis Doctor Doctor of Divinity.


S.T.D.

1975 as an abbreviation of sexually transmitted disease. Earlier it was an abbreviation of Latin
Sacrosanctae Theologiae Doctor Doctor of Sacred Theology.


L.L.

contraction of Latin legum of laws, in degrees; as in L.L.D., which stands for Legum Doctor Doctor
of Laws. Plural abbreviations in Latin were formed by doubling the letter.


doctrine (n.)

late 14c., from Old French doctrine (12c.) teaching, doctrine, and directly from Latin doctrina
teaching, body of teachings, learning, from doctor teacher (see doctor (n.)).


intern (n.)

1879, American English, one working under supervision as part of professional training, especially
doctor in training in a hospital, from French interne assistant doctor, literally resident within a
school, from Middle French interne internal (see intern (v.)). The verb in this sense is attested
from 1933. Related: Interned; interning.


veterinarian (n.)

animal doctor, 1640s, from Latin veterinarius of or having to do with beasts of burden, also, as a
noun, cattle doctor, from veterinum beast of burden, perhaps from vetus (genitive veteris) old (see
veteran), possibly from the notion of experienced, or of one year old (hence strong enough to draw
burdens). Another theory connects it to Latin vehere to draw, on notion of used as a draft animal.
Replaced native dog-leech (1520s).


doc (n.)

familiar form of doctor, first recorded c.1850.


kahuna (n.)

1886, in a report in English by the Hawaiian government, which defines the word as doctor and
sorcerer, from Hawaiian, where it was applied as well to priests and navigators. In surfer slang,
for a god of surfing, it is attested from 1962 (but big kahuna in same sense is said to date from
1950s.


anaesthetic (adj.)

1846, insensible, from Greek anaisthetos insensate, without feeling; senseless, stupid (see
anaesthesia). Noun meaning agent that produces anesthesia first used in modern sense 1848 by
Scottish doctor James Young Simpson (1811-1870), discoverer of the surgical uses of chloroform.


oculist (n.)

eye doctor, 1610s, from French oculiste (16c.), from Latin oculus an eye (see eye (n.)).


docent (adj.)

1630s, from Latin docentem (nominative docens), present participle of docere to teach (see doctor).
As a noun, from 1880.


geriatrics (n.)

coined 1909 by Austrian-born doctor Ignatz L. Nascher (1863-1944) in New York Medical Journal on the
model of pediatrics (also see -ics), from the same elements found in geriatric (q.v.). The correct
formation would be gerontiatrics.


alienist (n.)

one who treats mental illness, 'mad doctor,'  1864, from French ali&eacute;niste, from alienation in
the sense of insanity, loss of mental faculty, a sense attested in English from late 15c. (see
alienate).


leech (n.2)

obsolete for physician, from Old English l&aelig;ce, probably from Old Danish l&aelig;ke, from
Proto-Germanic *lekjaz enchanter, one who speaks magic words; healer, physician (cognates: Old
Frisian letza, Old Saxon laki, Old Norse l&aelig;knir, Old High German lahhi, Gothic lekeis
physician), literally one who counsels, perhaps connected with a root found in Celtic (compare Irish
liaig charmer, exorcist, physician) and Slavic (compare Serbo-Croatian lijekar, Polish lekarz), from
PIE *lep-agi conjurer, from root *leg- to collect, with derivatives meaning to speak (see lecture
(n.)).    For sense development, compare Old Church Slavonic baliji doctor, originally conjurer,
related to Serbo-Croatian bajati enchant, conjure; Old Church Slavonic vra&#269;i, Russian vra&#269;
doctor, related to Serbo-Croatian vra&#269; sorcerer, fortune-teller. The form merged with leech
(n.1) in Middle English, apparently by folk etymology. In 17c., leech usually was applied only to
veterinary practitioners. The fourth finger of the hand, in Old English, was l&aelig;cfinger,
translating Latin digitus medicus, Greek daktylus iatrikos, supposedly because a vein from that
finger stretches straight to the heart.


cook (v.)

late 14c., from cook (n.); the figurative sense of to manipulate, falsify, doctor is from 1630s.
Related: Cooked, cooking. To cook with gas is 1930s jive talk.


docile (adj.)

late 15c., easily taught, from Italian or French docile, from Latin docilis easily taught, from
docere teach (see doctor). Sense of obedient, submissive first recorded 1774.


psychiatrist (n.)

1875, from psychiatry + -ist.A psychiatrist is a man who goes to the Folies Berg&egrave;re and looks
at the audience. [Anglican Bishop Mervyn Stockwood, 1961]  An older name was mad-doctor (1703); also
psychiater expert in mental diseases (1852), from Greek psyche + iatros. Also see alienist.


agathist (n.)

1816, from Greek agathos good (see Agatha) + -ist.    Doctor Kearney, who formerly, with so much
reputation, delivered lectures in this place on the history of Rome, observed to me once, that he
was not an optimist, but an agathist; that he believed that every thing tended to good, but did not
think himself competent to determine what was absolutely the best. The distinction is important, and
seems to be fatal to the system of Optimism. [George Miller, Lectures on the Philosophy of Modern
History, Dublin, 1816]


handwriting (n.)

c.1500, from hand (n.) + writing, translating Latin manuscriptum. Hand in the sense of handwriting,
style of writing is from late 14c.    An ordinary note in his [Horace Greeley's] handwriting is said
to have been used for a long time as a railroad pass, then as a servant's recommendation, and
finally taken to a drug-store as a doctor's prescription. [Frank Leslie's Magazine, August 1884]


nymphomania (n.)

1775, in English translation of Nymphomania, or a Dissertation Concerning the Furor Uterinus, by
French doctor M.D.T. Bienville, coined from Greek nymphe bride (see nymph) + mania madness (see
mania). Perhaps influenced by earlier French nymphomanie. Defined as a female disease characterized
by morbid and uncontrollable sexual desire. Compare also nympholepsy.


empiric (adj.)

c.1600, from Latin empiricus a physician guided by experience, from Greek empeirikos experienced,
from empeiria experience, from empeiros skilled, from en in (see en- (2)) + peira trial, experiment,
from PIE *per- to try, risk. Originally a school of ancient physicians who based their practice on
experience rather than theory. Earlier as a noun (1540s) in reference to the sect, and earliest
(1520s) in a sense quack doctor which was in frequent use 16c.-19c.


Goldilocks

name for a person with bright yellow hair, 1540s, from adj. form of gold + lock in the hair sense.
The story of the Three Bears first was printed in Robert Southey's miscellany The Doctor (1837), but
the central figure there was a bad-tempered old woman. Southey did not claim to have invented the
story, and older versions have been traced, either involving an old woman or a silver-haired girl
(though in at least one version it is a fox who enters the house). The identification of the girl as
Goldilocks is attested only from c.1875.


sado-masochism (n.)

also sadomasochism, 1916, from comb. form of sadism + masochism. Abbreviation S &amp; M first
attested 1965. An earlier word for sexualities that focused on violence was algolagnia (1900),
Modern Latin, coined in German in 1892 by German doctor and paranormalist Albert von Schrenck-
Notzing (1862-1929) from Greek algos pain + lagneia lust.


physician (n.)

early 13c., fisicien a healer, a medical practitioner, from Old French fisiciien physician, doctor,
sage (12c., Modern French physicien means physicist), from fisique art of healing, from Latin
physica natural science (see physic). Distinguished from surgeon from c.1400. The ph- spelling
attested from late 14c. (see ph).


clap (n.2)

gonorrhea, 1580s, of unknown origin, perhaps from Middle English clapper rabbit-hole, from Old
French clapoire (Modern French clapier), originally rabbit burrow (of uncertain origin), but given a
slang extension to brothel and also the name of a disease of some sort. In English originally also a
verb, to infect with clap. Related: Clap-doctor.


Spock

half-alien character in the Star Trek U.S. entertainment franchise, developed and named 1964 by
series creator Gene Roddenberry, who later said he was searching for an alien-sounding word and not
thinking of U.S. physician and child-care specialist Benjamin M. Spock (1903-1998), whose name is of
Dutch origin. The doctor wrote the enormously popular Common Sense Book of Baby and Child Care
(1946) and is the source of the first element in Spock-marked (1967), defined in OED as (Adversely)
affected by an upbringing held to be in accordance with the principles of Dr. Spock ....


prescription (n.)

late 14c., in law, the right to something through long use, from Old French prescription (13c.) and
directly from Latin praescriptionem (nominative praescriptio) a writing before, order, direction,
noun of action from past participle stem of praescribere write before, prefix in writing; ordain,
determine in advance, from prae before (see pre-) + scribere to write (see script (n.)). Medical
sense of written directions from a doctor first recorded 1570s.


syphilis (n.)

infectious venereal disease, 1718, Modern Latin, originally from the title of a poem, Syphilis, sive
Morbus Gallicus Syphilis, or the French Disease, published 1530, by Veronese doctor Girolamo
Fracastoro (1483-1553), which tells the tale of the shepherd Syphilus, supposed to be the first
sufferer from the disease. Fracastoro first used the word as a generic term for the disease in his
1546 treatise De Contagione. Why he chose the name is unknown; it may be intended as Latin for Pig-
lover, though there was also a Sipylus, a son of Niobe, in Ovid.


document (n.)

early 15c., teaching, instruction, from Old French document (13c.) lesson, written evidence, from
Latin documentum example, proof, lesson, in Medieval Latin official written instrument, from docere
to show, teach (see doctor (n.)). Meaning something written that provides proof or evidence is from
early 18c. Related: Documents.


mountebank (n.)

a doctor that mounts a bench in the market, and boasts his infallible remedies and cures [Johnson],
1570s, from Italian montambanco, contraction of monta in banco quack, juggler, literally mount on
bench (to be seen by crowd), from monta, imperative of montare to mount (see mount (v.)) + banco,
variant of banca bench (see bank (n.2)). Figurative and extended senses from 1580s.


truck (n.2)

1530s, act or practice of barter, trading by exchange, from French troque, from troquer (see truck
(v.1)). Sense of dealings is from 1620s. Exchange of commodities, barter, then commodities for
barter and exchange. In this sense the word was given a wide use in 19c. American English: Truck at
first meant market-garden produce; then it came to mean stuff in general, including 'doctor-stuff.'
SPUN TRUCK is knitting work [Thornton, American Glossary, 1912]. Sense of vegetables raised for
market is from 1784, preserved in truck farm (1866).


do-gooder (n.)

a person who seeks to correct social ills in an idealistic, but usually impractical or superficial,
way, 1650s (as do-good), in Zootomia, or Observations on the Present Manners of the English: Briefly
Anatomizing the Living by the Dead. With An Usefull Detection of the Mountebanks of Both Sexes,
written by Richard Whitlock, a medical doctor. Probably used even then with a taint of impractical
idealism. Modern pejorative use seems to have begun on the socialist left, mocking those who were
unwilling to take a hard line. OED has this citation, from The Nation in 1923:    There is nothing
the matter with the United States except ... the parlor socialists, up-lifters, and do-goods.    The
form do-gooder appears in American English from 1927, presumably because do-good was no longer felt
as sufficiently noun-like. A slightly older word for this was goo-goo.


commencement (n.)

late 13c., beginning, from Old French comencement beginning, start (Modern French commencement),
from comencier (see commence). Meaning school graduation ceremony attested by 1850, American
English. (Sense entrance upon the privileges of a master or doctor in a university is from late
14c.)    I know what you are thinking of -- the class members grouped in a semicircle on the stage,
the three scared boys in new ready-made black suits, the seventeen pretty girls in fluffy white
dresses (the gowns of the year), each senior holding a ribbon-tied manuscript bulging with thoughts
on Beyond the Alps Lies Italy, Our Ship is Launched -- Whither Shall it Sail? and similar topics.
[Charles Moreau Harger, The Real Commencement, New Outlook, May 8, 1909]


rabbi (n.)

Jewish doctor of religious law, late 15c. (in Old English in biblical context only; in Middle
English also as a title prefixed to personal names), from Late Latin rabbi, from Greek rhabbi, from
Mishnaic Hebrew rabbi my master, from rabh master, great one, title of respect for Jewish doctors of
law + -i, first person singular pronominal suffix. From Semitic root r-b-b to be great or numerous
(compare robh multitude; Aramaic rabh great; chief, master, teacher; Arabic rabba was great, rabb
master).


triage (n.)

1727, action of assorting according to quality, from French triage a picking out, sorting (14c.),
from Old French trier to pick, cull (see try (v.)). There seems to be some influence from or
convergence with Latin tria three (as in triage for coffee beans of the third or lowest quality). In
World War I, adopted for the sorting of wounded soldiers into groups according to the severity of
their injuries, from French use.    First of all, the wounded man, or bless&#233;, is carried into
the first of the so-called Salles de Triage or sorting wards. Here his name and regimental number,
and if he is in condition to give it, the address of his family are taken; .... Then a hasty look-
over from the surgeon sends him into one of the two other Salles de Triage -- that of the Petits
Bless&#233;s if he is only slightly wounded and that of the Grands Bless&#233;s if he is more
severely so. [Woods Hutchinson, M.D., The Doctor in War, Boston, 1918]


bloviate (v.)

1857, American English, a Midwestern word for to talk aimlessly and boastingly; to indulge in 'high
falutin', according to Farmer (1890), who seems to have been the only British lexicographer to
notice it. He says it was based on blow (v.) on the model of deviate, etc.    It seems to have been
felt as outdated slang already by late 19c. (It was a leasure for him to hear the Doctor talk, or,
as it was inelegantly expressed in the phrase of the period, 'bloviate' .... [Overland Monthly, San
Francisco, 1872, describing a scene from 1860]), but it enjoyed a revival early 1920s during the
presidency of Warren G. Harding, who wrote a notoriously ornate and incomprehensible prose (e.e.
cummings eulogized him as The only man, woman or child who wrote a simple declarative sentence with
seven grammatical errors) at which time the word took on its connection with political speech; it
faded again thereafter, but, with its derivative, bloviation, it enjoyed a revival in the 2000 U.S.
election season that continued through the era of blogging.


first (adj., adv.)

Old English fyrst foremost, superlative of fore; from Proto-Germanic *furisto- (cognates: Old Saxon
fuirst first, Old High German furist, Old Norse fyrstr, Danish f&oslash;rste, Old Frisian ferist,
Middle Dutch vorste prince, Dutch vorst first, German F&uuml;rst prince), superlative of
*fur-/*for-, from PIE root *per- (1) forward, through (see per).   First-class (adj.) is from 1837;
first-rate (1660s) is from classes of warships in the British navy. First aid is that given at the
scene, pending the arrival of a doctor.   First Lady as an informal title for the wife of a U.S.
president was in use by 1908, short for First lady of the land (by 1863 with reference to the
president's wife). First name is attested from mid-13c.; first-born is from mid-14c. First base a
start (1938) is a figurative use from the game of baseball.


tongue-in-cheek (adv.)

1856, from phrase to speak with one's tongue in one's cheek to speak insincerely (1748), suggestive
of sly irony or humorous insincerity, perhaps a stage trick to convey irony to the audience.    Hem!
Pray, Sir, said he to the Bard, after thrusting his Tongue into a Corner of his Cheek, and rolling
his Eyes at Miss Willis, (Tricks which he had caught by endeavouring to take off a celebrated
Comedian) were these fine Tragedies of yours ever acted? [anonymous, Emily, or the History of a
Natural Daughter, 1761]   <hr />   This arietta, however, she no sooner began to perform, than he
and the justice fell asleep ; but the moment she ceased playing, the knight waked snorting, and
exclaimed,--'O cara! what d'ye think, gentlemen? Will you talk any more of your Pargolesi and your
Corelli ?'--At the same time, he thrust his tongue in one cheek, and leered with one eye at the
doctor and me, who sat on his left hand--He concluded the pantomime with a loud laugh, which he
could command at all times extempore. [Smollett, The Expedition of Humphrey Clinker, 1771]


root (n.)

underground part of a plant, late Old English rot, from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse rot
root, figuratively cause, origin, from Proto-Germanic *wrot (cognates: Old English wyrt root, herb,
plant, Old High German wurz, German Wurz a plant, Gothic waurts a root, with characteristic
Scandinavian loss of -w- before -r-), from PIE *wrad- (see radish (n.), and compare wort). The usual
Old English words for root were wyrttruma and wyrtwala.    Figurative use is from c.1200. Of teeth,
hair, etc., from early 13c. Mathematical sense is from 1550s. Philological sense from 1520s. Slang
meaning penis is recorded from 1846. In U.S. black use, a spell effected by magical properties of
roots, 1935. To take root is from 1530s. Root beer, made from the extracts of various roots, first
recorded 1841, American English; root doctor is from 1821. Root cap is from 1875.


powder (n.)

c.1300, ash, cinders; dust of the earth; early 14c., pulverized substance; mid-14c., medicinal
powder; late 14c. as gunpowder, from Old French poudre dust, powder; ashes; powdered substance
(13c.), earlier pouldre (11c.), from Latin pulverem (nominative pulvis) dust (see pollen).
Specialized sense gunpowder is from late 14c. In the sense powdered cosmetic, it is recorded from
1570s.    In figurative sense, powder keg is first attested 1855. Powder room, euphemistic for
women's lavatory, is attested from 1936. Earlier it meant place where gunpowder is stored on a
warship (1620s). Powder horn attested by 1530s. Powder puff first recorded 1704; as a symbol of
femaleness or effeminacy, in use from at least 1930s.    Phrase take a powder scram, vanish, is from
1920; it was a common phrase as a doctor's instruction, so perhaps from the notion of taking a
laxative medicine or a sleeping powder, with the result that one has to leave in a hurry (or, on
another guess, from a magician's magical powder, which made things disappear). Powder blue (1650s)
was smelt used in laundering; as a color name from 1894.


spin (v.)

Old English spinnan (transitive) draw out and twist fibers into thread, strong verb (past tense
spann, past participle spunnen), from Proto-Germanic *spenwan (cognates: Old Norse and Old Frisian
spinna, Danish spinde, Dutch spinnen, Old High German spinnan, German spinnen, Gothic spinnan), from
PIE *spen-wo-, from root *(s)pen- to draw, stretch, spin (cognates: Armenian henum I weave; Greek
patos garment, literally that which is spun; Lithuanian pinu I plait, braid, spandau I spin; Middle
Welsh cy-ffiniden spider; see span (v.)).    Intransitive senses of to form threads from fibrous
stuff; to twist, writhe developed in late Old English. Transitive sense of cause to turn rapidly is
from 1610s; intransitive meaning revolve, turn around rapidly first recorded 1660s. Meaning attempt
to influence reporters' minds after an event has taken place but before they have written about it
seems to have risen to popularity in the 1984 U.S. presidential campaign; as in spin doctor, first
attested 1984.


aspirin (n.)

coined 1899 by German chemist Heinrich Dreser (1860-1924) in German as a trademark name, from Latin
Spiraea (ulmaria) meadow-sweet, the plant in whose flowers or leaves the processed acid in the
medicine is naturally found, + common chemical ending -in (see -ine (2)). Spiraea (Tournefort, 1700)
is from Latinized form of Greek speiraia meadow-sweet, so called from the shape of its follicles
(see spiral (adj.)). The initial -a- is to acknowledge acetylation; Dreser said the word was a
contraction of acetylierte spirs&auml;ure, the German name of the acid, which now is obsolete,
replaced by salicylic acid.   Die Bezeichnung Aspirin ist abgeleitet aus Spirs&#228;ure -- alter
Name der Salicyls&#228;ure und A = Acetyl; statt Acetylirte Spirs&#228;ure, kurzweg Aspirin. [H,
Dreser, Pharmakologisches &#252;ber Aspirin (Acetylsalicyls&#228;ure), in Archiv f&#252;r die
Gesammte Physiologie des Menschen und der Thiere, 1899, p.307]    The custom of giving commercial
names to medicinal products began in Germany in the late 19th century, when nascent pharmaceutical
firms were discovering medical uses for common, easily made chemicals. To discourage competitors
they would market the substance under a short trademarked name a doctor could remember, rather than
the long chemical compound word. German law required prescriptions to be filled exactly as written.


medicine (n.)

c.1200, medical treatment, cure, remedy, also used figuratively, of spiritual remedies, from Old
French medecine (Modern French m&#233;dicine) medicine, art of healing, cure, treatment, potion,
from Latin medicina the healing art, medicine; a remedy, also used figuratively, perhaps originally
ars medicina the medical art, from fem. of medicinus (adj.) of a doctor, from medicus a physician
(see medical); though OED finds evidence for this is wanting. Meaning a medicinal potion or plaster
in English is mid-14c.    To take (one's) medicine submit to something disagreeable is first
recorded 1865. North American Indian medicine-man shaman is first attested 1801, from American
Indian adoption of the word medicine in sense of magical influence. The U.S.-Canadian boundary they
called Medicine Line (first attested 1910), because it conferred a kind of magic protection:
punishment for crimes committed on one side of it could be avoided by crossing over to the other.
Medicine show traveling show meant to attract a crowd so patent medicine can be sold to them is
American English, 1938. Medicine ball stuffed leather ball used for exercise is from 1889.    It is
called a medicine ball and it got that title from Prof. Roberts, now of Springfield, whose fame is
widespread, and whose bright and peculiar dictionary of terms for his prescription department in
physical culture is taught in every first-class conducted Y.M.C.A. gymnasium in America. Prof.
Roberts calls it a medicine ball because playful exercise with it invigorates the body, promotes
digestion, and restores and preserves one's health. [Scientific American Supplement, March 16, 1889]


witch (n.)

Old English wicce female magician, sorceress, in later use especially a woman supposed to have
dealings with the devil or evil spirits and to be able by their cooperation to perform supernatural
acts, fem. of Old English wicca sorcerer, wizard, man who practices witchcraft or magic, from verb
wiccian to practice witchcraft (compare Low German wikken, wicken to use witchcraft, wikker, wicker
soothsayer).    OED says of uncertain origin; Liberman says None of the proposed etymologies of
witch is free from phonetic or semantic difficulties. Klein suggests connection with Old English
wigle divination, and wig, wih idol. Watkins says the nouns represent a Proto-Germanic *wikkjaz
necromancer (one who wakes the dead), from PIE *weg-yo-, from *weg- (2) to be strong, be lively (see
wake (v.)).    That wicce once had a more specific sense than the later general one of female
magician, sorceress perhaps is suggested by the presence of other words in Old English describing
more specific kinds of magical craft. In the Laws of &AElig;lfred (c.890), witchcraft was
specifically singled out as a woman's craft, whose practitioners were not to be suffered to live
among the West Saxons:    &ETH;a f&aelig;mnan &thorn;e gewunia&eth; onfon gealdorcr&aelig;ftigan
&amp; scinl&aelig;can &amp; wiccan, ne l&aelig;t &thorn;u &eth;a libban.    The other two words
combined with it here are gealdricge, a woman who practices incantations, and scinl&aelig;ce female
wizard, woman magician, from a root meaning phantom, evil spirit. Another word that appears in the
Anglo-Saxon laws is lybl&aelig;ca wizard, sorcerer, but with suggestions of skill in the use of
drugs, because the root of the word is lybb drug, poison, charm. Lybbestre was a fem. word meaning
sorceress, and lybcorn was the name of a certain medicinal seed (perhaps wild saffron). Weekley
notes possible connection to Gothic weihs holy and German weihan consecrate, and writes, the priests
of a suppressed religion naturally become magicians to its successors or opponents. In Anglo-Saxon
glossaries, wicca renders Latin augur (c.1100), and wicce stands for pythoness, divinatricem. In the
Three Kings of Cologne (c.1400) wicca translates Magi:    &THORN;e paynyms ... cleped &thorn;e iij
kyngis Magos, &thorn;at is to seye wicchis.    The glossary translates Latin necromantia (demonum
invocatio) with galdre, wiccecr&aelig;ft. The Anglo-Saxon poem called Men's Crafts has
wiccr&aelig;ft, which appears to be the same word, and by its context means skill with horses. In a
c.1250 translation of Exodus, witches is used of the Egyptian midwives who save the newborn sons of
the Hebrews: &ETH;e wicches hidden hem for-&eth;an, Biforen pharaun nolden he ben. Witch in
reference to a man survived in dialect into 20c., but the fem. form was so dominant by 1601 that
men-witches or he-witch began to be used. Extended sense of old, ugly, and crabbed or malignant
woman is from early 15c; that of young woman or girl of bewitching aspect or manners is first
recorded 1740. Witch doctor is from 1718; applied to African magicians from 1836.    At this day it
is indifferent to say in the English tongue, 'she is a witch,' or 'she is a wise woman.' [Reginald
Scot, The Discoverie of Witchcraft, 1584]


