document (v.)

1640s, to teach; see document (n.). Meaning to support by documentary evidence is from 1711.
Related: Documented; documenting.


documentation (n.)

1754, admonition, from Medieval Latin documentationem (nominative documentio) admonition (see
document). Meaning furnishing with documents or papers is from 1884, probably from document. Meaning
collection of informational papers is from 1927.


document (n.)

early 15c., teaching, instruction, from Old French document (13c.) lesson, written evidence, from
Latin documentum example, proof, lesson, in Medieval Latin official written instrument, from docere
to show, teach (see doctor (n.)). Meaning something written that provides proof or evidence is from
early 18c. Related: Documents.


documentary (adj.)

c.1810, pertaining to documents, from document + -ary. Meaning factual, meant to provide a record of
something is from 1926, from French film documentarie (1924). The noun (short for documentary film)
is attested from 1935. Docudrama is a 1961 coinage.


charter (n.)

c.1200, from Old French chartre (12c.) charter, letter, document, covenant, from Latin chartula,
literally little paper, diminutive of charta, carta paper, document (see chart (n.)).


instrument (n.)

late 13c., musical instrument, from Old French instrument means, device; musical instrument (14c.,
earlier estrument, 13c.) and directly from Latin instrumentem a tool, apparatus, furniture, dress,
document, from instruere arrange, furnish (see instruct). Meaning tool, implement, utensil is early
14c. in English; meaning written document by which formal expression is given to a legal act is from
early 15c.


caption (n.)

late 14c., taking, seizure, from Old French capcion arrest, capture, imprisonment, or directly from
Latin captionem (nominative capito) a catching, seizing, holding, taking, noun of action from past
participle stem of capere to take (see capable).    From 17c. used especially in law, and there via
its appearance at the head of legal document involving seizure (Certificate of caption, etc.), the
word's sense was extended to the beginning of any document; thus heading of a chapter or section of
an article (1789), and, especially in U.S., description or title below an illustration (1919).


book (n.)

Old English boc book, writing, written document, traditionally from Proto-Germanic *bokiz beech
(cognates: German Buch book Buche beech; see beech), the notion being of beechwood tablets on which
runes were inscribed, but it may be from the tree itself (people still carve initials in them). The
Old English word originally meant any written document. Latin and Sanskrit also have words for
writing that are based on tree names (birch and ash, respectively). Meaning libretto of an opera is
from 1768. A betting book is from 1856.


placard (n.)

late 15c., formal document authenticated by an affixed seal, from Middle French placquard official
document with a large, flat seal, also plate of armor, from Old French plaquier to lay on, cover up,
plaster over, from Middle Dutch placken to patch (a garment), to plaster, related to Middle High
German placke patch, stain, German Placken spot, patch. Meaning poster first recorded 1550s in
English; this sense is in Middle French from 15c.


manuscript (n.)

document or book written by hand, 1590s (adj.), c.1600 (n.), from Medieval Latin manuscriptum
document written by hand, from Latin manu scriptus written by hand, from manu, ablative of manus
hand (see manual (adj.)) + scriptus (neuter scriptum), past participle of scribere to write (see
script (n.)). Abbreviation is MS, plural MSS.


pdf

by 1992, initialism (acronym) for portable document format, a generic term.


abstract (n.)

abridgement or summary of a document, mid-15c., from abstract (adj.). The general sense of a smaller
quantity containing the virtue or power of a greater [Johnson] is recorded from 1560s.


billet (n.2)

document, note; see billet-doux.


protocol (n.)

1540s, as prothogall draft of a document, from Middle French prothocole (c.1200, Modern French
protocole), from Medieval Latin protocollum draft, literally the first sheet of a volume (on which
contents and errata were written), from Greek protokollon first sheet glued onto a manuscript, from
protos first (see proto-) + kolla glue.    Sense developed in Medieval Latin and French from
official account to official record of a transaction, to diplomatic document, and finally, in
French, to formula of diplomatic etiquette. Meaning diplomatic rules of etiquette in English first
recorded 1896, from French; general sense of conventional proper conduct is from 1952. Protocols of
the (Learned) Elders of Zion, Russian anti-Semitic forgery purporting to reveal Jewish plan for
world domination, first published in English 1920 under title The Jewish Peril.


statement (n.)

1775, what is stated, from state (v.) + -ment. From 1789 as action of stating; 1885 in the
commercial sense document displaying debits and credits.


voucher (n.)

1520s, originally summoning of a person into court to warrant the title to a property, a calling to
vouch; see vouch. Meaning receipt from a business transaction is first attested 1690s; sense of
document which can be exchanged for goods or services is attested from 1947.


undocumented (adj.)

1883, from un- (1) not + past participle of document (v.).


spell-check (v.)

to use a computer's spell checker application on a document, by 1985. The applications themselves
date to the late 1970s. Related: Spell-checked; spell-checking.


transcript (n.)

written copy of a document, c.1300, from Medieval Latin transcriptum, neuter past participle of
Latin transcribere (see transcribe).


rider (n.)

one who rides, Old English ridere rider, trooper, knight, mounted warrior, agent noun from ride
(v.). Meaning clause tacked on to a document after first draft is from 1660s. Related: Riderless.


indictment (n.)

c.1300, endytement action of accusing, from Anglo-French enditement, from enditer (see indict).
Meaning legal document containing a charge is from c.1500. Latin spelling restored 17c.


conveyance (n.)

mid-15c., act of conveying, from convey + -ance. Meaning document by which something is legally
conveyed is from 1570s; sense means of transportation is attested from 1590s. Related: Conveyanced;
conveyancing.


certificate (n.)

early 15c., action of certifying, from French certificat, from Medieval Latin certificatum thing
certified, noun use of neuter past participle of certificare (see certify). Of documents, from mid-
15c., especially a document which attests to someone's authorization to practice or do something
(1540s).


witness (v.)

c.1300, bear testimony, from witness (n.). Meaning affix one's signature to (a document) to
establish its identity is from early 14c. Meaning see or know by personal presence, observe is from
1580s. Related: Witnessed; witnessing.


passbook (n.)

also pass-book, 1828, from pass (v.) + book (n.); apparently the notion is of the document passing
between bank and customer.


interline (v.)

c.1400, make corrections or insertions between the lines of (a document), from inter- + line;
perhaps modeled on Medieval Latin interlineare. Related: Interlined; interlining.


contents (n.)

things contained in something (the stomach, a document, etc.), early 15c., Latin contentum (plural
contenta), neuter past participle of continere (see contain). Table of contents is late 15c.


chirography (n.)

handwriting, 1650s, from chiro- + -graphy. Chirograph formal written legal document is attested from
late 13c. in Anglo-French, from Latin chirographum, from Greek kheirographia written testimony.


exhibit (n.)

1620s, document or object produced as evidence in court, from Latin exhibitum, neuter past
participle of exhibere (see exhibition). Meaning object displayed in a fair, museum, etc. is from
1862. Transferred use of exhibit A important piece of evidence is by 1906.


date (v.1)

to mark (a document) with the date, late 14c., from date (n.1). Meaning to assign to or indicate a
date (of an event) is from c.1400. Meaning to mark as old-fashioned is from 1895. Related: Dated;
dating.


enclose (v.)

early 14c., from en- (1) + close, and partially from Old French enclos, past participle of enclore.
Specific sense of to fence in waste or common ground for the purpose of cultivation or to give it to
private owners, is from c.1500. Meaning place a document with a letter for transmission is from
1707. Related: Enclosed; enclosing.


indenture (n.)

contract for services, late 14c., from Anglo-French endenture, Old French endenteure indentation,
from endenter (see indent). Such contracts (especially between master craftsmen and apprentices)
were written in full identical versions on a sheet of parchment, which was then cut apart in a
zigzag, or notched line. Each party took one, and the genuineness of a document of indenture could
be proved by juxtaposition with its counterpart. As a verb, 1650s, from the noun.


antedate (v.)

1580s, earlier as noun meaning a backdating, false early date attached to a document or event
(1570s); from Latin ante before (see ante) + date (v.1). Related: Antedated; antedating.


counterpart (n.)

mid-15c., originally countre part duplicate of a legal document, from Middle French contrepartie,
from contre facing, opposite (see contra-) + partie copy of a person or thing, originally fem. past
participle of partir to divide (see party (n.)).


subscription (n.)

c.1400, piece of writing at the end of a document, from Middle French subscription (Modern French
souscription) and directly from Latin subscriptionem (nominative subscriptio) anything written
underneath, a signature, noun of action from past participle stem of subscribere (see subscribe).
Meaning act of subscribing money is from 1640s.


blank (n.)

late 14c. as the name of a small French coin; 1550s as white space in the center of a target, from
the same source as blank (adj.). Meaning empty space (in a document, etc.) is from c.1570. Meaning
losing lottery ticket (1560s) is behind the expression draw a blank. The word has been for decorum's
sake, substituted for a word of execration [OED] from 1854. From 1896 as short for blank cartridge
(itself from 1826).


identification (n.)

1640s, treating of a thing as the same as another, from French identification, probably from
identifier (see identify). Sense of becoming or feeling oneself one with another is from 1857. Sense
of determination of identity is from 1859. Meaning object or document which marks identity is from
1947 (short for identification tag, card, etc.).


appendix (n.)

1540s, subjoined addition to a document or book, from Latin appendix an addition, continuation,
something attached, from appendere (see append). Used for small outgrowth of an internal organ from
1610s, especially in reference to the vermiform appendix. This sense perhaps from or influenced by
French appendix, where the term was in use from 1540s.


declaration (n.)

mid-14c., action of stating, from Old French declaration, from Latin declarationem (nominative
declaratio), noun of action from past participle stem of declarare (see declare). Meaning
proclamation, public statement is from 1650s. Declaration of independence is recorded from 1776 (the
one by the British American colonies seems to be the first so called; though the phrase is not in
the document itself, it was titled that from the first in the press).


holograph (n.)

document written entirely by the person from whom it proceeds, 1620s, from Late Latin holographus,
from Greek holographos written entirely by the same hand, literally written in full, from holos
whole (see safe (adj.)) + graphos written, from graphein to write (see -graphy). Modern use, with
reference to holograms, is a 1960s back-formation from holography.


diploma (n.)

1640s, state paper, official document, from Latin diploma, from Greek diploma license, chart,
originally paper folded double, from diploun to double, fold over, from diploos double (see diploid)
+ -oma. Specific academic sense is 1680s in English.


form (n.)

early 13c., from Old French forme physical form, appearance, pleasing looks; shape, image, from
Latin forma form, contour, figure, shape; appearance, looks' model, pattern, design; sort, kind
condition, origin unknown. One theory holds that it is from Greek morphe form, beauty, outward
appearance (see Morpheus) via Etruscan [Klein]. Sense of behavior is first recorded late 14c.
Meaning a document with blanks to be filled in is from 1855.


bulletin (n.)

1765, from French bulletin (16c.), modeled on Italian bulletino, diminutive of bulletta document,
voting slip, itself a diminutive of Latin bulla (see bull (n.2)). The word was used earlier in
English in the Italian form (mid-17c.). Popularized by their use in the Napoleonic Wars as the name
for dispatches sent from the front and meant for the home public (which led to the proverbial
expression as false as a bulletin). Bulletin board is from 1831.


instruction (n.)

c.1400, instruccioun, action or process of teaching, from Old French instruccion (14c.), from Latin
instructionem (nominative instructio) building, arrangement, teaching, from past participle stem of
instruere arrange, inform, teach, from in- on (see in- (2)) + struere to pile, build (see structure
(n.)). Meaning an authoritative direction telling someone what to do; a document giving such
directions, is early 15c. Related: Instructions.


bill (n.1)

written statement, mid-14c., from Anglo-French bille, Anglo-Latin billa list, from Medieval Latin
bulla decree, seal, sealed document, in classical Latin bubble, boss, stud, amulet for the neck
(hence seal; see bull (n.2)). Sense of account, invoice first recorded c.1400; that of order to pay
(technically bill of exchange) is from 1570s; that of paper money is from 1660s. Meaning draft of an
act of Parliament is from 1510s.


seal (v.)

to fasten with (or as with) a seal, c.1200, from seal (n.1). Meaning to place a seal on (a document)
is recorded from mid-14c.; hence to conclude, ratify, render official (late 15c.). Sense of to close
up with wax, lead, cement, etc. is attested from 1660s, from the notion of wax seals on envelopes.
In reference to the actions of wood-coatings, 1940. Related: Sealed; sealing. Sealing-wax is
attested from c.1300. To seal (one's) fate (1799) probably reflects the notion of a seal on an
execution warrant.


cachet (n.)

1630s, Scottish borrowing of French cachet seal affixed to a letter or document (16c.), from Old
French dialectal cacher to press, crowd, from Latin coactare constrain (see cache). Meaning evolving
through (letter under) personal stamp (of the king) to prestige. Compare French lettre de cachet
letter under seal of the king.


inhibition (n.)

late 14c., formal prohibition; interdiction of legal proceedings by authority; also, the document
setting forth such a prohibition, from Old French inibicion and directly from Latin inhibitionem
(nominative inhibitio) a restraining, from past participle stem of inhibere to hold in, hold back,
keep back, from in- in, on (see in- (2)) + habere to hold (see habit (n.)). Psychological sense of
involuntary check on an expression of an impulse is from 1876.


bull (n.2)

papal edict, c.1300, from Medieval Latin bulla sealed document (source of Old French bulle, Italian
bulla), originally the word for the seal itself, from Latin bulla round swelling, knob, said
ultimately to be from Gaulish, from PIE *beu-, a root supposed to have formed words associated with
swelling (cognates: Lithuanian bule buttocks, Middle Dutch puyl bag, also possibly Latin bucca
cheek).


subscribe (v.)

early 15c., to sign at the bottom of a document, from Latin subscribere write, write underneath,
sign one's name; register, also figuratively assent, agree to, approve, from sub underneath (see
sub-) + scribere write (see script (n.)). The meaning give one's consent (by subscribing one's name)
first recorded mid-15c.; that of contribute money to 1630s; and that of become a regular buyer of a
publication 1711, all originally literal. Related: Subscribed; subscribing.


