dominant (adj.)

mid-15c., from Middle French dominant (13c.), from Latin dominantem (nominative dominans), present
participle of dominari (see domination). Music sense is from 1819. Sexual bondage sense by c.1960.
The noun is first recorded 1819, earliest in the musical sense.


mistral (n.)

cold northerly wind on the Mediterranean coast of France, c.1600, from French, from Proven&ccedil;al
mistral, literally the dominant wind, from mistral (adj.) dominant, from Latin magistralis dominant,
from magister master (see master (n.)).


subdominant (n.)

also sub-dominant, 1793, in music, from sub- + dominant (n.).


codominant (adj.)

also co-dominant, 1926, from co- + dominant.


AOL

dominant online service of the late 1990s, initialism (acronym) of America Online, company name from
late 1989.


unbeknownst (adj.)

1833, vulgar formation from unbeknown (1630s). No clear reason for the -st, but since 19c. this has
become the dominant form.


magnetosphere (n.)

1959, from magneto- + sphere. So called because in it the magnetic field of the earth plays a
dominant role in the motion of particles.


Republicrat (n.)

in U.S. political jargon, usually meaning moderate; independent, 1881, from elements of the names of
the two dominant parties; see from republican (n.) and democrat (n.).


Reims

city in northeastern France, named for the Remi, a Gaulish people whose name is said to mean
dominant ones. The former French spelling was with an Rh-.


Gurkha

1811, member of a dominant race of Nepal, of Hindu descent, famous as warriors. Said to be
ultimately from Sanskrit gauh cow + raksati he protects.


commanding (adj.)

late 15c. (in astronomy), present participle adjective from command (v.). Meaning nobly dignified is
from 1590s. Meaning dominant by virtue of size or position is from 1630s. Related: Commandingly
(mid-15c.).


black letter

early 17c., from black (adj.); so called to distinguish heavy, old-style printers' types from the
ones coming into use then, which are the dominant modern forms, though a style of black letter was
preserved in German into 20c.


motif (n.)

theme, predominant feature, 1848, from French motif dominant idea, theme (see motive).


dominance (n.)

1819; see dominant + -ance. Related: Dominancy.


dominatrix (n.)

dominant female entity, attested since 1560s, though not in quite the usual modern sense (Rome ...
dominatrix of nations [1561]). See domination + -trix. Modern BDSM sense attested by 1976.


anew (adv.)

c.1300, a neue, from Old English of-niowe; see a- (1) + new. One-word form dominant from c.1400.


underdog (n.)

the beaten dog in a fight, 1887, from under + dog (n.). Compare top dog dominant person in a
situation or hierarchy (see top (adj.)).    I'm a poor underdog  But tonight I will bark  With the
great Overdog  That romps through the dark.   [from Canis Major, Robert Frost, 1928]


mediant (n.)

third note of the diatonic scale, 1753, from Italian mediante, from Late Latin mediantem (nominative
medians) dividing in the middle, present participle of mediare to be in the middle (see medial
(adj.)). So called from being midway between the tonic and the dominant.


principal (adj.)

c.1300, main, principal, chief, dominant, most important; also great, large, from Old French
principal main, most important, of persons, princely, high-ranking (11c.), from Latin principalis
first in importance; original, primitive, from princeps (see prince).


glam (adj.)

slang shortening of glamorous, first attested 1936. Glam rock attested by 1974. Glamazon glamourous,
dominant woman attested by 1985 (see amazon).


Christendom (n.)

Old English cristendom Christianity, state of being a Christian, from cristen (see Christian) +
-dom, suffix of condition or quality. The native formation, crowded out by Latinate Christianity
except for sense lands where Christianity is the dominant religion (late 14c.). Similar formations
in Scandinavian languages.


balls (n.)

testicles, early 14c., from plural of ball (n.1). See also ballocks. Meaning courage, nerve is from
1928. Balls to the wall, however, probably is from World War II Air Forces slang, from the ball that
topped the aircraft throttle, thrust to the bulkhead of the cockpit to attain full speed. Ball-
busting difficult is first recorded 1944; ball-buster, disparaging for dominant female, is from
1974.


underground (adv.)

1570s, below the surface, from under + ground (n.). As an adjective, attested from c.1600;
figurative sense of hidden, secret is attested from 1630s; adjectival meaning subculture is from
1953, from adjectival use in reference to World War II resistance movements against German
occupation, on analogy of the dominant culture and the Nazis. Noun sense of underground railway is
from 1887 (shortened from phrase underground railway, itself attested from 1834).


predominant (adj.)

1570s, from Middle French pr&eacute;dominant (14c.), from Medieval Latin *praedominantem (nominative
praedominans), present participle of *praedominare, from Latin prae- before (see pre-) + dominari to
rule (see dominate). Related: Predominantly.


pants (n.)

trousers, 1840, see pantaloons. Colloquial singular pant is attested from 1893. To wear the pants be
the dominant member of a household is first attested 1931. To do something by the seat of (one's)
pants by human instinct is from 1942, originally of pilots, perhaps with some notion of being able
to sense the condition and situation of the plane by engine vibrations, etc. To be caught with
(one's) pants down discovered in an embarrassing condition is from 1932.


ascendant (adj.)

late 14c., ascendent, astrological use is earliest, from Middle French ascendant (noun and
adjective) and directly from Latin ascendentem (nominative ascendans), present participle of
ascendere to mount, ascend, go up (see ascend). Sense moving upward, rising is recorded from 1590s.
In the ascendant ruling, dominant (not, as is often thought, rising) is from 1670s.


exorcise (v.)

c.1400, to invoke spirits, from Old French exorciser (14c.), from Late Latin exorcizare, from Greek
exorkizein banish an evil spirit; bind by oath (see exorcism). Sense of calling up evil spirits to
drive them out became dominant 16c. A rare case where -ise trumps -ize on both sides of the
Atlantic, perhaps by influence of exercise. Related: Exorcised; exorcising.


sage (n.1)

kind of herb (Salvia officinalis), early 14c., from Old French sauge (13c.), from Latin salvia, from
salvus healthy (see safe (adj.)). So called for its healing or preserving qualities (it was used to
keep teeth clean and relieve sore gums, and boiled in water to make a drink to alleviate arthritis).
In English folklore, sage, like parsley, is said to grow best where the wife is dominant. In late
Old English as salvie, directly from Latin. Compare German Salbei, also from Latin.


qwerty

1929, from the first six keys on a standard typewriter keyboard, read as though text, from top left.
Mechanical typewriter patented 1867; the QWERTY layout itself is said to date to 1887, dominant in
U.S. from early 20c.; it is not meant to slow down typists, but to separate the letters in common
digraphs (-sh-, -ck-, etc.) to reduce jamming of swing-arms in old-style machines. It actually
speeds typing by requiring alternate-hand strokes, which is one reason the alternative DVORAK
keyboard is not appreciably faster. Remnants of the original alphabetic typewriter keyboard remain
in the second row of letter keys: FGH-JKL. The French standard was AZERTY; in Germany, QWERTZ; in
Italy, QZERTY.


regency (n.)

early 15c., government by regents, from Medieval Latin regentia, from Latin regens (see regent).
Notable instances were: France 1715-1723 (under Philip, Duke of Orleans), Britain 1811-1820 (under
George, Prince of Wales, Prince Regent), in each case with suggestion of debauchery [Weekley]. In
reference to the style of that time, attested from 1880 (there is an unexplained use in Jane Austen
from 1793). Compare French equivalent R&eacute;gence, attested in English from 1919. U.S. Albany
Regency refers to dominant political faction in New York state c.1820-1850.


-ize

word-forming element used to make verbs, Middle English -isen, from Old French -iser, from Late
Latin -izare, from Greek -izein.    English picked up the French form, but partially reverted to the
correct Greek -z- spelling from late 16c. In Britain, despite the opposition (at least formerly) of
OED, Encyclopaedia Britannica, the Times of London, and Fowler, -ise remains dominant. Fowler thinks
this is to avoid the difficulty of remembering the short list of common words not from Greek which
must be spelled with an -s- (such as advertise, devise, surprise).


obscene (adj.)

1590s, offensive to the senses, or to taste and refinement, from Middle French obsc&#232;ne (16c.),
from Latin obscenus offensive, especially to modesty, originally boding ill, inauspicious, of
unknown origin; perhaps from ob onto (see ob-) + caenum filth. Meaning offensive to modesty or
decency is attested from 1590s. Legally, in U.S., it hinged on whether to the average person,
applying contemporary community standards, the dominant theme of the material taken as a whole
appeals to a prurient interest. [Justice William Brennan, Roth v. United States, June 24, 1957];
refined in 1973 by Miller v. California:    The basic guidelines for the trier of fact must be: (a)
whether 'the average person, applying contemporary community standards' would find that the work,
taken as a whole, appeals to the prurient interest, (b) whether the work depicts or describes, in a
patently offensive way, sexual conduct specifically defined by the applicable state law; and (c)
whether the work, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific
value.    Related: Obscenely.


capital (adj.)

early 13c., of or pertaining to the head, from Old French capital, from Latin capitalis of the head,
hence capital, chief, first, from caput (genitive capitis) head (see capitulum). Meaning main,
principal, chief, dominant, most important is from early 15c. in English. Capital letter for an
upper case one is attested from late 14c. The modern informal sense of excellent, first-rate is
dated from 1762 in OED (as an exclamation of approval, OED's first example is 1875), perhaps from
earlier use of the word in reference to ships, first-rate, of the line, attested from 1650s.     A
capital crime (1520s) is one that affects the life or head; capital had a sense of deadly, mortal
from late 14c. in English, a sense also found in Latin. The felt connection between head and life,
mortality also existed in Old English: as in heafodgilt deadly sin, capital offense, heafdes
&thorn;olian to forfeit life. Capital punishment was in Blackstone (1765) and classical Latin
capitis poena. Capital gain is recorded from 1921. Capital goods is recorded from 1899. Related:
Capitally.


king (n.)

Old English cyning king, ruler, from Proto-Germanic *kuninggaz (cognates: Dutch koning, Old Norse
konungr, Danish konge, Old Saxon and Old High German kuning, Middle High German k&uuml;nic, German
K&ouml;nig). Possibly related to Old English cynn family, race (see kin), making a king originally a
leader of the people; or from a related root suggesting noble birth, making a king originally one
who descended from noble birth. The sociological and ideological implications render this a topic of
much debate.    Finnish kuningas king, Old Church Slavonic kunegu prince (Russian knyaz, Bohemian
knez), Lithuanian kunigas clergyman are loans from Germanic.  As leon is the king of bestes. [John
Gower, Confessio Amantis, 1390]  In Old English, used for names of chiefs of Anglian and Saxon
tribes or clans, then of the states they founded. Also extended to British and Danish chiefs they
fought. The chess piece so called from early 15c.; the playing card from 1560s; use in
checkers/draughts first recorded 1820. Applied in nature to species deemed remarkably big or
dominant (such as king crab, 1690s). In marketing, king-size is from 1939, originally of cigarettes.
[I]t was [Eugene] Field who haunted the declining years of Creston Clarke with his review of that
actor's Lear. ... Said he, Mr. Clarke played the King all the evening as though under constant fear
that someone else was about to play the Ace. [Theatre Magazine, January 1922]


witch (n.)

Old English wicce female magician, sorceress, in later use especially a woman supposed to have
dealings with the devil or evil spirits and to be able by their cooperation to perform supernatural
acts, fem. of Old English wicca sorcerer, wizard, man who practices witchcraft or magic, from verb
wiccian to practice witchcraft (compare Low German wikken, wicken to use witchcraft, wikker, wicker
soothsayer).    OED says of uncertain origin; Liberman says None of the proposed etymologies of
witch is free from phonetic or semantic difficulties. Klein suggests connection with Old English
wigle divination, and wig, wih idol. Watkins says the nouns represent a Proto-Germanic *wikkjaz
necromancer (one who wakes the dead), from PIE *weg-yo-, from *weg- (2) to be strong, be lively (see
wake (v.)).    That wicce once had a more specific sense than the later general one of female
magician, sorceress perhaps is suggested by the presence of other words in Old English describing
more specific kinds of magical craft. In the Laws of &AElig;lfred (c.890), witchcraft was
specifically singled out as a woman's craft, whose practitioners were not to be suffered to live
among the West Saxons:    &ETH;a f&aelig;mnan &thorn;e gewunia&eth; onfon gealdorcr&aelig;ftigan
&amp; scinl&aelig;can &amp; wiccan, ne l&aelig;t &thorn;u &eth;a libban.    The other two words
combined with it here are gealdricge, a woman who practices incantations, and scinl&aelig;ce female
wizard, woman magician, from a root meaning phantom, evil spirit. Another word that appears in the
Anglo-Saxon laws is lybl&aelig;ca wizard, sorcerer, but with suggestions of skill in the use of
drugs, because the root of the word is lybb drug, poison, charm. Lybbestre was a fem. word meaning
sorceress, and lybcorn was the name of a certain medicinal seed (perhaps wild saffron). Weekley
notes possible connection to Gothic weihs holy and German weihan consecrate, and writes, the priests
of a suppressed religion naturally become magicians to its successors or opponents. In Anglo-Saxon
glossaries, wicca renders Latin augur (c.1100), and wicce stands for pythoness, divinatricem. In the
Three Kings of Cologne (c.1400) wicca translates Magi:    &THORN;e paynyms ... cleped &thorn;e iij
kyngis Magos, &thorn;at is to seye wicchis.    The glossary translates Latin necromantia (demonum
invocatio) with galdre, wiccecr&aelig;ft. The Anglo-Saxon poem called Men's Crafts has
wiccr&aelig;ft, which appears to be the same word, and by its context means skill with horses. In a
c.1250 translation of Exodus, witches is used of the Egyptian midwives who save the newborn sons of
the Hebrews: &ETH;e wicches hidden hem for-&eth;an, Biforen pharaun nolden he ben. Witch in
reference to a man survived in dialect into 20c., but the fem. form was so dominant by 1601 that
men-witches or he-witch began to be used. Extended sense of old, ugly, and crabbed or malignant
woman is from early 15c; that of young woman or girl of bewitching aspect or manners is first
recorded 1740. Witch doctor is from 1718; applied to African magicians from 1836.    At this day it
is indifferent to say in the English tongue, 'she is a witch,' or 'she is a wise woman.' [Reginald
Scot, The Discoverie of Witchcraft, 1584]


