dominate (v.)

1610s, from Latin dominatus, past participle of dominari to rule, dominate, to govern, from dominus
(see domain). Related: Dominated; dominating. Or perhaps a back-formation from domination.


surround (v.)

early 15c., to flood, overflow, from Anglo-French surounder, Middle French soronder to overflow,
abound; surpass, dominate, from Late Latin superundare overflow, from Latin super over (see super-)
+ undare to flow in waves, from unda wave (see water (n.1); and compare abound). Sense of to shut in
on all sides first recorded 1610s, influenced by figurative meaning in French of dominate, and by
sound association with round, which also influenced the spelling of the English word from 17c.
Related: Surrounded; surrounding.


bridle (v.)

to control, dominate, c.1200, from Old English bridlian to fit with a bridle, from bridel (see
bridle (n.)). Meaning to throw up the head (as a horse does when reined in) is from mid-15c.
Related: Bridled; bridling.


rule (v.)

c.1200, to control, guide, direct, from Old French riuler impose rule, from Latin regulare (see
regulate). Legal sense establish by decision is recorded from early 15c. Meaning mark with lines is
from 1590s. Meaning to dominate, prevail is from 1874. Rule Brittania, patriotic song, is from 1740.
Related: Ruled; ruling.


predominant (adj.)

1570s, from Middle French pr&eacute;dominant (14c.), from Medieval Latin *praedominantem (nominative
praedominans), present participle of *praedominare, from Latin prae- before (see pre-) + dominari to
rule (see dominate). Related: Predominantly.


chastise (v.)

c.1300, chastisen, from Old French chastiier to warn, advise, instruct; chastise, admonish; punish;
dominate, tame (12c., Modern French ch&acirc;tier), from Latin castigare to set or keep right, to
reprove, chasten, to punish, literally to make pure (see castigate). Or perhaps from Middle English
chastien (see chasten) + -ise, though this would be early for such a native formation. The form of
the modern word is not easily accounted for [OED]. Related: Chastised; chastising.  He alone may
chastise who loves. [Rabindranath Tagore, The Crescent Moon, 1913]


control (v.)

early 14c., to check, verify, regulate, from Anglo-French contreroller exert authority, from
Medieval Latin contrarotulus a counter, register, from Latin contra- against (see contra) + rotulus,
diminutive of rota wheel (see roll (n.)). From a medieval method of checking accounts by a duplicate
register. Sense of dominate, direct is mid-15c. Related: Controlled; controlling.   Control group in
scientific experiments is attested from 1952 (from a sense of control attested since 1875).


dogfish (n.)

a name for various types of small shark, late 15c., dokefyche, from dog (n.) + fish (n.). Said to be
so called because they hunt in packs. This was the image of sharks in classical antiquity as well.
But in the Mediterranean, among the Greeks and Romans of antiquity, closer contact with sharks had
left an impression of vicious dogs of the sea. Thus, Pliny's canis marinus. The metaphor of the dog
spread to the North to dominate the European image of the shark, from the Italian pescecane and
French chien de mer to the German Meerhund and Hundfisch and English sea dog and dogfish. [Tom
Jones, The Xoc, the Sharke and the Sea Dogs, in Fifth Palenque Round Table, 1983, edited by Virginia
M. Field, 1985.]


ride (v.)

Old English ridan sit or be carried on (as on horseback), move forward; rock; float, sail (class I
strong verb; past tense rad, past participle riden), from Proto-Germanic *ridan (cognates: Old Norse
ri&eth;a, Old Saxon ridan, Old Frisian rida to ride, Middle Dutch riden, Dutch rijden, Old High
Germn ritan, German reiten), from PIE *reidh- to ride (cognates: Old Irish riadaim I travel, Old
Gaulish reda chariot). Common to Celtic and Germanic, perhaps a loan word from one to the other.
Meaning heckle is from 1912; that of have sex with (a woman) is from mid-13c.; that of dominate
cruelly is from 1580s. To ride out endure (a storm, etc.) without great damage is from 1520s. To
ride shotgun is 1963, from custom of having an armed man beside the driver on the stagecoach in Old
West movies to ward off trouble. To ride shank's mare walk is from 1846 (see shank (n.)).


gay (adj.)

late 14c., full of joy, merry; light-hearted, carefree; also wanton, lewd, lascivious (late 12c. as
a surname, Philippus de Gay), from Old French gai joyful, happy; pleasant, agreeably charming;
forward, pert (12c.; compare Old Spanish gayo, Portuguese gaio, Italian gajo, probably French loan-
words). Ultimate origin disputed; perhaps from Frankish *gahi (related to Old High German wahi
pretty), though not all etymologists accept this. Meaning stately and beautiful; splendid and
showily dressed is from early 14c. The word gay by the 1890s had an overall tinge of promiscuity --
a gay house was a brothel. The suggestion of immorality in the word can be traced back at least to
the 1630s, if not to Chaucer:    But in oure bed he was so fressh and gay  Whan that he wolde han my
bele chose.    Slang meaning homosexual (adj.) begins to appear in psychological writing late 1940s,
evidently picked up from gay slang and not always easily distinguished from the older sense:
After discharge A.Z. lived for some time at home. He was not happy at the farm and went to a Western
city where he associated with a homosexual crowd, being gay, and wearing female clothes and makeup.
He always wished others would make advances to him. [Rorschach Research Exchange and Journal of
Projective Techniques, 1947, p.240]    The association with (male) homosexuality likely got a boost
from the term gay cat, used as far back as 1893 in American English for young hobo, one who is new
on the road, also one who sometimes does jobs.    A Gay Cat, said he, is a loafing laborer, who
works maybe a week, gets his wages and vagabonds about hunting for another 'pick and shovel' job. Do
you want to know where they got their monica (nickname) 'Gay Cat'? See, Kid, cats sneak about and
scratch immediately after chumming with you and then get gay (fresh). That's why we call them 'Gay
Cats'. [Leon Ray Livingston (America's Most Celebrated Tramp), Life and Adventures of A-no. 1, 1910]
Quoting a tramp named Frenchy, who might not have known the origin. Gay cats were severely and
cruelly abused by real tramps and bums, who considered them an inferior order of beings who begs of
and otherwise preys upon the bum -- as it were a jackal following up the king of beasts [Prof. John
J. McCook, Tramps, in The Public Treatment of Pauperism, 1893], but some accounts report certain
older tramps would dominate a gay cat and employ him as a sort of slave. In Sociology and Social
Research (1932-33) a paragraph on the gay cat phenomenon notes, Homosexual practices are more common
than rare in this group, and gey cat homosexual boy is attested in N. Erskine's 1933 dictionary of
Underworld &amp; Prison Slang (gey is a Scottish variant of gay).    The Dictionary of American
Slang reports that gay (adj.) was used by homosexuals, among themselves, in this sense since at
least 1920. Rawson [Wicked Words] notes a male prostitute using gay in reference to male homosexuals
(but also to female prostitutes) in London's notorious Cleveland Street Scandal of 1889. Ayto [20th
Century Words] calls attention to the ambiguous use of the word in the 1868 song The Gay Young Clerk
in the Dry Goods Store, by U.S. female impersonator Will S. Hays, but the word evidently was not
popularly felt in this sense by wider society until the 1950s at the earliest.    Gay (or gai) is
now widely used in French, Dutch, Danish, Japanese, Swedish, and Catalan with the same sense as the
English. It is coming into use in Germany and among the English-speaking upper classes of many
cosmopolitan areas in other countries. [John Boswell, Christianity, Social Tolerance, and
Homosexuality, 1980]   Gay as a noun meaning a (usually male) homosexual is attested from 1971; in
Middle English it meant excellent person, noble lady, gallant knight, also something gay or bright;
an ornament or badge (c.1400). As a slang word meaning bad, inferior, undesirable, from 2000.


