don (n.)

1520s, from Spanish or Portuguese don, title of respect, from Latin dominus lord, master. The
university sense is c.1660, originally student slang; underworld sense is 1952, from Italian don,
from Late Latin domnus, from Latin dominus (see domain). The fem. form is Dona (Spanish/Portuguese),
Donna (Italian).


don (v.)

early 14c. contraction of do on (see doff). After 1650 retained in popular use only in north.
dialect; as a literary archaism it has become very frequent in 19th c. [OED]. Related: Donned;
donning.


don juan (n.)

philanderer, from the legendary dissolute Spanish nobleman whose rakish exploits formed the stuff of
popular tales in Spain from early 17c., dramatized by Gabriel Tellez in Convivado de Piedra. Adapted
into French and Italian before 1700; Used attributively in English for ladies' man, womanizer from
the time of Byron's popular poem about him (1819).


don&#039;t

contraction of do not, recorded from 1630s.


Donald

surname, from 13c. Scottish Dofnald, Dufenald, probably from Gaelic Domhnall, Old Irish Domnall
(pronounced Dovnall), from Proto-Celtic *Dubno-valos world-mighty, ruler of the world, from *walos
ruler + PIE *dheub- (see deep (adj.)).


donate (v.)

1819, back-formation from donation. Related: Donated; donating.


donation (n.)

early 15c., from Old French donacion (13c.), from Latin donationem (nominative donatio) a
presenting, giving, noun of action from past participle stem of donare give as a gift, from donum
gift, from PIE *donum gift (cognates: Sanskrit danam offering, present, Old Church Slavonic dani
tribute, Lithuanian duonis gift, Old Irish dan gift, endowment, talent, Welsh dawn gift), from root
*do- to give (see date (n.1)).


Donatist (n.)

mid-15c., adherent of a Christian sect in 4c. North Africa, from Medieval Latin Donatista, from
Donatus name of two of the principal men in it. The schism had more to do with episcopal succession
in Carthage than with doctrine. The name is literally bestowed, given.


donative (adj.)

1550s, from Latin donativus, from donare (see donation). As a noun, from early 15c.


done

past participle of do (v.); from Old English past participle gedon (a vestige of the prefix is in
ado). U.S. Southern use of done in phrases like he done gone to the store is attested from 1827,
according to OED: a perfective auxiliary or with adverbial force in the sense 'already; completely.'
Meaning finished is early 15c. Slang done for doomed is from 1842.


donee (n.)

1520s; see donor + -ee.


Donegal

county in northern Ireland, from Irish Dun na nGall fort of the foreigners (in this case, the
Danes); also see Galloway.


dong (n.)

penis, 1891, of unknown origin.


donkey (n.)

1785, originally slang, perhaps a diminutive from dun dull gray-brown, the form perhaps influenced
by monkey. Or possibly from a familiar form of Duncan (compare dobbin). The older English word was
ass (n.1).


Donna

fem. proper name, from Italian, literally lady, from Latin domina (see dame).


donnish (adj.)

1835, from don (n.) in the university sense + -ish. Related: Donnishness.


donnybrook (n.)

1852, from Donnybrook Fair, proverbial for carousing and brawling, held in County Dublin until 1855.


donor (n.)

mid-15c., from Anglo-French donour, Old French doneur (Modern French donneur), from Latin donatorem
(nominative donator) giver, donor, agent noun from past participle stem of donare give as a gift
(see donation). Of blood, from 1910; of organs or tissues, from 1918.


Donovan

from Irish Donndubhan dark brown.


donut (n.)

see doughnut. It turns up as an alternate spelling in U.S. as early as 1870 (Josh Billings), common
from c.1920 in names of bakeries. Halliwell (Dictionary of Archaic and Provincial Words, 1847) has
donnut a pancake made of dough instead of batter, which Bartlett (1848) writes is no doubt the same
word as the American one.


Abaddon

late 14c., used in Rev. ix:11 of the angel of the bottomless pit, and by Milton of the pit itself,
from Hebrew Abhaddon destruction, from abhadh he perished. The Greek form was Apollyon.


abandon (v.)

late 14c., to give up, surrender (oneself or something), give over utterly; to yield (oneself)
utterly (to religion, fornication, etc.), from Old French abandoner (12c.), from adverbial phrase
&agrave; bandon at will, at discretion, from &agrave; at, to (see ad-) + bandon power, jurisdiction,
from Latin bannum, proclamation, from a Frankish word related to ban (v.).   Mettre sa forest
&agrave; bandon was a feudal law phrase in the 13th cent. = mettre sa for&ecirc;t &agrave;
permission, i.e. to open it freely to any one for pasture or to cut wood in; hence the later sense
of giving up one's rights for a time, letting go, leaving, abandoning. [Auguste Brachet, An
Etymological Dictionary of the French Language, transl. G.W. Kitchin, Oxford, 1878]
Etymologically, the word carries a sense of put someone under someone else's control. Meaning to
give up absolutely is from late 14c. Related: Abandoned; abandoning.


abandon (n.)

a letting loose, surrender to natural impulses, 1822, from a sense in French abandon (see abandon
(v.). Borrowed earlier (c.1400) from French in a sense (someone's) control; and compare Middle
English adverbial phrase at abandon, i.e. recklessly, attested from late 14c.


abandoned (adj.)

self-devoted to some purpose (usually evil), late 14c., past participle adjective from abandon (v.).


abandonment (n.)

1610s, from French abandonnement, from abandonner (see abandon (v.)).


Achilles tendon

from Modern Latin tendo Achillis, first used by German surgeon Heister and so-called in reference to
the one vulnerable spot of the great Greek hero Achilles, whose mother held him by the heel when she
dipped him in the River Styx to render him invulnerable (though this story is not in Homer and not
found before 1c. C.E.). Earlier Achilles' sinew, from Modern Latin chorda Achillis, coined 1693 by
Dutch anatomist Philip Verheyden when dissecting his own amputated leg. Hence figurative use of heel
of Achillies for vulnerable spot (1810).


Adonai

Old Testament word for God, late 14c., from Medieval Latin, from Hebrew, literally my lord, from
adon (see Adonis) + suffix of 1st person.


Adonis (n.)

a beau, 1620s, from Greek Adonis, name of the youth beloved by Aphrodite, from Phoenician adon lord,
probably originally ruler, from base a-d-n to judge, rule. Adonai is the Hebrew cognate.


aerodonetics (n.)

science of gliding, 1907, from Greek aero- air (see aero-) + stem of donein to shake, drive about.
Also see -ics.


anhedonia (n.)

inability to feel pleasure, 1897, from French anh&eacute;donie, coined 1896 by French psychologist
Theodule Ribot (1839-1916) as an opposite to analgesia, from Greek an-, privative prefix (see an-
(1)), + hedone pleasure (see hedonist).


Armageddon (n.)

a final conflict, 1811, figurative use of name in Rev. xvi:16, place of the great and final
conflict, from Hebrew Har Megiddon Mount of Megiddo, city in central Palestine, site of important
Israeli battles.


belladonna (n.)

1590s, deadly nightshade (Atropa belladonna), from Italian, literally fair lady; the plant so called
supposedly because women made cosmetic eye-drops from its juice (an 18c. explanation; atropic acid,
found in the plant, has a well-known property of dilating the pupils) or because it was used to
poison beautiful women. Perhaps a folk etymology alteration; Gamillscheg suggests ultimately of
Gaulish origin.


Bodoni

1880, typeface based on that used by celebrated Italian printer Giambattista Bodoni (1740-1813) of
Parma. The modern type of this name is a composite of his many forms.


boustrophedon (n.)

1783, ancient form of writing with lines alternately written left-to-right and right-to-left, from
Greek, literally turning as an ox in plowing, from bous ox (see cow (n.)) + strephein to turn (see
strophe).


burdon (n.)

mule born of a horse and a she-ass, late 14c., from Latin burdonem.


Caledonia

Roman name of part of northern Britain, taken from the name of former inhabitants, of unknown
origin, perhaps Celtic; since 18c, applied poetically to Scotland or the Scottish Highlands.
Related: Caledonian.


celadon (n.)

pale grayish-green, 1768, from French C&eacute;ladon, name of a character in the romance of
l'Astr&eacute;e by Honor&eacute; d'Urf&eacute; (1610); an insipidly sentimental lover who wore
bright green clothes, he is named in turn after Greek Keladon, a character in Ovid's Metamorphoses,
whose name is said to mean sounding with din or clamor. The mineral celadonite (1868) is so called
for its color.


chalcedony (n.)

c.1300, from Latin calcedonius, in Vulgate translating Greek khalkedon in Rev. xxi:19, found nowhere
else. Connection with Chalcedon in Asia Minor is very doubtful [OED]. The city name is from
Phoenician and means new town.


Chardonnay (n.)

type of wine, 1907, from French chardonnay, originally the type of grape used to make the wine,
supposedly named for the town of Chardonnay, Sa&ocirc;ne-et-Loire, in eastern France. The name is
said to be from Latin Cardonnacum.


clarendon (n.)

a thickened Roman type face, 1845, evidently named for the Clarendon press at Oxford University,
which was set up 1713 in the Clarendon Building, named for university Chancellor Edward Hyde, 1st
Earl of Clarendon.


cledonism (n.)

avoidance of words deemed unlucky, 1885, from Latinized form of Greek kledon omen or presage
contained in a word or sound, also report, rumor, tidings; fame (see claim (v.)) + -ism.


codon (n.)

1962, from code (n.) + -on.


condonation (n.)

1620s, from Latin condonationem (nominative condonatio) a giving away, noun of action from condonare
(see condone).


condone (v.)

1857, from Latin condonare to give up, remit, permit, from com-, intensive prefix (see com-), +
donare to give (see donation). Originally a legal term in the Matrimonial Causes Act, which made
divorce a civil matter in Britain. Related: Condoned; condoning.


cordon (n.)

mid-15c., cord or ribbon worn as an ornament, from Middle French cordon ribbon, diminutive of Old
French corde cord (see cord). Sense of a line of people or things guarding something is 1758.
Original sense preserved in cordon bleu (1727) the highest distinction, literally blue ribbon, for
the sky-blue ribbon worn by the Knights-grand-cross of the Holy Ghost (highest order of chivalry);
extended figuratively to other persons of distinction, especially, jocularly, to a first-rate cook.
Cordon sanitaire (1857), from French, a guarded line between infected and uninfected districts.


cordon (v.)

1560s, to ornament with a ribbon; 1891 as to guard with a cordon; from cordon (n.). Related:
Cordoned; cordoning.


Corydon

traditional poetic name for a shepherd or rustic swain, from Latin Corydon, from Greek Korydon, name
of a shepherd in Theocritus and Virgil.


cotyledon (n.)

from 1540s, in various sense, from Latin cotyledon pennywort, navelwort, from Greek kotyledon cup-
shaped cavity, from kotyle hollow thing, small vessel, also the name of a small liquid measure
(nearly a half-pint); of uncertain origin. Botanical sense is 1776, from Linnaeus (1751).


ding dong

imitative of the sound of a bell, c.1560.


glyptodon (n.)

extinct gigantic mammal, 1838, irregularly formed from Greek glyptos engraved (verbal adjective of
glyphein; see glyph) + odon (genitive odontos) tooth (see tooth).


