doom (v.)

late 14c., from doom (n.). Related: Doomed; dooming.


Doomsday (n.)

Old English domes d&aelig;g, from domes, genitive of dom (see doom (n.)) + d&aelig;g day (see day
(n.)).    In medieval England it was expected when the world's age reached 6,000 years from
creation, which was thought to have been in 5200 B.C. Bede, c.720, complained of being pestered by
rustici asking him how many years till the sixth millennium ended. There is no evidence for a
general panic in the year 1000 C.E. Doomsday machine bomb powerful enough to wipe out human life on
earth is from 1960.


doom (n.)

Old English dom law, judgment, condemnation, from Proto-Germanic *domaz (cognates: Old Saxon and Old
Frisian dom, Old Norse domr, Old High German tuom, Gothic doms judgment, decree), from PIE root
*dhe- (cognates: Sanskrit dhaman- law, Greek themis law, Lithuanian dome attention), literally to
set, put (see factitious). A book of laws in Old English was a dombec. Modern sense of fate, ruin,
destruction is c.1600, from the finality of the Christian Judgment Day.


duma (n.)

Russian national assembly, 1870 (in reference to city councils; the national one was set up in
1905), literally thought, from a Germanic source (compare Gothic doms judgment, English doom, deem).


deem (v.)

Old English deman to judge, condemn, think, compute, from root of dom (see doom (n.)). Originally to
pronounce judgment as well as to form an opinion. The two judges of the Isle of Man were called
deemsters in 17c., a title formerly common throughout England and Scotland and preserved in the
surname Dempster.


devote (v.)

1580s, from Latin devotus, past participle of devovere (see devotion). Second and third meanings in
Johnson's Dictionary (1755) are to addict, to give up to ill and to curse, to execrate; to doom to
destruction. Related: Devoted; devoting.


Domesday book

1178, popular name of Great Inquisition or Survey (1086), William the Conqueror's inventory of his
new domain, from Middle English domes, genitive of dom day of judgment (see doom). The booke ... to
be called Domesday, bicause (as Mathew Parise saith) it spared no man, but iudged all men
indifferently. [William Lambarde, A Perambulation of Kent, 1570]


Moira

fem. proper name, one of the Fates, from Greek Moira, literally share, fate, related to moros fate,
destiny, doom, meros part, lot, meiresthai to receive one's share (see merit (n.)).


condemn (v.)

early 14c., condempner to blame, censure, from Old French condamner to condemn (11c.), from Latin
condemnare to sentence, doom, blame, disapprove, from com-, intensive prefix (see com-), + damnare
to harm, damage (see damn). Replaced Old English fordeman. Related: Condemned; condemning.


-dom

abstract suffix of state, from Old English dom statute, judgment (see doom (n.)). Already active as
a suffix in Old English (as in freodom, wisdom); from stem *do- do + *-moz abstract suffix. Cognate
with German -tum, Old High German tuom.


judge (v.)

c.1300, to form an opinion about; make a decision, also to try and pronounce sentence upon (someone)
in a court, from Anglo-French juger, Old French jugier to judge, pronounce judgment; pass an opinion
on, from Latin iudicare to judge, to examine officially; form an opinion upon; pronounce judgment,
from iudicem (nominative iudex) a judge, a compound of ius right, law (see just (adj.)) + root of
dicere to say (see diction). Related: Judged; judging. From mid-14c. as to regard, consider. The Old
English word was deman (see doom). Spelling with -dg- emerged mid-15c.


damn (v.)

late 13c., to condemn, from Old French damner damn, condemn; convict, blame; injure, derivative of
Latin damnare to adjudge guilty; to doom; to condemn, blame, reject, from noun damnum damage, hurt,
harm; loss, injury; a fine, penalty, possibly from an ancient religious term from PIE *dap- to
apportion in exchange [see Watkins]. The Latin word evolved a legal meaning of pronounce judgment
upon. Theological sense is first recorded early 14c.; the optative expletive use likely is as old.
Damn and its derivatives generally were avoided in print from 18c. to c.1930s (the famous line in
the film version of Gone with the Wind was a breakthrough and required much effort by the studio).
The noun is recorded from 1610s; to be not worth a damn is from 1817. The adjective is 1775, short
for damned; Damn Yankee, characteristic Southern U.S. term for Northerner, is attested from 1812.
Related: Damning.


merit (n.)

c.1200, spiritual credit (for good works, etc.); c.1300, spiritual reward, from Old French merite
wages, pay, reward; thanks; merit, moral worth, that which assures divine pity, and directly from
Latin meritum a merit, service, kindness, benefit, favor; worth, value, importance, neuter of
meritus, past participle of merere, meriri to earn, deserve, acquire, gain, from PIE root *(s)mer-
to allot, assign (cognates: Greek meros part, lot, moira share, fate, moros fate, destiny, doom,
Hittite mark to divide a sacrifice).    Sense of worthiness, excellence is from early 14c.; from
late 14c. as condition or conduct that deserves either reward or punishment; also a reward, benefit.
Related: Merits. Merit system attested from 1880. Merit-monger was in common use 16c.-17c. in a
sense roughly of do-gooder.


