dormant (adj.)

late 14c., fixed in place, from Old French dormant (12c.), present participle of dormir to sleep,
from Latin dormire to sleep, from PIE root *drem- to sleep (cognates: Old Church Slavonic dremati to
sleep, doze, Greek edrathon I slept, Sanskrit drati sleeps). Meaning in a resting situation (in
heraldry) is from c.1500. Meaning sleeping' is from 1620s.


dormancy (n.)

1723; see dormant + -cy. Middle English had dormitation sleep, sleeping (mid-15c.)


dormer (n.)

1590s, originally window of a sleeping room, from Middle French dormeor sleeping room, from dormir
to sleep (see dormant).


profiteer (v.)

1797, but dormant in English until it was revived in World War I, from profit + -eer. From 1912 as a
noun. Related: Profiteering (1814).    Or is it simply hysteria which produces what is to-day termed
the profiteer? It is probable that the modern profiteer is the same person whom we formerly called
the grafter, the extortioner, the robber, the gouger. [Legal Aid Review, April 1920]


dormitory (n.)

mid-15c., from Latin dormitorium sleeping place, from dormire to sleep (see dormant). Old English
had sl&aelig;pern dormitory, with ending as in barn.


latent (adj.)

mid-15c., concealed, secret, from Latin latentem (nominative latens) lying hid, secret, unknown,
present participle of latere to lie hidden, from PIE *laidh-, from root *la- to be hidden (cognates:
Greek lethe forgetfulness, oblivion, Old Church Slavonic lajati to lie in wait for). Meaning dormant
is from 1680s.


sleeping (adj.)

c.1300, past participle adjective from sleep (v.). Sleeping-pill is from 1660s; sleeping-bag is from
1850; sleeping sickness as a specific African tropical disease is first recorded 1875; sleeping has
been used since late 14c. for diseases marked by morbid conditions. Sleeping Beauty (1729) is
Perrault's La belle au bois dormant.    It is ill wakyng of a sleapyng dogge. [Heywood, 1562]   <hr
/>   It is nought good a slepyng hound to wake. [Chaucer, c.1385]


dormouse (n.)

early 15c., possibly from Anglo-French *dormouse tending to be dormant (from stem of dormir to
sleep, see dormer), with the second element mistaken for mouse; or perhaps it is from a Middle
English dialectal compound of mouse and Middle French dormir. The rodent is inactive in winter.
French dormeuse, fem. of dormeur sleeper is attested only from 17c.


sleeper (n.)

Old English sl&aelig;pere one who sleeps, one who is inclined to sleep much, agent noun from sleep
(v.). Meaning strong horizontal beam is from c.1600. Meaning dormant or inoperative thing is from
1620s. Meaning railroad sleeping car is from 1875. Sense of something whose importance proves to be
greater than expected first attested 1892, originally in American English sports jargon, probably
from earlier (1856) gambling slang sense of unexpected winning card. Meaning spy, enemy agent,
terrorist etc. who remains undercover for a long time before attempting his purpose first attested
1955, originally in reference to communist agents in the West.


sleep (v.)

Old English sl&aelig;pan to be or fall asleep; be dormant or inactive (class VII strong verb; past
tense slep, past participle sl&aelig;pen), from Proto-Germanic *slepan (cognates: Old Saxon slapan,
Old Frisian slepa, Middle Dutch slapen, Dutch slapen, Old High German slafen, German schlafen,
Gothic slepan to sleep), from PIE root *sleb- to be weak, sleep (cognates: Old Church Slavonic slabu
lax, weak, Lithuanian silpnas weak), which perhaps is connected to the root of slack (adj.). Sleep
with do the sex act with is in Old English:  Gif hwa f&aelig;mnan beswice unbeweddode, and hire mid
sl&aelig;pe ... [Laws of King Alfred, c.900]    Related: Slept; sleeping. Sleep around first
attested 1928.


