dowry (n.)

early 14c., from Anglo-French dowarie, Old French doaire (late 13c.) dower, dowry, gift, from
Medieval Latin dotarium, from Latin dotare to endow, portion, from dos (genitive dotis) marriage
portion, from PIE *do-ti (cognates: Sanskrit dadati, Greek didonai, Old Church Slavonic dati,
Lithuanian duoti, Armenian tam, all meaning to give), from root *do- to give (see date (n.1)).


dower (n.)

late 13c., from Old French doaire dower, dowry, gift (see dowry).


paraphernalia (n.)

1650s, a woman's property besides her dowry, from Medieval Latin paraphernalia (short for
paraphernalia bona paraphernal goods), neuter plural of paraphernalis (adj.), from Late Latin
parapherna a woman's property besides her dowry, from Greek parapherna, neuter plural, from para-
beside (see para- (1)) + pherne dowry, related to pherein to carry (see infer). Meaning equipment,
apparatus is first attested 1791, from notion of odds and ends.


dowager (n.)

1520s, from Middle French douagere widow with a dower literally pertaining to a dower, from douage
dower, from douer endow, from Latin dotare, from dos (genitive dotis) dowry (see dowry).


gift (n.)

mid-13c. (c.1100 in surnames), from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse gift, gipt gift, good
luck, from Proto-Germanic *giftiz (cognates: Old Saxon gift, Old Frisian jefte, Middle Dutch ghifte
gift, German Mitgift dowry), from PIE root *ghabh- to give or receive (see habit).  For German Gift
poison, see poison (n.). Old English cognate gift meant bride-price, marriage gift (by the groom),
dowry (Old English noun for giving, gift was related giefu). Sense of natural talent is c.1300,
perhaps from earlier sense of inspiration (late 12c.). As a verb from 16c., especially in gifted. As
a verb, giftwrap (also gift-wrap) attested by 1936.


endow (v.)

late 14c., indowen provide an income for, from Anglo-French endover, from en- in + Old French douer
endow, from Latin dotare bestow (see dowry). Related: Endowed; endowing.


marriage (n.)

c.1300, action of marrying, entry into wedlock; also state or condition of being husband and wife,
matrimony, wedlock; from Old French mariage marriage; dowry (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *maritaticum
(11c.), from Latin maritatus, past participle of maritatre to wed, marry, give in marriage (see
marry (v.)). The Vulgar Latin word also is the source of Italian maritaggio, Spanish maridaje.
Meaning a union of a man and woman for life by marriage, a particular matrimonial union is early
14c. Meanings the marriage vow, formal declaration or contract by which two join in wedlock; also a
wedding, celebration of a marriage; the marriage ceremony are from late 14c. Figurative use (non-
theological) intimate union, a joining as if by marriage is from early 15c.[W]hen two people are
under the influence of the most violent, most insane, most delusive, and most transient of passions,
they are required to swear that they will remain in that excited, abnormal, and exhausting condition
until death do them part. [G.B. Shaw, preface to Getting Married, 1908]Marriage counseling recorded
by 1939. Marriage bed, figurative of marital intercourse generally, is attested from 1580s (bed of
marriage is from early 15c.).


