doze (v.)

1640s, probably from a Scandinavian source (compare Old Norse dusa to doze, Danish d&oslash;se to
make dull, Swedish dialectal dusa to sleep); related to Old English dysig foolish (see dizzy). May
have existed in dialect earlier than attested date. Related: Dozed; dozing. As a noun, from 1731.


dozen (n.)

c.1300, from Old French dozaine a dozen, from doze (12c.) twelve, from Latin duodecim twelve, from
duo two + decem ten (see ten).    The Old French fem. suffix -aine is characteristically added to
cardinals to form collectives in a precise sense (exactly 12, not about 12). The dozens invective
contest (1928) originated in slave culture, the custom probably African, the word probably from
bulldoze (q.v.) in its original sense of a whipping, a thrashing.


dozy (adj.)

drowsy, 1690s, from doze + -y (2).


nap (v.1)

Old English hnappian to doze, sleep lightly, of unknown origin, apparently related to Old High
German hnaffezan, German dialectal nafzen, Norwegian napp. Related: Napped; napping.


loll (v.)

mid-14c., lollen to lounge idly, hang loosely, perhaps related to Middle Dutch lollen to doze,
mumble, or somehow imitative of rocking or swinging. Specifically of the tongue from 1610s. Related:
Lolled; lolling. As a noun, from 1709. Grose [Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, 1785] has lollpoop A
lazy, idle drone.


Lollard

name for certain heretics, late 14c. (in Chaucer, Loller, c.1386), from Middle Dutch lollaerd,
applied pejoratively to members of reforming sects c.1300 who devoted themselves to the care of the
sick and poor, literally mumbler, mutterer, so called by critics who regarded them as heretics
pretending to humble piety, from lollen to mumble or doze. Generic late Middle English term for
groups suspected of heresy, especially followers of John Wyclif.


cower (v.)

c.1300, probably from Middle Low German *kuren lie in wait (Modern German kauern), or similar
Scandinavian words meaning to squat and to doze (such as Old Norse kura, Danish, Norwegian kure,
Swedish kura). Thus unrelated to coward. Related: Cowered; cowering.


dormant (adj.)

late 14c., fixed in place, from Old French dormant (12c.), present participle of dormir to sleep,
from Latin dormire to sleep, from PIE root *drem- to sleep (cognates: Old Church Slavonic dremati to
sleep, doze, Greek edrathon I slept, Sanskrit drati sleeps). Meaning in a resting situation (in
heraldry) is from c.1500. Meaning sleeping' is from 1620s.


slumber (v.)

mid-14c. alteration of slumeren (mid-13c.), frequentative form of slumen to doze, probably from Old
English sluma light sleep (compare Middle Dutch slumen, Dutch sluimeren, German schlummern to
slumber). Frequentative on the notion of intermittent light sleep. For the -b-, compare number,
lumber, chamber, etc. Related: Slumbered; slumbering.


score (n.)

late Old English scoru twenty, from Old Norse skor mark, notch, incision; a rift in rock, also, in
Icelandic, twenty, from Proto-Germanic *skura-, from PIE root *(s)ker- (1) to cut (see shear).
The connecting notion probably is counting large numbers (of sheep, etc.) with a notch in a stick
for each 20. That way of counting, called vigesimalism, also exists in French: In Old French, twenty
(vint) or a multiple of it could be used as a base, as in vint et doze (32), dous vinz et diz (50).
Vigesimalism was or is a feature of Welsh, Irish, Gaelic and Breton (as well as non-IE Basque), and
it is speculated that the English and the French picked it up from the Celts. Compare tally (n.).
The prehistoric sense of the Germanic word, then, likely was straight mark like a scratch, line
drawn by a sharp instrument, but in English this is attested only from c.1400, along with the sense
mark made (on a chalkboard, etc.) to keep count of a customer's drinks in a tavern. This sense was
extended by 1670s to mark made for purpose of recording a point in a game or match, and thus
aggregate of points made by contestants in certain games and matches (1742, originally in whist).
From the tavern-keeping sense comes the meaning amount on an innkeeper's bill (c.1600) and thus the
figurative verbal expression settle scores (1775).  Meaning printed piece of music first recorded
1701, said to be from the practice of connecting related staves by scores of lines. Especially music
composed for a film (1927). Meaning act of obtaining narcotic drugs is by 1951.   Scoreboard is from
1826;   score-keeping- from 1905; newspaper sports section score line is from 1965; baseball score-
card is from 1877.


