draft (n.)

c.1500, spelling variant of draught (q.v.) to reflect change in pronunciation. Among the senses that
have gone with this form of the word in American English, the meaning rough copy of a writing
(something drawn) is attested from 14c.; that of preliminary sketch from which a final copy is made
is from 1520s; that of flow of a current of air is from c.1770. Of beer from the 1830s, in reference
to the method of drawing it from the cask. Sense in bank draft is from 1745. The meaning a drawing
off a group for special duty is from 1703, in U.S. especially of military service; the verb in this
sense first recorded 1714. Related: Drafted; drafting.


draftee (n.)

1864, in a military context, American English, from draft + -ee.


draftsman (n.)

1660s, variant of draughtsman; also see draft.


drafty (adj.)

1580s, from draft + -y (2). Related: Draftiness.


yoke (n.)

Old English geoc contrivance for fastening a pair of draft animals, earlier geoht pair of draft
animals (especially oxen), from Proto-Germanic *yukam (cognates: Old Saxon juk, Old Norse ok, Danish
aag, Middle Dutch joc, Dutch juk, Old High German joh, German joch, Gothic juk yoke), from PIE root
*yeug- to join (see jugular). Figurative sense of heavy burden, oppression, servitude was in Old
English.


protocol (n.)

1540s, as prothogall draft of a document, from Middle French prothocole (c.1200, Modern French
protocole), from Medieval Latin protocollum draft, literally the first sheet of a volume (on which
contents and errata were written), from Greek protokollon first sheet glued onto a manuscript, from
protos first (see proto-) + kolla glue.    Sense developed in Medieval Latin and French from
official account to official record of a transaction, to diplomatic document, and finally, in
French, to formula of diplomatic etiquette. Meaning diplomatic rules of etiquette in English first
recorded 1896, from French; general sense of conventional proper conduct is from 1952. Protocols of
the (Learned) Elders of Zion, Russian anti-Semitic forgery purporting to reveal Jewish plan for
world domination, first published in English 1920 under title The Jewish Peril.


deferment (n.)

1610s, from defer (v.1) + -ment. As a word for conditional exemption from a military draft it dates
to 1918, American English.


outline (n.)

1660s, lines by which a figure is delineated, from out + line (v.). Meaning rough draft in words is
from 1759.


overdraft (n.)

1878, in the banking sense, from over- + draft (n.).


blotter (n.)

1590s, thing for drying wet spots, agent noun from blot (v.). Meaning bad writer is from c.1600.
Sense of day book is from 1670s, and the word was applied early 19c. to rough drafts, scrap books,
notebooks, and draft account books. Hence the police jargon sense arrest record sheet, recorded from
1887.


rider (n.)

one who rides, Old English ridere rider, trooper, knight, mounted warrior, agent noun from ride
(v.). Meaning clause tacked on to a document after first draft is from 1660s. Related: Riderless.


updraft (n.)

also updraught, rising air current, 1909, from up (adj.) + draft (n.).


minutes (n.)

record of proceedings, c.1710, perhaps from Latin minuta scriptura rough notes, literally small
writing; see minute (adj.). Minute rough draft is attested from c.1500.


concept (n.)

1550s, from Medieval Latin conceptum draft, abstract, in classical Latin (a thing) conceived, from
concep-, past participle stem of concipere to take in (see conceive). In some 16c. cases a
refashioning of conceit (perhaps to avoid negative connotations).


draught (n.)

c.1200, from Old English *dreaht, *dr&aelig;ht, related to dragan to draw, drag (see drag (v.)).
Oldest sense besides that of pulling is of drinking. It retains the functions that did not branch
off with draft (q.v.).


substitute (n.)

one who acts in place of another, early 15c., from Middle French substitut (noun use) and directly
from Latin substitutus, past participle of substituere put in place of another (see substitution).
Military draft sense is from 1777, American English. Team sports sense is from 1849. Of foodstuffs,
from 1879. As an adjective from early 15c.


hideout (n.)

also hide-out, a hiding place, 1885, American English, from hide (v.) + out. The phrase hide out
conceal (oneself) from the authorities is attested from 1870, American English (in reference to
Northern draft dodgers in the Civil War).


Rosinante (n.)

Don Quixote's horse, from Spanish Rocinante, from rocin worn-out horse + antes before, so called in
allusion to the circumstance that Don Quixote's charger was formerly a wretched hack [Klein]. Rocin
is cognate with Old French rancin draft horse, hack, but the word is of unknown origin.


formula (n.)

1630s, words used in a ceremony or ritual, from Latin formula form, draft, contract, regulation;
rule, method, formula, literally small form, diminutive of forma form (see form (n.)).    Modern
sense is colored by Carlyle's use (1837) of the word for rule slavishly followed without
understanding [OED].  Men who try to speak what they believe, are naked men fighting men quilted
sevenfold in formulae. [Charles Kingsley, Letters, 1861]  Mathematical use is from 1796; use in
chemistry is from c.1846.


bill (n.1)

written statement, mid-14c., from Anglo-French bille, Anglo-Latin billa list, from Medieval Latin
bulla decree, seal, sealed document, in classical Latin bubble, boss, stud, amulet for the neck
(hence seal; see bull (n.2)). Sense of account, invoice first recorded c.1400; that of order to pay
(technically bill of exchange) is from 1570s; that of paper money is from 1660s. Meaning draft of an
act of Parliament is from 1510s.


veterinarian (n.)

animal doctor, 1640s, from Latin veterinarius of or having to do with beasts of burden, also, as a
noun, cattle doctor, from veterinum beast of burden, perhaps from vetus (genitive veteris) old (see
veteran), possibly from the notion of experienced, or of one year old (hence strong enough to draw
burdens). Another theory connects it to Latin vehere to draw, on notion of used as a draft animal.
Replaced native dog-leech (1520s).


project (n.)

c.1400, a plan, draft, scheme, from Latin proiectum something thrown forth, noun use of neuter of
proiectus, past participle of proicere stretch out, throw forth, from pro- forward (see pro-) +
combining form of iacere (past participle iactus) to throw (see jet (v.)).    Meaning scheme,
proposal, mental plan is from c.1600. Meaning group of low-rent apartment buildings first recorded
1935, American English, short for housing project (1932). Related: Projects. Project manager
attested from 1913.


team (n.)

Old English team descendant, family, race, line; child-bearing, brood; company, band; set of draft
animals yoked together, from Proto-Germanic *tau(h)maz (cognates: Old Norse taumr, Old Frisian tam
bridle; progeny, line of descent, Dutch toom, Old High German zoum, German Zaum bridle), probably
literally that which draws, from PIE *douk-mo-, from root *deuk- to pull (see duke (n.)).    Applied
in Old English to groups of persons working together for some purpose, especially group of people
acting together to bring suit; modern sense of persons associated in some joint action is from
1520s. Team spirit is recorded from 1928. Team player attested from 1886, originally in baseball.


rough (adj.)

Old English ruh rough, coarse (of cloth); hairy, shaggy; untrimmed, uncultivated, from West Germanic
*rukhwaz shaggy, hairy, rough (cognates: Middle Dutch ruuch, Dutch ruig, Old High German ruher,
German rauh), from Proto-Germanic *rukhaz, from PIE *reue- (2) to smash, knock down, tear out, dig
up (cognates: Sanskrit ruksah rough; Latin ruga wrinkle, ruere to rush, fall violently, collapse,
ruina a collapse; Lithuanian raukas wrinkle, rukti to shrink).    The original -gh- sound was
guttural, as in Scottish loch. Sense of approximate is first recorded c.1600. Of places, riotous,
disorderly, characterized by violent action, 1863. Rough draft is from 1690s. Rough-and-ready is
from 1810, originally military; rough-and-tumble (1810) is from a style of free-fighting.


check (n.1)

c.1300, a call in chess noting one's move has placed his opponent's king (or another major piece) in
immediate peril, from Old French eschequier a check at chess (also chess board, chess set), from
eschec the game of chess; chessboard; check; checkmate, from Vulgar Latin *scaccus, from Arabic
shah, from Persian shah king, the principal piece in a chess game (see shah; also compare checkmate
(n.)). Also c.1300 in a generalized sense, harmful incident or event.    When the king is in check
that player's choices are severely limited. Hence, sudden stoppage (early 14c.), and by c.1700 to a
token of ownership used to check against, and prevent, loss or theft (surviving in hat check) and a
check against forgery or alteration, which gave the modern financial use of bank check, money draft
(first recorded 1798 and often spelled cheque), probably influenced by exchequer. Checking account
is attested from 1897, American English. Blank check in the figurative sense attested by 1849.
Checks and balances is from 1782, perhaps originally suggesting machinery.


Taurus (n.)

zodiac constellation, late Old English, from Latin taurus bull, bullock, steer, also the name of the
constellation, from PIE *tau-ro- bull (cognates: Greek tauros, Old Church Slavonic turu bull, steer;
Lithuanian tauras aurochs; Old Prussian tauris bison); from PIE *tauro- bull, from root *(s)taeu-
stout, standing, strong (cognates: Sanskrit sthura- thick, compact, Avestan staora- big cattle,
Middle Persian stor horse, draft animal, Gothic stiur young bull, Old English steor, see steer
(n.)); extended form of root *sta- to stand (see stet).    Klein proposes a Semitic origin (compare
Aramaic tora ox, bull, steer, Hebrew shor, Arabic thor, Ethiopian sor). Meaning person born under
the sign of the bull is recorded from 1901.    At midnight revels when the gossips met,  He was the
theme of their eternal chat:  This ask'd what form great Jove would next devise,  And when his
godship would again Taurise?  [William Somerville, The Wife, 1727]    The Taurid meteors (peaking
Nov. 20) so called from 1878.


dwarf (n.)

Old English dweorh, dweorg (West Saxon), duerg (Mercian), very short human being, from Proto-
Germanic *dweraz (cognates: Old Frisian dwerch, Old Saxon dwerg, Old High German twerg, German
Zwerg, Old Norse dvergr), perhaps from PIE *dhwergwhos something tiny, but with no established
cognates outside Germanic. The mythological sense is 1770, from German (it seems never to have
developed independently in English).    Whilst in this and other ways the dwarfs do at times have
dealings with mankind, yet on the whole they seem to shrink from man; they give the impression of a
downtrodden afflicted race, which is on the point of abandoning its ancient home to new and more
powerful invaders. There is stamped on their character something shy and something heathenish, which
estranges them from intercourse with christians. They chafe at human faithlessness, which no doubt
would primarily mean the apostacy from heathenism. In the poems of the Mid. Ages, Laurin is
expressly set before us as a heathen. It goes sorely against the dwarfs to see churches built, bell-
ringing ... disturbs their ancient privacy; they also hate the clearing of forests, agriculture, new
fangled pounding-machinery for ore. [Teutonic Mythology, Jacob Grimm, transl. Stallybrass, 1883]
The shift of the Old English guttural at the end of the word to modern -f is typical (compare
enough, draft). Old English plural dweorgas became Middle English dwarrows, later leveled down to
dwarfs. The use of dwarves for the legendary race was popularized by J.R.R. Tolkien. As an
adjective, from 1590s.


