drama (n.)

1510s, from Late Latin drama play, drama, from Greek drama (genitive dramatos) play, action, deed,
from dran to do, act, perform (especially some great deed, whether good or bad), from PIE *dere- to
work. Drama queen attested by 1992.


dramatic (adj.)

1580s, from Late Latin dramaticus, from Greek dramatikos pertaining to plays, from drama (genitive
dramatos; see drama). Meaning full of action and striking display, fit for a drama is from 1725.
Dramatic irony is recorded from 1907. Related: Dramatical; dramatically.


dramatis personae

Latin for persons of a drama.


dramatist (n.)

1670s, see drama (Greek stem dramat-) + -ist.


dramaturgy (n.)

composition and production of plays, 1801, from French dramaturgie, from Greek dramatourgia, from
drama (genitive dramatos) + ergos worker (see organ).


dramatize (v.)

1780s, to adopt for the stage, see drama (Greek stem dramat-) + -ize. Meaning to act out is from
1823. Related: Dramatized; dramatizing.


dramaturge (n.)

dramatist, 1870, from French dramaturge, from Greek dramatourgos a dramatist, from drama (genitive
dramatos) + ergos worker (see organ).


psychodrama (n.)

also psycho-drama, 1937 (in writing of U.S. psychiatrist Jacob L. Moreno (1889-1974)), from psycho-
+ drama. Related: Psychodramatic.


melodrama (n.)

1784 (1782 as melo drame), a stage-play in which songs were interspersed and music accompanied the
action, from French m&eacute;lodrame (18c.), from Greek melos song (see melody) + French drame drama
(see drama). Meaning a romantic and sensational dramatic piece with a happy ending is from 1883,
because this was often the form of the original melodramas. Also from French are Spanish melodrama,
Italian melodramma, German melodram. Related: Melodramatize.


gangbusters (n.)

to come on like gangbusters (c.1940) is from U.S. radio crimefighting drama Gangbusters (1937-57)
which opened with a cacophony of sirens, screams, shots, and jarring music.


legit

colloquial shortening of legitimate, 1897, originally in theater, in reference to legitimate drama,
that which has literary merit (Shakespeare, etc.).


onnagata (n.)

in Kabuki and similar drama, a man who plays female roles, 1901, from Japanese, from onna woman +
kata figure.


agonist (n.)

1876, in writings on Greek drama, from Greek agonistes, literally combatant in the games (see
agony).


Noh

traditional Japanese masked drama, 1871, from Japanese, literally ability, talent, function.
Dramatic form also known as nogaku, with gaku music.


Sturm und Drang (n.)

1844, literally storm and stress, late 18c. German romanticism period, taken from the title of a
1776 romantic drama by Friedrich Maximilian von Klinger (1752-1831), who gave it this name at the
suggestion of Christoph Kauffmann. See storm (n.) + throng (n.).


foreplay (n.)

in sexual sense, by 1911, from fore- + play (n.). Earlier as a theatrical term (by 1857).    In fact
the poem which Mr. Brooks has translated is but the prologue to the swelling theme, the fore-play to
the actual drama of Faust. [The Christian Examiner and Religious Miscellany, Jan.-May 1857]


kabuki (n.)

1896, from Japanese, popular theater (as opposed to shadow puppet-plays or lyrical Noh dramas),
literally art of song and dance, from ka song + bu dance + ki art, skill [Barnhart, OED].
Alternative etymology (in Webster's) is from nominal form of kabuku to be divergent, to deviate,
from early opinion of this form of drama. Since c.1650, all parts are played by males.


destruct (v.)

to destroy, 1958, probably a back-formation from destruction in the jargon of U.S. aerospace and
defense workers to refer to deliberate destruction of a missile in flight by a friendly agent;
popularized 1966 in form self-destruct in the voice-over at the beginning of popular TV spy drama
Mission Impossible. OED records an isolated use of destruct from 17c., in this case probably from
Latin destruct-, past participle stem of destruere.


catastrophe (n.)

1530s, reversal of what is expected (especially a fatal turning point in a drama), from Latin
catastropha, from Greek katastrophe an overturning; a sudden end, from katastrephein to overturn,
turn down, trample on; to come to an end, from kata down (see cata-) + strephein turn (see strophe).
Extension to sudden disaster is first recorded 1748.


heroine (n.)

1650s, from Latin heroine, heroina (plural heroinae) a female hero, a demigoddess (such as Medea),
from Greek heroine, fem. of heros (see hero (n.1)). As principal female character in a drama or
poem, from 1715.


scenic (adj.)

1620s, of or belonging to the stage or drama, theatrical, from French sc&eacute;nique (14c.) and
directly from Latin scaenicus dramatic, theatrical, from Greek skenikos, from skene (see scene).
Meaning of or belonging to natural scenery is recorded from 1842. Of roads, etc., offering fine
views, recorded since 1885. Scenic railway is recorded from 1886. Related: Scenically.


protagonist (n.)

1670s, principal character in a story, drama, etc., from Greek protagonistes actor who plays the
chief or first part, from protos first (see proto-) + agonistes actor, competitor, from agon contest
(see act (n.)). Meaning leading person in any cause or contest is from 1889. Mistaken sense of
advocate, supporter (1935) is from misreading of Greek protos as Latin pro- for.


leitmotif (n.)

1876, a musical figure to which some definite meaning is attached, from German Leitmotiv, literally
lead motive, from leiten to lead (see lead (v.1)) + Motiv (see motive). A term associated with
Wagnerian musical drama, though the thing itself is at least as old as Mozart. The leitmotif must be
characteristic of the person or thing it is intended to represent. [Elson's Music Dictionary]


philander (v.)

1737, from the noun meaning a lover (1700), from Philander, popular name for a lover in stories,
drama, and poetry, from Greek adjective philandros with love for people, perhaps mistaken as meaning
a loving man, from phil- loving (see philo-) + andr-, stem of aner man (see anthropo-). Related:
Philandered; philandering.


pantomime (n.)

1610s, mime actor, from Latin pantomimus mime, dancer, from Greek pantomimos actor, literally
imitator of all, from panto- (genitive of pan) all (see pan-) + mimos imitator (see mime (n.)).
Meaning drama or play without words first recorded 1735. The English dramatic performances so
called, usually at Christmas and with words and songs and stock characters, are attested by this
name from 1739; said to have originated c.1717. Related: Pantomimic; pantomimical.


tragedy (n.)

late 14c., play or other serious literary work with an unhappy ending, from Old French tragedie
(14c.), from Latin tragedia a tragedy, from Greek tragodia a dramatic poem or play in formal
language and having an unhappy resolution, apparently literally goat song, from tragos goat + oide
song (see ode).    The connection may be via satyric drama, from which tragedy later developed, in
which actors or singers were dressed in goatskins to represent satyrs. But many other theories have
been made (including singer who competes for a goat as a prize), and even the goat connection is at
times questioned. Meaning any unhappy event, disaster is from c.1500.


opera (n.)

a drama sung [Klein], 1640s, from Italian opera, literally a work, labor, composition, from Latin
opera work, effort (Latin plural regarded as feminine singular), secondary (abstract) noun from
operari to work, from opus (genitive operis) a work (see opus). Defined in Elson's Music Dictionary
as, a form of musical composition evolved shortly before 1600, by some enthusiastic Florentine
amateurs who sought to bring back the Greek plays to the modern stage. No good opera plot can be
sensible. ... People do not sing when they are feeling sensible. [W.H. Auden, 1961]As a branch of
dramatic art, it is attested from 1759. First record of opera glass small binoculars for use at the
theater is from 1738. Soap opera is first recorded 1939, as a disparaging reference to daytime radio
dramas sponsored by soap manufacturers.


person (n.)

early 13c., from Old French persone human being, anyone, person (12c., Modern French personne) and
directly from Latin persona human being, person, personage; a part in a drama, assumed character,
originally mask, false face, such as those of wood or clay worn by the actors in later Roman
theater. OED offers the general 19c. explanation of persona as related to Latin personare to sound
through (i.e. the mask as something spoken through and perhaps amplifying the voice), but the long o
makes a difficulty .... Klein and Barnhart say it is possibly borrowed from Etruscan phersu mask.
Klein goes on to say this is ultimately of Greek origin and compares Persephone.    Of corporate
entities from mid-15c. The use of -person to replace -man in compounds and avoid alleged sexist
connotations is first recorded 1971 (in chairperson). In person by bodily presence is from 1560s.
Person-to-person first recorded 1919, originally of telephone calls.


out (adv.)

Old English ut out, without, outside, common Germanic (Old Norse, Old Frisian, Old Saxon, Gothic ut,
Middle Dutch uut, Dutch uit, Old High German uz, German aus), from PIE root *ud- up, out, up away
(cognates: Sanskrit ut up, out, uttarah higher, upper, later, northern; Avestan uz- up, out, Old
Irish ud- out, Latin usque all the way to, without interruption, Greek hysteros the latter, Russian
vy- out). Meaning into public notice is from 1540s. As an adjective from c.1200. Meaning unconscious
is attested from 1898, originally in boxing. Sense of not popular or modern is from 1966. As a
preposition from mid-13c.    Sense in baseball (1860) was earlier in cricket (1746). Adverbial
phrase out-and-out thoroughly is attested from early 14c.; adjective usage is attested from 1813;
out-of-the-way (adj.) remote, secluded is attested from late 15c. Out-of-towner one not from a
certain place is from 1911. Shakespeare's It out-herods Herod (Hamlet) reflects Herod as stock
braggart and bully in old religious drama and was widely imitated 19c. Out to lunch insane is
student slang from 1955; out of this world excellent is from 1938; out of sight excellent, superior
is from 1891.


chorus (n.)

1560s, from Latin chorus a dance in a circle, the persons singing and dancing, the chorus of a
tragedy, from Greek khoros band of dancers or singers, dance, dancing ground, perhaps from PIE
*gher- to grasp, enclose, if the original sense of the Greek word is enclosed dancing floor.
Extension from dance to voice is because Attic drama arose from tales inserted in the intervals of
the dance. In Attic tragedy, the khoros (of 12 or 15 (tragic) or 24 (comedic) persons) gave
expression, between the acts, to the moral and religious sentiments evoked by the actions of the
play.    When a Poet wished to bring out a piece, he asked a Chorus from the Archon, and the
expenses, being great, were defrayed by some rich citizen (the khoregos): it was furnished by the
Tribe and trained originally by the Poet himself [Liddell &amp; Scott]  Originally in English used
in theatrical sense; meaning of a choir first attested 1650s. Meaning the refrain of a song (which
the audience joins in singing) is 1590s. As a verb, 1703, from the noun. Chorus girl is 1894.


vaudeville (n.)

1735, a country song, especially one for the stage, from French vaudeville (16c.), alteration (by
influence of ville town) of Middle French vaudevire, said to be from (chanson du) Vau de Vire (song
of the) valley of Vire, in the Calvados region of Normandy, first applied to the popular satirical
songs of Olivier Basselin, a 15c. poet who lived in Vire. The alternative explanation is that
vaudevire derives from Middle French dialectal vauder to go + virer to turn. From the popularity of
the songs in France grew a form of theatrical entertainment based on parodies of popular opera and
drama, interspersed with songs.    The Th&#233;atre du Vaudeville is rich in parodies, which follow
rapidly upon every new piece given at the Opera, or at the Th&#233;atre Fran&ccedil;ais. Their
parody upon Hamlet is too ludicrous for description, but irresistibly laughable; and the elegaut
light ballet of La Colombe Retrouv&#233;e [The Dove found again], I saw parodied at the Vaudeville
as La Maison Retrouv&#233;e [The House found again], with a breadth of farce quite beyond the genius
of Sadler's Wells. Some of the acting here, particularly that of the men, is exquisite; and the
orchestra like all the orchestras in Paris is full and excellent. [France in 1816, by Lady Morgan]
As a sort of popular stage variety entertainment show suitable for families, from c.1881 in U.S.,
displaced by movies after c.1914, considered dead from 1932.


satire (n.)

late 14c., work intended to ridicule vice or folly, from Middle French satire (14c.) and directly
from Latin satira satire, poetic medley, earlier satura, in lanx satura mixed dish, dish filled with
various kinds of fruit, literally full dish, from fem. of satur sated (see saturate).    First used
in the literary sense in Latin in reference to a collection of poems in various meters on a variety
of subjects by the late republican Roman poet Ennius. The matter of the little that survives of his
verse does not seem to be particularly satiric, but in classical Latin the word came to mean
especially a poem which assailed the prevailing vices, one after another. Altered in Latin by
influence of Greek satyr, on mistaken notion that the literary form is related to the Greek satyr
drama (see satyr).<b>Satire</b>, n. An obsolete kind of literary composition in which the vices and
follies of the author's enemies were expounded with imperfect tenderness. In this country satire
never had more than a sickly and uncertain existence, for the soul of it is wit, wherein we are
dolefully deficient, the humor that we mistake for it, like all humor, being tolerant and
sympathetic. Moreover, although Americans are 'endowed by their Creator' with abundant vice and
folly, it is not generally known that these are reprehensible qualities, wherefore the satirist is
popularly regarded as a sour-spirited knave, and his every victim's outcry for codefendants evokes a
national assent. [Ambrose Bierce, Devil's Dictionary, 1911]   <hr />   Proper satire is
distinguished, by the generality of the reflections, from a lampoon which is aimed against a
particular person, but they are too frequently confounded. [Johnson]   <hr />   [I]n whatever
department of human expression, wherever there is objective truth there is satire [Wyndham Lewis,
Rude Assignment, 1950]    For nuances of usage, see humor (n.).


