draughts (n.)

British name for the tabletop game that in U.S. is checkers, c.1400, from draught, perhaps because
the pieces are dragged over the board in moves. Earlier it is recorded as jeu de dames (late 14c.).


draughtsman (n.)

1660s, from genitive of draught + man (n.).


draughty (adj.)

1846, from draught + -y (2).


draught (n.)

c.1200, from Old English *dreaht, *dr&aelig;ht, related to dragan to draw, drag (see drag (v.)).
Oldest sense besides that of pulling is of drinking. It retains the functions that did not branch
off with draft (q.v.).


potion (n.)

c.1300, pocioun medicinal drink, from Old French pocion potion, draught, medicine (12c.), from Latin
potionem (nominative potio) a potion, a drinking, also poisonous draught, magic potion, from potus,
irregular past participle of potare to drink, from PIE root *po(i)- to drink (cognates: Sanskrit
pati drinks, panam beverage; Greek pinein to drink, poton that which one drinks, potos drinking
bout; Old Church Slavonic piti to drink, pivo beverage). Potus as a past participle adjective in
Latin meant drunken.


Clydesdale

breed of heavy draught horses, 1786, so called because they were bred in the valley of the Clyde in
Scotland. The river name is perhaps literally cleansing, from a Celtic root akin to Latin cloaca
(see cloaca).


gulp (n.)

1560s, from gulp (v.), or else from Flemish gulpe, Dutch gulp stream of water, large draught.


harness (v.)

to put a harness on a draught animal, c.1300, from Old French harneschier, from harnois (see harness
(n.)); figurative sense is from 1690s. Related: Harnessed; harnessing.


glut (v.)

early 14c., to swallow too much; to feed to repletion, probably from Old French gloter to swallow,
gulp down, from Latin gluttire swallow, gulp down, from PIE root *gwele- (3) to swallow (cognates:
Russian glot draught, gulp). Related: Glutted; glutting.


brake (n.1)

mid-15c., instrument for crushing or pounding, from Middle Dutch braeke flax brake, from breken to
break (see break (v.)). The word was applied to many crushing implements and to the ring through the
nose of a draught ox. It was influenced in sense by Old French brac, a form of bras an arm, thus a
lever or handle, which was being used in English from late 14c., and applied to a bridle or curb
from early 15c. One or the other or both took up the main modern meaning of stopping device for a
wheel, first attested 1772.


nuncheon (n.)

mid-14c., slight refreshment, originally taken in the afternoon, from none noon (see noon) + shench
draught, cup, from Old English scenc, related to scencan to pour out, to give to drink, cognate with
Old Frisian skenka to give to drink, German, Dutch schenken to give. Compare luncheon.


draft (n.)

c.1500, spelling variant of draught (q.v.) to reflect change in pronunciation. Among the senses that
have gone with this form of the word in American English, the meaning rough copy of a writing
(something drawn) is attested from 14c.; that of preliminary sketch from which a final copy is made
is from 1520s; that of flow of a current of air is from c.1770. Of beer from the 1830s, in reference
to the method of drawing it from the cask. Sense in bank draft is from 1745. The meaning a drawing
off a group for special duty is from 1703, in U.S. especially of military service; the verb in this
sense first recorded 1714. Related: Drafted; drafting.


