draw (v.)

c.1200, spelling alteration of Old English dragan to drag, to draw, protract (class VI strong verb;
past tense drog, past participle dragen), from Proto-Germanic *dragan to draw, pull (cognates: Old
Norse draga to draw, Old Saxon dragan, Old Frisian draga, Middle Dutch draghen, Old High German
tragen, German tragen to carry, bear), from PIE root *dhragh- (see drag (v.)).    Sense of make a
line or figure (by drawing a pencil across paper) is c.1200. Meaning pull out a weapon is c.1200. To
draw a criminal (drag him from a horse to place of execution) is from early 14c. To draw a blank
come up with nothing (1825) is an image from lotteries. As a noun, from 1660s; colloquial sense of
anything that can draw a crowd is from 1881 (the verb in this sense is 1580s).


draw (n.)

game or contest that ends without a winner, attested first in drawn match (1610s), of uncertain
origin; some speculate it is from withdraw. Draw-game is from 1825. As a verb, to leave undecided,
from 1837.


drawers (n.)

1560s, garments that are pulled (or drawn) on; see draw (v.).


drawer (n.)

mid-14c., agent noun from draw (v.). Attested from 1570s in sense of a box that can be drawn out of
a cabinet.


drawn

c.1200, from Old English dragen, past participle of draw (v.).


drawdown (n.)

of troops, by 1991, in reference to the end of the Cold War; from draw (v.) + down (adv.). Earlier
of wells (c.1900).


drawing (n.)

c.1300, a pulling, in various senses, verbal noun from draw (v.). The picture-making sense is from
1520s; of the picture itself from 1660s. Drawing board is from 1725; used in figurative expression
from mid-20c.


drawback (n.)

hindrance, disadvantage,1720, from draw (v.) + back (adv.). The notion is of something that holds
back success or activity.


drawbridge (n.)

14c., from draw (v.) + bridge (n.).


drawl (v.)

1590s, perhaps from Middle Dutch dralen, East Frisian draulen to linger, delay, apparently an
intensive of the root of draw (v.). Or else a native formation along the same lines. Related:
Drawled; drawling. As a noun from 1760.


portray (v.)

mid-13c., to draw, paint (something), from Anglo-French purtraire, Old French portraire to draw, to
paint, portray (12c.), literally trace, draw forth, from por- forth (from Latin pro-; see pro-) +
traire trace, draw, from Latin trahere to drag, draw (see tract (n.1)). Meaning depict in words,
describe is from late 14c. Related: Portrayed; portraying.


exhaust (v.)

1530s, to draw off or out, to use up completely, from Latin exhaustus, past participle of exhaurire
draw off, take away, use up, from ex- off (see ex-) + haurire to draw up (as water), from PIE *aus-
(3) to draw water. Of resources, etc., from 1630s. Related: Exhausted; exhausting.


attract (v.)

early 15c., from Latin attractus, past participle of attrahere to draw, pull; to attract, from ad-
to (see ad-) + trahere draw (see tract (n.1)).    Originally a medical term for the body's tendency
to absorb fluids, nourishment, etc., or for a poultice treatment to draw out diseased matter
(1560s). Of the ability of people or animals to draw others to them, it is attested from 1560s; of
physical forces (magnetism, etc.), from c.1600 (implied in attraction). Related: Attracted;
attracting.


distract (v.)

mid-14c., to draw asunder or apart, to turn aside (literal and figurative), from Latin distractus,
past participle of distrahere draw in different directions, from dis- away (see dis-) + trahere to
draw (see tract (n.1)).    Sense of to throw into a state of mind in which one knows not how to act
is from 1580s. Related: Distracted; distracting; distractedly; distractedness.


subtraction (n.)

c.1400, withdrawal, removal, from Late Latin subtractionem (nominative subtractio) a drawing back,
taking away, from past participle stem of Latin subtrahere take away, draw off, draw from below,
from sub from under (see sub-) + trahere to pull, draw (see tract (n.1)). The mathematical sense is
attested from early 15c.  &THORN;ou most know &thorn;at subtraccion is drawynge of one nowmber oute
of ano&thorn;er nomber. [The Crafte of Nombrynge, c.1425]


retreat (n.)

c.1300, a step backward; late 14c., act of retiring or withdrawing; military signal for retiring
from action or exercise, from Old French retret, noun use of past participle of retrere draw back,
from Latin retrahere draw back, withdraw, call back, from re- back (see re-) + trahere to draw (see
tract (n.1)). Meaning place of seclusion is from early 15c.; sense of establishment for mentally ill
persons is from 1797. Meaning period of retirement for religious self-examination is from 1756.


protraction (n.)

mid-15c., drawing or writing of numbers, from Middle French protraction (15c.) and directly from
Late Latin protractionem (nominative protractio) a drawing out or lengthening, noun of action from
past participle stem of Latin protrahere to draw forward, draw out, bring forth; figuratively bring
to light, reveal, expose, from pro- forward (see pro-) + trahere to draw (see tract (n.1)). Meaning
act of drawing out or prolonging is from 1530s.


profile (n.)

1650s, a drawing of the outline of anything, from older Italian profilo a drawing in outline, from
profilare to draw in outline, from pro- forth (see pro-) + filare draw out, spin, from Late Latin
filare to spin, draw out a line, from filum thread (see file (v.)). Meaning a side view is from
1660s. Meaning biographical sketch, character study is from 1734.


drag (v.)

mid-15c., from Old Norse draga, or a dialectal variant of Old English dragan to draw, both
ultimately from Proto-Germanic *dragan to draw, pull, from PIE root *dhragh- to draw, drag on the
ground (cognates: Sanskrit dhrajati pulls, slides in, Russian drogi wagon; but not considered to be
directly the source of Latin trahere).    Meaning to take a puff (of a cigarette, etc.) is from
1914. Related: Dragged; dragging. Drag-out violent fight is from c.1859. To drag (one's) feet (1946,
in figurative sense) supposedly is from logging, from a lazy way to use a two-man saw.


tow (v.)

pull with a rope, Old English togian to drag, pull, from Proto-Germanic *tugojanan (cognates: Old
English teon to draw, Old Frisian togia to pull about, Old Norse toga, Old High German zogon, German
ziehen to draw, pull, drag), from PIE root *deuk- to pull, draw (cognates: Latin ducere to lead; see
duke (n.)). Related: Towed; towing.


overdraw (v.)

late 14c., to draw across; 1734 in the banking sense, from over- + draw (v.). Related: Overdrawn;
overdrawing.


retreat (v.)

early 15c., to draw in, draw back, leave the extremities, from retreat (n.) and in part from Old
French retret, past participle of retrere. Meaning to fall back from battle is mid-15c. Related:
Retreated; retreating.


tier (n.)

row, rank, range, mid-15c., from Middle French tire, from Old French tire (13c.) rank, sequence,
order, kind, also likeness, image; state, condition, probably from tirer to draw, draw out (see
tirade).


sulcus (n.)

plural sulci, fissure between convolutions of the brain, 1833, from medical use of Latin sulcus
furrow, trench, ditch, wrinkle, apparently literally the result of plowing, from PIE *selk- to pull,
draw (cognates: Greek holkos furrow, Old English sulh plow, Lithuanian velku I draw).


capitulate (v.)

1570s, to draw up in chapters (i.e., under heads), in part a back-formation from capitulation, in
part from Medieval Latin capitulatus, past participle of capitulare to draw up in heads or chapters,
arrange conditions. Often of terms of surrender, hence meaning to yield on stipulated terms (1680s).
Related: Capitulated; capitulating.


retract (v.)

early 15c., to draw (something) back, from Old French retracter (14c.) and directly from Latin
retractus, past participle of retrahere to draw back (see retraction). Sense of to revoke, recant,
take back is attested from 1540s, probably a back-formation from retraction. Related: Retracted;
retracting.


extract (v.)

late 15c., from Latin extractus, past participle of extrahere draw out, from ex- out (see ex-) +
trahere to draw (see tract (n.1)). Related: Extracted; extracting.


toll (v.)

to sound with slow single strokes (intransitive), mid-15c., probably a special use of tollen to
draw, lure, early 13c. variant of Old English -tyllan in betyllan to lure, decoy, and fortyllan draw
away, seduce, of obscure origin. The notion is perhaps of luring people to church with the sound of
the bells, or of drawing on the bell rope. Transitive sense from late 15c. Related: Tolled; tolling.
The noun meaning a stroke of a bell is from mid-15c.


contract (n.)

early 14c., from Old French contract (Modern French contrat), from Latin contractus a contract,
agreement, from past participle of contrahere to draw together, metaphorically, to make a bargain,
from com- together (see com-) + trahere to draw (see tract (n.1)). U.S. underworld sense of
arrangement to kill someone first recorded 1940.


contract (v.)

late 14c., make narrow, draw together; early 15c. make an agreement; from Middle French contracter,
from Latin contractus, past participle of contrahere to draw together, combine, make an agreement
(see contract (n.)). Related: Contracted; contracting.


distress (n.)

late 13c., circumstance that causes anxiety or hardship, from Old French destresse, from Vulgar
Latin *districtia restraint, affliction, narrowness, distress, from Latin districtus, past
participle of distringere draw apart, hinder, also, in Medieval Latin compel, coerce, from dis-
apart (see dis-) + stringere draw tight, press together (see strain (v.)). Meaning anguish,
suffering; grief is from c.1300.


retraction (n.)

late 14c., withdrawal of an opinion, from Latin retractionem (nominative retractio) a drawing back,
hesitation, refusal, noun of action from past participle stem of retractare revoke, cancel, from re-
back (see re-) + tractere draw violently, frequentative of trahere to draw (see tract (n.1)).
Originally the title of a book by St. Augustine correcting his former writings. Meaning recantation
of opinion with admission of error is from 1540s.


till (n.)

cashbox, mid-15c., from Anglo-French tylle compartment, Old French tille compartment, shelter on a
ship, probably from Old Norse &thorn;ilja plank, floorboard, from Proto-Germanic *theljon. The other
theory [Klein, Century Dictionary] is that the word is from Middle English tillen to draw, from Old
English -tyllan (see toll (v.)), with a sense evolution as in drawer (see draw (v.)).


veterinarian (n.)

animal doctor, 1640s, from Latin veterinarius of or having to do with beasts of burden, also, as a
noun, cattle doctor, from veterinum beast of burden, perhaps from vetus (genitive veteris) old (see
veteran), possibly from the notion of experienced, or of one year old (hence strong enough to draw
burdens). Another theory connects it to Latin vehere to draw, on notion of used as a draft animal.
Replaced native dog-leech (1520s).


tirade (n.)

a long, vehement speech, a 'volley of words,'  1801, from French tirade a volley, a shot; a pull; a
long speech or passage; a drawing out (16c.), from tirer draw out, endure, suffer, or the French
noun is perhaps from or influenced by cognate Italian tirata a volley, from past participle of
tirare to draw. The whole Romanic word group is of uncertain origin. Barnhart suggests it is a
shortening of the source of Old French martirer endure martyrdom (see martyr).


tract (n.1)

area, mid-15c., period or lapse of time, from Latin tractus track, course, space, duration, lit, a
drawing out or pulling, from stem of trahere to pull, draw, from PIE root *tragh- to draw, drag,
move (cognates: Slovenian trag trace, track, Middle Irish tragud ebb; perhaps with a variant form
*dhragh-; see drag (v.)). The meaning stretch of land or water is first recorded 1550s. Specific
U.S. sense of plot of land for development is recorded from 1912; tract housing attested from 1953.


duke (n.)

early 12c., sovereign prince, from Old French duc (12c.) and directly from Latin dux (genitive
ducis) leader, commander, in Late Latin governor of a province, from ducere to lead, from PIE *deuk-
to lead (cognates: Old English togian to pull, drag, Old High German ziohan to pull, Old English
togian to draw, drag, Middle Welsh dygaf I draw).    Applied in English to nobleman of the highest
rank probably first mid-14c., ousting native earl. Also used to translate various European titles
(such as Russian knyaz).


trek

1849 (n.) a stage of a journey by ox wagon; 1850 (v.), to travel or migrate by ox wagon, from
Afrikaans trek, from Dutch trekken to march, journey, originally to draw, pull, from Middle Dutch
trecken (cognate with Middle Low German trecken, Old High German trechan to draw). Especially in
reference to the Groot Trek (1835 and after) of more than 10,000 Boers, who, discontented with the
English colonial authorities, left Cape Colony and went north and north-east. In general use as a
noun by 1941. Related: Trekked; trekking.


train (n.)

early 14c., a drawing out, delay; late 14c., trailing part of a skirt, gown, or cloak; also retinue,
procession, from Old French train tracks, path, trail (of a rome or gown); act of dragging, from
trainer to pull, drag, draw, from Vulgar Latin *traginare, extended from *tragere to pull, back-
formation from tractus, past participle of Latin trahere to pull, draw (see tract (n.1)).,
General sense of series, progression, succession, continuous course is from late 15c. Train of
thought first attested 1650s. The railroad sense locomotive and the cars coupled to it is recorded
from 1820 (publication year, dated 1816), from notion of a train of wagons or carriages pulled by a
mechanical engine.


infer (v.)

1520s, from Latin inferre bring into, carry in; deduce, infer, conclude, draw an inference; bring
against, from in- in (see in- (2)) + ferre carry, bear, from PIE *bher- (1) to bear, to carry, to
take (cognates: Sanskrit bharati carries; Avestan baraiti carries; Old Persian barantiy they carry;
Armenian berem I carry; Greek pherein to carry; Old Irish beru/berim I catch, I bring forth; Gothic
bairan to carry; Old English and Old High German beran, Old Norse bera barrow; Old Church Slavonic
birati to take; Russian brat' to take, bremya a burden). Sense of draw a conclusion is first
attested 1520s.


trace (v.)

late 14c., follow (a course); draw a line, make an outline of something, also figurative; ponder,
investigate, from Old French tracier look for, follow, pursue (12c., Modern French tracer), from
Vulgar Latin *tractiare delineate, score, trace (source also of Spanish trazar to trace, devise,
plan out, Italian tracciare to follow by foot), a frequentative form from Latin tractus track,
course, literally a drawing out, from past participle stem of trahere to pull, draw (see tract
(n.1)).    Meaning move along, pass over (a path, etc.) is attested from c.1400; that of track down,
follow the trail of is early 15c. Meaning copy a drawing on a transparent sheet laid over it is
recorded from 1762. Related: Traced; tracing.


shrink (v.)

Old English scrincan to draw in the limbs, contract, shrivel up; wither, pine away (class III strong
verb; past tense scranc, past participle scruncen), from Proto-Germanic *skrink- (cognates: Middle
Dutch schrinken), probably from PIE root *(s)ker- (3) to turn, bend (see ring (n.1)).    Originally
with causal shrench (compare drink/drench). Sense of become reduced in size recorded from late 13c.
The meaning draw back, recoil (early 14c.) perhaps was suggested by the behavior of snails.
Transitive sense, cause to shrink is from late 14c. Shrink-wrap is attested from 1961 (shrinking-
wrap from 1959). Shrinking violet shy person attested from 1882.


braid (v.)

to plait, knit, weave, twist together, c.1200, breidan, from Old English bregdan to move quickly,
pull, shake, swing, throw (in wrestling), draw (a sword); bend, weave, knit, join together; change
color, vary; scheme, feign, pretend (class III strong verb, past tense br&aelig;gd, past participle
brogden), from Proto-Germanic *bregthan make sudden jerky movements from side to side (compare Old
Norse breg&eth;a to brandish, turn about, braid; Old Saxon bregdan to weave; Dutch breien to knit;
Old High German brettan to draw, weave, braid), from PIE root *bherek- to gleam, flash (compare
Sanskrit bhrasate flames, blazes, shines). In English the verb survives only in the narrow
definition of plait hair. Related: Braided; braiding.


drew

Old English dreow, past tense of draw (v.).


educe (v.)

early 15c., in the literal sense, from Latin educere to lead out, bring out (of troops, ships, etc.;
see educate). Meaning to draw a conclusion from data is from 1837.


pull (v.)

c.1300, to move forcibly by pulling, to drag, from Old English pullian to pluck off (wool), to draw
out, of unknown origin, perhaps related to Low German pulen remove the shell or husk, Frisian
p&#251;lje to shell, husk, Middle Dutch polen to peel, strip, Icelandic pula work hard.    Early
14c. as to pick, pull off, gather (fruit, flowers, berries, leaves, petals, etc.); mid-14c. as to
uproot, pull up (of teeth, weeds, etc.). Sense of to draw, attract (to oneself) is from c.1400;
sense of to pluck at with the fingers is from c.1400. Meaning tear to pieces is mid-15c. By late
16c. it had replaced draw in these senses. Related: Pulled; pulling.    Common in slang usages
19c.-20c.; Bartlett (1859) has to pull foot walk fast; run; pull it to run. To pull up check a
course of action is from 1808, figurative of the lifting of the reins in horse-riding. To pull
(someone's) chain in figurative sense is from 1974, perhaps on the notion of a captive animal; the
expression was also used for to contact (someone), on the notion of the chain that operates a
signaling mechanism.    To pull (someone's) leg is from 1882, perhaps on notion of playfully
tripping (compare pull the long bow exaggerate, 1830, and pulling someone's leg also sometimes was
described as a way to awaken a sleeping person in a railway compartment, ship's berth, etc.).
Thornton's American Glossary (1912) has pull (n.) a jest (to have a pull at (someone)), which it
identifies as local and illustrates with an example from the Massachusetts Spy of May 21, 1817,
which identifies it as a Georgian phrase. To pull (one's) punches is from 1920 in pugilism, from
1921 figuratively. To pull in arrive (1892) and pull out depart (1868) are from the railroads.    To
pull (something) off accomplish, succeed at is originally in sporting, to win the prize money
(1870). To pull (something) on (someone) is from 1916; to pull (something) out of one's ass is Army
slang from 1970s. To pull rank is from 1919; to pull the rug from under (someone) figuratively is
from 1946.


write (v.)

Old English writan to score, outline, draw the figure of, later to set down in writing (class I
strong verb; past tense wrat, past participle writen), from Proto-Germanic *writan tear, scratch
(cognates: Old Frisian writa to write, Old Saxon writan to tear, scratch, write, Old Norse rita
write, scratch, outline, Old High German rizan to write, scratch, tear, German rei&szlig;en to tear,
pull, tug, sketch, draw, design), outside connections doubtful.  For men use to write an evill turne
in marble stone, but a good turne in the dust. [More, 1513]    Words for write in most Indo-European
languages originally mean carve, scratch, cut (such as Latin scribere, Greek grapho, Sanskrit
rikh-); a few originally meant paint (Gothic meljan, Old Church Slavonic pisati, and most of the
modern Slavic cognates). To write (something) off (1680s) originally was from accounting; figurative
sense is recorded from 1889. Write-in unlisted candidate is recorded from 1932.


underscore (v.)

1771, to draw a line under, from under + score (v.). The figurative sense of to emphasize is
attested from 1891. Noun meaning a line drawn below (something) is recorded from 1901.


conscript (adj.)

1530s, from Latin conscriptus, past participle of conscribere to draw up, list, literally to write
together (see conscription).


spin (v.)

Old English spinnan (transitive) draw out and twist fibers into thread, strong verb (past tense
spann, past participle spunnen), from Proto-Germanic *spenwan (cognates: Old Norse and Old Frisian
spinna, Danish spinde, Dutch spinnen, Old High German spinnan, German spinnen, Gothic spinnan), from
PIE *spen-wo-, from root *(s)pen- to draw, stretch, spin (cognates: Armenian henum I weave; Greek
patos garment, literally that which is spun; Lithuanian pinu I plait, braid, spandau I spin; Middle
Welsh cy-ffiniden spider; see span (v.)).    Intransitive senses of to form threads from fibrous
stuff; to twist, writhe developed in late Old English. Transitive sense of cause to turn rapidly is
from 1610s; intransitive meaning revolve, turn around rapidly first recorded 1660s. Meaning attempt
to influence reporters' minds after an event has taken place but before they have written about it
seems to have risen to popularity in the 1984 U.S. presidential campaign; as in spin doctor, first
attested 1984.


