dregs (n.)

c.1300 (implied in surname Dryngedregges), from Old Norse dregg sediment, from Proto-Germanic *drag-
(cognates: Old High German trestir, German Trester grapeskins, husks), from PIE *dher- (1) to make
muddy. Replaced Old English cognate dr&aelig;st, d&aelig;rst dregs, lees. Figurative use is from
1530s.


feces (n.)

also faeces, c.1400, dregs, from Latin faeces sediment, dregs, plural of faex (genitive faecis)
grounds, sediment, lees, dregs, of unknown origin. Specific sense of human excrement is from 1630s.


defecate (v.)

1570s, to purify, from Latin defaecatus, past participle of defaecare cleanse from dregs, purify,
from the phrase de faece from dregs (plural faeces; see feces). Excretory sense first recorded 1830
(defecation), American English, from French. Related: Defecated; defecating.


magma (n.)

mid-15c., dregs, from Latin magma dregs of an ointment, from Greek magma thick unguent, ointment,
from root of  massein to knead, mold, from PIE *mag- to knead (see macerate). Geological meaning
molten rock is 1859. Related: Magmalic.


dross (n.)

dirt, dregs, Old English dros the scum thrown off from metals in smelting, from Proto-Germanic
*drohs- (cognates: Middle Dutch droes, Dutch droesem, Middle Low German dros, Old High German
truosana, German Drusen dregs, husks), from PIE dher- (1) to make muddy. Meaning refuse, rubbish is
mid-15c.


dreg (n.)

see dregs.


mother (n.2)

a thick substance concreting in liquors; the lees or scum concreted [Johnson], probably from Middle
Dutch modder filth, dregs, from PIE *meu- (see mud).


feculent (adj.)

late 15c., from Middle French f&eacute;culent, from Latin faeculentus abounding in dregs, from stem
faec- (see feces). Related: Feculence.


mother of pearl (n.)

c.1500, translating Medieval Latin mater perlarum, with the first element perhaps connected in
popular imagination with obsolete mother (n.2) dregs. Compare Italian madreperla, French m&#232;re-
perle, Dutch parelmoer, German Perlmutter, Danish perlemor.


tapioca (n.)

1640s, tipiaca, from Portuguese or Spanish tapioca, from Tupi (Brazil) tipioca juice of a pressed
cassava, from tipi residue, dregs + og, ok to squeeze out (from roots of the cassava plant).


suds (n.)

1540s, dregs, leavings, muck, especially in East Anglia, ooze left by flood (according to OED this
may be the original sense), perhaps borrowed from Middle Dutch sudse marsh, bog, or related words in
Frisian and Low German, cognate with Old English soden boiled, from Proto-Germanic *suth-, from PIE
*seut- to seethe, boil (see seethe). Meaning soapy water dates from 1580s; slang meaning beer first
attested 1904. Related: Sudsy.


rascal (n.)

mid-14c., rascaile people of the lowest class, rabble of an army, also singular, low, tricky,
dishonest person, from Old French rascaille rabble, mob (12c., Modern French racaille, the rascality
or base and rascall sort, the scumme, dregs, offals, outcasts, of any company [Cotgrave, French-
English Dictionary, 1611]), perhaps a diminutive from Old French rascler, from Vulgar Latin
*rasicare to scrape (see rash (n.)). Used also in Middle English of animals not hunted as game.


schlock (n.)

trash, 1915, from American Yiddish shlak, from German Schlacke dregs, scum, dross (see slag (n.)).
Alternative etymology [OED] is from Yiddish shlogn to strike (cognate with German schlagen; see
slay). Derived form schlockmeister purveyor of cheap merchandise is from 1965. Adjectival form
schlocky is attested from 1968; schlock was used as an adjective from 1916.


sag (v.)

late 14c., possibly from a Scandinavian source related to Old Norse sokkva to sink, or from Middle
Low German sacken to settle, sink (as dregs in wine), from denasalized derivative of Proto-Germanic
base *senkwanan to sink (see sink (v.)). A general North Sea Germanic word (compare Dutch zakken,
Swedish sacka, Danish sakke). Of body parts from 1560s; of clothes from 1590s. Related: Sagged;
sagging.


latex (n.)

1660s, body fluid, from Latin latex (genitive laticis) liquid, fluid, probably from Greek latax
dregs, from PIE root *lat- wet (cognates: Middle Irish laith beer, Welsh llaid mud, mire, Lithuanian
latakas pool, puddle, Old Norse le&thorn;ja filth). Used 1835 to mean milky liquid from plants.
Meaning water-dispersed polymer particles (used in rubber goods, paints, etc.) is from 1937. As an
adjective by 1954, in place of clasically correct laticiferous.


stale (adj.)

early 13c., freed from dregs or lees (of ale, wine, etc.), probably literally having stood long
enough to clear, ultimately from PIE root *sta- to stand (see stet); probably via Old French estal
placed, fixed position, from Frankish *stal- position (see stall (n.1)). Cognate with Middle Dutch
stel stale (of beer and old urine). Originally a desirable quality (in beer and wine); the meaning
not fresh is first recorded late 15c. Figurative sense (of immaterial things) old and trite,
hackneyed is recorded from 1560s. As a noun, that which has become tasteless by exposure, hence a
prostitute (in Shakespeare, etc.). Related: Staleness.


crap (v.)

defecate, 1846, from one of a cluster of words generally applied to things cast off or discarded
(such as weeds growing among corn (early 15c.), residue from renderings (late 15c.), underworld
slang for money (18c.), and in Shropshire, dregs of beer or ale), all probably from Middle English
crappe grain that was trodden underfoot in a barn, chaff (mid-15c.), from Middle French crape
siftings, from Old French crappe, from Medieval Latin crappa, crapinum chaff.  Related: Crapped;
crapping.    Despite folk etymology insistence, not from Thomas Crapper (1837-1910) who was,
however, a busy plumber and may have had some minor role in the development of modern toilets. The
name Crapper is a northern form of Cropper (attested from 1221), an occupational surname, obviously,
but the exact reference is unclear. Crap (v.) as a variant of crop (v.) was noted early 19c, as a
peculiarity of speech in Scotland and the U.S. Southwest (Arkansas, etc.).    Draw out yere sword,
thou vile South'ron!  Red wat wi' blude o' my kin!  That sword it crapped the bonniest flower  E'er
lifted its head to the sun!   [Allan Cunningham (1784-1842), The Young Maxwell]


