drip (n.)

mid-15c., from drip (v.). The slang meaning stupid, feeble, or dull person is first recorded 1932,
perhaps from earlier American English slang sense nonsense (1919).


drippy (adj.)

1817, from drip + -y (2). Meaning sloppily sentimental is 1944, from the slang sense.


drip (v.)

c.1300, perhaps from Middle Danish drippe, from Proto-Germanic *drup- (cognates: Dutch druipen,
German triefen), from PIE root *dhreu-. Related to droop and drop. Old English had cognate drypan to
let drop, dropian fall in drops, and dreopan to drop. Related: Dripped; dripping.


stagnate (v.)

1660s, from Latin stagnatum, stagnatus, past participle of stagnare to stagnate, from stagnatum
standing water, pond, swamp, perhaps from a PIE root *stag- to seep drip (cognates: Greek stazein to
ooze, drip; see stalactite). Figurative use by 1709. Related: Stagnated; stagnating.


dreary (adj.)

Old English dreorig sad, sorrowful, originally cruel, bloody, blood-stained, from dreor gore, blood,
from (ge)dreosan (past participle droren) fall, decline, fail, from Proto-Germanic *dreuzas
(cognates: Old Norse dreyrigr gory, bloody, and more remotely, German traurig sad, sorrowful), from
PIE root *dhreu- to fall, flow, drip, droop (see drip (v.)).    The word has lost its original sense
of dripping blood. Sense of dismal, gloomy first recorded 1667 in Paradise Lost, but Old English had
a related verb drysmian become gloomy.


soap (n.)

Old English sape soap, salve (originally a reddish hair dye used by Germanic warriors to give a
frightening appearance), from Proto-Germanic *saipon dripping thing, resin (cognates: Middle Low
German sepe, West Frisian sjippe, Dutch zeep, Old High German seiffa, German seife soap, Old High
German seifar foam, Old English sipian to drip), from PIE *soi-bon-, from root *seib- to pour out,
drip, trickle (cognates: Latin sebum tallow, suet, grease).    Romans and Greeks used oil to clean
skin; the Romance language words for soap (cognates: Italian sapone, French savon, Spanish jabon)
are from Late Latin sapo pomade for coloring the hair (first mentioned in Pliny), which is a
Germanic loan-word, as is Finnish saippua. The meaning flattery is recorded from 1853.


eavesdropper (n.)

mid-15c., from Middle English eavesdrop, from Old English yfesdrype place around a house where the
rainwater drips off the roof, from eave (q.v.) + drip (v.). Technically, one who stands at walls or
windows to overhear what's going on inside.


dribble (v.)

1580s, frequentative of obsolete verb drib (1520s), variant of drip (v.). Sports sense first used of
soccer (1863), basketball sense is by 1892 (implied in dribbling). Related: Dribbled; dribbling. As
a noun from 1670s.


stalagmite (n.)

cone-shaped formation of carbonate of lime on the floor of a cave, 1680s, from Modern Latin
stalagmites (1650s, Olaus Wormius), from Greek stalagmos a dropping, or stalagma a drop, drip, that
which drops, from stalassein to trickle (see stalactite). Related: Stalagmitic; stalagmitical.


droop (v.)

early 13c., from Old Norse drupa to drop, sink, hang (the head), from Proto-Germanic *drup-, from
PIE *dhreu-, related to Old English dropian to drop (see drip). Related: Drooped; drooping. As a
noun, from 1640s.


seep (v.)

1790, variant of sipe (c.1500), possibly from Old English sipian to seep, from Proto-Germanic *sip-
(cognates: Middle High German sifen, Dutch sijpelen to ooze), from PIE root *seib- to pour out,
drip, trickle (see soap (n.)). Related: Seeped; seeping.


distill (v.)

also distil, late 14c., from Old French distiller (14c.), from Latin distillare trickle down in
minute drops, from dis- apart (see dis-) + stillare to drip, drop, from stilla drop. Related:
Distilled; distilling.


stalactite (n.)

hanging formation of carbonite of lime from the roof of a cave, 1670s, Englished from Modern Latin
stalactites (used 1654 by Olaus Wormius), from Greek stalaktos dripping, oozing out in drops, from
stalassein to trickle, from PIE root *stag- to seep, drip, drop (cognates: German stallen,
Lithuanian telziu to urinate) + noun suffix -ite (1). Related: Stalactic; stalactitic.


mat (adj.)

1640s, lusterless, dull (of a color or surface), from French mat dull, dead surface, from Old French
mat beaten down, withered, afflicted, dejected; dull, which is perhaps from Latin mattus maudlin
with drink, from madere to be wet or sodden, be drunk, from PIE root *mad- to be wet, drip (see mast
(n.2)). Or the French word might represent a transferred use from chess of mater to checkmate,
defeat, from Arabic (see mate (v.2)).


drizzle (v.)

1540s, perhaps an alteration of drysning a falling of dew (c.1400), from Old English -drysnian,
related to dreosan to fall, from PIE root *dhreu- (see drip (v.)). Or perhaps a frequentative of
Middle English dresen to fall, from Old English dreosan. Related: Drizzled; drizzling. As a noun,
from 1550s.


sieve (n.)

Old English sife sieve, from Proto-Germanic *sib (cognates: Middle Dutch seve, Dutch zeef, Old High
German sib, German Sieb), from PIE *seib- to pour out, sieve, drip, trickle (see soap (n.)). Related
to sift. The Sieve of Eratosthenes (1803) is a contrivance for finding prime numbers. Sieve and
shears formerly were used in divinations.


leak (v.)

to let water in or out [Johnson], late 14c., from Middle Dutch leken to drip, to leak, or from Old
Norse leka, both of them related to Old English leccan to moisten (which did not survive into Middle
English), all from Proto-Germanic *lek- deficiency (cognates: Old High German lecchen to become dry,
German lechzen to be parched with thirst), from PIE root *leg- to dribble, trickle. The figurative
meaning come to be known in spite of efforts at concealment dates from at least 1832; transitive
sense first recorded 1859. Related: Leaked; leaking.


litmus (n.)

blue dye-stuff obtained from certain lichens, early 14c., from Middle Dutch lijkmoes (Dutch
lakmoes), from lac (see lac) + moes pulp. Another theory is that it represents Old Norse litmose,
literally lichen for dying, from Old Norse lita to dye, to stain, from litr color, dye (see lit
(n.1)) + mos moss. Yet another idea connects the first element to Middle Dutch leken to drip, leak
(see leak (v.)).    Whichever was the original word, it probably was influenced by the others. The
dye is obtained from certain lichens. It is naturally blue but turns red in acid and is restored to
blue by alkalis. Figurative use of litmus test is first attested 1957, from scientific use of
litmus-treated paper as a chemical indicator. Litmus paper with this meaning is from 1803.


