drollery (n.)

1590s, from French dr&ocirc;lerie (16c.), from dr&ocirc;le (see droll).


droll (adj.)

1620s, from French dr&ocirc;le odd, comical, funny (1580s), in Middle French a noun meaning a merry
fellow, possibly from Middle Dutch drol fat little fellow, goblin, or Middle High German trolle
clown, ultimately from Old Norse troll giant, troll (see troll (n.)). Related: Drolly; drollish.


Spenserian (adj.)

1817, from Edmund Spenser (c.1552-1599), Elizabethan poet (for the origin of the surname, see
Spencer). Spenserian stanza, which he employed in the Faerie Queen, consists of eight decasyllabic
lines and a final Alexandrine, with rhyme scheme ab ab bc bcc.    The measure soon ceases to be
Spenser's except in its mere anatomy of rhyme-arrangement [Elton, Survey of English Literature
1770-1880, 1920]; it is the meter in Butler's Hudibras, Scott's Lady of the Lake, and notably the
Childe Harold of Byron, who found (quoting Beattie) that it allowed him to be either droll or
pathetic, descriptive or sentimental, tender or satirical, as the humour strikes me; for, if I
mistake not, the measure which I have adopted admits equally of all these kinds of composition.


quiz (n.)

brief examination of a student on some subject, 1852, perhaps from quiz (v.), or from slang quiz odd
person (1782, perhaps originally university slang), via the notion of schoolboy prank or joke played
at the expense of a person deemed a quiz (a noun sense attested frequently 1840s).    A Quiz, in the
common acceptation of the word, signifies one who thinks, speaks, or acts differently from the rest
of the world in general. But, as manners and opinions are as various as mankind, it will be
difficult to say who shall be termed a Quiz, and who shall not: each person indiscriminately
applying the name of Quiz to every one who differs from himself .... [The London Magazine, November,
1783]     According to OED, the anecdote that credits this word to a bet by the Dublin theater-
manager Daly or Daley that he could coin a word is regarded by authorities as doubtful and the first
record of it appears to be in 1836 (in Smart's Walker Remodelled; the story is omitted in the
edition of 1840).    The word Quiz is a sort of a kind of a word  That people apply to some being
absurd;  One who seems, as t'were oddly your fancy to strike  In a sort of a fashion you somehow
don't like  A mixture of odd, and of queer, and all that  Which one hates, just, you know, as some
folks hate a cat;  A comical, whimsical, strange, droll -- that is,  You know what I mean; 'tis --
in short, -- 'tis a quiz!    [from Etymology of Quiz, Charles Dibdin, 1842]


Yankee (n.)

1683, a name applied disparagingly by Dutch settlers in New Amsterdam (New York) to English
colonists in neighboring Connecticut. It may be from Dutch Janke, literally Little John, diminutive
of common personal name Jan; or it may be from Jan Kes familiar form of John Cornelius, or perhaps
an alteration of Jan Kees, dialectal variant of Jan Kaas, literally John Cheese, the generic
nickname the Flemings used for Dutchmen.    [I]t is to be noted that it is common to name a droll
fellow, regarded as typical of his country, after some favorite article of food, as E[nglish] Jack-
pudding, G[erman] Hanswurst (Jack Sausage), F[rench] Jean Farine (Jack Flour). [Century Dictionary,
1902, entry for macaroni]    Originally it seems to have been applied insultingly to the Dutch,
especially freebooters, before they turned around and slapped it on the English. A less-likely
theory (attested by 1832) is that it represents some southern New England Algonquian language
mangling of English. In English a term of contempt (1750s) before its use as a general term for
native of New England (1765); during the American Revolution it became a disparaging British word
for all American natives or inhabitants. Contrasted with southerner by 1828. Shortened form Yank in
reference to an American first recorded 1778. Latin-American form Yanqui attested in English by 1914
(in Mexican Spanish by 1835).    The rule observed in this country is, that the man who receives
that name [Yankee] must come from some part north of him who gives it. To compensate us for giving
each other nicknames, John Bull lumps us all together, and calls us all Yankees. [Who is a Yankee?
Massachusetts Spy, June 6, 1827]


