drone (n.)

Old English dran, dr&aelig;n male honeybee, from Proto-Germanic *dran- (cognates: Middle Dutch
drane; Old High German treno; German Drohne, which is from Middle Low German drone), probably
imitative; given a figurative sense of idler, lazy worker (male bees make no honey) 1520s. Meaning
pilotless aircraft is from 1946.    Drones, as the radio-controlled craft are called, have many
potentialities, civilian and military. Some day huge mother ships may guide fleets of long-distance,
cargo-carrying airplanes across continents and oceans. Long-range drones armed with atomic bombs
could be flown by accompanying mother ships to their targets and in for perfect hits. [Popular
Science, November, 1946]    Meaning deep, continuous humming sound is early 16c., apparently
imitative (compare threnody). The verb in the sound sense is early 16c.; it often is the
characteristic sound of airplane engines. Related: Droned; droning.


burden (n.2)

leading idea, 1640s, a figurative use from earlier sense refrain or chorus of a song, 1590s,
originally bass accompaniment to music (late 14c.), from Old French bordon bumble-bee, drone, or
directly from Medieval Latin burdonom drone, drone bass (source of French bourdon, Spanish bordon,
Portuguese bord&atilde;o, Italian bordone), of echoic origin.


threnody (n.)

song of lamentation, 1630s, from Greek threnodia lamentation, from threnos dirge, lament + oide ode
(see ode). Greek threnos probably is from PIE imitative root *dher- (3) to drone, murmur, hum;
cognates: Old English dran drone, Gothic drunjus sound, Greek tenthrene a kind of wasp.


loll (v.)

mid-14c., lollen to lounge idly, hang loosely, perhaps related to Middle Dutch lollen to doze,
mumble, or somehow imitative of rocking or swinging. Specifically of the tongue from 1610s. Related:
Lolled; lolling. As a noun, from 1709. Grose [Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, 1785] has lollpoop A
lazy, idle drone.


hum (v.)

late 14c., hommen make a murmuring sound to cover embarrassment, later hummen to buzz, drone (early
15c.), probably of imitative origin. Sense of sing with closed lips is first attested late 15c.;
that of be busy and active is 1884, perhaps on analogy of a beehive. Related: Hummed; humming.
Humming-bird (1630s) so called from sound made by the rapid vibration of its wings.There is a
curious bird to see to, called a humming bird, no bigger then a great Beetle. [Thomas Morton, New
English Canaan, 1637]


wasp (n.)

Old English w&aelig;ps, w&aelig;sp wasp, altered (probably by influence of Latin vespa) from Proto-
Germanic *wabis- (cognates: Old Saxon waspa, Middle Dutch wespe, Dutch wesp, Old High German wafsa,
German Wespe, Danish hveps), from PIE *wopsa-/*wospa- wasp (cognates: Latin vespa, Lithuanian vapsa,
Old Church Slavonic vosa wasp, Old Irish foich drone), perhaps from *webh- weave (see weave (v.)).
If that is the correct derivation, the insect would be so called for the shape of its nest. Of
persons with wasp-like tendencies, from c.1500. Wasp-waist in reference to women's figures is
recorded from 1870 (wasp-waisted is from 1775).


meld (v.)

to blend together, merge, unite (intransitive), by 1910, of uncertain origin. OED suggests perh. a
blend of MELT v.1 and WELD v. Said elsewhere to be a verb use of melled mingled, blended, past
participle of dialectal mell to mingle, mix, combine, blend.    [T]he biplane grew smaller and
smaller, the stacatto clatter of the motor became once more a drone which imperceptibly became
melded with the waning murmur of country sounds .... [Aircraft magazine, October 1910]      But it
is perhaps an image from card-playing, where the verb meld is attested by 1907 in a sense of combine
two cards for a score:    Upon winning a trick, and before drawing from the stock, the player can
meld certain combinations of cards. [rules for two-hand pinochle in Hoyle's Games, 1907]    The rise
of the general sense of the word in English coincides with the craze for canasta, in which melding
figures. The card-playing sense is said to be apparently from German melden make known, announce,
from Old High German meldon, from Proto-Germanic *meldojan (source of Old English meldian to
declare, tell, display, proclaim), and the notion is of declaring the combination of cards. Related:
Melded; melding.


