dross (n.)

dirt, dregs, Old English dros the scum thrown off from metals in smelting, from Proto-Germanic
*drohs- (cognates: Middle Dutch droes, Dutch droesem, Middle Low German dros, Old High German
truosana, German Drusen dregs, husks), from PIE dher- (1) to make muddy. Meaning refuse, rubbish is
mid-15c.


cinder (n.)

Old English sinder dross of iron, slag, from Proto-Germanic *sendra- slag (cognates: Old Saxon
sinder slag, dross, Old Norse sindr, Middle Low German and Middle Dutch sinder, Dutch sintel, Old
High German sintar, German Sinter), from PIE root *sendhro- coagulating fluid (cognates: Old Church
Slavonic sedra cinder).    Initial s- changed to c- under influence of unrelated French cendre
ashes, from Latin cinerem (nominative cinis) ashes, from or related to Greek konis dust (see
incinerate). The French word also apparently shifted the sense of the English one to small piece of
burnt coal (16c.). Volcanic cinder cone is recorded from 1849.


galena (n.)

lead ore, lead sulphide, c.1600, from Latin galena mix of silver and lead; dross from smelting lead,
of unknown origin.


recrement (n.)

dross, scum, 1590s, from French r&#233;cr&#233;ment (mid-16c.) or directly from Latin recrementum,
from re- (see re-) + cernere to sift, separate (see crisis).


sublimate (v.)

1590s, raise to a high place, back-formation from sublimation or else from Medieval Latin
sublimatus, past participle of sublimare to lift up. The word was used in English from 1560s as a
past participle adjective meaning purified, refined by sublimation. Chemical/alchemical sense of
heat a solid into vapor and allow it to cool again as a way of extracting a pure substance from
dross is from c.1600. Related: Sublimated; sublimating. As a noun from 1620s.


trash (n.)

late 14c., thing of little use or value, waste, refuse, dross, perhaps from a Scandinavian source
(compare Old Norse tros rubbish, fallen leaves and twigs, Norwegian dialectal trask lumber, trash,
baggage, Swedish trasa rags, tatters), of unknown origin. Applied to ill-bred persons or groups from
1604 (Othello), and especially of poor whites in the U.S. South by 1831. Applied to domestic refuse
or garbage from 1906 (American English). Trash-can attested from 1914. To trash-talk someone or
something is by 1989.


schlock (n.)

trash, 1915, from American Yiddish shlak, from German Schlacke dregs, scum, dross (see slag (n.)).
Alternative etymology [OED] is from Yiddish shlogn to strike (cognate with German schlagen; see
slay). Derived form schlockmeister purveyor of cheap merchandise is from 1965. Adjectival form
schlocky is attested from 1968; schlock was used as an adjective from 1916.


