drudgery (n.)

1540s, from drudge + -ery.


drudge (n.)

late 15c., one employed in mean, servile, or distasteful work, missing in Old English and Middle
English, unless it is represented by Middle English druggen do menial or monotonous work; druggunge,
mid-13c., which are perhaps from Old English dreogan to work, suffer, endure (see endure). The verb
is from 1540s. Related: Drudged; drudging. The surname is from 13c., probably from Old French dragie
a mixture of grains sown together, thus, a grower of this crop.


dree (v.)

Old English dreogan to work, suffer, endure; see drudge. Cognate of Old Norse drygjado carry out,
accomplish, Gothic driugan serve as a soldier.


grub (n.)

larva, early 15c., perhaps from grub (v.) on the notion of digging insect, or from the possibly
unrelated Middle English grub dwarfish fellow (c.1400). Meaning dull drudge is 1650s. The slang
sense of food is first recorded 1650s, said to be from birds eating grubs, but also often linked
with bub drink.


journeyman (n.)

qualified worker at a craft or trade who works for wages for another (a position between apprentice
and master), early 15c., from journey (n.), preserving the etymological sense of the word, + man
(n.). Figurative depricatory sense of hireling, drudge is from 1540s. Its American English
colloquial shortening jour (adj.) is attested from 1835.


scrub (n.1)

late 14c., low, stunted tree, variant of shrobbe (see shrub), perhaps influenced by a Scandinavian
word (such as Danish dialectal skrub a stunted tree, brushwood). Collective sense brush, shrubs is
attested from 1805. As an adjective from 1710. Scrub oak recorded from 1766.    Transferred sense of
mean, insignificant fellow is from 1580s; U.S. sports meaning athlete not on the varsity team is
recorded from 1892, probably from this, but compare scrub hard-working servant, drudge (1709),
perhaps from influence of scrub (v.).


hack (n.2)

person hired to do routine work, c.1700, ultimately short for hackney an ordinary horse (c.1300),
probably from place name Hackney, Middlesex (q.v.). Apparently nags were raised on the pastureland
there in early medieval times. Extended sense of horse for hire (late 14c.) led naturally to broken-
down nag, and also prostitute (1570s) and drudge (1540s).  Sense of carriage for hire (1704) led to
modern slang for taxicab. As an adjective, 1734, from the noun. Hack writer is first recorded 1826,
though hackney writer is at least 50 years earlier. Hack-work is recorded from 1851.


robot (n.)

1923, from English translation of 1920 play R.U.R. (Rossum's Universal Robots), by Karel Capek
(1890-1938), from Czech robotnik slave, from robota forced labor, compulsory service, drudgery, from
robotiti to work, drudge, from an Old Czech source akin to Old Church Slavonic rabota servitude,
from rabu slave, from Old Slavic *orbu-, from PIE *orbh- pass from one status to another (see
orphan). The Slavic word thus is a cousin to German Arbeit work (Old High German arabeit). According
to Rawson the word was popularized by Karel Capek's play, but was coined by his brother Josef (the
two often collaborated), who used it initially in a short story.


slut (n.)

c.1400, a dirty, slovenly, or untidy woman, according to OED Of doubtful origin, but probably
cognate with dialectal German Schlutt slovenly woman, dialectal Swedish slata idle woman, slut, and
Dutch slodde slut, slodder a careless man, but the exact relationship of all these is obscure.
Chaucer uses sluttish (late 14c.) in reference to the appearance of an untidy man. Also a kitchen
maid, a drudge (mid-15c.; hard pieces in a bread loaf from imperfect kneading were called slut's
pennies, 18c.).    Specific modern sense of woman who enjoys sex in a degree considered shamefully
excessive is by 1966. Meaning woman of loose character, bold hussy is attested from mid-15c., but
the primary association through 18c. was untidiness. Johnson has it (second definition) as A word of
slight contempt to a woman but sexual activity does not seem to figure into his examples. Playful
use of the word, without implication of messiness or loose morals, is attested by 1660s:    My wife
called up the people to washing by four o'clock in the morning; and our little girl Susan is a most
admirable slut, and pleases us mightily, doing more service than both the others, and deserves wages
better. [Pepys, diary, Feb. 21, 1664]    Compare playful use of scamp, etc., for boys. Sometimes
used 19c. as a euphemism for bitch to describe a female dog.    There is a group of North Sea
Germanic words in sl- that mean sloppy, and also slovenly woman and, less often, slovenly man, and
that tend to evolve toward woman of loose morals. Compare slattern, also English dialectal slummock
a dirty, untidy, or slovenly person (1861), variant of slammacks slatternly woman, said to be from
slam ill-shaped, shambling fellow. Also slammakin (from 1756 as a type of loose gown; 1785 as
slovenly female, 1727 as a character name in Gay's Beggar's Opera), with variants slamkin,
slammerkin. Also possibly related are Middle Dutch slore a sluttish woman, Dutch slomp, German
schlampe a slattern.


