dubious (adj.)

1540s, from Latin dubiosus doubtful, from dubium doubt, neuter of dubius vacillating, moving two
ways, fluctuating; figuratively wavering in opinion, doubting, doubtful, from duo two (see two),
with a sense of of two minds, undecided between two things. Old English also used tweo two to mean
doubt. Compare doubt (v.). Related: Dubiously; dubiousness.


questionable (adj.)

1580s, that may be interrogated; c.1600, open to dispute, doubtful, from question (v.) + -able.
Deprecatory sense of dubious in character is attested from 1806. Related: Questionably.


dubiety (n.)

c.1750, from Late Latin dubietas doubt, uncertainty, from dubius (see dubious).


widgeon (n.)

migratory wild duck, 1510s, perhaps from a northern variant of French vigeon, which some trace to
Latin vipionem (nominative vipio), a kind of small crane, a Balearic word, perhaps imitative, with
an evolution of form similar to that which produced pigeon. But the French word is later than the
English one, and OED finds all this very dubious. Applied to different species in Europe and
America.


ticklish (adj.)

easily tickled, 1590s, from tickle + -ish. Literal sense is attested later than the figurative sense
easy to upset (1580s). An earlier word for this was tickly (1520s). Meaning difficult to do,
dubious, requiring great care is from 1590s. Related: Ticklishly; ticklishness.


dubitation (n.)

mid-15c., from Middle French dubitation (13c.), from Latin dubitationem (nominative dubitatio)
uncertainty, doubt, noun of state from past participle stem of dubitare to waver in opinion, be
uncertain, doubt, question (related to dubius uncertain; see dubious).


louche (adj.)

dubious, disreputable, 1819, from French louche squinting, from Old French lousche, lois (12c.)
cross-eyed, squint-eyed, lop-sided, from Latin lusca, fem. of luscus one-eyed, of unknown origin.


cerveza (n.)

Spanish for beer, from Latin cervisia beer (related to Latin cerea a Spanish beer), from a Celtic
*kerb- (compare Gaulish curmi, Old Irish cuirm, Middle Irish coirm, Welsh cwrwf, Old Cornish coref
beer), from Proto-Celtic *kormi-, perhaps from PIE root *krem-, also source of Latin cremare to burn
(see cremation). Connection with ceres (as a drink from grain) is very dubious [Tucker].


doubt (v.)

early 13c., to dread, fear, from Old French doter doubt, be doubtful; be afraid, from Latin dubitare
to doubt, question, hesitate, waver in opinion (related to dubius uncertain; see dubious),
originally to have to choose between two things.    The sense of fear developed in Old French and
was passed on to English. Meaning to be uncertain is attested in English from c.1300. The -b- was
restored 14c. by scribes in imitation of Latin. Replaced Old English tweogan (noun twynung), from
tweon two, on notion of of two minds or the choice of two implied in Latin dubitare (compare German
Zweifel doubt, from zwei two).


snow (v.)

c.1300, from the noun, replacing Old English sniwan, which would have yielded modern snew (which
existed as a parallel form until 17c. and, in Yorkshire, even later), from the root of snow (n.).
The Old English verb is cognate with Middle Dutch sneuuwen, Dutch sneeuwen, Old Norse snjova,
Swedish sn&#246;ga.  Also &thorn;ikke as snow &thorn;at snew,  Or al so hail &thorn;at stormes blew.
[Robert Mannyng of Brunne, transl. Wace's Chronicle, c.1330]    The figurative sense of overwhelm;
surround, cover, and imprison (as deep snows can do to livestock) is 1880, American English, in
phrase to snow (someone) under. Snow job strong, persistent persuasion in a dubious cause is World
War II armed forces slang, probably from the same metaphoric image.


