duplicity (n.)

early 15c., from Old French duplicite (13c.), from Late Latin duplicitatem (nominative duplicitas)
doubleness, in Medieval Latin ambiguity, noun of quality from duplex (genitive duplicis) twofold.
The notion is of being double in one's conduct (compare Greek diploos treacherous, double-minded,
literally twofold, double).


biplicity (n.)

1731; see bi- + ending from multiplicity. A useful and non-pejorative alternative to duplicity.


simpleness (n.)

14c., absence of pride, from simple (adj.) + -ness. From late 14c. as absence of duplicity;
ignorance; absence of complexity.


duplicitous (adj.)

1831; see duplicity + -ous.


Injun (n.)

1812 (from 1683 as Ingin), spelling representing American English colloquial pronunciation of Indian
(q.v.). Honest Injun as an asseveration of truthfuless first recorded 1868, from the notion of
assurance extracted from Indians of their lack of duplicity.    Honest Injun? inquired Mr. Wilder,
using a Western phrase equivalent to demanding of the narrator of a story whether he is strictly
adhering to the truth. [The Genial Showman, London, 1870]    The term honest Indian is attested from
1676.


prevarication (n.)

late 14c., divergence from a right course, transgression, from Old French prevaricacion breaking of
God's laws, disobedience (to the Faith) (12c., Modern French pr&#233;varication) and directly from
Latin praevaricationem (nominative praevaricatio) duplicity, collusion, a stepping out of line (of
duty or behavior), noun of action from past participle stem of praevaricari to make a sham
accusation, deviate, literally walk crookedly, in Church Latin, to transgress, from prae before (see
pre-) + varicare to straddle, from varicus straddling, from varus bowlegged, knock-kneed (see
varus). Meaning evasion, quibbling is attested from 1650s.


simple (adj.)

c.1200, free from duplicity, upright, guileless; blameless, innocently harmless, also ignorant,
uneducated; unsophisticated; simple-minded, foolish, from Old French simple (12c.) plain, decent;
friendly, sweet; naive, foolish, stupid, hence wretched, miserable, from Latin simplus, variant of
simplex simple, uncompounded, literally onefold (see simplex). Sense of free from pride, humble,
meek is mid-13c. As consisting of only one substance or ingredient (opposite of composite or
compounded) it dates from late 14c.; as easily done (opposite of complicated) it dates from late
15c.    From mid-14c. as unqualified; mere; sheer; also clear, straightforward; easily understood.
From late 14c. as single, individual; whole. From late 14c. of clothing, etc., modest, plain,
unadorned, and of food, plain, not sumptuous. In medicine, of fractures, etc., lacking
complications, late 14c. As a law term, lacking additional legal stipulations, unlimited, from mid-
14c.    In Middle English with wider senses than recently, such as inadequate, insufficient; weak,
feeble; mere; few; sad, downcast; mournful; of little value; low in price; impoverished, destitute;
of hair, straight, not curly. As noun, an innocent or a guileless person; a humble or modest person
(late 14c.), also an uncompounded substance. From c.1500 as ignorant people.


