duration (n.)

late 14c., from Old French duration, from Medieval Latin durationem (nominative duratio), noun of
action from past participle stem of Latin durare harden (see endure). Old legalese phrase for the
duration popularized 1916 in reference to British enlistments in World War I.


perpetuity (n.)

late 14c., from Old French perpetuit&eacute; permanence, duration (13c., Modern French
perp&eacute;tuit&eacute;) and directly from Latin perpetuitatem (nominative perpetuitas)
uninterrupted duration, continuity, continuous succession, from perpetuus (see perpetual).


momentary (adj.)

lasting a moment, mid-15c., from Latin momentarius of brief duration, from momentum (see moment).


longinquity (n.)

remoteness, 1540s, from Latin longinquitas length, extent, duration, from longinquus long,
extensive, remote, distant, from longus (see long (adj.)) -inquus.


perseveration (n.)

early 15c., duration, quality of persisting; will to persevere, from Old French perseveracion
persistence, stubbornness (13c.) and directly, from Latin perseverationem (nominative perseveratio),
noun of action from past participle stem of perseverare (see persevere). Psychological sense (1915)
is from German.


longitude (n.)

late 14c., length, from Latin longitudo length, duration, from longus (see long (adj.)). For
origins, see latitude.


mini-series

also miniseries television series of short duration, on a single theme, 1971, from mini- + series.


psychometric (adj.)

also psycho-metric, 1854, from psychometry (1854), the alleged power of reading the history of an
object by handling it, + -ic. In reference to the measurement of the duration of mental states, from
1879, from psycho- + -metric.


durance (n.)

late 15c., from Old French durance duration, from durer to endure, from Latin durare (see endure).


Parnassus (n.)

late 14c., from Latin, from Greek Parnassos, mountain in central Greece, sacred to Apollo and the
Muses, thus symbolic of poetry. Room writes that the name is from Hittite parna abode. Related:
Parnassian.    Various kinds of literary fame seem destined to various measures of duration. Some
spread into exuberance with a very speedy growth, but soon wither and decay; some rise more slowly,
but last long. Parnassus has its flowers of transient fragrance, as well as its oaks of towering
height, and its laurels of eternal verdure. [Samuel Johnson, The Rambler, March 23, 1751]


tract (n.1)

area, mid-15c., period or lapse of time, from Latin tractus track, course, space, duration, lit, a
drawing out or pulling, from stem of trahere to pull, draw, from PIE root *tragh- to draw, drag,
move (cognates: Slovenian trag trace, track, Middle Irish tragud ebb; perhaps with a variant form
*dhragh-; see drag (v.)). The meaning stretch of land or water is first recorded 1550s. Specific
U.S. sense of plot of land for development is recorded from 1912; tract housing attested from 1953.


natural (adj.)

c.1300, naturel, of one's inborn character; hereditary, by birth; early 14c. as of the world of
nature (especially as opposed to man), from Old French naturel of nature, conforming to nature; by
birth, and directly from Latin naturalis by birth, according to nature, from natura nature (see
nature).    From late 15c. as not miraculous, in conformity with nature. Meaning easy, free from
affectation is attested from c.1600. Of things, not artificially created, c.1600. As a euphemism for
illegitimate, bastard (of children), it is first recorded c.1400, on notion of blood kinship (but
not legal status).   Natural science is from late 14c.; natural law is from early 15c. Natural order
apparent order in nature is from 1690s. Natural childbirth first attested 1933. Natural life,
usually in reference to the duration of life, is from late 15c. Natural history is from 1560s (see
history). To die of natural causes is from 1570s.


term (n.)

c.1200, terme limit in time, set or appointed period, from Old French terme limit of time or place,
date, appointed time, duration (11c.), from Latin terminus end, boundary line, in Medieval Latin
expression, definition, related to termen boundary, end (see terminus). Old English had termen term,
end, from Latin. Sense of period of time during which something happens first recorded c.1300,
especially of a school or law court session (mid-15c.).    The meaning word or phrase used in a
limited or precise sense is first recorded late 14c., from Medieval Latin use of terminus to render
Greek horos boundary, employed in mathematics and logic. Hence in terms of in the language or
phraseology peculiar to. Meaning completion of the period of pregnancy is from 1844. Term-paper in
U.S. educational sense is recorded from 1931.


life (n.)

Old English life (dative lif) existence, lifetime, way of life, condition of being a living thing,
opposite of death, from Proto-Germanic *libam (cognates: Old Norse lif life, body, Dutch lijf body,
Old High German lib life, German Leib body), properly continuance, perseverance, from PIE *leip- to
remain, persevere, continue; stick, adhere (see leave (v.)). Much of the modern range of meanings
was present in Old English. Meaning property which distinguishes living from non-living matter is
from 1560s. Sense of vitality, energy is from 1580s. Extended 1703 to term of duration (of inanimate
objects).   Life-jacket is from 1840; life-preserver from 1630s of anything that is meant to save a
life, 1803 of devices worn to prevent drowning. Life-saver is from 1883, figurative use from 1909,
as a brand of hard sugar candy, from 1912, so called for shape. Life-form is from 1861. Life cycle
is from 1855.


Annuit Coeptis

on the Great Seal of the United States of America, condensed by Charles Thompson, designer of the
seal in its final form, from Latin Juppiter omnipotes, audacibus annue coeptis All-powerful Jupiter
favor (my) daring undertakings, line 625 of book IX of Virgil's Aeneid. The words also appear in
Virgil's Georgics, book I, line 40: Da facilem cursam, atque audacibus annue coeptis Give (me) an
easy course, and favor (my) daring undertakings. Thompson changed the imperative annue to annuit,
the third person singular form of the same verb in either the present tense or the perfect tense.
The motto also lacks a subject.    The motto is often translated as He (God) is favorable to our
undertakings, but this is not the only possible translation. Thomson wrote: The pyramid signifies
Strength and Duration: The Eye over it &amp; Motto allude to the many signal interpositions of
providence in favour of the American cause. The original design (by William Barton) showed the
pyramid and the motto Deo Favente Perennis God favoring through the years.


spike (n.1)

large nail, mid-14c., perhaps from or related to a Scandinavian word, such as Old Norse spik
splinter, Middle Swedish spijk nail, from Proto-Germanic *spikaz (cognates: Middle Dutch spicher,
Dutch spijker nail, Old English spicing large nail, Old English spaca, Old High German speihha
spoke), from PIE root *spei- sharp point (cognates: Latin spica ear of corn, spina thorn, prickle,
backbone, and perhaps pinna pin (see pin (n.)); Greek spilas rock, cliff; Lettish spile wooden fork;
Lithuanian speigliai thorns, spitna tongue of a buckle, Old English spitu spit).    The English word
also might be influenced by and partly a borrowing of Latin spica (see spike (n.2)), from the same
root. Slang meaning needle is from 1923. Meaning pointed stud in athletic shoes is from 1832.
Electrical sense of pulse of short duration is from 1935.


quick (adj.)

Old English cwic living, alive, animate, and figuratively, of mental qualities, rapid, ready, from
Proto-Germanic *kwikwaz (cognates: Old Saxon and Old Frisian quik, Old Norse kvikr living, alive,
Dutch kwik lively, bright, sprightly, Old High German quec lively, German keck bold), from PIE root
*gweie- (1) to live (see bio-). Sense of lively, swift developed by late 12c., on notion of full of
life.    NE swift or the now more common fast may apply to rapid motion of any duration, while in
quick (in accordance with its original sense of 'live, lively') there is a notion of 'sudden' or
'soon over.' We speak of a fast horse or runner in a race, a quick starter but not a quick horse. A
somewhat similar feeling may distinguish NHG schnell and rasch or it may be more a matter of local
preference. [Buck]    Of persons, mentally active, from late 15c. Also in Middle English used of
soft soils, gravel pits, etc. where the ground is shifting and yielding (mid-14c., compare
quicksand). As an adverb from c.1300. To be quick about something is from 1937. Quick buck is from
1946, American English. Quick-change artist (1886) originally was an actor expert in playing
different roles in the same performance of a show. Quick-witted is from 1520s.


time (n.)

Old English tima limited space of time, from Proto-Germanic *timon- time (cognates: Old Norse timi
time, proper time, Swedish timme an hour), from PIE *di-mon-, suffixed form of root *da- cut up,
divide (see tide (n.)).    Abstract sense of time as an indefinite continuous duration is recorded
from late 14c. Personified since at least 1509 as an aged bald man (but with a forelock) carrying a
scythe and an hour-glass. In English, a single word encompasses time as extent and point (French
temps/fois, German zeit/mal) as well as hour (as in what time is it? compare French heure, German
Uhr). Extended senses such as occasion, the right time, leisure, or times (v.) multiplied by
developed in Old and Middle English, probably as a natural outgrowth of such phrases as He commends
her a hundred times to God (Old French La comande a Deu cent foiz).  to have a good time ( = a time
of enjoyment) was common in Eng. from c 1520 to c 1688; it was app. retained in America, whence
readopted in Britain in 19th c. [OED]   Time of day (now mainly preserved in negation, i.e. what
someone won't give you if he doesn't like you) was a popular 17c. salutation (as in Good time of day
vnto your Royall Grace, Richard III, I.iii.18). The times the current age is from 1590s. Behind the
times old-fashioned is recorded from 1831. Times as the name of a newspaper dates from 1788.   Time
warp first attested 1954; time-traveling in the science fiction sense first recorded 1895 in H.G.
Wells' The Time Machine. Time capsule first recorded 1938, in reference to the one deemed capable of
resisting the effects of time for five thousand years preserving an account of universal
achievements embedded in the grounds of the New York World's fair.    Jones [archaeologist of A.D.
5139] potters about for a while in the region which we have come to regard as New York, finds
countless ruins, but little of interest to the historian except a calcified direction sheet to
something called a Time Capsule. Jones finds the capsule but cannot open it, and decides, after
considerable prying at the lid, that it is merely evidence of an archaic tribal ceremony called a
publicity gag of which he has already found many examples. [Princeton Alumni Weekly, April 14, 1939]
To do time serve a prison sentence is from 1865. Time frame is attested by 1964; time-limit is from
1880. About time, ironically for long past due time, is recorded from 1920.


