earner (n.)

1610s, agent noun from earn.


earn (v.)

Old English earnian deserve, earn, merit, win, get a reward for labor, from Proto-Germanic *aznojan
(source also of Old Frisian esna reward, pay), from *azna labor especially field labor (source of
Old Norse &ouml;nn work in the field), from PIE *aznon to do harvest work, serve (source of Old High
German arnon to reap), denominative verb from *es-en- harvest, fall (cognates: Old High German aren
harvest, crop, German Ernte harvest, Old English ern harvest, Gothic asans harvest, summer, Old
Church Slavonic jeseni, Russian osen, Old Prussian assanis autumn).    Also from the same root are
Gothic asneis, Old High German esni hired laborer, day laborer, Old English esne serf, laborer, man.
Related: Earned; earning.


earnings (n.)

amount of money one makes (from labor or investment), 1732, from plural of verbal noun earning (Old
English earnung fact of deserving; what one deserves); see earn.


merit (v.)

late 15c., to be entitled to, from Middle French meriter (Modern French m&#233;riter), from merite
(n.), or directly from Latin meritare to earn, yield, frequentative of mereri to earn (money); also
to serve as a soldier (see merit (n.)). Related: Merited; meriting.


well-earned (adj.)

1730, from well (adv.) + past participle of earn (v.).


unearned (adj.)

c.1200, from un- (1) not + past participle of earn (v.). Unearned income is recorded from 1889.


gross (v.)

to earn a total of, 1884, from gross (n.). Related: Grossed; grossing.


esne (n.)

Old English esne domestic slave, from Proto-Germanic *asnjoz- harvestman (cognates: Gothic asneis),
from *asanoz- harvest (see earn).


meritorious (adj.)

early 15c., deserving of divine grace, from Latin meritorius that for which money is paid, that by
which money is earned, from meritus, past participle of merere to earn (see merit (n.)). Related:
Meritoriously; meritoriousness.


meretricious (adj.)

1620s, pertaining to harlots, from Latin meretricius of or pertaining to prostitutes, from meretrix
(genitive meretricis) prostitute, literally woman who earns money, from merere, mereri to earn, gain
(see merit (n.)). Meaning gaudily alluring is from 1630s. Related: Meretriciously; meretriciousness.


acquire (v.)

mid-15c., acqueren, from Old French aquerre acquire, gain, earn, procure, from Vulgar Latin
*acquaerere, from Latin acquirere to seek in addition to (see acquisition). Reborrowed in current
form from Latin c.1600. Related: Acquired; acquiring.


emeritus (adj.)

c.1600, from Latin emeritus veteran soldier who has served his time, literally that has finished
work, past service, past participle of emerere serve out, complete one's service, from ex- out (see
ex-) + merere to serve, earn, from PIE *(s)mer- to get a share of something (see merit (n.)). First
used of retired professors 1794 in American English.


deserve (v.)

early 13c., from Old French deservir (Modern French desservir) deserve, be worthy of, earn, merit,
from Latin deservire serve well, from de- completely (see de-) + servire to serve (see serve). From
be entitled to because of good service (a sense found in Late Latin), meaning generalized c.1300 to
be worthy of. Related: Deserved; deserving.


erne (n.)

sea eagle, from Old English earn eagle, a common Germanic word (cognates: Old High German arn,
German Aar, Middle Dutch arent, Old Norse &ouml;rn, Gothic ara eagle), from PIE root *or- great
bird, eagle (cognates: Greek ornis bird, Old Church Slavonic orilu, Lithuanian erelis, Welsh eryr
eagle). The Germanic word also survives in the first element of old Germanic names such as Arnold
and Arthur.


gain (v.)

1520s, from Middle French gagner, from Old French gaaignier to earn, gain; trade; capture, win, also
work in the fields, cultivate land, from Frankish *waidanjan hunt, forage, also graze, pasture, from
Proto-Germanic *wartho hunting ground (cognates: Old English wa&thorn; hunting, German Weide
pasture, pasturage, Old Norse vei&eth;r hunting, catch of fish), from PIE *weie- to strive after,
pursue with vigor, desire (see venison). Related: Gained; gaining; gainer. To gain on advance nearer
is from 1719. To gain ground (1620s) was originally military.


wing (n.)

late 12c., wenge, from Old Norse v&aelig;ngr wing of a bird, aisle, etc. (cognates: Danish and
Swedish vinge wing), of unknown origin, perhaps from a Proto-Germanic *we-ingjaz, suffixed form of
PIE root *we- blow (source of Old English wawan to blow; see wind (n.)). Replaced Old English
fe&eth;ra (plural) wings (see feather). The meaning either of two divisions of a political party,
army, etc. is first recorded c.1400; theatrical sense is from 1790.      The slang sense of earn
(one's) wings is 1940s, from the wing-shaped badges awarded to air cadets on graduation. To be under
(someone's) wing protected by (someone) is recorded from early 13c. Phrase on a wing and a prayer is
title of a 1943 song about landing a damaged aircraft.


merit (n.)

c.1200, spiritual credit (for good works, etc.); c.1300, spiritual reward, from Old French merite
wages, pay, reward; thanks; merit, moral worth, that which assures divine pity, and directly from
Latin meritum a merit, service, kindness, benefit, favor; worth, value, importance, neuter of
meritus, past participle of merere, meriri to earn, deserve, acquire, gain, from PIE root *(s)mer-
to allot, assign (cognates: Greek meros part, lot, moira share, fate, moros fate, destiny, doom,
Hittite mark to divide a sacrifice).    Sense of worthiness, excellence is from early 14c.; from
late 14c. as condition or conduct that deserves either reward or punishment; also a reward, benefit.
Related: Merits. Merit system attested from 1880. Merit-monger was in common use 16c.-17c. in a
sense roughly of do-gooder.


money (n.)

mid-13c., coinage, metal currency, from Old French monoie money, coin, currency; change (Modern
French monnaie), from Latin moneta place for coining money, mint; coined money, money, coinage, from
Moneta, a title or surname of the Roman goddess Juno, in or near whose temple money was coined;
perhaps from monere advise, warn (see monitor (n.)), with the sense of admonishing goddess, which is
sensible, but the etymology is difficult. Extended early 19c. to include paper money.    It had been
justly stated by a British writer that the power to make a small piece of paper, not worth one cent,
by the inscribing of a few names, to be worth a thousand dollars, was a power too high to be
entrusted to the hands of mortal man. [John C. Calhoun, speech, U.S. Senate, Dec. 29, 1841]   <hr />
I am not interested in money but in the things of which money is the symbol. [Henry Ford]  To make
money earn pay is first attested mid-15c. Highwayman's threat your money or your life first attested
1841. Phrase in the money (1902) originally meant one who finishes among the prize-winners (in a
horse race, etc.). The challenge to put (one's) money where (one's) mouth is is first recorded 1942,
American English. money-grub one who is sordidly intent on amassing money is from 1768. The image of
money burning a hole in someone's pocket is attested from 1520s.


little (adj.)

Old English lytel not large, not much; short in distance or time; unimportant, also used in late Old
English as a noun, small piece; a short time, from Proto-Germanic *lutilla- (cognates: Old Saxon
luttil, Dutch luttel, Old High German luzzil, German l&uuml;tzel, Gothic leitils little), perhaps
originally a diminutive of the root of Old English lyt little, few, from PIE *leud- small. Often
synonymous with small, but capable of emotional implications which small is not [OED].    Phrase the
little woman wife attested from 1795. Little people the faeries is from 1726; as children, it is
attested from 1752; as ordinary people (opposed to the great), it is attested from 1827. Little Neck
clams (1884) are so called for Little Neck, Long Island, a neck of land on the island's North Shore.
Little by little is from late 15c. (litylle be litille). Little green men space aliens is from 1950.
Little black dress is from 1939.    At the beginning of summer, smart women who stay in town like to
wear sheer little black dresses. Because most little black dresses look alike, retailers struggle
each year to find something which will make them seem new. [Life, June 13, 1939]   Little Orphan
Annie originally was (as Little Orphant Annie) the character in James Whitcomb Riley's 1885 poem,
originally titled Elf Child. The U.S. newspaper comic strip created by Harold Gray (1894-1968)
debuted in 1924 in the New York Daily News.    LITTLE Orphant Annie's come to our house to stay,
An' wash the cups an' saucers up, an' brush the crumbs away,  An' shoo the chickens off the porch,
an' dust the hearth, an' sweep,  An' make the fire, an' bake the bread, an' earn her board-an'-keep;
An' all us other childern, when the supper-things is done,  We set around the kitchen fire an' has
the mostest fun  A-list'nin' to the witch-tales 'at Annie tells about,  An' the Gobble-uns 'at gits
you  Ef you  Don't  Watch  Out!  [Riley, Elf Child]


