earthly (adj.)

Old English eor&thorn;lic earthly, worldly; see earth + -ly (1).


terrene (adj.)

earthly, terrestrial, of or pertaining to the earth, c.1300, from Anglo-French terreine, Old French
terrien, from Latin terrenus on the earth, earthly, from terra earth (see terrain).


temporal (adj.)

late 14c., worldly, secular; also terrestrial, earthly; temporary, lasting only for a time, from Old
French temporal earthly, and directly from from Latin temporalis of a time, but for a time,
temporary, from tempus (genitive temporis) time, season, proper time or season, of unknown origin.
Related: Temporally.


unearthly (adj.)

1610s, heavenly, sublime, from un- (1) not + earthly. Sense of ghostly, weird first recorded 1802.
Related: Unearthliness.


Shangri La (n.)

imaginary earthly paradise, 1938, from Shangri La, name of Tibetan utopia in James Hilton's novel
Lost Horizon (1933, film version 1937). In Tibetan, la means mountain pass.


perfectionist (n.)

1650s, from perfection + -ist. Originally theological, one who believes moral perfection may be
attained in earthly existence; sense of one satisfied only with the highest standards is from 1934.
Related: Perfectionism.


terran (adj.)

of or pertaining to the planet Earth, 1881, in science fiction writing, from Latin terra (see
terrain). Also used as a noun meaning inhabitant of the Earth (1953). An earlier form, terrene was
used in Middle English in sense of belonging to this world, earthly, secular, temporal (c.1300),
later, of the Earth as a planet (1630s).


sublunary (adj.)

1590s, situated under the moon, hence earthly, mundane (old cosmology), from Modern Latin
sublunaris, from sub- (see sub-) + lunaris (see lunar).


terrestrial (adj.)

late 14c., of or pertaining to the earth, with + -al (1) + from Latin terrestris earthly, of the
earth, on land, from terra earth (see terrain). Originally opposed to celestial; natural history
sense of living on land is attested from 1630s. The noun meaning a human being, a mortal is recorded
from 1590s.


worldly (adj.)

Old English woruldlic earthly, secular, from the roots of world and like (adj.). A common Germanic
compound (Old Frisian wraldlik, Old Saxon weroldlik, Middle Dutch wereldlik, German weltlich, Old
Norse veraldligr). Worldly-wise is recorded from c.1400.


bliss (n.)

Old English blis, also bli&eth;s bliss, merriment, happiness, grace, favor, from Proto-Germanic
*blithsjo (cognates: Old Saxon blidsea, blizza), from *blithiz gentle, kind + *-tjo noun suffix.
Originally mostly of earthly happiness; influenced by association with bless and blithe.


geology (n.)

1735, from Modern Latin geologia the study of the earth, from geo- earth + logia (see -logy). In
Medieval Latin, geologia (14c.) meant study of earthly things, i.e. law, as distinguished from arts
and sciences, which concern the works of God. Darwin used geologize as a verb.


material (adj.)

mid-14c., real, ordinary; earthly, drawn from the material world; a term in scholastic philosophy
and theology, from Old French material, materiel (14c.) and directly from Late Latin materialis
(adj.) of or belonging to matter, from Latin materia matter, stuff, wood, timber (see matter). From
late 14c. as made of matter, having material existence; material, physical, substantial; from late
15c. as important, relevant.


world war (n.)

attested by 1898 as a speculation.    If through fear of entangling alliances the United States
should return the Philippines to Spain, Mr. Page asserted that the predatory nations would swoop
down upon them and a world war would result. [New York Times, Dec. 16, 1898]    Applied to the first
one almost as soon as it began in 1914 (England has Thrown Lot with France in World War -- headline,
Pittsburgh Press, Aug. 2, 1914). World War I coined 1939, replacing Great War as the most common
name for it; First World War, World War II, and Second World War all also are from 1939. Old English
had woruldgewinn, woruldgefeoht, both of which might be translated world war, but with world in the
sense of earthly, secular.


vicar (n.)

early 14c., from Anglo-French vicare, Old French vicaire deputy, second in command, also in the
ecclesiastical sense (12c.), from Latin vicarius a substitute, deputy, proxy, noun use of adjective
vicarius substituted, delegated, from vicis change, interchange, succession; a place, position (see
vicarious). The original notion is of earthly representative of God or Christ; but also used in
sense of person acting as parish priest in place of a real parson (early 14c.).    The original
Vicar of Bray (in figurative use from 1660s) seems to have been Simon Allen, who held the benefice
from c.1540 to 1588, thus serving from the time of Henry VIII to Elizabeth I, being twice a Catholic
and twice a Protestant but always vicar of Bray. The village is near Maidenhead in Berkshire.


mundane (adj.)

mid-15c., of this world, from Old French mondain of this world, worldly, earthly, secular; also
pure, clean; noble, generous (12c.), from Late Latin mundanus belonging to the world (as distinct
from the Church), in classical Latin a citizen of the world, cosmopolite, from mundus universe,
world, literally clean, elegant; used as a translation of Greek khosmos (see cosmos) in its
Pythagorean sense of the physical universe (the original sense of the Greek word was orderly
arrangement). Latin mundus also was used of a woman's ornaments, dress, and is related to the
adjective mundus clean, elegant (used of women's dress, etc.). Related: Mundanely.


cloud (n.)

Old English clud mass of rock, hill, related to clod. Metaphoric extension to raincloud, mass of
evaporated water in the sky is attested by c.1200 based on similarity of cumulus clouds and rock
masses. The usual Old English word for cloud was weolcan. In Middle English, skie also originally
meant cloud.    The four fundamental types of cloud classification (cirrus, cumulus, stratus,
nimbus) were proposed by British amateur meteorologist Luke Howard (1772-1864) in 1802.
Figuratively, as something that casts a shadow, from early 15c.; hence under a cloud (c.1500). In
the clouds removed from earthly things; obscure, fanciful, unreal is from 1640s. Cloud-compeller
translates (poetically) Greek nephelegereta, a Homeric epithet of Zeus.


terrain (n.)

1727, ground for training horses, from French terrain piece of earth, ground, land, from Old French
(12c.), from Vulgar Latin *terranum, from Latin terrenum land, ground, noun use of neuter of
terrenus of earth, earthly, from terra earth, land, literally dry land (as opposed to sea); from PIE
root *ters- to dry (cognates: Sanskrit tarsayati dries up, Avestan tarshu- dry, solid, Greek
teresesthai to become or be dry, Latin torrere dry up, parch, Gothic &thorn;aursus dry, barren, Old
High German thurri, German d&uuml;rr, Old English &thorn;yrre dry; Old English &thorn;urstig
thirsty). Meaning tract of country, considered with regard to its natural features first attested
1766.


pontifex (n.)

member of the supreme college of priests in ancient Rome, 1570s, from Latin pontifex high priest,
chief of the priests, probably from pont-, stem of pons bridge (see pons) + -fex, -ficis, root of
facere make (see factitious). If so, the word originally meant bridge-maker, or path-maker.
Weekley points out that, bridge-building has always been regarded as a pious work of divine
inspiration. Or the term may be metaphoric of bridging the earthly world and the realm of the gods.
Other suggestions trace it to Oscan-Umbrian puntis propitiary offering, or to a lost Etruscan word,
in either case altered by folk etymology to resemble the Latin for bridge-maker. In Old English,
pontifex is glossed in the Durham Ritual (Old Northumbrian dialect) as brycgwyrcende bridge-maker.


human (adj.)

mid-15c., humain, humaigne, from Old French humain, umain (adj.) of or belonging to man (12c.), from
Latin humanus of man, human, also humane, philanthropic, kind, gentle, polite; learned, refined,
civilized, probably related to homo (genitive hominis) man (see homunculus) and to humus earth, on
notion of earthly beings, as opposed to the gods (compare Hebrew adam man, from adamah ground).
Cognate with Old Lithuanian zmuo (accusative zmuni) man, male person.    As a noun, from 1530s. Its
Old English cognate guma (from Proto-Germanic *guman-) survives only in disguise in bridegroom.
Related: Humanness. Human rights attested by 1680s; human being by 1690s. Human relations is from
1916; human resources attested by 1907, American English, apparently originally among social
Christians and drawn from natural resources.


petition (n.)

early 14c., a supplication or prayer, especially to a deity, from Old French peticion request,
petition (12c., Modern French p&#233;tition) and directly from Latin petitionem (nominative petitio)
a blow, thrust, attack, aim; a seeking, searching, in law a claim, suit, noun of action from past
participle stem of petere to make for, go to; attack, assail; seek, strive after; ask for, beg,
beseech, request; fetch; derive; demand, require, from PIE root *pet-, also *pete- to rush; to fly
(cognates: Sanskrit pattram wing, feather, leaf, patara- flying, fleeting; Hittite pittar wing;
Greek piptein to fall, potamos rushing water, pteryx wing; Old English fe&eth;er feather; Latin
penna feather, wing; Old Church Slavonic pero feather; Old Welsh eterin bird). Meaning formal
written request to a superior (earthly) is attested from early 15c.


