eccentric (adj.)

1550s, from Middle French eccentrique and directly from Medieval Latin eccentricus (noun and
adjective; see eccentric (n.)). Figurative sense of odd, whimsical first recorded 1620s.


eccentric (n.)

early 15c., eccentric circle or orbit, originally a term in Ptolemaic astronomy, circle or orbit not
having the Earth precisely at its center, from Middle French eccentrique and directly from Medieval
Latin eccentricus (noun and adjective), from Greek ekkentros out of the center (as opposed to
concentric), from ek out (see ex-) + kentron center (see center (n.)). Meaning odd or whimsical
person attested by 1824.    June 4 [1800].--Died in the streets in Newcastle, William Barron, an
eccentric, well known for many years by the name of   Billy Pea-pudding. [John Sykes, Local Records,
or Historical Register of Remarkable Events which have Occurred Exclusively in the Counties of
Durham and Northumberland, Town and County of Newcastle Upon Tyne, and Berwick Upon Tweed,
Newcastle, 1824]


eccentricity (n.)

1540s, of planetary orbits; 1650s, of persons (an instance of eccentricity); 1794, of persons (a
quality of eccentricity); from eccentric (adj.) + -ity. Related: Eccentricities.


flaky (adj.)

1570s, from flake + -y (2). Meaning eccentric, crazy first recorded 1959, said to be American
English baseball slang, but probably from earlier druggie slang flake cocaine (1920s). Flake
eccentric person is a 1968 back-formation from it.  The term 'flake' needs explanation. It's an
insider's word, used throughout baseball, usually as an adjective; someone is considered 'flaky.' It
does not mean anything so crude as 'crazy,' but it's well beyond 'screwball' and far off to the side
of 'eccentric.' [New York Times, April 26, 1964]


wacky (adj.)

crazy, eccentric, 1935, variant of whacky (n.) fool, late 1800s British slang, probably ultimately
from whack a blow, stroke, from the notion of being whacked on the head one too many times.


oddball (n.)

eccentric or unconventional person, 1948, from odd + ball (n.1). Earlier (1946) as an adjective,
used by aviators.


kinky (adj.)

1844, full of kinks, twisted, curly, from kink + -y (2). Meaning odd, eccentric, crotchety is from
1859; that of sexually perverted is from 1959. Related: Kinkiness.


Appomattox

eccentric spelling of plural of Appomattoc, name of a local subgroup of the Powhatan (Algonquian)
confederacy in Virginia (first attested as Apamatic, 1607). Site of last battle for Army of Northern
Virginia (CSA) in the American Civil War, and of Lee's surrender to Grant in Wilmer McLean house,
April 9, 1865.


screwball (n.)

eccentric person, 1933, U.S. slang, earlier as a type of erratic baseball pitch (1928), from a still
earlier name for a type of delivery in cricket (1866), from screw (n.) + ball (n.1). Screwball
comedy is attested from 1938, in reference to Carole Lombard.


outre (adj.)

exaggerated, extravagant, eccentric, 1722, from French outr&eacute; exaggerated, excessive, extreme,
past participle of outrer to carry to excess, overdo, overstrain, exaggerate, from outre beyond (see
outrage).


dip (n.)

stupid person, eccentric person, 1920s slang, perhaps a back-formation from dippy. Dipshit is an
emphatic form of dip (2); dipstick may be a euphemism or may reflect putative dipstick 'penis'
[DAS].


doolally (adj.)

insane, eccentric, British slang, by 1917 in the armed services and in full doolally tap (with Urdu
word for fever), from Deolali, near Bombay, India, which was a military camp (established 1861) with
a large barracks and a chief staging point for British troops on their way to or from India; the
reference is to men whose enlistments had expired who waited there impatiently for transport home.


quizzical (adj.)

1789, from quiz odd or eccentric person (1782), of unknown origin (see quiz (n.)) + -ical. Related:
Quizzically.


mondo (adj.)

very much, extreme, 1979, from Italian mondo world, from Mondo cane, 1961 film, literally world for
a dog (English title A Dog's Life), depicting eccentric human behavior; the word was abstracted from
the original title and taken as an intensifier.


erratic (adj.)

late 14c., wandering, moving, from Old French erratique (13c.) and directly from Latin erraticus
wandering, straying, roving, from erratum an error, mistake, fault, past participle of errare to
wander, err (see err). Sense of irregular, eccentric is attested by 1841. The noun is from 1620s, of
persons; 1849, of boulders. Related: Erratically.


exorbitant (adj.)

mid-15c., a legal term, deviating from rule or principle, eccentric; from Latin exorbitantem
(nominative exorbitans), present participle of exorbitare deviate, go out of the track, from ex- out
of (see ex-) + orbita wheel track (see orb). Sense of excessive, immoderate is from 1620s; of
prices, rates, etc., from 1660s. Related: Exorbitantly.


atopy (n.)

1923, coined by Edward D. Perry, professor of Greek at Columbia University, at the request of
medical men, from Greek atopia unusualness, strangeness, a being out of the way, from atopos out of
place, strange, odd, eccentric, from a-, privative prefix (see a- (3)), + topos place (see topos).


space (v.)

1540s, to make of a certain extent; 1680s in typography; 1703 as to arrange at set intervals, from
space (n.). Meaning to be in a state of drug-induced euphoria is recorded from 1968. Space cadet
eccentric person disconnected with reality (often implying an intimacy with hallucinogenic drugs) is
a 1960s phrase, probably traceable to 1950s U.S. sci-fi television program Tom Corbett, Space Cadet,
which was watched by many children who dreamed of growing up to be one and succeeded. Related:
Spaced; spacing.


vagary (n.)

1570s, a wandering, a roaming journey, from Italian vagare or directly from Latin vagari to wander,
stroll about, roam, be unsettled, spread abroad, from vagus roving, wandering (see vague). The
infinitive appears to have been adopted in English as a noun and conformed to nouns in -ary, but
this can hardly be explained except as an orig. university use [Century Dictionary]. Current meaning
of eccentric notion or conduct (1620s) is from notion of mental wandering. Related: Vagaries.


queer (adj.)

c.1500, strange, peculiar, eccentric, from Scottish, perhaps from Low German (Brunswick dialect)
queer oblique, off-center, related to German quer oblique, perverse, odd, from Old High German twerh
oblique, from PIE root *terkw- to turn, twist, wind (see thwart (adv.)).    Sense of homosexual
first recorded 1922; the noun in this sense is 1935, from the adjective. Related: Queerly. Queer
studies as an academic discipline attested from 1994.


fruit (n.)

late 12c., from Old French fruit fruit, fruit eaten as dessert; harvest; virtuous action (12c.),
from Latin fructus an enjoyment, delight, satisfaction; proceeds, produce, fruit, crops, from frug-,
stem of frui to use, enjoy, from PIE *bhrug- agricultural produce, also to enjoy (see brook (v.)).
Classical sense preserved in fruits of one's labor. Originally in English meaning vegetables as
well. Modern narrower sense is from early 13c. Meaning odd person, eccentric is from 1910; that of
male homosexual is from 1935. The term also is noted in 1931 as tramp slang for a girl or woman
willing to oblige, probably from the fact of being easy picking. Fruit salad recorded from 1861.


crank (n.)

handle for turning a revolving axis, Old English *cranc, implied in crancst&aelig;f a weaver's
instrument, crencestre female weaver, spinster, from Proto-Germanic base *krank-, and related to
crincan to bend, yield (see crinkle, cringe). English retains the literal sense of the ancient root,
while German and Dutch krank sick, formerly weak, small, is from a figurative use. The 1825
supplement to Jamieson's Scottish dictionary has crank infirm, weak, etc.    The sense of an
eccentric person, especially one who is irrationally fixated, is first recorded 1833, said to be
from the crank of a barrel organ, which makes it play the same tune over and over; but more likely a
back-formation from cranky (q.v.). Meaning methamphetamine attested by 1989.


forty (n.)

Old English feowertig, from feower four (see four) + tig group of ten (see -ty (1)). Compare Old
Saxon fiwartig, Old Frisian fiuwertich, Dutch veertig, Old High German fiorzug, German vierzig, Old
Norse fjorir tigir, Gothic fidwor tigjus.    [T]he number 40 must have been used very frequently by
Mesha's scribe as a round number. It is probably often used in that way in the Bible where it is
remarkably frequent, esp. in reference to periods of days or years. ... How it came to be so used is
not quite certain, but it may have originated, partly at any rate, in the idea that 40 years
constituted a generation or the period at the end of which a man attains maturity, an idea common,
it would seem, to the Greeks, the Israelites, and the Arabs. [The International Standard Bible
Encyclopedia, James Orr, ed., Chicago, 1915]   Forty winks short sleep is attested from 1821, In
early use associated with, and perhaps coined by, eccentric English lifestyle reformer William
Kitchiner M.D. (1775-1827).


character (n.)

mid-14c., carecter, symbol marked or branded on the body; mid-15c., symbol or drawing used in
sorcery, from Old French caratere feature, character (13c., Modern French caract&egrave;re), from
Latin character, from Greek kharakter engraved mark, also symbol or imprint on the soul, also
instrument for marking, from kharassein to engrave, from kharax pointed stake, from PIE root *gher-
(4) to scrape, scratch. Meaning extended in ancient times by metaphor to a defining quality.You
remember Eponina, who kept her husband alive in an underground cavern so devotedly and heroically?
The force of character she showed in keeping up his spirits would have been used to hide a lover
from her husband if they had been living quietly in Rome. Strong characters need strong nourishment.
[Stendhal de l'Amour, 1822]Meaning sum of qualities that define a person is from 1640s. Sense of
person in a play or novel is first attested 1660s, in reference to the defining qualities he or she
is given by the author. Meaning a person in the abstract is from 1749; especially eccentric person
(1773). Colloquial sense of chap, fellow is from 1931. The Latin ch- spelling was restored from
1500s. Character actor attested from 1861; character assassination from 1888; character-building
(n.) from 1886.


head (n.)

Old English heafod top of the body, also upper end of a slope, also chief person, leader, ruler;
capital city, from Proto-Germanic *haubudam (cognates: Old Saxon hobid, Old Norse hofu&eth;, Old
Frisian haved, Middle Dutch hovet, Dutch hoofd, Old High German houbit, German Haupt, Gothic
haubi&thorn; head), from PIE *kaput- head (cognates: Sanskrit kaput-, Latin caput head).    Modern
spelling is early 15c., representing what was then a long vowel (as in heat) and remained after
pronunciation shifted. Of rounded tops of plants from late 14c. Meaning origin of a river is mid-
14c. Meaning obverse of a coin (the side with the portrait) is from 1680s; meaning foam on a mug of
beer is first attested 1540s; meaning toilet is from 1748, based on location of crew toilet in the
bow (or head) of a ship. Synechdochic use for person (as in head count) is first attested late 13c.;
of cattle, etc., in this sense from 1510s. As a height measure of persons, from c.1300. Meaning drug
addict (usually in a compound with the preferred drug as the first element) is from 1911.    To give
head perform fellatio is from 1950s. Phrase heads will roll people will be punished (1930)
translates Adolf Hitler. Head case eccentric or insane person is from 1979. Head game mental
manipulation attested by 1972. To have (one's) head up (one's) ass is attested by 1978.


