ecclesiastical (adj.)

early 15c., from ecclesiastic + -al (1). Related: Ecclesiastically.


abbe (n.)

1520s, title given in France to every one who wears an ecclesiastical dress, especially one having
no assigned ecclesiastical duty, from French abb&eacute;, from Late Latin abbatem, accusative of
abbas (see abbot).


cardinal (n.)

early 12c., one of the ecclesiastical princes who constitute the sacred college (short for
cardinalis ecclesiae Romanae or episcopus cardinalis), from Latin cardinalis principal, chief,
essential (see cardinal (adj.)).    Ecclesiastical use began for the presbyters of the chief
(cardinal) churches of Rome. The North American songbird (Cardinalis virginianus) is attested from
1670s, so named for its resemblance to the cardinals in their red robes.


provincial (n.)

late 14c., ecclesiastical head of a province, from provincial (adj.). From c.1600 as native or
inhabitant of a province; from 1711 as country person.


stewardship (n.)

position or responsibilities of a steward, mid-15c., from steward (n.) + -ship. Specific
ecclesiastical sense of responsible use of resources in the service of God is from 1899.


patriarchy (n.)

1560s, in ecclesiastical sense, from Greek patriarkhia, from patriarkhes (see patriarch). Meaning
system of society or government by fathers or elder males of the community first recorded 1630s.


stylite (n.)

ascetic living on the top of a pillar, 1630s, from Ecclesiastical Greek stylites, from stylos pillar
(see stet).


martyrology (n.)

1590s, a native formation from martyr (n.) + -ology, or else from Church Latin martyrologium, from
Ecclesiastical Greek martyrologicon.


Nicene (adj.)

early 15c., in reference to Nicaea (Greek Nikaia, modern Turkish Isnik), city in Bithynia where
ecclesiastical council of 325 C.E. dealt with the Arian schism and produced the Nicene Creed. A
second council held there (787) considered the question of images.


censure (n.)

late 14c., originally ecclesiastical, from Latin censura judgment, opinion, also office of a censor,
from census, past participle of censere appraise, estimate, assess (see censor (n.)). General sense
of a finding of fault and an expression of condemnation is from c.1600.


sanction (n.)

early 15c., confirmation or enactment of a law, from Latin sanctionem (nominative sanctio) act of
decreeing or ordaining, also decree, ordinance, noun of action from past participle stem of sancire
to decree, confirm, ratify, make sacred (see saint (n.)). Originally especially of ecclesiastical
decrees.


diabolism (n.)

c.1600s, from Ecclesiastical Greek diabolos devil (see devil (n.)) + -ism.


exorcist (n.)

one who drives out evil spirits, late 14c., from Late Latin exorcista, from Ecclesiastical Greek
exorkistes an exorcist, from exorkizein (see exorcism).


diabolic (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French diabolique (13c.), from Late Latin diabolicus, from Ecclesiastical Greek
diabolikos devilish, from diabolos (see devil (n.)).


Isidore

masc. proper name, from French, from Latin Isidorus, from Greek Isidoros, literally gift of Isis,
from doron gift (see date (n.1)). St. Isidore, archbishop of Seville (600-636) wrote important
historical, etymological, and ecclesiastical works and in 2001 was named patron saint of computers,
computer users, and the Internet.


summoner (n.)

petty officer who cites persons to appear in court, secular or ecclesiastical, early 14c. (mid-13c.
as a surname), from Anglo-French sumenour, Old French somoneor, from Medieval Latin summonitorem,
from past participle stem of summonere (see summon). Contracted form sumner is from mid-14c.


psalmist (n.)

late 15c. (replacing psalmistre, late 14c.), from Middle French psalmiste and directly from Church
Latin psalmista, from Ecclesiastical Greek psalmistes, from psalmizein to sing psalms, from psalmos
(see psalm).


archdeacon (n.)

Old English arcediacon, from Church Latin archidiaconus, from Ecclesiastical Greek arkhidiakonon
chief deacon; see arch- + deacon.


Christian (n., adj.)

16c., forms replacing earlier Christen, from Old English cristen (noun and adjective), from a West
Germanic borrowing of Church Latin christianus, from Ecclesiastical Greek christianos, from Christos
(see Christ). First used in Antioch, according to Acts xi:25-26. Christian Science as the name of a
religious sect is from 1863.


monastic (adj.)

mid-15c., from Middle French monastique monkish, monastic, or directly from Late Latin monasticus,
from Ecclesiastical Greek monastikos solitary, pertaining to a monk, from Greek monazein to live
alone (see monastery). Related: Monastical (c.1400).


Kulturkampf (n.)

1879, originally in reference to the struggle between the German government and the Catholic Church
over control of educational and ecclesiastical appointments, 1872-86, German, literally struggle for
culture, from Kultur + Kampf combat, fight, struggle, from Latin campus field, battlefield (see
campus).


commissary (n.)

mid-14c., one to whom special duty is entrusted by a higher power, from Medieval Latin commissarius,
from Latin commissus entrusted, past participle of committere (see commit). Originally
ecclesiastical; the military sense of official in charge of supply of food, stores, transport dates
to late 15c. Hence storeroom (1882) and dining room in a larger facility (1929, American English).


monastery (n.)

c.1400, from Old French monastere monastery (14c.) and directly from Late Latin monasterium, from
Ecclesiastical Greek monasterion a monastery, from monazein to live alone, from monos alone (see
mono-). With suffix -terion place for (doing something). Originally applied to houses of any
religious order, male or female.


metropolitan (adj.)

1540s, belonging to an ecclesiastical metropolis, from Late Latin metropolitanus, from Greek
metropolites resident of a city, from metropolis (see metropolitan (n.)). Meaning belonging to a
chief or capital city is from 1550s. In reference to underground city railways, it is attested from
1867.


visitation (n.)

c.1300, a visit by an ecclesiastical representative to examine the condition of a parish, abbey,
etc., from Anglo-French visitacioun, Old French visitacion and directly from Latin visitationem
(nominative visitatio), noun of action from past participle stem of visitare (see visit (v.)). The
supernatural sense of a sight, apparition, a coming of God to a mortal is attested from mid-14c.


Christopher

masc. proper name, Church Latin Christophoros, from Ecclesiastical Greek khristophoros, literally
Christ-bearing; from phoros bearer, from pherein to carry (see infer). In medieval legend he was a
giant (one of the rare virtuous ones) who aided travellers by carrying them across a river.
Medallions with his image worn by travellers are known from the Middle Ages (Chaucer's Yeoman had
one). Not a common name in medieval England.


idolater (n.)

late 14c., ydolatrer idol-worshipper, from Old French idolatre, contracted from Late Latin
idololatres, from Ecclesiastical Greek eidololatres idol-worshipper (see idolatry).


fellowship (n.)

c.1200, feolahschipe companionship, from fellow + -ship. In Middle English it was at times a
euphemism for sexual intercourse (carnal fellowship).   To fellowship with is to hold communion
with; to unite with in doctrine and discipline. This barbarism now appears with disgusting frequency
in the reports of ecclesiastical conventions, and in the religious newspapers generally. [Bartlett,
Dictionary of Americanisms, 1848]


piscine (n.)

c.1300, reservoir, bathing pool, from Old French piscine fishpond, from Latin piscina, from piscis a
fish (see fish (n.)). Ecclesiastical sense is from late 15c., from Medieval Latin piscina. As an
adjective from 1799.


paternity (n.)

mid-15c., condition of being a father, from Old French paternit&eacute; (12c.), from Late Latin
paternitatem (nominative paternitas) fatherly care, fatherhood, from Latin paternus of a father,
from pater (see father (n.)). Originally in the ecclesiastical sense; literal sense first recorded
1580s. Meaning paternal origin is from 1868.


canonical (adj.)

early 15c., according to ecclesiastical law, from Medieval Latin canonicalis, from Late Latin
canonicus according to rule, in Church Latin, pertaining to the canon (see canon (n.1)). Earlier was
canonial (early 13c.).


tithe (n.)

a tenth part (originally of produce) due as support of the clergy, c.1200, from Old English
teogo&thorn;a (Anglian), teo&thorn;a (West Saxon) tenth, from Proto-Germanic *teguntha, from PIE
*dekmto-, from *dekm ten (see ten). Retained in ecclesiastical sense while the form was replaced in
ordinal use by tenth.


cassock (n.)

1540s, long loose gown, from Middle French casaque long coat (16c.), probably ultimately from
Turkish quzzak nomad, adventurer, (the source of Cossack), from their typical riding coat. Or
perhaps from Arabic kazagand, from Persian kazhagand padded coat, from kazh raw silk + agand
stuffed. Chiefly a soldier's cloak 16c.-17c.; ecclesiastical use is from 1660s.


idolatry (n.)

mid-13c., from Old French idolatrie, from Vulgar Latin idolatria, shortened from Late Latin
idololatria (Tertullian), from Ecclesiastical Greek eidololatria worship of idols, from eidolon
image (see idol) + latreia worship, service (see -latry).


communion (n.)

late 14c., from Old French comunion community, communion (12c.), from Latin communionem (nominative
communio) fellowship, mutual participation, a sharing, used in Late Latin ecclesiastical language
for participation in the sacrament, from communis (see common (adj.)). Used by Augustine, in belief
that the word was derived from com- with, together + unus oneness, union.


provision (n.)

late 14c., a providing beforehand, action of arranging in advance (originally in reference to
ecclesiastical appointments made before the position was vacant), from Old French provision
precaution, care (early 14c.), from Latin provisionem (nominative provisio) a foreseeing, foresight,
preparation, prevention, noun of action from past participle stem of providere look ahead (see
provide). Meaning something provided is attested from late 15c.; specific sense of supply of food is
from c.1600.


parliament (n.)

c.1300, consultation; formal conference, assembly, from Old French parlement (11c.), originally a
speaking, talk, from parler to speak (see parley (n.)); spelling altered c.1400 to conform with
Medieval Latin parliamentum.    Anglo-Latin parliamentum is attested from early 13c. Specific sense
representative assembly of England or Ireland emerged by mid-14c. from general meaning a conference
of the secular and/or ecclesiastical aristocracy summoned by a monarch.


antidisestablishmentarianism (n.)

opposition to disestablishment of the Church of England, 1838, said by Weekley to be first recorded
in Gladstone's Church and State, from dis- + establishment in the sense of the ecclesiastical system
established by law; the Church of England (1731). Hence, establishmentarianism the principle of a
state church, and disestablish (1590s) to deprive (a church) of especial state patronage and support
(first used specifically of Christian churches in 1806), which are married in this word. Rarely used
at all now except in examples of the longest words, amongst which it has been counted at least since
1901.


ecumenical (adj.)

late 16c., representing the entire (Christian) world, formed in English as an ecclesiastical word,
from Late Latin oecumenicus general, universal, from Greek oikoumenikos, from he oikoumene ge the
inhabited world (as known to the ancient Greeks); the Greeks and their neighbors considered as
developed human society, from oikoumenos, present passive participle of oikein inhabit, from oikos
house, habitation (see villa).


parson (n.)

late 12c., from Anglo-French and Old French persone curate, parson, holder of Church office (12c.),
from Medieval Latin persona parson (see person). Ecclesiastical use is obscure; it might refer to
the person legally holding church property, or it may be an abbreviation of persona ecclesiae person
of the church.


spiritual (adj.)

c.1300, of or concerning the spirit (especially in religious aspects), from Old French spirituel,
esperituel (12c.) or directly from a Medieval Latin ecclesiastical use of Latin spiritualis of or
pertaining to breath, breathing, wind, or air; pertaining to spirit, from spiritus of breathing, of
the spirit (see spirit (n.)). Meaning of or concerning the church is attested from mid-14c. Related:
Spiritually.


synod (n.)

late 14c., ecclesiastical council, from Late Latin synodus, from Greek synodos assembly, meeting; a
coming together, conjunction of planets, from syn- together (see syn-) + hodos a going, a way (see
cede). Earlier in English as sinoth (early 12c.). Used by Presbyterians for assembly of ministers
and other elders from 1593 to c.1920, when replaced by General Council.


A.D.

1570s, from Latin Anno Domini Year of the Lord. First put forth by Dionysius Exiguus in 527 or 533
C.E., but at first used only for Church business. Introduced in Italy in 7c., France (partially) in
8c. In England, first found in a charter of 680 C.E. Ordained for all ecclesiastical documents in
England by the Council of Chelsea, July 27, 816.    The resistance to it in part might have come
because Dionysius chose 754 A.U.C. as the birth year of Jesus, while many early Christians would
have thought it was 750 A.U.C. [See John J. Bond, Handy-Book of Rules and Tables for Verifying Dates
With the Christian Era, 4th ed., London: George Bell &amp; Sons, 1889] A.C., for Anno Christi, also
was common 17c.


pax (n.)

mid-15c., kiss of peace, from Latin pax (genitive pacis) peace, in Ecclesiastical Latin, kiss of
peace (see peace). Capitalized, Pax was the name of the Roman goddess of peace. Used by 1933 with
adjectives from national names, on model of Pax Romana (such as Pax Britannica, 1872; Pax Americana,
1886, with reference to Latin America).


almanac (n.)

late 14c., attested in Anglo-Latin from mid-13c., via Old French almanach or Medieval Latin
almanachus, of uncertain origin. It is sometimes said to be from a Spanish-Arabic al-manakh
calendar, almanac, but possibly ultimately from Late Greek almenichiakon calendar, which is said to
be of Coptic origin.    This word has been the subject of much speculation. Originally a book of
permanent tables of astronomical data; one-year versions, combined with ecclesiastical calendars,
date from 16c.; astrological and weather predictions appear in 16-17th c.; the 'useful statistics'
are a modern feature [OED].


doxology (n.)

hymn of praise, 1640s, from Medieval Latin doxologia, from Ecclesiastical Greek doxologia praise,
glory, from doxologos praising, glorifying, from doxa glory, praise (from dokein to seem good; see
decent) + logos a speaking (see lecture (n.)).


chasuble (n.)

ecclesiastical vestment, c.1300, cheisible, from Old French chesible (12c., Modern French chasuble),
from Medieval Latin casubla, from Late Latin *casubula, unexplained alteration of Latin casula a
little hut, diminutive of casa cottage, house (see casino), used by c.400 in transferred sense of
outer garment. From the notion that hooded garments resembled or suggested little houses. The
English form conformed to French from c.1600.


prothesis (n.)

from Greek prothesis a placing before, a placing in public, from pro (see pro-) + thesis (see
thesis). In ecclesiastical sense from 1670s; grammatical from 1870. Related: Prothetic (1835 in
grammar); prothetical; prothetically.


tonsure (n.)

late 14c., shaving of the head or part of it, especially as a religious rite, from Anglo-French
tonsure (mid-14c.), Old French tonsure ecclesiastical tonsure; sheep-shearing (14c.), from Latin
tonsura a shearing, clipping, from tonsus, past participle of tondere to shear, shave, clip, crop,
from PIE *tend-, from root *tem- to cut (see tome). The verb is attested from 1706 (implied in
tonsured). Related: Tonsuring.


amen

Old English, from Late Latin amen, from Ecclesiastical Greek amen, from Hebrew amen truth, used
adverbially as an expression of agreement (as in Deut. xxvii:26, I Kings i:36; compare Modern
English verily, surely, absolutely in the same sense), from Semitic root a-m-n to be trustworthy,
confirm, support. Used in Old English only at the end of Gospels, otherwise translated as
So&eth;lic! or Swa hit ys, or Sy! As an expression of concurrence after prayers, it is recorded from
early 13c.


