ecliptic (n.)

late 14c., the circle in the sky followed by the Sun, from Medieval Latin ecliptica, from Late Latin
(linea) ecliptica, from Greek ekliptikos of an eclipse (see eclipse (n.)). So called because
eclipses happen only when the Moon is near the line. Related: Ecliptical.


node (n.)

early 15c., a knot or lump, from Latin nodus knot (see net (n.)). Originally borrowed c.1400 in
Latin form, meaning lump in the flesh. Meaning point of intersection (originally of planetary orbits
with the ecliptic) first recorded 1660s.


tropic (n.)

late 14c., either of the two circles in the celestial sphere which describe the northernmost and
southernmost points of the ecliptic, from Late Latin tropicus of or pertaining to the solstice (as a
noun, one of the tropics), from Latin tropicus pertaining to a turn, from Greek tropikos of or
pertaining to a turn or change; of or pertaining to the solstice (as a noun, the solstice, short for
tropikos kyklos), from trope a turning (see trope).    The notion is of the point at which the sun
turns back after reaching its northernmost or southernmost point in the sky. Extended 1520s to the
corresponding latitudes on the earth's surface (23 degrees 28 minutes north and south); meaning
region between the tropics of Cancer and Capricorn is from 1837.


mensa (n.)

altar top, 1848, Latin, literally table, also meal, supper, and altar, sacrificial table, hence used
in Church Latin for upper slab of a church altar (see mesa). With a capital M-, the name of an
organization for people of IQs of 148 or more founded in England in 1946, the name chosen, according
to the organization, to suggest a round table type group. The constellation was originally Mons
Mensae Table Mountain.    La Caille, who did so much for our knowledge of the southern heavens,
formed the figure from stars under the Greater Cloud, between the poles of the equator and the
ecliptic, just north of the polar Octans; the title being suggested by the fact that the Table
Mountain, back of Cape Town, which had witnessed his nightly vigils and daily toils, also was
frequently capped by a cloud. [Richard Hinckley Allen, Star Names and Their Meanings, London: 1899]


