economy (adj.)

as a term in advertising, at first meant simply cheaper (1821), then bigger and thus cheaper per
unit or amount (1950). See economy (n.).


economy (n.)

1530s, household management, from Latin oeconomia, from Greek oikonomia household management,
thrift, from oikonomos manager, steward, from oikos house (cognate with Latin vicus district,
vicinus near; Old English wic dwelling, village; see villa) + nomos managing, from nemein manage
(see numismatic). The sense of wealth and resources of a country (short for political economy) is
from 1650s.


economist (n.)

1580s, household manager, from Middle French &eacute;conomiste; meaning student of political economy
is from 1804; see economy + -ist.


economic (adj.)

1590s, pertaining to management of a household, perhaps shortened from economical or from French
&eacute;conomique or directly from Latin oeconomicus of domestic economy, from Greek oikonomikos
practiced in the management of a household or family, hence, frugal, thrifty, from oikonomia (see
economy (n.)). Meaning relating to the science of economics is from 1835 and now is the main sense,
economical retaining the older one of characterized by thrift.


banana republic (n.)

small Central American state with an economy dependent on banana production, 1901, American English.


producer (n.)

1510s, one who produces; agent noun from produce (v.). Of entertainments, from 1891; in political
economy, opposed to consumer, from 1784 (Adam Smith).


protectionist (n.)

in the economics sense, 1841, from French protectionniste (in political economy sense, protection is
attested from 1789). As an adjective by 1843.


econometric (adj.)

1933, from comb. form of economy + -metric.


economical (adj.)

1570s, pertaining to household management; from economic + -al (1). Meaning pertaining to political
economy is from 1781; that of thrifty is from 1780. Related: Economically.


demand (n.)

late 13c., a question, from Old French demande (see demand (v.)). Meaning a request, claim is from
c.1300. In the political economy sense (correlating to supply) it is attested from 1776 in Adam
Smith.


skinflint (n.)

miser, one who makes use of contemptible economy to keep money, 1700, slang; literally kind of
person who would skin a flint to save or gain something, from skin (v.) + flint. Flay-flint in same
sense is from 1670s.


cocoon (v.)

1986, to stay inside and be inactive, from coccoon (n.).    A lady with an enchanting name, Faith
Popcorn, has identified a menacing new American behavior that she gives the sweet name of
'cocooning.' It threatens the nation's pursuit of happiness, sometimes called the economy. [George
Will, April 1987]    Related: Cocooned; cocooning.


bedbug (n.)

also bed-bug, 1772, from bed (n.) + bug (n.).    [The bed bug] is supposed to have been first
introduced to this country in the fir timber that was brought over to rebuild London after it had
suffered by the great fire; for it is generally said that Bugs were not known in England before that
time, and many of them were found almost immediately afterwards in the new-built houses. [the Rev.
W. Bingley, Animal Biography; or Anecdotes of the Lives, Manners, and Economy of the Animal
Creation, London, 1803]


economize (v.)

1640s, to govern a household, from economy + -ize. Meaning to spend less is from 1790. Related:
Economized; economizing; economization; economizer.


austerity (n.)

mid-14c., sternness, harshness, from Old French austerite harshness, cruelty (14c.) and directly
from Late Latin austeritatem (nominative austeritas), from austerus (see austere). Of severe self-
discipline, from 1580s; hence severe simplicity (1875); applied during World War II to national
policies limiting non-essentials as a wartime economy.


cooperative (adj.)

also co-operative, c.1600, from Late Latin cooperat-, past participle stem of cooperari (see
cooperation) + -ive. Political economy sense is from 1808, from the pre-Marx communist movement. The
noun meaning a cooperative store is from 1883; meaning a cooperative society is from 1921.


manage (v.)

1560s, probably from Italian maneggiare to handle, especially to control a horse, ultimately from
Latin noun manus hand (see manual (adj.)). Influenced by French man&egrave;ge horsemanship (earliest
English sense was of handling horses), which also was from Italian. Extended to other objects or
business from 1570s. Slang sense of get by first recorded 1650s. Related: Managed; managing. Managed
economy was used by 1933.


supply (n.)

early 15c., assistance, relief, act of supplying, from supply (v.). Meaning that which is provided,
quantity or amount of something provided is attested from c.1600. Meaning person who temporarily
takes the place of another (especially a minister or preacher) is from 1580s. In the political
economy sense (corollary of demand (n.)) it dates from 1776; supply-side (adj.) in reference to
economic policy is attested from 1976; as a noun by 1922. Supplies necessary provisions held for
distribution and use is from c.1650.


plan (v.)

1728, make a plan of, from plan (n.). Related: Planned; planning; plans. Planned economy is attested
from 1931. Planned Parenthood (1942) formerly was Birth Control Federation of America.


educrat (n.)

1968, usually pejorative; first element from education, second from bureaucrat. Said to have been
coined by Claude R. Kirk Jr. (b.1926), governor of Florida.    While political leaders and corporate
CEOs, focusing as usual on the quarterly return, call for workers for the new economy, their
educational reforms are producing just that: students with a grab-bag of minor skills and
competencies and minds that are sadly uneventful, incapable of genuine intellectual achievement and
lacking any sense of continuity with the historical and cultural traditions of our society. Their
world is small, bleak, and limited; their world will become ours. [David Solway, The Turtle
Hypodermic of Sickenpods, Quebec, 2000]


diocese (n.)

early 14c., from Old French diocese (13c., Modern French dioc&egrave;se), from Late Latin diocesis a
governor's jurisdiction, later, a bishop's jurisdiction, from Greek dioikesis government,
administration; province, originally economy, housekeeping, from dioikein control, govern,
administer, manage a house, from dia- thoroughly (see dia-) + oikos house (see villa).


cablese (n.)

1895, from cable in the telegraphic sense + -ese as a language name suffix. Since cablegrams had to
be paid for by the word and even press rates were expensive the practice was to affix Latin prefixes
and suffixes to make one word do the work of several [Daniel Schorr], such as exLondon and
Londonward to mean from London, to London (non-Latin affixes also were used). Hence the tale, famous
in the lore of the United Press International, of the distinguished but harried foreign
correspondent who reached his breaking point and wired headquarters UPSTICK JOB ASSWARD. Its economy
and expressive power fascinated Hemingway in his newspapering days.


incentive (n.)

early 15c., from Late Latin incentivum, noun use of neuter of Latin adjective incentivus setting the
tune (in Late Latin inciting), from past participle stem of incinere strike up, from in- in, into
(see in- (2)) + canere sing (see chant (v.)). Sense influenced by association with incendere to
kindle. The adjective use, in reference to a system of rewards meant to encourage harder work, first
attested 1943 in jargon of the U.S. war economy; as a noun, in this sense, from 1948.


coach (n.)

1550s, large kind of carriage, from Middle French coche (16c.), from German kotsche, from Hungarian
kocsi (szek&eacute;r) (carriage) of Kocs, village where it was first made. In Hungary, the thing and
the name for it date from 15c., and forms are found in most European languages (Spanish and
Portuguese coche, Italian cocchino, Dutch koets). Applied to railway cars 1866, American English.
Sense of economy or tourist class is from 1949. Meaning instructor/trainer is c.1830 Oxford
University slang for a tutor who carries a student through an exam; athletic sense is 1861.


thrift (n.)

c.1300, fact or condition of thriving, also prosperity, savings, from Middle English thriven to
thrive (see thrive), influenced by (or from) Old Norse &thorn;rift, variant of &thorn;rif
prosperity, from &thorn;rifask to thrive. Sense of habit of saving, economy first recorded 1550s
(thrifty in this sense is recorded from 1520s; also see spendthrift). Thrift shop attested by 1919.


market (n.)

early 12c., a meeting at a fixed time for buying and selling livestock and provisions, from Old
North French market marketplace, trade, commerce (Old French marchiet, Modern French march&eacute;),
from Latin mercatus trading, buying and selling, trade, market (source of Italian mercato, Spanish
mercado, Dutch markt, German Markt), from past participle of mercari to trade, deal in, buy, from
merx (genitive mercis) wares, merchandise, from Italic root *merk-, possibly from Etruscan,
referring to various aspects of economics. Meaning public building or space where markets are held
first attested mid-13c. Sense of sales, as controlled by supply and demand is from 1680s. Market
value (1690s) first attested in writings of John Locke. Market economy is from 1948; market research
is from 1921.


