ecstasy (n.)

late 14c., in a frenzy or stupor, fearful, excited, from Old French estaise ecstasy, rapture, from
Late Latin extasis, from Greek ekstasis entrancement, astonishment; any displacement, in New
Testament a trance, from existanai displace, put out of place, also drive out of one's mind
(existanai phrenon), from ek out (see ex-) + histanai to place, cause to stand, from PIE root *sta-
to stand (see stet).    Used by 17c. mystical writers for a state of rapture that stupefied the body
while the soul contemplated divine things, which probably helped the meaning shift to exalted state
of good feeling (1610s). Slang use for the drug 3,4-methylendioxymethamphetamine dates from 1985.


enrapt (adj.)

c.1600, carried away by (prophetic) ecstasy, past participle adjective from en- make, put in (see
en- (1)) + rapt.


ecstatic (adj.)

1590s, mystically absorbed, stupefied, from Greek ekstatikos unstable, from ekstasis (see ecstasy).
Meaning characterized by intense emotions is from 1660s, now usually pleasurable ones, but not
originally always so. Related: Ecstatical; ecstatically.


charismatic (adj.)

1851, in Bible commentary and theology, in reference to the operation of the Holy Spirit and
prophetic ecstasy in the early Church (from the use of Greek kharismata in Rom. xii), from Latin
stem of charisma + -ic. As a movement in modern Christian churches which believes in divine gifts of
healing, etc., attested by 1936, reflecting the older sense of charisma.


nympholepsy (n.)

frenzy or rapture supposed to take hold of a man upon gazing on a nymph, 1775, coined by Richard
Chandler, in Travels in Greece, from nymph, on model of epilepsy, with second element from stem of
Greek lambanein to take. Especially an ecstasy or frenzy caused by desire for the unattainable.
Ancient Greek had nympholeptos caught by nymphs. Related: Nympholept; nympholeptic.


rapture (n.)

c.1600, act of carrying off, from Middle French rapture, from Medieval Latin raptura seizure, rape,
kidnapping, from Latin raptus a carrying off, abduction, snatching away; rape (see rapt). Earliest
attested use in English is of women and in 17c. it sometimes meant rape (v.), which word is a
cognate of this. Sense of spiritual ecstasy, state of mental transport first recorded c.1600
(raptures).


G-string (n.)

1878, geestring, loincloth worn by American Indian, originally the string that holds it up,
etymology unknown. The spelling with G (1882) is perhaps from influence of violin string tuned to a
G (in this sense G string is first recorded 1831), the lowest and heaviest of the violin strings.
First used of women's attire 1936, with reference to strip-teasers.    I AM the spirit of the silver
G:  I am silvered sadness,  I am moonlit gladness,  I am that fine madness  Of reverence half, and
half of ecstasy  [from Spirit of the 'G' String, Alfred L. Donaldson, in Songs of My Violin, 1901]


enthusiasm (n.)

c.1600, from Middle French enthousiasme (16c.) and directly from Late Latin enthusiasmus, from Greek
enthousiasmos divine inspiration, from enthousiazein be inspired or possessed by a god, be rapt, be
in ecstasy, from entheos divinely inspired, possessed by a god, from en in (see en- (2)) + theos god
(see theo-). Acquired a derogatory sense of excessive religious emotion (1650s) under the Puritans;
generalized sense of fervor, zeal (the main modern sense) is first recorded 1716.


