edict (n.)

late 15c., edycte; earlier edit, late 13c., proclamation having the force of law, from Old French
edit, from Latin edictum proclamation, ordinance, edict, neuter past participle of edicere publish,
proclaim, from e- out (see ex-) + dicere to say (see diction).


ban (n.1)

edict of prohibition, c.1300, proclamation or edict of an overlord, from Old English (ge)bann
proclamation, summons, command and Old French ban, both from Germanic; see ban (v.).


refugee (n.)

1680s, from French refugi&eacute;, noun use of past participle of refugier to take shelter, protect,
from Old French refuge (see refuge). First applied to French Huguenots who migrated after the
revocation (1685) of the Edict of Nantes. The word meant one seeking asylum, till 1914, when it
evolved to mean one fleeing home (first applied in this sense to civilians in Flanders heading west
to escape fighting in World War I). In Australian slang from World War II, reffo.


bull (n.2)

papal edict, c.1300, from Medieval Latin bulla sealed document (source of Old French bulle, Italian
bulla), originally the word for the seal itself, from Latin bulla round swelling, knob, said
ultimately to be from Gaulish, from PIE *beu-, a root supposed to have formed words associated with
swelling (cognates: Lithuanian bule buttocks, Middle Dutch puyl bag, also possibly Latin bucca
cheek).


ukase (n.)

decree issued by a Russian emperor, 1729, from Russian ukaz edict, back-formation from from ukazat'
to show, decree, to order, from Old Church Slavonic ukazati, from u- away, perhaps here an intensive
prefix, from PIE *au- (2) off, away + kazati to show, order, from Slavic *kaz- (related to the first
element of Casimir), from PIE root *kwek- to appear, show.


constitution (n.)

mid-14c., law, regulation, edict, from Old French constitucion (12c.) constitution, establishment,
and directly from Latin constitutionem (nominative constitutio) act of settling, settled condition,
anything arranged or settled upon, regulation, order, ordinance, from constitut-, past participle
stem of constituere (see constitute).    Meaning action of establishing is from 1580s; that of way
in which a thing is constituted is from c.1600; that of physical health, strength and vigor of the
body is from 1550s; of the mind, temperament, character from 1580s. Sense of mode of organization of
a state is from c.1600; that of system of principles by which a community is governed dates from
1730s; especially of a document of written laws since the U.S. and French constitutions, late 18c.


program (n.)

1630s, public notice, from Late Latin programma proclamation, edict, from Greek programma a written
public notice, from stem of prographein to write publicly, from pro- forth (see pro-) + graphein to
write (see -graphy).    General sense of a definite plan or scheme is recorded from 1837. Meaning
list of pieces at a concert, playbill first recorded 1805 and retains the original sense. That of
objects or events suggested by music is from 1854. Sense of broadcasting presentation is from 1923.
Computer sense (noun and verb) is from 1945. Spelling programme, established in Britain, is from
French in modern use and began to be used early 19c., originally especially in the playbill sense.
Program music attested from 1877.


