edifice (n.)

late 14c., from Old French edifice building, from Latin aedificium building, from aedificare to
erect a building, from aedis, variant of aedes temple, sanctuary, usually a single edifice without
partitions, also, in the plural, dwelling house, building, originally a place with a hearth + the
root of facere to make (see factitious).   &AElig;dis is from PIE *aidh- to burn (cognates: Greek
aithein to burn, Sanskrit inddhe burst into flames, Old Irish aed fire, Welsh aidd heat, zeal, Old
High German eit funeral pile), from root *ai- to burn.


Etna

volcano in Sicily, from Latin Aetna, from an indigenous Sicilian language, *aith-na the fiery one,
from PIE *ai-dh-, from root *ai- to burn (see edifice).


estuary (n.)

1530s, from Latin aestuarium a tidal marsh or opening, from aestus boiling (of the sea), tide, heat,
from PIE *aidh- to burn (see edifice). Related: Estuaries; estuarine.


cornerstone (n.)

late 13c., from corner (n.) + stone (n.). The figurative use is from early 14c.    I endorse without
reserve the much abused sentiment of Governor M'Duffie, that Slavery is the corner-stone of our
republican edifice; while I repudiate, as ridiculously absurd, that much lauded but nowhere
accredited dogma of Mr. Jefferson, that all men are born equal. No society has ever yet existed, and
I have already incidentally quoted the highest authority to show that none ever will exist, without
a natural variety of classes. [James H. Hammond, Letter to an English Abolitionist 1845]


monument (n.)

late 13c., a sepulchre, from Old French monument grave, tomb, monument, and directly from Latin
monumentum a monument, memorial structure, statue; votive offering; tomb; memorial record, literally
something that reminds, from monere to remind, warn (see monitor (n.)). Sense of structure or
edifice to commemorate a notable person, action, or event first attested c.1600.


estivate (v.)

to spend the summer, mid-17c., from Latin aestivatus, past participle of aestivare to spend the
summer, from aestus heat, aestas summer, literally the hot season, from Proto-Italic *aissat-, from
PIE *aidh- to burn (see edifice). Related: Estivated; estivating.


steeple (n.)

Old English stepel (Mercian), stiepel (West Saxon) high tower, related to steap high, lofty, from
Proto-Germanic *staupilaz (see steep (adj.)). Also the name of a lofty style of women's head-dress
from the 14th century. Steeple-house (1640s) was the old Quaker way of referring to a church
edifice, to avoid in that sense using church, which had with them a more restricted meaning.


edify (v.)

mid-14c., to build, construct, also, in figurative use, to build up morally or in faith, from Old
French edefiier build, install, teach, instruct (morally), from Latin aedificare to build,
construct, in Late Latin improve spiritually, instruct (see edifice). Related: Edified; edifying.


edification (n.)

mid-14c., in religious use, building up of the soul, from Old French edification and directly from
Latin aedificationem (nominative aedificatio) construction, building, in Late Latin spiritual
improvement, from past participle stem of aedificare (see edifice). Religious use is as translation
of Greek oikodome in I Cor. xiv. Meaning mental improvement is 1650s. Literal sense of building is
rare in English.


ember (n.)

Old English &aelig;merge ember, merged with or influenced by Old Norse eimyrja, both from Proto-
Germanic *aim-uzjon- ashes (cognates: Middle Low German emere, Old High German eimuria, German
Ammern); a compound from *aima- ashes (from PIE root *ai- to burn; see edifice) + *uzjo- to burn
(from PIE root *eus- to burn; source also of Latin urere to burn, singe). The -b- is intrusive.


temple (n.1)

building for worship, edifice dedicated to the service of a deity or deities, Old English tempel,
from Latin templum piece of ground consecrated for the taking of auspices, building for worship of a
god, of uncertain signification. Commonly referred to PIE root *tem- to cut (see tome), on notion of
place reserved or cut out [Watkins], or to root *temp- to stretch [Klein's sources], on notion of
cleared space in front of an altar (see tenet). Compare Greek temenos sacred area around a temple,
literally place cut off, from stem of temnein to cut. Figurative sense of any place regarded as
occupied by divine presence was in Old English. Applied to Jewish synagogues from 1590s.


ether (n.)

late 14c., upper regions of space, from Old French ether and directly from Latin aether the upper
pure, bright air, from Greek aither upper air; bright, purer air; the sky, from aithein to burn,
shine, from PIE root *aidh- to burn (see edifice).    In ancient cosmology, the element that filled
all space beyond the sphere of the moon, constituting the substance of the stars and planets.
Conceived of as a purer form of fire or air, or as a fifth element. From 17c.-19c., it was the
scientific word for an assumed frame of reference for forces in the universe, perhaps without
material properties. The concept was shaken by the Michelson-Morley experiment (1887) and discarded
after the Theory of Relativity won acceptance, but before it went it gave rise to the colloquial use
of ether for the radio (1899).    The name also was bestowed c.1730 (Frobenius; in English by 1757)
on a volatile chemical compound known since 14c. for its lightness and lack of color (its anesthetic
properties weren't fully established until 1842).


structure (n.)

mid-15c., action or process of building or construction; 1610s, that which is constructed, a
building or edifice; from Latin structura a fitting together, adjustment; a building, mode of
building; figuratively, arrangement, order, from structus, past participle of struere to pile, place
together, heap up; build, assemble, arrange, make by joining together, related to strues heap, from
PIE *stere- to spread, extend, stretch out.    The widespread descendants of this ancient root are
believed to include: Sanskrit strnoti strews, throws down; Avestan star- to spread out, stretch out;
Greek stronymi strew, stroma bedding, mattress, sternon breast, breastbone; Latin sternere to
stretch, extend; Old Church Slavonic stira, streti spread, strama district; Russian stroji order;
Gothic straujan, Old High German strouwen, Old English streowian to sprinkle, strew; Old English
streon strain, streaw straw, that which is scattered; Old High German stirna forehead, strala arrow,
lightning bolt; Old Irish fo-sernaim spread out, srath a wide river valley; Welsh srat plain.


