effective (adj.)

late 14c., from French effectif, from Latin effectivus productive, effective, from effect-, stem of
efficere (see effect (n.)). Effectively in the sense of actually is attested by 1650s. Related:
Effectivity.


effectiveness (n.)

c.1600, from effective + -ness.


cost-effective (adj.)

also cost effective, 1967, from cost (n.) + effective.


silver bullet (n.)

very effective, almost magical remedy, 1808. The belief in the magical power of silver weapons to
conquer foes goes back at least to ancient Greece (as in Delphic Oracle's advice to Philip of
Macedon).


derringer (n.)

1850, for Henry Deringer (1786-1868), U.S. gunsmith who invented it in the 1840s; prevailing
misspelled form is how his name appeared on the many counterfeits and imitations. A small pistol
with a large bore, very effective at short range [OED].


available (adj.)

mid-15c., beneficial, also valid, effective, capable of producing the desired effect, from avail +
-able. Meaning at one's disposal, capable of being made use of is recorded from 1827.


drastic (adj.)

1690s, originally medical, forceful, vigorous, especially in effect on bowels, from Greek drastikos
effective, efficacious; active, violent, from drasteon (thing) to be done, from dran to do, act,
perform. Sense of extreme, severe is first recorded 1808. Related: Drastically.


valid (adj.)

1570s, having force in law, legally binding, from Middle French valide (16c.), from Latin validus
strong, effective, powerful, active, from valere be strong (see valiant). The meaning sufficiently
supported by facts or authority, well-grounded is first recorded 1640s.


agency (n.)

1650s, active operation, from Medieval Latin agentia, noun of state from Latin agentem (nominative
agens) effective, powerful, present participle of agere (see act (n.)). Meaning establishment where
business is done for another first recorded 1861.


ineffective (adj.)

1650s, from in- (1) not, opposite of + effective. Related: Ineffectively; ineffectiveness.


agent (n.)

late 15c., one who acts, from Latin agentem (nominative agens) effective, powerful, present
participle of agere to set in motion, drive, lead, conduct (see act (n.)). Meaning any natural force
or substance which produces a phenomenon is from 1550s. Meaning deputy, representative is from
1590s. Sense of spy, secret agent is attested by 1916.


nerf

1955, in nerf bars, hot-rodder slang for custom bumpers; from slang verb in auto racing (1953)
meaning to nudge something with a bumper in passing and knock it off course; ultimate origin and
signification unknown.    As a trademark name for toys made of foam-like material for indoor play,
introduced 1970 (Nerf ball). By 1995 this had yielded a verbal sense of to make less effective (as a
Nerf basketball is softer and lighter than the real thing).


virtual (adj.)

late 14c., influencing by physical virtues or capabilities, effective with respect to inherent
natural qualities, from Medieval Latin virtualis, from Latin virtus excellence, potency, efficacy,
literally manliness, manhood (see virtue). The meaning being something in essence or effect, though
not actually or in fact is from mid-15c., probably via sense of capable of producing a certain
effect (early 15c.). Computer sense of not physically existing but made to appear by software is
attested from 1959.


bay (n.3)

howl of a dog, early 14c., earlier howling chorus raised (by hounds) when in contact with the hunted
animal, c.1300, from Old French bayer, from PIE root *bai- echoic of howling (compare Greek bauzein,
Latin baubari to bark, English bow-wow; also see bawl). From the hunting usage comes the transferred
sense of final encounter, and thence, on the notion of putting up an effective defense, at bay.


Berlin

city in Brandenburg, capital of Germany, traditionally by folk-etymology from German B&auml;r bear,
but likely from a Slavic source, compare Old Polabian berl-, birl- swamp, in reference to the old
city's location on low, marshy ground along the River Spree. A flashpoint city in the Cold War, the
Berlin airlift ran from June 28, 1948 to May 12, 1949. The Berlin Wall began to be built Aug. 15,
1961, and was effective until Nov. 9, 1989.


countervail (v.)

late 14c., to be worth as much as, also to prevail against, from Anglo-French countrevaloir, Old
French contrevaloir to be effective against, be comparable to, from Latin phrase contra valere to be
worth against (see contra- and valiant). Related: Countervailing.


active (adj.)

mid-14c., given to worldly activity (opposed to contemplative or monastic), from Old French actif
(12c.) or directly from Latin activus, from actus (see act (n.)). As capable of acting (opposed to
passive), from late 14c. Meaning energetic, lively is from 1590s; that of working, effective, in
operation is from 1640s. Active voice is recorded from 1765 (grammatical use of active dates from
mid-15c.).


efficient (adj.)

capable of producing the desired effect, late 14c., making, producing immediate effect, from Old
French efficient and directly from Latin efficientem (nominative efficiens) effective, efficient,
producing, active, present participle of efficere work out, accomplish (see effect). Meaning
productive, skilled is from 1787. Related: Efficiently.


efficacy (n.)

1520s, from Latin efficacia efficacy, efficiency, from efficax (genitive efficacis) powerful,
effective, from stem of efficere work out, accomplish (see effect). Earlier in same sense was
efficace (c.1200), from Old French eficace (14c.), from Latin efficacia; also efficacite (early
15c.), from Latin efficacitatem.


razzle-dazzle (n.)

1886, American English slang, varied reduplication of dazzle (q.v.).    My confr&#232;re, The
Chevalier, last month gave a new name to the scarfs of disjointed pattern when he called them the
razzle-dazzle. The name was evidently a hit of the most patent character, for in several avenue and
Broadway stores the clerks have thrown out a display of broken figures before me and explained that
the ruling style at present was the razzle-dazzle, and the word seems to have been equally effective
with the public, for when it is quoted by the live salesman, the customer, I am told is at once
interested and caught by it. [Clothier and Furnisher magazine, Jan. 1889]    Meaning state of
confusion is from 1889.


fascism (n.)

1922, originally used in English 1920 in its Italian form (see fascist). Applied to similar groups
in Germany from 1923; applied to everyone since the rise of the Internet.A form of political
behavior marked by obsessive preoccupation with community decline, humiliation or victimhood and by
compensatory cults of unity, energy and purity, in which a mass-based party of committed nationalist
militants, working in uneasy but effective collaboration with traditional elites, abandons
democratic liberties and pursues with redemptive violence and without ethical or legal restraints
goals of internal cleansing and external expansion. [Robert O. Paxton, The Anatomy of Fascism, 2004]


Hezbollah (n.)

extremist Shiite group active in Lebanon, founded c.1982, from Persian hezbollah, Arabic hizbullah,
literally Party of God, from hezb/hizb party + allah God. An adherent is a Hezbollahi. The name of
various Islamic groups in modern times, the name itself is attested in English by 1960 in referense
to an Indonesian guerilla battalion of 1945 that grew out of a similarly named organization formed
by the Japanese to give training in military drill to young Moslems.    In Modjokuto (like Masjumi
itself, Hizbullah was Indonesia-wide but, also like Masjumi, it had little effective central
organization) this group was led by the present head of Muhammadijah -- the same man who a year or
so before was going to Djakarta for propaganda training and studying to be a kamikaze. [Clifford
Geertz, The Religion of Java, Chicago, 1960]


pearl (n.)

mid-13c., from Old French perle (13c.) and directly from Medieval Latin perla (mid-13c.), of unknown
origin. Perhaps from Vulgar Latin *pernula, diminutive of Latin perna, which in Sicily meant pearl,
earlier sea-mussel, literally ham, haunch, gammon, so called for the shape of the mollusk shells.
Other theories connect it with the root of pear, also somehow based on shape, or Latin pilula
globule, with dissimilation. The usual Latin word for pearl was margarita (see margarite).    For
pearls before swine, see swine. Pearl Harbor translates Hawaiian Wai Momi, literally pearl waters,
so named for the pearl oysters found there; transferred sense of effective sudden attack is attested
from 1942 (in reference to Dec. 7, 1941).


practical (adj.)

early 15c., practicale of or pertaining to matters of practice; applied, with -al (1) + earlier
practic (adj.) dealing with practical matters, applied, not merely theoretical (early 15c.), or
practic (n.) method, practice, use (late 14c.). In some cases directly from Old French practique
(adj.) fit for action, earlier pratique (13c.) and Medieval Latin practicalis, from Late Latin
practicus practical, active, from Greek praktikos fit for action, fit for business; business-like,
practical; active, effective, vigorous, from praktos done; to be done, verbal adjective of prassein,
prattein to do, act, effect, accomplish.


wash (v.)

Old English wascan to wash, cleanse, bathe, transitive sense in late Old English, from Proto-
Germanic *watskan to wash (cognates: Old Norse vaska, Middle Dutch wasscen, Dutch wassen, German
waschen), from stem *wed- water, wet (see water (n.1)). Related: Washed; washing.    Used mainly of
clothes in Old English (the principal verb for washing the body, dishes, etc. being &thorn;wean).
Old French gaschier to stain, soil; soak, wash (Modern French g&#226;cher) is from Frankish *waskan,
from the same Germanic source. Italian guazzare also is a Germanic loan-word. To wash (one's) hands
of something id 1550s, from Pilate in Matt. xxvii.24. To wash up clean utensils after a meal is from
1751. Washed up no longer effective is 1923, theater slang, from notion of washing up at the end of
a job.


business (n.)

Old English bisignes (Northumbrian) care, anxiety, occupation, from bisig careful, anxious, busy,
occupied, diligent (see busy (adj.)) + -ness. Middle English sense of state of being much occupied
or engaged (mid-14c.) is obsolete, replaced by busyness.    Sense of a person's work, occupation is
first recorded late 14c. (in late Old English bisig (adj.) appears as a noun with the sense
occupation, state of employment). Meaning what one is about at the moment is from 1590s. Sense of
trade, commercial engagements is first attested 1727. In 17c. it also could mean sexual intercourse.
Modern two-syllable pronunciation is 17c.   Business card first attested 1840; business letter from
1766. Business end the practical or effective part (of something) is American English, by 1874.
Phrase business as usual attested from 1865. To mean business be intent on serious action is from
1856. To mind (one's) own business is from 1620s. Johnson's dictionary also has busiless At leisure;
without business; unemployed.


fetish (n.)

1610s, fatisso, from Portuguese feiti&ccedil;o charm, sorcery, from Latin facticius made by art,
from facere to make (see factitious).    Latin facticius in Spanish has become hechizo magic,
witchcraft, sorcery. Probably introduced by Portuguese sailors and traders as a name for charms and
talismans worshipped by the inhabitants of the Guinea coast of Africa. Popularized in anthropology
by C. de Brosses' Le Culte des Dieux F&eacute;tiches (1760), which influenced the word's spelling in
English (French f&eacute;tiche, also from the Portuguese word). Figurative sense of something
irrationally revered is American English, 1837.    Any material image of a religious idea is an
idol; a material object in which force is supposed to be concentrated is a Fetish; a material
object, or a class of material objects, plants, or animals, which is regarded by man with
superstitious respect, and between whom and man there is supposed to exist an invisible but
effective force, is a Totem. [J. Fitzgerald Lee, The Greater Exodus, London, 1903]    For sexual
sense, see fetishism.


charm (n.)

c.1300, incantation, magic charm, from Old French charme (12c.) magic charm, magic, spell;
incantation, song, lamentation, from Latin carmen song, verse, enchantment, religious formula, from
canere to sing (see chant (v.)), with dissimilation of -n- to -r- before -m- in intermediate form
*canmen (for a similar evolution, see Latin germen germ, from *genmen). The notion is of chanting or
reciting verses of magical power.    A yet stronger power than that of herb or stone lies in the
spoken word, and all nations use it both for blessing and cursing. But these, to be effective, must
be choice, well knit, rhythmic words (verba concepta), must have lilt and tune; hence all that is
strong in the speech wielded by priest, physician, magician, is allied to the forms of poetry.
[Jacob Grimm, Teutonic Mythology (transl. Stallybrass), 1883]    Sense of pleasing quality evolved
17c. Meaning small trinket fastened to a watch-chain, etc. first recorded 1865. Quantum physics
sense is from 1964. To work like a charm (figuratively) is recorded by 1824.


fuck (v.)

until recently a difficult word to trace, in part because it was taboo to the editors of the
original OED when the F volume was compiled, 1893-97. Written form only attested from early 16c. OED
2nd edition cites 1503, in the form fukkit; earliest appearance of current spelling is 1535 --
Bischops ... may fuck thair fill and be vnmaryit [Sir David Lyndesay, Ane Satyre of the Thrie
Estaits], but presumably it is a much more ancient word than that, simply one that wasn't written in
the kind of texts that have survived from Old English and Middle English. Buck cites proper name
John le Fucker from 1278, but the surname could have other explanations. The word apparently is
hinted at in a scurrilous 15c. poem, titled Flen flyys, written in bastard Latin and Middle English.
The relevant line reads:Non sunt in celi quia fuccant uuiuys of heliThey [the monks] are not in
heaven because they fuck the wives of [the town of] Ely. Fuccant is pseudo-Latin, and in the
original it is written in cipher. The earliest examples of the word otherwise are from Scottish,
which suggests a Scandinavian origin, perhaps from a word akin to Norwegian dialectal fukka
copulate, or Swedish dialectal focka copulate, strike, push, and fock penis. Another theory traces
it to Middle English fyke, fike move restlessly, fidget, which also meant dally, flirt, and probably
is from a general North Sea Germanic word; compare Middle Dutch fokken, German ficken fuck, earlier
make quick movements to and fro, flick, still earlier itch, scratch; the vulgar sense attested from
16c. This would parallel in sense the usual Middle English slang term for have sexual intercourse,
swive, from Old English swifan to move lightly over, sweep (see swivel). But OED remarks these
cannot be shown to be related to the English word. Chronology and phonology rule out Shipley's
attempt to derive it from Middle English firk to press hard, beat.    Germanic words of similar form
(f + vowel + consonant) and meaning 'copulate' are numerous. One of them is G. ficken. They often
have additional senses, especially 'cheat,' but their basic meaning is 'move back and forth.' ...
Most probably, fuck is a borrowing from Low German and has no cognates outside Germanic. [Liberman]
French foutre and Italian fottere look like the English word but are unrelated, derived rather from
Latin futuere, which is perhaps from PIE root *bhau(t)- knock, strike off, extended via a figurative
use from the sexual application of violent action [Shipley; compare the sexual slang use of bang,
etc.]. Popular and Internet derivations from acronyms (and the pluck yew fable) are merely
<b>ingenious trifling</b>. The Old English word was h&aelig;man, from ham dwelling, home, with a
sense of take home, co-habit. Fuck was outlawed in print in England (by the Obscene Publications
Act, 1857) and the U.S. (by the Comstock Act, 1873). As a noun, it dates from 1670s. The word may
have been shunned in print, but it continued in conversation, especially among soldiers during World
War I.It became so common that an effective way for the soldier to express this emotion was to omit
this word. Thus if a sergeant said, 'Get your ----ing rifles!' it was understood as a matter of
routine. But if he said 'Get your rifles!' there was an immediate implication of urgency and danger.
[John Brophy, Songs and Slang of the British Soldier: 1914-1918, pub. 1930]The legal barriers broke
down in the 20th century, with the Ulysses decision (U.S., 1933) and Lady Chatterley's Lover (U.S.,
1959; U.K., 1960). Johnson excluded the word, and fuck wasn't in a single English language
dictionary from 1795 to 1965. The Penguin Dictionary broke the taboo in the latter year. Houghton
Mifflin followed, in 1969, with The American Heritage Dictionary, but it also published a Clean
Green edition without the word, to assure itself access to the lucrative public high school market.
The abbreviation F (or eff) probably began as euphemistic, but by 1943 it was being used as a cuss
word, too. In 1948, the publishers of The Naked and the Dead persuaded Norman Mailer to use the
euphemism fug instead. When Mailer later was introduced to Dorothy Parker, she greeted him with, So
you're the man who can't spell 'fuck'  [The quip sometimes is attributed to Tallulah Bankhead].
Hemingway used muck in For whom the Bell Tolls (1940). The major breakthrough in publication was
James Jones' From Here to Eternity (1950), with 50 fucks (down from 258 in the original manuscript).
Egyptian legal agreements from the 23rd Dynasty (749-21 B.C.E.) frequently include the phrase, If
you do not obey this decree, may a donkey copulate with you! [Reinhold Aman, Maledicta, Summer
1977]. Fuck-all nothing first recorded 1960.  Verbal phrase fuck up to ruin, spoil, destroy first
attested c.1916. A widespread group of Slavic words (such as Polish pierdoli&#263;) can mean both
fornicate and make a mistake. Fuck off attested from 1929; as a command to depart, by 1944. Flying
fuck originally meant have sex on horseback and is first attested c.1800 in broadside ballad New
Feats of Horsemanship. For the unkillable urban legend that this word is an acronym of some sort (a
fiction traceable on the Internet to 1995 but probably predating that) see here, and also here.
Related: Fucked; fucking. Agent noun fucker attested from 1590s in literal sense; by 1893 as a term
of abuse (or admiration).    DUCK F-CK-R. The man who has the care of the poultry on board a
&#383;hip of war. [Classical Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, 1796]


