effeminate (adj.)

early 15c., from Latin effeminatus womanish, effeminate, past participle of effeminare make a woman
of, from ex- out (see ex-) + femina woman (see feminine). Rarely used without reproach. Related:
Effeminately.


nance (n.)

effeminate man, homosexual, 1904, from female name Nancy (q.v.), which was in use as an adjective
meaning effeminate (applied to men) from 1883, a shortening of earlier Miss Nancy.   <b>Nancy,
Miss,</b> an opprobrious epithet for an exceedingly effeminate, over-nice young man. The original
Miss Nancy, however, was a Mrs. Anna Old field, a celebrated actress, who died in 1730 and was
buried in Westminster Abbey. She was extremely vain and nice about her dress, and as she lay in
state, attended by two noblemen, she was attired, as she had directed shortly before her death, in a
very fine Brussels lace head-dress, a Holland shift with a tucker and double ruffles of the same
lace, a pair of new kid gloves, etc., a circumstance alluded to by Pope .... [William S. Walsh,
Handy-Book of Literary Curiosities, 1892]   Nancy boy effeminate male homosexual is attested by
1958.


weakling (n.)

1520s, coined by Tyndale from weak (adj.) + -ling as a loan-translation of Luther's Weichling
effeminate man (from German weich soft) in I Cor. vi.9, where the Greek is malakoi, from malakos
soft, soft to the touch, Like the Lat. mollis, metaph. and in a bad sense: effeminate, of a
catamite, a male who submits his body to unnatural lewdness [Thayer's Greek-English Lexicon of the
New Testament].


feminine (adj.)

mid-14c., of the female sex, from Old French femenin (12c.) feminine, female; with feminine
qualities, effeminate, from Latin femininus feminine (in the grammatical sense at first), from
femina woman, female, literally she who suckles, from root of felare to suck, suckle (see fecund).
Sense of woman-like, proper to or characteristic of women is recorded from mid-15c.    The interplay
of meanings now represented in female, feminine, and effeminate, and the attempt to make them clear
and separate, has led to many coinages: feminitude (1878); feminile feminine (1640s); feminility
womanliness (1838); femality (17c., effeminacy; 1754 female nature). Also feminality (1640s, quality
or state of being female), from rare adjective feminal (late 14c.), from Old French feminal. And
femineity quality or state of being feminine, from Latin femineus of a woman, pertaining to a woman.


poof (n.2)

effeminate man, male homosexual, c.1850, perhaps a corruption of puff. The Australian extended form
poofter is attested from 1910.


mama

1707, spelling variant of mamma. Meaning sexually attractive woman first recorded 1925 in black
slang; mama's boy soft, effeminate male is from 1901.


pantywaist (n.)

weak or effeminate male, 1936, from a type of child's garment with short pants that buttoned to the
waist of a shirt; see panties + waist.


swish (n.)

1820, sound of something moving through the air, from swish (v.); sense of effeminate homosexual is
1930s in homosexual slang, probably from notion of mincing motion. Related: Swishy (adj.).


Nancy

fem. proper name, probably a pet form of Ancy, diminutive of Middle English Annis Agnes (see Agnes).
As an adjective meaning effeminate (with reference to men) it is from 1904. Among the top 10 popular
names for girls born in U.S. between 1935 and 1955.


pussy (n.1)

cat, 1726, diminutive of puss (n.1), also used of a rabbit (1715). As a term of endearment for a
girl or woman, from 1580s (also used of effeminate men). To play pussy was World War II RAF slang
for to take advantage of cloud cover, jumping from cloud to cloud to shadow a potential victim or
avoid recognition.


womanly (adj.)

c.1200, of a man, wanton, lascivious; late 14c. of a woman, feminine, of qualities, proper to a
woman; from woman + -ly (1). From c.1400 of men with the sense effeminate, weak.  Related:
Womanliness.


milksop (n.)

effeminate spiritless man, late 14c., attested as a (fictional) surname mid-13c.; also applied in
Middle English to the infant Christ. Literal sense piece of bread soaked in milk attested late 15c.;
see milk (n.) + sop (n.).


sissy (n.)

1846, sister, extended form of sis (q.v.). Meaning effeminate man is recorded from 1887; the
adjective in this sense is from 1891. Related: Sissiness. Sissy bar is recorded from 1969.


cheesecake (n.)

also cheese-cake, mid-15c., from cheese (n.1) + cake (n.). In figurative uses for soft, effeminate
from 18c. Slang meaning dates from 1934, when a Time magazine article defined it as leg-pictures of
sporty females. In its early years this sense of the word often was associated with Marlene
Dietrich.


effeminacy (n.)

c.1600; see effeminate + -acy.


Jessica

fem. proper name, from Late Latin Jesca, from Greek Ieskha, from Hebrew Yiskah, name of a daughter
of Haran (Gen. xi:29). Among the top 5 popular names for girls born in the U.S. every year between
1977 and 1997. The familiar form Jessie was one of many fem. names used 20c. for cowardly or
effeminate male.


womanize (v.)

1590s, to make effeminate, from woman + -ize. Sense of to chase women, to go wenching is attested
from 1893. Related: Womanized; womanizer; womanizing.


gussy (v.)

to dress up or decorate in a showy way, 1952, American English slang, apparently from Gussy (1940),
schoolyard slang name for an overly dressed person, perhaps related to gussie (1901) effeminate man,
and somehow connected to the nickname for Augusta and Augustus.


womanish (adj.)

late 14c., womanly, feminine; resembling a woman; of a man or men, behaving in the manner of a
woman, effeminate, from woman + -ish. Related: Womanishly; womanishness.


softy (n.)

also softie, 1863, silly person, from soft (adj.) + -y (3). Meaning soft-hearted person is from
1886; that of weak, unmanly or effeminate man is from 1895. The Mister Softee soft ice-cream
operation began in Philadelphia, U.S., in 1956.


delicate (adj.)

late 14c., self-indulgent, loving ease; delightful; sensitive, easily hurt; feeble, from Latin
delicatus alluring, delightful, dainty, also addicted to pleasure, luxurious, effeminate; of
uncertain origin; related by folk etymology (and perhaps genuinely) to deliciae a pet, and delicere
to allure, entice (see delicious). Meaning easily broken is recorded from 1560s.


mollycoddle (v.)

also molly-coddle, 1870, from a noun (1833) meaning one who coddles himself, from Molly (pet name
formation from Mary), which had been used contemptuously since 1754 for a milksop, an effeminate
man, + coddle (q.v.). Related: Mollycoddled; mollycoddling.


pansy (n.)

mid-15c., from Middle French pens&eacute;e a pansy, literally thought, remembrance, from fem. past
participle of penser to think, from Latin pensare consider, frequentative of pendere to weigh (see
pendant). So called because it was regarded as a symbol of thought or remembrance. Meaning
effeminate homosexual man is first recorded 1929.


epicene (adj.)

mid-15c., epycen, originally a grammatical term for nouns that may denote either gender, from Latin
epicoenus common, from Greek epikoinos common to many, promiscuous, from epi on (see epi-) + koinos
common (see coeno-). Extended sense of characteristic of both sexes first recorded in English
c.1600; that of effeminate 1630s.


weenie (n.)

frankfurter, 1906, with slang sense of penis following soon after, from German wienerwurst Vienna
sausage (see wiener). Meaning ineffectual person, effeminate young man is slang from 1963;
pejorative sense via penis shape, or perhaps from weenie in the sense of small (see wee).


smock (n.)

Old English smoc garment worn by women, corresponding to the shirt on men, from Proto-Germanic
*smukkaz (cognates: Old Norse smokkr a smock, but this is perhaps from Old English; Old High German
smoccho smock, a rare word; North Frisian smok woman's shift, but this, too, perhaps from English).
Klein's sources, Barnhart and the OED see this as connected to a group of Germanic sm- words having
to do with creeping or pressing close, such as Old Norse smjuga to creep (through an opening), to
put on (a garment), smuga narrow cleft to creep through; small hole; Old Swedish smog a round hole
for the head; Old English smugan, smeogan to creep, smygel a burrow. Compare also German schmiegen
to cling to, press close, nestle; and Schmuck jewelry, adornments, from schmucken to adorn,
literally to dress up.    Watkins, however, traces it to a possible Germanic base *(s)muk- wetness,
figuratively slipperiness, from PIE root*meug- slimy, slippery (see mucus). Either way, the original
notion, then, seems generally to have been garment one creeps or slips into, by the same pattern
that produced sleeve and slip (n.2).    Now replaced by euphemistic shift (n.2); smock was the
common word down to 18c., and was emblematic of womanhood generally, as in verb smock to render (a
man) effeminate or womanish (1610s); smocker man who consorts with women (18c.); smock-face person
having a pale, effeminate face (c.1600). A smock-race (1707) was an old country pastime, a foot-race
for women and girls with a smock as a prize. Modern meaning woman's or child's loose dress or blouse
is from 1907; sense of loose garment worn by artists over other clothes is from 1938.


wonk (n.)

overly studious person, 1962, earlier effeminate male (1954), American English student slang.
Perhaps a shortening of British slang wonky shaky, unreliable, or a variant of British slang wanker
masturbator. It seemed to rise into currency as a synonym for nerd late 1980s from Ivy League slang
and was widely popularized 1993 during the presidency of Bill Clinton. Tom Wolfe (1988) described it
as an Eastern prep-school term referring to all those who do not have the 'honk' voice, i.e., all
who are non-aristocratic.


quean (n.)

young, robust woman, Old English cwene woman, also female serf, hussy, prostitute (as in portcwene
public woman), from Proto-Germanic *kwenon (cognates: Old Saxon quan, Old High German quena, Old
Norse kona, Gothic qino wife, woman); see queen. Popular 16c.-17c. in sense hussy. Sense of
effeminate homosexual is recorded from 1935, especially in Australian slang.


cockney (n.)

c.1600, usually said to be from rare Middle English cokenei, cokeney spoiled child, milksop (late
14c.), originally cokene-ey cock's egg (mid-14c.). Most likely disentangling of the etymology is to
start from Old English cocena cock's egg -- genitive plural of coc cock + &aelig;g egg -- medieval
term for runt of a clutch, extended derisively c.1520s to town dweller, gradually narrowing
thereafter to residents of a particular neighborhood in the East End of London. Liberman, however,
disagrees:    [I]n all likelihood, not the etymon of ME cokeney 'milksop, simpleton; effeminate man;
Londoner,' which is rather a reshaping of [Old French] acoquin&eacute; 'spoiled' (participle).
However, this derivation poses some phonetic problems that have not been resolved.    The accent so
called from 1890, but the speech peculiarities were noted from 17c. As an adjective in this sense,
from 1630s.


Ionian (adj.)

of Ionia, the districts of ancient Greece inhabited by the Ionians (including Attica and the north
coast of the Peloponnesus, but especially the coastal strip of Asia Minor, including the islands of
Samos and Chios). The name (which Herodotus credits to an ancestral Ion, son of Apollo and Creusa)
probably is pre-Greek, perhaps related to Sanskrit yoni womb, vulva, and a reference to goddess-
worshipping people.    Also used of the sea that lies between Italy and the northern Peloponnesus
(1630s). The musical Ionian mode (1844) corresponds to our basic major scale but was characterized
by the Greeks as soft and effeminate, as were the Ionians generally.  The Ionians delighted in
wanton dances and songs more than the rest of the Greeks ... and wanton gestures were proverbially
termed Ionic motions. [Thomas Robinson, Arch&aelig;ologica Gr&aelig;ca, 1807]


fairy (n.)

c.1300, fairie, enchantment, magic, from Old French faerie land of fairies, meeting of fairies,
enchantment, magic, from fae fay, from Latin fata (plural) the Fates, from PIE *bha- to speak (see
fame (n.)).    As a supernatural creature from late 14c. [contra Tolkien; for example This maketh
that ther been no fairyes in Wife of Bath's Tale], perhaps via intermediate forms such as fairie
knight supernatural or legendary knight (early 14c.). The diminutive winged beings so-called in
children's stories seem to date from early 17c.    Yet I suspect that this flower-and-butterfly
minuteness was also a product of rationalization, which transformed the glamour of Elfland into mere
finesse, and invisibility into a fragility that could hide in a cowslip or shrink behind a blade of
grass. It seems to become fashionable soon after the great voyages had begun to make the world seem
too narrow to hold both men and elves; when the magic land of Hy Breasail in the West had become the
mere Brazils, the land of red-dye-wood. [J.R.R. Tolkien, On Fairy-Stories, 1947]     The slang
meaning effeminate male homosexual is first recorded 1895. Fairy ring is from 1590s. Fossil sea
urchins found on the English downlands were called fairy loaves.


bad (adj.)

c.1200, inferior in quality; early 13c., wicked, evil, vicious, a mystery word with no apparent
relatives in other languages.* Possibly from Old English derogatory term b&aelig;ddel and its
diminutive b&aelig;dling effeminate man, hermaphrodite, pederast, probably related to b&aelig;dan to
defile. A rare word before 1400, and evil was more common in this sense until c.1700. Meaning
uncomfortable, sorry is 1839, American English colloquial.    Comparable words in the other Indo-
European languages tend to have grown from descriptions of specific qualities, such as ugly,
defective, weak, faithless, impudent, crooked, filthy (such as Greek kakos, probably from the word
for excrement; Russian plochoj, related to Old Church Slavonic plachu wavering, timid; Persian gast,
Old Persian gasta-, related to gand stench; German schlecht, originally level, straight, smooth,
whence simple, ordinary, then bad).    Comparative and superlative forms badder, baddest were common
14c.-18c. and used as recently as Defoe (but not by Shakespeare), but yielded to comparative worse
and superlative worst (which had belonged to evil and ill).    As a noun, late 14c., evil,
wickedness. In U.S. place names, sometimes translating native terms meaning supernaturally
dangerous. Ironic use as a word of approval is said to be at least since 1890s orally, originally in
Black English, emerging in print 1928 in a jazz context. It might have emerged from the ambivalence
of expressions like bad nigger, used as a term of reproach by whites, but among blacks sometimes
representing one who stood up to injustice, but in the U.S. West bad man also had a certain
ambivalence:    These are the men who do most of the killing in frontier communities, yet it is a
noteworthy fact that the men who are killed generally deserve their fate. [Farmer &amp; Henley]
*Farsi has bad in more or less the same sense as the English word, but this is regarded by linguists
as a coincidence. The forms of the words diverge as they are traced back in time (Farsi bad comes
from Middle Persian vat), and such accidental convergences exist across many languages, given the
vast number of words in each and the limited range of sounds humans can make to signify them. Among
other coincidental matches with English are Korean mani many, Chinese pei pay, Nahuatl (Aztecan)
huel well, Maya hol hole.


