efficacy (n.)

1520s, from Latin efficacia efficacy, efficiency, from efficax (genitive efficacis) powerful,
effective, from stem of efficere work out, accomplish (see effect). Earlier in same sense was
efficace (c.1200), from Old French eficace (14c.), from Latin efficacia; also efficacite (early
15c.), from Latin efficacitatem.


efficacious (adj.)

sure to have the desired effect (often of medicines), 1520s, from Latin efficaci-, stem of efficax
(see efficacy) + -ous. Related: Efficaciously; efficaciousness.


inefficacy (n.)

want of force or virtue to produce the desired effect, 1610s, from Late Latin inefficacia, from
inefficacem (nominative inefficax), from in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + efficax (see
efficacy).


virtual (adj.)

late 14c., influencing by physical virtues or capabilities, effective with respect to inherent
natural qualities, from Medieval Latin virtualis, from Latin virtus excellence, potency, efficacy,
literally manliness, manhood (see virtue). The meaning being something in essence or effect, though
not actually or in fact is from mid-15c., probably via sense of capable of producing a certain
effect (early 15c.). Computer sense of not physically existing but made to appear by software is
attested from 1959.


void (adj.)

c.1300, unoccupied, vacant, from Anglo-French and Old French voide, viude empty, vast, wide, hollow,
waste, uncultivated, fallow, as a noun, opening, hole; loss, from Latin vocivos unoccupied, vacant,
related to vacuus empty (see vacuum (n.)). Meaning lacking or wanting (something) is recorded from
early 15c. Meaning legally invalid, without legal efficacy is attested from mid-15c.


main (n.)

Old English m&aelig;gen (n.) power, bodily strength, force, efficacy, from Proto-Germanic *maginam
power, suffixed form of PIE root *magh- (1) be able, have power (see may (v.)). Original sense
preserved in phrase with might and main. Meaning principal channel in a utility system is first
recorded 1727 in main drain; Used since 1540s for continuous stretch of land or water.  In Spanish
Main the word is short for mainland and refers to the coast between Panama and Orinoco.


fortify (v.)

early 15c., increase efficacy (of medicine); mid-15c., provide (a town) with walls and defenses,
from Old French fortifiier (14c.) to fortify, strengthen, from Late Latin fortificare to strengthen,
make strong, from Latin fortis strong (see fort) + facere to make (see factitious).    Sense of to
strengthen mentally or morally is from late 15c. Meaning add liquor or alcohol is from 1880.
Related: Fortified; fortifying.


actuality (n.)

late 14c., power, efficacy, from Old French actualite and directly from Medieval Latin actualitatem
(nominative actualitas), from Late Latin actualis (see actual). A Latin loan-translation of Greek
energeia. Meaning state of being real is from 1670s (actualities existing conditions is from 1660s).
Mod. use of actuality in the sense of realism, contact with the contemporary, is due to Fr.
actualit&eacute;, from actuel, which does not mean actual, real, but now existing, up to date.
[Weekley]


virtue (n.)

c.1200, vertu, moral life and conduct; a particular moral excellence, from Anglo-French and Old
French vertu force, strength, vigor; moral strength; qualities, abilities (10c. in Old French), from
Latin virtutem (nominative virtus) moral strength, high character, goodness; manliness; valor,
bravery, courage (in war); excellence, worth, from vir man (see virile).    For my part I honour
with the name of virtue the habit of acting in a way troublesome to oneself and useful to others.
[Stendhal de l'Amour, 1822]    Especially (in women) chastity, sexual purity from 1590s. Phrase by
virtue of (early 13c.) preserves alternative Middle English sense of efficacy. Wyclif Bible has
virtue where KJV uses power. The seven cardinal virtues (early 14c.) were divided into the natural
(justice, prudence, temperance, fortitude) and the theological (hope, faith, charity). To make a
virtue of a necessity (late 14c.) translates Latin facere de necessitate virtutem [Jerome].


power (n.)

c.1300, ability; ability to act or do; strength, vigor, might, especially in battle; efficacy;
control, mastery, lordship, dominion; legal power or authority; authorization; military force, an
army, from Anglo-French pouair, Old French povoir, noun use of the infinitive, to be able, earlier
podir (9c.), from Vulgar Latin *potere, from Latin potis powerful (see potent).    Whatever some
hypocritical ministers of government may say about it, power is the greatest of all pleasures. It
seems to me that only love can beat it, and love is a happy illness that can't be picked up as
easily as a Ministry. [Stendhal de l'Amour, 1822]    Meaning one who has power is late 14c. Meaning
specific ability or capacity is from early 15c. Meaning a state or nation with regard to
international authority or influence [OED] is from 1726. Used for a large number of from 1660s.
Meaning energy available for work is from 1727. Sense of electrical supply is from 1896.    Phrase
the powers that be is from Rom. xiii:1. As a statement wishing good luck, more power to (someone) is
recorded from 1842. A power play in ice hockey so called by 1940. Power failure is from 1911; power
steering from 1921.


