effrontery (n.)

1715, from French effronterie, from effront&eacute; shameless, from Old French esfronte shameless,
brazen, probably from Late Latin effrontem (nominative effrons) barefaced, from Latin ex- out (see
ex-) + frontem (nominative frons) brow (see front (n.)).    Latin frontus had a sense of ability to
blush, but the literal sense of effrontery often has been taken to be putting forth the forehead.
Forehead in Johnson's Dictionary (1755) has a secondary sense of impudence; confidence; assurance;
audaciousness; audacity.


barefaced (adj.)

1580s, with face uncovered or shaven; see bare (adj.) + face (n.). Thus, unconcealed (c.1600), and,
in a bad sense, shameless (1670s). Compare effrontery. The half-French bare-vis (adj.) conveyed the
same sense in Middle English.


brazen (adj.)

Old English br&aelig;sen of brass, from br&aelig;s brass (see brass) + -en (2). The figurative sense
of hardened in effrontery is 1570s (in brazen-face), perhaps suggesting a face unable to show shame
(see brass). To brazen it out face impudently is from 1550s.


brass (n.)

Old English br&aelig;s brass, bronze, originally in reference to an alloy of copper and tin (now
bronze), later and in modern use an alloy of two parts copper, one part zinc. A mystery word, with
no known cognates beyond English. Perhaps akin to French brasser to brew, because it is an alloy. It
also has been compared to Old Swedish brasa fire, but no sure connection can be made. Yet another
theory connects it with Latin ferrum iron, itself of obscure origin.    As brass was unknown in
antiquity, use of the word in Bible translations, etc., likely means bronze. The Romans were the
first to deliberately make it. Words for brass in other languages (such as German Messing, Old
English m&aelig;sling, French laiton, Italian ottone) also tend to be difficult to explain.    The
meaning effrontery, impudence is from 1620s. Slang sense of high officials is first recorded 1899.
The brass tacks that you get down to (1897) probably are the ones used to measure cloth on the
counter of a dry goods store, suggesting precision. Slang brass balls toughness, courage
(emphatically combining two metaphors for the same thing) attested by 1960s.


