ego (n.)

1714, as a term in metaphysics, from Latin ego I (cognate with Old English ic, see I).
Psychoanalytic sense is from 1894; sense of conceit is 1891. Ego trip first recorded 1969.    In the
book of Egoism it is written, Possession without obligation to the object possessed approaches
felicity. [George Meredith, The Egoist, 1879]


egocentric (adj.)

1900, from ego + -centric. Related: Egocentricity; egocentrism.


egoism (n.)

1785, in metaphysics (see egoist), from French &eacute;goisme (1755), from Modern Latin egoismus,
from Latin ego (see ego). Meaning self-interest is from 1800.


egoist (n.)

1785, in metaphysics, one who maintains there is no evidence of the existence of anything but the
self (taking ego in a sense of thinking subject), from French &eacute;goiste (1755); see ego + -ist.
Meaning selfish person is from 1879. Related: Egoistic; egoistical.


egomania (n.)

1825, from ego + mania.


egomaniac (n.)

1890, from egomania. Related: Egomaniacal.


egotism (n.)

1714, from ego + -ism (see egotist). Meaning selfishness is from 1800.


egotist (n.)

1714, first used by Joseph Addison; see ego + -ist. Addison credits the term to Port-Royalists who
used it in reference to obtrusive use of first person singular pronoun in writing, hence talking too
much about oneself. Meaning self-conceit, selfishness is 1800. The -t- is abnornmal, perhaps by
influence of dogmatism. Related: Egotistic; egotistical.


allegorical (adj.)

1520s, from French all&eacute;gorique, from Latin allegoricus, from Greek allegorikos (see
allegory). Earlier form was allegoric (late 14c.). Related: Allegorically.


allegory (n.)

late 14c., from Old French allegorie (12c.), from Latin allegoria, from Greek allegoria figurative
language, description of one thing under the image of another, literally a speaking about something
else, from allos another, different (see alias (adv.)) + agoreuein speak openly, speak in the
assembly, from agora assembly (see agora).


alter ego

1530s, from Latin phrase (used by Cicero), a second self, a trusted friend (compare Greek allos
ego); see alter and ego.


begone (v.)

late 14c., contracted from be (imperative) + gone.


begonia (n.)

1751, from French begonia (1706), named by Plumier for Michel B&eacute;gon (1638-1710), French
governor of Santo Domingo (Haiti) and patron of botany.


begorra

1839, antiquated Anglo-Irish form of expletive By God.


begotten (adj.)

late 14c., past participle adjective from beget.


categorical (adj.)

1590s, as a term in logic, unqualified, asserting absolutely, from Late Latin categoricus, from
Greek kategorikos accusatory, affirmative, categorical, from kategoria (see category). General sense
of explicit, unconditional is from 1610s. Categorical imperative, from the philosophy of Kant, first
recorded 1827. Related: Categorically.


categorization (n.)

1866, noun of action from categorize. Perhaps influenced by French cat&eacute;gorisation (1845).


categorize (v.)

1705, from category + -ize. Related: Categorized; categorizing.


category (n.)

1580s, from Middle French cat&eacute;gorie, from Late Latin categoria, from Greek kategoria
accusation, prediction, category, verbal noun from kategorein to speak against; to accuse, assert,
predicate, from kata down to (or perhaps against; see cata-) + agoreuein to harangue, to declaim (in
the assembly), from agora public assembly (see agora). Original sense of accuse weakened to assert,
name by the time Aristotle applied kategoria to his 10 classes of things that can be named.
<b>category</b> should be used by no-one who is not prepared to state (1) that he does not mean
class, &amp; (2) that he knows the difference between the two .... [Fowler]


forego (v.)

to go before, Old English foregan to go before, from fore- + go.  The similarly constructed foredone
killed, destroyed, now is archaic, replaced by done for. Related: Foregoing; foregone.    Phrase
foregone conclusion popularized in Othello [III.iii], but Shakespeare's sense was not necessarily
the main modern one of a decision already formed before the case is argued. Othello says it of
Cassio's dream, and it is clear from the context that Othello means Cassio actually has been in bed
with Desdemona before he allegedly dreamed it.


Gregorian (adj.)

literally pertaining to Gregory, from Late Latin Gregorianus, from Gregorius (see Gregory). From
c.1600 in reference to church music, from Gregory I (pope from 590-600), who traditionally codified
it; 1640s in reference to new calendar (introduced 1582) from Pope Gregory XIII.


Gregory

masc. proper name, common in England and Scotland by mid-12c. (Pope Gregory I sent the men who
converted the English to Christianity), from Late Latin Gregorius, from Greek gregorios, a
derivative of gregoros to be watchful, from PIE root *ger- to be awake (cognates: Sanskrit jagarti
he is awake, Avestan agarayeiti wakes up, rouses). At times confused with Latin gregarius (see
gregarious).


hapax legomenon (n.)

(plural legomena), word occurring only once, Greek, literally once said, from hapax once +
legomenon, neuter passive present participle of legein to say.


hasta luego

Spanish, literally until soon; salutation in parting.


Herzegovina

former Austrian duchy in the Balkans, from Old Serbian herceg duke (related to Modern German Herzog)
+ possessive ending -ov + -ina country.


hoosegow (n.)

jail, 1911, western U.S., probably from mispronunciation of Mexican Spanish juzgao tribunal, court,
from juzgar to judge, used as a noun, from Latin judicare to judge, which is related to judicem (see
judge (v.)).


Lego

1954, proprietary name (in use since 1934, according to the company), from Danish phrase leg godt
play well. The founder, Ole Kirk Christiansen, didn't realize until later that the word meant I
study or I put together in Latin.


misbegotten (adj.)

bastard, illegitimate, 1550s, past participle adjective from obsolete misbeget (c.1300); see mis-
(1) + beget.


negotiable (adj.)

1749, from negotiate + -able, or from French n&#233;gociable (17c.). Related: Negotiably;
negotiability.


negotiate (v.)

to communicate in search of mutual agreement, 1590s, back-formation from negotiation, or else from
Latin negotiatus, past participle of negotiari. In the sense of tackle successfully (1862), it at
first meant to clear on horseback a hedge, fence, or other obstacle and originated in the hunting-
field; those who hunt the fox like also to hunt jocular verbal novelties [Gowers, 1965]. Related:
Negotiated; negotiating.


negotiation (n.)

early 15c., from Old French negociacion business, trade, and directly from Latin negotiationem
(nominative negotiatio) business, traffic, noun of action from past participle stem of negotiari
carry on business, do business, act as a banker, from negotium a business, employment, occupation,
affair (public or private), also difficulty, pains, trouble, labor, literally lack of leisure, from
neg- not (see deny) + otium ease, leisure. The sense expansion from doing business to also include
bargaining about anything took place in Latin.


negotiator (n.)

1590s, businessman, from Latin negotiator one who carries on business by wholesale, from negotiatus,
past participle of negotiari (see negotiation). Meaning one who carries on negotiations is from
c.1600.


Oregon

1765 as the name of a large river in the west of North America, probably the modern Columbia; of
uncertain and disputed origin. It seems to be of Algonquian origin. From 1848 as the name of a U.S.
territory (admitted as a state 1859).


paregoric (n.)

medicine that soothes pain, 1704, from adjective (1680s) soothing, from Late Latin paregoricus, from
Greek paregorikos soothing, encouraging, consoling, from paregorein speak soothingly to, from
paregoros consoling, from para- beside (see para- (1)) + root of agoreuein speak in public, from
agora public assembly, from PIE root *ger- to gather (see gregarious).


pegomancy (n.)

divination by fountains, 1727, from Latinized form of Greek pege fountain, spring (of unknown
origin) + -mancy.


prolegomenon (n.)

1650s, learned preamble to a book, from Greek prolegomenon, noun use of neuter passive present
participle of prolegein to say beforehand, from pro- before (see pro-) + legein to speak (see
lecture (n.)) + suffix -menos (as in alumnus). The same sense is in preface (n.). Related:
Prolegomenary; prolegomenous.


regolith (n.)

1897, from Greek rhegos rug, blanket, from PIE *reg- (3) to dye (see raga) + lithos stone (see
litho-).


renegotiate (v.)

1934, from re- again + negotiate. Related: Renegotiated; renegotiating.


scapegoat (n.)

1530, goat sent into the wilderness on the Day of Atonement, symbolic bearer of the sins of the
people, coined by Tyndale from scape (n.1) + goat to translate Latin caper emissarius, itself a
translation in Vulgate of Hebrew 'azazel (Lev. xvi:8,10,26), which was read as 'ez ozel goat that
departs, but which others hold to be the proper name of a devil or demon in Jewish mythology
(sometimes identified with Canaanite deity Aziz).    Jerome's reading also was followed by Martin
Luther (der ledige Bock), Symmachus (tragos aperkhomenos), and others (compare French bouc
&eacute;missaire), but the question of who, or what (or even where) is meant by 'azazel is a vexed
one. The Revised Version (1884) simply restores Azazel. But the old translation has its modern
defenders:   Azazel is an active participle or participial noun, derived ultimately from azal
(connected with the Arabic word azala, and meaning removed), but immediately from the reduplicate
form of that verb, azazal. The reduplication of the consonants of the root in Hebrew and Arabic
gives the force of repetition, so that while azal means removed, azalzal means removed by a
repetition of acts. Azalzel or azazel, therefore, means one who removes by a series of acts. ... The
interpretation is founded on sound etymological grounds, it suits the context wherever the word
occurs, it is consistent with the remaining ceremonial of the Day of Atonement, and it accords with
the otherwise known religious beliefs and symbolical practices of the Israelites. [Rev. F. Meyrick,
Leviticus, London, 1882]    Meaning one who is blamed or punished for the mistakes or sins of others
first recorded 1824; the verb is attested from 1943. Related: Scapegoated; scapegoating.   For the
formation, compare scapegrace, also scape-gallows one who deserves hanging.


stegosaurus (n.)

type of plant-eating dinosaur, 1892, from Modern Latin order name Stegosauria (O.C. Marsh, 1877),
from comb. form of Greek stegos a roof (related to stege covering, stegein to cover, from PIE root
*(s)teg- (2) to cover, especially cover with a roof (cognates: Sanskrit sthag- cover, conceal, hide;
Latin tegere to cover; Lithuanian stegti roof; Old Norse &thorn;ekja, Old English &thorn;eccan
thatch; Dutch dekken, German decken to cover, put under roof; Irish tuigiur cover, tech house; Welsh
toi thatch, roof, ty house) + -saurus. The back-armor plates in the fossilized remains look like
roof tiles.


sub-category (n.)

also subcategory, 1855, from sub- + category (n.).


super-ego (n.)

also superego, that part of the psyche which controls the impulses of the id, 1924, as a translation
of German &uuml;ber-Ich; see super- and ego.


telegony (n.)

supposed influence of a sire on the offspring of a female by a later sire, 1893, from Greek tele far
off (see tele-) + -geneia origin, from -genes born (see genus).


unbegotten (adj.)

1530s, from un- (1) not + begotten.


wegotism (n.)

1797, from we + egotism; an obtrusive and too frequent use of the first person plural by a speaker
or writer [OED].


wobbegong (n.)

type of Australian shark, 1852, an Aboriginal word.


woebegone (adj.)

c.1300, in expressions such as me is wo bigone woe has beset me, from woe + begon to beset,
surround, overwhelm, from Old English began go over, traverse; inhabit, occupy; surround, beset,
overrun; from be + go.


