elaborate (adj.)

1590s, produced by labor, from Latin elaboratus, past participle of elaborare to exert oneself (see
elaboration). Meaning very detailed is from 1620s.


elaborate (v.)

c.1600, to build up from simple elements, from Latin elaboratus, past participle of elaborare (see
elaboration). Meaning to work out in detail is attested from 1610s. Related: Elaborated;
elaborating.


elaborately (adv.)

1630s, see elaborate (adj.) + -ly (2).


studied (adj.)

1520s, learned; c.1600, studiously elaborate, past participle adjective from study (v.).


pouf (n.)

style of elaborate female head-dress, 1817 (in reference to styles of c.1780), from French bouffer
to blow out, puff, probably of imitative origin. In dress-making, recorded from 1869; in reference
to over-stuffed cushions, 1884. As a verb by 1882 (implied in pouffed).


tinker (n.)

mender of kettles, pots, pans, etc., late 14c. (mid-13c. as a surname), of uncertain origin. Some
connect the word with the sound made by light hammering on metal. Tinker's damn something slight and
worthless is from 1824, probably preserving tinkers' reputation for free and casual use of
profanity; the plain and simple etymology is not good enough for some writers, and since 1877 an
ingeniously elaborate but baseless derivation has been circulated claiming the second word is really
dam.


shrine (n.)

Old English scrin ark (of the covenant); chest, coffer; case for relics, from Latin scrinium case or
box for keeping papers, of unknown origin. From late 14c. as a tomb of a saint (usually elaborate
and large). A widespread word, compare Dutch schrijn, German Schrein, French &#233;crin, Russian
skrynya, Lithuanian skrine.


dukes (n.)

hands, 1874, now mainly in put up your dukes (phrase from 1859), probably not connected to duke
(n.). Chapman [Dictionary of American Slang] suggests Romany dook the hand as read in palmistry,
one's fate; but Partridge [Slang To-day and Yesterday] gives it a plausible, if elaborate, etymology
as a contraction of Duke of Yorks, rhyming slang for forks, a Cockney term for fingers, thus hands.


baseball (n.)

in the modern sense, 1845, American English, from base (n.) + ball (n.1). Earlier references, such
as in Jane Austen's Northanger Abbey, refer to the game of rounders, of which baseball is a more
elaborate variety. Legendarily invented 1839 by Abner Doubleday in Cooperstown, N.Y. Base was used
for start or finish line of a race from 1690s; and the sense of safe spot found in modern children's
game of tag can be traced to 14c. (the sense in baseball is from 1868).


accurate (adj.)

1610s, done with care, from Latin accuratus prepared with care, exact, elaborate, past participle of
accurare take care of, from ad- to (see ad-) + curare take care of (see cure). The notion of doing
something carefully led to that of being exact (1650s). Related: Accurately; accurateness.


quaint (adj.)

c.1200, cointe, cunning, ingenious; proud, from Old French cointe knowledgeable, well-informed;
clever; arrogant, proud; elegant, gracious, from Latin cognitus known, approved, past participle of
cognoscere get or come to know well (see cognizance). Modern spelling is from early 14c.    Later in
English, elaborate, skillfully made (c.1300); strange and clever (mid-14c.). Sense of old-fashioned
but charming is first attested 1795, and could describe the word itself, which had become rare after
c.1700 (though it soon recovered popularity in this secondary sense).  Related: Quaintly;
quaintness.


negligee (n.)

1756, a kind of loose gown worn by women, from French n&eacute;glig&eacute;e, noun use of fem. past
participle of n&eacute;gligier to neglect (14c.), from Latin neglegere to disregard, not heed, not
trouble oneself about, also to make light of (see neglect (v.)). So called in comparison to the
elaborate costume of a fully dressed woman of the period. Grose [Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue,
1788] reports it vulgarly termed a neggledigee. Borrowed again, 1835; the modern sense semi-
transparent, flimsy, lacy dressing gown is yet another revival, first recorded 1930. It also was
used in the U.S. funeral industry mid-20c. for shroud of a corpse.


clam (n.)

bivalve mollusk, c.1500, in clam-shell, originally Scottish, apparently a particular use from Middle
English clam pincers, vice, clamp (late 14c.), from Old English clamm bond, fetter, grip, grasp,
from Proto-Germanic *klam- to press or squeeze together (cognates: Old High German klamma cramp,
fetter, constriction, German Klamm a constriction). If this is right then the original reference is
to the shell. Clam-chowder attested from 1822. To be happy as a clam is from 1833, but the earliest
uses do not elaborate on the notion behind it, unless it be self-containment.


tuxedo (n.)

man's evening dress for semiformal occasions, 1889, named for Tuxedo Park, N.Y., a rural resort
development for wealthy New Yorkers and site of a country club where it first was worn, supposedly
in 1886. The name is an attractive subject for elaborate speculation, and connections with
Algonquian words for bear or wolf were proposed. The authoritative Bright, however, says the tribe's
name probably is originally a place name, perhaps Munsee Delaware (Algonquian) p'tuck-sepo crooked
river.    There was a hue and cry raised against the Tuxedo coat upon its first appearance because
it was erroneously considered and widely written of as intended to displace the swallow tail. When
the true import of the tailless dress coat came to be realized it was accepted promptly by swelldom,
and now is widely recognized as one of the staple adjuncts of the jeunesse dor&#233;e. [Clothier and
Furnisher, August, 1889]


symphony (n.)

c.1300, a name given to various types of musical instruments, from Old French simphonie, sifonie,
simfone musical harmony; stringed instrument (12c., Modern French symphonie) and directly from Latin
symphonia a unison of sounds, harmony, from Greek symphonia harmony, concord of sounds, from
symphonos harmonious, agreeing in sound, from assimilated form of syn- together (see syn-) + phone
voice, sound (see fame (n.)).    Meaning harmony of sounds in English is attested from late 14c.;
sense of music in parts is from 1590s. It was only after the advent of Haydn that this word began to
mean a sonata for full orchestra. Before that time it meant a prelude, postlude, or interlude, or
any short instrumental work. [Elson's Music Dictionary] Meaning elaborate orchestral composition
first attested 1789. Elliptical for symphony orchestra from 1926. Diminutive symphonette is recorded
from 1947.


Sabbath (n.)

Old English sabat Saturday as a day of rest, as observed by the Jews, from Latin sabbatum, from
Greek sabbaton, from Hebrew shabbath, properly day of rest, from shabath he rested. Spelling with
-th attested from late 14c., not widespread until 16c.    The Babylonians regarded seventh days as
unlucky, and avoided certain activities then; the Jewish observance might have begun as a similar
custom. Among European Christians, from the seventh day of the week it began to be applied early
15c. to the first day (Sunday), though no definite law, either divine or ecclesiastical, directed
the change [Century Dictionary], but elaborate justifications have been made. The change was driven
by Christians' celebration of the Lord's resurrection on the first day of the week, a change
completed during the Reformation.    The original meaning is preserved in Spanish Sabado, Italian
Sabbato, and other languages' names for Saturday. Hungarian szombat, Rumanian simbata, French
samedi, German Samstag Saturday are from Vulgar Latin sambatum, from Greek *sambaton, a vulgar
nasalized variant of sabbaton. Sabbath-breaking attested from 1650s.


talk (v.)

c.1200, talken, probably a diminutive or frequentative form related to Middle English tale story,
and ultimately from the same source as tale, with rare English formative -k (compare hark from hear,
stalk from steal, smirk from smile) and replacing that word as a verb. East Frisian has talken to
talk, chatter, whisper. Related: Talked; talking.    To talk (something) up discuss in order to
promote is from 1722. To talk shop is from 1854. To talk turkey is from 1824, supposedly from an
elaborate joke about a swindled Indian. To talk back answer impudently or rudely is from 1869.
Phrase talking head is by 1966 in the jargon of television production, an in-tight closeup of a
human head talking on television. In reference to a person who habitually appears on television in
talking-head shots (usually a news anchor), by 1970. The phrase is used earlier, in reference to the
well-known magic trick (such as Se&#241;or Wences's talking head-in-the-box Pedro on the Ed Sullivan
Show), and to actual talking heads in mythology around the world (Orpheus, Bran).


alchemy (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French alchimie (14c.), alquemie (13c.), from Medieval Latin alkimia, from Arabic
al-kimiya, from Greek khemeioa (found c.300 C.E. in a decree of Diocletian against the old writings
of the Egyptians), all meaning alchemy. Perhaps from an old name for Egypt (Khemia, literally land
of black earth, found in Plutarch), or from Greek khymatos that which is poured out, from khein to
pour, related to khymos juice, sap [Klein, citing W. Muss-Arnolt, calls this folk etymology]. The
word seems to have elements of both origins.Mahn ... concludes, after an elaborate investigation,
that Gr. khymeia was probably the original, being first applied to pharmaceutical chemistry, which
was chiefly concerned with juices or infusions of plants; that the pursuits of the Alexandrian
alchemists were a subsequent development of chemical study, and that the notoriety of these may have
caused the name of the art to be popularly associated with the ancient name of Egypt. [OED]The al-
is the Arabic definite article, the. The art and the name were adopted by the Arabs from
Alexandrians and thence returned to Europe via Spain. Alchemy was the chemistry of the Middle Ages
and early modern times; since c.1600 the word has been applied distinctively to the pursuit of the
transmutation of baser metals into gold, which, along with the search for the universal solvent and
the panacea, were the chief occupations of early chemistry.


