elevation (n.)

late 14c., a rising, height of something, from Old French elevation and directly from Latin
elevationem (nominative elevatio) a lifting up, noun of action from past participle stem of elevare
(see elevate). Meaning act of elevating is from 1520s.


exaltation (n.)

late 14c, from Old French exaltacion enhancement, elevation, from Latin exaltationem (nominative
exaltatio) elevation, pride, from exaltare (see exalt).


mound (n.)

1550s, hedge, fence, also embankment, dam (a sense probably influenced by mount (n.)). The
relationship between the noun and the verb is uncertain. Commonly supposed to be from Old English
mund hand, protection, guardianship (cognate with Latin manus), but this is not certain (OED
discounts it on grounds of sense). Perhaps a confusion of the native word and Middle Dutch mond
protection, used in military sense for fortifications of various types, including earthworks. From
1726 as artificial elevation (as over a grave); 1810 as natural low elevation. As the place where
the pitcher stands on a baseball field, from 1912.


mogul (n.2)

elevation on a ski slope, 1961, probably [Barnhart] from Scandinavian (compare dialectal Norwegian
mugje, fem. muga, a heap, a mound), or [OED] from southern German dialect mugel in the same sense.


Baja

in place names (such as Baja California), Spanish baja, literally lower, either in elevation or
geography.


Harlem

Manhattan district, used figuratively for African-American culture from 1934. The N.Y. community was
founded 1658 and originally named Nieuw Haarlem for Haarlem in Netherlands, which probably is from
Dutch haar height + lem silt, in reference to its position on a slight elevation on the banks of the
Spaarne River.


pew (n.)

late 14c., raised, enclosed seat for certain worshippers (ladies, important men, etc.), from Old
French puie, puy balcony, elevation, from Latin podia, plural of podium elevated place, also balcony
in a Roman theater (see podium). Meaning fixed bench with a back, for a number of worshippers is
attested from 1630s.


tribunal (n.)

early 15c., a judgement seat, from Old French tribunal justice seat, judgement seat (13c.) and
directly from Latin tribunal platform for the seat of magistrates, elevation, embankment, from
tribunus official in ancient Rome, magistrate, literally head of a tribe (see tribune). Hence, a
court of justice or judicial assembly (1580s).


majesty (n.)

c.1300, greatness, glory, from Old French majeste grandeur, nobility (12c.), from Latin maiestatem
(nominative maiestas) greatness, dignity, elevation, honor, excellence, from stem of maior (neuter
maius), comparative of magnus great (see magnate). Earliest English us is with reference to God; as
a title, in reference to kings and queens (late 14c.), it is from Romance languages and descends
from the Roman Empire.


parados (n.)

rear wall of a trench, 1917, earlier elevation behind a fortified place (1853), literally defense
from the back, from French parados, from para- defense (see para- (2)) + dos back (see dossier).


parachute (n.)

1784 (the year the use of one first was attempted, in Paris), from French parachute, literally that
which protects against a fall, hybrid coined by French aeronaut Fran&ccedil;ois Blanchard
(1753-1809) from para- defense against (see para- (2)) + chute a fall (see chute).    PARACHUTE, a
kind of large and strong umbrella, contrived to break a person's fall from an airballoon, should any
accident happen to the balloon at a high elevation. [Supplement to the Encyclopaedia or Dictionary
of Arts and Sciences, Philadelphia, 1803]


rampart (n.)

earthen elevation around a place for fortification, sometimes also including parapets, 1580s, from
Middle French rempart, rampart, from remparer to fortify, from re- again (see re-) + emparer
fortify, take possession of, from Old Proven&ccedil;al amparer, from Vulgar Latin *anteparare
prepare, properly to make preparations beforehand, from Latin ante- before (see ante) + parare
prepare (see pare). With excrescent -t in French, perhaps by influence of boulevart (see boulevard).


point-blank (n.)

1570s, said to be from point (v.) + blank (n.), here meaning the white center of a target. The
notion would be of standing close enough to aim (point) at the blank without allowance for curve,
windage, or gravity. But early references make no mention of a white target, and the phrase is
possibly from a simplification of the French phrase de pointe en blanc, used in French gunnery in
reference to firing a piece on the level into open space to test how far it will carry. In that case
the blank represents empty space or perhaps the zero point of elevation. The whole phrase might be a
French loan-translation from Italian. From 1590s as an adjective in English.


mountain (n.)

c.1200, from Old French montaigne (Modern French montagne), from Vulgar Latin *montanea mountain,
mountain region, noun use of fem. of *montaneus of a mountain, mountainous, from Latin montanus
mountainous, of mountains, from mons (genitive montis) mountain (see mount (n.)).    Until 18c.,
applied to a fairly low elevation if it was prominent (such as Sussex Downs, the hills around
Paris). As an adjective from late 14c. Mountain dew raw and inferior whiskey first recorded 1839;
earlier a type of Scotch whiskey (1816); Jamieson's 1825 Supplement to his Scottish dictionary
defines it specifically as A cant term for Highland whisky that has paid no duty. Mountain-climber
recorded from 1839; mountain-climbing from 1836.


superior (adj.)

late 14c., higher in position, from Old French superior higher, upper (Modern French superieur),
from Latin superiorem (nominative superior) higher, comparative of superus situated above, upper,
from super above, over (see super-).    Meaning higher in rank or dignity is attested from late
15c.; sense of of a higher nature or character is attested from 1530s. Original sense was preserved
more strongly in French (as in les &eacute;tages sup&eacute;rieur the upper stories), and in Lake
Superior, a loan-translation of French Lac Sup&eacute;rieur, literally upper lake (at 600 feet above
sea-level it has the highest surface elevation of the five Great Lakes and is the furthest north).


hill (n.)

Old English hyll hill, from Proto-Germanic *hulni- (cognates: Middle Dutch hille, Low German hull
hill, Old Norse hallr stone, Gothic hallus rock, Old Norse holmr islet in a bay, Old English holm
rising land, island), from PIE root *kel- (4) to rise, be elevated, be prominent; hill (cognates:
Sanskrit kutam top, skull; Latin collis hill, columna projecting object, culmen top, summit, cellere
raise, celsus high; Greek kolonos hill, kolophon summit; Lithuanian kalnas mountain, kalnelis hill,
kelti raise). Formerly including mountains, now usually confined to heights under 2,000 feet. In
Great Britain heights under 2,000 feet are generally called hills; 'mountain' being confined to the
greater elevations of the Lake District, of North Wales, and of the Scottish Highlands; but, in
India, ranges of 5,000 and even 10,000 feet are commonly called 'hills,' in contrast with the
Himalaya Mountains, many peaks of which rise beyond 20,000 feet. [OED]   <hr />   The term mountain
is very loosely used. It commonly means any unusual elevation. In New England and central New York,
elevations of from one to two thousand feet are called hills, but on the plains of Texas, a hill of
a few hundred feet is called a mountain. [Ralph S. Tarr, Elementary Geology, Macmillan, 1903]   <hr
/>   Despite the differences in defining mountain systems, Penck (1896), Supan (1911) and Obst
(1914) agreed that the distinction between hills, mountains, and mountain systems according to areal
extent or height is not a suitable classification. [Geographic Information Science and Mountain
Geomorphology, 2004]    Phrase over the hill past one's prime is first recorded 1950.


