elicit (v.)

1640s, from Latin elicitus, past participle of elicere draw forth, from ex- out (see ex-) + -licere,
comb. form of lacere to entice, lure, deceive (related to laqueus noose, snare; see lace (n.)).
Related: Elicited; eliciting; elicits; elicitation.


evince (v.)

c.1600, disprove, confute, from French &eacute;vincer disprove, confute, from Latin evincere
conquer, elicit by argument, prove, from ex- out (see ex-) + vincere overcome (see victor).
Meaning show clearly is late 18c. Not clearly distinguished from evict until 18c. Related: Evinced;
evinces; evincing.


question (n.)

early 13c., philosophical or theological problem; early 14c. as utterance meant to elicit an answer
or discussion, also as a difficulty, a doubt, from Anglo-French questiun, Old French question
question, difficulty, problem; legal inquest, interrogation, torture, from Latin quaestionem
(nominative quaestio) a seeking, a questioning, inquiry, examining, judicial investigation, noun of
action from past participle stem of quaerere ask, seek (see query (v.)).   No question undoubtedly
is from mid-15c; no questions asked accountability not required is from 1879 (especially in
newspaper advertisements seeking the return of something lost or stolen). Question mark is from
1849, sometimes also question stop (1862); figurative use is from 1869. To be out of the question
(c.1700) is to be not pertinent to the subject, hence not to be considered.


bring (v.)

Old English bringan to bring, bring forth, produce, present, offer (past tense brohte, past
participle broht), from Proto-Germanic *brengan (cognates: Old Frisian brenga, Middle Dutch
brenghen, Old High German bringan, Gothic briggan); no exact cognates outside Germanic, but it
appears to be from PIE root *bhrengk-, compound based on root *bher- (1) to carry (source also of
Latin ferre; see infer).    The tendency to conjugate this as a strong verb on the model of sing,
drink, etc., is ancient: Old English also had a rare strong past participle form, brungen,
corresponding to modern colloquial brung. To bring down the house figuratively (1754) is to elicit
applause so thunderous it collapses the roof.


stamp (v.)

Old English stempan to pound in a mortar, from Proto-Germanic *stamp- (cognates: Old Norse stappa,
Danish stampe, Middle Dutch stampen, Old High German stampfon, German stampfen to stamp with the
foot, beat, pound, German Stampfe pestle), from nasalized form of PIE root *stebh- to support, place
firmly on (cognates: Greek stembein to trample, misuse; see staff (n.)). The vowel altered in Middle
English, perhaps by influence of Scandinavian forms.    Sense of strike the foot forcibly downwards
is from mid-14c. The meaning impress or mark (something) with a die is first recorded 1550s. Italian
stampa stamp, impression, Spanish estampar to stamp, print, French &#233;tamper (13c., Old French
estamper) to stamp, impress are Germanic loan-words. Related: Stamped; stamping. To stamp out
originally was extinguish a fire by stamping on it; attested from 1851 in the figurative sense.
Stamping ground one's particular territory (1821) is from the notion of animals. A stamped addressed
envelope (1873) was one you enclosed in a letter to speed or elicit a reply.


