ellipsis (n.)

1560s, an ellipse, from Latin ellipsis, from Greek elleipsis a falling short, defect, ellipse, from
elleipein to fall short, leave out, from en- in + leipein to leave (see relinquish). Grammatical
sense first recorded 1610s.


ellipse (n.)

1753, from French ellipse (17c.), from Latin ellipsis ellipse, also, a falling short, deficit, from
Greek elleipsis (see ellipsis). So called because the conic section of the cutting plane makes a
smaller angle with the base than does the side of the cone, hence, a falling short. The Greek word
was first applied by Apollonius of Perga (3c. B.C.E.). to the curve which had been previously called
the section of the acute-angled cone, but it had previously been technically applied to a rectangle
one of whose sides coincides with a part of a given line (Euclid, VI. 27).


elliptic (adj.)

1726, from Greek elleiptikos pertaining to an ellipse, from elleipein (see ellipsis).


elliptical (adj.)

1650s, elliptic in shape; see elliptic + -al (1). Grammatical sense of missing essential words or
phrases is recorded from 1778 (see ellipsis). Related: Elliptically.


anticline (n.)

1867, earlier anticlinal (1849, by ellipsis from anticlinal fold), from anti- against + Greek
klinein to lean, slope (see lean (v.)). Form assimilated to incline.


succeed (v.)

late 14c., intransitive and transitive, come next after, follow after another; take the place of
another, be elected or chosen for a position, from Old French succeder to follow on (14c.) and
directly from Latin succedere come after, follow after; go near to; come under; take the place of,
also go from under, mount up, ascend, hence get on well, prosper, be victorious, from sub next to,
after (see sub-) + cedere go, move (see cede).    Meaning to continue, endure is from early 15c. The
sense of turn out well, have a favorable result in English is first recorded late 15c., with
ellipsis of adverb (succeed well). Of persons, to be successful, from c.1500. Related: Succeeded;
succeeding.


prude (n.)

1704, woman who affects or upholds modesty in a degree considered excessive, from French prude
excessively prim or demure woman, first recorded in Moli&egrave;re. Perhaps a false back-formation
or an ellipsis of preudefemme a discreet, modest woman, from Old French prodefame noblewoman,
gentlewoman; wife, consort, fem. equivalent of prudhomme a brave man (see proud); or perhaps a
direct noun use of the French adjective prude prudish, from Old French prude, prode, preude good,
virtuous, modest, a feminine form of the adjective preux. Also occasionally as an adjective in
English 18c.


