elliptical (adj.)

1650s, elliptic in shape; see elliptic + -al (1). Grammatical sense of missing essential words or
phrases is recorded from 1778 (see ellipsis). Related: Elliptically.


venire

1660s, elliptical for venire facias (mid-15c.), Latin, literally that you cause to come, formerly
the first words in a writ to a sheriff to summon a jury. See venue.


regardless (adj.)

indifferent, 1590s, from regard (n.) + -less. Elliptical for regardless of consequences, expenses,
etc., from 1872.


whatnot (n.)

also what-not, 1530s, anything, from what + not. Elliptical for what may I not say, implying
everything else. As the name of a furniture item, first attested 1808, so named for the objects it
is meant to hold.


exactly (adv.)

1530s, from exact (adj.) + -ly (2). Elliptical use for quite right not recorded before 1869.


scotch (n.1)

1778, elliptical for Scotch whisky. See Scotch (adj.).


groat (n.)

medieval European coin, late 14c., probably from Middle Dutch groot, elliptical use of adj. meaning
great, big (in sense of thick); see great. Recognized from 13c. in various nations, in 14c. it was
roughly one-eighth an ounce of silver; the English groat coined 1351-2 was worth four pence. Also
see groschen.


Spencerian (adj.)

1863, pertaining to the penmanship system devised by American penman Platt R. Spencer, the Father of
American Writing (1800-1864), who c.1840 began promoting an elliptical cursive style that became the
standard U.S. business hand from 1850s to early 20c. It had an assured but joyous elegance lacking
in the later Palmer letters. The word also can be a reference to English philosopher Herbert Spencer
(1820-1903).


salutation (n.)

late 14c., from Old French salutacion greeting, from Latin salutationem (nominative salutatio) a
greeting, saluting, noun of action from past participle stem of salutare to greet (see salute (v.)).
As a word of greeting (elliptical for I offer salutation) it is recorded from 1530s. Related:
Salutations.


bay (adj.)

reddish-brown, usually of horses, mid-14c., from Anglo-French bai (13c.), Old French bai, from Latin
badius chestnut-brown (used only of horses), from PIE *badyo- yellow, brown (cognates: Old Irish
buide yellow). Also elliptical for a horse of this color.


calf (n.1)

young cow, Old English cealf (Anglian c&aelig;lf) young cow, from Proto-Germanic *kalbam (cognates:
Middle Dutch calf, Old Norse kalfr, German Kalb, Gothic kalbo), perhaps from PIE *gelb(h)-, from
root *gel- to swell, hence, womb, fetus, young of an animal. Elliptical sense of leather made from
the skin of a calf is from 1727. Used of icebergs that break off from glaciers from 1818.


apt (adj.)

mid-14c., inclined, disposed; late 14c., suited, fitted, adapted, from Old French ate (13c., Modern
French apte), or directly from Latin aptus fit, suited, adjectival use of past participle of *apere
to attach, join, tie to, from PIE root *ap- (1) to grasp, take, reach (cognates: Sanskrit apnoti he
reaches, Latin apisci to reach after, attain, Hittite epmi I seize). Elliptical sense of becoming,
appropriate is from 1560s.


instant (n.)

late 14c., infinitely short space of time, from Old French instant (adj.) assiduous, at hand, from
Medieval Latin instantem (nominative instans), in classical Latin present, pressing, urgent,
literally standing near, present participle of instare to urge, to stand near, be present (to urge
one's case), from in- in (see in- (2)) + stare to stand, from PIE root *sta- to stand (see stet).
Elliptical use of the French adjective as a noun.


sermon (n.)

c.1200, sarmun, a discourse upon a text of scripture; what is preached, from Anglo-French sermun,
Old French sermon speech, words, discourse; church sermon, homily (10c.), from Latin sermonem
(nominative sermo) continued speech, conversation; common talk, rumor; learned talk, discourse;
manner of speaking, literary style, originally a stringing together of words, from PIE *ser-mo-,
suffixed form of root *ser- (3) to line up, join (see series).    Main modern sense in English and
French is elliptical for Latin sermo religiosus. In transferred (non-religious) use from 1590s. The
Sermon on the Mount is in 5,6,7 Matt. and 6 Luke. Related: Sermonic; sermonical; sermonish.


by (prep.)

Old English be- (unstressed) or bi (stressed) near, in, by, during, about, from Proto-Germanic *bi
around, about (cognates: Old Saxon and Old Frisian bi by near, Middle Dutch bie, Dutch bij, German
bei by, at, near, Gothic bi about), from *umbi (cognate with second element in PIE *ambhi around;
see ambi-).    Originally an adverbial particle of place, in which sense it is retained in place
names (Whitby, Grimsby, etc.). Elliptical use for secondary course (opposed to main, as in byway,
also compare by-blow illegitimate child, 1590s) was in Old English. This also is the sense of the
second by in the phrase by the by (1610s). By the way literally means in passing by (mid-14c.); used
figuratively to introduce a tangential observation by 1540s.    Phrase by and by (early 14c.)
originally meant one by one, modern sense is from 1520s. By and large (1660s) originally was
nautical, sailing to the wind and off it, hence in one direction then another.


symphony (n.)

c.1300, a name given to various types of musical instruments, from Old French simphonie, sifonie,
simfone musical harmony; stringed instrument (12c., Modern French symphonie) and directly from Latin
symphonia a unison of sounds, harmony, from Greek symphonia harmony, concord of sounds, from
symphonos harmonious, agreeing in sound, from assimilated form of syn- together (see syn-) + phone
voice, sound (see fame (n.)).    Meaning harmony of sounds in English is attested from late 14c.;
sense of music in parts is from 1590s. It was only after the advent of Haydn that this word began to
mean a sonata for full orchestra. Before that time it meant a prelude, postlude, or interlude, or
any short instrumental work. [Elson's Music Dictionary] Meaning elaborate orchestral composition
first attested 1789. Elliptical for symphony orchestra from 1926. Diminutive symphonette is recorded
from 1947.


silk (n.)

c.1300, from Old English seoloc, sioloc silk, silken cloth, from Latin sericum silk, plural serica
silken garments, silks, literally Seric stuff, neuter of Sericus, from Greek Serikos silken;
pertaining to the Seres, an oriental people of Asia from whom the Greeks got silks. Western
cultivation began 552 C.E., when agents from Byzantium impersonating monks smuggled silkworms and
mulberry leaves out of China.    Chinese si silk, Manchurian sirghe, Mongolian sirkek have been
compared to this and the people name in Greek might be a rendering via Mongolian of the Chinese word
for silk, but this is uncertain.    Also found in Old Norse as silki but not elsewhere in Germanic.
The more common Germanic form is represented by Middle English say, from Old French seie, with
Spanish seda, Italian seta, Dutch zijde, German Seide  is from Medieval Latin seta  silk, perhaps
elliptical for seta serica, or else a particular use of seta bristle, hair (see seta (n.)).
According to some sources [Buck, OED], the use of -l- instead of -r- in the Balto-Slavic form of the
word (Old Church Slavonic &#353;elku, Lithuanian &#353;ilkai) passed into English via the Baltic
trade and may reflect a Chinese dialectal form, or a Slavic alteration of the Greek word. But the
Slavic linguist Vasmer dismisses that, based on the initial sh- in the Slavic words, and suggests
the Slavic words are from Scandinavian rather than the reverse.    As an adjective from mid-14c. In
reference to the hair of corn, 1660s, American English. Figurative use of silk-stocking (n.) is from
1590s; as an adjective meaning wealthy it is attested from 1798, American English (silk stockings,
especially worn by men, being regarded as extravagant and reprehensible, indicative of luxurious
habits). Silk-screen (n.) is first attested 1930; as a verb from 1961. Silk road so called in
English from 1931.


