eloquence (n.)

late 14c., from Old French eloquence (12c.), from Latin eloquentia, from eloquentem (nominative
eloquens) eloquent, present participle of eloqui speak out, from ex- out (see ex-) + loqui to speak
(see locution). Earlier in same sense was eloquency (mid-14c.).


wordcraft (n.)

Old English wordcr&#230;ft poetic art, eloquence; see word (n.) + craft (n.).


hermeneutic (adj.)

interpretive, 1670s, from Greek hermeneutikos interpreting, from hermeneutes interpreter, from
hermeneuein to interpret, of unknown origin (formerly considered ultimately a derivative of Hermes,
as the tutelary divinity of speech, writing, and eloquence).


elocution (n.)

mid-15c., from Late Latin elocutionem (nominative elocutio) voice production, manner of expression,
in classical Latin, oratorical expression, noun of action from past participle stem of eloqui speak
out (see eloquence).


oratory (n.1)

formal public speaking, the art of eloquence, 1580s, from Latin (ars) oratoria oratorical (art),
fem. of oratorius of speaking or pleading, pertaining to an orator, from orare to speak, pray, plead
(see orator).


eloquent (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French eloquent, from Latin eloquentem (nominative eloquens), present participle
of eloqui to speak out (see eloquence). Related: Eloquently.


cheese (v.)

stop (what one is doing), run off, 1812, thieves' slang, of uncertain origin. Meaning to smile is
from 1930 (see cheese (n.1)). For meaning to annoy, see cheesed.    CHEESE IT. Be silent, be quiet,
don't do it. Cheese it, the coves are fly; be silent, the people understand our discourse.
[Dictionary of Buckish Slang, University Wit, and Pickpocket Eloquence, London, 1811]


lush (n.)

drunkard, 1890, from earlier (1790) slang meaning liquor (especially in phrase lush ken alehouse);
perhaps a humorous use of lush (adj.) or from Romany or Shelta (tinkers' jargon).    LUSHEY. Drunk.
The rolling kiddeys  had a spree, and got bloody lushey; the dashing lads went on a party of
pleasure, and got very drunk. [Dictionary of Buckish Slang, University Wit, and Pickpocket
Eloquence, London, 1811]


calliope (n.)

1858, steam-whistle keyboard organ, named for Calliope, ninth and chief muse, presiding over
eloquence and epic poetry, Latinized from Greek Kalliope, literally beautiful-voiced, from kalli-,
combining form of kallos beauty (see Callisto) + opos (genitive of *ops) voice, related to Latin vox
(see voice (n.)).


Pilate (n.)

c.1400 as a term of reproach, from the Roman surname, especially that of Pontius, a governor of
Judaea, from Latin Pilatus, literally armed with javelins, from pilum javelin (see pile (n.2)).
Among slang and cant uses of Pontius Pilate mentioned in the 1811 Dictionary of Buckish Slang,
University Wit and Pickpocket Eloquence is (Cambridge) a Mr. Shepherd of Trinity College; who
disputing with a brother parson on the comparative rapidity with which they read the liturgy,
offered to give him as far as Pontius Pilate in the Belief.


parenthesis (n.)

1540s, words, clauses, etc. inserted into a sentence, from Middle French parenth&egrave;se (15c.),
from Late Latin parenthesis addition of a letter to a syllable in a word, from Greek parenthesis,
literally a putting in beside, from parentithenai put in beside, from para- beside (see para- (1)) +
en- in + tithenai put, place (see theme). Sense extension by 1715 from the inserted words to the
curved brackets that indicate the words inserted.    A wooden parenthesis; the pillory. An iron
parenthesis; a prison. [Dictionary of Buckish Slang, University Wit and Pickpocket Eloquence,
London, 1811]


lumber (n.)

timber sawn into rough planks, 1660s, American English (Massachusetts), earlier disused bit of
furniture; heavy, useless objects (1550s), probably from lumber (v.), perhaps influenced by Lombard,
from the Italian immigrants famous as pawnbrokers and money-lenders in England (see Lombard).
Lumbar, Lumbard were old alternative forms of Lombard in English. The evolution of sense then would
be because a lumber-house (pawn shop) naturally accumulates odds and ends of furniture.    Live
Lumber, soldiers or passengers on board a ship are so called by the sailors. [Grose, Dictionary of
the Vulgar Tongue, 1785]   <hr />   LUMBER HOUSE. A house appropriated by thieves for the reception
of their stolen property. [Dictionary of Buckish Slang, University Wit, and Pickpocket Eloquence,
London, 1811]


name (n.)

Old English nama, noma name, reputation, from Proto-Germanic *namon (cognates: Old Saxon namo, Old
Frisian nama, Old High German namo, German Name, Middle Dutch name, Dutch naam, Old Norse nafn,
Gothic namo name), from PIE *nomn- (cognates: Sanskrit nama; Avestan nama; Greek onoma, onyma; Latin
nomen; Old Church Slavonic ime, genitive imene; Russian imya; Old Irish ainm; Old Welsh anu name).
Meaning famous person is from 1610s. Meaning one's reputation is from c.1300. As a modifier meaning
well-known, first attested 1938. Name brand is from 1944; name-calling attested from 1846; name-
dropper first recorded 1947. name-tag is from 1903; name-child attested from 1845. The name of the
game the essential thing or quality is from 1966; to have one's name in lights be a famous performer
is from 1929.    He who once a good name gets,  May piss a bed, and say he sweats.  [Dictionary of
Buckish Slang, University Wit and Pickpocket Eloquence, London, 1811]


pig (n.)

probably from Old English *picg, found in compounds, ultimate origin unknown. Originally young pig
(the word for adults was swine). Apparently related to Low German bigge, Dutch big (but the
phonology is difficult -- OED). The meaning oblong piece of metal is first attested 1580s, on the
notion of large mass. Applied to persons, usually in contempt, since 1540s; the derogatory slang
meaning police officer has been in underworld slang since at least 1811.    The pigs frisked my
panney, and nailed my screws; the officers searched my house, and seized my picklock keys.
[Dictionary of Buckish Slang, University Wit and Pickpocket Eloquence, London, 1811]     Another Old
English word for pig was fearh, related to furh furrow, from PIE *perk- dig, furrow (source also of
Latin porc-us pig, see pork). This reflects a widespread IE tendency to name animals from typical
attributes or activities [Lass]. Synonyms grunter, porker are from sailors' and fishermen's
euphemistic avoidance of uttering the word pig at sea, a superstition perhaps based on the fate of
the Gadarene swine, who drowned. The image of a pig in a poke is attested from 1520s (see poke
(n.3)). Flying pigs as a type of something unreal is from 1610s.


piece (n.)

c.1200, fixed amount, measure, portion, from Old French piece piece, bit portion; item; coin (12c.),
from Vulgar Latin *pettia, probably from Gaulish *pettsi (compare Welsh peth thing, Breton pez
piece, a little), perhaps from an Old Celtic base *kwezd-i-, from PIE root *kwezd- a part, piece
(cognates: Russian chast' part). Related: Pieces.    Sense of portable firearm first recorded 1580s;
that of chessman is from 1560s. Meaning person regarded as a sex object is first recorded 1785
(compare piece of ass, human beings colloquially called piece of flesh from 1590s; also compare
Latin scortum bimbo, anyone available for a price, literally skin). Meaning a portion of a distance
is from 1610s; that of literary composition dates from 1530s. Piece of (one's) mind is from 1570s.
Piece of work remarkable person echoes Hamlet. Piece as a coin is attested in English from 1570s,
hence Piece of eight, old name for the Spanish dollar (c.1600) of the value of 8 reals.    PIECE. A
wench. A damned good or bad piece; a girl who is more or less active and skilful in the amorous
congress. Hence the (Cambridge) toast, may we never have a PIECE (peace) that will injure the
constitution. [Dictionary of Buckish Slang, University Wit and Pickpocket Eloquence, London, 1811]


