embellishment (n.)

1590s, from embellish + -ment.


embellish (v.)

mid-14c., to render beautiful, from Old French embelliss-, stem of embellir make beautiful,
ornament, from em- (see en- (1)) + bel beautiful, from Latin bellus handsome, pretty, fine (see
bene-). Meaning dress up (a narration) with fictitious matter is from mid-15c. Related: Embellished;
embellishing.


adorn (v.)

late 14c., to decorate, embellish, also be an ornament to, from Old French aorner to order, arrange,
dispose, equip; adorn, from Latin adornare equip, provide, embellish, from ad- to (see ad-) + ornare
prepare, furnish, adorn, fit out, from stem of ordo order (see order (n.)). The -d- was reinserted
by French scribes 14c., in English from late 15c. Related: Adorned; adorning.


illustrious (adj.)

1560s, from Latin illustris lighted, bright, brilliant; figuratively distinguished, famous, probably
a back-formation from illustrare embellish, distinguish, make famous (see illustration). Sometimes
also illustrous. Replaced illustre in same sense (mid-15c.), from Middle French illustre.


decorate (v.)

early 15c., from Latin decoratus, past participle of decorare to decorate, adorn, embellish,
beautify, from decus (genitive decoris) an ornament, from PIE root *dek- to receive, be suitable
(see decent). Related: Decorated; decorating.


imagine (v.)

mid-14c., to form a mental image of, from Old French imaginer sculpt, carve, paint; decorate,
embellish (13c.), from Latin imaginari to form a mental picture to oneself, imagine (also, in Late
Latin imaginare to form an image of, represent), from imago (see image). Sense of suppose is first
recorded late 14c. Related: Imagined; imagining.


mangonel (n.)

military engine for hurling stones, mid-13c., from Old French mangonel catapult, war engine for
throwing stones, etc. (Modern French mangonneau), diminutive of Medieval Latin mangonum, from Vulgar
Latin *manganum machine, from Greek manganon any means of tricking or bewitching, from PIE *mang- to
embellish, dress, trim (cognates: Old Prussian manga whore, Middle Irish meng craft, deception).
Attested from c.1200 in Anglo-Latin.


polish (v.)

early 14c., polischen make smooth, from Old French poliss-, present participle stem of polir (12c.)
to polish, decorate, see to one's appearance, from Latin polire to polish, make smooth; decorate,
embellish; figuratively refine, improve, said to be from Proto-Indo-European *pel- to thrust,
strike, drive (via the notion of fulling cloth). The sense of free from coarseness, to refine first
recorded in English mid-14c. Related: Polished; polishing.  Slang polish off finish is 1837, from
notion of applying a coat of polish being the final step in a piece of work.


garnish (v.)

late 14c., from Old French garniss-, present participle stem of garnir provide, furnish; fortify,
reinforce, from a Germanic stem related to Proto-Germanic *warnejan be cautious, guard, provide for
(cognates: Old High German warnon to take heed, Old English warnian to take warning, beware; see
warn). Sense evolution is from arm oneself to fit out to embellish, which was the earliest meaning
in English, though the others also were used in Middle English. Culinary sense of to decorate a dish
for the table predominated after c.1700. Older meaning survives in legal sense of warning of
attachment of funds (1570s). Related: Garnished; garnishing.


