embroider (v.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French enbrouder, from en- in (see en- (1)) + broisder embroider, from
Frankish *brozdon, from Proto-Germanic *bruzdajan. Spelling with -oi- is from c.1600, perhaps by
influence of broiden, irregular alternative Middle English past participle of braid (v.). Related:
Embroidered; embroidering.


embroidery (n.)

late 14c., embrouderie art of embroidering; see embroider + -y (4).


purl (v.1)

knit with inverted stitches, 1825; earlier embroider with gold or silver thread (1520s), probably
from Middle English pirlyng revolving, twisting, of unknown origin. The two senses usually are taken
as one word, but even this is not certain. Klein suggests a source in Italian pirolare to twirl,
from pirolo top. As a noun, from late 14c. as bordering, frills, 1530s as twisted thread of gold and
silver.


buskin (n.)

half boot, c.1500, origin unknown. The word exists in different forms in most of the continental
languages, and the exact relationship of them all apparently has yet to be determined. The English
word is perhaps immediately from Old French broissequin buskin; a kind of cloth (14c., Modern French
brodequin by influence of broder to embroider), or from Middle Dutch brosekin small leather boot,
which is of uncertain origin. OED suggests a likely candidate in Spanish borcegui, earlier boszegui
Figurative senses in English relating to tragedy are from the word being used (since mid-16c.) to
translate Greek kothurnus, the high, thick-soled boot worn in Athenian tragedy; contrasted with
sock, the low shoe worn by comedians. Related: Buskined.


paint (v.)

early 13c., represent in painting or drawing, portray; early 14c., paint the surface of, color,
stain; from Old French peintier to paint, from peint, past participle of peindre to paint, from
Latin pingere to paint, represent in a picture, stain; embroider, tattoo, from PIE root *peig- (1),
also *peik- to cut (cognates: Sanskrit pimsati hews out, cuts, carves, adorns, Old Church Slavonic
pila file, saw, Lithuanian pela file).    Sense evolution between PIE and Latin was, presumably,
from decorate with cut marks to decorate to decorate with color. Compare Sanskrit pingah reddish,
pesalah adorned, decorated, lovely, Old Church Slavonic pegu variegated; Greek poikilos variegated;
Old High German fehjan to adorn; Old Church Slavonic pisati, Lithuanian piesiu to write. Probably
also representing the cutting branch of the family is Old English feol (see file (n.)).    To paint
the town (red) go on a spree first recorded 1884; to paint (someone or something) black represent it
as wicked or evil is from 1590s. Adjective paint-by-numbers simple is attested by 1970; the art-for-
beginners kits themselves date to c.1953.


picture (n.)

early 15c., drawing, painting, from Latin pictura painting, from pictus, past participle of pingere
to make pictures, to paint, to embroider, (see paint (v.)). Picture window is from 1938. Picture
post-card first recorded 1899. Phrase every picture tells a story first attested 1900, in
advertisements for an illustrated life of Christ. To be in (or out of) the picture in the figurative
sense dates to 1900.    Expression a picture is worth a thousand words, attested from 1918, probably
was from the publication trade (the notion that a picture was worth 1,000 words is in printers'
publications by 1911). The phrase also was in use in the form worth a million words, the form used
by American newspaper editor Arthur Brisbane (1864-1936) in an editorial much-read c.1916 titled
What is a Good Newspaper in the New York Evening Journal. In part it read, After news and humor come
good pictures. In this day of hurry we learn through the eye, and one picture may be worth a million
words. It seems to have emerged into general use via the medium of advertising (which scaled down
the number and also gave the expression its spurious origin story as a Japanese proverb or some such
thing, by 1919). Earlier various acts or deeds (and in one case the arrow) were said to be worth a
thousand words.


