embrace (n.)

1590s, from embrace (v.).


embrace (v.)

mid-14c., from Old French embracer (12c., Modern French embrasser) clasp in the arms, enclose;
covet, handle, cope with, from en- in (see en- (1)) + brace, braz the arms, from Latin bracchium
(neuter plural brachia); see brace (n.). Related: Embraced; embracing; embraceable. Replaced Old
English clyppan, also f&aelig;&eth;m.


clip (v.2)

fasten, hold together by pressure, also (mostly archaic) to embrace, from Old English clyppan to
embrace, clasp; surround; prize, honor, cherish; related to Old Frisian kleppa to embrace, love, Old
High German klaftra, German klafter fathom (on notion of outstretched arms). Also compare Lithuanian
glebys armful, globiu to embrace, support. Meaning to fasten, bind is early 14c. Meaning to fasten
with clips is from 1902. Related: Clipped; clipping. Original sense of the verb is preserved in U.S.
football clipping penalty.


accolade (n.)

1620s, from French accolade (16c.), from Proven&ccedil;al acolada or Italian accollata, ultimately
from noun use of a fem. past participle from Vulgar Latin *accollare to embrace around the neck,
from Latin ad- to (see ad-) + collum neck (see collar (n.)).    The original sense is of an embrace
about the neck or the tapping of a sword on the shoulders to confer knighthood. Extended meaning
praise, award is from 1852. Also see -ade. Earlier was accoll (mid-14c.), from Old French acolee an
embrace, kiss, especially that given to a new-made knight, from verb acoler. The French noun in the
16c. was transformed to accolade, with the foreign suffix.


neck (v.)

to kiss, embrace, caress, 1825 (implied in necking) in northern England dialect, from neck (n.).
Compare Middle English halsen to embrace or caress affectionately, to fondle sexually, from hals
(n.) neck. Earlier, neck as a verb meant to kill by a strike on the neck (mid-15c.). Related:
Necked.


glebe (n.)

c.1300, from Old French glebe, from Latin gleba, glaeba clod, lump of earth, from PIE *glebh- to
roll into a ball (cognates: Latin globus sphere; Old English clyppan to embrace; Lithuanian glebys
armful, globti to embrace, support). Earliest English sense is land forming a clergyman's benefice,
on notion of soil of the earth as source of vegetable products.


hug (v.)

1560s, hugge to embrace, of unknown origin; perhaps from Old Norse hugga to comfort, from hugr
courage, mood, from Proto-Germanic *hugjan, related to Old English hycgan to think, consider, Gothic
hugs mind, soul, thought. Other have noted the similarity in some senses to German hegen to foster,
cherish, originally to enclose with a hedge. Related: Hugged; hugging. The noun was originally
(1610s) a hold in wrestling. Meaning affectionate embrace is from 1650s.


fathom (n.)

Old English f&aelig;&eth;m length of the outstretched arm (a measure of about six feet), also arms,
grasp, and, figuratively power, from Proto-Germanic *fathmaz embrace (cognates: Old Norse fa&eth;mr
embrace, bosom, Old Saxon fathmos the outstretched arms, Dutch vadem a measure of six feet), from
PIE *pot(e)-mo-, from root *pete- to spread, stretch out (see pace (n.)). There are apparent
cognates in Old Frisian fethem, German faden thread, which OED explains by reference to spreading
out.


pace (n.)

late 13c., a step in walking; rate of motion, from Old French pas a step, pace, trace, and directly
from Latin passus, passum a step, pace, stride, noun use of past participle of pandere to stretch
(the leg), spread out, probably from PIE *pat-no-, a nasalized variant of root *pete- to spread
(cognates: Greek petannynai to spread out, petalon a leaf, patane plate, dish; Old Norse fa&eth;mr
embrace, bosom, Old English f&aelig;&eth;m embrace, bosom, fathom, Old Saxon fathmos the
outstretched arms). Also, a measure of five feet [Johnson]. Pace-setter in fashion is from 1895.


fathom (v.)

Old English f&aelig;&eth;mian to embrace, surround, envelop; see fathom (n.). The meaning take
soundings is from c.1600; its figurative sense of get to the bottom of, understand is 1620s.
Related: Fathomed; fathoming.


clip (n.1)

something for attaching or holding, mid-14c., probably from clip (v.2). Meaning receptacle
containing several cartridges for a repeating firearm is from 1901. Meaning piece of jewelry
fastened by a clip is from 1937. This is also the source of paper clip (1854). Old English had clypp
an embrace.


adopt (v.)

c.1500, a back-formation from adoption or else from Middle French adopter or directly from Latin
adoptare take by choice, choose for oneself, select, choose (especially a child). Originally in
English also of friends, fathers, citizens, etc. Sense of to legally take as one's own child and
that of to embrace, espouse a practice, method, etc. are from c.1600. Related: Adopted; adopting.


cuddle (v.)

early 16c. (implied in cudlyng), perhaps a variant of obsolete cull, coll to embrace (see collar
(n.)); or perhaps from Middle English *couthelen, from couth known, hence comfortable with. It has a
spotty early history and seems to have been a nursery word at first. Related: Cuddled; cuddling.


brace (v.)

mid-14c., to seize, grasp, also wrap, enshroud; tie up, fetter, from Old French bracier to embrace,
from brace (see brace (n.)). Meaning to render firm or steady by tensing is mid-15c., earlier in
figurative sense strengthen or comfort (someone), early 15c., with later extension to tonics, etc.
that brace the nerves (compare bracer stiff drink). Related: Braced; bracing.


espouse (v.)

mid-15c., to take as spouse, marry, from Old French espouser marry, take in marriage, join in
marriage (11c., Modern French &eacute;pouser), from Latin sponsare, past participle of spondere make
an offering, perform a rite, hence to engage oneself by ritual act (see spondee).    Extended sense
of adopt, embrace a cause, party, etc., is from 1620s. Related: Espoused; espouses; espousing. For
initial e-, see e-.


complex (adj.)

1650s, composed of parts, from French complexe complicated, complex, intricate (17c.), from Latin
complexus surrounding, encompassing, past participle of complecti to encircle, embrace, in
transferred use, to hold fast, master, comprehend, from com- with (see com-) + plectere to weave,
braid, twine, entwine, from PIE *plek-to-, from root *plek- to plait (see ply (v.1)). The meaning
not easily analyzed is first recorded 1715. Complex sentence is attested from 1881.


lock (v.)

to fasten with a lock, c.1300, from Old English lucan to lock, to close (class II strong verb; past
tense leac, past participle locen), from the same root as lock (n.1). Cognate with Old Frisian luka
to close, Old Saxon lukan, Old High German luhhan, Old Norse luka, Gothic galukan. Meaning to
embrace closely is from 1610s. Related: Locked; locking. Slang lock horns fight is from 1839.


press (v.1)

push against, early 14c., to clasp, embrace; mid-14c. to squeeze out; also to cluster, gather in a
crowd;  late 14c., to press against, exert pressure, also assault, assail; also forge ahead, push
one's way, move forward, from Old French presser squeeze, press upon; torture (13c.), from Latin
pressare to press, frequentative formation from pressus, past participle of premere to press, hold
fast, cover, crowd, compress, from PIE *per- (4) to strike. Related: Pressed; pressing. Figurative
sense is from late 14c. Meaning to urge, argue for is from 1590s.


cling (v.)

Old English clingan hold fast, adhere closely; congeal, shrivel (strong verb, past tense clang, past
participle clungen), from Proto-Germanic *klingg- (cognates: Danish klynge to cluster; Old High
German klinga narrow gorge; Old Norse klengjask press onward; Danish klinke, Dutch klinken to
clench; German Klinke latch).    The main sense shifted in Middle English to adhere to (something
else), stick together. Of persons in embrace, c.1600. Figuratively (to hopes, outmoded ideas, etc.),
from 1580s. Of clothes from 1792. Related: Clung; clinging.


kiss (v.)

Old English cyssan to kiss, from Proto-Germanic *kussjan (cognates: Old Saxon kussian, Old Norse
kyssa, Old Frisian kessa, Middle Dutch cussen, Dutch, Old High German kussen, German k&uuml;ssen,
Norwegian and Danish kysse, Swedish kyssa), from *kuss-, probably ultimately imitative of the sound.
Related: Kissed; kissing. For vowel evolution, see bury. There appears to be no common Indo-European
root word for kiss, though suggestions of a common ku- sound may be found in the Germanic root and
Greek kynein to kiss, Hittite kuwash-anzi they kiss, Sanskrit cumbati he kisses.Kissing, as an
expression of affection or love, is unknown among many races, and in the history of mankind seems to
be a late substitute for the more primitive rubbing of noses, sniffing, and licking. [Buck,
p.1113]Some languages make a distinction between the kiss of affection and that of erotic love
(compare Latin saviari erotic kiss, vs. osculum, literally little mouth). French embrasser kiss, but
literally embrace, came about in 17c. when the older word baiser (from Latin basiare) acquired an
obscene connotation. Insulting invitation kiss my ass is at least from 1705, but probably much older
(see The Miller's Tale).


