eminent (adj.)

early 15c., from Middle French &eacute;minent (13c.) or directly from Latin eminentem (nominative
eminens), present participle of eminere stand out, project, from ex- out (see ex-) + minere, related
to mons hill (see mount (n.)). Related: Eminently. Legal eminent domain recorded from 1738.


sublimation (n.)

late 14c., in alchemy, process of purifying by vaporizing then allowing to cool, from Medieval Latin
sublimationem (nominative sublimatio) refinement, literally a lifting up, deliverance, noun of
action from past participle stem of Latin sublimare to raise, elevate, from sublimis lofty, high,
exalted; eminent, distinguished (see sublime).


pre-eminent (adj.)

also preeminent, mid-15c., from Medieval Latin preeminentem, from Latin praeeminentem (nominative
praeeminens), present participle of praeeminare to transcend, excel, literally to project forward,
rise above (see pre-eminence). Related: Pre-eminently; preeminently.


stand-out (n.)

also standout, one who is eminent, 1928; as an adjective in this sense from 1932; from verbal
phrase, from stand (v.) + out (adv.). Earlier it was used in a sense labor strike (1898). To stand
out is from 1530s as to project or seem to project, 1826 in the figurative sense be prominent.


biographer (n.)

1715; see biography + -er (1). Earlier was biographist (1660s).    Of every great and eminent
character, part breaks forth into public view, and part lies hid in domestic privacy. Those
qualities which have been exerted in any known and lasting performances may, at any distance of
time, be traced and estimated; but silent excellencies are soon forgotten; and those minute
peculiarities which discriminate every man from all others, if the are not recorded by those whom
personal knowledge enabled to observe them, are irrecoverably lost. [Johnson, Life of Sir Thomas
Browne, 1756]


Mephistopheles

1590s, the evil spirit to whom Faust sold his soul in the German legend, from German (1587), of
unknown origin. According to the speculation of eminent G&ouml;the scholar K.J. Schr&ouml;er (1886)
it is a compound of Hebrew mephitz destroyer + tophel liar (short for tophel sheqer, literally
falsehood plasterer; see Job xiii:4). Klein writes that the names of devils in the Middle Ages are
in most cases derived from Hebrew.


haught (adj.)

c.1400, haute, high in one's own estimation, haughty, from Old French haut (11c.) main, principal;
proud, noble, dignified; eminent; loud; grand, literally high, from Latin altus high (see old); with
initial h- by influence of Frankish hoh high. Spelling altered 16c. by influence of caught, naught,
etc.


Harley

type of motorcycle, by 1968, short for Harley-Davidson motorcycle manufacturer founded in Milwaukee,
Wisconsin, U.S., 1905 by engine designer William S. Harley (1880-1943) and Arthur Davidson. The
surname Harley is attested from mid-12c., literally dweller at the hares' wood. Harley Street in
London from the 1830s was associated with eminent physicians and used metonymically for medical
specialists collectively.


eminence (n.)

c.1400, projection, protuberance; early 15c., high or exalted position, from Old French eminence or
directly from Latin eminentia prominence, eminence, from eminentem (nominative eminens) excellent,
prominent (see eminent).    As a title of honor (now only of cardinals) it is attested from 1650s.
The original &Eacute;minence grise (French, literally gray eminence) was Fran&ccedil;ois Leclerc du
Trembley (1577-1638), confidential agent of Richelieu.


savant (n.)

one eminent for learning, 1719, from French savant a learned man, noun use of adjective savant
learned, knowing, former present participle of savoir to know, from Vulgar Latin *sapere, from Latin
sapere be wise (see sapient).


pre-eminence (n.)

also pre-eminence, c.1200, from Late Latin praeeminentia distinction, superiority, from Latin
praeeminentem (nominative praeeminens), present participle of praeeminere transcend, excel,
literally project forward, rise above, from prae before (see pre-) + eminere stand out, project (see
eminent).


quorum (n.)

early 15c., in reference to certain eminent justices of the peace, from Latin quorum of whom,
genitive plural (masc. and neuter; fem. quarum) of qui who (see who). The traditional wording of the
commission appointing justices of the peace translates as, We have also assigned you, and every two
or more of you (of whom [quoram vos] any one of you the aforesaid A, B, C, D, etc. we will shall be
one) our justices to inquire the truth more fully. The justices so-named usually were called the
justices of the quorum. Meaning fixed number of members whose presence is necessary to transact
business is first recorded 1610s.


maestro (n.)

master of music, great teacher or composer, 1797, from Italian maestro, literally master, from Latin
magisterium, accusative of magister (see master (n.)). Applied in Italian to eminent musical
composers. Meaning conductor, musical director is short for maestro di cappella (1724), literally
master of the chapel (compare German kapellmeister).


excel (v.)

c.1400, from Latin excellere to rise, surpass, be eminent, from ex- out from (see ex-) + -cellere
rise high, tower, related to celsus high, lofty, great, from PIE root *kel- to rise, be elevated
(see hill). Related: Excelled; excelling.


egregious (adj.)

1530s, distinguished, eminent, excellent, from Latin egregius distinguished, excellent,
extraordinary, from the phrase ex grege rising above the flock, from ex out of (see ex-) + grege,
ablative of grex herd, flock (see gregarious).    Disapproving sense, now predominant, arose late
16c., originally ironic and is not in the Latin word, which etymologically means simply exceptional.
Related: Egregiously; egregiousness.


sublime (adj.)

1580s, expressing lofty ideas in an elevated manner, from Middle French sublime (15c.), or directly
from Latin sublimis uplifted, high, borne aloft, lofty, exalted, eminent, distinguished, possibly
originally sloping up to the lintel, from sub up to + limen lintel, threshold, sill (see limit
(n.)). The sublime (n.) the sublime part of anything, that which is stately or imposing is from
1670s. For Sublime Porte, former title of the Ottoman government, see Porte.


magnificence (n.)

mid-14c., great-mindedness, courage, from Old French magnificence splendor, nobility, grandeur, from
Latin magnificentia splendor, munificence, from stem of magnificus great, elevated, noble, eminent,
also splendid, rich, fine, costly, literally doing great deeds, from magnus great (see magnate) +
root of facere to make (see factitious). Meaning greatness, grandeur, glory in English is from late
14c. That of beauty, splendor, wealth is 15c. As one of the Aristotelian and scholastic virtues, it
translates Greek megaloprepeia liberality of expenditure combined with good taste.


especial (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French especial pre-eminent, important, from Latin specialis belonging to a
particular kind or species, from species kind (see species). Latin words with initial sp-, st-, sc-
usually acquired an e- in Old French (see e-). Modern French has restored the word to
sp&eacute;cial. Originally with the same sense as special, later restricted to feelings, qualities,
etc.


odor (n.)

c.1300, from Anglo-French odour, from Old French odor smell, perfume, fragrance (12c., Modern French
odeur) and directly from Latin odor a smell, a scent (pleasant or disagreeable), from PIE *od- to
smell (cognates: Latin olere emit a smell, to smell of, with Sabine -l- for -d-; Greek ozein to
smell; Armenian hotim I smell; Lithuanian uodziu to smell).   Good or bad odor, in reference to
repute, estimation, is from 1835. Odor of sanctity (1756) is from French odeur de saintet&eacute;
(17c.) sweet or balsamic scent said to be exhaled by the bodies of eminent saints at death or upon
disinterment.


