enamored (adj.)

1630s, past participle adjective from enamor.


liberal (adj.)

mid-14c., generous, also, late 14c., selfless; noble, nobly born; abundant, and, early 15c., in a
bad sense extravagant, unrestrained, from Old French liberal befitting free men, noble, generous,
willing, zealous (12c.), from Latin liberalis noble, gracious, munificent, generous, literally of
freedom, pertaining to or befitting a free man, from liber free, unrestricted, unimpeded; unbridled,
unchecked, licentious, from PIE *leudh-ero- (source of Greek eleutheros free), probably originally
belonging to the people (though the precise semantic development is obscure), and a suffixed form of
the base *leudh- people (cognates: Old Church Slavonic ljudu, Lithuanian liaudis, Old English leod,
German Leute nation, people; Old High German liut person, people) but literally to mount up, to
grow.    With the meaning free from restraint in speech or action, liberal was used 16c.-17c. as a
term of reproach. It revived in a positive sense in the Enlightenment, with a meaning free from
prejudice, tolerant, which emerged 1776-88.    In reference to education, explained by Fowler as the
education designed for a gentleman (Latin liber a free man) &amp; ... opposed on the one hand to
technical or professional or any special training, &amp; on the other to education that stops short
before manhood is reached (see liberal arts). Purely in reference to political opinion, tending in
favor of freedom and democracy it dates from c.1801, from French lib&eacute;ral, originally applied
in English by its opponents (often in French form and with suggestions of foreign lawlessness) to
the party favorable to individual political freedoms. But also (especially in U.S. politics) tending
to mean favorable to government action to effect social change, which seems at times to draw more
from the religious sense of free from prejudice in favor of traditional opinions and established
institutions (and thus open to new ideas and plans of reform), which dates from
1823.<b>Conservative</b>, n. A statesman who is enamored of existing evils, as distinguished from
the Liberal, who wishes to replace them with others. [Ambrose Bierce, Devil's Dictionary, 1911]


