enchant (v.)

late 14c., literal and figurative, from Old French enchanter bewitch, charm, cast a spell (12c.),
from Latin incantare (see enchantment). Or perhaps a back-formation from enchantment. Related:
Enchanting; enchantingly. Enchanted in weakened sense of delighted is from 1590s.


gentry (n.)

c.1300, nobility of rank or birth, from Old French genterise, variant of gentilise noble birth,
gentleness, from gentil (see gentle). Meaning noble persons is from 1520s. Earlier in both senses
was gentrice (c.1200 as nobility of character, late 14c. as noble persons). In Anglo-Irish, gentry
was a name for the fairies (1880), and gentle could mean enchanted (1823).


wish (v.)

Old English wyscan to wish, cherish a desire, from Proto-Germanic *wunsk- (cognates: Old Norse
&#339;skja, Danish &oslash;nske, Swedish &ouml;nska, Middle Dutch wonscen, Dutch wensen, Old High
German wunsken, German wunschen to wish), from PIE *wen- (1) to strive after, wish, desire, be
satisfied (cognates: Sanskrit vanati he desires, loves, wins, Latin venus love, sexual desire,
loveliness, venerari to worship; see Venus). Related: Wished; wishing. Wishing well as an enchanted
water hole attested by 1819.


California

name of an imaginary realm in Las sergas de Esplandi&aacute;n (Exploits of Esplad&aacute;n), a
romance by Spanish writer Garci Ord&oacute;&ntilde;ez de Montalvo, published in 1510. It was a
sequel to his Amadis de Gaula, and was said to have been influential among Spanish explorers of the
New World. It could have led them to misidentify Baja California as this mythical land and to
mistake it for an island. The Amadis tales are the Iberian equivalent of the Arthurian romances;
they are older than 1510 (traces of them have been found mid-14c.) and were wildly popular. That
conquistadors and sailors would have known the story in all its imaginative detail is hardly
surprising.   Amadis de Gaula ... set a fashion: all later Spanish writers of books of chivalry
adopted the machinery of Amadis de Gaula. Later knights were not less brave (they could not be
braver than) Amadis; heroines were not less lovely (they could not be lovelier) than Oriana; there
was nothing for it but to make the dragons more appalling, the giants larger, the wizards craftier,
the magic castles more inaccessible, the enchanted lakes deeper. Subsequent books of chivalry are
simple variants of the types in Amadis de Gaula: Cervantes made his barber describe it as 'the best
of all books of this kind.' This verdict is essentially just. Amadis de Gaula was read everywhere,
especially in the French version of Herberay des Essarts. It was done into Hebrew during the
sixteenth century, and attracted readers as different as St Ignatius of Loyola and Henry of Navarre.
Its vogue perhaps somewhat exceeded its merit, but its merits are not inconsiderable. [James
Fitzmaurice-Kelly, Spanish Literature, 1922 edition]    Where Montalvo got the name and what it
means, if anything, is a mystery. Californian is attested from 1785. The element Californium (1950)
was named in reference to University of California, where it was discovered.


