encircle (v.)

c.1400, from en- (1) make, put in + circle. Related: Encircled; encircling; encirclement.


cinch (n.)

1859, American English, saddle-girth, from Spanish cincha girdle, from Latin cingulum a girdle, a
swordbelt, from cingere to surround, encircle, from PIE root *kenk- (1) to gird, encircle (cognates:
Sanskrit kankate binds, kanci girdle; Lithuanian kinkau to harness horses). Replaced earlier
surcingle. Sense of an easy thing is 1898, via notion of a sure hold (1888).


cincture (n.)

1580s, from Latin cinctura a girdle, from cinctus, past participle of cingere to surround, encircle
(see cinch (n.)). The verb is recorded from 1757 (implied in Cinctured).


trap (v.)

late 14c., ensnare (an animal), catch in a trap; encircle; capture, from trap (n.) or from Old
English betr&aelig;ppan. Figurative use is slightly earlier (late 14c.). Related: Trapped; trapping.


circumscribe (v.)

late 14c., from Latin circumscribere to make a circle around, encircle, draw a line around; limit,
restrain, confine, set the boundaries of, from circum- around (see circum-) + scribere write (see
script (n.)). Related: Circumscribed; circumscribing.


circumvent (v.)

mid-15c., to surround by hostile stratagem, from Latin circumventus, past participle of circumvenire
to get around, be around, encircle, surround, in figurative sense to oppress, assail, cheat, from
circum around (see circum-) + venire to come (see venue). Meaning to go round is from 1840. Related:
Circumvented; circumventing.


precinct (n.)

c.1400, prasaynt (mid-15c. as precincte), district defined for purposes of government or
representation, from Medieval Latin precinctum enclosure, boundary line, noun use of neuter past
participle of Latin praecingere to gird about, surround, from prae- before (see pre-) + cingere to
surround, encircle (see cinch (v.)).


environ (v.)

late 14c. (implied in environing), to surround, from Old French environer to surround, enclose,
encircle, from environ round about, from en- in (see en- (1)) + viron circle, circuit, from virer to
turn (see veer). Related: Environed.


en- (1)

word-forming element meaning in, into, from French and Old French en-, from Latin in- in, into (see
in- (2)). Typically assimilated to -p-, -b-, -m-, -l-, and -r-.    Also used with native elements to
form verbs from nouns and adjectives, put in or on (encircle), also cause to be, make (endear), and
used as an intensive (enclose). Spelling variants in French that were brought over into Middle
English account for parallels such as assure/ensure/insure.


complex (adj.)

1650s, composed of parts, from French complexe complicated, complex, intricate (17c.), from Latin
complexus surrounding, encompassing, past participle of complecti to encircle, embrace, in
transferred use, to hold fast, master, comprehend, from com- with (see com-) + plectere to weave,
braid, twine, entwine, from PIE *plek-to-, from root *plek- to plait (see ply (v.1)). The meaning
not easily analyzed is first recorded 1715. Complex sentence is attested from 1881.


Stephen

masc. proper name, from Latin Stephanus, from Greek Stephanos, from stephanos crown, wreath,
garland, chaplet; crown of victory, hence victory, prize, honor, glory, properly that which
surrounds; also used of the ring of spectators around a fight or the wall of a town, from stephein
to encircle, crown, wreathe, tie around, from PIE root *stebh- post, stem; place firmly on, fasten
(see step (v.)). Exclusively a monk's name in Old English, it became common after the Conquest.
Saint Stephen, stoned to death, was said to be Christianity's first martyr.


gird (v.)

Old English gyrdan put a belt or girdle around; encircle, surround; invest with attributes, from
Proto-Germanic *gurthjan (cognates: Old Norse gyr&eth;a, Old Saxon gurdian, Old Frisian gerda, Dutch
gorden, Old High German gurtan, German g&uuml;rten). Related to Old English geard hedge, enclosure
(see yard (n.1)). Related: Girded; girding.    Throughout its whole history the English word is
chiefly employed in rhetorical language, in many instances with more or less direct allusion to
biblical passages. [OED]


girdle (n.)

Old English gyrdel belt, sash, cord about the waist, common Germanic. (cognates: Old Norse
gyr&eth;ill, Swedish g&ouml;rdel, Old Frisian gerdel, Dutch gordel, Old High German gurtil, German
G&uuml;rtel belt), related to Old English gyrdan to gird (see gird). Modern euphemistic sense of
elastic corset first recorded 1925. The verb meaning encircle with a girdle is attested from 1580s.
Meaning to cut off a belt of bark around a trunk to kill a tree is from 1660s. Related: Girdled;
girdling.


span (v.)

Old English spannan to join, link, clasp, fasten, bind, connect; stretch, span, from Proto-Germanic
*spannan (cognates: Old Norse spenna, Old Frisian spanna, Middle Dutch spannen, Dutch spannan
stretch, bend, hoist, hitch, Old High German spannan, German spannen to join, fasten, extend,
connect), from PIE root *(s)pen- to draw, stretch, spin (cognates: Latin pendere to hang, to cause
to hang, pondus weight (perhaps the notion is the weight of a thing measured by how much it
stretches a cord), pensare to weigh, consider; Greek ponos toil, ponein to toil; Lithuanian spendziu
lay a snare; Old Church Slavonic peti stretch, strain, pato fetter, pina I span; Old English spinnan
to spin; for other cognates, see spin (v.)).    The meaning to encircle with the hand(s) is from
1781; in the sense of to form an arch over (something) it is first recorded 1630s. Related: Spanned;
spanning.


staff (n.)

Old English st&aelig;f (plural stafas), walking stick, strong pole used for carrying, rod used as a
weapon, pastoral staff, probably originally *st&aelig;b, from Proto-Germanic *stabaz (cognates: Old
Saxon staf, Old Norse stafr, Danish stav, Old Frisian stef, Middle Low German and Middle Dutch staf,
Old High German stab, German Stab, Gothic *stafs element; Middle Dutch stapel pillar, foundation),
from PIE root *stebh- post, stem, to support, place firmly on, fasten (cognates: Old Lithuanian
stabas idol, Lithuanian stebas staff, pillar; Old Church Slavonic stoboru pillar; Sanskrit stabhnati
supports; Greek stephein to tie around, encircle, wreathe, staphyle grapevine, bunch of grapes; Old
English stapol post, pillar).    As pole from which a flag is flown, 1610s. In musical notation from
1660s. Sense of group of military officers that assists a commander is attested from 1702,
apparently from German, from the notion of the baton that is a badge of office or authority (a sense
attested in English from 1530s); hence staff officer (1702), staff-sergeant (1811). Meaning group of
employees (as at an office or hospital) is first found 1837. Staff of life bread is from the
Biblical phrase break the staff of bread meaning cut off the supply of food (Lev. xxvi:26),
translating Hebrew matteh lekhem.    The Old English word, in plural, was the common one used for
letter of the alphabet, character, hence writing, literature, and many compounds having to do with
writing, such as st&aelig;fcr&aelig;ft grammar, st&aelig;fcr&aelig;ftig lettered,  st&aelig;flic
literary, st&aelig;fleahtor grammatical error, with leahtor vice, sin, offense.


