encompass (v.)

1550s, from en- (1) make, put in + compass. Related: Encompassed; encompasses; encompassing.


circle (v.)

late 14c., cerclen, to shape like a globe, also to encompass or surround, from circle (n.). From
c.1400 as to set in a circular pattern; mid-15c. as to move in a circle. Related: Circled; circling.
To circle the wagons, figuratively, assume an alert defensive stance is from 1969, from old Western
movies.


belie (v.)

Old English beleogan to deceive by lies, from be- + lie (v.1) to lie, tell lies. Current sense of to
contradict as a lie is first recorded 1640s. The other verb lie once also had a formation like this,
from Old English belicgan, which meant to encompass, beleaguer, and in Middle English was a
euphemism for to have sex with (i.e. to lie with carnally).


hustings (n.)

Old English husting meeting, court, tribunal, from Old Norse hus&eth;ing council, from hus house
(see house (n.)) + &eth;ing assembly (see thing); so called because it was a meeting of the men who
formed the household of a nobleman or king. The native Anglo-Saxon word for this was folc-gemot. The
plural became the usual form c.1500; sense of temporary platform for political speeches developed by
1719, apparently from London's Court of Hustings, presided over by the Lord Mayor, which was held on
a platform in the Guildhall. This sense broadened to encompass the whole election process.


quay (n.)

1690s, variant of Middle English key, keye, caye wharf (c.1300; mid-13c. in place names), from Old
North French cai (Old French chai, 12c., Modern French quai) sand bank, from Gaulish caium (5c.),
from Old Celtic *kagio- to encompass, enclose (cognates: Welsh cae fence, hedge, Cornish ke hedge),
from PIE *kagh- to catch, seize; wickerwork, fence (see hedge (n.)). Spelling altered in English by
influence of French quai.


circumstance (n.)

early 13c., conditions surrounding and accompanying an event, from Old French circonstance
circumstance, situation, also literally, outskirts (13c., Modern French circonstance), from Latin
circumstantia surrounding condition, neuter plural of circumstans (genitive circumstantis), present
participle of circumstare stand around, surround, encompass, occupy, take possession of from circum
around (see circum-) + stare to stand from PIE root *sta- to stand (see stet). The Latin word is a
loan-translation of Greek peristasis.    Meaning a person's surroundings, environment is from mid-
14c. Meaning a detail is from c.1300; sense of that which is non-essential is from 1590s. Obsolete
sense of formality about an important event (late 14c.) lingers in Shakespeare's phrase pomp and
circumstance (Othello III, iii).


