endemic (n.)

1660s, from Greek endemos native, dwelling in (a place), of or belonging to a people (from en in;
see en- (2) + demos people, district; see demotic) + -ic. From 1759 as an adjective. Endemical is
attested from 1650s.


cholera (n.)

late 14c., bile, melancholy (originally the same as choler), from Middle French cholera or directly
from Late Latin cholera, from Greek kholera a type of disease characterized by diarrhea, supposedly
caused by choler (Celsus), from khole gall, bile, from khloazein to be green, from khloros (see
Chloe). But another sense of khole was drainpipe, gutter.    Revived 1560s in classical sense as a
name for a severe digestive disorder (rarely fatal to adults); and 1704 (especially as cholera
morbus), for a highly lethal disease endemic in India, periodically breaking out in global
epidemics, especially that reaching Britain and America in the early 1830s.


nostalgia (n.)

1770, severe homesickness considered as a disease, Modern Latin, coined 1668 in a dissertation on
the topic at the University of Basel by scholar Johannes Hofer (1669-1752) as a rendering of German
heimweh (for which see home + woe). From Greek algos pain, grief, distress (see -algia) + nostos
homecoming, from PIE *nes- to return safely home (cognate with Old Norse nest food for a journey,
Sanskrit nasate approaches, joins, German genesen to recover, Gothic ganisan to heal, Old English
genesen to recover). French nostalgie is in French army medical manuals by 1754.    Originally in
reference to the Swiss and said to be peculiar to them and often fatal, whether by its own action or
in combination with wounds or disease. By 1830s the word was used of any intense homesickness: that
of sailors, convicts, African slaves. The bagpipes produced the same effects sometimes in the Scotch
regiments while serving abroad [Penny Magazine, Nov. 14, 1840]. It is listed among the endemic
diseases in the Cyclopaedia of Practical Medicine [London, 1833, edited by three M.D.s], which
defines it as The concourse of depressing symptoms which sometimes arise in persons who are absent
from their native country, when they are seized with a longing desire of returning to their home and
friends and the scenes their youth .... It was a military medical diagnosis principally, and was
considered a serious medical problem by the North in the American Civil War:    In the first two
years of the war, there were reported 2588 cases of nostalgia, and 13 deaths from this cause. These
numbers scarcely express the real extent to which nostalgia influenced the sickness and mortality of
the army. To the depressing influence of home-sickness must be attributed the fatal result in many
cases which might otherwise have terminated favorably. [Sanitary Memoirs of the War, U.S. Sanitary
Commission, N.Y.: 1867]    Transferred sense (the main modern one) of wistful yearning for the past
first recorded 1920, perhaps from such use of nostalgie in French literature. The longing for a
distant place also necessarily involves a separation in time.


