endorse (v.)

late 14c. endosse alteration, from Old French endosser (12c.), literally to put on back, from en-
put on (see en- (1)) + dos back, from Latin dossum, variant of dorsum.    Sense of confirm, approve
(by signing on the back) is recorded in English first in 1847. Assimilated 16c. in form to Medieval
Latin indorsare. Related: Endorsed; endorsing.    You can endorse, literally, a cheque or other
papers, &amp;, metaphorically, a claim or argument, but to talk of endorsing material things other
than papers is a solecism. [Fowler]


endorsement (n.)

1540s, from endorse + -ment. Earlier endosement (early 15c.).


creampuff (n.)

also cream puff, by 1859 as a kind of light confection, from cream (n.) + puff (n.). In figurative
sense of weakling, sissy, it is recorded from 1935.    I remember my first campaign. My opponent
called me a cream puff. That's what he said. Well, I rushed out and got the baker's union to endorse
me. [Sen. Claiborne Pell, D-R.I., 1987]    As a salesman's word, something that is a tremendous
bargain, it is from 1940s.


cornerstone (n.)

late 13c., from corner (n.) + stone (n.). The figurative use is from early 14c.    I endorse without
reserve the much abused sentiment of Governor M'Duffie, that Slavery is the corner-stone of our
republican edifice; while I repudiate, as ridiculously absurd, that much lauded but nowhere
accredited dogma of Mr. Jefferson, that all men are born equal. No society has ever yet existed, and
I have already incidentally quoted the highest authority to show that none ever will exist, without
a natural variety of classes. [James H. Hammond, Letter to an English Abolitionist 1845]


approve (v.)

c.1300, to demonstrate, prove; mid-14c., to attest (something) with authority, from Old French
aprover (Modern French approuver) approve, agree to, from Latin approbare to assent to as good,
regard as good, from ad- to (see ad-) + probare to try, test something (to find if it is good), from
probus honest, genuine (see prove).    The meaning extended late 14c. to to sanction, endorse,
confirm formally then to assent to (something) as good (early 15c.), especially in reference to the
actions of authorities, parliaments, etc. Related: Approved; approving.


