enduring

late 14c., action of the verb endure; as a present participle adjective meaning lasting, from 1530s.


patient (adj.)

mid-14c., enduring without complaint, from Old French pacient and directly from Latin patientem
bearing, supporting, suffering, enduring, permitting (see patience). Meaning pertaining to a medical
patient is late 14c., from the noun. Related: Patiently.


abiding (adj.)

late 14c., enduring, present participle adjective from abide (v.).


suffering (n.)

patient enduring of pain, inconvenience, loss, etc., mid-14c.; undergoing of punishment, affliction,
etc., late 14c., verbal noun from suffer (v.). Meaning a painful condition, pain felt is from late
14c.


anon (adv.)

late Old English anon, earlier on an, literally into one, thus continuously; straightway (in one
course), at once; see one. By gradual misuse, soon, in a little while (1520s). A one-word
etymological lesson in the enduring power of procrastination.


sufferance (n.)

c.1300, enduring of hardship, affliction, etc., also allowance of wrongdoing, from Old French
suffrance, from Late Latin sufferentia, from sufferens, present participle of sufferre to bear,
undergo, endure (see suffer).


vivace (adv.)

1680s, from Italian vivace brisk, lively, from Latin vivac-, stem of vivax lively, vigorous; long-
lived, enduring (see vivacity).


euphoria (n.)

1727, a physician's term for condition of feeling healthy and comfortable (especially when sick),
medical Latin, from Greek euphoria power of enduring easily, from euphoros, literally bearing well,
from eu well (see eu-) + pherein to carry (see infer). Non-technical use, now the main one, dates to
1882 and is perhaps a reintroduction.


persistence (n.)

1540s, from Middle French persistance, from persistant lasting, enduring, permanent, from Latin
persistentem (nominative persistens), present participle of persistere (see persist). Often spelled
persistance 16c. Related: Persistency.


eternal (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French eternel or directly from Late Latin aeternalis, from Latin aeternus of an
age, lasting, enduring, permanent, endless, contraction of aeviternus of great age, from aevum age
(see eon). Related: Eternally.


intolerant (adj.)

1735, from Latin intolerantem (nominative intolerans) not enduring, impatient, intolerant;
intolerable, from in- 창&euro;&oelig;not창&euro;? (see in- (1)) + tolerans, present participle of
tolerare 창&euro;&oelig;to bear, endure창&euro;? (see toleration). Of plants, from 1898. The noun
meaning intolerant person or persons is from 1765.


during (prep.)

late 14c., durand, present participle of obsolete verb duren to last, endure (mid-13c.), from Old
French durer, from Latin durare endure (see endure). During the day really is while the day endures,
and the usage is a transference into English of a Latin ablative absolute (compare durante bello
during (literally 'enduring') the war).


perennial (adj.)

1640s, evergreen, formed in English from Latin perennis lasting through the year (or years), from
per- through (see per) + annus year (see annual). Botanical sense of Remaining alive through a
number of years is attested from 1670s; figurative meaning of enduring, permanent is from 1750.
Related: Perennially. For vowel change, see biennial. The noun meaning a perennial plant is from
1763.


firm (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French ferm (12c.) firm, strong, vigorous, steadfast; loyal, faithful, from
Latin firmus firm, strong, steadfast, enduring, stable, from PIE root *dher- (1) to hold, support
(cognates: Sanskrit dharmah custom, law, Greek thronos seat, Lithuanian dirzmas strong, Welsh dir
hard, Breton dir steel). The return in late 1500s to -i- from Middle English ferme was modeled on
Latin. Related: Firmly; firmness.


passive (adj.)

late 14c., in grammatical sense (opposed to active), Old French passif suffering, undergoing
hardship (14c.) and directly from Latin passivus capable of feeling or suffering, from pass-, past
participle stem of pati to suffer (see passion). Meaning not active is first recorded late 15c.;
sense of enduring suffering without resistance is from 1620s. Related: Passively. Passive resistance
first attested 1819 in Scott's Ivanhoe, used throughout 19c.; re-coined by Gandhi c.1906 in South
Africa. Passive-aggressive with reference to behavior is attested by 1971.


cant (n.1)

insincere talk, 1709, earlier it was slang for whining of beggars (1640s), from the verb in this
sense (1560s), from Old North French canter (Old French chanter) to sing, chant, from Latin cantare,
frequentative of canere to sing (see chant (v.)). Sense in English developed after 1680 to mean the
jargon of criminals and vagabonds, thence applied contemptuously by any sect or school to the
phraseology of its rival.    ... Slang is universal, whilst Cant is restricted in usage to certain
classes of the community: thieves, vagrom men, and -- well, their associates. ... Slang boasts a
quasi-respectability denied to Cant, though Cant is frequently more enduring, its use continuing
without variation of meaning for many generations. [John S. Farmer, Forewords to Musa Pedestris,
1896]


irrepressible (adj.)

1767, from assimilated form of in- (1) not, opposite of + repressible (see repress).    Increase of
population, which is filling the States out to their very borders, together with a new and extended
network of railroads and other avenues, and an internal commerce which daily becomes more intimate,
is rapidly bringing the States into a higher and more perfect social unity or consolidation. Thus,
these antagonistic systems are continually coming into closer contact, and collision results.
Shall I tell you what this collision means? They who think that it is accidental, unnecessary, the
work of interested or fanatical agitators, and therefor ephemeral, mistake the case altogether. It
is an irrepressible conflict between opposing and enduring forces, and it means that the United
States must and will, sooner or later, become either entirely a slaveholding nation, or entirely a
free-labor nation. [William H. Seward, speech at Rochester, N.Y., Oct. 2, 1858]    Related:
Irrepressibly.


Saturn

Old English S&aelig;tern, a Roman god, also most remote planet (then known), from Latin Saturnus,
originally a name of an Italic god of agriculture, possibly from Etruscan. Derivation from Latin
serere (past participle satus) to sow is said to be folk-etymology.    An ancient Italic deity,
popularly believed to have appeared in Italy in the reign of Janus, and to have instructed the
people in agriculture, gardening, etc., thus elevating them from barbarism to social order and
civilization. His reign was sung by the poets as the golden age. [Century Dictionary]    Identified
with Greek Kronos, father of Zeus. Also the alchemical name for lead (late 14c.). In Akkadian, the
planet was kaiamanu, literally constant, enduring, hence Hebrew kiyyun, Arabic and Persian kaiwan
Saturn. Related: Saturnian.


patience (n.)

c.1200, quality of being willing to bear adversities, calm endurance of misfortune, suffering, etc.,
from Old French pacience patience; sufferance, permission (12c.) and directly from Latin patientia
patience, endurance, submission, also indulgence, leniency; humility; submissiveness; submission to
lust; literally quality of suffering. It is an abstract noun formed from the adjective patientem
(nominative patiens) bearing, supporting; suffering, enduring, permitting; tolerant, but also firm,
unyielding, hard, used of persons as well as of navigable rivers, present participle of pati to
suffer, endure, from PIE root *pe(i)- to damage, injure, hurt (see passion).<b>Patience</b>, n. A
minor form of despair, disguised as a virtue. [Ambrose Bierce, Devil's Dictionary, 1911]Meaning
constancy in effort is attested from 1510s. Meaning card game for one person is from 1816.


Islam (n.)

religious system revealed by Muhammad, 1818, from Arabic islam, literally submission (to the will of
God), from root of aslama he resigned, he surrendered, he submitted, causative conjunction of salima
he was safe, and related to salam peace.    ... Islam is the only major religion, along with
Buddhism (if we consider the name of the religion to come from Budd, the Divine Intellect, and not
the Buddha), whose name is not related to a person or ethnic group, but to the central idea of the
religion. [The Heart of Islam: Enduring Values for Humanity, Seyyed Hossein Nasr, 2002]    Earlier
English names for the faith include Mahometry (late 15c.), Muhammadism (1610s), Islamism (1747), and
Ismaelism (c.1600), which in part is from Ishmaelite, a name formerly given (especially by Jews) to
Arabs, as descendants of Ishmael (q.v.), and in part from Arabic Ismailiy, name of the Shiite sect
that after 765 C.E. followed the Imamship through descendants of Ismail (Arabic for Ishmael), eldest
son of Jafar, the sixth Imam. The Ismailians were not numerous, but among them were the powerful
Fatimid dynasty in Egypt and the Assassins, both of whom loomed large in European imagination.


ethnic (adj.)

late 15c. (earlier ethnical, early 15c.) pagan, heathen, from Late Latin ethnicus, from Greek
ethnikos adopted to the genius or customs of a people, peculiar to a people, from ethnos band of
people living together, nation, people, properly people of one's own kind, from PIE *swedh-no-,
suffixed form of root *s(w)e- (see idiom). Earlier in English as a noun, a heathen, pagan, one who
is not a Christian or Jew (c.1400).     In Septuagint, Greek ta ethne translates Hebrew goyim,
plural of goy nation, especially of non-Israelites, hence Gentile nation, foreign nation not
worshipping the true God (see goy), and ethnikos is used as savoring of the nature of pagans, alien
to the worship of the true God, and as a noun the pagan, the Gentile. The classical sense of
peculiar to a race or nation in English is attested from 1851, a return to the word's original
meaning; that of different cultural groups is 1935; and that of racial, cultural or national
minority group is American English 1945. Ethnic cleansing is attested from 1991.    Although the
term 'ethnic cleansing' has come into English usage only recently, its verbal correlates in Czech,
French, German, and Polish go back much further. [Jerry Z. Muller, Us and Them: The Enduring Power
of Ethnic Nationalism, Foreign Affairs, March/April 2008]


passion (n.)

late 12c., sufferings of Christ on the Cross, from Old French passion Christ's passion, physical
suffering (10c.), from Late Latin passionem (nominative passio) suffering, enduring, from past
participle stem of Latin pati to suffer, endure, possibly from PIE root *pe(i)- to hurt (cognates:
Sanskrit pijati reviles, scorns, Greek pema suffering, misery, woe, Old English feond enemy, devil,
Gothic faian to blame).    Sense extended to sufferings of martyrs, and suffering generally, by
early 13c.; meaning strong emotion, desire is attested from late 14c., from Late Latin use of passio
to render Greek pathos. Replaced Old English &thorn;olung (used in glosses to render Latin passio),
literally suffering, from &thorn;olian (v.) to endure.    Sense of sexual love first attested 1580s;
that of strong liking, enthusiasm, predilection is from 1630s. The passion-flower so called from
1630s.The name passionflower -- flos passionis -- arose from the supposed resemblance of the corona
to the crown of thorns, and of the other parts of the flower to the nails, or wounds, while the five
sepals and five petals were taken to symbolize the ten apostles -- Peter ... and Judas ... being
left out of the reckoning. [Encyclopaedia Britannica, 1885]


toleration (n.)

1510s, permission granted by authority, license, from Middle French tol&eacute;ration (15c.), from
Latin tolerationem (nominative toleratio) a bearing, supporting, enduring, noun of action from past
participle stem of tolerare to endure, sustain, support, suffer, literally to bear, from PIE *tele-
to bear, carry (see extol).    Meaning forbearance, sufferance is from 1580s. The specific religious
sense is from 1609; as in Act of Toleration (1689), statute granting freedom of religious worship
(with conditions) to dissenting Protestants in England. In this it means recognition of the right of
private judgment in matters of faith and worship; liberty granted by the government to preach and
worship as one pleases; equality under the law without regard to religion.    If any man err from
the right way, it is his own misfortune, no injury to thee; nor therefore art thou to punish him in
the things of this life because thou supposest he will be miserable in that which is to come.
Nobody, therefore, in fine, neither single persons nor churches, nay, nor even commonwealths, have
any just title to invade the civil rights and worldly goods of each other upon pretence of religion.
[John Locke, Letter Concerning Toleration, 1689]   <hr />   Before any man can be considered as a
member of Civil Society, he must be considered as a subject of the Governour of the Universe: And if
a member of Civil Society, do it with a saving of his allegiance to the Universal Sovereign. We
maintain therefore that in matters of Religion, no man's right is abridged by the institution of
Civil Society and that Religion is wholly exempt from its cognizance. [James Madison, Memorial and
Remonstrance Against Religious Assessments, 1785]   <hr />   Unlimited tolerance must lead to the
disappearance of tolerance. If we extend unlimited tolerance even to those who are intolerant, if we
are not prepared to defend a tolerant society against the onslaught of the intolerant, then the
tolerant will be destroyed, and tolerance with them. [Karl Popper, The Open Society and Its Enemies,
1962]


apple (n.)

Old English &aelig;ppel apple; any kind of fruit; fruit in general, from Proto-Germanic *ap(a)laz
(cognates: Old Saxon, Old Frisian, Dutch appel, Old Norse eple, Old High German apful, German
Apfel), from PIE *ab(e)l apple (cognates: Gaulish avallo fruit; Old Irish ubull, Lithuanian obuolys,
Old Church Slavonic jabloko apple), but the exact relation and original sense of these is uncertain
(compare melon).  A roted eppel amang &thorn;e holen, make&thorn; rotie &thorn;e yzounde. [Ayenbite
of Inwit, 1340]    In Middle English and as late as 17c., it was a generic term for all fruit other
than berries but including nuts (such as Old English finger&aelig;ppla dates, literally finger-
apples; Middle English appel of paradis banana, c.1400). Hence its grafting onto the unnamed fruit
of the forbidden tree in Genesis. Cucumbers, in one Old English work, are eor&thorn;&aelig;ppla,
literally earth-apples (compare French pomme de terre potato, literally earth-apple; see also
melon). French pomme is from Latin pomum apple; fruit (see Pomona).    As far as the forbidden fruit
is concerned, again, the Quran does not mention it explicitly, but according to traditional
commentaries it was not an apple, as believed by Christians and Jews, but wheat. [The Heart of
Islam: Enduring Values for Humanity, Seyyed Hossein Nasr, 2002]   Apple of Discord (c.1400) was
thrown into the wedding of Thetis and Peleus by Eris (goddess of chaos and discord), who had not
been invited, and inscribed kallisti To the Prettiest One. Paris, elected to choose which goddess
should have it, gave it to Aphrodite, offending Hera and Athene, with consequences of the Trojan
War, etc.   Apple of one's eye (Old English), symbol of what is most cherished, was the pupil,
supposed to be a globular solid body. Apple-polisher one who curries favor first attested 1928 in
student slang. The image of something that upsets the apple cart is attested from 1788. Road apple
horse dropping is from 1942.


