engagement (n.)

c.1600, formal promise, from engage + -ment. Meaning battle, fight is from 1660s; promise-of-
marriage sense is from 1742; meaning appointment is from 1806.


engage (v.)

early 15c., to pledge, from Middle French engagier, from Old French en gage under pledge, from en
make + gage pledge, through Frankish from Proto-Germanic *wadiare pledge (see wed).    It shows the
common evolution of Germanic -w- to French -g-, as in Guillaume from Wilhelm). Meaning attract the
attention of is from 1640s; that of employ is from 1640s, from notion of binding as by a pledge.
Specific sense of promise to marry is 1610s (implied in engaged).


pre-engage (v.)

bind in advance by promise, 1640s, from pre- + engage (v.). Related: Pre-engaged; pre-engaging.


wage (v.)

c.1300, give (something) as surety, deposit as a pledge, from Old North French wagier to pledge (Old
French gagier, to pledge, guarantee, promise; bet, wager, pay, Modern French gager), from wage (see
wage (n.)). Meaning to carry on, engage in (of war, etc.) is attested from mid-15c., probably from
earlier sense of to offer as a gage of battle, agree to engage in combat (mid-14c.). Related: Waged;
waging.


spondee (n.)

metrical foot consisting of two long syllables, late 14c., from Old French spondee (14c.), from
Latin spondeus, from Greek spondeios (pous), the name of the meter originally used in chants
accompanying libations, from sponde solemn libation, a drink-offering, related to spendein make a
drink offering, from PIE root *spend- to make an offering, perform a rite, hence to engage oneself
by a ritual act (cognates: Latin spondere to engage oneself, promise, Hittite shipantahhi I pour out
a libation, I sacrifice). Related: Spondaic.


zouk (n.)

Creole French, party, from zouker engage in unrestrained social activity.


engaging (adj.)

interesting, 1650s (implied in engagingly), present participle adjective from engage.


lek (v.)

to engage in courtship displays of certain animals, 1871, probably from Swedish leka to play,
cognate of English dialectal verb lake (see lark (v.)).


exercise (v.)

late 14c., to employ, put into active use, from exercise (n.); originally to make use of; also in
regard to mental and spiritual training; sense of engage in physical activity is from 1650s.
Related: Exercised; exercises; exercising.


disengage (v.)

c.1600 in figurative sense; 1660s in literal sense of detach, from dis- do the opposite of + engage
(q.v.). Related: Disengaged; disengaging.


riot (v.)

late 14c., behave in a dissolute manner, engage in loose revelry, from Old French rioter chatter,
dispute, quarrel, from riote (see riot (n.)). Meaning take part in a public disturbance is from
1755. Related: Rioted; rioting.


politic (v.)

also politick, to engage in political activity, 1917, a back-formation from politics. Related:
Politicked; politicking (for the -k- see picnic).


book (v.)

Old English bocian to grant or assign by charter, from book (n.). Meaning to enter into a book,
record is early 13c. Meaning to enter for a seat or place, issue (railway) tickets is from 1841; to
engage a performer as a guest is from 1872. Related: Booked; booking.


specialize (v.)

1610s, to indicate specially, from special (adj.) + -ize, perhaps on model of French
sp&#233;cialiser. Sense of engage in a special study or line of business is first attested 1881;
biological sense is from 1851. Related: Specialized; specializing.


hire (v.)

Old English hyrian pay for service, employ for wages, engage, from Proto-Germanic *hurjan (cognates:
Danish hyre, Old Frisian hera, Dutch huren, German heuern to hire, rent). Reflexively, to agree to
work for wages from mid-13c. Related: Hired; hiring.


stipulation (n.)

1550s, a commitment or activity to do something (now obsolete), from Latin stipulationem (nominative
stipulatio), noun of action from past participle stem of stipulari exact a promise, engage, bargain,
of uncertain origin. Traditionally said to be from Latin stipula stalk, straw (see stipule) in
reference to some obscure symbolic act; this is rejected by most authorities, who, however, have not
come up with a better guess. Meaning act of specifying one of the terms of a contract or agreement
is recorded from 1750. Meaning that which is stipulated or agreed upon is from 1802.


oblige (v.)

c.1300, to bind by oath, from Old French obligier engage one's faith, commit (oneself), pledge
(13c.), from Latin obligare to bind, bind up, bandage, figuratively put under obligation, from ob to
(see ob-) + ligare to bind, from PIE root *leig- to bind (see ligament). Main modern meaning to make
(someone) indebted by conferring a benefit or kindness is from 1560s. Related: obliged; obliging.


while (v.)

to cause (time) to pass (without dullness), 1630s, earlier to occupy or engage (someone or
something) for a period of time (c.1600), new formation from while (n.), not considered to be from
Middle English hwulen to have leisure, which is from a Germanic verb form of while (n.) (compare
German weilen to stay, linger). An association with phrases such as Shakespearean beguile the day,
Latin diem decipere, French tromper le temps has led to the substitution of WILE v by some modern
writers [OED] (see wile (v.)).


fiancee (n.)

woman to whom one is betrothed, 1853, from French fiance&eacute;, fem. of fianc&eacute;, past
participle of fiancer to betroth, from fiance a promise, trust, from fier to trust, from Vulgar
Latin *fidare (see affiance). Has all but expelled native betrothed. The verb fiance, now obsolete,
was used c.1450-1600 for to engage to be married.


dyke (n.)

1931, American English, perhaps a shortening of morphadike, dialectal garbling of hermaphrodite; but
bulldyker engage in lesbian activities is attested from 1921, and a source from 1896 lists dyke as
slang for the vulva.    [T]he word appears first in the long forms, bulldiker and bulldyking, both
used in the 1920s by American blacks. No African antecedents have been found for the term, however,
which leads to the possibility that this is basically just another backcountry, barnyard word,
perhaps a combination of BULL and DICK. [Rawson]


espouse (v.)

mid-15c., to take as spouse, marry, from Old French espouser marry, take in marriage, join in
marriage (11c., Modern French &eacute;pouser), from Latin sponsare, past participle of spondere make
an offering, perform a rite, hence to engage oneself by ritual act (see spondee).    Extended sense
of adopt, embrace a cause, party, etc., is from 1620s. Related: Espoused; espouses; espousing. For
initial e-, see e-.


press (v.2)

force into service, 1570s, alteration (by association with press (v.1)) of prest (mid-14c.) engage
by loan, pay in advance, especially money paid to a soldier or sailor on enlisting, from Latin
praestare to stand out, stand before; fulfill, perform, provide, from prae- before (see pre-) +
stare to stand, from PIE root *sta- to stand (see stet). Related to praesto (adv.) ready, available.
Related: Pressed; pressing.


employ (v.)

early 15c., from Middle French employer, from Old French emploiier (12c.) make use of, apply;
increase; entangle; devote, from Latin implicare enfold, involve, be connected with, from in- (see
in- (2)) + plicare to fold (see ply (v.1)).    Sense of hire, engage first recorded in English
1580s, from involve in a particular purpose, a sense which arose in Late Latin. Related: Employed;
employing. The noun is 1660s, from French emploi. Imply, which is the same word, retains more of the
original sense.


spar (v)

late 14c., go quickly, rush, dart, spring; c.1400, to strike or thrust, perhaps from Middle French
esparer to kick (Modern French &#233;parer), from Italian sparare to fling, from Latin ex- (see ex-)
+ parare make ready, prepare, hence ward off, parry (see pare). Etymologists consider a connection
with spur unlikely. Used in 17c. in reference to preliminary actions in a cock fight; figurative
sense of to dispute, bandy with words is from 1690s. Extension to humans, in a literal sense, with
meaning to engage in or practice boxing is attested from 1755. Related: Sparred; sparring.


wick (n.1)

bundle of fiber in a lamp or candle, 17c. spelling alteration of wueke, from Old English weoce wick
of a lamp or candle, from West Germanic *weukon (cognates: Middle Dutch wieke, Dutch wiek, Old High
German wiohha, German Wieche), of unknown origin, with no known cognates beyond Germanic. To dip
one's wick engage in sexual intercourse (in reference to males) is recorded from 1958, perhaps from
Hampton Wick, rhyming slang for prick, which would connect it rather to wick (n.2).


meddle (v.)

early 14c., to mingle, blend, mix, from Old North French medler (Old French mesler, 12c., Modern
French m&#234;ler) to mix, mingle, to meddle, from Vulgar Latin *misculare (source of
Proven&ccedil;al mesclar, Spanish mezclar, Italian mescolare, meschiare), from Latin miscere to mix
(see mix (v.)). From late 14c. as busy oneself, be concerned with, engage in; also disparagingly
interfere, be officious, make a nuisance of oneself (the notion is of meddling too much). From mid-
14c. to 1700, it also was a euphemism for have sexual intercourse. Related: Meddled; meddling.


signify (v.)

late 13c., be a sign of, indicate, mean, from Old French signifier (12c.), from Latin significare to
make signs, show by signs, point out, express; mean, signify; foreshadow, portend, from significus
(adj.), from signum sign (see sign (n.)) + root of facere to make (see factitious). Intransitive
sense of to be of importance is attested from 1660s. Meaning engage in mock-hostile banter is
American English black slang first recorded 1932.    ...'signifying,' which in Harlemese means
making a series of oblique remarks apparently addressed to no one in particular, but unmistakable in
intention in such a close-knit circle. [Down Beat, March 7, 1968]


indulgence (n.)

mid-14c., freeing from temporal punishment for sin, from Old French indulgence or directly from
Latin indulgentia complaisance, fondness, remission, from indulgentem (nominative indulgens)
indulgent, kind, tender, fond, present participle of indulgere be kind, yield, of unknown origin;
perhaps from in- in + derivative of PIE root *dlegh- to engage oneself.    Sense of gratification of
another's desire or humor is attested from late 14c. That of yielding to one's inclinations
(technically self-indulgence) is from 1640s. In British history, Indulgence also refers to grants of
certain liberties to Nonconformists under Charles II and James II, as special favors rather than
legal rights; specifically the Declarations of Indulgence of 1672, 1687, and 1688 in England and
1669, 1672, and 1687 in Scotland.


handicap (n.)

1650s, from hand in cap, a game whereby two bettors would engage a neutral umpire to determine the
odds in an unequal contest. The bettors would put their hands holding forfeit money into a hat or
cap. The umpire would announce the odds and the bettors would withdraw their hands -- hands full
meaning that they accepted the odds and the bet was on, hands empty meaning they did not accept the
bet and were willing to forfeit the money. If one forfeited, then the money went to the other. If
both agreed either on forfeiting or going ahead with the wager, then the umpire kept the money as
payment. The custom, though not the name, is attested from 14c. (Piers Plowman).  Reference to horse
racing is 1754 (Handy-Cap Match), where the umpire decrees the superior horse should carry extra
weight as a handicap; this led to sense of encumbrance, disability first recorded 1890. The main
modern sense, disability, is the last to develop, early 20c.


avant-garde (n.)

(also avant garde, avantgarde); French, literally advance guard (see avant + guard (n.)). Used in
English 15c.-18c. in a literal, military sense; borrowed again 1910 as an artistic term for pioneers
or innovators of a particular period. Also used around the same time in communist and anarchist
publications. As an adjective, by 1925.    The avant-garde g&#233;n&#233;rale, avant-garde
strat&#233;gique, or avant-garde d'arm&#233;e is a strong force (one, two, or three army corps)
pushed out a day's march to the front, immediately behind the cavalry screen. Its mission is,
vigorously to engage the enemy wherever he is found, and, by binding him, to ensure liberty of
action in time and space for the main army. [Sadowa, Gen. Henri Bonnal, transl. C.F. Atkinson, 1907]


hat trick (n.)

1879, originally from cricket, taking three wickets on three consecutive deliveries; extended to
other sports c.1909, especially ice hockey (In an earlier contest we had handed Army a 6-2 defeat at
West Point as Billy Sloane performed hockey's spectacular 'hat trick' by scoring three goals
[Princeton Alumni Weekly, Feb. 10, 1941]). Allegedly because it entitled the bowler to receive a hat
from his club commemorating the feat (or entitled him to pass the hat for a cash collection), but
also influenced by the image of a conjurer pulling things from his hat (an act attested by 1876).
The term was used earlier for a different sort of magic trick:    Place a glass of liquor on the
table, put a hat over it, and say, I will engage to drink every drop of that liquor, and yet I'll
not touch the hat. You then get under the table; and after giving three knocks, you make a noise
with your mouth, as if you were swallowing the liquor. Then, getting from under the table, say Now,
gentlemen, be pleased to look. Some one, eager to see if you have drunk the liquor, will raise the
hat; when you instantly take the glass and swallow the contents, saying, Gentlemen I have fulfilled
my promise: you are all witnesses that I did not touch the hat. [Wit and Wisdom, London, 1860]


plump (v.1)

c.1300, to fall or strike with a full impact, common Low German word, from or related to Middle
Dutch and Dutch plompen, East Frisian plumpen, Middle Low German plumpen, probably more or less
imitative of something hard striking something soft. Hence plump (n.) a firm blow, in pugilism
usually one to the stomach.    To plump; to strike, or shoot. I'll give you a plump in the bread
basket, or the victualling office; I'll give you a blow in the stomach. [Grose, Dictionary of the
Vulgar Tongue, London, 1785]   <hr />   Or, even if any of them should suspect me, I know how to
bring myself off. It is but pretending to be affronted, stripping directly, challenging him to
fight, and before he can be on his guard, hitting him a plump in the bread-basket, that shall make
him throw up his accounts; and I'll engage he will have but very little stomach to accuse me after.
[The Reverie: or A Flight to the Paradise of Fools, London, 1763]


swing (v.)

Old English swingan beat, strike; scourge, flog; to rush, fling oneself (strong verb, past tense
swang, past participle swungen), from Proto-Germanic *swingan (cognates: Old Saxon, Old High German
swingan, Old Frisian swinga, German schwingen to swing, swingle, oscillate), from PIE *sweng(w)- to
swing, turn, toss (perhaps Germanic only).    The meaning move freely back and forth is first
recorded 1540s. Transitive sense cause to oscillate is from 1550s. Sense of bring about, make happen
is from 1934. Sense of engage in promiscuous sex is from 1964; earlier, more generally, enjoy
oneself unconventionally (1957). Related: Swung; swinging. Swing-voter independent who often
determines the outcome of an election is from 1966.


play (v.)

Old English plegan, plegian move rapidly, occupy or busy oneself, exercise; frolic; make sport of,
mock; perform music, from West Germanic *plegan occupy oneself about  (cognates: Old Saxon plegan
vouch for, take charge of, Old Frisian plega tend to, Middle Dutch pleyen to rejoice, be glad,
German pflegen take care of, cultivate), from PIE root *dlegh- to engage oneself, forming words in
Celtic, Germanic, Slavic, and possibly Latin.    Meaning to take part in a game is from c.1200.
Opposed to work (v.) since late 14c. Related: Played; playing. To play up emphasize is from 1909; to
play down minimize is from 1930; to play along cooperate is from 1929. To play with oneself
masturbate is from 1896; play for keeps is from 1861, originally of marbles or other children's
games with tokens. To play second fiddle in the figurative sense is from 1809 (Gil Blas). To play
into the hands (of someone) is from 1705. To play the _______ card is attested from 1886; to play
fair is from mid-15c. To play (something) safe is from 1911; to play favorites is attested from
1902. For play the field see field (n.).


