boffin (n.)

person engaged in innovative research, especially in aviation, 1945; earlier elderly naval officer
(1941), probably from one of the Mr. Boffins of English literature (as in Our Mutual Friend).


trader (n.)

dealer, trafficker, one engaged in commerce, 1580s, agent noun from trade (v.).


militant (n.)

one engaged in war or strife, c.1600, from militant (adj.); in a political sense, it is attested by
1907.


handler (n.)

late 14c., one who handles anything, agent noun from handle (v.). Specific sense of one engaged in
trade is from 1690s; that of prizefighter's assistant (1916) was earlier used in reference to
dogfights and cockfights (1825).


compositor (n.)

a typesetter engaged in picking up arranging and distributing letters or type in a printing office,
1560s, agent noun from past participle stem of Latin componere (see composite).


unattached (adj.)

late 15c., not arrested or seized, from un- (1) not + past participle of attach (v.). Meaning not
associated with any body or institution is recorded from 1796; sense of single, not engaged or
married is first attested 1874.


Micawber (n.)

as a type of a childishly impractical man living in optimistic fantasy, from the character of
Wilkins Micawber in Dickens' David Copperfield (1850).    I am at present, my dear Copperfield,
engaged in the sale of corn upon commission. It is not an avocation of a remunerative description --
in other words it does not pay -- and some temporary embarrassments of a pecuniary nature have been
the consequence. I am however delighted to add that I have now an immediate prospect of something
turning up ....


looker (n.)

Old English locere one engaged in looking, agent noun from look (v.). Meaning one who watches over
is from c.1300; that of one who has a certain appearance is late 15c. Slang meaning attractive woman
attested from 1893. Looker-in (1927) was an early word for television viewer.


versatile (adj.)

c.1600, inconstant, from Latin versatilis turning, revolving, moving, capable of turning with ease
to varied subjects or tasks, from past participle stem of versare keep turning, be engaged in
something, turn over in the mind, frequentative of vertere to turn (see versus). Meaning able to do
many things well is from 1762 in English.


pre-engage (v.)

bind in advance by promise, 1640s, from pre- + engage (v.). Related: Pre-engaged; pre-engaging.


hiker (n.)

1913, agent noun from hike (v.). Earlier as a type of boat:    The hiker or tuck-up as it is more
generally termed, is a craft peculiar to the Delaware River, and is to the youth residing along the
banks of that stream what the racing shell is to the Torontonian .... The origin of the name hiker
is veiled in mystery. No member of the clubs engaged in sailing these boats can give anything like a
satisfactory derivation of the word. The most common explanation is that it is corrupted from the
local verb to hike, which means to run or fly swiftly. [Harper's Young People, 1885]


working (adj.)

late 14c., active, busy, past participle adjective from work (v.). From 1630s as engaged in physical
toil or manual labor as a means of livelihood. Working class is from 1789 as a noun, 1839 as an
adjective. Working-day is from late 15c.; working man is by 1816.


nom (n.)

French, name (9c.), from Latin nomen (see name (n.)). Used in various phrases, such as nom de guerre
(1670s), name used by a person engaged in some action, literally war name; nom de plume (1823),
literally pen name; nom de th&eacute;&acirc;tre (1874) stage name. Nom de plume is open to the
criticism that it is ridiculous for English writers to use a French phrase that does not come from
France [Fowler].


militant (adj.)

early 15c., fighting, engaged in warfare, from Middle French militant fighting, from Latin
militantem (nominative militans), present participle of militare serve as a soldier (see militate),
originally especially in Church militant. Related: Militantly.


profession (n.)

c.1200, vows taken upon entering a religious order, from Old French profession (12c.), from Latin
professionem (nominative professio) public declaration, from past participle stem of profiteri
declare openly (see profess). Meaning any solemn declaration is from mid-14c. Meaning occupation one
professes to be skilled in is from early 15c.; meaning body of persons engaged in some occupation is
from 1610; as a euphemism for prostitution (compare oldest profession) it is recorded from 1888.


-ary

adjective and noun suffix, in most cases from Latin -arius, -aria, -arium connected with, pertaining
to; the man engaged in, from PIE relational adjective suffix *-yo- of or belonging to. It appears in
words borrowed from Latin in Middle English. In later borrowings from Latin to French, it became
-aire and passed into Middle English as -arie, subsequently -ary.


engage (v.)

early 15c., to pledge, from Middle French engagier, from Old French en gage under pledge, from en
make + gage pledge, through Frankish from Proto-Germanic *wadiare pledge (see wed).    It shows the
common evolution of Germanic -w- to French -g-, as in Guillaume from Wilhelm). Meaning attract the
attention of is from 1640s; that of employ is from 1640s, from notion of binding as by a pledge.
Specific sense of promise to marry is 1610s (implied in engaged).


yarn (n.)

Old English gearn spun fiber, spun wool, from Proto-Germanic *garnan (cognates: Old Norse, Old High
German, German garn, Middle Dutch gaern, Dutch garen yarn), from PIE root *ghere- intestine, gut,
entrail (cognates: Old Norse gorn gut, Sanskrit hira vein; entrails, Latin hernia rupture, Greek
khorde intestine, gut-string, Lithuanian zarna gut). The phrase to spin a yarn to tell a story is
first attested 1812, from a sailors' expression, on notion of telling stories while engaged in
sedentary work such as yarn-twisting.


square (adj.)

early 14c., containing four equal sides and right angles, from square (n.), or from Old French
esquarre, past participle of esquarrer. Meaning honest, fair, is first attested 1560s; that of
straight, direct is from 1804. Of meals, from 1868.    Sense of old-fashioned is 1944, U.S. jazz
slang, said to be from shape of a conductor's hand gestures in a regular four-beat rhythm. Square-
toes meant nearly the same thing late 18c.: precise, formal, old-fashioned person, from the style of
men's shoes worn early 18c. and then fallen from fashion. Squaresville is attested from 1956. Square
dance attested by 1831; originally one in which the couples faced inward from four sides; later of
country dances generally.    [T]he old square dance is an abortive attempt at conversation while
engaged in walking certain mathematical figures over a limited area. [March 1868]


business (n.)

Old English bisignes (Northumbrian) care, anxiety, occupation, from bisig careful, anxious, busy,
occupied, diligent (see busy (adj.)) + -ness. Middle English sense of state of being much occupied
or engaged (mid-14c.) is obsolete, replaced by busyness.    Sense of a person's work, occupation is
first recorded late 14c. (in late Old English bisig (adj.) appears as a noun with the sense
occupation, state of employment). Meaning what one is about at the moment is from 1590s. Sense of
trade, commercial engagements is first attested 1727. In 17c. it also could mean sexual intercourse.
Modern two-syllable pronunciation is 17c.   Business card first attested 1840; business letter from
1766. Business end the practical or effective part (of something) is American English, by 1874.
Phrase business as usual attested from 1865. To mean business be intent on serious action is from
1856. To mind (one's) own business is from 1620s. Johnson's dictionary also has busiless At leisure;
without business; unemployed.


field (n.)

Old English feld plain, open land (as opposed to woodland), also a parcel of land marked off and
used for pasture or tillage, probably related to Old English folde earth, land, from Proto-Germanic
*felthuz flat land (common West Germanic, cognates: Old Saxon and Old Frisian feld field, Old Saxon
folda earth, Middle Dutch velt, Dutch veld Old High German felt, German Feld field, but not found
outside it; Swedish f&auml;lt, Danish felt are borrowed from German), from PIE *pel(e)-tu-, from
root *pele- (2) flat, to spread (see plane (n.1)).    Finnish pelto field is believed to have been
adapted from Proto-Germanic. The English spelling with -ie- probably is the work of Anglo-French
scribes (compare brief, piece). Collective use for all engaged in a sport (or, in horseracing, all
but the favorite) is 1742; play the field avoid commitment (1936) is from notion of gamblers betting
on other horses than the favorite. Field glasses attested by 1836.


great (adj.)

Old English great big, tall, thick, stout; coarse, from West Germanic *grautaz coarse, thick
(cognates: Old Saxon grot, Old Frisian grat, Dutch groot, German gro&szlig; great).    Said to have
meant originally big in size, coarse, and, if so, perhaps from PIE root *ghreu- to rub, grind. It
took over much of the sense of Middle English mickle, and is now largely superseded by big and large
except for non-material things.    As a prefix to terms denoting kinship one degree further removed
(early 15c., earliest attested use is in great uncle) it is from the similar use of French grand,
itself used as the equivalent of Latin magnus. An Old English way of saying great-grandfather was
&thorn;ridda f&aelig;der, literally third father.    In the sense of excellent, wonderful great is
attested from 1848. Great White Way Broadway in New York City is from 1901. Great Spirit high deity
of the North American Indians, 1703, originally translates Ojibwa kitchi manitou. The Great War
originally (1887) referred to the Napoleonic Wars, later (1914) to what we now call World War I (see
world).The Great War -- as, until the fall of France, the British continued to call the First World
War in order to avoid admitting to themselves that they were now again engaged in a war of the same
magnitude. [Arnold Toynbee, Experiences, 1969]  Also formerly with a verb form, Old English
greatian, Middle English greaten to become larger, increase, grow; become visibly pregnant, which
became archaic after 17c.


