enhancement (n.)

1570s, from enhance + -ment.


enhance (v.)

late 13c., anhaunsen to raise, make higher, from Anglo-French enhauncer, probably from Old French
enhaucier make greater, make higher or louder; fatten, foster; raise in esteem, from Vulgar Latin
*inaltiare, from Late Latin inaltare raise, exalt,  from altare make high, from altus high (see
old).    Meaning raise in station, wealth, or fame attested in English from c.1300. The -h- in Old
French supposedly from influence of Frankish *hoh high. Related: Enhanced; enhancing.


inhance (v.)

obsolete form of enhance.


endear (v.)

1580s, to enhance the value of, also win the affection of, from en- (1) make, put in + dear (adj.).
Meaning to make dear is from 1640s. Related: Endeared; endearing.


carburetor (n.)

device to enhance a gas flame, 1866, from carburet compound of carbon and another substance (1795,
now displaced by carbide), also used as a verb, to combine with carbon (1802); from carb-, comb.
form of carbon, + -uret, an archaic suffix formed from Modern Latin -uretum to parallel French words
in -ure. Motor vehicle sense is from 1896.


augment (v.)

c.1400, from Old French augmenter increase, enhance (14c.), from Late Latin augmentare to increase,
from Latin augmentum an increase, from augere to increase, make big, enlarge, enrich, from PIE root
*aug- to increase (cognates: Sanskrit ojas- strength; Lithuanian augu to grow, aukstas high, of
superior rank; Greek auxo increase, auxein to increase; Gothic aukan to grow, increase; Old English
eacien to increase). Related: Augmented; augmenting. As a noun from early 15c.


spice (n.)

c.1200, something added to food or drink to enhance the flavor, vegetable substance aromatic or
pungent to the taste, also a spice used as a medication or an alchemical ingredient, from Old French
espice (Modern French &#233;pice), from Late Latin species (plural) spices, goods, wares, in
classical Latin kind, sort (see species). From c.1300 as an aromatic spice, also spices as
commodities; from early 14c. as a spice-bearing plant. Figurative sense of attractive or enjoyable
variation is from 13c.; that of slight touch or trace of something is recorded from 1530s. Meaning
specimen, sample is from 1790. Early druggists recognized four types of spices: saffron, clove,
cinnamon, nutmeg.


