enliven (v.)

1630s, give life to (enlive in same sense is from 1590s); see en- (1) make, put in + life + -en (1).
Meaning make lively or cheerful is from 1690s. Related: Enlivened; enlivening.


liven (v.)

1884, colloquial shortening of 17c. enliven, usually with up. Related: Livened; livening.


vegetate (v.)

c.1600, to grow as plants do, perhaps a back-formation from vegetation, or from Latin vegetatus,
past participle of vegetare to enliven, to animate (see vegetable (adj.)). Sense of to lead a dull,
empty, or stagnant life is from 1740. Related: Vegetated; vegetating.


juice (v.)

1630s, to suffuse with juice, from juice (n.). Meaning to enliven attested by 1964; juiced drunk
attested by 1946; in reference to steroids, by 2003. Related: Juiced; juicing.


-iatric

word-forming element from Greek iatrikos healing, from iatros physician, healer (related to iatreun
treat medically, and iasthai heal, treat); of uncertain origin, perhaps from iaomai to cure, related
to iaino heat, warm, cheer, probably from a root meaning enliven, animate.


gin (v.1)

in slang phrase gin up enliven, make more exciting, 1887, probably from earlier ginger up in same
sense (1849), from ginger in sense of spice, pizzazz; specifically in reference to the treatment
described in the 1811 slang dictionary under the entry for feague:    ... to put ginger up a horse's
fundament, and formerly, as it is said, a live eel, to make him lively and carry his tail well; it
is said, a forfeit is incurred by any horse-dealer's servant, who shall shew a horse without first
feaguing him. Feague is used, figuratively, for encouraging or spiriting one up.


vegetable (adj.)

early 15c., capable of life or growth; growing, vigorous; also neither animal nor mineral, of the
plant kingdom, living and growing as a plant, from Old French vegetable living, fit to live, and
directly from Medieval Latin vegetabilis growing, flourishing, from Late Latin vegetabilis
animating, enlivening, from Latin vegetare to enliven, from vegetus vigorous, enlivened, active,
sprightly, from vegere to be alive, active, to quicken, from PIE *weg- (2) be strong, lively, source
of watch (v.), vigor, velocity, and possibly witch (see wake (v.)). The meaning resembling that of a
vegetable, dull, uneventful; having life such as a plant has is attested from 1854 (see vegetable
(n.)).


wake (v.)

to become awake, a Middle English merger of Old English wacan to become awake, arise, be born,
originate, and Old English wacian to be or remain awake, both from Proto-Germanic *waken (cognates:
Old Saxon wakon, Old Norse vaka, Danish vaage, Old Frisian waka, Dutch waken, Old High German
wahhen, German wachen to be awake, Gothic wakan to watch), from PIE root *weg- (2) to be strong, be
lively (cognates: Sanskrit vajah force, strength; swiftness, speed, vajayati drives on; Latin vigil
watchful, awake,  vigere be lively, thrive, velox fast, lively, vegere to enliven; vigil awake,
wakeful, vigor liveliness, activity). Causative sense to rouse from sleep is attested from c.1300.
Related: Waked; waking.


