enmity (n.)

late 14c., from Old French enemisti&eacute; enmity, hostile act, aversion, from Vulgar Latin
*inimicitatem (nominative *inimicitas), from Latin inimicitia enmity, hostility, from inimicus enemy
(see enemy). Related: Enmities.


feud (n.)

c.1300, fede enmity, hatred, hostility, northern English and Scottish; perhaps from an unrecorded
Old English word or else from Old French fede, which is from Germanic (compare Old High German
fehida contention, quarrel, feud), from Proto-Germanic *faihitho noun of state from adjective
*faiho- (cognates: Old English f&aelig;h&eth; enmity, fah hostile; German Fehde feud; Old Frisian
feithe enmity), from PIE root *peig- (2), also *peik- evil-minded, hostile (see foe). Sense of
vendetta is early 15c. Alteration of spelling in 16c. is unexplained.


hostility (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French hostilit&eacute; enmity (15c.), or directly from Late Latin
hostilitatem (nominative hostilitas) enmity, from Latin hostilis, from hostis enemy (see guest).
Hostilities in the sense of warfare attested from 1610s.


Job

Biblical masc. proper name, from Hebrew Iyyobh, which according to some scholars is literally hated,
persecuted, from ayyabh he was hostile to, related to ebhah enmity. Others say it means the penitent
one.


kriegspiel (n.)

war games played with pieces on maps, 1811 as a German word in English, from German Kriegsspiel,
literally war game, from Krieg war, from Middle High German kriec, combat, mostly exertion, effort;
opposition, enmity, resistance, from Old High German chreg stubbornness, defiance, obsinancy,
perhaps from PIE *gwere- (2) heavy (see grave (adj.)) or cognate with Greek hybris violence (see
hubris; also see war (n.)). For second element, see spiel (n.). Introduced 1870s as officer training
in British army.


rain (v.)

Old English regnian, usually contracted to rinan; see rain (n.), and compare Old Norse rigna,
Swedish regna, Danish regne, Old High German reganon, German regnen, Gothic rignjan. Related:
Rained; raining. Transferred and figurative use of other things that fall as rain (blessings, tears,
etc.) is recorded from c.1200.    To rain on (someone's) parade is attested from 1941. Phrase to
rain cats and dogs is attested from 1738 (variation rain dogs and polecats is from 1650s), of
unknown origin, despite intense speculation. One of the less likely suggestions is pets sliding off
sod roofs when the sod got too wet during a rainstorm. (Ever see a dog react to a rainstorm by
climbing up on an exposed roof?) Probably rather an extension of cats and dogs as proverbial for
strife, enmity (1570s).


Satan (n.)

proper name of the supreme evil spirit in Christianity, Old English Satan, from Late Latin Satan (in
Vulgate in Old Testament only), from Greek Satanas, from Hebrew satan adversary, one who plots
against another, from satan to show enmity to, oppose, plot against, from root s-t-n one who
opposes, obstructs, or acts as an adversary.    In Septuagint (Greek) usually translated as diabolos
slanderer, literally one who throws (something) across the path of another (see devil (n.)), though
epiboulos plotter is used once.    In biblical sources the Hebrew term the satan describes an
adversarial role. It is not the name of a particular character. Although Hebrew storytellers as
early as the sixth century B.C.E. occasionally introduced a supernatural character whom they called
the satan, what they meant was any one of the angels sent by God for the specific purpose of
blocking or obstructing human activity. [Elaine Pagels, The Origin of Satan, 1995]


sin (n.)

Old English synn moral wrongdoing, injury, mischief, enmity, feud, guilt, crime, offense against
God, misdeed, from Proto-Germanic *sun(d)jo- sin (cognates: Old Saxon sundia, Old Frisian sende,
Middle Dutch sonde, Dutch zonde, German S&uuml;nde sin, transgression, trespass, offense, extended
forms), probably ultimately it is true, i.e. the sin is real (compare Gothic sonjis, Old Norse sannr
true), from PIE *snt-ya-, a collective form from *es-ont- becoming, present participle of root *es-
to be (see is).    The semantic development is via notion of to be truly the one (who is guilty), as
in Old Norse phrase ver&eth; sannr at be found guilty of, and the use of the phrase it is being in
Hittite confessional formula. The same process probably yielded the Latin word sons (genitive
sontis) guilty, criminal from present participle of sum, esse to be, that which is. Some
etymologists believe the Germanic word was an early borrowing directly from the Latin genitive. Also
see sooth.   Sin-eater is attested from 1680s. To live in sin cohabit without marriage is from 1838;
used earlier in a more general sense. Ice hockey slang sin bin penalty box is attested from 1950.


