enterprise (n.)

early 15c., an undertaking, from Old French enterprise an undertaking, noun use of fem. past
participle of entreprendre undertake, take in hand, from entre- between (see entre-) + prendre to
take, contraction of prehendere (see prehensile). Abstract sense of readiness to undertake
challenges, spirit of daring is from late 15c.


enterprising (adj.)

eager to undertake, 1610s, from enterprise. Until mid-19c. (at least in Britain) mostly in a bad
sense: scheming, ambitious, foolhardy. Earlier (1560s) as a verbal noun meaning action of
undertaking.


undertaking (n.)

enterprise, early 15c., verbal noun from undertake (v.). An Old English word for this was
underfangenes.


grubstake (n.)

material, provisions, etc. supplied to an enterprise (originally a prospector) in return for a share
in the profits, by 1876, American English, from grub + stake (v.).


mastermind (n.)

1720, an outstanding intellect, from master (n.) + mind (n.). Meaning head of a criminal enterprise
is first attested 1872. As a verb from 1940. Related: Masterminded; masterminding.


DVD

1995, initialism (acronym) from Digital Video Disc, later changed to Digital Versatile Disc.
Earlier this year, electronics giant Toshiba positioned the first DVD players available in the U.S.
as a home entertainment unit (retail price $600). [Black Enterprise magazine, June 1997]


venture (n.)

c.1400, fortune, chance, shortening of aventure (n.), a variant of adventure (n.); also from Anglo-
French venture. Sense of risky undertaking first recorded 1560s; meaning enterprise of a business
nature is recorded from 1580s. Venture capital is attested from 1943.


entrepreneur (n.)

1828, manager or promoter of a theatrical production, reborrowing of French entrepreneur one who
undertakes or manages, agent noun from Old French entreprendre undertake (see enterprise). The word
first crossed the Channel late 15c. but did not stay. Meaning business manager is from 1852.
Related: Entrepreneurship.


emprise (n.)

c.1300, chivalrous endeavor, from Old French emprise (12c.) enterprise, venture, adventure,
undertaking, from Vulgar Latin *imprensa (source of Proven&ccedil;al empreza, Spanish empresa,
Italian impresa), from *imprendere to undertake, from in- + prehendere to take (see prehensile).
Archaic in English; in French now with a literal sense a hold, a grip.


inter-

Latin inter (prep., adv.) among, between, betwixt, in the midst of, from PIE *enter between, among
(cognates: Sanskrit antar, Old Persian antar among, between, Greek entera (plural) intestines, Old
Irish eter, Old Welsh ithr among, between, Gothic undar, Old English under under), a comparative of
*en in (see in). Also in certain Latin phrases in English, such as inter alia among other things. A
living prefix in English from 15c. Spelled entre- in French, most words borrowed into English in
that form were re-spelled 16c. to conform with Latin except entertain, enterprise.


campaign (n.)

1640s, operation of an army in the field, during a single season, in a particular region, or in a
definite enterprise; from French campagne campaign, literally open country, from Old French
champagne countryside, open country (suited to military maneuvers), from Late Latin campania level
country (source of Italian campagna, Spanish campa&ntilde;a, Portuguese campanha), from Latin campus
a field (see campus). Old armies spent winters in quarters and took to the open field to seek battle
in summer. Extension of meaning to political activity before an election, marked by organized action
in influencing the voters [DAE] is American English, 1809.


pirate (n.)

c.1300 (mid-13c. as a surname), from Latin pirata sailor, corsair, sea robber (source of Spanish,
Italian pirata, Dutch piraat, German Pirat), literally one who attacks (ships), from Greek peirates
brigand, pirate, literally one who attacks, from peiran to attack, make a hostile attempt on, try,
from peira trial, an attempt, attack, from PIE root *per- try (cognates: Latin peritus experienced,
periculum trial, experiment; attempt on or against; enterprise; see peril). An Old English word for
it was s&aelig;scea&#240;a. Meaning one who takes another's work without permission first recorded
1701; sense of unlicensed radio broadcaster is from 1913.


private (adj.)

late 14c., pertaining or belonging to oneself, not shared, individual; not open to the public; of a
religious rule, not shared by Christians generally, distinctive; from Latin privatus set apart,
belonging to oneself (not to the state), peculiar, personal, used in contrast to publicus, communis;
past participle of privare to separate, deprive, from privus one's own, individual, from PIE *prei-
wo-, from PIE *prai-, *prei-, from root *per- (1) forward, through (see per).    Old English in this
sense had syndrig. Private grew popular 17c. as an alternative to common (adj.), which had overtones
of condescention. Of persons, not holding public office, recorded from early 15c. In private privily
is from 1580s. Related: Privately. Private school is from 1650s. Private parts the pudenda is from
1785. Private enterprise first recorded 1797; private property by 1680s; private sector is from
1948. Private eye private detective is recorded from 1938, American English.


nigger (n.)

1786, earlier neger (1568, Scottish and northern England dialect), from French n&egrave;gre, from
Spanish negro (see Negro). From the earliest usage it was the term that carries with it all the
obloquy and contempt and rejection which whites have inflicted on blacks [cited in Gowers, 1965,
probably Harold R. Isaacs]. But as black inferiority was at one time a near universal assumption in
English-speaking lands, the word in some cases could be used without deliberate insult. More
sympathetic writers late 18c. and early 19c. seem to have used black (n.) and, after the American
Civil War, colored person.  You're a fool nigger, and the worst day's work Pa ever did was to buy
you, said Scarlett slowly. ... There, she thought, I've said nigger and Mother wouldn't like that at
all. [Margaret Mitchell, Gone With the Wind, 1936]  Also applied by English settlers to dark-skinned
native peoples in India, Australia, Polynesia. The reclamation of the word as a neutral or positive
term in black culture (not universally regarded as a worthwhile enterprise), often with a suggestion
of soul or style, is attested first in the U.S. South, later (1968) in the Northern, urban-based
Black Power movement.    Used in combinations (such as nigger-brown) since 1840s for various dark
brown or black hues or objects; euphemistic substitutions (such as Zulu) began to appear in these
senses c.1917. Brazil nuts were called nigger toes by 1896. Variant niggah, attested from 1925
(without the -h, from 1969), is found usually in situations where blacks use the word. Nigra (1944),
on the other hand, in certain uses reflects a pronunciation of negro meant to suggest nigger, and is
thus deemed (according to a 1960 slang dictionary) even more derog[atory] than 'nigger.'  Slang
phrase nigger in the woodpile attested by 1800; A mode of accounting for the disappearance of fuel;
an unsolved mystery [R.H. Thornton, American Glossary, 1912]. Nigger heaven the top gallery in a
(segregated) theater first attested 1878 in reference to Troy, N.Y.


free (adj.)

Old English freo free, exempt from, not in bondage, also noble; joyful, from Proto-Germanic *frijaz
(cognates: Old Frisian fri, Old Saxon and Old High German vri, German frei, Dutch vrij, Gothic freis
free), from PIE *prijos dear, beloved, from root *pri- to love (cognates: Sanskrit priyah own, dear,
beloved, priyate loves; Old Church Slavonic prijati to help, prijatelji friend; Welsh rhydd free).
The primary sense seems to have been beloved, friend, to love; which in some languages (notably
Germanic and Celtic) developed also a sense of free, perhaps from the terms beloved or friend being
applied to the free members of one's clan (as opposed to slaves; compare Latin liberi, meaning both
free and children).    Compare Gothic frijon to love; Old English freod affection, friendship, friga
love, fri&eth;u peace; Old Norse fri&eth;r, German Friede peace; Old English freo wife; Old Norse
Frigg wife of Odin, literally beloved or loving; Middle Low German vrien to take to wife, Dutch
vrijen, German freien to woo.  Of nations, not subject to foreign rule or to despotism, it is
recorded from late 14c. (Free world non-communist nations attested from 1950.) Sense of given
without cost is 1580s, from notion of free of cost. Free lunch, originally offered in bars to draw
in business, by 1850, American English. Free pass on railways, etc., attested by 1850. Free speech
in Britain used of a privilege in Parliament since the time of Henry VIII. In U.S., as a civil
right, it became a prominent phrase in the debates over the Gag Rule (1836).   Free enterprise
recorded from 1890; free trade is from 1823. Free will is from early 13c. Free association in
psychology is from 1899. Free love sexual liberation attested from 1822. Free range (adj.) is
attested by 1960. Free and easy unrestrained is from 1690s.


