enticement (n.)

c.1300, thing which entices; 1540s, action of enticing; from Old French enticement, from enticier
(see entice).


entice (v.)

late 13c., intice, from Old French enticier to stir up (fire), to excite, incite,  perhaps from
Vulgar Latin *intitiare set on fire, from Latin in- in (see in- (2)) + titio (genitive titionis)
firebrand, of uncertain origin. Meaning to allure, attract is from c.1300. Related: Enticed;
enticing.


intice (v.)

obsolete spelling of entice.


delicate (adj.)

late 14c., self-indulgent, loving ease; delightful; sensitive, easily hurt; feeble, from Latin
delicatus alluring, delightful, dainty, also addicted to pleasure, luxurious, effeminate; of
uncertain origin; related by folk etymology (and perhaps genuinely) to deliciae a pet, and delicere
to allure, entice (see delicious). Meaning easily broken is recorded from 1560s.


tempt (v.)

c.1200, of the devil, flesh, etc., draw or entice to evil or sin, lure (someone) from God's law; be
alluring or seductive, from Old French tempter (12c.), from Latin temptare to feel, try out, attempt
to influence, test, a variant of tentare handle, touch, try, test. The Latin alteration is
explainable only as an ancient error due to some confusion [Century Dictionary]. From late 14c. as
to provoke, defy (God, fate, etc.). Related: Tempted; tempting.


stool pigeon (n.)

police informer, 1859, American English; earlier one who betrays the unwary (or is used to betray
them), 1821, originally a decoy bird (1812); said to be from decoys being fastened to stools to lure
other pigeons. But perhaps related to stall decoy bird (c.1500), especially a pigeon used to entice
a hawk into the net (see stall (n.2)). Also see pigeon.


debauch (v.)

1590s, from Middle French d&eacute;baucher entice from work or duty, from Old French desbaucher to
lead astray, supposedly literally to trim (wood) to make a beam (from bauch beam, from Frankish balk
or some other Germanic source akin to English balk (n.)). A sense of shaving something away,
perhaps, but the root is also said to be a word meaning workshop, which gets toward the notion of to
lure someone off the job; either way the sense evolution is unclear.


delight (n.)

c.1200, delit, from Old French delit pleasure, delight, sexual desire, from delitier please greatly,
charm, from Latin delectare to allure, delight, charm, please, frequentative of delicere entice (see
delicious). Spelled delite until 16c. when it changed under influence of light, flight, etc.


elicit (v.)

1640s, from Latin elicitus, past participle of elicere draw forth, from ex- out (see ex-) + -licere,
comb. form of lacere to entice, lure, deceive (related to laqueus noose, snare; see lace (n.)).
Related: Elicited; eliciting; elicits; elicitation.


captivate (v.)

1520s, to enthrall with charm, from Late Latin captivatus, past participle of captivare to take,
capture, from captivus (see captive). Literal sense (1550s) is rare or obsolete in English, which
uses capture (q.v.). Latin captare to take, hold also had a transferred sense of to entice, entrap,
allure. Related: Captivated; captivating; captivatingly.


cajole (v.)

1640s, from French cajoler to cajole, wheedle, coax, perhaps a blend of Middle French cageoler to
chatter like a jay (16c., from gajole, southern diminutive of geai jay; see jay (n.)), and Old
French gaioler to cage, entice into a cage (see jail (n.)). Related: Cajoled; cajoling.


delicious (adj.)

c.1300 (implied in deliciously), from Old French delicios (Modern French d&eacute;licieux), from
Late Latin deliciosus delicious, delicate, from Latin delicia (plural deliciae) a delight,
allurement, charm, from delicere to allure, entice, from de- away (see de-) + lacere lure, deceive
(related to laqueus noose, snare; see lace). As a name of a type of apple, attested from 1903, first
grown by Jesse Hiatt of Iowa, U.S.A. Colloquial shortening delish is attested from 1920.


seduce (v.)

1520s, to persuade a vassal, etc., to desert his allegiance or service, from Latin seducere lead
away, lead astray, from se- aside, away (see secret (n.)) + ducere to lead (see duke (n.)). Sexual
sense, now the prevailing one, is attested from 1550s and apparently was not in Latin. Originally
entice (a woman) to a surrender of chastity. Related: Seduced; seducing.    Replaced Middle English
seduisen (late 15c.), from Middle French s&eacute;duire seduce, from Old French suduire to corrupt,
seduce, from Latin subducere draw away, withdraw, remove (see subduce).


garden (n.)

c.1300, from Old North French gardin (13c., Modern French jardin), from Vulgar Latin hortus gardinus
enclosed garden, via Frankish *gardo, from Proto-Germanic *gardaz- (cognates: Old Frisian garda, Old
Saxon gardo, Old High German garto, German Garten garden, Old English geard enclosure, see yard
(n.1)). Italian giardino, Spanish jardin are from French.   Garden-party is by 1843. Garden variety
in figurative sense first recorded 1928. To lead someone up the garden path entice, deceive is
attested by 1925.


troll (v.)

late 14c., to go about, stroll, later (early 15c.) roll from side to side, trundle, probably from
Old French troller, a hunting term, wander, to go in quest of game without purpose (Modern French
tr&#244;ler), from a Germanic source (compare Old High German trollen to walk with short steps),
from Proto-Germanic *truzlanan.    Sense of sing in a full, rolling voice (first attested 1570s) and
that of fish with a moving line (c.1600) both are extended technical uses from the general sense of
roll, trundle, the former from sing in the manner of a catch or round, the latter perhaps confused
with trail or trawl. Figurative sense of to lure on as with a moving bait, entice, allure is from
1560s. Meaning to cruise in search of sexual encounters is recorded from 1967, originally in
homosexual slang.


lace (n.)

early 13c., laz, cord made of braided or interwoven strands of silk, etc., from Old French laz a
net, noose, string, cord, snare (Modern French lacs), from Vulgar Latin *lacium, from Latin laqueum
(nominative laqueus) noose, snare (source also of Italian laccio, Spanish lazo), a trapping and
hunting term, probably from Italic base *laq- to ensnare (compare Latin lacere to entice). Later
also net, noose, snare (c.1300); and piece of cord used to draw together the edges of slits or
openings in an article of clothing (late 14c., as in shoelace). The ornamental net pattern meaning
is first recorded 1550s. As an adjective, lace-curtain middle class (or lower-class with middle-
class pretensions), usually is used in reference to Irish-Americans, is attested by 1928.


restaurant (n.)

1821, from French restaurant a restaurant, originally food that restores, noun use of present
participle of restaurer to restore or refresh, from Old French restorer (see restore).    In 1765 a
man by the name of Boulanger, also known as Champ d'Oiseaux or Chantoiseau, opened a shop near the
Louvre (on either the rue des Poulies or the rue Bailleul, depending on which authority one chooses
to believe). There he sold what he called restaurants or bouillons restaurants--that is, meat-based
consomm&#233;s intended to restore a person's strength. Ever since the Middle Ages the word
restaurant had been used to describe any of a variety of rich bouillons made with chicken, beef,
roots of one sort or another, onions, herbs, and, according to some recipes, spices, crystallized
sugar, toasted bread, barley, butter, and even exotic ingredients such as dried rose petals,
Damascus grapes, and amber. In order to entice customers into his shop, Boulanger had inscribed on
his window a line from the Gospels: Venite ad me omnes qui stomacho laboratis et ego vos restaurabo.
He was not content simply to serve bouillon, however. He also served leg of lamb in white sauce,
thereby infringing the monopoly of the caterers' guild. The guild filed suit, which to everyone's
astonishment ended in a judgment in favor of Boulanger. [Jean-Robert Pitte, The Rise of the
Restaurant, in Food: A Culinary History from Antiquity to the Present, English editor Albert
Sonnenfeld, transl. Clarissa Botsford, 1999, Columbia University Press]    Italian spelling
ristorante attested in English by 1925.


