entity (n.)

1590s, from Late Latin entitatem (nominative entitas), from ens (genitive entis) a thing, proposed
by Caesar as present participle of esse be (see is), to render Greek philosophical term to on that
which is (from neuter of present participle of einai to be; see essence). Originally abstract;
concrete sense in English is from 1620s.


non-entity (n.)

also nonentity, c.1600, something which does not exist, from non- + entity. Meaning a person or
thing of no importance is attested from 1710.


dominatrix (n.)

dominant female entity, attested since 1560s, though not in quite the usual modern sense (Rome ...
dominatrix of nations [1561]). See domination + -trix. Modern BDSM sense attested by 1976.


competition (n.)

c.1600, action of competing, from Latin competitionem (nominative competitio) agreement, rivalry,
noun of action from past participle stem of competere (see compete). Meaning a contest for something
is from 1610s. Sense of rivalry in the marketplace attested from 1793; that of entity or entities
with which one competes is from 1961, especially in business.


corporation (n.)

mid-15c., persons united in a body for some purpose, from such use in Anglo-Latin, from Late Latin
corporationem (nominative corporatio), noun of action from past participle stem of Latin corporare
to embody (see corporate). Meaning legally authorized entity (including municipal governments and
modern business companies) is from 1610s.


psyche (n.)

1640s, animating spirit, from Latin psyche, from Greek psykhe the soul, mind, spirit; breath; life,
one's life, the invisible animating principle or entity which occupies and directs the physical
body; understanding (personified as Psykhe, the beloved of Eros), akin to psykhein to blow, cool,
from PIE root *bhes- to blow, to breathe (source also of Sanskrit bhas-), Probably imitative
[Watkins].    Also in ancient Greek, departed soul, spirit, ghost, and often represented
symbolically as a butterfly or moth. The word had extensive sense development in Platonic philosophy
and Jewish-influenced theological writing of St. Paul (compare spirit (n.)). Meaning human soul is
from 1650s. In English, psychological sense mind, is attested by 1910.


state (n.2)

political organization of a country, supreme civil power, government, c.1300, from special use of
state (n.1); this sense grew out of the meaning condition of a country with regard to government,
prosperity, etc. (late 13c.), from Latin phrases such as status rei public&aelig; condition (or
existence) of the republic.    The sense of a semi-independent political entity under a federal
authority, one of the bodies politic which together make up a federal republic is from 1774. The
British North American colonies occasionally were called states as far back as 1630s; the States has
been short for the United States of America since 1777; also of the Netherlands. State rights in
U.S. political sense is attested from 1798; form states rights is first recorded 1858. Church and
state have been contrasted from 1580s. State-socialism attested from 1850.


soul (n.1)

A substantial entity believed to be that in each person which lives, feels, thinks and wills
[Century Dictionary], Old English sawol spiritual and emotional part of a person, animate existence;
life, living being, from Proto-Germanic *saiwalo (cognates: Old Saxon seola, Old Norse sala, Old
Frisian sele, Middle Dutch siele, Dutch ziel, Old High German seula, German Seele, Gothic saiwala),
of uncertain origin.    Sometimes said to mean originally coming from or belonging to the sea,
because that was supposed to be the stopping place of the soul before birth or after death
[Barnhart]; if so, it would be from Proto-Germanic *saiwaz (see sea). Klein explains this as from
the lake, as a dwelling-place of souls in ancient northern Europe.    Meaning spirit of a deceased
person is attested in Old English from 971. As a synonym for person, individual, human being (as in
every living soul) it dates from early 14c. Soul-searching (n.) is attested from 1871, from the
phrase used as a past participle adjective (1610s). Distinguishing soul from spirit is a matter best
left to theologians.


thing (n.)

Old English &thorn;ing meeting, assembly, council, discussion, later entity, being, matter (subject
of deliberation in an assembly), also act, deed, event, material object, body, being, creature, from
Proto-Germanic *thingam assembly (cognates: Old Frisian thing assembly, council, suit, matter,
thing, Middle Dutch dinc court-day, suit, plea, concern, affair, thing, Dutch ding thing, Old High
German ding public assembly for judgment and business, lawsuit, German ding affair, matter, thing,
Old Norse &thorn;ing public assembly). The Germanic word is perhaps literally appointed time, from a
PIE *tenk- (1), from root *ten- stretch, perhaps on notion of stretch of time for a meeting or
assembly.    The sense meeting, assembly did not survive Old English. For sense evolution, compare
French chose, Spanish cosa thing, from Latin causa judicial process, lawsuit, case; Latin res
affair, thing, also case at law, cause. Old sense is preserved in second element of hustings and in
Icelandic Althing, the nation's general assembly.    Of persons, often pityingly, from late 13c.
Used colloquially since c.1600 to indicate things the speaker can't name at the moment, often with
various meaningless suffixes (see thingamajig). Things personal possessions is from c.1300. The
thing what's stylish or fashionable is recorded from 1762. Phrase do your thing follow your
particular predilection, though associated with hippie-speak of 1960s is attested from 1841.


