entomology (n.)

1766, from French entomologie (1764), coined from Greek entomon insect + -logia study of (see
-logy). Entomon is neuter of entomos having a notch or cut (at the waist), from en in (see en- (2))
+ temnein to cut (see tome).    So called by Aristotle in reference to the segmented division of
insect bodies. Compare insect. Related: Entomological. Hybrid insectology (1766, from French
insectologie, 1744) is not much used.  I have given the name insectology to that part of natural
history which has insects for its object; that of entomology ... would undoubtedly have been more
suitable ... but its barbarous sound terryfy'd me. [Charles Bonnet's English translation of his
Contemplation de la nature, 1766]


entomologist (n.)

1771; see entomology + -ist.


insect (n.)

c.1600, from Latin (animal) insectum (animal) with a notched or divided body, literally cut into,
from neuter past participle of insectare to cut into, to cut up, from in- into (see in- (2)) +
secare to cut (see section (n.)). Pliny's loan-translation of Greek entomon insect (see entomology),
which was Aristotle's term for this class of life, in reference to their notched bodies.    First in
English in 1601 in Holland's translation of Pliny. Translations of Aristotle's term also form the
usual word for insect in Welsh (trychfil, from trychu cut + mil animal), Serbo-Croatian (zareznik,
from rezati cut), Russian (nasekomoe, from sekat cut), etc.


boll (n.)

Old English bolla bowl, cup, pot, merged with Middle Dutch bolle round object, borrowed 13c., both
from Proto-Germanic *bul-, from PIE *bhel- (2) to blow, inflate, swell (see bole). Influenced in
meaning by Latin bulla bubble, ball, ultimately from the same PIE root. Extended c.1500 to round
seed pod of flax or cotton. Boll weevil is 1895, American English.    In south Texas, among Spanish-
speaking people, the insect is generally known as the 'picudo,' a descriptive name which refers to
the snout or beak of the insect. English-speaking planters generally referred to the insect at first
as 'the sharpshooter,' a term which for many years has been applied to any insect which causes
through its punctures the shedding of the squares or the rotting of the bolls. As there are several
native insects that are commonly called sharpshooters and which, though injurious, are by no means
to be compared with this insect, it becomes necessary to discourage in every way the use of the word
sharpshooter as applied to this weevil. The adoption of the term 'Mexican cotton-boll weevil' for
the new pest is recommended. [New Mexico College of Agriculture and the Mechanic Arts Agricultural
Experiment Station Bulletin No. 19, April 1896]    A case of entomology meddling in etymology.


