entrance (n.)

1520s, act of entering, from Middle French entrance, from entrer (see enter). Sense of door, gate
first recorded in English 1530s.


entrance (v.)

to throw into a trance, 1590s, from en- (1) put in + trance (n.). Meaning to delight also is 1590s.
Related: Entranced; entrancing.


port (n.2)

gateway, Old English port portal, door, gate, entrance, from Old French porte gate, entrance, from
Latin porta city gate, gate; door, entrance, from PIE root *per- (see port (n.1)). Specific meaning
porthole, opening in the side of a ship is attested from c.1300.


pylon (n.)

1823, gateway to an Egyptian temple, from Greek pylon gateway, from pyle gate, wing of a pair of
double gates; an entrance, entrance into a country; mountain pass; narrow strait of water, of
unknown origin. Meaning tower for guiding aviators (1909) led to that of steel tower for high-
tension wires (1923).


porch (n.)

c.1300, covered entrance, from Old French porche porch, vestibule, from Latin porticus covered
gallery, covered walk between columns, arcade, portico, porch, from porta gate, entrance, door (see
port (n.2)). The Latin word was borrowed directly into Old English as portic.


lobby (n.)

1530s, cloister, covered walk, from Medieval Latin laubia, lobia covered walk in a monastery, from a
Germanic source (compare Old High German louba hall, roof; see lodge (n.)). Meaning large entrance
hall in a public building is from 1590s. Political sense of those who seek to influence legislation
is attested by 1790s in American English, in reference to the custom of influence-seekers gathering
in large entrance-halls outside legislative chambers.


adit (n.)

entrance, c.1600, from Latin aditus approach, entrance, a going to or drawing near, from past
participle stem of adire to approach, from ad- to (see ad-) + ire to go, from PIE root *ei- to go
(see ion).


facilis descensus Averni

Latin, literally the descent of Avernus (is) easy [Aeneid, VI.126], in reference to Avernus, a deep
lake near Puteoli, a reputed entrance to the underworld; hence, it is easy to slip into moral ruin.


vestibule (n.)

1620s, a porch, later antechamber, lobby (1730), from French vestible, from Latin vestibulum
forecourt, entrance, of unknown origin. In reference to the ear part from 1728.


ab initio

c.1600, Latin, literally from the beginning, from oblique case of initium entrance, beginning,
related to verb inire to go into, enter upon, begin (see initial).


bottleneck (n.)

also bttle-neck, narrow entrance, spot where traffic becomes congested, 1896; from bottle (n.) +
neck (n.). Meaning anything which obstructs a flow is from 1922; the verb in this sense is from
1928.


insinuation (n.)

1520s, from Latin insinuationem (nominative insinuatio) entrance through a narrow way; an
ingratiating oneself, noun of action from past participle stem of insinuare (see insinuate).


Jephthah

biblical judge of Israel, from Greek Iephthae, from Hebrew Yiphtah, literally God opens,
imperfective of pathah he opened (compare pethah opening, entrance).


entry (n.)

late 13c., door, gate, that by which a place is entered; c.1300, an entering upon; right of
entering, from Old French entree entry, entrance (12c.), originally fem. past participle of entrer
to enter (see enter).


colossus (n.)

gigantic statue, late 14c., from Latin colossus a statue larger than life, from Greek kolossos
gigantic statue, of unknown origin, used by Herodotus of giant Egyptian statues, and used by Romans
of the bronze Apollo at the entrance to the harbor of Rhodes. Figurative sense of any thing of
awesome greatness or vastness is from 1794.


janitor (n.)

1580s, an usher in a school, later doorkeeper (1620s), from Latin ianitor doorkeeper, porter, from
ianua door, entrance, gate, from ianus arched passageway, arcade (see Janus) + agent suffix -tor.
Meaning caretaker of a building first recorded 1708.


marquee (n.)

1680s, large tent, from French marquise (mistaken in English as a plural) linen canopy placed over
an officer's tent to distinguish it from others,'  fem. of marquis (see marquis), and perhaps
indicating a place suitable for a marquis. Sense of canopy over the entrance to a hotel or theater,
etc. first recorded 1912 in American English.


access (n.)

early 14c., an attack of fever, from Old French acces onslaught, attack; onset (of an illness)
(14c.), from Latin accessus a coming to, an approach, noun use of past participle of accedere
approach (see accede). The later senses are directly from Latin. Meaning an entrance is from c.1600.
Meaning habit or power of getting into the presence of (someone or something) is from late 14c.


income (n.)

c.1300, entrance, arrival, literally what enters, perhaps a noun use of the late Old English verb
incuman come in, from in (adv.) + cuman to come (see come). Meaning money made through business or
labor (i.e., that which 'comes in' as a product of work or business) first recorded c.1600. Income
tax is from 1799, first introduced in Britain as a war tax, re-introduced 1842; authorized on a
national level in U.S. in 1913.


Thermopylae

narrow land passage along the Malian Gulf in ancient Greece, from Greek thermos hot (see thermal) +
pylai, plural of pyle gate; mountain pass, entrance into a region (see pylon). In reference to
nearby hot sulfur springs. Often simply hai pylai the gates. Figurative of heroic resistance against
overwhelming numbers since the battle fought there between the Greeks and Persians in 480 B.C.E.


suffocation (n.)

late 14c., from Middle French suffocation, from Latin suffocationem (nominative suffocatio) a
choking, stifling, noun of action from past participle stem of suffocare suffocate, throttle,
stifle, strangle, originally to narrow up, from sub up (from under) (see sub-) + fauces (plural)
throat, narrow entrance (see faucet).


proscenium (n.)

c.1600, stage of an ancient theater, from Latin proscaenium, from Greek proskenion the space in
front of the scenery, also entrance of a tent, from pro in front (see pro-) + skene stage, tent,
booth (see scene). Modern sense of space between the curtain and the orchestra is attested from
1807.


initial (adj.)

1520s, of or pertaining to a beginning, from Middle French initial or directly from Latin initialis
initial, incipient, from initium a beginning, an entrance, from past participle stem of inire to go
into, enter upon, begin, from in- into, in (see in- (2)) + ire to go (see ion).


episode (n.)

1670s, commentary between two choric songs in a Greek tragedy, also an incidental narrative or
digression within a story, poem, etc., from French &eacute;pisode or directly from Greek epeisodion
addition, noun use of neuter of epeisodios coming in besides, from epi in addition (see epi-) +
eisodos a coming in, entrance (from eis into + hodos way). Sense of outstanding incident, experience
first recorded in English 1773. Transferred by 1930s to individual broadcasts of serial radio
programs.


frontispiece (n.)

1590s, decorated entrance of a building, from Middle French frontispice, probably from Italian
frontespizio and Late Latin frontispicium facade, originally a view of the forehead, judgment of
character through facial features, from Latin frons (genitive frontis) forehead (see front (n.)) +
specere to look at (see scope (n.1)). Sense of illustration facing a book's title page first
recorded 1680s. The spelling alteration is apparently from confusion with piece.


stoop (n.)

raised open platform at the entrance of a house, 1755, American and Canadian, from Dutch stoep
flight of steps, doorstep, threshold, from Middle Dutch, from Proto-Germanic *stap- step (see step
(v.)).    This, unlike most of the words received [in American English] from the Dutch, has
extended, in consequence of the uniform style of building that prevails throughout the country,
beyond the bounds of New York State, as far as the backwoods of Canada. [Bartlett]     Also in South
African English as stoep.


usher (n.)

late 13c., servant who has charge of doors and admits people to a chamber, hall, etc., from Anglo-
French usser (12c.), Old French ussier, uissier porter, doorman, from Vulgar Latin *ustiarius
doorkeeper, variant of Latin ostiarius door-keeper, from ostium door, entrance, from os mouth, from
PIE *os- mouth (see oral). Fem. form usherette is attested from 1913, American English.


warder (n.)

c.1400, guardian of an entrance, from Anglo-French wardere, wardour guardian, keeper, custodian (Old
French gardeor), agent noun from Old North French warder to guard, keep, maintain, uphold (Old
French garder), from Frankish *wardon, from Proto-Germanic *wardon to guard (see ward (v.)).


malmsey (n.)

c.1400, type of strong, sweet white wine, from Proven&ccedil;al malmesie or Middle Dutch malemesye,
both from Medieval Latin malmasia, from Medieval Greek Monembasia Monemvasia, a town in the southern
Peloponnesus that was an important center of wine production in the Middle Ages, literally only one
entrance, from monos alone, only (see mono-) + embasis entering into, from en- in + basis a going, a
stepping, a base (see basis).


ford (n.)

Old English ford shallow place where water can be crossed, from Proto-Germanic *furdhus (cognates:
Old Frisian forda, Old High German furt, German Furt ford), from PIE *prtu- a going, a passage
(cognates: Latin portus harbor, originally entrance, passage; Old Welsh rit, Welsh rhyd ford; Old
English faran to go; see port (n.1)). The line of automobiles is named for U.S. manufacturer Henry
Ford (1863-1947).


oral (adj.)

1620s, from Late Latin oralis, from Latin os (genitive oris) mouth, opening, face, entrance, from
PIE *os- mouth (cognates: Sanskrit asan mouth, asyam mouth, opening, Avestan ah-, Hittite aish,
Middle Irish a mouth, Old Norse oss mouth of a river, Old English or beginning, origin, front).
Psychological meaning of the mouth as the focus of infantile sexual energy (as in oral fixation) is
from 1910. The sexual sense is first recorded 1948, in Kinsey. As a noun, oral examination, attested
from 1876. Related: Orally (c.1600); orality.


commencement (n.)

late 13c., beginning, from Old French comencement beginning, start (Modern French commencement),
from comencier (see commence). Meaning school graduation ceremony attested by 1850, American
English. (Sense entrance upon the privileges of a master or doctor in a university is from late
14c.)    I know what you are thinking of -- the class members grouped in a semicircle on the stage,
the three scared boys in new ready-made black suits, the seventeen pretty girls in fluffy white
dresses (the gowns of the year), each senior holding a ribbon-tied manuscript bulging with thoughts
on Beyond the Alps Lies Italy, Our Ship is Launched -- Whither Shall it Sail? and similar topics.
[Charles Moreau Harger, The Real Commencement, New Outlook, May 8, 1909]


gate (n.)

opening, entrance, Old English geat (plural geatu) gate, door, opening, passage, hinged framework
barrier, from Proto-Germanic *gatan (cognates: Old Norse gat opening, passage, Old Saxon gat eye of
a needle, hole, Old Frisian gat hole, opening, Dutch gat gap, hole, breach, German Gasse street), of
unknown origin. Meaning money collected from selling tickets dates from 1896 (short for gate money,
1820). Gate-crasher is from 1927. Finnish katu, Lettish gatua street are Germanic loan-words.


port (n.1)

harbor, Old English port harbor, haven, reinforced by Old French port harbor, port; mountain pass;
Old English and Old French words both from Latin portus port, harbor, originally entrance, passage,
figuratively place of refuge, assylum, from PIE *prtu- a going, a passage, from root *per- (2) to
lead, pass over (cognates: Sanskrit parayati carries over; Greek poros journey, passage, way,
peirein to pierce, run through; Latin porta gate, door, portare passage, peritus experienced;
Avestan peretush passage, ford, bridge; Armenian hordan go forward; Welsh rhyd ford; Old Church
Slavonic pariti to fly; Old English faran to go, journey, Old Norse fj&ouml;r&eth;r inlet, estuary).
Meaning left side of a ship (looking forward from the stern) is attested from 1540s, from notion of
the side facing the harbor (when a ship is docked). It replaced larboard in common usage to avoid
confusion with starboard; officially so by Admiralty order of 1844 and U.S. Navy Department notice
of 1846. Figurative sense place of refuge is attested from early 15c.; phrase any port in a storm
first recorded 1749. A port of call (1810) is one paid a scheduled visit by a ship.


