entreaty (n.)

mid-15c., treatment, negotiation; see entreat + -y (1). Meaning earnest request is from 1570s.
Related: Entreaties.


entreat (v.)

mid-14c., to enter into negotiations; early 15c., to treat (someone) in a certain way, also to plead
for (someone), from Anglo-French entretier, Old French entraiter to treat, from en- make (see en-
(1)) + traiter to treat (see treat (v.)). Meaning to beseech, implore is first attested c.1500.
Related: Entreated; entreating.


pray (v.)

early 13c., ask earnestly, beg, also (c.1300) pray to a god or saint, from Old French preier to pray
(c.900, Modern French prier), from Vulgar Latin *precare (also source of Italian pregare), from
Latin precari ask earnestly, beg, entreat, from *prex (plural preces, genitive precis) prayer,
request, entreaty, from PIE root *prek- to ask, request, entreat (cognates: Sanskrit prasna-,
Avestan frashna- question; Old Church Slavonic prositi, Lithuanian prasyti to ask, beg; Old High
German frahen, German fragen, Old English fricgan to ask a question).    Parenthetical expression I
pray you, please, if you will, attested from 1510s, contracted to pray 16c. Related: Prayed;
praying. Praying mantis attested from 1809. The Gardener's Monthly of July 1861 lists other names
for it as camel cricket, soothsayer, and rear horse.


bid (v.)

probably a merger of two old words: The sense in bid farewell is from Old English biddan to ask,
entreat, pray, beseech; order; beg (class V strong verb, past tense b&aelig;d, past participle
beden), from Proto-Germanic *bidjan to pray, entreat (source also of German bitten to ask, attested
from 8c.), which, according to Kluge and Watkins is from a PIE root *gwhedh- to ask, pray (see bead
(n.)).    To bid at an auction, meanwhile, is from Old English beodan offer, proclaim (class II
strong verb; past tense bead, past participle boden), from Proto-Germanic *beudan to stretch out,
reach out, offer, present, (source also of German bieten to offer), from PIE root *bheudh- to be
aware, make aware (cognates: Sanskrit bodhati is awake, is watchful, observes, buddhah awakened,
enlightened; Old Church Slavonic bljudo to observe; Lithuanian budeti to be awake; Old Irish buide
contentment, thanks). As a noun, 1788, from the verb.


obsecration (n.)

late 14c., from Latin obsecrationem (nominative obsecratio) a beseeching, imploring, supplication,
entreaty, noun of action from past participle stem of obsecrare to beseech, entreat (on religious
grounds), from ob- (see ob-) + sacrare to make or declare sacred (see sacred).


suppliant (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French suppliant, noun use of present participle of supplier to plead
humbly, entreat, beg, pray, (Old French souploier, 12c.), from Latin supplicare beg, beseech (see
supplication). Originally in English especially at law; sense of humble petitioner is from mid-16c.
As an adjective, supplicating, entreating from 1580s. Related: Suppliance; suppliantly.


solicit (v.)

early 15c., to disturb, trouble, from Middle French soliciter (14c.), from Latin sollicitare to
disturb, rouse, trouble, harass; stimulate, provoke, from sollicitus agitated, from sollus whole,
entire + citus aroused, past participle of ciere shake, excite, set in motion (see cite). Related:
Solicited; soliciting.    Meaning entreat, petition is from 1520s. Meaning to further (business
affairs) evolved mid-15c. from Middle French sense of manage affairs. The sexual sense (often in
reference to prostitutes) is attested from 1710, probably from a merger of the business sense and an
earlier sense of to court or beg the favor of (a woman), attested from 1590s.


bead (n.)

mid-14c., bede prayer bead, from Old English gebed prayer, with intensive or collective prefix *ge-
+ Proto-Germanic *bidjan to pray, entreat (cognates: Middle Dutch bede, Old High German beta, German
bitte, Gothic bida prayer, request), from PIE *gwhedh- to ask, pray. Shift in meaning came via beads
threaded on a string to count prayers, and in phrases like to bid one's beads, to count one's beads.
German cognate Bitte is the usual word for conversational request please. Also related to bid (Old
English biddan) and Gothic bidjan to ask, pray. Sense transferred to drop of liquid 1590s; to small
knob forming front sight of a gun 1831 (Kentucky slang); hence draw a bead on take aim at, 1841,
U.S. colloquial.


