enumerate (v.)

1610s, from or modeled on Latin enumeratus, past participle of enumerare (see enumeration). Middle
English had annumerate (early 15c.). Related: Enumerated; enumerating.


teller (n.)

bank clerk who pays or receives money, late 15c., person who keeps accounts, agent noun from tell
(v.) in its secondary sense of count, enumerate, which is the primary sense of cognate words in many
Germanic languages. Earlier person who announces or narrates (c.1300).


recension (n.)

1630s, from Latin recensionem (nominative recensio) an enumeration, noun of action from past
participle stem of recensere to count, enumerate, survey, from re- (see re-) + censere to tax, rate,
assess, estimate (see censor (n.)).


recount (v.2)

also re-count, to enumerate again, 1764, from re- + count (v). Related: Recounted; recounting.


enumeration (n.)

1550s, from Middle French &eacute;num&eacute;ration, from Latin enumerationem (nominative
enumeratio) a counting up, noun of action from past participle stem of enumerare to reckon up, count
over, enumerate, from ex- from (see ex-) + numerare to count, number, from numerus number (see
number (n.)).


account (v.)

c.1300, to count, enumerate, from Old French aconter to count, render account (Modern French
conter), from a to (see ad-) + conter to count, tell (see count (v.)). Meaning to reckon for money
given or received, render a reckoning, is from late 14c.; sense of to explain (c.1710) is from
notion of answer for money held in trust. Transferred sense of value is from late 14c. Related:
Accounted; accounting.


lecture (n.)

late 14c., action of reading, that which is read, from Medieval Latin lectura a reading, lecture,
from Latin lectus, past participle of legere to read, originally to gather, collect, pick out,
choose (compare election), from PIE *leg- to pick together, gather, collect (cognates: Greek legein
to say, tell, speak, declare, originally, in Homer, to pick out, select, collect, enumerate; lexis
speech, diction; logos word, speech, thought, account; Latin lignum wood, firewood, literally that
which is gathered).    To read is to pick out words. Meaning action of reading (a lesson) aloud is
from 1520s. That of a discourse on a given subject before an audience for purposes of instruction is
from 1530s.


tick (v.)

early 13c., to touch or pat, perhaps from an Old English verb corresponding to tick (n.2), and
perhaps ultimately echoic. Compare Old High German zeckon to pluck, Dutch tikken to pat, Norwegian
tikke touch lightly. Meaning make a ticking sound is from 1721. Related: Ticked; ticking.    To tick
(someone) off is from 1915, originally to reprimand, scold. The verbal phrase tick off was in use in
several senses at the time: as what a telegraph instrument does when it types out a message (1873),
as what a clock does in marking the passage of time (1777), to enumerate on one's fingers (1899),
and in accountancy, etc., make a mark beside an item on a sheet with a pencil, etc., often
indicating a sale (by 1881, from tick (n.2) in sense small mark or dot). This last might be the
direct source of the phrase, perhaps via World War I military bureaucratic sense of being marked off
from a list as dismissed or ineligible. Meaning to annoy is recorded by 1971.


