epic (adj.)

1580s, perhaps via Middle French &eacute;pique or directly from Latin epicus, from Greek epikos,
from epos word, story, poem, from PIE *wekw- to speak (see voice). Extended sense of grand, heroic
first recorded in English 1731. From 1706 as a noun in reference to an epic poem, A long narrative
told on a grand scale of time and place, featuring a larger-than-life protagonist and heroic actions
[Miller Williams, Patterns of Poetry].


rhapsody (n.)

1540s, epic poem, from Middle French rhapsodie, from Latin rhapsodia, from Greek rhapsoidia verse
composition, recitation of epic poetry; a book, a lay, a canto, from rhapsodos reciter of epic
poems, literally one who stitches or strings songs together, from rhaptein to stitch, sew, weave
(see wrap (v.)) + oide song (see ode). Meaning exalted enthusiastic feeling or expression is from
1630s. Meaning sprightly musical composition is first recorded 1850s.


odyssey (n.)

c.1600, Odyssey, from Latin Odyssea, from Greek Odysseia, name of the Homeric epic poem of ancient
Greece, relating the ten-year wanderings of Odysseus, king of Ithaca, after the Trojan War.
Figurative sense of long, adventurous journey is first recorded 1889.


Nibelungenlied (n.)

German epic poem of 13c., literally song of the Nibelungs, a race of dwarves who lived in Norway and
owned a hoard of gold and a magic ring, literally children of the mist, related to Old High German
nebul mist, darkness, Old English nifol (see nebula).


American dream

coined 1931 by James Truslow Adams (1878-1949), U.S. writer and popular historian (unrelated to the
Massachusetts Adamses), in Epic of America.    [The American Dream is] that dream of a land in which
life should be better and richer and fuller for everyone, with opportunity for each according to
ability or achievement. It is a difficult dream for the European upper classes to interpret
adequately, and too many of us ourselves have grown weary and mistrustful of it. It is not a dream
of motor cars and high wages merely, but a dream of social order in which each man and each woman
shall be able to attain to the fullest stature of which they are innately capable, and be recognized
by others for what they are, regardless of the fortuitous circumstances of birth or position.
[Adams]    Others have used the term as they will.


chanson (n.)

c.1600, from French chanson, from Old French chan&#231;on song, epic poem (12c.), from Latin
cantionem (nominative cantio) song, from past participle stem of canere (see chant (v.)).


calliope (n.)

1858, steam-whistle keyboard organ, named for Calliope, ninth and chief muse, presiding over
eloquence and epic poetry, Latinized from Greek Kalliope, literally beautiful-voiced, from kalli-,
combining form of kallos beauty (see Callisto) + opos (genitive of *ops) voice, related to Latin vox
(see voice (n.)).


muse (n.)

late 14c., protectors of the arts, from Old French Muse and directly from Latin Musa, from Greek
Mousa, the Muse, also music, song, from PIE root *men- to think, remember (see mind (n.)). Meaning
inspiring goddess of a particular poet is from late 14c. The traditional names and specialties of
the nine Muses, daughters of Zeus and Mnemosyne, are: Calliope (epic poetry), Clio (history), Erato
(love poetry, lyric art), Euterpe (music, especially flute), Melpomene (tragedy), Polymnia (hymns),
Terpsichore (dance), Thalia (comedy), Urania (astronomy).


