epiphany (n.)

early 14c., festival of the manifestation of Christ to the gentiles (celebrated Jan. 6; usually with
a capital -E-), from Old French epiphanie, from Late Latin epiphania, neuter plural (taken as
feminine singular), from late Greek epiphaneia manifestation, striking appearance, festival held in
commemoration of the appearance of a god at some particular place (in New Testament, advent or
manifestation of Christ), from epiphanes manifest, conspicuous, from epiphainein to manifest,
display, show off; come suddenly into view, from epi on, to (see epi-) + phainein to show (see
phantasm). Of divine beings other than Christ, first recorded 1660s; general literary sense of any
manifestation or revelation appeared 1840, first in De Quincey.


tiffany (n.)

type of thin, transparent fabric, c. 1600; earlier a common name for the festival of the Epiphany
(early 14c.; in Anglo-French from late 13c.), from Old French Tifinie, Tiphanie Epiphany (c. 1200),
from Late Latin Theophania Theophany, another name for the Epiphany, from Greek theophania the
manifestation of a god (see theophany).    Also popular in Old French and Middle English as a name
given to girls born on Epiphany Day. The fabric sense is found only in English and is of obscure
origin and uncertain relation to the other meanings, unless holiday silk or as a fanciful or playful
allusion to manifestation:    The invention of that fine silke, Tiffanie, Sarcenet, and Cypres,
which instead of apparell to cover and hide, shew women naked through them. [Holland's Pliny, 1601]
The fashionable N.Y. jewelry firm Tiffany &amp; Co. (1895) is named for its founder, goldsmith
Charles L. Tiffany (1812-1902) and his son, Louis C. Tiffany (1848-1933), who was the art nouveau
decorator noted for his glassware. The surname is attested in English from 1206.


Good Friday (n.)

the Friday before Easter, c. 1300, from good (adj.) in Middle English sense of holy, sacred,
especially of holy days or seasons observed by the church; the word also was applied to Christmas
and Shrove Tuesday. Good Twelfthe Dai (c. 1500) was Epiphany (the twelfth day after Christmas).


theophany (n.)

an appearance of God to man, 1630s, from Late Latin theophania, from Greek theos god (see theo-) +
phainein to show (see phantasm). In Middle English Epiphany (late 12c.). Ancient Greek Theophaneia
was the name of a festival at Delphi during which the statues of Apollo and other gods were
displayed to the public.


apparition (n.)

c. 1500, unclosing (of Heaven), from Anglo-French aparicion, Old French apparition, aparoison
(15c.), used in reference to the Epiphany (revealing of Christ child to the Wise Men), from Late
Latin apparitionem (nominative apparitio) an appearance, also attendants, in classical Latin
service, servants, noun of action from past participle stem of apparere appear (see appear). Meaning
ghost first recorded c. 1600; the shade of sense differentiation between appearance and apparition
is that the latter tends to be unexpected or startling.


twelfth (adj.)

late 14c., with -th (1), altering Middle English twelfte, from Old English twelfta, from twelf ((see
twelve). The earlier form is cognate with Old Norse tolfti, Danish tolvte, Old Frisian twelefta,
Dutch twaalfde, Old High German zwelifto, German zw&ouml;lfte .    As a noun meaning a twelfth part,
from 1550s. Twelfth Night is Old English twelftan niht Twelfth Night, the eve of Epiphany, which
comes twelve days after Christmas, formerly an occasion of social rites and a time of merrymaking.


