epitaph (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French epitaphe (12c.) and directly from Medieval Latin epitaphium funeral
oration, eulogy, from Greek epitaphion a funeral oration, noun use of neuter of epitaphos of a
funeral, from epi at, over (see epi-) + taphos tomb, funeral rites, from PIE root *dhembh- to bury.
Among the Old English equivalents was byrgelsleo&eth;.


epigram (n.)

mid-15c., from Middle French &eacute;pigramme, from Latin epigramma an inscription, from Greek
epigramma an inscription, epitaph, epigram, from epigraphein to write on, inscribe (see epigraph).
Related: Epigrammatist.


mnemonic (adj.)

aiding the memory, 1753, back-formation from mnemonics, or from Greek mnemonikos of or pertaining to
memory, from mnemon (genitive mnemonos) remembering, mindful, from memne memory, a remembrance,
record, an epitaph; memory as a mental faculty, from base of mnasthai remember, from PIE root *men-
to think (see mind (n.)). The noun meaning mnemonic device is from 1858. Related: Mnemonical
(1660s).


Three Rs (n.)

1824; said to have been given as a toast by Sir William Curtis (1752-1829), a beloved lord mayor of
London in the 1820s, who seems to have been a figure of fun to whom many mangled phrases were
attributed. Among the toasts he is alleged to have given at public dinners were The Female Ladies of
London; The three C's--Cox, King, and Curtis; and The three R's--Reading, Writing, and Rithmetic.
It has been very much the fashion amongst a class of persons to attribute to Sir W. C. ... a
vulgarity and ignorance of speech which are by no means consistent with his character and conduct.
The worthy and hospitable baronet has a rapid mode of speech, but it is always correct ; and
although some eccentricities are mixed up in his composition, he is highly honourable, and has been
a very useful member of society, particularly to his London constituents. [The Mirror, Jan. 29,
1825]    After listing some examples, the article continues:    It is, however, very certain, that
at a city festival some years ago, having indulged very freely, he fell asleep, when some wag,
choosing to consider him dead, wrote his epitaph, which was found next morning pinned to the
baronet's dress coat:--  Here lies the great Curtis,  Of London, Lord May'r:  He's left this here
world,  And gone to that there.


