epitome (n.)

1520s, an abstract; brief statement of the chief points of some writing, from Middle French
&eacute;pitom&eacute; (16c.), from Latin epitome abridgment, from Greek epitome abridgment, from
epitemnein cut short, abridge, from epi into (see epi-) + temnein to cut (see tome). Sense of person
or thing that typifies something is first recorded c.1600.


summary (n.)

a summary statement or account, c.1500, from Latin summarium an epitome, abstract, summary, from
summa totality, gist (see sum (n.)).


epitomize (v.)

1590s, shorten, condense, from epitome + -ize. Meaning typify, embody is from 1620s. Related:
Epitomized; epitomizing; epitomizes.


Baskerville

typeface style, 1802 (the type was created in the 1750s), named for John Baskerville (1706-1775),
British type-founder and printer.    The initial version were cut by John Handy under Baskerville's
watchful eye. The result is the epitome of Neoclassicism and eighteenth-century rationalism in type
-- a face far more popular in Republican France and the American colonies than in eighteenth-century
England, where it was made. [Robert Bringhurst, The Elements of Typographic Style, 1992]


microcosm (n.)

c.1200, mycrocossmos (modern form from early 15c.), human nature, man viewed as the epitome of
creation, literally miniature world, from Middle French microcosme and in earliest use directly from
Medieval Latin microcosmus, from Greek mikros small (see mica) + kosmos world (see cosmos). General
sense of a community constituting a world unto itself is attested from 1560s. Related: Microcosmic.
A native expression in the same sense was petty world (c.1600).


map (n.)

1520s, shortening of Middle English mapemounde map of the world (late 14c.), and in part from Middle
French mappe, shortening of Old French mapemonde, both English and French words from Medieval Latin
mappa mundi map of the world; first element from Latin mappa napkin, cloth (on which maps were
drawn), tablecloth, signal-cloth, flag, said by Quintilian to be of Punic origin (compare Talmudic
Hebrew mappa, contraction of Mishnaic menaphah a fluttering banner, streaming cloth) + Latin mundi
of the world, from mundus universe, world (see mundane). Commonly used 17c. in a figurative sense of
epitome; detailed representation. To put (something) on the map bring it to wide attention is from
1913.


