epithet (n.)

1570s, descriptive name for a person or thing, from Middle French &eacute;pith&egrave;te or directly
from Latin epitheton, from Greek epitheton something added, adjective often used as noun, from
neuter of epithetos attributed, added, from epitithenai to add on, from epi in addition (see epi-) +
tithenai to put (see theme).


blazing (adj.)

late 14c., shining, also vehement, present participle adjective from blaze (v.1). As a mild or
euphemistic epithet, attested from 1888 (no doubt connected with the blazes in colloquial sense of
Hell).


Cynthia

fem. proper name, also the Moon, from Latin Cynthia dea the Cynthian goddess, epithet of
Artemis/Diana, said to have been born on Mt. Cynthus on Delos.


unconventional (adj.)

1832, from un- (1) not + conventional (adj.). A 19 cent. epithet for a certain type of affectation.
[Weekley] Related: Unconventionally.


Phoebe

fem. proper name, late 14c., originally a name of Artemis as the goddess of the moon, from Latin
Phoebe, from Greek phoibos bright, pure, of unknown origin. The fem. form of Phoebus, an epithet of
Apollo as sun-god.


margarite (n.)

a pearl, late Old English, from Late Latin margarita (see Margaret). Figuratively, that which is
precious or excellent, a priceless quality or attribute; also used as an epithet for Christ, Mary,
etc., late 13c. Also margerie (mid-14c.).


Phoebus

epithet of Apollo as sun-god, late 14c., from Latin Phoebus, from Greek Phoibos, literally bright,
shining, radiant, of unknown origin. Related: Phoeban.


Modena

Italian city, the name probably is from a pre-Latin language, but folk etymology connects it with
Mutina, epithet of the nymph Lara who was stricken dumb by Zeus in punishment for her loquacity,
from Latin mutus. Related: Modenese.


Bloody Mary

the cocktail, attested from 1953 (originally touted in part as a hangover cure), said to be named
for Mary Tudor, queen of England 1553-58, who earned her epithet for vigorous prosecution of
Protestants. The drink earned its, apparently, simply for being red from tomato juice. The
cocktail's popularity also concided with that of the musical South Pacific, which has a character
named Bloody Mary.


Astyanax

son of Hector and Andromache (Iliad), Greek, literally lord of the city, from asty city (see
asteism) + anax chief, lord, master. Also the epithet of certain gods.


claviger (n.)

one who carries a club, c.1600, from Latin claviger (an epithet of Hercules), from clava club,
knotty branch + stem of gerere to bear (see gest).


Corinna

fem. proper name, from Latin Corinna, from Greek Korinna, diminutive of kore maiden, also an epithet
of Persephone; see Kore.


Argo

name of the ship in which Jason and his companions sought the Fleece in Colchis, in Greek, literally
The Swift, from argos swift (adj.), an epithet, literally shining, bright (see argent; compare also
Sanskrit cognate rjrah shining, glowing, bright, also swift), because all swift motion causes a kind
of glancing or flickering light [Liddell &amp; Scott].


Argus

hundred-eyed giant of Greek mythology, late 14c., from Latin, from Greek Argos, literally the bright
one, from argos shining, bright (see argent). His epithet was Panoptes all-eyes. After his death,
Hera transferred his eyes to the peacock's tail. Used in figurative sense of very vigilant person.


carbine (n.)

short rifle, 1580s, from French carabine (Middle French carabin), used of light horsemen and also of
the weapon they carried, of uncertain origin, perhaps from Medieval Latin Calabrinus Calabrian
(i.e., rifle made in Calabria). A less-likely theory (Gamillscheg, etc.) connects it to Old French
escarrabin corpse-bearer during the plague, literally (probably) carrion beetle, said to have been
an epithet for archers from Flanders.


megalopolis (n.)

1832, from comb. form of Greek megas (genitive megalou) great (see mickle) + polis city (see polis).
The word was used in classical times as an epithet of great cities (Athens, Syracuse, Alexandria),
and it also was the name of a former city in Arcadia.


chopping (adj.)

large and thriving, 1560s, past participle adjective from chop (v.). Compare strapping, whopping in
similar sense.   <b>chopping</b>. An epithet frequently applied to infants, by way of ludicrous
commendation: imagined by Skinner to signify lusty, from cas Sax. by others to mean a child that
would bring money at a market. Perhaps a greedy, hungry child, likely to live. [Johnson]


Morpheus

name for the god of dreams in Ovid, son of Sleep, literally the maker of shapes, from Greek morphe
form, shape, figure, especially a fine figure, a beautiful form; beauty, fashion, outward
appearance, perhaps from PIE *merph-, a possible Greek root meaning form. Related: Morphean. Morpho
was an epithet of Aphrodite, literally shapely.


Pythia (n.)

priestess of Apollo at Delphi, 1842, from Greek pythia (hiereia) (Priestess) of Pythian Apollo, from
a variant form of Pythios, an epithet of Apollo, from Pytho, older name of the region of Delphi (see
python).


Sebastian

masc. proper name, from Latin Sebastianus, from Greek Sebastianos, man of Sebastia, a city in Pontus
that was named for Augustus Caesar, first Roman emperor, from Greek sebastos venerable, a
translation of Latin augustus, the epithet of Caesar.


lyceum (n.)

1580s, Latin form of Greek lykeion, name of a grove or garden with covered walks near Athens where
Aristotle taught, from neuter of Lykeios wolf-slayer, an epithet of Apollo, whose temple was nearby,
from lykos wolf. Hence lyc&eacute;e, name given in France to state-run secondary schools. In
England, early 19c., lyceum was the name taken by a number of literary societies; in U.S., after
c.1820, it was the name of institutes that sponsored popular lectures in science and literature.


blamed (adv.)

confoundedly 1833, later also as an adjective, from past participle of blame (v.), as a euphemistic
evasion of the horrible word damn. [Bartlett, Dictionary of Americanisms, 1848].    This adjective
'blamed' is the virtuous oath by which simple people, who are improving their habits, cure
themselves of a stronger epithet. [Edward Everett Hale, If, Yes, and Perhaps, 1868]    Compare also
blamenation (1837) as an expletive. The imprecation blame me is attested from 1830.


pythoness (n.)

late 14c., woman with the power of soothsaying, from Old French phitonise (13c.), from Late Latin
pythonissa, used in Vulgate of the Witch of Endor (I Sam. xxviii:7), and often treated as her proper
name, literally fem. of pytho familiar spirit; which ultimately is connected with the title of the
prophetess of the Delphic Oracle, Greek pythia hiereia, from Pythios, an epithet of Apollo, from
Pytho, older name of the region of Delphi (see python).


antonomasia (n.)

use of an epithet for a proper name (or vice versa; as in His Holiness for the name of a pope),
1580s, from Latin, from Greek antonomasia, from antonomazein to name instead, call by a new name,
from anti instead (see anti-) + onomazein to name, from onoma name (see name (n.)).


Uncle Tom (n.)

servile black man, 1922, somewhat inaccurately in reference to the humble, pious, but strong-willed
main character in Harriet Beecher Stowe's novel, Uncle Tom's Cabin (1852). The image implied in the
insult perhaps is more traceable to the late 19c. minstel show versions of the story, which reached
a far wider audience than the book.    I don't recall anyone in the 1920s using the term 'Uncle Tom'
as an epithet. But what's amazing is how fast it caught on (in the 1930s). Black scholars picked up
(the term) and just started throwing it at each other. [Ernest Allen, quoted in Hamilton, Kendra,
The Strange Career of Uncle Tom, Black Issues in Higher Education, June 2002]    As a verb, attested
from 1937.


Mithras

Persian god of light, 1550s, from Latin, from Greek Mithras, from Avestan Mithra-, from Indo-Iranian
*mitram contract, whence *mitras contractual partner, friend, conceptualized as a god, or, according
to Kent, first the epithet of a divinity and eventually his name; from PIE root *mei- to bind (see
mitre). Related to Sanskrit Mitrah, a Vedic deity associated with Varuna. His name is one of the
earliest Indic words we possess, being found in clay tablets from Anatolia dating to about 1500 B.C.
[Calvert Watkins, Dictionary of Indo-European Roots, 2000]. Related: Mithraic; Mithraism.


baroque (adj.)

1765, from French baroque (15c.) irregular, from Portuguese barroco imperfect pearl, of uncertain
origin, perhaps related to Spanish berruca a wart.This style in decorations got the epithet of
Barroque taste, derived from a word signifying pearls and teeth of unequal size. [Fuseli's
translation of Winkelmann, 1765]Klein suggests the name may be from Italian painter Federigo Barocci
(1528-1612), a founder of the style. How to tell baroque from rococo, according to Fowler: The
characteristics of baroque are grandeur, pomposity, and weight; those of rococo are inconsequence,
grace, and lightness. But the two terms often used without distinction for styles featuring odd and
excessive ornamentation.


uranian (adj.)

homosexual, 1893, from the reference to Aphrodite in Plato's Symposium; Urania Heavenly (Greek
Ourania; see Uranus) being an epithet of Aphrodite as born of Uranus and also as distinguished from
the vulgar Venus of commonplace lust.    But the son of the heavenly Aphrodite is sprung from a
mother in whose birth the female has no part, but she is from the male only; this is that love which
is of youths only, and the goddess being older has nothing of wantonness. Those who are inspired by
this love turn to the male, and delight in him who is the more valiant and intelligent nature; any
one may recognize the pure enthusiasts in the very character of their attachments. [B. Jowett,
transl., 1874]    Also as a noun, a homosexual person (1908). Related uranism homosexuality (1893).


surname (n.)

c.1300, name, title, or epithet added to a person's name, from sur above (from Latin super-; see
sur- (1)) + name (n.); modeled on Anglo-French surnoun surname (early 14c.), variant of Old French
sornom, from sur over + nom name. As family name from late 14c.    An Old English word for this was
freonama, literally free name. Meaning family name is first found late 14c. Hereditary surnames
existed among Norman nobility in England in early 12c., among the common people they began to be
used 13c., increasingly frequent until near universal by end of 14c. The process was later in the
north of England than the south. The verb is attested from 1510s. Related: Surnamed.


cherub (n.)

late 14c. as an order of angels, from Late Latin cherub, from Greek cheroub, from Hebrew kerubh
(plural kerubhim) winged angel, perhaps related to Akkadian karubu to bless, karibu one who blesses,
an epithet of the bull-colossus. Old English had cerubin, from the Greek plural.    The cherubim, a
common feature of ancient Near Eastern mythology, are not to be confused with the round-cheeked
darlings of Renaissance iconography. The root of the terms either means hybrid or, by an inversion
of consonants, mount, steed, and they are winged beasts, probably of awesome aspect, on which the
sky god of the old Canaanite myths and of the poetry of Psalms goes riding through the air. [Robert
Alter, The Five Books of Moses, 2004, commentary on Gen. iii:24]


nance (n.)

effeminate man, homosexual, 1904, from female name Nancy (q.v.), which was in use as an adjective
meaning effeminate (applied to men) from 1883, a shortening of earlier Miss Nancy.   <b>Nancy,
Miss,</b> an opprobrious epithet for an exceedingly effeminate, over-nice young man. The original
Miss Nancy, however, was a Mrs. Anna Old field, a celebrated actress, who died in 1730 and was
buried in Westminster Abbey. She was extremely vain and nice about her dress, and as she lay in
state, attended by two noblemen, she was attired, as she had directed shortly before her death, in a
very fine Brussels lace head-dress, a Holland shift with a tucker and double ruffles of the same
lace, a pair of new kid gloves, etc., a circumstance alluded to by Pope .... [William S. Walsh,
Handy-Book of Literary Curiosities, 1892]   Nancy boy effeminate male homosexual is attested by
1958.


cloud (n.)

Old English clud mass of rock, hill, related to clod. Metaphoric extension to raincloud, mass of
evaporated water in the sky is attested by c.1200 based on similarity of cumulus clouds and rock
masses. The usual Old English word for cloud was weolcan. In Middle English, skie also originally
meant cloud.    The four fundamental types of cloud classification (cirrus, cumulus, stratus,
nimbus) were proposed by British amateur meteorologist Luke Howard (1772-1864) in 1802.
Figuratively, as something that casts a shadow, from early 15c.; hence under a cloud (c.1500). In
the clouds removed from earthly things; obscure, fanciful, unreal is from 1640s. Cloud-compeller
translates (poetically) Greek nephelegereta, a Homeric epithet of Zeus.


tag (n.1)

small, hanging piece from a garment, c.1400, of uncertain origin but probably from a Scandinavian
source (compare Norwegian tagg point, prong, barb, Swedish tagg prickle, thorn) and related to
Middle Low German tagge branch, twig, spike), from Proto-Germanic *tag-. The sense development might
be point of metal at the end of a cord, string, etc., hence part hanging loose. Or perhaps
ultimately from PIE *dek-, a root forming words referring to fringe, horsetail, locks of hair (see
with tail (n.1)).    Meaning a label is first recorded 1835; sense of automobile license plate is
recorded from 1935, originally underworld slang. Meaning an epithet, popular designation is recorded
from 1961, hence slang verb meaning write graffiti in public places (1990).


griffin (n.)

c.1200 (as a surname), from Old French grifon a bird of prey, also fabulous bird of Greek mythology
(with head and wings of an eagle, body and hind quarters of a lion, believed to inhabit Scythia and
guard its gold), from Late Latin gryphus, misspelling of grypus, variant of gryps (genitive grypos),
from Greek gryps (genitive grypos) curved, hook-nosed, in reference to its beak.    Klein suggests a
Semitic source, through the medium of the Hittites, and cites Hebrew kerubh a winged angel, Akkad.
karibu, epithet of the bull-colossus (see cherub). The same or an identical word was used, with
uncertain connections, in mid-19c. Louisiana to mean mulatto (especially one one-quarter or two-
fifths white) and in India from late 18c. to mean newly arrived European.


fierce (adj.)

mid-13c., proud, noble, bold, from Old French fers, nominative form of fer, fier strong,
overwhelming, violent, fierce, wild; proud, mighty, great, impressive (Modern French fier proud,
haughty), from Latin ferus wild, untamed, from PIE root *ghwer- wild, wild animal (cognates: Greek
ther, Old Church Slavonic zveri, Lithuanian zveris wild beast).    Original English sense of brave,
proud died out 16c., but caused the word at first to be commonly used as an epithet, which accounts
for the rare instance of a French word entering English in the nominative case. Meaning ferocious,
wild, savage is from c.1300. Related: Fiercely; fierceness.


parish (n.)

c.1300, district with its own church; members of such a church, from Anglo-French paroche, parosse
(late 11c.), Old French paroisse, from Late Latin parochia a diocese, alteration of Late Greek
paroikia a diocese or parish, from paroikos a sojourner (in Christian writers), in classical Greek,
neighbor, from para- near (see para- (1)) + oikos house (see villa).    Sense development unclear,
perhaps from sojourner as epithet of early Christians as spiritual sojourners in the material world.
In early Church writing the word was used in a more general sense than Greek diokesis, though by
13c. they were synonymous. Replaced Old English preostscyr, literally priest-shire.


son (n.)

Old English sunu son, descendant, from Proto-Germanic *sunuz (cognates: Old Saxon and Old Frisian
sunu, Old Norse sonr, Danish s&oslash;n, Swedish son, Middle Dutch sone, Dutch zoon, Old High German
sunu, German Sohn, Gothic sunus son). The Germanic words are from PIE *su(e)-nu- son (cognates:
Sanskrit sunus, Greek huios, Avestan hunush, Armenian ustr, Lithuanian sunus, Old Church Slavonic
synu, Russian and Polish syn son), a derived noun from root *seue- (1) to give birth (cognates:
Sanskrit sauti gives birth, Old Irish suth birth, offspring).   Son of _____ as the title of a
sequel to a book or movie is recorded from 1917 (Son of Tarzan). Most explanations for son of a gun
(1708) are more than a century after its appearance. Henley (1903) describes it as meaning
originally a soldier's bastard; Smyth's Sailor's Word-Book (1867) describes it as An epithet
conveying contempt in a slight degree, and originally applied to boys born afloat, when women were
permitted to accompany their husbands to sea ....


son of a bitch

1707 as a direct phrase, but implied much earlier, and Old Norse had bikkju-sonr. Abbreviated form
SOB from 1918; form sumbitch attested in writing by 1969.    Abide &thorn;ou &thorn;ef malicious!
Biche-sone &thorn;ou drawest amis  &thorn;ou schalt abigge it ywis!  [Of Arthour &amp; of Merlin,
c.1330]    Probably the most common American vulgarity from about the middle of the eighteenth
century to the middle of the twentieth [Rawson].     Our maid-of-all-work in that department
[indecency] is son-of-a-bitch, which seems as pale and ineffectual to a Slav or a Latin as fudge
does to us. There is simply no lift in it, no shock, no sis-boom-ah. The dumbest policeman in
Palermo thinks of a dozen better ones between breakfast and the noon whistle. [H.L. Mencken, The
American Language, 4th ed., 1936, p.317-8]    Elsewhere, complaining of the tepidity of the American
vocabulary of profanity, Mencken writes that the toned-down form son-of-a-gun is so lacking in punch
that the Italians among us have borrowed it as a satirical name for an American: la sanemagogna is
what they call him, and by it they indicate their contempt for his backwardness in the art that is
one of their great glories.    It was in 1934 also that the New York Daily News, with commendable
frankness, in reporting a hearing in Washington at which Senator Huey P. Long featured, forsook the
old-time dashes and abbreviations and printed the complete epithet son of a bitch. [Stanley Walker,
City Editor, 1934]


god (n.)

Old English god supreme being, deity; the Christian God; image of a god; godlike person, from Proto-
Germanic *guthan (cognates: Old Saxon, Old Frisian, Dutch god, Old High German got, German Gott, Old
Norse gu&eth;, Gothic gu&thorn;), from PIE *ghut- that which is invoked (cognates: Old Church
Slavonic zovo to call, Sanskrit huta- invoked, an epithet of Indra), from root *gheu(e)- to call,
invoke.    But some trace it to PIE *ghu-to- poured, from root *gheu- to pour, pour a libation
(source of Greek khein to pour, also in the phrase khute gaia poured earth, referring to a burial
mound; see found (v.2)). Given the Greek facts, the Germanic form may have referred in the first
instance to the spirit immanent in a burial mound [Watkins]. See also Zeus.    Not related to good.
Originally a neuter noun in Germanic, the gender shifted to masculine after the coming of
Christianity. Old English god probably was closer in sense to Latin numen. A better word to
translate deus might have been Proto-Germanic *ansuz, but this was used only of the highest deities
in the Germanic religion, and not of foreign gods, and it was never used of the Christian God. It
survives in English mainly in the personal names beginning in Os-.  I want my lawyer, my tailor, my
servants, even my wife to believe in God, because it means that I shall be cheated and robbed and
cuckolded less often. ... If God did not exist, it would be necessary to invent him. [Voltaire]
God bless you after someone sneezes is credited to St. Gregory the Great, but the pagan Romans
(Absit omen) and Greeks had similar customs.


