equinox (n.)

late 14c., from Old French equinoce (12c.) or directly from Medieval Latin equinoxium equality of
night (and day), from Latin aequinoctium the equinoxes, from aequus equal (see equal (adj.)) + nox
(genitive noctis) night (see night). The Old English translation was efnniht. Related: Equinoctial.


taurine (adj.)

1610s, from Latin taurus (see Taurus) + -ine (1). In reference to a period in history, it means the
time when the sun was in Taurus at the vernal equinox (roughly 4500-1900 B.C.E.).


sidereal (adj.)

also siderial, 1630s, star-like; 1640s, of or pertaining to the stars, earlier sideral (1590s), from
French sidereal (16c.), from Latin sidereus starry, astral, of the constellations, from sidus
(genitive sideris) star, group of stars, constellation, probably from PIE root *sweid- to shine
(cognates: Lithuanian svidus shining, bright). Sidereal time is measured by the apparent diurnal
motion of the fixed stars. The sidereal day begins and ends with the passage of the vernal equinox
over the meridian and is about four minutes shorter than the solar day, measured by the passage of
the sun over the meridian.


harvest (n.)

Old English h&aelig;rfest autumn, period between August and November, from Proto-Germanic *harbitas
(cognates: Old Saxon hervist, Old Frisian and Dutch herfst, German Herbst autumn, Old Norse haust
harvest), from PIE *kerp- to gather, pluck, harvest (cognates: Sanskrit krpana- sword, krpani
shears; Greek karpos fruit, karpizomai make harvest of; Latin carpere to cut, divide, pluck;
Lithuanian kerpu cut; Middle Irish cerbaim cut).    The borrowing of autumn and the use of fall in a
seasonal sense gradually focused the meaning of harvest to the time of gathering crops (mid-13c.),
then to the action itself and the product of the action (after c.1300). Figurative use by 1530s.
Harvest home (1590s) is the occasion of bringing home the last of the harvest; harvest moon (1706)
is that which is full within a fortnight of the autumnal equinox.


Easter

Old English Easterd&aelig;g, from Eastre (Northumbrian Eostre), from Proto-Germanic *Austron, a
goddess of fertility and spring, probably originally of sunrise whose feast was celebrated at the
spring equinox, from *austra-, from PIE *aus- to shine (especially of the dawn).    Bede says Anglo-
Saxon Christians adopted her name and many of the celebratory practices for their Mass of Christ's
resurrection. Ultimately related to east. Almost all neighboring languages use a variant of Latin
Pascha to name this holiday (see paschal). Easter egg attested by 1825, earlier pace egg (1610s).
Easter bunny attested by 1904 in children's lessons; Easter rabbit is by 1888; the paganish customs
of Easter seem to have grown popular c. 1900; before that they were limited to German immigrants.
If the children have no garden, they make nests in the wood-shed, barn, or house. They gather
colored flowers for the rabbit to eat, that it may lay colored eggs. If there be a garden, the eggs
are hidden singly in the green grass, box-wood, or elsewhere. On Easter Sunday morning they whistle
for the rabbit, and the children imagine that they see him jump the fence. After church, on Easter
Sunday morning, they hunt the eggs, and in the afternoon the boys go out in the meadows and crack
eggs or play with them like marbles. Or sometimes children are invited to a neighbor's to hunt eggs.
[Phebe Earle Gibbons, Pennsylvania Dutch, Philadelphia 1882]


