equitable (adj.)

1640s, from French &eacute;quitable (16c.), from &eacute;quit&eacute; (see equity). Related:
Equitably.


just (adj.)

late 14c., righteous in the eyes of God; upright, equitable, impartial; justifiable, reasonable,
from Old French juste just, righteous; sincere (12c.), from Latin iustus upright, equitable, from
ius right, especially legal right, law, from Old Latin ious, perhaps literally sacred formula, a
word peculiar to Latin (not general Italic) that originated in the religious cults, from PIE root
*yewes- law (cognates: Avestan yaozda- make ritually pure; see jurist). The more mundane Latin law-
word lex covered specific laws as opposed to the body of laws. The noun meaning righteous person or
persons is from late 14c.


justly (adv.)

early 14c., in an adjacent position, closely, from just (adj.) + -ly (2). Meanings truthfully,
honestly, in an equitable manner, with justice, fairly are from late 14c. Sense of justifiably, with
good reason is from c.1400; that of legally, legitimately, rightfully is early 15c.


inequitable (adj.)

1660s, from in- (1) not, opposite of + equitable. Related: Inequitably.


unfair (adj.)

Old English unf&aelig;gr unlovely, not beautiful, deformed, hideous, unlovable, from un- (1) not +
fair (adj.). Similar formation in Old Norse ufagr, Gothic unfagrs. Meaning wicked, evil, bad is
recorded from c.1300. Sense of not equitable, unjust is first recorded 1713. Related: Unfairly.


adjust (v.)

late 14c., ajusten, to correct, remedy; reborrowed by c.1600 in sense arrange, settle, compose, from
Middle French adjuster, Old French ajouter to join (12c.), from Late Latin adiuxtare to bring near,
from Latin ad- to (see ad-) + iuxta next, related to iungere to join (see jugular).    Influenced by
folk etymology derivation from Latin iustus just, equitable, fair. Meaning to arrange (something) so
as to conform with (a standard or another thing) is from 1660s. Insurance sense is from 1755.
Meaning to get used to first recorded 1924. Related: Adjusted; adjusting.


lesbian (adj.)

1590s, pertaining to the island of Lesbos, from Latin Lesbius, from Greek lesbios of Lesbos, Greek
island in northeastern Aegean Sea (the name originally may have meant wooded), home of Sappho, great
lyric poet whose erotic and romantic verse embraced women as well as men, hence meaning relating to
homosexual relations between women (1890; lesbianism in this sense is attested from 1870) and the
noun, first recorded 1925. Her particular association in English with erotic love between women
dates to at least 1825, though the words formed from it are later. Before this, the principal
figurative use (common in 17c.) was lesbian rule (c.1600) a mason's rule of lead, of a type used on
Lesbos, which could be bent to fit the curves of a molding; hence, pliant morality or judgment.And
this is the nature of the equitable, a correction of law where it is defective owing to its
universality. ... For when the thing is indefinite the rule also is indefinite, like the leaden rule
used in making the Lesbian moulding; the rule adapts itself to the shape of the stone and is not
rigid, and so too the decree is adapted to the facts. [Aristotle, Nicomachean Ethics]  See also
tribadism. Greek had a verb lesbiazein to imitate the Lesbians, which implied sexual initiative and
shamelessness among women, but not necessarily female homosexuality.


