equity (n.)

early 14c., from Old French equite (13c.), from Latin aequitatem (nominative aequitas) equality,
conformity, symmetry, fairness, from aequus even, just, equal (see equal (adj.)). As the name of a
system of law, 1590s, from Roman naturalis aequitas, the general principles of justice which
corrected or supplemented the legal codes.


justice (n.)

mid-12c., the exercise of authority in vindication of right by assigning reward or punishment; also
quality of being fair and just, from Old French justice justice, legal rights, jurisdiction (11c.),
from Latin iustitia righteousness, equity, from iustus upright, just (see just (adj.)). The Old
French word had widespread senses, including uprightness, equity, vindication of right, court of
justice, judge. The word began to be used in English c.1200 as a title for a judicial officer.
Meaning right order, equity is late 14c. Justice of the peace first attested early 14c. In the
Mercian hymns, Latin iustitia is glossed by Old English rehtwisnisse. To do justice to (someone or
something) render fully and fairly showing due appreciation is from 1670s.


inequity (n.)

1550s, from in- (1) not, opposite of + equity. Formed from the same elements as iniquity, but
natively. Related: Inequities.


equitable (adj.)

1640s, from French &eacute;quitable (16c.), from &eacute;quit&eacute; (see equity). Related:
Equitably.


sweat (n.)

Old English swat perspiration, moisture exuded from the skin, also labor, that which causes sweat,
from Proto-Germanic *swaitaz sweat (cognates: Old Saxon, Old Frisian swet, Old Norse sveiti, Danish
sved sweat, Swedish svett, Middle Dutch sweet, Dutch zweet, Old High German sweiz, German
Schwei&szlig;), from PIE *sweid- (2) to sweat (cognates: Sanskrit svedah sweat, Avestan xvaeda-
sweat, Greek hidros sweat, perspiration, Latin sudor, Lettish swiedri, Welsh chwys sweat).    A
widespread set of Slavic words (Polish, Russian pot sweat) is from Old Church Slavonic potu, related
to peku heat, cognate with Latin coquere.    The Old English noun became Middle English swote, but
later altered to the current form under the influence of the verb. Sweat of (one's) brow as a symbol
of toil is from Gen. iii:19. Sweat equity is from 1968. Colloquial no sweat no problem attested from
1963.


