equine (adj.)

1765, from Latin equinus, from equus horse, from PIE root *ekwo- horse (cognates: Greek hippos, Old
Irish ech, Old English eoh, Gothic aihwa-, Sanskrit a&ccedil;va-, Avestan aspa-, Old Church Slavonic
ehu-, all meaning horse).


Eohippus (n.)

oldest known genus of the horse family, 1879, from Modern Latin, from Greek eos (see eo-) + hippos
horse (see equine).


Xanthippe

also (incorrectly) Xantippe, late 16c., spouse of Socrates (5c. B.C.E.), the prototype of the
quarrelsome, nagging wife. The name is related to the masc. proper name Xanthippos, a compound of
xanthos yellow (see xantho-) + hippos horse (see equine).


Hippolytus

masc. proper name, son of Theseus in Greek mythology, from Greek Hippolytos, literally letting
horses loose, from hippos horse (see equine) + stem of lyein (see lose).


equestrian (adj.)

1650s, formed in English from Latin equester (genitive equestris) of a horseman, from eques
horseman, knight, from equus horse (see equine). As a noun, one who rides on horseback, from 1791.
The pseudo-French fem. equestrienne is attested from 1848.


hippo-

before vowels, hipp-, word-forming element meaning horse, from Greek hippo-, from hippos horse, from
PIE *ekwo- (see equine).


Philip

masc. proper name, from Latin Philippus, from Greek Philippos fond of horses, from philos beloved,
loving (see philo-) + hippos horse (see equine). In 16c., Philip and Cheyney was a way to say any
two common men.


hippodrome (n.)

1580s, from French hippodrome, from Latin hippodromos race course, from Greek hippodromos chariot
road, race course for chariots, from hippos horse (see equine) + dromos course (see dromedary). In
modern use for circus performance place, and thus extended to large theater for stage shows.


zebra (n.)

c.1600, from Italian zebra, perhaps via Portuguese, earlier applied to a now-extinct wild ass, of
uncertain origin, said to be Congolese [OED], or Amharic [Klein], but perhaps ultimately from Latin
equiferus wild horse, from equus horse (see equine) + ferus (see fierce). Related: Zebrine; zebroid.


hippogriff (n.)

also hippogryph, 1650s, from French hippogriffe (16c.), from Italian ippogrifo, from Greek hippos
horse (see equine) + Italian grifo, from Late Latin gryphus griffin (see griffin). A creature part
griffin, but with body and hind parts in the form of a horse.


hippopotamus (n.)

1560s, from Late Latin hippopotamus, from Greek hippopotamus riverhorse (earlier ho hippos ho
potamios the horse of the river), from hippos horse (see equine) + potamos river, rushing water (see
potamo-). Replaced Middle English ypotame (c.1300), which is from the same source but via Old
French. Glossed in Old English as s&aelig;hengest.Ypotamos comen flyngynge. ... Grete bestes and
griselich [Kyng Alisaunder, c.1300]


cavalier (n.)

1580s, from Italian cavalliere mounted soldier, knight; gentleman serving as a lady's escort, from
Late Latin caballarius horseman, from Vulgar Latin caballus, the common Vulgar Latin word for horse
(and source of Italian cavallo, French cheval, Spanish caballo, Irish capall, Welsh ceffyl),
displacing Latin equus (see equine).    Sense advanced in 17c. to knight, then courtly gentleman
(but also, pejoratively, swaggerer), which led to the adjectival senses, especially disdainful
(1650s). Meaning Royalist adherent of Charles I is from 1641. Meaning one who devotes himself solely
to attendance on a lady is from 1817, roughly translating Italian cavaliere-servente. In classical
Latin caballus was work horse, pack horse, sometimes, disdainfully, hack, nag. Not a native Lat.
word (as the second -a- would show), though the source of the borrowing is uncertain [Tucker].
Perhaps from some Balkan or Anatolian language, and meaning, originally, gelding. The same source is
thought to have yielded Old Church Slavonic kobyla.


horse (n.)

Old English hors, from Proto-Germanic *hursa- (cognates: Old Norse hross, Old Frisian hors, Middle
Dutch ors, Dutch ros, Old High German hros, German Ro&szlig; horse), of unknown origin, connected by
some with PIE root *kurs-, source of Latin currere to run (see current (adj.)).    The usual Indo-
European word is represented by Old English eoh, from PIE *ekwo- horse (see equine). In many other
languages, as in English, this root has been lost in favor of synonyms, probably via superstitious
taboo on uttering the name of an animal so important in Indo-European religion.    Used since at
least late 14c. of various devices or appliances which suggest a horse (as in sawhorse). To ride a
horse that was foaled of an acorn (1670s) was through early 19c. a way to say be hanged from the
gallows. Slang for heroin is first attested 1950. Horse latitudes first attested 1777, the name of
unknown origin, despite much speculation. Dead horse as a figure for something that has ceased to be
useful is attested from 1630s.    HORSEGODMOTHER, a large masculine wench; one whom it is difficult
to rank among the purest and gentlest portion of the community. [John Trotter Brockett, A Glossary
of North Country Words, 1829]   The horse's mouth as a source of reliable information is from 1921,
perhaps originally of racetrack tips, from the fact that a horse's age can be determined accurately
by looking at its teeth. To swap horses while crossing the river (a bad idea) is from the American
Civil War and appears to have been originally one of Abe Lincoln's stories. Horse and buggy meaning
old-fashioned is recorded from 1926 slang, originally in reference to a young lady out of date, with
long hair. The proverbial gift horse was earlier given horse:    No man ought to looke a geuen hors
in the mouth. [Heywood, 1546]    The modern form perhaps traces to Butler's Hudibras (1663), where
the tight iambic tetrameter required a shorter phrase:    He ne'er consider'd it, as loth  To look a
Gift-horse in the mouth.


