erotica (n.)

1820, noun use of neuter plural of Greek erotikos amatory (see erotic); originally a booksellers'
catalogue heading.    Force Flame  And with a Blonde push  Over your impotence  Flits Steam  [Emily
Dickinson, #854, c.1864]


eroticism (n.)

1881, from erotic + -ism.


eroticize (v.)

1914, from erotic + -ize. Related: Eroticized; eroticizing.


erotic (adj.)

1620s (implied in erotical), from French &eacute;rotique (16c.), from Greek erotikos caused by
passionate love, referring to love, from eros (genitive erotos) sexual love (see Eros).


auto-erotic (adj.)

1898, coined by Havelock Ellis from auto- + erotic. Related: Auto-eroticism.


homoerotic (adj.)

also homo-erotic, 1916, from homo- (2) homosexual + erotic.


tantric (adj.)

1905, from tantra + -ic; used loosely in the West to denote erotic spiritualism.


lesbian (adj.)

1590s, pertaining to the island of Lesbos, from Latin Lesbius, from Greek lesbios of Lesbos, Greek
island in northeastern Aegean Sea (the name originally may have meant wooded), home of Sappho, great
lyric poet whose erotic and romantic verse embraced women as well as men, hence meaning relating to
homosexual relations between women (1890; lesbianism in this sense is attested from 1870) and the
noun, first recorded 1925. Her particular association in English with erotic love between women
dates to at least 1825, though the words formed from it are later. Before this, the principal
figurative use (common in 17c.) was lesbian rule (c.1600) a mason's rule of lead, of a type used on
Lesbos, which could be bent to fit the curves of a molding; hence, pliant morality or judgment.And
this is the nature of the equitable, a correction of law where it is defective owing to its
universality. ... For when the thing is indefinite the rule also is indefinite, like the leaden rule
used in making the Lesbian moulding; the rule adapts itself to the shape of the stone and is not
rigid, and so too the decree is adapted to the facts. [Aristotle, Nicomachean Ethics]  See also
tribadism. Greek had a verb lesbiazein to imitate the Lesbians, which implied sexual initiative and
shamelessness among women, but not necessarily female homosexuality.


erotomaniac (n.)

one driven mad by passionate love (sometimes also used in the sense of nymphomaniac), 1858, from
erotomania (1813, defined then as Desperate love; sentimentalism producing morbid feelings), from
comb. form of erotic + mania.


kiss (v.)

Old English cyssan to kiss, from Proto-Germanic *kussjan (cognates: Old Saxon kussian, Old Norse
kyssa, Old Frisian kessa, Middle Dutch cussen, Dutch, Old High German kussen, German k&uuml;ssen,
Norwegian and Danish kysse, Swedish kyssa), from *kuss-, probably ultimately imitative of the sound.
Related: Kissed; kissing. For vowel evolution, see bury. There appears to be no common Indo-European
root word for kiss, though suggestions of a common ku- sound may be found in the Germanic root and
Greek kynein to kiss, Hittite kuwash-anzi they kiss, Sanskrit cumbati he kisses.Kissing, as an
expression of affection or love, is unknown among many races, and in the history of mankind seems to
be a late substitute for the more primitive rubbing of noses, sniffing, and licking. [Buck,
p.1113]Some languages make a distinction between the kiss of affection and that of erotic love
(compare Latin saviari erotic kiss, vs. osculum, literally little mouth). French embrasser kiss, but
literally embrace, came about in 17c. when the older word baiser (from Latin basiare) acquired an
obscene connotation. Insulting invitation kiss my ass is at least from 1705, but probably much older
(see The Miller's Tale).


steamy (adj.)

1640s, vaporous, misty, abounding in steam, from steam + -y (2); in the sense of erotic, sexy, it is
first recorded 1952. Related: Steamily; steaminess.


Cyprian (adj.)

1620s, of Cyprus, from Latin Cyprianus, from Cyprius, from Greek Kyprios (see Cyprus). The island
was famous in ancient times as the birthplace of Aphrodite and for erotic worship rituals offered to
her there; hence Cyprian meant licentious, lewd, the earliest attested sense in English (1590s) and
was applied 18c.-19c. to prostitutes.


chaotic (adj.)

1713, in a state of primordial chaos, irregularly formed in English from chaos + -ic, probably on
model of eros/erotic, demos/demotic, hypnos/hypnotic, etc. Transferred or figurative meaning
confused, disordered is from 1747.


curious (adj.)

mid-14c., eager to know (often in a bad sense), from Old French curios solicitous, anxious,
inquisitive; odd, strange (Modern French curieux) and directly from Latin curiosus careful,
diligent; inquiring eagerly, meddlesome, akin to cura care (see cure (n.)). The objective sense of
exciting curiosity is 1715 in English. In booksellers' catalogues, the word means erotic,
pornographic. Curiouser and curiouser is from Alice in Wonderland (1865).


hoochy koochy (n.)

also hoochie-coochie, hootchy kootchy, erotic suggestive women's dance (involving a lot of hip-
grinding), 1898, of obscure origin, usually associated, without evidence, with the Chicago world's
fair of 1893 and belly-dancer Little Egypt (who might not even have been there), but the word itself
is attested from 1890, as the stage name of minstrel singer Hoochy-Coochy Rice, though its meaning
there is unclear, perhaps a nonsense word.    To-day, however, in place of the danse du ventre or
the coochie-coochie we have the loop-the-loop or the razzle-dazzle, which latter, while not exactly
edifying at least do not serve to deprave public taste. [The Redemption of 'Old Coney,' in Broadway
Magazine, April 1904]


cupidity (n.)

mid-15c., from Anglo-French cupidite, Middle French cupidit&eacute;, from Latin cupiditatem
(nominative cupiditas) passionate desire, lust; ambition, from cupidus eager, passionate, from
cupere to desire (perhaps cognate with Sanskrit kupyati bubbles up, becomes agitated, Old Church
Slavonic kypeti to boil, Lithuanian kupeti to boil over). Despite the primarily erotic sense of the
Latin word, in English cupidity originally, and still especially, means desire for wealth.


mackerel (n.)

edible fish, c.1300, from Old French maquerel mackerel (Modern French maquereau), of unknown origin
but apparently identical with Old French maquerel pimp, procurer, broker, agent, intermediary, a
word from a Germanic source (compare Middle Dutch makelaer broker, from Old Frisian mek marriage,
from maken to make). The connection is obscure, but medieval people had imaginative notions about
the erotic habits of beasts. The fish approach the shore in shoals in summertime to spawn.
Exclamation holy mackerel is attested from 1876.


Anacreontic (adj.)

of or in the manner of Anacreon, convivial bard of Greece (literally Up-lord), the celebrated Greek
lyrical poet (560-478 B.C.E.), born at Teos in Ionia. Also in reference to his lyric form (1706) of
a four-line stanza, rhymed alternately, each line with four beats (three trochees and a long
syllable), also convivial and amatory (1801); and an erotic poem celebrating love and wine (1650s).
Francis Scott Key in 1814 set or wrote his poem The Star-Spangled Banner to the melody of To
Anacreon in Heav'n, the drinking song of the popular London gentleman's club called The Anacreontic
Society, whose membership was dedicated to wit, harmony, and the god of wine. The tune is late 18c.
and may be the work of society member and court musician John Stafford Smith (1750-1836).


pot (n.1)

vessel, from late Old English pott and Old French pot pot, container, mortar (also in erotic
senses), both from a general Low Germanic (Old Frisian pott, Middle Dutch pot) and Romanic word from
Vulgar Latin *pottus, of uncertain origin, said by Barnhart and OED to be unconnected to Late Latin
potus drinking cup. Celtic forms are said to be borrowed from English and French.    Slang meaning
large sum of money staked on a bet is attested from 1823. Pot roast is from 1881; phrase go to pot
(16c.) suggests cooking. In phrases, the pot calls the kettle black-arse is from c.1700; shit or get
off the pot is traced by Partridge to Canadian armed forces in World War II.


gender (n.)

c.1300, kind, sort, class, from Old French gendre (12c., Modern French genre), from stem of Latin
genus (genitive generis) race, stock, family; kind, rank, order; species, also (male or female) sex
(see genus) and used to translate Aristotle's Greek grammatical term genos.    The grammatical sense
is attested in English from late 14c.; the male-or-female sense from early 15c. As sex took on
erotic qualities in 20c., gender came to be the common word used for sex of a human being, often in
feminist writing with reference to social attributes as much as biological qualities; this sense
first attested 1963. Gender-bender is first attested 1980, with reference to pop star David Bowie.


miser (n.)

1540s, miserable person, wretch, from Latin miser (adj.) unhappy, wretched, pitiable, in distress,
of unknown origin. Original sense now obsolete; main modern meaning of money-hoarding person
recorded 1560s, from presumed unhappiness of such people.    Besides general wretchedness, the Latin
word connoted also intense erotic love (compare slang got it bad deeply infatuated) and hence was a
favorite word of Catullus. In Greek a miser was kyminopristes, literally a cumin seed splitter. In
Modern Greek, he might be called hekentabelones, literally one who has sixty needles. The German
word, filz, literally felt, preserves the image of the felt slippers which the miser often wore in
caricatures. Lettish mantrausis miser is literally money-raker.


paraphilia (n.)

1913, from German paraphilie (by 1903), apparently coined by Austrian ethnologist Friedrich Salomo
Krauss (1859-1938) as literally inverted erotic instinct, from Greek para- beside, aside (see para-
(1)) + philos loving (see -phile).    The neurotic whose accompanying fancies always lead into
forbidden ground (and this is what constitutes the guilt feeling of pollutions) fights against
masturbation [pollutions] because it is connected with incest fancies, criminal desires,
perversions, or as F.S. Krauss calls them, paraphilias. [Wm. J. Robinson, M.D., Masturbation --
Injurious or Harmless, American Journal of Urology, May 1913]   <hr />  Krauss bereichert uns um das
neue Wort Paraphilie anstelle der Psychopathie, ein fortschrittlich-oppositionelles Wort zwar, aber
auch nur ein Wort und als Aufkl&#228;rung etwa so bedeutsam wie Seitenspr&#252;nge. [Rezensionen
&#252;ber die Anthropophyteia Jahrb&#252;cher, Leipzig, 1907]    Popularized in psychology circles
in English from c.1918 in translation of work by Viennese-born psychotherapist Wilhelm Stekel
(1868-1940); not in widespread use until 1950s. first used in Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders in 1980, as a morally neutral and more dignified label than perversion, to which it
is nonetheless etymologically similar. Related: Paraphiliac; paraphilic.


wet (adj.)

Old English w&aelig;t moist, rainy, liquid, also as a noun. moisture, liquid drink, from Proto-
Germanic *weta- (source also of Old Frisian wet ). Also from cognate Old Norse vatr; all from PIE
*wed- (1) water, wet (see water (n.1)). Of paint, ink, etc., not yet dry from 1510s. Opposed to dry
in reference to the U.S. battles over prohibition from 1870. Wet blanket person who has a
dispiriting effect is recorded from 1871, from use of blankets drenched in water to smother fires
(the phrase is attested in this literal sense from 1660s).    Do we not know them, those wet
blankets who come down on our pleasant little fires and extinguish them, with no more ruth than the
rain feels when it pours on the encampment of the merry picnic party, or floods the tents of a
flower show? [Wet Blankets, in Godey's Lady's Book and Magazine, February, 1871]   All wet in the
wrong is recorded from 1923, American English; earlier simply wet ineffectual, and perhaps
ultimately from slang meaning drunken (c.1700). Wet-nurse is from 1610s. The diver's wet-suit is
from 1955. Wet dream is from 1851; in the same sense Middle English had ludificacioun an erotic
dream.    He knew som tyme a man of religion, &thorn;at gaff hym gretelie vnto chastitie bothe of
his harte &amp; of his body noghtwithstondyng he was tempid with grete ludificacions on &thorn;e
nyght. [Alphabet of Tales, c.1450]


pornography (n.)

1843, ancient obscene painting, especially in temples of Bacchus, from French pornographie, from
Greek pornographos (one) depicting prostitutes, from porne prostitute, originally bought, purchased
(with an original notion, probably of female slave sold for prostitution), related to pernanai to
sell, from PIE root *per- (5) to traffic in, to sell (see price (n.)) + graphein to write (see
-graphy). A brothel in ancient Greek was a porneion.    Pornography, or obscene painting, which in
the time of the Romans was practiced with the grossest license, prevailed especially at no
particular period in Greece, but was apparently tolerated to a considerable extent at all times.
Parrhasius, Aristides, Pausanias, Nicophanes, Chaerephanes, Arellius, and a few other [pornographoi]
are mentioned as having made themselves notorious for this species of license. [Charles Anthon,
Dictionary of Greek and Roman Antiquities, New York, 1843]    In reference to modern works by 1859
(originally French novels), later as a charge against native literature; sense of obscene pictures
in modern times is from 1906. Also sometimes used late 19c. for description of prostitutes as a
matter of public hygiene. The Medical Archives in 1873 proposed porniatria for the lengthy and
really meaningless expression 'social evil hospital' ....     I shall not today attempt further to
define the kinds of material I understand to be embraced within that shorthand description [hard-
core pornography]; and perhaps I could never succeed in intelligibly doing so. But I know it when I
see it, and the motion picture involved in this case is not that. [U.S. Supreme Court Justice Potter
Stewart, concurring opinion, Jacobellis v. Ohio, 1964]    In ancient contexts, often paired with
rhypography, genre painting of low, sordid, or unsuitable subjects. Pornocracy (1860) is the
dominating influence of harlots, used specifically of the government of Rome during the first half
of the 10th century by Theodora and her daughters. Pornotopia (1966) was coined to describe the
ideal erotic-world of pornographic movies.


