erratic (adj.)

late 14c., wandering, moving, from Old French erratique (13c.) and directly from Latin erraticus
wandering, straying, roving, from erratum an error, mistake, fault, past participle of errare to
wander, err (see err). Sense of irregular, eccentric is attested by 1841. The noun is from 1620s, of
persons; 1849, of boulders. Related: Erratically.


tangential (adj.)

1620s, see tangent (adj.) + -ial. Figurative sense of divergent, erratic is from 1787; that of
slightly connected is from 1825. Related: Tangentially.


screwball (n.)

eccentric person, 1933, U.S. slang, earlier as a type of erratic baseball pitch (1928), from a still
earlier name for a type of delivery in cricket (1866), from screw (n.) + ball (n.1). Screwball
comedy is attested from 1938, in reference to Carole Lombard.


loiter (v.)

early 15c., idle one's time, dawdle over work, from Middle Dutch loteren be loose or erratic, shake,
totter like a loose tooth or a sail in a storm; in modern Dutch, leuteren to delay, linger, loiter
over one's work. Probably cognate with Old English lutian lurk, and related to Old English loddere
beggar; Old High German lotar empty, vain, luzen lurk; German Lotterbube vagabond, rascal, lauschen
eavesdrop; Gothic luton mislead; Old English ly&eth;re base, bad, wicked. Related: Loitered;
loitering.


mad (adj.)

late 13c., from Old English gem&aelig;dde (plural) out of one's mind (usually implying also violent
excitement), also foolish, extremely stupid, earlier gem&aelig;ded rendered insane, past participle
of a lost verb *gem&aelig;dan to make insane or foolish, from Proto-Germanic *ga-maid-jan,
demonstrative form of *ga-maid-az changed (for the worse), abnormal (cognates: Old Saxon gimed
foolish, Old High German gimeit foolish, vain, boastful, Gothic gamai&thorn;s crippled, wounded, Old
Norse mei&eth;a to hurt, maim), from intensive prefix *ga- + PIE *moito-, past participle of root
*mei- (1) to change (cognates: Latin mutare to change, mutuus done in exchange, migrare to change
one's place of residence; see mutable).    Emerged in Middle English to replace the more usual Old
English word, wod (see wood (adj.)). Sense of beside oneself with excitement or enthusiasm is from
early 14c. Meaning beside oneself with anger is attested from early 14c., but deplored by Rev. John
Witherspoon (1781) as an Americanism. It now competes in American English with angry for this sense.
Of animals, affected with rabies, from late 13c. Phrase mad as a March hare is attested from 1520s,
via notion of breeding season; mad as a hatter is from 1829 as demented, 1837 as enraged, according
to a modern theory supposedly from erratic behavior caused by prolonged exposure to poison mercuric
nitrate, used in making felt hats. For mad as a wet hen see hen. Mad money is attested from 1922;
mad scientist is from 1891.


