erroneous (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French erroneus and directly from Latin erroneus vagrant, wandering (in Late
Latin erroneous), from erronem (nominative erro) vagabond, from errare to wander, err (see err).
Related: Erroneously.


plentitude (n.)

1610s, erroneous form of plenitude.


homogenous (adj.)

erroneous for homogeneous.


micturate (v.)

urinate, by 1842, from micturition; malformed and with an erroneous sense; condemned from its birth.


junto (n.)

1640s, erroneous formation of junta on model of Spanish nouns ending in -o.


kitch (n.)

colloquial shortening of kitchen, attested by 1919. Sometimes also an erroneous spelling of kitsch.


zygote (n.)

1880, coined 1878 by German cytologist Eduard Strasburger (1844-1912), the widespread attribution to
William Bateson being apparently erroneous; from Greek zygotos yoked, from zygon yoke (see jugular).


tidal (adj.)

1807, a hybrid formation from tide (n.) + Latin-derived suffix -al (1). A tidal wave (1819) properly
is high water caused by movements of the tides; erroneous use for tsunami, great ocean wave caused
by an earthquake, etc. is recorded from 1868.


Ecclesiastes (n.)

c.1300, name given to one of the Old Testament books, traditionally ascribed to Solomon, from Greek
ekklesiastes (see ecclesiastic), to render Hebrew qoheleth one who addresses an assembly, from qahal
assembly. The title is technically the designation of the speaker, but that word throughout is
usually rendered into English as The Preacher (which Klein calls erroneous).


Buddhist (n.)

1810, from Buddha + -ist. An earlier word in this sense was a direct borrowing of Sanskrit Bauddha
follower of Buddha (1801 in English), hence early erroneous hybrid compounds such as Boudhist,
Bauddhist.


irregardless

an erroneous word that, etymologically, means the opposite of what it is used to express. Attested
in non-standard writing from at least 1870s (e.g. Portsmouth Times, Portsmouth, Ohio, U.S.A., April
11, 1874: We supported the six successful candidates for Council in the face of a strong opposition.
We were led to do so because we believed every man of them would do his whole duty, irregardless of
party, and the columns of this paper for one year has [sic] told what is needed.); probably a blend
of irrespective and regardless. Perhaps inspired by the colloquial use of the double negative as an
emphatic.


Hessian (n.)

resident of the former Landgraviate of Hessen-Kassel, western Germany; its soldiers being hired out
by the ruler to fight for other countries, especially the British during the American Revolution,
the name Hessians (unjustly) became synonymous with mercenaries. Hessian fly (Cecidomyia destructor)
was a destructive parasite the ravaged U.S. crops late 18c., so named 1787 in erroneous belief that
it was carried into America by the Hessians.


incorrect (adj.)

early 15c., uncorrected, from Latin incorrectus uncorrected, from in- not (see in- (1)) + correctus
(see correct). Sense of not in good style is from 1670s; that of factually wrong, erroneous,
inaccurate is from 1610s (implied in incorrectly).


Tocharian

in reference to an extinct people and Indo-European language of Chinese Turkestan, 1927, from French
tocharien, from Greek Tokharoi (Strabo), name of an Asiatic people who lived in the Oxus valley in
ancient times. Earlier Tocharish (1910), from German tocharisch. The identification of this culture
with the people named by Strabo was suggested in 1907 by F.W.K. M&uuml;ller and is obviously
erroneous (Klein).


oblivious (adj.)

mid-15c., from Latin obliviosus forgetful, that easily forgets; producing forgetfulness, from
oblivion (see oblivion). Meaning unaware, unconscious (of something) is from 1862, formerly regarded
as erroneous, this is now the general meaning and the word has lost its original sense of no longer
aware or mindful. Properly should be used with to, not of. Related: Obliviously; obliviousness.


Maranatha

late 14c., a Bible word, from Greek maranatha, untranslated Semitic word in I Cor. xvi:22, where it
follows Greek anathema, and therefore has been taken as part of a phrase and used as a curse.
Usually assumed to be from Aramaic maran atha Our Lord has come, which would make the common usage
erroneous (see OED entry), but possibly it is a false transliteration of Hebrew mohoram atta you are
put under the ban, which would make more sense in the context. [Klein]


substract (v.)

to subtract, 1540s, now illiterate [OED], An erroneous form of subtract, common in vulger use
[Century Dictionary], from Modern Latin substractus, past participle of substrahere, alternative
form of subtrahere (see subtraction). Related: Subtracted; subtracting.


spatula (n.)

1520s (from early 15c. as a type of medical instrument), from Latin spatula broad piece, spatula,
diminutive of spatha broad, flat tool or weapon, from Greek spathe broad flat blade (used by
weavers) (see spade (n.1)). Erroneous form spattular is attested from c.1600.


psoas (n.)

1680s, from Greek psoa (plural psoai) muscles of the loins. Related: Psoitis.    Gk. [psoas], the
gen. of the feminine noun [psoa], was mistaken by the French anatomist Jean Riolan (1577-1657) for
the nom. of a (nonexistent) masculine noun. It was he who introduced this erroneous form into
anatomy. [Klein]


transpire (v.)

1590s, pass off in the form of a vapor or liquid, from Middle French transpirer (16c.), from Latin
trans- through (see trans-) + spirare to breathe (see spirit (n.)). Figurative sense of leak out,
become known is recorded from 1741, and the erroneous meaning take place, happen is almost as old,
being first recorded 1755. Related: Transpired; transpiring.


unique (adj.)

c.1600, single, solitary, from Middle French unique (16c.), from Latin unicus only, single, sole,
alone of its kind, from unus one (see one). Meaning forming the only one of its kind is attested
from 1610s; erroneous sense of remarkable, uncommon is attested from mid-19c. Related: Uniquely;
uniqueness.


wrack (v.)

to ruin or wreck (originally of ships), 1560s, from earlier intransitive sense to be shipwrecked
(late 15c.), from wrack (n.). Often confused in this sense since 16c. with rack (v.) in the sense of
torture on the rack; to wrack one's brains is thus erroneous. Related: Wracked; wracking.


bathetic (adj.)

1834, from bathos on the model of pathetic, which, however, does not come directly from pathos (see
pathetic), so the formation is either erroneous or humorous. Bathotic (1863, perhaps on model of
chaotic) is not much better.


Erl-king

1797, in Scott's translation of Goethe, from German Erl-k&ouml;nig, literally alder-king, Herder's
erroneous translation of Danish ellerkonge king of the elves. Compare German Eller, Erle alder (see
alder).


firmament (n.)

mid-13c., from Latin firmamentum firmament, literally a support or strengthening, from firmus firm
(see firm (adj.)), used in Vulgate to translate Greek stereoma firm or solid structure, which
translated Hebrew raqia, a word used of both the vault of the sky and the floor of the earth in the
Old Testament, probably literally expanse, from raqa to spread out, but in Syriac meaning to make
firm or solid, hence the erroneous translation.


phat (adj.)

hip-hop slang, great, excellent, 1992, originating perhaps in the late 1980s and meaning at first
sexiness in a woman. The word itself is presumably a variant of fat (q.v.) in one of its slang
senses, with the kind of off-beat spelling preferred in street slang (compare boyz). The spelling is
attested as far back as 1678, as an erroneous form of fat (a classical over-correction; see ph).
This spelling is said by some to be an acronym, and supposed originals are offered: pretty hot and
tasty, or pretty hips and thighs among them, all unconvincing. These, too may have been innovations
given as explanations to women who felt insulted by the word.


lease (n.)

late 14c., legal contract conveying property, usually for a fixed period of time and with a fixed
compensation, from Anglo-French les (late 13c.), from lesser to let, let go, from Old French
laissier to let, allow, permit; bequeath, leave, from Latin laxare loosen, open, make wide, from
laxus loose (see lax). Modern French equivalent legs is altered by erroneous derivation from Latin
legatum bequest, legacy.


pyromania (n.)

1840, from pyro- fire + mania madness, frenzy. Used in German in the 1830s.    The propensity which
leads an insane person to accomplish his purpose by burning, has been considered to merit particular
notice, and to constitute a variety of monomania. Dr. Marc, of France, has published a memoir on the
subject; he gives the name of pyromania to it, and considers that, like other insane propensities,
it may be the result of instinct, or it may be the result of delusion--reasoning upon erroneous
principles. [Alexander Morrison, M.D., The Physiognomy of Mental Diseases, London, 1840]    An older
word for it was incendiarism.


pseudo-

often before vowels pseud-, word-forming element meaning false; feigned; erroneous; in appearance
only; resembling, from Greek pseudo-, comb. form of pseudes false, lying; falsely; deceived, or
pseudos falsehood, untruth, a lie, both from pseudein to deceive, cheat by lies.    Productive in
compound formation in ancient Greek (such as pseudodidaskalos false teacher, pseudokyon a sham
cynic, pseudologia a false speech, pseudoparthenos pretended virgin), it began to be used with
native words in Middle English.


pervert (v.)

c.1300 (transitive), to turn someone aside from a right religious belief to a false or erroneous
one, from Old French pervertir pervert, undo, destroy (12c.) and directly from Latin pervertere
overthrow, overturn, figuratively to corrupt, subvert, abuse, literally turn the wrong way, turn
about, from per- away (see per) + vertere to turn (see versus).    Related: Perverted; perverting.
Replaced native froward, which embodies the same image. Old English had mishweorfed perverted,
inverted, an identical formation to the Latin word using native elements.


false (adj.)

late 12c., from Old French fals, faus (12c., Modern French faux) false, fake, incorrect, mistaken,
treacherous, deceitful, from Latin falsus deceived, erroneous, mistaken, past participle of fallere
deceive, disappoint, of uncertain origin (see fail).  Adopted into other Germanic languages
(cognates: German falsch, Dutch valsch, Danish falsk), though English is the only one in which the
active sense of deceitful (a secondary sense in Latin) has predominated. False alarm recorded from
1570s. Related: Falsely; falseness.


gamete (n.)

sexual protoplasmic body, 1880, coined 1878 by German cytologist Eduard Strasburger (1844-1912), the
widespread attribution to  Mendel being apparently erroneous; from Greek gamete a wife, gametes a
husband, from gamein to take to wife, to marry, from PIE root *gem(e)- to marry (cognates: Greek
gambros son-in-law, father-in-law, brother-in-law; Sanskrit jamih brother, sister, jama daughter-in-
law; Avestan zama-tar son-in-law; Latin gener son-in-law). See also -gamy. The seventh month of the
ancient Attic calendar (corresponding to late January and early February) was Gamelion, Month of
Marriages.


Jehovah

1530, Tyndale's erroneous transliteration of Hebrew Tetragramaton YHWH using vowel points of Adhonai
my lord (see Yahweh). Used for YHWH (the full name being too sacred for utterance) in four places in
the Old Testament in the KJV where the usual translation lord would have been inconvenient; taken as
the principal and personal name of God.    The vowel substitution was originally made by the
Masoretes as a direction to substitute Adhonai for the ineffable name. European students of Hebrew
took this literally, which yielded Latin JeHoVa (first attested in writings of Galatinus, confessor
to Leo X, 1516). Jehovah's Witnesses member of Watchtower Bible and Tract Society first attested
1933; the organization founded c.1879 by Charles Taze Russell (1852-1916); the name from Isa.
xliii:10.


meta-

word-forming element meaning 1. after, behind, 2. changed, altered, 3. higher, beyond; from Greek
meta (prep.) in the midst of, in common with, by means of, in pursuit or quest of, from PIE *me- in
the middle (cognates: German mit, Gothic mi&thorn;, Old English mi&eth; with, together with, among;
see mid). Notion of changing places with probably led to senses change of place, order, or nature,
which was a principal meaning of the Greek word when used as a prefix (but also denoting community,
participation; in common with; pursuing).    Third sense, higher than, transcending, overarching,
dealing with the most fundamental matters of, is due to misinterpretation of metaphysics as science
of that which transcends the physical. This has led to a prodigious erroneous extension in modern
usage, with meta- affixed to the names of other sciences and disciplines, especially in the academic
jargon of literary criticism, which affixes it to just about anything that moves and much that
doesn't.


me (pron.)

Old English me (dative), me, mec (accusative); oblique cases of I, from Proto-Germanic *meke
(accusative), *mes (dative), cognates: Old Frisian mi/mir, Old Saxon mi, Middle Dutch mi, Dutch mij,
Old High German mih/mir, German mich/mir, Old Norse mik/mer, Gothic mik/mis; from PIE root *me-,
oblique form of the personal pronoun of the first person singular (nominative *eg; see I); cognates:
Sanskrit, Avestan mam, Greek eme, Latin me, mihi, Old Irish me, Welsh mi me, Old Church Slavonic me,
Hittite ammuk.    Erroneous or vulgar use for nominative (such as it is me) attested from c.1500.
Dative preserved in obsolete meseems, methinks and expressions such as sing me a song (dative of
interest). Reflexively, myself, for myself, to myself from late Old English.


addle (v.)

1712, from addle (n.) urine, liquid filth, from Old English adela mud, mire, liquid manure (cognate
with Old Swedish adel urine, Middle Low German adel, Dutch aal puddle).    Used in noun phrase addle
egg (mid-13c.) egg that does not hatch, rotten egg, literally urine egg, a loan-translation of Latin
ovum urinum, which is itself an erroneous loan-translation of Greek ourion oon putrid egg, literally
wind egg, from ourios of the wind (confused by Roman writers with ourios of urine, from ouron
urine). Because of this usage, from c.1600 the noun in English was taken as an adjective meaning
putrid, and thence given a figurative extension to empty, vain, idle, also confused, muddled,
unsound (1706). The verb followed a like course. Related: Addled; addling.


vicious (adj.)

late 14c., unwholesome, impure, of the nature of vice, wicked, corrupting, pernicious, harmful; of a
text, erroneous, corrupt, from Anglo-French vicious, Old French vicios wicked, cunning, underhand;
defective, illegal (Modern French vicieux), from Latin vitiosus (Medieval Latin vicious) faulty,
full of faults, defective, corrupt; wicked, depraved, from vitium fault (see vice (n.1)).    Meaning
inclined to be savage or dangerous is first recorded 1711 (originally of animals, especially
horses); that of full of spite, bitter, severe is from 1825. In law, marred by some inherent fault
(late 14c.), hence also this sense in logic (c.1600), as in vicious circle in reasoning (c.1792,
Latin circulus vitiosus), which was given a general sense of a situation in which action and
reaction intensify one another by 1839. Related: Viciously (mid-14c., sinfully); viciousness.


indri (n.)

1839, European name for the babakoto, a lemur-like arboreal primate of Madagascar (Indris
Lichanotus); the common story since late 19c. is that the name was given in error by French
naturalist Pierre Sonnerat (1748-1814), c.1780, from mistaken use of Malagasy indry! look! See!
Evidently this was what his native guides said when they spotted the creature and called his
attention to it.    However, as Hacking (1981) pointed out, Sonnerat was far too familiar with
indris -- he described and figured them in detail, and apparently kept at least one in captivity --
for this story to be plausible. Furthermore, endrina is actually recorded as a native name for the
indri (Cousins, 1885), and indri could easily be a variant of this name. Although the word endrina
is first recorded in Malagasy only in 1835, there is no evidence that it could be a back-formation
from the French indri (Hacking, 1981), and it seems implausible that the Malagasy would adopt an
erroneous French name for an animal they were them selves familiar with. [Dunkel, Alexander R., et
al., Giant rabbits, marmosets, and British comedies: etymology of lemur names, part 1, in Lemur
News, vol. 16, 2011-2012, p.67]


