esoteric (adj.)

1650s, from Greek esoterikos belonging to an inner circle, from esotero more within, comparative
adverb of eso within, related to eis into, en in (see en- (2)).    In English, originally of
Pythagorean doctrines. According to Lucian, the division of teachings into exoteric and esoteric
originated with Aristotle.


esoterica (n.)

by 1807, Modern Latin, from plural of Greek esoterikos pertaining to those within (see esoteric).


samadhi (n.)

intense esoteric meditation through yoga, 1795, from Sanskrit samadhi-, literally a putting or
joining together, from sam- together + a- toward + stem of dadhati puts, places (see factitious).


hierophant (n.)

expounder of sacred mysteries, 1670s, from Late Latin hierophantes, from Greek hierophantes one who
teaches the rites of sacrifice and worship, literally one who shows sacred things, from hieros
sacred (see ire) + phainein to reveal, bring to light (see phantasm). In modern use, expounder of
esoteric doctrines, from 1822.


mahatma (n.)

1884, literally great-souled, from Sanskrit mahatman, from maha great, from PIE root *meg- great
(see magnate) + atman, soul, principle of life, properly breath (see atman). In esoteric Buddhism, a
person of supernatural powers. In common use, as a title, a mark of love and respect. Said to have
been applied to Gandhi (1869-1948) in 1915 by poet Rabrindranath Tagore.


theosophy (n.)

1640s (implied in theosophical), knowledge of divine things obtained through mystic study, from
Medieval Latin theosophia (c.880), from Late Greek theosophia (c.500) wisdom concerning God or
things divine, from Greek theosophos one wise about God, from theos god (see theo-) + sophia skill,
knowledge of, acquaintance with; philosophy, from sophos wise, learned (see sophist).    Applied
variously over the years, including to the followers of Swedenborg. Taken as the name of a modern
philosophical system (sometimes called Esoteric Buddhism), founded in New York 1875 as Theosophical
Society by Madame Blavatsky and others, which has elements of Hinduism and Buddhism and claims
supernatural knowledge of the divinity and his words deeper than that obtained from empiricism.
Related: Theosophist.


