esteem (n.)

(also steem, extyme), mid-14c., account, worth, from French estime, from estimer (see esteem (v.)).
Meaning high regard is from 1610s.


esteem (v.)

mid-15c., from Middle French estimer (14c.), from Latin aestimare to value, appraise, perhaps
ultimately from *ais-temos one who cuts copper, i.e. mints money (but de Vaan finds this not very
credible). At first used as we would now use estimate; sense of value, respect is 1530s. Related:
Esteemed; esteeming.


self-esteem (n.)

1650s, from self- + esteem (n.). Popularized by phrenology, which assigned it a bump (Spurzheim,
1815).


achtung

German word used to command attention, from German achtung, from acht (n.) attention, care, heed,
consideration, achten (v.) pay attention to, regard, esteem, respect, from Old High German ahton pay
attention to, a general Germanic word akin to Old English eahtian to estimate, esteem, consider,
praise, but with no living native descendants in English.


respects (n.)

expressions or signs of esteem, deference, or compliment, 1610s; see respect (n.). Earlier (late
14c.) as aspects, particular respects.


flattering (adj.)

late 14c., pleasing to the imagination, present participle adjective from flatter. Meaning
gratifying to self-esteem is from 1757. Related: Flatteringly.


regards (n.)

plural of regard (n.). In letters, from 1775, from regard in the sense of esteem, affection (late
14c.).


respectable (adj.)

worthy of esteem, 1580s; see respect (v.) + -able. Sense of having an honest reputation is from
1755. That of occupying a fairly good position in society is c.1800. Related: Respectably.


estimate (n.)

1560s, valuation, from Latin aestimatus, verbal noun from aestimare (see esteem). Earlier in sense
power of the mind (mid-15c.). Meaning approximate judgment is from 1580s. As a builder's statement
of projected costs, from 1796.


charity (n.)

mid-12c., benevolence for the poor, from Old French charit&eacute; (Christian) charity, mercy,
compassion; alms; charitable foundation (12c., Old North French carit&eacute;), from Latin caritatem
(nominative caritas) costliness, esteem, affection (in Vulgate often used as translation of Greek
agape love -- especially Christian love of fellow man -- perhaps to avoid the sexual suggestion of
Latin amor), from carus dear, valued, from PIE *karo-, from root *ka- to like, desire (see whore
(n.)).    Vulgate also sometimes translated agape by Latin dilectio, noun of action from diligere to
esteem highly, to love (see diligence).  Wyclif and the Rhemish version regularly rendered the
Vulgate dilectio by 'love,' caritas by 'charity.' But the 16th c. Eng. versions from Tindale to
1611, while rendering agape sometimes 'love,' sometimes 'charity,' did not follow the dilectio and
caritas of the Vulgate, but used 'love' more often (about 86 times), confining 'charity' to 26
passages in the Pauline and certain of the Catholic Epistles (not in I John), and the Apocalypse
.... In the Revised Version 1881, 'love' has been substituted in all these instances, so that it now
stands as the uniform rendering of agape. [OED]  Sense of charitable foundation or institution in
English attested by 1690s.


reverence (v.)

late 14c., treat with respect, honor; venerate, pay pious homage to; esteem, value; bow to
(someone); do honor to, from reverence (n.). Related: Reverenced; reverencing.


undervalue (v.)

1590s, to rate as inferior in value (to), from under + value (v.). Sense of to estimate or esteem
too low is recorded from 1610s. Meaning to rate at too low a monetary value is attested from 1620s.
Related: Undervalued; undervaluing.


appreciate (v.)

1650s, to esteem or value highly, from Late Latin appretiatus, past participle of appretiare to set
a price to (see appraise). Meaning to rise in value (intransitive) first recorded 1789. Related:
Appreciated; appreciating.


estimation (n.)

late 14c., action of appraising; manner of judging; opinion, from Old French estimacion, from Latin
aestimationem (nominative aestimatio) a valuation, from past participle stem of aestimare to value
(see esteem). Meaning appreciation is from 1520s. That of process of forming an approximate notion
is from c.1400.


proband (n.)

1929, from Latin probandus, gerundive of probare to make good, esteem good; make credible, show,
prove, demonstrate (see prove).


estimate (v.)

1530s, appraise the worth of, from Latin aestimatus, past participle of aestimare to value, appraise
(see esteem). Meaning form an approximate notion is from 1660s. Related: Estimated; estimates;
estimating.


dildo (n.)

1590s, perhaps a corruption of Italian deletto delight, from Latin dilectio, noun of action from
diligere to esteem highly, to love (see diligence). Or (less likely) of English diddle. Curse Eunuke
dilldo, senceless counterfet [Choise of Valentines or the Merie Ballad of Nash his Dildo, T. Nashe,
c.1593]


magnify (v.)

late 14c., to speak or act for the glory or honor (of someone or something), from Old French
magnefiier glorify, magnify, from Latin magnificare esteem greatly, extol, make much of, from
magnificus great, elevated, noble (see magnificence). Meaning use a telescope or microscope is first
attested 1660s, said to be a unique development in English. Related: Magnified; magnifying.


aim (v.)

early 14c., to estimate, calculate, also to intend, from Old French aesmer value, rate; count,
estimate, from Latin aestimare appraise (see estimation); current meaning apparently developed from
esteem, to calculate, to calculate with a view to action (c.1400), then to direct a missile, a blow,
etc. (1570s). Related: Aimed; aiming.


estimable (adj.)

mid-15c., from Old French estimable and directly from Latin aestimabilis valuable, estimable, from
aestimare (see esteem (v.)).


regard (n.)

mid-14c., a consideration; a judgment, from Old French regard, from regarder take notice of, from
re-, intensive prefix + garder look, heed, from Germanic (see guard (n.)). Meanings a look,
appearance; respect, esteem, favor, kindly feeling which springs from a consideration of estimable
qualities all recorded late 14c. Phrase in regard to is from mid-15c. (Chaucer uses at regard of).


nullify (v.)

1590s, from Late Latin nullificare to esteem lightly, despise, literally to make nothing, from Latin
nullus not any (see null) + root of facere to make (see factitious). Related: Nullified; nullifying.


amour-propre (n.)

1775, French, sensitive self-love, self-esteem; see amour and proper.   Vanity usually gives the
meaning as well, &amp;, if as well, then better. [Fowler]    The term was in Middle English as
proper love self-love.


underrate (v.)

also under-rate, 1640s, to esteem at too little worth, from under + rate (v.). Related: Underrated;
underrating.


prefer (v.)

late 14c., to put forward or advance in rank or fortune, to promote, from Old French preferer (14c.)
and directly from Latin praeferre place or set before, carry in front, from prae before (see pre-) +
ferre to carry, to place (see infer). Meaning to esteem (something) more than others also is
recorded from late 14c. Original sense in English is preserved in preferment.


opinion (n.)

c.1300, from Old French opinion opinion, view, judgements founded upon probabilities (12c.), from
Latin opinionem (nominative opinio) opinion, conjecture, fancy, belief, what one thinks;
appreciation, esteem, from stem of opinari think, judge, suppose, opine, from PIE *op- (2) to choose
(see option).    Where there is much desire to learn, there of necessity will be much arguing, much
writing, many opinions; for opinion in good men is but knowledge in the making. [Milton,
Areopagitica]


postpone (v.)

c.1500, from Latin postponere put after; esteem less; neglect; postpone, from post after (see post-)
+ ponere put, place (see position (n.)). Related: Postponed; postponing.


vilify (v.)

mid-15c., to lower in worth or value, from Late Latin vilificare to make cheap or base; to esteem of
little value, from Latin vilis cheap, base (see vile) + root of facere to make (see factitious).
Meaning to slander, speak evil of is first recorded 1590s. Related: Vilified, vilifying.


respect (n.)

late 14c., relationship, relation; regard, consideration, from Old French respect and directly from
Latin respectus regard, a looking at, literally act of looking back (or often) at one, noun use of
past participle of respicere look back at, regard, consider, from re- back (see re-) + specere look
at (see scope (n.1)). Meanings feeling of esteem excited by actions or attributes of someone or
something; courteous or considerate treatment due to personal worth or power are from 1580s, as is
sense of point, particular feature.


deputy (n.)

c.1400, one given the full power of an officer without holding the office, from Anglo-French
deput&eacute;, noun use of past participle of Middle French d&eacute;puter appoint, assign (14c.),
from Late Latin deputare to destine, allot, in classical Latin to esteem, consider, consider as,
literally to cut off, prune, from de- away (see de-) + putare to think, count, consider, literally
to cut, prune (see pave).


vile (adj.)

late 13c., morally repugnant; morally flawed, corrupt, wicked; of no value; of inferior quality;
disgusting, foul, ugly; degrading, humiliating; of low estate, without worldly honor or esteem, from
Anglo-French ville, Old French vil shameful, dishonorable; low-born; cheap; ugly, hideous, from
Latin vilis cheap, worthless, base, common, of uncertain origin, perhaps from PIE root *wes- (1) to
buy, sell (see venal). Related: Vilely; vileness; vilety (early 13c.).


likely (adj.)

c.1300, perhaps from Old Norse likligr likely, from likr like (see like (adj.)). Old English had
cognate geliclic. Meaning having the appearance of being strong and capable is from mid-15c., though
now mostly confined to American English; according to OED this sense is perhaps influenced by like
(v.). Sense of good-looking is from late 15c. Meaning probably is attested from late 14c., now
principally in American English.    LIKELY. That may be liked; that may please; handsome. In the
United States, as a colloquial term, respectable; worthy of esteem; sensible.--Worcester. [Bartlett]
As an adverb, late 14c., from the adjective.


respect (v.)

1540s, to regard, from Middle French respecter look back; respect; delay, from Latin respectere,
frequentative of respicere (see respect (n.). Meaning treat with deferential regard or esteem is
from 1550s. Sense of refrain from injuring is from 1620s. Meaning have reference to is from 1560s.
Related: Respected; respecting.    To respect the person was show undue bias toward (or against)
based on regard for the outward circumstances of a person; hence respecter of persons, usually with
negative, from Acts x:34, in the 1611 translation.


enhance (v.)

late 13c., anhaunsen to raise, make higher, from Anglo-French enhauncer, probably from Old French
enhaucier make greater, make higher or louder; fatten, foster; raise in esteem, from Vulgar Latin
*inaltiare, from Late Latin inaltare raise, exalt,  from altare make high, from altus high (see
old).    Meaning raise in station, wealth, or fame attested in English from c.1300. The -h- in Old
French supposedly from influence of Frankish *hoh high. Related: Enhanced; enhancing.


diligence (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French diligence attention, care; haste, speed, from Latin diligentia
attentiveness, carefulness, from diligentem (nominative diligens) attentive, assiduous, careful,
originally present participle of diligere single out, value highly, esteem, prize, love; aspire to,
be content with, appreciate, originally to pick out, select, from dis- apart (see dis-) + legere
choose, gather (see lecture (n.)).    Sense evolved from love through attentiveness to carefulness
to steady effort. From the secondary French sense comes the old useage of diligence for public stage
coach (1742; dilly for short), from a French shortening of carrosse de diligence.


penal (adj.)

pertaining to punishment, mid-15c., from Old French peinal (12c., Modern French p&#233;nal) and
directly from Medieval Latin penalis, from Latin poenalis pertaining to punishment, from poena
punishment, from Greek poine blood-money, fine, penalty, punishment, from PIE *kwoina, from root
*kwei- to pay, atone, compensate (cognates: Greek time price, worth, honor, esteem, respect, tinein
to pay a price, punish, take vengeance; Sanskrit cinoti observes, notes; Avestan kaena punishment,
vengeance; Old Church Slavonic cena honor, price; Lithuanian kaina value, price).


prove (v.)

late 12c., pruven, proven to try, test; evaluate; demonstrate, from Old French prover, pruver show;
convince; put to the test (11c., Modern French prouver), from Latin probare to make good; esteem,
represent as good; make credible, show, demonstrate; test, inspect; judge by trial (source also of
Spanish probar, Italian probare), from probus worthy, good, upright, virtuous, from PIE *pro-bhwo-
being in front, from *pro-, extended form of root *per- (1) forward, through (see per), + root *bhu-
to be (cognates: Latin fui I have been, futurus about to be; Old English beon to be; see be).
Related: Proved; proven; proving.


grace (n.)

late 12c., God's favor or help, from Old French grace pardon, divine grace, mercy; favor, thanks;
elegance, virtue (12c.), from Latin gratia favor, esteem, regard; pleasing quality, good will,
gratitude (source of Italian grazia, Spanish gracia), from gratus pleasing, agreeable, from PIE root
*gwere- (3) to favor (cognates: Sanskrit grnati sings, praises, announces, Lithuanian giriu to
praise, celebrate, Avestan gar- to praise).    Sense of virtue is early 14c., that of beauty of form
or movement, pleasing quality is mid-14c. In classical sense, one of the three sister goddesses
(Latin Grati&aelig;, Greek Kharites), bestowers of beauty and charm, it is first recorded in English
1579 in Spenser. The short prayer that is said before or after a meal (early 13c.; until 16c.
usually graces) has a sense of gratitude.


miracle (n.)

mid-12c., a wondrous work of God, from Old French miracle (11c.) miracle, story of a miracle,
miracle play, from Latin miraculum object of wonder (in Church Latin, marvelous event caused by
God), from mirari to wonder at, marvel, be astonished, figuratively to regard, esteem, from mirus
wonderful, astonishing, amazing, earlier *smeiros, from PIE *smei- to smile, laugh (cognates:
Sanskrit smerah smiling, Greek meidan to smile, Old Church Slavonic smejo to laugh; see smile (v.)).
From mid-13c. as extraordinary or remarkable feat, without regard to deity. Replaced Old English
wundortacen, wundorweorc. The Greek words rendered as miracle in the English bibles were semeion
sign, teras wonder, and dynamis power, in Vulgate translated respectively as signum, prodigium, and
virtus. The Latin word is the source of Spanish milagro, Italian miracolo.


win (v.)

be victorious, c.1300 fusion of Old English winnan to labor, toil, struggle for, work at, strive,
fight, and gewinnan to gain or succeed by struggling, conquer, obtain, both from Proto-Germanic
*winn(w)an to seek to gain (cognates: Old Saxon winnan, Old Norse vinna, Old Frisian winna, Dutch
winnen to gain, win, Danish vinde to win, Old High German winnan to strive, struggle, fight, German
gewinnen to gain, win, Gothic gawinnen to suffer, toil), from PIE *wen- (1) desire, strive for
(source of wish; see Venus).    Related: Won; winning. Meaning gain the affection or esteem of is
from c.1600. Breadwinner preserves the sense of toil in Old English winnan. Phrase you can't win
them all (1954) first attested in Raymond Chandler. Winningest is attested by 1804.


shame (n.)

Old English scamu, sceomu feeling of guilt or disgrace; confusion caused by shame; disgrace,
dishonor, insult, loss of esteem or reputation; shameful circumstance, what brings disgrace;
modesty; private parts, from Proto-Germanic *skamo (cognates: Old Saxon skama, Old Norse sk&ouml;mm,
Swedish skam, Old Frisian scome, Dutch schaamte, Old High German scama, German Scham). The best
guess is that this is from PIE *skem-, from *kem- to cover (covering oneself being a common
expression of shame).    Until modern times English had a productive duplicate form in shand. An Old
Norse word for it was kinnro&eth;i, literally cheek-redness, hence, blush of shame. Greek
distinguished shame in the bad sense of disgrace, dishonor (aiskhyne) from shame in the good sense
of modesty, bashfulness (aidos). To put (someone or something) to shame is mid-13c. Shame culture
attested by 1947.


belief (n.)

late 12c., bileave, replacing Old English geleafa belief, faith, from West Germanic *ga-laubon to
hold dear, esteem, trust (cognates: Old Saxon gilobo, Middle Dutch gelove, Old High German giloubo,
German Glaube), from *galaub- dear, esteemed, from intensive prefix *ga- + *leubh- to care, desire,
like, love (see love (v.)). The prefix was altered on analogy of the verb believe. The distinction
of the final consonant from that of believe developed 15c.    The be-, which is not a natural prefix
of nouns, was prefixed on the analogy of the vb. (where it is naturally an intensive) .... [OED]
Belief used to mean trust in God, while faith meant loyalty to a person based on promise or duty (a
sense preserved in keep one's faith, in good (or bad) faith and in common usage of faithful,
faithless, which contain no notion of divinity). But faith, as cognate of Latin fides, took on the
religious sense beginning in 14c. translations, and belief had by 16c. become limited to mental
acceptance of something as true, from the religious use in the sense of things held to be true as a
matter of religious doctrine (a sense attested from early 13c.).


tell (v.)

Old English tellan to reckon, calculate, number, compute; consider, think, esteem, account (past
tense tealde, past participle teald), from Proto-Germanic *taljan to mention in order (cognates: Old
Saxon tellian tell, Old Norse telja to count, number; to tell, say, Old Frisian tella to count; to
tell, Middle Dutch and Dutch tellen, Old Saxon talon to count, reckon, Danish tale to speak, Old
High German zalon, German z&auml;hlen to count, reckon), from PIE root *del- (2) to count, reckon
(see tale).    Meaning to narrate, announce, relate in English is from c.1000; that of to make known
by speech or writing, announce is from early 12c. Sense of to reveal or disclose is from c.1400;
that of to act as an informer, to 'peach'  is recorded from 1901. Meaning to order (someone to do
something) is from 1590s. To tell (someone) off reprimand is from 1919.    Original sense in teller
and phrase to tell time. For sense evolution, compare French conter to count, raconter to recount;
Italian contare, Spanish contar to count, recount, narrate; German z&auml;hlen to count,
erz&auml;hlen to recount, narrate. Klein also compares Hebrew saphar he counted, sipper he told.


