ethnicity (n.)

ethnic character, 1953, from ethnic + -ity. Earlier it meant paganism (1772).


ethnic (adj.)

late 15c. (earlier ethnical, early 15c.) pagan, heathen, from Late Latin ethnicus, from Greek
ethnikos adopted to the genius or customs of a people, peculiar to a people, from ethnos band of
people living together, nation, people, properly people of one's own kind, from PIE *swedh-no-,
suffixed form of root *s(w)e- (see idiom). Earlier in English as a noun, a heathen, pagan, one who
is not a Christian or Jew (c.1400).     In Septuagint, Greek ta ethne translates Hebrew goyim,
plural of goy nation, especially of non-Israelites, hence Gentile nation, foreign nation not
worshipping the true God (see goy), and ethnikos is used as savoring of the nature of pagans, alien
to the worship of the true God, and as a noun the pagan, the Gentile. The classical sense of
peculiar to a race or nation in English is attested from 1851, a return to the word's original
meaning; that of different cultural groups is 1935; and that of racial, cultural or national
minority group is American English 1945. Ethnic cleansing is attested from 1991.    Although the
term 'ethnic cleansing' has come into English usage only recently, its verbal correlates in Czech,
French, German, and Polish go back much further. [Jerry Z. Muller, Us and Them: The Enduring Power
of Ethnic Nationalism, Foreign Affairs, March/April 2008]


Crete

traditionally said to be from Krus, name of a mythological ancestor; probably an ethnic name of some
sort.


profiling (n.)

by 1852 as a term in field engineering, verbal noun from profile (v.). The racial/ethnic
stereotyping sense is attested from c.1991, American English.


tribe (n.)

mid-13c., one of the twelve divisions of the ancient Hebrews, from Old French tribu or directly from
Latin tribus one of the three political/ethnic divisions of the original Roman state (Tites, Ramnes,
and Luceres, corresponding, perhaps, to the Latins, Sabines, and Etruscans), later, one of the 30
political divisions instituted by Servius Tullius (increased to 35 in 241 B.C.E.), of unknown
origin. Perhaps from tri- three + *bheue-, root of the verb be. Others connect the word with the PIE
root *treb- a dwelling (see tavern).    In the Biblical sense, which was the original one in
English, the Latin word translates Greek phyle race or tribe of men, body of men united by ties of
blood and descent, a clan (see phylo-). Extension to modern ethnic groups or races of people is from
1590s, specifically a division of a barbarous race of people, usually distinguishable in some way
from their congeners, united into a community under a recognized head or chief [Century Dictionary],
but colloquially of any aggregate of individuals of a kind.


Darfur

region in Sudan, named for its people, from Arabic dar, literally house + Fur, ethnic name of the
indigenous African population.


assimilationist (n.)

one who advocates racial or ethnic integration, 1900, in reference to possible U.S. attitudes toward
Hawaii and possessions obtained in the war against Spain; usually with reference to Jews in European
nations; see assimilation + -ist.


ethno-

word-forming element meaning race, culture, from Greek ethnos people, nation, class, caste, tribe; a
number of people accustomed to live together (see ethnic). Used to form modern compounds in the
social sciences.


Swahili

name of a Bantu people inhabiting the coast of southeastern Africa, 1814, literally coast-dwellers,
from Arabic sawahil, plural of sahil coast + ethnic suffix -i.


-ite (1)

from French -ite and directly from Latin -ita, from Greek -ites (fem. -itis), forming adjectives and
nouns meaning connected with or belonging to. Especially used in classical times to form ethnic and
local designations (for example in Septuagint translations of Hebrew names in -i) and for names of
gems and minerals.


Feringhee (n.)

name used in India for European, 1630s, from Persian Farangi, from Arabic Faranji (10c.), from Old
French Franc Frank (see Frank) + Arabic ethnic suffix -i. The fr- sound is not possible in Arabic.


Myanmar

an old name for a part of Burma and a word for the country in native speech, officially chosen by
military rulers of Burma in 1989. Reasons given include casting off a relic of colonialism, or
downplaying of the connection to the Burman ethnic majority.    It should be pointed out that this
renaming has virtually no impact on Burmese citizens speaking in Burmese, who continue to refer to
both Myanma as well as Bama (this not unlike formal reference in the English language to 'The
Netherlands' while informally using 'Holland'). [Gustaaf Houtman, Mental Culture in Burmese Crisis
Politics, 1999]


Texas

Mexican province, briefly an independent nation and now a U.S. state, from Spanish Texas, Tejas,
earlier pronounced ta-shas, originally an ethnic name, from Caddo (eastern Texas Indian tribe)
taysha friends, allies, written by the Spanish as a plural. Related: Texan. Baseball Texas-leaguer
ball popped up just over the head of the infielders and falling too close for outfielders to catch
is recorded from 1905, named for the minor league that operated in Texas from 1902 (one theory is
that outfielders played unusually deep in Texas because hit balls bounced hard off the hard, sun-
baked ground).


Frank

one of the Germanic people that conquered Celtic northern Gaul from the Romans c.500 C.E. and made
it into France, from Frankish *Frank (cognate with Old High German Franko, Old English Franca). The
origin of the ethnic name is uncertain; it traditionally is said to be from the old Germanic word
*frankon javelin, lance (compare Old English franca), their preferred weapon, but the reverse may be
the case. Compare also Saxon, traditionally from root of Old English seax knife. In the Levant, this
was the name given to anyone of Western nationality (compare Feringhee and lingua franca).


Arkansas

organized as a U.S. territory 1819 (admitted as a state 1836), named for the Arkansas River, which
was named for a Siouan tribe.    The spelling of the term represents a French plural, Arcansas, of a
name applied to the Quapaw people who lived on the Arkansas River; their name was also written in
early times as Akancea, Acansea, Acansa (Dickinson, 1995). This was not the name used by the Quapaws
themselves, however. The term /akansa/ was applied to them by Algonquian speakers; this consists of
/a-/, an Algonquian prefix found in the names of ethnic groups, plus /kk&aacute;:ze, a Siouan term
refering to members of the Dhegiha branch of the Siouan family. This stem is also the origin for the
name of the Kansa tribe and of the state of Kansas; thus the placenames Arkansas and Kansas
indirectly have the same origin. [William Bright, Native American Placenames of the United States,
2004]


Islam (n.)

religious system revealed by Muhammad, 1818, from Arabic islam, literally submission (to the will of
God), from root of aslama he resigned, he surrendered, he submitted, causative conjunction of salima
he was safe, and related to salam peace.    ... Islam is the only major religion, along with
Buddhism (if we consider the name of the religion to come from Budd, the Divine Intellect, and not
the Buddha), whose name is not related to a person or ethnic group, but to the central idea of the
religion. [The Heart of Islam: Enduring Values for Humanity, Seyyed Hossein Nasr, 2002]    Earlier
English names for the faith include Mahometry (late 15c.), Muhammadism (1610s), Islamism (1747), and
Ismaelism (c.1600), which in part is from Ishmaelite, a name formerly given (especially by Jews) to
Arabs, as descendants of Ishmael (q.v.), and in part from Arabic Ismailiy, name of the Shiite sect
that after 765 C.E. followed the Imamship through descendants of Ismail (Arabic for Ishmael), eldest
son of Jafar, the sixth Imam. The Ismailians were not numerous, but among them were the powerful
Fatimid dynasty in Egypt and the Assassins, both of whom loomed large in European imagination.


Aryan

c.1600, as a term in classical history, from Latin Arianus, Ariana, from Greek Aria, Areia, names
applied in classical times to the eastern part of ancient Persia and to its inhabitants. Ancient
Persians used the name in reference to themselves (Old Persian ariya-), hence Iran. Ultimately from
Sanskrit arya- compatriot; in later language noble, of good family.    Also the name Sanskrit-
speaking invaders of India gave themselves in the ancient texts, from which early 19c. European
philologists (Friedrich Schlegel, 1819, who linked the word with German Ehre honor) applied it to
the ancient people we now call Indo-Europeans (suspecting that this is what they called themselves);
this use is attested in English from 1851. The term fell into the hands of racists, and in German
from 1845 it was specifically contrasted to Semitic (Lassen).    German philologist Max M&uuml;ller
(1823-1900) popularized the term in his writings on comparative linguistics, recommending it as the
name (replacing Indo-European, Indo-Germanic, Caucasian, Jshortened) for the group of related,
inflected languages connected with these peoples, mostly found in Europe but also including Sanskrit
and Persian. Arian was used in this sense from 1839 (and is more philologically correct), but this
spelling caused confusion with Arian, the term in ecclesiastical history.    Gradually replaced in
comparative linguistics c.1900 by Indo-European, except when used to distinguish Indo-European
languages of India from non-Indo-European ones. Used in Nazi ideology to mean member of a Caucasian
Gentile race of Nordic type. As an ethnic designation, however, it is properly limited to Indo-
Iranians (most justly to the latter) and has fallen from general academic use since the Nazi era.


