ethnology (n.)

1842, from ethno- + -logy.  Related: Ethnologist.


Algonquian

also Algonkian, 1885, an ethnologist's word, modified from Algonquin + -ian. Both forms of the name
have been used as adjectives and nouns. An American-Indian language family spread over a wide area
of northeast and north-central North America, from Nova Scotia (Micmac) to Montana (Cheyenne).


kangaroo (n.)

1770, used by Capt. Cook and botanist Joseph Banks, supposedly an aborigine word from northeast
Queensland, Australia, usually said to be unknown now in any native language. However, according to
Australian linguist R.M.W. Dixon (The Languages of Australia, Cambridge, 1980), the word probably is
from Guugu Yimidhirr (Endeavour River-area Aborigine language) /gaNurru/ large black kangaroo.In
1898 the pioneer ethnologist W.E. Roth wrote a letter to the Australasian pointing out that gang-oo-
roo did mean 'kangaroo' in Guugu Yimidhirr, but this newspaper correspondence went unnoticed by
lexicographers. Finally the observations of Cook and Roth were confirmed when in 1972 the
anthropologist John Haviland began intensive study of Guugu Yimidhirr and again recorded /gaNurru/.
[Dixon] Kangaroo court is American English, first recorded 1850 in a Southwestern context (also
mustang court), from notion of proceeding by leaps.


paraphilia (n.)

1913, from German paraphilie (by 1903), apparently coined by Austrian ethnologist Friedrich Salomo
Krauss (1859-1938) as literally inverted erotic instinct, from Greek para- beside, aside (see para-
(1)) + philos loving (see -phile).    The neurotic whose accompanying fancies always lead into
forbidden ground (and this is what constitutes the guilt feeling of pollutions) fights against
masturbation [pollutions] because it is connected with incest fancies, criminal desires,
perversions, or as F.S. Krauss calls them, paraphilias. [Wm. J. Robinson, M.D., Masturbation --
Injurious or Harmless, American Journal of Urology, May 1913]   <hr />  Krauss bereichert uns um das
neue Wort Paraphilie anstelle der Psychopathie, ein fortschrittlich-oppositionelles Wort zwar, aber
auch nur ein Wort und als Aufkl&#228;rung etwa so bedeutsam wie Seitenspr&#252;nge. [Rezensionen
&#252;ber die Anthropophyteia Jahrb&#252;cher, Leipzig, 1907]    Popularized in psychology circles
in English from c.1918 in translation of work by Viennese-born psychotherapist Wilhelm Stekel
(1868-1940); not in widespread use until 1950s. first used in Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders in 1980, as a morally neutral and more dignified label than perversion, to which it
is nonetheless etymologically similar. Related: Paraphiliac; paraphilic.


