etymologist (n.)

1630s; see etymology + -ist. Also etymologer (1640s).


grammarian (n.)

student of or writer on (Latin) grammar; philologist, etymologist; in general use, learned man, late
14c., from Old French gramairien (Modern French grammairien) grammarian, wise man, person who knows
Latin; magician, agent noun from grammaire (see grammar).


motorist (n.)

motor-car driver, 1896, from motor- + -ist. Earlier as a name for electric railway drivers (1889).
Other early alternatives included motorneer.    Motorer we have given our reasons for rejecting, and
there only remains motorist or a compound like motor-man or motor-driver. Mr. C.P.G. Scott, the
etymologist of the Century Dictionary, strongly favors motor-man or motor-driver, though he would
not object to motorist and prefers it above any other single word.   [Electric Power, October 1889]


gazette (n.)

newspaper, c.1600, from French gazette (16c.), from Italian gazzetta, Venetian dialectal gazeta
newspaper, also the name of a small copper coin, literally little magpie, from gazza; applied to the
monthly newspaper (gazeta de la novit&agrave;) published in Venice by the government, either from
its price or its association with the bird (typical of false chatter), or both.  First used in
English 1665 for the paper issued at Oxford, whither the court had fled from the plague.    The coin
may have been so called for its marking; Gamillscheg writes the word is from French gai (see jay).
The general story of the origin of the word is broadly accepted, but there are many variations in
the details:    We are indebted to the Italians for the idea of newspapers. The title of their
gazettas was, perhaps, derived from gazzera, a magpie or chatterer; or, more probably, from a
farthing coin, peculiar to the city of Venice, called gazetta, which was the connom price of the
newspapers. Another etymologist is for deriving it from the Latin gaza, which would colloquially
lengthen into gazetta, and signify a little treasury of news. The Spanish derive it from the Latin
gaza, and likewise their gazatero, and our gazetteer, for a writer of the gazette and, what is
peculiar to themselves, gazetista, for a lover of the gazette. [Isaac Disraeli, Curiosities of
Literature, 1835]   <hr />  <b>Gazzetta</b> It., Sp. gazeta, Fr. E. gazette; prop. the name of a
Venetian coin (from gaza), so in Old English. Others derive gazette from gazza a magpie, which, it
is alleged, was the emblem figured on the paper; but it does not appear on any of the oldest
Venetian specimens preserved at Florence. The first newspapers appeared at Venice about the middle
of the 16th century during the war with Soliman II, in the form of a written sheet, for the
privilege of reading which a gazzetta (= a crazia) was paid. Hence the name was transferred to the
news-sheet. [T.C. Donkin, Etymological Dictionary of the Romance Languages (based on Diez), 1864]
<hr />   GAZETTE. A paper of public intelligence and news of divers countries, first printed at
Venice, about the year 1620, and so called (some say) because una gazetta, a small piece of Venetian
coin, was given to buy or read it. Others derive the name from gazza, Italian for magpie,  i.e.
chatterer.--Trusler. A gazette was printed in France in 1631; and one in Germany in 1715. [Haydn's
Dictionary of Dates, 1857]


