etymology (n.)

late 14c., ethimolegia facts of the origin and development of a word, from Old French et(h)imologie
(14c., Modern French &eacute;tymologie), from Latin etymologia, from Greek etymologia, properly
study of the true sense (of a word), from etymon true sense (neuter of etymos true, real, actual,
related to eteos true) + -logia study of, a speaking of (see -logy).    In classical times, of
meanings; later, of histories. Latinized by Cicero as veriloquium. As a branch of linguistic
science, from 1640s. Related: Etymological; etymologically.


wormwood (n.)

c.1400, folk etymology of Old English wermod wormwood, absinthe, related to vermouth, but the
ultimate etymology is unknown. Compare Old Saxon wermoda, Dutch wermoet, Old High German werimuota,
German Wermut. Weekley suggests wer man + mod courage, from its early use as an aphrodisiac.
Figurative use, however, is usually in reference to its proverbial bitter aftertaste. Perhaps
because of the folk etymology, it formerly was used to protect clothes and bedding from moths and
fleas. A medecyne for an hawke that hath mites. Take the Iuce of wormewode and put it ther thay be
and thei shall dye. [Book of St. Albans, 1486]


cockroach (n.)

1620s, folk etymology (as if from cock + roach) of Spanish cucaracha chafer, beetle, from cuca kind
of caterpillar. Folk etymology also holds that the first element is from caca excrement.A certaine
India Bug, called by the Spaniards a Cacarootch, the which creeping into Chests they eat and defile
with their ill-sented dung [Capt. John Smith, Virginia, 1624].


Nephilim

of uncertain etymology; much disputed.


jota (n.)

Spanish folk dance; by 1846, of uncertain etymology.


Shasta

mountain in California, named for local native tribe, for whose name Bright offers no etymology.


lounge (v.)

to loll idly, c.1500, Scottish, of uncertain origin, perhaps [Barnhart] from French s'allonger
(paresseusement) to lounge about, lie at full length, from Old French alongier lengthen, from Latin
longus long (see long (adj.)). Another etymology traces it through obsolete lungis (n.) slow, lazy
person (c.1560), from Middle French longis, a generic application of Longinus, supposed to be the
name of the centurion who pierced Christ's side with a spear in John xix:34. Popular etymology
associated the name directly with long (adj.). Related: Lounged; lounging.


Samoyed (n.)

Siberian Mongolian people, 1580s, from Russian samoyed (11c.), traditionally literally self-eaters,
i.e. cannibals (the first element cognate with same, the second with eat), but this might be Russian
folk etymology of a native name:    The common Russian etymology of the name Samoyed, meaning self-
eater, deepened the Russians' already exotic image of far-northerners. The most probable linguistic
origin of Samoyed, however, is from the Saami -- saam-edne, land of the people [Andrei V. Golovnev
and Gail Osherenko, Siberian Survival: The Nenets and Their Story, Cornell University, 1999]
Which would make the name a variant of Suomi Finn. The native name is Nenets. As the name of a type
of dog (once used as a working dog in the Arctic) it is attested from 1889.


folk (n.)

Old English folc common people, laity; men; people, nation, tribe; multitude; troop, army, from
Proto-Germanic *folkom (cognates: Old Frisian folk, Middle Dutch volc, German Volk people), from
Proto-Germanic *fulka-, perhaps originally host of warriors; compare Old Norse folk people, also
army, detachment; and Lithuanian pulkas crowd, Old Church Slavonic pluku division of an army, both
believed to have been borrowed from Proto-Germanic. Old English folcstede could mean both dwelling-
place and battlefield.    Some have attempted to link the word to Greek plethos multitude; Latin
plebs people, mob, populus people or vulgus; OED and Klein discount this theory but it is accepted
in Watkins. The plural form has been usual since 17c. Superseded in most senses by people. Old
English folc was commonly used in forming compounds, such as folccwide popular saying, folcgemot
town or district meeting; folcwoh deception of the public. Folk-etymology is attested from 1890.
By Folk-etymology is meant the influence exercised upon words, both as to their form and meaning, by
the popular use and misuse of them. In a special sense, it is intended to denote the corruption
which words undergo, owing either to false ideas about their derivation, or to a mistaken analogy
with other words to which they are supposed to be related. [The Rev. A. Smythe Palmer, Folk-
Etymology, 1890]


chinchilla (n.)

small South American rodent, 1590s, from Spanish, literally little bug, diminutive of chinche (see
chinch); perhaps a folk-etymology alteration of a word from Quechua or Aymara.


Tijuana

from the name of a Diegue&ntilde;o (Yuman) village, written Tiajuan in 1829; deformed by folk-
etymology association with Spanish Tia Juana Aunt Jane.


Charterhouse

great English public school founded in London in 1611, a folk etymology alteration of chartreux (see
chartreuse); it was founded upon the site of a Carthusian monastery.


axe (n.)

Old English &aelig;ces (Northumbrian acas) axe, pickaxe, hatchet, later &aelig;x, from Proto-
Germanic *akusjo (cognates: Old Saxon accus, Old Norse ex, Old Frisian axe, German Axt, Gothic
aqizi), from PIE *agw(e)si- (cognates: Greek axine, Latin ascia).    The spelling ax is better on
every ground, of etymology, phonology, and analogy, than axe, which became prevalent during the 19th
century; but it is now disused in Britain. [OED]   <hr />   The spelling ax, though better on every
ground, of etymology, phonology, &amp; analogy (OED), is so strange to 20th-c. eyes that it suggests
pedantry &amp; is unlikely to be restored. [Fowler]    Meaning musical instrument is 1955,
originally jazz slang for the saxophone; rock slang for guitar dates to 1967. The axe in figurative
sense of cutting of anything (expenses, workers, etc.), especially as a cost-saving measure, is from
1922, probably from the notion of the headman's literal axe (itself attested from mid-15c.). To have
an axe to grind is from an 1815 essay by U.S. editor and politician Charles Miner (1780-1865) in
which a man flatters a boy and gets him to do the chore of axe-grinding for him, then leaves without
offering thanks or recompense. Misattributed to Benjamin Franklin in Weekley, OED print edition, and
many other sources.


Tabasco

proprietary name of a type of hot sauce, 1876, (the sauce so called from 1650s, originally Tavasco),
named for the state in Mexico, perhaps because the pepper sauce was first encountered there by U.S.
and European travelers. The trademark (by Edward Avery McIlhenny) claims use from c.1870. The place
name is from an unidentified Mexican Indian language and of unknown etymology.


fandango (n.)

mid-18c., lively Spanish dance, the word of unknown etymology [OED says alleged to be of negro
origin], perhaps related to fado. Fado is lovely, but not lively, so perhaps the link, if any, is
thematic. But the late date argues against it.


bidet (n.)

1620s, small horse, from French bidet (16c.), of unknown etymology. Originally in French a small
horse, a pony, thus a vessel on a low narrow stand, which can be bestridden for bathing purposes, a
sense attested in English from 1766.


Muppet (n.)

Trademark (U.S.) Sept. 26, 1972, claiming use from 1971, but in print from Sept. 1970. Name coined
by creator Jim Henson (1936-1990), who said, despite the resemblance to marionette and puppet (they
have qualities of both), it has no etymology; he just liked the sound.


Ephesus

Greek city in ancient Asia Minor, center of worship for Artemis, Greek Ephesos, traditionally
derived from ephoros overseer, in reference to its religious significance, but this might be folk
etymology.


cantaloupe (n.)

also cantaloup, 1739, from French, from Italian, from Cantalupo, name of a former Papal summer
estate near Rome, where the melons first were grown in Europe after their introduction (supposedly
from Armenia). The place name seems to be singing wolf and might refer to a spot where wolves
gathered, but this might be folk etymology.


johnny-cake (n.)

1739, American English, of unknown origin, perhaps from Shawnee cake, from the Indian tribe. Folk
etymology since 1775, however, connects it to journey cake.


Acheron

1580s, fabled river of the Lower World in Greek mythology. The name perhaps means marsh-like
(compare Greek akherousai marshlike water); the derivation from Greek akhos woe is considered folk
etymology.


Gullah

of or pertaining to blacks on the sea-islands of Georgia and South Carolina, 1739 (first attested as
a male slave's proper name), of uncertain origin. Early 19c. folk etymology made it a shortening of
Angola (homeland of many slaves) or traced it to a W. African tribal group called the Golas.


Kiev

Ukrainian Kyyiv, of unknown origin; explanation from the name of a founding prince named Kiy
probably is folk etymology. Related: Kievan.


Mexico

from Spanish, from Nahuatl (Aztecan) mexihco, the name of the ancient Aztec capital.  The etymology
of this is opaque. Because of the difference in vowel length, it cannot be derived from ME-TL
'maguey.' The sequence XIH also differs in vowel length from XIC-TLI 'navel,' which has been
proposed as a component element. The final element is locative -C(O). [Kartunnen]


jackanapes (n.)

mid-15c., a monkey, also an impertinent, conceited fellow; apparently from Jack of Naples, but
whether this is some specific personification or folk etymology of jack (n.) + ape is unknown. See
note in OED.


piggyback (adj.)

1823, probably a folk etymology alteration of pick pack (1560s), which perhaps is from pick, a
dialectal variant of pitch (v.1). As a verb from 1952.


askew (adv.)

1570s, of uncertain etymology; perhaps literally on skew (see skew), or from the Old Norse form, a
ska. Earlier askoye is attested in the same sense (early 15c.).


pennyroyal (n.)

herb, 1520s, alteration by folk etymology of Anglo-French puliol real; for second element see royal;
first element ultimately from Latin puleium thyme, of unknown origin.


mace (n.2)

spice made from dry outer husk of nutmeg, late 14c., from Old French macis (in English taken as a
plural and stripped of its -s), of uncertain origin, sometimes said to be a scribal error for Latin
macir, the name of a red spicy bark from India, but OED finds this etymology unlikely.


Herefordshire

Old English Herefordscir, from Hereford (958), literally ford suitable for the passage of an army.
Probably so-called in reference to the Roman road passing over the Wye River. Herford in Germany has
the same etymology. As the name for a type of cattle, first bred there, it is attested from 1789.


tamarack (n.)

also tamarac, North American black larch, 1805, probably of Algonquian origin (compare synonymous
hackmatack, 1792, from a source akin to Abenaki akemantak a kind of supple wood used for making
snowshoes), but the etymology is unclear.


croft (n.)

Old English croft enclosed field, small field, of unknown etymology. Crofter is 1799, originally
Scottish.


Bern

Swiss capital, probably originally from PIE root *ber- marshy place, but by folk etymology from
German B&auml;r bear (compare Berlin). Related: Bernese.


etymological (adj.)

1590s; see etymology + -ical. Related: Etymologically.


sequoia (n.)

large American coniferous tree, 1857, from Modern Latin tree genus name given 1847 by Austrian
botanist Stephan Endlicher (1804-1849), originally to a different tree, the coast redwood,
apparently in honor of Sequoya (a.k.a. George Guess, 1760-1843), Cherokee man who invented a system
of writing for his people's language, whose name is from Cherokee (Iroquoian) Sikwayi, a word of
unknown etymology.    Endlicher was a specialist in conifers, and he also was a philologist. But he
never gave an etymology of this name and a search of his papers discovered no mention of Sequoya or
the Cherokee writing system, and the connection is an assumption that some botanists have
challenged, though no better candidate for a source has yet been found.    The giant sequoia was
unseen by Europeans until 1833 and unknown to scientists until 1852. In May 1855, a pair of American
botanists named it Taxodium giganteum, but that name was deemed inappropriate for several scientific
reasons. Meanwhile, English botanist John Lindley, who had never been to California, in 1853 named
it Wellingtonia in honor of the Duke of Wellington. As high as Wellington towers above his
contemporaries, as high towers this California tree above the forest surrounding it. Therefore, it
shall bear for all time to come the name Wellingtonia gigantea. This sat poorly with the Americans,
and much ink was spilled until a French botanist provided the solution by transferring Endlicher's
name. In Britain still popularly called Wellingtonia.


Cassiopeia (n.)

northern constellation, in Greek mythology queen of Ethiopia and mother of Andromeda, from Latinized
form of Greek Kassiepeia, Kassiopeia, of unknown etymology. Related: Cassiopeian.


Cyrus

Latinized form of Greek Kyros, from Old Persian Kurush, a name of unknown etymology. In Hebrew,
Koresh, and in that form taken c.1990 by Wayne Howell of Texas, U.S., when he became head of the
Branch Davidian church there.


Swanee

in Stephen Foster's Old Folks at Home, river in Georgia and Florida, usually Suwanee, sometimes said
to be a corruption of Spanish San Juan [Room]; Bright says the river name is from the Cherokee
village of Sawani, for which no etymology is offered.


Modena

Italian city, the name probably is from a pre-Latin language, but folk etymology connects it with
Mutina, epithet of the nymph Lara who was stricken dumb by Zeus in punishment for her loquacity,
from Latin mutus. Related: Modenese.


piepowder (n.)

early 13c., wayfarer, itinerant merchant, etc., folk etymology alteration of Old French pie pouldre
or Medieval Latin pede-pulverosus, both literally dusty-footed (see foot (n.) + powder (n.)).


belladonna (n.)

1590s, deadly nightshade (Atropa belladonna), from Italian, literally fair lady; the plant so called
supposedly because women made cosmetic eye-drops from its juice (an 18c. explanation; atropic acid,
found in the plant, has a well-known property of dilating the pupils) or because it was used to
poison beautiful women. Perhaps a folk etymology alteration; Gamillscheg suggests ultimately of
Gaulish origin.


etymologist (n.)

1630s; see etymology + -ist. Also etymologer (1640s).


Uriah

masc. proper name, in Old Testament, the Hittite husband of Bathsheba; of non-Hebrew (possibly
Horite) origin, but explained by folk etymology as Hebrew Uriyyah, literally flame of the Lord.
Uriah Heep, character from Dickens' David Copperfield (1850) sometimes is invoked as the type of a
hypocritically humble person.


banausic (adj.)

merely mechanical, coined 1845 from Greek banausikos pertaining to mechanics, from banausos artisan,
mere mechanical, hence (to the Greeks) base, ignoble; perhaps literally working by fire, from baunos
furnace, forge (but Klein dismisses this as folk etymology and calls it of uncertain origin).


Sisyphus

 King of Corinth, famed as the craftiest of men, he was condemned in the afterlife to roll uphill a
stone which perpetually rolls down again; Greek Sisyphos, a name of unknown origin. Liddell &amp;
Scott suggest a reduplication of syphos the crafty (with Aeolic -u- for -o-), but Klein calls this
folk-etymology.


rue (n.1)

perennial evergreen shrub, late 14c., from Old French rue (13c.), earlier rude, from Latin ruta rue,
probably from Greek rhyte, of uncertain etymology, originally a Peloponnesian word. The bitter taste
of its leaves led to many punning allusions to rue (n.2.).


baba (n.)

kind of plum cake, 1827, from French baba (19c.), said by French etymology dictionaries to be from
Polish baba.


boa (n.)

late 14c., large snake, from Latin boa, type of large serpent mentioned in Pliny's Natural History;
origin unknown (in Middle English folk etymology associated with Greek bous ox). Extension to snake-
like coil of fur worn by ladies is from 1836. Boa constrictor so called from 1788.


Chamorro

indigenous people of Guam and the Marianas Islands, from Spanish Chamorro, literally shorn, shaven,
bald. Supposedly because the men shaved their heads, but the name also has been connected to native
Chamoru, said to mean noble, so perhaps Chamorro is a Spanish folk etymology.


etymologicon (n.)

a work in which etymologies are traced, 1640s, from Latin etymologicon, from Greek etymologikon,
neuter of etymologikos (see etymology).


