Eucharist (n.)

sacrament of the Lord's Supper, the Communion, mid-14c., from Old French eucariste, from Late Latin
eucharistia, from Greek eukharistia thanksgiving, gratitude, later the Lord's Supper, from
eukharistos grateful, from eu well (see eu-) + stem of kharizesthai show favor, from kharis favor,
grace, from PIE root *gher- (5) to like, want (see hortatory). Eukharisteo is the usual verb for to
thank, to be thankful in the Septuagint and Greek New Testament. Related: Eucharistic.


sacrament (n.)

outward and visible sign of inward and spiritual grace, also the eucharist, c. 1200, from Old French
sacrament consecration; mystery (12c., Modern French sacrement) and directly from Latin sacramentum
a consecrating (also source of Spanish sacramento, German Sakrament, etc.), from sacrare to
consecrate (see sacred); a Church Latin loan-translation of Greek mysterion (see mystery).
Meaning a holy mystery in English is from late 14c. The seven sacraments are baptism, penance,
confirmation, holy orders, the Eucharist, matrimony, and anointing of the sick (extreme unction).


Zwinglian (adj.)

1532, after Ulrich Zwingli (1484-1531), Swiss Protestant reformer who revolted from the Roman
communion in 1516 but who differed from Luther on theological points relating to the real presence
in the Eucharist.


Sanctus (n.)

late 14c., Latin, initial word of the angelic hymn (Isa. vi:3), concluding the preface of the
Eucharist, literally holy (see saint (n.)). It renders Hebrew qadhosh in the hymn.


really (adv.)

c. 1400, originally in reference to the presence of Christ in the Eucharist, from real (adj.) + -ly
(2). Sense of actually is from early 15c. Purely emphatic use dates from c. 1600; interrogative use
(oh, really?) is first recorded 1815.


paten (n.)

plate for bread at Eucharist, c. 1300, from Old French patene and directly, from Medieval Latin
patena, from Latin patina pan, dish (see pan (n.)).


celebration (n.)

1520s, honoring of a day or season by appropriate festivities, formed in English from celebrate, or
else from Latin celebrationem (nominative celebratio) numerous attendance (especially upon a
festival celebration), noun of action from past participle stem of celebrare. Meaning performance of
a religious ceremony (especially the Eucharist) is from 1570s; that of extolling in speeches, etc.
is from 1670s.


viaticum (n.)

1560s, from Latin viaticum travelling money; provision for a journey, noun use of neuter of
adjective viaticus, from via way (see via). In Late Latin also money to pay the expenses of one
studying abroad, and in Church Latin, the eucharist given to a dying person.


transubstantiation (n.)

late 14c., change of one substance to another, from Medieval Latin trans(s)ubstantiationem
(nominative trans(s)ubstantio), noun of action from trans(s)ubstantiare to change from one substance
into another, from Latin trans- across (see trans-) + substantiare to substantiate, from substania
substance (see substance). Ecclesiastical sense in reference to the Eucharist first recorded 1530s.


liturgy (n.)

1550s, the service of the Holy Eucharist, from Middle French liturgie or directly from Late
Latin/Medieval Latin liturgia public service, public worship, from Greek leitourgia a liturgy;
public duty, ministration, ministry, from leitourgos one who performs a public ceremony or service,
public servant, from leito- public (from laos people; compare leiton public hall, leite priestess;
see lay (adj.)) + -ergos that works, from ergon work (see organ). Meaning collective formulas for
the conduct of divine service in Christian churches is from 1590s.


