evasive (adj.)

1725, from French &eacute;vasif, from Latin evas-, past participle stem of evadere (see evasion).
Related: Evasively; evasiveness.


cagey (adj.)

evasive, reticent, 1896, U.S. colloquial, of unknown origin. Earlier in English dialect it meant
sportive.


stalling (n.)

action of being evasive, 1927, verbal noun from stall (v.2).


runaround (n.)

also run-around, deceptive, evasive treatment, 1915, from verbal phrase, from run (v.) + around
(adv.).


tergiversate (v.)

1650s, back-formation from tergiversation, or else from Latin tergiversatus, past participle of
tergiversari be evasive, literally to turn one's back. Related: Tergiversated; tergiversating.


stall (v.2)

1590s, distract a victim and thus screen a pickpocket from observation, from stall (n.2) decoy.
Meaning to precaricate, be evasive, play for time is attested from 1903. Related: Stalled; stalling.
Compare old slang stalling ken house for receiving stolen goods (1560s).


loo (n.2)

type of card game, 1670s, short for lanterloo (1660s), from French lanturelu, originally (1620s) the
refrain of a popular comic song; according to French sources the refrain expresses a mocking refusal
or an evasive answer and was formed on the older word for a type of song chorus, turelure;
apparently a jingling reduplication of loure bagpipe (perhaps from Latin lura bag, purse).     From
its primary signification -- a kind of bagpipe inflated from the mouth -- the word 'loure' came to
mean an old dance, in slower rhythm than the gigue, generally in 6-4 time. As this was danced to the
nasal tones of the 'loure,' the term 'loure' was gradually applied to any passage meant to be played
in the style of the old bagpipe airs. [Grove's Dictionary of Music and Musicians, London, 1906]
The refrain sometimes is met in English as turra-lurra.


trick (n.)

early 15c., a cheat, a mean ruse, from Old North French trique trick, deceit, treachery, cheating,
from trikier to deceive, to cheat, variant of Old French trichier to cheat, trick, deceive, of
uncertain origin, probably from Vulgar Latin *triccare, from Latin tricari be evasive, shuffle, from
tric&aelig; trifles, nonsense, a tangle of difficulties, of unknown origin.    Meaning a roguish
prank is recorded from 1580s; sense of the art of doing something is first attested 1610s. Meaning
prostitute's client is first attested 1915; earlier it was U.S. slang for a robbery (1865). To do
the trick accomplish one's purpose is from 1812; to miss a trick fail to take advantage of
opportunity is from 1889; from 1872 in reference to playing the card-game of whist, which might be
the original literal sense. Trick-or-treat is recorded from 1942. Trick question is from 1907.


stall (n.2)

pretense or evasive story to avoid doing something, 1812, from earlier sense thief's assistant
(1590s, also staller), from a variant of stale bird used as a decoy to lure other birds (mid-15c.),
from Anglo-French estale decoy, pigeon used to lure a hawk (13c., compare stool pigeon), literally
standstill, from Old French estal place, stand, stall, from Frankish *stal- position, ultimately
from Germanic and cognate with Old English steall (see stall (n.1)). Compare Old English
st&aelig;lhran decoy reindeer, German stellvogel decoy bird. Figurative sense of deception, means of
allurement is first recorded 1520s. Also see stall (v.2).    The stallers up are gratified with such
part of the gains acquired as the liberality of the knuckling gentlemen may prompt them to bestow.
[J.H. Vaux, Flash Dictionary, 1812]


shuck (v.)

to remove the shucks from, 1819, from or related to shuck (n.). Related: Shucked; shucking.    Many
extended senses are from the notion of stripping an ear of corn, or from the capers associated with
husking frolics; such as to strip (off) one's clothes (1848) and to deceive, swindle, cheat, fool
(1959); phrase shucking and jiving fooling, deceiving is suggested from 1966, in U.S. black English,
but compare shuck (v.) a slang term among cool musicians for to improvise chords, especially to a
piece of music one does not know (1957), and shuck (n.) a theft or fraud, in use by 1950s among U.S.
blacks.    [B]lack senses probably fr[om] the fact that black slaves sang and shouted gleefully
during corn-shucking season, and this behavior, along with lying and teasing, became a part of the
protective and evasive behavior normally adopted towards white people in traditional race relations;
the sense of swindle is perhaps related to the mid-1800s term to be shucked out, be defeated, be
denied victory, which suggests that the notion of stripping someone as an ear of corn is stripped
may be basic in the semantics. [Dictionary of American Slang]


