exact (v.)

mid-15c., from Latin exactus, past participle of exigere (see exact (adj.)). Older in English than
the adjective and retaining the literal sense of the Latin source. Related: Exacted; exacting.


exactitude (n.)

1734, from French exactitude (17c.), from exact, from Latin exactus (see exact (adj.)).


exact (adj.)

precise, rigorous, accurate, 1530s, from Latin exactus precise, accurate, exact, past participle of
exigere demand, require, literally to drive or force out, also demand, finish, measure, from ex- out
(see ex-) + agere drive, lead, act (see act (n.)).


exacting (adj.)

too demanding, 1580s, present participle adjective from exact (v.).


exacta (n.)

type of horse-racing bet, 1964, said to have originated in New York; from exact (adj.).


exactness (n.)

1560s, perfection, from exact (adj.) + -ness. Meaning precision is 1640s.


exactly (adv.)

1530s, from exact (adj.) + -ly (2). Elliptical use for quite right not recorded before 1869.


exaction (n.)

late 14c., from French exaction, from Latin exactionem (nominative exactio) a driving out;
supervision; exaction; a tax, tribute, impost, noun of action from past participle stem of exigere
(see exact (adj.)).


T

to cross one's t's (and dot one's i's) to be exact is attested from 1849. Phrase to a T exactly is
recorded from 1690s, though the exact signification remains uncertain despite much speculation. The
measuring tool called a T-square (sometimes suggested as the source of this) is recorded by that
name only from 1785. The T-cell (1970) so called because they are derived from the thymus. As a
medieval numeral, T represented 160.


accurate (adj.)

1610s, done with care, from Latin accuratus prepared with care, exact, elaborate, past participle of
accurare take care of, from ad- to (see ad-) + curare take care of (see cure). The notion of doing
something carefully led to that of being exact (1650s). Related: Accurately; accurateness.


brag (n.)

late 14c., pomp; arrogance, pride; see brag (v.); the exact relationship of the forms is uncertain.
Meaning that which is boasted is from 1530s. As a once-popular poker-like card game, from 1734.


conservation of energy

apparently coined in French by Leibnitz in 1692; attested in English from early 18c. as conservatio
virum vivarum or partially nativized versions of it. The exact phrase is attested from 1853.


piece de resistance (n.)

1831, from French pi&egrave;ce de r&eacute;sistance, originally the most substantial dish in a meal.
Lit. piece of resistance; there seems to be disagreement as to the exact signification.


upsilon (n.)

20th letter of the Greek alphabet, 1640s, from Greek u psilon, literally a mere (or bare) 'u;'  so
called in later Greek in reference to its sound. The exact reason is variously explained, but it
seems to have had something to do with distinguishing it from diphthongs.


blackleg (n.)

swindler, especially in equestrian events, 1771, from black (adj.) + leg (n.), but the exact
signification is uncertain.


heel-tap (n.)

also heeltap, 1680s, one of the bits of leather that are stacked up to make a shoe heel (see heel
(n.1)); meaning bit of liquor left in a glass or bottle first recorded 1780s; the exact connection
is uncertain unless it be the last or final part.


endgame (n.)

1884, from chess, from end + game (n.). There is no formal or exact definition of it in chess, but
it begins when most of the pieces have been cleared from the board.


trip (n.)

act or action of tripping (transitive), early 14c., from trip (v.); sense of a short journey or
voyage is from mid-15c.; the exact connection to the earlier sense is uncertain. The meaning
psychedelic drug experience is first recorded 1959 as a noun; the verb in this sense is from 1966,
from the noun.


B.C.

abbreviation of Before Christ, in chronology, attested by 1823. The phrase itself, Before Christ, in
dating, with exact years, is in use by 1660s.


addicted (adj.)

1530s, delivered over by judicial sentence; past participle adjective from addict (v.). Modern sense
of dependent is short for self-addicted to give over or award (oneself) to someone or some practice
(1560s; exact phrase from c.1600); specialization to narcotics dependency is from c.1910.


coincidence (n.)

c.1600, exact correspondence, from French coincidence, from coincider (see coincide). Meaning a
concurrence of events with no apparent connection is from 1680s.


exiguous (adj.)

scanty, 1650s, from Latin exiguus small, petty, paltry, scanty in measure or number, from exigere
(see exact (v.)).


dippy (adj.)

mad, insane, crazy, 1903, perhaps from dip + -y (2), but the exact signification is unclear. Another
theory connects it with dipsomania.


skidoo (v.)

a vogue word of 1905, to leave in a hurry, perhaps a variant of skedaddle (q.v.). The association
with twenty-three is as old as the word, but the exact connection is obscure.    Then skidoo, little
girl, skidoo.  23 is the number for you.  [1906]


pheromone (n.)

chemical released by an animal that causes a specific response when detected by another animal of
the same species, but the exact definition is much debated; 1959, coined (by Karlson &amp;
L&uuml;scher) from Greek pherein to carry (see infer) + ending as in hormone.


inexact (adj.)

1828, from in- (1) not, opposite of + exact. Related: Inexactly.


converse (adj.)

exact opposite, 1560s, from Latin conversus turn around, past participle of convertere to turn about
(see convert). Originally mathematical. The noun is attested from 1550s in mathematics. Related:
Conversely.


plumb (adj.)

perpendicular, vertical, mid-15c., from plumb (n.). The notion of exact measurement led to extended
sense of completely, downright (1748), sometimes spelled plump, plum, or plunk.


impressionist

as a style of painting aiming to represent overall impressions rather than exact details, first
attested in English 1876 (adjective and noun), coined in French 1874 by French critic Louis Leroy
(&eacute;cole impressionniste) in a disparaging reference to Monet's sunset painting Impression,
Soleil Levant. Later extended to other arts.


top-notch (adj.)

also top notch, 1848, from top (adj.) + notch (n.). Figurative of the highest point of something,
but the exact mechanical image is uncertain.


akimbo

c.1400, in kenebowe, of unknown origin, perhaps from Middle English phrase in keen bow at a sharp
angle, or from a Scandinavian word akin to Icelandic kengboginn bow-bent, but this seems not to have
been used in this exact sense. Many languages use a teapot metaphor for this, such as French faire
le pot a deux anses to play the pot with two handles.


heteronym (n.)

word having the same spelling as another but with a different sound and meaning, 1880s, also a
thing's name in one language that is an exact translation of its name in another; from hetero- +
-onym name (see name (n.)). Related: Heteronymic; heteronymous.


exigent (adj.)

1660s, urgent, a back-formation from exigency or else from Latin exigentem (nominative exigens),
present participle of exigere to demand (see exact (v.)).


saying (n.)

utterance, recitation, action of the verb 'say,'  c.1300, verbal noun from say (v.); meaning
something that has been said (usually by someone thought important) is from c.1300; sense of a
proverb is first attested mid-15c.   <b>&#199;a va sans dire</b>, a familiar French locution, whose
English equivalent might be that is a matter of course, or that may be taken for granted. But
recently it has become the tendency to translate it literally, that goes without saying, and these
words, though originally uncouth and almost unmeaning to the unpractised ear, are gradually
acquiring the exact meaning of the French. [Walsh, 1892]


duplicate (v.)

1620s, to double, from Latin duplicatus, past participle of duplicare (see duplicate (adj.)).
Meaning make an exact copy is from 1640s (implied in duplicated). Related: Duplicating. The noun is
first recorded 1530s.


dickens

exclamation, 1590s, apparently a substitute for devil; probably altered from Dickon, nickname for
Richard and source of the surnames Dickens and Dickenson, but exact derivation and meaning are
unknown.


grinder (n.)

Old English grindere one who grinds (grain); agent noun from grind (v.). Meaning molar tooth is late
14c. (Old English had grindeto&eth;). Meaning machine for milling is from 1660s; of persons, from
late 15c. Large sandwich sense is from 1954, though the exact signification is uncertain (perhaps
from the amount of chewing required to eat one).


stipulate (v.)

1620s, bargain, make a contract (intransitive), back-formation from stipulation, or else from Latin
stipulatus, past participle of stipulari exact (a promise), bargain for. Transitive sense of demand
as a condition is from 1640s. Related: Stipulated; stipulating.


exigency (n.)

1580s, from Middle French exigence, from Latin exigentia urgency, from exigentem (nominative
exigens), from exigere to demand, require; drive out (see exact (v.)). Related: Exigencies (1650s).


tallboy (n.)

also tall-boy, high-stemmed glass or goblet, 1670s, from tall + boy, though the exact signification
is unclear. In reference to a high chest of drawers it is recorded from 1769, here perhaps a partial
loan-translation of French haut bois, literally high wood.


serape (n.)

also sarape, type of shawl for men, 1834, from Mexican Spanish sarape, probably from Nahuatl, but
exact source difficult to identify source because there is no -r- sound in Nahuatl.


blab (v.)

mid-15c., apparently from Middle English noun blabbe one who does not control his tongue (late
13c.), probably echoic. Related: Blabbed; blabbing. The exact relationship between the blabs and
blabber is difficult to determine. The noun was [e]xceedingly common in 16th and 17th c.; unusual in
literature since c 1750 [OED].


bleeding heart (n.)

type of flowering plant, so called from 1690s. In the sense of person excessively sympathetic
(especially toward those the speaker deems not to deserve it) is attested by 1951, but said by many
to have been popularized with reference to liberals (especially Eleanor Roosevelt) in 1930s by
newspaper columnist Westbrook Pegler (1894-1969), though quotations are wanting; bleeding in a
figurative sense of generous is from late 16c., and the notion of one's heart bleeding as a figure
of emotional anguish is from late 14c., but the exact image here may be the bleeding heart of Jesus.


examine (v.)

c.1300, from Old French examiner interrogate, question, torture, from Latin examinare to test or
try; weigh, consider, ponder, from examen a means of weighing or testing, probably ultimately from
exigere weigh accurately (see exact (adj.)). Related: Examined; examining.


exigence (n.)

mid-15c., from Middle French exigence or directly from Latin exigentia, from exigentem (nominative
exigens), present participle of exigere (see exact (v.)).


duplicate (adj.)

mid-15c., having two parts, double, from Latin duplicatus, past participle of duplicare to double,
from duo two (see two) + plicare to fold see ply (v.1)). Meaning exactly corresponding, that is an
exact copy of is from 1812.


tartar (n.)

bitartrate of potash (a deposit left during fermentation), late 14c., from Old French tartre, from
Medieval Latin tartarum, from late Greek tartaron tartar encrusting the sides of wine casks, perhaps
of Semitic origin, but if so the exact source has not been identified. The purified substance is
cream of tartar. Used generally in 17c. of encrustations from liquid contact; specific meaning
encrustation on teeth (calcium phosphate) is first recorded 1806.


scalp (n.)

mid-14c., top of the head (including hair), presumably from a Scandinavian source (though exact
cognates are wanting) related to Old Norse skalli a bald head, skalpr sheath, scabbard,from the
source of scale (n.1). French scalpe, German, Danish, Swedish skalp are from English. Meaning head
skin and hair as proof of death or a victory trophy is from c.1600.


snuff (n.)

powdered tobacco to be inhaled, 1680s, from Dutch or Flemish snuf, shortened form of snuftabak snuff
tobacco, from snuffen to sniff, snuff (see snuff (v.2)). The practice became fashionable in England
c.1680. Slang phrase up to snuff knowing, sharp, wide-awake, not likely to be deceived is from 1811;
the exact sense is obscure unless it refers to the elevating properties of snuff.


jackboot (n.)

also jack-boot, 1680s, type of large, strong cavalry boot of 17c.-18c., later a type worn by German
military and para-military units in the Nazi period. From jack (n.), though the exact sense here is
unclear + boot (n.1). Figurative of military oppression since 1768. Related: Jackbooted.


