exaltation (n.)

late 14c, from Old French exaltacion enhancement, elevation, from Latin exaltationem (nominative
exaltatio) elevation, pride, from exaltare (see exalt).


exalt (v.)

late 14c., from Old French exalter (10c.), from Latin exaltare raise, elevate, from ex- out, up (see
ex-) + altus high (see old). Related: Exalted; exalting.


puff (v.)

Old English pyffan to blow with the mouth, of imitative origin. Meaning pant, breathe hard and fast
is from late 14c. Used of small swellings and round protuberances since 1530s. Transitive figurative
sense of exalt is from 1530s; shading by early 18c. into meaning praise with self-interest. Related:
Puffed; puffing.


heighten (v.)

mid-15c., heightenen to exalt, to honor or raise to high position, from height + -en (1). Related:
Heightened; heightening.


Jeremiah

masc. proper name, Old Testament prophet (see jeremiad) who flourished c.626-586 B.C.E., from Late
Latin Jeremias, from Hebrew Yirmeyah, probably literally may Jehovah exalt, but Klein suggests it
also might be short for Yirmeyahu the Lord casts, the Lord founds, and compares the first element in
Jerusalem. The vernacular form in English was Jeremy.


enhance (v.)

late 13c., anhaunsen to raise, make higher, from Anglo-French enhauncer, probably from Old French
enhaucier make greater, make higher or louder; fatten, foster; raise in esteem, from Vulgar Latin
*inaltiare, from Late Latin inaltare raise, exalt,  from altare make high, from altus high (see
old).    Meaning raise in station, wealth, or fame attested in English from c.1300. The -h- in Old
French supposedly from influence of Frankish *hoh high. Related: Enhanced; enhancing.


heave (v.)

Old English hebban to lift, raise; lift up, exalt (class VI strong verb; past tense hof, past
participle hafen), from Proto-Germanic *hafjan (cognates: Old Norse hefja, Dutch heffen, German
heben, Gothic hafjan to lift, raise), from PIE *kap-yo-, from root *kap- to grasp (see capable).
Related to Old English habban to hold, possess. Intransitive use by c.1200. Meaning to throw is from
1590s. Sense of retch, make an effort to vomit is first attested c.1600. Related: Heaved; heaving.
Nautical heave-ho was a chant in lifting (c.1300, hevelow).


extol (v.)

also extoll, c.1400, to lift up, from Latin extollere to place on high, raise, elevate, figuratively
to exalt, praise, from ex- up (see ex-) + tollere to raise, from PIE *tele- to bear, carry, with
derivatives referring to measured weights and thence money and payment [Watkins] (cognates: Greek
talantos bearing, suffering, tolman to carry, bear, telamon broad strap for bearing something,
talenton a balance, pair of scales, Atlas the 'Bearer' of Heaven; Lithuanian tiltas bridge; Sanskrit
tula balance, tulayati lifts up, weighs; Latin tolerare to bear, support, latus borne; Old English
&thorn;olian to endure; Armenian tolum I allow). Figurative sense of praise highly in English is
first attested c.1500. Related: Extolled; extolling.


