exchequer (n.)

c.1300, from Anglo-French escheker a chessboard, from Old French eschequier, from Medieval Latin
scaccarium chess board (see check (n.1); also see checker (n.2)). Government financial sense began
under the Norman kings of England and refers to a cloth divided in squares that covered a table on
which accounts of revenue were reckoned with counters, and which apparently reminded people of a
chess board. Respelled with an -x- based on the mistaken belief that it originally was a Latin ex-
word.


checker (n.2)

table covered with a checked cloth, specialized sense of checker (n.1), late 14c. (in Anglo-Latin
from c.1300); especially a table for counting money or keeping accounts (revenue reckoned with
counters); later extended to the fiscal department of the English Crown; the Exchequer (mid-14c.; in
Anglo-Latin from late 12c.).


remembrance (n.)

c.1300, a memory, recollection, from Old French remembrance (11c.), from remembrer (see remember).
From late 14c. as consideration, reflection; present consciousness of a past event; store of
personal experiences available to recollection, capacity to recall the past. Also late 14c. as
memento, keepsake, souvenir, and a commemoration, remembering, ritual of commemoration. Meaning
faculty of memory, capability of remembering is early 15c.    British Remembrance Day, the Sunday
nearest Nov. 11 (originally in memory of the dead of World War I) is attested from 1921. A
remembrancer (early 15c.) was a royal official of the Exchequer tasked with recording and collecting
debts due to the Crown; hence also, figuratively Death (late 15c.).


check (n.1)

c.1300, a call in chess noting one's move has placed his opponent's king (or another major piece) in
immediate peril, from Old French eschequier a check at chess (also chess board, chess set), from
eschec the game of chess; chessboard; check; checkmate, from Vulgar Latin *scaccus, from Arabic
shah, from Persian shah king, the principal piece in a chess game (see shah; also compare checkmate
(n.)). Also c.1300 in a generalized sense, harmful incident or event.    When the king is in check
that player's choices are severely limited. Hence, sudden stoppage (early 14c.), and by c.1700 to a
token of ownership used to check against, and prevent, loss or theft (surviving in hat check) and a
check against forgery or alteration, which gave the modern financial use of bank check, money draft
(first recorded 1798 and often spelled cheque), probably influenced by exchequer. Checking account
is attested from 1897, American English. Blank check in the figurative sense attested by 1849.
Checks and balances is from 1782, perhaps originally suggesting machinery.


