excited (adj.)

1650s, magnetically or electrically stimulated; modern sense of agitated attested 1855; past
participle adjective from excite. Related: Excitedly.


surprised (adj.)

1610s, attacked unexpectedly, past participle adjective from surprise (v.). Meaning excited by
something unexpected is from 1882.


shook (adj.)

disturbed, 1891, past participle adjective from shake (v.). Shook up excited is 1897 slang, revived
1957 by Elvis Presley.


animated (adj.)

1530s, alive, past participle adjective from animate (v.). Meaning mentally excited is from 1530s;
full of activity from 1580s. The moving pictures sense is attested from 1895; of cartoons from 1897.
Related: Animatedly.


up (adj.)

c.1300, dwelling inland or upland, from up (adv.). Meaning going up is from 1784. From 1815 as
excited, exhilarated, happy, hence enthusiastic, optimistic. Up-and-coming promising is from 1848.
Musical up-tempo (adj.) is recorded from 1948.


sensational (adj.)

of or pertaining to sensation or the senses, 1840; aiming at violently excited effects, 1863, from
sensation in its secondary sense. Related: Sensationalistic; sensationalistically.


bristle (v.)

c.1200 (implied in past participle adjective bristled) set or covered with bristles, from bristle
(n.). Meaning become angry or excited is 1540s, from the way animals show fight. Related: Bristling.


barmy (adj.)

1530s, frothing, covered with barm; see barm + -y (2). Figurative sense of excited, flighty,
bubbling with excitement is from c.1600. Meaning foolish (1892) is probably an alteration of balmy.


hopped (adj.)

a word that seems to merge three senses of hop; the meaning flavored with hops (hop (n.1)) is first
attested 1660s; that of under the influence of drugs (hop (n.2)) is from 1924; that of excited,
enthusiastic (perhaps from hop (v.)) is from 1923. Meaning performance-enhanced (of an engine, etc.)
is from 1945.


tumult (n.)

late 14c., from Old French tumult (12c.), from Latin tumultus commotion, bustle, uproar, disorder,
disturbance, related to tumere to be excited, swell (see tumid).


frenzy (n.)

mid-14c., delirium, insanity, from Old French frenesie, from Medieval Latin phrenesia, from
phrenesis, back-formation from Latin phreneticus delirious (see frenetic). Meaning excited state of
mind is from c.1400.


aggie (n.2)

type of toy marble, by 1905, American English, colloquial shortening of agate (q.v.).    Excited
groups gather about rude circles scratched in the mud, and there is talk of pureys, and reals, and
aggies, and commies, and fen dubs! There is a rich click about the bulging pockets of the boys, and
every so often in school time something drops on the floor and rolls noisily across the room. When
Miss Daniels asks: Who did that? the boys all look so astonished. Who did what pray tell? [McClure's
Magazine, May 1905]


irritable (adj.)

1660s, from French irritable and directly from Latin irritabilis easily excited, from irritare (see
irritate). Related: Irritably.


astir (adv.)

up and about, 1823, from phrase on the stir, or from Scottish asteer; from stir. Old English had
astyrian, which yielded Middle English ben astired be stirred up, excited, aroused.


tumescence (n.)

1725, from French tumescence, from Latin tumescentem (nominative tumescens) swelling, present
participle of tumescere begin to swell, swell up, figuratively grow excited, become enraged,
inceptive of tumere to swell (see tumid) + inchoative suffix -escere.


feverish (adj.)

late 14c., causing fever; 1630s, excited; 1640s, having symptoms of fever, from fever + -ish.
Earlier in same sense was feverous (late 14c.). Related: Feverishly; feverishness.


over-excite (v.)

1708 (implied in over-excited), from over- + excite. Related: Over-exciting.


fetishism (n.)

1801, worship of fetishes; in the purely psycho-sexual sense first recorded 1897 in writings of
Henry Havelock Ellis (1859-1939), from fetish + -ism.  In certain perversions of the sexual
instinct, the person, part of the body, or particular object belonging to the person by whom the
impulse is excited, is called the fetish of the patient. [E. Morselli in Baldwin Dictionary of
Philosophy, 1901]  Related: Fetishist (1845; psycho-sexual sense from 1897).


surge (n.)

late 15c., fountain, stream, of uncertain origin, probably from Middle French sourge-, stem of
sourdre to rise, swell, from Latin surgere to rise, arise, get up, mount up, ascend; attack,
contraction of surrigere, from assimilated form of sub up from below (see sub-) + regere to keep
straight, guide (see regal). Meaning high, rolling swell of water is from 1520s; figurative sense of
excited rising up (as of feelings) is from 1510s.


respect (n.)

late 14c., relationship, relation; regard, consideration, from Old French respect and directly from
Latin respectus regard, a looking at, literally act of looking back (or often) at one, noun use of
past participle of respicere look back at, regard, consider, from re- back (see re-) + specere look
at (see scope (n.1)). Meanings feeling of esteem excited by actions or attributes of someone or
something; courteous or considerate treatment due to personal worth or power are from 1580s, as is
sense of point, particular feature.


orgasm (n.)

1680s, sexual climax, from French orgasme or Modern Latin orgasmus, from Greek orgasmos excitement,
swelling, from organ be in heat, become ripe for, literally to swell, be excited, related to orge
impulse, excitement, anger, from PIE root *wrog- to burgeon, swell with strength (cognates: Sanskrit
urja a nourishment, sap, vigor, Old Irish ferc, ferg anger). Also used 17c. of other violent
excitements of emotion or other bodily functions.


bustle (v.)

be active, 1570s (bustling noisy or excited activity is from early 15c.), frequentative of Middle
English bresten to rush, break, from Old English bersten (see burst (v.)), influenced by Old Norse
buask to make oneself ready (see busk (v.)), or from busk (v.) via a frequentative form buskle.
Related: Bustled; bustling; bustler.


flip (v.)

1590s (1520s in flip-flop), imitative or else a contraction of fillip (q.v.), which also is held to
be imitative. Sense of get excited is first recorded 1950; flip one's lid lose one's head, go wild
is from 1950. For flip (adj.) glib, see flippant. Meaning to flip a coin (to decide something) is by
1879. As a noun by 1690s. Related: Flipped. Flipping (adj.) as euphemism for fucking is British
slang first recorded 1911 in D.H. Lawrence. Flip side (of a gramophone record) is by 1949.


handle (n.)

Old English handle, formed from hand (n.) with instrumental suffix -le indicating a tool in the way
thimble was formed from thumb, spindle from spin, treadle from tread, etc. The slang sense of
nickname is first recorded 1870, originally U.S., from earlier expressions about adding a handle to
(one's) name, i.e. a title such as Mister or Sir, attested from 1833. To fly off the handle (1833)
is a figurative reference to an ax head (to be off the handle be excited is recorded from 1825,
American English). To get a handle on get control of is recorded by 1919.


ecstasy (n.)

late 14c., in a frenzy or stupor, fearful, excited, from Old French estaise ecstasy, rapture, from
Late Latin extasis, from Greek ekstasis entrancement, astonishment; any displacement, in New
Testament a trance, from existanai displace, put out of place, also drive out of one's mind
(existanai phrenon), from ek out (see ex-) + histanai to place, cause to stand, from PIE root *sta-
to stand (see stet).    Used by 17c. mystical writers for a state of rapture that stupefied the body
while the soul contemplated divine things, which probably helped the meaning shift to exalted state
of good feeling (1610s). Slang use for the drug 3,4-methylendioxymethamphetamine dates from 1985.


hot (adj.)

Old English hat hot, flaming, opposite of cold, also fervent, fierce, intense, excited, from Proto-
Germanic *haita- (cognates: Old Saxon and Old Frisian het, Old Norse heitr, Middle Dutch and Dutch
heet, German hei&szlig; hot, Gothic heito heat of a fever), from PIE root *kai- heat (cognates:
Lithuanian kaistu to grow hot).    The association of hot with sexuality dates back to c.1500. Taste
sense of pungent, acrid, biting is from 1540s. Sense of exciting, remarkable, very good is 1895;
that of stolen is first recorded 1925 (originally with overtones of easily identified and difficult
to dispose of); that of radioactive is from 1942.   Hot flashes in the menopausal sense attested
from 1887. Hot air unsubstantiated statements, boastful talk is from 1900. Hot stuff for anything
good or excellent is by 1889. Hot potato in figurative sense is from 1846. The hot and cold in hide-
and-seek or guessing games are from hunting (1640s), with notion of tracking a scent.


marriage (n.)

c.1300, action of marrying, entry into wedlock; also state or condition of being husband and wife,
matrimony, wedlock; from Old French mariage marriage; dowry (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *maritaticum
(11c.), from Latin maritatus, past participle of maritatre to wed, marry, give in marriage (see
marry (v.)). The Vulgar Latin word also is the source of Italian maritaggio, Spanish maridaje.
Meaning a union of a man and woman for life by marriage, a particular matrimonial union is early
14c. Meanings the marriage vow, formal declaration or contract by which two join in wedlock; also a
wedding, celebration of a marriage; the marriage ceremony are from late 14c. Figurative use (non-
theological) intimate union, a joining as if by marriage is from early 15c.[W]hen two people are
under the influence of the most violent, most insane, most delusive, and most transient of passions,
they are required to swear that they will remain in that excited, abnormal, and exhausting condition
until death do them part. [G.B. Shaw, preface to Getting Married, 1908]Marriage counseling recorded
by 1939. Marriage bed, figurative of marital intercourse generally, is attested from 1580s (bed of
marriage is from early 15c.).


ghost (n.)

Old English gast soul, spirit, life, breath; good or bad spirit, angel, demon, from Proto-Germanic
*ghoizdoz (cognates: Old Saxon gest, Old Frisian jest, Middle Dutch gheest, Dutch geest, German
Geist spirit, ghost), from PIE root *gheis- to be excited, amazed, frightened (cognates: Sanskrit
hedah wrath; Avestan zaesha- horrible, frightful; Gothic usgaisjan, Old English g&aelig;stan to
frighten). This was the usual West Germanic word for supernatural being, and the primary sense seems
to have been connected to the idea of to wound, tear, pull to pieces. The surviving Old English
senses, however, are in Christian writing, where it is used to render Latin spiritus (see spirit
(n.)), a sense preserved in Holy Ghost. Modern sense of disembodied spirit of a dead person is
attested from late 14c. and returns the word toward its ancient sense.    Most Indo-European words
for soul, spirit also double with reference to supernatural spirits. Many have a base sense of
appearance (such as Greek phantasma; French spectre; Polish widmo, from Old Church Slavonic videti
to see; Old English scin, Old High German giskin, originally appearance, apparition, related to Old
English scinan, Old High German skinan to shine). Other concepts are in French revenant, literally
returning (from the other world), Old Norse aptr-ganga, literally back-comer. Breton bugelnoz is
literally night-child. Latin manes probably is a euphemism.    The gh- spelling appeared early 15c.
in Caxton, influenced by Flemish and Middle Dutch gheest, but was rare in English before mid-16c.
Sense of slight suggestion (in ghost image, ghost of a chance, etc.) is first recorded 1610s; that
in ghost writing is from 1884, but that term is not found until 1919. Ghost town is from 1908. To
give up the ghost die was in Old English. Ghost in the machine was Gilbert Ryle's term (1949) for
the mind viewed as separate from the body.


