execute (v.)

late 14c., to carry into effect, from Old French executer (14c.), from Medieval Latin executare,
from Latin execut-/exsecut-, past participle stem of exequi/exsequi to follow out (see execution).
Meaning to inflict capital punishment is from late 15c. Related: Executed; executing.


electrocute (v.)

execute by electricity, 1889, American English, from electro- + back half of execute. The method
first was used Aug. 6, 1890, in New York state, on William Kemmler, convicted of the murder of his
common-law wife. Sense involving accidental death is first recorded 1909. Electric chair is also
first recorded 1889, which is when the first one was introduced in New York state as a humane
alternative to hanging. Related: Electrocuted; electrocuting.


go through (v.)

to execute, carry to completion (a plan, etc., often with with), 1560s. Meaning to examine is 1660s;
to endure is by 1712; to wear out by 1959.


Jap

Colloquial abbreviation of Japanese, by 1880 as a noun, 1892 as an adjective, not originally
pejorative but became so during World War II. It was protested by Japanese before the war, but did
not begin to be taboo in the U.S. before 1960s. For some years after World War II in American
English the word also functioned as a verb, to execute a sneak attack upon, a reference to Pearl
Harbor.


garrote (v.)

to execute with a garrote, 1851, from garrote (n.); sense of choke and then rob is from 1852.
Related: Garotted; garotting.


function (n.)

1530s, proper work or purpose, from Middle French fonction (16c.) and directly from Latin functionem
(nominative functio) performance, execution, noun of action from functus, past participle of fungi
perform, execute, discharge, from PIE root *bheug- (2) to use, enjoy (see brook (v.)). Use in
mathematics probably begun by Leibnitz (1692).


fry (v.)

late 13c., from Old French frire to fry (13c.), from Latin frigere to roast or fry, from PIE *bher-
(4) to cook, bake (cognates: Sanskrit bhrjjati roasts, bharjanah roasting; Persian birishtan to
roast; Greek phrygein to roast, bake).    Meaning execute in the electric chair is U.S. slang from
1929. To go out of the frying pan into the fire is first attested in Thomas More (1532). The related
noun is from 1630s. Related: Fried; frying. Frying pan recorded from mid-14c.


furnish (v.)

mid-15c., from Middle French furniss-, present participle stem of furnir furnish, accomplish, from
Old French fornir (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *fornire, alteration of *fromire, from West Germanic
*frumjan forward movement, advancement (source also of Old High German frumjan to do, execute,
provide), from Proto-Germanic *fram- forwards (see from). Meaning to provide (something) is from
1520s. Related: Furnished; furnishing.


qualm (n.)

Old English cwealm (West Saxon) death, murder, slaughter; disaster; plague; torment, utcualm
(Anglian) utter destruction, probably related to cwellan to kill, murder, execute, cwelan to die
(see quell). Sense softened to feeling of faintness 1520s; figurative meaning uneasiness, doubt is
from 1550s; that of scruple of conscience is 1640s.    Evidence of a direct path from the Old
English to the modern senses is wanting, but it is plausible, via the notion of fit of sickness. The
other suggested etymology, less satisfying, is to take the fit of uneasiness sense from Dutch kwalm
steam, vapor, mist (cognate with German Qualm smoke, vapor, stupor), which also might be ultimately
from the same Germanic root as quell.


frame (v.)

Old English framian to profit, be helpful, avail, benefit, from fram active, vigorous, bold,
originally going forward, from fram forward; from (see from).    Influenced by related Old English
fremman help forward, promote, further, do, perform, accomplish, and by Old Norse fremja to further,
execute. Sense focused in Middle English from make ready (mid-13c.) to prepare timber for building
(late 14c.). Meaning compose, devise is first attested 1540s.    The criminal slang sense of blame
an innocent person (1920s) is probably from earlier sense of plot in secret (1900), perhaps
ultimately from meaning fabricate a story with evil intent, first attested 1510s. Related: Framed;
framing.


quell (v.)

Old English cwellan to kill, murder, execute, from Proto-Germanic *kwaljanan (cognates: Old English
cwelan to die, cwalu violent death; Old Saxon quellian to torture, kill; Old Norse kvelja to
torment; Middle Dutch quelen to vex, tease, torment; Old High German quellan to suffer pain, German
qu&auml;len to torment, torture), from PIE root *gwele- (1) to throw, reach, with extended sense of
to pierce (cognates: Armenian kelem I torture; Old Church Slavonic zali pain; Lithuanian galas end,
gela agony, gelati to sting; see ballistics). Milder sense of suppress, extinguish developed by
c.1300. Related: Quelled; quelling.


