exempt (v.)

mid-15c., from Middle French exempter, from exempt (adj.); see exempt (adj.). Related: Exempted;
exempting.


exempt (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French exempt (13c.) and directly from Latin exemptus, past participle of
eximere remove, take out, take away; free, release, deliver, make an exception of, from ex- out (see
ex-) + emere buy, originally take, from PIE root *em- to take, distribute (cognates: Latin sumere to
take, obtain, buy, Old Church Slavonic imo to take, Lithuanian imui, Sanskrit yamati holds,
subdues). For sense shift from take to buy, compare Old English sellan to give, source of Modern
English sell to give in exchange for money; Hebrew laqah he bought, originally he took; and
colloquial English I'll take it for I'll buy it.


exemption (n.)

late 14c., from Old French exemption, exencion or directly from Latin exemptionem (nominative
exemptio) a taking out, removing, noun of action from past participle stem of eximere (see exempt
(adj.)).


immune (adj.)

mid-15c., free; exempt, back-formation from immunity. Latin immunis meant exempt from public
service, free from taxes. Specific modern medical sense of exempt from a disease (typically because
of inoculation) is from 1881. Immune system attested by 1917.


immunity (n.)

late 14c., exempt from service or obligation, from Old French immunit&eacute; and directly from
Latin immunitatem (nominative immunitas) exemption from performing public service or charge, from
immunis exempt, free, from assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + munis performing
services (compare municipal), from PIE *moi-n-es-, suffixed form of root *mei- (1) to change (see
mutable). Medical sense protection from disease is 1879, from French or German.


caveat emptor

Latin, literally let the buyer beware; see caveat and second element of exempt (adj.).


emption (n.)

late 15c., purchase, from Latin emptionem (nominative emptio) a buying, purchasing, noun of action
from past participle stem of emere to buy (see exempt (adj.)).


example (n.)

late 14c., partial re-Latinization of earlier essample, asaumple (mid-13c.), from Old French
essemple sample, model, example, precedent, cautionary tale, from Latin exemplum a sample, literally
that which is taken out, from eximere take out, remove (see exempt (adj.)). Oldest English senses
are of behavior and punishment.


prompt (v.)

mid-14c., prompten, from Latin promptus, past participle of promere to bring forth, from pro-
forward (see pro-) + emere to take (see exempt (adj.)). Theatrical sense of to assist a speaker with
lines is first recorded early 15c. Related: Prompted; prompting.


premium (n.)

c.1600, reward given for a specific act, from Latin praemium reward, profit derived from booty, from
prae- before (see pre-) + emere to buy, originally to take (see exempt (adj.)). Insurance sense is
1660s, from Italian premio. Adjectival sense of superior in quality is first attested 1925,
originally in reference to butter.


sumptuous (adj.)

late 15c., from Old French sumptueux or directly from Latin sumptuosus costly, very expensive;
lavish, wasteful, from sumptus, past participle of sumere to borrow, buy, spend, eat, drink,
consume, employ, take, take up, contraction of *sub-emere, from sub- under (see sub-) + emere to
take, buy (see exempt (adj.)). Related: Sumptuously; sumptuousness.


consume (v.)

late 14c., from Old French consumer to consume (12c.) and directly from Latin consumere to use up,
eat, waste, from com-, intensive prefix (see com-), + sumere to take, from sub- under + emere to
buy, take (see exempt (adj.)).


peremptory (adj.)

decisive, mid-15c., legal term, from Anglo-French peremptorie, from Middle French peremtoire, from
Latin peremptorius destructive, decisive, final, from peremptor destroyer, from perimpere destroy,
cut off, from per- away entirely, to destruction (see per) + emere to take (see exempt (adj.)). Of
persons or their words, certain, assured, brooking no debate, 1580s. Related: Peremptorily.


subsume (v.)

1530s, from Modern Latin subsumere to take under, from Latin sub under (see sub-) + sumere to take
(see exempt (adj.)). Related: Subsumed; subsuming, subsumption.


sejm (n.)

congress of the Polish republic, 1690s, from Polish sejm assembly, from *syn-imu, literally a taking
together, from *syn- together (see syn-) + PIE root *em- to take (see exempt).


isolate (v.)

by 1786, a new formation from isolated (q.v.).    The translation of this work is well performed,
excepting that fault from which few translations are wholly exempt, and which is daily tending to
corrupt our language, the adoption of French expressions. We have here evasion for escape, twice or
more times repeated; brigands very frequently; we have the unnecessary and foolish word isolate;
and, if we mistake not, paralize, which at least has crept in through a similar channel. Translators
cannot be too careful on this point, as it is a temptation to which they are constantly exposed.
[The British Critic, April 1799]    As a noun from 1890, from earlier adjectival use (1819).


impromptu

1660s (adv.), 1764 (adj.), from French impromptu (1650s), from Latin in promptu in readiness, from
assimilated form of in- into, in, on, upon (see in- (2)) + promptu, ablative of promptus readiness,
from past participle of promere to bring out, from pro- before, forward, for + emere to obtain (see
exempt).


impassible (adj.)

incapable of feeling pain, exempt from suffering, mid-14c., from Old French impassible (13c.), from
Church Latin impassibilis incapable of passion, from assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see
in- (1)) + passibilis, from passio suffering (see passion). Related: Impassibility.


discharge (v.)

early 14c., to exempt, exonerate, release, from Old French deschargier (12c., Modern French
d&eacute;charger) to unload, discharge, from Late Latin discarricare, from dis- do the opposite of
(see dis-) + carricare load (see charge (v.)).    Meaning to unload, to free from is late 14c. Of
weapons, from 1550s. The electrical sense is first attested 1748. Meaning to fulfill, to perform
one's duties is from c.1400. Related: Discharged; discharging.


redemption (n.)

mid-14c., deliverance from sin, from Old French redemcion (12c.) and directly from Latin
redemptionem (nominative redemptio) a buying back, releasing, ransoming (also bribery), noun of
action from past participle stem of redimere to redeem, buy back, from red- back (see re-) + emere
to take, buy, gain, procure (see exempt). The -d- is from the Old Latin habit of using red- as the
form of re- before vowels. In the Mercian hymns, Latin redemptionem is glossed by Old English
alesnisse.


presumption (n.)

mid-13c., seizure and occupation without right, also taking upon oneself more than is warranted,
from Old French presumcion (12c., Modern French pr&#233;somption) and directly from Late Latin
praesumptionem (nominative praesumptio) confidence, audacity, in classical Latin, a taking for
granted, anticipation, noun of action from past participle stem of praesumere to take beforehand,
from prae before (see pre-) + sumere to take (see exempt (adj.)). In English, the meaning the taking
of something for granted is attested from c.1300. Presumptuous preserves the older sense.


assume (v.)

early 15c., assumpten to receive up into heaven (especially of the Virgin Mary), also assumen to
arrogate, from Latin assumere, adsumere to take up, take to oneself, take besides, obtain in
addition, from ad- to, up (see ad-) + sumere to take, from sub under (see sub-) + emere to take (see
exempt (adj.)).    Meaning to suppose, to take for granted as the basis of argument is first
recorded 1590s; that of to take or put on (an appearance, etc.) is from c.1600. Related: Assumed;
assuming. Early past participle was assumpt. In rhetorical usage, assume expresses what the assumer
postulates, often as a confessed hypothesis; presume expresses what the presumer really believes.


vintage (n.)

early 15c., harvest of grapes, yield of wine from a vineyard, from Anglo-French vintage (mid-14c.),
from Old French vendage, vendenge vine-harvest, yield from a vineyard, from Latin vindemia a
gathering of grapes, yield of grapes, from comb. form of vinum wine (see wine (n.)) + stem of demere
take off (from de- from, away from + emere to take; see exempt). Sense shifted to age or year of a
particular wine (1746), then to a general adjectival sense of being of an earlier time (1883). Used
of cars since 1928.


scot-free (adj.)

Old English scotfreo exempt from royal tax, from scot royal tax, from Old Norse skot contribution,
literally a shooting, shot; thing shot, missile, from PIE *skeud- to shoot, chase, throw (see shoot
(v.); the Old Norse verb form, skjota, has a secondary sense of transfer to another; pay) + freo
(see free (adj.)). First element related to Old English sceotan to pay, contribute, Dutch schot,
German Scho&szlig; tax, contribution. French &eacute;cot share (Old French escot) is from Germanic.


sheer (adj.)

c.1200, exempt, free from guilt (as in Sheer Thursday, the Thursday of Holy Week); later schiere
thin, sparse (c.1400), from Old English scir bright, clear, gleaming; translucent; pure, unmixed,
and influenced by Old Norse cognate sc&aelig;r bright, clean, pure, both from Proto-Germanic
*skeran- (cognates: Old Saxon skiri, Old Frisian skire, German schier, Gothic skeirs clean, pure),
from PIE root *(s)ker- (1) to cut (see shear (v.)).     Sense of absolute, utter (sheer nonsense)
developed 1580s, probably from the notion of unmixed; that of very steep (a sheer cliff) is first
recorded 1800, probably from notion of continued without halting. Meaning diaphanous is from 1560s.
As an adverb from c.1600.


hog (n.)

late 12c. (implied in hogaster), swine reared for slaughter (usually about a year old), also used by
stockmen for young sheep (mid-14c.) and for horse older than one year, suggesting the original sense
had something to do with an age, not a type of animal. Not evidenced in Old English, but it may have
existed. Possibility of British Celtic origin [Watkins, etc.] is regarded by OED as improbable.
Figurative sense of gluttonous person is first recorded early 15c. Meaning Harley-Davidson
motorcycle is attested from 1967.    To go hog wild is from 1904. Hog in armor awkward or clumsy
person in ill-fitting attire is from 1650s. Phrase to go the whole hog (1828) is sometimes said to
be from the butcher shop option of buying the whole slaughtered animal (at a discount) rather than
just the choice bits. But it is perhaps rather from the story (recorded in English from 1779) of
Muslim sophists, forbidden by the Quran from eating a certain unnamed part of the hog, who debated
which part was intended and managed to exempt the whole of it from the prohibition. Road hog is
attested from 1886.


toleration (n.)

1510s, permission granted by authority, license, from Middle French tol&eacute;ration (15c.), from
Latin tolerationem (nominative toleratio) a bearing, supporting, enduring, noun of action from past
participle stem of tolerare to endure, sustain, support, suffer, literally to bear, from PIE *tele-
to bear, carry (see extol).    Meaning forbearance, sufferance is from 1580s. The specific religious
sense is from 1609; as in Act of Toleration (1689), statute granting freedom of religious worship
(with conditions) to dissenting Protestants in England. In this it means recognition of the right of
private judgment in matters of faith and worship; liberty granted by the government to preach and
worship as one pleases; equality under the law without regard to religion.    If any man err from
the right way, it is his own misfortune, no injury to thee; nor therefore art thou to punish him in
the things of this life because thou supposest he will be miserable in that which is to come.
Nobody, therefore, in fine, neither single persons nor churches, nay, nor even commonwealths, have
any just title to invade the civil rights and worldly goods of each other upon pretence of religion.
[John Locke, Letter Concerning Toleration, 1689]   <hr />   Before any man can be considered as a
member of Civil Society, he must be considered as a subject of the Governour of the Universe: And if
a member of Civil Society, do it with a saving of his allegiance to the Universal Sovereign. We
maintain therefore that in matters of Religion, no man's right is abridged by the institution of
Civil Society and that Religion is wholly exempt from its cognizance. [James Madison, Memorial and
Remonstrance Against Religious Assessments, 1785]   <hr />   Unlimited tolerance must lead to the
disappearance of tolerance. If we extend unlimited tolerance even to those who are intolerant, if we
are not prepared to defend a tolerant society against the onslaught of the intolerant, then the
tolerant will be destroyed, and tolerance with them. [Karl Popper, The Open Society and Its Enemies,
1962]


free (adj.)

Old English freo free, exempt from, not in bondage, also noble; joyful, from Proto-Germanic *frijaz
(cognates: Old Frisian fri, Old Saxon and Old High German vri, German frei, Dutch vrij, Gothic freis
free), from PIE *prijos dear, beloved, from root *pri- to love (cognates: Sanskrit priyah own, dear,
beloved, priyate loves; Old Church Slavonic prijati to help, prijatelji friend; Welsh rhydd free).
The primary sense seems to have been beloved, friend, to love; which in some languages (notably
Germanic and Celtic) developed also a sense of free, perhaps from the terms beloved or friend being
applied to the free members of one's clan (as opposed to slaves; compare Latin liberi, meaning both
free and children).    Compare Gothic frijon to love; Old English freod affection, friendship, friga
love, fri&eth;u peace; Old Norse fri&eth;r, German Friede peace; Old English freo wife; Old Norse
Frigg wife of Odin, literally beloved or loving; Middle Low German vrien to take to wife, Dutch
vrijen, German freien to woo.  Of nations, not subject to foreign rule or to despotism, it is
recorded from late 14c. (Free world non-communist nations attested from 1950.) Sense of given
without cost is 1580s, from notion of free of cost. Free lunch, originally offered in bars to draw
in business, by 1850, American English. Free pass on railways, etc., attested by 1850. Free speech
in Britain used of a privilege in Parliament since the time of Henry VIII. In U.S., as a civil
right, it became a prominent phrase in the debates over the Gag Rule (1836).   Free enterprise
recorded from 1890; free trade is from 1823. Free will is from early 13c. Free association in
psychology is from 1899. Free love sexual liberation attested from 1822. Free range (adj.) is
attested by 1960. Free and easy unrestrained is from 1690s.


