exertion (n.)

1660s, act of exerting, from exert + -ion. Meaning vigorous action or effort is from 1777.


labor (n.)

c.1300, a task, a project; later exertion of the body; trouble, difficulty, hardship (late 14c.),
from Old French labor labor, toil, work, exertion, task (12c., Modern French labeur), from Latin
laborem (nominative labor) labor, toil, exertion; hardship, pain, fatigue; a work, a product of
labor, of uncertain origin, perhaps originally from the notion of tottering under a burden, and
related to labere to totter.    Meaning body of laborers considered as a class (usually contrasted
to capitalists) is from 1839. Sense of physical exertions of childbirth is 1590s, earlier labour of
birthe (early 15c.), a sense also found in Old French, and compare French en travail in (childbirth)
suffering (see travail). Labor Day first marked 1882 in New York City.


encouragement (n.)

1560s, from encourage + -ment, or from Middle French encoragement.  As a general rule, Providence
seldom vouchsafes to mortals any more than just that degree of encouragement which suffices to keep
them at a reasonably full exertion of their powers. [Hawthorne, House of Seven Gables]


hardly (adv.)

c.1200, in a hard manner, with great exertion or effort, from Old English heardlic stern, severe,
harsh; bold, warlike (see hard + -ly (2)). Hence assuredly, certainly (early 14c.). Main modern
sense of barely, just (1540s) reverses this, via the intermediate meaning not easily, with trouble
(early 15c.). Formerly with superficial negative (not hardly).


intention (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French entencion stretching, intensity, will, thought (12c.), from Latin
intentionem (nominative intentio) a stretching out, straining, exertion, effort; attention, noun of
action from intendere to turn one's attention, literally to stretch out (see intend).


quiet (adj.)

late 14c., peaceable, at rest, restful, tranquil, from Old French quiet and directly from Latin
quietus calm, at rest, free from exertion, from quies (genitive quietis) rest (see quiet (n.)). As
an adverb from 1570s. Related: Quietly; quietness.


opulence (n.)

c.1510, from Middle French opulence (16c.), from Latin opulentia, from opulentus wealthy,
dissimilated from *op-en-ent-, related to ops wealth, power, resources, opus work, labor, exertion,
from PIE root *op- (1) to work, produce in abundance (see opus).


fatigue (n.)

1660s, that which causes weariness, from French fatigue weariness, from fatiguer to tire, from Latin
fatigare, originally to cause to break down, later, to weary, fatigue, tire out, from pre-Latin adj.
*fati-agos driving to the point of breakdown, from Old Latin *fatis (of unknown origin, related to
adv. affatim sufficiently and to fatisci crack, split) + root of agere to drive (see act (n.)).
Meaning weariness from exertion is from 1719.


kriegspiel (n.)

war games played with pieces on maps, 1811 as a German word in English, from German Kriegsspiel,
literally war game, from Krieg war, from Middle High German kriec, combat, mostly exertion, effort;
opposition, enmity, resistance, from Old High German chreg stubbornness, defiance, obsinancy,
perhaps from PIE *gwere- (2) heavy (see grave (adj.)) or cognate with Greek hybris violence (see
hubris; also see war (n.)). For second element, see spiel (n.). Introduced 1870s as officer training
in British army.


recreation (n.)

late 14c., refreshment or curing of a person, refreshment by eating, from Old French recreacion
(13c.), from Latin recreationem (nominative recreatio) recovery from illness, noun of action from
past participle stem of recreare to refresh, restore, make anew, revive, invigorate, from re- again
(see re-) + creare (see create). Meaning refresh oneself by some amusement is first recorded c.1400.
A verb recreate to refresh by physical influence after exertion is attested from early 15c. and was
used by Lyly, Pope, Steele, and Harriet Martineau, but it did not take, probably to avoid confusion
with recreate.


influence (n.)

late 14c., an astrological term, streaming ethereal power from the stars acting upon character or
destiny of men, from Old French influence emanation from the stars that acts upon one's character
and destiny (13c.), also a flow of water, from Medieval Latin influentia a flowing in (also used in
the astrological sense), from Latin influentem (nominative influens), present participle of influere
to flow into, from in- into, in, on, upon (see in- (2)) + fluere to flow (see fluent). Meaning
exercise of personal power by human beings is from mid-15c.; meaning exertion of unseen influence by
persons is from 1580s (a sense already in Medieval Latin, for instance Aquinas). Under the influence
drunk first attested 1866.


opus (n.)

a work, composition, especially a musical one, 1809, from Latin opus a work, labor, exertion (source
of Italian opera, French oeuvre, Spanish obra), from PIE root *op- (1) to work, produce in abundance
(Germanic *ob-) to work, produce in abundance, originally of agriculture later extended to religious
acts (cognates: Sanskrit apas- work, religious act; Avestan hvapah- good deed; Old High German uoben
to start work, to practice, to honor; German &uuml;ben to exercise, practice; Dutch oefenen, Old
Norse &aelig;fa, Danish &oslash;ve to exercise, practice; Old English &aelig;fnan to perform, work,
do, afol power). The plural, seldom used as such, is opera.


purchase (n.)

c.1300, purchas, acquisition, gain; also, something acquired or received, a possession; property,
goods; especially booty, spoil; goods gained by pillage or robbery (to make purchase was to seize by
robbery). Also mercenary soldier, one who fights for booty. From Anglo-French purchace, Old French
porchaz acquisition, gain, profit; seizing, plunder; search pursuit, effort, from Anglo-French
purchaser, Old French porchacier (see purchase (v.)).    From early 14c. as endeavor, effort,
exertion; instigation, contrivance; late 14c. as act of acquiring, procurement. Meaning that which
is bought is from 1580s. The sense of hold or position for advantageously applying power (1711) is
extended from the nautical verb meaning to haul or draw (especially by mechanical power), often used
in reference to hauling up anchors, attested from 1560s. Wif of purchase (early 14c.) was a term for
concubine.


work (n.)

Old English weorc, worc something done, discreet act performed by someone, action (whether voluntary
or required), proceeding, business; that which is made or manufactured, products of labor, also
physical labor, toil; skilled trade, craft, or occupation; opportunity of expending labor in some
useful or remunerative way; also military fortification, from Proto-Germanic *werkan (cognates: Old
Saxon, Old Frisian, Dutch werk, Old Norse verk, Middle Dutch warc, Old High German werah, German
Werk, Gothic gawaurki), from PIE *werg-o-, from root *werg- to do (see organ).    Work is less
boring than amusing oneself. [Baudelaire, Mon Coeur mis a nu, 1862]    In Old English, the noun also
had the sense of fornication. Meaning physical effort, exertion is from c.1200; meaning scholarly
labor or its productions is from c.1200; meaning artistic labor or its productions is from c.1200.
Meaning labor as a measurable commodity is from c.1300. Meaning embroidery, stitchery, needlepoint
is from late 14c. Work of art attested by 1774 as artistic creation, earlier (1728) artifice,
production of humans (as opposed to nature). Work ethic recorded from 1959. To be out of work
unemployed is from 1590s. To make clean work of is from c.1300; to make short work of is from 1640s.
Proverbial expression many hands make light work is from c.1300. To have (one's) work cut out for
one is from 1610s; to have it prepared and prescribed, hence, to have all one can handle. Work in
progress is from 1930 in a general sense, earlier as a specific term in accountancy and
parliamentary procedure.


