Exodus

late Old English, the second book of the Old Testament, from Latin exodus, from Greek exodos a
military expedition; a solemn procession; departure; death, literally a going out, from ex- out (see
ex-) + hodos way (see cede). General sense (with lower-case -e-) is from 1620s.


blockbuster (n.)

also block-buster, big bomb (4,000 pounds or larger, according to some sources), 1942, from block
(n.) in the built-up city square sense. Entertainment sense is attested from 1957. U.S. sense of
real estate broker who sells a house to a black family on an all-white neighborhood, thus sparking
an exodus, is from 1955.


fleshpot (n.)

from flesh (n.) + pot (n.1); literally pot in which flesh is boiled, hence luxuries regarded with
envy, especially in fleshpots of Egypt, from Exodus xvi:3:  Whan we sat by ye Flesh pottes, and had
bred ynough to eate. [Coverdale translation, 1535]


burning (adj.)

Old English in the literal sense; c.1300 figurative, present participle adjective from burn (v.)).
Burning question matches French question br&#251;lante, German brennende Frage. Burning bush is from
Exodus III. Burning glass is attested from 1560s.


shewbread (n.)

1530, Tyndale's word (Exodus xxv:30), based on or influenced by German schaubrot (in Luther),
literally show-bread, translating Latin panes propositiones, from Greek artai enopioi, from Hebrew
lechem panim, the 12 loaves placed every Sabbath before the Lord on a table beside the altar of
incense, from lechem bread + panim face, presence. Old English translations used offring-hlafas.


Deuteronomy (n.)

5th book of the Pentateuch, late 14c., from Late Latin Deuteronomium, from Greek Deuteronomion,
literally second law, from deuteros second + nomos law (see numismatics). A mistranslation of Hebrew
mishneh hattorah hazzoth a copy of this law [Deut. xvii:18]. The book is a repetition, with
comments, of the Decalogue and most of the laws of Exodus. The title was translated literally into
Old English as &aelig;fter&aelig;, literally after-law.


curtain (n.)

c.1300, from Old French cortine curtain, tapestry, drape, blanket, from Late Latin cortina curtain,
but in classical Latin round vessel, cauldron, from Latin cortem (older cohortem) enclosure,
courtyard (see cohort). The confusion apparently begins in using cortina as a loan-translation for
Greek aulaia (curtain) in the Vulgate (to render Hebrew yeriah in Exodus xxvi:1, etc.) because the
Greek word was connected to aule court, perhaps because the door of a Greek house that led out to
the courtyard was a hung cloth. The figurative sense in curtain call is from 1884. Curtains the end
is 1912, originally from stage plays.


fetish (n.)

1610s, fatisso, from Portuguese feiti&ccedil;o charm, sorcery, from Latin facticius made by art,
from facere to make (see factitious).    Latin facticius in Spanish has become hechizo magic,
witchcraft, sorcery. Probably introduced by Portuguese sailors and traders as a name for charms and
talismans worshipped by the inhabitants of the Guinea coast of Africa. Popularized in anthropology
by C. de Brosses' Le Culte des Dieux F&eacute;tiches (1760), which influenced the word's spelling in
English (French f&eacute;tiche, also from the Portuguese word). Figurative sense of something
irrationally revered is American English, 1837.    Any material image of a religious idea is an
idol; a material object in which force is supposed to be concentrated is a Fetish; a material
object, or a class of material objects, plants, or animals, which is regarded by man with
superstitious respect, and between whom and man there is supposed to exist an invisible but
effective force, is a Totem. [J. Fitzgerald Lee, The Greater Exodus, London, 1903]    For sexual
sense, see fetishism.


witch (n.)

Old English wicce female magician, sorceress, in later use especially a woman supposed to have
dealings with the devil or evil spirits and to be able by their cooperation to perform supernatural
acts, fem. of Old English wicca sorcerer, wizard, man who practices witchcraft or magic, from verb
wiccian to practice witchcraft (compare Low German wikken, wicken to use witchcraft, wikker, wicker
soothsayer).    OED says of uncertain origin; Liberman says None of the proposed etymologies of
witch is free from phonetic or semantic difficulties. Klein suggests connection with Old English
wigle divination, and wig, wih idol. Watkins says the nouns represent a Proto-Germanic *wikkjaz
necromancer (one who wakes the dead), from PIE *weg-yo-, from *weg- (2) to be strong, be lively (see
wake (v.)).    That wicce once had a more specific sense than the later general one of female
magician, sorceress perhaps is suggested by the presence of other words in Old English describing
more specific kinds of magical craft. In the Laws of &AElig;lfred (c.890), witchcraft was
specifically singled out as a woman's craft, whose practitioners were not to be suffered to live
among the West Saxons:    &ETH;a f&aelig;mnan &thorn;e gewunia&eth; onfon gealdorcr&aelig;ftigan
&amp; scinl&aelig;can &amp; wiccan, ne l&aelig;t &thorn;u &eth;a libban.    The other two words
combined with it here are gealdricge, a woman who practices incantations, and scinl&aelig;ce female
wizard, woman magician, from a root meaning phantom, evil spirit. Another word that appears in the
Anglo-Saxon laws is lybl&aelig;ca wizard, sorcerer, but with suggestions of skill in the use of
drugs, because the root of the word is lybb drug, poison, charm. Lybbestre was a fem. word meaning
sorceress, and lybcorn was the name of a certain medicinal seed (perhaps wild saffron). Weekley
notes possible connection to Gothic weihs holy and German weihan consecrate, and writes, the priests
of a suppressed religion naturally become magicians to its successors or opponents. In Anglo-Saxon
glossaries, wicca renders Latin augur (c.1100), and wicce stands for pythoness, divinatricem. In the
Three Kings of Cologne (c.1400) wicca translates Magi:    &THORN;e paynyms ... cleped &thorn;e iij
kyngis Magos, &thorn;at is to seye wicchis.    The glossary translates Latin necromantia (demonum
invocatio) with galdre, wiccecr&aelig;ft. The Anglo-Saxon poem called Men's Crafts has
wiccr&aelig;ft, which appears to be the same word, and by its context means skill with horses. In a
c.1250 translation of Exodus, witches is used of the Egyptian midwives who save the newborn sons of
the Hebrews: &ETH;e wicches hidden hem for-&eth;an, Biforen pharaun nolden he ben. Witch in
reference to a man survived in dialect into 20c., but the fem. form was so dominant by 1601 that
men-witches or he-witch began to be used. Extended sense of old, ugly, and crabbed or malignant
woman is from early 15c; that of young woman or girl of bewitching aspect or manners is first
recorded 1740. Witch doctor is from 1718; applied to African magicians from 1836.    At this day it
is indifferent to say in the English tongue, 'she is a witch,' or 'she is a wise woman.' [Reginald
Scot, The Discoverie of Witchcraft, 1584]


