exotic (adj.)

1590s, belonging to another country, from Middle French exotique (16c.) and directly from Latin
exoticus, from Greek exotikos foreign, literally from the outside, from exo outside (see exo-).
Sense of unusual, strange first recorded in English 1620s, from notion of alien, outlandish. In
reference to strip-teasers and dancing girls, it is first attested by 1942, American English.
Exotic dancer in the nightclub trade means a girl who goes through a few motions while wearing as
few clothes as the cops will allow in the city where she is working ... [Life, May 5, 1947]    As a
noun from 1640s.


exoticism (n.)

1827, from exotic + -ism.


pasties (n.)

adhesive patches worn over the nipples by exotic dancers, 1957, plural diminutive from paste (v.).


Mata Hari

stage name taken by exotic dancer Margaretha Gertruida Zelle (1876-1917), from Malay mata eye + hari
day, dawn.


Barbara

fem. proper name, from Latin, fem. of barbarus strange, foreign, barbarous, from Greek barbaros (see
barbarian). For women, unlike men, the concept of alien presumably could be felt as exotic and thus
make an appealing name. Popularized as a Christian name by the legend of Saint Barbara, early 4c.
martyr, whose cult was popular from 7c. The common Middle English form was Barbary. A top 10 name in
popularity for girls born in the U.S. between 1927 and 1958.


malic (adj.)

1797, from French malique (18c.), from Latin malum apple (the acid, discovered 1785 by Scheele, was
obtained from unripe apples and other fruits), from Greek melon (Doric malon) apple, probably from a
pre-Greek Mediterranean language. The Latin and Greek words also meant fruit generally, especially
if exotic.


macaroni (n.)

tube-shaped food made of dried wheaten paste [Klein], 1590s, from southern Italian dialectal
maccaroni (Italian maccheroni), plural of maccarone, name for a kind of pasty food, possibly from
maccare bruise, batter, crush, of unknown origin, or from late Greek makaria food made from barley.
Used after c.1764 to mean a fop, a dandy; typical of elegant young men (as in Yankee Doodle) because
it was an exotic dish at a time when certain young men who had traveled the continent were affecting
French and Italian fashions and accents. There is said to have been a Macaroni Club in Britain,
which was the immediate source of this usage in English.


Samoyed (n.)

Siberian Mongolian people, 1580s, from Russian samoyed (11c.), traditionally literally self-eaters,
i.e. cannibals (the first element cognate with same, the second with eat), but this might be Russian
folk etymology of a native name:    The common Russian etymology of the name Samoyed, meaning self-
eater, deepened the Russians' already exotic image of far-northerners. The most probable linguistic
origin of Samoyed, however, is from the Saami -- saam-edne, land of the people [Andrei V. Golovnev
and Gail Osherenko, Siberian Survival: The Nenets and Their Story, Cornell University, 1999]
Which would make the name a variant of Suomi Finn. The native name is Nenets. As the name of a type
of dog (once used as a working dog in the Arctic) it is attested from 1889.


porcelain (n.)

1530s, from Middle French porcelaine and directly from Italian porcellana porcelain (13c.),
literally cowrie shell, the chinaware so called from resemblance of its lustrous transparency to the
shiny surface of the shells. The shell's name in Italian is from porcella young sow, fem. of Latin
porcellus young pig, diminutive of porculus piglet, diminutive of porcus pig (see pork (n.)).
According to an old theory, the connection of the shell and the pig is a perceived resemblance of
the shell opening to the exposed outer genitalia of pigs.   <b>porcelain</b> is china &amp; china is
p.; there is no recondite difference between the two things, which indeed are not two, but one;
&amp; the difference between the two words is merely that china is the homely term, while porcelain
is exotic &amp; literary. [Fowler]


bean (n.)

Old English bean bean, pea, legume, from Proto-Germanic *bauno (cognates: Old Norse baun, Middle
Dutch bone, Dutch boon, Old High German bona, German Bohne), perhaps from a PIE reduplicated base
*bha-bha- and related to Latin faba bean.    As a metaphor for something of small value it is
attested from c.1300. Meaning head is U.S. baseball slang c.1905 (in bean-ball a pitch thrown at the
head); thus slang verb bean meaning to hit on the head, attested from 1910.    The notion of lucky
or magic beans in English folklore is from the exotic beans or large seeds that wash up occasionally
in Cornwall and western Scotland, carried from the Caribbean or South America by the Gulf Stream.
They were cherished, believed to ward off the evil eye and aid in childbirth.    Slang bean-counter
accountant recorded by 1971. To not know beans (American English, 1933) is perhaps from the of
little worth sense, but may have a connection to colloquial expression recorded around Somerset, to
know how many beans make five be a clever fellow.


beer (n.)

Old English beor strong drink, beer, mead, a word of much-disputed and ambiguous origin, cognate
with Old Frisian biar, Middle Dutch and Dutch bier, Old High German bior, German Bier.    Probably a
6c. West Germanic monastic borrowing of Vulgar Latin biber a drink, beverage (from Latin infinitive
bibere to drink; see imbibe). Another suggestion is that it comes from Proto-Germanic *beuwoz-, from
*beuwo- barley. The native Germanic word for the beverage was the one that yielded ale (q.v.).
Beer was a common drink among most of the European peoples, as well as in Egypt and Mesopotamia, but
was known to the Greeks and Romans only as an exotic product. [Buck]    They did have words for it,
however. Greek brytos, used in reference to Thracian or Phrygian brews, was related to Old English
breowan brew; Latin zythum is from Greek zythos, first used of Egyptian beer and treated as an
Egyptian word but perhaps truly Greek and related to zyme leaven. French bi&egrave;re is from
Germanic. Spanish cerveza is from Latin cervesia beer, perhaps related to Latin cremor thick broth.
Old Church Slavonic pivo, source of the general Slavic word for beer, is originally a drink (compare
Old Church Slavonic piti drink). French bi&egrave;re is a 16c. borrowing from German. U.S. slang
beer goggles, through which every potential romantic partner looks desirable, is from 1986.


restaurant (n.)

1821, from French restaurant a restaurant, originally food that restores, noun use of present
participle of restaurer to restore or refresh, from Old French restorer (see restore).    In 1765 a
man by the name of Boulanger, also known as Champ d'Oiseaux or Chantoiseau, opened a shop near the
Louvre (on either the rue des Poulies or the rue Bailleul, depending on which authority one chooses
to believe). There he sold what he called restaurants or bouillons restaurants--that is, meat-based
consomm&#233;s intended to restore a person's strength. Ever since the Middle Ages the word
restaurant had been used to describe any of a variety of rich bouillons made with chicken, beef,
roots of one sort or another, onions, herbs, and, according to some recipes, spices, crystallized
sugar, toasted bread, barley, butter, and even exotic ingredients such as dried rose petals,
Damascus grapes, and amber. In order to entice customers into his shop, Boulanger had inscribed on
his window a line from the Gospels: Venite ad me omnes qui stomacho laboratis et ego vos restaurabo.
He was not content simply to serve bouillon, however. He also served leg of lamb in white sauce,
thereby infringing the monopoly of the caterers' guild. The guild filed suit, which to everyone's
astonishment ended in a judgment in favor of Boulanger. [Jean-Robert Pitte, The Rise of the
Restaurant, in Food: A Culinary History from Antiquity to the Present, English editor Albert
Sonnenfeld, transl. Clarissa Botsford, 1999, Columbia University Press]    Italian spelling
ristorante attested in English by 1925.


sugar (n.)

late 13c., sugre, from Old French sucre sugar (12c.), from Medieval Latin succarum, from Arabic
sukkar, from Persian shakar, from Sanskrit sharkara ground or candied sugar, originally grit, gravel
(cognate with Greek kroke pebble). The Arabic word also was borrowed in Italian (zucchero), Spanish
(azucar, with the Arabic article), and German (Old High German zucura, German Zucker), and its forms
are represented in most European languages (such as Serbian cukar, Polish cukier, Russian sakhar).
Its Old World home was India (Alexander the Great's companions marveled at the honey without bees)
and it remained exotic in Europe until the Arabs began to cultivate it in Sicily and Spain; not
until after the Crusades did it begin to rival honey as the West's sweetener. The Spaniards in the
West Indies began raising sugar cane in 1506; first grown in Cuba 1523; first cultivated in Brazil
1532. The reason for the -g- in the English word is obscure (OED compares flagon, from French
flacon). The pronunciation shift from s- to sh- is probably from the initial long vowel sound syu-
(as in sure).    As a type of chemical compound from 1826. Slang euphemistic substitute for an
imprecation [OED] is attested from 1891. As a term of endearment, first recorded 1930. Sugar-cane is
from 1560s. Sugar-maple is from 1731. Sugar loaf was originally a moulded conical mass of refined
sugar (early 15c.); now obsolete, but sense extended 17c. to hills, hats, etc. of that shape.


