expedient (adj.)

late 14c., advantageous, fit, proper, from Old French expedient (14c.) or directly from Latin
expedientem (nominative expediens) beneficial, present participle of expedire make fit or ready,
prepare (see expedite). The noun meaning a device adopted in an exigency, a resource is from 1650s.
Related: Expediential; expedientially (both 19c.)


expediently (adv.)

late 14c., from expedient (adj.) + -ly (2).


inexpedient (adj.)

c.1600, from in- (1) not, opposite of + expedient. Related: Inexpedience; inexpediently.


expedience (n.)

mid-15c., advantage, benefit, from Old French expedience, from Late Latin expedientia, from
expedientem (see expedient). Related: Expediency (1610s).


shift (n.1)

c.1300, a movement, a beginning, from shift (v.). This is the word in to make shift make efforts
(mid-15c.). Sense of change, alteration is from 1560s. Sense of means to an end is from 1520s; hence
an expedient. Meaning mechanism for changing gear in a motor vehicle is recorded from 1914.
Typewriter shift key is from 1893; shift-lock is from 1899.    Meaning period of working time
(originally in a mine) is attested from 1809, with older sense relay of horses (1708); perhaps with
sense influenced by a North Sea Germanic cognate word (such as North Frisian skeft division,
stratum, skaft one of successive parties of workmen). Similar double senses of division and relay of
workers exist in Swedish skift, German schicht.


card (n.1)

c.1400, playing card, from Middle French carte (14c.), from Latin charta leaf of paper, tablet, from
Greek khartes layer of papyrus, probably from Egyptian. Form influenced after 14c. by Italian carta
(see chart (n.)).    Sense of playing cards also is oldest in French. Sense in English extended by
1590s to similar small, flat, stiff bits of paper. Meaning printed ornamental greetings for special
occasions is from 1869. Application to clever or original persons (1836, originally with an
adjective, as in smart card) is from the playing-card sense, via expressions such as sure card an
expedient certain to attain an object (c.1560).   Card table is from 1713. Card-sharper is 1859.
House of cards in the figurative sense is from 1640s, first attested in Milton. To have a card up
(one's) sleeve is 1898; to play the _______ card is from 1886, originally the Orange card, meaning
appeal to Northern Irish Protestant sentiment (for political advantage).


bias (n.)

1520s, from French biais slant, slope, oblique, also figuratively, expedient, means (13c.,
originally in Old French a past participle adjective, sideways, askance, against the grain), of
unknown origin, probably from Old Proven&ccedil;al biais, with cognates in Old Catalan and
Sardinian; possibly from Vulgar Latin *(e)bigassius, from Greek epikarsios athwart, crosswise, at an
angle, from epi- upon + karsios oblique, from PIE *krs-yo-, from root *(s)ker- (1) to cut (see shear
(v.)). It became a noun in Old French. [A] technical term in the game of bowls, whence come all the
later uses of the word [OED]. Transferred sense of predisposition, prejudice is from 1570s in
English.    For what a man had rather were true he more readily believes. Therefore he rejects
difficult things from impatience of research; sober things, because they narrow hope; the deeper
things of nature, from superstition; the light of experience, from arrogance and pride, lest his
mind should seem to be occupied with things mean and transitory; things not commonly believed, out
of deference to the opinion of the vulgar. Numberless in short are the ways, and sometimes
imperceptible, in which the affections colour and infect the understanding. [Francis Bacon, Novum
Organum, 1620]


state (n.1)

c.1200, circumstances, position in society, temporary attributes of a person or thing, conditions,
from Old French estat position, condition; status, stature, station, and directly from Latin status
a station, position, place; way of standing, posture; order, arrangement, condition, figuratively
standing, rank; public order, community organization, noun of action from past participle stem of
stare to stand from PIE root *sta- to stand (see stet). Some Middle English senses are via Old
French estat (French &eacute;tat; see estate).    The Latin word was adopted into other modern
Germanic languages (German, Dutch staat) but chiefly in the political senses only. Meaning physical
condition as regards form or structure is attested from late 13c. Meaning mental or emotional
condition is attested from 1530s (phrase state of mind first attested 1749); colloquial sense of
agitated or perturbed state is from 1837.     He [the President] shall from time to time give to the
Congress Information of the State of the Union, and recommend to their Consideration such Measures
as he shall judge necessary and expedient. [U.S. Constitution, Article II, Section iii]


machine (n.)

1540s, structure of any kind, from Middle French machine device, contrivance, from Latin machina
machine, engine, military machine; device, trick; instrument (source also of Spanish maquina,
Italian macchina), from Greek makhana, Doric variant of mekhane device, means, related to mekhos
means, expedient, contrivance, from PIE *maghana- that which enables, from root *magh- (1) to be
able, have power (cognates: Old Church Slavonic mogo be able, Old English m&aelig;g I can; see may
(v.)).    Main modern sense of device made of moving parts for applying mechanical power (1670s)
probably grew out of mid-17c. senses of apparatus, appliance and military siege-tower. In late 19c.
slang the word was used for both penis and vagina, one of the few so honored. Political sense is
U.S. slang, first recorded 1876. Machine age is attested by 1851:    The idea of remodelling society
at public meetings is one of the least reasonable which ever entered the mind of an agitator: and
the notion that the relations of the sexes can be re-arranged and finally disposed of by preamble
and resolution, is one of the latest, as it should have been the last, vagary of a machine age. [The
Literary World, Nov. 1, 1851]   Machine for living (in) house translates Le Corbusier's machine
&agrave; habiter (1923).


