expedite (v.)

late 15c. (implied in past participle expedit), from Latin expeditus, past participle of expedire
extricate, disengage, liberate; procure, make ready, make fit, prepare, literally free the feet from
fetters, hence liberate from difficulties, from ex- out (see ex-) + *pedis fetter, chain for the
feet, related to pes (genitive pedis) foot (see foot (n.)). Compare Greek pede fetter. Related:
Expedited; expediting.


expediate (v.)

a 17c. error for expedite that has gotten into the dictionaries.


expeditious (adj.)

late 15c., expedycius useful, fitting, from Latin expeditus disengaged, ready, prompt, past
participle of expidere (see expedite). Meaning speedy is from 1590s. Related: Expeditiously;
expeditiousness.


expedient (adj.)

late 14c., advantageous, fit, proper, from Old French expedient (14c.) or directly from Latin
expedientem (nominative expediens) beneficial, present participle of expedire make fit or ready,
prepare (see expedite). The noun meaning a device adopted in an exigency, a resource is from 1650s.
Related: Expediential; expedientially (both 19c.)


expedition (n.)

early 15c., military campaign; the act of rapidly setting forth, from Middle French
exp&eacute;dition (13c.) and directly from Latin expeditionem (nominative expeditio), noun of action
from past participle stem of expedire (see expedite). Meaning journey for some purpose is from
1590s. Sense by 1690s also included the body of persons on such a journey. Related: Expeditionary.


dispatch (v.)

1510s, to send off in a hurry, from a word in Spanish (despachar expedite, hasten) or Italian
(dispacciare to dispatch). For first element, see dis-. The exact source of the second element has
been proposed as Vulgar Latin *pactare to fasten, fix or *pactiare, or as Latin -pedicare to entrap
(from Latin pedica shackle; see impeach); and the Spanish and Italian words seem to be related to
(perhaps opposites of) Old Proven&ccedil;al empachar impede. See OED for full discussion. Meaning to
get rid of by killing is attested from 1520s. Related: Dispatched; dispatching. As a noun, from
1540s, originally dismissal; sense of a message sent speedily is first attested 1580s.


