explicitly (adv.)

1630s, from explicit + -ly (2). Opposed to implicitly.


explicit (adj.)

c.1600, from French explicite, from Latin explicitus unobstructed, variant past participle of
explicare unfold, unravel, explain, from ex- out (see ex-) + plicare to fold (see ply (v.1)).
Explicitus was written at the end of medieval books, originally short for explicitus est liber the
book is unrolled. As a euphemism for pornographic it dates from 1971.


explicative (adj.)

1640s, having the function of explaining, from Latin explicativus, from past participle stem of
explicare (see explicit). As a noun, from 1775.


explicable (adj.)

1550s, from or on model of Latin explicabilis capable of being unraveled, that may be explained,
from explicare (see explicit). Middle English had a verb expliken explain, interpret (mid-15c.).


explicate (v.)

1530s, from Latin explicatus, past participle of explicare unfold, unravel, explain (see explicit).
Related: Explicated; explicating.


allusion (n.)

1540s, from Latin allusionem (nominative allusio) a playing with, a reference to, noun of action
from past participle stem of alludere (see allude). An allusion is never an outright or explicit
mention of the person or thing the speaker seems to have in mind.


explication (n.)

1520s, from Middle French explication, from Latin explicationem (nominative explicatio), noun of
action from past participle stem of explicare (see explicit).


categorical (adj.)

1590s, as a term in logic, unqualified, asserting absolutely, from Late Latin categoricus, from
Greek kategorikos accusatory, affirmative, categorical, from kategoria (see category). General sense
of explicit, unconditional is from 1610s. Categorical imperative, from the philosophy of Kant, first
recorded 1827. Related: Categorically.


inexplicit (adj.)

1775 (implied in inexplicitly), from in- (1) not, opposite of + explicit. Or else from Latin
inexplicitus not to be unfolded; unexplained. Related: Inexplicitly; inexplicitness.


exploit (n.)

late 14c., outcome of an action, from Old French esploit (12c.), a very common word, used in senses
of action, deed, profit, achievement, from Latin explicitum a thing settled, ended, or displayed,
noun use of neuter of explicitus, past participle of explicare unfold, unroll, disentangle (see
explicit).    Meaning feat, achievement is c.1400. Sense evolution is from unfolding to bringing out
to having advantage to achievement. Related: Exploits.


disclose (v.)

late 14c., from Old French desclos open, exposed, plain, explicit, past participle of desclore
(Modern French d&eacute;clore) open, break open, unlock, reveal, from des- (see dis-) + clore to
close (see close (v.)). Related: Disclosed; disclosing.


hamburger (n.)

1610s, native of Hamburg; the meat product so called from 1884, hamburg steak, named for the German
city of Hamburg, though no certain connection has ever been put forth, and there may not be one
unless it be that Hamburg was a major port of departure for German immigrants to United States.
Meaning a sandwich consisting of a bun and a patty of grilled hamburger meat attested by 1912.
Shortened form burger attested from 1939; beefburger was attempted 1940, in an attempt to make the
main ingredient more explicit, after the -burger had taken on a life of its own as a suffix (compare
cheeseburger, first attested 1938).


an

indefinite article before words beginning with vowels, 12c., from Old English an (with a long vowel)
one; lone, also used as a prefix an- single, lone; see one for the divergence of that word from
this. Also see a, of which this is the older, fuller form.    In other European languages, identity
between indefinite article and the word for one remains explicit (as in French un, German ein, etc.)
Old English got by without indefinite articles: He was a good man in Old English was he w&aelig;s
god man. Circa 15c., a and an commonly were written as one word with the following noun, which
contributed to the confusion over how such words as newt and umpire ought to be divided (see N).
In Shakespeare, etc., an sometimes is a contraction of as if (a usage first attested c.1300),
especially before it.


sabotage (n.)

1907 (from 1903 as a French word in English), from French sabotage, from saboter to sabotage,
bungle, literally walk noisily, from sabot wooden shoe (13c.), altered (by association with Old
French bot boot) from Middle French savate old shoe, from an unidentified source that also produced
similar words in Old Proven&ccedil;al, Portuguese, Spanish (zapata), Italian (ciabatta), Arabic
(sabbat), and Basque (zapata).    In French, and at first in English, the sense of deliberately and
maliciously destroying property originally was in reference to labor disputes, but the oft-repeated
story (as old as the record of the word in English) that the modern meaning derives from strikers'
supposed tactic of throwing shoes into machinery is not supported by the etymology. Likely it was
not meant as a literal image; the word was used in French in a variety of bungling senses, such as
to play a piece of music badly. This, too, was the explanation given in some early usages.
SABOTAGE [chapter heading] The title we have prefixed seems to mean scamping work. It is a device
which, we are told, has been adopted by certain French workpeople as a substitute for striking. The
workman, in other words, purposes to remain on and to do his work badly, so as to annoy his
employer's customers and cause loss to his employer. [The Liberty Review, January 1907]   <hr />
You may believe that sabotage is murder, and so forth, but it is not so at all. Sabotage means
giving back to the bosses what they give to us. Sabotage consists in going slow with the process of
production when the bosses go slow with the same process in regard to wages. [Arturo M. Giovannitti,
quoted in report of the Sagamore Sociological Conference, June 1907]   <hr />   In English,
malicious mischief would appear to be the nearest explicit definition of sabotage, which is so much
more expressive as to be likely of adoption into all languages spoken by nations suffering from this
new force in industry and morals. Sabotage has a flavor which is unmistakable even to persons
knowing little slang and no French .... [Century Magazine, November 1910]


