expletive (adj.)

mid-15c., from Latin expletivus (see expletive (n.)).


expletive (n.)

1610s, originally a word or phrase serving to fill out a sentence or metrical line, from Middle
French expl&eacute;tif (15c.) and directly from Late Latin expletivus serving to fill out, from
explet-, past participle stem of Latin explere fill out, from ex- out (see ex-) + plere to fill (see
pleio-).    Sense of exclamation, often in the form of a cuss word, first recorded 1815 in Sir
Walter Scott, popularized by edited transcripts of Watergate tapes (mid-1970s), in which expletive
deleted replaced President Nixon's salty expressions. As an adjective, from 1660s.


Jehosaphat

biblical name (II Sam. viii:16), used as a mild expletive in American English from 1857.


frigging (adj.)

by 1936 as an expletive, from present participle of frig.


begorra

1839, antiquated Anglo-Irish form of expletive By God.


hanged (adj.)

put to death by hanging, late 15c., past participle of hang (v.). As an expletive, from 1887.


bejesus

mild expletive, 1908, perhaps from by Jesus. To beat the bejesus out of someone is from 1934.


blamed (adv.)

confoundedly 1833, later also as an adjective, from past participle of blame (v.), as a euphemistic
evasion of the horrible word damn. [Bartlett, Dictionary of Americanisms, 1848].    This adjective
'blamed' is the virtuous oath by which simple people, who are improving their habits, cure
themselves of a stronger epithet. [Edward Everett Hale, If, Yes, and Perhaps, 1868]    Compare also
blamenation (1837) as an expletive. The imprecation blame me is attested from 1830.


alive (adj.)

c.1200, from Old English on life in living. The fuller form on live was still current 17c. Alive and
kicking alert, vigorous, attested from 1859; The allusion is to a child in the womb after quickening
[Farmer]. Used emphatically, especially with man; as in:    [A]bout a thousand gentlemen having
bought his almanacks for this year, merely to find what he said against me, at every line they read
they would lift up their eyes, and cry out betwixt rage and laughter, they were sure no man alive
ever writ such damned stuff as this. [Jonathan Swift, Bickerstaff's Vindication, 1709]    Thus
abstracted as an expletive, man alive! (1845).


Moses

masc. proper name, name of Hebrew prophet and lawgiver, from Latin, from Greek Mouses, from Hebrew
Mosheh, of unknown origin.Most scholars see in it the Hebraization of Egyptian mes, mesu 'child,
son,' which is often used in theophorous names. According to this derivation the words of Pharaoh's
daughter in Ex. 2:10, 'For out of the water I drew him' are not the explanation of the Hebrew name
Mosheh, but express the idea that the Egyptian name given by Pharaoh's daughter resembles in sound,
and therefore, reminds us of, the Hebrew verb mashah 'he drew out,' which is suggestive of the words
spoken by Pharaoh's daughter. [Dr. Ernest Klein, A Comprehensive Etymological Dictionary of the
English Language]  As an expletive or oath, 1840.


damn (v.)

late 13c., to condemn, from Old French damner damn, condemn; convict, blame; injure, derivative of
Latin damnare to adjudge guilty; to doom; to condemn, blame, reject, from noun damnum damage, hurt,
harm; loss, injury; a fine, penalty, possibly from an ancient religious term from PIE *dap- to
apportion in exchange [see Watkins]. The Latin word evolved a legal meaning of pronounce judgment
upon. Theological sense is first recorded early 14c.; the optative expletive use likely is as old.
Damn and its derivatives generally were avoided in print from 18c. to c.1930s (the famous line in
the film version of Gone with the Wind was a breakthrough and required much effort by the studio).
The noun is recorded from 1610s; to be not worth a damn is from 1817. The adjective is 1775, short
for damned; Damn Yankee, characteristic Southern U.S. term for Northerner, is attested from 1812.
Related: Damning.


what (pron.)

Old English hw&aelig;t, referring to things in abstraction; also why, wherefore; indeed, surely,
truly, from Proto-Germanic pronoun *hwat (cognates: Old Saxon hwat, Old Norse hvat, Danish hvad, Old
Frisian hwet, Dutch wat, Old High German hwaz, German was, Gothic hva what), from PIE *kwod, neuter
singular of *kwos who (see who). Corresponding to Latin quid.    Meaning what did you say? is
recorded from c.1300. As an adjective and adverb, in Old English. As a conjunction in late Old
English. Exclamatory use was in Old English. What the _____ (devil, etc.) as an exclamation of
surprise is from late 14c. As an interrogative expletive at the end of sentences from 1891; common
in affected British speech. Or what as an alternative end to a question is first attested 1766. What
have you anything else one can think of is from 1925. What's up? what is happening? first recorded
1881.     To give one what for is to respond to his remonstrant what for? by further assault
[Weekley]. The phrase is attested from 1873; what for? as introducing a question is from 1760. To
know what is what is from c.1400; I'll tell you what to emphasize what is about to be said is in
Shakespeare.


