exposition (n.)

late 14c., explanation, narration, from Old French esposicion explanation, interpretation (12c.),
from Latin expositionem (nominative expositio) a setting or showing forth; narration, explanation,
noun of action from past participle stem of exponere put forth; explain; expose (see expound).
The meaning public display is first recorded 1851 in reference to the Crystal Palace Exposition in
London. Abbreviation Expo is first recorded 1963, in reference to planning for the world's fair held
in Montreal in 1967.


Ferris wheel (n.)

1893, American English, from U.S. engineer George W.G. Ferris (1859-1896), who designed it for the
World's Columbian Exposition, held in Chicago in 1893. It was 250 feet tall and meant to rival the
Eiffel Tower, from the 1889 Paris Exposition. The surname is said to be a 16c. form of Ferrers,
borne in England by two families, from two places named Ferri&#232;res in Normandy.


Eiffel Tower

erected in the Champ-de-Mars for the Paris Universal Exposition of 1889; at 984.25 feet the world's
tallest structure at the time. Designed by French engineer Alexandre Gustave Eiffel (1832-1923).


rationale (n.)

1650s, exposition of principles, from Late Latin rationale, noun use of neuter of Latin rationalis
of reason (see rational). Hence, fundamental reason (1680s).


interpretation (n.)

mid-14c. (late 13c. in Anglo-French), from Old French interpretacion (12c.) and directly from Latin
interpretationem (nominative interpretatio) explanation, exposition, noun of action from past
participle stem of interpretari (see interpret).


morgue (n.)

mortuary, 1821, from French Morgue, originally a specific building in Paris where bodies were
exposed for identification:    There is, in the most populous part of the French metropolis, an
establishment entitled La Morgue, destined for the reception and exposition of bodies drowned in the
Seine, and caught in nets, which are placed in different parts of the river for that purpose. The
object of this exposition is, that the deceased may be recognised by their friends or relatives, and
receive the rights of sepulture accordingly. The Morgue is open at all hours of the day, to
passengers of every description, and often displays at a time, five or six horrible carcasses
stretched, without covering, on an inclined platform, and subjected to the promiscuous gaze of the
mob. [American Review, January 1811]     Before that it was the place where new prisoners were
displayed to keepers to establish their identification. Thus the name is believed to be probably
from French morgue haughtiness, originally a sad expression, solemn look, from Old French morguer
look solemnly, from Vulgar Latin *murricare to make a face, pout, from *murrum muzzle, snout. The
1768 Dictionnaire Royal Fran&#231;ois-Anglois Et Anglois-Fran&#231;ois defines French morgue both as
A proud, big, haughty or stately look, stare, surliness, or surly look and A little gratel room
wherein a new prisoner is set, and must continue some hours, that the Jailer's ordinary servants may
the better take notice of his face.    Adopted as a general term in U.S., 1880s, replacing earlier
dead house, etc. In newspaper slang, collection of pre-written obituary material of living persons
(1903), hence library of clips, photos, etc., 1918.


art deco

decorative and architectural style of the period 1925-1940, attested from 1966, from French art
d&eacute;coratif, literally decorative art (see decorative); from L'Exposition Internationale des
Arts D&eacute;coratifs et Industriels Modernes, held in Paris 1925.


moral (n.)

moral exposition of a story, c. 1500, from moral (adj.) and from French moral and Late Latin morale.


mythology (n.)

early 15c., exposition of myths, from Middle French mythologie and directly from Late Latin
mythologia, from Greek mythologia legendary lore, a telling of mythic legends; a legend, story,
tale, from mythos myth (of unknown origin) + -logy study. Meaning a body of myths first recorded
1781.


midway (n.)

Old English mid-weg the middle of a way or distance; see mid + way (n.). Meaning central avenue of a
fairground is first recorded 1893, American English, in reference to the Midway Plaisance of the
Worlds Columbian Exposition held that year in Chicago. The Pacific island group so called for being
midway between America and Asia. As an adverb from late Old English.


cracker-jack (n.)

also crackerjack, something excellent, 1893, U.S. colloquialism, apparently a fanciful construction,
earliest use in reference to racing horses. The caramel-coated popcorn-and-peanuts confection was
said to have been introduced at the World's Columbian Exposition (1893). Supposedly a salesman gave
it the name when he tasted some and said, That's a cracker-jack, using the then-popular expression.
The name was trademarked 1896. The Prize in Every Box was introduced 1912.    Your brother Bob is
traveling, isn't he?    Yep. He's with one of the big racing teams. I tell you, he's a cracker-jack!
Wins a bushel of diamonds and gold cups every week.  [Life, Aug. 1, 1895]


exegesis (n.)

1610s, explanatory note, from Greek exegesis explanation, interpretation, from exegeisthai explain,
interpret, from ex out (see ex-) + hegeisthai to lead, guide, from PIE root *sag- to track down,
seek out (see seek (v.)). Meaning exposition (of Scripture) is from 1823. Related: Exegetic;
exegetical; exegetically.


Aquarius

faint constellation and 11th zodiac sign, late Old English, from Latin aquarius, literally water
carrier, properly an adjective, pertaining to water (see aquarium); a loan-translation of Greek
Hydrokhoos the water-pourer, old Greek name of this constellation.   Aquarians were a former
Christian sect that used water instead of wine at the Lord's Supper. Age of Aquarius (1940) is an
astrological epoch supposed to have begun in the 1960s, embodying the traits of this sign and
characterized by world peace and human brotherhood. The term and the concept probably got a boost in
popular use when An Aquarian Exposition was used as the sub-name of the Woodstock Music &amp; Art
Fair (1969).


