expound (v.)

c.1300, from Old French espondre expound (on), set forth, explain, from Latin exponere put forth,
explain, expose, exhibit, from ex- forth (see ex-) + ponere to put, place (see position); with
intrusive -d (compare sound (n.1)). The usual Middle English form was expoune. Related: Expounded;
expounding.


haggadah (n.)

1856, from Rabbinical Hebrew haggadhah, literally tale, verbal noun from higgidh to make clear,
narrate, expound.


exponent (n.)

1706, from Latin exponentem (nominative exponens), present participle of exponere put forth (see
expound). A mathematical term at first; the sense of one who expounds is 1812. As an adjective, from
1580s.


expository (adj.)

1620s, from Medieval Latin expositorius, from expositus, past participle of exponere (see expound).
Earlier in English as a noun meaning an expository treatise, commentary (early 15c.).


moralize (v.)

c.1400, expound or interpret spiritual or moral significance, from Old French moraliser and directly
from Late Latin moralizare, from moralis (see moral (adj.)). Related: Moralized; moralizing.


compound (v.)

to put together, late 14c., compounen to mix, combine, from Old French compondre, componre arrange,
direct, from Latin componere to put together (see composite). The -d appeared 1500s in English on
model of expound, etc. Related: Compounded; compounding.


expose (v.)

early 15c., to leave without shelter or defense, from Middle French exposer lay open, set forth
(13c.), from Latin exponere set forth (see expound), altered by confusion with poser to place, lay
down (see pose (v.1)). Meaning to exhibit openly is from 1620s; that of to unmask is from 1690s.
Photographic sense is from 1839. Related: Exposed; exposes; exposing.


propound (v.)

late 16c. variant of Middle English proponen to put forward (late 14c.), from Latin proponere put
forth, set forth, lay out, display, expose to view, figuratively set before the mind; resolve;
intend, design, from pro- before (see pro-) + ponere to put (see position (n.)). Perhaps influenced
in form by compound, expound. Related: Propounded; propounding.


exposition (n.)

late 14c., explanation, narration, from Old French esposicion (12c.), from Latin expositionem
(nominative expositio) a setting or showing forth, noun of action from past participle stem of
exponere (see expound).    The meaning public display is first recorded 1851 in reference to the
Crystal Palace Exposition in London. Abbreviation Expo is first recorded 1963, in reference to
planning for the world's fair held in Montreal in 1967.


interpret (v.)

late 14c., from Old French interpreter (13c.) and directly from Latin interpretari explain, expound,
understand, from interpres agent, translator, from inter- (see inter-) + second element of uncertain
origin, perhaps related to Sanskrit prath- to spread abroad, PIE *per- (5) to traffic in, sell (see
pornography). Related: Interpreted; interpreting.


phantasm (n.)

early 13c., fantesme, from Old French fantosme a dream, illusion, fantasy; apparition, ghost,
phantom (12c.), and directly from Latin phantasma an apparition, specter, from Greek phantasma
image, phantom, apparition; mere image, unreality, from phantazein to make visible, display, from
stem of phainein to bring to light, make appear; come to light, be seen, appear; explain, expound,
inform against; appear to be so, from PIE root *bha- (1) to shine (cognates: Sanskrit bhati shines,
glitters, Old Irish ban white, light, ray of light). Spelling conformed to Latin from 16c. (see ph).
A spelling variant of phantom, differentiated, but so that the differences are elusive [Fowler].


