exquisite (adj.)

early 15c., carefully selected, from Latin exquisitus carefully sought out, thus, choice, from past
participle of exquirere search out thoroughly, from ex- out (see ex-) + quaerere to seek (see query
(v.)).    Of any thing (good or bad, torture as well as art) brought to a highly wrought condition,
sometimes shading into disapproval. A vogue word 15c.-18c., given wide extensions of meaning, none
of which survives. The main modern sense of of consummate and delightful excellence is first
attested 1579, in Lyly's Euphues. Related: Exquisitely; exquisiteness. The noun meaning a dandy, fop
is from 1819.


comely (adj.)

beautiful, handsome, c.1400, probably from Old English cymlic lovely, splendid, finely made, from
cyme exquisite, glorious, delicate, from West Germanic *kumi- delicate, feeble (cognates: Old High
German chumo with difficulty, chumig weak, delicate; German kaum hardly, scarcely). Or perhaps the
modern word is from Middle English bicumelic (c.1200) suitable, exquisite, literally becomely
(compare becoming).


perfect (adj.)

early 15c. alteration of Middle English parfit (c.1300), from Old French parfit finished, completed,
ready (11c.), from Latin perfectus completed, excellent, accomplished, exquisite, past participle of
perficere accomplish, finish, complete, from per- completely (see per) + facere to perform (see
factitious). Often used in English as an intensive (perfect stranger, etc.).


cartoon (n.)

1670s, a drawing on strong paper (used as a model for another work), from French carton, from
Italian cartone strong, heavy paper, pasteboard, thus preliminary sketches made by artists on such
paper (see carton). Extension to comical drawings in newspapers and magazines is 1843.  Punch has
the benevolence to announce, that in an early number of his ensuing Volume he will astonish the
Parliamentary Committee by the publication of several exquisite designs, to be called Punch's
Cartoons! [Punch, June 24, 1843]  Also see -oon.


vaudeville (n.)

1735, a country song, especially one for the stage, from French vaudeville (16c.), alteration (by
influence of ville town) of Middle French vaudevire, said to be from (chanson du) Vau de Vire (song
of the) valley of Vire, in the Calvados region of Normandy, first applied to the popular satirical
songs of Olivier Basselin, a 15c. poet who lived in Vire. The alternative explanation is that
vaudevire derives from Middle French dialectal vauder to go + virer to turn. From the popularity of
the songs in France grew a form of theatrical entertainment based on parodies of popular opera and
drama, interspersed with songs.    The Th&#233;atre du Vaudeville is rich in parodies, which follow
rapidly upon every new piece given at the Opera, or at the Th&#233;atre Fran&ccedil;ais. Their
parody upon Hamlet is too ludicrous for description, but irresistibly laughable; and the elegaut
light ballet of La Colombe Retrouv&#233;e [The Dove found again], I saw parodied at the Vaudeville
as La Maison Retrouv&#233;e [The House found again], with a breadth of farce quite beyond the genius
of Sadler's Wells. Some of the acting here, particularly that of the men, is exquisite; and the
orchestra like all the orchestras in Paris is full and excellent. [France in 1816, by Lady Morgan]
As a sort of popular stage variety entertainment show suitable for families, from c.1881 in U.S.,
displaced by movies after c.1914, considered dead from 1932.


