extoll

variant of extol.


extol (v.)

also extoll, c.1400, to lift up, from Latin extollere to place on high, raise, elevate, figuratively
to exalt, praise, from ex- up (see ex-) + tollere to raise, from PIE *tele- to bear, carry, with
derivatives referring to measured weights and thence money and payment [Watkins] (cognates: Greek
talantos bearing, suffering, tolman to carry, bear, telamon broad strap for bearing something,
talenton a balance, pair of scales, Atlas the 'Bearer' of Heaven; Lithuanian tiltas bridge; Sanskrit
tula balance, tulayati lifts up, weighs; Latin tolerare to bear, support, latus borne; Old English
&thorn;olian to endure; Armenian tolum I allow). Figurative sense of praise highly in English is
first attested c.1500. Related: Extolled; extolling.


laud (v.)

late 14c., from Old French lauder praise, extol, from Latin laudare to praise, commend, honor,
extol, eulogize, from laus (genitive laudis) praise, fame glory. Probably cognate with Old English
leo&eth; song, poem, hymn, from Proto-Germanic *leuthan (cognates: Old Norse ljo&eth; strophe,
German Lied song, Gothic liu&thorn;on to praise), and from an echoic PIE root *leu-. Related:
Lauded; lauding.


trumpet (v.)

1520s, from trumpet (n.). Figurative sense of to proclaim, extol is attested from 1580s. Related:
Trumpeted; trumpeting.


emblazon (v.)

inscribe conspicuously, also extol, 1590s, from en- (1) + blazon. Related: Emblazoned; emblazoning.


Tantalus

Greek Tantalos, king of Phrygia, perhaps literally the Bearer or the Sufferer, by dissimilation from
*tal-talos, a reduplication of PIE root *tele- to bear, carry, support (see extol), in reference to
his long endurance, but Watkins finds this unlikely. Compare tantalize.


magnify (v.)

late 14c., to speak or act for the glory or honor (of someone or something), from Old French
magnefiier glorify, magnify, from Latin magnificare esteem greatly, extol, make much of, from
magnificus great, elevated, noble (see magnificence). Meaning use a telescope or microscope is first
attested 1660s, said to be a unique development in English. Related: Magnified; magnifying.


caduceus (n.)

1590s, from Latin caduceus, alteration of Doric Greek karykeion herald's staff, from karyx (genitive
karykos) a herald, from PIE *karu-, from root *kar- to praise loudly, extol (cognates: Sanskrit
carkarti mentions with praise, Old English hre&eth; fame, glory). Token of a peaceful embassy;
originally an olive branch. Especially the wand carried by Mercury, messenger of the gods, usually
represented with two serpents twined round it.


oblate (n.)

person devoted to religious work, 1756, from Medieval Latin oblatus, noun use of Latin oblatus,
variant past participle of offerre to offer, to bring before, from ob- (see ob-) + latus carried,
borne (used as suppletive past participle of ferre to bear), from *tlatos, from PIE root *tele- to
bear, carry (see extol).


thole (v.)

to be subjected to or exposed to, to endure without complaint, now Scottish and Northern English
dialect, from Old English &thorn;olian to suffer, endure, undergo; remain, survive; to lose, lack,
forfeit, from Proto-Germanic stem *thul- (cognates: Old Saxon tholon, Old High German dolon, Old
Norse &thorn;ola, Gothic &thorn;ulan to suffer, German geduld patience), from PIE *tele- to bear,
carry (see extol).


superlative (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French superlatif absolute, highest; powerful; best (13c.) and directly from
Late Latin superlativus extravagant, exaggerated, hyperbolic, from Latin superlatus exaggerated
(used as past participle of superferre carry over or beyond), from super beyond (see super-) + lat-
carry, from *tlat-, past participle stem of tollere to take away (see extol). Related:
Superlatively; superlativeness.    The noun is attested from 1520s, originally in the grammatical
sense, a word in the superlative; hence exaggerated language (1590s).


talent (n.)

late 13c., inclination, disposition, will, desire, from Old French talent (12c.), from Medieval
Latin talenta, plural of talentum inclination, leaning, will, desire (11c.), in classical Latin
balance, weight; sum of money, from Greek talanton a balance, pair of scales, hence weight, definite
weight, anything weighed, and in later times sum of money, from PIE *tele- to lift, support, weigh,
with derivatives referring to measured weights and thence money and payment [Watkins]; see extol.
An ancient denomination of weight, originally Babylonian (though the name is Greek), and varying
widely in value among different peoples and at different times. [Century Dictionary]    According to
Liddell &amp; Scott, as a monetary sum, considered to consist of 6,000 drachmae, or, in Attica,
57.75 lbs. of silver. Also borrowed in other Germanic languages and Celtic. Attested in Old English
as talente). The Medieval Latin and common Romanic sense developed from figurative use of the word
in the sense of money. Meaning special natural ability, aptitude, gift committed to one for use and
improvement developed by mid-15c., in part perhaps from figurative sense wealth, but mostly from the
parable of the talents in Matt. xxv:14-30. Meaning persons of ability collectively is from 1856.


toleration (n.)

1510s, permission granted by authority, license, from Middle French tol&eacute;ration (15c.), from
Latin tolerationem (nominative toleratio) a bearing, supporting, enduring, noun of action from past
participle stem of tolerare to endure, sustain, support, suffer, literally to bear, from PIE *tele-
to bear, carry (see extol).    Meaning forbearance, sufferance is from 1580s. The specific religious
sense is from 1609; as in Act of Toleration (1689), statute granting freedom of religious worship
(with conditions) to dissenting Protestants in England. In this it means recognition of the right of
private judgment in matters of faith and worship; liberty granted by the government to preach and
worship as one pleases; equality under the law without regard to religion.    If any man err from
the right way, it is his own misfortune, no injury to thee; nor therefore art thou to punish him in
the things of this life because thou supposest he will be miserable in that which is to come.
Nobody, therefore, in fine, neither single persons nor churches, nay, nor even commonwealths, have
any just title to invade the civil rights and worldly goods of each other upon pretence of religion.
[John Locke, Letter Concerning Toleration, 1689]   <hr />   Before any man can be considered as a
member of Civil Society, he must be considered as a subject of the Governour of the Universe: And if
a member of Civil Society, do it with a saving of his allegiance to the Universal Sovereign. We
maintain therefore that in matters of Religion, no man's right is abridged by the institution of
Civil Society and that Religion is wholly exempt from its cognizance. [James Madison, Memorial and
Remonstrance Against Religious Assessments, 1785]   <hr />   Unlimited tolerance must lead to the
disappearance of tolerance. If we extend unlimited tolerance even to those who are intolerant, if we
are not prepared to defend a tolerant society against the onslaught of the intolerant, then the
tolerant will be destroyed, and tolerance with them. [Karl Popper, The Open Society and Its Enemies,
1962]


