extremist (n.)

1840, from extreme + -ist.


bathyscaphe (n.)

diving apparatus for reaching great depths, 1947, name coined by its inventor, Swiss scientific
extremist Prof. Auguste Piccard (1884-1962), from Greek bathys deep (see benthos) + skaphe light
boat, skiff (see skaphoid).


ultra-

word-forming element meaning beyond (ultraviolet) or extremely (ultramodern), from Latin ultra- from
ultra (adv. and prep.) beyond, on the other side, on the farther side, past, over, across, from PIE
*ol-tero-, suffixed form of root *al- (1) beyond (see alias (adv.)). In common use from early 19c.,
it appears to have arisen from French political designations. As its own word, a noun meaning
extremist of various stripes, it is first recorded 1817, from French ultra, shortening of ultra-
royaliste extreme royalist.


Hezbollah (n.)

extremist Shiite group active in Lebanon, founded c.1982, from Persian hezbollah, Arabic hizbullah,
literally Party of God, from hezb/hizb party + allah God. An adherent is a Hezbollahi. The name of
various Islamic groups in modern times, the name itself is attested in English by 1960 in referense
to an Indonesian guerilla battalion of 1945 that grew out of a similarly named organization formed
by the Japanese to give training in military drill to young Moslems.    In Modjokuto (like Masjumi
itself, Hizbullah was Indonesia-wide but, also like Masjumi, it had little effective central
organization) this group was led by the present head of Muhammadijah -- the same man who a year or
so before was going to Djakarta for propaganda training and studying to be a kamikaze. [Clifford
Geertz, The Religion of Java, Chicago, 1960]


terrorist (n.)

in the modern sense, 1944, especially in reference to Jewish tactics against the British in
Palestine -- earlier it was used of extremist revolutionaries in Russia who attempted to demoralize
the government by terror (1866); and Jacobins during the French Revolution (1795) -- from French
terroriste; see terror + -ist (also see terrorism).    The term now usually refers to a member of a
clandestine or expatriate organization aiming to coerce an established government by acts of
violence against it or its subjects. [OED]    The tendency of one party's terrorist to be another's
guerilla or freedom fighter was noted in reference to the British action in Cyprus (1956) and the
war in Rhodesia (1973). The word terrorist has been applied, at least retroactively, to the Maquis
resistance in occupied France in World War II (as in in the Spectator, Oct. 20, 1979).


