extraneous (adj.)

1630s, from Latin extraneus external, strange, from extra outside of (see extra-).


clog (v.)

late 14c., hinder, originally by fastening a block of wood to something, from clog (n.). Meaning
choke up with extraneous matter is 17c. Related: Clogged; clogging.


self-made (adj.)

1610s, made by oneself, from self- + made. Self-made man first recorded 1832, American English; the
sense is having attained material success in life without extraneous advantages.


numb (adj.)

c.1400, nome, deprived of motion or feeling, literally taken, seized, from past participle of nimen
to take, seize, from Old English niman to take, catch, grasp (see nimble). The extraneous -b (to
conform to comb, limb, etc.) appeared 17c. The notion is of being taken with palsy, shock, and
especially cold. Figurative use from 1560s.


adventitious (adj.)

of the nature of an addition from without, c.1600, from Medieval Latin adventitius coming from
abroad, extraneous, a corruption of Latin adventicius foreign, strange, accidental, from advent-
past participle stem of advenire arrive (see advent). Related: Adventitiously; adventitiousness.


purify (v.)

early 14c., free from spiritual pollution, from Old French purefier purify, cleanse, refine (12c.),
from Latin purificare to make pure, from purus pure (see pure) + root of facere to make (see
factitious). Meaning free from extraneous matter is recorded from mid-15c. Related: Purified;
purifying.


orchid (n.)

1845, introduced by John Lindley in School Botanty, from Modern Latin Orchide&aelig; (Linnaeus), the
plant's family name, from Latin orchis, a kind of orchid, from Greek orkhis (genitive orkheos)
orchid, literally testicle, from PIE *orghi-, the standard root for testicle (cognates: Avestan
erezi testicles, Armenian orjik, Middle Irish uirgge, Irish uirge testicle, Lithuanian erzilas
stallion). The plant so called because of the shape of its root. Earlier in English in Latin form,
orchis (1560s), and in Middle English it was ballockwort (c.1300; see ballocks). Marred by
extraneous -d- in an attempt to extract the Latin stem.


