extricate (v.)

1610s, from Latin extricatus, past participle of extricare disentangle, perhaps from ex- out of +
tricae (plural) perplexities, hindrances, of unknown origin. Related: Extricated; extricating.


extrication (n.)

1640s, noun of action from extricate (v.).


extricable (adj.)

1620s, from extricate + -able. Related: Extricably.


intricate (adj.)

early 15c., from Latin intricatus entangled, past participle of intricare to entangle, perplex,
embarrass, from in- in (see in- (2)) + tricae (plural) perplexities, hindrances, toys, tricks, of
uncertain origin (compare extricate). Related: Intricately.


club (v.)

to hit with a club, 1590s, from club (v.). Meaning gather in a club-like mass is from 1620s.
Related: Clubbed; clubbing.   <b>CLUB</b>, verb (military). -- In manoeuvring troops, so to blunder
the word of command that the soldiers get into a position from which they cannot extricate
themselves by ordinary tactics. [Farmer &amp; Henley]


inextricable (adj.)

early 15c., from Latin inextricabilis that cannot be disentangled, from in- not, opposite of (see
in- (1)) + extricare (see extricate). Related: Inextricably.


expedite (v.)

late 15c. (implied in past participle expedit), from Latin expeditus, past participle of expedire
extricate, disengage, liberate; procure, make ready, make fit, prepare, literally free the feet from
fetters, hence liberate from difficulties, from ex- out (see ex-) + *pedis fetter, chain for the
feet, related to pes (genitive pedis) foot (see foot (n.)). Compare Greek pede fetter. Related:
Expedited; expediting.


weasel (v.)

to deprive (a word or phrase) of its meaning, 1900, from weasel (n.); so used because the weasel
sucks out the contents of eggs, leaving the shell intact. Both this and weasel-word are first
attested in The Stained-Glass Political Platform, a short story by Stewart Chaplin, first printed in
Century Magazine, June 1900:    Why, weasel words are words that suck all the life out of the words
next to them, just as a weasel sucks an egg and leaves the shell. If you heft the egg afterward it's
as light as a feather, and not very filling when you're hungry; but a basketful of them would make
quite a show, and would bamboozle the unwary.    They were picked up at once in American political
slang. The sense of extricate oneself (from a difficult place) like a weasel is first recorded 1925;
that of to evade and equivocate is from 1956. Related: Weasled; weasling.


