exultant (adj.)

1650s, from Latin exultantem/exsultantem, present participle of exultare/exsultare  (see exult).
Related: Exultantly.


exultation (n.)

early 15c., from Old French exultacion, from Latin exultationem/exsultationem, noun of action from
past participle stem of exultare/exsultare, frequentative of exsilire leap out or up (see exult).
Notion is of leaping or dancing for joy. An Old English word for it was heahbliss high bliss.


exult (v.)

1560s, to leap up; 1590s, to rejoice, triumph, from Middle French exulter, from Latin
exultare/exsultare leap about, leap for joy, frequentative of exsilire to leap up, from ex- out (see
ex-) + salire to leap (see salient (adj.)). The notion is of leaping or dancing for joy. Related:
Exulted; exulting.


crow (v.)

Old English crawian make a loud noise like a crow  (see crow (n.)); sense of exult in triumph is
1520s, perhaps in part because the English crow is a carrion-eater. Related: Crowed; crowing.


agave (n.)

American aloe plant, 1797, from Latin Agave, from Greek Agaue, proper name in mythology (mother of
Pentheus), from agauos noble, perhaps from agasthai wonder at, from gaiein to rejoice, exult, with
intensive prefix a-. The name seems to have been taken generically by botanists, the plant perhaps
so called for its stately flower stem.


fawn (v.)

Old English f&aelig;gnian rejoice, be glad, exult, from f&aelig;gen glad (see fain); used in Middle
English to refer to expressions of delight, especially a dog wagging its tail (early 13c.), hence
court favor, grovel, act slavishly (early 14c.). Related: Fawned; fawning.


viola (n.)

tenor violin, 1797, from Italian viola, from Old Proven&ccedil;al viola, from Medieval Latin vitula
stringed instrument, perhaps from Vitula, Roman goddess of joy (see fiddle), or from related Latin
verb vitulari to exult, be joyful. Viola da gamba bass viol (1724) is from Italian, literally a
viola for the leg (i.e. to hold between the legs).


yelp (v.)

Old English gielpan (West Saxon), gelpan (Anglian) to boast, exult, from Proto-Germanic *gel-
(cognates: Old Saxon galpon, Old Norse gjalpa to yelp, Old Norse gjalp boasting, Old High German
gelph outcry), from PIE root *ghel- (1) to cry out (see yell (v.)). Meaning utter a quick, sharp,
bark or cry is 1550s, probably from the noun. Related: Yelped; yelping.


ovation (n.)

1530s, in the Roman historical sense, from Middle French ovation or directly from Latin ovationem
(nominative ovatio) a triumph, rejoicing, noun of action from past participle stem of ovare exult,
rejoice, triumph, probably imitative of a shout (compare Greek euazein to utter cries of joy). In
Roman history, a lesser triumph, granted to a commander for achievements insufficient to entitle him
to a triumph proper. Figurative sense of burst of enthusiastic applause from a crowd is first
attested 1831.


