fabled (adj.)

c.1600, unreal, invented, past participle adjective from fable (v.) to tell tales (late 14c.), from
Old French fabler, from Latin fabulari, from fabula (see fable). Meaning celebrated in fable is from
1706.


fable (n.)

c.1300, falsehood, lie, pretense, from Old French fable (12c.) story, fable, tale; fiction, lie,
falsehood, from Latin fabula story, play, fable, narrative, account, tale, literally that which is
told, related to fari speak, tell, from PIE root *bha- (2) speak (see fame (n.)). Sense of animal
story (early 14c.) comes from Aesop. In modern folklore terms, defined as a short, comic tale making
a moral point about human nature, usually through animal characters behaving in human ways. Most
trace to Greece or India.


fib (n.)

1610s, of uncertain origin, perhaps from fibble-fable nonsense (1580s), a reduplication of fable.


fabulous (adj.)

early 15c., mythical, legendary, from Latin fabulosus celebrated in fable; rich in myths, from
fabula (see fable (n.)).    Sense of incredible first recorded c.1600. Slang shortening fab first
recorded 1957; popularized in reference to The Beatles, c.1963.Fabulous (often contracted to fab(s))
and fantastic are also in that long list of words which boys and girls use for a time to express
high commendation and then get tired of, such as, to go no farther back than the present century,
topping, spiffing, ripping, wizard, super, posh, smashing. [Gower's 1965 revision of Fowler's Modern
English Usage]  Related: Fabulously.


spell (n.1)

Old English spell story, saying, tale, history, narrative, fable; discourse, command, from Proto-
Germanic *spellam (see spell (v.1)). Compare Old Saxon spel, Old Norse spjall, Old High German spel,
Gothic spill report, discourse, tale, fable, myth; German Beispiel example. From c.1200 as an
utterance, something said, a statement, remark; meaning set of words with supposed magical or occult
powers, incantation, charm first recorded 1570s; hence any means or cause of enchantment.    The
term 'spell' is generally used for magical procedures which cause harm, or force people to do
something against their will -- unlike charms for healing, protection, etc. [Oxford Dictionary of
English Folklore]    Also in Old English, doctrine; a sermon; religious instruction or teaching; the
gospel; a book of the Bible; compare gospel.


roc (n.)

large, ferocious bird of fable, 1570s, from Arabic rukhkh, from Persian rukh. Mentioned in Marco
Polo's account of Madagascar, modern use is mostly from Arabian Nights. Hence roc's egg something
marvelous or prodigious.


fabulist (n.)

1590s, from French fabuliste, from Latin fabula (see fable (n.)).


implicate (v.)

early 15c., to convey in a fable; c.1600, intertwine, wreathe, from Latin implicatus, past
participle of implicare to involve, entwine (see implication). Meaning involve a person in a crime,
charge, etc., is from 1797. Related: Implicated; implicating.


schlemiel (n.)

awkward, clumsy person, 1868, from Yiddish shlemiel bungler, from main character in A. von
Chamisso's German fable The Wonderful History of Peter Schlemihl (1813), probably from Biblical name
Shelumiel (Num. i:6), chief of the tribe of Simeon, identified with the Simeonite prince Zimri ben
Salu, who was killed while committing adultery. Compare schlemazel.


ricochet (n.)

1769, from ricochet (v.) or French ricochet the skipping of a shot or of a flat stone on water, but
in earliest French use (15c.) verbal to-and-fro, and only in the phrase fable du ricochet, an
entertainment in which the teller of a tale skillfully evades questions, and chanson du ricochet, a
kind of repetitious song; of uncertain origin.


confabulate (v.)

1610s, from confabulatus, past participle of Latin confabulari to converse together, from com-
together (see com-) + fabulari to talk, chat, from fabula a tale (see fable). Psychiatric sense is
from 1924.


enigma (n.)

1580s, earlier enigmate (mid-15c.), from Latin aenigma riddle, from Greek ainigma (plural
ainigmata), from ainissesthai speak obscurely, speak in riddles, from ainos fable, riddle, of
unknown origin.


apologue (n.)

moral fable, 1550s, from French apologue, from Latin apologus, from Greek apologos, from apo- off,
away from (see apo-) + logos speech (see lecture (n.)). Literally, (that which comes) from a speech.


gourmand (n.)

late 15c., glutton, from Middle French gourmant glutton, originally an adj., gluttonous, of
uncertain origin. Not connected with gourmet. Meaning one fond of good eating is from 1758.    The
gourmand is one whose chief pleasure is eating; but a gourmet is a connoisseur of food and wines. In
England the difference is this: a gourmand regards quantity more than quality, a gourmet quality
more than quantity. [Brewer, Dictionary of Phrase and Fable, Philadelphia, 1898]


saw (n.2)

proverb, saying, maxim, Old English sagu saying, discourse, speech, study, tradition, tale, from
Proto-Germanic *saga-, *sagon- (cognates: Middle Low German, Middle Dutch sage, zage, German Sage
legend, fable, saga, myth, tradition, Old Norse saga story, tale, saga), from PIE root *sek(w)- to
say, utter (see say (v.)).


curry favor (v.)

early 16c., altered by folk etymology from curry favel (c.1400) from Old French correier fauvel to
be false, hypocritical, literally to curry the chestnut horse, which in medieval French allegories
was a symbol of cunning and deceit. See curry (v.). Old French fauvel is from a Germanic source and
ultimately related to fallow (adj.); the sense here is entangled with that of similar-sounding Old
French favele lying, deception, from Latin fabella, diminutive of fabula (see fable (n.)).


Mesopotamia

ancient name for the land that lies between the Tigris and Euphrates rivers (in modern Iraq), from
Greek mesopotamia (khora), literally a country between two rivers, from fem. of mesopotamos, from
mesos middle (see medial (adj.)) + potamos river (see potamo-).    In 19c. the word sometimes was
used in the sense of anything which gives irrational or inexplicable comfort to the hearer, based on
the story of the old woman who told her pastor that she found great support in that comfortable word
Mesopotamia [Brewer's Dictionary of Phrase &amp; Fable, 1870]. The place was called Mespot (1917) by
British soldiers serving there in World War I. Related: Mesopotamian.


altruism (n .)

1853, unselfishness, opposite of egoism, from French altruisme, coined or popularized 1830 by French
philosopher Auguste Comte (1798-1857), from autrui, from Old French altrui, of or to others, from
Latin alteri, dative of alter other (see alter). Apparently suggested to Comte by French legal
phrase l'autrui, or in full, le bien, le droit d'autrui. The -l- is perhaps a reinsertion from the
Latin word.    There is a fable that when the badger had been stung all over by bees, a bear
consoled him by a rhapsodic account of how he himself had just breakfasted on their honey. The
badger replied peevishly, The stings are in my flesh, and the sweetness is on your muzzle. The bear,
it is said, was surprised at the badger's want of altruism. [George Eliot, Theophrastus Such, 1879]


speech (n.)

Old English sp&aelig;c act of speaking; power of speaking; manner of speaking; statement, discourse,
narrative, formal utterance; language, variant of spr&aelig;c, from Proto-Germanic *sprek-, *spek-
(cognates: Danish sprog, Old Saxon spraca, Old Frisian spreke, Dutch spraak, Old High German
sprahha, German Sprache speech; see speak (v.))    The spr- forms were extinct in English by 1200.
Meaning address delivered to an audience first recorded 1580s.    And I honor the man who is willing
to sink  Half his present repute for the freedom to think,  And, when he has thought, be his cause
strong or weak,  Will risk t' other half for the freedom to speak,  Caring naught for what vengeance
the mob has in store,  Let that mob be the upper ten thousand or lower.   [James Russell Lowell, A
Fable for Critics, 1848]


stork (n.)

Old English storc stork, from Proto-Germanic *sturkaz (cognates: Old Norse storkr, Swedish and
Danish stork, Middle Dutch storc, Old High German storah, German Storch stork), from PIE *ster-
stiff (cognates: Old English stear stiff, strong; see stark). Perhaps so called with reference to
the bird's stiff or rigid posture. But some connect the word to Greek torgos vulture.    Old Church
Slavonic struku, Russian sterkhu, Lithuanian starkus, Hungarian eszterag, Albanian sterkjok stork
are said to be Germanic loan-words. The children's fable that babies are brought by storks (told by
adults who aren't ready to go into the details) is in English by 1854, from German and Dutch nursery
stories, no doubt from the notion that storks nesting on one's roof meant good luck, often in the
form of family happiness.


tale (n.)

Old English talu series, calculation, also story, tale, statement, deposition, narrative, fable,
accusation, action of telling, from Proto-Germanic *talo (cognates: Dutch taal speech, language,
Danish tale speech, talk, discourse, German Erz&#228;hlung story, Gothic talzjan to teach), from PIE
root *del- (2) to recount, count. The secondary Modern English sense of number, numerical reckoning
(c.1200) probably was the primary one in Germanic; see tell (v.), teller and Old Frisian tale,
Middle Dutch tal, Old Saxon tala, Danish tal, Old High German zala, German Zahl number.    The
ground sense of the Modern English word in its main meaning, then, might have been an account of
things in their due order. Related to talk (v.) and tell (v.). Meaning things divulged that were
given secretly, gossip is from mid-14c.; first record of talebearer tattletale is late 15c.


fuck (v.)

until recently a difficult word to trace, in part because it was taboo to the editors of the
original OED when the F volume was compiled, 1893-97. Written form only attested from early 16c. OED
2nd edition cites 1503, in the form fukkit; earliest appearance of current spelling is 1535 --
Bischops ... may fuck thair fill and be vnmaryit [Sir David Lyndesay, Ane Satyre of the Thrie
Estaits], but presumably it is a much more ancient word than that, simply one that wasn't written in
the kind of texts that have survived from Old English and Middle English. Buck cites proper name
John le Fucker from 1278, but the surname could have other explanations. The word apparently is
hinted at in a scurrilous 15c. poem, titled Flen flyys, written in bastard Latin and Middle English.
The relevant line reads:Non sunt in celi quia fuccant uuiuys of heliThey [the monks] are not in
heaven because they fuck the wives of [the town of] Ely. Fuccant is pseudo-Latin, and in the
original it is written in cipher. The earliest examples of the word otherwise are from Scottish,
which suggests a Scandinavian origin, perhaps from a word akin to Norwegian dialectal fukka
copulate, or Swedish dialectal focka copulate, strike, push, and fock penis. Another theory traces
it to Middle English fyke, fike move restlessly, fidget, which also meant dally, flirt, and probably
is from a general North Sea Germanic word; compare Middle Dutch fokken, German ficken fuck, earlier
make quick movements to and fro, flick, still earlier itch, scratch; the vulgar sense attested from
16c. This would parallel in sense the usual Middle English slang term for have sexual intercourse,
swive, from Old English swifan to move lightly over, sweep (see swivel). But OED remarks these
cannot be shown to be related to the English word. Chronology and phonology rule out Shipley's
attempt to derive it from Middle English firk to press hard, beat.    Germanic words of similar form
(f + vowel + consonant) and meaning 'copulate' are numerous. One of them is G. ficken. They often
have additional senses, especially 'cheat,' but their basic meaning is 'move back and forth.' ...
Most probably, fuck is a borrowing from Low German and has no cognates outside Germanic. [Liberman]
French foutre and Italian fottere look like the English word but are unrelated, derived rather from
Latin futuere, which is perhaps from PIE root *bhau(t)- knock, strike off, extended via a figurative
use from the sexual application of violent action [Shipley; compare the sexual slang use of bang,
etc.]. Popular and Internet derivations from acronyms (and the pluck yew fable) are merely
<b>ingenious trifling</b>. The Old English word was h&aelig;man, from ham dwelling, home, with a
sense of take home, co-habit. Fuck was outlawed in print in England (by the Obscene Publications
Act, 1857) and the U.S. (by the Comstock Act, 1873). As a noun, it dates from 1670s. The word may
have been shunned in print, but it continued in conversation, especially among soldiers during World
War I.It became so common that an effective way for the soldier to express this emotion was to omit
this word. Thus if a sergeant said, 'Get your ----ing rifles!' it was understood as a matter of
routine. But if he said 'Get your rifles!' there was an immediate implication of urgency and danger.
[John Brophy, Songs and Slang of the British Soldier: 1914-1918, pub. 1930]The legal barriers broke
down in the 20th century, with the Ulysses decision (U.S., 1933) and Lady Chatterley's Lover (U.S.,
1959; U.K., 1960). Johnson excluded the word, and fuck wasn't in a single English language
dictionary from 1795 to 1965. The Penguin Dictionary broke the taboo in the latter year. Houghton
Mifflin followed, in 1969, with The American Heritage Dictionary, but it also published a Clean
Green edition without the word, to assure itself access to the lucrative public high school market.
The abbreviation F (or eff) probably began as euphemistic, but by 1943 it was being used as a cuss
word, too. In 1948, the publishers of The Naked and the Dead persuaded Norman Mailer to use the
euphemism fug instead. When Mailer later was introduced to Dorothy Parker, she greeted him with, So
you're the man who can't spell 'fuck'  [The quip sometimes is attributed to Tallulah Bankhead].
Hemingway used muck in For whom the Bell Tolls (1940). The major breakthrough in publication was
James Jones' From Here to Eternity (1950), with 50 fucks (down from 258 in the original manuscript).
Egyptian legal agreements from the 23rd Dynasty (749-21 B.C.E.) frequently include the phrase, If
you do not obey this decree, may a donkey copulate with you! [Reinhold Aman, Maledicta, Summer
1977]. Fuck-all nothing first recorded 1960.  Verbal phrase fuck up to ruin, spoil, destroy first
attested c.1916. A widespread group of Slavic words (such as Polish pierdoli&#263;) can mean both
fornicate and make a mistake. Fuck off attested from 1929; as a command to depart, by 1944. Flying
fuck originally meant have sex on horseback and is first attested c.1800 in broadside ballad New
Feats of Horsemanship. For the unkillable urban legend that this word is an acronym of some sort (a
fiction traceable on the Internet to 1995 but probably predating that) see here, and also here.
Related: Fucked; fucking. Agent noun fucker attested from 1590s in literal sense; by 1893 as a term
of abuse (or admiration).    DUCK F-CK-R. The man who has the care of the poultry on board a
&#383;hip of war. [Classical Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, 1796]


