fabricate (v.)

mid-15c., to fashion, make, build, from Latin fabricatus, past participle of fabricare make,
construct, fashion, build, from fabrica (see fabric). In bad sense of to tell a lie, etc., it is
recorded by 1779. Related: Fabricated; fabricating.


text (n.)

late 14c., wording of anything written, from Old French texte, Old North French tixte text, book;
Gospels (12c.), from Medieval Latin textus the Scriptures, text, treatise, in Late Latin written
account, content, characters used in a document, from Latin textus style or texture of a work,
literally thing woven, from past participle stem of texere to weave, to join, fit together, braid,
interweave, construct, fabricate, build, from PIE root *teks- to weave, to fabricate, to make; make
wicker or wattle framework (see texture (n.)).    An ancient metaphor: thought is a thread, and the
raconteur is a spinner of yarns -- but the true storyteller, the poet, is a weaver. The scribes made
this old and audible abstraction into a new and visible fact. After long practice, their work took
on such an even, flexible texture that they called the written page a textus, which means cloth.
[Robert Bringhurst, The Elements of Typographic Style]


fabrication (n.)

c.1500, manufacturing, construction, from Middle French fabrication and directly from Latin
fabricationem (nominative fabricatio), noun of action from past participle stem of fabricare (see
fabricate). Meaning lying, falsehood, forgery is from late 18c.


smith (v.)

Old English smi&#240;ian to forge, fabricate, design, from the source of smith (n.). Related:
Smithed; smithing.


prefabricate (v.)

1919 (implied in prefabricated), from pre- + fabricate (v.). Related: Prefabricating.


feign (v.)

c.1300, from Old French feign-, present participle stem of feindre pretend, represent, imitate,
shirk (12c.), from Latin fingere to touch, handle; devise; fabricate, alter, change (see fiction).
Related: Feigned; feigning.


techno-

word-forming element meaning art, craft, skill, later technical, technology, from Latinized form of
Greek tekhno-, combining form of tekhne art, skill, craft in work; method, system, an art, a system
or method of making or doing, from PIE *teks-na- craft (of weaving or fabricating), from suffixed
form of root *teks- to weave, fabricate, make (cognates: Sanskrit taksan carpenter, Greek tekton
carpenter, Latin texere to weave; see texture (n.)).


frame (v.)

Old English framian to profit, be helpful, avail, benefit, from fram active, vigorous, bold,
originally going forward, from fram forward; from (see from).    Influenced by related Old English
fremman help forward, promote, further, do, perform, accomplish, and by Old Norse fremja to further,
execute. Sense focused in Middle English from make ready (mid-13c.) to prepare timber for building
(late 14c.). Meaning compose, devise is first attested 1540s.    The criminal slang sense of blame
an innocent person (1920s) is probably from earlier sense of plot in secret (1900), perhaps
ultimately from meaning fabricate a story with evil intent, first attested 1510s. Related: Framed;
framing.


trump (v.2)

fabricate, devise, 1690s, from trump deceive, cheat (1510s), from Middle English trumpen (late
14c.), from Old French tromper to deceive, of uncertain origin. Apparently from se tromper de to
mock, from Old French tromper to blow a trumpet. Brachet explains this as to play the horn, alluding
to quacks and mountebanks, who attracted the public by blowing a horn, and then cheated them into
buying .... The Hindley Old French dictionary has baillier la trompe blow the trumpet as act the
fool, and Donkin connects it rather to trombe waterspout, on the notion of turning (someone) around.
Connection with triumph also has been proposed. Related: Trumped; trumping. Trumped up false,
concocted first recorded 1728.


texture (n.)

early 15c., network, structure, from Middle French texture and directly from Latin textura web,
texture, structure, from stem of texere to weave, from PIE root *teks- to weave, to fabricate, to
make; make wicker or wattle framework (cognates: Sanskrit taksati he fashions, constructs, taksan
carpenter; Avestan ta&#353;a ax, hatchet, thwax&#353;- be busy; Old Persian tax&#353;- be active;
Latin tela web, net, warp of a fabric; Greek tekton carpenter, tekhne art; Old Church Slavonic tesla
ax, hatchet; Lithuanian tasau to carve; Old Irish tal cooper's ax; Old High German dahs, German
Dachs badger, literally builder; Hittite taksh- to join, unite, build). Meaning structural character
is recorded from 1650s. Related: Textural.


