facetious (adj.)

1590s, from French fac&eacute;tieux, from fac&eacute;tie a joke (15c.), from Latin facetia jest,
witticism, from facetus witty, elegant, fine, courteous, of unknown origin, perhaps related to facis
torch.    It implies a desire to be amusing, often intrusive or ill-timed.  Related: Facetiously;
facetiousness. Faceti&aelig; in booksellers' catalogues, is, like curious, a euphemism for erotica.
[Fowler]


pneumonoultramicroscopicsilicovolcanoconiosis (n.)

1962, A facetious word alleged to mean 'a lung disease caused by the inhalation of very fine silica
dust' but occurring chiefly as an instance of a very long word [OED]. Said in an early reference to
have been invented by seventh grade students in Norfolk, Virginia.


whodunit (n.)

murder mystery, 1930, U.S. slang, originally a semi-facetious formation from who done it? Whydunit
is from 1968.


curvaceous (adj.)

1936, U.S. colloquial, from curve + facetious use of -aceous, Modern Latin botanical suffix meaning
of a certain kind. First recorded reference is to Mae West.


absquatulate (v.)

1837, Facetious U.S. coinage [Weekley], perhaps based on a mock-Latin negation of squat to settle.
Said to have been used by the U.S. Western character Nimrod Wildfire in the play The Kentuckian, as
re-written by British author William B. Bernard and staged in London in 1833. Related:
Absquatulated; absquatulating.


jocularity (n.)

1640s, from Medieval Latin iocularitas jocular, facetious, from iocularis (see jocular).


gazebo

1752, supposedly a facetious formation from gaze + -bo, Latin first person singular future tense
suffix (as in videbo I shall see), on model of earlier belvedere cupola, from Italian bello verde
handsome sight. But perhaps rather a corruption of some oriental word.


hobo (n.)

1889, Western U.S., of unknown origin. Barnhart compares early 19c. English dialectal hawbuck lout,
clumsy fellow, country bumpkin. Or possibly from ho, boy, a workers' call on late 19c. western U.S.
railroads. Facetious formation hobohemia, community or life of hobos, is from 1923 (see bohemian).


underwhelm (v.)

1953 (implied in underwhelming), a facetious play on overwhelm, with under. Related: Underwhelmed;
underwhelmingly.


urban (adj.)

characteristic of city life, pertaining to cities or towns, 1610s (but rare before 1830s), from
Latin urbanus of or pertaining to a city or city life; in Rome, also in city fashion, polished,
refined, cultivated, courteous, but also sometimes witty, facetious, bold, impudent; as a noun, city
dweller, from urbs (genitive urbis) city, walled town, of unknown origin.    The word gradually
emerged in this sense as urbane became restricted to manners and styles of expression. In late 20c.
American English gradually acquiring a suggestion of African-American. Urban renewal, euphemistic
for slum clearance, is attested from 1955, American English. Urban sprawl recorded by 1958. Urban
legend attested by 1980.


coulrophobia (n.)

morbid fear of clowns, by 2001 (said in Web sites to date from 1990s or even 1980s), a popular term,
not from psychology, possibly facetious, though the phenomenon is real enough; said to be built from
Greek kolon limb, with some supposed sense of stilt-walker, hence clown + -phobia.    Ancient Greek
words for clown were skl&ecirc;ro-paikt&ecirc;s, from paizein to play (like a child); or
deikeliktas; other classical words used for theatrical clowns were related to rustic, peasant
(compare Latin fossor clown, literally laborer, digger, related to fossil).    The whole creation
looks suspiciously like the sort of thing idle pseudo-intellectuals invent on the Internet and which
every smarty-pants takes up thereafter; perhaps it is a mangling of Modern Greek klooun clown, which
is the English word borrowed into Greek.


