factitious (adj.)

1640s, from Latin factitius artificial, from factus, past participle of facere do (source of French
faire, Spanish hacer), from PIE root *dhe- to put, to do (cognates: Sanskrit dadhati puts, places;
Avestan dadaiti he puts; Old Persian ada he made; Hittite dai- to place; Greek tithenai to put, set,
place; Lithuanian deti to put; Polish dzia&#263; si&#281; to be happening; Russian delat' to do; Old
High German tuon, German tun, Old Saxon, Old English don to do; Old Frisian dua, Old Swedish duon,
Gothic gadeths a doing; Old Norse dalidun they did).


-fication

word-forming element meaning a making or causing, from Latin -ficationem (nominative -ficatio),
ultimately from facere to make, do (see factitious).


-fy

word-forming element meaning to make into, from French -fier, from Latin -ficare, from unstressed
form of facere to make, do (see factitious).


samadhi (n.)

intense esoteric meditation through yoga, 1795, from Sanskrit samadhi-, literally a putting or
joining together, from sam- together + a- toward + stem of dadhati puts, places (see factitious).


factor (n.)

early 15c., agent, deputy, from Middle French facteur agent, representative, from Latin factor doer
or maker, agent noun from past participle stem of facere to do (see factitious). Sense of
circumstance producing a result is from 1816.


refectory (n.)

dining hall, especially one in a monastery, early 15c., from Medieval Latin refectorium, from past
participle stem of reficere to remake, restore, from re- (see re-) + facere (see factitious).


faction (n.)

c.1500, from Middle French faction (14c.) and directly from Latin factionem (nominative factio)
political party, class of persons, literally a making or doing, from past participle stem of facere
to do (see factitious). In ancient Rome, one of the companies of contractors for the chariot races
in the circus.


facile (adj.)

late 15c., from Middle French facile easy, from Latin facilis easy to do and, of persons, pliant,
courteous, from facere to do (see factitious).


feasance (n.)

1530s, from Anglo-French fesance, from Old French faisance action, deed, enactment, from faisant,
present participle of faire to make, do (from Latin facere; see factitious).


malefic (adj.)

1650s, from Latin maleficus wicked, vicious, criminal, from male ill (see mal-) + -ficus, from stem
of facere to make, do (see factitious).


labefaction (n.)

1610s, process of shaking; downfall, noun of action from Latin labefactus, past participle of
labefacere to cause to totter, shake; overthrow, from labi to slip, slide (see lapse (n.)) + facere
to make, do (see factitious). Related: Labefy.


fiat (n.)

authoritative sanction, 1630s, from Latin fiat let it be done (also used in the opening of Medieval
Latin proclamations and commands), third person singular present subjunctive of fieri, used as
passive of facere to make, do (see factitious). Also sometimes a reference to fiat lux let there be
light in the Book of Genesis.


deficient (adj.)

1580s, from Latin deficientem (nominative deficiens), present participle of deficere to desert,
revolt, fail, from de- down, away (see de-) + facere to do, perform (see factitious).


fact (n.)

1530s, action, especially evil deed, from Latin factum event, occurrence, literally thing done,
neuter past participle of facere to do (see factitious). Usual modern sense of thing known to be
true appeared 1630s, from notion of something that has actually occurred. Facts of life harsh
realities is from 1854; specific sense of human sexual functions first recorded 1913.


sudorific (adj.)

causing sweat, 1620s, from Latin sudor (see sweat (n.)) + -ficus, from stem of facere to make, do
(see factitious).


putrefy (v.)

mid-15c., from Middle French putr&eacute;fier, from Latin putrefacere to make rotten, from putrere
(see putrid) + facere (see factitious). Related: Putrefied; putrefying.


malefactor (n.)

mid-15c., from Latin malefactor, agent noun from past participle stem of malefacere to do evil, from
male badly (see mal-) + facere to perform (see factitious).


honorific (adj.)

1640s, from Latin honorificus that which does honor, from honorem (see honor (n.)) + -ficus making,
from stem of facere make, do (see factitious). As a noun, by 1867.


stratification (n.)

1610s, from Medieval Latin stratificationem (nominative stratificatio), noun of action from past
participle stem of stratificare to form strata, from stratum thing spread out  (see stratum) + root
of facere to make (see factitious). In sociology from 1879.


infect (v.)

late 14c., from Latin infectus, past participle of inficere to spoil, stain, literally to put in to,
dip into, from in- in (see in- (2)) + facere perform (see factitious). Related: Infected; infecting.


vitrify (v.)

1590s, from Middle French vitrifier (16c.), from Latin vitrum glass (see vitreous) + -ficare, from
facere to make, do (see factitious). Related: Vitrified; vitrification.


olfaction (n.)

noun of action from Latin olfactus, past participle of olfacere to smell, get the smell of
(transitive), from olere to emit a smell (see odor) + facere to make (see factitious).


tortfeasor (n.)

1650s, from Old French tortfesor, from tort wrong, evil (see tort) + -fesor doer, from Latin facere
to make (see factitious).


stupefy (v.)

early 15c., from Latin stupefacere make stupid or senseless, benumb, stun, from stupere be stunned
(see stupid) + facere to make (see factitious).


malfeasance (n.)

1690s, from French malfaisance wrongdoing, from malfaisant, from mal- badly (see mal-) + faisant,
present participle of faire to do, from Latin facere to do (see factitious). Malfeasor wrong-doer is
attested from early 14c. Related: Malfeasant.


modify (v.)

late 14c., from Old French modifier (14c.), from Latin modificare to limit, measure off, restrain,
from modus measure, manner (see mode (n.1)) + root of facere to make (see factitious). Related:
Modified; modifying.


abortifacient (n.)

1875, noun and adjective, from Latin abortus (see abortive) + facientem making, related to facere do
(see factitious). An earlier word for this in the noun sense was abortive (1640s).


amplify (v.)

early 15c., to enlarge or expand, from Middle French amplifier, from Latin amplificare to enlarge,
from amplificus splendid, from amplus large (see ample) + the root of facere make, do (see
factitious). Meaning augment in volume or amount is from 1570s. Restriction of use to sound seems to
have emerged in the electronic age, c.1915, in reference to radio technology.


olfactory (adj.)

1650s, from Latin olfactorius, from olfact-, past participle stem of olfacere to get the smell of,
sniff, from olere emit a smell, give off a smell of (see odor) + facere make (see factitious).


feasible (adj.)

capable of being done, accomplished or carried out, mid-15c., from Anglo-French faisible, from Old
French faisable possible, easy, convenient, from fais-, stem of faire do, make, from Latin facere
do, perform (see factitious). Fowler recommends this word only for those who feel that the use of an
ordinary word for an ordinary notion does not do justice to their vocabulary or sufficiently exhibit
their cultivation.


quantify (v.)

1840, from Medieval Latin quantificare, from Latin quantus as much, correlative pronomial adjective
(see quantity) + facere to make (see factitious). Literal sense of determine the quantity of,
measure is from 1878. Related: Quantified; quantifying.


petrify (v.)

1590s, from Middle French p&eacute;trifier to make or become stone (16c.), from Latin petra rock,
crag (see petrous) + -ficare, from facere to make, do (see factitious). Metaphoric sense of paralyze
with fear or shock first recorded 1771. Related: Petrified; petrifying.


munificence (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French munificence, from Latin munificentia bountifulness, liberality,
generosity, from stem of munificus generous, bountiful, liberal, literally present-making, from
munus gift or service, duty, office (see municipal) + unstressed stem of facere to do (see
factitious).


proficiency (n.)

1540s, probably from -cy + Latin proficientem (nominative proficiens), present participle of
proficere accomplish, make progress; be useful, do good; have success, profit, from pro- forward
(see pro-) + root of facere to make (see factitious).


nullify (v.)

1590s, from Late Latin nullificare to esteem lightly, despise, literally to make nothing, from Latin
nullus not any (see null) + root of facere to make (see factitious). Related: Nullified; nullifying.


ratify (v.)

mid-14c., from Old French ratifier (13c.), from Medieval Latin ratificare confirm, approve,
literally fix by reckoning, from Latin ratus fixed by calculation; determined; approved; certain,
sure; valid (past participle adjective from reri to reckon, think; see reason (v.)) + root of facere
to make (see factitious). Related: Ratified; ratifying.


terrific (adj.)

1660s, frightening, from Latin terrificus causing terror or fear, frightful, from terrere fill with
fear (see terrible) + root of facere to make (see factitious). Weakened sensed of very great, severe
(as in terrific headache) appeared 1809; inverted colloquial sense of excellent began 1888. Related:
Terrifically.


horrific (adj.)

causing horror, 1650s, from French horrifique or directly from Latin horrificus dreadful, exciting
terror, literally making the hair stand on end, from horrere to bristle, to stand on end (see
horror) + -ficus, from stem of facere to make, do (see factitious). Related: Horrifically.


misfeasance (n.)

wrongful exercise of lawful authority or improper performance of a lawful act, 1590s, from Middle
French mesfaisance, from mesfaisant, present participle of Old French mesfaire to misdo, from mes-
wrongly (see mis- (2)) + faire to do, from Latin facere to perform (see factitious).


frigorific (adj.)

causing cold, 1660s, from French frigorifique, from Late Latin frigorificus cooling, from Latin
frigus (genitive frigoris) cold, cool, coolness (see frigid) + -ficus making, root of facere make,
do (see factitious).


surfeit (n.)

early 14c., excess quantity; late 14c., overindulgence, from Old French sorfet excess; arrogance
(Modern French surfait), noun use of past participle of surfaire overdo, from sur- over (see sur-
(1)) + faire do, from Latin facere to make (see factitious).


gratify (v.)

c.1400, to bestow grace upon; 1530s, to show gratitude to, from French gratifier (16c.) or directly
from Latin gratificari to do favor to, oblige, gratify, from gratus pleasing (see grace (n.)) + root
of facere make, do, perform (see factitious). Meaning to give pleasure to is from 1560s. Related:
Gratified; gratifying.


suffice (v.)

early 14c. (intransitive); late 14c. (transitive), from present participle stem of Old French sofire
be sufficient, satisfy (Modern French suffire), from Latin sufficere put under, lay a foundation
under; supply as a substitute; be enough, be adequate, from sub up to (see sub-) + root of facere to
make (see factitious). Phrase suffice it to say (1690s) is a rare surviving subjunctive.


verify (v.)

early 14c., from Old French verifier substantiate, find out the truth about (14c.), from Medieval
Latin verificare make true, from Latin verus true (see very) + root of facere to make (see
factitious).


affect (n.)

late 14c., mental state, from Latin noun use of affectus furnished, supplied, endowed, figuratively
disposed, constituted, inclined, past participle of afficere to do; treat, use, manage, handle; act
on; have influence on, do something to, a verb of broad meaning, from ad- to (see ad-) + facere
(past participle factus) do (see factitious). Perhaps obsolete except in psychology. Related:
Affects.


deify (v.)

mid-14c., from Old French deifier (13c.), from Late Latin deificare, from deificus making godlike,
from Latin deus god (see Zeus) + -ficare, from facere to make, do (see factitious). Related:
Deified; deifying.


artifact (n.)

1821, artefact, anything made by human art, from Italian artefatto, from Latin arte by skill
(ablative of ars art; see art (n.)) + factum thing made, from facere to make, do (see factitious).
The spelling with -i- is by 1884, by influence of the Latin stem. Archaeological application dates
from 1890.


benefice (n.)

c.1300, a church living, from Old French benefice (13c.) and directly from Latin beneficium a favor,
service, generosity, kindness, benefit, from beneficus generous, kind, benevolent, obliging, from
bene- good, well (see bene-) + -ficus, from stem of -ficere, unstressed form of facere to do, to
make (see factitious).


dolce far niente

1814, from Italian, literally sweet doing nothing. The Latin roots are dulcis sweet (see dulcet),
facere to make, do (see factitious), and nec entem, literally not a being.    This phrase, frequent
enough in English literature, does not seem to occur in any Italian author of note. Howells says
that he found it current among Neapolitan lazzaroni, but it is not included in any collection of
Italian proverbial sayings. [Walsh]


liquefy (v.)

early 15c., from Old French liquefier liquefy, dissolve, from Latin liquefacere make liquid, melt,
from liquere be fluid (see liquid (adj.)) + facere to make (see factitious).


