factor (v.)

1610s, act as an agent, manage, from factor (n.). The use in mathematics is attested from 1837.
Related: Factored; factoring.


factor (n.)

early 15c., commercial agent, deputy, one who buys or sells for another, from Middle French facteur
agent, representative (Old French factor, faitor doer, author, creator), from Latin factor doer,
maker, performer, in Medieval Latin, agent, agent noun from past participle stem of facere to do
(see factitious). In commerce, especially a commission merchant. Mathematical sense is from 1670s.
Sense of circumstance producing a result is attested by 1816, from the mathematical sense.


factorial (n.)

1816, in mathematics, from factor + -al (2). As an adjective from 1837 in mathematics; from 1881 as
pertaining to a factor.


factory (n.)

1550s, estate manager's office, from Middle French factorie (15c.), from Late Latin factorium office
for agents ('factors'), also oil press, mill, from Latin factor doer, maker (see factor (n.)). From
1580s as establishment of merchants and factors in a foreign place. Sense of building for making
goods is first attested 1610s. Factory farm attested from 1890.


parameter (n.)

1650s in geometry, from Modern Latin parameter (1630s), from Greek para- beside, subsidiary (see
para- (1)) + metron measure (see meter (n.2)).    A geometry term until 1920s when it yielded sense
of measurable factor which helps to define a particular system (1927). Common modern meaning
(influenced by perimeter) of boundary, limit, characteristic factor is from 1950s. Related:
Parametric.


Rh factor

1942, from the first letters of rhesus; so called because the blood group, and its effects, were
discovered in the blood of rhesus monkeys (1941).


scale (v.3)

weigh in scales, 1690s, from scale (n.2). Earlier to compare, estimate (c. 1600). Meaning measure or
regulate by a scale is from 1798, from scale (n.3); that of weigh out in proper quantities is from
1841. Scale down reduce proportionately is attested from 1887. Scale factor is from 1948. Related:
Scaled; scaling.


biotic (adj.)

pertaining to life, 1847, in the medical sense, from Latin bioticus, from Greek biotikos pertaining
to life, from bios life (see bio-). Biotic factor was in use by 1907. Related: Biotical.


holism (n.)

1926, apparently by South African Gen. J.C. Smuts (1870-1950) in his book Holism and Evolution which
treats of evolution as a process of unification of separate parts; from Greek holos whole (see safe
(adj.)) + -ism.    This character of wholeness meets us everywhere and points to something
fundamental in the universe. Holism (from [holos] = whole) is the term here coined for this
fundamental factor operative towards the creation of wholes in the universe. [Smuts, Holism and
Evolution, p.86]


risk (n.)

1660s, risque, from French risque (16c.), from Italian risco, riscio (modern rischio), from riscare
run into danger, of uncertain origin. The anglicized spelling first recorded 1728. Spanish riesgo
and German Risiko are Italian loan-words. With run (v.) from 1660s. Risk aversion is recorded from
1942; risk factor from 1906; risk management from 1963; risk taker from 1892.


psychological (adj.)

1680s; see psychology + -ical. Related: Psychologically. Psychological warfare recorded from 1940.
Psychological moment was in vogue from 1871, from French moment psychologique moment of immediate
expectation of something about to happen.    The original German phrase, misinterpreted by the
French &amp; imported together with its false sense into English, meant the psychic factor, the
mental effect, the influence exerted by a state of mind, &amp; not a point of time at all, das
Moment in German corresponding to our momentum, not our moment. [Fowler]


corn (n.1)

grain, Old English corn, from Proto-Germanic *kurnam small seed (cognates: Old Frisian and Old Saxon
korn grain, Middle Dutch coren, German Korn, Old Norse korn, Gothic kaurn), from PIE root *gre-no-
grain (cognates: Old Church Slavonic zruno grain, Latin granum seed, Lithuanian &#382;irnis pea).
The sense of the Old English word was grain with the seed still in (as in barleycorn) rather than a
particular plant.    Locally understood to denote the leading crop of a district. Restricted to the
indigenous maize in America (c. 1600, originally Indian corn, but the adjective was dropped),
usually wheat in England, oats in Scotland and Ireland, while Korn means rye in parts of Germany.
Maize was introduced to China by 1550, it thrived where rice did not grow well and was a significant
factor in the 18th century population boom there. Cornflakes first recorded 1907. Corned beef so
called for the corns or grains of salt with which it is preserved; from verb corn to salt (1560s).


two-step (n.)

dance style, 1893, from two + step (n.); so called for the time signature of the music (as
distinguished from the three-step waltz). But as the positions taken by the dancers involved direct
contact, it was highly scandalous in its day and enormously popular.    A certain Division of an
Auxiliary gave a dance not long since. I went and looked on. What did they dance? Two-step, two-step
and two-step. How did they dance? When we used to waltz, we clasped arms easily, took a nice,
respectable position, and danced in a poetry of motion. Now, girls, how do you two-step? In nine
cases out of ten the dear girl reposes her head on the young man's shoulder, or else their faces
press each other. He presses her to his breast as closely as possible, and actually carries her
around. Disgraceful? I should say so. Do you wonder at the ministers preaching on dancing as a sin,
when it looks like this to a woman like myself who believes in dancing and has danced all her life?
Mothers, as you love your girls, forbid them to dance after this manner. [letter in the ladies'
section of Locomotive Engineers' Monthly Journal, March 1898]   <hr />   To the Two Step may be
accredited, serious injury to the Waltz, awkward and immodest positions assumed in round dancing,
also as being a prominent factor in overcrowding the profession and causing a general depression in
the business of the legitimate Master of Dancing. [The Director, March 1898]


wear (v.)

Old English werian to clothe, put on, cover up, from Proto-Germanic *wazjan (cognates: Old Norse
verja, Old High German werian, Gothic gawasjan to clothe), from PIE *wos-eyo-, from root *wes- (4)
to clothe (cognates: Sanskrit vaste he puts on, vasanam garment; Avestan vah-; Greek esthes
clothing, hennymi to clothe, eima garment; Latin vestire to clothe; Welsh gwisgo, Breton gwiska; Old
English w&aelig;stling sheet, blanket; Hittite washshush garments, washanzi they dress).    The
Germanic forms were homonyms of the vb. for 'prevent, ward off, protect' (Goth. warjan, O.E. werian,
etc.), and this was prob. a factor in their early displacement in most of the Gmc. languages [Buck].
Shifted from a weak verb (past tense and past participle wered) to a strong one (past tense wore,
past participle worn) in 14c. on analogy of rhyming strong verbs such as bear and tear. Secondary
sense of use up, gradually damage (late 13c.) is from effect of continued use on clothes. To wear
down (transitive) overcome by steady force is from 1843. To wear off diminish by attrition or use is
from 1690s.


