faction (n.)

c.1500, from Middle French faction (14c.) and directly from Latin factionem (nominative factio)
political party, class of persons, literally a making or doing, from past participle stem of facere
to do (see factitious). In ancient Rome, one of the companies of contractors for the chariot races
in the circus.


factional (adj.)

1640s, from faction + -al (1).


Girondist (n.)

1795, member of the moderate republican party of France, 1791-93, from Gironde, name of a deputy in
southwestern France; the faction so called because its leaders were deputies elected from there.


factious (adj.)

1530s, from Middle French factieux and directly from Latin factiosus partisan, seditious, inclined
to form parties, from factionem (see faction).


liquefaction (n.)

late 15c., from French liqu&eacute;faction, from Late Latin liquefactionem (nominative liquefactio),
noun of action from past participle stem of liquefacere to make liquid, melt (see liquefy).


rarefaction (n.)

c.1600, from Middle French rar&#233;faction or directly from Medieval Latin rarefactionem
(nominative rarefactio), noun of action from past participle stem of Latin rarefacere (see rarefy).
Used chiefly in reference to gases.


Hasidim

also Chasidim, 1812, adherents of a conservative Jewish religious movement founded 1750 by Rabbi
Israel ben Eliezer Baal Shem Tobh, from Hebrew hasidhim, literally pious ones, plural of hasidh
kind, pious. Earlier used in Hebrew of adherents of an anti-Hellenistic faction during the time of
the Maccabean Wars.


loco-foco (n.)

self-igniting cigar or match, 1839 (but presumably older), American English, of unknown origin,
perhaps from a misapprehension of the meaning of the first element of locomotive as self- + Spanish
fuego fire. During one heated political meeting in N.Y., the lights went out and the delegates used
such matches to relight them, thence the name loco-foco entered U.S. political jargon (1837),
usually applied to a radical faction of the Democratic Party, but by the Whigs applied to all
Democrats.


Menshevik (adj.)

1907, from Russian men'shevik, from men'she lesser (comparative of malo little, from PIE root *mei-
(2) small; see minus) + -evik one that is. So called by Lenin because they were a minority in the
party. Earlier used in reference to the minority faction of the Social-Democratic Party, when it
split in 1903. As a noun from 1917. Russian plural mensheviki occasionally was used in English.


partisan (n.)

also partizan, 1550s, one who takes part with another, zealous supporter, from Middle French
partisan (15c.), from dialectal upper Italian partezan (Tuscan partigiano) member of a faction,
partner, from parte part, party, from Latin partem (nominative pars), see part (n.). Sense of
guerilla fighter is first recorded 1690s.


Shia (n.)

also Shiah, 1620s, a collective name for one of the two great Muslim sects, from Arabic shi'ah
partisans, followers, sect, company, faction (from sha'a to follow). This is the proper use, but it
commonly is used in English to mean a Shiite. In Arabic, shi'ah is the name of the sect, shiya'iy is
a member of the sect.    The branch of Islam that recognizes Ali, Muhammad's son-in-law, as the
lawful successor of the Prophet; the minority who believed, after the death of the Prophet, that
spiritual and political authority followed his family line, as opposed to the Sunni, who took Abu
Bakr as the political leader of the community. The Arabic name is short for Shi'at Ali the party of
Ali.


regency (n.)

early 15c., government by regents, from Medieval Latin regentia, from Latin regens (see regent).
Notable instances were: France 1715-1723 (under Philip, Duke of Orleans), Britain 1811-1820 (under
George, Prince of Wales, Prince Regent), in each case with suggestion of debauchery [Weekley]. In
reference to the style of that time, attested from 1880 (there is an unexplained use in Jane Austen
from 1793). Compare French equivalent R&eacute;gence, attested in English from 1919. U.S. Albany
Regency refers to dominant political faction in New York state c.1820-1850.


democratic (adj.)

c.1600, from French d&eacute;mocratique, from Medieval Latin democraticus, from Greek demokratikos
of or for democracy; favoring democracy, from demokratia (see democracy). Earlier was democratian
(1570s).    As a political faction name, from 1790 in reference to France. U.S. political usage
(with a capital D) attested from c.1800. The party originally was the Anti-Federal party, then the
Democratic-Republican (Democratic for short). It formed among those opposed to extensive powers for
the U.S. federal government. The name of the party was not formally shortened to Democratic until
1829. Democratic socialism is attested from 1849.


Bolshevik (n.)

1917, from Russian bol'shiy greater, comparative of adjective bol'shoy big, great (as in Bolshoi
Ballet), from Old Church Slavonic boljiji larger, from PIE root *bel- strong (cognates: Sanskrit
balam strength, force, Greek beltion better, Phrygian balaios big, fast, Old Irish odbal strong,
Welsh balch proud; Middle Dutch, Low German, Frisian pal strong, firm).    It was the faction of the
Russian Social Democratic Worker's Party after a split in 1903 that was either larger or more
extreme (or both) than the Mensheviks (from Russian men'shij less); after they seized power in 1917,
applied generally to Russian communists. Bolshevism is recorded from 1917.


ticket (n.)

1520s, short note or document, from a shortened form of Middle French etiquet label, note, from Old
French estiquette a little note (late 14c.), especially one affixed to a gate or wall as a public
notice, literally something stuck (up or on), from estiquer to affix, stick on, attach, from
Frankish *stikkan, cognate with Old English stician to pierce, from Proto-Germanic *stikken to be
stuck, stative form from PIE *steig- to stick; pointed (see stick (v.)).    Meaning card or piece of
paper that gives its holder a right or privilege is first recorded 1670s, probably developing from
the sense of certificate, license, permit. The political sense of list of candidates put forward by
a faction has been used in American English since 1711. Meaning official notification of offense is
from 1930. Big ticket item is from 1953. Slang the ticket just the thing, what is expected is
recorded from 1838, perhaps with notion of a winning lottery ticket.


terror (n.)

early 15c., something that intimidates, an object of fear, from Old French terreur (14c.), from
Latin terrorem (nominative terror) great fear, dread, alarm, panic; object of fear, cause of alarm;
terrible news, from terrere fill with fear, frighten, from PIE root *tres- to tremble (see
terrible).    Meaning quality of causing dread is attested from 1520s. Sense of a person fancied as
a source of terror (often with deliberate exaggeration, as of a naughty child) is recorded from
1883. Terror bombing first recorded 1941, with reference to German air attack on Rotterdam. Terror-
stricken is from 1831. The Reign of Terror in French history (March 1793-July 1794) was the period
when the nation was ruled by a faction whose leaders made policy of killing by execution anyone
deemed an impediment to their measures; so called in English from 1801. Old English words for terror
included broga and egesa.


part (n.)

mid-13c., division, portion of a whole, from Old French part share, portion; character; power,
dominion; side, way, path, from Latin partem (nominative pars) a part, piece, a share, a division; a
party or faction; a part of the body; a fraction; a function, office, related to portio share,
portion, from PIE root *pere- (2) to assign, grant, allot (reciprocally, to get in return; cognates:
Greek peprotai it has been granted, Sanskrit purtam reward, Hittite parshiya- fraction, part).    It
has replaced native deal (n.) in most senses. Theatrical sense (late 15c.) is from an actor's share
in a performance (The Latin plural partis was used in the same sense). Meaning the parting of the
hair is 1890, American English.    As an adjective from 1590s. Late Old English part part of speech
did not survive and the modern word is considered a separate borrowing. Phrase for the most part is
from late 14c. To take part participate is from late 14c.


diversity (n.)

mid-14c., quality of being diverse, mostly in a neutral sense, from Old French diversit&eacute;
(12c.) difference, diversity, unique feature, oddness: also wickedness, perversity, from Latin
diversitatem (nominative diversitas) contrariety, contradiction, disagreement; also, as a secondary
sense, difference, diversity, from diversus turned different ways (in Late Latin various), past
participle of divertere (see divert).    Negative meaning, being contrary to what is agreeable or
right; perversity, evil existed in English from late 15c. but was obsolete from 17c. Diversity as a
virtue in a nation is an idea from the rise of modern democracies in the 1790s, where it kept one
faction from arrogating all power (but this was not quite the modern sense, as ethnicity, gender,
sexual identity, etc. were not the qualities in mind):    The dissimilarity in the ingredients which
will compose the national government, and still more in the manner in which they will be brought
into action in its various branches, must form a powerful obstacle to a concert of views in any
partial scheme of elections. There is sufficient diversity in the state of property, in the genius,
manners, and habits of the people of the different parts of the Union, to occasion a material
diversity of disposition in their representatives towards the different ranks and conditions in
society. [Federalist #60, Feb. 26, 1788 (Hamilton)]    Specific focus (in a positive sense) on race,
gender, etc. is from 1992.


conservative (adj.)

late 14c., conservatyf, from Middle French conservatif, from Late Latin conservativus, from Latin
conservatus, past participle of conservare (see conserve).    As a modern political tradition,
conservatism traces to Edmund Burke's opposition to the French Revolution (1790), but the word
conservative is not found in his writing. It was coined by his French disciples, (such as
Chateaubriand, who titled his journal defending clerical and political restoration Le Conservateur).
Conservative as the name of a British political faction first appeared in an 1830 issue of the
Quarterly Review, in an unsigned article sometimes attributed to John Wilson Croker. It replaced
Tory (q.v.) by 1843, reflecting both a change from the pejorative name (in use for 150 years) and
repudiation of some reactionary policies. Extended to similar spirits in other parties from
1845.Strictly speaking, conservatism is not a political system, but rather a way of looking at the
civil order. The conservative of Peru ... will differ greatly from those of Australia, for though
they may share a preference for things established, the institutions and customs which they desire
to preserve are not identical. [Russell Kirk (1918-1994)]  Phrases such as a conservative estimate
make no sense etymologically. The noun is attested from 1831, originally in the British political
sense.


new (adj.)

Old English neowe, niowe, earlier niwe new, fresh, recent, novel, unheard-of, different from the
old; untried, inexperienced, from Proto-Germanic *newjaz (cognates: Old Saxon niuwi, Old Frisian
nie, Middle Dutch nieuwe, Dutch nieuw, Old High German niuwl, German neu, Danish and Swedish ny,
Gothic niujis new), from PIE *newo- new (cognates: Sanskrit navah, Persian nau, Hittite newash,
Greek neos, Lithuanian naujas, Old Church Slavonic novu, Russian novyi, Latin novus, Old Irish nue,
Welsh newydd new).    The adverb is Old English niwe, from the adjective. New math in reference to a
system of teaching mathematics based on investigation and discovery is from 1958. New World (adj.)
to designate phenomena of the Western Hemisphere first attested 1823, in Lord Byron; the noun phrase
is recorded from 1550s. New Deal in the FDR sense attested by 1932. New school in reference to the
more advanced or liberal faction of something is from 1806. New Left (1960) was a coinage of U.S.
political sociologist C. Wright Mills (1916-1962). New light in reference to religions is from
1640s. New frontier, in U.S. politics, reform and social betterment, is from 1934 but associated
with John F. Kennedy's use of it in 1960.


line (n.)

a Middle English merger of Old English line cable, rope; series, row, row of letters; rule,
direction, and Old French ligne guideline, cord, string; lineage, descent; both from Latin linea
linen thread, string, line, from phrase linea restis linen cord, from fem. of lineus (adj.) of
linen, from linum linen (see linen).    Oldest sense is rope, cord, string; extended late 14c. to a
thread-like mark (from sense cord used by builders for making things level, mid-14c.), also track,
course, direction. Sense of things or people arranged in a straight line is from 1550s. That of cord
bearing hooks used in fishing is from c.1300. Meaning one's occupation, branch of business is from
1630s, probably from misunderstood KJV translation of 2 Cor. x:16, And not to boast in another mans
line of things made ready to our hand, where line translates Greek kanon, literally measuring rod.
Meaning class of goods in stock is from 1834. Meaning telegraph wire is from 1847 (later telephone
wire).    Meaning policy or set of policies of a political faction is 1892, American English, from
notion of a procession of followers; this is the sense in party line. In British army, the Line
(1802) is the regular, numbered troops, as distinguished from guards and auxiliaries. In the Navy
(1704, as in ship of the line) it refers to the battle line. Lines words of an actor's part is from
1882. Lines of communication were originally transverse trenches in siegeworks.


