faculty (n.)

late 14c., ability, means, resources, from Old French facult&eacute; (14c.) skill, accomplishment,
learning, and directly from Latin facultatem (nominative facultas) power, ability, wealth, from
*facli-tat-s, from facilis (see facile).    Academic sense branch of knowledge probably was the
earliest in English (attested in Anglo-Latin from late 12c.), on notion of ability in knowledge.
Originally each department was a faculty; the use in reference to the whole teaching staff of a
college dates from 1767.


faculties (n.)

early 16c., powers or properties of one's self, also physical functions; plural of faculty.


taste (n.)

early 14c., act of tasting, from Old French tast sense of touch (Modern French t&acirc;t), from
taster (see taste (v.)). From late 14c. as a small portion given; also faculty or sense by which the
flavor of a thing is discerned; also savor, sapidity, flavor.    Meaning aesthetic judgment, faculty
of discerning and appreciating what is excellent is first attested 1670s (compare French go&#251;t,
German geschmack, Russian vkus, etc.).    Of all the five senses, 'taste' is the one most closely
associated with fine discrimination, hence the familiar secondary uses of words for 'taste, good
taste' with reference to aesthetic appreciation. [Buck]   <hr />  Taste is active, deciding,
choosing, changing, arranging, etc.; sensibility is passive, the power to feel, susceptibility of
impression, as from the beautiful. [Century Dictionary]


memory (n.)

mid-13c., recollection (of someone or something); awareness, consciousness, also fame, renown,
reputation, from Anglo-French memorie (Old French memoire, 11c., mind, memory, remembrance;
memorial, record) and directly from Latin memoria memory, remembrance, faculty of remembering, noun
of quality from memor mindful, remembering, from PIE root *(s)mer- to remember (Sanskrit smarati
remembers, Avestan mimara mindful; Greek merimna care, thought, mermeros causing anxiety,
mischievous, baneful; Serbo-Croatian mariti to care for; Welsh marth sadness, anxiety; Old Norse
Mimir, name of the giant who guards the Well of Wisdom; Old English gemimor known, murnan mourn,
remember sorrowfully; Dutch mijmeren to ponder). Meaning faculty of remembering is late 14c. in
English.  I am grown old and my memory is not as active as it used to be. When I was younger I could
remember anything, whether it had happened or not; but my faculties are decaying now and soon I
shall be so I cannot remember any but the things that never happened.  It is sad to go to pieces
like this, but we all have to do it. [Mark Twain, Autobiography]  Computer sense, device which
stores information, is from 1946. Related: Memories.


sentience (n.)

1817, faculty of sense; feeling, consciousness; see sentient + -ence. Related: Sentiency (1796).


capability (n.)

1580s, from capable + -ity. Capabilities undeveloped faculty or property is attested from 1778.


alienist (n.)

one who treats mental illness, 'mad doctor,'  1864, from French ali&eacute;niste, from alienation in
the sense of insanity, loss of mental faculty, a sense attested in English from late 15c. (see
alienate).


smell (n.)

odor, aroma, stench, late 12c.; faculty of perceiving by the nose, c.1200; see smell (v.). Ousted
Old English stenc (see stench) in most senses.


recordation (n.)

late 14c., faculty of remembering, Old French recordacion record, memory (14c.) or directly from
Latin recordationem (nominative recordatio), noun of action from past participle stem of recordari
(see record (v.)). Meaning act or process of committing to writing is c.1810.


imagination (n.)

faculty of the mind which forms and manipulates images, mid-14c., ymaginacion, from Old French
imaginacion concept, mental picture; hallucination, from Latin imaginationem (nominative imaginatio)
imagination, a fancy, noun of action from past participle stem of imaginari (see imagine).


eidetic (adj.)

pertaining to the faculty of projecting images, 1924, from German eidetisch, coined by German
psychologist Erich Jaensch (1883-1940), from Greek eidetikos pertaining to images, also pertaining
to knowledge, from eidesis knowledge, from eidos form, shape (see -oid).


oration (n.)

late 14c., prayer, from Late Latin orationem (nominative oratio) a speaking, speech, discourse;
language, faculty of speech, mode of expressing; prayer, noun of action from past participle stem of
Latin orare to pray, plead, speak before an assembly (see orator). Meaning formal speech, discourse
first recorded c.1500.


regent (n.)

one who rules during the minority or absence of a sovereign, c.1400, from the adjective (now
archaic, attested in English late 14c.), from Old French regent and directly from Medieval Latin
regentem (nominative regens), from Latin regens ruler, governor, noun use of present participle of
regere to rule, direct (see regal). Senses of university faculty member is attested from mid-15c.,
originally Scottish.


instinct (n.)

early 15c., a prompting, from Latin instinctus instigation, impulse, noun use of past participle of
instinguere to incite, impel, from in- on (see in- (2)) + stinguere prick, goad, from PIE *steig- to
prick, stick, pierce (see stick (v.)). Meaning animal faculty of intuitive perception is from mid-
15c., from notion of natural prompting. Sense of innate tendency is first recorded 1560s.


mnemonic (adj.)

aiding the memory, 1753, back-formation from mnemonics, or from Greek mnemonikos of or pertaining to
memory, from mnemon (genitive mnemonos) remembering, mindful, from memne memory, a remembrance,
record, an epitaph; memory as a mental faculty, from base of mnasthai remember, from PIE root *men-
to think (see mind (n.)). The noun meaning mnemonic device is from 1858. Related: Mnemonical
(1660s).


prospect (n.)

early 15c., act of looking into the distance, from Latin prospectus distant view, look out; sight,
faculty of sight, noun use of past participle of prospicere look out on, look forward, from pro-
forward (see pro-) + specere look at (see scope (n.1)). Meaning extensive view of the landscape is
from 1530s; transferred sense of mental view or survey is from 1620s. Sense of person or thing
considered promising is from 1922. Prospects expectations, things looked forward to is from 1660s.


visual (adj.)

early 15c., pertaining to the faculty of sight; also coming from the eye or sight (as a beam of
light was thought to do), from Late Latin visualis of sight, from Latin visus a sight, a looking;
power of sight; things seen, appearance, from visus, past participle of videre to see (see vision).
Meaning perceptible by sight is from late 15c; sense of relating to vision is first attested c.1600.
The noun meaning photographic film or other visual display is first recorded 1944.


eugenics (n.)

1883, coined (along with adjective eugenic) by English scientist Francis Galton (1822-1911) on
analogy of ethics, physics, etc. from Greek eugenes well-born, of good stock, of noble race, from
eu- good (see eu-) + genos birth (see genus).  The investigation of human eugenics, that is, of the
conditions under which men of a high type are produced. [Galton, Human Faculty, 1883]


invention (n.)

c.1400, devised method of organization, from Old French invencion (13c.) and directly from Latin
inventionem (nominative inventio) faculty of invention; a finding, discovery, noun of action from
past participle stem of invenire devise, discover, find, from in- in, on (see in- (2)) + venire to
come (see venue).    Meaning finding or discovering of something is early 15c. in English; sense of
thing invented is first recorded 1510s. Etymological sense preserved in Invention of the Cross,
Church festival (May 3) celebrating the reputed finding of the Cross of the Crucifixion by Helena,
mother of Constantine, in 326 C.E.


remembrance (n.)

c.1300, a memory, recollection, from Old French remembrance (11c.), from remembrer (see remember).
From late 14c. as consideration, reflection; present consciousness of a past event; store of
personal experiences available to recollection, capacity to recall the past. Also late 14c. as
memento, keepsake, souvenir, and a commemoration, remembering, ritual of commemoration. Meaning
faculty of memory, capability of remembering is early 15c.    British Remembrance Day, the Sunday
nearest Nov. 11 (originally in memory of the dead of World War I) is attested from 1921. A
remembrancer (early 15c.) was a royal official of the Exchequer tasked with recording and collecting
debts due to the Crown; hence also, figuratively Death (late 15c.).


intelligence (n.)

late 14c., faculty of understanding, from Old French intelligence (12c.), from Latin intelligentia,
intellegentia understanding, power of discerning; art, skill, taste, from intelligentem (nominative
intelligens) discerning, present participle of intelligere to understand, comprehend, from inter-
between (see inter-) + legere choose, pick out, read (see lecture (n.)).    Meaning superior
understanding, sagacity is from early 15c. Sense of information, news first recorded mid-15c.,
especially secret information from spies (1580s). Intelligence quotient first recorded 1921 (see
I.Q.).


sensitive (adj.)

late 14c., in reference to the body or its parts, having the function of sensation; also (early
15c.) pertaining to the faculty of the soul that receives and analyzes sensory information; from Old
French sensitif capable of feeling (13c.) and directly from Medieval Latin sensitivus capable of
sensation, from Latin sensus, past participle of sentire feel perceive (see sense (n.)).    Meaning
easily affected (with reference to mental feelings) first recorded 1816; meaning having intense
physical sensation is from 1849. Original meaning is preserved in sensitive plant (1630s), which is
mechanically irritable in a higher degree than almost any other plant [Century Dictionary]. Meaning
involving national security is recorded from 1953. Related: Sensitively; sensitiveness.


aphasia (n.)

loss of ability to speak, especially as result of brain injury or disorder, 1867, from Modern Latin
aphasia, from Greek aphasia speechlessness, from a- without (see a- (3)) + phasis utterance, from
phanai to speak, related to pheme voice, report, rumor (see fame (n.)).    APHASIA is the term which
has recently been given to the loss of the faculty of articulate language, the organs of phonation
and of articulation, as well as the intelligence, being unimpaired. The pathology of this affection
is at the present time the subject of much discussion in the scientific world; the French Academy
devoted several of their s&#233;ances during the year 1865 to its special elucidation, and the
Medical Journals of France and of our own country have lately contained a good deal of original
matter bearing upon this obscure feature in cerebral pathology. [Frederic Bateman, M.D., Aphasia,
London, 1868]


reason (n.)

c.1200, intellectual faculty that adopts actions to ends, also statement in an argument, statement
of explanation or justification, from Anglo-French resoun, Old French raison course; matter;
subject; language, speech; thought, opinion, from Latin rationem (nominative ratio) reckoning,
understanding, motive, cause, from ratus, past participle of reri to reckon, think, from PIE root
*re(i)- to reason, count (source of Old English r&aelig;dan to advise; see read (v.)).    Meaning
sanity; degree of intelligence that distinguishes men from brutes is recorded from late 13c. Sense
of grounds for action, motive, cause of an event is from c.1300. Middle English sense of meaning,
signification (early 14c.) is in the phrase rhyme or reason. Phrase it stands to reason is from
1630s. Age of Reason the Enlightenment is first recorded 1794, as the title of Tom Paine's book.


sight (n.)

Old English sih&eth;, gesiht, gesih&eth; thing seen; faculty of sight; aspect; vision; apparition,
from Proto-Germanic *sekh(w)- (cognates: Danish sigte, Swedish sigt, Middle Dutch sicht, Dutch
zicht, Old High German siht, German Sicht, Gesicht), stem that also yielded Old English seon (see
see (v.)), with noun suffix -th (2), later -t.  Verily, truth is sight. Therefore if two people
should come disputing, saying, 'I have seen,' 'I have heard,' we should trust the one who says 'I
have seen.' [Brhadaranyaka Upanishad 5.14.4]  Meaning perception or apprehension by means of the
eyes is from early 13c. Meaning device on a firearm to assist in aiming is from 1580s. A show of
something, hence, colloquially, a great many; a lot (late 14c.). Sight for sore eyes welcome visitor
is attested from 1738; sight unseen without previous inspection is from 1892. Sight gag first
attested 1944. Middle English had sighty (late 14c.) visible, conspicuous; bright, shining;
attractive, handsome; c.1400 as keen-sighted; mid-15c. as discerning (compare German sichtig
visible).


sense (n.)

c.1400, faculty of perception, also meaning, import, interpretation (especially of Holy Scripture),
from Old French sens one of the five senses; meaning; wit, understanding (12c.) and directly from
Latin sensus perception, feeling, undertaking, meaning, from sentire perceive, feel, know, probably
a figurative use of a literally meaning to find one's way, or to go mentally, from PIE root *sent-
to go (cognates: Old High German sinnan to go, travel, strive after, have in mind, perceive, German
Sinn sense, mind, Old English si&eth; way, journey, Old Irish set, Welsh hynt way). Application to
any one of the external or outward senses (touch, sight, hearing, etc.) in English first recorded
1520s.    A certain negro tribe has a special word for see; but only one general word for hear,
touch, smell, and taste. It matters little through which sense I realize that in the dark I have
blundered into a pig-sty. In French sentir means to smell, to touch, and to feel, all together.
[Erich M. von Hornbostel, Die Einheit der Sinne (The Unity of the Senses), 1927]    Meaning that
which is wise is from c.1600. Meaning capacity for perception and appreciation is from c.1600 (as in
sense of humor, attested by 1783, sense of shame, 1640s).


mind (n.)

late 12c., from Old English gemynd memory, remembrance, state of being remembered; thought, purpose;
conscious mind, intellect, intention, Proto-Germanic *ga-mundiz (cognates: Gothic muns thought,
munan to think; Old Norse minni mind; German Minne (archaic) love, originally memory, loving
memory), from PIE root *men- think, remember, have one's mind aroused, with derivatives referring to
qualities of mind or states of thought (cognates: Sanskrit matih thought, munih sage, seer; Greek
memona I yearn, mania madness, mantis one who divines, prophet, seer; Latin mens mind,
understanding, reason, memini I remember, mentio remembrance; Lithuanian mintis thought, idea, Old
Church Slavonic mineti to believe, think, Russian pamjat memory).    Meaning mental faculty is mid-
14c. Memory, one of the oldest senses, now is almost obsolete except in old expressions such as bear
in mind, call to mind. Mind's eye remembrance is early 15c. Phrase time out of mind is attested from
early 15c. To pay no mind disregard is recorded from 1916, American English dialect. To have half a
mind to to have one's mind half made up to (do something) is recorded from 1726. Mind-reading is
from 1882.


