faker (n.)

1885, agent noun from fake (v.).


fake

attested in London criminal slang as adjective (1775), verb (1812), and noun (1851, of persons
1888), but probably older. A likely source is feague to spruce up by artificial means, from German
fegen polish, sweep, also to clear out, plunder in colloquial use. Much of our early thieves' slang
is Ger. or Du., and dates from the Thirty Years' War [Weekley]. Or it may be from Latin facere to
do. Related: Faked; fakes; faking.


wangle (v.)

obtain something by trickery, 1888, originally British printer's slang for fake by manipulation;
perhaps an alteration of waggle, or of wankle (now dialectal) unsteady, fickle, from Old English
wancol (see wench (n.)). Brought into wider use by World War I soldiers.


faux (adj.)

from French faux false (12c., see false). Used with English words at least since 1676 (Etheredge,
faux-prude). Used by itself, with French pronunciation, from 1980s to mean fake.


illegitimate (adj.)

1530s, born out of wedlock, formed in English (and replacing earlier illegitime, c.1500), modeled on
Latin illegitimus not legitimate (see il- + legitimate). Sense of unauthorized, unwarranted is from
1640s. Phrase illegitimi non carborundum, usually translated as don't let the bastards grind you
down, is fake Latin (by 1965, said to date from c.1939) (Carborundum was a brand of abrasives).


stand-up (adj.)

1811, courageous, originally of fist fights, denoting a manful contest without fake falls, from the
verbal phrase (early 12c. in sense rise to one's feet), from stand (v.) + up (adv.). To stand up
hold oneself against an opponent is from c.1600; as stand up to in the same sense from 1620s. To
stand up for defend the cause of is from c.1600. To stand (someone) up fail to keep an appointment
is attested from 1902. Stand-up comic first attested 1966. Catch-phrase will the real _______ please
stand up? is from the popular CBS game show To Tell the Truth, which debuted in 1956.


false (adj.)

late 12c., from Old French fals, faus (12c., Modern French faux) false, fake, incorrect, mistaken,
treacherous, deceitful, from Latin falsus deceived, erroneous, mistaken, past participle of fallere
deceive, disappoint, of uncertain origin (see fail).  Adopted into other Germanic languages
(cognates: German falsch, Dutch valsch, Danish falsk), though English is the only one in which the
active sense of deceitful (a secondary sense in Latin) has predominated. False alarm recorded from
1570s. Related: Falsely; falseness.


hobby (n.)

late 13c., hobyn, small horse, pony, later mock horse used in the morris dance, and c.1550 child's
toy riding horse, which led to hobby-horse in a transferred sense of favorite pastime or avocation,
first recorded 1670s, shortened to hobby by 1816. The connecting notion being activity that doesn't
go anywhere. Probably originally a proper name for a horse (see dobbin), a diminutive of Robert or
Robin. The original hobbyhorse was a Tourney Horse, a wooden or basketwork frame worn around the
waist and held on with shoulder straps, with a fake tail and horse head attached, so the wearer
appears to be riding a horse. These were part of church and civic celebrations at Midsummer and New
Year's throughout England.


