fallacious (adj.)

c.1500, from fallacy (Latin fallacia) + -ous. Related: Fallaciously; fallaciousness.


captious (adj.)

c.1400, capcyus, from Middle French captieux (15c.) or directly from Latin captiosus fallacious,
from captionem (nominative captio) a deceiving, fallacious argument, literally a taking (in), from
captus, past participle of capere to take, catch (see capable). Related: Captiously; captiousness.


sophism (n.)

early 15c., earlier sophime (mid-14c.), specious but fallacious argument devised for purposes of
deceit or to exercise one's ingenuity, from Old French sophime a fallacy, false argument (Modern
French sophisme), from Latin sophisma, from Greek sophisma clever device, skillful act, stage-trick,
from stem of sophizesthai become wise (see sophist).


sophistry (n.)

specious but fallacious reasoning, mid-14c., from Old French sophistrie (Modern French sophisterie),
from Medieval Latin sophistria, from Latin sophista, sophistes (see sophist). Sophistry applies to
reasoning as sophism to a single argument [Century Dictionary].


sophistication (n.)

early 15c., use of sophistry; fallacious argument intended to mislead; adulteration; an adulterated
or adulterating substance, from Medieval Latin sophisticationem (nominative sophisticatio), noun of
action from past participle stem of sophisticare adulterate, cheat quibble, from Latin sophisticus
of sophists, from Greek sophistikos of or pertaining to a sophist, from sophistes a wise man,
master, teacher (see sophist). Meaning wordly wisdom, refinement, discrimination is attested from
1850.


sophist (n.)

one who makes use of fallacious arguments, mid-15c., earlier sophister (late 14c.), from Latin
sophista, sophistes, from Greek sophistes a master of one's craft; a wise or prudent man, one clever
in matters of daily life, from sophizesthai to become wise or learned, from sophos skilled in a
handicraft, cunning in one's craft; clever in matters of everyday life, shrewd; skilled in the
sciences, learned; clever; too clever, of unknown origin. Greek sophistes came to mean one who gives
intellectual instruction for pay, and at Athens, contrasted with philosopher, it became a term of
contempt.    Sophists taught before the development of logic and grammar, when skill in reasoning
and in disputation could not be accurately distinguished, and thus they came to attach great value
to quibbles, which soon brought them into contempt. [Century Dictionary]


