fallow (n.)

c.1300, from Old English fealh fallow land, from Proto-Germanic *falgo (cognates: Old High German
felga harrow, German Felge plowed-up fallow land, East Frisian falge fallow, falgen to break up
ground), perhaps from a derivation of PIE root *pel- (3) to turn, fold. Assimilated in English to
fallow (adj.) because of the color of plowed earth. Originally plowed land, then land plowed but not
planted (1520s). As an adjective, from late 14c.


fallow (adj.)

pale yellow, brownish yellow, Old English fealu reddish yellow, yellowish-brown, tawny, dusk-
colored, from Proto-Germanic *falwa- (cognates: Old Saxon falu, Old Norse f&ouml;lr, Middle Dutch
valu, Dutch vaal, Old High German falo, German falb), from PIE *pal-wo- dark-colored, gray
(cognates: Old Church Slavonic plavu, Lithuanian palvas sallow; Greek polios, Sanskrit palitah,
Welsh llwyd gray; Latin pallere to be pale), suffixed form of root *pel- (2) pale (see pallor). It
also forms the root of words for pigeon in Greek (peleia), Latin (palumbes), and Old Prussian
(poalis).


doe (n.)

Old English da a female deer, of unknown origin, perhaps a Celtic loan-word (compare Cornish da
fallow deer, Old Irish dam ox, Welsh dafad sheep).


Fauvist (n.)

movement in painting associated with Henri Matisse, 1915, from French fauve, wild beast (12c., in
Old French fawn-colored horse, dark-colored thing, dull, from Frankish *falw-, from the Germanic
root of fallow (adj.)). Coined by French art critic Louis Vauxcelles at Autumn Salon of 1905. It was
a reaction against impressionism, featuring vivid use of colors. Related: Fauvism.


void (adj.)

c.1300, unoccupied, vacant, from Anglo-French and Old French voide, viude empty, vast, wide, hollow,
waste, uncultivated, fallow, as a noun, opening, hole; loss, from Latin vocivos unoccupied, vacant,
related to vacuus empty (see vacuum (n.)). Meaning lacking or wanting (something) is recorded from
early 15c. Meaning legally invalid, without legal efficacy is attested from mid-15c.


palomino (n.)

1914, from American Spanish palomino cream-colored horse, from Spanish, literally young dove,
perhaps from Italian palombino dove-colored, from Latin palumbinus of wood pigeons, from palumba
wood pigeon (see fallow (adj.)). The horse so called because of its dove-like coloring, light brown
or cream with a pale mane and tail.


curry favor (v.)

early 16c., altered by folk etymology from curry favel (c.1400) from Old French correier fauvel to
be false, hypocritical, literally to curry the chestnut horse, which in medieval French allegories
was a symbol of cunning and deceit. See curry (v.). Old French fauvel is from a Germanic source and
ultimately related to fallow (adj.); the sense here is entangled with that of similar-sounding Old
French favele lying, deception, from Latin fabella, diminutive of fabula (see fable (n.)).


poliomyelitis (n.)

1874, also polio-myelitis, coined by German physician Adolph Kussmaul (1822-1902) from Greek polios
grey (see fallow (adj.)) + myelos marrow + -itis inflammation. So called because the gray matter in
the spinal cord is inflamed, which causes paralysis. The earlier name was infantile paralysis
(1843).    In many respects, also, this affection resembles the acute spinal paralysis of infancy,
which, from the researches of Charcot, Joffroy, and others, have been shown pathologically to be an
acute myelitis of the anterior cornua. Hence, for these forms of paralysis, Professor Kussmaul
suggests the name of 'poliomyelitis anterior.' [London Medical Record, Dec. 9, 1874]


lie (v.2)

rest horizontally, early 12c., from Old English licgan (class V strong verb; past tense l&aelig;g,
past participle legen) be situated, reamin; be at rest, lie down, from Proto-Germanic *legjan
(cognates: Old Norse liggja, Old Frisian lidzia, Middle Dutch ligghen, Dutch liggen, Old High German
ligen, German liegen, Gothic ligan), from PIE *legh- to lie, lay (cognates: Hittite laggari falls,
lies, Greek lekhesthai to lie down, Latin lectus bed, Old Church Slavonic lego to lie down,
Lithuanian at-lagai fallow land, Old Irish laigim I lie down, Irish luighe couch, grave). To lie
with have sexual intercourse is from c.1300, and compare Old English licgan mid cohabit with. To
take (something) lying down passively, submissively is from 1854.


land (n.)

Old English land, lond, ground, soil, also definite portion of the earth's surface, home region of a
person or a people, territory marked by political boundaries, from Proto-Germanic *landom (cognates:
Old Norse, Old Frisian Dutch, German, Gothic land), from PIE *lendh- land, heath (cognates: Old
Irish land, Middle Welsh llan an open space, Welsh llan enclosure, church, Breton lann heath, source
of French lande; Old Church Slavonic ledina waste land, heath, Czech lada fallow land).
Etymological evidence and Gothic use indicates the original sense was a definite portion of the
earth's surface owned by an individual or home of a nation. Meaning early extended to solid surface
of the earth, which had been the sense of the root of Modern English earth. Original sense of land
in English is now mostly found under country. To take the lay of the land is a nautical expression.
In the American English exclamation land's sakes (1846) land is a euphemism for Lord.


