fanciful (adj.)

1620s, from fancy (n.) + -ful. Related: Fancifully.


snollygoster

1846, American English slang, fanciful coinage.


whangdoodle (n.)

name of an imaginary creature or thing, 1858, American English, fanciful formation.


skeezicks (n.)

1850, rascal, rogue, of unknown origin, perhaps a fanciful formation. In early 20c. used
affectionately or playfully of children.


mulligrubs (n.)

fit of the blues, also colic, 1590s, mulliegrums, fanciful formation.


kicksie-wicksie (n.)

a fanciful word for wife in Shakespeare (All's Well, II iii.297), 1601, apparently a perversion of
kickshaw a fancy dish in cookery.


kludge

1962, noun and verb, U.S. slang, fanciful coinage by U.S. author Jackson W. Granholm (b.1921).
Related: Kludgy.


hornswoggle (v.)

to cheat, 1829, probably a fanciful formation. Related: Hornswoggled; hornswoggling.


hellacious (adj.)

1930s, college slang, from hell + fanciful ending (see bodacious).


collywobbles (n.)

1823, fanciful formation from colic and wobble.


whim (n.)

1640s, play on words, pun, shortened from whimwham fanciful object (q.v.). Meaning caprice, fancy,
sudden turn or inclination of the mind first recorded 1690s, probably a shortened form of whimsy.


lollapalooza (n.)

also lallapaloosa, lallapalootza, etc.; remarkable or wonderful person or thing, 1901, American
English, fanciful formation. The annual North American alternative pop music concert of the same
name dates from 1991.


discombobulate (v.)

1834, American English, fanciful coinage of a type popular then (originally discombobricate).
Related: discombobulating; discombobulation.


humongous (adj.)

also humungous, by 1972, American English, apparently a fanciful coinage from huge and monstrous.


piccalilli (n.)

pickle of chopped vegetables, 1769, piccalillo, perhaps a fanciful elaboration of pickle. Spelling
with an -i attested from 1845.


callithumpian (adj.)

1836, U.S. colloquial, probably a fanciful construction. The English Dialect Dictionary reports
Gallithumpians as a Dorset and Devon word from 1790s for a society of radical social reformers, and
also in reference to noisy disturbers of elections and meetings (1770s). The U.S. reference is most
commonly a band of discordant instruments or bangers on pots and pans, especially to serenade a
newlywed couple to show disapproval of one or the other or the match.


rapscallion (n.)

1690s, alteration of rascallion (1640s), a fanciful elaboration of rascal (q.v.). It had a parallel
in now-extinct rampallion (1590s), from Middle English ramp (n.2) ill-behaved woman.


rumpus (n.)

1764, of unknown origin, prob. a fanciful formation [OED], possibly an alteration of robustious
boisterous, noisy (1540s; see robust). First record of rumpus room play room for children in a
family home is from 1938.


bittern (n.)

heron-like bird, 13c., botor, from Old French butor bittern, perhaps from Gallo-Roman *butitaurus,
from Latin butionem bittern + taurus bull (see steer (n.)); according to Pliny, so called because of
its booming voice, but this seems fanciful. Modern form from 1510s.


gadzooks (interj.)

1690s, a condensed form of some exclamation, possibly God's hooks (nails of the cross) or even God's
hocks. Compare godsookers (1670s). The use of Gad for God (as in egad) is first attested 1590s.
Among other similar phraseological combinations (all from 17c.) were gadsbobs, gadslid, and
gadsniggers; in all of which the second elements are sometimes said to be mere fanciful syllables.


conceit (n.)

late 14c., something formed in the mind, thought, notion, from conceiven (see conceive) based on
analogy of deceit and receipt. Sense evolved from something formed in the mind, to fanciful or witty
notion (1510s), to vanity (c.1600) through shortening of self-conceit (1580s).


shilly-shally (v.)

to vacillate, 1782, from adverbial expression to stand shilly-shally (1703), earlier shill I, shall
I (1700), a fanciful reduplication of shall I? (compare wishy-washy, dilly-dally, etc.). From 1734
as an adjective, by 1755 as a noun. Related: Shilly-shallying (1816).


Hoosier

native or resident of Indiana, by c.1830, American English, of unknown origin; fanciful explanations
were printed in 1830s newspapers. Said to have been first printed Jan. 1, 1833, in the Indianapolis
Journal, in a poem, The Hoosiers Nest, by John Finely, which poem was said to have been written in
1830 [The Word Hoosier, Indiana Historical Society Publications, vol. IV, No. 2, 1907], and to have
been in oral use from late 1820s. Seemingly it originated among Ohio River boatmen; perhaps related
to English dialectal (Cumberland) hoozer, used of anything unusually large [Barnhart]. For other
theories, see the above quoted source.


cracker-jack (n.)

also crackerjack, something excellent, 1893, U.S. colloquialism, apparently a fanciful construction,
earliest use in reference to racing horses. The caramel-coated popcorn-and-peanuts confection was
said to have been introduced at the World's Columbian Exposition (1893). Supposedly a salesman gave
it the name when he tasted some and said, That's a cracker-jack, using the then-popular expression.
The name was trademarked 1896. The Prize in Every Box was introduced 1912.    Your brother Bob is
traveling, isn't he?    Yep. He's with one of the big racing teams. I tell you, he's a cracker-jack!
Wins a bushel of diamonds and gold cups every week.  [Life, Aug. 1, 1895]


sockdolager (n.)

1830, a decisive blow (also, figuratively a conclusive argument), fanciful formation from sock (v.1)
hit hard, perhaps via a comical mangling of doxology, on a notion of finality. The meaning something
exceptional is attested from 1838.   Sockdologising likely was nearly the last word President
Abraham Lincoln heard. During the performance of Tom Taylor's Our American Cousin, assassin John
Wilkes Booth (who knew the play well) waited for the laugh-line Well, I guess I know enough to turn
you inside out, you sockdologising old man-trap. Amid the noise as the audience responded, Booth
fired the fatal shot.


grotesque (adj.)

c.1600s, originally a noun (1560s), from Middle French crotesque (16c., Modern French grotesque),
from Italian grottesco, literally of a cave, from grotta (see grotto). The usual explanation is that
the word first was used of paintings found on the walls of basements of Roman ruins (Italian pittura
grottesca), which OED finds intrinsically plausible. Originally fanciful, fantastic, sense became
pejorative after mid-18c. Related: Grotesquely; grotesqueness.


toadstool (n.)

late 14c., apparently just what it looks like: a fanciful name from Middle English tadde toad (see
toad) + stole stool (see stool). Toads themselves were regarded as highly poisonous, and this word
is popularly restricted to poisonous or inedible fungi, as distinct from edible mushrooms [OED].
Compare toad-cheese, a poisonous fungi; toad's meat (1886), a rustic term for toadstool.


ragamuffin (n.)

mid-14c., demon, also in surnames (Isabella Ragamuffyn, 1344), from Middle English raggi ragged
(rag-y?) + fanciful ending (or else second element is Middle Dutch muffe mitten). Or, as Johnson has
it, From rag and I know not what else. Ragged was used of the devil from c.1300 in reference to
shaggy appearance. Raggeman was used by Langland as the name of a demon, and compare Old French
Ragamoffyn, name of a demon in a mystery play. Sense of dirty, disreputable boy is from 1580s.
Compare in the same sense ragabash (c.1600).


taupe (n.)

dark brownish-gray color (the color of moleskin), 1906, from French taupe, the color, originally a
mole, Old French, from Latin talpa a mole. The story below lacks evidence appears to be a fanciful
attempt to divert the origin of the color name to something more appealing:    Before the season
advances very far you will find that taupe, pronounced tope, will be the most favored color in the
entire category of shades and blendings. The original word is taken from the German word taube
pronounced tob-a, which is the name for the dove, but the French have twisted the b into a p and
give us taupe. [The Illustrated Milliner, August, 1906]


hoodlum (n.)

popularized 1871, American English, (identified throughout the 1870s as a California word) young
street rowdy, loafer, especially one involved in violence against Chinese immigrants, young
criminal, gangster; it appears to have been in use locally from a slightly earlier date and may have
begun as a specific name of a gang:    The police have recently been investigating the proceedings
of a gang of thieving boys who denominate themselves and are known to the world as the Hoodlum Gang.
[San Francisco Golden Era newspaper, Feb. 16, 1868, p.4]    Of unknown origin, though newspapers of
the day printed myriad fanciful stories concocted to account for it. A guess perhaps better than
average is that it is from German dialectal (Bavarian) Huddellump ragamuffin [Barnhart].    What the
derivation of the word hoodlum is we could never satisfactorily ascertain, though several
derivations have been proposed; and it would appear that the word has not been very many years in
use. But, however obscure the word may be, there is nothing mysterious about the thing; .... [Walter
M. Fisher, The Californians, London, 1876]


cloud (n.)

Old English clud mass of rock, hill, related to clod. Metaphoric extension to raincloud, mass of
evaporated water in the sky is attested by c.1200 based on similarity of cumulus clouds and rock
masses. The usual Old English word for cloud was weolcan. In Middle English, skie also originally
meant cloud.    The four fundamental types of cloud classification (cirrus, cumulus, stratus,
nimbus) were proposed by British amateur meteorologist Luke Howard (1772-1864) in 1802.
Figuratively, as something that casts a shadow, from early 15c.; hence under a cloud (c.1500). In
the clouds removed from earthly things; obscure, fanciful, unreal is from 1640s. Cloud-compeller
translates (poetically) Greek nephelegereta, a Homeric epithet of Zeus.


cranky (adj.)

cross-tempered, irritable, 1807, from crank (n.) + -y (2). The evolution would be from earlier
senses of crank, such as a twist or fanciful turn of speech (1590s); inaccessible hole or crevice
(1560s). Grose's 1787 Provincial Glossary has Cranky. Ailing sickly from the dutch crank, sick, and
identifies it as a Northern word. Jamieson's Scottish dictionary (1825) has crank in a secondary
sense of hard, difficult, as in crank word, a word hard to be understood; crank job, a work attended
with difficulty, or requiring ingenuity in the execution. Related: Crankily; crankiness.   Ben. Dang
it, don't you spare him--A cross grain'd cranky toad as ever crawl'd. (etc.) [Richard Cumberland,
Lovers Resolutions, Act I, 1813]


tiffany (n.)

type of thin, transparent fabric, c.1600; earlier a common name for the festival of the Epiphany
(early 14c.; in Anglo-French from late 13c.), from Old French Tifinie, Tiphanie Epiphany (c.1200),
from Late Latin Theophania Theophany, another name for the Epiphany, from Greek theophania the
manifestation of a god (see theophany).    Also popular in Old French and Middle English as a name
given to girls born on Epiphany Day. The fabric sense is found only in English and is of obscure
origin and uncertain relation to the other meanings, unless holiday silk or as a fanciful or playful
allusion to manifestation:    The invention of that fine silke, Tiffanie, Sarcenet, and Cypres,
which instead of apparell to cover and hide, shew women naked through them. [Holland's Pliny, 1601]
The fashionable N.Y. jewelry firm Tiffany &amp; Co. (1895) is named for its founder, goldsmith
Charles L. Tiffany (1812-1902) and his son, Louis C. Tiffany (1848-1933), who was the art nouveau
decorator noted for his glassware. The surname is attested in English from 1206.


fiasco (n.)

1855, theater slang for a failure, by 1862 acquired the general sense of any dismal flop, on or off
the stage. Via French phrase fiare fiasco turn out a failure (19c.), from Italian far fiasco suffer
a complete breakdown in performance, literally make a bottle, from fiasco bottle, from Late Latin
flasco, flasconem (see flask).    The reason for all this is utterly obscure today, but the usual
range of fanciful theories has been advanced [Ayto]. Weekley finds it utterly mysterious and
compares French ramasser un pelle to come a cropper (in bicycling), literally to pick up a shovel.
OED makes nebulous reference to alleged incidents in Italian theatrical history. Klein suggests
Venetian glass-crafters tossing aside imperfect pieces to be made later into common flasks. But
according to an Italian dictionary, fare il fiasco used to mean to play a game so that the one that
loses will pay the fiasco, in other words, he will buy the next bottle (of wine). That plausibly
connects the word with the notion of a costly mistake.


bigot (n.)

1590s, sanctimonious person, religious hypocrite, from French bigot (12c.), of unknown origin.
Earliest French use of the word is as the name of a people apparently in southern Gaul, which led to
the now-doubtful, on phonetic grounds, theory that the word comes from Visigothus. The typical use
in Old French seems to have been as a derogatory nickname for Normans, the old theory (not
universally accepted) being that it springs from their frequent use of the Germanic oath bi God. But
OED dismisses in a three-exclamation-mark fury one fanciful version of the by god theory as absurdly
incongruous with facts. At the end, not much is left standing except Spanish bigote mustache, which
also has been proposed but not explained, and the chief virtue of which as a source seems to be
there is no evidence for or against it.    In support of the by God theory, as a surname Bigott,
Bygott are attested in Normandy and in England from the 11c., and French name etymology sources
(such as Dauzat) explain it as a derogatory name applied by the French to the Normans and
representing by god. The English were known as goddamns 200 years later in Joan of Arc's France, and
during World War I Americans serving in France were said to be known as les sommobiches (see also
son of a bitch). But the sense development in bigot is difficult to explain. According to Donkin,
the modern use first appears in French 16c. This and the earliest English sense, religious
hypocrite, especially a female one, might have been influenced by beguine and the words that cluster
around it. Sense extended 1680s to other than religious opinions.


