fancy (v.)

take a liking to, 1540s, a contraction of fantasien to fantasize (about), from fantasy (n.). Meaning
to imagine is from 1550s. Related: Fancied; fancies; fancying. Colloquial use in fancy that, etc. is
recorded by 1813.


fancy-free (adj.)

free from the trammels of love, 1580s, from fancy (n.) + free (adj.).


fancy (n.)

mid-15c., contraction of fantasy, it took the older and longer word's sense of inclination, whim,
desire. Meaning fans of an amusement or sport, collectively is attested by 1735, especially (though
not originally) of the prize ring. The adjective is recorded from mid-18c.


milliner (n.)

mid-15c., vendor of fancy wares, especially those made in Milan, Italian city, famous for straw
works, fancy goods, ribbons, bonnets, and cutlery. Meaning one who sells women's hats may be from
1520s, certainly by 18c. (it is difficult in early references to know whether the word means a type
of merchant or a resident of Milan who is selling certain wares).


fan (n.2)

devotee, 1889, American English, originally of baseball enthusiasts, probably a shortening of
fanatic, but may be influenced by the fancy, a collective term for followers of a certain hobby or
sport (especially boxing); see fancy. There is an isolated use from 1682, but the modern word is
likely a late 19c. formation. Fan club attested by 1930.


Juliet

fem. proper name, from Italian Giulietta, diminutive of Giulia Julia (see Julia). Compare French
Juliette. Juliet cap (1904) was felt to resemble a type worn in stage productions of Romeo and
Juliet.    A Parisian fancy which is finding little favor here, is the Juliet cap. It is a net of
beads or of meshed cord jewelled or beaded at the intersections. Clustered bunches of blossoms and
foliage are set at each side of the cap, above the ears. [Fabrics, Fancy-Goods &amp; Notions, trade
publication, New York, January 1904]


fancied (adj.)

imaginary, 1560s, past participle adjective from fancy (v.).


kickshaw (n.)

late 16c., a fancy dish in cookery (especially a non-native one), from English pronunciation of
French quelque chose a something, a little something.


kicksie-wicksie (n.)

a fanciful word for wife in Shakespeare (All's Well, II iii.297), 1601, apparently a perversion of
kickshaw a fancy dish in cookery.


floozie (n.)

also floozy, woman of disreputable character, 1902, perhaps a variation of flossy fancy, frilly
(1890s slang), with the notion of fluffiness.


mixed (adj.)

mid-15c., from past participle of mix (v.). Mixed blessing from 1933. Mixed marriage is from 1690s
(originally in a religious context; racial sense was in use by 1942 in U.S., though mixed breed in
reference to mulattoes is found by 1775). Mixed bag heterogeneous collection is from 1936. Mixed up
is from 1884 as confused, from 1862 as involved.   Mixed drink in the modern liquor sense is
recorded by 1868; the thing itself is older; Bartlett (1859) lists sixty names given to the various
compounds or mixtures of spirituous liquors and wines served up in fashionable bar rooms in the
United States, all from a single advertisement. The list includes Tippe na Pecco, Moral suasion, Vox
populi, Jewett's fancy, Ne plus ultra, Shambro, Virginia fancy, Stone wall, Smasher, Slingflip, Pig
and whistle, Cocktail, Phlegm-cutter, Switchel flip, Tip and Ty, Ching-ching, Fiscal agent, Slip
ticket, Epicure's punch.


striking (adj.)

1610s, that strikes, present participle adjective from strike (v.). Meaning producing a vivid
impression id from 1752, from the verb in the sense of to catch the fancy of (1590s). Related:
Strikingly.


crotchety (adj.)

1825, from crotchet whim or fancy + -y (2). But the sense evolution is obscure.


whim (n.)

1640s, play on words, pun, shortened from whimwham fanciful object (q.v.). Meaning caprice, fancy,
sudden turn or inclination of the mind first recorded 1690s, probably a shortened form of whimsy.


amusing (adj.)

c.1600, cheating; present participle adjective from amuse (v.). Sense of interesting is from 1712;
that of pleasantly entertaining, tickling to the fancy is from 1826. Noted late 1920s as a vogue
word. Amusive has been tried in all senses since 18c. and might be useful, but it never caught on.
Related: Amusingly.


fanciful (adj.)

1620s, from fancy (n.) + -ful. Related: Fancifully.


imagination (n.)

faculty of the mind which forms and manipulates images, mid-14c., ymaginacion, from Old French
imaginacion concept, mental picture; hallucination, from Latin imaginationem (nominative imaginatio)
imagination, a fancy, noun of action from past participle stem of imaginari (see imagine).


crotchet (n.)

late 14c., crocket, later small hook (early 15c.), from Old French crochet (pronounced crotchet)
hook (see crochet). As a surgical instrument, from 1750. Figurative use in musical notation is from
mid-15c., from the shape of the notes. Meaning whimsical fancy is from 1570s; perhaps from the same
mechanical image in crank; but other authorities link this sense to the musical notation one.


Tartuffe (n.)

pretender to piety, 1670s, from name of the principal character in the comedy by Moli&egrave;re
(1664), apparently from Old French tartuffe truffle (see truffle), perhaps chosen for suggestion of
concealment (Tartuffe is a religious hypocrite), or in allusion to the fancy that truffles were a
diseased product of the earth. Italian Tartufo is said to have been the name of a hypocritical
character in Italian comedy.


shine (n.)

1520s, brightness, from shine (v.). Meaning polish given to a pair of boots is from 1871. Derogatory
meaning black person is from 1908 (perhaps from glossiness of skin or, on another guess, from
frequent employment as shoeshines). Phrase to take a shine to fancy is American English slang from
1839, perhaps from shine up to attempt to please as a suitor. Shiner is from late 14c. as something
that shines; sense of black eye first recorded 1904.


opinion (n.)

c.1300, from Old French opinion opinion, view, judgements founded upon probabilities (12c.), from
Latin opinionem (nominative opinio) opinion, conjecture, fancy, belief, what one thinks;
appreciation, esteem, from stem of opinari think, judge, suppose, opine, from PIE *op- (2) to choose
(see option).    Where there is much desire to learn, there of necessity will be much arguing, much
writing, many opinions; for opinion in good men is but knowledge in the making. [Milton,
Areopagitica]


pelican (n.)

Old English pellicane, from Late Latin pelecanus, from Greek pelekan pelican (so used by Aristotle),
apparently related to pelekas woodpecker and pelekys ax, perhaps so called from the shape of the
bird's bill. Spelling influenced in Middle English by Old French pelican. Used in Septuagint to
translate Hebrew qaath. The fancy that it feeds its young on its own blood is an Egyptian tradition
properly belonging to some other bird. Louisiana has been known as the Pelican state at least since
1859.


amuse (v.)

late 15c., to divert the attention, beguile, delude, from Middle French amuser divert, cause to
muse, from a at, to (but here probably a causal prefix) + muser ponder, stare fixedly (see muse
(v.)). Sense of divert from serious business, tickle the fancy of is recorded from 1630s, but
through 18c. the primary meaning was deceive, cheat by first occupying the attention. Bemuse retains
more of the original meaning. Related: Amused; amusing.


hillbilly (n.)

southern Appalachian U.S. resident, by 1892, from hill + masc. proper name Billy/Billie.    Then
again, I do not think It will do so well. I would hate to see some old railroad man come here and
take my job, and then, I don t think It is right to hire some Hill Billy and give him the same right
as I just because he was hired the same time I was. [The Railroad Trainmen's Journal, vol. IX, July
1892]   <hr />   In short, a Hill-Billie is a free and untrammelled white citizen of Alabama, who
lives in the hills, has no means to speak of, dresses as he can, talks as he pleases, drinks whiskey
when he gets it, and fires of his revolver as the fancy takes him. [New York Journal, April 23,
1900]  In reference to a type of folk music, first attested 1924.


ween (v.)

be of the opinion, have the notion (archaic), Old English wenan to fancy, imagine, believe; expect,
hope, from Proto-Germanic *wenjan to hope (cognates: Old Saxon wanian, Old Norse v&aelig;na, Old
Frisian wena, Old High German wanen, German w&auml;hnen, Gothic wenjan to expect, suppose, think),
from *woeniz expectation, from PIE root *wen- (1) to wish, desire, strive for (see Venus). Archaic
since 17c.


swaddle (v.)

bind with long strips of cloth, late 15c. alteration of Middle English swathlen (c.1200), probably a
frequentative form of Old English swa&thorn;ian (see swathe). Related: Swaddled; swaddling. Phrase
swaddling clothes is from Coverdale (1535) translation of Luke ii:7.    Young children ... are still
bandaged in this manner in many parts of Europe to prevent them from using their limbs freely, owing
to a fancy that those who are left free in infancy become deformed. [Century Dictionary, 1891]
Wyclif uses swathing-clothes (late 14c.).


maggot (n.)

late 15c., probably an unexplained variant of Middle English ma&eth;ek, from Old English ma&eth;a
maggot, grub, from Proto-Germanic *mathon (cognates: Old Norse ma&eth;kr, Old Saxon matho, Middle
Dutch, Dutch made, Old High German mado, German Made, Gothic ma&thorn;a maggot). Figurative use
whim, fancy, crotchet is 1620s, from the notion of a maggot in the brain.


list (v.4)

to be pleased, desire (archaic), mid-12c., lusten, listen to please, desire, from Old English lystan
to please, cause pleasure or desire, provoke longing, from Proto-Germanic *lustijan (cognates: Old
Saxon lustian, Dutch lusten to like, fancy, Old High German lusten, German l&uuml;sten, Old Norse
lysta); from the root of lust (n.). Related: Listed; listing. As a noun, c.1200, from the verb.
Somehow English has lost listy (adj.) pleasant, willing (to do something); ready, quick (mid-15c.).


dentist (n.)

1759, from French dentiste, from dent tooth, from Latin dens (see tooth) + -ist.  Dentist figures it
now in our newspapers, and may do well enough for a French puffer, but we fancy Rutter is content
with being called a tooth-drawer [Edinburgh Chronicle, Sept. 15, 1759].   Tooth-drawer is attested
from late 14c.


terrace (n.)

1510s, gallery, portico, balcony, later flat, raised place for walking (1570s), from Middle French
terrace (Modern French terasse), from Old French terrasse (12c.) platform (built on or supported by
a mound of earth), from Vulgar Latin *terracea, fem. of *terraceus earthen, earthy, from Latin terra
earth, land (see terrain). As a natural formation in geology, attested from 1670s. In street names,
originally in reference to a row of houses along the top of a slope, but lately applied arbitrarily
as a fancy name for an ordinary road. As a verb from 1610s, to form into a terrace. Related:
Terraced.


ph

now in English usually representing f, originally it was the combination used by Romans to represent
Greek letter phi (cognate with Sanskrit -bh-, Germanic -b-), which at first was an aspirated p,
later the same sound as German -pf-. But by 2c. B.C.E. had become a simple sound made by blowing
through the lips (bilabial spirant).    Roman f, like modern English f, was dentilabial; by c.400,
however, the sounds had become identical and in some Romanic languages (Italian, Spanish), -ph-
regularly was replaced by -f-. This tendency took hold in Old French and Middle English, but with
the revival of classical learning the words subsequently were altered back to -ph- (except fancy and
fantastic), and due to zealousness in this some non-Greek words in -f- began to appear confusedly in
-ph-, though these forms generally have not survived.


bee (n.)

stinging insect, Old English beo bee, from Proto-Germanic *bion (cognates: Old Norse by, Old High
German bia, Middle Dutch bie), possibly from PIE root *bhi- quiver. Used metaphorically for busy
worker since 1530s.    Sense of meeting of neighbors to unite their labor for the benefit of one of
their number, 1769, American English, probably is from comparison to the social activity of the
insect; this was extended to other senses (such as spelling bee, first attested 1809; Raising-bee
(1814) for building construction; also hanging bee a lynching). To have a bee in (one's) bonnet
(1825), said of one who is harebrained or has an intense new notion or fancy, is said in Jamieson to
be Scottish, perhaps from earlier expressions such as head full of bees (1510s), denoting mad mental
activity.


pettifogger (n.)

1560s, from petty; the second element possibly from obsolete Dutch focker, from Flemish focken to
cheat, or from cognate Middle English fugger, from Fugger the renowned family of merchants and
financiers of 15c.-16c. Augsburg. In German, Flemish and Dutch, the name became a word for
monopolist, rich man, usurer.A 'petty Fugger' would mean one who on a small scale practices the
dishonourable devices for gain popularly attributed to great financiers; it seems possible that the
phrase 'petty fogger of the law,' applied in this sense to some notorious person, may have caught
the popular fancy. [OED first edition, in a rare burst of pure speculation]However, OED also calls
attention to pettifactor legal agent who undertakes small cases (1580s), which, though attested
slightly later, might be the source of this. Related: Pettifoggery.


freak (n.)

1560s, sudden turn of mind, of unknown origin, perhaps related to Old English frician to dance (not
recorded in Middle English, but the word may have survived in dialect) [OED, Barnhart], or perhaps
from Middle English frek bold, quickly, from Old English frec greedy, gluttonous (compare German
frech bold, impudent).    Sense of capricious notion (1560s) and unusual thing, fancy (1784)
preceded that of strange or abnormal individual (first in freak of nature, 1847; compare Latin lusus
natur&#230;, which was used in English from 1660s). The sense in health freak, ecology freak, etc.
is attested from 1908 (originally Kodak freak, a camera buff). Freak show attested from 1887.


buzz (n.)

a busy rumour [Rowe], 1620s (earlier a fancy, c.1600), figurative use from buzz (v.). Literal sense
of humming sound is from 1640s. A buzz was the characteristic sound of an airplane in early 20c.;
hence verbal sense to fly swiftly, by 1928; by 1940 especially in military use, to fly low over a
surface as a warning signal (for example that target practice is about to begin):    The patrol
aircraft shall employ the method of warning known as buzzing which consists of low flight by the
airplane and repeated opening and closing of the throttle. [1941 Supplement to the Code of Federal
Regulations of the United States of America, Chap. II, Corps of Engineers, War Department, p. 3434,
etc. ]    Meaning pleasant sense of intoxication first recorded 1935. The children's game of
counting off with 7 or multiples of it replaced by buzz is attested from 1864 and is mentioned in
Little Women (1868). To give (someone) a buzz (by 1922) is from the buzz that announced a call on
old telephone systems.


tickle (v.)

early 14c. (intransitive) to be thrilled or tingling, of uncertain origin, possibly a frequentative
form of tick (v.) in its older sense of to touch. The Old English form was tinclian. Some suggest a
metathesis of kittle (Middle English kytyllen), from Dutch kietelen, from a common North Sea
Germanic word for to tickle (compare Old Norse kitla, Old High German kizzilon, German kitzeln).
Meaning to excite agreeably (late 14c.) is a translation of Latin titillare. Meaning to touch
lightly so as to cause a peculiar and uneasy sensation in the nerves is recorded from late 14c.;
that of to poke or touch so as to excite laughter is from early 15c.; figurative sense of to excite,
amuse is attested from 1680s. Related: Tickled; tickling. The noun is recorded from 1801. To tickle
(one's) fancy is from 1640s.


quiz (n.)

brief examination of a student on some subject, 1852, perhaps from quiz (v.), or from slang quiz odd
person (1782, perhaps originally university slang), via the notion of schoolboy prank or joke played
at the expense of a person deemed a quiz (a noun sense attested frequently 1840s).    A Quiz, in the
common acceptation of the word, signifies one who thinks, speaks, or acts differently from the rest
of the world in general. But, as manners and opinions are as various as mankind, it will be
difficult to say who shall be termed a Quiz, and who shall not: each person indiscriminately
applying the name of Quiz to every one who differs from himself .... [The London Magazine, November,
1783]     According to OED, the anecdote that credits this word to a bet by the Dublin theater-
manager Daly or Daley that he could coin a word is regarded by authorities as doubtful and the first
record of it appears to be in 1836 (in Smart's Walker Remodelled; the story is omitted in the
edition of 1840).    The word Quiz is a sort of a kind of a word  That people apply to some being
absurd;  One who seems, as t'were oddly your fancy to strike  In a sort of a fashion you somehow
don't like  A mixture of odd, and of queer, and all that  Which one hates, just, you know, as some
folks hate a cat;  A comical, whimsical, strange, droll -- that is,  You know what I mean; 'tis --
in short, -- 'tis a quiz!    [from Etymology of Quiz, Charles Dibdin, 1842]


surprise (n.)

also formerly surprize, late 14c., unexpected attack or capture, from Old French surprise a taking
unawares (13c.), from noun use of past participle of Old French sorprendre to overtake, seize,
invade (12c.), from sur- over (see sur- (1)) + prendre to take, from Latin prendere, contracted from
prehendere to grasp, seize (see prehensile). Meaning something unexpected first recorded 1590s, that
of feeling of astonishment caused by something unexpected is c.1600. Meaning fancy dish is attested
from 1708.    A Surprize is ... a dish ... which promising little from its first appearance, when
open abounds with all sorts of variety. [W. King, Cookery, 1708]   Surprise party originally was a
stealth military detachment (1826); festive sense is attested by 1857; according to Thornton's
American Glossary, originally a gathering of members of a congregation at the house of their
preacher with the ostensible purpose of contributing provisions, &amp;c.;, for his support, and
sometimes called a donation party. Phrase taken by surprise is attested from 1690s.


kleptomania (n.)

1830, formed from mania + Greek kleptes thief, from kleptein to steal, act secretly, from PIE *klep-
to steal, an extention of root *kel- (2) to cover, conceal (see cell; cognate with Latin clepere to
steal, listen secretly to, Old Prussian au-klipts hidden, Old Church Slavonic poklopu cover,
wrapping, Gothic hlifan to steal, hliftus thief). Much-derided 19c. as a fancy term for old-
fashioned thievery and an opportunity for the privileged to claim a psychological motive for
criminal misbehavior.    There is a popular belief that some of the criminal laws under which the
poor are rigorously punished are susceptible of remarkable elasticity when the peccadilloes of the
rich are brought under judgment, and that there is some truth in the old adage which declares that
one man may steal a horse where another dare not look over the hedge. This unwholesome distrust is
not likely to diminish if, in cases of criminal prosecutions where so-called respectable persons
commit theft without sufficiently obvious motive for the act, they have their crime extenuated on
the plea of kleptomania, as has recently occurred in several notable instances. [Kleptomania, The
Lancet, Nov. 16, 1861]


lunatic (adj.)

late 13c., affected with periodic insanity, dependent on the changes of the moon, from Old French
lunatique, lunage insane, or directly from Late Latin lunaticus moon-struck, from Latin luna moon
(see Luna). Compare Old English monseoc lunatic, literally moon-sick; Middle High German lune humor,
temper, mood, whim, fancy (German Laune), from Latin luna. Compare also New Testament Greek
seleniazomai be epileptic, from selene moon. Lunatic fringe (1913) apparently was coined by U.S.
politician Theodore Roosevelt.    Then, among the wise and high-minded people who in self-respecting
and genuine fashion strive earnestly for peace, there are foolish fanatics always to be found in
such a movement and always discrediting it -- the men who form the lunatic fringe in all reform
movements. [Theodore Roosevelt, autobiography, 1913].    Earlier it was a term for a type of
hairstyle worn over the forehead (1877). Lunatic soup (1933) was Australian slang for alcoholic
drink.


comedy (n.)

late 14c., from Old French comedie (14c., a poem, not in the theatrical sense), from Latin comoedia,
from Greek komoidia a comedy, amusing spectacle, probably from komodios actor or singer in the
revels, from komos revel, carousal, merry-making, festival, + aoidos singer, poet, from aeidein to
sing, related to oide (see ode).    The passage on the nature of comedy in the Poetic of Aristotle
is unfortunately lost, but if we can trust stray hints on the subject, his definition of comedy
(which applied mainly to Menander) ran parallel to that of tragedy, and described the art as a
purification of certain affections of our nature, not by terror and pity, but by laughter and
ridicule. [Rev. J.P. Mahaffy, A History of Classical Greek Literature, London, 1895]    The
classical sense of the word, then, was amusing play or performance, which is similar to the modern
one, but in the Middle Ages the word came to mean poems and stories generally (albeit ones with
happy endings), and the earliest English sense is narrative poem (such as Dante's Commedia).
Generalized sense of quality of being amusing dates from 1877.   Comedy aims at entertaining by the
fidelity with which it presents life as we know it, farce at raising laughter by the outrageous
absurdity of the situation or characters exhibited, &amp; burlesque at tickling the fancy of the
audience by caricaturing plays or actors with whose style it is familiar. [Fowler]


monkey (n.)

1520s, likely from an unrecorded Middle Low German *moneke or Middle Dutch *monnekijn, a colloquial
word for monkey, originally a diminutive of some Romanic word, compare French monne (16c.); Middle
Italian monnicchio, from Old Italian monna; Spanish mona ape, monkey. In a 1498 Low German version
of the popular medieval beast story Roman de Renart (Reynard the Fox), Moneke is the name given to
the son of Martin the Ape; transmission of the word to English might have been via itinerant
entertainers from the German states.    The Old French form of the name is Monequin (recorded as
Monnekin in a 14c. version from Hainault), which could be a diminutive of some personal name, or it
could be from the general Romanic word, which may be ultimately from Arabic maimun monkey, literally
auspicious, a euphemistic usage because the sight of apes was held by the Arabs to be unlucky
[Klein]. The word would have been influenced in Italian by folk etymology from monna woman, a
contraction of ma donna my lady.  Monkey has been used affectionately for child since c.1600. As a
type of modern popular dance, it is attested from 1964. Monkey business attested from 1883. Monkey
suit fancy uniform is from 1886. Monkey wrench is attested from 1858; its figurative sense of
something that obstructs operations is from the notion of one getting jammed in the gears of
machinery (compare spanner in the works). To make a monkey of someone is attested from 1900. To have
a monkey on one's back be addicted is 1930s narcotics slang, though the same phrase in the 1860s
meant to be angry. There is a story in the Sinbad cycle about a tormenting ape-like creature that
mounts a man's shoulders and won't get off, which may be the root of the term. In 1890s British
slang, to have a monkey up the chimney meant to have a mortgage on one's house. The three wise
monkeys (see no evil, etc.) are attested from 1926.


cunt (n.)

female intercrural foramen, or, as some 18c. writers refer to it, the monosyllable, Middle English
cunte female genitalia, by early 14c. (in Hendyng's Proverbs -- &#658;eve &#254;i cunte to
cunni[n]g, And crave affetir wedding), akin to Old Norse kunta, Old Frisian, Middle Dutch, and
Middle Low German kunte, from Proto-Germanic *kunton, of uncertain origin. Some suggest a link with
Latin cuneus wedge, others to PIE root *geu- hollow place, still others to PIE *gwen-, root of queen
and Greek gyne woman.    The form is similar to Latin cunnus female pudenda (also, vulgarly, a
woman), which is likewise of disputed origin, perhaps literally gash, slit, from PIE *sker- (1) to
cut, or literally sheath, from PIE *kut-no-, from root *(s)keu- to conceal, hide.   Hec vulva: a
cunt. Hic cunnus: idem est. [from Londesborough Illustrated Nominale, c.1500, in Anglo-Saxon and Old
English Vocabularies, eds. Wright and W&#252;lcker, vol. 1, 1884]    First known reference in
English apparently is in a compound, Oxford street name Gropecuntlane cited from c.1230 (and
attested through late 14c.) in Place-Names of Oxfordshire (Gelling &amp; Stenton, 1953), presumably
a haunt of prostitutes. Used in medical writing c.1400, but avoided in public speech since 15c.;
considered obscene since 17c.    in Middle English also conte, counte, and sometimes queinte,
queynte (for this, see q). Chaucer used quaint and queynte in Canterbury Tales (late 14c.), and
Andrew Marvell might be punning on quaint in To His Coy Mistress (1650).    What eyleth yow to
grucche thus and grone? Is it for ye wolde haue my queynte allone? [Wife of Bath's Tale]    Under
MONOSYLLABLE Farmer lists 552 synonyms from English slang and literature before launching into
another 5 pages of them in French, German, Italian, Spanish, and Portuguese. [A sampling: Botany
Bay, chum, coffee-shop, cookie, End of the Sentimental Journey, fancy bit, Fumbler's Hall,
funniment, goatmilker, heaven, hell, Itching Jenny, jelly-bag, Low Countries, nature's tufted
treasure, parenthesis, penwiper, prick-skinner, seminary, tickle-toby, undeniable, wonderful lamp,
and aphrodisaical tennis court. Dutch cognate de kont means a bottom, an arse, but Dutch also has
attractive poetic slang ways of expressing this part, such as liefdesgrot, literally cave of love,
and vleesroos rose of flesh.     Alternative form cunny is attested from c.1720 but is certainly
much earlier and forced a change in the pronunciation of coney (q.v.), but it was good for a pun
while coney was still the common word for rabbit: A pox upon your Christian cockatrices! They cry,
like poulterers' wives, 'No money, no coney.'  [Philip Massinger: The Virgin-Martyr, Act I, Scene 1,
1622]


