fancied (adj.)

imaginary, 1560s, past participle adjective from fancy (v.).


pug-nose (n.)

1778, from pug (n.) based on fancied similarity to the nose of either the monkey or the dog.
Related: Pug-nosed.


snapdragon (n.)

garden plant, 1570s, from snap (n.) + dragon. So called from fancied resemblance of antirrhinum
flowers to a dragon's mouth. As the name of a Christmas game of plucking raisins from burning brandy
and eating them alight, from 1704.


dolly (n.)

c.1600, Dolly, a fem. nickname (see doll); 1790 as child's doll; applied from 1792 to any
contrivance fancied to resemble a dolly in some sense, especially a small platform on rollers
(1901). Doesn't look like one to me, either, but that's what they say.


crucible (n.)

early 15c., from Medieval Latin crucibulum melting pot for metals, originally night lamp. First
element might be Middle High German kruse earthen pot. Or perhaps it is from Latin crux on some
fancied resemblance to a cross. Used of any severe test or trial since 1640s.


thymus (n.)

gland near the base of the neck, 1690s, Modern Latin, from Greek thymos a warty excrescence, used of
the gland by Galen, literally thyme, probably so called because of a fancied resemblance to a bud of
thyme (see thyme). Related: Thymic.


cirrus (n.)

1708, curl-like fringe or tuft, from Latin cirrus a lock of hair, tendril, curl, ringlet of hair;
the fringe of a garment. In meteorology, cirrus clouds attested from 1803. So called from fancied
resemblance of shape.


conk (v.)

as in conk out, 1918, coined by World War I airmen, perhaps in imitation of the sound of a stalling
motor, reinforced by conk (v.) hit on the head, originally punch in the nose (1821), from conk (n.),
slang for nose (1812), perhaps from fancied resemblance to a conch (pronounced conk) shell.


fancy (v.)

take a liking to, 1540s, a contraction of fantasien to fantasize (about), from fantasy (n.). Meaning
to imagine is from 1550s. Related: Fancied; fancies; fancying. Colloquial use in fancy that, etc. is
recorded by 1813.


Stonehenge (n.)

early 12c., Stanenges, literally stone gallows, perhaps so called from fancied resemblance to old-
style gallows with two posts, with the second element related to the verb hang. Some antiquarians
suggest the notion may be of supported in the air, that which hangs in the air (compare henge-clif
for Latin pr&aelig;ruptum), in reference to the lintel stones, but the order of the elements and the
inflection is against this. An ancient name for it was the Giant's Dance.


nave (1)

main part of a church, 1670s, from Medieval Latin navem (nominative navis) nave of a church, from
Latin navis ship (see naval), on some fancied resemblance in shape.


gamma

third letter of the Greek alphabet, c.1400, from Greek gamma, from Phoenician gimel, literally camel
(see camel); so called for a fancied resemblance of its shape to some part of a camel. Gamma rays
(1903) originally were thought to be a third type of radiation, now known to be identical with very
short X-rays.


narthex (n.)

porch at the west end of early churches (used by penitents not admitted to the body of the church),
1670s, from Late Greek narthex, in classical Greek giant fennel, of unknown origin. The
architectural feature allegedly so called from fancied resemblance of porch to a hollow stem. The
word also was used in Greek to mean a small case for unguents, etc. According to Hesiod (Theogeny),
Prometheus conveyed fire from Heaven to Earth in hollow fennel stalks. Related: Narthecal.


amygdala (n.)

the tonsils, 1540s (amygdal), from Latin, from Greek amygdale almond (see almond). The anatomical
use is as a direct translation of Arabic al-lauzatani the two tonsils, literally the two almonds, so
called by Arabic physicians for fancied resemblance. From early 15c. as amygdales tonsils; as
almonds from mid-12c.


Grenada

W. Indies island, discovered by Columbus Aug, 15, 1498, and named by him Concepci&oacute;n, the
place later was renamed for the old Spanish kingdom or city of Granada, which is said to be from
Latin granatum pomegranate, either from fruit grown in the region or from some fancied resemblance.
Others connect the name to Moorish karnattah. The Roman name, Illiberis, is said to be Iberian and
represent cognates of Basque hiri town + berri new, and survive in the name of the surrounding
Sierra Elvira.


imaginary (adj.)

not real, late 14c., ymaginaire, from imagine + -ary; or else from Late Latin imaginarius seeming,
fancied, from imaginari. Imaginary friend (one who does not exist) attested by 1789.


polonaise (n.)

1773, woman's overdress (from fancied resemblance to Polish costume); 1797, stately dance, from
French (danse) polonaise a Polish (dance), fem. of polonais (adj.) Polish, from Pologne Poland, from
Medieval Latin Polonia Poland (see Poland). In the culinary sense, applied to dishes supposed to be
cooked in Polish style, attested from 1889.


Adam&#039;s apple (n.)

1731, corresponding to Latin pomum Adami, perhaps an inexact translation of Hebrew tappuah haadam,
literally man's swelling, from ha-adam the man + tappuah anything swollen. The reference is to the
legend that a piece of the forbidden fruit (commonly believed to be an apple) that Eve gave Adam
stuck in his throat. The term is mentioned in early 15c. as the name of an actual oriental and
Mediterranean fruit, a variety of lime with an indentation fancied to resemble the marks of Adam's
teeth.


uvula (n.)

late 14c., from Late Latin uvula, from Latin uvola small bunch of grapes, diminutive of uva grape,
from PIE root *og- fruit, berry. So called from fancied resemblance of the organ to small grapes.
Related: Uvular.


hull (n.2)

body of a ship, 1550s, perhaps from hull (n.1) on fancied resemblance of ship keels to open peapods
(compare Latin carina keel of a ship, originally shell of a nut; Greek phaselus light passenger
ship, yacht, literally bean pod; French coque hull of a ship; shell of a walnut or egg). Alternative
etymology is from Middle English hoole ship's keel (mid-15c.), from the same source as hold (n.).


date (n.2)

the fruit, late 13c., from Old French date, from Old Proven&ccedil;al datil, from Latin dactylus,
from Greek daktylos date, originally finger, toe; so called because of fancied resemblance between
oblong fruit of the date palm and human digits. Possibly from a Semitic source (compare Hebrew
deqel, Aramaic diqla, Arabic daqal date palm) and assimilated to the Greek word for finger.


Mohawk

North American Indian tribe name, Iroquoian, 1630s, Mohowawogs (plural), said to mean they eat
living things in a southern New England Algonquian tongue, probably a reference to cannibalism.
Compare Unami Delaware /muhuwe:yck/ cannibal monsters. The people's name for themselves is
kanye'keha:ka. Meaning haircut style favored by punk rockers is c.1975, from fancied resemblance to
hair style of the Indians in old illustrations. The style of cut earlier was called a Mohican
(1960). Mohoc, Mohock, variant form of the word, was the name given 1711 to gangs of aristocratic
London ruffians.


duel (n.)

1590s (from late 13c. in Latin form), from Medieval Latin duellum combat between two persons, by
association with Latin duo two, but originally from Latin duellum war, an Old Latin form of bellum
(see bellicose). Retained in poetic and archaic language and apparently given a special meaning in
Medieval or Late Latin of one-on-one combat on fancied connection with duo two.


Teddy

pet form of masc. proper names Edward, Edmund, and Theodore, with -y (3). Meaning women's
undergarment (with lower-case t-) is recorded from 1924, of unknown origin, perhaps from some
fancied resemblance to a teddy bear (q.v.), a theory that dates to 1929. In British slang phrase
teddy boy (1954) it is short for Edward, from the preference of such youths for Edwardian styles
(1901-10). Teddies (probably from Teddy Roosevelt) was one of the names given to U.S. troops in
France in 1917.


ape (n.)

Old English apa ape, monkey, from Proto-Germanic *apan (cognates: Old Saxon apo, Old Norse api,
Dutch aap, German affe), perhaps borrowed in Proto-Germanic from Celtic (compare Old Irish apa) or
Slavic (compare Old Bohemian op, Slovak opitza), perhaps ultimately from a non-Indo-European
language.    Apes were noted in medieval times for mimicry of human action, hence, perhaps, the
other figurative use of the word, to mean a fool. To go ape (in emphatic form, go apeshit) go crazy
is 1955, U.S. slang. To lead apes in hell (1570s) was the fancied fate of one who died an old maid.


stocking (n.)

close-fitting garment covering the foot and lower leg, 1580s, from stock leg covering, stocking
(late 15c.), from Old English stocu sleeve, related to Old English stocc trunk, log (see stock
(n.1)). Probably so called because of a fancied resemblance of legs to tree trunks, or a reference
to the punishing stocks. Cognates include Old Norse stuka, Old High German stuhha, from the same
Proto-Germanic source. Restriction to women's hose is 20c. As a receptacle for Christmas presents,
attested from 1853; hence stocking stuffer first recorded 1945. Stocking-feet without shoes is from
1802.


gossamer (n.)

c.1300, spider threads spun in fields of stubble in late fall, apparently from gos goose + sumer
summer (compare Swedish sommertrad summer thread). The reference might be to a fancied resemblance
of the silk to goose down, or because geese are in season then. The German equivalent
m&auml;dchensommer (literally girls' summer) also has a sense of Indian summer, and the English word
originally may have referred to a warm spell in autumn before being transferred to a phenomenon
especially noticable then. Compare obsolete Scottish go-summer period of summer-like weather in late
autumn. Meaning anything light or flimsy is from c.1400. The adjective sense filmy is attested from
1802.


bracket (n.)

1570s, bragget, architectural support, probably from Middle French braguette codpiece armor (16c.),
from a fancied resemblance of architectural supports to that article of attire (Spanish cognate
bragueta meant both codpiece and bracket), diminutive of brague knee pants, ultimately from Gaulish
*braca pants, itself perhaps from Germanic (compare Old English broc garment for the legs and trunk;
see breeches). The sense might reflect the breeches sense, on the notion of two limbs or of
appliances used in pairs. The typographical bracket is first recorded 1750, so called for its
resemblance to double supports in carpentry (a sense attested from 1610s). Senses affected by Latin
brachium arm.


porpoise (n.)

early 14c., porpas, from Old French porpais (12c.) porpoise, literally pork fish, from porc pork
(see pork (n.)) + peis fish, from Latin piscis fish (see fish (n.)).    The Old French word probably
is a loan-translation of a Germanic word meaning literally sea-hog, mere-swine, such as Old Norse
mar-svin, Old High German meri-swin, Middle Dutch mereswijn porpoise (the last of which also was
borrowed directly into French and became Modern French marsouin).    Classical Latin had a similar
name, porculus marinus (in Pliny), and the notion behind the name likely is a fancied resemblance of
the snout to that of a pig.


flute (n.)

early 14c., from Old French flaute (12c.), from Old Proven&ccedil;al flaut, of uncertain origin,
perhaps imitative or from Latin flare to blow; perhaps influenced by Proven&ccedil;al laut lute. The
other Germanic words (such as German fl&ouml;te) are likewise borrowings from French.    Ancient
flutes were blown through a mouthpiece, like a recorder; the modern transverse or German flute
developed 18c. The older style then sometimes were called fl&#251;te-a-bec (French, literally flute
with a beak). The modern design and key system of the concert flute were perfected 1834 by Theobald
Boehm. The architectural sense of furrow in a pillar (1650s) is from fancied resemblance to the
inside of a flute split down the middle. Meaning tall, slender wine glass is from 1640s.


tulip (n.)

1570s, via Dutch or German tulpe, French tulipe a tulip (16c.), all ultimately from Turkish
t&uuml;lbent turban, also gauze, muslin, from Persian dulband turban; so called from the fancied
resemblance of the flower to a turban.    Introduced from Turkey to Europe, where the earliest known
instance of a tulip flowering in cultivation is 1559 in the garden of Johann Heinrich Herwart in
Augsburg; popularized in Holland after 1587 by Clusius. The tulip-mania raged in Holland in the
1630s. The full form of the Turkish word is represented in Italian tulipano, Spanish tulipan, but
the -an tended to drop in Germanic languages, where it was mistaken for a suffix. Tulip tree (1705),
a North American magnolia, so called from its tulip-shaped flowers.


marten (n.)

mid-13c., skin or fur of the marten, from Old French martrine marten fur, noun use of fem. adjective
martrin of or pertaining to the marten, from martre marten, from Frankish *martar or some other
Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic *marthuz (cognates: Old Saxon marthrin of or pertaining to the
marten, Old Frisian merth, Middle Dutch maerter, Dutch marter, Old High German mardar, German
Marder, Old English mear&thorn;, Old Norse m&ouml;r&eth;r marten), probably from PIE *martu- bride,
perhaps on some fancied resemblance, or else a Germanic euphemism for the real name of the animal,
which might have been taboo.    In Middle English the animal itself typically was called marter,
directly from Old French martre, but marten took over this sense in English c.1400.


terror (n.)

early 15c., something that intimidates, an object of fear, from Old French terreur (14c.), from
Latin terrorem (nominative terror) great fear, dread, alarm, panic; object of fear, cause of alarm;
terrible news, from terrere fill with fear, frighten, from PIE root *tres- to tremble (see
terrible).    Meaning quality of causing dread is attested from 1520s. Sense of a person fancied as
a source of terror (often with deliberate exaggeration, as of a naughty child) is recorded from
1883. Terror bombing first recorded 1941, with reference to German air attack on Rotterdam. Terror-
stricken is from 1831. The Reign of Terror in French history (March 1793-July 1794) was the period
when the nation was ruled by a faction whose leaders made policy of killing by execution anyone
deemed an impediment to their measures; so called in English from 1801. Old English words for terror
included broga and egesa.


