farce (n.)

late 14c., force-meat, stuffing; 1520s, as a type of dramatic work, from Middle French farce comic
interlude in a mystery play (16c.), literally stuffing, from Old French farcir to stuff, (13c.),
from Latin farcire to stuff, cram, of unknown origin, perhaps related to frequens crowded.    The
pseudo-Latin farsia was applied 13c. in France and England to praise phrases inserted into
liturgical formulae (for example between kyrie and eleison), then in Old French farce was extended
to the impromptu buffoonery among actors that was a feature of religious stage plays.


farcical (adj.)

1716, from farce + -ical. Related: Farcically.


namby-pamby (adj.)

weakly sentimental, insipidly pretty, 1745, from satiric nickname of English poet Ambrose Philips
(1674-1749) mocking his sentimental pastorals addressed to infant members of the nobility. Used
first in 1726 in a farce credited to Carey. Related: Namby-pambical.


infarct (n.)

1873, from medical Latin infarctus (Latin infartus), past participle of infarcire to stuff into,
from in- + farcire â&euro;&oelig;to stuffâ&euro;? (see farce).


forcemeat (n.)

also force-meat, mincemeat, 1680s, from force to stuff, a variant of farce (q.v.) + meat.


comedy (n.)

late 14c., from Old French comedie (14c., a poem, not in the theatrical sense), from Latin comoedia,
from Greek komoidia a comedy, amusing spectacle, probably from komodios actor or singer in the
revels, from komos revel, carousal, merry-making, festival, + aoidos singer, poet, from aeidein to
sing, related to oide (see ode).    The passage on the nature of comedy in the Poetic of Aristotle
is unfortunately lost, but if we can trust stray hints on the subject, his definition of comedy
(which applied mainly to Menander) ran parallel to that of tragedy, and described the art as a
purification of certain affections of our nature, not by terror and pity, but by laughter and
ridicule. [Rev. J.P. Mahaffy, A History of Classical Greek Literature, London, 1895]    The
classical sense of the word, then, was amusing play or performance, which is similar to the modern
one, but in the Middle Ages the word came to mean poems and stories generally (albeit ones with
happy endings), and the earliest English sense is narrative poem (such as Dante's Commedia).
Generalized sense of quality of being amusing dates from 1877.   Comedy aims at entertaining by the
fidelity with which it presents life as we know it, farce at raising laughter by the outrageous
absurdity of the situation or characters exhibited, &amp; burlesque at tickling the fancy of the
audience by caricaturing plays or actors with whose style it is familiar. [Fowler]


vaudeville (n.)

1735, a country song, especially one for the stage, from French vaudeville (16c.), alteration (by
influence of ville town) of Middle French vaudevire, said to be from (chanson du) Vau de Vire (song
of the) valley of Vire, in the Calvados region of Normandy, first applied to the popular satirical
songs of Olivier Basselin, a 15c. poet who lived in Vire. The alternative explanation is that
vaudevire derives from Middle French dialectal vauder to go + virer to turn. From the popularity of
the songs in France grew a form of theatrical entertainment based on parodies of popular opera and
drama, interspersed with songs.    The Th&#233;atre du Vaudeville is rich in parodies, which follow
rapidly upon every new piece given at the Opera, or at the Th&#233;atre Fran&ccedil;ais. Their
parody upon Hamlet is too ludicrous for description, but irresistibly laughable; and the elegaut
light ballet of La Colombe Retrouv&#233;e [The Dove found again], I saw parodied at the Vaudeville
as La Maison Retrouv&#233;e [The House found again], with a breadth of farce quite beyond the genius
of Sadler's Wells. Some of the acting here, particularly that of the men, is exquisite; and the
orchestra like all the orchestras in Paris is full and excellent. [France in 1816, by Lady Morgan]
As a sort of popular stage variety entertainment show suitable for families, from c.1881 in U.S.,
displaced by movies after c.1914, considered dead from 1932.


