fastidious (adj.)

mid-15c., full of pride, from Latin fastidiosus disdainful, squeamish, exacting, from fastidium
loathing, squeamishness, most likely from *fastu-taidiom, a compound of fastus contempt, arrogance
and taedium aversion, disgust. Early use in English was both in passive and active senses. Meaning
squeamish, over-nice emerged in English 1610s. Related: Fastidiously; fastidiousness.


dude (n.)

1883, fastidious man, New York City slang of unknown origin; recent research suggests it is a
shortening of Yankee Doodle, based on the song's notion of foppish, over-fastidious male (compare
macaroni). The vogue word of 1883, originally used in reference to the devotees of the aesthetic
craze, later applied to city slickers, especially Easterners vacationing in the West (as in dude
ranch, first recorded 1921).    Now, tenderfoot is not to be construed as the Western equivalent of
that much evolved and more abused specimen of mankind, familiarly styled dude. For even the Montana
cowboy recognizes the latter. Not that he has ever seen the true prototype of a class that was
erstwhile so numerous among us. But he is convinced that a person caught in the act of wearing a
white linen collar, and who looks as though he might have recently shaved or washed his face, must
be a dude, true and proper. [Random Notes and Observations of a Trip through the Great Northwest,
The Medical Record, Oct. 20, 1883]    Application to any male is recorded by 1966, U.S., originally
in Black English.


pernickety (adj.)

1808 (pernicktie, in Jamieson), precise, fastidious, extended form of Scottish pernicky, of
uncertain origin, perhaps somehow from particular.


squeamish (adj.)

late 14c., variant (with -ish) of squoymous disdainful, fastidious (early 14c.), from Anglo-French
escoymous, which is of unknown origin. Related: Squeamishly; squeamishness.    He was somdel
squaymous  Of fartyng, and of speche daungerous  [Chaucer, Miller's Tale, c.1386]


morose (adj.)

1530s gloomy, from Latin morosus morose, peevish, hypercritical, fastidious, from mos (genitive
moris) habit, custom (see moral (adj.)). In English, manners by itself means (good) manners, but
here the implication in Latin is (bad) manners. Related: Morosity.


elegant (adj.)

late 15c., from Middle French &eacute;l&eacute;gant (15c.), from Latin elegantem (nominative
elegans) choice, fine, tasteful, collateral form of present participle of eligere select with care,
choose. Elegans was originally a term of reproach, dainty, fastidious; the notion of tastefully
refined emerged in classical Latin. Related: Elegantly.


choice (n.)

mid-14c., that which is choice, from choice (adj.) blended with earlier chois (n.) action of
selecting (c.1300); power of choosing (early 14c.), someone or something chosen (late 14c.), from
Old French chois one's choice; fact of having a choice (12c., Modern French choix), from verb
choisir to choose, distinguish, discern; recognize, perceive, see, from a Germanic source related to
Old English ceosan to choose, taste, try; see choose. Late Old English chis fastidious, choosy, from
or related to ceosan, probably also contributed to the development of choice.   Replaced Old English
cyre choice, free will, from the same base, probably because the imported word was closer to choose
[see note in OED].


nice (adj.)

late 13c., foolish, stupid, senseless, from Old French nice (12c.) careless, clumsy; weak; poor,
needy; simple, stupid, silly, foolish, from Latin nescius ignorant, unaware, literally not-knowing,
from ne- not (see un-) + stem of scire to know (see science). The sense development has been
extraordinary, even for an adj. [Weekley] -- from timid (pre-1300); to fussy, fastidious (late
14c.); to dainty, delicate (c.1400); to precise, careful (1500s, preserved in such terms as a nice
distinction and nice and early); to agreeable, delightful (1769); to kind, thoughtful (1830).    In
many examples from the 16th and 17th centuries it is difficult to say in what particular sense the
writer intended it to be taken. [OED]    By 1926, it was pronounced too great a favorite with the
ladies, who have charmed out of it all its individuality and converted it into a mere diffuser of
vague and mild agreeableness. [Fowler]I am sure, cried Catherine, I did not mean to say anything
wrong; but it is a nice book, and why should I not call it so?  Very true, said Henry, and this is a
very nice day, and we are taking a very nice walk; and you are two very nice young ladies. Oh! It is
a very nice word indeed! It does for everything. [Jane Austen, Northanger Abbey, 1803]


belly (n.)

Old English belg, bylg (West Saxon), b&aelig;lg (Anglian) leather bag, purse, bellows, from Proto-
Germanic *balgiz bag (cognates: Old Norse belgr bag, bellows, bylgja billow, Gothic balgs wineskin),
from PIE *bholgh-, from root *bhelgh- to swell, an extension of *bhel- (2) to blow, swell (see
bole). Meaning shifted to body (late 13c.), then focused to abdomen (mid-14c.). Meaning bulging part
or concave surface of anything is 1590s. The West Germanic root had a figurative or extended sense
of anger, arrogance (as in Old English bolgenmod enraged; belgan (v.) to become angry).    Indo-
European languages commonly use the same word for both the external belly and the internal (stomach,
womb, etc.), but the distinction of external and internal is somewhat present in English
belly/stomach; Greek gastr- (see gastric) in classical language denoted the paunch or belly, while
modern science uses it only in reference to the stomach as an organ. Fastidious avoidance of belly
in speech and writing (compensated for by stretching the senses of imported stomach and abdomen,
baby-talk tummy and misappropriated midriff) began late 18c. and the word was banished from Bibles
in many early 19c. editions. Belly punch (n.) is attested from 1811.


