fawn (v.)

Old English f&aelig;gnian rejoice, be glad, exult, from f&aelig;gen glad (see fain); used in Middle
English to refer to expressions of delight, especially a dog wagging its tail (early 13c.), hence
court favor, grovel, act slavishly (early 14c.). Related: Fawned; fawning.


fawn (n.)

young deer, mid-14c., from Anglo-French (late 13c.), Old French faon, feon young animal (12c.), from
Vulgar Latin *fetonem (nominative *feto), from Latin fetus an offspring (see fetus). Still used of
the young of any animal in King James I's private translation of the Psalms, but mainly of deer from
15c. Color use is 1881.


Ossianic (adj.)

1808, in reference to Oisin, name of a legendary Gaelic bard, literally little fawn; James
Macpherson claimed to have collected and translated his works (1760-1763) under the name Ossian, and
the poetic prose sparked a Celtic revival and fascination with the glamor of the lost world of the
bards. The work turned out to be Macpherson's forgery, and the style later was regarded as
bombastic, but the resulting swerve in European literature was real.


Fauvist (n.)

movement in painting associated with Henri Matisse, 1915, from French fauve, wild beast (12c., in
Old French fawn-colored horse, dark-colored thing, dull, from Frankish *falw-, from the Germanic
root of fallow (adj.)). Coined by French art critic Louis Vauxcelles at Autumn Salon of 1905. It was
a reaction against impressionism, featuring vivid use of colors. Related: Fauvism.


wheedle (v.)

to influence by flattery, 1660s, of uncertain origin, perhaps connected with Old English
w&aelig;dlian to beg, from w&aelig;dl poverty [OED], or borrowed by English soldiers in the 17c.
German wars from German wedeln wag the tail, hence fawn, flatter (compare adulation). Related:
Wheedled; wheedling.


hellebore (n.)

late 14c., from Old French ellebore, from Latin elleborus, from Greek helleboros, perhaps meaning
plant eaten by fawns, from Greek ellos/hellos fawn + bora food of beasts, from bibroskein to eat,
from PIE root *gwere- (4) to swallow (see voracity). Among the ancients, the name given to various
plants of both poisonous and medicinal qualities, reputed to cure madness.


smile (v.)

c.1300, perhaps from Middle Low German *smilen or a Scandinavian source (such as Danish smile smile,
Swedish smila smile, smirk, simper, fawn), from Proto-Germanic *smil-, extended form of PIE root
*smei- to laugh, smile (cognates: Old English smerian to laugh at, scorn, Old High German smieron to
smile, Latin mirus wonderful, mirari to wonder). Related: Smiled; smiling.     Gradually pushed the
usual Old English word, smearcian (modern smirk), into a specific, unpleasant sense. Of the eyes,
from 1759. Figuratively, as indicating favor or encouragement, from c.1400. Romance, Celtic, and
Slavic languages tend to use a diminutive of the word for laugh to mean smile (such as Latin ridere
laugh; subridere smile), perhaps literally small laugh or low laugh.


