adulation (n.)

late 14c., insincere praise, from Old French adulacion, from Latin adulationem (nominative adulatio)
a fawning; flattery, cringing courtesy, noun of action from past participle stem of aduliari to
flatter, from ad- to (see ad-) + ulos tail, from PIE *ul- the tail (cognates: Sanskrit valah tail,
Lithuanian valai horsehair of the tail). The original notion is to wag the tail like a fawning dog
(compare Greek sainein to wag the tail, also to flatter; see also wheedle).


sleek (adj.)

1580s, variant of Middle English slike (see slick (adj.)). Originally of healthy-looking animal
hair; applied to persons 1630s, with sense of plump and smooth-skinned. Figurative meaning slick,
fawning, flattering is from 1590s.


toady (n.)

servile parasite, 1826, apparently shortened from toad-eater fawning flatterer (1742), originally
(1620s) the assistant of a charlatan, who ate a toad (believed to be poisonous) to enable his master
to display his skill in expelling the poison. The verb is recorded from 1827. Related: Toadied;
toadying.


fawn (v.)

Old English f&aelig;gnian rejoice, be glad, exult, from f&aelig;gen glad (see fain); used in Middle
English to refer to expressions of delight, especially a dog wagging its tail (early 13c.), hence
court favor, grovel, act slavishly (early 14c.). Related: Fawned; fawning.


obsequious (adj.)

late 15c., prompt to serve, from Middle French obs&#233;quieux (15c.), from Latin obsequiosus
compliant, obedient, from obsequium compliance, dutiful service, from obsequi to accommodate oneself
to the will of another, from ob after (see ob-) + sequi to follow (see sequel). Pejorative sense of
fawning, sycophantic had emerged by 1590s. Related: Obsequiously; obsequiousness (mid-15c.).


servile (adj.)

late 14c., from Latin servilis of a slave (as in Servile Wars, name given to the slave revolts in
the late Roman Republic), also slavish, servile, from servus slave (see serve (v.)). Earliest sense
was legal, servile work being forbidden on the Sabbath; sense of cringing, fawning first recorded
c.1600.


