feature (v.)

1755, to resemble, from feature (n.). The sense of make special display or attraction of is 1888;
entertainment sense from 1897. Related: Featured; featuring.


feature (n.)

early 14c., make, form, fashion, from Anglo-French feture, from Old French faiture deed, action;
fashion, shape, form; countenance, from Latin factura a formation, a working, from past participle
stem of facere make, do, perform (see factitious). Sense of facial characteristic is mid-14c.; that
of any distinctive part first recorded 1690s. Entertainment sense is from 1801; in journalism by
1855. Meaning a feature film is from 1913.


features (n.)

parts of the visible body (especially the face), c.1300, from feature (n.).


trait (n.)

late 15c., shot, missiles; later a stroke in drawing, a short line (1580s), from Middle French trait
line, stroke, feature, tract, from Latin tractus drawing, drawing out, dragging, pulling, later line
drawn, feature, from past participle stem of trahere to pull, draw (see tract (n.1)). Sense of
particular feature, distinguishing quality in English is first recorded 1752.


carpaccio (n.)

raw meat or fish served as an appetizer, late 20c., from Italian, often connected to the name of
Renaissance painter Vittore Carpaccio (c.1460-1526) but without any plausible explanation except
perhaps that his pictures often feature an orange-red hue reminiscent of some raw meat.


motif (n.)

theme, predominant feature, 1848, from French motif dominant idea, theme (see motive).


poster (n.)

bill, placard, thing posted, 1838, from post (v.1). Poster boy/girl/child someone given prominence
in certain causes is attested by 1990, in reference to fund-raising drives for charities associated
with disability, featuring child sufferers, a feature since 1930s.


B movie (n.)

by 1939, usually said to be so called from being the second, or supporting, film in a double
feature. Some film industry sources say it was so called for being the second of the two films major
studios generally made in a year, and the one cast with less headline talent and released with less
promotion. And early usage varies with grade-B movie, suggesting a perceived association with
quality.


upskirt (adj.)

by 1997, from up (adv.) + skirt (n.). As a verb by 2008.    Upskirt videos, usually taken using low-
hanging bags, feature up-close-and-personal crotch shots of leggy, panty-clad young women. [Weekly
World News, Sept. 29, 1998]


Creek

Indian tribe or confederation, 1725, named for creek, the geographical feature, and abbreviated from
Ochese Creek Indians, from the place in Georgia where English first encountered them. Native name is
Muskogee, a word of uncertain origin.


highlight (n.)

1650s, originally of paintings, the brightest part of a subject, from high (adj.) + light (n.). The
figurative sense of outstanding feature or characteristic is from 1855. The verb is from 1861.
Hairdressing sense is 1941 (n.), 1942 (v.). Related: Highlighted; highlighting.


pothole (n.)

also pot-hole, 1826, originally a geological feature in glaciers and gravel beds, from Middle
English pot a deep hole for a mine, or from peat-digging (late 14c.), now generally obsolete, but
preserved in Scotland and northern England dialect; perhaps ultimately related to pot (n.1) on
notion of deep, cylindrical shape. Applied to a hole in a road from 1909.


abnormality (n.)

quality of being abnormal, 1854; abnormal feature or quality, 1859, from abnormal + -ity. Earlier as
abnormity (1731).


backspace (adj.)

also back-space, 1899, in reference to keyboarding, from back (adv.) + space.    We have had the
pleasure of examining one of the 1899 model Hammond typewriters, with the new back-space key. This
new feature is certainly an improvement in the machine. [The Phonetic Journal, March 11, 1899]


pictorial (adj.)

1640s, from Latin pictorius of a painter, from pictor painter, from past participle stem of pingere
to make pictures (see paint (v.)) + -al (1). The noun meaning journal in which pictures are the main
feature is first recorded 1844. Related: Pictorially.


lineament (n.)

early 15c., distinctive feature of the body, outline, from Middle French lineament, from Latin
lineamentum contour, outline, literally a line, stroke, mark, from lineare to reduce to a straight
line, from linea (see line (n.)). Figurative sense of a characteristic is attested from 1630s.


basin (n.)

large shallow vessel or dish, c.1200, from Old French bacin (11c., Modern French bassin), from
Vulgar Latin *baccinum, from *bacca water vessel, perhaps originally Gaulish. Meaning large-scale
artificial water-holding landscape feature is from 1712. Geological sense of tract of country
drained by one river or draining into one sea is from 1830.


cavern (n.)

late 14c., from Old French caverne (12c.) cave, vault, cellar, from Late Latin caverna cave, from
Latin cavus hollow (see cave (n.)). In Old English such a land feature might be called an
eor&eth;scr&aelig;f.


narthex (n.)

porch at the west end of early churches (used by penitents not admitted to the body of the church),
1670s, from Late Greek narthex, in classical Greek giant fennel, of unknown origin. The
architectural feature allegedly so called from fancied resemblance of porch to a hollow stem. The
word also was used in Greek to mean a small case for unguents, etc. According to Hesiod (Theogeny),
Prometheus conveyed fire from Heaven to Earth in hollow fennel stalks. Related: Narthecal.


almanac (n.)

late 14c., attested in Anglo-Latin from mid-13c., via Old French almanach or Medieval Latin
almanachus, of uncertain origin. It is sometimes said to be from a Spanish-Arabic al-manakh
calendar, almanac, but possibly ultimately from Late Greek almenichiakon calendar, which is said to
be of Coptic origin.    This word has been the subject of much speculation. Originally a book of
permanent tables of astronomical data; one-year versions, combined with ecclesiastical calendars,
date from 16c.; astrological and weather predictions appear in 16-17th c.; the 'useful statistics'
are a modern feature [OED].


respect (n.)

late 14c., relationship, relation; regard, consideration, from Old French respect and directly from
Latin respectus regard, a looking at, literally act of looking back (or often) at one, noun use of
past participle of respicere look back at, regard, consider, from re- back (see re-) + specere look
at (see scope (n.1)). Meanings feeling of esteem excited by actions or attributes of someone or
something; courteous or considerate treatment due to personal worth or power are from 1580s, as is
sense of point, particular feature.


dome (n.)

round, vaulted roof, 1650s, from French dome (16c.), from Proven&ccedil;al doma, from Greek doma
house, housetop (especially a style of roof from the east), related to domos house (see domestic).
In the Middle Ages, German dom and Italian duomo were used for cathedral (on the notion of God's
house), so English began to use this word in the sense cupola, an architectural feature
characteristic of Italian cathedrals. Used in U.S. also with reference to round summits of
mountains.


couch (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French couche (12c.) a bed, lair, from coucher to lie down, from Latin collocare
(see couch (v.)). Traditionally, a couch has the head end only raised, and only half a back; a sofa
has both ends raised and a full back; a settee is like a sofa but may be without arms; an ottoman
has neither back nor arms, nor has a divan, the distinctive feature of which is that it goes against
a wall. Couch potato first recorded 1979.


attic (n.)

top story under the roof of a house, 1855, shortened from attic storey (1724). The term Attic order
in classical architecture meant a small, square decorative column of the type often used in a low
story above a building's main facade, a feature associated with the region around Athens (see
Attic). The word then was applied by architects to a low decorative facade above the main story of a
building (1690s in English) to convey a classical heritage where none exists, and it came to mean
the space enclosed by such a structure. The modern use is via French attique. An attic is upright, a
garret is in a sloping roof [Weekley].


farce (n.)

late 14c., force-meat, stuffing; 1520s, as a type of dramatic work, from Middle French farce comic
interlude in a mystery play (16c.), literally stuffing, from Old French farcir to stuff, (13c.),
from Latin farcire to stuff, cram, of unknown origin, perhaps related to frequens crowded.    The
pseudo-Latin farsia was applied 13c. in France and England to praise phrases inserted into
liturgical formulae (for example between kyrie and eleison), then in Old French farce was extended
to the impromptu buffoonery among actors that was a feature of religious stage plays.


viaduct (n.)

1816, from Latin via road (see via) + -duct as in  aqueduct. French viaduc is a 19c. English loan-
word.    An extensive bridge consisting, strictly of a series of arches of masonry, erected for the
purpose of conducting a road or a railway a valley or a district of low level, or over existing
channels of communication, where an embankment would be impracticable or inexpedient; more widely,
any elevated roadway which artificial constructions of timber, iron, bricks, or stonework are
established. [Century Dictionary]     But the word apparently was coined by English landscape
gardener Humphry Repton (1752-1818) for an architectural feature, a form of bridge adapted to the
purposes of passing over, which may unite strength with grace, or use with beauty ....


cherub (n.)

late 14c. as an order of angels, from Late Latin cherub, from Greek cheroub, from Hebrew kerubh
(plural kerubhim) winged angel, perhaps related to Akkadian karubu to bless, karibu one who blesses,
an epithet of the bull-colossus. Old English had cerubin, from the Greek plural.    The cherubim, a
common feature of ancient Near Eastern mythology, are not to be confused with the round-cheeked
darlings of Renaissance iconography. The root of the terms either means hybrid or, by an inversion
of consonants, mount, steed, and they are winged beasts, probably of awesome aspect, on which the
sky god of the old Canaanite myths and of the poetry of Psalms goes riding through the air. [Robert
Alter, The Five Books of Moses, 2004, commentary on Gen. iii:24]


fascist (adj.)

1921, (as a noun 1922), from Italian partito nazionale fascista, the anti-communist political
movement organized 1919 under Benito Mussolini (1883-1945); from Italian fascio group, association,
literally bundle (see fasces).    With fascism, originally used in English in its Italian form, as
an Italian word. [Fowler: Whether this full anglicization of the words is worth while cannot be
decided till we know whether the things are to be temporary or permanent in England -- probably an
addition to the 1930 reprint, retained in 1944 U.S. edition.] Fasci groups of men organized for
political purposes had been a feature of Sicily since c.1895, and the 20c. totalitatrian sense
probably came directly from this, but influenced by the Roman fasces, which became the party symbol.
Related: Fascistic.


tan (v.)

late Old English tannian to convert hide into leather (by steeping it in tannin), from Medieval
Latin tannare tan, dye a tawny color (c.900), from tannum crushed oak bark, used in tanning leather,
probably from a Celtic source (such as Breton tann oak tree). The meaning make brown by exposure to
the sun (as tanning does to hides) first recorded 1520s; intransitive sense also from 1520s. Of
persons, not considered an attractive feature until 20c.; in Shakespeare, to deprive of the
freshness and beauty of youth (Sonnet CXV). As an adjective from 1620s. To tan (someone's) hide in
the figurative sense is from 1660s. Related: Tanned; tanning. German Tanne fir tree (as in
Tannenbaum) might be a transferred meaning from the same Celtic source.


nineties (n.)

1857 as the years of someone's life between 90 and 99; from 1848 as the tenth decade of years in a
given century; 1849 with reference to Fahrenheit temperature. See ninety.    Many still live who
remember those days; if the old men cannot tell you the exact date, they will say: 'It were in the
nineties;' (etc.) [Chambers's Journal, Nov. 1, 1856]    In Britain, the naughty nineties was a
popular name 1920s-30s for the 1890s, based on the notion of a relaxing of morality and mood in
contrast to earlier Victorian times. In U.S., gay nineties in reference to the same decade is
attested from 1927, and was the title of a regular nostalgia feature in Life magazine about that
time.    The long, dreary blue-law Sunday afternoons were periods of the Nineties which no amount of
rosy retrospect will ever be able to recall as gay, especially to a normal healthy boy to whom all
activities were taboo except G. A. Henty and the bound volumes of Leslie's Weekly of the Civil War.
[Life, Sept. 1, 1927]


aphasia (n.)

loss of ability to speak, especially as result of brain injury or disorder, 1867, from Modern Latin
aphasia, from Greek aphasia speechlessness, from a- without (see a- (3)) + phasis utterance, from
phanai to speak, related to pheme voice, report, rumor (see fame (n.)).    APHASIA is the term which
has recently been given to the loss of the faculty of articulate language, the organs of phonation
and of articulation, as well as the intelligence, being unimpaired. The pathology of this affection
is at the present time the subject of much discussion in the scientific world; the French Academy
devoted several of their s&#233;ances during the year 1865 to its special elucidation, and the
Medical Journals of France and of our own country have lately contained a good deal of original
matter bearing upon this obscure feature in cerebral pathology. [Frederic Bateman, M.D., Aphasia,
London, 1868]


fashion (n.)

c.1300, shape, manner, mode, from Old French fa&ccedil;on (12c.) face, appearance; construction,
pattern, design; thing done; beauty; manner, characteristic feature, from Latin factionem
(nominative factio) group of people acting together, literally a making or doing, from facere to
make (see factitious).    Sense of prevailing custom is from late 15c.; that of style of attire is
from 1520s.  To call a fashion wearable is the kiss of death. No new fashion worth its salt is
wearable. [Eugenia Sheppard, New York Herald Tribune, Jan. 13, 1960] Fashion plate (1851) originally
was full-page picture in a popular magazine showing the prevailing or latest style of dress, in
reference to the typographic plate from which it was printed. Transfered sense of well-dressed
person had emerged by 1920s.


hear (v.)

Old English heran (Anglian), (ge)hieran, hyran (West Saxon) to hear, listen (to), obey, follow;
accede to, grant; judge, from Proto-Germanic *hauzjan (cognates: Old Norse heyra, Old Frisian hora,
Dutch horen, German h&ouml;ren, Gothic hausjan), perhaps from PIE *kous- to hear (see acoustic). The
shift from *-z- to -r- is a regular feature in some Germanic languages.    For spelling, see head
(n.); spelling distinction between hear and here developed 1200-1550. Old English also had the
excellent adjective hiersum ready to hear, obedient, literally hear-some with suffix from handsome,
etc. Hear, hear! (1680s) was originally imperative, used as an exclamation to call attention to a
speaker's words; now a general cheer of approval. Originally it was hear him!


diversity (n.)

mid-14c., quality of being diverse, mostly in a neutral sense, from Old French diversit&eacute;
(12c.) difference, diversity, unique feature, oddness: also wickedness, perversity, from Latin
diversitatem (nominative diversitas) contrariety, contradiction, disagreement; also, as a secondary
sense, difference, diversity, from diversus turned different ways (in Late Latin various), past
participle of divertere (see divert).    Negative meaning, being contrary to what is agreeable or
right; perversity, evil existed in English from late 15c. but was obsolete from 17c. Diversity as a
virtue in a nation is an idea from the rise of modern democracies in the 1790s, where it kept one
faction from arrogating all power (but this was not quite the modern sense, as ethnicity, gender,
sexual identity, etc. were not the qualities in mind):    The dissimilarity in the ingredients which
will compose the national government, and still more in the manner in which they will be brought
into action in its various branches, must form a powerful obstacle to a concert of views in any
partial scheme of elections. There is sufficient diversity in the state of property, in the genius,
manners, and habits of the people of the different parts of the Union, to occasion a material
diversity of disposition in their representatives towards the different ranks and conditions in
society. [Federalist #60, Feb. 26, 1788 (Hamilton)]    Specific focus (in a positive sense) on race,
gender, etc. is from 1992.


katzenjammer (n.)

1849, a hangover, American English colloquial, from German katzen, comb. form of katze cat (see cat
(n.)) + jammer distress, wailing (see yammer). Hence, any unpleasant reaction (1897).    Pleasure
can intoxicate, passion can inebriate, success can make you quite as drunk as champagne. The waking
from these several stages of delights will bring the same result--Katzenjammer. In English you would
call it reaction; but whole pages of English cannot express the sick, empty, weary, vacant feeling
which is so concisely contained within these four German syllables. [Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine,
August 1884]   Katzenjammer Kids spectacularly naughty children is from title of comic strip first
drawn by German-born U.S. comic strip artist Rudolph Dirks (1877-1968) in 1897 for the New York
Journal. It was temporarily de-Germanized during World War I:    THE SHENANIGAN KIDS is the new
American name for the original Katzenjammer Kids. Although the original name and idea were pure
Holland Dutch, some people may have had the mistaken impression that they were of Germanic origin,
and hence the change. It is the same splendid comic as in the past. [International Feature Service
advertisement in Editor &amp; Publisher, July 6, 1918]


character (n.)

mid-14c., carecter, symbol marked or branded on the body; mid-15c., symbol or drawing used in
sorcery, from Old French caratere feature, character (13c., Modern French caract&egrave;re), from
Latin character, from Greek kharakter engraved mark, also symbol or imprint on the soul, also
instrument for marking, from kharassein to engrave, from kharax pointed stake, from PIE root *gher-
(4) to scrape, scratch. Meaning extended in ancient times by metaphor to a defining quality.You
remember Eponina, who kept her husband alive in an underground cavern so devotedly and heroically?
The force of character she showed in keeping up his spirits would have been used to hide a lover
from her husband if they had been living quietly in Rome. Strong characters need strong nourishment.
[Stendhal de l'Amour, 1822]Meaning sum of qualities that define a person is from 1640s. Sense of
person in a play or novel is first attested 1660s, in reference to the defining qualities he or she
is given by the author. Meaning a person in the abstract is from 1749; especially eccentric person
(1773). Colloquial sense of chap, fellow is from 1931. The Latin ch- spelling was restored from
1500s. Character actor attested from 1861; character assassination from 1888; character-building
(n.) from 1886.


slang (n.)

1756, special vocabulary of tramps or thieves, later jargon of a particular profession (1801), of
uncertain origin, the usual guess being that it is from a Scandinavian source, such as Norwegian
slengenamn nickname, slengja kjeften to abuse with words, literally to sling the jaw, related to Old
Norse slyngva to sling. But OED, while admitting some approximation in sense, discounts this
connection based on date and early associations. Liberman also denies it, as well as any connection
with French langue (or language or lingo). Rather, he derives it elaborately from an old slang word
meaning narrow piece of land, itself of obscure origin. Century Dictionary says there is no evidence
to establish a Gipsy origin. Sense of very informal language characterized by vividness and novelty
first recorded 1818.    [S]lang is a conscious offence against some conventional standard of
propriety. A mere vulgarism is not slang, except when it is purposely adopted, and acquires an
artificial currency, among some class of persons to whom it is not native. The other distinctive
feature of slang is that it is neither part of the ordinary language, nor an attempt to supply its
deficiencies. The slang word is a deliberate substitute for a word of the vernacular, just as the
characters of a cipher are substitutes for the letters of the alphabet, or as a nickname is a
substitute for a personal name. [Henry Bradley, from Slang, in Encyclopedia Britannica, 11th ed.]
A word that ought to have survived is slangwhanger (1807, American English) noisy or abusive talker
or writer.


club (n.)

c.1200, thick stick used as a weapon, from Old Norse klubba cudgel or a similar Scandinavian source
(compare Swedish klubba, Danish klubbe), assimilated from Proto-Germanic *klumbon, related to clump
(n.). Old English words for this were sagol, cycgel. Specific sense of bat used in games is from
mid-15c.    The club suit in the deck of cards (1560s) bears the correct name (Spanish basto,
Italian bastone), but the pattern adopted on English cards is the French trefoil. Compare Danish
kl&#337;ver, Dutch klaver a club at cards, literally a clover.    The social club (1660s) apparently
evolved from this word from the verbal sense gather in a club-like mass (1620s), then, as a noun,
association of people (1640s).    We now use the word clubbe for a sodality in a tavern. [John
Aubrey, 1659]   <hr />   Admission to membership of clubs is commonly by ballot. Clubs are now an
important feature of social life in all large cities, many of them occupying large buildings
containing reading-rooms, libraries, restaurants, etc. [Century Dictionary, 1902]   <hr />   I got a
good mind to join a club and beat you over the head with it. [Rufus T. Firefly] Club sandwich
recorded by 1899, apparently as a type of sandwich served in clubs; club soda is 1877, originally a
proprietary name.


Viking (n.)

Scandinavian pirate, 1801, vikingr, in The History of the Anglo-Saxons by English historian Sharon
H. Turner (1768-1847); he suggested the second element might be connected to king:    The name by
which the pirates were at first distinguished was Vikingr, which perhaps originally meant kings of
the bays. It was in bays that they ambushed, to dart upon the passing voyager.     But this later
was dismissed as incorrect. The form viking is attested in 1820, in Jamieson's notes to The Bruce.
The word is a historians' revival; it was not used in Middle English, but it was reintroduced from
Old Norse vikingr freebooter, sea-rover, pirate, viking, which usually is explained as meaning
properly one who came from the fjords, from vik creek, inlet, small bay (cognates: Old English wic,
Middle High German wich bay, and second element in Reykjavik). But Old English wicing and Old
Frisian wizing are almost 300 years older than the earliest attestation of the Old Norse word, and
probably derive from wic village, camp (large temporary camps were a feature of the Viking raids),
related to Latin vicus village, habitation (see villa).    The connection between the Norse and Old
English words is still much debated. The period of Viking activity was roughly 8c. to 11c. In the
Anglo-Saxon Chronicle, the raiding armies generally were referred to as &thorn;a Deniscan the Danes,
while those who settled in England were identified by their place of settlement. Old Norse viking
(n.) meant freebooting voyage, piracy; one would go on a viking (fara &#237; viking).


point (n.)

c.1200, minute amount, single item in a whole; sharp end of a sword, etc., a merger of two words,
both ultimately from Latin pungere prick, pierce, puncture (see pungent). The Latin neuter past
participle punctum was used as a noun, meaning small hole made by pricking, subsequently extended to
anything that looked like one, hence, dot, particle, etc. This yielded Old French point dot;
smallest amount, which was borrowed in Middle English by c.1300.    Meanwhile the Latin fem. past
participle of pungere was puncta, which was used in Medieval Latin to mean sharp tip, and became Old
French pointe point of a weapon, vanguard of an army, which also passed into English, early 14c.
The senses have merged in English, but remain distinct in French. Extended senses are from the
notion of minute, single, or separate items in an extended whole. Meaning small mark, dot in English
is mid-14c. Meaning distinguishing feature is recorded from late 15c. Meaning a unit of score in a
game is first recorded 1746. As a typeface unit (in Britain and U.S., one twelfth of a pica), it
went into use in U.S. 1883. As a measure of weight for precious stones (one one-hundredth of a
carat) it is recorded from 1931.   The point the matter being discussed is attested from late 14c.;
meaning sense, purpose, advantage (usually in the negative, as in what's the point?) is first
recorded 1903. Point of honor (1610s) translates French point d'honneur. Point of no return (1941)
is originally aviators' term for the point in a flight before which any engine failure requires an
immediate turn around and return to the point of departure, and beyond which such return is no
longer practical.


score (n.)

late Old English scoru twenty, from Old Norse skor mark, notch, incision; a rift in rock, also, in
Icelandic, twenty, from Proto-Germanic *skura-, from PIE root *(s)ker- (1) to cut (see shear).
The connecting notion probably is counting large numbers (of sheep, etc.) with a notch in a stick
for each 20. That way of counting, called vigesimalism, also exists in French: In Old French, twenty
(vint) or a multiple of it could be used as a base, as in vint et doze (32), dous vinz et diz (50).
Vigesimalism was or is a feature of Welsh, Irish, Gaelic and Breton (as well as non-IE Basque), and
it is speculated that the English and the French picked it up from the Celts. Compare tally (n.).
The prehistoric sense of the Germanic word, then, likely was straight mark like a scratch, line
drawn by a sharp instrument, but in English this is attested only from c.1400, along with the sense
mark made (on a chalkboard, etc.) to keep count of a customer's drinks in a tavern. This sense was
extended by 1670s to mark made for purpose of recording a point in a game or match, and thus
aggregate of points made by contestants in certain games and matches (1742, originally in whist).
From the tavern-keeping sense comes the meaning amount on an innkeeper's bill (c.1600) and thus the
figurative verbal expression settle scores (1775).  Meaning printed piece of music first recorded
1701, said to be from the practice of connecting related staves by scores of lines. Especially music
composed for a film (1927). Meaning act of obtaining narcotic drugs is by 1951.   Scoreboard is from
1826;   score-keeping- from 1905; newspaper sports section score line is from 1965; baseball score-
card is from 1877.


