felicity (n.)

late 14c., from Old French felicite (14c.) happiness, from Latin felicitatem (nominative felicitas)
happiness, fertility, from felix (genitive felicis) happy, fortunate, fruitful, fertile, from Latin
root *fe-, equivalent of PIE *dhe(i)- to suck, suckle, produce, yield (see fecund).


Felix

masc. proper name, from Latin felix happy (see felicity).


Felicia

fem. proper name, from Latin felix (genitive felicis) happy (see felicity).


felicitous (adj.)

1530s (implied in felicitously), from felicity + -ous.


Arcadian

ideally rustic or rural; an idealized rustic, 1580s, from Greek Arkadia, district in the
Peloponnesus, taken by poets as an ideal region of rural felicity, traditionally from Arkas
(genitive Arkadas), son of Zeus, name of the founder and first ruler of Arcadia.


ego (n.)

1714, as a term in metaphysics, from Latin ego I (cognate with Old English ic, see I).
Psychoanalytic sense is from 1894; sense of conceit is 1891. Ego trip first recorded 1969.    In the
book of Egoism it is written, Possession without obligation to the object possessed approaches
felicity. [George Meredith, The Egoist, 1879]


infelicity (n.)

late 14c., from Latin infelicitas ill luck, misfortune, from infelix (genitive infelicis)
unfruitful, barren; unfortunate, unhappy, causing misfortune, unlucky, from in- not, opposite of
(see in- (1)) + felix (see felicity).


felicitate (v.)

1620s, to render happy; 1630s, to reckon happy; from Latin felicitatus, past participle of
felicitare to make happy, from felicitas fruitfulness, happiness, from felix (see felicity). Meaning
congratulate is from 1630s. Related: Felicitated; felicitating.


abstract (adj.)

late 14c., originally in grammar (of nouns), from Latin abstractus drawn away, past participle of
abstrahere to drag away, detach, pull away, divert; also figuratively, from ab(s)- away (see ab-) +
trahere draw (see tract (n.1)).    Meaning withdrawn or separated from material objects or practical
matters is from mid-15c. That of difficult to understand, abstruse is from c.1400. Specifically in
reference to modern art, it dates from 1914; abstract expressionism as an American-based uninhibited
approach to art exemplified by Jackson Pollock is from 1952, but the term itself had been used in
the 1920s of Kandinsky and others.    Oswald Herzog, in an article on Der Abstrakte Expressionismus
(Sturm, heft 50, 1919) gives us a statement which with equal felicity may be applied to the artistic
attitude of the Dadaists. Abstract Expressionism is perfect Expressionism, he writes. It is pure
creation. It casts spiritual processes into a corporeal mould. It does not borrow objects from the
real world; it creates its own objects .... The abstract reveals the will of the artist; it becomes
expression. ... [William A. Drake, The Life and Deeds of Dada, 1922]   <hr />   Then, that art we
have called abstract for want of any possible descriptive term, with which we have been patient,
and, even, appreciative, getting high stimulation by the new Guggenheim non-objective Art Museum, is
reflected in our examples of surrealism, dadaism, and what-not, to assert our acquaintance in every
art, fine or other. [Report of the Art Reference Department of Pratt Institute Free Library for year
ending June 30, 1937]


