felon (n.)

late 13c., from Old French felon evil-doer, scoundrel, traitor, rebel, the Devil (9c.), from
Medieval Latin fellonem (nominative fello) evil-doer, of uncertain origin, perhaps from Frankish
*fillo, *filljo person who whips or beats, scourger (source of Old High German fillen to whip); or
from Latin fel gall, poison, on the notion of one full of bitterness.    Another theory (advanced by
Professor R. Atkinson of Dublin) traces it to Latin fellare to suck (see fecund), which had an
obscene secondary meaning in classical Latin (well-known to readers of Martial and Catullus), which
would make a felon etymologically a cock-sucker. OED inclines toward the gall explanation, but finds
Atkinson's most plausible of the others.


felony (n.)

late 13c. as a term in common law, in Anglo-French, from Old French felonie (12c.) wickedness, evil,
treachery, perfidy, crime, cruelty, sin, from Gallo-Roman *fellonia, from fellonem (see felon).


hue (n.2)

a shouting, mid-13c., from Old French hue outcry, noise, war or hunting cry, probably of imitative
origin. Hue and cry is late 13c. as an Anglo-French legal term meaning outcry calling for pursuit of
a felon. Extended sense of cry of alarm is 1580s.


fell (adj.)

cruel, late 13c., from Old French fel cruel, fierce, vicious, from Medieval Latin fello villain (see
felon). Phrase at one fell swoop is from Macbeth.


enemy (n.)

early 13c., from Old French enemi (12c.), earlier inimi (9c.) enemy, adversary, foe, demon, the
Devil, from Latin inimicus hostile, unfriendly; an enemy (source of Italian nemico, Catalan enamic,
Spanish enemigo, Portuguese inimigo), from in- not (see in- (1)) + amicus friend related to amare to
love (see Amy).    Most words for personal enemy cover also enemy in war, but certain languages have
special terms for the latter, such as Greek polemioi (distinct from ekhthroi), Latin hostis,
originally stranger (distinct from inimicus), Russian neprijatel' (distinct from vrag).    Russian
vrag (Old Church Slavonic vragu) is cognate with Lithuanian vargas misery (see urge (v.)), and
probably is related to Proto-Germanic *wargoz, source of Old Norse vargr outlaw, hence wolf;
Icelandic vargur fox, Old English wearg criminal, felon; which likely were the inspirations for
J.R.R. Tolkien's warg a kind of large ferocious wolf in The Hobbit (1937) and Lord of the Rings.
Related: Enemies.


