fermentation (n.)

late 14c., in alchemy, with a broad sense; modern scientific sense is from c.1600; from Late Latin
fermentationem (nominative fermentatio), noun of action from fermentare (see ferment (v.)).
Figurative use attested from 1650s.


Dom Perignon

trademark name, 1954 (in use from 1936), from monk of that name (1638-1715), blind cellarmaster of
the monastery of Hautvilliers near Epernay, France, who was said to have discovered the advantage of
corked bottles in fermentation. Dom was a title of authority, from Latin dominus lord, master (see
domain).


butyl (n.)

hydrocarbon radical, 1868, from butyric acid, a product of fermentation found in rancid butter, from
Latin butyrum butter (see butter (n.)).


dander (n.)

1831, American English, temper, of unknown origin; perhaps originally from figurative use of West
Indies dander, dunder fermentation of sugar, from Spanish redundar to overflow, from Latin redundare
(see redundant).


butane (n.)

paraffin hydrocarbon, 1875, from butyl, hydrocarbon from butyric acid, a product of fermentation
found in rancid butter, from Latin butyrum (see butter (n.)) + chemical suffix -ane.


ferment (v.)

late 14c., from Old French fermenter (13c.) and directly from Latin fermentare to leaven, ferment,
from fermentum substance causing fermentation, leaven, from root of fervere to boil, seethe (see
brew). Figurative use from 1650s. Related: Fermented; fermenting.


tartar (n.)

bitartrate of potash (a deposit left during fermentation), late 14c., from Old French tartre, from
Medieval Latin tartarum, from late Greek tartaron tartar encrusting the sides of wine casks, perhaps
of Semitic origin, but if so the exact source has not been identified. The purified substance is
cream of tartar. Used generally in 17c. of encrustations from liquid contact; specific meaning
encrustation on teeth (calcium phosphate) is first recorded 1806.


barm (n.)

Old English beorma yeast, leaven, also head of a beer, from Proto-Germanic *bermon- (cognates: Dutch
berm, Middle Low German barm), from PIE root *bher- (4) to cook, bake (cognates: Latin fermentum
substance causing fermentation, Sanskrit bhurati moves convulsively, quivers, Middle Irish berbaim I
boil, seethe; see brew (v.)).


