ferment (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French ferment, from Latin fermentum (see ferment (v.)). Figurative sense of
anger, passion is from 1670s.


ferment (v.)

late 14c., from Old French fermenter (13c.) and directly from Latin fermentare to leaven, ferment,
from fermentum substance causing fermentation, leaven, from root of fervere to boil, seethe (see
brew). Figurative use from 1650s. Related: Fermented; fermenting.


fermentation (n.)

late 14c., in alchemy, with a broad sense; modern scientific sense is from c.1600; from Late Latin
fermentationem (nominative fermentatio), noun of action from fermentare (see ferment (v.)).
Figurative use attested from 1650s.


boil (v.)

early 13c., from Old French bolir boil, bubble up, ferment, gush (12c., Modern French bouillir),
from Latin bullire to bubble, seethe, from PIE base *beu- to swell (see bull (n.2)). The native word
is seethe. Figurative sense of to agitate the feelings is from 1640s.I am impatient, and my blood
boyls high. [Thomas Otway, Alcibiades, 1675]  Related: Boiled; boiling. Boiling point is recorded
from 1773.


yeast (n.)

Old English gist yeast, froth, from Proto-Germanic *jest- (cognates: Old Norse jastr, Swedish
j&#228;st, Middle High German gest, German Gischt foam, froth, Old High German jesan, German
g&auml;ren to ferment), from PIE root *yes- to boil, foam, froth (cognates: Sanskrit yasyati boils,
seethes, Greek zein to boil, Welsh ias seething, foaming).


cheese (n.1)

Old English cyse (West Saxon), cese (Anglian) cheese, from West Germanic *kasjus (cognates: Old
Saxon kasi, Old High German chasi, German K&auml;se, Middle Dutch case, Dutch kaas), from Latin
caseus cheese (source of Italian cacio, Spanish queso, Irish caise, Welsh caws).    Of unknown
origin; perhaps from a PIE root *kwat- to ferment, become sour (cognates: Prakrit chasi buttermilk;
Old Church Slavonic kvasu leaven; fermented drink, kyselu sour, -kyseti to turn sour; Czech kysati
to turn sour, rot; Sanskrit kvathati boils, seethes; Gothic hwa&thorn;jan foam). Also compare
fromage. Old Norse ostr, Danish ost, Swedish ost are related to Latin ius broth, sauce, juice.
Earliest references would be to compressed curds of milk used as food; pressed or molded cheeses
with rinds are 14c. Transferred to other cheese-like substances by 1530s. As a photographer's word
to make subjects hold a smile, it is attested from 1930, but in a reminiscence of schoolboy days,
which suggests an earlier use. Probably for the forced smile involved in making the -ee- sound.
Green cheese is that newly made; the notion that the moon is made of green cheese as a type of a
ridiculous assertion is from 1520s. To make cheeses was a schoolgirls' amusement (1835) of wheeling
rapidly so one's petticoats blew out in a circle then dropping down so they came to rest inflated
and resembling a wheel of cheese; hence, used figuratively for a deep curtsey.


