ferocious (adj.)

1640s, from Latin ferocis, oblique case of ferox fierce, wild-looking (see ferocity). Related:
Ferociously; ferociousness.


roc (n.)

large, ferocious bird of fable, 1570s, from Arabic rukhkh, from Persian rukh. Mentioned in Marco
Polo's account of Madagascar, modern use is mostly from Arabian Nights. Hence roc's egg something
marvelous or prodigious.


savage (adj.)

mid-13c., fierce, ferocious; c.1300, wild, undomesticated, untamed (of animals and places), from Old
French sauvage, salvage wild, savage, untamed, strange, pagan, from Late Latin salvaticus,
alteration of silvaticus wild, literally of the woods, from silva forest, grove (see sylvan). Of
persons, the meaning reckless, ungovernable is attested from c.1400, earlier in sense indomitable,
valiant (c.1300).


bait (v.1)

to torment or goad (someone unable to escape, and to take pleasure in it), c.1300, beyten, a
figurative use from the literal sense of to set dogs on, from the medieval entertainment of setting
dogs on some ferocious animal to bite and worry it (the literal use is attested from c.1300); from
Old Norse beita to cause to bite, from Proto-Germanic *baitan (cognates: Old English b&aelig;tan to
cause to bite, Old High German beizzen to bait, Middle High German beiz hunting, German beizen to
hawk, to cauterize, etch), causative of *bitan (see bite (v.)); the causative word forked into the
two meanings of harass and food offered. Related: Baited; baiting.


fierce (adj.)

mid-13c., proud, noble, bold, from Old French fers, nominative form of fer, fier strong,
overwhelming, violent, fierce, wild; proud, mighty, great, impressive (Modern French fier proud,
haughty), from Latin ferus wild, untamed, from PIE root *ghwer- wild, wild animal (cognates: Greek
ther, Old Church Slavonic zveri, Lithuanian zveris wild beast).    Original English sense of brave,
proud died out 16c., but caused the word at first to be commonly used as an epithet, which accounts
for the rare instance of a French word entering English in the nominative case. Meaning ferocious,
wild, savage is from c.1300. Related: Fiercely; fierceness.


enemy (n.)

early 13c., from Old French enemi (12c.), earlier inimi (9c.) enemy, adversary, foe, demon, the
Devil, from Latin inimicus hostile, unfriendly; an enemy (source of Italian nemico, Catalan enamic,
Spanish enemigo, Portuguese inimigo), from in- not (see in- (1)) + amicus friend related to amare to
love (see Amy).    Most words for personal enemy cover also enemy in war, but certain languages have
special terms for the latter, such as Greek polemioi (distinct from ekhthroi), Latin hostis,
originally stranger (distinct from inimicus), Russian neprijatel' (distinct from vrag).    Russian
vrag (Old Church Slavonic vragu) is cognate with Lithuanian vargas misery (see urge (v.)), and
probably is related to Proto-Germanic *wargoz, source of Old Norse vargr outlaw, hence wolf;
Icelandic vargur fox, Old English wearg criminal, felon; which likely were the inspirations for
J.R.R. Tolkien's warg a kind of large ferocious wolf in The Hobbit (1937) and Lord of the Rings.
Related: Enemies.


