fertile (adj.)

mid-15c., from Middle French fertil and directly from Latin fertilis bearing in abundance, fruitful,
productive, from ferre to bear (see infer). Fertile Crescent (1914) was coined by U.S. archaeologist
James H. Breasted (1865-1935).


fertilize (v.)

1640s, make fertile; see fertile + -ize. Its biological sense of unite with an egg cell is first
recorded 1859. Related: Fertilized; fertilizing.


Goshen

from the Bible, fertile land settled by the Israelites in Egypt; light shone there during the plague
of darkness [Gen. xxxxv:10]. The name is of unknown origin.


Goa

former Portuguese colony in India, from local goe mat fertile land.


teeming (adj.)

swarming, 1715, earlier abundantly productive, fertile (1590s), present participle adjective from
teem (v.1).


Sharon

fem. proper name; from the name of the fertile coastal plain between Jaffa and Mount Carmel, from
Hebrew, short for yesharon, properly the Plain, from stem of yashar was straight, was even (compare
Hebrew mishor level land, plain). A top-10 list name for girls born in the U.S. between 1943 and
1949.


shifty (adj.)

1560s, able to manage for oneself, fertile in expedients, from shift (n.1) in secondary sense of
dodge, trick, artifice + -y (2). Meaning habitually using dishonest methods, characterized by
trickery first recorded 1837. In a sense prone to shifting, of the wind, used from 1884. Related:
Shiftily; shiftiness.


Carmel

mountain in northern Israel, from Latin Carmel, from Greek Karmel, from Hebrew karmel garden,
fertile field.


fertility (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French fertilit&eacute;, from Latin fertilitatem (nominative fertilitas)
fruitfulness, fertility, from fertilis (see fertile).


plenteous (adj.)

c.1300, plentivous, from Old French plentiveus fertile, rich (early 13c.), from plentif abundant,
from plentee abundance (see plenty). Related: Plentifully; plentifulness.


loam (n.)

Old English lam clay, mud, mire, earth, from Proto-Germanic *laimaz (cognates: Old Saxon lemo, Dutch
leem, German Lehm loam), from PIE root *(s)lei- slimy (see slime (n.)). As a type of highly fertile
clayey soil, it is attested from 1660s. As a verb from c.1600.


piedmont (n.)

name given to the fertile upland region along the eastern slope of the Appalachians, 1755,
originally piemont, from Italian Piemonte, literally mountain foot, name of the region at the foot
of the Alps in northern Italy (see Piedmont). With -d- added by 1855. Applied to similar features of
other mountain ranges by 1860.


Yale

university in New Haven, Connecticut, U.S., founded 1701 as Collegiate School, renamed 1718 in honor
of a gift from British merchant-philanthropist Elihu Yale (1649-1721). As a kind of lock,  1854,
invented by U.S. mechanic Linus Yale Jr. (1821-1868). The surname is Welsh, from ial, and means
dweller at the fertile upland. Related: Yalie.


felicity (n.)

late 14c., from Old French felicite (14c.) happiness, from Latin felicitatem (nominative felicitas)
happiness, fertility, from felix (genitive felicis) happy, fortunate, fruitful, fertile, from Latin
root *fe-, equivalent of PIE *dhe(i)- to suck, suckle, produce, yield (see fecund).


Acadian

1705, from Acadia, Latinized form of Acadie, French name of Nova Scotia, probably from Archadia, the
name given to the region by Verrazano in 1520s, from Greek Arkadia, emblematic in pastoral poetry of
a place of rural peace (see Arcadian); the name may have been suggested to Europeans by the native
Micmac (Algonquian) word akadie fertile land. The Acadians, expelled by the English in 1755, settled
in large numbers in Louisiana (see Cajun, which is a corruption of Acadian).


infertile (adj.)

1590s, from French infertile (late 15c.), from Late Latin infertilis unfruitful, from in- not,
opposite of (see in- (1)) + fertilis (see fertile).


cultural (adj.)

1868, in reference to the raising of plants or animals, from Latin cultura tillage (see culture) +
-al (1). In reference to the cultivation of the mind, from 1875; hence, relating to civilization or
a civilization. A fertile starter-word among anthropologists and sociologists, for example cultural
diffusion, in use by 1912; cultural diversity by 1935; cultural imperialism by 1937; cultural
pluralism by 1932; cultural relativism by 1948.


moor (n.)

waste ground, Old English mor morass, swamp, from Proto-Germanic *mora- (cognates: Old Saxon, Middle
Dutch, Dutch meer swamp, Old High German muor swamp, also sea, German Moor moor, Old Norse m&ouml;rr
moorland, marr sea), perhaps related to mere (n.), or from root *mer- to die, hence dead land.
The basic sense in place names is 'marsh', a kind of low-lying wetland possibly regarded as less
fertile than mersc 'marsh.' The development of the senses 'dry heathland, barren upland' is not
fully accounted for but may be due to the idea of infertility. [Cambridge Dictionary of English
Place-Names]


Irish (n.)

c.1200, Irisce, from stem of Old English Iras inhabitant of Ireland, from Old Norse irar, ultimately
from Old Irish Eriu (accusative Eirinn, Erinn) Erin, which is from Old Celtic *Iveriu (accusative
*Iverionem, ablative *Iverione), perhaps from PIE *pi-wer- fertile, literally fat, from root *peie-
to be fat, swell (see fat (adj.)).    Meaning temper, passion is 1834, American English (first
attested in writings of Davy Crockett), from the legendary pugnacity of Irish people. Irish-American
is from 1832; Irish stew is attested from 1814; Irish coffee is from 1950. Wild Irish (late 14c.)
originally were those not under English rule; Black Irish in reference to those of Mediterranean
appearance is from 1888.


fecund (adj.)

early 15c., from Middle French fecond, from Latin fecundus fruitful, fertile, productive, from *fe-
kwondo-, suffixed form of Latin root *fe-, corresponding to PIE *dhe(i)- to suck, suckle, also
produce, yield (cognates: Sanskrit dhayati sucks, dhayah nourishing; Greek thele mother's breast,
nipple, thelys female, fruitful; Old Church Slavonic dojiti to suckle, dojilica nurse, deti child;
Lithuanian dele leech; Old Prussian dadan milk; Gothic daddjan to suckle; Old Swedish dia suckle;
Old High German tila female breast; Old Irish denaim I suck, dinu lamb).    Also from the same Latin
root come felare to suck; femina woman (*fe-mna-, literally she who suckles); felix happy,
auspicious, fruitful; fetus offspring, pregnancy; fenum hay (probably literally produce); and
probably filia/filius daughter/son, assimilated from *felios, originally a suckling.


rose (n.1)

Old English rose, from Latin rosa (source of Italian and Spanish rosa, French rose; also source of
Dutch roos, German Rose, Swedish ros, Polish r&oacute;&#380;a, Russian roza, Lithuanian rozhe,
Hungarian r&#243;zsa, Irish ros, Welsh rhosyn, etc.), probably via Italian and Greek dialects from
Greek rhodon rose (Aeolic wrodon), ultimately from Persian *vrda-.    But Tucker writes: The rose
was a special growth of Macedonia &amp; the Thracian region as well as of Persia, &amp; the Lat.
&amp; Gk. names prob. came from a Thraco-Phrygian source. Aramaic warda is from Old Persian; the
modern Persian cognate, via the usual sound changes, is gul, source of Turkish g&uuml;l rose. Klein
proposes a PIE *wrdho- thorn, bramble.    The form of the English word was influenced by the French.
Used as a color name since 1520s. In English civil wars of 15c., the white rose was the badge of the
House of York, the red of its rival Lancaster. In the figurative sense, bed of roses is from 1590s.
To come up roses is attested from 1969; the image, though not the wording, from 1855. To come out
smelling like a rose is from 1968. Rose of Sharon (Song of Sol. ii:1) is attested from 1610s and
named for the fertile strip of coastal Palestine. The flower has not been identified; used in U.S.
since 1847 of the Syrian hibiscus.


swan (n.)

Old English swan swan, from Proto-Germanic *swanaz singer (cognates: Old Saxon swan, Old Norse
svanr, Danish svane, Swedish svan, Middle Dutch swane, Dutch zwaan, Old High German swan, German
Schwan), probably literally the singing bird, from PIE root *swen- to sing, make sound (see sound
(n.1)); thus related to Old English geswin melody, song and swinsian to make melody.    In classical
mythology, sacred to Apollo and to Venus. The singing of swans before death was alluded to by
Chaucer (late 14c.), but swan-song (1831) is a translation of German Schwanengesang. The ancient
Indo-European mythical swan-maiden so called by mythographers from 1829. Swan dive is recorded from
1898. A black swan was proverbial for something extremely rare or non-existent (late 14c.), after
Juvenal [Sat. vi. 164], but later they turned up in Australia (Chenopsis atratus).    Do you say no
worthy wife is to be found among all these crowds? Well, let her be handsome, charming, rich and
fertile; let her have ancient ancestors ranged about her halls; let her be more chaste than all the
dishevelled Sabine maidens who stopped the war--a prodigy as rare upon the earth as a black swan!
yet who could endure a wife that possessed all perfections?  I would rather have a Venusian wench
for my wife than you, O Cornelia, mother of the Gracchi, if, with all your virtues, you bring me a
haughty brow, and reckon up Triumphs as part of your marriage portion. [Juvenal]


