fervor (n.)

mid-14c., warmth or glow of feeling, from Old French fervor (Modern French ferveur) heat,
enthusiasm, ardor, passion, from Latin fervor a boiling, violent heat; passion, ardor, fury, from
fervere to boil (see brew (v.)).


jealousy (n.)

c.1200, of God; c.1300, of persons, from Old French jalousie enthusiasm, love, longing, jealousy
(12c.), from jalos (see jealous). Meaning zeal, fervor, devotion is late 14c.


fervour (n.)

chiefly British English spelling of fervor (q.v.); for spelling, see -or.


teddy bear (n.)

1906, named for U.S. president Theodore Teddy Roosevelt (1858-1919), a noted big-game hunter, whose
conservationist fervor inspired a comic illustrated poem in the New York Times of Jan. 7, 1906,
about two bears named Teddy, whose names were transferred to two bears presented to the Bronx Zoo
that year. The name was picked up by toy dealers in 1907 for a line of Roosevelt bears imported from
Germany. Meaning big, lovable person first attested 1957, from the song popularized by Elvis
Presley.


enthusiasm (n.)

c.1600, from Middle French enthousiasme (16c.) and directly from Late Latin enthusiasmus, from Greek
enthousiasmos divine inspiration, from enthousiazein be inspired or possessed by a god, be rapt, be
in ecstasy, from entheos divinely inspired, possessed by a god, from en in (see en- (2)) + theos god
(see theo-). Acquired a derogatory sense of excessive religious emotion (1650s) under the Puritans;
generalized sense of fervor, zeal (the main modern sense) is first recorded 1716.


heat (n.)

Old English h&aelig;tu, h&aelig;to heat, warmth; fervor ardor, from Proto-Germanic *haita- heat
(cognates: Old Saxon hittia, Old Norse hiti, Old Frisian hete, German hitze heat, Gothic heito
fever), from PIE *kaid-, from root *kai- heat. The same root is the source of Old English hat hot
and h&aelig;&eth;a hot weather (see hot).    Meaning a single course in a race, especially a horse
race, is from 1660s, perhaps from earlier figurative sense of violent action; a single intense
effort (late 14c.), or meaning run given to a horse to prepare for a race (1570s). This later
expanded to division of a race or contest when there are too many contestants to run at once, the
winners of each heat then competing in a final race. Meaning sexual excitement in animals is from
1768. Meaning trouble with the police attested by 1920. Heat wave period of excessive hot weather
first attested 1890; earlier in reference to solar cycles.


Quaker (n.)

1651, said to have been applied to them in 1650 by Justice Bennett at Derby, from George Fox's
admonition to his followers to tremble at the Word of the Lord; but the word was used earlier of
foreign sects given to fits of shaking during religious fervor, and that is likely the source here.
Either way, it never was an official name of the Religious Society of Friends. The word in a literal
sense is attested from early 15c., an agent noun from quake (v.).    There is not a word in the
Scripture, to put David's condition into rime and meeter: sometimes he quaked and trembled, and lay
roaring all the day long, that he watered his bed with his tears: and how can you sing these
conditions (but dishonour the Lord) and say all your bones quake, your flesh trembled, and that you
water your bed with your tears? when you live in pride and haughtiness, and pleasure, and
wantonness; etc. [A Brief Discovery of a threefold estate of Antichrist Now Extant in the world,
etc., an early Quaker work, London, 1653]    Quaker gun (1809, American English) was a log painted
black and propped up to look from a distance like a cannon, so called for the sect's noted pacifism.
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, has been known as the Quaker City since at least 1824. Related:
Quakerish; Quakeress (a female Quaker); Quakerism.


