festive (adj.)

1650s, pertaining to a feast, from Latin festivus festive, joyous, gay, from festum festival,
holiday, noun use of neuter of adjective festus (see feast (n.)).    Meaning mirthful is attested by
1774. Unattested from 1651 to 1735; modern use may be a back-formation from festivity. Related:
Festively; festiveness.


gala (n.)

1620s, festive dress or attire, from French en gala, perhaps from Old French gale merriment, from
galer rejoice, make merry (see gallant). Klein suggests the French word is from Italian gala (as in
phrase vestito di gala robe of state), perhaps from Arabic khil'a fine garment given as a
presentation. Sense of festive occasion (characterized by display of finery) first recorded 1777.


Festus

male proper name, from Latin, literally solemn, joyous, festive (see feast (n.)).


theo-

word-forming element meaning god, gods, God, from comb. form of Greek theos god, from PIE root
*dhes-, root of words applied to various religious concepts, such as Latin feriae holidays, festus
festive, fanum temple.


festoon (n.)

1620s, from French feston (16c.), from Italian festone, literally a festive ornament, apparently
from festa celebration, feast, from Vulgar Latin *festa (see feast (n.)). The verb is attested from
1789. Related: Festooned.


genial (adj.)

1560s, pertaining to marriage, from Latin genialis pleasant, festive, literally pertaining to
marriage rites, from genius guardian spirit (see genius). Originally used in the Latin literal
sense; meaning cheerful, friendly first recorded 1746. Related: Genially.


festivity (n.)

late 14c., from Old French festivit&eacute;, from Latin festivitatem (nominative festivitas) good
fellowship, generosity, from festivus festive, from festum festival or holiday, neuter of festus of
a feast (see feast (n.)). Related: Festivities.


Thalia

fem. proper name, from Latinized form of Greek Thaleia, the joyful Muse, presiding over comedy and
idyllic poetry, literally the blooming one, fem. proper name from adjective meaning blooming,
luxuriant, bounteous, from thallein to bloom, related to thalia abundance, thallos young shoot (see
thallus). Also the name of one of the three Graces, patroness of festive meetings.


fair (n.)

early 14c., from Anglo-French feyre (late 13c.), from Old French feire, from Vulgar Latin *feria
holiday, market fair, from Latin feriae religious festivals, holidays, related to festus solemn,
festive, joyous (see feast).


fanatic (n.)

1520s, insane person, from Latin fanaticus mad, enthusiastic, inspired by a god, also furious, mad,
originally, pertaining to a temple, from fanum temple, related to festus festive (see feast).
Meaning zealous person is mid-17c. As an adjective, in English, 1530s, furious; meaning
characterized by excessive enthusiasm, especially in religion (of Nonconformists), is from 1640s.A
fanatic is someone who can't change his mind and won't change the subject. [attributed to Winston
Churchill]


jolly (adj.)

c.1300 (late 13c. as a surname), from Old French jolif festive, merry, amorous, pretty (12c.) of
uncertain origin (cognate with Italian giulivo merry, pleasant).    Perhaps a Germanic loan-word
from a source akin to Old Norse jol a winter feast (see yule), or from Latin gaudere to rejoice,
from PIE *gau- to rejoice (see joy). For loss of -f, compare tardy, hasty. Related: Jollily;
jolliness.


feast (n.)

c.1200, religious anniversary characterized by rejoicing (rather than fasting), from Old French
feste (12c., Modern French f&ecirc;te) religious festival; noise, racket, from Vulgar Latin *festa
(fem. singular; also source of Italian festa, Spanish fiesta), from Latin festa holidays, feasts,
noun use of neuter plural of festus festive, joyful, merry, related to feriae holiday and fanum
temple, from PIE *dhes- root of words in religious concepts [Watkins]. The spelling -ea- was used in
Middle English to represent the sound we mis-call long e. Meaning abundant meal (whether public or
private) is from late 14c.


yule (n.)

Old English geol, geola Christmas Day, Christmastide, from Old Norse jol (plural), a heathen feast,
later taken over by Christianity, of unknown origin.    The Old English (Anglian) cognate giuli was
the Anglo-Saxons' name for a two-month midwinter season corresponding to Roman December and January,
a time of important feasts but not itself a festival. After conversion to Christianity it narrowed
to mean the 12-day feast of the Nativity (which began Dec. 25), but was replaced by Christmas by
11c., except in the northeast (areas of Danish settlement), where it remained the usual word.
Revived 19c. by writers to mean the Christmas of 'Merrie England.'  First direct reference to the
Yule log is 17c. Old Norse jol seems to have been borrowed in Old French as jolif, hence Modern
French joli pretty, nice, originally festive (see jolly).


surprise (n.)

also formerly surprize, late 14c., unexpected attack or capture, from Old French surprise a taking
unawares (13c.), from noun use of past participle of Old French sorprendre to overtake, seize,
invade (12c.), from sur- over (see sur- (1)) + prendre to take, from Latin prendere, contracted from
prehendere to grasp, seize (see prehensile). Meaning something unexpected first recorded 1590s, that
of feeling of astonishment caused by something unexpected is c.1600. Meaning fancy dish is attested
from 1708.    A Surprize is ... a dish ... which promising little from its first appearance, when
open abounds with all sorts of variety. [W. King, Cookery, 1708]   Surprise party originally was a
stealth military detachment (1826); festive sense is attested by 1857; according to Thornton's
American Glossary, originally a gathering of members of a congregation at the house of their
preacher with the ostensible purpose of contributing provisions, &amp;c.;, for his support, and
sometimes called a donation party. Phrase taken by surprise is attested from 1690s.


