fetter (v.)

c.1300, from Old English gefetrian (see fetter (n.)). Related: Fettered; fettering.


fetter (n.)

Old English fetor chain or shackle for the feet, from Proto-Germanic *fetero (cognates: Old Saxon
feteros (plural), Middle Dutch veter fetter, in modern Dutch lace, string, Old High German fezzera,
Old Norse fi&ouml;turr, Swedish fj&auml;tter), from PIE root *ped- foot (see foot (n.)). The
generalized sense of anything that shackles had evolved in Old English. Related Fetters.


clam (n.)

bivalve mollusk, c.1500, in clam-shell, originally Scottish, apparently a particular use from Middle
English clam pincers, vice, clamp (late 14c.), from Old English clamm bond, fetter, grip, grasp,
from Proto-Germanic *klam- to press or squeeze together (cognates: Old High German klamma cramp,
fetter, constriction, German Klamm a constriction). If this is right then the original reference is
to the shell. Clam-chowder attested from 1822. To be happy as a clam is from 1833, but the earliest
uses do not elaborate on the notion behind it, unless it be self-containment.


expedite (v.)

late 15c. (implied in past participle expedit), from Latin expeditus, past participle of expedire
extricate, disengage, liberate; procure, make ready, make fit, prepare, literally free the feet from
fetters, hence liberate from difficulties, from ex- out (see ex-) + *pedis fetter, chain for the
feet, related to pes (genitive pedis) foot (see foot (n.)). Compare Greek pede fetter. Related:
Expedited; expediting.


varvel (n.)

metal ring attached to the end of a hawk's jess and connecting it to the leash, 1530s, from Old
French vervelle falcon's leg fetter (14c.), from Vulgar Latin derivation of Latin vertibulum joint.
Related: Varvels.


bend (n.2)

broad diagonal band in a coat-of-arms, etc., c.1400, from earlier sense of thin, flat strap for
wrapping round, from Old English bend fetter, shackle, chain, from PIE *bhendh- (see bend (v.)).


unfetter (v.)

mid-14c., from un- (2) opposite of + fetter (v.). The figurative sense is recorded from late 14c.
Related: Unfettered; unfettering.


manacle (v.)

c.1300, to fetter with manacles, from manacle (n.). Related: Manacled; manacling.


catenary (adj.)

1872, from Latin catenarius relating to a chain, from catenanus chained, fettered, from catena
chain, fetter, shackle (see chain (n.)). As a noun from 1788 in mathematics. Related: Catenarian.


cummerbund (n.)

1610s, from Hindi kamarband loin band, from Persian kamar waist + band something that ties, from
Avestan banda- bond, fetter, from PIE root *bhendh- to bind (see bend (v.)).


fettle (n.)

condition, state, trim, c.1750, Lancashire dialect, from fettle (v.) to make ready, arrange (14c.),
perhaps from Old English fetel a girdle, belt, from Proto-Germanic *fatilaz (cognates: German fessel
fetter, chain, Old Norse fetill strap, brace), from PIE *ped- (2) container (see vat).


brace (v.)

mid-14c., to seize, grasp, also wrap, enshroud; tie up, fetter, from Old French bracier to embrace,
from brace (see brace (n.)). Meaning to render firm or steady by tensing is mid-15c., earlier in
figurative sense strengthen or comfort (someone), early 15c., with later extension to tonics, etc.
that brace the nerves (compare bracer stiff drink). Related: Braced; bracing.


constrain (v.)

early 14c., constreyen, from stem of Old French constreindre (Modern French contraindre) restrain,
control, from Latin constringere to bind together, tie tightly, fetter, shackle, chain, from com-
together (see com-) + stringere to draw tight (see strain (v.)). Related: Constrained; constraining.


fret (n.)

ornamental interlaced pattern, late 14c., from Old French frete interlaced work, trellis work,
probably from Frankish *fetur or another Germanic source (cognates: Old English fetor, Old High
German feggara fetter) perhaps from notion of decorative anklet, or of materials bound together. The
other noun, ridge on the fingerboard of a guitar, is c.1500 of unknown origin but possibly another
sense of Old French frete.


buoy (n.)

late 13c., perhaps from either Old French buie or Middle Dutch boeye, both from West Germanic
*baukna beacon, signal (see beacon). OED, however, supports Middle Dutch boeie, or Old French boie
fetter, chain (see boy), because of its being fettered to a spot.


periwinkle (n.1)

evergreen plant, c.1500, diminutive of parvink (12c.), from Old English perwince, from Late Latin
pervinca periwinkle (4c.), from Latin, perhaps from pervincire to entwine, bind, from per-
thoroughly (see per) + vincire to bind, fetter (see wind (v.1)).


writhe (v.)

Old English wri&eth;an (transitive) to twist or bend, earlier to bind or fetter, from Proto-Germanic
*writhanan (cognates: North Frisian wrial, Old High German ridan, Old Norse ri&eth;a, Middle Swedish
vri&thorn;a, Middle Danish vride), from PIE *wreit- to turn, bend (see wreath). Intransitive, of the
body or limbs, move in a twisting or tortuous manner, from c.1300. Related: Writhed; writhing.


manacle (n.)

mid-14c., a fetter for the hand, from Old French manicle manacles, handcuffs; bracelet; armor for
the hands, from Latin manicula handle, literally little hand, diminutive of manicae long sleeves of
a tunic, gloves; armlets, gauntlets; handcuffs, manacles, from manus hand (see manual (adj.)).
Related: Manacles.    In every cry of every man,  In every infant's cry of fear,  In every voice, in
every ban,  The mind-forged manacles I hear  [Blake, Songs of Experience]


shackle (n.)

Old English sceacel shackle, fetter, probably also in a general sense a link or ring of a chain,
from Proto-Germanic *skakula- (cognates: Middle Dutch, Dutch schakel link of a chain, ring of a net,
Old Norse sk&ouml;kull pole of a carriage), of uncertain origin. According to OED, the common notion
of something to fasten or attach makes a connection with shake unlikely. Figurative use from early
13c. Related: Shackledom marriage (1771); shackle-bone the wrist (1570s).


chignon (n.)

knot or coil of hair worn at the back of the neck, from French chignon nape of the neck, from Old
French chaignon iron collar, shackles, noose (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *catenionem (nominative
*catenio), from Latin catena chain, fetter, restraint (see chain (n.)). Popular 1780s, 1870s, 1940s.
Form influenced in French by tignon coil of hair.


haft (n.)

Old English h&aelig;ft handle, related to h&aelig;ft fetter, from Proto-Germanic *haftjom (cognates:
Old Saxon haft captured; Dutch hecht, Old High German hefti, German Heft handle; German Haft
arrest), from PIE *kap- to grasp (see capable). To haven other haeftes in hand have other hafts in
hand was a 14c.-15c. way of saying have other business to attend to.


scourge (n.)

c.1200, a whip, lash, from Anglo-French escorge, back-formation from Old French escorgier to whip,
from Vulgar Latin *excorrigiare, from Latin ex- out, off (see ex-) + corrigia thong, shoelace, in
this case whip, probably from a Gaulish word related to Old Irish cuimrech fetter, from PIE root
*reig- to bind (see rig (v.)). Figurative use from late 14c. Scourge of God, title given by later
generations to Attila the Hun (406-453 C.E.), is attested from late 14c., from Latin flagellum Dei.


impeach (v.)

late 14c., to impede, hinder, prevent, from Anglo-French empecher, Old French empeechier hinder
(12c., Modern French emp&ecirc;cher), from Late Latin impedicare to fetter, catch, entangle, from
assimilated form of in- into, in (see in- (2)) + Latin pedica shackle, from pes (genitive pedis)
foot. Sense of accuse a public officer of misconduct first recorded 1560s, perhaps via confusion
with Latin impetere attack, accuse. Related: Impeached; impeaching.


pact (n.)

early 15c., from Old French pacte agreement, treaty, compact (14c.), from Latin pactum agreement,
contract, covenant, noun use of neuter past participle of pacisci to covenant, to agree, make a
treaty, from PIE root *pag- fix, join together, unite, make firm (cognates: Sanskrit pasa- cord,
rope, Avestan pas- to fetter, Greek pegnynai to fix, make firm, fast or solid, Latin pangere to fix,
to fasten, Slavonic pa&#382; wooden partition, Old English fegan to join, fon to catch seize).


tie (n.)

Old English teag, cord, band, thong, fetter, literally that with which anything is tied, from Proto-
Germanic *taugo (cognates: Old Norse taug tie, tygill string), from PIE *deuk- to pull, to lead
(cognates: Old English teon to draw, pull, drag; see duke (n.)).    Figurative sense is recorded
from 1550s.  Sense of cravat, necktie (usually a simple one knotted in front) first recorded 1761.
The railway sense of cross-beam between and beneath rails to keep them in place is from 1857,
American English. Meaning equality between competitors is first found 1670s, from notion of a
connecting link. Tie-breaker is recorded from 1938.


cleaver (n.)

late 15c., one who splits, agent noun from cleave (v.1). Originally one who splits boards with a
wedge instead of sawing; attested as part of a surname from mid-14c. Meaning butcher's chopper is
from mid-15c.    This last [Marrowbones and Cleaver] is a sign in Fetter Lane, originating from a
custom, now rapidly dying away, of the butcher boys serenading newly married couples with these
professional instruments. Formerly, the band would consist of four cleavers, each of a different
tone, or, if complete, of eight, and by beating their marrowbones skilfully against these, they
obtained a sort of music somewhat after the fashion of indifferent bell-ringing. When well
performed, however, and heard from a proper distance, it was not altogether unpleasant. ... The
butchers of Clare market had the reputation of being the best performers. ... This music was once so
common that Tom Killigrew called it the national instrument of England.  [Larwood &amp; Hotten, The
History of Signboards from the Earliest Times to the Present Day, London, 1867]


clamp (n.)

device for fastening, c.1300, probably from clamb, perhaps originally past tense of climb (v.), or
from Middle Dutch clampe (Dutch klamp), from West Germanic *klamp- clamp, cleat; cognate with Middle
Low German klampe clasp, hook, Old High German klampfer clip, clamp; also probably related to Middle
Dutch klamme a clamp, hook, grapple, Danish klamme a clamp, cramp, Old English clamm fetter; see
clam (n.).


bend (v.)

Old English bendan to bend a bow; confine with a string, fetter, causative of bindan to bind, from
Proto-Germanic base *band- string, band (cognates: Old Norse benda to join, strain, strive, bend),
from PIE root *bhendh- to bind (cognates: Gothic bindan, Old High German bintan, Sanskrit badhnati
binds, Lithuanian bendras partner; Old Persian bandaka- subject).    Modern sense (early 14c.) is
via notion of bending a bow to string it. Cognate with band, bind, and bond. Related: Bended; bent;
bending.


span (v.)

Old English spannan to join, link, clasp, fasten, bind, connect; stretch, span, from Proto-Germanic
*spannan (cognates: Old Norse spenna, Old Frisian spanna, Middle Dutch spannen, Dutch spannan
stretch, bend, hoist, hitch, Old High German spannan, German spannen to join, fasten, extend,
connect), from PIE root *(s)pen- to draw, stretch, spin (cognates: Latin pendere to hang, to cause
to hang, pondus weight (perhaps the notion is the weight of a thing measured by how much it
stretches a cord), pensare to weigh, consider; Greek ponos toil, ponein to toil; Lithuanian spendziu
lay a snare; Old Church Slavonic peti stretch, strain, pato fetter, pina I span; Old English spinnan
to spin; for other cognates, see spin (v.)).    The meaning to encircle with the hand(s) is from
1781; in the sense of to form an arch over (something) it is first recorded 1630s. Related: Spanned;
spanning.


capital (n.1)

early 15c., a capital letter, from capital (adj.). The meaning capital city is first recorded 1660s
(the Old English word was heafodstol). The financial sense is from 1610s (Middle English had chief
money principal fund, mid-14c.), from Medieval Latin capitale stock, property, noun use of neuter of
capitalis capital, chief, first. (The noun use of this adjective in classical Latin was for a
capital crime.)    [The term capital] made its first appearance in medieval Latin as an adjective
capitalis (from caput, head) modifying the word pars, to designate the principal sum of a money
loan. The principal part of a loan was contrasted with the usury--later called interest--the payment
made to the lender in addition to the return of the sum lent. This usage, unknown to classical
Latin, had become common by the thirteenth century and possibly had begun as early as 1100 A.D., in
the first chartered towns of Europe. [Frank A. Fetter, Reformulation of the Concepts of Capital and
Income in Economics and Accounting, 1937, in Capital, Interest, &amp; Rent, 1977]    Also see
cattle, and compare sense development of fee, pecuniary.


