feud (n.)

c.1300, fede enmity, hatred, hostility, northern English and Scottish; perhaps from an unrecorded
Old English word or else from Old French fede, which is from Germanic (compare Old High German
fehida contention, quarrel, feud), from Proto-Germanic *faihitho noun of state from adjective
*faiho- (cognates: Old English f&aelig;h&eth; enmity, fah hostile; German Fehde feud; Old Frisian
feithe enmity), from PIE root *peig- (2), also *peik- evil-minded, hostile (see foe). Sense of
vendetta is early 15c. Alteration of spelling in 16c. is unexplained.


feud (v.)

1670s, from feud (n.). Related: Feuded; feuding.


feudal (adj.)

1610s, from Medieval Latin feudalis, from feudum feudal estate, of Germanic origin (cognates: Gothic
faihu property, Old High German fihu cattle; see fee). Related to Middle English feodary one who
holds lands of an overlord in exchange for service (late 14c.). Not related to feud.


vendetta (n.)

a private war in which a kinsman wreaks vengeance on the slayer of a relative, 1846, from Italian
vendetta a feud, blood feud, from Latin vindicta vengeance, revenge (see vindictive). Especially
associated with Corsica.


foe (n.)

Old English gefa foe, enemy, adversary in a blood feud (the prefix denotes mutuality), from fah at
feud, hostile, from Proto-Germanic *fakhaz (cognates: Old High German fehan to hate, Gothic faih
deception), probably from PIE root *peig- (2) evil-minded, treacherous, hostile (cognates: Sanskrit
pisunah malicious, picacah demon; Greek pikros bitter; Latin piget it irks, troubles, displeases,
piger reluctant, lazy; Lithuanian piktas wicked, angry, pekti to blame). Weaker sense of adversary
is first recorded c.1600.


tweedledum (n.)

paired with tweedledee to signify two things or persons nearly alike, differing in name, 1725,
coined by English poet John Byrom (1692-1767) in his satire On the Feud Between Handel and
Bononcini, a couple of competing musicians, from tweedle to sing, to whistle (1680s), of imitative
origin. The -dum and -dee perhaps suggest low and high sounds respectively.


sin (n.)

Old English synn moral wrongdoing, injury, mischief, enmity, feud, guilt, crime, offense against
God, misdeed, from Proto-Germanic *sun(d)jo- sin (cognates: Old Saxon sundia, Old Frisian sende,
Middle Dutch sonde, Dutch zonde, German S&uuml;nde sin, transgression, trespass, offense, extended
forms), probably ultimately it is true, i.e. the sin is real (compare Gothic sonjis, Old Norse sannr
true), from PIE *snt-ya-, a collective form from *es-ont- becoming, present participle of root *es-
to be (see is).    The semantic development is via notion of to be truly the one (who is guilty), as
in Old Norse phrase ver&eth; sannr at be found guilty of, and the use of the phrase it is being in
Hittite confessional formula. The same process probably yielded the Latin word sons (genitive
sontis) guilty, criminal from present participle of sum, esse to be, that which is. Some
etymologists believe the Germanic word was an early borrowing directly from the Latin genitive. Also
see sooth.   Sin-eater is attested from 1680s. To live in sin cohabit without marriage is from 1838;
used earlier in a more general sense. Ice hockey slang sin bin penalty box is attested from 1950.


