fictitious (adj.)

1610s, artificial, counterfeit, from Medieval Latin fictitus, a misspelling of Latin ficticius
artificial, counterfeit, from fictus feigned, fictitious, false, past participle of fingere (see
fiction). Related: Fictitiously.


John Doe (n.)

fictitious plaintiff in a legal action, attested from 1768 (in Blackstone). The fictitious defendant
was Richard Roe. If female, Jane Doe, Jane Roe. Replaced earlier John-a-nokes (1530s) or Jack Nokes,
who usually was paired with John-a-stiles or Tom Stiles. Also used of plaintiffs or defendants who
have reason to be anonymous. By 1852, John Doe was being used in North America for any man whose
name is not known, but Britain tended to preserve it in the narrower legal sense name of the
fictitious plaintiff in actions of ejectment. John Doe warrant attested from 1935.


Biedermeier

1854, from German, from Gottlieb Biedermeier, name of a fictitious writer of stodgy poems (invented
by Ludwig Eichrodt as a satire on bourgeois taste); the name generally applied to styles prevalent
in Germany 1815-48; also conventional, bourgeois.


nouvelle (n.)

short fictitious narrative dealing with a single situation or aspect of a character, 1670s, French
nouvelle (11c.), literally new (see novel (adj.)).


anonym (n.)

1812, nameless person, from French anonyme, from Latin anonymus, from Greek anonymos without a name
(see anonymous). Meaning fictitious name is recorded from 1866.


termagant (n.)

c.1500, violent, overbearing person (especially of women), from Teruagant, Teruagaunt (c.1200), name
of a fictitious Muslim deity appearing in medieval morality plays, from Old French Tervagant, a
proper name in Chanson de Roland (c.1100), of uncertain origin. As an adjective from 1590s.


Yippie

1968, acronym from fictitious Youth International Party, modeled on hippie.    On December 31, 1967,
Abbie [Hoffman], Jerry [Rubin], Paul Krassner, Dick Gregory, and friends decided to pronounce
themselves the Yippies. (The name came first, then the acronym that would satisfy literal-minded
reporters: Youth International Party.) [Todd Gitlin, The Sixties, 1987, p.235]


kite (v.)

write a fictitious check, 1839, American English, from 1805 phrase fly a kite raise money by issuing
commercial paper on nonexistent funds; see kite (n.). Related: Kited; kiting.


fictional (adj.)

pertaining to fiction, 1843, from fiction + -al (1). Earlier fictitious also was used in this sense
(1773).


romance (v.)

late 14c., recite a narrative, from Old French romancier narrate in French; translate into French,
from romanz (see romance (n.)). Later invent fictitious stories (1670s), then be romantically
enthusiastic (1849); meaning court as a lover is from 1938, probably from romance (n.). Related:
Romanced; romancing.


embellish (v.)

mid-14c., to render beautiful, from Old French embelliss-, stem of embellir make beautiful,
ornament, from em- (see en- (1)) + bel beautiful, from Latin bellus handsome, pretty, fine (see
bene-). Meaning dress up (a narration) with fictitious matter is from mid-15c. Related: Embellished;
embellishing.


assimilate (v.)

early 15c., from Latin assimilatus feigned, pretended, fictitious, past participle of assimilare to
make like, from ad- to (see ad-) + simulare make similar, from similis like, resembling (see
similar). Originally transitive (with to); intransitive use first recorded 1837. Related:
Assimilated; assimilating.


Taser (n.)

1972, formed (probably on model of laser, etc.) from the initials of Tom Swift's electric rifle, a
fictitious weapon. A word that threatens to escape the cage of its copyright, despite the strenuous
efforts of the owners, who are within their rights to fight to hold it. They also insist, via their
attorneys, that it be written all in capitals. Tom Swift was the hero of a series of early 20c.
American sci-fi/adventure novels, one of which was titled Tom Swift and His Electric Rifle. It seems
to have spawned a verb, taze or tase. Related: Tased; tasing.


floss (n.)

rough silk, 1759, perhaps from French floche tuft of wool (16c.), from Old French floc tuft, lock,
from Latin floccus tuft of wool. Or from an unrecorded Old English or Old Norse word from the root
found in Dutch flos plush (17c.). Compare the surname Flossmonger, attested 1314, which might
represent a direct borrowing from Scandinavian or Low German. In The Mill on the Floss the word is
the proper name of a fictitious river in the English Midlands.


novel (n.)

fictitious narrative, 1560s, from Italian novella short story, originally new story, from Latin
novella new things (source of Middle French novelle, French nouvelle), neuter plural or fem. of
novellus (see novel (adj.)). Originally one of the tales or short stories in a collection
(especially Boccaccio's), later (1630s) long work of fiction, works which had before that been
called romances.    A novel is like a violin bow; the box which gives off the sounds is the soul of
the reader. [Stendhal, Life of Henri Brulard]


authentic (adj.)

mid-14c., authoritative, from Old French autentique (13c., Modern French authentique) authentic;
canonical, and directly from Medieval Latin authenticus, from Greek authentikos original, genuine,
principal, from authentes one acting on one's own authority, from autos self (see auto-) + hentes
doer, being, from PIE *sene- to accomplish, achieve. Sense of entitled to acceptance as factual is
first recorded mid-14c.    Traditionally (at least since the 18c.), authentic implies that the
contents of the thing in question correspond to the facts and are not fictitious; genuine implies
that the reputed author is the real one; though this distinction is not etymological and is not
always now recognized.


story (n.1)

connected account or narration of some happening, c.1200, originally narrative of important events
or celebrated persons of the past, from Old French estorie, estoire story, chronicle, history, from
Late Latin storia, shortened from Latin historia history, account, tale, story (see history).
Meaning recital of true events first recorded late 14c.; sense of narrative of fictitious events
meant to entertain is from c.1500. Not differentiated from history till 1500s. As a euphemism for a
lie it dates from 1690s. Meaning newspaper article is from 1892. Story-line first attested 1941.
That's another story that requires different treatment is attested from 1818. Story of my life sad
truth first recorded 1938, from typical title of an autobiography.


