fidelity (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French fid&eacute;lit&eacute; (15c.), from Latin fidelitatem (nominative
fidelitas) faithfulness, adherence, from fidelis faithful, true, from fides faith (see faith).


fealty (n.)

c.1300, from Old French feaut&eacute; loyalty, fidelity; homage sworn by a vassal to his overlord;
faithfulness, from Latin fidelitatem (nominative fidelitas) fidelity, from fidelis loyal, faithful
(see fidelity).


trust (n.)

c.1200, reliance on the veracity, integrity, or other virtues of someone or something; religious
faith, from Old Norse traust help, confidence, protection, support, from Proto-Germanic abstract
noun *traustam (cognates: Old Frisian trast, Dutch troost comfort, consolation, Old High German
trost trust, fidelity, German Trost comfort, consolation, Gothic trausti agreement, alliance), from
Proto-Germanic *treuwaz-, source of Old English treowian to believe, trust, and treowe faithful,
trusty (see true (adj.)).    from c.1300 as reliability, trustworthiness; trustiness, fidelity,
faithfulness; from late 14c. as confident expectation and that on which one relies. From early 15c.
in legal sense of confidence placed in a one who holds or enjoys the use of property entrusted to
him by its legal owner; mid-15c. as condition of being legally entrusted. Meaning businesses
organized to reduce competition is recorded from 1877. Trust-buster is recorded from 1903.


audiophile (n.)

1951, originally in High Fidelity magazine, from audio- + -phile.


hi-fi (adj.)

1947, abbreviation of high fidelity (1934), of radio recievers, in reference to their quality of
sound reproduction. Hi as an advertiser's phonetic shortening of high is attested by 1914.


seven-year itch (n.)

1899, American English, some sort of skin condition (sometimes identified with poison ivy infection)
that either lasts seven years or returns every seven years. Jocular use for urge to stray from
marital fidelity is attested from 1952, as the title of the Broadway play (made into a film, 1955)
by George Axelrod (1922-2003), in which the lead male character reads an article describing the high
number of men have extra-marital affairs after seven years of marriage.


feal (adj.)

faithful, 1560s, from Old French feal, collateral form of feeil, from Latin fidelis loyal (see
fidelity).


soothfast (adj.)

truthful, Old English so&#240;f&#230;st true, trustworthy, honest, just righteous; see sooth (n.) +
-fast. Related: Old English so&#240;f&#230;stnes truthfulness, fairness, fidelity;
so&#240;f&#230;stlic true, sincere; so&#240;f&#230;stlice truly, honestly.


loyalty (n.)

c.1400, from Old French loialt&eacute;, leaut&eacute; loyalty, fidelity; legitimacy; honesty; good
quality (Modern French loyaut&eacute;), from loial (see loyal). Earlier leaute (mid-13c.), from the
older French form. Loyalty oath first attested 1852.


infidel

mid-15c. (adjective and noun), from Middle French infid&egrave;le, from Latin infidelis unfaithful,
not to be trusted, later unbelieving, from in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + fidelis faithful
(see fidelity). In 15c. a non-Christian (especially a Saracen); later one who does not believe in
religion (1520s). Also used to translate Arabic qafir, which is from a root meaning to disbelieve,
to deny, strictly referring to all non-Muslims but virtually synonymous with Christian; hence, from
a Muslim or Jewish point of view, a Christian (1530s; see kaffir).


truce (n.)

mutually agreed-upon temporary intermission of hostilities, early 13c., triws, variant of trewes,
originally plural of trewe faith, assurance of faith, covenant, treaty, from Old English treow
faith, truth, fidelity; pledge, promise, agreement, treaty, from Proto-Germanic *treuwaz- (cognates:
Old Frisian triuwe, Middle Dutch trouwe, Dutch trouw, Old High German triuwa, German treue, Gothic
triggwa faith, faithfulness). Related to Old English treowe faithful (see true (adj.)). The Germanic
word was borrowed into Late Latin as tregua, hence French tr&egrave;ve, Italian tregua.


warlock (n.)

Old English w&aelig;rloga traitor, liar, enemy, devil, from w&aelig;r faith, fidelity; a compact,
agreement, covenant, from Proto-Germanic *wera- (cognates: Old High German wara truth, Old Norse
varar solemn promise, vow), from PIE *were-o- true, trustworthy (see very, also Varangian). Second
element is an agent noun related to leogan to lie (see lie (v.1); and compare Old English wordloga
deceiver, liar).    Original primary sense seems to have been oath-breaker; given special
application to the devil (c.1000), but also used of giants and cannibals. Meaning one in league with
the devil is recorded from c.1300. Ending in -ck (1680s) and meaning male equivalent of a witch
(1560s) are from Scottish. Related: Warlockery.


liege (adj.)

word used by a vassal to address his superior or lord in the feudal system, c.1300, from Anglo-
French lige (late 13c.), Old French lige (feudal) liege, free, giving or receiving fidelity, perhaps
from Late Latin laeticus cultivated by serfs, from laetus serf, which probably is from Proto-
Germanic *lethiga- freed (cognates: Old English l&aelig;t half-freedman, serf; Old High German laz,
Old Frisian lethar freedman), from PIE root *le- let go, slacken (see let (v.)). Or the Middle
English word may be directly from Old High German leidig free. As a noun from late 14c., both as
vassal and lord. Hence, liege-man a vassal sworn to the service and support of a lord, who in turn
is obliged to protect him (mid-14c.).


photosynthesis (n.)

1898, loan-translation of German Photosynthese, from photo- light (see photo-) + synthese synthesis
(see synthesis). Another early word for it was photosyntax.    [T]he body of the work has been
rendered into English with fidelity, the only change of moment being the substitution of the word
photosynthesis for that of assimilation. This change follows from a suggestion by Dr. Barnes, made a
year ago before the American Association at Madison, who clearly pointed out the need of a
distinctive term for the synthetical process in plants, brought about by protoplasm in the presence
of chlorophyll and light. He proposed the word photosyntax, which met with favor. In the discussion
Professor MacMillan suggested the word photosynthesis, as etymologically more satisfactory and
accurate, a claim which Dr. Barnes showed could not be maintained. The suggestion of Dr. Barnes not
only received tacit acceptance by the botanists of the association, but was practically approved by
the Madison Congress in the course of a discussion upon this point. [The Botanical Gazette, vol.
XIX, 1894]


truth (n.)

Old English triew&eth; (West Saxon), treow&eth; (Mercian) faith, faithfulness, fidelity, loyalty;
veracity, quality of being true; pledge, covenant, from triewe, treowe faithful (see true (adj.)),
with Proto-Germanic abstract noun suffix *-itho (see -th (2)).    Sense of something that is true is
first recorded mid-14c. Meaning accuracy, correctness is from 1560s. English and most other IE
languages do not have a primary verb for for speak the truth, as a contrast to lie (v.). Truth squad
in U.S. political sense first attested in the 1952 U.S. presidential election campaign.    At
midweek the Republican campaign was bolstered by an innovation--the truth squad ..., a team of
senators who trailed whistle-stopping Harry Truman to field what they denounced as his wild pitches.
[Life, Oct. 13, 1952]   <hr />   Let [Truth] and Falsehood grapple; who ever knew Truth put to the
worse, in a free and open encounter. [Milton, Areopagitica, 1644]


comedy (n.)

late 14c., from Old French comedie (14c., a poem, not in the theatrical sense), from Latin comoedia,
from Greek komoidia a comedy, amusing spectacle, probably from komodios actor or singer in the
revels, from komos revel, carousal, merry-making, festival, + aoidos singer, poet, from aeidein to
sing, related to oide (see ode).    The passage on the nature of comedy in the Poetic of Aristotle
is unfortunately lost, but if we can trust stray hints on the subject, his definition of comedy
(which applied mainly to Menander) ran parallel to that of tragedy, and described the art as a
purification of certain affections of our nature, not by terror and pity, but by laughter and
ridicule. [Rev. J.P. Mahaffy, A History of Classical Greek Literature, London, 1895]    The
classical sense of the word, then, was amusing play or performance, which is similar to the modern
one, but in the Middle Ages the word came to mean poems and stories generally (albeit ones with
happy endings), and the earliest English sense is narrative poem (such as Dante's Commedia).
Generalized sense of quality of being amusing dates from 1877.   Comedy aims at entertaining by the
fidelity with which it presents life as we know it, farce at raising laughter by the outrageous
absurdity of the situation or characters exhibited, &amp; burlesque at tickling the fancy of the
audience by caricaturing plays or actors with whose style it is familiar. [Fowler]


