fiend (n.)

Old English feond enemy, foe, originally present participle of feogan to hate, from Proto-Germanic
*fijand- hating, hostile (cognates: Old Frisian fiand enemy, Old Saxon fiond, Middle Dutch viant,
Dutch vijand enemy, Old Norse fjandi, Old High German fiant, Gothic fijands), from suffixed form of
PIE root *pe(i)- to hurt (source also of Gothic faian to blame; see passion).    As spelling
suggests, it was originally the opposite of friend, but the word began to be used in Old English for
Satan (as the enemy of mankind), which shifted its sense to diabolical person (early 13c.). The old
sense of the word devolved to foe, then to the imported word enemy. For spelling with -ie- see
field. Meaning devotee (of whatever is indicated), as in dope fiend, is from 1865.


fiendish (adj.)

1520s, from fiend + -ish. Related: Fiendishly; fiendishness.


archfiend (n.)

1667, from arch (adj.) + fiend (n.). Originally and typically Satan (arch-foe Satan is from 1610s).
So stretcht out huge in length the Arch-fiend lay. [Paradise Lost, 1667]


flibbertigibbet (n.)

1540s, chattering gossip, flighty woman, probably a nonsense word meant to sound like fast talking;
as the name of a devil or fiend it dates from c.1600.


friend (n.)

Old English freond friend, from Proto-Germanic *frijand- lover, friend (cognates: Old Norse
fr&aelig;ndi, Old Frisian friund, Middle High German friunt, German Freund, Gothic frijonds friend),
from PIE *priy-ont-, present participle form of root *pri- to love (see free (adj.)).    Meaning a
Quaker (a member of the Society of Friends) is from 1670s. Feond (fiend, originally enemy) and
freond often were paired alliteratively in Old English; both are masculine agent nouns derived from
present participle of verbs, but are not directly related to one another (see fiend). Related:
Friends.


Davy Jones

the spirit of the sea, 1751, first mentioned in Smollett's The Adventures of Peregrin Pickle
(chapter 15) as an ominous and terrifying fiend who presides over all the evil spirits of the deep,
and is often seen in various shapes, perching among the rigging on the eve of hurricanes, shipwrecks
and other disasters. Davy Jones's Locker bottom of the sea, is 1803, from nautical slang, of unknown
origin; second element may be from biblical Jonah, regarded as unlucky by sailors.


Puck

mischievous fairy (in A Midsummer Night's Dream), probably from pouke devil, evil spirit (c.1300),
from Old English puca, pucel goblin, cognate with Old Norse puki devil, fiend, of unknown origin
(compare pug). Celtic origins also have been proposed. Capitalized since 16c. His disguised name was
Robin Goodfellow.


dope (n.)

1807, American English, sauce, gravy, thick liquid, from Dutch doop thick dipping sauce, from doopen
to dip (see dip (v.)). Extension to drug is 1889, from practice of smoking semi-liquid opium
preparation. Meaning foolish, stupid person is older (1851) and may have a sense of thick-headed.
Sense of inside information (1901) may come from knowing before the race which horse had been
drugged to influence performance. Dope-fiend is attested from 1896.


succubus (n.)

late 14c., alteration (after incubus, giving a masc. form to a word generally felt as of female
meaning) of Late Latin succuba strumpet, applied to a fiend (generally in female form) having sexual
connection with men in their sleep, from succubare to lie under, from sub- under (see sub-) + cubare
to lie down (see cubicle). Related: Succubine (adj.).


