figure (n.)

c.1200, numeral; mid-13c. as visible appearance of a person; late 14c. as form of anything, from Old
French figure (10c.) shape, body, form, figure; symbol, allegory, from Latin figura a shape, form,
figure, from PIE *dheigh- to form, build (see dough).    Philosophical and scientific senses are
from Latin figura being used to translate Greek skhema. The rhetorical use of figure dates to late
14c.; hence figure of speech (1824). Figure eight as a shape was originally figure of eight
(c.1600).


figure (v.)

late 14c., to represent (in a picture); see figure (n.). Meaning to shape into is early 15c.; to
picture in the mind is from c.1600; to make an appearance is c.1600. Meaning work out a sum is from
1833, American English. Related: Figured; figuring.


figurehead (n.)

1765, from figure (n.) + head (n.). Originally the ornament on the bow of a ship; sense of leader
without real authority is first attested 1883.


disfigure (v.)

late 14c., from Old French desfigurer disfigure, alter, disguise, destroy, from Medieval Latin
diffigurare, from Latin dis- (see dis-) + figura figure, from figurare to figure (see figure (n.)).
Related: Disfigured; disfiguring.


trope (n.)

1530s, from Latin tropus a figure of speech, from Greek tropos a turn, direction, course, way;
manner, fashion, in rhetoric, turn or figure of speech, related to trope a turning and trepein to
turn, from PIE root trep- (2) to turn (cognates: Sanskrit trapate is ashamed, confused, properly
turns away in shame; Latin trepit he turns). Technically, in rhetoric, a figure of speech which
consists in the use of a word or phrase in a sense other than that which is proper to it [OED], as
when we call a stupid fellow an ass, or a shrewd man a fox [Century Dictionary].


scheme (n.)

1550s, figure of speech, from Medieval Latin schema shape, figure, form, appearance; figure of
speech; posture in dancing, from Greek skhema (genitive skhematos) figure, appearance, the nature of
a thing, related to skhein to get, and ekhein to have, from PIE root *segh- to hold, to hold in
one's power, to have (cognates: Sanskrit sahate he masters, overcomes, sahah power, victory; Avestan
hazah power, victory; Greek ekhein to have, hold; Gothic sigis, Old High German sigu, Old Norse
sigr, Old English sige victory).    The sense program of action first is attested 1640s. Unfavorable
overtones (selfish, devious) began to creep in early 18c. Meaning complex unity of coordinated
component elements is from 1736. Color scheme is attested from 1884.


Morpheus

name for the god of dreams in Ovid, son of Sleep, literally the maker of shapes, from Greek morphe
form, shape, figure, especially a fine figure, a beautiful form; beauty, fashion, outward
appearance, perhaps from PIE *merph-, a possible Greek root meaning form. Related: Morphean. Morpho
was an epithet of Aphrodite, literally shapely.


shadow-figure (n.)

silhouette, 1851, from shadow (n.) + figure (n.).


Uncle Sam (n.)

symbol of the United States of America, 1813, coined during the war with Britain as a contrast to
John Bull, and no doubt suggested by the initials U.S. in abbreviations. [L]ater statements
connecting it with different government officials of the name of Samuel appear to be unfounded
[OED]. The common figure of Uncle Sam began to appear in political cartoons c.1850. Only gradually
superseded earlier Brother Jonathan (1776), largely through the popularization of the figure by
cartoonist Thomas Nast. British in World War I sometimes called U.S. soldiers Sammies.


figurative (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French figuratif metaphorical, from Late Latin figurativus, from figurat-, past
participle stem of figurare to form, shape, from figura a shape, form, figure (see figure (n.)). Of
speech, language, etc., involving figures of speech, from 1845. Related: Figuratively.


configure (v.)

late 14c., from Latin configurare to fashion after a pattern, from con- together (see com-) +
figurare to form, shape, from figura a shape, form, figure (see figure (n.)).


baboon (n.)

type of old world ape, c.1400, babewyn, earlier a grotesque figure used in architecture or
decoration (early 14c.), from French babouin baboon, from Old French baboin ape, earlier simpleton,
dimwit, fool (13c.), also gaping figure (such as a gargoyle), so perhaps from Old French baboue
grimacing; or perhaps it is imitative of the ape's babbling speech-like cries. Also see -oon. German
Pavian baboon is from Dutch baviaan, from Middle Dutch baubijn, a borrowing of the Old French word.
Century Dictionary says Arabic maimun probably is from the European words.


trapezoid (n.)

1706, a trapezium, from Modern Latin trapezoides, from Late Greek trapezoeides, noun use by Euclid
of Greek trapezoeides trapezium-shaped, from trapeza, literally table (see trapezium), + -oeides
shaped (see -oid). Technically, a plane four-sided figure with no two sides parallel. But in English
since c.1800, often confused with trapezium in its sense of a quadrilateral figure having only sides
parallel and two not.


prefigure (v.)

early 15c., from Late Latin praefigurare to prefigure, from Latin prae before (see pre-) + figurare
to form, shape, from figura a shape, form, figure (see figure (n.)). Related: Prefigured;
prefiguring.


contrive (v.)

early 14c., from Old French controver (Modern French controuver) to find out, contrive, imagine,
from Late Latin contropare to compare (via a figure of speech), from Latin com- with (see com-) +
tropus song, musical mode, from Greek tropos figure of speech (see trope).    Sense evolution (in
French) was from invent with ingenuity to invent falsely. Spelled contreve until unexplained 15c.
sound change that also affected briar, friar, choir. Related: Contrived; contriving.


transfigure (v.)

early 13c., from Old French transfigurer change, transform (12c.), and directly from Latin
transfigurare change the shape of, from trans- across (see trans-) + figurare to form, fashion, from
figura to form, shape, from figura a shape, form, figure (see figure (n.)). Related: Transfigured;
transfiguring.


circle (n.)

c.1300, figure of a circle, from Old French cercle circle, ring (for the finger); hoop of a helmet
or barrel (12c.), from Latin circulus circular figure; small ring, hoop; circular orbit (also source
of Italian cerchio), diminutive of circus ring (see circus).    Replaced Old English trendel and
hring. Late Old English used circul, from Latin, but only in an astronomical sense. Meaning group of
persons surrounding a center of interest is from 1714 (it also was a secondary sense of Latin
circulus); that of coterie is from 1640s (a sense also found in Latin circulus). To come full circle
is in Shakespeare.


square (n.)

mid-13c., tool for measuring right angles, carpenter's square, from Old French esquire a square,
squareness, from Vulgar Latin *exquadra, back-formation from *exquadrare to square, from Latin ex-
out (see ex-) + quadrare make square, set in order, complete, from quadrus a square (see quadrant).
Meaning square shape or area is recorded by late 14c. (Old English used feower-scyte). Geometric
sense four-sided rectilinear figure is from 1550s; mathematical sense of a number multiplied by
itself is first recorded 1550s. Sense of open space in a town or park is from 1680s; that of area
bounded by four streets in a city is from c.1700. As short for square meal, from 1882. Square one
the very beginning (often what one must go back to) is from 1960, probably a figure from board
games.


type (n.)

late 15c., symbol, emblem, from Latin typus figure, image, form, kind, from Greek typos a blow,
dent, impression, mark, effect of a blow; figure in relief, image, statue; anything wrought of metal
or stone; general form, character; outline, sketch, from root of typtein to strike, beat, from PIE
*tup-, variant of root *(s)teu- (1) to push, stick, knock, beat (see steep (adj.)).    Extended 1713
to printing blocks with letters carved on them in relief. The meaning general form or character of
some kind, class is attested in English from 1843, though it had that sense in Latin and Greek. To
be (someone's) type be the sort of person that person is attracted to is recorded from 1934.


circular (n.)

1550s, circular figure, from circular (adj.). Meaning a notice circulated is from 1818.


poppet (n.)

small human figure used in witchcraft and sorcery, c.1300, early form of puppet (n.). Meaning small
or dainty person is recorded from late 14c.; later a term of endearment but also in other cases one
of contempt.


rub (n.)

act of rubbing, 1610s, from rub (v.); earlier obstacle, inequality on ground (1580s, common in 17c.)
which is the figure in Hamlet's there's the rub (1602).


bottom line (n.)

figurative sense is attested from 1967, from profit and loss accounting, where the final figure
after both are calculated is the bottom line on the page. Also (especially as an adjective)
bottomline.


lutz (n.)

type of skating jump, 1932, from the name Alois Lutz, an obscure Austrian skater of the 1920s [James
R. Hines, Historical Dictionary of Figure Skating, 2011], who is said to have first performed it in
1913.


onnagata (n.)

in Kabuki and similar drama, a man who plays female roles, 1901, from Japanese, from onna woman +
kata figure.


lune (n.)

figure formed by two arcs of circles, 1704, from Latin luna moon; crescent-shaped badge (see luna).


arete (n.1)

sharp crest of a mountain, 1862, from Swiss French ar&#234;te, from Latin arista ear of grain, the
top of an ear, which probably is of Etruscan origin. The figure is of something jagged.


outline (n.)

1660s, lines by which a figure is delineated, from out + line (v.). Meaning rough draft in words is
from 1759.


hexagram (n.)

1863 as a type of geometric figure, from hexa- + -gram. I Ching sense attested from 1882.


suss (v.)

to figure out, investigate and discover, 1966, earlier to suspect (1953, police jargon), a slang
shortening of suspect (v.). Related: Sussed.


curve (n.)

1690s, curved line, from curve (v.). With reference to the female figure (usually plural, curves),
from 1862; as a type of baseball pitch, from 1879.


stripling (n.)

a youth, late 14c., of uncertain origin, possibly from strip (n.1) long, narrow piece, on the notion
of one who is slender as a strip, whose figure is not yet filled out + -ling.


heartbeat (n.)

1850, from heart + beat (n.). From the beginning used as a figure for a very brief time.


lick (n.)

an act of licking, c.1600, from lick (v.1). Meaning small portion is 1814, originally Scottish;
hence U.S. colloquial sense. Sense of place where an animal goes to lick salt is from 1747. The jazz
music sense of short figure or solo is by 1922.


dummy (n.)

1590s, mute person, from dumb (adj.) + -y (3). Extended by 1845 to figure representing a person.
Used in card games (originally whist) since 1736. Meaning dolt, blockhead is from 1796.


nonagon (n.)

plane figure with nine sides, 1680s, a hybrid from Latin nonus ninth (see nones) + ending from
pentagon, etc.


figment (n.)

early 15c., from Latin figmentum something formed or fashioned, creation, related to figura shape
(see figure (n.)).


nook (n.)

c.1300, noke, of unknown origin. Possibly connected with Norwegian dialectal nokke hook, bent
figure, or Old English hnecca neck, but the sense evolution would be difficult.


stumpy (adj.)

c.1600, from stump (n.) + -y (2). In reference to persons of stump-like figure, from 1822.


foot (v.)

c.1400, dance, move on foot, from foot (n.). To foot a bill is attested from 1848, from the process
of tallying the expenses and writing the figure at the bottom (foot) of the bill.


hendiadys (n.)

1580s, figure of speech in which two nouns joined by and are used in place of a noun and an
adjective; from Medieval Latin alteration of Greek hen dia duoin one (thing) by means of two. If
this term was used by Greek grammarians it is no longer found in their writings, but it is frequent
among Latin writers.


hen (n.)

Old English henn, from West Germanic *hannjo (cognates: Old Frisian henn, Middle Dutch henne, Old
High German henna), fem. of *han(e)ni male fowl, cock (source of Old English hana cock), literally
bird who sings (for sunrise), from PIE root *kan- to sing (see chant).    The original masculine
word survives in German (Hahn cock), Swedish, Danish, etc. German also has a generic form, Huhn, for
either gender of the bird. Extension to female of any bird species is early 14c. in English. Hen as
slang for woman dates from 1620s; hence hen party gathering of women, first recorded 1887. To be mad
as a wet hen is from 1823, but the figure was used to indicate other states:    Some, on the
contrary, are viciously opposite to these, who act so tamely and so coldly, that when they ought to
be angry, to thunder and lighten, as one may say, they are no fuller of Heat, than a wet Hen, as the
Saying is; .... [Life of Mr. Thomas Betterton, London, 1710]   <hr />   Orth. Out upon you for a
dastardly Fellow; you han't the Courage of a wet Hen. [A Sermon Preached at St. Mary-le-Bow, March
27, 1704]   As wanton as a wet hen is in Scots Proverbs (1813). Among Middle English proverbial
expressions was nice as a nonne hen over-refined, fastidiously wanton (c.1500); to singen so hen in
snowe sing miserably, literally sing like a hen in snow (c.1200). Hen's teeth as a figure of
scarceness is attested by 1838.


eggshell (n.)

early 15c., from egg (n.) + shell (n.). Earlier ay-schelle (c.1300). Emblematic of thin and delicate
from 1835; as a color term, from 1894. The figure of treading on eggshells to move cautiously is
attested by 1734.


specter (n.)

c.1600, frightening ghost, from French spectre an image, figure, ghost (16c.), from Latin spectrum
appearance, vision, apparition (see spectrum). Figurative sense object of dread is from 1774.


hyperbaton (n.)

1570s, figure of speech in which the natural order of words or phrases is inverted, especially for
the sake of emphasis, from Greek hyperbaton, literally overstepping, from hyper over + bainein to
step (see come).


prism (n.)

1560s, a type of solid figure, from Late Latin prisma, from Greek prisma (Euclid), literally
something sawed, from prizein to saw (see prion). Meaning in optics is first attested 1610s.


Thoth

ancient Egyptian god of wisdom and magic, hieroglyphics, and the reckoning of time, from Latin, from
Greek Thoth, from Egyptian Tehuti. Usually represented as a human figure with the head of an ibis.
By the Greeks, assimilated to their Hermes.


oval (n.)

1560s, from Middle French ovalle oval figure, from Medieval Latin ovalis (see oval (adj.)).


Choctaw

1722, from Choctaw Chahta, of uncertain meaning, but also said to be from Spanish chato flattened,
for the tribe's custom of flattening the heads of male infants. As a figure skating step, first
recorded 1892. Sometimes used in 19c. American English as typical of a difficult or incomprehensible
language (compare Greek in this sense from c.1600).


manikin (n.)

1560s, jointed figure used by artists, from Dutch manneken, literally little man, diminutive of
Middle Dutch man (see man (n.)). Sense and spelling often blended with mannequin.


