filth (n.)

Old English fyl&eth; uncleanness, impurity, from Proto-Germanic *fulitho (cognates: Old Saxon
fulitha foulness, filth, Dutch vuilte, Old High German fulida), noun derivative of *fulo- foul (see
foul (adj.)). A classic case of i-mutation.


filthy (adj.)

late 12c., fulthe, corrupt, sinful, from filth + -y (2). Meaning physically unclean is from late
14c. Meaning morally dirty, obscene is from 1530s.    In early use often hardly more emphatic than
the mod. dirty; it is now a violent expression of disgust, seldom employed in polite colloquial
speech. [OED]    Related: Filthiness.


gore (n.1)

Old English gor dirt, dung, filth, shit, a Germanic word (cognates: Middle Dutch goor filth, mud;
Old Norse gor cud; Old High German gor animal dung), of uncertain origin. Sense of clotted blood
(especially shed in battle) developed by 1560s.


pollution (n.)

mid-14c., discharge of semen other than during sex, later, desecration, defilement (late 14c.), from
Late Latin pollutionem (nominative pollutio) defilement, noun of action from past participle stem of
Latin polluere to soil, defile, contaminate, from por- before + -luere smear, from PIE root *leu-
dirt; make dirty (cognates: Latin lutum mud, mire, clay, lues filth; Greek lyma filth, dirt,
disgrace, lymax rubbish, refuse; Old Irish loth mud, dirt; Lithuanian lutynas pool, puddle). Sense
of contamination of the environment first recorded c.1860, but not common until c.1955.


scat (n.2)

filth, dung, 1950, from Greek stem skat- dung (see scatology).


mother (n.2)

a thick substance concreting in liquors; the lees or scum concreted [Johnson], probably from Middle
Dutch modder filth, dregs, from PIE *meu- (see mud).


cleanness (n.)

Old English cl&#230;nnes (moral) cleanness, purity, chastity; see clean (adj.) + -ness. Meaning
absence of dirt or filth is late 14c.


raunchy (adj.)

1939, clumsy, careless, sloppy, U.S. Army Air Corps slang, of unknown origin. Origins among cadets
in Texas suggest possible connection to Mexican Spanish rancho (see ranch (n.)), which had
connotations of animal filth by 1864. Sense of coarse, vulgar, smutty is from 1967. Related:
Raunchiness.


swash (n.)

1530s, the fall of a heavy body or blow, probably imitative. It also meant pig-wash, filth, wet
refuse (1520s) and may have been imitative of the sound of water dashing against solid objects. The
meaning a body of splashing water is first found 1670s; that of a dashing or splashing is from 1847.
Swash-letters (1883) are italic capitals with flourished projections.


coprolalia (n.)

obsessive use of obscene language, either through mental illness or perversion, 1886, from French
coprolalie, coined 1885 by de la Tourette, from copro- dung, filth + Greek lalia talk, prattle, a
speaking, from lalein to speak, prattle, of echoic origin.


ordure (n.)

late 14c., from Old French ordure filth, uncleanliness (12c.), from ord, ort filthy, dirty, foul,
from Latin horridus dreadful (see horrid).


copro-

word-forming element indicating dung, filth, excrement, before vowels copr-, from Modern Latin
copro-, from Greek kopros dung, from PIE root *kekw-. Hence, coprology study of obscene literature.


gleet (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French glete clay, loam; slime, mud; filth (12c., Modern French glette), from
Latin glitem (nominative glis) sticky, glutinous ground, back-formation from glittus sticky.


soil (n.2)

filth, dirt, refuse matter, sewage, liquid likely to contain excrement, c.1600, earlier miry or
muddy place (early 15c.), from Old French soille miry place, from soillier (v.) to make dirty, and
in part a native formation from soil (v.). This is the sense in archaic night-soil.


hore (n.)

dirt, filth, also hor; from Old English horh phlegm, horu foulness, from Proto-Germanic *horwo-
(cognates: Old Frisian hore, Old High German horo, Old Norse horr), perhaps imitative.


dreck (n.)

filth, trash, 1922, from Yiddish drek (German dreck), from Middle High German drec, from Proto-
Germanic *threkka (cognates: Old English &thorn;reax rubbish, Old Frisian threkk), perhaps connected
to Greek skatos dung, Latin stercus excrement, from PIE root *(s)ker- to cut (see shear (v.)).


sordid (adj.)

early 15c., festering, from Latin sordidus dirty, filthy, foul, vile, mean, base, from sordere be
dirty, be shabby, related to sordes dirt, filth, from PIE *swrd-e-, from root *swordo- black, dirty
(cognates: Old English sweart black). Sense of foul, low, mean first recorded 1610s. Related:
Sordidly; sordidness.


squalid (adj.)

1590s, from Middle French squalide and directly from Latin squalidus rough, coated with dirt,
filthy, related to squales filth, squalus filthy, squalare be covered with a rough, stiff layer, be
coated with dirt, be filthy, of uncertain origin. Related: Squalidly; squalidness; squalidity.


latex (n.)

1660s, body fluid, from Latin latex (genitive laticis) liquid, fluid, probably from Greek latax
dregs, from PIE root *lat- wet (cognates: Middle Irish laith beer, Welsh llaid mud, mire, Lithuanian
latakas pool, puddle, Old Norse le&thorn;ja filth). Used 1835 to mean milky liquid from plants.
Meaning water-dispersed polymer particles (used in rubber goods, paints, etc.) is from 1937. As an
adjective by 1954, in place of clasically correct laticiferous.


garbage (n.)

early 15c., giblets of a fowl, waste parts of an animal, later confused with garble in its sense of
siftings, refuse. Perhaps some senses derive from Old French garbe a bundle of sheaves, entrails,
from Proto-Germanic *garba- (cognates: Dutch garf, German garbe sheaf), from PIE *ghrebh- (1) to
seize, reach (see grab (v.)). Sense of refuse, filth is first attested 1580s; used figuratively for
worthless stuff from 1590s. Garbology study of waste as a social science is from 1976.


grime (n.)

1580s, of uncertain origin, probably alteration of Middle English grim dirt, filth (early 14c.),
from Middle Low German greme dirt, from Proto-Germanic *grim- to smear (cognates: Flemish grijm,
Middle Dutch grime soot, mask), from PIE root *ghrei- to rub. The verb was Middle English grymen
(mid-15c.) but was replaced early 16c. by begrime.


mash (n.)

soft mixture, late Old English *masc (in masc-wyrt mash-wort, infused malt), from Proto-Germanic
*maisk- (cognates: Swedish m&auml;sk grains for pigs, German Maisch crushed grapes, infused malt,
Old English meox dung, filth), from PIE *meik- to mix (see mix (v.)). Originally a word in brewing;
general sense of anything reduced to a soft pulpy consistency is recorded from 1590s, as is the
figurative sense confused mixture, muddle. Short for mashed potatoes it is attested from 1904.


micturition (n.)

1725, the need very badly to urinate, from Latin micturitum, from past participle of micturire to
desire to urinate, desiderative of mingere to urinate, from PIE *meigh- to urinate (cognates:
Sanskrit mehati urinates; Avestan maezaiti urinates; Greek omeikhein to urinate; Armenian mizem
urinate; Lithuanian min&#382;u urinate; Old English migan to urinate, micga urine, meox dung,
filth). As during the final 20 minutes of a 4-hour film after drinking a 32-ounce Mountain Dew from
the snack bar and the movie ends with a drawn-out farewell scene while Frodo is standing on the pier
and wavelets lap audibly on the dock the whole time as if the director was a sadist set on
compounding your torment.


muckraker (n.)

c.1600, one who rakes muck, from muck (n.) + agent noun from rake (v.). Meaning one who inquires
into and publishes scandal and allegations of corruption among political and business leaders,
popularized 1906 in speech by President Theodore Roosevelt, in reference to man ... with a Muckrake
in his hand in Bunyan's Pilgrim's Progress (1684) who seeks worldly gain by raking filth.The men
with the muck-rakes are often indispensable to the well-being of society, but only if they know when
to stop raking the muck. [T. Roosevelt, quoted in Cincinnati Enquirer, April 15, 1906.] Muckrake in
sense person who hunts scandal is attested from 1872. To muckrake (v.) in the literal sense is from
1879; figuratively from 1910. Related: Muckraking.


addle (v.)

1712, from addle (n.) urine, liquid filth, from Old English adela mud, mire, liquid manure (cognate
with Old Swedish adel urine, Middle Low German adel, Dutch aal puddle).    Used in noun phrase addle
egg (mid-13c.) egg that does not hatch, rotten egg, literally urine egg, a loan-translation of Latin
ovum urinum, which is itself an erroneous loan-translation of Greek ourion oon putrid egg, literally
wind egg, from ourios of the wind (confused by Roman writers with ourios of urine, from ouron
urine). Because of this usage, from c.1600 the noun in English was taken as an adjective meaning
putrid, and thence given a figurative extension to empty, vain, idle, also confused, muddled,
unsound (1706). The verb followed a like course. Related: Addled; addling.


obscene (adj.)

1590s, offensive to the senses, or to taste and refinement, from Middle French obsc&#232;ne (16c.),
from Latin obscenus offensive, especially to modesty, originally boding ill, inauspicious, of
unknown origin; perhaps from ob onto (see ob-) + caenum filth. Meaning offensive to modesty or
decency is attested from 1590s. Legally, in U.S., it hinged on whether to the average person,
applying contemporary community standards, the dominant theme of the material taken as a whole
appeals to a prurient interest. [Justice William Brennan, Roth v. United States, June 24, 1957];
refined in 1973 by Miller v. California:    The basic guidelines for the trier of fact must be: (a)
whether 'the average person, applying contemporary community standards' would find that the work,
taken as a whole, appeals to the prurient interest, (b) whether the work depicts or describes, in a
patently offensive way, sexual conduct specifically defined by the applicable state law; and (c)
whether the work, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific
value.    Related: Obscenely.


mud (n.)

mid-14c., cognate with and probably from Middle Low German mudde, Middle Dutch modde thick mud, from
Proto-Germanic *mud- from PIE *(s)meu-/*mu- [Buck], found in many words denoting wet or dirty
(cognates: Greek mydos damp, moisture, Old Irish muad cloud, Polish mu&#322; slime, Sanskrit mutra-
urine, Avestan muthra- excrement, filth); related to German Schmutz dirt, which also is used for mud
in roads, etc., to avoid dreck, which originally meant excrement. Welsh mwd is from English.
Replaced native fen.    Meaning lowest or worst of anything is from 1580s. As a word for coffee, it
is hobo slang from 1925; as a word for opium from 1922. To throw or hurl mud make disgraceful
accusations is from 1762. To say (one's) name is mud and mean (one) is discredited is first recorded
1823, from mud in obsolete sense of a stupid twaddling fellow (1708). Mud in your eye as a toast
recorded from 1912, American English. Mud puppy salamander is from 1889, American English; mud bath
is from 1798; mud pie is from 1788.


clean (adj.)

Old English cl&aelig;ne free from dirt or filth; pure, chaste, innocent; open, in the open, of
beasts, ritually safe to eat, from West Germanic *klainoz clear, pure (cognates: Old Saxon kleni
dainty, delicate, Old Frisian klene small, Old High German kleini delicate, fine, small, German
klein small; English preserves the original Germanic sense), from PIE root *gel- bright, gleaming
(cognates: Greek glene eyeball, Old Irish gel bright).    Largely replaced by clear, pure in the
higher senses [Weekley], but as a verb (mid-15c.) it has largely usurped what once belonged to
cleanse. Meaning whole, entire is from c.1300 (clean sweep in the figurative sense is from 1821).
Sense of innocent is from c.1300; that of not lewd is from 1867; that of not carrying anything
forbidden is from 1938; that of free of drug addiction is from 1950s. To come clean confess is from
1919, American English.


whore (n.)

1530s spelling alteration (see wh-) of Middle English hore, from Old English hore prostitute,
harlot, from Proto-Germanic *horaz (fem. *horon-) one who desires (cognates: Old Norse hora
adulteress, Danish hore, Swedish hora, Dutch hoer, Old High German huora whore; in Gothic only in
the masc. hors adulterer, fornicator, also as a verb, horinon commit adultery), from PIE *ka- to
like, desire, a base that has produced words in other languages for lover (cognates: Latin carus
dear; Old Irish cara friend; Old Persian kama desire; Sanskrit Kama, name of the Hindu god of love,
kamah love, desire, the first element in Kama Sutra).   Whore itself is perhaps a Germanic euphemism
for a word that has not survived. The Old English vowel naturally would have yielded *hoor, which is
the pronunciation in some dialects; it might have shifted by influence of Middle English homonym
hore physical filth, slime, also moral corruption, sin, from Old English horh. The wh- form became
current 16c. A general term of abuse for an unchaste or lewd woman (without regard to money) from at
least c.1200. Of male prostitutes from 1630s. Whore of Babylon is from Rev. xvii:1, 5, etc. In
Middle English with occasional plural forms horen, heoranna.    The word, with its derivatives, is
now avoided polite speech; its survival in literature, so as it survives, is due to the fact that it
is a favorite word with Shakspere (who uses it, with its derivatives, 99 times) and is common in the
authorized English version of the Bible ... though the American revisers recommended the
substitution of harlot as less gross .... [Century Dictionary]     Some equivalent words in other
languages also derive from sources not originally pejorative, such as Bohemian nevestka, diminutive
of nevesta bride; Dutch deern, German dirne originally girl, lass, wench; also perhaps Old French
pute, perhaps literally girl, fem. of Vulgar Latin *puttus (but perhaps rather from Latin putidus
stinking; see poontang). Welsh putain whore is from French, probably via Middle English. Among other
languages, Greek porne prostitute is related to pernemi sell, with an original notion probably of a
female slave sold for prostitution; Latin meretrix is literally one who earns wages (source of Irish
mertrech, Old English miltestre whore, prostitute).    The vulgar Roman word was scortum, literally
skin, hide. Another term was lupa, literally she-wolf (preserved in Spanish loba, Italian lupa,
French louve; see wolf (n.)). And of course there was prostituta, literally placed in front, thus
publicly exposed, from the fem. past participle of prostituere (see prostitute (n.)). Another Old
Norse term was sk&aelig;kja, which yielded Danish sk&oslash;ge, Swedish sk&ouml;ka; probably from
Middle Low German schoke, which is perhaps from schode foreskin of a horse's penis, perhaps with the
sense of skin (compare Latin scortum) or perhaps via an intermediary sense of vagina. Spanish
ramera, Portuguese ramiera are from fem. form of ramero young bird of prey, literally little branch,
from ramo branch. Breton gast is cognate with Welsh gast bitch, of uncertain origin. Compare also
strumpet, harlot.    Old Church Slavonic ljubodejica is from ljuby dejati fornicate, a compound from
ljuby love + dejati put, perform. Russian bljad whore derives from Old Church Slavonic bladinica,
from bladu fornication. Polish nierz&#261;dnica is literally disorderly woman. Sanskrit vecya is a
derivation of veca- house, dwelling, especially house of ill-repute, brothel. Another term,
pumccali, means literally one who runs after men. Avestan jahika is literally woman, but only of
evil creatures; another term is kunairi, from pejorative prefix ku- + nairi woman.


