finish (n.)

1779, that which finishes or gives completion, from finish (v.). Meaning the end is from 1790.
Finish line attested from 1873.


finish (v.)

late 14c., to bring to an end; mid-15c., to come to an end, from Old French finiss-, present
participle stem of fenir (13c.) stop, finish, come to an end, die, from Latin finire to limit, set
bounds, put an end to, come to an end, from finis boundary, limit, border, end, of unknown origin,
perhaps related to figere to fasten, fix (see fix (v.)). Meaning to kill is from 1755. Related:
Finished; finishing. Finishing school is from 1836.


define (v.)

late 14c., to specify; to end, from Old French defenir, definir to finish, conclude, come to an end;
bring to an end; define, determine with precision, and directly from Latin definire to limit,
determine, explain, from de- completely (see de-) + finire to bound, limit, from finis boundary, end
(see finish (v.)). Related: Defined; defining.


finis (n.)

Latin, literally the end (see finish (v.)).


achieve (v.)

early 14c., from Old French achever (12c.) to finish, accomplish, complete, from phrase &agrave;
chef (venir) at an end, finished, or Vulgar Latin *accapare, from Late Latin ad caput (venire); both
the French and Late Latin phrases meaning literally to come to a head, from stem of Latin caput head
(see capitulum).    The Lat. caput, towards the end of the Empire, and in Merov[ingian] times, took
the sense of an end, whence the phrase ad caput venire, in the sense of to come to an end ....
Venire ad caput naturally produced the Fr. phrase venir &agrave; chef = venir &agrave; bout. ...
From this chief, O.Fr. form of chef (q.v.) in sense of term, end, comes the Fr. compd. achever =
venir &agrave; chef, to end, finish. [Auguste Brachet, An Etymological Dictionary of the French
Language, transl. G.W. Kitchin, Oxford, 1878]    Related: Achieved; achieving.


unfinished (adj.)

1550s, from un- (1) not + past participle of finish (v.).


touch-up (n.)

act of improvement requiring modest effort, 1872, from verbal phrase touch up improve or finish (as
a painting or drawing) with light strokes (1715), from touch (v.) + up (adv.).


mat (n.2)

sheet of backing material, 1845, from French mat dull surface or finish (15c.), noun use of Old
French mat (adj.); see mat (adj.).


finite (adj.)

early 15c., from Latin finitus, past participle of finire to limit, set bounds, end, from finis (see
finish (v.)). Related: Finitely.


shellac (v.)

1876, from shellack (n.). The slang sense of beat soundly is 1920s, perhaps from the notion of
shellac as a finish. Shellacked drunk is from 1922 (compare plastered). Related: Shellacking.


photo (n.)

1860, shortening of photograph. The verb is first recorded 1865, from the noun. Photo finish is
attested from 1936. Photo opportunity first recorded 1974.


top (v.)

put a top on, 1580s, perhaps mid-15c., from top (n.1). Earlier cut the top off, shave the head
(c.1300). The meaning be higher or greater than also is first recorded 1580s. Meaning strike (a
ball) towards its top is from 1881. Related: Topped; topping. To top off to finish is colloquial
from 1836; in sense fill up, add more to to bring to fullness it is from 1917.


tie (v.)

Old English tigan, tiegan to tie, bind, join, connect, from the source of tie (n.). Meaning to
finish equal to a competitor is from 1888. Related: Tied; tying. To tie the knot in the figurative
sense form a union is from 1707. Tie one on get drunk is recorded from 1944.


start (n.)

late 14c., an involuntary movement of the body, a sudden jump, from start (v.). Meaning act of
beginning to move or act is from 1560s. Meaning act of beginning to build a house is from 1946. That
of opportunity at the beginning of a career or course of action is from 1849. Paired with finish
(n.) at least from 1839. False start first attested 1850.


consummate (v.)

1520s, to bring to completion, from Latin consummatus, past participle of consummare to sum up, make
up, complete, finish (see consummation). Meaning to bring a marriage to completion (by sexual
intercourse) is from 1530s. Related: Consummated; consummating.


consomme (n.)

1815, from French consomm&eacute;, noun use of past participle of consommer to consume (12c.), from
Latin consummare to complete, finish, perfect (see consummation). The French verb was influenced in
sense by Latin consumere to consume.


infinite (adj.)

late 14c., eternal, limitless, also extremely great in number, from Old French infinit endless,
boundless, and directly from Latin infinitus unbounded, unlimited, from in- not, opposite of (see
in- (1)) + finitus defining, definite, from finis end (see finish (v.)). The noun meaning that which
is infinite is from 1580s.


final (adj.)

early 14c., from Old French final and directly from Latin finalis of or pertaining to an end,
concluding, final, from finis end (see finish (v.)). As a noun, late 14c., that which comes last;
meaning final contest in a sporting sense is from 1880. As a shortening of final examination, from
1880.


consummation (n.)

late 14c., completion, from Latin consummationem (nominative consummatio), from consummat-, past
participle stem of consummare to sum up, finish, from com- together (see com-) + summa sum, total,
from summus highest (see sum (n.)). Sense of completion of a marriage (by sexual intercourse) is
c.1530.


complete (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French complet full, or directly from Latin completus, past participle of
complere to fill up, complete the number of (a legion, etc.), transferred to to fill, to fulfill, to
finish (a task), from com-, intensive prefix (see com-), + plere to fill (see pleio-).


baseball (n.)

in the modern sense, 1845, American English, from base (n.) + ball (n.1). Earlier references, such
as in Jane Austen's Northanger Abbey, refer to the game of rounders, of which baseball is a more
elaborate variety. Legendarily invented 1839 by Abner Doubleday in Cooperstown, N.Y. Base was used
for start or finish line of a race from 1690s; and the sense of safe spot found in modern children's
game of tag can be traced to 14c. (the sense in baseball is from 1868).


affinity (n.)

c.1300, relation by marriage (as opposed to consanguinity), from Old French afinit&eacute; (12c.),
from Latin affinitatem (nominative affinitas) neighborhood, relationship by marriage, noun of state
from affinis adjacent, also kin by marriage, literally bordering on, from ad- to (see ad-) + finis a
border, an end (see finish (v.)). Used figuratively since c.1600 of structural relationships in
chemistry, philology, etc. Meaning natural attraction (as though by family) is from 1610s.


exact (adj.)

precise, rigorous, accurate, 1530s, from Latin exactus precise, accurate, exact, past participle of
exigere demand, require, literally to drive or force out, also demand, finish, measure, from ex- out
(see ex-) + agere drive, lead, act (see act (n.)).


perfect (adj.)

early 15c. alteration of Middle English parfit (c.1300), from Old French parfit finished, completed,
ready (11c.), from Latin perfectus completed, excellent, accomplished, exquisite, past participle of
perficere accomplish, finish, complete, from per- completely (see per) + facere to perform (see
factitious). Often used in English as an intensive (perfect stranger, etc.).


defunct (adj.)

1590s, from Old French defunct (14c., Modern French defunt) or directly from Latin defunctus dead,
literally off-duty, from past participle of defungi to discharge, finish, from de- off, completely
(see de-) + fungi perform or discharge duty, from PIE root *bheug- (2) to enjoy (see brook (v.)).


perform (v.)

c.1300, carry into effect, fulfill, discharge, via Anglo-French performer, altered (by influence of
Old French forme form) from Old French parfornir to do, carry out, finish, accomplish, from par-
completely (see per-) + fornir to provide (see furnish).    Theatrical/musical sense is from c.1600.
The verb was used with wider senses in Middle English than now, including to make, construct;
produce, bring about; also come true (of dreams), and to performen muche time was to live long.
Related: Performed; performing.


fine (n.)

c.1200, termination, from Old French fin end, limit, boundary; death; fee, payment, finance, money
(10c.), from Medieval Latin finis a payment in settlement, fine or tax, from Latin finis end (see
finish (v.)).    Modern meaning is via sense of sum of money paid for exemption from punishment or
to compensate for injury (mid-14c., from the same sense in Anglo-French, late 13c.) and from phrases
such as to make fine make one's peace, settle a matter (c.1300). Meaning sum of money imposed as
penalty for some offense is first recorded 1520s.


polish (v.)

early 14c., polischen make smooth, from Old French poliss-, present participle stem of polir (12c.)
to polish, decorate, see to one's appearance, from Latin polire to polish, make smooth; decorate,
embellish; figuratively refine, improve, said to be from Proto-Indo-European *pel- to thrust,
strike, drive (via the notion of fulling cloth). The sense of free from coarseness, to refine first
recorded in English mid-14c. Related: Polished; polishing.  Slang polish off finish is 1837, from
notion of applying a coat of polish being the final step in a piece of work.


publish (v.)

mid-14c., make publicly known, reveal, divulge, announce; alteration of publicen (early 14c.) by
influence of banish, finish, etc.; from extended stem of Old French publier make public, spread
abroad, communicate, from Latin publicare make public, from publicus public (see public). Meaning
issue (a book, etc.) to the public is from late 14c., also to disgrace, put to shame; denounce
publicly. Related: Published; publishing. In Middle English the verb also meant to people, populate;
to multiply, breed (late 14c.), for example ben published of be descended from.


Pullman (n.)

sleeping car on a passenger train, 1867, Pullman car, in recognition of U.S. inventor George M.
Pullman (1831-1897) of Chicago, who designed a railroad car with folding berths.    The Pullman
Sleeping Car.--The Western World. This splendid specimen of car architecture, being one of a number
of sleeping-cars to be completed   for the Michigan Central road, by Mr. Pullman, has created a
great sensation among railway circles east. ... The car itself is admitted by all who have seen it
to be, in the matter of sleeping and cooking accessories, and superb finish, the ne plus ultra of
perfection. Nothing before has been seen to equal, much less surpass it. [Western Railroad Gazette,
Chicago, quoted in Appleton's Illustrated Railway and Steam Navigation Guide, New York, June, 1867]


confine (n.)

c.1400, boundary, limit (usually as confines), from Old French confins boundaries, from Medieval
Latin confines, from Latin confinium (plural confinia) boundary, limit, from confine, neuter of
confinis bordering on, having the same boundaries, from com- with (see com-) + finis an end (see
finish (v.)).


fine (adj.)

mid-13c., unblemished, refined, pure; of superior quality, from Old French fin perfected, of highest
quality (12c.), from Latin finis end, limit (see finish (v.)); hence acme, peak, height, as in finis
boni the highest good.    In French, the main meaning remains delicate, intricately skillful; in
English since mid-15c. fine is also a general expression of admiration or approval, the equivalent
of French beau (as in fine arts, 1767, translating French beaux-arts). Finer; finest. Fine print is
from 1861 as type small and close-set; by 1934 as qualifications and limitations of a deal.


wire (n.)

Old English wir metal drawn out into a fine thread, from Proto-Germanic *wira- (cognates: Old Norse
viravirka filigree work, Swedish vira to twist, Old High German wiara fine gold work), from PIE
*wei- (1) to turn, twist, plait (cognates: Old Irish fiar, Welsh gwyr bent, crooked; Latin viere to
bend, twist, viri&aelig; bracelets, of Celtic origin). A wire as marking the finish line of a
racecourse is attested from 1883; hence the figurative down to the wire. Wire-puller in the
political sense is 1848, American English, on the image of pulling the wires that work a puppet.


torch (n.)

mid-13c., from Old French torche torch, also handful of straw (for wiping or cleaning, hence French
torcher to wipe, wipe down), originally twisted thing, then torch formed of twisted tow dipped in
wax, probably from Vulgar Latin *torca, alteration of Late Latin torqua, from Latin torquere to
twist (see torque (n.)).    In Britain, also applied to the battery-driven version (in U.S., a
flashlight). To pass the torch is an ancient metaphor from the Greek torch-races (lampadedromia)
where the goal was to reach the finish line with the torch still burning. Torch-bearer leader of a
cause is from 1530s. Torch song is 1927 (My Melancholy Baby, performed by Tommy Lyman, is said to
have been the first so called), from carry a torch suffer an unrequited love (also 1927), Broadway
slang, but the sense is obscure.


down (n.2)

Old English dun down, moor; height, hill, mountain, from Proto-Germanic *dunaz- (cognates: Middle
Dutch dunen sandy hill, Dutch duin), probably a pre-insular loan-word from Celtic [Cambridge
Dictionary of English Place-Names], in other words, borrowed at a very early period, before the
Anglo-Saxon migration, from PIE root *dheue- to close, finish, come full circle. Meaning elevated
rolling grassland is from c.1300.    The non-English Germanic words tend to mean dune, sand bank
(see dune), while the Celtic cognates tend to mean hill, citadel (compare Old Irish dun hill, hill
fort; Welsh din fortress, hill fort; and second element in place names London, Verdun, etc.). German
D&uuml;ne, French dune, Italian, Spanish duna are said to be loan-words from Dutch.


close (v.)

c.1200, to shut, cover in, from Old French clos- (past participle stem of clore to shut, to cut off
from), 12c., from Latin clausus, past participle of claudere to shut, close; to block up, make
inaccessible; put an end to; shut in, enclose, confine (always -clusus, -cludere in compounds).
The Latin word might be from the possible PIE root *klau- hook, peg, crooked or forked branch (used
as a bar or bolt in primitive structures); cognates: Latin clavis key, clavus nail, claustrum bar,
bolt, barrier, claustra dam, wall, barricade, stronghold; Greek kleidos (genitive) bar, bolt, key,
klobos cage; Old Irish clo nail, Middle Irish clithar hedge, fence; Old Church Slavonic klju&#269;i
hook, key, klju&#269;iti shut; Lithuanian kliuti to catch, be caught on, kliaudziu check, hinder,
kliuvu clasp, hang; Old High German sliozan shut, German schlie&szlig;en to shut, Schl&uuml;ssel
key.    Also partly from Old English beclysan close in, shut up. Intransitive sense become shut is
from late 14c. Meaning draw near to is from 1520s. Intransitive meaning draw together, come together
is from 1550s, hence the idea in military verbal phrase close ranks (mid-17c.), later with
figurative extensions. Meaning bring to an end, finish is from c.1400; intransitive sense come to an
end is from 1826. Of stock prices, from 1860. Meaning bring together the parts of (a book, etc.) is
from 1560s. Related: Closed; closing.


wait (v.)

c.1200, to watch with hostile intent, lie in wait for, plot against, from Anglo-French and Old North
French waitier to watch (Old French gaitier defend, watch out, be on one's guard; lie in wait for;
Modern French guetter), from Frankish *wahton or another Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic *waht-
(cognates: Dutch wacht a watching, Old High German wahten, German wachten to watch, to guard; Old
High German wahhon to watch, be awake, Old English wacian to be awake; see wake (v.)). General sense
of remain in some place is from late 14c.; that of to see to it that something occurs is late 14c.
Meaning to stand by in attendance on is late 14c.; specific sense of serve as an attendant at a
table is from 1560s. Related: Waited; waiting.    To wait (something) out endure a period of waiting
is recorded from 1849. Waiting room is attested from 1680s. Waiting list is recorded from 1841; the
verb wait-list to put (someone) on a waiting list is recorded from 1960. Waiting game is recorded
from 1835, originally in horse-racing.    When speed, not stoutness, is the best of a horse, quite a
contrary system is practised. With such a horse, the jockey plays a waiting game; that is, he
carefully nurses him through the race, so as not to distress him by overpacing him; as the finish
approaches, he creeps up to his horses by degrees, but does not quit them to go in front till he
sees that the pace has made them safe, -- when he lets loose and wins. [James Christie Whyte,
History of the British Turf, London, 1840]


town (n.)

Old English tun enclosure, garden, field, yard; farm, manor; homestead, dwelling house, mansion;
later group of houses, village, farm, from Proto-Germanic *tunaz, *tunan fortified place (cognates:
Old Saxon, Old Norse, Old Frisian tun fence, hedge, Middle Dutch tuun fence, Dutch tuin garden, Old
High German zun, German Zaun fence, hedge), an early borrowing from Celtic *dunon hill, hill-fort
(cognates: Old Irish dun, Welsh din fortress, fortified place, camp, dinas city, Gaulish-Latin
-dunum in place names), from PIE *dhu-no- enclosed, fortified place, hill-fort, from root *dheue- to
close, finish, come full circle (see down (n.2)).    Meaning inhabited place larger than a village
(mid-12c.) arose after the Norman conquest from the use of this word to correspond to French ville.
The modern word is partially a generic term, applicable to cities of great size as well as places
intermediate between a city and a village; such use is unusual, the only parallel is perhaps Latin
oppidium, which occasionally was applied even to Rome or Athens (each of which was more properly an
urbs).    First record of town hall is from late 15c. Town ball, version of baseball, is recorded
from 1852. Town car (1907) originally was a motor car with an enclosed passenger compartment and
open driver's seat. On the town living the high life is from 1712. Go to town do (something)
energetically is first recorded 1933. Man about town one constantly seen at public and private
functions is attested from 1734.


