over (prep.)

Old English ofer beyond, above, upon, in, across, past; on high, from Proto-Germanic *uberi
(cognates: Old Saxon obar, Old Frisian over, Old Norse yfir, Old High German ubar, German &uuml;ber,
Gothic ufar over, above), from PIE *uper (see super-). As an adjective from Old English uffera. As
an adverb from late Old English. Sense of finished is attested from late 14c. Meaning recovered from
is from 1929. In radio communication, used to indicate the speaker has finished speaking (1926).
Adjective phrase over-the-counter is attested from 1875, originally of stocks and shares.


ended (adj.)

finished, completed, 1590s, past participle adjective from end (v.).


unaccomplished (adj.)

1520s, not finished, from un- (1) not + past participle of accomplish (v.). Meaning not furnished
with social or intellectual accomplishments is from 1729 (see accomplished).


choate (adj.)

finished, complete, mistaken back-formation from inchoate (q.v.) as though that word contained in-
not. First attested 1878 in letter from Oliver Wendell Holmes lamenting barbarisms in legal case
writing (he said he found choate in a California report).


done

past participle of do (v.); from Old English past participle gedon (a vestige of the prefix is in
ado). U.S. Southern use of done in phrases like he done gone to the store is attested from 1827,
according to OED: a perfective auxiliary or with adverbial force in the sense 'already; completely.'
Meaning finished is early 15c. Slang done for doomed is from 1842.


emeritus (adj.)

c.1600, from Latin emeritus veteran soldier who has served his time, literally that has finished
work, past service, past participle of emerere serve out, complete one's service, from ex- out (see
ex-) + merere to serve, earn, from PIE *(s)mer- to get a share of something (see merit (n.)). First
used of retired professors 1794 in American English.


finish (v.)

late 14c., to bring to an end; mid-15c., to come to an end, from Old French finiss-, present
participle stem of fenir (13c.) stop, finish, come to an end, die, from Latin finire to limit, set
bounds, put an end to, come to an end, from finis boundary, limit, border, end, of unknown origin,
perhaps related to figere to fasten, fix (see fix (v.)). Meaning to kill is from 1755. Related:
Finished; finishing. Finishing school is from 1836.


perfect (adj.)

early 15c. alteration of Middle English parfit (c.1300), from Old French parfit finished, completed,
ready (11c.), from Latin perfectus completed, excellent, accomplished, exquisite, past participle of
perficere accomplish, finish, complete, from per- completely (see per) + facere to perform (see
factitious). Often used in English as an intensive (perfect stranger, etc.).


selvage (n.)

mid-15c., edge of web or cloth so finished as to prevent raveling, apparently literally its own
edge, a corruption of self + edge (n.); on analogy of Middle Flemish selvegge (compare also Low
German sulfegge; Dutch zelfkant, from kant border; Middle High German selbende, German Selbend,
literally self-end).


corduroy (n.)

1780, probably from cord + obsolete 17c. duroy, name of a coarse fabric made in England, of unknown
origin. Folk etymology is from *corde du roi the king's cord, but this is not attested in French,
where the term for the cloth was velours &agrave; c&ocirc;tes. Applied in U.S. to a road of logs
across swampy ground (1780s) on similarity of appearance.    CORDUROY ROAD. A road or causeway
constructed with logs laid together over swamps or marshy places. When properly finished earth is
thrown between them by which the road is made smooth; but in newly settled parts of the United
States they are often left uncovered, and hence are extremely rough and bad to pass over with a
carriage. Sometimes they extend many miles. They derive their name from their resemblance to a
species of ribbed velvet, called corduroy. [Bartlett]


sketch (n.)

rough drawing intended to serve as the basis for a finished picture, 1660s, from Dutch schets or Low
German skizze, both apparently 17c. artists' borrowings from Italian schizzo sketch, drawing, which
is commonly said to be from Latin *schedius (OED compares schedia raft, schedium an extemporaneous
poem), from or related to Greek skhedios temporary, extemporaneous, done or made off-hand, related
to skhema form, shape, appearance (see scheme (n.)). But according to Barnhart Italian schizzo is a
special use of schizzo a splash, squirt, from schizzare to splash or squirt, of uncertain origin.
Extended sense of brief account is from 1660s; meaning short play or performance, usually comic is
from 1789. Sketch-book recorded from 1820. German Skizze, French esquisse, Spanish esquicio are
likewise from Italian schizzo.


reach (v.)

Old English r&aelig;can, reccan reach out, stretch out, extend, hold forth, also succeed in
touching, succeed in striking; address, speak to, also offer, present, give, grant, from West
Germanic *raikjan stretch out the hand (cognates: Old Frisian reka, Middle Dutch reiken, Dutch
reiken, Old High German and German reichen), from Proto-Germanic *raikijanau, perhaps from PIE root
*reig- to stretch out (cognates: Sanskrit rjyati he stretches himself, riag torture (by racking);
Greek oregein to reach, extend; Lithuanian rai&#382;ius to stretch oneself; Old Irish rigim I
stretch).    Shakespeare uses the now-obsolete past tense form raught (Old English r&aelig;hte).
Meaning arrive at is early 14c.; that of succeed in influencing is from 1660s. Related: Reached;
reaching. Reach-me-down ready-made (of clothes) is recorded from 1862, from notion of being on the
rack in a finished state.


achieve (v.)

early 14c., from Old French achever (12c.) to finish, accomplish, complete, from phrase &agrave;
chef (venir) at an end, finished, or Vulgar Latin *accapare, from Late Latin ad caput (venire); both
the French and Late Latin phrases meaning literally to come to a head, from stem of Latin caput head
(see capitulum).    The Lat. caput, towards the end of the Empire, and in Merov[ingian] times, took
the sense of an end, whence the phrase ad caput venire, in the sense of to come to an end ....
Venire ad caput naturally produced the Fr. phrase venir &agrave; chef = venir &agrave; bout. ...
From this chief, O.Fr. form of chef (q.v.) in sense of term, end, comes the Fr. compd. achever =
venir &agrave; chef, to end, finish. [Auguste Brachet, An Etymological Dictionary of the French
Language, transl. G.W. Kitchin, Oxford, 1878]    Related: Achieved; achieving.


river (n.)

early 13c., from Anglo-French rivere, Old French riviere river, riverside, river bank (12c.), from
Vulgar Latin *riparia riverbank, seashore, river (source also of Spanish ribera, Italian riviera),
noun use of fem. of Latin riparius of a riverbank (see riparian). Generalized sense of a copious
flow of anything is from late 14c. The Old English word was ea river, cognate with Gothic ahwa,
Latin aqua (see aqua-). Romanic cognate words tend to retain the sense river bank as the main one,
or else the secondary Latin sense coast of the sea (compare Riviera).    U.S. slang phrase up the
river in prison (1891) is originally in reference to Sing Sing prison, which was literally up the
(Hudson) river from New York City. Phrase down the river done for, finished perhaps echoes sense in
sell down the river (1851), originally of troublesome slaves, to sell from the Upper South to the
harsher cotton plantations of the Deep South.


kaput (adj.)

finished, worn out, dead, 1895, from German kaputt destroyed, ruined, lost (1640s), which in this
sense probably is a misunderstanding of the phrase capot machen, a partial translation of French
faire capot, a phrase which meant to win all the tricks (from the other player) in piquet, an
obsolete card game. Literally to make a bonnet; perhaps the notion is throwing a hood over the other
player, but faire capot also meant in French marine jargon to overset in a squall when under sail.
The word was popularized in English during World War I.   Kaput -- a slang word in common use which
corresponds roughly to the English done in, the French fichu. Everything enemy was kaput in the
early days of German victories. [F. Britten Austin, According to Orders, New York, 1919]    French
capot is literally cover, bonnet, also the name of a type of greatcloak worn by sailors and soldiers
(see capote). The card-playing sense attested in German only from 1690s, but capot in the
(presumably) transferred sense of destroyed, ruined, lost is attested from 1640s. [see William
Jervis Jones, A Lexicon of French Borrowings in the German Vocabulary (1575-1648), Berlin, de
Gruyter, 1976]. In Hoyle and other English gaming sources, faire capot is to win all the tricks, and
a different phrase, &ecirc;tre capot, to be a bonnet, is sometimes cited as the term for losing
them. The sense reversal in German might have come about because if someone wins all the tricks the
other player has to lose them, and the same word capot, when it entered English from French in the
mid-17c. meant to score a cabot against; to win all the tricks from.    There are others, says a
third, that have played with my Lady Lurewell at picquet besides my lord; I have capotted her myself
two or three times in an evening. [George Farquhar (1677-1707), Sir Harry Wildair]


