fissure (n.)

c.1400, from Old French fissure (13c.) and directly from Latin fissura a cleft, from root of findere
to split, cleave, from PIE *bhi-n-d-, from root *bheid- to split (cognates: Sanskrit bhinadmi I
cleave, Old High German  bizzan to bite, Old English  bita a piece bitten off,  morsel, Old Norse
beita to  hunt with dogs, beita  pasture, food).


chink (n.1)

a split, crack, 1530s, with parasitic -k + Middle English chine (and replacing this word) fissure,
narrow valley, from Old English cinu, cine fissure, related to cinan to crack, split, gape, common
Germanic (compare Old Saxon and Old High German kinan, Gothic uskeinan, German keimen to germinate;
Middle Dutch kene, Old Saxon kin, German Keim germ; ), from PIE root *geie- to sprout, split open.
The connection being in the notion of bursting open.


-fid

word-forming element meaning split, divided into parts, from Latin -fidus, related to findere to
split (see fissure).


fissile (adj.)

1660s, from Latin fissilis that which may be cleft or split, from fissus, past participle of findere
(see fissure).


fission (n.)

1841, division of a cell or organism, from Latin fissionem (nominative fissio) a breaking up,
cleaving, from past participle stem of findere to split (see fissure). Cognate with Old English
bitan to bite. Nuclear physics sense is 1939. As a verb, from 1929.


split (n.)

1590s, narrow cleft, crack, fissure, from split (v.). Meaning piece of wood formed by splitting is
from 1610s. Meaning an act of separation, a divorce is from 1729. From 1861 as the name of the
acrobatic feat. Meaning a drink composed of two liquors is from 1882; that of sweet dish of sliced
fruit with ice cream is attested from 1920, American English. Slang meaning share of the take is
from 1889. Meaning a draw in a double-header is from 1920.


crevice (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French crevace (12c., Modern French crevasse) gap, rift, crack (also, vulgarly,
the female pudenda), from Vulgar Latin *crepacia, from Latin crepare to crack, creak (see raven);
meaning shifted from the sound of breaking to the resulting fissure.


cranny (n.)

mid-15c., possibly from a diminutive of Middle French cran notch, fissure (14c.), from crener to
notch, split, from Medieval Latin crenare, possibly from Latin cernere to separate, sift (see
crisis). But OED casts doubt on this derivation.


sulcus (n.)

plural sulci, fissure between convolutions of the brain, 1833, from medical use of Latin sulcus
furrow, trench, ditch, wrinkle, apparently literally the result of plowing, from PIE *selk- to pull,
draw (cognates: Greek holkos furrow, Old English sulh plow, Lithuanian velku I draw).


chap (v.)

to crack, mid-15c., chappen (intransitive) to split, burst open; cause to crack (transitive);
perhaps a variant of choppen (see chop (v.), and compare strap/strop), or related to Middle Dutch
kappen to chop, cut, Danish kappe, Swedish kappa to cut. Related: Chapped; chapping. The noun
meaning fissure in the skin is from late 14c.


bifid (adj.)

split in two equal parts, 1660s, from Latin bifidus split into two parts, from bi- (see bi-) + stem
of findere to split (see fissure).


abet (v.)

late 14c. (implied in abetting), from Old French abeter to bait, to harass with dogs, literally to
cause to bite, from a- to (see ad-) + beter to bait, from a Germanic source, perhaps Low Franconian
betan incite, or Old Norse beita cause to bite, from Proto-Germanic *baitjan, from PIE root *bheid-
to split (see fissure). Related: Abetted; abetting.


boat (n.)

Old English bat boat, ship, vessel, from Proto-Germanic *bait- (cognates: Old Norse batr, Dutch
boot, German Boot), possibly from PIE root *bheid- to split (see fissure), with the sense of making
a boat by hollowing out a tree trunk; or it may be an extension of the name for some part of a ship.
French bateau boat is from Old English or Norse. Spanish batel, Italian battello, Medieval Latin
batellus likewise probably are from Germanic.


vent (n.)

c.1400, anus, from Old French vent from verb eventer (see vent (v.)) and in part from Middle English
aventer, from the French verb. Perhaps also merged with or influenced by Middle English fent opening
or slit in a the front of a garment (usually held closed with a brooch), c.1400, from Old French
fente, from Latin findere to split (see fissure). Meaning outlet for water, also air hole, breathing
hole is from mid-15c. Meaning action of venting is recorded from c.1500.


bite (v.)

Old English bitan (class I strong verb; past tense bat, past participle biten), from Proto-Germanic
*bitan (cognates: Old Saxon bitan, Old Norse and Old Frisian bita, Middle Dutch biten, Dutch bijten,
German beissen, Gothic beitan to bite), from PIE root *bheid- to split, crack (see fissure).    To
bite the bullet is said to be 1700s military slang, from old medical custom of having the patient
bite a lead bullet during an operation to divert attention from pain and reduce screaming.
Figurative use from 1891; the custom itself attested from 1840s. To bite (one's) tongue refrain from
speaking is 1590s. To bite the dust die is 1750 (Latin had the same image; compare Virgil's
procubuit moriens et humum semel ore momordit). To bite off more than one can chew (c.1880) is U.S.
slang, from plug tobacco.


bit (n.1)

small piece, c.1200; related Old English bite act of biting, and bita piece bitten off, probably are
the source of the modern words meaning boring-piece of a drill (1590s), mouthpiece of a horse's
bridle (mid-14c.), and a piece bitten off, morsel (c.1000). All from Proto-Germanic *biton
(cognates: Old Saxon biti, Old Norse bit, Old Frisian bite, Middle Dutch bete, Old High German bizzo
biting, German Bissen a bite, morsel), from PIE root *bheid- to split (see fissure).    Meaning
small piece, fragment is from c.1600. Sense of short space of time is 1650s. Theatrical bit part is
from 1909. Money sense in two bits, etc. is originally from Southern U.S. and West Indies, in
reference to silver wedges cut or stamped from Spanish dollars (later Mexican reals); transferred to
eighth of a dollar.


