flagrant (adj.)

c.1500, resplendent, from Latin flagrantem (nominative flagrans) burning, blazing, glowing,
figuratively glowing with passion, eager, vehement, present participle of flagrare to burn, blaze,
glow from Latin root *flag-, corresponding to PIE *bhleg- to shine, flash, burn (cognates: Greek
phlegein to burn, scorch, Latin fulgere to shine), from root *bhel- (1) to shine, flash, burn (see
bleach (v.)). Sense of glaringly offensive first recorded 1706, probably from common legalese phrase
in flagrante delicto red-handed, literally with the crime still blazing. Related: Flagrantly.


flagrance (n.)

1610s, from French flagrance or directly from Latin flagrantia, noun of quality from flagrantem (see
flagrant).


delict

1520s, from Latin delictum fault, offense, crime, neuter singular of past participle of delinquere
(see delinquent). Phrase in flagrant delict translates Latin in flagrante delicto.


deflagration (n.)

c.1600, from Latin deflagrationem (nominative deflagratio) a burning up, conflagration, noun of
action from past participle stem of deflagrare, from de- (see de-) + flagrare (see flagrant).


conflagration (n.)

1550s, from Middle French conflagration (16c.) or directly from Latin conflagrationem (nominative
conflagratio), present participle of conflagrare to burn up, from com-, intensive prefix (see com-),
+ flagrare to burn (see flagrant).


gross (adj.)

mid-14c., large; early 15c., coarse, plain, simple, from Old French gros big, thick, fat, tall,
pregnant; coarse, rude, awkward; ominous, important; arrogant (11c.), from Late Latin grossus thick,
coarse (of food or mind), of obscure origin, not in classical Latin. Said to be unrelated to Latin
crassus, which meant the same thing, or to German gross large, but said by Klein to be cognate with
Old Irish bres, Middle Irish bras big. Its meaning forked in English to glaring, flagrant, monstrous
(1580s) on the one hand and entire, total, whole (early 15c.) on the other. Meaning disgusting is
first recorded 1958 in U.S. student slang, from earlier use as an intensifier of unpleasant things
(gross stupidity, etc.). Earlier coarse in behavior or manners (1530s) and, of things, inferior,
common (late 15c.). Gross national product first recorded 1947.


