flag (n.1)

cloth ensign, late 15c., now in all modern Germanic languages, but apparently first recorded in
English, origin unknown, but likely connected with flag (v.) or else, like it, perhaps imitative. A
less likely guess is that it is from the flag in flagstone on notion of being square and flat. U.S.
Flag Day (1894) is in reference to the adopting of the Stars and Stripes by the Continental Congress
on June 14, 1777.


flag (n.3)

aquatic plant, late 14c., reed, rush, perhaps from a Scandinavian source (compare Danish fl&aelig;g
yellow iris) or Dutch flag; perhaps ultimately connected to flag (v.) on notion of fluttering in the
breeze.


flagstaff (n.)

1610s, from flag (n.) + staff (n.). The settlement in Arizona, U.S., so called for a July 4, 1876,
celebration in which a large flag was flown from a tall tree.


flagship (n.)

1670s, ship bearing an admiral's flag, from flag (n.) + ship (n.). Figurative use by 1933.


flagstone (n.)

1730, from flag (n.2) flat, split stone + stone (n.).


flag (n.2)

flat, split stone, c.1600, earlier piece cut from turf or sod (mid-15c.), from Old Norse flaga stone
slab, perhaps related to Old Norse flak (see flake (n.)).


flag (v.)

1540s, flap about loosely, perhaps a variant of Middle English flakken, flacken to flap, flutter
(late 14c.), probably from Old Norse flakka to flicker, flutter, perhaps imitative of something
flapping lazily in the wind.    Sense of go limp, droop is first recorded 1610s. Meaning to
designate as someone who will not be served more liquor is from 1980s, probably from use of flags to
signal trains, etc., to halt, which led to the verb in this sense (1856, American English). Related:
Flagged; flagging.


flagrant (adj.)

c.1500, resplendent, from Latin flagrantem (nominative flagrans) burning, blazing, glowing,
figuratively glowing with passion, eager, vehement, present participle of flagrare to burn, blaze,
glow from Latin root *flag-, corresponding to PIE *bhleg- to shine, flash, burn (cognates: Greek
phlegein to burn, scorch, Latin fulgere to shine), from root *bhel- (1) to shine, flash, burn (see
bleach (v.)). Sense of glaringly offensive first recorded 1706, probably from common legalese phrase
in flagrante delicto red-handed, literally with the crime still blazing. Related: Flagrantly.


tricolor (n.)

also tricolour, 1798, flag having three colors, especially the emblem of France adopted during the
Revolution, from French tricolore, in drapeau tricolore three-colored flag. The arrangement of
colors on the modern French national flag dates from 1794.


Stars and Stripes (n.)

American flag, attested from 1782. Stars and Bars as a name for the Confederate flag is attested
from 1863.


Union Jack

1670s, from union + jack (n.); properly a small British union flag flown as the jack of a ship, but
it has long been in use as a general name for the union flag. The Union flag (1630s) was introduced
to symbolize the union of the crowns of England and Scotland (in 1603) and was formed of a
combination of the cross saltire of St. Andrew and the cross of St. George. The cross saltire of St.
Patrick was added 1801 upon the union of parliaments of Great Britain and Ireland.


pennant (n.)

1610s, rope for hoisting, probably a blend of pendant in the nautical sense of suspended rope and
pennon. Use for flag on a warship first recorded 1690s; flag symbolizing a sports championship
(especially baseball) is from 1880; as a synonym for championship it was first used 1915.


pennon (n.)

long, narrow flag (often triangular or swallow-tailed), late 14c., from Old French penon feathers of
an arrow; streamer, flag, banner, from penne feather, from Latin penna feather (see pen (n.1)).


ensign (n.)

late 14c., via Scottish, from Old French enseigne (12c.) mark, symbol, signal; flag, standard,
pennant, from Latin insignia (plural); see insignia. Sense of banner, flag is c.1400; that of
soldier who carries one is first recorded 1510s. U.S. Navy sense of commissioned officer of the
lowest rank is from 1862. French navy had rank of enseigne de vaisseau since at least early 18c.


fane (n.)

weathercock, late 14c., from Old English fana flag, banner, from Proto-Germanic *fanon (cognates:
Old Frisian fana, Gothic fana piece of cloth, Old High German fano, German Fahne flag, standard);
possibly cognate with Latin pannus piece of cloth (see pane).


colors (n.)

flag of a regiment or ship 1580s, from color (n.).


streamer (n.)

flag that streams in the air, late 13c., agent noun from stream (v.).


standard (n.1)

mid-12c., flag or other conspicuous object to serve as a rallying point for a military force, from
shortened form of Old French estandart military standard, banner. According to Barnhart and others,
this is probably from Frankish *standhard, literally stand fast or firm, a compound of unrecorded
Frankish words cognate stand (v.) and hard. So called because the flag was fixed to a pole or spear
and stuck in the ground to stand upright. The more common theory [OED, etc.] calls this folk-
etymology and connects the Old French word to estendre to stretch out, from Latin extendere (see
extend). Some senses (such as upright pole, mid-15c.) seem to be influenced by if not from stand
(v.). Standard-bearer in the figurative sense is from 1560s.


vane (n.)

plate metal wind indicator, early 15c., southern England alteration (see V) of fane flag, banner.


bunting (n.1)

flag material, 1742, perhaps from Middle English bonting gerundive of bonten to sift, because cloth
was used for sifting grain, via Old French, from Vulgar Latin *bonitare to make good.


unflagging (adj.)

1715, from un- (1) not + present participle of flag (v.). Related: Unflaggingly.


fag (v.)

to droop, decline, tire, 1520s, apparently an alteration of flag (v.) in its sense of droop.
Transitive sense of to make (someone or something) fatigued is first attested 1826. Related: Fagged;
fagging.


star-spangled (adj.)

1590s, from star (n.) + spangle (v.); Star-Spangled Banner United States flag is 1814, from Francis
Scott Key's poem (printed in the Baltimore Patriot Sept. 20).


vexillology (n.)

study of flags, 1959, from Latin vexillum flag, military ensign, banner (from velum a sail, curtain,
veil; see veil (n.)) + -ology.


lone (adj.)

late 14c., having no companion, solitary, shortening of alone (q.v.) by weakening of stress or else
by misdivision of what is properly all one. The Lone Star in reference to Texas is first recorded
1843, from its flag. Lone wolf in the figurative sense is 1909, American English.


guidon (n.)

small flag, 1540s, from Middle French guidon (16c.), from Italian guidone battle standard, from
guidare to direct, guide, from Old Proven&ccedil;al guidar (see guide (v.)).


red (adj.1)

Old English read red, from Proto-Germanic *rauthaz (cognates: Old Norse rau&eth;r, Danish
r&oslash;d, Old Saxon rod, Old Frisian rad, Middle Dutch root, Dutch rood, German rot, Gothic
rau&thorn;s). As a noun from mid-13c.    The Germanic words are from PIE root *reudh- red, ruddy
(cognates: Latin ruber, also dialectal rufus light red, mostly of hair; Greek erythros; Sanskrit
rudhira-; Avestan raoidita-; Old Church Slavonic rudru, Polish rumiany, Russian rumjanyj flushed,
red, of complexions, etc.; Lithuanian raudas; Old Irish ruad, Welsh rhudd, Breton ruz red). The only
color for which a definite common PIE root word has been found. The initial -e- in the Greek word is
because Greek tends to avoid beginning words with -r-.    Along with dead, bread (n.), lead (n.1),
the vowel shortened in Middle English. The surname Read/Reid retains the original Old English long
vowel pronunciation and is the corresponding surname to Brown-, Black, White.    The color
designation of Native Americans in English from 1580s. The color as characteristic of British
possessions on a map is attested from 1885. Red-white-and-blue in reference to American patriotism,
from the colors of the flag, is from 1840; in a British context, in reference to the Union flag,
1852. The red flag was used as a symbol of defiance in battle on land or sea from c.1600. To see red
get angry is an American English expression first recorded 1898. Red rover, the children's game,
attested from 1891. Red light as a sign to stop is from 1849, long before traffic signals. As the
sign of a brothel, it is attested from 1899. As a children's game (in reference to the traffic light
meaning) it is recorded from 1953.   Red-letter day (late 14c.) was originally a saint's day, marked
on church calendars in red letters. Red ball signifying express in railroad jargon is 1904,
originally (1899) a system of moving and tracking freight cars. Red dog, type of U.S. football pass
rush, is recorded from 1959. Red meat is from 1808. Red shift in spectography is first recorded
1923. Red carpet sumptuous welcome is from 1934, but the custom for dignitaries is described as far
back as Aeschylus (Agamemnon); it also was the name of a type of English moth.


banner (n.)

c.1200, from Old French baniere (Modern French banni&egrave;re) flag, banner, standard, from Late
Latin bandum standard, borrowed from a West Germanic cognate of Gothic bandwa a sign (see band
(n.2)). Figurative use from early 14c. Of newspaper headlines, from 1913.


canton (n.)

1530s, corner, angle, from Middle French canton piece, portion of a country (13c.), from Italian
(Lombard dialect) cantone region, especially in the mountains, augmentative of Latin canto section
of a country, literally corner (see cant (n.2)). Originally in English a term in heraldry and flag
descriptions; applied to the sovereign states of the Swiss republic from 1610s. Related: Cantoned.


saltire (n.)

c.1400, an ordinary that resembles a St. Andrew's Cross on a shield or flag, consisting of a bend
dexter and a bend sinister crossing each other, from Middle French saultoir, literally stirrup, from
Medieval Latin saltatorium, properly neuter of Latin saltatorius pertaining to leaping, from salire
to leap (see salient (adj.)). The connection between a stirrup and the diagonal cross is perhaps the
two deltoid shapes that comprise the cross.


rally (v.1)

bring together, c.1600, from French rallier, from Old French ralier reassemble, unite again, from
re- again (see re-) + alier unite (see ally (v.)). Intransitive meaning pull together hastily,
recover order, revive, rouse is from 1660s. Related: Rallied; rallying. Rally round the flag (1862)
is a line from popular American Civil War song Battle Cry of Freedom.


pane (n.)

mid-13c., garment, part of a garment, later side of a building, section of a wall, from Old French
pan section, piece, panel (11c.), from Latin pannum (nominative pannus) piece of cloth, garment,
possibly from PIE root *pan- fabric (cognates: Gothic fana piece of cloth, Greek penos web, Old
English fanna flag). Sense of window glass first attested mid-15c.


palmetto (n.)

1580s, from Spanish palmito dwarf fan palm tree, diminutive of palma palm tree, from Latin palma
(see palm (n.2)). The suffix was subsequently Italianized. The Palmetto Flag was an emblem of South
Carolina after secession (1860); the state was called Palmetto State from at least 1837.


gonfalon

1590s, variant of Middle English gonfanon (c.1300), from Old French gonfanon knight's pennon (12c.),
from Old High German guntfano battle flag, from Proto-Germanic *gunthja- war, from PIE *gwhen- to
strike, kill (see bane) + *fano banner (compare Gothic fana cloth). Cognate with Old English
gu&thorn;fana, Old Norse gunnfani. Change of -n- to -l- by dissimilation.


flying (adj.)

Old English fleogende flying, winged, present participle of fly (v.1). Flying buttress is from
1660s; flying fish is from 1510s. Flying saucer first attested 1947, though the image of saucers for
unidentified flying objects is from at least 1880s. Flying Dutchman, ghost ship off the Cape of Good
Hope, attested since 1803 [John Leyden, Scenes of Infancy, who describes it as a common superstition
of mariners]. Flying colors (1706) probably is from the image of a naval vessel with the national
flag bravely displayed.


pendant (n.)

early 14c., loose, hanging part of anything, from Anglo-French pendaunt hanging (c.1300), Old French
pendant (13c.), noun use of present participle of pendre to hang, from Latin pendere to hang, from
PIE *(s)pend-, extended form of root *(s)pen- to pull, draw, stretch (see span (v.)). Meaning
dangling part of an earring is attested from 1550s. Nautical sense of tapering flag is recorded from
late 15c. In this sense presumably a corruption of pennon [OED].


jack (n.)

late 14c., jakke a mechanical device, from the masc. name Jack. The proper name was used in Middle
English for any common fellow (mid-14c.), and thereafter extended to various appliances replacing
servants (1570s). Used generically of men (jack-of-all-trades, 1610s), male animals (1620s, see
jackass, jackdaw, etc.), and male personifications (1520s, such as Jack Frost, 1826).    As the name
of a device for pulling off boots, from 1670s. The jack in a pack of playing cards (1670s) is in
German Bauer peasant. Jack shit nothing at all is attested by 1968, U.S. slang. The plant jack-in-
the-pulpit is attested by 1837. Jack the Ripper was active in London 1888. The jack of Union Jack is
a nautical term for small flag at the bow of a ship (1630s).


map (n.)

1520s, shortening of Middle English mapemounde map of the world (late 14c.), and in part from Middle
French mappe, shortening of Old French mapemonde, both English and French words from Medieval Latin
mappa mundi map of the world; first element from Latin mappa napkin, cloth (on which maps were
drawn), tablecloth, signal-cloth, flag, said by Quintilian to be of Punic origin (compare Talmudic
Hebrew mappa, contraction of Mishnaic menaphah a fluttering banner, streaming cloth) + Latin mundi
of the world, from mundus universe, world (see mundane). Commonly used 17c. in a figurative sense of
epitome; detailed representation. To put (something) on the map bring it to wide attention is from
1913.


placenta (n.)

1670s of plants, 1690s of mammals, from Modern Latin placenta uterina uterine cake (so called 16c.
by Italian anatomist Realdo Colombo), from Latin placenta a cake, flat cake, from Greek plakoenta,
accusative of plakoeis flat, related to plax (genitive plakos) level surface, anything flat, from
PIE *plak- (1) to be flat (cognates: Greek plakoeis flat, Lettish plakt to become flat, Old Norse
flaga layer of earth, Norwegian flag open sea, Old English floh piece of stone, fragment, Old High
German fluoh cliff), extended form of root *pele- (2) flat, to spread (see plane (n.1)). So called
from the shape.


Roger

masc. proper name, from Old French Rogier, from Old High German Hrotger, literally famous with the
spear, from hruod- fame, glory + ger spear (see gar (n.)). As a generic name for a person, attested
from 1630s. Slang meaning penis was popular c.1650-c.1870; hence the slang verb sense of to copulate
with (a woman), attested from 1711.    The use of the word in radio communication to mean yes, I
understand is attested from 1941, from the U.S. military phonetic alphabet word for the letter -R-,
in this case an abbreviation for received. Said to have been used by the R.A.F. since 1938. The
Jolly Roger pirate flag is first attested 1723, of unknown origin; jolly here has its otherwise
obsolete Middle English sense high-hearted, gallant. Roger de Coverley, once a favorite English
country dance, is so called from 1685, in reference to Addison's character in the Spectator. French
roger-bontemps jovial, carefree man, is attested there from 15c.


waif (n.)

late 14c., unclaimed property, flotsam, stray animal, from Anglo-French waif (13c., Old French
guaif) ownerless property, something lost; as an adjective, not claimed, outcast, abandoned,
probably from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse veif waving thing, flag, from Proto-Germanic
*waif-, from PIE *weip- to turn, vacillate, tremble ecstatically (see vibrate). Compare Medieval
Latin waivium thing thrown away by a thief in flight. A Scottish/northern English parallel form was
wavenger (late 15c.).    Meaning person (especially a child) without home or friends first attested
1784, from legal phrase waif and stray (1620s), from the adjective in the sense lost, strayed,
homeless. Neglected children being uncommonly thin, the word tended toward this sense. Connotations
of fashionable, small, slender woman began 1991 with application to childishly slim supermodels such
as Kate Moss.


Orangemen (n.)

secret society founded 1795 in Belfast to promote Protestant power in Northern Ireland, named for
William of Orange (who became King William III of England and triumphed in Ireland at the head of a
Protestant army at the Battle of the Boyne), of the German House of Nassau. His cousins and their
descendants constitute the royal line of Holland.    The name is from the town of Orange on the
Rhone in France, which became part of the Nassau principality in 1530. Its Roman name was Arausio,
which is said in 19c. sources to be from aura a breeze and a reference to the north winds which rush
down the valley, but perhaps this is folk etymology of a Celtic word. The name subsequently was
corrupted to Auranche, then Orange. The town has no obvious association with the fruit other than
being on the road from Marseilles to Paris, along which masses of oranges were transported to
northern France and beyond. In this roundabout way the political/religious movement of Northern
Irish Protestantism acquired an association with the color orange, the Irish national flag acquired
its orange band, and Syracuse University in New York state acquired its Otto the Orange mascot.


yellow ribbon

The American folk custom of wearing or displaying a yellow ribbon to signify solidarity with loved
ones or fellow citizens at war originated during the U.S. embassy hostage crisis in Iran in 1979. It
does not have a connection to the American Civil War, beyond the use of the old British folk song
Round Her Neck She Wore A Yellow Ribbon in the John Wayne movie of the same name, with a Civil War
setting, released in 1949. The story of a ribbon tied to a tree as a signal to a convict returning
home that his loved ones have forgiven him is attested from 1959, but the ribbon in that case was
white.    The ribbon color seems to have changed to yellow first in a version retold by newspaper
columnist Pete Hamill in 1971. The story was dramatized in June 1972 on ABC-TV (James Earl Jones
played the ex-con). Later that year, Irwin Levine and L. Russell Brown copyrighted the song Tie a
Yellow Ribbon Round the Ole Oak Tree, which became a pop hit in early 1973 and sparked a lawsuit by
Hamill, later dropped.    In 1975, the wife of a Watergate conspirator put out yellow ribbons when
her husband was released from jail, and news coverage of that was noted and remembered by Penne
Laingen, whose husband was U.S. ambassador to Iran in 1979 and one of the Iran hostages taken in the
embassy on Nov. 4. Her yellow ribbon in his honor was written up in the Dec. 10, 1979, Washington
Post. When the hostage families organized as the Family Liaison Action Group (FLAG), they took the
yellow ribbon as their symbol. The ribbons revived in the 1991 Gulf War and again during the 2000s
wars in Afghanistan and Iraq.


black (adj.)

Old English bl&aelig;c dark, from Proto-Germanic *blakaz burned (cognates: Old Norse blakkr dark,
Old High German blah black, Swedish bl&auml;ck ink, Dutch blaken to burn), from PIE *bhleg- to burn,
gleam, shine, flash (cognates: Greek phlegein to burn, scorch, Latin flagrare to blaze, glow, burn),
from root *bhel- (1) to shine, flash, burn; see bleach (v.).    The same root produced Old English
blac bright, shining, glittering, pale; the connecting notions being, perhaps, fire (bright) and
burned (dark). The usual Old English word for black was sweart (see swart). According to OED: In ME.
it is often doubtful whether blac, blak, blake, means 'black, dark,' or 'pale, colourless, wan,
livid.'  Used of dark-skinned people in Old English.    Of coffee, first attested 1796. Meaning
fierce, terrible, wicked is late 14c. The color of sin and sorrow since at least c.1300; sense of
with dark purposes, malignant emerged 1580s (as in black magic). Black face in reference to a
performance style originated in U.S., is from 1868. Black flag, flown (especially by pirates) as a
signal of no mercy, from 1590s. Black dog melancholy attested from 1826. Black belt is from 1875 in
reference to districts of the U.S. South with heaviest African population; 1870 with reference to
fertility of soil; 1913 in judo sense. Black power is from 1966, associated with Stokely Carmichael.


white (adj.)

Old English hwit bright, radiant; clear, fair, also as a noun (see separate entry), from Proto-
Germanic *hwitaz (cognates: Old Saxon and Old Frisian hwit, Old Norse hvitr, Dutch wit, Old High
German hwiz, German wei&szlig;, Gothic hveits), from PIE *kweid-o-, suffixed form of root *kweit-
white; to shine (cognates: Sanskrit svetah white; Old Church Slavonic sviteti to shine, svetu light;
Lithuanian &#353;viesti to shine, svaityti to brighten).    As a surname, originally with reference
to fair hair or complexion, it is one of the oldest in English, being well-established before the
Conquest. Meaning morally pure was in Old English. Association with royalist causes is late 18c.
Slang sense of honorable, fair is 1877, American English; in Middle English it meant gracious,
friendly, favorable. The racial sense of those races (chiefly European or of European extraction)
characterized by light complexion is recorded from c.1600; meaning characteristic of or pertaining
to white people is from 1852, American English. White supremacy attested from 1884, American
English; white flight is from 1966, American English.   White way brightly illuminated street in a
big city is from 1908. White flag of truce or surrender is from c.1600. White lie is attested from
1741. White Christmas is attested from 1847. White House as the name of the U.S. presidential
residence is recorded from 1811. White water river rapids is recorded from 1580s. White Russian
language of Byelorussia is recorded from 1850; the mixed drink is from c.1978. Astronomical white
dwarf is from 1924. White witch, one who used the power for good, is from 1620s.


raven (n.)

Old English hr&aelig;fn (Mercian), hrefn; hr&aelig;fn (Northumbrian, West Saxon), from Proto-
Germanic *khrabanas (cognates: Old Norse hrafn, Danish ravn, Dutch raaf, Old High German hraban,
German Rabe raven, Old English hroc rook), from PIE root *ker- (2), imitative of harsh sounds
(cognates: Latin crepare to creak, clatter, cornix crow, corvus raven; Greek korax raven, korone
crow; Old Church Slavonic kruku raven; Lithuanian krauklys crow). Raven mythology shows considerable
homogeneity throughout the whole area [northern regions of the northern hemisphere] in spite of
differences in detail. The Raven peeps forth from the mists of time and the thickets of mythology,
as a bird of slaughter, a storm bird, a sun and fire bird, a messenger, an oracular figure and a
craftsman or culture hero. [Edward A. Armstrong, The Folklore of Birds, 1958]Old English also used
hr&aelig;mn, hremm. The raven standard was the flag of the Danish Vikings. The Quran connects the
raven with Cain's murder of Abel; but in Christianity the bird plays a positive role in the stories
of St. Benedict, St. Paul the Hermit, St. Vincent, etc. It was anciently believed to live to great
old age, but the ancients also believed it wanting in parental care. The vikings, like Noah, were
said to have used the raven to discover land. When uncertain of their course they let one loose, and
steered the vessel in his track, deeming that the land lay in the direction of his flight; if he
returned to the ship, it was supposed to be at a distance [Charles Swainson, The Folk Lore and
Provincial Names of British Birds, London, 1886].


staff (n.)

Old English st&aelig;f (plural stafas), walking stick, strong pole used for carrying, rod used as a
weapon, pastoral staff, probably originally *st&aelig;b, from Proto-Germanic *stabaz (cognates: Old
Saxon staf, Old Norse stafr, Danish stav, Old Frisian stef, Middle Low German and Middle Dutch staf,
Old High German stab, German Stab, Gothic *stafs element; Middle Dutch stapel pillar, foundation),
from PIE root *stebh- post, stem, to support, place firmly on, fasten (cognates: Old Lithuanian
stabas idol, Lithuanian stebas staff, pillar; Old Church Slavonic stoboru pillar; Sanskrit stabhnati
supports; Greek stephein to tie around, encircle, wreathe, staphyle grapevine, bunch of grapes; Old
English stapol post, pillar).    As pole from which a flag is flown, 1610s. In musical notation from
1660s. Sense of group of military officers that assists a commander is attested from 1702,
apparently from German, from the notion of the baton that is a badge of office or authority (a sense
attested in English from 1530s); hence staff officer (1702), staff-sergeant (1811). Meaning group of
employees (as at an office or hospital) is first found 1837. Staff of life bread is from the
Biblical phrase break the staff of bread meaning cut off the supply of food (Lev. xxvi:26),
translating Hebrew matteh lekhem.    The Old English word, in plural, was the common one used for
letter of the alphabet, character, hence writing, literature, and many compounds having to do with
writing, such as st&aelig;fcr&aelig;ft grammar, st&aelig;fcr&aelig;ftig lettered,  st&aelig;flic
literary, st&aelig;fleahtor grammatical error, with leahtor vice, sin, offense.


old (adj.)

Old English ald (Anglian), eald (West Saxon) aged, antique, primeval; elder, experienced, from
Proto-Germanic *althas grown up, adult (cognates: Old Frisian ald, Gothic al&thorn;eis, Dutch oud,
German alt), originally a past participle stem of a verb meaning grow, nourish (compare Gothic alan
to grow up, Old Norse ala to nourish), from PIE root *al- to grow, nourish (cognates: Greek aldaino
make grow, strengthen, althein,  althainein to get well; Latin alere to feed, nourish, bring up,
increase, altus high, literally grown tall, almus nurturing, nourishing, alumnus fosterling, step-
child; Old Irish alim I nourish).    The usual PIE root is *sen- (see senior (adj.)). A few Indo-
European languages distinguish words for old (vs. young) from words for old (vs. new), and some have
separate words for aged persons as opposed to old things. Latin senex was used of aged living
things, mostly persons, while vetus (literally having many years) was used of inanimate things.
Greek geraios was used mostly of humans; Greek palaios was used mostly of things, of persons only in
a derogatory sense. Greek also had arkhaios, literally belonging to the beginning, which parallels
French ancien, used mostly with reference to things of former times.    Old English also had fyrn
ancient, related to Old English feor far, distant (see far, and compare Gothic fairneis, Old Norse
forn old, of old, of former times, Old High German firni old, experienced). The original Old English
vowel is preserved in Scots auld, also in alderman. The original comparative and superlative (elder,
eldest) are retained in particular uses.    First record of old-timer is from 1860. Expression old
as the hills first recorded 1819. The good old days dates from 1828. Of old of old times is from
late 14c. Old Glory for the American flag is first attested 1862. Old maid woman who remains single
well beyond the usual marrying age is from 1520s; the card game is attested by that name from 1844.
Old man man who has lived long is from c.1200; sense of husband, father, boss is from 1854, earlier
(1830) it was military slang for commanding officer; old lady wife, mother is attested from c.1775.
Old English is attested from 1701, originally as a type of font. Old boy originally was a former
pupil of one of the English public schools. Old Testament attested from mid-14c.


