flashy (adj.)

showy, cheaply attractive, 1680s, from flash + -y (2). Earlier it meant splashing (1580s);
sparkling, giving off flashes (c.1600). Related: Flashily; flashiness.


snazzy (adj.)

stylish, flashy, 1932, U.S. colloquial, perhaps a blend of snappy and jazzy.


tinhorn (adj.)

petty but flashy, 1857, from tin + horn (n.); originally of low-class gamblers, from the tin cans
they used for shaking dice.


jay (adj.)

fourth-rate, worthless (as in a jay town), 1888, American English, apparently from some disparaging
sense of jay (n.). Perhaps from a decaying or ironical use of jay flashy dresser.


gow (n.)

1915, opium, from Cantonese yao-kao opium, literally drug-sap; used as such by Raymond Chandler,
etc.; by 1950s meaning had expanded to pictures of nude or scantily clad women, hence gow job flashy
girl, which in teenager slang came to also mean hot rod.


flaunt (v.)

1560s, to display oneself in flashy clothes, of unknown origin; perhaps a variant of flout or vaunt.
It looks French, but it corresponds to no known French word. Transitive sense is from 1827. Related:
Flaunted; flaunting.


spiv (n.)

petty crook who will turn his hand to anything so long as it does not involve honest work, 1934,
British slang, probably dating back to late 19c. and connected with spiff (see spiffy) in one of its
various senses. Being a flashy dresser was a spiv characteristic.    The spiv reached his apotheosis
during World War II and the succeeding years, when the disrupted economic conditions allowed ample
scope for unofficial trading (a pair of nylons here, a few packets of cigarettes there) and other
petty crime. He became a stock figure in the English social comedy, represented on screen by such
stereotypes as 'Flash Harry' (played by George Cole) in the St. Trinian's films and Pte. Walker in
Dad's Army. [Ayto, 20th Century Words]


jay (n.)

c.1300, common European bird (Garrulus glandarinus), from Old North French gai, Old French jai
magpie, jay, from Late Latin gaius a jay, probably echoic and supposedly influenced by Latin Gaius,
a common Roman proper name. For other bird names from proper names, compare martin and parrot.
Applied to the North American blue jay (Cyanocitta cristata) from 1709. Applied to humans in sense
of impertinent chatterer, flashy dresser from 1620s.


