flay (v.)

Old English flean to skin (strong verb, past tense flog, past participle flagen), from Proto-
Germanic *flahan (cognates: Middle Dutch vlaen, Old High German flahan, Old Norse fla), from PIE
root *pl(e)ik-, *pleik- to tear (cognates: Lithuanian ple&#353;iu to tear). Related: Flayed;
flaying.


tear (v.1)

pull apart, Old English teran to tear, lacerate (class IV strong verb; past tense t&aelig;r, past
participle toren), from Proto-Germanic *teran (cognates: Old Saxon terian, Middle Dutch teren to
consume, Old High German zeran to destroy, German zehren, Gothic ga-tairan to tear, destroy), from
PIE *der- (2) to split, peel, flay, with derivatives referring to skin and leather (cognates:
Sanskrit drnati cleaves, bursts, Greek derein to flay, Armenian terem I flay, Old Church Slavonic
dera to burst asunder, Breton darn piece).    The Old English past tense survived long enough to get
into Bible translations as tare before giving place 17c. to tore, which is from the old past
participle toren. Sense of to pull by force (away from some situation or attachment) is attested
from late 13c. To be torn between two things (desires, loyalties, etc.) is from 1871.


tetter (n.)

skin disease, Old English teter, from a reduplicated form of PIE *der- (2) to split, peel, flay (see
tear (v.1)).


skinflint (n.)

miser, one who makes use of contemptible economy to keep money, 1700, slang; literally kind of
person who would skin a flint to save or gain something, from skin (v.) + flint. Flay-flint in same
sense is from 1670s.


derma (n.)

skin beneath the epidermis, 1706, from Modern Latin derma, from Greek derma (genitive dermatos)
skin, from PIE root *der- (2) to split, peel, flay (see tear (v.1)).


fleck (v.)

late 14c., probably from Old Norse flekka to spot, from Proto-Germanic *flekk- (cognates: Middle
Dutch vlecke, Old High German flec, German Fleck), from PIE *pleik- to tear (see flay). Related:
Flecked; flecking.


tart (adj.)

having a sharp taste, 1520s, also attested once, obscurely, from late 14c., perhaps from Old English
teart painful, sharp, severe, rough (in reference to punishment, pain, suffering), from Germanic
*ter-t-, from PIE *der- (2) to split, flay, peel (see tear (v.1)), but the gap in the record is
unexplained. Figurative use, with reference to words, speech, etc., is attested from c.1600.
Related: Tartly; tartness, both also absent in Middle English.


excoriate (v.)

early 15c., from Late Latin excoriatus, past participle of excoriare flay, strip off the hide, from
Latin ex- off (see ex-) + corium hide, skin (see corium). Figurative sense of denounce, censure
first recorded in English 1708. Related: Excoriated; excoriating.


scorch (v.)

to burn superficially or slightly, but so as to change the color or injure the texture, early 14c.,
perhaps an alteration of scorrcnenn make dry, parch (c.1200), of obscure origin, perhaps from Old
Norse skorpna to be shriveled, cognate with Old English scrimman to shrink, dry up. Or perhaps from
Old French escorchier to strip off the skin, from Vulgar Latin excorticare to flay, from ex- (see
ex-) + Latin cortex (genitive corticis) cork; but OED finds this not likely. Scorched earth military
strategy is 1937, translation of Chinese jiaotu, used against the Japanese in a bid to stem their
advance into China.


flax (n.)

Old English fleax cloth made with flax, linen, from Proto-Germanic *flakhsan (cognates: Old Frisian
flax, Middle Dutch and Dutch vlas, Old Saxon flas, Old High German flahs, German Flachs), probably
from Proto-Germanic base *fleh-, corresponding to PIE *plek- to weave, plait (see ply (v.1)). But
some connect it with PIE *pleik- (see flay) from the notion of stripping fiber to prepare it.


flake (n.)

thin, flat piece, early 14c., possibly from Old English *flacca flakes of snow, from Old Norse flak
loose or torn piece (related to Old Norse fla to skin, see flay), from Proto-Germanic *flago-
(cognates: Middle Dutch vlac, Dutch vlak flat, level, Middle High German vlach, German Flocke
flake); from PIE *plak- (1) to be flat, extended form of root *pele- (2) flat, to spread (see plane
(n.1)).


turd (n.)

Old English tord piece of excrement, from Proto-Germanic *turdam (cognates: Middle Dutch torde piece
of excrement, Old Norse tord-yfill, Dutch tort-wevel dung beetle), from PIE *drtom, past participle
of root *der- (2) to split, peel, flay, tear; thus that which is separated (torn off) from the body
(compare shit (v.) from root meaning to split; Greek skatos from root meaning to cut off; see
scatology). As a type of something worthless and vile, it is attested from mid-13c. Meaning
despicable person is recorded from mid-15c.    A tord ne yeue ic for eu alle [The Owl and the
Nightingale, c.1250]   <hr />   Alle thingis ... I deme as toordis, that I wynne Crist. [Wyclif,
Phil. iii.8, 1382; KJV has I count all things ... but dung, that I may win Christ]


skin (n.)

c.1200, animal hide (usually dressed and tanned), from Old Norse skinn animal hide, fur, from Proto-
Germanic *skintha- (cognates: Old English scinn (rare), Old High German scinten, German schinden to
flay, skin; German dialectal schind skin of a fruit, Flemish schinde bark), from PIE *sken- to cut
off (cognates: Breton scant scale of a fish, Irish scainim I tear, I burst), from root *sek- to cut
(see section (n.)).    Ful of fleissche Y was to fele, Now ... Me is lefte But skyn &amp; boon.
[hymn, c.1430]    The usual Anglo-Saxon word is hide (n.1). Meaning epidermis of a living animal or
person is attested from early 14c.; extended to fruits, vegetables, etc. late 14c. Jazz slang sense
of drum is from 1927. Meaning a skinhead is from 1970. As an adjective, it formerly had a slang
sense of cheating (1868); sense of pornographic is attested from 1968. Skin deep is first attested
in this:    All the carnall beauty of my wife, Is but skin-deep. [Sir Thomas Overbury, A Wife, 1613;
the poem was a main motive for his murder]    The skin of one's teeth as the narrowest of margins is
attested from 1550s in the Geneva Bible literal translation of the Hebrew text in Job xix:20. To get
under (someone's) skin annoy is from 1896. Skin-graft is from 1871. Skin merchant recruiting officer
is from 1792.


Hobbit (n.)

1937, coined in the fantasy tales of J.R.R. Tolkien (1892-1973).    On a blank leaf I scrawled: 'In
a hole in the ground there lived a hobbit.' I did not and do not know why.  [Tolkien, letter to W.H.
Auden, dated 1955]    The word also turns up in a very long list of folkloric supernatural creatures
in the writings of Michael Aislabie Denham (d.1859), printed in volume 2 of The Denham Tracts [ed.
James Hardy, London: Folklore Society, 1895], a compilation of Denham's scattered publications.
Denham was an early folklorist who concentrated on Northumberland, Durham, Westmoreland, Cumberland,
the Isle of Man, and Scotland.    What a happiness this must have been seventy or eighty years ago
and upwards, to those chosen few who had the good luck to be born on the eve of this festival of all
festivals; when the whole earth was so overrun with ghosts, boggles, bloody-bones, spirits, demons,
ignis fatui, brownies, bugbears, black dogs, specters, shellycoats, scarecrows, witches, wizards,
barguests, Robin-Goodfellows, hags, night-bats, scrags, breaknecks, fantasms, hobgoblins,
hobhoulards, boggy-boes, dobbies, hob-thrusts, fetches, kelpies, warlocks, mock-beggars, mum-pokers,
Jemmy-burties, urchins, satyrs, pans, fauns, sirens, tritons, centaurs, calcars, nymphs, imps,
incubuses, spoorns, men-in-the-oak, hell-wains, fire-drakes, kit-a-can-sticks, Tom-tumblers, melch-
dicks, larrs, kitty-witches, hobby-lanthorns, Dick-a-Tuesdays, Elf-fires, Gyl-burnt-tales, knockers,
elves, rawheads, Meg-with-the-wads, old-shocks, ouphs, pad-foots, pixies, pictrees, giants, dwarfs,
Tom-pokers, tutgots, snapdragons, sprets, spunks, conjurers, thurses, spurns, tantarrabobs,
swaithes, tints, tod-lowries, Jack-in-the-Wads, mormos, changelings, redcaps, yeth-hounds, colt-
pixies, Tom-thumbs, black-bugs, boggarts, scar-bugs, shag-foals, hodge-pochers, hob-thrushes, bugs,
bull-beggars, bygorns, bolls, caddies, bomen, brags, wraiths, waffs, flay-boggarts, fiends,
gallytrots, imps, gytrashes, patches, hob-and-lanthorns, gringes, boguests, bonelesses, Peg-powlers,
pucks, fays, kidnappers, gallybeggars, hudskins, nickers, madcaps, trolls, robinets, friars'
lanthorns, silkies, cauld-lads, death-hearses, goblins, hob-headlesses, bugaboos, kows, or cowes,
nickies, nacks necks, waiths, miffies, buckies, ghouls, sylphs, guests, swarths, freiths, freits,
gy-carlins Gyre-carling, pigmies, chittifaces, nixies, Jinny-burnt-tails, dudmen, hell-hounds,
dopple-gangers, boggleboes, bogies, redmen, portunes, grants, <b>hobbits</b>, hobgoblins, brown-men,
cowies, dunnies, wirrikows, alholdes, mannikins, follets, korreds, lubberkins, cluricauns, kobolds,
leprechauns, kors, mares, korreds, puckles korigans, sylvans, succubuses, blackmen, shadows,
banshees, lian-hanshees, clabbernappers, Gabriel-hounds, mawkins, doubles, corpse lights or candles,
scrats, mahounds, trows, gnomes, sprites, fates, fiends, sibyls, nicknevins, whitewomen, fairies,
thrummy-caps, cutties, and nisses, and apparitions of every shape, make, form, fashion, kind and
description, that there was not a village in England that had not its own peculiar ghost. Nay, every
lone tenement, castle, or mansion-house, which could boast of any antiquity had its bogle, its
specter, or its knocker. The churches, churchyards, and crossroads were all haunted. Every green
lane had its boulder-stone on which an apparition kept watch at night. Every common had its circle
of fairies belonging to it. And there was scarcely a shepherd to be met with who had not seen a
spirit!    [Emphasis added] It is curious that the name occurs nowhere else in folklore, and there
is no evidence that Tolkien ever saw this. The word also was recorded from 1835 as a term generally
used in Wales to express a quantity made up of four Welsh pecks. Hobbitry attested from 1947.


