fleece (v.)

1530s in the literal sense of to strip a sheep of fleece; 1570s in the figurative meaning to cheat,
swindle, from fleece (n.). Related: Fleeced; fleecing.


fleece (n.)

Old English fleos, from West Germanic *flusaz (cognates: Middle Dutch vluus, Dutch vlies, Middle
High German vlius, German Vlies), probably from PIE *pleus- to pluck, also a feather, fleece
(cognates: Latin pluma feather, down, Lithuanian plunksna feather).


plume (n.)

late 14c., a feather (especially a large and conspicuous one), from Old French plume soft feather,
down; feather bed, and directly from Latin pluma a feather, down; the first beard, from PIE root
*pleus- to pluck; a feather, fleece (source of Old English fleos fleece). Meaning a long streamer of
smoke, etc. is first attested 1878.


fleecy (adj.)

1560s, from fleece (n.) + -y (2).


villus (n.)

long, slender hair, 1704, plural villi, from modern use of Latin villus tuft of hair, shaggy hair,
wool, fleece (see velvet).


Argonaut (n.)

sailor of the Argo, 1580s (implied in argonautic), from Argo + Greek nautes sailor (see naval).
Adventurers in the California Gold Rush of 1848 were called argonauts (because they sought the
golden fleece) by those who stayed home.


Argo

name of the ship in which Jason and his companions sought the Fleece in Colchis, in Greek, literally
The Swift, from argos swift (adj.), an epithet, literally shining, bright (see argent; compare also
Sanskrit cognate rjrah shining, glowing, bright, also swift), because all swift motion causes a kind
of glancing or flickering light [Liddell &amp; Scott].


skin (v.)

late 14c., to remove the skin from (originally of circumcision), from skin (n.). As to have (a
particular kind of) skin from c.1400. In 19c. U.S. colloquial use, to strip, fleece, plunder; hence
skin-game, one in which one player has no chance against the others (as with a stacked deck), the
type of con game played in a skin-house. Skin the cat in gymnastics is from 1845. Related: Skinned;
skinning.


rifle (v.1)

to plunder, early 14c. (implied in rifling), from Old French rifler strip, filch, plunder, peel off
(skin or bark), fleece, literally to graze, scratch (12c.), probably from a Germanic source (compare
Old English geriflian to wrinkle, Old High German riffilon to tear by rubbing, Old Norse rifa to
tear, break). Related: Rifled; rifling.


pillage (n.)

late 14c., act of plundering (especially in war), from Old French pilage (14c.) plunder, from
pillier to plunder, loot, ill-treat, possibly from Vulgar Latin *piliare to plunder, probably from a
figurative use of Latin pilare to strip of hair, perhaps also meaning to skin (compare figurative
extension of verbs pluck, fleece), from pilus a hair (see pile (n.3)).


velvet (n.)

early 14c., probably from Old Proven&ccedil;al veluet, from Vulgar Latin *villutittus, diminutive of
Vulgar Latin *villutus velvet, literally shaggy cloth, from Latin villus shaggy hair, nap of cloth,
tuft of hair, probably a dialectal variant of vellus fleece, from PIE *wel-no-, suffixed form of
root *wel- (4) to tear, pull (see svelte).


fluff (n.)

light, feathery stuff, 1790, apparently a variant of floow wooly substance, down, nap (1580s),
perhaps from Flemish vluwe, from French velu shaggy, hairy, from Latin vellus fleece, or Latin
villus tuft of hair (see velvet). OED suggests fluff as an imitative modification of floow,
imitating the action of puffing away some light substance. Slang bit of fluff young woman is from
1903. The marshmallow confection Fluff dates to c.1920 in Massachusetts, U.S.


fight (v.)

Old English feohtan to fight (class III strong verb; past tense feaht, past participle fohten), from
Proto-Germanic *fehtan (cognates: Old High German fehtan, German fechten, Middle Dutch and Dutch
vechten, Old Frisian fiuhta to fight), from PIE *pek- (2) to pluck out (wool or hair), apparently
with a notion of pulling roughly (cognates: Greek pekein to comb, shear, pekos fleece, wool; Persian
pashm wool, down, Latin pectere to comb, Sanskrit paksman- eyebrows, hair).    Spelling substitution
of -gh- for a hard H sound was a Middle English scribal habit, especially before -t-. In some late
Old English examples, the middle consonant was represented by a yogh. To fight back resist is
recorded from 1890.


wool (n.)

Old English wull wool, fine soft hair which forms the coat of some animals, from Proto-Germanic
*wulno (cognates: Old Norse ull, Old Frisian wolle, Middle Dutch wolle, Dutch wol, Old High German
wolla, German wolle, Gothic wulla), from PIE *wele- (1) wool (cognates: Sanskrit urna; Avestan
varena; Greek lenos wool; Latin lana wool, vellus fleece; Old Church Slavonic vluna, Russian vulna,
Lithuanian vilna wool; Middle Irish olann, Welsh gwlan wool).    Figurative expression pull the wool
over (someone's) eyes is recorded from 1838, American English. To be literally dyed in the wool
(1725, as opposed to dyed in the piece) is to be so before spinning, while the material is in its
raw state, which has a more durable effect; hence the figurative sense from the beginning; most
thoroughly, attested from 1809, and especially, in U.S. politics, from 1830.


