flicker (n.)

1849, wavering, unsteady light or flame; 1857 as a flickering, from flicker (v.).


flicker (n.)

woodpecker, 1808, American English, possibly echoic of bird's note, or from white spots on plumage
that seem to flicker as it flits from tree to tree.


flicker (v.)

Old English flicorian to flutter, flap quickly and lightly, originally of birds. Onomatopoeic and
suggestive of quick motion. Sense of shine with a wavering light is c.1600, but not common till 19c.
Related: Flickered; flickering.


flick (n.)

mid-15c., probably imitative of a light blow with a whip. Earliest recorded use is in phrase not
worth a flykke useless. As slang for film, it is first attested 1926, a back-formation from flicker
(v.), from their flickering appearance.


whiffle (v.)

flicker or flutter as if blown by the wind, 1660s; see whiff. The noun meaning something light or
insignificant (1670s) is preserved in whiffle-ball (1931).


flutter (v.)

Old English floterian to flutter, fly, flicker, float to and fro, be tossed by waves, frequentative
of flotian to float (see float (v.)). Related: Fluttered; fluttering. As a noun from 1640s; meaning
state of excitement is 1740s.


flag (v.)

1540s, flap about loosely, perhaps a variant of Middle English flakken, flacken to flap, flutter
(late 14c.), probably from Old Norse flakka to flicker, flutter, perhaps imitative of something
flapping lazily in the wind.    Sense of go limp, droop is first recorded 1610s. Meaning to
designate as someone who will not be served more liquor is from 1980s, probably from use of flags to
signal trains, etc., to halt, which led to the verb in this sense (1856, American English). Related:
Flagged; flagging.


murk (n)

c.1300, myrke, from Old Norse myrkr darkness, from Proto-Germanic *merkwjo- (cognates: Old English
mirce murky, black, dark; murkiness, darkness, Danish m&#511;rk darkness, Old Saxon mirki dark);
cognate with Old Church Slavonic mraku, Serbo-Croatian mrak, Russian mrak darkness; Lithuanian
merkti shut the eyes, blink, from PIE *mer- to flicker (see morn). Murk Monday was long the name in
Scotland for the great solar eclipse of March 29, 1652 (April 8, New Style).


shine (v.)

Old English scinan shed light, be radiant, be resplendent, iluminate, of persons, be conspicuous
(class I strong verb; past tense scan, past participle scinen), from Proto-Germanic *skinan
(cognates: Old Saxon and Old High German skinan, Old Norse and Old Frisian skina, Dutch schijnen,
German scheinen, Gothic skeinan to shine, appear), from PIE root *skai- (2) to gleam, shine, flicker
(cognates: Sanskrit chaya brilliance, luster; shadow, Greek skia shade, Old Church Slavonic sinati
to flash up, shine, Albanian he shadow). Transitive meaning to black (boots) is from 1610s. Related:
Shined (in the shoe polish sense), otherwise shone; shining.


scene (n.)

1530s, subdivision of an act of a play, also stage-setting, from Middle French sc&egrave;ne (14c.),
from Latin scaena, scena scene, stage of a theater, from Greek skene wooden stage for actors, also
that which is represented on stage, originally tent or booth, related to skia shadow, shade, via
notion of something that gives shade, from PIE root *skai- to shine, flicker, glimmer (see shine
(v.)).    Meaning material apparatus of a theatrical stage is from 1540s. Meaning place in which the
action of a literary work occurs is attested from 1590s; general (non-literary) sense of place where
anything is done or takes place is recorded from 1590s. Hence U.S. slang sense of setting or milieu
for a specific group or activity, attested from 1951 in Beat jargon. Meaning stormy encounter
between two or more persons is attested from 1761. Behind the scenes having knowledge of affairs not
apparent to the public (1660s) is an image from the theater, amid actors and stage machinery (out of
sight of the audience). Scene of the crime (1923) first attested in Agatha Christie.


