flora (n.)

1777, the plant life of a region or epoch, from Latin Flora, Roman goddess of flowers, from flos
(genitive floris) flower, from *flo-s-, Italic suffixed form of PIE *bhle- to blossom, flourish
(cognates: Middle Irish blath, Welsh blawd blossom, flower, Old English blowan to flower, bloom),
extended form of *bhel- (3) to thrive, bloom, possibly identical with *bhel- (2) to blow, swell (see
bole). Used as the title of descriptive plant catalogues since 1640s, but popularized by Linnaeus in
his 1745 study of Swedish plants, Flora Suecica.


floral (adj.)

1640s, pertaining to Flora, from French floral (16c.), from Latin floralis of flowers (see flora).
Meaning pertaining to flowers is from 1753.


floret (n.)

c.1400, flourette, from Old French florete little flower; cheap silk material, diminutive of flor
flower, from Latin flora (see flora). Botany sense is from 1670s.


cauliflower (n.)

1590s, originally cole florye, from Italian cavoli fiori flowered cabbage, plural of cavolo cabbage
+ fiore flower (from Latin flora; see flora).    First element is from Latin caulis cabbage
(originally stem, stalk) which was borrowed into Germanic and is the source of cole in cole-slaw and
of Scottish kale. The front end of the word was re-Latinized from 18c.; the back end was influenced
by flower (n.). The boxer's cauliflower ear is from 1907.


camellia (n.)

1753, named by Linn&aelig;us from Latinized form of Georg Joseph Kamel (1661-1706), Moravian-born
Jesuit who described the flora of the island of Luzon.


habitat (n.)

1762, as a technical term in Latin texts on English flora and fauna, literally it inhabits, third
person singular present indicative of habitare to live, dwell, frequentative of habere to have, to
hold, possess (see habit (n.)). General sense of dwelling place is first attested 1854.


floricide (n.)

one who destroys flowers, 1841, from Latin floris, genitive of flos flower (see flora) + -cide.


florid (adj.)

1640s, strikingly beautiful, from French floride flourishing, from Latin floridus flowery, in bloom,
from flos flower (see flora). Sense of ruddy is first recorded 1640s. Meaning profusely adorned, as
with flowers, is from 1650s. Related: Floridly.


florist (n.)

1620s, formed on analogy of French fleuriste, from Latin floris, genitive of flos flower (see flora)
+ -ist.


Cloris

fem. proper name, from Chloris, Latin form of Greek Khloris, goddess of flowers (later identified
with Roman Flora), literally greenness, freshness, poetic fem. of khloros greenish-yellow, fresh,
related to khloe young green shoot (see Chloe).


floriculture (n.)

1822, from Latin floris, genitive of flos flower (see flora) + -culture on analogy of agriculture.
Related: Floricultural; floriculturist.


florin (n.)

c.1300, from Old French florin, from Italian fiorino, from fiore flower, from Latin florem flower
(see flora). The 13c. gold Florentine coin was stamped on the obverse with the image of a lily, the
symbol of the city. As the name of an English gold coin, from late 15c.


effloresce (v.)

to come into flower, 1775, from Latin efflorescere to blossom, spring up, flourish, abound, from ex
out (see ex-) + florescere to blossom, from flos (see flora).


fauna (n.)

1771, collective name for animals of a certain region or time, from Late Latin Fauna, a Roman
fertility goddess, wife, sister, or daughter (or some combination thereof) of Faunus (see faun).
Popularized by Linnaeus, who adopted it as a companion word to flora and used it in the title of his
1746 catalogue of the animals of Sweden, Fauna Suecica. First used in English by naturalist Gilbert
White.


flourish (v.)

c.1300, to blossom, grow, from Old French floriss-, stem of florir blossom, flower, bloom, flourish,
from Latin florere to bloom, blossom, flower, figuratively to flourish, be prosperous, from flos a
flower (see flora).    Metaphoric sense of thrive is mid-14c. Meaning to brandish (a weapon) first
attested late 14c. Related: Flourished; flourishing.


deflower (v.)

late 14c., deprive (a maiden) of her virginity, also excerpt the best parts of (a book), from Old
French desflorer (13c., Modern French d&eacute;florer) to deflower (a garden); to take the virginity
of, from Late Latin deflorare, from de- (see de-) + flos flower (see flora). Notion is to strip of
flowers, hence to ravish, which is the oldest sense in English.The French Indians are said not to
have deflowered any of our young women they captivated. [James Adair, The Life of an Indian Trader,
London, 1775]


flower (n.)

c.1200, from Old French flor flower, blossom; heyday, prime; fine flour; elite; innocence, virginity
(Modern French fleur), from Latin florem (nominative flos) flower (source of Italian fiore, Spanish
flor; see flora).    Modern spelling is 14c. Ousted Old English cognate blostm (see blossom (n.)).
Also used from 13c. in sense of finest part or product of anything and from c.1300 in the sense of
virginity. Flower children gentle hippies is from 1967.


