flotsam (n.)

c.1600, from Anglo-French floteson, from Old French flotaison a floating, from floter to float (of
Germanic origin; see float) + -aison, from Latin -ation(em). Spelled flotsen till mid-19c. when it
altered, perhaps under influence of many English words in -some.    In British law, flotsam are
goods found floating on the sea as a consequence of a shipwreck or action of wind or waves; jetsam
are things cast out of a ship in danger of being wrecked, and afterward washed ashore, or things
cast ashore by the sailors. Whatever sinks is lagan. Figurative use for odds and ends attested by
1861.


wreck (n.)

early 13c., goods cast ashore after a shipwreck, flotsam, from Anglo-French wrec, from a
Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse *wrek wreck, flotsam (cognates: Norwegian, Icelandic rek),
related to reka to drive, push, from Proto-Germanic *wrekan (see wreak (v.)). The meaning a
shipwreck is first recorded mid-15c.; that of a wrecked ship is by c.1500. General sense of remains
of anything that has been ruined is recorded from 1713; applied by 1795 to dissipated persons.
Compare wrack (v.).


jetsam (n.)

1560s, jottsome act of throwing goods overboard to lighten a ship, alteration and contraction of
Middle English jetteson, from Anglo-French getteson, Old French getaison a throwing (see jettison).
Intermediate forms were jetson, jetsome; the form perhaps was deformed by influence of flotsam. From
1590s as goods thrown overboard; figurative use by 1861. For distinction of meaning, see flotsam.


waif (n.)

late 14c., unclaimed property, flotsam, stray animal, from Anglo-French waif (13c., Old French
guaif) ownerless property, something lost; as an adjective, not claimed, outcast, abandoned,
probably from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse veif waving thing, flag, from Proto-Germanic
*waif-, from PIE *weip- to turn, vacillate, tremble ecstatically (see vibrate). Compare Medieval
Latin waivium thing thrown away by a thief in flight. A Scottish/northern English parallel form was
wavenger (late 15c.).    Meaning person (especially a child) without home or friends first attested
1784, from legal phrase waif and stray (1620s), from the adjective in the sense lost, strayed,
homeless. Neglected children being uncommonly thin, the word tended toward this sense. Connotations
of fashionable, small, slender woman began 1991 with application to childishly slim supermodels such
as Kate Moss.


