flourish (n.)

c.1500, a blossom, from flourish (v.). Meaning ostentatious waving of a weapon is from 1550s; that
of literary or rhetorical embellishment is from c.1600.


flourish (v.)

c.1300, to blossom, grow, from Old French floriss-, stem of florir blossom, flower, bloom, flourish,
from Latin florere to bloom, blossom, flower, figuratively to flourish, be prosperous, from flos a
flower (see flora).    Metaphoric sense of thrive is mid-14c. Meaning to brandish (a weapon) first
attested late 14c. Related: Flourished; flourishing.


quirk (n.)

1560s, quibble, evasion, of unknown origin, perhaps connected to German quer (see queer (adj.)) via
notion of twisting and slanting; but its earliest appearance in western England dialect seems to
argue against this source. Perhaps originally a technical term for a twist or flourish in weaving.
Sense of peculiarity is c.1600.


floruit

used now mainly in sense of period during which a historical person's life work was done, 1843,
Latin, literally he flourished, third person singular perf. indicative of florere (see flourish
(v.)). Usually in abbreviation fl.


cannibalistic (adj.)

1840, from cannibal + -istic. Elder but failing to flourish were cannibalic, cannibalish (both from
1824).


seed (v.)

late 14c., to flower, flourish; produce seed; mid-15c., to sow with seed, from seed (n.). Meaning
remove the seeds from is from 1904. Sporting (originally tennis) sense (1898) is from notion of
spreading certain players' names so as to ensure they will not meet early in a tournament. The noun
in this sense is attested from 1924. Related: Seeded; seeding.


brandish (v.)

mid-14c., from Old French brandiss-, present participle stem of brandir to flourish (a sword)
(12c.), from brant blade of a sword, prow of a ship, of Frankish origin (see brand (n.)). Related:
Brandished; brandishing.


florescence (n.)

1793, from Modern Latin florescentia, from Latin florescentem (nominative florescens) blooming,
present participle of florescere to begin to bloom, inceptive of florere to blossom (see flourish
(v.)).


effloresce (v.)

to come into flower, 1775, from Latin efflorescere to blossom, spring up, flourish, abound, from ex
out (see ex-) + florescere to blossom, from flos (see flora).


vigorous (adj.)

c.1300 (early 13c. as a surname), from Anglo-French vigrus, Old French vigoros strong, robust,
powerful (12c., Modern French vigoreux), from Medieval Latin vigorosus, from Latin vigere be lively,
flourish, thrive (see vigor). Related: Vigorously.


inflorescence (n.)

1760, from Modern Latin inflorescentia, from Late Latin inflorescentem (nominative inflorescens)
flowering, present participle of Latin inflorescere to come to flower, from in- in (see in- (2)) +
florescere to begin to bloom (see flourish).


cornice (n.)

1560s, from Middle French corniche (16c.) or directly from Italian cornice ornamental molding along
a wall, perhaps from Latin coronis curved line, flourish in writing, from Greek koronis curved
object (see crown). Perhaps influenced by (or even from) Latin cornicem, accusative of cornix crow
(compare corbel).


prosper (v.)

mid-14c., from Old French prosperer (14c.) and directly from Latin prosperare cause to succeed,
render happy, from prosperus favorable, fortunate, prosperous, perhaps literally agreeable to one's
wishes, traditionally regarded as from Old Latin pro spere according to expectation, according to
one's hope, from pro for + ablative of spes hope, from PIE root *spe- to flourish, succeed, thrive,
prosper (see speed (n.)).


thrive (v.)

c.1200, from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse &thorn;rifask to thrive, originally grasp to
oneself, probably reflexive of &thorn;rifa to clutch, grasp, grip, take hold of (compare Norwegian
triva to seize, Swedish trifvas, Danish trives to thrive, flourish), of unknown origin. Related:
Thrived (or throve); thriving.


multiply (v.)

mid-12c., multeplier, to cause to become many, from Old French multiplier, mouteplier (12c.)
increase, get bigger; flourish; breed; extend, enrich, from Latin multiplicare to increase, from
multiplex (genitive multiplicis) having many folds, many times as great in number, from comb. form
of multus (see multi-) + -plex -fold, from PIE *plek- to plait (see ply (v.1.)). Mathematical sense
is attested from late 14c. Related: Multiplied; multiplying.


Florence

fem. proper name, from Latin Florentia, fem. of Florentius, literally blooming, from florens
(genitive florentis), present participle of florere to flower (see flourish). The c.1700 Dictionary
of the Canting Crew defines Florence as a slang word for a Wench that is touz'd and ruffled. This
was also the Italian city name (Roman Colonia Florentia, flowering colony, either literal or
figurative), which became Old Italian Fiorenze, in modern Italian Firenze.


vigor (n.)

c.1300, physical strength, energy in an activity, from Anglo-French vigour, Old French vigor force,
strength (Modern French vigueur), from Latin vigorem (nominative vigor) liveliness, activity, force,
from vigere be lively, flourish, thrive, from PIE root *weg- (2) be lively or active (see wake
(v.)).


blow (v.2)

to bloom, blossom (intransitive), from Old English blowan to flower, blossom, flourish, from Proto-
Germanic *bl&aelig;- (cognates: Old Saxon bloian, Old Frisian bloia, Middle Dutch and Dutch bloeien,
Old High German bluoen, German bl&uuml;hen), from PIE *bhle-, extended form of *bhel- (2) to blow,
inflate, swell (see bole). This word is the source of the blown in full-blown.


grow (v.)

Old English growan (of plants) to grow, flourish, increase, develop, get bigger (class VII strong
verb; past tense greow, past participle growen), from Proto-Germanic *gro- (cognates: Old Norse
groa, Old Frisian groia, Dutch groeien, Old High German gruoen), from PIE root *ghre- (see grass).
Applied in Middle English to human beings (c.1300) and animals (early 15c.) and their parts,
supplanting Old English weaxan (see wax (v.)).  Have you ever heard anything about God, Topsy? ...
Do you know who made you? Nobody, as I knows on, said the child. ... I spect I grow'd. Don't think
nobody never made me. [Harriet B. Stowe, Uncle Tom's Cabin, 1851]


flora (n.)

1777, the plant life of a region or epoch, from Latin Flora, Roman goddess of flowers, from flos
(genitive floris) flower, from *flo-s-, Italic suffixed form of PIE *bhle- to blossom, flourish
(cognates: Middle Irish blath, Welsh blawd blossom, flower, Old English blowan to flower, bloom),
extended form of *bhel- (3) to thrive, bloom, possibly identical with *bhel- (2) to blow, swell (see
bole). Used as the title of descriptive plant catalogues since 1640s, but popularized by Linnaeus in
his 1745 study of Swedish plants, Flora Suecica.


bole (n.)

early 14c., from Old Norse bolr tree trunk, from Proto-Germanic *bulas (cognates: Middle Dutch bolle
trunk of a tree), from PIE *bhel- (2) to blow, inflate, swell (cognates: Greek phyllon leaf, phallos
swollen penis; Latin flos flower, florere to blossom, flourish, folium leaf; Old Prussian balsinis
cushion; Old Norse belgr bag, bellows; Old English bolla pot, cup, bowl; Old Irish bolgaim I swell,
blath blossom, flower, bolach pimple, bolg bag; Breton bolc'h flax pod; Serbian buljiti to stare, be
bug-eyed; Serbo-Croatian blazina pillow).


Shakespeare

surname recorded from 1248; it means a spearman. This was a common type of English surname
(Shakelance (1275), Shakeshaft (1332)). Shake (v.) in the sense of to brandish or flourish (a
weapon) is attested from late Old English  Heo sc&aelig;ken on heore honden speren swi&eth;e
stronge.  [Laymon, Brut, c. 1205]  Compare also shake-buckler a swaggerer, a bully; shake-rag ragged
fellow, tatterdemalion. Never a name in English nomenclature so simple or so certain in origin. It
is exactly what it looks -- Shakespear [Bardsley, Dictionary of English and Welsh Surnames, 1901].
Nevertheless, speculation flourishes. The name was variously written in contemporary records, also
Shakespear, Shakespere, the last form being the one adopted by the New Shakespere Society of London
and the first edition of the OED. Related: Shakespearian (1753); Shakesperean (1796); Shakesperian
(1755).


bloom (n.1)

blossom of a plant, c.1200, a northern word, from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse blomi
flower, blossom, also collectively flowers and foliage on trees; from Proto-Germanic *blomon
(cognates: Old Saxon blomo, Middle Dutch bloeme, Dutch bloem, Old High German bluomo, German Blume,
Gothic bloma), from PIE *bhle- (cognates: Old Irish blath blossom, flower, Latin flos flower,
florere to blossom, flourish), extended form of *bhel- (2) to blow, inflate, swell (see bole).
Related to Old English blowan to flower (see blow (v.2)).    Transferred sense, of persons, is from
c.1300; meaning state of greatest loveliness is from early 14c.; that of blush on the cheeks is from
1752. Old English had cognate bloma, but only in the figurative sense of state of greatest beauty;
the main word in Old English for flower was blostm (see blossom).


