fluctuate (v.)

1630s, from Latin fluctuatus, past participle of fluctuare to undulate (see fluctuation). Related:
Fluctuated; fluctuates; fluctuating.


vogue (n.)

1570s, the vogue, height of popularity or accepted fashion, from Middle French vogue fashion,
success; also drift, swaying motion (of a boat) literally a rowing, from Old French voguer to row,
sway, set sail (15c.), probably from a Germanic source. Compare Old High German wagon to float,
fluctuate, literally to balance oneself; German Wege wave, billow, wogen fluctuate, float (see
weigh).    Perhaps the notion is of being borne along on the waves of fashion. Italian voga a
rowing, Spanish boga rowing, but colloquially fashion, reputation also probably are from the same
Germanic source. Phrase in vogue having a prominent place in popular fashion first recorded 1643.
The fashion magazine began publication in 1892.


wave (v.)

move back and forth, Old English wafian to wave, fluctuate (related to w&aelig;fre wavering,
restless, unstable), from Proto-Germanic *wab- (cognates: Old Norse vafra to hover about, Middle
High German waben to wave, undulate), possibly from PIE root *webh- to move to and fro; to weave
(see weave (v.)). Transitive sense is from mid-15c.; meaning to make a sign by a wave of the hand is
from 1510s. Related: Waved; waving.    I was much further out than you thought  And not waving but
drowning.  [Stevie Smith]


wag (v.)

early 13c. (intransitive), waver, vacillate, lack steadfastness, probably from a Scandinavian source
(compare Old Norse vagga a cradle, Danish vugge rock a cradle, Old Swedish wagga fluctuate, rock a
cradle), and in part from Old English wagian move backwards and forwards; all from Proto-Germanic
*wag- (cognates: Old High German weggen, Gothic wagjan to wag), probably from PIE root *wegh- to
move about (see weigh).    Transitive meaning move (something) back and forth or up and down is from
c.1300; of dogs and their tails from mid-15c.: and whanne they [hounds] see the hure maystre they
wol make him cheere and wagge hur tayles upon him. [Edward, Duke of York, The Master of Game, 1456].
Related: Wagged; wagging. Wag-at-the-wall (1825) was an old name for a hanging clock with pendulum
and weights exposed.


