flush (adj.)

1550s, perfect, faultless; c.1600, abundant; plentifully supplied (with money, etc.), perhaps from
flush (v.) through the notion of a river running full, hence level with its banks. Meaning even,
level is from 1620s.


flush (n.)

hand of cards all of one suit, 1520s, perhaps from Middle French flus (15c.), from Old French flux a
flowing, with the sense of a run (of cards), from Latin fluxus flux, from fluere to flow (see
fluent). The form in English probably was influenced by flush (v.).


flush (v.)

fly up suddenly, c.1300, perhaps imitative of the sound of beating wings, or related to flash via
its variant flushe. Probably not connected to Old French flux, source of flush (n.).    Transitive
meaning to cause to fly, start is first attested mid-15c. The sense of spurt, rush out suddenly,
flow with force (1540s) is probably the same word, with the connecting notion being sudden movement,
but its senses seem more to fit the older ones of flash (now all transferred to this word except in
flash flood). Meaning cleanse a drain, etc., with a rush of water is from 1789. The noun sense of
sudden redness in the face (1620s) probably belongs here, too. The verb in this sense is from 1660s.
A very puzzling word [Weekley]. Related: Flushed; flushing.


Flushing

New York village established 1645 by English Puritans (now a neighborhood in Queens), an English
corruption of Dutch Vlissingen, name of Dutch town where the Puritans had taken refuge, literally
flowing (so called for its location on an estuary of the West Scheldt), related to flush (v.).


four-flusher (n.)

cheat, dishonest person, 1900, from verb four-flush to bluff a poker hand, claim a flush (n.) while
holding only four cards in the suit (1896).


awash (adj.)

1825, originally nautical, on the level of, flush with, from a- (1) on + wash (n.). Figurative use
by 1912.


ferret (v.)

early 15c., from ferret (n.), in reference to the use of half-tame ferrets to kill rats and flush
rabbits from burrows; the extended sense of search out, discover is 1570s. Related: Ferreted;
ferreting.


aflush (adj.)

blushing, 1880, from a- (1) + flush (v.).


water-closet (n.)

privy with a waste-pipe and means to carry off the discharge by a flush of water, 1755, from water
(n.1) + closet (n.).


devoid (adj.)

c.1400, shortening of devoided, past participle of obsolete verb devoiden to remove, void, vacate
(c.1300), from Old French desvuidier (12c., Modern French d&eacute;vider) to empty out, flush game
from, unwind, let loose (an arrow), from des- out, away + voider to empty, from voide empty (see
void (adj.)).


shamefaced (adj.)

modest, bashful, 1550s, folk etymology alteration of shamefast, from Old English scamf&aelig;st
bashful, literally restrained by shame, or else firm in modesty, from shame (n.) + -f&aelig;st,
adjectival suffix (see fast (adj.)). Related: Shamefacedly; shamefacedness.   <b>shamefaced,
-fast</b>. It is true that the second is the original form, that -faced is due to a mistake, &amp;
that the notion attached to the word is necessarily affected in some slight degree by the change.
But those who, in the flush of this discovery, would revert to -fast in ordinary use are rightly
rewarded with the name of pedants .... [Fowler]


busk (v.)

to prepare, to dress oneself, also to go, set out, c.1300, probably from Old Norse buask to prepare
oneself, reflexive of bua to prepare (see bound (adj.2)) + contraction of Old Norse reflexive
pronoun sik. Most common in northern Middle English and surviving chiefly in Scottish and northern
English dialect. Related boun had the same senses in northern and Scottish Middle English. Related:
Busked; busking.    The nautical term is attested from 1660s (in a general sense of to tack, to beat
to windward), apparently from obsolete French busquer to shift, filch, prowl, which is related to
Italian buscare to filch, prowl, Spanish buscar (from Old Spanish boscar), perhaps originally from
bosco wood (see bush (n.)), with a hunting notion of beating a wood to flush game.


beat (n.)

c.1300, a beating, whipping; the beating of a drum, from beat (v.). As throb of the heart from 1755.
Meaning regular route travelled by someone is attested from 1731, also a track made by animals
(1736), from the sense of the beat of the feet on the ground (late Old English), or perhaps that in
beat the bushes to flush game (c.1400), or beat the bounds (1560s). Extended to journalism by 1875.
Musical sense is by 1842, perhaps from the motion of the conductor and the notion of beating the
time:    It is usual, in beating the time of a piece of music, to mark or signalize the commencement
of every measure by a downward movement or beat of the hand, or of any other article that may be
used for the purpose .... [Godfrey Weber's General Music Teacher, 1842]    Earlier in music it meant
a sort of grace note:    BEAT, in music, a transient grace note, struck immediately before the note
it is intended to ornament. The beat always lies half a note beneath its principal, and should be
heard so closely upon it, that they may almost seem to be struck together. [The British
Encyclopedia, London, 1809]


