flux (n.)

late 14c., from Old French flus flowing, rolling, bleeding, or directly from Latin fluxus flowing,
loose, slack, past participle of fluere to flow (see fluent). Originally excessive flow (of blood or
excrement); an early name for dysentery; sense of continuous succession of changes is first recorded
1620s. The verb is early 15c., from the noun.


flush (n.)

hand of cards all of one suit, 1520s, perhaps from Middle French flus (15c.), from Old French flux a
flowing, with the sense of a run (of cards), from Latin fluxus flux, from fluere to flow (see
fluent). The form in English probably was influenced by flush (v.).


tesla (n.)

unit of magnetic flux density, 1960, from Nikola Tesla (1856-1943), Croatian-born U.S. engineer.
Tesla coil is attested from 1896.


rheumatism (n.)

c.1600, from Late Latin rheumatismus, from Greek rheumatismos, from rheumatizein suffer from the
flux, from rheuma a discharge from the body (see rheum). The meaning of a disease of the joints is
first recorded in 1688, because rheumatism was thought to be caused by an excessive flow of rheum
into a joint thereby stretching ligaments [Barnhart].


reflux (n.)

early 15c., a flowing back (of the sea, etc.), from Medieval Latin refluxus, from Latin re- back,
again (see re-) + fluxus a flowing (see flux). Digestive sense is recorded from 1937.


seborrhea (n.)

also seborrhoea, discharge of sebaceous matter, especially as a scalp condition, 1849, coined in
Modern Latin as a hybrid, from sebo-, used as comb. form of Latin sebum tallow, suet, grease (see
sebum) + Greek hroia flow, flux, from rhein to flow (see rheum)


flush (v.)

fly up suddenly, c.1300, perhaps imitative of the sound of beating wings, or related to flash via
its variant flushe. Probably not connected to Old French flux, source of flush (n.).    Transitive
meaning to cause to fly, start is first attested mid-15c. The sense of spurt, rush out suddenly,
flow with force (1540s) is probably the same word, with the connecting notion being sudden movement,
but its senses seem more to fit the older ones of flash (now all transferred to this word except in
flash flood). Meaning cleanse a drain, etc., with a rush of water is from 1789. The noun sense of
sudden redness in the face (1620s) probably belongs here, too. The verb in this sense is from 1660s.
A very puzzling word [Weekley]. Related: Flushed; flushing.


rheum (n.)

mucous discharge, late 14c., from Old French reume a cold (13c., Modern French rhume), from Latin
rheuma, from Greek rheuma discharge from the body, flux; a stream, current, flood, a flowing,
literally that which flows, from rhein to flow, from PIE root *sreu- to flow (cognates: Sanskrit
sravati flows, srotah stream; Avestan thraotah- stream, river, Old Persian rauta river; Greek rheos
a flowing, stream, rhythmos rhythm, rhytos fluid, liquid; Old Irish sruaim, Irish sruth stream,
river; Welsh ffrwd stream; Old Norse straumr, Old English stream, Old High German strom (second
element in maelstrom); Lettish strauma stream, river; Lithuanian sraveti to trickle, ooze; Old
Church Slavonic struja river, o-strovu island, literally that which is surrounded by a river; Polish
strumie&#324; brook).


