flying (adj.)

Old English fleogende flying, winged, present participle of fly (v.1). Flying buttress is from
1660s; flying fish is from 1510s. Flying saucer first attested 1947, though the image of saucers for
unidentified flying objects is from at least 1880s. Flying Dutchman, ghost ship off the Cape of Good
Hope, attested since 1803 [John Leyden, Scenes of Infancy, who describes it as a common superstition
of mariners]. Flying colors (1706) probably is from the image of a naval vessel with the national
flag bravely displayed.


Dutchman (n.)

Dutch ship, 1650s, from Dutch (adj.) + man (n.). References to the ghost ship called the Flying
Dutchman seem to begin early 19c. (see flying).


seraph (n.)

1667, first used by Milton (probably on analogy of cherub/cherubim), back-formed singular from Old
English seraphim (plural), from Late Latin seraphim, from Greek seraphim, from Hebrew seraphim (only
in Isa. vi), plural of *saraph (which does not occur in the Bible), probably literally the burning
one, from saraph it burned. Seraphs were traditionally regarded as burning or flaming angels, though
the word seems to have some etymological sense of flying, perhaps from confusion with the root of
Arabic sharafa be lofty. Some scholars identify it with a word found in other passages interpreted
as fiery flying serpent.


Pythonesque (adj.)

1975, in reference to the style of humor popularized by British TV series Monty Python's Flying
Circus.


flight (n.1)

act of flying, Old English flyht a flying, flight, from Proto-Germanic *flukhtiz (cognates: Dutch
vlucht flight of birds, Old Norse flugr, Old High German flug, German Flug flight), from root of
*fleugan to fly (see fly (v.1)).    Spelling altered late 14c. from Middle English fliht (see fight
(v.)). Meaning an instance of flight is 1785, originally of ballooning. Meaning series of stairs
between landings is from 1703.


UFO (n.)

1953, abbreviation of Unidentified Flying Object, which is attested from 1950.


fly (n.)

Old English fleoge fly, winged insect, from Proto-Germanic *fleugjon (cognates: Old Saxon fleiga,
Old Norse fluga, Middle Dutch vlieghe, Dutch vlieg, Old High German flioga, German Fliege fly);
literally the flying (insect) (compare Old English fleogende flying), from same source as fly (v.1).
Originally any winged insect (hence butterfly, etc.); long used by farmers and gardeners for any
insect parasite. The Old English plural in -n (as in oxen) gradually normalized 13c.-15c. to -s. Fly
on the wall unseen observer first recorded 1881. An Old English word for curtain was fleonet fly-
net. Fly-swatter as a bit of wire mesh on a handle first attested 1917. Fly-fishing is from 1650s.
From the verb and the notion of flapping as a wing does comes the noun sense of tent flap (1810),
which yielded covering for buttons that close up a garment (1844). The sense of a flight, flying is
from mid-15c. Baseball fly ball attested by 1866.  To do something on the fly is 1856, apparently
from baseball.    When the catcher sees several fielders running to catch a ball, he should name the
one he thinks surest to take it, when the others should not strive to catch the ball on the fly, but
only, in case of its being missed, take it on the bound. [The American Boys Book of Sports and
Games, New York, 1864]


propeller (n.)

1780, anything that propels, agent noun from propel. In mechanical sense, 1809, of ships; of flying
machines (in a broad, theoretical sense) 1842, in the specific modern sense 1853.


aerodrome (n.)

1902, from aero- on analogy of hippodrome. Earlier (1891) a name for a flying machine.


pinion (v.)

disable by binding the arms, 1550s, older in English than literal sense cut or bind the pinions (of
a bird's wing) to prevent flying (1570s); from pinion (n.1). Related: Pinioned.


doodle-bug (n.)

type of beetle or larvae, c.1866, Southern U.S. dialect; see doodle + bug (n.). The same word was
applied 1944 in R.A.F. slang to German V-model flying bombs.


fleeting (adj.)

early 13c., fickle, shifting, unstable, from Old English fleotende floating, drifting, later flying,
moving swiftly, from present participle of fleotan (see fleet (v.)). Meaning existing only briefly
is from 1560s.


aerobatics (n.)

aircraft tricks, trick flying, 1914, from aero- + ending from acrobat (also see -ics). Earlier
(1879) it meant the art of constructing and using airships; aerial navigation; aeronautics.


R.A.F.

also RAF, initialism (acronym) for Royal Air Force, founded 1918 by consolidation of Royal Flying
Corps and Royal Naval Air Service.


Altair

bright star in the constellation Aquila, 16c., from Arabic Al Nasr al Tair the Flying Eagle, from
tair, participle of tara it flew.


Horus

1851, Egyptian hawk-headed god, from Latin Horus, from Egyptian Hor, literally the high-flying one.


hang-glider (n.)

a type of popular flying device, 1971; see hang (v.) + glide (v.). The activity of hang-gliding is
from the same time.


pterodactyl (n.)

extinct flying reptile, 1830, from French pt&eacute;rodactyle (1821), from Modern Latin genus name
Pterodactylus, from Greek pteron wing (see ptero-) + daktylos finger (see dactyl).


slag (n.)

refuse from smelting, 1550s, from Middle Low German slagge (German Schlacke) splinter flying off
when metal is struck, related to Old High German slahan to strike, slay (see slay (v.)).


volant (adj.)

flying, c.1500, from Middle French volant able to fly, from Latin volantem (nominative volans),
present participle of volare to fly, of unknown origin. French voler, literally to fly, in 16c.
acquired a sense of to steal, via the transitive meaning to make fly.


spam (n.)

proprietary name registered by Geo. A. Hormel &amp; Co. in U.S., 1937; probably a conflation of
spiced ham. Soon extended to other kinds of canned meat.    In the sense of Internet junk mail it
was coined by Usenet users after March 31, 1993, when Usenet administrator Richard Depew
inadvertently posted the same message 200 times to a discussion group. The term had been used in
online text games, and ultimately it is from a 1970 sketch on the British TV show Monty Python's
Flying Circus wherein a reading of a restaurant's menu devolves into endless repetitions of spam.


buttress (n.)

early 14c., from Old French (arc) botrez flying buttress, apparently from bouter to thrust against,
of Frankish origin (compare Old Norse bauta to strike, beat), from Proto-Germanic *butan, from PIE
root *bhau- to strike (see butt (v.)).


high-falutin&#039;

also highfalutin, 1848, U.S. slang, possibly from high-flying, or flown, or even flute.


flyer (n.)

also flier, mid-15c., something that flies, agent noun of fly (v.1). Meaning something that goes
fast is from 1795; that of aviator is from 1934. Meaning speculative investment is from 1846 (on the
notion of a flying leap). Meaning small handbill or fly-sheet is from 1889, U.S. slang (originally
especially of police bulletins), on notion of made to be scattered broadcast. Meaning aviator is
from World War I. Related: Fliers; flyers.


slack (n.2)

coal dust, mid-15c., sleck, of uncertain origin, probably related to Middle Dutch slacke, Middle Low
German slecke slag, small pieces left after coal is screened, perhaps related to slagge splinter
flying off metal when it is struck (see slag (n.)).


petrel (n.)

seabird, 1670s, pitteral, modern spelling first recorded 1703 by English explorer William Dampier
(1651-1715), who wrote the bird was so called from its way of flying with its feet just skimming the
surface of the water, which recalls the apostle's walk on the sea of Galilee (Matt. xiv:28); if so,
it likely was formed in English as a diminutive of Peter (Late Latin Petrus). If this is folk
etymology, the true source of the name is undiscovered. French p&eacute;trel (1760) probably is from
English.


solo (n.)

1690s, piece of music for one voice or instrument, from Italian solo, literally alone, from Latin
solus alone (see sole (adj.)). As an adjective in English from 1712, originally in the non-musical
sense of alone, unassisted; in reference to aircraft flying from 1909. The verb is first attested
1858 in the musical sense, 1886 in a non-musical sense. Related: Soloed; soloing.


volatile (adj.)

1590s fine or light, also evaporating rapidly (c.1600), from Middle French volatile, from Latin
volatilis fleeting, transitory; swift, rapid; flying, winged, from past participle stem of volare to
fly (see volant). Sense of readily changing, flighty, fickle is first recorded 1640s. Volatiles in
Middle English meant birds, butterflies, and other winged creatures (c.1300).


aeroplane (n.)

1866, from French a&eacute;roplane (1855), from Greek aero- air (see air (n.1)) + stem of French
planer to soar, from Latin planus level, flat (see plane (n.1)). Originally in reference to surfaces
(such as the protective shell casings of beetles' wings); meaning heavier than air flying machine
first attested 1873, probably an independent English coinage (see airplane).


Exocet (n.)

1970, proprietary name of a rocket-propelled short-range guided missile, trademarked 1970 by
Soci&eacute;t&eacute; Nationale Industrielle Aerospatiale, from French exocet flying fish (16c.),
from Latin exocoetus, from Greek exokoitos sleeping fish, fish that sleeps upon the beach, from exo
outside (see exo-) + koitos bed.


strafe (v.)

1915, punish, attack, bomb heavily, picked up by British soldiers from German strafen to punish
(from Proto-Germanic *str&aelig;f-), in slogan Gott strafe England May God punish England, current
in Germany c.1914-16 at the start of World War I. The word used for many kinds of attack at first;
meaning shoot up ground positions from low-flying aircraft emerged as the main sense 1942. Related:
Strafed; strafing.


helicopter (n.)

1861, from French h&eacute;licopt&egrave;re device for enabling airplanes to rise perpendicularly,
thus flying machine propelled by screws. The idea was to gain lift from spiral aerofoils, and it
didn't work. Used by Jules Verne and the Wright Brothers, the word transferred to helicopters in the
modern sense when those were developed in the 1920s. From Greek helix (genitive helikos) spiral (see
helix) + pteron wing (see pterodactyl). Nativized in Flemish as wentelwiek with rotary vanes.


Parthian (n.)

1520s, native or inhabitant of Parthia (ancient kingdom northeast of Persia in western Asia), from
Old Persian Parthava- Parthian, dialectal variant of the stem Parsa-, source of Persia.    As an
adjective, 1580s. Phrase Parthian shot is in reference to their horsemen, who were expert at racing
forward, turning, and shooting arrows backward at the moment of retreat. The exact phrase is
attested by 1832; the image itself was in use long before (for example Parthian fight, 1630s).
Or, like the Parthian, I shall flying fight [Cymbeline, Act I, Scene VII]


fly (v.1)

to soar through air, Old English fleogan to fly (class II strong verb; past tense fleag, past
participle flogen), from Proto-Germanic *fleugan to fly (cognates: Old Saxon and Old High German
fliogan, Old Norse fl&uuml;gja, Old Frisian fliaga, Middle Dutch vlieghen, Dutch vliegen, German
fliegen), from PIE *pleu- flowing, floating (see pluvial). Related: Flew; flied (baseball); flying.
Slang phrase fly off the handle lose one's cool dates from 1825.


broom (n.)

Old English brom broom, brushwood, the common flowering shrub whose twigs were tied together to make
a tool for sweeping, from Proto-Germanic *br&aelig;maz thorny bush (cognates: Dutch braam, German
Brombeere blackberry), from PIE root *bh(e)rem- to project, a point.    Traditionally, both the
flowers and sweeping with broom twigs were considered unlucky in May (Suffolk, Sussex, Wiltshire,
etc.). The witch's flying broomstick originally was one among many such objects (pitchfork, trough,
bowl), but the broomstick became fixed as the popular tool of supernatural flight via engravings
from a famous Lancashire witch trial of 1612.


Catch-22 (n.)

from the title of Joseph Heller's 1961 novel. In widespread use only after release of the movie
based on the book in 1970. The catch is that a bomber pilot is insane if he flies combat missions
without asking to be relieved from duty, and is thus eligible to be relieved from duty. But if he
asks to be relieved from duty, that means he's sane and has to keep flying.  There was only one
catch and that was Catch-22, which specified that a concern for one's safety in the face of dangers
that were real and immediate was the process of a rational mind. Orr was crazy and could be
grounded. All he had to do was ask; and as soon as he did, he would no longer be crazy and would
have to fly more missions. Orr would be crazy to fly more missions and sane if he didn't, but if he
was sane he had to fly them. If he flew them he was crazy and didn't have to; but if he didn't want
to he was sane and had to. Yossarian was moved very deeply by the absolute simplicity of this clause
of Catch-22 and let out a respectful whistle.  That's some catch, that Catch-22, he observed.It's
the best there is, Doc Daneeka agreed.  See catch (n.).


gnat (n.)

Old English gn&aelig;tt gnat, midge, mosquito, earlier gneat, used of various small, flying insects,
from Proto-Germanic *gnattaz (cognates: Low German gnatte, German Gnitze); perhaps literally biting
insect and related to gnaw.    The gnatte is a litil fflye, and hatte culex..he souke&thorn; blood
and ha&thorn; in his mou&thorn; a pipe, as hit were a pricke..And is a-countid a-mong volatiles..and
greue&thorn; slepinge men wi&thorn; noyse &amp; wi&thorn; bytinge and wake&thorn; hem of here reste.
[John of Trevisa, transl. of Bartholomew de Glanville's De proprietatibus rerum, 1398]


lark (n.2)

spree, frolic, 1811, possibly shortening of skylark (1809), sailors' slang play rough in the rigging
of a ship (larks were proverbial for high-flying), or from English dialectal lake/laik to play
(c.1300, from Old Norse leika to play, from PIE *leig- to leap) with intrusive -r- common in
southern British dialect. The verb lake, considered characteristic of Northern English vocabulary,
is the opposite of work but lacks the other meanings of play. As a verb, from 1813. Related: Larked;
larking.


clip (v.1)

to cut or sever with a sharp instrument, c.1200, from a Scandinavian source (compare Old Norse
klippa, Swedish klippa, Danish klippe clip, shear, cut) probably echoic. Related: Clipped; clipping.
Meaning to pronounce short is from 1520s. The verb has a long association with shady activities,
originally especially in reference to cutting or shaving metal from coins (c.1400), but later
extended to swindles from the sense to shear sheep, hence clip-joint place that overcharges
outrageously (1933, American English, a term from Prohibition). To clip (someone's) wings
figuratively (1590s) is from the method of preventing a captive bird from flying.


skyscraper (n.)

very tall urban building, 1888, in a Chicago context, from sky (n.) + agent noun of scrape (v.).
Used earlier for ornament atop a building (1883), very tall man (1857), high-flying bird (1840),
light sail at the top of a mast (1794), and the name of a racehorse (1789). Compare cognate French
gratte-ciel, from gratter to scrape + ciel sky; German Wolkenkratzer, from Wolke cloud + Kratzer
scraper.    cloud-cleaver, an imaginary sail jokingly assumed to be carried by Yankee ships. [W.
Clark Russell, Sailors' Word Book, 1883]


bat (n.2)

flying mammal (order Chiroptera), 1570s, a dialectal alteration of Middle English bakke (early
14c.), which is probably related to Old Swedish natbakka, Old Danish nathbakk&aelig; night bat, and
Old Norse le&eth;rblaka leather flapper, so original sense is likely flapper. The shift from -k- to
-t- may have come through confusion of bakke with Latin blatta moth, nocturnal insect.    Old
English word for the animal was hreremus, from hreran to shake (see rare (adj.2)), and rattle-mouse
is attested from late 16c., an old dialectal word for bat. As a contemptuous term for an old woman,
perhaps a suggestion of witchcraft (compare fly-by-night), or from bat as prostitute who plies her
trade by night [Farmer, who calls it old slang and finds French equivalent night swallow (hirondelle
de nuit) more poetic].


blind (adj.)

Old English blind blind, also dark, enveloped in darkness, obscure; unintelligent, lacking mental
perception, probably from Proto-Germanic *blinda- blind (cognates: Dutch and German blind, Old Norse
blindr, Gothic blinds blind), perhaps, via notion of to make cloudy, deceive, from an extended
Germanic form of the PIE root *bhel- (1) to shine, flash, burn (see bleach (v.)). Compare Lithuanian
blendzas blind, blesti to become dark. The original sense would be not sightless but rather
confused, which perhaps underlies such phrases as blind alley (Chaucer's lanes blynde), which is
older than the sense of closed at one end (1610s).  The twilight, or rather the hour between the
time when one can no longer see to read and the lighting of the candles, is commonly called
blindman's holiday. [Grose, 1796]    In reference to doing something without seeing it first, by
1840. Of aviators flying without instruments or without clear observation, from 1919. Related:
Blinded; blinding. Blindman's bluff is from 1580s.


petition (n.)

early 14c., a supplication or prayer, especially to a deity, from Old French peticion request,
petition (12c., Modern French p&#233;tition) and directly from Latin petitionem (nominative petitio)
a blow, thrust, attack, aim; a seeking, searching, in law a claim, suit, noun of action from past
participle stem of petere to make for, go to; attack, assail; seek, strive after; ask for, beg,
beseech, request; fetch; derive; demand, require, from PIE root *pet-, also *pete- to rush; to fly
(cognates: Sanskrit pattram wing, feather, leaf, patara- flying, fleeting; Hittite pittar wing;
Greek piptein to fall, potamos rushing water, pteryx wing; Old English fe&eth;er feather; Latin
penna feather, wing; Old Church Slavonic pero feather; Old Welsh eterin bird). Meaning formal
written request to a superior (earthly) is attested from early 15c.


pig (n.)

probably from Old English *picg, found in compounds, ultimate origin unknown. Originally young pig
(the word for adults was swine). Apparently related to Low German bigge, Dutch big (but the
phonology is difficult -- OED). The meaning oblong piece of metal is first attested 1580s, on the
notion of large mass. Applied to persons, usually in contempt, since 1540s; the derogatory slang
meaning police officer has been in underworld slang since at least 1811.    The pigs frisked my
panney, and nailed my screws; the officers searched my house, and seized my picklock keys.
[Dictionary of Buckish Slang, University Wit and Pickpocket Eloquence, London, 1811]     Another Old
English word for pig was fearh, related to furh furrow, from PIE *perk- dig, furrow (source also of
Latin porc-us pig, see pork). This reflects a widespread IE tendency to name animals from typical
attributes or activities [Lass]. Synonyms grunter, porker are from sailors' and fishermen's
euphemistic avoidance of uttering the word pig at sea, a superstition perhaps based on the fate of
the Gadarene swine, who drowned. The image of a pig in a poke is attested from 1520s (see poke
(n.3)). Flying pigs as a type of something unreal is from 1610s.


fuck (v.)

until recently a difficult word to trace, in part because it was taboo to the editors of the
original OED when the F volume was compiled, 1893-97. Written form only attested from early 16c. OED
2nd edition cites 1503, in the form fukkit; earliest appearance of current spelling is 1535 --
Bischops ... may fuck thair fill and be vnmaryit [Sir David Lyndesay, Ane Satyre of the Thrie
Estaits], but presumably it is a much more ancient word than that, simply one that wasn't written in
the kind of texts that have survived from Old English and Middle English. Buck cites proper name
John le Fucker from 1278, but the surname could have other explanations. The word apparently is
hinted at in a scurrilous 15c. poem, titled Flen flyys, written in bastard Latin and Middle English.
The relevant line reads:Non sunt in celi quia fuccant uuiuys of heliThey [the monks] are not in
heaven because they fuck the wives of [the town of] Ely. Fuccant is pseudo-Latin, and in the
original it is written in cipher. The earliest examples of the word otherwise are from Scottish,
which suggests a Scandinavian origin, perhaps from a word akin to Norwegian dialectal fukka
copulate, or Swedish dialectal focka copulate, strike, push, and fock penis. Another theory traces
it to Middle English fyke, fike move restlessly, fidget, which also meant dally, flirt, and probably
is from a general North Sea Germanic word; compare Middle Dutch fokken, German ficken fuck, earlier
make quick movements to and fro, flick, still earlier itch, scratch; the vulgar sense attested from
16c. This would parallel in sense the usual Middle English slang term for have sexual intercourse,
swive, from Old English swifan to move lightly over, sweep (see swivel). But OED remarks these
cannot be shown to be related to the English word. Chronology and phonology rule out Shipley's
attempt to derive it from Middle English firk to press hard, beat.    Germanic words of similar form
(f + vowel + consonant) and meaning 'copulate' are numerous. One of them is G. ficken. They often
have additional senses, especially 'cheat,' but their basic meaning is 'move back and forth.' ...
Most probably, fuck is a borrowing from Low German and has no cognates outside Germanic. [Liberman]
French foutre and Italian fottere look like the English word but are unrelated, derived rather from
Latin futuere, which is perhaps from PIE root *bhau(t)- knock, strike off, extended via a figurative
use from the sexual application of violent action [Shipley; compare the sexual slang use of bang,
etc.]. Popular and Internet derivations from acronyms (and the pluck yew fable) are merely
<b>ingenious trifling</b>. The Old English word was h&aelig;man, from ham dwelling, home, with a
sense of take home, co-habit. Fuck was outlawed in print in England (by the Obscene Publications
Act, 1857) and the U.S. (by the Comstock Act, 1873). As a noun, it dates from 1670s. The word may
have been shunned in print, but it continued in conversation, especially among soldiers during World
War I.It became so common that an effective way for the soldier to express this emotion was to omit
this word. Thus if a sergeant said, 'Get your ----ing rifles!' it was understood as a matter of
routine. But if he said 'Get your rifles!' there was an immediate implication of urgency and danger.
[John Brophy, Songs and Slang of the British Soldier: 1914-1918, pub. 1930]The legal barriers broke
down in the 20th century, with the Ulysses decision (U.S., 1933) and Lady Chatterley's Lover (U.S.,
1959; U.K., 1960). Johnson excluded the word, and fuck wasn't in a single English language
dictionary from 1795 to 1965. The Penguin Dictionary broke the taboo in the latter year. Houghton
Mifflin followed, in 1969, with The American Heritage Dictionary, but it also published a Clean
Green edition without the word, to assure itself access to the lucrative public high school market.
The abbreviation F (or eff) probably began as euphemistic, but by 1943 it was being used as a cuss
word, too. In 1948, the publishers of The Naked and the Dead persuaded Norman Mailer to use the
euphemism fug instead. When Mailer later was introduced to Dorothy Parker, she greeted him with, So
you're the man who can't spell 'fuck'  [The quip sometimes is attributed to Tallulah Bankhead].
Hemingway used muck in For whom the Bell Tolls (1940). The major breakthrough in publication was
James Jones' From Here to Eternity (1950), with 50 fucks (down from 258 in the original manuscript).
Egyptian legal agreements from the 23rd Dynasty (749-21 B.C.E.) frequently include the phrase, If
you do not obey this decree, may a donkey copulate with you! [Reinhold Aman, Maledicta, Summer
1977]. Fuck-all nothing first recorded 1960.  Verbal phrase fuck up to ruin, spoil, destroy first
attested c.1916. A widespread group of Slavic words (such as Polish pierdoli&#263;) can mean both
fornicate and make a mistake. Fuck off attested from 1929; as a command to depart, by 1944. Flying
fuck originally meant have sex on horseback and is first attested c.1800 in broadside ballad New
Feats of Horsemanship. For the unkillable urban legend that this word is an acronym of some sort (a
fiction traceable on the Internet to 1995 but probably predating that) see here, and also here.
Related: Fucked; fucking. Agent noun fucker attested from 1590s in literal sense; by 1893 as a term
of abuse (or admiration).    DUCK F-CK-R. The man who has the care of the poultry on board a
&#383;hip of war. [Classical Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, 1796]


