fodder (n.)

Old English fodder food, especially food for cattle, from Proto-Germanic *fodran (cognates: Old
Norse fo&eth;r, Middle Dutch voeder, Old High German fuotar, German Futter), from PIE *patrom, from
*pa- to feed (see food).


forage (n.)

early 14c. (late 13c. as Anglo-Latin foragium), from Old French forrage fodder, foraging, pillaging,
looting (12c., Modern French fourrage), from fuerre hay, straw, forage, fodder (Modern French
feurre) fodder, straw, from Frankish *fodr food or a similar Germanic source (compare Old High
German fuotar, Old English fodor); see fodder. Military forage cap attested by 1827.


gastric (adj.)

1650s, with -ic + Greek gaster (genitive gastros) stomach, by dissimilation from *graster, literally
eater, devourer, from gran to gnaw, eat, from PIE root *gras- to devour (cognates: Greek grastis
green fodder, Latin gramen fodder, grass, Old English c&aelig;rse cress).


forb (n.)

1924, from Greek phorbe fodder, forage.


bumf (n.)

papers, paperwork, 1889, British schoolboy slang, originally toilet-paper, from bum-fodder.


alfalfa (n.)

1845, from Spanish alfalfa, earlier alfalfez, from Arabic al-fisfisa fresh fodder.


graminivorous (adj.)

feeding on grass, 1739, from gramini-, comb. form of Latin gramen (genitive graminis) grass, fodder,
which perhaps ultimately is cognate with English grass, + -vorous.


botanic (adj.)

1650s, from French botanique (17c.) or directly from Medieval Latin botanicus, from Greek botanikos
of herbs, from botane a plant, grass, pasture, fodder. The Greek words seems to have more to do with
pasturage than plants; compare related botamia pastures, meadows, boter herdsman, boton grazing
beast.


pabulum (n.)

food for anything, 1670s, from Latin pabulum fodder, food, nourishment, from PIE root *pa- to
protect, feed (see food) + instrumentive suffix *-dhlom.   Pablum (1932), derived from this, is a
trademark (Mead Johnson &amp; Co.) for a soft, bland cereal used as a food for infants and weak and
invalid people, hence figurative use (attested from 1970, first by U.S. Vice President Spiro Agnew)
in reference to mushy political prose.


silage (n.)

fodder packed in a silo, 1884, alteration (probably by influence of silo) of ensilage (1881), from
French ensilage, from ensiler put in a silo, from Spanish ensilar (see silo).


proboscis (n.)

c.1600, elephant's trunk, from Latin proboscis (Pliny), from Greek proboskis elephant's trunk,
literally means for taking food, from pro forward (see pro-) + boskein to nourish, feed, from
boskesthai graze, be fed, from stem *bot- (source of botane grass, fodder; see botanic).


hay (n.)

grass mown, Old English heg (Anglian), hieg, hig (West Saxon) grass cut or mown for fodder, from
Proto-Germanic *haujam (cognates: Old Norse hey, Old Frisian ha, Middle Dutch hoy, German Heu,
Gothic hawi hay), literally that which is cut, or that which can be mowed, from PIE *kau- to hew,
strike (cognates: Old English heawan to cut; see hew). Slang phrase hit the hay (pre-1880) was
originally to sleep in a barn; hay in the general figurative sense of bedding (as in roll in the
hay) is from 1903.


pasture (n.)

c.1300, grass eaten by cattle, from Old French pasture fodder, grass eaten by cattle (12c., Modern
French p&#226;ture), from Late Latin pastura a feeding, grazing, from Latin pastus, past participle
of pascere to feed, graze (see pastor). Meaning land covered with vegetation suitable for grazing is
from early 14c. To be out to pasture retired is from 1945, from what was done (ideally) to horses
after the active working life.


cannon (n.)

c.1400, tube for projectiles, from Anglo-French canon, Old French canon (14c.), from Italian cannone
large tube, barrel, augmentative of Latin canna reed, tube (see cane (n.)). Meaning large ordnance
piece, the main modern sense, is from 1520s. Spelling not differentiated from canon till c.1800.
Cannon fodder (1891) translates German kanonenfutter (compare Shakespeare's food for powder in I
Hen. IV).


tare (n.1)

kind of fodder plant, vetch, c.1300, perhaps cognate with or from Middle Dutch tarwe wheat, from a
Germanic source perhaps related to Breton draok, Welsh drewg darnel, Sanskrit durva a kind of millet
grass, Greek darata, daratos bread, Lithuanian dirva a wheat-field. Used in 2nd Wyclif version
(1388) of Matt. xxiii:25 to render Greek zizania as a weed among corn (earlier darnel and cockle had
been used in this place); hence figurative use for something noxious sown among something good
(1711).


crib (n.)

Old English cribbe manger, fodder bin in cowsheds and fields, from a West Germanic root (cognates:
Old Saxon kribbia manger; Old Frisian and Middle Dutch kribbe; Old High German krippa, German Krippe
crib, manger) probably related to German krebe basket. Meaning child's bed with barred sides is
1640s; probably from frequent use in reference to the manger where infant Jesus was laid. Thieves'
slang for dwelling house dates to at least 1812, but late 20c.  use probably is independent. The Old
High German version passed to French and became creche.


food (n.)

Old English foda food, nourishment; fuel, also figurative, from Proto-Germanic *fodon (cognates:
Gothic fodeins), from Germanic root *fod-, equivalent of PIE *pa- to tend, keep, pasture, to
protect, to guard, to feed (cognates: Greek pateisthai to feed; Latin pabulum food, fodder, panis
bread, pasci to feed, pascare to graze, pasture, feed, pastor shepherd, literally feeder; Avestan
pitu- food; Old Church Slavonic pasti feed cattle, pasture; Russian pishcha food).   Food chain is
from 1917. Food poisoning attested by 1864; food processor in the kitchen appliance sense from 1973.


