foil (n.)

thin sheet of metal, early 14c., from Old French fueille leaf, from Latin folia leaves, plural
(mistaken for fem. singular) of folium leaf (see folio).    The sense of one who enhances another by
contrast (1580s) is from the practice of backing a gem with metal foil to make it shine more
brilliantly. The meaning light sword used in fencing (1590s) could be from this sense, or from foil
(v.). The modern sense of metallic food wrap is from 1946.


foil (v.)

c.1300, foilen to spoil a trace or scent by running over it, irregularly from Old French fouler
trample, from Vulgar Latin *fullare to clean cloth (by treading on it), from Latin fullo one who
cleans cloth, fuller, of unknown origin.    Hence, to overthrow, defeat (1540s). Sense of frustrate
the efforts of first recorded 1560s. Related: Foiled; foiling. Foiled again! as a cry of defeat and
dismay is from at least 1847.


tinfoil (n.)

also tin-foil, late 15c., from tin (n.) + foil (n.).


quatrefoil (n.)

flower with four leaves, early 15c., from Old French quatrefoil, from quatre four (see four) + foil
leaf (see foil (n.)).


aerofoil (n.)

1907, from aero- + foil (n.).


Nimrod

great hunter, 1712, a reference to the biblical son of Cush, referred to (Gen. x:8-9) as a mighty
hunter before the Lord. It came to mean geek, klutz by 1983 in teenager slang, for unknown reasons.
(Amateur theories include its occasional use in Bugs Bunny cartoon episodes featuring rabbit-hunting
Elmer Fudd as a foil; its possible ironic use, among hunters, for a clumsy member of their
fraternity; or a stereotype of deer hunters by the non-hunting population in the U.S.)


foliage (n.)

mid-15c., from Middle French feuillage, from Old French feuille leaf (see foil (n.)). The form has
altered by influence of Latin folium.


hydrofoil (n.)

1959, boat that travels through water on wings, short for hydrofoil boat, originally the name of the
wings themselves (1920); formed in English from hydro- + foil (n.).


full (v.)

to tread or beat cloth to cleanse or thicken it, late 14c., from Old French fouler, from Latin fullo
(see foil (v.)); Old English had the agent-noun fullere, probably directly from Latin fullo.


fuller (n.)

one who fulls cloth, Old English fullere, from Latin fullo fuller (see foil (v.)). The substance
called fuller's earth (silicate of alumina) is first recorded 1520s, so called because it was used
in cleansing cloth.


defile (v.)

c.1400, to desecrate, profane; mid-15c., to make foul or dirty, alteration of earlier defoulen, from
Old French defouler trample down, violate, also ill-treat, dishonor, from de- down (see de-) + foler
to tread, from Latin fullo person who cleans and thickens cloth by stamping on it  (see foil (v.)).
The alteration (or re-formation) in English is from influence of Middle English filen (v.) to render
foul; make unclean or impure, literal and figurative, from Old English fylen (trans.), related to
Old English fulian (intrans.) to become foul, rot, from the source of foul (adj.). Compare befoul,
which also had a parallel form befilen. Related: Defiled; defiling.


