foliage (n.)

mid-15c., from Middle French feuillage, from Old French feuille leaf (see foil (n.)). The form has
altered by influence of Latin folium.


frond (n.)

1785, from Latin frons (genitive frondis) leafy branch, green bough, foliage. Adopted by
Linn&aelig;us in a sense distinct from folium.


vert (n.)

mid-15c., the color green (especially in heraldry), also trees and brush bearing green leaves (in
forest law), from Anglo-French and Old French vert foliage, greenery, green cloth, from Latin
viridem, viridis green (see verdure).


borage (n.)

flowering plant used in salads, mid-13c., from Anglo-French, Old French borage (13c., Modern French
bourrache), from Medieval Latin borrago. Klein says this is ultimately from Arabic abu arak,
literally the father of sweat, so called by Arab physicians for its effect on humans. But OED says
it's from Latin borra rough hair, short wool, in reference to the texture of the foliage.


overgrown (adj.)

late 14c., covered with growth, past participle adjective from overgrow overspread with foliage (Old
English ofergrowan); see over- + grown, and compare Old English verb ofergrowan to overgrow. Meaning
having grown too large is attested from late 15c.


Juliet

fem. proper name, from Italian Giulietta, diminutive of Giulia Julia (see Julia). Compare French
Juliette. Juliet cap (1904) was felt to resemble a type worn in stage productions of Romeo and
Juliet.    A Parisian fancy which is finding little favor here, is the Juliet cap. It is a net of
beads or of meshed cord jewelled or beaded at the intersections. Clustered bunches of blossoms and
foliage are set at each side of the cap, above the ears. [Fabrics, Fancy-Goods &amp; Notions, trade
publication, New York, January 1904]


Phyllis

fem. proper name, generic proper name for a comely rustic maiden in pastoral poetry (1630s), from
Latin Phyllis, a girl's name in Virgil, Horace, etc., from Greek Phyllis, female name, literally
foliage of a tree, from phyllon leaf, from PIE *bholyo- leaf, from root *bhel- (3) to thrive, bloom,
possibly identical with *bhel- (2) to blow, inflate, swell (see bole). In English, often spelled
Phillis, probably from influence of phil- loving. Her sweetheart usually was Philander.


leaf (n.)

Old English leaf leaf of a plant; page of a book, from Proto-Germanic *laubaz (cognates: Old Saxon
lof, Old Norse lauf, Old Frisian laf, Dutch loof, Old High German loub, German Laub foliage, leaves,
Gothic lauf), perhaps from PIE *leup- to peel off, break off (cognates: Lithuanian luobas, Old
Church Slavonic lubu bark, rind). Extended 15c. to very thin sheets of metal (especially gold).
Meaning hinged flap on the side of a table is from 1550s.


lodge (n.)

mid-13c. in surnames and place names; late 13c. as small building or hut, from Old French loge
arbor, covered walk; hut, cabin, grandstand at a tournament, from Frankish *laubja shelter (cognate
with Old High German louba porch, gallery, German Laube bower, arbor), from Proto-Germanic *laubja-
shelter, likely originally shelter of foliage, or roof made from bark, from root of leaf (n.).
Hunter's cabin sense is first recorded late 14c. Sense of local branch of a society is first
recorded 1680s, from mid-14c. logge workshop of masons. Also used of certain American Indian
buildings, hence lodge-pole (1805). Feste of Logges (c.1400) was a Middle English rendition of the
Old Testament Jewish Feast of Tabernacles.


blade (n.)

Old English bl&aelig;d a leaf, but also a leaf-like part (of spade, oar, etc.), from Proto-Germanic
*bladaz (cognates: Old Frisian bled leaf, German blatt, Old Saxon, Danish, Dutch blad, Old Norse
bla&eth;), from PIE *bhle-to-, suffixed form (past participle) of *bhel- (3) to thrive, bloom,
possibly identical with *bhel- (2) to blow, swell (see bole). Extended in Middle English to
shoulders (c.1300) and swords (early 14c.). The modern use in reference to grass may be a Middle
English revival, by influence of Old French bled corn, wheat (11c., perhaps from Germanic). The
cognate in German, Blatt, is the general word for leaf; Laub is used collectively as foliage. Old
Norse bla&eth; was used of herbs and plants, lauf in reference to trees. This might have been the
original distinction in Old English, too. Of men from 1590s; in later use often a reference to 18c.
gallants, but the original exact sense, and thus signification, is uncertain.


bloom (n.1)

blossom of a plant, c.1200, a northern word, from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse blomi
flower, blossom, also collectively flowers and foliage on trees; from Proto-Germanic *blomon
(cognates: Old Saxon blomo, Middle Dutch bloeme, Dutch bloem, Old High German bluomo, German Blume,
Gothic bloma), from PIE *bhle- (cognates: Old Irish blath blossom, flower, Latin flos flower,
florere to blossom, flourish), extended form of *bhel- (2) to blow, inflate, swell (see bole).
Related to Old English blowan to flower (see blow (v.2)).    Transferred sense, of persons, is from
c.1300; meaning state of greatest loveliness is from early 14c.; that of blush on the cheeks is from
1752. Old English had cognate bloma, but only in the figurative sense of state of greatest beauty;
the main word in Old English for flower was blostm (see blossom).


