folklore (n.)

1846, coined by antiquarian William J. Thoms (1803-1885) as an Anglo-Saxonism (replacing popular
antiquities) and first published in the Athenaeum of Aug. 22, 1846, from folk + lore. Old English
folclar meant homily.    This word revived folk in a modern sense of of the common people, whose
culture is handed down orally, and opened up a flood of compound formations, as in folk art (1892),
folk-hero (1874), folk-medicine (1877), folk-tale/folk tale (1850; Old English folctalu meant
genealogy), folk-song (1847), folk singer (1876), folk-dance (1877).


folk music

1889, from folk (also see folklore). In reference to the branch of modern popular music (originally
associated with Greenwich Village in New York City) it dates from 1958.


folk (n.)

Old English folc common people, laity; men; people, nation, tribe; multitude; troop, army, from
Proto-Germanic *folkom (cognates: Old Frisian folk, Middle Dutch volc, German Volk people), from
Proto-Germanic *fulka-, perhaps originally host of warriors; compare Old Norse folk people, also
army, detachment; and Lithuanian pulkas crowd, Old Church Slavonic pluku division of an army, both
believed to have been borrowed from Proto-Germanic. Old English folcstede could mean both dwelling-
place and battlefield.    Some have attempted to link the word to Greek plethos multitude; Latin
plebs people, mob, populus people or vulgus; OED and Klein discount this theory but it is accepted
in Watkins. The plural form has been usual since 17c. Superseded in most senses by people. Old
English folc was commonly used in forming compounds, such as folccwide popular saying, folcgemot
town or district meeting; folcwoh deception of the public. Folk-etymology is attested from 1890.
By Folk-etymology is meant the influence exercised upon words, both as to their form and meaning, by
the popular use and misuse of them. In a special sense, it is intended to denote the corruption
which words undergo, owing either to false ideas about their derivation, or to a mistaken analogy
with other words to which they are supposed to be related. [The Rev. A. Smythe Palmer, Folk-
Etymology, 1890]


folks (n.)

people of one's family, 1715, colloquial, from plural of folk.


folkie (n.)

devotee of (modern) folk music, attested by 1966, with -ie.


folky (adj.)

characteristic of the common people, 1914, from folk + -y (2). Old English had folcisc popular,
secular, common.


folkways (n.)

coined 1907 in book of the same name by U.S. sociologist William Graham Sumner (1840-1910), who also
is credited with ethnocentrism, found in the same book. See folk (n.) + way (n.).    Folkways are
habits of the individual and customs of the society which arise from efforts to satisfy needs. ...
Then they become regulative for succeeding generations and take on the character of a social force.
[Sumner, Folkways]


kinfolk (n.)

also kin-folk, 1802, principally American English, but the earliest references are British, from kin
(n.) + folk (n.). Kinsfolk is recorded from 1844.


menfolk (n.)

also men-folk the male sex, men generally, 1802, from men + folk (n.).


hop (n.2)

opium, 1887, from Cantonese nga-pin (pronounced HAH-peen) opium, a Chinese folk etymology of the
English word opium, literally crow peelings. Re-folk-etymologized back into English by association
with hop (n.1).


cockroach (n.)

1620s, folk etymology (as if from cock + roach) of Spanish cucaracha chafer, beetle, from cuca kind
of caterpillar. Folk etymology also holds that the first element is from caca excrement.A certaine
India Bug, called by the Spaniards a Cacarootch, the which creeping into Chests they eat and defile
with their ill-sented dung [Capt. John Smith, Virginia, 1624].


jota (n.)

Spanish folk dance; by 1846, of uncertain etymology.


volkslied (n.)

folk-song, 1858, from German Volkslied, from Volk people (see folk (n.)) + Lied song (see laud
(v.)).


wormwood (n.)

c.1400, folk etymology of Old English wermod wormwood, absinthe, related to vermouth, but the
ultimate etymology is unknown. Compare Old Saxon wermoda, Dutch wermoet, Old High German werimuota,
German Wermut. Weekley suggests wer man + mod courage, from its early use as an aphrodisiac.
Figurative use, however, is usually in reference to its proverbial bitter aftertaste. Perhaps
because of the folk etymology, it formerly was used to protect clothes and bedding from moths and
fleas. A medecyne for an hawke that hath mites. Take the Iuce of wormewode and put it ther thay be
and thei shall dye. [Book of St. Albans, 1486]


Pict (n.)

an ancient people of Great Britain, late 14c., from Late Latin Picti (late 3c., probably a nickname
given them by Roman soldiers), usually taken as derived from picti painted, but probably ultimately
from the Celtic name of the tribe, perhaps Pehta, Peihta, literally the fighters (compare Gaulish
Pictavi, a different people, who gave the name to the French city of Poitiers). They painted and
tattooed themselves, which may have suggested a Roman folk-etymology alteration of the name. The Old
English name for the people was Peohtas.In Scottish folk-lore the Pechts are often represented as a
dark pygmy race, or an underground people; and sometimes identified with elves, brownies, or
fairies. [OED]  Related: Pictish; Pictland.


ticky-tacky (n.)

inferior, cheap material, 1962 (in song Little Boxes by U.S. political folk-singer Malvina Reynolds,
1900-1978), reduplication of tacky. As an adjective by 1967.


Suffolk

Old English Su&thorn;folcci (895), literally the South Folk; compare Norfolk.


hysterics (n.)

1727, from hysterical. Sometimes in 19c. jocularly folk-etymologized as high-strikes (1838).


Sauk (2)

southern Coastal Salishan group of Native Americans, from a native Lushootseed name, probably folk-
etymologized by influence of Sauk (1).


Grateful Dead

San Francisco rock band, 1965, the name taken, according to founder Jerry Garcia, from a dictionary
entry he saw about the folk tale motif of a wanderer who gives his last penny to pay for a corpse's
burial, then is magically aided by the spirit of the dead person. A different version of the concept
is found in the Egyptian Book of the Dead.


chinchilla (n.)

small South American rodent, 1590s, from Spanish, literally little bug, diminutive of chinche (see
chinch); perhaps a folk-etymology alteration of a word from Quechua or Aymara.


Tijuana

from the name of a Diegue&ntilde;o (Yuman) village, written Tiajuan in 1829; deformed by folk-
etymology association with Spanish Tia Juana Aunt Jane.


Sidhe

the hills of the fairies, 1793; but in Yeats, the fairie folk (1899), elipsis of Irish (aos) sidhe
people of the faerie mound (compare second element in banshee).


Charterhouse

great English public school founded in London in 1611, a folk etymology alteration of chartreux (see
chartreuse); it was founded upon the site of a Carthusian monastery.


hootenanny (n.)

informal session of folk musicians, 1940, American English, earlier a gadget (1927), of unknown
origin, perhaps a nonsense word.    Another device used by the professional car thief, and one
recently developed to perfection, according to a large Chicago lock-testing laboratory, is a
hootenanny, so-called by the criminals using it. [Popular Mechanics, February 1931]


Ephesus

Greek city in ancient Asia Minor, center of worship for Artemis, Greek Ephesos, traditionally
derived from ephoros overseer, in reference to its religious significance, but this might be folk
etymology.


cantaloupe (n.)

also cantaloup, 1739, from French, from Italian, from Cantalupo, name of a former Papal summer
estate near Rome, where the melons first were grown in Europe after their introduction (supposedly
from Armenia). The place name seems to be singing wolf and might refer to a spot where wolves
gathered, but this might be folk etymology.


johnny-cake (n.)

1739, American English, of unknown origin, perhaps from Shawnee cake, from the Indian tribe. Folk
etymology since 1775, however, connects it to journey cake.


Acheron

1580s, fabled river of the Lower World in Greek mythology. The name perhaps means marsh-like
(compare Greek akherousai marshlike water); the derivation from Greek akhos woe is considered folk
etymology.


Gullah

of or pertaining to blacks on the sea-islands of Georgia and South Carolina, 1739 (first attested as
a male slave's proper name), of uncertain origin. Early 19c. folk etymology made it a shortening of
Angola (homeland of many slaves) or traced it to a W. African tribal group called the Golas.


Kiev

Ukrainian Kyyiv, of unknown origin; explanation from the name of a founding prince named Kiy
probably is folk etymology. Related: Kievan.


VW (n.)

1958, short for Volkswagen, which is German for people's car (see folk (n.) + wagon).


jackanapes (n.)

mid-15c., a monkey, also an impertinent, conceited fellow; apparently from Jack of Naples, but
whether this is some specific personification or folk etymology of jack (n.) + ape is unknown. See
note in OED.


piggyback (adj.)

1823, probably a folk etymology alteration of pick pack (1560s), which perhaps is from pick, a
dialectal variant of pitch (v.1). As a verb from 1952.


pennyroyal (n.)

herb, 1520s, alteration by folk etymology of Anglo-French puliol real; for second element see royal;
first element ultimately from Latin puleium thyme, of unknown origin.


Bern

Swiss capital, probably originally from PIE root *ber- marshy place, but by folk etymology from
German B&auml;r bear (compare Berlin). Related: Bernese.


Modena

Italian city, the name probably is from a pre-Latin language, but folk etymology connects it with
Mutina, epithet of the nymph Lara who was stricken dumb by Zeus in punishment for her loquacity,
from Latin mutus. Related: Modenese.


yellow ribbon

The American folk custom of wearing or displaying a yellow ribbon to signify solidarity with loved
ones or fellow citizens at war originated during the U.S. embassy hostage crisis in Iran in 1979. It
does not have a connection to the American Civil War, beyond the use of the old British folk song
Round Her Neck She Wore A Yellow Ribbon in the John Wayne movie of the same name, with a Civil War
setting, released in 1949. The story of a ribbon tied to a tree as a signal to a convict returning
home that his loved ones have forgiven him is attested from 1959, but the ribbon in that case was
white.    The ribbon color seems to have changed to yellow first in a version retold by newspaper
columnist Pete Hamill in 1971. The story was dramatized in June 1972 on ABC-TV (James Earl Jones
played the ex-con). Later that year, Irwin Levine and L. Russell Brown copyrighted the song Tie a
Yellow Ribbon Round the Ole Oak Tree, which became a pop hit in early 1973 and sparked a lawsuit by
Hamill, later dropped.    In 1975, the wife of a Watergate conspirator put out yellow ribbons when
her husband was released from jail, and news coverage of that was noted and remembered by Penne
Laingen, whose husband was U.S. ambassador to Iran in 1979 and one of the Iran hostages taken in the
embassy on Nov. 4. Her yellow ribbon in his honor was written up in the Dec. 10, 1979, Washington
Post. When the hostage families organized as the Family Liaison Action Group (FLAG), they took the
yellow ribbon as their symbol. The ribbons revived in the 1991 Gulf War and again during the 2000s
wars in Afghanistan and Iraq.


piepowder (n.)

early 13c., wayfarer, itinerant merchant, etc., folk etymology alteration of Old French pie pouldre
or Medieval Latin pede-pulverosus, both literally dusty-footed (see foot (n.) + powder (n.)).


belladonna (n.)

1590s, deadly nightshade (Atropa belladonna), from Italian, literally fair lady; the plant so called
supposedly because women made cosmetic eye-drops from its juice (an 18c. explanation; atropic acid,
found in the plant, has a well-known property of dilating the pupils) or because it was used to
poison beautiful women. Perhaps a folk etymology alteration; Gamillscheg suggests ultimately of
Gaulish origin.


Uriah

masc. proper name, in Old Testament, the Hittite husband of Bathsheba; of non-Hebrew (possibly
Horite) origin, but explained by folk etymology as Hebrew Uriyyah, literally flame of the Lord.
Uriah Heep, character from Dickens' David Copperfield (1850) sometimes is invoked as the type of a
hypocritically humble person.


banausic (adj.)

merely mechanical, coined 1845 from Greek banausikos pertaining to mechanics, from banausos artisan,
mere mechanical, hence (to the Greeks) base, ignoble; perhaps literally working by fire, from baunos
furnace, forge (but Klein dismisses this as folk etymology and calls it of uncertain origin).


Sisyphus

 King of Corinth, famed as the craftiest of men, he was condemned in the afterlife to roll uphill a
stone which perpetually rolls down again; Greek Sisyphos, a name of unknown origin. Liddell &amp;
Scott suggest a reduplication of syphos the crafty (with Aeolic -u- for -o-), but Klein calls this
folk-etymology.


Tuscarora

Iroquoian people originally inhabiting what is now North Carolina, 1640s, from Catawba (Siouan)
/taskarude:/, literally dry-salt eater, a folk-etymologizing of the people's name for themselves,
Tuscarora (Iroquoian) /skaru:re/, literally hemp-gatherers.


boa (n.)

late 14c., large snake, from Latin boa, type of large serpent mentioned in Pliny's Natural History;
origin unknown (in Middle English folk etymology associated with Greek bous ox). Extension to snake-
like coil of fur worn by ladies is from 1836. Boa constrictor so called from 1788.


Chamorro

indigenous people of Guam and the Marianas Islands, from Spanish Chamorro, literally shorn, shaven,
bald. Supposedly because the men shaved their heads, but the name also has been connected to native
Chamoru, said to mean noble, so perhaps Chamorro is a Spanish folk etymology.


Bombay

city in western India, from Portuguese, and popularly explained as Portuguese bom bahia good bay,
but that seems folk etymology (for one, the adjective is masculine and the noun is feminine), and
the more likely candidate is the local Mumbadevi Goddess Mumba, a Hindu deity worshipped there. The
city's name officially changed to Mumbai in 1995.


Lilith

female evil spirit, in medieval Hebrew folklore the first wife of Adam, from Hebrew Lilith, from
Akkad. Lilitu, which is connected by folk etymology with Hebrew laylah night.


art (adj.)

produced with conscious artistry, as opposed to popular or folk, 1890, from art (n.), possibly from
influence of German kunstlied art song. E.g. art film (1960); art rock (1968).


Sofia

Bulgarian capital, Roman Serdica, from the Thracian Serdi people who lived thereabouts. Conquered by
the Bulgarians 9c. who altered the name by folk-etymology to Sredeti, which in their tongue meant
center, middle. It got its current name 14c. when the Turks conquered it and converted the 6c.
church of St. Sophia into a mosque; the name thence extended to the whole city.


