forbearance (n.)

1570s, originally legal, in reference to enforcement of debt obligations, from forbear (v.) + -ance.
General sense of refraining from is from 1590s.


abstinence (n.)

mid-14c., forbearance in indulgence of the appetites, from Old French abstinence (earlier
astenance), from Latin abstinentia abstinence, starvation; self-restraint, integrity, noun of
quality from abstinentem (nominative abstinens), present participle of abstinere (see abstain).
Specifically of sexual appetites from mid-14c., but also in Middle English of food, fighting,
luxury.


affray (n.)

c.1300, state of alarm produced by a sudden disturbance, from Old French effrei, esfrei disturbance,
fright, from esfreer (v.) to worry, concern, trouble, disturb, from Vulgar Latin *exfridare,
literally to take out of peace, from Latin ex- out of (see ex-) + Frankish *frithu peace, from
Proto-Germanic *frithuz peace, consideration, forbearance (cognates: Old Saxon frithu, Old English
fri&eth;u, Old High German fridu peace, truce), from PIE root *pri- to be friendly, love (see free
(adj.)). Meaning breach of the peace, riotous fight in public is from late 15c. Related verb afrey
(early 14c.) survives almost exclusively in its past participle, afraid (q.v.).


toleration (n.)

1510s, permission granted by authority, license, from Middle French tol&eacute;ration (15c.), from
Latin tolerationem (nominative toleratio) a bearing, supporting, enduring, noun of action from past
participle stem of tolerare to endure, sustain, support, suffer, literally to bear, from PIE *tele-
to bear, carry (see extol).    Meaning forbearance, sufferance is from 1580s. The specific religious
sense is from 1609; as in Act of Toleration (1689), statute granting freedom of religious worship
(with conditions) to dissenting Protestants in England. In this it means recognition of the right of
private judgment in matters of faith and worship; liberty granted by the government to preach and
worship as one pleases; equality under the law without regard to religion.    If any man err from
the right way, it is his own misfortune, no injury to thee; nor therefore art thou to punish him in
the things of this life because thou supposest he will be miserable in that which is to come.
Nobody, therefore, in fine, neither single persons nor churches, nay, nor even commonwealths, have
any just title to invade the civil rights and worldly goods of each other upon pretence of religion.
[John Locke, Letter Concerning Toleration, 1689]   <hr />   Before any man can be considered as a
member of Civil Society, he must be considered as a subject of the Governour of the Universe: And if
a member of Civil Society, do it with a saving of his allegiance to the Universal Sovereign. We
maintain therefore that in matters of Religion, no man's right is abridged by the institution of
Civil Society and that Religion is wholly exempt from its cognizance. [James Madison, Memorial and
Remonstrance Against Religious Assessments, 1785]   <hr />   Unlimited tolerance must lead to the
disappearance of tolerance. If we extend unlimited tolerance even to those who are intolerant, if we
are not prepared to defend a tolerant society against the onslaught of the intolerant, then the
tolerant will be destroyed, and tolerance with them. [Karl Popper, The Open Society and Its Enemies,
1962]


