ford (n.)

Old English ford shallow place where water can be crossed, from Proto-Germanic *furdhus (cognates:
Old Frisian forda, Old High German furt, German Furt ford), from PIE *prtu- a going, a passage
(cognates: Latin portus harbor, originally entrance, passage; Old Welsh rit, Welsh rhyd ford; Old
English faran to go; see port (n.1)). The line of automobiles is named for U.S. manufacturer Henry
Ford (1863-1947).


ford (v.)

1610s, from ford (n.). Related: Forded; fording.


Stafford

city in England, mid-11c., St&aelig;fford, literally ford by a landing-place, from Old English
st&aelig;&eth; river bank, shore + ford (n.). County town of Staffordshire, which, as a name for a
type of earthenware and porcelain made there is attested from 1765. The city was noted in medieval
England as a source of blue cloth.


flivver (n.)

cheap car, especially Model-T Ford, 1910, of unknown origin.


Mosul

city in northern Iraq, from Arabic al-Mawsul, literally the joined, a reference to the bridge and
ford over the Tigris here.


Lizzie

pet form of fem. proper name Elizabeth, used colloquially for a motor car (especially an early-model
Ford) from 1913; also tin lizzie.


wade (v.)

Old English wadan to go forward, proceed, move, stride, advance (the modern sense perhaps
represented in oferwaden wade across), from Proto-Germanic *wadan (cognates: Old Norse va&eth;a,
Danish vade, Old Frisian wada, Dutch waden, Old High German watan, German waten to wade), from PIE
root *wadh- (2) to go, found only in Germanic and Latin (cognates: Latin vadere to go, vadum shoal,
ford, vadare to wade). Italian guado, French gu&eacute; ford are Germanic loan-words.
Specifically walk into or through water (or any substance which impedes the free motion of limbs)
c.1200. Originally a strong verb (past tense wod, past participle wad); weak since 16c. Figurative
sense of to go into (action, battle, etc.) is recorded from late 14c. Related: Waded; wading.
Forbade to wade through slaughter to a throne,  And shut the gates of mercy on mankind,    [Gray,
Elegy Written in a Country Churchyard]


Hertfordshire

Old English Heortfordscir, from Herutford (731), literally ford frequented by harts.


Edsel

the make of car was introduced 1956, named for Henry and Clara Ford's only child; figurative sense
of something useless and unwanted is almost as old. Edsel is a family name, attested since 14c.
(William de Egeshawe), from High Edser in Ewhurst, Surrey.


Herefordshire

Old English Herefordscir, from Hereford (958), literally ford suitable for the passage of an army.
Probably so-called in reference to the Roman road passing over the Wye River. Herford in Germany has
the same etymology. As the name for a type of cattle, first bred there, it is attested from 1789.


bilbo (n.)

kind of sword noted for temper and elasticity, 1590s, from Bilbao, town in northern Spain where
swords were made, in English Bilboa. The town name is Roman Bellum Vadum beautiful ford (over the
Nervion River).


automation (n.)

1948, in the manufacturing sense, coined by Ford Motor Co. Vice President Delmar S. Harder, from
automatic + -ion. Earlier (1838) was automatism, which meant quality of being automatic in the
classical sense.


port (n.1)

harbor, Old English port harbor, haven, reinforced by Old French port harbor, port; mountain pass;
Old English and Old French words both from Latin portus port, harbor, originally entrance, passage,
figuratively place of refuge, assylum, from PIE *prtu- a going, a passage, from root *per- (2) to
lead, pass over (cognates: Sanskrit parayati carries over; Greek poros journey, passage, way,
peirein to pierce, run through; Latin porta gate, door, portare passage, peritus experienced;
Avestan peretush passage, ford, bridge; Armenian hordan go forward; Welsh rhyd ford; Old Church
Slavonic pariti to fly; Old English faran to go, journey, Old Norse fj&ouml;r&eth;r inlet, estuary).
Meaning left side of a ship (looking forward from the stern) is attested from 1540s, from notion of
the side facing the harbor (when a ship is docked). It replaced larboard in common usage to avoid
confusion with starboard; officially so by Admiralty order of 1844 and U.S. Navy Department notice
of 1846. Figurative sense place of refuge is attested from early 15c.; phrase any port in a storm
first recorded 1749. A port of call (1810) is one paid a scheduled visit by a ship.


frankfurter (n.)

hot dog, 1894, American English, from German Frankfurter of Frankfurt, because a smoked-beef-and-
pork sausage somewhat like a U.S. hot dog was originally made in Germany, where it was associated
with the city of Frankfurt am Main (literally ford of the Franks on the River Main). Attested from
1877 as Frankfort sausage.


vamoose (v.)

to decamp, be off, 1834, from Spanish vamos let us go, from Latin vadamus, first person plural
indicative of vadere to go, to walk, go hastily, from PIE root *wadh- (2) to go (cognates: Old
English wadan to go, Latin vadum ford; see wade (v.)).


Oxford

university town in England, Middle English Oxforde, from Old English Oxnaforda (10c.) literally
where the oxen ford. In reference to a type of shoe laced over the instep, it is attested from 1721
(Oxford-cut shoes). Related: Oxfordian; Oxfordish; Oxfordist; Oxfordy.


Euphrates

Old English Eufrate, from Greek Euphrates, from Old Persian Ufratu, perhaps from Avestan huperethuua
good to cross over, from hu- good + peretu- ford. But Kent says probably a popular etymologizing in
O.P. of a local non-Iranian name [Old Persian, p.176]. In Akkadian, purattu.


deuce (n.)

late 15c., the 2 in dice or cards, also a roll of 2 in dice (1510s), from Middle French deus (Modern
French deux), from Latin duos (nominative duo) two (see two).    Became a mild oath by 1710, about
50 years after it was first attested in the sense of bad luck, the devil, etc., perhaps because two
was the lowest score, and probably by similarity to Latin deus and related words meaning god. Low
German had der daus! in same sense 16c., which perhaps influenced the English form. Deuce coupe is
1940s hot-rodder slang for souped up two-door car, especially a 1932 Ford. Related: Deuced;
deucedly.


Denver

city in Colorado, U.S., founded 1858 as Auraria (golden), renamed 1859 for Gen. James W. Denver
(1817-1892), governor of the territory. The family name is from the place of that name in Norfolk,
literally ford or passage used by the Danes, from Old English Dena (genitive plural) + f&aelig;r.
The Denver boot or shoe as the name for a wheel clamp for illegally parked vehicles, supposedly was
invented 1953 by Frank Marugg, pattern-maker and violinist with the Denver Symphony Orchestra. He
was a friend of politicians and police department officials, and the city sheriff's department came
to him for help in making a device to immobilize vehicles whose owners didn't pay parking tickets.


model (n.)

1570s, likeness made to scale; architect's set of designs, from Middle French modelle (16c., Modern
French mod&egrave;le), from Italian modello a model, mold, from Vulgar Latin *modellus, from Latin
modulus a small measure, standard, diminutive of modus manner, measure (see mode (n.1)).    Sense of
thing or person to be imitated is 1630s. Meaning motor vehicle of a particular design is from 1900
(such as Model T, 1908; Ford's other early models included C, F, and B). Sense of artist's model is
first recorded 1690s; that of fashion model is from 1904. German, Swedish modell, Dutch, Danish
model are from French or Italian.


tin (n.)

Old English tin, from Proto-Germanic *tinom (cognates: Middle Dutch and Dutch tin, Old High German
zin, German Zinn, Old Norse tin), of unknown origin, not found outside Germanic.    Other Indo-
European languages often have separate words for tin as a raw metal and tin plate; such as French
&eacute;tain, fer-blanc. Pliny refers to tin as plumbum album white lead, and for centuries it was
regarded as a form of silver debased by lead; hence its figurative use for mean, petty, worthless.
The chemical symbol Sn is from Late Latin stannum (see stannic).    Meaning container made of tin is
from 1795. Tin-can is from 1770; as naval slang for destroyer, by 1937. Tin-type in photography is
from 1864. Tin ear lack of musical discernment is from 1909. Tin Lizzie early Ford, especially a
Model T, first recorded 1915.


money (n.)

mid-13c., coinage, metal currency, from Old French monoie money, coin, currency; change (Modern
French monnaie), from Latin moneta place for coining money, mint; coined money, money, coinage, from
Moneta, a title or surname of the Roman goddess Juno, in or near whose temple money was coined;
perhaps from monere advise, warn (see monitor (n.)), with the sense of admonishing goddess, which is
sensible, but the etymology is difficult. Extended early 19c. to include paper money.    It had been
justly stated by a British writer that the power to make a small piece of paper, not worth one cent,
by the inscribing of a few names, to be worth a thousand dollars, was a power too high to be
entrusted to the hands of mortal man. [John C. Calhoun, speech, U.S. Senate, Dec. 29, 1841]   <hr />
I am not interested in money but in the things of which money is the symbol. [Henry Ford]  To make
money earn pay is first attested mid-15c. Highwayman's threat your money or your life first attested
1841. Phrase in the money (1902) originally meant one who finishes among the prize-winners (in a
horse race, etc.). The challenge to put (one's) money where (one's) mouth is is first recorded 1942,
American English. money-grub one who is sordidly intent on amassing money is from 1768. The image of
money burning a hole in someone's pocket is attested from 1520s.


