forensic (adj.)

pertaining to or suitable for courts of law, 1650s, from Latin forensis of a forum, place of
assembly, from forum public place (see forum). Used in sense of pertaining to legal trials, as in
forensic medicine (1845). Related: Forensical (1580s).


prolicide (n.)

killing of one's child or children, 1824, introduced by Dr. John Gordon Smith in the 2nd edition of
his Principles of Forensic Medicine; from Latin proles offspring (see prolific) + -cide.    It is
hoped that this word will be considered entitled to reception, on the score of analogy. We have long
had parricide, fratricide, and infanticide, all (if I may use the figure of speech,) of the same
family; and recently the very appropriate term foeticide has been introduced into Forensic Medicine.
In both these last crimes there is a peculiarity arising from the person accused being, in almost
every instance, the parent .... In this relation to the beings destroyed, the general term of
murderer, or murder of offspring seems to be the fair converse of parricide; and will suit well the
purpose of the Medico-legal writer, who considers the two cases as parts of one subject, for the
designation of which collectively a proper term was wanting. [Smith]


abortion (n.)

1540s, originally of both deliberate and unintended miscarriages; from Latin abortionem (nominative
abortio) miscarriage; abortion, noun of action from past participle stem of aboriri (see abortive).
Earlier noun in English was simple abort (early 15c.) miscarriage. In 19c. some effort was made to
distinguish abortion expulsion of the fetus between 6 weeks and 6 months from miscarriage (the same
within 6 weeks of conception) and premature labor (delivery after 6 months but before due time). The
deliberate miscarriage was criminal abortion. This broke down late 19c. as abortion came to be used
principally for intentional miscarriages, probably via phrases such as procure an abortion.
Foeticide (n.) appears 1823 as a forensic medical term for deliberate premature fatal expulsion of
the fetus; also compare prolicide. Abortion was a taboo word for much of early 20c., disguised in
print as criminal operation (U.S.) or illegal operation (U.K.), and replaced by miscarriage in film
versions of novels.


