foresight (n.)

c.1300, from fore- + sight (n.). Compare German Vorsicht attention, caution, cautiousness.


prudence (n.)

mid-14c. (c.1200 as a surname), mid-14c., intelligence; discretion, foresight; wisdom to see what is
suitable or profitable; also one of the four cardinal virtues, wisdom to see what is virtuous; from
Old French prudence (13c.) and directly from Latin prudentia a foreseeing, foresight, sagacity,
practical judgment, contraction of providentia foresight (see providence). Secondary sense of wisdom
(late 14c.) is preserved in jurisprudence.


providence (n.)

late 14c., foresight, prudent anticipation, from Old French providence divine providence, foresight
(12c.) and directly from Latin providentia foresight, precaution, foreknowledge, from providentem
(nominative providens), present participle of providere (see provide).   Providence (usually
capitalized) God as beneficent caretaker, first recorded c.1600, from earlier use of the word for
God's beneficient care or guidance (14c.), short for divine providence, etc. The noun in Latin
occasionally had a similar sense.


hindsight (n.)

by 1841, backsight of a firearm, from hind (adj.) + sight. Meaning seeing what has happened is
attested by 1862, American English, (in proverbial If our foresight was as good as our hindsight, it
would be an easy matter to get rich), probably a formation on the model of foresight.


imprudence (n.)

early 15c., quality of rashness or heedlessness; imprudent act, from Latin imprudentia lack of
foresight, inconsiderateness, ignorance, inadvertence, noun of quality from imprudens (see
imprudent).


improvidence (n.)

lack of foresight, rashness, mid-15c., from Latin improvidentia, from assimilated form of in- not
(see in- (1)) + providentia (see providence).


short-sighted (adj.)

also shortsighted, 1640s, of eyesight, myopic; 1620s in the sense lacking foresight; see short
(adj.) + sight (n.). Related: Shortsightedly; shortsightedness.


circumspection (n.)

late 14c., careful observation of one's surroundings, from Old French circumspection (Modern French
circonspection), from Latin circumspectionem (nominative circumspectio) a looking around; foresight,
caution, noun of action from past participle stem of circumspicere to look around (see circumspect).


prudential (adj.)

mid-15c., from Medieval Latin prudentialis, from Latin prudentia a foreseeing, foresight (see
prudence). Related: Prudentially. Prudential, the U.S. insurance company, dates to the 1870s; its
logo featuring the Rock of Gibraltar dates from c.1900 and was widely known 20c.


caution (n.)

c.1300, bail, guarantee, pledge, from Old French caution security, surety (13c.), from Latin
cautionem (nominative cautio) caution, care, foresight, precaution, noun of action from past
participle stem of cavere to be on one's guard (see caveat). The Latin sense re-emerged in English
16c.-17c. Meaning word of warning is from c.1600.


provide (v.)

early 15c., from Latin providere look ahead, prepare, supply, act with foresight, from pro- ahead
(see pro-) + videre to see (see vision). Related: Provided; providing. Earlier in same sense was
purvey, which is the same word as deformed in Old French.


prevision (n.)

1610s, foresight, from French pr&eacute;vision (14c.), from Late Latin praevisionem (nominative
praevisio), noun of action from past participle stem of Latin praevidere see first, see beforehand,
from prae- before (see pre-) + videre to see (see vision).


provision (n.)

late 14c., a providing beforehand, action of arranging in advance (originally in reference to
ecclesiastical appointments made before the position was vacant), from Old French provision
precaution, care (early 14c.), from Latin provisionem (nominative provisio) a foreseeing, foresight,
preparation, prevention, noun of action from past participle stem of providere look ahead (see
provide). Meaning something provided is attested from late 15c.; specific sense of supply of food is
from c.1600.


vision (n.)

c.1300, something seen in the imagination or in the supernatural, from Anglo-French visioun, Old
French vision presence, sight; view, look, appearance; dream, supernatural sight (12c.), from Latin
visionem (nominative visio) act of seeing, sight, thing seen, noun of action from past participle
stem of videre to see.    This is from the productive PIE root *weid- to know, to see (cognates:
Sanskrit veda I know; Avestan vaeda I know; Greek oida, Doric woida I know, idein to see; Old Irish
fis vision, find white, i.e. clearly seen, fiuss knowledge; Welsh gwyn, Gaulish vindos, Breton gwenn
white; Gothic, Old Swedish, Old English witan to know; Gothic weitan to see; English wise, German
wissen to know; Lithuanian vysti to see; Bulgarian vidya I see; Polish widzie&#263; to see,
wiedzie&#263; to know; Russian videt' to see, vest' news, Old Russian vedat' to know).    The
meaning sense of sight is first recorded late 15c. Meaning statesman-like foresight, political
sagacity is attested from 1926.


