forfeit (v.)

c.1300, to lose by misconduct; see forfeit (n.). Related: Forfeited; forfeiting.


forfeiture

mid-14c., from Old French forfaiture crime, transgression; penalty for committing a crime, from
forfait (see forfeit).


forfeit (n.)

c.1300, misdeed, from Old French forfait crime, punishable offense (12c.), originally past
participle of forfaire transgress, from for- outside, beyond (from Latin foris; see foreign) + faire
to do (from Latin facere; see factitious). Translating Medieval Latin foris factum. Sense shifted
mid-15c. from the crime to the penalty: something to which the right is lost through a misdeed. As
an adjective from late 14c., from Old French forfait.


handicap (n.)

1650s, from hand in cap, a game whereby two bettors would engage a neutral umpire to determine the
odds in an unequal contest. The bettors would put their hands holding forfeit money into a hat or
cap. The umpire would announce the odds and the bettors would withdraw their hands -- hands full
meaning that they accepted the odds and the bet was on, hands empty meaning they did not accept the
bet and were willing to forfeit the money. If one forfeited, then the money went to the other. If
both agreed either on forfeiting or going ahead with the wager, then the umpire kept the money as
payment. The custom, though not the name, is attested from 14c. (Piers Plowman).  Reference to horse
racing is 1754 (Handy-Cap Match), where the umpire decrees the superior horse should carry extra
weight as a handicap; this led to sense of encumbrance, disability first recorded 1890. The main
modern sense, disability, is the last to develop, early 20c.


gin (v.1)

in slang phrase gin up enliven, make more exciting, 1887, probably from earlier ginger up in same
sense (1849), from ginger in sense of spice, pizzazz; specifically in reference to the treatment
described in the 1811 slang dictionary under the entry for feague:    ... to put ginger up a horse's
fundament, and formerly, as it is said, a live eel, to make him lively and carry his tail well; it
is said, a forfeit is incurred by any horse-dealer's servant, who shall shew a horse without first
feaguing him. Feague is used, figuratively, for encouraging or spiriting one up.


thole (v.)

to be subjected to or exposed to, to endure without complaint, now Scottish and Northern English
dialect, from Old English &thorn;olian to suffer, endure, undergo; remain, survive; to lose, lack,
forfeit, from Proto-Germanic stem *thul- (cognates: Old Saxon tholon, Old High German dolon, Old
Norse &thorn;ola, Gothic &thorn;ulan to suffer, German geduld patience), from PIE *tele- to bear,
carry (see extol).


capital (adj.)

early 13c., of or pertaining to the head, from Old French capital, from Latin capitalis of the head,
hence capital, chief, first, from caput (genitive capitis) head (see capitulum). Meaning main,
principal, chief, dominant, most important is from early 15c. in English. Capital letter for an
upper case one is attested from late 14c. The modern informal sense of excellent, first-rate is
dated from 1762 in OED (as an exclamation of approval, OED's first example is 1875), perhaps from
earlier use of the word in reference to ships, first-rate, of the line, attested from 1650s.     A
capital crime (1520s) is one that affects the life or head; capital had a sense of deadly, mortal
from late 14c. in English, a sense also found in Latin. The felt connection between head and life,
mortality also existed in Old English: as in heafodgilt deadly sin, capital offense, heafdes
&thorn;olian to forfeit life. Capital punishment was in Blackstone (1765) and classical Latin
capitis poena. Capital gain is recorded from 1921. Capital goods is recorded from 1899. Related:
Capitally.


