forge (n.)

late 14c., a smithy, from Old French forge (12c.) forge, smithy, earlier faverge, from Latin fabrica
workshop, from faber (genitive fabri) workman in hard materials, smith (see fabric). As the heating
apparatus itself, from late 15c.


forge (v.2)

1610s, make way, move ahead, of unknown origin, perhaps an alteration of force (v.), but perhaps
rather from forge (n.), via notion of steady hammering at something. Originally nautical, in
reference to vessels.


forge (v.1)

c.1300, to make, shape, create, from Old French forgier, from Latin fabricari to frame, construct,
build, from fabrica workshop (see forge (n.)). Meaning to counterfeit is early 14c. Related: Forged;
forging.


forger (n.)

late 14c., a maker, a smith, agent noun from forge (v.). Meaning a counterfeiter is from 1550s.


forgery (n.)

1570s, a thing made fraudulently, from forge (n.) + -ery. Meaning act of counterfeiting is 1590s.


advisability (n.)

1778 (in a letter from George Washington at Valley Forge), from advisable + -ity.


incus (n.)

ear bone, 1660s, from Latin incus anvil, from incudere to forge with a hammer. So called by Belgian
anatomist Andreas Vesalius (1514-1564).


banausic (adj.)

merely mechanical, coined 1845 from Greek banausikos pertaining to mechanics, from banausos artisan,
mere mechanical, hence (to the Greeks) base, ignoble; perhaps literally working by fire, from baunos
furnace, forge (but Klein dismisses this as folk etymology and calls it of uncertain origin).


smith (v.)

Old English smi&#240;ian to forge, fabricate, design, from the source of smith (n.). Related:
Smithed; smithing.


volcano (n.)

1610s, from Italian vulcano burning mountain, from Latin Vulcanus Vulcan, Roman god of fire, also
fire, flames, volcano (see Vulcan). The name was first applied to Mt. Etna by the Romans, who
believed it was the forge of Vulcan. Earlier form in English was volcan (1570s), from French.


press (v.1)

push against, early 14c., to clasp, embrace; mid-14c. to squeeze out; also to cluster, gather in a
crowd;  late 14c., to press against, exert pressure, also assault, assail; also forge ahead, push
one's way, move forward, from Old French presser squeeze, press upon; torture (13c.), from Latin
pressare to press, frequentative formation from pressus, past participle of premere to press, hold
fast, cover, crowd, compress, from PIE *per- (4) to strike. Related: Pressed; pressing. Figurative
sense is from late 14c. Meaning to urge, argue for is from 1590s.


chimney (n.)

late 13c., furnace; early 14c., chimney stack of a fireplace; late 14c., fireplace in a residential
space; from Old French cheminee fireplace; room with a fireplace; hearth; chimney stack (12c.,
Modern French chemin&eacute;e), from Late Latin (camera) caminata fireplace; room with a fireplace,
from Latin caminatus, adjective of caminus furnace, forge; hearth, oven; flue, from Greek kaminos
furnace, oven, brick kiln. Jamieson [1808] notes that in vulgar use in Scotland it always is
pronounced chimley. Chimney sweep attested from 1610s, earlier chimney sweeper (c.1500).


hew (v.)

Old English heawan to chop, hack, gash (class VII strong verb; past tense heow, past participle
heawen), earlier geheawan, from Proto-Germanic *hawwan (cognates: Old Norse hoggva, Old Frisian
hawa, Old Saxon hauwan, Middle Dutch hauwen, Dutch houwen, Old High German houwan, German hauen to
cut, strike, hew), from PIE root *kau- to hew, strike (cognates: Old Church Slavonic kovo,
Lithuanian kauju to beat, forge; Latin cudere to strike, beat; Middle Irish cuad beat, fight).
Weak past participle hewede appeared 14c., but hasn't displaced hewn. Seemingly contradictory sense
of hold fast, stick to (in phrase hew to) developed from hew to the line stick to a course,
literally cut evenly with an axe or saw, first recorded 1891. Related: Hewed; hewing.


slay (v.)

Old English slean to smite, strike, beat, also to kill with a weapon, slaughter (class VI strong
verb; past tense sloh, slog, past participle slagen), from Proto-Germanic *slahan, from root *slog-
to hit (cognates: Old Norse and Old Frisian sla, Danish slaa, Middle Dutch slaen, Dutch slaan, Old
High German slahan, German schlagen, Gothic slahan to strike). The Germanic words are from PIE root
*slak- to strike (cognates: Middle Irish past participle slactha struck, slacc sword).    Modern
German cognate schlagen maintains the original sense of to strike. Meaning overwhelm with delight
(mid-14c.) preserves one of the wide range of meanings the word once had, including, in Old English,
stamp (coins); forge (weapons); throw, cast; pitch (a tent), to sting (of a snake); to dash, rush,
come quickly; play (the harp); gain by conquest.


