forlorn (adj.)

mid-12c., forloren disgraced, depraved, past participle of obsolete forlesan be deprived of, lose,
abandon, from Old English forleosan to lose, abandon, let go; destroy, ruin, from for- completely +
leosan to lose (see lose). In the Mercian hymns, Latin perditionis is glossed by Old English
forlorenisse.    Sense of forsaken, abandoned is 1530s; that of wretched, miserable first recorded
1580s. A common Germanic compound (cognates: Old Saxon farilosan, Old Frisian urliasa, Middle Dutch
verliesen, Dutch verliezen, Old High German virliosan, German verlieren, Gothic fraliusan to lose).
Commonly in forlorn hope (1570s), which is a partial translation of Dutch verloren hoop, in which
hoop means troop, band, literally heap, and the sense of the whole phrase is of a suicide mission.
The phrase is usually used incorrectly in English, and the misuse has colored the sense of forlorn.
Related: Forlornly; forlornness.


lorn (adj.)

(archaic) c.1300, lost, ruined, from Old English loren, past participle of leosan to lose (see
lose). Meaning abandoned, left alone is from late 15c. Compare forlorn.


lose (v.)

Old English losian be lost, perish, from los destruction, loss, from Proto-Germanic *lausa-
(cognates: Old Norse los the breaking up of an army; Old English forleosan to lose, destroy, Old
Frisian forliasa, Old Saxon farliosan, Middle Dutch verliesen, Old High German firliosan, German
verlieren), from PIE root *leu- to loosen, divide, cut apart, untie, separate (cognates: Sanskrit
lunati cuts, cuts off, lavitram sickle; Greek lyein to loosen, untie, slacken, lysus a loosening;
Latin luere to loose, release, atone for, expiate).    Replaced related leosan (a class II strong
verb whose past participle loren survives in forlorn and lovelorn), from Proto-Germanic *leusanan
(cognates: Old High German virliosan, German verlieren, Old Frisian urliasa, Gothic fraliusan to
lose).    Transitive sense of to part with accidentally is from c.1200. Meaning fail to maintain is
from mid-15c. Meaning to be defeated (in a game, etc.) is from 1530s. Meaning to cause (someone) to
lose his way is from 1640s. To lose (one's) mind become insane is attested from c.1500. To lose out
fail is 1858, American English. Related: Lost; losing.


