formality (n.)

1530s, agreement as to form, from Middle French formalit&eacute; (15c.) or directly from Latin
formalis formal (see formal). Originally literary form; meaning something done for the sake of form
is from 1590s. Related: Formalities.


summarily (adv.)

1520s, briefly, in few words, from summary + -ly (2). Meaning without hesitation or formality is
from 1620s.


stiffness (n.)

late 14c., from stiff (adj.) + -ness. Meaning uneasy formality is from 1630s.


pro forma

also proforma, Latin, literally for form's sake, by way of formality; see pro- + form (n.).


summary (adj.)

early 15c., brief, abbreviated; containing the sum or substance only, from Medieval Latin summarius
of or pertaining to the sum or substance, from Latin summa whole, totality, gist (see sum (n.)).
Compare Latin phrase ad summam on the whole, generally, in short. Sense of done promptly, performed
without hesitation or formality is from 1713.


ramrod (n.)

1757, literally a rod used in ramming (the charge of a gun), from ram (v.) + rod. Used figuratively
for straightness or stiffness from 1939, also figuratively for formality, primness (ramroddy is in
Century Dictionary, 1902). The verb is 1948, from the noun. Related: Ramrodded; ramrodding.


circumstance (n.)

early 13c., conditions surrounding and accompanying an event, from Old French circonstance
circumstance, situation, also literally, outskirts (13c., Modern French circonstance), from Latin
circumstantia surrounding condition, neuter plural of circumstans (genitive circumstantis), present
participle of circumstare stand around, surround, encompass, occupy, take possession of from circum
around (see circum-) + stare to stand from PIE root *sta- to stand (see stet). The Latin word is a
loan-translation of Greek peristasis.    Meaning a person's surroundings, environment is from mid-
14c. Meaning a detail is from c.1300; sense of that which is non-essential is from 1590s. Obsolete
sense of formality about an important event (late 14c.) lingers in Shakespeare's phrase pomp and
circumstance (Othello III, iii).


