forsaken (adj.)

mid-13c., past participle adjective from forsake. Related: Forsakenly.


forsake (v.)

Old English forsacan object to, decline, oppose, refuse, deny, from for- completely + sacan to deny,
refuse (see sake). Related: Forsaking.


forsook

past tense of forsake.


derelict (adj.)

1640s, from Latin derelictus solitary, deserted, past participle of dereliquere to abandon, forsake,
desert, from de- entirely + relinquere leave behind (see relinquish). Originally especially of
vessels abandoned at sea or stranded on shore. As a noun, from 1660s.


redhead (n.)

mid-13c., from red (adj.1) + head (n.). Red (adj.), of persons, having red hair is from late Old
English.The Carrot pate be sure you hate, for she'l be true to no man,  But put her too 't and she
will do 't, and oft turns very common:  She that is red upon the head will doubtless ne'r forsake
it,  But wanton be, assuredly, and willingly will take it.  [The True Lover's Admonition, Roxburghe
Ballads, c.1680]


walk-out (n.)

strike, 1888, from walk (v.) + out (adv.). Phrase walk out to leave is attested by 1840. To walk out
on a person desert, forsake is by 1913.


destitute (adj.)

late 14c., abandoned, forsaken, from Latin destitutus abandoned, past participle of destituere
forsake, from de- away + statuere put, place, causative of stare to stand, from PIE root *sta- to
stand (see stet). Originally literal; sense of lacking resources, impoverished is 1530s.


eclipse (n.)

late 13c., from Old French eclipse eclipse, darkness (12c.), from Latin eclipsis, from Greek
ekleipsis an abandonment, an eclipse, from ekleipein to forsake a usual place, fail to appear, be
eclipsed, from ek out (see ex-) + leipein to leave (cognate with Latin linquere; see relinquish).


desert (v.)

to leave one's duty, late 14c., from Old French deserter (12c.) leave, literally undo or sever
connection, from Late Latin desertare, frequentative of Latin deserere to abandon, to leave,
forsake, give up, leave in the lurch, from de- undo (see de-) + serere join together, put in a row
(see series). Military sense is first recorded 1640s. Related: Deserted; deserting.


relinquish (v.)

mid-15c., desert, abandon; late 15c., give up, desist, from Old French relinquiss-, present
participle stem of relinquir (12c.), from Latin relinquere leave behind, forsake, abandon, give up,
from re- back (see re-) + linquere to leave, from PIE *linkw-, from root *leikw- to leave behind
(cognates: Sanskrit reknas inheritance, wealth, rinakti leaves; Greek leipein to leave; Gothic
leihvan, Old English l&aelig;nan to lend; Old High German lihan to borrow; Old Norse lan loan).
Related: Relinquished; relinquishing.


desert (n.1)

wasteland, early 13c., from Old French desert (12c.) desert, wilderness, wasteland; destruction,
ruin, from Late Latin desertum (source of Italian diserto, Old Proven&ccedil;al dezert, Spanish
desierto), literally thing abandoned (used in Vulgate to translate wilderness), noun use of neuter
past participle of Latin deserere forsake (see desert (v.)).    Sense of waterless, treeless region
was in Middle English and gradually became the main meaning. Commonly spelled desart in 18c., which
is not etymological but at least avoids confusion with the other two senses of the word. Classical
Latin indicated this idea with deserta, plural of desertus.


