fortuitous (adj.)

1650s, from Latin fortuitus happening by chance, casual, accidental, from forte by chance, ablative
of fors chance (related to fortuna; see fortune). It means accidental, undesigned not fortunate.
Earlier in this sense was fortuit (late 14c.), from French. Related: Fortuitously; fortuitousness.


fortuity (n.)

1747, from fortuitous + -ity.


adventurous (adj.)

mid-14c., hazardous (also occurring by chance, late 14c.), from Old French aventuros chance,
accidental, fortuitous; of persons, devoted to adventure (Modern French aventureux), from aventure
(see adventure (n.)). Sense evolution is through rash, risk-taking (c.1400), daring, fond of
adventure (mid-15c.).


American dream

coined 1931 by James Truslow Adams (1878-1949), U.S. writer and popular historian (unrelated to the
Massachusetts Adamses), in Epic of America.    [The American Dream is] that dream of a land in which
life should be better and richer and fuller for everyone, with opportunity for each according to
ability or achievement. It is a difficult dream for the European upper classes to interpret
adequately, and too many of us ourselves have grown weary and mistrustful of it. It is not a dream
of motor cars and high wages merely, but a dream of social order in which each man and each woman
shall be able to attain to the fullest stature of which they are innately capable, and be recognized
by others for what they are, regardless of the fortuitous circumstances of birth or position.
[Adams]    Others have used the term as they will.


silly (adj.)

Old English ges&aelig;lig happy, fortuitous, prosperous (related to s&aelig;l happiness), from
Proto-Germanic *s&aelig;ligas (cognates: Old Norse s&aelig;ll happy, Old Saxon salig, Middle Dutch
salich, Old High German salig, German selig blessed, happy, blissful, Gothic sels good,
kindhearted), from PIE *sele- of good mood; to favor, from root *sel- (2) happy, of good mood; to
favor (cognates: Latin solari to comfort, Greek hilaros cheerful, gay, merry, joyous).    This is
one of the few instances in which an original long e (ee) has become shortened to i. The same change
occurs in breeches, and in the American pronunciation of been, with no change in spelling. [Century
Dictionary]    The word's considerable sense development moved from happy to blessed to pious, to
innocent (c.1200), to harmless, to pitiable (late 13c.), weak (c.1300), to feeble in mind, lacking
in reason, foolish (1570s). Further tendency toward stunned, dazed as by a blow (1886) in knocked
silly, etc. Silly season in journalism slang is from 1861 (August and September, when newspapers
compensate for a lack of hard news by filling up with trivial stories). Silly Putty trademark claims
use from July 1949.


