fortitude (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French fortitude, from Latin fortitudo strength, force, firmness, from
fortis strong, brave (see fort).


powerless (adj.)

early 15c., lacking might or fortitude, from power (n.) + -less. Related: Powerlessly;
powerlessness.


fortitudinous (adj.)

from Latin fortitudinem (nominative fortitudo; see fortitude) + -ous. Related: Fortitudinously.


tolerance (n.)

early 15c., endurance, fortitude (in the face of pain, hardship, etc.), from Old French tolerance
(14c.), from Latin tolerantia a bearing, supporting, endurance, from tolerans, present participle of
tolerare to bear, endure, tolerate (see toleration). Of individuals, with the sense tendency to be
free from bigotry or severity in judging other, from 1765. Meaning allowable amount of variation
dates from 1868; and physiological sense of ability to take large doses first recorded 1875.


force (n.)

c.1300, physical strength, from Old French force (12c.) force, strength, courage, fortitude;
violence, power, compulsion, from Vulgar Latin *fortia (source also of Spanish fuerza, Italian
forza), noun use of neuter plural of Latin fortis strong (see fort). Meaning body of armed men, army
first recorded late 14c. (also in Old French). Physics sense is from 1660s; force field attested by
1920.


strength (n.)

Old English streng&thorn;u, streng&#240; bodily power, force, vigor, firmness, fortitude, manhood,
violence, moral resistance, from Proto-Germanic *strangitho (cognates: Old High German strengida
strength), from PIE *strenk- tight, narrow (see string (n.)), with Proto-Germanic abstract noun
suffix *-itho (see -th (2)). Compare length/long. From the same root as strong,


cardinal (adj.)

chief, pivotal, early 14c., from Latin cardinalis principal, chief, essential, from cardo (genitive
cardinis) that on which something turns or depends; pole of the sky, originally door hinge, of
unknown origin. Related: Cardinally.    The cardinal points (1540s) are north, south, east, west.
The cardinal sins (c.1600) are too well known to require rehearsal. The cardinal virtues (c.1300)
were divided into natural (justice prudence, temperance, fortitude) and theological (faith, hope,
charity). The natural ones were the original classical ones, which were amended by Christians. But
typically in Middle English only the first four were counted as the cardinal virtues:    Of &#254;e
uour uirtues cardinales speke&#254; moche &#254;e yealde philosofes. [Ayenbite of Inwyt, c.1340]
By analogy of this, and cardinal points, cardinal winds, cardinal signs (four zodiacal signs marking
the equinoxes and the solstices), the adjective in Middle English acquired an association with the
number four.


virtue (n.)

c.1200, vertu, moral life and conduct; a particular moral excellence, from Anglo-French and Old
French vertu force, strength, vigor; moral strength; qualities, abilities (10c. in Old French), from
Latin virtutem (nominative virtus) moral strength, high character, goodness; manliness; valor,
bravery, courage (in war); excellence, worth, from vir man (see virile).    For my part I honour
with the name of virtue the habit of acting in a way troublesome to oneself and useful to others.
[Stendhal de l'Amour, 1822]    Especially (in women) chastity, sexual purity from 1590s. Phrase by
virtue of (early 13c.) preserves alternative Middle English sense of efficacy. Wyclif Bible has
virtue where KJV uses power. The seven cardinal virtues (early 14c.) were divided into the natural
(justice, prudence, temperance, fortitude) and the theological (hope, faith, charity). To make a
virtue of a necessity (late 14c.) translates Latin facere de necessitate virtutem [Jerome].


