forward (v.)

1590s, to help push forward, from forward (adv.). Meaning to send (a letter, etc.) on to another
destination is from 1757. Related: Forwarded; forwarding.


forward (n.)

Old English, the fore or front part of something; see forward (adv.). The position in football so
called since 1879.


forwards (adv.)

Middle English, from forward + adverbial genitive -s. British English until mid-20c. preserved the
distinction between forward and forwards, the latter expressing a definite direction viewed in
contrast with other directions. In American English, however, forward prevails in all senses since
Webster (1832) damned forwards as a corruption.


forwardness (n.)

1520s, from forward (adj.) + -ness. Meaning presumptuousness is from c.1600.


forward (adv.)

Old English forewearde toward the front; see fore + -ward. Adjectival sense of early is from 1520s;
that of presumptuous is attested from 1560s.


propel (v.)

mid-15c., to drive away, expel, from Latin propellere push forward, drive forward, drive forth;
move, impel, from pro- forward (see pro-) + pellere to push, drive (see pulse (n.1)). Meaning to
drive onward, cause to move forward is from 1650s. Related: Propelled; propelling.


protrude (v.)

1610s, to thrust forward or onward, to drive along; 1640s, to cause to stick out, from Latin
protrudere thrust forward; push out, from pro- forward (see pro-) + trudere to thrust (see
extrusion). Intransitive meaning jut out, bulge forth recorded from 1620s. Related: Protruded;
protruding.


procumbent (adj.)

leaning forward, 1660s, from Latin procumbentem (nominative procumbens), present participle of
procumbere to fall forward, fall prostrate, from pro forward (see pro-) + -cumbere to lie down (see
succumb). Related: Procumbently.


forth (adv.)

Old English for&eth; forward, onward, further, continually, perfective of fore, from Proto-Germanic
*furtha- (cognates: Old Frisian, Old Saxon forth forward, onward, Old Norse for&eth;, Dutch voort,
German fort), from PIE *prto-, from *pr-, from root *per- (1) forward, through (see per).


proceed (v.)

late 14c., to go on, also to emanate from, result from, from Old French proceder (13c., Modern
French proc&#233;der) and directly from Latin procedere (past participle processus) go before, go
forward, advance, make progress; come forward, from pro- forward (see pro-) + cedere to go (see
cede). Related: Proceeded; proceeding.


progression (n.)

late 14c., action of moving from one condition to another, from Old French progression and directly
from Latin progressionem (nominative progressio) a going forward, advancement, growth, increase,
noun of action from past participle stem of progredi go forward, from pro- forward (see pro-) +
gradi to step, walk, from gradus step (see grade (n.)).


prospect (n.)

early 15c., act of looking into the distance, from Latin prospectus distant view, look out; sight,
faculty of sight, noun use of past participle of prospicere look out on, look forward, from pro-
forward (see pro-) + specere look at (see scope (n.1)). Meaning extensive view of the landscape is
from 1530s; transferred sense of mental view or survey is from 1620s. Sense of person or thing
considered promising is from 1922. Prospects expectations, things looked forward to is from 1660s.


pro-

word-forming element meaning forward, forth, toward the front (as in proclaim, proceed); beforehand,
in advance (prohibit, provide); taking care of (procure); in place of, on behalf of (proconsul,
pronoun); from Latin pro on behalf of, in place of, before, for, in exchange for, just as, which
also was used as a prefix.    Also in some cases from cognate Greek pro before, in front of, sooner,
which also was used in Greek as a prefix (as in problem). Both the Latin and Greek words are from
PIE *pro- (cognates: Sanskrit pra- before, forward, forth; Gothic faura before, Old English fore
before, for, on account of, fram forward, from; Old Irish roar enough), extended form of root *per-
(1) forward, through (see per).    The common modern sense in favor of, favoring (pro-independence,
pro-fluoridation, pro-Soviet, etc.) was not in classical Latin and is attested in English from early
19c.


straightforward (adj.)

1550s, directly forward, right ahead, from straight (adj.1) + forward (adv.). In reference to
language, from 1806. Related: Straightforwardly; straightforwardness.


restive (adj.)

early 15c., restyffe not moving forward, from Middle French restif motionless, brought to a
standstill (Modern French r&#233;tif), from rester to remain (see rest (n.2)). Sense of unmanageable
(1680s) evolved via notion of a horse refusing to go forward.


frame (v.)

Old English framian to profit, be helpful, avail, benefit, from fram active, vigorous, bold,
originally going forward, from fram forward; from (see from).    Influenced by related Old English
fremman help forward, promote, further, do, perform, accomplish, and by Old Norse fremja to further,
execute. Sense focused in Middle English from make ready (mid-13c.) to prepare timber for building
(late 14c.). Meaning compose, devise is first attested 1540s.    The criminal slang sense of blame
an innocent person (1920s) is probably from earlier sense of plot in secret (1900), perhaps
ultimately from meaning fabricate a story with evil intent, first attested 1510s. Related: Framed;
framing.


portend (v.)

early 15c., from Latin portendere foretell, reveal; point out, indicate, originally to stretch
forward, from por- (variant of pro-; see pro-) forth, forward + tendere to stretch, extend (see
tenet). Related: Portended; portending.


from (prep.)

Old English fram from, since, by, as a result, originally forward movement, advancement, evolving
into sense of movement away, from Proto-Germanic *fr- (cognates: Old Saxon, Old High German, Gothic
fram from, away, Old Norse fra from, fram forward), corresponding to PIE *pro (see pro-).


propensity (n.)

1560s, disposition to favor, with -ty + obsolete adjective propense inclined, prone (1520s), from
Latin propensus, past participle of propendere incline to, hang forward, hang down, weigh over, from
pro- forward (see pro-) + pendere hang (see pendant).


prone (adj.)

c.1400, naturally inclined to something, apt, liable, from Latin pronus bent forward, leaning
forward, bent over, figuratively inclined to, disposed, perhaps from adverbial form of pro- before,
for, instead of (see pro-) + ending as in infernus, externus. Meaning lying face-down is first
recorded 1570s. Literal and figurative senses both were in Latin; figurative is older in English.
Related: Proneness.


prodrome (n.)

1640s, from French prodrome (16c.), from Modern Latin prodromus, from Greek prodromos a running
forward, a sally, sudden attack, from pro- forward (see pro-) + dromos a running (see dromedary).


progress (n.)

late 14c., a going on, action of walking forward, from Old French progres (Modern French
progr&#232;s), from Latin progressus a going forward, from past participle of progredi (see
progression).    In early use in English especially a state journey by royalty. Figurative sense of
growth, development, advancement to higher stages is from c.1600. To be in progress underway is
attested by 1849. Progress report attested by 1865.


proclitic (adj.)

1846, from Medieval Latin procliticus, formed on analogy of encliticus from Greek proklinein to lean
forward, from pro- forward (see pro-) + klinein to lean (see lean (v.)).


for-

prefix usually meaning away, opposite, completely, from Old English for-, indicating loss or
destruction, or completion, also used as an intensive or pejorative element, which is related to Old
Norse for-, Dutch ver-, Old High German fir-, German ver-; from PIE *pr-, from root *per- (1)
forward, through (see per). Probably originally in Germanic with a sense of forward, forth, but with
complex sense developments in the various languages. Ultimately from the same root as fore (adv.).


promote (v.)

late 14c., to advance (someone) to a higher grade or office, from Old French promoter and directly
from Latin promotus, past participle of promovere move forward, advance; cause to advance, push
onward; bring to light, reveal, from pro- forward (see pro-) + movere to move (see move (v.)).
General sense of to further the growth or progress of (anything) is from 1510s. Related: Promoted;
promoting.


process (n.)

early 14c., fact of being carried on (as in in process), from Old French proces a journey;
continuation, development; legal trial (13c.) and directly from Latin processus a going forward,
advance, progress, from past participle stem of procedere go forward (see proceed).    Meaning
course or method of action is from mid-14c.; sense of continuous series of actions meant to
accomplish some result (the main modern sense) is from 1620s. Legal sense of course of action of a
suit at law is attested from early 14c.


protraction (n.)

mid-15c., drawing or writing of numbers, from Middle French protraction (15c.) and directly from
Late Latin protractionem (nominative protractio) a drawing out or lengthening, noun of action from
past participle stem of Latin protrahere to draw forward, draw out, bring forth; figuratively bring
to light, reveal, expose, from pro- forward (see pro-) + trahere to draw (see tract (n.1)). Meaning
act of drawing out or prolonging is from 1530s.


advance (v.)

mid-13c., avauncen, transitive, improve (something), further the development of, from Old French
avancier move forward (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *abanteare (source of Italian avanzare, Spanish
avanzar), from Late Latin abante from before, composed of ab- from (see ab-) + ante before, in front
of, against (see ante).    The -d- was inserted 16c. on mistaken notion that initial a- was from
Latin ad-. From c.1300 as to promote; intransitive sense is mid-14c., move forward. Meaning to give
money before it is legally due is first attested 1670s. Related: Advanced; advancing. The adjective
(in advance warning, etc.) is recorded from 1843.


pretend (v.)

late 14c., to profess, assert, maintain (a claim, etc.), to direct (one's) efforts, from Old French
pretendre to lay claim, from Latin praetendere stretch in front, put forward, allege, from prae
before (see pre-) + tendere to stretch, from PIE root *ten- to stretch (see tend).    Main modern
sense of feign, put forward a false claim is recorded from c.1400; the older sense of simply to
claim is behind the string of royal pretenders (1690s) in English history. Meaning to play, make
believe is recorded from 1865. In 17c. pretend also could mean make a suit of marriage for, from a
sense in French. Related: Pretended; pretending.


problem (n.)

late 14c., a difficult question proposed for solution, from Old French probl&egrave;me (14c.) and
directly from Latin problema, from Greek problema a task, that which is proposed, a question; also
anything projecting, headland, promontory; fence, barrier; also a problem in geometry, literally
thing put forward, from proballein propose, from pro forward (see pro-) + ballein to throw (see
ballistics).    Meaning a difficulty is mid-15c. Mathematical sense is from 1560s in English.
Problem child first recorded 1920. Phrase _______ problem in reference to a persistent and seemingly
insoluble difficulty is attested at least from 1882, in Jewish problem. Response no problem that is
acceptable; that can be done without difficulty is recorded from 1968.


prow (n.)

forepart of a ship, 1550s, from Middle French proue, from Italian (Genoese) prua, from Vulgar Latin
*proda, by dissimilation from Latin prora prow, from Greek proira, related to pro before, forward,
proi early in the morning, from PIE *pre-, from root *per- (1) forward, through (see per).    Middle
English and early Modern English (and Scott) had prore in same sense, from Latin. Modern Italian has
proda only in sense shore, bank. Prow and poop meant the whole ship, hence 16c.-17c. figurative use
of the expression for the whole (of anything).


per (prep.)

1580s (earlier in various Latin and French phrases), from Latin per through, during, by means of, on
account of, as in, from PIE root *per- (1) Base of prepositions and preverbs with the basic meanings
of 'forward,' 'through,' and a wide range of extended senses such as 'in front of,' 'before,'
'early,' 'first,' 'chief,' 'toward,' 'against,' 'near,' 'at,' 'around' [Watkins]. Cognates: Sanskrit
pari- around, about, through, pura before, formerly; Avestan pairi- around, paro before; Old Persian
pariy; Hittite para- on, forth; Greek peri around, about, near, beyond, paros before, para from
beside, beyond, pro before; Latin pro before, for, on behalf of, instead of, porro forward, prae
before; Old English fore (prep.) before, in front of; (adv.) before, previously; German vor for; Old
Church Slavonic pra-dedu great-grandfather; Russian pere- through; Lithuanian per through; Old Irish
air- Gothic fair-, German ver-, Old English fer-, intensive prefixes.


fore (adj.)

mid-15c., forward; late 15c., former, earlier; early 16c., at the front; all senses apparently from
fore- compounds, which frequently were written as two words in Middle English.


proceeding (n.)

1510s, action of going forward, verbal noun from proceed (v.). From 1550s as what is done, conduct.
Proceedings records of the doings of a society is attested by 1824.


avaunt

interjection, late 15c., begone, literally move on, from Middle French avant forward! (see avant).


plunge (n.)

c.1400, deep pool, from plunge (v.). From late 15c. as a sudden pitch forward; meaning act of
plunging is from 1711. Figurative use in take the plunge commit oneself is from 1845, from earlier
noun sense of point of being in trouble or danger (1530s).


prodromal (adj.)

1717, from Modern Latin prodromus a running forward (see prodrome) + -al (1).


propulsion (n.)

1610s, expulsion, noun of action formed from propuls-, past participle stem of Latin propellere to
propel (see propel). Meaning act of driving forward, propulsive force first attested 1799.


pergola (n.)

latticework structure for climbing plants, 1670s, from Italian pergola, from Latin pergula school,
lecture room; projecting roof, vine arbor, of uncertain origin; perhaps from pergere to come
forward.


prolapse (v.)

1736, from Latin prolapsus, past participle of prolabi glide fdorward, slide along, slip forward or
down; see pro- + lapse (n.). As a noun from 1808.


protractor (n.)

1610s, one who lengthens (an action), from Medieval Latin protractor, agent noun from Latin
protrahere to draw forward (see protraction); sense of instrument for drawing angles first recorded
1650s.


port (n.1)

harbor, Old English port harbor, haven, reinforced by Old French port harbor, port; mountain pass;
Old English and Old French words both from Latin portus port, harbor, originally entrance, passage,
figuratively place of refuge, assylum, from PIE *prtu- a going, a passage, from root *per- (2) to
lead, pass over (cognates: Sanskrit parayati carries over; Greek poros journey, passage, way,
peirein to pierce, run through; Latin porta gate, door, portare passage, peritus experienced;
Avestan peretush passage, ford, bridge; Armenian hordan go forward; Welsh rhyd ford; Old Church
Slavonic pariti to fly; Old English faran to go, journey, Old Norse fj&ouml;r&eth;r inlet, estuary).
Meaning left side of a ship (looking forward from the stern) is attested from 1540s, from notion of
the side facing the harbor (when a ship is docked). It replaced larboard in common usage to avoid
confusion with starboard; officially so by Admiralty order of 1844 and U.S. Navy Department notice
of 1846. Figurative sense place of refuge is attested from early 15c.; phrase any port in a storm
first recorded 1749. A port of call (1810) is one paid a scheduled visit by a ship.


propagate (v.)

1560s, to cause to multiply, from Latin propagatus, past participle of propagare to set forward,
extend, procreate (see propagation). Intransitive sense reproduce one's kind is from c.1600.
Related: Propagated; propagating.


protero-

before vowels proter-, word-forming element meaning former, earlier, from comb. form of Greek
proteros before, former, anterior, from PIE *pro-, from root *per- (1) forward, through (see per).


anticipation (n.)

late 14c., from Latin anticipationem (nominative anticipatio) preconception, preconceived notion,
noun of action from past participle stem of anticipare take care of ahead of time (see anticipate).
Meaning action of looking forward to is from 1809.


henceforward (adv.)

late 14c., from hence + forward (adv.).


pushy (adj.)

forward, aggressive, 1894 of persons (1891 of a cow), from push (v.) + -y (2). Related: Pushily;
pushiness.


march (n.1)

act of marching, 1580s, from march (v.) or else from Middle French marche (n.), from marcher (v.).
The musical sense first attested 1570s, from notion of rhythmic drumbeat for marching. Transferred
sense of forward motion is from 1620s.


headway (n.)

c.1300, main road, highway, from Old English heafodweg; see head (adj.) + way (n.). Sense of motion
forward first attested 1748, short for ahead-way; ultimately nautical (see leeway).


proponent (n.)

1580s, one who brings forth a proposition or argument, from Latin proponentem (nominative
proponens), present participle of proponere put forward (see propound). In part also a native
formation from propone. As an adjective from 1680s.


