foster (v.)

Old English *fostrian to supply with food, nourish, support, from fostor food, nourishment, bringing
up, from Proto-Germanic *fostrom, from root *foth-/*fod- (see food).    Meaning to bring up a child
with parental care is from c.1200; that of to encourage or help grow is early 13c. of things; 1560s
of feelings, ideas, etc. Old English also had the adjective meaning in the same family but not
related, in fostorf&aelig;der, etc. Related: Fostered; fostering.


nurse (n.1)

12c., nurrice wet-nurse, foster-mother to a young child (modern form from late 14c.), from Old
French norrice foster-mother, wet-nurse, nanny (source of proper name Norris), from Late Latin
*nutricia nurse, governess, tutoress, noun use of fem. of Latin nutricius that suckles, nourishes,
from nutrix (genitive nutricis) wet-nurse, from nutrire to suckle (see nourish). Meaning person who
takes care of sick in English first recorded 1580s.


nourish (v.)

late 13c., to bring up, nurture (a child, a feeling, etc.), from Old French norriss-, stem of norrir
raise, bring up, nurture, foster; maintain, provide for (12c., Modern French nourrir), from Latin
nutrire to feed, nurse, foster, support, preserve, from *nutri (older form of nutrix nurse),
literally she who gives suck, from PIE *nu- (from root *(s)nau- to swim, flow, let flow, hence to
suckle; see nutriment) + fem. agent suffix. Related: Nourished; nourishing.


Silenus

1710, from Greek Seilenos, foster-father of Bacchus and leader of the satyrs; the name is of unknown
origin (Klein compares Thracian zilai wine).


Swanee

in Stephen Foster's Old Folks at Home, river in Georgia and Florida, usually Suwanee, sometimes said
to be a corruption of Spanish San Juan [Room]; Bright says the river name is from the Cherokee
village of Sawani, for which no etymology is offered.


nutrient (n.)

a nutritious substance, 1828, noun use of adjective (1640s) meaning providing nourishment, from
Latin nutrientem (nominative nutriens), present participle of nutrire to nourish, suckle, feed,
foster (see nourish).


educator (n.)

1560s, one who nourishes or rears; 1670s, one who trains or instructs, from Latin educator (in
classical Latin, a foster father as well as a tutor), agent noun from past participle stem of
educare (see educate). Latin educatrix meant a nurse.


niacin (n.)

pellagra-preventing vitamin in enriched bread, 1942, coined from ni(cotinic) ac(id) + -in (2),
chemical suffix; suggested by the American Medical Association as a more commercially viable name
than nicotinic acid.The new name was found to be necessary because some anti-tobacco groups warned
against enriched bread because it would foster the cigarette habit. [Cooperative Consumer, Feb. 28,
1942]


alumnus (n.)

1640s, from Latin alumnus a pupil, literally foster son, vestigial present passive participle of
alere to nourish (see old), with ending akin to Greek -omenos. Plural is alumni. Fem. is alumna
(1882), fem. plural alumnae.


synapse (n.)

junction between two nerve cells, 1899, medical Latin, from Greek synapsis conjunction, from or
related to synaptein to clasp, join together, tie or bind together, be connected with, from syn-
together (see syn-) + haptein to fasten (see apse). Introduced by English physiologist Sir Michael
Foster (1836-1907) at the suggestion of English classical scholar Arthur Woollgar Verral
(1851-1912).


Maia

Roman goddess of fertility, Latin Maia, literally she who brings increase, related to magnus great
(see magnate). Maia, one of the Pleiades, is from Greek Maia, daughter of Atlas, mother of Hermes,
literally mother, good mother, dame; foster-mother, nurse, midwife, said by Watkins to be from
infant babbling (see mamma).


feed (v.)

Old English fedan nourish, feed, sustain, foster, from Proto-Germanic *fodjan (cognates: Old Saxon
fodjan, Old Frisian feda, Dutch voeden, Old High German fuotan, Old Norse foe&eth;a, Gothic fodjan
to feed), from PIE *pa- to protect, feed (see food). Feeding frenzy is from 1989, metaphoric
extension of a phrase that had been used of sharks since 1950s.


hug (v.)

1560s, hugge to embrace, of unknown origin; perhaps from Old Norse hugga to comfort, from hugr
courage, mood, from Proto-Germanic *hugjan, related to Old English hycgan to think, consider, Gothic
hugs mind, soul, thought. Other have noted the similarity in some senses to German hegen to foster,
cherish, originally to enclose with a hedge. Related: Hugged; hugging. The noun was originally
(1610s) a hold in wrestling. Meaning affectionate embrace is from 1650s.


enhance (v.)

late 13c., anhaunsen to raise, make higher, from Anglo-French enhauncer, probably from Old French
enhaucier make greater, make higher or louder; fatten, foster; raise in esteem, from Vulgar Latin
*inaltiare, from Late Latin inaltare raise, exalt,  from altare make high, from altus high (see
old).    Meaning raise in station, wealth, or fame attested in English from c.1300. The -h- in Old
French supposedly from influence of Frankish *hoh high. Related: Enhanced; enhancing.


brinkmanship (n.)

also brinksmanship, with parasitic -s- and construction based on salesmanship, sportsmanship, etc.;
from brink (the image of the brink of war dates to at least 1840).    Associated with the policies
advocated by John Foster Dulles (1888-1959), U.S. Secretary of State 1953-1959. The word springs
from Dulles' philosophy as outlined in a magazine interview [with Time-Life Washington bureau chief
James Shepley] early 1956:    The ability to get to the verge without getting into the war is the
necessary art. If you cannot master it, you inevitably get into war. If you try to run away from it,
if you are scared to go to the brink, you are lost.    The quote was widely criticized by the
Eisenhower Administration's opponents, and the first attested use of brinkmanship seems to have been
in such a context, a few weeks after the magazine appeared, by Democratic presidential candidate
Adlai Stevenson criticizing Dulles for boasting of his brinkmanship, ... the art of bringing us to
the edge of the nuclear abyss.


even (adj.)

Old English efen level, also equal, like; calm, harmonious; quite, fully; namely, from Proto-
Germanic *ebnaz (cognates: Old Saxon eban, Old Frisian even level, plain, smooth, Dutch even, Old
High German eban, German eben, Old Norse jafn, Danish j&aelig;vn, Gothic ibns).    Etymologists are
uncertain whether the original sense was level or alike. Used extensively in Old English compounds,
with a sense of fellow, co- (as in efeneald of the same age; Middle English even-sucker foster-
brother). Of numbers, from 1550s. Modern adverbial sense (introducing an extreme case of something
more generally implied) seems to have arisen 16c. from use of the word to emphasize identity (Who,
me? Even you, etc.) Sense of on an equal footing is from 1630s. Rhyming reduplication phrase even
steven is attested from 1866; even break first recorded 1911. Even-tempered from 1875.


raise (v.)

c.1200, cause a rising of; lift upright, set upright; build, construct, from a Scandinavian source,
such as Old Norse reisa to raise, from Proto-Germanic *raizjan (cognates: Gothic ur-raisjan, Old
English r&aelig;ran to rear; see rear (v.)), causative of root *ris- to rise (see rise (v.)). At
first sharing many senses with native rear (v.).    Meaning make higher is from c.1300 in the
physical sense, as is that of restore to life. Of the voice, from late 14c. Meaning increase the
amount of is from c.1500; from 1530s of prices, etc. Meaning to bring up (a question, etc.) is from
1640s. Card-playing sense is from 1821. Meaning promote the growth of (plants, etc.) is from 1660s;
sense of foster, rear, bring up (of children) is from 1744. Meaning to elevate (the consciousness)
is from 1970. Related: Raised; raising.    Pickering (1816) has a long passage on the use of raise
and grow in reference to crops. He writes that in the U.S. raise is used of persons, in the sense
brought up, but it is never thus used in the Northern States. Bartlett [1848] adds that it is
applied in the Southern States to the breeding of negroes. It is sometimes heard at the North among
the illiterate; as 'I was raised in Connecticut,' meaning brought up there.


hold (v.)

Old English haldan (Anglian), healdan (West Saxon), to contain, grasp; retain; foster, cherish,
class VII strong verb (past tense heold, past participle healden), from Proto-Germanic *haldan
(cognates: Old Saxon haldan, Old Frisian halda, Old Norse halda, Dutch houden, German halten to
hold, Gothic haldan to tend), originally to keep, tend, watch over (as cattle), later to have.
Ancestral sense is preserved in behold. The original past participle holden was replaced by held
beginning 16c., but survives in some legal jargon and in beholden.   Hold back is 1530s, transitive;
1570s, intransitive; hold off is early 15c., transitive; c.1600, intransitive; hold out is 1520s as
to stretch forth, 1580s as to resist pressure. Hold on is early 13c. as to maintain one's course,
1830 as to keep one's grip on something, 1846 as an order to wait or stop. To hold (one's) tongue be
silent is from c.1300. To hold (one's) own is from early 14c. To hold (someone's) hand give moral
support is from 1935. Phrase hold your horses be patient is from 1844. To have and to hold have been
paired alliteratively since at least c.1200, originally of marriage but also of real estate.


