foul (v.)

Old English fulian to become foul, rot, from ful (see foul (adj.)). Related: Fouled; fouling.


foul (adj.)

Old English ful rotten, unclean, vile, corrupt, offensive to the senses, from Proto-Germanic *fulaz
(cognates: Old Saxon and Old Frisian ful, Middle Dutch voul, Dutch vuil, Old High German f&uuml;l,
German faul, Gothic f&uuml;ls), from root *fu-, corresponding to PIE *pu-, perhaps from the sound
made in reaction to smelling something bad (compare Sanskrit puyati rots, stinks, putih foul,
rotten; Greek puon discharge from a sore; Latin pus putrid matter, putere to stink, putridus rotten;
Lithuanian puviu to rot).  Old English ful occasionally meant ugly (as contrasted with f&aelig;ger
(adj.), modern fair (adj.)), a sense frequently found in Middle English, and the cognate in Swedish
is the usual word for ugly. Of weather, first recorded late 14c. In the sporting sense of irregular,
unfair it is first attested 1797, though foul play is recorded from mid-15c. Baseball sense of out
of play attested by 1860. Foulmart was a Middle English word for polecat (from Old English mear&eth;
marten).


foul-mouthed (adj.)

also foulmouthed, 1590s, apparently first in Shakespeare [Henry IV, 1596].


foulness (n.)

Old English fulness foulness, filthy smell; see foul (adj.) + -ness.


foully (adv.)

Old English fullice; see foul (adj.) + -ly (2).


defile (v.)

c.1400, to desecrate, profane; mid-15c., to make foul or dirty, alteration of earlier defoulen, from
Old French defouler trample down, violate, also ill-treat, dishonor, from de- down (see de-) + foler
to tread, from Latin fullo person who cleans and thickens cloth by stamping on it  (see foil (v.)).
The alteration (or re-formation) in English is from influence of Middle English filen (v.) to render
foul; make unclean or impure, literal and figurative, from Old English fylen (trans.), related to
Old English fulian (intrans.) to become foul, rot, from the source of foul (adj.). Compare befoul,
which also had a parallel form befilen. Related: Defiled; defiling.


filth (n.)

Old English fyl&eth; uncleanness, impurity, from Proto-Germanic *fulitho (cognates: Old Saxon
fulitha foulness, filth, Dutch vuilte, Old High German fulida), noun derivative of *fulo- foul (see
foul (adj.)). A classic case of i-mutation.


pus (n.)

late 14c., from Latin pus pus, matter from a sore; figuratively bitterness, malice (related to puter
rotten; see putrid), from PIE *pu- (2) to rot, decay (cognates: Sanskrit puyati rots, stinks, putih
stinking, foul; Greek puon discharge from a sore, pythein to cause to rot; Gothic fuls, Old English
ful foul), perhaps originally echoic of a natural exclamation of disgust.


sordid (adj.)

early 15c., festering, from Latin sordidus dirty, filthy, foul, vile, mean, base, from sordere be
dirty, be shabby, related to sordes dirt, filth, from PIE *swrd-e-, from root *swordo- black, dirty
(cognates: Old English sweart black). Sense of foul, low, mean first recorded 1610s. Related:
Sordidly; sordidness.


stinkhorn (n.)

type of foul-smelling fungus, 1724, from stink + horn (n.), for its shape.


whiff (n.)

13c., weffe foul scent or odor, of imitative origin. Modern form became popular late 16c. with
tobacco smoking, probably influenced by whiffle blow in gusts or puffs (1560s). The verb in the
baseball slang sense to swing at a ball and miss first recorded 1913.


profanity (n.)

c.1600, from Late Latin profanitas, from Latin profanus (see profane (adj.)). Extended sense of foul
language is from Old Testament commandment against profaning the name of the Lord.


afoul (adv.)

1809, originally nautical, in collision or entanglement, from a- (1) + foul (adj.). From 1833 in
general sense of in violent or hostile conflict, mainly in phrases such as run afoul of.


ventilation (n.)

process of replacing foul air in an enclosed place with fresh, pure air, 1660s, from Latin
ventilationem (nominative ventilatio) an exposing to the air, noun of action from past participle
stem of ventilare (see ventilate).


loathsome (adj.)

c.1300, foul, detestable, from loath in its older, stronger sense + -some (1). Related: Loathsomely;
loathsomeness.


pediculosis (n.)

lice infestation, 1809, with -osis + pediculus, diminutive of pedis a louse, said in some sources to
be akin to pedere to break wind (see petard) on notion of foul-smelling insect [Watkins].


feist (n.)

also fist, a breaking wind, foul smell, fart, mid-15c. (Old English had present participle fisting),
a general West Germanic word with cognates in Middle Dutch veest, Dutch vijst (see feisty).


ordure (n.)

late 14c., from Old French ordure filth, uncleanliness (12c.), from ord, ort filthy, dirty, foul,
from Latin horridus dreadful (see horrid).


obscenity (n.)

1580s, obscene quality, from French obsc&#233;nit&#233;, from Latin obscenitatem (nominative
obscenitas) inauspiciousness, filthiness, from obscenus offensive (see obscene). Meaning a foul or
loathsome act is 1610s. Sense of an obscene utterance or word is attested by 1690. Related:
Obscenities.


befoul (v.)

early 14c., from be- + foul (v.). Related: Befouled; befouling.


scold (n.)

mid-12c., person of ribald speech, later person fond of abusive language (c.1300), especially a
shrewish woman [Johnson defines it as A clamourous, rude, mean, low, foul-mouthed woman], from Old
Norse skald poet (see skald). The sense evolution might reflect the fact that Germanic poets (like
their Celtic counterparts) were famously feared for their ability to lampoon and mock (as in
skaldskapr poetry, also, in Icelandic law books, libel in verse).


impure (adj.)

mid-15c., from Middle French impur (13c.), from Latin impurus unclean, filthy, foul, from
assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + purus pure (see pure). As a noun from 1784.
Related: Impurely.


pollute (v.)

late 14c., to defile, a back formation from pollution, or else from Latin pollutus, past participle
of polluere to defile, pollute, contaminate. Related: Polluted; polluting. Meaning make physically
foul is from 1540s; specific sense contaminate the environment emerged from late 19c.


squamous (adj.)

1540s, from Latin squamosus covered with scales, scaly, from squama scale, perhaps related to
squalus foul, filthy (see squalid). Middle English had squame a scale (late 14c.), from Old French
esquame, from Latin squama. Alternative form squamose attested from 1660s.


viscous (adj.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French viscous and directly from Late Latin viscosus sticky, from Latin viscum
anything sticky, birdlime made from mistletoe, mistletoe, probably from PIE root *weis- to melt
away, flow (used of foul or malodorous fluids); see virus.


malaria (n.)

1740, from Italian mal'aria, from mala aria, literally bad air, from mala bad (fem. of malo, from
Latin malus; see mal-) + aria air (see air (n.1)). Probably first used by Italian physician
Francisco Torti (1658-1741). The disease, now known to be mosquito-borne, once was thought to be
caused by foul air in marshy districts. Replaced native ague.


soil (v.)

early 13c., to defile or pollute with sin, from Old French soillier to splatter with mud, to foul or
make dirty, originally to wallow (12c., Modern French souillier), from souil tub, wild boar's
wallow, pigsty, which is from either Latin solium tub for bathing; seat, or Latin suculus little
pig, from sus pig. Literal meaning to make dirty, begrime is attested from c.1300 in English.
Related: Soiled; soiling.


vile (adj.)

late 13c., morally repugnant; morally flawed, corrupt, wicked; of no value; of inferior quality;
disgusting, foul, ugly; degrading, humiliating; of low estate, without worldly honor or esteem, from
Anglo-French ville, Old French vil shameful, dishonorable; low-born; cheap; ugly, hideous, from
Latin vilis cheap, worthless, base, common, of uncertain origin, perhaps from PIE root *wes- (1) to
buy, sell (see venal). Related: Vilely; vileness; vilety (early 13c.).


technical (adj.)

1610s, skilled in a particular art or subject, formed in English from technic + -al (1), or in part
from Greek tekhnikos of art; systematic, in reference to persons skillful, artistic, from tekhne
art, skill, craft (see techno-).    The sense narrowed to having to do with the mechanical arts
(1727). Basketball technical foul (one which does not involve contact between opponents) is recorded
from 1934. Boxing technical knock-out (one in which the loser is not knocked out) is recorded from
1921; abbreviation TKO is from 1940s. Technical difficulty is from 1805.


strike (n.)

1580s, act of striking, from strike (v.). Meaning concentrated cessation of work by a body of
employees is from 1810. Baseball sense is first recorded 1841, originally meaning any contact with
the ball; modern sense developed by 1890s, apparently from foul strike, which counted against the
batter, and as hit came to be used for contact with the ball this word was left for a swing and a
miss that counts against the batter; figurative sense of have two strikes against (of a possible
three) is from 1938. Bowling sense attested from 1859. Meaning sudden military attack is attested
from 1942.


weasel (n.)

Old English weosule, wesle weasel, from Proto-Germanic *wisulon (cognates: Old Norse visla, Middle
Dutch wesel, Dutch wezel, Old High German wisula, German Wiesel), probably related to Proto-Germanic
*wisand- bison (see bison), with a base sense of stinking animal, because both animals have a foul,
musky smell (compare Latin vissio stench). A John Wesilheued (John Weaselhead) turns up on the
Lincolnshire Assize Rolls for 1384, but the name seems not to have endured, for some reason.
Related: Weaselly.


nasty (adj.)

c.1400, foul, filthy, dirty, unclean, of unknown origin; perhaps [Barnhart] from Old French nastre
miserly, envious, malicious, spiteful, shortened form of villenastre infamous, bad, from vilein
villain + -astre, pejorative suffix, from Latin -aster.    Alternative etymology [OED] is from Dutch
nestig dirty, literally like a bird's nest. Likely reinforced in either case by a Scandinavian
source (compare Swedish dialectal naskug dirty, nasty), which also might be the source of the Middle
English word. Of weather, from 1630s; of things generally, unpleasant, offensive, from 1705. Of
people, ill-tempered, from 1825. Noun meaning something nasty is from 1935. Related: Nastily;
nastiness.


separate (adj.)

detached, kept apart, c.1600, from separate (v.) or from Latin separatus. Separate but equal in
reference to U.S. segregation policies on railroads is attested from 1888. Separate development,
official name of apartheid in South Africa, is from 1955. Related: Separately (1550s); separateness.
Frequently the colored coach is little better than a cattle car. Generally one half the smoking car
is reserved for the colored car. Often only a cloth curtain or partition run half way up separates
this so-called colored car from the smoke, obscene language, and foul air of the smokers' half of
the car. All classes and conditions of colored humanity, from the most cultured and refined to the
most degraded and filthy, without regard to sex, good breeding or ability to pay for better
accommodation, are crowded into this separate, but equal (?) half car. [Rev. Norman B. Wood, The
White Side of a Black Subject, 1897]


virus (n.)

late 14c., venomous substance, from Latin virus poison, sap of plants, slimy liquid, a potent juice,
probably from PIE root *weis- to melt away, to flow, used of foul or malodorous fluids, with
specialization in some languages to poisonous fluid (cognates: Sanskrit visam poison, visah
poisonous; Avestan vish- poison; Latin viscum sticky substance, birdlime; Greek ios poison, ixos
mistletoe, birdlime; Old Church Slavonic vi&#353;nja cherry; Old Irish fi poison; Welsh gwy fluid,
water, gwyar blood). Main modern meaning agent that causes infectious disease first recorded 1728
(in reference to venereal disease). The computer sense is from 1972.


rank (adj.)

Old English ranc proud, overbearing, showy, from Proto-Germanic *rankaz (cognates: Danish rank
right, upright, German rank slender, Old Norse rakkr straight, erect), perhaps from PIE *reg- to
stretch, straighten (see right (adj.)). In reference to plant growth, vigorous, luxuriant, abundant,
copious it is recorded from c.1300. Related: Rankly; rankness.    Sense evolved in Middle English to
large and coarse (c.1300), then, via notion of excessive and unpleasant, to corrupt, loathsome, foul
(mid-14c.), perhaps from influence of Middle French rance rancid. In 17c. also lewd, lustful.
Much used 16c. as a pejorative intensive (as in rank folly). This is possibly the source of the verb
meaning to reveal another's guilt (1929, underworld slang), and that of to harass, abuse, 1934, U.S.
black dialect, though this also may be from the role of the activity in establishing social
hierarchy (from rank (n.)).


fair (adj.)

Old English f&aelig;ger beautiful, lovely, pleasant, from Proto-Germanic *fagraz (cognates: Old
Saxon fagar, Old Norse fagr, Old High German fagar beautiful, Gothic fagrs fit), perhaps from PIE
*pek- (1) to make pretty (cognates: Lithuanian puo&#353;iu I decorate).    The meaning in reference
to weather (c.1200) preserves the original sense (opposed to foul). Sense of light-complexioned
(1550s) reflects tastes in beauty; sense of free from bias (mid-14c.) evolved from another early
meaning, morally pure, unblemished (late 12c.). The sporting senses (fair ball, fair catch etc.)
began in 1856. Fair play is from 1590s; fair and square is from c.1600. Fair-haired in the
figurative sense of darling, favorite is from 1909. First record of fair-weather friends is from
1736.


snake (n.)

Old English snaca, from Proto-Germanic *snakon (cognates: Old Norse snakr snake, Swedish snok,
German Schnake ring snake), from PIE root *sneg- to crawl, creeping thing (cognates: Old Irish
snaighim to creep, Lithuanian snake snail, Old High German snahhan to creep). In Modern English,
gradually replacing serpent in popular use.    Traditionally applied to the British serpent, as
distinguished from the poisonous adder. Meaning treacherous person first recorded 1580s (compare Old
Church Slavonic gadu reptile, gadinu foul, hateful). Applied from 17c. to various snake-like devices
and appliances. Snakes! as an exclamation is from 1839.   Snake eyes in crap-shooting sense is from
1919. Snake oil is from 1927. Snake-bitten unlucky is sports slang from 1957, from a literal sense,
perhaps suggesting one doomed by being poisoned. The game of Snakes and Ladders is attested from
1907. Snake charmer is from 1813. Snake pit is from 1883, as a supposed primitive test of truth or
courage; figurative sense is from 1941. Phrase snake in the grass is from Virgil's Latet anguis in
herba [Ecl. III:93].


