franchise (n.)

late 13c., from Old French franchise freedom, exemption; right, privilege (12c.), from variant stem
of franc free (see frank (adj.)). Sense narrowed 18c. to particular legal privilege, then right to
vote (1790). Meaning authorization by a company to sell its products or services is from 1959.


franchise (v.)

late 14c., from Old French franchiss-, past participle stem of franchir to free (12c.), from franc
(see frank (adj.)). Franchising is from 1570s; the commercial licensing sense is from 1966. Related:
Franchisee; franchiser; franchisor.


enfranchise (v.)

early 15c., to set free, from Old French enfranchiss-, present participle stem of enfranchir to set
or make free; grant a franchise to; from en- make, put in (see en- (1)) + franc free (see
franchise).    Meaning to admit to membership in a state (generally with reference to voting
privileges) is from 1680s. Related: Enfranchised; enfranchisement.


Pokemon (n.)

video and trading card franchise, released in Japan in 1996, said to be from a contracted
Romanization of Japanese Poketto Monsuta pocket monsters, both elements ultimately from European
languages. Apparently it is a collective word with no distinctive plural form.


suffragist (n.)

1822, advocate of extension of the political franchise in Britain, without regard to gender, or, in
the U.S., of voting rights for free blacks; from suffrage + -ist. After c.1885 especially with
reference to voting rights for women.


Spock

half-alien character in the Star Trek U.S. entertainment franchise, developed and named 1964 by
series creator Gene Roddenberry, who later said he was searching for an alien-sounding word and not
thinking of U.S. physician and child-care specialist Benjamin M. Spock (1903-1998), whose name is of
Dutch origin. The doctor wrote the enormously popular Common Sense Book of Baby and Child Care
(1946) and is the source of the first element in Spock-marked (1967), defined in OED as (Adversely)
affected by an upbringing held to be in accordance with the principles of Dr. Spock ....


