fraudulent (adj.)

early 15c., from Middle French fraudulent, from Latin fraudulentus cheating, deceitful, from fraus
(see fraud). Related: Fraudulently.


gyp (v.)

to cheat, swindle, 1889, American English, probably derived from the colloquial shortening of Gypsy
(compare gip). Related: Gypped. As a noun, fraudulent action, a cheat, by 1914.


subreption (n.)

act of obtaining a favor by fraudulent suppression of facts, c.1600, from Latin subreptionem
(nominative subreptio), noun of action from past participle stem of subripere, surripere (see
surreptitious). Related: Subreptitious.


cucking stool (n.)

early 13c., from cuck to void excrement, from Old Norse kuka feces (the chair was sometimes in the
form of a close-stool). Also known as trebucket and castigatory, it was used on disorderly women and
fraudulent tradesmen, either in the form of public exposure to ridicule or for ducking in a pond.


sleazy (adj.)

1640s, downy, fuzzy, later flimsy, unsubstantial (1660s), of unknown origin; one theory is that it
is a corruption of Silesia, the German region, where thin linen or cotton fabric was made for
export. Silesia in reference to cloth is attested in English from 1670s; and sleazy as an
abbreviated form is attested from 1670), but OED is against this. Sense of sordid is from 1941.
Related: Sleazily; sleaziness.    A day is a more magnificent cloth than any muslin, the mechanism
that makes it is infinitely cunninger, and you shall not conceal the sleazy, fraudulent, rotten
hours you have slipped into the piece, nor fear that any honest thread, or straighter steel, or more
inflexible shaft, will not testify in the web. [Emerson, The Conduct of Life, 1860]


nutmeg (n.)

hard aromatic seed of the East Indies, c.1300, from Old North French or Anglo-French *noiz mugue,
from Old French nois muguete, unexplained alteration of nois muscade nut smelling like musk, from
nois nut (from Latin nux) + Latin muscada, fem. of muscat musky (see muscat). Probably influenced in
English by Medieval Latin nux maga (compare unaltered Dutch muskaatnoot, German muscatnu&szlig;,
Swedish muskotn&ouml;t).    American English colloquial wooden nutmeg anything false or fraudulent
is from 1830. Connecticut is called the Nutmeg State in allusion to the story that wooden nutmegs
are there manufactured for exportation. [John Russell Bartlett, Dictionary of Americanisms, 1859]


thug (n.)

1810, member of a gang of murderers and robbers in India who strangled their victims, from Marathi
thag, thak cheat, swindler, Hindi thag, perhaps from Sanskrit sthaga-s cunning, fraudulent, from
sthagayati (he) covers, conceals, perhaps from PIE root *(s)teg- (2) to cover (see stegosaurus).
The thugs roamed about the country in bands of from 10 to 100, usually in the disguise of peddlers
or pilgrims, gaining the confidence of other travelers, whom they strangled, when a favorable
opportunity presented itself, with a handkerchief, an unwound turban, or a noosed cord. The shedding
of blood was seldom resorted to. The motive of the thugs was not so much lust of plunder as a
certain religious fanaticism. The bodies of their victims were hidden in graves dug with a
consecrated pickax, and of their spoil one third was devoted to the goddess Kali, whom they
worshiped. [Century Dictionary]    The more correct Indian name is phanseegur (from phansi noose),
and the activity was described in English as far back as c.1665. Rigorously prosecuted by the
British from 1831, they were driven from existence by century's end. Transferred sense of ruffian,
cutthroat, violent lowbrow is from 1839.


