freebooter (n.)

1560s, loan-translation of Dutch vrijbuiter plunderer, robber, from vrijbuiten to rob, plunder, from
vrijbuit plunder, literally free booty, from vrij free + buit booty, from buiten to exchange or
plunder, from Middle Dutch buten, related to Middle Low German bute exchange (see booty). See
filibuster. The back-formed verb freeboot is recorded from 1590s.


filibuster (n.)

1580s, flibutor pirate, probably ultimately from Dutch vrijbuiter freebooter, a word which used of
pirates in the West Indies in Spanish (filibustero) and French (flibustier) forms, either or both of
which gave the word to American English (see freebooter).    Used 1850s and '60s of lawless
adventurers from the U.S. who tried to overthrow Central American governments. The legislative sense
is not in Bartlett (1859) and seems not to have been in use in U.S. legislative writing before 1865.
Probably the extension in sense is because obstructionist legislators pirated debate or overthrew
the usual order of authority. Not technically restricted to U.S. Senate, but that's where the
strategy works best.


Rob Roy (n.)

Highland freebooter (1671-1734). His name means Red Robert. As a type of cocktail made with Scotch
whiskey, it is attested from 1960.


jayhawker (n.)

American English, 1858, originally freebooter, guerrilla, Kansas irregular (especially one who came
from the North). Hence back-formed verb jayhawk harass (1866).


rapparee (n.)

Irish freebooter, 1680s, originally pikeman, from Irish rapairidhe, plural of rapaire half-pike.
Kind of soldier prominent in the war of 1688-92.


hussar (n.)

1530s, from German Husar, from Hungarian husz&aacute;r light horseman, originally freebooter, from
Old Serbian husar, variant of kursar pirate, from Italian corsaro (see corsair). Bodies of light
horsemen organized in Hungary late 15c., widely imitated elsewhere in Europe.


moss (n.)

Old English meos moss, related to mos bog, from Proto-Germanic *musan (cognates: Old High German
mios, Danish mos, German Moos), also in part from Old Norse mosi moss, bog, and Medieval Latin mossa
moss, from the same Germanic source, from PIE *meus- damp, with derivatives referring to swamps and
swamp vegetation (cognates: Latin muscus moss, Lithuanian musai mold, mildew, Old Church Slavonic
muchu moss).   Selden Mose&thorn; &thorn;e Marbelston &thorn;at men ofte treden. [Piers Plowman,
1362]  All the Germanic languages have the word in both senses, which is natural because moss is the
characteristic plant of boggy places. It is impossible to say which sense is original. Scott (1805)
revived 17c. moss-trooper freebooter infesting Scottish border marshes.


Viking (n.)

Scandinavian pirate, 1801, vikingr, in The History of the Anglo-Saxons by English historian Sharon
H. Turner (1768-1847); he suggested the second element might be connected to king:    The name by
which the pirates were at first distinguished was Vikingr, which perhaps originally meant kings of
the bays. It was in bays that they ambushed, to dart upon the passing voyager.     But this later
was dismissed as incorrect. The form viking is attested in 1820, in Jamieson's notes to The Bruce.
The word is a historians' revival; it was not used in Middle English, but it was reintroduced from
Old Norse vikingr freebooter, sea-rover, pirate, viking, which usually is explained as meaning
properly one who came from the fjords, from vik creek, inlet, small bay (cognates: Old English wic,
Middle High German wich bay, and second element in Reykjavik). But Old English wicing and Old
Frisian wizing are almost 300 years older than the earliest attestation of the Old Norse word, and
probably derive from wic village, camp (large temporary camps were a feature of the Viking raids),
related to Latin vicus village, habitation (see villa).    The connection between the Norse and Old
English words is still much debated. The period of Viking activity was roughly 8c. to 11c. In the
Anglo-Saxon Chronicle, the raiding armies generally were referred to as &thorn;a Deniscan the Danes,
while those who settled in England were identified by their place of settlement. Old Norse viking
(n.) meant freebooting voyage, piracy; one would go on a viking (fara &#237; viking).


