frenzied (adj.)

1796; see frenzy.


raving (adj.)

late 15c., delirious, frenzied, present participle adjective from rave (v.); sense of remarkable,
fit to excite admiration is from 1841, hence slang superlative use.


lymphatic (adj.)

1640s, from Latin lymphaticus, from lympha (see lymph). Also sometimes used in the classical Latin
sense mad, frenzied, which was the primary sense of lymphaticus in Latin: OED reports this difficult
to account for, but perhaps due to association of lympha with nymphe; compare Greek nymphian to be
frenzy-stricken.


amok (adv.)

in verbal phrase run amok first recorded 1670s, from Malay amuk attacking furiously. Earlier the
word was used as a noun or adjective meaning a frenzied Malay, originally in the Portuguese form
amouco or amuco.There are some of them [the Javanese] who ... go out into the streets, and kill as
many persons as they meet. ... These are called Amuco. [The Book of Duarte Barbosa: An Account of
the Countries Bordering on the Indian Ocean and Their Inhabitants, c.1516, English translation]
Compare amuck.


vates (n.)

1620s, poet or bard, specifically Celtic divinely inspired poet (1728), from Latin vates sooth-
sayer, prophet, seer, from a Celtic source akin to Old Irish faith poet, Welsh gwawd poem, from PIE
root *wet- (1) to blow; inspire, spiritually arouse (cognates: Old English wod mad, frenzied, god-
name Woden; see wood (adj.)). Hence vaticination oracular prediction (c.1600).


estrus (n.)

1850, frenzied passion, from Latin oestrus frenzy, gadfly, from Greek oistros gadfly, breeze, sting,
mad impulse, perhaps from a PIE *eis, forming words denoting passion (cognates: Avestan ae&#353;ma-
anger, Lithuanian aistra violent passion, Latin ira anger). First attested 1890 with specific
meaning rut in animals, heat. Earliest use (1690s) was for a gadfly. Related: Estrous (1900).


wood (adj.)

violently insane (now obsolete), from Old English wod mad, frenzied, from Proto-Germanic *woda-
(cognates: Gothic wo&thorn;s possessed, mad, Old High German wuot mad, madness, German wut rage,
fury), from PIE *wet- (1) to blow; inspire, spiritually arouse; source of Latin vates seer, poet,
Old Irish faith poet; with a common element of mental excitement [Buck]. Compare Old English
wo&thorn; sound, melody, song, Old Norse o&eth;r poetry, and the god-name Odin.


