friction (n.)

1560s, a chafing, rubbing, from Middle French friction (16c.) and directly from Latin frictionem
(nominative frictio) a rubbing, rubbing down, noun of action from past participle stem of fricare to
rub, of uncertain origin. Sense of resistance to motion is from 1722; figurative sense of
disagreement, clash first recorded 1761. Related: Frictional.


frottage (n.)

1933, from French frottage rubbing, friction, from frotter to rub, from Old French froter to rub,
wipe; beat, thrash (12c.), from Latin fricare to rub (see friction). As a paraphilia, it is known as
frotteurism.


bearing (n.)

carrying of oneself, deportment, mid-13c., verbal noun from bear (v.). Mechanical sense of part of a
machine that bears the friction is from 1791.


electricity (n.)

1640s (Browne), from electric + -ity. Originally in reference to friction.


bearings (n.)

parts of a machine which 'bear' the friction, 1791, from present participle of bear (v.). Meaning
direction from a point of reference is from 1630s; to take (one's) bearings is from 1711.


tribology (n.)

1965, study of friction, from comb. form of Greek tribos rubbing, from tribein to rub, rub down,
wear away (from PIE root *tere- (1) to rub, turn, twist; see throw (v.)) + -logy.


fricative

1860 (adj.), 1863 (n.), from Modern Latin fricativus, from Latin fricatus, past participle of
fricare to rub (see friction).


lubricant (adj.)

reducing friction, 1809, from Latin lubricantem (nominative lubricans), present participle of
lubricare to make slippery or smooth, from lubricus slippery; easily moved, sliding, gliding;
figuratively uncertain, hazardous, dangerous; seductive, from PIE *sleubh- to slip, slide (see
sleeve).


friable (adj.)

1560s, from Middle French friable and directly from Latin friabilis easily crumbled or broken, from
friare rub away, crumble into small pieces, related to fricare to rub (see friction). Related:
Friability.


affricative (n.)

1879, perhaps via German, from Latin affricat-, past participle stem of affricare rub against, from
ad- (see ad-) + fricare to rub (see friction).


fray (v.)

wear out by rubbing, c.1400, from Middle French frayer to rub against, from Old French froiier rub,
scrape, from Latin fricare to rub, rub down (see friction). Related: Frayed; fraying.


trypsin (n.)

chief digestive enzyme of pancreatic juice, 1876, coined 1874 by German physiologist Wilhelm
Friedrich K&#252;hne (1837-1900), apparently from Greek tripsis rubbing, friction (from tribein to
rub, rub down, wear away, from PIE root *tere- (1) to rub, turn, twist (see throw (v.)) + chemical
suffix -in (2). Said to be so called because it first was obtained (in 1862) by rubbing the pancreas
with glycerin.


dentifrice (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French dentifrice (15c.), from Latin dentifricium powder for rubbing the
teeth, from dens (genitive dentis) tooth (see tooth) + fricare to rub (see friction).


traction (n.)

early 15c., a drawing or pulling (originally the pulling of a dislocated limb to reposition it),
from Medieval Latin tractionem (nominative tractio) a drawing (mid-13c.), noun of action from past
participle stem of Latin trahere to pull, draw (see tract (n.1)). Sense of rolling friction of a
vehicle first appears 1825. In modern medical care, a sustained pull to a part of the body to hold
fractured bones in position, 1885.


massage (n.)

1874, from French massage friction of kneading, from masser to massage, possibly from Arabic massa
to touch, feel, handle; if so, probably picked up in Egypt during the Napoleonic campaign there.
Other possibility is that French got it in colonial India from Portuguese amassar knead, a verb from
Latin massa mass, dough (see mass (n.1)). Massage parlor first attested 1894, from the start a
euphemism for house of prostitution.


skid (n.)

c.1600, beam or plank on which something rests, especially on which something heavy can be rolled
from place to place (1782), of uncertain origin, probably from a Scandinavian source akin to Old
Norse ski&eth; stick of wood (see ski (n.)). As a sliding along from 1890; specifically of motor
vehicles from 1903. Skid-mark is from 1914.    In the timber regions of the American West, skids
laid down one after another to form a road were a poor thing for pleasure walks, but admirably
adapted for hauling logs on the ground with a minimum of friction [Out West magazine, October 1903].
A skid as something used to facilitate downhill motion led to figurative phrases such as hit the
skids go into rapid decline (1909), and see skid row.


traffic (n.)

c.1500, trade, commerce, from Middle French trafique (15c.), from Italian traffico (14c.), from
trafficare carry on trade, of uncertain origin, perhaps from a Vulgar Latin *transfricare to rub
across, from Latin trans- across (see trans-) + fricare to rub (see friction), with the original
sense of the Italian verb being touch repeatedly, handle.    Or the second element may be an
unexplained alteration of Latin facere to make, do. Klein suggests ultimate derivation of the
Italian word from Arabic tafriq distribution. Meaning people and vehicles coming and going first
recorded 1825. Traffic jam is 1917, ousting earlier traffic block (1895). Traffic circle is from
1938.


grind (v.)

Old English grindan to rub together, grate, scrape, forgrindan destroy by crushing (class III strong
verb; past tense grand, past participle grunden), from Proto-Germanic *grindanan (cognates: Dutch
grenden), related to ground, from PIE *ghrendh- to grind (cognates: Latin frendere to gnash the
teeth, Greek khondros corn, grain, Lithuanian grendu to scrape, scratch). Meaning to make smooth or
sharp by friction is from c.1300. Most other Germanic languages use a verb cognate with Latin molere
(compare Dutch malen, Old Norse mala, German mahlen).


tape (n.)

Old English t&aelig;ppe narrow strip of cloth used for tying, measuring, etc., of uncertain origin;
perhaps [Klein] a back-formation from Latin tapete cloth, carpet, compare also Old Frisian tapia,
Middle Low German tapen to pull, pluck, tear. The original short vowel became long in Middle
English.   Adhesive tape is from 1885; also in early use sometimes friction tape. Tape recorder
device for recording sound on magnetic tape first attested 1932; from earlier meaning device for
recording data on ticker tape (1892), from tape in the sense of paper strip of a printer (1884).
Tape-record (v.) is from 1950. Tape-measure is attested from 1873; tape-delay is from 1968.


Lucifer

Old English Lucifer Satan, also morning star, from Latin Lucifer morning star, literally light-
bringing, from lux (genitive lucis) light (see light (n.)) + ferre carry (see infer).    Belief that
it was the proper name of Satan began with its use in Bible to translate Greek Phosphoros, which
translates Hebrew Helel ben Shahar in Isaiah xiv:12 -- How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer,
son of the morning! [KJV] Because of the mention of a fall from Heaven, the verse was interpreted by
Christians as a reference to Satan, even though it is literally a reference to the King of Babylon
(see Isaiah xiv:4).   Lucifer match friction match is from 1831. Adjectival forms include
Luciferian, Luciferine, Luciferous. There was a noted Bishop Lucifer of Cagliari in Sardinia in the
4th century, regarded locally as a saint.


match (n.1)

stick for striking fire, late 14c., macche, wick of a candle or lamp, from Old French meiche wick of
a candle, from Vulgar Latin *micca/*miccia (source also of Catalan metxa, Spanish mecha, Italian
miccia), probably ultimately from Latin myxa, from Greek myxa lamp wick, originally mucus, based on
notion of wick dangling from the spout of a lamp like snot from a nostril, from PIE root *meug-
slimy, slippery (see mucus). Modern spelling is from mid-15c. (English snot also had a secondary
sense of snuff of a candle, burnt part of a wick from late 14c., surviving at least to late 19c. in
northern dialects.)    Meaning piece of cord or splinter of wood soaked in sulfur, used for lighting
fires, lamps, candles, etc. is from 1530. First used 1831 for the modern type of wooden friction
match, and competed with lucifer for much of 19c. as the name for this invention.


bear (v.)

Old English beran to bear, bring; bring forth, produce; to endure, sustain; to wear (class IV strong
verb; past tense b&aelig;r, past participle boren), from Proto-Germanic *beran (cognates: Old Saxon
beran, Old Frisian bera, Old High German beran, German geb&auml;ren, Old Norse bera, Gothic bairan
to carry, bear, give birth to), from PIE root *bher- (1) meaning both give birth (though only
English and German strongly retain this sense, and Russian has beremennaya pregnant) and carry a
burden, bring (see infer).   Ball bearings bear the friction. Many senses are from notion of move
onward by pressure. Old English past tense b&aelig;r became Middle English bare; alternative bore
began to appear c.1400, but bare remained the literary form till after 1600. Past participle
distinction of borne for carried and born for given birth is from late 18c. To bear (something) in
mind is from 1530s.


