frigidity (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French frigidit&eacute; (15c.), from Late Latin frigiditatem (nominative
frigiditas) the cold, from Latin frigidus cold (see frigid).


frigid (adj.)

1620s, from Latin frigidus cold, chill, cool, figuratively indifferent, from stem of frigere be
cold; related to frigus cold, coldness, frost, from PIE root *srig- cold.    The meaning wanting in
sexual heat is attested from 1650s. Frigidaire as the proprietary name of a brand of self-contained
automatically operated iceless refrigerator dates from 1919 (Frigidaire Corporation, Detroit,
Michigan, U.S.).


frisson (n.)

1777, from French frisson, literally shiver, thrill (12c.), from Latin frigere to be cold (see
frigid).


frigorific (adj.)

causing cold, 1660s, from French frigorifique, from Late Latin frigorificus cooling, from Latin
frigus (genitive frigoris) cold, cool, coolness (see frigid) + -ficus making, root of facere make,
do (see factitious).


infrigidation (n.)

early 15c., from Late Latin infrigidationem (nominative infrigidatio), noun of action from
infrigidare to make cold, from in- in, into (see in- (2)) + frigidare, from frigidus cold (see
frigid). Related: infrigidate (v.).


refrigeration (n.)

late 15c., act of cooling or freezing, from Latin refrigerationem (nominative refrigeratio) a
cooling, mitigation of heat, especially in sickness, noun of action from past participle stem of
refrigerare, from re- again (see re-) + frigerare make cool, from frigus (genitive frigoris) cold
(see frigid). Specifically freezing provisions as a means of preserving them from 1881.


sang-froid (n.)

presence of mind, composure, 1712, from French sang froid, literally cool blood, from sang blood
(from Latin sanguis; see sanguinary) + froid cold (from Latin frigidus; see frigid).


zone (n.)

late 14c., from Latin zona geographical belt, celestial zone, from Greek zone a belt, the girdle
worn by women at the hips, related to zonnynai to gird, from PIE root *yos- to gird (cognates:
Avestan yasta- girt, Lithuanian juosiu to gird, Old Church Slavonic po-jasu girdle). The 10c. Anglo-
Saxon treatise on astronomy translates Latin quinque zonas as fyf gyrdlas.    Originally one of the
five great divisions of the earth's surface (torrid, temperate, frigid; separated by tropics of
Cancer and Capricorn and Arctic and Antarctic circles); meaning any discrete region is first
recorded 1822. Zone defense in team sports is recorded from 1927.


