fringe (n.)

early 14c., from Old French frenge thread, strand, fringe, hem (early 14c.), from Vulgar Latin
*frimbia, metathesis of Latin fimbriae (plural) fibers, threads, fringe, of uncertain origin.
Figurative sense of outer edge, margin, is first recorded 1894. Related: Fringes. Fringe benefits is
recorded from 1952.


fringe (v.)

late 15c., from fringe (n.). Related: Fringed; fringing.


frazzle (v.)

c.1825, to unravel (of clothing), from East Anglian variant of 17c. fasel to unravel, fray (as the
end of a rope), from Middle English facelyn to fray (mid-15c.), from fasylle fringe, frayed edge,
diminutive of Old English f&aelig;s fringe. Related: Frazzled, frazzling. Compare German Faser
thread, fiber, filament, Middle Dutch vese fringe, fiber, chaff. Probably influenced in form by fray
(v.). As a noun, from 1865, American English.


cirrus (n.)

1708, curl-like fringe or tuft, from Latin cirrus a lock of hair, tendril, curl, ringlet of hair;
the fringe of a garment. In meteorology, cirrus clouds attested from 1803. So called from fancied
resemblance of shape.


fimbria (n.)

Latin, literally fringe, border, shred.


lunatic (adj.)

late 13c., affected with periodic insanity, dependent on the changes of the moon, from Old French
lunatique, lunage insane, or directly from Late Latin lunaticus moon-struck, from Latin luna moon
(see Luna). Compare Old English monseoc lunatic, literally moon-sick; Middle High German lune humor,
temper, mood, whim, fancy (German Laune), from Latin luna. Compare also New Testament Greek
seleniazomai be epileptic, from selene moon. Lunatic fringe (1913) apparently was coined by U.S.
politician Theodore Roosevelt.    Then, among the wise and high-minded people who in self-respecting
and genuine fashion strive earnestly for peace, there are foolish fanatics always to be found in
such a movement and always discrediting it -- the men who form the lunatic fringe in all reform
movements. [Theodore Roosevelt, autobiography, 1913].    Earlier it was a term for a type of
hairstyle worn over the forehead (1877). Lunatic soup (1933) was Australian slang for alcoholic
drink.


hem (v.)

late 14c., to provide (something) with a border or fringe (surname Hemmer attested from c.1300),
from hem (n.). Related: Hemmed; hemming. The phrase hem in shut in, confine, first recorded 1530s.


tail (n.1)

hindmost part of an animal, Old English t&aelig;gl, t&aelig;gel a tail, from Proto-Germanic *tagla-
(cognates: Old High German zagal, German Zagel tail, dialectal German Zagel penis, Old Norse tagl
horse's tail, Gothic tagl hair), from PIE *doklos, from suffixed form of root *dek- (2) something
long and thin (referring to such things as fringe, lock of hair, horsetail; cognates: Old Irish dual
lock of hair, Sanskrit dasah fringe, wick). According to OED, the primary sense, at least in
Germanic, seems to have been hairy tail, or just tuft of hair, but already in Old English the word
was applied to the hairless tails of worms, bees, etc. But Buck writes that the common notion is of
long, slender shape. As an adjective from 1670s.    Meaning reverse side of a coin (opposite the
side with the head) is from 1680s; that of backside of a person, buttocks is recorded from c.1300;
slang sense of pudenda is from mid-14c.; that of woman as sex object is from 1933, earlier act of
copulation with a prostitute (1846). Of descending strokes of letters, from 1590s.   Tails coat with
tails is from 1857. The tail-race (1776) is the part of a mill race below the wheel. To turn tail
take flight (1580s) originally was a term in falconry. The image of the tail wagging the dog is
attested from 1907. Another Old English word for tail was steort (see stark).


brim (n.)

c.1200, brymme edge of the sea, of obscure origin, perhaps akin to Old Norse barmr rim, brim,
probably related to German br&auml;me margin, border, fringe, from PIE *bhrem- point, spike, edge.
(Old English had brim in the sense sea, surf, but this probably was from the Germanic stem *brem- to
roar, rage.) Extended by 1520s to cups, basins, hats.


limb (n.2)

late 14c., edge of a quadrant or other instrument, from Latin limbus border, hem, fringe, edge, of
uncertain origin. Klein suggests cognate with Sanskrit lambate hangs down, and English limp. But
Tucker writes that the sense appears to be that of something which twists, goes round, or binds ...
not of something which hangs loose, and suggests cognates in Lithuanian linta ribbon, Old Norse
linnr whether. Astronomical sense of edge of the disk of a heavenly body first attested 1670s.


frippery (n.)

1560s, old clothes, cast-off garments, from Middle French friperie old clothes, an old clothes shop,
from Old French freperie, feuperie old rags, rubbish (13c.), from frepe, feupe fringe; rags, old
clothes, from Late Latin faluppa chip, splinter, straw, fiber. The notion is of things worn down,
clothes rubbed to rags. The ironic meaning finery (but with overtones of tawdriness) dates from
1630s.


tassel (n.)

c.1300, mantle fastener, from Old French tassel tassel, fringe, hem; a fastening, clasp (12c.,
Modern French tasseau), from Vulgar Latin *tassellus, said to be from Latin taxillus small die or
cube, a diminutive of talus knucklebone (used as a die in gaming), ankle (see talus (n.1)). But OED
finds this doubtful and calls attention to the variant form tossel and suggests association with
toss (v.). Meaning hanging bunch of small cords is first recorded late 14c.


label (n.)

c.1300, narrow band or strip of cloth (oldest use is as a technical term in heraldry), from Old
French label, lambel ribbon, fringe worn on clothes (13c., Modern French lambeau strip, rag, shred,
tatter), possibly from Frankish *labba or some other Germanic source (compare Old High German lappa
flap), from Proto-Germanic *lapp- (see lap (n.)).    Later dangling strip of cloth or ribbon used as
an ornament in dress, strip attached to a document to hold a seal (both early 15c.), and with a
general meaning tag, sticker, slip of paper (1670s). Meaning circular piece of paper in the center
of a gramophone record (1907), containing information about the recorded music, led to meaning a
recording company (1947).


tag (n.1)

small, hanging piece from a garment, c.1400, of uncertain origin but probably from a Scandinavian
source (compare Norwegian tagg point, prong, barb, Swedish tagg prickle, thorn) and related to
Middle Low German tagge branch, twig, spike), from Proto-Germanic *tag-. The sense development might
be point of metal at the end of a cord, string, etc., hence part hanging loose. Or perhaps
ultimately from PIE *dek-, a root forming words referring to fringe, horsetail, locks of hair (see
with tail (n.1)).    Meaning a label is first recorded 1835; sense of automobile license plate is
recorded from 1935, originally underworld slang. Meaning an epithet, popular designation is recorded
from 1961, hence slang verb meaning write graffiti in public places (1990).


