fritter (n.)

fried batter, late 14c., from Old French friture fritter, pancake, something fried (12c.), from Late
Latin frictura a frying, from frigere to roast, fry (see fry (v.)).


fritter (v.)

whittle away, 1728, from fritters fragment or shred, possibly from a noun sense, but this is not
recorded as early as the verb; perhaps an alteration of 16c. fitters fragments or pieces, perhaps
ultimately from Old French fraiture a breaking, from Latin fractura. Or perhaps from a Germanic
source (compare Middle High German vetze clothes, rags).


beignet (n.)

fritter, 1835, from French beignet fritter, eggroll, doughnut (14c.), from Old French buigne bump,
lump, from a Germanic source (compare Middle High German bunge clod, lump), or from Gaulish *bunia
(compare Gaelic bonnach).


bun (n.)

late 14c., origin obscure, perhaps from Old French buignete a fritter, originally boil, swelling,
diminutive of buigne swelling from a blow, bump on the head, from a Germanic source (compare Middle
High German bunge clod, lump), or from Gaulish *bunia (compare Gaelic bonnach). Spanish bu&#241;elo
a fritter apparently is from the same source. Of hair coiled at the back of the head, first attested
1894. To have a bun in the oven be pregnant is from 1951.    The first record of buns in the sense
of male buttocks is from 1960s, perhaps from a perceived similarity; but bun also meant tail of a
hare (1530s) in Scottish and northern England dialect and was transferred to human beings (and
conveniently rhymed with nun in ribald ballads). This may be an entirely different word; OED points
to Gaelic bun stump, root.


tortellini (n.)

1937, from Italian, plural of tortellino, diminutive of tortello cake, fritter, itself a diminutive
of torta (see torte).


doodle (v.)

scrawl aimlessly, 1935, from dialectal doodle, dudle fritter away time, trifle, or associated with
dawdle. It was a noun meaning simple fellow from 1620s.    LONGFELLOW: That's a name we made up back
home for people who make foolish designs on paper when they're thinking. It's called doodling.
Almost everybody's a doodler. Did you ever see a scratch pad in a telephone booth? People draw the
most idiotic pictures when they're thinking. Dr. Von Holler, here, could probably think up a long
name for it, because he doodles all the time. [Mr. Deeds Goes to Town, screenplay by Robert Riskin,
1936; based on Opera Hat, serialized in American Magazine beginning May 1935, by Clarence Aldington
Kelland]    Related: Doodled; Doodling.    Doodle Sack. A bagpipe. Dutch. -- Also the private parts
of a woman. [Classical Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, 1796]


