frock (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French froc a monk's habit (12c.), of unknown origin; perhaps from Frankish *hrok
or some other Germanic source (compare Old High German hroc mantle, coat; Old Norse rokkr, Old
English rocc, Old Frisian rokk, German Rock coat), from PIE root *rug- to spin.    Another theory
traces it to Medieval Latin floccus, from Latin floccus flock of wool. Meaning outer garment for
women or children is from 1530s. Frock-coat attested by 1823.


defrock (v.)

1580s, from French d&eacute;froquer (15c.), from de- (see de-) + froque frock (see frock). Related:
Defrocked.


jerkin (n.)

1510s, of uncertain origin, perhaps related to Dutch jurk a frock, but this is a modern word, itself
of unknown origin, and the initial consonant presents difficulties (Dutch -j- typically becomes
English -y-).


chiton (n.)

mollusc genus, 1816, from Latinized form of Greek khiton frock (worn by both sexes), tunic, mail
coat (see chitin). Used in English in literal sense of ancient Greek tunic from 1850. The molluscs
also are known as coat-of-mail shells for their mail-like covering.


chitin (n.)

1836, from French chitine, from Greek khiton frock, tunic, of soldiers, coat of mail, used
metaphorically for any coat or covering. Probably an Oriental word [Liddell &amp; Scott]. Klein
compares Hebrew kuttoneth coat, Aramaic kittana, Arabic kattan linen.


soutane (n.)

long, buttoned gown or frock with sleeves, outer garment of Roman Catholic ecclesiastics, 1838, from
French soutane, from Old French sotane undershirt, from Medieval Latin subtana an under-cassock,
from Latin subtus beneath, under, below (see sub-).


hackle (n.)

Old English hacele cloak, mantle (cognate with Old High German hachul, Gothic hakuls cloak; Old
Norse hekla hooded frock), of uncertain origin. Sense of bird plumage is first recorded early 15c.,
though this might be from unrelated Middle English hackle flax comb (see heckle (n.)) on supposed
resemblance of comb to ruffled feathers. Metaphoric extension found in raise one's hackles (as a
cock does when angry) is first recorded 1881.


blouse (n.)

1828 (from 1822 as a French word in English), from French blouse, workman's or peasant's smock
(1788), origin unknown. Perhaps akin to Proven&ccedil;al (lano) blouso short (wool) [Gamillscheg].
Another suggestion [Klein] is that it is from Medieval Latin pelusia, from Pelusium, a city in Upper
Egypt, supposedly a clothing manufacturing center in the Middle Ages.    In Paris, a very slovenly,
loose, drawn frock, with most capacious sleeves, had been introduced called a blouse. Some of our
priestesses of the toilet seemed emulous of copying this deshabille, with some slight alterations,
but we never wish to see it on the symmetrical form of a British lady. [Summary of Fashion for 1822,
in Museum of Foreign Literature and Science, Jan.-June 1823]


