frugal (adj.)

1590s, from Middle French frugal, from Latin frugalis, from undeclined adj. frugi useful, proper,
worthy, honest; temperate, economical, originally dative of frux (plural fruges) fruit, produce,
figuratively value, result, success, related to fructus (see fruit). Sense evolved in Latin from
useful to profitable to economical. Related: Frugally.


frugality (n.)

1530s, from Middle French frugalit&eacute; (14c.), from Latin frugalitatem (nominative frugalitas)
thriftiness, temperance, frugality, from frugalis (see frugal).


thrifty (adj.)

late 14c., respectable, from thrift + -y (2). Meaning frugal is from 1520s. Related: Thriftily;
thriftiness.


spare (adj.)

kept in reserve, not used, provided or held for extra need, late 14c., from or from the same root as
spare (v.). Old English had sp&#230;r sparing, frugal. Also compare Old Norse sparr (to be) spared.
In reference to time, from mid-15c.; sense of lacking in substance; lean, gaunt; flimsy, thin; poor,
is recorded from 1540s. Spare part is attested from 1888. Spare tire is from 1894 of bicycles; 1903
of automobiles; 1961 of waistlines.


economic (adj.)

1590s, pertaining to management of a household, perhaps shortened from economical or from French
&eacute;conomique or directly from Latin oeconomicus of domestic economy, from Greek oikonomikos
practiced in the management of a household or family, hence, frugal, thrifty, from oikonomia (see
economy (n.)). Meaning relating to the science of economics is from 1835 and now is the main sense,
economical retaining the older one of characterized by thrift.


spare (v.)

Old English sparian to refrain from harming, be indulgent to, allow to go free; use sparingly, from
the source of Old English sp&aelig;r sparing, frugal, from Proto-Germanic *sparaz (cognates: Old
Saxon sparon, Old Frisian sparia, Old Norse spara, Dutch sparen, Old High German sparon, German
sparen to spare). Meaning to dispense from one's own stock, give or yield up, is recorded from early
13c. Related: Spared; sparing.


stint (v.)

to be sparing or frugal, 1722, earlier to limit, restrain (1510s), cause to cease, put an end to
(mid-14c.), cease, desist (intransitive), c.1200, from Old English styntan to blunt, make dull,
probably originally make short, from Proto-Germanic *stuntijanan (cognates: Old Norse stuttr short,
scant, Middle High German stunz blunt, short, German stutzen to cut short, curtail, stop, hesitate),
from PIE root *(s)teu- (1) to push, stick, knock, beat (see steep (adj.)). The English word perhaps
was influenced by its Scandinavian cognates. Sense of be careful in expenditure is from 1848.
Related: Stinted; stinting. The noun is attested from c.1300.


care (n.)

Old English caru, cearu sorrow, anxiety, grief, also burdens of mind; serious mental attention, from
Proto-Germanic *karo (cognates: Old Saxon kara sorrow; Old High German chara wail, lament; Gothic
kara sorrow, trouble, care; German Karfreitag Good Friday), from PIE root *gar- cry out, call,
scream (cognates: Irish gairm shout, cry, call; see garrulous).    Different sense evolution in
related Dutch karig scanty, frugal, German karg stingy, scanty. The sense development in English is
from cry to lamentation to grief. Meaning charge, oversight, protection is attested c.1400, the
sense in care of in addressing. To take care of take in hand, do is from 1580s.


meat (n.)

Old English mete food, item of food (paired with drink), from Proto-Germanic *mati (cognates: Old
Frisian mete, Old Saxon meti, Old Norse matr, Old High German maz, Gothic mats food, Middle Dutch,
Dutch metworst, German Mettwurst type of sausage), from PIE *mad-i-, from root *mad- moist, wet,
also with reference to food qualities, (cognates: Sanskrit medas- fat (n.), Old Irish mat pig; see
mast (n.2)).  Narrower sense of flesh used as food is first attested c.1300; similar sense evolution
in French viande meat, originally food. Figurative sense of essential part is from 1901. Dark meat,
white meat popularized 19c., supposedly as euphemisms for leg and breast, but earliest sources use
both terms without apparent embarrassment.    The choicest parts of a turkey are the side bones, the
breast, and the thigh bones. The breast and wings are called light meat; the thigh-bones and side-
bones dark meat. When a person declines expressing a preference, it is polite to help to both kinds.
[Lydia Maria Child, The American Frugal Housewife, Boston, 1835]    First record of meat loaf is
from 1876. Meat market place where one looks for sex partners is from 1896 (meat in various sexual
senses of penis, vagina, body regarded as a sex object, prostitute are attested from 1590s); meat
wagon ambulance is from 1920, American English slang, said to date from World War I (in a literal
sense by 1857). Meat-grinder in the figurative sense attested by 1951. Meat-hook in colloquial
transferred sense arm attested by 1919.


