fugitive

late 14c. (adjective and noun), from Old French fugitif, from Latin fugitivus fleeing (but commonly
used as a noun meaning runaway, fugitive slave, deserter), from past participle stem of fugere run
away, flee, from PIE root *bheug- (1) to flee (cognates: Greek pheugein to flee, Lithuanian bugstu
be frightened). Replaced Old English flyma.


hideaway (n.)

small, secluded restaurant, etc., 1929, from hide (v.1) + away. Earlier it meant a fugitive person
(1871).


overtake (v.)

to come up to, to catch in pursuit, early 13c., from over- + take (v.). According to OED, originally
the running down and catching of a fugitive or beast of chase; it finds the sense of over- in this
word not so clear. Related: Overtaken; overtaking. Old English had oferniman to take away, carry
off, seize, ravish.


febrifuge (n.)

1680s, from French f&eacute;brifuge, literally driving fever away, from Latin febris (see fever) +
fugare to put to flight (see fugitive).


fugacious (adj.)

fleeing, likely to flee, 1630s, from Latin fugaci-, stem of fugax apt to flee, timid, figuratively
transitory, fleeting, from fugere to flee (see fugitive) + -ous. Related: Fugaciously;
fugaciousness.


lucifugous (adj.)

shunning the light, 1650s, from Latin lucifugus, from stem of lucere to shine (see light (n.)) +
stem of fugax apt to flee, timid, figuratively transitory, fleeting, from fugere to flee (see
fugitive).


subterfuge (n.)

1570s, from Middle French subterfuge (14c.) or directly from Medieval Latin subterfugium an evasion,
from Latin subterfugere to evade, escape, flee by stealth, from subter beneath, below; in compounds
secretly (from PIE *sup-ter-, suffixed (comparative) form of *(s)up-; see sub-) + fugere flee (see
fugitive).


maroon (v.)

put ashore on a desolate island or coast, 1724 (implied in marooning), earlier to be lost in the
wild (1690s); from maron (n.) fugitive black slave in the jungles of W.Indies and Dutch Guyana
(1660s), earlier symeron (1620s), from French marron, said to be a corruption of Spanish cimmaron
wild, untamed, from Old Spanish cimarra thicket, probably from cima summit, top (from Latin cyma
sprout), with a notion of living wild in the mountains. Related: Marooned.


refuge (n.)

shelter or protection from danger or distress, late 14c., from Old French refuge hiding place
(12c.), from Latin refugium a taking refuge; place to flee back to, from re- back (see re-) + fugere
to flee (see fugitive) + -ium place for.


centrifugal (adj.)

1690s, with adjectival suffix -al (1) + Modern Latin centrifugus, 1687, coined by Sir Isaac Newton
(who wrote in Latin) in Principia (which is written in Latin), from Latin centri- alternative comb.
form of centrum center (see center (n.)) + fugere to flee (see fugitive). Centrifugal force is
Newton's vis centrifuga.


fugue (n.)

1590s, fuge, from Italian fuga ardor, literally flight, from Latin fuga act of fleeing, from fugere
to flee (see fugitive). Current spelling (1660s) is from the French version of the Italian word.   A
Fugue is a composition founded upon one subject, announced at first in one part alone, and
subsequently imitated by all the other parts in turn, according to certain general principles to be
hereafter explained. The name is derived from the Latin word fuga, a flight, from the idea that one
part starts on its course alone, and that those which enter later are pursuing it. [Fugue, Ebenezer
Prout, 1891]


