fundamentally (adv.)

c.1600, from fundamental + -ly (2).


fundamental (adj.)

mid-15c., primary, original, pertaining to a foundation, modeled on Late Latin fundamentalis of the
foundation, from Latin fundamentum foundation (see fundament). Fundamentals primary principles or
rules of anything is from 1630s.


fundamentalist (adj.)

1920 in the religious sense (as is fundamentalism), from fundamental + -ist. Coined in American
English to name a movement among Protestants c.1920-25 based on scriptural inerrancy, etc., and
associated with William Jennings Bryan, among others.   Fundamentalist is said (by George McCready
Price) to have been first used in print by Curtis Lee Laws (1868-1946), editor of The Watchman
Examiner, a Baptist newspaper. The movement may have roots in the Presbyterian General Assembly of
1910, which drew up a list of five defining qualities of true believers which other evangelicals
published in a mass-circulation series of books called The Fundamentals. A World's Christian
Fundamentals Association was founded in 1918. The words reached widespread use in the wake of the
contentious Northern Baptist Convention of 1922 in Indianapolis.    Fundamentalism is a protest
against that rationalistic interpretation of Christianity which seeks to discredit supernaturalism.
This rationalism, when full grown, scorns the miracles of the Old Testament, sets aside the virgin
birth of our Lord as a thing unbelievable, laughs at the credulity of those who accept many of the
New Testament miracles, reduces the resurrection of our Lord to the fact that death did not end his
existence, and sweeps away the promises of his second coming as an idle dream. It matters not by
what name these modernists are known. The simple fact is that, in robbing Christianity of its
supernatural content, they are undermining the very foundations of our holy religion. They boast
that they are strengthening the foundations and making Christianity more rational and more
acceptable to thoughtful people. Christianity is rooted and grounded in supernaturalism, and when
robbed of supernaturalism it ceases to be a religion and becomes an exalted system of ethics. [Laws,
Herald &amp; Presbyter, July 19, 1922]    The original opposition to fundamentalist (within the
denominations) was modernist.    A new word has been coined into our vocabulary -- two new words --
'Fundamentalist' and 'Fundamentalism.' They are not in the dictionaries as yet -- unless in the very
latest editions. But they are on everyone's tongue. [Address Delivered at the Opening of the
Seminary, Sept. 20, 1922, by Professor Harry Lathrop Reed, Auburn Seminary Record]    Applied to
other religions, especially Islam, since 1957.


holism (n.)

1926, apparently by South African Gen. J.C. Smuts (1870-1950) in his book Holism and Evolution which
treats of evolution as a process of unification of separate parts; from Greek holos whole (see safe
(adj.)) + -ism.    This character of wholeness meets us everywhere and points to something
fundamental in the universe. Holism (from [holos] = whole) is the term here coined for this
fundamental factor operative towards the creation of wholes in the universe. [Smuts, Holism and
Evolution, p.86]


grass roots (n.)

1766, literally; figurative use from 1901 in sense fundamental level; U.S. political sense of the
rank and file of the electorate is attested from 1912; also grassroots.


principia (n.)

fundamental principles, plural of Latin principium beginning, origin (see principle (n.)).
Especially as the short form of the title of Newton's book (published 1687).


aetio-

word-forming element used in chemistry and indicating a fundamental degradation product of a complex
organic compound [Flood], from Latinized comb. form of Greek aitia a cause, an origin (see
etiology).


noob (n.)

c.2000 in gamer slang, variant of newbie; often used interchangeably with it, but also often with a
more derogatory shade of meaning; newbies owe their clueless behavior to lack of experience and can
improve, while the fundamental characteristic of noobs is incorrigible obnoxiousness or stupidity.


rationale (n.)

1650s, exposition of principles, from Late Latin rationale, noun use of neuter of Latin rationalis
of reason (see rational). Hence, fundamental reason (1680s).


proton (n.)

1920 in physics, coined by English physicist Ernest Rutherford (1871-1937) from noun use of Greek
proton, neuter of protos first (see proto-), on analogy of electron; supposedly because hydrogen was
hypothesized as a constituent of all the elements. The word was used earlier in embryology (1893) as
a translation of German anlage (fundamental thing) based on Aristotle's phrase he prote ousia to
proton.


proposition (n.)

mid-14c., a setting forth as a topic for discussion, from Old French proposicion proposal,
submission, (philosophical) proposition (12c.), from Latin propositionem (nominative propositio) a
setting forth, statement, a presentation, representation; fundamental assumption, noun of action
from past participle stem of proponere (see propound). Meaning action of proposing something to be
done is from late 14c. General sense of matter, problem, undertaking recorded by 1877. Related:
Propositional.


meta-

word-forming element meaning 1. after, behind, 2. changed, altered, 3. higher, beyond; from Greek
meta (prep.) in the midst of, in common with, by means of, in pursuit or quest of, from PIE *me- in
the middle (cognates: German mit, Gothic mi&thorn;, Old English mi&eth; with, together with, among;
see mid). Notion of changing places with probably led to senses change of place, order, or nature,
which was a principal meaning of the Greek word when used as a prefix (but also denoting community,
participation; in common with; pursuing).    Third sense, higher than, transcending, overarching,
dealing with the most fundamental matters of, is due to misinterpretation of metaphysics as science
of that which transcends the physical. This has led to a prodigious erroneous extension in modern
usage, with meta- affixed to the names of other sciences and disciplines, especially in the academic
jargon of literary criticism, which affixes it to just about anything that moves and much that
doesn't.


cloud (n.)

Old English clud mass of rock, hill, related to clod. Metaphoric extension to raincloud, mass of
evaporated water in the sky is attested by c.1200 based on similarity of cumulus clouds and rock
masses. The usual Old English word for cloud was weolcan. In Middle English, skie also originally
meant cloud.    The four fundamental types of cloud classification (cirrus, cumulus, stratus,
nimbus) were proposed by British amateur meteorologist Luke Howard (1772-1864) in 1802.
Figuratively, as something that casts a shadow, from early 15c.; hence under a cloud (c.1500). In
the clouds removed from earthly things; obscure, fanciful, unreal is from 1640s. Cloud-compeller
translates (poetically) Greek nephelegereta, a Homeric epithet of Zeus.


clay (n.)

Old English cl&aelig;g stiff, sticky earth; clay, from Proto-Germanic *klaijaz (cognates: Old High
German kliwa bran, German Kleie, Old Frisian klai clay, Old Saxon klei, Middle Dutch clei, Danish
kl&aelig;g clay; also Old English cl&aelig;man, Old Norse kleima, Old High German kleiman to cover
with clay), from PIE root *glei- clay (cognates: Greek gloios sticky matter; Latin gluten glue; Old
Church Slavonic glina clay, glenu slime, mucus; Old Irish glenim I cleave, adhere).    in Scripture,
the stuff from which the body of the first man was formed; hence human body (especially when dead).
Clay pigeon is from 1888. Feet of clay fundamental weakness is from Dan. ii:33.


taste (v.)

c.1300, to touch, to handle, from Old French taster to taste, sample by mouth; enjoy (13c.), earlier
to feel, touch, pat, stroke (12c., Modern French t&#226;ter), from Vulgar Latin *tastare, apparently
an alteration (perhaps by influence of gustare) of taxtare, a frequentative form of Latin taxare
evaluate, handle (see tax (v.)). Meaning to take a little food or drink is from c.1300; that of to
perceive by sense of taste is recorded from mid-14c. Of substances, to have a certain taste or
flavor, it is attested from 1550s (replaced native smack (v.3) in this sense). For another PIE root
in this sense, see gusto.    The Hindus recognized six principal varieties of taste with sixty-three
possible mixtures ... the Greeks eight .... These included the four that are now regarded as
fundamental, namely 'sweet,' 'bitter,' 'acid,' 'salt.' ... The others were 'pungent' (Gk. drimys,
Skt. katuka-), 'astringent' (Gk. stryphnos, Skt. kasaya-), and, for the Greeks, 'rough, harsh'
(austeros), 'oily, greasy' (liparos), with the occasional addition of 'winy' (oinodes). [Buck]
Sense of to know by experience is from 1520s. Related: Tasted; tasting. Taste buds is from 1879;
also taste goblets.


