furiously (adv.)

1550s, from furious + -ly (2).


furious (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French furieus (14c., Modern French furieux), from Latin furiosus full of rage,
mad, from furia rage, passion, fury. Furioso, from the Italian form of the word, was used in English
17c.-18c. for an enraged person, probably from Ariosto's Orlando Furioso.


rabid (adj.)

1610s, furious, raving, from Latin rabidus raging, furious, enraged; inspired; ungoverned; rabid,
from rabere be mad, rave (see rage (v.)). Meaning made mad by rabies in English first recorded 1804.
Related: Rabidly; rabidness.


fanatic (n.)

1520s, insane person, from Latin fanaticus mad, enthusiastic, inspired by a god, also furious, mad,
originally, pertaining to a temple, from fanum temple, related to festus festive (see feast).
Meaning zealous person is mid-17c. As an adjective, in English, 1530s, furious; meaning
characterized by excessive enthusiasm, especially in religion (of Nonconformists), is from 1640s.A
fanatic is someone who can't change his mind and won't change the subject. [attributed to Winston
Churchill]


frumious (adj.)

1871, coined by Lewis Carroll, who said it was a blend of fuming and furious. He used it in both
Jabberwocky and The Hunting of the Snark (1876).


rage (v.)

mid-13c., to play, romp, from rage (n.). Meanings be furious; speak passionately; go mad first
recorded c.1300. Of things from 1530s. Related: Raged; raging.


irate (adj.)

1838, from Latin iratus angry, enraged, violent, furious, past participle of irasci grow angry, from
ira anger (see ire).


hip hop

also hip-hop, music style, first recorded 1982. Reduplication with vowel variation (as in tip-top,
sing-song); OED reports use of hip hop with a sense of successive hopping motion dating back to
1670s. The term in its modern sense comes from its use in the early rap lyrics of the genre, notably
Grandmaster Flash and the Furious Five and The Sugarhill Gang in Rapper's Delight.


snort (v.)

late 14c., to snore, probably related to snore (v.). Meaning breathe through the nose with a harsh
sound first recorded 1520s. Sense of express contempt is from 1818. Meaning to inhale cocaine is
first attested 1935. Related: Snorted; snorting. American English snorter something fierce or
furious is from 1833.


fervent (adj.)

mid-14c., from Old French fervent, from Latin ferventem (nominative fervens) boiling, hot, glowing,
figuratively violent, impetuous, furious, present participle of fervere to boil, glow, from PIE root
*bhreue- (see brew (v.)). The figurative sense of impassioned is first attested c.1400. Related:
Fervency; fervently.


gale (n.)

storm at sea, 1540s, from gaile wind, origin uncertain, perhaps from Old Norse gol breeze, or Old
Danish gal bad, furious (often used of weather), from Old Norse galinn bewitched. Or perhaps it is
from Old English galan to sing (the second element in nightingale), or giellan to yell. In technical
meteorological use, a wind between 32 and 63 miles per hour.


vehement (adj.)

early 15c., from Middle French vehement, veement impetuous, ardent (12c.), from Latin vehementem
(nominative vehemens) impetuous, eager, violent, furious, ardent, carried away, perhaps [Barnhart]
from a lost present middle participle of vehere to carry (see vehicle). The other theory is that it
represents vehe- lacking, wanting + mens mind. Related: Vehemently.


wroth (adj.)

Old English wra&eth; angry (literally tormented, twisted), from Proto-Germanic *wraith- (cognates:
Old Frisian wreth evil, Old Saxon wred, Middle Dutch wret, Dutch wreed cruel, Old High German reid,
Old Norse rei&eth;r angry, offended), from PIE *wreit- to turn (see wreath). Rare or obsolete from
early 16c. to mid-19c., but somewhat revived since, especially in dignified writing, or this:
Secretary: The Dean is furious. He's waxing wroth.  Quincy Adams Wagstaf [Groucho]: Is Roth out
there too? Tell Roth to wax the Dean for a while.  [Horse Feathers, 1932]


mania (n.)

late 14c., mental derangement characterized by excitement and delusion, from Late Latin mania
insanity, madness, from Greek mania madness, frenzy; enthusiasm, inspired frenzy; mad passion, fury,
related to mainesthai to rage, go mad, mantis seer, menos passion, spirit, all from PIE *men- to
think, to have one's mind aroused, rage, be furious (see mind (n.)). Sense of fad, craze is 1680s,
from French manie in this sense. Sometimes nativized in Middle English as manye. Used since 1500s
(in imitation of Greek) as the second element in compounds expressing particular types of madness
(such as nymphomania, 1775; kleptomania, 1830; megalomania, 1890).


kitsch (n.)

1926, from German kitsch, literally gaudy, trash, from dialectal kitschen to smear.    What we
English people call ugliness in German art is simply the furious reaction against what Germans call
s&uuml;sses Kitsch, the art of the picture postcard, and of what corresponds to the royalty ballad.
It has for years been their constant reproach against us that England is the great country of
Kitsch. Many years ago a German who loved England only too well said to me, 'I like your English
word plain; it is a word for which we have no equivalent in German, because all German women are
plain.' He might well have balanced it by saying that English has no equivalent for the word Kitsch.
[Edward J. Dent, The Music of Arnold Sch&ouml;nberg, The Living Age, July 9, 1921]


grim (adj.)

Old English grimm fierce, cruel, savage, dire, painful, from Proto-Germanic *grimmaz (cognates: Old
Saxon, Old Frisian, Old High German, German grimm, Old Norse grimmr, Swedish grym fierce, furious),
from PIE *ghrem- angry, perhaps imitative of the sound of rumbling thunder (compare Greek khremizein
to neigh, Old Church Slavonic vuzgrimeti to thunder, Russian gremet' thunder).    A weaker word now
than once it was; sense of dreary, gloomy first recorded late 12c. It also had a verb form in Old
English, grimman (class III strong verb; past tense gramm, p.p. grummen). Old English also had a
noun, grima goblin, specter, perhaps also a proper name or attribute-name of a god, hence its
appearance as an element in place names.   Grim reaper as a figurative way to say death is attested
by 1847 (the association of grim and death goes back at least to 17c.). A Middle English expression
for have recourse to harsh measures was to wend the grim tooth (early 13c.).


