furrow (n.)

Old English furh furrow, trench, from Proto-Germanic *furkh- (cognates: Old Frisian furch furrow;
Middle Dutch vore, Dutch voor; German Furche furrow; Old Norse for furrow, drainage ditch), from PIE
*perk- (cognates: Latin porca ridge between two furrows, Old Irish -rech, Welsh rhych furrow). Some
scholars connect this word with Latin porcus, Eng. FARROW, assigning to the common root the sense
'to root like a swine.'  [OED]


furrow (v.)

early 15c., to plow, from furrow (n.). Meaning to make wrinkles in one's face, brow, etc. is from
1590s. Related: Furrowed; furrowing.


delirium (n.)

1590s, from Latin delirium madness, from deliriare be crazy, rave, literally go off the furrow, a
plowing metaphor, from phrase de lire, from de off, away (see de-) + lira furrow, earth thrown up
between two furrows, from PIE *leis- (1) track, furrow (see learn).


sulcus (n.)

plural sulci, fissure between convolutions of the brain, 1833, from medical use of Latin sulcus
furrow, trench, ditch, wrinkle, apparently literally the result of plowing, from PIE *selk- to pull,
draw (cognates: Greek holkos furrow, Old English sulh plow, Lithuanian velku I draw).


furlong (n.)

Old English furlang measure of distance of roughly 220 yards, originally the length of a furrow in
the common field of 10 acres, from furh furrow + lang long. The acre of the common field being
variously measured, the furlong was fixed 9c. on the classical stadium, one-eighth of a Roman mile.


groove (n.)

c.1400, cave, mine, pit (late 13c. in place names), from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse
grod pit, or from Middle Dutch groeve furrow, ditch, both from Proto-Germanic *grobo (cognates: Old
Norse grof brook, river bed, Old High German gruoba ditch, Gothic groba pit, cave, Old English
gr&aelig;f ditch), related to grave (n.). Sense of long, narrow channel or furrow is 1650s. Meaning
spiral cut in a phonograph record is from 1902. Figurative sense of routine is from 1842, often
deprecatory at first, a rut.


strigil (n.)

ancient tool for scraping the skin after a bath, 1580s, from Latin strigilis scraper, horse-comb,
from stringere (1) draw along a surface, graze, touch lightly; strip off, pluck off, cut away; clip,
prune; lay bare, unsheathe, figuratively waste, consume, reduce; touch, move, affect, cause pain,
from PIE root *streig- to stroke, rub, press (cognates: Latin striga stroke, strike, furrow, stria
furrow, channel; Old Church Slavonic striga shear; Old English stracian to stroke; German streichen
to stroke, rub). Etymologists dispute over whether this is connected to Latin stringere (2), root of
strain (v.).


drill (n.2)

small furrow, 1727; also machine for sowing seeds (1731), from obsolete drill rill, trickling stream
(1640s), of unknown origin; perhaps connected to drill (n.1).


pig (n.)

probably from Old English *picg, found in compounds, ultimate origin unknown. Originally young pig
(the word for adults was swine). Apparently related to Low German bigge, Dutch big (but the
phonology is difficult -- OED). The meaning oblong piece of metal is first attested 1580s, on the
notion of large mass. Applied to persons, usually in contempt, since 1540s; the derogatory slang
meaning police officer has been in underworld slang since at least 1811.    The pigs frisked my
panney, and nailed my screws; the officers searched my house, and seized my picklock keys.
[Dictionary of Buckish Slang, University Wit and Pickpocket Eloquence, London, 1811]     Another Old
English word for pig was fearh, related to furh furrow, from PIE *perk- dig, furrow (source also of
Latin porc-us pig, see pork). This reflects a widespread IE tendency to name animals from typical
attributes or activities [Lass]. Synonyms grunter, porker are from sailors' and fishermen's
euphemistic avoidance of uttering the word pig at sea, a superstition perhaps based on the fate of
the Gadarene swine, who drowned. The image of a pig in a poke is attested from 1520s (see poke
(n.3)). Flying pigs as a type of something unreal is from 1610s.


stria (n.)

plural striae, narrow stripe, groove, 1560s, from Latin stria a furrow, flute of a column (see
striate).


rue (n.3)

French for street, from Vulgar Latin *ruga (source also of Old Italian ruga), properly a furrow,
then in Medieval Latin a path, street (see rough (adj.)).


sulcate (adj.)

furrowed, grooved, 1760, from Latin sulcatus, past participle of sulcare to make furrowed, from
sulcus furrow, trench, ditch (see sulcus).


rill (n.)

small brook, rivulet, 1530s, from or related to Dutch and Frisian ril, Low German rille groove,
furrow, running stream, probably from Proto-Germanic *ril- (cognates: Old English ri&eth;,
ri&thorn;e brook, stream, which survives only in dialects), a diminutive form from PIE root *reie-
to run, flow (see Rhine).


striate (v.)

1670s, from special modern use of Latin striatus, past participle of striare to groove, to flute,
from Latin stria furrow, channel, flute of a column (in Modern Latin strip, streak), from PIE root
*streig-  to stroke, rub, press (see strigil). Related: Striated (1640s); striating.


embrasure (n.)

1702, from French embrasure (16c.), from Old French embraser to cut at a slant, make a groove or
furrow in a door or window, from en- in (see en- (1)) + braser to cut at a slant.


dock (n.1)

ship's berth, late 15c., from Middle Dutch or Middle Low German docke, perhaps ultimately (via Late
Latin *ductia aqueduct) from Latin ducere to lead (see duke (n.)); or possibly from a Scandinavian
word for low ground (compare Norwegian dokk hollow, low ground). Original sense perhaps furrow a
grounded vessel makes in a mud bank. As a verb from 1510s. Related: Docked; docking.


lore (n.)

Old English lar learning, what is taught, knowledge, science, doctrine, art of teaching, from Proto-
Germanic *laizo (Old Saxon lera, Old Frisian lare, Middle Dutch lere, Dutch leer, Old High German
lera, German Lehre teaching, precept, doctrine), from PIE *leis- (1) track, furrow (see learn).


ogham (n.)

also ogam, ancient Irish form of writing, 1620s, from Irish ogham, from Old Irish ogam, said to be
from name of its inventor, Ogma Mac Eladan. But this appears to be from Celt. *Ogmios, perhaps from
PIE *og-mo- furrow, track, thus metaphorically incised line. This could be the source of the name of
the writing style, which looks like a series of cuts or incised lines, and the inventor's name thus
might be folk etymology. Related: Oghamic.


gutter (n.)

late 13c., watercourse, water drainage channel along the side of a street, from Anglo-French gotere,
Old French guitere, goutiere (13c., Modern French goutti&egrave;re) gutter, spout (of water), from
goute a drop, from Latin gutta a drop. Meaning furrow made by running water is from 1580s. Meaning
trough under the eaves of a roof to carry off rainwater is from mid-14c. Figurative sense of low,
profane is from 1818. In printers' slang, from 1841.


last (v.)

endure, go on existing, from Old English l&aelig;stan to continue, endure, earlier accomplish, carry
out, literally to follow a track, from Proto-Germanic *laistjan to follow a track (cognates: Gothic
laistjan to follow, Old Frisian lasta to fulfill, to pay (duties), German leisten to perform,
achieve, afford), from PIE *leis- (1) track, furrow (see learn).    Related to last (n.), not to
last (adj.). Related: Lasted; lasting.


scratch (n.)

1580s, slight skin tear produced by a sharp thing, from scratch (v.). Meaning mark or slight furrow
in metal, etc. is from 1660s. American English slang sense of money is from 1914, of uncertain
signification. Many figurative senses (such as up to scratch, originally ready to meet one's
opponent) are from sporting use for line or mark drawn as a starting place, attested from 1778 (but
the earliest use is figurative); meaning nothing (as in from scratch) is 1918, generalized from
specific 19c. sporting sense of starting point of a competitor who receives no odds in a handicap
match. Sense in billiards is from 1850. Scratch-pad is attested from 1883.


flute (n.)

early 14c., from Old French flaute (12c.), from Old Proven&ccedil;al flaut, of uncertain origin,
perhaps imitative or from Latin flare to blow; perhaps influenced by Proven&ccedil;al laut lute. The
other Germanic words (such as German fl&ouml;te) are likewise borrowings from French.    Ancient
flutes were blown through a mouthpiece, like a recorder; the modern transverse or German flute
developed 18c. The older style then sometimes were called fl&#251;te-a-bec (French, literally flute
with a beak). The modern design and key system of the concert flute were perfected 1834 by Theobald
Boehm. The architectural sense of furrow in a pillar (1650s) is from fancied resemblance to the
inside of a flute split down the middle. Meaning tall, slender wine glass is from 1640s.


learn (v.)

Old English leornian to get knowledge, be cultivated, study, read, think about, from Proto-Germanic
*liznojan (cognates: Old Frisian lernia, Middle Dutch leeren, Dutch leren, Old High German lernen,
German lernen to learn, Gothic lais I know), with a base sense of to follow or find the track, from
PIE *leis- (1) track, furrow. Related to German Gleis track, and to Old English l&aelig;st sole of
the foot (see last (n.)).    The transitive sense (He learned me how to read), now vulgar, was
acceptable from c.1200 until early 19c., from Old English l&aelig;ran to teach (cognates: Dutch
leren, German lehren to teach, literally to make known; see lore), and is preserved in past
participle adjective learned having knowledge gained by study. Related: Learning.


plow (n.)

late Old English plog, ploh plow; plowland (a measure of land equal to what a yoke of oxen could
plow in a day), possibly from a Scandinavian source (such as Old Norse plogr plow, Swedish and
Danish plog), from Proto-Germanic *plogo- (cognates: Old Saxon plog, Old Frisian ploch plow, Middle
Low German ploch, Middle Dutch ploech, Dutch ploeg, Old High German pfluog, German Pflug), a late
word in Germanic, of uncertain origin. Old Church Slavonic plugu, Lithuanian plugas plow are
Germanic loan-words, as probably is Latin plovus, plovum plow, a word said by Pliny to be of
Rhaetian origin.    Replaced Old English sulh, cognate with Latin sulcus furrow (see sulcus). As a
name for the star pattern also known as the Big Dipper or Charles's Wain, it is attested by early
15c., perhaps early 14c. The three handle stars (in the Dipper configuration) generally are seen as
the team of oxen pulling the plow, though sometimes they are the handle.


