fusion (n.)

1550s, from Middle French fusion, from Latin fusionem (nominative fusio) an outpouring, effusion,
noun of action from fusus, past participle of fundere pour, melt (see found (v.2)). In nuclear
physics sense, first recorded 1947; in jazz sense, by 1972.


grip (n.)

fusion of Old English gripe grasp, clutch and gripa handful, sheaf (see grip (v.)). Meaning stage
hand is from 1888, from their work shifting scenery.


fuse (v.)

1680s, to melt (transitive), back-formation from fusion. Intransitive sense, to become liquid,
attested from 1800. Figurative sense of blend different things is first recorded 1817. Related:
Fused; fusing.


tyrosine (n.)

white, crystalline amino acid, 1857, coined 1846 by German chemist Justus von Liebig (1803-1873),
who had first obtained it a year before from the products of a fusion of old cheese and potash, from
Greek tyros cheese (from PIE *tu-ro-, from *teue- (2) to swell (see thigh) on the notion of a
swelling, coagulating) + chemical suffix -ine (2).


promethium (n.)

radioactive element, long one of the missing elements, 1948, so called by discoverers Jacob Marinsky
and Lawrence Glendenin, who detected it in 1945 in the fusion products of uranium while working on
the Manhattan Project. From Prometheus, who stole fire from the gods and was punished for it, +
element name ending -ium. The name not only symbolizes the dramatic way in which the element may be
produced in quantity as a result of man's harnessing of the energy of nuclear fission, but also
warns man of the impending danger of punishment by the vulture of war. [Marinsky and Glendenin]


mummer (n.)

one who performs in a mumming, actor in a dumb show, early 15c., probably a fusion of Middle French
momeur mummer (from Old French momer mask oneself, from momon mask) and Middle English mommen to
mutter, be silent, related to mum (interjection).


butt (n.3)

target of a joke, 1610s, originally target for shooting practice (mid-14c.), from Old French but
aim, goal, end, target (of an arrow, etc.), 13c., which seems to be a fusion of Old French words for
end (bout) and aim, goal (but), both ultimately from Germanic. The latter is from Frankish *but
stump, stock, block, or some other Germanic source (compare Old Norse butr log of wood), which would
connect it with butt (n.1).


scratch (v.)

c.1400, probably a fusion of Middle English scratten and crachen, both meaning to scratch, both of
uncertain origin. Related: Scratched; scratching. Billiards sense of to hit the cue ball into a
pocket is first recorded 1909 (also, originally, itch), though earlier it meant a lucky shot (1850).
Meaning to withdraw (a horse) from a race is 1865, from notion of scratching name off list of
competitors; used in a non-sporting sense of cancel a plan, etc. from 1680s. To scratch the surface
make only slight progress in penetrating or understanding is from 1882. To scratch (one's) head as a
gesture of perplexity is recorded from 1712.


angel (n.)

14c. fusion of Old English engel (with hard -g-) and Old French angele, both from Latin angelus,
from Greek angelos messenger, envoy, one that announces, possibly related to angaros mounted
courier, both from an unknown Oriental word (Watkins compares Sanskrit ajira- swift; Klein suggests
Semitic sources). Used in Scriptural translations for Hebrew mal'akh (yehowah) messenger (of
Jehovah), from base l-'-k to send. An Old English word for it was aerendgast, literally errand-
spirit.    Of persons, loving; lovely, by 1590s. The medieval gold coin (a new issue of the noble,
first struck 1465 by Edward VI) was so called for the image of archangel Michael slaying the dragon,
which was stamped on it. It was the coin given to patients who had been touched for the King's Evil.
Angel food cake is from 1881; angel dust phencyclidine is from 1968.


work (v.)

a fusion of Old English wyrcan (past tense worhte, past participle geworht) prepare, perform, do,
make, construct, produce; strive after (from Proto-Germanic *wurkijan); and Old English wircan
(Mercian) to operate, function, set in motion, a secondary verb formed relatively late from Proto-
Germanic noun *werkan (see work (n.)). Sense of perform physical labor was in Old English, as was
sense ply one's trade and exert creative power, be a creator. Transitive sense manipulate (physical
substances) into a desired state or form was in Old English. Meaning have the expected or desired
effect is from late 14c. In Middle English also perform sexually (mid-13c.). Related: Worked (15c.);
working. To work up excite is from c.1600. To work over beat up, thrash is from 1927. To work
against attempt to subvert is from late 14c.


win (v.)

be victorious, c.1300 fusion of Old English winnan to labor, toil, struggle for, work at, strive,
fight, and gewinnan to gain or succeed by struggling, conquer, obtain, both from Proto-Germanic
*winn(w)an to seek to gain (cognates: Old Saxon winnan, Old Norse vinna, Old Frisian winna, Dutch
winnen to gain, win, Danish vinde to win, Old High German winnan to strive, struggle, fight, German
gewinnen to gain, win, Gothic gawinnen to suffer, toil), from PIE *wen- (1) desire, strive for
(source of wish; see Venus).    Related: Won; winning. Meaning gain the affection or esteem of is
from c.1600. Breadwinner preserves the sense of toil in Old English winnan. Phrase you can't win
them all (1954) first attested in Raymond Chandler. Winningest is attested by 1804.


-ling

diminutive word-forming element, early 14c., from Old English -ling a nominal suffix (not originally
diminutive), from Proto-Germanic *-linga-; attested in historical Germanic languages as a simple
suffix, but probably representing a fusion of two suffixes: 1. that represented by English -le
(thimble, handle), from Old English -ol, -ul, -el, representing PIE *-lo- (see -ule); and 2. -ing,
suffix indicating person or thing of a specific kind or origin; in masculine nouns also son of
(farthing, atheling, Old English horing adulterer, fornicator), from PIE *-(i)ko- (see -ic).    Both
these suffixes had occasional diminutive force, but this was only slightly evident in Old English
-ling and its equivalents in Germanic languages except Norse, where it commonly was used as a
diminutive suffix, especially in words designating the young of animals (such as g&aelig;slingr
gosling). Thus it is possible that the diminutive use that developed in Middle English is from Old
Norse.


organ (n.)

fusion of late Old English organe, and Old French orgene (12c.), both meaning musical instrument,
both from Latin organa, plural of organum a musical instrument, from Greek organon implement, tool
for making or doing; musical instrument; organ of sense, organ of the body, literally that with
which one works, from PIE *werg-ano-, from root *werg- to do (cognates: Greek ergon work, orgia
religious performances; Armenian gorc work; Avestan vareza work, activity; Gothic waurkjan, Old
English wyrcan to work, Old English weorc deed, action, something done; Old Norse yrka work, take
effect).    Applied vaguely in late Old English to musical instruments; sense narrowed by late 14c.
to the musical instrument now known by that name (involving pipes supplied with wind by a bellows
and worked by means of keys), though Augustine (c.400) knew this as a specific sense of Latin
organa. The meaning body part adapted to a certain function is attested from late 14c., from a
Medieval Latin sense of Latin organum. Organist is first recorded 1590s; organ-grinder is attested
from 1806.


guild (n.)

early 13c., yilde (spelling later influenced by Old Norse gildi guild, brotherhood), a semantic
fusion of Old English gegyld guild and gild, gyld payment, tribute, compensation, from Proto-
Germanic *gelth- pay (cognates: Old Frisian geld money, Old Saxon geld payment, sacrifice, reward,
Old High German gelt payment, tribute; see yield (v.)).    The connecting sense is of a tribute or
payment to join a protective or trade society. But some see the root in its alternative sense of
sacrifice, as if in worship, and see the word as meaning a combination for religious purposes,
either Christian or pagan. The Anglo-Saxon guilds had a strong religious component; they were burial
societies that paid for masses for the souls of deceased members as well as paying fines in cases of
justified crime. The continental custom of guilds of merchants arrived after the Conquest, with
incorporated societies of merchants in each town or city holding exclusive rights of doing business
there. In many cases they became the governing body of a town (compare Guildhall, which came to be
the London city hall). Trade guilds arose 14c., as craftsmen united to protect their common
interest.


hang (v.)

a fusion of Old English hon suspend (transitive, class VII strong verb; past tense heng, past
participle hangen), and Old English hangian (weak, intransitive, past tense hangode) be suspended;
also probably influenced by Old Norse hengja suspend, and hanga be suspended. All from Proto-
Germanic *hangen (intransitive) to hang (cognates: Old Frisian hangia, Dutch hangen, German
h&auml;ngen), from PIE *konk- to hang (cognates: Gothic hahan, Hittite gang- to hang, Sanskrit
sankate wavers, Latin cunctari to delay; see also second element in Stonehenge). As a method of
execution, in late Old English (but originally specifically of crucifixion).   Hung emerged as past
participle 16c. in northern England dialect, and hanged endured only in legal language (which tends
to be conservative) and metaphors extended from it (I'll be hanged). Teen slang sense of spend time
first recorded 1951; hang around idle, loiter is from 1830, and hang out (v.) is from 1811. Hang
fire (1781) was originally used of guns that were slow in communicating the fire through the vent to
the charge. To let it all hang out be relaxed and uninhibited is from 1967.


pick (v.)

early 13c., picken to peck; c.1300, piken to work with a pick, probably representing a fusion of Old
English *pician to prick, (implied by picung a piercing, pricking, an 8c. gloss on Latin stigmata)
with Old Norse pikka to prick, peck, both from a Germanic root (source also of Middle Dutch picken,
German picken to pick, peck), perhaps imitative. Influence from Middle French piquer to prick, sting
(see pike (n.2)) also is possible, but that French word generally is not considered a source of the
English word. Related: Picked; picking.    Meaning to eat with small bites is from 1580s. The
meaning to choose, select, pick out emerged late 14c., from earlier meaning to pluck with the
fingers (early 14c.). Sense of to rob, plunder (c.1300) weakened to a milder sense of steal petty
things by late 14c. Of forcing locks with a pointed tool, by 1540s. Meaning to pluck (a banjo) is
recorded from 1860. To pick a quarrel, etc. is from mid-15c.; to pick at find fault with is from
1670s. Pick on single out for adverse attention is from late 14c.; pick off shoot one by one is
recorded from 1810; baseball sense of to put out a runner on base is from 1939. Also see pick up. To
pick and choose select carefully is from 1660s (choose and pick is attested from c.1400).


