gait (n.)

c.1300, gate a going or walking, departure, journey, earlier way, road, path (c.1200), from a
Scandinavian source (compare Old Norse gata way, road, path), cognate with Old High German gazza
street, German Gasse, Gothic gatwo. Meaning manner of walking is from mid-15c. Modern spelling
developed before 1750, originally in Scottish. Related: Gaited.


rack (n.2)

type of gait of a horse, 1580s, from rack (v.) move with a fast, lively gait 1520s in this sense
(implied in racking), of unknown origin; perhaps from French racquassure racking of a horse in his
pace, itself of unknown origin. Or perhaps a variant of rock (v.1).


shamble (v.)

to walk with a shuffling gait, walk awkwardly and unsteadily, 1680s, from an adjective meaning
ungainly, awkward (c.1600), from shamble (n.) table, bench (see shambles), perhaps on the notion of
the splayed legs of bench, or the way a worker sits astride it. Compare French bancal bow-legged,
wobbly (of furniture), properly bench-legged, from banc bench. The noun meaning a shambling gait is
from 1828. Related: Shambled; shambling.


stepper (n.)

horse with a showy gait, 1835, agent noun from step (v.).


saunter (v.)

late 15c., santren to muse, be in reverie, of uncertain origin despite many absurd speculations.
Meaning walk with a leisurely gait is from 1660s, and may be a different word. Klein suggests this
sense of the word derives via Anglo-French sauntrer (mid-14c.) from French s'aventurer to take
risks, but OED finds this unlikely. Related: Sauntered; sauntering.


spavin (n.)

disease of the hock joint of a horse, early 15c., from Middle French espavain (Modern French
&#233;pavin, cognate with Italian spavenio, Spanish esparavan); in most sources said to be perhaps
from Frankish *sparwan sparrow (see sparrow), on the supposition that a horse affected with spavin
moved with a walk that reminded people of the bird's awkward gait. This seems a stretcher, and
Century Dictionary admits it rests on mere resemblance of form.


trot (n.)

a gait faster than a walk and slower than a run, c.1300, originally of horses, from Old French trot
a trot, trotting (12c.), from troter to trot, to go, from Frankish *trotton, from Proto-Germanic
*trott- (cognates: Old High German trotton to tread), derivative of *tred- (see tread (v.)). The
trots diarrhea is recorded from 1808 (compare the runs).


demarche (n.)

1650s, walk, step, from French d&eacute;marche (15c.) literally gait, walk, bearing, from
d&eacute;marcher (12c.) to march, from de- (see de-) + marcher (see march (v.)). Meaning a
diplomatic step attested from 1670s. A word never quite anglicized.


allure (v.)

c.1400, from Anglo-French alurer, Old French aleurer to attract, captivate; train a falcon to hunt,
from &agrave; to (see ad-) + loirre falconer's lure, from a Frankish word (see lure), perhaps
influenced by French allure gait, way of walking. Related: Allured; alluring. The noun is first
attested 1540s; properly this sense is allurement.


wait (n.)

early 13c., a watcher, onlooker, from Old North French wait (Old French gait look-out, watch,
sentry), from Old North French waitier (Old French gaitier; see wait (v.)). Compare Old High German
wahta, German Wacht a watchman. From late 14c. as an ambush, a trap (as in lie in wait). From 1855
as time occupied in waiting; 1873 as an act of waiting. From the sense civic employee responsible
for signaling the hour or an alarm by sounding on a trumpet, etc. comes the old sense town musicians
(mid-15c.).


stride (n.)

a step in walking, especially a long one, from Old English stride a stride, a step, from the root of
stride (v.). Compare Dutch strijd, Old High German strit, German Streit fight, contention, combat,
Swedish and Danish strid combat, contention. From c.1300 as a measure of distance roughly the length
of a stride. Figurative meaning advance rapidly, make progress is from c.1600. Of animals
(especially horses) from early 17c. To take (something) in stride (1832), i.e. without change of
gait, originally is of horses leaping hedges in the hunting-field; figurative sense attested from
1902. To hit (one's) stride is from horse-racing. Jazz music stride tempo is attested from 1938.
Meaning a standing with the legs apart, a straddle is from 1590s.


grade (n.)

1510s, degree of measurement, from French grade grade, degree (16c.), from Latin gradus step, pace,
gait, walk; figuratively a step, stage, degree, related to gradi to walk, step, go, from PIE
*ghredh- (cognates: Lithuanian gridiju to go, wander, Old Church Slavonic gredo to come, Old Irish
in-greinn he pursues, and second element in congress, progress, etc.).  Replaced Middle English gree
step, degree in a series, from Old French grei step, from Latin gradus. Railway sense is from 1811.
Meaning class of things having the same quality or value is from 1807; meaning division of a school
curriculum equivalent to one year is from 1835; that of letter-mark indicating assessment of a
student's work is from 1886 (earlier used of numerical grades). Grade A top quality, fit for human
consumption (originally of milk) is from a U.S. system instituted in 1912.


