galaxy (n.)

late 14c., from Old French galaxie, from Late Latin galaxias Milky Way, from Greek galaxias (adj.),
in galaxias kyklos, literally milky circle, from gala (genitive galaktos) milk (see lactation). The
technical astronomical sense emerged 1848. Figurative sense of brilliant assembly of persons is from
1580s. Milky Way is a translation of Latin via lactea.See yonder, lo, the Galaxy&#235; Which men
clepeth the Milky Wey, For hit is whyt. [Chaucer, House of Fame]  Astronomers began to speculate by
mid-19c. that some of the spiral nebulae they could see in telescopes were actually immense and
immensely distant structures the size and shape of the Milky Way. But the matter was not settled
until the 1920s.


galactic (adj.)

1839, of the Milky Way, from Late Latin galacticus, from galaxias (see galaxy). In modern scientific
sense pertaining to (our) galaxy, from 1849.


milky way (n.)

late 14c., loan-translation of Latin via lactea. See also galaxy.


westernization (n.)

also westernisation, 1873, noun of action from westernize (v.). Earliest reference is to Japan.
[The mikado's] late rapid and radical progress in westernization (to evolve a word that the Japanese
will need) justifies great expectations of him. [Coates Kinney, Japanning the English Language, The
Galaxy, July-Dec. 1873]


spiral (adj.)

1550s, from Middle French spiral (16c.), from Medieval Latin spiralis winding around a fixed center,
coiling (mid-13c.), from Latin spira a coil, fold, twist, spiral, from Greek speira a winding, a
coil, twist, wreath, anything wound or coiled, from PIE *sper-ya-, from base *sper- (2) to turn,
twist. Related: Spirally. Spiral galaxy first attested 1913.


deadbeat (n.)

worthless sponging idler, 1863, American English slang, perhaps originally Civil War slang, from
dead (adj.) + beat. Earlier used colloquially as an adjectival expression to mean completely beaten
(1821), and perhaps the base notion is of worn out, good for nothing. It is noted in a British
source from 1861 as a term for a pensioner.    In England dead beat means worn out, used up. ... But
here, dead beat is used, as a substantive, to mean a scoundrel, a shiftless, swindling vagabond. We
hear it said that such a man is a beat or a dead beat. The phrase thus used is not even good slang.
It is neither humorous nor descriptive. There is not in it even a perversion of the sense of the
words of which it is composed. Its origin is quite beyond conjecture. [Americanisms, in The Galaxy,
January 1878]    It also was used of a kind of regulating mechanism in pendulum clocks.


