gale (n.)

storm at sea, 1540s, from gaile wind, origin uncertain, perhaps from Old Norse gol breeze, or Old
Danish gal bad, furious (often used of weather), from Old Norse galinn bewitched. Or perhaps it is
from Old English galan to sing (the second element in nightingale), or giellan to yell. In technical
meteorological use, a wind between 32 and 63 miles per hour.


galleon (n.)

large ship, 1520s, from Old French galion little ship (13c.), from Spanish gale&oacute;n galleon,
armed merchant ship, from Byzantine Greek galea galley (see galley) + augmentative suffix -on. In
English use, especially of Spanish ships involved in the American trade.


gala (n.)

1620s, festive dress or attire, from French en gala, perhaps from Old French gale merriment, from
galer rejoice, make merry (see gallant). Klein suggests the French word is from Italian gala (as in
phrase vestito di gala robe of state), perhaps from Arabic khil'a fine garment given as a
presentation. Sense of festive occasion (characterized by display of finery) first recorded 1777.


regale (v.)

entertain splendidly, 1650s, from French r&eacute;galer to entertain or feast, from Old French
regale, rigale, from gale merriment, from galer make merry (see gallant (adj.)). Influenced in Old
French by se rigoler amuse oneself, rejoice, of unknown origin. Italian regalo is from French.
Related: Regaled; regaling.


goal (n.)

1530s, end point of a race, of uncertain origin. The noun gol appears once before this, in a poem
from early 14c. and with an apparent sense of boundary, limit. Perhaps from Old English *gal
obstacle, barrier, a word implied by g&aelig;lan to hinder and also found in compounds (singal,
widgal); and compare Old Norse geil a narrow glen, a passage. Or from Old French gaule a pole, from
Germanic; or a figurative use of Middle English gale a way, course (mid-14c.) Sports sense of place
where the ball is put to score is attested from 1540s. Figurative sense of object of an effort is
from 1540s.


kite (n.)

bird of prey (Milvus ictinus), Old English cyta kind of hawk, probably imitative of its cries
(compare ciegan to call, German Kauz screech owl). The toy kite first so-called 1660s, from its way
of hovering in the air like a bird. The dismissive invitation to go fly a kite is attested by 1942,
American English, probably tracing to the popular song of the same name (lyrics by Johnny Burke),
sung by Bing Crosby in The Star Maker (1939):    Go fly a kite and tie your troubles to the tail
They'll be blown away by a merry gale,   Go fly a kite and toss your worries to the wind   And they
won't come back, they'll be too chagrined.


yell (v.)

Old English giellan (West Saxon), gellan (Mercian) to yell, sound, shout, class III strong verb
(past tense geal, past participle gollen), from Proto-Germanic *gel- (cognates: Old Norse gjalla to
resound, Middle Dutch ghellen, Dutch gillen, Old High German gellan, German gellen to yell),
extended form of root of Old English galan to sing (source of the -gale in nightingale); from PIE
*ghel- (1) to call, cry out, shout, sing (cognates: Greek kikhle thrush, khelidon the swallow).
Intransitive sense from early 13c. Related: Yelled; yelling.


south (adv.)

Old English su&eth; southward, to the south, southern, in the south, from Proto-Germanic *sunthaz,
perhaps literally sun-side (cognates: Old Saxon, Old Frisian suth southward, in the south, Middle
Dutch suut, Dutch zuid, German S&uuml;den), and related to base of *sunnon sun (see sun (v.)). Old
French sur, sud (French sud), Spanish sur, sud are loan-words from Germanic, perhaps from Old Norse
su&eth;r.    As an adjective from c.1300; as a noun, one of the four cardinal points, also southern
region of a country, both late 13c. The Southern states of the U.S. have been collectively called
The South since 1779 (in early use this often referred only to Georgia and South Carolina). South
country in Britain means the part below the Tweed, in England the part below the Wash, and in
Scotland the part below the Forth. South Sea meant the Mediterranean (late 14c.) and the English
Channel (early 15c.) before it came to mean (in plural) the South Pacific Ocean (1520s). The
nautical coat called a sou'wester (1836) protects the wearer against severe weather, such as a gale
out of the southwest.


