gallows (n.)

c.1300, plural of Middle English galwe gallows (mid-13c.), from Old Norse galgi gallows, or from Old
English galga (Mercian), gealga (West Saxon) gallows; all from Proto-Germanic *galgon- pole
(cognates: Old Frisian galga, Middle High German galge gallows, cross, German Galgen gallows, Gothic
galga cross), from PIE *ghalgh- branch, rod (cognates: Lithuanian zalga pole, perch, Armenian dzalk
pole). In Old English, also used of the cross of the crucifixion. Plural because made of two poles.


gibbet (n.)

early 13c., gallows, from Old French gibet gallows; a bent stick, diminutive of gibe club, perhaps
from Frankish *gibb forked stick. The verb meaning to kill by hanging is from 1590s. Related:
Gibbeted; gibbeting. Originally synonymous with GALLOWS sb., but in later use signifying an upright
post with projecting arm from which the bodies of criminals were hung in chains or irons after
execution [OED].


derrick (n.)

c.1600, originally hangman, then a gallows, then hoist, crane (1727), from surname of a hangman at
Tyburn gallows, London, c.1606-1608, often referred to in contemporary theater. The name represents
a late borrowing from the Low Countries (compare Dutch Diederik) of Old High German Theodric.


Stonehenge (n.)

early 12c., Stanenges, literally stone gallows, perhaps so called from fancied resemblance to old-
style gallows with two posts, with the second element related to the verb hang. Some antiquarians
suggest the notion may be of supported in the air, that which hangs in the air (compare henge-clif
for Latin pr&aelig;ruptum), in reference to the lintel stones, but the order of the elements and the
inflection is against this. An ancient name for it was the Giant's Dance.


gallow

singular of gallows.


hanging (n.)

act of putting to death on the gallows, c.1300 (see hang (v.)). Hanging judge first recorded 1848.
Meaning piece of drapery on the wall of a room is late 15c. Hangings curtains, tapestry is from
1640s.


wag (n.1)

person fond of making jokes, 1550s, perhaps a shortening of waghalter gallows bird, person destined
to swing in a noose or halter, applied humorously to mischievous children, from wag (v.) + halter.
Or possibly directly from wag (v.); compare wagger one who stirs up or agitates (late 14c.).


tree (n.)

Old English  treo, treow tree (also timber, wood, beam, log, stake), from Proto-Germanic *treuwaz-
(cognates: Old Frisian tre, Old Saxon trio, Old Norse tre, Gothic triu tree), from PIE *drew-o-,
from *deru- oak (cognates: Sanskrit dru tree, wood, daru wood, log; Greek drys oak, drymos copse,
thicket, doru beam, shaft of a spear; Old Church Slavonic drievo tree, wood; Serbian drvo tree, drva
wood; Russian drevo tree, wood; Czech drva; Polish drwa wood; Lithuanian derva pine, wood; Old Irish
daur, Welsh derwen oak, Albanian drusk oak). This is from PIE *drew-o-, a suffixed form of the root
*deru- to be firm, solid, steadfast (see true), with specialized sense wood, tree and derivatives
referring to objects made of wood.    The line which divides trees from shrubs is largely arbitrary,
and dependent upon habit rather than size, the tree having a single trunk usually unbranched for
some distance above the ground, while a shrub has usually several stems from the same root and each
without a proper trunk. [Century Dictionary]    The widespread use of words originally meaning oak
in the sense tree probably reflects the importance of the oak to ancient Indo-Europeans. In Old
English and Middle English also thing made of wood, especially the cross of the Crucifixion and a
gallows (such as Tyburn tree, famous gallows outside London). Middle English also had plural treen,
adjective treen (Old English treowen of a tree, wooden). For Dutch boom, German Baum, the usual
words for tree, see beam (n.). Meaning framework of a saddle is from 1530s. Meaning representation
of familial relationships in the form of a tree is from c.1300. Tree-hugger, contemptuous for
environmentalist is attested by 1989.    Minc'd Pyes do not grow upon every tree,  But search the
Ovens for them, and there they be.  [Poor Robin, Almanack, 1669]


gauge (v.)

ascertain by exact measurements, mid-15c., from Anglo-French gauge (mid-14c.), from Old North French
gauger (Old French jauger), from gauge gauging rod, perhaps from Frankish *galgo rod, pole for
measuring or another Germanic source (compare Old Norse gelgja pole, perch, Old High German galgo;
see gallows). Related: Gauged; gauging. The figurative use is from 1580s.


beam (n.)

Old English beam originally living tree, but by late 10c. also rafter, post, ship's timber, from
Proto-Germanic *baumaz (cognates: Old Norse ba&eth;mr, Old Frisian bam tree, gallows, beam, Middle
Dutch boom, Old High German boum, German Baum tree, Gothic bagms), perhaps from PIE verb root
*bheue- to grow (see be). The shift from *-au- to -ea- is regular in Old English.    Meaning ray of
light developed in Old English, probably because it was used by Bede to render Latin columna lucis,
the Biblical pillar of fire. Nautical sense of one of the horizontal transverse timbers holding a
ship together is from early 13c., hence greatest breadth of a ship, and slang broad in the beam
wide-hipped (of persons). To be on the beam (1941) was originally an aviator's term for to follow
the course indicated by a radio beam.


suicide (n.)

deliberate killing of oneself, 1650s, from Modern Latin suicidium suicide, from Latin sui of oneself
(genitive of se self), from PIE *s(u)w-o- one's own, from root *s(w)e- (see idiom) + -cidium a
killing (see -cide). Probably an English coinage; much maligned by Latin purists because it may as
well seem to participate of sus, a sow, as of the pronoun sui [Phillips]. The meaning person who
kills himself deliberately is from 1728. In Anglo-Latin, the term for one who commits suicide was
felo-de-se, literally one guilty concerning himself.    Even in 1749, in the full blaze of the
philosophic movement, we find a suicide named Portier dragged through the streets of Paris with his
face to the ground, hung from a gallows by his feet, and then thrown into the sewers; and the laws
were not abrogated till the Revolution, which, having founded so many other forms of freedom,
accorded the liberty of death. [W.E.H. Lecky, History of European Morals, 1869]    In England,
suicides were legally criminal if of age and sane, but not if judged to have been mentally deranged.
The criminal ones were mutilated by stake and given degrading burial in highways until 1823. Suicide
blonde (one who has dyed by her own hand) first attested 1921. Baseball suicide squeeze is attested
from 1937.


stage (n.)

mid-13c., story of a building; early 14c., raised platform used for public display (also the
platform beneath the gallows), from Old French estage building, dwelling place; stage for
performance; phase, stage, rest in a journey (12c., Modern French &#233;tage story of a house,
stage, floor, loft), from Vulgar Latin *staticum a place for standing, from Latin statum, past
participle of stare to stand (see stet). Meaning platform for presentation of a play is attested
from late 14c.; generalized for profession of an actor from 1580s.    Sense of period of development
or time in life first recorded early 14c., probably from Middle English sense of degree or step on
the 'ladder' of virtue, 'wheel' of fortune, etc., in parable illustrations and morality plays.
Meaning a step in sequence, a stage of a journey is late 14c. Meaning level of water in a river,
etc. is from 1814, American English.   Stage-name is from 1727. Stage-mother (n.) in the overbearing
mother-of-an-actress sense is from 1915. Stage-door is from 1761, hence Stage-Door Johnny young man
who frequents stage doors seeking the company of actresses, chorus girls, etc. (1907). Stage
whisper, such as used by an actor on stage to be heard by the audience, first attested 1865. Stage-
manage (v.) is from 1871.


scapegoat (n.)

1530, goat sent into the wilderness on the Day of Atonement, symbolic bearer of the sins of the
people, coined by Tyndale from scape (n.1) + goat to translate Latin caper emissarius, itself a
translation in Vulgate of Hebrew 'azazel (Lev. xvi:8,10,26), which was read as 'ez ozel goat that
departs, but which others hold to be the proper name of a devil or demon in Jewish mythology
(sometimes identified with Canaanite deity Aziz).    Jerome's reading also was followed by Martin
Luther (der ledige Bock), Symmachus (tragos aperkhomenos), and others (compare French bouc
&eacute;missaire), but the question of who, or what (or even where) is meant by 'azazel is a vexed
one. The Revised Version (1884) simply restores Azazel. But the old translation has its modern
defenders:   Azazel is an active participle or participial noun, derived ultimately from azal
(connected with the Arabic word azala, and meaning removed), but immediately from the reduplicate
form of that verb, azazal. The reduplication of the consonants of the root in Hebrew and Arabic
gives the force of repetition, so that while azal means removed, azalzal means removed by a
repetition of acts. Azalzel or azazel, therefore, means one who removes by a series of acts. ... The
interpretation is founded on sound etymological grounds, it suits the context wherever the word
occurs, it is consistent with the remaining ceremonial of the Day of Atonement, and it accords with
the otherwise known religious beliefs and symbolical practices of the Israelites. [Rev. F. Meyrick,
Leviticus, London, 1882]    Meaning one who is blamed or punished for the mistakes or sins of others
first recorded 1824; the verb is attested from 1943. Related: Scapegoated; scapegoating.   For the
formation, compare scapegrace, also scape-gallows one who deserves hanging.


horse (n.)

Old English hors, from Proto-Germanic *hursa- (cognates: Old Norse hross, Old Frisian hors, Middle
Dutch ors, Dutch ros, Old High German hros, German Ro&szlig; horse), of unknown origin, connected by
some with PIE root *kurs-, source of Latin currere to run (see current (adj.)).    The usual Indo-
European word is represented by Old English eoh, from PIE *ekwo- horse (see equine). In many other
languages, as in English, this root has been lost in favor of synonyms, probably via superstitious
taboo on uttering the name of an animal so important in Indo-European religion.    Used since at
least late 14c. of various devices or appliances which suggest a horse (as in sawhorse). To ride a
horse that was foaled of an acorn (1670s) was through early 19c. a way to say be hanged from the
gallows. Slang for heroin is first attested 1950. Horse latitudes first attested 1777, the name of
unknown origin, despite much speculation. Dead horse as a figure for something that has ceased to be
useful is attested from 1630s.    HORSEGODMOTHER, a large masculine wench; one whom it is difficult
to rank among the purest and gentlest portion of the community. [John Trotter Brockett, A Glossary
of North Country Words, 1829]   The horse's mouth as a source of reliable information is from 1921,
perhaps originally of racetrack tips, from the fact that a horse's age can be determined accurately
by looking at its teeth. To swap horses while crossing the river (a bad idea) is from the American
Civil War and appears to have been originally one of Abe Lincoln's stories. Horse and buggy meaning
old-fashioned is recorded from 1926 slang, originally in reference to a young lady out of date, with
long hair. The proverbial gift horse was earlier given horse:    No man ought to looke a geuen hors
in the mouth. [Heywood, 1546]    The modern form perhaps traces to Butler's Hudibras (1663), where
the tight iambic tetrameter required a shorter phrase:    He ne'er consider'd it, as loth  To look a
Gift-horse in the mouth.


