galleywest

as a destination where you knock something or someone, American English slang, by 1835; considered
by OED to be a corruption of western England dialectal collyweston, name of a village in
Northamptonshire (Colin's West Farmstead) that somehow came to signify askew, not right. But Farmer
calls it an Americanism and goes in for it as an indefinite superlative, and DAS also does not
consider the obscure English term to be the source. Early nautical references suggest it might
simply be what it looks like: a sailor's generic way of indicating something has been thrown pretty
far by impact.     Matter? why d--n my old shoes, Captain Williams, here is one of that bloody Don
Dego's shot gone right through the galley-door, and through the side of the big copper, and knocked
all the beef and hot water galley-west. ... [N.Ames, Old Sailor's Yarns, New York, 1835]


galley (n.)

c.1300, from Old French galie, from Medieval Latin galea or Catalan galea, from Late Greek galea, of
unknown origin. The word has made its way into most Western European languages. Originally low,
flat-built seagoing vessel of one deck, once common in the Mediterranean; meaning cooking range on a
ship dates from 1750. The printing sense is from 1650s, from French gal&eacute;e in the same sense,
in reference to the shape of the oblong tray that holds the type. As a short form of galley-proof it
is attested from 1890.


galleon (n.)

large ship, 1520s, from Old French galion little ship (13c.), from Spanish gale&oacute;n galleon,
armed merchant ship, from Byzantine Greek galea galley (see galley) + augmentative suffix -on. In
English use, especially of Spanish ships involved in the American trade.


galoot (n.)

awkward or boorish man, 1812, nautical, raw recruit, green hand, apparently originally a sailor's
contemptuous word for soldiers or marines, of uncertain origin. Dictionary of American Slang
proposes galut, Sierra Leone creole form of Spanish galeoto galley slave.


loggia (n.)

roofed galley used as an open-air room, 1742, from Italian loggia, from French loge (see lodge
(n.)).


caboose (n.)

1747, ship's cookhouse, from Middle Dutch kambuis ship's galley, from Low German kabhuse wooden
cabin on ship's deck; probably a compound whose elements correspond to English cabin and house (n.).
Railroading sense is by 1859.


slushy (adj.)

1791, covered with slush, from slush + -y (2). As slang for ship's cook, 1859, from slush (n.)
refuse from a cook's galley (1756). Related: Slushiness.


remora (n.)

1560s, from Latin remora sucking fish, literally delay, hindrance, from re- back (see re-) + mora
delay (see moratorium); so called because the fish were believed by the ancients to retard a vessel
to which they attached themselves. Hence, in 17c.-18c., an obstacle, an impediment (the first sense
of the word in Johnson's dictionary). In Greek, ekheneis, from ekhein to hold + naus (dative nei)
ship. Pliny writes that Antony's galley was delayed by one at Actium. Sometimes called in English
stayship or stopship.


