gall (n.1)

bile, Old English galla (Anglian), gealla (West Saxon) gall, bile, from Proto-Germanic *gallon- bile
(cognates: Old Norse gall, Old Saxon, Old High German galla, German Galle), from PIE root *ghel- (2)
to shine, with derivatives referring to bright materials and gold, and bile or gall (see glass).
Informal sense of impudence, boldness first recorded American English 1882; but meaning embittered
spirit, rancor is from c.1200, from the medieval theory of humors. Gall bladder recorded from 1670s.


gall (n.2)

sore spot on a horse, Old English gealla painful swelling, from Latin galla gall, lump on plant,
originally oak apple, of uncertain origin. Perhaps from or influenced by gall (1) on notion of
poison-sore. German galle, Dutch gal also are from Latin.


gall (v.)

to make sore by chafing, mid-15c., from gall (n.2). Earlier to have sores, be sore (early 14c.).
Figurative sense of harass, irritate is from 1570s. Related: Galled; galling.


galling (adj.)

irritating, offensive, 1580s, figurative use of present participle of gall (v.).


gallstone (n.)

1758, from gall (n.1) + stone (n.).


cholecyst (n.)

gall bladder, 1846, from medical Latin cholecystis, incorrectly formed from Greek khole gall (see
cholera) + kystis bladder, cyst (see cyst). Related: Cholecystectomy.


felon (n.)

late 13c., from Old French felon evil-doer, scoundrel, traitor, rebel, the Devil (9c.), from
Medieval Latin fellonem (nominative fello) evil-doer, of uncertain origin, perhaps from Frankish
*fillo, *filljo person who whips or beats, scourger (source of Old High German fillen to whip); or
from Latin fel gall, poison, on the notion of one full of bitterness.    Another theory (advanced by
Professor R. Atkinson of Dublin) traces it to Latin fellare to suck (see fecund), which had an
obscene secondary meaning in classical Latin (well-known to readers of Martial and Catullus), which
would make a felon etymologically a cock-sucker. OED inclines toward the gall explanation, but finds
Atkinson's most plausible of the others.


Galbraith

surname, from Old Gaelic Gall-Bhreathnach stranger-Briton, a name given to Britons settled among
Gaels.


cocco-

word-forming element meaning berry, seed, or something shaped like them, from Latinized form of
Greek kokkos a grain, a seed, especially kermes-berry, gall of the kermes oak (actually an insect),
which yields scarlet dye, of unknown origin, perhaps from a non-Greek source.


chutzpah (n.)

also hutzpah, 1892, from Yiddish khutspe impudence, gall. from Hebrew hutspah. The classic
definition is that given by Leo Rosten: that quality enshrined in a man who, having killed his
mother and father, throws himself on the mercy of the court because he is an orphan.


phrenology (n.)

1815, literally mental science, from phreno- + -logy study of. Applied to the theory of mental
faculties originated by Gall and Spurzheim that led to the 1840s mania for reading personality clues
in the shape of one's skull and the bumps of the head. Related: Phrenological; phrenologist.


cystic (adj.)

1630s, pertaining to the gall bladder, from French cystique (16c.), from Modern Latin cysticus, from
Greek kystis bladder, pouch. Meaning pertaining to a cyst is from 1713. Cystic fibrosis coined in
1938.


cholera (n.)

late 14c., bile, melancholy (originally the same as choler), from Middle French cholera or directly
from Late Latin cholera, from Greek kholera a type of disease characterized by diarrhea, supposedly
caused by choler (Celsus), from khole gall, bile, from khloazein to be green, from khloros (see
Chloe). But another sense of khole was drainpipe, gutter.    Revived 1560s in classical sense as a
name for a severe digestive disorder (rarely fatal to adults); and 1704 (especially as cholera
morbus), for a highly lethal disease endemic in India, periodically breaking out in global
epidemics, especially that reaching Britain and America in the early 1830s.


Chloe

fem. proper name, Latin, from Greek Khloe, literally young green shoot; related to khloros greenish-
yellow, from PIE *ghlo- variant of root *ghel- (2) to shine, with derivatives referring to bright
materials and gold, and bile or gall (such as Latin helvus yellowish, bay, Gallo-Latin gilvus light
bay; Lithuanian geltonas yellow; Old Church Slavonic zlutu, Polish &#380;&oacute;&#322;ty, Russian
zeltyj yellow; Sanskrit harih yellow, tawny yellow, hiranyam gold; Avestan zari yellow; Old English
geolu, geolwe, Modern English yellow, German gelb yellow) and green (such as Latin galbus greenish-
yellow; Greek khloros greenish-yellow color, kholos bile; Lithuanian zalias green, zelvas greenish;
Old Church Slavonic zelenu, Polish zielony, Russian zelenyj green; Old Irish glass, Welsh and Breton
glas green, also gray, blue).    Buck says the interchange of words for yellow and green is perhaps
because they were applied to vegetation like grass, cereals, etc., which changed from green to
yellow. It is possible that this whole group of yellow-green words is related to PIE root *ghlei- to
shine, glitter, glow, be warm (see gleam (n.)).


