gaucherie (n.)

1798, from French gaucherie, from gauche (see gauche).


gauche (adj.)

awkward, tactless, 1751 (Chesterfield), from French gauche left (15c., replacing Old French senestre
in that sense), originally awkward, awry, from Middle French gauchir turn aside, swerve, from Proto-
Germanic *wankjan (cognates: Old High German wankon, Old Norse vakka to stagger, totter), from PIE
*weng- to bend, curve (see wink (v.)).


left (adj.)

c.1200, from Kentish and northern English form of Old English lyft- weak, foolish (compare lyft-adl
lameness, paralysis, East Frisian luf, Dutch dialectal loof weak, worthless). It emerged 13c. as
opposite of right (the left being usually the weaker hand), a derived sense also found in cognate
Middle Dutch and Low German luchter, luft. But German link, Dutch linker left are from Old High
German slinc and Middle Dutch slink left, related to Old English slincan crawl, Swedish linka limp,
slinka dangle.    Replaced Old English winestra, literally friendlier, a euphemism used
superstitiously to avoid invoking the unlucky forces connected with the left side (see sinister).
The Kentish word itself may have been originally a taboo replacement, if instead it represents PIE
root *laiwo-, meaning considered conspicuous (represented in Greek laios, Latin laevus, and Russian
levyi). Greek also uses a euphemism for left, aristeros the better one (compare also Avestan
vairyastara- to the left, from vairya- desirable). But Lithuanian kairys left and Lettish kreilis
left hand derive from a root that yields words for twisted, crooked.    As an adverb from early 14c.
As a noun from c.1200. Political sense arose from members of a legislative body assigned to the left
side of a chamber, first attested in English 1837 (by Carlyle, in reference to the French
Revolution), probably a loan-translation of French la gauche (1791), said to have originated during
the seating of the French National Assembly in 1789 in which the nobility took the seats on the
President's right and left the Third Estate to sit on the left. Became general in U.S. and British
political speech c.1900.    Used since at least c.1600 in various senses of irregular, illicit;
earlier proverbial sense was opposite of what is expressed (mid-15c.). Phrase out in left field out
of touch with pertinent realities is attested from 1944, from the baseball fielding position that
tends to be far removed from the play. To have two left feet be clumsy is attested by 1902. The Left
Bank of Paris (left bank of the River Seine, as you face downstream) has been associated with
intellectual and artistic culture since at least 1893.


