gaudy (adj.)

showy, tastelessly rich, 1580s, probably ultimately from Middle English gaudi large, ornamental bead
in a rosary (early 14c.); but there is a parallel sense of gaudy as full of trickery (1520s), from
Middle English gaud deception, trick, from gaudi a jest, trick, possibly from Anglo-French gaudir be
merry, scoff, from Latin gaudere rejoice (see joy).    Alternative etymology of the adjective is
from Middle English gaudegrene yellowish-green (early 14c.), originally green dye obtained from a
plant formerly known as weld, from a Germanic source (see weld (n.)), which became gaude in Old
French. The English term supposedly shifted sense from weld-dye to bright. As a noun, feast,
festival 1650s, from gaudy day day of rejoicing (1560s).


gaud (n.)

late 14c., jest, joke, prank, trick; also fraud, deception, trick, artifice. Also large, ornamental
bead in a rosary (mid-14c.); a bauble, trinket, plaything (mid-15c.). In some senses, from gaudy
(n.) (see gaudy). In some, from Latin gaudium joy, gaude rejoice thou (in hymns), or from Old French
gaudie, noun of action from gaudir. As a verb, to furnish with gauds, from late 14c. Related:
Gauded; gauding.


Guido

masc. proper name, Italian, literally leader, of Germanic origin (see guide (v.)). As a type of
gaudy machoism often associated with Italian-Americans, 1980s, teen slang, from the name of
character in Hollywood film Risky Business (1983).


kicky (adj.)

1790, clever; showy, gaudy, from kick (n.) + -y (2). Meaning full of thrills, providing kicks is
from 1968.


gaudiness (n.)

c.1600, from gaudy + -ness.


gaudily (adv.)

1610s, from gaudy + -ly (2).


kitsch (n.)

1926, from German kitsch, literally gaudy, trash, from dialectal kitschen to smear.    What we
English people call ugliness in German art is simply the furious reaction against what Germans call
s&uuml;sses Kitsch, the art of the picture postcard, and of what corresponds to the royalty ballad.
It has for years been their constant reproach against us that England is the great country of
Kitsch. Many years ago a German who loved England only too well said to me, 'I like your English
word plain; it is a word for which we have no equivalent in German, because all German women are
plain.' He might well have balanced it by saying that English has no equivalent for the word Kitsch.
[Edward J. Dent, The Music of Arnold Sch&ouml;nberg, The Living Age, July 9, 1921]


purple (n., adj.)

Old English purpul, dissimilation (first recorded in Northumbrian, in Lindisfarne gospel) of purpure
purple dye, a purple garment, purpuren (adj.) purple, a borrowing by 9c. from Latin purpura purple
color, purple-dyed cloak, purple dye, also shellfish from which purple was made, and splendid attire
generally, from Greek porphyra purple dye, purple (see porphyry), of uncertain origin, perhaps
Semitic, originally the name for the shellfish (murex) from which it was obtained. Purpur continued
as a parallel form until 15c., and through 19c. in heraldry. As a color name, attested from early
15c. Tyrian purple, produced around Tyre, was prized as dye for royal garments.    Also the color of
mourning or penitence (especially in royalty or clergy). Rhetorical for splendid, gaudy (of prose)
from 1590s. Purple Heart, U.S. decoration for service members wounded in combat, instituted 1932;
originally a cloth decoration begun by George Washington in 1782. Hendrix' Purple Haze (1967) is
slang for LSD.


butterfly (n.)

Old English buttorfleoge, evidently butter (n.) + fly (n.), but of obscure signification. Perhaps
based on the old notion that the insects (or witches disguised as butterflies) consume butter or
milk that is left uncovered. Or, less creatively, simply because the pale yellow color of many
species' wings suggests the color of butter. Another theory connects it to the color of the insect's
excrement, based on Dutch cognate boterschijte. An overview of words for butterfly in various
languages can be found here. Also see papillon.    Applied to persons from c.1600, originally in
reference to vain and gaudy attire; by 1806 in reference to transformation from early lowly state;
in reference to flitting tendencies by 1873. The swimming stroke so called from 1936. Butterflies
light stomach spasms caused by anxiety is from 1908.    The butterfly effect is a deceptively simple
insight extracted from a complex modern field. As a low-profile assistant professor in MIT's
department of meteorology in 1961, [Edward] Lorenz created an early computer program to simulate
weather. One day he changed one of a dozen numbers representing atmospheric conditions, from .506127
to .506. That tiny alteration utterly transformed his long-term forecast, a point Lorenz amplified
in his 1972 paper, Predictability: Does the Flap of a Butterfly's Wings in Brazil Set Off a Tornado
in Texas? [Peter Dizikes, The Meaning of the Butterfly, The Boston Globe, June 8, 2008]


