gaunt (adj.)

mid-15c. (as a surname from mid-13c.), from Middle French gant, of uncertain origin; perhaps from a
Scandinavian source (compare Old Norse gand a thin stick, also a tall thin man) and somehow
connected with the root of gander. Connection also has been suggested to Old French jaunet yellowish
[Middle English Dictionary].


hagged (adj.)

c.1700, from hag, by influence of haggard. Originally bewitched, also lean, gaunt, as bewitched
persons and animals were believed to become.


raw-boned (adj.)

 having little flesh on the bones, gaunt, from raw (adj.) + bone (n.).


Lancaster

Loncastre (1086) Roman Fort on the River Lune, a Celtic river name probably meaning healthy, pure.
The Lancastrians in the War of the Roses took their name from their descent from John of Gaunt, Duke
of Lancaster.


scraggy (adj.)

early 13c., rough, jagged (figurative); 1570s, of landscape, rough, rugged, stumpy; 1610s, of
persons, gaunt and wasted, lean, thin, bony; see scrag + -y (2), and compare scroggy, scraggly. In
Scottish, scranky. Related: Scragginess.


spare (adj.)

kept in reserve, not used, provided or held for extra need, late 14c., from or from the same root as
spare (v.). Old English had sp&#230;r sparing, frugal. Also compare Old Norse sparr (to be) spared.
In reference to time, from mid-15c.; sense of lacking in substance; lean, gaunt; flimsy, thin; poor,
is recorded from 1540s. Spare part is attested from 1888. Spare tire is from 1894 of bicycles; 1903
of automobiles; 1961 of waistlines.


scarecrow (n.)

1550s, from scare (v.) + crow (n.). Earliest reference is to a person employed to scare birds.
Meaning device of straw and cloth in grotesque resemblance of a man, set up in a grain field or
garden to frighten crows, is implied by 1580s; hence gaunt, ridiculous person (1590s). The older
name for such a thing was shewel. Shoy-hoy apparently is another old word for a straw-stuffed
scarecrow (Cobbett began using it as a political insult in 1819 and others picked it up; OED defines
it as one who scares away birds from a sown field, and says it is imitative of their cry).


haggard (adj.)

1560s, wild, unruly (originally in reference to hawks), from Middle French haggard, probably from
Old French faulcon hagard wild falcon, literally falcon of the woods, from Middle High German hag
hedge, copse, wood, from Proto-Germanic *hagon-, from PIE root *kagh- to catch, seize; also
wickerwork, fence (see hedge). OED, however, finds this whole derivation very doubtful. Sense
perhaps reinforced by Low German hager gaunt, haggard. Sense of with a haunted expression first
recorded 1690s, that of careworn first recorded 1853. Sense influenced by association with hag.
Related: Haggardly; haggardness.


cracker (n.2)

Southern U.S. derogatory term for poor, white trash (1766), probably an agent noun from crack (v.)
in the sense to boast (as in not what it's cracked up to be). Compare Latin crepare to rattle,
crack, creak, with a secondary figurative sense of boast of, prattle, make ado about.I should
explain to your Lordship what is meant by crackers; a name they have got from being great boasters;
they are a lawless set of rascalls on the frontiers of Virginia, Maryland, the Carolinas and
Georgia, who often change their places of abode. [1766, G. Cochrane]  But DARE compares corn-cracker
poor white farmer (1835, U.S. Midwest colloquial). Especially of Georgians by 1808, though often
extended to residents of northern Florida. Another name in mid-19c. use was sand-hiller poor white
in Georgia or South Carolina.    Not very essentially different is the condition of a class of
people living in the pine-barrens nearest the coast [of South Carolina], as described to me by a
rice-planter. They seldom have any meat, he said, except they steal hogs, which belong to the
planters, or their negroes, and their chief diet is rice and milk. They are small, gaunt, and
cadaverous, and their skin is just the color of the sand-hills they live on. They are quite
incapable of applying themselves steadily to any labor, and their habits are very much like those of
the old Indians. [Frederick Law Olmsted, A Journey in the Seaboard Slave States, 1856]


