gazette (v.)

â&euro;&oelig;to announce in the Gazette,â&euro;? 1670s; see gazette. The three official journals
were published in Britain from c.1665, twice weekly, and contained lists of appointments,
promotions, public notices, etc. Hence, â&euro;&oelig;to be gazetted;â&euro;? to be named to a
command, etc.


gazette (n.)

newspaper, c.1600, from French gazette (16c.), from Italian gazzetta, Venetian dialectal gazeta
newspaper, also the name of a small copper coin, literally little magpie, from gazza; applied to the
monthly newspaper (gazeta de la novit&agrave;) published in Venice by the government, either from
its price or its association with the bird (typical of false chatter), or both.  First used in
English 1665 for the paper issued at Oxford, whither the court had fled from the plague.    The coin
may have been so called for its marking; Gamillscheg writes the word is from French gai (see jay).
The general story of the origin of the word is broadly accepted, but there are many variations in
the details:    We are indebted to the Italians for the idea of newspapers. The title of their
gazettas was, perhaps, derived from gazzera, a magpie or chatterer; or, more probably, from a
farthing coin, peculiar to the city of Venice, called gazetta, which was the connom price of the
newspapers. Another etymologist is for deriving it from the Latin gaza, which would colloquially
lengthen into gazetta, and signify a little treasury of news. The Spanish derive it from the Latin
gaza, and likewise their gazatero, and our gazetteer, for a writer of the gazette and, what is
peculiar to themselves, gazetista, for a lover of the gazette. [Isaac Disraeli, Curiosities of
Literature, 1835]   <hr />  <b>Gazzetta</b> It., Sp. gazeta, Fr. E. gazette; prop. the name of a
Venetian coin (from gaza), so in Old English. Others derive gazette from gazza a magpie, which, it
is alleged, was the emblem figured on the paper; but it does not appear on any of the oldest
Venetian specimens preserved at Florence. The first newspapers appeared at Venice about the middle
of the 16th century during the war with Soliman II, in the form of a written sheet, for the
privilege of reading which a gazzetta (= a crazia) was paid. Hence the name was transferred to the
news-sheet. [T.C. Donkin, Etymological Dictionary of the Romance Languages (based on Diez), 1864]
<hr />   GAZETTE. A paper of public intelligence and news of divers countries, first printed at
Venice, about the year 1620, and so called (some say) because una gazetta, a small piece of Venetian
coin, was given to buy or read it. Others derive the name from gazza, Italian for magpie,  i.e.
chatterer.--Trusler. A gazette was printed in France in 1631; and one in Germany in 1715. [Haydn's
Dictionary of Dates, 1857]


gazetteer

1610s, â&euro;&oelig;journalist,â&euro;? from gazette (n.) + -eer. Meaning
â&euro;&oelig;geographical dictionaryâ&euro;? is from 1704, from Laurence Eachard's 1693
geographical handbook for journalists, The Gazetteer's, or Newsman's, Interpreter, second edition
simply titled The Gazetteer.


Santa Claus (n.)

1773 (as St. A Claus, in New York Gazette), American English, from dialectal Dutch Sante Klaas, from
Middle Dutch Sinter Niklaas Saint Nicholas, bishop of Asia Minor who became a patron saint for
children. Now a worldwide phenomenon (Japanese santakurosu).


joker (n.)

1729, jester, merry fellow, agent noun from joke (v.). In generic slang use for any man, fellow,
chap by 1811, which probably is the source of the meaning odd face card in the deck (1868). An 1857
edition of Hoyle's Games lists a card game called Black Joke in which all face cards were called
jokers.  American manufacturers of playing-cards are wont to include a blank card at the top of the
pack; and it is, alas! true that some thrifty person suggested that the card should not be wasted.
This was the origin of the joker. [St. James's Gazette, 1894]


newspaper (n.)

1660s, though the thing itself is older (see gazette); from news (n.) + paper (n.).    [T]he
newspaper that drops on your doorstep is a partial, hasty, incomplete, inevitably somewhat flawed
and inaccurate rendering of some of the things we have heard about in the past twenty-four hours --
distorted, despite our best efforts to eliminate gross bias, by the very process of compression that
makes it possible for you to lift it from the doorstep and read it in about an hour. If we labeled
the product accurately, then we could immediately add: But it's the best we could do under the
circumstances, and we will be back tomorrow with a corrected and updated version. [David Broder,
Pulitzer Prize acceptance speech, 1973]


Pullman (n.)

sleeping car on a passenger train, 1867, Pullman car, in recognition of U.S. inventor George M.
Pullman (1831-1897) of Chicago, who designed a railroad car with folding berths.    The Pullman
Sleeping Car.--The Western World. This splendid specimen of car architecture, being one of a number
of sleeping-cars to be completed   for the Michigan Central road, by Mr. Pullman, has created a
great sensation among railway circles east. ... The car itself is admitted by all who have seen it
to be, in the matter of sleeping and cooking accessories, and superb finish, the ne plus ultra of
perfection. Nothing before has been seen to equal, much less surpass it. [Western Railroad Gazette,
Chicago, quoted in Appleton's Illustrated Railway and Steam Navigation Guide, New York, June, 1867]


photosynthesis (n.)

1898, loan-translation of German Photosynthese, from photo- light (see photo-) + synthese synthesis
(see synthesis). Another early word for it was photosyntax.    [T]he body of the work has been
rendered into English with fidelity, the only change of moment being the substitution of the word
photosynthesis for that of assimilation. This change follows from a suggestion by Dr. Barnes, made a
year ago before the American Association at Madison, who clearly pointed out the need of a
distinctive term for the synthetical process in plants, brought about by protoplasm in the presence
of chlorophyll and light. He proposed the word photosyntax, which met with favor. In the discussion
Professor MacMillan suggested the word photosynthesis, as etymologically more satisfactory and
accurate, a claim which Dr. Barnes showed could not be maintained. The suggestion of Dr. Barnes not
only received tacit acceptance by the botanists of the association, but was practically approved by
the Madison Congress in the course of a discussion upon this point. [The Botanical Gazette, vol.
XIX, 1894]


case (n.2)

receptacle, early 14c., from Anglo-French and Old North French casse (Old French chasse case,
reliquary; Modern French ch&acirc;sse), from Latin capsa box, repository (especially for books),
from capere to take, hold (see capable).    Meaning outer protective covering is from late 14c. Also
used from 1660s with a sense frame (as in staircase, casement). Artillery sense is from 1660s, from
case-shot small projectiles put in cases (1620s). Its application in the printing trade (first
recorded 1580s) to the two trays where compositors keep their types in separate compartments for
easy access led to upper-case letter for a capital (1862) and lower-case for small letters.    The
cases, or receptacles, for the type, which are always in pairs, and termed the 'upper' and the
'lower,' are formed of two oblong wooden frames, divided into compartments or boxes of different
dimensions, the upper case containing ninety-eight and the lower fifty-four. In the upper case are
placed the capital, small capital, and accented letters, also figures, signs for reference to notes
&amp;c.; in the lower case the ordinary running letter, points for punctuation, spaces for
separating the words, and quadrats for filling up the short lines. [The Literary Gazette, Jan. 29,
1859]


rabbit (n.)

late 14c., young of the coney, from Walloon rob&egrave;te or a similar French dialect word,
diminutive of Flemish or Middle Dutch robbe rabbit, of unknown origin. A Germanic noun with a French
suffix [Liberman]. The adult was a coney (q.v.) until 18c.Zoologically speaking, there are no native
rabbits in the United States; they are all hares. But the early colonists, for some unknown reason,
dropped the word hare out of their vocabulary, and it is rarely heard in American speech to this
day. When it appears it is almost always applied to the so-called Belgian hare, which, curiously
enough, is not a hare at all, but a true rabbit. [Mencken, The American Language]Rabbit punch chop
on the back of the neck so called from resemblance to a gamekeeper's method of dispatching an
injured rabbit. Pulling rabbits from a hat as a conjurer's trick recorded by 1843. Rabbit's foot
good luck charm first attested 1879, in U.S. Southern black culture. Earlier references are to its
use as a tool to apply cosmetic powders.    [N]ear one of them was the dressing-room of the
principal danseuse of the establishment, who was at the time of the rising of the curtain consulting
a mirror in regard to the effect produced by the application of a rouge-laden rabbit's foot to her
cheeks, and whose toilet we must remark, passim, was not entirely completed. [New York Musical
Review and Gazette, Nov. 29, 1856]   Rabbit ears dipole television antenna is from 1950. Grose's
1785 Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue has RABBIT CATCHER. A midwife.


spirit (n.)

mid-13c., animating or vital principle in man and animals, from Anglo-French spirit, Old French
espirit spirit, soul (12c., Modern French esprit) and directly from Latin spiritus a breathing
(respiration, and of the wind), breath; breath of a god, hence inspiration; breath of life, hence
life; also disposition, character; high spirit, vigor, courage; pride, arrogance, related to spirare
to breathe, from PIE *(s)peis- to blow (cognates: Old Church Slavonic pisto to play on the flute).
Meaning supernatural immaterial creature; angel, demon; an apparition, invisible corporeal being of
an airy nature is attested from mid-14c.; from late 14c. as a ghost (see ghost (n.)). From c.1500 as
a nature, character; sense of essential principle of something (in a non-theological context, as in
Spirit of St. Louis) is attested from 1680s, common after 1800; Spirit of '76 in reference to the
qualities that sparked and sustained the American Revolution is attested by 1797 in William
Cobbett's Porcupine's Gazette and Daily Advertiser.    From late 14c. in alchemy as volatile
substance; distillate; from c.1500 as substance capable of uniting the fixed and the volatile
elements of the philosopher's stone. Hence spirits volatile substance; sense narrowed to strong
alcoholic liquor by 1670s. This also is the sense in spirit level (1768). Also from mid-14c. as
character, disposition; way of thinking and feeling, state of mind; source of a human desire; in
Middle English freedom of spirit meant freedom of choice. From late 14c. as divine substance, divine
mind, God; also Christ or His divine nature; the Holy Ghost; divine power; also, extension of divine
power to man; inspiration, a charismatic state; charismatic power, especially of prophecy. Also
essential nature, essential quality. From 1580s in metaphoric sense animation, vitality.
According to Barnhart and OED, originally in English mainly from passages in Vulgate, where the
Latin word translates Greek pneuma and Hebrew ruah. Distinction between soul and spirit (as seat of
emotions) became current in Christian terminology (such as Greek psykhe vs. pneuma, Latin anima vs.
spiritus) but is without significance for earlier periods [Buck]. Latin spiritus, usually in
classical Latin breath, replaces animus in the sense spirit in the imperial period and appears in
Christian writings as the usual equivalent of Greek pneuma. Spirit-rapping is from 1852.


