gear (adj.)

stylish, excellent, British slang, 1951 (popularized c.1963 by the Beatles), said to be from earlier
that's the gear, an expression of approval (1925), from gear (n.).


gear (v.)

c.1200, to equip oneself for fighting; to dress, probably from gear (n.) or from the verb in Old
Norse. Mechanical meaning put (machinery) in gear is from 1851. Related: Geared; gearing.


gear (n.)

c.1200, fighting equipment, armor and weapons, probably from Old Norse g&#248;rvi (plural
g&#248;rvar) apparel, gear, related to g&#246;rr, g&#248;rr, gerr skilled, accomplished; ready,
willing, and to g&#248;ra, g&#248;rva to make, construct, build; set in order, prepare, a very
frequent verb in Old Norse, used in a wide range of situations from writing a book to dressing meat.
This is from Proto-Germanic *garwjan to make, prepare, equip (cognates: Old English gearwe clothing,
equipment, ornament, which may be the source of some uses; Old Saxon garwei; Dutch gaar done,
dressed; Old High German garo ready, prepared, complete, garawi clothing, dress, garawen to make
ready; German gerben to tan).    From early 14c. as wearing apparel, clothes, dress; also harness of
a draught animal; equipment of a riding horse. From late 14c. as equipment generally; tools,
utensils, especially the necessary equipment for a certain activity, as the rigging of a sailing
ship. Meaning toothed wheel in machinery first attested 1520s; specific mechanical sense of parts by
which a motor communicates motion is from 1814; specifically of a vehicle (bicycle, automobile,
etc.) by 1888. Slang for male sex organs from 1670s.


appurtenances (n.)

apparatus, gear, late 14c.; see appurtenance.


shifter (n.)

1550s, one who shifts in any way; agent noun from shift (v.). As a mechanical contrivance, from
1869; specifically of the gear-changing mechanism in a motor-vehicle, from 1910.


head shop (n.)

emporium for stoner gear, by 1969 (noted in 1966 as the name of a specific shop in New York City
selling psychedelic stuff), from head (n.) in the drug sense.


first (n.)

1560s, that which is first, from first (adj.). Meaning first day of the month is by 1590s. In music,
instrument or voice that takes the highest or chief part of its class, 1774. From 1909 as the name
of the lowest gear in an engine. In British schools colloquial use, highest rank in an examination,
1850.


undercarriage (n.)

1794, from under + carriage (n.). Meaning landing gear of an aircraft is recorded from 1911.


Caligula

cognomen of the third Roman emperor (12 C.E.-41 C.E.), born Gaius Caesar. The nickname is Latin,
literally little boot, given when he joined his father on military campaigns when still a toddler,
in full, child-sized military gear; diminutive of caliga heavy military shoe, which is of unknown
origin.


neutral (n.)

mid-15c., one who remains neutral, from Latin neutralis of neuter gender, (see neutral (adj.)).
Meaning disengaged position in gear mechanisms is from 1912.


overdrive (n.)

speed-increasing gear in an automobile, 1929, from over- + drive (n.).


derailleur (n.)

type of bicycle gear mechanism, 1930, from French d&eacute;railleur (1927), from d&eacute;railler to
go off the rails (see derail).


reverse (n.)

mid-14c., opposite or contrary (of something), from reverse (adj.) or from Old French Related:
revers the opposite, reverse. Meaning a defeat, a change of fortune is from 1520s; meaning back side
of a coin is from 1620s. Of gear-shifts in motor cars, from 1875. As a type of sports play
(originally rugby) it is recorded from 1921.


tack (n.3)

food in general, but in dialect especially bad food, and especially among sailors food of a bread
kind, 1833, perhaps a shortening and special use of tackle (n.) in the sense of gear. But compare
tack taste (c.1600), perhaps a variant of tact.


yore (adv.)

Old English geara of yore, formerly, in former times, literally of years, originally adverbial
genitive plural of gear (see year), and used without of. As a noun from mid-14c.


Smokey Bear (n.)

state policeman, 1974, from truckers' slang, in reference to the wide-brim style of hat worn by
state troopers (the hats so called by 1969). Ultimately the reference is to a popular illustrated
character of that name, dressed in forest ranger gear (including a hat like those later worn by
state troopers). He was introduced in 1944 by the U.S. Forest Service and the Wartime Advertising
Council in a campaign to lower the number of forest fires in the West.


heriot (n.)

Old English here-geatwe (plural) military equipment, army-gear, from here army (see harry). An
Anglo-Saxon service of weapons, loaned by the lord to his retainer and repayable to him upon the
retainer's death; transferred by 13c. to a feudal due upon the death of a tenant, payable to his
lord in beasts.


armoire (n.)

1570s, from French armoire, from Old French armarie (12c.) cupboard, bookcase, reliquary, from Latin
armarium closet, chest, place for implements or tools, from arma gear, tools, arms (see arm (n.2)).
Before being reborrowed from French, the word earlier was in English as ambry (late 14c.).


boatswain (n.)

mid-15c., from late Old English batswegen, from bat boat (see boat (n.)) + Old Norse sveinn boy (see
swain). Phonetic spelling bo'sun/bosun is attested from 1840.    BOATSWAIN. The warrant officer who
in the old Navy was responsible for all the gear that set the ship in motion and all the tackle that
kept her at rest. [Sir Geoffrey Callender, Sea Passages, 1943]


stern (n.)

early 13c., hind part of a ship; steering gear of a ship, probably from a Scandinavian source, such
as Old Norse stjorn a steering, related to or derived from styra to guide (see steer (v.)). Or the
word may come from Old Frisian stiarne rudder, which also is related to steer (v.). Stern-wheeler as
a type of steam-boat is from 1855, American English.


armor (n.)

c.1300, mail, defensive covering worn in combat, also means of protection, from Old French armeure
weapons, armor (12c.), from Latin armatura arms, equipment, from arma arms, gear (see arm (n.2)).
Figurative use from mid-14c.    Meaning military equipment generally, especially siege engines, is
late 14c. The word might have died with jousting if not for late 19c. transference to metal-shielded
machinery beginning with U.S. Civil War ironclads (first attested in this sense in an 1855 report
from the U.S. Congressional Committee on Naval Affairs).


pinion (n.2)

small wheel with teeth to gear with a larger one (as in rack and pinion), 1650s, from French pignon
pinion (16c.), literally gable, from Old French pignon pointed gable, summit, from Vulgar Latin
*pinnionem, augmentative of Latin pinna battlement, pinnacle (see pin (n.)).


garb (n.)

fashion of dress, 1620s, from earlier sense person's outward demeanor (c.1600), originally elegance,
stylishness (1590s), from Middle French garbe graceful outline, gracefulness, comeliness (Modern
French galbe) or directly from Italian garbo grace, elegance, pleasing manners,  which is from Old
High German gar(a)wi dress, equipment, preparation, or some other Germanic source, from Proto-
Germanic *garwi- equipment; adornment (see gear (n.)).


yare (adj.)

ready, prepared, Old English gearo ready, prepared, equipped, from gearwian to equip, prepare
(related to gearwe clothing, dress) from Proto-Germanic *garwjan to make, prepare, equip, ready,
complete (see gear (n.)). Cognate with German gar, Dutch gaar. Related: Yarely.


Pentateuch

first five books of the Bible, c.1400, from Late Latin pentateuchus (Tertullian, c.207), from Greek
pentateukhos (c.160), originally an adjective (abstracted from phrase pentateukhos biblos), from
pente five (see five) + teukhos implement, vessel, gear (in Late Greek book, via notion of case for
scrolls), literally anything produced, related to teukhein to make ready, from PIE *dheugh- to
produce something of utility  (see doughty). Glossed in Old English as fifbec.


toy (n.)

c.1300, amorous playing, sport, later piece of fun or entertainment (c.1500), thing of little value,
trifle (1520s), and thing for a child to play with (1580s). Of uncertain origin, and there may be
more than one word here. Compare Middle Dutch toy, Dutch tuig tools, apparatus; stuff, trash, in
speeltuig play-toy, plaything; German Zeug stuff, matter, tools, Spielzeug plaything, toy; Danish
t&oslash;i, Swedish tyg stuff, gear. Applied as an adjective to things of diminutive size,
especially dogs, from 1806. Toy-boy is from 1981.


shroud (n.)

Old English scrud a garment, clothing, dress, from West Germanic *skruthan, from Proto-Germanic
*skrud- cut (cognates: Old Norse skru&eth; shrouds of a ship, tackle, gear; furniture of a church,
Danish, Swedish skrud dress, attire), from PIE *skreu- to cut (see shred (n.)).    Specific meaning
winding-sheet, cloth or sheet for burial, to which the word now is restricted, first attested 1560s.
Sense of strong rope supporting the mast of a ship (mid-15c.) is from the notion of clothing a spar
or mast; one without rigging was said to be naked.


gu-

because g- followed by some vowels in English usually has a soft pronunciation, a silent -u-
sometimes was inserted between the g- and the vowel in Middle English to signal hardness, especially
in words from French; but this was not done with many Scandinavian words where hard g precedes a
vowel (gear (n.), get (v.), give, etc.). Germanic -w- generally became -gu- in words borrowed into
Romance languages, but Old North French preserved the Frankish -w-, and English sometimes borrowed
both forms, hence guarantee/warranty, guard/ward, etc.


tackle (n.)

mid-13c., apparatus, gear, especially the rigging of a ship, from Middle Dutch or Middle Low German
takel the rigging of a ship, perhaps related to Middle Dutch taken grasp, seize (see take (v.)), or
perhaps from root of tack (n.1), which, if not the origin, has influenced the sense. Meaning
apparatus for fishing is recorded from late 14c. Meaning device for grasping and shifting or moving
is from 1530s. Meaning act of tackling in the sporting sense is recorded from 1876 (see tackle
(v.)); as the name of a position in North American football, it is recorded from 1884. Welsh tacl is
fro English.


foul (v.)

Old English fulian to become foul, rot, decay, from ful (see foul (adj.)). Transitive meaning make
foul, pollute is from c.1200. Meaning become entangled (chiefly nautical) is from 1832, probably
from foul (adj.) in the sense obstructed by anything fixed or attached (late 15c.). A term generally
used in contrast to clear, and implies entangled, embarrassed or contrary to: e.g. to foul the helm,
to find steerage impracticable owing to the rudder becoming entangled with rope or other gear [Sir
Geoffrey Callender, Sea Passages, 1943]. Related: Fouled; fouling. Hence also foul anchor (1769),
one with the slack of the cable twisted round the stock or a fluke; noted by 1832 as naval insignia.


year (n.)

Old English gear (West Saxon), ger (Anglian) year, from Proto-Germanic *jeram year (cognates: Old
Saxon, Old High German jar, Old Norse ar, Danish aar, Old Frisian ger, Dutch jaar, German Jahr,
Gothic jer year), from PIE *yer-o-, from root *yer- year, season (cognates: Avestan yare (nominative
singular) year; Greek hora year, season, any part of a year, also any part of a day, hour; Old
Church Slavonic jaru, Bohemian jaro spring; Latin hornus of this year; Old Persian du&#353;iyaram
famine, literally bad year). Probably originally that which makes [a complete cycle], and from
verbal root *ei- meaning to do, make.


helm (n.1)

instrument by which a ship is steered, late 13c., from Old English helma rudder; position of
guidance, control, from Proto-Germanic *halbma- (cognates: Old Norse hjalm, Old High German helmo,
German Helm handle), from PIE *kelp- to hold, grasp (see helve).   <b>Helm</b> - the handle or
tiller, in large ships the wheel, by which the runner is managed; the word is sometimes used with
reference to the whole stearing-gear.   <b>Rudder</b> - that part of the helm which consists of a
broad piece of timber, enters the water, and is governed by means of the wheel or tiller.
<b>Tiller</b> - the bar or lever by means of which the rudder of a ship or boat is turned.  [J.H.A.
G&#252;nther, English Synonyms Explained &amp; Illustrated, Groningen, 1904]


shift (n.1)

c.1300, a movement, a beginning, from shift (v.). This is the word in to make shift make efforts
(mid-15c.). Sense of change, alteration is from 1560s. Sense of means to an end is from 1520s; hence
an expedient. Meaning mechanism for changing gear in a motor vehicle is recorded from 1914.
Typewriter shift key is from 1893; shift-lock is from 1899.    Meaning period of working time
(originally in a mine) is attested from 1809, with older sense relay of horses (1708); perhaps with
sense influenced by a North Sea Germanic cognate word (such as North Frisian skeft division,
stratum, skaft one of successive parties of workmen). Similar double senses of division and relay of
workers exist in Swedish skift, German schicht.


strip (v.)

make bare, early 13c., from Old English -striepan, -strypan to plunder, despoil (as in West Saxon
bestrypan to plunder), from Proto-Germanic *straupijan (cognates: Middle Dutch stropen to strip off,
to ramble about plundering, Old High German stroufen to strip off, plunder, German streifen strip
off, touch upon, to ramble, roam, rove). Meaning to unclothe is recorded from early 13c.
Intransitive sense from late 14c. Of screw threads, from 1839; of gear wheels, from 1873. Meaning
perform a strip-tease is from 1929. Related: Stripped; stripping. Strip poker is attested from 1916,
in a joke in The Technology Monthly and Harvard Engineering Journal:    Say, Bill how, did the game
come out?  It ended in a tie.  Oh, were you playing strip poker?    strip search is from 1947, in
reference to World War II prison camps.


shift (v.)

Old English sciftan, scyftan arrange, place, order, also divide, partition; distribute, allot,
share, from Proto-Germanic *skiftan (cognates: Old Norse skipta to divide, change, separate, Old
Frisian skifta to decide, determine, test, Dutch schiften to divide, turn, German schichten to
classify, Schicht shift). This is said to be related to the source of Old English sceadan divide,
separate, (see shed (v.)).    c.1200 as to dispose; make ready; set in order, control, also
intransitive, take care of oneself. From c.1300 as to go, move, depart; move (someone or something),
transport. Sense of to alter, to change appeared mid-13c. (compare shiftless). Meaning change the
gear setting of an engine is from 1910; to shift gears in the figurative sense is from 1961.
Related: Shifted; shifting.


speed (n.)

Old English sped success, a successful course; prosperity, riches, wealth; luck; opportunity,
advancement, from Proto-Germanic *spodiz (cognates: Old Saxon spod success, Dutch spoed haste,
speed, Old High German spuot success, Old Saxon spodian to cause to succeed, Middle Dutch spoeden,
Old High German spuoten to haste), from PIE *spo-ti-, from root *spe- (1) to thrive, prosper
(cognates: Sanskrit sphayate increases, Latin sperare to hope, Old Church Slavonic spechu endeavor,
Lithuanian speju to have leisure).    Meaning rapidity of movement, quickness, swiftness emerged in
late Old English (at first usually adverbially, in dative plural, as in spedum feran). Meaning rate
of motion or progress (whether fast or slow) is from c.1200. Meaning gear of a machine is attested
from 1866. Meaning methamphetamine, or a related drug, first attested 1967, from its effect on
users.   Speed limit is from 1879 (originally of locomotives); speed-trap is from 1908. Speed bump
is 1975; figurative sense is 1990s. Full speed is recorded from late 14c. Speed reading first
attested 1965. Speedball mix of cocaine and morphine or heroin is recorded from 1909.


park (n.)

mid-13c., enclosed preserve for beasts of the chase, from Old French parc enclosed wood or heath
land used as a game preserve (12c.), probably ultimately from West Germanic *parruk enclosed tract
of land (cognates: Old English pearruc, root of paddock (n.2), Old High German pfarrih fencing
about, enclosure, German pferch fold for sheep, Dutch park).    Internal evidence suggests the West
Germanic word is pre-4c. and originally meant the fencing, not the place enclosed. Found also in
Medieval Latin as parricus enclosure, park (8c.), which likely is the direct source of the Old
French word, as well as Italian parco, Spanish parque, etc. Some claim the Medieval Latin word as
the source of the West Germanic, but the reverse seems more likely. Some later senses in English
represent later borrowings from French. OED discounts notion of a Celtic origin. Welsh parc, Gaelic
pairc are from English.    Meaning enclosed lot in or near a town, for public recreation is first
attested 1660s, originally in reference to London; the sense evolution is via royal parks in the
original, hunting sense being overrun by the growth of London and being opened to the public.
Applied to sporting fields in American English from 1867.    New York's Park Avenue as an adjective
meaning luxurious and fashionable (1956) was preceded in the same sense by London's Park Lane
(1880). As a surname, Parker keeper of a park is attested in English from mid-12c. As a vehicle
transmission gear, park (n.) is attested from 1949.


