genesis (n.)

Old English Genesis, first book of the Pentateuch, from Latin genesis, adopted as title of first
book of Old Testament in Vulgate, from Greek genesis origin, creation, generation, from gignesthai
to be born, related to genos race, birth, descent (see genus). As such, it translated Hebrew
bereshith, literally in the beginning, which was the first word of the text, taken as its title.
Extended sense of origin, creation first recorded in English c.1600.


parthenogenesis (n.)

reproduction without fertilization, 1849, from Greek parthenos virgin, of unknown origin, + genesis
(see genesis). Related: Parthenogenetic.


biogenesis (n.)

also bio-genesis, 1870, theory that living organisms arise only from pre-existing living matter,
coined by English biologist T.H. Huxley (1825-1895) from Greek bios life (see bio-) + genesis
(q.v.). Related: Biogenetic; biogenetical.


psychogenesis (n.)

also psycho-genesis, 1838, origin of the soul or mind, from psycho- + genesis. Related:
Psychogenetic; psychogenetical.


phylogenesis (n.)

1870, coined in German by Haeckel, from phylo- + genesis.


spermatogenesis (n.)

1877, earlier in German, from comb. form of Greek sperma (see sperm) + genesis.


morphogenesis (n.)

1863 in biology; 1958 in geology; from morpho- + genesis. Related: Morphogenetic.


polygenesis (n.)

plurality of origins, 1858, from poly- + genesis. Related: Polygenetic (1851).


oogenesis (n.)

formation of the ovum, 1892, from oo- + genesis.


keeper (n.)

c.1300 (late 13c. as a surname), one who has charge of some person or thing, warden, agent noun from
keep (v.). Sense of one who carries on some business is from mid-15c. Sporting sense (originally
cricket) is from 1744. Meaning something (or someone) worth keeping is attested by 1999. Brother's
keeper is from Genesis iv:9.


angiogenesis (n.)

1896, from angio- + genesis.


pathogenesis (n.)

1876, from patho- + genesis.


-geny

word-forming element meaning genesis, origin, production, from French -g&eacute;nie, from Greek
-geneia, from genes born, produced (see genus).


pyogenic (adj.)

1840s, from pyogenesis, medical Latin, from pyo- pus + genesis.


Eden (n.)

early 13c., delightful place, figurative use of the place described in Genesis, usually referred to
Hebrew edhen pleasure, delight, but perhaps from Ugaritic base 'dn and meaning a place that is well-
watered throughout (see also Aden).


genetic (adj.)

pertaining to origins, coined 1831 by Carlyle from Greek genetikos genitive, from genesis origin
(see genus). Biological sense first recorded in Darwin, 1859. Related: Genetically. Genetical is
attested from 1650s.


fiat (n.)

authoritative sanction, 1630s, from Latin fiat let it be done (also used in the opening of Medieval
Latin proclamations and commands), third person singular present subjunctive of fieri, used as
passive of facere to make, do (see factitious). Also sometimes a reference to fiat lux let there be
light in the Book of Genesis.


phylogeny (n.)

genesis and evolution of a phylum, 1869, from German Phylogenie, coined 1866 by German biologist
Ernst Heinrich Haeckel (1834-1919) from Greek phylon race (see phylo-) + -geneia origin, from -genes
born (see genus). Related: Phylogenic.


Eve

fem. proper name, from Biblical first woman, Late Latin, from Hebrew Hawwah, literally a living
being, from base hawa he lived (compare Arabic hayya, Aramaic hayyin).    Like most of the
explanations of names in Genesis, this is probably based on folk etymology or an imaginative playing
with sound. ... In the Hebrew here, the phonetic similarity is between hawah, Eve, and the verbal
root hayah, to live. It has been proposed that Eve's name conceals very different origins, for it
sounds suspiciously like the Aramaic word for serpent. [Robert Alter, The Five Books of Moses, 2004,
commentary on Gen. iii:20]


Puritan (n.)

1560s, opponent of Anglican hierarchy, later applied opprobriously to person in Church of England
who seeks further reformation (1570s), probably from purity. Largely historical from 19c. in literal
sense. After c.1590s, applied to anyone deemed overly strict in matters of religion and morals.
What [William] Perkins, and the whole Puritan movement after him, sought was to replace the personal
pride of birth and status with the professional's or craftsman's pride of doing one's best in one's
particular calling. The good Christian society needs the best of kings, magistrates, and citizens.
Perkins most emphasized the work ethic from Genesis: In the swaete of thy browe shalt thou eate thy
breade. [E. Digby Baltzell, Puritan Boston and Quaker Philadelphia, 1979]


Benjamin

masc. proper name, in Old Testament, Jacob's youngest son (Gen. xxxv:18), from Hebrew Binyamin,
literally son of the south, though interpreted in Genesis as son of the right hand, from ben son of
+ yamin right hand, also south (in an East-oriented culture). Compare Arabic cognate yaman right
hand, right side, south; yamana he was happy, literally he turned to the right. The right was
regarded as auspicious (see left and dexterity). Also see Yemen, southpaw, and compare deasil
rightwise, turned toward the right, from Gaelic deiseil toward the south; toward the right, from
deas right, right-hand; south. Also compare Sanskrit dakshina right; south. Slang meaning money (by
1999) is from portrait of Benjamin Franklin on U.S. $100 bill.


kind (n.)

class, sort, variety, from Old English gecynd kind, nature, race, related to cynn family (see kin),
from Proto-Germanic *kundjaz family, race, from PIE *gene- to give birth, beget (see genus).
&AElig;lfric's rendition of the Book of Genesis into Old English came out gecyndboc. The prefix
disappeared 1150-1250. No exact cognates beyond English, but it corresponds to adjective endings
such as Goth -kunds, Old High German -kund. Also in English as a suffix (mankind, etc.). Other
earlier, now obsolete, senses in English included character, quality derived from birth and manner
or way natural or proper to anyone. Use in phrase a kind of (1590s) led to colloquial extension as
adverb (1804) in phrases such as kind of stupid (a kind of stupid (person)).


chaos (n.)

late 14c., gaping void, from Old French chaos (14c.) or directly from Latin chaos, from Greek khaos
abyss, that which gapes wide open, is vast and empty, from *khnwos, from PIE root *gheu- to gape,
yawn (cognates: Greek khaino I yawn, Old English ginian, Old Norse ginnunga-gap; see yawn (v.)).
Meaning utter confusion (c.1600) is extended from theological use of chaos for the void at the
beginning of creation in Vulgate version of Genesis (1530s in English). The Greek for disorder was
tarakhe, however the use of chaos here was rooted in Hesiod (Theogony), who describes khaos as the
primeval emptiness of the Universe, begetter of Erebus and Nyx (Night), and in Ovid (Metamorphoses),
who opposes Khaos to Kosmos, the ordered Universe. Meaning orderless confusion in human affairs is
from c.1600. Chaos theory in the modern mathematical sense is attested from c.1977.


Bible (n.)

early 14c., from Anglo-Latin biblia, Old French bible (13c.) the Bible, also any large book
generally, from Medieval and Late Latin biblia (neuter plural interpreted as feminine singular), in
phrase biblia sacra holy books, a translation of Greek ta biblia to hagia the holy books, from Greek
biblion paper, scroll, the ordinary word for book, originally a diminutive of byblos Egyptian
papyrus, possibly so called from Byblos (modern Jebeil, Lebanon), the name of the Phoenician port
from which Egyptian papyrus was exported to Greece (compare parchment). Or the place name might be
from the Greek word, which then would be probably of Egyptian origin. The Christian scripture was
referred to in Greek as Ta Biblia as early as c.223. Bible replaced Old English biblio&eth;ece (see
bibliothek) as the ordinary word for the Scriptures. Figurative sense of any authoritative book is
from 1804.    Walter Scott and Pope's Homer were reading of my own election, but my mother forced
me, by steady daily toil, to learn long chapters of the Bible by heart; as well as to read it every
syllable through, aloud, hard names and all, from Genesis to the Apocalypse, about once a year; and
to that discipline -- patient, accurate, and resolute -- I owe, not only a knowledge of the book,
which I find occasionally serviceable, but much of my general power of taking pains, and the best
part of my taste in literature. ... [O]nce knowing the 32nd of Deuteronomy, the 119th Psalm, the
15th of 1st Corinthians, the Sermon on the Mount, and most of the Apocalypse, every syllable by
heart, and having always a way of thinking with myself what words meant, it was not possible for me,
even in the foolishest times of youth, to write entirely superficial or formal English .... [John
Ruskin, Fors Clavigera, 1871]


apple (n.)

Old English &aelig;ppel apple; any kind of fruit; fruit in general, from Proto-Germanic *ap(a)laz
(cognates: Old Saxon, Old Frisian, Dutch appel, Old Norse eple, Old High German apful, German
Apfel), from PIE *ab(e)l apple (cognates: Gaulish avallo fruit; Old Irish ubull, Lithuanian obuolys,
Old Church Slavonic jabloko apple), but the exact relation and original sense of these is uncertain
(compare melon).  A roted eppel amang &thorn;e holen, make&thorn; rotie &thorn;e yzounde. [Ayenbite
of Inwit, 1340]    In Middle English and as late as 17c., it was a generic term for all fruit other
than berries but including nuts (such as Old English finger&aelig;ppla dates, literally finger-
apples; Middle English appel of paradis banana, c.1400). Hence its grafting onto the unnamed fruit
of the forbidden tree in Genesis. Cucumbers, in one Old English work, are eor&thorn;&aelig;ppla,
literally earth-apples (compare French pomme de terre potato, literally earth-apple; see also
melon). French pomme is from Latin pomum apple; fruit (see Pomona).    As far as the forbidden fruit
is concerned, again, the Quran does not mention it explicitly, but according to traditional
commentaries it was not an apple, as believed by Christians and Jews, but wheat. [The Heart of
Islam: Enduring Values for Humanity, Seyyed Hossein Nasr, 2002]   Apple of Discord (c.1400) was
thrown into the wedding of Thetis and Peleus by Eris (goddess of chaos and discord), who had not
been invited, and inscribed kallisti To the Prettiest One. Paris, elected to choose which goddess
should have it, gave it to Aphrodite, offending Hera and Athene, with consequences of the Trojan
War, etc.   Apple of one's eye (Old English), symbol of what is most cherished, was the pupil,
supposed to be a globular solid body. Apple-polisher one who curries favor first attested 1928 in
student slang. The image of something that upsets the apple cart is attested from 1788. Road apple
horse dropping is from 1942.


