generic (adj.)

1670s, belonging to a large group of objects, formed in English from Latin gener-, stem of genus
kind (see genus) + -ic. Sense of not special, not brand-name; in plain, cheap packaging, of
groceries, etc., is from 1977.


pdf

by 1992, initialism (acronym) for portable document format, a generic term.


Scrooge (n.)

generic for miser, 1940, from curmudgeonly character in Dickens' 1843 story A Christmas Carol. It
does not appear to be a genuine English surname. Compare scrounge.


Levittown

used figuratively for generic suburban tract housing, American English, from the vast planned real
estate developments built by the firm Levitt &amp; Sons Inc., the first on Long Island, 1946-51
(more than 17,000 homes), the second north of Philadelphia (1951-55).


photostat (n.)

1909, a type of copying machine (trademark Commercial Camera Company, Providence, R.I.) whose name
became a generic noun and verb (1914) for photocopy; from photo- + stat.


Mac

casual, generic term of address for a man, 1928, from Irish and Gaelic mac, a common element in
Scottish and Irish names (literally son of; see Mac-); hence used generally from early 19c. for a
Celtic Irishman.


flapjack (n.)

pre-1600, from flap + jack (n.), using the personal name in its generic object sense.


ain&#039;t

1706, originally a contraction of am not, and in proper use with that sense until it began to be
used as a generic contraction for are not, is not, etc., in early 19c. Cockney dialect of London;
popularized by representations of this in Dickens, etc., which led to the word being banished from
correct English.


Joan

fem. proper name, originally Joanna, fem. of Johannes (see John). Often 17c.-18c. used as a generic
name for a female rustic. Among U.S. births, a top 10 name for girls born between 1930 and 1937.


skipjack (n.)

1550s, a pert shallow-brained fellow; a puppy, a whipper-snapper; a conceited fop or dandy [OED],
from skip (v.) + generic name jack (n.). Applied 1703 to tropical fishes with leaping tendencies. In
reference to a kind of sailing boat used on Chesapeake Bay, attested from 1887.


Brown Shirt (n.)

generic term for Nazi, fascist, especially of the thuggish sort, 1934, originally (1922) in
reference to the German Sturmabteilung, Nazi militia founded 1921; they were called Brown Shirts in
English because of their uniforms.


manners (n.)

external behavior (especially polite behavior) in social intercourse, late 14c., plural of manner.
Under bad manners, as under graver faults, lies very commonly an overestimate of our special
individuality, as distinguished from our generic humanity. [Oliver W. Holmes, The Professor at the
Breakfast Table, 1858]  Earlier it meant moral character (early 13c.).


urethane (n.)

1838, from French ur&eacute;thane (1833), coined by Dumas, apparently from urea + ether + -ane as a
generic chemical suffix.


barista (n.)

bartender in a coffee shop, as a purely English word in use by 1992, from Italian, where it is said
to derive ultimately from the English bar (n.2), as borrowed into Italian. The word is of generic
gender and may be applied with equal accuracy to women and men (it is said that the typical barista
in Italy is a man).


lousy (adj.)

mid-14c., lousi, infested with lice, from louse + -y (2). Figurative use as a generic adjective of
abuse dates from late 14c.; sense of swarming with (money, etc.) is American English slang from
1843. Related: Lousiness.


Samson

masc. proper name, Biblical strong-man (Judges xiii-xvi), from Late Latin, from Greek Sampson, from
Hebrew Shimshon, probably from shemesh sun. As a generic name for a man of great strength, attested
from 1565. Samsonite, proprietary name for a make of luggage, is 1939, by Shwayder Bros. Inc.,
Denver, U.S.


nylon (n.)

1938, coined, according to DuPont, from random generic syllable nyl- + -on, common ending in fiber
names (compare rayon), said to be ultimately from cotton. Use (in plural) for nylon stockings is
from 1940.


joe (n.)

coffee, by 1941, perhaps late 1930s, of unknown origin. Meaning generic fellow, man is from 1846,
from the pet-form of Joseph (q.v.). Joe college typical college man is from 1932. Joe Blow average
fellow is U.S. military slang, first recorded 1941.


patootie (n.)

sweetheart, pretty girl, colloquial American English, 1921, perhaps a corruption of potato (c.f.
sweet potato). Sweet patootie is recorded from 1919 as a generic exclamation.


dago (n.)

1823, from Spanish Diego James. Originally used of Spanish or Portuguese sailors on English or
American ships; by 1900 it had broadened to include non-sailors and shifted to mean chiefly Italian.
James the Greater is the patron saint of Spain, and Diego as generic for a Spaniard is attested from
1610s.


methadone (n.)

1947, generic designation for 6-dimethylamino-4, 4-diphenyl-3-heptanone. For origins of the
syllables, see methyl + amino + di- + -one.


cretin (n.)

1779, from French cr&eacute;tin (18c.), from Alpine dialect crestin, a dwarfed and deformed idiot of
a type formerly found in families in the Alpine lands, a condition caused by a congenital deficiency
of thyroid hormones, from Vulgar Latin *christianus a Christian, a generic term for anyone, but
often with a sense of poor fellow. Related: Cretinism (1801).


Jane

fem. proper name, from French Jeanne, Old French Jehane, from Medieval Latin Johanna (see John). As
a generic name for girl, girlfriend it is attested from 1906 in U.S. slang. Never a top-10 list name
for girls born in the U.S., it ranked in the top 50 from 1931 to 1956. It may owe its everywoman
reputation rather to its association with John.


photoshop (v.)

to edit an image using a computer program, 1992, originally, and properly still, only in reference
to Photoshop, a bitmap graphics editor trademarked and published by Adobe, released in 1990. Like
Taser and Dumpster, it has a tendency to become generic, but if you use it that way in print their
lawyers will still send you The Letter. Related: Photoshopped; photoshopping.


crimson (n.)

early 15c., deep red color, from Old Spanish cremesin of or belonging to the kermes (the shield-
louse insects from which a deep red dye was obtained), from Medieval Latin cremesinus (see kermes).
For similar transfer of the dye word to generic use for red, compare Old Church Slavonic
&#269;ruminu, Russian &#269;ermnyj red, from the same source.


orca (n.)

killer whale, introduced as a generic term for the species by 1841, from earlier use in scientific
names, from Latin orca cetacean, a kind of whale. Earlier in English, orc, ork large whale (c.1590),
from French orque, had been used vaguely of sea monsters (see orc).


osprey (n.)

fishing hawk, mid-15c., from Anglo-French ospriet, from Medieval Latin avis prede bird of prey, from
Latin avis praed&aelig;, a generic term apparently confused with this specific bird in Old French on
its similarity to ossifrage.


Lollard

name for certain heretics, late 14c. (in Chaucer, Loller, c.1386), from Middle Dutch lollaerd,
applied pejoratively to members of reforming sects c.1300 who devoted themselves to the care of the
sick and poor, literally mumbler, mutterer, so called by critics who regarded them as heretics
pretending to humble piety, from lollen to mumble or doze. Generic late Middle English term for
groups suspected of heresy, especially followers of John Wyclif.


area (n.)

1530s, vacant piece of ground, from Latin area level ground, open space, used of building sites,
playgrounds, threshing floors, etc.; of uncertain origin. Perhaps related to arere to become dry, on
notion of a burned clearing or dry, bare space. The generic sense of amount of surface (whether open
or not) contained within any set of limits is from 1845. Area code in North American telephone
systems is attested from 1959.


platypus (n.)

Australian duck-mole, 1799, from Modern Latin, from Greek platypous, literally flat-footed, from
platys broad, flat (see plaice (n.)) + pous foot (see foot).Orig. the generic name, but, having
already been given to a genus of beetles, it was in 1800 changed for Ornithorhyncus. [OED]


lemon (n.1)

type of citrus fruit, c.1400, lymon, from Old French limon citrus fruit (12c.), via Proven&#231;al
or Italian from Arabic laimun, from Persian limu(n), generic terms for citrus fruits (compare lime
(n.2)); cognate with Sanskrit nimbu the lime. Slang meaning a Quaalude is 1960s, from Lemmon, name
of a pharmaceutical company that once manufactured the drug.


Jack

masc. proper name, 1218, probably an anglicization of Old French Jacques (which was a diminutive of
Latin Jacobus; see Jacob), but in English the name always has been associated with Johan, Jan John,
and some have argued that it is a native formation.    Alliterative coupling of Jack and Jill is
from 15c. (Ienken and Iulyan). In England, applied familiarly or contemptuously to anybody
(especially one of the lower classes) from late 14c. Later used especially of sailors (1650s; Jack-
tar is from 1781). In U.S., as a generic name addressed to an unknown stranger, attested from 1889.


joker (n.)

1729, jester, merry fellow, agent noun from joke (v.). In generic slang use for any man, fellow,
chap by 1811, which probably is the source of the meaning odd face card in the deck (1868). An 1857
edition of Hoyle's Games lists a card game called Black Joke in which all face cards were called
jokers.  American manufacturers of playing-cards are wont to include a blank card at the top of the
pack; and it is, alas! true that some thrifty person suggested that the card should not be wasted.
This was the origin of the joker. [St. James's Gazette, 1894]


Bayard (n.)

generic or mock-heroic name for a horse, mid-14c., from Old French Baiard, name of the bay-colored
magic steed given by Charlemagne to Renaud in the legends, from Old French baiart bay-colored (see
bay (adj.)). Also by early 14c. proverbial as a blind person or thing, for now-unknown reasons. The
name later was used attributively of gentlemen of courage and integrity, in this sense from Pierre
du Terrail, seigneur de Bayard (1473-1524), French knight celebrated as Chevalier sans peur et sans
reproche. The surname is perhaps in reference to hair color.


syphilis (n.)

infectious venereal disease, 1718, Modern Latin, originally from the title of a poem, Syphilis, sive
Morbus Gallicus Syphilis, or the French Disease, published 1530, by Veronese doctor Girolamo
Fracastoro (1483-1553), which tells the tale of the shepherd Syphilus, supposed to be the first
sufferer from the disease. Fracastoro first used the word as a generic term for the disease in his
1546 treatise De Contagione. Why he chose the name is unknown; it may be intended as Latin for Pig-
lover, though there was also a Sipylus, a son of Niobe, in Ovid.


genitive (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French genitif or directly from Latin (casus) genitivus case expressing
possession, source, origin, from genitus (past participle of gignere; see genital); misused by Latin
grammarians to render Greek genike (ptosis) generic (case), expressing race or kind (see genus). The
noun meaning the genitive case in grammar is from 1610s.


galleywest

as a destination where you knock something or someone, American English slang, by 1835; considered
by OED to be a corruption of western England dialectal collyweston, name of a village in
Northamptonshire (Colin's West Farmstead) that somehow came to signify askew, not right. But Farmer
calls it an Americanism and goes in for it as an indefinite superlative, and DAS also does not
consider the obscure English term to be the source. Early nautical references suggest it might
simply be what it looks like: a sailor's generic way of indicating something has been thrown pretty
far by impact.     Matter? why d--n my old shoes, Captain Williams, here is one of that bloody Don
Dego's shot gone right through the galley-door, and through the side of the big copper, and knocked
all the beef and hot water galley-west. ... [N.Ames, Old Sailor's Yarns, New York, 1835]


sanguinary (adj.)

characterized by slaughter, 1620s, possibly from French sanguinaire, or directly from Latin
sanguinarius pertaining to blood, from sanguis (genitive sanguinis) blood, of unknown origin. Latin
distinguished sanguis, the generic word, from cruor blood from a wound. The latter word is related
to Greek kreas meat, Sanskrit kravis- raw flesh, Old English hreaw- raw (see raw).


zilch (n.)

nothing, 1957; insignificant person, 1933, from use of Zilch as a generic comical-sounding surname
for an insignificant person (especially Joe Zilch). There was a Mr. Zilch (1931), comic character in
the magazine Ballyhoo, and the use perhaps originated c.1922 in U.S. college or theater slang.
Probably a nonsense syllable, suggestive of the end of the alphabet, but Zilch is an actual German
surname of Slavic origin.    The [Cadence] agency aims to have each album cover actually promote the
record, on the theory that the day of pretty, boffy, zoomy and zingy covers for the sake of zilch is
no more. [Billboard, Oct. 28, 1957]


Phyllis

fem. proper name, generic proper name for a comely rustic maiden in pastoral poetry (1630s), from
Latin Phyllis, a girl's name in Virgil, Horace, etc., from Greek Phyllis, female name, literally
foliage of a tree, from phyllon leaf, from PIE *bholyo- leaf, from root *bhel- (3) to thrive, bloom,
possibly identical with *bhel- (2) to blow, inflate, swell (see bole). In English, often spelled
Phillis, probably from influence of phil- loving. Her sweetheart usually was Philander.


velociraptor (n.)

1924, from Latin velox (genitive velocis) swift, speedy (see velocity) + raptor robber (see raptor).
Fossil remains discovered in 1923 in the red Djadochta sandstone at Shabarakh Usu in Mongolia.
The first (Fig. 1) of the typical megalosaurian type, although of small size, seems to have been an
alert, swift-moving carnivorous dinosaur to which the generic name Velociraptor is applied. [Henry
Fairfield Osborn, Three New Therapoda, Protoceratops Zone, Central Mongolia, in American Museum
Novitates, Nov., 7, 1924]


spruce (n.)

1660s, evergreen tree, fir, from spruse (adj.) made of spruce wood (early 15c.), literally from
Prussia, from Spruce, Sprws (late 14c.), unexplained alterations of Pruce Prussia, from an Old
French form of Prussia.   Spruce seems to have been a generic term for commodities brought to
England by Hanseatic merchants (especially beer, boards and wooden chests, and leather), and the
tree thus was believed to be particular to Prussia, which for a time was figurative in England as a
land of luxuries. Compare spruce (adj.). As a distinct species of fir, from 1731.


buster (n.)

1838, anything large; a man of great strength, American English slang (originally
Missouri/Arkansas), perhaps meaning something that takes one's breath away and an agent noun from
bust (v.). Around the same years, buster (as an extended form of bust (n.)) also meant a frolic, a
spree. Hence a roistering blade (OED; probably not the favored definition in old Missouri and
Arkansas), attested from 1850. As a generic or playful address to a male, from 1948, American
English. Meaning horse-breaker is from 1891, American English; hence back-formed verb bust (v.)
break a horse.


lounge (v.)

to loll idly, c.1500, Scottish, of uncertain origin, perhaps [Barnhart] from French s'allonger
(paresseusement) to lounge about, lie at full length, from Old French alongier lengthen, from Latin
longus long (see long (adj.)). Another etymology traces it through obsolete lungis (n.) slow, lazy
person (c.1560), from Middle French longis, a generic application of Longinus, supposed to be the
name of the centurion who pierced Christ's side with a spear in John xix:34. Popular etymology
associated the name directly with long (adj.). Related: Lounged; lounging.


cull (n.)

dupe, saphead, rogues' slang from late 16c., perhaps a shortening of cullion base fellow, originally
testicle (from French couillon, from Old French coillon testicle; worthless fellow, dolt, from Latin
coleus, literally strainer bag; see cojones), though another theory traces it to Romany (Gypsy)
chulai man. Also sometimes cully, though some authorities assert cully was the canting term for dupe
and cull was generic man, fellow, without implication of gullibility. Compare also gullible.


beast (n.)

c.1200, from Old French beste animal, wild beast, figuratively fool, idiot (11c., Modern French
b&ecirc;te), from Vulgar Latin *besta, from Latin bestia beast, wild animal, of unknown origin. Used
to translate Latin animal. Replaced Old English deor (see deer) as the generic word for wild
creature, only to be ousted 16c. by animal. Of persons felt to be animal-like in various senses from
early 13c. Of the figure in the Christian apocalypse story from late 14c.


jacket (n.)

mid-15c., short garment for men, from Middle French jaquet short coat with sleeves, diminutive of
Old French jaque, a kind of tunic, probably from Jacque, the male proper name, also the generic name
of a French peasant (see jacquerie), but possibly associated with jaque (de mailles) short, tight-
fitting coat, originally coat of mail, from Spanish jaco, from Arabic shakk breastplate. Iakke a
short, close-fitting stuffed or quilted tunic, often serving as a defensive garment is attested in
English from late 14c., and by c.1400 was being used for woman's short tunic. Meaning paper wrapper
of a book is first attested 1894.


melon (n.)

late 14c., from Old French melon (13c.), from Medieval Latin melonem (nominative melo), from Latin
melopeponem, a kind of pumpkin, from Greek melopepon gourd-apple (name for several kinds of gourds
bearing sweet fruit), from melon apple (see malic) + pepon, a kind of gourd, probably noun use of
pepon ripe (see pumpkin).    In Greek, melon  was used in a generic way for all foreign fruits
(compare similar use of apple). The Greek plural of melon was used from ancient times for a girl's
breasts.


maid (n.)

late 12c., a virgin, a young unmarried woman, shortening of maiden (n.). Like that word, used in
Middle English of unmarried men as well as women (as in maiden-man, c.1200, used of both sexes,
reflecting also the generic use of man). Domestic help sense is from c.1300. In reference to Joan of
Arc, attested from 1540s (French la Pucelle). Maid Marian, one of Robin Hood's companions, first
recorded 1520s, perhaps from French, where Robin et Marian have been stock names for country lovers
since 13c. Maid of Honor (1580s) originally was unmarried lady of noble birth who attends a queen or
princess; meaning principal bridesmaid is attested from 1895. Maydelond (translating Latin terra
feminarum) was the land of the Amazons.


loath (adj.)

Old English la&eth; hated; hateful; hostile; repulsive, from Proto-Germanic *laithaz (cognates: Old
Saxon, Old Frisian leth loathsome, Old Norse lei&eth;r hateful, hostile, loathed; Middle Dutch
lelijc, Dutch leelijk ugly; Old High German leid sorrowful, hateful, offensive, grievous, German
Leid sorrow; French laid ugly, from Frankish (Germanic) *laid), from PIE root *leit- to detest.
Weakened meaning averse, disinclined is attested from late 14c. Loath to depart, a line from some
long-forgotten song, is recorded since 1580s as a generic term expressive of any tune played at
farewells, the sailing of a ship, etc. Related: Loathness.


