genre (n.)

1770, as a French word in English (nativized from c.1840), from French genre kind, sort, style (see
gender). Used especially in French for independent style. Of painting, depicting scenes of ordinary
life (as compared to landscape, historical, etc.) from 1849.


hip hop

also hip-hop, music style, first recorded 1982. Reduplication with vowel variation (as in tip-top,
sing-song); OED reports use of hip hop with a sense of successive hopping motion dating back to
1670s. The term in its modern sense comes from its use in the early rap lyrics of the genre, notably
Grandmaster Flash and the Furious Five and The Sugarhill Gang in Rapper's Delight.


nuanced (adj.)

1896, past participle adjective from verb nuance (q.v.).    The new co-operative history of English
literature which the University of Cambridge is now publishing prints genre without italics. And it
even permits one contributor--and a contributor who is discussing Shakespeare!--to say that
something is delicately nuanced. Is there now an English verb to nuance? It is terrible to think of
the bad language the scholars of the venerable English university might have used if nuanced had
been first discovered in the text of an American author. [Scribner's Magazine, January 1911]


pop (adj.)

having popular appeal, 1926, of individual songs from many genres; 1954 as a noun, as genre of its
own; abbreviation of popular; earlier as a shortened form of popular concert (1862), and often in
the plural form pops. Pop art first recorded 1957, said to have been in use conversationally among
Independent group of artists from late 1954. Pop culture attested from 1959, short for popular
culture (attested by 1846).


suspense (n.)

c.1400, abeyance, temporary cessation; state of not being carried out (of legal matters), from
Anglo-French suspens (in en suspens in abeyance, c.1300), Old French sospense delay, deferment (of
judgement), act of suspending, from Latin suspensus, past participle of suspendere to hang up;
interrupt (see suspend). Meaning state of mental uncertainty with more or less anxiety (mid-15c.) is
from legal meaning, perhaps via notion of awaiting an expected decision, or from state of having the
mind or thoughts suspended. As a genre of novels, stories, etc., attested from 1951.


horror (n.)

early 14c., from Old French horror (12c., Modern French horreur) and directly from Latin horror
dread, veneration, religious awe, a figurative use, literally a shaking, trembling, shudder, chill,
from horrere to bristle with fear, shudder, from PIE root *ghers- to bristle (cognates: Sanskrit
harsate bristles, Avestan zarshayamna- ruffling one's feathers, Latin eris (genitive) hedgehog,
Welsh garw rough). As a genre in film, 1934. Chamber of horrors originally (1849) was a gallery of
notorious criminals in Madame Tussaud's wax exhibition.


pulp (n.)

c.1400, fleshy part of a fruit or plant, from Latin pulpa animal or plant pulp; pith of wood,
earlier *pelpa, perhaps from the same root as pulvis dust, pollen fine flour (see pollen); extended
to other similar substances by early 15c. The adjective meaning sensational is from pulp magazine
(1931), so called from pulp in sense of type of rough paper used in cheaply made magazines and books
(1727). As a genre name, pulp fiction attested by 1943 (pulp writer writer of pulp fiction was in
use by 1939). The opposite adjective in reference to magazines was slick.


gender (n.)

c.1300, kind, sort, class, from Old French gendre (12c., Modern French genre), from stem of Latin
genus (genitive generis) race, stock, family; kind, rank, order; species, also (male or female) sex
(see genus) and used to translate Aristotle's Greek grammatical term genos.    The grammatical sense
is attested in English from late 14c.; the male-or-female sense from early 15c. As sex took on
erotic qualities in 20c., gender came to be the common word used for sex of a human being, often in
feminist writing with reference to social attributes as much as biological qualities; this sense
first attested 1963. Gender-bender is first attested 1980, with reference to pop star David Bowie.


pornography (n.)

1843, ancient obscene painting, especially in temples of Bacchus, from French pornographie, from
Greek pornographos (one) depicting prostitutes, from porne prostitute, originally bought, purchased
(with an original notion, probably of female slave sold for prostitution), related to pernanai to
sell, from PIE root *per- (5) to traffic in, to sell (see price (n.)) + graphein to write (see
-graphy). A brothel in ancient Greek was a porneion.    Pornography, or obscene painting, which in
the time of the Romans was practiced with the grossest license, prevailed especially at no
particular period in Greece, but was apparently tolerated to a considerable extent at all times.
Parrhasius, Aristides, Pausanias, Nicophanes, Chaerephanes, Arellius, and a few other [pornographoi]
are mentioned as having made themselves notorious for this species of license. [Charles Anthon,
Dictionary of Greek and Roman Antiquities, New York, 1843]    In reference to modern works by 1859
(originally French novels), later as a charge against native literature; sense of obscene pictures
in modern times is from 1906. Also sometimes used late 19c. for description of prostitutes as a
matter of public hygiene. The Medical Archives in 1873 proposed porniatria for the lengthy and
really meaningless expression 'social evil hospital' ....     I shall not today attempt further to
define the kinds of material I understand to be embraced within that shorthand description [hard-
core pornography]; and perhaps I could never succeed in intelligibly doing so. But I know it when I
see it, and the motion picture involved in this case is not that. [U.S. Supreme Court Justice Potter
Stewart, concurring opinion, Jacobellis v. Ohio, 1964]    In ancient contexts, often paired with
rhypography, genre painting of low, sordid, or unsuitable subjects. Pornocracy (1860) is the
dominating influence of harlots, used specifically of the government of Rome during the first half
of the 10th century by Theodora and her daughters. Pornotopia (1966) was coined to describe the
ideal erotic-world of pornographic movies.


