gentleness (n.)

c.1300, inherited nature, from gentle + -ness. Meaning freedom from harshness and violence is from
1610s.


gentlewoman (n.)

early 13c., from gentle + woman.


gentleman (n.)

well-born man, early 13c., from gentle + man.    The Gentleman is always truthful and sincere; will
not agree for the sake of complaisance or out of weakness ; will not pass over that of which he
disapproves. He has a clear soul, and a fearless, straightforward tongue. On the other hand he is
not blunt and rude. His truth is courteous; his courtesy, truthful; never a humbug, yet, where he
truthfully can, he prefers to say pleasant things. [J.R. Vernon, Contemporary Review, 1869]
Related: Gentlemen. Gentleman's agreement is first attested 1929. Gentleman farmer recorded from
1749.


gentle (adj.)

early 13c., well-born, from Old French gentil high-born, noble, of good family (11c., in Modern
French nice, graceful, pleasing; fine pretty), from Latin gentilis of the same family or clan, from
gens (genitive gentis) race, clan, from root of gignere beget, from PIE root *gen- produce (see
genus). Sense of gracious, kind (now obsolete) first recorded late 13c.; that of mild, tender is
1550s. Older sense remains in gentleman.


gently (adv.)

early 14c., befitting one of gentle rank, from gentle + -ly (2). Meaning quietly, softly is from
1550s.


gentility (n.)

mid-14c., gentle birth, from Old French gentilit&eacute; (14c.) or directly from Latin gentilitatem
(nominative gentilitas) relationship in the same family or clan, from gentilis (see gentle). Meaning
state of being gentile is from 1520s.


yenta (n.)

gossip, busybody, 1923, from Yente Telebende, comic strip gossip in 1920s-30s writing of Yiddish
newspaper humorist B. Kovner (pen-name of Jacob Adler) in the Jewish Daily Forward. It was a common
Yiddish fem. proper name, altered from Yentl and said to be ultimately from Italian gentile kind,
gentle, earlier noble, high-born (see gentle).


meek (adj.)

c.1200, gentle, quiet, unaggressive; benevolent, kind; courteous, humble, unassuming; of a woman,
modest, from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse mjukr soft, pliant, gentle, from Proto-Germanic
*meukaz (cognates: Gothic muka-modei humility, Dutch muik soft), of uncertain origin, perhaps from
PIE *meug- slippery, slimy. In the Bible, it translates Latin mansuetus from Vulgate (see
mansuetude). Sense of submissive is from mid-14c.


gentry (n.)

c.1300, nobility of rank or birth, from Old French genterise, variant of gentilise noble birth,
gentleness, from gentil (see gentle). Meaning noble persons is from 1520s. Earlier in both senses
was gentrice (c.1200 as nobility of character, late 14c. as noble persons). In Anglo-Irish, gentry
was a name for the fairies (1880), and gentle could mean enchanted (1823).


mitigate (v.)

early 15c., relieve (pain), from Latin mitigatus, past participle of mitigare soften, make tender,
ripen, mellow, tame, figuratively, make mild or gentle, pacify, soothe, ultimately from mitis
gentle, soft (from PIE *mei- mild) + root of agere do, make, act (see act). First element is from
PIE root *mei- soft, mild. Related: Mitigated; mitigating; mitigates.


lithe (adj.)

Old English li&eth;e soft, mild, gentle, meek, from Proto-Germanic *linthja- (cognates: Old Saxon
lithi soft, mild, gentle, Old High German lindi, German lind, Old Norse linr, with characteristic
loss of n before th in English), from PIE root *lent- flexible (cognates: Latin lentus flexible,
pliant, slow, Sanskrit lithi). In Middle English, used of the weather. Current sense of easily
flexible is from c.1300. Related: Litheness.


blithe (adj.)

Old English bli&thorn;e joyous, kind, cheerful, pleasant, from Proto-Germanic *blithiz gentle, kind
(cognates: Old Saxon bli&eth;i bright, happy, Middle Dutch blide, Dutch blijde, Old Norse bli&eth;r
mild, gentle, Old High German blidi gay, friendly, Gothic blei&thorn;s kind, friendly, merciful).
Rare since 16c. No cognates outside Germanic. The earlier application was to the outward expression
of kindly feeling, sympathy, affection to others, as in Gothic and ON.; but in OE. the word had come
more usually to be applied to the external manifestation of one's own pleased or happy frame of
mind, and hence even to the state itself. [OED]


childe (n.)

youth of gentle birth, used as a kind of title, late Old English, variant spelling of child (q.v.).


Fauntleroy

in various usages, from the gentle boy hero of Frances Hodgson Burnett's popular novel Little Lord
Fauntleroy (1885). The family name is from mid-13c., literally son of the king (Anglo-French Le
Enfant le Roy).


tinkle (v.)

to make a gentle ringing sound, late 14c., possibly a frequentative form of tinken to ring, jingle,
perhaps of imitative origin. Meaning to urinate is recorded from 1960, from childish talk. Related:
Tinkled; tinkling. As a noun from 1680s.


gingerly (adv.)

1510s, elegantly, daintily, perhaps from Old French gensor, comp. of gent dainty, delicate, from
Latin gentius (well)-born (see gentle). Meaning extremely cautiously is from c.1600.


debonair (adj.)

c.1200, mild, gentle, kind courteous, from Old French debonaire, from de bon' aire of good race,
originally used of hawks, hence, thoroughbred (opposite of French demalaire). Used in Middle English
to mean docile, courteous, it became obsolete and was revived with an altered sense of pleasant,
affable (1680s).


placid (adj.)

1620s, from French placide (15c.) and directly from Latin placidus pleasing, peaceful, quiet,
gentle, still, calm, from placere to please (see please). Related: Placidly; placidness.


deft (adj.)

Old English ged&aelig;fte mild, gentle, differentiated in Middle English into daft (q.v.) and this
word, via sense of apt, skillful, adept. Cognate with Gothic gadaban to be fit, Old Norse dafna to
grow strong, Dutch deftig important, relevant.


immitigable (adj.)

1570s, from Latin immitigabilis, from assimilated form of in- not (see in- (1) + mitigabilis, from
past participle stem of mitigare make mild or gentle (see mitigate). Related: Immitigably.


jaunty (adj.)

1660s, elegant, stylish, from French gentil nice, pleasing, in Old French noble (see gentle). Form
reflects attempt to render the French pronunciation of gentil. Meaning easy and sprightly in manner
first attested 1670s. Related: Jauntily; jauntiness.


clement (adj.)

mid-15c., mild, of persons (attested from early 13c. as a surname), from Old French clement, from
Latin clementem (nominative clemens) mild, placid, gentle (see clemency). Of weather, 1620s. Taken
as a name by several early popes and popular in England as a masculine given name from mid-12c.,
also in fem. form Clemence.


aura (n.)

1870 in spiritualism, subtle emanation around living beings; earlier characteristic impression made
by a personality (1859), earlier still gentle breeze (late 14c.), from Latin aura breeze, wind, air,
from Greek aura breath, breeze, from PIE root *awer- (see air (n.1)).


daft (adj.)

Old English ged&aelig;fte gentle, becoming, from Proto-Germanic *gadaftjaz (cognates: Old English
daeftan to put in order, arrange, gedafen suitable; Gothic gadaban to be fit), from PIE *dhabh- to
fit together. Sense progression from mild (c.1200) to dull (c.1300) to foolish (mid-15c.) to crazy
(1530s) probably was influenced by analogy with daffe halfwit.


judo (n.)

1889, from Japanese judo, from ju softness, gentleness (from Chinese jou soft, gentle) + do way,
art, from Chinese tao way. A refined form of ju-jitsu introduced in 1882 by Dr. Jigoro Kano, using
principles of movement and balance, and practiced as a sport or form of physical exercise [OED].


coy (adj.)

early 14c., quiet, modest, demure, from Old French coi, earlier quei quiet, still, placid, gentle,
ultimately from Latin quietus resting, at rest (see quiet (n.)). Meaning shy emerged late 14c.
Meaning unwilling to commit is 1961. Related: Coyly; coyness.


jujitsu (n.)

also ju-jitsu, 1875, from Japanese jujutsu, from ju softness, gentleness (from Chinese jou soft,
gentle) + jutsu art, science, from Chinese shu, shut.


soft (adj.)

Old English softe, earlier sefte, gentle, mild-natured; easeful, comfortable, calm, undisturbed;
luxurious, from West Germanic *samfti, from Proto-Germanic *samftijaz level, even, smooth, gentle,
soft (cognates: Old Saxon safti, Old High German semfti, German sanft; and from a variant form with
-ch- for -f-, Middle Dutch sachte, Dutch zacht, German sacht), from root *som- fitting, agreeable.
From c.1200 of material things, not stiff, not coarse, fine; yielding to weight. From late 14c. of
wind, rain, etc. Of sounds, quiet, not loud, from early 13c. Of words, mild, restrained; courteous
mid-14c. From late 14c. as indulgent, also physically feeble; easily overcome, lacking manly
courage. From 1755 of water (relatively free from mineral salts), from 1789 of coal. Meaning
foolish, simple, silly is attested from 1620s; earlier easily moved or swayed; soft-hearted,
sympathetic; docile (early 13c.). In reference to drinks, non-alcoholic from 1880. As an adverb, Old
English softe gently; late 13c. as quietly. As an interjection from 1540s.   Soft landing is from
1958 and the U.S. space program. Adjective soft-core (in reference to pornography) is from 1966 (see
hardcore). Soft rock as a music style is attested from 1969. Soft sell is from 1955. Soft-shoe as a
dancing style is attested from 1927. Soft-boiled is from 1757 of eggs; of persons, ideas, etc., 1930
(compare half-baked). Soft-focus (adj.) of camera shots is from 1917. The softer sex women
collectively is from 1640s.


placate (v.)

1670s, a back-formation from placation or else from Latin placatus soothed, quiet, gentle, calm,
peaceful, past participle of placare to calm, appease, quiet, soothe, assuage, related to placere to
please (see please). Related: Placated; placating; placatingly.


breeze (n.)

1560s, north or northeast wind, from Old Spanish briza cold northeast wind; in West Indies and
Spanish Main, the sense shifting to northeast trade wind, then fresh wind from the sea. English
sense of gentle or light wind is from 1620s. An alternative possibility is that the English word is
from East Frisian brisen to blow fresh and strong. The slang for something easy is American English,
c.1928.


bliss (n.)

Old English blis, also bli&eth;s bliss, merriment, happiness, grace, favor, from Proto-Germanic
*blithsjo (cognates: Old Saxon blidsea, blizza), from *blithiz gentle, kind + *-tjo noun suffix.
Originally mostly of earthly happiness; influenced by association with bless and blithe.


genteel (adj.)

1590s, from Middle French gentil stylish, fashionable, elegant; nice, graceful, pleasing, from Old
French gentil high-born, noble (11c.); a reborrowing of the French word that had early come into
English as gentle (q.v.), with French pronunciation and stress preserved to emphasize the
distinction. See also jaunty; gentile. OED 2nd ed. reports genteel is now used, except by the
ignorant, only in mockery (a development it dates from the 1840s).


weatherman (n.)

one who observes the weather, 1869, from weather (n.) + man (n.). Weather-prophet is from 1784 as
barometer; 1827 as person who predicts the weather.    Clerk of the Weather, I deplore  That all thy
greatness is no more,  As should a gentle bard;  That Nature, or that Nature's law  When you
politely called for thaw,  Gave frost was rather hard.  [from Consolatory Address to Mr. Murphy, the
Weather Prophet, Colburn's New Monthly Magazine, 1838]


mastiff (n.)

large, powerful breed of dog, early 14c., from Old French mastin great cur, mastiff (Modern French
m&#226;tin) or Proven&ccedil;al mastis, both from Vulgar Latin *mansuetinus domesticated, tame, from
Latin mansuetus tame, gentle (see mansuetude). Probably originally meaning a dog that stays in the
house, thus a guard-dog or watchdog. Form in English perhaps influenced by Old French mestif
mongrel.


goon (n.)

1921, stupid person, from gony simpleton (1580s), of unknown origin, but applied by sailors to the
albatross and similar big, clumsy birds (1839); sense of hired thug first recorded 1938 (in
reference to union beef squads used to cow strikers in the Pacific northwest), probably from Alice
the Goon, slow-witted and muscular (but gentle-natured) character in Thimble Theater comic strip
(starring Popeye) by E.C. Segar (1894-1938). She also was the inspiration for British comedian Spike
Milligan's The Goon Show. What are now juvenile delinquents were in the 1940s sometimes called
goonlets.


gentile (adj.)

mid-13c., noble, kind, gracious (mid-12c. as a surname); late 14c., of noble rank or birth,
belonging to the gentry, from Late Latin gentilis foreign, heathen, pagan, from Latin gentilis
person belonging to the same family, fellow countryman, from gentilis (adj.) of the same family or
clan, from gens (genitive gentis) race, clan (see gentle).


less

Old English l&aelig;s (adv.), l&aelig;ssa (adj.), comparative of l&aelig;s small; from Proto-
Germanic *lais-izo smaller (cognates: Old Saxon, Old Frisian les less; Middle Dutch lise soft,
gentle, German leise soft), from PIE root *leis- (2) small (cognates: Lithuanian liesas thin).
Formerly also younger, as a translation of Latin minor, a sense now obsolete except in James the
Less. Used as a comparative of little, but not related to it. The noun is Old English l&aelig;sse.


lamb (n.)

Old English lamb lamb, from Proto-Germanic *lambaz (cognates: Old Norse, Old Frisian, Gothic lamb,
Middle Dutch, Dutch lam, Middle High German lamp, German Lamm lamb). Common to the Germanic
languages, but with no certain cognates outside them. Old English plural was lomberu. Applied to
persons (especially young Church members, gentle souls, etc.) from late Old English. Also sometimes
used ironically for cruel or rough characters (such as Kirke's Lambs in wars of 1684-86).
Lamb's-wool (adj.) is from 1550s.


flower (n.)

c.1200, from Old French flor flower, blossom; heyday, prime; fine flour; elite; innocence, virginity
(Modern French fleur), from Latin florem (nominative flos) flower (source of Italian fiore, Spanish
flor; see flora).    Modern spelling is 14c. Ousted Old English cognate blostm (see blossom (n.)).
Also used from 13c. in sense of finest part or product of anything and from c.1300 in the sense of
virginity. Flower children gentle hippies is from 1967.


modesty (n.)

1530s, freedom from exaggeration, self-control, from Middle French modestie or directly from Latin
modestia moderation, sense of honor, correctness of conduct, from modestus moderate, keeping
measure, sober, gentle, temperate, from modus measure, manner (see mode (n.1)). Meaning quality of
having a moderate opinion of oneself is from 1550s; that of womanly propriety is from 1560s.   La
pudeur donne des plaisirs bien flatteurs &#224; l'amant: elle lui fait sentir quelles lois l'on
transgresse pour lui;  (Modesty both pleases and flatters a lover, for it lays stress on the laws
which are being transgressed for his sake.) [Stendhal de l'Amour, 1822]


benign (adj.)

early 14c., from Old French benigne (12c., kind, benign, merciful, gracious; Modern French
b&eacute;nin, fem. b&eacute;nigne), from Latin benignus kindly, kindhearted, friendly, generous,
literally well born, from bene well (see bene-) + gignere to bear, beget, from genus birth (see
genus). For similar sense evolution, compare gentle, kind (adj.), generous. Related: Benignly.


receptionist (n.)

person hired to receive clients in an office, 1900, from reception + -ist.  Originally in
photography studios.    Let me not forget the receptionist -- generally and preferably, a woman of
refined and gentle manners, well informed and specially gifted in handling people of varied
dispositions. A woman especially who knows how to handle other women, and who can make herself
beloved by the children who may visit the studio. A woman, also, who in a thoroughly suave and
dignified way, knows just how to handle the young man of the period so that the photographer may be
glad to have his business. What a power the receptionist is when properly chosen and trained. It is
not too much to say that she can both make and destroy a business, if she has the amount of
discretionary power given to her in some galleries. [John A. Tennant, Business Methods Applied in
Photography, Wilson's Photographic Magazine, October 1900]    Earlier as an adjective in theology
and law (1867).


slack (adj.)

Old English sl&aelig;c remiss, lax, characterized by lack of energy, sluggish, indolent, languid;
slow, gentle, easy, from Proto-Germanic *slakas (cognates: Old Saxon slak, Old Norse slakr, Old High
German slah slack, Middle Dutch lac fault, lack), from PIE root *(s)leg- to be slack (see lax).
Sense of not tight (in reference to things) is first recorded c.1300. As an adverb from late 14c.
Slack-key (1975) translates Hawaiian ki ho'alu. Slack water (n.) time when tide is not flowing is
from 1769. Slack-handed remiss is from 1670s. Slack-baked baked imperfectly, half-baked is from
1823; figuratively from 1840.


lenient (adj.)

1650s, relaxing, soothing, from Middle French lenient, from Latin lenientem (nominative leniens),
present participle of lenire to soften, alleviate, mitigate, allay, calm, from lenis mild, gentle,
calm, probably from PIE root *le- to leave, yield, let go, slacken (cognates: Lithuanian lenas
quiet, tranquil, tame, slow, Old Church Slavonic lena lazy, Latin lassus faint, weary, Old English
l&aelig;t sluggish, slow, l&aelig;tan to leave behind). Sense of mild, merciful (of persons) first
recorded 1787. In earlier use was lenitive, attested from early 15c. of medicines, 1610s of persons.


mild (adj.)

Old English milde gentle, merciful, from Proto-Germanic *milthjaz- (cognates: Old Norse mildr, Old
Saxon mildi, Old Frisian milde, Middle Dutch milde, Dutch mild, Old High German milti, German milde
mild, Gothic mildi&thorn;a kindness), from PIE *meldh-, from root *mel- soft, with derivatives
referring to soft or softened materials (cognates: Greek malthon weakling, myle mill; Latin molere
to grind; Old Irish meldach tender; Sanskrit mrdh to neglect, also to be moist). Originally of
persons and powers; of the weather from c.1400, of disease from 1744. Also in Old English as an
adverb, mercifully, graciously.


henchman (n.)

mid-14c., hengestman, later henshman (mid-15c.) high-ranking servant (usually of gentle birth),
attendant upon a king, nobleman, etc., originally groom, probably from man (n.) + Old English
hengest horse, stallion, gelding, from Proto-Germanic *hangistas (cognates: Old Frisian hengst,
Dutch hengest, German Hengst stallion), perhaps literally best at springing, from PIE *kenku-
(cognates: Greek kekiein to gush forth; Lithuanian sokti to jump, dance; Breton kazek a mare,
literally that which belongs to a stallion).    Perhaps modeled on Old Norse compound hesta-ma&eth;r
horse-boy, groom. The word became obsolete in England but was retained in Scottish as personal
attendant of a Highland chief, in which sense Scott revived it in literary English from 1810. Sense
of obedient or unscrupulous follower is first recorded 1839, probably based on a misunderstanding of
the word as used by Scott.


human (adj.)

mid-15c., humain, humaigne, from Old French humain, umain (adj.) of or belonging to man (12c.), from
Latin humanus of man, human, also humane, philanthropic, kind, gentle, polite; learned, refined,
civilized, probably related to homo (genitive hominis) man (see homunculus) and to humus earth, on
notion of earthly beings, as opposed to the gods (compare Hebrew adam man, from adamah ground).
Cognate with Old Lithuanian zmuo (accusative zmuni) man, male person.    As a noun, from 1530s. Its
Old English cognate guma (from Proto-Germanic *guman-) survives only in disguise in bridegroom.
Related: Humanness. Human rights attested by 1680s; human being by 1690s. Human relations is from
1916; human resources attested by 1907, American English, apparently originally among social
Christians and drawn from natural resources.


still (adj.)

Old English stille motionless, stable, fixed, stationary, from Proto-Germanic *stilli- (cognates:
Old Frisian, Middle Low German, Middle Dutch stille, Dutch stil, Old High German stilli, German
still), from PIE root *stel- to put, stand, with derivatives referring to a standing object or place
(see stall (n.1)). Meaning quiet, calm, gentle, silent emerged in later Old English. Euphemistic for
dead in stillborn, etc. Still small voice is from KJV:    And he said, Go forth, and stand upon the
mount before the LORD. And, behold, the LORD passed by, and a great and strong wind rent the
mountains, and brake in pieces the rocks before the LORD; but the LORD was not in the wind: and
after the wind an earthquake; but the LORD was not in the earthquake: and after the earthquake a
fire; but the LORD was not in the fire: and after the fire a still small voice. [1 Kings 19:11-13]
Used as a conjunction from 1722.


tame (adj.)

early Middle English tame in a state of subjection, physically subdued, restrained in behavior
(c.1200); of animals domesticated, reclaimed from wildness, also, of persons, meek, gentle-natured,
compliant, intent on homely or domestic activities (mid-13c.), from oblique forms of Old English
tom, tam domesticated, docile, from Proto-Germanic *tamaz (cognates: Old Norse tamr, Old Saxon, Old
Frisian, Middle Low German, Middle Dutch tam, Old High German zam, German zahm tame, Gothic tamjan
to tame), from PIE *deme- to constrain, to force, to break (horses) (cognates: Sanskrit damayati
tames; Persian dam a tame animal; Greek daman to tame, subdue, dmetos tame; Latin domare to tame,
subdue; Old Irish damnaim I tie up, fasten, I tame, subdue).    A possible ulterior connection is
with PIE *dem- house, household (see domestic (adj.)). Meaning spiritless, weak, dull, uninspiring,
insipid is recorded from c.1600. Related: Tamely; tameness.


Wyoming

region in Luzerne County, Pennsylvania, from Munsee Delaware (Algonquian) chwewamink at the big
river flat, from /xw-/ big + /-e:wam-/ river flat + /-enk/ place. Popularized by 1809 poem Gertrude
of Wyoming, set amid wars between Indians and American settlers, written by Scottish author Thomas
Campbell (1777-1844), who seems to have had a vague or defective notion of Pennsylvania geography:
On Susquehanna's side, fair Wyoming!  Although the wild-flower on thy ruin'd wall,  And roofless
homes, a sad remembrance bring,  Of what thy gentle people did befall;  Yet thou wert once the
loveliest land of all  That see the Atlantic wave their morn restore.  Sweet land! may I thy lost
delights recall,  And paint thy Gertrude in her bowers of yore,  Whose beauty was the love of
Pennsylvania's shore!   et cetera. Subsequently applied 19c. to other locations (in Kansas, Ohio,
and Wisconsin), and to a western territory organized July 25, 1868 (admitted as a state 1890).    On
the same day there was debate in the Senate over the name for the new Territory. Territories often
keep their names when they become States, so we may be glad that Cheyenne, to be pronounced Shy-en,
was not adopted. Lincoln was rejected for an obvious and, no doubt, sound reason. Apparently, nobody
had a better name to offer, though there must be plenty of Indian words that could properly be used,
and, for the present, the insignificant Wyoming is retained. [The Nation, June 11, 1868]


