germ (n.)

mid-15c., bud, sprout; 1640s, rudiment of a new organism in an existing one, from Middle French
germe germ (of egg); bud, seed, fruit; offering, from Latin germen (genitive germinis) sprout, bud,
perhaps from PIE root *gen- to beget, bear (see genus). The older sense is preserved in wheat germ
and germ of an idea; sense of seed of a disease first recorded 1796 in English; that of harmful
microorganism dates from 1871. Germ warfare recorded from 1920.


germinal (adj.)

1808, from Modern Latin germinalis in the germ, from Latin germen (genitive germinis) sprout, bud,
sprig, offshoot (see germ) + -al (1).


germicide (n.)

1880, from germ + -cide.


germy (adj.)

1912, from germ + -y (2).


germination (n.)

mid-15c., from Latin germinationem (nominative germinatio) sprouting forth, budding, noun of action
from past participle stem of germinare to sprout, put forth shoots, from germen (genitive germinis)
a sprout or bud (see germ).


blasto-

before vowels blast-, word-forming element used in scientific compounds to mean germ, bud, from
Greek blasto-, comb. form of blastos sprout, germ, of unknown origin.


blastula (n.)

embryonic state, 1875, Modern Latin, from Greek blastos sprout, germ + diminutive ending -ula.


blastema (n.)

1849, Modern Latin, from Greek blastema offspring, offshoot, from stem of blastanein to shoot forth,
from blastos sprout, germ, of unknown origin. Related: Blastemal.


chink (n.1)

a split, crack, 1530s, with parasitic -k + Middle English chine (and replacing this word) fissure,
narrow valley, from Old English cinu, cine fissure, related to cinan to crack, split, gape, common
Germanic (compare Old Saxon and Old High German kinan, Gothic uskeinan, German keimen to germinate;
Middle Dutch kene, Old Saxon kin, German Keim germ; ), from PIE root *geie- to sprout, split open.
The connection being in the notion of bursting open.


charm (n.)

c.1300, incantation, magic charm, from Old French charme (12c.) magic charm, magic, spell;
incantation, song, lamentation, from Latin carmen song, verse, enchantment, religious formula, from
canere to sing (see chant (v.)), with dissimilation of -n- to -r- before -m- in intermediate form
*canmen (for a similar evolution, see Latin germen germ, from *genmen). The notion is of chanting or
reciting verses of magical power.    A yet stronger power than that of herb or stone lies in the
spoken word, and all nations use it both for blessing and cursing. But these, to be effective, must
be choice, well knit, rhythmic words (verba concepta), must have lilt and tune; hence all that is
strong in the speech wielded by priest, physician, magician, is allied to the forms of poetry.
[Jacob Grimm, Teutonic Mythology (transl. Stallybrass), 1883]    Sense of pleasing quality evolved
17c. Meaning small trinket fastened to a watch-chain, etc. first recorded 1865. Quantum physics
sense is from 1964. To work like a charm (figuratively) is recorded by 1824.


genus (n.)

(plural genera), 1550s as a term of logic, kind or class of things (biological sense dates from
c.1600), from Latin genus (genitive generis) race, stock, kind; family, birth, descent, origin,
cognate with Greek genos race, kind, and gonos birth, offspring, stock, from PIE root *gene-
produce, give birth, beget, with derivatives referring to family and tribal groups (cognates:
Sanskrit janati begets, bears, janah race, janman- birth, origin, jatah born; Avestan zizanenti they
bear; Greek gignesthai to become, happen; Latin gignere to beget, gnasci to be born, genius
procreative divinity, inborn tutelary spirit, innate quality, ingenium inborn character, germen
shoot, bud, embryo, germ; Lithuanian gentis kinsmen; Gothic kuni race; Old English cennan beget,
create; Old High German kind child; Old Irish ro-genar I was born; Welsh geni to be born; Armenian
chanim I bear, I am born).


bug (n.)

insect, 1620s (earliest reference is to bedbugs), of unknown origin, probably but not certainly from
or influenced by Middle English bugge something frightening, scarecrow (late 14c.), a meaning
obsolete since the insect sense arose except in bugbear (1570s) and bugaboo (q.v.).    Probably
connected with Scottish bogill goblin, bugbear, or obsolete Welsh bwg ghost, goblin (compare Welsh
bwgwl threat, earlier fear, Middle Irish bocan&#225;ch supernatural being). Some speculate that
these words are from a root meaning goat (see buck (n.1)) and represent originally a goat-like
spectre. Compare also bogey (n.1) and German b&ouml;gge, b&ouml;ggel-mann goblin. Perhaps influenced
in meaning by Old English -budda used in compounds for beetle (compare Low German budde louse, grub,
Middle Low German buddech thick, swollen).     In the United States bug is not confined, as in
England, to the domestic pest, but is applied to all insects of the Coleoptera order, which includes
what in this country are generally called beetles. [Farmer &amp; Henley, Dictionary of Slang and
Colloquial English, 1912 abridged edition]    Meaning defect in a machine (1889) may have been
coined c.1878 by Thomas Edison (perhaps with the notion of an insect getting into the works).
Meaning person obsessed by an idea (such as firebug) is from 1841, perhaps from notion of
persistence. Sense of microbe, germ is from 1919. Bugs crazy is from c.1900. Bug juice as a slang
name for drink is from 1869, originally bad whiskey. The 1811 slang dictionary has bug-hunter an
upholsterer. Bug-word word or words meant to irritate and vex is from 1560s.


