gibberish (n.)

1550s, imitative of the sound of chatter, probably influenced by jabber. Used early 17c. of the
language of rogues and gypsies.


jibber-jabber (v.)

1728, to talk gibberish, reduplication of jabber (q.v.). Related: Jibber-jabbering. As a noun, from
1813.


gibber (v.)

c.1600, probably a back-formation from gibberish. Related: Gibbered; gibbering.


Double Dutch

gibberish, 1864 (High Dutch for incomprehensible language is recorded from 1789); from double (adj.)
+ Dutch.


gringo (n.)

1849, from Mexican Spanish gringo, contemptuous word for foreigner, from Spanish gringo foreign,
unintelligible talk, gibberish, perhaps ultimately from griego Greek. The Diccionario Castellano
(1787) says gringo was used in Malaga for anyone who spoke Spanish badly, and in Madrid for the
Irish.


jargon (n.)

mid-14c., unintelligible talk, gibberish; chattering, jabbering, from Old French jargon a chattering
(of birds), also language, speech, especially idle talk; thieves' Latin. Ultimately of echoic origin
(compare Latin garrire to chatter, English gargle). Often applied to something the speaker does not
understand, hence meaning mode of speech full of unfamiliar terms (1650s). Middle English also had
it as a verb, jargounen to chatter (late 14c.), from French.


jingo (n.)

mindless, gung-ho patriot, 1878, picked up from the refrain of a music hall song written by G.W.
Hunt, and sung by Gilbert H. MacDermott (1845-1901), supporting aggressive British policy toward
Russia at a time of international tension. (We don't want to fight, But by Jingo! if we do, We've
got the ships, we've got the men, We've got the money too.)    Hunt's patriotic song of 1878, with a
swinging tune ... became at Macdermott's instigation the watchword of the popular supporters of
England's bellicose policy. The Daily News on 11 March 1878 first dubbed the latter 'Jingoes' in
derision .... [Dictionary of National Biography, London, 1912]    As an asseveration, it was in
colloquial use since 1690s, and is apparently yet another euphemism for Jesus, influenced by
conjurer's gibberish presto-jingo (1660s). The frequent suggestion that it somehow derives from
Basque Jinko god is not impossible, but as yet unsupported by evidence [OED].


Greek (n.)

Old English Grecas, Crecas (plural), early Germanic borrowing from Latin Graeci the Hellenes, from
Greek Grakoi. Aristotle, who was the first to use Graikhos as equivalent to Hellenes (Meteorologica
I.xiv), wrote that it was the name originally used by Illyrians for the Dorians in Epirus, from
Graii, native name of the people of Epirus.    But a modern theory (put forth by German classical
historian Georg Busolt, 1850-1920), derives it from Graikhos inhabitant of Graia (literally gray), a
town on the coast of Boeotia, which was the name given by the Romans to all Greeks, originally to
the Greek colonists from Graia who helped found Cumae (9c. B.C.E.), the important city in southern
Italy where the Latins first encountered Greeks. Under this theory, it was reborrowed in this
general sense by the Greeks.    The Germanic languages originally borrowed the word with an initial
-k- sound (compare Old High German Chrech, Gothic Kreks), which probably was their initial sound
closest to the Latin -g- at the time; the word was later refashioned.  It was subtle of God to learn
Greek when he wished to become an author -- and not to learn it better. [Nietzsche, Beyond Good and
Evil, 1886]  Meaning the Greek language is from late 14c.; meaning unintelligible speech, gibberish
is from c.1600. Meaning Greek letter fraternity member is student slang, 1900.


