giddy (adj.)

Old English gidig, variant of gydig insane, mad, stupid, possessed (by a spirit), probably from
Proto-Germanic *gud-iga-, from *gudam god + *-ig possessed. Meaning having a confused, swimming
sensation is from 1560s. Meaning elated is from 1540s. Related: Giddily; giddiness.


swindler (n.)

1774, from German Schwindler giddy person, extravagant speculator, cheat, from schwindeln to be
giddy, act extravagantly, swindle, from Old High German swintilon be giddy, frequentative form of
swintan to languish, disappear; cognate with Old English swindan, and probably with swima dizziness.
Said to have been introduced in London by German Jews c.1762.


giglot (n.)

lewd, wanton woman (mid-14c.); later a giddy, romping girl; of unknown origin; compare gig (n.1).


giddiness (n.)

late 13c., thoughtless folly; see giddy + -ness. Meaning dizziness is late 14c.


flirt (v.)

1550s, originally to turn up one's nose, sneer at, then to rap or flick, as with the fingers
(1560s). The noun is first attested 1540s, from the verb, with the meaning stroke of wit. It's
possible that the original word was imitative, along the lines of flip (v.), but there seems to be
some influence from flit, such as in the flirt sense of to move in short, quick flights, attested
from 1580s.    Meanwhile flirt (n.) had come to mean a pert young hussey [Johnson] by 1560s, and
Shakespeare has flirt-gill (i.e. Jill) a woman of light or loose behavior, while flirtgig was a 17c.
Yorkshire dialect word for a giddy, flighty girl. All or any of these could have fed into the main
modern verbal sense of play at courtship (1777), which also could have grown naturally from the
earlier meaning to flit inconstantly from object to object (1570s), perhaps influenced by Old French
fleureter talk sweet nonsense, also to touch a thing in passing, diminutive of fleur flower and
metaphoric of bees skimming from flower to flower.    The noun meaning person who flirts is from
1732. The English word also is possibly related to East Frisian flirt a flick or light blow, and
flirtje a giddy girl. French flirter to flirt is a 19c. borrowing from English. Related: Flirted;
flirting.


hare-brained (adj.)

also harebrained, 1550s, from hare-brain giddy or reckless person (1540s), probably from hare, on
notion of flighty, skittish.


gig (n.1)

light carriage, small boat, 1790, perhaps, on notion of bouncing, from Middle English ghyg spinning
top (in whyrlegyg, mid-15c.), also giddy girl (early 13c., also giglet), from Old Norse geiga turn
sideways, or Danish gig spinning top.


giddily (adv.)

mid-13c., from giddy + -ly (2).


scatterbrain (n.)

also scatter-brain, thoughtless, giddy person, one incapable of serious, connected thought, 1764
(scatter-brained), from scatter (v.) + brain (n.). Related: Scatterbrained. Compare scatter-good
spendthrift.


sober (adj.)

mid-14c., moderate in desires or actions, temperate, restrained, especially abstaining from strong
drink, also calm, quiet, not overcome by emotion, from Old French sobre decent; sober (12c.), from
Latin sobrius not drunk, temperate, moderate, sensible, from a variant of se- without (see se-) +
ebrius drunk, of unknown origin. Meaning not drunk at the moment is from late 14c.; also
appropriately solemn, serious, not giddy. Related: Soberly; soberness. Sobersides sedate, serious-
minded person is recorded from 1705.


dizzy (adj.)

Old English dysig foolish, stupid, from Proto-Germanic *dusijaz (cognates: Low German d&uuml;sig
dizzy, Dutch duizelen to be dizzy, Old High German dusig foolish, German Tor fool, Old English
dw&aelig;s, Dutch dwaas foolish), perhaps from PIE *dheu- (1) dust, vapor, smoke; to rise in a cloud
(and related notions of defective perception or wits).    Meaning having a whirling sensation is
from mid-14c.; that of giddy is from c.1500 and seems to merge the two earlier meanings. Used of the
foolish virgins in early translations of Matthew xxv; used especially of blondes since 1870s.
Related: Dizzily.


dwell (v.)

Old English dwellan to mislead, deceive, originally to make a fool of, lead astray, from Proto-
Germanic *dwelan to go or lead astray (cognates: Old Norse dv&ouml;l delay, dvali sleep; Middle
Dutch dwellen to stun, make giddy, perplex; Old High German twellen to hinder, delay; Danish dvale
trance, stupor, dvaelb&aelig;r narcotic berry, source of Middle English dwale nightshade), from PIE
*dhwel-, extended form of root *dheu- (1) dust, cloud, vapor, smoke (and related notions of
defective perception or wits).    Related to Old English gedweola error, heresy, madness. Sense
shifted in Middle English through hinder, delay, to linger (c.1200, as still in phrase to dwell
upon), to make a home (mid-13c.). Related: Dwelled; dwelt; dwells.


