gilded (adj.)

1560s (late Old English had gegylde); in modern use the more dignified past participle of gild
(q.v.). Shakespeare's lilies were never gilded; the quote (King John, iv.2) is, To gild refined
gold, to paint the lily.


gild (v.)

Old English gyldan to gild, to cover with a thin layer of gold, from Proto-Germanic *gulthian
(cognates: Old Norse gylla to gild, Old High German ubergulden to cover with gold), from *gulthan
gold (see gold). Related: Gilded; gilding. Figuratively from 1590s.


gilding (n.)

action of gilding, mid-15c.; golden surface produced by gilding, 1630s; verbal noun from gild (v.).


dory (n.2)

type of edible fish, mid-15c., from Old French doree, originally the fem. past participle of dorer
to gild, from Latin deauratus, from de- + aurare to gild, from aurum (see aureate). So called in
reference to its colorings.


eldorado (n.)

1590s, from Spanish El Dorado the golden one, name given 16c. to country or city believed to lie in
the heart of the Amazon jungle, from past participle of dorar to gild, from Latin deaurare.


gilt (adj.)

c.1400, past participle of Middle English gilden, from Old English gyldan (see gild). Also used as a
noun with a sense of gilding (early 15c.).


geld (n.)

royal tax in medieval England, Old English gield payment, tribute, from Proto-Germanic *geldam
payment (cognates: Middle High German gelt payment, contribution, German geld money, Old Norse gjald
payment, Gothic gild tribute, tax), from PIE root of yield (v.).


guild (n.)

early 13c., yilde (spelling later influenced by Old Norse gildi guild, brotherhood), a semantic
fusion of Old English gegyld guild and gild, gyld payment, tribute, compensation, from Proto-
Germanic *gelth- pay (cognates: Old Frisian geld money, Old Saxon geld payment, sacrifice, reward,
Old High German gelt payment, tribute; see yield (v.)).    The connecting sense is of a tribute or
payment to join a protective or trade society. But some see the root in its alternative sense of
sacrifice, as if in worship, and see the word as meaning a combination for religious purposes,
either Christian or pagan. The Anglo-Saxon guilds had a strong religious component; they were burial
societies that paid for masses for the souls of deceased members as well as paying fines in cases of
justified crime. The continental custom of guilds of merchants arrived after the Conquest, with
incorporated societies of merchants in each town or city holding exclusive rights of doing business
there. In many cases they became the governing body of a town (compare Guildhall, which came to be
the London city hall). Trade guilds arose 14c., as craftsmen united to protect their common
interest.


blond (adj.)

late 15c., from Old French blont fair, blond (12c.), from Medieval Latin blundus yellow, perhaps
from Frankish *blund. If it is a Germanic word, it is possibly related to Old English blonden-feax
gray-haired, from blondan, blandan to mix (see blend (v.)). According to Littr&eacute;, the original
sense of the French word was a colour midway between golden and light chestnut, which might account
for the notion of mixed.    Old English beblonden meant dyed, so it is also possible that the root
meaning of blonde, if it is Germanic, may be dyed, as ancient Teutonic warriors were noted for dying
their hair. Du Cange, however, writes that blundus was a vulgar pronunciation of Latin flavus
yellow. Another guess (discounted by German etymologists), is that it represents a Vulgar Latin
*albundus, from alba white.    The word was reintroduced into English 17c. from French, and was
until recently still felt as French, hence blonde (with French feminine ending) for females. Italian
biondo, Spanish blondo, Old Proven&ccedil;al blon all are of Germanic origin.    Fair hair was much
esteemed by both the Greeks and Romans, and so they not only dyed and gold-dusted theirs ..., but
also went so far as to gild the hair of their statues, as notably those of Venus de Medici and
Apollo. In the time of Ovid (A.U.C. 711) much fair hair was imported from Germany, by the Romans, as
it was considered quite the fashionable color. Those Roman ladies who did not choose to wear wigs of
this hue, were accustomed to powder theirs freely with gold dust, so as to give it the fashionable
yellow tint. [C. Henry Leonard, The Hair, 1879]


