gist (n.)

1711, the real point (of a law case, etc.), from Anglo-French legalese phrases such as cest action
gist this action lies, meaning this case is sustainable by law, from Old French gist en it consists
in, it lies in (third person singular present indicative of g&eacute;sir to lie), from Latin iacet
it lies, from iacere to lie, rest, related to iacere to throw (see jet (v.)). Extended sense of
essence first recorded 1823.


nub (n.)

knob, lump, bump, 1590s, variant of dialectal knub, probably a variant of knob. Figurative meaning
point, gist first recorded 1834.


summary (n.)

a summary statement or account, c.1500, from Latin summarium an epitome, abstract, summary, from
summa totality, gist (see sum (n.)).


summary (adj.)

early 15c., brief, abbreviated; containing the sum or substance only, from Medieval Latin summarius
of or pertaining to the sum or substance, from Latin summa whole, totality, gist (see sum (n.)).
Compare Latin phrase ad summam on the whole, generally, in short. Sense of done promptly, performed
without hesitation or formality is from 1713.


yeast (n.)

Old English gist yeast, froth, from Proto-Germanic *jest- (cognates: Old Norse jastr, Swedish
j&#228;st, Middle High German gest, German Gischt foam, froth, Old High German jesan, German
g&auml;ren to ferment), from PIE root *yes- to boil, foam, froth (cognates: Sanskrit yasyati boils,
seethes, Greek zein to boil, Welsh ias seething, foaming).


sum (n.)

c.1300, summe, quantity or amount of money, from Anglo-French and Old French summe, somme amount,
total; collection; essential point; summing up, conclusion (13c., Modern French somme), from Latin
summa the top, summit; chief place, highest rank; main thing, chief point, essence, gist; an amount
(of money), noun use (via phrases such as summa pars, summa res) of fem. of summus highest,
uppermost, from PIE *sup-mos-, from root *uper over (see super-).    The sense development from
highest to total number, the whole probably is via the Roman custom of adding up a stack of figures
from the bottom and writing the sum at the top, rather than at the bottom as now (compare the bottom
line).    General sense of numerical quantity of anything, a total number is from late 14c. Meaning
essence of a writing or speech also is attested from mid-14c. Meaning aggregate of two or more
numbers is from early 15c.; sense of arithmetical problem to be solved is from 1803. Sum-total is
attested from late 14c., from Medieval Latin summa totalis.


