gladden (v.)

c.1300, to be glad; 1550s, to make glad; see glad + -en (1). Earlier in both senses was simply glad
(v.), from Old English gladian, Mercian gleadian be glad, make glad.


glad (adj.)

Old English gl&aelig;d bright, shining, joyous, from Proto-Germanic *glada- (cognates: Old Norse
gla&eth;r smooth, bright, glad, Danish glad glad, joyful, Old Saxon gladmod glad, Old Frisian gled
smooth, Dutch glad slippery, German glatt smooth), from PIE *ghel- (2) to shine, with derivatives
referring to bright materials and gold (see glass). The modern sense is much weakened. Slang glad
rags one's best clothes first recorded 1902.


glad hand (n.)

1895, in verbal phrase to give the glad hand extend a welcome. As a verb, attested from 1903 (also
gladhand). Often used cynically.


gladly (adv.)

Old English gl&aelig;dlice joyfully, kindly, willingly; see glad + -ly (2).


gladness (n.)

Old English gl&aelig;dnes; see glad + -ness.


gladsome (adj.)

late 14c., gladsum; see glad + -some (1).


glade (n.)

clear, open space in a woods, c.1400, perhaps from Middle English glode (c.1300), from Old Norse
gla&eth;r bright (see glad). Original meaning would be bright (because open) space in a wood
(compare French clairi&egrave;re glade, from clair clear, bright; German Lichtung clearing, glade,
from Licht light). American English sense of marshy grassland (as in Everglades) first recorded
c.1796.


fain (adj.)

Old English f&aelig;gen, fagen glad, cheerful, happy, joyful, rejoicing, from a common Germanic root
(cognates: Old Saxon fagan, Old Norse feginn glad, Old High German faginon, Gothic faginon to
rejoice), perhaps from PIE *pek- (1) to make pretty. As an adverb, from c.1200.


fawn (v.)

Old English f&aelig;gnian rejoice, be glad, exult, from f&aelig;gen glad (see fain); used in Middle
English to refer to expressions of delight, especially a dog wagging its tail (early 13c.), hence
court favor, grovel, act slavishly (early 14c.). Related: Fawned; fawning.


glabrous (adj.)

1630s, from Latin glaber hairless, smooth, bald (see glad).


Letitia

fem. proper name, literally gladness, from Latin laetitia, from laetus glad, of unknown origin.


gabbro (n.)

type of igneous rock, 1837, from Italian (Tuscan) gabbro, from Latin glaber bare, smooth, bald (see
glad).


Ganymede

Trojan youth whom Zeus made his cup-bearer, from Greek Ganymedes, literally rejoicing in his
virility, from ganymai I rejoice, am glad + medea (plural) counsels, plans, cunning (see Medea), but
here taken by many to mean genitals. Used figuratively of serving-boys (c.1600) and catamites
(1590s).


glabella (n.)

space between the eyebrows, 1590s, Modern Latin, properly fem. of adj. glabellus without hair,
smooth, diminutive of glaber smooth, bald, from PIE *gladh- smooth (see glad).


serene (adj.)

mid-15c., clear, calm, from Latin serenus peaceful, calm, clear (of weather), figuratively cheerful,
glad, tranquil, of uncertain origin; perhaps from a suffixed variant of PIE *ksero- dry, source of
Greek xeros dry (see xerasia). In English, applied to persons since 1630s. Related: Serenely.


joyous (adj.)

c.1300, from Anglo-French joyous, Old French joios happy, cheerful, merry, glad (12c., Modern French
joyeux), from joie (see joy). Related: Joyously; joyousness.


rejoice (v.)

c.1300, to own, possess, enjoy the possession of, have the fruition of, from Old French rejoiss-,
present participle stem of rejoir, resjoir gladden, rejoice, from re-, which here is of obscure
signification, perhaps an intensive (see re-), + joir be glad, from Latin gaudere rejoice (see joy).
Originally sense in to rejoice in. Meaning to be full of joy is recorded from late 14c. Middle
English also used simple verb joy to feel gladness; to rejoice (mid-13c.) and rejoy (early 14c.).
Related: Rejoiced; rejoicing.


frolic

1530s, as an adjective, joyous, merry, from Middle Dutch vrolyc (adj.) happy, from vro- merry, glad
+ lyc like (see like (adj.)). Cognate with German fr&ouml;hlich happy. The stem is cognate with Old
Norse frar swift, Middle English frow hasty, from PIE *preu- (see frog (n.1)), giving the whole an
etymological sense akin to jumping for joy. The verb is first attested 1580s. Related: Frolicked;
frolicking. As a noun, from 1610s.


glee (n.)

Old English gliu, gliw entertainment, mirth, jest, play, sport, presumably from a Proto-Germanic
*gleujam but absent in other Germanic languages except for the rare Old Norse gly joy; probably
related to glad. A poetry word in Old English and Middle English, obsolete c.1500-c.1700, it somehow
found its way back to currency late 18c. In Old English, an entertainer was a gleuman (female
gleo-m&aelig;gden). Glee club (1814) is from the secondary sense of unaccompanied part-song (1650s)
as a form of musical entertainment.


glide (v.)

Old English glidan move along smoothly and easily, glide, slip, slide (class I strong verb, past
tense glad, past participle gliden), from West Germanic *glidan to glide (cognates: Old Saxon
glidan, Old Frisian glida, German gleiten). Related: Glided; gliding. Strong past tense form glid
persisted into 20c. The noun is attested 1580s, from the verb.


receptionist (n.)

person hired to receive clients in an office, 1900, from reception + -ist.  Originally in
photography studios.    Let me not forget the receptionist -- generally and preferably, a woman of
refined and gentle manners, well informed and specially gifted in handling people of varied
dispositions. A woman especially who knows how to handle other women, and who can make herself
beloved by the children who may visit the studio. A woman, also, who in a thoroughly suave and
dignified way, knows just how to handle the young man of the period so that the photographer may be
glad to have his business. What a power the receptionist is when properly chosen and trained. It is
not too much to say that she can both make and destroy a business, if she has the amount of
discretionary power given to her in some galleries. [John A. Tennant, Business Methods Applied in
Photography, Wilson's Photographic Magazine, October 1900]    Earlier as an adjective in theology
and law (1867).


enjoy (v.)

late 14c., rejoice, be glad (intransitive), from Old French enjoir to give joy, rejoice, take
delight in, from en- make (see en- (1)) + joir enjoy, from Latin gaudere rejoice (see joy); Sense of
have the use or benefit of first recorded early 15c. (replacing Old English brucan; see brook (v.)).
Meaning take pleasure in is mid-15c. In modern use it has a tendency to lose its connection with
pleasure: newspaper photo captions say someone enjoys an ice cream cone, etc., when all she is doing
is eating it, and Wright's English Dialect Dictionary (1900) reports widespread use in north and
west England of the phrase to enjoy bad health for one who has ailments. Related: Enjoyed; enjoying;
enjoys.


gospel (n.)

Old English godspel gospel, glad tidings announced by Jesus; one of the four gospels, from god good
(see good) + spel story, message (see spell (n.1)); translation of Latin bona adnuntiatio, itself a
translation of Greek euangelion reward for bringing good news.    The first element of the Old
English word had a long o, but it shifted under mistaken association with God. The word passed early
from English to continental Germanic languages in forms that clearly indicate the first element had
shifted to God, such as Old Saxon godspell, Old High German gotspell, Old Norse go&eth;spiall. Used
of anything as true as the Gospel from mid-13c. Gospel-gossip was Addison's word (Spectator, 1711)
for one who is always talking of sermons, texts, etc.


evangelist (n.)

late 12c., Matthew, Mark, Luke or John, from Old French evangelist and directly from Late Latin
evangelista, from Greek euangelistes preacher of the gospel, literally bringer of good news, from
euangelizesthai bring good news, from eu- good (see eu-) + angellein announce, from angelos
messenger (see angel).    In early Greek Christian texts, the word was used of the four supposed
authors of the narrative gospels. Meaning itinerant preacher was another early Church usage, revived
in Middle English (late 14c.). Classical Greek euangelion meant the reward of good tidings; sense
transferred in Christian use to the glad tidings themselves. In Late Latin, Greek eu- regularly was
consonantized to ev- before vowels.


happy (adj.)

late 14c., lucky, favored by fortune, prosperous; of events, turning out well, from hap (n.) chance,
fortune + -y (2). Sense of very glad first recorded late 14c. Ousted Old English eadig (from ead
wealth, riches) and ges&aelig;lig, which has become silly. Meaning greatly pleased and content is
from 1520s. Old English bli&eth;e happy survives as blithe. From Greek to Irish, a great majority of
the European words for happy at first meant lucky. An exception is Welsh, where the word used first
meant wise.    Used in World War II and after as a suffix (as in bomb-happy, flak-happy) expressing
dazed or frazzled from stress. Happy medium is from 1778. Happy ending in the literary sense
recorded from 1756. Happy as a clam (1630s) was originally happy as a clam in the mud at high tide,
when it can't be dug up and eaten. Happy hunting ground, the reputed Indian paradise, is attested
from 1840, American English. Related: Happier; happiest.


play (v.)

Old English plegan, plegian move rapidly, occupy or busy oneself, exercise; frolic; make sport of,
mock; perform music, from West Germanic *plegan occupy oneself about  (cognates: Old Saxon plegan
vouch for, take charge of, Old Frisian plega tend to, Middle Dutch pleyen to rejoice, be glad,
German pflegen take care of, cultivate), from PIE root *dlegh- to engage oneself, forming words in
Celtic, Germanic, Slavic, and possibly Latin.    Meaning to take part in a game is from c.1200.
Opposed to work (v.) since late 14c. Related: Played; playing. To play up emphasize is from 1909; to
play down minimize is from 1930; to play along cooperate is from 1929. To play with oneself
masturbate is from 1896; play for keeps is from 1861, originally of marbles or other children's
games with tokens. To play second fiddle in the figurative sense is from 1809 (Gil Blas). To play
into the hands (of someone) is from 1705. To play the _______ card is attested from 1886; to play
fair is from mid-15c. To play (something) safe is from 1911; to play favorites is attested from
1902. For play the field see field (n.).


Wyoming

region in Luzerne County, Pennsylvania, from Munsee Delaware (Algonquian) chwewamink at the big
river flat, from /xw-/ big + /-e:wam-/ river flat + /-enk/ place. Popularized by 1809 poem Gertrude
of Wyoming, set amid wars between Indians and American settlers, written by Scottish author Thomas
Campbell (1777-1844), who seems to have had a vague or defective notion of Pennsylvania geography:
On Susquehanna's side, fair Wyoming!  Although the wild-flower on thy ruin'd wall,  And roofless
homes, a sad remembrance bring,  Of what thy gentle people did befall;  Yet thou wert once the
loveliest land of all  That see the Atlantic wave their morn restore.  Sweet land! may I thy lost
delights recall,  And paint thy Gertrude in her bowers of yore,  Whose beauty was the love of
Pennsylvania's shore!   et cetera. Subsequently applied 19c. to other locations (in Kansas, Ohio,
and Wisconsin), and to a western territory organized July 25, 1868 (admitted as a state 1890).    On
the same day there was debate in the Senate over the name for the new Territory. Territories often
keep their names when they become States, so we may be glad that Cheyenne, to be pronounced Shy-en,
was not adopted. Lincoln was rejected for an obvious and, no doubt, sound reason. Apparently, nobody
had a better name to offer, though there must be plenty of Indian words that could properly be used,
and, for the present, the insignificant Wyoming is retained. [The Nation, June 11, 1868]


sad (adj.)

Old English s&aelig;d sated, full, having had one's fill (of food, drink, fighting, etc.), weary of,
from Proto-Germanic *sathaz (cognates: Old Norse sa&eth;r, Middle Dutch sat, Dutch zad, Old High
German sat, German satt, Gothic sa&thorn;s satiated, sated, full), from PIE *seto- (cognates: Latin
satis enough, sufficient, Greek hadros thick, bulky, Old Church Slavonic sytu, Lithuanian sotus
satiated, Old Irish saith satiety, sathach sated), from root *sa- to satisfy (cognates: Sanskrit
a-sinvan insatiable).    Sense development passed through the meaning heavy, ponderous (i.e. full
mentally or physically), and weary, tired of before emerging c.1300 as unhappy. An alternative
course would be through the common Middle English sense of steadfast, firmly established, fixed (as
in sad-ware tough pewter vessels) and serious to grave. In the main modern sense, it replaced Old
English unrot, negative of rot cheerful, glad.    Meaning very bad is from 1690s. Slang sense of
inferior, pathetic is from 1899; sad sack is 1920s, popularized by World War II armed forces
(specifically by cartoon character invented by Sgt. George Baker, 1942, and published in U.S. Armed
Forces magazine Yank), probably a euphemistic shortening of common military slang phrase sad sack of
shit.


