glamor

chiefly U.S. alternative spelling of glamour (q.v.). Related: Glamorous; glamorously.


glamorous (adj.)

1882, from glamor + -ous. Related: Glamorously.


glamorize (v.)

also glamourize, 1901, from glamor + -ize. Related: Glamorized; glamorizing.


Ossianic (adj.)

1808, in reference to Oisin, name of a legendary Gaelic bard, literally little fawn; James
Macpherson claimed to have collected and translated his works (1760-1763) under the name Ossian, and
the poetic prose sparked a Celtic revival and fascination with the glamor of the lost world of the
bards. The work turned out to be Macpherson's forgery, and the style later was regarded as
bombastic, but the resulting swerve in European literature was real.


grimoire (n.)

magician's manual for invoking demons, 1849, from French grimoire, altered from grammaire grammar
(see grammar). See glamor.


glamour (n.)

1720, Scottish, magic, enchantment (especially in phrase to cast the glamor), a variant of Scottish
gramarye magic, enchantment, spell, alteration of English grammar (q.v.) with a medieval sense of
any sort of scholarship, especially occult learning, the latter sense attested from c.1500 in
English but said to have been more common in Medieval Latin. Popularized by the writings of Sir
Walter Scott (1771-1832). Sense of magical beauty, alluring charm first recorded 1840. Jamieson's
1825 supplement to his Etymological Dictionary of the Scottish Language has glamour-gift the power
of enchantment; metaph. applied to female fascination. Jamieson's original edition (1808) looks to
Old Norse for the source of the word. Zoega's Old Icelandic dictionary has gl&#225;m-s&#253;ni
illusion.


grammar (n.)

early 14c., gramarye (late 12c. in surnames), from Old French gramaire learning, especially Latin
and philology, grammar, (magic) incantation, spells, mumbo-jumbo, irregular semi-popular adoption
[OED] of Latin grammatica, from Greek grammatike tekhne art of letters, with a sense of both
philology and literature in the broadest sense, fem. adjective from gramma letter, from stem of
graphein to draw or write (see -graphy). An Old English word for it was st&aelig;fcr&aelig;ft (see
staff (n.)).    Form grammar is from late 14c. Restriction to rules of language is a post-classical
development, but as this type of study was until 16c. limited to Latin, Middle English gramarye also
came to mean learning in general, knowledge peculiar to the learned classes (early 14c.), which
included astrology and magic; hence the secondary meaning of occult knowledge (late 15c.), which
evolved in Scottish into glamor (q.v.).    A grammar school (late 14c.) originally was a school in
which the learned languages are grammatically taught [Johnson, who also has grammaticaster a mean
verbal pedant]. In U.S. (1842) the term was put to use in the graded system for a school between
primary and secondary where English grammar is taught.


