glaring (adj.)

late 14c., from present participle of glare. Meaning obtrusively conspicuous is from 1706.


howler

1832, animal that howls, agent noun from howl (v.). Meaning glaring blunder, ridiculous mistake is
first recorded 1890.


glare (v.)

late 13c., shine brightly, from or related to Middle Dutch, Middle Low German glaren to gleam,
related by rhoticization to glas (see glass). Sense of stare fiercely is from late 14c. The noun is
c.1400 in sense bright light; 1660s in sense of fierce look. Old English gl&aelig;r (n.) meant
amber. Related: Glared; glaring.


gross (adj.)

mid-14c., large; early 15c., coarse, plain, simple, from Old French gros big, thick, fat, tall,
pregnant; coarse, rude, awkward; ominous, important; arrogant (11c.), from Late Latin grossus thick,
coarse (of food or mind), of obscure origin, not in classical Latin. Said to be unrelated to Latin
crassus, which meant the same thing, or to German gross large, but said by Klein to be cognate with
Old Irish bres, Middle Irish bras big. Its meaning forked in English to glaring, flagrant, monstrous
(1580s) on the one hand and entire, total, whole (early 15c.) on the other. Meaning disgusting is
first recorded 1958 in U.S. student slang, from earlier use as an intensifier of unpleasant things
(gross stupidity, etc.). Earlier coarse in behavior or manners (1530s) and, of things, inferior,
common (late 15c.). Gross national product first recorded 1947.


gunsel (n.)

1914, American English, from hobo slang, a catamite; specifically a young male kept as a sexual
companion, especially by an older tramp, from Yiddish genzel, from German G&auml;nslein gosling,
young goose. The secondary, non-sexual meaning young hoodlum seems to be entirely traceable to
Dashiell Hammett, who sneaked it into The Maltese Falcon (1929) while warring with his editor over
the book's racy language.    Another thing, Spade repeated, glaring at the boy: Keep that gunsel
away from me while you're making up your mind. I'll kill him.    The context implies some connection
with gun and a sense of gunman, and evidently the editor bought it. The word was retained in the
script of the 1941 movie made from the book, so evidently the Motion Picture Production Code censors
didn't know it either.    The relationship between Kasper Gutman (Sidney Greenstreet) and his young
hit-man companion, Wilmer Cook (Elisha Cook, Jr.), is made fairly clear in the movie, but the overt
mention of sexual perversion would have been deleted if the censors hadn't made the same mistaken
assumption as Hammett's editor. [Hugh Rawson, Wicked Words, 1989, p.184]


