gleam (v.)

early 13c., from gleam (n). Related: Gleamed; gleaming.


gleam (n.)

Old English gl&aelig;m brilliant light; brightness, splendor, radiance, from Proto-Germanic *glaimiz
(cognates: Old Saxon glimo brightness; Middle High German glim spark, gleime glowworm; German
glimmen to glimmer, glow; Old Norse glija to shine, glitter), from root *glim-, from PIE *ghel- (2)
to shine, with derivatives referring to bright materials and gold (see glass).


blink (v.)

1580s, perhaps from Middle Dutch blinken to glitter, of uncertain origin, possibly, with German
blinken to gleam, sparkle, twinkle, from a nasalized form of base found in Old English blican to
shine, glitter (see bleach (v.)).    Middle English had blynke (c.1300) in the sense a brief gleam
or spark, perhaps a variant of blench to move suddenly or sharply; to raise one's eyelids (c.1200),
perhaps from the rare Old English blencan deceive. Related: Blinked; blinking. The last, as a
euphemism for a stronger word, is attested by 1914.


mere (adj.)

c.1400, unmixed, pure, from Old French mier pure (of gold), entire, total, complete, and directly
from Latin merus unmixed (of wine), pure; bare, naked; figuratively true, real, genuine, probably
originally clear, bright, from PIE *mer- to gleam, glimmer, sparkle (cognates: Old English amerian
to purify, Old Irish emer not clear, Sanskrit maricih ray, beam, Greek marmarein to gleam, glimmer).
Original sense of nothing less than, absolute (mid-15c., now only in vestiges such as mere folly)
existed for centuries alongside opposite sense of nothing more than (1580s, as in a mere dream).


neat (adj.)

1540s, clean, free from dirt, from Anglo-French neit, Middle French net clear, pure (12c.), from
Latin nitidus well-favored, elegant, trim, literally gleaming, from nitere to shine, from PIE root
*nei- to shine (cognates: Middle Irish niam gleam, splendor, niamda shining; Old Irish noib holy,
niab strength; Welsh nwyfiant gleam, splendor).    Meaning inclined to be tidy is from 1570s. Of
liquor, straight, c.1800, from meaning unadulterated (of wine), which is first attested 1570s.
Informal sense of very good first recorded 1934 in American English; variant neato is teenager
slang, first recorded 1968. Related: Neatly; neatness.


gleen (n.)

gleam of sunlight, 1650s, probably from a Scandinavian dialectal word; compare Swedish dialectal
glena, Danish dialectal glene clear patch of sky.


blush (n.)

mid-14c., a look, a glance (sense preserved in at first blush), also a gleam, a gleaming (late
14c.), from blush (v.). As a reddening of the face from 1590s. Meaning a rosy color is 1590s.


bling (n.)

also bling-bling, by 1997, U.S. rap slang, wealth, expensive accessories, a sound suggestive of the
glitter of jewels and precious metals (compare German blinken to gleam, sparkle).


candescent (adj.)

1824, from Latin candescentem (nominative candescens), present participle of candescere to become
white, begin to gleam, inchoative of candere to shine, to glow (see candle).


agleam (adj.)

1854, from a- (1) + gleam.


phaeton (n.)

type of light four-wheeled carriage, 1742, from French (1735), from Greek Phaethon name of the son
of Helios and Clymene, who tried to drive his father's sun-chariot but crashed after almost setting
fire to the whole earth. His name is literally shining, from phaein to shine, gleam, from phaos
light (see fantasy). Earlier as a name for a reckless driver (1590s).


radiate (v.)

1610s, spread in all directions from a point, from Latin radiatus, past participle of radiare to
beam, shine, gleam; make beaming (see radiation). Meaning be radiant, give off rays (of light or
heat) is from 1704. Related: Radiated; radiates; radiating.


scintillate (v.)

1620s, from Latin scintillatus, past participle of scintillare to sparkle, glitter, gleam, flash,
from scintilla spark (see scintilla). Related: Scintillated; scintillating.


glimpse (v.)

c.1400, to glisten, be dazzling, probably from Old English *glimsian shine faintly, from Proto-
Germanic *glim- (see gleam). If so, the intrusive -p- would be there to ease pronunciation. Sense of
catch a quick view first recorded mid-15c.  Related: Glimpsed. The noun is recorded from mid-16c.;
earlier in verbal noun glimpsing (mid-14c.).


glimmer (v.)

early 14c., shine brightly, a frequentative from Proto-Germanic *glim-, root of Old English
gl&aelig;m brightness (see gleam (n.)). Sense shifted 15c. to shine faintly. Compare Dutch
glimmeren, German glimmeren to shine dimly. Related: Glimmered; glimmering.


Zeus

supreme god of the ancient Greeks and master of the others, 1706, from Greek, from PIE *dewos- god
(cognates: Latin deus god, Old Persian daiva- demon, evil god, Old Church Slavonic deivai, Sanskrit
deva-), from root *dyeu- to gleam, to shine; also the root of words for sky and day (see diurnal).
The god-sense is originally shining, but whether as originally sun-god or as lightener is not now
clear.


silver lining

a bright side which proverbially accompanies even the darkest trouble; by 1843, apparently from oft-
quoted lines from Milton's Comus, where the silver lining is the light of the moon shining from
behind the cloud.    Was I deceived? or did a sable cloud  Turn forth her silver lining on the
night?  I did not err, there does a sable cloud,  Turn out her silver lining on the night  And casts
a gleam over this tufted grove.    To which Thomas Warton added the commentary: When all succour
&#383;eems to be lost, Heaven unexpectedly presents the &#383;ilver lining o&#383; a &#383;able
cloud to the virtuous.


scintilla (n.)

1690s, spark, glimmer, hence least particle, trace, from figurative use of Latin scintilla particle
of fire, spark, glittering speck, atom, probably from PIE *ski-nto-, from root *skai- to shine, to
gleam (cognates: Gothic skeinan, Old English scinan to shine; see shine (v.)).


glint (v.)

1787, from Scottish, where apparently it survived as an alteration of Middle English glenten gleam,
flash, glisten (mid-15c.), from a Scandinavian source (compare Norwegian gletta to look, dialectal
Swedish glinta to shine), from Proto-Germanic *glent-, from PIE *ghel- (2) to shine, with
derivatives referring to bright materials and gold (see glass). Reintroduced into literary English
by Burns. Related: Glinted; glinting.


glisten (v.)

Old English glisnian to glisten, gleam, from Proto-Germanic *glis- (cognates: Old Frisian glisa to
shine, Middle High German glistern to sparkle, Old Danish glisse to shine), from PIE *ghleis-, from
root *ghel- (2) to shine, with derivatives referring to bright materials and gold (see glass).
Related: Glistened; glistening.


radiation (n.)

mid-15c., act or process of radiating, from Middle French radiation and directly from Latin
radiationem (nominative radiatio) a shining, radiation, noun of action from past participle stem of
radiare to beam, shine, gleam; make beaming, from radius beam of light; spoke of a wheel (see
radius). Meaning rays or beams emitted is from 1560s. Meaning divergence from a center is 1650s.


glare (v.)

late 13c., shine brightly, from or related to Middle Dutch, Middle Low German glaren to gleam,
related by rhoticization to glas (see glass). Sense of stare fiercely is from late 14c. The noun is
c.1400 in sense bright light; 1660s in sense of fierce look. Old English gl&aelig;r (n.) meant
amber. Related: Glared; glaring.


beacon (n.)

Old English beacen sign, portent, lighthouse, from West Germanic *baukna beacon, signal (cognates:
Old Frisian baken, Old Saxon bokan, Old High German bouhhan); not found outside Germanic. Perhaps
borrowed from Latin bucina a crooked horn or trumpet, signal horn. But more likely from PIE *bhew-,
a variant of the base *bha- (1) to gleam, shine (see phantasm). Figurative use from c.1600.


shimmer (v.)

Old English scimerian to glitter, shimmer, glisten, shine, related to (perhaps a frequentative of)
scimian to shine, from Proto-Germanic *skim- (cognates: Swedish skimra, Dutch schemeren to glitter,
German schimmern), from PIE root *skai- to gleam, to shine (see shine (v.). Related: Shimmered;
shimmering.


bright (adj.)

Old English bryht, by metathesis from beorht bright; splendid; clear-sounding; beautiful; divine,
from Proto-Germanic *berhta- bright (cognates: Old Saxon berht, Old Norse bjartr, Old High German
beraht, Gothic bairhts bright), from PIE root *bhereg- to gleam, white (cognates: Sanskrit bhrajate
shines, glitters, Lithuanian breksta to dawn, Welsh berth bright, beautiful). Meaning quick-witted
is from 1741.


burnish (v.)

early 14c., from Old French burniss- present participle stem of burnir, metathesis of brunir to
shine, gleam, sparkle (trans.), to polish, make sparkle, make bright, shine, from brun brown;
polished, from a Germanic source (compare Old High German brun, Old Norse brunn bright, polished;
brown; see brown (adj.)). The connection to brown might be explained if the original objects in mind
were wooden ones. Related: Burnished; burnishing.


splendid (adj.)

1620s, marked by grandeur, probably a shortening of earlier splendidious (early 15c.), from Latin
splendidus bright, shining, glittering; sumptuous, gorgeous, grand; illustrious, distinguished,
noble; showy, fine, specious, from splendere be bright, shine, gleam, glisten, from PIE *splend- to
shine, glow (cognates: Lithuanian splendziu I shine, Middle Irish lainn bright). An earlier form was
splendent (late 15c.). From 1640s as brilliant, dazzling; 1640s as conspicuous, illustrious; very
fine, excellent. Ironic use (as in splendid isolation, 1843) is attested from 17c.


bald (adj.)

c.1300, ballede, probably, with Middle English -ede adjectival suffix + Celtic bal white patch,
blaze especially on the head of a horse or other animal (from PIE root *bhel- (1) to shine, flash,
gleam; see bleach (v.)). Compare, from the same root, Sanskrit bhalam brightness, forehead, Greek
phalos white, Latin fulcia coot (so called for the white patch on its head), Albanian bale forehead.
But connection with ball (n.1), on notion of smooth, round also has been suggested. Bald eagle first
attested 1680s; so called for its white head.


shine (v.)

Old English scinan shed light, be radiant, be resplendent, iluminate, of persons, be conspicuous
(class I strong verb; past tense scan, past participle scinen), from Proto-Germanic *skinan
(cognates: Old Saxon and Old High German skinan, Old Norse and Old Frisian skina, Dutch schijnen,
German scheinen, Gothic skeinan to shine, appear), from PIE root *skai- (2) to gleam, shine, flicker
(cognates: Sanskrit chaya brilliance, luster; shadow, Greek skia shade, Old Church Slavonic sinati
to flash up, shine, Albanian he shadow). Transitive meaning to black (boots) is from 1610s. Related:
Shined (in the shoe polish sense), otherwise shone; shining.


birch (n.)

Old English berc, beorc (also the name of the rune for b), from Proto-Germanic *berkjon (cognates:
Old Saxon birka, Old Norse b&ouml;rk, Danish birk, Swedish bj&ouml;rk, Middle Dutch berke, Dutch
berk, Old High German birihha, German Birke), from PIE *bhergo (cognates: Ossetian barz, Old Church
Slavonic breza, Russian bereza, Lithuanian ber&#382;as, Sanskrit bhurjah, Latin farnus, fraxinus
mountain ash), from root *bhereg- to gleam, white. Meaning bunch of birch twigs used for flogging
(1640s) led to verb meaning to flog (1830). Related: Birched; birching. Birch beer is by 1827,
American English.


braid (v.)

to plait, knit, weave, twist together, c.1200, breidan, from Old English bregdan to move quickly,
pull, shake, swing, throw (in wrestling), draw (a sword); bend, weave, knit, join together; change
color, vary; scheme, feign, pretend (class III strong verb, past tense br&aelig;gd, past participle
brogden), from Proto-Germanic *bregthan make sudden jerky movements from side to side (compare Old
Norse breg&eth;a to brandish, turn about, braid; Old Saxon bregdan to weave; Dutch breien to knit;
Old High German brettan to draw, weave, braid), from PIE root *bherek- to gleam, flash (compare
Sanskrit bhrasate flames, blazes, shines). In English the verb survives only in the narrow
definition of plait hair. Related: Braided; braiding.


light (n.)

brightness, radiant energy, Old English leht, earlier leoht light, daylight; luminous, beautiful,
from Proto-Germanic *leukhtam (cognates: Old Saxon lioht, Old Frisian liacht, Middle Dutch lucht,
Dutch licht, Old High German lioht, German Licht, Gothic liuha&#254; light), from PIE *leuk- light,
brightness (cognates: Sanskrit rocate shines; Armenian lois light, lusin moon; Greek leukos bright,
shining, white; Latin lucere to shine, lux light, lucidus clear; Old Church Slavonic luci light;
Lithuanian laukas pale; Welsh llug gleam, glimmer; Old Irish loche lightning, luchair brightness;
Hittite lukezi is bright).    The -gh- was an Anglo-French scribal attempt to render the Germanic
hard -h- sound, which has since disappeared from this word. The figurative spiritual sense was in
Old English; the sense of mental illumination is first recorded mid-15c. Meaning something used for
igniting is from 1680s. Meaning a consideration which puts something in a certain view (as in in
light of) is from 1680s. Something that's a joy and a delight has been the light of (someone's) eyes
since Old English:   &#208;u eart dohtor min, minra eagna leoht [Juliana].    To see the light come
into the world is from 1680s; later in a Christian sense.


Chloe

fem. proper name, Latin, from Greek Khloe, literally young green shoot; related to khloros greenish-
yellow, from PIE *ghlo- variant of root *ghel- (2) to shine, with derivatives referring to bright
materials and gold, and bile or gall (such as Latin helvus yellowish, bay, Gallo-Latin gilvus light
bay; Lithuanian geltonas yellow; Old Church Slavonic zlutu, Polish &#380;&oacute;&#322;ty, Russian
zeltyj yellow; Sanskrit harih yellow, tawny yellow, hiranyam gold; Avestan zari yellow; Old English
geolu, geolwe, Modern English yellow, German gelb yellow) and green (such as Latin galbus greenish-
yellow; Greek khloros greenish-yellow color, kholos bile; Lithuanian zalias green, zelvas greenish;
Old Church Slavonic zelenu, Polish zielony, Russian zelenyj green; Old Irish glass, Welsh and Breton
glas green, also gray, blue).    Buck says the interchange of words for yellow and green is perhaps
because they were applied to vegetation like grass, cereals, etc., which changed from green to
yellow. It is possible that this whole group of yellow-green words is related to PIE root *ghlei- to
shine, glitter, glow, be warm (see gleam (n.)).


black (adj.)

Old English bl&aelig;c dark, from Proto-Germanic *blakaz burned (cognates: Old Norse blakkr dark,
Old High German blah black, Swedish bl&auml;ck ink, Dutch blaken to burn), from PIE *bhleg- to burn,
gleam, shine, flash (cognates: Greek phlegein to burn, scorch, Latin flagrare to blaze, glow, burn),
from root *bhel- (1) to shine, flash, burn; see bleach (v.).    The same root produced Old English
blac bright, shining, glittering, pale; the connecting notions being, perhaps, fire (bright) and
burned (dark). The usual Old English word for black was sweart (see swart). According to OED: In ME.
it is often doubtful whether blac, blak, blake, means 'black, dark,' or 'pale, colourless, wan,
livid.'  Used of dark-skinned people in Old English.    Of coffee, first attested 1796. Meaning
fierce, terrible, wicked is late 14c. The color of sin and sorrow since at least c.1300; sense of
with dark purposes, malignant emerged 1580s (as in black magic). Black face in reference to a
performance style originated in U.S., is from 1868. Black flag, flown (especially by pirates) as a
signal of no mercy, from 1590s. Black dog melancholy attested from 1826. Black belt is from 1875 in
reference to districts of the U.S. South with heaviest African population; 1870 with reference to
fertility of soil; 1913 in judo sense. Black power is from 1966, associated with Stokely Carmichael.


