glimmer (n.)

1580s, from glimmer (v.).


glimmer (v.)

early 14c., shine brightly, a frequentative from Proto-Germanic *glim-, root of Old English
gl&aelig;m brightness (see gleam (n.)). Sense shifted 15c. to shine faintly. Compare Dutch
glimmeren, German glimmeren to shine dimly. Related: Glimmered; glimmering.


mere (adj.)

c.1400, unmixed, pure, from Old French mier pure (of gold), entire, total, complete, and directly
from Latin merus unmixed (of wine), pure; bare, naked; figuratively true, real, genuine, probably
originally clear, bright, from PIE *mer- to gleam, glimmer, sparkle (cognates: Old English amerian
to purify, Old Irish emer not clear, Sanskrit maricih ray, beam, Greek marmarein to gleam, glimmer).
Original sense of nothing less than, absolute (mid-15c., now only in vestiges such as mere folly)
existed for centuries alongside opposite sense of nothing more than (1580s, as in a mere dream).


glim (n.)

18c. slang, a light, candle, lantern; 19c. slang an eye, probably a back-formation from glimmer.


scintilla (n.)

1690s, spark, glimmer, hence least particle, trace, from figurative use of Latin scintilla particle
of fire, spark, glittering speck, atom, probably from PIE *ski-nto-, from root *skai- to shine, to
gleam (cognates: Gothic skeinan, Old English scinan to shine; see shine (v.)).


gleam (n.)

Old English gl&aelig;m brilliant light; brightness, splendor, radiance, from Proto-Germanic *glaimiz
(cognates: Old Saxon glimo brightness; Middle High German glim spark, gleime glowworm; German
glimmen to glimmer, glow; Old Norse glija to shine, glitter), from root *glim-, from PIE *ghel- (2)
to shine, with derivatives referring to bright materials and gold (see glass).


scene (n.)

1530s, subdivision of an act of a play, also stage-setting, from Middle French sc&egrave;ne (14c.),
from Latin scaena, scena scene, stage of a theater, from Greek skene wooden stage for actors, also
that which is represented on stage, originally tent or booth, related to skia shadow, shade, via
notion of something that gives shade, from PIE root *skai- to shine, flicker, glimmer (see shine
(v.)).    Meaning material apparatus of a theatrical stage is from 1540s. Meaning place in which the
action of a literary work occurs is attested from 1590s; general (non-literary) sense of place where
anything is done or takes place is recorded from 1590s. Hence U.S. slang sense of setting or milieu
for a specific group or activity, attested from 1951 in Beat jargon. Meaning stormy encounter
between two or more persons is attested from 1761. Behind the scenes having knowledge of affairs not
apparent to the public (1660s) is an image from the theater, amid actors and stage machinery (out of
sight of the audience). Scene of the crime (1923) first attested in Agatha Christie.


light (n.)

brightness, radiant energy, Old English leht, earlier leoht light, daylight; luminous, beautiful,
from Proto-Germanic *leukhtam (cognates: Old Saxon lioht, Old Frisian liacht, Middle Dutch lucht,
Dutch licht, Old High German lioht, German Licht, Gothic liuha&#254; light), from PIE *leuk- light,
brightness (cognates: Sanskrit rocate shines; Armenian lois light, lusin moon; Greek leukos bright,
shining, white; Latin lucere to shine, lux light, lucidus clear; Old Church Slavonic luci light;
Lithuanian laukas pale; Welsh llug gleam, glimmer; Old Irish loche lightning, luchair brightness;
Hittite lukezi is bright).    The -gh- was an Anglo-French scribal attempt to render the Germanic
hard -h- sound, which has since disappeared from this word. The figurative spiritual sense was in
Old English; the sense of mental illumination is first recorded mid-15c. Meaning something used for
igniting is from 1680s. Meaning a consideration which puts something in a certain view (as in in
light of) is from 1680s. Something that's a joy and a delight has been the light of (someone's) eyes
since Old English:   &#208;u eart dohtor min, minra eagna leoht [Juliana].    To see the light come
into the world is from 1680s; later in a Christian sense.


