glitter (v.)

c.1300, glideren (late 14c. as gliteren), from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse glitra to
glitter, from glit brightness, from Proto-Germanic *glit- shining, bright (cognates: Old English
glitenian to glitter, shine; be distinguished, Old High German glizzan, German glitzern, Gothic
glitmunjan), from PIE *ghleid- (cognates: Greek khlidon, khlidos ornament), from root *ghel- (2) to
shine, with derivatives referring to bright materials and gold (see glass). Related: Glittered;
glittering. The noun is c.1600, from the verb. Glitter rock is from 1972.


glitterati (n.)

1956, from glitter, with a play on literati.


glitzy (adj.)

1966, from Yiddish glitz glitter, from German glitzern sparkle (see glitter).


shimmer (v.)

Old English scimerian to glitter, shimmer, glisten, shine, related to (perhaps a frequentative of)
scimian to shine, from Proto-Germanic *skim- (cognates: Swedish skimra, Dutch schemeren to glitter,
German schimmern), from PIE root *skai- to gleam, to shine (see shine (v.). Related: Shimmered;
shimmering.


blink (v.)

1580s, perhaps from Middle Dutch blinken to glitter, of uncertain origin, possibly, with German
blinken to gleam, sparkle, twinkle, from a nasalized form of base found in Old English blican to
shine, glitter (see bleach (v.)).    Middle English had blynke (c.1300) in the sense a brief gleam
or spark, perhaps a variant of blench to move suddenly or sharply; to raise one's eyelids (c.1200),
perhaps from the rare Old English blencan deceive. Related: Blinked; blinking. The last, as a
euphemism for a stronger word, is attested by 1914.


micacious (adj.)

sparkling, 1836, from Late Latin micare to shine, sparkle, flash, glitter.


bling (n.)

also bling-bling, by 1997, U.S. rap slang, wealth, expensive accessories, a sound suggestive of the
glitter of jewels and precious metals (compare German blinken to gleam, sparkle).


spangle (v.)

1540s, cover with spangles, from spangle (n.). Intransitive meaning glitter, glisten is from 1630s.
Related: Spangled; spangling.


coruscation (n.)

late 15c., from Latin coruscationem (nominative coruscatio), noun of action from past participle
stem of coruscare to vibrate, glitter (see coruscate).


coruscate (v.)

1705, from Latin coruscatus, past participle of coruscare to vibrate, glitter, perhaps from PIE
*(s)ker- (2) leap, jump about (compare scherzo). Related: Coruscated; coruscating.


glister (v.)

late 14c., probably from or related to Low German glisten, Middle Dutch glisteren, from PIE root
*ghel- (2) to shine, glitter (see glass). Related: Glistered; glistering. As a noun, from 1530s.


scintillate (v.)

1620s, from Latin scintillatus, past participle of scintillare to sparkle, glitter, gleam, flash,
from scintilla spark (see scintilla). Related: Scintillated; scintillating.


net (adj.)

remaining after deductions, 1510s, from earlier sense of trim, elegant, clean, neat (c.1300), from
Old French net clean, pure, from Latin nitere to shine, look bright, glitter (see neat). Meaning
influenced by Italian netto remaining after deductions. As a noun, 1910.


resplendent (adj.)

mid-15c., from Latin resplendentem (nominative resplendens) brilliant, radiant, present participle
of resplendere to glitter, shine, from re-, intensive prefix, + splendere to shine, be splendid (see
splendid). Related: Resplendently.


bream (n.)

freshwater fish, late 14c., from Old French braisme bream, from Frankish *brahsima, from West
Germanic *brahsm- (compare Old High German brahsima), perhaps from Proto-Germanic base *brehwan to
shine, glitter, sparkle, from PIE *bherek- (see braid (v.)).


mica (n.)

1706, from specialized use of Latin mica crumb, bit, morsel, grain, originally *smika (form probably
influenced by Latin micare to flash, glitter), from PIE *smik- small (cognates: Greek smikros, Attic
mikros small; Old High German smahi littleness). Related: Micaceous containing mica.


gleam (n.)

Old English gl&aelig;m brilliant light; brightness, splendor, radiance, from Proto-Germanic *glaimiz
(cognates: Old Saxon glimo brightness; Middle High German glim spark, gleime glowworm; German
glimmen to glimmer, glow; Old Norse glija to shine, glitter), from root *glim-, from PIE *ghel- (2)
to shine, with derivatives referring to bright materials and gold (see glass).


Chloe

fem. proper name, Latin, from Greek Khloe, literally young green shoot; related to khloros greenish-
yellow, from PIE *ghlo- variant of root *ghel- (2) to shine, with derivatives referring to bright
materials and gold, and bile or gall (such as Latin helvus yellowish, bay, Gallo-Latin gilvus light
bay; Lithuanian geltonas yellow; Old Church Slavonic zlutu, Polish &#380;&oacute;&#322;ty, Russian
zeltyj yellow; Sanskrit harih yellow, tawny yellow, hiranyam gold; Avestan zari yellow; Old English
geolu, geolwe, Modern English yellow, German gelb yellow) and green (such as Latin galbus greenish-
yellow; Greek khloros greenish-yellow color, kholos bile; Lithuanian zalias green, zelvas greenish;
Old Church Slavonic zelenu, Polish zielony, Russian zelenyj green; Old Irish glass, Welsh and Breton
glas green, also gray, blue).    Buck says the interchange of words for yellow and green is perhaps
because they were applied to vegetation like grass, cereals, etc., which changed from green to
yellow. It is possible that this whole group of yellow-green words is related to PIE root *ghlei- to
shine, glitter, glow, be warm (see gleam (n.)).


