glorious (adj.)

late 13c., from Anglo-French glorious, Old French glorieus (12c., Modern French glorieux), from
Latin gloriosus full of glory, famous, from gloria (see glory). In 14c.-17c. it also could mean
boastful, vainglorious. Related: Gloriously.


Dracula (n.)

the vampire, from in Bram Stoker's novel (1897). It was a surname of Prince Vlad II of Wallachia
(d.1476), and means in Romanian son of Dracul, literally the dragon, from the name and emblem taken
by Vlad's father, also named Vlad, c.1431 when he joined the Order of the Dragon, founded 1418 by
Sigismund the Glorious of Hungary to defend the Christian religion from the Turks and crush heretics
and schismatics.


sharif (n.)

1550s, shereef, from Arabic sharif noble, glorious, from sharafa to be exalted. A descendant of
Muhammad through his daughter Fatima.


vainglorious (adj.)

early 15c., from vainglory + -ous, or from Old French vain glorios boastful, swaggering. Related:
Vaingloriously; vaingloriousness. Groce (Classical Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, 3rd ed., 1796)
has vain-glorious man One who boasts without reason, or, as the canters say, pisses more than he
drinks.


inglorious (adj.)

1570s, from Latin ingloriosus, from in- not (see in- (1)) + gloriosus (see glorious). Related:
Ingloriously; ingloriousness.


Clio

muse of history, muse who sings of glorious actions, usually represented with a scroll and
manuscript case, from Latin Clio, from Greek Kleio, literally the proclaimer, from kleiein to tell
of, celebrate, make famous, from kleos rumor, report, news; good report, fame, glory, from PIE
*klew-yo-, from root *kleu- to hear (see listen). Related to the -kles in Damocles, etc.


comely (adj.)

beautiful, handsome, c.1400, probably from Old English cymlic lovely, splendid, finely made, from
cyme exquisite, glorious, delicate, from West Germanic *kumi- delicate, feeble (cognates: Old High
German chumo with difficulty, chumig weak, delicate; German kaum hardly, scarcely). Or perhaps the
modern word is from Middle English bicumelic (c.1200) suitable, exquisite, literally becomely
(compare becoming).


splendiferous (adj.)

considered a playful elaboration since its re-birth in 1843, but in 15c. it was good English, from
Medieval Latin splendorifer, from splendor (see splendor) + ferre to bear (see infer). Compare 15c.
splendidious, also splendacious (1843). Bartlett (1859) offers this, allegedly from An itinerant
gospeller ... holding forth to a Kentuckian audience on the kingdom of heaven:    Heaven, my beloved
hearers, said he, is a glorious, a beautiful, a splendiferous, an angeliferous place. Eye hath not
seen, ear hath not heard, it has not entered into the imagination of any Cracker in these here
diggings what carryings on the just made perfect have up thar.


hoar (adj.)

Old English har hoary, gray, venerable, old, the connecting notion being gray hair, from Proto-
Germanic *haira (cognates: Old Norse harr gray-haired, old, Old Saxon, Old High German her
distinguished, noble, glorious, German hehr), from PIE *kei-, source of color adjectives (see hue
(n.1)). German also uses the word as a title of respect, in Herr. Of frost, it is recorded in Old
English, perhaps expressing the resemblance of the white feathers of frost to an old man's beard.
Used as an attribute of boundary stones in Anglo-Saxon, perhaps in reference to being gray with
lichens, hence its appearance in place-names.


Europe

from Latin Europa Europe, from Greek Europe, of uncertain origin; as a geographic name, first the
Homeric hymn to Apollo (522 B.C.E. or earlier):    Telphusa, here I am minded to make a glorious
temple, an oracle for men, and hither they will always bring perfect hecatombs, both those who live
in rich Peloponnesus and those of Europe and all the wave-washed isles, coming to seek oracles.
Often explained as broad face, from eurys wide (see aneurysm) + ops face. But also traditionally
linked with Europa, Phoenician princess in Greek mythology. Klein (citing Heinrich Lewy) suggests a
possible Semitic origin in Akkad. erebu to go down, set (in reference to the sun) which would
parallel orient. Another suggestion along those lines is Phoenician 'ereb evening, hence west.


clear (adj.)

late 13c., bright, from Old French cler clear (of sight and hearing), light, bright, shining; sparse
(12c., Modern French clair), from Latin clarus clear, loud, of sounds; figuratively manifest, plain,
evident, in transferred use, of sights, bright, distinct; also illustrious, famous, glorious (source
of Italian chiaro, Spanish claro), from PIE *kle-ro-, from root *kele- (2) to shout (see claim
(v.)).    The sense evolution involves an identification of the spreading of sound and the spreading
of light (compare English loud, used of colors; German hell clear, bright, shining, of pitch,
distinct, ringing, high). Of complexion, from c.1300; of the weather, from late 14c.; of meanings or
explanations, manifest to the mind, comprehensible, c.1300. (An Old English word for this was
sweotol distinct, clear, evident.) Sense of free from encumbrance, apparently nautical, developed
c.1500. Phrase in the clear attested from 1715. Clear-sighted is from 1580s (clear-eyed is from
1529s); clear-headed is from 1709.


