glossary (n.)

late 14c., from Latin glossarium collection of glosses, from Greek glossarion, diminutive of glossa
obsolete or foreign word (see gloss (n.2)).


jack-in-the-box (n.)

1560s, originally a name for a sharp or cheat, who deceived tradesmen by substituting empty boxes
for others full of money [Robert Nares, A Glossary of Words, Phrases, Names, and Allusions, London,
1905]. As a type of toy, it is attested from 1702.


clumpy (adj.)

1820, from clump (n.) + -y (2). Also noted 1881 in an Isle of Wight glossary as a noun meaning a
stupid fellow. Related: Clumpily; clumpiness. Compare also clumperton clown, clodhopper (1530s).


development (n.)

1756, an unfolding; see develop + -ment. Of property, with the sense bringing out the latent
possibilities, from 1885 (Pickering's glossary of Americanisms, 1816, has betterments The
improvements made on new lands, by cultivation, and the erection of buildings, &amp;c.;). Meaning
state of economic advancement is from 1902. Meaning advancement through progressive stages is 1836.


splurge (v.)

to make an ostentatious display, to put on a splurge (in the older sense of the noun), by 1843, from
splurge (n.). Thornton's American Glossary has an 1848 citation defining splurge (v.) as to
expatiate at large, to appeal to broad and general principles. Meaning to spend extravagantly is by
1934. Related: Splurged; splurging.


spit (v.2)

c.1200, put on a spit, thrust with a spit, from late Old English sputtian to spit (for cooking),
from spit (n.2). Meaning pierce with a weapon, transfix, impale is from early 15c. Related: Spitted;
spitting. Nares' Glossary has spit-frog a small sword.


Hobson-Jobson

1690s, hossen gossen, said to have been British soldiers' mangled Englishing of the Arabic cry they
heard at Muharram processions in India, Ya Hasan! Ya Husayn! (O Hassan! O Husain!), mourning two
grandsons of the Prophet who died fighting for the faith. Title of Yule &amp; Burnell's 1886
glossary of Anglo-Indian words, and taken by linguists in naming the law of Hobson-Jobson,
describing the effort to bring a new and strange word into harmony with the language.


chicanery (n.)

c.1600, legal quibbling, sophistry, from French chicanerie trickery, from Middle French chicaner to
pettifog, quibble (15c.), of unknown origin, perhaps from Middle Low German schikken to arrange,
bring about, or from the name of a golf-like game once played in Languedoc. Thornton's American
Glossary has shecoonery (1845), which it describes as probably a corruption of chicanery.


branks (n.)

1590s, of unknown origin, perhaps from North Sea Germanic. An instrument of punishment for women,
originally Scottish, it was a kind of iron cage for the head with a metal bit attached to still the
tongue.Paide for caring a woman throughe the towne for skoulding, with branks, 4d. [Municipal
Accounts of Newcastle, 1595]Ungallant, and unmercifully severe, as this species of torture seems to
be, Dr. Plot, in his History of Staffordshire, much prefers it to the cucking stool, which, he says,
'not only endangers the health of the party, but also gives the tongue liberty 'twixt every dip.'
[Brockett, A Glossary of North Country Words,1829].


professor (n.)

late 14c., one who teaches a branch of knowledge, from Old French professeur (14c.) and directly
from Latin professor person who professes to be an expert in some art or science; teacher of highest
rank, agent noun from profiteri lay claim to, declare openly (see profess). As a title prefixed to a
name, it dates from 1706. Short form prof is recorded from 1838.   <b>Professor</b>. One professing
religion. This canting use of the word comes down from the Elizabethan period, but is obsolete in
England. [Thornton, American Glossary, 1912]


mammoth (n.)

1706, from Russian mammot', probably from Ostyak, a Finno-Ugric language of northern Russia (compare
Finnish maa earth). Because the remains were dug from the earth, the animal was believed to root
like a mole. As an adjective, gigantic, from 1802; in this sense the word appears to be originally
American [Thornton, American Glossary], and its first uses are in derogatory accounts to the cheese
wheel, more than 4 feet in diameter, sent to President Jefferson by the ladies of the Baptist
congregation in Cheshire, Mass., as a present, engraved with the motto Rebellion to tyrants is
obedience to God. Federalist editors mocked the affair, and called up the word mammoth (known from
Peale's exhibition) to characterize it.


ease (n.)

early 13c., from Old French aise comfort, pleasure, well-being; opportunity, of unknown origin,
despite attempts to link it to various Latin verbs.    The earliest senses in French appear to be 1.
elbow-room (from an 11th century Hebrew-French glossary) and 2. opportunity. This led Sophus Bugge
to suggest an origin in Vulgar Latin asa, a shortened form of Latin ansa handle, which could be used
in the figurative sense of opportunity, occasion, as well as being a possible synonym for elbow,
because Latin ansatus furnished with handles also was used to mean having the arms akimbo. OED
editors report this theory, and write, This is not very satisfactory, but it does not appear that
any equally plausible alternative has yet been proposed.


truck (n.2)

1530s, act or practice of barter, trading by exchange, from French troque, from troquer (see truck
(v.1)). Sense of dealings is from 1620s. Exchange of commodities, barter, then commodities for
barter and exchange. In this sense the word was given a wide use in 19c. American English: Truck at
first meant market-garden produce; then it came to mean stuff in general, including 'doctor-stuff.'
SPUN TRUCK is knitting work [Thornton, American Glossary, 1912]. Sense of vegetables raised for
market is from 1784, preserved in truck farm (1866).


powerful (adj.)

c.1400, from power (n.) + -ful. Meaning of great quality or number is from 1811; colloquial sense of
exceedingly (adv.) is from 1822. Related: Powerfully. Thornton (American Glossary) notes powerful as
Much used by common people in the sense of very, along with monstrous and cites curious expressions
such as devilish good, monstrous pretty (1799), dreadful polite, cruel pretty, abominable fine
(1803), or when a young lady admires a lap dog for being so vastly small and declares him prodigious
handsome (1799).


horseshoe (n.)

late 14c. (early 13c. as a proper name), from horse (n.) + shoe (n.). Horseshoes as another name for
the game of quoits, attested by 1822.    HORSE-SHOES, the game of coits, or quoits--because
sometimes actually played with horse-shoes. [John Trotter Brockett, A Glossary of North Country
Words, 1829]    The belief that finding a horseshoe by chance is lucky is attested from late 14c.,
and the practice of nailing one above a doorway to prevent a witch entering therein was common in
London down to c.1800. Of a type of bend in a river, 1770, American English. As a type of crab, from
1775.


veranda (n.)

also verandah, 1711, from Hindi varanda, which probably is from Portuguese varanda, originally long
balcony or terrace, of uncertain origin, possibly related to Spanish baranda railing, and ultimately
from Vulgar Latin *barra barrier, bar. French v&eacute;randa is borrowed from English.    That the
word as used in England and in France was brought by the English from India need not be doubted. But
either in the same sense, or in one closely analogous, it appears to have existed, quite
independently, in Portuguese and Spanish; and the manner in which it occurs without explanation in
the very earliest narrative of the adventure of the Portuguese in India ... seems almost to preclude
the possibility of their having learned it in that country for the first time .... [Col. Henry Yule
and A.C. Burnell, Hobson-Jobson, A Glossary of Colloquial Anglo-Indian Words and Phrases, 1903]


tardy (adj.)

1520s, slow, from Old French tardif slow, late (12c.), also the name of the snail character in the
Roman de Renart, from Vulgar Latin *tardivus, from Latin tardus slow, sluggish; late; dull, stupid,
of unknown origin. Meaning late in English is from 1660s.    This word, not much used in English
prose, is constantly employed in the U.S. and in Canada with reference to lateness in school-
attendance. [Thornton, American Glossary, 1912]    Related: Tardily; tardiness. Earlier form of the
word in English was tardif, tardyve (late 15c.). Tardity slowness of movement or action is recorded
in English from early 15c., from Old French tardete, from Latin tarditas.


cranky (adj.)

cross-tempered, irritable, 1807, from crank (n.) + -y (2). The evolution would be from earlier
senses of crank, such as a twist or fanciful turn of speech (1590s); inaccessible hole or crevice
(1560s). Grose's 1787 Provincial Glossary has Cranky. Ailing sickly from the dutch crank, sick, and
identifies it as a Northern word. Jamieson's Scottish dictionary (1825) has crank in a secondary
sense of hard, difficult, as in crank word, a word hard to be understood; crank job, a work attended
with difficulty, or requiring ingenuity in the execution. Related: Crankily; crankiness.   Ben. Dang
it, don't you spare him--A cross grain'd cranky toad as ever crawl'd. (etc.) [Richard Cumberland,
Lovers Resolutions, Act I, 1813]


surprise (n.)

also formerly surprize, late 14c., unexpected attack or capture, from Old French surprise a taking
unawares (13c.), from noun use of past participle of Old French sorprendre to overtake, seize,
invade (12c.), from sur- over (see sur- (1)) + prendre to take, from Latin prendere, contracted from
prehendere to grasp, seize (see prehensile). Meaning something unexpected first recorded 1590s, that
of feeling of astonishment caused by something unexpected is c.1600. Meaning fancy dish is attested
from 1708.    A Surprize is ... a dish ... which promising little from its first appearance, when
open abounds with all sorts of variety. [W. King, Cookery, 1708]   Surprise party originally was a
stealth military detachment (1826); festive sense is attested by 1857; according to Thornton's
American Glossary, originally a gathering of members of a congregation at the house of their
preacher with the ostensible purpose of contributing provisions, &amp;c.;, for his support, and
sometimes called a donation party. Phrase taken by surprise is attested from 1690s.


askance (adv.)

1520s, sideways, asquint, of obscure origin. OED has separate listings for askance and obsolete
Middle English askance(s) and no indication of a connection, but Barnhart and others derive the
newer word from the older one. The Middle English word, recorded early 14c. as ase quances and found
later in Chaucer, meant in such a way that; even as; as if; and as an adverb insincerely,
deceptively. It has been analyzed as a compound of as and Old French quanses (pronounced kanses) how
if, from Latin quam how + si if.    The E[nglish] as is, accordingly, redundant, and merely added by
way of partial explanation. The M.E. askances means as if in other passages, but here means, as if
it were, i.e. possibly, perhaps; as said above. Sometimes the final s is dropped .... [Walter W.
Skeat, glossary to Chaucer's Man of Law's Tale, 1894]    Also see discussion in Leo Spitzer, Anglo-
French Etymologies, Philological Quarterly 24.23 (1945), and see OED entry for askance (adv.) for
discussion of the mysterious ask- word cluster in English. Other guesses about the origin of askance
include Old French a escone, from past participle of a word for hidden; Italian a scancio obliquely,
slantingly; or that it is a cognate of askew.


swamp (n.)

c.1500 (implied in swampwatyr swamp-water), of uncertain origin, perhaps [Barnhart] a dialectal
survival from an Old English cognate of Old Norse sv&ouml;ppr sponge, fungus, from Proto-Germanic
*swampuz; but traditionally connected with Middle English sompe morass, swamp, which probably is
from Middle Dutch somp or Middle Low German sump swamp (see sump). All of these likely are
ultimately related to each other, from PIE *swombho- spongy; mushroom, via the notion of spongy
ground.    [B]y swamps then in general is to be understood any low grounds subject to inundations,
distinguished from marshes, in having a large growth of timber, and much underwood, canes, reeds,
wythes, vines, briers, and such like, so matted together, that they are in a great measure
impenetrable to man or beast .... [Bernard Romans, A Concise History of East and West Florida, 1775]
More popular in U.S. (swamp (n.) by itself is first attested 1624 in Capt. John Smith's description
of Virginia). Swamp-oak is from 1680s, American English. Swamp Yankee rural, rustic New Englander is
attested from 1941. Thornton's American Glossary (1912) has swamp-angel dweller in a swamp, swamp-
law might makes right.


elf (n.)

one of a race of powerful supernatural beings in Germanic folklore, Old English elf (Mercian,
Kentish), &aelig;lf (Northumbrian), ylfe (plural, West Saxon), from Proto-Germanic *albiz (cognates:
Old Saxon alf, Old Norse alfr, German alp evil spirit, goblin, incubus), origin unknown, possibly
from PIE *albho- white. Used figuratively for mischievous person from 1550s.    In addition to
elf/&aelig;lf (masc.), Old English had parallel form *elfen (fem.), the plural of which was
*elfenna, -elfen, from Proto-Germanic *albinjo-. Both words survived into Middle English and were
active there, the former as elf (with the vowel of the plural), plural elves, the latter as elven,
West Midlands dialect alven (plural elvene).    The Germanic elf originally was dwarfish and
malicious (compare Old English &aelig;lfadl nightmare, &aelig;lfsogo&eth;a hiccup, thought to be
caused by elves); in the Middle Ages they were confused to some degree with faeries; the more noble
version begins with Spenser. Nonetheless a popular component in Anglo-Saxon names, many of which
survive as modern given names and surnames, such as &AElig;lfr&aelig;d Elf-counsel (Alfred),
&AElig;lfwine Elf-friend (Alvin), &AElig;lfric Elf-ruler (Eldridge), also women's names such as
&AElig;lffl&aelig;d Elf-beauty. Elf Lock hair tangled, especially by Queen Mab, which it was not
fortunate to disentangle [according to Robert Nares' glossary of Shakespeare] is from 1592.


school (n.1)

place of instruction, Old English scol, from Latin schola intermission of work, leisure for
learning; learned conversation, debate; lecture; meeting place for teachers and students, place of
instruction; disciples of a teacher, body of followers, sect, from Greek skhole spare time, leisure,
rest ease; idleness; that in which leisure is employed; learned discussion; also a place for
lectures, school; originally a holding back, a keeping clear, from skhein to get (from PIE root
*segh- to hold, hold in one's power, to have; see scheme (n.)) + -ole by analogy with bole a throw,
stole outfit, etc.    The original notion is leisure, which passed to otiose discussion (in Athens
or Rome the favorite or proper use for free time), then place for such discussion. The Latin word
was widely borrowed (Old French escole, French &eacute;cole, Spanish escuela, Italian scuola, Old
High German scuola, German Schule, Swedish skola, Gaelic sgiol, Welsh ysgol, Russian shkola).
Translated in Old English as larhus, literally lore house, but this seems to have been a glossary
word only.    Meaning students attending a school in English is attested from c.1300; sense of
school building is first recorded 1590s. Sense of people united by a general similarity of
principles and methods is from 1610s; hence school of thought (1864). School of hard knocks rough
experience in life is recorded from 1912 (in George Ade); to tell tales out of school betray
damaging secrets is from 1540s. School bus is from 1908. School days is from 1590s. School board
from 1870.


pull (v.)

c.1300, to move forcibly by pulling, to drag, from Old English pullian to pluck off (wool), to draw
out, of unknown origin, perhaps related to Low German pulen remove the shell or husk, Frisian
p&#251;lje to shell, husk, Middle Dutch polen to peel, strip, Icelandic pula work hard.    Early
14c. as to pick, pull off, gather (fruit, flowers, berries, leaves, petals, etc.); mid-14c. as to
uproot, pull up (of teeth, weeds, etc.). Sense of to draw, attract (to oneself) is from c.1400;
sense of to pluck at with the fingers is from c.1400. Meaning tear to pieces is mid-15c. By late
16c. it had replaced draw in these senses. Related: Pulled; pulling.    Common in slang usages
19c.-20c.; Bartlett (1859) has to pull foot walk fast; run; pull it to run. To pull up check a
course of action is from 1808, figurative of the lifting of the reins in horse-riding. To pull
(someone's) chain in figurative sense is from 1974, perhaps on the notion of a captive animal; the
expression was also used for to contact (someone), on the notion of the chain that operates a
signaling mechanism.    To pull (someone's) leg is from 1882, perhaps on notion of playfully
tripping (compare pull the long bow exaggerate, 1830, and pulling someone's leg also sometimes was
described as a way to awaken a sleeping person in a railway compartment, ship's berth, etc.).
Thornton's American Glossary (1912) has pull (n.) a jest (to have a pull at (someone)), which it
identifies as local and illustrates with an example from the Massachusetts Spy of May 21, 1817,
which identifies it as a Georgian phrase. To pull (one's) punches is from 1920 in pugilism, from
1921 figuratively. To pull in arrive (1892) and pull out depart (1868) are from the railroads.    To
pull (something) off accomplish, succeed at is originally in sporting, to win the prize money
(1870). To pull (something) on (someone) is from 1916; to pull (something) out of one's ass is Army
slang from 1970s. To pull rank is from 1919; to pull the rug from under (someone) figuratively is
from 1946.


nigger (n.)

1786, earlier neger (1568, Scottish and northern England dialect), from French n&egrave;gre, from
Spanish negro (see Negro). From the earliest usage it was the term that carries with it all the
obloquy and contempt and rejection which whites have inflicted on blacks [cited in Gowers, 1965,
probably Harold R. Isaacs]. But as black inferiority was at one time a near universal assumption in
English-speaking lands, the word in some cases could be used without deliberate insult. More
sympathetic writers late 18c. and early 19c. seem to have used black (n.) and, after the American
Civil War, colored person.  You're a fool nigger, and the worst day's work Pa ever did was to buy
you, said Scarlett slowly. ... There, she thought, I've said nigger and Mother wouldn't like that at
all. [Margaret Mitchell, Gone With the Wind, 1936]  Also applied by English settlers to dark-skinned
native peoples in India, Australia, Polynesia. The reclamation of the word as a neutral or positive
term in black culture (not universally regarded as a worthwhile enterprise), often with a suggestion
of soul or style, is attested first in the U.S. South, later (1968) in the Northern, urban-based
Black Power movement.    Used in combinations (such as nigger-brown) since 1840s for various dark
brown or black hues or objects; euphemistic substitutions (such as Zulu) began to appear in these
senses c.1917. Brazil nuts were called nigger toes by 1896. Variant niggah, attested from 1925
(without the -h, from 1969), is found usually in situations where blacks use the word. Nigra (1944),
on the other hand, in certain uses reflects a pronunciation of negro meant to suggest nigger, and is
thus deemed (according to a 1960 slang dictionary) even more derog[atory] than 'nigger.'  Slang
phrase nigger in the woodpile attested by 1800; A mode of accounting for the disappearance of fuel;
an unsolved mystery [R.H. Thornton, American Glossary, 1912]. Nigger heaven the top gallery in a
(segregated) theater first attested 1878 in reference to Troy, N.Y.


horse (n.)

Old English hors, from Proto-Germanic *hursa- (cognates: Old Norse hross, Old Frisian hors, Middle
Dutch ors, Dutch ros, Old High German hros, German Ro&szlig; horse), of unknown origin, connected by
some with PIE root *kurs-, source of Latin currere to run (see current (adj.)).    The usual Indo-
European word is represented by Old English eoh, from PIE *ekwo- horse (see equine). In many other
languages, as in English, this root has been lost in favor of synonyms, probably via superstitious
taboo on uttering the name of an animal so important in Indo-European religion.    Used since at
least late 14c. of various devices or appliances which suggest a horse (as in sawhorse). To ride a
horse that was foaled of an acorn (1670s) was through early 19c. a way to say be hanged from the
gallows. Slang for heroin is first attested 1950. Horse latitudes first attested 1777, the name of
unknown origin, despite much speculation. Dead horse as a figure for something that has ceased to be
useful is attested from 1630s.    HORSEGODMOTHER, a large masculine wench; one whom it is difficult
to rank among the purest and gentlest portion of the community. [John Trotter Brockett, A Glossary
of North Country Words, 1829]   The horse's mouth as a source of reliable information is from 1921,
perhaps originally of racetrack tips, from the fact that a horse's age can be determined accurately
by looking at its teeth. To swap horses while crossing the river (a bad idea) is from the American
Civil War and appears to have been originally one of Abe Lincoln's stories. Horse and buggy meaning
old-fashioned is recorded from 1926 slang, originally in reference to a young lady out of date, with
long hair. The proverbial gift horse was earlier given horse:    No man ought to looke a geuen hors
in the mouth. [Heywood, 1546]    The modern form perhaps traces to Butler's Hudibras (1663), where
the tight iambic tetrameter required a shorter phrase:    He ne'er consider'd it, as loth  To look a
Gift-horse in the mouth.


witch (n.)

Old English wicce female magician, sorceress, in later use especially a woman supposed to have
dealings with the devil or evil spirits and to be able by their cooperation to perform supernatural
acts, fem. of Old English wicca sorcerer, wizard, man who practices witchcraft or magic, from verb
wiccian to practice witchcraft (compare Low German wikken, wicken to use witchcraft, wikker, wicker
soothsayer).    OED says of uncertain origin; Liberman says None of the proposed etymologies of
witch is free from phonetic or semantic difficulties. Klein suggests connection with Old English
wigle divination, and wig, wih idol. Watkins says the nouns represent a Proto-Germanic *wikkjaz
necromancer (one who wakes the dead), from PIE *weg-yo-, from *weg- (2) to be strong, be lively (see
wake (v.)).    That wicce once had a more specific sense than the later general one of female
magician, sorceress perhaps is suggested by the presence of other words in Old English describing
more specific kinds of magical craft. In the Laws of &AElig;lfred (c.890), witchcraft was
specifically singled out as a woman's craft, whose practitioners were not to be suffered to live
among the West Saxons:    &ETH;a f&aelig;mnan &thorn;e gewunia&eth; onfon gealdorcr&aelig;ftigan
&amp; scinl&aelig;can &amp; wiccan, ne l&aelig;t &thorn;u &eth;a libban.    The other two words
combined with it here are gealdricge, a woman who practices incantations, and scinl&aelig;ce female
wizard, woman magician, from a root meaning phantom, evil spirit. Another word that appears in the
Anglo-Saxon laws is lybl&aelig;ca wizard, sorcerer, but with suggestions of skill in the use of
drugs, because the root of the word is lybb drug, poison, charm. Lybbestre was a fem. word meaning
sorceress, and lybcorn was the name of a certain medicinal seed (perhaps wild saffron). Weekley
notes possible connection to Gothic weihs holy and German weihan consecrate, and writes, the priests
of a suppressed religion naturally become magicians to its successors or opponents. In Anglo-Saxon
glossaries, wicca renders Latin augur (c.1100), and wicce stands for pythoness, divinatricem. In the
Three Kings of Cologne (c.1400) wicca translates Magi:    &THORN;e paynyms ... cleped &thorn;e iij
kyngis Magos, &thorn;at is to seye wicchis.    The glossary translates Latin necromantia (demonum
invocatio) with galdre, wiccecr&aelig;ft. The Anglo-Saxon poem called Men's Crafts has
wiccr&aelig;ft, which appears to be the same word, and by its context means skill with horses. In a
c.1250 translation of Exodus, witches is used of the Egyptian midwives who save the newborn sons of
the Hebrews: &ETH;e wicches hidden hem for-&eth;an, Biforen pharaun nolden he ben. Witch in
reference to a man survived in dialect into 20c., but the fem. form was so dominant by 1601 that
men-witches or he-witch began to be used. Extended sense of old, ugly, and crabbed or malignant
woman is from early 15c; that of young woman or girl of bewitching aspect or manners is first
recorded 1740. Witch doctor is from 1718; applied to African magicians from 1836.    At this day it
is indifferent to say in the English tongue, 'she is a witch,' or 'she is a wise woman.' [Reginald
Scot, The Discoverie of Witchcraft, 1584]


