gloss (v.)

1570s as insert a word as an explanation, from gloss (n.2). From 1650s as to add luster, from gloss
(n.1). Figurative sense of smooth over, hide is from 1729, mostly from gloss (n.1) but showing
influence of gloss (n.2) in the extended verbal sense of explain away (1630s), from idea of a note
inserted in the margin of a text to explain a difficult word. Related: Glossed; glossing.


glossy (adj.)

1550s, from gloss (n.1) + -y (2). Figurative use from 1690s. The noun sense of photograph with a
glossy surface is from 1931. Related: Glossiness.


glossary (n.)

late 14c., from Latin glossarium collection of glosses, from Greek glossarion, diminutive of glossa
obsolete or foreign word (see gloss (n.2)).


glosso-

word-forming element meaning tongue, from Greek glosso-, comb. form of glossa tongue (see gloss
(n.2)).


glossolalia (n.)

speaking in tongues, 1879, from Greek glossa tongue, language (see gloss (n.2)) + lalia talk,
prattle, a speaking, from lalein to speak, prattle, of echoic origin.


gloss (n.1)

luster, 1530s, from Scandinavian (compare Icelandic glossi flame, related to glossa to flame), or
obsolete Dutch gloos a glowing, from Middle High German glos; probably ultimately from the same
source as Old English glowan (see glow (v.)).


glossator (n.)

writer of glosses, late 14c., from Medieval Latin glossator, from Latin glossa (see gloss (n.2)).
Also in same sense were glossographer (c.1600), glossographist (1774).


gloss (n.2)

word inserted as an explanation, 1540s (earlier gloze, c.1300), from Latin glossa obsolete or
foreign word, one that requires explanation; hence also explanation, note, from Greek glossa
(Ionic), glotta (Attic) obscure word, language, also mouthpiece, literally tongue, from PIE *glogh-
thorn, point, that which is projected (source also of Old Church Slavonic glogu thorn). Figurative
use from 1540s. Both glossology (1716) and glottology (1841) have been used in the sense science of
language.


luster (n.1)

gloss, radiance, 1520s, from Middle French lustre gloss, radiance (14c.), common Romanic (cognates:
Spanish and Portuguese lustre, Rumanian lustru, Italian lustro splendor, brilliancy), from Latin
lustrare spread light over, brighten, illumine, related to lucere shine, lux light (see light (n.)).


lustre (n.)

gloss, radiance; see luster (n.1).


teriyaki

1962, from Japanese, from teri gloss, luster + yaki roast.


glotto-

word-forming element meaning language, from Attic Greek glotto-, from glotta tongue, language (see
gloss (n.2)).


glottis (n.)

1570s, from Greek glottis mouth of the windpipe, from glotta, Attic dialect variant of glossa tongue
(see gloss (n.2)).


glace (adj.)

having a smooth, polished surface, 1847, from French glac&eacute;, past participle of glacer to ice,
give a gloss to, from Vulgar Latin *glaciare to turn or make into ice, from Latin glacies ice (see
glacial).


Panglossian (adj.)

optimistic (usually ironic or disparaging), 1831, from French Panglosse, name of the philosopher and
tutor in Voltaire's Candide (1758), from pan- (see pan-) + Greek glossa, literally tongue (see gloss
(n.2)).


bugloss (n.)

1530s, from French buglosse, from Latin buglossa, from Greek bouglossos, literally ox-tongued, from
bous ox (see cow (n.)) + glossa tongue  (see gloss (n.2)) . So called from the shape of its leaves.


polyglot (adj.)

1650s, from Greek polyglottos speaking many languages, literally many-tongued, from polys many (see
poly-) + glotta, Attic variant of glossa language, literally tongue (see gloss (n.2)). As a noun
from 1640s.


varnish (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French vernis varnish (12c.), from Medieval Latin vernix odorous resin, of
uncertain origin, perhaps from Late Greek verenike, from Greek Berenike, name of an ancient city in
Libya (modern Bengasi) credited with the first use of varnishes. The town is named for Berenike II,
queen of Egypt (see Berenice). Figurative sense of specious gloss, pretense, is recorded from 1560s.


empyrean (n.)

mid-14c. (as empyre), from Greek empyros fiery, from en (see en- (2)) + pyr fire (see fire (n.));
confused by early writers with imperial. In Greek cosmology, the highest heaven, the sphere of pure
fire; later baptized with a Christian gloss as the abode of God and the angels.


epiglottis (n.)

1520s, from Late Latin epiglottis, from Greek epiglottis, literally (that which is) upon the tongue,
from epi on (see epi-) + glottis, from glotta, variant of glossa tongue (see gloss (n.2)). An
earlier form was epiglote (c.1400), from Old French epiglotte. Related: Epiglottic.


Scratch (n.2)

in Old Scratch the Devil, 1740, from earlier Scrat, from Old Norse skratte goblin, wizard, a word
which was used in late Old English to gloss hermaphrodite; probably originally monster (compare Old
High German scraz, scrato satyr, wood demon, German Schratt, Old High German screz a goblin, imp,
dwarf; borrowed from Germanic into Slavic, as in Polish skrzat a goblin).


plane (v.1)

to make smooth, early 14c., to gloss over, explain away; mid-14c. as to make smooth or even, from
Old French planer to smooth, level off; wipe away, erase (12c.), from Late Latin planare make level,
from Latin planus level, flat (see plane (n.1)). In early use in English often plain. Related:
Planed; planing.


whisper (v.)

Old English hwisprian speak very softly, murmur (only in a Northumbrian gloss for Latin murmurare),
from Proto-Germanic *hwis- (cognates: Middle Dutch wispelen, Old High German hwispalon, German
wispeln, wispern, Old Norse hviskra to whisper), from PIE *kwei- to hiss, whistle, imitative.
Transitive sense is from 1560s. Related: Whispered; whispering. An alternative verb, now obsolete,
was whister (late 14c., from Old English hw&aelig;strian), and Middle English had whistringe
grucchere a slanderer.


nixie (n.)

water fairy, 1816 (introduced by Sir Walter Scott), from German Nixie, from Old High German nihhussa
water sprite, fem. of nihhus, from Proto-Germanic *nikwiz (cognates: Old Norse nykr, Old English
nicor water spirit, water monster, also used to gloss hippopotamus; Grendel's mother in Beowulf was
a nicor), perhaps from PIE *neigw- to wash (cognates: Sanskrit nenkti washes, Greek nizo I wash, Old
Irish nigid washes).


lip (n.)

Old English lippa, from Proto-Germanic *lepjon (cognates: Old Frisian lippa, Middle Dutch lippe,
Dutch lip, Old High German lefs, German Lefze, Swedish l&auml;pp, Danish l&aelig;be), from PIE *leb-
to lick; lip (source also of Latin labium).    French lippe is from a Germanic source. Transferred
sense of edge or margin of a cup, etc. is from 1590s. Slang sense saucy talk is from 1821, probably
from move the lip (1570s) utter even the slightest word (against someone). To bite (one's) lip show
vexation is from early 14c. Stiff upper lip as a sign of courage is from 1833. Lip gloss is attested
from 1939; lip balm from 1877. Related: Lips.


shoddy (adj.)

1862, having a delusive appearance of high quality, a Northern word from the American Civil War in
reference to the quality of government supplies for the armies, from earlier noun meaning rag-wool,
wool made of woolen waste and old rags (1832), perhaps a Yorkshire provincial word, of uncertain
origin.    Originally used for padding, English manufacturers began making coarse wearing clothes
from it, and when new it looked like broad-cloth but the gloss quickly wore off, giving the stuff a
bad reputation as a cheat. The 1860 U.S. census of manufactures notes import of more than 6 million
pounds of it, which was much used in the manufacture of army and navy cloths and blankets in the
United States according to an 1865 government report.    The Days of Shoddy, as the reader will
readily anticipate, are the opening months of the present war, at which time the opprobrious name
first came into general use as a designation for swindling and humbug of every character; and
nothing more need be said to indicate the scope of this novel. [Henry Morford, The Days of Shoddy: A
Novel of the Great Rebellion in 1861, Philadelphia, 1863]    Related: Shoddily; shoddiness.


pick (v.)

early 13c., picken to peck; c.1300, piken to work with a pick, probably representing a fusion of Old
English *pician to prick, (implied by picung a piercing, pricking, an 8c. gloss on Latin stigmata)
with Old Norse pikka to prick, peck, both from a Germanic root (source also of Middle Dutch picken,
German picken to pick, peck), perhaps imitative. Influence from Middle French piquer to prick, sting
(see pike (n.2)) also is possible, but that French word generally is not considered a source of the
English word. Related: Picked; picking.    Meaning to eat with small bites is from 1580s. The
meaning to choose, select, pick out emerged late 14c., from earlier meaning to pluck with the
fingers (early 14c.). Sense of to rob, plunder (c.1300) weakened to a milder sense of steal petty
things by late 14c. Of forcing locks with a pointed tool, by 1540s. Meaning to pluck (a banjo) is
recorded from 1860. To pick a quarrel, etc. is from mid-15c.; to pick at find fault with is from
1670s. Pick on single out for adverse attention is from late 14c.; pick off shoot one by one is
recorded from 1810; baseball sense of to put out a runner on base is from 1939. Also see pick up. To
pick and choose select carefully is from 1660s (choose and pick is attested from c.1400).


shed (v.)

cast off, Old English sceadan, scadan to divide, separate, part company; discriminate, decide;
scatter abroad, cast about, strong verb (past tense scead, past participle sceadan), from Proto-
Germanic *skaithan (cognates: Old Saxon skethan, Old Frisian sketha, Middle Dutch sceiden, Dutch
scheiden, Old High German sceidan, German scheiden part, separate, distinguish, Gothic skaidan
separate), from *skaith divide, split.    According to Klein's sources, this probably is related to
PIE root *skei- to cut, separate, divide, part, split (cognates: Sanskrit chid-, Greek skhizein,
Latin scindere to split; Lithuanian skedzu I make thin, separate, divide; Old Irish scian knife;
Welsh chwydu to break open). Related: Shedding. A shedding-tooth (1799) was a milk-tooth or baby-
tooth.     In reference to animals, to lose hair, feathers, etc. recorded from c.1500; of trees
losing leaves from 1590s; of clothes, 1858. This verb was used in Old English to gloss Late Latin
words in the sense to discriminate, to decide that literally mean to divide, separate (compare
discern). Hence also scead (n.) separation, distinction; discretion, understanding, reason;
sceadwisnes discrimination, discretion.


