glow (v.)

Old English glowan to glow, shine as if red-hot, from Proto-Germanic base *glo- (cognates: Old Saxon
gloian, Old Frisian gled glow, blaze, Old Norse gloa, Old High German gluoen, German gl&uuml;hen to
glow), from PIE *ghel- (2) to shine, with derivatives referring to bright materials and gold (see
glass). Figuratively from late 14c. Related: Glowed; glowing.


glow (n.)

mid-15c., from glow (v).


glower (v.)

mid-14c., to shine; c.1500, to stare with wide eyes, perhaps from a Scandinavian source (compare
Norwegian dialectal glora to glow), from Proto-Germanic base *glo- (see glow (v.)), root of Old
English glowan to glow, which influenced the spelling. Or perhaps related to Middle Dutch gluren to
leer. Meaning to look angrily, scowl is first recorded 1775. Related: Glowered; glowering. As a
noun, 1715, from the verb.


glow-worm (n.)

early 14c., from glow (v.) + worm (n.).


gloaming (n.)

Old English glomung twilight, formed (probably on model of &aelig;fning evening) from glom twilight,
related to glowan to glow (hence glow of sunrise or sunset), from Proto-Germanic *glo- (see glow
(v.)). Fell from currency except in Yorkshire dialect, but preserved in Scotland and reintroduced by
Burns and other Scottish writers after 1785.


incandescent (adj.)

1794, from French incandescent or directly from Latin incandescentem (nominative incandescens),
present participle of incandescere become warm, glow, kindle, from in- within (see in- (2)) +
candescere begin to glow, become white, inceptive of candere to glow, to shine (see candle).


afterglow (n.)

also after-glow, 1829, from after + glow (n.).


ardent (adj.)

early 14c., of alcoholic distillates, brandy (ardent spirits), etc., from Old French ardant (13c.)
burning, hot; zealous, from Latin ardentem (nominative ardens) glowing, fiery, hot, ablaze, also
used figuratively of passions, present participle of ardere to burn, from PIE root *as- to burn,
glow from PIE root *as- to burn, glow (cognates: Old English &aelig;sce ashes; see ash (n.1)).
Ardent spirits (late 15c.) so called because they are inflammable, but the term now, if used at all,
probably is felt in the figurative sense. The figurative sense (of burning with passions, desire,
etc.) is from late 14c.; literal sense of burning, parching (c.1400) remains rare. Related:
Ardently.


aglow (adj.)

1817 (in Coleridge), from a- (1) + glow. Figurative sense of flushed with pleasurable excitement is
from 1830.


moonglow (n.)

1926, from moon (n.) + glow (n.).


fervid (adj.)

1590s, from Latin fervidus glowing, burning; vehement, fervid, from fervere to boil, glow (see brew
(v.)). Figurative sense of impassioned is from 1650s. Related: Fervidly.


candescent (adj.)

1824, from Latin candescentem (nominative candescens), present participle of candescere to become
white, begin to gleam, inchoative of candere to shine, to glow (see candle).


gloss (n.1)

luster, 1530s, from Scandinavian (compare Icelandic glossi flame, related to glossa to flame), or
obsolete Dutch gloos a glowing, from Middle High German glos; probably ultimately from the same
source as Old English glowan (see glow (v.)).


arid (adj.)

1650s, dry, parched, from French aride (15c.) or directly from Latin aridus dry, arid, parched, from
arere to be dry, from PIE root *as- to burn, glow (see ash (n.1)). Figurative sense of uninteresting
is from 1827. Related: Aridly.


fervent (adj.)

mid-14c., from Old French fervent, from Latin ferventem (nominative fervens) boiling, hot, glowing,
figuratively violent, impetuous, furious, present participle of fervere to boil, glow, from PIE root
*bhreue- (see brew (v.)). The figurative sense of impassioned is first attested c.1400. Related:
Fervency; fervently.


ardor (n.)

early 15c., heat of passion or desire, from Old French ardure heat, glow; passion (12c.), from Latin
ardorem (nominative ardor) a flame, fire, burning, heat; also of feelings, etc., eagerness, zeal,
from ardere to burn (see ardent). In Middle English, used of base passions; since Milton's time, of
noble ones.


sandalwood (n.)

1510s, earlier sandell (c.1400), saundres (early 14c.), from Old French sandale, from Medieval Latin
sandalum, from Late Greek santalon, ultimately from Sanskrit &#269;andana-m the sandalwood tree,
perhaps literally wood for burning incense, related to candrah shining, glowing, and cognate with
Latin candere to shine, glow (see candle).


candid (adj.)

1620s, white, from Latin candidum white; pure; sincere, honest, upright, from candere to shine, from
PIE root *kand- to glow, to shine (see candle). In English, metaphoric extension to frank first
recorded 1670s (compare French candide open, frank, ingenuous, sincere). Of photography, 1929.
Related: Candidly; candidness.


fervor (n.)

mid-14c., warmth or glow of feeling, from Old French fervor (Modern French ferveur) heat,
enthusiasm, ardor, passion, from Latin fervor a boiling, violent heat; passion, ardor, fury, from
fervere to boil (see brew (v.)).


gleam (n.)

Old English gl&aelig;m brilliant light; brightness, splendor, radiance, from Proto-Germanic *glaimiz
(cognates: Old Saxon glimo brightness; Middle High German glim spark, gleime glowworm; German
glimmen to glimmer, glow; Old Norse glija to shine, glitter), from root *glim-, from PIE *ghel- (2)
to shine, with derivatives referring to bright materials and gold (see glass).


arson (n.)

1670s, from Anglo-French arsoun (late 13c.), Old French arsion, from Late Latin arsionem (nominative
arsio) a burning, noun of action from past participle stem of Latin ardere to burn, from PIE root
*as- to burn, glow (see ash (n.1)). The Old English term was b&aelig;rnet, literally burning; and
Coke has indictment of burning (1640).


incendiary

c.1400 as a noun, person who sets malicious fires; mid-15c. as an adjective, capable of being used
to set fires, from Latin incendiarius causing a fire, from incendium conflagration, from incendere
set on fire, figuratively, incite, rouse, enrage, from in- into, in, on, upon (see in- (2)) +
*candere to set alight, cause to glow, related to candere to shine (see candle). Figurative sense of
enflaming passions (adj.) is from 1610s. Military use, of bombs, shells, etc., attested from 1871.
The obsolete verb incend is attested from c.1500.


blush (v.)

mid-14c., bluschen, blischen, probably from Old English blyscan blush, become red, glow (glossing
Latin rutilare), akin to blyse torch, from Proto-Germanic *blisk- to shine, burn, which also yielded
words in Low German (Dutch blozen to blush) and Scandinavian (Danish blusse to blaze; to blush);
ultimately from PIE *bhel- (1) to shine, flash, burn (see bleach (v.)).    For vowel evolution, see
bury. Earliest recorded senses were to shine brightly; to look, stare. Sense of turn red in the face
(with shame, modesty, etc.) is from c.1400. Related: Blushed; blushing.


splendid (adj.)

1620s, marked by grandeur, probably a shortening of earlier splendidious (early 15c.), from Latin
splendidus bright, shining, glittering; sumptuous, gorgeous, grand; illustrious, distinguished,
noble; showy, fine, specious, from splendere be bright, shine, gleam, glisten, from PIE *splend- to
shine, glow (cognates: Lithuanian splendziu I shine, Middle Irish lainn bright). An earlier form was
splendent (late 15c.). From 1640s as brilliant, dazzling; 1640s as conspicuous, illustrious; very
fine, excellent. Ironic use (as in splendid isolation, 1843) is attested from 17c.


flagrant (adj.)

c.1500, resplendent, from Latin flagrantem (nominative flagrans) burning, blazing, glowing,
figuratively glowing with passion, eager, vehement, present participle of flagrare to burn, blaze,
glow from Latin root *flag-, corresponding to PIE *bhleg- to shine, flash, burn (cognates: Greek
phlegein to burn, scorch, Latin fulgere to shine), from root *bhel- (1) to shine, flash, burn (see
bleach (v.)). Sense of glaringly offensive first recorded 1706, probably from common legalese phrase
in flagrante delicto red-handed, literally with the crime still blazing. Related: Flagrantly.


ash (n.1)

powdery remains of fire, Old English &aelig;sce ash, from Proto-Germanic *askon (cognates: Old Norse
and Swedish aska, Old High German asca, German asche, Gothic azgo ashes), from PIE root *as- to
burn, glow (cognates: Sanskrit asah ashes, dust, Armenian azazem I dry up, Greek azein to dry up,
parch, Latin ardus parched, dry). Spanish and Portuguese ascua red-hot coal are Germanic loan-words.
Symbol of grief or repentance; hence Ash Wednesday (c.1300), from custom introduced by Pope Gregory
the Great of sprinkling ashes on the heads of penitents on the first day of Lent. Ashes meaning
mortal remains of a person is late 13c., in reference to the ancient custom of cremation.


rum (n.)

liquor from sugar cane or molasses, 1650s, shortening of rumbullion (1651), rombostion (1652), of
uncertain origin, perhaps from rum (adj.).The chiefe fudling they make in the Island [i.e. Barbados]
is Rumbullion alias Kill-Devill, and this is made of suggar cane distilled, a hott, hellish and
terrible liquor. [A briefe Description of the Island of Barbados, 1651]The English word was borrowed
into Dutch, German, Swedish, Danish, Spanish, Portuguese, Italian, French, and Russian. Used since
1800 in North America as a general (hostile) name for intoxicating liquors.    Rum I take to be the
name which unwashed moralists apply alike to the product distilled from molasses and the noblest
juices of the vineyard. Burgundy in all its sunset glow is rum. Champagne, soul of the foaming grape
of Eastern France, is rum. ... Sir, I repudiate the loathsome vulgarism as an insult to the first
miracle wrought by the Founder of our religion! [Oliver Wendell Holmes, The Autocrat of the
Breakfast-Table, 1891]


candle (n.)

Old English candel lamp, lantern, candle, an early ecclesiastical borrowing from Latin candela a
light, torch, candle made of tallow or wax, from candere to shine, from PIE root *kand- to glow, to
shine, to shoot out light (cognates: Sanskrit cand- to give light, shine, candra- shining, glowing,
moon; Greek kandaros coal; Welsh cann white; Middle Irish condud fuel).    Candles were unknown in
ancient Greece (where oil lamps sufficed), but common from early times among Romans and Etruscans.
Candles on birthday cakes seems to have been originally a German custom. To hold a candle to
originally meant to help in a subordinate capacity, from the notion of an assistant or apprentice
holding a candle for light while the master works (compare Old English taporberend acolyte). To burn
the candle at both ends is recorded from 1730.


Praesepe (n.)

loose (open) star cluster (M44) in Cancer, from Latin praesaepe the Roman name for the grouping,
literally enclosure, stall, manger, hive, from prae- (see pre-) + saepire to fence (see septum).
It is similar to the Hyades but more distant, about 600 light-years away, consists of about 1,000
stars, mostly older, the brightest of them around magnitude 6.5, thus not discernable to the naked
eye even on the clearest nights, but their collective light makes a visible fuzz of glow that the
ancients likened to a cloud (the original nebula); Galileo was the first to resolve it into stars
(1609). The modern name for it in U.S. and Britain, Beehive, seems no older than 1840. Greek names
included Nephelion Little Cloud and Akhlys Little Mist. In astrology, like all clusters, it
threatened mischief and blindness [Allen].    Manger to the Romans perhaps by influence of two
nearby stars, Gamma and Delta Cancri, dim and unspectacular but both for some reason figuring
largely in ancient astrology and weather forecasting, and known as the Asses (Latin Aselli),
supposedly those of Silenus.


Chloe

fem. proper name, Latin, from Greek Khloe, literally young green shoot; related to khloros greenish-
yellow, from PIE *ghlo- variant of root *ghel- (2) to shine, with derivatives referring to bright
materials and gold, and bile or gall (such as Latin helvus yellowish, bay, Gallo-Latin gilvus light
bay; Lithuanian geltonas yellow; Old Church Slavonic zlutu, Polish &#380;&oacute;&#322;ty, Russian
zeltyj yellow; Sanskrit harih yellow, tawny yellow, hiranyam gold; Avestan zari yellow; Old English
geolu, geolwe, Modern English yellow, German gelb yellow) and green (such as Latin galbus greenish-
yellow; Greek khloros greenish-yellow color, kholos bile; Lithuanian zalias green, zelvas greenish;
Old Church Slavonic zelenu, Polish zielony, Russian zelenyj green; Old Irish glass, Welsh and Breton
glas green, also gray, blue).    Buck says the interchange of words for yellow and green is perhaps
because they were applied to vegetation like grass, cereals, etc., which changed from green to
yellow. It is possible that this whole group of yellow-green words is related to PIE root *ghlei- to
shine, glitter, glow, be warm (see gleam (n.)).


black (adj.)

Old English bl&aelig;c dark, from Proto-Germanic *blakaz burned (cognates: Old Norse blakkr dark,
Old High German blah black, Swedish bl&auml;ck ink, Dutch blaken to burn), from PIE *bhleg- to burn,
gleam, shine, flash (cognates: Greek phlegein to burn, scorch, Latin flagrare to blaze, glow, burn),
from root *bhel- (1) to shine, flash, burn; see bleach (v.).    The same root produced Old English
blac bright, shining, glittering, pale; the connecting notions being, perhaps, fire (bright) and
burned (dark). The usual Old English word for black was sweart (see swart). According to OED: In ME.
it is often doubtful whether blac, blak, blake, means 'black, dark,' or 'pale, colourless, wan,
livid.'  Used of dark-skinned people in Old English.    Of coffee, first attested 1796. Meaning
fierce, terrible, wicked is late 14c. The color of sin and sorrow since at least c.1300; sense of
with dark purposes, malignant emerged 1580s (as in black magic). Black face in reference to a
performance style originated in U.S., is from 1868. Black flag, flown (especially by pirates) as a
signal of no mercy, from 1590s. Black dog melancholy attested from 1826. Black belt is from 1875 in
reference to districts of the U.S. South with heaviest African population; 1870 with reference to
fertility of soil; 1913 in judo sense. Black power is from 1966, associated with Stokely Carmichael.


