gluttony (n.)

c.1200, glutunie, from Old French glutonie, from gluton glutton (see glutton). Gluttonry recorded
from late 12c.


gluttonous (adj.)

mid-14c.; see glutton + -ous. Related: Gluttonously.


glutton (n.)

early 13c., from Old French gluton (Modern French glouton), from Latin gluttonem (nominative glutto)
overeater, formed from gluttire to swallow, from gula throat, from PIE *gwele- (3) to swallow (see
glut (v.)).


gourmand (n.)

late 15c., glutton, from Middle French gourmant glutton, originally an adj., gluttonous, of
uncertain origin. Not connected with gourmet. Meaning one fond of good eating is from 1758.    The
gourmand is one whose chief pleasure is eating; but a gourmet is a connoisseur of food and wines. In
England the difference is this: a gourmand regards quantity more than quality, a gourmet quality
more than quantity. [Brewer, Dictionary of Phrase and Fable, Philadelphia, 1898]


Gulliver

male proper name, from Old French goulafre glutton, a very common name, found as a surname in
Domesday Book (William Gulafra).


comedo (n.)

blackhead, etc., 1866, from Latin comedo glutton, from comedere to eat up (see comestible). A name
formerly given to worms that devour the body; transferred in medical use to secretions that resemble
them.


gourmet (n.)

connoisseur in eating and drinking, 1820, from French gourmet, altered (by influence of Middle
French gourmant glutton) from Old French groume, originally wine-taster, wine merchant's servant (in
13c. a lad generally), of uncertain origin. As an adjective from 1900. See gourmand.


epicure (n.)

late 14c., follower of Epicurus, from Latin Epicurus, from Greek Epicouros (341-270 B.C.E.),
Athenian philosopher who taught that pleasure is the highest good and identified virtue as the
greatest pleasure; the first lesson recalled, the second forgotten, and the name used pejoratively
for one who gives himself up to sensual pleasure (1560s), especially glutton, sybarite (1774).
Epicurus' school opposed by stoics, who first gave his name a reproachful sense. Non-pejorative
meaning one who cultivates refined taste in food and drink is from 1580s.


mange (n.)

skin disease of animals, early 15c., from Old French manjue the itch, also hunger, appetite;
itching, longing, literally the eating, verbal noun from a collateral form of Old French mangier to
eat (Modern French manger) to eat, from Late Latin manducare to chew, eat, from manducus glutton,
from Latin mandere to chew (see mandible).


gavotte (n.)

lively dance, 1690s, from French gavotte (17c.), from Old Proven&ccedil;al gavoto mountaineer's
dance, from gavot, a local name for an Alpine resident, literally boor, glutton, from gaver to
stuff, force-feed poultry, from Old Proven&ccedil;al gava crop. From the same source is French
gavache coward, dastard.


lackey (n.)

1520s, footman, running footman, valet, from Middle French laquais foot soldier, footman, servant
(15c.), of unknown origin; perhaps from Old Proven&ccedil;al lacai, from lecai glutton, covetous,
from lecar to lick. Alternative etymology is via French from Catalan alacay, from Arabic al-qadi the
judge. Yet another guess traces it through Spanish lacayo, from Italian lacch&egrave;, from Modern
Greek oulakes, from Turkish ulak runner, courier. This suits the original sense better, but OED says
Italian lacch&egrave; is from French. Sense of servile follower appeared 1580s. As a political term
of abuse it dates from 1939 in communist jargon.


