goad (v.)

1570s, from goad (n.); earliest use is figurative. Related: Goaded; goading.


goad (n.)

Old English gad point, spearhead, arrowhead, from Proto-Germanic *gaido (cognates: Lombardic gaida
spear), from PIE root *ghei- (1) to propel, prick (cognates: Sanskrit hetih missile, projectile,
himsati he injures; Avestan zaena- weapon; Greek khaios shepherd's staff; Old English gar spear; Old
Irish gae spear). Figurative use is since 16c., probably from the Bible.


stimulation (n.)

1520s, act of pricking or stirring to action, from Latin stimulationem (nominative stimulatio) an
incitement, noun of action from past participle stem of stimulare prick, goad, urge, from stimulus
spur, goad (see stimulus).


paroxysm (n.)

sudden attack, convulsion, early 15c., from Middle French paroxysme (16c.), earlier paroxime (13c.),
from Medieval Latin paroxysmus irritation, fit of a disease, from Greek paroxysmos irritation,
exasperation, from paroxynein to irritate, goad, provoke, from para- beyond (see para- (1)) +
oxynein sharpen, goad, from oxys sharp, pointed (see acrid). Non-medical sense first attested
c.1600. Related: Paroxysmal.


gad (n.)

goad, metal rod, early 13c., from Old Norse gaddr spike, nail, from Proto-Germanic *gadaz pointed
stick (see yard (n.2)).


stick (v.)

Old English stician to pierce, stab, transfix, goad, also to remain embedded, stay fixed, be
fastened, from Proto-Germanic *stik- pierce, prick, be sharp (cognates: Old Saxon stekan, Old
Frisian steka, Dutch stecken, Old High German stehhan, German stechen to stab, prick), from PIE
*steig- to stick; pointed (cognates: Latin instigare to goad, instinguere to incite, impel; Greek
stizein to prick, puncture, stigma mark made by a pointed instrument; Old Persian tigra- sharp,
pointed; Avestan tighri- arrow; Lithuanian stingu to remain in place; Russian stegati to quilt).
Figurative sense of to remain permanently in mind is attested from c.1300. Transitive sense of to
fasten (something) in place is attested from late 13c. Stick out project is recorded from 1560s.
Slang stick around remain is from 1912; stick it as a rude item of advice is first recorded 1922.
Related: Stuck; sticking. Sticking point, beyond which one refuses to go, is from 1956; sticking-
place, where any thing put will stay is from 1570s. Modern use generally is an echo of Shakespeare.


needle (v.)

1715, to sew or pierce with a needle, from needle (n.). Meaning goad, provoke (1881) probably is
from earlier meaning haggle in making a bargain (1812). Related: Needled; needling.


stickleback (n.)

c.1400, from Old English sticel prick, sting, goad, thorn (from Proto-Germanic *stik- pierce, prick,
be sharp; see stick (v.)) + back (n.).


gad (v.)

to rove about, mid-15c., perhaps a back-formation from Middle English gadeling (Old English
g&aelig;deling) kinsman, fellow, companion in arms, but which had a deteriorated sense of rogue,
vagabond by c.1300 (it also had a meaning wandering, but this is attested only from 16c.); or else
it should be associated with gad (n.) a goad for driving cattle. Related: Gadding.


gadfly (n.)

1620s, fly which bites cattle, probably from gad (n.) goad, metal rod, here in the sense of stinger;
but the sense is entangled with gad (v.) and another early meaning of gadfly was someone who likes
to go about, often stopping here and there (1610s). Sense of one who irritates another is from 1640s
(equivalent of Latin oestrus).


prod (v.)

1530s, to poke with a stick, of uncertain origin; possibly [Barnhart] a variant of brod, from Middle
English brodden to goad, from Old Norse broddr shaft, spike (see brad), or perhaps imitative [OED].
Figurative sense is recorded from 1871. Related: Prodded; prodding.


egg (v.)

c.1200, from Old Norse eggja to goad on, incite, from egg edge (see edge (n.)). The unrelated verb
meaning to pelt with (rotten) eggs is from 1857, from egg (n.). Related: Egged; egging.


prickle (n.)

Old English pricel thing to prick with, goad, point, from the same source as Old English prician
(see prick (v.)) with instrumental suffix -el (compare Middle Low German prickel, Dutch prikkel).


stimulus (n.)

plural stimuli, 1680s, originally as a medical term, something that goads a lazy organ (often the
male member), from a modern use of Latin stimulus a goad, a pointed stick, figuratively a sting, a
pang; incitement, spur, from PIE *sti- point, prick, pierce (see stick (v.)). General sense of
something that excites or arouses the mind or spirit is from 1791. Psychological sense is first
recorded 1894.


instinct (n.)

early 15c., a prompting, from Latin instinctus instigation, impulse, noun use of past participle of
instinguere to incite, impel, from in- on (see in- (2)) + stinguere prick, goad, from PIE *steig- to
prick, stick, pierce (see stick (v.)). Meaning animal faculty of intuitive perception is from mid-
15c., from notion of natural prompting. Sense of innate tendency is first recorded 1560s.


gar (n.)

pike-like fish, 1765, American English, shortening of garfish (mid-15c.), from Old English gar
spear, from Proto-Germanic *gaizo- (cognates: Old Norse geirr, Old Saxon, Old High German ger,
German Ger spear), from PIE *ghaiso- stick, spear (see goad (n.)).


center (n.)

late 14c., middle point of a circle; point round which something revolves, from Old French centre
(14c.), from Latin centrum center, originally fixed point of the two points of a drafting compass,
from Greek kentron sharp point, goad, sting of a wasp, from kentein stitch, from PIE root *kent- to
prick (cognates: Breton kentr a spur, Welsh cethr nail, Old High German hantag sharp, pointed).
Figuratively from 1680s. Meaning the middle of anything attested from 1590s. Spelling with -re
popularized in Britain by Johnson's dictionary (following Bailey's), though -er is older and was
used by Shakespeare, Milton, and Pope. Center of gravity is recorded from 1650s. Center of attention
is from 1868.


bait (v.1)

to torment or goad (someone unable to escape, and to take pleasure in it), c.1300, beyten, a
figurative use from the literal sense of to set dogs on, from the medieval entertainment of setting
dogs on some ferocious animal to bite and worry it (the literal use is attested from c.1300); from
Old Norse beita to cause to bite, from Proto-Germanic *baitan (cognates: Old English b&aelig;tan to
cause to bite, Old High German beizzen to bait, Middle High German beiz hunting, German beizen to
hawk, to cauterize, etch), causative of *bitan (see bite (v.)); the causative word forked into the
two meanings of harass and food offered. Related: Baited; baiting.


prick (n.)

Middle English prikke, from Old English prica (n.) point, puncture; particle, small portion of space
or time, common Proto-Germanic (compare Low German prik point, Middle Dutch prick, Dutch prik,
Swedish prick point, dot). Meaning pointed weapon, dagger is first attested 1550s.    Earliest
recorded use for penis is 1590s (Shakespeare puns upon it). My prick was used 16c.-17c. as a term of
endearment by immodest maids for their boyfriends. As a term of abuse, it is attested by 1929.
Prick-teaser attested from 1958. The use in kick against the pricks (Acts ix:5, first in the
translation of 1382) probably is from sense of a goad for oxen (mid-14c.), which made it a plausible
translation of Latin stimulus; advorsum stimulum calces was proverbial in Latin.


spur (n.)

Old English spura, spora metal implement worn on the heel to goad a horse (related to spurnan to
kick), from Proto-Germanic *spuron (cognates: Old Norse spori, Middle Dutch spore, Dutch spoor, Old
High German sporo, German Sporn spur), from PIE *spere- ankle (see spurn). Related to Dutch spoor,
Old English spor track, footprint, trace.    Generalized sense of anything that urges on, stimulus,
is from late 14c. As a sharp projection on the leg of a cock, from 1540s. Meaning a ridge projecting
off a mountain mass is recorded from 1650s. Of railway lines from 1837. Widely extended senses ...
are characteristic of a horsey race [Weekley]. Expression on the spur of the moment (1801) preserves
archaic phrase on the spur in great haste (1520s). To win one's spurs is to gain knighthood by some
valorous act, gilded spurs being the distinctive mark of a knight.


acrid (adj.)

1712, formed irregularly from Latin acer (fem. acris) sharp, pungent, bitter, eager, fierce, from
PIE *akri- sharp, from root *ak- be sharp, rise (out) to a point, pierce (cognates: Oscan akrid
(ablative singular) sharply; Greek akis sharp point, akros at the farthest point, highest,
outermost, akantha thorn, akme summit, edge; also oxys sharp, bitter; Sanskrit acri- corner, edge,
acani- point of an arrow, asrih edge; Lithuanian a&#353;muo sharpness, akstis sharp stick; Old
Lithuanian a&#353;tras, Lithuanian a&#353;trus sharp; Old Church Slavonic ostru, Russian &#243;stryj
sharp; Old Irish er high; Welsh ochr edge, corner, border; Old Norse eggja goad; Old English ecg
sword). The -id suffix probably is in imitation of acid. Acrious (1670s) is a correct formation, but
seldom seen.


harry (v.)

Old English hergian make war, lay waste, ravage, plunder, the word used in the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle
for what the Vikings did to England, from Proto-Germanic *harjon (cognates: Old Frisian urheria lay
waste, ravage, plunder, Old Norse herja to make a raid, to plunder, Old Saxon and Old High German
herion, German verheeren to destroy, lay waste, devastate), from *harjaz an armed force (cognates:
Old English here, Old Norse herr crowd, great number; army, troop, Old Saxon and Old Frisian heri,
Dutch heir, Old High German har, German Heer host, army, Gothic harjis), from PIE root *koro- war
also war-band, hose, army (cognates: Lithuanian karas war, quarrel, karias host, army; Old Church
Slavonic kara strife; Middle Irish cuire troop; Old Persian kara host, people, army; Greek koiranos
ruler, leader, commander). Weakened sense of worry, goad, harass is from c.1400. Related: Harried;
harrying.


