gobble (v.2)

make a turkey noise, 1670s, probably imitative, perhaps influenced by gobble (1) or gargle. As a
noun from 1781.


gobbler (n.)

1737, turkey cock, agent noun from gobble (v.2). As one who eats greedily 1755, from gobble (v.1).


gobble (v.1)

eat greedily, c.1600, probably partly echoic, partly frequentative of gob, via gobben drink
something greedily. Related: Gobbled; gobbling.


little (adj.)

Old English lytel not large, not much; short in distance or time; unimportant, also used in late Old
English as a noun, small piece; a short time, from Proto-Germanic *lutilla- (cognates: Old Saxon
luttil, Dutch luttel, Old High German luzzil, German l&uuml;tzel, Gothic leitils little), perhaps
originally a diminutive of the root of Old English lyt little, few, from PIE *leud- small. Often
synonymous with small, but capable of emotional implications which small is not [OED].    Phrase the
little woman wife attested from 1795. Little people the faeries is from 1726; as children, it is
attested from 1752; as ordinary people (opposed to the great), it is attested from 1827. Little Neck
clams (1884) are so called for Little Neck, Long Island, a neck of land on the island's North Shore.
Little by little is from late 15c. (litylle be litille). Little green men space aliens is from 1950.
Little black dress is from 1939.    At the beginning of summer, smart women who stay in town like to
wear sheer little black dresses. Because most little black dresses look alike, retailers struggle
each year to find something which will make them seem new. [Life, June 13, 1939]   Little Orphan
Annie originally was (as Little Orphant Annie) the character in James Whitcomb Riley's 1885 poem,
originally titled Elf Child. The U.S. newspaper comic strip created by Harold Gray (1894-1968)
debuted in 1924 in the New York Daily News.    LITTLE Orphant Annie's come to our house to stay,
An' wash the cups an' saucers up, an' brush the crumbs away,  An' shoo the chickens off the porch,
an' dust the hearth, an' sweep,  An' make the fire, an' bake the bread, an' earn her board-an'-keep;
An' all us other childern, when the supper-things is done,  We set around the kitchen fire an' has
the mostest fun  A-list'nin' to the witch-tales 'at Annie tells about,  An' the Gobble-uns 'at gits
you  Ef you  Don't  Watch  Out!  [Riley, Elf Child]


