good (n.)

Old English g&#333;d that which is good, goodness; advantage, benefit; gift; virtue; property; from
good (adj.).


good-time (adj.)

1928, from good (adj.) + time. Expression to have a good time enjoy oneself attested from 1822;
earlier have a good time of it (1771). To make good time go fast is from 1838.


good-bye

also goodbye, good bye, good-by, 1590s, from godbwye (1570s), itself a contraction of God be with ye
(late 14c.), influenced by good day, good evening, etc.


good-neighbor (adj.)

also (chiefly British English) good-neighbour, adjectival phrase, in reference to U.S. foreign
policy, especially in Latin America, 1928, originally in Herbert Hoover. The good neighbours is
Scottish euphemism for the fairies (1580s).


good day

salutation, late 14c., short for have a good day (c.1200). Good morning is c.1400, gode morwene.
Good night, also goodnight, is late 14c.; as an exclamation of surprise, from 1893.


good-natured (adj.)

1570s, from good (adj.) + nature. Good nature pleasing or kind disposition is from mid-15c. Related:
Good-naturedly.


good (adj.)

Old English god (with a long o) virtuous; desirable; valid; considerable, probably originally having
the right or desirable quality, from Proto-Germanic *gothaz (cognates: Old Norse go&eth;r, Dutch
goed, Old High German guot, German gut, Gothic go&thorn;s), originally fit, adequate, belonging
together, from PIE root *ghedh- to unite, be associated, suitable (cognates: Old Church Slavonic
godu pleasing time, Russian godnyi fit, suitable, Old English g&aelig;drian to gather, to take up
together). As an expression of satisfaction, from early 15c.; of children, well-behaved, by 1690s.
Irregular comparatives (better, best) reflect a widespread pattern, as in Latin bonus, melior,
optimus. Good-for-nothing is from 1711. Good looking is attested from 1780 (good looks by c.1800).
Good sport, of persons, is from 1906; good to go is attested from 1989. The good book the Bible
attested from 1801, originally in missionary literature describing the language of conversion
efforts in American Indian tribes.    Why then, can one desire too much of a good thing. [As You
Like It]


Good Friday

late 13c., from good in Middle English sense of holy, also especially of holy days or seasons
observed by the church (early 15c.); the word also was applied to Christmas and Shrove Tuesday.


goods (n.)

property, late 13c., from plural of good (n.), which had the same sense in Old English. Meaning
saleable commodities is mid-15c.; colloquial sense of stolen articles is from 1900; hence figurative
use, evidence of guilt.


good will

Old English godes willan virtuous, pious, upright, also state of wishing well to another. One-word
form goodwill (18c.) is used especially in commercial senses.


goodly

Old English godlic goodly, excellent; comely fair; see good (adj.) + -ly (1).


goodness (n.)

Old English godnes goodness, virtue, kindliness; see good (adj.) + -ness. In exclamations from
1610s, first recorded being for goodnesse sake, i.e. as you trust in the goodness of God.


goody (n.)

also goodie, something tasty, 1745, from good (adj.) + -y (2); adj. use for sentimentally proper is
1830 (especially in reduplicated form goody-goody, 1871). As an exclamation of pleasure, by 1796.
Goody also used since 1550s as a shortened form of goodwife, a term of civility applied to a married
woman in humble life; hence Goody Two-shoes, name of heroine in 1760s children's story who exulted
upon acquiring a second shoe.


eu-

word-forming element in modern use meaning good, well, from comb. form of Greek eus good, eu well
(adv.), also luckily, happily, from PIE *(e)su- good (cognates: Sanskrit su- good, Avestan hu-
good).


bon

French, literally good (adj.), from Latin bonus good (see bene-). It has crossed the Channel in
phrases such as bon ap&eacute;tit (1860), literally good appetite; bon-ton (1744) good style; bon
mot.


no-good (adj.)

1908, from phrase no good good for nothing. As a noun, first recorded 1924; variant no-goodnik (see
-nik) first attested 1960.


benevolence (n.)

c.1400, disposition to do good, from Old French benivolence and directly from Latin benevolentia
good feeling, good will, kindness, from bene well (see bene-) + volantem (nominative volens) present
participle of velle to wish (see will (v.)). In English history, this was the name given to forced
extra-legal loans or contributions to the crown, first so called 1473 by Edward IV, who cynically
asked it as a token of good will toward his rule.


bonhomie (n.)

good nature, 1803, from French bonhomie good nature, easy temper, from bonhomme good man (with
unusual loss of -m-), from bon good (see bon) + homme man, from Latin homo (see homunculus).


approve (v.)

c.1300, to demonstrate, prove; mid-14c., to attest (something) with authority, from Old French
aprover (Modern French approuver) approve, agree to, from Latin approbare to assent to as good,
regard as good, from ad- to (see ad-) + probare to try, test something (to find if it is good), from
probus honest, genuine (see prove).    The meaning extended late 14c. to to sanction, endorse,
confirm formally then to assent to (something) as good (early 15c.), especially in reference to the
actions of authorities, parliaments, etc. Related: Approved; approving.


prosit (interj.)

1846, toast or expression wishing good health (from 16c., famously a drinking pledge by German
students), Latin, literally may it advantage (you), third person singular present subjunctive of
prodesse to do good, be profitable (see proud).


bon mot (n.)

1735, French, good saying,  literally good word, from bon good + mot (12c.), from Vulgar Latin
muttum, from Latin muttire to mutter, mumble, murmur (see mutter).


sniper (n.)

sharpshooter; one who shoots from a hidden place, 1824, agent noun from snipe (v.). The birds were
considered a challenging target for an expert shooter:    Snipe Shooting is a good trial of the
gunner's skill, who often engages in this diversion, without the assistance of a dog of any kind; a
steady pointer, however, is a good companion. [Sportsman's Calendar, London, December 1818]


evangelist (n.)

late 12c., Matthew, Mark, Luke or John, from Old French evangelist and directly from Late Latin
evangelista, from Greek euangelistes preacher of the gospel, literally bringer of good news, from
euangelizesthai bring good news, from eu- good (see eu-) + angellein announce, from angelos
messenger (see angel).    In early Greek Christian texts, the word was used of the four supposed
authors of the narrative gospels. Meaning itinerant preacher was another early Church usage, revived
in Middle English (late 14c.). Classical Greek euangelion meant the reward of good tidings; sense
transferred in Christian use to the glad tidings themselves. In Late Latin, Greek eu- regularly was
consonantized to ev- before vowels.


Topeka

city in Kansas, U.S.A., from Kansa (Siouan), literally a good place to dig potatoes;from /do/ wild
potato + /ppi/ good + /ke/ to dig.


mature (v.)

late 14c., encourage suppuration; mid-15c. bring to maturity, from Latin maturare to ripen, bring to
maturity, from maturus ripe, timely, early, related to manus good and mane early, of the morning,
from PIE root *ma- good, with derivatives meaning occurring at a good moment, timely, seasonable,
early. Meaning come or bring to maturity is from 1620s. The financial sense of reach the time for
payment is from 1861. Related: Matured; maturing.


budgerigar (n.)

1847, from Native Australian, said to mean good cockatoo, from budgeri good + gar cockatoo.


proband (n.)

1929, from Latin probandus, gerundive of probare to make good, esteem good; make credible, show,
prove, demonstrate (see prove).


benefit (n.)

late 14c., good or noble deed, also advantage, profit, from Anglo-French benfet well-done, from
Latin benefactum good deed, from bene facere (see benefactor). Meaning performance or entertainment
to raise money for some charitable cause is from 1680s.


n.g.

abbreviation of no good, attested from 1838; variant n.b.g. for no bloody good is first recorded
1903.


bonito (n.)

type of sea fish, 1590s, from Spanish bonito, probably literally the good one, diminutive of bueno
good, from Latin bonus (see bene-).


well-heeled (adj.)

well-off, having much money, in good circumstances; also well-equipped, 1872, American English slang
(originally in the money sense), from well (adv.) + colloquial sense of heeled. [A]pplied to a
player at cards who has a good hand, to a person who possesses plenty of money, or to a man who is
well armed [Century Dictionary]. From 1817 in a literal sense, in reference to shoes.


Manes (pl.)

Gods of the Lower World, in Roman religion, from Latin manes departed spirit, ghost, shade of the
dead, deified spirits of the underworld, usually said to be from Latin manus good, thus properly the
good gods, a euphemistic word, but Tucker suggests a possible connection instead to macer, thus the
thin or unsubstantial ones.


unfavorable (adj.)

also unfavourable, mid-15c. (implied in unfavorably), from un- (1) not + favorable (adj.).    We
must not indulge in unfavorable views of mankind, since by doing it we make bad men believe that
they are no worse than others, and we teach the good that they are good in vain. [Walter Savage
Landor, Imaginary Conversations]


sapience (n.)

late 14c., wisdom, understanding, from Old French sapience, from Latin sapientia good taste, good
sense, discernment; intelligence, wisdom, from sapiens (see sapient).


bona fide

1540s, Latin, literally in good faith, ablative of bona fides good faith (see faith). Originally
used as an adverb, later (18c.) also as an adjective. The opposite is mala fide.


well (adv.)

in a satisfactory manner, Old English wel abundantly, very, very much; indeed, to be sure; with good
reason; nearly, for the most part, from Proto-Germanic *welo- (cognates: Old Saxon wela, Old Norse
vel, Old Frisian wel, Dutch wel, Old High German wela, German wohl, Gothic waila well), from PIE
root *wel- (2) to wish, will (cognates: Sanskrit prati varam at will, Old Church Slavonic vole well,
Welsh gwell better, Latin velle to wish, will, Old English willan to wish; see will (v.)).    Also
used in Old English as an interjection and an expression of surprise. The adjective was in Old
English in the sense in good fortune, happy, from the adverb; sense of satisfactory is from late
14c.; agreeable to wish or desire is from mid-15c.; in good health, not ailing is from 1550s. Well-
to-do prosperous is recorded from 1825.


gospel (n.)

Old English godspel gospel, glad tidings announced by Jesus; one of the four gospels, from god good
(see good) + spel story, message (see spell (n.1)); translation of Latin bona adnuntiatio, itself a
translation of Greek euangelion reward for bringing good news.    The first element of the Old
English word had a long o, but it shifted under mistaken association with God. The word passed early
from English to continental Germanic languages in forms that clearly indicate the first element had
shifted to God, such as Old Saxon godspell, Old High German gotspell, Old Norse go&eth;spiall. Used
of anything as true as the Gospel from mid-13c. Gospel-gossip was Addison's word (Spectator, 1711)
for one who is always talking of sermons, texts, etc.


cui bono

a Latin phrase from Cicero. It means to whom for a benefit, or who profits by it? not to what good
purpose? as is often erroneously claimed. From cui to? for whom?, an old form preserved here in the
dative form of the interrogative pronoun quis who? (see who) + bono good (see bene-).


bonjour

French, literally good day, from bon good, from Latin bonus (see bene-) + jour (see journey (n.)).


Tobias

masc. proper name, from Late Latin Tobias, from Greek Tobias, from Hebrew Tobhiyyah, literally the
Lord is my Good, from Hebrew tobh good. Toby is a short form.


agathist (n.)

1816, from Greek agathos good (see Agatha) + -ist.    Doctor Kearney, who formerly, with so much
reputation, delivered lectures in this place on the history of Rome, observed to me once, that he
was not an optimist, but an agathist; that he believed that every thing tended to good, but did not
think himself competent to determine what was absolutely the best. The distinction is important, and
seems to be fatal to the system of Optimism. [George Miller, Lectures on the Philosophy of Modern
History, Dublin, 1816]


poker (n.2)

card game, 1834, American English, of unknown origin, perhaps from the first element of German
Pochspiel, name of a card game similar to poker, from pochen to brag as a bluff, literally to knock,
rap (see poke (v.)). A popular alternative theory traces the word to French poque, also said to have
been a card game resembling poker. [B]ut without documentation these explanations are mere
speculation [Barnhart]. The earlier version of the game in English was called brag. Slang poker face
(n.) deadpan is from 1874.    A good player is cautious or bold by turns, according to his estimate
of the capacities of his adversaries, and to the impression he wants to make on them. 7. It follows
that the possession of a good poker face is an advantage. No one who has any pretensions to good
play will betray the value of his hand by gesture, change of countenance, or any other symptom.
[Cavendish, Round Games at Cards, dated 1875]   <hr />   To any one not very well up in these games,
some parts of the book are at first sight rather puzzling. It follows, we read in one passage, that
the possession of a good poker face (the italics are the author's) is an advantage. If this had been
said by a Liverpool rough of his wife, the meaning would have been clear to every one. Cavendish,
however, does not seem to be writing especially for Lancashire. [review of above, Saturday Review,
Dec. 26, 1874]


prove (v.)

late 12c., pruven, proven to try, test; evaluate; demonstrate, from Old French prover, pruver show;
convince; put to the test (11c., Modern French prouver), from Latin probare to make good; esteem,
represent as good; make credible, show, demonstrate; test, inspect; judge by trial (source also of
Spanish probar, Italian probare), from probus worthy, good, upright, virtuous, from PIE *pro-bhwo-
being in front, from *pro-, extended form of root *per- (1) forward, through (see per), + root *bhu-
to be (cognates: Latin fui I have been, futurus about to be; Old English beon to be; see be).
Related: Proved; proven; proving.


indifferent (adj.)

late 14c., unbiased, from Old French indifferent impartial or directly from Latin indifferentem
(nominative indifferens) not differing, not particular, of not consequence, neither good nor evil,
from in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + differens, present participle of differre set apart (see
differ). Extended sense of apathetic first recorded early 15c.; that of neither good nor bad 1530s,
on notion of neither more nor less advantageous.


Euphrates

Old English Eufrate, from Greek Euphrates, from Old Persian Ufratu, perhaps from Avestan huperethuua
good to cross over, from hu- good + peretu- ford. But Kent says probably a popular etymologizing in
O.P. of a local non-Iranian name [Old Persian, p.176]. In Akkadian, purattu.


benevolent (adj.)

mid-15c., wishing to do good, kindly, from Middle French benivolent and directly from Latin
benevolentem (nominative benevolens) wishing (someone) well, benevolent, related to benevolentia
good feeling (see benevolence). Related: Benevolently.


luck (n.)

late 15c. from early Middle Dutch luc, shortening of gheluc happiness, good fortune, of unknown
origin. It has cognates in Dutch geluk, Middle High German g(e)l&uuml;cke, German Gl&uuml;ck
fortune, good luck. Perhaps first borrowed in English as a gambling term. To be down on (one's) luck
is from 1832; to be in luck is from 1900; to push (one's) luck is from 1911. Good luck as a
salutation to one setting off to do something is from 1805. Expression better luck next time
attested from 1802.    A gentleman was lately walking through St Giles's, where a levelling citizen
attempting to pick his pocket of a handkerchief, which the gentleman caught in time, and secured,
observing to the fellow, that he had missed his aim, the latter, with perfect sang-froid, answered,
better luck next time master.Â  [â&euro;&oelig;Monthly Mirror,â&euro;? London, 1802]


optimism (n.)

1759 (in translations of Voltaire), from French optimisme (1737), from Modern Latin optimum, used by
Gottfried Leibniz (in Th&eacute;odic&eacute;e, 1710) to mean the greatest good, from Latin optimus
the best (see optimum). The doctrine holds that the actual world is the best of all possible worlds,
in which the creator accomplishes the most good at the cost of the least evil.En termes de l'art, il
l'appelle la raison du meilleur ou plus savamment encore, et Theologiquement autant que
G&eacute;om&eacute;triquement, le syst&ecirc;me de l'Optimum, ou l'Optimisme. [M&eacute;moires de
Tr&eacute;voux, Feb. 1737]Launched out of philosophical jargon and into currency by Voltaire's
satire on it in Candide. General sense of belief that good ultimately will prevail in the world
first attested 1841 in Emerson; meaning tendency to take a hopeful view of things first recorded
1819 in Shelley.


hap (n.)

c.1200, chance, a person's luck, fortune, fate; also unforeseen occurrence, from Old Norse happ
chance, good luck, from Proto-Germanic *hap- (source of Old English geh&aelig;p convenient, fit),
from PIE *kob- to suit, fit, succeed (cognates: Old Church Slavonic kobu fate, foreboding, omen, Old
Irish cob victory). Meaning good fortune is from early 13c.


virtuous (adj.)

c.1300, characterized by vigor or strength; having qualities befitting a knight; valiant, hardy,
courageous; from Old French vertuos righteous; potent; of good quality; mighty, valiant, brave
(12c.), from Late Latin virtuosus good, virtuous, from Latin virtus (see virtue). From mid-14c. in
English as having beneficial or efficacious properties; late 14c. (of persons) as having excellent
moral qualities; conforming to religious law. Related: Virtuously; virtuousness.


