gorge (v.)

eat greedily, c.1300, from Old French gorger, from gorge (see gorge (n.)). Related: Gorged; gorging.


gorget (n.)

armor for the throat, late 15c., from Old French gorgete, diminutive of gorge throat (see gorge
(n.)).


gorge (n.)

mid-14c., throat, from Old French gorge throat, bosom, from Late Latin gurges gullet, throat, jaws,
of uncertain origin, probably related to Latin gurgulio gullet, windpipe, from PIE *gwere- (4) to
swallow (see voracity). Transferred sense of deep, narrow valley was in Old French.


gorgeous (adj.)

late 15c., splendid, showy (of clothing), from Middle French gorgias elegant, fashionable, of
unknown origin; perhaps literally necklace (and thus fond of jewelry), from Old French gorge bosom,
throat, also something adorning the throat. A connection to the Greek proper name Gorgias
(supposedly in reference to a notorious sophist) also has been proposed. Related: Gorgeousness.


engorge (v.)

1510s, from French engorger to obstruct, block, congest, Old French engorgier to swallow, devour,
from en- (see en- (1)) + gorge throat (see gorge (n.)). Probably originally in reference to hawks.
Related: Engorged; engorging.


disgorge (v.)

late 15c., from Old French desgorgier to disgorge, pour out, from des- (see dis-) + gorge throat
(see gorge). Related: Disgorged; disgorging; disgorgement.


jabot (n.)

frill of a shirt, 1823, from French jabot grizzard (of a bird), frill on a shirt front (16c.), of
unknown origin. Klein suggests a connection with gaver to cram, gorge, and thus ultimately with
English jaw.


cheddar (n.)

type of cheese, 1660s (but the cheese presumably was made long before that), from Cheddar, village
in Somerset, England, where it originally was made, from Old English Ceodre (c.880), probably from
ceodor ravine (there is a gorge nearby).


gurgitation (n.)

late 14c., from Late Latin gurgulationem (nominative gurgulatio), noun of action from past
participle stem of gurgitare to engulf, from gurges whirlpool, gorge (see gurges).


canyon (n.)

narrow valley between cliffs, 1834, from Mexican Spanish ca&ntilde;on, extended sense of Spanish
ca&ntilde;on a pipe, tube; deep hollow, gorge, augmentative of cano a tube, from Latin canna reed
(see cane (n.)). But earlier spelling callon (1560s) might suggest a source in calle street.


regurgitation (n.)

c.1600, from Medieval Latin regurgitationem (nominative regurgitatio), noun of action from past
participle stem of regurgitare to overflow, from re- back (see re-) + Late Latin gurgitare engulf,
flood (found in Latin ingurgitare to pour in), from gurges whirlpool, gorge, abyss (see gurges).


Neanderthal (adj.)

1861, in reference to a type of extinct hominid, from German Neanderthal Neander Valley, name of a
gorge near D&uuml;sseldorf where humanoid fossils were identified in 1856. The place name is from
the Graecized form of Joachim Neumann (literally new man, Greek *neo-ander), 1650-1680, German
pastor, poet and hymn-writer, who made this a favorite spot in the 1670s. Adopting a classical form
of one's surname was a common practice among educated Germans in this era. As a noun, by 1915; as a
type f a big, brutish, stupid person from 1926.


dale (n.)

Old English d&aelig;l dale, valley, gorge, from Proto-Germanic *dalan valley (cognates: Old Saxon,
Dutch, Gothic dal, Old Norse dalr, Old High German tal, German Tal valley), from PIE *dhel- a hollow
(cognates: Old Church Slavonic dolu pit, Russian dol valley). Preserved by Norse influence in north
of England.


stuff (v.)

mid-14c., furnish with (goods, provisions, etc.), also reinforce (troops), from Old French estofer
pad, upholster, fit out (Modern French &#233;toffer), from estoffe, and probably also in part from
stuff (n.).    From c.1400 as fill, cram full; fill (the belly) with food or drink, gorge; from
early 15c. as to clog (the sinuses, etc.); from late 14c. as fill (a mattress, etc.) with padding,
line with padding; also in the cookery sense, in reference to filing the interior of a pastry or the
cavity of a fowl or beast. The ballot-box sense is attested from 1854, American English; in
expressions of contempt and suggestive of bodily orifices, it dates from 1952.


cling (v.)

Old English clingan hold fast, adhere closely; congeal, shrivel (strong verb, past tense clang, past
participle clungen), from Proto-Germanic *klingg- (cognates: Danish klynge to cluster; Old High
German klinga narrow gorge; Old Norse klengjask press onward; Danish klinke, Dutch klinken to
clench; German Klinke latch).    The main sense shifted in Middle English to adhere to (something
else), stick together. Of persons in embrace, c.1600. Figuratively (to hopes, outmoded ideas, etc.),
from 1580s. Of clothes from 1792. Related: Clung; clinging.


ravine (n.)

1760, deep gorge, from French ravin a gully (1680s, from Old French raviner to pillage, sweep down,
cascade), and from French ravine violent rush of water, gully worn by a torrent, from Old French
ravine violent rush of water, waterfall; avalanche; robbery, rapine, both ultimately from Latin
rapina act of robbery, plundering (see rapine); sense influenced by Latin rapidus rapid. Middle
English ravine meant booty, plunder, robbery from c.1350-1500. Compare ravening.


