gory (adj.)

blood-soaked, late 15c., from gore (n.) + -y (2).


dreary (adj.)

Old English dreorig sad, sorrowful, originally cruel, bloody, blood-stained, from dreor gore, blood,
from (ge)dreosan (past participle droren) fall, decline, fail, from Proto-Germanic *dreuzas
(cognates: Old Norse dreyrigr gory, bloody, and more remotely, German traurig sad, sorrowful), from
PIE root *dhreu- to fall, flow, drip, droop (see drip (v.)).    The word has lost its original sense
of dripping blood. Sense of dismal, gloomy first recorded 1667 in Paradise Lost, but Old English had
a related verb drysmian become gloomy.


penny (n.)

Old English pening, penig, Northumbrian penning penny, from Proto-Germanic *panninggaz (cognates:
Old Norse penningr, Swedish p&auml;nning, Danish penge, Old Frisian panning, Old Saxon pending,
Middle Dutch pennic, Dutch penning, Old High German pfenning, German Pfennig, not recorded in
Gothic, where skatts is used instead), of unknown origin.    Offa's reformed coinage on light, broad
flans is likely to have begun c.760-5 in London, with an awareness of developments in Francia and
East Anglia. ... The broad flan penny established by Offa remained the principal denomination, with
only minor changes, until the fourteenth century. [Anna Gannon, The Iconography of Early Anglo-Saxon
Coinage, Oxford, 2003]    The English coin was originally set at one-twelfth of a shilling and was
of silver, later copper, then bronze. There are two plural forms: pennies of individual coins, pence
collectively. In translations it rendered various foreign coins of small denomination, especially
Latin denarius, whence comes its abbreviation d.   As American English colloquial for cent, it is
recorded from 1889. Penny-a-liner writer for a journal or newspaper is attested from 1834. Penny
dreadful cheap and gory fiction dates from c.1870. Phrase penny-wise and pound-foolish is recorded
from c.1600. Penny-pincher miserly person is recorded from 1906 (as an adjective penny-pinching is
recorded from 1858, American English). Penny loafers attested from 1960.


