gracious (adj.)

c.1300, filled with God's grace, from Old French gracios courteous, pleasing, kind, friendly (12c.,
Modern French gracieux), from Latin gratiosus enjoying favor, agreeable, obliging; popular,
acceptable, from gratia (see grace). Meaning merciful, benevolent is from late 14c. As an
exclamation, elliptically for gracious God, attested from 1713.


graciously (adv.)

c.1300, by God's grace, from gracious + -ly (2). Meaning favorably, with good will is late 14c.


graciousness (n.)

early 15c., from gracious + -ness.


propitious (adj.)

mid-15c., from Anglo-French propicius, Old French propicius gracious, favorable, useful (12c.,
Modern French propice) and directly from Latin propitius favorable, kind, gracious, well-disposed
(see propitiation). Earlier English form was propice, from Old French propice. Related:
Propitiously.


Hannah

fem. proper name, biblical mother of the prophet Samuel, from Hebrew, literally graciousness, from
stem of hanan he was gracious, showed favor.


ungracious (adj.)

c.1200, ungrateful; early 14c., lacking God's grace; early 15c., rude, unmannerly, from un- (1) not
+ gracious (adj.). Related: Ungraciously.


frank (adj.)

c.1300, free, liberal, generous, from Old French franc free (not servile), sincere, genuine, open,
gracious; worthy (12c.), from Medieval Latin Franc a freeman, a Frank (see Frank). The connection is
that only Franks, as the conquering class, had the status of freemen. Sense of outspoken first
recorded in English 1540s.


Hannibal

masc. proper name, name of the Carthaginian general who hounded Rome in the 2nd Punic War, Punic
Hannibha'al, literally my favor is with Baal; first element related to Hebrew hanan he was gracious,
showed favor (see Hannah); for second element see Baal.


suave (adj.)

early 15c., gracious, kindly, pleasant, delightful, from Latin suavis agreeable, sweet, pleasant (to
the senses), delightful, from PIE root *swad- sweet, pleasant (see sweet (adj.)). In reference to
persons, sense of smoothly agreeable first recorded 1815 (implied in suavity). Related: Suavely.


Siva (n.)

also Shiva, one of the three supreme gods of Hinduism, lord of destruction and reproduction, 1788,
from Hindi Shiva, from Sanskrit Sivah, literally propitious, gracious, from PIE *ki-wo-, from root
*kei- beloved, dear (connected with Latin civis citizen, literally member of a household), also to
lie, couch (compare cemetery). But by some this is said to be a euphemism. Related: Sivaism;
Sivaistic.


minion (n.)

c.1500, a favorite; a darling; a low dependant; one who pleases rather than benefits [Johnson], from
Middle French mignon a favorite, darling (n.), also a term of (probably homosexual) abuse; as an
adjective, dainty, pleasing, favorite, from Old French mignot pretty, attractive, dainty, gracious,
affectionate, perhaps of Celtic origin (compare Old Irish min tender, soft), or from Old High German
minnja, minna love, memory (see mind (n.)). Used  16c.-17c. without disparaging overtones.


quaint (adj.)

c.1200, cointe, cunning, ingenious; proud, from Old French cointe knowledgeable, well-informed;
clever; arrogant, proud; elegant, gracious, from Latin cognitus known, approved, past participle of
cognoscere get or come to know well (see cognizance). Modern spelling is from early 14c.    Later in
English, elaborate, skillfully made (c.1300); strange and clever (mid-14c.). Sense of old-fashioned
but charming is first attested 1795, and could describe the word itself, which had become rare after
c.1700 (though it soon recovered popularity in this secondary sense).  Related: Quaintly;
quaintness.


gentile (adj.)

mid-13c., noble, kind, gracious (mid-12c. as a surname); late 14c., of noble rank or birth,
belonging to the gentry, from Late Latin gentilis foreign, heathen, pagan, from Latin gentilis
person belonging to the same family, fellow countryman, from gentilis (adj.) of the same family or
clan, from gens (genitive gentis) race, clan (see gentle).


cobalt (n.)

1680s, from German kobold household goblin, Harz Mountains silver miners' term for rock laced with
arsenic and sulfur (so called because it degraded the ore and made the miners ill), from Middle High
German kobe hut, shed + *holt goblin, from hold gracious, friendly, a euphemistic word for a
troublesome being. The metallic element was extracted from this rock. It was known to Paracelsus,
but discovery is usually credited to the Swede George Brandt (1733), who gave it the name. Extended
to a blue color 1835 (a mineral containing it had been used as a blue coloring for glass since
16c.). Compare nickel.


gentle (adj.)

early 13c., well-born, from Old French gentil high-born, noble, of good family (11c., in Modern
French nice, graceful, pleasing; fine pretty), from Latin gentilis of the same family or clan, from
gens (genitive gentis) race, clan, from root of gignere beget, from PIE root *gen- produce (see
genus). Sense of gracious, kind (now obsolete) first recorded late 13c.; that of mild, tender is
1550s. Older sense remains in gentleman.


euphemism (n.)

1650s, from Greek euphemismos use of a favorable word in place of an inauspicious one, from
euphemizein speak with fair words, use words of good omen, from eu- good (see eu-) + pheme speaking,
from phanai speak (see fame (n.)).    In ancient Greece, the superstitious avoidance of words of
ill-omen during religious ceremonies, or substitutions such as Eumenides the Gracious Ones for the
Furies (see also Euxine). In English, a rhetorical term at first; broader sense of choosing a less
distasteful word or phrase than the one meant is first attested 1793. Related: Euphemistic;
euphemistically.


benign (adj.)

early 14c., from Old French benigne (12c., kind, benign, merciful, gracious; Modern French
b&eacute;nin, fem. b&eacute;nigne), from Latin benignus kindly, kindhearted, friendly, generous,
literally well born, from bene well (see bene-) + gignere to bear, beget, from genus birth (see
genus). For similar sense evolution, compare gentle, kind (adj.), generous. Related: Benignly.


propitiation (n.)

late 14c., from Late Latin propitiationem (nominative propitiatio) an atonement, noun of action from
past participle stem of Latin propitiare appease, propitiate, from propitius favorable, gracious,
kind, well-disposed, from pro- forward (see pro-) + stem related to petere to make for, go to; seek,
strive after; ask for, beg, beseech, request (see petition (n.)).    The sense in Latin is perhaps
because the word originally was religious, literally a falling or rushing toward, hence eager, and,
of the gods, well-disposed. Earliest recorded form of the word in English is propitiatorium the
mercy seat, place of atonement (c.1200), translating Greek hilasterion.


decent (adj.)

1530s, proper to one's station or rank, also tasteful, from Middle French d&eacute;cent, or directly
from Latin decentem (nominative decens) becoming, seemly, fitting, proper, present participle of
decere to be fitting or suitable, from PIE *deke-, from root *dek- to take, accept, to receive,
greet, be suitable (cognates: Greek dokein to appear, seem, think, dekhesthai to accept; Sanskrit
da&#347;asyati shows honor, is gracious, dacati makes offerings, bestows; Latin docere to teach,
decus grace, ornament). Meaning kind, pleasant is from 1902. Are you decent? (1949) was originally
backstage theater jargon for are you dressed.


John

masc. proper name, mid-12c., from Medieval Latin Johannes, from Late Latin Joannes, from Greek
Ioannes, from Hebrew Yohanan (longer form y'hohanan) literally Jehovah has favored, from hanan he
was gracious.    As the name of John the Baptist and John the Evangelist, it was one of the most
common Christian given names, and in England by early 14c. it rivaled William in popularity. The Old
French form was Jean, but in England its variants Johan, Jehan yielded Jan, Jen (also compare
surname Jensen). Welsh form was Ieuan (see Evan), but Ioan was adopted for the Welsh Authorized
Version of the Bible, hence frequency of Jones as a Welsh surname.


cemetery (n.)

late 14c., from Old French cimetiere graveyard (12c.), from Late Latin coemeterium, from Greek
koimeterion sleeping place, dormitory, from koiman to put to sleep, keimai I lie down, from PIE root
*kei- to lie, rest, also bed, couch, hence secondary sense of beloved, dear (cognates: Greek
keisthai to lie, lie asleep, Old Church Slavonic semija family, domestic servants, Lithuanian
&#353;eima domestic servants, Lettish sieva wife, Old English hiwan members of a household, higid
measure of land, Latin cunae a cradle,  Sanskrit Sivah propitious, gracious). Early Christian
writers were the first to use it for burial ground, though the Greek word also had been anciently
used in reference to the sleep of death. An Old English word for cemetery was licburg.


doughnut (n.)

1809, American English, from dough + nut (n.), probably on the notion of being a small round lump
(the holes came later, first mentioned c.1861). First recorded by Washington Irving, who described
them as balls of sweetened dough, fried in hog's fat, and called doughnuts, or olykoeks. Earlier
name for it was dough-boy (1680s). Bartlett (1848) meanwhile lists doughnuts and crullers among the
types of olycokes, a word he derives from Dutch olikoek, literally oil-cake, to indicate a cake
fried in lard.    The ladies of Augusta, Maine, set in operation and carried out a novel idea,
namely, the distribution of over fifty bushels of doughnuts to the Third volunteer regiment of that
State. A procession of ladies, headed by music, passed between double lines of troops, who presented
arms, and were afterwards drawn up in hollow square to receive from tender and gracious hands the
welcome doughnation. [Frazar Kirkland, Anecdotes of the Rebellion, 1866]     Meaning a driving in
tight circles is U.S. slang, 1981. Compare also donut.


white (adj.)

Old English hwit bright, radiant; clear, fair, also as a noun (see separate entry), from Proto-
Germanic *hwitaz (cognates: Old Saxon and Old Frisian hwit, Old Norse hvitr, Dutch wit, Old High
German hwiz, German wei&szlig;, Gothic hveits), from PIE *kweid-o-, suffixed form of root *kweit-
white; to shine (cognates: Sanskrit svetah white; Old Church Slavonic sviteti to shine, svetu light;
Lithuanian &#353;viesti to shine, svaityti to brighten).    As a surname, originally with reference
to fair hair or complexion, it is one of the oldest in English, being well-established before the
Conquest. Meaning morally pure was in Old English. Association with royalist causes is late 18c.
Slang sense of honorable, fair is 1877, American English; in Middle English it meant gracious,
friendly, favorable. The racial sense of those races (chiefly European or of European extraction)
characterized by light complexion is recorded from c.1600; meaning characteristic of or pertaining
to white people is from 1852, American English. White supremacy attested from 1884, American
English; white flight is from 1966, American English.   White way brightly illuminated street in a
big city is from 1908. White flag of truce or surrender is from c.1600. White lie is attested from
1741. White Christmas is attested from 1847. White House as the name of the U.S. presidential
residence is recorded from 1811. White water river rapids is recorded from 1580s. White Russian
language of Byelorussia is recorded from 1850; the mixed drink is from c.1978. Astronomical white
dwarf is from 1924. White witch, one who used the power for good, is from 1620s.


liberal (adj.)

mid-14c., generous, also, late 14c., selfless; noble, nobly born; abundant, and, early 15c., in a
bad sense extravagant, unrestrained, from Old French liberal befitting free men, noble, generous,
willing, zealous (12c.), from Latin liberalis noble, gracious, munificent, generous, literally of
freedom, pertaining to or befitting a free man, from liber free, unrestricted, unimpeded; unbridled,
unchecked, licentious, from PIE *leudh-ero- (source of Greek eleutheros free), probably originally
belonging to the people (though the precise semantic development is obscure), and a suffixed form of
the base *leudh- people (cognates: Old Church Slavonic ljudu, Lithuanian liaudis, Old English leod,
German Leute nation, people; Old High German liut person, people) but literally to mount up, to
grow.    With the meaning free from restraint in speech or action, liberal was used 16c.-17c. as a
term of reproach. It revived in a positive sense in the Enlightenment, with a meaning free from
prejudice, tolerant, which emerged 1776-88.    In reference to education, explained by Fowler as the
education designed for a gentleman (Latin liber a free man) &amp; ... opposed on the one hand to
technical or professional or any special training, &amp; on the other to education that stops short
before manhood is reached (see liberal arts). Purely in reference to political opinion, tending in
favor of freedom and democracy it dates from c.1801, from French lib&eacute;ral, originally applied
in English by its opponents (often in French form and with suggestions of foreign lawlessness) to
the party favorable to individual political freedoms. But also (especially in U.S. politics) tending
to mean favorable to government action to effect social change, which seems at times to draw more
from the religious sense of free from prejudice in favor of traditional opinions and established
institutions (and thus open to new ideas and plans of reform), which dates from
1823.<b>Conservative</b>, n. A statesman who is enamored of existing evils, as distinguished from
the Liberal, who wishes to replace them with others. [Ambrose Bierce, Devil's Dictionary, 1911]


