grandeur (n.)

c.1500, loftiness, height, from Middle French grandeur grandness, greatness, Old French grandor
(12c.), from grand great (see grand (adj.)). Extended sense of majesty, stateliness is first
recorded 1660s.


magnificence (n.)

mid-14c., great-mindedness, courage, from Old French magnificence splendor, nobility, grandeur, from
Latin magnificentia splendor, munificence, from stem of magnificus great, elevated, noble, eminent,
also splendid, rich, fine, costly, literally doing great deeds, from magnus great (see magnate) +
root of facere to make (see factitious). Meaning greatness, grandeur, glory in English is from late
14c. That of beauty, splendor, wealth is 15c. As one of the Aristotelian and scholastic virtues, it
translates Greek megaloprepeia liberality of expenditure combined with good taste.


hauteur (n.)

1620s, from French hauteur haughtiness, arrogance, literally height, from Old French hauture (12c.)
height, loftiness; grandeur, majesty, from haut (see haught).


overstate (v.)

1630s, assume too much grandeur; see over- + state (n.1). Meaning state too strongly is attested
from 1798, from state (v.). Related: Overstated, overstating.


majesty (n.)

c.1300, greatness, glory, from Old French majeste grandeur, nobility (12c.), from Latin maiestatem
(nominative maiestas) greatness, dignity, elevation, honor, excellence, from stem of maior (neuter
maius), comparative of magnus great (see magnate). Earliest English us is with reference to God; as
a title, in reference to kings and queens (late 14c.), it is from Romance languages and descends
from the Roman Empire.


delusion (n.)

act of misleading someone, early 15c.; as a form of mental derangement, 1550s, from Latin delusionem
(nominative delusio) a deceiving, noun of action from past participle stem of deludere (see delude).
Technically, delusion is a belief that, though false, has been surrendered to and accepted by the
whole mind as a truth; illusion is an impression that, though false, is entertained provisionally on
the recommendation of the senses or the imagination, but awaits full acceptance and may not
influence action. Delusions of grandeur, the exact phrase, is recorded from 1840, though the two
words were in close association for some time before that.


baroque (adj.)

1765, from French baroque (15c.) irregular, from Portuguese barroco imperfect pearl, of uncertain
origin, perhaps related to Spanish berruca a wart.This style in decorations got the epithet of
Barroque taste, derived from a word signifying pearls and teeth of unequal size. [Fuseli's
translation of Winkelmann, 1765]Klein suggests the name may be from Italian painter Federigo Barocci
(1528-1612), a founder of the style. How to tell baroque from rococo, according to Fowler: The
characteristics of baroque are grandeur, pomposity, and weight; those of rococo are inconsequence,
grace, and lightness. But the two terms often used without distinction for styles featuring odd and
excessive ornamentation.


splendid (adj.)

1620s, marked by grandeur, probably a shortening of earlier splendidious (early 15c.), from Latin
splendidus bright, shining, glittering; sumptuous, gorgeous, grand; illustrious, distinguished,
noble; showy, fine, specious, from splendere be bright, shine, gleam, glisten, from PIE *splend- to
shine, glow (cognates: Lithuanian splendziu I shine, Middle Irish lainn bright). An earlier form was
splendent (late 15c.). From 1640s as brilliant, dazzling; 1640s as conspicuous, illustrious; very
fine, excellent. Ironic use (as in splendid isolation, 1843) is attested from 17c.


