grappler (n.)

1620s, agent noun from grapple (v.).


grapple (n.)

late 13c., from Old French grapil hook (see grapnel). The verb is 1520s, seize and hold fast, from
the noun. Sense of battle, struggle (with) is from 1590s. Related: Grappled; grappling.


grapnel (n.)

small hook, late 14c., Anglo-French diminutive of grapon, from Old French grapil, grapin hook,
diminutive of grape hook (see grape). Earlier form was grapel (see grapple).


harpoon (n.)

1610s, from French harpon, from Old French harpon cramp iron, clamp, clasp (described as a mason's
tool for fastening stones together), from harper to grapple, grasp, possibly of Germanic origin; or
from Latin harpa- hook (related to harpagonem grappling hook), from Greek harpe sickle, from PIE
root *serp- (1) sickle, hook. Earlier harping-iron (mid-15c.). Sense and spelling perhaps influenced
by Dutch (Middle Dutch harpoen) or Basque, the language of the first whaling peoples, who often
accompanied English sailors on their early expeditions. Also see -oon.


clamp (n.)

device for fastening, c.1300, probably from clamb, perhaps originally past tense of climb (v.), or
from Middle Dutch clampe (Dutch klamp), from West Germanic *klamp- clamp, cleat; cognate with Middle
Low German klampe clasp, hook, Old High German klampfer clip, clamp; also probably related to Middle
Dutch klamme a clamp, hook, grapple, Danish klamme a clamp, cramp, Old English clamm fetter; see
clam (n.).


truth (n.)

Old English triew&eth; (West Saxon), treow&eth; (Mercian) faith, faithfulness, fidelity, loyalty;
veracity, quality of being true; pledge, covenant, from triewe, treowe faithful (see true (adj.)),
with Proto-Germanic abstract noun suffix *-itho (see -th (2)).    Sense of something that is true is
first recorded mid-14c. Meaning accuracy, correctness is from 1560s. English and most other IE
languages do not have a primary verb for for speak the truth, as a contrast to lie (v.). Truth squad
in U.S. political sense first attested in the 1952 U.S. presidential election campaign.    At
midweek the Republican campaign was bolstered by an innovation--the truth squad ..., a team of
senators who trailed whistle-stopping Harry Truman to field what they denounced as his wild pitches.
[Life, Oct. 13, 1952]   <hr />   Let [Truth] and Falsehood grapple; who ever knew Truth put to the
worse, in a free and open encounter. [Milton, Areopagitica, 1644]


