graphite (n.)

1796, from German Graphit black lead, coined 1789 by German mineralogist Abraham Gottlob Werner
(1750-1817) from Greek graphein write (see -graphy) + mineral suffix -ite. So called because it was
used in pencils. Related: Graphitic.


molybdenum (n.)

metallic element, 1816, from molybdena, used generally for lead-like minerals, from Greek molybdos
lead, also black graphite, related to Latin plumbum lead (see plumb (n.)), and like it probably
borrowed from a lost Mediterranean language, perhaps Iberian. The element so called because of its
resemblance to lead ore.


plummet (n.)

late 14c., ball of lead, plumb of a bob-line, from Old French plomet graphite, lead; plummet,
sounding lead, diminutive of plom sounding lead (see plumb (n.)).


plumbago (n.)

graphite, 1784, from Latin plumbago a type of lead ore, black lead, from plumbum lead (see plumb
(n.)); it renders Greek molybdaina, which was used of yellow lead oxide and also of a type of plant
(leadwort). Attested in English in the yellow oxide sense from 1610s; as a type of plant from 1747.
Related: Plumbaginous.


pencil (n.)

early 14c., an artist's fine brush of camel hair, from Old French pincel artist's paintbrush (13c.,
Modern French pinceau), from Latin penicillus painter's brush, hair-pencil, literally little tail,
diminutive of peniculus brush, itself a diminutive of penis tail (see penis). Small brushes formerly
were used for writing before modern lead or chalk pencils; meaning graphite writing implement
apparently evolved late 16c. Derogatory slang pencil-pusher office worker is from 1881; pencil neck
weak person first recorded 1973.


lead (n.1)

heavy metal, Old English lead, from West Germanic *loudhom (cognates: Old Frisian lad, Middle Dutch
loot, Dutch lood lead, German Lot weight, plummet). The name and the skill in using the metal seem
to have been borrowed from the Celts (compare Old Irish luaide), probably from PIE root *plou(d)- to
flow.    Figurative of heaviness since at least early 14c. Black lead was an old name for graphite,
hence lead pencil (1680s) and the colloquial figurative phrase to have lead in one's pencil be
possessed of (especially male sexual) vigor, attested by 1902. Lead balloon a failure, American
English slang, attested by 1957 (as a type of something heavy that can be kept up only with effort,
from 1904). Lead-footed slow is from 1896; opposite sense of fast emerged 1940s in trucker's jargon,
from notion of a foot heavy on the gas pedal.


