graphic (adj.)

vivid, 1570s (implied in graphically), from Latin graphicus picturesque, from Greek graphikos of or
for writing, belonging to drawing, picturesque, from graphe writing, drawing, from graphein to write
(see -graphy). Meaning of or pertaining to drawing is from 1756. Related: Graphically. Graphic
design is attested by 1956. Graphic equalizer is from 1969.


graphics (n.)

1889, in reference to the use of diagrams, from graphic; also see -ics. Layout and typography sense
attested from 1960; of computers by 1966.


graph (n.)

1878, shortening of graphic formula (see graphic). The verb meaning charted on a graph is from 1889.
Related: Graphed; graphing.


phonographic (adj.)

1840, originally in reference to shorthand; see phono- + graphic. Modern sense from 1878.


manga (n.)

Japanese comic books or graphic novels, c.1984, from Japanese, cartoon, caricature, literally
involuntary pictures. Term said to have been coined 1814 by artist Katsushika Hokusai to convey a
sense of free-flowing composition and quirky style. See anime.


logograph (n.)

instrument for giving a graphic representation of speech, 1879, from Greek logos (see logos) +
-graph instrument for recording; something written. Earliest use (1797) is in the sense logogriph,
and it frequently was used in this sense.


psychographic (adj.)

also psycho-graphic, 1856, from psychograph supernatural photographic image, from psycho- + -graph.
Related: Psychographics.


tableau (n.)

1690s, a picturesque or graphic description or picture, from French tableau picture, painting
(12c.), from Old French table slab, writing tablet (see table (n.)) + diminutive suffix -eau, from
Latin -ellus. Hence tableau-vivant (1817) person or persons silent and motionless, enacting a well-
known scene, incident, painting, etc., 19c. parlor game, literally living picture.


anime (n.)

c.1985, Japanese for animation, a term that seems to have arisen in the 1970s, apparently based on
French anim&eacute; animated, lively, roused, from the same root as English animate (adj.). Probably
taken into Japanese from a phrase such as dessin anim&eacute; cartoon, literally animated design,
with the adjective abstracted or mistaken, due to its position, as a noun.   Manga (q.v.) is
Japanese for comic book, graphic novel, but anime largely are based on manga and until 1970s, anime
were known in Japan as manga eiga or TV manga. The two terms are somewhat confused in English.


ye (article)

old or quaintly archaic way of writing the, in which the -y- is a 16c. graphic alteration of
&thorn;, an Old English character (generally called thorn, originally a Germanic rune; see th-) that
represented the -th- sound (as at the beginning of thorn). The characters for -y- and -&thorn;- so
closely resembled each other in Old English and early Middle English handwriting that a dot had to
be added to the -y- to keep them distinct. In late 15c., early printers in English, whose types were
founded on the continent, did not have a &thorn; in their sets, so they substituted y as the letter
that looked most like it when setting type. But in such usages it was not meant to be pronounced
with any of the sounds associated with -y-, but still as -th-. Ye for the (and yt for that)
continued in manuscripts through 18c. Revived 19c. as a deliberate antiquarianism; the Ye Olde _____
construction was being mocked by 1896.


peace (n.)

mid-12c., freedom from civil disorder, from Anglo-French pes, Old French pais peace, reconciliation,
silence, permission (11c., Modern French paix), from Latin pacem (nominative pax) compact,
agreement, treaty of peace, tranquility, absence of war (source of Proven&ccedil;al patz, Spanish
paz, Italian pace), from PIE *pag-/*pak- fasten, related to pacisci to covenant or agree (see pact).
Replaced Old English fri&eth;, also sibb, which also meant happiness. Modern spelling is 1500s,
reflecting vowel shift. Sense in peace of mind is from c.1200. Used in various greetings from
c.1300, from Biblical Latin pax, Greek eirene, which were used by translators to render Hebrew
shalom, properly safety, welfare, prosperity.    Sense of quiet is attested by 1300; meaning absence
or cessation of war or hostility is attested from c.1300. As a type of hybrid tea rose (developed
1939 in France by Francois Meilland), so called from 1944. Native American peace pipe is first
recorded 1760. Peace-officer attested from 1714. Peace offering is from 1530s. Phrase peace with
honor first recorded 1607 (in Coriolanus). The U.S. Peace Corps was set up March 1, 1962. Peace
sign, both the hand gesture and the graphic, attested from 1968.


letter (n.1)

c.1200, graphic symbol, alphabetic sign, written character, from Old French letre (10c., Modern
French lettre) character, letter; missive, note, in plural, literature, writing, learning, from
Latin littera (also litera) letter of the alphabet, of uncertain origin, perhaps via Etruscan from
Greek diphthera tablet, with change of d- to l- as in lachrymose. In this sense it replaced Old
English bocst&aelig;f, literally book staff (compare German Buchstabe letter, character, from Old
High German buohstab, from Proto-Germanic *bok-staba-m).    Latin littera also meant a writing,
document, record, and in   plural litter&aelig; a letter, epistle, a sense first attested in English
early 13c., replacing Old English &aelig;rendgewrit, literally errand-writing. The Latin plural also
meant literature, books, and figuratively learning, liberal education, schooling (see letters).
School letter in sports, attested by 1908, were said to have been first awarded by University of
Chicago football coach Amos Alonzo Stagg. Expression to the letter precisely is from 1520s (earlier
as after the letter). Letter-perfect is from 1845, originally in theater jargon, in reference to an
actor knowing the lines exactly. Letter-press, in reference to matter printed from relief surfaces,
is from 1840.


pork (n.)

c.1300 (early 13c. in surname Porkuiller), flesh of a pig as food, from Old French porc pig, swine,
boar, and directly from Latin porcus pig, tame swine, from PIE *porko- young swine (cognates:
Umbrian purka; Old Church Slavonic prase young pig; Lithuanian parsas pig; and Old English fearh,
Middle Dutch varken, both from Proto-Germanic *farhaz).   Pork barrel in the literal sense is from
1801, American English; meaning state's financial resources (available for distribution) is attested
from 1907 (in full, national pork barrel); it was noted as an expression of U.S. President President
William Howard Taft:    Now there is a proposition that we issue $500,000,000 or $1,000,000,000 of
bonds for a waterway, and then that we just apportion part to the Mississippi and part to the
Atlantic, a part to the Missouri and a part to the Ohio. I am opposed to it. I am opposed to it
because it not only smells of the pork barrel, but it will be the pork barrel itself. Let every
project stand on its bottom. [The Outlook, Nov. 6, 1909, quoting Taft]    The magazine article that
includes the quote opens with:    We doubt whether any one knows how or when, or from what
application of what story, the phrase the National pork barrel has come into use. If not a very
elegant simile, it is at least an expressive one, and suggests a graphic picture of Congressmen
eager for local advantage going, one after another, to the National pork barrel to take away their
slices for home consumption.   Pork in this sense is attested from 1862 (compare figurative use of
bacon). Pork chop is attested from 1858. Pork pie is from 1732; pork-pie hat (1855) originally
described a woman's style popular c.1855-65, so called for its shape.


