grate (n.)

late 14c., grill for cooking; early 15c., iron bars or cagework across a door or windows, from
Anglo-Latin (mid-14c.), from Old French grate or directly from Medieval Latin grata lattice, from
Latin cratis wickerwork, hurdle (see hurdle). As a verb meaning to fit with a grate, from mid-15c.
Related: Grated; grating.


grater (n.)

instrument for scraping (bread, ginger, etc.), late 14c., from Old French grateor, agent noun from
grater (see grate (v.)).


grateful (adj.)

1550s, pleasing to the mind, also full of gratitude, from obsolete adj. grate agreeable, thankful,
from Latin gratus pleasing (see grace (n.)). A most unusual formation [Weekley]. Hard to think of
another case where English uses -ful to make an adjective from an adjective. Related: Gratefully;
gratefulness.


grate (v.)

to scrape, rub, late 14c. (implied in grated), from Old French grater to scrape (Modern French
gratter), from Frankish *kratton, from Proto-Germanic *krattojan (cognates: Old High German krazzon
to scratch, scrape, German kratzen to scratch, Swedish kratta, Danish kratte to rake), probably of
imitative origin. Senses of sound harshly, and annoy are mid-16c. Italian grattare also is from
Germanic. Related: Grated; grating.


grating (adj.)

annoying, irritating, 1560s, figurative use of present participle adjective from grate (v.).


roast (v.)

late 13c., to cook by dry heat, from Old French rostir to roast, burn (Modern French r&ocirc;tir),
from Frankish *hraustjan (cognate with Old High German rosten, German r&#246;sten, Middle Dutch
roosten to roast), originally cook on a grate or gridiron, related to Germanic words meaning
gridiron, grate; such as German Rost, Middle Dutch roost.    Intransitive sense be very hot, be
exposed to great heat is from c.1300. The meaning make fun of in an affectionate way is from 1710.
From the same source as roster. Related: Roasted; roasting. Roast beef first recorded 1630s (French
rosbif is from English).


gratin (n.)

light crust over a dish, 1806 (in au gratin), from French gratin crust (16c.), from gratter to
scrape, scratch (see grate (v.)).


rasp (v.)

mid-13c., to scrape, from Middle Dutch raspen and from Old French rasper (Modern French r&#226;per)
to grate, rasp, which is perhaps from a West Germanic source (compare Old English gehrespan) akin to
the root of raffle. Vocalic sense is from 1843. Related: Rasped; rasping.


stridulous (adj.)

1610s, from Latin stridulus giving a shrill sound, creaking, from stridere to utter an inarticulate
sound, grate, creak (see strident). Stridulation is from 1831. Stridulate (v.) first recorded 1838.
Related: Stridulated; stridulating; stridulously; stridulousness.


strident (adj.)

1650s, from French strident (16c.) and directly from Latin stridentem (nominative stridens), present
participle of stridere utter an inarticulate sound, grate, screech, from PIE *(s)trei-, possibly of
imitative origin (cognates: Greek trismos a grinding, scream). Related: Stridently; stridence;
stridency.


grisly (adj.)

Old English grislic horrible, dreadful, from root of grisan to shudder, fear, with cognates in Old
Frisian grislik horrible, Middle Dutch grisen to shudder, Dutch griezelen, German grausen to
shudder, fear, Old High German grisenlik horrible; of unknown origin; Watkins connects it with the
PIE root *ghrei- to rub, on notion of to grate on the mind. See also gruesome, to which it probably
is connected in some way.


grind (v.)

Old English grindan to rub together, grate, scrape, forgrindan destroy by crushing (class III strong
verb; past tense grand, past participle grunden), from Proto-Germanic *grindanan (cognates: Dutch
grenden), related to ground, from PIE *ghrendh- to grind (cognates: Latin frendere to gnash the
teeth, Greek khondros corn, grain, Lithuanian grendu to scrape, scratch). Meaning to make smooth or
sharp by friction is from c.1300. Most other Germanic languages use a verb cognate with Latin molere
(compare Dutch malen, Old Norse mala, German mahlen).


