gratuity (n.)

1520s, graciousness, from French gratuit&eacute; (14c.) or directly from Medieval Latin gratuitatem
(nominative gratuitas) free gift, probably from Latin gratuitus free, freely given (see gratuitous).
Meaning money given for favor or services is first attested 1530s.


corollary (n.)

late 14c., from Late Latin corollarium a deduction, consequence, from Latin corollarium, originally
money paid for a garland, hence gift, gratuity, something extra; and in logic, a proposition proved
from another that has been proved. From corolla small garland, diminutive of corona crown (see crown
(n.)).


bounty (n.)

mid-13c., generosity, from Old French bonte goodness (12c., Modern French bont&eacute;), from Latin
bonitatem (nominative bonitas) goodness, from bonus good (see bene-). Sense of gift bestowed by a
sovereign or the state led to extended senses of gratuity to a military recruit (1702) and reward
for killing or taking a criminal or enemy (1764).I do ... promise, that there shall be paid ... the
following several and respective premiums and Bounties for the prisoners and Scalps of the Enemy
Indians that shall be taken or killed .... [Papers of the Governor of Pennsylvania, 1764]


tip (v.2)

give a small present of money to, c.1600, originally to give, hand, pass, thieves' cant, perhaps
from tip (v.3) to tap. The meaning give a gratuity to is first attested 1706. The noun in this sense
is from 1755; the noun meaning piece of confidential information is from 1845; and the verb in the
sense give private information to is from 1883.    The word's supposed origin as an acronym is
highly unlikely and the story seems to be no older than an editorial in Life magazine from July 15,
1946, claiming the restaurant server's word tip probably comes from a London coffeehouse custom of
two centuries ago when the words 'To Insure Promptness' were written on notes to the waiter, with
coins attached. Later just the initials T.I.P. were used. There is no historical evidence for this.
Also <b>see here</b>.


