gravity (n.)

c.1500, weight, dignity, seriousness, from Middle French gravit&eacute; seriousness, thoughtfulness,
and directly from Latin gravitatem (nominative gravitas) weight, heaviness, pressure, from gravis
heavy (see grave (adj.)). The scientific sense of force that gives weight to objects first recorded
1640s.


gravitas (n.)

1924, from Latin gravitas weight, heaviness; figuratively, of persons, dignity, presence, influence
(see gravity). A word that became useful when gravity acquired a primarily scientific meaning.


gravitate (v.)

1640s, exert weight, move downward, from Modern Latin gravitatus, past participle of gravitare
gravitate, from Latin gravitas heaviness, weight (see gravity). Meaning To be affected by gravity is
from 1690s. Figurative use from 1670s. Related: Gravitated; gravitating. The classical Latin verb
was gravare to make heavy, burden, oppress, aggravate.


G

for history of the letter's development, see C. As a movie rating in the U.S., 1966, standing for
general. Standing for gravity in physics since 1785.


sobriety (n.)

c.1400, moderation in indulgence, from Old French sobriete sobriety, moderation (Modern French
sobriet&eacute;) or directly from Latin sobrietatem (nominative sobrietas), from sobrius (see sober
(adj.)). Meaning steadiness, gravity is recorded from 1540s.


owl (n.)

Old English ule owl, from Proto-Germanic *uwwalon- (cognates: Middle Dutch, Dutch uil, Old High
German uwila, German Eule, Old Norse ugla), a diminutive of PIE root *u(wa)l-, which is imitative of
a wail or an owl's hoot (compare Latin ulula owl; also see ululation). The bird was employed
proverbially and figuratively in reference to nocturnal habits, ugliness, and appearance of gravity
and wisdom (often ironic).


aggravation (n.)

late 15c., from Middle French aggravation, from Late Latin aggravationem (nominative aggravatio),
noun of action from past participle stem of Latin aggravare make heavier, figuratively to embarrass
further, increase in oppressiveness, from ad to (see ad-) + gravare weigh down, from gravis heavy
(see grave (adj.)). Oldest sense is increasing in gravity or seriousness; that of irritation is from
1610s.


syndicalism (n.)

1907, from French syndicalisme movement to transfer ownership of means of production and
distribution to industrial workers, from syndical of a labor union, from syndic chief representative
(see syndic).    Syndicalism is in France the new, all-absorbing form of Labor's conflict with
Capital. Its growth has been so rapid that its gravity is not appreciated abroad. This year, even
more than last, the strikes and other direct action, which it has combined, have upset the
industrial life of the country, and forced the attention of Parliament and Government. [The Nation,
June 20, 1907]


authority (n.)

early 13c., autorite book or quotation that settles an argument, from Old French auctorit&eacute;
authority, prestige, right, permission, dignity, gravity; the Scriptures (12c.; Modern French
autorit&eacute;), from Latin auctoritatem (nominative auctoritas) invention, advice, opinion,
influence, command, from auctor master, leader, author (see author (n.)).    Usually spelled with a
-c- in English till 16c., when it was dropped in imitation of the French. Meaning power to enforce
obedience is from late 14c.; meaning people in authority is from 1610s. Authorities those in charge,
those with police powers is recorded from mid-19c.


point-blank (n.)

1570s, said to be from point (v.) + blank (n.), here meaning the white center of a target. The
notion would be of standing close enough to aim (point) at the blank without allowance for curve,
windage, or gravity. But early references make no mention of a white target, and the phrase is
possibly from a simplification of the French phrase de pointe en blanc, used in French gunnery in
reference to firing a piece on the level into open space to test how far it will carry. In that case
the blank represents empty space or perhaps the zero point of elevation. The whole phrase might be a
French loan-translation from Italian. From 1590s as an adjective in English.


waterlogged (adj.)

1759 (in an account of the Battle of Lagos in Universal Magazine, September), from water (n.1) + log
(n.); the notion apparently is of reduce to a log-like condition.     WATER LOGGED, the state of a
ship when, by receiving a great quantity of water into her hold, by leaking, &amp;c.;, she has
become heavy and inactive upon the sea, so as to yield without resistance to the efforts of every
wave rushing over her decks. As, in this dangerous situation, the center of gravity is no longer
fixed, but fluctuating from place to place, the stability of the ship is utterly lost. She is
therefore almost totally deprived of the use of her sails, which would operate to overset her, or
press the head under water. Hence there is no resource for the crew, except to free her by the
pumps, or to abandon her by the boats as soon as possible. [William Falconer, An Universal
Dictionary of the Marine, London, 1784]    The verb waterlog (1779) appears to be a back-formation.


center (n.)

late 14c., middle point of a circle; point round which something revolves, from Old French centre
(14c.), from Latin centrum center, originally fixed point of the two points of a drafting compass,
from Greek kentron sharp point, goad, sting of a wasp, from kentein stitch, from PIE root *kent- to
prick (cognates: Breton kentr a spur, Welsh cethr nail, Old High German hantag sharp, pointed).
Figuratively from 1680s. Meaning the middle of anything attested from 1590s. Spelling with -re
popularized in Britain by Johnson's dictionary (following Bailey's), though -er is older and was
used by Shakespeare, Milton, and Pope. Center of gravity is recorded from 1650s. Center of attention
is from 1868.


apothecary (n.)

mid-14c., shopkeeper, especially one who stores, compounds, and sells medicaments, from Old French
apotecaire (13c., Modern French apothicaire), from Late Latin apothecarius storekeeper, from Latin
apotheca storehouse, from Greek apotheke barn, storehouse, literally a place where things are put
away, from apo- away (see apo-) + tithenai to put, to place (see theme). Same root produced French
boutique and Spanish bodega. Cognate compounds produced Sanskrit apadha- concealment, Old Persian
apadana- palace.    Drugs and herbs being among the chief items of non-perishable goods, the meaning
narrowed 17c. to druggist (Apothecaries' Company of London separated from the Grocers' in 1617).
Apothecaries formerly were notorious for the assumed gravity and affectation of knowledge generally
put on by the gentlemen of this profession, who are commonly as superficial in their learning as
they are pedantic in their language [Francis Grose, A Classical Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue,
1796]. Hence, Apothecary's Latin, barbarously mangled, also known as Dog Latin.


