Greek (adj.)

late 14c., from Greek (n.). Earlier Gregeis (c.1300), from Old French Gregois; also Greekish (Old
English Grecisc). In venery, anal, by 1970. Greek gift is from &AElig;neid, II.49: timeo Danaos et
dona ferentes.


Greek (n.)

Old English Grecas, Crecas (plural), early Germanic borrowing from Latin Graeci the Hellenes, from
Greek Grakoi. Aristotle, who was the first to use Graikhos as equivalent to Hellenes (Meteorologica
I.xiv), wrote that it was the name originally used by Illyrians for the Dorians in Epirus, from
Graii, native name of the people of Epirus.    But a modern theory (put forth by German classical
historian Georg Busolt, 1850-1920), derives it from Graikhos inhabitant of Graia (literally gray), a
town on the coast of Boeotia, which was the name given by the Romans to all Greeks, originally to
the Greek colonists from Graia who helped found Cumae (9c. B.C.E.), the important city in southern
Italy where the Latins first encountered Greeks. Under this theory, it was reborrowed in this
general sense by the Greeks.    The Germanic languages originally borrowed the word with an initial
-k- sound (compare Old High German Chrech, Gothic Kreks), which probably was their initial sound
closest to the Latin -g- at the time; the word was later refashioned.  It was subtle of God to learn
Greek when he wished to become an author -- and not to learn it better. [Nietzsche, Beyond Good and
Evil, 1886]  Meaning the Greek language is from late 14c.; meaning unintelligible speech, gibberish
is from c.1600. Meaning Greek letter fraternity member is student slang, 1900.


upsilon (n.)

20th letter of the Greek alphabet, 1640s, from Greek u psilon, literally a mere (or bare) 'u;'  so
called in later Greek in reference to its sound. The exact reason is variously explained, but it
seems to have had something to do with distinguishing it from diphthongs.


omicron

15th letter of the Greek alphabet, literally small 'o,'  from Greek (s)mikros small, from PIE
*smik-. Because the vowel was short in ancient Greek. Compare Omega.


Acheron

1580s, fabled river of the Lower World in Greek mythology. The name perhaps means marsh-like
(compare Greek akherousai marshlike water); the derivation from Greek akhos woe is considered folk
etymology.


koine (n.)

common literary dialect of Greek in Roman and early medieval period, 1903, from feminine singular of
Greek koinos common, ordinary (see coeno-). Used earlier as a Greek word in English.


hoi polloi

1837, from Greek hoi polloi (plural) the people, literally the many (plural of polys; see poly-).
Used in Greek by Dryden (1668) and Byron (1822), in both cases preceded by the, even though Greek
hoi means the, a mistake repeated often by subsequent writers, who at least have the excuse of
ignorance of Greek.


Jason

masc. proper name, from Greek Eason, from Hebrew Yehoshua, a common name among Hellenistic Jews (see
Joshua). In Greek mythology, son of Aeson, leader of the Argonauts, from Latin Jason, from Greek
Iason, perhaps related to iasthai to heal (see -iatric). The names were somewhat merged in Christian
Greek.


L

Roman letter, from Greek lambda, from Semitic lamed. The shape of the Roman letter is an early one
in Greek, adopted before it was superseded in Greek by the inverted form which became the Greek
lambda.


Tartarus (n.)

in Homer and older Greek mythology, the sunless abyss below Hades, from Greek Tartaros, of uncertain
origin; prob. a word of imitative origin, suggestive of something frightful [Klein]. Later in Greek
almost synonymous with Hades.


brady-

medical word-forming element meaning slow, delayed, tardy, from Greek bradys slow; as in bradycardia
(1890), with Latinized form of Greek kardia heart; bradykinesia, slow movement, with Greek kinesis
movement, motion; bradypnea, with Greek pneo/pnein to breathe.


Briareus

hundred-handed giant in Greek mythology, from Greek briaros strong, stout.


omega

c.1400, from Medieval Greek omega, from classical Greek o mega big 'o'  (in contrast to o micron
little 'o' ); so called because the vowel was long in ancient Greek. From mega (see mega-). The
final letter of the Greek alphabet, hence used figuratively for the last, final of anything (as in
Rev. i:8),


Hephaestus

Greek god of fire and metal-working, Roman spelling of Greek Hephaistos, a pre-Hellenic word of
unknown origin.


I.H.S.

Old English, from Medieval Latin, representing Greek abbreviation of IHSOUS Jesus, in which -H- is
the capital of the Greek vowel eta. The Roman form would be I.E.S. Mistaken for a Latin contraction
in the Middle Ages, after its Greek origin was forgotten, and sometimes treated as short for Iesus
Hominum Salvator Jesus Savior of Men. Alternative version I.H.C. (terminal -s- often written in
later Greek with a character resembling -c-) is found on vestments from 950 C.E., and may be the
source of the H. in slang Jesus H. Christ.


Rhodes

Greek island, one of the Dodecanese, from Greek Rhodos, perhaps from rhodon rose, or rhoia
pomegranate, but more likely [Room] from a pre-Greek name, from Phoenician erod snake, for the
serpents which were said to have anciently infested the island.


biography (n.)

1680s, probably from Latin biographia, from Late Greek biographia description of life, from Greek
bio- life (see bio-) + graphia record, account (see -graphy). Biographia was not in classical Greek
(bios alone was the word for it), though it is attested in later Greek from c.500.


Telamon

in Greek mythology, father of Ajax, brother of Peleus, literally the Bearer, from Greek telamon
broad strap for bearing something.


Elysian (adj.)

1570s, from Greek Elysion pedion Elysian field, where heroes and the virtuous live after death, from
a pre-Greek word of unknown origin.


malic (adj.)

1797, from French malique (18c.), from Latin malum apple (the acid, discovered 1785 by Scheele, was
obtained from unripe apples and other fruits), from Greek melon (Doric malon) apple, probably from a
pre-Greek Mediterranean language. The Latin and Greek words also meant fruit generally, especially
if exotic.


Apollo

Olympian deity, god of music, poetry, medicine, etc., later identified with Helios, the sun god; the
name is a Latin form of Greek Apollon, said to be perhaps related to an obsolete Greek verb meaning
to drive away (evil, etc.) [Klein, citing Usener].


narcissus (n.)

type of bulbous flowering plant, 1540s, from Latin narcissus, from Greek narkissos the narcissus,
perhaps from a pre-Greek Aegean word, but associated with Greek narke numbness (see narcotic)
because of the sedative effect of the alkaloids in the plant.


Pegasus

winged horse in Greek mythology, late 14c., from Latin, from Greek Pegasos, usually said to be from
pege fountain, spring; a well fed by a spring (plural pegai), especially in springs of Ocean, near
which Medusa was said to have been killed by Perseus (Pegasus sprang from her blood). But this may
be folk etymology, and the ending of the word indicates non-Greek origin. Advances since the 1990s
in the study of the Luwians, neighbors of the Hittites in ancient Anatolia, show a notable
convergence of the Greek name with Piha&#353;&#353;a&#353;&#353;i, the name of a Luwian weather-god:
the mythological figure of Pegasus carrying the lightning and thunderbolt of Zeus, ... is likely to
represent an avatar of the Luwian Storm-God of Lightning .... [Alice Mouton, et al., eds., Luwian
Identities, 2013]


philhellene (adj.)

1824, loving the Greeks, from Greek, from philos loving (see -phile) + Hellen Greek (see Hellenic).
Originally in English in reference to the cause of Greek independence. Related: Philhellenic.


thespian (adj.)

1670s, of or pertaining to tragedy or dramatic acting, from Greek Thespis, semi-legendary 6c. B.C.E.
poet of Icaria in Attica, often called the Father of Greek Tragedy. The literal meaning of the name
is inspired by the gods.


Socratic (adj.)

1630s (Socratical is from 1580s), of or pertaining to Greek philosopher Socrates (469-399 B.C.E.),
especially in reference to his method of eliciting truth by question and answer, from Latin
Socraticus, from Greek Sokratikos pertaining to Socrates or his school. His name is Greek Sokrates,
literally having safe might.


ecto-

word-forming element generally meaning outside, external, before vowels ect-, comb. form of Greek
ektos outside (adv.), used to form scientific compounds in Greek; related to Greek ek, ex out, from
PIE *eghs- (see ex-).


thalasso-

before vowels thalass-, word-forming element meaning sea, the sea, from comb. form of Greek thalassa
the sea (in Homer, when used of a particular sea, the Mediterranean, as opposed to okeanos), a word
from a lost pre-Greek Mediterranean language. In Attic Greek thalatta, hence sometimes thalatto-.


ballistics (n.)

1753, art of throwing; science of projectiles, with -ics + Latin ballista ancient military machine
for hurling stones, from Greek ballistes, from ballein to throw, to throw so as to hit, also in a
looser sense, to put, place, lay; from PIE root *gwele- (1) to throw, reach, in extended senses to
pierce (cognates: Sanskrit apa-gurya swinging, balbaliti whirls, twirls; Greek bole a throw, beam,
ray, belemnon dart, javelin, belone needle). Here, too, probably belongs Greek ballizein to dance,
literally to throw one's body, ancient Greek dancing being highly athletic.


myrmidon (n.)

c.1400, from Latin Myrmidones (plural), from Greek Myrmidones, Thessalian tribe led by Achilles to
the Trojan War, fabled to have been ants changed into men, and often derived from Greek myrmex ant
(from PIE *morwi- (see Formica (2)), but Watkins does not connect them and Klein's sources suggest a
connection to Greek mormos dread, terror. Transferred sense of faithful follower is from c.1600.


narthex (n.)

porch at the west end of early churches (used by penitents not admitted to the body of the church),
1670s, from Late Greek narthex, in classical Greek giant fennel, of unknown origin. The
architectural feature allegedly so called from fancied resemblance of porch to a hollow stem. The
word also was used in Greek to mean a small case for unguents, etc. According to Hesiod (Theogeny),
Prometheus conveyed fire from Heaven to Earth in hollow fennel stalks. Related: Narthecal.


thyrsus (n.)

1590s, from Latinized form of Greek thyrsos, literally stalk or stem of a plant, a non-Greek word of
unknown origin. The staff or spear, tipped with an ornament like a pine cone and sometimes wreathed
in ivy and vine branches, borne by Dionysus and his votaries.


calisthenics (n.)

1847 (calisthenic (adj.) is from 1839), formed on model of French callisthenie, from Latinized comb.
form of Greek kallos beauty (see Callisto) + sthenos strength + -ics. Originally, gymnastic
exercises suitable for girls and meant to develop the figure and promote graceful movement. The
proper Greek, if there was such a word in Greek, would have been *kallistheneia.


agonist (n.)

1876, in writings on Greek drama, from Greek agonistes, literally combatant in the games (see
agony).


Comus (n.)

Greek god of joy and revelry, from Latin, from Greek komos revel, merrymaking (see comedy).


Orion

bright constellation, late 14c., from Greek Oarion, name of a giant in Greek mythology, loved by
Aurora, slain by Artemis, of unknown origin, though some speculate on Akkadian Uru-anna the Light of
Heaven. Another Greek name for the constellation was Kandaon, a title of Ares, god of war, and the
star pattern is represented in many cultures as a giant (such as Old Irish Caomai the Armed King,
Old Norse Orwandil, Old Saxon Ebu&eth;rung).


Istanbul

Turkish name of Constantinople, a corruption of Greek phrase eis tan (ten) polin into the city,
which is how the local Greek population referred to it. Picked up in Turkish 16c., though Turkish
folk etymology traces the name to Islam bol plenty of Islam. Greek polis city has been adopted into
Turkish as a place-name suffix as -bolu.


hyalo-

word-forming element meaning of glass; glass-like, transparent, from Greek hyalos glass, clear
alabaster, apparently a non-Greek word, said to be of Egyptian origin.


caustic (adj.)

c.1400, burning, corrosive, from Latin causticus burning, caustic, from Greek kaustikos capable of
burning; corrosive, from kaustos combustible; burnt, verbal adjective from kaiein, the Greek word
for to burn (transitive and intransitive) in all periods, of uncertain origin with no certain
cognates outside Greek. Figurative sense of sarcastic is attested from 1771. As a noun, early 15c.,
from the adjective.


android (n.)

automaton resembling a human being, 1842, from Modern Latin androides (itself attested as a Latin
word in English from 1727), from Greek andro- human (see andro-) + eides form, shape. Greek androdes
meant like a man, manly; compare also Greek andrias image of a man, statue. Listed as rare in OED
1st edition (1879), popularized from c.1951 by science fiction writers.


Daedalus

father of Icarus in Greek mythology, builder of the Cretan labyrinth, from Greek Daidalos, literally
the cunning worker, from daidallein to work artfully.


Hellenic (adj.)

pertaining to Greece, 1640s, from Greek Hellenikos, from Hellen a Greek, of unknown origin. Earliest
surviving use is by Homer in reference to a Thessalian tribe.


guitar (n.)

1620s, ultimately from Greek kithara cithara, a stringed musical instrument related to the lyre,
perhaps from Persian sihtar (see sitar); the name reached English several times, including early
14c. giterne, from Old French, in reference to various stringed, guitar-like instruments; the modern
word is directly from Spanish guittara (14c.), which ultimately is from the Greek. The Arabic word
is perhaps from Spanish or Greek, though often the relationship is said to be the reverse.


Ephesus

Greek city in ancient Asia Minor, center of worship for Artemis, Greek Ephesos, traditionally
derived from ephoros overseer, in reference to its religious significance, but this might be folk
etymology.


Danaid (n.)

in Greek mythology, one of the 50 daughters of Danaus, king of Argos, from Greek Danaides (plural).
On command of their father, all (except Hypermnestra) killed their husbands and consequently were
condemned to draw water perpetually in bottomless buckets.


alpha (n.)

c.1300, from Latin alpha, from Greek alpha, from Hebrew or Phoenician aleph (see aleph). The Greeks
added -a because Greek words cannot end in most consonants. Sense of beginning of anything is from
late 14c., often paired with omega (last letter in the Greek alphabet) as the end. Sense of first in
a sequence is from 1620s. Alpha male was in use by c.1960 among scientists studying animals; applied
to humans in society from c.1992.


cocco-

word-forming element meaning berry, seed, or something shaped like them, from Latinized form of
Greek kokkos a grain, a seed, especially kermes-berry, gall of the kermes oak (actually an insect),
which yields scarlet dye, of unknown origin, perhaps from a non-Greek source.


threnody (n.)

song of lamentation, 1630s, from Greek threnodia lamentation, from threnos dirge, lament + oide ode
(see ode). Greek threnos probably is from PIE imitative root *dher- (3) to drone, murmur, hum;
cognates: Old English dran drone, Gothic drunjus sound, Greek tenthrene a kind of wasp.


pi (n.)

Greek letter, from Hebrew, literally little mouth. As the name of the mathematical constant, from
1841 in English, used in Latin 1748 by Swiss mathematician Leonhart Euler (1707-1783), as an
abbreviation of Greek periphereia periphery. For the meaning printer's term for mixed type, see pie
(3).


pan-

word-forming element meaning all, every, whole, all-inclusive, from Greek pan-, combining form of
pas (neuter pan, masculine and neuter genitive pantos) all, from PIE *pant- all (with derivatives
found only in Greek and Tocharian).    Commonly used as a prefix in Greek, in modern times often
with nationality names, the first example of which seems to have been Panslavism (1846). Also
panislamic (1881), pan-American (1889), pan-German (1892), pan-African (1900), pan-European (1901),
pan-Arabism (1930).


