gregarious (adj.)

1660s, living in flocks (of animals), from Latin gregarius pertaining to a flock; of the herd, of
the common sort, common, from grex (genitive gregis) flock, herd, reduplication of PIE root *ger- to
gather together, assemble (cognates: Sanskrit gramah heap, troop; Greek ageirein to assemble, agora
assembly; Latin gremium bosom, lap; Old Church Slavonic grusti handful, gramota heap; Lithuanian
gurgulys chaos, confusion, gurguole crowd, mass). Sense of sociable first recorded 1789. Related:
Gregariously;  gregariousness.


agora (n.)

assembly place, 1590s, from Greek agora open space (typically a marketplace), from ageirein to
assemble, from PIE root *ger- to gather (see gregarious).


aggregate (adj.)

c.1400, from Latin aggregatus associated, literally united in a flock, past participle of aggregare
add to (a flock), lead to a flock, bring together (in a flock), from ad- to (see ad-) + gregare herd
(see gregarious).


cram (v.)

Old English crammian press something into something else, from Proto-Germanic *kram-/*krem-
(cognates: Old High German krimman to press, pinch, Old Norse kremja to squeeze, pinch), from PIE
root *ger- to gather (see gregarious). Meaning study intensely for an exam originally was British
student slang first recorded 1803. Related: Crammed; cramming.


Gregory

masc. proper name, common in England and Scotland by mid-12c. (Pope Gregory I sent the men who
converted the English to Christianity), from Late Latin Gregorius, from Greek gregorios, a
derivative of gregoros to be watchful, from PIE root *ger- to be awake (cognates: Sanskrit jagarti
he is awake, Avestan agarayeiti wakes up, rouses). At times confused with Latin gregarius (see
gregarious).


congregate (v.)

mid-15c., from Latin congregatus flocking together, past participle of congregare to herd together,
collect in a flock, swarm; assemble, from com- together (see com-) + gregare to collect into a
flock, gather, from grex (genitive gregis) a flock (see gregarious). Related: Congregated;
congregating.


segregate (v.)

1540s, from Latin segregatus, past participle of segregare set apart, lay aside; isolate; divide,
literally separate from the flock, from *se gregare, from se apart from (see secret (n.)) + grege,
ablative of grex herd, flock (see gregarious). Originally often with reference to the religious
notion of separating the flock of the godly from sinners. In modern social context, to force or
enforce racial separation and exclusion, 1908. Related: Segregated; segregating.


egregious (adj.)

1530s, distinguished, eminent, excellent, from Latin egregius distinguished, excellent,
extraordinary, from the phrase ex grege rising above the flock, from ex out of (see ex-) + grege,
ablative of grex herd, flock (see gregarious).    Disapproving sense, now predominant, arose late
16c., originally ironic and is not in the Latin word, which etymologically means simply exceptional.
Related: Egregiously; egregiousness.


paregoric (n.)

medicine that soothes pain, 1704, from adjective (1680s) soothing, from Late Latin paregoricus, from
Greek paregorikos soothing, encouraging, consoling, from paregorein speak soothingly to, from
paregoros consoling, from para- beside (see para- (1)) + root of agoreuein speak in public, from
agora public assembly, from PIE root *ger- to gather (see gregarious).


