grill (v.)

to broil on a grill, 1660s, from grill (n.); figurative sense from 1842, and the specific
(transitive) sense of to subject to intense questioning is first attested 1894. Related: Grilled;
grilling.


grill (n.)

gridiron, 1680s, from French gril, from Old French greil, alteration of graille grill, frating,
railings, fencing, from Latin craticula gridiron, small griddle, diminutive of cratis wickerwork,
perhaps from PIE *kert- to turn, entwine. In many instances, Modern English grill is a shortened
form of grille, such as chrome front of an automobile.


grille (n.)

ornamental grating, 1660s, from French grille (fem.) grating, from Old French greille gridiron, from
Latin craticula gridiron (see grill). The distinction in French between grille and grill ... appears
to date from about the 16th c. [OED].


broiler (n.)

late 14c., grill or gridiron used in broiling, agent noun from broil (v.1). From c.1300 as a
surname, perhaps meaning cook who specializes in broiling. Meaning chicken for broiling is from
1876.


griddle (n.)

shallow frying pan, early 13c., apparently from Anglo-French gridil, Old North French gredil,
altered from Old French graille, from Latin craticula (see grill).


barbecue (n.)

1650s, framework for grilling meat, fish, etc., from American Spanish barbacoa, from Arawakan
(Haiti) barbakoa framework of sticks, the raised wooden structure the Indians used to either sleep
on or cure meat. Sense of outdoor meal of roasted meat or fish as a social entertainment is from
1733; modern popular noun sense of grill for cooking over an open fire is from 1931.


grate (n.)

late 14c., grill for cooking; early 15c., iron bars or cagework across a door or windows, from
Anglo-Latin (mid-14c.), from Old French grate or directly from Medieval Latin grata lattice, from
Latin cratis wickerwork, hurdle (see hurdle). As a verb meaning to fit with a grate, from mid-15c.
Related: Grated; grating.


toast (v.1)

to brown with heat, late 14c., from Old French toster to toast, to grill, roast, burn (12c.), from
Vulgar Latin *tostare (source of Italian tostare, Spanish tostar), frequentative of Latin torrere
(past participle tostus) to parch (see terrain). Related: Toasted; toasting.


buccaneer (n.)

1660s, from French boucanier user of a boucan, a native grill for roasting meat, from Tupi mukem
(rendered in Portuguese as moquem c.1587): initial b and m are interchangeable in the Tupi language
[Klein]. For Haitian variant barbacoa, see barbecue. Originally used of French settlers working as
hunters and woodsmen in the Spanish West Indies, a lawless and piratical set after they were driven
from their trade by Spanish authorities in the 1690s.


bratwurst (n.)

1911, from German Bratwurst, from wurst + Br&auml;t lean meat, finely chipped calf or swine meat,
from Old High German brato (12c.), from Proto-Germanic *bred-on- roast flesh (source also of Old
English br&aelig;de meat), from PIE *bhreue- (see brawn). German folk etymology derives it from
braten to roast, bake, broil, grill; more likely both are from the same ancient source.


