grim (n.)

spectre, bogey, haunting spirit, 1620s, from grim (adj.).


grim (adj.)

Old English grimm fierce, cruel, savage, dire, painful, from Proto-Germanic *grimmaz (cognates: Old
Saxon, Old Frisian, Old High German, German grimm, Old Norse grimmr, Swedish grym fierce, furious),
from PIE *ghrem- angry, perhaps imitative of the sound of rumbling thunder (compare Greek khremizein
to neigh, Old Church Slavonic vuzgrimeti to thunder, Russian gremet' thunder).    A weaker word now
than once it was; sense of dreary, gloomy first recorded late 12c. It also had a verb form in Old
English, grimman (class III strong verb; past tense gramm, p.p. grummen). Old English also had a
noun, grima goblin, specter, perhaps also a proper name or attribute-name of a god, hence its
appearance as an element in place names.   Grim reaper as a figurative way to say death is attested
by 1847 (the association of grim and death goes back at least to 17c.). A Middle English expression
for have recourse to harsh measures was to wend the grim tooth (early 13c.).


grime (n.)

1580s, of uncertain origin, probably alteration of Middle English grim dirt, filth (early 14c.),
from Middle Low German greme dirt, from Proto-Germanic *grim- to smear (cognates: Flemish grijm,
Middle Dutch grime soot, mask), from PIE root *ghrei- to rub. The verb was Middle English grymen
(mid-15c.) but was replaced early 16c. by begrime.


grimness (n.)

Old English grimnesse; see grim + -ness.


grimly

Old English grimlic (adj.) fierce, bloodthirsty, cruel, grimlice (adv.); see grim + -ly. Similar
formation in Middle Dutch grimmelijc, Old Norse grimmligr.


grimace (n.)

1650s, from French grimace, from Middle French grimache, from Old French grimuce grotesque face,
ugly mug, possibly from Frankish (compare Old Saxon grima face mask, Old English grima mask,
helmet), from same Germanic root as grim (adj.). With pejorative suffix -azo (from Latin -aceus).


grumble (v.)

1580s, from Middle French grommeler mutter between the teeth or directly from Middle Dutch grommelen
murmur, mutter, grunt, from grommen to rumble, growl. Imitative, or perhaps akin to grim. Related:
Grumbled; grumbling.


neocon (n.)

by 1987, abbreviation for neo-conservative in the U.S. political sense.  Neoconservatism is the
first variant of American conservatism in the past century that is in the 'American grain.' It is
hopeful, not lugubrious; forward-looking, not nostalgic; and its general tone is cheerful, not grim
or dyspeptic. Its 20th-century heroes tend to be TR, FDR, and Ronald Reagan. Such Republican and
conservative worthies as Calvin Coolidge, Herbert Hoover, Dwight Eisenhower, and Barry Goldwater are
politely overlooked. [Irving Kristol, The Neoconservative Persuasion, in The Weekly Standard, Aug.
25, 2003]


pogrom (n.)

1882, from Yiddish pogrom, from Russian pogromu devastation, destruction, from po- by, through,
behind, after (cognate with Latin post-; see post-) + gromu thunder, roar, from PIE imitative root
*ghrem- (see grim).


beetle (v.)

project, overhang, c.1600, back-formation from bitelbrouwed grim-browed, sullen (mid-14c.), from
bitel sharp-edged, sharp (c.1200), probably a compound from Old English *bitol biting, sharp,
related to bite, + brow, which in Middle English meant eyebrow, not forehead. Meaning to overhang
dangerously (of cliffs, etc.) is from c.1600. Related: Beetled; beetling.


