groom (v.)

1809, from groom (n.1) in its secondary sense of male servant who attends to horses. Transferred
sense of to tidy (oneself) up is from 1843; figurative sense of to prepare a candidate is from 1887,
originally in U.S. politics. Related: Groomed; grooming.


groom (n.2)

husband-to-be at a wedding, c.1600, short for bridegroom, in which the second element is Old English
guma man.


groomsman (n.)

attendant on a bridegroom at a wedding, 1690s, from groom (n.1) + man (n.).


groom (n.1)

c.1200, grome male child, boy; c.1300 as youth, young man. No known cognates in other Germanic
languages. Perhaps from Old English *groma, related to growan grow; or from Old French grommet
servant (compare Middle English gromet ship's boy, early 13c.). Meaning male servant who attends to
horses is from 1660s.


equerry (n.)

1590s, short for groom of the equirrie, from esquiry stables (1550s), from Middle French escuerie
(Modern French &eacute;curie), perhaps from Medieval Latin scuria stable, from Old High German scura
barn; or from Old French escuier groom, from Vulgar Latin scutarius shield-bearer. In either case,
spelling influenced by Latin equus horse, which is unrelated.


bridegroom (n.)

Old English brydguma suitor, from bryd bride (see bride) + guma man (source also of Old Norse gumi,
Old High German gomo, cognate with Latin homo man; see homunculus). Ending altered 16c. by folk
etymology after groom (n.) groom, boy, lad (q.v.).    Common Germanic compound (compare Old Saxon
brudigumo, Old Norse bru&eth;gumi, Old High German brutigomo, German Br&auml;utigam), except in
Gothic, which used bru&thorn;sfa&thorn;s, literally bride's lord.


henchman (n.)

mid-14c., hengestman, later henshman (mid-15c.) high-ranking servant (usually of gentle birth),
attendant upon a king, nobleman, etc., originally groom, probably from man (n.) + Old English
hengest horse, stallion, gelding, from Proto-Germanic *hangistas (cognates: Old Frisian hengst,
Dutch hengest, German Hengst stallion), perhaps literally best at springing, from PIE *kenku-
(cognates: Greek kekiein to gush forth; Lithuanian sokti to jump, dance; Breton kazek a mare,
literally that which belongs to a stallion).    Perhaps modeled on Old Norse compound hesta-ma&eth;r
horse-boy, groom. The word became obsolete in England but was retained in Scottish as personal
attendant of a Highland chief, in which sense Scott revived it in literary English from 1810. Sense
of obedient or unscrupulous follower is first recorded 1839, probably based on a misunderstanding of
the word as used by Scott.


marshal (n.)

early 13c. as a surname; mid-13c. as high officer of the royal court; from Old French mareschal
commanding officer of an army; officer in charge of a household (Modern French mar&#233;chal),
originally stable officer, horse tender, groom (Frankish Latin mariscaluis) from Frankish *marhskalk
or a similar Germanic word, literally horse-servant (compare Old High German marahscalc groom,
Middle Dutch maerschalc), from Proto-Germanic *markhaz horse (see mare (n.1)) + *skalkaz servant
(source of Old English scealc servant, retainer, member of a crew, Dutch schalk rogue, wag, Gothic
skalks servant).    Cognate with Old English hors&thorn;egn. From c.1300 as stable officer; early
14c. as military commander, general in the army. For development history, compare constable. Also
from Germanic are Italian scalco steward, Spanish mariscal marshal.


morganatic (adj.)

1727, from French morganatique (18c.), from Medieval Latin matrimonium ad morganaticam marriage of
the morning, probably from Old High German *morgangeba (Middle High German morgengabe) morning gift,
corresponding to Old English morgengifu (see morn + gift). In an unequal marriage between a man of
royal blood and a common woman, this was a gift traditionally given to the wife on the morning after
consummation, representing the only share she and her children may claim in the husband's estate.
Also known as left-handed marriage, because the groom gives the bride his left hand instead of his
right, but sometimes this latter term is used of a class of marriage (especially in Germany) where
the spouse of inferior rank is not elevated, but the children inherit rights of succession. Related:
Morganatically.


constable (n.)

c.1200, chief household officer, justice of the peace, from Old French conestable (12c., Modern
French conn&eacute;table), steward, governor, principal officer of the Frankish king's household,
from Late Latin comes stabuli, literally count of the stable (established by Theodosian Code, c.438
C.E.), hence, chief groom. See count (n.). Second element is from Latin stabulum stable, standing
place (see stable (n.)). Probably a translation of a Germanic word. Meaning an officer of the peace
is from c.1600, transferred to police officer 1836. French reborrowed constable 19c. as English
police.


gift (n.)

mid-13c. (c.1100 in surnames), from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse gift, gipt gift, good
luck, from Proto-Germanic *giftiz (cognates: Old Saxon gift, Old Frisian jefte, Middle Dutch ghifte
gift, German Mitgift dowry), from PIE root *ghabh- to give or receive (see habit).  For German Gift
poison, see poison (n.). Old English cognate gift meant bride-price, marriage gift (by the groom),
dowry (Old English noun for giving, gift was related giefu). Sense of natural talent is c.1300,
perhaps from earlier sense of inspiration (late 12c.). As a verb from 16c., especially in gifted. As
a verb, giftwrap (also gift-wrap) attested by 1936.


