gross (v.)

to earn a total of, 1884, from gross (n.). Related: Grossed; grossing.


gross (adj.)

mid-14c., large; early 15c., coarse, plain, simple, from Old French gros big, thick, fat, tall,
pregnant; coarse, rude, awkward; ominous, important; arrogant (11c.), from Late Latin grossus thick,
coarse (of food or mind), of obscure origin, not in classical Latin. Said to be unrelated to Latin
crassus, which meant the same thing, or to German gross large, but said by Klein to be cognate with
Old Irish bres, Middle Irish bras big. Its meaning forked in English to glaring, flagrant, monstrous
(1580s) on the one hand and entire, total, whole (early 15c.) on the other. Meaning disgusting is
first recorded 1958 in U.S. student slang, from earlier use as an intensifier of unpleasant things
(gross stupidity, etc.). Earlier coarse in behavior or manners (1530s) and, of things, inferior,
common (late 15c.). Gross national product first recorded 1947.


gross (n.)

a dozen dozen, early 15c., from Old French grosse douzaine large dozen; see gross (adj.). Earlier as
the name of a measure of weight equal to one-eighth of a dram (early 15c.). Sense of total profit
(opposed to net) is from 1520s.


grossness (n.)

size, early 15c., from gross + -ness.


grossly (adv.)

1520s, from gross + -ly (2).


grocer (n.)

early 15c. (mid-13c. as a surname), one who buys and sells in gross, from Anglo-French grosser, Old
French grossier, from Medieval Latin grossarius wholesaler, literally dealer in quantity, from Late
Latin grossus coarse (of food), great, gross (see gross). Sense of a merchant selling individual
items of food is 16c.


tare (n.2)

allowable difference between gross and net weight, deduction made from gross weight of goods to
account for approximate weight of packaging or container holding them, late 15c., from Middle French
tare wastage in goods, deficiency, imperfection (15c.), from Italian tara, Medieval Latin tara, from
Arabic tarah, literally thing deducted or rejected, that which is thrown away, from taraha to
reject.


GNP (n.)

abbreviation of gross national product, attested by 1953.


unrefined (adj.)

1590s, not refined in manners, from un- (1) not + past participle of refine (v.). Meaning not free
from gross matter is recorded from 1610s.


grosbeak (n.)

1670s, partial translation of French grosbec; see gross + beak.


pinguid (adj.)

1630s, from Latin pinguis fat (adj.), juicy, figuratively dull, gross, heavy; comfortable, from stem
of pinguere, from PIE *pei- fat, sap, juice (see pine (n.)).


grogram (n.)

1560s, from Middle French gros grain coarse grain or texture; see gross + grain (n.).


solecism (n.)

gross grammatical error; loosely any absurdity or incongruity, 1570s, from Middle French
sol&eacute;cisme (16c.), from Latin soloecismus mistake in speaking or writing, from Greek
soloikismos to speak (Greek) incorrectly, from soloikos ungrammatical utterance, properly a speaking
like the people of Soloi, an Athenian colony in Cilicia (modern Mezitli in Turkey), whose dialect
the Athenians considered barbarous. Related: Solecistic.


middlebrow

1911 (adj.), 1912 (n.), from middle + brow (compare highbrow, lowbrow).    [T]here is an alarmingly
wide chasm, I might almost say a vacuum, between the high-brow, who considers reading either as a
trade or as a form of intellectual wrestling, and the low-brow, who is merely seeking for gross
thrills. It is to be hoped that culture will soon be democratized through some less conventional
system of education, giving rise to a new type that might be called the middle-brow, who will
consider books as a source of intellectual enjoyment. [The Nation, Jan, 25, 1912]


newspaper (n.)

1660s, though the thing itself is older (see gazette); from news (n.) + paper (n.).    [T]he
newspaper that drops on your doorstep is a partial, hasty, incomplete, inevitably somewhat flawed
and inaccurate rendering of some of the things we have heard about in the past twenty-four hours --
distorted, despite our best efforts to eliminate gross bias, by the very process of compression that
makes it possible for you to lift it from the doorstep and read it in about an hour. If we labeled
the product accurately, then we could immediately add: But it's the best we could do under the
circumstances, and we will be back tomorrow with a corrected and updated version. [David Broder,
Pulitzer Prize acceptance speech, 1973]


groschen (n.)

1610s, small silver coin formerly used in Germany and Austria, from German groschen, altered from
Czech gro&#353;, name of a coin (about one-thirtieth of a thaler), from Medieval Latin (denarius)
grossus, literally a thick coin, from Latin grossus thick (see gross, and compare groat).


roister (v.)

bluster, swagger, be bold, noisy, vaunting, or turbulent, 1580s, from an obsolete noun roister noisy
bully (1550s, displaced by 19c. by roisterer), from Middle French ruistre ruffian, from Old French
ruiste boorish, gross, uncouth, from Latin rusticus (see rustic (adj.)). Related: Roistered;
roistering. Ralph Royster-Doyster is the title and lead character of what is sometimes called the
first English comedy (Udall, 1555).


intestine (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French intestin (14c.) or directly from Latin intestinum a gut, in plural,
intestines, bowels, noun use of neuter of adjective intestinus 창&euro;&oelig;inward,
internal창&euro;? (see intestines). Distinction of large and small intestines in Middle English was
made under the terms gross and subtle. The word also was used as an adjective in English from 1530s
with a sense of 창&euro;&oelig;internal, domestic, civil.창&euro;?


engross (v.)

c.1400, to buy up the whole stock of (in Anglo-French from c.1300), from Old French en gros in bulk,
in a large quantity, at wholesale, as opposed to en detail. See gross.    Figurative sense of absorb
the whole attention is first attested 1709. A parallel engross, meaning to write (something) in
large letters, is from Anglo-French engrosser, from Old French en gros in large (letters). Related:
Engrossed; engrossing.


carminative (adj.)

early 15c., from Latin carminat- (past participle stem of carminare to card, from carmen, genitive
carminis, a card for wool or flax, which is related to carrere to card; see card (v.2)) + -ive. As a
noun from 1670s.    A medical term from the old theory of humours. The object of carminatives is to
expel wind, but the theory was that they dilute and relax the gross humours from whence the wind
arises, combing them out like knots in wool. [Hensleigh Wedgwood, A Dictionary of English Etymology,
1859-65]


Dachau

town in Bavaria, Germany, from Old High German daha clay + ouwa island, describing its situation on
high ground by the Amper River. Infamous as the site of a Nazi concentration camp nearby, opened in
1933 as a detention site for political prisoners and surrendered to the U.S. Army April 29, 1945.
Not a death camp per se, but as it was one of the places where inmates from other camps were sent as
the Reich collapsed at the end of the war, and as it was one of the few large camps overrun by
British or American forces, it has come to symbolize Nazi atrocities in many minds in the West.
Arbeit Macht Frei was spelled out in metal on the gate (as it was on other concentration camps, such
as Gross-Rosen, Sachsenhausen, Theresienstadt).


whore (n.)

1530s spelling alteration (see wh-) of Middle English hore, from Old English hore prostitute,
harlot, from Proto-Germanic *horaz (fem. *horon-) one who desires (cognates: Old Norse hora
adulteress, Danish hore, Swedish hora, Dutch hoer, Old High German huora whore; in Gothic only in
the masc. hors adulterer, fornicator, also as a verb, horinon commit adultery), from PIE *ka- to
like, desire, a base that has produced words in other languages for lover (cognates: Latin carus
dear; Old Irish cara friend; Old Persian kama desire; Sanskrit Kama, name of the Hindu god of love,
kamah love, desire, the first element in Kama Sutra).   Whore itself is perhaps a Germanic euphemism
for a word that has not survived. The Old English vowel naturally would have yielded *hoor, which is
the pronunciation in some dialects; it might have shifted by influence of Middle English homonym
hore physical filth, slime, also moral corruption, sin, from Old English horh. The wh- form became
current 16c. A general term of abuse for an unchaste or lewd woman (without regard to money) from at
least c.1200. Of male prostitutes from 1630s. Whore of Babylon is from Rev. xvii:1, 5, etc. In
Middle English with occasional plural forms horen, heoranna.    The word, with its derivatives, is
now avoided polite speech; its survival in literature, so as it survives, is due to the fact that it
is a favorite word with Shakspere (who uses it, with its derivatives, 99 times) and is common in the
authorized English version of the Bible ... though the American revisers recommended the
substitution of harlot as less gross .... [Century Dictionary]     Some equivalent words in other
languages also derive from sources not originally pejorative, such as Bohemian nevestka, diminutive
of nevesta bride; Dutch deern, German dirne originally girl, lass, wench; also perhaps Old French
pute, perhaps literally girl, fem. of Vulgar Latin *puttus (but perhaps rather from Latin putidus
stinking; see poontang). Welsh putain whore is from French, probably via Middle English. Among other
languages, Greek porne prostitute is related to pernemi sell, with an original notion probably of a
female slave sold for prostitution; Latin meretrix is literally one who earns wages (source of Irish
mertrech, Old English miltestre whore, prostitute).    The vulgar Roman word was scortum, literally
skin, hide. Another term was lupa, literally she-wolf (preserved in Spanish loba, Italian lupa,
French louve; see wolf (n.)). And of course there was prostituta, literally placed in front, thus
publicly exposed, from the fem. past participle of prostituere (see prostitute (n.)). Another Old
Norse term was sk&aelig;kja, which yielded Danish sk&oslash;ge, Swedish sk&ouml;ka; probably from
Middle Low German schoke, which is perhaps from schode foreskin of a horse's penis, perhaps with the
sense of skin (compare Latin scortum) or perhaps via an intermediary sense of vagina. Spanish
ramera, Portuguese ramiera are from fem. form of ramero young bird of prey, literally little branch,
from ramo branch. Breton gast is cognate with Welsh gast bitch, of uncertain origin. Compare also
strumpet, harlot.    Old Church Slavonic ljubodejica is from ljuby dejati fornicate, a compound from
ljuby love + dejati put, perform. Russian bljad whore derives from Old Church Slavonic bladinica,
from bladu fornication. Polish nierz&#261;dnica is literally disorderly woman. Sanskrit vecya is a
derivation of veca- house, dwelling, especially house of ill-repute, brothel. Another term,
pumccali, means literally one who runs after men. Avestan jahika is literally woman, but only of
evil creatures; another term is kunairi, from pejorative prefix ku- + nairi woman.


