grotesque (adj.)

c.1600s, originally a noun (1560s), from Middle French crotesque (16c., Modern French grotesque),
from Italian grottesco, literally of a cave, from grotta (see grotto). The usual explanation is that
the word first was used of paintings found on the walls of basements of Roman ruins (Italian pittura
grottesca), which OED finds intrinsically plausible. Originally fanciful, fantastic, sense became
pejorative after mid-18c. Related: Grotesquely; grotesqueness.


antic (n.)

1520s, grotesque or comical gesture, from Italian antico antique, from Latin antiquus old (see
antique). Originally (like grotesque) a 16c. Italian word referring to the strange and fantastic
representations on ancient murals unearthed around Rome (especially originally the Baths of Titus,
rediscovered 16c.); later extended to any bizarre thing or behavior, in which sense it first arrived
in English. As an adjective in English from 1580s, grotesque, bizarre.


golliwog (n.)

grotesque blackface doll, 1895, coined by English children's book author and illustrator Florence K.
Upton (1873-1922), perhaps from golly + polliwog.


mug (n.2)

a person's face, 1708, possibly from mug (n.1), on notion of drinking mugs shaped like grotesque
faces. Sense of portrait or photograph in police records (as in mug shot, 1950) had emerged by 1887.
Hence, also, a person (especially a criminal), 1890.


gargoyle (n.)

grotesque carved waterspout, late 13c., gargurl, from Old French gargole throat, waterspout (see
gargle).


freakish (adj.)

1650s, capricious, from freak (n.) + -ish. Meaning grotesque is recorded from 1805. Related:
Freakishly; freakishness.


grotty (n.)

slang shortening of grotesque, it had a brief vogue 1964 as part of the argot popularized by The
Beatles in A Hard Day's Night. It unconsciously echoes Middle English groti muddy, slimy, from Old
English grotig earthy, from grot particle.


burlesque (n.)

1660s, derisive imitation, grotesque parody, from French burlesque (16c.), from Italian burlesco,
from burla joke, fun, mockery, possibly ultimately from Late Latin burra trifle, nonsense, literally
flock of wool. Modern sense of variety show featuring striptease is American English, 1870.
Originally (1857) the sketches at the end of minstrel shows. As a verb, from 1670s.


samba (n.)

Brazilian dance of African origin, 1885, Zemba, from Portuguese samba, shortened form of zambacueca,
a type of dance, probably altered (by influence of zamacueco stupid) from zambapalo, the name of a
grotesque dance, itself an alteration of zampapalo stupid man, from zamparse to bump, crash. As a
verb from 1949.


scarecrow (n.)

1550s, from scare (v.) + crow (n.). Earliest reference is to a person employed to scare birds.
Meaning device of straw and cloth in grotesque resemblance of a man, set up in a grain field or
garden to frighten crows, is implied by 1580s; hence gaunt, ridiculous person (1590s). The older
name for such a thing was shewel. Shoy-hoy apparently is another old word for a straw-stuffed
scarecrow (Cobbett began using it as a political insult in 1819 and others picked it up; OED defines
it as one who scares away birds from a sown field, and says it is imitative of their cry).


marmoset (n.)

small monkey, late 14c., from Old French marmoset grotesque figurine; fool, jester (late 13c.),
perhaps a variant of marmote long-tailed monkey, ape, then, as a term of endearment, little child;
said to be from marmonner, marmotter to mutter, mumble, probably of imitative origin. Some French
authorities suggest a derivation of marmoset from marmor marble, as if little marble figurine.


grimace (n.)

1650s, from French grimace, from Middle French grimache, from Old French grimuce grotesque face,
ugly mug, possibly from Frankish (compare Old Saxon grima face mask, Old English grima mask,
helmet), from same Germanic root as grim (adj.). With pejorative suffix -azo (from Latin -aceus).


baboon (n.)

type of old world ape, c.1400, babewyn, earlier a grotesque figure used in architecture or
decoration (early 14c.), from French babouin baboon, from Old French baboin ape, earlier simpleton,
dimwit, fool (13c.), also gaping figure (such as a gargoyle), so perhaps from Old French baboue
grimacing; or perhaps it is imitative of the ape's babbling speech-like cries. Also see -oon. German
Pavian baboon is from Dutch baviaan, from Middle Dutch baubijn, a borrowing of the Old French word.
Century Dictionary says Arabic maimun probably is from the European words.


