growl (v.)

1660s, from Middle English grollen to rumble, growl (early 15c.), from Old French grouler to rumble,
said to be from Frankish; probably ultimately of imitative origin. Related: Growled; growling. The
noun is 1727, from the verb.


growler (n.)

pitcher or other vessel for beer, 1885, American English, of uncertain origin; apparently an agent
noun from growl (v.). It owes its popularity to laws prohibiting sale of liquor on Sundays and thus
the tippler's need to stock up. Also in early use in the expression work the growler go on a spree.
Also late 19c. slang for a four-wheeled cab.


snarl (n.2)

a sharp growl accompanied by a display of the teeth, 1610s, from snarl (v.2).


arr (v.)

to growl like a dog, late 15c., imitative. In classical times, the letter R was called littera
canina the dog letter (Persius).


brontosaurus (n.)

1879, Modern Latin, from Greek bronte thunder (perhaps from PIE imitative root *bhrem- to growl) +
-saurus. Brontes was the name of one of the Cyclopes in Greek mythology.


Norn (n.)

1770, from Old Norse norn (plural nornir), one of the female fates of Scandinavian mythology,
related to Swedish dialectal norna to warn, to communicate secretly, perhaps ultimately imitative of
low murmuring (compare Middle High German narren to growl, snarl).


snarl (v.2)

growl and bare the teeth, 1580s, perhaps from Dutch or Low German snarren to rattle, probably of
imitative origin (compare German schnarren to rattle, schnurren to hum, buzz). Meaning speak in a
harsh manner first recorded 1690s. Related: Snarled; snarling.


cur (n.)

early 13c., curre, earlier kurdogge used of both vicious dogs and cowardly dogs, probably from Old
Norse kurra or Middle Low German korren both echoic, both meaning to growl. Compare Swedish
dialectal kurre, Middle Dutch corre house dog.


grumble (v.)

1580s, from Middle French grommeler mutter between the teeth or directly from Middle Dutch grommelen
murmur, mutter, grunt, from grommen to rumble, growl. Imitative, or perhaps akin to grim. Related:
Grumbled; grumbling.


schnauzer (n.)

breed of terrier, 1923, from German Schnauzer, literally growler, from schnauzen to snarl, growl,
from Schnauze snout, muzzle, which is related to Middle English snute, snoute snout (see snout).


