gruesome (adj.)

1560s, with -some (1) + Middle English gruen feel horror, shudder (c.1300); not recorded in Old
English or Norse, possibly from Middle Dutch gruwen or Middle Low German gruwen shudder with fear
(compare German grausam cruel), or from a Scandinavian source (such as Danish grusom cruel, grue to
dread, though others hold that these are Low German loan-words). One of the many Scottish words
popularized in England by Scott's novels.


grisly (adj.)

Old English grislic horrible, dreadful, from root of grisan to shudder, fear, with cognates in Old
Frisian grislik horrible, Middle Dutch grisen to shudder, Dutch griezelen, German grausen to
shudder, fear, Old High German grisenlik horrible; of unknown origin; Watkins connects it with the
PIE root *ghrei- to rub, on notion of to grate on the mind. See also gruesome, to which it probably
is connected in some way.


kibosh (n.)

1836, kye-bosk, in British English slang phrase put the kibosh on, of unknown origin, despite
intense speculation. The earliest citation is in Dickens. Looks Yiddish, but its original appearance
in a piece set in the heavily Irish Seven Dials neighborhood in the West End of London seems to
argue against this. One candidate is Irish caip bh&aacute;is, caip&iacute;n b&aacute;is cap of
death, sometimes said to be the black cap a judge would don when pronouncing a death sentence, but
in other sources identified as a gruesome method of execution employed by Brit. forces against 1798
insurgents [Bernard Share, Slanguage, A Dictionary of Irish Slang]. Or the word might somehow be
connected with Turkish bosh (see bosh).


macabre (adj.)

early 15c., originally in reference to a kind of morality show or allegorical representation of
death and his victims, from Old French (danse) Macabr&eacute; (dance) of Death (1376), of uncertain
origin, probably a translation of Medieval Latin (Chorea) Machab&aelig;orum, literally dance of the
Maccabees (leaders of the Jewish revolt against Syro-Hellenes; see Maccabees). The association with
the dance of death seems to be from vivid descriptions of the martyrdom of the Maccabees in the
Apocryphal books. The abstracted sense of gruesome is first attested 1842 in French, 1889 in
English.    The typical form which the allegory takes is that of a series of pictures, sculptured or
painted, in which Death appears, either as a dancing skeleton or as a shrunken corpse wrapped in
grave-clothes to persons representing every age and condition of life, and leads them all in a dance
to the grave. [Encyclopaedia Britannica, 11th ed., 1911]


