grunt (v.)

Old English grunnettan to grunt, frequentative of grunian to grunt, probably imitative (compare
Danish grynte, Old High German grunnizon, German grunzen to grunt, Latin grunnire to grunt).
Related: Grunted; grunting.


grunt (n.)

1550s, from grunt (v.); as a type of fish, from 1713; meaning infantry soldier emerged in U.S.
military slang during Vietnam War (first recorded in print 1969); used since 1900 of various low-
level workers. Grunt work first recorded 1977.


gruntle (v.)

1938, in gruntled pleased, satisfied, a back-formation from disgruntled. The original verb (early
15c.) meant to utter a little or low grunt.


grunion (n.)

1917, from American Spanish gru&ntilde;on grunting fish, from grunir to grunt, from Latin grunnire,
from Greek gryzein to grunt, from gry a grunt. The unrelated American fish called the grunt is so
called from the noise they make when taken.


gurnard (n.)

small marine fish, early 14c., from Old French gournart (13c.), formed by metathesis of gronir, from
Latin grunire to grunt. The fish so called for the sound it makes when pulled from the water.


disgruntle (v.)

1680s, from dis- entirely, very + obsolete gruntle to grumble (Middle English gruntelen, early
15c.), frequentative of grunt (v.).


groyne (n.)

strong, low sea wall, 1580s, perhaps from obsolete groin pig's snout (c.1300; the wall so called
because it was thought to look like one), from Old French groin, from Latin grunnire grunt.


motto (n.)

1580s, from Italian motto a saying, legend attached to a heraldic design, from Late Latin muttum
grunt, word, from Latin muttire to mutter, mumble, murmur (see mutter).


grumble (v.)

1580s, from Middle French grommeler mutter between the teeth or directly from Middle Dutch grommelen
murmur, mutter, grunt, from grommen to rumble, growl. Imitative, or perhaps akin to grim. Related:
Grumbled; grumbling.


grouse (v.)

complain, 1885 (implied in grouser), British Army slang, of uncertain origin but perhaps from Norman
French dialectal groucer, from Old French groucier to murmur, grumble, of imitative origin (compare
Greek gru a grunt, gruzein to grumble). Related: Groused; grousing. As a noun from 1918, from the
verb.


mutter (v.)

early 14c., moteren to mumble, from a common PIE imitative *mut- to grunt, mutter (cognates: Old
Norse mu&eth;la to murmur, Latin muttire to mutter, Old High German mutilon to murmur, mutter; to
drizzle), with frequentative suffix -er. Related: Muttered; muttering.


grump (n.)

ill-humor, 1727, in humps and grumps surly remarks, later the grumps a fit of ill-humor (1844), then
a person in ill humor (1900); perhaps an extended sense of grum morose, surly, which probably is
related to Danish grum cruel; or perhaps suggested by grumble, grunt, etc.


mot (n.)

a witty saying, 1580s, from French mot (12c.) remark, short speech, literally word, cognate of
Italian motto, from Latin mutum grunt, murmur (see mutter). Mot juste (1912) is French, literally
exact word, the precisely appropriate expression in some situation.The mot juste is an expression
which readers would like to buy of writers who use it, as one buys one's neighbour's bantam cock for
the sake of hearing its voice no more. [Fowler]


retch (v.)

1540s, originally to clear the throat, to cough up phlegm, from Old English hr&aelig;can to cough
up, spit (related to hraca phlegm), from Proto-Germanic *khr&aelig;kijan (cognates: Old High German
rahhison to clear one's throat), of imitative origin (compare Lithuanian kregeti to grunt). Meaning
to make efforts to vomit is from 1850; sense of to vomit is first attested 1888. Related: Retched;
retching.


ground (n.)

Old English grund bottom, foundation, ground, surface of the earth, especially bottom of the sea (a
sense preserved in run aground), from Proto-Germanic *grundus, which seems to have meant deep place
(cognates: Old Frisian, Old Saxon, Danish, Swedish grund, Dutch grond, Old High German grunt, German
Grund ground, soil, bottom; Old Norse grunn a shallow place, grund field, plain, grunnr bottom). No
known cognates outside Germanic. Sense of reason, motive first attested c.1200; electrical sense is
from 1870.


