guise (n.)

late 13c., style or fashion of attire, from Old French guise manner, fashion, way, from Frankish
*wisa or some similar Germanic source (cognate with Old High German wisa manner, wise; see wise
(n.)). Sense of assumed appearance is from 1660s, from earlier meaning mask, disguise (c.1500).


guiser (n.)

masquerader, mummer, late 15c., agent noun from guise.


disguise (v.)

c.1300, from Old French desguiser (11c.) disguise, change one's appearance, from des- away, off (see
dis-) + guise style, appearance (see guise). Originally primarily to put out of one's usual manner
(of dress, etc.). Oldest sense preserved in phrase disguised with liquor (1560s).It is most absurdly
said, in popular language, of any man, that he is disguised in liquor; for, on the contrary, most
men are disguised by sobriety. [Thomas de Quincy, Confessions of an English Opium-Eater, 1856]
Related: Disguised; disguising.


geezer (n.)

1885, variant of obsolete Cockney guiser mummer (late 15c.; see guise).


slum (v.)

visit slums of a city, especially for diversion or amusement, often under guise of philanthropy,
1884, from slum (n.). Pastime popularized by East End novels. Earlier it meant to visit slums for
disreputable purposes or in search of vice (1860). Related: Slumming.


Beguine (n.)

late 15c., from French b&eacute;guine (13c.), Medieval Latin beguina, a member of a women's
spiritual order said to have been founded c.1180 in Liege in the Low Countries. They are said to
take their name from the surname of Lambert le B&egrave;gue Lambert the Stammerer, a Liege priest
who was instrumental in their founding, and it's likely the word was pejorative at first.    The
order generally preserved its reputation, though it quickly drew imposters who did not; nonetheless
it eventually was condemned as heretical. A male order, called Beghards founded communities by the
1220s in imitation of them, but they soon degenerated (compare Old French beguin (male) Beguin, also
hypocrite) and wandered begging in the guise of religion; they likely were the source of the words
beg and beggar, though there is disagreement over whether Beghard produced Middle Dutch beggaert
mendicant or was produced by it.    Cole Porter's Begin the Beguine (1935) refers to a kind of
popular dance of West Indian origin, from French colloquial b&eacute;guin an infatuation, boyfriend,
girlfriend, earlier child's bonnet, and before that nun's headdress (14c.), from Middle Dutch
beggaert, ultimately the same word.


