gullible (adj.)

1825, apparently a back-formation from gullibility. Gullable is attested from 1818.


cull (n.)

dupe, saphead, rogues' slang from late 16c., perhaps a shortening of cullion base fellow, originally
testicle (from French couillon, from Old French coillon testicle; worthless fellow, dolt, from Latin
coleus, literally strainer bag; see cojones), though another theory traces it to Romany (Gypsy)
chulai man. Also sometimes cully, though some authorities assert cully was the canting term for dupe
and cull was generic man, fellow, without implication of gullibility. Compare also gullible.


marine (n.)

14c., seacoast; see marine (adj.). Meaning collective shipping of a country is from 1660s. Meaning
soldier who serves on a ship is from 1670s, a separate borrowing from French marine, from the French
adjective. Phrase tell that to the marines (1806) originally was the first half of a retort
expressing skepticism:    Upon my soul, sir, answered the lieutenant, when I thought she scorned my
passion, I wept like a child.    Belay there! cried the captain; you may tell that to the marines,
but I'll be d----d if the sailors will believe it. [John Moore, The Post-Captain; or, the Wooden
Walls Well Manned, 1805]    The book, a rollicking sea romance/adventure novel, was popular in its
day and the remark is a recurring punch line in it (repeated at least four times). It was written by
naval veteran John Davis (1774-1854) but published under the name John Moore. Walsh records that,
The marines are among the 'jolly' jack-tars a proverbially gullible lot, capable of swallowing any
yarn, in size varying from a yawl-boat to a full-rigged frigate.


green (n., adj.)

Old English grene green, young, immature, raw, earlier groeni, from Proto-Germanic *gronja-
(cognates: Old Saxon grani, Old Frisian grene, Old Norse gr&aelig;nn, Danish gr&oslash;n, Dutch
groen, Old High German gruoni, German gr&uuml;n), from PIE root *ghre- grow (see grass), through
sense of color of living plants.    Meaning a field, grassy place was in Old English. Sense of of
tender age, youthful is from early 15c.; hence gullible (c.1600). The color of jealousy at least
since Shakespeare (1596); Greensleeves, ballad of an inconstant lady-love, is from 1570s. Green
light in figurative sense of permission is from 1937. Green and red as signals on railways first
attested 1883, as nighttime substitutes for semaphore flags. Green beret originally British commando
is from 1949. Green room room for actors when not on stage is from 1701; presumably a well-known one
was painted green.


