gull (n.2)

cant term for dupe, sucker, credulous person, 1590s, of uncertain origin. Perhaps from verb meaning
to dupe, cheat (1540s), earlier to swallow (1520s), ultimately from gull throat, gullet (early
15c.); see gullet. Or it is perhaps from (or influenced by) the bird (see gull (n.1)); in either
case with a sense of someone who will swallow anything thrown at him. Another possibility is Middle
English dialectal gull newly hatched bird (late 14c.), which is perhaps from Old Norse golr yellow,
from the hue of its down.


gull (n.1)

shore bird, early 15c. (in a cook book), probably from Brythonic Celtic, compare Welsh gwylan gull,
Cornish guilan, Breton goelann; all from Old Celtic *voilenno-. Replaced Old English m&aelig;w (see
mew (n.1)).


gullibility (n.)

1793, earlier cullibility (1728), probably from gull (n.2) dupe, sucker + -ability.


Ellis Island

sandy island in mouth of Hudson River, said to have been called Gull Island by local Indians and
Oyster Island by the Dutch, renamed Gull Island after the British took over, then Gibbet Island
because pirates were hanged there. Sold to Samuel Ellis in 1785, who made it a picnic spot and gave
it his name. Sold by his heirs in 1808 to New York State and acquired that year by the U.S. War
Department for coastal defenses. Vacant after the American Civil War until the government opened an
immigration station there in 1892 to replace Castle Island.


anorexia nervosa (n.)

emaciation as a result of severe emotional disturbance, coined 1873 by William W. Gull (1816-1890),
who also proposed apepsia hysterica as a name for it. See anorexia.


skua (n.)

type of predatory gull, 1670s, from Faeroese skugvur, related to Old Norse skufr seagull, tuft,
tassel, and possibly to skauf fox's tail.


rook (v.)

to defraud by cheating (originally especially in a game), 1590s, from rook (n.1) in some sense (such
as a gull, simpleton, but this is not attested until 17c.). Related: Rooked; rooking.


seagull (n.)

1540s, from sea + gull (n.).


molly (n.)

seabird, 1857, short for mollymawk, from Dutch mallemok, from mal foolish + mok gull.


tern (n.)

gull-like shore bird (subfamily Sterninae), 1670s, via East Anglian dialect, from a Scandinavian
source (compare Danish terne, Swedish t&auml;rna, F&aelig;roese terna) related to Old Norse
&thorn;erna tern (also maid-servant), cognate with Old English stearn.


mew (n.1)

seagull, Old English m&aelig;w, from Proto-Germanic *maigwis (cognates: Old Saxon mew, Frisian meau,
Middle Dutch and Middle Low German mewe, Dutch meeuw gull), imitative of its cry. Old French moue
(Modern French mouette) and Lithuanian mevas are Germanic loan-words.


starling (n.)

Sturnus vulgaris, Old English st&aelig;rlinc starling, with diminutive suffix -linc + st&aelig;r
starling, from Proto-Germanic *staraz (cognates: Old English stearn, Old Norse stari, Norwegian
stare, Old High German stara, German star starling), from PIE *storo- starling (cognates: Latin
sturnus starling, Old Prussian starnite gull).


weep (v.)

Old English wepan shed tears, cry; bewail, mounr over; complain (class VII strong verb; past tense
weop, past participle wopen), from Proto-Germanic *wopjan (cognates: Old Norse op, Old High German
wuof shout, shouting, crying, Old Saxon wopian, Gothic wopjan to shout, cry out, weep), from PIE
*wab- to cry, scream (cognates: Latin vapulare to be flogged; Old Church Slavonic vupiti to call,
vypu gull). Of water naturally forming on stones, walls, etc., from c.1400. Related: Wept; weeping;
weeper.


gold (n.)

Old English gold, from Proto-Germanic *gulth- (cognates: Old Saxon, Old Frisian, Old High German
gold, German Gold, Middle Dutch gout, Dutch goud, Old Norse gull, Danish guld, Gothic gul&thorn;),
from PIE root *ghel- (2) to shine, with derivatives referring to bright materials and gold (compare
Old Church Slavonic zlato, Russian zoloto, Sanskrit hiranyam, Old Persian daraniya-, Avestan
zaranya- gold; see glass).    As an adjective from c.1200. In reference to the color of the metal,
it is recorded from c.1400. Gold rush is attested from 1859, originally in an Australian context.
Gold medal as first prize in a contest is from 1908.


