haggle (v.)

1570s, to cut unevenly (implied in haggler), frequentative of haggen to chop (see hack (v.1)). Sense
of argue about price first recorded c.1600, probably from notion of chopping away. Related: Haggled;
haggling.


needle (v.)

1715, to sew or pierce with a needle, from needle (n.). Meaning goad, provoke (1881) probably is
from earlier meaning haggle in making a bargain (1812). Related: Needled; needling.


barter (v.)

mid-15c., apparently from Old French barater to barter, cheat, deceive, haggle (also, to have sexual
intercourse), 12c., of uncertain origin, perhaps from a Celtic language (compare Irish brath
treachery). Connection between trading and cheating exists in several languages. Related: Bartered;
bartering. The noun is first recorded 1590s, from the verb.


argle (v.)

1580s to argue obstinately, from argue, perhaps by influence of haggle. Reduplicated form argle-
bargle (sometimes argy-bargy) wrangling is attested from 1872.


dicker (v.)

haggle, bargain in a petty way, 1802, American English, perhaps from dicker (n.) a unit or package
of tens, especially hides (attested from late 13c.), perhaps from Latin decuria parcel of ten
(supposedly a unit of barter on the Roman frontier; compare German Decher set of ten things), from
decem ten (see ten) on model of centuria from centum.


regatta (n.)

1650s, name of a boat race among gondoliers held on the Grand Canal in Venice, from Italian
(Venetian dialect) regatta, literally contention for mastery, from rigattare to compete, haggle,
sell at retail. [Klein's sources, however, suggest a source in Italian riga row, rank, from a
Germanic source and related to English row (v.).] The general meaning of boat race, yacht race is
usually considered to have begun with a race on the Thames by that name June 23, 1775 (see OED), but
there is evidence that it was used as early as 1768.


bargain (v.)

late 14c., from Old French bargaignier (12c., Modern French barguigner) to haggle over the price,
perhaps from Frankish *borganjan to lend or some other Germanic source, ultimately from Proto-
Germanic *borgan (cognates: Old High German borgen; Old English borgian, source of borrow). Another
suggestion is that the French word comes from Late Latin barca a barge, because it carries goods to
and fro. There are difficulties with both suggestions. Related: Bargained; bargaining.


challenge (v.)

c.1200, to rebuke, from Old French chalongier complain, protest; haggle, quibble, from Vulgar Latin
calumniare to accuse falsely, from Latin calumniari to accuse falsely, misrepresent, slander, from
calumnia trickery (see calumny).    From late 13c. as to object to, take exception to; c.1300 as to
accuse, especially to accuse falsely, also to call to account; late 14c. as to call to fight. Also
used in Middle English with sense claim, take to oneself. Related: Challenged; challenging.


