hail (v.1)

to call from a distance, 1560s, originally nautical, from hail (interj.). Related: Hailed; hailing.
Hail fellow well met is 1580s, from a familiar greeting. Hail Mary (c.1300) is the angelic
salutation (Latin ave Maria) in Luke i:58, used as a devotional recitation. As a desperation play in
U.S. football, attested by 1940. To hail from is 1841, originally nautical. Hail, Columbia, the
popular patriotic song, was a euphemism for hell in American English slang from c.1850-1910.


hail (n.)

frozen rain, Old English h&aelig;gl, hagol (Mercian hegel) hail, hailstorm, also the name of the
rune for H, from Proto-Germanic *haglaz (cognates: Old Frisian heil, Old Saxon, Old High German
hagal, Old Norse hagl, German Hagel hail), probably from PIE *kaghlo- pebble (cognates: Greek
kakhlex round pebble).


hail (v.2)

Old English hagolian, from root of hail (n.). Related: Hailed; hailing. Figurative use from mid-15c.


hailstorm (n.)

1690s, from hail (n.) + storm (n.).


hailstone (n.)

Old English hagolstan; see hail (n.) + stone (n.).


hail (interj.)

greetings! c.1200, from Old Norse heill health, prosperity, good luck, or a similar Scandinavian
source, and in part from Old English hals, shortening of w&aelig;s h&aelig;il be healthy (see health
and also wassail).


chalazion (n.)

small tumor in the eyelid, 1708, from Greek khalazion, diminutive of khalaza hail, hailstone; small
lump or knot; pimple, from PIE root *gheled- hail.


ave

hail, also farewell, early 13c. (in reference to the Ave Maria), from Latin ave, second person
singular imperative of avere to be or fare well.


blizzard (n.)

strong, sustained snowstorm, 1859, origin obscure (perhaps somehow connected with blaze (n.1)); it
came into general use in the U.S. in this sense the hard winter 1880-81. OED says it probably is
more or less onomatop&#339;ic, and adds there is nothing to indicate a French origin. Before that it
typically meant violent blow, also hail of gunfire in American English from 1829, and blizz violent
rainstorm is attested from 1770. The winter storm sense perhaps is originally a colloquial
figurative use in the Upper Midwest of the U.S.


Sieg Heil (interj.)

Nazi salute, German, literally hail victory; from German Sieg victory, from Old High German sigu
(see Siegfried), second element from Proto-Germanic *hailitho (see health).


sleet (n.)

c.1300, slete, either from an unrecorded Old English *slete, *slyte, related to Middle High German
sloz, Middle Low German sloten (plural) hail, from Proto-Germanic *slautjan- (cognates: dialectal
Norwegian slutr, Danish slud, Swedish sloud sleet), from root *slaut-.


Columbia

poetic name for United States of America, earlier for the British colonies there, 1730s, also the
nation's female personification, from name of Christopher Columbus (also see Colombia) with Latin
country ending -ia. A popular name for places and institutions in the U.S. in the post-Revolutionary
years, when former tributes to king and crown were out of fashion: such as Columbia University (New
York, U.S.) founded in 1754 as King's College; re-named 1784. Also District of Columbia (1791, as
Territory of Columbia); Hail, Columbia (Joseph Hopkinson, 1798), Barlow's Columbiad (1809).


salvo (n.)

1719, alteration of salva (1590s) simultaneous discharge of guns, from Italian salva salute, volley
(French salve, 16c., is from Italian), from Latin salve hail!, literally be in good health!, the
usual Roman greeting, regarded as imperative of salvere to be in good health, but properly vocative
of salvus healthy (see safe (adj.)). The notion is of important visitors greeted with a volley of
gunfire into the air; applied afterward to any concentrated fire from guns.


snow (v.)

c.1300, from the noun, replacing Old English sniwan, which would have yielded modern snew (which
existed as a parallel form until 17c. and, in Yorkshire, even later), from the root of snow (n.).
The Old English verb is cognate with Middle Dutch sneuuwen, Dutch sneeuwen, Old Norse snjova,
Swedish sn&#246;ga.  Also &thorn;ikke as snow &thorn;at snew,  Or al so hail &thorn;at stormes blew.
[Robert Mannyng of Brunne, transl. Wace's Chronicle, c.1330]    The figurative sense of overwhelm;
surround, cover, and imprison (as deep snows can do to livestock) is 1880, American English, in
phrase to snow (someone) under. Snow job strong, persistent persuasion in a dubious cause is World
War II armed forces slang, probably from the same metaphoric image.


meteor (n.)

late 15c., any atmospheric phenomenon, from Middle French meteore (13c.) and directly from Medieval
Latin meteorum (nominative meteora), from Greek ta meteora the celestial phenomena, things in heaven
above, plural of meteoron, literally thing high up, noun use of neuter of meteoros (adj.) high up,
raised from the ground, hanging, from meta- over, beyond (see meta-) + -aoros lifted, hovering in
air, related to aeirein to raise (see aorta).    Specific sense of fireball, shooting star is
attested from 1590s. Atmospheric phenomena were formerly classified as aerial meteors (wind),
aqueous meteors (rain, snow, hail), luminous meteors (aurora, rainbows), and igneous meteors
(lightning, shooting stars).


case (n.1)

early 13c., what befalls one; state of affairs, from Old French cas an event, happening, situation,
quarrel, trial, from Latin casus a chance, occasion, opportunity; accident, mishap, literally a
falling, from cas-, past participle stem of cadere to fall, sink, settle down, decline, perish (used
widely: of the setting of heavenly bodies, the fall of Troy, suicides), from PIE root *kad- to lay
out, fall or make fall, yield, break up (cognates: Sanskrit sad- to fall down, Armenian chacnum to
fall, become low, perhaps also Middle Irish casar hail, lightning). The notion being that which
falls as that which happens (compare befall).    Meaning instance, example is from c.1300. Meaning
actual state of affairs is from c.1400. Given widespread extended and transferred senses in English
in law (16c.), medicine (18c.), etc.; the grammatical sense (late 14c.) was in Latin. U.S. slang
meaning person is from 1848. In case in the event is recorded from mid-14c. Case history is from
1879, originally medical; case study study of a particular case is from 1879, originally legal.


