hale (adj.)

healthy, Old English hal healthy, entire, uninjured (see health). The Scottish and northern English
form of whole; it was given a literary sense of free from infirmity (1734). Related: Haleness.


hale (v.)

c.1200, drag; summon, in Middle English used of arrows, bowstrings, reins, anchors, from Old French
haler to pull, haul (12c.), from a Germanic source, perhaps Frankish *halon or Old Dutch halen;
probably also from Old English geholian obtain (see haul). Figurative sense of to draw (someone)
from one condition to another is late 14c. Related: Haled; haling.


halyard (n.)

rope for hoisting sails, 1610s, from Middle English halier a halyard (late 14c.), also a carrier,
porter (late 13c. in surnames), from halen to haul (see hale (v.)). Spelling influenced by yard long
beam that supports a sail (see yard (n.2)).


blamed (adv.)

confoundedly 1833, later also as an adjective, from past participle of blame (v.), as a euphemistic
evasion of the horrible word damn. [Bartlett, Dictionary of Americanisms, 1848].    This adjective
'blamed' is the virtuous oath by which simple people, who are improving their habits, cure
themselves of a stronger epithet. [Edward Everett Hale, If, Yes, and Perhaps, 1868]    Compare also
blamenation (1837) as an expletive. The imprecation blame me is attested from 1830.


haul (v.)

1580s, hall, variant spelling of Middle English halen (see hale (v.)), representing a change in
pronunciation after c.1200. Spelling with -au- or -aw- is from early 17c. Related: Hauled; hauling.
To haul off pull back a little before striking or otherwise acting is American English, 1802.


demote (v.)

1881, American English coinage from de- + stem of promote. Said to have been Midwestern in origin.
Regarding an antithesis to 'promote,' the word universally in use in Cambridge, in Harvard College,
is drop. The same word is in use in the leading schools here (Boston). I hope I may be counted every
time against such barbarisms as 'demote' and 'retromote.' [Edward Everett Hale, 1892, letter to the
publishers of Funk &amp; Wagnalls' Standard Dictionary]    Related: Demoted; demoting.


Mary

fem. proper name, Old English Maria, Marie, mother of Jesus, from Latin Maria, from Greek Mariam,
Maria, from Aramaic Maryam, from Hebrew Miryam, sister of Moses (Ex. xv.), of unknown origin, said
to mean literally rebellion. Nursery rhyme Mary had a Little Lamb written early 1830 by Sarah
Josepha Hale of Boston; published Sept. 1830 in Juvenile Miscellany, a popular magazine for
children. Mary Jane is 1921 as the proprietary name of a kind of low-heeled shoe worn chiefly by
young girls, 1928 as slang for marijuana.


health (n.)

Old English h&aelig;l&thorn; wholeness, a being whole, sound or well, from Proto-Germanic *hailitho,
from PIE *kailo- whole, uninjured, of good omen (cognates: Old English hal hale, whole; Old Norse
heill healthy; Old English halig,  Old Norse helge holy, sacred; Old English h&aelig;lan to heal).
With Proto-Germanic abstract noun suffix *-itho (see -th (2)). Of physical health in Middle English,
but also prosperity, happiness, welfare; preservation, safety.


scrod (n.)

1841, young cod, split and fried or boiled, possibly from Dutch schrood piece cut off, from Middle
Dutch scrode shred (cognate with Old English screade piece cut off; see shred (n.)). If this is the
origin, the notion is probably of fish cut into pieces for drying or cooking.A Boston brahmin is on
a business trip to Philadelphia. In search of dinner, and hungry for that Boston favorite, broiled
scrod, he hops into a cab and asks the driver, My good man, take me someplace where I can get scrod.
The cabbie replies, Pal, that's the first time I've ever been asked that in the passive pluperfect
subjunctive. [an old joke in Philadelphia, this version of it from Vex, Hex, Smash, Smooch,
Constance Hale, 2012]


steam (n.)

Old English steam vapor, fume, water in a gaseous state, from Proto-Germanic *staumaz (cognates:
Dutch stoom steam), of unknown origin. Meaning vapor of boiling water used to drive an engine is
from 1690s, hence steam age (1828) and many figurative uses, such as let off steam (1831, literal),
blow off steam (1857, figurative), full-steam (1878), get up steam (1887, figurative). Steam heat is
from 1820s in thermodynamics; as a method of temperature control from 1904.    We have given her six
months to consider the matter, and in this steam age of the world, no woman ought to require a
longer time to make up her mind. [Sarah Josepha Hale, Sketches of American Character, 1828]


