hallucination (n.)

in the pathological/psychological sense of seeing or hearing something which is not there, 1640s,
from Latin hallucinationem (nominative hallucinatio), from past participle stem of hallucinari (see
hallucinate). Hallucination is distinct from illusion in not necessarily involving a false belief.
Related: Hallucinations.


hallucinogen (n.)

drug which induces hallucinations, 1954, from stem of hallucination + -gen.


soma (n.)

name of an intoxicant used in ancient Vedic ritual, prepared from the juice of some East Indian
plant, 1785, from Sanskrit soma, from PIE *seu- juice, from root *seue- (2) to take liquid (see sup
(v.2)). In Brave New World (1932), the name of a state-dispensed narcotic producing euphoria and
hallucination.


imagination (n.)

faculty of the mind which forms and manipulates images, mid-14c., ymaginacion, from Old French
imaginacion concept, mental picture; hallucination, from Latin imaginationem (nominative imaginatio)
imagination, a fancy, noun of action from past participle stem of imaginari (see imagine).


hallucinate (v.)

c.1600, deceive, from Latin alucinatus, later hallucinatus, past participle of alucinari wander (in
the mind), dream; talk unreasonably, ramble in thought, probably from Greek alyein, Attic halyein be
distraught, probably related to alaomai wander about [Barnhart, Klein]. The Latin ending probably
was influenced by vaticinari to prophecy, also to rave. Sense of to have illusions is from 1650s.
Occasionally used 19c. in transitive senses, to cause hallucination. Related: Hallucinated;
hallucinating.


apocalypse (n.)

late 14c., revelation, disclosure, from Church Latin apocalypsis revelation, from Greek apokalyptein
uncover, disclose, reveal, from apo- from (see apo-) + kalyptein to cover, conceal (see Calypso).
The Christian end-of-the-world story is part of the revelation in John of Patmos' book Apokalypsis
(a title rendered into English as Apocalypse c.1230 and Revelations by Wyclif c.1380).    Its
general sense in Middle English was insight, vision; hallucination; meaning a cataclysmic event is
modern. As agent nouns, apocalypst (1829), apocalypt (1834), and apocalyptist (1835) have been
tried.


