halting (n.)

act of limping or walking lamely, early 14c., verbal noun from halt (v.). Related: Haltingly.


halt (n.)

a stop, a halting, 1590s, from French halte (16c.) or Italian alto, ultimately from German Halt,
imperative from Old High German halten to hold (see hold (v.)). A German military command borrowed
into the Romanic languages 16c. The verb in this sense is from 1650s, from the noun. Related:
Halted; halting.


halt (v.)

to walk unsteadily, early 14c., from Old English haltian to be lame, from the same source as halt
(adj.). The meaning make a halt is 1650s, from halt (n.). As a command word, attested from 1796.
Related: Halted; halting.


claudication (n.)

1550s, from Middle French claudication (13c.) or directly from Latin claudicationem (nominative
claudicatio) a limping, noun of action from past participle stem of claudicare to limp, be lame,
from claudus limping, halting, lame. Related: Claudicant (adj.); claudicate.


limp (v.)

1560s, of unknown origin, perhaps related to Middle English lympen to fall short (c.1400), which is
probably from Old English lemphealt halting, lame, limping, which has a lone cognate in the rare
Middle High German limphin, and perhaps is from a PIE root meaning slack, loose, to hang down
(cognates: Sanskrit lambate hangs down, Middle High German lampen to hang down). Related: Limped;
limping. As a noun, 1818, from the verb.


suspension (n.)

early 15c., a temporary halting or deprivation, from Latin suspensionem (nominative suspensio) the
act or state of hanging up, a vaulting, noun of action, from past participle stem of suspendere to
hang up, cause to hang, suspend (see suspend). Suspension of disbelief is from Coleridge:  A
semblance of truth sufficient to procure for these shadows of imagination that willing suspension of
disbelief for the moment, which constitutes poetic faith. [Biographia Literaria, 1817]    Meaning
action of hanging by a support from above is attested from 1540s. Meaning particles suspended in
liquid without dissolving is from 1707. Suspension-bridge first recorded 1819 (earlier suspended
bridge, 1796).


sheer (adj.)

c.1200, exempt, free from guilt (as in Sheer Thursday, the Thursday of Holy Week); later schiere
thin, sparse (c.1400), from Old English scir bright, clear, gleaming; translucent; pure, unmixed,
and influenced by Old Norse cognate sc&aelig;r bright, clean, pure, both from Proto-Germanic
*skeran- (cognates: Old Saxon skiri, Old Frisian skire, German schier, Gothic skeirs clean, pure),
from PIE root *(s)ker- (1) to cut (see shear (v.)).     Sense of absolute, utter (sheer nonsense)
developed 1580s, probably from the notion of unmixed; that of very steep (a sheer cliff) is first
recorded 1800, probably from notion of continued without halting. Meaning diaphanous is from 1560s.
As an adverb from c.1600.


