hamper (n.2)

1835, things important for a ship but in the way at certain times (Klein's definition), from French
hamper to impede. Hence top hamper, originally upper masts, spars, rigging, etc. of a sailing ship.


hamper (v.)

late 14c., hampren to surround, imprison, confine, also to pack in a container, of unknown origin,
possibly from hamper (n.1), or somehow connected to Middle English hamelian to maim. Related:
Hampered; hampering.


hamper (n.1)

large basket, early 14c., contraction of Anglo-French hanaper (Anglo-Latin hanepario), from Old
French hanepier case for holding a large goblet or cup; in medical use skull, also helmet; armored
leather cap, from hanap goblet, from Frankish or some other Germanic source (cognates: Old Saxon
hnapp cup, bowl; Old High German hnapf, German Napf, Old English hn&aelig;pp). The word also meant
(15c.) the department of Chancery into which fees were paid for sealing and enrolling charters, etc.
The first -a- may be a French attempt to render Germanic hn- into an acceptable Romanic form.


top-hamper (n.)

1791, originally the upper masts, sails, and rigging of a sailing ship, from top (n.1) + hamper (n.)
in the nautical sense of things necessary but often in the way.


cart (n.)

c.1200, from Old Norse kartr or a similar Scandinavian source, akin to and replacing Old English
cr&aelig;t cart, wagon, chariot, perhaps originally body of a cart made of wickerwork, hamper and
related to Middle Dutch cratte woven mat, hamper, Dutch krat basket, Old English cradol (see cradle
(n.)). To put the cart before the horse in a figurative sense is from 1510s in those words; the
image in other words dates to mid-14c.


unhampered (adj.)

1690s, from un- (1) not + past participle of hamper (v.).


encumber (v.)

early 14c., burden, vex, inconvenience, from Old French encombrer to block up, hinder, thwart, from
Late Latin incombrare, from in- in (see in- (2)) + combrus barricade, obstacle, probably from Latin
cumulus heap. Meaning hinder, hamper is attested in English from late 14c. Related: Encumbered;
encumbering.


embarrass (v.)

1670s, perplex, throw into doubt, from French embarrasser (16c.), literally to block, from embarras
obstacle, from Italian imbarrazzo, from imbarrare to bar, from in- into, upon (see in- (2)) + Vulgar
Latin *barra bar.    Meaning hamper, hinder is from 1680s. Meaning make (someone) feel awkward first
recorded 1828. Original sense preserved in embarras de richesse (1751), from French (1726): the
condition of having more wealth than one knows what to do with. Related: Embarrassed; embarrassing;
embarrassingly.


hobble (v.)

c.1300, hoblen to rock back and forth, toss up and down, probably related to its Dutch cognate
hobbelen (which, however, is not recorded before late 15c.).    Meaning to walk lamely is from
c.1400. Transitive sense of tie the legs (of an animal) first recorded 1831, probably an alteration
of 16c. hopple, cognate with Flemish hoppelen to rock, jump, which also is related to Dutch
hobbelen. Sense of hamper, hinder is c.1870. Related: Hobbled; hobbling. The noun is 1727, from the
verb.


cumber (v.)

c.1300, to overthrow, destroy; to be overwhelmed; to harass, apparently from French, but Old French
combrer to seize hold of, lay hands on, grab, snatch, take by force, rape, has not quite the same
sense. Perhaps a shortened formation from a verb akin to Middle English acombren obstructing
progress, from Old French encombrer, from combre obstruction, barrier, from Vulgar Latin *comboros
that which is carried together, perhaps from a Gaulish word.    The likely roots are PIE *kom (see
com-) + *bher- (1) to bear (see infer). Weakened sense of to hamper, to obstruct or weigh down is
late 14c. Related: Cumbered; cumbering.


coffin (n.)

early 14c., chest or box for valuables, from Old French cofin sarcophagus, earlier basket, coffer
(12c., Modern French coffin), from Latin cophinus basket, hamper (source of Italian cafano, Spanish
cuebano basket), from Greek kophinos a basket, of uncertain origin.    Funeral sense in English is
1520s; before that it was the literal Latin one and had also a meaning of pie crust (late 14c.).
Meaning vehicle regarded as unsafe is from 1830s. Coffin nail cigarette is slang from 1880; nail in
(one's) coffin thing that contributes to one's death is from 1792.


harangue (n.)

mid-15c., arang, Scottish (in English from c.1600), from Middle French harangue (14c.), from Italian
aringo public square, platform, from a Germanic source ultimately from or including Proto-Germanic
*ring circular gathering (see ring (n.1)). Perhaps it is ultimately from Gothic *hriggs (pronounced
hrings), with the first -a- inserted to ease Romanic pronunciation of Germanic hr- (see hamper
(n.)). But Barnhart suggests a Germanic compound, hari-hring circular gathering, literally army-
ring.


