handsome (adj.)

c.1400, handsom easy to handle, ready at hand, from hand (n.) + -some (1). Sense extended to fair
size, considerable (1570s), then having fine form, good-looking (1580s). Meaning generous (in
handsome reward, etc.) first recorded 1680s.    [Americans] use the word handsome much more
extensively than we do: saying that Webster made a handsome speech in the Senate: that a lady talks
handsomely, (eloquently:) that a book sells handsomely. A gentleman asked me on the Catskill
Mountain, whether I thought the sun handsomer there than at New York. [Harriet Martineau, Society in
America, 1837]    Related: Handsomeness.


handsomely (adv.)

1540s, conveniently, from handsome + -ly (2). Meaning attractively is from 1610s; liberally from
1735.


beau (n.)

attendant suitor of a lady, 1720, from French beau the beautiful, noun use of an adjective, from Old
French bel beautiful, handsome, fair, genuine, real (11c.), from Latin bellus handsome, fine,
pretty, agreeable, diminutive of bonus good (see bene-). Meaning man who attends excessively to
dress, etiquette, etc.; a fop; a dandy is from 1680s, short for French beau gar&ccedil;on pretty boy
(1660s).


tall (adj.)

high in stature, 1520s, probably from Middle English tal handsome, good-looking; valiant; lively in
speech; large, big; humble, meek, from Old English get&aelig;l prompt, active, from Germanic
*(ge)-tala- (cognates: Old High German gi-zal quick, Gothic un-tals indocile). Main modern sense
being of more than average height (and slim in proportion to height) probably evolved out of earlier
meanings brave, valiant, seemly, proper (c.1400), attractive, handsome (late 14c.).    Sense
evolution is remarkable [OED], but adjectives applied to persons can wander far in meaning (such as
pretty, buxom, German klein small, little, which in Middle High German meant the same as its English
cognate clean (adj.)). Meaning having a (defined) height, whether lofty or not is from 1580s.
Meaning exaggerated (as in tall tale) is American English colloquial attested by 1846. Phrase tall,
dark, and handsome is recorded from 1906. Related: Tallness.


Kenneth

masc. proper name, Scottish, from Gaelic Caioneach, literally handsome, comely.


gazebo

1752, supposedly a facetious formation from gaze + -bo, Latin first person singular future tense
suffix (as in videbo I shall see), on model of earlier belvedere cupola, from Italian bello verde
handsome sight. But perhaps rather a corruption of some oriental word.


bizarre (adj.)

1640s, from French bizarre odd, fantastic (16c.), originally handsome, brave, perhaps from Basque
bizar a beard (the notion being of bearded Spanish soldiers making a strange impression on the
French); alternative etymology traces it to Italian bizarro angry, fierce, irascible, from bizza fit
of anger.


Formosa

old name of Taiwan, given by Portuguese, from Portuguese Formosa insula beautiful island, from fem.
of Latin formosus beautiful, handsome, finely formed, from forma (see form (n.)).


beauty (n.)

early 14c., physical attractiveness, also goodness, courtesy, from Anglo-French beute, Old French
biaut&eacute; beauty, seductiveness, beautiful person (12c., Modern French beaut&eacute;), earlier
beltet, from Vulgar Latin bellitatem (nominative bellitas) state of being handsome, from Latin
bellus pretty, handsome, charming, in classical Latin used especially of women and children, or
ironically or insultingly of men, perhaps from PIE *dw-en-elo-, diminutive of root *deu- (2) to do,
perform; show favor, revere (see bene-). Famously defined by Stendhal as la promesse de bonheur the
promise of happiness.    [I]t takes the one hundred men in ten million who understand beauty, which
isn't imitation or an improvement on the beautiful as already understood by the common herd, twenty
or thirty years to convince the twenty thousand next most sensitive souls after their own that this
new beauty is truly beautiful. [Stendhal, Life of Henry Brulard]    Replaced Old English wlite.
Concrete meaning a beautiful woman is first recorded late 14c. Beauty sleep sleep before midnight is
attested by 1850. Beauty spot is from 1650s. Beauty parlor is from 1894.    The sudden death of a
young woman a little over a week ago in a down-town beauty parlor has served to direct public
attention to those institutions and their methods. In this case, it seems, the operator painted on
or injected into the patron's facial blemish a 4-per-cent cocaine solution and then applied an
electrode, the sponge of which was saturated with carbolized water. [The Western Druggist, October
1894]   Beaut&eacute; du diable (literally devil's beauty) is used as a French phrase in English
from 1825.


bene-

word-forming element meaning well, from Latin bene well, in the right way, honorably, properly, from
PIE *dw-ene-, adverbial form of root *deu- (2) to do, perform; show favor, revere. From the same
source come Latin bonus good, bellus handsome, fine, pretty, and possibly beatus blessed, beare to
make blessed.


embellish (v.)

mid-14c., to render beautiful, from Old French embelliss-, stem of embellir make beautiful,
ornament, from em- (see en- (1)) + bel beautiful, from Latin bellus handsome, pretty, fine (see
bene-). Meaning dress up (a narration) with fictitious matter is from mid-15c. Related: Embellished;
embellishing.


correspondent (n.)

one who communicates with another by letters, 1620s, from correspondent (adj.). The newspaper sense
is from 1711.    THE life of a newspaper correspondent, as may naturally be supposed, is one of
alternate cloud and sunshine--one day basking in an Andalusian balcony, playing a rubber at the club
on the off-nights of the Opera, being very musical when the handsome Prima Donna sings, and very
light fantastic toeish when the lively Prima Ballerina dances; another day roughing it over the
Balkan, amid sleet and snow, or starving at the tail of an ill-conditioned army, and receiving
bullets instead of billets-doux. [New Monthly Magazine, vol. 95, 1852, p.284]


comely (adj.)

beautiful, handsome, c.1400, probably from Old English cymlic lovely, splendid, finely made, from
cyme exquisite, glorious, delicate, from West Germanic *kumi- delicate, feeble (cognates: Old High
German chumo with difficulty, chumig weak, delicate; German kaum hardly, scarcely). Or perhaps the
modern word is from Middle English bicumelic (c.1200) suitable, exquisite, literally becomely
(compare becoming).


likely (adj.)

c.1300, perhaps from Old Norse likligr likely, from likr like (see like (adj.)). Old English had
cognate geliclic. Meaning having the appearance of being strong and capable is from mid-15c., though
now mostly confined to American English; according to OED this sense is perhaps influenced by like
(v.). Sense of good-looking is from late 15c. Meaning probably is attested from late 14c., now
principally in American English.    LIKELY. That may be liked; that may please; handsome. In the
United States, as a colloquial term, respectable; worthy of esteem; sensible.--Worcester. [Bartlett]
As an adverb, late 14c., from the adjective.


powerful (adj.)

c.1400, from power (n.) + -ful. Meaning of great quality or number is from 1811; colloquial sense of
exceedingly (adv.) is from 1822. Related: Powerfully. Thornton (American Glossary) notes powerful as
Much used by common people in the sense of very, along with monstrous and cites curious expressions
such as devilish good, monstrous pretty (1799), dreadful polite, cruel pretty, abominable fine
(1803), or when a young lady admires a lap dog for being so vastly small and declares him prodigious
handsome (1799).


hear (v.)

Old English heran (Anglian), (ge)hieran, hyran (West Saxon) to hear, listen (to), obey, follow;
accede to, grant; judge, from Proto-Germanic *hauzjan (cognates: Old Norse heyra, Old Frisian hora,
Dutch horen, German h&ouml;ren, Gothic hausjan), perhaps from PIE *kous- to hear (see acoustic). The
shift from *-z- to -r- is a regular feature in some Germanic languages.    For spelling, see head
(n.); spelling distinction between hear and here developed 1200-1550. Old English also had the
excellent adjective hiersum ready to hear, obedient, literally hear-some with suffix from handsome,
etc. Hear, hear! (1680s) was originally imperative, used as an exclamation to call attention to a
speaker's words; now a general cheer of approval. Originally it was hear him!


sight (n.)

Old English sih&eth;, gesiht, gesih&eth; thing seen; faculty of sight; aspect; vision; apparition,
from Proto-Germanic *sekh(w)- (cognates: Danish sigte, Swedish sigt, Middle Dutch sicht, Dutch
zicht, Old High German siht, German Sicht, Gesicht), stem that also yielded Old English seon (see
see (v.)), with noun suffix -th (2), later -t.  Verily, truth is sight. Therefore if two people
should come disputing, saying, 'I have seen,' 'I have heard,' we should trust the one who says 'I
have seen.' [Brhadaranyaka Upanishad 5.14.4]  Meaning perception or apprehension by means of the
eyes is from early 13c. Meaning device on a firearm to assist in aiming is from 1580s. A show of
something, hence, colloquially, a great many; a lot (late 14c.). Sight for sore eyes welcome visitor
is attested from 1738; sight unseen without previous inspection is from 1892. Sight gag first
attested 1944. Middle English had sighty (late 14c.) visible, conspicuous; bright, shining;
attractive, handsome; c.1400 as keen-sighted; mid-15c. as discerning (compare German sichtig
visible).


merry (adj.)

Old English myrge pleasing, agreeable, pleasant, sweet; pleasantly, melodiously, from Proto-Germanic
*murgijaz, which probably originally meant short-lasting, (compare Old High German murg short,
Gothic gamaurgjan to shorten), from PIE *mreghu- short (see brief (adj.)). The only exact cognate
for meaning outside English was Middle Dutch mergelijc joyful.    Connection to pleasure is likely
via notion of making time fly, that which makes the time seem to pass quickly (compare German
Kurzweil pastime, literally a short time; Old Norse skemta to amuse, entertain, amuse oneself, from
skamt, neuter of skammr short). There also was a verbal form in Old English, myrgan be merry,
rejoice. For vowel evolution, see bury (v.).Bot vchon enle we wolde were fyf, &thorn;e mo &thorn;e
myryer. [c.1300]The word had much wider senses in Middle English, such as pleasant-sounding (of
animal voices), fine (of weather), handsome (of dress), pleasant-tasting (of herbs). Merry-bout an
incident of sexual intercourse was low slang from 1780. Merry-begot illegitimate (adj.), bastard
(n.) is from 1785. Merrie England (now frequently satirical or ironic) is 14c. meri ingland,
originally in a broader sense of bountiful, prosperous. Merry Monday was a 16c. term for the Monday
before Shrove Tuesday (Mardi Gras).


swan (n.)

Old English swan swan, from Proto-Germanic *swanaz singer (cognates: Old Saxon swan, Old Norse
svanr, Danish svane, Swedish svan, Middle Dutch swane, Dutch zwaan, Old High German swan, German
Schwan), probably literally the singing bird, from PIE root *swen- to sing, make sound (see sound
(n.1)); thus related to Old English geswin melody, song and swinsian to make melody.    In classical
mythology, sacred to Apollo and to Venus. The singing of swans before death was alluded to by
Chaucer (late 14c.), but swan-song (1831) is a translation of German Schwanengesang. The ancient
Indo-European mythical swan-maiden so called by mythographers from 1829. Swan dive is recorded from
1898. A black swan was proverbial for something extremely rare or non-existent (late 14c.), after
Juvenal [Sat. vi. 164], but later they turned up in Australia (Chenopsis atratus).    Do you say no
worthy wife is to be found among all these crowds? Well, let her be handsome, charming, rich and
fertile; let her have ancient ancestors ranged about her halls; let her be more chaste than all the
dishevelled Sabine maidens who stopped the war--a prodigy as rare upon the earth as a black swan!
yet who could endure a wife that possessed all perfections?  I would rather have a Venusian wench
for my wife than you, O Cornelia, mother of the Gracchi, if, with all your virtues, you bring me a
haughty brow, and reckon up Triumphs as part of your marriage portion. [Juvenal]


