hap (n.)

c.1200, chance, a person's luck, fortune, fate; also unforeseen occurrence, from Old Norse happ
chance, good luck, from Proto-Germanic *hap- (source of Old English geh&aelig;p convenient, fit),
from PIE *kob- to suit, fit, succeed (cognates: Old Church Slavonic kobu fate, foreboding, omen, Old
Irish cob victory). Meaning good fortune is from early 13c.


hap (v.)

to happen, mid-14c., from hap (n.) chance.


hapax legomenon (n.)

(plural legomena), word occurring only once, Greek, literally once said, from hapax once +
legomenon, neuter passive present participle of legein to say.


haphazard (adj.)

1570s, from hap chance, luck (see hap) + hazard risk, danger, peril. Related: Haphazardly.


hapless (adj.)

unfortunate, c.1400, from hap (n.) in the sense good luck + -less. Related: Haplessly; haplessness.


haplo-

word-forming element meaning simple, single; simply, once, from comb. form of Greek haplos single,
simple.


haplography (n.)

scribal error of writing only once a letter that should have been written twice; see haplo- +
-graphy.


haploid (adj.)

1908, from German haploid (1905), from Greek haplos single.


haplology (n.)

1895; see haplo- + -logy.


haply (adv.)

late 14c., hapliche, from hap + -ly (2).


happen (v.)

c.1300, to come to pass, occur, originally occur by hap, to have the (good or bad) fortune (to do,
be, etc.); see hap (n.). Replaced Old English gelimpan, gesceon, and Middle English befall. In
Middle English fel it hap meant it happened. Related: Happened; happening.


happening (n.)

mid-15c., chance, luck, from present participle of happen; meaning occurrence is 1550s. Sense of
spontaneous event or display is from 1959 in the argot of artists. Happenings events was noted by
Fowler as a vogue word from c.1905.


happenstance (n.)

1897, from happening + ending from circumstance.


happify (v.)

1610s, from happy + -ify. Related: Happified.


happily (adv.)

mid-14c., by chance or accident, from happy + -ly (2). Meaning fortunate, lucky is late 14c.; that
of appropriately is from 1570s. Happily ever after recorded by 1853.


happiness (n.)

1520s, good fortune, from happy + -ness. Meaning pleasant and contented mental state is from 1590s.
Phrase greatest happiness for the greatest number was in Hutcheson (1725).


happy (adj.)

late 14c., lucky, favored by fortune, prosperous; of events, turning out well, from hap (n.) chance,
fortune + -y (2). Sense of very glad first recorded late 14c. Ousted Old English eadig (from ead
wealth, riches) and ges&aelig;lig, which has become silly. Meaning greatly pleased and content is
from 1520s. Old English bli&eth;e happy survives as blithe. From Greek to Irish, a great majority of
the European words for happy at first meant lucky. An exception is Welsh, where the word used first
meant wise.    Used in World War II and after as a suffix (as in bomb-happy, flak-happy) expressing
dazed or frazzled from stress. Happy medium is from 1778. Happy ending in the literary sense
recorded from 1756. Happy as a clam (1630s) was originally happy as a clam in the mud at high tide,
when it can't be dug up and eaten. Happy hunting ground, the reputed Indian paradise, is attested
from 1840, American English. Related: Happier; happiest.


happy hour

early evening period of discount drinks and free hors-d'oeuvres at a bar, first recorded 1961.


happy-go-lucky

also happy go lucky, 1670s as an adverb, haphazard; the adjective, of persons, recorded from 1856.


Hapsburg

European dynasty, from German Habsburg, from the name of a castle on the Aar in Switzerland,
originally Habichtsburg, literally Hawk's Castle.


haptic (adj.)

pertaining to the sense of touch, 1890, from Greek haptikos able to come into contact with, from
haptein to fasten (see apse).


haptics (n.)

1895, from haptic; see -ics.


chap (n.)

1570s, customer, short for obsolete chapman purchaser, trader (see cheap). Colloquial sense of lad,
fellow is first attested 1716 (compare slang tough customer).


chap (v.)

to crack, mid-15c., chappen (intransitive) to split, burst open; cause to crack (transitive);
perhaps a variant of choppen (see chop (v.), and compare strap/strop), or related to Middle Dutch
kappen to chop, cut, Danish kappe, Swedish kappa to cut. Related: Chapped; chapping. The noun
meaning fissure in the skin is from late 14c.


chaparral (n.)

shrub thicket, 1850, American English, from Spanish chaparro evergreen oak, perhaps from Basque
txapar little thicket, diminutive of sapar heath, thicket.    In Spain, a chaparral   is a bush of a
species of oak. The termination al signifies a place abounding in; as, chaparral, a place of oak-
bushes, almendral, an almond orchard; parral, a vineyard; cafetal, a coffee plantation, etc., etc.
This word, chaparral, has been introduced into the language since our acquisition of Texas and New
Mexico, where these bushes abound. It is a series of thickets, of various sizes, from one hundred
yards to a mile through, with bushes and briars, all covered with thorns, and so closely entwined
together as almost to prevent the passage of any thing larger than a wolf or hare. [John Russell
Bartlett, Dictionary of Americanisms, 1859]


chapbook (n.)

also chap-book, 1824, shortened from chap(man) book, so called because chapmen (see cheap) once sold
such books on the street. A modern word for a type of old book.


chapeau (n.)

1520s, from Middle French chapeau (Old French capel, 12c.) hat, from Vulgar Latin *cappellus, from
Late Latin capellum (also source of Italian cappello, Spanish capelo, Portuguese chapeo), diminutive
of cappa (see cap (n.)).


chapel (n.)

early 13c., from Old French chapele (12c., Modern French chapelle), from Medieval Latin cappella
chapel, sanctuary for relics, literally little cape, diminutive of Late Latin cappa cape (see cap
(n.)); by tradition, originally in reference to the sanctuary in France in which the miraculous cape
of St. Martin of Tours, patron saint of France, was preserved; meaning extended in most European
languages to any sanctuary. (While serving Rome as a soldier deployed in Gaul, Martin cut his
military coat in half to share it with a ragged beggar. That night, Martin dreamed Christ wearing
the half-cloak; the half Martin kept was the relic.)


chaperon (n.)

1720, woman accompanying a younger, unmarried lady in public, from French chaperon protector,
especially female companion to a young woman, earlier head covering, hood (c.1400), from Old French
chaperon hood, cowl (12c.), diminutive of chape cape (see cap (n.)). ... English writers often
erroneously spell it chaperone, app. under the supposition that it requires a fem. termination
[OED]. The notion is of covering the socially vulnerable one.  May I ask what is a chaperon?    A
married lady; without whom no unmarried one can be seen in public. If the damsel be five and forty,
she cannot appear without the matron; and if the matron be fifteen, it will do.    [Catharine
Hutton, The Welsh Mountaineer, London, 1817]    The word had been used in Middle English in the
literal sense hooded cloak.


chaperon (v.)

act as a chaperon, 1792, also chaperone, from chaperon (n.), or from French chaperonner, from
chaperon (n.). Related: Chaperoned; chaperoning.


chaplain (n.)

mid-14c., minister of a chapel, from Old French chapelein clergyman (Modern French chapelain), from
Medieval Latin cappellanus clergyman, originally custodian of St. Martin's cloak (see chapel).
Replaced Old English capellane (from the same Medieval Latin source) clergyman who conducts private
religious services, originally in great households, later in military regiments, prisons, etc.


chaplet (n.)

late 14c., from Old French chapelet (Old North French capelet) garland, rosary, properly a small
hat, diminutive of chape, chapeau headdress, hood, hat (see chapeau).


Chaplinesque (adj.)

1921, from Charlie Chaplin (1889-1977), British-born silent movie star. The surname is attested from
c.1200, from Old French chapelain priest.


chapman (n.)

peddler, itinerant tradesman, Middle English form of Old English ceapman tradesman, from West
Germanic compound *kaupman- (cognates: Old High German choufman, German Kauffman, Middle Dutch and
Dutch koopman), formed with equivalents of man (n.) + West Germanic *kaup- (cognates: Old Saxon cop,
Old Frisian kap trade, purchase, Middle Dutch coop, Dutch koop trade, market, bargain, kauf trader,
Old English ceap barter, business; a purchase), from Proto-Germanic *kaupoz- (cognates: Danish
kj&oslash;b purchase, bargain, Old Norse kaup bargain, pay; compare also Old Church Slavonic kupiti
to buy, a Germanic loan-word), probably an early Germanic borrowing from Latin caupo (genitive
cauponis) petty tradesman, huckster, of unknown origin. Compare also cheap (adj.).


Chappaquiddick

place in Dukes County, Mass., from a native New England Algonquian language, literally island
adjacent to the mainland.


chaps (n.1)

1844, American English, short for chaparejos, from Mexican Spanish chaparreras, overalls worn to
protect from chaparro (see chaparral).


chaps (n.2)

jaws, cheeks, from chap (n.), 1550s, of unknown origin. Hence, chap-fallen (1590s).


chapter (n.)

c.1200, main division of a book, from Old French chapitre (12c.) chapter (of a book), article (of a
treaty), chapter (of a cathedral), alteration of chapitle, from Late Latin capitulum, diminutive of
caput (genitive capitis) head (see capitulum). Sense of local branch (1815) is from cathedral sense
(late 15c.), which seems to trace to convocations of canons at cathedral churches, during which the
rules of the order by chapter, or a chapter (capitulum) of Scripture, were read aloud to the
assembled. Chapter and verse in full and thoroughly (1620s) is a reference to Scripture.


mayhap

1530s, from phrase (it) may hap.


mishap (n.)

early 14c., bad luck, unlucky accident, from mis- (1) bad + hap luck. Probably on analogy of Old
French meschance (see mischance (n.)).


mishappen (v.)

early 14c., from mis- (1) + happen. Related: Mishappened; mishappening.


misshapen (adj.)

having a bad or ugly shape, crippled, deformed, monstrous, also degraded, perverted, late 14c., from
mis- (1) + old alternative past participle of shape (v.).


perhaps (adv.)

1520s, formed from Middle English per, par by, through (see per-) + plural of hap chance (see
happen), on model of peradventure, perchance, etc. which now have been superseded by this word.
Perhappons possibly, by chance is recorded from late 15c.


reshape (v.)

also re-shape, 1798, from re- + shape (v.). Related: Reshaped; reshaping.


rhapsodic (adj.)

1782, from Greek rhapsodikos of or for a rhapsodist, from rhapsoidia (see rhapsody). Related:
Rhapsodically (c.1600).


rhapsodist (n.)

1650s, from French rhapsodiste, from rhapsode, from Greek rhapsodos (see rhapsody).


rhapsodize (v.)

c.1600, to piece together; 1806, to talk rhapsodically; see rhapsody + -ize. Related: Rhapsodized;
rhapsodizing.


rhapsodomancy (n.)

divination by means of verses, 1727, from French rhapsodomancie, from Greek rhapsodos a rhapsodist
(see rhapsody) + -manteia (see -mancy).    There were various methods of practicing this
rhapsodomancy. Sometimes they wrote several verses or sentences of a poet on so many pieces of wood,
paper, or the like; shook them together in an urn; and drew out one, which was accounted the lot.
Sometimes they cast dice on a table, on which verses were written; and that on which the die lodged,
contained the prediction. [Rees' Cyclopedia, London, 1819]


rhapsody (n.)

1540s, epic poem, from Middle French rhapsodie, from Latin rhapsodia, from Greek rhapsoidia verse
composition, recitation of epic poetry; a book, a lay, a canto, from rhapsodos reciter of epic
poems, literally one who stitches or strings songs together, from rhaptein to stitch, sew, weave
(see wrap (v.)) + oide song (see ode). Meaning exalted enthusiastic feeling or expression is from
1630s. Meaning sprightly musical composition is first recorded 1850s.


shape (v.)

Old English scapan, past participle of scieppan to create, form, destine (past tense scop), from
Proto-Germanic *skapjanan create, ordain (cognates: Old Norse skapa, Danish skabe, Old Saxon scapan,
Old Frisian skeppa, Middle Dutch schappen do, treat, Old High German scaffan, German schaffen shape,
create, produce), from PIE root *(s)kep- a base forming words meaning to cut, scrape, hack (see
scabies), which acquired broad technical senses and in Germanic a specific sense of to create.
Old English scieppan survived into Middle English as shippen, but shape emerged as a regular verb
(with past tense shaped) by 1500s. The old past participle form shapen survives in misshapen. Middle
English shepster (late 14c.) dressmaker, female cutter-out, is literally shape-ster, from Old
English scieppan.    Meaning to form in the mind is from late 14c. Phrase Shape up (v.) is literally
to give form to by stiff or solid material; attested from 1865 as progress; from 1938 as reform;
shape up or ship out is attested from 1956, originally U.S. military slang, with the sense being do
right or get shipped up to active duty.


