harangue (v.)

1650s, from French haranguer, from Middle French harangue (see harangue (n.)). Related: Harangued;
haranguing.


harangue (n.)

mid-15c., arang, Scottish (in English from c.1600), from Middle French harangue (14c.), from Italian
aringo public square, platform, from a Germanic source ultimately from or including Proto-Germanic
*ring circular gathering (see ring (n.1)). Perhaps it is ultimately from Gothic *hriggs (pronounced
hrings), with the first -a- inserted to ease Romanic pronunciation of Germanic hr- (see hamper
(n.)). But Barnhart suggests a Germanic compound, hari-hring circular gathering, literally army-
ring.


dissertation (n.)

1610s, discussion, debate, from Latin dissertationem (nominative dissertatio) discourse, noun of
action from past participle stem of dissertare debate, argue, examine, harangue, frequentative of
disserere discuss, examine, from dis- apart (see dis-) + serere to arrange words (see series). Sense
of formal, written treatise is 1650s.


sermocination (n.)

1510s, a talk, from Latin sermonationem (nominative sermonatio), noun of action from past participle
stem of sermonari talk, discourse, harangue, from sermo (see sermon). From 1753 in rhetoric, a form
of prosopopoeia in which the speaker, having addressed a real or imaginary hearer with a remark or
especially a question, immediately answers for the hearer. Related: Sermocinator, agent noun;
sermocinatrix a female talker (1620s).


category (n.)

1580s, from Middle French cat&eacute;gorie, from Late Latin categoria, from Greek kategoria
accusation, prediction, category, verbal noun from kategorein to speak against; to accuse, assert,
predicate, from kata down to (or perhaps against; see cata-) + agoreuein to harangue, to declaim (in
the assembly), from agora public assembly (see agora). Original sense of accuse weakened to assert,
name by the time Aristotle applied kategoria to his 10 classes of things that can be named.
<b>category</b> should be used by no-one who is not prepared to state (1) that he does not mean
class, &amp; (2) that he knows the difference between the two .... [Fowler]


