harassment (n.)

1753, from harass + -ment.


harass (v.)

1610s, from French harasser tire out, vex, possibly from Old French harer set a dog on, and perhaps
blended with Old French harier to harry, draw, drag [Barnhart]. Originally to lay waste, devastate,
sense of distress is from 1650s. Related: Harassed; harassing.


vex (v.)

early 15c., from Old French vexer vex, harass (14c.), from Latin vexare to shake, jolt, toss
violently; figuratively attack, harass, trouble, annoy, from vexus, collateral form of vectus, past
participle of vehere to draw, carry (see vehicle). Related: Vexed; vexing.


jayhawker (n.)

American English, 1858, originally freebooter, guerrilla, Kansas irregular (especially one who came
from the North). Hence back-formed verb jayhawk harass (1866).


hassle (n.)

1945, American English, perhaps from U.S. Southern dialectal hassle to pant, breathe noisily (1928),
of unknown origin; or perhaps from hatchel to harass (1800), which may be a variant of hazel, the
name of the plant that furnished switches for whippings. Noted in 1946 as a show biz vogue word.


gall (v.)

to make sore by chafing, mid-15c., from gall (n.2). Earlier to have sores, be sore (early 14c.).
Figurative sense of harass, irritate is from 1570s. Related: Galled; galling.


vexation (n.)

c.1400, from Old French vexacion abuse, harassment; insult, affront, or directly from Latin
vexationem (nominative vexatio) annoyance, harassing; distress, trouble, noun of action from past
participle stem of vexare to harass, trouble (see vex).


hare (v.)

to harry, harass, 1520s; meaning to frighten is 1650s; of uncertain origin; connections have been
suggested to harry (v.) and to hare (n.). Related: Hared; haring.


excruciate (v.)

1560s, from Latin excruciatus, past participle of excruciare to torture, torment, rack, plague;
figuratively to afflict, harass, vex, torment, from ex- out, thoroughly (see ex-) + cruciare cause
pain or anguish to, literally crucify, from crux (genitive crucis) cross.


trounce (v.)

1550s, to trouble, afflict, harass, later to beat, thrash (1560s), of uncertain origin. Perhaps
related to Middle French troncer to cut, cut off a piece from, from tronce piece of timber, from Old
French tronc (see trunk). Related: Trounced; trouncing.


annoyance (n.)

late 14c., act of annoying, from Old French enoiance ill-humor, irritation, from anuiant, present
participle of anuier to be troublesome, annoy, harass (see annoy). Meaning state of being annoyed is
from c.1500. Earlier, annoying was used in the sense of act of offending (c.1300), and a noun annoy
(c.1200) in a sense feeling of irritation, displeasure, distaste.


abet (v.)

late 14c. (implied in abetting), from Old French abeter to bait, to harass with dogs, literally to
cause to bite, from a- to (see ad-) + beter to bait, from a Germanic source, perhaps Low Franconian
betan incite, or Old Norse beita cause to bite, from Proto-Germanic *baitjan, from PIE root *bheid-
to split (see fissure). Related: Abetted; abetting.


chivvy (v.)

harass, 1918, from alternative form of chevy (1830) to chase, from a noun chevy (1824, also used as
a hunting cry, c.1785), from chevy chase a running pursuit, probably from the Ballad of Chevy Chase,
popular song from 15c. describing a hunting party on the borderland that turned into a battle
between the English and the Scots (the incident probably late 14c.). The place is probably
originally Cheviot Chase.    The old song of Chevy-Chase is the favourite ballad of the common
people of England, and Ben Jonson used to say, he had rather have been the author of it than of all
his works. [Addison, spectator No. 70, May 21, 1711]


afflict (v.)

late 14c., to cast down, from Old French aflicter, from Latin afflictare to damage, harass, torment,
frequentative of affligere (past participle afflictus) to dash down, overthrow, from ad- to (see
ad-) + fligere (past participle flictus) to strike, from PIE root *bhlig- to strike (cognates: Greek
phlibein to press, crush, Czech blizna scar, Welsh blif catapult). Transferred meaning of trouble,
distress, is first recorded 1530s. Related: Afflicted; afflicting.


cumber (v.)

c.1300, to overthrow, destroy; to be overwhelmed; to harass, apparently from French, but Old French
combrer to seize hold of, lay hands on, grab, snatch, take by force, rape, has not quite the same
sense. Perhaps a shortened formation from a verb akin to Middle English acombren obstructing
progress, from Old French encombrer, from combre obstruction, barrier, from Vulgar Latin *comboros
that which is carried together, perhaps from a Gaulish word.    The likely roots are PIE *kom (see
com-) + *bher- (1) to bear (see infer). Weakened sense of to hamper, to obstruct or weigh down is
late 14c. Related: Cumbered; cumbering.


taw (v.)

to prepare (leather), from Old English tawian prepare, make ready, make; cultivate, also harass,
insult, outrage to do, make, from Proto-Germanic *tawjan (cognates: Old Frisian tawa, Old Saxon
toian, Middle Dutch tauwen, Dutch touwen, Old High German zouwen to prepare, Old High German zawen
to succeed, Gothic taujan to make, prepare), from Proto-Germanic root *taw- to make, manufacture
(compare tool (n.)).


solicit (v.)

early 15c., to disturb, trouble, from Middle French soliciter (14c.), from Latin sollicitare to
disturb, rouse, trouble, harass; stimulate, provoke, from sollicitus agitated, from sollus whole,
entire + citus aroused, past participle of ciere shake, excite, set in motion (see cite). Related:
Solicited; soliciting.    Meaning entreat, petition is from 1520s. Meaning to further (business
affairs) evolved mid-15c. from Middle French sense of manage affairs. The sexual sense (often in
reference to prostitutes) is attested from 1710, probably from a merger of the business sense and an
earlier sense of to court or beg the favor of (a woman), attested from 1590s.


bait (v.1)

to torment or goad (someone unable to escape, and to take pleasure in it), c.1300, beyten, a
figurative use from the literal sense of to set dogs on, from the medieval entertainment of setting
dogs on some ferocious animal to bite and worry it (the literal use is attested from c.1300); from
Old Norse beita to cause to bite, from Proto-Germanic *baitan (cognates: Old English b&aelig;tan to
cause to bite, Old High German beizzen to bait, Middle High German beiz hunting, German beizen to
hawk, to cauterize, etch), causative of *bitan (see bite (v.)); the causative word forked into the
two meanings of harass and food offered. Related: Baited; baiting.


stalk (v.1)

pursue stealthily, Old English -stealcian, as in bestealcian to steal along, walk warily, from
Proto-Germanic *stalkon, frequentative of PIE *stel-, possibly a variant of *ster- (3) to rob, steal
(see steal (v.)). Compare hark/hear, talk/tell). In another view the Old English word might be from
a sense of stalk (v.1), influenced by stalk (n.). Meaning harass obsessively first recorded 1991.
Related: Stalked; stalking.    A stalking-horse in literal use was a horse draped in trappings and
trained to allow a fowler to conceal himself behind it to get within range of the game; figurative
sense of person who participates in a proceeding to disguise its real purpose is recorded from
1610s.


worry (v.)

Old English wyrgan to strangle, from Proto-Germanic *wurgjan (cognates: Middle Dutch worghen, Dutch
worgen, Old High German wurgen, German w&uuml;rgen to strangle, Old Norse virgill rope), from PIE
*wergh- to turn (see wring). Related: Worried; worrier; worrying.    The oldest sense was obsolete
in English after c.1600; meaning annoy, bother, vex, first recorded 1670s, developed from that of
harass by rough or severe treatment (1550s), as of dogs or wolves attacking sheep. Meaning to cause
mental distress or trouble is attested from 1822; intransitive sense of to feel anxiety or mental
trouble is first recorded 1860.


rank (adj.)

Old English ranc proud, overbearing, showy, from Proto-Germanic *rankaz (cognates: Danish rank
right, upright, German rank slender, Old Norse rakkr straight, erect), perhaps from PIE *reg- to
stretch, straighten (see right (adj.)). In reference to plant growth, vigorous, luxuriant, abundant,
copious it is recorded from c.1300. Related: Rankly; rankness.    Sense evolved in Middle English to
large and coarse (c.1300), then, via notion of excessive and unpleasant, to corrupt, loathsome, foul
(mid-14c.), perhaps from influence of Middle French rance rancid. In 17c. also lewd, lustful.
Much used 16c. as a pejorative intensive (as in rank folly). This is possibly the source of the verb
meaning to reveal another's guilt (1929, underworld slang), and that of to harass, abuse, 1934, U.S.
black dialect, though this also may be from the role of the activity in establishing social
hierarchy (from rank (n.)).


harry (v.)

Old English hergian make war, lay waste, ravage, plunder, the word used in the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle
for what the Vikings did to England, from Proto-Germanic *harjon (cognates: Old Frisian urheria lay
waste, ravage, plunder, Old Norse herja to make a raid, to plunder, Old Saxon and Old High German
herion, German verheeren to destroy, lay waste, devastate), from *harjaz an armed force (cognates:
Old English here, Old Norse herr crowd, great number; army, troop, Old Saxon and Old Frisian heri,
Dutch heir, Old High German har, German Heer host, army, Gothic harjis), from PIE root *koro- war
also war-band, hose, army (cognates: Lithuanian karas war, quarrel, karias host, army; Old Church
Slavonic kara strife; Middle Irish cuire troop; Old Persian kara host, people, army; Greek koiranos
ruler, leader, commander). Weakened sense of worry, goad, harass is from c.1400. Related: Harried;
harrying.


