harbinger (n.)

late 15c., herbengar one sent ahead to arrange lodgings (for a monarch, an army, etc.), alteration
of Middle English herberger provider of shelter, innkeeper (late 12c.), from Old French herbergeor,
from herbergier provide lodging, from herber lodging, shelter, from Frankish *heriberga lodging,
inn, from Germanic compound *harja-bergaz, literally army hill  (cognate with Old Saxon, Old High
German heriberga army shelter) from *heri army (see harry (v.)) + berga shelter (see barrow (n.2)).
Compare harbor (n.). Sense of forerunner is mid-16c. Intrusive -n- is 15c. (see messenger). As a
verb, from 1640s (harbinge to lodge is late 15c.).


messenger (n.)

c.1200, messager, from Old French messagier messenger, envoy, ambassador, from message (see message
(n.)). With parasitic -n- inserted by c.1300 for no apparent reason except that people liked to say
it that way (compare passenger, harbinger, scavenger).


orthopraxy (n.)

1840, from ortho- + Greek praxis a doing, action, performance (see praxis).   Errata -- Page 263,
line 9 from bottom, for 'orthodoxy' read orthopraxy. This is a new coin from the mint of Dr.
[Andrew] Wylie [of Bloomington College, Indiana], at least I have not before noticed it. Its
etymology places it in a just contrast with orthodoxy: for if that consecrated word indicates
thinking right, orthopraxy will legitimately import doing right, and hence, as Mr. Wylie says,
orthopraxy in the last dread day will pass the divine ordeal incomparably better than orthodoxy. O!
that a zeal for orthopraxy would transcend the zeal for orthodoxy! [The Millennial Harbinger, vol.
IV, no. VIII, Bethany, Va., August 1840]


passenger (n.)

early 14c., passager passer-by, from Old French passagier traveler, passer-by (Modern French
passager), noun use of passagier (adj.) passing, fleeting, traveling, from passage (see passage).
And in this I resemble the Lappwing, who fearing hir young ones to be destroyed by passengers,
flyeth with a false cry farre from their nestes, making those that looke for them seeke where they
are not .... [John Lyly, Euphues and His England, 1580]    The -n- was added early 15c. (compare
messenger, harbinger, scavenger, porringer). Meaning one traveling in a vehicle or vessel first
attested 1510s. Passenger-pigeon of North America so called from 1802; extinct since 1914.


scavenger (n.)

1540s, originally person hired to remove refuse from streets, from Middle English scawageour (late
14c.), London official in charge of collecting tax on goods sold by foreign merchants, from Anglo-
French scawager, from scawage toll or duty on goods offered for sale in one's precinct (c.1400),
from Old North French escauwage inspection, from a Germanic source (compare Old High German scouwon,
Old English sceawian to look at, inspect; see show (v.)).    It has come to be regarded as an agent
noun in -er, but the verb is a late back-formation from the noun. With intrusive -n- (c.1500) as in
harbinger, passenger, messenger. Extended to animals 1590s. Scavenger hunt is attested from 1937.


