harbor (v.)

Old English hereborgian, cognate with Old Norse herbergja, Old High German heribergon, Middle Dutch
herbergen; see harbor (n.). Figuratively, of thoughts, etc., from late 14c. Related: Harbored;
harboring.


harbor (n.)

lodging for ships, early 12c., probably from Old English herebeorg lodgings, quarters, from here
army, host (see harry) + beorg refuge, shelter (related to beorgan save, preserve; see bury);
perhaps modeled on Old Norse herbergi room, lodgings, quarters. Sense shifted in Middle English to
refuge, lodgings, then to place of shelter for ships.


port (n.1)

harbor, Old English port harbor, haven, reinforced by Old French port harbor, port; mountain pass;
Old English and Old French words both from Latin portus port, harbor, originally entrance, passage,
figuratively place of refuge, assylum, from PIE *prtu- a going, a passage, from root *per- (2) to
lead, pass over (cognates: Sanskrit parayati carries over; Greek poros journey, passage, way,
peirein to pierce, run through; Latin porta gate, door, portare passage, peritus experienced;
Avestan peretush passage, ford, bridge; Armenian hordan go forward; Welsh rhyd ford; Old Church
Slavonic pariti to fly; Old English faran to go, journey, Old Norse fj&ouml;r&eth;r inlet, estuary).
Meaning left side of a ship (looking forward from the stern) is attested from 1540s, from notion of
the side facing the harbor (when a ship is docked). It replaced larboard in common usage to avoid
confusion with starboard; officially so by Admiralty order of 1844 and U.S. Navy Department notice
of 1846. Figurative sense place of refuge is attested from early 15c.; phrase any port in a storm
first recorded 1749. A port of call (1810) is one paid a scheduled visit by a ship.


importune (v.)

1520s, back-formation from importunity, or else from Middle French importuner, from Medieval Latin
importunari to make oneself troublesome, from Latin importunus unfit, troublesome, originally having
no harbor (i.e. difficult to access), from assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) +
portus harbor (see port (n.1)). Related: Importuned; importuning. As an adjective from early 15c.


sea-dog (n.)

1590s, harbor seal, from sea + dog (n.). Also pirate (1650s). Meaning old seaman, sailor who has
been long afloat is attested from 1840.


Jap

Colloquial abbreviation of Japanese, by 1880 as a noun, 1892 as an adjective, not originally
pejorative but became so during World War II. It was protested by Japanese before the war, but did
not begin to be taboo in the U.S. before 1960s. For some years after World War II in American
English the word also functioned as a verb, to execute a sneak attack upon, a reference to Pearl
Harbor.


harbour

chiefly British English spelling of harbor (n. and v.); for spelling, see -or.


hafnium (n.)

rare element, 1923, Modern Latin, from Hafnia, Medieval Latin form of Danish Havn harbor, the usual
pre-1400 name of Copenhagen, Denmark, where it was discovered by physicist Dirk Coster (1889-1950)
and chemist George de Hevesy (1885-1966).


tsunami (n.)

1896, in reference to the one that struck Japan that year on June 15, from Japanese tsunami, from
tsu harbor + nami waves.


Puerto Rico

Spanish, literally rich harbor; Caribbean island, name given in 1493 by Christopher Columbus to the
large bay on the north side of the island; he called the island itself San Juan. Over time the name
of the bay became the name of the island and the name of the island was taken by the town that grew
up at the bay. Often spelled Porto Rico in 19c.; name officially changed 1932.


Tangier

port city of Morocco, Latin Tinge, said to be named for Tingis, daughter of Atlas, but probably from
Semitic tigisis harbor. In English often Tangiers, by influence of Algiers.


colossus (n.)

gigantic statue, late 14c., from Latin colossus a statue larger than life, from Greek kolossos
gigantic statue, of unknown origin, used by Herodotus of giant Egyptian statues, and used by Romans
of the bronze Apollo at the entrance to the harbor of Rhodes. Figurative sense of any thing of
awesome greatness or vastness is from 1794.


pier (n.)

mid-12c., support of a span of a bridge, from Medieval Latin pera, of unknown origin, perhaps from
Old North French pire a breakwater, from Vulgar Latin *petricus, from Latin petra rock (see
petrous), but OED is against this. Meaning solid structure in a harbor, used as a landing place for
vessels, is attested from mid-15c.


opportune (adj.)

c.1400, from Old French opportun and directly from Latin opportunus fit, convenient, suitable,
favorable, from the phrase ob portum veniens coming toward a port, in reference to the wind, from ob
to, toward (see ob-) + portus harbor (see port (n.1)). Related: Opportunely.


Portland

in Portland cement, 1720, named by its inventor, English mason Joseph Aspdin, from resemblance of
the color to the stone of Portland peninsula on the coast of Dorsetshire. The place name is
literally land surrounding a harbor, Old English Portlanda. Portland, Maine, U.S.A., took its name
1786, for the place in England. Portland, Oregon, was said to have been named for the city in Maine,
which won the honor by a coin toss over Boston.


tea party (n.)

1772, from tea + party (n.). Political references to tea party all trace to the Boston tea party of
1773 (the name seems to date from 1824), in which radicals in Massachusetts colony boarded British
ships carrying tea and threw the product into Boston Harbor in protest royal taxation. It has been a
model for other libertarian political actions in the U.S. (mostly symbolic), including citizen
gatherings begun in early 2009 to protest government spending.


deport (v.2)

banish, 1640s, from French d&eacute;porter, from Latin deportare carry off, transport, banish,
exile, from de- in its sense of off, away (see de-) + portare to carry (but associated by folk
etymology with portus harbor); see port (n.1). Related: Deported; deporting.


pile (n.1)

mass, heap, early 15c., originally pillar, pier of a bridge, from Middle French pile and directly
from Latin pila stone barrier, pillar, pier (see pillar). Sense development in Latin from pier,
harbor wall of stones, to something heaped up. In English, sense of heap of things is attested from
mid-15c. (the verb in this sense is recorded from mid-14c.). The meaning large building (late 14c.)
is probably the same word.


laid

past tense and past participle of lay (v.). Laid-up injured, sick, originally was a nautical term
(1769) describing a ship moored in harbor. Laid off temporarily unemployed is from 1916. Get laid
have sex (with someone) attested from 1952, U.S. slang. Laid-back relaxed is first attested 1973,
perhaps in reference to the posture of highway motorcyclists. Laid up incapacitated originally was
of ships.


sandwich (n.)

1762, said to be a reference to John Montagu (1718-1792), Fourth Earl Sandwich, who was said to be
an inveterate gambler who ate slices of cold meat between bread at the gaming table during marathon
sessions rather than get up for a proper meal (this account dates to 1770). It was in his honor that
Cook named the Hawaiian islands (1778) when Montagu was first lord of the Admiralty. The family name
is from the place in Kent, Old English Sandwic&aelig;, literally sandy harbor (or trading center).
For pronunciation, see cabbage. Sandwich board, one carried before and one behind, is from 1864.


bar (n.1)

late 12c., stake or rod of iron used to fasten a door or gate, from Old French barre (12c.) beam,
bar, gate, barrier, from Vulgar Latin *barra bar, barrier, which some suggest is from Gaulish
*barros the bushy end [Gamillscheg], but OED regards this as discredited because it in no way suits
the sense. Of soap, by 1833; of candy, by 1906 (the process itself dates to the 1840s). Meaning bank
of sand across a harbor or river mouth is from 1580s, probably so called because it was an
obstruction to navigation. Bar graph is attested from 1925. Bar code first recorded 1963. Behind
bars in prison is attested by 1934, U.S.


Greenwich

town on the south bank of the Thames adjoining London, Old English Grenewic (964), literally Green
Harbor. The Royal Observatory there founded June 22, 1675, by King Charles II specifically to solve
the problem of finding longitude while at sea.    In October 1884, at the behest of the President of
the U.S.A., 41 delegates from 25 nations met in Washington, D.C., for the International Meridian
Conference. They decided to adopt a single world meridian, passing through the principal Transit
Instrument at the observatory at Greenwich, as the basis of calculation for all longitude and a
worldwide 24-hour clock. The Greenwich motion passed 22-1; San Domingo voted against it; France and
Brazil abstained. Greenwich Village quarter of New York City has been symbolic of American bohemia
at least since 1903.


haven (n.)

Old English h&aelig;fen haven, port, from Old Norse h&ouml;fn haven, harbor or directly from Proto-
Germanic *hafno- (cognates: Danish havn, Middle Low German havene, German Hafen), perhaps from PIE
*kap- to seize, hold contain (see have) on notion of place that holds ships, but compare Old Norse
haf, Old English h&aelig;f sea (see haff). Figurative sense of refuge, now practically the only
sense, is c.1200.


arbor (n.)

c.1300, herber, herb garden, from Old French erbier field, meadow; kitchen garden, from Latin herba
grass, herb (see herb). Later a grassy plot (early 14c., a sense also in Old French), a shaded nook
(mid-14c.). Probably not from Latin arbor tree, though perhaps influenced by its spelling.    The
change from er- to ar- before consonants in Middle English also reflects a pronunciation shift:
compare farm from ferme, harbor from Old English herebeorg.


ford (n.)

Old English ford shallow place where water can be crossed, from Proto-Germanic *furdhus (cognates:
Old Frisian forda, Old High German furt, German Furt ford), from PIE *prtu- a going, a passage
(cognates: Latin portus harbor, originally entrance, passage; Old Welsh rit, Welsh rhyd ford; Old
English faran to go; see port (n.1)). The line of automobiles is named for U.S. manufacturer Henry
Ford (1863-1947).


stance (n.)

1530s, standing place, station, probably from Middle French stance resting place, harbor (16c.),
from Vulgar Latin *stantia place, abode (also source of Italian stanza stopping place, station,
stanza, Spanish stancia a dwelling), from Latin stans (genitive stantis), present participle of
stare to stand, from PIE root *sta- to stand (see stet). Sense of position of the feet (in golf,
etc.) is first recorded 1897; figurative sense of point of view is recorded from 1956. The sense of
the French word has since narrowed.


harbinger (n.)

late 15c., herbengar one sent ahead to arrange lodgings (for a monarch, an army, etc.), alteration
of Middle English herberger provider of shelter, innkeeper (late 12c.), from Old French herbergeor,
from herbergier provide lodging, from herber lodging, shelter, from Frankish *heriberga lodging,
inn, from Germanic compound *harja-bergaz, literally army hill  (cognate with Old Saxon, Old High
German heriberga army shelter) from *heri army (see harry (v.)) + berga shelter (see barrow (n.2)).
Compare harbor (n.). Sense of forerunner is mid-16c. Intrusive -n- is 15c. (see messenger). As a
verb, from 1640s (harbinge to lodge is late 15c.).


pearl (n.)

mid-13c., from Old French perle (13c.) and directly from Medieval Latin perla (mid-13c.), of unknown
origin. Perhaps from Vulgar Latin *pernula, diminutive of Latin perna, which in Sicily meant pearl,
earlier sea-mussel, literally ham, haunch, gammon, so called for the shape of the mollusk shells.
Other theories connect it with the root of pear, also somehow based on shape, or Latin pilula
globule, with dissimilation. The usual Latin word for pearl was margarita (see margarite).    For
pearls before swine, see swine. Pearl Harbor translates Hawaiian Wai Momi, literally pearl waters,
so named for the pearl oysters found there; transferred sense of effective sudden attack is attested
from 1942 (in reference to Dec. 7, 1941).


clear (v.)

late 14c., to fill with light, from clear (adj.). Of weather, from late 14c. Meaning make clear in
the mind is mid-15c., as is sense of to remove what clouds. Meaning to prove innocent is from late
15c. Meaning get rid of is from 1530s.    Meaning to free from entanglement is from 1590s; that of
pass without entanglement is from 1630s. Meaning to leap clear over is first attested 1791. Meaning
get approval for (a proposal, etc.) is from 1944; meaning establish as suitable for national
security work is from 1948. Related: Cleared; clearing.    To clear (one's) throat is from 1881;
earlier clear (one's) voice (1701). To clear out depart, leave (1825), perhaps is from the notion of
ships satisfying customs, harbor regulations, etc., then setting sail. To clear up is from 1620s, of
weather; 1690s as make clear to the mind. Clear the decks is what is done on a ship before it moves.


