hardy (adj.)

c.1200, bold, daring, fearless, from Old French hardi, from past participle of hardir to harden, be
or make bold, from Frankish *hardjan to make hard (cognates: Old Frisian herda, Old High German
herten, Old Norse her&eth;a, Gothic gahardjan make hard), from Proto-Germanic *hardu- (see hard).
Sense influenced by English hard. Related: Hardily; hardiness. Hardhede physical hardiness is
attested from early 15c.


venturous (adj.)

daring, bold, hardy, 1560s, shortened form of adventurous, influenced by venture.


Wessex

Anglo-Saxon kingdom in southern England, literally (land of the) West Saxons; see west + Saxon.
Modern use in reference to southwestern England (excluding Cornwall) is from Hardy's novels.


seaworthy (adj.)

1807, in fit condition to encounter heavy weather at sea, from sea + worthy. Related: Seaworthiness.
Old English had s&aelig;rof hardy at sea.


foolhardy (adj.)

early 13c., from fool (n.) + Middle English hardi bold; hence foolishly brave (see hardy). Compare
Old French fol hardi.


madding (adj.)

present participle adjective from obsolete verb mad to make insane; to become insane (see madden);
now principally in the phrase far from the madding crowd, title of a novel by Hardy (1874), who
lifted it from a line of Gray's Elegy (1749), which seems to echo a line from Drummond of
Hawthornden from 1614 (Farre from the madding Worldling's hoarse discords).


virtuous (adj.)

c.1300, characterized by vigor or strength; having qualities befitting a knight; valiant, hardy,
courageous; from Old French vertuos righteous; potent; of good quality; mighty, valiant, brave
(12c.), from Late Latin virtuosus good, virtuous, from Latin virtus (see virtue). From mid-14c. in
English as having beneficial or efficacious properties; late 14c. (of persons) as having excellent
moral qualities; conforming to religious law. Related: Virtuously; virtuousness.


robust (adj.)

1540s, from Middle French robuste (14c.) and directly from Latin robustus strong and hardy,
literally as strong as oak, originally oaken, from robur, robus hard timber, strength, also a
special kind of oak, named for its reddish heartwood, from Latin ruber red (related to robigo rust),
from PIE *reudh- (see red (adj.1)). Related: Robustly; robustness. Robustious (1540s) was a common
form in 17c. (see Hamlet iii.2); it fell from use by mid-18c., but was somewhat revived by mid-19c.
antiquarian writers.


-ard

also -art, from Old French -ard, -art, from German -hard, -hart hardy, forming the second element in
many personal names, often used as an intensifier, but in Middle High German and Dutch used as a
pejorative element in common nouns, and thus passing into Middle English in bastard, coward,
blaffard (one who stammers), etc. It thus became a living element in English, as in buzzard,
drunkard.


cum

verb and noun, by 1973, apparently a variant of the sexual sense of come that originated in
pornographic writing, perhaps first in the noun sense. This experience sexual orgasm slang meaning
of come (perhaps originally come off) is attested from 1650, in Walking In A Meadowe Greene, in a
folio of loose songs collected by Bishop Percy.    They lay soe close together, they made me much to
wonder;  I knew not which was wether, until I saw her under.  Then off he came, and blusht for shame
soe soon that he had endit;  Yet still she lies, and to him cryes, one more and none can mend it.
As a noun meaning semen or other product of orgasm it is on record from the 1920s. The sexual cum
seems to have no connection with Latin cum, the preposition meaning with, together with, which is
occasionally used in English in local names of combined parishes or benifices (such as Chorlton-cum-
Hardy), in popular Latin phrases (such as cum laude), or as a combining word to indicate a dual
nature or function (such as slumber party-cum-bloodbath).


sturdy (adj.)

c.1300, hard to manage, reckless, violent, from Old French estordi (11c., Modern French
&#233;tourdi) violent, originally dazed, past participle of estordiir to daze, stun, stupefy, from
Vulgar Latin *exturdire, which some presume to be from Latin intensive prefix ex- + turdus thrush.
Barnhart suggests the notion is of thrushes eating grape remnants at wineries and behaving as if
drunk (Italian tordo thrush also means simpleton, and French has the expression so&#251;l comme une
grive drunk as a thrush). OED, however, regards all this as open to grave objection. Century
Dictionary compares Latin torpidus dull.    Sense of solidly built, strong and hardy first recorded
late 14c. Related: Sturdily; sturdiness. Sturdy-boots obstinate person is from 1762; a sturdy beggar
in old language was one capable of work (c.1400).


trivia (n.)

trivialities, bits of information of little consequence, by 1932, from the title of a popular book
by U.S.-born British aphorist Logan Pearsall Smith (1865-1946) first published in 1902 but
popularized in 1918 (with More Trivia following in 1921 and a collected edition including both in
1933), containing short essays often tied to observation of small things and commonplace moments.
Trivia is Latin, plural of trivium place where three roads meet; in transferred use, an open place,
a public place. The adjectival form of this, trivialis, meant public, hence common, commonplace (see
trivial). The Romans also had trivius dea, the goddess of three ways, another name for Hecate,
perhaps originally in her triple aspect (Selene/Diana/Proserpine), but also as the especial divinity
of crossroads (Virgil has Nocturnisque hecate triviis ululata per urbes). John Gay took this
arbitrarily as the name of a goddess of streets and roads for his mock Georgic Trivia: Or, the Art
of Walking the Streets of London (1716); Smith writes in his autobiography that he got the title
from Gay.    I KNOW too much; I have stuffed too many of the facts of History and Science into my
intellectuals. My eyes have grown dim over books; believing in geological periods, cave dwellers,
Chinese Dynasties, and the fixed stars has prematurely aged me. [Trivia, 1918 edition]    Then noted
c.1965 as an informal fad game among college students wherein one asked questions about useless bits
of information from popular culture (What was Donald Duck's address?) and others vied to answer
first.    Nobody really wins in this game which concentrates on sports, comics and television.
Everyone knows that Amos's wife on the Amos 'n' Andy Show is Ruby, but who knows that she is from
Marietta, Georgia? Trivia players do. They also know the fourth man in the infield of Tinker-to-
Evers-to-Chance, the Canadian who shot down Baron Von Richtofen, and can name ten Hardy Boy books.
[Princeton Alumni Weekly, Nov. 9, 1965]    The board game Trivial Pursuit was released 1982 and was
a craze in U.S. for several years thereafter.


Hobbit (n.)

1937, coined in the fantasy tales of J.R.R. Tolkien (1892-1973).    On a blank leaf I scrawled: 'In
a hole in the ground there lived a hobbit.' I did not and do not know why.  [Tolkien, letter to W.H.
Auden, dated 1955]    The word also turns up in a very long list of folkloric supernatural creatures
in the writings of Michael Aislabie Denham (d.1859), printed in volume 2 of The Denham Tracts [ed.
James Hardy, London: Folklore Society, 1895], a compilation of Denham's scattered publications.
Denham was an early folklorist who concentrated on Northumberland, Durham, Westmoreland, Cumberland,
the Isle of Man, and Scotland.    What a happiness this must have been seventy or eighty years ago
and upwards, to those chosen few who had the good luck to be born on the eve of this festival of all
festivals; when the whole earth was so overrun with ghosts, boggles, bloody-bones, spirits, demons,
ignis fatui, brownies, bugbears, black dogs, specters, shellycoats, scarecrows, witches, wizards,
barguests, Robin-Goodfellows, hags, night-bats, scrags, breaknecks, fantasms, hobgoblins,
hobhoulards, boggy-boes, dobbies, hob-thrusts, fetches, kelpies, warlocks, mock-beggars, mum-pokers,
Jemmy-burties, urchins, satyrs, pans, fauns, sirens, tritons, centaurs, calcars, nymphs, imps,
incubuses, spoorns, men-in-the-oak, hell-wains, fire-drakes, kit-a-can-sticks, Tom-tumblers, melch-
dicks, larrs, kitty-witches, hobby-lanthorns, Dick-a-Tuesdays, Elf-fires, Gyl-burnt-tales, knockers,
elves, rawheads, Meg-with-the-wads, old-shocks, ouphs, pad-foots, pixies, pictrees, giants, dwarfs,
Tom-pokers, tutgots, snapdragons, sprets, spunks, conjurers, thurses, spurns, tantarrabobs,
swaithes, tints, tod-lowries, Jack-in-the-Wads, mormos, changelings, redcaps, yeth-hounds, colt-
pixies, Tom-thumbs, black-bugs, boggarts, scar-bugs, shag-foals, hodge-pochers, hob-thrushes, bugs,
bull-beggars, bygorns, bolls, caddies, bomen, brags, wraiths, waffs, flay-boggarts, fiends,
gallytrots, imps, gytrashes, patches, hob-and-lanthorns, gringes, boguests, bonelesses, Peg-powlers,
pucks, fays, kidnappers, gallybeggars, hudskins, nickers, madcaps, trolls, robinets, friars'
lanthorns, silkies, cauld-lads, death-hearses, goblins, hob-headlesses, bugaboos, kows, or cowes,
nickies, nacks necks, waiths, miffies, buckies, ghouls, sylphs, guests, swarths, freiths, freits,
gy-carlins Gyre-carling, pigmies, chittifaces, nixies, Jinny-burnt-tails, dudmen, hell-hounds,
dopple-gangers, boggleboes, bogies, redmen, portunes, grants, <b>hobbits</b>, hobgoblins, brown-men,
cowies, dunnies, wirrikows, alholdes, mannikins, follets, korreds, lubberkins, cluricauns, kobolds,
leprechauns, kors, mares, korreds, puckles korigans, sylvans, succubuses, blackmen, shadows,
banshees, lian-hanshees, clabbernappers, Gabriel-hounds, mawkins, doubles, corpse lights or candles,
scrats, mahounds, trows, gnomes, sprites, fates, fiends, sibyls, nicknevins, whitewomen, fairies,
thrummy-caps, cutties, and nisses, and apparitions of every shape, make, form, fashion, kind and
description, that there was not a village in England that had not its own peculiar ghost. Nay, every
lone tenement, castle, or mansion-house, which could boast of any antiquity had its bogle, its
specter, or its knocker. The churches, churchyards, and crossroads were all haunted. Every green
lane had its boulder-stone on which an apparition kept watch at night. Every common had its circle
of fairies belonging to it. And there was scarcely a shepherd to be met with who had not seen a
spirit!    [Emphasis added] It is curious that the name occurs nowhere else in folklore, and there
is no evidence that Tolkien ever saw this. The word also was recorded from 1835 as a term generally
used in Wales to express a quantity made up of four Welsh pecks. Hobbitry attested from 1947.


