Harry

masc. proper name, a familiar form of Henry. Weekley takes the overwhelming number of Harris and
Harrison surnames as evidence that Harry, not Henry, was the Middle English pronunciation of Henry.
Compare Harriet, English equivalent of French Henriette, fem. diminutive of Henri. Nautical slang
Harriet Lane preserved meat (1896) refers to a famous murder victim whose killer allegedly chopped
up her body.


harry (v.)

Old English hergian make war, lay waste, ravage, plunder, the word used in the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle
for what the Vikings did to England, from Proto-Germanic *harjon (cognates: Old Frisian urheria lay
waste, ravage, plunder, Old Norse herja to make a raid, to plunder, Old Saxon and Old High German
herion, German verheeren to destroy, lay waste, devastate), from *harjaz an armed force (cognates:
Old English here, Old Norse herr crowd, great number; army, troop, Old Saxon and Old Frisian heri,
Dutch heir, Old High German har, German Heer host, army, Gothic harjis), from PIE root *koro- war
also war-band, hose, army (cognates: Lithuanian karas war, quarrel, karias host, army; Old Church
Slavonic kara strife; Middle Irish cuire troop; Old Persian kara host, people, army; Greek koiranos
ruler, leader, commander). Weakened sense of worry, goad, harass is from c.1400. Related: Harried;
harrying.


hare (v.)

to harry, harass, 1520s; meaning to frighten is 1650s; of uncertain origin; connections have been
suggested to harry (v.) and to hare (n.). Related: Hared; haring.


okapi (n.)

short-necked giraffe of central Africa, 1900, from the animal's name in Mbuba (Congo). Reported by
English explorer Sir Harry Johnston (1858-1927).


Houdini (n.)

escape artist or other ingenious person, 1923, from Harry Houdini, professional name of U.S.
escapist Erich Weiss (1874-1926).


Sweet Adeline

female barbershop singing group member, 1947, from the name of a popular close harmony song by
Richard Armstrong &amp; Harry Gerard, You're the Flower of my Heart, Sweet Adeline (1903).


Bessemer

in reference to the process for decarbonizing and desiliconizing pig iron by passing air through the
molten metal, 1856, named for engineer and inventor Sir Harry Bessemer (1813-1898) who invented it.


transsexualism (n.)

intense desire to change one's sexual status, including the anatomical structure, 1953, coined by
U.S. physician Harry Benjamin (1885-1986) from trans- + sexual. Transsexuality is recorded from
1941, but was used at first to mean homosexuality or bisexuality. In the current sense from 1955.


harum-scarum

1670s (adv.), probably a compound of obsolete hare (v.) harry + scare (v.), with 'um as a reduced
form of them. As an adjective from 1751; as a noun from 1784.


harrier (n.)

1540s, from Middle English hayrer small hunting dog (c.1400), possibly from Middle French errier
wanderer [Barnhart], or associated with hare, which they would have hunted. The hawk genus (1550s)
is from harry (v.), which also is a candidate for the source of the dog name.


Herbert

masc. proper name, introduced in England by the Normans, from Old French Herbert, Latinized from
Frankish *Hari-berct, *Her(e)-bert, literally army-bright; see harry (v.) + bright (adj.).


heriot (n.)

Old English here-geatwe (plural) military equipment, army-gear, from here army (see harry). An
Anglo-Saxon service of weapons, loaned by the lord to his retainer and repayable to him upon the
retainer's death; transferred by 13c. to a feudal due upon the death of a tenant, payable to his
lord in beasts.


harass (v.)

1610s, from French harasser tire out, vex, possibly from Old French harer set a dog on, and perhaps
blended with Old French harier to harry, draw, drag [Barnhart]. Originally to lay waste, devastate,
sense of distress is from 1650s. Related: Harassed; harassing.


harrow (v.)

to drag a harrow over, especially in harrowing of Hell in Christian theology, early 14c., from
hergian (see harry). In the figurative sense of to wound the feelings, distress greatly it is first
attested c.1600 in Shakespeare. Related: Harrowed; harrowing.


martini (n.)

1891, short for Martini cocktail (1886), perhaps from Martini &amp; Rossi, Italian firm that makes
vermouth (an ingredient of the drink); the firm was in existence then by that name, but it is not
specified among the ingredients in the earliest recipes (such as Harry Johnson's Bartender's Manual,
1888). Another theory holds that it is a corruption of Martinez, California, town where the drink
was said to have originated. See discussion in Lowell Edmunds' book Martini, Straight Up (1998).


Herman

masc. proper name, from German Hermann, from Old High German Hariman, literally man of war, warrior,
from hari host, army (see harry (v.)) + man man (see man (n.)).


Sally

fem. proper name, alteration of Sarah (compare Hal from Harry, Moll from Mary, etc.). Sally Lunn
cakes (1780) supposedly named for the woman in Bath who first made them and sold them in the
streets. Sally Ann as a nickname for Salvation Army is recorded from 1927.


Harriet

fem. proper name, the English equivalent of French Henriette, fem. diminutive of Harry.    We think
that gentlemen lose a particle of their respect for young ladies who allow their names to be
abbreviated into such cognomens as Kate, Madge, Bess, Nell, &amp;c.; Surely it is more lady-like to
be called Catharine, Margaret, Eliza, or Ellen. We have heard the beautiful name Virginia degraded
into Jinny; and Harriet called Hatty, or even Hadge. [Eliza Leslie, Miss Leslie's Behaviour Book,
Philadelphia, 1839]


harrow (n.)

agricultural implement, heavy wooden rake, c.1300, haru, from Old English *hearwa, apparently
related to Old Norse harfr harrow, and perhaps connected with Old English h&aelig;rfest harvest (see
harvest). Or possibly from hergian (see harry).


Lothario

masc. proper name, Italian form of Old High German Hlothari, Hludher (whence German Luther, French
Lothaire), literally famous warrior, from Old High German lut (see loud) + heri host, army (see
harry (v.)). As a characteristic name for a lady-killer, 1756, from the name of the principal male
character of Nicholas Rowe's The Fair Penitent (1703).


Harold

masc. proper name, Old Norse Haraldr, Old Danish, Old Swedish Harald, from Proto-Germanic *harja-
waldaz army commander. For first element, see harry; second element is related to Proto-Germanic
*waldan, source of Old English wealdan (see wield). It shares an etymology with herald.


shamus (n.)

police officer, detective, 1920, apparently first in The Shamus, a detective story published that
year by Harry J. Loose (1880-1943), a Chicago police detective and crime writer; the book was
marketed as a true tale of thiefdom and an expose of the real system in crime. The word is said to
be probably from Yiddish shames, literally sexton of a synagogue (a potent personage only next in
influence to the President [Israel Zangwill]), from Hebrew shamash servant; influenced by Celtic
Seamus James, as a typical name for an Irish cop.


hurry (v.)

1590, first recorded in Shakespeare, who used it often; perhaps a variant of harry (v.), or perhaps
a West Midlands sense of Middle English hurren to vibrate rapidly, buzz, from Proto-Germanic *hurza
to move with haste (cognates: Middle High German hurren to whir, move fast, Old Swedish hurra to
whirl round), which also perhaps is the root of hurl. Related: hurried; hurrying.


Harris

popular surname, attested from c.1400, from Harry, popular medieval pronunciation of Henry. As a
type of tweed (1892), it is from the name of the southern section of the island of Lewis with Harris
in the Outer Hebrides; originally it referred to fabric produced by the inhabitants there, later a
proprietary name. That place name represents Gaelic na-h-earaidh that which is higher, in comparison
to the lower Lewis. Harrisburg, capital of Pennsylvania, is named for ferryman John Harris
(1727-1791), son of the original European settler.


argue (v.)

c.1300, to make reasoned statements to prove or refute a proposition, from Old French arguer
maintain an opinion or view; harry, reproach, accuse, blame (12c.), from Latin argutare to prattle,
prate, frequentative of arguere make clear, make known, prove, declare, demonstrate, from PIE *argu-
yo-, from root *arg- to shine, be white, bright, clear (see argent). Meaning to oppose, dispute is
from late 14c. Related: Argued; arguing.


Oliver

masc. personal name, in medieval lore the name of one of Charlemagne's peers, friend of Roland, from
French Olivier, from Middle Low German Alfihar, literally elf-host, elf-army, from alf elf (see elf)
+ hari host, army (see harry (v.)). Cognate with Anglo-Saxon name &AElig;lfhere. Form influenced in
Old French by olivier olive tree.


harbor (n.)

lodging for ships, early 12c., probably from Old English herebeorg lodgings, quarters, from here
army, host (see harry) + beorg refuge, shelter (related to beorgan save, preserve; see bury);
perhaps modeled on Old Norse herbergi room, lodgings, quarters. Sense shifted in Middle English to
refuge, lodgings, then to place of shelter for ships.


every (adj.)

early 13c., contraction of Old English &aelig;fre &aelig;lc each of a group, literally ever each
(Chaucer's everich), from each with ever added for emphasis. The word still is felt to want
emphasis; as in Modern English every last ..., every single ..., etc.    Compare everybody,
everything, etc. The word everywhen is attested from 1843 but never caught on; neither did everyhow
(1837). Slang phrase every Tom, Dick, and Harry dates from at least 1734, from common English given
names.


Walter

masc. proper name, from Old North French Waltier (Old French Gualtier, Modern French Gautier), of
Germanic origin and cognate with Old High German Walthari, Walthere, literally ruler of the army,
from waltan to rule (see wield) + hari host, army (see harry). Walter Mitty (1939) is from title
character in The Secret Life of Walter Mitty by U.S. short story writer James Thurber (1894-1961).


herald (n.)

late 13c. (in Anglo-Latin); c.1200 as a surname, messenger, envoy, from Anglo-French heraud, Old
French heraut, hiraut (12c.), perhaps from Frankish *hariwald commander of an army, from Proto-
Germanic *harja army (from PIE root *koro- war; see harry) + *waldaz to command, rule (see wield).
The form fits, but the sense evolution is difficult to explain, unless in reference to the chief
officer of a tournament, who introduced knights and made decisions on rules (which was one of the
early senses, often as heraud of armes, though not the earliest in English).


spiv (n.)

petty crook who will turn his hand to anything so long as it does not involve honest work, 1934,
British slang, probably dating back to late 19c. and connected with spiff (see spiffy) in one of its
various senses. Being a flashy dresser was a spiv characteristic.    The spiv reached his apotheosis
during World War II and the succeeding years, when the disrupted economic conditions allowed ample
scope for unofficial trading (a pair of nylons here, a few packets of cigarettes there) and other
petty crime. He became a stock figure in the English social comedy, represented on screen by such
stereotypes as 'Flash Harry' (played by George Cole) in the St. Trinian's films and Pte. Walker in
Dad's Army. [Ayto, 20th Century Words]


Tom

familiar shortening of masc. proper name Thomas, used by late 14c. as a type of a nickname for a
common man (as in Tom, Dick, and Harry, 1734). Applied 17c. as a nickname for several exceptionally
large bells. Short for Uncle Tom in the sense of black man regarded as too servile to whites is
recorded from 1959. Tom Walker, U.S. Southern colloquial for the devil is recorded from 1833. Tom
and Jerry is first attested 1828 and later used in many extended senses, originally were the names
of the two chief characters (Corinthian Tom and Jerry Hawthorn) in Pierce Egan's Life in London
(1821); the U.S. cat and mouse cartoon characters debuted 1940 in Puss Gets the Boot. Tom Thumb
(1570s) was a miniature man in popular tradition before P.T. Barnum took the name for a dwarf he
exhibited. Tom-tit titmouse is from 1709. Compare tomcat.


veep (n.)

1949, American English, apparently coined from V.P., abbreviation of vice president, perhaps modeled
on jeep, which was then in vogue. Introduced by Alben W. Barkley (1877-1956), Harry Truman's vice
president. According to the Saturday Evening Post, his grandchildren, finding Vice-President too
long, call him that. The magazines quickly picked it up, especially when the 71-year-old Barkley
married a 38-year-old widow (dubbed the Veepess).    Barkley says word Veep is not copyrighted, and
any vice president who wants to can use it. But he hopes not many will. [U.S. Department of State
wireless bulletin, 1949]    Time, tongue in cheek, suggested the president should be Peep, the
Secretary of State Steep, and the Secretary of Labor Sleep.


harbinger (n.)

late 15c., herbengar one sent ahead to arrange lodgings (for a monarch, an army, etc.), alteration
of Middle English herberger provider of shelter, innkeeper (late 12c.), from Old French herbergeor,
from herbergier provide lodging, from herber lodging, shelter, from Frankish *heriberga lodging,
inn, from Germanic compound *harja-bergaz, literally army hill  (cognate with Old Saxon, Old High
German heriberga army shelter) from *heri army (see harry (v.)) + berga shelter (see barrow (n.2)).
Compare harbor (n.). Sense of forerunner is mid-16c. Intrusive -n- is 15c. (see messenger). As a
verb, from 1640s (harbinge to lodge is late 15c.).


harness (n.)

c.1300, personal fighting equipment, body armor, also armor or trappings of a war-horse, from Old
French harnois arms, equipment; harness; male genitalia; tackle; household equipment, of uncertain
origin, perhaps from Old Norse *hernest provisions for an army, from herr army (see harry) + nest
provisions (see nostalgia). Non-military sense of fittings for a beast of burden is from early 14c.
German Harnisch harness, armor is the French word, borrowed into Middle High German. The Celtic
words also are believed to be from French, as are Spanish arnes, Portuguese arnez, Italian arnese.
Prive harness (late 14c.) was a Middle English term for sex organs.


truth (n.)

Old English triew&eth; (West Saxon), treow&eth; (Mercian) faith, faithfulness, fidelity, loyalty;
veracity, quality of being true; pledge, covenant, from triewe, treowe faithful (see true (adj.)),
with Proto-Germanic abstract noun suffix *-itho (see -th (2)).    Sense of something that is true is
first recorded mid-14c. Meaning accuracy, correctness is from 1560s. English and most other IE
languages do not have a primary verb for for speak the truth, as a contrast to lie (v.). Truth squad
in U.S. political sense first attested in the 1952 U.S. presidential election campaign.    At
midweek the Republican campaign was bolstered by an innovation--the truth squad ..., a team of
senators who trailed whistle-stopping Harry Truman to field what they denounced as his wild pitches.
[Life, Oct. 13, 1952]   <hr />   Let [Truth] and Falsehood grapple; who ever knew Truth put to the
worse, in a free and open encounter. [Milton, Areopagitica, 1644]


kaput (adj.)

finished, worn out, dead, 1895, from German kaputt destroyed, ruined, lost (1640s), which in this
sense probably is a misunderstanding of the phrase capot machen, a partial translation of French
faire capot, a phrase which meant to win all the tricks (from the other player) in piquet, an
obsolete card game. Literally to make a bonnet; perhaps the notion is throwing a hood over the other
player, but faire capot also meant in French marine jargon to overset in a squall when under sail.
The word was popularized in English during World War I.   Kaput -- a slang word in common use which
corresponds roughly to the English done in, the French fichu. Everything enemy was kaput in the
early days of German victories. [F. Britten Austin, According to Orders, New York, 1919]    French
capot is literally cover, bonnet, also the name of a type of greatcloak worn by sailors and soldiers
(see capote). The card-playing sense attested in German only from 1690s, but capot in the
(presumably) transferred sense of destroyed, ruined, lost is attested from 1640s. [see William
Jervis Jones, A Lexicon of French Borrowings in the German Vocabulary (1575-1648), Berlin, de
Gruyter, 1976]. In Hoyle and other English gaming sources, faire capot is to win all the tricks, and
a different phrase, &ecirc;tre capot, to be a bonnet, is sometimes cited as the term for losing
them. The sense reversal in German might have come about because if someone wins all the tricks the
other player has to lose them, and the same word capot, when it entered English from French in the
mid-17c. meant to score a cabot against; to win all the tricks from.    There are others, says a
third, that have played with my Lady Lurewell at picquet besides my lord; I have capotted her myself
two or three times in an evening. [George Farquhar (1677-1707), Sir Harry Wildair]


fundamentalist (adj.)

1920 in the religious sense (as is fundamentalism), from fundamental + -ist. Coined in American
English to name a movement among Protestants c.1920-25 based on scriptural inerrancy, etc., and
associated with William Jennings Bryan, among others.   Fundamentalist is said (by George McCready
Price) to have been first used in print by Curtis Lee Laws (1868-1946), editor of The Watchman
Examiner, a Baptist newspaper. The movement may have roots in the Presbyterian General Assembly of
1910, which drew up a list of five defining qualities of true believers which other evangelicals
published in a mass-circulation series of books called The Fundamentals. A World's Christian
Fundamentals Association was founded in 1918. The words reached widespread use in the wake of the
contentious Northern Baptist Convention of 1922 in Indianapolis.    Fundamentalism is a protest
against that rationalistic interpretation of Christianity which seeks to discredit supernaturalism.
This rationalism, when full grown, scorns the miracles of the Old Testament, sets aside the virgin
birth of our Lord as a thing unbelievable, laughs at the credulity of those who accept many of the
New Testament miracles, reduces the resurrection of our Lord to the fact that death did not end his
existence, and sweeps away the promises of his second coming as an idle dream. It matters not by
what name these modernists are known. The simple fact is that, in robbing Christianity of its
supernatural content, they are undermining the very foundations of our holy religion. They boast
that they are strengthening the foundations and making Christianity more rational and more
acceptable to thoughtful people. Christianity is rooted and grounded in supernaturalism, and when
robbed of supernaturalism it ceases to be a religion and becomes an exalted system of ethics. [Laws,
Herald &amp; Presbyter, July 19, 1922]    The original opposition to fundamentalist (within the
denominations) was modernist.    A new word has been coined into our vocabulary -- two new words --
'Fundamentalist' and 'Fundamentalism.' They are not in the dictionaries as yet -- unless in the very
latest editions. But they are on everyone's tongue. [Address Delivered at the Opening of the
Seminary, Sept. 20, 1922, by Professor Harry Lathrop Reed, Auburn Seminary Record]    Applied to
other religions, especially Islam, since 1957.


