Harvard

U.S. college named for John Harvard (1607-1638), Puritan immigrant minister who bequeathed half his
estate and 260 books to the yet-unorganized college that had been ordered by the Massachusetts
colonial government. The surname is cognate with Hereward, Old English hereweard, literally army
guard.


hazing (n.)

brutal initiation of college freshmen, 1848, said to be a Harvard word (This word is used at Harvard
College, to express the treatment which Freshmen sometimes receive from the higher classes, and
especially from the Sophomores -- Collection of College Words and Customs, Boston, 1851); see haze
(v.).


Davis Cup

donated 1900 as a national tennis championship trophy by U.S. statesman Dwight Filley Davis
(1879-1945) while still an undergraduate at Harvard.


Ameslan (n.)

1972, acronym of Ame(rican) S(ign) Lan(guage), known by that name since 1960, but its history goes
back to 1817, evolving from French Sign Language (introduced at American School for the Deaf in
Hartford, Conn.) and indigenous sign languages, especially that of Martha's Vineyard. [See Everyone
Here Spoke Sign Language, Nora Ellen Groce, Harvard University Press, 1985]


extrapolate (v.)

1862 (in a Harvard observatory account of the comet of 1858), from extra- + ending from interpolate.
Said in early references to be a characteristic word of Sir George Airy (1801-1892), English
mathematician and astronomer. Related: Extrapolated; extrapolating.


buzzword (n.)

also buzz word, 1946, from buzz (n.) + word (n.). Noted as Harvard student slang for the key words
in a lecture or reading. Perhaps from the use of buzz in the popular counting game.


pizazz (n.)

also pizzaz; pizzazz, 1937, probably originally college or show-biz slang.Pizazz, to quote the
editor of the Harvard Lampoon, is an indefinable dynamic quality, the je ne sais quoi of function;
as for instance, adding Scotch puts pizazz into a drink. Certain clothes have it, too. [Harper's
Bazaar, March 1937]


cum laude

1872, originally at Harvard, from Medieval Latin, literally with praise, from Latin cum with +
laude, ablative of laus (genitive laudis) praise (see laud). Probably from earlier use (in Latin) at
Heidelberg and other German universities.


Octavian

masc. proper name, from Latin, from Octavius, from octavus eighth, from octo (see eight).    But
although we find so marked differences in the use of the numerals as names, it is impossible to
believe that this use did not arise in the same way for all; that is, that they were at first used
to distinguish children by the order of birth. But when we find them as praenomina in historical
times it is evident that they no longer referred to order of birth. [George Davis Chase, The Origin
of Roman Praenomina, Harvard Studies in Classical Philology, 1897]


multiverse (n.)

1895, William James's coinage, an alternative to universe meant to convey absence of order and
unity.    But those times are past; and we of the nineteenth century, with our evolutionary theories
and our mechanical philosophies, already know nature too impartially and too well to worship
unreservedly any god of whose character she can be an adequate expression. Truly all we know of good
and beauty proceeds from nature, but none the less so all we know of evil. Visible nature is all
plasticity and indifference, a moral multiverse, as one might call it, and not a moral universe.
[William James, Is Life Worth Living? address to the Young Men's Christian Association of Harvard
University, May 1895]


crew (n.)

mid-15c., group of soldiers, from Middle French crue (Old French creue) an increase, recruit,
military reinforcement, from fem. past participle of creistre grow, from Latin crescere arise, grow
(see crescent). Meaning people acting or working together is first attested 1560s. Gang of men on a
warship is from 1690s. Crew-cut first attested 1938, so called because the style  originally was
adopted by boat crews at Harvard and Yale.


demote (v.)

1881, American English coinage from de- + stem of promote. Said to have been Midwestern in origin.
Regarding an antithesis to 'promote,' the word universally in use in Cambridge, in Harvard College,
is drop. The same word is in use in the leading schools here (Boston). I hope I may be counted every
time against such barbarisms as 'demote' and 'retromote.' [Edward Everett Hale, 1892, letter to the
publishers of Funk &amp; Wagnalls' Standard Dictionary]    Related: Demoted; demoting.


sabbatical (adj.)

1640s, of or suitable for the Sabbath, from Latin sabbaticus, from Greek sabbatikos of the Sabbath
(see Sabbath). Noun meaning a year's absence granted to researchers (originally one year in seven,
to university professors) is from 1934, short for sabbatical year, etc., first recorded 1886 (the
thing itself is attested from 1880, at Harvard), related to sabbatical year (1590s) in Mosaic law,
the seventh year, in which land was to remain untilled and debtors and slaves released.


ivy (n.)

Old English ifig, from West Germanic *ibakhs (cognates: Middle Low German iflof, Dutch eiloof, Old
High German ebahewi, German Efeu), of unknown origin; the second element in the Old High German word
might be hay.   Ivy bush as a sign of a tavern where wine is served is attested from mid-15c. Ivy
League, inspired by the notion of old, ivy-coated walls, dates to 1933 (perhaps originally in
reference to football; it consists of Brown, Columbia, Cornell, Dartmouth, Harvard, Pennsylvania,
Princeton, and Yale).


Yankee Doodle (n.)

popular tune of the American Revolution, apparently written c. 1755 by British Army surgeon Dr.
Richard Schuckburgh while campaigning with Amherst's force in upper New York during the French and
Indian War. The original verses mocked the colonial troops (see Yankee) serving alongside the
regulars, and the Doodle element might have been, or hinted at, the 18c. slang term for penis. The
song naturally was popular with British troops in the colonies during the Revolutionary War, but
after the colonials began to win skirmishes with them in 1775, they took the tune as a patriotic
prize and re-worked the lyrics. The current version seems to have been written in 1776 by Edward
Bangs, a Harvard sophomore who also was a Minuteman.


strip (v.)

make bare, early 13c., from Old English -striepan, -strypan to plunder, despoil (as in West Saxon
bestrypan to plunder), from Proto-Germanic *straupijan (cognates: Middle Dutch stropen to strip off,
to ramble about plundering, Old High German stroufen to strip off, plunder, German streifen strip
off, touch upon, to ramble, roam, rove). Meaning to unclothe is recorded from early 13c.
Intransitive sense from late 14c. Of screw threads, from 1839; of gear wheels, from 1873. Meaning
perform a strip-tease is from 1929. Related: Stripped; stripping. Strip poker is attested from 1916,
in a joke in The Technology Monthly and Harvard Engineering Journal:    Say, Bill how, did the game
come out?  It ended in a tie.  Oh, were you playing strip poker?    strip search is from 1947, in
reference to World War II prison camps.


