hatch (n.)

opening, Old English h&aelig;c (genitive h&aelig;cce) fence, grating, gate, from Proto-Germanic
*hak- (cognates: Middle High German heck, Dutch hek fence, gate). This apparently is the source of
many of the Hatcher surnames; one who lives near a gate. Sense of plank opening in ship's deck is
first recorded mid-13c. Drinking phrase down the hatch first recorded 1931.


hatchback

type of rear door of an automobile, 1970, from hatch (n.) + back (n.).


hatchling (n.)

1854, from hatch (v.1) + diminutive suffix -ling.


hatchway (n.)

1620s, originally nautical, from hatch (n.) + way (n.).


hatchery (n.)

1880, from hatch (v.1) + -ery.


hatch (v.2)

engrave, draw fine parallel lines, late 14c., from Old French hachier chop up, hack (14c.), from
hache ax (see hatchet). Related: Hatched; hatching. The noun meaning an engraved line or stroke is
from 1650s.


hatch (v.1)

to produce young from eggs by incubation, from Middle English hachen (early 13c.), probably from an
unrecorded Old English *h&aelig;ccan, of unknown origin, related to Middle High German, German
hecken to mate (used of birds). Meaning to come forth from an egg is late 14c. Figurative use (of
plots, etc.) is from early 14c. Related: Hatched; hatching.


hatchet (n.)

c.1300 small ax (mid-12c. in surnames), from Old French hachete, diminutive of hache ax, battle-axe,
pickaxe, possibly from Frankish *happja or some other Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic *hapjo-
(cognates: Old High German happa sickle, scythe), from PIE root *kop- to beat, strike (cognates:
Greek kopis knife; Lithuanian kaplys hatchet, kapoti cut small; Old Church Slavonic skopiti
castrate).    In Middle English, hatch itself was used in a sense battle-axe. In 14c., hang up
(one's) hatchet meant stop what one is doing. Phrase bury the hatchet (1794) is from a supposed
Native American peacemaking custom. Hatchet-man was originally California slang for hired Chinese
assassin (1880), later extended figuratively to journalists who attacked the reputation of a public
figure (1944).


clutch (n.3)

a brood, a nest in reference to chickens, eggs, 1721, from clekken to hatch (c.1400). Said by OED to
be apparently a southern England dialect word. Compare batch/bake. Probably from a Scandinavian
source (such as Old Norse klekja to hatch), perhaps of imitative origin (compare cluck (v.)).


incubation (n.)

1610s, brooding, from Latin incubationem (nominative incubatio) a laying upon eggs, noun of action
from past participle stem of incubare to hatch, literally to lie on, rest on, from in- on (see in-
(2)) + cubare to lie (see cubicle). The literal sense of sitting on eggs to hatch them first
recorded in English 1640s.


breed (v.)

Old English bredan bring young to birth, carry, also cherish, keep warm, from West Germanic *brodjan
(cognates: Old High German bruoten, German br&uuml;ten to brood, hatch), from *brod- fetus,
hatchling, from PIE *bhreue- burn, heat (see brood (n.)). Original notion of the word was
incubation, warming to hatch. Sense of grow up, be reared (in a clan, etc.) is late 14c. Related:
Bred; breeding.


brood (v.)

sit on eggs, hatch, mid-15c., from brood (n.). The figurative meaning (to incubate in the mind) is
first recorded 1570s, from notion of nursing one's anger, resentment, etc. Related: Brooded;
brooding.


incubate (v.)

1640s, to brood upon, watch jealously (which also was a figurative sense of Latin incubare); 1721 as
to sit on eggs to hatch them, from Latin incubatus, past participle of incubare to lie in or upon
(see incubation). Related: Incubated; incubating.


covey (n.)

mid-14c., brood of partridges, from Middle French cov&eacute;e brood (Modern French couv&eacute;e),
from Gallo-Roman *cubata, literally hatchling, from past participle stem of Latin cubare to sit,
incubate, hatch (see incubation).


barnacle (n.)

early 13c., species of wild goose; as a type of shellfish, first recorded 1580s. Often derived from
a Celtic source (compare Breton bernik, a kind of shellfish), but the application to the goose
predates that of the shellfish in English. The goose nests in the Arctic in summer and returns to
Europe in the winter, hence the mystery surrounding its reproduction. It was believed in ancient
superstition to hatch from barnacle's shell, possibly because the crustacean's feathery stalks
resemble goose down. The scientific name of the crustacean, Cirripedes, is from Greek cirri curls of
hair + pedes feet.


hash (v.)

1650s, to hack, chop into small pieces, from French hacher chop up, from Old French hache ax (see
hatchet). Hash browns is short for hash browned potatoes (1917), with the -ed omitted, as in mash
potatoes. The hash marks on a football field were so called 1960s, from similarity to hash marks,
armed forces slang for service stripes on the sleeve of a military uniform (1909), which supposedly
were called that because they mark the number of years one has had free food (hash (n.1)) from the
Army; but perhaps there is a connection with the noun form of hatch (v.2).


down (adv.)

late Old English shortened form of Old English ofdune downwards, from dune from the hill, dative of
dun hill (see down (n.2)). A sense development peculiar to English.    Used as a preposition since
c.1500. Sense of depressed mentally is attested from c.1600. Slang sense of aware, wide awake is
attested from 1812. Computer crash sense is from 1965. As a preposition from late 14c.; as an
adjective from 1560s. Down-and-out is from 1889, American English, from situation of a beaten
prizefighter. Down home (adj.) is 1931, American English; down the hatch as a toast is from 1931;
down to the wire is 1901, from horse-racing. Down time is from 1952. Down under Australia and New
Zealand attested from 1886; Down East Maine is from 1825.


addle (v.)

1712, from addle (n.) urine, liquid filth, from Old English adela mud, mire, liquid manure (cognate
with Old Swedish adel urine, Middle Low German adel, Dutch aal puddle).    Used in noun phrase addle
egg (mid-13c.) egg that does not hatch, rotten egg, literally urine egg, a loan-translation of Latin
ovum urinum, which is itself an erroneous loan-translation of Greek ourion oon putrid egg, literally
wind egg, from ourios of the wind (confused by Roman writers with ourios of urine, from ouron
urine). Because of this usage, from c.1600 the noun in English was taken as an adjective meaning
putrid, and thence given a figurative extension to empty, vain, idle, also confused, muddled,
unsound (1706). The verb followed a like course. Related: Addled; addling.


