haughtiness (n.)

1550s, from haughty + -ness. Earlier was haughtness (late 15c.).


supercilium (n.)

the eyebrow, 1670s, from Latin supercilium an eyebrow; a ridge, summit; figuratively haughtiness,
arrogance, pride (see supercilious).


contumacy (n.)

late 14c., from Latin contumacia haughtiness, insolence, noun of quality from contumax (see
contumely).


insolence (n.)

late 14c., from Latin insolentia unusualness, haughtiness, arrogance, from insolentem (see
insolent).


hauteur (n.)

1620s, from French hauteur haughtiness, arrogance, literally height, from Old French hauture (12c.)
height, loftiness; grandeur, majesty, from haut (see haught).


pride (n.)

late Old English pryto, Kentish prede, Mercian pride pride, haughtiness, pomp, from prud (see
proud). There is debate whether Scandinavian cognates (Old Norse pry&#240;i, Old Swedish prydhe ,
Danish pryd, etc.) are borrowed from Old French (from Germanic) or from Old English. Meaning that
which makes a person or people most proud is from c.1300. First applied to groups of lions late
15c., but not commonly so used until c.1930. Paired with prejudice from 1610s.


supercilious (adj.)

1520s, lofty with pride, haughtily contemptuous, from Latin superciliosus haughty, arrogant, from
supercilium haughty demeanor, pride, literally eyebrow (via notion of raising the eyebrow to express
haughtiness), from super above (see super-) + second element akin to cilium eyelid, related to
celare to cover, hide, from PIE root *kel- (2) to conceal (see cell).    Since cilium is more recent
than supercilium, the former can be interpreted as a back-formation to the latter .... If indeed
derived from the root *kel- 'to hide', we must still assume that a noun *kilium 'eyelid' existed,
since the eyelid can 'hide' the eye, whereas the eyebrow does not have such a function. Thus,
supercilium may originally have meant 'what is above the cilium'. [Michiel de Vaan, Etymological
Dictionary of Latin and the other Italic Languages, Leiden, 2008]    Related: Superciliously;
superciliousness.


Quaker (n.)

1651, said to have been applied to them in 1650 by Justice Bennett at Derby, from George Fox's
admonition to his followers to tremble at the Word of the Lord; but the word was used earlier of
foreign sects given to fits of shaking during religious fervor, and that is likely the source here.
Either way, it never was an official name of the Religious Society of Friends. The word in a literal
sense is attested from early 15c., an agent noun from quake (v.).    There is not a word in the
Scripture, to put David's condition into rime and meeter: sometimes he quaked and trembled, and lay
roaring all the day long, that he watered his bed with his tears: and how can you sing these
conditions (but dishonour the Lord) and say all your bones quake, your flesh trembled, and that you
water your bed with your tears? when you live in pride and haughtiness, and pleasure, and
wantonness; etc. [A Brief Discovery of a threefold estate of Antichrist Now Extant in the world,
etc., an early Quaker work, London, 1653]    Quaker gun (1809, American English) was a log painted
black and propped up to look from a distance like a cannon, so called for the sect's noted pacifism.
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, has been known as the Quaker City since at least 1824. Related:
Quakerish; Quakeress (a female Quaker); Quakerism.


morgue (n.)

mortuary, 1821, from French Morgue, originally a specific building in Paris where bodies were
exposed for identification:    There is, in the most populous part of the French metropolis, an
establishment entitled La Morgue, destined for the reception and exposition of bodies drowned in the
Seine, and caught in nets, which are placed in different parts of the river for that purpose. The
object of this exposition is, that the deceased may be recognised by their friends or relatives, and
receive the rights of sepulture accordingly. The Morgue is open at all hours of the day, to
passengers of every description, and often displays at a time, five or six horrible carcasses
stretched, without covering, on an inclined platform, and subjected to the promiscuous gaze of the
mob. [American Review, January 1811]     Before that it was the place where new prisoners were
displayed to keepers to establish their identification. Thus the name is believed to be probably
from French morgue haughtiness, originally a sad expression, solemn look, from Old French morguer
look solemnly, from Vulgar Latin *murricare to make a face, pout, from *murrum muzzle, snout. The
1768 Dictionnaire Royal Fran&#231;ois-Anglois Et Anglois-Fran&#231;ois defines French morgue both as
A proud, big, haughty or stately look, stare, surliness, or surly look and A little gratel room
wherein a new prisoner is set, and must continue some hours, that the Jailer's ordinary servants may
the better take notice of his face.    Adopted as a general term in U.S., 1880s, replacing earlier
dead house, etc. In newspaper slang, collection of pre-written obituary material of living persons
(1903), hence library of clips, photos, etc., 1918.


