haunt (n.)

place frequently visited, c.1300, also in Middle English, habit, custom (early 14c.), from haunt
(v.). The meaning spirit that haunts a place, ghost is first recorded 1843, originally in
stereotypical U.S. black speech.


haunt (v.)

early 13c., to practice habitually, busy oneself with, take part in, from Old French hanter to
frequent, resort to, be familiar with (12c.), probably from Old Norse heimta bring home, from Proto-
Germanic *haimat-janan, from *haimaz- (see home). Meaning to frequent (a place) is c.1300 in
English. Use in reference to a spirit returning to the house where it had lived perhaps was in
Proto-Germanic, but it was reinforced by Shakespeare's plays, and it is first recorded 1590 in A
Midsummer Night's Dream. Related: Haunted; haunting. Middle English hauntingly meant frequently;
sense of so as to haunt one's thoughts or memory is from 1859.


haunts (n.)

place or places one frequents, early 14c.; see haunt (n.).


kelpie (n.)

1747, Scottish, of unknown origin, perhaps related to Gaelic colpach heifer, steer, colt; colpa cow,
horse. The Lowland name of a demon in the shape of a horse that was reputed to haunt lakes and
rivers and to delight in causing drownings. But unlike its equivalents in Danish (n&oslash;kken) and
Icelandic (nykur), it occasionally was benevolent, especially to millers by keeping their streams
running.


obsess (v.)

c.1500, to besiege, from Latin obsessus, past participle of obsidere watch closely; besiege, occupy;
stay, remain, abide literally sit opposite to, from ob against (see ob-) + sedere sit (see
sedentary). Of evil spirits, to haunt, from 1530s. Psychological sense is 20c. Related: Obsessed;
obsessing.


brownie (n.)

benevolent goblin supposed to haunt old farmhouses in Scotland, 1510s, diminutive of brown a wee
brown man (see brown (adj.)). The name for the junior branch of the Girl Guides or Girl Scouts is
1916, in reference to uniform color. Brownie point (1963) is sometimes associated with Brownie in
the Scouting sense but is perhaps rather from brown-nose.


roam (v.)

c.1300, romen, possibly from Old English *ramian act of wandering about, which is probably related
to ar&aelig;man arise, lift up. There are no certain cognate forms in other Germanic languages, but
Barnhart points to Old Norse reimu&eth;r act of wandering about, reimast to haunt. Except in late
puns, there is no evidence of connexion with the Romance words denoting pilgrims or pilgrimages to
Rome .... [OED], such as Spanish romero a pilot-fish; a pilgrim; Old French romier travelling as a
pilgrim; a pilgrim, from Medieval Latin romerius a pilgrim (originally to Rome). Related: Roamed;
roamer; roaming.


cunt (n.)

female intercrural foramen, or, as some 18c. writers refer to it, the monosyllable, Middle English
cunte female genitalia, by early 14c. (in Hendyng's Proverbs -- &#658;eve &#254;i cunte to
cunni[n]g, And crave affetir wedding), akin to Old Norse kunta, Old Frisian, Middle Dutch, and
Middle Low German kunte, from Proto-Germanic *kunton, of uncertain origin. Some suggest a link with
Latin cuneus wedge, others to PIE root *geu- hollow place, still others to PIE *gwen-, root of queen
and Greek gyne woman.    The form is similar to Latin cunnus female pudenda (also, vulgarly, a
woman), which is likewise of disputed origin, perhaps literally gash, slit, from PIE *sker- (1) to
cut, or literally sheath, from PIE *kut-no-, from root *(s)keu- to conceal, hide.   Hec vulva: a
cunt. Hic cunnus: idem est. [from Londesborough Illustrated Nominale, c.1500, in Anglo-Saxon and Old
English Vocabularies, eds. Wright and W&#252;lcker, vol. 1, 1884]    First known reference in
English apparently is in a compound, Oxford street name Gropecuntlane cited from c.1230 (and
attested through late 14c.) in Place-Names of Oxfordshire (Gelling &amp; Stenton, 1953), presumably
a haunt of prostitutes. Used in medical writing c.1400, but avoided in public speech since 15c.;
considered obscene since 17c.    in Middle English also conte, counte, and sometimes queinte,
queynte (for this, see q). Chaucer used quaint and queynte in Canterbury Tales (late 14c.), and
Andrew Marvell might be punning on quaint in To His Coy Mistress (1650).    What eyleth yow to
grucche thus and grone? Is it for ye wolde haue my queynte allone? [Wife of Bath's Tale]    Under
MONOSYLLABLE Farmer lists 552 synonyms from English slang and literature before launching into
another 5 pages of them in French, German, Italian, Spanish, and Portuguese. [A sampling: Botany
Bay, chum, coffee-shop, cookie, End of the Sentimental Journey, fancy bit, Fumbler's Hall,
funniment, goatmilker, heaven, hell, Itching Jenny, jelly-bag, Low Countries, nature's tufted
treasure, parenthesis, penwiper, prick-skinner, seminary, tickle-toby, undeniable, wonderful lamp,
and aphrodisaical tennis court. Dutch cognate de kont means a bottom, an arse, but Dutch also has
attractive poetic slang ways of expressing this part, such as liefdesgrot, literally cave of love,
and vleesroos rose of flesh.     Alternative form cunny is attested from c.1720 but is certainly
much earlier and forced a change in the pronunciation of coney (q.v.), but it was good for a pun
while coney was still the common word for rabbit: A pox upon your Christian cockatrices! They cry,
like poulterers' wives, 'No money, no coney.'  [Philip Massinger: The Virgin-Martyr, Act I, Scene 1,
1622]


