haven (n.)

Old English h&aelig;fen haven, port, from Old Norse h&ouml;fn haven, harbor or directly from Proto-
Germanic *hafno- (cognates: Danish havn, Middle Low German havene, German Hafen), perhaps from PIE
*kap- to seize, hold contain (see have) on notion of place that holds ships, but compare Old Norse
haf, Old English h&aelig;f sea (see haff). Figurative sense of refuge, now practically the only
sense, is c.1200.


Yale

university in New Haven, Connecticut, U.S., founded 1701 as Collegiate School, renamed 1718 in honor
of a gift from British merchant-philanthropist Elihu Yale (1649-1721). As a kind of lock,  1854,
invented by U.S. mechanic Linus Yale Jr. (1821-1868). The surname is Welsh, from ial, and means
dweller at the fertile upland. Related: Yalie.


Copenhagen

capital of Denmark, literally merchant's port, from Danish k&oslash;ber merchant, literally buyer
(see cheap (adj.)), + havn port (see haven).


blue laws

1781, severe Puritanical code said to have been enacted 18c. in New Haven, Connecticut; of uncertain
origin, perhaps from one of the ground senses behind blues, or from notion of coldness. Or perhaps
connected to bluestocking in the sense of puritanically plain or mean (see bluestocking, which is a
different application of the same term; the parliament of 1653 was derisively called the
bluestocking parliament). The common explanation that they were written on blue paper is not
considered valid; pale blue paper was used for many old U.S. legal documents and there would have
been nothing notable about its use in this case.


haft (n.)

Old English h&aelig;ft handle, related to h&aelig;ft fetter, from Proto-Germanic *haftjom (cognates:
Old Saxon haft captured; Dutch hecht, Old High German hefti, German Heft handle; German Haft
arrest), from PIE *kap- to grasp (see capable). To haven other haeftes in hand have other hafts in
hand was a 14c.-15c. way of saying have other business to attend to.


knight (n.)

Old English cniht boy, youth; servant, attendant, common West Germanic (cognates: Old Frisian
kniucht, Dutch knecht, Middle High German kneht boy, youth, lad, German Knecht servant, bondman,
vassal), of unknown origin. The plural in Middle English sometimes was knighten. Meaning military
follower of a king or other superior is from c.1100. Began to be used in a specific military sense
in Hundred Years War, and gradually rose in importance until it became a rank in the nobility 16c.
The chess piece so called from mid-15c. Knight in shining armor in figurative sense is from 1917,
from the man who rescues the damsel in distress in romantic dramas (perhaps especially Lohengrin).
Knights of Columbus, society of Catholic men, founded 1882 in New Haven, Connecticut, U.S.; Knights
of Labor, trade union association, founded in Philadelphia, 1869; Knights of Pythias, secret order,
founded in Washington, 1864.


port (n.1)

harbor, Old English port harbor, haven, reinforced by Old French port harbor, port; mountain pass;
Old English and Old French words both from Latin portus port, harbor, originally entrance, passage,
figuratively place of refuge, assylum, from PIE *prtu- a going, a passage, from root *per- (2) to
lead, pass over (cognates: Sanskrit parayati carries over; Greek poros journey, passage, way,
peirein to pierce, run through; Latin porta gate, door, portare passage, peritus experienced;
Avestan peretush passage, ford, bridge; Armenian hordan go forward; Welsh rhyd ford; Old Church
Slavonic pariti to fly; Old English faran to go, journey, Old Norse fj&ouml;r&eth;r inlet, estuary).
Meaning left side of a ship (looking forward from the stern) is attested from 1540s, from notion of
the side facing the harbor (when a ship is docked). It replaced larboard in common usage to avoid
confusion with starboard; officially so by Admiralty order of 1844 and U.S. Navy Department notice
of 1846. Figurative sense place of refuge is attested from early 15c.; phrase any port in a storm
first recorded 1749. A port of call (1810) is one paid a scheduled visit by a ship.


