hazard (v.)

put something at stake in a game of chance, 1520s, from Middle French hasarder to play at gambling
(15c.), from hasard (see hazard (n.)). Related: Hazarded; hazarding.


hazardous (adj.)

1580s, venturesome; 1610s, perilous, from hazard (n.) + -ous or from Middle French hasardeux (16c.).


hazard (n.)

c.1300, from Old French hasard, hasart (12c.) game of chance played with dice, possibly from Spanish
azar an unfortunate card or throw at dice, which is said to be from Arabic az-zahr (for al-zahr) the
die. But this is doubtful because of the absence of zahr in classical Arabic dictionaries. Klein
suggests Arabic yasara he played at dice; Arabic -s- regularly becomes Spanish -z-. The -d was added
in French in confusion with the native suffix -ard. Sense evolved in French to chances in gambling,
then chances in life. In English, sense of chance of loss or harm, risk first recorded 1540s.


biohazard (n.)

also bio-hazard, 1973, from bio- + hazard (n.).


haphazard (adj.)

1570s, from hap chance, luck (see hap) + hazard risk, danger, peril. Related: Haphazardly.


aleatory (adj.)

of uncertain outcome, literally depending on the throw of a die, 1690s, from Latin aleatorius
pertaining to a gamester, from aleator a dice player, from alea a game with dice; chance, hazard,
risk; a die, the dice; perhaps literally a joint-bone, a pivot-bone, and related to axis.


stake (n.2)

that which is placed at hazard, 1530s, from stake (v.). Perhaps literally that which is put up, from
notion of post on which a gambling wager was placed, though OED points out there is no evidence of
the existence of such a custom. Weekley suggests there is a tinge of the burning or baiting metaphor
in this usage. Hence, an interest, something to gain or lose (1784). Plural stakes, sum of money to
be won in a (horse) race, first recorded 1690s (compare sweepstakes). To have a stake in is recorded
from 1784.


craps (n.)

1843, American English, unrelated to the term for excrement, instead it is from Louisiana French
craps the game of hazard, from an 18c. continental French corruption of English crabs, which was
18c. slang for a throw of two or three (the lowest throw), which perhaps is from crab (n.2), the
sense in crab apple. The 1843 citation (in an anti-gambling publication, An Exposure of the Arts and
Miseries of Gambling) calls it a game lately introduced into New Orleans.


