headlong (adv.)

late 14c., in phrase by headlong, from hed head (see head (n.)) + adverbial suffix -ling. Altered by
folk etymology on pattern of sidelong, etc.


precipitate (v.)

to hurl or fling down, 1520s, a back formation from precipitation or else from Latin praecipitatus,
past participle of praecipitare to throw or dive headlong, from praeceps steep, headlong, headfirst
(see precipice). Meaning to cause to happen, hurry the beginning of is recorded from 1620s. Chemical
sense is from 1620s; meteorological sense first attested 1863. Related: Precipitated; precipitating.


precipe (n.)

1610s, from Latin praecipes, variant of praeceps headfirst, headlong, precipitous, as a noun, a
precipice (see precipice).


Tarpeian rock (n.)

rock face on the Capitoline Hill in Rome, from which persons convicted of treason were thrown
headlong, from Latin (mons) Tarpeius (rock) of Tarpeia, said to have been a Vestal virgin who
betrayed the capitol to the Sabines and was buried at the foot of the rock. Her name probably is of
Etruscan-Tyrrhenian origin.


precipitate (adj.)

c.1600, from Latin praecipitatus, past participle of praecipitare to throw or dive headlong (see
precipitate (v.)). Meaning hasty is attested from 1650s. Related: Precipitately.


precipitous (adj.)

1640s, rash, headlong, from obsolete French precipiteux (16c.), from Vulgar Latin *praecipitosus,
from praecipitare (see precipitation). Related: Precipitously; precipitousness.


chipmunk (n.)

1829 (also chitmunk, 1832), from Algonquian, probably Ojibwa ajidamoo (in the Ottawa dialect
ajidamoonh) red squirrel, literally head first, or one who descends trees headlong (containing ajid-
upside down), probably influenced by English chip and mink. Other early names for it included ground
squirrel and striped squirrel.


race (v.)

c.1200, rasen to rush, from a Scandinavian source akin to the source of race (n.1), reinforced by
the noun in English and by Old English cognate r&aelig;san to rush headlong, hasten, enter rashly.
Meaning run swiftly is from 1757. Meaning run in competition against is from 1809. Transitive sense
of cause to run is from 1860. In reference to an engine, etc., run with uncontrolled speed, from
1862. Related: Raced; racing.


precipice (n.)

steep face of rock, 1630s, from Middle French pr&eacute;cipice, from Latin praecipitium a steep
place, literally a fall or leap, from praeceps (genitive praecipitis) steep, headlong, headfirst,
from prae before, forth (see pre-) + caput head (see head (n.)). Earlier in English as a verb
(1590s) meaning fall to great depth.


precipitation (n.)

late 15c., a casting down (of the evil angels from heaven), also, in alchemy separation of a solid
substance from a solution, from Middle French precipitation (15c.) and directly from Latin
praecipitationem (nominative praecipitatio) act or fact of falling headlong, haste, noun of action
from past participle stem of praecipitare fall, be hasty, from praeceps steep (see precipice).
Meaning sudden haste is c.1500. Meaning act of falling from a height is attested from 1610s.
Meteorological sense of rain, snow, dew, etc. is from 1670s.


grovel (v.)

1590s, Shakespearian back-formation of groveling (Middle English), regarded as a present participle
but really an adverb, from Old Norse grufe prone + obsolete adverbial suffix -ling (which survives
also as the -long in headlong, sidelong); first element from Old Norse a grufu on proneness. Perhaps
related to creep. Related: Groveled; grovelled; groveling; grovelling.


careen (v.)

1590s, to turn a ship on its side (with the keel exposed), from French cariner, literally to expose
a ship's keel, from Middle French carene keel (16c.), from Italian (Genoese dialect) carena, from
Latin carina keel of a ship, originally nutshell, possibly from PIE root *kar- hard (see hard
(adj.)).     Intransitive sense of to lean, to tilt is from 1763, specifically of ships; in general
use by 1883. In sense to rush headlong, confused with career (v.) since at least 1923. [To career is
to move rapidly; to careen is to lurch from side to side (often while moving rapidly).] Earlier
figurative uses of careen were to be laid up; to rest. Related: Careened; careening.


