healthy (adj.)

1550s, from health + -y (2). Slightly earlier in the same sense was healthsome (1530s). Related:
Healthiness.    It is wrong to say that certain articles of food are healthy or unhealthy. Wholesome
and unwholesome are the right words. A pig may be healthy or unhealthy while alive; but after he is
killed and becomes pork, he can enjoy no health, and suffer no sickness. [Eliza Leslie, Miss
Leslie's Behaviour Book, Philadelphia, 1839]


sane (adj.)

1721, back-formation from sanity or else from Latin sanus sound, healthy, in figurative or
transferred use, of sound mind, rational, sane, also, of style, correct; of uncertain origin. Used
earlier, of the body, with the sense of healthy (1620s). Related: Sanely.


hale (adj.)

healthy, Old English hal healthy, entire, uninjured (see health). The Scottish and northern English
form of whole; it was given a literary sense of free from infirmity (1734). Related: Haleness.


sanity (n.)

early 15c., healthy condition, from Middle French sanit&eacute; health, from Latin sanitatem
(nominative sanitas) health, sanity, from sanus healthy; sane (see sane). Meaning soundness of mind
first attested c.1600.


wassail

mid-12c., from Old Norse ves heill be healthy, a salutation, from ves, imperative of vesa to be (see
was) + heill healthy, from Proto-Germanic *haila- (see health). Use as a drinking phrase appears to
have arisen among Danes in England and spread to native inhabitants.    A similar formation appears
in Old English wes &thorn;u hal, but this is not recorded as a drinking salutation. Sense extended
c.1300 to liquor in which healths were drunk, especially spiced ale used in Christmas Eve
celebrations. Meaning a carousal, reveling first attested c.1600. Wassailing custom of going
caroling house to house at Christmas time is recorded from 1742.


sound (adj.)

free from special defect or injury, c.1200, from Old English gesund sound, safe, having the organs
and faculties complete and in perfect action, from Proto-Germanic *sunda-, from Germanic root *swen-
to- healthy, strong (cognates: Old Saxon gisund, Old Frisian sund, Dutch gezond, Old High German
gisunt, German gesund healthy, as in the post-sneezing interjection gesundheit; also Old English
swi&eth; strong, Gothic swin&thorn;s strong, German geschwind fast, quick), with connections in
Indo-Iranian and Balto-Slavic. Meaning right, correct, free from error is from mid-15c. Meaning
financially solid or safe is attested from c.1600; of sleep, undisturbed, from 1540s. Sense of
holding accepted opinions is from 1520s.


cushy (adj.)

easy, 1915, Anglo-Indian slang, from Hindi khush pleasant, healthy, happy + -y (2).


sleek (adj.)

1580s, variant of Middle English slike (see slick (adj.)). Originally of healthy-looking animal
hair; applied to persons 1630s, with sense of plump and smooth-skinned. Figurative meaning slick,
fawning, flattering is from 1590s.


lily-livered (adj.)

cowardly, 1605, in Macbeth; from lily (in its color sense of pale, bloodless) + liver (n.1), which
was a supposed seat of love and passion. A healthy liver is typically dark reddish-brown.


Lancaster

Loncastre (1086) Roman Fort on the River Lune, a Celtic river name probably meaning healthy, pure.
The Lancastrians in the War of the Roses took their name from their descent from John of Gaunt, Duke
of Lancaster.


healthily (adv.)

1630s, from healthy + -ly (2).


lusty (adj.)

early 13c., joyful, merry, from lust + -y (2). It largely has escaped the Christianization and
denigration of its root word. The sense of full of healthy vigor is from late 14c.; that of full of
desire is attested from c.1400. Related: Lustily; lustiness.


puericulture (n.)

science of bringing up healthy children, including prenatal care, 1887, from French
pu&#233;riculture (A. Caron, 1866), from Latin puer boy, child (see puerility) + cultura cultivation
(see culture).


tonic (adj.)

1640s, relating to or characterized by muscular tension, from Greek tonikos of stretching, from
tonos a stretching (see tenet). The meaning maintaining the healthy firmness of tissues is recorded
from 1680s, first extended 1756 to having the property of restoring to health. Related: Tonical
(1580s).


unhealthy (adj.)

1590s, injurious to health, from un- (1) not + healthy (adj.). Earlier unhealthsome (1540s),
unhealthful (1570s). Of persons, sickly, it is attested from 1610s. Related: Unhealthily.


hygiene (n.)

1670s, from French hygi&egrave;ne, ultimately from Greek hygieine techne the healthful art, from
hygies healthy, literally living well (personified as the goddess Hygieia), from PIE *eyu-gwie-es-
having a vigorous life. The Greek adjective was used by Aristotle as a noun meaning health.


soteriology (n.)

1847, in reference to health; 1864 in reference to salvation, from German soteriologie, from Greek
soteria preservation, salvation, from soizein save, preserve, related to sos safe, healthy, of
uncertain origin. With -ology.


wholesome (adj.)

c.1200, of benefit to the soul, from whole (adj.) in the healthy sense + -some (1). Physical sense
first attested late 14c. Related: Wholesomely; wholesomeness. Old English had halwende.


hail (interj.)

greetings! c.1200, from Old Norse heill health, prosperity, good luck, or a similar Scandinavian
source, and in part from Old English hals, shortening of w&aelig;s h&aelig;il be healthy (see health
and also wassail).


euphoria (n.)

1727, a physician's term for condition of feeling healthy and comfortable (especially when sick),
medical Latin, from Greek euphoria power of enduring easily, from euphoros, literally bearing well,
from eu well (see eu-) + pherein to carry (see infer). Non-technical use, now the main one, dates to
1882 and is perhaps a reintroduction.


sanitary (adj.)

1823, pertaining to health, from French sanitaire (1812), from Latin sanitas health, from sanus
healthy; sane (see sane). In reference to menstrual pads, first attested 1881 (in sanitary towel).


rosy (adj.)

late 14c., of a color, from rose (n.1) + -y (2), probably modeled on Old French rose. From 1590s of
healthy complexions; 1775 in the sense cheerful; meaning promising is from 1887. Similar formation
in Middle Dutch rosich, Dutch rozig, German rosig.


Milicent

fem. proper name, earlier Malasintha, from shortened form of Old High German Amalswind, literally
strong in work, from amal work + *swind strong (related to Old English swi&eth; strong, gesund
healthy).


sanitarium (n.)

1829, literally place dedicated to health, from neuter of Modern Latin *sanitarius, from Latin
sanitas health, from sanus healthy; sane (see sane). Compare sanatarium.


unsound (adj.)

early 14c., of persons, diseased, wounded, from un- (1) not + sound (adj.). Similar formation in
Middle Low German unsund, Middle Dutch ongesont, German ungesund. Meaning morally corrupt is
recorded from c.1300; that of not mentally healthy is from 1540s. Sense of not based on reasoning or
fact is attested from 1590s. Related: Unsoundly; unsoundness.


sanatorium (n.)

1839, Modern Latin, noun use of neuter of Late Latin adjective sanitorius health-giving, from Latin
sanat-, past participle stem of sanare to heal, from sanus well, healthy, sane (see sane). Latin
sanare is the source of Italian sanare, Spanish sanar.


tidy (adj.)

mid-13c., in good condition, healthy, probably originally in season, timely, opportune, excellent
(though this sense is not attested until mid-14c.), from tide (n.) in the sense of season, time + -y
(2). Of persons, of neat and orderly habits, from 1706. Similar formation in Old High German zitig,
German zeitig, Dutch tijdig, Danish tidig timely, Old English tidlic temporal, also timely,
seasonable.


sage (n.1)

kind of herb (Salvia officinalis), early 14c., from Old French sauge (13c.), from Latin salvia, from
salvus healthy (see safe (adj.)). So called for its healing or preserving qualities (it was used to
keep teeth clean and relieve sore gums, and boiled in water to make a drink to alleviate arthritis).
In English folklore, sage, like parsley, is said to grow best where the wife is dominant. In late
Old English as salvie, directly from Latin. Compare German Salbei, also from Latin.


salvo (n.)

1719, alteration of salva (1590s) simultaneous discharge of guns, from Italian salva salute, volley
(French salve, 16c., is from Italian), from Latin salve hail!, literally be in good health!, the
usual Roman greeting, regarded as imperative of salvere to be in good health, but properly vocative
of salvus healthy (see safe (adj.)). The notion is of important visitors greeted with a volley of
gunfire into the air; applied afterward to any concentrated fire from guns.


health (n.)

Old English h&aelig;l&thorn; wholeness, a being whole, sound or well, from Proto-Germanic *hailitho,
from PIE *kailo- whole, uninjured, of good omen (cognates: Old English hal hale, whole; Old Norse
heill healthy; Old English halig,  Old Norse helge holy, sacred; Old English h&aelig;lan to heal).
With Proto-Germanic abstract noun suffix *-itho (see -th (2)). Of physical health in Middle English,
but also prosperity, happiness, welfare; preservation, safety.


insane (adj.)

1550s, from Latin insanus mad, insane; outrageous, excessive, extravagant, from in- not (see in-
(1)) + sanus well, healthy, sane (see sane). Originally only of persons; of actions, from 1842.
Compare lunatic; and Italian pazzo insane, originally a euphemism, from Latin patiens suffering.
German verr&uuml;ckt, literally past participle of verr&uuml;cken to displace, applied to the brain
as to a clock that is 'out of order'  [Buck]. The noun meaning insane person is attested from 1786.


whole (adj.)

Old English hal entire, whole; unhurt, uninjured, safe; healthy, sound; genuine, straightforward,
from Proto-Germanic *haila- undamaged (cognates: Old Saxon hel, Old Norse heill, Old Frisian hal,
Middle Dutch hiel, Dutch heel, Old High German, German heil salvation, welfare), from PIE *kailo-
whole, uninjured, of good omen (cognates: Old Church Slavonic celu whole, complete; see health).
The spelling with wh- developed early 15c. The sense in whole number is from early 14c. Whole milk
is from 1782. On the whole considering all facts or circumstances is from 1690s. For phrase whole
hog, see hog (n.).


perspire (v.)

1640s, to evaporate through the pores, a back-formation from perspiration and in part from Latin
perspirare to breathe, to blow constantly (see perspiration). Meaning to sweat is a polite usage
attested from 1725. Medical men tried to maintain a distinction between sensible (sweat) and
insensible perspiration:  [I]t is sufficient for common use to observe, that perspiration is that
insensible discharge of vapour from the whole surface of the body and the lungs which is constantly
going on in a healthy state; that it is always natural and always salutary; that sweat, on the
contrary, is an evacuation, which never appears without some uncommon effort, or some disease to the
system, that it weakens and relaxes, and is so far from coinciding with perspiration, that it
obstructs and checks it. [Charles White, A Treatise on the Management of Pregnant and Lying-in
Women, London, 1791]  Related: Perspired; perspiring.


nineties (n.)

1857 as the years of someone's life between 90 and 99; from 1848 as the tenth decade of years in a
given century; 1849 with reference to Fahrenheit temperature. See ninety.    Many still live who
remember those days; if the old men cannot tell you the exact date, they will say: 'It were in the
nineties;' (etc.) [Chambers's Journal, Nov. 1, 1856]    In Britain, the naughty nineties was a
popular name 1920s-30s for the 1890s, based on the notion of a relaxing of morality and mood in
contrast to earlier Victorian times. In U.S., gay nineties in reference to the same decade is
attested from 1927, and was the title of a regular nostalgia feature in Life magazine about that
time.    The long, dreary blue-law Sunday afternoons were periods of the Nineties which no amount of
rosy retrospect will ever be able to recall as gay, especially to a normal healthy boy to whom all
activities were taboo except G. A. Henty and the bound volumes of Leslie's Weekly of the Civil War.
[Life, Sept. 1, 1927]


