healthful (adj.)

late 14c., wholesome, curative, saving, from health + -ful. Related: Healthfully; healthfulness.


salubrity (n.)

early 15c., from Latin salubritas, from salubris promoting health, healthful (see salubrious).


salutary (adj.)

late 15c., from Middle French salutaire beneficial, or directly from Latin salutaris healthful, from
salus (genitive salutis) good health (see salute).


hygiene (n.)

1670s, from French hygi&egrave;ne, ultimately from Greek hygieine techne the healthful art, from
hygies healthy, literally living well (personified as the goddess Hygieia), from PIE *eyu-gwie-es-
having a vigorous life. The Greek adjective was used by Aristotle as a noun meaning health.


salubrious (adj.)

1540s, from Latin salubris promoting health, healthful, from salus (genitive salutis) welfare,
health (see salute (v.)). Related: Salubriously; salubriousness.


surfing (n.)

1955, verbal noun from surf (v.). The surfing craze went nationwide in U.S. from California in 1963.
Surf-board is from 1826, originally in a Hawaiian and Polynesian context. Surf music attested from
1963.    It is highly amusing to a stranger to go out into the south part of this town, some day
when the sea is rolling in heavily over the reef, and to observe there the evolutions and rapid
career of a company of surf-players. The sport is so attractive and full of wild excitement to
Hawaiians, and withal so healthful, that I cannot but hope it will be many years before civilization
shall look it out of countenance, or make it disreputable to indulge in this manly, though it be
dangerous, exercise. [the Rev. Henry T. Cheever, Life in the Sandwich Islands, New York, 1851]   <hr
/>   The basis of surfing music is a rock and roll bass beat figuration, coupled with a raunch-type
weird-sounding lead guitar plus wailing saxes. Surfing music has to sound untrained with a certain
rough flavor to appeal to the teenagers. [music publisher Murray Wilson, quoted in Billboard, June
29, 1963]


safe (adj.)

c.1300, unscathed, unhurt, uninjured; free from danger or molestation, in safety, secure; saved
spiritually, redeemed, not damned; from Old French sauf protected, watched-over; assured of
salvation, from Latin salvus uninjured, in good health, safe, related to salus good health, saluber
healthful, all from PIE *solwos from root *sol- whole (cognates: Latin solidus solid, Sanskrit
sarvah uninjured, intact, whole, Avestan haurva- uninjured, intact, Old Persian haruva-, Greek holos
whole).    As a quasi-preposition from c.1300, on model of French and Latin cognates. From late 14c.
as rescued, delivered; protected; left alive, unkilled. Meaning not exposed to danger (of places) is
attested from late 14c.; of actions, etc., free from risk, first recorded 1580s. Meaning sure,
reliable, not a danger is from c.1600. Sense of conservative, cautious is from 1823. Paired
alliteratively with sound (adj.) from late 14c. The noun safe-conduct (late 13c.) is from Old French
sauf-conduit (13c.).


