hedge (n.)

Old English hecg, originally any fence, living or artificial, from West Germanic *khagja (cognates:
Middle Dutch hegge, Dutch heg, Old High German hegga, German Hecke hedge), from PIE *kagh- to catch,
seize; wickerwork, fence (cognates: Latin caulae a sheepfold, enclosure, Gaulish caio
circumvallation, Welsh cae fence, hedge). Related to Old English haga enclosure, hedge (see haw).
Figurative sense of boundary, barrier is from mid-14c. Prefixed to any word, it notes something
mean, vile, of the lowest class [Johnson], from contemptuous attributive sense of plying one's trade
under a hedge (hedge-priest, hedge-lawyer, hedge-wench, etc.), a usage attested from 1530s.


hedge (v.)

late 14c., make a hedge, also surround with a barricade or palisade; from hedge (n.). The sense of
dodge, evade is first recorded 1590s. That of insure oneself against loss, as in a bet, by playing
something on the other side is from 1670s, originally with in; probably from an earlier use of hedge
in meaning secure (a debt) by including it in a larger one which has better security (1610s).
Related: Hedged; hedging. The noun in the wagering sense is from 1736.


hedgehog (n.)

mid-15c. (replacing Old English igl), from hedge (n.) + hog (n.); the second element a reference to
its pig-like snout.


hedgerow (n.)

Old English heger&aelig;w; see hedge (n.) + row (n.).


haw (n.)

enclosure, Old English haga enclosure, hedge, from Proto-Germanic *hag- (cognates: Old Norse hagi,
Old Saxon hago, German Hag hedge; Middle Dutch hage, Dutch haag, as in the city name The Hague). See
hag and hedge (n.). Meaning fruit of the hawthorn bush (Old English) is perhaps short for
*h&aelig;gberie.


Hague

city in Netherlands, from Dutch Den Haag, short for 's Gravenhage, literally the count's hedge (i.e.
the hedge-enclosed hunting grounds of the counts of Holland); see haw. In French, it is La Haye.


quay (n.)

1690s, variant of Middle English key, keye, caye wharf (c. 1300; mid-13c. in place names), from Old
North French cai (Old French chai, 12c., Modern French quai) sand bank, from Gaulish caium (5c.),
from Old Celtic *kagio- to encompass, enclose (cognates: Welsh cae fence, hedge, Cornish ke hedge),
from PIE *kagh- to catch, seize; wickerwork, fence (see hedge (n.)). Spelling altered in English by
influence of French quai.


septum (n.)

partition between the nostrils, 1690s, Modern Latin, from Latin saeptum a fence, enclosure,
partition, from neuter past participle of saepire to hedge in, from saepes hedge, fence. Related:
Septal.


hag (n.)

early 13c., ugly old woman, probably a shortening of Old English h&aelig;gtesse witch, fury (on
assumption that -tesse was a suffix), from Proto-Germanic *hagatusjon, which is of unknown origin.
Similar shortening produced Dutch heks, German Hexe witch from cognate Middle Dutch haghetisse, Old
High German hagzusa.    First element is probably cognate with Old English haga enclosure, portion
of woodland marked off for cutting (see hedge (n.)). Old Norse had tunri&eth;a and Old High German
zunritha, both literally hedge-rider, used of witches and ghosts. Second element in the prehistoric
compound may be connected with Norwegian tysja fairy; crippled woman, Gaulish dusius demon,
Lithuanian dvasia spirit, from PIE *dhewes- to fly about, smoke, be scattered, vanish.    One of the
magic words for which there is no male form, suggesting its original meaning was close to diviner,
soothsayer, which were always female in northern European paganism, and h&aelig;gtesse seem at one
time to have meant woman of prophetic and oracular powers (&AElig;lfric uses it to render the Greek
pythoness, the voice of the Delphic oracle), a figure greatly feared and respected. Later, the word
was used of village wise women.   Haga is also the haw- in hawthorn, which is an important tree in
northern European pagan religion. There may be several layers of folk etymology here. Confusion or
blending with heathenish is suggested by Middle English h&aelig;htis, h&aelig;gtis hag, witch, fury,
etc., and haetnesse goddess, used of Minerva and Diana.    If the h&aelig;gtesse was once a powerful
supernatural woman (in Norse it is an alternative word for Norn, any of the three weird sisters, the
equivalent of the Fates), it might originally have carried the hawthorn sense. Later, when the pagan
magic was reduced to local scatterings, it might have had the sense of hedge-rider, or she who
straddles the hedge, because the hedge was the boundary between the civilized world of the village
and the wild world beyond. The h&aelig;gtesse would have a foot in each reality. Even later, when it
meant the local healer and root collector, living in the open and moving from village to village, it
may have had the mildly pejorative sense of hedge- in Middle English (hedge-priest, etc.),
suggesting an itinerant sleeping under bushes, perhaps. The same word could have contained all three
senses before being reduced to its modern one.


haggard (adj.)

1560s, wild, unruly (originally in reference to hawks), from Middle French haggard, probably from
Old French faulcon hagard wild falcon, literally falcon of the woods, from Middle High German hag
hedge, copse, wood, from Proto-Germanic *hagon, from PIE root *kagh- to catch, seize; also
wickerwork, fence (see hedge (n.)). OED, however, finds this whole derivation very doubtful. Sense
perhaps reinforced by Low German hager gaunt, haggard. Sense of with a haunted expression first
recorded 1690s, that of careworn first recorded 1853. Sense influenced by association with hag.
Related: Haggardly; haggardness.


closure (n.)

late 14c., a barrier, a fence, from Old French closure enclosure; that which encloses, fastening,
hedge, wall, fence, also closture barrier, division; enclosure, hedge, fence, wall (12c., Modern
French cl&ocirc;ture), from Late Latin clausura lock, fortress, a closing (source of Italian
chiusura), from past participle stem of Latin claudere to close (see close (v.)). Sense of act of
closing, bringing to a close is from early 15c. In legislation, especially closing or stopping of
debate. Sense of tendency to create ordered and satisfying wholes is 1924, from Gestalt psychology.


Hayward

proper name, from Old English hege-weard guardian of the fence/hedge. His original duties seem to
have been protecting the fences around the Lammas lands, when enclosed, to prevent cattle from
breaking in while the crops grew.


hobbledehoy (n.)

clumsy or awkward youth, 1530s, of uncertain origin and the subject of much discussion. First
element is probably hob in its sense of clown, prankster (see hobgoblin), the second element perhaps
is Middle French de haye worthless, untamed, wild, literally of the hedge.


fence (v.)

early 15c., defend (oneself); mid-15c. as protect with a hedge or fence; from fence (n.). From 1590s
as fight with swords, from the noun in this sense (1530s); see fencing. From 1610s as knowingly buy
or sell stolen goods. Related: Fenced.


rachio-

also rhachio-, before vowels rachi-, word-forming element meaning spinal, from Greek rhakhis spine,
ridge, rib of a leaf. Compare Greek rhakhos thorn hedge.


spinney (n.)

copse, thicket, 1590s, from Old French espinoi briar-patch, place full of thorns and brambles (13c.,
Modern French &eacute;pinaie), from espine or from Latin spinetum thorn hedge, thicket (see spine).


negotiate (v.)

to communicate in search of mutual agreement, 1590s, back-formation from negotiation, or else from
Latin negotiatus, past participle of negotiari. In the sense of tackle successfully (1862), it at
first meant to clear on horseback a hedge, fence, or other obstacle and originated in the hunting-
field; those who hunt the fox like also to hunt jocular verbal novelties [Gowers, 1965]. Related:
Negotiated; negotiating.


town (n.)

Old English tun enclosure, garden, field, yard; farm, manor; homestead, dwelling house, mansion;
later group of houses, village, farm, from Proto-Germanic *tunaz, *tunan fortified place (cognates:
Old Saxon, Old Norse, Old Frisian tun fence, hedge, Middle Dutch tuun fence, Dutch tuin garden, Old
High German zun, German Zaun fence, hedge), an early borrowing from Celtic *dunon hill, hill-fort
(cognates: Old Irish dun, Welsh din fortress, fortified place, camp, dinas city, Gaulish-Latin
-dunum in place names), from PIE *dhu-no- enclosed, fortified place, hill-fort, from root *dheue- to
close, finish, come full circle (see down (n.2)).    Meaning inhabited place larger than a village
(mid-12c.) arose after the Norman conquest from the use of this word to correspond to French ville.
The modern word is partially a generic term, applicable to cities of great size as well as places
intermediate between a city and a village; such use is unusual, the only parallel is perhaps Latin
oppidium, which occasionally was applied even to Rome or Athens (each of which was more properly an
urbs).    First record of town hall is from late 15c. Town ball, version of baseball, is recorded
from 1852. Town car (1907) originally was a motor car with an enclosed passenger compartment and
open driver's seat. On the town living the high life is from 1712. Go to town do (something)
energetically is first recorded 1933. Man about town one constantly seen at public and private
functions is attested from 1734.


diaphragm (n.)

late 14c., from Late Latin diaphragma, from Greek diaphragma partition, barrier, muscle which
divides the thorax from the abdomen, from diaphrassein to barricade, from dia- across (see dia-) +
phrassein to fence or hedge in. The native word is midriff. Meaning contraceptive cap is from 1933.


hawthorn (n.)

Old English haga&thorn;orn, earlier h&aelig;gu&thorn;orn hawthorn, white thorn, from obsolete haw
hedge or encompassing fence (see haw) + thorn. A common Germanic compound: Middle Dutch and German
hagedorn, Swedish hagtorn, Old Norse hag&thorn;orn.


mound (n.)

1550s, hedge, fence, also embankment, dam (a sense probably influenced by mount (n.)). The
relationship between the noun and the verb is uncertain. Commonly supposed to be from Old English
mund hand, protection, guardianship (cognate with Latin manus), but this is not certain (OED
discounts it on grounds of sense). Perhaps a confusion of the native word and Middle Dutch mond
protection, used in military sense for fortifications of various types, including earthworks. From
1726 as artificial elevation (as over a grave); 1810 as natural low elevation. As the place where
the pitcher stands on a baseball field, from 1912.


hug (v.)

1560s, hugge to embrace, of unknown origin; perhaps from Old Norse hugga to comfort, from hugr
courage, mood, from Proto-Germanic *hugjan, related to Old English hycgan to think, consider, Gothic
hugs mind, soul, thought. Other have noted the similarity in some senses to German hegen to foster,
cherish, originally to enclose with a hedge. Related: Hugged; hugging. The noun was originally
(1610s) a hold in wrestling. Meaning affectionate embrace is from 1650s.


arugula (n.)

edible cruciform plant (Eruca sativa) used originally in the Mediterranean region as a salad; the
American English and Australian form of the name is (via Italian immigrants) from dialectal variant
of Italian ruchetta, a diminutive form of ruca-, from Latin eruca, a name of some cabbage-like
plant, from PIE *gher(s)-uka-, from root *ghers- to bristle (see horror).    In England, the usual
name is rocket (see rocket (n.1)), which is from Italian ruchetta via French roquette. It also
sometimes is called hedge mustard.


row (n.1)

line of people or things, Old English r&aelig;w a row, line; succession, hedge-row, probably from
Proto-Germanic *rai(h)waz (cognates: Middle Dutch rie, Dutch rij row; Old High German rihan to
thread, riga line; German Reihe row, line, series; Old Norse rega string), possibly from PIE root
*rei- to scratch, tear, cut (cognates: Sanskrit rikhati scratches, rekha line). Meaning a number of
houses in a line is attested from mid-15c., originally chiefly Scottish and northern English. Phrase
a hard row to hoe attested from 1823, American English.


gap (n.)

early 14c., an opening in a wall or hedge; a break, a breach, mid-13c. in place names, from Old
Norse gap chasm, empty space, related to gapa to gape, open the mouth wide, common Proto-Germanic
(cognates: Middle Dutch, Dutch gapen, German gaffen to gape, stare, Swedish gapa, Danish gabe), from
PIE *ghai- to yawn, gape (see yawn (v.)). From late 14c. as a break or opening between mountains;
broader sense unfilled space or interval, any hiatus or interruption is from c. 1600. In U.S.,
common in place names in reference to a deep break or pass in a long mountain chain (especially one
that water flows through), a feature in the middle Appalachians.


heifer (n.)

Old English heahfore, West Saxon; Northumbrian hehfaro, heffera (plural), of unknown origin, not
found outside English. The first element seems to be heah high, common in Old English compounds with
a sense of great in size. The second element may be related to Old English fearr bull, or to Old
English faran to go (giving the whole a sense of high-stepper); but there are serious sense
difficulties with both conjectures. Liberman offers this alternative:    Old English seems to have
had the word *h&aelig;gfore 'heifer.' The first element (*h&aelig;g-) presumably meant 'enclosure'
(as do haw and hedge), whereas -fore was a suffix meaning 'dweller, occupant' ....    In modern use
a female that has not yet calved, as opposed to a cow, which has, and a calf, which is an animal of
either sex not more than a year old. As derisive slang for a woman, girl it dates from 1835.


kleptomania (n.)

1830, formed from mania + Greek kleptes thief, from kleptein to steal, act secretly, from PIE *klep-
to steal, an extention of root *kel- (2) to cover, conceal (see cell; cognate with Latin clepere to
steal, listen secretly to, Old Prussian au-klipts hidden, Old Church Slavonic poklopu cover,
wrapping, Gothic hlifan to steal, hliftus thief). Much-derided 19c. as a fancy term for old-
fashioned thievery and an opportunity for the privileged to claim a psychological motive for
criminal misbehavior.    There is a popular belief that some of the criminal laws under which the
poor are rigorously punished are susceptible of remarkable elasticity when the peccadilloes of the
rich are brought under judgment, and that there is some truth in the old adage which declares that
one man may steal a horse where another dare not look over the hedge. This unwholesome distrust is
not likely to diminish if, in cases of criminal prosecutions where so-called respectable persons
commit theft without sufficiently obvious motive for the act, they have their crime extenuated on
the plea of kleptomania, as has recently occurred in several notable instances. [Kleptomania, The
Lancet, Nov. 16, 1861]


yard (n.1)

patch of ground around a house, Old English geard fenced enclosure, garden, court; residence, house,
from Proto-Germanic *gardaz (cognates: Old Norse gar&eth;r enclosure, garden, yard; Old Frisian
garda, Dutch gaard, Old High German garto, German Garten garden; Gothic gards house, garda stall),
from PIE *ghor-to-, suffixed form of root *gher- (1) to grasp, enclose, with derivatives meaning
enclosure (cognates: Old English gyrdan to gird, Sanskrit ghra- house, Albanian garth hedge, Latin
hortus garden, Phrygian -gordum town, Greek khortos pasture, Old Irish gort field, Breton garz
enclosure, garden, and second element in Latin cohors enclosure, yard, company of soldiers,
multitude).    Lithuanian gardas pen, enclosure, Old Church Slavonic gradu town, city, and Russian
gorod, -grad town, city belong to this group, but linguists dispute whether they are independent
developments or borrowings from Germanic. As college campus enclosed by the main buildings, 1630s.
In railway usage, ground adjacent to a train station or terminus, used for switching or coupling
trains, 1827. Yard sale is attested by 1976.


close (v.)

c. 1200, to shut, cover in, from Old French clos- (past participle stem of clore to shut, to cut off
from), 12c., from Latin clausus, past participle of claudere to shut, close; to block up, make
inaccessible; put an end to; shut in, enclose, confine (always -clusus, -cludere in compounds).
The Latin word might be from the possible PIE root *klau- hook, peg, crooked or forked branch (used
as a bar or bolt in primitive structures); cognates: Latin clavis key, clavus nail, claustrum bar,
bolt, barrier, claustra dam, wall, barricade, stronghold; Greek kleidos (genitive) bar, bolt, key,
klobos cage; Old Irish clo nail, Middle Irish clithar hedge, fence; Old Church Slavonic klju&#269;i
hook, key, klju&#269;iti shut; Lithuanian kliuti to catch, be caught on, kliaudziu check, hinder,
kliuvu clasp, hang; Old High German sliozan shut, German schlie&szlig;en to shut, Schl&uuml;ssel
key.    Also partly from Old English beclysan close in, shut up. Intransitive sense become shut is
from late 14c. Meaning draw near to is from 1520s. Intransitive meaning draw together, come together
is from 1550s, hence the idea in military verbal phrase close ranks (mid-17c.), later with
figurative extensions. Meaning bring to an end, finish is from c. 1400; intransitive sense come to
an end is from 1826. Of stock prices, from 1860. Meaning bring together the parts of (a book, etc.)
is from 1560s. Related: Closed; closing.


