heed (n.)

attention, notice, regard, early 14c., apparently from heed (v.). Survives only in literal use and
as the object of verbs (take heed, etc.).


heed (v.)

Old English hedan to heed, observe; to take care, attend, from West Germanic *hodjan (cognates: Old
Saxon hodian, Old Frisian hoda, Middle Dutch and Dutch hoeden, Old High German huotan, German
h&uuml;ten to guard, watch), from PIE *kadh- to shelter, cover (see hat). Related: Heeded; heeding.


heedful (adj.)

1540s, from heed + -ful.


heedless (adj.)

without regard, 1570s, from heed + -less. Related: Heedlessly; heedlessness.


gumption (n.)

1719, originally Scottish, common sense, shrewdness, also drive, initiative, possibly connected with
Middle English gome attention, heed, from Old Norse gaumr heed, attention. Sense of initiative is
first recorded 1812.


scout (v.1)

late 14c., observe or explore as a scout, travel in search of information, from Old French escouter
to listen, heed (Modern French &eacute;couter), from Latin auscultare to listen to, give heed to
(see auscultate).  Related: Scouted; scouting.


warn (v.)

Old English warnian to give notice of impending danger, also intransitive, to take heed, from Proto-
Germanic *war-non (cognates: Old Norse varna to admonish, Old High German warnon to take heed,
German warnen to warn), from PIE *wer- (5) to cover (see weir). Related: Warned; warning.


reck (n.)

care, heed, consideration, 1560s, from reck (v.).


caveat (n.)

1540s, from Latin, literally let him beware, 3rd person singular present subjunctive of cavere to
beware, take heed, watch, guard against, from PIE root *skeue- to pay attention, perceive (cognates:
Sanskrit kavih wise, sage, seer, poet; Lithuanian kavoti tend, safeguard; Armenian cucanem I show;
Latin cautio wariness; Greek koein to mark, perceive, hear, kydos glory, fame, literally that which
is heard of; Old Church Slavonic chujo to feel, perceive, hear, cudo wonder, literally that which is
heard of; Czech (z)koumati to perceive, be aware of; Serbian chuvati watch, heed; Old English
sceawian to look at (source of show (v.)); Middle Dutch schoon beautiful, bright, properly showy;
Gothic hausjan hear).


reck (v.)

Old English reccan (2) take care of, be interested in, care for; have regard to, take heed of; to
care, heed; desire (to do something) (strong verb, past tense rohte, past participle rought), from
West Germanic *rokjan, from Proto-Germanic *rokja- (cognates: Old Saxon rokjan, Middle Dutch roeken,
Old Norse r&aelig;kja to care for, Old High German giruochan to care for, have regard to, German
geruhen to deign, which is influenced by ruhen to rest).    And in that very moment, away behind in
some courtyard of the City, a cock crowed. Shrill and clear he crowed, recking nothing of wizardry
or war, welcoming only the morning that in the sky far above the shadows of death was coming with
the dawn. [J.R.R. Tolkien, Return of the King, 1955]    The -k- sound is probably a northern
influence from Norse. No known cognates outside Germanic. From its earliest appearance in Eng., reck
is almost exclusively employed in negative or interrogative clauses [OED]. Related: Recked; recking.


gormless (adj.)

c.1746, wanting sense, a British dialectal word, from gome notice, understanding (c.1200), from Old
Norse gaumr care, heed, of unknown origin; + -less.


unguarded (adj.)

1590s, not furnished with a guard, from un- (1) not + guarded. Sense of not on one's guard, not
taking heed is attested from 1630s.


attendee (n.)

one who attends (something), 1961, from attend + -ee. Attender is older (mid-15c.) but had senses
one who waits upon and one who gives heed.


unheeded (adj.)

1610s, from un- (1) not + past participle of heed (v.).


keep (n.)

mid-13c., care or heed in watching, from keep (v.). Meaning innermost stronghold of a tower is from
1580s, perhaps a translation of Italian tenazza, with a notion of that which keeps (someone or
something); the sense of food required to keep a person or animal is attested from 1801. For keeps
completely, for good is American English colloquial, from 1861.


cure (n.1)

c.1300, care, heed, from Latin cura care, concern, trouble, with many figurative extensions, such as
study; administration; a mistress, and also means of healing, remedy, from Old Latin coira-, from
PIE root *kois- be concerned. Meaning medical care is late 14c.


gaze (v.)

late 14c., probably of Scandinavian origin (compare Norwegian, Swedish dialectal gasa to gape),
perhaps related somehow to Old Norse ga heed (see gawk). Related: Gazed; gazing.


circumspect (adj.)

early 15c., from Latin circumspectus deliberate, guarded, well-considered, past participle of
circumspicere look around, take heed, from circum- around (see circum-) + specere to look (see scope
(n.1)). Related: Circumspectly; circumspectness.


regard (n.)

mid-14c., a consideration; a judgment, from Old French regard, from regarder take notice of, from
re-, intensive prefix + garder look, heed, from Germanic (see guard (n.)). Meanings a look,
appearance; respect, esteem, favor, kindly feeling which springs from a consideration of estimable
qualities all recorded late 14c. Phrase in regard to is from mid-15c. (Chaucer uses at regard of).


ware (v.)

to take heed of, beware, Old English warian to guard against, beware; protect, defend, from Proto-
Germanic *waraz (cognates: Old Frisian waria, Old Norse vara), from PIE *war-o- to guard, watch,
from root *wer- (4) to perceive, watch out for (see ward (n.)).


neglect (v.)

1520s, from Latin neglectus, past participle of neglegere to make light of, disregard, be
indifferent to, not heed, not trouble oneself about, literally not to pick up, variant of neclegere,
from Old Latin nec not (see deny) + legere pick up, select (see lecture (n.)). Related: Neglected;
neglecting.


catoblepas (n.)

late 14c., from Latin catoblepas, from Greek katobleps, from kato downward (related to kata-) +
blepein to look, but this might be ancient folk etymology. Name given by ancient authors to some
African animal.A wylde beest that hyghte Catoblefas and hath a lytyll body and nyce in all membres
and a grete heed hangynge alway to-warde the erth. [John of Trevisa, translation of Bartholomew de
Glanville's De proprietatibus rerum, 1398]


attention (n.)

late 14c., giving heed, from Latin attentionem (nominative attentio) attention, attentiveness, noun
of action from past participle stem of attendere mental heeding (see attend). Used with a remarkable
diversity of verbs (such as pay, gather, attract, draw, call). As a military cautionary word
preparative to giving a command, it is attested from 1792. Attention span is from 1903 (earlier span
of attention, 1892).


mind (v.)

mid-14c., to remember, take care to remember, also to remind, from mind (n.). Meaning perceive,
notice is from late 15c.; that of to give heed to is from 1550s; that of be careful about is from
1737. Sense of object to, dislike is from c.1600; negative use (with not) to care for, to trouble
oneself with is attested from c.1600. Meaning to take care of, look after is from 1690s. Related:
Minded; minding. Meiotic expression don't mind if I do attested from 1847.


achtung

German word used to command attention, from German achtung, from acht (n.) attention, care, heed,
consideration, achten (v.) pay attention to, regard, esteem, respect, from Old High German ahton pay
attention to, a general Germanic word akin to Old English eahtian to estimate, esteem, consider,
praise, but with no living native descendants in English.


reckless (adj.)

Old English receleas careless, thoughtless, heedless, earlier reccileas, from *rece, recce care,
heed, from reccan to care (see reck (v.)) + -less. The same affixed form is in German ruchlos, Dutch
roekeloos wicked. Root verb reck (Old English reccan) is passing into obscurity.


remark (v.)

1630s, to mark out, distinguish modeled on French remarquer to mark, note, heed, formed in Middle
French from re-, intensive prefix (see re-), + marquer to mark, probably from a Germanic source such
as Old High German marchon to delimit (see mark (n.1)).    Meaning take notice of is from 1670s;
that of make a comment is first attested 1690s, from notion of make a verbal observation or call
attention to specific points. Related: Remarked; remarking.


gawk (v.)

1785, American English, perhaps from gaw, a survival from Middle English gowen to stare (c.1200),
from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse ga to heed, from Proto-Germanic *gawon-, from PIE
*ghow-e- to honor, revere, worship (see favor (n.)); and altered perhaps by gawk hand (see gawky).
Liberman writes that it need not have been derived from gowk. It is possibly another independent
imitative formation with the structure g-k. Related: Gawked; gawking.


reward (v.)

c.1300 to grant, bestow; early 14c. to give as compensation, from Old North French rewarder to
regard, reward (Old French regarder) take notice of, regard, watch over, from re-, intensive prefix
(see re-), + warder look, heed, watch, from Germanic (see warder). Originally any form of requital.
A doublet of regard. Related: Rewarded; rewarding.


attend (v.)

c.1300, to direct one's mind or energies, from Old French atendre (12c., Modern French attendre) to
expect, wait for, pay attention, and directly from Latin attendere give heed to, literally to
stretch toward, from ad- to (see ad-) + tendere stretch (see tenet). The notion is of stretching
one's mind toward something. Sense of take care of, wait upon is from early 14c. Meaning to pay
attention is early 15c.; that of to be in attendance is mid-15c. Related: Attended; attending.


negligee (n.)

1756, a kind of loose gown worn by women, from French n&eacute;glig&eacute;e, noun use of fem. past
participle of n&eacute;gligier to neglect (14c.), from Latin neglegere to disregard, not heed, not
trouble oneself about, also to make light of (see neglect (v.)). So called in comparison to the
elaborate costume of a fully dressed woman of the period. Grose [Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue,
1788] reports it vulgarly termed a neggledigee. Borrowed again, 1835; the modern sense semi-
transparent, flimsy, lacy dressing gown is yet another revival, first recorded 1930. It also was
used in the U.S. funeral industry mid-20c. for shroud of a corpse.


observe (v.)

late 14c., to hold to (a manner of life or course of conduct), from Old French observer, osserver to
observe, watch over, follow (10c.), from Latin observare watch over, note, heed, look to, attend to,
guard, regard, comply with, from ob over (see ob-) + servare to watch, keep safe, from PIE root
*ser- (1) to protect. Meaning to attend to in practice, to keep, follow is attested from late 14c.
Sense of watch, perceive, notice is 1560s, via notion of see and note omens. Meaning to say by way
of remark is from c.1600. Related: Observed; observing.


garnish (v.)

late 14c., from Old French garniss-, present participle stem of garnir provide, furnish; fortify,
reinforce, from a Germanic stem related to Proto-Germanic *warnejan be cautious, guard, provide for
(cognates: Old High German warnon to take heed, Old English warnian to take warning, beware; see
warn). Sense evolution is from arm oneself to fit out to embellish, which was the earliest meaning
in English, though the others also were used in Middle English. Culinary sense of to decorate a dish
for the table predominated after c.1700. Older meaning survives in legal sense of warning of
attachment of funds (1570s). Related: Garnished; garnishing.


lamia (n.)

late 14c., from Latin lamia, from Greek lamia female vampire, literally swallower, lecher, from
laimos throat, gullet. Probably cognate with Latin lemures spirits of the dead (see lemur). Used in
early translations of the Bible for screech owls and sea monsters. Sometimes also, apparently,
mermaids.    Also kynde erre&thorn; in som beestes wondirliche j-schape, as it fare&thorn; in a
beest &thorn;at hatte lamia, &thorn;at ha&thorn; an heed as a mayde &amp; body as a grym fissche[;]
whan &thorn;at best lamya may fynde ony man, first a flatere&thorn; wi&thorn; hym with a wommannes
face and make&thorn; hym ligge by here while he may dure, &amp; whanne he may nofer&thorn;ere
suffice to here lecherye &thorn;anne he rende&thorn; hym and sle&thorn; and ete&thorn; hym. [John of
Trevisa, translation of Bartholomew de Glanville's De proprietatibus rerum, 1398]


twit (v.)

to blame, reproach, taunt, upbraid, 1520s, twite, shortened form of Middle English atwite, from Old
English &aelig;twitan to blame, reproach, from &aelig;t at + witan to blame, from Proto-Germanic
*witanan (cognates: Old English wite, Old Saxon witi, Old Norse viti punishment, torture; Old High
German wizzi punishment, wizan to punish; Dutch verwijten, Old High German firwizan, German
verweisen to reproach, reprove, Gothic fraweitan to avenge), from PIE root *weid- to see (see
vision). For sense evolution, compare Latin animadvertere, literally to give heed to, observe, later
to chastise, censure, punish. Related: Twitted; twitting. As a noun meaning a taunt from 1520s.


glass (n.)

Old English gl&aelig;s glass, a glass vessel, from Proto-Germanic *glasam (cognates: Old Saxon glas,
Middle Dutch and Dutch glas, German Glas, Old Norse gler glass, looking glass, Danish glar), from
PIE *ghel- (2) to shine, with derivatives referring to bright materials and gold (cognates: Latin
glaber smooth, bald, Old Church Slavonic gladuku, Lithuanian glodus smooth), with derivatives
referring to colors and bright materials, a word that is the root of widespread words for gray,
blue, green, and yellow (such as Old English gl&aelig;r amber, Latin glaesum amber, Old Irish glass
green, blue, gray, Welsh glas blue; see glass). Sense of drinking glass is early 13c.    The glass
slipper in Cinderella is perhaps an error by Charles Perrault, translating in 1697, mistaking Old
French voir ermine, fur for verre glass. In other versions of the tale it is a fur slipper. The
proverb about people in glass houses throwing stones is attested by 1779, but earlier forms go back
to 17c.:    Who hath glass-windows of his own must take heed how he throws stones at his house. ...
He that hath a body made of glass must not throw stones at another. [John Ray, Handbook of Proverbs,
1670]


