helmet (n.)

mid-15c., perhaps a diminutive of Old English helm protection, covering; crown, helmet (see helm
(n.2)). But Barnhart says from Middle French helmet (Modern French heaume), diminutive of helme
helmet, from the same Germanic source as helm (n.2). Middle English Dictionary points to both
without making a choice. Old English helm never became an active term in the standard vocabulary of
English. [Barnhart]


helm (n.1)

handle of a tiller, late 13c., from Old English helma rudder; position of guidance, control, from
Proto-Germanic *halbma- (cognates: Old Norse hjalm, Old High German helmo, German Helm handle), from
PIE *kelp- to hold, grasp (see helve).


helm (n.2)

a helmet, c.1200, from Old English helm protection, covering; crown, helmet, and perhaps also from
cognate Old Norse hjalmr, from Proto-Germanic *helmaz protective covering, from PIE *kel- (2) to
cover, to hide (see cell). Italian elmo, Spanish yelmo are from Germanic.


helmsman (n.)

1620s, from helm (n.1) + man (n.).


Anselm

masc. proper name, from Latin Anselmus, from Old High German Ansehelm, literally having a divine
helmet, from ansi god (see Asgard) + helm (see helm (n.2)).


halberd (n.)

late 15c., from Middle French hallebarde (earlier alabarde, 15c.), from Middle High German halmbarte
broad-axe with handle, from halm handle (see helm) + barte hatchet, possibly from Proto-Germanic
*bardoz beard, also hatchet, broadax. Alternative etymology [Kluge, Darmesteter] traces first
element to helm helmet, making the weapon an axe for smashing helmets.


lurch (n.1)

sudden pitch to one side, 1784, from earlier lee-larches (1765), a nautical term for the sudden roll
which a ship makes to lee-ward in a high sea, when a large wave strikes her, and bears her weather-
side violently up, which depresses the other in proportion [Complete Dictionary of Arts and
Sciences, London 1765]; perhaps from French lacher to let go, from Latin laxus (see lax).    When a
Ship is brought by the Lee, it is commonly occa&#383;sioned by a large Sea, and by the Neglect of
the Helm's-man. When the Wind is two or three Points on the Quarter, the Ship taking a Lurch, brings
the Wind on the other Side, and lays the Sails all dead to the Ma&#383;t; as the Yards are braced
up, &#383;he then having no Way, and the Helm being of no Service, I would therefore brace about the
Head &#383;ails &#383;harp the other Way .... [John Hamilton Moore, Practical Navigator, 8th ed.,
1784]


Kenelm

masc. proper name, Old English Cenhelm, from cene brave, bold (see keen (adj.)) + helm helmet (see
helmet).


William

masc. proper name, from Old North French Willaume, Norman form of French Guillaume, of Germanic
origin (cognates: Old High German Willahelm, German Wilhelm), from willio will (see will (n.)) +
helma helmet, from Proto-Germanic *helmaz protective covering (see helm (n.2)). After the Conquest,
the most popular given name in England until supplanted by John.


helve (n.)

Old English helfe, hielfe handle of an axe or other tool or weapon, from Proto-Germanic *halb-
(cognates: Old Saxon helvi, Middle Dutch helf, Old High German halb handle of an axe, Old High
German helmo tiller); related to halter and helm (1), from PIE *kelp- to hold, grasp. In Middle
English, to holden the axe bi the helve (c.1200) meant to take something by the right end.


