hem (n.)

Old English hem a border, especially of cloth or a garment, from Proto-Germanic *hamjam (cognates:
Old Norse hemja to bridle, curb, Swedish h&auml;mma to stop, restrain, Old Frisian hemma to hinder,
Middle Dutch, German hemmen to hem in, stop, hinder), from PIE *kem- to compress. Apparently the
same root yielded Old English hamm, common in place names (where it means enclosure, land hemmed in
by water or high ground, land in a river bend). In Middle English, hem also was a symbol of pride or
ostentation.    If &thorn;ei wer &thorn;e first &thorn;at schuld puplysch &thorn;ese grete myracles
of her mayster, men myth sey of hem, as Crist ded of &thorn;e Pharisees, &thorn;at &thorn;ei
magnified her owne hemmys. [John Capgrave, Life of Saint Gilbert of Sempringham, 1451]


hem (interj.)

late 15c., probably imitative of the sound of clearing the throat. Hem and haw first recorded 1786,
from haw hesitation (1630s; see haw (v.)); hem and hawk attested from 1570s.


hem (v.)

late 14c., to provide (something) with a border or fringe (surname Hemmer attested from c.1300),
from hem (n.). Related: Hemmed; hemming. The phrase hem in shut in, confine, first recorded 1530s.


hematite (n.)

1540s, haematites, from Middle French hematite (16c.), from Latin haematites, from Greek haimatites
lithos bloodlike stone, from haima (genitive haimatos) blood (see -emia). Earlier as emachite (late
14c.).


hemato-

also haemato-, word-forming element meaning blood, from Greek haimato-, comb. form of haima
(genitive haimatos) blood (see -emia).


hematoma (n.)

1826, from hemato- + -oma.


hemi-

word-forming element meaning half, from Greek hemi- half, from PIE root *semi-, which is the source
of Sanskrit sami, Latin semi- (see semi-), Old High German sami- half, and Old English sam-,
denoting a partial or imperfect condition (see sandblind).


hemidemisemiquaver (n.)

1848, from hemi- + demi- + semi- + quaver (n.).


hemisphere (n.)

late 14c., hemysperie, in reference to the celestial sphere, from Latin hemisphaerium, from Greek
hemisphairion, from hemi- half (see hemi-) + sphaira sphere (see sphere). Spelling reformed 16c. Of
the Earth, from 1550s; of the brain, 1804.


hemispheric (adj.)

1580s, from hemisphere + -ic.


hemistich (n.)

half a poetic line, 1570s, from Middle French h&eacute;mistiche, from Latin hemistichium, from Greek
hemistikhion half-line, half-verse, from hemi- half (see hemi-) + stikhos row, line of verse (see
stair).


hemline (n.)

1899, from hem (n.) + line (n.).


hemlock (n.)

a poisonous plant, Old English (Kentish) hemlic, earlier hymlice, hymblice; of unknown origin.
Liberman suggests from root hem- poison, perhaps with the plant name suffix -ling or -ig. As the
name of the poison derived from the plant, c.1600. The North American tree so called from 1776, from
resemblance of its leaves to those of the plant.


hemo-

word-forming element meaning blood, perhaps via Old French hemo-, Latin haemo-, from Greek haimo-,
from haima blood (see -emia).


hemoglobin (n.)

coloring matter in red blood stones, 1862, shortening of h&aelig;matoglobin (1845), from Greek
haimato-, comb. form of haima (genitive haimatos) blood (see -emia) + globulin, a type of simple
protein, from globule, formerly a word for corpuscle of blood.


hemophilia (n.)

1854 (in anglicized form h&aelig;mophily), from German h&auml;mophile, coined 1828 by German
physician Johann Lucas Sch&ouml;nlein (1793-1864), from Greek haima blood (see -emia) + philia to
love (see -philia), here with a sense of tendency to.


hemophiliac

1896 (adj.); 1897 (n.)., from hemophilia. Perhaps modeled on French h&eacute;mophilique (1880).


hemophobia (n.)

1886, from hemo- blood + -phobia fear.


hemorrhage (n.)

c.1400, emorosogie (modern form by 17c.), from Latin haemorrhagia, from Greek haimorrhagia, from
haimorrhages bleeding violently, from haima blood (see -emia) + rhage a breaking, from rhegnynai to
break, burst. Related: Hemorrhagic.


hemorrhage (v.)

by 1882, from hemorrhage (n.). Related: Hemorrhaged; hemorrhaging.    Slang in Reports: B.I.D. for
Brought in Dead and Dotty are, [Mr. Sidney Holland of London Hospital] considers, permissible
expressions, but he draws the line at fitting and h&aelig;morrhaging. Only such terms, he says,
should be used as outside doctors will understand. We would say that on a point of such odiously bad
taste he might have been much more severe. [Lavinia L. Dock, The American Journal of Nursing, 1906]


hemorrhoids (n.)

plural of hemorrhoid; late 14c., emeroudis, from Old French emorroides (13c.), from Latin
h&aelig;morrhoidae, from Greek haimorrhoides (phlebes) (veins) liable to discharge blood, plural of
haimorrhois, from haima blood (see -emia) + rhoos a stream, a flowing, from rhein to flow (see
rheum). Related: Hemmorhoidal.


hemp (n.)

Old English h&aelig;nep hemp, cannabis sativa, from Proto-Germanic *hanapiz (cognates: Old Saxon
hanap, Old Norse hampr, Old High German hanaf, German Hanf), probably a very early Germanic
borrowing of the same Scythian word that became Greek kannabis (see cannabis). As the name of the
fiber made from the plant, by c.1300. Slang sense of marijuana dates from 1940s; though scientific
use for the narcotic derived from hemp dates to 1870.


hempen (adj.)

made of hemp, late 14c., from hemp + -en (2). In many figurative expressions 15c.-19c. it is in
reference to the hangman's noose.


hemstitch (n.)

also hem-stitch, 1821, from hem + stitch. As a verb by 1839. Related: Hemstitched; hemstitching.


-phemia

word-forming element meaning speech, from Greek -phemia, from pheme speech, from stem of phemi I
speak, cognate with Latin fari to speak, fama report, reputation (see fame (n.)).


accouchement (n.)

1803, from French accouchement, noun of action from accoucher (see accoucheur).


ahem

attention-getting interjection, 1763, lengthened from hem, imitative of clearing the throat.


alchemical (adj.)

1580s; see alchemy + -ical.


alchemist (n.)

1510s, from Middle French alquemiste, from Medieval Latin alchimista (see alchemy). Earlier forms
were alchemister (late 14c.), alkanamyer (late 15c.).


alchemy (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French alchimie (14c.), alquemie (13c.), from Medieval Latin alkimia, from Arabic
al-kimiya, from Greek khemeioa (found c.300 C.E. in a decree of Diocletian against the old writings
of the Egyptians), all meaning alchemy. Perhaps from an old name for Egypt (Khemia, literally land
of black earth, found in Plutarch), or from Greek khymatos that which is poured out, from khein to
pour, related to khymos juice, sap [Klein, citing W. Muss-Arnolt, calls this folk etymology]. The
word seems to have elements of both origins.Mahn ... concludes, after an elaborate investigation,
that Gr. khymeia was probably the original, being first applied to pharmaceutical chemistry, which
was chiefly concerned with juices or infusions of plants; that the pursuits of the Alexandrian
alchemists were a subsequent development of chemical study, and that the notoriety of these may have
caused the name of the art to be popularly associated with the ancient name of Egypt. [OED]The al-
is the Arabic definite article, the. The art and the name were adopted by the Arabs from
Alexandrians and thence returned to Europe via Spain. Alchemy was the chemistry of the Middle Ages
and early modern times; since c.1600 the word has been applied distinctively to the pursuit of the
transmutation of baser metals into gold, which, along with the search for the universal solvent and
the panacea, were the chief occupations of early chemistry.


anathema (n.)

1520s, an accursed thing, from Latin anathema an excommunicated person; the curse of
excommunication, from Greek anathema a thing accursed, originally a thing devoted, literally a thing
set up (to the gods), from ana- up (see ana-) + tithenai to put, place (see theme).    Originally
simply a votive offering, by the time it reached Latin the meaning had progressed through thing
devoted to evil, to thing accursed or damned. Later applied to persons and the Divine Curse. Meaning
formal act or formula of consigning to damnation is from 1610s.   Anathema maranatha, taken as an
intensified form, is a misreading of the Syriac maran etha the Lord hath come, which follows
anathema in I Cor. xvi:22, but is not connected with it (see Maranatha).


anathematization (n.)

1590s, from Medieval Latin anathematizationem (nominative anathematizatio), noun of action from past
participle stem of anathematizare (see anathematize). Earlier was anathemization (1540s).


anathematize (v.)

to pronounce an anathema against, 1560s, from French anath&eacute;matiser (Old French anatemer),
from Latin anathematizare, from Greek anathematizein to devote (to evil), from stem of anathema.
Alternative anathemize (1670s) is less correct and more rare. Related: Anathematized;
anathematizing.


anthem (n.)

Old English ontemn, antefn, a composition (in prose or verse) sung antiphonally, from Late Latin
antefana, from Greek antiphona verse response (see antiphon). Sense evolved to a composition set to
sacred music (late 14c.), then song of praise or gladness (1590s). Used in reference to the English
national song (technically, as OED points out, a hymn) and extended to those of other nations.
Modern spelling is from late 16c., perhaps an attempt to make the word look more Greek.


anthemic (adj.)

of music, felt to resemble an anthem, 1841, from anthem + -ic. In reference to a type of acid, 1859,
so called because isolated from dog-fennel (Anthemis arvensis).


behemoth (n.)

late 14c., huge biblical beast (Job xl:15), from Latin behemoth, from Hebrew b'hemoth, usually taken
as plural of intensity of b'hemah beast. But the Hebrew word is perhaps a folk etymology of Egyptian
pehemau, literally water-ox, the name for the hippopotamus.    Long before Jumbo was dreamed of, a
hippo was exhibited by George K. Bailey, who invented the tank on wheels now used so generally in
the circuses. The beast was advertised as the blood sweating Behemoth of Holy Writ, and he made
several men rich. [Isaac F. Marcosson, Sawdust and Gold Dust, in The Bookman, June 1910]


Bethlehem

the name probably means House of Lahmu and Lahamu, a pair of Mesopotamian agricultural deities.


biochemical (adj.)

also bio-chemical, 1851, after German biochemisch, from bio- + chemical. Related: Biochemically.


biochemist (n.)

also bio-chemist, 1897; see bio- + chemist.


biochemistry (n.)

also bio-chemistry, 1857, from bio- + chemistry.


blaspheme (v.)

mid-14c., from Old French blasfemer to blaspheme (14c., Modern French blasph&eacute;mer), from
Church Latin blasphemare (also in Late Latin revile, reproach), from Greek blasphemein to speak
lightly or amiss of sacred things, to slander, from blasphemos evil-speaking (see blasphemy). A
reintroduction after the original word had been worn down and sense-shifted to blame (v.). Related:
Blasphemed; blaspheming.


blasphemous (adj.)

early 15c., blasfemous, from Old French blasfemeus or directly from Late Latin blasphemus, from
blasphemare (see blaspheme).


blasphemy (n.)

early 13c., from Old French blasfemie blasphemy, from Late Latin blasphemia, from Greek blasphemia a
speaking ill, impious speech, slander, from blasphemein to speak evil of. Second element is pheme
utterance (see fame); first element uncertain, perhaps related to blaptikos hurtful, though blax
slack (in body and mind), stupid also has been suggested.


Bohemia

central European kingdom, mid-15c., Beeme, from Middle French Boheme Bohemia, from Latin Boiohaemum
(Tacitus), from Boii, the Celtic people who settled in what is now Bohemia (and were driven from it
by the Germanic Marcomans early 1c.; singular Boius, fem. Boia, perhaps literally warriors) + Proto-
Germanic *haimaz home (see home (n.)). Attested from 1861 in meaning community of artists and social
Bohemians or in reference to the district where they live (see bohemian).


bohemian (n.)

a gypsy of society, 1848, from French bohemi&eacute;n (1550s), from the country name (see Bohemia).
The modern sense is perhaps from the use of this country name since 15c. in French for gypsy (they
were wrongly believed to have come from there, though their first appearance in Western Europe may
have been directly from there), or from association with 15c. Bohemian heretics. It was popularized
by Henri Murger's 1845 story collection Scenes de la Vie de Boheme, the basis of Puccini's La
Boh&egrave;me. Used in English 1848 in Thackary's Vanity Fair.The term 'Bohemian' has come to be
very commonly accepted in our day as the description of a certain kind of literary gipsey, no matter
in what language he speaks, or what city he inhabits .... A Bohemian is simply an artist or
litt&eacute;rateur who, consciously or unconsciously, secedes from conventionality in life and in
art. [Westminster Review, 1862]


chemical (adj.)

1570s, relating to chemistry, from chemic of alchemy (a worn-down derivative of Medieval Latin
alchimicus; see alchemy) + -al (1). In early use also of alchemy. Related: Chemically.


chemical (n.)

1747, from chemical (adj.). Related: Chemicals.


chemise (n.)

late Old English, cemes shirt, from Old French chemise shirt, undertunic, shift, or directly from
Late Latin camisia shirt, tunic (Jerome; also source of Italian camicia, Spanish camisa); originally
a soldier's word, probably via Gaulish, from Proto-Germanic *hamithjan (cognates: Old Frisian
hemethe, Old Saxon hemithi, Old English heme&eth;e, German hemd shirt), of uncertain origin (see
heaven). The French form took over after c.1200. Related: Chemisette.


chemist (n.)

1560s, chymist, alchemist, from Middle French chimiste, from Medieval Latin chimista, reduced from
alchimista (see alchemy). Modern spelling is from c.1790. Meaning chemical scientist is from 1620s;
meaning dealer in medicinal drugs (mostly in British English) is from 1745.


chemistry (n.)

c.1600, alchemy, from chemist + -ry; also see chemical (adj.). The meaning natural physical process
is 1640s, and the scientific study not so called until 1788. The figurative sense of instinctual
attraction or affinity is attested slightly earlier, from the alchemical sense.


