herald (v.)

late 14c., to sound the praises of, from herald (n.). Related: Heralded; heralding.


heraldic (adj.)

1772, on model of French h&eacute;raldique (15c.), from Medieval Latin heraldus (see herald).


heraldry (n.)

art of arms and armorial bearings, late 14c., heraldy, from Old French hiraudie heralds
collectively, from hiraut (see herald (n.)). The spelling with -r- is attested from 1570s (see
poetry, pedantry).


herald (n.)

late 13c. (in Anglo-Latin); c.1200 as a surname, messenger, envoy, from Anglo-French heraud, Old
French heraut, hiraut (12c.), perhaps from Frankish *hariwald commander of an army, from Proto-
Germanic *harja army (from PIE root *koro- war; see harry) + *waldaz to command, rule (see wield).
The form fits, but the sense evolution is difficult to explain, unless in reference to the chief
officer of a tournament, who introduced knights and made decisions on rules (which was one of the
early senses, often as heraud of armes, though not the earliest in English).


caduceus (n.)

1590s, from Latin caduceus, alteration of Doric Greek karykeion herald's staff, from karyx (genitive
karykos) a herald, from PIE *karu-, from root *kar- to praise loudly, extol (cognates: Sanskrit
carkarti mentions with praise, Old English hre&eth; fame, glory). Token of a peaceful embassy;
originally an olive branch. Especially the wand carried by Mercury, messenger of the gods, usually
represented with two serpents twined round it.


chouse (n.)

swindler, swindle, 1650s, said to be from Turkish chaush sergeant, herald, messenger, but the sense
connection is obscure.


unheralded (adj.)

1845, from un- (1) not + past participle of herald (v.).


anaesthesiology (n.)

1908, from anaesthesia + -ology.    Anesthesiology. This is the new term adopted by the University
of Illinois defining the science that treats of the means and methods of producing in man or animal
various degrees of insensibility with or without hypnosis. [Medical Herald, January, 1912]


leaflet (n.)

1787 as a term in botany; 1867 as a term in printing and publication; diminutive of leaf (n.)    A
newspaperman asked the British authorities for a copy of the leaflets distributed in Germany by
British airplanes. According to the London Daily Herald, his request was refused with the following
answer: Copies are not given out, as they might fall into enemy hands. [The Living Age magazine,
Sept. 1939-Feb. 1940]


stentorian (adj.)

of powerful voice, c.1600, from Stentor, legendary Greek herald in the Trojan War, whose voice
(described in the Iliad) was as loud as 50 men. His name is from Greek stenein groan, moan, from PIE
imitative root *(s)ten-, source of Old English &thorn;unor thunder.


milquetoast (n.)

timid, meek person, 1938, from Caspar Milquetoast, character created by U.S. newspaper cartoonist
H.T. Webster (1885-1952) in the strip The Timid Soul, which ran from 1924 in the New York World and
later the Herald Tribune. By 1930 the name was being referenced as a type of the meek man. The form
seems to be milktoast with an added French twist; also see milksop.


mortician (n.)

1895, American English, coined from mortuary + -ician, as in physician.An undertaker will no longer
be known as an undertaker and embalmer. In the future he will be known as the mortician. This was
decided on at the second day's meeting of the Funeral Directors' Association of Kentucky, which was
held in Louisville. [The Medical Herald, July 1895]


kerygma (n.)

preaching, 1889, from Greek kerygma proclamation, preaching, from keryssein to proclaim, related to
keryx herald.


beadle (n.)

Old English bydel herald, messenger from an authority, preacher, from beodan to proclaim (see bid).
Sense of warrant officer, tipstaff was in late Old English; that of petty parish officer, which has
given the job a bad reputation, is from 1590s. French b&eacute;deau (Old French bedel, 12c.) is a
Germanic loan-word.


stagflation (n.)

1965, apparently coined by U.K. politician Iain Macleod (1913-1970), from stag(nation) +
(in)flation.    Attacking the Government's economic policy last night in the House of Commons, Mr.
Iain Macleod (West Enfield - Con.) the Opposition spokesman on Treasury and economic affairs,
described the present situation in Britain as stagflation -- stagnation and inflation together.
[Glasgow Herald, Nov. 18, 1965]


Harold

masc. proper name, Old Norse Haraldr, Old Danish, Old Swedish Harald, from Proto-Germanic *harja-
waldaz army commander. For first element, see harry; second element is related to Proto-Germanic
*waldan, source of Old English wealdan (see wield). It shares an etymology with herald.


fashion (n.)

c.1300, shape, manner, mode, from Old French fa&ccedil;on (12c.) face, appearance; construction,
pattern, design; thing done; beauty; manner, characteristic feature, from Latin factionem
(nominative factio) group of people acting together, literally a making or doing, from facere to
make (see factitious).    Sense of prevailing custom is from late 15c.; that of style of attire is
from 1520s.  To call a fashion wearable is the kiss of death. No new fashion worth its salt is
wearable. [Eugenia Sheppard, New York Herald Tribune, Jan. 13, 1960] Fashion plate (1851) originally
was full-page picture in a popular magazine showing the prevailing or latest style of dress, in
reference to the typographic plate from which it was printed. Transfered sense of well-dressed
person had emerged by 1920s.


sound (n.1)

noise, what is heard, sensation produced through the ear, late 13c., soun, from Old French son
sound, musical note, voice, from Latin sonus sound, a noise, from PIE *swon-o-, from root *swen- to
sound (cognates: Sanskrit svanati it sounds, svanah sound, tone; Latin sonare to sound; Old Irish
senim the playing of an instrument; Old English geswin music, song, swinsian to sing; Old Norse
svanr, Old English swan swan, properly the sounding bird).    The terminal -d was established
c.1350-1550 as part of a tendency to add -d- after -n-. First record of sound barrier is from 1939.
Sound check is from 1977; sound effects is 1909, originally live accompaniments to silent films.
The experts of Victor ... will ... arrange for the synchronized orchestration and sound effects for
this picture, in which airplane battles will have an important part. [Exhibitor's Herald &amp;
Moving Picture World, April 28, 1928]


fundamentalist (adj.)

1920 in the religious sense (as is fundamentalism), from fundamental + -ist. Coined in American
English to name a movement among Protestants c.1920-25 based on scriptural inerrancy, etc., and
associated with William Jennings Bryan, among others.   Fundamentalist is said (by George McCready
Price) to have been first used in print by Curtis Lee Laws (1868-1946), editor of The Watchman
Examiner, a Baptist newspaper. The movement may have roots in the Presbyterian General Assembly of
1910, which drew up a list of five defining qualities of true believers which other evangelicals
published in a mass-circulation series of books called The Fundamentals. A World's Christian
Fundamentals Association was founded in 1918. The words reached widespread use in the wake of the
contentious Northern Baptist Convention of 1922 in Indianapolis.    Fundamentalism is a protest
against that rationalistic interpretation of Christianity which seeks to discredit supernaturalism.
This rationalism, when full grown, scorns the miracles of the Old Testament, sets aside the virgin
birth of our Lord as a thing unbelievable, laughs at the credulity of those who accept many of the
New Testament miracles, reduces the resurrection of our Lord to the fact that death did not end his
existence, and sweeps away the promises of his second coming as an idle dream. It matters not by
what name these modernists are known. The simple fact is that, in robbing Christianity of its
supernatural content, they are undermining the very foundations of our holy religion. They boast
that they are strengthening the foundations and making Christianity more rational and more
acceptable to thoughtful people. Christianity is rooted and grounded in supernaturalism, and when
robbed of supernaturalism it ceases to be a religion and becomes an exalted system of ethics. [Laws,
Herald &amp; Presbyter, July 19, 1922]    The original opposition to fundamentalist (within the
denominations) was modernist.    A new word has been coined into our vocabulary -- two new words --
'Fundamentalist' and 'Fundamentalism.' They are not in the dictionaries as yet -- unless in the very
latest editions. But they are on everyone's tongue. [Address Delivered at the Opening of the
Seminary, Sept. 20, 1922, by Professor Harry Lathrop Reed, Auburn Seminary Record]    Applied to
other religions, especially Islam, since 1957.


