herd (n.)

Old English heord herd, flock, from Proto-Germanic *herdo- (cognates: Old Norse hjor&eth;, Old High
German herta, German Herde, Gothic hairda herd), from PIE *kerdh- a row, group, herd (cognates:
Sanskrit &#347;&#225;rdhah herd, troop, Old Church Slavonic &#269;reda herd, Greek korthys heap,
Lithuanian kerd&#382;ius shepherd). Herd instinct in psychology is first recorded 1908.


herd (v.)

mid-13c., 창&euro;&oelig;to watch over or herd (livestock);창&euro;? of animals, 창&euro;&oelig;to
gather in a herd, to form a flock,창&euro;? late 14c., from herd (n.). Related: Herded; herding.


herdsman (n.)

Old English heordman, but the word was not common until herd (Old English hierde) in sense  keeper
of domestic animals which go in herds fell from use (see shepherd). See herd (n.) + man (n.).
Intrusive -s- appeared early 15c., on model of craftsman, etc.


stud (n.2)

horse used for breeding, Old English stod herd of horses, place where horses are kept for breeding,
from Proto-Germanic *stodo (cognates: Old Norse sto&eth;, Middle Low German stod, Old High German
stuot herd of horses, German Stute mare), from PIE root *sta- to stand, with derivatives meaning
place or thing that is standing (cognates: Old Church Slavonic stado herd, Lithuanian stodas a drove
of horses; see stet). Sense of male horse kept for breeding is first recorded 1803; meaning man who
is highly active and proficient sexually is attested from 1895; that of any young man is from 1929.
Stud-poker (1864) is said to be from stud-horse poker, but that phrase is not found earlier than
1879.


pod (n.2)

herd of whales or seals, 1827, American English, of unknown origin.


dogie (n.)

motherless calf in a herd, 1887, cowboy slang, of uncertain origin.


shepherd (n.)

Old English sceaphierde, from sceap sheep (see sheep) + hierde herder, from heord a herd (see herd
(n.)). Similar formation in Middle Low German, Middle Dutch schaphirde, Middle High German
schafhirte, German dialectal Schafhirt. Shepherds customarily were buried with a tuft of wool in
hand, to prove on Doomsday their occupation and be excused for often missing Sunday church.
Shepherd's pie is recorded from 1877.


gregarious (adj.)

1660s, living in flocks (of animals), from Latin gregarius pertaining to a flock; of the herd, of
the common sort, common, from grex (genitive gregis) flock, herd, reduplication of PIE root *ger- to
gather together, assemble (cognates: Sanskrit gramah heap, troop; Greek ageirein to assemble, agora
assembly; Latin gremium bosom, lap; Old Church Slavonic grusti handful, gramota heap; Lithuanian
gurgulys chaos, confusion, gurguole crowd, mass). Sense of sociable first recorded 1789. Related:
Gregariously;  gregariousness.


goatherd (n.)

early 13c. (as a surname), from goat + herd (n.).


shepherd (v.)

1790, to herd sheep, from shepherd (n.). The metaphoric sense of watch over or guide is first
recorded 1820. Related: Shepherded; shepherding.


swineherd (n.)

c.1100, swynhyrde; see swine + herd.


single (v.)

to separate from the herd (originally in deer-hunting, often with forth or out), 1570s, from single
(adj.). Baseball sense of to make a one-base hit is from 1899 (from the noun meaning one-base hit,
attested from 1858). Related: Singled; singling.


Howard

proper name, from Old French Huard, from a Germanic source similar to Old High German *Hugihard
heart-brave, or *Hoh-weard, literally high defender; chief guardian. Also probably in some cases a
confusion with cognate Old Norse Haward, and as a surname also with unrelated Hayward. In some rare
cases from Old English eowu hierde ewe herd.


aggregate (adj.)

c.1400, from Latin aggregatus associated, literally united in a flock, past participle of aggregare
add to (a flock), lead to a flock, bring together (in a flock), from ad- to (see ad-) + gregare herd
(see gregarious).


hearth (n.)

Old English heor&eth; hearth, fire, in transferred use house, home, from West Germanic *hertho
burning place (cognates: Old Saxon and Old Frisian herth, Middle Dutch hert, Dutch haard, German
Herd floor, ground, fireplace), from PIE *kerta-, from root *ker- heat, fire (see carbon).


congregate (v.)

mid-15c., from Latin congregatus flocking together, past participle of congregare to herd together,
collect in a flock, swarm; assemble, from com- together (see com-) + gregare to collect into a
flock, gather, from grex (genitive gregis) a flock (see gregarious). Related: Congregated;
congregating.


segregate (v.)

1540s, from Latin segregatus, past participle of segregare set apart, lay aside; isolate; divide,
literally separate from the flock, from *se gregare, from se apart from (see secret (n.)) + grege,
ablative of grex herd, flock (see gregarious). Originally often with reference to the religious
notion of separating the flock of the godly from sinners. In modern social context, to force or
enforce racial separation and exclusion, 1908. Related: Segregated; segregating.


egregious (adj.)

1530s, distinguished, eminent, excellent, from Latin egregius distinguished, excellent,
extraordinary, from the phrase ex grege rising above the flock, from ex out of (see ex-) + grege,
ablative of grex herd, flock (see gregarious).    Disapproving sense, now predominant, arose late
16c., originally ironic and is not in the Latin word, which etymologically means simply exceptional.
Related: Egregiously; egregiousness.


demeanor (n.)

late 15c., from obsolete Middle English demean handle, manage, conduct, later behave in a certain
way (early 14c.), from Old French demener (11c.) to guide, conduct; to live, dwell, from de-
completely (see de-) + mener to lead, direct, from Latin minare to threaten, in Late Latin to drive
(a herd of animals); see menace. Sense in English evolved from notion of conduct, manage (oneself).
Spelling changed by influence of nouns in -or, -our.


narcissism (n.)

1905, from German Narzissismus, coined 1899 (in Die sexuellen Perversit&auml;ten), by German
psychiatrist Paul N&auml;cke (1851-1913), on a comparison suggested 1898 by Havelock Ellis, from
Greek Narkissos, name of a beautiful youth in mythology (Ovid, Metamorphoses, iii.370) who fell in
love with his own reflection in a spring and was turned to the flower narcissus (q.v.). Coleridge
used the word in a letter from 1822.    But already Krishna, enamoured of himself, had resolved to
experience lust for his own self; he manifested his own Nature in the cow-herd girls and enjoyed
them. [Karapatri, Lingopasana-rahasya, Siddhanta, II, 1941-2]    Sometimes erroneously as narcism.


rogue (n.)

1560s, idle vagrant, perhaps a shortened form of roger (with a hard -g-), thieves' slang for a
begging vagabond who pretends to be a poor scholar from Oxford or Cambridge, which is perhaps an
agent noun in English from Latin rogare to ask. Another theory [Klein] traces it to Celtic (compare
Breton rog haughty); OED says, There is no evidence of connexion with F. rogue 'arrogant.'     In
playful or affectionate use, one who is mischievous, 1590s. Meaning large wild beast living apart
from the herd is from 1859, originally of elephants. Meaning something uncontrolled or undisciplined
is from 1964. Also common in 17c. as a verb. Rogue's gallery police collection of mug shots is
attested from 1859.


coward (n.)

mid-13c., from Old French coart coward (no longer the usual word in French, which has now in this
sense poltron, from Italian, and l&acirc;che), from coe tail, from Latin coda, popular dialect
variant of cauda tail, of uncertain origin + -ard, an agent noun suffix denoting one that carries on
some action or possesses some quality, with derogatory connotation (see -ard).    The word probably
reflects an animal metaphoric sense still found in expressions like turning tail and tail between
legs. Coart was the name of the hare in Old French versions of Reynard the Fox. Italian codardo,
Spanish cobarde are from French.    The identification of coward &amp; bully has gone so far in the
popular consciousness that persons &amp; acts in which no trace of fear is to be found are often
called coward(ly) merely because advantage has been taken of superior strength or position ....
[Fowler]    As a surname (attested from 1255) it represents Old English cuhyrde cow-herd. Farmer has
coward's castle a pulpit, Because a clergyman may deliver himself therefrom without fear of
contradiction or argument.


punch (v.)

to thrust, push; jostle; also, prod, to drive (cattle, etc.) by poking and prodding, late 14c., from
Old French ponchonner to punch, prick, stamp, from ponchon pointed tool, piercing weapon (see punch
(n.1)). Meaning to pierce, emboss with a tool is from early 15c.; meaning to stab, puncture is from
mid-15c. To punch a ticket, etc., is from mid-15c. To punch the clock record one's arrival at or
departure from the workplace using an automated timing device is from 1900. Related: Punched;
punching.    Perhaps you are some great big chief, who has a lot to say.  Who lords it o'er the
common herd who chance to come your way;  Well, here is where your arrogance gets a dreadful shock,
When you march up, like a private, salute, and PUNCH THE CLOCK.  [from Punch the Clock, by The
Skipper, The Commercial Telegraphers' Journal, May 1912]    Specialized sense to hit with the fist
first recorded 1520s. Compare Latin pugnare to fight with the fists, from a root meaning to pierce,
sting. In English this was probably influenced by punish; punch or punsch for punish is found in
documents from 14c.-15c.:    punchyth me, Lorde, and spare my blyssyd wyff Anne. [Coventry Mystery
Plays, late 15c.]    To punch (someone) out beat up is from 1971.


beauty (n.)

early 14c., physical attractiveness, also goodness, courtesy, from Anglo-French beute, Old French
biaut&eacute; beauty, seductiveness, beautiful person (12c., Modern French beaut&eacute;), earlier
beltet, from Vulgar Latin bellitatem (nominative bellitas) state of being handsome, from Latin
bellus pretty, handsome, charming, in classical Latin used especially of women and children, or
ironically or insultingly of men, perhaps from PIE *dw-en-elo-, diminutive of root *deu- (2) to do,
perform; show favor, revere (see bene-). Famously defined by Stendhal as la promesse de bonheur the
promise of happiness.    [I]t takes the one hundred men in ten million who understand beauty, which
isn't imitation or an improvement on the beautiful as already understood by the common herd, twenty
or thirty years to convince the twenty thousand next most sensitive souls after their own that this
new beauty is truly beautiful. [Stendhal, Life of Henry Brulard]    Replaced Old English wlite.
Concrete meaning a beautiful woman is first recorded late 14c. Beauty sleep sleep before midnight is
attested by 1850. Beauty spot is from 1650s. Beauty parlor is from 1894.    The sudden death of a
young woman a little over a week ago in a down-town beauty parlor has served to direct public
attention to those institutions and their methods. In this case, it seems, the operator painted on
or injected into the patron's facial blemish a 4-per-cent cocaine solution and then applied an
electrode, the sponge of which was saturated with carbolized water. [The Western Druggist, October
1894]   Beaut&eacute; du diable (literally devil's beauty) is used as a French phrase in English
from 1825.


