heresy (n.)

an opinion of private men different from that of the catholick and orthodox church [Johnson],
c.1200, from Old French heresie (12c.), from Latin h&aelig;resis, school of thought, philosophical
sect, used by Christian writers for unorthodox sect or doctrine, from Greek hairesis a taking or
choosing, a choice, from haireisthai take, seize, middle voice of hairein to choose, of unknown
origin, perhaps from PIE *ser- (5) to seize (cognates: Hittite &#353;aru booty, Welsh herw booty).
The Greek word was used in the New Testament in reference to the Sadducees, Pharisees, and even the
Christians, as sects of Judaism, but in English bibles it usually is translated sect. Meaning
religious belief opposed to the orthodox doctrines of the Church evolved in Late Latin. Transferred
(non-religious) use from late 14c.


Nestorian (n.)

in Church history (mid-15c.), a follower of Nestorius (Latinized form of Nestor), 5c. patriarch of
Constantinople, whose doctrine attributed distinct divine and human persons to Christ and was
condemned as heresy. As an adjective from 1560s. Related: Nestorianism.


Montanist (n.)

mid-15c., millenarian and severely ascetic sect that believed in continual direct inspiration of the
spirit and offered prominent church roles to women, from Montanus, Christian-inspired prophet in the
wilds of Phrygia c.160 C.E. The heresy persisted into the 6c. and helped bring prophecy into
disrepute in the established Church. Related: Montanism.


Baha&#039;i

1889, mystical, tolerant Iranian religion founded by a Mirza Ali Mohammed ibn Radhik, Shiraz
merchant executed for heresy in 1850, and named for his leading disciple, Baha Allah (Persian
splendor of God; ultimately from Arabic). It also is sometimes called Babism, after the name taken
by the founder, Bab-ed-Din, gate of the faith.


Docetism (n.)

1846, heresy of the Docetae, who held that the body of Jesus was a phantom, from Greek Doketai, name
of the sect, literally believers, from dokein to seem, have the appearance of, think, related to
doxa (see decent).


heresiarch (n.)

1620s, from Church Latin haeresiarcha, from Late Greek hairesiarkhes (see heresy + arch-).


buggery (n.)

mid-14c., heresy, from Old French bougrerie, from bougre heretic (see bugger (n.)). Later unnatural
intercourse with man or beast, carnalis copula contra Naturam, &amp; hoc vel per confusionem
Specierum; from bugger (n.) + -y (4).


heretic (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French eretique (14c., Modern French h&eacute;r&eacute;tique), from Church Latin
haereticus, from Greek hairetikos able to choose, the verbal adjective of hairein (see heresy).


Lollard

name for certain heretics, late 14c. (in Chaucer, Loller, c.1386), from Middle Dutch lollaerd,
applied pejoratively to members of reforming sects c.1300 who devoted themselves to the care of the
sick and poor, literally mumbler, mutterer, so called by critics who regarded them as heretics
pretending to humble piety, from lollen to mumble or doze. Generic late Middle English term for
groups suspected of heresy, especially followers of John Wyclif.


dieresis (n.)

also diaeresis, 1610s, sign marking the division of a diphthong into two simple sounds, from Late
Latin diaeresis, from Greek diairesis division, noun of action from diairein to divide, separate,
from dia- apart (see dia-) + hairein to take (see heresy). In classical prosody, the slight break in
the forward motion of a line that is felt when the end of a foot coincides with the end of a word
[Miller Williams, Patterns of Poetry].


error (n.)

also, through 18c., errour, c.1300, from Old French error mistake, flaw, defect, heresy, from Latin
errorem (nominative error) a wandering, straying, mistake, from errare to wander (see err).    Words
for error in most Indo-European languages originally meant wander, go astray (but Irish has dearmad
error, from dermat a forgetting).


inquisition (n.)

late 14c., judicial investigation, act or process of inquiring, from Old French inquisicion inquiry,
investigation (12c.), from Latin inquisitionem (nominative inquisitio) a searching into, legal
examination, noun of action from past participle stem of inquirere (see inquire).    In Church
history, inquisitors were appointed from 382 C.E. to root out heretics, and the Inquisition refers
to the ecclesiastical court (Congregation of the Holy Office) appointed 13c. by Innocent III to
suppress heresy. It never operated in Britain. The capital letter form appeared in English only
after c.1500, and usually refers to the office's reorganization 1478-1483 in Spain as what is
commonly called the Spanish Inquisition.


adultery (n.)

voluntary violation of the marriage bed, c.1300, avoutrie, from Old French avouterie (12c.), noun of
condition from avoutre, from Latin adulterare to corrupt (see adulteration). Modern spelling, with
the re-inserted -d-, is from early 15c. (see ad-).    In Middle English, also sex between husband
and wife for recreational purposes; idolatry, perversion, heresy. Classified as single adultery
(with an unmarried person) and double adultery (with a married person). Old English word was
&aelig;wbryce breach of law(ful marriage) (compare German Ehebruch). Adultery Dune in Arizona
corresponds to Navajo sei adilehe adultery sand, where illicit lovers met privately.


dwell (v.)

Old English dwellan to mislead, deceive, originally to make a fool of, lead astray, from Proto-
Germanic *dwelan to go or lead astray (cognates: Old Norse dv&ouml;l delay, dvali sleep; Middle
Dutch dwellen to stun, make giddy, perplex; Old High German twellen to hinder, delay; Danish dvale
trance, stupor, dvaelb&aelig;r narcotic berry, source of Middle English dwale nightshade), from PIE
*dhwel-, extended form of root *dheu- (1) dust, cloud, vapor, smoke (and related notions of
defective perception or wits).    Related to Old English gedweola error, heresy, madness. Sense
shifted in Middle English through hinder, delay, to linger (c.1200, as still in phrase to dwell
upon), to make a home (mid-13c.). Related: Dwelled; dwelt; dwells.


