hew (v.)

Old English heawan to chop, hack, gash (class VII strong verb; past tense heow, past participle
heawen), earlier geheawan, from Proto-Germanic *hawwan (cognates: Old Norse hoggva, Old Frisian
hawa, Old Saxon hauwan, Middle Dutch hauwen, Dutch houwen, Old High German houwan, German hauen to
cut, strike, hew), from PIE root *kau- to hew, strike (cognates: Old Church Slavonic kovo,
Lithuanian kauju to beat, forge; Latin cudere to strike, beat; Middle Irish cuad beat, fight).
Weak past participle hewede appeared 14c., but hasn't displaced hewn. Seemingly contradictory sense
of hold fast, stick to (in phrase hew to) developed from hew to the line stick to a course,
literally cut evenly with an axe or saw, first recorded 1891. Related: Hewed; hewing.


hewer (n.)

cutter (of stone or wood), mid-12c. as a surname, agent noun from hew (v.). Hwers of wood and
drawers of water as the lowliest sort of physical laborers is from Joshua ix:12.


hewn

strong past participle of hew.


cashew (n.)

1703, a shortening of French acajou, from older Portuguese acaj&uacute; from Tupi (Brazil) acajuba,
name of the tree that produces the nut.


chew (v.)

Old English ceowan to bite, gnaw, chew, from West Germanic *keuwwan (cognates: Middle Low German
keuwen, Dutch kauwen, Old High German kiuwan, German kauen), from PIE root *gyeu- to chew (cognates:
Old Church Slavonic &#382;ivo to chew, Lithuanian &#382;iaunos jaws, Persian javidan to chew).
Figurative sense of to think over is from late 14c.; to chew the rag discusss some matter is from
1885, apparently originally British army slang. Related: Chewed; chewing. To chew (someone) out
(1948) probably is military slang from World War II. Chewing gum is by 1843, American English,
originally hardened secretions of the spruce tree.


chew (n.)

c.1200, an act of chewing, from chew (v.). Meaning wad of tobacco chewed at one time is from 1725;
as a kind of chewy candy, by 1906.


chewable (adj.)

1827, from chew (v.) + -able.


clerihew (n.)

humorous verse form, 1928, from English humorist Edmund Clerihew Bentley (1875-1956), who described
it in a book published 1906 under the name E. Clerihew.


eschew (v.)

mid-14c., from Old French eschiver shun, eschew, avoid, dispense with, from Frankish *skiuhan dread,
avoid, shun, from Proto-Germanic *skeukhwaz (cognates: Old High German sciuhen to avoid, escape,
German scheuen to fear, shun, shrink from, scheu shy, timid); see shy (v.). Related: Eschewed;
eschewing. Italian schivare to avoid, shun, protect from, schivo shy, bashful also are loan words
from West Germanic.


Matthew

masc. proper name, introduced in England by the Normans, from Old French Mathieu, from Late Latin
Matthaeus, from Greek Matthaios, contraction of Mattathias, from Hebrew Mattathyah gift of Jehovah,
from mattath gift. Variant Matthias is from the Greek version.


nephew (n.)

c.1300, from Old French neveu (Old North French nevu) grandson, descendant, from Latin nepotem
(nominative nepos) sister's son, grandson, descendant, in post-Augustan Latin, nephew, from PIE
*nepot- grandchild, and in a general sense, male descendant other than son (cognates: Sanskrit napat
grandson, descendant; Old Persian napat- grandson; Old Lithuanian nepuotis grandson; Dutch neef;
German Neffe nephew; Old Irish nia, genitive niath son of a sister, Welsh nei). Used in English in
all the classical senses until meaning narrowed in 17c., and also as a euphemism for the
illegitimate son of an ecclesiastic (1580s). The Old English cognate, nefa nephew, stepson,
grandson, second cousin survived to 16c.


phew

vocalic gesture expressing weariness, etc., attested from c.1600.


rough-hewn (adj.)

1520s, originally of timber, from rough-hew (v.); see rough (adj.) + hew (v.).


Saskatchewan

Canadian province, named for the river running through it, from Cree kis-si-ska-tches-wani-sipi
rapid flowing river.


shewbread (n.)

1530, Tyndale's word (Exodus xxv:30), based on or influenced by German schaubrot (in Luther),
literally show-bread, translating Latin panes propositiones, from Greek artai enopioi, from Hebrew
lechem panim, the 12 loaves placed every Sabbath before the Lord on a table beside the altar of
incense, from lechem bread + panim face, presence. Old English translations used offring-hlafas.


shewel (n.)

something hung up to keep wild animals away, mid-13c., perhaps in Old English, from the same source
as shy (adj.); a derivative of the verb which in German became scheuen to scare.


thew (n.)

Old English &thorn;eaw usage, custom, habit; see thews.


thews (n.)

Old English &thorn;eawes customs, habit, manners; morals, conduct, disposition, personal qualities,
plural of &thorn;eaw habit, custom, from Proto-Germanic *thawaz (cognates: Old Saxon thau usage,
custom, habit, Old High German thau discipline). According to OED, with no certain cognates outside
West Germanic and of unknown origin, but Watkins traces it to PIE root *teue- (1) to pay attention.
Meaning bodily powers or parts indicating strength, good physique is attested from 1560s, from
notion of good qualities. Acquired a sense of muscular development when it was revived by Scott
(1818).


whew

exclamation of astonishment, etc., early 15c., a whistling sound, of imitative origin.


