hide (v.1)

Old English hydan to hide, conceal; preserve; hide oneself; bury a corpse, from West Germanic
*hudjan (cognates: Middle Dutch, Middle Low German huden), from PIE *keudh- (source also of Greek
keuthein to hide, conceal), from root *(s)keu- to cover, conceal (see hide (n.1)). Hide and seek (by
1670s), children's game, replaced earlier all hid (1580s).


hideout (n.)

also hide-out, a hiding place, 1885, American English, from hide (v.) + out. The phrase hide out
conceal (oneself) from the authorities is attested from 1870, American English (in reference to
Northern draft dodgers in the Civil War).


hide (n.1)

skin of a large animal, Old English hyd hide, skin, from Proto-Germanic *hudiz (cognates: Old Norse
hu&eth;, Old Frisian hed, Middle Dutch huut, Dutch huid, Old High German hut, German Haut skin),
related to Old English verb hydan to hide, the common notion being of covering.    All of this is
from PIE root *(s)keu- to cover, conceal (cognates: Sanskrit kostha enclosing wall, skunati covers;
Armenian ciw roof; Latin cutis skin, scutum shield, ob-scurus dark; Greek kytos a hollow, vessel,
keutho to cover, to hide, skynia eyebrows; Russian kishka gut, literally sheath; Lithuanian kiautas
husk, kutis stall; Old Norse sky cloud; Old English sceo cloud; Middle High German hode scrotum; Old
High German scura, German Scheuer barn; Welsh cuddio to hide).    The alliterative pairing of hide
and hair (often negative, hide nor hair) was in Middle English (early 15c.), but earlier and more
common was hide ne hewe, literally skin and complexion ('hue') (c.1200).


hide (n.2)

measure of land (obsolete), Old English hid hide of land, earlier higid, from hiw- family (related
to hiwan household, hiwo a husband, master of a household), from Proto-Germanic *hiwido-, from PIE
*keiwo- (source also of Latin civis citizen), from root *kei- to lie; bed, couch; beloved, dear (see
cemetery, and compare city).    The notion was of amount of land needed to feed one free family and
dependents, usually 100 or 120 acres, but the amount could be as little as 60, depending on the
quality of the land. Often also defined as as much land as could be tilled by one plow in a year.
Translated in Latin as familia.


hideaway (n.)

small, secluded restaurant, etc., 1929, from hide (v.1) + away. Earlier it meant a fugitive person
(1871).


hidebound (adj.)

1550s, from hide (n.1) + past tense of bind (v.). Original reference is to emaciated cattle with
skin sticking closely to backbones and ribs; metaphoric sense of restricted by narrow attitudes is
first recorded c.1600.


feal (v.)

to hide, conceal, early 14c., a Northern English and Northern Midlands word, from Old Norse fela to
hide, cognate with Gothic filhan to hide, bury, Old English feolan.


scoundrel (n.)

1580s, skowndrell, of unknown origin. One suggestion is Anglo-French escoundre (Old French escondre)
to hide, hide oneself, from Vulgar Latin *excondere, from Latin condere to hide (see abscond). The
main objection to this theory is that hundreds of years lie between the two words.


corium (n.)

1650s, from Latin corium skin, hide, leather, related to cortex bark, scortum skin, hide, from PIE
root *(s)ker- (1) to cut (cognates: Sanskrit krtih hide; Old Church Slavonic scora skin, Russian
skora hide, kora bark; Welsh corwg boat made with leather skins; Old English sceran to cut, shear;
see shear (v.)). Related: Coriaceous.


conceal (v.)

early 14c., concelen, from Old French conceler to hide, conceal, dissimulate, from Latin concelare
to hide, from com-, intensive prefix (see com-), + celare to hide, from PIE root *kel- (2) to cover,
conceal (see cell). Replaced Old English deagan. Related: Concealed; concealing.


crypt (n.)

early 15c., grotto, cavern, from Latin crypta vault, cavern, from Greek krypte (short for krypte
kamara hidden vault), fem. of kryptos hidden, verbal adjective from kryptein to hide, from PIE
*krau- to conceal, hide (cognates: Old Church Slavonic kryjo, kryti to hide). Meaning underground
burial vault or chapel in a church first attested 1789.


film (n.)

Old English filmen membrane, thin skin, from West Germanic *filminjan (cognates: Old Frisian filmene
skin, Old English fell hide), extended from Proto-Germanic *fello(m) animal hide, from PIE *pel- (4)
skin, hide (cognates: Greek pella, Latin pellis skin).    Sense of a thin coat of something is
1570s, extended by 1845 to the coating of chemical gel on photographic plates. By 1895 this also
meant the coating plus the paper or celluloid. First used of motion pictures in 1905.


hiding (n.2)

a flogging, 1809, from hide (n.1), perhaps in reference to a whip or thong made of animal hide. Old
English had hyde &eth;olian to undergo a flogging, and hydgild fine paid to save one's skin (from a
punishment by flogging). The English expression a hiding to nothing (by 1905) referred to a
situation where there was disgrace in defeat and no honor in victory.


cuticle (n.)

1610s, from Latin cuticula, diminutive of cutis skin, from PIE *ku-ti-, from root *(s)keu- to cover,
conceal (cognates: Lithuanian kiautas husk, Old English hyd skin, hide; see hide (n.1)). Specialized
sense of skin at the base of the nail is from 1907. Related: Cuticular.


shun (v.)

Old English scunian to shun, avoid; abhor; desist, abstain; to hide, seek safety by concealment, of
uncertain origin; not found in any other language. Perhaps ultimately from PIE root *skeu- to cover,
to hide. Related: Shunned; shunning. A shun-pike (American English, 1911) was a road constructed to
avoid tolls.


excoriate (v.)

early 15c., from Late Latin excoriatus, past participle of excoriare flay, strip off the hide, from
Latin ex- off (see ex-) + corium hide, skin (see corium). Figurative sense of denounce, censure
first recorded in English 1708. Related: Excoriated; excoriating.


abscond (v.)

1560s, from Middle French abscondre and directly from Latin abscondere to hide, conceal, put out of
sight, from ab(s)- away (see ab-) + condere put together, store, from com- together (see com-) +
dere put, from PIE *dhe- to put, place, make (see factitious). The notion is of to hide oneself,
especially to escape debt or the law. Related: Absconded; absconder; absconding.


ox-hide

late 15c., from ox + hide (n.1).


supercilious (adj.)

1520s, lofty with pride, haughtily contemptuous, from Latin superciliosus haughty, arrogant, from
supercilium haughty demeanor, pride, literally eyebrow (via notion of raising the eyebrow to express
haughtiness), from super above (see super-) + second element akin to cilium eyelid, related to
celare to cover, hide, from PIE root *kel- (2) to conceal (see cell).    Since cilium is more recent
than supercilium, the former can be interpreted as a back-formation to the latter .... If indeed
derived from the root *kel- 'to hide', we must still assume that a noun *kilium 'eyelid' existed,
since the eyelid can 'hide' the eye, whereas the eyebrow does not have such a function. Thus,
supercilium may originally have meant 'what is above the cilium'. [Michiel de Vaan, Etymological
Dictionary of Latin and the other Italic Languages, Leiden, 2008]    Related: Superciliously;
superciliousness.


fell (n.2)

skin or hide of an animal, Old English fel, from Proto-Germanic *felnam- (cognates: Old Frisian fel,
Old Saxon fel, Dutch vel, Old High German fel, German fell, Old Norse fiall, Gothic fill), from PIE
*pel-no-, suffixed form of root *pel- (4) skin, hide (see film (n.)).


bursa (n.)

by 1788 as an English word in physiology, shortened from medieval Latin bursa mucosa mucus pouch,
from Medieval Latin bursa bag, purse, from Late Latin bursa, variant of byrsa hide, from Greek byrsa
hide, skin, wineskin, drum, of unknown origin; compare purse (n.).


recondite (adj.)

1640s, removed or hidden from view, from Old French recondit, from Latin reconditus, past participle
of recondere store away, hide, conceal, put back again, put up again, lay up, from re- away, back
(see re-) + condere to store, hide, put together, from con- together (see con-) + -dere to put,
place, comb. form of dare to give (see date (n.1)). Meaning removed from ordinary understanding,
profound is from 1650s; of writers or sources, obscure, it is recorded from 1817.


tarnish (v.)

mid-15c. (transitive), from present participle stem of Middle French ternir dull the luster or
brightness of, make dim (15c.), probably from Old French terne (adj.) dull, dark, which according to
Diez is from a Germanic source cognate with Old High German tarnjan to conceal, hide, Old English
dyrnan to hide, darken, from Proto-Germanic *darnjaz (see dern), but there are difficulties of form,
sense, and date. Intransitive sense from 1670s. Figurative sense is from 1690s. Related: Tarnished;
tarnishing.


buff (n.)

1570s, buffe leather leather made of buffalo hide, from Middle French buffle buffalo (15c., via
Italian, from Latin bufalus; see buffalo (n.)).    The color term comes from the hue of buffalo
hides (later ox hides). Association of hide and skin led c.1600 to in the buff. Buff-colored
uniforms of New York City volunteer firefighters since 1820s led to meaning enthusiast (1903).The
Buffs are men and boys whose love of fires, fire-fighting and firemen is a predominant
characteristic. [N.Y. Sun, Feb. 4, 1903]


pell (n.)

a parchment, mid-15c., earlier skin, hide (mid-14c.), from Anglo-French pell, Old French pel skin
(13c., Modern French peau), from Latin pellem, pellis skin, leather, parchment, hide (see film
(n.)).


quarry (n.1)

what is hunted, early 14c., quirre entrails of deer placed on the hide and given to dogs of the
chase as a reward, from Anglo-French quirreie, Old French cuiriee the spoil, quarry (Modern French
cur&#233;e), altered (by influence of Old French cuir skin, from Latin corium hide), from Old French
cor&eacute;e viscera, entrails, from Vulgar Latin *corata entrails, from Latin cor heart (see
heart). Sense of anything chased in hunt is first recorded 1610s; earlier bird targeted by a hawk or
other raptor (late 15c.).


hut (n.)

1650s, from French hutte cottage (16c.), from Middle High German h&uuml;tte cottage, hut, probably
from Proto-Germanic *hudjon-, related to the root of Old English hydan to hide, from PIE *keudh-,
from root (s)keu- (see hide (n.1)). Apparently first in English as a military word. Old Saxon hutta,
Danish hytte, Swedish hytta, Frisian and Middle Dutch hutte, Dutch hut are from High German.


sward (n.)

grass-covered ground, c.1300, from Old English sweard skin, hide, rind (of bacon, etc.), from Proto-
Germanic *swarthu- (cognates: Old Frisian swarde skin of the head, Middle Dutch swarde rind of
bacon, Dutch zwoord rind of bacon, German Schwarte thick, hard skin, rind, Old Norse sv&ouml;r&eth;r
walrus hide). Meaning sod, turf developed from the notion of the skin of the earth (compare Old
Norse grassv&ouml;r&eth;r, Danish gr&oslash;nsv&aelig;r greensward).


tan (v.)

late Old English tannian to convert hide into leather (by steeping it in tannin), from Medieval
Latin tannare tan, dye a tawny color (c.900), from tannum crushed oak bark, used in tanning leather,
probably from a Celtic source (such as Breton tann oak tree). The meaning make brown by exposure to
the sun (as tanning does to hides) first recorded 1520s; intransitive sense also from 1520s. Of
persons, not considered an attractive feature until 20c.; in Shakespeare, to deprive of the
freshness and beauty of youth (Sonnet CXV). As an adjective from 1620s. To tan (someone's) hide in
the figurative sense is from 1660s. Related: Tanned; tanning. German Tanne fir tree (as in
Tannenbaum) might be a transferred meaning from the same Celtic source.


mooch (v.)

mid-15c., pretend poverty, probably from Old French muchier, mucier to hide, sulk, conceal, hide
away, keep out of sight, of uncertain origin, perhaps from Celtic or Germanic (Liberman prefers the
latter, Klein the former). Or the word may be a variant of Middle English mucchen to hoard, be
stingy (c.1300), probably originally to keep coins in one's nightcap, from mucche nightcap, from
Middle Dutch muste cap, nightcap, ultimately from Medieval Latin almucia, of unknown origin. Sense
of sponge off others first recorded 1857.    Whatever the distant origin of mooch, the verb *mycan
and its cognates have been part of European slang for at least two millennia. [Liberman]    Related:
Mooched; mooching. As a noun meaning a moocher, from 1914.


dern (adj.)

secret, hidden (obsolete), from Old English derne concealed, secret, dark, from West Germanic
*darnjaz (cognates: Old Saxon derni, Old Frisian dern concealed, dark, Old High German tarni secret,
concealed, veiled).    As a verb, to conceal, from Old English diernan to hide. Compare Old High
German tarnjan to conceal, hide; German Tarnkappe, Tarnhelm magical cap or helmet which turns the
wearer invisible or allows him to assume any form. Related to dark (adj.). French ternir to tarnish,
to dull apparently is a Germanic loan-word.


skin (n.)

c.1200, animal hide (usually dressed and tanned), from Old Norse skinn animal hide, fur, from Proto-
Germanic *skintha- (cognates: Old English scinn (rare), Old High German scinten, German schinden to
flay, skin; German dialectal schind skin of a fruit, Flemish schinde bark), from PIE *sken- to cut
off (cognates: Breton scant scale of a fish, Irish scainim I tear, I burst), from root *sek- to cut
(see section (n.)).    Ful of fleissche Y was to fele, Now ... Me is lefte But skyn &amp; boon.
[hymn, c.1430]    The usual Anglo-Saxon word is hide (n.1). Meaning epidermis of a living animal or
person is attested from early 14c.; extended to fruits, vegetables, etc. late 14c. Jazz slang sense
of drum is from 1927. Meaning a skinhead is from 1970. As an adjective, it formerly had a slang
sense of cheating (1868); sense of pornographic is attested from 1968. Skin deep is first attested
in this:    All the carnall beauty of my wife, Is but skin-deep. [Sir Thomas Overbury, A Wife, 1613;
the poem was a main motive for his murder]    The skin of one's teeth as the narrowest of margins is
attested from 1550s in the Geneva Bible literal translation of the Hebrew text in Job xix:20. To get
under (someone's) skin annoy is from 1896. Skin-graft is from 1871. Skin merchant recruiting officer
is from 1792.


purse (n.)

Old English pursa little bag made of leather, especially for carrying money, from Medieval Latin
bursa leather purse (source also of Old French borse, 12c., Modern French bourse; see bourse), from
Late Latin bursa, variant of byrsa hide, from Greek byrsa hide, leather. Change of b- to p- perhaps
by influence of Old English pusa, Old Norse posi bag.    Meaning woman's handbag is attested from
1951. Meaning sum of money collected as a prize in a race, etc., is from 1640s. Purse-strings,
figurative for control of money, is from early 15c. Purse-snatcher first attested 1902 (earlier
purse-picker, 1540s). The notion of drawn together by a thong also is behind purse-net (c.1400).


hid (v.)

past tense and alternative past participle of hide (v.1).    How to entangle, trammel up and snare
Your soul in mine, and labyrinth you there  Like the hid scent in an unbudded rose?  Aye, a sweet
kiss -- you see your mighty woes.  [Keats, Lamia]


scudo (n.)

old Italian silver coin, Italian, literally shield (in reference to the device it bore), from Latin
scutum (see hide (n.1)).


derm (n.)

1835, from Greek derma skin, hide, leather (see derma).


rawhide (n.)

material cut from untanned skins of cattle, 1650s, from raw (adj.) + hide (n.1).


-derm

word-forming element meaning skin, from Greek derma skin, hide, leather (see derma).


bury (v.)

Old English byrgan to raise a mound, hide, bury, inter, akin to beorgan to shelter, from Proto-
Germanic *burzjan- protection, shelter (cognates: Old Saxon bergan, Dutch bergen, Old Norse bjarga,
Swedish berga, Old High German bergan protect, shelter, conceal, German bergen, Gothic bairgan to
save, preserve), from PIE root *bhergh- (1) to hide, protect (cognates: Old Church Slavonic brego I
preserve, guard). Related: Buried; burying. Burying-ground cemetery attested from 1711.    The Old
English -y- was a short oo sound, like modern French -u-. Under normal circumstances it transformed
into Modern English -i- (as in bridge, kiss, listen, sister), but in bury and a few other words (as
in merry, knell) it retained a Kentish change to e that took place in the late Old English period.
In the West Midlands, meanwhile, the Old English -y- sound persisted, slightly modified over time,
giving the standard modern pronunciation of blush, much, church.


hooky (n.)

also hookey, in the truant sense, 1848, American English (New York City), from Dutch hoekje hide and
seek; or else from hook it, attested since 14c. as make off, run away, originally depart, proceed.


horsehide

early 14c., from horse (n.) + hide (n.).


hiding (n.1)

concealment, early 13c., verbal noun from hide (v.1). Hiding place is from mid-15c.; an Old English
word for this was hydels.


stash (v.)

to conceal, hide, 1797, criminals' slang, of unknown origin, perhaps a blend of stow and cache.
Related: Stashed; stashing.


concealment (n.)

early 14c. (late 13c. in Anglo-French), from Old French concelement concealment, secrecy, from
conceler to hide (see conceal). Originally a term in law; general sense is from c.1600.


occultation (n.)

early 15c., disguise or concealment of identity, from Latin occultationem (nominative occultatio),
noun of action from past participle stem of occultare to hide, conceal, frequentative of occulere
(see occult).


custody (n.)

mid-15c., from Latin custodia guarding, watching, keeping, from custos (genitive custodis) guardian,
keeper, protector, from PIE *(s)keu- to cover, conceal (see hide (n.1)).


dark (adj.)

Old English deorc dark, obscure, gloomy; sad, cheerless; sinister, wicked, from Proto-Germanic
*derkaz (cognates: Old High German tarchanjan to hide, conceal). Absence of light especially at
night is the original meaning. Application to colors is 16c. Theater slang for closed is from 1916.


turncoat (n.)

1550s, from turn (v.) + coat (n.). The image is of one who attempts to hide the badge of his party
or leader. The expression to turn one's coat change principles or party is recorded from 1560s.


latescent (adj.)

tending to become latent, 1836, from Latin latescentem (nominative latescens), present participle of
latescere to hide oneself, be hidden, inchoative of latere (see latent).


cyto-

before a vowel, cyt-, word-forming element, Latinized comb. form of Greek kytos a hollow,
receptacle, basket (from PIE *ku-ti-, from root *(s)keu- to cover, conceal; see hide (n.1)); used in
modern science since c.1859 for cell, perhaps especially from the sense (in Aristophanes) of a cell
of a hive of wasps or bees.


