hierarchy (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French ierarchie, from Medieval Latin hierarchia ranked division of angels (in
the system of Dionysius the Areopagite), from Greek hierarkhia rule of a high priest, from
hierarkhes high priest, leader of sacred rites, from ta hiera the sacred rites (neuter plural of
hieros sacred; see ire) + arkhein to lead, rule (see archon). Sense of ranked organization of
persons or things first recorded 1610s, initially of clergy, sense probably influenced by higher.
Related: Hierarchal; hierarchical.


Peter Principle

1968, in a hierarchy, every employee tends to rise to his level of incompetence, named for (and by)
Laurence Johnston Peter (1919-1990) Canadian-born U.S. educationalist and author, who described it
in his book of the same name (1969).


hierarch (n.)

1570s, from Medieval Latin hierarcha, from Greek hierarkhes leader of sacred rites, high priest (see
hierarchy).


hierocracy (n.)

rule or government by priests, 1794; see hierarchy + -cracy. Related: Hierocratic.


pecking (n.)

verbal noun from peck (v.), late 14c. As a behavior among hens, pecking order (1928) translates
German hackliste (T.J. Schjelderuo-Ebbe, 1922); transferred sense of human hierarchy based on rank
or status is from 1955.


hierarchic (adj.)

1680s, from Medieval Latin hierarchicus, from hierarchia (see hierarchy). Hierarchical is from
1580s.


underdog (n.)

the beaten dog in a fight, 1887, from under + dog (n.). Compare top dog dominant person in a
situation or hierarchy (see top (adj.)).    I'm a poor underdog  But tonight I will bark  With the
great Overdog  That romps through the dark.   [from Canis Major, Robert Frost, 1928]


Gnostic (n.)

1580s, believer in a mystical religious doctrine of spiritual knowledge, from Late Latin Gnosticus,
from Late Greek Gnostikos, noun use of adj. gnostikos knowing, able to discern, from gnostos
knowable, from gignoskein to learn, to come to know (see know). Applied to various early Christian
sects that claimed direct personal knowledge beyond the Gospel or the Church hierarchy.


ovate (n.)

1723, from assumed Latin plural Ovates, from Greek Ouateis soothsayers, prophets, mentioned by
Strabo as a third order in the Gaulish hierarchy, from Proto-Celtic *vateis, plural of *vatis,
cognate with Latin vatis, Old Irish faith, Welsh ofydd. The modern word, and the artificial senses
attached to it, are from the 18c. Celtic revival and the word appears first in Henry Rowlands.


Puritan (n.)

1560s, opponent of Anglican hierarchy, later applied opprobriously to person in Church of England
who seeks further reformation (1570s), probably from purity. Largely historical from 19c. in literal
sense. After c.1590s, applied to anyone deemed overly strict in matters of religion and morals.
What [William] Perkins, and the whole Puritan movement after him, sought was to replace the personal
pride of birth and status with the professional's or craftsman's pride of doing one's best in one's
particular calling. The good Christian society needs the best of kings, magistrates, and citizens.
Perkins most emphasized the work ethic from Genesis: In the swaete of thy browe shalt thou eate thy
breade. [E. Digby Baltzell, Puritan Boston and Quaker Philadelphia, 1979]


degree (n.)

early 13c., from Old French degr&eacute; (12c.) a step (of a stair), pace, degree (of relationship),
academic degree; rank, status, position, said to be from Vulgar Latin *degradus a step, from Late
Latin degredare, from Latin de- down (see de-) + gradus step (see grade (n.)).    Most modern senses
date from Middle English, from notion of a hierarchy of steps. Meaning a grade of crime is 1670s;
that of a unit of temperature is from 1727. The division of the circle into 360 degrees was known in
Babylon and Egypt. It is perhaps from the daily motion of the sun through the zodiac in the course
of a year.


rank (adj.)

Old English ranc proud, overbearing, showy, from Proto-Germanic *rankaz (cognates: Danish rank
right, upright, German rank slender, Old Norse rakkr straight, erect), perhaps from PIE *reg- to
stretch, straighten (see right (adj.)). In reference to plant growth, vigorous, luxuriant, abundant,
copious it is recorded from c.1300. Related: Rankly; rankness.    Sense evolved in Middle English to
large and coarse (c.1300), then, via notion of excessive and unpleasant, to corrupt, loathsome, foul
(mid-14c.), perhaps from influence of Middle French rance rancid. In 17c. also lewd, lustful.
Much used 16c. as a pejorative intensive (as in rank folly). This is possibly the source of the verb
meaning to reveal another's guilt (1929, underworld slang), and that of to harass, abuse, 1934, U.S.
black dialect, though this also may be from the role of the activity in establishing social
hierarchy (from rank (n.)).


