high (n.1)

early 14c., high point, top, from high (adj.). As area of high barometric pressure, from 1878. As
highest recorded temperature from 1926. Meaning state of euphoria is from 1953.


high horse (n.)

originally (late 14c.) fine, tall horse; war horse, charger (high steed is from c.1300), also, like
high hall, status symbol; figurative sense of airs, easily wounded dignity in mount (one's) high
horse affect airs of superiority is from 1782 (Addison has to ride the great horse in the same
sense, 1716). Compare French monter sur ses grands chevaux; The simile is common to most languages
[Farmer].


high-strung (adj.)

also high strung, 1848 in the figurative sense, from high (adj.) + strung. Originally a musical
term, with reference to stringed instruments, where it is attested from 1748.


high-minded (adj.)

c.1500, arrogant; 1550s, morally lofty, from high (adj.) + minded. Related: High-mindedness.


high (adj.)

Old English heh (Anglian), heah (West Saxon) of great height, lofty, tall, exalted, high-class, from
Proto-Germanic *haukhaz (cognates: Old Saxon hoh, Old Norse har, Danish h&oslash;i, Swedish
h&ouml;g, Old Frisian hach, Dutch hoog, Old High German hoh, German hoch, Gothic hauhs high; also
German H&uuml;gel hill, Old Norse haugr mound), perhaps related to Lithuanian kaukara hill. Spelling
with -gh represents a final guttural sound in the original word, lost since 14c.    Of sound pitch,
late 14c. Of roads, most frequented or important, c.1200. Meaning euphoric or exhilarated from
alcohol is first attested 1620s, of drugs, 1932. Sense of proud, haughty, arrogant, supercilious
(c.1200) is reflected in high hand (late 14c.) and high horse. High seas first attested late 14c.,
with sense (also found in the Latin cognate) of deep as well as tall (cognates: Old English heahflod
deep water, also Old Persian bar&#353;an height, depth). Of an evil or a punishment, grave, serious,
severe (as in high treason), c.1200 (Old English had heahsynn deadly sin, crime).   High pressure
(adj.) is from 1824, of engines, 1891, of weather systems, 1933, of sales pitches. A child's high
chair is from 1848. High school school for advanced studies attested from late 15c. in Scotland; by
1824 in U.S. High time fully time, the fullness of time, is from late 14c. High noon is from early
14c.; the sense is full, total, complete. High and mighty is c.1200 (heh i mahhte). High finance
(1905) is that concerned with large sums. High and dry of beached things (especially ships) is from
1783. High-water mark is what is left by a flood or highest tide (1550s); figurative use by 1814.


high-toned (adj.)

1779 of musical pitch, 1807 of morality, from high (adj.) + tone.


high-powered (adj.)

1903, originally of automobiles, from high (adj.) + power (v.).


highbrow (n.)

person of superior intellect and taste, 1902, back-formation from high-browed (adj.), which is
attested from 1891, from high (adj.) + brow (see also lowbrow).


high-tail (v.)

also hightail move quickly, attested by 1890, U.S. slang from cattle ranches (animals fleeing with
elevated tails); from high (adj.) + tail (n.). Related: Hightailed; hightailing.


high-falutin&#039;

also highfalutin, 1848, U.S. slang, possibly from high-flying, or flown, or even flute.


highborn (adj.)

also high-born, of noble birth, c.1300, from high (adj.) + born.


high (n.2)

thought, understanding, obsolete from 13c. in English and also lost in Modern German, but once an
important Germanic word, Old English hyge, cognate with Old Saxon hugi, Old High German hugi, Old
Norse hygr, Swedish h&#246;g, Danish hu.


highway (n.)

Old English heahweg main road from one town to another; see high (adj.) in sense of main + way (n.).
High street (Old English heahstr&aelig;te) was the word before 17c. applied to highways and main
roads, whether in the country or town, especially one of the Roman roads. In more recent usage, it
generally is the proper name of the street of a town which is built upon a highway and was the
principal street of the place.


high-roller (n.)

extravagant spender, by 1873, American English, probably originally a reference to a gambler
throwing dice.


high-class (adj.)

1864, from high (adj.) + class (n.).


high hat (n.)

1889, tall hat; also used synechdochically for men who wear such hats; figurative meaning swelled
head is from 1923. Drum set sense is from 1934.


high-five

originally U.S. basketball slang, 1980 as a noun, 1981 as a verb, though the greeting itself seems
to be older (Dick Shawn in The Producers, 1968). In reference to the five fingers of the hand.


highball (n.)

type of alcoholic drink, 1898, probably from ball drink of whiskey; high because it is served in a
tall glass.


highly (adv.)

Old English healice nobly, gloriously, honorably; see high (adj.) + -ly (1). Meaning very, very
much, fully is mid-14c.


highland (n.)

Old English heohlond; see high (adj.) + land (n.). Highlands mountainous district of Scotland first
recorded early 15c.


highlight (n.)

1650s, originally of paintings, the brightest part of a subject, from high (adj.) + light (n.). The
figurative sense of outstanding feature or characteristic is from 1855. The verb is from 1861.
Hairdressing sense is 1941 (n.), 1942 (v.). Related: Highlighted; highlighting.


highest

superl. of high (adj.), Old English. Biblical in the highest translates Latin in excelsis, Greek en
hypsostois.


highness (n.)

Old English heanes; see high (adj.) + -ness. Meaning royalty, excellence, nobility is early 13c.;
Your Highness as a form of address to English royalty is attested from c.1400.


higher

comparative of high (adj.), Old English. Higher education is attested by 1839.    The French
distinguish l'instruction secondaire, which includes what we term a liberal education, from
l'instruction sup&eacute;rieure, which denotes professional education; but I do not think the
corresponding English phrases are used with this distinction. [William Whewell, Of a Liberal
Education in General, 1850]   Higher-up (n.) one in a superior post is from 1905, American English.


Eli

masc. proper name, in Old Testament, the name of a high priest of Israel, teacher of Samuel, from
Hebrew, literally high.


haught (adj.)

c.1400, haute, high in one's own estimation, haughty, from Old French haut (11c.) main, principal;
proud, noble, dignified; eminent; loud; grand, literally high, from Latin altus high (see old); with
initial h- by influence of Frankish hoh high. Spelling altered 16c. by influence of caught, naught,
etc.


knee-high (adj.)

1743, from knee (n.) + high (adj.). Phrase knee-high to a grasshopper first recorded 1851 (earliest
form was knee-high to a toad, 1814).


arduous (adj.)

1530s, hard to accomplish, difficult to do, from Latin arduus high, steep, also figuratively,
difficult, from PIE root *eredh- to grow, high (see ortho-). Literal sense of high, steep, difficult
to climb, attested in English from 1709.


tallboy (n.)

also tall-boy, high-stemmed glass or goblet, 1670s, from tall + boy, though the exact signification
is unclear. In reference to a high chest of drawers it is recorded from 1769, here perhaps a partial
loan-translation of French haut bois, literally high wood.


hautboy (n.)

1570s, from French hautbois high wood (15c.; see oboe). The high is haut in its secondary sense of
high-pitched. Frequently nativized as hoboy.This Pageaunt waz clozd vp with a delectable harmony of
Hautboiz, Shalmz, Coronets, and such oother looud muzik. [Robert Laneham, 1575]


lofty (adj.)

exalted, of high rank, early 15c.; also with a high purpose, from loft + -y (2). From early 14c. as
a surname. Literal sense of high is attested from 1580s. Related: Loftily; loftiness.


hypsi-

word-forming element meaning on high, from Greek hypsi aloft, on high, related to hypsos height;
cognate with Sanskrit os above, over, Old Church Slavonic vysoku high.


ortho-

before vowels orth-, word-forming element meaning straight, upright, rectangular, regular; true,
correct, proper, now mostly in scientific and technical compounds, from Greek ortho-, stem of orthos
straight, true, correct, regular, from PIE *eredh- high (cognates: Sanskrit urdhvah high, lofty,
steep, Latin arduus high, steep, Old Irish ard high).


junior (adj.)

late 13c., from Latin iunior, comparative of iuvenis young, young man (see young). Used after a
person's name to mean the younger of two from late 13c. Abbreviation Jr. is attested from 1620s.
Meaning of lesser standing, more recent is from 1766. That of meant for younger people, of smaller
size is from 1860. Junior college first attested 1896; junior high school is from 1909. Junior miss
young teenage girl is from 1907.    The junior high school is rapidly becoming the people's high
school. The percentage of pupils completing the ninth year is constantly rising where junior high
schools have been established. [Anne Laura McGregor, Supervised Study in English for Junior High
School Grades, New York, 1921]


height (n.)

Old English hieh&thorn;u, Anglian heh&thorn;o highest part or point, summit; the heavens, heaven,
from root of heah high (see high) + -itha, Germanic abstract noun suffix. Compare Old Norse
h&aelig;&eth;, Middle Dutch hoochte, Old High German hohida, Gothic hauhi&thorn;a height. Meaning
distance from bottom to top is from late 13c. Meaning excellence, high degree of a quality is late
14c. The modern pronunciation with -t emerged 13c., but wasn't established till 19c., and heighth is
still colloquial.


wacke (n.)

rock resembling sandstone, 1803, from German Wacke, from Middle High German wacke large stone, rock
projecting from the surface of the ground, from Old High German wacko, waggo gravel, pebble,
probably from Old High German wegan to move. A miner's word, brought into geology by German
geologist Abraham Gottlob Werner (1750-1817).


hi-fi (adj.)

1947, abbreviation of high fidelity (1934), of radio recievers, in reference to their quality of
sound reproduction. Hi as an advertiser's phonetic shortening of high is attested by 1914.


steep (adj.)

having a sharp slope, Old English steap high, lofty; deep; prominent, projecting, from Proto-
Germanic *staupaz (cognates: Old Frisian stap high, lofty, Middle High German *stouf), from PIE
*steup-, extended form of root *(s)teu- (1) to push, stick, knock, beat, with derivations referring
to projecting objects (cognates: Greek typtein to strike, typos a blow, mold, die; Sanskrit tup-
harm, tundate pushes, stabs; Gothic stautan push; Old Norse stuttr short). The sense of precipitous
is from c.1200. The slang sense at a high price is a U.S. coinage first attested 1856. Related:
Steeply; steepness. The noun meaning steep place is from 1550s.


bagel (n.)

1919, from Yiddish beygl, from Middle High German boug- ring, bracelet, from Old High German boug a
ring, related to Old English beag ring (in poetry, an Anglo-Saxon lord was beaggifa ring-giver),
from Proto-Germanic *baugaz-, from PIE root *bheug- (3) to bend, with derivatives referring to bent,
pliable, or curved objects (such as Old High German biogan to bend; see bow (v.)).


tower (v.)

c.1400, rise high (implied in towered); see tower (n.). Also, of hawks, to fly high so as to swoop
down on prey (1590s). Related: Towering.


magnanimity (n.)

mid-14c., loftiness of thought or purpose, from Old French magnanimit&#233; high-mindedness,
generosity of spirit, from Latin magnanimitatem (nominative magnanimitas) greatness of soul, high-
mindedness, from magnanimus having a great soul, from magnus great (see magnate) + animus mind,
soul, spirit (see animus). Probably a loan-translation of Greek megalopsykhos high-souled, generous
(Aristotle) or megathymus great-hearted.


enhance (v.)

late 13c., anhaunsen to raise, make higher, from Anglo-French enhauncer, probably from Old French
enhaucier make greater, make higher or louder; fatten, foster; raise in esteem, from Vulgar Latin
*inaltiare, from Late Latin inaltare raise, exalt,  from altare make high, from altus high (see
old).    Meaning raise in station, wealth, or fame attested in English from c.1300. The -h- in Old
French supposedly from influence of Frankish *hoh high. Related: Enhanced; enhancing.


barrow (n.2)

mound, Old English beorg (West Saxon), berg (Anglian) barrow, mountain, hill, mound, from Proto-
Germanic *bergaz (cognates: Old Saxon, Old Frisian, Old High German berg mountain, Old North bjarg
rock), from PIE root *bhergh- (2) high, elevated (cognates: Old Church Slavonic bregu mountain,
height, Old Irish brigh mountain, Welsh bera stack, pyramid, Sanskrit b'rhant high, Avestan brzant-
high, Old Persian bard- be high, Greek Pergamos, name of the citadel of Troy). Obsolete except in
place-names and southwest England dialect by 1400; revived by modern archaeology.    In place-names
used of small continuously curving hills, smaller than a dun, with the summit typically occupied by
a single farmstead or by a village church with the village beside the hill, and also of burial
mounds. [Cambridge Dictionary of English Place-Names]  Meaning mound erected over a grave was a
specific sense in late Old English. Barrow-wight first recorded 1869 in Eirikr Magnusson and William
Morris's translation of the Icelandic saga of Grettir the Strong.


mulberry (n.)

late 14c., developed from 13c. morberie, or cognate  Middle High German mul-beri (alteration by
dissimilation of Old High German mur-beri, Modern German Maulbeere); both from Latin morum mulberry,
blackberry, + Old English berie, Old High German beri berry. The Latin word probably is from Greek
moron mulberry, from PIE *moro- blackberry, mulberry (cognates: Armenian mor blackberry, Middle
Irish merenn, Welsh merwydden mulberry). Children's singing game with a chorus beginning Here we go
round the mulberry bush is attested from 1820s, first in Scotland.


Fuhrer (n.)

1934, from F&uuml;hrer und Reichskanzler, title assumed by Hitler in 1934 as head of the German
state, from German F&uuml;hrer leader, from f&uuml;hren to lead, from Middle High German v&uuml;eren
to lead, drive, from Old High German fuoren to set in motion, lead, causative of Old High German
faran to go, travel, which is cognate with Old English faran (see fare (v.)). Hitler's title was
modeled on Mussolini's Duce.


tide (n.)

Old English tid point or portion of time, due time, period, season; feast-day, canonical hour, from
Proto-Germanic *tidiz division of time (cognates: Old Saxon tid, Dutch tijd, Old High German zit,
German Zeit time), from PIE *di-ti- division, division of time, suffixed form of root *da- to
divide, cut up (cognates: Sanskrit dati cuts, divides; Greek demos people, land, perhaps literally
division of society, daiesthai to divide; Old Irish dam troop, company).    Meaning rise and fall of
the sea (mid-14c.) probably is via notion of fixed time, specifically time of high water; either a
native evolution or from Middle Low German getide (compare Middle Dutch tijd, Dutch tij, German
Gezeiten flood tide, tide of the sea). Old English seems to have had no specific word for this,
using flod and ebba to refer to the rise and fall. Old English heahtid high tide meant festival,
high day.


shtick (n.)

also schtick, 1959, from Yiddish shtik an act, gimmick, literally a piece, slice, from Middle High
German st&uuml;cke piece, play, from Old High German stucki (see stock (n.1)).


Bridget

fem. proper name, from Irish Brighid, fire goddess, from brigh strength, from Celtic *brig-o-, from
PIE *bhrgh-nt- high, mighty, from root *bhrgh- high (see borough).


meteorology (n.)

science of the atmosphere, weather forecasting, 1610s, from French m&eacute;t&eacute;orologie and
directly from Greek meteorologia treatise on celestial phenomena, discussion of high things, from
meteoron, literally thing high up (see meteor), + -logia treatment of (see -logy).


Howard

proper name, from Old French Huard, from a Germanic source similar to Old High German *Hugihard
heart-brave, or *Hoh-weard, literally high defender; chief guardian. Also probably in some cases a
confusion with cognate Old Norse Haward, and as a surname also with unrelated Hayward. In some rare
cases from Old English eowu hierde ewe herd.


