staff (n.)

Old English st&aelig;f (plural stafas), walking stick, strong pole used for carrying, rod used as a
weapon, pastoral staff, probably originally *st&aelig;b, from Proto-Germanic *stabaz (cognates: Old
Saxon staf, Old Norse stafr, Danish stav, Old Frisian stef, Middle Low German and Middle Dutch staf,
Old High German stab, German Stab, Gothic *stafs element; Middle Dutch stapel pillar, foundation),
from PIE root *stebh- post, stem, to support, place firmly on, fasten (cognates: Old Lithuanian
stabas idol, Lithuanian stebas staff, pillar; Old Church Slavonic stoboru pillar; Sanskrit stabhnati
supports; Greek stephein to tie around, encircle, wreathe, staphyle grapevine, bunch of grapes; Old
English stapol post, pillar).    As pole from which a flag is flown, 1610s. In musical notation from
1660s. Sense of group of military officers that assists a commander is attested from 1702,
apparently from German, from the notion of the baton that is a badge of office or authority (a sense
attested in English from 1530s); hence staff officer (1702), staff-sergeant (1811). Meaning group of
employees (as at an office or hospital) is first found 1837. Staff of life bread is from the
Biblical phrase break the staff of bread meaning cut off the supply of food (Lev. xxvi:26),
translating Hebrew matteh lekhem.    The Old English word, in plural, was the common one used for
letter of the alphabet, character, hence writing, literature, and many compounds having to do with
writing, such as st&aelig;fcr&aelig;ft grammar, st&aelig;fcr&aelig;ftig lettered,  st&aelig;flic
literary, st&aelig;fleahtor grammatical error, with leahtor vice, sin, offense.


Jordan

river in ancient Palestine; the crossing of it is symbolic of death in high-flown language as a
reference to Num. xxxiii:51. The modern nation-state dates to 1921.


flow (v.)

Old English flowan to flow, stream, issue; become liquid, melt; abound, overflow (class VII strong
verb; past tense fleow, past participle flowen), from Proto-Germanic *flo- (cognates: Middle Dutch
vloyen, Dutch vloeien to flow, Old Norse floa to deluge, Old High German flouwen to rinse, wash),
probably from PIE *pleu- flow, float (see pluvial). The weak form predominated from 14c., but strong
past participle flown is occasionally attested through 18c. Related: Flowed; flowing.


high-falutin&#039;

also highfalutin, 1848, U.S. slang, possibly from high-flying, or flown, or even flute.


black (adj.)

Old English bl&aelig;c dark, from Proto-Germanic *blakaz burned (cognates: Old Norse blakkr dark,
Old High German blah black, Swedish bl&auml;ck ink, Dutch blaken to burn), from PIE *bhleg- to burn,
gleam, shine, flash (cognates: Greek phlegein to burn, scorch, Latin flagrare to blaze, glow, burn),
from root *bhel- (1) to shine, flash, burn; see bleach (v.).    The same root produced Old English
blac bright, shining, glittering, pale; the connecting notions being, perhaps, fire (bright) and
burned (dark). The usual Old English word for black was sweart (see swart). According to OED: In ME.
it is often doubtful whether blac, blak, blake, means 'black, dark,' or 'pale, colourless, wan,
livid.'  Used of dark-skinned people in Old English.    Of coffee, first attested 1796. Meaning
fierce, terrible, wicked is late 14c. The color of sin and sorrow since at least c.1300; sense of
with dark purposes, malignant emerged 1580s (as in black magic). Black face in reference to a
performance style originated in U.S., is from 1868. Black flag, flown (especially by pirates) as a
signal of no mercy, from 1590s. Black dog melancholy attested from 1826. Black belt is from 1875 in
reference to districts of the U.S. South with heaviest African population; 1870 with reference to
fertility of soil; 1913 in judo sense. Black power is from 1966, associated with Stokely Carmichael.


drone (n.)

Old English dran, dr&aelig;n male honeybee, from Proto-Germanic *dran- (cognates: Middle Dutch
drane; Old High German treno; German Drohne, which is from Middle Low German drone), probably
imitative; given a figurative sense of idler, lazy worker (male bees make no honey) 1520s. Meaning
pilotless aircraft is from 1946.    Drones, as the radio-controlled craft are called, have many
potentialities, civilian and military. Some day huge mother ships may guide fleets of long-distance,
cargo-carrying airplanes across continents and oceans. Long-range drones armed with atomic bombs
could be flown by accompanying mother ships to their targets and in for perfect hits. [Popular
Science, November, 1946]    Meaning deep, continuous humming sound is early 16c., apparently
imitative (compare threnody). The verb in the sound sense is early 16c.; it often is the
characteristic sound of airplane engines. Related: Droned; droning.


aardvark (n.)

1833, from Afrikaans Dutch aardvark, literally earth-pig (the animal burrows), from aard earth (see
earth) + vark pig, cognate with Old High German farah (source of German Ferkel young pig, sucking
pig, a diminutive form), Old English fearh (see farrow).


ablaut (n.)

systematic vowel alteration in the root of a word to indicate shades of meaning or tense, a
characteristic of Indo-European languages, 1849, from German Ablaut, literally off-sound, coined by
J.P. Zweigel in 1568 from ab off + Laut sound, tone, from Old High German hlut (see listen).
Popularized by Jacob Grimm.


above (adv.)

Old English abufan, earlier onbufan, from on (see on) + bufan over, compound of be by (see by) +
ufan over/high, from Proto-Germanic *ufan- (cognates: Old Saxon, Old High German oban, German oben),
from PIE root *upo (see up (adv.)). Meaning in addition first corded 1590s.


Abraham

masc. proper name, name of the first of the patriarchs in the Old Testament, from Hebrew Abraham
father of a multitude, from abh father + *raham (cognate with Arabic ruham multitude); the name he
altered from Abram high father, from second element ram high, exalted. Related: Abrahamic.


abstract (adj.)

late 14c., originally in grammar (of nouns), from Latin abstractus drawn away, past participle of
abstrahere to drag away, detach, pull away, divert; also figuratively, from ab(s)- away (see ab-) +
trahere draw (see tract (n.1)).    Meaning withdrawn or separated from material objects or practical
matters is from mid-15c. That of difficult to understand, abstruse is from c.1400. Specifically in
reference to modern art, it dates from 1914; abstract expressionism as an American-based uninhibited
approach to art exemplified by Jackson Pollock is from 1952, but the term itself had been used in
the 1920s of Kandinsky and others.    Oswald Herzog, in an article on Der Abstrakte Expressionismus
(Sturm, heft 50, 1919) gives us a statement which with equal felicity may be applied to the artistic
attitude of the Dadaists. Abstract Expressionism is perfect Expressionism, he writes. It is pure
creation. It casts spiritual processes into a corporeal mould. It does not borrow objects from the
real world; it creates its own objects .... The abstract reveals the will of the artist; it becomes
expression. ... [William A. Drake, The Life and Deeds of Dada, 1922]   <hr />   Then, that art we
have called abstract for want of any possible descriptive term, with which we have been patient,
and, even, appreciative, getting high stimulation by the new Guggenheim non-objective Art Museum, is
reflected in our examples of surrealism, dadaism, and what-not, to assert our acquaintance in every
art, fine or other. [Report of the Art Reference Department of Pratt Institute Free Library for year
ending June 30, 1937]


bacon (n.)

early 14c., meat from the back and sides of a pig (originally either fresh or cured, but especially
cured), from Old French bacon, from Proto-Germanic *bakkon back meat (cognates: Old High German
bahho, Old Dutch baken bacon). Slang phrase bring home the bacon first recorded 1908; bacon formerly
being the staple meat of the working class.


badger (n.)

1520s, perhaps from bage badge (see badge) + -ard one who carries some action or possesses some
quality, suffix related to Middle High German -hart bold (see -ard). If so, the central notion is
the badge-like white blaze on the animal's forehead (as in French blaireau badger, from Old French
blarel, from bler marked with a white spot; also obsolete Middle English bauson badger, from Old
French bauzan, literally black-and-white spotted). But blaze (n.2) was the usual word for this.
An Old English name for the creature was the Celtic borrowing brock; also gr&aelig;g (Middle English
grei, grey). In American English, the nickname of inhabitants or natives of Wisconsin (1833).


bagel (n.)

1919, from Yiddish beygl, from Middle High German boug- ring, bracelet, from Old High German boug a
ring, related to Old English beag ring (in poetry, an Anglo-Saxon lord was beaggifa ring-giver),
from Proto-Germanic *baugaz-, from PIE root *bheug- (3) to bend, with derivatives referring to bent,
pliable, or curved objects (such as Old High German biogan to bend; see bow (v.)).


bairn (n.)

child (of any age), Old English bearn child, son, descendant, probably related to beran (to bear,
carry, give birth; see bear (v.)). Originally not chiefly Scottish, but felt as such from c.1700.
This was the English form of the original Germanic word for child (see child). Dutch, Old High
German kind, German Kind are from a prehistoric *gen-to-m born, from the same root as Latin gignere.
Middle English had bairn-team brood of children.


bait (v.1)

to torment or goad (someone unable to escape, and to take pleasure in it), c.1300, beyten, a
figurative use from the literal sense of to set dogs on, from the medieval entertainment of setting
dogs on some ferocious animal to bite and worry it (the literal use is attested from c.1300); from
Old Norse beita to cause to bite, from Proto-Germanic *baitan (cognates: Old English b&aelig;tan to
cause to bite, Old High German beizzen to bait, Middle High German beiz hunting, German beizen to
hawk, to cauterize, etch), causative of *bitan (see bite (v.)); the causative word forked into the
two meanings of harass and food offered. Related: Baited; baiting.


bake (v.)

Old English bacan to bake, from Proto-Germanic *bakan to bake (cognates: Old Norse baka, Middle
Dutch backen, Old High German bahhan, German backen), from PIE *bheg- (source also of Greek phogein
to roast), extended form of root *bhe- to warm (see bath). Related: Baked (Middle English had
baken); baking. Baked beans attested by 1803.


baldric (n.)

c.1300, belt worn over the shoulder, from Old French baldre (Modern French baudrier shoulder-belt),
which probably is from Latin balteus belt, said by Varro to be of Etruscan origin. The English word
perhaps influenced by Middle High German balderich (which itself is from the Old French).


Baldwin

masc. proper name, from Old French Baldoin (Modern French Baudouin), from a Germanic source similar
to Old High German Baldawin, literally bold friend, from bald bold (see bold) + wini friend (see
win). A popular Flemish name, common in England before and after the Conquest.


bale (n.)

large bundle or package, early 14c., from Old French bale rolled-up bundle, from a Germanic source
(such as Old High German balla ball), from Proto-Germanic *ball-, from PIE *bhel- (2) to blow, swell
(see bole).


baleful (adj.)

Old English bealu-full dire, wicked, cruel, from bealu harm, injury, ruin, evil, mischief,
wickedness, a noxious thing, from Proto-Germanic *balwom (cognates: Old Saxon balu, Old Frisian balu
evil, Old High German balo destruction, Old Norse bol, Gothic balwjan to torment), from PIE root
*bhelu- to harm. During Anglo-Saxon times, the noun was in poetic use only (in compounds such as
bealubenn mortal wound, bealu&eth;onc evil thought), and for long baleful has belonged exclusively
to poets. Related: Balefully.


balk (n.)

Old English balca ridge, bank, from or influenced by Old Norse balkr ridge of land, especially
between two plowed furrows, both from Proto-Germanic *balkon- (cognates: Old Saxon balko, Danish
bjelke, Old Frisian balka, Old High German balcho, German Balken beam, rafter), from PIE *bhelg-
beam, plank (cognates: Latin fulcire to prop up, support, fulcrum bedpost; Lithuanian balziena
cross-bar; and possibly Greek phalanx trunk, log, line of battle). Modern senses are figurative,
representing the balk as a hindrance or obstruction (see balk (v.)). Baseball sense is first
attested 1845.


ball (n.1)

round object, Old English *beal, from or corresponding to Old Norse bollr ball, from Proto-Germanic
*balluz (cognates: Old High German ballo, German Ball), from PIE root *bhel- (2) to blow, inflate,
swell (see bole).    Meaning testicle is from early 14c. Ball of the foot is from mid-14c. A ball as
an object in a sports game is recorded from c.1200; To have the ball hold the advantage is from
c.1400. To be on the ball is 1912, from sports. Ball-point pen first recorded 1946. Ball of fire
when first recorded in 1821 referred to a glass of brandy; as spectacularly successful striver it is
c.1900.


ban (v.)

Old English bannan to summon, command, proclaim, from Proto-Germanic *bannan proclaim, command,
forbid (cognates: Old High German bannan to command or forbid under threat of punishment, German
bannen banish, expel, curse), originally to speak publicly, from PIE root *bha- (2) to speak
(cognates: Old Irish bann law, Armenian ban word; see fame (n.)).     Main modern sense of to
prohibit (late 14c.) is from Old Norse cognate banna to curse, prohibit, and probably in part from
Old French ban, which meant outlawry, banishment, among other things (see banal) and was a borrowing
from Germanic. The sense evolution in Germanic was from speak to proclaim a threat to (in Norse,
German, etc.) curse.    The Germanic root, borrowed in Latin and French, has been productive:
banish, bandit, contraband, etc. Related: Banned; banning. Banned in Boston dates from 1920s, in
allusion to the excessive zeal and power of that city's Watch and Ward Society.


band (n.1)

a flat strip, also something that binds, a merger of two words, ultimately from the same source. In
the sense that by which someone or something is bound, it is attested from early 12c., from Old
Norse band thin strip that ties or constrains, from Proto-Germanic *bindan, from PIE *bendh- to bind
(cognates: Gothic bandi that which binds; Sanskrit bandhah a tying, bandage, source of bandana;
Middle Irish bainna bracelet; see bend (v.), bind (v.)). Most of the figurative senses of this word
have passed into bond (n.), which originally was a phonetic variant of this band.    The meaning a
flat strip (late 14c.) is from Old French bande strip, edge, side, via Old North French bende, from
Old High German binda, from Proto-Germanic *bindan (see above). In Middle English, this was
distinguished by the spelling bande, but since the loss of the final -e the words have fully merged.
Meaning broad stripe of color is from late 15c.; the electronics sense of range of frequencies or
wavelengths is from 1922. The Old North French form was retained in heraldic bend. Band saw is
recorded from 1864.


bane (n.)

Old English bana killer, slayer, murderer; the devil, from Proto-Germanic *banon, cognate with
*banja- wound (cognates: Old Frisian bona murderer, Old Norse bani, Old High German bana murder, Old
English benn wound, Gothic banja stroke, wound), from PIE root *gwhen- to strike, kill, wound
(cognates: Avestan banta ill).  Modern sense of that which causes ruin or woe is from 1570s.


bank (n.1)

financial institution, late 15c., from either Old Italian banca or Middle French banque (itself from
the Italian word), both meaning table (the notion is of the moneylender's exchange table), from a
Germanic source (compare Old High German bank bench); see bank (n.2).   Bank holiday is from 1871,
though the tradition is as old as the Bank of England. To cry all the way to the bank was coined
1956 by flamboyant pianist Liberace, after a Madison Square Garden concert that was packed with
patrons but panned by critics.


crab (n.1)

crustacean, Old English crabba, from a general Germanic root (compare Dutch krab, Old High German
krebiz, German Krabbe, Old Norse krabbi crab), related to Low German krabben, Dutch krabelen to
scratch, claw, from PIE root *gerbh- to scratch, carve (see carve). The constellation name is
attested in English from c.1000; the Crab Nebula (1840), however, is in Taurus, the result of the
supernova of 1054, and is so called for its shape. French crabe (13c.) is from Germanic, probably
Old Norse.


cradle (n.)

baby's bed, c.1200, cradel, from Old English cradol little bed, cot, from Proto-Germanic *kradulas
basket (cognates: Old High German kratto, krezzo basket, German Kr&auml;tze basket carried on the
back). From late 14c. as device for holding or hoisting. Cat's cradle is so called from 1768.
Cradle-snatching amorous pursuit of younger person is from 1906.    It's like cradle-snatching to
want to marry a girl of sixteen, and you ought to be ashamed of yourself, for you can't be much more
than twenty one yourself. [Edith Van Dyne (L. Frank Baum), Aunt Jane's Nieces Abroad, 1906]


craft (n.)

Old English cr&aelig;ft (West Saxon, Northumbrian), -creft (Kentish), originally power, physical
strength, might, from Proto-Germanic *krab-/*kraf- (cognates: Old Frisian kreft, Old High German
chraft, German Kraft strength, skill; Old Norse kraptr strength, virtue). Sense expanded in Old
English to include skill, dexterity; art, science, talent (via a notion of mental power), which led
by late Old English to the meaning trade, handicraft, calling, also something built or made. The
word still was used for might, power in Middle English.    Use for small boat is first recorded
1670s, probably from a phrase similar to vessels of small craft and referring either to the trade
they did or the seamanship they required, or perhaps it preserves the word in its original sense of
power.


cram (v.)

Old English crammian press something into something else, from Proto-Germanic *kram-/*krem-
(cognates: Old High German krimman to press, pinch, Old Norse kremja to squeeze, pinch), from PIE
root *ger- to gather (see gregarious). Meaning study intensely for an exam originally was British
student slang first recorded 1803. Related: Crammed; cramming.


cramp (n.1)

muscle contraction, late 14c., from Old French crampe, from a Frankish or other Germanic word
(compare Old High German krapmhe cramp, spasm, related to kramph bent, crooked), from a Proto-
Germanic root forming many words for bent, crooked, including, via French, crampon. Writer's cramp
is first attested 1842 as the name of a physical affliction of the hand, in reference to
translations of German medical papers (Stromeyer); also known as scrivener's palsy.


crane (n.)

Old English cran large wading bird, common Germanic (cognates: Old Saxon krano, Old High German
krano, German Kranich, and, with unexplained change of consonant, Old Norse trani), from PIE *gere-
(cognates: Greek geranos, Latin grus, Welsh garan, Lithuanian garnys heron, stork), perhaps echoic
of its cry. Metaphoric use for machine with a long arm is first attested late 13c. (a sense also in
equivalent words in German and Greek).


craw (n.)

Old English *cr&aelig;g throat, from Proto-Germanic *krag- throat (cognates: Middle Dutch craghe
neck, throat, Old High German chrago, German Kragen collar, neck), of obscure origin.


crayfish (n.)

small, freshwater lobster, early 14c., crevis, from Old French crevice crayfish (13c., Modern French
&eacute;crevisse), probably from Frankish *krebitja or a similar Germanic word that is a diminutive
form of the root of crab (n.1); compare Old High German krebiz crab, shellfish, German Krebs. Modern
spelling is 16c., under influence of fish (n.).


creche (n.)

Christmas manger scene, 1792, from French cr&egrave;che, from Old French cresche (13c.) crib,
manger, stall, ultimately from a Germanic source; compare Old High German kripja, Old English cribb
(see crib). Also a public nursery for infants where they are cared for while their mothers are at
work (1854).


cress (n.)

Old English cresse, originally c&aelig;rse, from Proto-Germanic *krasjon- (cognates: Middle Low
German kerse, karse; Middle Dutch kersse; Old High German kresso, German Kresse), from PIE root
*gras- to devour (see gastric). It underwent a metathesis similar to that of grass. French cresson,
Italian crescione are Germanic loan-words.


crib (n.)

Old English cribbe manger, fodder bin in cowsheds and fields, from a West Germanic root (cognates:
Old Saxon kribbia manger; Old Frisian and Middle Dutch kribbe; Old High German krippa, German Krippe
crib, manger) probably related to German krebe basket. Meaning child's bed with barred sides is
1640s; probably from frequent use in reference to the manger where infant Jesus was laid. Thieves'
slang for dwelling house dates to at least 1812, but late 20c.  use probably is independent. The Old
High German version passed to French and became creche.


crock (n.)

Old English crocc, crocca pot, vessel, from Proto-Germanic *krogu pitcher, pot (cognates: Old
Frisian krocha pot, Old Saxon kruka, Middle Dutch cruke, Dutch kruik, Old High German kruog pitcher,
German Krug, Old Norse krukka pot). Perhaps from the same source as Middle Irish crocan pot, Greek
krossos pitcher, Old Church Slavonic krugla cup. Used as an image of worthless rubbish since 19c.,
perhaps from the use of crockery as chamberpots.


crook (n.)

early 13c., hook-shaped instrument or weapon, from Old Norse krokr hook, corner, cognate with Old
High German kracho hooked tool, of obscure origin but perhaps related to a widespread group of
Germanic kr- words meaning bent, hooked. Meaning swindler is American English, 1879, from crooked in
figurative sense of dishonest (1708). Crook dishonest trick was in Middle English.


crop (n.)

Old English cropp bird's craw, also head or top of a sprout or herb. The common notion is
protuberance. Cognate with Old High German kropf, Old Norse kroppr. Meaning harvest product is
c.1300, probably through the verbal meaning cut off the top of a plant (c.1200).


crowd (v.)

Old English crudan to press, crush. Cognate with Middle Dutch cruden to press, push, Middle High
German kroten to press, oppress, Norwegian kryda to crowd. Related: Crowded; crowding.


crucible (n.)

early 15c., from Medieval Latin crucibulum melting pot for metals, originally night lamp. First
element might be Middle High German kruse earthen pot. Or perhaps it is from Latin crux on some
fancied resemblance to a cross. Used of any severe test or trial since 1640s.


cruet (n.)

small glass bottle for vinegar, oil, etc., c.1300, Anglo-French diminutive of Old French crue an
earthen pot, from Frankish *kruka or some other Germanic source (compare Old High German kruog);
related to crock.


crust (n.)

early 14c., hard outer part of bread, from Old French crouste (13c., Modern French cro&#251;te) and
directly from Latin crusta rind, crust, shell, bark, from PIE *krus-to- that which has been
hardened, from root *kreus- to begin to freeze, form a crust (cognates: Sanskrit krud- make hard,
thicken; Avestan xruzdra- hard; Greek krystallos ice, crystal, kryos icy cold, frost; Lettish
kruwesis frozen mud; Old High German hrosa ice, crust; Old English hruse earth; Old Norse hro&eth;r
scurf). Meaning outer shell of the earth is from 1550s.


crutch (n.)

Old English crycce crutch, staff, from Proto-Germanic *krukjo (cognates: Old Saxon krukka, Middle
Dutch crucke, Old High German krucka, German Kr&ouml;cke crutch, related to Old Norse krokr hook;
see crook). Figurative sense is first recorded c.1600. As a verb, from 1640s. Italian gruccia
crutch, crocco hook are Germanic loan-words.


cud (n.)

Old English cudu cud, earlier cwudu, common Germanic (compare Old Norse kva&eth;a resin, Old High
German quiti glue, German Kitt putty); perhaps from PIE root *gwet- resin, gum.


cunnilingus (n.)

1887, from Latin cunnus vulva (see cunt) + lingere to lick (see lick (v.)). The Latin properly would
mean one who licks a vulva, but it is used in English in reference to the action, not the actor. The
verb ought to be *cunnilingue.Cunnilingus was a very familiar manifestation in classical times; ...
it tends to be especially prevalent at all periods of high civilization. [Havelock Ellis, 1905]


curl (v.)

mid-15c., metathesis of crulle (c.1300), probably from an unrecorded Old English word or from Middle
Dutch krul curly, from Proto-Germanic *krusl- (cognates: East Frisian krull lock of hair, Middle
High German krol, Norwegian krull, Danish kr&oslash;lle curl). The noun is recorded from c.1600.


cake (n.)

early 13c., from Old Norse kaka cake, from West Germanic *kokon- (cognates: Middle Dutch koke, Dutch
koek, Old High German huohho, German Kuchen). Not now believed to be related to Latin coquere to
cook, as formerly supposed. Replaced its Old English cognate, coecel.  What man, I trow ye raue,
Wolde ye bothe eate your cake and haue your cake? [The Proverbs &amp; Epigrams of John Heywood,
1562]  Originally (until early 15c.) a flat, round loaf of bread. Piece of cake something easy is
from 1936. The let them eat cake story is found in Rousseau's Confessions, in reference to an
incident c.1740, long before Marie Antoinette, though it has been associated with her since c.1870;
it apparently was a chestnut in the French royal family that had been told of other princesses and
queens before her.


