hindmost (adj.)

late 14c., from hind (adj.) + -most.   Thra. What, if a toy take 'em i' the heels now, and they run
all away, and cry, 'The devil take the hindmost'?  Dion. Then the same devil take the foremost too,
and souse him for his breakfast! [Beaumont &amp; Fletcher, Philaster, Act V, Sc. 2, 1611]


rear (n.)

hindmost part, c.1600, abstracted from rerewarde rear guard, hindmost part of an army or fleet (mid-
14c.), from Anglo-French rerewarde, Old French rieregarde, from Old French adverb riere behind (from
Latin retro back, behind; see retro-) + Old French garde (see guard (n.)). Or the word may be a
shortened form of arrear (see arrears).    As a euphemism for buttocks it is attested from 1796.
Rear admiral is first attested 1580s, apparently so called from ranking behind an admiral proper.
Rear-view (mirror) is recorded from 1926.


posterior (n.)

buttocks, euphemistic, 1610s, from posterior (adj.). Earlier it meant those who come after,
posterity (1530s). Compare Lithuanian pasturas the last, the hindmost, from pas at, by.


medulla (n.)

hindmost segment of the brain, 1650s, from Latin medulla, literally marrow, also pith of plants, of
unknown origin, perhaps related to or influenced by medius middle (but compare also Old Irish smiur,
Welsh mer marrow). The word was used in the Latin senses in Middle English. Related: Medular;
medullary.


tail (n.1)

hindmost part of an animal, Old English t&aelig;gl, t&aelig;gel a tail, from Proto-Germanic *tagla-
(cognates: Old High German zagal, German Zagel tail, dialectal German Zagel penis, Old Norse tagl
horse's tail, Gothic tagl hair), from PIE *doklos, from suffixed form of root *dek- (2) something
long and thin (referring to such things as fringe, lock of hair, horsetail; cognates: Old Irish dual
lock of hair, Sanskrit dasah fringe, wick). According to OED, the primary sense, at least in
Germanic, seems to have been hairy tail, or just tuft of hair, but already in Old English the word
was applied to the hairless tails of worms, bees, etc. But Buck writes that the common notion is of
long, slender shape. As an adjective from 1670s.    Meaning reverse side of a coin (opposite the
side with the head) is from 1680s; that of backside of a person, buttocks is recorded from c.1300;
slang sense of pudenda is from mid-14c.; that of woman as sex object is from 1933, earlier act of
copulation with a prostitute (1846). Of descending strokes of letters, from 1590s.   Tails coat with
tails is from 1857. The tail-race (1776) is the part of a mill race below the wheel. To turn tail
take flight (1580s) originally was a term in falconry. The image of the tail wagging the dog is
attested from 1907. Another Old English word for tail was steort (see stark).


