hindrance (n.)

mid-15c., a hybrid from hindren, from same root as hinder (v.), on model of French-derived words in
-ance.


obstacle (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French obstacle, ostacle opposition, obstruction, hindrance (13c.) or directly
from Latin obstaculum a hindrance, obstacle, with instrumental suffix *-tlom + obstare stand before,
stand opposite to, block, hinder, thwart, from ob against (see ob-) + stare to stand, from PIE root
*sta- to stand (see stet).  The lover thinks more often of reaching his mistress than the husband of
guarding his wife; the prisoner thinks more often of escaping than the gaoler of shutting his door;
and so, whatever the obstacles may be, the lover and the prisoner ought to succeed. [Stendhal,
Charterhouse of Parma]Obstacle course is attested from 1891.


hinderance (n.)

early form of hindrance.


stoppage (n.)

mid-15c., deduction from payment, from stop (v.) + -age. From late 15c. as impediment, hindrance,
obstruction; 1650s as act of stopping.


drawback (n.)

hindrance, disadvantage,1720, from draw (v.) + back (adv.). The notion is of something that holds
back success or activity.


balk (v.)

late 14c., to leave an unplowed ridge when plowing, from balk (n.). Extended meaning to omit,
intentionally neglect is mid-15c. Most modern senses are figurative, from the notion of a balk in
the fields as a hindrance or obstruction: sense of stop short (as a horse confronted with an
obstacle) is late 15c.; that of to refuse is 1580s. Related: Balked; balking.


impediment (n.)

c.1400, from Latin impedimentem hindrance, from impedire impede, literally to shackle the feet, from
assimilated form of in- into, in (see in- (2)) + pes (genitive pedis) foot (see foot (n.)).


notwithstanding (prep.)

late 14c., notwi&thorn;stondynge, from not + present participle of the verb withstand. A loan-
translation of Medieval Latin non obstante being no hindrance, from ablative of obstans, present
participle of obstare stand opposite to (see obstacle). As an adverb and as a conjunction from early
15c.


forestall (v.)

late 14c. (implied in forestalling), to lie in wait for; also to intercept goods before they reach
public markets and buy them privately (formerly a crime; mid-14c. in this sense in Anglo-French),
from Old English noun foresteall intervention, hindrance (of justice); an ambush, a waylaying,
literally a standing before (someone), from fore- before + steall standing position (see stall
(n.1)). Modern sense of to anticipate and delay is from 1580s. Related: Forestalled; forestalling.


remora (n.)

1560s, from Latin remora sucking fish, literally delay, hindrance, from re- back (see re-) + mora
delay (see moratorium); so called because the fish were believed by the ancients to retard a vessel
to which they attached themselves. Hence, in 17c.-18c., an obstacle, an impediment (the first sense
of the word in Johnson's dictionary). In Greek, ekheneis, from ekhein to hold + naus (dative nei)
ship. Pliny writes that Antony's galley was delayed by one at Actium. Sometimes called in English
stayship or stopship.


balk (n.)

Old English balca ridge, bank, from or influenced by Old Norse balkr ridge of land, especially
between two plowed furrows, both from Proto-Germanic *balkon- (cognates: Old Saxon balko, Danish
bjelke, Old Frisian balka, Old High German balcho, German Balken beam, rafter), from PIE *bhelg-
beam, plank (cognates: Latin fulcire to prop up, support, fulcrum bedpost; Lithuanian balziena
cross-bar; and possibly Greek phalanx trunk, log, line of battle). Modern senses are figurative,
representing the balk as a hindrance or obstruction (see balk (v.)). Baseball sense is first
attested 1845.


