historic (adj.)

1660s, probably a back-formation from historical, perhaps influenced by French historique. What is
historic is noted or celebrated in history; what is historical deals with history.


historicism (n.)

1895, translating German historismus, from historic + -ism. Given various senses 20c. in theology,
philosophy, architecture, etc.


preservationist (n.)

advocate of protecting existing things, 1905, from preservation + -ist; specifically of historic
buildings by 1957.


prehistoric (adj.)

1832, modeled on French pr&eacute;historique; see pre- + historic.


ahistoric (adj.)

not historical, lacking in historical background or justification, 1911, from a- (2) not + historic.


-ical

adjectival suffix, mostly the same as -ic but sometimes with specialized sense (such as
historic/historical), Middle English, from Late Latin -icalis, from Latin -icus + -alis.


fetus (n.)

late 14c., the young while in the womb or egg, from Latin fetus (often, incorrectly, foetus) the
bearing, bringing forth, or hatching of young, from Latin base *fe- to generate, bear, also to suck,
suckle (see fecund).    In Latin, fetus sometimes was transferred figuratively to the newborn
creature itself, or used in a sense of offspring, brood (as in Horace's Germania quos horrida
parturit Fetus), but this was not the basic meaning. Also used of plants, in the sense of fruit,
produce, shoot. The spelling foetus is sometimes attempted as a learned Latinism, but it is not
historic.


spirituality (n.)

early 15c., the clergy, also ecclesiastical property; things pertaining to the Church, from Middle
French spiritualite, from Late Latin spiritualitatem (nominative spiritualitas), from Latin
spiritualis (see spiritual). Meaning quality of being spiritual is from c.1500; seldom-used sense of
fact or condition of being a spirit is from 1680s. An earlier form was spiritualty (late 14c.).
English is blessed with multiple variant forms of many words. But it has made scant use of them; for
every pair historic/historical; realty/reality, or luxuriant/luxurious there is a
spiritualty/spirituality or a specialty/speciality, with two distinct forms, two senses requiring
differentiation, hundreds of years gone by, and but little progress made in in sorting them out.


atomic (adj.)

1670s as a philosophical term (see atomistic); scientific sense dates from 1811, from atom + -ic.
Atomic number is from 1821; atomic mass is from 1848. Atomic energy first recorded 1906 in modern
sense (as intra-atomic energy from 1903).    March, 1903, was an historic date for chemistry. It is,
also, as we shall show, a date to which, in all probability, the men of the future will often refer
as the veritable beginning of the larger powers and energies that they will control. It was in
March, 1903, that Curie and Laborde announced the heat-emitting power of radium. [Robert Kennedy
Duncan, The New Knowledge, 1906]    Atomic bomb first recorded 1914 in writings of H.G. Wells, who
thought of it as a bomb that would continue to explode indefinitely.  When you can drop just one
atomic bomb and wipe out Paris or Berlin, war will have become monstrous and impossible. [S.
Strunsky, Yale Review, January 1917] Atomic Age is from 1945. Atomical is from 1640s.


