historical (adj.)

early 15c. (earlier in same sense was historial, late 14c.), from Latin historicus (from Greek
historikos historical, of or for inquiry, from historia; see history) + -al (1). Related:
Historically.


historico-

word-forming element meaning historical, from Latinized comb. form of Greek historikos (see
historical).


ahistoric (adj.)

not historical, lacking in historical background or justification, 1911, from a- (2) not + historic.


historic (adj.)

1660s, probably a back-formation from historical, perhaps influenced by French historique. What is
historic is noted or celebrated in history; what is historical deals with history.


plebeian (adj.)

also plebian, of or characteristic of the lower class, 1560s in a Roman historical sense, from Latin
plebeius belonging to the plebs, earlier plebes, the populace, the common people (as opposed to
patricians, etc.), also commonality; the mass, the multitude; the lower class, from PIE *ple- (see
pleio-). In general (non-historical) use from 1580s.


historian (n.)

mid-15c., from Middle French historien (14c.), from Latin historia (see history). As writer of
history in the higher sense (distinguished from a mere annalist or chronicler), from 1530s. The Old
English word was &thorn;eod-wita.    [T]he historian's fallacy is the error of assuming that a man
who has a given historical experience knows it, when he has had it, to be all that a historian would
know it to be, with the advantage of historical perspective. [David Hackett Fischer, Historians'
Fallacies, 1970]


DAE

initialism (acronym) for A Dictionary of American English on Historical Principles, published in
four volumes between 1936 and 1944, edited by Sir William A. Craigie and James R. Hulbert.


amir (n.)

1610s; the same word as emir (q.v.), but generally used of contemporary Indian or Afghan rulers as
opposed to historical ones.


Brenner Pass

historical route over the Alps between Germany and Italy, from Breuni, name of a people who lived
near there, perhaps Celtic.


re-enactor (n.)

1965, agent noun from re-enact (v.). Specifically of one whose hobby or profession is to embody
accurate historical presentation is in use by 1984, American English.


lutz (n.)

type of skating jump, 1932, from the name Alois Lutz, an obscure Austrian skater of the 1920s [James
R. Hines, Historical Dictionary of Figure Skating, 2011], who is said to have first performed it in
1913.


ahistorical (adj.)

without reference to or regard for history, 1950, from a- (2) not + historical.


Caucasian (adj.)

1807, from Caucasus Mountains, between the Black and Caspian seas; applied to the white race 1795
(in German) by German anthropologist Johann Blumenbach, because its supposed ancestral homeland lay
there; since abandoned as a historical/anthropological term. (See Aryan).


floruit

used now mainly in sense of period during which a historical person's life work was done, 1843,
Latin, literally he flourished, third person singular perf. indicative of florere (see flourish
(v.)). Usually in abbreviation fl.


revisionism (n.)

1903, from revision + -ism. Originally in Marxist jargon, rejection of gradual introduction of
socialism. Revisionist is from 1850 (adj.); 1854 (n.); in the historical sense from 1934, originally
with reference to the causes of World War I.


U

for historical evolution, see V. Used punningly for you by 1588 [Love's Labour's Lost, V.i.60], not
long after the pronunciation shift that made the vowel a homonym of the pronoun. As a simple
shorthand (without intentional word-play), it is recorded from 1862. Common in business
abbreviations since 1923 (such as U-Haul, attested from 1951).


genre (n.)

1770, as a French word in English (nativized from c.1840), from French genre kind, sort, style (see
gender). Used especially in French for independent style. Of painting, depicting scenes of ordinary
life (as compared to landscape, historical, etc.) from 1849.


historicity (n.)

1880, from Latin historicus (see historical) + -ity.


Baedeker

travel guide, 1863, from German printer and bookseller Karl Baedeker (1801-1859) whose popular
travel guides began the custom of rating places with one to four stars. The Baedeker raids by the
Luftwaffe in April and May 1942 targeted British cultural and historical sites.


unhistorical (adj.)

1610s, not in accordance with history, not being a part of recorded history, from un- (1) not +
historical. Unhistoric in this sense is from 1801. Related: Unhistorically.


Wardour-street (n.)

affected pseudo-archaic diction of historical novels, 1888, from street in London lined with shops
selling imitation-antique furniture.    This is not literary English of any date; this is Wardour-
Street Early English -- a perfectly modern article with a sham appearance of the real antique about
it. [A. Ballantyne, Wardour-Street English, Longman's Magazine, October, 1888]


Dionysian (adj.)

of or pertaining to Dionysos, Greek god of wine and revelry, identified with Roman Bacchus. His name
is of unknown origin. Or in reference to historical men named Dionysius such as the tyrants of
Syracuse and especially Dionysius Exiguus (see A.D.), such as Dionysian period of 532 Julian years,
when the moon phases recur on the same days of the week.


Isidore

masc. proper name, from French, from Latin Isidorus, from Greek Isidoros, literally gift of Isis,
from doron gift (see date (n.1)). St. Isidore, archbishop of Seville (600-636) wrote important
historical, etymological, and ecclesiastical works and in 2001 was named patron saint of computers,
computer users, and the Internet.


thunk (v.)

dialectal or jocular past tense or past participle of think, by 1876. Not historical, but by analogy
of drink/drunk, sink/sunk, etc.


euhemerism (n.)

1846, the method of regarding myths as glorified accounts of actual events or persons, from
Euhemerus of Sicily (4c. B.C.E.), who wrote Iera Anagraphe, in which he maintained the Greek deities
actually were historical mortals. His name is literally good day, from eu well (see eu-) + hemera
day (see ephemera). Related: Euhemerist; euhemeristic.


-ical

adjectival suffix, mostly the same as -ic but sometimes with specialized sense (such as
historic/historical), Middle English, from Late Latin -icalis, from Latin -icus + -alis.


monsieur (n.)

1510s, from French monsieur, from mon sieur my lord, from sieur lord, shortened form of seigneur
(see monseigneur) It was the historical title for the second son or next younger brother of the king
of France.


Hoosier

native or resident of Indiana, by c.1830, American English, of unknown origin; fanciful explanations
were printed in 1830s newspapers. Said to have been first printed Jan. 1, 1833, in the Indianapolis
Journal, in a poem, The Hoosiers Nest, by John Finely, which poem was said to have been written in
1830 [The Word Hoosier, Indiana Historical Society Publications, vol. IV, No. 2, 1907], and to have
been in oral use from late 1820s. Seemingly it originated among Ohio River boatmen; perhaps related
to English dialectal (Cumberland) hoozer, used of anything unusually large [Barnhart]. For other
theories, see the above quoted source.


villein (n.)

early 14c., vileyn, spelling variant of villain in its reference to a feudal class of half-free
peasants. It tends to keep the literal, historical sense of the word and let the pejorative meanings
go with villain; Century Dictionary writes that the forms villain, villein, etc., are historically
one, and the attempt to differentiate them in meaning is idle, but Fowler finds this a useful piece
of differentiation. Related: Villeinage.


could (v.)

Old English cu&eth;e, past tense of cunnan to be able (see can (v.1)); ending changed 14c. to
standard English -d(e). The excrescent -l- was added 15c.-16c. on model of would, should, where it
is historical.


Octavian

masc. proper name, from Latin, from Octavius, from octavus eighth, from octo (see eight).    But
although we find so marked differences in the use of the numerals as names, it is impossible to
believe that this use did not arise in the same way for all; that is, that they were at first used
to distinguish children by the order of birth. But when we find them as praenomina in historical
times it is evident that they no longer referred to order of birth. [George Davis Chase, The Origin
of Roman Praenomina, Harvard Studies in Classical Philology, 1897]


copperhead (n.)

Trigonocephalus contortrix, 1775, American English, so called for color markings between its eyes;
see copper + head (n.). Poisonous sneak snakes (because they bite without warning), the name is said
to have been first used in reference to Northerners suspected of Southern sympathies in Greeley's
New York Tribune, July 20, 1861. Charles H. Coleman, The Use of the Term 'Copperhead' During the
Civil War [Mississippi Valley Historical Review 25 (1938), p.263] traces it to an anonymous letter
against Ohio anti-war Democrats in the Cincinnati Commercial newspaper in the summer of 1861. It
seems not to have been in widespread use until summer 1862.


secession (n.)

1530s, from Latin secessionem (nominative secessio) a withdrawal, separation; political withdrawal,
insurrection, schism, noun of action from past participle stem of secedere secede, from se- apart
(see secret) + cedere to go (see cede). Originally in a Roman historical context, temporary
migration of plebeians from the city to compel patricians to address their grievances; modern use in
reference to religious or political unions dates from 1650s.


Occam&#039;s razor

when two competing hypotheses explain the data equally well, choose the simpler. Or, as Sir William
Hamilton puts it, Neither more, nor more onerous, causes are to be assumed, than are necessary to
account for the phenomena. Named for English philosopher William of Ockham or Occam (c.1285-c.1349),
who expressed it with Entia non sunt multiplicanda praeter ncccssitatem.    So called after William
of Occam (died about 1349): but, as a historical fact, Occam does not make much use of this
principle, which belongs rather to the contemporary nominalist William Durand de St. Pour&#231;ain
(died 1332). [Century Dictionary]


farther (adj.)

c.1300, variant of further (q.v.), by 17c. it replaced ferrer as comparative of the descendant of
Old English fierr far (itself a comparative but no longer felt as one). Vowel change influenced by
the root vowel, and confusion with Middle English fer&thorn;eren to assist, promote, advance (see
forth). There is no historical basis for the notion that farther is of physical distance and further
of degree or quality.


educrat (n.)

1968, usually pejorative; first element from education, second from bureaucrat. Said to have been
coined by Claude R. Kirk Jr. (b.1926), governor of Florida.    While political leaders and corporate
CEOs, focusing as usual on the quarterly return, call for workers for the new economy, their
educational reforms are producing just that: students with a grab-bag of minor skills and
competencies and minds that are sadly uneventful, incapable of genuine intellectual achievement and
lacking any sense of continuity with the historical and cultural traditions of our society. Their
world is small, bleak, and limited; their world will become ours. [David Solway, The Turtle
Hypodermic of Sickenpods, Quebec, 2000]


ogre (n.)

man-eating giant, 1713, hogre (in a translation of a French version of the Arabian Nights), from
French ogre, first used in Perrault's Contes, 1697, and perhaps formed by him from Italian orco
demon, monster, from Latin Orcus Hades, perhaps via an Italian dialect. In English, more literary
than colloquial. The conjecture that it is from Byzantine Ogur Hungarian or some other version of
that people's name (perhaps via confusion with the bloodthirsty Huns), lacks historical evidence.
Related: Ogrish; ogrishness.


ovation (n.)

1530s, in the Roman historical sense, from Middle French ovation or directly from Latin ovationem
(nominative ovatio) a triumph, rejoicing, noun of action from past participle stem of ovare exult,
rejoice, triumph, probably imitative of a shout (compare Greek euazein to utter cries of joy). In
Roman history, a lesser triumph, granted to a commander for achievements insufficient to entitle him
to a triumph proper. Figurative sense of burst of enthusiastic applause from a crowd is first
attested 1831.


Puritan (n.)

1560s, opponent of Anglican hierarchy, later applied opprobriously to person in Church of England
who seeks further reformation (1570s), probably from purity. Largely historical from 19c. in literal
sense. After c.1590s, applied to anyone deemed overly strict in matters of religion and morals.
What [William] Perkins, and the whole Puritan movement after him, sought was to replace the personal
pride of birth and status with the professional's or craftsman's pride of doing one's best in one's
particular calling. The good Christian society needs the best of kings, magistrates, and citizens.
Perkins most emphasized the work ethic from Genesis: In the swaete of thy browe shalt thou eate thy
breade. [E. Digby Baltzell, Puritan Boston and Quaker Philadelphia, 1979]


submission (n.)

late 14c., act of referring to a third party for judgment or decision, from Old French submission or
directly from Latin submissionem (nominative submissio) a lowering, letting down; sinking, noun of
action from past participle stem of submittere to let down, put down, lower, reduce, yield (see
submit).    Sense of humble obedience is first recorded mid-15c. Modern French submission has been
replaced by doublet soumission. English in 16c.-17c. also had an adjective submiss humble,
submissive.  Submissionist in various political historical contexts is from 1828.


Briton (n.)

Anglo-French Bretun, from Latin Brittonem (nominative Britto, misspelled Brito in MSS) a member of
the tribe of the Britons, from *Britt-os, the Celtic name of the Celtic inhabitants of Britain and
southern Scotland before the 5c. Anglo-Saxon invasion drove them into Wales, Cornwall, and a few
other corners. In 4c. B.C.E. Greek they are recorded as Prittanoi, which is said to mean tattooed
people. Exclusively in historical use after Old English period; revived when James I was proclaimed
King of Great Britain in 1604, and made official at the union of England and Scotland in 1707.


bard (n.)

mid-15c., from Scottish, from Old Celtic bardos poet, singer, from PIE root *gwer- to lift up the
voice, praise. In historical times, a term of contempt among the Scots (who considered them
itinerant troublemakers), but one of great respect among the Welsh. All vagabundis, fulis, bardis,
scudlaris, and siclike idill pepill, sall be brint on the cheek. [local Scottish ordinance,
c.1500]Subsequently idealized by Scott in the more ancient sense of lyric poet, singer. Poetic use
of the word in English is from Greek bardos, Latin bardus, both from Gaulish.


chivalry (n.)

c.1300, body or host of knights; knighthood in the feudal social system; bravery in war, warfare as
an art, from Old French chevalerie knighthood, chivalry, nobility, cavalry, art of war, from
chevaler knight, from Medieval Latin caballarius horseman, from Latin caballus nag, pack-horse (see
cavalier). From late 14c. as the nobility as one of the estates of the realm, also as the word for
an ethical code emphasizing honor, valor, generosity and courtly manners. Modern use for social and
moral code of medieval feudalism probably is an 18c. historical revival.


tip (v.2)

give a small present of money to, c.1600, originally to give, hand, pass, thieves' cant, perhaps
from tip (v.3) to tap. The meaning give a gratuity to is first attested 1706. The noun in this sense
is from 1755; the noun meaning piece of confidential information is from 1845; and the verb in the
sense give private information to is from 1883.    The word's supposed origin as an acronym is
highly unlikely and the story seems to be no older than an editorial in Life magazine from July 15,
1946, claiming the restaurant server's word tip probably comes from a London coffeehouse custom of
two centuries ago when the words 'To Insure Promptness' were written on notes to the waiter, with
coins attached. Later just the initials T.I.P. were used. There is no historical evidence for this.
Also <b>see here</b>.


alder (n.)

tree related to the birch, Old English alor alder (with intrusive -d- added 14c.; the historical
form aller survived until 18c. in literary English and persists in dialects, such as Lancashire
owler, which is partly from Norse), from Proto-Germanic *aliso (cognates: Old Norse &ouml;lr, Danish
elle, Swedish al, Dutch els, German erle), from *el-, the ancient PIE name of the tree (cognates:
Russian olicha, Polish olcha, Latin alnus, Lithuanian alksnis).


numismatic (adj.)

1765, pertaining to historical coins and coinage, from French numismatique (late 16c.), from Latin
numismat-, stem of numisma coin, currency, from Greek nomisma current coin, money, usage, literally
what has been sanctioned by custom or usage, from nomizein have in use, adopt a custom, from nomos
custom, law, usage, from PIE root *nem- to divide, distribute, allot (see nemesis). Related:
Numismatical (1716). Earlier in the same sense was nummary (1650s), from Latin nummarius, from
nummus a coin.


Norman (n.)

c.1200, one of the mixed Scandinavian-Frankish people who conquered England in 1066, from Old French
Normanz, plural of Normand, Normant, literally North man, from a Scandinavian word meaning northman
(see Norse), in reference to the Scandinavian people who overran and occupied Normandy 10c. Later
meaning one of the Norman French who conquered England in 1066. As an adjective from 1580s. As a
style of architecture, developed in Normandy and employed in England after the conquest, it is
attested from 1797. Norseman (1817) is not historical and appears to be due to Scott.


-er (2)

comparative suffix, from Old English -ra (masc.), -re (fem., neuter), from Proto-Germanic *-izon,
*-ozon (cognates: Gothic -iza, Old Saxon -iro, Old Norse -ri, Old High German -iro, German -er),
originally also with umlaut change in stem, but this was mostly lost in Old English by historical
times and has now vanished (except in better and elder).    For most comparatives of one or two
syllables, use of -er seems to be fading as the oral element in our society relies on more before
adjectives to express the comparative; thus prettier is more pretty, cooler is more cool [Barnhart].


abide (v.)

Old English abidan, gebidan remain, wait, delay, remain behind, from ge- completive prefix (denoting
onward motion; see a- (1)) + bidan bide, remain, wait, dwell (see bide). Originally intransitive
(with genitive of the object: we abidon his we waited for him); transitive sense emerged in Middle
English. Meaning to put up with (now usually negative) first recorded 1520s. Related: Abided;
abiding. The historical conjugation is abide, abode, abidden, but the modern formation is now
generally weak.


plebiscite (n.)

direct vote of the people, 1860 (originally in reference to Italian unification), from French
pl&eacute;biscite (1776 in modern sense, originally with reference to Switzerland), from Latin
plebiscitum a decree or resolution of the people, from plebs (genitive plebis) the common people
(see plebeian (adj.)) + scitum decree, noun use of neuter past participle of sciscere to assent,
vote for, approve, inchoative of scire to know (see science). Used earlier (1530s) in a purely Roman
historical context. Related: Plebiscitary.


