hive (n.)

Old English hyf beehive, from Proto-Germanic *hufiz (cognates: Old Norse hufr hull of a ship), from
PIE *keup- round container, bowl (cognates: Sanskrit kupah hollow, pit, cave, Greek kypellon cup,
Latin cupa tub, cask, vat). Figurative sense of swarming, busy place is from 1630s. As a verb, of
bees, etc., to form themselves into a hive, c.1400; to put bees in a hive, mid-15c.


borg (n.)

fictional hostile alien hive-race in the Star Trek series, noted for assimilating defeated rivals,
first introduced in The Next Generation TV series (debut fall 1987). Their catchphrase is resistance
is futile.


beehive (n.)

early 14c., from bee + hive (n.). As the name of a hairstyle, attested from 1960 (the style itself
said to be popular from 1958). As the name of a star cluster in the constellation Cancer, from 1840
(see Praesepe).


cyto-

before a vowel, cyt-, word-forming element, Latinized comb. form of Greek kytos a hollow,
receptacle, basket (from PIE *ku-ti-, from root *(s)keu- to cover, conceal; see hide (n.1)); used in
modern science since c.1859 for cell, perhaps especially from the sense (in Aristophanes) of a cell
of a hive of wasps or bees.


cage (n.)

early 13c., from Old French cage cage, prison; retreat, hideout (12c.), from Latin cavea hollow
place, enclosure for animals, coop, hive, stall, dungeon, spectators' seats in the theater (source
also of Italian gabbia basket for fowls, coop; see cave (n.)).


swarm (v.2)

to leave a hive to start another, also to gather in a swarm, crowd, or throng, late 14c., from swarm
(n.). Compare Dutch zwermen, German schw&#228;rmen, Danish sv&#230;rme. Related: Swarmed; swarming.


Praesepe (n.)

loose (open) star cluster (M44) in Cancer, from Latin praesaepe the Roman name for the grouping,
literally enclosure, stall, manger, hive, from prae- (see pre-) + saepire to fence (see septum).
It is similar to the Hyades but more distant, about 600 light-years away, consists of about 1,000
stars, mostly older, the brightest of them around magnitude 6.5, thus not discernable to the naked
eye even on the clearest nights, but their collective light makes a visible fuzz of glow that the
ancients likened to a cloud (the original nebula); Galileo was the first to resolve it into stars
(1609). The modern name for it in U.S. and Britain, Beehive, seems no older than 1840. Greek names
included Nephelion Little Cloud and Akhlys Little Mist. In astrology, like all clusters, it
threatened mischief and blindness [Allen].    Manger to the Romans perhaps by influence of two
nearby stars, Gamma and Delta Cancri, dim and unspectacular but both for some reason figuring
largely in ancient astrology and weather forecasting, and known as the Asses (Latin Aselli),
supposedly those of Silenus.


