hoarder (n.)

Old English hordere treasurer, from hoard (n.). As one who hoards, c.1500, from hoard (v.).


hoard (v.)

Old English hordian, cognate with Old High German gihurten, German gehorden, Gothic huzdjan, from
the root of hoard (n.). Related: Hoarded; hoarding.


hoard (n.)

Old English hord treasure, valuable stock or store, from Proto-Germanic *huzdam (cognates: Old Saxon
hord treasure, hidden or inmost place, Old Norse hodd, German Hort, Gothic huzd treasure, literally
hidden treasure), from PIE root *(s)keu- to cover, conceal (see hide (n.1)).


stash (n.)

hoard, cache, 1914, from stash (v.). Slang sense of personal supply of narcotics is from 1942.


Arimasp (n.)

Latin Arimaspi (plural), from Greek Arimaspoi, mythical race of one-eyed people in Northern Europe
believed in antiquity to have carried off a hoard of gold which was under guardianship of griffins.
The name is said to be Scythian for one-eyed. Related: Arimaspian.


squirrel (v.)

to hoard up, store away (as a squirrel does nuts), 1939, from squirrel (n.). Related: Squirreled;
squirreling.


Nibelungenlied (n.)

German epic poem of 13c., literally song of the Nibelungs, a race of dwarves who lived in Norway and
owned a hoard of gold and a magic ring, literally children of the mist, related to Old High German
nebul mist, darkness, Old English nifol (see nebula).


hugger-mugger

also huggermugger, secretly, 1520s, one of a number of similar-sounding reduplicated words in use
around this time and meaning much the same thing, including hucker-mucker, which may be the original
of the bunch if the root is, as some think, Middle English mukre to hoard up, conceal. Also compare
Middle English hukmuck, late 15c., name of some sort of device for cleansing.


trove (n.)

1888, from treasure trove (c.1550), from Anglo-French tresor trov&eacute; (late 12c.), translating
Latin thesaurus inventus, literally treasure found. Originally any precious metal object one finds
hidden whose owner is unknown. As this usually meant ancient hoards, the term came to mean treasure
hoard in popular use. Rendered treasure found from mid-15c. French trove is past participle of
trover to find, from Old French trover, torver, of unknown origin, perhaps from Latin turbare to
move (hence to seek for) or Medieval Latin *tropare to compose, sing.


thesaurus (n.)

1823, treasury, storehouse, from Latin thesaurus treasury, a hoard, a treasure, something laid up,
figuratively repository, collection, from Greek thesauros a treasure, treasury, storehouse, chest,
from root of tithenai to put, to place (see theme). The meaning encyclopedia filled with information
is from 1840, but existed earlier as thesaurarie (1590s), used as a title by early dictionary
compilers, on the notion of thesaurus verborum a treasury of words. Meaning collection of words
arranged according to sense is first attested 1852 in Roget's title. Thesaurer is attested in Middle
English for treasurer and thesaur treasure was in use 15c.-16c.


mooch (v.)

mid-15c., pretend poverty, probably from Old French muchier, mucier to hide, sulk, conceal, hide
away, keep out of sight, of uncertain origin, perhaps from Celtic or Germanic (Liberman prefers the
latter, Klein the former). Or the word may be a variant of Middle English mucchen to hoard, be
stingy (c.1300), probably originally to keep coins in one's nightcap, from mucche nightcap, from
Middle Dutch muste cap, nightcap, ultimately from Medieval Latin almucia, of unknown origin. Sense
of sponge off others first recorded 1857.    Whatever the distant origin of mooch, the verb *mycan
and its cognates have been part of European slang for at least two millennia. [Liberman]    Related:
Mooched; mooching. As a noun meaning a moocher, from 1914.


treasure (n.)

mid-12c., tresor, from Old French tresor treasury, hoard, treasure (11c., Modern French
tr&#233;sor), from Gallo-Roman *tresaurus, from Latin thesaurus treasury, treasure (source also of
Spanish, Italian tesoro), from Greek thesauros store, treasure, treasure house (see thesaurus). In
Middle English also thresur, etc.; modern spelling is from 16c. Replaced Old English goldhord.
General sense of anything valued is recorded from c.1200. Treasure hunt is first recorded 1913. For
treasure trove, see trove.


