homage (n.)

late 13c., from Old French homage (12c., Modern French hommage) allegiance or respect for one's
feudal lord, from homme man, from Latin homo (genitive hominis) man (see homunculus). Figurative
sense of reverence, honor shown is from late 14c. As a verb, from 1590s (agent noun homager is from
c.1400).


reverence (v.)

late 14c., treat with respect, honor; venerate, pay pious homage to; esteem, value; bow to
(someone); do honor to, from reverence (n.). Related: Reverenced; reverencing.


court (v.)

woo, offer homage, as one does at court, 1570s; see court (n.). Related: Courted; courting.


fealty (n.)

c.1300, from Old French feaut&eacute; loyalty, fidelity; homage sworn by a vassal to his overlord;
faithfulness, from Latin fidelitatem (nominative fidelitas) fidelity, from fidelis loyal, faithful
(see fidelity).


attorn (v.)

late 13c., Anglo-French, to turn over to another, from Old French atorner to turn, turn to, assign,
attribute, dispose, from a- to (see ad-) + tourner to turn (see turn (v.)). In feudal law, to
transfer homage or allegiance to another lord.


disobey (v.)

late 14c., from Old French desobeir (13c.) disobey; refuse service or homage, from Vulgar Latin
*disoboedire, reformed with dis- from Late Latin inobedire, a back-formation from inobediens not
obeying, from Latin in- not + present participle of obedire (see obey). Related: Disobeyed;
disobeying.


sacrifice (n.)

late 13c., offering of something (especially a life) to a deity as an act of propitiation or homage;
mid-14c., that which is offered in sacrifice, from Old French sacrifise sacrifice, offering (12c.),
from Latin sacrificium, from sacrificus performing priestly functions or sacrifices, from sacra
sacred rites (properly neuter plural of sacer sacred; see sacred) + root of facere to do, perform
(see factitious).    Latin sacrificium is glossed in Old English by ansegdniss. Sense of act of
giving up one thing for another; something given up for the sake of another is first recorded 1590s.
Baseball sense first attested 1880.


service (n.1)

c.1100, celebration of public worship, from Old French servise act of homage; servitude; service at
table; Mass, church ceremony, from Latin servitium slavery, condition of a slave, servitude, also
slaves collectively, from servus slave (see serve (v.)).    Meaning act of serving, occupation of an
attendant servant is attested from c.1200, as is that of assistance, help; a helpful act. From
c.1300 as provision of food; sequence of dishes served in a meal; from late 14c. as service at
table, attendance during a meal. Meaning the furniture of the table (tea service, etc.) is from mid-
15c.    Meanings state of being bound to undertake tasks for someone or at someone's direction;
labor performed or undertaken for another are mid-13c. Sense of service or employment in a court or
administration is from c.1300, as is that of military service (especially by a knight); employment
as a soldier; hence the military as an occupation (1706).     Also in Middle English sexual
intercourse, conjugal relations (mid-15c.; service of Venus, or flesh's service). Service industry
(as distinct from production) attested from 1938. A service station originally was a gas stop that
also repaired cars.


