homely (adj.)

late 14c., of or belonging to home or household, domestic, from Middle English hom home (see home
(n.)) + -ly (2). Sense of plain, unadorned, simple is late 14c., and extension to having a plain
appearance, ugly, crude took place c.1400, but now survives chiefly in U.S., especially in New
England, where it was the usual term for physically unattractive; ugly being typically ill-tempered.


homeliness (n.)

mid-14c., from homely + -ness. Originally meekness, gentleness, also familiarity, intimacy;
friendliness; sense degenerated by c.1400 to want of refinement in manners, coarseness;
presumptuousness.


homespun (adj.)

1580s, spun at home, from home (n.) + spun. Figurative sense of plain, homely is from c.1600. As a
noun, from c.1600.


dowdy

1580s (n.), an aukward, ill-dressed, inelegant woman [Johnson]; 1670s (adj.), perhaps a diminutive
of doue poorly dressed woman (early 14c.), of uncertain origin. The modern use of dowd (n.) is most
likely a back-formation from dowdy. If plaine or homely, wee saie she is a doudie or a slut [Barnabe
Riche, Riche his Farewell to Militarie profession, 1581].You don't have to be dowdy to be a
Christian. [Tammy Faye Bakker, Newsweek, June 8, 1987]  Related: Dowdily; dowdiness.


porcelain (n.)

1530s, from Middle French porcelaine and directly from Italian porcellana porcelain (13c.),
literally cowrie shell, the chinaware so called from resemblance of its lustrous transparency to the
shiny surface of the shells. The shell's name in Italian is from porcella young sow, fem. of Latin
porcellus young pig, diminutive of porculus piglet, diminutive of porcus pig (see pork (n.)).
According to an old theory, the connection of the shell and the pig is a perceived resemblance of
the shell opening to the exposed outer genitalia of pigs.   <b>porcelain</b> is china &amp; china is
p.; there is no recondite difference between the two things, which indeed are not two, but one;
&amp; the difference between the two words is merely that china is the homely term, while porcelain
is exotic &amp; literary. [Fowler]


credenza (n.)

1883, an Italian sideboard, from Italian credenza, literally belief, credit, from Medieval Latin
credentia (see credence).    The same evolution that produced this sense in Italian also worked on
the English word credence, which in Middle English also meant act or process of testing the nature
or character of food before serving it as a precaution against poison, a former practice in some
royal or noble households. Because of that, in medieval times it also meant a side-table or side-
board on which the food was placed to be tasted before serving; hence, in later use, a cupboard or
cabinet for the display of plate, etc. These senses fell away in English, and the modern furniture
piece, which begins to be mentioned in domestic interiors from c.1920, took its name from Italian,
perhaps as a more elegant word than homely sideboard.


tame (adj.)

early Middle English tame in a state of subjection, physically subdued, restrained in behavior
(c.1200); of animals domesticated, reclaimed from wildness, also, of persons, meek, gentle-natured,
compliant, intent on homely or domestic activities (mid-13c.), from oblique forms of Old English
tom, tam domesticated, docile, from Proto-Germanic *tamaz (cognates: Old Norse tamr, Old Saxon, Old
Frisian, Middle Low German, Middle Dutch tam, Old High German zam, German zahm tame, Gothic tamjan
to tame), from PIE *deme- to constrain, to force, to break (horses) (cognates: Sanskrit damayati
tames; Persian dam a tame animal; Greek daman to tame, subdue, dmetos tame; Latin domare to tame,
subdue; Old Irish damnaim I tie up, fasten, I tame, subdue).    A possible ulterior connection is
with PIE *dem- house, household (see domestic (adj.)). Meaning spiritless, weak, dull, uninspiring,
insipid is recorded from c.1600. Related: Tamely; tameness.


Saturday (n.)

seventh day of the week, Old English s&aelig;terd&aelig;g, s&aelig;ternesd&aelig;g, literally day of
the planet Saturn, from S&aelig;ternes (genitive of S&aelig;tern; see Saturn) + Old English
d&aelig;g (see day). Partial loan-translation of Latin Saturni dies Saturn's day (compare Dutch
Zaterdag, Old Frisian Saterdi, Middle Low German Satersdach; Irish dia Sathuirn, Welsh dydd Sadwrn).
The Latin word itself is a loan-translation of Greek kronou hemera, literally the day of Cronus.
Unlike other day names, no god substitution seems to have been attempted, perhaps because the
northern European pantheon lacks a clear corresponding figure to Roman Saturn. A homely ancient
Nordic custom, however, seems to be preserved in Old Norse laugardagr, Danish l&oslash;rdag, Swedish
l&ouml;rdag Saturday, literally bath day (Old Norse laug bath).    German Samstag (Old High German
sambaztag) appears to be from a Greek *sambaton, a nasalized colloquial form of sabbaton sabbath,
also attested in Old Church Slavonic sabota, Polish sobota, Russian subbota, Hungarian szombat,
French samedi.   Saturday night has been used figuratively to suggest drunkenness and looseness in
relations between the young men and young women since at least mid-19c. Saturday-night special
cheap, low-caliber handgun is American English, attested from 1976 (earlier Saturday-night pistol,
1929).


