hopefully (adv.)

1630s, in a hopeful manner, from hopeful + -ly (2). As a replacement for the admittedly awkward it
is to be hoped that attested from 1932 but avoided by careful writers.


hopeful (adj.)

c.1200, from hope + -ful. As a noun, one on whom hopes are set, from 1720. Related: Hopefulness.


neocon (n.)

by 1987, abbreviation for neo-conservative in the U.S. political sense.  Neoconservatism is the
first variant of American conservatism in the past century that is in the 'American grain.' It is
hopeful, not lugubrious; forward-looking, not nostalgic; and its general tone is cheerful, not grim
or dyspeptic. Its 20th-century heroes tend to be TR, FDR, and Ronald Reagan. Such Republican and
conservative worthies as Calvin Coolidge, Herbert Hoover, Dwight Eisenhower, and Barry Goldwater are
politely overlooked. [Irving Kristol, The Neoconservative Persuasion, in The Weekly Standard, Aug.
25, 2003]


sanguine (adj.)

blood-red, late 14c. (late 12c. as a surname), from Old French sanguin (fem. sanguine), from Latin
sanguineus of blood, also bloody, bloodthirsty, from sanguis (genitive sanguinis) blood (see
sanguinary). Meaning cheerful, hopeful, confident first attested c.1500, because these qualities
were thought in medieval physiology to spring from an excess of blood as one of the four humors.
Also in Middle English as a noun, type of red cloth (early 14c.).


Solomon

masc. proper name, Biblical name of David's son, king of Judah and Israel and wisest of all men,
from Greek Solomon, from Hebrew Sh'lomoh, from shelomo peaceful, from shalom peace. The Arabic form
is Suleiman. The common medieval form was Salomon (Vulgate, Tyndale, Douai); Solomon was used in
Geneva Bible and KJV. Used allusively for a wise ruler since 1550s. Related: Solomonic; Solomonian.
The Solomon Islands were so named 1568 by Spanish explorers in hopeful expectation of having found
the source of the gold brought to King Solomon in I Kings ix:29.


optimism (n.)

1759 (in translations of Voltaire), from French optimisme (1737), from Modern Latin optimum, used by
Gottfried Leibniz (in Th&eacute;odic&eacute;e, 1710) to mean the greatest good, from Latin optimus
the best (see optimum). The doctrine holds that the actual world is the best of all possible worlds,
in which the creator accomplishes the most good at the cost of the least evil.En termes de l'art, il
l'appelle la raison du meilleur ou plus savamment encore, et Theologiquement autant que
G&eacute;om&eacute;triquement, le syst&ecirc;me de l'Optimum, ou l'Optimisme. [M&eacute;moires de
Tr&eacute;voux, Feb. 1737]Launched out of philosophical jargon and into currency by Voltaire's
satire on it in Candide. General sense of belief that good ultimately will prevail in the world
first attested 1841 in Emerson; meaning tendency to take a hopeful view of things first recorded
1819 in Shelley.


