horde (n.)

1550s, from West Turkic (compare Tatar urda horde, Turkish ordu camp, army), to English via Polish,
French, or Spanish. The initial -h- seems to have been acquired in Polish. Transferred sense of
uncivilized gang is from 1610s. Related: Hordes.


bored (adj.)

1823, past participle adjective from bore (v.) in the figurative sense.    Society is now one
polished horde,  Formed of two mighty tribes, the Bores and Bored.  [Byron, Don Juan, 1823]


Almoravides

Muslim Berber horde from the Sahara which founded a dynasty in Morocco (11c.) and conquered much of
Spain and Portugal. The name is Spanish, from Arabic al-Murabitun, literally the monks living in a
fortified convent, from ribat fortified convent.


Urdu

official language of Pakistan, 1796, from Hindustani urdu camp, from Turkish ordu (source of horde);
short for zaban-i-urdu language of the camp. Compare Dzongkha, a variant of Tibetan and the official
language of Bhutan, literally the language of the fortress. So named because it grew up since the
eleventh century in the camps of the Mohammedan conquerors of India as a means of communication
between them and the subject population of central Hindustan. [Century Dictionary]


hurdle (n.)

Old English hyrdel frame of intertwined twigs used as a temporary barrier, diminutive of hyrd door,
from Proto-Germanic *hurdiz wickerwork frame, hurdle (cognates: Old Saxon hurth plaiting, netting,
Dutch horde wickerwork, German H&uuml;rde hurdle, fold, pen; Old Norse hur&eth;, Gothic haurds
door), from PIE *krtis (cognates: Latin cratis hurdle, wickerwork, Greek kartalos a kind of basket,
kyrtos fishing creel), from root *kert- to weave, twist together (cognates: Sanskrit krt to spin).
Sense of barrier to jump in a race is by 1822; figurative sense of obstacle is 1924.


Tartar

mid-14c. (implied in Tartary, the land of the Tartars), from Medieval Latin Tartarus, from Persian
Tatar, first used 13c. in reference to the hordes of Ghengis Khan (1202-1227), said to be ultimately
from Tata, a name of the Mongols for themselves. Form in European languages probably influenced by
Latin Tartarus hell (e.g. letter of St. Louis of France, 1270: In the present danger of the Tartars
either we shall push them back into the Tartarus whence they are come, or they will bring us all
into heaven).    The historical word for what now are called in ethnological works Tatars. A Turkic
people, their native region was east of the Caspian Sea. Ghengis' horde was a mix of Tatars,
Mongols, Turks, etc. Used figuratively for savage, rough, irascible person (1660s). To catch a
Tartar get hold of what cannot be controlled is recorded from 1660s; original sense not preserved,
but probably from some military story similar to the old battlefield joke:    Irish soldier
(shouting from within the brush): I've captured one of the enemy.  Captain: Excellent! Bring him
here.  Soldier: He won't come.  Captain: Well, then, you come here.  Soldier: I would, but he won't
let me.    Among the adjectival forms that have been used are Tartarian (16c.), Tartarous (Ben
Jonson), Tartarean (17c.); Byron's Tartarly (1821) is a nonce-word (but a good one). Tartar sauce is
first recorded 1855, from French sauce tartare.


