hortatory (adj.)

1580s, from Middle French hortatoire and directly from Late Latin hortatorius encouraging, cheering,
from hortatus, past participle of hortari exhort, encourage, urge, incite, instigate, intensive of
horiri urge, incite, encourage, from PIE root *gher- (5) to like, want (cognates: Old English
giernan to strive, desire, yearn; Gothic gairnei desire; Greek khresthai to lack, want; use, make
use of, kharis grace, favor, khairein to rejoice, delight in; Sanskrit haryati finds pleasure,
likes, harsate is aroused; Avestan zara effort, aim; Russian zhariti awake desire, charm).


hortative (adj.)

c.1600, from Latin hortativus, from past participle stem of hortari â&euro;&oelig;to
exhortâ&euro;? (see hortatory).


exhortation (n.)

late 14c., from Old French exhortacion and directly from Latin exhortationem (nominative exhortatio)
an exhortation, encouragement, noun of action from past participle stem of exhortari, from ex-
thoroughly (see ex-) + hortari encourage, urge (see hortatory).


chrestomathy (n.)

collection of literary passages, 1774, from French chrestomathie, from Latinized form of Greek
khrestomatheia desire of learning; book containing selected passages, lit. useful learning, from
khrestos useful (verbal adjective of khresthai to make use of; see hortatory) + manthanein to learn
(see mathematic). Related: Chrestomathic.


chervil (n.)

type of herb, Old English cerfelle chervil, from Latin chaerephyllum, from Greek khairephyllon;
second element  phyllon leaf (see folio); first element perhaps from khairein to rejoice (see
hortatory).


catachresis (n.)

1580s, from Latin catachresis, from Greek katakhresis misuse (of a word), from katakhresthai to
misuse, from kata- down (here with a sense of perversion; see cata-) + khresthai to use (see
hortatory). Related: Catachrestic; catachrestical; catachrestically.


Eucharist (n.)

sacrament of the Lord's Supper, the Communion, mid-14c., from Old French eucariste, from Late Latin
eucharistia, from Greek eukharistia thanksgiving, gratitude, later the Lord's Supper, from
eukharistos grateful, from eu well (see eu-) + stem of kharizesthai show favor, from kharis favor,
grace, from PIE root *gher- (5) to like, want (see hortatory). Eukharisteo is the usual verb for to
thank, to be thankful in the Septuagint and New Testament. Related: Eucharistic.


yearn (v.)

Old English giernan (West Saxon), geornan (Mercian), giorna (Northumbrian) to strive, be eager,
desire, seek for, beg, demand, from Proto-Germanic *gernjan (cognates: Gothic gairnjan to desire,
German begehren to desire; Old High German gern, Old Norse gjarn desirous, Old English georn eager,
desirous, German gern gladly, willingly), from PIE root *gher- (5) to like, want (see hortatory).
Related: Yearned; yearning.


charisma (n.)

gift of leadership, power of authority, c.1930, from German, used in this sense by Max Weber
(1864-1920) in Wirtschaft u. Gesellschaft (1922), from Greek kharisma favor, divine gift, from
kharizesthai to show favor to, from kharis grace, beauty, kindness (Charis was the name of one of
the three attendants of Aphrodite) related to khairein to rejoice at, from PIE root *gher- (5) to
desire, like (see hortatory). More mundane sense of personal charm recorded by 1959.    Earlier, the
word had been used in English with a sense of grace, talent from God (1875), directly from Latinized
Greek; and in the form charism (plural charismata) it is attested with this sense in English from
1640s. Middle English, meanwhile, had karisme spiritual gift, divine grace (c.1500).


