hostage (n.)

late 13c., from Old French hostage person given as security or hostage (12c., Modern French
&ocirc;tage), either from hoste guest (see host (n.1)) via notion of a lodger held by a landlord as
security, or from Late Latin obsidanus condition of being held as security, from obses hostage, from
ob- before + base of sedere to sit [OED]. Modern political/terrorism sense is from 1970.


yellow ribbon

The American folk custom of wearing or displaying a yellow ribbon to signify solidarity with loved
ones or fellow citizens at war originated during the U.S. embassy hostage crisis in Iran in 1979. It
does not have a connection to the American Civil War, beyond the use of the old British folk song
Round Her Neck She Wore A Yellow Ribbon in the John Wayne movie of the same name, with a Civil War
setting, released in 1949. The story of a ribbon tied to a tree as a signal to a convict returning
home that his loved ones have forgiven him is attested from 1959, but the ribbon in that case was
white.    The ribbon color seems to have changed to yellow first in a version retold by newspaper
columnist Pete Hamill in 1971. The story was dramatized in June 1972 on ABC-TV (James Earl Jones
played the ex-con). Later that year, Irwin Levine and L. Russell Brown copyrighted the song Tie a
Yellow Ribbon Round the Ole Oak Tree, which became a pop hit in early 1973 and sparked a lawsuit by
Hamill, later dropped.    In 1975, the wife of a Watergate conspirator put out yellow ribbons when
her husband was released from jail, and news coverage of that was noted and remembered by Penne
Laingen, whose husband was U.S. ambassador to Iran in 1979 and one of the Iran hostages taken in the
embassy on Nov. 4. Her yellow ribbon in his honor was written up in the Dec. 10, 1979, Washington
Post. When the hostage families organized as the Family Liaison Action Group (FLAG), they took the
yellow ribbon as their symbol. The ribbons revived in the 1991 Gulf War and again during the 2000s
wars in Afghanistan and Iraq.


Homer

name of the supposed author of the Iliad and the Odyssey, from Latin Homerus, from Greek Homeros.
The name first occurs in a fragment of Hesiod. It is identical to Greek homeros hostage, also blind
(connecting notion is going with a companion).


Stockholm

capital city of Sweden; it arose mid-13c. from a fishing village; the second element in the name is
holm island (see holm); the first is either st&auml;k bay or stock stake, pole. Related:
Stockholmer.   Stockholm Syndrome is from 1978, a psychologists' term; the name derives from the
Aug. 23, 1973, violent armed robbery of Sveriges Kreditbank in Stockholm, after which four bank
employees were held hostage in a vault for more than five days. The hostages developed a dramatic
attachment to their abuser, and a fear of would-be rescuers, that they could not explain.


prisoner (n.)

person in prison, captive person, late 14c. (earlier a jailer, mid-13c., but this did not survive
Middle English), from Old French prisonier captive, hostage (12c., Modern French prisonnier), from
prisoun (see prison (n.)). Captives taken in war have been called prisoners since mid-14c.; phrase
prisoner of war dates from 1670s (see also POW). Prisoner's dilemma attested from 1957.


pledge (n.)

mid-14c., surety, bail, from Old French plege (Modern French pleige) hostage, security, bail,
probably from Frankish *plegan to guarantee, from *pleg-, a West Germanic root meaning have
responsibility for (cognates: Old Saxon plegan vouch for, Middle Dutch plien to answer for,
guarantee, Old High German pflegan to care for, be accustomed to, Old English pleon to risk the loss
of, expose to danger; see plight (v.)).    Meaning allegiance vow attested by drinking with another
is from 1630s. Sense of solemn promise first recorded 1814, though this notion is from 16c. in the
verb. Weekley notes the curious contradiction in pledge (v.) to toast with a drink (1540s) and
pledge (n.) the vow to abstain from drinking (1833). Meaning student who has agreed to join a
fraternity or sorority dates from 1901.


H

the pronunciation aitch was in Old French (ache name of the letter H), and is from a presumed Late
Latin *accha (compare Italian effe, elle, emme), with the central sound approximating the value of
the letter when it passed from Roman to Germanic, where it at first represented a strong, distinctly
aspirated -kh- sound close to that in Scottish loch. In earlier Latin the letter was called ha.
In Romanic languages, the sound became silent in Late Latin and was omitted in Old French and
Italian, but it was restored in Middle English spelling in words borrowed from French, and often
later in pronunciation, too. Thus Modern English has words ultimately from Latin with missing -h-
(as in able, from Latin habile); with a silent -h- (as in heir,  hour); with a formerly silent -h-
now often vocalized (as in humble, humor, herb); and even a few with an excrescent -h- fitted in
confusion to words that never had one (as in hostage, hermit).    Relics of the formerly unvoiced
-h- persist in pedantic insistence on an historical (object) and in obsolete mine host. The use in
digraphs (as in -sh-, -th-) goes back to the ancient Greek alphabet, which used it in -ph-, -th-,
-kh- until -H- took on the value of a long e and the digraphs acquired their own characters. The
letter passed into Roman use before this evolution, and thus retained there more of its original
Semitic value.


