hostility (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French hostilit&eacute; enmity (15c.), or directly from Late Latin
hostilitatem (nominative hostilitas) enmity, from Latin hostilis, from hostis enemy (see guest).
Hostilities in the sense of warfare attested from 1610s.


thaw (n.)

the melting of ice or snow, also spell of weather causing this, c.1400, from thaw (v.). Figurative
sense is from 1590s; specifically relaxation of political harshness or hostility from 1950, an image
from the Cold War.


indisposition (n.)

early 15c., unfavorable influence (in astrology); also in Middle English, ill health, disorder of
the mind or body; unfavorable disposition, hostility; inclination to evil; wickedness; public
disorder, lawlessness, from in- (1) not, opposite of + disposition.


polemic (adj.)

1640s, from French pol&#233;mique (from Middle French polemique) disputatious, controversial, or
directly from Greek polemikos of war, warlike, belligerent; skilled in war, fit for service; like an
enemy, stirring up hostility, from polemos war, of unknown origin. Related: Polemical (1630s).


Electra

daughter of Agamemnon and Clytaemnestra, responsible for the murder of her mother, from Greek
Elektra, literally shining, bright, related to elektor the beaming sun and perhaps to elektron
amber. Especially in psychological Electra complex (1913) in reference to a daughter who feels
attraction toward her father and hostility to her mother.


concur (v.)

early 15c., collide, clash in hostility, from Latin concurrere to run together, assemble hurriedly;
clash, fight, in transferred use, to happen at the same time, from com- together (see com-) +
currere to run (see current (adj.)). Sense of to coincide, happen at the same time is 1590s; that of
to agree in opinion is 1580s in English.


confront (v.)

1560s, to stand in front of, from Middle French confronter (15c.), from Medieval Latin confrontare
assign limits, adjoin, from Latin com- together (see com-) + frontem (nominative frons) forehead
(see front (n.)). Sense of to face in defiance or hostility is late 16c. Related: Confronted;
confronting.


adversity (n.)

c.1200, aduersite misfortune, hardship, difficulty, from Old French aversit&eacute; adversity,
calamity, misfortune; hostility, wickedness, malice (Modern French adversit&eacute;), from Latin
adversitatem (nominative adversitas) opposition, from adversus (see adverse).


enmity (n.)

late 14c., from Old French enemisti&eacute; enmity, hostile act, aversion, from Vulgar Latin
*inimicitatem (nominative *inimicitas), from Latin inimicitia enmity, hostility, from inimicus enemy
(see enemy). Related: Enmities.


mafia (n.)

1875, from Italian Mafia Sicilian secret society of criminals (the prevailing sense outside Sicily),
earlier, spirit of hostility to the law and its ministers, from Italian (Sicilian) mafia boldness,
bravado, probably from Arabic mahjas aggressive, boasting, bragging. Or perhaps from Old French
mafler to gluttonize, devour. A member is a mafioso (1870), fem. mafiosa, plural mafiosi.


ill (adv.)

c.1200, wickedly; with hostility; see ill (adj.). Meaning not well, poorly is from c.1300. It
generally has not shifted to the realm of physical sickess, as the adjective has done. Ill-fated
recorded from 1710; ill-informed from 1824; ill-tempered from c.1600; ill-starred from c.1600.
Generally contrasted with well, hence the useful, but now obsolete or obscure illcome (1570s),
illfare (c.1300), and illth.


iniquity (n.)

c.1300, hostility, malevolence; a hostile action, from Old French iniquit&eacute; wickedness,
unfavorable situation, from Latin iniquitatem (nominative iniquitas) unequalness, unevenness,
injustice, noun of quality from iniquus unjust, unequal; slanting, steep, from in- not (see in- (1))
+ aequus just, equal (see equal (adj.)). For vowel change, see acquisition. Meaning evil, wickedness
is from late 14c.


handle (v.)

Old English handlian to touch or move with the hands, also deal with, discuss; see handle (n.). Akin
to Old Norse h&ouml;ndla to seize, capture, Danish handle to trade, deal, German handeln to bargain,
trade. Related: Handled; handling. Meaning to act towards (someone) in a certain manner (usually
with hostility or roughness) is from c.1200. The commercial sense was weaker in English than in some
other Germanic languages, but it emerged in American English (1888) from the notion of something
passing through one's hands, and see handler.


feud (n.)

c.1300, fede enmity, hatred, hostility, northern English and Scottish; perhaps from an unrecorded
Old English word or else from Old French fede, which is from Germanic (compare Old High German
fehida contention, quarrel, feud), from Proto-Germanic *faihitho noun of state from adjective
*faiho- (cognates: Old English f&aelig;h&eth; enmity, fah hostile; German Fehde feud; Old Frisian
feithe enmity), from PIE root *peig- (2), also *peik- evil-minded, hostile (see foe). Sense of
vendetta is early 15c. Alteration of spelling in 16c. is unexplained.


peace (n.)

mid-12c., freedom from civil disorder, from Anglo-French pes, Old French pais peace, reconciliation,
silence, permission (11c., Modern French paix), from Latin pacem (nominative pax) compact,
agreement, treaty of peace, tranquility, absence of war (source of Proven&ccedil;al patz, Spanish
paz, Italian pace), from PIE *pag-/*pak- fasten, related to pacisci to covenant or agree (see pact).
Replaced Old English fri&eth;, also sibb, which also meant happiness. Modern spelling is 1500s,
reflecting vowel shift. Sense in peace of mind is from c.1200. Used in various greetings from
c.1300, from Biblical Latin pax, Greek eirene, which were used by translators to render Hebrew
shalom, properly safety, welfare, prosperity.    Sense of quiet is attested by 1300; meaning absence
or cessation of war or hostility is attested from c.1300. As a type of hybrid tea rose (developed
1939 in France by Francois Meilland), so called from 1944. Native American peace pipe is first
recorded 1760. Peace-officer attested from 1714. Peace offering is from 1530s. Phrase peace with
honor first recorded 1607 (in Coriolanus). The U.S. Peace Corps was set up March 1, 1962. Peace
sign, both the hand gesture and the graphic, attested from 1968.


war (n.)

late Old English wyrre, werre large-scale military conflict, from Old North French werre war (Old
French guerre difficulty, dispute; hostility; fight, combat, war; Modern French guerre), from
Frankish *werra, from Proto-Germanic *werz-a- (cognates: Old Saxon werran, Old High German werran,
German verwirren to confuse, perplex), from PIE *wers- (1) to confuse, mix up. Cognates suggest the
original sense was to bring into confusion.    Spanish, Portuguese, and Italian guerra also are from
Germanic; Romanic peoples turned to Germanic for a word possibly to avoid Latin bellum because its
form tended to merge with bello- beautiful. There was no common Germanic word for war at the dawn of
historical times. Old English had many poetic words for war (wig, gu&eth;, hea&eth;o, hild, all
common in personal names), but the usual one to translate Latin bellum was gewin struggle, strife
(related to win (v.)).    First record of war time is late 14c. Warpath (1775) is originally in
reference to North American Indians, as are war-whoop (1761), war-paint (1826), and war-dance
(1757). War crime first attested 1906 (in Oppenheim's International Law). War chest is attested from
1901; now usually figurative. War games translates German Kriegspiel (see kriegspiel).


