hover (v.)

c.1400, hoveren, frequentative of hoven hover, tarry, linger; see hove (1). Related: Hovered;
hovering. As a noun from 1510s.


hovercraft

1959, from hover + craft. A proprietary name after 1961.


hove (v.1)

wait, linger, hover, mid-13c., of unknown origin. Chiefly nautical at first, of ships standing off a
coast, also of birds in the air. Common 13c.-16c., then superseded by its derivative, hover.


windhover (n.)

kestrel, 1670s, from wind (n.1) + hover; so called from the bird's habit of hovering in the wind.
Among the many early names for it was windfucker (1590s).


waver (v.)

late 13c., weyveren, to show indecision, probably related to Old English w&aelig;fre restless,
wavering, from Proto-Germanic *w&aelig;braz (cognates: Middle High German wabern to waver, Old Norse
vafra to hover about), a frequentative form from the root of wave (v.). Related: Wavered; wavering.


wobble (v.)

1650s, wabble, probably from Low German wabbeln to wobble; cognate with Old Norse vafla hover about,
totter, related to vafra move unsteadily, from Proto-Germanic *wab- to move back and forth, perhaps
from PIE *webh- to weave (see waver). Form with -o- is from 1851. Related: Wobbled; wobbling. The
noun is attested from 1690s.


plane (v.2)

soar, glide on motionless wings, early 15c., from Old French planer to hover (as a bird), to lie
flat, from plan (n.) plane, from Latin planum flat surface (see plane (n.1)), on notion of bird
gliding with flattened wings. Of boats, etc., to skim over the surface of water, it is first found
1913. Related: Planed; planing.


unappeasable (adj.)

1560s, from un- (1) not + appeasable. Related: Unappeasably.    Desolate winds that cry over the
wandering sea;  Desolate winds that hover in the flaming West;  Desolate winds that beat the doors
of Heaven, and beat  The doors of Hell and blow there many a whimpering ghost;  O heart the winds
have shaken, the unappeasable host  Is comelier than candles at Mother Mary's feet.    [W.B. Yeats,
The Unappeasable Host, 1899]


wince (v.)

c.1300, wincen; mid-13c. winchen, to recoil suddenly, from Anglo-French *wenchir, Old North French
*wenchier (Old French guenchir) to turn aside, avoid, from Frankish *wenkjan, from Proto-Germanic
*wankjan (cognates: Old High German wankon to stagger, totter, Old Norse vakka to stray, hover; see
wink (v.)). Originally of horses. Modern form is attested from late 13c. Related: Winced; wincing.


wave (v.)

move back and forth, Old English wafian to wave, fluctuate (related to w&aelig;fre wavering,
restless, unstable), from Proto-Germanic *wab- (cognates: Old Norse vafra to hover about, Middle
High German waben to wave, undulate), possibly from PIE root *webh- to move to and fro; to weave
(see weave (v.)). Transitive sense is from mid-15c.; meaning to make a sign by a wave of the hand is
from 1510s. Related: Waved; waving.    I was much further out than you thought  And not waving but
drowning.  [Stevie Smith]


wink (v.)

Old English wincian to blink, wink, close one's eyes quickly, from Proto-Germanic *wink- (cognates:
Dutch winken, Old High German winkan move sideways, stagger; nod, German winken to wave, wink), a
gradational variant of the root of Old High German wankon to stagger, totter, Old Norse vakka to
stray, hover, from PIE root *weng- to bend, curve. The meaning close an eye as a hint or signal is
first recorded c.1100; that of close one's eyes (to fault or irregularity) first attested late 15c.
Related: Winked; winking.


lap (n.)

Old English l&aelig;ppa (plural l&aelig;ppan) skirt or flap of a garment, from Proto-Germanic *lapp-
(cognates: Old Frisian lappa, Old Saxon lappo, Middle Dutch lappe, Dutch lap, Old High German lappa,
German Lappen rag, shred, Old Norse leppr patch, rag), from PIE root *leb- be loose, hang down.
Sense of lower part of a shirt led to that of upper legs of seated person (c.1300). Used
figuratively (bosom, breast) from late 14c., as in lap of luxury, first recorded 1802. From 15c.-In
17c. the word (often in plural) was a euphemism for female pudendum, but this is not the source of
lap dance, which is first recorded 1993.To lap dance, you undress, sit your client down, order him
to stay still and fully clothed, then hover over him, making a motion that you have perfected by
watching Mister Softee ice cream dispensers. [Anthony Lane, review of Showgirls, New Yorker, Oct.
16, 1995]That this is pleasure and not torment for the client is something survivors of the late
20c. will have to explain to their youngers.


