hull (v.)

to remove the husk of, early 15c., from hull (n.1). Related: Hulled, which can mean both having a
particular kind of hull and stripped of the hull.


hull (n.2)

body of a ship, 1550s, perhaps from hull (n.1) on fancied resemblance of ship keels to open peapods
(compare Latin carina keel of a ship, originally shell of a nut; Greek phaselus light passenger
ship, yacht, literally bean pod; French coque hull of a ship; shell of a walnut or egg). Alternative
etymology is from Middle English hoole ship's keel (mid-15c.), from the same source as hold (n.).


hull (n.1)

seed covering, from Old English hulu husk, pod, from Proto-Germanic *hulus to cover (cognates: Old
High German hulla, hulsa; German H&uuml;lle, H&uuml;lse, Dutch huls). Figurative use by 1831.


hold (n.2)

space in a ship below the lower deck, in which cargo is stowed, 15c. corruption in the direction of
hold (v.) of Old English hol hole (see hole), influenced by Middle Dutch hol hold of a ship, and
Middle English hul, which originally meant both the hold and the hull of a ship (see hull). Or
possibly from Old English holu husk, pod. All from PIE *kel- to cover, conceal.


Halifax

place in West Yorkshire, from Old English halh secluded spot + feax rough grass, literally hair. In
popular expressions coupled with Hull and Hell since at least 1620s.


sheik (n.)

head of an Arab family, also head of a Muslim religious order, 1570s, from Arabic shaykh chief,
literally old man, from base of shakha to grow old. Popularized by The Sheik, novel in Arabian
setting by E.M. Hull (1919), and the movie version, The Sheikh, 1921, starring Rudolph Valentino,
which gave it a 1920s sense of strong, romantic lover.


aircraft (n.)

1851, originally in reference to airships and balloons, from air (n.1) + craft (n.); a term from
boating, as were many early aviation words. Of airplanes from 1907 and since 1930s exclusively of
them. Aircraft carrier is attested from 1919 (H.M.S. Hermes, launched September 1919, was the first
ship to be built from the hull up as an aircraft carrier).


blanch (v.1)

c.1400, transitive, to make white, turn pale, from Old French blanchir to whiten, wash, from blanc
white (11c.; see blank (adj.)). Originally to remove the hull of (almonds, etc.) by soaking.
Intransitive sense of to turn white is from 1768. Related: Blanched; blanching.


waterline (n.)

also water-line, 1620s, line where the water rises to on the hull of a ship afloat, from water (n.1)
+ line (n.).


scrag (n.)

1540s, lean person or animal, a raw-bones; perhaps from a Scandinavian source (compare Norwegian
skragg a lean person; dialectal Swedish skraka a great, dry tree; a long, lean man, skragge old and
torn thing, Danish skrog hull of a ship, carcass, Icelandic skr&#246;ggr, a nickname of the fox);
perhaps from root of shrink.


bilge (n.)

1510s, lowest internal part of a ship, also used of the foulness which collects there; variant of
bulge ship's hull, also leather bag, from Old North French boulge leather sack, from Late Latin
bulga leather sack, apparently from Gaulish bulga (see budget (n.)).


hive (n.)

Old English hyf beehive, from Proto-Germanic *hufiz (cognates: Old Norse hufr hull of a ship), from
PIE *keup- round container, bowl (cognates: Sanskrit kupah hollow, pit, cave, Greek kypellon cup,
Latin cupa tub, cask, vat). Figurative sense of swarming, busy place is from 1630s. As a verb, of
bees, etc., to form themselves into a hive, c.1400; to put bees in a hive, mid-15c.


lobe (n.)

early 15c., a lobe of the liver or lungs, from Middle French lobe and directly from Medieval Latin
lobus, from Late Latin lobus hull, husk, pod, from Greek lobos lobe of the ear, vegetable pod,
perhaps related to Greek leberis husk of fruits, from PIE *logwos. Extended 1670s to divisions of
the brain.


Plimsoll (n.)

mark on the hull of a British ship showing how deeply she may be loaded, 1881, from Samuel Plimsoll
(1824-1898), M.P. for Derby and advocate of shipping reforms (which were embodied in the Merchant
Shipping Act of 1876). Sense extended 1907 to rubber-soled canvas shoe (equivalent of American
English sneakers) because the band around the shoes that holds the two parts together reminded
people of a ship's Plimsoll line; sense perhaps reinforced by sound association with sole (which
sometimes influenced the spelling to plimsole). The name is of Huguenot origin.


vanilla (n.)

1660s, pod of the vanilla plant, from Spanish vainilla vanilla plant, literally little pod,
diminutive of vaina sheath, from Latin vagina sheath of an ear of grain, hull of a plant (see
vagina). So called from the shape of the pods. European discovery 1521 by Hernando Cortes' soldiers
on reconnaissance in southeastern Mexico. Meaning flavoring extracted from the vanilla bean is
attested by 1728. Meaning conventional, of ordinary sexual preferences is 1970s, from notion of
whiteness and the common choice of vanilla ice cream.


rakish (adj.)

1706, debauched, disreputable, from rake (n.2) + -ish. Related: Rakishly; rakishness.    The meaning
smart, jaunty, dashing (1824) is said to be a different word, probably from rake slant, slope
(1620s), used especially in reference to a ship's hull or sails, of uncertain origin, perhaps from
Scandinavian (compare Old Swedish raka project, reach; Danish rage protrude, project) related to Old
English reccan stretch. The piratical craft of former times were distinguished for their rakish
build [Century Dictionary].


vagina (n.)

sexual passage of the female from the vulva to the uterus, 1680s, medical Latin, from specialized
use of Latin vagina sheath, scabbard, covering; sheath of an ear of grain, hull, husk (plural
vaginae), from PIE *wag-ina- (cognates: Lithuanian vo&#382;iu ro cover with a hollow thing), from
root *wag- to break, split, bite. Probably the ancient notion is of a sheath made from a split piece
of wood (see sheath). A modern medical word; the Latin word was not used in an anatomical sense in
classical times. Anthropological vagina dentata is attested from 1902.


timber (n.)

Old English timber building, structure, in late Old English building material, trees suitable for
building, and trees or woods in general, from Proto-Germanic *timran (cognates: Old Saxon timbar a
building, room, Old Frisian timber wood, building, Old High German zimbar timber, wooden dwelling,
room, Old Norse timbr timber, German Zimmer room), from PIE *deme- to build, possibly from root
*dem- house, household (source of Greek domos, Latin domus; see domestic (adj.)).    The related Old
English verb timbran, timbrian was the chief word for to build (compare Dutch timmeren, German
zimmern). As a call of warning when a cut tree is about to fall, it is attested from 1912 in
Canadian English. Timbers in the nautical slang sense (see shiver (v.2)) is from the specialized
meaning pieces of wood composing the frames of a ship's hull (1748).    The timber-wolf (1846) of
the U.S. West is the gray wolf, not confined to forests but so-called to distinguish it from the
prairie-wolf (coyote).


hill (n.)

Old English hyll hill, from Proto-Germanic *hulni- (cognates: Middle Dutch hille, Low German hull
hill, Old Norse hallr stone, Gothic hallus rock, Old Norse holmr islet in a bay, Old English holm
rising land, island), from PIE root *kel- (4) to rise, be elevated, be prominent; hill (cognates:
Sanskrit kutam top, skull; Latin collis hill, columna projecting object, culmen top, summit, cellere
raise, celsus high; Greek kolonos hill, kolophon summit; Lithuanian kalnas mountain, kalnelis hill,
kelti raise). Formerly including mountains, now usually confined to heights under 2,000 feet. In
Great Britain heights under 2,000 feet are generally called hills; 'mountain' being confined to the
greater elevations of the Lake District, of North Wales, and of the Scottish Highlands; but, in
India, ranges of 5,000 and even 10,000 feet are commonly called 'hills,' in contrast with the
Himalaya Mountains, many peaks of which rise beyond 20,000 feet. [OED]   <hr />   The term mountain
is very loosely used. It commonly means any unusual elevation. In New England and central New York,
elevations of from one to two thousand feet are called hills, but on the plains of Texas, a hill of
a few hundred feet is called a mountain. [Ralph S. Tarr, Elementary Geology, Macmillan, 1903]   <hr
/>   Despite the differences in defining mountain systems, Penck (1896), Supan (1911) and Obst
(1914) agreed that the distinction between hills, mountains, and mountain systems according to areal
extent or height is not a suitable classification. [Geographic Information Science and Mountain
Geomorphology, 2004]    Phrase over the hill past one's prime is first recorded 1950.


