humanity (n.)

late 14c., kindness, graciousness, from Old French humanit&eacute;, umanit&eacute; human nature;
humankind, life on earth; pity, from Latin humanitatem (nominative humanitas) human nature;
philanthropy, kindness; good breeding, refinement; the human race, mankind, from humanus (see
human). Sense of human nature, human form is c.1400; that of human race first recorded mid-15c.


humanism (n.)

along with humanist used in a variety of philosophical and theological senses 16c.-18c., especially
ones imitating Latin humanitas education befitting a cultivated man. See human + -ism. Main modern
sense in reference to revival of interest in the Classics traces to c.1860; as a pragmatic system of
thought, defined 1907 by co-founder F.C.S. Schiller as: The perception that the philosophical
problem concerns human beings striving to comprehend a world of human experience by the resources of
human minds.


humanist (n.)

1580s, student of the classical humanities, from Middle French humaniste (16c.), formed on model of
Italian umanista student of human affairs or human nature, coined by Italian poet Lodovicio Ariosto
(1474-1533), from Latin humanus â&euro;&oelig;humanâ&euro;? (see human; also see humanism).
Philosophical sense is from 1903.


human (adj.)

mid-15c., humain, humaigne, from Old French humain, umain (adj.) of or belonging to man (12c.), from
Latin humanus of man, human, also humane, philanthropic, kind, gentle, polite; learned, refined,
civilized, probably related to homo (genitive hominis) man (see homunculus) and to humus earth, on
notion of earthly beings, as opposed to the gods (compare Hebrew adam man, from adamah ground).
Cognate with Old Lithuanian zmuo (accusative zmuni) man, male person.    As a noun, from 1530s. Its
Old English cognate guma (from Proto-Germanic *guman-) survives only in disguise in bridegroom.
Related: Humanness. Human rights attested by 1680s; human being by 1690s. Human relations is from
1916; human resources attested by 1907, American English, apparently originally among social
Christians and drawn from natural resources.


humanoid

1912 (adj.), an anthropological hybrid from human + -oid. As a noun, from 1925. Earlier (1906) brand
name of a type of cow's milk altered to be closer to human milk intended as food for infants.


humane (adj.)

mid-15c., variant of human (compare german/germane, urban/urbane), used interchangeably with it
until early 18c., by which time it had become a distinct word with sense of having qualities
befitting human beings. But inhuman still can be the opposite of humane. The Royal Humane Society
(founded 1774) was originally to rescue drowning persons. Such societies had turned to animal care
by late 19c.


humankind (n.)

1640s, properly two words, from human + kind (n.).


humanities

1702; plural of humanity, which was used in English from late 15c. in a sense class of studies
concerned with human culture (opposed variously at different times to divinity or sciences). Latin
literae humaniores, they were those branches of literature (ancient classics, rhetoric, poetry)
which tended to humanize or refine.


humanistic

1845 (humanistical is from 1716), in reference to Renaissance or classical humanism; from humanist +
-ic. From 1904 in reference to a modern philosophy that concerns itself with the interests of the
human race.


humanitarian (n.)

1794 (n.) in the theological sense  one who affirms the humanity of Christ but denies his pre-
existence and divinity, from humanity + suffix from unitarian, etc.; see humanism. Meaning
philanthropist, one who advocates or practices human action to solve social problems is from 1842,
originally disparaging, with a suggestion of excess. As an adjective, by 1834.


humanly (adv.)

c.1500, from human + -ly (2).


humanize (v.)

c.1600, from human + -ize. Related: Humanized; humanizing.


homunculus (n.)

1650s, from Latin homunculus, literally little person, from homo (genitive hominis) man, human
being, the Latin word that means man, person, a human being (technically male human, but in logical
and scholastic writing human being), also the human race, mankind, perhaps from PIE *(dh)ghomon-,
literally earthling, from *dhghem- earth (see chthonic; also compare human). With -culus, Latin
diminutive suffix. Other Latin diminutives from homo included homullus, homuncio.


long pig (n.)

human being eaten as food, 1848, in a Pacific Islander context:    Bau literally stank for many
days, human flesh having been cooked in every house, and the entrails thrown outside as food for
pigs, or left to putrefy in the sun. The Somosomo people were fed with human flesh during their stay
at Bau, they being on a visit at that time; and some of the Chiefs of other towns, when bringing
their food, carried a cooked human being on one shoulder, and a pig on the other; but they always
preferred the long pig, as they call a man when baked. [FEEJEE.--Extract of a Letter from the Rev.
John Watsford, dated Ono, October 6th, 1846. in Wesleyan Missionary Notices, Sept. 1847]


yahoo (n.)

a brute in human form, 1726, from the race of brutish human creatures in Swift's Gulliver's Travels.
A made name, prob. meant to suggest disgust [Century Dictionary]. Freq. in mod. use, a person
lacking cultivation or sensibility, a philistine; a lout; a hooligan [OED]. The internet search
engine so called from 1994.


unhuman (adj.)

1540s, inhumane, cruel, from un- (1) not + human (adj.). Meaning destitute of human qualities;
superhuman is from 1782.


anthropomorphism (n.)

1753, attributing of human qualities to a deity; see anthropomorphic + -ism. Of other non-human
things, from 1858. Related: Anthropomorphist (1610s).


anthropomorphic (adj.)

1806, from anthropomorphous + -ic. Originally in reference to regarding God or gods as having human
form and human characteristics; of animals and other things from 1858; the sect of the
Antropomorfites is mentioned in English from mid-15c. (see anthropomorphite).


anthropic (adj.)

pertaining to man, 1836, from Greek anthropikos human, from anthropos male human being, man (see
anthropo-). Related: Anthropical (1804).


manly (adj.)

c.1200, human; characteristic of human beings, from man (n.) + -ly (1). Sense of possessing virtues
proper to a male person (resoluteness, steadfastness, reliability) is from early 13c. Meaning
masculine is attested from late 14c. Old English had werlic male, masculine, manly.


somato-

before vowels somat-, word-forming element meaning the body of an organism, from comb. form of Greek
soma (genitive somatos) the body, a human body dead or living, body as opposed to spirit; material
substance; mass; a person, human being; the whole body or mass of anything, of uncertain origin.


mannish (adj.)

Old English mennisc human, human-like, natural, from Proto-Germanic *manniska- (cognates: Old Saxon
mannisc, Old High German mennisc, Gothic mannisks), from *manna- (see man (n.)). In some cases a new
formation from man (n.) + -ish.    Sense of masculine is from late 14c.; in reference to women seen
as masculine, from late 14c. Of adult males (opposed to childish) from 1520s. Related: Mannishly;
mannishness. The Proto-Germanic adjective became, in some languages, a noun meaning human (such as
German Mensch), and in Old English mannish also was used as a noun mankind, folk, race, people.


mensch (n.)

person of strength and honor, 1907, from Yiddish, from German Mensch, literally man, person, from
Old High German mennisco human, from Proto-Germanic adjective *manniska- human (see mannish).


psilanthropism (n.)

the teaching that Jesus was entirely human, 1817 (Coleridge; Biographia Literaria), from Greek
psilanthropos merely human, from psilos naked, bare, mere (see psilo-) + anthropos man (see
anthropo-). Related: Psilanthropy; psilanthropic; psilanthropist.


anthropomorphous (adj.)

1753, anglicization of Late Latin anthropomorphus having human form, from Greek anthropomorphos,
from anthropos human being (see anthropo-) + morphe form (see morphine).


anthropopathy (n.)

ascribing of human feelings to god, 1640s, from Greek anthropopatheia humanity, literally human
feeling, from anthropo- + -patheia, comb. form of pathos suffering, disease, feeling (see pathos).
Related: Anthropopathic; anthropopathically.


automatic (adj.)

self-acting, moving or acting on its own, 1812, from Greek automatos, used of the gates of Olympus
and the tripods of Hephaestus (also without apparent cause, by accident), from autos self (see
auto-) + matos thinking, animated (see automaton). Of involuntary animal or human actions, from
1748, first used in this sense by English physician and philosopher David Hartley (1705-1757). In
reference to a type of firearm, from 1877; specifically of machinery that imitates human-directed
action from 1940.


android (n.)

automaton resembling a human being, 1842, from Modern Latin androides (itself attested as a Latin
word in English from 1727), from Greek andro- human (see andro-) + eides form, shape. Greek androdes
meant like a man, manly; compare also Greek andrias image of a man, statue. Listed as rare in OED
1st edition (1879), popularized from c.1951 by science fiction writers.


Adam

masc. proper name, Biblical name of the first man, progenitor of the human race, from Hebrew adam
man, literally (the one formed from the) ground (Hebrew adamah ground); compare Latin homo man,
humanus human, humus earth, ground, soil. To not know (someone) from Adam not know him at all is
first recorded 1784.


mankind (n.)

the human race, c.1300, earlier man-kende (early 13c.), from man (n.) + kind (n.). Replaced Old
English mancynn human race. Also used occasionally in Middle English for male persons (late 14c.),
but otherwise preserving the original gender neutrality of man (n.). For menfolk, the male sex,
menkind (late 14c.) and menskind (1590s) have been used.


manhood (n.)

early 13c., state of being human, from man (n.) + -hood. Meanings state of being an adult male, also
manliness, are from late 14c. Similar words in Old English were less explicitly masculine: manscipe
humanity, courtesy, literally man-ship; mennisclicnes state of man, humanity, humaneness, human
nature. The more manly word was werhad male sex, virility, manhood (see first element in werewolf).


inhuman (adj.)

mid-15c., cruel, from Latin inhumanus inhuman, savage, cruel, rude, barbarous, from in- not,
opposite of (see in- (1)) + humanus human (see human). Spelled inhumane till 18c. (see humane).


eugenics (n.)

1883, coined (along with adjective eugenic) by English scientist Francis Galton (1822-1911) on
analogy of ethics, physics, etc. from Greek eugenes well-born, of good stock, of noble race, from
eu- good (see eu-) + genos birth (see genus).  The investigation of human eugenics, that is, of the
conditions under which men of a high type are produced. [Galton, Human Faculty, 1883]


fable (n.)

c.1300, falsehood, lie, pretense, from Old French fable (12c.) story, fable, tale; fiction, lie,
falsehood, from Latin fabula story, play, fable, narrative, account, tale, literally that which is
told, related to fari speak, tell, from PIE root *bha- (2) speak (see fame (n.)). Sense of animal
story (early 14c.) comes from Aesop. In modern folklore terms, defined as a short, comic tale making
a moral point about human nature, usually through animal characters behaving in human ways. Most
trace to Greece or India.


Cro Magnon

1869, from the name of a hill in Dordogne department of France, where in a cave prehistoric human
remains were found in 1868.


Homo sapiens (n.)

1802, in William Turton's translation of Linn&aelig;us, coined in Modern Latin from Latin homo man
(technically male human, but in logical and scholastic writing human being; see homunculus) +
sapiens, present participle of sapere be wise (see sapient). Used since in various Latin or pseudo-
Latin combinations intended to emphasize some aspect of humanity, as in Henri Bergson's Homo faber
man the tool-maker, in L'Evolution Cr&eacute;atrice (1907). Homo as a genus of the order Primates is
first recorded 1797.


cannibal (n.)

human that eats human flesh, 1550s, from Spanish canibal, caribal a savage, cannibal, from Caniba,
Christopher Columbus' rendition of the Caribs' name for themselves (see Caribbean). The natives were
believed to be anthropophagites. Columbus, seeking evidence that he was in Asia, thought the name
meant the natives were subjects of the Great Khan. Shakespeare's Caliban (in The Tempest) is from a
version of this word, with -n- and -l- interchanged, found in Hakluyt's Voyages (1599). The Spanish
word had reached French by 1515. Used of animals from 1796. An Old English word for cannibal was
self&aelig;ta.


Tlingit (n.)

Indian group in southwestern Alaska and adjacent parts of Canada, 1865, the people's word for
themselves, literally human beings.


Tophet

place near Jerusalem, where, according to the Old Testament, idolatrous Jews made human sacrifice to
strange gods; later symbolic of the torments of Hell.


global warming (n.)

by 1983 as the name for a condition of overall rising temperatures and attendant consequences as a
result of human activity. Originally theoretical, popularized as a reality from 1989.


woman (n.)

adult female human, late Old English wimman, wiman (plural wimmen), literally woman-man, alteration
of wifman (plural wifmen) woman, female servant (8c.), a compound of wif woman (see wife) + man
human being (in Old English used in reference to both sexes; see man (n.)). Compare Dutch vrouwmens
wife, literally woman-man.    It is notable that it was thought necessary to join wif, a neuter
noun, representing a female person, to man, a masc. noun representing either a male or female
person, to form a word denoting a female person exclusively. [Century Dictionary]    The formation
is peculiar to English and Dutch. Replaced older Old English wif and quean as the word for female
human being. The pronunciation of the singular altered in Middle English by the rounding influence
of -w-; the plural retains the original vowel. Meaning wife, now largely restricted to U.S.
dialectal use, is attested from mid-15c. Woman-hater misogynist is from c.1600. Women's work is from
1660s. Women's liberation is attested from 1966; women's rights is from 1840, with an isolated
example in 1630s.


HIV (n.)

1986, initialism (acronym) from human immunodeficiency virus, name for either of the two viruses
that cause AIDS.


anthropo-

before a vowel, anthrop-, word-forming element meaning pertaining to man or human beings, from comb.
form of Greek anthropos man, human being (sometimes also including women) from Attic andra (genitive
andros), from Greek aner man (as opposed to a woman, a god, or a boy), from PIE *ner- (2) man, also
vigorous, vital, strong (cognates: Sanskrit nar-, Armenian ayr, Welsh ner).   Anthropos sometimes is
explained as a compound of aner and ops (genitive opos) eye, face; so literally he who has the face
of a man. The change of -d- to -th- is difficult to explain; perhaps it is from some lost dialectal
variant, or the mistaken belief that there was an aspiration sign over the vowel in the second
element (as though *-dhropo-), which mistake might have come about by influence of common verbs such
as horao to see.


astrology (n.)

late 14c., from Latin astrologia astronomy, the science of the heavenly bodies, from Greek
astrologia telling of the stars, from astron star (see astro-) + -logia treating of (see -logy).
Originally identical with astronomy, it had also a special sense of practical astronomy, astronomy
applied to prediction of events. This was divided into natural astrology the calculation and
foretelling of natural phenomenon (tides, eclipses, etc.), and judicial astrology the art of judging
occult influences of stars on human affairs (also known as astromancy, 1650s). Differentiation
between astrology and astronomy began late 1400s and by 17c. this word was limited to reading
influences of the stars and their effects on human destiny.


its

neuter possessive pronoun; the modern word begins to appear in writing at the end of 16c., from it +
genitive/possessive ending 's (q.v.), and at first commonly written it's, a spelling retained by
some to the beginning of the 19c. [OED]. The apostrophe came to be omitted, perhaps because it's
already was established as a contraction of it is, or by general habit of omitting apostrophes in
personal pronouns (hers, yours, theirs, etc.).    The neuter genitive pronoun in Middle English was
his, but the clash between grammatical gender and sexual gender, or else the application of the word
to both human and non-human subjects, evidently made users uncomfortable. Restriction of his to the
masculine and avoidance of it as a neuter pronoun is evidenced in Middle English, and of it and
thereof (as in KJV) were used for the neuter possessive. Also, from c.1300, simple it was used as a
neuter possessive pronoun. But in literary use, his as a neuter pronoun continued into the 17c.


Ainu

people native to northern Japan and far eastern Russia, 1819, from the Ainu self-designation,
literally man, human. Once considered to be Caucasian, based on their appearance; but DNA testing
has disproven this. Their language is an isolate with no known relatives.


mortal (adj.)

mid-14c., deadly, also doomed to die, from Old French mortel destined to die; deserving of death,
from Latin mortalis subject to death, mortal, of a mortal, human, from mors (genitive mortis) death,
from PIE base *mer- to die, with derivatives referring to death and human beings (cognates: Sanskrit
mrtih death, martah mortal man; Avestan miryeite dies, Old Persian martiya- man; Armenian meranim
die; Latin mori to die; Lithuanian mirtis mortal man; Greek brotos mortal (hence ambrotos immortal);
Old Church Slavonic mrutvu dead; Old Irish marb, Welsh marw died; Old English mor&thorn; murder).
The most widespread Indo-European root for to die, forming the common word for it except in Greek
and Germanic. Watkins says it is possibly the same as PIE *mer- rub, pound, wear away (see morbid).


hovel (n.)

mid-14c., roofed passage, vent for smoke, later shed for animals (mid-15c.), of unknown origin.
Meaning shed for human habitation; rude or miserable cabin is from 1620s. It also sometimes meant
canopied niche for a statue or image (mid-15c.).


man (n.)

Old English man, mann human being, person (male or female); brave man, hero; servant, vassal, from
Proto-Germanic *manwaz (cognates: Old Saxon, Swedish, Dutch, Old High German man, German Mann, Old
Norse ma&eth;r, Danish mand, Gothic manna man), from PIE root *man- (1) man (cognates: Sanskrit
manuh, Avestan manu-, Old Church Slavonic mozi, Russian muzh man, male).    Plural men (German
M&auml;nner) shows effects of i-mutation. Sometimes connected to root *men- to think (see mind),
which would make the ground sense of man one who has intelligence, but not all linguists accept
this. Liberman, for instance, writes, Most probably man 'human being' is a secularized divine name
from Mannus [Tacitus, Germania, chap. 2], believed to be the progenitor of the human race.    So I
am as he that seythe, `Come hyddr John, my man.' [1473]    Sense of adult male is late (c.1000); Old
English used wer and wif to distinguish the sexes, but wer began to disappear late 13c. and was
replaced by man. Universal sense of the word remains in mankind and manslaughter. Similarly, Latin
had homo human being and vir adult male human being, but they merged in Vulgar Latin, with homo
extended to both senses. A like evolution took place in Slavic languages, and in some of them the
word has narrowed to mean husband. PIE had two stems: *uiHro freeman (source of Sanskrit vira-,
Lithuanian vyras, Latin vir, Old Irish fer, Gothic wair) and *hner man, a title more of honor than
*uiHro (source of Sanskrit nar-, Armenian ayr, Welsh ner, Greek aner).    MANTRAP, a woman's
commodity. [Grose, Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, London, 1785]   Man also was in Old English as
an indefinite pronoun, one, people, they. The chess pieces so called from c.1400. As an interjection
of surprise or emphasis, first recorded c.1400, but especially popular from early 20c. Man-about-
town is from 1734; the Man the boss is from 1918. To be man or mouse be brave or be timid is from
1540s. Men's Liberation first attested 1970.At the kinges court, my brother, Ech man for himself.
[Chaucer, Knight's Tale, c.1386]


person (n.)

early 13c., from Old French persone human being, anyone, person (12c., Modern French personne) and
directly from Latin persona human being, person, personage; a part in a drama, assumed character,
originally mask, false face, such as those of wood or clay worn by the actors in later Roman
theater. OED offers the general 19c. explanation of persona as related to Latin personare to sound
through (i.e. the mask as something spoken through and perhaps amplifying the voice), but the long o
makes a difficulty .... Klein and Barnhart say it is possibly borrowed from Etruscan phersu mask.
Klein goes on to say this is ultimately of Greek origin and compares Persephone.    Of corporate
entities from mid-15c. The use of -person to replace -man in compounds and avoid alleged sexist
connotations is first recorded 1971 (in chairperson). In person by bodily presence is from 1560s.
Person-to-person first recorded 1919, originally of telephone calls.


