humane (adj.)

mid-15c., variant of human (compare german/germane, urban/urbane), used interchangeably with it
until early 18c., by which time it had become a distinct word with sense of having qualities
befitting human beings. But inhuman still can be the opposite of humane. The Royal Humane Society
(founded 1774) was originally to rescue drowning persons. Such societies had turned to animal care
by late 19c.


humanely

1590s, from humane + -ly (2).


inhumane (adj.)

late 15c., from Latin inhumanus (see inhuman). Originally a variant spelling and pronunciation of
inhuman, it appears to have died out 17c. but been revived c.1822 as a negative form of humane.


germane (adj.)

mid-14c., having the same parents, derived from german (adj.); compare human/humane, urban/urbane.
Main modern sense of closely connected, relevant (c.1600) derives from use in Hamlet Act V, Scene
ii: The phrase would bee more Germaine to the matter: If we could carry Cannon by our sides, which
is a figurative use of the word in the now-obsolete sense of closely related, akin (late 15c.) in
reference to things, not persons.


electrocute (v.)

execute by electricity, 1889, American English, from electro- + back half of execute. The method
first was used Aug. 6, 1890, in New York state, on William Kemmler, convicted of the murder of his
common-law wife. Sense involving accidental death is first recorded 1909. Electric chair is also
first recorded 1889, which is when the first one was introduced in New York state as a humane
alternative to hanging. Related: Electrocuted; electrocuting.


inhuman (adj.)

mid-15c., cruel, from Latin inhumanus inhuman, savage, cruel, rude, barbarous, from in- not,
opposite of (see in- (1)) + humanus human (see human). Spelled inhumane till 18c. (see humane).


urbane (adj.)

1530s, of or relating to cities or towns, from Middle French urbain (14c.) and directly from Latin
urbanus belonging to a city, also citified, elegant (see urban). The meaning having the manners of
townspeople, courteous, refined is from 1620s, from a secondary sense in classical Latin. Urbanity
in this sense is recorded from 1530s. For sense connection and differentiation of form, compare
human/humane; german/germane.


human (adj.)

mid-15c., humain, humaigne, from Old French humain, umain (adj.) of or belonging to man (12c.), from
Latin humanus of man, human, also humane, philanthropic, kind, gentle, polite; learned, refined,
civilized, probably related to homo (genitive hominis) man (see homunculus) and to humus earth, on
notion of earthly beings, as opposed to the gods (compare Hebrew adam man, from adamah ground).
Cognate with Old Lithuanian zmuo (accusative zmuni) man, male person.    As a noun, from 1530s. Its
Old English cognate guma (from Proto-Germanic *guman-) survives only in disguise in bridegroom.
Related: Humanness. Human rights attested by 1680s; human being by 1690s. Human relations is from
1916; human resources attested by 1907, American English, apparently originally among social
Christians and drawn from natural resources.


