humble (adj.)

mid-13c., from Old French humble, earlier humele, from Latin humilis lowly, humble, literally on the
ground, from humus earth. Senses of not self-asserting and of low birth or rank were both in Middle
English Related: Humbly; humbleness.Don't be so humble; you're not that great. [Golda Meir]To eat
humble pie (1830) is from umble pie (1640s), pie made from umbles edible inner parts of an animal
(especially deer), considered a low-class food. The similar sense of similar-sounding words (the h
of humble was not pronounced then) converged in the pun. Umbles, meanwhile, is Middle English
numbles offal (with loss of n- through assimilation into preceding article).


humble (v.)

late 14c. in the intransitive sense of to render oneself humble; late 15c. in the transitive sense
of to lower (someone) in dignity; see humble (adj.). Related: Humbled; humbling.


humiliation (n.)

late 14c., from Late Latin humiliationem (nominative humiliatio) humbling, humiliation, noun of
action from past participle stem of humiliare to humble, from humilis humble (see humble).


humility (n.)

early 14c., from Old French umelite humility, modesty, sweetness, from Latin humilitatem (nominative
humilitas) lowness, insignificance, in Church Latin meekness, from humilis humble (see humble). In
the Mercian hymns, Latin humilitatem is glossed by Old English ea&eth;modnisse.


submission (n.)

late 14c., act of referring to a third party for judgment or decision, from Old French submission or
directly from Latin submissionem (nominative submissio) a lowering, letting down; sinking, noun of
action from past participle stem of submittere to let down, put down, lower, reduce, yield (see
submit).    Sense of humble obedience is first recorded mid-15c. Modern French submission has been
replaced by doublet soumission. English in 16c.-17c. also had an adjective submiss humble,
submissive.  Submissionist in various political historical contexts is from 1828.


umbles (n.)

edible inner parts of a deer or other animal, c.1400, see humble.


simple (adj.)

c.1200, free from duplicity, upright, guileless; blameless, innocently harmless, also ignorant,
uneducated; unsophisticated; simple-minded, foolish, from Old French simple (12c.) plain, decent;
friendly, sweet; naive, foolish, stupid, hence wretched, miserable, from Latin simplus, variant of
simplex simple, uncompounded, literally onefold (see simplex). Sense of free from pride, humble,
meek is mid-13c. As consisting of only one substance or ingredient (opposite of composite or
compounded) it dates from late 14c.; as easily done (opposite of complicated) it dates from late
15c.    From mid-14c. as unqualified; mere; sheer; also clear, straightforward; easily understood.
From late 14c. as single, individual; whole. From late 14c. of clothing, etc., modest, plain,
unadorned, and of food, plain, not sumptuous. In medicine, of fractures, etc., lacking
complications, late 14c. As a law term, lacking additional legal stipulations, unlimited, from mid-
14c.    In Middle English with wider senses than recently, such as inadequate, insufficient; weak,
feeble; mere; few; sad, downcast; mournful; of little value; low in price; impoverished, destitute;
of hair, straight, not curly. As noun, an innocent or a guileless person; a humble or modest person
(late 14c.), also an uncompounded substance. From c.1500 as ignorant people.


lowly

c.1300 (adv.); late 14c. (adj.) humble, from low (adj.) + -ly.


low-down (adj.)

also low down, lowdown, vulgar, 1888, from low (adj.) + down (adv.). Earlier it meant humble
(1540s). As a noun, 1915, from the adjective, American English.


Uriah

masc. proper name, in Old Testament, the Hittite husband of Bathsheba; of non-Hebrew (possibly
Horite) origin, but explained by folk etymology as Hebrew Uriyyah, literally flame of the Lord.
Uriah Heep, character from Dickens' David Copperfield (1850) sometimes is invoked as the type of a
hypocritically humble person.


supplicant (adj.)

1590s, from Latin supplicantem (nominative supplicans), present participle of supplicare plead
humbly (see supplication). As a noun from 1590s, a humble petitioner.


upstart (n.)

1550s, one newly risen from a humble position to one of power, importance, or rank, a parvenu, also
start-up, from up (adv.) + start (v.) in the sense of jump, spring, rise. As an adjective from
1560s. Compare the archaic verb upstart to spring to one's feet, attested from c.1300.


supplication (n.)

late 14c., from Old French suplicacion humble request, from Latin supplicationem (nominative
supplicatio) a public prayer, thanksgiving day, noun of action from past participle stem of
supplicare plead humbly (see supple). In ancient Rome, a religious solemnity, especially in
thanksgiving for a victory or in times of public danger.


menial (adj.)

late 14c., pertaining to a household, from Anglo-French meignial, from Old French mesnie household,
earlier mesnede, from Vulgar Latin *mansionata, from Latin mansionem dwelling (see mansion). Sense
of lowly, humble, suited to a servant is recorded by 1670s.


suppliant (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French suppliant, noun use of present participle of supplier to plead
humbly, entreat, beg, pray, (Old French souploier, 12c.), from Latin supplicare beg, beseech (see
supplication). Originally in English especially at law; sense of humble petitioner is from mid-16c.
As an adjective, supplicating, entreating from 1580s. Related: Suppliance; suppliantly.


Lollard

name for certain heretics, late 14c. (in Chaucer, Loller, c.1386), from Middle Dutch lollaerd,
applied pejoratively to members of reforming sects c.1300 who devoted themselves to the care of the
sick and poor, literally mumbler, mutterer, so called by critics who regarded them as heretics
pretending to humble piety, from lollen to mumble or doze. Generic late Middle English term for
groups suspected of heresy, especially followers of John Wyclif.


crumble (v.)

late 15c., kremelen, from Old English *crymelan, presumed frequentative of gecrymman to break into
crumbs, from cruma (see crumb). The -b- is 16c., probably on analogy of French-derived words like
humble, where it belongs, or by influence of crumb. Related: Crumbled; crumbling.


goody (n.)

also goodie, something tasty, 1745, from good (adj.) + -y (2); adj. use for sentimentally proper is
1830 (especially in reduplicated form goody-goody, 1871). As an exclamation of pleasure, by 1796.
Goody also used since 1550s as a shortened form of goodwife, a term of civility applied to a married
woman in humble life; hence Goody Two-shoes, name of heroine in 1760s children's story who exulted
upon acquiring a second shoe.


Uncle Tom (n.)

servile black man, 1922, somewhat inaccurately in reference to the humble, pious, but strong-willed
main character in Harriet Beecher Stowe's novel, Uncle Tom's Cabin (1852). The image implied in the
insult perhaps is more traceable to the late 19c. minstel show versions of the story, which reached
a far wider audience than the book.    I don't recall anyone in the 1920s using the term 'Uncle Tom'
as an epithet. But what's amazing is how fast it caught on (in the 1930s). Black scholars picked up
(the term) and just started throwing it at each other. [Ernest Allen, quoted in Hamilton, Kendra,
The Strange Career of Uncle Tom, Black Issues in Higher Education, June 2002]    As a verb, attested
from 1937.


meek (adj.)

c.1200, gentle, quiet, unaggressive; benevolent, kind; courteous, humble, unassuming; of a woman,
modest, from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse mjukr soft, pliant, gentle, from Proto-Germanic
*meukaz (cognates: Gothic muka-modei humility, Dutch muik soft), of uncertain origin, perhaps from
PIE *meug- slippery, slimy. In the Bible, it translates Latin mansuetus from Vulgate (see
mansuetude). Sense of submissive is from mid-14c.


abject (adj.)

early 15c., cast off, rejected, from Latin abiectus, past participle of abicere to throw away, cast
off; degrade, humble, lower, from ab- away, off (see ab-) + iacere to throw (past participle iactus;
see jet (v.)). Figurative sense of downcast, brought low first attested 1510s. Related: Abjectly;
abjectness.


thimble (n.)

Old English &thorn;ymel sheath or covering for the thumb, from thuma (see thumb) + -el, suffix used
in forming names of instruments (compare handle). Excrescent -b- began mid-15c. (compare humble,
nimble). Originally of leather, metal ones came into use 17c. Related: Thimbleful. Thimblerig, con
game played with three thimbles and a pea or button, is attested from 1825 by this name, though
references to thimble cheats, probably the same swindle, date back to 1716 (see rig (v.)).


buxom (adj.)

late 12c., buhsum humble, obedient, from Proto-Germanic *buh- stem of Old English bugen to bow  (see
bow (v.)) + -som, for a total meaning capable of being bent. Meaning progressed from compliant,
obliging, through lively, jolly, healthily plump, vigorous, to (in women, and perhaps influenced by
lusty) plump, comely (1580s). In Johnson [1755] the primary meaning still is obedient, obsequious.
Used often of breasts, and by 1950s it had begun to be used more narrowly for bosomy and could be
paired with slim (adj.). Dutch buigzaam, German biegsam flexible, pliable hew closer to the original
sense of the English cognate.


supple (adj.)

c.1300, soft, tender, from Old French souple, sople pliant, flexible; humble, submissive (12c.),
from Gallo-Roman *supples, from Latin supplex submissive, humbly begging, beseeching, kneeling in
entreaty, literally bending, kneeling down, perhaps an altered form of *supplacos humbly pleading,
appeasing, from sub under + placare appease (see placate). Meaning pliant is from late 14c.;
figurative sense of artfully obsequious, capable of adapting oneself to the wishes and opinions of
others is from c.1600. Supple-chapped (c.1600) was used of a flatterer. Related: Suppleness.


wench (n.)

late 13c., wenche  girl, young woman, especially if unmarried, also female infant, shortened from
wenchel child, also in Middle English girl, maiden, from Old English wencel, probably related to
wancol unsteady, fickle, weak, from Proto-Germanic *wankila- (cognates: Old Norse vakr child, weak
person, Old High German wanchal fickle), from PIE *weng- to bend, curve (see wink (v.)).    The
wenche is nat dead, but slepith. [Wyclif, Matt. ix:24, c.1380]    In Middle English occasionally
with disparaging suggestion, and secondary sense of concubine, strumpet is attested by mid-14c. Also
serving-maid, bondwoman, young woman of a humble class (late 14c.). It retained this in the 19c.
U.S. South in reference to slave women of any age.


adder (n.)

Old English n&aelig;ddre a snake, serpent, viper, from Proto-Germanic *n&aelig;dro a snake
(cognates: Old Norse na&eth;ra, Middle Dutch nadre, Old High German natra, German Natter, Gothic
nadrs), from PIE root *netr- (cognates: Latin natrix water snake, probably by folk-association with
nare to swim; Old Irish nathir, Welsh neidr adder).    The modern form represents a faulty
separation 14c.-16c. into an adder, for which see also apron, auger, nickname, humble pie, umpire.
Nedder is still a northern English dialect form. Folklore connection with deafness is via Psalm
lviii:1-5. The adder is said to stop up its ears to avoid hearing the snake charmer called in to
drive it away. Adderbolt (late 15c.) was a former name for dragonfly.


low (adj.)

not high, late 13c., from lah (late 12c.), not rising much, being near the base or ground (of
objects or persons); lying on the ground or in a deep place (late 13c.), from Old Norse lagr low, or
a similar Scandinavian source (compare Swedish l&#229;g, Danish lav), from Proto-Germanic *lega-
lying flat, low (cognates: Old Frisian lech, Middle Dutch lage, Dutch laag low, dialectal German
l&auml;ge flat), from PIE *legh- to lie (see lie (v.2)).    Meaning humble in rank is from c.1200;
undignified is from 1550s; sense of dejected, dispirited is attested from 1737; meaning coarse,
vulgar is from 1759. In reference to sounds, not loud, also having a deep pitch, it is attested from
c.1300. Of prices, from c.1400. In geographical usage, low refers to the part of a country near the
sea-shore (c.1300, as in Low Countries Holland, Belgium, Luxemburg, 1540s). As an adverb c.1200,
from the adjective.


N

in nickname, newt, and British dialectal naunt, the -n- belongs to a preceding indefinite article an
or possessive pronoun mine.    Other examples of this from Middle English manuscripts include a
neilond (an island, early 13c.), a narawe (an arrow, c.1400), a nox (an ox, c.1400), a noke (an oak,
early 15c.), a nappyle (an apple, early 15c.), a negge (an egg, 15c.). In 16c., an idiot sometimes
became a nidiot, which, with still-common casual pronunciation, became nidget, which, alas, has not
survived.    The process also worked in surnames, from oblique cases of Old English at by, near, as
in Nock/Nokes/Noaks from atten Oke by the oak; Nye from atten ye near the lowland; and see
Nashville.    But it is more common for an English word to lose an -n- to a preceding a: apron,
auger, adder, umpire, humble pie, etc. The mathematical use of n for an indefinite number is first
recorded 1852, in to the nth power.


tall (adj.)

high in stature, 1520s, probably from Middle English tal handsome, good-looking; valiant; lively in
speech; large, big; humble, meek, from Old English get&aelig;l prompt, active, from Germanic
*(ge)-tala- (cognates: Old High German gi-zal quick, Gothic un-tals indocile). Main modern sense
being of more than average height (and slim in proportion to height) probably evolved out of earlier
meanings brave, valiant, seemly, proper (c.1400), attractive, handsome (late 14c.).    Sense
evolution is remarkable [OED], but adjectives applied to persons can wander far in meaning (such as
pretty, buxom, German klein small, little, which in Middle High German meant the same as its English
cognate clean (adj.)). Meaning having a (defined) height, whether lofty or not is from 1580s.
Meaning exaggerated (as in tall tale) is American English colloquial attested by 1846. Phrase tall,
dark, and handsome is recorded from 1906. Related: Tallness.


H

the pronunciation aitch was in Old French (ache name of the letter H), and is from a presumed Late
Latin *accha (compare Italian effe, elle, emme), with the central sound approximating the value of
the letter when it passed from Roman to Germanic, where it at first represented a strong, distinctly
aspirated -kh- sound close to that in Scottish loch. In earlier Latin the letter was called ha.
In Romanic languages, the sound became silent in Late Latin and was omitted in Old French and
Italian, but it was restored in Middle English spelling in words borrowed from French, and often
later in pronunciation, too. Thus Modern English has words ultimately from Latin with missing -h-
(as in able, from Latin habile); with a silent -h- (as in heir,  hour); with a formerly silent -h-
now often vocalized (as in humble, humor, herb); and even a few with an excrescent -h- fitted in
confusion to words that never had one (as in hostage, hermit).    Relics of the formerly unvoiced
-h- persist in pedantic insistence on an historical (object) and in obsolete mine host. The use in
digraphs (as in -sh-, -th-) goes back to the ancient Greek alphabet, which used it in -ph-, -th-,
-kh- until -H- took on the value of a long e and the digraphs acquired their own characters. The
letter passed into Roman use before this evolution, and thus retained there more of its original
Semitic value.


wife (n.)

Old English wif (neuter) woman, female, lady, also, but not especially, wife, from Proto-Germanic
*wiban (cognates: Old Saxon, Old Frisian wif, Old Norse vif, Danish and Swedish viv, Middle Dutch,
Dutch wijf, Old High German wib, German Weib), of uncertain origin, not found in Gothic.
Apparently felt as inadequate in its basic sense, leading to the more distinctive formation wifman
(source of woman). Dutch wijf now means, in slang, girl, babe, having softened somewhat from earlier
sense of bitch. German cognate Weib also tends to be slighting or derogatory and has been displaced
by Frau.    The more usual Indo-European word is represented in English by queen/quean. Words for
woman also double for wife in some languages. Some proposed PIE roots for wife include *weip- to
twist, turn, wrap, perhaps with sense of veiled person (see vibrate); and more recently  *ghwibh-, a
proposed root meaning shame, also pudenda, but the only examples of it would be the Germanic words
and Tocharian (a lost IE language of central Asia) kwipe, kip female pudenda.    The modern sense of
female spouse began as a specialized sense in Old English; the general sense of woman is preserved
in midwife, old wives' tale, etc. Middle English sense of mistress of a household survives in
housewife; and the later restricted sense of tradeswoman of humble rank in fishwife. By 1883 as
passive partner in a homosexual couple. Wife-swapping is attested from 1954.


