humility (n.)

early 14c., from Old French umelite humility, modesty, sweetness, from Latin humilitatem (nominative
humilitas) lowness, insignificance, in Church Latin meekness, from humilis humble (see humble). In
the Mercian hymns, Latin humilitatem is glossed by Old English ea&eth;modnisse.


omerta (n.)

1909, from dialectal form of Italian umilta humility, in reference to the code of submission of
individuals to the group interest, from Latin humilitas (see humility).


minor (n.)

early 14c., a Franciscan, from Latin Fratres Minores lesser brethren, name chosen by St. Francis,
who founded the order, for the sake of humility; see minor (adj.). From c.1400 as minor premise of a
syllogism. From 1610s as person under legal age (Latin used minores (plural) for the young). Musical
sense is from 1797. Meaning secondary subject of study, subject of study with fewer credits than a
major is from 1890; as a verb in this sense from 1934.


meek (adj.)

c.1200, gentle, quiet, unaggressive; benevolent, kind; courteous, humble, unassuming; of a woman,
modest, from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse mjukr soft, pliant, gentle, from Proto-Germanic
*meukaz (cognates: Gothic muka-modei humility, Dutch muik soft), of uncertain origin, perhaps from
PIE *meug- slippery, slimy. In the Bible, it translates Latin mansuetus from Vulgate (see
mansuetude). Sense of submissive is from mid-14c.


simplicity (n.)

late 14c., singleness of nature, unity, indivisibility; immutability, from Old French simplicite
(12c., Modern French simplicit&eacute;), from Latin simplicitatem (nominative simplicitas) state of
being simple, frankness, openness, artlessness, candor, directness, from simplex (genitive
simplicis) simple (see simplex). Sense of ignorance is from c.1400; that of simplicity of
expression, plainness of style is early 15c.    Middle English also had simplesse, from French,
attested in English from mid-14c. in sense humility, lack of pride, late 14c. as wholeness, unity;
c.1400 as ignorance.


patience (n.)

c.1200, quality of being willing to bear adversities, calm endurance of misfortune, suffering, etc.,
from Old French pacience patience; sufferance, permission (12c.) and directly from Latin patientia
patience, endurance, submission, also indulgence, leniency; humility; submissiveness; submission to
lust; literally quality of suffering. It is an abstract noun formed from the adjective patientem
(nominative patiens) bearing, supporting; suffering, enduring, permitting; tolerant, but also firm,
unyielding, hard, used of persons as well as of navigable rivers, present participle of pati to
suffer, endure, from PIE root *pe(i)- to damage, injure, hurt (see passion).<b>Patience</b>, n. A
minor form of despair, disguised as a virtue. [Ambrose Bierce, Devil's Dictionary, 1911]Meaning
constancy in effort is attested from 1510s. Meaning card game for one person is from 1816.


saint (n.)

early 12c., from Old French saint, seinte a saint; a holy relic, displacing or altering Old English
sanct, both from Latin sanctus holy, consecrated (used as a noun in Late Latin; also source of
Spanish santo, santa, Italian san, etc.), properly past participle of sancire consecrate (see
sacred). Adopted into most Germanic languages (Old Frisian sankt, Dutch sint, German Sanct).
Originally an adjective prefixed to the name of a canonized person; by c.1300 it came to be regarded
as a noun. Meaning person of extraordinary holiness is recorded from 1560s.  <b>Saint</b>, n. A dead
sinner revised and edited. The Duchess of Orleans relates that the irreverent old calumniator,
Marshal Villeroi, who in his youth had known St. Francis de Sales, said, on hearing him called
saint: 'I am delighted to hear that Monsieur de Sales is a saint. He was fond of saying indelicate
things, and used to cheat at cards. In other respects he was a perfect gentleman, though a fool.'
[Ambrose Bierce, Devil's Dictionary, 1911]   <hr />   Perhaps you have imagined that this humility
in the saints is a pious illusion at which God smiles. That is a most dangerous error. It is
theoretically dangerous, because it makes you identify a virtue (i.e., a perfection) with an
illusion (i.e., an imperfection), which must be nonsense. It is practically dangerous because it
encourages a man to mistake his first insights into his own corruption for the first beginnings of a
halo round his own silly head. No, depend upon it; when the saints say that they--even they--are
vile, they are recording truth with scientific accuracy. [C.S. Lewis, The Problem of Pain, 1940]
Saint Bernard, the breed of mastiff dogs (1839), so called because the monks of the hospice of the
pass of St. Bernard (between Italy and Switzerland) sent them to rescue snowbound travelers; St.
Elmo's Fire corposant (1560s) is from Italian fuoco di Sant'Elmo, named for the patron saint of
Mediterranean sailors, a corruption of the name of St. Erasmus, an Italian bishop martyred in 303.


