humorous (adj.)

early 15c., relating to the body humors, a native formation from humor, or else from Middle French
humoreux damp, from Old French humor (see humor (n.)). The meaning funny dates from 1705 in English.
Related: Humorously; humorousness.


critter (n.)

1815, dialectal or humorous pronunciation of creature.


half-assed (adj.)

ineffectual, 1932, perhaps a humorous mispronunciation of haphazard.


process (v.2)

to go in procession, 1814, A colloquial or humorous back-formation from procession [OED]. Accent on
second syllable.


dingleberry (n.)

by 1973, perhaps with suggestions of dangle and berry. Attested from late 19c. through 1930s as a
humorous-sounding surname in comedic writing.


enthuse (v.)

1827, American English, back-formation from enthusiasm. Originally often humorous or with affected
ignorance. Related: enthused; enthusing.


unmentionable (adj.)

1837, from un- (1) not + mentionable (adj.). Humorous use of unmentionables trousers is attested
from 1823; from 1910 as underwear, both on notion of articles of dress not to be mentioned in polite
circles.


thusly (adv.)

1865 (in an Artemus Ward dialect humor piece), from thus + -ly (2). A double adverb. Perhaps
originally a humorous or mocking over-correction of thus; it has gained some currency but earns
frowns for the user.


clerihew (n.)

humorous verse form, 1928, from English humorist Edmund Clerihew Bentley (1875-1956), who described
it in a book published 1906 under the name E. Clerihew.


ambisexual (adj.)

unisex (of clothing), also bisexual, 1912 in the jargon of psychology, from ambi- + sexual. As a
humorous coinage based on ambidextrous, ambisextrous is recorded from 1929.


bumptious (adj.)

assertive, 1803, probably a humorous coinage from bump on the pattern of fractious, etc. Related:
Bumptiously; bumptiousness.


omnium gatherum

1520s, miscellaneous collection, humorous coinage from Latin omnium of all (genitive plural of
omnis; see omni-) + Latinized form of English gather.


Johnny

pet form of masc. proper name John (see -y (3)). Used as a contemptuous or humorous designation for
some class or group of men from 1670s (it was the typical name in the North and the Northern armies
for a Confederate soldier during the American Civil War). In the Mediterranean, it was a typical
name for an Englishman by c.1800; in the Crimean War, it became the typical name among the English
for a Turk, later extended to an Arab (who by World War II were using it in turn as the typical name
for a British man). Johnny-come-lately first attested 1839.


R

In a circle, meaning registered (trademark), first incorporated in U.S. statues 1946. R&R; rest and
relaxation, first recorded 1953, American English; R&B; rhythm and blues (type of popular music)
first attested 1949, American English.    If all our r's that are written are pronounced, the sound
is more common than any other in English utterance (over seven per cent.); the instances of
occurrence before a vowel, and so of universal pronunciation, are only half as frequent. There are
localities where the normal vibration of the tip of the tongue is replaced by one of the uvula,
making a guttural trill, which is still more entitled to the name of dog's letter than is the
ordinary r; such are considerable parts of France and Germany; the sound appears to occur only
sporadically in English pronunciation. [Century Dictionary]   <hr />   The moment we encounter the
added r's of purp or dorg in our reading we know that we have to do with humor, and so with school-
marm. The added consonants are supposed to be spoken, if the words are uttered, but, as a matter of
fact, they are less often uttered than seen. The words are, indeed, largely visual forms; the humor
is chiefly for the eye. [Louise Pound, The Humorous 'R,' American Mercury, October 1924]    She goes
on to note that in British humorous writing, -ar popularly indicates the sound of the vowel in
father and formations like larf (for laugh) are to be read with the broad vowel but no uttered r.
She also quotes Henry James on the characteristic prominence of the medial -r- sound (which tends to
be dropped in England and New England) in the speech of the U.S. Midwest, under some strange impulse
received toward consonantal recovery of balance, making it present even in words from which it is
absent, bringing it in everywhere as with the small vulgar effect of a sort of morose grinding of
the back teeth.


lush (n.)

drunkard, 1890, from earlier (1790) slang meaning liquor (especially in phrase lush ken alehouse);
perhaps a humorous use of lush (adj.) or from Romany or Shelta (tinkers' jargon).    LUSHEY. Drunk.
The rolling kiddeys  had a spree, and got bloody lushey; the dashing lads went on a party of
pleasure, and got very drunk. [Dictionary of Buckish Slang, University Wit, and Pickpocket
Eloquence, London, 1811]


bug (v.1)

to bulge, protrude, 1872, originally of eyes, perhaps from a humorous or dialect mispronunciation of
bulge (v.). Related: Bugged; bugging. As an adjective, bug-eyed recorded from 1872; so commonly used
of space creatures in mid-20c. science fiction that the initialism (acronym) BEM for bug-eyed
monster was current by 1953.


bathetic (adj.)

1834, from bathos on the model of pathetic, which, however, does not come directly from pathos (see
pathetic), so the formation is either erroneous or humorous. Bathotic (1863, perhaps on model of
chaotic) is not much better.


philistine (n.)

person deficient in liberal culture, 1827, originally in Carlyle, popularized by him and Matthew
Arnold, from German Philister enemy of God's word, literally Philistine, inhabitants of a Biblical
land, neighbors (and enemies) of Israel (see Philistine). Popularized in German student slang
(supposedly first in Jena, late 17c.) as a contemptuous term for townies, and hence, by extension,
any uncultured person. Philistine had been used in a humorous figurative sense of the enemy in
English from c.1600.


funny (adj.)

humorous, 1756, from fun + -y (2). Meaning strange, odd is 1806, said to be originally U.S.
Southern. The two senses of the word led to the retort question funny ha-ha or funny peculiar, which
is attested from 1916. Related: Funnier; funniest. Funny farm mental hospital is slang from 1962.
Funny bone elbow end of the humerus is 1826; funnies newspaper comic strips is from 1852.


pun (n.)

1660s (first attested in Dryden), of uncertain origin, perhaps from pundigron, which is perhaps a
humorous alteration of Italian puntiglio equivocation, trivial objection, diminutive of Latin
punctum point. This is pure speculation. The verb also is attested from 1660s. Related: Punned;
punning.   Pun was prob. one of the clipped words, such as cit, mob, nob, snob, which came into
fashionable slang at or after the Restoration. [OED]


deadbeat (n.)

worthless sponging idler, 1863, American English slang, perhaps originally Civil War slang, from
dead (adj.) + beat. Earlier used colloquially as an adjectival expression to mean completely beaten
(1821), and perhaps the base notion is of worn out, good for nothing. It is noted in a British
source from 1861 as a term for a pensioner.    In England dead beat means worn out, used up. ... But
here, dead beat is used, as a substantive, to mean a scoundrel, a shiftless, swindling vagabond. We
hear it said that such a man is a beat or a dead beat. The phrase thus used is not even good slang.
It is neither humorous nor descriptive. There is not in it even a perversion of the sense of the
words of which it is composed. Its origin is quite beyond conjecture. [Americanisms, in The Galaxy,
January 1878]    It also was used of a kind of regulating mechanism in pendulum clocks.


rococo (adj.)

1836, old-fashioned, from French rococo (19c.), apparently a humorous alteration of rocaille
shellwork, pebble-work from Middle French roche rock, from Vulgar Latin *rocca stone. Specifically
of furniture or architecture of the time of Louis Quatorze and Louis Quinze, from 1841. If this is
correct, the reference is to the excessive use of shell designs in this lavish style. For
differentiation, see baroque. The general sense of tastelessly florid or ornate is from 1844.
Much of the painting, engraving, porcelain-work, etc., of the time has ... a real decorative charm,
though not of a very high order in art. Hence rococo is used attributively in contempt to note
anything feebly pretentious and tasteless in art or literature. [Century Dictionary, 1902]


tete (n.)

as a type of women's tall dressed hair or wig, 1756, from French t&ecirc;te head, Old French teste,
from Latin testa, literally piece of earthenware, tile, potsherd; earthen pot, pitcher, jug; shell
of shellfish, related to  Latin testudo tortoise and texere to weave (compare Lithuanian ti&#353;tas
vessel made of willow twigs; see texture (n.)).    The head sense arose in Vulgar Latin, perhaps as
a humorous use of the jug, pot meaning, or via Late Latin use of testa as skull, from testa
(capitis) shell (of the head). Compare German Kopf head from the root of English cup (n.).


tongue-in-cheek (adv.)

1856, from phrase to speak with one's tongue in one's cheek to speak insincerely (1748), suggestive
of sly irony or humorous insincerity, perhaps a stage trick to convey irony to the audience.    Hem!
Pray, Sir, said he to the Bard, after thrusting his Tongue into a Corner of his Cheek, and rolling
his Eyes at Miss Willis, (Tricks which he had caught by endeavouring to take off a celebrated
Comedian) were these fine Tragedies of yours ever acted? [anonymous, Emily, or the History of a
Natural Daughter, 1761]   <hr />   This arietta, however, she no sooner began to perform, than he
and the justice fell asleep ; but the moment she ceased playing, the knight waked snorting, and
exclaimed,--'O cara! what d'ye think, gentlemen? Will you talk any more of your Pargolesi and your
Corelli ?'--At the same time, he thrust his tongue in one cheek, and leered with one eye at the
doctor and me, who sat on his left hand--He concluded the pantomime with a loud laugh, which he
could command at all times extempore. [Smollett, The Expedition of Humphrey Clinker, 1771]


bull (n.1)

bovine male animal, from Old English bula a bull, a steer, or Old Norse boli bull, both from Proto-
Germanic *bullon- (cognates: Middle Dutch bulle, Dutch bul, German Bulle), perhaps from a Germanic
verbal stem meaning to roar, which survives in some German dialects and perhaps in the first element
of boulder (q.v.). The other possibility [Watkins] is that the Germanic root is from PIE *bhln-,
from root *bhel- (2) to blow, inflate, swell (see bole).    An uncastrated male, reared for
breeding, as opposed to a bullock or steer. Extended after 1610s to males of other large animals
(elephant, alligator, whale, etc.). Stock market sense is from 1714 (see bear (n.)). Meaning
policeman attested by 1859. Figurative phrase to take the bull by the horns first recorded 1711. To
be a bull in a china shop, figurative of careless and inappropriate use of force, attested from 1812
and was the title of a popular humorous song in 1820s England. Bull-baiting attested from 1570s.


shit (v.)

Old English scitan, from Proto-Germanic *skit- (cognates: North Frisian skitj, Dutch schijten,
German scheissen), from PIE *skei- to cut, split, divide, separate (see shed (v.)). The notion is of
separation from the body (compare Latin excrementum, from excernere to separate, Old English scearn
dung, muck, from scieran to cut, shear; see sharn). It is thus a cousin to science and conscience.
<b>Shit is not an acronym</b>. The notion that it is a recent word might be partly because it was
taboo from c.1600 and rarely appeared in print (neither Shakespeare nor the KJV has it), and even in
vulgar publications of the late 18c. it is disguised by dashes. It drew the wrath of censors as late
as 1922 (Ulysses and The Enormous Room), scandalized magazine subscribers in 1957 (a Hemingway story
in Atlantic Monthly) and was omitted from some dictionaries as recently as 1970 (Webster's New
World).    Extensive slang usage; meaning to lie, to tease is from 1934; that of to disrespect is
from 1903. Shite, now a jocular or slightly euphemistic and chiefly British variant of the noun,
formerly a dialectal variant, reflects the vowel in the Old English verb (compare German scheissen);
the modern verb has been influenced by the noun. Shat is a humorous past tense form, not
etymological, first recorded 18c. To shit bricks be very frightened attested by 1961. The connection
between fear and involuntary defecation has generated expressions since 14c., and probably also is
behind scared shitless (1936).


-or

word-forming element making nouns of quality, state, or condition, from Middle English -our, from
Old French -our (Modern French -eur), from Latin -orem (nominative -or), a suffix added to pp.
verbal stems. Also in some cases from Latin -atorem (nominative -ator).    In U.S., via Noah
Webster, -or is nearly universal (but not in glamour, curious, generous), while in Britain -our is
used in most cases (but with many exceptions: author, error, senator, ancestor, horror etc.). The
-our form predominated after c.1300, but Mencken reports that the first three folios of
Shakespeare's plays used both spellings indiscriminately and with equal frequency; only in the
Fourth Folio of 1685 does -our become consistent.    A partial revival of -or on the Latin model
took place from 16c. (governour began to lose its -u- 16c. and it was gone by 19c.), and also among
phonetic spellers in both England and America (John Wesley wrote that -or was a fashionable
impropriety in England in 1791).    Webster criticized the habit of deleting -u- in -our words in
his first speller (A Grammatical Institute of the English Language, commonly called the Blue-Black
Speller) in 1783. His own deletion of the -u- began with the revision of 1804, and was enshrined in
the influential Comprehensive Dictionary of the English Language (1806), which also established in
the U.S. -ic for British -ick and -er for -re, along with many other attempts at reformed spelling
which never caught on (such as masheen for machine). His attempt to justify them on the grounds of
etymology and the custom of great writers does not hold up.    Fowler notes the British drop the -u-
when forming adjectives ending in -orous (humorous) and derivatives in -ation and -ize, in which
cases the Latin origin is respected (such as vaporize). When the Americans began to consistently
spell it one way, however, the British reflexively hardened their insistence on the other. The
American abolition of -our in such words as honour and favour has probably retarded rather than
quickened English progress in the same direction. [Fowler]


