hurl (v.)

early 13c., hurlen, to run against (each other), come into collision, later throw forcibly (c.1300);
rush violently (late 14c.); perhaps related to Low German hurreln to throw, to dash, and East
Frisian hurreln to roar, to bluster. OED suggests all are from an imitative Germanic base *hurr
expressing rapid motion; see also hurry. The noun is attested from late 14c., originally rushing
water. For difference between hurl and hurtle (which apparently were confused since early Middle
English) see hurtle.


hurling (n.)

verbal noun of hurl (q.v.); attested 1520s as a form of hockey played in Ireland; c.1600 as the name
of a game like hand-ball that once was popular in Cornwall.


hurly-burly

also hurlyburly, 1530s, apparently an alteration of phrase hurling and burling, reduplication of
14c. hurling commotion, tumult, verbal noun of hurl (q.v.). Hurling time was the name applied by
chroniclers to the period of tumult and commotion around Wat Tyler's rebellion.


whir (v.)

c.1400, Scottish, fling, hurl, probably from Old Norse hvirfla, frequentative of hverfa to turn (see
wharf). Compare Danish hvirvle, Dutch wervelen, German wirbeln to whirl. Related: Whirred; whirring.


catapult (n.)

1570s, from Middle French catapulte and directly from Latin catapulta war machine for throwing, from
Greek katapeltes, from kata against (see cata-) + base of pallein to toss, hurl (see pulse (n.1)).
As an airplane-launching device on an aircraft-carrier by 1927.


circumjacent (adj.)

late 15c., from Latin circumiacens, present participle of circumiacere to border upon, to lie round
about, enjoin, from circum- around (see circum-) + iacere to throw, cast, hurl (see jet (v.)).
Related: Circumjacence; circumjacency.


hurtle (v.)

early 14c., hurteln, to crash together; to crash down, knock down, probably frequentative of hurten
(see hurt (v.)) in its original sense. Intransitive meaning to rush, dash, charge is late 14c. The
essential notion in hurtle is that of forcible collision, in hurl that of forcible projection.
Related: Hurtled; hurtling.


precipitate (v.)

to hurl or fling down, 1520s, a back formation from precipitation or else from Latin praecipitatus,
past participle of praecipitare to throw or dive headlong, from praeceps steep, headlong, headfirst
(see precipice). Meaning to cause to happen, hurry the beginning of is recorded from 1620s. Chemical
sense is from 1620s; meteorological sense first attested 1863. Related: Precipitated; precipitating.


ejaculate (v.)

1570s, emit semen, from Latin eiaculatus, past participle of eiaculari to throw out, shoot out, from
ex- out (see ex-) + iaculari to throw, hurl, cast, dart, from iaculum javelin, dart, from iacere to
throw (see jet (v.)). Only other surviving sense is exclaim suddenly (1660s). Related: Ejaculated;
ejaculating.


hurry (v.)

1590, first recorded in Shakespeare, who used it often; perhaps a variant of harry (v.), or perhaps
a West Midlands sense of Middle English hurren to vibrate rapidly, buzz, from Proto-Germanic *hurza
to move with haste (cognates: Middle High German hurren to whir, move fast, Old Swedish hurra to
whirl round), which also perhaps is the root of hurl. Related: hurried; hurrying.


cast (v.)

c.1200, to throw, fling, hurl, from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse kasta to throw (cognate
with Swedish kasta, Danish kaste, North Frisian kastin), of uncertain origin. Meaning to form in a
mold is late 15c. In the sense of warp, turn it replaced Old English weorpan (see warp (v.)), and
itself largely has been superseded now by throw, though cast still is used of fishing lines and
glances. Meaning calculate, find by reckoning; chart (a course) is from c.1300.


launch (v.)

c.1300, to rush, plunge, leap, start forth; to be set into sudden motion, from Old North French
lancher (Old French lancier) to fling, hurl, throw, cast, from Late Latin lanceare wield a lance,
from Latin lancea light spear (see lance (n.)). Sense of set (a boat) afloat first recorded c.1400,
from notion of throwing it out on the water; generalized by 1600 to any sort of beginning. The noun
meaning a leap or a bound is from mid-15c., from the verb. Meaning the liftoff of a missile,
spacecraft, etc. is from 1935. Launch pad attested from 1960.


fulminate (v.)

early 15c., publish a 'thundering' denunciation, from Latin fulminatus, past participle of fulminare
hurl lightning, lighten, from fulmen (genitive fulminis) lightning flash, related to fulgere to
shine, flash, from PIE *bhleg- to shine, flash, from root *bhel- (1) to shine, flash, burn (see
bleach (v.)). Metaphoric sense (the original sense in English) is via its use in reference to a
formal ecclesiastical censure. Related: Fulminated; fulminating.


mud (n.)

mid-14c., cognate with and probably from Middle Low German mudde, Middle Dutch modde thick mud, from
Proto-Germanic *mud- from PIE *(s)meu-/*mu- [Buck], found in many words denoting wet or dirty
(cognates: Greek mydos damp, moisture, Old Irish muad cloud, Polish mu&#322; slime, Sanskrit mutra-
urine, Avestan muthra- excrement, filth); related to German Schmutz dirt, which also is used for mud
in roads, etc., to avoid dreck, which originally meant excrement. Welsh mwd is from English.
Replaced native fen.    Meaning lowest or worst of anything is from 1580s. As a word for coffee, it
is hobo slang from 1925; as a word for opium from 1922. To throw or hurl mud make disgraceful
accusations is from 1762. To say (one's) name is mud and mean (one) is discredited is first recorded
1823, from mud in obsolete sense of a stupid twaddling fellow (1708). Mud in your eye as a toast
recorded from 1912, American English. Mud puppy salamander is from 1889, American English; mud bath
is from 1798; mud pie is from 1788.


start (v.)

Old English *steortian, *stiertan, Kentish variants of styrtan to leap up (related to starian to
stare), from Proto-Germanic *stert- (cognates: Old Frisian stirta to fall, tumble, Middle Dutch
sterten, Dutch storten to rush, fall, Old High German sturzen, German st&uuml;rzen to hurl, throw,
plunge), of uncertain origin. According to Watkins, the notion is move briskly, move swiftly, and it
is from PIE root *ster- (1) stiff.    From move or spring suddenly, sense evolved by late 14c. to
awaken suddenly, flinch or recoil in alarm, and by 1660s to cause to begin acting or operating.
Meaning begin to move, leave, depart (without implication of suddenness) is from 1821. The
connection probably is from sporting senses (to force an animal from its lair, late 14c.).
Transitive sense of set in motion or action is from 1670s; specifically as to set (machinery) in
action from 1841.    Related: Started; starting. To start something cause trouble is 1915, American
English colloquial. To start over begin again is from 1912. Starting-line in running is from 1855;
starting-block in running first recorded 1937.


shoot (v.)

Old English sceotan to hurl missiles, cast; strike, hit, push; run, rush; send forth swiftly; wound
with missiles (class II strong verb; past tense sceat, past participle scoten), from Proto-Germanic
*skeutanan (cognates: Old Saxon skiotan, Old Norse skjota to shoot with (a weapon); shoot, launch,
push, shove quickly, Old Frisian skiata, Middle Dutch skieten, Dutch schieten, Old High German
skiozan, German schie&szlig;en), from PIE root *skeud- to shoot, to chase, to throw, to project
(cognates: Sanskrit skundate hastens, makes haste, Old Church Slavonic iskydati to throw out,
Lithuanian skudrus quick, nimble).    In reference to pool playing, from 1926. Meaning to strive
(for) is from 1967, American English. Sense of descend (a river) quickly is from 1610s. Meaning to
inject by means of a hypodermic needle is attested from 1914. Meaning photograph (especially a
movie) is from 1890. As an interjection, an arbitrary euphemistic alteration of shit, it is recorded
from 1934. Shoot the breeze chat first recorded 1941. Shoot-'em-up (adj.) in reference to violent
entertainment (Western movies, etc.) is from 1942. Shoot to kill first attested 1867. Shoot the cat
to vomit is from 1785. To shoot the moon originally meant depart by night with ones goods to escape
back rent (1829).    O, 'tis cash makes such crowds to the gin shops roam, And 'tis cash often
causes a rumpus at home ;  'Tis when short of cash people oft shoot the moon ;  And 'tis cash always
keeps our pipes in tune.  Cash! cash! &amp;c.;  [The Melodist and Mirthful Olio, An Elegant
Collection of the Most Popular Songs, vol. IV, London, 1829]


