husband (v.)

manage thriftily, early 15c., from husband (n.) in an obsolete sense of steward (mid-15c.). Related:
Husbanded; husbanding.


husbandman

c.1300, head of a family; early 14c., tiller of the soil, from husband (n.) + man (n.).


husbandry

c.1300, management of a household; late 14c. as farm management, from husband (n.) in a now-obsolete
sense of peasant farmer (early 13c.) + -ery.


husband (n.)

Old English husbonda male head of a household, probably from Old Norse husbondi master of the house,
from hus house (see house (n.)) + bondi householder, dweller, freeholder, peasant, from buandi,
present participle of bua to dwell (see bower). Beginning late 13c., replaced Old English wer as
married man, companion of wif, a sad loss for English poetry. Slang shortening hubby first attested
1680s.


polyandrous (adj.)

1764, in botany, having numerous stamens, from poly- + stem of aner man, husband (see anthropo-).
From 1854 of humans, having more than one husband. Greek polyandros meant numerous (of persons),
populous (of places); polyanor meant of many husbands.


potent (adj.)

early 15c., from Latin potentem (nominative potens) powerful, present participle of *potere be
powerful, from potis powerful, able, capable; possible; of persons, better, preferable; chief,
principal; strongest, foremost, from PIE root *poti- powerful, lord (cognates: Sanskrit patih
master, husband, Greek posis, Lithuanian patis husband). Meaning having sexual power is first
recorded 1899.


spouse (n.)

c.1200, a married person, either one of a married pair, but especially a married woman in relation
to her husband, also Christ or God as the spiritual husband of the soul, the church, etc., also
marriage, the wedded state, from Old French spous (fem. spouse) marriage partner, variant of
espous/espouse (Modern French &#233;pous/&#233;pouse), from Latin sponsus bridegroom (fem. sponsa
bride), literally betrothed, from masc. and fem. past participle of spondere to bind oneself,
promise solemnly, from PIE *spend- to make an offering, perform a rite (see spondee). Spouse-breach
(early 13c.) was an old name for adultery.


groom (n.2)

husband-to-be at a wedding, c.1600, short for bridegroom, in which the second element is Old English
guma man.


Carl

masc. proper name, from Middle High German Karl man, husband (see carl).


Alcestis

wife of Admetus, she offered her life for her husband and was rescued from the Underworld by
Herakles, from Greek Alkestis, literally valiant, courageous, from alke protection, help, strength,
power.


hubby (n.)

colloquial shortening of husband, attested from 1680s, with -y (3).


monogamous (adj.)

having but one wife or husband at a time, 1770, from Medieval Latin monogamus, from Greek monogamos
marrying only once (see monogamy).


widowhood (n.)

c.1200, from widow (n.) + -hood. Modifying or replacing Old English wuduwanhad state of a woman who
has no husband.


grass widow (n.)

1520s, originally discarded mistress (compare German Strohwitwe, literally straw-widow), probably in
reference to casual bedding. Sense of married woman whose husband is absent is from 1846.[G]rasse
wydowes ... be yet as seuerall as a barbours chayre and neuer take but one at onys. [More, 1528]


Orphic (adj.)

1670s, from Greek orphikos pertaining to Orpheus, master musician of Thrace, son of Eagrus and
Calliope, husband of Eurydice, whose name (of unknown origin) was associated with mystic doctrines.
Related: Orphism.


character (n.)

mid-14c., carecter, symbol marked or branded on the body; mid-15c., symbol or drawing used in
sorcery, from Old French caratere feature, character (13c., Modern French caract&egrave;re), from
Latin character, from Greek kharakter engraved mark, also symbol or imprint on the soul, also
instrument for marking, from kharassein to engrave, from kharax pointed stake, from PIE root *gher-
(4) to scrape, scratch. Meaning extended in ancient times by metaphor to a defining quality.You
remember Eponina, who kept her husband alive in an underground cavern so devotedly and heroically?
The force of character she showed in keeping up his spirits would have been used to hide a lover
from her husband if they had been living quietly in Rome. Strong characters need strong nourishment.
[Stendhal de l'Amour, 1822]Meaning sum of qualities that define a person is from 1640s. Sense of
person in a play or novel is first attested 1660s, in reference to the defining qualities he or she
is given by the author. Meaning a person in the abstract is from 1749; especially eccentric person
(1773). Colloquial sense of chap, fellow is from 1931. The Latin ch- spelling was restored from
1500s. Character actor attested from 1861; character assassination from 1888; character-building
(n.) from 1886.


Oberon

king of the faeries and husband of Titania in medieval lore, from French Ob&eacute;ron, from Old
French Auberon, perhaps from a Germanic source related to elf.


levirate (n.)

custom by which the male next-of-kin of a dead man was bound to marry his widow, 1725, from Latin
levir brother-in-law (from PIE *daiwer- husband's brother) + -ate (2).


ex (n.)

1827, originally short for ex-Catholic; ultimately from Latin ex (see ex-). Since 1929 as
abbreviation for ex-wife, ex-husband, etc. Also used in some commercial senses for from, out of.


yellow ribbon

The American folk custom of wearing or displaying a yellow ribbon to signify solidarity with loved
ones or fellow citizens at war originated during the U.S. embassy hostage crisis in Iran in 1979. It
does not have a connection to the American Civil War, beyond the use of the old British folk song
Round Her Neck She Wore A Yellow Ribbon in the John Wayne movie of the same name, with a Civil War
setting, released in 1949. The story of a ribbon tied to a tree as a signal to a convict returning
home that his loved ones have forgiven him is attested from 1959, but the ribbon in that case was
white.    The ribbon color seems to have changed to yellow first in a version retold by newspaper
columnist Pete Hamill in 1971. The story was dramatized in June 1972 on ABC-TV (James Earl Jones
played the ex-con). Later that year, Irwin Levine and L. Russell Brown copyrighted the song Tie a
Yellow Ribbon Round the Ole Oak Tree, which became a pop hit in early 1973 and sparked a lawsuit by
Hamill, later dropped.    In 1975, the wife of a Watergate conspirator put out yellow ribbons when
her husband was released from jail, and news coverage of that was noted and remembered by Penne
Laingen, whose husband was U.S. ambassador to Iran in 1979 and one of the Iran hostages taken in the
embassy on Nov. 4. Her yellow ribbon in his honor was written up in the Dec. 10, 1979, Washington
Post. When the hostage families organized as the Family Liaison Action Group (FLAG), they took the
yellow ribbon as their symbol. The ribbons revived in the 1991 Gulf War and again during the 2000s
wars in Afghanistan and Iraq.


Philemon

masc. proper name, in Greek mythology a pious man, husband of Baucis; from Greek philemon, literally
loving, affectionate, from philein to love (see philo-).


bondman (n.)

mid-13c., husband, husbandman, from Middle English bond (see bondage) + man (n.). Later, man in
bondage, slave (mid-14c.).


Uriah

masc. proper name, in Old Testament, the Hittite husband of Bathsheba; of non-Hebrew (possibly
Horite) origin, but explained by folk etymology as Hebrew Uriyyah, literally flame of the Lord.
Uriah Heep, character from Dickens' David Copperfield (1850) sometimes is invoked as the type of a
hypocritically humble person.


consortium (n.)

1829, from Latin consortium fellowship, participation, society, from consors (genitive consortis;
see consort (n.)). Earlier, in British law, a term for right of husband's access to his wife.


Menelaeus

king of Sparta, husband of Helen, brother of Agamemnon, Latinized form of Greek Menelaos, literally
restraining the people, from menein to stay, abide, remain + laos people (see lay (adj.)).


polonium (n.)

radioactive element, 1898, discovered by Marie Curie (nee Sk&#322;odowska), 1867-1934, and her
husband, and named for her native country, Poland (Modern Latin Polonia). With element-name ending
-ium.


Charles

masc. proper name, from French Charles, from Medieval Latin Carolus, from Middle High German Karl,
literally man, husband (see carl).


marital (adj.)

c.1600, from French maritale and directly from Latin maritalis of or belonging to married people,
from maritus married man, husband (see marry).


radium (n.)

radioactive metallic element, 1899, from French radium, named 1898 after identification by Marie
Curie and her husband, formed in Modern Latin from Latin radius ray (see radius). So called for its
power of emitting energy in the form of rays.


divorce (n.)

late 14c., from Old French divorce (14c.), from Latin divortium separation, dissolution of marriage,
from divertere to separate, leave one's husband, turn aside (see divert). Not distinguished in
English from legal separation until mid-19c.


bedfellow (n.)

close friend, roommate, mid-15c., from bed (n.) + fellow (n.). Also (late 15c) concubine. Earlier in
the close companion sense was bed-fere (early 14c.). Bedsister husband's concubine is recorded in
Middle English (c.1300).


droit du seigneur (n.)

1784, alleged medieval custom whereby the feudal lord had the right to have sex with the bride of
his vassal on their wedding night before she went to her husband, from French, literally the lord's
right. There is little evidence that it actually existed; it seems to have been invented in
imagination 16c. or 17c. The Latin form was jus primae noctis, law of the first night. For French
droit, see right (adj.2).


nubile (adj.)

1640s, marriageable (said of a woman), from French nubile (16c.) or directly from Latin nubilis
marriageable, from stem of nubere take as husband (see nuptial). In sense of young and sexually
attractive from 1973. Related: Nubility.


sole (adj.)

single, alone, having no husband or wife; one and only, singular, unique, late 14c., from Old French
soul only, alone, just, from Latin solus alone, only, single, sole; forsaken; extraordinary, of
unknown origin, perhaps related to se oneself, from PIE reflexive root *swo- (see so).


polyandria (n.)

1751 in botany; 1809 of human relationships, from poly- many andr-, stem of aner man, husband (see
anthropo-) + -ia condition of. Late Greek polyandria meant populousness.


alimony (n.)

1650s, nourishment, also allowance to a wife from a husband's estate, or in certain cases of
separation, from Latin alimonia food, support, nourishment, sustenance, from alere to nourish (see
old) + -monia suffix signifying action, state, condition (cognate with Greek -men). Derived form
palimony coined 1979.


Andromache

wife of Hector, Latin Andromache, from Greek Andromakhe, perhaps literally whose husband excells in
fighting, fem. of andromakhos fighting with men; see anthropo- + -machy.


suttee (n.)

self-cremation of a Hindu widow on her husband's funeral pyre, 1786, from Hindi, from Sanskrit sati
virtuous woman, faithful wife, used also of the burning, fem. of sat good, wise, virtuous, true,
literally existing, present participle of asmi I am (cognate with Latin esse; see essence).
Properly, the word for the woman who does so. The custom was abolished in British India in 1829.


baron (n.)

c.1200, from Old French baron (nominative ber) baron, nobleman, military leader, warrior, virtuous
man, lord, husband, probably from or related to Late Latin baro man, of uncertain origin, perhaps
from Frankish *baro freeman, man; merged in England with cognate Old English beorn nobleman.


jerry-built (adj.)

1869, in which jerry has a sense of bad, defective, probably a pejorative use of the male nickname
Jerry (a popular form of Jeremy; compare Jerry-sneak, mid-19c., sneaking fellow, a hen-pecked
husband [OED]). Or from or influenced by nautical slang jury temporary, which came to be used of all
sorts of makeshift and inferior objects (see jury (adj.)).


Andromeda

constellation, 1667 (earlier Andromece, mid-15c.); in classical mythology the daughter of Cepheus
and Cassiopeia, from Greek, literally mindful of her husband, from andros, genitive of aner man (see
anthropo-) + medesthai to be mindful of, think on, related to medea (neuter plural) counsels, plans,
devices, cunning (and source of the name Medea).


rum (adj.)

excellent, fine, good, valuable, 1560s, from rome fine (1560s), said to be from Romany rom male,
husband (see Romany). E.g. rum kicks Breeches of gold or silver brocade, or richly laced with gold
or silver [Grose, Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, 1785].    A very common 16c. cant word, by 1774
it also had come to mean odd, strange, bad, spurious, perhaps because it had been so often used
approvingly by rogues in reference to one another. This was the main sense after c.1800.


make (n.)

match, mate, companion (now archaic or dialectal), from Old English gemaca mate, equal; one of a
pair, comrade; consort, husband, wife, from Proto-Germanic *gamakon-, related to Old English
gem&aelig;cc well-matched, suitable, macian to make (see make (v.)). Meaning manner in which
something is made, design, construction is from c.1300. Phrase on the make intent on profit or
advancement is from 1869.


broad (n.)

woman, slang, 1911, perhaps suggestive of broad (adj.) hips, but it also might trace to American
English abroadwife, word for a woman (often a slave) away from her husband. Earliest use of the
slang word suggests immorality or coarse, low-class women. Because of this negative association, and
the rise of women's athletics, the track and field broad jump was changed to the long jump c.1967.


Romany (n.)

a gypsy; the Gypsy language, 1812, romani, fem. of romano (adj.) Gypsy, from rom, the Romany word
for man, husband, male, Gypsy (plural roma), from Sanskrit domba-s (with initial cerebral d, which
confuses with r [Klein]) male member of a low caste of musicians.


housewife (n.)

early 13c., husewif, woman, usually married, in charge of a family or household (compare husebonde;
see husband), from huse house (see house (n.)) + wif woman (see wife). Also see hussy. Related:
Housewifely.


cohabitation (n.)

mid-15c., action or state of living together (especially as husband and wife), from Middle French
cohabitation (Old French cohabitacion cohabitation, sexual intercourse), from Late Latin
cohabitationem (nominative cohabitatio), noun of action from past participle stem of cohabitare to
dwell together, from co- with, together (see co-) + habitare to live, dwell (see habitat).


nuptial (adj.)

late 15c., from Middle French nuptial, or directly from Latin nuptialis pertaining to marriage, from
nuptiae wedding, from nupta, fem. past participle of nubere to marry, wed, take as a husband,
related to Greek nymphe bride, from PIE *sneubh- to marry, wed (cognates: Old Church Slavonic
snubiti to love, woo, Czech snoubiti to seek in marriage, Slovak zasnubit to betroth). Related:
Nuptially.


consort (n.)

early 15c., partner, from Middle French consort colleague, partner, wife (14c., Old French
consorte), from Latin consortem (nominative consors) partner, comrade; wife, brother, sister, noun
use of adjective meaning having the same lot, of the same fortune, from com- with (see com-) + sors
a share, lot (see sort (n.)). Sense of husband or wife (partner in marriage) is 1630s in English.


symbiosis (n.)

1876, as a biological term, union for life of two different organisms based on mutually benefit,
from Greek symbiosis a living together, from symbioun live together, from symbios (one) living
together (with another), partner, companion, husband or wife, from assimilated form of syn- together
(see syn-) + bios life (see bio-). Given a wider (non-biological) sense by 1921. An earlier sense of
communal or social life is found in 1620s. A back-formed verb symbiose is recorded from 1960.


