hyperbole (n.)

early 15c., from Latin hyperbole, from Greek hyperbole exaggeration, extravagance, related to
hyperballein to throw over or beyond, from hyper- beyond + bole a throwing, a casting, the stroke of
a missile, bolt, beam, from bol-, nominative stem of ballein to throw (see ballistics). Rhetorical
sense is found in Aristotle and Isocrates.


hyperbola (n.)

1660s, from Latinized form of Greek hyperbole extravagance, literally a throwing beyond (see
hyperbole). Perhaps so called because the inclination of the plane to the base of the cone exceeds
that of the side of the cone.


hyperbolic (adj.)

1640s (iperbolical is from early 15c.), from Greek hyperbolikos extravagant, from hyperbole
extravagance, literally a throwing beyond (see hyperbole). Geometric sense is from 1670s. Related:
Hyperbolically.


literally (adv.)

1530s, in a literal sense, from literal + -ly (2). Erroneously used in reference to metaphors,
hyperbole, etc., even by writers like Dryden and Pope, to indicate what follows must be taken in the
strongest admissible sense (1680s), which is opposite to the word's real meaning and a long step
down the path to the modern misuse of it.    We have come to such a pass with this emphasizer that
where the truth would require us to insert with a strong expression 'not literally, of course, but
in a manner of speaking', we do not hesitate to insert the very word we ought to be at pains to
repudiate; ... such false coin makes honest traffic in words impossible. [Fowler, 1924]


hype (n.)

excessive or misleading publicity or advertising, 1967, American English (the verb is attested from
1937), probably in part a back-formation of hyperbole, but also from underworld slang sense swindle
by overcharging or short-changing (1926), a back-formation of hyper short-change con man (1914),
from prefix hyper- meaning over, to excess. Also possibly influenced by drug addicts' slang hype,
1913 shortening of hypodermic needle. Related: Hyped; hyping. In early 18c., hyp morbid depression
of the spirits was colloquial for hypochondria (usually as the hyp or the hyps).


