hypothetical (adj.)

1580s, from Greek hypothetikos pertaining to a hypothesis, from hypothesis (see hypothesis).
Related: Hypothetically; hypothetic.


telecommuting (n.)

by 1975, as a hypothetical workplace set-up; verbal noun from telecommute. Said to have been coined
by Jack Niles of USC.


Oort cloud (n.)

in reference to the hypothetical cloud of small objects beyond Pluto that become comets, proposed
1949 by Dutch astronomer Jan Hendrick Oort (1900-1992), and named for him by 1968.


big bang

hypothetical explosive beginning of the universe, developed from the work of Monsignor Georges Henri
Joseph &Eacute;douard Lema&icirc;tre and George Gamow, the name first attested 1950 (said to have
been used orally 1949) by British astronomer Fred Hoyle (1915-2001) in an attempt to explain the
idea in laymen's terms.


tachyon (n.)

1967, hypothetical faster-than-light particle, from tachy- swift + -on.


moot (adj.)

debatable; not worth considering from moot case, earlier simply moot (n.) discussion of a
hypothetical law case (1530s), in law student jargon. The reference is to students gathering to test
their skills in mock cases.


Antarctica

continent name attributed to Scottish cartographer John George Bartholomew (1860-1920), who used it
on a map published 1887. From antarctic (q.v.). Hypothetical southern continents had been imagined
since antiquity; first sighting of Antarctica by Europeans probably was 1820 (Lazarev and
Bellingshausen). Also compare Antipodes.


ape-man (n.)

hypothetical missing link, 1879, in a translation of Haeckel, from ape (n.) + man (n.). Man-ape is
attested from 1878. The name Martin Halfape appears in an English roll from 1227.


telecommute (v.)

by 1974 (as a hypothetical experience), from tele- + commute. Related: Telecommuted. Compare
telecommuting.


Venusian (n.)

(hypothetical) inhabitant of the second planet from the sun, 1866, from Venus + -ian. Middle English
had Venerian one under the influence of the planet Venus; a lover (late 14c.).


Yahweh

1869, hypothetical reconstruction of the tetragrammaton YHWH (see Jehovah), based on the assumption
that the tetragrammaton is the imperfective of Hebrew verb hawah, earlier form of hayah was, in the
sense of the one who is, the existing.


caloric (n.)

hypothetical fluid in a now-discarded model of heat exchange, 1792, from French calorique, coined in
this sense by Lavoisier, from Latin calorem heat (nominative calor; see calorie). The adjective is
recorded from 1865.


schema (n.)

plural schemata, 1796, in Kantian philosophy (a product of the imagination intermediary between an
image and a concept), from Greek skhema (see scheme (n.)). Meaning diagrammatic representation is
from 1890; general sense of hypothetical outline is by 1939.


pithecanthropus (n.)

genus of extinct primates, 1895, from Modern Latin, literally monkey-man, from Greek pithekos ape +
anthropos man (see anthropo-). Coined 1868 by Haeckel as a name for a hypothetical link between apes
and men (attested in English in this sense from 1876); applied by Dr. Eug&egrave;ne Dubois
(1858-1940), physician of the Dutch army in Java, to remains he found there in 1891.


neutron (n.)

electrically neuter particle of the atom, 1921, coined by U.S. chemist William D. Harkins
(1873-1951) from neutral (adj.) + -on. First record of neutron bomb is from 1960. Neutron star
attested from 1934, originally hypothetical; so called because it would be composed of neutrons.


snookums (n.)

trivial term of endearment, 1919, from Snooks, proper name used in Britain for a hypothetical person
(1860), compare Joe Blow in U.S. As an actual proper name, Snooks dates back to the Domesday Book
and may be from Old English *snoc a projecting point of land (perhaps here with sense of a big
nose).


Vulcan (n.)

god of fire and metal-work in Roman mythology, 1510s, from Latin Vulcanus, Volcanus, according to
Klein a word of Etruscan origin. Often with allusions to his lameness and the unfaithfulness of his
wife, Venus. As the name of a hypothetical planet between Mercury and the Sun, it is attested from
1860. French physician Edmond Modeste Lescarbault claimed to have discovered it crossing the Sun's
disk in 1859. The Roman feast of Vulcanalia was on Aug. 23.


wussy (n.)

1960s, probably an alteration of pussy (n.2). DAS suggests shortened from hypothetical pussy-wussy,
reduplicated form of pussy (n.1).


scenario (n.)

1868, sketch of the plot of a play, from Italian scenario, from Late Latin scenarius of stage
scenes, from Latin scena scene (see scene). Meaning imagined situation is first recorded 1960, in
reference to hypothetical nuclear wars.


snack (v.)

c.1300, to bite or snap (of a dog), probably from Middle Dutch or Flemish snacken to snatch, snap;
chatter, which Watkins traces to a hypothetical Germanic imitative root *snu- forming words having
to do with the nose (see snout). The meaning have a mere bite or morsel, eat a light meal is first
attested 1807. Related: Snacked; snacking.


quasi (adv.)

late 15c., Latin, in hypothetical comparisons, as if, just as if, as though; in real comparisons
just as, as; in approximation, somewhat like, nearly, not far from; from quam as relative pronomial
adverb of manner (see who) + si if, from PIE pronomial stem *swo- so (see so).


bird (n.3)

middle finger held up in a rude gesture, slang derived from 1860s expression give the big bird to
hiss someone like a goose, kept alive in vaudeville slang with sense of to greet someone with boos,
hisses, and catcalls (1922), transferred 1960s to the up yours hand gesture (the rigid finger
representing the hypothetical object to be inserted) on notion of defiance and contempt. Gesture
itself seems to be much older (the human anatomy section of a 12c. Latin bestiary in Cambridge
describes the middle finger as that by means of which the pursuit of dishonour is indicated).


bumper (n.)

1670s, glass filled to the brim; perhaps from notion of bumping as large, or from a related sense of
booming (see bump (v.)). Meaning anything unusually large is from 1759, slang. Agent-noun meaning
buffer of a car is from 1839, American English, originally in reference to railway cars; 1901 of
automobiles (in phrase bumper-to-bumper, in reference to a hypothetical situation; of actual traffic
jams by 1908).


chevron (n.)

late 14c., from Old French chevron rafter; chevron (13c.), the accent mark so called because it
looks like rafters of a shallow roof, from Vulgar Latin *caprione, from Latin caper goat (see cab);
the hypothetical connection between goats and rafters being the animal's angular hind legs. Compare
Latin capreolus props, stays, short pieces of timber for support, lit. wild goat, chamoix.


grub (v.)

c.1300, from hypothetical Old English *grubbian, from West Germanic *grubbjan (cognates: Middle
Dutch grobben, Old High German grubilon to dig, search, German gr&uuml;beln to meditate, ponder),
from Proto-Germanic *grub- to dig, base of Old English grafan (see grave (v.)).


hormone (n.)

1905, from Greek hormon that which sets in motion, present participle of horman impel, urge on, from
horme onset, impulse, from PIE *or-sma-, from root *er- to move, set in motion. Used by Hippocrates
to denote a vital principle; modern meaning coined by English physiologist Ernest Henry Starling
(1866-1927). Jung used horme (1915) in reference to hypothetical mental energy that drives
unconscious activities and instincts. Related: Hormones.


phlogiston (n.)

1730, hypothetical inflammatory principle, formerly believed to exist in all combustible matter,
from Modern Latin (1702), from Greek phlogiston (1610s in this sense), neuter of phlogistos burnt
up, inflammable, from phlogizein to set on fire, burn, from phlox (genitive phlogos) flame, blaze
(see bleach (v.)). Theory propounded by Stahl (1702), denied by Lavoisier (1775), defended by
Priestley but generally abandoned by 1800. Related: Phlogistic; phlogisticated.


Mercury

the Roman god Mercury, mid-12c., from Latin Mercurius Mercury, originally a god of tradesmen and
thieves, from merx merchandise (see market (n.)); or perhaps [Klein, Tucker] from Etruscan and
influenced by merx. Later he was associated with Greek Hermes. The planet closest to the sun so
called in classical Latin (late 14c. in English). A hypothetical inhabitant of the planet was a
Mercurean (1855) or a Mercurian (1868). For the metallic element, see mercury.


blog (n.)

1998, short for weblog (which is attested from 1994, though not in the sense online journal), from
(World Wide) Web + log. Joe Bloggs (c.1969) was British slang for any hypothetical person (compare
U.S. equivalent Joe Blow); earlier blog meant a servant boy in one of the college houses (c.1860,
see Partridge, who describes this use as a perversion of bloke), and, as a verb, to defeat in
schoolboy slang. The Blogger online publishing service was launched in 1999.


ur-

prefix meaning original, earliest, primitive, from German ur- out of, original, from Proto-Germanic
*uz- out, from PIE *ud- up, out (see out (adv.)) At first only in words borrowed from German (such
as ursprache hypothetical primitive language); since mid-20c. a living prefix in English. Compare
also Urschleim under protoplasm and Urquell under Pilsner.


atom (n.)

late 15c., as a hypothetical indivisible body, the building block of the universe, from Latin atomus
(especially in Lucretius) indivisible particle, from Greek atomos uncut, unhewn; indivisible, from
a- not + tomos a cutting, from temnein to cut (see tome). An ancient term of philosophical
speculation (in Leucippus, Democritus), revived 1805 by British chemist John Dalton. In late
classical and medieval use also a unit of time, 22,560 to the hour. Atom bomb is from 1945 as both a
noun and a verb; compare atomic.


pout (v.)

early 14c., of uncertain origin, perhaps from Scandinavian (compare Swedish dialectal puta to be
puffed out), or Frisian (compare East Frisian p&uuml;t bag, swelling, Low German puddig swollen);
related via notion of inflation to Old English &aelig;lepute fish with inflated parts, and Middle
Dutch puyt, Flemish puut frog, from hypothetical PIE imitative root *beu- suggesting swelling (see
bull (n.2)). Related: Pouted; pouting. As a noun from 1590s.


theoretical (adj.)

1610s, contemplative, with -al (1) + Late Latin theoreticus of or pertaining to theory, from Greek
theoretikos contemplative, speculative, pertaining to theory (by Aristotle contrasted to praktikos),
from theoretos that may be seen or considered, from theorein to consider, look at (see theory).
Meaning pertaining to theory, making deductions from theory not from fact (opposed to practical) is
from 1650s; earlier in this sense was theorical (c.1500). Meaning ideal, hypothetical is from 1790s
(implied in theoretically). Related: theoretician.


gladiator (n.)

mid-15c., Roman swordsman, from Latin gladiator, literally swordsman, from gladius sword, probably
from Gaulish (compare Welsh cleddyf, Cornish clethe, Breton kleze sword; see claymore). Old Irish
claideb is from Welsh.    The close connection with Celtic words for 'sword', together with the
imperfect match of initial consonants, and the semantic field of weaponry, suggests that Latin
borrowed a form *gladio- or *kladio- (a hypothetical variant of attested British Celtic  *kladimo-
'sword') from [Proto-Celtic] or from a third language. [de Vaan]


snout (n.)

early 13c., trunk or projecting nose of an animal, from Middle Low German and Middle Dutch snute
snout, from Proto-Germanic *snut- (cognates: German Schnauze, Norwegian snut, Danish snude snout),
which Watkins traces to a hypothetical Germanic root *snu- forming words having to do with the nose,
imitative of a sudden drawing of breath (compare Old English gesnot nasal mucus; German schnauben
pant, puff, snort (Austrian dialect), schnaufen breathe heavily, pant, Schnupfen cold in the head;
Old Norse snaldr snout (of a serpent), snuthra to sniff, snuffle). Of other animals and
(contemptuously) of humans from c.1300.


adamant (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French adamant and directly from Latin adamantem (nominative adamas) adamant,
hardest iron, steel, also figuratively, of character, from Greek adamas (genitive adamantos)
unbreakable, inflexible metaphoric of anything unalterable, also the name of a hypothetical hardest
material, perhaps literally invincible, from a- not + daman to conquer, to tame (see tame (adj.)),
or else a word of foreign origin altered to conform to Greek.    Applied in antiquity to a metal
resembling gold (Plato), white sapphire, magnet (by Ovid, perhaps via confusion with Latin adamare
to love passionately), steel, emery stone, and especially diamond (see diamond). The name has thus
always been of indefinite and fluctuating sense [Century Dictionary]. The word was in Old English as
a&eth;amans a very hard stone.


lemur (n.)

nocturnal Madagascar mammal, 1795, coined by Linnaeus, from Latin lemures (plural) spirits of the
dead in Roman mythology.     The oldest usage of lemur for a primate that we are aware of is in
Linnaeus's catalog of the Museum of King Adolf Frederick of Sweden (Tattersall, 1982); .... In this
work, he explained his use of the name lemur thus: Lemures dixi  hos, quod noctu imprimis
obambulant, hominibus quodanmodo similes, &amp; lento passu vagantur [I call them lemurs, because
they go around mainly by night, in a certain way similar to humans, and roam with a slow pace]
[Dunkel, Alexander R., et al., Giant rabbits, marmosets, and British comedies: etymology of lemur
names, part 1, in Lemur News, vol. 16, 2011-2012, p.65]   Lemuria (1864) was the name given by
English zoologist P.L. Sclater (1829-1913) to a hypothetical ancient continent connecting Africa and
Southeastern Asia (and including Madagascar), which was hypothesized to explain phenomena now
accounted for by continental drift. Earlier it was the name of the Roman feast of the Lemures.


television (n.)

1907, as a theoretical system to transmit moving images over telegraph or telephone wires; formed in
English or borrowed from French t&eacute;l&eacute;vision, from tele- + vision.    Television is not
impossible in theory. In practice it would be very costly without being capable of serious
application. But we do not want that. On that day when it will be possible to accelerate our methods
of telephotography by at least ten times, which does not appear to be impossible in the future, we
shall arrive at television with a hundred telegraph wires. Then the problem of sight at a distance
will without doubt cease to be a chimera. [Telegraphing Pictures in Windsor Magazine, 1907]    Other
proposals for the name of a then-hypothetical technology for sending pictures over distance were
telephote (1880) and televista (1904). The technology was developed in the 1920s and '30s. Nativized
in German as Fernsehen. Shortened form TV is from 1948. Meaning a television set is from 1941.
Meaning television as a medium is from 1927.  Television is the first truly democratic culture --
the first culture available to everyone and entirely governed by what the people want. The most
terrifying thing is what people do want. [Clive Barnes, New York Times, Dec. 30, 1969]


Q

16th letter of the classical Roman alphabet, from the Phoenician equivalent of Hebrew koph, qoph,
which was used for the more guttural of the two k sounds in Semitic.    The letter existed in Greek,
but was little used and not alphabetized; the stereotypical connection with -u- began in Latin.
Anglo-Saxon scribes adopted the habit at first, but later used spellings with cw- or cu-. The qu-
pattern returned to English with the Norman Conquest and had displaced cw- by c.1300. In some
spelling variants of late Middle English, quh- also took work from wh-, especially in Scottish and
northern dialects, for example Gavin Douglas, Provost of St. Giles, in his vernacular Aeneid of
1513:    Lyk as the rois in June with hir sueit smell  The marygulde or dasy doith excell.  Quhy
suld I than, with dull forhede and vane,  With ruide engine and barrand emptive brane,  With bad
harsk speche and lewit barbour tong,  Presume to write quhar thi sueit bell is rong,  Or contirfait
sa precious wourdis deir?    Scholars use -q- alone to transliterate Semitic koph (as in Quran,
Qatar, Iraq ). In Christian theology, Q has been used since 1901 to signify the hypothetical source
of passages shared by Matthew and Luke, but not in Mark; in this sense probably it is an
abbreviation of German Quelle source.


Australia

from Latin Terra Australis (16c.), from australis southern + -ia. A hypothetical southern continent,
known as terra australis incognita, had been proposed since 2c. Dutch explorers called the newfound
continent New Holland; the current name was suggested 1814 by Matthew Flinders as an improvement
over Terra Australis as being more agreeable to the ear, and an assimilation to the name of the
other great portions of the earth [Voyage to Terra Australis]. In 1817 Gov. Lachlan Macquarie,
having read Flinders' suggestion, began using it in official correspondence. The ultimate source is
Latin auster south wind, hence, the south country.    The Latin sense shift in australis, if it is
indeed the same word other Indo-European languages use for east (see aurora), for which Latin uses
oriens (see orient), perhaps is based on a false assumption about the orientation of the Italian
peninsula, with shift through 'southeast' explained by the diagonal position of the axis of Italy
[Buck]; see Walde, Alois, Lateinisches etymologisches W&ouml;rterbuch, 3rd. ed., vol. 1, p.87;
Ernout, Alfred, and Meillet, Alfred, Dictionnaire &eacute;tymologique de la langue latine, 2nd. ed.,
p.94. Or perhaps the connection is more ancient, and from PIE root *aus- to shine, source of aurora,
which also produces words for burning, with reference to the hot south wind that blows into Italy.
Thus auster (hot) south wind, metaphorically extended to south.


