hypocritical (adj.)

1540s (implied in hypocritically), from hypocritic, which was used in the same sense, + -al (1).
Middle English used simple hypocrite as the adjective (c.1400) as well as the noun.


bilingual (adj.)

1818, from bi- + lingual. Latin bilinguis meant literally two-tongued, and, figuratively, speaking a
jumble of languages, also double-tongued, hypocritical, false.


histrionic (adj.)

theatrical (figuratively, hypocritical), 1640s, from Latin histrionicus pertaining to an actor, from
histrio (genitive histrionis) actor, said to be of Etruscan origin. The literal sense in English is
from 1759.


Tartuffe (n.)

pretender to piety, 1670s, from name of the principal character in the comedy by Moli&egrave;re
(1664), apparently from Old French tartuffe truffle (see truffle), perhaps chosen for suggestion of
concealment (Tartuffe is a religious hypocrite), or in allusion to the fancy that truffles were a
diseased product of the earth. Italian Tartufo is said to have been the name of a hypocritical
character in Italian comedy.


pretense (n.)

also pretence, early 15c., the putting forth of a claim, from Anglo-French pretensse, Middle French
pretensse (Modern French pr&#233;tense), from Medieval Latin noun use of fem. of Late Latin
praetensus, altered from Latin praetentus, past participle of praetendere (see pretend). Meaning
false or hypocritical profession is from 1540s.


curry favor (v.)

early 16c., altered by folk etymology from curry favel (c.1400) from Old French correier fauvel to
be false, hypocritical, literally to curry the chestnut horse, which in medieval French allegories
was a symbol of cunning and deceit. See curry (v.). Old French fauvel is from a Germanic source and
ultimately related to fallow (adj.); the sense here is entangled with that of similar-sounding Old
French favele lying, deception, from Latin fabella, diminutive of fabula (see fable (n.)).


power (n.)

c.1300, ability; ability to act or do; strength, vigor, might, especially in battle; efficacy;
control, mastery, lordship, dominion; legal power or authority; authorization; military force, an
army, from Anglo-French pouair, Old French povoir, noun use of the infinitive, to be able, earlier
podir (9c.), from Vulgar Latin *potere, from Latin potis powerful (see potent).    Whatever some
hypocritical ministers of government may say about it, power is the greatest of all pleasures. It
seems to me that only love can beat it, and love is a happy illness that can't be picked up as
easily as a Ministry. [Stendhal de l'Amour, 1822]    Meaning one who has power is late 14c. Meaning
specific ability or capacity is from early 15c. Meaning a state or nation with regard to
international authority or influence [OED] is from 1726. Used for a large number of from 1660s.
Meaning energy available for work is from 1727. Sense of electrical supply is from 1896.    Phrase
the powers that be is from Rom. xiii:1. As a statement wishing good luck, more power to (someone) is
recorded from 1842. A power play in ice hockey so called by 1940. Power failure is from 1911; power
steering from 1921.


