ideology (n.)

1796, science of ideas, originally philosophy of the mind which derives knowledge from the senses
(as opposed to metaphysics), from French id&eacute;ologie study or science of ideas, coined by
French philosopher Destutt de Tracy (1754-1836) from id&eacute;o- of ideas, from Greek idea (see
idea) + -logy. Later used in a sense impractical theorizing (1813). Meaning systematic set of ideas,
doctrines first recorded 1909.Ideology ... is usually taken to mean, a prescriptive doctrine that is
not supported by rational argument. [D.D. Raphael, Problems of Political Philosophy, 1970]


ideological (adj.)

1797, from ideology + -ical. Related: Ideologically.


given (adj.)

late 14c., allotted, predestined, past participle adjective from give (v.); also with a noun sense
of fate, reflecting an important concept in pagan Germanic ideology (Old English had giefe&eth;e in
this sense). The modern noun sense of what is given, known facts is from 1879. Given name (1827) so
called because given at baptism.


liberal (n.)

1820, member of the Liberal party of Great Britain, from liberal (adj.). Used early 20c. of less
dogmatic Christian churches; in reference to a political ideology not conservative or fascist but
short of socialism, from c.1920.    This is the attitude of mind which has come to be known as
liberal. It implies vigorous convictions, tolerance for the opinions of others, and a persistent
desire for sound progress. It is a method of approach which has played a notable and constructive
part in our history, and which merits a thorough trial today in the attack on our absorbingly
interesting American task. [Guy Emerson, The New Frontier, 1920]


propaganda (n.)

1718, committee of cardinals in charge of Catholic missionary work, short for Congregatio de
Propaganda Fide congregation for propagating the faith, a committee of cardinals established 1622 by
Gregory XV to supervise foreign missions. The word is properly the ablative fem. gerundive of Latin
propagare (see propagation). Hence, any movement to propagate some practice or ideology (1790).
Modern political sense dates from World War I, not originally pejorative. Meaning material or
information propagated to advance a cause, etc. is from 1929.


Herr

German equivalent of Mr., 1650s, originally nobler, superior, from Middle High German herre, from
Old High German herro, comparative of her noble, worthy, exalted, from PIE *kei-, a color adjective,
in suffixed form *koi-ro- here meaning gray, hoary, hence gray-haired, venerable. Cognate with Old
Frisian hera, Dutch heer; perhaps in this usage a loan-translation of Latin senior. Hence also
Herrenvolk master race, in Nazi ideology, the concept of the German people.


Aryan

c.1600, as a term in classical history, from Latin Arianus, Ariana, from Greek Aria, Areia, names
applied in classical times to the eastern part of ancient Persia and to its inhabitants. Ancient
Persians used the name in reference to themselves (Old Persian ariya-), hence Iran. Ultimately from
Sanskrit arya- compatriot; in later language noble, of good family.    Also the name Sanskrit-
speaking invaders of India gave themselves in the ancient texts, from which early 19c. European
philologists (Friedrich Schlegel, 1819, who linked the word with German Ehre honor) applied it to
the ancient people we now call Indo-Europeans (suspecting that this is what they called themselves);
this use is attested in English from 1851. The term fell into the hands of racists, and in German
from 1845 it was specifically contrasted to Semitic (Lassen).    German philologist Max M&uuml;ller
(1823-1900) popularized the term in his writings on comparative linguistics, recommending it as the
name (replacing Indo-European, Indo-Germanic, Caucasian, Jshortened) for the group of related,
inflected languages connected with these peoples, mostly found in Europe but also including Sanskrit
and Persian. Arian was used in this sense from 1839 (and is more philologically correct), but this
spelling caused confusion with Arian, the term in ecclesiastical history.    Gradually replaced in
comparative linguistics c.1900 by Indo-European, except when used to distinguish Indo-European
languages of India from non-Indo-European ones. Used in Nazi ideology to mean member of a Caucasian
Gentile race of Nordic type. As an ethnic designation, however, it is properly limited to Indo-
Iranians (most justly to the latter) and has fallen from general academic use since the Nazi era.


