idiomatic (adj.)

1712, from Latin idiomaticus, from Greek idiomatikos; from idios one's own (see idiom) + matos
thinking, animated (see automaton).


idiom (n.)

1580s, form of speech peculiar to a people or place, from Middle French idiome (16c.) and directly
from Late Latin idioma a peculiarity in language, from Greek idioma peculiarity, peculiar
phraseology, from idioumai to appropriate to oneself, from idios personal, private, properly
particular to oneself, from PIE *swed-yo-, suffixed form of root *s(w)e-, pronoun of the third
person and reflexive (referring back to the subject of a sentence), also used in forms denoting the
speaker's social group, (we our-)selves (cognates: Sanskrit svah, Avestan hva-, Old Persian huva
one's own, khva-data lord, literally created from oneself; Greek hos he, she, it; Latin suescere to
accustom, get accustomed, sodalis companion; Old Church Slavonic svoji his, her, its, svojaku
relative, kinsman; Gothic swes one's own; Old Norse sik oneself; German Sein; Old Irish fein self,
himself). Meaning phrase or expression peculiar to a language is from 1620s.


go west (v.)

19c. British idiom for die, be killed (popularized during World War I), probably from thieves'
slang, wherein to go west meant to go to Tyburn, hence to be hanged, though the phrase has
indubitably been influenced by the setting of the sun in the west. [Partridge]


Hellenism (n.)

c.1600, idiom or expression peculiar to Greek; see Hellenic + -ism. In sense culture and ideals of
ancient Greece, 1865.


outen (v.)

put out, 1916, American English dialectal; see out (adv.) + -en (1). An idiom in Pennsylvania
German.


Gallicism (n.)

French word or idiom, 1650s, from Gallic + -ism.


Orientalism (n.)

in reference to character, style, trait, or idiom felt to be from the Orient, 1769, from oriental +
-ism. Related: Orientalist.


ethos (n.)

revived by Palgrave in 1851 from Greek ethos moral character, nature, disposition, habit, custom,
from suffixed form of PIE root *s(w)e- (see idiom). An important concept in Aristotle (as in
Rhetoric II xii-xiv).


bad-mouth (v.)

abuse someone verbally, 1941, probably ultimately from noun phrase bad mouth (1835), in Black
English, a curse, spell, translating an idiom found in African and West Indian languages. Related:
Bad-mouthed; bad-mouthing.


idio-

word-forming element meaning one's own, personal, distinct, from Greek idio-, comb. form of idios
own, personal, private, one's own (see idiom).


backtalk (n.)

also back-talk, impertinent retort, 1858, originally often used in literary attempts at low Irish
idiom, from back (adj.) + talk (n.).


ill (adj.)

c.1200, morally evil (other 13c. senses were malevolent, hurtful, unfortunate, difficult), from Old
Norse illr ill, bad, of unknown origin. Not related to evil. Main modern sense of sick, unhealthy,
unwell is first recorded mid-15c., probably related to Old Norse idiom it is bad to me. Slang
inverted sense of very good, cool is 1980s. As a noun, something evil, from mid-13c.


sui generis

1787, Latin, literally of one's own kind, peculiar. First element from sui, genitive of suus his,
her, its, one's, from Old Latin sovos, from PIE root *swe-, pronoun of the third person (see idiom).


Sinn Fein (n.)

1905, from Irish, literally we ourselves, from Old Irish f&eacute;in self, from PIE *swei-no-,
suffixed form of root *s(w)e- (see idiom). Movement founded 1905 by Irish journalist and politician
Arthur Griffith (1872-1922).


hetaera (n.)

1820, mistress, from Medieval Latin hetaera, from Greek hetaira female companion, in Athens opposed
to lawful wife, and thus embracing everything from concubine to courtesan; fem. of hetairos comrade,
companion, from PIE *swet-aro-, suffixed form of root *s(w)e- (see idiom).


-sk

reflexive suffix in words of Danish origin (such as bask, literally to bathe oneself), contracted
from Old Norse sik, reflexive pronoun corresponding to Gothic sik, Old High German sih, German sich
himself, herself, itself, from PIE root *s(w)e- (source of Latin se himself; see idiom).


swami (n.)

1773, Hindu idol, later, Hindu religious teacher (1901), from Hindi swami master (used as a term of
address to a Brahmin), from Sanskrit svamin lord, prince, master, (one's own) master, from sva-s
one's own (from PIE *s(u)w-o- one's own, from root *s(w)e-; see idiom) + amah pressure, vehemence.


poltergeist (n.)

1838, from German Poltergeist, literally noisy ghost, from poltern make noise, rattle (from PIE root
*bhel- (4) to sound, ring, roar; source of bellow, bell) + Geist ghost (see ghost). In the native
idiom of Northern England, such phenomenon likely would be credited to a boggart.


swain (n.)

mid-12c., young man attendant upon a knight, from Old Norse sveinn boy, servant, attendant, from
Proto-Germanic *swainaz attendant, servant, properly one's own (man), from PIE *swoi-no-, from root
*s(w)e- oneself, alone, apart (see idiom). Cognate with Old English swan shepherd, swineherd, Old
Saxon swen, Old High German swein. Meaning country or farm laborer is from 1570s; that of lover,
wooer (in pastoral poetry) is from 1580s.


idiosyncrasy (n.)

c.1600, from French idiosyncrasie, from Greek idiosynkrasia a peculiar temperament, from idios one's
own (see idiom) + synkrasis temperament, mixture of personal characteristics, from syn together (see
syn-) + krasis mixture (see rare (adj.2)). Originally in English a medical term meaning physical
constitution of an individual. Mental sense first attested 1660s.


idiopathy (n.)

1640s, Modern Latin, from Greek idiopatheia, from comb. form of idios one's own (see idiom) +
-patheia, comb. form of pathos suffering, disease, feeling (see pathos). Related: idiopathic.


sodality (n.)

companionship, fellowship, association with others, c.1600, from Middle French sodalit&eacute; or
directly from Latin sodalitatem (nominative sodalitas) companionship, a brotherhood, association,
fellowship, from sodalis companion, perhaps literally one's own, relative, related to suescere to
accustom, from PIE *swedh-, extended form of root *s(w)e-, pronoun of the third person and reflexive
(see idiom). Especially of religious guilds in the Catholic Church.


se-

word-forming element, from Latin se-, collateral form of sed- without, apart, aside, on one's own,
related to sed, Latin reflexive pronoun (accusative and ablative), from PIE *sed-, extended form of
root *s(w)e-, pronoun of the third person and reflexive (source also of German sich; see idiom).


peculiar (adj.)

mid-15c., belonging exclusively to one person, from Latin peculiaris of one's own (property), from
peculium private property, literally property in cattle (in ancient times the most important form of
property), from pecu cattle, flock, related to pecus cattle (see pecuniary). Meaning unusual is
first attested c.1600 (earlier distinguished, special, 1580s; for sense development, compare idiom).
Related: Peculiarly.


provincial (adj.)

late 14c., pertaining to a province, from Old French provincial belonging to a particular province
(of friars) (13c.), from Latin provincialis of a province, from provincia (see province).    Meaning
of the small towns and countryside (as opposed to the capital and urban center) is from 1630s, a
borrowed idiom from French, transferred from sense of particular to the province, hence local.
Suggestive of rude, petty, or narrow society by 1755. Classical Latin provincialis seems not to have
had this tinge. In British use, with reference to the American colonies, from 1680s.


are (v.)

present plural indicative of be (q.v.), from Old English earun (Mercian), aron (Northumbrian). Also
from Old Norse cognates. In 17c., began to replace be, ben as first person plural present indicative
in standard English. The only non-dialectal survival of be in this sense is the powers that be. But
in southwest England, we be (in Devonshire us be) remains non-standard idiom as a contradictory
positive (You people aren't speaking correct English. Oh, yes we be!).


solve (v.)

late 14c., to disperse, dissipate, loosen, from Latin solvere to loosen, dissolve; untie, release,
detach; depart; unlock; scatter; dismiss; accomplish, fulfill; explain; remove, from PIE *se-lu-,
from reflexive pronoun *s(w)e- (see idiom) + root *leu- to loosen, divide, cut apart (see lose). The
meaning explain, answer is attested from 1530s; for sense evolution, see solution. Mathematical use
is attested from 1737. Related: Solved; solving.


mansuetude (n.)

tameness, gentleness, mildness, late 14c., from Latin mansuetudo tameness, mildness, gentleness,
noun of state from past participle stem of mansuescere to tame, literally to accustom to the hand,
from manus hand (see manual (adj.)) + suescere to accustom, habituate, from PIE *swdh-sko-, from
*swedh- (see sodality), extended form of root *s(w)e- (see idiom).


khedive (n.)

Turkish viceroy of Egypt, 1867, from French kh&eacute;dive, from Turkish khidiv, from Persian khidiw
prince, derivative of khuda master, prince, from Old Persian khvadata- lord, from compound *khvat-
data-, literally created from oneself, from khvat- (from PIE *swe-tos from oneself, ablative of root
*s(w)e-; see idiom) + data- created.


cost (n.)

c.1200, from Old French cost (12c., Modern French co&#251;t) cost, outlay, expenditure; hardship,
trouble, from Vulgar Latin *costare, from Latin constare, literally to stand at (or with), with a
wide range of figurative senses including to cost. The idiom is the same one used in Modern English
when someone says something stands at X dollars to mean it sells for X dollars. The Latin word is
from com- with (see com-) + stare to stand, from PIE root *sta- to stand (see stet).


custom (n.)

c.1200, habitual practice, from Old French costume custom, habit, practice; clothes, dress (12c.,
Modern French coutume), from Vulgar Latin *consuetumen, from Latin consuetudinem (nominative
consuetudo) habit, usage, way, practice, tradition, familiarity, from consuetus, past participle of
consuescere accustom, from com-, intensive prefix (see com-), + suescere become used to, accustom
oneself, related to sui, genitive of suus oneself, from PIE *swe- oneself (see idiom). Replaced Old
English &thorn;eaw. Sense of a regular toll or tax on goods is early 14c. The native word here is
toll.


self (pron.)

Old English self, seolf, sylf one's own person, -self; own, same, from Proto-Germanic *selbaz
(cognates: Old Norse sjalfr, Old Frisian self, Dutch zelf, Old High German selb, German selb,
selbst, Gothic silba), Proto-Germanic *selbaz self, from PIE *sel-bho-, suffixed form of root
*s(w)e-, pronoun of the third person and reflexive (referring back to the subject of a sentence),
also used in forms denoting the speaker's social group, (we our-)selves (see idiom).    Trying to
define yourself is like trying to bite your own teeth. [Alan Watts]    Its use in compounds to form
reflexive pronouns grew out of independent use in Old English. As a noun from early 14c.


idiot (n.)

early 14c., person so mentally deficient as to be incapable of ordinary reasoning; also in Middle
English simple man, uneducated person, layman (late 14c.), from Old French idiote uneducated or
ignorant person (12c.), from Latin idiota ordinary person, layman; outsider, in Late Latin
uneducated or ignorant person, from Greek idiotes layman, person lacking professional skill (opposed
to writer, soldier, skilled workman), literally private person (as opposed to one taking part in
public affairs), used patronizingly for ignorant person, from idios one's own (see idiom).Reader,
suppose you were an idiot. And suppose you were a member of Congress. But I repeat myself. [Mark
Twain, c.1882]Idiot box television set is from 1959; idiot light dashboard warning signal is
attested from 1968. Idiot savant attested by 1870.


so (adv.)

Old English swa, sw&aelig; (adv., conj., pron.) in this way, also to that extent; so as,
consequently, therefore, and purely intensive; from Proto-Germanic *swa (cognates: Old Saxon, Middle
Dutch, Old High German so, Old Norse sva, Danish saa, Swedish s&#229;, Old Frisian sa, Dutch zo,
German so so, Gothic swa as), from PIE reflexive pronomial stem *swo- so (cognates: Greek hos as,
Old Latin suad so, Latin se himself), derivative of *s(w)e-, pronoun of the third person and
reflexive (see idiom).    Old English swa frequently was strengthened by eall, and so also is
contained in compounds as, also, such. The -w- was eliminated by contraction from 12c.; compare two,
which underwent the same process but retained its spelling. As an introductory particle [OED] from
1590s. Used to add emphasis or contradict a negative from 1913. So in mid-20c. British slang could
mean homosexual (adj.). So? as a term of dismissal is attested from 1886 (short for is that so?,
etc.). So what as an exclamation of indifference dates from 1934. So-and-so is from 1596 meaning
something unspecified; first recorded 1897 as a euphemistic term of abuse. Abbreviating phrase and
so on is attested from 1724. So far so good is from 1721.


suicide (n.)

deliberate killing of oneself, 1650s, from Modern Latin suicidium suicide, from Latin sui of oneself
(genitive of se self), from PIE *s(u)w-o- one's own, from root *s(w)e- (see idiom) + -cidium a
killing (see -cide). Probably an English coinage; much maligned by Latin purists because it may as
well seem to participate of sus, a sow, as of the pronoun sui [Phillips]. The meaning person who
kills himself deliberately is from 1728. In Anglo-Latin, the term for one who commits suicide was
felo-de-se, literally one guilty concerning himself.    Even in 1749, in the full blaze of the
philosophic movement, we find a suicide named Portier dragged through the streets of Paris with his
face to the ground, hung from a gallows by his feet, and then thrown into the sewers; and the laws
were not abrogated till the Revolution, which, having founded so many other forms of freedom,
accorded the liberty of death. [W.E.H. Lecky, History of European Morals, 1869]    In England,
suicides were legally criminal if of age and sane, but not if judged to have been mentally deranged.
The criminal ones were mutilated by stake and given degrading burial in highways until 1823. Suicide
blonde (one who has dyed by her own hand) first attested 1921. Baseball suicide squeeze is attested
from 1937.


mother (n.1)

Old English modor female parent, from Proto-Germanic *moth&aelig;r (cognates: Old Saxon modar, Old
Frisian moder, Old Norse mo&#240;ir, Danish moder, Dutch moeder, Old High German muoter, German
Mutter), from PIE *mater- mother (cognates: Latin mater, Old Irish mathir, Lithuanian mote, Sanskrit
matar-, Greek meter, Old Church Slavonic mati), [b]ased ultimately on the baby-talk form *m&#257;-
(2); with the kinship term suffix *-ter- [Watkins]. Spelling with -th- dates from early 16c., though
that pronunciation is probably older (see father (n.)).   Mother nature first attested c.1600;
mother earth is from 1580s. Mother tongue one's native language first attested late 14c. Mother of
all ________ 1991, is Gulf War slang, from Saddam Hussein's use in reference to the coming battle;
it is an Arabic idiom (as well as an English one), for instance Ayesha, second wife of Muhammad, is
known as Mother of Believers. Mother Carey's chickens is late 18c. sailors' nickname for storm
petrels, or for snowflakes. Mother lode attested by c.1882, from mining [1849].


sibling (n.)

brother or sister, 1903, modern revival (in anthropology) of Old English sibling relative, kinsman,
from sibb kinship, relationship; love, friendship, peace, happiness, from Proto-Germanic *sibja-
blood relation, relative, properly one's own (cognates: Old Saxon sibba, Old Frisian, Middle Dutch
sibbe, Old High German sippa, German Sippe, Gothic sibja kin, kindred), from PIE s(w)e-bh(o)-
(cognates: Old Church Slavonic sobistvo, Russian sob character, individuality), an enlargement of
the root *swe- self (see idiom). Related to the second element in gossip.  The word 'sib' or
'sibling' is coming into use in genetics in the English-speaking world, as an equivalent of the
convenient German term 'Geschwister' [E.&amp;C.; Paul, Human Heredity, 1930]    In Old English, sibb
and its compounds covered grounds of brotherly love, familial affection which tended later to lump
into love (n.), as in sibsumnes peace, concord, brotherly love, sibbian (v.) bring together,
reconcile, sibbecoss kiss of peace. Sibship, however, is a modern formation (1908). Sib persisted
through Middle English as a noun, adjective, and verb expressing kinship and relationship.


ethnic (adj.)

late 15c. (earlier ethnical, early 15c.) pagan, heathen, from Late Latin ethnicus, from Greek
ethnikos adopted to the genius or customs of a people, peculiar to a people, from ethnos band of
people living together, nation, people, properly people of one's own kind, from PIE *swedh-no-,
suffixed form of root *s(w)e- (see idiom). Earlier in English as a noun, a heathen, pagan, one who
is not a Christian or Jew (c.1400).     In Septuagint, Greek ta ethne translates Hebrew goyim,
plural of goy nation, especially of non-Israelites, hence Gentile nation, foreign nation not
worshipping the true God (see goy), and ethnikos is used as savoring of the nature of pagans, alien
to the worship of the true God, and as a noun the pagan, the Gentile. The classical sense of
peculiar to a race or nation in English is attested from 1851, a return to the word's original
meaning; that of different cultural groups is 1935; and that of racial, cultural or national
minority group is American English 1945. Ethnic cleansing is attested from 1991.    Although the
term 'ethnic cleansing' has come into English usage only recently, its verbal correlates in Czech,
French, German, and Polish go back much further. [Jerry Z. Muller, Us and Them: The Enduring Power
of Ethnic Nationalism, Foreign Affairs, March/April 2008]


hell (n.)

Old English hel, helle, nether world, abode of the dead, infernal regions, from Proto-Germanic
*haljo the underworld (cognates: f. Old Frisian helle, Dutch hel, Old Norse hel, German H&ouml;lle,
Gothic halja hell) the underworld, literally concealed place (compare Old Norse hellir cave,
cavern), from PIE *kel- (2) to cover, conceal (see cell).    The English word may be in part from
Old Norse Hel (from Proto-Germanic *halija one who covers up or hides something), in Norse mythology
the name of Loki's daughter, who rules over the evil dead in Niflheim, the lowest of all worlds
(nifl mist). Transfer of a pagan concept and word to a Christian idiom. In Middle English, also of
the Limbus Patrum, place where the Patriarchs, Prophets, etc. awaited the Atonement. Used in the KJV
for Old Testament Hebrew Sheol and New Testament Greek Hades, Gehenna. Used figuratively for state
of misery, any bad experience since at least late 14c. As an expression of disgust, etc., first
recorded 1670s.    Expression Hell in a handbasket is attested by 1867, in a context implying use
from a few years before, and the notion of going to Heaven in a handbasket is from 1853, with a
sense of easy passage to the destination. Hell or high water (1874) apparently is a variation of
between the devil and the deep blue sea. To wish someone would go to hell is in Shakespeare
(Merchant of Venice). Snowball's chance in hell no chance is from 1931; till hell freezes over never
is from 1832. To ride hell for leather is from 1889, originally with reference to riding on
horseback. Hell on wheels is said to be from 1843 in DAS; popularity dates from 1869 in reference to
the temporary workers' towns along the U.S. transcontinental railroad and their vices.


so long (interj.)

parting salutation, 1860, of unknown origin, perhaps from a German idiom (compare German parting
salutation adieu so lange, the full sense of which probably is something like farewell, whilst
(we're apart)); or perhaps from Hebrew shalom (via Yiddish sholom). Some have noted a similarity to
Scandinavian leave-taking phrases, such as Norwegian Adj&oslash; s&#229; lenge, Farvel s&#229;
lenge, Mor'n s&#229; lenge, literally bye so long, farewell so long, morning so long; and Swedish
Hej s&#229; l&auml;nge good-bye for now, with s&#229; l&auml;nge for now attested since 1850
according to Swedish sources. Most etymology sources seem to lean toward the German origin.
Earlier guesses that it was a sailors' corruption of a South Pacific form of Arabic salaam are not
now regarded as convincing. Dictionary of American Slang also adds to the list of candidates Irish
sl&aacute;n safe, said to be used as a salutation in parting. The phrase seems to have turned up
simultaneously in America, Britain, and perhaps Canada, originally among lower classes. First
attested use is in title and text of the last poem in Whitman's Leaves of Grass in the 1860 edition.
An unknown sphere, more real than I dream'd, more direct, darts awakening rays about me -- So long!
Remember my words -- I may again return,   I love you -- I depart from materials;   I am as one
disembodied, triumphant, dead.   Whitman's friend and fan William Sloane Kennedy wrote in 1923:
The salutation of parting -- 'So long!' -- was, I believe, until recent years, unintelligible to the
majority of persons in America, especially in the interior, and to members of the middle and
professional classes. I had never heard of it until I read it in Leaves of Grass, but since then
have quite often heard it used by the laboring class and other classes in New England cities. Walt
wrote to me, defining 'so long' thus: A salutation of departure, greatly used among sailors, sports,
&amp; prostitutes -- the sense of it is 'Till we meet again,' -- conveying an inference that somehow
they will doubtless so meet, sooner or later. ... It is evidently about equivalent to our 'See you
later.' The phrase is reported as used by farm laborers near Banff, Scotland. In Canada it is
frequently heard; 'and its use is not entirely confined to the vulgar.' It is in common use among
the working classes of Liverpool and among sailors at Newcastle-upon-Tyne, and in Dorsetshire. ...
The London Globe suggests that the expression is derived from the Norwegian 'Saa laenge,' a common
form of 'farewell,' au revoir. If so, the phrase was picked up from the Norwegians in America, where
'So long' first was heard. The expression is now (1923) often used by the literary and artistic
classes.


