idle (v.)

late 15c., make vain or worthless, from idle (adj.). Meaning spend or waste (time) is from 1650s.
Meaning cause to be idle is from 1789. Sense of running slowly and steadily without transmitting
power (as a motor) first recorded 1916. Related: Idled; idling.


idle (adj.)

Old English idel empty, void; vain; worthless, useless; not employed, common West Germanic
(cognates: Old Saxon idal, Old Frisian idel empty, worthless, Old Dutch idil, Old High German ital,
German eitel vain, useless, mere, pure), of unknown origin. Idle threats preserves original sense;
meaning lazy is c.1300.


idler (n.)

1530s, agent noun from idle.


idleness (n.)

Old English idelnes frivolity, vanity, emptiness; vain existence; see idle + -ness. Old English
expressed the idea we attach to in vain by in idelnisse. Spenser, Scott, and others use idlesse to
mean the same thing in a positive, pleasant sense.


vaniloquence (n.)

idle talk, 1620s, from Latin vaniloquentia, from vanus idle, empty (see vain) + loquens, from loqui
to speak (see locution).


vain (adj.)

c.1300, devoid of real value, idle, unprofitable, from Old French vain, vein worthless, void,
invalid, feeble; conceited (12c.), from Latin vanus empty, void, figuratively idle, fruitless, from
PIE *wa-no-, from root *eue- to leave, abandon, give out (cognates: Old English wanian to lessen,
wan deficient; Old Norse vanta to lack; Latin vacare to be empty, vastus empty, waste; Avestan va-
lack, Persian vang empty, poor; Sanskrit una- deficient, Armenian unain empty).    Meaning
conceited, elated with a high opinion of oneself first recorded 1690s in English; earlier silly,
idle, foolish (late 14c.). Phrase in vain to no effect (c.1300, after Latin in vanum) preserves the
original sense. Related: Vainly; vainness. Compare also vainglory.


otiose (adj.)

1794, unfruitful, futile, from Latin otiosus having leisure or ease,unoccupied, idle, not busy
(source of French oiseux, Spanish ocioso, Italian otioso), from otium leisure, free time, freedom
from business, of unknown origin. Meaning at leisure, idle is recorded from 1850. Compare Latin
phrase otium cum dignitate leisure with dignity. Earlier adjective in English was otious- at ease
(1610s), and Middle English had noun otiosity (late 15c.).


sulky (adj.)

quietly sullen, 1744, of uncertain origin. Connection has been suggested to obsolete, rare sulke
hard to sell (1630s) and to Old English asolcen idle, lazy, slow, past participle adjective from
aseolcan become sluggish, be weak or idle (related to besylcan be languid), from Proto-Germanic
*seklan (cognates: Middle High German selken to drop, fall). But words of similar meaning often are
held to be imitative (compare miff, mope, boudoir). Related: Sulkily; sulkiness.


truant (adj.)

idle, loitering, given to shirking duty or business, 1540s, from truant (n.).


saunter (n.)

a leisurely stroll, 1828, from saunter (v.). Earlier it meant idle occupation, diversion (1728).


rake (n.2)

debauchee; idle, dissolute person, 1650s, shortening of rakehell. Hogarth's Rake's Progress
engravings were published in 1735.


unoccupied (adj.)

late 14c., idle, from un- (1) not + past participle of occupy (v.). In reference to ground, etc.,
not possessed, not made use of, from early 15c.


daliance (n.)

mid-14c., confab, chat, from dally + -ance. Probably formed in Anglo-French, but not attested there.
Meaning amorous play, flirtation is from late 14c.; that of idle or frivolous activity is from
1540s.


vagrancy (n.)

life of idle begging, 1706, from vagrant + -cy. Earlier in a figurative sense, mental wandering
(1640s). By late 18c. used in law as a catch-all for miscellaneous petty offenses against public
order.


blah (n.)

idle, meaningless talk, 1918, probably echoic; the adjective meaning bland, dull is from 1919,
perhaps influenced by French blas&eacute; bored, indifferent. The blahs depression is attested by
1966.


vagabond (n.)

c.1400, earlier wagabund (in a criminal indictment from 1311); see vagabond (adj.). Despite the
earliest use, in Middle English often merely one who is without a settled home, a vagrant but not
necessarily in a bad sense. Notion of idle, disreputable person predominated from 17c.


tramp (n.)

person who wanders about, idle vagrant, vagabond, 1660s, from tramp (v). Sense of steamship which
takes cargo wherever it can be traded (as opposed to one running a regular line) is attested from
c.1880. The meaning promiscuous woman is from 1922. Sense of a long, toilsome walk is from 1786.


babble (n.)

idle talk, c.1500, from babble (v.). In 16c., commonly in reduplicated form bibble-babble.


gab (n.)

early 14c., mockery, from Old French gab, from gaber (see gab (v.)); meaning idle talk is by 1737.
Gift of the gab talent for speaking is from 1680s.


trifle (n.)

c.1200, trufle false or idle tale, later matter of little importance (c.1300), from Old French
trufle mockery, diminutive of truffe deception, of uncertain origin. As a type of light confection
from 1755.


idly (adv.)

Old English idellice; see idle + -ly (2).


yap (v.)

1660s, bark as a (small) dog, earlier as a noun, yapping dog (c.1600), probably of imitative origin.
Compare verb yamph in same sense (1718). Originally in reference to dog sounds; meaning to talk idle
chatter is first recorded 1886. Related: Yapped; yapping. As a noun, 1826 in reference to the sound;
1900, American English slang as mouth.


argon (n.)

chemical element, 1894, Modern Latin, from Greek argon, neuter of argos lazy, idle, not working the
ground, living without labor, from a- without (see a- (3)) + ergon work (see organ). So called by
its discoverers, Baron Rayleigh and Sir William Ramsay, for its inert qualities.


jest (n.)

early 13c., geste, narrative of exploits, from Old French geste action, exploit, from Latin gesta
deeds, neuter plural of gestus, past participle of gerere to carry, behave, act, perform (see gest).
Sense descended through idle tale (late 15c.) to mocking speech, raillery (1540s) to joke (1550s).


moon (v.)

c.1600, to expose to moonlight; later idle about (1836), move listlessly (1848), probably on notion
of being moonstruck. The meaning to flash the buttocks is first recorded 1968, U.S. student slang,
from moon (n.) buttocks (1756), probably from the idea of pale circularity [Ayto]. See moon (n.).
Related: Mooned; mooning.


schmooze (v.)

also shmooze, to chat intimately, 1897, from Yiddish shmuesn to chat, from shmues idle talk, chat,
from Hebrew shemu'oth news, rumors. As a noun from 1939. Related: Schmoozed; schmoozing. Schmoozer
is from 1909.


loll (v.)

mid-14c., lollen to lounge idly, hang loosely, perhaps related to Middle Dutch lollen to doze,
mumble, or somehow imitative of rocking or swinging. Specifically of the tongue from 1610s. Related:
Lolled; lolling. As a noun, from 1709. Grose [Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, 1785] has lollpoop A
lazy, idle drone.


vacant (adj.)

c.1300, not filled, held, or occupied, from Old French vacant idle, unoccupied (of an office, etc.),
from Latin vacantem (nominative vacans), empty, unoccupied, present participle of vacare to be empty
(see vain). Meaning characterized by absence of mental occupation is from 1570s. Related: Vacantly.


villein (n.)

early 14c., vileyn, spelling variant of villain in its reference to a feudal class of half-free
peasants. It tends to keep the literal, historical sense of the word and let the pejorative meanings
go with villain; Century Dictionary writes that the forms villain, villein, etc., are historically
one, and the attempt to differentiate them in meaning is idle, but Fowler finds this a useful piece
of differentiation. Related: Villeinage.


lass (n.)

young woman, c.1300, probably from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Swedish l&oslash;sk kona
unmarried woman, but also perhaps related to Old Norse l&ouml;skr idle, weak, West Frisian lask
light, thin. Liberman suggests Old Danish las rag. Slang words for 'rag' sometimes acquire the
jocular meaning 'child' and especially 'girl.' Used now only of mean girls [Johnson, who also has
lasslorn forsaken by his mistress]. Scottish diminutive lassie first recorded 1725.


slack (v.)

1510s, to moderate, make slack, back-formed from slack (adj.) after the original verb veered into
the specialized sense of slake. Meaning be remiss, inactive or idle, fail to exert oneself is
attested from 1540s; current use is probably a re-coining from c.1904 (see slacker, and compare Old
English slacful lazy, sleacmodnes laziness). Related: Slacked; slacking.


cease (v.)

c.1300, cesen, from Old French cesser to come to an end, stop, cease; give up, desist, from Latin
cessare to cease, go slow, give over, leave off, be idle, frequentative of cedere (past participle
cessus) go away, withdraw, yield (see cede). Related: Ceased; ceasing. Old English in this sense had
geswican, blinnan.


gossip (n.)

Old English godsibb sponsor, godparent, from God + sibb relative (see sibling). Extended in Middle
English to any familiar acquaintance (mid-14c.), especially to woman friends invited to attend a
birth, later to anyone engaging in familiar or idle talk (1560s). Sense extended 1811 to trifling
talk, groundless rumor. Similar formations in Old Norse gu&eth;sifja, Old Saxon gu&thorn;ziff.


vanity (n.)

c.1200, that which is vain, futile, or worthless, from Old French vanite self-conceit; futility;
lack of resolve (12c.), from Latin vanitatem (nominative vanitas) emptiness, aimlessness; falsity,
figuratively vainglory, foolish pride, from vanus empty, vain, idle (see vain). Meaning self-
conceited in English is attested from mid-14c. Vanity table is attested from 1936. Vanity Fair is
from Pilgrim's Progress (1678).


tattle (v.)

late 15c., to stammer, prattle, in Caxton's translation of Reynard the Fox, probably from Middle
Flemish tatelen to stutter, parallel to Middle Dutch, Middle Low German, East Frisian tateren to
chatter, babble, possibly of imitative origin. The meaning tell tales or secrets is first recorded
1580s. Sense influenced by tittle. Related: Tattled; tattling. As a noun from 1520s. Tattler, the
name of the famous periodical by Addison and Steele (1709-1711), means idle talker, a gossip.


bummer (n.)

loafer, idle person, 1855, possibly an extension of the British word for backside (similar
development took place in Scotland by 1540), but more probably from German slang bummler loafer,
agent noun from bummeln go slowly, waste time.    According to Kluge, the German word is from 17c.,
and the earliest sense of it is oscillate back and forth; possibly connected to words in German for
dangle (baumeln), via back-and-forth motion of a bell clapper, transferred to going back and forth,
hence doing nothing. Meaning bad experience is 1968 slang.


bum (n.2)

dissolute loafer, tramp, 1864, American English, from bummer loafer, idle person (1855), probably
from German slang bummler loafer, from bummeln go slowly, waste time. Bum first appears in a German-
American context, and bummer was popular in the slang of the North's army in the American Civil War
(as many as 216,000 German immigrants in the ranks). Bum's rush forcible ejection first recorded
1910.


jargon (n.)

mid-14c., unintelligible talk, gibberish; chattering, jabbering, from Old French jargon a chattering
(of birds), also language, speech, especially idle talk; thieves' Latin. Ultimately of echoic origin
(compare Latin garrire to chatter, English gargle). Often applied to something the speaker does not
understand, hence meaning mode of speech full of unfamiliar terms (1650s). Middle English also had
it as a verb, jargounen to chatter (late 14c.), from French.


palaver (n.)

1733 (implied in palavering), talk, conference, discussion, sailors' slang, from Portuguese palavra
word, speech, talk, traders' term for negotiating with the natives in West Africa, metathesis of
Late Latin parabola speech, discourse, from Latin parabola comparison (see parable). Meaning idle
talk first recorded 1748. The verb is 1733, from the noun. Related: Palavering.


lethargy (n.)

late 14c., litarge, from Old French litargie or directly from Medieval Latin litargia, from Late
Latin lethargia, from Greek lethargia forgetfulness, from lethargos forgetful, originally inactive
through forgetfulness, from lethe forgetfulness (see latent) + argos idle (see argon). The form with
-th- is from 1590s in English.


chatter (v.)

early 13c., chateren to twitter, gossip, earlier cheateren, chiteren, of echoic origin. Compare
Dutch koeteren jabber, Danish kvidre twitter, chirp. Related: Chattered; chattering. Phrase
chattering class in use by 1893, with a reference perhaps from 1843:    Such was the most
interesting side of the fatal event to that idle chattering class of London life to whom the
collision of heaven and earth were important only as affording matter for news! [Catherine Grace F.
Gore (Mrs. Gore), The Banker's Wife, 1843]


vaunt (v.)

early 15c., speak vainly or proudly, from Anglo-French vaunter, Old French vanter to praise, speak
highly of, from Medieval Latin vanitare to boast, frequentative of Latin vanare to utter empty
words, from vanus idle, empty (see vain). Also short for avaunten to boast (see vaunt (n.)).
Related: Vaunted; vaunting.


rogue (n.)

1560s, idle vagrant, perhaps a shortened form of roger (with a hard -g-), thieves' slang for a
begging vagabond who pretends to be a poor scholar from Oxford or Cambridge, which is perhaps an
agent noun in English from Latin rogare to ask. Another theory [Klein] traces it to Celtic (compare
Breton rog haughty); OED says, There is no evidence of connexion with F. rogue 'arrogant.'     In
playful or affectionate use, one who is mischievous, 1590s. Meaning large wild beast living apart
from the herd is from 1859, originally of elephants. Meaning something uncontrolled or undisciplined
is from 1964. Also common in 17c. as a verb. Rogue's gallery police collection of mug shots is
attested from 1859.


booby (n.)

1590s, from Spanish bobo stupid person, slow bird (used of various ungainly seabirds), probably from
Latin balbus stammering, from an imitative root (see barbarian).   Booby prize is by 1883: an object
of little value given to the loser of a game; booby trap is 1850, originally a schoolboy prank; the
more lethal sense developed during World War I.    At the end of every session the dominie had the
satirical custom of presenting his tawse as a booby-prize to some idle or stupid lout whom he picked
out as meriting this distinction so that next time they met he might start fresh and fair with new
pair for a new set of classes. [Ascott R. Hope, Dumps, Young England magazine, 1883]


harlot (n.)

c.1200 (late 12c. in surnames), vagabond, man of no fixed occupation, idle rogue, from Old French
herlot, arlot vagabond, tramp (usually male in Middle English and Old French), with forms in Old
Proven&ccedil;al (arlot), Old Spanish (arlote), and Italian (arlotto); of unknown origin. Used in
both positive and pejorative senses by Chaucer; applied in Middle English to jesters, buffoons,
jugglers, later to actors. Sense of prostitute, unchaste woman probably had developed by 14c.,
certainly by early 15c., but this was reinforced by use as euphemism for strumpet, whore in 16c.
translations of the Bible. The word may be Germanic, with an original sense of camp follower, if the
first element is hari army, as some suspect.


loiter (v.)

early 15c., idle one's time, dawdle over work, from Middle Dutch loteren be loose or erratic, shake,
totter like a loose tooth or a sail in a storm; in modern Dutch, leuteren to delay, linger, loiter
over one's work. Probably cognate with Old English lutian lurk, and related to Old English loddere
beggar; Old High German lotar empty, vain, luzen lurk; German Lotterbube vagabond, rascal, lauschen
eavesdrop; Gothic luton mislead; Old English ly&eth;re base, bad, wicked. Related: Loitered;
loitering.


late (adj.)

Old English l&aelig;t occurring after the customary or expected time, originally slow, sluggish,
from Proto-Germanic *lata- (cognates: Old Norse latr sluggish, lazy, Middle Dutch, Old Saxon lat,
German la&szlig; idle, weary, Gothic lats weary, sluggish, lazy, latjan to hinder), from PIE *led-
slow, weary (cognates: Latin lassus faint, weary, languid, exhausted, Greek ledein to be weary),
from root *le- to let go, slacken (see let (v.)).    The sense of deceased (as in the late Mrs.
Smith) is from late 15c., from an adverbial sense of recently. Of women's menstrual periods,
attested colloquially from 1962. Related: Lateness. As an adverb, from Old English late.


coulrophobia (n.)

morbid fear of clowns, by 2001 (said in Web sites to date from 1990s or even 1980s), a popular term,
not from psychology, possibly facetious, though the phenomenon is real enough; said to be built from
Greek kolon limb, with some supposed sense of stilt-walker, hence clown + -phobia.    Ancient Greek
words for clown were skl&ecirc;ro-paikt&ecirc;s, from paizein to play (like a child); or
deikeliktas; other classical words used for theatrical clowns were related to rustic, peasant
(compare Latin fossor clown, literally laborer, digger, related to fossil).    The whole creation
looks suspiciously like the sort of thing idle pseudo-intellectuals invent on the Internet and which
every smarty-pants takes up thereafter; perhaps it is a mangling of Modern Greek klooun clown, which
is the English word borrowed into Greek.


addle (v.)

1712, from addle (n.) urine, liquid filth, from Old English adela mud, mire, liquid manure (cognate
with Old Swedish adel urine, Middle Low German adel, Dutch aal puddle).    Used in noun phrase addle
egg (mid-13c.) egg that does not hatch, rotten egg, literally urine egg, a loan-translation of Latin
ovum urinum, which is itself an erroneous loan-translation of Greek ourion oon putrid egg, literally
wind egg, from ourios of the wind (confused by Roman writers with ourios of urine, from ouron
urine). Because of this usage, from c.1600 the noun in English was taken as an adjective meaning
putrid, and thence given a figurative extension to empty, vain, idle, also confused, muddled,
unsound (1706). The verb followed a like course. Related: Addled; addling.


sit (v.)

Old English sittan to occupy a seat, be seated, sit down, seat oneself; remain, continue; settle,
encamp, occupy; lie in wait; besiege (class V strong verb; past tense s&aelig;t, past participle
seten), from Proto-Germanic *setjan (cognates: Old Saxon sittian, Old Norse sitja, Danish sidde, Old
Frisian sitta, Middle Dutch sitten, Dutch zitten, Old High German sizzan, German sitzen, Gothic
sitan), from PIE root *sed- (1) to sit (see sedentary).    With past tense sat, formerly also set,
now restricted to dialect, and sate, now archaic; and past participle sat, formerly sitten. In
reference to a legislative assembly, from 1510s. Meaning to baby-sit is recorded from 1966.    To
sit back be inactive is from 1943. To sit on one's hands was originally to withhold applause (1926);
later, to do nothing (1959). To sit around be idle, do nothing is 1915, American English. To sit out
not take part is from 1650s. Sitting pretty is from 1916.


