igneous (adj.)

1660s, from Latin igneus of fire, fiery, from ignis fire, from PIE *egni- fire (cognates: Sanskrit
agnih fire, sacrificial fire, Old Church Slavonic ogni, Lithuanian ugnis fire).


ignis fatuus (n.)

will o' the wisp, jack-a-lantern, 1560s, from Medieval Latin, literally foolish fire; see igneous +
fatuous.


gabbro (n.)

type of igneous rock, 1837, from Italian (Tuscan) gabbro, from Latin glaber bare, smooth, bald (see
glad).


traps (n.1)

expanse of dark igneous rock, 1794, from Swedish trapp (Torbern Bergman, 1766), from trappa stair,
related to Middle Low German trappe staircase (see trap (n.)). So called from the step-like
appearance of the rock.


ignite (v.)

1660s, from Latin ignitus, past participle of ignire set on fire, from ignis fire (see igneous).
Attested earlier as an adjective (1550s). Related: Ignited; igniting.


serpentine (n.)

c.1400, plant reputed to contain antivenom, from Old French serpentin name of a precious stone, noun
use of adjective meaning of a snake, snake-like; sly, deceptive, from Late Latin serpentius of a
serpent, from Latin serpentem (nominative serpens) snake (see serpent). As the name of a greenish
igneous rock consisting mainly of hydrous magnesium silicate, attested from early 15c.


ignition (n.)

1610s, act of heating to the point of combustion, from French ignition (16c.) or directly from
Medieval Latin ignitionem (nominative ignitio), from Latin ignire set on fire, from ignis fire (see
igneous). Meaning means of sparking an internal combustion engine is from 1881.


porphyry (n.)

type of ornamental stone, late 14c., porfurie, from Old French porfire, from Italian porfiro and in
some cases directly from Latin porphyrites, a purple semi-precious stone quarried near the Red Sea
in Egypt, from Greek porphyrites (lithos) the purple (stone), from porphyra (n.) purple, purple dye
(see purple). Spelling Latinized mid-15c. Now used generally for a type of igneous rock without
regard to color. Porphyrios was an ancient proper name.


ignivomous (adj.)

vomiting fire, c.1600, from Late Latin ignivomous, from Latin ignis fire (see igneous) + vomere to
vomit (see vomit).


meteor (n.)

late 15c., any atmospheric phenomenon, from Middle French meteore (13c.) and directly from Medieval
Latin meteorum (nominative meteora), from Greek ta meteora the celestial phenomena, things in heaven
above, plural of meteoron, literally thing high up, noun use of neuter of meteoros (adj.) high up,
raised from the ground, hanging, from meta- over, beyond (see meta-) + -aoros lifted, hovering in
air, related to aeirein to raise (see aorta).    Specific sense of fireball, shooting star is
attested from 1590s. Atmospheric phenomena were formerly classified as aerial meteors (wind),
aqueous meteors (rain, snow, hail), luminous meteors (aurora, rainbows), and igneous meteors
(lightning, shooting stars).


