illicit (adj.)

c.1500, from Old French illicite (14c.) unlawful, forbidden, from Latin illicitus not allowed,
unlawful, illegal, from assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + licitus lawful,
past participle of licere to be allowed (see licence). Related: Illicitly.


poteen (n.)

illicit whiskey, 1812, from Irish poitin little pot, suggesting distillation in small quantities,
from English pot (n.1) vessel + diminutive suffix -in, -een.


rum-runner (n.)

smuggler or transporter of illicit liquor, 1919, from rum (n.) + runner.


jigger (n.)

1.5-ounce shot glass, 1836, American English, in early use also of the drink itself, from jigger
illicit distillery (1824), of unknown origin; or else perhaps from jigger, a 1756 alteration of
chigger tiny mite or flea. As a name for various appliances, the word is attested by 1825, from jig.


moonshine (n.)

c.1500, moonlight, from moon (n.) + shine (n.). In figurative use, implying appearance without
substance, from late 15c.; perhaps connected in that sense with notion of moonshine in water (see
moonraker). Meaning illicit liquor is attested from 1785 (earliest reference is to that smuggled on
the coasts of Kent and Sussex); moonlight also occasionally was used in this sense early 19c. As a
verb from 1883. Related: Moonshiner (1860).


left-handed (adj.)

late 14c., of persons; 1650s of tools, etc., from left (adj.) + handed. In 15c. it also could mean
maimed. Sense of underhanded is from early 17c., as in left-handed compliment (1787, also attested
1855 in pugilism slang for a punch with the left fist), as is that of illicit (as in left-handed
marriage). Related: Left-handedly; left-handedness.


pine (n.)

coniferous tree, Old English pin (in compounds), from Old French pin and directly from Latin pinus
pine, pine-tree, fir-tree, perhaps in reference to the sap or pitch, from PIE *peie- to be fat,
swell (see fat (adj.)). Compare Sanskrit pituh juice, sap, resin, pitudaruh pine tree, Greek pitys
pine tree. Also see pitch (n.1). Pine-top cheap illicit whiskey, first recorded 1858, Southern U.S.
slang. Pine-needle (n.) attested from 1866.


adultery (n.)

voluntary violation of the marriage bed, c.1300, avoutrie, from Old French avouterie (12c.), noun of
condition from avoutre, from Latin adulterare to corrupt (see adulteration). Modern spelling, with
the re-inserted -d-, is from early 15c. (see ad-).    In Middle English, also sex between husband
and wife for recreational purposes; idolatry, perversion, heresy. Classified as single adultery
(with an unmarried person) and double adultery (with a married person). Old English word was
&aelig;wbryce breach of law(ful marriage) (compare German Ehebruch). Adultery Dune in Arizona
corresponds to Navajo sei adilehe adultery sand, where illicit lovers met privately.


strumpet (n.)

harlot; bold, lascivious woman, early 14c., of uncertain origin. One theory connects it with Latin
stuprata, fem. past participle of stuprare have illicit sexual relations with, or Late Latin strupum
dishonor, violation. But evidence for this is wanting and others suggest Middle Dutch strompe a
stocking, or strompen to stride, to stalk (as a prostitute might a customer). The major sources
don't seem to give much preference to any of these. Weekley notes Gregory's Chronicle (c.1450) has
streppett in same sense. In 18c.-early 19c., often abbreviated as strum and also used as a verb,
which led to some odd dictionary entries:    TO STRUM: to have carnal knowledge of a woman, also to
play badly on the harpsichord or any other stringed instrument. [Capt. Francis Grose, A Classical
Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, 1785]


left (adj.)

c.1200, from Kentish and northern English form of Old English lyft- weak, foolish (compare lyft-adl
lameness, paralysis, East Frisian luf, Dutch dialectal loof weak, worthless). It emerged 13c. as
opposite of right (the left being usually the weaker hand), a derived sense also found in cognate
Middle Dutch and Low German luchter, luft. But German link, Dutch linker left are from Old High
German slinc and Middle Dutch slink left, related to Old English slincan crawl, Swedish linka limp,
slinka dangle.    Replaced Old English winestra, literally friendlier, a euphemism used
superstitiously to avoid invoking the unlucky forces connected with the left side (see sinister).
The Kentish word itself may have been originally a taboo replacement, if instead it represents PIE
root *laiwo-, meaning considered conspicuous (represented in Greek laios, Latin laevus, and Russian
levyi). Greek also uses a euphemism for left, aristeros the better one (compare also Avestan
vairyastara- to the left, from vairya- desirable). But Lithuanian kairys left and Lettish kreilis
left hand derive from a root that yields words for twisted, crooked.    As an adverb from early 14c.
As a noun from c.1200. Political sense arose from members of a legislative body assigned to the left
side of a chamber, first attested in English 1837 (by Carlyle, in reference to the French
Revolution), probably a loan-translation of French la gauche (1791), said to have originated during
the seating of the French National Assembly in 1789 in which the nobility took the seats on the
President's right and left the Third Estate to sit on the left. Became general in U.S. and British
political speech c.1900.    Used since at least c.1600 in various senses of irregular, illicit;
earlier proverbial sense was opposite of what is expressed (mid-15c.). Phrase out in left field out
of touch with pertinent realities is attested from 1944, from the baseball fielding position that
tends to be far removed from the play. To have two left feet be clumsy is attested by 1902. The Left
Bank of Paris (left bank of the River Seine, as you face downstream) has been associated with
intellectual and artistic culture since at least 1893.


