illusion (n.)

mid-14c., act of deception, from Old French illusion a mocking, deceit, deception (12c.), from Latin
illusionem (nominative illusio) a mocking, jesting, irony, from illudere mock at, literally to play
with, from assimilated form of in- at, upon (see in- (2)) + ludere to play (see ludicrous). Sense of
deceptive appearance developed in Church Latin and was attested in English by late 14c. Related:
Illusioned full of illusions (1920).


illusionist (n.)

conjurer, magic act performer, 1840, from illusion + -ist. Earlier one suffering from illusions
(1812).


illusionary (adj.)

1886, from illusion + -ary.


prestige (n.)

1650s, trick, from French prestige (16c.) deceit, imposture, illusion (in Modern French, illusion,
magic, glamour), from Latin praestigium delusion, illusion (see prestigious). Derogatory until 19c.;
sense of dazzling influence first applied 1815, to Napoleon.


disillusion (v.)

to free or be freed from illusion, 1855, from a noun meaning act of freeing from illusion (1814);
see dis- + illusion. Related: Disillusioned; disillusioning.


illusive (adj.)

deceptive, illusory, formed in English 1670s, from stem of illusion + -ive. Also see illusory.


hallucination (n.)

in the pathological/psychological sense of seeing or hearing something which is not there, 1640s,
from Latin hallucinationem (nominative hallucinatio), from past participle stem of hallucinari (see
hallucinate). Hallucination is distinct from illusion in not necessarily involving a false belief.
Related: Hallucinations.


phantom (n.)

c.1300, fantum illusion, unreality, from Old French fantosme (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *fantauma,
from Latin phantasma an apparition (see phantasm). The ph- was restored in English late 16c. (see
ph). Meaning specter, spirit, ghost is attested from late 14c.; that of something having the form,
but not the substance, of a real thing is from 1707. As an adjective from early 15c.


mirage (n.)

optical illusion of water in sandy deserts, 1812, from French mirage, from se mirer to be reflected,
from Latin mirare (see mirror). Or the French word is from Latin mirus wonderful (see miracle).


prestigious (adj.)

1540s, practicing illusion or magic, deceptive, from Latin praestigious full of tricks, from
praestigiae juggler's tricks, probably altered by dissimilation from praestrigiae, from
praestringere to blind, blindfold, dazzle, from prae before (see pre-) + stringere to tie or bind
(see strain (v.)). Derogatory until 19c.; meaning having dazzling influence is attested from 1913
(see prestige). Related: Prestigiously; prestigiousness.


saint (n.)

early 12c., from Old French saint, seinte a saint; a holy relic, displacing or altering Old English
sanct, both from Latin sanctus holy, consecrated (used as a noun in Late Latin; also source of
Spanish santo, santa, Italian san, etc.), properly past participle of sancire consecrate (see
sacred). Adopted into most Germanic languages (Old Frisian sankt, Dutch sint, German Sanct).
Originally an adjective prefixed to the name of a canonized person; by c.1300 it came to be regarded
as a noun. Meaning person of extraordinary holiness is recorded from 1560s.  <b>Saint</b>, n. A dead
sinner revised and edited. The Duchess of Orleans relates that the irreverent old calumniator,
Marshal Villeroi, who in his youth had known St. Francis de Sales, said, on hearing him called
saint: 'I am delighted to hear that Monsieur de Sales is a saint. He was fond of saying indelicate
things, and used to cheat at cards. In other respects he was a perfect gentleman, though a fool.'
[Ambrose Bierce, Devil's Dictionary, 1911]   <hr />   Perhaps you have imagined that this humility
in the saints is a pious illusion at which God smiles. That is a most dangerous error. It is
theoretically dangerous, because it makes you identify a virtue (i.e., a perfection) with an
illusion (i.e., an imperfection), which must be nonsense. It is practically dangerous because it
encourages a man to mistake his first insights into his own corruption for the first beginnings of a
halo round his own silly head. No, depend upon it; when the saints say that they--even they--are
vile, they are recording truth with scientific accuracy. [C.S. Lewis, The Problem of Pain, 1940]
Saint Bernard, the breed of mastiff dogs (1839), so called because the monks of the hospice of the
pass of St. Bernard (between Italy and Switzerland) sent them to rescue snowbound travelers; St.
Elmo's Fire corposant (1560s) is from Italian fuoco di Sant'Elmo, named for the patron saint of
Mediterranean sailors, a corruption of the name of St. Erasmus, an Italian bishop martyred in 303.


delusion (n.)

act of misleading someone, early 15c.; as a form of mental derangement, 1550s, from Latin delusionem
(nominative delusio) a deceiving, noun of action from past participle stem of deludere (see delude).
Technically, delusion is a belief that, though false, has been surrendered to and accepted by the
whole mind as a truth; illusion is an impression that, though false, is entertained provisionally on
the recommendation of the senses or the imagination, but awaits full acceptance and may not
influence action. Delusions of grandeur, the exact phrase, is recorded from 1840, though the two
words were in close association for some time before that.


fantasy (n.)

early 14c., illusory appearance, from Old French fantaisie (14c.) vision, imagination, from Latin
phantasia, from Greek phantasia appearance, image, perception, imagination, from phantazesthai
picture to oneself, from phantos visible, from phainesthai appear, in late Greek to imagine, have
visions, related to phaos, phos light, phainein to show, to bring to light (see phantasm). Sense of
whimsical notion, illusion is pre-1400, followed by that of imagination, which is first attested
1530s. Sense of day-dream based on desires is from 1926.


magic (n.)

late 14c., art of influencing events and producing marvels using hidden natural forces, from Old
French magique magic, magical, from Late Latin magice sorcery, magic, from Greek magike (presumably
with tekhne art), fem. of magikos magical, from magos one of the members of the learned and priestly
class, from Old Persian magush, possibly from PIE *magh- (1) to be able, to have power (see
machine).  Transferred sense of legerdemain, optical illusion, etc. is from 1811. Displaced Old
English wiccecr&aelig;ft (see witch); also drycr&aelig;ft, from dry magician, from Irish drui
priest, magician (see druid).


glamour (n.)

1720, Scottish, magic, enchantment (especially in phrase to cast the glamor), a variant of Scottish
gramarye magic, enchantment, spell, alteration of English grammar (q.v.) with a medieval sense of
any sort of scholarship, especially occult learning, the latter sense attested from c.1500 in
English but said to have been more common in Medieval Latin. Popularized by the writings of Sir
Walter Scott (1771-1832). Sense of magical beauty, alluring charm first recorded 1840. Jamieson's
1825 supplement to his Etymological Dictionary of the Scottish Language has glamour-gift the power
of enchantment; metaph. applied to female fascination. Jamieson's original edition (1808) looks to
Old Norse for the source of the word. Zoega's Old Icelandic dictionary has gl&#225;m-s&#253;ni
illusion.


phantasm (n.)

early 13c., fantesme, from Old French fantosme a dream, illusion, fantasy; apparition, ghost,
phantom (12c.), and directly from Latin phantasma an apparition, specter, from Greek phantasma
image, phantom, apparition; mere image, unreality, from phantazein to make visible, display, from
stem of phainein to bring to light, make appear; come to light, be seen, appear; explain, expound,
inform against; appear to be so, from PIE root *bha- (1) to shine (cognates: Sanskrit bhati shines,
glitters, Old Irish ban white, light, ray of light). Spelling conformed to Latin from 16c. (see ph).
A spelling variant of phantom, differentiated, but so that the differences are elusive [Fowler].


dream (n.)

mid-13c. in the sense sequence of sensations passing through a sleeping person's mind (also as a
verb), probably related to Old Norse draumr, Danish dr&oslash;m, Swedish dr&ouml;m, Old Saxon drom
merriment, noise, Old Frisian dram dream, Dutch droom, Old High German troum, German traum dream,
perhaps from Proto-Germanic *draugmas deception, illusion, phantasm (cognates: Old Saxon bidriogan,
Old High German triogan, German tr&uuml;gen to deceive, delude, Old Norse draugr ghost, apparition).
Possible cognates outside Germanic are Sanskrit druh- seek to harm, injure, Avestan druz- lie,
deceive.    But Old English dream meant only joy, mirth, noisy merriment, also music. And much study
has failed to prove that Old English dream is the root of the modern word for sleeping vision,
despite being identical in spelling. Either the meaning of the word changed dramatically or vision
was an unrecorded secondary Old English meaning of dream, or there are two separate words here. OED
offers this theory: It seems as if the presence of dream 'joy, mirth, music,' had caused dream
'dream' to be avoided, at least in literature, and swefn, lit. 'sleep,' to be substituted ....
Words for sleeping vision in Old English were m&aelig;ting and swefn. Old English swefn originally
meant sleep, as did a great many Indo-European dream nouns, such as Lithuanian sapnas, Old Church
Slavonic sunu, and the Romanic words (French songe, Spanish sue&#241;o, Italian sogno all from Latin
somnium (from PIE *swep-no-; cognate with Greek hypnos; see somnolence; Old English swefn is from
the same root). Dream in the sense of ideal or aspiration is from 1931, from earlier sense of
something of dream-like beauty or charm (1888).


