illuminate (v.)

c.1500, to light up, shine on, a back-formation from illumination, or else from Latin illuminatus,
past participle of illuminare (see illumination). Earlier was enlumyen (late 14c.) decorate written
material with gold, silver, bright colors, from Old French enluminer, from Late Latin inluminare;
also illumine (late 14c.). Related: Illuminated; illuminating.


limn (v.)

early 15c., to illuminate (manuscripts), altered from Middle English luminen, to illuminate
manuscripts (late 14c.), from Old French luminer light up, illuminate, from Latin luminare
illuminate, burnish, from lumen (genitive luminis) radiant energy, light, related to lucere to shine
(see light (n.)). Sense of portray, depict first recorded 1590s. Related: Limned.


illustration (n.)

c.1400, a shining; early 15c., a manifestation; mid-15c., a spiritual illumination, from Old French
illustration apparition, appearance, and directly from Latin illustrationem (nominative illustratio)
vivid representation (in writing), literally an enlightening, from past participle stem of
illustrare light up, make light, illuminate; figuratively make clear, disclose, explain; adorn,
render distinguished, from assimilated form of in- in (see in- (2)) + lustrare make bright,
illuminate, related to lucere shine, lux light (see light (n.)). Mental sense of act of making clear
in the mind is from 1580s. Meaning an illustrative picture is from 1816.


torch (v.)

1819, illuminate with a torch, from torch (n.). Meaning set fire to is from 1931. Related: Torched;
torching.


lighten (v.2)

shed light upon, illuminate, brighten, early 14c., from light (n.) -en (1). Meaning to grow brighter
is late 14c. Of faces, expressions, etc., from 1795. Related: Lightened; lightening.


light (v.2)

to illuminate, fill with brightness, Old English lyhtan, common Germanic (cognates: Old Saxon
liohtian, Old High German liuhtan, German leuchten, Gothic liuhtjan to light), from source of from
light (n.). Related: Lighted; lighting.


miniature (n.)

1580s, a reduced image, from Italian miniatura manuscript illumination or small picture, from past
participle of miniare to illuminate a manuscript, from Latin miniare to paint red, from minium red
lead, used in ancient times to make red ink, a word said to be of Iberian origin. Sense development
is because pictures in medieval manuscripts were small, but no doubt there was influence as well
from the similar-sounding Latin words that express smallness: minor, minimus, minutus, etc.


