illusory (adj.)

1590s, from French illusorie, from Late Latin illusorius ironical, of a mocking character, from
illus-, past participle stem of Latin illudere mock at, literally to play with, from assimilated
form of in- at, upon (see in- (2)) + ludere to play (see ludicrous).


illusive (adj.)

deceptive, illusory, formed in English 1670s, from stem of illusion + -ive. Also see illusory.


fantasy (n.)

early 14c., illusory appearance, from Old French fantaisie (14c.) vision, imagination, from Latin
phantasia, from Greek phantasia appearance, image, perception, imagination, from phantazesthai
picture to oneself, from phantos visible, from phainesthai appear, in late Greek to imagine, have
visions, related to phaos, phos light, phainein to show, to bring to light (see phantasm). Sense of
whimsical notion, illusion is pre-1400, followed by that of imagination, which is first attested
1530s. Sense of day-dream based on desires is from 1926.


mare (n.1)

female horse, Old English mere (Mercian), myre (West Saxon), fem. of mearh horse, from Proto-
Germanic *markhjon- (cognates: Old Saxon meriha, Old Norse merr, Old Frisian merrie, Dutch merrie,
Old High German meriha, German M&auml;hre mare), said to be of Gaulish origin (compare Irish and
Gaelic marc, Welsh march, Breton marh horse). No known cognates beyond Germanic and Celtic. As the
name of a throw in wrestling, it is attested from c.1600. Mare's nest illusory discovery, excitement
over something which does not exist is from 1610s.


never (adv.)

Old English n&aelig;fre never, compound of ne not, no (from PIE root *ne- no, not; see un- (1)) +
&aelig;fre ever (see ever). Early used as an emphatic form of not (as still in never mind). Old
English, unlike its modern descendant, had the useful custom of attaching ne to words to create
their negatives, as in nabban for na habban not to have.    Italian giammai, French jamais, Spanish
jamas are from Latin iam already + magis more; thus literally at any time, ever, originally with a
negative, but this has been so thoroughly absorbed in sense as to be formally omitted.    Phrase
never say die don't despair is from 1818. Never Never Land is first attested in Australia as a name
for the uninhabited northern part of Queensland (1884), perhaps so called because anyone who had
gone there once never wished to return. Meaning imaginary, illusory or utopian place first attested
1900 in American English.


fool (n.)

late 13c., silly or stupid person, from Old French fol madman, insane person; idiot; rogue; jester,
also blacksmith's bellows, also an adjective meaning mad, insane (12c., Modern French fou), from
Latin follis bellows, leather bag (see follicle); in Vulgar Latin used with a sense of windbag,
empty-headed person. Compare also Sanskrit vatula- insane, literally windy, inflated with wind.
The word has in mod.Eng. a much stronger sense than it had at an earlier period; it has now an
implication of insulting contempt which does not in the same degree belong to any of its synonyms,
or to the derivative foolish. [OED]    Meaning jester, court clown first attested late 14c., though
it is not always possible to tell whether the reference is to a professional entertainer or an
amusing lunatic on the payroll. As the name of a kind of custard dish, it is attested from 1590s
(the food also was called trifle, which may be the source of the name).    There is no foole to the
olde foole [Heywood, 1546] Feast of Fools (early 14c.), from Medieval Latin festum stultorum) refers
to the burlesque festival celebrated in some churches on New Year's Day in medieval times. Fool's
gold iron pyrite is from 1829. Fool's paradise state of illusory happiness is from mid-15c.
Foolosopher, a most useful insult, turns up in a 1549 translation of Erasmus. Fool's ballocks is
described in OED as an old name for the green-winged orchid.


