imbibe (v.)

late 14c., from Old French imbiber, embiber to soak into, from Latin imbibere absorb, drink in,
inhale, from assimilated form of in- into, in, on, upon (see in- (2)) + bibere to drink, related to
potare to drink, from PIE *po(i)- to drink (see potion). Figurative sense of mentally drink in
(knowledge, ideas, etc.) was the main one in classical Latin, first attested in English 1550s.
Related: Imbibed; imbibing.


beverage (n.)

mid-13c., from Anglo-French beverage, Old French bevrage, from Old French boivre to drink (Modern
French boire; from Latin bibere to imbibe; see imbibe) + -age, suffix forming mass or abstract
nouns.


bib (n.)

linen worn over the breast while eating, 1570s, from verb bibben to drink (late 14c.), imitative of
lip sounds, or else from Latin bibere (see imbibe), but difficult now to say whether this is because
it was worn while drinking or because it soaked up spills.


pinocytosis (n.)

from Greek pinein to drink (see imbibe) + -cytosis.


bibulous (adj.)

1670s, spongy, absorbent, from Latin bibulus drinking readily, given to drink; of things, absorbent;
moistened, from bibere to drink (see imbibe). Meaning fond of drink attested in English by 1861.


bibitory (adj.)

pertaining to drinking, 1690s, from Modern Latin bibitorius, from Late Latin bibitor drinker, toper,
from bibere to drink (see imbibe).


imbue (v.)

early 15c., to keep wet; to soak, saturate; also figuratively to cause to absorb (feelings,
opinions, etc.), from Latin imbuere moisten, of uncertain origin, perhaps from the same root as
imbrication. Compare also Old French embu, past participle of emboivre, from Latin imbibere drink
in, soak in (see imbibe), which might have influenced the English word. Related: Imbued; imbuing.


imbrue (v.)

early 15c., to soak, steep; mid-15c., to stain, soil, from Old French embreuvere to moisten, a
metathesis of embeuvrer, from em- (see im-) + -bevrer, ultimately from Latin bibere to drink (see
imbibe). Or perhaps from Old French embroue soiled, ultimately from boue mud, dirt.


swallow (v.)

ingest through the throat (transitive), Old English swelgan swallow, imbibe, absorb (class III
strong verb; past tense swealg, past participle swolgen), from Proto-Germanic *swelgan/*swelhan
(cognates: Old Saxon farswelgan, Old Norse svelgja to swallow, Middle Dutch swelghen, Dutch zwelgen
to gulp, swallow, Old High German swelahan to swallow, German schwelgen to revel), probably from PIE
root *swel- (1) to eat, drink (cognates: Iranian *khvara- eating).    Intransitive sense perform the
act of swallowing is from c.1700. Sense of consume, destroy is attested from mid-14c. Meaning to
accept without question is from 1590s. Related: Swallowed; swallowing.


drink (v.)

Old English drincan to drink, also to swallow up, engulf (class III strong verb; past tense dranc,
past participle druncen), from Proto-Germanic *drenkan (cognates: Old Saxon drinkan, Old Frisian
drinka, Dutch drinken, Old High German trinkan, German trinken, Old Norse drekka, Gothic drigkan to
drink), of uncertain origin or connections, perhaps from a root meaning to draw.    Most Indo-
European words for this trace to PIE *po(i)- (source of Greek pino, Latin biber, Irish ibim, Old
Church Slavonic piti, Russian pit'; see imbibe).    The noun meaning beverage, alcoholic beverage
was in late Old English.  The noun, AS. drinc, would normally have given southern drinch (cf.
drench), but has been influenced by the verb. [Weekley]    To drink like a fish is first recorded
1747.


beer (n.)

Old English beor strong drink, beer, mead, a word of much-disputed and ambiguous origin, cognate
with Old Frisian biar, Middle Dutch and Dutch bier, Old High German bior, German Bier.    Probably a
6c. West Germanic monastic borrowing of Vulgar Latin biber a drink, beverage (from Latin infinitive
bibere to drink; see imbibe). Another suggestion is that it comes from Proto-Germanic *beuwoz-, from
*beuwo- barley. The native Germanic word for the beverage was the one that yielded ale (q.v.).
Beer was a common drink among most of the European peoples, as well as in Egypt and Mesopotamia, but
was known to the Greeks and Romans only as an exotic product. [Buck]    They did have words for it,
however. Greek brytos, used in reference to Thracian or Phrygian brews, was related to Old English
breowan brew; Latin zythum is from Greek zythos, first used of Egyptian beer and treated as an
Egyptian word but perhaps truly Greek and related to zyme leaven. French bi&egrave;re is from
Germanic. Spanish cerveza is from Latin cervesia beer, perhaps related to Latin cremor thick broth.
Old Church Slavonic pivo, source of the general Slavic word for beer, is originally a drink (compare
Old Church Slavonic piti drink). French bi&egrave;re is a 16c. borrowing from German. U.S. slang
beer goggles, through which every potential romantic partner looks desirable, is from 1986.


