impartial (adj.)

formed in English 1590s from assimilated form of in- (1) not, opposite of + partial. First recorded
in Richard II.


impartiality (n.)

1610s; see impartial + -ity.


unbiased (adj.)

c.1600, literal, in reference to throws at bowls, from un- (1) not + biased. Figurative sense of
impartial, unprejudiced is recorded from 1640s.


indifferent (adj.)

late 14c., unbiased, from Old French indifferent impartial or directly from Latin indifferentem
(nominative indifferens) not differing, not particular, of not consequence, neither good nor evil,
from in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + differens, present participle of differre set apart (see
differ). Extended sense of apathetic first recorded early 15c.; that of neither good nor bad 1530s,
on notion of neither more nor less advantageous.


disinterested (adj.)

1610s, unconcerned, the sense we now would ascribe to uninterested, with the sense of impartial
going to disinteressed (c.1600). See dis- + interest. Modern sense of disinterested is first
attested 1650s. As things now stand, disinterested means free from personal bias, while uninterested
means caring nothing for the matter in question. Related: Disinterestedly; disinterestedness.


just (adj.)

late 14c., righteous in the eyes of God; upright, equitable, impartial; justifiable, reasonable,
from Old French juste just, righteous; sincere (12c.), from Latin iustus upright, equitable, from
ius right, especially legal right, law, from Old Latin ious, perhaps literally sacred formula, a
word peculiar to Latin (not general Italic) that originated in the religious cults, from PIE root
*yewes- law (cognates: Avestan yaozda- make ritually pure; see jurist). The more mundane Latin law-
word lex covered specific laws as opposed to the body of laws. The noun meaning righteous person or
persons is from late 14c.


rule (n.)

c.1200, principle or maxim governing conduct, formula to which conduct must be conformed from Old
French riule, Norman reule rule, custom, (religious) order (in Modern French partially re-Latinized
as r&#232;gle), from Vulgar Latin *regula, from Latin regula straight stick, bar, ruler;
figuratively a pattern, a model, related to regere to rule, straighten, guide (see regal). Replaced
Old English wealdan.    Meaning regulation governing play of a game, etc. is from 1690s. Phrase rule
of thumb first attested 1690s. Rule of law supremacy of impartial and well-defined laws to any
individual's power is from 1883. Meaning strip used for making straight lines or measuring is
recorded from mid-14c. Typography sense is attested from 1680s.


