impart (v.)

early 15c., to give a part of (one's possessions); late 15c., to share, take part, from Old French
impartir (14c.), from Late Latin impartire (also impertire) to share in, divide with another,
communicate, from assimilated form of in- into, in (see in- (2)) + partire to divide, part (see part
(v.)). Related: Imparted; imparting.


communicate (v.)

1520s, to impart (information, etc.), from Latin communicatus, past participle of communicare
impart, inform (see communication). Meaning to share, transmit (diseases, etc.) is from 1530s.
Related: Communicated; communicating.


seasoning (n.)

act of adding flavor, 1510s; something added to a dish to impart flavor, 1570s, verbal noun from
season (v.).


communicative (adj.)

late 14c., that communicates, from French communicatif, from Latin communicat-, past participle stem
of communicare impart, inform (see communication). Meaning talkative is recorded from 1650s.


communique (n.)

1852, from French communiqu&eacute;, originally past participle of communiquer to communicate
(14c.), from Latin communicare impart, inform (see communication). Originally the heading of
official statements from the French government. Better, if it must be used in English, to print it
with the accent.


perfume (v.)

1530s, to fill with smoke or vapor, from perfume (n.) or from Middle French parfumer. Meaning to
impart a sweet scent to is from 1530s. Related: Perfumed; perfuming.


tone (v.)

to impart tone to, 1811, from tone (n.). Related: Toned; toning. To tone (something) down originally
was in painting (1831); general sense of reduce, moderate is by 1847.


incommunicado (adj./adv.)

1844, American English, from Spanish incomunicado, past participle of incomunicar deprive of
communication, from in- not + comunicar communicate, from Latin communicare to share, impart (see
communication).


communication (n.)

late 14c., from Old French comunicacion (14c., Modern French communication), from Latin
communicationem (nominative communicatio), noun of action from past participle stem of communicare
to share, divide out; communicate, impart, inform; join, unite, participate in, literally to make
common, from communis (see common (adj.)).


participate (v.)

1530s, back-formation from participation, or else from Latin participatus, past participle of
participare to share, share in, participate in; to impart, from particeps partaking, sharing, from
parti, past participle of partir to divide (see part (n.)) + -cip-, weak form of stem of capere to
take (see capable). Related: Participated; participating.


participation (n.)

late 14c., from Old French participacion (13c.) and directly from Late Latin participationem
(nominative participatio) partaking, noun of action from past participle stem of Latin participare
participate in, share in, partake of; to make partaker, to share, impart, from particeps (genitive
participis) partaker, comrade, fellow soldier, also, as an adjective, sharing, partaking, from pars
(genitive partis) part (see part (n.)) + -cip-, weak form of stem of capere to take (see capable).


mannequin (n.)

1902, model to display clothes, from French mannequin (15c.), from Dutch manneken (see manikin). A
French form of the same word that yielded manikin, and sometimes mannequin was used in English in a
sense artificial man (especially in translations of Hugo). Originally of persons, in a sense where
we might use model.    A mannequin is a good-looking, admirably formed young lady, whose mission is
to dress herself in her employer's latest creations, and to impart to them the grace which only
perfect forms can give. Her grammar may be bad, and her temper worse, but she must have the chic the
Parisienne possesses, no matter whether she hails from the aristocratic Faubourg St. Germain or from
the Faubourg Montmartre. [The Bystander, Aug. 15, 1906]    Later (by 1939) of artificial model
figures to display clothing.


