impendent

1590s, from Latin impendens impending, present participle of impendere (see impend).


offing (n.)

in phrase in the offing, 1779, from nautical term offing the more distant part of the sea as seen
from the shore (1620s), from off (q.v.) + noun suffix -ing (1). Originally the phrase meant in the
distant future; modern sense of impending developed 1914.


promethium (n.)

radioactive element, long one of the missing elements, 1948, so called by discoverers Jacob Marinsky
and Lawrence Glendenin, who detected it in 1945 in the fusion products of uranium while working on
the Manhattan Project. From Prometheus, who stole fire from the gods and was punished for it, +
element name ending -ium. The name not only symbolizes the dramatic way in which the element may be
produced in quantity as a result of man's harnessing of the energy of nuclear fission, but also
warns man of the impending danger of punishment by the vulture of war. [Marinsky and Glendenin]


impend (v.)

1590s, from figurative use of Latin impendere to hang over, to be imminent, from assimilated form of
in- into, in, on, upon (see in- (2)) + pendere hang (see pendant). Related: Impended; impending.


warn (v.)

Old English warnian to give notice of impending danger, also intransitive, to take heed, from Proto-
Germanic *war-non (cognates: Old Norse varna to admonish, Old High German warnon to take heed,
German warnen to warn), from PIE *wer- (5) to cover (see weir). Related: Warned; warning.


kiss (n.)

Old English coss; see kiss (v.). It became Middle English cuss, but this yielded to kiss, from the
verb. Kiss of death in figurative sense thing that signifies impending failure is from 1944
(Billboard, Oct. 21), ultimately in reference to Judas's kiss in Gethsemane (Matt. xxvi:48-50). The
kiss of peace was, in Old English, sibbecoss (for first element, see sibling).


reprieve (v.)

1570s, reprive, take back to prison, alteration (perhaps by influence of reprove) of Middle English
repryen to remand, detain (late 15c.), probably from Middle French repris, past participle of
reprendre take back (see reprise). Meaning to suspend an impending execution is recorded from 1590s;
this sense evolved because being sent back to prison was the alternative to being executed. Spelling
with -ie- is from 1640s, perhaps by analogy of achieve, etc. Related: Reprieved; reprieving.


monster (n.)

early 14c., malformed animal or human, creature afflicted with a birth defect, from Old French
monstre, mostre monster, monstrosity (12c.), and directly from Latin monstrum divine omen, portent,
sign; abnormal shape; monster, monstrosity, figuratively repulsive character, object of dread, awful
deed, abomination, from root of monere warn (see monitor (n.)). Abnormal or prodigious animals were
regarded as signs or omens of impending evil. Extended by late 14c. to imaginary animals composed of
parts of creatures (centaur, griffin, etc.). Meaning animal of vast size is from 1520s; sense of
person of inhuman cruelty or wickedness is from 1550s. As an adjective, of extraordinary size, from
1837. In Old English, the monster Grendel was an agl&aelig;ca, a word related to agl&aelig;c
calamity, terror, distress, oppression.


