impenetrable (adj.)

mid-15c., from Middle French impenetrable, from Latin impenetrabilis that cannot be penetrated, from
assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + penetrabilis penetrable (see penetrate).
Related: Impenetrably; impenetrability.


unpenetrable (adj.)

c.1400, from un- (1) not + penetrable (adj.). The usual word now is impenetrable.


Iron Curtain (n.)

in reference to the Soviet occupation of Eastern Europe, famously coined by Winston Churchill March
5, 1946, in speech at Westminster College, Fulton, Missouri, but it had been used earlier in this
context (for example by U.S. bureaucrat Allen W. Dulles at a meeting of the Council on Foreign
Relations, Dec. 3, 1945). The figurative sense of impenetrable barrier is attested from 1819, and
the specific sense of barrier at the edge of the sphere of influence of the Soviet Union is recorded
from 1920. During World War II, Goebbels used it in German (ein eiserner Vorhang) in the same sense.
Its popular use in the U.S. dates from Churchill's speech.


brick (n.)

early 15c., from Old French briche brick, probably from a Germanic source akin to Middle Dutch
bricke a tile, literally a broken piece, from the verbal root of break (v.). Meaning a good, honest
fellow is from 1840, probably on notion of squareness (as in fair and square) though most extended
senses of brick (and square) applied to persons in English are not meant to be complimentary. Brick
wall in the figurative sense of impenetrable barrier is from 1886.


swamp (n.)

c.1500 (implied in swampwatyr swamp-water), of uncertain origin, perhaps [Barnhart] a dialectal
survival from an Old English cognate of Old Norse sv&ouml;ppr sponge, fungus, from Proto-Germanic
*swampuz; but traditionally connected with Middle English sompe morass, swamp, which probably is
from Middle Dutch somp or Middle Low German sump swamp (see sump). All of these likely are
ultimately related to each other, from PIE *swombho- spongy; mushroom, via the notion of spongy
ground.    [B]y swamps then in general is to be understood any low grounds subject to inundations,
distinguished from marshes, in having a large growth of timber, and much underwood, canes, reeds,
wythes, vines, briers, and such like, so matted together, that they are in a great measure
impenetrable to man or beast .... [Bernard Romans, A Concise History of East and West Florida, 1775]
More popular in U.S. (swamp (n.) by itself is first attested 1624 in Capt. John Smith's description
of Virginia). Swamp-oak is from 1680s, American English. Swamp Yankee rural, rustic New Englander is
attested from 1941. Thornton's American Glossary (1912) has swamp-angel dweller in a swamp, swamp-
law might makes right.


