imperial (adj.)

late 14c., having a commanding quality, from Old French imperial (12c.), from Latin imperialis of
the empire or emperor, from imperium (see empire). Meaning pertaining to an empire (especially the
Roman) is from late 14c. Imperial presidency in a U.S. context traces to Arthur Schlesinger Jr.'s
book on the Nixon administration (1974). Related: Imperially.


imperialistic (adj.)

1872, from imperial + -istic. Also see imperialist.


imperialist (n.)

c.1600, an adherent of an emperor, such as the emperor of Germany, France, China, etc., probably
modeled on French imp&eacute;rialiste (early 16c.); from imperial + -ist. The shift in meaning to
advocate of imperialism (1893) came via the British Empire, which involved a worldwide colonial
system. See imperialism. As a term of abuse in communist circles, attested by 1918. As an adjective
by 1816.


imperialism (n.)

1826, advocacy of empire, originally in a Napoleonic context, also of Rome and of British foreign
policy, from imperial + -ism. At times in British usage (and briefly in U.S.) with a neutral or
positive sense relating to national interests or the spread of the benefits of Western civilization,
but from the begining usually more or less a term of reproach. General sense of one country's rule
over another, first recorded 1878. Picked up disparagingly in Communist jargon by 1918.    It is the
old story of 1798, when French republicanism sick of its own folly and misdeeds, became
metamorphosed into imperialism, and consoled itself for its incapacity to found domestic freedom by
putting an iron yoke upon Europe, and covering it with blood and battle-fields. [Francis Lloyd, St.
James's Magazine, January 1842]


drang nach Osten (n.)

1906, former German imperial policy of eastward expansion; literally pressure to the east.


Kate

fem. proper name, pet form of Katherine. In World War II it was the Allies' nickname for the
standard torpedo bomber used by the Imperial Japanese Navy.


Pekingese

1907, small long-haired dog of the pug type, so called because originally brought from the Imperial
Palace at Peking, China. Also Pekinese.


Lipizzan

1911, from Lipizza, home of the former Austrian Imperial Stud; term used to designate horses
originally bred there. The city is modern-day Lipica near Trieste in Slovenia (Lipizza is the
Italian form of the name).


Octobrist (n.)

1., from Russian oktyabrist, member of the league formed October 1905 in response to imperial
policies; 2., from Russian Oktyabryonok, member of a Russian communist children's organization
founded 1925 and named in honor of the October Revolution.


anker (n.)

also anchor, liquid measure in North Sea and Baltic trade, early 14c., from Dutch, related to German
Anker, Swedish ankare, Medieval Latin anceria keg, vat, of unknown origin. That of Rotterdam, once
used in England, equaled 10 old wine or 8.5 imperial gallons.


consistory (n.)

c.1300, secular tribunal, from Old North French consistorie (Old French consistoire, 12c.) and
directly from Late Latin consistorium waiting room, meeting place of the imperial council, from
Latin consistere (see consist). Meaning Church council is from early 14c.


telekinesis (n.)

1890, said in early references to have been coined by Alexander N. Aksakof (1832-1903) Imperial
Councilor to the Czar, in Modern Latin, literally motion at a distance, from tele- +  Greek kinesis
movement, motion, from PIE root *keie- to set in motion (see cite). Translates German Fernwirkung.
Related: Telekinetic.


empyrean (n.)

mid-14c. (as empyre), from Greek empyros fiery, from en (see en- (2)) + pyr fire (see fire (n.));
confused by early writers with imperial. In Greek cosmology, the highest heaven, the sphere of pure
fire; later baptized with a Christian gloss as the abode of God and the angels.


Guelph

one of the two great parties in medieval Italian politics, characterized by support of the popes
against the emperors (opposed to the Ghibellines), 1570s, from Italian Guelfo, from Old High German
Welf, name of a princely family that became the ducal house of Brunswick, literally whelp,
originally the name of the founder. The family are the ancestors of the present dynasty of Great
Britain. The name is said to have been used as a war-cry at the Battle of Weinsberg (1140) by
partisans of Henry the Lion, duke of Bavaria, who was of the family, against Emperor Conrad III;
hence it was adopted in Italy as the name of the anti-imperial party.


Reichstag (n.)

German imperial parliament (1871-1918), earlier used of the chief deliberative body of the North
German Confederacy, 1867, from German Reichstag, from Reich (see Reich) + Tag assembly, literally
day (see day). The Reichstag Fire was Feb. 27, 1933.


solidus (n.)

late 14c., plural solidi, used of both English shilling and Roman gold coin, from Late Latin
solidus, an imperial Roman coin (worth about 25 denarii), from nummus solidus, literally solid coin,
properly a coin of thick or solid metal, not of thin plate (see solid (adj.)).


viscount (n.)

late 14c., deputy of a count or earl, from Anglo-French and Old French visconte (Modern French
vicomte), from Medieval Latin vicecomes (genitive vicecomitis), from Late Latin vice- deputy (see
vice-) + Latin comes member of an imperial court, nobleman (see count (n.)). As a rank in British
peerage, first recorded 1440. Related: Viscountess.


empire (n.)

early 14c., from Old French empire rule, authority, kingdom, imperial rule, from Latin imperium
rule, command, from imperare to command, from im- in (see in- (2)) + parare to order, prepare (see
pare).    Not etymologically restricted to territory ruled by an emperor, but used that way. The
Empire, meaning the British Empire, first recorded 1772 (it officially devolved into The
Commonwealth in 1931); before that it meant the Holy Roman Empire (1670s). Empire style (especially
in reference to a style of dresses with high waistlines) is 1869, from the Second Empire rule of
Napoleon III of France (1852-70). New York has been called the Empire State since 1834.


sun (n.)

Old English sunne sun, from Proto-Germanic *sunnon (cognates: Old Norse, Old Saxon, Old High German
sunna, Middle Dutch sonne, Dutch zon, German Sonne, Gothic sunno the sun), from PIE *s(u)wen-
(cognates: Avestan xueng sun, Old Irish fur-sunnud lighting up), alternative form of root *saewel-
to shine; sun (see Sol).    Old English sunne was feminine (as generally in Germanic), and the fem.
pronoun was used in English until 16c.; since then masc. has prevailed. The empire on which the sun
never sets (1630) originally was the Spanish, later the British. To have one's place in the sun
(1680s) is from Pascal's Pens&eacute;es; the German imperial foreign policy sense (1897) is from a
speech by von B&uuml;low.


minstrel (n.)

early 13c., from Old French menestrel entertainer, poet, musician; servant, workman; good-for-
nothing, rogue, from Medieval Latin ministralis servant, jester, singer, from Late Latin
ministerialem (nominative ministerialis) imperial household officer, one having an official duty,
from ministerialis (adj.) ministerial, from Latin ministerium (see ministry). The connecting notion
is via the jester, etc., as a court position.    Specific sense of musician developed in Old French,
but in English until 16c. the word was used of anyone (singers, storytellers, jugglers, buffoons)
whose profession was to entertain patrons. Only in 18c. was the word limited, in a historical sense,
to medieval singer of heroic or lyric poetry who accompanied himself on a stringed instrument.
Reference to blackface music acts in U.S. is from 1843.


tank (n.)

1610s, pool or lake for irrigation or drinking water, a word originally brought by the Portuguese
from India, from a Hindi source, such as Gujarati tankh cistern, underground reservoir for water,
Marathi tanken, or tanka reservoir of water, tank. Perhaps ultimately from Sanskrit tadaga-m pond,
lake pool, and reinforced in later sense of large artificial container for liquid (1680s) by
Portuguese tanque reservoir, from estancar hold back a current of water, from Vulgar Latin
*stanticare (see stanch). But other sources say the Portuguese word is the source of the Indian
ones. Meaning fuel container is recorded from 1902. Slang meaning detention cell is from 1912.
Railroad tank-car is from 1874.    In military use, armored, gun-mounted vehicle moving on
continuous articulated tracks, the word originated late 1915. In Tanks in the Great War [1920],
Brevet Col. J.F.C. Fuller quotes a memorandum of the Committee of Imperial Defence dated Dec. 24,
1915, recommending the proposed caterpillar machine-gun destroyer machines be entrusted to an
organization which, for secrecy, shall be called the 'Tank Supply Committee,' ... In a footnote,
Fuller writes, This is the first appearance of the word 'tank' in the history of the machine. He
writes that cistern and reservoir also were put forth as possible cover names, all of which were
applicable to the steel-like structure of the machines in the early stages of manufacture. Because
it was less clumsy and monosyllabic, the name 'tank' was decided on. They were first used in action
at Pozieres ridge, on the Western Front, Sept. 15, 1916, and the name was quickly picked up by the
soldiers. Tank-trap attested from 1920.


toga (n.)

c.1600, from Latin toga cloak or mantle, from PIE *tog-a- covering, from root *(s)teg- to cover (see
stegosaurus). The outer garment of a Roman citizen in time of peace.    The toga as the Roman
national dress was allowed to be worn by free citizens only. A stranger not in full possession of
the rights of a Roman citizen could not venture to appear in it. Even banished Romans were in
imperial times precluded from wearing it. The appearance in public in a foreign dress was considered
as contempt of the majesty of the Roman people. Even boys appeared in the toga, called, owing to the
purple edge attached to it (a custom adopted from the Etruscans) toga praetexta. On completing his
sixteenth, afterward his fifteenth, year (tirocinium fori), the boy exchanged the toga praetexta for
the toga virilis, pura, or libera--a white cloak without the purple edge. Roman ladies (for these
also wore the toga) abandoned the purple edge on being married. [Guhl &amp; Koner, The Life of the
Greeks and Romans, transl. Francis Hueffer, 1876]    Breeches, like the word for them (Latin bracae)
were alien to the Romans, being the dress of Persians, Germans, and Gauls, so that bracatus wearing
breeches was a term in Roman geography meaning north of the Alps. College fraternity toga party was
re-popularized by movie Animal House (1978), but this is set in 1962 and the custom seems to date
from at least the mid-1950s.    Down on Prospect Street, Campus Club held a toga party, at which
everyone wore togas. Charter held a come-as-you-are party, at which everyone wore what they happened
to have on, and Cloister held a party called A Night in Tahiti, at which we'd hate to guess what
everyone wore. The borough police reported that only one false alarm was turned in. [Princeton
Alumni Weekly, March 19, 1954]


spirit (n.)

mid-13c., animating or vital principle in man and animals, from Anglo-French spirit, Old French
espirit spirit, soul (12c., Modern French esprit) and directly from Latin spiritus a breathing
(respiration, and of the wind), breath; breath of a god, hence inspiration; breath of life, hence
life; also disposition, character; high spirit, vigor, courage; pride, arrogance, related to spirare
to breathe, from PIE *(s)peis- to blow (cognates: Old Church Slavonic pisto to play on the flute).
Meaning supernatural immaterial creature; angel, demon; an apparition, invisible corporeal being of
an airy nature is attested from mid-14c.; from late 14c. as a ghost (see ghost (n.)). From c.1500 as
a nature, character; sense of essential principle of something (in a non-theological context, as in
Spirit of St. Louis) is attested from 1680s, common after 1800; Spirit of '76 in reference to the
qualities that sparked and sustained the American Revolution is attested by 1797 in William
Cobbett's Porcupine's Gazette and Daily Advertiser.    From late 14c. in alchemy as volatile
substance; distillate; from c.1500 as substance capable of uniting the fixed and the volatile
elements of the philosopher's stone. Hence spirits volatile substance; sense narrowed to strong
alcoholic liquor by 1670s. This also is the sense in spirit level (1768). Also from mid-14c. as
character, disposition; way of thinking and feeling, state of mind; source of a human desire; in
Middle English freedom of spirit meant freedom of choice. From late 14c. as divine substance, divine
mind, God; also Christ or His divine nature; the Holy Ghost; divine power; also, extension of divine
power to man; inspiration, a charismatic state; charismatic power, especially of prophecy. Also
essential nature, essential quality. From 1580s in metaphoric sense animation, vitality.
According to Barnhart and OED, originally in English mainly from passages in Vulgate, where the
Latin word translates Greek pneuma and Hebrew ruah. Distinction between soul and spirit (as seat of
emotions) became current in Christian terminology (such as Greek psykhe vs. pneuma, Latin anima vs.
spiritus) but is without significance for earlier periods [Buck]. Latin spiritus, usually in
classical Latin breath, replaces animus in the sense spirit in the imperial period and appears in
Christian writings as the usual equivalent of Greek pneuma. Spirit-rapping is from 1852.


