imperative (n.)

mid-15c., in grammar; later something imperative (c.1600), from Old French imperatif and directly
from Late Latin imperativus (see imperative (adj.)).


imperative (adj.)

1520s, from Late Latin imperativus pertaining to a command, from imperatus commanded, past
participle of imperare to command, to requisition, from assimilated form of in- into, in (see in-
(2)) + parare prepare (see pare).


allons

well! French, literally let us go, first person plural imperative of aller to go.


aroint (v.)

intransitive verb, c.1600, used by Shakespeare (only in imperative: begone!), obsolete and of
obscure origin. [T]he subject of numerous conjectures, none of which can be said to have even a
prima facie probability. [OED]


quaere

Latin imperative of quaerere to ask, inquire (see query (v.)). Hence one may ask (1530s) as an
introduction to a question.


vide

see, Latin imperative singular of videre to see (see vision).


vade

Latin, imperative singular of vadere to go (see vamoose).


tace

be silent! Latin imperative of tacere to be silent (see tacit).


imperator (n.)

commander-in-chief, Latin agent noun from stem of imperare to command (see imperative). In the Roman
republic, a commander; in the Roman Empire, the emperor.


ave

hail, also farewell, early 13c. (in reference to the Ave Maria), from Latin ave, second person
singular imperative of avere to be or fare well.


vid.

abbreviation of vide, Latin imperative singular of videre to see (see vision).


begone (v.)

late 14c., contracted from be (imperative) + gone.


dele

typographer's direction to blot out a letter, from Latin dele, imperative singular of delere (see
delete).


vade-mecum (n.)

a pocket manual, handbook, 1620s, Latin, literally go with me; from imperative of vadere to go (see
vamoose) + me me + cum with.


sick (v.)

to chase, set upon (as in command sick him!), 1845, dialectal variant of seek. Used as an imperative
to incite a dog to attack a person or animal; hence cause to pursue. Related: Sicked; sicking.


scram (v.)

1928, U.S. slang, either a shortened form of scramble (v.) or from German schramm, imperative
singular of schrammen depart. Related: Scrammed; scramming.


mush (interj.)

command to sled dogs, first recorded 1862, as mouche, perhaps altered from French marchons! advance!
(imperative of marcher to march; see march (v.)).


Shema

from Hebrew shema hear!, imperative of shama to hear. First word of Deut. vi:4.


para- (2)

word-forming element meaning defense, protection against; that which protects from, from Italian
para, imperative of parare to ward off, from Latin parare make ready (see pare).


experto crede

Latin (Aeneid, xi.283), take it from one who knows; from dative singular of expertus (see expert
(adj.)) + imperative singular of credere (see credo).


praecipe (n.)

c.1500 (in Magna Carta in Anglo-Latin), from Latin praecipe, imperative of praecipere to admonish,
enjoin, from the opening words of such a writ, praecipe quod reddat enjoin (him) that he render.


lo (interj.)

early 13c., from Old English la, exclamation of surprise, grief, or joy; influenced in Middle
English by lo!, short for lok look! imperative of loken to look (see look (v.)). Expression lo and
behold attested by 1779.


shampoo (v.)

1762, to massage, from Anglo-Indian shampoo, from Hindi champo, imperative of champna to press,
knead the muscles, perhaps from Sanskrit capayati pounds, kneads. Meaning wash the hair first
recorded 1860; extended 1954 to carpets, upholstery, etc. Related: Shampooed; shampooing.


parry (v.)

1630s, from French parez! (which commonly would have been heard in fencing lessons), imperative of
parer ward off, from Italian parare to ward or defend a blow (see para- (2)). Related: Parried;
parrying. Non-fencing use is from 1718. The noun is 1705, from the verb.


categorical (adj.)

1590s, as a term in logic, unqualified, asserting absolutely, from Late Latin categoricus, from
Greek kategorikos accusatory, affirmative, categorical, from kategoria (see category). General sense
of explicit, unconditional is from 1610s. Categorical imperative, from the philosophy of Kant, first
recorded 1827. Related: Categorically.


recipe (n.)

1580s, medical prescription, from Middle French r&eacute;cip&eacute; (15c.), from Latin recipe
take!, second person imperative singular of recipere to take (see receive); word written by
physicians at the head of prescriptions. Figurative use from 1640s. Meaning instructions for
preparing food first recorded 1743. The original sense survives only in the pharmacist's
abbreviation Rx.


voila (interj.)

1739, French voil&#224;, imperative of voir to see, to view (from Latin videre to see; see vision) +
la there (from Latin ille yonder).


dirge (n.)

early 13c., dirige (current contracted form is from c.1400), from Latin dirige direct! imperative of
dirigere to direct, probably from antiphon Dirige, Domine, Deus meus, in conspectu tuo viam meam,
Direct, O Lord, my God, my way in thy sight, from Psalm v:9, which opened the Matins service in the
Office of the Dead. Transferred sense of any funeral song is from c.1500.


valediction (n.)

a farewell, a bidding farewell, 1610s, from past participle stem of Latin valedicere bid farewell,
take leave, from vale farewell!, second person singular imperative of valere be well, be strong (see
valiant) + dicere to say (see diction).


hosanna

Old English osanna, via Latin and Greek from Hebrew hosha'na, probably a shortening of hoshi'ah-nna
save, we pray (see Psalms cxviii:25), from imperative of y-sh- (compare yeshua salvation,
deliverance, welfare) + emphatic particle -na. Originally an appeal for deliverance; used in
Christian Church as an ascription of praise, because when Jesus entered Jerusalem this was shouted
by Galilean pilgrims in recognition of his messiahhood (Matt. xxi:9, 15, etc.).


Parabellum (n.)

proprietary name for a type of automatic firearm, 1904 (Mauser &amp; Deutsche Waffen und
Munitionsfabriken), from Latin phrase si vis pacem, para bellum, from para, imperative of parare to
prepare (see para- (2)) + bellum war (see bellicose).


hallelujah

also halleluiah, 1530s, from Hebrew hallalu-yah praise ye Jehovah, from hallalu, plural imperative
of hallel to praise also song of praise, from hillel he praised, of imitative origin, with primary
sense being to trill. Second element is yah, shortened form of Yahweh, name of God. Replaced variant
formation alleluia (12c.).


Reuben

masc. proper name, Old Testament eldest son of Jacob and name of the tribe descended from him, from
Greek Rouben, from Hebrew Reubhen, probably literally Behold a son, from reu, imperative of ra'ah he
saw + ben a son. As a typical name of a farmer, rustic, or country bumpkin, from 1804. The reuben
sandwich (1956) is Not obviously connected with the sense in rube [OED], possibly from Reuben's
restaurant, a popular spot in New York's Lower East Side.


chanty (n.)

1856, also shanty, chantey; probably an alteration of French chanter to sing (see chant (v.));
perhaps from French chantez, imperative of chanter.


yes (adv.)

Old English gise, gese so be it!, probably from gea, ge so (see yea) + si be it!, third person
imperative of beon to be (see be). Originally stronger than simple yea. Used in Shakespeare mainly
as an answer to negative questions. As a noun from 1712. Yes-man is first recorded 1912, American
English.


plaudit (n.)

1620s, short for plaudite an actor's request for applause (1560s), from Latin plaudite! applaud!
second person plural imperative of plaudere to clap, strike, beat; applaud, approve, of unknown
origin (also in applaud, explode). This was the customary appeal for applause that Roman actors made
at the end of a play. In English, the -e went silent then was dropped.


memento (n.)

c.1400, Psalm cxxxi in the Canon of the Mass (which begins with the Latin word Memento and in which
the dead are commemorated), from Latin memento remember, imperative of meminisse to remember,
recollect, think of, bear in mind, a reduplicated form, related to mens mind (see mind (n.)).
Meaning reminder, object serving as a warning is from 1580s; sense of keepsake is first recorded
1768.


query (n.)

1530s, quaere a question, from Latin quaere ask, imperative of quaerere to seek, look for; strive,
endeavor, strive to gain; ask, require, demand; figuratively seek mentally, seek to learn, make
inquiry, probably ultimately from PIE *kwo-, root forming the stem of relative and interrogative
pronouns (see who). Spelling Englished or altered c.1600 by influence of inquiry.


oyez (interj.)

early 15c., from Anglo-French oyez hear ye! (late 13c., Old French oiez), a cry uttered (usually
thrice) to call attention, from Latin subjunctive audiatis, plural imperative of audire to hear
(Anglo-French oier; see audience).


factotum (n.)

1560s, from Medieval Latin factotum do everything, from fac, imperative of facere do (see
factitious) + totum all (see total).


halt (n.)

a stop, a halting, 1590s, from French halte (16c.) or Italian alto, ultimately from German Halt,
imperative from Old High German halten to hold (see hold (v.)). A German military command borrowed
into the Romanic languages 16c. The verb in this sense is from 1650s, from the noun. Related:
Halted; halting.


noli me tangere

late 14c., type of facial ulcer, lupus, Latin, literally touch me not, from noli, imperative of
nolle to be unwilling + me (see me) + tangere to touch (see tangent (adj.)). Used over the years of
various persons or things that must not be touched, especially picture of Jesus as he appeared to
Mary Magdalene (1670s, see John 20:17) and plant of the genus Impatiens (1560s, so called because
the ripe seed pods burst when touched).


allocate (v.)

1630s, from verbal used of adjective allocate (mid-15c. in legal use), from Medieval Latin allocate
(the common first word of writs authorizing payment), imperative plural of allocare allocate, from
Latin ad- to (see ad-) + locare to place (see locate). Related: Allocated; allocating.


kyrie eleison

early 13c., Greek liturgical formula, adopted untranslated into the Latin mass, literally lord have
mercy (Ps. cxxii:3, Matt. xv:22, xvii:15, etc.). From kyrie, vocative of kyrios lord, master (see
church) + eleeson, aorist imperative of eleo I have pity on, show mercy to, from eleos pity, mercy
(see alms).


territorial (adj.)

1620s, of or pertaining to a territory, from Late Latin territorialis, from territorium (see
territory). In reference to British regiments, from 1881. In reference to an area defended by an
animal, from 1920. Territorial waters is from 1841. Territorial army British home defense is from
1908. Territorial imperative animal need to claim and defend territory is from 1966.


Miserere (n.)

51st Psalm (one of the Penitential Psalms), 13c., from Miserere mei Deus Have mercy upon me, O God,
opening line, from Latin miserere feel pity, have compassion, commiserate, imperative of misereri to
have mercy, from miser (see miser). From 15c.-17c. used as an informal measure of time, the time it
takes to recite the Miserere. Also in miserere mei kind of severe colic ('iliac passion')
accompanied by excruciating cramps and vomiting of excrement (1610s), literally have mercy on me.


reveille (n.)

1640s, from French r&eacute;veillez-vous awaken! imperative plural of r&eacute;veiller to awaken, to
wake up, from Middle French re- again (see re-) + eveiller to rouse, from Vulgar Latin *exvigilare,
from Latin ex- out + vigilare be awake, keep watch (see vigil).


pastime (n.)

late 15c., passe tyme recreation, diversion, amusement, sport, from pass (v.) + time (n.). Formed on
model of Middle French passe-temps (15c.), from passe, imperative of passer to pass + temps time.


mountebank (n.)

a doctor that mounts a bench in the market, and boasts his infallible remedies and cures [Johnson],
1570s, from Italian montambanco, contraction of monta in banco quack, juggler, literally mount on
bench (to be seen by crowd), from monta, imperative of montare to mount (see mount (v.)) + banco,
variant of banca bench (see bank (n.2)). Figurative and extended senses from 1580s.


nota bene

mark well, observe particularly, c.1721, from Latin nota, second person singular imperative of
notare to mark (see note (v.)) + bene well (see bene-). Often abbreviated N.B.


