impeller (n.)

1680s, agent noun from impel (v.). As a machine part from 1890.


impel (v.)

early 15c., from Latin impellere to push, strike against, drive forward, urge on, from assimilated
form of in- into, in, on, upon (see in- (2)) + pellere to push, drive (see pulse (n.1)). Related:
Impelled; impelling.


impulse (n.)

early 15c., an act of impelling, a thrust, push, from Latin impulsus a push against, pressure,
shock, also incitement, instigation, impulse, past participle of impellere (see impel). Meaning
stimulus in the mind arising from some state or feeling first recorded 1640s.


impulsive (adj.)

early 15c., originally in reference to medicine that reduces swelling or humors, from Middle French
impulsif or directly from Medieval Latin impulsivus, from Latin impuls-, past participle stem of
impellere (see impel). Of persons, rash, characterized by impulses, from 1847.


impulsion (n.)

early 15c., driving, pushing, thrusting, from Old French impulsion (early 14c.), from Latin
impulsionem (nominative impulsio) external pressure, figuratively incitement, instigation, noun of
action from past participle stem of impellere (see impel).


cause (v.)

late 14c., produce an effect, also impel, compel, from Old French causer to cause (13c.) and
directly from Medieval Latin causare, from Latin causa a cause; a reason; interest; judicial
process, lawsuit, of unknown origin. Related: Caused; causing. Classical Latin causari meant to
plead, to debate a question.


agitate (v.)

1580s, to disturb, from Latin agitatus, past participle of agitare to put in constant motion, drive
onward, impel, frequentative of agere to move, drive (see agitation). Literal sense of move to and
fro, shake is from 1590s. Related: Agitated; agitating.


further (v.)

Old English (ge)fyr&eth;an further, impel; see further (adj.). Compare Middle Low German vorderen,
Old High German furdiran, German f&ouml;rdern. Related: Furthered; furthering.


instinct (n.)

early 15c., a prompting, from Latin instinctus instigation, impulse, noun use of past participle of
instinguere to incite, impel, from in- on (see in- (2)) + stinguere prick, goad, from PIE *steig- to
prick, stick, pierce (see stick (v.)). Meaning animal faculty of intuitive perception is from mid-
15c., from notion of natural prompting. Sense of innate tendency is first recorded 1560s.


hormone (n.)

1905, from Greek hormon that which sets in motion, present participle of horman impel, urge on, from
horme onset, impulse, from PIE *or-sma-, from root *er- to move, set in motion. Used by Hippocrates
to denote a vital principle; modern meaning coined by English physiologist Ernest Henry Starling
(1866-1927). Jung used horme (1915) in reference to hypothetical mental energy that drives
unconscious activities and instincts. Related: Hormones.


cogitation (n.)

c.1200, thought, idea, notion, from Old French cogitacion thought, consideration, reflection, from
Latin cogitationem (nominative cogitatio), noun of action from past participle stem of cogitare to
think, reflect, consider, turn over in the mind, apparently from co-agitare, from com- together (see
co-) + agitare, here in a sense of to turn over in the mind, literally to put in constant motion,
drive, impel, frequentative of agere to move, drive (see agitation).


propel (v.)

mid-15c., to drive away, expel, from Latin propellere push forward, drive forward, drive forth;
move, impel, from pro- forward (see pro-) + pellere to push, drive (see pulse (n.1)). Meaning to
drive onward, cause to move forward is from 1650s. Related: Propelled; propelling.


distinguish (v.)

1560s, from Middle French distinguiss-, stem of distinguer, or directly from Latin distinguere to
separate between, separate by pricking, from dis- apart (see dis-) + -stinguere to prick (see
extinguish, and compare Latin instinguere to incite, impel).    The suffix -ish is due to the
influence of many verbs in which it is the equivalent of Old French -iss-, ultimately from Latin
inchoative suffix -iscere (this is also the case in extinguish, admonish, and astonish). Related:
Distinguishing. The earlier form of the verb was distinguen (mid-14c.).


sweep (v.)

early 14c., make clean by sweeping with a broom; mid-14c., perform the act of sweeping, of uncertain
origin, perhaps from a past tense form of Middle English swope sweep, from Old English swapan to
sweep (transitive &amp; intransitive); see swoop (v.), or perhaps from a Scandinavian source.
Related: Swept; sweeping.    From late 14c. as hasten, rush, move swiftly and strongly; also collect
by sweeping. From c.1400 in transitive sense drive quickly, impel, move or carry forward by force;
mid-15c. as clear (something) away. Meaning win all the events is 1960, American English. Sense of
pass systematically over in search of something is from 1966. To sweep (someone) off (his or her)
feet affect with infatuation is from 1913.


move (v.)

late 13c., from Anglo-French mover, Old French movoir to move, get moving, set out; set in motion;
introduce (Modern French mouvoir), from Latin movere move, set in motion; remove; disturb (past
participle motus, frequentative motare), from PIE root *meue- to push away (cognates: Sanskrit kama-
muta moved by love and probably mivati pushes, moves; Lithuanian mauti push on; Greek ameusasthai to
surpass, amyno push away).    Intransitive sense developed in Old French and came thence to English,
though it now is rare in French. Meaning to affect with emotion is from c.1300; that of to prompt or
impel toward some action is from late 14c. Sense of to change one's place of residence is from 1707.
Meaning to propose (something) in an assembly, etc., is first attested mid-15c.  Related: Moved;
moving.


send (v.)

Old English sendan send, send forth; throw, impel, from Proto-Germanic *sandijan (cognates: Old
Saxon sendian, Old Norse and Old Frisian senda, Middle Low German and Middle Dutch senden, Dutch
zenden, German senden, Gothic sandjan), causative form of base *sin&thorn;an, denoting go, journey
(source of Old English si&eth; way, journey, Old Norse sinn, Gothic sin&thorn;s going, walk, time),
from PIE root *sent- to head for, go (cognates: Lithuanian siusti send; see sense (n.)).    Also
used in Old English of divine ordinance (as in godsend, from Old English sand messenger, message,
from Proto-Germanic *sandaz that which is sent). Slang sense of to transport with emotion, delight
is recorded from 1932, in American English jazz slang.


stick (v.)

Old English stician to pierce, stab, transfix, goad, also to remain embedded, stay fixed, be
fastened, from Proto-Germanic *stik- pierce, prick, be sharp (cognates: Old Saxon stekan, Old
Frisian steka, Dutch stecken, Old High German stehhan, German stechen to stab, prick), from PIE
*steig- to stick; pointed (cognates: Latin instigare to goad, instinguere to incite, impel; Greek
stizein to prick, puncture, stigma mark made by a pointed instrument; Old Persian tigra- sharp,
pointed; Avestan tighri- arrow; Lithuanian stingu to remain in place; Russian stegati to quilt).
Figurative sense of to remain permanently in mind is attested from c.1300. Transitive sense of to
fasten (something) in place is attested from late 13c. Stick out project is recorded from 1560s.
Slang stick around remain is from 1912; stick it as a rude item of advice is first recorded 1922.
Related: Stuck; sticking. Sticking point, beyond which one refuses to go, is from 1956; sticking-
place, where any thing put will stay is from 1570s. Modern use generally is an echo of Shakespeare.


