impedimenta (n.)

traveling equipment, c.1600, from Latin impedimenta luggage, baggage, literally that by which one is
impeded; plural of impedimentum (see impediment).


impediment (n.)

c.1400, from Latin impedimentem hindrance, from impedire impede, literally to shackle the feet, from
assimilated form of in- into, in (see in- (2)) + pes (genitive pedis) foot (see foot (n.)).


impede (v.)

c.1600, back-formation from impediment, or else from Latin impedire impede, be in the way, hinder,
detain, literally to shackle the feet (see impediment). Related: Impeded; impedes; impeding.


stoppage (n.)

mid-15c., deduction from payment, from stop (v.) + -age. From late 15c. as impediment, hindrance,
obstruction; 1650s as act of stopping.


smoothly (adv.)

1520s, in a smooth manner, blandly, from smooth (adj.) + -ly (2). Meaning without impediment or
complications is from 1660s.


snag (v.)

be caught on an impediment, 1807, from snag (n.). Originally in American English, often in reference
to steamboats caught on branches and stumps lodged in riverbeds. Of fabric, from 1967. The
transitive meaning to catch, steal, pick up is U.S. colloquial, attested from 1895. Related:
Snagged; snagging.


snag (n.)

1570s, stump of a tree, branch, of Scandinavian origin, compare Old Norse snagi clothes peg, snaga a
kind of ax, snag-hyrndr snag-cornered, with sharp points. The ground sense seems to be a sharp
protuberance. The meaning sharp or jagged projection is first recorded 1580s; especially tree or
branch in water and partly near the surface, so as to be dangerous to navigation (1807). The
figurative meaning obstacle, impediment is from 1829.


remora (n.)

1560s, from Latin remora sucking fish, literally delay, hindrance, from re- back (see re-) + mora
delay (see moratorium); so called because the fish were believed by the ancients to retard a vessel
to which they attached themselves. Hence, in 17c.-18c., an obstacle, an impediment (the first sense
of the word in Johnson's dictionary). In Greek, ekheneis, from ekhein to hold + naus (dative nei)
ship. Pliny writes that Antony's galley was delayed by one at Actium. Sometimes called in English
stayship or stopship.


terror (n.)

early 15c., something that intimidates, an object of fear, from Old French terreur (14c.), from
Latin terrorem (nominative terror) great fear, dread, alarm, panic; object of fear, cause of alarm;
terrible news, from terrere fill with fear, frighten, from PIE root *tres- to tremble (see
terrible).    Meaning quality of causing dread is attested from 1520s. Sense of a person fancied as
a source of terror (often with deliberate exaggeration, as of a naughty child) is recorded from
1883. Terror bombing first recorded 1941, with reference to German air attack on Rotterdam. Terror-
stricken is from 1831. The Reign of Terror in French history (March 1793-July 1794) was the period
when the nation was ruled by a faction whose leaders made policy of killing by execution anyone
deemed an impediment to their measures; so called in English from 1801. Old English words for terror
included broga and egesa.


drag (n.)

c.1300, dragnet, perhaps from a Scandinavian source (compare Swedish dragg grapnel) or from Old
English dr&aelig;ge dragnet, related to dragan to draw (see drag (v.)).    Sense of annoying, boring
person or thing is 1813, perhaps from the notion of something that must be dragged as an impediment.
Sense of women's clothing worn by a man is said to be 1870 theater slang, from the sensation of long
skirts trailing on the floor (another guess is Yiddish trogn to wear, from German tragen); drag
queen is from 1941.   Drag racing (1947), is said to be from thieves' slang drag automobile (1935),
perhaps ultimately from slang sense of wagon, buggy (1755), because a horse would drag it. By 1851
this was transferred to street, as in the phrase main drag (which some propose as the source of the
racing sense).    In addition to the time trials there are a number of drag races between two or
more cars. They are run, not for record, but to satisfy the desire of most Americans to see who can
get from here to there in the fastest time. [Popular Mechanics, January 1947]


