impious (adj.)

1590s, from Latin impius without reverence, irreverent, wicked; undutiful, unpatriotic, from
assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + pius (see pious). Related: Impiously;
impiousness.


impiety (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French impiet&eacute; (12c.), from Latin impietatem (nominative impietas)
irreverence, ungodliness; disloyalty, treason, noun of quality from impius (see impious).


Kaffir (n.)

1790, from Arabic kafir unbeliever, infidel, impious wretch, with a literal sense of one who does
not admit the blessings of God, from kafara to cover up, conceal, deny, blot out. Technically, non-
Muslim, but in Ottoman times it came to be used almost exclusively for Christian. Early English
missionaries used it as an equivalent of heathen to refer to Bantus in South Africa (1792), from
which use it came generally to mean South African black regardless of ethnicity, and to be a term of
abuse since at least 1934.


nefandous (adj.)

not to be spoken of, 1630s, from Latin nefandous unmentionable, impious, heinous, from ne-, negative
particle, + fandus to be spoken, gerundive of fari (see fame (n.)).


unholy (adj.)

Old English unhalig, impious, profane, wicked, from un- (1) not + halig (see holy). Similar
formation in Middle Dutch onheilich, Old Norse uheilagr, Danish unhellig, Swedish ohelig. In
reference to actions, it is attested from late 14c. Colloquial sense of awful, dreadful is recorded
from 1842.


irreligious (adj.)

c.1400, from Late Latin irreligiosus irreligious, impious, from assimilated form of in- not,
opposite of (see in- (1)) + religiosus (see religious). Related: Irreligiously.


nefarious (adj.)

c.1600, from Latin nefarius wicked, abominable, impious, from nefas crime, wrong, impiety, from ne-
not (see un-) + fas right, lawful, divinely spoken, related to fari to speak (see fame (n.)).
Related: Nefariously.


blasphemy (n.)

early 13c., from Old French blasfemie blasphemy, from Late Latin blasphemia, from Greek blasphemia a
speaking ill, impious speech, slander, from blasphemein to speak evil of. Second element is pheme
utterance (see fame); first element uncertain, perhaps related to blaptikos hurtful, though blax
slack (in body and mind), stupid also has been suggested.


incest (n.)

c.1200, the crime of sexual intercourse between near kindred, from Old French inceste and directly
from Latin incestum unchastity, impious unchastity, also specifically sex between close relatives,
noun use of neuter adjective incestus unchaste, impure, from in- not (see in- (1)) + castus pure
(see caste). In early use also in reference to sexual relations or marriage with one under a vow of
chastity (sometimes distinguished as spiritual incest). Old English had sibleger incest, literally
kin-lying.


