implications (n.)

see implication.


implication (n.)

early 15c., action of entangling, from Latin implicationem (nominative implicatio) interweaving,
entanglement, from past participle stem of implicare involve, entangle, connect closely, from
assimilated form of in- into, in, on, upon (see in- (2)) + plicare to fold (see ply (v.1)). Meaning
something implied (but not expressed) is from 1550s.


implicit

1590s, from Middle French implicite and directly from Latin implicitus, later variant of implicatus,
past participle of implicare (see implication).


implicate (v.)

early 15c., to convey in a fable; c.1600, intertwine, wreathe, from Latin implicatus, past
participle of implicare to involve, entwine (see implication). Meaning involve a person in a crime,
charge, etc., is from 1797. Related: Implicated; implicating.


overtone (n.)

1867, in literal sense, from over + tone (n.); a loan-translation of German Oberton, first used by
German physicist Hermann Ludwig Ferdinand von Helmholtz (1821-1894) as a contraction of
Overpartialton upper partial tone. Figurative sense of subtle implication is from 1890, first
attested in writings of William James.


morose (adj.)

1530s gloomy, from Latin morosus morose, peevish, hypercritical, fastidious, from mos (genitive
moris) habit, custom (see moral (adj.)). In English, manners by itself means (good) manners, but
here the implication in Latin is (bad) manners. Related: Morosity.


brown-nose (v.)

also brownnose, 1939, American English colloquial, said to be military slang originally, from brown
(adj.) + nose (n.), from the implication that servility is tantamount to having one's nose in the
anus of the person from whom advancement is sought [Webster, 1961]. Related: Brown-noser, brown-
nosing (both 1950).


imply (v.)

late 14c., to enfold, enwrap, entangle (the classical Latin sense), from Old French emplier, from
Latin implicare involve (see implication). Meaning to involve something unstated as a logical
consequence first recorded c.1400; that of to hint at from 1580s. Related: Implied; implying. The
distinction between imply and infer is in What do you imply by that remark? But, What am I to infer
from that remark?


afraid (adj.)

early 14c., originally past participle of afray frighten, from Anglo-French afrayer, from Old French
esfreer (see affray (n.)). A rare case of an English adjective that never stands before a noun.
Because it was used in A.V. Bible, it acquired independent standing and thrived while affray faded,
chasing out the once more common afeared. Sense in I'm afraid I regret to say, I suspect (without
implication of fear) is first recorded 1590s.Her blue affrayed eyes wide open shone [Keats, The Eve
of St. Agnes, 1820]


cull (n.)

dupe, saphead, rogues' slang from late 16c., perhaps a shortening of cullion base fellow, originally
testicle (from French couillon, from Old French coillon testicle; worthless fellow, dolt, from Latin
coleus, literally strainer bag; see cojones), though another theory traces it to Romany (Gypsy)
chulai man. Also sometimes cully, though some authorities assert cully was the canting term for dupe
and cull was generic man, fellow, without implication of gullibility. Compare also gullible.


will (v.1)

Old English *willan, wyllan to wish, desire; be willing; be used to; be about to (past tense wolde),
from Proto-Germanic *willjan (cognates: Old Saxon willian, Old Norse vilja, Old Frisian willa, Dutch
willen, Old High German wellan, German wollen, Gothic wiljan to will, wish, desire, Gothic waljan to
choose).    The Germanic words are from PIE root *wel- (2) to wish, will (cognates: Sanskrit vrnoti
chooses, prefers, varyah to be chosen, eligible, excellent, varanam choosing; Avestan verenav- to
wish, will, choose; Greek elpis hope; Latin volo, velle to wish, will, desire; Old Church Slavonic
voljo, voliti to will, veljo, veleti to command; Lithuanian velyti to wish, favor, pa-velmi I will,
viliuos I hope; Welsh gwell better).    Compare also Old English wel well, literally according to
one's wish; wela well-being, riches. The use as a future auxiliary was already developing in Old
English. The implication of intention or volition distinguishes it from shall, which expresses or
implies obligation or necessity. Contracted forms, especially after pronouns, began to appear 16c.,
as in sheele for she will. The form with an apostrophe is from 17c.


start (v.)

Old English *steortian, *stiertan, Kentish variants of styrtan to leap up (related to starian to
stare), from Proto-Germanic *stert- (cognates: Old Frisian stirta to fall, tumble, Middle Dutch
sterten, Dutch storten to rush, fall, Old High German sturzen, German st&uuml;rzen to hurl, throw,
plunge), of uncertain origin. According to Watkins, the notion is move briskly, move swiftly, and it
is from PIE root *ster- (1) stiff.    From move or spring suddenly, sense evolved by late 14c. to
awaken suddenly, flinch or recoil in alarm, and by 1660s to cause to begin acting or operating.
Meaning begin to move, leave, depart (without implication of suddenness) is from 1821. The
connection probably is from sporting senses (to force an animal from its lair, late 14c.).
Transitive sense of set in motion or action is from 1670s; specifically as to set (machinery) in
action from 1841.    Related: Started; starting. To start something cause trouble is 1915, American
English colloquial. To start over begin again is from 1912. Starting-line in running is from 1855;
starting-block in running first recorded 1937.


fool (n.)

late 13c., silly or stupid person, from Old French fol madman, insane person; idiot; rogue; jester,
also blacksmith's bellows, also an adjective meaning mad, insane (12c., Modern French fou), from
Latin follis bellows, leather bag (see follicle); in Vulgar Latin used with a sense of windbag,
empty-headed person. Compare also Sanskrit vatula- insane, literally windy, inflated with wind.
The word has in mod.Eng. a much stronger sense than it had at an earlier period; it has now an
implication of insulting contempt which does not in the same degree belong to any of its synonyms,
or to the derivative foolish. [OED]    Meaning jester, court clown first attested late 14c., though
it is not always possible to tell whether the reference is to a professional entertainer or an
amusing lunatic on the payroll. As the name of a kind of custard dish, it is attested from 1590s
(the food also was called trifle, which may be the source of the name).    There is no foole to the
olde foole [Heywood, 1546] Feast of Fools (early 14c.), from Medieval Latin festum stultorum) refers
to the burlesque festival celebrated in some churches on New Year's Day in medieval times. Fool's
gold iron pyrite is from 1829. Fool's paradise state of illusory happiness is from mid-15c.
Foolosopher, a most useful insult, turns up in a 1549 translation of Erasmus. Fool's ballocks is
described in OED as an old name for the green-winged orchid.


slut (n.)

c.1400, a dirty, slovenly, or untidy woman, according to OED Of doubtful origin, but probably
cognate with dialectal German Schlutt slovenly woman, dialectal Swedish slata idle woman, slut, and
Dutch slodde slut, slodder a careless man, but the exact relationship of all these is obscure.
Chaucer uses sluttish (late 14c.) in reference to the appearance of an untidy man. Also a kitchen
maid, a drudge (mid-15c.; hard pieces in a bread loaf from imperfect kneading were called slut's
pennies, 18c.).    Specific modern sense of woman who enjoys sex in a degree considered shamefully
excessive is by 1966. Meaning woman of loose character, bold hussy is attested from mid-15c., but
the primary association through 18c. was untidiness. Johnson has it (second definition) as A word of
slight contempt to a woman but sexual activity does not seem to figure into his examples. Playful
use of the word, without implication of messiness or loose morals, is attested by 1660s:    My wife
called up the people to washing by four o'clock in the morning; and our little girl Susan is a most
admirable slut, and pleases us mightily, doing more service than both the others, and deserves wages
better. [Pepys, diary, Feb. 21, 1664]    Compare playful use of scamp, etc., for boys. Sometimes
used 19c. as a euphemism for bitch to describe a female dog.    There is a group of North Sea
Germanic words in sl- that mean sloppy, and also slovenly woman and, less often, slovenly man, and
that tend to evolve toward woman of loose morals. Compare slattern, also English dialectal slummock
a dirty, untidy, or slovenly person (1861), variant of slammacks slatternly woman, said to be from
slam ill-shaped, shambling fellow. Also slammakin (from 1756 as a type of loose gown; 1785 as
slovenly female, 1727 as a character name in Gay's Beggar's Opera), with variants slamkin,
slammerkin. Also possibly related are Middle Dutch slore a sluttish woman, Dutch slomp, German
schlampe a slattern.


fuck (v.)

until recently a difficult word to trace, in part because it was taboo to the editors of the
original OED when the F volume was compiled, 1893-97. Written form only attested from early 16c. OED
2nd edition cites 1503, in the form fukkit; earliest appearance of current spelling is 1535 --
Bischops ... may fuck thair fill and be vnmaryit [Sir David Lyndesay, Ane Satyre of the Thrie
Estaits], but presumably it is a much more ancient word than that, simply one that wasn't written in
the kind of texts that have survived from Old English and Middle English. Buck cites proper name
John le Fucker from 1278, but the surname could have other explanations. The word apparently is
hinted at in a scurrilous 15c. poem, titled Flen flyys, written in bastard Latin and Middle English.
The relevant line reads:Non sunt in celi quia fuccant uuiuys of heliThey [the monks] are not in
heaven because they fuck the wives of [the town of] Ely. Fuccant is pseudo-Latin, and in the
original it is written in cipher. The earliest examples of the word otherwise are from Scottish,
which suggests a Scandinavian origin, perhaps from a word akin to Norwegian dialectal fukka
copulate, or Swedish dialectal focka copulate, strike, push, and fock penis. Another theory traces
it to Middle English fyke, fike move restlessly, fidget, which also meant dally, flirt, and probably
is from a general North Sea Germanic word; compare Middle Dutch fokken, German ficken fuck, earlier
make quick movements to and fro, flick, still earlier itch, scratch; the vulgar sense attested from
16c. This would parallel in sense the usual Middle English slang term for have sexual intercourse,
swive, from Old English swifan to move lightly over, sweep (see swivel). But OED remarks these
cannot be shown to be related to the English word. Chronology and phonology rule out Shipley's
attempt to derive it from Middle English firk to press hard, beat.    Germanic words of similar form
(f + vowel + consonant) and meaning 'copulate' are numerous. One of them is G. ficken. They often
have additional senses, especially 'cheat,' but their basic meaning is 'move back and forth.' ...
Most probably, fuck is a borrowing from Low German and has no cognates outside Germanic. [Liberman]
French foutre and Italian fottere look like the English word but are unrelated, derived rather from
Latin futuere, which is perhaps from PIE root *bhau(t)- knock, strike off, extended via a figurative
use from the sexual application of violent action [Shipley; compare the sexual slang use of bang,
etc.]. Popular and Internet derivations from acronyms (and the pluck yew fable) are merely
<b>ingenious trifling</b>. The Old English word was h&aelig;man, from ham dwelling, home, with a
sense of take home, co-habit. Fuck was outlawed in print in England (by the Obscene Publications
Act, 1857) and the U.S. (by the Comstock Act, 1873). As a noun, it dates from 1670s. The word may
have been shunned in print, but it continued in conversation, especially among soldiers during World
War I.It became so common that an effective way for the soldier to express this emotion was to omit
this word. Thus if a sergeant said, 'Get your ----ing rifles!' it was understood as a matter of
routine. But if he said 'Get your rifles!' there was an immediate implication of urgency and danger.
[John Brophy, Songs and Slang of the British Soldier: 1914-1918, pub. 1930]The legal barriers broke
down in the 20th century, with the Ulysses decision (U.S., 1933) and Lady Chatterley's Lover (U.S.,
1959; U.K., 1960). Johnson excluded the word, and fuck wasn't in a single English language
dictionary from 1795 to 1965. The Penguin Dictionary broke the taboo in the latter year. Houghton
Mifflin followed, in 1969, with The American Heritage Dictionary, but it also published a Clean
Green edition without the word, to assure itself access to the lucrative public high school market.
The abbreviation F (or eff) probably began as euphemistic, but by 1943 it was being used as a cuss
word, too. In 1948, the publishers of The Naked and the Dead persuaded Norman Mailer to use the
euphemism fug instead. When Mailer later was introduced to Dorothy Parker, she greeted him with, So
you're the man who can't spell 'fuck'  [The quip sometimes is attributed to Tallulah Bankhead].
Hemingway used muck in For whom the Bell Tolls (1940). The major breakthrough in publication was
James Jones' From Here to Eternity (1950), with 50 fucks (down from 258 in the original manuscript).
Egyptian legal agreements from the 23rd Dynasty (749-21 B.C.E.) frequently include the phrase, If
you do not obey this decree, may a donkey copulate with you! [Reinhold Aman, Maledicta, Summer
1977]. Fuck-all nothing first recorded 1960.  Verbal phrase fuck up to ruin, spoil, destroy first
attested c.1916. A widespread group of Slavic words (such as Polish pierdoli&#263;) can mean both
fornicate and make a mistake. Fuck off attested from 1929; as a command to depart, by 1944. Flying
fuck originally meant have sex on horseback and is first attested c.1800 in broadside ballad New
Feats of Horsemanship. For the unkillable urban legend that this word is an acronym of some sort (a
fiction traceable on the Internet to 1995 but probably predating that) see here, and also here.
Related: Fucked; fucking. Agent noun fucker attested from 1590s in literal sense; by 1893 as a term
of abuse (or admiration).    DUCK F-CK-R. The man who has the care of the poultry on board a
&#383;hip of war. [Classical Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, 1796]


