imply (v.)

late 14c., to enfold, enwrap, entangle (the classical Latin sense), from Old French emplier, from
Latin implicare involve (see implication). Meaning to involve something unstated as a logical
consequence first recorded c.1400; that of to hint at from 1580s. Related: Implied; implying. The
distinction between imply and infer is in What do you imply by that remark? But, What am I to infer
from that remark?


Xenia

city in Ohio, from Greek xenia hospitality, rights of a guest, friendly relation with strangers,
literally state of a guest, from xenos guest (see guest (n.)). Founded 1803 and named by vote of a
town meeting, on suggestion of the Rev. Robert Armstrong to imply friendliness and hospitality.


berk (n.)

fool, 1936, abbreviation of Berkshire Hunt (or Berkeley Hunt), rhyming slang for cunt but typically
applied only to contemptible persons, not to the body part.  This is not an objective, anatomical
term, neither does it imply coitus. It connects with that extension of meaning of the unprintable, a
fool, or a person whom one does not like. [Dictionary of Rhyming Slang, 1960]


as (adv.)

c.1200, worn-down form of Old English alswa quite so (see also), fully established by c.1400.
Equivalent to so; any distinction in use is purely idiomatic. Related to German als as, than, from
Middle High German also. Phrase as well just as much is recorded from late 15c.; the phrase also can
imply as well as not, as well as anything else. Interjection of incredulity as if! (i.e. as if that
really could happen) is attested from 1995, an exact duplication of Latin quasi.


attitude (n.)

1660s, via French attitude (17c.), from Italian attitudine disposition, posture, also aptness,
promptitude, from Late Latin aptitudinem (nominative aptitudo; see aptitude). Originally 17c. a
technical term in art for the posture of a figure in a statue or painting; later generalized to a
posture of the body supposed to imply some mental state (1725). Sense of settled behavior reflecting
feeling or opinion is first recorded 1837. Connotations of antagonistic and uncooperative developed
by 1962 in slang.


alternate (adj.)

1510s, from Latin alternatus one after the other, past participle of alternare to do first one thing
then the other; exchange parts, from alternus one after the other, alternate, in turns, reciprocal,
from alter the other (see alter). Alternate means by turns; alternative means offering a choice.
Both imply two kinds or things.


central (adj.)

1640s, from French central  or directly from Latin centralis pertaining to a center, from centrum
(see center (n.)). Centrally is attested perhaps as early as early 15c., which might imply a usage
of central earlier than the attested date.    Slightly older is centric (1580s). As a U.S.
colloquial noun for central telephone exchange, first recorded 1889 (hence, Hello, Central?).
Central processing unit attested from 1961. Central America is attested from 1826.


employ (v.)

early 15c., from Middle French employer, from Old French emploiier (12c.) make use of, apply;
increase; entangle; devote, from Latin implicare enfold, involve, be connected with, from in- (see
in- (2)) + plicare to fold (see ply (v.1)).    Sense of hire, engage first recorded in English
1580s, from involve in a particular purpose, a sense which arose in Late Latin. Related: Employed;
employing. The noun is 1660s, from French emploi. Imply, which is the same word, retains more of the
original sense.


abortive (adj.)

late 14c., born prematurely or dead, from Latin abortivus pertaining to miscarriage; causing
abortion, from abort-, past participle stem of aboriri disappear, miscarry, from ab- amiss (see ab-)
+ oriri appear, be born, arise (see orchestra); the compound word used in Latin for deaths,
miscarriages, sunsets, etc. The Latin verb for to produce an abortion was abigo, literally to drive
away. Not originally used to imply forced or deliberate miscarriage; from 14c.-18c. stillborn
children or domestic animals were said to be abortive. Also see abortion. Related: Abortiveness.


creole (n.)

c.1600, from French cr&eacute;ole (17c.), from Spanish criollo person native to a locality, from
Portuguese crioulo, diminutive of cria person (especially a servant) raised in one's house, from
criar to raise or bring up, from Latin creare to produce, create (see create).    The exact sense
varies with local use. Originally with no connotation of color or race; Fowler (1926) writes: Creole
does not imply mixture of race, but denotes a person either of European or (now rarely) of negro
descent born and naturalized in certain West Indian and American countries. In U.S. use, applied to
descendants of French and Spanish settlers in Louisiana from at least 1792. Of languages, from 1879.
As an adjective, from 1748.


back (n.)

Old English b&aelig;c back, from Proto-Germanic *bakam (cognates: Old Saxon and Middle Dutch bak,
Old Frisian bek), with no known connections outside Germanic. In other modern Germanic languages the
cognates mostly have been ousted in this sense ib words akin to Modern English ridge (cognates:
Danish ryg, German R&uuml;cken). Many Indo-European languages show signs of once having
distinguished the horizontal back of an animal (or a mountain range) from the upright back of a
human. In other cases, a modern word for back may come from a word related to spine (Italian
schiena, Russian spina) or shoulder, shoulder blade (Spanish espalda, Polish plecy).    To turn
(one's) back on (someone or something) ignore is from early 14c. Behind (someone's) back
clandestinely is from late 14c. To know (something) like the back of one's hand, implying
familiarity, is first attested 1893. The first attested use of the phrase is from a dismissive
speech made to a character in Robert Louis Stevenson's Catriona:    If I durst speak to herself, you
may be certain I would never dream of trusting it to you; because I know you like the back of my
hand, and all your blustering talk is that much wind to me.    The story, a sequel to Kidnapped, has
a Scottish setting and context, and the back of my hand to you was noted in the late 19th century as
a Scottish expression meaning I will have nothing to do with you [see Longmuir's edition of
Jamieson's Scottish dictionary]. In English generally, the back of (one's) hand has been used to
imply contempt and rejection since at least 1300. Perhaps the connection of a menacing dismissal is
what made Stevenson choose that particular anatomical reference.


