implement (v.)

1806, originally chiefly in Scottish, where the noun was a legal term meaning fulfillment, from
implement (n.). It led to the wretched formation implementation, first recorded 1913. Related:
Implemented.


implement (n.)

mid-15c., from Late Latin implementem a filling up (as with provisions), from Latin implere to fill,
from assimilated form of in- into, in, on, upon (see in- (2)) + plere to fill (see pleio-). Sense of
tool is 1530s, from notion of things provided to do work, that which fills up or completes a
household (c.1500).


tool (n.)

Old English tol instrument, implement used by a craftsman or laborer, weapon, from Proto-Germanic
*to(w)lam implement (cognates: Old Norse tol), from a verb stem represented by Old English tawian
prepare (see taw). The ending is the instrumental suffix -el (as in handle (n.)). Figurative sense
of person used by another for his own ends is recorded from 1660s. Slang meaning penis first
recorded 1550s.


pen (n.1)

writing implement, late 13c., from Old French pene quill pen; feather (12c.) and directly from Latin
penna a feather, plume, in plural a wing, in Late Latin, a pen for writing, from Old Latin petna,
pesna, from PIE *pet-na-, suffixed form of root *pet- to rush; to fly (see petition (n.)).    Latin
penna and pinna a feather, plume; in plural a wing; also a pinnacle; battlement (see pin (n.)) are
treated as identical in Watkins, etc., but regarded as separate (but confused) Latin words by Tucker
and others, who derive pinna from PIE *spei- sharp point (see spike (n.1)) and see the feather/wing
sense as secondary.    In later French, this word means only long feather of a bird, while the
equivalent of English plume is used for writing implement, the senses of the two words thus are
reversed from the situation in English. Pen-and-ink (adj.) is attested from 1670s. Pen name is
recorded from mid-19c.


beater (n.)

mid-14c., an implement for beating; mid-15c., a person who punishes (c.1200 as a surname); agent
noun from beat (v.). Of various mechanical devices that beat in some sense from early 17c. Meaning
one who rouses game is from 1825. Slang meaning old car is from c.1980.


heirloom (n.)

early 15c., ayre lome, a hybrid from heir + loom in its original but now otherwise obsolete sense of
implement, tool. Technically, some piece of property that by will or custom passes down with the
real estate.


ram (v.)

to beat with a heavy implement, c.1300, from ram (n.). Related: Rammed; ramming.


battledore (n.)

mid-15c., bat-like implement used in washing clothes, of unknown origin, perhaps from Old
Proven&ccedil;al batedor, Spanish batidor beater, bat, from batir to beat; perhaps blended with
Middle English betel hammer, mallet. As a trype of racket used in a game, from 1590s.


armament (n.)

c.1600, munitions of war (especially the great guns on board a man-of-war), also naval force
equipped for war (1690s), from Latin armamentum implement, from Latin armare to arm, furnish with
weapons from arma (see arm (n.2)). Meaning process of equipping for war is from 1813.


sling (n.1)

c.1300, implement for throwing stones, from an unidentified continental Germanic source (such as
Middle Low German slinge a sling); see sling (v.). The notion probably is of a sling being twisted
and twirled before it is thrown. Sense of loop for lifting or carrying heavy objects first recorded
early 14c. Meaning piece of cloth tied around the neck to support an injured arm is first attested
1720.


hoplite (n.)

heavy-armed foot soldier of ancient Greece, 1727, from Greek hoplites heavily armed soldier,
literally heavy armed, from hopla arms, armor, plural of hoplon tool, weapon, implement.


utensil (n.)

late 14c., from Old French utensile implement (14c., Modern French ustensile), from Latin utensilia
materials, things for use, noun use of neuter plural of utensilis (adj.) fit for use, of use,
useful, from uti (see use (v.)).


forceps (n.)

1560s, from Latin forceps pair of tongs, pincers, compound of formus hot (see warm (adj.)) + root of
capere to hold, take (see capable). Originally a smith's implement. The classical plural is
forcipes.


loom (n.)

weaving machine, Old English geloma utensil, tool, from ge-, perfective prefix, + -loma, of unknown
origin (compare Old English andloman (plural) apparatus, furniture). Originally implement or tool of
any kind (as in heirloom); thus, the penis (c.1400-1600). Specific meaning a machine in which yarn
or thread is woven into fabric is from c.1400.


harrow (n.)

agricultural implement, heavy wooden rake, c.1300, haru, from Old English *hearwa, apparently
related to Old Norse harfr harrow, and perhaps connected with Old English h&aelig;rfest harvest (see
harvest). Or possibly from hergian (see harry).


instrument (n.)

late 13c., musical instrument, from Old French instrument means, device; musical instrument (14c.,
earlier estrument, 13c.) and directly from Latin instrumentem a tool, apparatus, furniture, dress,
document, from instruere arrange, furnish (see instruct). Meaning tool, implement, utensil is early
14c. in English; meaning written document by which formal expression is given to a legal act is from
early 15c.


Pentateuch

first five books of the Bible, c.1400, from Late Latin pentateuchus (Tertullian, c.207), from Greek
pentateukhos (c.160), originally an adjective (abstracted from phrase pentateukhos biblos), from
pente five (see five) + teukhos implement, vessel, gear (in Late Greek book, via notion of case for
scrolls), literally anything produced, related to teukhein to make ready, from PIE *dheugh- to
produce something of utility  (see doughty).


tweezers (n.)

small pincers, diminutive tongs, 1650s, extended from tweezes, plural of tweeze case for tweezers
(1620s), a shortening of etweese, considered as plural of etwee (1610s) a small case, from French
&eacute;tui small case (see etui). Sense transferred from the case to the implement inside it. For
form, compare trousers from trouzes.


flail (n.)

implement for threshing grain, c.1100, perhaps from an unrecorded Old English *flegel, which
probably represents West Germanic *flagil (cognates: Middle Dutch and Low German vlegel, Old High
German flegel, German flegel), a borrowing of Late Latin flagellum winnowing tool, flail, from Latin
flagellum whip (see flagellum).


rake (n.1)

toothed tool for drawing or scraping things together, Old English raca rake, earlier r&aelig;ce,
from Proto-Germanic *rak- gather, heap up (cognates: Old Norse reka spade, shovel, Old High German
rehho, German Rechen a rake, Gothic rikan to heap up, collect), from PIE *reg- (1) move in a
straight line (cognates: Greek oregein to reach, stretch out, Latin regere direct, rule; keep
straight, guide; see regal), perhaps via its action, or via the notion of implement with straight
pieces of wood [Watkins].


pencil (n.)

early 14c., an artist's fine brush of camel hair, from Old French pincel artist's paintbrush (13c.,
Modern French pinceau), from Latin penicillus painter's brush, hair-pencil, literally little tail,
diminutive of peniculus brush, itself a diminutive of penis tail (see penis). Small brushes formerly
were used for writing before modern lead or chalk pencils; meaning graphite writing implement
apparently evolved late 16c. Derogatory slang pencil-pusher office worker is from 1881; pencil neck
weak person first recorded 1973.


whisk (n.)

late 14c., quick stroke, sweeping movement, probably from Old Norse visk wisp of hay, something to
sweep with, from Proto-Germanic *wisk- move quickly (cognates: Danish visk broom, Middle Dutch
wisch, Dutch wis, Old High German wisc, German wisch wisp, brush), from PIE root *weis- to turn,
twist (cognates: Sanskrit veskah noose, Czech vechet a wisp of straw, Old English wiscian to plait,
weoxian to clean with a whisk or brush). Unetymological spelling with wh- is from 1570s. Meaning
implement for beating eggs, etc. first recorded 1660s.


rack (n.1)

frame with bars, c.1300, possibly from Middle Dutch rec framework, literally something stretched
out, related to recken (modern rekken) stretch out, cognate with Old English reccan to stretch out,
from Proto-Germanic *rak- (cognates: Old Saxon rekkian, Old Frisian reza, Old Norse rekja, Old High
German recchen, German recken, Gothic uf-rakjan to stretch out), from PIE *rog-, from root *reg- to
move in a straight line (see regal).    Meaning instrument of torture first recorded early 15c.,
perhaps from German rackbank, originally an implement for stretching leather, etc. Mechanical
meaning toothed bar is from 1797 (see pinion). Meaning set of antlers is first attested 1945,
American English; hence slang sense of a woman's breasts (especially if large), by 1991. Meaning
framework for displaying clothes is from 1948; hence off the rack (1951) of clothing, as opposed to
tailored.


spur (n.)

Old English spura, spora metal implement worn on the heel to goad a horse (related to spurnan to
kick), from Proto-Germanic *spuron (cognates: Old Norse spori, Middle Dutch spore, Dutch spoor, Old
High German sporo, German Sporn spur), from PIE *spere- ankle (see spurn). Related to Dutch spoor,
Old English spor track, footprint, trace.    Generalized sense of anything that urges on, stimulus,
is from late 14c. As a sharp projection on the leg of a cock, from 1540s. Meaning a ridge projecting
off a mountain mass is recorded from 1650s. Of railway lines from 1837. Widely extended senses ...
are characteristic of a horsey race [Weekley]. Expression on the spur of the moment (1801) preserves
archaic phrase on the spur in great haste (1520s). To win one's spurs is to gain knighthood by some
valorous act, gilded spurs being the distinctive mark of a knight.


organ (n.)

fusion of late Old English organe, and Old French orgene (12c.), both meaning musical instrument,
both from Latin organa, plural of organum a musical instrument, from Greek organon implement, tool
for making or doing; musical instrument; organ of sense, organ of the body, literally that with
which one works, from PIE *werg-ano-, from root *werg- to do (cognates: Greek ergon work, orgia
religious performances; Armenian gorc work; Avestan vareza work, activity; Gothic waurkjan, Old
English wyrcan to work, Old English weorc deed, action, something done; Old Norse yrka work, take
effect).    Applied vaguely in late Old English to musical instruments; sense narrowed by late 14c.
to the musical instrument now known by that name (involving pipes supplied with wind by a bellows
and worked by means of keys), though Augustine (c.400) knew this as a specific sense of Latin
organa. The meaning body part adapted to a certain function is attested from late 14c., from a
Medieval Latin sense of Latin organum. Organist is first recorded 1590s; organ-grinder is attested
from 1806.


