implore (v.)

c.1500, from Middle French implorer and directly from Latin implorare call for help, beseech,
originally invoke with weeping, from assimilated form of in- on, upon (see in- (2)) + plorare to
weep, cry out. Related: Implored; imploring; imploringly.


emplore (v.)

variant of implore.


clepe (v.)

to call; to name (archaic), from Old English cleopian, clipian to speak, call; summon, invoke;
implore.


yclept

Old English gicliopad; from y- + past participle of cleopian, cpipian to speak, call; summon,
invoke; implore (see clepe).


crave (v.)

Old English crafian ask, implore, demand by right, from North Germanic *krabojan (cognates: Old
Norse krefja to demand, Danish kr&aelig;ve, Swedish kr&auml;va); perhaps related to craft in its
base sense of power. Current sense to long for is c.1400, probably through intermediate meaning to
ask very earnestly (c.1300). Related: Craved; craving.


entreat (v.)

mid-14c., to enter into negotiations; early 15c., to treat (someone) in a certain way, also to plead
for (someone), from Anglo-French entretier, Old French entraiter to treat, from en- make (see en-
(1)) + traiter to treat (see treat (v.)). Meaning to beseech, implore is first attested c.1500.
Related: Entreated; entreating.


invoke (v.)

late 15c., from Middle French envoquer (12c.), from Latin invocare call upon, implore, from in- upon
(see in- (2)) + vocare to call, related to vox (genitive vocis) voice (see voice (n.)). Related:
Invoked; invoking.


cry (v.)

early 13c., beg, implore, from Old French crier, from Vulgar Latin *critare, from Latin quiritare to
wail, shriek (source of Italian gridare, Old Spanish cridar, Spanish and Portuguese gritar), of
uncertain origin; perhaps a variant of quirritare to squeal like a pig, from *quis, echoic of
squealing, despite ancient folk etymology that traces it to call for the help of the Quirites, the
Roman constabulary. The meaning was extended 13c. to weep, which it largely replaced by 16c.
Related: Cried; crying.    Most languages, in common with English, use the general word for cry out,
shout, wail to also mean weep, shed tears to express pain or grief. Romance and Slavic, however, use
words for this whose ultimate meaning is beat (the breast), compare French pleurer, Spanish llorar,
both from Latin plorare cry aloud, but probably originally plodere beat, clap the hands. Also
Italian piangere (cognate with French plaindre lament, pity) from Latin plangere, originally beat,
but especially of the breast, as a sign of grief. U.S. colloquial for crying out loud is 1924,
probably another euphemism for for Christ's sake.


