import (n.)

consequence, importance, 1580s; sense of that which is imported is from 1680s; both from import
(v.).


importation (n.)

c.1600; see import (v.) + -ation.


import (v.)

early 15c., convey information, express, make known, signify, from Latin importare bring in, convey,
from assimilated form of in- into, in (see in- (2)) + portare to carry (see port (n.1)). Sense of
bring in goods from abroad first recorded c.1500. Related: Imported; importing.


important (adj.)

mid-15c., from Middle French important and directly from Medieval Latin importantem (nominative
importans), present participle of importare be significant in, from Latin importare bring in (see
import). Related: Importantly.


re-import (v.)

also reimport, 1742, from re- + import (v.). Related: Re-imported; re-importing.


meaning (n.)

sense, import, intent, c.1300, from mean (v.).


aphorism (n.)

1520s (especially in reference to the Aphorisms of Hippocrates), from Middle French aphorisme (14c.,
aufforisme), from Late Latin aphorismus, from Greek aphorismos definition, pithy sentence, from
aphorizein to mark off, divide, from apo- from (see apo-) + horizein to bound (see horizon).    An
aphorism is a short, pithy statement containing a truth of general import; an axiom is a statement
of self-evident truth; a theorem is a demonstrable proposition in science or mathematics; an epigram
is like an aphorism, but lacking in general import. Maxim and saying can be used as synonyms for
aphorism.


smuggle (v.)

import or export secretly and contrary to law, 1680s, of Low German or Dutch origin (see smuggler).
Related: Smuggled; smuggling.


astronomer (n.)

late 14c., from astronomy (q.v.), replacing French import astronomyen (c.1300), which, had it
survived, probably would have yielded *astronomian. Still in Shakespeare used in places where we
would write astrologer.


astrologer (n.)

late 14c., from astrology + -er (1). Drove out French import astrologein, which, had it survived,
probably would have yielded *astrologian, as in Chaucer's The wise Astrologen. Earliest recorded
reference is to roosters as announcers of sunrise.


significance (n.)

c.1400, meaning, from Old French significance or directly from Latin significantia meaning, force,
energy, from significans, present participle of significare to mean, import, signify (see signify).
The earlier word was signifiance (mid-13c.). Meaning importance is from 1725. Related: Significancy.


latch (v.)

Old English l&aelig;ccan to grasp or seize, from Proto-Germanic *lakkijanan. Not found in other
Germanic languages; probably from PIE *(s)lagw- to seize (see analemma). In its original sense the
verb was paralleled in Middle English and then replaced by French import catch (v.). Meaning to
fasten with a latch is mid-15c. Related: Latched; latching.


tariff (n.)

1590s, arithmetical table, also official list of customs duties on imports or exports; law
regulating import duties, from Italian tariffa tariff, price, assessment, Medieval Latin tarifa list
of prices, book of rates, from Arabic ta'rif information, notification, a making known; inventory of
fees to be paid, verbal noun from arafa he made known, he taught. Sense of classified list of
charges made in a business is recorded from 1757. The U.S. Tariff of Abominations was passed in
1828.


orthopraxy (n.)

1840, from ortho- + Greek praxis a doing, action, performance (see praxis).   Errata -- Page 263,
line 9 from bottom, for 'orthodoxy' read orthopraxy. This is a new coin from the mint of Dr.
[Andrew] Wylie [of Bloomington College, Indiana], at least I have not before noticed it. Its
etymology places it in a just contrast with orthodoxy: for if that consecrated word indicates
thinking right, orthopraxy will legitimately import doing right, and hence, as Mr. Wylie says,
orthopraxy in the last dread day will pass the divine ordeal incomparably better than orthodoxy. O!
that a zeal for orthopraxy would transcend the zeal for orthodoxy! [The Millennial Harbinger, vol.
IV, no. VIII, Bethany, Va., August 1840]


tuxedo (n.)

man's evening dress for semiformal occasions, 1889, named for Tuxedo Park, N.Y., a rural resort
development for wealthy New Yorkers and site of a country club where it first was worn, supposedly
in 1886. The name is an attractive subject for elaborate speculation, and connections with
Algonquian words for bear or wolf were proposed. The authoritative Bright, however, says the tribe's
name probably is originally a place name, perhaps Munsee Delaware (Algonquian) p'tuck-sepo crooked
river.    There was a hue and cry raised against the Tuxedo coat upon its first appearance because
it was erroneously considered and widely written of as intended to displace the swallow tail. When
the true import of the tailless dress coat came to be realized it was accepted promptly by swelldom,
and now is widely recognized as one of the staple adjuncts of the jeunesse dor&#233;e. [Clothier and
Furnisher, August, 1889]


shoddy (adj.)

1862, having a delusive appearance of high quality, a Northern word from the American Civil War in
reference to the quality of government supplies for the armies, from earlier noun meaning rag-wool,
wool made of woolen waste and old rags (1832), perhaps a Yorkshire provincial word, of uncertain
origin.    Originally used for padding, English manufacturers began making coarse wearing clothes
from it, and when new it looked like broad-cloth but the gloss quickly wore off, giving the stuff a
bad reputation as a cheat. The 1860 U.S. census of manufactures notes import of more than 6 million
pounds of it, which was much used in the manufacture of army and navy cloths and blankets in the
United States according to an 1865 government report.    The Days of Shoddy, as the reader will
readily anticipate, are the opening months of the present war, at which time the opprobrious name
first came into general use as a designation for swindling and humbug of every character; and
nothing more need be said to indicate the scope of this novel. [Henry Morford, The Days of Shoddy: A
Novel of the Great Rebellion in 1861, Philadelphia, 1863]    Related: Shoddily; shoddiness.


sense (n.)

c.1400, faculty of perception, also meaning, import, interpretation (especially of Holy Scripture),
from Old French sens one of the five senses; meaning; wit, understanding (12c.) and directly from
Latin sensus perception, feeling, undertaking, meaning, from sentire perceive, feel, know, probably
a figurative use of a literally meaning to find one's way, or to go mentally, from PIE root *sent-
to go (cognates: Old High German sinnan to go, travel, strive after, have in mind, perceive, German
Sinn sense, mind, Old English si&eth; way, journey, Old Irish set, Welsh hynt way). Application to
any one of the external or outward senses (touch, sight, hearing, etc.) in English first recorded
1520s.    A certain negro tribe has a special word for see; but only one general word for hear,
touch, smell, and taste. It matters little through which sense I realize that in the dark I have
blundered into a pig-sty. In French sentir means to smell, to touch, and to feel, all together.
[Erich M. von Hornbostel, Die Einheit der Sinne (The Unity of the Senses), 1927]    Meaning that
which is wise is from c.1600. Meaning capacity for perception and appreciation is from c.1600 (as in
sense of humor, attested by 1783, sense of shame, 1640s).


