impregnate (v.)

c.1600, from Late Latin impraegnatus pregnant, past participle of impraegnare to render pregnant,
from assimilated form of in- into, in (see in- (2)) + praegnare make pregnant (see pregnant).
Earlier in same sense was impregn (1530s).


onanism (n.)

masturbation, also coitus interruptus, 1727, from Onan, son of Judah (Gen. xxxviii:9), who spilled
his seed on the ground rather than impregnate his dead brother's wife: And Onan knew that the seed
should not be his; and it came to pass, when he went in unto his brother's wife, that he spilled it
on the ground, lest that he should give seed to his brother. The moral of this verse was redirected
by those who sought to suppress masturbation.


impregnation (n.)

late 14c., making or becoming pregnant, from Old French impregnacion, from Late Latin impregnationem
(nominative impregnatio), from impraegnare (see impregnate).


carbonate (v.)

1805, to form into a carbonate, from carbonate (n.) by influence of French carbonater transform into
a carbonate. Meaning to impregnate with carbonic acid gas (i.e. carbon dioxide) is from 1850s.
Related: Carbonated; carbonating.


resinate (v.)

impregnate with resin, 1891, from resin + -ate (2). Related: Resinated; resinating.


inseminate (v.)

1620s, to cast as seed, from Latin inseminatus, past participle of inseminare to sow, implant, from
in- in (see in- (2)) + semen (genitive semenis) seed. Meaning to impregnate with semen is attested
from 1923. Related: Inseminated; inseminating.


scent (v.)

late 14c., sent to find the scent of, from Old French sentir to feel, smell, touch, taste; realize,
perceive; make love to, from Latin sentire  to feel, perceive, sense, discern, hear, see (see sense
(n.)).    Originally a hunting term. The -c- appeared 17c., perhaps by influence of ascent, descent,
etc., or by influence of science. This was a tendency in early Modern English, also in scythe and
for a time threatening to make scite and scituate. Figurative use from 1550s. Transitive sense
impregnate with an odor, perfume is from 1690s. Related: Scented; scenting.


