imprecation (n.)

mid-15c., a curse, cursing, from Latin imprecationem (nominative imprecatio), from past participle
stem of imprecari invoke, pray, call down upon, from assimilated form of in- into, in, within (see
in- (2)) + precari to pray, ask, beg, request (see pray). Current limited sense is characteristic of
human nature. [Weekley]


imprecate (v.)

1610s, probably a back-formation from imprecation. Related: Imprecated; imprecating; imprecatory
(1580s).


blamed (adv.)

confoundedly 1833, later also as an adjective, from past participle of blame (v.), as a euphemistic
evasion of the horrible word damn. [Bartlett, Dictionary of Americanisms, 1848].    This adjective
'blamed' is the virtuous oath by which simple people, who are improving their habits, cure
themselves of a stronger epithet. [Edward Everett Hale, If, Yes, and Perhaps, 1868]    Compare also
blamenation (1837) as an expletive. The imprecation blame me is attested from 1830.


damnation (n.)

c.1300, condemnation to Hell by God, also fact of being condemned by judicial sentence, from Old
French damnation, from Latin damnationem (nominative damnatio), noun of action from past participle
stem of damnare (see damn). As an imprecation, attested from c.1600.    Damnation follows death in
other men,  But your damn'd Poet lives and writes agen.  [Pope, letter to Henry Cromwell, 1707 or
1708]


wig (v.)

1826, supply with a wig, from wig (n.). The meaning to behave hysterically (usually with out) is
attested from 1955, perhaps from notion in flip one's wig. Compare dash my wig!, a former mild
imprecation (1797), also wigs on the green (1856), Irish colloquial for a fight or rumble (because
wigs are likely to get detached from owners in such an event). The verb also had a colloquial sense
of scold severely, attested by 1829, perhaps related to these. Related: Wigged; wigging.


blow (v.1)

move air, Old English blawan blow, breathe, make an air current; kindle; inflate; sound a wind
instrument (class VII strong verb; past tense bleow, past participle blawen), from Proto-Germanic
*bl&aelig;-anan (source of Old High German blaen, German bl&auml;hen), from PIE *bhle- to swell,
blow up (source of Latin flare to blow), possibly identical with *bhel- (2) to blow, swell (see
bole).    Meaning to squander (of money) is from 1874. Sense of depart suddenly is from 1902. Slang
do fellatio on sense is from 1933, as blow (someone) off, originally among prostitutes (compare blow
job). This usage probably is not connected to the colloquial imprecation (1781, associated with
sailors, as in Popeye's well, blow me down!), which has past participle blowed. Meaning to spend
(money) foolishly and all at once is 1890s; that of bungle an opportunity is from 1943. To blow over
pass is from 1610s, originally of storms. To blow (someone's) mind was in use by 1967; there is a
song title Blow Your Mind released in a 1965 Mirawood recording by a group called The Gas Company.


sugar (n.)

late 13c., sugre, from Old French sucre sugar (12c.), from Medieval Latin succarum, from Arabic
sukkar, from Persian shakar, from Sanskrit sharkara ground or candied sugar, originally grit, gravel
(cognate with Greek kroke pebble). The Arabic word also was borrowed in Italian (zucchero), Spanish
(azucar, with the Arabic article), and German (Old High German zucura, German Zucker), and its forms
are represented in most European languages (such as Serbian cukar, Polish cukier, Russian sakhar).
Its Old World home was India (Alexander the Great's companions marveled at the honey without bees)
and it remained exotic in Europe until the Arabs began to cultivate it in Sicily and Spain; not
until after the Crusades did it begin to rival honey as the West's sweetener. The Spaniards in the
West Indies began raising sugar cane in 1506; first grown in Cuba 1523; first cultivated in Brazil
1532. The reason for the -g- in the English word is obscure (OED compares flagon, from French
flacon). The pronunciation shift from s- to sh- is probably from the initial long vowel sound syu-
(as in sure).    As a type of chemical compound from 1826. Slang euphemistic substitute for an
imprecation [OED] is attested from 1891. As a term of endearment, first recorded 1930. Sugar-cane is
from 1560s. Sugar-maple is from 1731. Sugar loaf was originally a moulded conical mass of refined
sugar (early 15c.); now obsolete, but sense extended 17c. to hills, hats, etc. of that shape.


