impudence (n.)

late 14c., from Latin impudentia shamelessness, noun of quality from impudens; see impudent.


jaywalking (n.)

by 1912, American English (said in original citation to be a Kansas City term), from jay, perhaps
with notion of boldness and impudence. Related: Jaywalk; jaywalker.


chutzpah (n.)

also hutzpah, 1892, from Yiddish khutspe impudence, gall. from Hebrew hutspah. The classic
definition is that given by Leo Rosten: that quality enshrined in a man who, having killed his
mother and father, throws himself on the mercy of the court because he is an orphan.


petulance (n.)

c.1600, insolence, immodesty, from French p&eacute;tulance (early 16c.), from Latin petulantia
sauciness, impudence, noun of quality from petulantem (see petulant). Meaning peevishness is
recorded from 1784, from influence of pettish, etc. It displaced earlier petulancy (1550s).


sass (n.)

impudence, 1835, back-formation from sassy. The verb is first recorded 1856, from the noun. Related:
Sassed; sassing. Sass (n.) as a variant of sauce is attested from 1775.


assurance (n.)

late 14c., formal or solemn pledge, promise, also certainty, from Old French asseurance (11c.,
Modern French assurance) assurance, promise; truce; certainty, safety, security, from asseurer (see
assure). The word had a negative tinge 18c., often suggesting impudence or presumption.


gall (n.1)

bile, Old English galla (Anglian), gealla (West Saxon) gall, bile, from Proto-Germanic *gallon- bile
(cognates: Old Norse gall, Old Saxon, Old High German galla, German Galle), from PIE root *ghel- (2)
to shine, with derivatives referring to bright materials and gold, and bile or gall (see glass).
Informal sense of impudence, boldness first recorded American English 1882; but meaning embittered
spirit, rancor is from c.1200, from the medieval theory of humors. Gall bladder recorded from 1670s.


effrontery (n.)

1715, from French effronterie, from effront&eacute; shameless, from Old French esfronte shameless,
brazen, probably from Late Latin effrontem (nominative effrons) barefaced, from Latin ex- out (see
ex-) + frontem (nominative frons) brow (see front (n.)).    Latin frontus had a sense of ability to
blush, but the literal sense of effrontery often has been taken to be putting forth the forehead.
Forehead in Johnson's Dictionary (1755) has a secondary sense of impudence; confidence; assurance;
audaciousness; audacity.


brass (n.)

Old English br&aelig;s brass, bronze, originally in reference to an alloy of copper and tin (now
bronze), later and in modern use an alloy of two parts copper, one part zinc. A mystery word, with
no known cognates beyond English. Perhaps akin to French brasser to brew, because it is an alloy. It
also has been compared to Old Swedish brasa fire, but no sure connection can be made. Yet another
theory connects it with Latin ferrum iron, itself of obscure origin.    As brass was unknown in
antiquity, use of the word in Bible translations, etc., likely means bronze. The Romans were the
first to deliberately make it. Words for brass in other languages (such as German Messing, Old
English m&aelig;sling, French laiton, Italian ottone) also tend to be difficult to explain.    The
meaning effrontery, impudence is from 1620s. Slang sense of high officials is first recorded 1899.
The brass tacks that you get down to (1897) probably are the ones used to measure cloth on the
counter of a dry goods store, suggesting precision. Slang brass balls toughness, courage
(emphatically combining two metaphors for the same thing) attested by 1960s.


nerve (n.)

late 14c., nerf sinew, tendon, from Old French nerf and directly from Medieval Latin nervus nerve,
from Latin nervus sinew, tendon; cord, bowstring, metathesis of pre-Latin *neuros, from PIE *(s)neu-
tendon, sinew (cognates: Sanskrit snavan- band, sinew, Armenian neard sinew, Greek neuron sinew,
tendon, in Galen nerve). Sense of fibers that convey impulses between the brain and the body is from
c.1600.    Secondary senses developed from meaning strength, vigor, energy (c.1600), from the sinew
sense. Hence figurative sense of feeling, courage, first attested c.1600; that of courage, boldness
is from 1809; bad sense impudence, cheek is from 1887. Latin nervus also had a figurative sense of
vigor, force, power, strength, as did Greek neuron. From the neurological sense come Nerves
condition of nervousness, attested from 1792; to get on someone's nerves, from 1895. War of nerves
psychological warfare is from 1915.


