impudent (adj.)

late 14c., from Latin impudentem (nominative impudens) without shame, shameless, from assimilated
form of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + pudens ashamed, modest, present participle of pudere to
cause shame (see pudendum). Related: Impudently.


jezebel (n.)

impudent woman, 1550s, after Jezebel, the wicked Tyrean princess who married Ahab, king of Israel
(Kings xxi:5-23), from Hebrew Izebhel, a name of uncertain origin and meaning [Klein].


impudence (n.)

late 14c., from Latin impudentia shamelessness, noun of quality from impudens; see impudent.


fresh (adj.2)

impudent, presumptuous, 1848, U.S. slang, probably from German frech insolent, cheeky, from Old High
German freh covetous, related to Old English frec greedy, bold (see freak (n.)).


headstrong (adj.)

determined to have one's way, late 14c., from head (n.) + strong. Compare Old English heafodbald
impudent, literally head-bold. Strongheaded is attested from c.1600.


immodest (adj.)

1560s, arrogant, impudent, pretentious, from Latin immodestus unrestrained, excessive, from
assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + modestus (see modest). Meaning indecent is
from 1580s. Related: immodestly.


brassy (adj.)

impudent, 1570s, from brass + -y (2). Compare brazen. Sense of debased and pretentious is from
1580s, from brass as contrasted with gold; sense of strident and artificial is from 1865. Related:
Brassily; brassiness.


snotty (adj.)

1560s, full of snot, from snot + -y (2). Meaning impudent, curt, conceited is from 1870. Related:
Snottily; snottiness. Snotnose upstart is from 1941; snotty-nose contemptible fellow is from c.1600.


malapert (adj.)

impudent, early 15c., from Old French mal apert, literally ill-skilled, from mal- badly (see mal-) +
apert skillful, variant of espert experienced, skillful, clever (from Latin expertus; see expert).
Related: Malapertly; malapertness.


shameless (adj.)

Old English scamleas shameless, impudent, immodest; see shame (n.) + -less. Related: Shamelessly;
shamelessness. Similar formation in Old Norse skammlauss, Dutch schaamteloos, Old High German
scamalos, German schamlos.


minx (n.)

1540s, mynx pet dog, later a young, pert, wanton girl [Johnson] (1590s), of uncertain origin,
perhaps a shortening of minikin girl, woman, from Middle Dutch minnekijn darling, beloved, from
minne love (see minnesinger) + -kijn, diminutive suffix. Klein's sources suggest the word is from
Low German minsk a man, also an impudent woman, related to German Mensch (see mensch), which also
has a sense in vulgar use of wench, hussy, slut.


freak (n.)

1560s, sudden turn of mind, of unknown origin, perhaps related to Old English frician to dance (not
recorded in Middle English, but the word may have survived in dialect) [OED, Barnhart], or perhaps
from Middle English frek bold, quickly, from Old English frec greedy, gluttonous (compare German
frech bold, impudent).    Sense of capricious notion (1560s) and unusual thing, fancy (1784)
preceded that of strange or abnormal individual (first in freak of nature, 1847; compare Latin lusus
natur&#230;, which was used in English from 1660s). The sense in health freak, ecology freak, etc.
is attested from 1908 (originally Kodak freak, a camera buff). Freak show attested from 1887.


urban (adj.)

characteristic of city life, pertaining to cities or towns, 1610s (but rare before 1830s), from
Latin urbanus of or pertaining to a city or city life; in Rome, also in city fashion, polished,
refined, cultivated, courteous, but also sometimes witty, facetious, bold, impudent; as a noun, city
dweller, from urbs (genitive urbis) city, walled town, of unknown origin.    The word gradually
emerged in this sense as urbane became restricted to manners and styles of expression. In late 20c.
American English gradually acquiring a suggestion of African-American. Urban renewal, euphemistic
for slum clearance, is attested from 1955, American English. Urban sprawl recorded by 1958. Urban
legend attested by 1980.


bad (adj.)

c.1200, inferior in quality; early 13c., wicked, evil, vicious, a mystery word with no apparent
relatives in other languages.* Possibly from Old English derogatory term b&aelig;ddel and its
diminutive b&aelig;dling effeminate man, hermaphrodite, pederast, probably related to b&aelig;dan to
defile. A rare word before 1400, and evil was more common in this sense until c.1700. Meaning
uncomfortable, sorry is 1839, American English colloquial.    Comparable words in the other Indo-
European languages tend to have grown from descriptions of specific qualities, such as ugly,
defective, weak, faithless, impudent, crooked, filthy (such as Greek kakos, probably from the word
for excrement; Russian plochoj, related to Old Church Slavonic plachu wavering, timid; Persian gast,
Old Persian gasta-, related to gand stench; German schlecht, originally level, straight, smooth,
whence simple, ordinary, then bad).    Comparative and superlative forms badder, baddest were common
14c.-18c. and used as recently as Defoe (but not by Shakespeare), but yielded to comparative worse
and superlative worst (which had belonged to evil and ill).    As a noun, late 14c., evil,
wickedness. In U.S. place names, sometimes translating native terms meaning supernaturally
dangerous. Ironic use as a word of approval is said to be at least since 1890s orally, originally in
Black English, emerging in print 1928 in a jazz context. It might have emerged from the ambivalence
of expressions like bad nigger, used as a term of reproach by whites, but among blacks sometimes
representing one who stood up to injustice, but in the U.S. West bad man also had a certain
ambivalence:    These are the men who do most of the killing in frontier communities, yet it is a
noteworthy fact that the men who are killed generally deserve their fate. [Farmer &amp; Henley]
*Farsi has bad in more or less the same sense as the English word, but this is regarded by linguists
as a coincidence. The forms of the words diverge as they are traced back in time (Farsi bad comes
from Middle Persian vat), and such accidental convergences exist across many languages, given the
vast number of words in each and the limited range of sounds humans can make to signify them. Among
other coincidental matches with English are Korean mani many, Chinese pei pay, Nahuatl (Aztecan)
huel well, Maya hol hole.


