inanimate (adj.)

early 15c., from Late Latin inanimatus lifeless, from in- not (see in- (1)) + animatus (see
animation). The same word in 17c. also was a verb meaning to infuse with life, from the other in-
(see in- (2)).


lifeless (adj.)

Old English lifleas inanimate, dead; see life + -less. Meaning with no living things is from 1728.
Related: Lifelessly; lifelessness.


insensate (adj.)

1510s, from Late Latin insensatus irrational, foolish, from Latin in- not (see in- (1)) + sensatus
gifted with sense (see sensate). Insensate means not capable of feeling sensation, often inanimate;
insensible means lacking the power to feel with the senses, hence, often, unconscious; insensitive
means having little or no reaction to what is perceived by one's senses, often tactless.


pathetic (adj.)

1590s, affecting the emotions, exciting the passions, from Middle French path&eacute;tique moving,
stirring, affecting (16c.), from Late Latin patheticus, from Greek pathetikos subject to feeling,
sensitive, capable of emotion, from pathetos liable to suffer, verbal adjective of pathein to suffer
(see pathos). Meaning arousing pity, pitiful is first recorded 1737. Colloquial sense of so
miserable as to be ridiculous is attested from 1937.  Related: Pathetical (1570s); pathetically.
Pathetic fallacy (1856, first used by Ruskin) is the attribution of human qualities to inanimate
objects.


pentagon (n.)

plane figure with five angles and five sides, 1560s, from Middle French pentagone or directly from
Late Latin pentagonum pentagon, from Greek pentagonon, noun use of neuter of adjective pentagonos
five-angled, from pente five (see five) + gonia angle (see knee (n.)). The U.S. military
headquarters Pentagon was completed 1942, so called for its shape; used allusively for U.S. military
leadership from 1945. Related: Pentagonal.    In nature, pentagonal symmetry is rare in inanimate
forms. Packed soap bubbles seem to strive for it but never quite succeed, and there are no mineral
crystals with true pentagonal structures. But pentagonal geometry is basic to many living things,
from roses and forget-me-nots to sea urchins and starfish. [Robert Bringhurst, The Elements of
Typographic Style, 1992]


say (v.)

Old English secgan to utter, inform, speak, tell, relate, from Proto-Germanic *sagjanan (cognates:
Old Saxon seggian, Old Norse segja, Danish sige, Old Frisian sedsa, Middle Dutch segghen, Dutch
zeggen, Old High German sagen, German sagen to say), from PIE *sokwyo-, from root *sekw- (3) to say,
utter (cognates: Hittite shakiya- to declare, Lithuanian sakyti to say, Old Church Slavonic sociti
to vindicate, show, Old Irish insce speech, Old Latin inseque to tell say).    Past tense said
developed from Old English segde. Not attested in use with inanimate objects (clocks, signs, etc.)
as subjects before 1930. You said it you're right first recorded 1919; you can say that again as a
phrase expressing agreement is recorded from 1942, American English. You don't say (so) as an
expression of astonishment (often ironic) is first recorded 1779, American English.


life (n.)

Old English life (dative lif) existence, lifetime, way of life, condition of being a living thing,
opposite of death, from Proto-Germanic *libam (cognates: Old Norse lif life, body, Dutch lijf body,
Old High German lib life, German Leib body), properly continuance, perseverance, from PIE *leip- to
remain, persevere, continue; stick, adhere (see leave (v.)). Much of the modern range of meanings
was present in Old English. Meaning property which distinguishes living from non-living matter is
from 1560s. Sense of vitality, energy is from 1580s. Extended 1703 to term of duration (of inanimate
objects).   Life-jacket is from 1840; life-preserver from 1630s of anything that is meant to save a
life, 1803 of devices worn to prevent drowning. Life-saver is from 1883, figurative use from 1909,
as a brand of hard sugar candy, from 1912, so called for shape. Life-form is from 1861. Life cycle
is from 1855.


water (n.1)

Old English w&aelig;ter, from Proto-Germanic *watar (cognates: Old Saxon watar, Old Frisian wetir,
Dutch water, Old High German wazzar, German Wasser, Old Norse vatn, Gothic wato water), from PIE
*wod-or, from root *wed- (1) water, wet (cognates: Hittite watar, Sanskrit udrah, Greek hydor, Old
Church Slavonic and Russian voda, Lithuanian vanduo, Old Prussian wundan, Gaelic uisge  water; Latin
unda wave).    To keep (one's) head above water in the figurative sense is recorded from 1742. Water
cooler is recorded from 1846; water polo from 1884; water torture from 1928. Linguists believe PIE
had two root words for water: *ap- and *wed-. The first (preserved in Sanskrit apah as well as
Punjab and julep) was animate, referring to water as a living force; the latter referred to it as an
inanimate substance. The same probably was true of fire (n.).


fire (n.)

Old English fyr, from Proto-Germanic *fuir (cognates: Old Saxon and Old Frisian fiur, Old Norse
f&uuml;rr, Middle Dutch and Dutch vuur, Old High German fiur, German Feuer), from PIE *perjos, from
root *paewr- (cognates: Armenian hur fire, torch, Czech pyr hot ashes, Greek pyr, Umbrian pir,
Sanskrit pu, Hittite pahhur fire).    Current spelling is attested as early as 1200, but did not
fully displace Middle English fier (preserved in fiery) until c.1600.    PIE apparently had two
roots for fire: *paewr- and *egni- (source of Latin ignis). The former was inanimate, referring to
fire as a substance, and the latter was animate, referring to it as a living force (see water
(n.1)).   Fire applied in English to passions, feelings, from mid-14c. Meaning action of guns, etc.
is from 1580s. Firecracker is American English coinage for what is in England just cracker, but the
U.S. word distinguishes it from the word meaning biscuit. Fire-engine attested from 1680s. The
figurative expression play with fire risk disaster is from 1887; phrase where's the fire? what's the
hurry? first recorded 1924.


buck (n.1)

male deer, c.1300, earlier male goat; from Old English bucca male goat, from Proto-Germanic *bukkon
(cognates: Old Saxon buck, Middle Dutch boc, Dutch bok, Old High German boc, German Bock, Old Norse
bokkr), perhaps from a PIE root *bhugo (cognates: Avestan buza buck, goat, Armenian buc lamb), but
some speculate that it is from a lost pre-Germanic language. Barnhart says Old English buc male
deer, listed in some sources, is a ghost word or scribal error.    Meaning dollar is 1856, American
English, perhaps an abbreviation of buckskin, a unit of trade among Indians and Europeans in
frontier days, attested in this sense from 1748. Pass the buck is first recorded in the literal
sense 1865, American English:The 'buck' is any inanimate object, usually knife or pencil, which is
thrown into a jack pot and temporarily taken by the winner of the pot. Whenever the deal reaches the
holder of the 'buck', a new jack pot must be made. [J.W. Keller, Draw Poker, 1887]Perhaps originally
especially a buck-handled knife. The figurative sense of shift responsibility is first recorded
1912. Buck private is recorded by 1870s, of uncertain signification.


old (adj.)

Old English ald (Anglian), eald (West Saxon) aged, antique, primeval; elder, experienced, from
Proto-Germanic *althas grown up, adult (cognates: Old Frisian ald, Gothic al&thorn;eis, Dutch oud,
German alt), originally a past participle stem of a verb meaning grow, nourish (compare Gothic alan
to grow up, Old Norse ala to nourish), from PIE root *al- to grow, nourish (cognates: Greek aldaino
make grow, strengthen, althein,  althainein to get well; Latin alere to feed, nourish, bring up,
increase, altus high, literally grown tall, almus nurturing, nourishing, alumnus fosterling, step-
child; Old Irish alim I nourish).    The usual PIE root is *sen- (see senior (adj.)). A few Indo-
European languages distinguish words for old (vs. young) from words for old (vs. new), and some have
separate words for aged persons as opposed to old things. Latin senex was used of aged living
things, mostly persons, while vetus (literally having many years) was used of inanimate things.
Greek geraios was used mostly of humans; Greek palaios was used mostly of things, of persons only in
a derogatory sense. Greek also had arkhaios, literally belonging to the beginning, which parallels
French ancien, used mostly with reference to things of former times.    Old English also had fyrn
ancient, related to Old English feor far, distant (see far, and compare Gothic fairneis, Old Norse
forn old, of old, of former times, Old High German firni old, experienced). The original Old English
vowel is preserved in Scots auld, also in alderman. The original comparative and superlative (elder,
eldest) are retained in particular uses.    First record of old-timer is from 1860. Expression old
as the hills first recorded 1819. The good old days dates from 1828. Of old of old times is from
late 14c. Old Glory for the American flag is first attested 1862. Old maid woman who remains single
well beyond the usual marrying age is from 1520s; the card game is attested by that name from 1844.
Old man man who has lived long is from c.1200; sense of husband, father, boss is from 1854, earlier
(1830) it was military slang for commanding officer; old lady wife, mother is attested from c.1775.
Old English is attested from 1701, originally as a type of font. Old boy originally was a former
pupil of one of the English public schools. Old Testament attested from mid-14c.


