incantation (n.)

late 14c., from Old French incantacion spell, exorcism (13c.), from Latin incantationem (nominative
incantatio) art of enchanting, noun of action from past participle stem of incantare bewitch, charm,
literally sing spells (see enchantment).


charm (n.)

c.1300, incantation, magic charm, from Old French charme (12c.) magic charm, magic, spell;
incantation, song, lamentation, from Latin carmen song, verse, enchantment, religious formula, from
canere to sing (see chant (v.)), with dissimilation of -n- to -r- before -m- in intermediate form
*canmen (for a similar evolution, see Latin germen germ, from *genmen). The notion is of chanting or
reciting verses of magical power.    A yet stronger power than that of herb or stone lies in the
spoken word, and all nations use it both for blessing and cursing. But these, to be effective, must
be choice, well knit, rhythmic words (verba concepta), must have lilt and tune; hence all that is
strong in the speech wielded by priest, physician, magician, is allied to the forms of poetry.
[Jacob Grimm, Teutonic Mythology (transl. Stallybrass), 1883]    Sense of pleasing quality evolved
17c. Meaning small trinket fastened to a watch-chain, etc. first recorded 1865. Quantum physics
sense is from 1964. To work like a charm (figuratively) is recorded by 1824.


Carmen (n.)

French opera by Georges Bizet (1838-1875), premiered in Paris March 3, 1875. As a proper name, it
can represent (especially in Italian and Spanish) a diminutive of Carmel/Carmelo or Latin carmen
song, poem, incantation, oracle (see charm (n.)).


epode (n.)

1590s, a kind of lyric poem in which a short line follows a longer one (invented by Archilochus,
also used by Horace), from Latin epodos, from Greek epodus after-song, incantation, from epi after
(see epi-) + odein to sing (see ode).


conjuration (n.)

late 14c., coniuracioun, conspiracy (now obsolete), also a calling upon something supernatural, from
Old French conjuracion spell, incantation, formula used in exorcism, from Latin coniurationem
(nominative coniuratio) a swearing together, conspiracy, noun of action from coniurare (see
conjure).


song (n.)

Old English sang voice, song, art of singing; metrical composition adapted for singing, psalm, poem,
from Proto-Germanic *sangwaz (cognates: Old Norse s&ouml;ngr, Norwegian song, Swedish s&#229;ng, Old
Saxon, Danish, Old Frisian, Old High German, German sang, Middle Dutch sanc, Dutch zang, Gothic
saggws), from PIE *songwh-o- singing, song, from *sengwh- to sing, make an incantation (see sing
(v.)).    Phrase for a song for a trifle, for little or nothing is from All's Well III.ii.9 (the
identical image, por du son, is in Old French. With a song in (one's) heart feeling joy is first
attested 1930 in Lorenz Hart's lyric. Song and dance as a form of vaudeville act is attested from
1872; figurative sense of rigmarole is from 1895.


spell (n.1)

Old English spell story, saying, tale, history, narrative, fable; discourse, command, from Proto-
Germanic *spellam (see spell (v.1)). Compare Old Saxon spel, Old Norse spjall, Old High German spel,
Gothic spill report, discourse, tale, fable, myth; German Beispiel example. From c.1200 as an
utterance, something said, a statement, remark; meaning set of words with supposed magical or occult
powers, incantation, charm first recorded 1570s; hence any means or cause of enchantment.    The
term 'spell' is generally used for magical procedures which cause harm, or force people to do
something against their will -- unlike charms for healing, protection, etc. [Oxford Dictionary of
English Folklore]    Also in Old English, doctrine; a sermon; religious instruction or teaching; the
gospel; a book of the Bible; compare gospel.


sing (v.)

Old English singan to chant, sing, celebrate, or tell in song, also used of birds (class III strong
verb; past tense sang, past participle sungen), from Proto-Germanic *sengwan (cognates: Old Saxon
singan, Old Frisian sionga, Middle Dutch singhen, Dutch zingen, Old High German singan, German
singen, Gothic siggwan, Old Norse syngva, Swedish sjunga), from PIE root *sengwh- to sing, make an
incantation. The criminal slang sense of to confess to authorities is attested from 1610s.    No
related forms in other languages, unless perhaps it is connected to Greek omphe voice (especially of
a god), oracle; and Welsh dehongli explain, interpret. The typical Indo-European root is represented
by Latin canere (see chant (v.)). Other words meaning sing derive from roots meaning cry, shout, but
Irish gaibim is literally take, seize, with sense evolution via take up a song or melody.


grammar (n.)

early 14c., gramarye (late 12c. in surnames), from Old French gramaire learning, especially Latin
and philology, grammar, (magic) incantation, spells, mumbo-jumbo, irregular semi-popular adoption
[OED] of Latin grammatica, from Greek grammatike tekhne art of letters, with a sense of both
philology and literature in the broadest sense, fem. adjective from gramma letter, from stem of
graphein to draw or write (see -graphy). An Old English word for it was st&aelig;fcr&aelig;ft (see
staff (n.)).    Form grammar is from late 14c. Restriction to rules of language is a post-classical
development, but as this type of study was until 16c. limited to Latin, Middle English gramarye also
came to mean learning in general, knowledge peculiar to the learned classes (early 14c.), which
included astrology and magic; hence the secondary meaning of occult knowledge (late 15c.), which
evolved in Scottish into glamor (q.v.).    A grammar school (late 14c.) originally was a school in
which the learned languages are grammatically taught [Johnson, who also has grammaticaster a mean
verbal pedant]. In U.S. (1842) the term was put to use in the graded system for a school between
primary and secondary where English grammar is taught.


