incarnation (n.)

c.1300, embodiment of God in the person of Christ, from Old French incarnacion (12c.), from Late
Latin incarnationem (nominative incarnatio), act of being made flesh (used by Church writers
especially of God in Christ), noun of action from past participle stem of Latin incarnare to make
flesh, from in- in (see in- (2)) + caro (genitive carnis) flesh (see carnage).


reincarnation (n.)

1829, fact of repeated incarnation, from re- back, again + incarnation. Meaning a new embodiment is
from 1854.


incarnate (v.)

1530s, a back-formation from incarnation, or else from Latin incarnatus, past participle of
incarnare (see incarnation). Related: Incarnated; incarnating.


Rama

incarnation of Vishnu, from Sanskrit Ramah, literally lovely, from stem of ramate stands still,
rests, is pleased.


Hare Krishna

1968, title of a Hindu chant or mantra, from Hindi hare O God! + Krishna, name of an incarnation of
the god Vishnu.


incarnate (adj.)

late 14c., from Late Latin incarnatus made flesh, a common word among early Christian writers, past
participle of Latin incarnare to make flesh (see incarnation).


annunciation (n.)

early 14c., Lady Day, from Anglo-French anunciacioun, Old French anonciacion, from Latin
annuntiationem (nominative annuntiatio), noun of action from past participle stem of annuntiare (see
announce). The Church festival (March 25) commemorating the visit of the angel Gabriel to the Virgin
Mary, foretelling the incarnation. General sense of an announcing is from 1560s. Old English for
Annunciation Day was bodungd&aelig;g.


genius (n.)

late 14c., tutelary god (classical or pagan), from Latin genius guardian deity or spirit which
watches over each person from birth; spirit, incarnation, wit, talent; also prophetic skill,
originally generative power, from root of gignere beget, produce (see kin), from PIE root *gen-
produce. Sense of characteristic disposition is from 1580s. Meaning person of natural intelligence
or talent and that of natural ability are first recorded 1640s.


incarnadine

1590s (adj.) flesh-colored, from French incarnadine, from dialectal Italian incarnadino flesh-color,
from Late Latin incarnatio (see incarnation). The verb properly would mean to make flesh colored,
but the modern meaning make red, and the entire survival of the verb, is traceable to Macbeth II ii.
(1605). Its direct root might be the noun incarnadine blood-red; flesh-color, though this is not
attested until 1620s.


juggernaut (n.)

1630s, huge wagon bearing an image of the god Krishna, especially that at the town of Puri, drawn
annually in procession in which (apocryphally) devotees allowed themselves to be crushed under its
wheels in sacrifice. Altered from Jaggernaut, a title of Krishna (an incarnation of Vishnu), from
Hindi Jagannath, literally lord of the world, from Sanskrit jagat world (literally moving, present
participle of *jagati he goes, from PIE *gwa- to go, come (see come (v.)) + natha-s lord, master,
from nathate he helps, protects, from PIE *na- to help. The first European description of the
festival is by Friar Odoric (c.1321). Figurative sense of anything that demands blind devotion or
merciless sacrifice is from 1854.


carnation (n.)

Dianthus Caryophyllus, commonly also called pink, herbaceous perennial flowering plant native to
southern Europe and abundant in Normandy, 1530s, of uncertain origin. The early forms are confused;
perhaps (on evidence of early spellings) it is a corruption of coronation, from the flower's being
used in chaplets or from the toothed crown-like look of the petals.    Or it might be called for its
pinkness and derive from Middle French carnation person's color or complexion (15c.), which probably
is from Italian dialectal carnagione flesh color, from Late Latin carnationem (nominative carnatio)
fleshiness, from Latin caro flesh (see carnage). This carnation had been borrowed separately into
English as color of human flesh (1530s) and as an adjective meaning flesh-colored (1560s; the
earliest use of the word in English was to mean the incarnation of Christ, mid-14c.). OED points out
that not all the flowers are this color.


