incense (v.2)

to offer incense, perfume with incense, c.1300, from Old French encenser, from encens (see incense
(n.)).


incense (v.1)

make angry, early 15c., from Middle French incenser, from Latin incensare, frequentative of Latin
incendere set on fire (see incendiary). A figurative use of the word used literally in incense (n.).
Related: Incensed.


incense (n.)

late 13c., from Old French encens sweet-smelling substance, from Late Latin incensum (nominative
incensus) burnt incense, literally something burnt, neuter past participle of Latin incendere set on
fire (see incendiary).


censer (n.)

vessel used for burning incense, mid-13c., from Old French censier, a shortened form of encensier,
from encens incense (see incense (n.)).


cense (v.)

to perfume with burning incense, late 14c., a shortened form of incense. Related: Censed; censing.


frankincense (n.)

late 14c., apparently from Old French franc encense, from franc noble, true (see frank (adj.)), in
this case probably signifying of the highest quality + encens incense (see incense (n.)).


punk (n.1)

Chinese incense, 1870, from punk (adj.).


Hong Kong

from Cantonese pronunciation of Chinese Xianggang, literally fragrant port. Perhaps so called from
the scent of incense factories or opium cargoes, or from the semi-fresh waters of the bay. The word
hong was the general English term for foreign trading establishments in China.


joss (n.)

Chinese figure of a deity, 1711, from Chinese Pidgin English, from Javanese dejos, taken 16c. from
Portuguese deus god, from Latin deus (see Zeus). Colloquially, it came to mean luck. Joss stick
Chinese incense first recorded 1883.


benzoin (n.)

balsamic resin obtained from a tree (Styrax benzoin) of Indonesia, 1560s (earlier as bengewine,
1550s), from Middle French benjoin (16c.), which comes via Spanish, Portuguese, or Italian from
Arabic luban jawi incense of Java (actually Sumatra, with which the Arabs confused it), with lu
probably mistaken in Romance languages for a definite article. The English form with -z- is perhaps
from influence of Italian benzoi (Venetian, 1461).


sandalwood (n.)

1510s, earlier sandell (c.1400), saundres (early 14c.), from Old French sandale, from Medieval Latin
sandalum, from Late Greek santalon, ultimately from Sanskrit &#269;andana-m the sandalwood tree,
perhaps literally wood for burning incense, related to candrah shining, glowing, and cognate with
Latin candere to shine, glow (see candle).


shewbread (n.)

1530, Tyndale's word (Exodus xxv:30), based on or influenced by German schaubrot (in Luther),
literally show-bread, translating Latin panes propositiones, from Greek artai enopioi, from Hebrew
lechem panim, the 12 loaves placed every Sabbath before the Lord on a table beside the altar of
incense, from lechem bread + panim face, presence. Old English translations used offring-hlafas.


thyme (n.)

plant of the mint family, late 14c., from Old French thym, tym (13c.) and directly from Latin
thymum, from Greek thymon, from PIE *dheu- (1), base of words meaning to rise in a cloud (see fume
(n.)); thus thyme might be the plant having a strong odor, or it might be related to thyein burn as
a sacrifice, which would indicate the plant was used as incense. Related: Thymic.


