incitement (n.)

1590s, from incite + -ment.


incite (v.)

mid-15c., from Middle French enciter (14c.), from Latin incitare to put into rapid motion,
figuratively rouse, urge, encourage, stimulate, from in- into, in, on, upon (see in- (2)) + citare
move, excite (see cite). Related: Incited; inciting.


whet (v.)

Old English hwettan to whet, sharpen, figuratively incite, encourage, from Proto-Germanic *hwatjan
(cognates: Old Norse hvetja to sharpen, encourage, Middle Low German, Middle Dutch wetten, Old High
German wezzan, German wetzen to sharpen, Gothic ga-hvatjan to sharpen, incite), from PIE root *kwed-
to sharpen (cognates: Sanskrit codati incites, literally sharpens; Old English hw&aelig;t brave,
bold, Old Saxon hwat sharp).


hortatory (adj.)

1580s, from Middle French hortatoire and directly from Late Latin hortatorius encouraging, cheering,
from hortatus, past participle of hortari exhort, encourage, urge, incite, instigate, intensive of
horiri urge, incite, encourage, from PIE root *gher- (5) to like, want (cognates: Old English
giernan to strive, desire, yearn; Gothic gairnei desire; Greek khresthai to lack, want; use, make
use of, kharis grace, favor, khairein to rejoice, delight in; Sanskrit haryati finds pleasure,
likes, harsate is aroused; Avestan zara effort, aim; Russian zhariti awake desire, charm).


sick (v.)

to chase, set upon (as in command sick him!), 1845, dialectal variant of seek. Used as an imperative
to incite a dog to attack a person or animal; hence cause to pursue. Related: Sicked; sicking.


incitive (adj.)

1888; see incite + -ive.


irritate (v.)

1530s, stimulate to action, rouse, incite, from Latin irritatus, past participle of irritare excite,
provoke. An earlier verb form was irrite (mid-15c.), from Old French irriter. Meaning annoy, make
impatient is from 1590s. Related: Irritated; irritating.


hallo

shout to call attention, 1781, earlier hollo, holla (see hello). Halow as a shipman's cry to incite
effort is from mid-15c.; Halloo as a verb, to pursue with shouts, to shout in the chase, from late
14c. Compare also harou, cry of distress, late 13c., from French.


egg (v.)

c.1200, from Old Norse eggja to goad on, incite, from egg edge (see edge (n.)). The unrelated verb
meaning to pelt with (rotten) eggs is from 1857, from egg (n.). Related: Egged; egging.


instigate (v.)

1540s, back-formation from instigation or else from Latin instigatus, past participle of instigare
to urge on, incite (see instigation). Related: Instigated; instigates; instigating.


edge (v.)

late 13c., to give an edge to (implied in past participle egged), from edge (n.). Meaning to move
edgeways (with the edge toward the spectator), advance slowly is from 1620s, originally nautical.
Meaning to defeat by a narrow margin is from 1953. The meaning urge on, incite (16c.) often must be
a mistake for egg (v.). Related: Edged; edging.


entice (v.)

late 13c., intice, from Old French enticier to stir up (fire), to excite, incite,  perhaps from
Vulgar Latin *intitiare set on fire, from Latin in- in (see in- (2)) + titio (genitive titionis)
firebrand, of uncertain origin. Meaning to allure, attract is from c.1300. Related: Enticed;
enticing.


instinct (n.)

early 15c., a prompting, from Latin instinctus instigation, impulse, noun use of past participle of
instinguere to incite, impel, from in- on (see in- (2)) + stinguere prick, goad, from PIE *steig- to
prick, stick, pierce (see stick (v.)). Meaning animal faculty of intuitive perception is from mid-
15c., from notion of natural prompting. Sense of innate tendency is first recorded 1560s.


instigation (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French instigation and directly from Latin instigationem (nominative
instigatio), noun of action from past participle stem of instigare urge on, incite, from in- in (see
in- (2)) + *stigare, a root meaning to prick, from PIE root *steig- to prick, stick, pierce (see
stick (v.)).


suasion (n.)

late 14c., from Old French suasion (14c.) and directly from Latin suasionem (nominative suasio) a
recommending, advocacy, support, noun of action from past participle stem of suadere to urge,
incite, promote, advise, persuade, literally recommend as good (related to suavis sweet), from PIE
*swad- sweet, pleasant (see sweet (adj.)). Survives chiefly in phrase moral suasion (1640s). Latin
Suada was the goddess of persuasion.


abet (v.)

late 14c. (implied in abetting), from Old French abeter to bait, to harass with dogs, literally to
cause to bite, from a- to (see ad-) + beter to bait, from a Germanic source, perhaps Low Franconian
betan incite, or Old Norse beita cause to bite, from Proto-Germanic *baitjan, from PIE root *bheid-
to split (see fissure). Related: Abetted; abetting.


incendiary

c.1400 as a noun, person who sets malicious fires; mid-15c. as an adjective, capable of being used
to set fires, from Latin incendiarius causing a fire, from incendium conflagration, from incendere
set on fire, figuratively, incite, rouse, enrage, from in- into, in, on, upon (see in- (2)) +
*candere to set alight, cause to glow, related to candere to shine (see candle). Figurative sense of
enflaming passions (adj.) is from 1610s. Military use, of bombs, shells, etc., attested from 1871.
The obsolete verb incend is attested from c.1500.


suborn (v.)

to procure unlawfully, to bribe to accomplish a wicked purpose, especially to induce a witness to
perjury, to lure (someone) to commit a crime, 1530s, from Middle French suborner seduce, instigate,
bribe (13c.) and directly from Latin subornare employ as a secret agent, incite secretly, originally
equip, fit out, furnish, from sub under, secretly (see sub-) + ornare equip, related to ordo order
(see order (n.)). Related: Suborned; suborning.


stir (v.)

Old English styrian to stir, move; rouse, agitate, incite, urge (transitive and intransitive), from
Proto-Germanic *sturjan (cognates: Middle Dutch stoeren, Dutch storen to disturb, Old High German
storan to scatter, destroy, German st&ouml;ren to disturb), from PIE *(s)twer- (1) to turn, whirl
(see storm (n.)). Related: Stirred; stirring. Stir-fry (v.) is attested from 1959.


shy (adj.)

late Old English sceoh timid, easily startled, from Proto-Germanic *skeukh(w)az afraid (cognates:
Middle Low German sch&uuml;we, Dutch schuw, German scheu shy; Old High German sciuhen, German
scheuchen to scare away). Uncertain cognates outside Germanic, unless in Old Church Slavonic shchuti
to hunt, incite. Italian schivare to avoid, Old French eschiver to shun are Germanic loan-words.
Meaning lacking, short of is from 1895, American English gambling slang. Related: Shyly; shyness.


distinguish (v.)

1560s, from Middle French distinguiss-, stem of distinguer, or directly from Latin distinguere to
separate between, separate by pricking, from dis- apart (see dis-) + -stinguere to prick (see
extinguish, and compare Latin instinguere to incite, impel).    The suffix -ish is due to the
influence of many verbs in which it is the equivalent of Old French -iss-, ultimately from Latin
inchoative suffix -iscere (this is also the case in extinguish, admonish, and astonish). Related:
Distinguishing. The earlier form of the verb was distinguen (mid-14c.).


trim (v.)

mid-15c., probably from Old English trymian, trymman strengthen, fortify, confirm; comfort; incite;
set in order, arrange, prepare, make ready; become strong, from trum strong, stable, from Proto-
Germanic *trum-, from PIE *dru-mo-, suffixed form of *deru- to be firm, solid, steadfast (see true).
Examples in Middle English are wanting.    Original sense is preserved in nautical phrase in
fighting trim (see trim (n.)); where the verb meant distribute the load of a ship so she floats on
an even keel (1570s). Meaning make neat by cutting is first recorded 1520s; that of decorate, adorn
is from 1540s. Sense of reduce is attested from 1966.


set (v.)

Old English settan (transitive) cause to sit, put in some place, fix firmly; build, found; appoint,
assign, from Proto-Germanic *(bi)satjan to cause to sit, set (cognates: Old Norse setja, Swedish
s&#228;tta, Old Saxon settian, Old Frisian setta, Dutch zetten, German setzen, Gothic satjan),
causative form of PIE *sod-, variant of *sed- (1) to sit (see sit (v.)). Also see set (n.2).
Intransitive sense from c.1200, be seated. Used in many disparate senses by Middle English; sense of
make or cause to do, act, or be; start and that of mount a gemstone attested by mid-13c. Confused
with sit since early 14c. Of the sun, moon, etc., to go down, recorded from c.1300, perhaps from
similar use of the cognates in Scandinavian languages. To set (something) on incite to attack
(c.1300) originally was in reference to hounds and game.


stick (v.)

Old English stician to pierce, stab, transfix, goad, also to remain embedded, stay fixed, be
fastened, from Proto-Germanic *stik- pierce, prick, be sharp (cognates: Old Saxon stekan, Old
Frisian steka, Dutch stecken, Old High German stehhan, German stechen to stab, prick), from PIE
*steig- to stick; pointed (cognates: Latin instigare to goad, instinguere to incite, impel; Greek
stizein to prick, puncture, stigma mark made by a pointed instrument; Old Persian tigra- sharp,
pointed; Avestan tighri- arrow; Lithuanian stingu to remain in place; Russian stegati to quilt).
Figurative sense of to remain permanently in mind is attested from c.1300. Transitive sense of to
fasten (something) in place is attested from late 13c. Stick out project is recorded from 1560s.
Slang stick around remain is from 1912; stick it as a rude item of advice is first recorded 1922.
Related: Stuck; sticking. Sticking point, beyond which one refuses to go, is from 1956; sticking-
place, where any thing put will stay is from 1570s. Modern use generally is an echo of Shakespeare.


