incident (adj.)

conducive (to), contributing (to), early 15c., from Middle French incident (adj.) or directly from
Latin   incidens, present participle of   incidere (see incident (n.)).


incident (n.)

early 15c., something which occurs casually in connection with something else, from Middle French
incident and directly from Latin incidentem (nominative incidens), present participle of incidere
happen, befall, from in- on + -cidere, comb. form of cadere to fall (see case (n.1)). Sense of an
occurrence viewed as a separate circumstance is from mid-15c. Meaning event that might trigger a
crisis or political unrest first attested 1913.


incidental (adj.)

casual, occasional, 1610s, from Medieval Latin incidentalis, from incidens (see incident (n.)).
Incidentals (n.) 'occasional' expenses, etc., is attested by 1707.


black hole (n.)

in astrophysics, 1968, probably with awareness of Black Hole of Calcutta, incident of June 19, 1756,
in which 146 British POWs taken by the Nawab of Bengal after the capture of Ft. William, Calcutta,
were held overnight in punishment cell of the barracks (meant to hold 4 people) and all but 23
perished.


incidence (n.)

early 15c., incidental matter, from Middle French incidence (15c.), from Late Latin incidentia (see
incident (n.)). Meaning act of coming into contact with is from 1650s; sense in physics is from
1620s.


blood-curdling (adj.)

also bloodcurdling, 1817, from blood (n.) + present participle of curdle. Also formerly with a noun
form, bloodcurdler incident which freezes the blood, especially sensational story, 1877, slang; also
in use in this sense was blood-freezer (1886).


recognition (n.)

mid-15c., knowledge of an event or incident; understanding, from Middle French recognition (15c.)
and directly from Latin recognitionem (nominative recognitio) a reviewing, investigation,
examination, noun of action from past participle stem of recognoscere to acknowledge, know again;
examine (see recognize).    Sense of formal avowal of knowledge and approval is from 1590s;
especially acknowledgement of the independence of a country by a state formerly exercising
sovereignty (1824). Meaning a knowing again is from 1798.


inconvenience (n.)

c.1400, harm, damage, danger, also a harmful incident, misfortune, affliction, from Old French
inconvenience misfortune, calamity; impropriety (Modern French inconvenance), from Late Latin
inconvenientia lack of consistency, incongruity, noun of quality from inconvenientem (see
inconvenient). Later impropriety, unfitness; an improper act or utterance (early 15c.). Meaning
quality of being inconvenient is from 1650s.


minke (n.)

type of small whale (Balaenoptera acutorostrata), 1939, supposedly from the Norwegian surname
Meincke.    The name minke is said to have derived from one of Svend Foyn's crew by the name of
Meincke, who mistook a school of these whales for blue whales. Whalers all over the world considered
this incident so amusing that they used his name as a household word to describe this species. [J.N.
T&#248;nnessen &amp; A.O. Johnsen, The History of Modern Whaling (transl. R.I. Christophersen),
1982]    Also known in English as the lesser rorqual and little piked whale.


episode (n.)

1670s, commentary between two choric songs in a Greek tragedy, also an incidental narrative or
digression within a story, poem, etc., from French &eacute;pisode or directly from Greek epeisodion
addition, noun use of neuter of epeisodios coming in besides, from epi in addition (see epi-) +
eisodos a coming in, entrance (from eis into + hodos way). Sense of outstanding incident, experience
first recorded in English 1773. Transferred by 1930s to individual broadcasts of serial radio
programs.


tableau (n.)

1690s, a picturesque or graphic description or picture, from French tableau picture, painting
(12c.), from Old French table slab, writing tablet (see table (n.)) + diminutive suffix -eau, from
Latin -ellus. Hence tableau-vivant (1817) person or persons silent and motionless, enacting a well-
known scene, incident, painting, etc., 19c. parlor game, literally living picture.


accident (n.)

late 14c., an occurrence, incident, event, from Old French accident (12c.), from Latin accidentem
(nominative accidens), present participle of accidere happen, fall out, fall upon, from ad- to (see
ad-) + cadere fall (see case (n.1)). Meaning grew from something that happens, an event, to
something that happens by chance, then mishap. Philosophical sense non-essential characteristic of a
thing is late 14c. Meaning unplanned child is attested by 1932.


adventure (n.)

c.1200, auenture that which happens by chance, fortune, luck, from Old French aventure (11c.)
chance, accident, occurrence, event, happening, from Latin adventura (res) (a thing) about to
happen, from adventurus, future participle of advenire to come to, reach, arrive at, from ad- to
(see ad-) + venire to come (see venue).    Meaning developed through risk/danger (a trial of one's
chances), c.1300, and perilous undertaking (late 14c.) and thence to a novel or exciting incident
(1560s). Earlier it also meant a wonder, a miracle; accounts of marvelous things (13c.). The -d- was
restored 15c.-16c. Venture is a 15c. variant.


chivvy (v.)

harass, 1918, from alternative form of chevy (1830) to chase, from a noun chevy (1824, also used as
a hunting cry, c.1785), from chevy chase a running pursuit, probably from the Ballad of Chevy Chase,
popular song from 15c. describing a hunting party on the borderland that turned into a battle
between the English and the Scots (the incident probably late 14c.). The place is probably
originally Cheviot Chase.    The old song of Chevy-Chase is the favourite ballad of the common
people of England, and Ben Jonson used to say, he had rather have been the author of it than of all
his works. [Addison, spectator No. 70, May 21, 1711]


logrolling (n.)

also log-rolling, in the legislative vote-trading sense, 1823, American English, from the notion of
neighbors on the frontier helping one another with the heavy work of clearing land and building
cabins (as in phrase you roll my log and I'll roll yours); see log (n.1) + rolling.    LOG-ROLLING.
1. In the lumber regions of Maine it is customary for men of different logging camps to appoint days
for helping each other in rolling the logs to the river, after they are felled and trimmed -- this
rolling being about the hardest work incident to the business. Thus the men of three or four camps
will unite, say on Monday, to roll for camp No. 1, -- on Tuesday for camp No. 2, -- on Wednesday for
camp No. 3, -- and so on, through the whole number of camps within convenient distance of each
other. [Bartlett]


defenestration (n.)

1620, the action of throwing out of a window, from Latin fenestra window (see fenestration). A word
invented for one incident: the Defenestration of Prague, May 21, 1618, when two Catholic deputies to
the Bohemian national assembly and a secretary were tossed out the window (into a moat) of the
castle of Hradshin by Protestant radicals. It marked the start of the Thirty Years War. Some
linguists link fenestra with Greek verb phainein to show; others see in it an Etruscan borrowing,
based on the suffix -(s)tra, as in Latin loan-words aplustre the carved stern of a ship with its
ornaments, genista the plant broom, lanista trainer of gladiators. Related: Defenestrate (1915);
defenestrated (1620).


camp (n.)

place where an army lodges temporarily, 1520s, from French camp, from Italian campo, from Latin
campus open field, level space (also source of French champ; see campus), especially open space for
military exercise.    A later reborrowing of the Latin word, which had been taken up in early West
Germanic as *kampo-z and appeared originally in Old English as camp contest, battle, fight, war.
This was obsolete by mid-15c. Transferred to non-military senses 1550s. Meaning body of adherents of
a doctrine or cause is 1871. Camp-follower first attested 1810. Camp-meeting is from 1809,
originally usually in reference to Methodists. Camp-fever (1758) is any epidemic fever incident to
life in a camp, especially typhus or typhoid.


cake (n.)

early 13c., from Old Norse kaka cake, from West Germanic *kokon- (cognates: Middle Dutch koke, Dutch
koek, Old High German huohho, German Kuchen). Not now believed to be related to Latin coquere to
cook, as formerly supposed. Replaced its Old English cognate, coecel.  What man, I trow ye raue,
Wolde ye bothe eate your cake and haue your cake? [The Proverbs &amp; Epigrams of John Heywood,
1562]  Originally (until early 15c.) a flat, round loaf of bread. Piece of cake something easy is
from 1936. The let them eat cake story is found in Rousseau's Confessions, in reference to an
incident c.1740, long before Marie Antoinette, though it has been associated with her since c.1870;
it apparently was a chestnut in the French royal family that had been told of other princesses and
queens before her.


Macbeth

masc. proper name, Gaelic, literally son of life. The first reference to bad luck associated with
Shakespeare's Macbeth, and to avoidance of naming it, is from 1896, alludes to an incident of 1885,
and says the tradition goes back so far as modern memory can recall. The original superstition seems
to have pertained particularly to the witches' scenes, which were played up dramatically in 19c.
productions, and especially to Matthew Locke's 17c. music to accompany the witches' song, which was
regularly played through the 19th century.    It is strange how the effect of this music has exerted
such a long surviving influence on members of the dramatic profession. It is still considered most
unlucky to sing, hum, or whistle the witch airs in the theatre except in the ways of business.
[Young-Stewart, The Three Witches, in The Shakespearean, Sept. 15, 1896]   <hr />   If you number an
actor or actress among your friends, and desire to retain his or her friendship, there are three
things you positively must not do, especially if the actor is of the old school. Do not whistle in
the theatre, do not look over his shoulder into the glass while he is making up, and do not hum the
witch's song from Macbeth. ... [O]lder actors would almost prefer to lose their salary than go on in
Macbeth on account of this song. They believe that it casts spells upon the members of the company.
[Some Odd Superstitions of the Stage, Theatre magazine, July 1909]


check (n.1)

c.1300, a call in chess noting one's move has placed his opponent's king (or another major piece) in
immediate peril, from Old French eschequier a check at chess (also chess board, chess set), from
eschec the game of chess; chessboard; check; checkmate, from Vulgar Latin *scaccus, from Arabic
shah, from Persian shah king, the principal piece in a chess game (see shah; also compare checkmate
(n.)). Also c.1300 in a generalized sense, harmful incident or event.    When the king is in check
that player's choices are severely limited. Hence, sudden stoppage (early 14c.), and by c.1700 to a
token of ownership used to check against, and prevent, loss or theft (surviving in hat check) and a
check against forgery or alteration, which gave the modern financial use of bank check, money draft
(first recorded 1798 and often spelled cheque), probably influenced by exchequer. Checking account
is attested from 1897, American English. Blank check in the figurative sense attested by 1849.
Checks and balances is from 1782, perhaps originally suggesting machinery.


merry (adj.)

Old English myrge pleasing, agreeable, pleasant, sweet; pleasantly, melodiously, from Proto-Germanic
*murgijaz, which probably originally meant short-lasting, (compare Old High German murg short,
Gothic gamaurgjan to shorten), from PIE *mreghu- short (see brief (adj.)). The only exact cognate
for meaning outside English was Middle Dutch mergelijc joyful.    Connection to pleasure is likely
via notion of making time fly, that which makes the time seem to pass quickly (compare German
Kurzweil pastime, literally a short time; Old Norse skemta to amuse, entertain, amuse oneself, from
skamt, neuter of skammr short). There also was a verbal form in Old English, myrgan be merry,
rejoice. For vowel evolution, see bury (v.).Bot vchon enle we wolde were fyf, &thorn;e mo &thorn;e
myryer. [c.1300]The word had much wider senses in Middle English, such as pleasant-sounding (of
animal voices), fine (of weather), handsome (of dress), pleasant-tasting (of herbs). Merry-bout an
incident of sexual intercourse was low slang from 1780. Merry-begot illegitimate (adj.), bastard
(n.) is from 1785. Merrie England (now frequently satirical or ironic) is 14c. meri ingland,
originally in a broader sense of bountiful, prosperous. Merry Monday was a 16c. term for the Monday
before Shrove Tuesday (Mardi Gras).


