prone (adj.)

c.1400, naturally inclined to something, apt, liable, from Latin pronus bent forward, leaning
forward, bent over, figuratively inclined to, disposed, perhaps from adverbial form of pro- before,
for, instead of (see pro-) + ending as in infernus, externus. Meaning lying face-down is first
recorded 1570s. Literal and figurative senses both were in Latin; figurative is older in English.
Related: Proneness.


hypnotic (adj.)

1620s, inducing sleep, originally used of drugs, from French hypnotique (16c.) inclined to sleep,
soporific, from Late Latin hypnoticus, from Greek hypnotikos inclined to sleep, putting to sleep,
sleepy, from hypnoun put to sleep, from hypnos sleep (see somnolence). Modern sense of pertaining to
an induced trance first recorded in English 1843, along with hypnotist, hypnotize, both coined by
Dr. James Braid. Related: Hypnotical; hypnotically.


disposed (adj.)

mid-14c., inclined, in the mood, past participle adjective from dispose. Meaning in a certain
condition is late 14c.; arranged is 15c.


forgiving (adj.)

inclined to forgive, 1680s, from present participle of forgive. Related: Forgivingness.


-acious

adjectival word-forming element meaning given to, inclined to, abounding in, from Latin -aci-
(nominative -ax), noun ending used with verbal stems, + -ous.


judgmental (adj.)

1892, from judgment + -al (1). Meaning inclined to make moral judgments is attested from 1952.
Related: Judgmentally.


vergence (n.)

1902 in ophthalmology, from verge (v.) + -ence. From 1660s as fact or condition of being inclined
(toward something). Related: Vergency.


factious (adj.)

1530s, from Middle French factieux and directly from Latin factiosus partisan, seditious, inclined
to form parties, from factionem (see faction).


resilient (adj.)

1640s, springing back, from Latin resilientem inclined to leap or spring back, present participle of
resilire (see resilience). Figuratively, of persons, from 1830. Related: Resiliently.


-ous

word-forming element making adjectives from nouns, meaning having, full of, having to do with,
doing, inclined to, from Old French -ous, -eux, from Latin -osus (compare -ose (1)). In chemistry,
having a lower valence than forms expressed in -ic.


secretive (adj.)

inclined to secrecy, 1815 (implied in secretiveness); see secret (n.) + -ive. The word also was in
Middle English with a sense secret, hidden (mid-15c.). Related: Secretively.


transgressive (adj.)

1640s, inclined to transgress, from transgress + -ive. Related: Transgressively.


charitable (adj.)

c.1200, in reference to the Christian virtue, from Old French charitable, from charit&eacute; (see
charity). Meaning liberal in treatment of the poor is from c.1400; that of inclined to impute
favorable motives to others is from 1620s. Related: Charitableness; charitably.


remunerative (adj.)

1620s, inclined to remunerate, from remunerate + -ive. From 1670s as rewarding; 1859 as profitable.
Related: Remuneratively; remunerativeness.


thievish (adj.)

mid-15c., of or pertaining to thieves, from thieve or thief + -ish. Meaning inclined to steal is
from 1530s. Wyclif and Chaucer used thiefly (late 14c.). Related: Thievishly; thievishness.


bent (adj.)

not straight, late 14c. (earlier ibent, c.1300, from past participle of bend (v.). Meaning turned or
inclined in some direction is from 1530s, probably as a translation of Latin inclinatio. Meaning
directed in a course is from 1690s. Figurative phrase bent out of shape extremely upset is 1960s
U.S. Air Force and college student slang.


romancer (n.)

mid-14c., chronicler writing in French, from Old French romanceour, from romanz (see romance (n.)).
Later, one inclined to romantic imagination (the main sense 19c.); modern use for seducer, wooer of
a romantic quality appears to be a new formation c.1967 from romance (v.).


affectionate (adj.)

1580s, fond, loving, from affection + -ate (1). Early, now mostly obsolete, senses included inclined
(1530s), prejudiced (1530s), passionate (1540s), earnest (c.1600). Other forms also used in the main
modern sense of the word included affectious (1580s), affectuous (mid-15c.).


snape (v.)

also sneap, to be hard upon, rebuke, revile, snub, early 14c., from Old Norse sneypa to outrage,
dishonor, disgrace, probably related to similar-sounding words meaning cut (compare snip (v.)).
Verbal meaning bevel the end (of a timber) to fit an inclined surface is of uncertain origin or
connection. Snaiping rebuking, reproaching, reviling is attested from early 14c.


submissive (adj.)

1580s, inclined to submit, yielding to authority, from Latin submiss-, past participle stem of
submittere (see submission) + -ive. Masochistic sexual sense is attested by 1969. As a noun in this
sense, by 1985. Related: Submissively; submissiveness.


newfangled (adj.)

late 15c., addicted to novelty, literally ready to grasp at all new things, from adj. newefangel
fond of novelty (late 14c.), from new + -fangel inclined to take, from root of Old English fon to
capture (see fang). Sense of lately come into fashion first recorded 1530s.


scrappy (adj.)

consisting of scraps, 1837, from scrap (n.1) + -y (2). Meaning inclined to fight (1895) is from
scrap (v.2). Related: Scrappily; scrappiness.


woo (v.)

Old English wogian to woo, court, marry, of uncertain origin and with no known cognates; perhaps
related to woh, wog- bent, inclined, as with affection. Related: Wooed; wooing; wooer.


have-not (n.)

poor person, 1742, from have + not. Have in the sense of one who 'has,' one of the wealthier class
of persons is from the same source. Earliest in translation of Don Quixote:    'A fig for Basilius's
abilities! for, you are worth just as much as you have, and you have just as much as you are worth.
There are but two families in the world, as my grandmother used to say; the Have's and the Have-
not's, and she stuck to the former; and now-a-days, master Don Quixote, people are more inclined to
feel the pulse of Have than of Know.' [Don Quixote de la Mancha, transl. Charles Jarvis, London,
1742]


smiley (adj.)

also smily, inclined to smile, 1848, from smile (n.) + -y (2). Smiley-face (n.) is from 1981; as a
computer icon from 1987.


nauseous (adj.)

c.1600, inclined to nausea, easily made queasy (obsolete), from nausea + -ous. Sense of causing
nausea or squeamishness is attested from 1610s. For distinction from nauseated see nauseate.
Related: Nauseously; nauseousness.


peaceful (adj.)

early 14c., inclined to peace, friendly, pacific, from peace + -ful. Meaning tranquil, calm, full of
peace is from mid-14c. In reference to nonviolent methods of effecting social change, it is attested
from 1876. Related: Peacefully; peacefulness. Peaceful coexistence (1920) originally was in regard
to Soviet policy toward the capitalist West.


sticky (adj.)

1727, adhesive, inclined to stick, from stick (v.) + -y (2). An Old English word for this was
clibbor. First recorded 1864 in the sense of sentimental; of situations, 1915 with the meaning
difficult. Of weather, hot and humid, from 1895. Sticky wicket is 1952, from British slang, in
reference to cricket. Related: Stickily; stickiness.


macrobiotic (adj.)

also macro-biotic, inclined to prolong life, 1797, from Greek makrobiotikos long-lived, from makros
long (see macro-) + bios life (see bio-). The specific reference to a Zen Buddhist dietary system
dates from 1936.


slide (n.)

1560s, from slide (v.). As a smooth inclined surface down which something can be slid, from 1680s;
the playground slide is from 1890. Meaning collapse of a hillside, landslide is from 1660s. As a
working part of a musical instrument from 1800 (as in slide-trombone, 1891). Meaning rapid downturn
is from 1884. Meaning picture prepared for use with a projector is from 1819 (in reference to magic
lanterns). Baseball sense is from 1886. Slide-guitar is from 1968.


affect (n.)

late 14c., mental state, from Latin noun use of affectus furnished, supplied, endowed, figuratively
disposed, constituted, inclined, past participle of afficere to do; treat, use, manage, handle; act
on; have influence on, do something to, a verb of broad meaning, from ad- to (see ad-) + facere
(past participle factus) do (see factitious). Perhaps obsolete except in psychology. Related:
Affects.


proclivity (n.)

1590s, from Middle French proclivit&#233; or directly from Latin proclivitatem (nominative
proclivitas) a tendency, predisposition, propensity, from proclivis prone to, literally sloping,
inclined, from pro- forward (see pro-) + clivus a slope, from PIE *klei-wo-, suffixed form of *klei
to lean (see lean (v.)).


propensity (n.)

1560s, disposition to favor, with -ty + obsolete adjective propense inclined, prone (1520s), from
Latin propensus, past participle of propendere incline to, hang forward, hang down, weigh over, from
pro- forward (see pro-) + pendere hang (see pendant).


apt (adj.)

mid-14c., inclined, disposed; late 14c., suited, fitted, adapted, from Old French ate (13c., Modern
French apte), or directly from Latin aptus fit, suited, adjectival use of past participle of *apere
to attach, join, tie to, from PIE root *ap- (1) to grasp, take, reach (cognates: Sanskrit apnoti he
reaches, Latin apisci to reach after, attain, Hittite epmi I seize). Elliptical sense of becoming,
appropriate is from 1560s.


suspicious (adj.)

mid-14c., deserving of or exciting suspicion, from Old French sospecious, from Latin suspiciosus,
suspitiosus exciting suspicion, causing mistrust, also full of suspicion, ready to suspect, from
stem of suspicere (see suspicion). Meaning full of suspicion, inclined to suspect in English is
attested from c.1400. Poe (c.1845) proposed suspectful to take one of the two conflicting senses.
Related: suspiciously; suspiciousness.


large (adj.)

c.1200, bountiful, inclined to give or spend freely, also, of areas, great in expanse, from Old
French large broad, wide; generous, bounteous, from Latin largus abundant, copious, plentiful;
bountiful, liberal in giving, of unknown origin. Main modern meanings extensive; big in overall size
emerged 14c. An older sense of liberated, free from restraining influence is preserved in at large
(late 14c.). Adjective phrase larger-than-life first attested 1937 (bigger than life is from 1640s).


chute (n.1)

1725, American English, fall of water (earlier shoot, 1610s), from French chute fall, from Old
French cheoite a fall, fem. past participle of cheoir to fall, from Latin cadere (see case (n.1)).
Meaning inclined tube, trough is from 1804; that of narrow passage for cattle, etc. first recorded
1881. In North America, absorbing some senses of similar-sounding shoot (n.1).


sleeper (n.)

Old English sl&aelig;pere one who sleeps, one who is inclined to sleep much, agent noun from sleep
(v.). Meaning strong horizontal beam is from c.1600. Meaning dormant or inoperative thing is from
1620s. Meaning railroad sleeping car is from 1875. Sense of something whose importance proves to be
greater than expected first attested 1892, originally in American English sports jargon, probably
from earlier (1856) gambling slang sense of unexpected winning card. Meaning spy, enemy agent,
terrorist etc. who remains undercover for a long time before attempting his purpose first attested
1955, originally in reference to communist agents in the West.


heel (v.2)

to lean to one side, in reference to a ship, Old English hieldan incline, lean, slope, from Proto-
Germanic *helthijan (cognates: Middle Dutch helden to lean, Dutch hellen, Old Norse hallr inclined,
Old High German halda, German halde slope, declivity). Re-spelled 16c. from Middle English hield,
probably by misinterpretation of -d as a past tense suffix.


incline (v.)

c.1300, to bend or bow toward, from Old French encliner, from Latin inclinare to cause to lean;
bend, incline, turn, divert, from in- into, in, on, upon (see in- (2)) + clinare to bend, from PIE
*klei-n-, suffixed form of *klei- to lean (see lean (v.)). Metaphoric sense of have a mental
disposition toward is early 15c. in English (but existed in classical Latin). Related: Inclined;
inclining.


clemency (n.)

1550s, mildness or gentleness shown in exercise of authority, from Latin clementia calmness,
gentleness, from clemens calm, mild, related to clinare to lean (see lean (v.)) + participial suffix
-menos (also in alumnus). For sense evolution, compare inclined in secondary meaning disposed
favorably. Earlier in same sense was clemence (late 15c.).    Meaning mildness of weather or climate
is 1660s (a sense also in Latin); clement (adj.) is older in both senses, late 15c. and 1620s
respectively, but now is used only in negation and only of the weather.


nation (n.)

c.1300, from Old French nacion birth, rank; descendants, relatives; country, homeland (12c.) and
directly from Latin nationem (nominative natio) birth, origin; breed, stock, kind, species; race of
people, tribe, literally that which has been born, from natus, past participle of nasci be born (Old
Latin gnasci; see genus). Political sense has gradually predominated, but earliest English examples
inclined toward the racial meaning large group of people with common ancestry. Older sense preserved
in application to North American Indian peoples (1640s). Nation-building first attested 1907
(implied in nation-builder).


neat (adj.)

1540s, clean, free from dirt, from Anglo-French neit, Middle French net clear, pure (12c.), from
Latin nitidus well-favored, elegant, trim, literally gleaming, from nitere to shine, from PIE root
*nei- to shine (cognates: Middle Irish niam gleam, splendor, niamda shining; Old Irish noib holy,
niab strength; Welsh nwyfiant gleam, splendor).    Meaning inclined to be tidy is from 1570s. Of
liquor, straight, c.1800, from meaning unadulterated (of wine), which is first attested 1570s.
Informal sense of very good first recorded 1934 in American English; variant neato is teenager
slang, first recorded 1968. Related: Neatly; neatness.


vicious (adj.)

late 14c., unwholesome, impure, of the nature of vice, wicked, corrupting, pernicious, harmful; of a
text, erroneous, corrupt, from Anglo-French vicious, Old French vicios wicked, cunning, underhand;
defective, illegal (Modern French vicieux), from Latin vitiosus (Medieval Latin vicious) faulty,
full of faults, defective, corrupt; wicked, depraved, from vitium fault (see vice (n.1)).    Meaning
inclined to be savage or dangerous is first recorded 1711 (originally of animals, especially
horses); that of full of spite, bitter, severe is from 1825. In law, marred by some inherent fault
(late 14c.), hence also this sense in logic (c.1600), as in vicious circle in reasoning (c.1792,
Latin circulus vitiosus), which was given a general sense of a situation in which action and
reaction intensify one another by 1839. Related: Viciously (mid-14c., sinfully); viciousness.


marry (v.)

c.1300, to give (offspring) in marriage, from Old French marier to get married; to marry off, give
in marriage; to bring together in marriage, from Latin maritare to wed, marry, give in marriage
(source of Italian maritare, Spanish and Portuguese maridar), from maritus (n.) married man,
husband, of uncertain origin, originally a past participle, perhaps ultimately from provided with a
*mari, a young woman, from PIE root *mari- young wife, young woman, akin to *meryo- young man
(source of Sanskrit marya- young man, suitor).    Meaning to get married, join (with someone) in
matrimony is early 14c. in English, as is that of to take in marriage. Said from 1520s of the
priest, etc., who performs the rite. Figurative use from early 15c. Related: Married; marrying.
Phrase the marrying kind, describing one inclined toward marriage and almost always used with a
negative, is attested by 1824, probably short for marrying kind of men, which is from a popular 1756
essay by Chesterfield.    In some Indo-European languages there were distinct marry verbs for men
and women, though some of these have become generalized. Compare Latin ducere uxorem (of men),
literally to lead a wife; nubere (of women), perhaps originally to veil [Buck]. Also compare Old
Norse kvangask (of men) from kvan wife (see quean), so, take a wife; giptask (of women), from gipta,
a specialized use of to give (see gift (n.)), so, to be given.


morgue (n.)

mortuary, 1821, from French Morgue, originally a specific building in Paris where bodies were
exposed for identification:    There is, in the most populous part of the French metropolis, an
establishment entitled La Morgue, destined for the reception and exposition of bodies drowned in the
Seine, and caught in nets, which are placed in different parts of the river for that purpose. The
object of this exposition is, that the deceased may be recognised by their friends or relatives, and
receive the rights of sepulture accordingly. The Morgue is open at all hours of the day, to
passengers of every description, and often displays at a time, five or six horrible carcasses
stretched, without covering, on an inclined platform, and subjected to the promiscuous gaze of the
mob. [American Review, January 1811]     Before that it was the place where new prisoners were
displayed to keepers to establish their identification. Thus the name is believed to be probably
from French morgue haughtiness, originally a sad expression, solemn look, from Old French morguer
look solemnly, from Vulgar Latin *murricare to make a face, pout, from *murrum muzzle, snout. The
1768 Dictionnaire Royal Fran&#231;ois-Anglois Et Anglois-Fran&#231;ois defines French morgue both as
A proud, big, haughty or stately look, stare, surliness, or surly look and A little gratel room
wherein a new prisoner is set, and must continue some hours, that the Jailer's ordinary servants may
the better take notice of his face.    Adopted as a general term in U.S., 1880s, replacing earlier
dead house, etc. In newspaper slang, collection of pre-written obituary material of living persons
(1903), hence library of clips, photos, etc., 1918.


family (n.)

early 15c., servants of a household, from Latin familia family servants, domestics collectively, the
servants in a household, thus also members of a household, the estate, property; the household,
including relatives and servants, from famulus servant, of unknown origin. The Latin word rarely
appears in the sense parents with their children, for which domus (see domestic) was used.    In
English, sense of collective body of persons who form one household under one head and one domestic
government, including parents, children, and servants, and as sometimes used even lodgers or
boarders [Century Dictionary] is from 1540s. From 1660s as parents with their children, whether they
dwell together or not, also in a more general sense, persons closely related by blood, including
aunts, uncles, cousins; and in the most general sense those who descend from a common progenitor
(1580s). Meaning those claiming descent from a common ancestor, a house, a lineage is early 15c.
Hence, any group of things classed as kindred based on common distinguishing characteristics
(1620s); as a scientific classification, between genus and order, from 1753.    I have certainly
known more men destroyed by the desire to have wife and child and to keep them in comfort than I
have seen destroyed by drink and harlots. [William Butler Yeats, Autobiography]    Replaced Old
English hiwscipe. As an adjective from c.1600; with the meaning suitable for a family, by 1807.
Family values first recorded 1966. Phrase in a family way pregnant is from 1796. Family circle is
1809; family man man devoted to wife and children, man inclined to lead a domestic life is 1856
(earlier it meant thief, 1788, from family in a slang sense of the fraternity of thieves).
<b>Happy family</b> an assemblage of animals of diverse habits and propensities living amicably, or
at least quietly, together in one cage. [Century Dictionary, 1902]    The phrase is attested from
1844.


