incline (n.)

c.1600, mental tendency, from incline (v.). The literal meaning slant, slope is attested from 1846.


incline (v.)

c.1300, to bend or bow toward, from Old French encliner, from Latin inclinare to cause to lean;
bend, incline, turn, divert, from in- into, in, on, upon (see in- (2)) + clinare to bend, from PIE
*klei-n-, suffixed form of *klei- to lean (see lean (v.)). Metaphoric sense of have a mental
disposition toward is early 15c. in English (but existed in classical Latin). Related: Inclined;
inclining.


verge (v.1)

tend, incline, c.1600, from Latin vergere to bend, turn, tend toward, incline, from PIE *werg- to
turn, from root *wer- (3) to turn, bend (see versus). Influenced by verge (v.2) provide with a
border (c.1600); be adjacent to (1787), from verge (n.). Related: Verged; verging.


loop (v.)

to form a loop, c.1400, draw (a leash through a ring), from loop (n.). Related: Looped; looping.
Slang looped drunk is from 1934. Loop the loop (1900) originally was in reference to roller-coasters
at amusement parks.    Loop-the-Loop is the name of a new entertainment which goes further in the
way of tempting Providence than anything yet invented. The Loop is an immense circle of track in the
air. A car on a mimic railway shoots down a very steep incline, and is impelled around the inner
side of this loop. ... The authorities at Coney Island are said to have prohibited looping-the-loop
because women break their corset strings in their efforts to catch their breath as they sweep down
the incline, and moreover, a young man is reported to have ruptured a blood vessel in his liver.
[Philadelphia Medical Journal, Aug. 10, 1901]


lean (v.)

c.1200, from Old English hleonian to bend, recline, lie down, rest, from Proto-Germanic *khlinen
(cognates: Old Saxon hlinon, Old Frisian lena, Middle Dutch lenen, Dutch leunen, Old High German
hlinen, German lehnen to lean), from PIE root *klei- to lean, to incline (cognates: Sanskrit srayati
leans, sritah leaning; Old Persian cay to lean; Lithuanian slyti to slope, slieti to lean; Latin
clinare to lean, bend, clivus declivity, inclinare cause to bend, declinare bend down, turn aside;
Greek klinein to cause to slope, slant, incline; Old Irish cloin crooked, wrong; Middle Irish cle,
Welsh cledd left, literally slanting; Welsh go-gledd north, literally left -- for similar sense
evolution, see Yemen, Benjamin, southpaw).    Meaning to incline the body against something for
support is mid-13c. Figurative sense of to trust for support is from early 13c. Sense of to lean
toward mentally, to favor is from late 14c. Related: Leaned; leaning. Colloquial lean on put
pressure on (someone) is first recorded 1960.


slope (n.)

1610s, inclination, from slope (v.). Meaning an incline, a slant (of ground) is from 1620s.
Derogatory slang meaning Oriental person is attested from 1948.


bank (v.)

to act as a banker, 1727, from bank (n.1). As to deposit in a bank from 1833. Figurative sense of to
rely on (i.e. to put money on) is from 1884, U.S. colloquial. Meaning to ascend, as of an incline,
is from 1892. In aeronautics, from 1911. Related: Banked; banking.


clino-

before vowels clin-, word-forming element meaning slope, slant, incline, from Latinized comb. form
of Greek klinein to lean, slope (see lean (v.)).


inclinable (adj.)

amenable, disposed, mid-15c., from Old French enclinable and directly from Latin inclinabilis, from
inclinare (see incline).


tend (v.1)

to incline, to move in a certain direction, early 14c., from Old French tendre stretch out, hold
forth, hand over, offer (11c.), from Latin tendere to stretch, extend, make tense; aim, direct;
direct oneself, hold a course (see tenet).


bank (n.2)

earthen incline, edge of a river, c.1200, probably in Old English but not attested in surviving
documents, from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse banki, Old Danish banke sandbank, from
Proto-Germanic *bangkon slope, cognate with *bankiz shelf (see bench (n.)).


wriggle (v.)

late 15c., from Middle Low German wrigglen to wriggle, from Proto-Germanic *wreik- to turn (see
wry). Related to Old English wrigian to turn, incline, go forward.


cline (n.)

1938, in biological use, back-formation from incline or from Greek klinein to slope, to lean (see
lean (v.)). Middle English had clinen (v.) to bend, bow, from Old French cliner, from Latin clinare.


disincline (v.)

1640s, from dis- + incline (v.). Related: Disinclined; disinclining.


synclinal (adj.)

sloping downward on both sides, 1833 (in Lyell), from -al (1) + Latinized form of stem of Greek
synklinein to incline, lean, from syn- together (see syn-) + klinein to slope (see lean (v.)).


penchant (n.)

1670s, from French penchant, noun use of present participle of Old French pencher to incline, from
Vulgar Latin *pendicare, a frequentative formed from Latin pendere to hang (see pendant (n.)).


inclination (n.)

condition of being mentally disposed (to do something), late 14c., from Middle French inclination
(14c.) and directly from Latin inclinationem (nominative inclinatio) a leaning, bending,
figuratively tendency, bias, favor, noun of action from past participle stem of inclinare (see
incline). Meaning action of bending toward (something) is from early 15c. That of amount of a slope
is from 1799.


converge (v.)

1690s, from Late Latin convergere to incline together from com- together (see com-) + vergere to
bend (see verge (v.)). Related: Converged; converging.


list (v.1)

tilt, lean, especially of a ship, 1880, earlier (1620s) lust, of unknown origin, perhaps an
unexplained spelling variant of Middle English lysten to please, desire, wish, like (see list (v.4))
with a sense development from the notion of leaning toward what one desires (compare incline).
Related: Listed; listing. The noun in this sense is from 1630s.


anticline (n.)

1867, earlier anticlinal (1849, by ellipsis from anticlinal fold), from anti- against + Greek
klinein to lean, slope (see lean (v.)). Form assimilated to incline.


propensity (n.)

1560s, disposition to favor, with -ty + obsolete adjective propense inclined, prone (1520s), from
Latin propensus, past participle of propendere incline to, hang forward, hang down, weigh over, from
pro- forward (see pro-) + pendere hang (see pendant).


slope (v.)

1590s, go in an oblique direction, from earlier adjective meaning slanting (c.1500), probably from
Middle English aslope (adv.) on the incline (late 15c.), from Old English *aslopen, past participle
of aslupan to slip away, from a- away + slupan to slip (see sleeve). From 1709 as to be in a
slanting position; transitive sense place in a slanting position is from c.1600. Related: Sloped;
sloping.


heel (v.2)

to lean to one side, in reference to a ship, Old English hieldan incline, lean, slope, from Proto-
Germanic *helthijan (cognates: Middle Dutch helden to lean, Dutch hellen, Old Norse hallr inclined,
Old High German halda, German halde slope, declivity). Re-spelled 16c. from Middle English hield,
probably by misinterpretation of -d as a past tense suffix.


pitch (v.1)

c.1200, to thrust in, fasten, settle, probably from an unrecorded Old English *piccean, related to
prick (v.). The original past tense was pight. Sense of set upright, as in pitch a tent (late 13c.),
is from notion of driving in the pegs. Meaning to incline forward and downward is from 1510s.
Meaning throw (a ball) evolved late 14c. from that of hit the mark. Musical sense is from 1670s. Of
ships, to plunge in the waves, 1620s. To pitch in work vigorously is from 1847, perhaps from farm
labor. Related: Pitched; pitching.


physicist (n.)

1836, from physics + -ist. Coined by the Rev. William Whewell (1794-1866), English polymath, to
denote a cultivator of physics as opposed to a physician.    As we cannot use physician for a
cultivator of physics, I have called him a physicist. We need very much a name to describe a
cultivator of science in general. I should incline to call him a Scientist. Thus we might say, that
as an Artist is a Musician, Painter, or Poet, a Scientist is a Mathematician, Physicist, or
Naturalist. [William Whewell, The Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences, London, 1840]


client (n.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French clyent (c.1300), from Latin clientem (nominative cliens) follower,
retainer, perhaps a variant of present participle of cluere listen, follow, obey (see listen); or,
more likely, from clinare to incline, bend, from suffixed form of PIE root *klei- to lean (see lean
(v.)).    The ground sense apparently is of one who leans on another for protection. In ancient
Rome, a plebian under protection of a patrician (called patronus in this relationship; see patron);
in English originally a lawyer's customer, by c.1600 extended to any customer.


coast (n.)

margin of the land, early 14c.; earlier rib as a part of the body (early 12c.), from Old French
coste rib, side, flank; slope, incline; later coast, shore (12c., Modern French c&ocirc;te), from
Latin costa a rib, perhaps related to a root word for bone (compare Old Church Slavonic kosti bone,
also see osseous).    Latin costa developed a secondary sense in Medieval Latin of the shore, via
notion of the side of the land, as well as side of a hill, and this passed into Romanic (Italian
costa coast, side, Spanish cuesta slope, costa coast), but only in the Germanic languages that
borrowed it is it fully specialized in this sense (Dutch kust, Swedish kust, German K&uuml;ste,
Danish kyst). French also used this word for hillside, slope, which led to verb meaning sled
downhill, first attested 1775 in American English. Expression the coast is clear (16c.) is an image
of landing on a shore unguarded by enemies.


make (v.)

Old English macian to make, form, construct, do; prepare, arrange, cause; behave, fare, transform,
from West Germanic *makon to fashion, fit (cognates: Old Saxon makon, Old Frisian makia to build,
make, Middle Dutch and Dutch maken, Old High German mahhon to construct, make, German machen to
make), from PIE *mag- to knead, mix; to fashion, fit (see macerate). If so, sense evolution perhaps
is via prehistoric houses built of mud. Gradually replaced the main Old English word, gewyrcan (see
work (v.)).    Meaning to arrive at (a place), first attested 1620s, originally was nautical.
Formerly used in many places where specific verbs now are used, such as to make Latin (c.1500) to
write Latin compositions. This broader usage survives in some phrases, such as to make water to
urinate, to make a book arrange a series of bets (1828), make hay to turn over mown grass to expose
it to sun. Make the grade is 1912, perhaps from the notion of railway engines going up an incline.
Read the valuable suggestions in Dr. C.V. Mosby's book -- be prepared to surmount obstacles before
you encounter them -- equipped with the power to make the grade in life's climb. [advertisement for
Making the Grade, December 1916]    But the phrase also was in use in a schoolwork context at the
time. Make do manage with what is available is attested from 1867. Make time go fast is 1849; make
tracks in this sense is from 1834. To make a federal case out of (something) popularized in 1959
movie Anatomy of a Murder; to make an offer (one) can't refuse is from Mario Puzo's 1969 novel The
Godfather. To make (one's) day is from 1909; menacing make my day is from 1971, popularized by Clint
Eastwood in film Sudden Impact (1983). Related: Made; making.


