incubus (n.)

c.1200, from Late Latin (Augustine), from Latin incubo nightmare, one who lies down on (the
sleeper), from incubare to lie upon (see incubate). Plural is incubi. In the Middle Ages their
existence was recognized by law.


mare (n.3)

night-goblin, incubus, Old English mare incubus, nightmare, monster, from mera, m&aelig;re, from
Proto-Germanic *maron goblin (cognates: Middle Low German mar, Middle Dutch mare, Old High German
mara, German Mahr incubus, Old Norse mara nightmare, incubus), from PIE *mora- incubus (cognates:
first element in Old Irish Morrigain demoness of the corpses, literally queen of the nightmare, also
Bulgarian, Serbian mora, Czech mura, Polish zmora incubus; French cauchemar, with first element from
Old French caucher to trample), from root *mer- to rub away, harm (see morbid).


nightmare (n.)

late 13c., an evil female spirit afflicting sleepers with a feeling of suffocation, compounded from
night + mare (3) goblin that causes nightmares, incubus. Meaning shifted mid-16c. from the incubus
to the suffocating sensation it causes. Sense of any bad dream first recorded 1829; that of very
distressing experience is from 1831. Cognate with Middle Dutch nachtmare, German Nachtmahr.


succubus (n.)

late 14c., alteration (after incubus, giving a masc. form to a word generally felt as of female
meaning) of Late Latin succuba strumpet, applied to a fiend (generally in female form) having sexual
connection with men in their sleep, from succubare to lie under, from sub- under (see sub-) + cubare
to lie down (see cubicle). Related: Succubine (adj.).


goblin (n.)

early 14c., a devil, incubus, fairy, from Old French gobelin (12c., as Medieval Latin Gobelinus, the
name of a spirit haunting the region of Evreux, in chronicle of Ordericus Vitalis), of uncertain
origin, perhaps related to German kobold (see cobalt), or from Medieval Latin cabalus, from Greek
kobalos rogue, knave, kobaloi wicked spirits invoked by rogues, of unknown origin. Another
suggestion is that it is a diminutive of the proper name Gobel.    Though French gobelin was not
recorded until almost 250 years after appearance of the English term, it is mentioned in the
Medieval Latin text of the 1100's, and few people who believed in folk magic used Medieval Latin.
[Barnhart]


elf (n.)

one of a race of powerful supernatural beings in Germanic folklore, Old English elf (Mercian,
Kentish), &aelig;lf (Northumbrian), ylfe (plural, West Saxon), from Proto-Germanic *albiz (cognates:
Old Saxon alf, Old Norse alfr, German alp evil spirit, goblin, incubus), origin unknown, possibly
from PIE *albho- white. Used figuratively for mischievous person from 1550s.    In addition to
elf/&aelig;lf (masc.), Old English had parallel form *elfen (fem.), the plural of which was
*elfenna, -elfen, from Proto-Germanic *albinjo-. Both words survived into Middle English and were
active there, the former as elf (with the vowel of the plural), plural elves, the latter as elven,
West Midlands dialect alven (plural elvene).    The Germanic elf originally was dwarfish and
malicious (compare Old English &aelig;lfadl nightmare, &aelig;lfsogo&eth;a hiccup, thought to be
caused by elves); in the Middle Ages they were confused to some degree with faeries; the more noble
version begins with Spenser. Nonetheless a popular component in Anglo-Saxon names, many of which
survive as modern given names and surnames, such as &AElig;lfr&aelig;d Elf-counsel (Alfred),
&AElig;lfwine Elf-friend (Alvin), &AElig;lfric Elf-ruler (Eldridge), also women's names such as
&AElig;lffl&aelig;d Elf-beauty. Elf Lock hair tangled, especially by Queen Mab, which it was not
fortunate to disentangle [according to Robert Nares' glossary of Shakespeare] is from 1592.


