indiscriminate (adj.)

1640s, from in- (1) not, opposite of + discriminate (adj.).


indiscriminately (adv.)

1650s, from indiscriminate + -ly (2).


promiscuous (adj.)

c.1600, people or things, mingled confusedly, grouped together without order, consisting of a
disorderly mix; indiscriminate, from Latin promiscuus mixed, indiscriminate, in common, without
distinction, from pro- forward (see pro-) + miscere to mix (see mix (v.)). Meaning indiscriminate in
sexual relations recorded by 1857, from promiscuity. The Latin adjective was used with conubia (such
as between patricians and plebeians). Related: Promiscuously.


pica (n.2)

pathological craving for substance unfit for food (such as chalk), 1560s, from Medieval Latin pica
magpie  (see pie (n.2)), probably translating Greek kissa, kitta magpie, jay, also false appetite.
The connecting notion may be the birds' indiscriminate feeding.


promiscuity (n.)

1834, indiscriminate mixture, from French promiscuit&eacute; (1752), from Latin promiscuus mixed
(see promiscuous) + French -it&eacute; (see -ity). Sexual sense is from 1844. Earlier was
promiscuousness (by 1773 general; 1808 sexual).


prostitute (v.)

1520s, to offer to indiscriminate sexual intercourse (usually in exchange for money), from Latin
prostitutus, past participle of prostituere to expose to prostitution, expose publicly, from pro-
before (see pro-) + statuere cause to stand, establish, from PIE root *sta- to stand, with
derivatives meaning place or thing that is standing (see stet). Related: Prostituted; prostituting.
The notion of sex for hire is not inherent in the etymology, which rather suggests one exposed to
lust or sex indiscriminately offered. However, this is now almost the official European term for the
institution: German prostituierte, Russian prostitutka, etc. Figurative sense (of abilities, etc.)
is from 1570s. Of men, in reference to homosexual acts, from 1886 (in form prostitution); phrase
male prostitute attested by 1948.


ostrich (n.)

early 13c., from Old French ostruce ostrich (Modern French autruche) and Medieval Latin ostrica,
ostrigius, all from Vulgar Latin avis struthio, from Latin avis bird (see aviary) + Late Latin
struthio ostrich, from Greek strouthion ostrich, from strouthos megale big sparrow, perhaps from PIE
*trozdo- thrush (see thrush (n.1)). The Greeks also knew the bird as strouthokamelos camel-sparrow,
for its long neck. Among its proverbial peculiarities are indiscriminate voracity (especially a
habit of swallowing iron and stone to aid digestion), want of regard for its eggs, and a tendency to
hide its head in the sand when pursued.Like the Austridge, who hiding her little head, supposeth her
great body obscured. [1623, recorded in OED]Ostriches do put their heads in the sand, but ostrich
farmers say they do this in search of something to eat.


