indigenous (adj.)

1640s, from Late Latin indigenus born in a country, native, from Latin indigena sprung from the
land, as a noun, a native, literally in-born, or born in (a place), from Old Latin indu in, within
(earlier endo) + *gene-, root of gignere (perf. genui) beget, from PIE *gen- produce (see genus).


Rwanda

African nation, named for indigenous people there, whose word for themselves is of unknown origin.


Andorra

probably from indigenous (Navarrese) andurrial shrub-covered land.


Samoa

an indigenous name, said to be from the name of a Polynesian chieftain, or else meaning place of the
moa. Related: Samoan (1846, noun and adjective).


Somalia

country named for the indigenous Somali people, whose name (attested in English by 1814) is of
unknown origin.


Mali

modern African nation, known by that name from 1959, formerly French Sudan. The name is that of a
former African kingdom (13c.-14c.), perhaps from Malinke, name of an indigenous people of the
region.


Darfur

region in Sudan, named for its people, from Arabic dar, literally house + Fur, ethnic name of the
indigenous African population.


Trier

city in Germany (French Tr&egrave;ves), founded c.15 B.C.E. by Augustus, named for the indigenous
Gaulish people, the Treveri.


Madagascar

large island off the east coast of Africa, from Mogadishu, the name of the city in Somalia, due to
an error by Marco Polo in reading Arabic, whereby he thought the name was that of the island. There
is no indigenous name for the whole island. Related: Madagascan.


indigene

1590s (adj.); 1660s (n.); from French indig&egrave;ne (16c.), from Latin indigena sprung from the
land, as a noun, a native, literally in-born (see indigenous).


autochthonous (adj.)

native, indigenous, 1845, from autochthon + -ous.


Uganda

from Swahili u land, country + Ganda, indigenous people name, of unknown origin. Related: Ugandan.


Ameslan (n.)

1972, acronym of Ame(rican) S(ign) Lan(guage), known by that name since 1960, but its history goes
back to 1817, evolving from French Sign Language (introduced at American School for the Deaf in
Hartford, Conn.) and indigenous sign languages, especially that of Martha's Vineyard. [See Everyone
Here Spoke Sign Language, Nora Ellen Groce, Harvard University Press, 1985]


Utah

U.S. teritory organized 1850 (admitted as a state 1896), from Spanish yuta, name of the indigenous
Uto-Aztecan people of the Great Basin (Modern English Ute), perhaps from Western Apache (Athabaskan)
yudah high (in reference to living in the mountains).


Caribbean

from Carib, indigenous people's name for themselves, + -ean.


Tibet

said to be a corruption in Chinese or Arabic of Bod, indigenous name, of unknown origin. As an
adjective in English, Tibetian is older (1747) but Tibetan (1822) is now the usual word. With comb.
form Tibeto-.


Etna

volcano in Sicily, from Latin Aetna, from an indigenous Sicilian language, *aith-na the fiery one,
from PIE *ai-dh-, from root *ai- to burn (see edifice).


Chamorro

indigenous people of Guam and the Marianas Islands, from Spanish Chamorro, literally shorn, shaven,
bald. Supposedly because the men shaved their heads, but the name also has been connected to native
Chamoru, said to mean noble, so perhaps Chamorro is a Spanish folk etymology.


Thailand

from Thai, indigenous name of the inhabitants, + land (n.). Also see Siam.


Catalan (adj.)

pertaining to Catalonia, also as a noun, person from Catalonia, late 15c., from the indigenous name,
which is of Celtic origin and probably means chiefs of battle. As a noun meaning a Catalan, Middle
English used Catelaner (mid-14c.), Catellain (early 15c., from French). As a language name in
English by 1792. Related: Catalonian (1707).


Mede

inhabitant of ancient Media, late 14c., from Latin Medus, from Greek Medos Mede, from the indigenous
people-name Medes, said to be from the name of their first king (Medos).


Kazakhstan

from the indigenous Kazakh people (from the Turkish root kazak nomad; see Cossack) + Iranian root
-stan country, land (see -stan).


Arab (n.)

late 14c. (Arabes, a plural form), from Old French Arabi, from Latin Arabs (accusative Arabem), from
Greek Araps (genitive Arabos), from Arabic 'arab, indigenous name of the people, perhaps literally
inhabitant of the desert and related to Hebrew arabha desert. Meaning homeless little wanderer,
child of the street is from 1848 (originally Arab of the city), in reference to nomadic ways. Arab
League formed in Cairo, March 22, 1945.


Hungary

c.1300, from Medieval Latin Hungaria (also source of French Hongrie), probably literally meaning
land of the Huns, who ruled a vast territory from there under Attila in 5c. The people's name for
themselves we transliterate as Magyar. Middle English uses the same words for both Attila's people
and the Magyars, who appeared in Europe in 9c. From the same source as Medieval Greek Oungroi,
German Ungarn, Russian Vengriya, Ukrainian Ugorshchina. The Turkish name for the country,
Macaristan, reflects the indigenous name. Related: Hungarian.


Iran

from Persian Iran, from Middle Persian &#274;r&#257;n (land) of the Iranians, genitive plural of
&#275;r- an Iranian, from Old Iranian *arya- (Old Persian ariya-, Avestan airya-) Iranian, from
Indo-Iranian *arya- or *&#257;rya- (see Aryan), a self-designation, perhaps meaning compatriot. In
1935 the government of Reza Shah Pahlavi requested governments with which it had diplomatic
relations to call his country Iran, after the indigenous name, rather than the Greek-derived Persia.


vernacular (adj.)

c.1600, native to a country, from Latin vernaculus domestic, native, indigenous; pertaining to home-
born slaves, from verna home-born slave, native, a word of Etruscan origin. Used in English in the
sense of Latin vernacula vocabula, in reference to language. As a noun, native speech or language of
a place, from 1706.    For human speech is after all a democratic product, the creation, not of
scholars and grammarians, but of unschooled and unlettered people. Scholars and men of education may
cultivate and enrich it, and make it flower into the beauty of a literary language; but its rarest
blooms are grafted on a wild stock, and its roots are deep-buried in the common soil. [Logan
Pearsall Smith, Words and Idioms, 1925]


corn (n.1)

grain, Old English corn, from Proto-Germanic *kurnam small seed (cognates: Old Frisian and Old Saxon
korn grain, Middle Dutch coren, German Korn, Old Norse korn, Gothic kaurn), from PIE root *gre-no-
grain (cognates: Old Church Slavonic zruno grain, Latin granum seed, Lithuanian &#382;irnis pea).
The sense of the Old English word was grain with the seed still in (as in barleycorn) rather than a
particular plant.    Locally understood to denote the leading crop of a district. Restricted to the
indigenous maize in America (c.1600, originally Indian corn, but the adjective was dropped), usually
wheat in England, oats in Scotland and Ireland, while Korn means rye in parts of Germany. Maize was
introduced to China by 1550, it thrived where rice did not grow well and was a significant factor in
the 18th century population boom there. Cornflakes first recorded 1907. Corned beef so called for
the corns or grains of salt with which it is preserved; from verb corn to salt (1560s).


