indicative (adj.)

mid-15c., from Old French indicatif (14c.), from Late Latin indicativus, from indicat-, past
participle stem of Latin indicare (see indication).


are (v.)

present plural indicative of be (q.v.), from Old English earun (Mercian), aron (Northumbrian). Also
from Old Norse cognates. In 17c., began to replace be, ben as first person plural present indicative
in standard English. The only non-dialectal survival of be in this sense is the powers that be. But
in southwest England, we be (in Devonshire us be) remains non-standard idiom as a contradictory
positive (You people aren't speaking correct English. Oh, yes we be!).


were (v.)

Old English w&aelig;ron (past plural indicative of wesan) and w&aelig;re (second person singular
past indicative); see was. The forms illustrate Verner's Law (named for Danish linguist Karl Verner,
1875), which predicts the s to z sound shift, and rhotacism, which changed z to r. Wast (second
person singular) was formed 1500s on analogy of be/beest, displacing were. An intermediate form,
wert, was used in literature 17c.-18c., before were reclaimed the job.


didst

archaic 2nd person singular past indicative of do (q.v.).


hath (v.)

archaic third person singular present indicative of have.


hast (v.)

archaic second person singular present indicative of have.


mwah

sound indicative of a kiss or an air-kiss, 1994, imitative.


loquitur

stage direction, he or she speaks, Latin, third person present indicative singular of loqui to talk
(see locution).


exeunt

stage direction, late 15c., from Latin, literally they go out, third person plural present
indicative of exire (see exit).


incipit

opening word of a Latin book or manuscript, Latin, literally (here) begins, third person singular
present indicative of incipere (see incipient).


maturely (adv.)

1530s, promptly, from mature (adj.) + -ly (2). Sense of with deliberation is from 1590s; that of in
a way indicative of maturity is from 1841.


mandamus (n.)

1530s, writ from a superior court to an inferior one, specifying that something be done, (late 14c.
in Anglo-French), from Latin, literally we order, first person plural present indicative of mandare
to order (see mandate (n.)).


has (v.)

third person singular present indicative of have. Has-been one who has outlived his fame first
recorded c.1600 (as hes-beene).


mum (interj.)

be silent, 1560s, from Middle English mum, mom (late 14c.), inarticulate closed-mouth sound,
indicative of unwillingness or inability to speak. As an adjective meaning secret from 1520s. Phrase
mum's the word is first recorded 1704.


wot (v.)

to know (archaic), from Old English wat, first and third person singular present indicative of witan
to know (see wit (v.)).


caret (n.)

mark in writing to show where something is to be inserted, 1680s, from Latin caret there is lacking,
3rd person singular indicative of carere to lack (see caste).


floruit

used now mainly in sense of period during which a historical person's life work was done, 1843,
Latin, literally he flourished, third person singular perf. indicative of florere (see flourish
(v.)). Usually in abbreviation fl.


tacet

musical instruction, 1724, from Latin tacet is silent, third person singular present indicative of
tacere (see tacit).


eureka

c.1600, from Greek heureka I have found (it), first person singular perfect active indicative of
heuriskein to find (see heuristic). Supposedly shouted by Archimedes (c.287-212 B.C.E.) when he
solved a problem that had been set to him: determining whether goldsmiths had adulterated the metal
in the crown of Hiero II, king of Syracuse.


-s (2)

third person singular present indicative suffix of verbs, it represents Old English -es, -as, which
began to replace -e&eth; in Northumbrian 10c., and gradually spread south until by Shakespeare's
time it had emerged from colloquialism and -eth began to be limited to more dignified speeches.


habitat (n.)

1762, as a technical term in Latin texts on English flora and fauna, literally it inhabits, third
person singular present indicative of habitare to live, dwell, frequentative of habere to have, to
hold, possess (see habit (n.)). General sense of dwelling place is first attested 1854.


veto (n.)

1620s, from Latin veto, literally I forbid, first person singular present indicative of vetare
forbid, prohibit, oppose, hinder, of unknown origin. In ancient Rome, the technical term for protest
interposed by a tribune of the people against any measure of the Senate or of the magistrates
[Lewis].


art (v.)

second person present indicative of be; Old English eart. Also see are (v.).


sematic (adj.)

significant, indicative, 1890, from Greek semat-, comb. form of sema  (genitive sematos) sign (see
semantic) + -ic. Used especially in biology, in reference to warning colors, etc.


symptomatic (adj.)

1690s, from French symptomatique or directly from Late Latin symptomaticus, from symptomat-, stem of
symptoma (see symptom). General sense of indicative (of) is from 1751. Related: Symptomatical
(1580s).


deficit (n.)

1782, from French d&eacute;ficit (late 17c.), from Latin deficit it is wanting, an introductory word
in clauses of inventory, third person singular present indicative of deficere to be deficient (see
deficient).


placebo (n.)

early 13c., name given to the rite of Vespers of the Office of the Dead, so called from the opening
of the first antiphon, I will please the Lord in the land of the living (Psalm cxiv:9), from Latin
placebo I shall please, future indicative of placere to please (see please). Medical sense is first
recorded 1785, a medicine given more to please than to benefit the patient. Placebo effect attested
from 1900.


vamoose (v.)

to decamp, be off, 1834, from Spanish vamos let us go, from Latin vadamus, first person plural
indicative of vadere to go, to walk, go hastily, from PIE root *wadh- (2) to go (cognates: Old
English wadan to go, Latin vadum ford; see wade (v.)).


lambent (adj.)

1640s, from figurative use of Latin lambentem (nominative lambens), present participle of lambere to
lick, from PIE root *lab-, indicative of smacking lips or licking (cognates: Greek laptein to sip,
lick, Old English lapian to lick, lap up, suck; see lap (v.1)).


ignoramus (n.)

1570s, from an Anglo-French legal term (early 15c.), from Latin ignoramus we do not know, first
person present indicative of ignorare not to know (see ignorant). The legal term was one a grand
jury could write on a bill when it considered the prosecution's evidence insufficient. Sense of
ignorant person came from the title role of George Ruggle's 1615 play satirizing the ignorance of
common lawyers.


credo (n.)

late 12c., from Latin, literally I believe, first word of the Apostles' and Nicene Creeds, first
person singular present indicative of credere to believe, perhaps from PIE compound *kerd-dhe- to
believe, literally to put one's heart (cognates: Old Irish cretim, Irish creidim, Welsh credu I
believe, Sanskrit &#347;rad-dh&#257;- faith). The nativized form is creed. General sense of formula
or statement of belief is from 1580s.


morbid (adj.)

1650s, of the nature of a disease, indicative of a disease, from Latin morbidus diseased, from
morbus sickness, disease, ailment, illness, from root of mori to die, which is possibly from PIE
root *mer- to rub, pound, wear away (cognates: Sanskrit mrnati crushes, bruises; Greek marainein to
consume, exhaust, put out, quench, marasmus consumption). Transferred use, of mental states, is from
1777. Related: Morbidly; morbidness.


blacklist (n.)

also black-list, black list, list of persons who have incurred suspicion, 1610s, from black (adj.),
here indicative of disgrace, censure, punishment (attested from 1590s, in black book) + list (n.).
Specifically of employers' list of workers considered troublesome (usually for union activity) is
from 1888. As a verb, from 1718. Related: Blacklisted; blacklisting.


video (adj.)

1935, as visual equivalent of audio, from Latin video I see, first person singular present
indicative of videre to see (see vision). As a noun, that which is displayed on a (television)
screen, 1937.    Engineers, however, remember the sad fate of television's first debut and are not
willing to allow video transmission (as television is now called by moderns) to leave the laboratory
until they are sure it will be accepted. [The Michigan Technic, November 1937]   video game is from
1973.


Asperges (n.)

sprinkling ritual of the Catholic church, 1550s, from Late Latin asperges, noun use of 2nd person
singular future indicative of Latin aspergere to scatter, strew upon, sprinkle, from ad to (see ad-)
+ spargere to sprinkle (see sparse). The word is taken from the phrase Asperges me, Domine, hyssopo
et mundabor, from  Psalm 51 (Vulgate), sung during the rite of sprinkling a congregation with holy
water.


gist (n.)

1711, the real point (of a law case, etc.), from Anglo-French legalese phrases such as cest action
gist this action lies, meaning this case is sustainable by law, from Old French gist en it consists
in, it lies in (third person singular present indicative of g&eacute;sir to lie), from Latin iacet
it lies, from iacere to lie, rest, related to iacere to throw (see jet (v.)). Extended sense of
essence first recorded 1823.


viz.

1530s, abbreviation of videlicet that is to say, to wit, namely (mid-15c.), from Latin videlicet,
contraction of videre licet it is permissible to see, from videre to see (see vision) + licet it is
allowed, third person singular present indicative of licere be allowed (see licence). The -z- is not
a letter, but originally a twirl, representing the usual Medieval Latin shorthand symbol for the
ending -et. In reading aloud usually rendered by 'namely.'  [OED]


lap (v.1)

take up liquid with the tongue, from Old English lapian to lap up, drink, from Proto-Germanic
*lapajan (cognates: Old High German laffen to lick, Old Saxon lepil, Dutch lepel, German L&ouml;ffel
spoon), from PIE imitative base *lab- (cognates: Greek laptein to sip, lick, Latin lambere to lick),
indicative of licking, lapping, smacking lips. Meaning splash gently first recorded 1823, based on
similarity of sound. Related: Lapped; lapping.


all

Old English eall all, every, entire, from Proto-Germanic *alnaz (cognates: Old Frisian, Old High
German al, Old Norse allr, Gothic alls), with no certain connection outside Germanic.
Combinations with all meaning wholly, without limit were common in Old English (such as eall-halig
all-holy, eall-mihtig all-mighty) and the method continued to form new compound words throughout the
history of English. First record of all out to one's full powers is 1880. All-terrain vehicle first
recorded 1968. All clear as a signal of no danger is recorded from 1902. All right, indicative of
approval, is attested from 1953.


can (v.1)

Old English 1st &amp; 3rd person singular present indicative of cunnan know, have power to, be able,
(also to have carnal knowledge), from Proto-Germanic *kunnan to be mentally able, to have learned
(cognates: Old Norse kenna to know, make known, Old Frisian kanna to recognize, admit, German kennen
to know, Gothic kannjan to make known), from PIE root *gno- (see know).    Absorbing the third sense
of to know, that of to know how to do something (in addition to to know as a fact and to be
acquainted with something or someone). An Old English preterite-present verb, its original past
participle, couth, survived only in its negation (see uncouth), but see also could. The present
participle has spun off as cunning.


exit (n.)

1530s, from Latin exit he or she goes out, third person singular present indicative of exire go out,
from ex- out (see ex-) + ire to go (see ion). Also from Latin exitus a leaving, a going out, noun of
action from exire. Originally in English a Latin stage direction (late 15c.); sense of door for
leaving is 1786. Meaning departure (originally from the stage) is from 1580s. The verb is c.1600,
from the noun; it ought to be left to stage directions and the clunky jargon of police reports.
Related: Exited; exiting.  Those who neither know Latin nor read plays are apt to forget or not know
that this is a singular verb with plural exeunt. [Fowler]


dare (v.)

from first and third person singular of Old English durran to brave danger, dare; venture, presume,
from Proto-Germanic *ders- (cognates: Old Norse dearr, Old High German giturran, Gothic gadaursan),
from PIE *dhers- to dare, be courageous (cognates: Sanskrit dadharsha to be bold; Old Persian
dar&#353;- to dare; Greek thrasys bold; Old Church Slavonic druzate to be bold, dare; Lithuanian
dristi to dare, drasus courageous).    An Old English irregular preterite-present verb: darr,
dearst, dear were first, second and third person singular present indicative; mostly regularized
16c., though past tense dorste survived as durst, but is now dying, persisting mainly in northern
English dialect. Meaning to challenge or defy (someone) is first recorded 1570s.


tenet (n.)

principle, opinion, or dogma maintained as true by a person, sect, school, etc., properly a thing
held (to be true), early 15c., from Latin tenet he holds, third person singular present indicative
of tenere to hold, grasp, keep, have possession, maintain, also reach, gain, acquire, obtain; hold
back, repress, restrain; figuratively hold in mind, take in, understand.    The Latin word is from
PIE root *ten- to stretch (cognates: Sanskrit tantram loom, tanoti stretches, lasts; Persian tar
string; Lithuanian tankus compact, i.e. tightened; Greek teinein to stretch, tasis a stretching,
tension, tenos sinew, tetanos stiff, rigid, tonos string, hence sound, pitch; Latin tendere to
stretch, tenuis thin, rare, fine; Old Church Slavonic tento cord; Old English &thorn;ynne thin).
Connecting notion between stretch and hold is cause to maintain. The modern sense is probably
because tenet was used in Medieval Latin to introduce a statement of doctrine.


silk (n.)

c.1300, from Old English seoloc, sioloc silk, silken cloth, from Latin sericum silk, plural serica
silken garments, silks, literally Seric stuff, neuter of Sericus, from Greek Serikos silken;
pertaining to the Seres, an oriental people of Asia from whom the Greeks got silks. Western
cultivation began 552 C.E., when agents from Byzantium impersonating monks smuggled silkworms and
mulberry leaves out of China.    Chinese si silk, Manchurian sirghe, Mongolian sirkek have been
compared to this and the people name in Greek might be a rendering via Mongolian of the Chinese word
for silk, but this is uncertain.    Also found in Old Norse as silki but not elsewhere in Germanic.
The more common Germanic form is represented by Middle English say, from Old French seie, with
Spanish seda, Italian seta, Dutch zijde, German Seide  is from Medieval Latin seta  silk, perhaps
elliptical for seta serica, or else a particular use of seta bristle, hair (see seta (n.)).
According to some sources [Buck, OED], the use of -l- instead of -r- in the Balto-Slavic form of the
word (Old Church Slavonic &#353;elku, Lithuanian &#353;ilkai) passed into English via the Baltic
trade and may reflect a Chinese dialectal form, or a Slavic alteration of the Greek word. But the
Slavic linguist Vasmer dismisses that, based on the initial sh- in the Slavic words, and suggests
the Slavic words are from Scandinavian rather than the reverse.    As an adjective from mid-14c. In
reference to the hair of corn, 1660s, American English. Figurative use of silk-stocking (n.) is from
1590s; as an adjective meaning wealthy it is attested from 1798, American English (silk stockings,
especially worn by men, being regarded as extravagant and reprehensible, indicative of luxurious
habits). Silk-screen (n.) is first attested 1930; as a verb from 1961. Silk road so called in
English from 1931.


