indifferent (adj.)

late 14c., unbiased, from Old French indifferent impartial or directly from Latin indifferentem
(nominative indifferens) not differing, not particular, of not consequence, neither good nor evil,
from in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + differens, present participle of differre set apart (see
differ). Extended sense of apathetic first recorded early 15c.; that of neither good nor bad 1530s,
on notion of neither more nor less advantageous.


indifferently (adv.)

c.1400, from indifferent + -ly (2).


blah (n.)

idle, meaningless talk, 1918, probably echoic; the adjective meaning bland, dull is from 1919,
perhaps influenced by French blas&eacute; bored, indifferent. The blahs depression is attested by
1966.


regardless (adj.)

indifferent, 1590s, from regard (n.) + -less. Elliptical for regardless of consequences, expenses,
etc., from 1872.


stoical (adj.)

early 15c. in reference to philosophers, from stoic + -al (2). Related: Stoically. From 1570s as
indifferent to pleasure or pain.


anythingarian (n.)

one indifferent to religious creeds, c.1704, originally dismissive, from anything on model of
trinitarian, unitarian, etc.


indifference (n.)

mid-15c., from Latin indifferentia want of difference, similarity, noun of quality from
indifferentem (see indifferent).


latitudinarian (adj.)

1660s, characterized by broad-mindedness, especially in reference to Episcopal clergymen indifferent
to doctrinal details; from Latin latitudin-, from latitude in its meaning freedom from narrow
restrictions (c.1600). Related: Latitudinarianism.


Miocene (adj.)

pertaining to the geological period between the Oligocene and Pliocene, 1831, irregular formation
from Greek meion less + -cene.  A typical example of the monstrosities with which scientific men in
want of a label for something, and indifferent to all beyond their own province, defile the
language. The elements of the word are Greek, but not the way they are put together, nor the meaning
demanded of the compound. [Fowler]


uninterested (adj.)

1640s, unbiased, from un- (1) not + past participle of interest (v.). It later meant disinterested
(1660s); sense of unconcerned, indifferent is recorded from 1771. This is the correct word for what
often is miscalled disinterested.


amoral (adj.)

ethically indifferent, 1882, a hybrid formed from Greek privative prefix a- not (see a- (3)) +
moral, which is derived from Latin. First used by Robert Louis Stephenson (1850-1894) as a
differentiation from immoral.


frigid (adj.)

1620s, from Latin frigidus cold, chill, cool, figuratively indifferent, from stem of frigere be
cold; related to frigus cold, coldness, frost, from PIE root *srig- cold.    The meaning wanting in
sexual heat is attested from 1650s. Frigidaire as the proprietary name of a brand of self-contained
automatically operated iceless refrigerator dates from 1919 (Frigidaire Corporation, Detroit,
Michigan, U.S.).


backwood (n.)

1709, American English, from back (adj.) + wood (n.) forested tract. Also backwoods. As an
adjective, from 1784.    BACKWOODSMEN ... This word is commonly used as a term of reproach (and
that, only in a familiar style,) to designate those people, who, being at a distance from the sea
and entirely agricultural, are considered as either hostile or indifferent to the interests of the
commercial states. [John Pickering, A Vocabulary, or Collection of Words and Phrases Which Have Been
Supposed to be Peculiar to the United States of America, Boston, 1816]


neglect (v.)

1520s, from Latin neglectus, past participle of neglegere to make light of, disregard, be
indifferent to, not heed, not trouble oneself about, literally not to pick up, variant of neclegere,
from Old Latin nec not (see deny) + legere pick up, select (see lecture (n.)). Related: Neglected;
neglecting.


nonchalant (adj.)

1734, from French nonchalant, present participle of nonchaloir be indifferent to, have no concern
for (13c.), from non- not (see non-) + chaloir have concern for, ultimately from Latin calere be hot
(see calorie). French chaland customer, client is of the same origin. Related: Nonchalantly.


cleaver (n.)

late 15c., one who splits, agent noun from cleave (v.1). Originally one who splits boards with a
wedge instead of sawing; attested as part of a surname from mid-14c. Meaning butcher's chopper is
from mid-15c.    This last [Marrowbones and Cleaver] is a sign in Fetter Lane, originating from a
custom, now rapidly dying away, of the butcher boys serenading newly married couples with these
professional instruments. Formerly, the band would consist of four cleavers, each of a different
tone, or, if complete, of eight, and by beating their marrowbones skilfully against these, they
obtained a sort of music somewhat after the fashion of indifferent bell-ringing. When well
performed, however, and heard from a proper distance, it was not altogether unpleasant. ... The
butchers of Clare market had the reputation of being the best performers. ... This music was once so
common that Tom Killigrew called it the national instrument of England.  [Larwood &amp; Hotten, The
History of Signboards from the Earliest Times to the Present Day, London, 1867]


contrary (adj.)

mid-14c., from Anglo-French contrarie, from Latin contrarius opposite, opposed, from contra against
(see contra).    If we take the statement All men are mortal, its contrary is Not all men are
mortal, its converse is All mortal beings are men, &amp; its opposite is No men are mortal. The
contrary, however, does not exclude the opposite, but includes it as its most extreme form. Thus
This is white has only one opposite, This is black, but many contraries, as This is not white, This
is coloured, This is dirty, This is black; &amp; whether the last form is called the contrary, or
more emphatically the opposite, is usually indifferent. But to apply the opposite to a mere contrary
(e.g. to I did not hit him in relation to I hit him, which has no opposite), or to the converse
(e.g. to He hit me in relation to I hit him, to which it is neither contrary nor opposite), is a
looseness that may easily result in misunderstanding; the temptation to go wrong is intelligible
when it is remembered that with certain types of sentence (A exceeds B) the converse &amp; the
opposite are identical (B exceeds A). [Fowler]    As a noun from late 13c. Related: Contrarily;
contrariwise.


witch (n.)

Old English wicce female magician, sorceress, in later use especially a woman supposed to have
dealings with the devil or evil spirits and to be able by their cooperation to perform supernatural
acts, fem. of Old English wicca sorcerer, wizard, man who practices witchcraft or magic, from verb
wiccian to practice witchcraft (compare Low German wikken, wicken to use witchcraft, wikker, wicker
soothsayer).    OED says of uncertain origin; Liberman says None of the proposed etymologies of
witch is free from phonetic or semantic difficulties. Klein suggests connection with Old English
wigle divination, and wig, wih idol. Watkins says the nouns represent a Proto-Germanic *wikkjaz
necromancer (one who wakes the dead), from PIE *weg-yo-, from *weg- (2) to be strong, be lively (see
wake (v.)).    That wicce once had a more specific sense than the later general one of female
magician, sorceress perhaps is suggested by the presence of other words in Old English describing
more specific kinds of magical craft. In the Laws of &AElig;lfred (c.890), witchcraft was
specifically singled out as a woman's craft, whose practitioners were not to be suffered to live
among the West Saxons:    &ETH;a f&aelig;mnan &thorn;e gewunia&eth; onfon gealdorcr&aelig;ftigan
&amp; scinl&aelig;can &amp; wiccan, ne l&aelig;t &thorn;u &eth;a libban.    The other two words
combined with it here are gealdricge, a woman who practices incantations, and scinl&aelig;ce female
wizard, woman magician, from a root meaning phantom, evil spirit. Another word that appears in the
Anglo-Saxon laws is lybl&aelig;ca wizard, sorcerer, but with suggestions of skill in the use of
drugs, because the root of the word is lybb drug, poison, charm. Lybbestre was a fem. word meaning
sorceress, and lybcorn was the name of a certain medicinal seed (perhaps wild saffron). Weekley
notes possible connection to Gothic weihs holy and German weihan consecrate, and writes, the priests
of a suppressed religion naturally become magicians to its successors or opponents. In Anglo-Saxon
glossaries, wicca renders Latin augur (c.1100), and wicce stands for pythoness, divinatricem. In the
Three Kings of Cologne (c.1400) wicca translates Magi:    &THORN;e paynyms ... cleped &thorn;e iij
kyngis Magos, &thorn;at is to seye wicchis.    The glossary translates Latin necromantia (demonum
invocatio) with galdre, wiccecr&aelig;ft. The Anglo-Saxon poem called Men's Crafts has
wiccr&aelig;ft, which appears to be the same word, and by its context means skill with horses. In a
c.1250 translation of Exodus, witches is used of the Egyptian midwives who save the newborn sons of
the Hebrews: &ETH;e wicches hidden hem for-&eth;an, Biforen pharaun nolden he ben. Witch in
reference to a man survived in dialect into 20c., but the fem. form was so dominant by 1601 that
men-witches or he-witch began to be used. Extended sense of old, ugly, and crabbed or malignant
woman is from early 15c; that of young woman or girl of bewitching aspect or manners is first
recorded 1740. Witch doctor is from 1718; applied to African magicians from 1836.    At this day it
is indifferent to say in the English tongue, 'she is a witch,' or 'she is a wise woman.' [Reginald
Scot, The Discoverie of Witchcraft, 1584]


