indignation (n.)

c.1200, from Old French indignacion or directly from Latin indignationem (nominative indignatio)
indignation, displeasure, noun of action from past participle stem of indignari regard as unworthy,
be angry or displeased at, from indignus unworthy, from in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + dignus
worthy (see dignity).


shocking (adj.)

1690s, offensive, present participle adjective from shock (v.1). From 1704 as causing a jolt of
indignation, horror, etc.; from 1798 as so bad as to be shocking. Related: Shockingly. Shocking pink
introduced February 1937 by Italian-born fashion designer Elsa Schiaparelli.


indignant (adj.)

1580s, from Latin indignantem (nominative indignans) impatient, reluctant, indignant, present
participle of indignari to be displeased at, be indignant (see indignation). Related: Indignantly.


stomach (v.)

tolerate, put up with, 1570s, from stomach (n.), probably in reference to digestion; earlier sense
was opposite: to be offended at, resent (1520s), echoing Latin stomachari to be resentful, be
irritated, be angry, from stomachus (n.) in its secondary sense of pride, indignation. Related:
Stomached; stomaching.


indignity (n.)

1580s, unworthiness, also unworthy treatment; act intended to expose someone to contempt, from Latin
indignitatem (nominative indignitas) unworthiness, meanness, baseness, also unworthy conduct, an
outrage, noun of quality from indignus unworthy (see indignation). Related: Indignities.


huff (v.)

mid-15c., apparently imitative of exhaling. Extended sense of bluster with indignation is attested
from 1590s. Related: Huffed; huffing. As a slang term for a type of narcotics abuse, by 1996. As a
noun from 1590s; to leave in a huff is recorded from 1778. Popular terms for strong beer or ale
noted from 1577 include huff cap as well as mad dog and dragon's milk.


nemesis

1570s, Nemesis, Greek goddess of vengeance, personification of divine wrath, from Greek nemesis just
indignation, righteous anger, literally distribution (of what is due), related to nemein distribute,
allot, apportion one's due, from PIE root *nem- to divide, distribute, allot, to take (cognates: Old
English, Gothic niman to take, German nehmen; see nimble). With a lower-case -n-, in the sense of
retributive justice, attested from 1590s. General sense of anything by which it seems one must be
defeated is 20c.


nimble (adj.)

agile, light-footed, c.1300, nemel, from Old English n&aelig;mel quick to grasp (attested but once),
related to niman to take, from Proto-Germanic *neman (cognates: Old Saxon, Old Dutch, Gothic niman,
Old Norse nema, Old Frisian nima, German nehmen to take), from PIE root *nem- to divide, distribute,
allot, also to take (cognates: Greek nemein to deal out, nemesis just indignation, Latin numerus
number, Lithuanian nuoma rent, interest, Middle Irish nos custom, usage). With excrescent -b- from
c.1500 (compare limb (n.1)). Related: Nimbleness. In 17c., English had nimblechaps talkative fellow.


scarlet (n.)

mid-13c., rich cloth (often, but not necessarily, bright red), from a shortened form of Old French
escarlate scarlet (color), top-quality fabric (12c., Modern French &eacute;carlate), from Medieval
Latin scarlatum scarlet, cloth of scarlet (also source of Italian scarlatto, Spanish escarlate),
probably via a Middle Eastern source (compare Arabic siqillat fine cloth), from Medieval Greek and
ultimately from Late Latin sigillatus clothes and cloth decorated with small symbols or figures,
literally sealed, past participle of sigillare, from the root of sign (n.).    In English as the
name of a color, attested from late 14c. As an adjective from c.1300. Scarlet lady, etc. (Isa. i:18,
Rev. xvii:1-5) is from notion of red with shame or indignation. Scarlet fever is from 1670s, so
called for its characteristic rash. Scarlet oak, a New World tree, attested from 1590s. Scarlet
letter traces to Hawthorne's story (1850). German Scharlach, Dutch scharlaken show influence of
words cognate with English lake (n.2).


stomach (n.)

late 14c., earlier stomak (early 14c.), internal pouch into which food is digested, from Old French
stomaque, estomac stomach, from Latin stomachus throat, gullet; stomach, also taste, inclination,
liking; distaste, dislike; also pride, indignation, which were thought to have their origin in that
organ (source also of Spanish est&#243;mago, Italian stomaco), from Greek stomachos throat, gullet,
esophagus, literally mouth, opening, from stoma mouth (see stoma).    Applied anciently to the
openings of various internal organs, especially that of the stomach, then by the later Greek
physicians to the stomach itself. The native word is maw. Some 16c. anatomists tried to correct the
sense back to esophagus and introduce ventricle for what we call the stomach. Meaning belly,
midriff, part of the body that contains the stomach is from late 14c.    The spelling of the ending
of the word was conformed to Latin, but the pronunciation remains as in Middle English. Related:
stomachial (1580s); stomachical (c.1600); stomachic (1650s). Pugilistic stomacher punch in the
stomach is from 1814; from mid-15c. as vest or other garment which covers the belly. The Latin
figurative senses also were in Middle English (such as relish, inclination, desire, mid-15c.) or
early Modern English. Also sometimes regarded in Middle Ages as the seat of sexual desire.


