indolence (n.)

c.1600, insensitivity to pain, from French indolence (16c.), from Latin indolentia freedom from
pain, insensibility, noun of action from indolentem (nominative indolens) insensitive to pain, used
by Jerome to render Greek apelgekos in Ephesians; from Latin in- not, opposite of, without (see in-
(1)) + dolentem (nominative dolens) grieving, present participle of dolere suffer pain. Sense of
laziness (1710) is from notion of avoiding trouble (compare taking pains).


sloth (n.)

late 12c., indolence, sluggishness, formed from Middle English slou, slowe (see slow (adj.)) +
abstract formative -th (2). Replaced Old English sl&aelig;w&eth; sloth, indolence. Sense of
slowness, tardiness is from mid-14c. As one of the deadly sins, it translates Latin accidia.    The
slow-moving mammal first so called 1610s, a translation of Portuguese pregui&ccedil;a slowness,
slothfulness, from Latin pigritia laziness (compare Spanish perezosa slothful, also the sloth).


indolent (adj.)

1660s, painless, from Late Latin indolentem (see indolence). Sense of living easily is 1710, from
French indolent. Related: Indolently.


apathy (n.)

c.1600, freedom from suffering, from French apathie (16c.), from Latin apathia, from Greek apatheia
freedom from suffering, impassability, want of sensation, from apathes without feeling, without
suffering or having suffered, from a- without (see a- (3)) + pathos emotion, feeling, suffering (see
pathos). Originally a positive quality; sense of indolence of mind, indifference to what should
excite is from c.1733.


Laurence

masc. proper name, from Old French Lorenz (French Laurent), from Latin Laurentius, literally of
Laurentum, a maritime town in Latium, literally town of bay trees, from laurus (see laurel). The
Italian form is Lorenzo. A popular given name in the Middle Ages, as a surname it is attested in
England from mid-12c. Larkin is a pet-form. For some reason, the name since at least 18c. has been
the personification of indolence (compare German der faule Lenz Lazy Lawrence). But in Scotland, the
pet form Lowrie has been used for a fox (c.1500), also for a crafty person (1560s).


