industrial (adj.)

1774, from French industriel, from Medieval Latin industrialis, from Latin industria (see industry).
Earlier the word had been used in English in a sense resulting from labor (1580s); the modern use is
considered a reborrowing. Meaning suitable for industrial use is from 1904. As a style of dance
music, attested from 1988. Industrial revolution was in use by 1840 to refer to recent developments
and changes in England and elsewhere.


industrialist (n.)

1846, from industrial + -ist. Perhaps modeled on French industrialiste (Saint-Simon, 1823). Earlier
one who makes a living by productive industry (1837).


industrialism (n.)

1831, from industrial + -ism. Compare French industrialisme (Saint-Simon, 1823).


industrialize (v.)

1852, from industrial + -ize, or else from French industrialiser (1842), from Medieval Latin
industrialis. Related: Industrialized; industrializing.


Birmingham

industrial city in central England, 1086, Bermingehame, literally homestead of the place (or people)
named for Beorma, some forgotten Anglo-Saxon person, whose name probably is a shortening of
Beornmund. The Birmingham in Alabama, U.S., was founded 1871 as an industrial center and named for
the English city.


syndicalism (n.)

1907, from French syndicalisme movement to transfer ownership of means of production and
distribution to industrial workers, from syndical of a labor union, from syndic chief representative
(see syndic).    Syndicalism is in France the new, all-absorbing form of Labor's conflict with
Capital. Its growth has been so rapid that its gravity is not appreciated abroad. This year, even
more than last, the strikes and other direct action, which it has combined, have upset the
industrial life of the country, and forced the attention of Parliament and Government. [The Nation,
June 20, 1907]


effluent (adj.)

mid-15c., from Latin effluentem (see effluence). As a noun, from 1859; meaning liquid industrial
waste is from 1930.


brownfield (n.)

abandoned or disused industrial land, often contaminated to some degree, 1992, American English,
from brown (adj.) + field (n.).


revolving (adj.)

1690s, present participle adjective from revolve (v.). Revolving door attested from 1856 in
industrial processes, 1896 in buildings.


Wobbly (n.)

1914, member of Industrial Workers of the World (I.W.W.). Probably some sort of elaboration of the W
aspect of the acronym.


throughput (n.)

energy, activity, 1808, Scottish slang; from through + put. Industrial sense is from 1915.


air conditioner (n.)

from air (n.1) + agent noun from condition; along with air-conditioning, first attested 1909,
originally an industrial process; main modern use in residences and office buildings is from 1930s.


biotechnology (n.)

also bio-technology, 1947, use of machinery in relation to human needs; 1972 in sense of use of
biological processes in industrial production, from bio- + technology.


recycle (v.)

1922, originally of industrial processes; see re- + cycle (v.). Specifically of waste material from
1960. Related: Recycled; recycling.


Dow Jones

short for Dow Jones Industrial Average, first published 1884 by Charles Henry Dow (1851-1902) and
Edward D. Jones (1856-1920), later publishers of The Wall Street Journal.


uptown (adv.)

1802, to or in the higher or upper portion of a town, from up (adv.) + town (n.). As an adjective
from 1838. As this usually was the residential portion of a town (especially a port) the word had
overtones of residential quarter as opposed to commercial and industrial district. As a noun from
1946, often meaning more prosperous area of town.


Formica (1)

proprietary name (1922), originally manufactured by Formica Insulation Co. of Cincinnati, Ohio, U.S.
(founded 1913). According to the company, the material (originally marketed as an industrial
insulator) was so called because it could be used for mica, i.e., in place of mica, a more expensive
natural insulator. Primarily used in consumer goods since c.1945.


flume (n.)

late 12c., stream, from Old French flum running water, stream, river, from Latin flumen flood,
stream, running water, from fluere to flow (see fluent). In U.S., used especially of artificial
streams channeled for some industrial purpose.


works (n.)

Old English, (someone's) deeds, acts, or actions, the things one has done in life, often especially
good deeds, acts of piety, demonstrations of virtue, plural of work (n.). Meaning operations
pertinent to maintaining a large physical place (private, religious, or municipal) is from late 14c.
Meaning industrial place (usually with qualifying adjective) is from late 15c. To be in the works in
the extended sense of in the process of being done or made is by 1973.


technocracy (n.)

1919, coined by W.H. Smyth as a name for a new system of government by technical experts, from
techno- + -cracy.    William Henry Smyth, a distinguished engineer of Berkeley, California, wrote at
the close of the war a series of thoughtful papers for the New York magazine Industrial Management,
on the subject of Technocracy. His thesis was the need of a Supreme National Council of Scientists
to advise us how best to live, and how most efficiently to realize our individual aspirations and
our national purpose. [The Bookman, March 1922]


technology (n.)

1610s, a discourse or treatise on an art or the arts, from Greek tekhnologia systematic treatment of
an art, craft, or technique, originally referring to grammar, from tekhno- (see techno-) + -logy.
The meaning study of mechanical and industrial arts (Century Dictionary, 1902, gives examples of
spinning, metal-working, or brewing) is first recorded 1859. High technology attested from 1964;
short form high-tech is from 1972.


military (adj.)

mid-15c., from Middle French militaire (14c.), from Latin militaris of soldiers or war, of military
service, warlike, from miles (genitive militis) soldier, of unknown origin, perhaps ultimately from
Etruscan, or else meaning one who marches in a troop, and thus connected to Sanskrit melah assembly,
Greek homilos assembled crowd, throng. Related: Militarily. Old English had militisc, from Latin.
Military-industrial complex coined 1961 in farewell speech of U.S. president Dwight D. Eisenhower.


recession (n.)

1640s, act of receding, a going back, from French r&#233;cession a going backward, a withdrawing,
and directly from Latin  recessionem (nominative recessio) a going back, noun of action from past
participle stem of recedere (see recede).    Sense of temporary decline in economic activity, 1929,
noun of action from recess (q.v.): The material prosperity of the United States is too firmly based,
in our opinion, for a revival in industrial activity -- even if  we have to face an immediate
recession of some magnitude -- to be long delayed. [Economist, Nov. 2, 1929]Ayto notes, There was
more than a hint of euphemism in the coining of this term.


rust (n.)

red oxide of iron, Old English rust rust; moral canker, related to rudu redness, from Proto-Germanic
*rusta- (cognates: Frisian rust, Old High German and German rost, Middle Dutch ro(e)st), from PIE
*reudh-s-to- (cognates: Lithuanian rustas brownish, rudeti to rust; Latin robigo, Old Church
Slavonic ruzda rust), from root *reudh- red (see red (adj.1)).    As a plant disease, attested from
mid-14c. Rust Belt decayed urban industrial areas of mid-central U.S. (1984) was popularized, if not
coined, by Walter Mondale's presidential campaign.


hammer (n.)

Old English hamor hammer, from Proto-Germanic *hamaraz (cognates: Old Saxon hamur, Middle Dutch,
Dutch hamer, Old High German hamar, German Hammer. The Old Norse cognate hamarr meant stone, crag
(it's common in English place names), and suggests an original sense of tool with a stone head, from
PIE *akmen stone, sharp stone used as a tool (cognates: Old Church Slavonic kamy, Russian kameni
stone), from root *ak- sharp (see acme). Hammer and sickle as an emblem of Soviet communism attested
from 1921, symbolizing industrial and agricultural labor.


plant (n.)

Old English plante young tree or shrub, herb newly planted, from Latin planta sprout, shoot, cutting
(source of Spanish planta, French plante), perhaps from *plantare to drive in with the feet, push
into the ground with the feet, from planta sole of the foot, from nasalized form of PIE *plat- to
spread, flat (see place (n.)).    Broader sense of any vegetable life, vegetation generally is first
recorded 1550s. Most extended usages are from the verb, on the notion of something planted; such as
construction for an industrial process, 1789, at first with reference to the set-up of machinery,
later also the building; also slang meaning a spy (1812). Many of these follow similar developments
in the French form of the word. German Pflanz, Irish cland, Welsh plant are from Latin.


cotton-picking (adj.)

as a deprecatory term first recorded in a Bugs Bunny cartoon, but a similar noun meaning
contemptible person dates to around 1919, perhaps with racist overtones that have faded over the
years. Before mechanization, cotton picking was the most difficult labor on a cotton plantation.
I drove out to a number of the farms near Denison and found many very young white children working
all day in the hot sun picking and dragging sacks of cotton. In one field the labor corps consisted
of one woman and six children, one of them 5 years, one 6 years, one 7 years, one 9 years, and two
about 11. The father was plowing. The 5 and 6 year olds worked all day as did the rest. The 7-year-
old said he picked 50 pounds a day and the 9 year old 75 pounds. (A good picker averages several
hundred a day.) School begins late on account of the cotton picking, but the children nearly all
prefer school to the picking. Picking hours are long, hot, and deadly monotonous. While the very
young children seem to enjoy it, very soon their distaste for it grows into all-absorbing hatred for
all work. [Field Notes of Lewis W. Hine, Child-Labor Conditions in Texas, report to U.S.
Congressional Commission on Industrial Relations, 1916]


mill (n.1)

building fitted to grind grain, Old English mylen a mill (10c.), an early Germanic borrowing from
Late Latin molina, molinum mill (source of French moulin, Spanish molino), originally fem. and
neuter of molinus pertaining to a mill, from Latin mola mill, millstone, related to molere to grind,
from PIE *mel- (1) soft, with derivatives referring to ground material and tools for grinding
(source also of Greek myle mill; see mallet).    Also from Late Latin molina, directly or
indirectly, are German M&uuml;hle, Old Saxon mulin, Old Norse mylna, Danish m&oslash;lle, Old Church
Slavonic mulinu. Broader sense of grinding machine is attested from 1550s. Other types of
manufacturing machines driven by wind or water, whether for grinding or not, began to be called
mills by early 15c. Sense of building fitted with industrial machinery is from c.1500.


