inducement (n.)

1590s, that which induces, from induce + -ment.


induce (v.)

late 14c., to lead by persuasions or other influences, from Latin inducere lead into, bring in,
introduce, conduct, persuade, from in- into, in, on, upon (see in- (2)) + ducere to lead (see duke
(n.)). Meaning to bring about, of concrete situations, etc., is from early 15c.; sense of to infer
by reasoning is from 1560s. Electro-magnetic sense first recorded 1777. Related: Induced; inducing.


inductor (n.)

1650s, from Latin inductor, agent noun from past participle stem of inducere (see induce).
Electromagnetic sense begins in 1837.


inductive (adj.)

early 15c., from Old French inductif or directly from Late Latin inductivus, from induct-, past
participle stem of inducere (see induce). As a term in logic, from 1764.


inducive (adj.)

1610s, from induce + -ive.


induct (v.)

late 14c., from Latin inductus, past participle of inducere to lead (see induce). Originally of
church offices; sense of bring into military service is 1934 in American English. Related: Inducted;
inducting.


endue (v.)

also indue, c.1400, from Old French enduire lead, drive, initiate, indoctrinate (12c.), from Latin
inducere to lead (see induce). Related: Endued.


Greenland

Old Norse Groenland, so named by its discoverer (986 C.E.) because it would induce settlers to go
there, if the land had a good name:   Hann gaf nafn landinu ok kalla&eth;i Groenland, ok kva&eth;
menn &thorn;at myndu fysa &thorn;angat farar, at landit &aelig;tti nafn gott. [Islendingabok,
1122-1133]


inspire (v.)

mid-14c., enspiren, to fill (the mind, heart, etc., with grace, etc.); also to prompt or induce
(someone to do something), from Old French enspirer (13c.), from Latin inspirare inflame; blow into
(see inspiration), a loan-translation of Greek pnein in the Bible. General sense of influence or
animate with an idea or purpose is from late 14c. Also sometimes used in literal sense in Middle
English. Related: Inspired; inspires; inspiring.


suborn (v.)

to procure unlawfully, to bribe to accomplish a wicked purpose, especially to induce a witness to
perjury, to lure (someone) to commit a crime, 1530s, from Middle French suborner seduce, instigate,
bribe (13c.) and directly from Latin subornare employ as a secret agent, incite secretly, originally
equip, fit out, furnish, from sub under, secretly (see sub-) + ornare equip, related to ordo order
(see order (n.)). Related: Suborned; suborning.


induction (n.)

late 14c., advancement toward the grace of God; also (c.1400) formal installation of a clergyman,
from Old French induction (14c.) or directly from Latin inductionem (nominative inductio) a leading
in, introduction, noun of action from past participle stem of inducere to lead (see induce).    As a
term in logic (early 15c.) it is from Cicero's use of inductio to translate Greek epagoge leading to
in Aristotle. Induction starts with known instances and arrives at generalizations; deduction starts
from the general principle and arrives at some individual fact. As a term of science, c.1800;
military service sense is from 1934, American English.


nest (n.)

Old English nest bird's nest, snug retreat, also young bird, brood, from Proto-Germanic *nistaz
(cognates: Middle Low German, Middle Dutch nest, German Nest), from PIE *nizdo- (cognates: Sanskrit
nidah resting place, nest, Latin nidus nest, Old Church Slavonic gnezdo, Old Irish net, Welsh nyth,
Breton nez nest), probably from *ni down + *sed- (1) to sit (see sedentary).    Used since Middle
English in reference to various accumulations of things (such as a nest of drawers, early 18c.).
Nest egg retirement savings is from 1700, originally a real or artificial egg left in a nest to
induce the hen to go on laying there (c.1600).


fetch (v.)

Old English feccan, apparently a variant of fetian, fatian to fetch, bring near, bring back, obtain;
induce; to marry, probably from Proto-Germanic *fetan (cognates: Old Frisian fatia to grasp, seize,
contain, Old Norse feta to find one's way, Middle Dutch vatten, Old High German sih faggon to mount,
climb, German fassen to grasp, contain), from PIE verbal root *ped- to walk, from root *ped- (1)
foot (see foot (n.)). Variant form fet, a derivation of the older Old English version of the word,
survived as a competitor until 17c. Related: Fetched; fetching.


sheep (n.)

ruminant mammal, Old English sceap, scep, from West Germanic *sk&aelig;pan (cognates: Old Saxon
scap, Old Frisian skep, Middle Low German schap, Middle Dutch scaep, Dutch schaap, Old High German
scaf, German Schaf), of unknown origin. Not found in Scandinavian (Danish has faar for sheep) or
Gothic (which uses lamb), and with no known cognates outside Germanic. The more usual Indo-European
word for the animal is represented in English by ewe.    The plural form was leveled with the
singular in Old English, but Old Northumbrian had a plural scipo. Used since Old English as a type
of timidity and figuratively of those under the guidance of God. The meaning stupid, timid person is
attested from 1540s. The image of the wolf in sheep's clothing was in Old English (from Matt.
vii:15); that of separating the sheep from the goats is from Matt. xxv:33. To count sheep in a bid
to induce sleep is recorded from 1854 but seems not to have been commonly written about until 1870s.
It might simply be a type of a tedious activity, but an account of shepherd life from Australia from
1849 [Sidney's Emigrant's Journal] describes the night-shepherd (hut-keeper) taking a count of the
sheep regularly at the end of his shift to protect against being answerable for any animals later
lost or killed.    Sheep's eyes loving looks is attested from 1520s (compare West Frisian
skiepseach, Dutch schaapsoog, German Schafsauge). A sheep-biter was a dog that worries sheep
(1540s); a mutton-monger (1590s); and a whore-monger (1610s, i.e. one who chases mutton); hence
Shakespeare's sheep-biting thieving, sneaky.


