ineffectual (adj.)

early 15c., from in- (1) not, opposite of + effectual. Related: Ineffectually; ineffectuality.


half-assed (adj.)

ineffectual, 1932, perhaps a humorous mispronunciation of haphazard.


numbnuts (n.)

stupid or ineffectual person, by 1971, U.S. slang, from numb (adj.) + nuts testicles; with
suggestion of impotence.


stuffed (adj.)

mid-15c., in reference to garments, padded with stuffing, past participle adjective from stuff-
(v.). Hence stuffed shirt pompous, ineffectual person (1913).


twit (n.)

foolish, stupid and ineffectual person, 1934, British slang, popular 1950s-60s, crossed over to U.S.
with British sitcoms. It probably developed from twit (v.) in the sense of reproach, but it may be
influenced by nitwit.


unavailable (adj.)

1540s, ineffectual, from un- (1) not + available. Meaning incapable of being used is recorded from
1855. Unavailing has taken up the older sense of the word.


unavailing (adj.)

ineffectual, useless, 1660s, from un- (1) not + availing. Also see unavailable.


weenie (n.)

frankfurter, 1906, with slang sense of penis following soon after, from German wienerwurst Vienna
sausage (see wiener). Meaning ineffectual person, effeminate young man is slang from 1963;
pejorative sense via penis shape, or perhaps from weenie in the sense of small (see wee).


jerk (n.2)

tedious and ineffectual person, 1935 (the lyric in Big Rock Candy Mountain apparently is Where they
hung the Turk [not jerk] that invented work), American English carnival slang, of uncertain origin.
Perhaps from jerkwater town (1878), where a steam locomotive crew had to take on boiler water from a
trough or a creek because there was no water tank [Barnhart, OED]. This led 1890s to an adjectival
use of jerk as inferior, insignificant. Alternatively, or influenced by, verbal phrase jerk off
masturbate [Rawson].


son of a bitch

1707 as a direct phrase, but implied much earlier, and Old Norse had bikkju-sonr. Abbreviated form
SOB from 1918; form sumbitch attested in writing by 1969.    Abide &thorn;ou &thorn;ef malicious!
Biche-sone &thorn;ou drawest amis  &thorn;ou schalt abigge it ywis!  [Of Arthour &amp; of Merlin,
c.1330]    Probably the most common American vulgarity from about the middle of the eighteenth
century to the middle of the twentieth [Rawson].     Our maid-of-all-work in that department
[indecency] is son-of-a-bitch, which seems as pale and ineffectual to a Slav or a Latin as fudge
does to us. There is simply no lift in it, no shock, no sis-boom-ah. The dumbest policeman in
Palermo thinks of a dozen better ones between breakfast and the noon whistle. [H.L. Mencken, The
American Language, 4th ed., 1936, p.317-8]    Elsewhere, complaining of the tepidity of the American
vocabulary of profanity, Mencken writes that the toned-down form son-of-a-gun is so lacking in punch
that the Italians among us have borrowed it as a satirical name for an American: la sanemagogna is
what they call him, and by it they indicate their contempt for his backwardness in the art that is
one of their great glories.    It was in 1934 also that the New York Daily News, with commendable
frankness, in reporting a hearing in Washington at which Senator Huey P. Long featured, forsook the
old-time dashes and abbreviations and printed the complete epithet son of a bitch. [Stanley Walker,
City Editor, 1934]


wet (adj.)

Old English w&aelig;t moist, rainy, liquid, also as a noun. moisture, liquid drink, from Proto-
Germanic *weta- (source also of Old Frisian wet ). Also from cognate Old Norse vatr; all from PIE
*wed- (1) water, wet (see water (n.1)). Of paint, ink, etc., not yet dry from 1510s. Opposed to dry
in reference to the U.S. battles over prohibition from 1870. Wet blanket person who has a
dispiriting effect is recorded from 1871, from use of blankets drenched in water to smother fires
(the phrase is attested in this literal sense from 1660s).    Do we not know them, those wet
blankets who come down on our pleasant little fires and extinguish them, with no more ruth than the
rain feels when it pours on the encampment of the merry picnic party, or floods the tents of a
flower show? [Wet Blankets, in Godey's Lady's Book and Magazine, February, 1871]   All wet in the
wrong is recorded from 1923, American English; earlier simply wet ineffectual, and perhaps
ultimately from slang meaning drunken (c.1700). Wet-nurse is from 1610s. The diver's wet-suit is
from 1955. Wet dream is from 1851; in the same sense Middle English had ludificacioun an erotic
dream.    He knew som tyme a man of religion, &thorn;at gaff hym gretelie vnto chastitie bothe of
his harte &amp; of his body noghtwithstondyng he was tempid with grete ludificacions on &thorn;e
nyght. [Alphabet of Tales, c.1450]


turkey (n.)

1540s, originally guinea fowl (Numida meleagris), a bird imported from Madagascar via Turkey, and
called guinea fowl when brought by Portuguese traders from West Africa. The larger North American
bird (Meleagris gallopavo) was domesticated by the Aztecs, introduced to Spain by conquistadors
(1523) and thence to wider Europe. The word turkey first was applied to it in English 1550s because
it was identified with or treated as a species of the guinea fowl, and/or because it got to the rest
of Europe from Spain by way of North Africa, then under Ottoman (Turkish) rule. Indian corn was
originally turkey corn or turkey wheat in English for the same reason.    The Turkish name for it is
hindi, literally Indian, probably influenced by Middle French dinde (c.1600, contracted from poulet
d'inde, literally chicken from India, Modern French dindon), based on the then-common misconception
that the New World was eastern Asia.    After the two birds were distinguished and the names
differentiated, turkey was erroneously retained for the American bird, instead of the African. From
the same imperfect knowledge and confusion Melagris, the ancient name of the African fowl, was
unfortunately adopted by Linn&#230;us as the generic name of the American bird. [OED]    The New
World bird itself reputedly reached England by 1524 at the earliest estimate, though a date in the
1530s seems more likely. The wild turkey, the North American form of the bird, was so called from
1610s. By 1575, turkey was becoming the usual main course at an English Christmas. Meaning inferior
show, failure, is 1927 in show business slang, probably from the bird's reputation for stupidity.
Meaning stupid, ineffectual person is recorded from 1951. Turkey shoot something easy is World War
II-era, in reference to marksmanship contests where turkeys were tied behind a log with their heads
showing as targets. To talk turkey (1824) supposedly comes from an old tale of a Yankee attempting
to swindle an Indian in dividing up a turkey and a buzzard as food.


