infamous (adj.)

late 14c., from Medieval Latin infamosus, from Latin in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + famosus
celebrated (see famous).  Meaning influenced by Latin infamis of ill fame (see infamy). As a legal
term, disqualified from certain rights of citizens in consequence of conviction of certain crimes
(late 14c.). Related: Infamously.


Casanova (n.)

man of carnal adventures, connoisseur of seduction, 1888, from Giacomo Girolamo Casanova de Seignalt
(1725-1798), the infamous debaucher. His name could be Englished as Jacob Jerome Newhouse, which is
somewhat less romantic.


Star Chamber (n.)

late 14c., apartment in the royal palace at Westminster in which members of the king's council sat
to exercise jurisdiction 14-15c., it evolved 15c. into a court of criminal jurisdiction, infamous
under James I and Charles I for arbitrary and oppressive proceedings. Abolished 1641. Supposedly so
called because gilt stars had been painted on the ceiling. Later there was a star on the door.


unfamous (adj.)

late 14c., not well known, obscure, from un- (1) not + famous (adj.). Also from late 14c. as notably
bad, a sense now in infamous.


famous (adj.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French famous, Old French fameus (Modern French fameux), from Latin famosus
much talked of, renowned, often infamous, notorious, of ill repute, from fama (see fame (n.)). A
native word for this was Old English namcu&eth;, literally name-known. Catch phrase famous last
words remark likely to be proved wrong is first attested 1948.


flagitious (adj.)

shamefully wicked, criminal, late 14c., from Old French flagicieux or directly from Latin
flagitiosus shameful, disgraceful, infamous, from flagitium shameful act, passionate deed,
disgraceful thing, related to flagrum a whip, scourge, lash, flagitare to demand importunately, from
PIE root *bhlag- to strike. Related: Flagitiously; flagitiousness.


Dachau

town in Bavaria, Germany, from Old High German daha clay + ouwa island, describing its situation on
high ground by the Amper River. Infamous as the site of a Nazi concentration camp nearby, opened in
1933 as a detention site for political prisoners and surrendered to the U.S. Army April 29, 1945.
Not a death camp per se, but as it was one of the places where inmates from other camps were sent as
the Reich collapsed at the end of the war, and as it was one of the few large camps overrun by
British or American forces, it has come to symbolize Nazi atrocities in many minds in the West.
Arbeit Macht Frei was spelled out in metal on the gate (as it was on other concentration camps, such
as Gross-Rosen, Sachsenhausen, Theresienstadt).


swart (adj.)

Old English sweart black, dark, of night, clouds, also figurative, wicked, infamous, from Proto-
Germanic *swarta- (cognates: Old Frisian, Old Saxon, and Middle Dutch swart, Dutch zwart, Old Norse
svartr, German schwarz, Gothic swarts dark-colored, black), from PIE root *swordo- dirty, dark,
black (source of sordid). The true Germanic word, surviving in the Continental languages, displaced
in English by black. Of skin color of persons from late 14c. Related: Swartest.


nasty (adj.)

c.1400, foul, filthy, dirty, unclean, of unknown origin; perhaps [Barnhart] from Old French nastre
miserly, envious, malicious, spiteful, shortened form of villenastre infamous, bad, from vilein
villain + -astre, pejorative suffix, from Latin -aster.    Alternative etymology [OED] is from Dutch
nestig dirty, literally like a bird's nest. Likely reinforced in either case by a Scandinavian
source (compare Swedish dialectal naskug dirty, nasty), which also might be the source of the Middle
English word. Of weather, from 1630s; of things generally, unpleasant, offensive, from 1705. Of
people, ill-tempered, from 1825. Noun meaning something nasty is from 1935. Related: Nastily;
nastiness.


shend (n.)

shame, disgrace (obsolete or dialectal), Old English scand ignominy, shame, confusion, disgrace;
scandal, disgraceful thing; wretch, impostor, infamous man; bad woman, from the source of Old
English scamu shame (see shame (n.)) + -&#254;a, with change of -m- to -n- before a dental (compare
Old Frisian skande, Dutch schande, Old High German scanda, German Schande disgrace). Also in early
Modern English as a verb, shend (Old English scendan) put to shame; blame, reproach; bring to ruin.
It was active in forming compounds, such as shendful (Old English scandful) shameful, shendship
disgrace; Old English scandhus house of ill-fame, scandlic shameful, scandlufiende loving
shamefully, scandword obscene language).


un- (1)

prefix of negation, Old English un-, from Proto-Germanic *un- (cognates: Old Saxon, Old Frisian, Old
High German, German un-, Gothic un-, Dutch on-), from PIE *n- (source of Sanskrit a-, an- not, Greek
a-, an-, Old Irish an-, Latin in-), comb. form of PIE root *ne not (cognates: Avestan na, Old Church
Slavonic and Lithuanian ne not, Latin ne that not, Greek ne- not, Old Irish ni, Cornish ny not).
Often euphemistic (such as untruth for lie).     The most prolific of English prefixes, freely and
widely used in Old English, where it forms more than 1,000 compounds. It underwent a mass extinction
in early Middle English, but emerged with renewed vigor 16c. to form compounds with native and
imported words. It disputes with Latin-derived cognate in- (1) the right to form the negation of
certain words (indigestable/undigestable, etc.), and though both might be deployed in cooperation to
indicate shades of meaning (unfamous/infamous), typically they are not.    It also makes words from
phrases (such as uncalled-for, c.1600; undreamed-of, 1630s; uncome-at-able, 1690s; unputdownable,
1947, of a book; un-in-one-breath-utterable, Ben Jonson; etc., but the habit is not restricted to
un-; such as put-up-able-with, 1812). As a prefix in telegramese to replace not and save the cost of
a word, it is attested by 1936.


