infer (v.)

1520s, from Latin inferre bring into, carry in; deduce, infer, conclude, draw an inference; bring
against, from in- in (see in- (2)) + ferre carry, bear, from PIE *bher- (1) to bear, to carry, to
take (cognates: Sanskrit bharati carries; Avestan baraiti carries; Old Persian barantiy they carry;
Armenian berem I carry; Greek pherein to carry; Old Irish beru/berim I catch, I bring forth; Gothic
bairan to carry; Old English and Old High German beran, Old Norse bera barrow; Old Church Slavonic
birati to take; Russian brat' to take, bremya a burden). Sense of draw a conclusion is first
attested 1520s.


inference (n.)

1590s, from Medieval Latin inferentia, from Latin inferentem (nominative inferens), present
participle of inferre (see infer).


imply (v.)

late 14c., to enfold, enwrap, entangle (the classical Latin sense), from Old French emplier, from
Latin implicare involve (see implication). Meaning to involve something unstated as a logical
consequence first recorded c.1400; that of to hint at from 1580s. Related: Implied; implying. The
distinction between imply and infer is in What do you imply by that remark? But, What am I to infer
from that remark?


pheromone (n.)

chemical released by an animal that causes a specific response when detected by another animal of
the same species, but the exact definition is much debated; 1959, coined (by Karlson &amp;
L&uuml;scher) from Greek pherein to carry (see infer) + ending as in hormone.


phoresy (n.)

1914, from French phor&eacute;sie (1896), from Greek phoresis being carried, from pherein to carry
(see infer).


chromatophore (n.)

pigment cell, 1864, from chromato- + Greek -phoros bearing, bearer, from pherein to carry (see
infer).


fossiliferous (adj.)

by 1830, from fossil + -ferous producing, containing, from ferre to bear (see infer).


fertile (adj.)

mid-15c., from Middle French fertil and directly from Latin fertilis bearing in abundance, fruitful,
productive, from ferre to bear (see infer). Fertile Crescent (1914) was coined by U.S. archaeologist
James H. Breasted (1865-1935).


euphoria (n.)

1727, a physician's term for condition of feeling healthy and comfortable (especially when sick),
medical Latin, from Greek euphoria power of enduring easily, from euphoros, literally bearing well,
from eu well (see eu-) + pherein to carry (see infer). Non-technical use, now the main one, dates to
1882 and is perhaps a reintroduction.


esophagus (n.)

late 14c., from Greek oisophagos gullet, literally what carries and eats, from oisein, future
infinitive of pherein to carry (see infer) + -phagos, from phagein to eat (see -phagous). Related:
Esophageal.


furtive (adj.)

late 15c. (implied in furtively), from French furtif, from Latin furtivus stolen, hidden, secret,
from furtum theft, robbery, from fur (genitive furis) thief, probably from PIE *bhor-, from root
*bher- (1) to carry (see infer). Related: Furtiveness.


semaphore (n.)

apparatus for signaling, 1816, probably via French s&eacute;maphore, literally a bearer of signals,
ultimately from Greek sema sign, signal (see semantic) + phoros bearer, from pherein to carry (see
infer). Related: Semaphoric (1808).


surmise (v.)

c.1400, in law, to charge, allege, from Old French surmis, past participle of surmettre to accuse,
from sur- upon (see sur- (1)) + mettre put, from Latin mittere to send (see mission). Meaning to
infer conjecturally is recorded from 1700, from the noun. Related: Surmised; surmising.


proliferation (n.)

1859, formation or development of cells, from French prolif&#233;ration, from prolif&#232;re
producing offspring, from Latin proles offspring (see prolific) + ferre to bear (see infer). Meaning
enlargement, extension, increase is from 1920; especially of nuclear weapons (1966).


aquifer (n.)

1897, coined from Latin aqui-, comb. form of aqua water (see aqua-) + -fer bearing, from ferre to
bear (see infer).


somniferous (adj.)

sleep-producing, c.1600, from Latin somnifer, from somni- sleep + ferre to bear (see infer). With
-ous.


Christopher

masc. proper name, Church Latin Christophoros, from Ecclesiastical Greek khristophoros, literally
Christ-bearing; from phoros bearer, from pherein to carry (see infer). In medieval legend he was a
giant (one of the rare virtuous ones) who aided travellers by carrying them across a river.
Medallions with his image worn by travellers are known from the Middle Ages (Chaucer's Yeoman had
one). Not a common name in medieval England.


anaphora (n.)

repetition of a word or phrase in successive clauses, 1580s, from Latin, from Greek anaphora
reference, literally a carrying back, from anapherein to carry back, to bring up, from ana back (see
ana-) + pherein to bear (see infer).


odoriferous (adj.)

early 15c., that has a scent, with -ous + Latin odorifer spreading odor, fragrant, literally bearing
odor, from odor (see odor) + ferre to bear, carry (see infer). Usually in a positive sense.


efferent (adj.)

1827, from Latin efferentem (nominative efferens), present participle of effere to carry out or
away, bring forth, from ef- (see ex-) + ferre to bear, carry (see infer).


pestiferous (adj.)

mid-15c., mischievous, pernicious, figurative use of Latin pestiferus that brings plague or
destruction, variant of pestifer bringing plague, destructive, noxious, from pestis plague (see
pest) + ferre carry (see infer). Related: Pestiferously; pestiferousness.


vociferous (adj.)

1610s, from Latin vociferari to shout, yell, cry out, from vox (genitive vocis) voice  (see voice
(n.)) + stem of ferre to carry (see infer). Related: Vociferously; vociferousness.


Foraminifera

1835, Modern Latin, neuter plural of foraminifer bearing holes, from Latin foramen hole, opening,
orifice (see foramen) + -fer bearing, from ferre to bear (see infer). So called because the shells
usually are perforated by pores. Related: Foraminiferous.


vociferate (v.)

1590s, a back-formation from vociferation and in part from Latin vociferatus, past participle of
vociferari to cry out, shout, exclaim, from voci-, stem of vox voice (see voice (n.)) + ferre to
carry (see infer). Related: Vociferated; vociferating.


prefer (v.)

late 14c., to put forward or advance in rank or fortune, to promote, from Old French preferer (14c.)
and directly from Latin praeferre place or set before, carry in front, from prae before (see pre-) +
ferre to carry, to place (see infer). Meaning to esteem (something) more than others also is
recorded from late 14c. Original sense in English is preserved in preferment.


defer (v.2)

yield, mid-15c., from Middle French d&eacute;f&eacute;rer (14c.) to yield, comply, from Latin
deferre carry away, transfer, grant, from de- down, away (see de-) + ferre carry (see infer). Main
modern sense is from meaning refer (a matter) to someone, which also was in Latin.


auriferous (adj.)

containing gold, 1727, from Latin aurifer gold-bearing, from auri-, comb. form of aurum gold (see
aureate) + -fer producing, bearing (see infer).


induce (v.)

late 14c., to lead by persuasions or other influences, from Latin inducere lead into, bring in,
introduce, conduct, persuade, from in- into, in, on, upon (see in- (2)) + ducere to lead (see duke
(n.)). Meaning to bring about, of concrete situations, etc., is from early 15c.; sense of to infer
by reasoning is from 1560s. Electro-magnetic sense first recorded 1777. Related: Induced; inducing.


deduce (v.)

early 15c., from Latin deducere lead down, derive (in Medieval Latin, infer logically), from de-
down (see de-) + ducere to lead (see duke (n.)). Originally literal; sense of draw a conclusion from
something already known is first recorded 1520s, from Medieval Latin. Related: Deduced; deducing.


Porifera (n.)

1843, Modern Latin, literally bearing pores, neuter plural of porifer, from Latin porus pore,
opening (see pore (n.)) + -fer bearing (see infer). Related: Poriferal; poriferous.


pyrophoric (adj.)

1779, from Modern Latin pyrophorus, literally fire-bearing, from Greek pyrophoros, from pyro- (see
pyro-) + phoros bearer, from pherein to carry (see infer). Related: Pyrophorous; pyrophorus.


refer (v.)

late 14c., to trace back (to a first cause), attribute, assign, from Old French referer (14c.) and
directly from Latin referre to relate, refer, literally to carry back, from re- back (see re-) +
ferre carry (see infer). Meaning to commit to some authority for a decision is from mid-15c.; sense
of to direct (someone) to a book, etc. is from c.1600. Related: Referred; referring.


legislator (n.)

c.1600, from Latin legis lator proposer of a law, from legis, genitive of lex law + lator proposer,
agent noun of latus borne, brought, carried (see oblate (n.)), used as past tense of ferre to carry
(see infer). Fem. form legislatrix is from 1670s.


transfer (v.)

late 14c., from Old French transferer or directly from Latin transferre bear across, carry over,
bring through; transfer, copy, translate, from trans- across (see trans-) + ferre to carry (see
infer). Related: Transferred; transferring.


differ (v.)

late 14c., from Old French differer (14c.) and directly from Latin differre to set apart, differ,
from dis- away from (see dis-) + ferre carry (see infer).    Two senses that were present in Latin
have gone separate ways in English since c.1500 with defer (transitive) and differ (intransitive).
Related: Differed; differing.


collate (v.)

1610s, from Latin collatus, irregular past participle of conferre to bring together, from com-
together (see com-) + latus (see oblate (n.)), serving as past participle of ferre to bear (see
infer). Related: Collated; collating.


conifer (n.)

1851, from Latin conifer cone-bearing, bearing conical fruit, from conus cone (see cone) + ferre to
bear (see infer).


confer (v.)

1530s, from Middle French conf&eacute;rer (14c.) to give, converse, compare, from Latin conferre to
bring together, figuratively to compare; consult, deliberate, talk over, from com- together (see
com-) + ferre to bear (see infer). Sense of taking counsel led to conference. The meaning compare
(common 1530-1650) is largely obsolete, but the abbreviation cf. still is used in this sense.
Related: Conferred; conferring.


Carboniferous (adj.)

1830 with reference the geological period, from a word formed in English in 1799 to mean coal-
bearing, from Latin carbo (genitive carbonis) coal (see carbon) + -ferous producing, containing,
bearing, from ferre to bear (see infer). The great coal beds of Europe were laid down during this
period. As a stand-alone noun (short for Carboniferous Period) from 1940s.


amphora (n.)

early 14c., two-handled vessel for holding wine, oil, etc., from Latin amphora from Greek amphoreus
an amphora, jar, urn, contraction of amphiphoreus, literally two-handled, from amphi- on both sides
(see amphi-) + phoreus bearer, related to pherein to bear (see infer).  Also a liquid measure in the
ancient world, in Greece equal to 9 gallons, in Rome to 6 gallons, 7 pints.


elation (n.)

late 14c., from Old French elacion elation, conceit, arrogance, vanity, from Latin elationem
(nominative elatio), noun of action from elatus elevated, form used as past participle of efferre,
from ex- out + latus (see oblate (n.)), past participle of ferre carry (see infer). Metaphoric sense
of lifting spirits was in Latin and has always been the principal meaning in English.


circumference (n.)

late 14c., from Latin circumferentia, neuter plural of circumferens, present participle of
circumferre to lead around, take around, carry around, from circum around (see circum-) + ferre to
carry (see infer). A loan-translation of Greek periphereia periphery, the line round a circular
body, literally a carrying round (see periphery). Related: Circumferential.


Berenice

fem. proper name, from Latin Berenice, from Macedonian Greek Berenike (classical Greek Pherenike),
literally bringer of victory, from pherein to bring (see infer) + nike victory. The constellation
Berenice's hair is from the story of the pilfered locks of the wife of Ptolemy Euergetes, king of
Egypt, c.248 B.C.E., which the queen cut off as an offering to Venus. The constellation features a
dim but visible star cluster. But the earliest use of the phrase in astronomy in English was as a
name for the star Canopus (1601).


burden (n.1)

a load, Old English byr&eth;en a load, weight, charge, duty; also a child; from Proto-Germanic
*burthinjo- that which is borne (cognates: Old Norse byr&eth;r, Old Saxon burthinnia, German
b&uuml;rde, Gothic baur&thorn;ei), from PIE root *bher- (1) to bear, to carry; give birth (see
infer).    The shift from -th- to -d- took place beginning 12c. (compare murder (n.)). Archaic
burthen is occasionally retained for the specific sense of capacity of a ship. Burden of proof is
recorded from 1590s.


cumber (v.)

c.1300, to overthrow, destroy; to be overwhelmed; to harass, apparently from French, but Old French
combrer to seize hold of, lay hands on, grab, snatch, take by force, rape, has not quite the same
sense. Perhaps a shortened formation from a verb akin to Middle English acombren obstructing
progress, from Old French encombrer, from combre obstruction, barrier, from Vulgar Latin *comboros
that which is carried together, perhaps from a Gaulish word.    The likely roots are PIE *kom (see
com-) + *bher- (1) to bear (see infer). Weakened sense of to hamper, to obstruct or weigh down is
late 14c. Related: Cumbered; cumbering.


ablative (n.)

mid-15c., from Middle French ablatif, from Latin (casus) ablativus (case) of removal, expressing
direction from a place or time, coined by Julius Caesar from ablatus taken away, past participle of
auferre carrying away, from ab- away (see ab-) + irregular verb ferre (past participle latum; see
oblate) to carry, to bear (see infer). The Latin case of adverbial relation, typically expressing
the notion away from, or the source or place of an action.


splendiferous (adj.)

considered a playful elaboration since its re-birth in 1843, but in 15c. it was good English, from
Medieval Latin splendorifer, from splendor (see splendor) + ferre to bear (see infer). Compare 15c.
splendidious, also splendacious (1843). Bartlett (1859) offers this, allegedly from An itinerant
gospeller ... holding forth to a Kentuckian audience on the kingdom of heaven:    Heaven, my beloved
hearers, said he, is a glorious, a beautiful, a splendiferous, an angeliferous place. Eye hath not
seen, ear hath not heard, it has not entered into the imagination of any Cracker in these here
diggings what carryings on the just made perfect have up thar.


metaphor (n.)

late 15c., from Middle French metaphore (Old French metafore, 13c.), and directly from Latin
metaphora, from Greek metaphora a transfer, especially of the sense of one word to a different word,
literally a carrying over, from metapherein transfer, carry over; change, alter; to use a word in a
strange sense, from meta- over, across (see meta-) + pherein to carry, bear (see infer).


offer (v.)

Old English ofrian to offer, show, exhibit, sacrifice, bring an oblation, from Latin offerre to
present, bestow, bring before (in Late Latin to present in worship), from ob to (see ob-) + ferre to
bring, to carry (see infer). The Latin word was borrowed elsewhere in Germanic: Old Frisian offria,
Middle Dutch offeren, Old Norse offra. Non-religious sense reinforced by Old French offrir to offer,
from Latin offerre. Related: Offered; offering.


paraphernalia (n.)

1650s, a woman's property besides her dowry, from Medieval Latin paraphernalia (short for
paraphernalia bona paraphernal goods), neuter plural of paraphernalis (adj.), from Late Latin
parapherna a woman's property besides her dowry, from Greek parapherna, neuter plural, from para-
beside (see para- (1)) + pherne dowry, related to pherein to carry (see infer). Meaning equipment,
apparatus is first attested 1791, from notion of odds and ends.


