infernal (adj.)

late 14c., in reference to the underworld, from Old French enfernal, infernal (12c.), from Late
Latin infernalis of the lower regions, from infernus hell (Ambrose), literally the lower (world),
noun use of Latin infernus lower, lying beneath, from infra below (see infra-). Meaning devilish,
hateful is from early 15c. For the name of the place, or things which resemble it, the Italian form
inferno has been used in English since 1834, from Dante. Related: Infernally.


inferno (n.)

1834, from Italian inferno, from Latin infernus (see infernal).


supernal (adj.)

mid-15c., heavenly, divine, from Old French supernal supreme (12c.), formed from Latin supernus
situated above, that is above; celestial (from super above, over; see super-) as a contrast to
infernal.


hellish (adj.)

1520s, from hell + -ish. Related: Hellishly; hellishness. Earlier in same sense were helli helly
(late 12c.); hellen hellish, infernal (c.1200), with -en (2); and Old English hellic.


knucklehead (n.)

stupid person, 1890, American English, from knuckle (n.) + head (n.).    That infernal knuckle-head
at the camp ought to have reported before now, he thought to himself, as he smoked. [Charles H.
Shinn, The Quicksands of Toro, in Belford's Magazine, vol. V, June-November 1890, New York]    From
1869 as the name of a part in a type of mechanical coupling device. Popularized in the stupid person
sense from 1942, from character R.F. Knucklehead, star of Don't posters hung up at U.S. Army Air
Force training fields.    Everything Knucklehead does is wrong and ends in disaster. He endures one
spectacular crash after another so that the students at the Gulf Coast Air Force Training Center may
profit by his mistakes, and it looks now as if there will be no let-up in his agony. [Life, May 25,
1942]


hell (n.)

Old English hel, helle, nether world, abode of the dead, infernal regions, from Proto-Germanic
*haljo the underworld (cognates: f. Old Frisian helle, Dutch hel, Old Norse hel, German H&ouml;lle,
Gothic halja hell) the underworld, literally concealed place (compare Old Norse hellir cave,
cavern), from PIE *kel- (2) to cover, conceal (see cell).    The English word may be in part from
Old Norse Hel (from Proto-Germanic *halija one who covers up or hides something), in Norse mythology
the name of Loki's daughter, who rules over the evil dead in Niflheim, the lowest of all worlds
(nifl mist). Transfer of a pagan concept and word to a Christian idiom. In Middle English, also of
the Limbus Patrum, place where the Patriarchs, Prophets, etc. awaited the Atonement. Used in the KJV
for Old Testament Hebrew Sheol and New Testament Greek Hades, Gehenna. Used figuratively for state
of misery, any bad experience since at least late 14c. As an expression of disgust, etc., first
recorded 1670s.    Expression Hell in a handbasket is attested by 1867, in a context implying use
from a few years before, and the notion of going to Heaven in a handbasket is from 1853, with a
sense of easy passage to the destination. Hell or high water (1874) apparently is a variation of
between the devil and the deep blue sea. To wish someone would go to hell is in Shakespeare
(Merchant of Venice). Snowball's chance in hell no chance is from 1931; till hell freezes over never
is from 1832. To ride hell for leather is from 1889, originally with reference to riding on
horseback. Hell on wheels is said to be from 1843 in DAS; popularity dates from 1869 in reference to
the temporary workers' towns along the U.S. transcontinental railroad and their vices.


