infidelity (n.)

c.1400, want of faith, unbelief in religion; false belief, paganism; also (early 15c.)
unfaithfulness or disloyalty to a person (originally to a sovereign, by 16c. to a lover or spouse),
from French infid&eacute;lit&eacute;, from Latin infidelitatem (nominative infidelitas)
unfaithfulness, faithlessness, noun of quality from infidelis (see infidel).


infidel

mid-15c. (adjective and noun), from Middle French infid&egrave;le, from Latin infidelis unfaithful,
not to be trusted, later unbelieving, from in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + fidelis faithful
(see fidelity). In 15c. a non-Christian (especially a Saracen); later one who does not believe in
religion (1520s). Also used to translate Arabic qafir, which is from a root meaning to disbelieve,
to deny, strictly referring to all non-Muslims but virtually synonymous with Christian; hence, from
a Muslim or Jewish point of view, a Christian (1530s; see kaffir).


miscreant (n.)

late 14c., heathen, Saracen, from miscreant (adj.) or from Old French mescreant, which also had a
noun sense of infidel, pagan, heretic. Sense of villain first recorded 1590 in Spenser.


unfaithful (adj.)

mid-14c., acting falsely, from un- (1) not + faithful. In Middle English it also had a sense of
infidel, unbelieving, irreligious (late 14c.). Sense of not faithful in marriage is attested from
1828. Related: Unfaithfully; unfaithfulness.


Kaffir (n.)

1790, from Arabic kafir unbeliever, infidel, impious wretch, with a literal sense of one who does
not admit the blessings of God, from kafara to cover up, conceal, deny, blot out. Technically, non-
Muslim, but in Ottoman times it came to be used almost exclusively for Christian. Early English
missionaries used it as an equivalent of heathen to refer to Bantus in South Africa (1792), from
which use it came generally to mean South African black regardless of ethnicity, and to be a term of
abuse since at least 1934.


miscreant (adj.)

c.1300, non-Christian, pagan, infidel; early 15c., heretical, unbelieving, from Old French mescreant
disbelieving (Modern French m&#233;cr&#233;ant), from mes- wrongly (see mis- (2)) + creant, present
participle of creire believe, from Latin credere (see credo). Meaning villainous is from 1590s.


adverse (adj.)

late 14c., contrary, opposing, from Old French avers (13c., Modern French adverse) antagonistic,
unfriendly, contrary, foreign (as in gent avers infidel race), from Latin adversus turned against,
turned toward, fronting, facing, figuratively hostile, adverse, unfavorable, past participle of
advertere, from ad- to (see ad-) + vertere to turn (see versus). Related: Adversely.


