inflection (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French inflexion and directly from Latin inflexionem (nominative inflexio) a
bending, inflection, modification, noun of action from past participle stem of inflectere (see
inflect). For spelling, see connection. Grammatical sense is from 1660s.


youse

dialectal inflection of you, 1876, not always used in plural senses.


syne (adv.)

in Burns' poem Auld Lang Syne (1788), Scottish form of since (q.v.), without the adverbial genitive
inflection, recorded from c. 1300.


inflexion (n.)

see inflection; also see -xion.


accidence (n.)

late 14c., in philosophy, non-essential or incidental characteristic, also part of grammar dealing
with inflection (mid-15c.), in some cases a misspelling of accidents, or else directly from Latin
accidentia (used as a term in grammar by Quintilian), neuter plural of accidens, present participle
of accidere (see accident). The grammar sense is because they change in accordance with use.


currant (n.)

c. 1500, from raysyn of Curans (mid-14c.) raisins of Corinth, with the -s- mistaken for a plural
inflection. From Anglo-French reisin de Corauntz. The small, seedless raisins were exported from
southern Greece. Then in 1570s the word was applied to an unrelated Northern European berry (genus
Ribes), recently introduced in England, on its resemblance to the raisins.


Stonehenge (n.)

early 12c., Stanenges, literally stone gallows, perhaps so called from fancied resemblance to old-
style gallows with two posts, with the second element related to the verb hang. Some antiquarians
suggest the notion may be of supported in the air, that which hangs in the air (compare henge-clif
for Latin pr&aelig;ruptum), in reference to the lintel stones, but the order of the elements and the
inflection is against this. An ancient name for it was the Giant's Dance.


-some (2)

suffix added to numerals meaning a group of (that number), as in twosome, from pronoun use of Old
English sum some (see some). Originally a separate word used with the genitive plural (as in sixa
sum six-some); the inflection disappeared in Middle English and the pronoun was absorbed. Use of
some with a number meaning approximately also was in Old English.


awoken

past participle of awake (v.); also see awaken.  The tendency has been to restrict the strong past
participle (awoken) to the original intransitive sense of awake and the weak inflection (awakened)
to the transitive, but this never has been complete.


inflect (v.)

early 15c., to bend inward, from Latin inflectere (past participle inflexus) to bend in, bow, curve,
figuratively, to change, from in- in (see in- (1)) + flectere to bend (see flexible). Grammatical
sense is attested 1660s; pronunciation sense (in inflection) is c. 1600. Related: Inflected;
inflecting.


awoke

past tense of awake (v.), from Old English awoc; also see awaken. The tendency has been to restrict
the strong past tense (awoke) to the original intransitive sense of awake and the weak inflection
(awakened) to the transitive, but this never has been complete.


caper (n.1)

type of prickly Mediterranean bush, also in reference to the plant's edible buds, late 14c., from
Latin capparis (source of Italian cappero, French c&acirc;pre, German Kaper), from Greek kapparis
the caper plant or its fruit, which is of uncertain origin. Arabic kabbar, Persian kabar are from
Greek. Perhaps reborrowed into English 16c. The final -s was mistaken for a plural inflection in
English and dropped.


browse (v.)

mid-15c., feed on buds, from Middle French brouster, from Old French broster to sprout, bud, from
brost young shoot, twig, probably from Proto-Germanic *brust- bud, shoot, from PIE *bhreus- to
swell, sprout (see breast (n.)). Lost its final -t in English on the mistaken notion that the letter
was a past participle inflection. Figurative extension to peruse (books) is 1870s, American English.
Related: Browsed; browsing.


succor (n.)

c. 1200, socour, earlier socours aid, help, from Anglo-French succors help, aid, Old French socors,
sucurres aid, help, assistance (Modern French secours), from Medieval Latin succursus help,
assistance, from past participle of Latin succurrere run to help, hasten to the aid of, from
assimilated form of sub up to (see sub-) + currere to run (see current (adj.)). Final -s mistaken in
English as a plural inflection and dropped late 13c. Meaning one who aids or helps is from c. 1300.


Ottoman

1580s (n.), c. 1600 (adj.), from French Ottoman, from Italian Ottomano, from Arabic 'Uthmani of or
belonging to 'Uthman, Arabic masc. proper name, which in Turkish is pronounced Othman (see Osmanli),
name of the founder of the dynasty and empire. Ending altered in Italian by formation of a new false
singular, because -i was a plural inflection in Italian. Byron used the more correct form Othman,
and a few writers have followed him. The type of couch so called (1806) because one reclined on it,
which was associated with Eastern customs (see couch).


pea (n.)

early or mid-17c., false singular from Middle English pease (plural pesen), which was both single
and collective (as with wheat, corn) but the s sound was mistaken for the plural inflection. From
Old English pise (West Saxon), piose (Mercian) pea, from Late Latin pisa, variant of Latin pisum
pea, from Greek pison the pea, perhaps of Thracian or Phrygian origin [Klein].    In Southern U.S.
and the Caribbean, used of other legumes as well. Pea soup is first recorded 1711 (pease-soup);
applied to London fogs since at least 1849. Pea-shooter attested from 1803.


eve (n.)

c. 1200, eve evening, especially the time between sunset and darkness, from Old English &aelig;fen,
with loss of terminal -n (which, though forming part of the stem, perhaps was mistaken for an
inflection), from Proto-Germanic *&aelig;bando- (cognates: Old Saxon aband, Old Frisian ewnd, Dutch
avond, Old High German aband, German Abend, Old Norse aptann, Danish aften), which is of uncertain
origin. Now superseded in its original sense by evening.    Specific meaning day before a saint's
day or festival is from late 13c. Transferred sense of the moment right before any event, etc. is by
1780. Even (n.), evening keep the original form.


ring (v.1)

sound a bell, Old English hringan sound, give a certain resonant sound when struck; announce by
bells, from Proto-Germanic *khrengan (cognates: Old Norse hringja, Swedish ringa, Middle Dutch
ringen), probably of imitative origin. Related: Rang; rung. Originally a weak verb, strong
inflection began in early Middle English by influence of sing, etc. To ring down a theatrical
curtain is from 1772, from the custom of signaling for it by ringing a bell. To ring up a purchase
on a cash register is by 1937, from the bell that sounded. Specialized sense give a resonant sound
when struck as an indication of genuineness or purity, with transferred use (as in to ring hollow)
is from 1610s.


awake (v.)

a merger of two Middle English verbs: 1. awaken, from Old English aw&aelig;cnan (earlier
onw&aelig;cnan; strong, past tense awoc, past participle awacen) to awake, arise, originate, from a
on + wacan to arise, become awake (see wake (v.)); and 2. awakien, from Old English awacian (weak,
past participle awacode) to awaken, revive; arise; originate, spring from, from a on (see a (2)) +
wacian to be awake, remain awake, watch (see watch (v.)).    Both originally were intransitive only;
the transitive sense being expressed by Middle English awecchen (from Old English aweccan) until
later Middle English. In Modern English, the tendency has been to restrict the strong past tense and
past participle (awoke, awoken) to the original intransitive sense and the weak inflection
(awakened) to the transitive, but this never has been complete (see wake (v.); also compare awaken).


&#039;s

suffix forming the possessive singular case of most Modern English nouns; its use gradually was
extended in Middle English from Old English -es, the most common genitive inflection of masculine
and neuter nouns (such as d&aelig;g day, genitive d&aelig;ges day's).    Old English also had
genitives in -e, -re, -an, as well as mutation-genitives (boc book, plural bec), and the -es form
never was used in plural (where -a, -ra, -na prevailed), thus avoiding the verbal ambiguity of words
like kings'.    In Middle English, both the possessive singular and the common plural forms were
regularly spelled es, and when the e was dropped in pronunciation and from the written word, the
habit grew up of writing an apostrophe in place of the lost e in the possessive singular to
distinguish it from the plural. Later the apostrophe, which had come to be looked upon as the sign
of the possessive, was carried over into the plural, but was written after the s to differentiate
that form from the possessive singular. By a process of popular interpretation, the 's was supposed
to be a contraction for his, and in some cases the his was actually restored. [Samuel C. Earle, et
al, Sentences and their Elements, New York: Macmillan, 1911]    As a suffix forming some adverbs, it
represents the genitive singular ending of Old English masculine and neuter nouns and some
adjectives.


-s (1)

suffix forming almost all Modern English plural nouns, gradually extended in Middle English from Old
English -as, the nominative plural and accusative plural ending of certain strong masculine nouns
(such as d&aelig;g day, nominative/accusative plural dagas days). The commonest Germanic declension,
traceable back to the original PIE inflection system, it is also the source of the Dutch -s plurals
and (by rhotacism) Scandinavian -r plurals (such as Swedish dagar).    Much more uniform today than
originally; Old English also had a numerous category of weak nouns that formed their plurals in -an,
and other strong nouns that formed plurals with -u. Quirk and Wrenn, in their Old English grammar,
estimate that 45 percent of the nouns a student will encounter will be masculine, nearly four-fifths
of them with genitive singular -es and nominative/accusative plural in -as. Less than half, but
still the largest chunk.    The triumphs of -'s possessives and -s plurals represent common patterns
in language: using only a handful of suffixes to do many jobs (such as -ing), and the most common
variant squeezing out the competition. To further muddy the waters, it's been extended in slang
since 1936 to singulars (such as ducks, sweets, babes) as an affectionate or diminutive suffix.
Old English single-syllable collectives (sheep, folk) as well as weights, measures, and units of
time did not use -s. The use of it in these cases began in Middle English, but the older custom is
preserved in many traditional dialects (ten pound of butter; more than seven year ago; etc.).


onion (n.)

early 12c., from Anglo-French union, Old French oignon onion (formerly also oingnon), and directly
from Latin unionem (nominative unio), colloquial rustic Roman for a kind of onion, also pearl (via
notion of a string of onions), literally one, unity; sense connection is the successive layers of an
onion, in contrast with garlic or cloves.    Old English had ynne (in ynne-leac), from the same
Latin source, which also produced Irish inniun, Welsh wynwyn and similar words in Germanic. In
Dutch, the ending in -n was mistaken for a plural inflection and new singular ui formed. The usual
Indo-European name is represented by Greek kromion, Irish crem, Welsh craf, Old English hramsa,
Lithuanian kremuse.    The usual Latin word was cepa, a loan from an unknown language; it is the
source of Old French cive, Old English cipe, and, via Late Latin diminutive cepulla, Italian
cipolla, Spanish cebolla, Polish cebula. German Zwiebel also is from this source, but altered by
folk etymology in Old High German (zwibolla) from words for two and ball. Onion ring is attested
from 1952.   Onion dome attested from 1956; onion grass from 1883; onion skin as a type of paper
from 1892. Onions, the surname, is attested from mid-12c. (Ennian), from Old Welsh Enniaun,
ultimately from Latin Annianus, which was associated with Welsh einion anvil.


brow (n.)

early 14c., browes, brues brow, forehead, eyebrow, earlier brouwes (c. 1300), bruwen (c. 1200), from
Old English bru, probably originally eyebrow, but extended to eyelash, then eyelid by association of
the hair of the eyebrow with the hair of the eyelid, the eyebrows then becoming Old English oferbrua
overbrows (early Middle English uvere breyhes or briges aboue &thorn;e eiges).    The general word
for eyebrow in Middle English was  brew, breowen (c. 1200), from Old English br&aelig;w (West
Saxon), *brew (Anglian), from Proto-Germanic *br&aelig;wi- blinker, twinkler (cognates: Old Frisian
bre, Old Saxon brawa, Middle Dutch brauwe eyelid, Old High German brawaeyebrow, Old Norse bra
eyebrow, Gothic brahw twinkle, blink, in phrase in brahwa augins in the twinkling of an eye).    Old
English bru is from Proto-Germanic *brus- eyebrow (source also of Old Norse brun), from PIE *bhru-
eyebrow (cognates: Sanskrit bhrus eyebrow, Greek ophrys, Old Church Slavonic bruvi, Lithuanian
bruvis brow, Old Irish bru edge). The -n- in the Old Norse (brun) and German (braune) forms of the
word are from a genitive plural inflection.    Words for eyelid, eyelash, and eyebrow changed about
maddeningly in Old and Middle English (and in all the West Germanic languages). By 1530s, brow had
been given an extended sense of forehead, especially with reference to movements and expressions
that showed emotion or attitude.


