blown (adj.)

early 15c., inflated, from Old English blawen, past participle of blow (v.1). Figurative sense of
inflated by pride is from late 15c. Meaning out of breath is from 1670s. As a past participle
adjective from blow (v.2), it was Old English geblowenne.


puffery (n.)

inflated laudation [OED], 1782, from puff (v.) in its figurative sense + -ery.


bombastic (adj.)

1704, inflated, from bombast + -ic. Meaning given to bombastic language is from 1727.


turgid (adj.)

1610s, from Latin turgidus swollen, inflated, distended, from turgere to swell, of unknown origin.
Figurative use in reference to prose is from 1725. Related: Turgidly; turgidness.


overblown (adj.)

late 15c., blown over, passed away, past participle adjective from verb overblow to blow over the
top of, of a storm, to abate, pass on (late 14c.), from over- + blow (v.1). Meaning inflated, puffed
up (with vanity, etc.) is from 1864.


follicle (n.)

early 15c., from French follicule or directly from Latin folliculus little bag, diminutive of follis
bellows, inflated ball, from PIE *bhol-n-, suffixed form of root *bhel- (2) to blow, swell (see
bole).


puff (n.)

c.1200, perhaps Old English, puf, puffe short, quick blast; act of puffing, from puff (v.). Meaning
type of light pastry is recorded from late 14c.; that of small pad for applying powder to skin or
hair is from 1650s. Figurative sense of flattery, inflated praise is first recorded 1732. Derogatory
use for homosexual male is recorded by 1902.


inflate (v.)

early 15c., cause to swell, from Latin inflatus, past participle of inflare to blow into, inflate
(see inflation). Economics sense from 1844. In some senses a back-formation from inflation. Related:
Inflatable; inflated; inflating.


fustian (n.)

thick cotton cloth, c.1200, from Old French fustaigne, from Medieval Latin fustaneum, probably from
Latin fustis staff, stick of wood, probably a loan-translation of Greek xylina lina linens of wood
(i.e. cotton), but the Medieval Latin word also is sometimes said to be from Fostat, town near Cairo
where this cloth was manufactured. [Klein finds this derivation untenable.] Figurative sense of
pompous, inflated language recorded by 1590s.


pustule (n.)

late 14c., from Old French pustule (13c.) and directly from Latin pustula blister, pimple, from PIE
imitative root *pu- (1)  blow, swell, on notion of inflated area (cognates: Sanskrit pupphusah lung,
Greek physa breath, blast, wind, bubble, Lithuanian puciu to blow, swell, Old Church Slavonic
puchati to blow). Compare emphysema. Related: Pustulant; pustular.


pout (v.)

early 14c., of uncertain origin, perhaps from Scandinavian (compare Swedish dialectal puta to be
puffed out), or Frisian (compare East Frisian p&uuml;t bag, swelling, Low German puddig swollen);
related via notion of inflation to Old English &aelig;lepute fish with inflated parts, and Middle
Dutch puyt, Flemish puut frog, from hypothetical PIE imitative root *beu- suggesting swelling (see
bull (n.2)). Related: Pouted; pouting. As a noun from 1590s.


loo (n.2)

type of card game, 1670s, short for lanterloo (1660s), from French lanturelu, originally (1620s) the
refrain of a popular comic song; according to French sources the refrain expresses a mocking refusal
or an evasive answer and was formed on the older word for a type of song chorus, turelure;
apparently a jingling reduplication of loure bagpipe (perhaps from Latin lura bag, purse).     From
its primary signification -- a kind of bagpipe inflated from the mouth -- the word 'loure' came to
mean an old dance, in slower rhythm than the gigue, generally in 6-4 time. As this was danced to the
nasal tones of the 'loure,' the term 'loure' was gradually applied to any passage meant to be played
in the style of the old bagpipe airs. [Grove's Dictionary of Music and Musicians, London, 1906]
The refrain sometimes is met in English as turra-lurra.


balloon (n.)

1570s, a game played with a large inflated leather ball, from Italian pallone large ball, from palla
ball, from a Germanic source akin to Langobardic palla (from Proto-Germanic *ball-, from PIE *bhel-
(2) to blow, swell; see bole) + -one, suffix indicating great size.    Perhaps also borrowed in part
from French ballon (16c.), altered (after balle) from Italian pallone. It also meant the ball itself
(1590s), which was batted back and forth by means of large wooden paddles strapped to the forearms.
In 17c., it also meant a type of fireworks housed in a pasteboard ball (1630s) and round ball used
as an architectural ornament (1650s). Acquired modern meaning after Montgolfier brothers' flights,
1783. As a child's toy, it is attested from 1848; as outline containing words in a comic engraving
it dates from 1844. Also see -oon.


fool (n.)

late 13c., silly or stupid person, from Old French fol madman, insane person; idiot; rogue; jester,
also blacksmith's bellows, also an adjective meaning mad, insane (12c., Modern French fou), from
Latin follis bellows, leather bag (see follicle); in Vulgar Latin used with a sense of windbag,
empty-headed person. Compare also Sanskrit vatula- insane, literally windy, inflated with wind.
The word has in mod.Eng. a much stronger sense than it had at an earlier period; it has now an
implication of insulting contempt which does not in the same degree belong to any of its synonyms,
or to the derivative foolish. [OED]    Meaning jester, court clown first attested late 14c., though
it is not always possible to tell whether the reference is to a professional entertainer or an
amusing lunatic on the payroll. As the name of a kind of custard dish, it is attested from 1590s
(the food also was called trifle, which may be the source of the name).    There is no foole to the
olde foole [Heywood, 1546] Feast of Fools (early 14c.), from Medieval Latin festum stultorum) refers
to the burlesque festival celebrated in some churches on New Year's Day in medieval times. Fool's
gold iron pyrite is from 1829. Fool's paradise state of illusory happiness is from mid-15c.
Foolosopher, a most useful insult, turns up in a 1549 translation of Erasmus. Fool's ballocks is
described in OED as an old name for the green-winged orchid.


cheese (n.1)

Old English cyse (West Saxon), cese (Anglian) cheese, from West Germanic *kasjus (cognates: Old
Saxon kasi, Old High German chasi, German K&auml;se, Middle Dutch case, Dutch kaas), from Latin
caseus cheese (source of Italian cacio, Spanish queso, Irish caise, Welsh caws).    Of unknown
origin; perhaps from a PIE root *kwat- to ferment, become sour (cognates: Prakrit chasi buttermilk;
Old Church Slavonic kvasu leaven; fermented drink, kyselu sour, -kyseti to turn sour; Czech kysati
to turn sour, rot; Sanskrit kvathati boils, seethes; Gothic hwa&thorn;jan foam). Also compare
fromage. Old Norse ostr, Danish ost, Swedish ost are related to Latin ius broth, sauce, juice.
Earliest references would be to compressed curds of milk used as food; pressed or molded cheeses
with rinds are 14c. Transferred to other cheese-like substances by 1530s. As a photographer's word
to make subjects hold a smile, it is attested from 1930, but in a reminiscence of schoolboy days,
which suggests an earlier use. Probably for the forced smile involved in making the -ee- sound.
Green cheese is that newly made; the notion that the moon is made of green cheese as a type of a
ridiculous assertion is from 1520s. To make cheeses was a schoolgirls' amusement (1835) of wheeling
rapidly so one's petticoats blew out in a circle then dropping down so they came to rest inflated
and resembling a wheel of cheese; hence, used figuratively for a deep curtsey.


