information (n.)

late 14c., act of informing, from Old French informacion, enformacion information, advice,
instruction, from Latin informationem (nominative informatio) outline, concept, idea, noun of action
from past participle stem of informare (see inform). Meaning knowledge communicated is from mid-15c.
Information technology attested from 1958. Information revolution from 1969.


informant (n.)

1660s, someone or something that supplies information, from Latin informantem (nominative
informans), present participle of informare (see inform). Meaning one who gives information to the
authorities, informer is from 1783. As an adjective from 1890. The older noun was informer.


notice (n.)

early 15c., information, intelligence, from Middle French notice (14c.), and directly from Latin
notitia a being known, celebrity, fame, knowledge, from notus known, past participle of (g)noscere
come to know, to get to know, get acquainted (with), from PIE *gno-sko-, a suffixed form of root
*gno- (see know). Sense of formal warning is attested from 1590s. Meaning a sign giving information
is from 1805.


tip (v.2)

give a small present of money to, c.1600, originally to give, hand, pass, thieves' cant, perhaps
from tip (v.3) to tap. The meaning give a gratuity to is first attested 1706. The noun in this sense
is from 1755; the noun meaning piece of confidential information is from 1845; and the verb in the
sense give private information to is from 1883.    The word's supposed origin as an acronym is
highly unlikely and the story seems to be no older than an editorial in Life magazine from July 15,
1946, claiming the restaurant server's word tip probably comes from a London coffeehouse custom of
two centuries ago when the words 'To Insure Promptness' were written on notes to the waiter, with
coins attached. Later just the initials T.I.P. were used. There is no historical evidence for this.
Also <b>see here</b>.


magazine (n.)

1580s, place for storing goods, especially military ammunition, from Middle French magasin
warehouse, depot, store (15c.), from Italian magazzino, from Arabic makhazin, plural of makhzan
storehouse (source of Spanish almac&eacute;n warehouse, magazine), from khazana to store up. The
original sense is almost obsolete; meaning periodical journal dates from the publication of the
first one, Gentleman's Magazine, in 1731, which was so called from earlier use of the word for a
printed list of military stores and information, or in a figurative sense, from the publication
being a storehouse of information.


intelligence (n.)

late 14c., faculty of understanding, from Old French intelligence (12c.), from Latin intelligentia,
intellegentia understanding, power of discerning; art, skill, taste, from intelligentem (nominative
intelligens) discerning, present participle of intelligere to understand, comprehend, from inter-
between (see inter-) + legere choose, pick out, read (see lecture (n.)).    Meaning superior
understanding, sagacity is from early 15c. Sense of information, news first recorded mid-15c.,
especially secret information from spies (1580s). Intelligence quotient first recorded 1921 (see
I.Q.).


info (n.)

1906, short for information.


info-

word-forming element abstracted from information.


CD

1979 as an abbreviation of compact disc as a system of information storage.


know (n.)

inside information (as in in the know), 1883; earlier fact of knowing (1590s), from know (v.).


feedback (n.)

1920, in the electronics sense, from feed + back (adj.). Transferred use, information about the
results of a process is attested by 1955.


insider (n.)

one in possession of special information by virtue of being within some organization, 1848, from
inside + -er (1). Originally in reference to the stock markets.


poop (n.3)

up-to-date information, 1941, in poop sheet, U.S. Army slang, of unknown origin, perhaps from poop
(n.2).


informer (n.)

late 14c., enfourmer instructor, teacher, native agent noun from inform and also from Old French
enformeor. Meaning one who gives information against another (especially in reference to law-
breaking) is c.1500.


rundown (n.)

in baseball, 1908, from verbal phrase, from run (v.) + down (adv.). Meaning list of entries in a
horse race and the odds is from 1935; slang generalized sense of summary, account, list of
information or facts is from 1945.


brief (v.)

to give instructions or information to, 1866; originally to instruct by a brief (1862), from brief
(n.). Related: Briefed; briefing.


tipster (n.)

one who provides private information, 1862, from tip (v.2) + -ster.


leak (n.)

late 15c., from leak (v.) or Old Norse cognate leki. Sense of revelation of secret information is
from 1950. Meaning act of urination is attested from 1934 (Tropic of Cancer); but the verb meaning
to piss is from 1590s: Why, you will allow vs ne're a Iourden, and then we leake in your Chimney. [I
Hen. IV, II.i.22]


disinformation (n.)

1955, from Russian dezinformatsiya (1949), which is said to be from French; see dis- + information.


informatics (n.)

1967, translating Russian informatika (1966), from information; also see -ics.


boilerplate (n.)

newspaper (and now information technology) slang for unit of writing that can be used over and over
without change, 1893, from a literal meaning (1840) metal rolled in large, flat plates for use in
making steam boilers. The connecting notion is probably of sturdiness or reusability. From 1890s to
1950s, publicity items were cast or stamped in metal ready for the printing press and distributed to
newspapers as filler. The largest supplier was Western Newspaper Union.


expose (n.)

also expos&eacute;, display of discreditable information, 1803, initially as a French word; past
participle of French exposer (see expose (v.)). Earliest use was in reference to Napoleon.


four (n.)

Old English feower, from Proto-Germanic *fedwor- (cognates: Old Saxon fiwar, Old Frisian fiuwer,
Frankish *fitter-, Dutch and German vier, Old Norse fjorir, Danish fire, Swedish fyra, Gothic fidwor
four), from PIE *kwetwer- four (cognates: Sanskrit catvarah, Avestan &#269;athwaro, Persian
&#269;atvar, Greek tessares, Latin quattuor, Oscan petora, Old Church Slavonic &#269;etyre,
Lithuanian keturi, Old Irish cethir, Welsh pedwar). The phonetic evolution of the Germanic forms has
not been fully explained; Watkins explains the -f- as being from the following number (Modern
English five).    Slang four-eyes person who wears glasses first recorded 1874. Four-letter word
first attested 1934; four-letter man, however, is recorded from 1923 (as a euphemism for a shit). A
four-in-hand (1793) was a carriage with four horses driven by one person; in the sense of loosely
tied necktie it is attested from 1892. To study The History of the Four Kings (1760, compare French
Livres des Quatre Rois) contains euphemistic slang phrase for a pack of cards from the time when
card-playing was considered a wicked pastime for students. Slang 4-1-1 essential information (by
1993) is from the telephone number called to get customer information.


spoiler (n.)

1530s, one who robs or plunders, agent noun from spoil (v.). Meaning one who mars another's chance
at victory is attested from 1950 in U.S. politics, perhaps from boxing. Aeronautics sense is from
1928, because the flap thwarts the lift on the plane; transferred to structures serving a similar
purpose on speedboats (1957) and motor vehicles (1963). Meaning information about the plot of a
movie, etc., which might 'spoil' it for one who has not seen it is attested by 1982.


indicia (n.)

indications, Latin plural of indicium information, disclosure, discovery, from index (genitive
indicis); see index.


retrovirus (n.)

1977, earlier retravirus (1974), from re(verse) tra(nscriptase) + virus. So called because it
contains reverse transcriptase, an enzyme that uses RNA instead of DNA to encode genetic
information, which reverses the usual pattern. Remodeled by influence of retro- backwards.


update (v.)

1944, in reference to information, 1952 in reference to persons, from up (adv.) + date (v.1).
Related: Updated; updating. The noun is attested from 1967.


communicate (v.)

1520s, to impart (information, etc.), from Latin communicatus, past participle of communicare
impart, inform (see communication). Meaning to share, transmit (diseases, etc.) is from 1530s.
Related: Communicated; communicating.


debrief (v.)

obtain information (from someone) at the end of a mission, 1945, from de- + brief (v.). Related:
Debriefed; debriefing.


sidelight (n.)

also side-light, c.1600, light coming from the side, from side (adj.) + light (n.). Figurative
meaning incidental information on a subject is attested from 1862.


classified (adj.)

arranged in classes, 1828, past participle adjective from classify. Meaning secret (of government
information) is from 1941, American English. Classifieds (n.) newspaper advertisements arranged by
classes, 1913, is short for classified advertisements


data (n.)

1640s, plural of datum, from Latin datum (thing) given, neuter past participle of dare to give (see
date (n.1)). Meaning transmittable and storable computer information first recorded 1946. Data
processing is from 1954.


tip-off (n.)

1901 in reference to information, from tip (v.2) + off (adv.). From 1924 in basketball, from tip
(v.3).


misinformation (n.)

mid-15c., from mis- (1) + information.


scout (n.)

person who scouts, one sent out to gain information, 1550s, from scout (v.1). Boy Scout is from
1908. Scout's honor attested from 1908.


pump (v.)

c.1500, from pump (n.1). Metaphoric extension in pump (someone) for information is from 1630s. To
pump iron lift weights for fitness is from 1972. Related: Pumped; pumping.


source (n.)

mid-14c., support, base, from Old French sourse a rising, beginning, fountainhead of a river or
stream (12c.), fem. noun taken from past participle of sourdre to rise, spring up, from Latin
surgere to rise (see surge (n.)). Meaning a first cause is from late 14c., as is that of fountain-
head of a river. Meaning written work (later also a person) supplying information or evidence is
from 1788.


wire-tapping (n.)

also wiretapping, surreptitiously obtaining information by connecting wires to telegraph (later
telephone) lines and establishing an intermediate station between two legitimate ones, 1878, from
wire (n.) + agent noun from tap (v.2). Earliest references often are to activity during the American
Civil War, but the phrase does not seem to have been used at that time. Related: Wire-tap; wire-
tapper.


guide (n.)

mid-14c., one who shows the way, from Old French guide, 14c. (alteration of earlier guie), verbal
noun from guider (see guide (v.)). In book titles from 1610s; meaning book of information on local
sites is from 1759. In 18c. France, a for Dummies or Idiot's Guide to book would have been a guid'
&acirc;ne, literally guide-ass.


channel (n.)

early 14c., bed of running water, from Old French chanel bed of a waterway; tube, pipe, gutter, from
Latin canalis groove, channel, waterpipe (see canal). Given a broader, figurative sense 1530s (of
information, commerce, etc.); meaning circuit for telegraph communication (1848) probably led to
that of band of frequency for radio or TV signals (1928). The Channel Islands are the French
&#206;les Anglo-Normandes.


Lloyd

male proper name, from Welsh Llwyd, literally gray, from PIE *pel- (2) pale (see pallor).  Lloyd's,
meaning the London-based association of marine underwriters, is first recorded as such 1805, from
Lloyd's Coffee House, Tower Street, London, opened in 1688 by Edward Lloyd, who supplied shipping
information to his patrons.


import (v.)

early 15c., convey information, express, make known, signify, from Latin importare bring in, convey,
from assimilated form of in- into, in (see in- (2)) + portare to carry (see port (n.1)). Sense of
bring in goods from abroad first recorded c.1500. Related: Imported; importing.


propaganda (n.)

1718, committee of cardinals in charge of Catholic missionary work, short for Congregatio de
Propaganda Fide congregation for propagating the faith, a committee of cardinals established 1622 by
Gregory XV to supervise foreign missions. The word is properly the ablative fem. gerundive of Latin
propagare (see propagation). Hence, any movement to propagate some practice or ideology (1790).
Modern political sense dates from World War I, not originally pejorative. Meaning material or
information propagated to advance a cause, etc. is from 1929.


retail (v.)

mid-14c. sell in small quantities or parcels, from Old French retaillier cut back, cut off, pare,
clip, reduce, circumcise, from re- back (see re-) + taillier to cut, trim (see tailor (n.)).
Sometimes also to deal out (information, etc.) in small quantities; hand down by report; recount,
tell over again (1590s). Related: Retailed; retailing.


scout (v.1)

late 14c., observe or explore as a scout, travel in search of information, from Old French escouter
to listen, heed (Modern French &eacute;couter), from Latin auscultare to listen to, give heed to
(see auscultate).  Related: Scouted; scouting.


dope (n.)

1807, American English, sauce, gravy, thick liquid, from Dutch doop thick dipping sauce, from doopen
to dip (see dip (v.)). Extension to drug is 1889, from practice of smoking semi-liquid opium
preparation. Meaning foolish, stupid person is older (1851) and may have a sense of thick-headed.
Sense of inside information (1901) may come from knowing before the race which horse had been
drugged to influence performance. Dope-fiend is attested from 1896.


tariff (n.)

1590s, arithmetical table, also official list of customs duties on imports or exports; law
regulating import duties, from Italian tariffa tariff, price, assessment, Medieval Latin tarifa list
of prices, book of rates, from Arabic ta'rif information, notification, a making known; inventory of
fees to be paid, verbal noun from arafa he made known, he taught. Sense of classified list of
charges made in a business is recorded from 1757. The U.S. Tariff of Abominations was passed in
1828.


husky (n.)

Eskimo dog, 1852, Canadian English, earlier (1830) hoskey an Eskimo, probably shortened variant of
Ehuskemay (1743), itself a variant of Eskimo.    The moment any vessel is noticed steering for these
islands [Whalefish Islands], the Esquimaux, or Huskies,* as the Danes customarily term them, come
off in sufficient numbers to satisfy you that you are near the haunts of uncivilized men, and will
afford sufficient information to guide any stranger to his anchorage. *Husky is their own term. I
recollect the chorus to a song at Kamtchatka was Husky, Husky. [Last of the Arctic Voyages, London,
1855]


trivia (n.)

trivialities, bits of information of little consequence, by 1932, from the title of a popular book
by U.S.-born British aphorist Logan Pearsall Smith (1865-1946) first published in 1902 but
popularized in 1918 (with More Trivia following in 1921 and a collected edition including both in
1933), containing short essays often tied to observation of small things and commonplace moments.
Trivia is Latin, plural of trivium place where three roads meet; in transferred use, an open place,
a public place. The adjectival form of this, trivialis, meant public, hence common, commonplace (see
trivial). The Romans also had trivius dea, the goddess of three ways, another name for Hecate,
perhaps originally in her triple aspect (Selene/Diana/Proserpine), but also as the especial divinity
of crossroads (Virgil has Nocturnisque hecate triviis ululata per urbes). John Gay took this
arbitrarily as the name of a goddess of streets and roads for his mock Georgic Trivia: Or, the Art
of Walking the Streets of London (1716); Smith writes in his autobiography that he got the title
from Gay.    I KNOW too much; I have stuffed too many of the facts of History and Science into my
intellectuals. My eyes have grown dim over books; believing in geological periods, cave dwellers,
Chinese Dynasties, and the fixed stars has prematurely aged me. [Trivia, 1918 edition]    Then noted
c.1965 as an informal fad game among college students wherein one asked questions about useless bits
of information from popular culture (What was Donald Duck's address?) and others vied to answer
first.    Nobody really wins in this game which concentrates on sports, comics and television.
Everyone knows that Amos's wife on the Amos 'n' Andy Show is Ruby, but who knows that she is from
Marietta, Georgia? Trivia players do. They also know the fourth man in the infield of Tinker-to-
Evers-to-Chance, the Canadian who shot down Baron Von Richtofen, and can name ten Hardy Boy books.
[Princeton Alumni Weekly, Nov. 9, 1965]    The board game Trivial Pursuit was released 1982 and was
a craze in U.S. for several years thereafter.


revelation (n.)

c.1300, disclosure of information to man by a divine or supernatural agency, from Old French
revelacion and directly from Latin revelationem (nominative revelatio), noun of action from past
participle stem of revelare unveil, uncover, lay bare (see reveal). General meaning disclosure of
facts is attested from late 14c.; meaning striking disclosure is from 1862. As the name of the last
book of the New Testament (Revelation of St. John), it is first attested late 14c. (see apocalypse);
as simply Revelations, it is first recorded 1690s.


