ingenious (adj.)

early 15c., intellectual, talented, from Middle French ing&eacute;nieux clever, ingenious (Old
French engeignos), from Latin ingeniosus of good capacity, full of intellect; clever, gifted with
genius, from ingenium innate qualities, ability, literally that which is inborn, from in- in (see
in- (2)) + gignere, from PIE *gen- produce (see genus). Sense of skillful, clever at contrivance
first recorded 1540s. In a sense of crafty, clever, skillful Middle English had enginous (mid-14c.),
from Old French engeignos. Related: Ingeniously; ingeniousness.


Houdini (n.)

escape artist or other ingenious person, 1923, from Harry Houdini, professional name of U.S.
escapist Erich Weiss (1874-1926).


crafty (adj.)

mid-12c., crafti, from Old English cr&aelig;ftig strong, powerful, later skillful, ingenious,
degenerating by c.1200 to cunning, sly (but through 15c. also skillfully done or made; intelligent,
learned; artful, scientific) from craft (n.) + -y (2). Related: Craftily; craftiness.


gin (n.2)

machine for separating cotton from seeds, 1796, American English, used earlier of various other
machineries, from Middle English gin ingenious device, contrivance (c.1200), from Old French gin
machine, device, scheme, shortened form of engin, from Latin ingenium (see engine). The verb in this
sense is recorded from 1789.


engine (n.)

c.1300, mechanical device, also skill, craft, from Old French engin skill, cleverness, also trick,
deceit, stratagem; war machine (12c.), from Latin ingenium inborn qualities, talent (see ingenious).
At first meaning a trick or device, or any machine (especially military); sense of device that
converts energy to mechanical power is 18c., especially of steam engines.


mechanic (n.)

manual laborer, late 14c., from Latin mechanicus, from Greek mekhanikos an engineer, noun use of
adjective meaning full of resources, inventive, ingenious (see mechanic (adj.)). Sense of one who is
employed in manual labor, a handicraft worker, an artisan (chief sense through early 19c.) is
attested from 1560s. Sense of skilled workman who is concerned with making or repair of machinery is
from 1660s, but not the main sense until the rise of the automobile.


mechanic (adj.)

late 14c., pertaining to or involving mechanical labor (now usually mechanical), also having to do
with tools, from Latin mechanicus, from Greek mekhanikos full of resources, inventive, ingenious,
literally mechanical, pertaining to machines, from mekhane (see machine (n.)). Meaning of the nature
of or pertaining to machines is from 1620s.


thankful (adj.)

Old English &thorn;ancful satisfied, grateful, also thoughtful, ingenious, clever; see thank + -ful.
Related: Thankfully; thankfulness. Thankfully in the sense thankful to say is attested by 1966, but
deplored by purists (compare hopefully).


tangram (n.)

Chinese geometric puzzle, 1864, said to be an arbitrary formation based on anagram, etc. First
element perhaps Chinese t'an to extend, or t'ang, commonly used in Cantonese for Chinese. Some
suggest it is the name of the inventor, but no such person is known to Chinese scholars [OED].
Another theory involves the Tanka, an outcast aboriginal people of southern China, and Western
sailors who discovered the puzzle from their Tanka girlfriends. Perhaps from an obscure sense of
tram. The Chinese name is Ch'i ch'iao t'u seven ingenious plan.


carousel (n.)

merry-go-round, 1670s, earlier playful tournament of knights in chariots or on horseback (1640s),
from French carrousel a tilting match, from Italian carusiello, possibly from carro chariot, from
Latin carrus (see car).A new and rare invencon knowne by the name of the royalle carousell or
tournament being framed and contrived with such engines as will not only afford great pleasure to us
and our nobility in the sight thereof, but sufficient instruction to all such ingenious young
gentlemen as desire to learne the art of perfect horsemanshipp. [letter of 1673]


ingenuity (n.)

1590s, honor, nobility, from Middle French ing&eacute;nuit&eacute; and directly from Latin
ingenuitatem (nominative ingenuitas) condition of a free-born man, figuratively generosity, noble-
mindedness, from ingenuus (see ingenuous). Etymologically, this word belongs to ingenuous, but in
17c. ingenious and ingenuous so often were confused (even by Shakespeare) that ingenuity has
acquired the meaning capacity for invention or construction (first attested 1640s).


quaint (adj.)

c.1200, cointe, cunning, ingenious; proud, from Old French cointe knowledgeable, well-informed;
clever; arrogant, proud; elegant, gracious, from Latin cognitus known, approved, past participle of
cognoscere get or come to know well (see cognizance). Modern spelling is from early 14c.    Later in
English, elaborate, skillfully made (c.1300); strange and clever (mid-14c.). Sense of old-fashioned
but charming is first attested 1795, and could describe the word itself, which had become rare after
c.1700 (though it soon recovered popularity in this secondary sense).  Related: Quaintly;
quaintness.


subtle (adj.)

c.1300 (mid-13c. as a surname), sotil, penetrating; ingenious; refined (of the mind); sophisticated,
intricate, abstruse (of arguments), from Old French sotil, soutil, subtil adept, adroit; cunning,
wise; detailed; well-crafted (12c., Modern French subtil), from Latin subtilis fine, thin, delicate,
finely woven; figuratively precise, exact, accurate, in taste or judgment, fine, keen, of style,
plain, simple, direct, from sub under (see sub-) + -tilis, from tela web, net, warp of a fabric (see
texture (n.)).     From early 14c. in reference to things, of thin consistency; in reference to
craftsmen, cunning, skilled, clever; Depreciative sense insidious, treacherously cunning; deceitful
is from mid-14c. Material senses of not dense or viscous, light; pure; delicate, thin, slender;
fine, consisting of small particles are from late 14c. sotil wares were goods sold in powdered form
or finely ground. Partially re-Latinized in spelling, and also by confusion with subtile.


fuck (v.)

until recently a difficult word to trace, in part because it was taboo to the editors of the
original OED when the F volume was compiled, 1893-97. Written form only attested from early 16c. OED
2nd edition cites 1503, in the form fukkit; earliest appearance of current spelling is 1535 --
Bischops ... may fuck thair fill and be vnmaryit [Sir David Lyndesay, Ane Satyre of the Thrie
Estaits], but presumably it is a much more ancient word than that, simply one that wasn't written in
the kind of texts that have survived from Old English and Middle English. Buck cites proper name
John le Fucker from 1278, but the surname could have other explanations. The word apparently is
hinted at in a scurrilous 15c. poem, titled Flen flyys, written in bastard Latin and Middle English.
The relevant line reads:Non sunt in celi quia fuccant uuiuys of heliThey [the monks] are not in
heaven because they fuck the wives of [the town of] Ely. Fuccant is pseudo-Latin, and in the
original it is written in cipher. The earliest examples of the word otherwise are from Scottish,
which suggests a Scandinavian origin, perhaps from a word akin to Norwegian dialectal fukka
copulate, or Swedish dialectal focka copulate, strike, push, and fock penis. Another theory traces
it to Middle English fyke, fike move restlessly, fidget, which also meant dally, flirt, and probably
is from a general North Sea Germanic word; compare Middle Dutch fokken, German ficken fuck, earlier
make quick movements to and fro, flick, still earlier itch, scratch; the vulgar sense attested from
16c. This would parallel in sense the usual Middle English slang term for have sexual intercourse,
swive, from Old English swifan to move lightly over, sweep (see swivel). But OED remarks these
cannot be shown to be related to the English word. Chronology and phonology rule out Shipley's
attempt to derive it from Middle English firk to press hard, beat.    Germanic words of similar form
(f + vowel + consonant) and meaning 'copulate' are numerous. One of them is G. ficken. They often
have additional senses, especially 'cheat,' but their basic meaning is 'move back and forth.' ...
Most probably, fuck is a borrowing from Low German and has no cognates outside Germanic. [Liberman]
French foutre and Italian fottere look like the English word but are unrelated, derived rather from
Latin futuere, which is perhaps from PIE root *bhau(t)- knock, strike off, extended via a figurative
use from the sexual application of violent action [Shipley; compare the sexual slang use of bang,
etc.]. Popular and Internet derivations from acronyms (and the pluck yew fable) are merely
<b>ingenious trifling</b>. The Old English word was h&aelig;man, from ham dwelling, home, with a
sense of take home, co-habit. Fuck was outlawed in print in England (by the Obscene Publications
Act, 1857) and the U.S. (by the Comstock Act, 1873). As a noun, it dates from 1670s. The word may
have been shunned in print, but it continued in conversation, especially among soldiers during World
War I.It became so common that an effective way for the soldier to express this emotion was to omit
this word. Thus if a sergeant said, 'Get your ----ing rifles!' it was understood as a matter of
routine. But if he said 'Get your rifles!' there was an immediate implication of urgency and danger.
[John Brophy, Songs and Slang of the British Soldier: 1914-1918, pub. 1930]The legal barriers broke
down in the 20th century, with the Ulysses decision (U.S., 1933) and Lady Chatterley's Lover (U.S.,
1959; U.K., 1960). Johnson excluded the word, and fuck wasn't in a single English language
dictionary from 1795 to 1965. The Penguin Dictionary broke the taboo in the latter year. Houghton
Mifflin followed, in 1969, with The American Heritage Dictionary, but it also published a Clean
Green edition without the word, to assure itself access to the lucrative public high school market.
The abbreviation F (or eff) probably began as euphemistic, but by 1943 it was being used as a cuss
word, too. In 1948, the publishers of The Naked and the Dead persuaded Norman Mailer to use the
euphemism fug instead. When Mailer later was introduced to Dorothy Parker, she greeted him with, So
you're the man who can't spell 'fuck'  [The quip sometimes is attributed to Tallulah Bankhead].
Hemingway used muck in For whom the Bell Tolls (1940). The major breakthrough in publication was
James Jones' From Here to Eternity (1950), with 50 fucks (down from 258 in the original manuscript).
Egyptian legal agreements from the 23rd Dynasty (749-21 B.C.E.) frequently include the phrase, If
you do not obey this decree, may a donkey copulate with you! [Reinhold Aman, Maledicta, Summer
1977]. Fuck-all nothing first recorded 1960.  Verbal phrase fuck up to ruin, spoil, destroy first
attested c.1916. A widespread group of Slavic words (such as Polish pierdoli&#263;) can mean both
fornicate and make a mistake. Fuck off attested from 1929; as a command to depart, by 1944. Flying
fuck originally meant have sex on horseback and is first attested c.1800 in broadside ballad New
Feats of Horsemanship. For the unkillable urban legend that this word is an acronym of some sort (a
fiction traceable on the Internet to 1995 but probably predating that) see here, and also here.
Related: Fucked; fucking. Agent noun fucker attested from 1590s in literal sense; by 1893 as a term
of abuse (or admiration).    DUCK F-CK-R. The man who has the care of the poultry on board a
&#383;hip of war. [Classical Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, 1796]


