ingenuity (n.)

1590s, honor, nobility, from Middle French ing&eacute;nuit&eacute; and directly from Latin
ingenuitatem (nominative ingenuitas) condition of a free-born man, figuratively generosity, noble-
mindedness, from ingenuus (see ingenuous). Etymologically, this word belongs to ingenuous, but in
17c. ingenious and ingenuous so often were confused (even by Shakespeare) that ingenuity has
acquired the meaning capacity for invention or construction (first attested 1640s).


puzzle (n.)

c.1600, state of being puzzled, from puzzle (v.); meaning perplexing question is from 1650s; that of
a toy contrived to test one's ingenuity is from 1814.


weaver (n.)

mid-14c. (mid-13c. as a surname), agent noun from weave (v.). The weaver-bird (1826) so called from
the ingenuity of its nests.


engineer (v.)

1843, act as an engineer, from engineer (n.). Figurative sense of arrange, contrive, guide or manage
(via ingenuity or tact) is attested from 1864, originally in a political context. Related:
Engineered. Middle English had a verb engine contrive, construct (late 14c.), also seduce, trick,
deceive (c.1300) and put to torture.


fishing (n.)

verbal noun from fish (v.), c.1300, fysschynge; figurative use from 1540s. Fishing rod (1550s) is
older than fishing pole (1791). To go fishing is as old as Old English on fisco&eth; gan.  [O]f all
diversions which ingenuity ever devised for the relief of idleness, fishing is the worst qualified
to amuse a man who is at once indolent and impatient. [Scott, Waverly, 1814]


sophism (n.)

early 15c., earlier sophime (mid-14c.), specious but fallacious argument devised for purposes of
deceit or to exercise one's ingenuity, from Old French sophime a fallacy, false argument (Modern
French sophisme), from Latin sophisma, from Greek sophisma clever device, skillful act, stage-trick,
from stem of sophizesthai become wise (see sophist).


subtlety (n.)

c.1300, sotilte, skill, ingenuity, from Old French sotilte skillfulness, cunning (Modern French
subtilit&#233;), from Latin subtilitatem (nominative subtilitas) fineness; simplicity, slenderness,
noun of quality from subtilis fine, thin, delicate (see subtle). From late 14c. as cleverness,
shrewdness; trickery, guile, craftiness, also thinness, slenderness, smallness; rarity. The -b-
begins to appear late 14c. in English, in imitation of Latin.


contrive (v.)

early 14c., from Old French controver (Modern French controuver) to find out, contrive, imagine,
from Late Latin contropare to compare (via a figure of speech), from Latin com- with (see com-) +
tropus song, musical mode, from Greek tropos figure of speech (see trope).    Sense evolution (in
French) was from invent with ingenuity to invent falsely. Spelled contreve until unexplained 15c.
sound change that also affected briar, friar, choir. Related: Contrived; contriving.


cranky (adj.)

cross-tempered, irritable, 1807, from crank (n.) + -y (2). The evolution would be from earlier
senses of crank, such as a twist or fanciful turn of speech (1590s); inaccessible hole or crevice
(1560s). Grose's 1787 Provincial Glossary has Cranky. Ailing sickly from the dutch crank, sick, and
identifies it as a Northern word. Jamieson's Scottish dictionary (1825) has crank in a secondary
sense of hard, difficult, as in crank word, a word hard to be understood; crank job, a work attended
with difficulty, or requiring ingenuity in the execution. Related: Crankily; crankiness.   Ben. Dang
it, don't you spare him--A cross grain'd cranky toad as ever crawl'd. (etc.) [Richard Cumberland,
Lovers Resolutions, Act I, 1813]


etymology (n.)

late 14c., ethimolegia facts of the origin and development of a word, from Old French et(h)imologie
(14c., Modern French &eacute;tymologie), from Latin etymologia, from Greek etymologia, properly
study of the true sense (of a word), from etymon true sense (neuter of etymos true, real, actual,
related to eteos true) + -logia study of, a speaking of (see -logy). Latinized by Cicero as
veriloquium.    In classical times, of meanings; later, of histories. Classical etymologists,
Christian and pagan, based their explanations on allegory and guesswork, lacking historical records
as well as the scientific method to analyze them, and the discipline fell into disrepute that lasted
a millennium. Flaubert [Dictionary of Received Ideas] perhaps had them in mind when he wrote that
the general view was that etymology was the easiest thing in the world with the help of Latin and a
little ingenuity. As a modern branch of linguistic science, from 1640s. Related: Etymological;
etymologically.


