inherent (adj.)

1570s, from Latin inhaerentem (nominative inhaerens), present participle of inhaerere be closely
connected with, literally adhere to, from in- in (see in- (2)) + haerere to stick (see hesitation).
Related: Inherently.


inbred (adj.)

1590s, native, also inherent by nature, from in + bred. The genetic sense is from 1892 (also see
inbreeding).


inherence (n.)

1570s, from Medieval Latin inhaerentia, from inhaerentem (see inherent). Related: Inherency
(c.1600).


inhere (v.)

1580s, to exist, have being, from Latin inhaerere to stick in or to (see inherent). Figurative
(immaterial) use attested by 1610s (also in Latin). Related: Inhered; inhering.


virtual (adj.)

late 14c., influencing by physical virtues or capabilities, effective with respect to inherent
natural qualities, from Medieval Latin virtualis, from Latin virtus excellence, potency, efficacy,
literally manliness, manhood (see virtue). The meaning being something in essence or effect, though
not actually or in fact is from mid-15c., probably via sense of capable of producing a certain
effect (early 15c.). Computer sense of not physically existing but made to appear by software is
attested from 1959.


immanent (adj.)

indwelling, inherent, 1530s, via French, from Late Latin immanens, present participle of Latin
immanere to dwell in, remain in, from assimilated form of in- into, in, on, upon (see in- (2)) +
manere to dwell (see manor). Contrasted with transcendent. Related: Immanently.


prostitute (v.)

1520s, to offer to indiscriminate sexual intercourse (usually in exchange for money), from Latin
prostitutus, past participle of prostituere to expose to prostitution, expose publicly, from pro-
before (see pro-) + statuere cause to stand, establish, from PIE root *sta- to stand, with
derivatives meaning place or thing that is standing (see stet). Related: Prostituted; prostituting.
The notion of sex for hire is not inherent in the etymology, which rather suggests one exposed to
lust or sex indiscriminately offered. However, this is now almost the official European term for the
institution: German prostituierte, Russian prostitutka, etc. Figurative sense (of abilities, etc.)
is from 1570s. Of men, in reference to homosexual acts, from 1886 (in form prostitution); phrase
male prostitute attested by 1948.


vicious (adj.)

late 14c., unwholesome, impure, of the nature of vice, wicked, corrupting, pernicious, harmful; of a
text, erroneous, corrupt, from Anglo-French vicious, Old French vicios wicked, cunning, underhand;
defective, illegal (Modern French vicieux), from Latin vitiosus (Medieval Latin vicious) faulty,
full of faults, defective, corrupt; wicked, depraved, from vitium fault (see vice (n.1)).    Meaning
inclined to be savage or dangerous is first recorded 1711 (originally of animals, especially
horses); that of full of spite, bitter, severe is from 1825. In law, marred by some inherent fault
(late 14c.), hence also this sense in logic (c.1600), as in vicious circle in reasoning (c.1792,
Latin circulus vitiosus), which was given a general sense of a situation in which action and
reaction intensify one another by 1839. Related: Viciously (mid-14c., sinfully); viciousness.


