injurious (adj.)

early 15c., abusive, from Middle French injurios (14c., Modern French injurieux) and directly from
Latin injuriosus unlawful, wrongful, harmful, noxious, from injuria (see injury). Related:
Injuriously.


unhealthy (adj.)

1590s, injurious to health, from un- (1) not + healthy (adj.). Earlier unhealthsome (1540s),
unhealthful (1570s). Of persons, sickly, it is attested from 1610s. Related: Unhealthily.


noxious (adj.)

c.1500, from Latin noxius hurtful, injurious, from noxa injury, hurt, damage entailing liability
(related to nocere to hurt, and to nex slaughter), from PIE *nek-ro-, causative form of root *nek-
(1) death (see necro-).


inconvenient (adj.)

late 14c., injurious, dangerous, from Old French inconv&eacute;nient (13c.), from Latin
inconvenientem (nominative inconveniens) unsuitable, not accordant, dissimilar, from in- not,
opposite of (see in- (1)) + convenientem (see convenient). In early 15c., inappropriate, unbecoming,
unnatural; also, of an accused person, unlikely as a culprit, innocent. Sense of troublesome,
awkward first recorded 1650s.


prejudicial (adj.)

early 15c., causing prejudice; 1530s, full of prejudice, from prejudice (n.) + -al (1), or else from
Middle French prejudicial and directly from Medieval Latin prejudicialis injurious, from Latin
praeiudicium.


obnoxious (adj.)

1580s, subject to the authority of another, from Latin obnoxiosus hurtful, injurious, from obnoxius
subject, exposed to harm, from ob to, toward (see ob-) + noxa injury, hurt, damage entailing
liability (see noxious). Meaning subject to something harmful is 1590s; meaning offensive, hateful
is first recorded 1670s, influenced by noxious.Obnoxious has two very different senses, one of which
(exposed or open or liable to attack or injury) requires notice because its currency is now so
restricted that it is puzzling to the uninstructed. It is the word's rightful or de jure meaning,
and we may hope that scholarly writers will keep it alive. [Fowler]  Related: Obnoxiously;
obnoxiousness.


boll (n.)

Old English bolla bowl, cup, pot, merged with Middle Dutch bolle round object, borrowed 13c., both
from Proto-Germanic *bul-, from PIE *bhel- (2) to blow, inflate, swell (see bole). Influenced in
meaning by Latin bulla bubble, ball, ultimately from the same PIE root. Extended c.1500 to round
seed pod of flax or cotton. Boll weevil is 1895, American English.    In south Texas, among Spanish-
speaking people, the insect is generally known as the 'picudo,' a descriptive name which refers to
the snout or beak of the insect. English-speaking planters generally referred to the insect at first
as 'the sharpshooter,' a term which for many years has been applied to any insect which causes
through its punctures the shedding of the squares or the rotting of the bolls. As there are several
native insects that are commonly called sharpshooters and which, though injurious, are by no means
to be compared with this insect, it becomes necessary to discourage in every way the use of the word
sharpshooter as applied to this weevil. The adoption of the term 'Mexican cotton-boll weevil' for
the new pest is recommended. [New Mexico College of Agriculture and the Mechanic Arts Agricultural
Experiment Station Bulletin No. 19, April 1896]    A case of entomology meddling in etymology.


paraphilia (n.)

1913, from German paraphilie (by 1903), apparently coined by Austrian ethnologist Friedrich Salomo
Krauss (1859-1938) as literally inverted erotic instinct, from Greek para- beside, aside (see para-
(1)) + philos loving (see -phile).    The neurotic whose accompanying fancies always lead into
forbidden ground (and this is what constitutes the guilt feeling of pollutions) fights against
masturbation [pollutions] because it is connected with incest fancies, criminal desires,
perversions, or as F.S. Krauss calls them, paraphilias. [Wm. J. Robinson, M.D., Masturbation --
Injurious or Harmless, American Journal of Urology, May 1913]   <hr />  Krauss bereichert uns um das
neue Wort Paraphilie anstelle der Psychopathie, ein fortschrittlich-oppositionelles Wort zwar, aber
auch nur ein Wort und als Aufkl&#228;rung etwa so bedeutsam wie Seitenspr&#252;nge. [Rezensionen
&#252;ber die Anthropophyteia Jahrb&#252;cher, Leipzig, 1907]    Popularized in psychology circles
in English from c.1918 in translation of work by Viennese-born psychotherapist Wilhelm Stekel
(1868-1940); not in widespread use until 1950s. first used in Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders in 1980, as a morally neutral and more dignified label than perversion, to which it
is nonetheless etymologically similar. Related: Paraphiliac; paraphilic.


