innate (adj.)

early 15c., from Late Latin innatus inborn, past participle of innasci to be born in, originate in,
from in- in (see in- (2)) + nasci to be born (Old Latin gnasci; see genus). Related: Innately.


ingrown (adj.)

1660s, native, innate, from in + grown. Of nails, that has grown into the flesh, 1878.


kindly (adj.)

early 14c., from Old English gecyndelic natural, innate; suitable, lawful; see kind (adj.) + -ly
(1). Related: Kindliness.


original (adj.)

early 14c., first in time, earliest, from Old French original first (13c.) and directly from Latin
originalis, from originem (nominative origo) beginning, source, birth, from oriri to rise (see
orchestra). The first reference is in original sin innate depravity of man's nature, supposed to be
inherited from Adam in consequence of the Fall. Related: Originally.


perception (n.)

late 14c., receiving, collection, from Latin perceptionem (nominative perceptio) perception,
apprehension, a taking, from percipere perceive (see perceive). First used in the more literal sense
of the Latin word; in secondary sense, the taking cognizance of, it is recorded in English from
1610s. Meaning intuitive or direct recognition of some innate quality is from 1827.


kind (adj.)

friendly, deliberately doing good to others, from Old English gecynde natural, native, innate,
originally with the feeling of relatives for each other, from Proto-Germanic *kundi- natural,
native, from *kunjam family (see kin), with collective prefix *ga- and abstract suffix *-iz. Sense
development from with natural feelings, to well-disposed (c.1300), benign, compassionate (c.1300).


instinct (n.)

early 15c., a prompting, from Latin instinctus instigation, impulse, noun use of past participle of
instinguere to incite, impel, from in- on (see in- (2)) + stinguere prick, goad, from PIE *steig- to
prick, stick, pierce (see stick (v.)). Meaning animal faculty of intuitive perception is from mid-
15c., from notion of natural prompting. Sense of innate tendency is first recorded 1560s.


naive (adj.)

1650s, natural, simple, artless, from French na&#239;ve, fem. of na&#239;f, from Old French naif
naive, natural, genuine; just born; foolish, innocent; unspoiled, unworked (13c.), from Latin
nativus not artificial, also native, rustic, literally born, innate, natural (see native (adj.)).
Related: Naively.


personality (n.)

late 14c., quality or fact of being a person, from Medieval Latin personalitatem (nominative
personalitas), from Late Latin personalis (see personal). Sense of a distinctive character is first
recorded 1795, from French personnalit&eacute;.Personality is the supreme realization of the innate
idiosyncrasy of a living being. It is an act of courage flung in the face of life, the absolute
affirmation of all that constitutes the individual, the most successful adaptation to the universal
conditions of existence, coupled with the greatest possible freedom of self-determination. [C.G.
Jung, 1875-1961]Meaning person whose character stands out from that of others is from 1889.
Personality cult is attested from 1956.


native (adj.)

late 14c., natural, hereditary, connected with something in a natural way, from Old French natif
native, born in; raw, unspoiled (14c.) and directly from Latin nativus innate, produced by birth,
from natus, past participle of nasci (Old Latin gnasci) be born, related to gignere beget, from PIE
root *gene-/*gen- to give birth, beget, with derivatives referring to familial and tribal groups
(see genus). From late 15c. as born in a particular place. From early 15c. as of one's birth, also
used from mid-15c. in sense of bound; born in servitude or serfdom, also, as a noun a bondsman,
serf. Native American attested from 1956.


bowery (n.)

farm, plantation, from Dutch bowerij homestead farm (from the same source as bower); a Dutch word
probably little used in America outside New York, and there soon limited to one road, The Bowery,
that ran from the built-up part of the city out to the plantations in middle Manhattan, attested
from 1787; the city's growth soon overran it, and it was noted by 1840 as a commercial district
notorious for squalor, rowdiness, and low life.   <b>Bowery Boy</b>, the typical New York tough of a
generation or two ago, named from the street which he chiefly affected .... He rather prided himself
on his uncouthness, his ignorance, and his desperado readiness to fight, but he also loved to have
attention called to his courage, his gallantry to women, his patriotic enthusiasm, and his innate
tenderness of heart. A fire and a thrilling melodrama called out all his energies and emotions.
[Walsh, 1892]


ingenious (adj.)

early 15c., intellectual, talented, from Middle French ing&eacute;nieux clever, ingenious (Old
French engeignos), from Latin ingeniosus of good capacity, full of intellect; clever, gifted with
genius, from ingenium innate qualities, ability, literally that which is inborn, from in- in (see
in- (2)) + gignere, from PIE *gen- produce (see genus). Sense of skillful, clever at contrivance
first recorded 1540s. In a sense of crafty, clever, skillful Middle English had enginous (mid-14c.),
from Old French engeignos. Related: Ingeniously; ingeniousness.


nature (n.)

late 13c., restorative powers of the body, bodily processes; powers of growth; from Old French
nature nature, being, principle of life; character, essence, from Latin natura course of things;
natural character, constitution, quality; the universe, literally birth, from natus born, past
participle of nasci to be born, from PIE *gene- to give birth, beget (see genus).    From late 14c.
as creation, the universe; also heredity, birth, hereditary circumstance; essential qualities,
innate disposition (as in human nature); nature personified, Mother Nature. Specifically as material
world beyond human civilization or society from 1660s. Nature and nurture have been contrasted since
1874.  Nature should be avoided in such vague expressions as 'a lover of nature,' 'poems about
nature.' Unless more specific statements follow, the reader cannot tell whether the poems have to do
with natural scenery, rural life, the sunset, the untouched wilderness, or the habits of squirrels.
[Strunk &amp; White, The Elements of Style, 3rd ed., 1979]


genus (n.)

(plural genera), 1550s as a term of logic, kind or class of things (biological sense dates from
c.1600), from Latin genus (genitive generis) race, stock, kind; family, birth, descent, origin,
cognate with Greek genos race, kind, and gonos birth, offspring, stock, from PIE root *gene-
produce, give birth, beget, with derivatives referring to family and tribal groups (cognates:
Sanskrit janati begets, bears, janah race, janman- birth, origin, jatah born; Avestan zizanenti they
bear; Greek gignesthai to become, happen; Latin gignere to beget, gnasci to be born, genius
procreative divinity, inborn tutelary spirit, innate quality, ingenium inborn character, germen
shoot, bud, embryo, germ; Lithuanian gentis kinsmen; Gothic kuni race; Old English cennan beget,
create; Old High German kind child; Old Irish ro-genar I was born; Welsh geni to be born; Armenian
chanim I bear, I am born).


