insensible (adj.)

c.1400, lacking the power to feel with the senses, from Latin insensibilis that cannot be felt, from
in- not (see in- (1)) + sensibilis (see sensible). Also sometimes in Middle English incapable of
being felt or perceived by the senses (early 15c.). Meaning unconscious is attested from early 15c.
See insensate.


perspire (v.)

1640s, to evaporate through the pores, a back-formation from perspiration and in part from Latin
perspirare to breathe, to blow constantly (see perspiration). Meaning to sweat is a polite usage
attested from 1725. Medical men tried to maintain a distinction between sensible (sweat) and
insensible perspiration:  [I]t is sufficient for common use to observe, that perspiration is that
insensible discharge of vapour from the whole surface of the body and the lungs which is constantly
going on in a healthy state; that it is always natural and always salutary; that sweat, on the
contrary, is an evacuation, which never appears without some uncommon effort, or some disease to the
system, that it weakens and relaxes, and is so far from coinciding with perspiration, that it
obstructs and checks it. [Charles White, A Treatise on the Management of Pregnant and Lying-in
Women, London, 1791]  Related: Perspired; perspiring.


anaesthetic (adj.)

1846, insensible, from Greek anaisthetos insensate, without feeling; senseless, stupid (see
anaesthesia). Noun meaning agent that produces anesthesia first used in modern sense 1848 by
Scottish doctor James Young Simpson (1811-1870), discoverer of the surgical uses of chloroform.


insensibly (adv.)

early 15c.; see insensible + -ly (2).


stolid (adj.)

c.1600, back-formation from stolidity, or else from Middle French stolide (16c.), from Latin
stolidus insensible, dull, slow, brutish, rude, stupid, properly unmovable, related to stultus
foolish, from PIE root *stel- to put, stand (see stall (n.1)).


insensibility (n.)

late 14c., from Late Latin insensibilitas, from Latin insensibilis (see insensible).


unconscious (adj.)

1712, unaware, not marked by conscious thought, from un- (1) not + conscious. Meaning temporarily
insensible, knocked out is recorded from 1860. Related: Unconsciously; unconsciousness. In
psychology, the noun the unconscious (1876) is a loan-translation of German das Unbewusste. The
adjective in this sense is recorded from 1912.


analgesia (n.)

absence of pain, 1706, medical Latin, from Greek analgesia painlessness, insensibility, from
analgetos without pain, insensible to pain (also unfeeling, ruthless), from an- not (see an- (1)) +
algein to feel pain (see -algia).


trance (n.)

late 14c., state of extreme dread or suspense, also a half-conscious or insensible condition, state
of insensibility to mundane things, from Old French transe fear of coming evil, originally coma,
passage from life to death (12c.), from transir be numb with fear, originally die, pass on, from
Latin transire cross over (see transient). French trance in its modern sense has been reborrowed
from English.


insensate (adj.)

1510s, from Late Latin insensatus irrational, foolish, from Latin in- not (see in- (1)) + sensatus
gifted with sense (see sensate). Insensate means not capable of feeling sensation, often inanimate;
insensible means lacking the power to feel with the senses, hence, often, unconscious; insensitive
means having little or no reaction to what is perceived by one's senses, often tactless.


unfeeling (adj.)

late Old English had unfelende, having no sensation. Middle English had a verb unfeel be insensible,
fail to feel (early 14c.) as well as unfeelingness insensibility, loss of sensation, and unfeelingly
without understanding or direct knowledge (late 14c.), and a verbal noun unfeeling loss of
sensation, lack of feeling. However the word in its main modern meaning devoid of kindly or tender
feelings is from 1590s, from un- (1) not + past participle of feel (v.). Related: Unfeelingly.


dead (adj.)

Old English dead dead, also torpid, dull; of water, still, standing, from Proto-Germanic *dauthaz
(cognates: Old Saxon dod, Danish d&oslash;d, Swedish d&ouml;d, Old Frisian dad, Middle Dutch doot,
Dutch dood, Old High German tot, German tot, Old Norse dau&eth;r, Gothic dau&thorn;s dead), from PIE
*dhou-toz-, from root *dheu- (3) to die (see die (v.)).    Meaning insensible is first attested
early 13c. Of places, inactive, dull, from 1580s. Used from 16c. in adjectival sense of utter,
absolute, quite (as in dead drunk, first attested 1590s; dead heat, 1796). As an adverb, from late
14c. Dead on is 1889, from marksmanship. Dead duck is from 1844. Dead letter is from 1703, used of
laws lacking force as well as uncollected mail. Phrase in the dead of the night first recorded
1540s. Dead soldier emptied liquor bottle is from 1913 in that form; the image is older.  For but
ich haue bote of mi bale I am ded as dorenail (c.1350).


stall (n.1)

place in a stable for animals, Old English steall standing place, position, state; place where
cattle are kept, fishing ground, from Proto-Germanic *stalla- (cognates: Old Norse stallr pedestal
for idols, altar; crib, manger, Old Frisian stal, Old High German stall stand, place, stable, stall,
German Stall stable, Stelle place), from PIE root *stel- to put, stand, with derivatives referring
to a standing object or place (cognates: Greek stele standing block, slab, stellein to set in order,
arrange, array, equip, make ready; Latin stolidus insensible, dull, brutish, properly unmovable).
Meaning partially enclosed seat in a choir is attested from c.1400; that of urinal in a men's room
is from 1967. Several meanings, including that of a stand for selling (mid-13c., implied in
stallage), probably are from (or influenced by) Anglo-French and Old French estal station, position;
stall of a stable; stall in a market; a standing still; a standing firm (12c., Modern French
&eacute;tal butcher's stall). This, along with Italian stallo place, stalla stable is a borrowing
from a Germanic source from the same root as the native English word.


