insolence (n.)

late 14c., from Latin insolentia unusualness, haughtiness, arrogance, from insolentem (see
insolent).


contumacy (n.)

late 14c., from Latin contumacia haughtiness, insolence, noun of quality from contumax (see
contumely).


intolerance (n.)

unwillingness to endure a differing opinion, 1765, from Latin intolerantia impatience,
unendurableness, insufferableness, insolence, from intolerantem (see intolerant). Especially of
religious matters through mid-19c. Now-obsolete intolerancy was used in same sense from 1620s.


hubris (n.)

also hybris, 1884, a back-formation from hubristic or else from Greek hybris wanton violence,
insolence, outrage, originally presumption toward the gods; the first element probably PIE *ud- up,
out, but the meaning of the second is  debated.


cheeky (adj.)

1859, from cheek in its sense of insolence + -y (2). Related: Cheekily; cheekiness.


petulance (n.)

c.1600, insolence, immodesty, from French p&eacute;tulance (early 16c.), from Latin petulantia
sauciness, impudence, noun of quality from petulantem (see petulant). Meaning peevishness is
recorded from 1784, from influence of pettish, etc. It displaced earlier petulancy (1550s).


outrage (n.)

c.1300, evil deed, offense, crime; affront, indignity, from Old French outrage harm, damage; insult;
criminal behavior; presumption, insolence, overweening (12c.), earlier oltrage (11c.), from Vulgar
Latin *ultraticum excess, from Latin ultra beyond (see ultra-). Etymologically, the passing beyond
reasonable bounds in any sense; meaning narrowed in English toward violent excesses because of folk
etymology from out + rage. Of injuries to feelings, principles, etc., from 1769.


patron (n.)

a lord-master, a protector, c.1300, from Old French patron patron, protector, patron saint (12c.)
and directly from Medieval Latin patronus patron saint, bestower of a benefice, lord, master, model,
pattern, from Latin patronus defender, protector, former master (of a freed slave); advocate, from
pater (genitive patris) father (see father (n.)). Meaning one who advances the cause (of an artist,
institution, etc.), usually by the person's wealth and power, is attested from late 14c.; commonly a
wretch who supports with insolence, and is paid with flattery [Johnson]. Commercial sense of regular
customer first recorded c.1600. Patron saint (1717) originally was simply patron (late 14c.).


cheek (n.)

Old English ceace, cece jaw, jawbone, in late Old English also the fleshy wall of the mouth. Perhaps
from the root of Old English ceowan chew (see chew (v.)), or from Proto-Germanic *kaukon (cognates:
Middle Low German kake jaw, jawbone, Middle Dutch kake jaw, Dutch kaak), not found outside West
Germanic.    Words for cheek, jaw, and chin tend to run together in IE languages (compare PIE
*genw-, source of Greek genus jaw, cheek, geneion chin, and English chin); Aristotle considered the
chin as the front of the jaws and the cheeks as the back of them. The other Old English word for
cheek was ceafl (see jowl).    A thousand men he [Samson] slow eek with his hond,  And had no wepen
but an asses cheek.  [Chaucer, Monk's Tale]    In reference to the buttocks from c.1600. Sense of
insolence is from 1840, perhaps from a notion akin to that which led to jaw insolent speech, mouth
off, etc. To turn the other cheek is an allusion to Matt. v:39 and Luke vi:29.


