institutionalize (v.)

to put into institutional life (usually deprecatory), 1905; see institution. Related:
Institutionalized. Earlier (1865) it meant to make into an institution.


institutional (adj.)

1610s, from institution + -al (1).


institution (n.)

c.1400, action of establishing or founding (a system of government, a religious order, etc.), from
Old French institucion foundation; thing established, from Latin institutionem (nominative
institutio) disposition, arrangement; instruction, education, noun of state from institutus (see
institute). Meaning established law or practice is from 1550s. Meaning establishment or organization
for the promotion of some charity is from 1707.


hospital (n.)

mid-13c., shelter for the needy, from Old French hospital, ospital hostel (Modern French
h&ocirc;pital), from Late Latin hospitale guest-house, inn, neuter of Latin adjective hospitalis of
a guest or host, from hospes (genitive hospitis); see host (n.1). Later charitable institution to
house and maintain the needy (early 15c.); sense of institution for sick people is first recorded
1540s.


manager (n.)

1580s, one who manages, agent noun from manage. Specific sense of one who conducts a house of
business or public institution is from 1705.


inmate (n.)

1580s, one allowed to live in a house rented by another (usually for a consideration), from in
inside + mate companion. Sense of one confined to an institution is first attested 1834.


endowment (n.)

mid-15c., action of endowing, from endow + -ment. Meaning property with which an institution or
person is endowed is from 1590s; that of gift, power, advantage is early 17c.


unattached (adj.)

late 15c., not arrested or seized, from un- (1) not + past participle of attach (v.). Meaning not
associated with any body or institution is recorded from 1796; sense of single, not engaged or
married is first attested 1874.


homeboy (n.)

person from one's hometown, 1940s, American English, black slang, also originally with overtones of
simpleton. With many variants (compare homebuddy, homeslice, both 1980s, with meaning shading toward
good friend). The word had been used by Ruskin (1886) with the sense stay-at-home male, and it was
Canadian slang for boy brought up in an orphanage or other institution (1913).


co-ed (n.)

also coed, 1886, American English, (first in Louisa Mae Alcott's Jo's Boys); short for co-
educational system; 1889 as an adjective, short for coeducational; 1893 as a noun meaning girl or
woman student at a co-educational institution.


warehouse (n.)

mid-14c., from ware (n.) + house. Compare Dutch warenhuis, German warenhaus. Meaning large
impersonal institution is American English colloquial, first attested 1970.


dinosaur (n.)

1841, coined in Modern Latin by Sir Richard Owen, from comb. form of Greek deinos terrible (see
dire) + sauros lizard (see -saurus). Figurative sense of person or institution not adapting to
change is from 1952.


eponym (n.)

one whose name becomes that of a place, a people, an era, an institution, etc., 1846, from Greek
eponymos given as a name, giving one's name to something, from epi upon (see epi-) + onyma, Aeolic
dialectal variant of onoma name (see name (n.)).


college (n.)

body of scholars and students within a university, late 14c., from Old French college collegiate
body (14c.), from Latin collegium community, society, guild, literally association of collegae (see
colleague). At first meaning any corporate group, the sense of academic institution attested from
1560s became the principal sense in 19c. via use at Oxford and Cambridge.


pillar (n.)

c.1200, from Old French piler pillar, column, pier (12c., Modern French pilier) and directly from
Medieval Latin pilare, from Latin pila pillar, stone barrier. Figurative sense of prop or support of
an institution or community is first recorded early 14c. Phrase pillar to post is c.1600, originally
of tennis, exact meaning obscure.


picnic (n.)

1748 (in Chesterfield's Letters), but rare before c.1800 as an English institution; originally a
fashionable pot-luck social affair, not necessarily out of doors; from French piquenique (1690s),
perhaps a reduplication of piquer to pick, peck, from Old French (see pike (n.2)), or the second
element may be nique worthless thing, from a Germanic source. Figurative sense of something easy is
from 1886. Picnic table recorded from 1926, originally a folding table.


polytechnic (adj.)

1805, pertaining to instruction in many (technical) subjects, from French &Eacute;cole
Polytechnique, engineering school founded 1794 (as &Eacute;cole des Travaux publics) in Paris; from
Greek polytekhnos skilled in many arts, from polys many (see poly-) + tekhne art (see techno-). As a
noun (short for polytechnic institution) from 1836.


asylum (n.)

early 15c., earlier asile (late 14c.), from Latin asylum sanctuary, from Greek asylon refuge, noun
use of neuter of asylos inviolable, safe from violence, especially of persons seeking protection,
from a- without + syle right of seizure. So literally an inviolable place. General sense of safe or
secure place is from 1640s; meaning benevolent institution to shelter some class of persons is from
1776.


bank (n.1)

financial institution, late 15c., from either Old Italian banca or Middle French banque (itself from
the Italian word), both meaning table (the notion is of the moneylender's exchange table), from a
Germanic source (compare Old High German bank bench); see bank (n.2).   Bank holiday is from 1871,
though the tradition is as old as the Bank of England. To cry all the way to the bank was coined
1956 by flamboyant pianist Liberace, after a Madison Square Garden concert that was packed with
patrons but panned by critics.


university (n.)

c.1300, institution of higher learning, also body of persons constituting a university, from Anglo-
French universit&eacute;, Old French universite universality; academic community (13c.), from
Medieval Latin universitatem (nominative universitas), the whole, aggregate, in Late Latin
corporation, society, from universus whole, entire (see universe). In the academic sense, a
shortening of universitas magistrorum et scholarium community of masters and scholars; superseded
studium as the word for this. The Latin word also is the source of Spanish universidad, German
universit&#228;t, Russian universitet&#365;, etc.


prostitute (v.)

1520s, to offer to indiscriminate sexual intercourse (usually in exchange for money), from Latin
prostitutus, past participle of prostituere to expose to prostitution, expose publicly, from pro-
before (see pro-) + statuere cause to stand, establish, from PIE root *sta- to stand, with
derivatives meaning place or thing that is standing (see stet). Related: Prostituted; prostituting.
The notion of sex for hire is not inherent in the etymology, which rather suggests one exposed to
lust or sex indiscriminately offered. However, this is now almost the official European term for the
institution: German prostituierte, Russian prostitutka, etc. Figurative sense (of abilities, etc.)
is from 1570s. Of men, in reference to homosexual acts, from 1886 (in form prostitution); phrase
male prostitute attested by 1948.


patron (n.)

a lord-master, a protector, c.1300, from Old French patron patron, protector, patron saint (12c.)
and directly from Medieval Latin patronus patron saint, bestower of a benefice, lord, master, model,
pattern, from Latin patronus defender, protector, former master (of a freed slave); advocate, from
pater (genitive patris) father (see father (n.)). Meaning one who advances the cause (of an artist,
institution, etc.), usually by the person's wealth and power, is attested from late 14c.; commonly a
wretch who supports with insolence, and is paid with flattery [Johnson]. Commercial sense of regular
customer first recorded c.1600. Patron saint (1717) originally was simply patron (late 14c.).


summer (n.1)

hot season of the year, Old English sumor summer, from Proto-Germanic *sumur- (cognates: Old Saxon,
Old Norse, Old High German sumar, Old Frisian sumur, Middle Dutch somer, Dutch zomer, German
Sommer), from PIE root *sem- (2) summer (cognates: Sanskrit sama season, half-year, Avestan hama in
summer, Armenian amarn summer, Old Irish sam, Old Welsh ham, Welsh haf summer).    As an adjective
from c.1300. Summer camp as an institution for youth is attested from 1886; summer resort is from
1823; summer school first recorded 1810; theatrical summer stock is attested from 1941 (see stock
(n.2)). Old Norse sumarsdag, first day of summer, was the Thursday that fell between April 9 and 15.


rubber (n.)

thing that rubs (a brush, cloth, etc.), 1530s, agent noun from rub (v.). The meaning elastic
substance from tropical plants (short for India rubber) first recorded 1788, introduced to Europe
1744 by Charles Marie de la Condamine, so called because it originally was used as an eraser.Very
useful for erasing the strokes of black lead pencils, and is popularly called rubber, and lead-
eater. [entry for Caoutchouc in Howard, New Royal Encyclopedia, 1788]Meaning overshoe made of rubber
is 1842, American English; slang sense of condom is by 1930s. Sense of deciding match in a game or
contest is 1590s, of unknown signification, and perhaps an entirely separate word. Rubber stamp (n.)
is from 1881; figurative sense of institution whose power is formal but not real is from 1919; the
verb in this sense is from 1934. Rubber cement is attested from 1856 (from 1823 as India-rubber
cement). Rubber check (one that bounces) is from 1927.


kindergarten (n.)

1852, from German, literally children's garden, from Kinder children (plural of Kind child; see kin
(n.)) + Garten garden (see yard (n.1)). Coined 1840 by German educator Friedrich Fr&ouml;bel
(1782-1852) in reference to his method of developing intelligence in young children.   Kindergarten
means a garden of children, and Froebel, the inventor of it, or rather, as he would prefer to
express it, the discoverer of the method of Nature, meant to symbolize by the name the spirit and
plan of treatment. How does the gardener treat his plants? He studies their individual natures, and
puts them into such circumstances of soil and atmosphere as enable them to grow, flower, and bring
forth fruit,-- also to renew their manifestation year after year. [Mann, Horace, and Elizabeth P.
Peabody, Moral Culture of Infancy and Kindergarten Guide, Boston, 1863]    The first one in England
was established 1850 by Johannes Ronge, German Catholic priest; in America, 1868, by Elizabeth
Peabody of Boston, Mass. Taken into English untranslated, whereas other nations that borrowed the
institution nativized the name (Danish b&ouml;rnehave, Modern Hebrew gan yeladim, literally garden
of children). Sometimes partially anglicized as kindergarden (attested by 1879).


charity (n.)

mid-12c., benevolence for the poor, from Old French charit&eacute; (Christian) charity, mercy,
compassion; alms; charitable foundation (12c., Old North French carit&eacute;), from Latin caritatem
(nominative caritas) costliness, esteem, affection (in Vulgate often used as translation of Greek
agape love -- especially Christian love of fellow man -- perhaps to avoid the sexual suggestion of
Latin amor), from carus dear, valued, from PIE *karo-, from root *ka- to like, desire (see whore
(n.)).    Vulgate also sometimes translated agape by Latin dilectio, noun of action from diligere to
esteem highly, to love (see diligence).  Wyclif and the Rhemish version regularly rendered the
Vulgate dilectio by 'love,' caritas by 'charity.' But the 16th c. Eng. versions from Tindale to
1611, while rendering agape sometimes 'love,' sometimes 'charity,' did not follow the dilectio and
caritas of the Vulgate, but used 'love' more often (about 86 times), confining 'charity' to 26
passages in the Pauline and certain of the Catholic Epistles (not in I John), and the Apocalypse
.... In the Revised Version 1881, 'love' has been substituted in all these instances, so that it now
stands as the uniform rendering of agape. [OED]  Sense of charitable foundation or institution in
English attested by 1690s.


wolf (n.)

Old English wulf wolf, wolfish person, devil, from Proto-Germanic *wulfaz (cognates: Old Saxon wulf,
Old Norse ulfr, Old Frisian, Dutch, Old High German, German wolf, Gothic wulfs), from PIE root
*wlkwo- wolf (cognates: Sanskrit vrkas, Avestan vehrka-; Albanian ul'k; Old Church Slavonic vluku;
Russian volcica; Lithuanian vilkas wolf; Old Persian Varkana- Hyrcania, district southeast of the
Caspian Sea, literally wolf-land; probably also Greek lykos, Latin lupus).    This manne can litle
skyl ... to saue himself harmlesse from the perilous accidentes of this world, keping ye wulf from
the doore (as they cal it). [The Institution of a Gentleman, 1555]    Probably extinct in England
from the end of the 15th century; in Scotland from the early 18th. Wolves as a symbol of lust are
ancient, such as Roman slang lupa whore, literally she-wolf (preserved in Spanish loba, Italian
lupa, French louve). The equation of wolf and prostitute, sexually voracious female persisted into
12c., but by Elizabethan times wolves had become primarily symbolic of male lust. The specific use
of wolf for sexually aggressive male first recorded 1847; wolf-whistle attested by 1945, American
English, at first associated with sailors. The image of a wolf in sheep's skin is attested from
c.1400. See here for a discussion of wolf in Indo-European history. The wolf-spider so called for
prowling and leaping on its prey rather than waiting in a web.


toleration (n.)

1510s, permission granted by authority, license, from Middle French tol&eacute;ration (15c.), from
Latin tolerationem (nominative toleratio) a bearing, supporting, enduring, noun of action from past
participle stem of tolerare to endure, sustain, support, suffer, literally to bear, from PIE *tele-
to bear, carry (see extol).    Meaning forbearance, sufferance is from 1580s. The specific religious
sense is from 1609; as in Act of Toleration (1689), statute granting freedom of religious worship
(with conditions) to dissenting Protestants in England. In this it means recognition of the right of
private judgment in matters of faith and worship; liberty granted by the government to preach and
worship as one pleases; equality under the law without regard to religion.    If any man err from
the right way, it is his own misfortune, no injury to thee; nor therefore art thou to punish him in
the things of this life because thou supposest he will be miserable in that which is to come.
Nobody, therefore, in fine, neither single persons nor churches, nay, nor even commonwealths, have
any just title to invade the civil rights and worldly goods of each other upon pretence of religion.
[John Locke, Letter Concerning Toleration, 1689]   <hr />   Before any man can be considered as a
member of Civil Society, he must be considered as a subject of the Governour of the Universe: And if
a member of Civil Society, do it with a saving of his allegiance to the Universal Sovereign. We
maintain therefore that in matters of Religion, no man's right is abridged by the institution of
Civil Society and that Religion is wholly exempt from its cognizance. [James Madison, Memorial and
Remonstrance Against Religious Assessments, 1785]   <hr />   Unlimited tolerance must lead to the
disappearance of tolerance. If we extend unlimited tolerance even to those who are intolerant, if we
are not prepared to defend a tolerant society against the onslaught of the intolerant, then the
tolerant will be destroyed, and tolerance with them. [Karl Popper, The Open Society and Its Enemies,
1962]


