institute (n.)

1510s, purpose, design, from institute (v.). From 1540s as an established law. The sense of
organization, society is from 1828, borrowed from French Institut national des Sciences et des Arts,
established 1795 to replace the royal academies, from Latin institutum, neuter past participle of
instituere.


institute (v.)

early 14c., to establish in office, appoint, from Latin institutus, past participle of instituere to
set up, from in- in (see in- (2)) + statuere establish, to cause to stand, from PIE root *sta- to
stand, with derivatives meaning place or thing that is standing (see stet). General sense of set up,
found, introduce first attested late 15c. Related: Instituted; instituting.


Gallup poll

1940, from George H. Gallup (1901-1984), U.S. journalist and statistician, who in 1935 set up the
American Institute of Public Opinion.


macadamia (n.)

Australian evergreen tree, 1904, from Modern Latin (1858), named for Scotland-born chemist Dr. John
Macadam (1827-1865), secretary of the Victoria Philosophical Institute, Australia.


tech (n.)

1906 as short for technical college (or institute, etc.), American English; 1942 as short for
technician.


MIT

originally M.I.T., abbreviation of Massachusetts Institute of Technology, attested from 1892.


Smithsonian

Smithsonian Institute, named for English scientist and philanthropist James Smithson (1765-1829),
who left a legacy to the U.S. government to found it. The mineral smithsonite also is named for him.


Esalen

alternative philosophy and human potential movement, 1966, from Esalen Institute in Big Sur,
California, U.S., from Esselen, name of an extinct Native American people of the California coast.


think tank (n.)

also think-tank, 1959 as research institute (first reference is to Center for Behavioral Sciences,
Palo Alto, Calif.); it had been colloquial for the brain since 1905. See think + tank (n.).


Wisteria (n.)

genus of woody vines, 1819, formed by Thomas Nuttall, English botanist, in recognition of American
anatomist Caspar Wistar (1761-1818) of Philadelphia. The -e- apparently is a misprint. The Wistar
Institute was founded in 1892 by his great-nephew and named for him.


institution (n.)

c.1400, action of establishing or founding (a system of government, a religious order, etc.), from
Old French institucion foundation; thing established, from Latin institutionem (nominative
institutio) disposition, arrangement; instruction, education, noun of state from institutus (see
institute). Meaning established law or practice is from 1550s. Meaning establishment or organization
for the promotion of some charity is from 1707.


hacker (n.)

a chopper, cutter, perhaps also one who makes hacking tools, early 13c. (as a surname), agent noun
from hack (v.1). Meaning one who gains unauthorized access to computer records is attested by 1983,
agent noun from hack (v.2). Said to be from slightly earlier tech slang sense of one who works like
a hack at writing and experimenting with software, one who enjoys computer programming for its own
sake, 1976, reputedly a usage that evolved at Massachusetts Institute of Technology (however an MIT
student from the late 1960s recalls hack (n.) being used then and there in the general sense of
creative prank, which clouds its sense connection with the writing for hire word, and there may be a
source or an influence here in hack (v.1)).


spook (n.)

1801, spectre, apparition, ghost, from Dutch spook, from Middle Dutch spooc spook, ghost, from a
common Germanic source (German Spuk ghost, apparition, Middle Low German spok spook, Swedish spok
scarecrow, Norwegian spjok ghost, specter, Danish sp&oslash;g joke), of unknown origin. According to
Klein's sources, possible outside connections include Lettish spigana dragon, witch, spiganis will
o' the wisp, Lithuanian spingu, spingeti to shine, Old Prussian spanksti spark.    Meaning
undercover agent is attested from 1942. The derogatory racial sense of black person is attested from
1940s, perhaps from notion of dark skin being difficult to see at night. Black pilots trained at
Tuskegee Institute during World War II called themselves the Spookwaffe.


ambrotype (n.)

1855, American English, apparently from Greek ambrotos immortal, imperishable (see ambrosia), with
second element from daguerreotype. A type of photograph on glass with lights given by silver and
shades by a dark background showing through.    This invention consists in an improved process of
taking photographic pictures upon glass, and also of beautifying and preserving the same, which
process I have styled ambrotype. My improved process has reference to the art of taking pictures
photographically on a film of collodion upon the surface of a sheet of glass, the collodion being
suitably prepared for the purpose. By the use of the said process, the beauty and permanency of such
pictures are greatly increased, and I have on this account styled the process ambrotype, from the
Greek word ambrotos, immortal. [Specification of the Patent granted to James A. Cutting, of Boston,
in the United States of America, Photographer, for an Improved Process of taking Photographic
Pictures upon Glass and also of Beautifying and Preserving the same. Dated London, July 26, 1854,
printed in Journal of the Franklin Institute, September 1855]


abstract (adj.)

late 14c., originally in grammar (of nouns), from Latin abstractus drawn away, past participle of
abstrahere to drag away, detach, pull away, divert; also figuratively, from ab(s)- away (see ab-) +
trahere draw (see tract (n.1)).    Meaning withdrawn or separated from material objects or practical
matters is from mid-15c. That of difficult to understand, abstruse is from c.1400. Specifically in
reference to modern art, it dates from 1914; abstract expressionism as an American-based uninhibited
approach to art exemplified by Jackson Pollock is from 1952, but the term itself had been used in
the 1920s of Kandinsky and others.    Oswald Herzog, in an article on Der Abstrakte Expressionismus
(Sturm, heft 50, 1919) gives us a statement which with equal felicity may be applied to the artistic
attitude of the Dadaists. Abstract Expressionism is perfect Expressionism, he writes. It is pure
creation. It casts spiritual processes into a corporeal mould. It does not borrow objects from the
real world; it creates its own objects .... The abstract reveals the will of the artist; it becomes
expression. ... [William A. Drake, The Life and Deeds of Dada, 1922]   <hr />   Then, that art we
have called abstract for want of any possible descriptive term, with which we have been patient,
and, even, appreciative, getting high stimulation by the new Guggenheim non-objective Art Museum, is
reflected in our examples of surrealism, dadaism, and what-not, to assert our acquaintance in every
art, fine or other. [Report of the Art Reference Department of Pratt Institute Free Library for year
ending June 30, 1937]


-or

word-forming element making nouns of quality, state, or condition, from Middle English -our, from
Old French -our (Modern French -eur), from Latin -orem (nominative -or), a suffix added to pp.
verbal stems. Also in some cases from Latin -atorem (nominative -ator).    In U.S., via Noah
Webster, -or is nearly universal (but not in glamour, curious, generous), while in Britain -our is
used in most cases (but with many exceptions: author, error, senator, ancestor, horror etc.). The
-our form predominated after c.1300, but Mencken reports that the first three folios of
Shakespeare's plays used both spellings indiscriminately and with equal frequency; only in the
Fourth Folio of 1685 does -our become consistent.    A partial revival of -or on the Latin model
took place from 16c. (governour began to lose its -u- 16c. and it was gone by 19c.), and also among
phonetic spellers in both England and America (John Wesley wrote that -or was a fashionable
impropriety in England in 1791).    Webster criticized the habit of deleting -u- in -our words in
his first speller (A Grammatical Institute of the English Language, commonly called the Blue-Black
Speller) in 1783. His own deletion of the -u- began with the revision of 1804, and was enshrined in
the influential Comprehensive Dictionary of the English Language (1806), which also established in
the U.S. -ic for British -ick and -er for -re, along with many other attempts at reformed spelling
which never caught on (such as masheen for machine). His attempt to justify them on the grounds of
etymology and the custom of great writers does not hold up.    Fowler notes the British drop the -u-
when forming adjectives ending in -orous (humorous) and derivatives in -ation and -ize, in which
cases the Latin origin is respected (such as vaporize). When the Americans began to consistently
spell it one way, however, the British reflexively hardened their insistence on the other. The
American abolition of -our in such words as honour and favour has probably retarded rather than
quickened English progress in the same direction. [Fowler]


