instigate (v.)

1540s, back-formation from instigation or else from Latin instigatus, past participle of instigare
to urge on, incite (see instigation). Related: Instigated; instigates; instigating.


excite (v.)

mid-14c., to move, stir up, instigate, from Old French esciter (12c.) or directly from Latin
excitare rouse, call out, summon forth, produce, frequentative of exciere call forth, instigate,
from ex- out (see ex-) + ciere set in motion, call (see cite). Of feelings, from late 14c. Of bodily
organs or tissues, from 1831. Main modern sense of emotionally agitate is first attested 1821.


subornation (n.)

1520s, from Latin subornationem (nominative subornatio), noun of action from past participle stem of
subornare to provide, furnish; instigate(see suborn).


foment (v.)

early 15c., apply hot liquids, from Old French fomenter (13c.) apply hot compress (to a wound), from
Late Latin fomentare, from Latin fomentum warm application, poultice, contraction of *fovimentum,
from fovere to warm; cherish, encourage (see fever). Extended sense of stimulate, instigate (1620s)
was in the French. Related: Fomented; fomenting.


suborn (v.)

to procure unlawfully, to bribe to accomplish a wicked purpose, especially to induce a witness to
perjury, to lure (someone) to commit a crime, 1530s, from Middle French suborner seduce, instigate,
bribe (13c.) and directly from Latin subornare employ as a secret agent, incite secretly, originally
equip, fit out, furnish, from sub under, secretly (see sub-) + ornare equip, related to ordo order
(see order (n.)). Related: Suborned; suborning.


purchase (v.)

c.1300, acquire, obtain; get, receive; procure, provide, also accomplish or bring about; instigate;
cause, contrive, plot; recruit, hire, from Anglo-French purchaser go after, Old French porchacier
search for, procure; purchase; aim at, strive for, pursue eagerly (11c., Modern French pourchasser),
from pur- forth (possibly used here as an intensive prefix; see pur-) + Old French chacier run
after, to hunt, chase (see chase (v.)).    Originally to obtain or receive as due in any way,
including through merit or suffering; specific sense of acquire for money, pay money for, buy is
from mid-14c., though the word continued to be used for to get by conquest in war, obtain as booty
up to 17c. Related: Purchased; purchasing.


hortatory (adj.)

1580s, from Middle French hortatoire and directly from Late Latin hortatorius encouraging, cheering,
from hortatus, past participle of hortari exhort, encourage, urge, incite, instigate, intensive of
horiri urge, incite, encourage, from PIE root *gher- (5) to like, want (cognates: Old English
giernan to strive, desire, yearn; Gothic gairnei desire; Greek khresthai to lack, want; use, make
use of, kharis grace, favor, khairein to rejoice, delight in; Sanskrit haryati finds pleasure,
likes, harsate is aroused; Avestan zara effort, aim; Russian zhariti awake desire, charm).


