insurrection (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French insurrection, from Late Latin insurrectionem (nominative insurrectio)
a rising up, noun of action from past participle stem of insurgere to rise up (see insurgent).


insurrectionary

1796 (adj.), 1893 (n.), from insurrection + -ary.


rising (n.)

c.1300, resurrection, act of one who rises, verbal noun from rise (v.). Of heavenly bodies from mid-
14c. Meaning a getting up from bed is c.1400. Sense of insurrection is late 14c.


upset (n.)

early 15c., insurrection, from upset (v.). Meaning overturning of a vehicle or boat is recorded from
1804.


ruction (n.)

disturbance, 1825, dialectal or colloquial, of unknown origin. Perhaps from eruption or an altered
shortening of insurrection.


Vendee

department of western France, French Vend&#233;e, named for the river through it, which is perhaps
from Gaulish vindos white. Especially in reference to the insurrection there against the Republic in
1793. Related: Vendean.


uprising (n.)

mid-13c., action of rising from death or the grave, resurrection, from up (adv.) + rising (n.).
Meaning action of rising from bed is recorded from c.1300; sense of insurrection, popular revolt
first attested 1580s.


gook (n.)

1899, U.S. military slang for Filipino during the insurrection there, probably from a native word,
or imitative of the babbling sound of their language to American ears (compare barbarian). The term
goo-goo eyes soft, seductive eyes was in vogue c.1900 and may have contributed to this somehow.
Extended over time to Nicaraguan (U.S. intervention there early 20c.), any Pacific Islander (World
War II), Korean (1950s), Vietnamese and any Asian (1960s).


insurgent (n.)

one who rises in revolt, 1765, from Latin insurgentem (nominative insurgens), present participle of
insurgere rise up, rise against, revolt, from in- against, or perhaps merely intensive, + surgere to
rise (see surge). An obsolete verb insurge to rise in opposition or insurrection is attested from
1530s.


secession (n.)

1530s, from Latin secessionem (nominative secessio) a withdrawal, separation; political withdrawal,
insurrection, schism, noun of action from past participle stem of secedere secede, from se- apart
(see secret) + cedere to go (see cede). Originally in a Roman historical context, temporary
migration of plebeians from the city to compel patricians to address their grievances; modern use in
reference to religious or political unions dates from 1650s.


concentration camp (n.)

1901, compound for noncombatants in a war zone (see concentration); a term for a controversial idea
in the second Boer War (1899-1902), and the term emerged with a bad odor.    The concentration camp
now definitely taken its place side by side with Black Hole of Calcutta as one of those of horror at
which humanity will never cease shudder. [The Review of Reviews, London, March 1902]    It also was
used 1902 in reference to then-current U.S. policies in the Philippines, and retroactively in
reference to Spanish policies in Cuba during the insurrection there of 1896-98. The phrase was used
in U.S. during the Spanish-American war, but in reference to designated rendezvous points for U.S.
troops headed overseas. In reference to prisons for dissidents and minorities in Nazi Germany from
1934, in Soviet Russia from 1935.


domestic (adj.)

early 15c., from Middle French domestique (14c.) and directly from Latin domesticus belonging to the
household, from domus house, from PIE *dom-o- house, from root *dem- house, household (cognates:
Sanskrit damah house; Avestan demana- house; Greek domos house, despotes master, lord; Latin dominus
master of a household; Old Church Slavonic domu, Russian dom house; Lithuanian dimstis enclosed
court, property; Old Norse topt homestead).    It represents the usual Indo-European word for house
(Italian, Spanish casa are from Latin casa cottage, hut; Germanic *hus is of obscure origin). The
noun meaning household servant is 1530s (a sense also found in Old French domestique). Domestics,
originally articles of home manufacture, is attested from 1620s. Related: Domestically. Domestic
violence is attested from 19c. as revolution and insurrection; 1977 as spouse abuse, violence in the
home.


