insubstantiality (n.)

1827, from insubstantial + -ity.


insubstantial (adj.)

c.1600, from Medieval Latin insubstantialis, from in- not (see in- (1)) + substantialis (see
substantial). Related: Insubstantially.


matterless (adj.)

late 14c., insubstantial, immaterial, without physical substance, from matter (n.) + -less. From
1610s as devoid of sense or meaning.


bubble (n.)

early 14c., perhaps from Middle Dutch bobbel (n.) and/or Middle Low German bubbeln (v.), all
probably of echoic origin. Bubble bath first recorded 1949. Of financial schemes originally in South
Sea Bubble (1590s), on notion of fragile and insubstantial.


gingerbread (n.)

late 13c., gingerbrar, from Old French ginginbrat ginger preserve, from Medieval Latin gingimbratus
gingered, from gingiber (see ginger). The ending changed by folk etymology to -brede bread, a
formation attested by mid-14c. Originally preserved ginger, the meaning a kind of spiced cake is
from 15c. Figurative use, showy, insubstantial is from c.1600. Sense of fussy decoration on a house
is first recorded 1757; gingerbread-work (1748) was a sailor's term for carved decoration on a ship.


slight (adj.)

early 14c., flat, smooth; hairless, probably from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse slettr
smooth, sleek, from Proto-Germanic *slikhtaz (cognates: Old Saxon slicht; Low German slicht smooth,
plain common; Old English -sliht level, attested in eor&eth;slihtes level with the ground; Old
Frisian sliucht smooth, slight, Middle Dutch sleht even, plain, Old High German sleht, Gothic
slaihts smooth), probably from a collateral form of PIE *sleig- to smooth, glide, be muddy, from
root *(s)lei- slimy (see slime (n.)).    Sense evolution probably is from smooth (c.1300), to slim,
slender; of light texture, hence not good or strong; insubstantial, trifling, inferior,
insignificant (early 14c.). Meaning small in amount is from 1520s. Sense of German cognate schlecht
developed from smooth, plain, simple to bad, mean, base, and as it did it was replaced in the
original senses by schlicht, a back-formation from schlichten to smooth, to plane, a derivative of
schlecht in the old sense [Klein].


