interrogation (n.)

late 14c., a question; c.1500, a questioning; a set of questions, from Old French interrogacion
(13c.) or directly from Latin interrogationem (nominative interrogatio) a question, questioning,
interrogation, noun of action from past participle stem of interrogare to ask, question, inquire,
interrogate, from inter- between (see inter-) + rogare ask, to question (see rogation).


third degree (n.)

intense interrogation by police, 1900, probably a reference to Third Degree of master mason in
Freemasonry (1772), the conferring of which included an interrogation ceremony. Third degree as a
measure of severity of burns (most severe) is attested from 1866, from French (1832); in American
English, as a definition of the seriousness of a particular type of crime (the least serious type)
it is recorded from 1865.


interrogate (v.)

late 15c., a back-formation from interrogation, or else from Latin interrogatus, past participle of
interrogare to ask, question (see interrogation). Related: Interrogated; interrogating.


interrogatory (adj.)

1570s, from Late Latin interrogatorius consisting of questions, from past participle stem of
interrogare to ask, question (see interrogation).


semicolon (n.)

punctuation-mark, 1640s, a hybrid coined from Latin-derived semi- + Greek-based colon (n.1). The
mark itself was in Greek the point of interrogation.


interrogator (n.)

1751, from Late Latin interrogator, agent noun from interrogare to ask, question (see
interrogation).


interrogative (adj.)

c.1500, from Late Latin interrogativus pertaining to a question, from Latin interrogat-, past
participle stem of interrogare to ask, question (see interrogation) + -ive.


question (n.)

early 13c., philosophical or theological problem; early 14c. as utterance meant to elicit an answer
or discussion, also as a difficulty, a doubt, from Anglo-French questiun, Old French question
question, difficulty, problem; legal inquest, interrogation, torture, from Latin quaestionem
(nominative quaestio) a seeking, a questioning, inquiry, examining, judicial investigation, noun of
action from past participle stem of quaerere ask, seek (see query (v.)).   No question undoubtedly
is from mid-15c; no questions asked accountability not required is from 1879 (especially in
newspaper advertisements seeking the return of something lost or stolen). Question mark is from
1849, sometimes also question stop (1862); figurative use is from 1869. To be out of the question
(c.1700) is to be not pertinent to the subject, hence not to be considered.


