inter alia

Latin, literally amongst other things. (Latin for among other persons is inter alios), from inter
among, between (see inter-).


internecine (adj.)

1660s, deadly, destructive, from Latin internecinus very deadly, murderous, destructive, from
internecare kill or destroy, from inter (see inter-) + necare kill (see noxious). Considered in the
OED as misinterpreted in Johnson's Dictionary [1755], which defined it as endeavouring mutual
destruction, on association of inter- with mutual when the prefix supposedly is used in this case as
an intensive. From Johnson, wrongly or not, has come the main modern definition of mutually
destructive.


inter-war (adj.)

1939, in reference to the period between the world wars,   from inter- + war (n.).


interleague (adj.)

also inter-league, by 1917 in a U.S. baseball sense, from inter- + league. Earlier (1580s) as a
verb.


inter-

Latin inter (prep., adv.) among, between, betwixt, in the midst of, from PIE *enter between, among
(cognates: Sanskrit antar, Old Persian antar among, between, Greek entera (plural) intestines, Old
Irish eter, Old Welsh ithr among, between, Gothic undar, Old English under under), a comparative of
*en in (see in). Also in certain Latin phrases in English, such as inter alia among other things. A
living prefix in English from 15c. Spelled entre- in French, most words borrowed into English in
that form were re-spelled 16c. to conform with Latin except entertain, enterprise.


intermeddle (v.)

late 14c., from Latin inter- (see inter-) + Anglo-French medler (see meddle (v.)).


interpellation (n.)

late 15c., an appeal, from Latin interpellationem, noun of action from past participle stem of
interpellare to interrupt by speaking, from inter between (see inter-) + pellare, collateral form of
pellere to drive (see pulse (n.1)).


interlude (n.)

c.1300, from Medieval Latin interludium an interlude, from Latin inter- between (see inter-) + ludus
a play (see ludicrous). Originally farcical episodes introduced between acts of long mystery plays;
transferred sense of interval in the course of some action is from 1751.


interlocutor (n.)

1510s, agent noun from Latin interlocut-, past participle stem of interloqui interrupt, from inter-
between (see inter-) + loqui to speak (see locution). Related: Interlocutory.


interim (n.)

1540s, from Latin interim (adv.) in the meantime, meanwhile, originally in the midst of that, from
inter- between (see inter-) + im, ancient adverb from stem of pronoun is this, that.


intermural (adj.)

1650s, from Latin intermuralis situated between walls, from inter- between (see inter-) + murus
(genitive muralis) wall (see mural).


interposition (n.)

late 14c., from Old French interposicion (12c.), from Latin interpositionem (nominative
interpositio), noun of action from past participle stem of interponere to put between, place among;
put forward, from inter- (see inter-) + ponere (see position).


intersperse (v.)

1560s, from Latin interspersus strewn, scattered, sprinkled upon, past participle of *interspergere,
from inter- between (see inter-) + spargere to scatter (see sparse). Related: Interspersed;
interspersing.


intermit (v.)

1540s, from Latin intermittere to leave off, omit, suspend, interrupt, neglect, from inter- between
(see inter-) + mittere to send (see mission). Related: Intermitted; intermitting; intermittingly.


interdict (v.)

late 13c., from Old French entredit, past participle of entredire forbid by decree, from Latin
interdicere interpose by speech, prohibit, from inter- between (see inter-) + dicere to speak, to
say (see diction). Related: Interdicted; interdicting.


interpunction (n.)

punctuation, 1610s, from Latin interpunctionem (nominative interpunctio) a putting of points
between, noun of action from past participle stem of interpungere to put points between, from inter-
(see inter-) + pungere (see pungent).


interstice (n.)

early 15c., from Old French interstice (14c.) and directly from Latin interstitium interval,
literally space between, from inter- between (see inter-) + stem of stare to stand (see stet).
Related: Interstices.


interjacent (adj.)

1590s, from Latin interiacentem (nominative interiacens) lying between, present participle of
interiacere to lie between, from inter- (see inter-) + iacere (see jet (v.)).


intercalate (v.)

to insert a day into the calendar, 1610s, from Latin intercalatus, past participle of intercalare to
proclaim the insertion of an intercalary day, from inter- between (see inter-) + calare (see
calendar). Related: Intercalated; intercalating.


intercede (v.)

1570s, a back-formation from intercession, or else from Latin intercedere intervene, come between,
be between, from inter- between (see inter-) + cedere go (see cede). Related: Interceded;
interceding.


interpose (v.)

1590s, from Middle French interposer (14c.), from inter- (see inter-) + poser (see pose (v.1)).
Related: Interposed; interposing.


intercept (v.)

c.1400, from Latin interceptus, past participle of intercipere take or seize between, to seize in
passing, from inter- between (see inter-) + -cipere, comb. form of capere to take, catch (see
capable). Related: Intercepted; intercepting.


intervention (n.)

early 15c., intercession, intercessory prayer, from Middle French intervention or directly from Late
Latin interventionem (nominative interventio) an interposing, noun of action from past participle
stem of Latin intervenire to come between, interrupt, from inter- between (see inter-) + venire come
(see venue).


interpret (v.)

late 14c., from Old French interpreter (13c.) and directly from Latin interpretari explain, expound,
understand, from interpres agent, translator, from inter- (see inter-) + second element of uncertain
origin, perhaps related to Sanskrit prath- to spread abroad, PIE *per- (5) to traffic in, sell (see
pornography). Related: Interpreted; interpreting.


interdepartmental (adj.)

also inter-departmental, 1861, from inter- + departmental.


interracial (adj.)

also inter-racial, 1883, from inter- + racial.


interrelationship (n.)

also inter-relationship, 1841, from inter- + relationship.


interlinear (adj.)

late 14c., from Medieval Latin interlinearis that which is between the lines, from inter- (see
inter-) + Latin linearis (see linear).


intermediate (adj.)

early 15c., from Medieval Latin intermediatus lying between, from Latin intermedius that which is
between, from inter- between (see inter-) + medius in the middle (see medial (adj.)).


intersect (v.)

1610s, back-formation from intersection, or else from Latin intersectus, past participle of
intersecare intersect, cut asunder, from inter- between (see inter-) + secare to cut (see section
(n.)). Related: Intersected; intersecting.


interval (n.)

early 14c., from Old French intervalle (14c.), earlier entreval (13c.), from Late Latin intervallum
space, interval, distance, originally space between palisades or ramparts, from inter between (see
inter-) + vallum rampart (see wall (n.)). Metaphoric sense of gap in time was present in Latin.


intersection (n.)

act or fact of crossing, 1550s, from Middle French intersection (14c.) and directly from Latin
intersectionem (nominative intersectio) a cutting asunder, intersection, noun of action from past
participle stem of intersecare intersect, cut asunder, from inter- between (see inter-) + secare to
cut (see section). Originally a term in geometry; meaning crossroads is from 1864.


intervene (v.)

1580s, back-formation from intervention, or else from Latin intervenire to come between, intervene,
interrupt, from inter between (see inter-) + venire to come (see venue). Related: Intervened;
intervening.


intercourse (n.)

mid-15c., communication to and fro, from Old French entrecours exchange, commerce, from Late Latin
intercursus a running between, intervention, from intercursus, past participle of intercurrere to
run between, from Latin inter- between (see inter-) + currere to run (see current (adj.)). Meaning
sexual relations first recorded 1798, from earlier sense social contact and relations (1540s).


interjection (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French interjection (Old French interjeccion, 13c.), from Latin
interiectionem (nominative interiectio) a throwing or placing between, noun of action from past
participle stem of intericere, from inter- between (see inter-) + -icere, comb. form of iacere to
throw (see jet (v.)).


interrupt (v.)

c.1400, to interfere with a legal right, from Latin interruptus, past participle of interrumpere
break apart, break off, from inter- between (see inter-) + rumpere to break (see rupture (n.), and
compare corrupt). Meaning to break into (a speech, etc.) is early 15c. Related: Interrupted;
interrupting.


interregnum (n.)

1570s, from Latin interregnum, literally between-reign, from inter- (see inter-) + regnum (see reign
(n.)). In the republic, a vacancy in the consulate.


intermission (n.)

early 15c., from Latin intermissionem (nominative intermissio) interruption, noun of action from
past participle stem of intermittere to leave off, from inter- between (see inter-) + mittere let
go, send (see mission).<b>Intermission</b> is used in U.S. for what we call an interval (in a
musical or dramatic performance). Under the influence of LOVE OF THE LONG WORD, it is beginning to
infiltrate here and should be repelled; our own word does very well. [H.W. Fowler, Modern English
Usage, 1926]


interrogation (n.)

late 14c., a question; c.1500, a questioning; a set of questions, from Old French interrogacion
(13c.) or directly from Latin interrogationem (nominative interrogatio) a question, questioning,
interrogation, noun of action from past participle stem of interrogare to ask, question, inquire,
interrogate, from inter- between (see inter-) + rogare ask, to question (see rogation).


interior (adj.)

late 15c., from Middle French int&eacute;rieur and directly from Latin interior inner, interior,
middle, comparative adjective of inter within (see inter-). Meaning of the interior parts of a
country is from 1777; meaning internal affairs of a country or state (as in U.S. Department of the
Interior) is from 1838. Interior decoration first attested 1807. Interior design from 1927.


interpolate (v.)

1610s, to alter or enlarge (a writing) by inserting new material, from Latin interpolatus, past
participle of interpolare alter, freshen up, polish; of writing, falsify, from inter- up (see
inter-) + polare, related to polire to smoothe, polish. Sense evolved in Latin from refurbish, to
alter appearance of, to falsify (especially by adding new material). Middle English had interpolen
(early 15c.) in a similar sense. Related: Interpolated; interpolating.


intercrural (adj.)

between the thighs, or in madicine, between leg-like structures, 1690s, from inter- + Latin crus
shin, shinbone leg; supports of a bridge.


interest (n.)

mid-15c., legal claim or right; concern; benefit, advantage; earlier interesse (late 14c.), from
Anglo-French interesse what one has a legal concern in, from Medieval Latin interesse compensation
for loss, noun use of Latin interresse to concern, make a difference, be of importance, literally to
be between, from inter- between (see inter-) + esse to be (see essence).    Compare German
Interesse, from the same Medieval Latin source. Form in English influenced 15c. by French interest
damage, from Latin interest it is of importance, it makes a difference, third person singular
present of interresse. Financial sense of money paid for the use of money lent (1520s) earlier was
distinguished from usury (illegal under Church law) by being in reference to compensation due from a
defaulting debtor. Meaning curiosity is first attested 1771. Interest group is attested from 1907;
interest rate by 1868.


interglacial (adj.)

1867, from German, coined 1865 by Swiss naturalist Oswald Heer (1809-1883); see inter- + glacial.


interpersonal (adj.)

1842, from inter- + personal. Introduced in a psychological sense 1938 by H.S. Sullivan (1892-1949)
to describe behavior between people in an encounter.


intercontinental (adj.)

1825, American English, from inter- + continental. Of missiles, from 1956.


interstellar (adj.)

1620s, situated between the stars, from inter- + stellar.


intercom (n.)

1940, colloquial shortening of intercommunication (mid-15c., discussion, conference; see inter- +
communication), which is attested from 1911 in reference to systems of linked telephones.


Internet (n.)

1985, the linked computer networks of the U.S. Defense Department, shortened from internetwork, from
inter- + network (n.).


interplanetary (adj.)

1690s, existing between planets, from inter- + planetary. In reference to travel between planets,
attested from 1897.


