integrate (v.)

1630s, to render (something) whole, from Latin integratus, past participle of integrare make whole,
from integer whole (see integer). Meaning to put together parts or elements and combine them into a
whole is from 1802. Integrate in the racially desegregate sense is a back-formation from
integration, dating to the 1948 U.S. presidential contest. Related: Integrated; integrating.


integrated (adj.)

1580s, combined into a whole, past participle adjective from integrate (v.). Sense of not divided by
race, etc. is from 1948.


bus (v.)

1838, to travel by omnibus, from bus (n.). Transitive meaning transport students to integrate
schools is from 1961, American English. Meaning clear tables in a restaurant is first attested 1913,
probably from the four-wheeled cart used to carry dishes. Related: Bused; busing.


integration (n.)

1610s, from French int&eacute;gration and directly from Latin integrationem (nominative integratio)
renewal, restoration, noun of action from past participle stem of integrare (see integrate). Anti-
discrimination sense is recorded from 1940 in a S.African context.


disintegrate (v.)

1796, from dis- do the opposite of + integrate (v.). Related: Disintegrated; disintegrating.


reintegrate (v.)

1580s, from re- + integrate. Also in classically correct form redintegrate. Related: Reintegrated;
reintegrating.


freedom (n.)

Old English freodom freedom, state of free will; charter, emancipation, deliverance; see free (adj.)
+ -dom. Freedom-rider recorded 1961, in reference to civil rights activists in U.S. trying to
integrate bus lines.    It has been said by some physicians, that life is a forced state. The same
may be said of freedom. It requires efforts, it presupposes mental and moral qualities of a high
order to be generally diffused in the society where it exists. [John C. Calhoun, speech, U.S. House
of Representatives, Jan. 31, 1816]   <hr />   Freedom Rider Situation Cuts Into Montgomery Juke,
Game Revenues [headline, Billboard, July 24, 1961]   Freedom fighter attested by 1903 (originally
with reference to Cuba).


