interjection (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French interjection (Old French interjeccion, 13c.), from Latin
interiectionem (nominative interiectio) a throwing or placing between, noun of action from past
participle stem of intericere, from inter- between (see inter-) + -icere, comb. form of iacere to
throw (see jet (v.)).


interject (v.)

1570s, back-formation from interjection or else from Latin interiectus, past participle of
intericere to throw between, insert, interject (see interjection). Related: Interjected;
interjecting.


ugh

1765, imitative of the sound of a cough; as an interjection of disgust, recorded from 1822.


wow (interj.)

1510s, Scottish, a natural expression of amazement. This old interjection had a new popularity in
the early 1900s and again during the 1960s and later [DAS].


o

interjection of fear, surprise, admiration, etc.; see oh.


yippee (interj.)

interjection of pleasure, exultation, etc., 1920; perhaps an extension and modification of hip
(interj.).


ahem

attention-getting interjection, 1763, lengthened from hem, imitative of clearing the throat.


tut (interj.)

1520s, along with tush (mid-15c.), a natural interjection expressing impatient or dismissive
contempt.


Lordy (interj.)

1832, in imitation of U.S. black speech; extended form of Lord as an interjection.


part of speech (n.)

c.1500, translating Latin pars orationis (see parse). Noun, adjective, pronoun, verb, adverb,
preposition, conjunction, and interjection. Sometimes article and participle are counted among them.


deus (n.)

God, a god, see Zeus; c.1300 as a French interjection; never nativized, but appearing in adopted
Latin expressions such as deus absconditus hidden god.


avaunt

interjection, late 15c., begone, literally move on, from Middle French avant forward! (see avant).


whoosh (v.)

1856, of imitative origin. Related: Whooshed; whooshing. As a noun from 1880; as an interjection by
1899.


mumble (v.)

early 14c., momelen, to eat in a slow, ineffective manner (perhaps to talk with one's mouth full),
probably frequentative of interjection mum. The -b- is excrescent. Meaning to speak indistinctly is
from mid-14c. Related: Mumbled; mumbling.


whist (n.)

card game for four, 1660s, alteration of whisk, name of a kind of card game, alluded to as early as
1520s, perhaps so called from the notion of whisking up cards after each trick, and thus from whisk
(v.). Altered perhaps on assumption that the word was an interjection invoking silence, by influence
of whist silent (15c.).


indeed (adv.)

early 14c., in dede in fact, in truth, from Old English d&aelig;d (see deed). Written as two words
till c.1600. As an interjection, 1590s; as an expression of surprise or disgust, 1834. Emphatic form
in yes (or no) indeedy attested from 1856, American English.


avast

1680s, a nautical interjection, hold! stop! probably worn down from Dutch houd vast hold fast.
AVAST. -- The order to stop, or pause, in any exercise or operation; as Avast heaving -- that is to
say, desist, or stop, from drawing in the cable or hawser, by means of the capstan &amp;c.; [George
Biddlecombe, The Art of Rigging, 1848]


lackadaisical (adj.)

1768 (Sterne), from interjection lackadaisy alas, alack (1748), an alteration of lack-a-day (1690s),
from alack the day (1590s). Hence, given to crying 'lack-a-day,' vapidly sentimental. Sense probably
altered by influence of lax. Related: Lackadaisically.


woe (n.)

late 12c., from the interjection, Old English wa!, a common exclamation of lament in many languages
(compare Latin v&aelig;, Greek oa, German weh, Lettish wai, Old Irish fe, Welsh gwae, Armenian vay).


why (adv.)

Old English hwi, instrumental case (indicating for what purpose or by what means) of hw&aelig;t (see
what), from Proto-Germanic adverb *hwi (cognates: Old Saxon hwi, Old Norse hvi), from PIE *kwi-
(source of Greek pei where), locative of *kwo- who (see who). As an interjection of surprise or
emphasis, recorded from 1510s. As a noun, cause, reason from c.1300.


my (pron.)

c.1200, mi, reduced form of mine used before words beginning in consonants except h- (my father, but
mine enemy), and from 14c. before all nouns. As interjection, by 1825, probably a shortened form of
my God!


heyday (n.)

late 16c., alteration of heyda (1520s), exclamation of playfulness or surprise, something like
Modern English hurrah, apparently an extended form of Middle English interjection hey or hei (see
hey). Modern sense of stage of greatest vigor first recorded 1751, which altered the spelling on
model of day, with which this word apparently has no etymological connection.


clam (v.)

to dig for clams, 1630s, American English, from clam (n.). Clam up be quiet is 1916, American
English, but clam was used in this sense as an interjection mid-14c.


bam

interjection, imitative of the sound of a hard hit, first recorded 1922 (from 1917 as the sound of
an artillery shell bursting). Middle English had a verb bammen to hit or strike (late 14c.). A
literary work from c.1450 represents the sound of repeated impact by Lus, bus! las, das!, and Middle
English had lushe a stroke, blow (c.1400); lushen to strike, knock, beat (c.1300).


mummer (n.)

one who performs in a mumming, actor in a dumb show, early 15c., probably a fusion of Middle French
momeur mummer (from Old French momer mask oneself, from momon mask) and Middle English mommen to
mutter, be silent, related to mum (interjection).


as (adv.)

c.1200, worn-down form of Old English alswa quite so (see also), fully established by c.1400.
Equivalent to so; any distinction in use is purely idiomatic. Related to German als as, than, from
Middle High German also. Phrase as well just as much is recorded from late 15c.; the phrase also can
imply as well as not, as well as anything else. Interjection of incredulity as if! (i.e. as if that
really could happen) is attested from 1995, an exact duplication of Latin quasi.


not

negative particle, mid-13c., unstressed variant of noht, naht in no way (see naught). As an
interjection to negate what was said before or reveal it as sarcasm, it is first attested 1900;
popularized 1989 by Wayne's World sketches on Saturday Night Live TV show. To not know X from Y
(one's ass from one's elbow, shit from Shinola, etc.) was a construction first attested c.1930.
Double negative construction not un- was derided by Orwell, but is persistent and ancient in
English, popular with Milton and the Anglo-Saxon poets.


Hercules

hero, son of Zeus and Alcmene, c.1200 (originally in reference to the Pillars of Hercules), also
Ercules, from Latin Hercles, from Greek Herakles, literally Glory of Hera; from Hera (q.v.) + kleos
glory, renown (see Clio). Used figuratively of strength since late 14c. Vocative form Hercule was a
common Roman interjection (especially me Hercule!) assuredly, certainly.


alarm (n.)

early 14c., from Old French alarme (14c.), from Italian all'arme to arms! (literally to the arms).
An interjection that came to be used as the word for the call or warning (compare alert). Extended
16c. to any sound to warn of danger or to arouse. Weakened sense of apprehension, unease is from
1833. Variant alarum is due to the rolling -r- in the vocalized form. Sometimes in early years
anglicized as all-arm. Alarm clock is attested from 1690s (as A Larum clock).


hey

c.1200, variously, in Middle English, hei, hai, ai, he, heh, expressing challenge, rebuttal, anger,
derision, sorrow, or concern; also a shout of encouragement to hunting dogs. Possibly a natural
expression (compare Roman eho, Greek eia, German hei).    &THORN;a onswerede &thorn;e an swi&eth;e
prudeliche, `Hei! hwuch wis read of se icudd keiser!' [St. Katherine of Alexandria, c.1200]    In
Latin, hei was a cry of grief or fear; but heia, eia was an interjection denoting joy.


whoop (v.)

mid-14c., houpen, partly imitative, partly from Old French huper, houper to cry out, shout, also
imitative. It is attested as an interjection from at least mid-15c. Spelling with wh- is from mid-
15c. The noun is recorded from c.1600. Phrase whoop it up create a disturbance is recorded from
1881. Expression whoop-de-do is recorded from 1929. Whooping cough (1739) is now the prevalent
spelling of hooping cough; whooping crane is recorded from 1791.


hush (v.)

1540s, variant of Middle English huisht (late 14c.), probably of imitative origin, with terminal -t
lost probably by being mistaken for a past tense suffix. Hush-hush (adj.) is 1916 reduplication.
Related: Hushed; hushing. The noun is attested from 1680s. As an interjection meaning be quiet,
attested by c.1600. To hush (one's) mouth be quiet is attested from 1878. Hush up suppress talk for
secrecy's sake is from 1630s. Hush-money is attested from 1709. Hush-puppy deep-fried ball of
cornmeal batter first attested 1899; as a type of lightweight soft shoe, it is a proprietary name,
registered 1961.


now (adv.)

Old English nu now, at present, immediately; now that, also used as an interjection and as an
introductory word; common Germanic (Old Norse nu, Dutch nu, Old Frisian nu, German nun, Gothic nu
now), from PIE *nu now (cognates: Sanskrit and Avestan nu, Old Persian nuram, Hittite nuwa, Greek
nu, nun, Latin nunc, Old Church Slavonic nyne, Lithuanian nu, Old Irish nu-). Perhaps originally
newly, recently, and related to the root of new.    Often merely emphatic; non-temporal usage (as in
Now, then) was in Old English. The adjective meaning up to date first recorded 1967, but the word
was used also as an adjective in Middle English with the sense current from late 14c. Now and then
occasionally is from 1530s; now or never attested from 1550s.


oh

1530s, interjection expressing various emotions, a common Indo-European word (Old French &ocirc;;,
oh; Latin o, oh; Greek o; Old Church Slavonic and Lithuanian o; Gothic, Dutch, German o; Old Irish
a; Sanskrit a), but not found in Old English, which translated Latin oh with la or eala.    The
present tendency is to restrict oh to places where it has a certain independence, &amp; prefer o
where it is proclitic or leans forward upon what follows .... [Fowler]    Often extended for
emphasis, as in Oh, baby, stock saying from c.1918; oh, boy (1910); oh, yeah (1924). Reduplicated
form oh-oh as an expression of alarm or dismay is attested from 1944. Oh-so so very (often sarcastic
or ironic) is from 1922. Oh yeah? really? Is that so? attested from 1930.


well (adv.)

in a satisfactory manner, Old English wel abundantly, very, very much; indeed, to be sure; with good
reason; nearly, for the most part, from Proto-Germanic *welo- (cognates: Old Saxon wela, Old Norse
vel, Old Frisian wel, Dutch wel, Old High German wela, German wohl, Gothic waila well), from PIE
root *wel- (2) to wish, will (cognates: Sanskrit prati varam at will, Old Church Slavonic vole well,
Welsh gwell better, Latin velle to wish, will, Old English willan to wish; see will (v.)).    Also
used in Old English as an interjection and an expression of surprise. The adjective was in Old
English in the sense in good fortune, happy, from the adverb; sense of satisfactory is from late
14c.; agreeable to wish or desire is from mid-15c.; in good health, not ailing is from 1550s. Well-
to-do prosperous is recorded from 1825.


lord (n.)

mid-13c., laverd, loverd, from Old English hlaford master of a household, ruler, superior, also God
(translating Latin Dominus, though Old English drihten was used more often), earlier hlafweard,
literally one who guards the loaves, from hlaf bread, loaf (see loaf (n.)) + weard keeper, guardian
(see ward (n.)). Compare lady (literally bread-kneader), and Old English hlaf&aelig;ta household
servant, literally loaf-eater. Modern monosyllabic form emerged 14c. As an interjection from late
14c. Lord's Prayer is from 1540s. Lord of the Flies translates Beelzebub (q.v.) and was name of 1954
book by William Golding. To drink like a lord is from 1620s.


mercy (n.)

late 12c., God's forgiveness of his creatures' offenses, from Old French mercit, merci (9c.) reward,
gift; kindness, grace, pity, from Latin mercedem (nominative merces) reward, wages, pay hire (in
Vulgar Latin favor, pity), from merx (genitive mercis) wares, merchandise (see market (n.)). In
Church Latin (6c.) applied to the heavenly reward of those who show kindness to the helpless.
Meaning disposition to forgive or show compassion is attested from early 13c. As an interjection,
attested from mid-13c. In French largely superseded by mis&eacute;ricorde except as a word of
thanks. Seat of mercy golden covering of the Ark of the Covenant (1530) is Tyndale's loan-
translation of Luther's gnadenstuhl, an inexact rendering of Hebrew kapporeth, literally
propitiatory.


sound (adj.)

free from special defect or injury, c.1200, from Old English gesund sound, safe, having the organs
and faculties complete and in perfect action, from Proto-Germanic *sunda-, from Germanic root *swen-
to- healthy, strong (cognates: Old Saxon gisund, Old Frisian sund, Dutch gezond, Old High German
gisunt, German gesund healthy, as in the post-sneezing interjection gesundheit; also Old English
swi&eth; strong, Gothic swin&thorn;s strong, German geschwind fast, quick), with connections in
Indo-Iranian and Balto-Slavic. Meaning right, correct, free from error is from mid-15c. Meaning
financially solid or safe is attested from c.1600; of sleep, undisturbed, from 1540s. Sense of
holding accepted opinions is from 1520s.


real (adj.)

early 14c., actually existing, true; mid-15c., relating to things (especially property), from Old
French reel real, actual, from Late Latin realis actual, in Medieval Latin belonging to the thing
itself, from Latin res matter, thing, of uncertain origin. Meaning genuine is recorded from 1550s;
sense of unaffected, no-nonsense is from 1847.    Generally, by the time you are Real, most of your
hair has been loved off, and your eyes drop out and you get loose in the joints and very shabby. But
these things don't matter at all, because once you are Real you can't be ugly, except to people who
don't understand. [Margery Williams, The Velveteen Rabbit]   Real estate is first recorded 1660s and
retains the oldest English sense of the word. Noun phrase real time is early 19c. as a term in logic
and philosophy, 1953 as an adjectival phrase; get real, usually an interjection, was U.S. college
slang in 1960s, reached wide popularity c.1987.


fudge (v.)

put together clumsily or dishonestly, 1610s, perhaps an alteration of fadge make suit, fit (1570s),
of unknown origin. As an interjection meaning lies, nonsense from 1766; the noun meaning nonsense is
1791. It could be a natural extension from the verb. But Farmer suggests provincial French fuche,
feuche, an exclamation of contempt from Low German futsch = begone.  The traditional English story
traces fudge in this sense to a sailor's retort to anything considered lies or nonsense, from
Captain Fudge, who always brought home his owners a good cargo of lies [Isaac Disraeli, 1791, citing
a pamphlet from 1700]. It seems there really was a late 17c. Captain Fudge, called Lying Fudge, and
perhaps his name reinforced this form of fadge in the sense of contrive without the necessary
materials. The surname is from Fuche, a pet form of the masc. proper name Fulcher, from Germanic and
meaning literally people-army.


no

negative reply, early 13c., from Old English na (adv.) no, never, not at all, from ne not, no + a
ever. First element from Proto-Germanic *ne (cognates: Old Norse, Old Frisian, Old High German ne,
Gothic ni not), from PIE root *ne no, not (see un-). Second element from PIE *aiw- vital force,
life, long life, eternity (see aye (adv.)).    As an adjective meaning not any (c.1200) it is
reduced from Old English nan (see none), the final -n omitted first before consonants and then
altogether. As a noun from c.1300. Phrase no can do it is not possible is attested from 1827, a
locution of English-speaking Chinese noted 19c. in China, Australia and West Coast of U.S.    We
repeated our advice again and again, but got no answer but a loud horse-laugh, and their national
maxim of No can do: Europe fashion no do in China. [Reminiscences of a Voyage to and from China, in
Paxton's Horticultural Register, London, 1836]    Construction no X, no Y attested from 1530s (in no
peny no pardon). No problem as an interjection of assurance first attested 1963. No way as an
expression meaning it can't be done is attested by 1968 (no way by no means is from c.1400).


soft (adj.)

Old English softe, earlier sefte, gentle, mild-natured; easeful, comfortable, calm, undisturbed;
luxurious, from West Germanic *samfti, from Proto-Germanic *samftijaz level, even, smooth, gentle,
soft (cognates: Old Saxon safti, Old High German semfti, German sanft; and from a variant form with
-ch- for -f-, Middle Dutch sachte, Dutch zacht, German sacht), from root *som- fitting, agreeable.
From c.1200 of material things, not stiff, not coarse, fine; yielding to weight. From late 14c. of
wind, rain, etc. Of sounds, quiet, not loud, from early 13c. Of words, mild, restrained; courteous
mid-14c. From late 14c. as indulgent, also physically feeble; easily overcome, lacking manly
courage. From 1755 of water (relatively free from mineral salts), from 1789 of coal. Meaning
foolish, simple, silly is attested from 1620s; earlier easily moved or swayed; soft-hearted,
sympathetic; docile (early 13c.). In reference to drinks, non-alcoholic from 1880. As an adverb, Old
English softe gently; late 13c. as quietly. As an interjection from 1540s.   Soft landing is from
1958 and the U.S. space program. Adjective soft-core (in reference to pornography) is from 1966 (see
hardcore). Soft rock as a music style is attested from 1969. Soft sell is from 1955. Soft-shoe as a
dancing style is attested from 1927. Soft-boiled is from 1757 of eggs; of persons, ideas, etc., 1930
(compare half-baked). Soft-focus (adj.) of camera shots is from 1917. The softer sex women
collectively is from 1640s.


rat (n.)

late Old English r&aelig;t rat, of uncertain origin. Similar words are found in Celtic (Gaelic
radan), Romanic (Italian ratto, Spanish rata, French rat) and Germanic (Old Saxon ratta; Dutch rat;
German Ratte, dialectal Ratz; Swedish r&#229;tta, Danish rotte) languages, but connection is
uncertain and origin unknown. In all this it is very much like cat.    Perhaps from Vulgar Latin
*rattus, but Weekley thinks this is of Germanic origin, the animal having come from the East with
the race-migrations and the word passing thence to the Romanic languages. American Heritage and
Tucker connect Old English r&aelig;t to Latin rodere and thus PIE *red- to scrape, scratch, gnaw,
source of rodent (q.v.). Klein says there is no such connection and suggests a possible cognate in
Greek rhine file, rasp. Weekley connects them with a question mark and Barnhart writes, the
relationship to each other of the Germanic, Romance, and Celtic words for rat is uncertain. OED says
probable the rat word spread from Germanic to Romanic, but takes no position on ultimate origin.
RATS. Of these there are the following kinds: a black rat and a grey rat, a py-rat and a cu-rat.
[Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, Grose, 1788]    Middle English common form was ratton, from
augmented Old French form raton. Sense of one who abandons his associates (1620s) is from belief
that rats leave a ship about to sink or a house about to fall and led to meaning traitor, informant
(1902; verb 1910). Interjection rats is American English, 1886. To smell a rat is 1540s; to be put
on the watch by suspicion as the cat by the scent of a rat; to suspect danger [Johnson]. _____-rat,
person who frequents _____ (in earliest reference dock-rat) is from 1864.


shoot (v.)

Old English sceotan to hurl missiles, cast; strike, hit, push; run, rush; send forth swiftly; wound
with missiles (class II strong verb; past tense sceat, past participle scoten), from Proto-Germanic
*skeutanan (cognates: Old Saxon skiotan, Old Norse skjota to shoot with (a weapon); shoot, launch,
push, shove quickly, Old Frisian skiata, Middle Dutch skieten, Dutch schieten, Old High German
skiozan, German schie&szlig;en), from PIE root *skeud- to shoot, to chase, to throw, to project
(cognates: Sanskrit skundate hastens, makes haste, Old Church Slavonic iskydati to throw out,
Lithuanian skudrus quick, nimble).    In reference to pool playing, from 1926. Meaning to strive
(for) is from 1967, American English. Sense of descend (a river) quickly is from 1610s. Meaning to
inject by means of a hypodermic needle is attested from 1914. Meaning photograph (especially a
movie) is from 1890. As an interjection, an arbitrary euphemistic alteration of shit, it is recorded
from 1934. Shoot the breeze chat first recorded 1941. Shoot-'em-up (adj.) in reference to violent
entertainment (Western movies, etc.) is from 1942. Shoot to kill first attested 1867. Shoot the cat
to vomit is from 1785. To shoot the moon originally meant depart by night with ones goods to escape
back rent (1829).    O, 'tis cash makes such crowds to the gin shops roam, And 'tis cash often
causes a rumpus at home ;  'Tis when short of cash people oft shoot the moon ;  And 'tis cash always
keeps our pipes in tune.  Cash! cash! &amp;c.;  [The Melodist and Mirthful Olio, An Elegant
Collection of the Most Popular Songs, vol. IV, London, 1829]


man (n.)

Old English man, mann human being, person (male or female); brave man, hero; servant, vassal, from
Proto-Germanic *manwaz (cognates: Old Saxon, Swedish, Dutch, Old High German man, German Mann, Old
Norse ma&eth;r, Danish mand, Gothic manna man), from PIE root *man- (1) man (cognates: Sanskrit
manuh, Avestan manu-, Old Church Slavonic mozi, Russian muzh man, male).    Plural men (German
M&auml;nner) shows effects of i-mutation. Sometimes connected to root *men- to think (see mind),
which would make the ground sense of man one who has intelligence, but not all linguists accept
this. Liberman, for instance, writes, Most probably man 'human being' is a secularized divine name
from Mannus [Tacitus, Germania, chap. 2], believed to be the progenitor of the human race.    So I
am as he that seythe, `Come hyddr John, my man.' [1473]    Sense of adult male is late (c.1000); Old
English used wer and wif to distinguish the sexes, but wer began to disappear late 13c. and was
replaced by man. Universal sense of the word remains in mankind and manslaughter. Similarly, Latin
had homo human being and vir adult male human being, but they merged in Vulgar Latin, with homo
extended to both senses. A like evolution took place in Slavic languages, and in some of them the
word has narrowed to mean husband. PIE had two stems: *uiHro freeman (source of Sanskrit vira-,
Lithuanian vyras, Latin vir, Old Irish fer, Gothic wair) and *hner man, a title more of honor than
*uiHro (source of Sanskrit nar-, Armenian ayr, Welsh ner, Greek aner).    MANTRAP, a woman's
commodity. [Grose, Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, London, 1785]   Man also was in Old English as
an indefinite pronoun, one, people, they. The chess pieces so called from c.1400. As an interjection
of surprise or emphasis, first recorded c.1400, but especially popular from early 20c. Man-about-
town is from 1734; the Man the boss is from 1918. To be man or mouse be brave or be timid is from
1540s. Men's Liberation first attested 1970.At the kinges court, my brother, Ech man for himself.
[Chaucer, Knight's Tale, c.1386]


