intermediary

1788 (adj.); 1791 (n.), from French interm&eacute;diaire (17c.), from Medieval Latin intermedium,
from Latin intermedius (see intermediate).


Betelgeuse

bright star in the shoulder of Orion, 1515, from Arabic Ibt al Jauzah the Armpit of the Central One.
Intermediary forms include Bed Elgueze, Beit Algueze.


schema (n.)

plural schemata, 1796, in Kantian philosophy (a product of the imagination intermediary between an
image and a concept), from Greek skhema (see scheme (n.)). Meaning diagrammatic representation is
from 1890; general sense of hypothetical outline is by 1939.


mean (n.)

that which is halfway between extremes, early 14c., from Old French meien middle, means,
intermediary, noun use of adjective from Latin medianus of or that is in the middle (see mean
(adj.2)). Oldest sense is musical; mathematical sense is from c.1500. Some senes reflect confusion
with mean (adj.1). This is the mean in by no means (late 15c.).


craven (adj.)

early 13c., cravant, perhaps from Old French crevante defeated, past participle of cravanter to
strike down, to fall down, from Latin crepare to crack, creak. Sense affected by crave and moved
from defeated to cowardly (c.1400) perhaps via intermediary sense of confess oneself defeated.
Related: Cravenly; cravenness.


mackerel (n.)

edible fish, c.1300, from Old French maquerel mackerel (Modern French maquereau), of unknown origin
but apparently identical with Old French maquerel pimp, procurer, broker, agent, intermediary, a
word from a Germanic source (compare Middle Dutch makelaer broker, from Old Frisian mek marriage,
from maken to make). The connection is obscure, but medieval people had imaginative notions about
the erotic habits of beasts. The fish approach the shore in shoals in summertime to spawn.
Exclamation holy mackerel is attested from 1876.


express (v.)

late 14c., from Old French espresser press, squeeze out; speak one's mind (Modern French exprimer),
Medieval Latin expressare, frequentative of exprimere represent, describe, literally to press out
(source of Italian espresso; the sense evolution here is perhaps via an intermediary sense of
something like clay that takes under pressure takes the form of an image), from ex- out (see ex-) +
pressare to press, push, from Latin premere (see press (v.1)). Related: Expressed; expresses;
expressing.


whore (n.)

1530s spelling alteration (see wh-) of Middle English hore, from Old English hore prostitute,
harlot, from Proto-Germanic *horaz (fem. *horon-) one who desires (cognates: Old Norse hora
adulteress, Danish hore, Swedish hora, Dutch hoer, Old High German huora whore; in Gothic only in
the masc. hors adulterer, fornicator, also as a verb, horinon commit adultery), from PIE *ka- to
like, desire, a base that has produced words in other languages for lover (cognates: Latin carus
dear; Old Irish cara friend; Old Persian kama desire; Sanskrit Kama, name of the Hindu god of love,
kamah love, desire, the first element in Kama Sutra).   Whore itself is perhaps a Germanic euphemism
for a word that has not survived. The Old English vowel naturally would have yielded *hoor, which is
the pronunciation in some dialects; it might have shifted by influence of Middle English homonym
hore physical filth, slime, also moral corruption, sin, from Old English horh. The wh- form became
current 16c. A general term of abuse for an unchaste or lewd woman (without regard to money) from at
least c.1200. Of male prostitutes from 1630s. Whore of Babylon is from Rev. xvii:1, 5, etc. In
Middle English with occasional plural forms horen, heoranna.    The word, with its derivatives, is
now avoided polite speech; its survival in literature, so as it survives, is due to the fact that it
is a favorite word with Shakspere (who uses it, with its derivatives, 99 times) and is common in the
authorized English version of the Bible ... though the American revisers recommended the
substitution of harlot as less gross .... [Century Dictionary]     Some equivalent words in other
languages also derive from sources not originally pejorative, such as Bohemian nevestka, diminutive
of nevesta bride; Dutch deern, German dirne originally girl, lass, wench; also perhaps Old French
pute, perhaps literally girl, fem. of Vulgar Latin *puttus (but perhaps rather from Latin putidus
stinking; see poontang). Welsh putain whore is from French, probably via Middle English. Among other
languages, Greek porne prostitute is related to pernemi sell, with an original notion probably of a
female slave sold for prostitution; Latin meretrix is literally one who earns wages (source of Irish
mertrech, Old English miltestre whore, prostitute).    The vulgar Roman word was scortum, literally
skin, hide. Another term was lupa, literally she-wolf (preserved in Spanish loba, Italian lupa,
French louve; see wolf (n.)). And of course there was prostituta, literally placed in front, thus
publicly exposed, from the fem. past participle of prostituere (see prostitute (n.)). Another Old
Norse term was sk&aelig;kja, which yielded Danish sk&oslash;ge, Swedish sk&ouml;ka; probably from
Middle Low German schoke, which is perhaps from schode foreskin of a horse's penis, perhaps with the
sense of skin (compare Latin scortum) or perhaps via an intermediary sense of vagina. Spanish
ramera, Portuguese ramiera are from fem. form of ramero young bird of prey, literally little branch,
from ramo branch. Breton gast is cognate with Welsh gast bitch, of uncertain origin. Compare also
strumpet, harlot.    Old Church Slavonic ljubodejica is from ljuby dejati fornicate, a compound from
ljuby love + dejati put, perform. Russian bljad whore derives from Old Church Slavonic bladinica,
from bladu fornication. Polish nierz&#261;dnica is literally disorderly woman. Sanskrit vecya is a
derivation of veca- house, dwelling, especially house of ill-repute, brothel. Another term,
pumccali, means literally one who runs after men. Avestan jahika is literally woman, but only of
evil creatures; another term is kunairi, from pejorative prefix ku- + nairi woman.


