integrity (n.)

c.1400, innocence, blamelessness; chastity, purity, from Old French integrit&eacute; or directly
from Latin integritatem (nominative integritas) soundness, wholeness, blamelessness, from integer
whole (see integer). Sense of wholeness, perfect condition is mid-15c.


entirety (n.)

also entierty, mid-14c., enterete, from Anglo-French entiertie, Old French entieret&eacute;
totality, entirety; integrity, purity, from Latin integritatem (nominative integritas) completeness,
soundness, integrity, from integer (see integer).


shaky (adj.)

1840, of handwriting; 1841 of persons, horses, and credit; 1850 of structures; from shake (v.) + -y
(2). General sense of uncertain, of questionable integrity is from 1834. Earliest of trees or logs,
split, having fissures (1808). Related: Shakily; shakiness.


abstinence (n.)

mid-14c., forbearance in indulgence of the appetites, from Old French abstinence (earlier
astenance), from Latin abstinentia abstinence, starvation; self-restraint, integrity, noun of
quality from abstinentem (nominative abstinens), present participle of abstinere (see abstain).
Specifically of sexual appetites from mid-14c., but also in Middle English of food, fighting,
luxury.


Bayard (n.)

generic or mock-heroic name for a horse, mid-14c., from Old French Baiard, name of the bay-colored
magic steed given by Charlemagne to Renaud in the legends, from Old French baiart bay-colored (see
bay (adj.)). Also by early 14c. proverbial as a blind person or thing, for now-unknown reasons. The
name later was used attributively of gentlemen of courage and integrity, in this sense from Pierre
du Terrail, seigneur de Bayard (1473-1524), French knight celebrated as Chevalier sans peur et sans
reproche. The surname is perhaps in reference to hair color.


honesty (n.)

early 14c., splendor, honor; elegance, later honorable position; propriety of behavior, good
manners; virginity, chastity (late 14c.), from Old French honest&eacute; (Modern French
honn&ecirc;tet&eacute;), from Latin honestatem (nominative honestas) honor received from others;
reputation, character; figuratively uprightness, probity, integrity, virtue, from honestus (see
honest). Meaning moral purity, uprightness, virtue, justness is from c.1400; in English, the word
originally had more to do with honor than honest.


trust (n.)

c.1200, reliance on the veracity, integrity, or other virtues of someone or something; religious
faith, from Old Norse traust help, confidence, protection, support, from Proto-Germanic abstract
noun *traustam (cognates: Old Frisian trast, Dutch troost comfort, consolation, Old High German
trost trust, fidelity, German Trost comfort, consolation, Gothic trausti agreement, alliance), from
Proto-Germanic *treuwaz-, source of Old English treowian to believe, trust, and treowe faithful,
trusty (see true (adj.)).    from c.1300 as reliability, trustworthiness; trustiness, fidelity,
faithfulness; from late 14c. as confident expectation and that on which one relies. From early 15c.
in legal sense of confidence placed in a one who holds or enjoys the use of property entrusted to
him by its legal owner; mid-15c. as condition of being legally entrusted. Meaning businesses
organized to reduce competition is recorded from 1877. Trust-buster is recorded from 1903.


