intellectual (n.)

1590s, mind, intellect, from intellectual (adj.); sense of an intellectual person is from 1650s.
Related: Intellectuals.


intellect (n.)

late 14c. (but little used before 16c.), from Old French intellecte intellectual capacity (13c.),
and directly from Latin intellectus discernment, a perception, understanding, from noun use of past
participle of intelligere to understand, discern (see intelligence).


intellectuality (n.)

mid-15c., the part of the mind which understands; understanding, intellect; from Old French
intellectualit&eacute; and directly from Late Latin intellectualitas, from Latin intellectualis (see
intellectual).


heart (n.)

Old English heorte heart; breast, soul, spirit, will, desire; courage; mind, intellect, from Proto-
Germanic *herton- (cognates: Old Saxon herta, Old Frisian herte, Old Norse hjarta, Dutch hart, Old
High German herza, German Herz, Gothic hairto), from PIE *kerd- heart (cognates: Greek kardia, Latin
cor, Old Irish cride, Welsh craidd, Hittite kir, Lithuanian &#353;irdis, Russian serdce heart,
Breton kreiz middle, Old Church Slavonic sreda middle).    Spelling with -ea- is c.1500, reflecting
what then was a long vowel, and remained when pronunciation shifted. Most of the figurative senses
were present in Old English, including intellect, memory, now only in by heart. Heart attack
attested from 1875; heart disease is from 1864. The card game hearts is so called from 1886.


greenhead (n.)

1580s, young, untrained intellect, from green (adj.) + head (n.). As a type of biting fly, by 1837.


nous (n.)

slang for intelligence, common sense, 1706, from Greek nous, Attic form of noos mind, intellect,
which was taken in English in philosophy 1670s.


mastermind (n.)

1720, an outstanding intellect, from master (n.) + mind (n.). Meaning head of a criminal enterprise
is first attested 1872. As a verb from 1940. Related: Masterminded; masterminding.


noetic (adj.)

pertaining to the intellect, 1650s, from Greek noetikos intelligent, from noesis (see noesis).


highbrow (n.)

person of superior intellect and taste, 1902, back-formation from high-browed (adj.), which is
attested from 1891, from high (adj.) + brow (see also lowbrow).


witty (adj.)

Old English wittig clever, wise, sagacious; in one's right mind; see wit (n.) intellect + -y (2).
Meaning possessing sparkling wit is recorded from 1580s. Related: Wittily; wittiness.


profundity (n.)

early 15c., bottom of the sea, from Old French profundite (Modern French profondit&eacute;) and
directly from Late Latin profunditatem (nominative profunditas) depth, intensity, immensity, from
profundus deep, vast (see profound). Meaning depth of intellect in English is from c.1500.


distraught (adj.)

late 14c., alteration (Englishing) of earlier distract (perhaps by association with other past
participle forms in -ght, such as caught, bought, brought), mid-14c., past participle of distracten
derange the intellect of, drive mad (see distract).


inwit (n.)

Middle English word meaning conscience (early 13c.), reason, intellect (c.1300), from in (adv.) +
wit (n.). Not related to Old English inwit, which meant deceit. Joyce's use in Ulysses (1922), which
echoes the 14c. work Ayenbite of Inwyt, is perhaps the best-known example of the modern use of the
word as a conscious archaism.&THORN;ese ben also &thorn;y fyve inwyttys: Wyl, Resoun, Mynd,
Ymaginacioun, and Thoght [Wyclif, c.1380]   <hr />   If ... such good old English words as inwit and
wanhope should be rehabilitated (and they have been pushing up their heads for thirty years), we
should gain a great deal. [Robert Bridges, 1922]


culture (n.)

mid-15c., the tilling of land, from Middle French culture and directly from Latin cultura a
cultivating, agriculture, figuratively care, culture, an honoring, from past participle stem of
colere tend, guard, cultivate, till (see colony). The figurative sense of cultivation through
education is first attested c.1500. Meaning the intellectual side of civilization is from 1805; that
of collective customs and achievements of a people is from 1867.    For without culture or holiness,
which are always the gift of a very few, a man may renounce wealth or any other external thing, but
he cannot renounce hatred, envy, jealousy, revenge. Culture is the sanctity of the intellect.
[William Butler Yeats]    Slang culture vulture is from 1947. Culture shock first recorded 1940.


ingenious (adj.)

early 15c., intellectual, talented, from Middle French ing&eacute;nieux clever, ingenious (Old
French engeignos), from Latin ingeniosus of good capacity, full of intellect; clever, gifted with
genius, from ingenium innate qualities, ability, literally that which is inborn, from in- in (see
in- (2)) + gignere, from PIE *gen- produce (see genus). Sense of skillful, clever at contrivance
first recorded 1540s. In a sense of crafty, clever, skillful Middle English had enginous (mid-14c.),
from Old French engeignos. Related: Ingeniously; ingeniousness.


clever (adj.)

1580s, handy, dexterous, apparently from East Anglian dialectal cliver expert at seizing, perhaps
from East Frisian kl&#252;fer skillful, or Norwegian dialectic klover ready, skillful, and perhaps
influenced by Old English clifer claw, hand (early usages seem to refer to dexterity). Or perhaps
akin to Old Norse kleyfr easy to split and from a root related to cleave to split. Extension to
intellect is first recorded 1704.    This is a low word, scarcely ever used but in burlesque or
conversation; and applied to any thing a man likes, without a settled meaning. [Johnson, 1755]
The meaning has narrowed since, but clever also often in old use and dialect meant well-shaped,
attractive-looking and in 19c. American English sometimes good-natured, agreeable. Related:
Cleverly; cleverness.


mood (n.1)

emotional condition, frame of mind, Old English mod heart, frame of mind, spirit; courage,
arrogance, pride; power, violence, from Proto-Germanic *motha- (cognates: Old Saxon mod mind,
courage, Old Frisian mod intellect, mind, intention, Old Norse mo&eth;r wrath, anger, Middle Dutch
moet, Dutch moed, Old High German muot, German Mut courage, Gothic mo&thorn;s courage, anger), of
unknown origin.    A much more vigorous word in Anglo-Saxon than currently, and used widely in
compounds (such as modcr&aelig;ftig intelligent, modful proud). To be in the mood willing (to do
something) is from 1580s. First record of mood swings is from 1942.


wit (n.)

mental capacity, Old English wit, witt, more commonly gewit understanding, intellect, sense;
knowledge, consciousness, conscience, from Proto-Germanic *wit- (cognates: Old Saxon wit, Old Norse
vit, Danish vid, Swedish vett, Old Frisian wit, Old High German wizzi knowledge, understanding,
intelligence, mind, German Witz wit, witticism, joke, Gothic unwiti ignorance), from PIE *weid- to
see, metaphorically to know (see vision). Related to Old English witan to know (source of wit (v.)).
Meaning ability to connect ideas and express them in an amusing way is first recorded 1540s; that of
person of wit or learning is from late 15c. For nuances of usage, see humor.    A witty saying
proves nothing. [Voltaire, Diner du Comte de Boulainvilliers]   <hr />   Wit ought to be five or six
degrees above the ideas that form the intelligence of an audience. [Stendhal, Life of Henry Brulard]
Witjar was old slang (18c.) for head, skull. Witling (1690s) was a pretender to wit.


typhus (n.)

acute infectious fever, usually accompanied by prostration, delirium, and small reddish spots, 1785,
from medical Latin, from Greek typhos stupor caused by fever, literally smoke, from typhein to
smoke, related to typhos blind, typhon whirlwind, from PIE *dheubh-, perhaps an extended form of
root *dheu- (1) to fly about like dust.    The Greek term [typhos] (smoke, mist, fog) was employed
by Hippocrates to define a confused state of the intellect, with a tendency to stupor (stupor
attonitus); and in this sense it is aptly applied to typhus fever with its slow cerebration and
drowsy stupor. Boissier de Sauvages first (in 1760) called this fever typhus, and the name was
adopted by Cullen of Edinburgh in 1769. Previous to the time of de Sauvages typhus was known as
Pestilential or Putrid Fever, or by some name suggested by the eruption, or expressive of the
locality in which it appeared, as Camp, Jail, Hospital, or Ship Fever (Murchison). [Thomas Clifford,
ed., A System of Medicine, New York, 1897]    Related: typhous (adj.).


Islam (n.)

religious system revealed by Muhammad, 1818, from Arabic islam, literally submission (to the will of
God), from root of aslama he resigned, he surrendered, he submitted, causative conjunction of salima
he was safe, and related to salam peace.    ... Islam is the only major religion, along with
Buddhism (if we consider the name of the religion to come from Budd, the Divine Intellect, and not
the Buddha), whose name is not related to a person or ethnic group, but to the central idea of the
religion. [The Heart of Islam: Enduring Values for Humanity, Seyyed Hossein Nasr, 2002]    Earlier
English names for the faith include Mahometry (late 15c.), Muhammadism (1610s), Islamism (1747), and
Ismaelism (c.1600), which in part is from Ishmaelite, a name formerly given (especially by Jews) to
Arabs, as descendants of Ishmael (q.v.), and in part from Arabic Ismailiy, name of the Shiite sect
that after 765 C.E. followed the Imamship through descendants of Ismail (Arabic for Ishmael), eldest
son of Jafar, the sixth Imam. The Ismailians were not numerous, but among them were the powerful
Fatimid dynasty in Egypt and the Assassins, both of whom loomed large in European imagination.


sharp (adj.)

Old English scearp having a cutting edge; pointed; intellectually acute, active, shrewd; keen (of
senses); severe; biting, bitter (of tastes), from Proto-Germanic *skarpaz, literally cutting
(cognates: Old Saxon scarp, Old Norse skarpr, Old Frisian skerp, Dutch scherp, German scharf sharp),
from PIE *(s)ker- (1) to cut (cognates: Lettish skarbs sharp, Middle Irish cerb cutting; see shear
(v.)).    The figurative meaning acute or penetrating in intellect or perception was in Old English;
hence keenly alive to one's own interests, quick to take advantage (1690s). Of words or talk,
cutting, sarcastic, from early 13c. Meaning distinct in contour is from 1670s. The adverbial meaning
abruptly is from 1836; that of promptly is first attested 1840. The musical meaning half step above
(a given tone) is from 1570s. Meaning stylish is from 1944, hepster slang, from earlier general
slang sense of excellent (1940). Phrase sharp as a tack first recorded 1912 (sharp as a needle has
been around since Old English). Sharp-shinned attested from 1704 of persons, 1813 of hawks.


mind (n.)

late 12c., from Old English gemynd memory, remembrance, state of being remembered; thought, purpose;
conscious mind, intellect, intention, Proto-Germanic *ga-mundiz (cognates: Gothic muns thought,
munan to think; Old Norse minni mind; German Minne (archaic) love, originally memory, loving
memory), from PIE root *men- think, remember, have one's mind aroused, with derivatives referring to
qualities of mind or states of thought (cognates: Sanskrit matih thought, munih sage, seer; Greek
memona I yearn, mania madness, mantis one who divines, prophet, seer; Latin mens mind,
understanding, reason, memini I remember, mentio remembrance; Lithuanian mintis thought, idea, Old
Church Slavonic mineti to believe, think, Russian pamjat memory).    Meaning mental faculty is mid-
14c. Memory, one of the oldest senses, now is almost obsolete except in old expressions such as bear
in mind, call to mind. Mind's eye remembrance is early 15c. Phrase time out of mind is attested from
early 15c. To pay no mind disregard is recorded from 1916, American English dialect. To have half a
mind to to have one's mind half made up to (do something) is recorded from 1726. Mind-reading is
from 1882.


