intimidate (v.)

1640s, from Medieval Latin intimidatus, past participle of intimidare to frighten, intimidate, from
Latin in- in (see in- (2)) + timidus fearful (see timid). Related: Intimidated; intimidating.


intimidation (n.)

1650s, noun of action from intimidate; perhaps modeled on French intimidation.


cow (v.)

intimidate, c.1600, probably from Old Norse kuga oppress, of unknown origin, but perhaps having
something to do with cow (n.) on the notion of easily herded. Related: Cowed; cowing.


rag (v.)

scold, 1739, of unknown origin; perhaps related to Danish dialectal rag grudge. Related: Ragged;
ragging. Compare bullyrag, ballarag intimidate (1807).


daunt (v.)

c.1300, to vanquish, from Old French danter, variant of donter (12c., Modern French dompter) be
afraid of, fear, doubt; control, restrain, from Latin domitare, frequentative of domare to tame (see
tame (v.)). Sense of to intimidate is from late 15c. Related: Daunted; daunting.


punk (n.2)

worthless person (especially a young hoodlum), 1917, probably from punk kid criminal's apprentice,
underworld slang first attested 1904 (with overtones of catamite). Ultimately from punk (n.1) or
else from punk prostitute, harlot, strumpet, first recorded 1590s, of unknown origin.    For sense
shift from harlot to homosexual, compare gay. By 1923 used generally for young boy, inexperienced
person (originally in show business, as in punk day, circus slang from 1930, day when children are
admitted free). The verb meaning to back out of is from 1920.    The young criminal sense is no
doubt the inspiration in punk rock first attested 1971 (in a Dave Marsh article in Creem, referring
to Rudi Question Mark Martinez); popularized 1976.    If you looked different, people tried to
intimidate you all the time. It was the same kind of crap you had to put up with as a hippie, when
people started growing long hair. Only now it was the guys with the long hair yelling at you. You
think they would have learned something. I had this extreme parrot red hair and I got hassled so
much I carried a sign that said FUCK YOU ASSHOLE. I got so tired of yelling it, I would just hold up
the sign. [Bobby Startup, Philadelphia punk DJ, Philadelphia Weekly, Oct. 10, 2001]


