intimate (n.)

1650s, person with whom one is intimate, from intimate (adj.).


intimate (v.)

suggest indirectly, 1530s, back-formation from intimation, or else from Late Latin intimatus, past
participle of intimare. Related: Intimated; intimating.


intimate (adj.)

1630s, closely acquainted, very familiar, from Late Latin intimatus, past participle of intimare
make known, announce, impress, from Latin intimus inmost (adj.), close friend (n.), superlative of
in in (see in- (2)). Used euphemistically in reference to women's underwear from 1904. Related:
Intimately.


familiar (adj.)

mid-14c., intimate, very friendly, on a family footing, from Old French famelier, from Latin
familiaris domestic, of a household; also familiar, intimate, friendly, dissimilated from
*familialis, from familia (see family). The sense gradually broadened. Of things, from late 15c. The
noun meaning demon, evil spirit that answers one's call is from 1580s.


intimacy (n.)

1640s, from intimate + -cy. As a euphemism for sexual intercourse, from 1670s.


sociable (adj.)

1550s, enjoying the company of others, from Middle French sociable (16c.) and directly from Latin
sociabilis close, intimate, easily united, from sociare to join, unite, from socius companion, ally
(see social (adj.)).


familiarity (n.)

c.1200, from Old French familiarite and directly from Latin familiaritatem (nominative familiaritas)
intimacy, friendship, from familiaris friendly, intimate (see familiar). Meaning undue intimacy is
from late 14c. That of close acquaintance is from c.1600.


compere (n.)

1738, from French comp&egrave;re a godfather, from Old French compere (13c., from Medieval Latin
compater) godfather, also a friendly greeting, friend, brother, hence fellow, familiar, intimate
(see compadre).


faun (n.)

late 14c., from Latin Faunus, a word of unknown origin. A god of the countryside, worshipped
especially by farmers and shepherds, equivalent of Greek Pan. Formerly men with goat horns and
tails, later with goat legs, which caused them to be assimilated to satyrs, but they have diverged
again lately.    The faun is now regarded rather as the type of unsophisticated &amp; the satyr of
unpurified man; the first is man still in intimate communion with Nature, the second is man still
swayed by bestial passions. [Fowler]    The plural is fauni.


intimation (n.)

mid-15c., action of making known, from Middle French intimation (late 14c.), from Late Latin
intimationem (nominative intimatio) an announcement (in Medieval Latin a judicial notification),
noun of action from past participle stem of intimare (see intimate). Meaning suggestion, hint is
from 1530s.


liaison (n.)

1640s, from French liaison a union, a binding together (13c.), from Late Latin ligationem
(nominative ligatio) a binding, from past participle stem of Latin ligare to bind (see ligament).
Originally a cookery term for a thickening agent for sauces. Sense of intimate relations is from
1806. Military sense of cooperation between branches, allies, etc. is from 1816. The noun meaning
one who is concerned with liaison of units, etc. is short for liaison officer.


privy (adj.)

private, early 13c., from Old French priv&eacute; friendly, intimate; a private place, from Latin
privatus private, personal (see private (adj.)). Meaning participating in (a secret) (usually with
to) is attested from late 14c. Related: Privily. Privy Council is from c.1300 in a general sense;
specifically of the British government, first attested late 14c., as consaile priue. Privy member
organ of sex is from late 13c.


irrepressible (adj.)

1767, from assimilated form of in- (1) not, opposite of + repressible (see repress).    Increase of
population, which is filling the States out to their very borders, together with a new and extended
network of railroads and other avenues, and an internal commerce which daily becomes more intimate,
is rapidly bringing the States into a higher and more perfect social unity or consolidation. Thus,
these antagonistic systems are continually coming into closer contact, and collision results.
Shall I tell you what this collision means? They who think that it is accidental, unnecessary, the
work of interested or fanatical agitators, and therefor ephemeral, mistake the case altogether. It
is an irrepressible conflict between opposing and enduring forces, and it means that the United
States must and will, sooner or later, become either entirely a slaveholding nation, or entirely a
free-labor nation. [William H. Seward, speech at Rochester, N.Y., Oct. 2, 1858]    Related:
Irrepressibly.


marriage (n.)

c.1300, action of marrying, entry into wedlock; also state or condition of being husband and wife,
matrimony, wedlock; from Old French mariage marriage; dowry (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *maritaticum
(11c.), from Latin maritatus, past participle of maritatre to wed, marry, give in marriage (see
marry (v.)). The Vulgar Latin word also is the source of Italian maritaggio, Spanish maridaje.
Meaning a union of a man and woman for life by marriage, a particular matrimonial union is early
14c. Meanings the marriage vow, formal declaration or contract by which two join in wedlock; also a
wedding, celebration of a marriage; the marriage ceremony are from late 14c. Figurative use (non-
theological) intimate union, a joining as if by marriage is from early 15c.[W]hen two people are
under the influence of the most violent, most insane, most delusive, and most transient of passions,
they are required to swear that they will remain in that excited, abnormal, and exhausting condition
until death do them part. [G.B. Shaw, preface to Getting Married, 1908]Marriage counseling recorded
by 1939. Marriage bed, figurative of marital intercourse generally, is attested from 1580s (bed of
marriage is from early 15c.).


tight (adj.)

c.1400, tyght dense, close, compact, from Middle English thight, from Old Norse &thorn;ettr
watertight, close in texture, solid, and also from Old English -&thorn;iht (compare second element
in mete&thorn;iht stout from eating), both from Proto-Germanic *thinhta- (cognates: Middle High
German dihte dense, thick, German dicht dense, tight, Old High German gidigan, German gediegen
genuine, solid, worthy), from PIE root *tenk- (2) to become firm, curdle, thicken (cognates: Irish
techt curdled, coagulated, Lithuanian tankus close, tight, Persian tang tight, Sanskrit tanakti
draws together, contracts).    Sense of drawn, stretched is from 1570s; meaning fitting closely (as
of garments) is from 1779; that of evenly matched (of a contest, bargain, etc.) is from 1828,
American English; that of drunk is from 1830. Of persons, close, intimate, sympathetic from 1956.
From 1670s as an adverb; to sit tight is from 1738. Related: Tightly; tightness. Tight-assed
unwilling to relax is attested from 1903. Tight-laced is recorded from 1741 in both the literal and
figurative senses. Tight-lipped is first attested 1872.


