intoxicated (adj.)

1550s, poisoned; 1570s, drunk, past participle adjective from intoxicate (v.).


intoxicate (v.)

to poison, mid-15c., from Medieval Latin intoxicatus, past participle of intoxicare to poison, from
Latin in- in (see in- (2)) + toxicare to poison, from toxicum poison (see toxic). Meaning make drunk
first recorded 1570s. Related: Intoxicated; intoxicating.


intoxicant (n.)

liquor, 1863; see intoxicate.


wet (v.)

Old English w&aelig;tan to wet, moisten, water; be or become wet; see wet (adj.). From mid-15c. as
to intoxicate (oneself). Meaning urinate is by 1925. Related: Wetted; wetting.


intoxication (n.)

c.1400, intoxigacion poisoning, from Medieval Latin intoxicationem (nominative intoxicatio)
poisoning, noun of action from past participle stem of intoxicare (see intoxicate). Meaning
drunkenness is from 1640s.


katzenjammer (n.)

1849, a hangover, American English colloquial, from German katzen, comb. form of katze cat (see cat
(n.)) + jammer distress, wailing (see yammer). Hence, any unpleasant reaction (1897).    Pleasure
can intoxicate, passion can inebriate, success can make you quite as drunk as champagne. The waking
from these several stages of delights will bring the same result--Katzenjammer. In English you would
call it reaction; but whole pages of English cannot express the sick, empty, weary, vacant feeling
which is so concisely contained within these four German syllables. [Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine,
August 1884]   Katzenjammer Kids spectacularly naughty children is from title of comic strip first
drawn by German-born U.S. comic strip artist Rudolph Dirks (1877-1968) in 1897 for the New York
Journal. It was temporarily de-Germanized during World War I:    THE SHENANIGAN KIDS is the new
American name for the original Katzenjammer Kids. Although the original name and idea were pure
Holland Dutch, some people may have had the mistaken impression that they were of Germanic origin,
and hence the change. It is the same splendid comic as in the past. [International Feature Service
advertisement in Editor &amp; Publisher, July 6, 1918]


