intrinsic (adj.)

late 15c., interior, inward, internal, from Middle French intrins&egrave;que inner (13c.), from
Medieval Latin intrinsecus interior, internal, from Latin intrinsecus (adv.) inwardly, on the
inside, from intra within (see intra-) + secus alongside, originally following (related to sequi to
follow; see sequel). Meaning belonging to the nature of a thing is from 1640s. Related: Intrinsicly.


luminosity (n.)

1630s, quality of being luminous, from French luminosit&#233; or else a native formation from
luminous + -ity. In astronomy, intrinsic brightness of a heavenly body (as distinguished from
apparent magnitude, which diminishes with distance), attested from 1906.


inward

Old English inweard, inneweard (adj., adv.) inmost; sincere; internal, intrinsic; deep, from Proto-
Germanic *inwarth inward (cognates: Old Norse innanver&eth;r, Old High German inwart, Middle Dutch
inwaert), from root of Old English inne in (see in) + -weard (see -ward).


value (n.)

c.1300, price equal to the intrinsic worth of a thing; late 14c., degree to which something is
useful or estimable, from Old French value worth, price, moral worth; standing, reuptation (13c.),
noun use of fem. past participle of valoir be worth, from Latin valere be strong, be well; be of
value, be worth (see valiant). The meaning social principle is attested from 1918, supposedly
borrowed from the language of painting. Value judgment (1889) is a loan-translation of German
Werturteil.


proper (adj.)

c.1300, adapted to some purpose, fit, apt; commendable, excellent (sometimes ironic), from Old
French propre own, particular; exact, neat, fitting, appropriate (11c.), from Latin proprius one's
own, particular to itself, from pro privo for the individual, in particular, from ablative of privus
one's own, individual (see private (adj.)) + pro for (see pro-). Related: Properly.    From early
14c. as belonging or pertaining to oneself; individual; intrinsic; from mid-14c. as pertaining to a
person or thing in particular, special, specific; distinctive, characteristic; also what is by the
rules, correct, appropriate, acceptable. From early 15c. as separate, distinct; itself. Meaning
socially appropriate, decent, respectable is first recorded 1704. Proper name name belonging to or
relating to the person or thing in question, is from late 13c., a sense also preserved in
astronomical proper motion (c.1300). Proper noun is from c.1500.


