intrigue (n.)

1640s, probably from intrigue (v.).


intrigue (v.)

1610s, to trick, deceive, cheat (earlier entriken, late 14c.), from French intriguer (16c.), from
Italian intrigare to plot, meddle, from Latin intricare entangle (see intricate). Meaning to plot or
scheme first recorded 1714; that of to excite curiosity is from 1894. Related: Intrigued; intriguing
(1680s, plotting, scheming; meaning exciting curiosity is from 1909).


intrigante (n.)

women given to intrigue, 1806, from fem. of French intrigant, from Italian intrigante, present
participle of intrigare (see intrigue).


machination (n.)

late 15c., a plotting, intrigue, from Old French machinacion plot, conspiracy, scheming, intrigue,
from Latin machinationem (nominative machinatio) device, contrivance, machination, noun of action
from past participle stem of machinari contrive skillfully, to design; to scheme, to plot, from
machina (see machine (n.)). Related: Machinations.


bull (n.3)

false talk, fraud, Middle English, apparently from Old French bole deception, trick, scheming,
intrigue, and perhaps connected to modern Icelandic bull nonsense.  Sais christ to ypocrites ... yee
ar ... all ful with wickednes, tresun and bull. [Cursor Mundi, early 14c.]  There also was a verb
bull meaning to mock, cheat, which dates from 1530s.


machinate (v.)

lay plots, intrigue, c.1600, a back-formation from machination, or else from Latin machinatus, past
participle of machinari (see machination). Related: Machinated; machinating; machinator.


Orient (n.)

c.1300, the East (originally usually meaning what is now called the Middle East), from Old French
orient east (11c.), from Latin orientem (nominative oriens) the rising sun, the east, part of the
sky where the sun rises, originally rising (adj.), present participle of oriri to rise (see
orchestra). The Orient Express was a train that ran from Paris to Istanbul via Vienna 1883-1961,
from the start associated with espionage and intrigue.


amour (n.)

c.1300, love, from Old French amour, from Latin amorem (nominative amor) love, affection, strong
friendly feeling (it could be used of sons or brothers, but especially of sexual love), from amare
to love (see Amy). The accent shifted 15c.-17c. to the first syllable as the word became nativized,
then shifted back as the naughty or intriguing sense became primary and the word was felt to be a
euphemism.    A common ME word for love, later accented &aacute;mour (cf. enamour). Now with
suggestion of intrigue and treated as a F[rench] word. [Weekley]


cloak (n.)

late 13c., long, loose outer garment, from Old North French cloque (Old French cloche, cloke)
travelling cloak, from Medieval Latin clocca travelers' cape, literally a bell, so called from the
garment's bell-like shape (the word is thus a doublet of clock (n.1)). An article of everyday wear
in England through 16c., somewhat revived 19c. as a fashion garment. Cloak-and-dagger (adj.)
attested from 1848, said to be ultimately translating French de cape et d'&eacute;p&eacute;e,
suggestive of stealthy violence and intrigue.    Other cloak and dagger pieces, as Bouterwek tells
us the Spaniards call their intriguing comedies, might be tried advantageously in the night, ....
[Levana; or the Doctrine of Education, English translation, London, 1848]


