inviolable (adj.)

mid-15c., from Latin inviolabilis inviolable, invulnerable, from in- not, opposite of (see in- (1))
+ violabilis, from violare to do violence to (see violation). Related: Inviolably.


asylum (n.)

early 15c., earlier asile (late 14c.), from Latin asylum sanctuary, from Greek asylon refuge, noun
use of neuter of asylos inviolable, safe from violence, especially of persons seeking protection,
from a- without + syle right of seizure. So literally an inviolable place. General sense of safe or
secure place is from 1640s; meaning benevolent institution to shelter some class of persons is from
1776.


inviolability (n.)

1793, from inviolable + -ity.


sacrosanct (adj.)

superlatively sacred or inviolable, c.1600, from Latin sacrosanctus protected by religious sanction,
consecrated with religious ceremonies, from sacro, ablative of sacrum religious sanction (from
neuter singular of sacer sacred) + sanctus, past participle of sancire make sacred (for both, see
sacred). Earlier in partially anglicized form sacro-seint (c.1500).


taboo (adj.)

also tabu, 1777 (in Cook's A Voyage to the Pacific Ocean), consecrated, inviolable, forbidden,
unclean or cursed, explained in some English sources as being from Tongan (Polynesian language of
the island of Tonga) ta-bu sacred, from ta mark + bu especially. But this may be folk etymology, as
linguists in the Pacific have reconstructed an irreducable Proto-Polynesian *tapu, from Proto-
Oceanic *tabu sacred, forbidden (compare Hawaiian kapu taboo, prohibition, sacred, holy,
consecrated; Tahitian tapu restriction, sacred; Maori tapu be under ritual restriction, prohibited).
The noun and verb are English innovations first recorded in Cook's book.


vestal (adj.)

chaste, pure, virgin, 1590s, originally (early 15c.) belonging to or dedicated to Vesta, Roman
goddess of hearth and home, from Latin vestalis. The noun is recorded from 1570s, short for Vestal
virgin, one of four (later six) priestesses (Latin virgines Vestales) in charge of the sacred fire
in the temple of Vesta in Rome. From 1580s in reference to any virgin or chaste woman.    They
entered the service of the goddess at from six to ten years of age, their term of service lasting
thirty years. They were then permitted to retire and to marry, but few did so, for, as vestals, they
were treated with great honor, and had important public privileges. Their persons were inviolable,
any offense against them being punished with death, and they were treated in all their relations
with the highest distinction and reverence. A vestal who broke her vow of chastity was immured alive
in an underground vault amid public mourning. There were very few such instances; in one of them,
under Domitian, the chief of the vestals was put to death under a false charge trumped up by the
emperor.


