invincible (adj.)

early 15c., from Middle French invincible (14c.) or directly from Latin invincibilis unconquerable,
from in- not (see in- (1)) + vincibilis conquerable, from vincere to overcome (see victor). Related:
Invincibly. Noun meaning one who is invincible is from 1630s.  Invincible ignorance is from Church
Latin ignorantia invincibilis (Aquinas). Related: Invincibly.


invictus

Latin adjective, unconquered, unsubdued, invincible.


invincibility (n.)

1670s, from invincible + -ity.


armada (n.)

fleet of warships, 1530s (erroneously, as armado), from Spanish armada an armed force, from Medieval
Latin armata (see army). Especially of the Invincible Armada of Philip II of Spain (1588). Current
form of the word is from 1590s.


adamant (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French adamant and directly from Latin adamantem (nominative adamas) adamant,
hardest iron, steel, also figuratively, of character, from Greek adamas (genitive adamantos)
unbreakable, inflexible metaphoric of anything unalterable, also the name of a hypothetical hardest
material, perhaps literally invincible, from a- not + daman to conquer, to tame (see tame (adj.)),
or else a word of foreign origin altered to conform to Greek.    Applied in antiquity to a metal
resembling gold (Plato), white sapphire, magnet (by Ovid, perhaps via confusion with Latin adamare
to love passionately), steel, emery stone, and especially diamond (see diamond). The name has thus
always been of indefinite and fluctuating sense [Century Dictionary]. The word was in Old English as
a&eth;amans a very hard stone.


bogey (n.2)

in golfing, c.1891, originally number of strokes a good player is supposed to need for a given hole
or course; later, score one over par (1946); from the same source as bogey (n.1), on the notion of a
phantom opponent, represented by the ground score. The word was in vogue at the time in Britain
because of the popularity of a music hall tune Hush, Hush, Hush, Here Comes the Bogey Man.One
popular song at least has left its permanent effect on the game of golf. That song is 'The Bogey
Man.' In 1890 Dr. Thos. Browne, R.N., the hon. secretary of the Great Yarmouth Club, was playing
against a Major Wellman, the match being against the 'ground score,' which was the name given to the
scratch value of each hole. The system of playing against the 'ground score' was new to Major
Wellman, and he exclaimed, thinking of the song of the moment, that his mysterious and well-nigh
invincible opponent was a regular 'bogey-man.' The name 'caught on' at Great Yarmouth, and to-day
'Bogey' is one of the most feared opponents on all the courses that acknowledge him. [1908, cited in
OED]  Other early golfing sources give it an American origin. As a verb, attested by 1948.


