invoke (v.)

late 15c., from Middle French envoquer (12c.), from Latin invocare call upon, implore, from in- upon
(see in- (2)) + vocare to call, related to vox (genitive vocis) voice (see voice (n.)). Related:
Invoked; invoking.


invocation (n.)

late 14c., petition (to God or a god) for aid or comfort; invocation, prayer; also a summoning of
evil spirits, from Old French invocacion (12c.), from Latin invocationem (nominative invocatio),
noun of action from past participle stem of invocare to call upon, invoke, appeal to (see invoke).


clepe (v.)

to call; to name (archaic), from Old English cleopian, clipian to speak, call; summon, invoke;
implore.


beshrew (v.)

early 14c., deprave, pervert, corrupt, from be- + shrew (v.) to curse; see shrew. Meaning to invoke
evil upon is from late 14c.


yclept

Old English gicliopad; from y- + past participle of cleopian, cpipian to speak, call; summon,
invoke; implore (see clepe).


implore (v.)

c.1500, from Middle French implorer and directly from Latin implorare call for help, beseech,
originally invoke with weeping, from assimilated form of in- on, upon (see in- (2)) + plorare to
weep, cry out. Related: Implored; imploring; imploringly.


imprecation (n.)

mid-15c., a curse, cursing, from Latin imprecationem (nominative imprecatio), from past participle
stem of imprecari invoke, pray, call down upon, from assimilated form of in- into, in, within (see
in- (2)) + precari to pray, ask, beg, request (see pray). Current limited sense is characteristic of
human nature. [Weekley]


ridicule (n.)

1670s, absurd thing; 1680s, words or actions meant to invoke ridicule, from French ridicule, noun
use of adjective (15c.), or from Latin ridiculum laughing matter, joke, from noun use of neuter of
ridiculus (see ridiculous).    He who brings ridicule to bear against truth, finds in his hand a
blade without a hilt. [Walter Savage Landor, Imaginary Conversations]


exorcise (v.)

c.1400, to invoke spirits, from Old French exorciser (14c.), from Late Latin exorcizare, from Greek
exorkizein banish an evil spirit; bind by oath (see exorcism). Sense of calling up evil spirits to
drive them out became dominant 16c. A rare case where -ise trumps -ize on both sides of the
Atlantic, perhaps by influence of exercise. Related: Exorcised; exorcising.


conjure (v.)

late 13c., command on oath, from Old French conjurer invoke, conjure (12c.), from Latin coniurare to
swear together; conspire, from com- together (see com-) + iurare to swear (see jury (n.)). Magical
sense is c.1300, for constraining by spell a demon to do one's bidding. Related: Conjured;
conjuring. Phrase conjure up cause to appear in the mind (as if by magic) attested from 1580s.


vouch (v.)

early 14c., summon into court to prove a title, from Anglo-French voucher, Old French vocher to
call, summon, invoke, claim, probably from Gallo-Roman *voticare, metathesis of Latin vocitare to
call to, summon insistently, frequentative of Latin vocare to call, call upon, summon (see voice
(n.)). Meaning guarantee to be true or accurate is first attested 1590s. Related: Vouched; vouching.


bless (v.)

Old English bletsian, bledsian, Northumbrian bloedsian to consecrate, make holy, give thanks, from
Proto-Germanic *blodison hallow with blood, mark with blood, from *blotham blood (see blood).
Originally a blood sprinkling on pagan altars. This word was chosen in Old English bibles to
translate Latin benedicere and Greek eulogein, both of which have a ground sense of to speak well
of, to praise, but were used in Scripture to translate Hebrew brk to bend (the knee), worship,
praise, invoke blessings. Meaning shifted in late Old English toward pronounce or make happy, by
resemblance to unrelated bliss. No cognates in other languages. Related: Blessed; blessing.


reclaim (v.)

early 14c., call back a hawk to the glove, from Old French reclamer to call upon, invoke; claim;
seduce; to call back a hawk (12c.) and directly from Latin reclamare cry out against, contradict,
protest, appeal, from re- opposite, against (see re-) + clamare cry out (see claim (v.)).    Call
back a hawk, hence to make tame (mid-15c.), subdue, reduce to obedience, make amenable to control
(late 14c.). In many Middle English uses with no sense of return or reciprocation. Meaning revoke (a
grant, gift, etc.) is from late 15c. That of recall (someone) from an erring course to a proper
state is mid-15c. Sense of get back by effort might reflect influence of claim. Meaning bring waste
land into useful condition fit for cultivation first attested 1764, probably on notion of reduce to
obedience. Related: Reclaimed; reclaiming.


swear (v.)

Old English swerian take an oath (class VI strong verb; past tense swor, past participle sworen),
from Proto-Germanic *swarjan-, (cognates: Old Saxon swerian, Old Frisian swera, Old Norse sverja,
Danish sverge, Middle Dutch swaren, Old High German swerien, German schw&ouml;ren, Gothic swaren to
swear), from PIE root *swer- (1) to speak, talk, say (cognates: Old Church Slavonic svara quarrel,
Oscan sverrunei to the speaker).    Also related to the second element in answer. The secondary
sense of use bad language (early 15c.) developed from the notion of invoke sacred names. Swear off
desist as with a vow is from 1898. Swear in install in office by administration of an oath is from
1700 in modern use, echoing Old English.


shade (n.)

Middle English schade, Kentish ssed, from late Old English scead partial darkness; shelter,
protection, also partly from sceadu shade, shadow, darkness; shady place, arbor, protection from
glare or heat, both from Proto-Germanic *skadwaz (cognates: Old Saxon skado, Middle Dutch scade,
Dutch schaduw, Old High German scato, German Schatten, Gothic skadus), from PIE *skot-wo-, from root
*skot- dark, shade (cognates: Greek skotos darkness, gloom, Albanian kot darkness, Old Irish scath,
Old Welsh scod, Breton squeut darkness, Gaelic sgath shade, shadow, shelter).    Figurative use in
reference to comparative obscurity is from 1640s. Meaning a ghost is from 1610s; dramatic (or mock-
dramatic) expression shades of _____ to invoke or acknowledge a memory is from 1818, from the ghost
sense. Meaning lamp cover is from 1780. Sense of window blind first recorded 1845. Meaning cover to
protect the eyes is from 1801. Meaning grade of color first recorded 1680s; that of degree or
gradiation of darkness in a color is from 1680s (compare nuance, from French nue cloud). Meaning
small amount or degree is from 1782.


god (n.)

Old English god supreme being, deity; the Christian God; image of a god; godlike person, from Proto-
Germanic *guthan (cognates: Old Saxon, Old Frisian, Dutch god, Old High German got, German Gott, Old
Norse gu&eth;, Gothic gu&thorn;), from PIE *ghut- that which is invoked (cognates: Old Church
Slavonic zovo to call, Sanskrit huta- invoked, an epithet of Indra), from root *gheu(e)- to call,
invoke.    But some trace it to PIE *ghu-to- poured, from root *gheu- to pour, pour a libation
(source of Greek khein to pour, also in the phrase khute gaia poured earth, referring to a burial
mound; see found (v.2)). Given the Greek facts, the Germanic form may have referred in the first
instance to the spirit immanent in a burial mound [Watkins]. See also Zeus.    Not related to good.
Originally a neuter noun in Germanic, the gender shifted to masculine after the coming of
Christianity. Old English god probably was closer in sense to Latin numen. A better word to
translate deus might have been Proto-Germanic *ansuz, but this was used only of the highest deities
in the Germanic religion, and not of foreign gods, and it was never used of the Christian God. It
survives in English mainly in the personal names beginning in Os-.  I want my lawyer, my tailor, my
servants, even my wife to believe in God, because it means that I shall be cheated and robbed and
cuckolded less often. ... If God did not exist, it would be necessary to invent him. [Voltaire]
God bless you after someone sneezes is credited to St. Gregory the Great, but the pagan Romans
(Absit omen) and Greeks had similar customs.


