irascible (adj.)

late 14c., from Middle French irascible (12c.) and directly from Late Latin irascibilis, from Latin
irasci be angry, be in a rage, from ira anger (see ire).


spitfire (n.)

1610s, a cannon, from spit (v.) + fire (n.); c.1600 as an adjective. Meaning irascible, passionate
person is from 1670s. Replaced earlier shitfire (similar formation in Florentine cacafuoco).


irascibility (n.)

1750, from irascible + -ity.


bizarre (adj.)

1640s, from French bizarre odd, fantastic (16c.), originally handsome, brave, perhaps from Basque
bizar a beard (the notion being of bearded Spanish soldiers making a strange impression on the
French); alternative etymology traces it to Italian bizarro angry, fierce, irascible, from bizza fit
of anger.


testy (adj.)

early 15c., impetuous, rash, altered from Middle English testif headstrong (late 14c.), from Anglo-
French testif, Old French testu (Modern French t&#234;tu) stubborn, headstrong, obstinate, literally
heady, from teste head (see tete). Meaning easily irritated, irascible is first recorded 1520s.
Related: Testily; testiness.


Tartar

mid-14c. (implied in Tartary, the land of the Tartars), from Medieval Latin Tartarus, from Persian
Tatar, first used 13c. in reference to the hordes of Ghengis Khan (1202-1227), said to be ultimately
from Tata, a name of the Mongols for themselves. Form in European languages probably influenced by
Latin Tartarus hell (e.g. letter of St. Louis of France, 1270: In the present danger of the Tartars
either we shall push them back into the Tartarus whence they are come, or they will bring us all
into heaven).    The historical word for what now are called in ethnological works Tatars. A Turkic
people, their native region was east of the Caspian Sea. Ghengis' horde was a mix of Tatars,
Mongols, Turks, etc. Used figuratively for savage, rough, irascible person (1660s). To catch a
Tartar get hold of what cannot be controlled is recorded from 1660s; original sense not preserved,
but probably from some military story similar to the old battlefield joke:    Irish soldier
(shouting from within the brush): I've captured one of the enemy.  Captain: Excellent! Bring him
here.  Soldier: He won't come.  Captain: Well, then, you come here.  Soldier: I would, but he won't
let me.    Among the adjectival forms that have been used are Tartarian (16c.), Tartarous (Ben
Jonson), Tartarean (17c.); Byron's Tartarly (1821) is a nonce-word (but a good one). Tartar sauce is
first recorded 1855, from French sauce tartare.


