ironic (adj.)

1620s, from Late Latin ironicus, from Greek eironikos dissembling, putting on a feigned ignorance,
from eironeia (see irony). Related: Ironical (1570s); ironically.


putz (n.)

obnoxious man, fool, 1964, from Yiddish, from German putz, literally finery, adornment, obviously
used here in an ironic sense. Attested in writing earlier in slang sense of penis (1934, in Tropic
of Cancer). A non-ironic sense is in putz Nativity display around a Christmas tree (1873), from
Pennsylvania Dutch (German), which retains the old German sense.


big deal (n.)

from mid-19c. in poker or business; as an ironic expression, popular in American English from
c.1965, perhaps a translated Yiddishism (such as a groyser kunst).


deconstruction (n.)

1973, as a strategy of critical analysis, in translations from French of the works of philosopher
Jacques Derrida (1930-2004). The word was used in English in a literal sense from 1865 of building
and architecture, and in late 1860s sometimes as an ironic variant of Reconstruction in the U.S.
political sense.


uh

inarticulate sound, attested from c.1600; uh-huh, spoken affirmative (often ironic or non-committal)
is recorded from 1904; negative uh-uh is attested from 1924.


pet peeve (n.)

thing that provokes one most, 1919, from pet (n.1) in the adjectival sense especially cherished
(1826), here in jocular or ironic use with peeve (n.).


blessed (adj.)

late 12c., supremely happy, also consecrated (c.1200), past participle adjective from bless (v.).
Reversed or ironic sense of cursed, damned is recorded from 1806. Related: Blessedly; blessedness.


Chad (n.2)

African nation, former French colony (Tchad), independent since 1960, named for Lake Chad, which is
from a local word meaning lake, large expanse of water. An ironic name for such a desert country.


kultur (n.)

1914, originally, civilization as conceived by the Germans (especially their own), a word from the
First World War and always at first ironic, from German kultur, from Latin cultura (see culture
(n.)).


Nimrod

great hunter, 1712, a reference to the biblical son of Cush, referred to (Gen. x:8-9) as a mighty
hunter before the Lord. It came to mean geek, klutz by 1983 in teenager slang, for unknown reasons.
(Amateur theories include its occasional use in Bugs Bunny cartoon episodes featuring rabbit-hunting
Elmer Fudd as a foil; its possible ironic use, among hunters, for a clumsy member of their
fraternity; or a stereotype of deer hunters by the non-hunting population in the U.S.)


laugh (n.)

1680s, from laugh (v.). Meaning a cause of laughter is from 1895; ironic use (as in that's a laugh)
attested from 1930. Laugh track canned laughter on a TV program is from 1961.


Sherlock

masc. proper name, literally fair-haired, from Old English scir bright + locc lock of hair. Slang
for private detective, perceptive person (the latter often ironic) is attested from 1903, from A.C.
Doyle's fictional character Sherlock Holmes (full name in this sense used from 1896; Holmes debuted
in 1887 and was popular by 1892).


Panglossian (adj.)

optimistic (usually ironic or disparaging), 1831, from French Panglosse, name of the philosopher and
tutor in Voltaire's Candide (1758), from pan- (see pan-) + Greek glossa, literally tongue (see gloss
(n.2)).


sanctimonious (adj.)

c.1600 (in Measure for Measure, with the disparaging sense making a show of sanctity, affecting an
appearance of holiness), from sanctimony + -ous. The un-ironic, literal sense was used occasionally
in English from c.1600 to c.1800. Related: Sanctimoniously; sanctimoniousness.


wicked (adj.)

c.1200, extended form of earlier wick bad, wicked, false (12c.), which apparently is an adjectival
use of Old English wicca wizard (see wicca). Formed as if a past participle, but there is no
corresponding verb. For evolution, compare wretched from wretch. Slang ironic sense of wonderful
first attested 1920, in F. Scott Fitzgerald. As an adverb from early 15c. Related: Wickedly.


unquote (v.)

1915, in telegraphs, where punctuation had to be spelled out and quote and unquote were used in
place of the quotation marks; from un- (2) reverse, opposite of + quote (v.). Quote unquote together
to indicate quotation of the word or phrase to follow (often with ironic intent) is from 1942.


owl (n.)

Old English ule owl, from Proto-Germanic *uwwalon- (cognates: Middle Dutch, Dutch uil, Old High
German uwila, German Eule, Old Norse ugla), a diminutive of PIE root *u(wa)l-, which is imitative of
a wail or an owl's hoot (compare Latin ulula owl; also see ululation). The bird was employed
proverbially and figuratively in reference to nocturnal habits, ugliness, and appearance of gravity
and wisdom (often ironic).


frippery (n.)

1560s, old clothes, cast-off garments, from Middle French friperie old clothes, an old clothes shop,
from Old French freperie, feuperie old rags, rubbish (13c.), from frepe, feupe fringe; rags, old
clothes, from Late Latin faluppa chip, splinter, straw, fiber. The notion is of things worn down,
clothes rubbed to rags. The ironic meaning finery (but with overtones of tawdriness) dates from
1630s.


cheesy (adj.)

cheese-like, late 14c., from cheese (n.1) + -y (2). Meaning cheap, inferior is attested from 1896,
perhaps originally U.S. student slang, along with cheese (n.) an ignorant, stupid person. In late
19c. British slang, cheesy was fine, showy (1858), probably from cheese (n.2) and some suggest the
modern derogatory use is an ironic reversal of this. The word was in common use in medical writing
in the late 19c. to describe morbid substances found in tubers, decaying flesh, etc.


egregious (adj.)

1530s, distinguished, eminent, excellent, from Latin egregius distinguished, excellent,
extraordinary, from the phrase ex grege rising above the flock, from ex out of (see ex-) + grege,
ablative of grex herd, flock (see gregarious).    Disapproving sense, now predominant, arose late
16c., originally ironic and is not in the Latin word, which etymologically means simply exceptional.
Related: Egregiously; egregiousness.


fey (adj.)

of excitement that presages death, from Old English f&aelig;ge doomed to die, fated, destines, also
timid, feeble; and/or from Old Norse feigr, both from Proto-Germanic *faigjo- (cognates: Old Saxon
fegi, Old Frisian fai, Middle Dutch vege, Middle High German veige doomed, also timid, German feige
cowardly), from PIE *peig- (2) evil-minded, hostile (see foe). Preserved in Scottish. Sense of
displaying unearthly qualities and disordered in the mind (like one about to die) led to modern
ironic sense of affected.


splendid (adj.)

1620s, marked by grandeur, probably a shortening of earlier splendidious (early 15c.), from Latin
splendidus bright, shining, glittering; sumptuous, gorgeous, grand; illustrious, distinguished,
noble; showy, fine, specious, from splendere be bright, shine, gleam, glisten, from PIE *splend- to
shine, glow (cognates: Lithuanian splendziu I shine, Middle Irish lainn bright). An earlier form was
splendent (late 15c.). From 1640s as brilliant, dazzling; 1640s as conspicuous, illustrious; very
fine, excellent. Ironic use (as in splendid isolation, 1843) is attested from 17c.


oh

1530s, interjection expressing various emotions, a common Indo-European word (Old French &ocirc;;,
oh; Latin o, oh; Greek o; Old Church Slavonic and Lithuanian o; Gothic, Dutch, German o; Old Irish
a; Sanskrit a), but not found in Old English, which translated Latin oh with la or eala.    The
present tendency is to restrict oh to places where it has a certain independence, &amp; prefer o
where it is proclitic or leans forward upon what follows .... [Fowler]    Often extended for
emphasis, as in Oh, baby, stock saying from c.1918; oh, boy (1910); oh, yeah (1924). Reduplicated
form oh-oh as an expression of alarm or dismay is attested from 1944. Oh-so so very (often sarcastic
or ironic) is from 1922. Oh yeah? really? Is that so? attested from 1930.


deal (n.1)

from Old English d&aelig;l part, share, quantity, amount, from Proto-Germanic *dailaz (cognates: Old
Norse deild, Old Frisian del, Dutch deel, Old High German and German teil, Gothic dails part,
share), from PIE *dail- to divide (cognates: Old Church Slavonic delu part, Lithuanian dalis).
Business sense of transaction, bargain is 1837, originally slang. Meaning an amount is from 1560s.
New Deal is from F.D. Roosevelt speech of July 1932. Big deal is 1928; ironic use first recorded
1951 in Catcher in the Rye. Deal breaker is attested by 1975.


proper (adj.)

c.1300, adapted to some purpose, fit, apt; commendable, excellent (sometimes ironic), from Old
French propre own, particular; exact, neat, fitting, appropriate (11c.), from Latin proprius one's
own, particular to itself, from pro privo for the individual, in particular, from ablative of privus
one's own, individual (see private (adj.)) + pro for (see pro-). Related: Properly.    From early
14c. as belonging or pertaining to oneself; individual; intrinsic; from mid-14c. as pertaining to a
person or thing in particular, special, specific; distinctive, characteristic; also what is by the
rules, correct, appropriate, acceptable. From early 15c. as separate, distinct; itself. Meaning
socially appropriate, decent, respectable is first recorded 1704. Proper name name belonging to or
relating to the person or thing in question, is from late 13c., a sense also preserved in
astronomical proper motion (c.1300). Proper noun is from c.1500.


say (v.)

Old English secgan to utter, inform, speak, tell, relate, from Proto-Germanic *sagjanan (cognates:
Old Saxon seggian, Old Norse segja, Danish sige, Old Frisian sedsa, Middle Dutch segghen, Dutch
zeggen, Old High German sagen, German sagen to say), from PIE *sokwyo-, from root *sekw- (3) to say,
utter (cognates: Hittite shakiya- to declare, Lithuanian sakyti to say, Old Church Slavonic sociti
to vindicate, show, Old Irish insce speech, Old Latin inseque to tell say).    Past tense said
developed from Old English segde. Not attested in use with inanimate objects (clocks, signs, etc.)
as subjects before 1930. You said it you're right first recorded 1919; you can say that again as a
phrase expressing agreement is recorded from 1942, American English. You don't say (so) as an
expression of astonishment (often ironic) is first recorded 1779, American English.


few (adj.)

Old English feawe (plural; contracted to fea) few, seldom, even a little, from Proto-Germanic *faw-,
from PIE root *pau- (1) few, little (cognates: Latin paucus few, little, paullus little, parvus
little, small, pauper poor; Greek pauros few, little, pais (genitive paidos) child; Latin puer
child, boy, pullus young animal; Oscan puklu child; Sanskrit potah a young animal, putrah son; Old
English fola young horse; Old Norse fylja young female horse; Old Church Slavonic puta bird;
Lithuanian putytis young animal, young bird). Always plural in Old English.    Phrase few and far
between attested from 1660s. Unusual ironic use in quite a few many (1883), earlier a good few
(1828). The noun is late 12c., fewe, from the adjective.  Never in the field of human conflict was
so much owed by so many to so few. [Winston Churchill, 1940]


fat (adj.)

Old English f&aelig;tt fat, fatted, plump, obese, originally a contracted past participle of
f&aelig;ttian to cram, stuff, from Proto-Germanic *faitaz fat (cognates: Old Frisian fatt, Old Norse
feitr, Dutch vet, German feist), from PIE *poid- to abound in water, milk, fat, etc. (source also of
Greek piduein to gush forth), from root *peie- to be fat, swell (cognates: Sanskrit payate swells,
exuberates, pituh juice, sap, resin; Lithuanian pienas milk; Greek pion fat, wealthy; Latin pinguis
fat).    Teen slang meaning attractive, up to date (also later phat) is attested from 1951. Fat cat
privileged and rich person is from 1928; fat chance no chance at all attested from 1905, perhaps
ironic (the expression is found earlier in the sense good opportunity). Fathead is from 1842; fat-
witted is from 1590s; fatso is first recorded 1943. Expression the fat is in the fire originally
meant the plan has failed (1560s).


break (v.)

Old English brecan to break, shatter, burst; injure, violate, destroy, curtail; break into, rush
into; burst forth, spring out; subdue, tame (class IV strong verb; past tense br&aelig;c, past
participle brocen), from Proto-Germanic *brekan (cognates: Old Frisian breka, Dutch breken, Old High
German brehhan, German brechen, Gothic brikan), from PIE root *bhreg- to break (see fraction). Most
modern senses were in Old English. In reference to the heart from early 13c. Meaning to disclose is
from early 13c.   Break bread share food (with) is from late 14c. Break the ice is c.1600, in
reference to the coldness of encounters of strangers. Break wind first attested 1550s. To break
(something) out (1890s) probably is an image from dock work, of freeing cargo before unloading it.
Ironic theatrical good luck formula break a leg has parallels in German Hals- und Beinbruch break
your neck and leg, and Italian in bocca al lupo. Evidence of a highly superstitious craft (see
Macbeth).


merry (adj.)

Old English myrge pleasing, agreeable, pleasant, sweet; pleasantly, melodiously, from Proto-Germanic
*murgijaz, which probably originally meant short-lasting, (compare Old High German murg short,
Gothic gamaurgjan to shorten), from PIE *mreghu- short (see brief (adj.)). The only exact cognate
for meaning outside English was Middle Dutch mergelijc joyful.    Connection to pleasure is likely
via notion of making time fly, that which makes the time seem to pass quickly (compare German
Kurzweil pastime, literally a short time; Old Norse skemta to amuse, entertain, amuse oneself, from
skamt, neuter of skammr short). There also was a verbal form in Old English, myrgan be merry,
rejoice. For vowel evolution, see bury (v.).Bot vchon enle we wolde were fyf, &thorn;e mo &thorn;e
myryer. [c.1300]The word had much wider senses in Middle English, such as pleasant-sounding (of
animal voices), fine (of weather), handsome (of dress), pleasant-tasting (of herbs). Merry-bout an
incident of sexual intercourse was low slang from 1780. Merry-begot illegitimate (adj.), bastard
(n.) is from 1785. Merrie England (now frequently satirical or ironic) is 14c. meri ingland,
originally in a broader sense of bountiful, prosperous. Merry Monday was a 16c. term for the Monday
before Shrove Tuesday (Mardi Gras).


patriot (n.)

1590s, compatriot, from Middle French patriote (15c.) and directly from Late Latin patriota fellow-
countryman (6c.), from Greek patriotes fellow countryman, from patrios of one's fathers, patris
fatherland, from pater (genitive patros) father (see father (n.)); with -otes, suffix expressing
state or condition. Liddell &amp; Scott write that patriotes was applied to barbarians who had only
a common [patris], [politai] being used of Greeks who had a common [polis] (or free-state).
Meaning loyal and disinterested supporter of one's country is attested from c.1600, but became an
ironic term of ridicule or abuse from mid-18c. in England, so that Johnson, who at first defined it
as one whose ruling passion is the love of his country, in his fourth edition added, It is sometimes
used for a factious disturber of the government.The name of patriot had become [c.1744] a by-word of
derision. Horace Walpole scarcely exaggerated when he said that ... the most popular declaration
which a candidate could make on the hustings was that he had never been and never would be a
patriot. [Macaulay, Horace Walpole, 1833]Somewhat revived in reference to resistance movements in
overrun countries in World War II, it has usually had a positive sense in American English, where
the phony and rascally variety has been consigned to the word patrioteer (1928). Oriana Fallaci [The
Rage and the Pride, 2002] marvels that Americans, so fond of patriotic, patriot, and patriotism,
lack the root noun and are content to express the idea of patria by cumbersome compounds such as
homeland. (Joyce, Shaw, and H.G. Wells all used patria as an English word early 20c., but it failed
to stick.) Patriots' Day (April 19, anniversary of the 1775 skirmishes at Lexington and Concord
Bridge) was observed as a legal holiday in Maine and Massachusetts from 1894.


bad (adj.)

c.1200, inferior in quality; early 13c., wicked, evil, vicious, a mystery word with no apparent
relatives in other languages.* Possibly from Old English derogatory term b&aelig;ddel and its
diminutive b&aelig;dling effeminate man, hermaphrodite, pederast, probably related to b&aelig;dan to
defile. A rare word before 1400, and evil was more common in this sense until c.1700. Meaning
uncomfortable, sorry is 1839, American English colloquial.    Comparable words in the other Indo-
European languages tend to have grown from descriptions of specific qualities, such as ugly,
defective, weak, faithless, impudent, crooked, filthy (such as Greek kakos, probably from the word
for excrement; Russian plochoj, related to Old Church Slavonic plachu wavering, timid; Persian gast,
Old Persian gasta-, related to gand stench; German schlecht, originally level, straight, smooth,
whence simple, ordinary, then bad).    Comparative and superlative forms badder, baddest were common
14c.-18c. and used as recently as Defoe (but not by Shakespeare), but yielded to comparative worse
and superlative worst (which had belonged to evil and ill).    As a noun, late 14c., evil,
wickedness. In U.S. place names, sometimes translating native terms meaning supernaturally
dangerous. Ironic use as a word of approval is said to be at least since 1890s orally, originally in
Black English, emerging in print 1928 in a jazz context. It might have emerged from the ambivalence
of expressions like bad nigger, used as a term of reproach by whites, but among blacks sometimes
representing one who stood up to injustice, but in the U.S. West bad man also had a certain
ambivalence:    These are the men who do most of the killing in frontier communities, yet it is a
noteworthy fact that the men who are killed generally deserve their fate. [Farmer &amp; Henley]
*Farsi has bad in more or less the same sense as the English word, but this is regarded by linguists
as a coincidence. The forms of the words diverge as they are traced back in time (Farsi bad comes
from Middle Persian vat), and such accidental convergences exist across many languages, given the
vast number of words in each and the limited range of sounds humans can make to signify them. Among
other coincidental matches with English are Korean mani many, Chinese pei pay, Nahuatl (Aztecan)
huel well, Maya hol hole.


