itinerant (adj.)

1560s (attested in Anglo-Latin from late 13c.), from Late Latin itinerantem (nominative itinerans),
present participle of itinerare to travel, from Latin iter (genitive itineris) journey, from ire go
(see ion). Originally in reference to circuit courts.


klezmer (n.)

late 19c. (plural klezmorim); originally, an itinerant East European Jewish professional musician,
from Hebrew kley zemer, literally vessels of song, thus musical instruments.


cadge (v.)

to beg (1812), to get by begging (1848), of uncertain origin, perhaps a back-formation from cadger
itinerant dealer with a pack-horse, mid-15c., which is perhaps from early 14c. cadge to fasten, to
tie, of unknown origin.


barnstorm (v.)

1815, in reference to a theatrical troupe's performances in upstate New York barns (usually
featuring short action pieces to suit vulgar tastes); extended 1896 to electioneering, 1928 to
itinerant airplane pilots who performed stunts at fairs and races. Related: Barnstormed;
barnstorming.


rapper (n.)

agent noun meaning one who raps in any sense (see rap (v.)). Before the hip-hpo performance sense
emerged c.1979, it could mean door-knocker (1630s), spirit-rapper (1755), professional perjurer
(1840), prison slang for prosecutor (1904), itinerant antiques buyer, with a tinge of shadiness
(1914). Rapster is from 1772.


piepowder (n.)

early 13c., wayfarer, itinerant merchant, etc., folk etymology alteration of Old French pie pouldre
or Medieval Latin pede-pulverosus, both literally dusty-footed (see foot (n.) + powder (n.)).


costermonger (n.)

1510s, itinerant apple-seller from coster (see costard) + monger. Sense extended from apple-seller
to any salesman who plied his wares from a street-cart. Contemptuous use is from Shakespeare (2
Henry IV), but reason is unclear.


itinerate (v.)

c.1600, from Late Latin itineratus, past participle of itinerare to travel (see itinerant).
Especially to travel from place to place preaching (1775). Related: Itinerated; itinerating.


busker (n.)

itinerant entertainer, 1857, from busk (v.) to offer goods for sale only in bars and taprooms, 1851
(in Mayhew), perhaps from busk to cruise as a pirate, which was used in a figurative sense by 1841,
in reference to people living shiftless and peripatetic lives. Busker has been mistakenly derived
from buskin in the stage sense.


itinerary (n.)

mid-15c., route of travel, from Late Latin itinerarium account of a journey, noun use of neuter of
itinerarius of a journey, from Latin itineris journey (see itinerant). By late 15c. it meant record
of a journey; extended sense sketch of a proposed route is from 1856.


hawk (v.1)

to sell in the open, peddle, late 15c., back-formation from hawker itinerant vendor (c.1400), from
Middle Low German h&ouml;ken to peddle, carry on the back, squat, from Proto-Germanic *huk-.
Related: Hawked; hawking. Despite the etymological connection with stooping under a burden on one's
back, a hawker is technically distinguished from a peddler by use of a horse and cart or a van.


circuit (n.)

late 14c., a going around; a line going around, from Old French circuit (14c.) a circuit; a journey
(around something), from Latin circuitus a going around, from stem of circuire, circumire go around,
from circum round (see circum-) + ire to go (see ion). Electrical sense is from 1746. Of judicial
assignments, from 1570s; of venues for itinerant entertainers, from 1834. Circuit breaker is
recorded from 1874. Related: Circuital.


bard (n.)

mid-15c., from Scottish, from Old Celtic bardos poet, singer, from PIE root *gwer- to lift up the
voice, praise. In historical times, a term of contempt among the Scots (who considered them
itinerant troublemakers), but one of great respect among the Welsh. All vagabundis, fulis, bardis,
scudlaris, and siclike idill pepill, sall be brint on the cheek. [local Scottish ordinance,
c.1500]Subsequently idealized by Scott in the more ancient sense of lyric poet, singer. Poetic use
of the word in English is from Greek bardos, Latin bardus, both from Gaulish.


queer (v.)

to spoil, ruin, 1812, from queer (adj.). Related: Queered; queering. Earlier it meant to puzzle,
ridicule, cheat (1790). To queer the pitch (1846) is in reference to the patter of an itinerant
tradesman or showman (see pitch (n.1)).    These wanderers, and those who are still seen
occasionally in the back streets of the metropolis, are said to 'go a-pitching ;' the spot they
select for their performance is their 'pitch,' and any interruption of their feats, such as an
accident, or the interference of a policeman, is said to 'queer the pitch,'--in other words, to
spoil it. [Thomas Frost, Circus Life and Circus Celebrities, London, 1875]


splendiferous (adj.)

considered a playful elaboration since its re-birth in 1843, but in 15c. it was good English, from
Medieval Latin splendorifer, from splendor (see splendor) + ferre to bear (see infer). Compare 15c.
splendidious, also splendacious (1843). Bartlett (1859) offers this, allegedly from An itinerant
gospeller ... holding forth to a Kentuckian audience on the kingdom of heaven:    Heaven, my beloved
hearers, said he, is a glorious, a beautiful, a splendiferous, an angeliferous place. Eye hath not
seen, ear hath not heard, it has not entered into the imagination of any Cracker in these here
diggings what carryings on the just made perfect have up thar.


evangelist (n.)

late 12c., Matthew, Mark, Luke or John, from Old French evangelist and directly from Late Latin
evangelista, from Greek euangelistes preacher of the gospel, literally bringer of good news, from
euangelizesthai bring good news, from eu- good (see eu-) + angellein announce, from angelos
messenger (see angel).    In early Greek Christian texts, the word was used of the four supposed
authors of the narrative gospels. Meaning itinerant preacher was another early Church usage, revived
in Middle English (late 14c.). Classical Greek euangelion meant the reward of good tidings; sense
transferred in Christian use to the glad tidings themselves. In Late Latin, Greek eu- regularly was
consonantized to ev- before vowels.


chapman (n.)

peddler, itinerant tradesman, Middle English form of Old English ceapman tradesman, from West
Germanic compound *kaupman- (cognates: Old High German choufman, German Kauffman, Middle Dutch and
Dutch koopman), formed with equivalents of man (n.) + West Germanic *kaup- (cognates: Old Saxon cop,
Old Frisian kap trade, purchase, Middle Dutch coop, Dutch koop trade, market, bargain, kauf trader,
Old English ceap barter, business; a purchase), from Proto-Germanic *kaupoz- (cognates: Danish
kj&oslash;b purchase, bargain, Old Norse kaup bargain, pay; compare also Old Church Slavonic kupiti
to buy, a Germanic loan-word), probably an early Germanic borrowing from Latin caupo (genitive
cauponis) petty tradesman, huckster, of unknown origin. Compare also cheap (adj.).


monkey (n.)

1520s, likely from an unrecorded Middle Low German *moneke or Middle Dutch *monnekijn, a colloquial
word for monkey, originally a diminutive of some Romanic word, compare French monne (16c.); Middle
Italian monnicchio, from Old Italian monna; Spanish mona ape, monkey. In a 1498 Low German version
of the popular medieval beast story Roman de Renart (Reynard the Fox), Moneke is the name given to
the son of Martin the Ape; transmission of the word to English might have been via itinerant
entertainers from the German states.    The Old French form of the name is Monequin (recorded as
Monnekin in a 14c. version from Hainault), which could be a diminutive of some personal name, or it
could be from the general Romanic word, which may be ultimately from Arabic maimun monkey, literally
auspicious, a euphemistic usage because the sight of apes was held by the Arabs to be unlucky
[Klein]. The word would have been influenced in Italian by folk etymology from monna woman, a
contraction of ma donna my lady.  Monkey has been used affectionately for child since c.1600. As a
type of modern popular dance, it is attested from 1964. Monkey business attested from 1883. Monkey
suit fancy uniform is from 1886. Monkey wrench is attested from 1858; its figurative sense of
something that obstructs operations is from the notion of one getting jammed in the gears of
machinery (compare spanner in the works). To make a monkey of someone is attested from 1900. To have
a monkey on one's back be addicted is 1930s narcotics slang, though the same phrase in the 1860s
meant to be angry. There is a story in the Sinbad cycle about a tormenting ape-like creature that
mounts a man's shoulders and won't get off, which may be the root of the term. In 1890s British
slang, to have a monkey up the chimney meant to have a mortgage on one's house. The three wise
monkeys (see no evil, etc.) are attested from 1926.


hag (n.)

early 13c., ugly old woman, probably a shortening of Old English h&aelig;gtesse witch, fury (on
assumption that -tesse was a suffix), from Proto-Germanic *hagatusjon-, of unknown origin. Similar
shortening produced Dutch heks, German Hexe witch from cognate Middle Dutch haghetisse, Old High
German hagzusa.    First element is probably cognate with Old English haga enclosure, portion of
woodland marked off for cutting (see hedge). Old Norse had tunri&eth;a and Old High German zunritha,
both literally hedge-rider, used of witches and ghosts. Second element may be connected with
Norwegian tysja fairy; crippled woman, Gaulish dusius demon, Lithuanian dvasia spirit, from PIE
*dhewes- to fly about, smoke, be scattered, vanish.    One of the magic words for which there is no
male form, suggesting its original meaning was close to diviner, soothsayer, which were always
female in northern European paganism, and h&aelig;gtesse seem at one time to have meant woman of
prophetic and oracular powers (&AElig;lfric uses it to render the Greek pythoness, the voice of the
Delphic oracle), a figure greatly feared and respected. Later, the word was used of village wise
women.   Haga is also the haw- in hawthorn, which is an important tree in northern European pagan
religion. There may be several layers of folk etymology here. Confusion or blending with heathenish
is suggested by Middle English h&aelig;htis, h&aelig;gtis hag, witch, fury, etc., and haetnesse
goddess, used of Minerva and Diana.    If the h&aelig;gtesse was once a powerful supernatural woman
(in Norse it is an alternative word for Norn, any of the three weird sisters, the equivalent of the
Fates), it might originally have carried the hawthorn sense. Later, when the pagan magic was reduced
to local scatterings, it might have had the sense of hedge-rider, or she who straddles the hedge,
because the hedge was the boundary between the civilized world of the village and the wild world
beyond. The h&aelig;gtesse would have a foot in each reality. Even later, when it meant the local
healer and root collector, living in the open and moving from village to village, it may have had
the mildly pejorative sense of hedge- in Middle English (hedge-priest, etc.), suggesting an
itinerant sleeping under bushes, perhaps. The same word could have contained all three senses before
being reduced to its modern one.


