jab (v.)

1825, to thrust with a point, Scottish variant of job to strike, pierce, thrust, from Middle English
jobben to jab, thrust, peck (late 15c.), of unknown origin, perhaps echoic. Related: Jabbed;
jabbing.


jab (n.)

1825, from jab (v.). Meaning a punch with the fist is from 1889. Sense of injection with a
hypodermic needle, beloved by headline writers, is from 1914.


jabber (v.)

1650s, spelling variant of Middle English jablen (c.1400), also javeren, jaberen, probably
ultimately echoic. Related: Jabbered; jabbering. The noun is 1727, from the verb.


Jabberwocky

1872, nonsense word (perhaps based on jabber) coined by Lewis Carroll, for the poem of the same
name, which he published in Through the Looking-Glass. The poem is about a fabulous beast called the
Jabberwock.


jabot (n.)

frill of a shirt, 1823, from French jabot grizzard (of a bird), frill on a shirt front (16c.), of
unknown origin. Klein suggests a connection with gaver to cram, gorge, and thus ultimately with
English jaw.


jabroni (n.)

c.2000, professional wrestling slang for one whose main purpose is to make the better-known
wrestlers of the organization look good; he or she does this by losing to them. More commonly known
as a jobber (though some enthusiasts claim there is a difference), and perhaps a mock-Italianized
form of that word (but compare jaboney naive person, immigrant, hoodlum, of unknown origin, American
English, in use c.1990).   <b>Jobber</b> -- A performer who regularly loses on television and
doesn't receive much if any push. A comparable term for such a performer is jabroni, which is a
favorite catch-phrase of Dwayne The Rock Johnson. To soften the blow of such labels, some wrestling
promotions refer to jobbers as enhancement talent. Carpenter was the phrase used by earlier
generations. [The Professional Wrestlers' Instructional and Workout Guide, 2005]


jibber-jabber (v.)

1728, to talk gibberish, reduplication of jabber (q.v.). Related: Jibber-jabbering. As a noun, from
1813.


Punjab

region on the Indian subcontinent, from Hindi Panjab, from Persian panj five (from PIE *penkwo-; see
five) + ab water, from Iranian *ap-, from PIE *ap- (2) water (see water (n.1)). So called for its
five rivers. Related: Punjabi.


