Jabberwocky

1872, nonsense word (perhaps based on jabber) coined by Lewis Carroll, for the poem of the same
name, which he published in Through the Looking-Glass. The poem is about a fabulous beast called the
Jabberwock.


jabber (v.)

1650s, spelling variant of Middle English jablen (c.1400), also javeren, jaberen, probably
ultimately echoic. Related: Jabbered; jabbering. The noun is 1727, from the verb.


jibber-jabber (v.)

1728, to talk gibberish, reduplication of jabber (q.v.). Related: Jibber-jabbering. As a noun, from
1813.


gibberish (n.)

1550s, imitative of the sound of chatter, probably influenced by jabber. Used early 17c. of the
language of rogues and gypsies.


smatter (v.)

early 15c., talk idly, chatter; talk ignorantly or superficially, of uncertain origin, perhaps
imitative. Similar forms are found in Middle High German smetern to chatter and Swedish smattra to
patter, rattle, and compare Danish snaddre chatter, jabber, Dutch snateren, German schnattern
cackle, chatter, prattle. Related: Smattered; smattering.


chatter (v.)

early 13c., chateren to twitter, gossip, earlier cheateren, chiteren, of echoic origin. Compare
Dutch koeteren jabber, Danish kvidre twitter, chirp. Related: Chattered; chattering. Phrase
chattering class in use by 1893, with a reference perhaps from 1843:    Such was the most
interesting side of the fatal event to that idle chattering class of London life to whom the
collision of heaven and earth were important only as affording matter for news! [Catherine Grace F.
Gore (Mrs. Gore), The Banker's Wife, 1843]


higgledy-piggledy

confusedly, hurriedly, 1590s, a vocal gesture [OED] probably formed from pig and the animal's
suggestions of mess and disorder. Reduplications in the h-/p- pattern are common (as in hanky-panky,
hocus-pocus, hinch(y)-pinch(y), an obsolete children's game, attested from c.1600).    Edward Moor,
Suffolk Words and Phrases (London, 1823), quotes a list of reduplications from Ray's Collection of
English Words (1768), all said to signify any confusion or mixture; the list has higgledy-piggledy,
hurly-burly, hodge-podge, mingle-mangle, arsy-versy, kim-kam, hub-bub, crawly-mauly, and hab-nab. To
which he might have added, Moor writes, crincum-crankum, crinkle-crankle, flim-flam, fiddle-faddle,
gibble-gabble, harum-scarum, helter-skelter, hiccup-suickup, hocus-pocus, hotch-potch, hugger-
mugger, hum-drum, hum-strum, hurry-scurry, jibber-jabber, prittle-prattle, shilly-shally, tittle-
tattle, and topsy-turvy. Many of them seem to date to the 16th century.


