jaundice (n.)

c.1300, jaunis, from Old French jaunice, earlier jalnice, yellowness (12c.), from jaune yellow, from
Latin galbinus greenish yellow, probably from PIE *ghel- yellow, green (see Chloe).    With
intrusive -d- (compare gender, astound, thunder). Figurative meaning feeling in which views are
colored or distorted first recorded 1620s, from yellow's association with bitterness and envy (see
yellow). As a verb, from 1791, but usually in figurative use. Related: Jaundiced.


icterus (n.)

1706, medical Latin, from Greek ikteros jaundice, also the name of a yellowish bird the sight of
which was supposed, by sympathetic magic, to cure jaundice. As a zoological genus, from 1713.


cyanosis (n.)

blue disease, the blue jaundice of the ancients, 1820, Medical Latin, from Greek kyanosis, from
kyanos dark blue color (see cyan) + -osis.


yellow (adj.)

Old English geolu, geolwe, yellow, from Proto-Germanic *gelwaz (cognates: Old Saxon, Old High German
gelo, Middle Dutch ghele, Dutch geel, Middle High German gel, German gelb, Old Norse gulr, Swedish
gul yellow), from PIE *ghel- (2) to shine, with derivatives referring to bright materials and gold
(see glass).    Occasionally in Middle English used of a color closer to blue-gray or gray, of frogs
or hazel eyes, and to translate Latin caeruleus, glauco. Also as a noun in Old English. Meaning
light-skinned (of blacks) first recorded 1808. Applied to Asiatics since 1787, though the first
recorded reference is to Turkish words for inhabitants of India. Yellow peril translates German die
gelbe gefahr. Sense of cowardly is 1856, of unknown origin; the color was traditionally associated
rather with jealousy and envy (17c.). Yellow-bellied cowardly is from 1924, probably a semi-rhyming
reduplication of yellow; earlier yellow-belly was a sailor's name for a half-caste (1867) and a
Texas term for Mexican soldiers (1842, based on the color of their uniforms). Yellow dog mongrel is
attested from c.1770; slang sense of contemptible person first recorded 1881. Yellow fever attested
from 1748, American English (jaundice is a symptom).


