jest (v.)

1520s, to speak in a trifling manner; 1550s, to joke, from Middle English gesten recite a tale (late
14c.), from geste (see jest (n.)). Related: Jested; jesting.


jester (n.)

mid-14c., jestour (Anglo-Latin), late 14c., gestour a minstrel, professional reciter of romances,
agent noun from gesten recite a tale, which was a jester's original function (see jest). Sense of
buffoon in a prince's court is from c.1500.


jest (n.)

early 13c., geste, narrative of exploits, from Old French geste action, exploit, from Latin gesta
deeds, neuter plural of gestus, past participle of gerere to carry, behave, act, perform (see gest).
Sense descended through idle tale (late 15c.) to mocking speech, raillery (1540s) to joke (1550s).


scoff (v.)

mid-14c., jest, make light of something; mid-15c., make fun of, mock, from the noun meaning
contemptuous ridicule (c.1300), from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse skaup, skop mockery,
ridicule, Middle Danish skof jest, mockery; perhaps from Proto-Germanic *skub-, *skuf- (cognates:
Old English scop poet, Old High German scoph fiction, sport, jest, derision), from PIE *skeubh- to
shove (see shove (v.)).


cavil (v.)

1540s, from Middle French caviller to mock, jest, from Latin cavillari to jeer, mock; satirize,
argue scoffingly (also source of Italian cavillare, Spanish cavilar), from cavilla jest, jeering,
related to calumnia (see calumny).


humbug (n.)

1751, student slang, trick, jest, hoax, deception, also as a verb, of unknown origin. A vogue word
of the early 1750s; its origin was a subject of much whimsical speculation even then.


jape (n.)

early 14c., trick, deceit, later a joke, a jest (late 14c.); see jape (v.). By mid-14c. it meant
frivolous pastime, by 1400, bawdiness.


Underground Railroad (n.)

network of U.S. anti-slavery activists helping runaways elude capture, attested from 1847, but said
to date from 1831 and to have been coined in jest by bewildered trackers after their slaves vanished
without a trace. Originally mostly the term for escape networks in the (then) western states of the
U.S.


Joe Miller (n.)

stale joke, 1816, from Joseph Miller (1684-1738), a comedian, whose name was affixed after his death
to a popular jest-book, Joe Miller's jests, or the Wit's Vade-mecum (1739) compiled by John Mottley.


scoptic (adj.)

1660s, mocking, scoffing, from Greek skoptikos given to mockery, from skoptein to mock, jest.


jeu (n.)

a French word for play, game occurring in some phrases borrowed into English, from Latin jocum jest,
joke, play, sport (see joke (n.)).


agog (adj., adv.)

in a state of desire; in a state of imagination; heated with the notion of some enjoyment; longing
[Johnson], c.1400, perhaps from Old French en gogues in jest, good humor, joyfulness, from gogue
fun, of unknown origin.


pleasantry (n.)

sprightly humor in conversation, 1650s, from French plaisanterie joke, jest; joking, jesting, from
plaisant (see pleasant). Related: Pleasantries.


scop (n.)

poet, minstrel, Old English scop, cognate with Old High German scoph poetry, sport, jest, Old Norse
skop railing, mockery (see scoff (v.)).


buffoon (n.)

1540s, type of pantomime dance; 1580s, clown, from Middle French bouffon (16c.), from Italian
buffone jester, from buffa joke, jest, pleasantry, from buffare to puff out the cheeks, a comic
gesture, of echoic origin. Also see -oon.


game (v.)

Old English gamenian to play, jest, joke; see game (n.). Modern usages probably represent recent
formations from the noun. Related: Gamed; gaming.


jocose (adj.)

1670s, from Latin iocosus full of jesting, joking, from iocus pastime, sport; a jest, joke (see joke
(n.)). Implies ponderous humor. Related: Jocosely; jocoseness.


sobriquet (n.)

1640s, from French sobriquet nickname, from Middle French soubriquet (15c.), which also meant a
jest, quip, and is said to have meant literally a chuck under the chin [Gamillscheg]; of unknown
origin (first element perhaps from Latin sub under).


nugatory (adj.)

trifling, of no value, c.1600, from Latin nugatorius worthless, trifling, futile, from nugator
jester, trifler, braggart, from nugatus, past participle of nugari to trifle, jest, play the fool,
from nug&aelig; jokes, jests, trifles, of unknown origin.


boilermaker (n.)

a maker of boilers for engines, 1814, from boiler (n.) + maker. Meaning shot of whiskey with a glass
of beer is short for boilermaker's delight (1910), strong cheap whiskey, so called in jest from the
notion that it would clean the scales from the interior of a boiler.


jape (v.)

late 14c., to trick, beguile, jilt, perhaps from Old French japer to howl, bawl, scream, of echoic
origin, or from Old French gaber to mock, deride. Phonetics suits the former, but sense the latter
explanation. Took on a slang sense mid-15c. of have sex with, and disappeared from polite usage.
Revived in harmless Middle English sense of say or do something in jest by Scott, etc. Related:
Japed; japing.


gest (n.)

famous deed, exploit; story, romance, c.1300, from Old French geste action, exploit, romance,
history (of celebrated people or actions), from Latin gesta actions, exploits, deeds, achievements,
neuter plural of gestus, past participle of gerere to carry on, wage, perform, of unknown origin.
See jest.


allude (v.)

1530s, mock, from Middle French alluder or directly from Latin alludere to play, sport, joke, jest,
from ad- to (see ad-) + ludere to play (see ludicrous). Meaning make an indirect reference, point in
passing is from 1570s. Related: Alluded; alluding.


joke (v.)

1660s, to make a joke, from Latin iocari to jest, joke, from iocus (see joke (n.)). Related: Joked;
joking.


badinage (n.)

light railery, 1650s, from French badinage playfulness, jesting, from badiner (v.) to jest, joke,
from badin silly, jesting, from Old Proven&ccedil;al badar to yawn, gape, from Late Latin badare to
gape, from *bat-, the root of abash.


juggle (v.)

late 14c., entertain by clowning or doing tricks, back-formation from juggler and in part from Old
French jogler play tricks, sing songs, from Late Latin ioculare (source of Italian giocolare), from
Latin ioculari to jest (see jocular). Related: Juggled; juggling.


juggler (n.)

c.1100, iugulere jester, buffoon, also wizard, sorcerer, from Old English geogelere magician,
conjurer, also from Anglo-French jogelour, Old French jogleor (accusative), from Latin ioculatorem
(nominative ioculator) joker, from ioculari to joke, to jest (see jocular). Connecting notion
between magician and juggler is dexterity.


facetious (adj.)

1590s, from French fac&eacute;tieux, from fac&eacute;tie a joke (15c.), from Latin facetia jest,
witticism, from facetus witty, elegant, fine, courteous, of unknown origin, perhaps related to facis
torch.    It implies a desire to be amusing, often intrusive or ill-timed.  Related: Facetiously;
facetiousness. Faceti&aelig; in booksellers' catalogues, is, like curious, a euphemism for erotica.
[Fowler]


gaud (n.)

late 14c., jest, joke, prank, trick; also fraud, deception, trick, artifice. Also large, ornamental
bead in a rosary (mid-14c.); a bauble, trinket, plaything (mid-15c.). In some senses, from gaudy
(n.) (see gaudy). In some, from Latin gaudium joy, gaude rejoice thou (in hymns), or from Old French
gaudie, noun of action from gaudir. As a verb, to furnish with gauds, from late 14c. Related:
Gauded; gauding.


jeopardy (n.)

c.1300, ioparde (13c. in Anglo-French), from Old French jeu parti, literally a divided game, game
with even chances, from jeu a game (from Latin iocus jest; see joke (n.)) + parti, past participle
of partir to divide (see part (v.)). Originally a stratagem; sense of danger, risk is late 14c.


edible (adj.)

1590s, from Late Latin edibilis eatable, from Latin edere to eat, from PIE root *ed- to eat
(cognates: Sanskrit admi I eat; Greek edo I eat; Lithuanian edu I eat; Hittite edmi I eat, adanna
food; Old Irish ithim I eat; Gothic itan, Old Swedish and Old English etan, Old High German essan to
eat;    Avestan ad- to eat; Armenian utem I eat; Old Church Slavonic jasti to eat, Russian jest to
eat).


sarcasm (n.)

1570s, sarcasmus, from Late Latin sarcasmus, from late Greek sarkasmos a sneer, jest, taunt,
mockery, from sarkazein to speak bitterly, sneer, literally to strip off the flesh, from sarx
(genitive sarkos) flesh, properly piece of meat, from PIE root *twerk- to cut (cognates: Avestan
thwares to cut). Current form of the English word is from 1610s. For nuances of usage, see humor.


retort (v.)

1550s, make return in kind (especially of an injury), from Old French retort and directly from Latin
retortus, past participle of retorquere turn back, twist back, throw back, from re- back (see re-) +
torquere to twist (see torque (n.)). Applied to exchanges of jest or sarcasm by c.1600, hence say or
utter sharply and aggressively in reply (1620s). Related: Retorted; retorting.


glee (n.)

Old English gliu, gliw entertainment, mirth, jest, play, sport, presumably from a Proto-Germanic
*gleujam but absent in other Germanic languages except for the rare Old Norse gly joy; probably
related to glad. A poetry word in Old English and Middle English, obsolete c.1500-c.1700, it somehow
found its way back to currency late 18c. In Old English, an entertainer was a gleuman (female
gleo-m&aelig;gden). Glee club (1814) is from the secondary sense of unaccompanied part-song (1650s)
as a form of musical entertainment.


scherzo (n.)

1852, from Italian scherzo, literally sport, joke, from scherzare to jest or joke, from a Germanic
source (compare Middle High German scherzen to jump merrily, enjoy oneself, German scherz sport),
from PIE *(s)ker- (2) leap, jump about. The lively second or third movement in a multi-movement
work. Scherzando is the Italian gerund of scherzare.


gamble (v.)

1726 (implied in gambling), from a dialectal survival of Middle English gammlen, variant of gamenen
to play, jest, be merry, from Old English gamenian to play, joke, pun, from gamen (see game). Or
possibly gamble is from a derivative of gamel to play games (1590s), itself likely a frequentative
from game. Originally regarded as a slang word. The intrusive -b- may be from confusion with gambol.
Related: Gambled; gambling.


joke (n.)

1660s, joque, a jest, something done to excite laughter, from Latin iocus joke, sport, pastime, from
PIE root *yek- (1) to speak (cognates: Breton iez language, Old High German jehan to say, German
Beichte confession).    Originally a colloquial or slang word. Meaning something not to be taken
seriously is 1791. Practical joke trick played on someone for the sake of a laugh at his expense is
from 1804 (earlier handicraft joke, 1741). Black joke is old slang for smutty song (1730s), from use
of that phrase in the refrain of a then-popular song as a euphemism for the monosyllable.


yeast (n.)

Old English gist yeast, froth, from Proto-Germanic *jest- (cognates: Old Norse jastr, Swedish
j&#228;st, Middle High German gest, German Gischt foam, froth, Old High German jesan, German
g&auml;ren to ferment), from PIE root *yes- to boil, foam, froth (cognates: Sanskrit yasyati boils,
seethes, Greek zein to boil, Welsh ias seething, foaming).


ruse (n.)

early 15c., dodging movements of a hunted animal; 1620s, a trick, from Old French ruse, reuse
diversion, switch in flight; trick, jest (14c.), back-formed noun from reuser to dodge, repel,
retreat; deceive, cheat, from Latin recusare deny, reject, oppose, from re-, intensive prefix (see
re-), + causari plead as a reason, object, allege, from causa reason, cause (see cause (n.)). It
also has been proposed that the French word may be from Latin rursus backwards, or a Vulgar Latin
form of refusare. Johnson calls it, A French word neither elegant nor necessary. The verb ruse was
used in Middle English.


scorn (n.)

c.1200, a shortening of Old French escarn mockery, derision, contempt, a common Romanic word
(Spanish escarnio, Italian scherno) of Germanic origin, from Proto-Germanic *skarnjan mock, deride
(cognates: Old High German skern mockery, jest, sport, Middle High German scherzen to jump with
joy).    Probably influenced by Old French escorne affront, disgrace, which is a back-formation from
escorner, literally to break off (someone's) horns, from Vulgar Latin *excornare (source of Italian
scornare treat with contempt), from Latin ex- without (see ex-) + cornu horn (see horn (n.)).


gaudy (adj.)

showy, tastelessly rich, 1580s, probably ultimately from Middle English gaudi large, ornamental bead
in a rosary (early 14c.); but there is a parallel sense of gaudy as full of trickery (1520s), from
Middle English gaud deception, trick, from gaudi a jest, trick, possibly from Anglo-French gaudir be
merry, scoff, from Latin gaudere rejoice (see joy).    Alternative etymology of the adjective is
from Middle English gaudegrene yellowish-green (early 14c.), originally green dye obtained from a
plant formerly known as weld, from a Germanic source (see weld (n.)), which became gaude in Old
French. The English term supposedly shifted sense from weld-dye to bright. As a noun, feast,
festival 1650s, from gaudy day day of rejoicing (1560s).


sport (n.)

early 15c., pleasant pastime, shortening of disport activity that offers amusement or relaxation;
entertainment, fun (c.1300), also a pastime or game; flirtation; pleasure taken in such activity
(late 14c.), from Anglo-French disport, Old French desport, deport pleasure, enjoyment, delight;
solace, consolation; favor, privilege, related to desporter, deporter to divert, amuse, please, play
(see sport (v.)).    Original sense preserved in phrases such as in sport in jest (mid-15c.).
Meaning game involving physical exercise first recorded 1520s. Sense of stylish man is from 1861,
American English, probably because they lived by gambling and betting on races. Meaning good fellow
is attested from 1881 (as in be a sport, 1913). Sport as a familiar form of address to a man is from
1935, Australian English. The sport of kings was originally (1660s) war-making. Other, lost senses
of Middle English disport were consolation, solace; a source of comfort.


guest (n.)

Old English g&aelig;st, giest (Anglian gest) guest; enemy; stranger, the common notion being
stranger, from Proto-Germanic *gastiz (cognates: Old Frisian jest, Dutch gast, German Gast, Gothic
gasts guest, originally stranger), from PIE root *ghos-ti- stranger, guest; host (cognates: Latin
hostis enemy, hospes host -- from *hosti-potis host, guest, originally lord of strangers -- Greek
xenos guest, host, stranger; Old Church Slavonic gosti guest, friend, gospodi lord, master); the
root sense, according to Watkins, probably is someone with whom one has reciprocal duties of
hospitality, representing a mutual exchange relationship highly important to ancient Indo-European
society. But as strangers are potential enemies as well as guests, the word has a forked path.
Spelling evolution influenced by Old Norse cognate gestr (the usual sound changes from the Old
English word would have yielded Modern English *yest). Phrase be my guest in the sense of go right
ahead first recorded 1955.


pull (v.)

c.1300, to move forcibly by pulling, to drag, from Old English pullian to pluck off (wool), to draw
out, of unknown origin, perhaps related to Low German pulen remove the shell or husk, Frisian
p&#251;lje to shell, husk, Middle Dutch polen to peel, strip, Icelandic pula work hard.    Early
14c. as to pick, pull off, gather (fruit, flowers, berries, leaves, petals, etc.); mid-14c. as to
uproot, pull up (of teeth, weeds, etc.). Sense of to draw, attract (to oneself) is from c.1400;
sense of to pluck at with the fingers is from c.1400. Meaning tear to pieces is mid-15c. By late
16c. it had replaced draw in these senses. Related: Pulled; pulling.    Common in slang usages
19c.-20c.; Bartlett (1859) has to pull foot walk fast; run; pull it to run. To pull up check a
course of action is from 1808, figurative of the lifting of the reins in horse-riding. To pull
(someone's) chain in figurative sense is from 1974, perhaps on the notion of a captive animal; the
expression was also used for to contact (someone), on the notion of the chain that operates a
signaling mechanism.    To pull (someone's) leg is from 1882, perhaps on notion of playfully
tripping (compare pull the long bow exaggerate, 1830, and pulling someone's leg also sometimes was
described as a way to awaken a sleeping person in a railway compartment, ship's berth, etc.).
Thornton's American Glossary (1912) has pull (n.) a jest (to have a pull at (someone)), which it
identifies as local and illustrates with an example from the Massachusetts Spy of May 21, 1817,
which identifies it as a Georgian phrase. To pull (one's) punches is from 1920 in pugilism, from
1921 figuratively. To pull in arrive (1892) and pull out depart (1868) are from the railroads.    To
pull (something) off accomplish, succeed at is originally in sporting, to win the prize money
(1870). To pull (something) on (someone) is from 1916; to pull (something) out of one's ass is Army
slang from 1970s. To pull rank is from 1919; to pull the rug from under (someone) figuratively is
from 1946.


ghost (n.)

Old English gast soul, spirit, life, breath; good or bad spirit, angel, demon, from Proto-Germanic
*ghoizdoz (cognates: Old Saxon gest, Old Frisian jest, Middle Dutch gheest, Dutch geest, German
Geist spirit, ghost), from PIE root *gheis- to be excited, amazed, frightened (cognates: Sanskrit
hedah wrath; Avestan zaesha- horrible, frightful; Gothic usgaisjan, Old English g&aelig;stan to
frighten). This was the usual West Germanic word for supernatural being, and the primary sense seems
to have been connected to the idea of to wound, tear, pull to pieces. The surviving Old English
senses, however, are in Christian writing, where it is used to render Latin spiritus (see spirit
(n.)), a sense preserved in Holy Ghost. Modern sense of disembodied spirit of a dead person is
attested from late 14c. and returns the word toward its ancient sense.    Most Indo-European words
for soul, spirit also double with reference to supernatural spirits. Many have a base sense of
appearance (such as Greek phantasma; French spectre; Polish widmo, from Old Church Slavonic videti
to see; Old English scin, Old High German giskin, originally appearance, apparition, related to Old
English scinan, Old High German skinan to shine). Other concepts are in French revenant, literally
returning (from the other world), Old Norse aptr-ganga, literally back-comer. Breton bugelnoz is
literally night-child. Latin manes probably is a euphemism.    The gh- spelling appeared early 15c.
in Caxton, influenced by Flemish and Middle Dutch gheest, but was rare in English before mid-16c.
Sense of slight suggestion (in ghost image, ghost of a chance, etc.) is first recorded 1610s; that
in ghost writing is from 1884, but that term is not found until 1919. Ghost town is from 1908. To
give up the ghost die was in Old English. Ghost in the machine was Gilbert Ryle's term (1949) for
the mind viewed as separate from the body.


