jetsam (n.)

1560s, jottsome act of throwing goods overboard to lighten a ship, alteration and contraction of
Middle English jetteson, from Anglo-French getteson, Old French getaison a throwing (see jettison).
Intermediate forms were jetson, jetsome; the form perhaps was deformed by influence of flotsam. From
1590s as goods thrown overboard; figurative use by 1861. For distinction of meaning, see flotsam.


jettison (v.)

1848, from jettison (n.) act of throwing overboard to lighten a ship. This noun was an 18c. Marine
Insurance writers' restoration of the earlier form and original sense of the 15c. word that had
become jetsam, probably because jetsam had taken on a sense of things cast overboard and an
unambiguous word was needed for act of throwing overboard.    Middle English jetteson (n.) act of
throwing overboard is from Anglo-French getteson, from Old French getaison act of throwing (goods
overboard), especially to lighten a ship in distress, from Late Latin iactionem (nominative
iactatio) act of throwing, noun of action from past participle stem of iectare toss about (see jet
(v.)). Related: Jettisoned.


rack (n.3)

clouds driven before the wind, c.1300, also rush of wind, collision, crash, originally a northern
word, possibly from Old English racu cloud (or an unrecorded Scandinavian cognate of it), reinforced
by Old Norse rek wreckage, jetsam, or by influence of Old English wr&aelig;c something driven; from
Proto-Germanic *wrakaz, from PIE root *wreg- to push, shove, drive (see urge (v.)). Often confused
with wrack (n.), especially in phrase rack and ruin (1590s). The distinction is that rack is driven
clouds; wrack is seaweed cast up on shore.


flotsam (n.)

c.1600, from Anglo-French floteson, from Old French flotaison a floating, from floter to float (of
Germanic origin; see float) + -aison, from Latin -ation(em). Spelled flotsen till mid-19c. when it
altered, perhaps under influence of many English words in -some.    In British law, flotsam are
goods found floating on the sea as a consequence of a shipwreck or action of wind or waves; jetsam
are things cast out of a ship in danger of being wrecked, and afterward washed ashore, or things
cast ashore by the sailors. Whatever sinks is lagan. Figurative use for odds and ends attested by
1861.


