jocularity (n.)

1640s, from Medieval Latin iocularitas jocular, facetious, from iocularis (see jocular).


jocular (adj.)

1620s, from Latin iocularis funny, comic, from ioculus, diminutive of iocus (see joke (n.)). Implies
evasion of an issue by a joke.


fantods (n.)

1839, jocular formation, perhaps based on fantasy.


mixologist (n.)

bartender, 1856, jocular slang formation from mix (v.) + ending from the sciences.


phiz (n.)

1680s, jocular abbreviation of physiognomy; hence face, countenance, facial expression.


blighter (n.)

1822, thing which blights, agent noun from blight (v.). British colloquial sense of contemptible
person (often jocular) is recorded from 1896.


bestest (adj.)

jocular emphatic superlative of best (which is itself a superlative), attested from 1834.


buttinski (n.)

a jocular name for one who cuts into a line, etc., 1902, American English, from verbal phrase butt
in (see butt (v.)) + surname ending based on Eastern European names.


megabucks (n.)

1946, originally one million dollars, from mega- in the scientific sense + slang buck (n.) dollar. A
jocular coinage of U.S. scientists working on expensive atomic research.


betweenity (n.)

1760, a jocular formation, perhaps coined by Horace Walpole, from between + -ity.


-er (3)

suffix used to make jocular or familiar formations from common or proper names (soccer being one),
first attested 1860s, English schoolboy slang, Introduced from Rugby School into Oxford University
slang, orig. at University College, in Michaelmas Term, 1875 [OED, with unusual precision].


sexpert (n.)

sex therapist, 1924, from jocular merger of sex (n.) + expert.


blunderful (adj.)

1881, jocular blend of blunder and wonderful.


flustrated (adj.)

1712, jocular formation from fluster + frustrated.


simpleton (n.)

1640s, probably a jocular formation from simple and -ton, suffix extracted from surnames. Compare
skimmington, personification of an ill-used spouse, c.1600.


anecdotage (n.)

anecdotes collectively, 1823, from anecdote + -age. As a jocular coinage meaning garrulous old age
it is recorded from 1835, and led to anecdotard.


gent (n.)

short for gentleman, by 17c. (in early uses it is difficult to distinguish the shortening from the
common abbreviation gent.). Early in the nineteenth century the word was colloquial and slightly
jocular; about 1840 its use came to be regarded as a mark of low breeding [OED].


pet peeve (n.)

thing that provokes one most, 1919, from pet (n.1) in the adjectival sense especially cherished
(1826), here in jocular or ironic use with peeve (n.).


beeswax (n.)

1670s, from genitive of bee + wax. As a jocular alteration of business (usually in an injunction to
someone to mind his own) attested from 1934 in Lower East Side slang as reproduced in Henry Roth's
Call It Sleep.


druthers (n.)

1895, from jocular formation based on I'd ruther, American English dialectal form of I'd rather
(used by Bret Harte as drathers, 1875).


hair-raising (adj.)

exciting, 1837, from hair + raise (v.). In 19c. works, sometimes as jocular mock-classical
tricopherous.


mugwump (n.)

1832, jocular for great man, boss, important person, American English, from Algonquian (Natick)
mugquomp important person (derived from mugumquomp war leader); used from 1884 of Republicans who
refused to support James G. Blaine's presidential candidacy, hence one who holds himself aloof from
party politics.


john (n.)

toilet, 1932, probably from jakes, used for toilet since 15c. Meaning prostitute's customer is from
1911, probably from the common, and thus anonymous, name by which they identified themselves.
Meaning policeman is 1858, from shortening of johndarm, jocular anglicization of gendarme.


seven-year itch (n.)

1899, American English, some sort of skin condition (sometimes identified with poison ivy infection)
that either lasts seven years or returns every seven years. Jocular use for urge to stray from
marital fidelity is attested from 1952, as the title of the Broadway play (made into a film, 1955)
by George Axelrod (1922-2003), in which the lead male character reads an article describing the high
number of men have extra-marital affairs after seven years of marriage.


futility (n.)

1620s, from French futilit&eacute; or directly from Latin futilitatem (nominative futilitas)
worthlessness, from futilis (see futile). Hence, jocular futilitarian (1827).


thunk (v.)

dialectal or jocular past tense or past participle of think, by 1876. Not historical, but by analogy
of drink/drunk, sink/sunk, etc.


pleasant (adj.)

late 14c. (early 14c. as a surname), from Old French plaisant pleasant, pleasing, agreeable (12c.),
present participle of plaisir to please (see please). Pleasantry has the word's modern French sense
of funny, jocular. Related: Pleasantly.


floccinaucinihilipilification (n.)

action or habit of estimating as worthless, 1741, a combination of four Latin words (flocci, nauci,
nihili, pilifi) all signifying at a small price or for nothing, which were listed together in a rule
of the well-known Eton Latin Grammar. The kind of jocular formation that was possible among educated
men in Britain in those days. Just so, as in praesenti, the opening words of mnemonic lines on
conjugation in Lilley's 16c. Latin grammar, could stand alone as late as 19c. and be understood to
mean rudiments of Latin.


negotiate (v.)

to communicate in search of mutual agreement, 1590s, back-formation from negotiation, or else from
Latin negotiatus, past participle of negotiari. In the sense of tackle successfully (1862), it at
first meant to clear on horseback a hedge, fence, or other obstacle and originated in the hunting-
field; those who hunt the fox like also to hunt jocular verbal novelties [Gowers, 1965]. Related:
Negotiated; negotiating.


costa (n.)

Spanish costa coast, from same Latin source as English coast (n.). Used in Britain from 1960s in
jocular formations (costa geriatrica, costa del crime, etc.) in imitation of the names of Spanish
tourist destinations.


pond (n.)

c.1300 (mid-13c. in compounds), artificially banked body of water, variant of pound enclosed place
(see pound (n.2)). Applied locally to natural pools and small lakes from late 15c. Jocular reference
to the Atlantic Ocean dates from 1640s. Pond scum (Spirogyra) is from 1864 (also called frog-spittle
and brook-silk. As figurative for someone extremely repulsive, from 1984.


tandem (n.)

1785, carriage pulled by horses harnessed one behind the other (instead of side-by-side), jocular
use of Latin tandem at length (of time), at last, so much, from tam so (from PIE *tam-, adverbial
form of demonstrative pronoun root *-to-; see -th (1)) + demonstrative suffix -dem. Probably first
in university use [Century Dictionary]. Transferred by 1884 to bicycles with two seats. In English
as an adverb from 1795; as an adjective from 1801.


vive (interj.)

1590s (in vive le roi), from French, literally long live ______; French equivalent of viva (q.v.).
Jocular phrase vive la diff&eacute;rence in reference to the difference between men and women is
recorded from 1963. Also in vive la bagatelle, literally long live nonsense, denoting a carefree
attitude to life.


lass (n.)

young woman, c.1300, probably from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Swedish l&oslash;sk kona
unmarried woman, but also perhaps related to Old Norse l&ouml;skr idle, weak, West Frisian lask
light, thin. Liberman suggests Old Danish las rag. Slang words for 'rag' sometimes acquire the
jocular meaning 'child' and especially 'girl.' Used now only of mean girls [Johnson, who also has
lasslorn forsaken by his mistress]. Scottish diminutive lassie first recorded 1725.


juggle (v.)

late 14c., entertain by clowning or doing tricks, back-formation from juggler and in part from Old
French jogler play tricks, sing songs, from Late Latin ioculare (source of Italian giocolare), from
Latin ioculari to jest (see jocular). Related: Juggled; juggling.


juggler (n.)

c.1100, iugulere jester, buffoon, also wizard, sorcerer, from Old English geogelere magician,
conjurer, also from Anglo-French jogelour, Old French jogleor (accusative), from Latin ioculatorem
(nominative ioculator) joker, from ioculari to joke, to jest (see jocular). Connecting notion
between magician and juggler is dexterity.


ineffable (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French ineffable (14c.) or directly from Latin ineffabilis unutterable, from in-
not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + effabilis speakable, from effari utter, from ex- out (see ex-) +
fari speak (see fame (n.)). Plural noun ineffables was, for a time, a jocular euphemism for trousers
(1823). Related: Ineffably.


steed (n.)

Old English steda stallion, stud horse, from Proto-Germanic *stodjon (source also of Old Norse
sto&eth;), from the same Germanic root as Old English stod (see stud (n.2)). In Middle English, a
great horse (as distinguished from a palfrey), a spirited war horse. Obsolete from 16c. except in
poetic, rhetorical, or jocular language.


creature (n.)

late 13c., anything created, also living being, from Old French creature (Modern French
cr&eacute;ature), from Late Latin creatura thing created, from creatus, past participle of Latin
creare create (see create). Meaning anything that ministers to man's comforts (1610s), after I Tim.
iv:4, led to jocular use for whiskey (1630s).


Liverpool

English city on the River Mersey, Liuerpul (c.1190) Pool with Muddy Water, from Old English lifer
thick, clotted water + pol (see pool (n.1)). The original reference was to a pool or tidal creek now
filled up into which two streams drained [Victor Watts, Cambridge Dictionary of English Place-Names,
2004]. The adjective and noun Liverpudlian (with jocular substitution of puddle for pool) is
attested from 1833.


beak (n.)

mid-13c., bird's bill, from Old French bec beak, figuratively mouth, also tip or point of a nose, a
lance, a ship, a shoe, from Latin beccus (source also of Italian becco, Spanish pico), said by
Suetonius (De vita Caesarum 18) to be of Gaulish origin, perhaps from Gaulish beccus, possibly
related to Celtic stem bacc- hook. Or there may be a link in Old English becca pickax, sharp end.
Jocular sense of human nose is from 1854 (but also was used mid-15c. in the same sense).


soccer (n.)

1889, socca, later socker (1891), soccer (1895), originally university slang (with jocular formation
-er (3)), from a shortened form of Assoc., abbreviation of association in Football Association (as
opposed to Rugby football); compare rugger. An unusual method of formation, but those who did it
perhaps shied away from making a name out of the first three letters of Assoc.


several (adj.)

early 15c., existing apart, from Anglo-French several, from Middle French seperalis separate, from
Medieval Latin separalis, from Latin separ separate, different, back-formation from separare to
separate (see separate (v.)). Meaning various, diverse, different is attested from c.1500; that of
more than one is from 1530s, originally in legal use.    Here we are all, by day; by night we're
hurled  By dreams, each one into a several world  [Herrick, 1648]  Related: Severalty. Jocular
ordinal form severalth attested from 1902 in American English dialect (see -th (2)).


G.I.

also GI, 1936 as an adjective meaning U.S. Army equipment, American English, apparently an
abbreviation of Government Issue, and applied to anything associated with servicemen. Transferred
sense of U.S. Army soldier arose during World War II (first recorded 1943), apparently from the
jocular notion that the men themselves were manufactured by the government.    An earlier G.I.
(1908) was an abbreviation of galvanized iron, especially in G.I. can, a type of metal trash can;
the term was picked up by U.S. soldiers in World War I as slang for a similar-looking type of German
artillery shells. But it is highly unlikely that this G.I. came to mean soldier. No two sources seem
to agree on the entire etymology, but none backs the widespread notion that it stands for *General
Infantry. GI Joe any U.S. soldier attested from 1942 (date in OED is a typo).


ware (n.)

manufactured goods, goods for sale, Old English waru article of merchandise, also protection, guard,
hence probably originally object of care, that which is kept in custody, from Proto-Germanic *waro
(cognates: Swedish vara, Danish vare, Old Frisian were, Middle Dutch were, Dutch waar, Middle High
German, German ware goods), from PIE *wer- (4) to perceive, watch out for (see ward (n.)). Usually
wares, except in compounds such as hardware, earthenware, etc. Lady ware was a jocular 17c.
euphemism for a woman's private parts, and Middle English had ape-ware deceptive or false ware;
tricks (mid-13c.).


elbow (n.)

c.1200, elbowe, from Old English elnboga, from ell length of the forearm + boga bow, arch, from West
Germanic *alinobogan, from Proto-Germanic *elino-bugon, literally bend of the forearm (cognates:
Middle Dutch ellenboghe, Dutch elleboog, Old High German elinbogo, German Ellenbogen, Old Norse
&ouml;lnbogi).    Second element related to Old English bugan to bend (see bow (v.)); first element
from *alina arm, from PIE *el- (1) elbow, forearm (see ell (n.1)). Phrase elbow grease hard rubbing
is attested from 1670s, from jocular sense of the best substance for polishing furniture. Elbow room
attested from mid-16c.


catawampus (adj.)

also catawampous, cattywampus, catiwampus, etc. (see Dictionary of American Slang for more),
American colloquial. First element perhaps from obsolete cater to set or move diagonally (see catty-
cornered); second element perhaps related to Scottish wampish to wriggle, twist, or swerve about. Or
perhaps simply the sort of jocular pseudo-classical formation popular in the slang of those times,
with the first element suggesting Greek kata-.    Earliest use seems to be in adverbial form,
catawampusly (1834), expressing no certain meaning but adding intensity to the action: utterly,
completely; with avidity, fiercely, eagerly. It appears as a noun from 1843, as a name for an
imaginary hobgoblin or fright, perhaps from influence of catamount. The adjective is attested from
the 1840s as an intensive, but this is only in British lampoons of American speech and might not be
authentic. It was used in the U.S. by 1864 in a sense of askew, awry, wrong and by 1873 (noted as a
peculiarity of North Carolina speech) as in a diagonal position, on a bias, crooked.


OK

1839, only survivor of a slang fad in Boston and New York c.1838-9 for abbreviations of common
phrases with deliberate, jocular misspellings (such as K.G. for no go, as if spelled know go; N.C.
for 'nuff ced; K.Y. for know yuse). In the case of O.K., the abbreviation is of oll korrect.
Probably further popularized by use as an election slogan by the O.K. Club, New York boosters of
Democratic president Martin Van Buren's 1840 re-election bid, in allusion to his nickname Old
Kinderhook, from his birth in the N.Y. village of Kinderhook. Van Buren lost, the word stuck, in
part because it filled a need for a quick way to write an approval on a document, bill, etc. Spelled
out as okeh, 1919, by Woodrow Wilson, on assumption that it represented Choctaw okeh it is so (a
theory which lacks historical documentation); this was ousted quickly by okay after the appearance
of that form in 1929. Greek immigrants to America who returned home early 20c. having picked up U.S.
speech mannerisms were known in Greece as okay-boys, among other things.    The noun is first
attested 1841; the verb 1888. Okey-doke is student slang first attested 1932.


shit (v.)

Old English scitan, from Proto-Germanic *skit- (cognates: North Frisian skitj, Dutch schijten,
German scheissen), from PIE *skei- to cut, split, divide, separate (see shed (v.)). The notion is of
separation from the body (compare Latin excrementum, from excernere to separate, Old English scearn
dung, muck, from scieran to cut, shear; see sharn). It is thus a cousin to science and conscience.
<b>Shit is not an acronym</b>. The notion that it is a recent word might be partly because it was
taboo from c.1600 and rarely appeared in print (neither Shakespeare nor the KJV has it), and even in
vulgar publications of the late 18c. it is disguised by dashes. It drew the wrath of censors as late
as 1922 (Ulysses and The Enormous Room), scandalized magazine subscribers in 1957 (a Hemingway story
in Atlantic Monthly) and was omitted from some dictionaries as recently as 1970 (Webster's New
World).    Extensive slang usage; meaning to lie, to tease is from 1934; that of to disrespect is
from 1903. Shite, now a jocular or slightly euphemistic and chiefly British variant of the noun,
formerly a dialectal variant, reflects the vowel in the Old English verb (compare German scheissen);
the modern verb has been influenced by the noun. Shat is a humorous past tense form, not
etymological, first recorded 18c. To shit bricks be very frightened attested by 1961. The connection
between fear and involuntary defecation has generated expressions since 14c., and probably also is
behind scared shitless (1936).


girl (n.)

c.1300, gyrle child (of either sex), of unknown origin; current scholarship [OED says] leans toward
an unrecorded Old English *gyrele, from Proto-Germanic *gurwilon-, diminutive of *gurwjoz
(apparently also represented by Low German g&aelig;re boy, girl, Norwegian dialectal gorre, Swedish
dialectal gurre small child, though the exact relationship, if any, between all these is obscure),
from PIE *ghwrgh-, also found in Greek parthenos virgin. But this is highly conjectural. And
Liberman (2008) writes:   Girl does not go back to any Old English or Old Germanic form. It is part
of a large group of Germanic words whose root begins with a g or k and ends in r. The final
consonant in girl is a diminutive suffix. The g-r words denote young animals, children, and all
kinds of creatures considered immature, worthless, or past their prime.    Another candidate is Old
English gierela garment (for possible sense evolution in this theory, compare brat). Like boy, lass,
lad it is of obscure origin. Probably most of them arose as jocular transferred uses of words that
had originally different meaning [OED]. Specific meaning of female child is late 14c. Applied to any
young unmarried woman since mid-15c. Meaning sweetheart is from 1640s. Girl next door as a type of
unflashy attractiveness is recorded by 1953.    Doris [Day] was a big vocalist even before she hit
the movies in 1948. There, as the latest movie colony girl next door, sunny-faced Doris soon became
a leading movie attraction as well as the world's top female recording star. She's the girl next
door, all right, said one Hollywood admirer. Next door to the bank. [Life magazine, Dec. 22, 1958]
Girl Friday is from 1940, a reference to Robinson Crusoe.


