jolly boat (n.)

1727, of unknown origin, probably from Danish jolle (17c.) or Dutch jol (1680s), both related to
yawl; or it may be from Middle English jolywat (late 15c.) a ship's small boat, of unknown origin.


jolly (adj.)

c.1300 (late 13c. as a surname), from Old French jolif festive, merry, amorous, pretty (12c.) of
uncertain origin (cognate with Italian giulivo merry, pleasant).    Perhaps a Germanic loan-word
from a source akin to Old Norse jol a winter feast (see yule), or from Latin gaudere to rejoice,
from PIE *gau- to rejoice (see joy). For loss of -f, compare tardy, hasty. Related: Jollily;
jolliness.


jollification (n.)

merrymaking, 1809, American English, from jolly + -fication. Shortened form jolly led to phrase get
(one's) jollies have fun (1957).


golly

euphemism for God, first recorded 1775, in a source that refers to it as a sort of jolly kind of
oath, or asseveration much in use among our carters, &amp; the lowest people.


Roger

masc. proper name, from Old French Rogier, from Old High German Hrotger, literally famous with the
spear, from hruod- fame, glory + ger spear (see gar (n.)). As a generic name for a person, attested
from 1630s. Slang meaning penis was popular c.1650-c.1870; hence the slang verb sense of to copulate
with (a woman), attested from 1711.    The use of the word in radio communication to mean yes, I
understand is attested from 1941, from the U.S. military phonetic alphabet word for the letter -R-,
in this case an abbreviation for received. Said to have been used by the R.A.F. since 1938. The
Jolly Roger pirate flag is first attested 1723, of unknown origin; jolly here has its otherwise
obsolete Middle English sense high-hearted, gallant. Roger de Coverley, once a favorite English
country dance, is so called from 1685, in reference to Addison's character in the Spectator. French
roger-bontemps jovial, carefree man, is attested there from 15c.


jolliness (n.)

late 14c., from jolly + -ness.


jollity (n.)

c.1300, jolyfte, iolite, from Old French jolivete gaity, cheerfulness; amorous passion; life of
pleasure, from jolif (see jolly).


buxom (adj.)

late 12c., buhsum humble, obedient, from Proto-Germanic *buh- stem of Old English bugen to bow  (see
bow (v.)) + -som, for a total meaning capable of being bent. Meaning progressed from compliant,
obliging, through lively, jolly, healthily plump, vigorous, to (in women, and perhaps influenced by
lusty) plump, comely (1580s). In Johnson [1755] the primary meaning still is obedient, obsequious.
Used often of breasts, and by 1950s it had begun to be used more narrowly for bosomy and could be
paired with slim (adj.). Dutch buigzaam, German biegsam flexible, pliable hew closer to the original
sense of the English cognate.


yule (n.)

Old English geol, geola Christmas Day, Christmastide, from Old Norse jol (plural), a heathen feast,
later taken over by Christianity, of unknown origin.    The Old English (Anglian) cognate giuli was
the Anglo-Saxons' name for a two-month midwinter season corresponding to Roman December and January,
a time of important feasts but not itself a festival. After conversion to Christianity it narrowed
to mean the 12-day feast of the Nativity (which began Dec. 25), but was replaced by Christmas by
11c., except in the northeast (areas of Danish settlement), where it remained the usual word.
Revived 19c. by writers to mean the Christmas of 'Merrie England.'  First direct reference to the
Yule log is 17c. Old Norse jol seems to have been borrowed in Old French as jolif, hence Modern
French joli pretty, nice, originally festive (see jolly).


bully (n.)

1530s, originally sweetheart, applied to either sex, from Dutch boel lover; brother, probably a
diminutive of Middle Dutch broeder brother (compare Middle High German buole brother, source of
German Buhle lover; see brother (n.)).    Meaning deteriorated 17c. through fine fellow and
blusterer to harasser of the weak (1680s, from bully-ruffian, 1650s). Perhaps this was by influence
of bull (n.1), but a connecting sense between lover and ruffian may be in protector of a prostitute,
which was one sense of bully (though not specifically attested until 1706). The expression meaning
worthy, jolly, admirable (especially in 1864 U.S. slang bully for you!) is first attested 1680s, and
preserves an earlier, positive sense of the word.


marine (n.)

14c., seacoast; see marine (adj.). Meaning collective shipping of a country is from 1660s. Meaning
soldier who serves on a ship is from 1670s, a separate borrowing from French marine, from the French
adjective. Phrase tell that to the marines (1806) originally was the first half of a retort
expressing skepticism:    Upon my soul, sir, answered the lieutenant, when I thought she scorned my
passion, I wept like a child.    Belay there! cried the captain; you may tell that to the marines,
but I'll be d----d if the sailors will believe it. [John Moore, The Post-Captain; or, the Wooden
Walls Well Manned, 1805]    The book, a rollicking sea romance/adventure novel, was popular in its
day and the remark is a recurring punch line in it (repeated at least four times). It was written by
naval veteran John Davis (1774-1854) but published under the name John Moore. Walsh records that,
The marines are among the 'jolly' jack-tars a proverbially gullible lot, capable of swallowing any
yarn, in size varying from a yawl-boat to a full-rigged frigate.


waltz (n.)

round dance performed to music in triple time, extraordinarily popular as a fashionable dance from
late 18c. to late 19c., the dance itself probably of Bohemian origin, 1781, from German Waltzer,
from walzen to roll, dance, from Old High German walzan to turn, roll, from Proto-Germanic *walt-
(cognate with Old Norse velta), from PIE root *wel- (3) to turn, revolve (see volvox). Described in
1825 as a riotous and indecent German dance [Walter Hamilton, A Hand-Book or Concise Dictionary of
Terms Used in the Arts and Sciences].    The music struck up a beautiful air, and the dancers
advanced a few steps, when suddenly, to my no small horror and amazement, the gentlemen seized the
ladies round the waist, and all, as if intoxicated by this novel juxtaposition, began to whirl about
the room, like a company of Bacchanalians dancing round a statue of the jolly god. A waltz!
exclaimed I, inexpressibly shocked, have I lived to see Scotch women waltz? [The Edinburgh Magazine,
April, 1820]


