joyful (adj.)

mid-13c., from joy + -ful. Related: Joyfully; joyfulness.


festival (n.)

1580s, from earlier adjective (14c.), from Old French festival suitable for a feast, solemn,
magnificent, joyful, happy, and directly from Medieval Latin festivalis of a church holiday (see
festivity).


game (adj.2)

brave, spirited, 1725, especially in game-cock bird for fighting, from game (n.). Middle English had
gamesome (adj.) joyful, playful, sportive.


jubilate (v.)

make a joyful noise, 1640s, from Latin jubilatus, past participle of jubilare (see jubilant).
Related: Jubilated; jubilating.


lusty (adj.)

early 13c., joyful, merry, from lust + -y (2). It largely has escaped the Christianization and
denigration of its root word. The sense of full of healthy vigor is from late 14c.; that of full of
desire is attested from c.1400. Related: Lustily; lustiness.


hilarious (adj.)

1823, cheerful, from Latin hilaris cheerful, of good cheer (see hilarity) + -ous. Meaning
boisterously joyful is from 1830s. Related: Hilariously.


mynah (n.)

type of passerine bird of India and the East, talking starling, 1769, from Hindi maina a starling,
from Sanskrit madana- delightful, joyful, related to madati it gladdens, literally it bubbles, from
PIE root *mad- moist, wet (see mast (n.2).


Thalia

fem. proper name, from Latinized form of Greek Thaleia, the joyful Muse, presiding over comedy and
idyllic poetry, literally the blooming one, fem. proper name from adjective meaning blooming,
luxuriant, bounteous, from thallein to bloom, related to thalia abundance, thallos young shoot (see
thallus). Also the name of one of the three Graces, patroness of festive meetings.


fain (adj.)

Old English f&aelig;gen, fagen glad, cheerful, happy, joyful, rejoicing, from a common Germanic root
(cognates: Old Saxon fagan, Old Norse feginn glad, Old High German faginon, Gothic faginon to
rejoice), perhaps from PIE *pek- (1) to make pretty. As an adverb, from c.1200.


viola (n.)

tenor violin, 1797, from Italian viola, from Old Proven&ccedil;al viola, from Medieval Latin vitula
stringed instrument, perhaps from Vitula, Roman goddess of joy (see fiddle), or from related Latin
verb vitulari to exult, be joyful. Viola da gamba bass viol (1724) is from Italian, literally a
viola for the leg (i.e. to hold between the legs).


glad (adj.)

Old English gl&aelig;d bright, shining, joyous, from Proto-Germanic *glada- (cognates: Old Norse
gla&eth;r smooth, bright, glad, Danish glad glad, joyful, Old Saxon gladmod glad, Old Frisian gled
smooth, Dutch glad slippery, German glatt smooth), from PIE *ghel- (2) to shine, with derivatives
referring to bright materials and gold (see glass). The modern sense is much weakened. Slang glad
rags one's best clothes first recorded 1902.


carol (n.)

c.1300, joyful song, also dance in a ring, from Old French carole kind of dance in a ring, round
dance accompanied by singers, perhaps from Medieval Latin choraula a dance to the flute, from Latin
choraules flute-player, from Greek khoraules flute player who accompanies the choral dance, from
khoros chorus (see chorus) + aulein to play the flute, from aulos reed instrument (see alveolus).
The meaning Christmas hymn of joy is attested from c.1500.


feast (n.)

c.1200, religious anniversary characterized by rejoicing (rather than fasting), from Old French
feste (12c., Modern French f&ecirc;te) religious festival; noise, racket, from Vulgar Latin *festa
(fem. singular; also source of Italian festa, Spanish fiesta), from Latin festa holidays, feasts,
noun use of neuter plural of festus festive, joyful, merry, related to feriae holiday and fanum
temple, from PIE *dhes- root of words in religious concepts [Watkins]. The spelling -ea- was used in
Middle English to represent the sound we mis-call long e. Meaning abundant meal (whether public or
private) is from late 14c.


merry (adj.)

Old English myrge pleasing, agreeable, pleasant, sweet; pleasantly, melodiously, from Proto-Germanic
*murgijaz, which probably originally meant short-lasting, (compare Old High German murg short,
Gothic gamaurgjan to shorten), from PIE *mreghu- short (see brief (adj.)). The only exact cognate
for meaning outside English was Middle Dutch mergelijc joyful.    Connection to pleasure is likely
via notion of making time fly, that which makes the time seem to pass quickly (compare German
Kurzweil pastime, literally a short time; Old Norse skemta to amuse, entertain, amuse oneself, from
skamt, neuter of skammr short). There also was a verbal form in Old English, myrgan be merry,
rejoice. For vowel evolution, see bury (v.).Bot vchon enle we wolde were fyf, &thorn;e mo &thorn;e
myryer. [c.1300]The word had much wider senses in Middle English, such as pleasant-sounding (of
animal voices), fine (of weather), handsome (of dress), pleasant-tasting (of herbs). Merry-bout an
incident of sexual intercourse was low slang from 1780. Merry-begot illegitimate (adj.), bastard
(n.) is from 1785. Merrie England (now frequently satirical or ironic) is 14c. meri ingland,
originally in a broader sense of bountiful, prosperous. Merry Monday was a 16c. term for the Monday
before Shrove Tuesday (Mardi Gras).


tobacco (n.)

1580s, from Spanish tabaco, in part from an Arawakan language of the Caribbean (probably Taino),
said to mean a roll of tobacco leaves (according to Las Casas, 1552) or a kind of pipe for smoking
tobacco (according to Oviedo, 1535). Scholars of Caribbean languages lean toward Las Casas'
explanation. But Spanish tabaco (also Italian tabacco) was a name of medicinal herbs from early
15c., from Arabic tabbaq, attested since 9c. as the name of various herbs. So the word may be in
part a European one transferred to an American plant. The West Indian island of Tobago was said to
have been named by Columbus in 1498 from Haitian tambaku pipe, in reference to the native custom of
smoking dried tobacco leaves [Room].    Cultivation in France began 1556 with an importation of seed
by Andre Thevet; introduced in Spain 1558 by Francisco Fernandes. Tobacco Road as a mythical place
representative of rural Southern U.S. poverty is from the title of Erskine Caldwell's 1932 novel.
Early German and Portuguese accounts of Brazil also record another name for tobacco, bittin or
betum, evidently a native word in South America, which made its way into 17c. Spanish, French, and
English as petun, petumin, etc., and which is preserved in petunia and butun, the Breton word for
tobacco.  Many haue giuen it [tobacco] the name, Petum, whiche is in deede the proper name of the
Hearbe, as they whiche haue traueiled that countrey can tell. [John Frampton, translation of
Nicol&aacute;s Monardes' Joyful Newes Oute of the Newe Founde Worlde, 1577]


free (adj.)

Old English freo free, exempt from, not in bondage, also noble; joyful, from Proto-Germanic *frijaz
(cognates: Old Frisian fri, Old Saxon and Old High German vri, German frei, Dutch vrij, Gothic freis
free), from PIE *prijos dear, beloved, from root *pri- to love (cognates: Sanskrit priyah own, dear,
beloved, priyate loves; Old Church Slavonic prijati to help, prijatelji friend; Welsh rhydd free).
The primary sense seems to have been beloved, friend, to love; which in some languages (notably
Germanic and Celtic) developed also a sense of free, perhaps from the terms beloved or friend being
applied to the free members of one's clan (as opposed to slaves; compare Latin liberi, meaning both
free and children).    Compare Gothic frijon to love; Old English freod affection, friendship, friga
love, fri&eth;u peace; Old Norse fri&eth;r, German Friede peace; Old English freo wife; Old Norse
Frigg wife of Odin, literally beloved or loving; Middle Low German vrien to take to wife, Dutch
vrijen, German freien to woo.  Of nations, not subject to foreign rule or to despotism, it is
recorded from late 14c. (Free world non-communist nations attested from 1950.) Sense of given
without cost is 1580s, from notion of free of cost. Free lunch, originally offered in bars to draw
in business, by 1850, American English. Free pass on railways, etc., attested by 1850. Free speech
in Britain used of a privilege in Parliament since the time of Henry VIII. In U.S., as a civil
right, it became a prominent phrase in the debates over the Gag Rule (1836).   Free enterprise
recorded from 1890; free trade is from 1823. Free will is from early 13c. Free association in
psychology is from 1899. Free love sexual liberation attested from 1822. Free range (adj.) is
attested by 1960. Free and easy unrestrained is from 1690s.


gay (adj.)

late 14c., full of joy, merry; light-hearted, carefree; also wanton, lewd, lascivious (late 12c. as
a surname, Philippus de Gay), from Old French gai joyful, happy; pleasant, agreeably charming;
forward, pert (12c.; compare Old Spanish gayo, Portuguese gaio, Italian gajo, probably French loan-
words). Ultimate origin disputed; perhaps from Frankish *gahi (related to Old High German wahi
pretty), though not all etymologists accept this. Meaning stately and beautiful; splendid and
showily dressed is from early 14c. The word gay by the 1890s had an overall tinge of promiscuity --
a gay house was a brothel. The suggestion of immorality in the word can be traced back at least to
the 1630s, if not to Chaucer:    But in oure bed he was so fressh and gay  Whan that he wolde han my
bele chose.    Slang meaning homosexual (adj.) begins to appear in psychological writing late 1940s,
evidently picked up from gay slang and not always easily distinguished from the older sense:
After discharge A.Z. lived for some time at home. He was not happy at the farm and went to a Western
city where he associated with a homosexual crowd, being gay, and wearing female clothes and makeup.
He always wished others would make advances to him. [Rorschach Research Exchange and Journal of
Projective Techniques, 1947, p.240]    The association with (male) homosexuality likely got a boost
from the term gay cat, used as far back as 1893 in American English for young hobo, one who is new
on the road, also one who sometimes does jobs.    A Gay Cat, said he, is a loafing laborer, who
works maybe a week, gets his wages and vagabonds about hunting for another 'pick and shovel' job. Do
you want to know where they got their monica (nickname) 'Gay Cat'? See, Kid, cats sneak about and
scratch immediately after chumming with you and then get gay (fresh). That's why we call them 'Gay
Cats'. [Leon Ray Livingston (America's Most Celebrated Tramp), Life and Adventures of A-no. 1, 1910]
Quoting a tramp named Frenchy, who might not have known the origin. Gay cats were severely and
cruelly abused by real tramps and bums, who considered them an inferior order of beings who begs of
and otherwise preys upon the bum -- as it were a jackal following up the king of beasts [Prof. John
J. McCook, Tramps, in The Public Treatment of Pauperism, 1893], but some accounts report certain
older tramps would dominate a gay cat and employ him as a sort of slave. In Sociology and Social
Research (1932-33) a paragraph on the gay cat phenomenon notes, Homosexual practices are more common
than rare in this group, and gey cat homosexual boy is attested in N. Erskine's 1933 dictionary of
Underworld &amp; Prison Slang (gey is a Scottish variant of gay).    The Dictionary of American
Slang reports that gay (adj.) was used by homosexuals, among themselves, in this sense since at
least 1920. Rawson [Wicked Words] notes a male prostitute using gay in reference to male homosexuals
(but also to female prostitutes) in London's notorious Cleveland Street Scandal of 1889. Ayto [20th
Century Words] calls attention to the ambiguous use of the word in the 1868 song The Gay Young Clerk
in the Dry Goods Store, by U.S. female impersonator Will S. Hays, but the word evidently was not
popularly felt in this sense by wider society until the 1950s at the earliest.    Gay (or gai) is
now widely used in French, Dutch, Danish, Japanese, Swedish, and Catalan with the same sense as the
English. It is coming into use in Germany and among the English-speaking upper classes of many
cosmopolitan areas in other countries. [John Boswell, Christianity, Social Tolerance, and
Homosexuality, 1980]   Gay as a noun meaning a (usually male) homosexual is attested from 1971; in
Middle English it meant excellent person, noble lady, gallant knight, also something gay or bright;
an ornament or badge (c.1400). As a slang word meaning bad, inferior, undesirable, from 2000.


