joyous (adj.)

c.1300, from Anglo-French joyous, Old French joios happy, cheerful, merry, glad (12c., Modern French
joyeux), from joie (see joy). Related: Joyously; joyousness.


Festus

male proper name, from Latin, literally solemn, joyous, festive (see feast (n.)).


bawd (n.)

a complicated word of uncertain history. First attested late 15c., lewd person (of either sex; since
c.1700 applied only to women), probably from baude-strote procurer of prostitutes (mid-14c.), which
may be from Middle English bawde (adj.) merry, joyous, from Old French baud gay, licentious (from
Frankish bald bold or some such Germanic source). It would not be the first time a word meaning
joyous had taken on a sexual sense. The sense evolution shading from bold to lewd is not difficult;
compare Old French baudise ardor, joy, elation, act of boldness, presumption; baudie elation, high
spirits, fole baudie bawdry, shamelessness. The Old French word also is the source of French baudet
donkey, in Picardy dialect loose woman.    The second element in baude-strote would be trot one who
runs errands, or Germanic *strutt (see strut). But OED doubts all this. There was an Old French
baudestrote, baudetrot of the same meaning (13c.), and this may be the direct source of Middle
English baude-strote. The obsolete word bronstrops procuress, frequently found in Middleton's
comedies, probably is an alteration of baude-strote.


Serena

fem. proper name, from Latin serena, fem. of serenus clear, bright, fair, joyous (see serene).


Spencerian (adj.)

1863, pertaining to the penmanship system devised by American penman Platt R. Spencer, the Father of
American Writing (1800-1864), who c.1840 began promoting an elliptical cursive style that became the
standard U.S. business hand from 1850s to early 20c. It had an assured but joyous elegance lacking
in the later Palmer letters. The word also can be a reference to English philosopher Herbert Spencer
(1820-1903).


fair (n.)

early 14c., from Anglo-French feyre (late 13c.), from Old French feire, from Vulgar Latin *feria
holiday, market fair, from Latin feriae religious festivals, holidays, related to festus solemn,
festive, joyous (see feast).


festive (adj.)

1650s, pertaining to a feast, from Latin festivus festive, joyous, gay, from festum festival,
holiday, noun use of neuter of adjective festus (see feast (n.)).    Meaning mirthful is attested by
1774. Unattested from 1651 to 1735; modern use may be a back-formation from festivity. Related:
Festively; festiveness.


hilarity (n.)

mid-15c., from Latin hilaritatem (nominative hilaritas) cheerfulness, gaiety, merriment, from
hilaris cheerful, gay, from Greek hilaros cheerful, gay, merry, joyous, related to hilaos graceful,
kindly. In ancient Rome, Hilaria (neuter plural of hilaris) were a class of holidays, times of pomp
and rejoicing; there were public ones in honor of Cybele at the spring equinoxes as well as private
ones on the day of a marriage or a son's birth.


lustful (adj.)

Old English lustfull wishful, desirous, having an eager desire; see lust (n.) + -ful. Specifically
of sexual desire from 1570s. Related: Lustfully; lustfulness. Middle English also had lustsome,
which was used in a sense of voluptuous, lustful from c.1400. Old English had lustb&#230;re
desirable, pleasant, cheerful, joyous.


frolic

1530s, as an adjective, joyous, merry, from Middle Dutch vrolyc (adj.) happy, from vro- merry, glad
+ lyc like (see like (adj.)). Cognate with German fr&ouml;hlich happy. The stem is cognate with Old
Norse frar swift, Middle English frow hasty, from PIE *preu- (see frog (n.1)), giving the whole an
etymological sense akin to jumping for joy. The verb is first attested 1580s. Related: Frolicked;
frolicking. As a noun, from 1610s.


glad (adj.)

Old English gl&aelig;d bright, shining, joyous, from Proto-Germanic *glada- (cognates: Old Norse
gla&eth;r smooth, bright, glad, Danish glad glad, joyful, Old Saxon gladmod glad, Old Frisian gled
smooth, Dutch glad slippery, German glatt smooth), from PIE *ghel- (2) to shine, with derivatives
referring to bright materials and gold (see glass). The modern sense is much weakened. Slang glad
rags one's best clothes first recorded 1902.


blithe (adj.)

Old English bli&thorn;e joyous, kind, cheerful, pleasant, from Proto-Germanic *blithiz gentle, kind
(cognates: Old Saxon bli&eth;i bright, happy, Middle Dutch blide, Dutch blijde, Old Norse bli&eth;r
mild, gentle, Old High German blidi gay, friendly, Gothic blei&thorn;s kind, friendly, merciful).
Rare since 16c. No cognates outside Germanic. The earlier application was to the outward expression
of kindly feeling, sympathy, affection to others, as in Gothic and ON.; but in OE. the word had come
more usually to be applied to the external manifestation of one's own pleased or happy frame of
mind, and hence even to the state itself. [OED]


silly (adj.)

Old English ges&aelig;lig happy, fortuitous, prosperous (related to s&aelig;l happiness), from
Proto-Germanic *s&aelig;ligas (cognates: Old Norse s&aelig;ll happy, Old Saxon salig, Middle Dutch
salich, Old High German salig, German selig blessed, happy, blissful, Gothic sels good,
kindhearted), from PIE *sele- of good mood; to favor, from root *sel- (2) happy, of good mood; to
favor (cognates: Latin solari to comfort, Greek hilaros cheerful, gay, merry, joyous).    This is
one of the few instances in which an original long e (ee) has become shortened to i. The same change
occurs in breeches, and in the American pronunciation of been, with no change in spelling. [Century
Dictionary]    The word's considerable sense development moved from happy to blessed to pious, to
innocent (c.1200), to harmless, to pitiable (late 13c.), weak (c.1300), to feeble in mind, lacking
in reason, foolish (1570s). Further tendency toward stunned, dazed as by a blow (1886) in knocked
silly, etc. Silly season in journalism slang is from 1861 (August and September, when newspapers
compensate for a lack of hard news by filling up with trivial stories). Silly Putty trademark claims
use from July 1949.


