jug (n.)

deep vessel for carrying liquids, late 15c., jugge, variant of jubbe, of unknown origin, perhaps
from jug a low woman, a maidservant (mid-16c.), a familiar alteration of a common personal name,
Joan or Judith. Use as a musical instrument is attested from 1946. Jughead klutz is from 1926;
jughandle tight curved road used for turns is from 1961. Jugs for woman's breasts first recorded
1920 in Australian slang, short for milk jugs.


jug band (n.)

musical ensemble in which the bass line is carried or augmented by a player blowing on the open lip
of a jug (n.), 1886, American English.


Jugendstil (n.)

German equivalent of art nouveau, from Jugend, literally youth, name of a German magazine begun in
1896 + stil style.


juggernaut (n.)

1630s, huge wagon bearing an image of the god Krishna, especially that at the town of Puri, drawn
annually in procession in which (apocryphally) devotees allowed themselves to be crushed under its
wheels in sacrifice. Altered from Jaggernaut, a title of Krishna (an incarnation of Vishnu), from
Hindi Jagannath, literally lord of the world, from Sanskrit jagat world (literally moving, present
participle of *jagati he goes, from PIE *gwa- to go, come (see come (v.)) + natha-s lord, master,
from nathate he helps, protects, from PIE *na- to help. The first European description of the
festival is by Friar Odoric (c.1321). Figurative sense of anything that demands blind devotion or
merciless sacrifice is from 1854.


juggle (v.)

late 14c., entertain by clowning or doing tricks, back-formation from juggler and in part from Old
French jogler play tricks, sing songs, from Late Latin ioculare (source of Italian giocolare), from
Latin ioculari to jest (see jocular). Related: Juggled; juggling.


juggler (n.)

c.1100, iugulere jester, buffoon, also wizard, sorcerer, from Old English geogelere magician,
conjurer, also from Anglo-French jogelour, Old French jogleor (accusative), from Latin ioculatorem
(nominative ioculator) joker, from ioculari to joke, to jest (see jocular). Connecting notion
between magician and juggler is dexterity.


Jugoslavia

see Yugoslavia. Related: Jugoslav; Jugoslavian.


jugular (adj.)

1590s, pertaining to the throat or neck (especially in reference to the great veins of the neck),
from Modern Latin jugularis, from Latin iugulum collarbone, throat, neck, diminutive of iugum yoke,
related to iungere to join, from PIE *yeug- to join (cognates: Sanskrit yugam yoke, yunjati binds,
harnesses, yogah union; Hittite yugan yoke; Greek zygon yoke, zeugnyanai to join, unite; Old Church
Slavonic igo, Old Welsh iou yoke; Lithuanian jungas yoke, jungiu fastened in a yoke; Old English
geoc yoke; probably also Latin iuxta close by). As a noun, 1610s, from the adjective.


conjugal (adj.)

1540s, from Middle French conjugal (13c.), from Latin coniugalis relating to marriage, from coniunx
(genitive coniugis) spouse, related to coniugare to join together, from com- together (see com-) +
iugare to join, from iugum yoke (see jugular).


conjugate (v.)

1520s, in grammatical sense; 1560s in literal sense, from Latin coniugatus, past participle of
coniugare to yoke together (see conjugal). Earlier as an adjective (late 15c.). Related: Conjugated;
conjugating.


conjugation (n.)

mid-15c., from Latin conjugationem (nominative conjugatio) a combining, connecting, noun of action
from conjugare to join together (see conjugal). Grammatical sense is 1520s.


subjugable (adj.)

1850, from stem of Latin subiugare (see subjugation) + -able.


subjugate (v.)

early 15c., a back-formation from subjugation or else from Latin subiugatus, past participle of
subiugare to subjugate. Related: Subjugated; subjugating.


subjugation (n.)

late 14c., from Late Latin subiugationem (nominative subiugatio), noun of action from past
participle stem of Latin subiugare to subdue, literally bring under the yoke, from sub under (see
sub-) + iugum (see jugular).


subjugator (n.)

1795, agent noun in Latin form from subjugate.


