jurisdiction (n.)

early 14c. administration of justice (attested from mid-13c. in Anglo-Latin), from Old French
juridiccion (13c.) and directly from Latin iurisdictionem (nominative iurisdictio) administration of
justice, jurisdiction, from ius (genitive iuris; see jurist) right, law + dictio a saying (see
diction). Meaning extent or range of administrative power is from late 14c. Related: Jurisdictional.


district (n.)

1610s, territory under the jurisdiction of a lord or officer, from French district (16c.), from
Medieval Latin districtus restraining of offenders, jurisdiction, then under the feudal system area
of jurisdiction, noun use of past participle of Latin distringere hinder, detain (see distress).
Used vaguely of any tract of land from 1712. District attorney attested by 1789, American English.


Star Chamber (n.)

late 14c., apartment in the royal palace at Westminster in which members of the king's council sat
to exercise jurisdiction 14-15c., it evolved 15c. into a court of criminal jurisdiction, infamous
under James I and Charles I for arbitrary and oppressive proceedings. Abolished 1641. Supposedly so
called because gilt stars had been painted on the ceiling. Later there was a star on the door.


soke (n.)

right of jurisdiction, Old English socn jurisdiction, prosecution, literally seeking, from Proto-
Germanic *sokniz, from PIE *sag-ni-, from root *sag- to seek out (see seek). Related: Sokeman;
sokemanry.


diocese (n.)

early 14c., from Old French diocese (13c., Modern French dioc&egrave;se), from Late Latin diocesis a
governor's jurisdiction, later, a bishop's jurisdiction, from Greek dioikesis government,
administration; province, originally economy, housekeeping, from dioikein control, govern,
administer, manage a house, from dia- thoroughly (see dia-) + oikos house (see villa).


cognizable (adj.)

1670s, capable of being known, also liable to be tried in a given court or jurisdiction, from stem
of cognizance + -able.


suzerainty (n.)

late 15c., supremacy, from Old French suserenete office or jurisdiction of a suzerain, from suserain
(see suzerain).


justiciable (adj.)

mid-15c., from Old French justisable amenable to a jurisdiction, from justicier, from Latin iustitia
(see justice).


appellate (adj.)

pertaining to appeals, 1726, from Latin appellatus, past participle of appellare (see appeal).
Appellate jurisdiction is in Blackstone (1768).


reeve (n.)

steward, Old English gerefa king's officer, of unknown origin and with no known cognates. Not
connected to German Graf (see margrave). An Anglo-Saxon official of high rank, having local
jurisdiction under a king. Compare sheriff.


general (n.)

late 14c., whole class of things or persons, from general (adj.). Meaning commander of an army is
1570s, shortening of captain general, from Middle French capitaine g&eacute;n&eacute;ral. The
English adjective was affixed to civic officer designations by late 14c. to indicate superior rank
and extended jurisdiction.


conservancy (n.)

1755, commission with jurisdiction over a port or river, from Latin conservant-, present participle
stem of conservare (see conserve) + -cy. Earlier was conservacy (mid-15c., Anglo-French
conservacie). Meaning official preservation of undeveloped land dates from 1859 (first reference is
to protection of bo trees in Ceylon).


county (n.)

c.1300, from Anglo-French counte, from Late Latin comitatus jurisdiction of a count, from Latin
comes (see count (n.)); replaced Old English scir shire.


concurrent (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French concurrent or directly from Latin concurrentem (nominative concurrens),
present participle of concurrere (see concur). Related: Concurrency; concurrently. Concurrent
jurisdiction is recorded from 1767.


see (n.)

c.1300, throne of a bishop, archbishop, or pope, also throne of a monarch, a goddess, Antichrist,
etc., from Old French sie seat, throne; town, capital; episcopal see, from Latin sedem (nominative
sedes) seat, throne, abode, temple, related to sedere to sit (see sedentary). Early 14c. as
administrative center of a bishopric; c.1400 as province under the jurisdiction of a bishop.


suffragan (n.)

late 14c., bishop who assists another bishop, especially one with no right of ordinary jurisdiction,
from Anglo-French and Old French suffragan (13c.), from Medieval Latin suffraganeus an assistant,
noun use of adjective, assisting, supporting, applied especially to a bishop, from Latin suffragium
support (see suffrage). Related: Suffragant.


shire (n.)

Old English scir administrative office, jurisdiction, stewardship, authority, also in particular use
district, province, country, from Proto-Germanic *skizo (cognates: Old High German scira care,
official charge). Ousted since 14c. by Anglo-French county. The gentrified sense is from The Shires
(1796), used by people in other parts of England of those counties that end in -shire; sense
transferred to hunting country of the Midlands (1860).


banlieue (n.)

French, suburbs, precincts, from Vulgar Latin *banleuca, from ban (see ban (n.1)) + leuca a league
(of distance), in Medieval Latin, indefinite extent of territory (see league (n.2)). So, the extent
of a ban; the territory within which a ban is of force, hence, territory subject to one
jurisdiction.


justice (n.)

mid-12c., the exercise of authority in vindication of right by assigning reward or punishment; also
quality of being fair and just, from Old French justice justice, legal rights, jurisdiction (11c.),
from Latin iustitia righteousness, equity, from iustus upright, just (see just (adj.)). The Old
French word had widespread senses, including uprightness, equity, vindication of right, court of
justice, judge. The word began to be used in English c.1200 as a title for a judicial officer.
Meaning right order, equity is late 14c. Justice of the peace first attested early 14c. In the
Mercian hymns, Latin iustitia is glossed by Old English rehtwisnisse. To do justice to (someone or
something) render fully and fairly showing due appreciation is from 1670s.


plea (n.)

early 13c., lawsuit, from Anglo-French plai (late 12c.), Old French plait lawsuit, decision, decree
(9c.), from Medieval Latin placitum lawsuit, in classical Latin, opinion, decree, literally that
which pleases, thing which is agreed upon, properly neuter past participle of placere (see please).
Sense development seems to be from something pleasant, to something that pleases both sides, to
something that has been decided. Meaning a pleading, an agreement in a suit is attested from late
14c. Plea-bargaining is first attested 1963. Common pleas (early 13c.) originally were legal
proceedings over which the Crown did not claim exclusive jurisdiction (as distinct from pleas of the
Crown); later actions brought by one subject against another.


lynch (v.)

1835, from earlier Lynch law (1811), likely named after William Lynch (1742-1820) of Pittsylvania,
Virginia, who c.1780 led a vigilance committee to keep order there during the Revolution. Other
sources trace the name to Charles Lynch (1736-1796) a Virginia magistrate who fined and imprisoned
Tories in his district c.1782, but the connection to him is less likely. Originally any sort of
summary justice, especially by flogging; narrowing of focus to extralegal execution by hanging is
20c. Lynch mob is attested from 1838. The surname is perhaps from Irish Loingseach sailor. Compare
earlier Lydford law, from a place in Dartmoor, England, where was held a Stannaries Court of summary
jurisdiction [Weekley], hence:   Lydford law: is to hang men first, and indite them afterwards.
[Thomas Blount, Glossographia, 1656]    Related: Lynched; lynching.


danger (n.)

mid-13c., power of a lord or master, jurisdiction, from Anglo-French daunger, Old French dangier
power, power to harm, mastery, authority, control (12c., Modern French danger), alteration (due to
assoc. with damnum) of dongier, from Vulgar Latin *dominarium power of a lord, from Latin dominus
lord, master (see domain).    Modern sense of risk, peril (from being in the control of someone or
something else) evolved first in French and was in English late 14c. Replaced Old English pleoh; in
early Middle English this sense is found in peril.


territory (n.)

late 14c., land under the jurisdiction of a town, state, etc., probably from Latin territorium land
around a town, domain, district, from terra earth, land (see terrain) + -orium, suffix denoting
place (see -ory). Sense of any tract of land, district, region is first attested c.1600. Specific
U.S. sense of organized self-governing region not yet a state is from 1799. Of regions defended by
animals from 1774.    Since -torium is a productive suffix only after verbal stems, the rise of
terri-torium is unexplained [Michiel de Vaan, Etymological Dictionary of Latin and the other Italic
Languages]. An alternative theory, somewhat supported by the vowels of the original Latin word,
suggests derivation from terrere to frighten (see terrible); thus territorium would mean a place
from which people are warned off.


liberty (n.)

late 14c., free choice, freedom to do as one chooses, from Old French libert&eacute; freedom,
liberty, free will (14c.), from Latin libertatem (nominative libertas) freedom, condition of a free
man; absence of restraint; permission, from liber free (see liberal)The spirit of liberty is the
spirit which is not too sure it is right. [Learned Hand, 1944]Nautical sense of leave of absence is
from 1758. To take liberties go beyond the bounds of propriety is from 1620s. Sense of privileges by
grant (14c.) led to sense of a person's private land (mid-15c.), which yielded sense in 18c. in both
England and America of a district within a county but having its own justice of the peace, and also
a district adjacent to a city and in some degree under its municipal jurisdiction (as in Northern
Liberties of Philadelphia). Also compare Old French libert&eacute;s local rights, laws, taxes.


suburb (n.)

early 14c., area outside a town or city, whether agricultural or residential but most frequently
residential, from Old French suburbe suburb of a town, from Latin suburbium an outlying part of a
city (especially Rome), from sub below, near (see sub-) + urbs (genitive urbis) city (see urban).
Glossed in Old English as underburg. Just beyond the reach of municipal jurisdiction, suburbs had a
bad reputation in 17c. England, especially those of London, and suburban had a sense of inferior,
debased, licentious (as in suburban sinner, slang for loose woman, prostitute). By 1817, the tinge
had shifted to of inferior manners and narrow views. Compare also French equivalent faubourg.
[T]he growth of the metropolis throws vast numbers of people into distant dormitories where ... life
is carried on without the discipline of rural occupations and without the cultural resources that
the Central District of the city still retains. [Lewis Mumford, 1922]


abandon (v.)

late 14c., to give up, surrender (oneself or something), give over utterly; to yield (oneself)
utterly (to religion, fornication, etc.), from Old French abandoner (12c.), from adverbial phrase
&agrave; bandon at will, at discretion, from &agrave; at, to (see ad-) + bandon power, jurisdiction,
from Latin bannum, proclamation, from a Frankish word related to ban (v.).   Mettre sa forest
&agrave; bandon was a feudal law phrase in the 13th cent. = mettre sa for&ecirc;t &agrave;
permission, i.e. to open it freely to any one for pasture or to cut wood in; hence the later sense
of giving up one's rights for a time, letting go, leaving, abandoning. [Auguste Brachet, An
Etymological Dictionary of the French Language, transl. G.W. Kitchin, Oxford, 1878]
Etymologically, the word carries a sense of put someone under someone else's control. Meaning to
give up absolutely is from late 14c. Related: Abandoned; abandoning.


