ken (v.)

to know, Scottish dialect, from Old English cennan make known, declare, acknowledge (in late Old
English also to know), originally make to know, causative of cunnan to become acquainted with, to
know (see can (v.)). Cognate with German kennen, Danish kjende, Swedish k&auml;nna. Related: Kenned;
kenning.


ken (n.2)

house where thieves meet, 1560s, vagabonds' slang, probably a shortening of kennel.


ken (n.1)

range of sight, 1580s, a nautical abbreviation of kenning.


kendal (n.)

green woolen cloth, late 14c., from place name in Westmoreland where it was manufactured. The place
so called for being in the dale of the River Kent.


Kenelm

masc. proper name, Old English Cenhelm, from cene brave, bold (see keen (adj.)) + helm helmet (see
helmet).


Kennedy

Irish surname, said to be from Old Irish cinneide ugly head.


kennel (n.)

c.1300, from Anglo-French *kenil, Old French chenil, from Vulgar Latin *canile, from Latin canem
(nominative canis) dog (see canine (n.)). With suffix as in ovile sheepfold from ovus, equile horse-
stable from equus, etc. As a verb, 1550s, from the noun.


Kenneth

masc. proper name, Scottish, from Gaelic Caioneach, literally handsome, comely.


kenning (n.)

Old English cenning procreation; declaration in court, present participle of ken (v.). From early
14c. in senses sign, token; teaching, instruction; c.1400 as mental cognition. From 1871 as
periphrastic expression in early Germanic poetry; in this sense it probably is from a modern learned
use of Old Norse cognate verb kenna to know, to recognize, to feel or perceive; to call, to name (in
a formal poetic metaphor).    In the whole poem of Beowulf there are scarcely half a dozen of them
[similes], and these of the simplest character, such as comparing a ship to a bird. Indeed, such a
simple comparison as this is almost equivalent to the more usual kenning (as it is called in
Icelandic), such as brimfugol, where, instead of comparing the ship to a bird, the poet simply calls
it a sea-bird, preferring the direct assertion to the indirect comparison. [Henry Sweet, Sketches of
the History of Anglo-Saxon Poetry, London, 1871]


keno (n.)

game of chance (akin to bingo), 1814, American English, probably from French quine five winning
numbers in a lottery, from Latin quini five each, distributive of quinque five (see five). The
numbers are arranged in rows of five.


keno-

before vowels, ken-, word-forming element meaning empty, from comb. form of Greek kenos empty, from
PIE root *ken- (3) empty.


kenosis (n.)

from Greek kenosis an emptying, from kenoein to empty, from PIE *ken- (3) empty. From Phil. ii:7.
Related: Kenotic.


Kent

Old English, from Latin Canticum, Greek Kantion (51 B.C.E.), an ancient Celtic name often explained
as coastal district, but possibly land of the hosts or armies. Related: Kentish.


Kentucky

U.S. state, earlier a county of Virginia, organized 1776; the name is of Iroquois or Shawnee origin,
perhaps a Wyandot (Iroquoian) word meaning meadow (compare Seneca geda'geh at the field); the
original use in English seems to have been the river name; the native use perhaps was first in
reference to a village in what now is Clark County known in Shawnee as Eskippakithiki. Related:
Kentuckian.


Kenya

African nation, named for Mount Kenya, which probably is a shortening of Kikuyu Kirinyaga, from kere
nyaga, literally white mountain (though just south of the equator, it is snowcapped). Related:
Kenyan.


Ashkenazim (n.)

(plural) central and northern European Jews (as opposed to Sephardim, Jews of Spain and Portugal),
1839, from Hebrew Ashkenazzim, plural of Ashkenaz, eldest son of Gomer (Gen. x:3), also the name of
a people mentioned in Jer. li:27 (perhaps akin to Greek skythoi Scythians, compare Akkadian
ishkuzai); identified historically with various people; in Middle Ages, with the Germans.


awaken (v.)

Old English aw&aelig;cnan (intransitive), to spring into being, arise, originate, also, less often,
to wake up; earlier onw&aelig;cnan, from a- (1) on + w&aelig;cnan (see waken). Transitive meaning to
rouse from sleep is recorded from 1510s; figurative sense of to stir up, rouse to activity is from
c.1600.    Originally strong declension (past tense awoc, past participle awacen), already in Old
English it was confused with awake (v.) and a weak past tense aw&aelig;cnede (modern awakened)
emerged and has since become the accepted form, with awoke and awoken transferred to awake. Subtle
shades of distinction determine the use of awake or awaken in modern English. Related: Awakening.


awoken

past participle of awake (v.); also see awaken.  The tendency has been to restrict the strong past
participle (awoken) to the original intransitive sense of awake and the weak inflection (awakened)
to the transitive, but this never has been complete.


betoken (v.)

late 12c., from be- + Old English tacnian to signify, from tacn sign (see token). Related:
Betokened; betokening.


blacken (v.)

c.1200, become black or dark; early 14c., make black, darken, dye (hair); see black + -en (1).
Figurative sense of to besmirch (with dishonor, etc.) is from early 15c. Related: Blackened;
blackening.


bracken (n.)

coarse fern, early 14c., a northern England word from a Scandinavian source (compare Danish bregne,
Swedish br&auml;ken fern).


broken (adj.)

late 14c., past participle adjective from break (v.). Broken record in reference to someone
continually repeating the same thing is from 1944, in reference to scratches on records that cause
the needle to jump back and repeat.    When Britain's Minister of State, Selwyn Lloyd[,] became
bored with a speech by Russia's Andrei Vishinsky in UN debate, he borrowed a Dizzy Gillespie bebop
expression and commented: Dig that broken record. While most translators pondered the meaning, a man
who takes English and puts it into Chinese gave this translation: Recover the phonograph record
which you have discarded. [Jet, Oct. 15, 1953]


broken-hearted (adj.)

also brokenhearted, 1520s, from broken + hearted. Related: Broken-heartedly; broken-heartedness.


chicken (n.)

Old English cicen (plural cicenu) young fowl, which by early Middle English had came to mean young
chicken, then later any chicken, from Proto-Germanic *kiukinam (cognates: Middle Dutch kiekijen,
Dutch kieken, Old Norse kjuklingr, Swedish kyckling, German K&uuml;ken chicken), from root *keuk-
(echoic of the bird's sound and possibly also the root of cock (n.1)) + diminutive suffixes.
Applied to the young of other bird species from early 13c. Adjective sense of cowardly is at least
as old as 14c. (compare hen-herte a chicken-hearted person, mid-15c.). As the name of a game of
danger to test courage, it is first recorded 1953. Chicken feed paltry sum of money is by 1897,
American English slang; literal use (it is made from the from lowest quality of grain) by 1834.
Chicken lobster young lobster, is from c.1960s, American English, apparently from chicken in its
sense of young. Generic words for chicken in Indo-European tend to be extended uses of hen words, as
hens are more numerous among domestic fowl, but occasionally they are from words for the young, as
in English and in Latin pullus.


chicken (v.)

to back down or fail through cowardice, 1943, U.S. slang, from chicken (n.), almost always with out
(adv.).


chicken hawk (n.)

type of hawk that is believed to prey on domestic fowl, 1802, American English. Figuratively, from
the secondary senses of both words, public person who advocates war but who declined significant
opportunity to serve in uniform during wartime, at least 1988, American English. From chicken (n.) +
hawk (n.).


chicken pox (n.)

c.1730, from chicken (n.) + pox. Perhaps so called for its mildness compared to smallpox [Barnhart].


chicken-shit

1947 (n.) contemptible cowardly person; 1948 (adj.); from chicken + shit (n.).


darken (v.)

c. 1300, to make dark; late 14c., to become dark, from dark (adj.) + -en (1). The more usual verb in
Middle English was simply dark, as it is in Chaucer and Shakespeare, and darken did not predominate
until 17c. The Anglo-Saxons also had a verb sweorcan meaning to grow dark. To darken someone's door
(usually with a negative) is attested from 1729.


dickens

exclamation, 1590s, apparently a substitute for devil; probably altered from Dickon, nickname for
Richard and source of the surnames Dickens and Dickenson, but exact derivation and meaning are
unknown.


drunken (adj.)

full form of the past participle of drunk. Meaning inebriated was in Old English druncena;
adjectival meaning habitually intoxicated is from 1540s. Related: Drunkenly.


drunkenness (n.)

Old English druncennysse; see drunken + -ness.


forsaken (adj.)

mid-13c., past participle adjective from forsake. Related: Forsakenly.


Frankenstein

allusive use dates to 1838, from Baron Frankenstein (German, free stone), character in Mary
Shelley's 1818 novel Frankenstein: The Modern Prometheus. Commonly used, mistakenly, as the proper
name of the monster he created, and thus franken- extended 1990s as a prefix to mean non-natural.


glockenspiel (n.)

1825, from German Glockenspiel, literally play of bells, from Glocke bell (see clock) + Spiel a
play.


godforsaken (adj.)

1816, from God + forsaken.


Hakenkreuz (n.)

1931, proper German name for the Nazi swastika (q.v.), literally hook-cross, from Old High German
hako hook, from Proto-Germanic *hoka-, from PIE *keg- hook, tooth (see hook (n.)).


harken

variant of hearken.


hearken (v.)

Old English heorcnian, a suffixed form of *heorcian, root of hark; from Proto-Germanic *hausjan (see
hear). Harken is the usual spelling in U.S. and probably is better justified by etymology; hearken
likely is from influence of hear.


hearkening (n.)

Old English heorcnunge harkening, listening, power of hearing (see hearken).


heartbroken (adj.)

1580s, present participle of heartbreak.


Hoboken

city in New Jersey, U.S., birthplace of Frank Sinatra, named by 17c. Dutch settlers for a village in
modern Belgium that is now a suburb of Antwerp.


Kilkenny

county in Leinster, Ireland. The county is named for its town, from Irish Cill Chainnigh Church of
(St.) Kenneth. The story of the Kilkenny cats, a pair of which fought until only their tails were
left, is attested from 1807.


kraken (n.)

monster of the North Sea, 1755, from Norwegian dialectal krake.


liken (v.)

late 13c., to represent as like, from like (adj.) + -en (1). Related: Likened; likening.


likeness (n.)

Old English (Northumbrian) licnes likeness, similarity; figure, statue, image, shortened from
gelicness; see like (adj.) + -ness.


Mackenzie

river in Canada, named for Scottish fur trader and explorer Sir Alexander Mackenzie (1764-1820) who
discovered and explored it 1789.


mistaken (adj.)

c.1600, under misapprehension, past participle adjective from mistake (v.). Related: Mistakenly.
Mistaken identity attested from 1865.


oaken (adj.)

made of, or consisting of, oak, late 12c., from oak + -en (2).


outspoken (adj.)

given to speaking freely, 1808, originally Scottish, from out (adv.) + spoken. The pa. pple. has
here a resultant force, as in 'well spoken', 'well read'. [OED]. Related: Outspokenly;
outspokenness.


