kindred (n.)

c.1200, kinraden, compound of kin (q.v.) + -rede, from Old English r&aelig;den condition, rule,
related to r&aelig;dan to advise, rule (see read (v.)). With intrusive -d- (17c.) probably for
phonetic reasons (compare thunder) but perhaps encouraged by kind (n.). As an adjective, 1520s, from
the noun.


congenial (adj.)

1620s, kindred, sympathetic, from Latin com- together (see com-) + genialis of birth, thus, kindred
(see genus). Sense of agreeable is first recorded 1711. Related: Congeniality.


allied (adj.)

c.1300, past participle adjective from ally (v.). Originally of kindred; in reference to a league or
formal treaty, it is first recorded late 14c.


pious (adj.)

mid-15c., from Latin pius dutiful, devout, conscientious, religious; faithful to kindred; inspired
by friendship, prompted by natural affections, perhaps [Klein] related to Latin purus pure, clean
(see pure). Often coupled with fraud (n.) from at least 1630s. Related: Piously; piousness.


hatred (n.)

early 13c., from hate + rare suffix -red, from Old English r&aelig;den state, condition, related to
verb r&aelig;dan to advise, discuss, rule, read, guess. See read (v.) and see second element of
kindred and proper names &AElig;&thorn;elr&aelig;d and Alfred.


incest (n.)

c.1200, the crime of sexual intercourse between near kindred, from Old French inceste and directly
from Latin incestum unchastity, impious unchastity, also specifically sex between close relatives,
noun use of neuter adjective incestus unchaste, impure, from in- not (see in- (1)) + castus pure
(see caste). In early use also in reference to sexual relations or marriage with one under a vow of
chastity (sometimes distinguished as spiritual incest). Old English had sibleger incest, literally
kin-lying.


brotherhood (n.)

equivalent of Old English bro&thorn;errede fellowship, brotherhood, with ending as in kindred; in
early Middle English the word was brotherhede with ending as in maidenhead. The modern word, with
-hood, is from 15c. Originally relationship of a brother, also friendly companionship. Concrete
sense of an association, a fraternity is from mid-14c. in the Middle English word (later also labor
union, 1880s). Old English also had bro&eth;orscipe brothership, bro&#240;orsibb kinship of
brothers.    Oh, the Protestants hate the Catholics,  And the Catholics hate the Protestants,  And
the Hindus hate the Muslims,  And everybody hates the Jews.    [Tom Lehrer, National Brotherhood
Week lyrics, 1965]


flesh (n.)

Old English fl&aelig;sc flesh, meat, also near kindred (a sense now obsolete except in phrase flesh
and blood), common West and North Germanic (compare Old Frisian flesk, Middle Low German vlees,
German Fleisch flesh, Old Norse flesk pork, bacon), of uncertain origin, perhaps from Proto-Germanic
*flaiskoz-.    Figurative use for animal or physical nature of man (Old English) is from the Bible,
especially Paul's use of Greek sarx, which yielded sense of sensual appetites (c.1200). Flesh-wound
is from 1670s; flesh-color, the hue of Caucasian skin, is first recorded 1610s, described as a tint
composed of a light pink with a little yellow [O'Neill, Dyeing, 1862]. An Old English poetry-word
for body was fl&aelig;sc-hama, literally flesh-home.


sibling (n.)

brother or sister, 1903, modern revival (in anthropology) of Old English sibling relative, kinsman,
from sibb kinship, relationship; love, friendship, peace, happiness, from Proto-Germanic *sibja-
blood relation, relative, properly one's own (cognates: Old Saxon sibba, Old Frisian, Middle Dutch
sibbe, Old High German sippa, German Sippe, Gothic sibja kin, kindred), from PIE s(w)e-bh(o)-
(cognates: Old Church Slavonic sobistvo, Russian sob character, individuality), an enlargement of
the root *swe- self (see idiom). Related to the second element in gossip.  The word 'sib' or
'sibling' is coming into use in genetics in the English-speaking world, as an equivalent of the
convenient German term 'Geschwister' [E.&amp;C.; Paul, Human Heredity, 1930]    In Old English, sibb
and its compounds covered grounds of brotherly love, familial affection which tended later to lump
into love (n.), as in sibsumnes peace, concord, brotherly love, sibbian (v.) bring together,
reconcile, sibbecoss kiss of peace. Sibship, however, is a modern formation (1908). Sib persisted
through Middle English as a noun, adjective, and verb expressing kinship and relationship.


blood (n.)

Old English blod blood, from Proto-Germanic *blodam blood (cognates: Old Frisian blod, Old Saxon
bl&#244;d, Old Norse blo&eth;, Middle Dutch bloet, Dutch bloed, Old High German bluot, German Blut,
Gothic blo&thorn;), from PIE *bhlo-to-, perhaps meaning to swell, gush, spurt, or that which bursts
out (compare Gothic blo&thorn; blood, bloma flower), in which case it would be from suffixed form of
*bhle-, extended form of *bhel- (2) to blow, inflate, swell (see bole).    There seems to have been
an avoidance in Germanic, perhaps from taboo, of other PIE words for blood, such as *esen- (source
of poetic Greek ear, Old Latin aser, Sanskrit asrk, Hittite eshar); also *krew-, which seems to have
had a sense of blood outside the body, gore from a wound (source of Latin cruour blood from a wound,
Greek kreas meat), which came to mean simply blood in the Balto-Slavic group and some other
languages.    Inheritance and relationship senses (also found in Latin sanguis, Greek haima) emerged
in English by mid-13c. Meaning person of one's family, race, kindred is late 14c. As the seat of
passions, it is recorded from c.1300. Slang meaning hot spark, a man of fire [Johnson] is from
1560s. Blood pressure attested from 1862. Blood money is from 1530s; originally money paid for
causing the death of another.   Blood type is from 1928. That there were different types of human
blood was discovered c.1900 during early experiments in transfusion. To get blood from a stone do
the impossible is from 1660s. Expression blood is thicker than water attested by 1803, in reference
to family ties of those separated by distance. New (or fresh) blood, in reference to members of an
organization or group is from 1880.


family (n.)

early 15c., servants of a household, from Latin familia family servants, domestics collectively, the
servants in a household, thus also members of a household, the estate, property; the household,
including relatives and servants, from famulus servant, of unknown origin. The Latin word rarely
appears in the sense parents with their children, for which domus (see domestic) was used.    In
English, sense of collective body of persons who form one household under one head and one domestic
government, including parents, children, and servants, and as sometimes used even lodgers or
boarders [Century Dictionary] is from 1540s. From 1660s as parents with their children, whether they
dwell together or not, also in a more general sense, persons closely related by blood, including
aunts, uncles, cousins; and in the most general sense those who descend from a common progenitor
(1580s). Meaning those claiming descent from a common ancestor, a house, a lineage is early 15c.
Hence, any group of things classed as kindred based on common distinguishing characteristics
(1620s); as a scientific classification, between genus and order, from 1753.    I have certainly
known more men destroyed by the desire to have wife and child and to keep them in comfort than I
have seen destroyed by drink and harlots. [William Butler Yeats, Autobiography]    Replaced Old
English hiwscipe. As an adjective from c.1600; with the meaning suitable for a family, by 1807.
Family values first recorded 1966. Phrase in a family way pregnant is from 1796. Family circle is
1809; family man man devoted to wife and children, man inclined to lead a domestic life is 1856
(earlier it meant thief, 1788, from family in a slang sense of the fraternity of thieves).
<b>Happy family</b> an assemblage of animals of diverse habits and propensities living amicably, or
at least quietly, together in one cage. [Century Dictionary, 1902]    The phrase is attested from
1844.


