knavery (n.)

1520s, from knave + -ery.


knave (n.)

Old English cnafa boy, male servant, common Germanic (cognates: Old High German knabo boy, youth,
servant, German knabe boy, lad, also probably related to Old English cnapa boy, youth, servant, Old
Norse knapi servant boy, Dutch knaap a youth, servant, Middle High German knappe a young squire,
German Knappe squire, shield-bearer). The original meaning might have been stick, piece of wood
[Klein]. Sense of rogue, rascal first recorded c.1200. In playing cards, the jack, 1560s.


boy (n.)

mid-13c., boie servant, commoner, knave, boy, of unknown origin. Possibly from Old French embuie one
fettered, from Vulgar Latin *imboiare, from Latin boia leg iron, yoke, leather collar, from Greek
boeiai dorai ox hides. (Words for boy double as servant, attendant across the Indo-European map --
compare Italian ragazzo, French gar&ccedil;on, Greek pais, Middle English knave, Old Church Slavonic
otroku -- and often it is difficult to say which meaning came first.)    But it also appears to be
identical with East Frisian boi young gentleman, and perhaps with Dutch boef knave, from Middle
Dutch boeve, perhaps from Middle Low German buobe. This suggests a gradational relationship to babe.
For a different conjecture:    In Old English, only the proper name Boia has been recorded. ME boi
meant 'churl, servant' and (rarely) 'devil.' In texts, the meaning 'male child' does not antedate
1400. ModE boy looks like a semantic blend of an onomatopoeic word for an evil spirit (*boi) and a
baby word for 'brother' (*bo). [Liberman]   <hr />   A noticable number of the modern words for
'boy', 'girl', and 'child' were originally colloquial nicknames, derogatory or whimsical, in part
endearing, and finally commonplace. These, as is natural, are of the most diverse, and in part
obscure, origin. [Buck]    Used slightingly of young men in Middle English; meaning male negro slave
or Asian personal servant of any age attested from c.1600. Exclamation oh, boy attested from 1892.


blackguard (n.)

1530s, scullion, kitchen knave. Perhaps once an actual military or guard unit; more likely
originally a mock-military reference to scullions and kitchen-knaves of noble households, of black-
liveried personal guards, and of shoeblacks. By 1736, sense had emerged of one of the criminal
class. Hence the adjectival use (1784), of low or worthless character.


shirk (v.)

1630s, to practice fraud or trickery, also a noun (1630s, now obsolete) a needy, disreputable
parasite [OED], perhaps from German schurke scoundrel, rogue, knave, villain (see shark (n.)). Sense
of evade one's work or duty first recorded 1785, originally in slang. Related: Shirked; shirking.


arch (adj.)

1540s, chief, principal, from prefix arch-; used in 12c. archangel, etc., but extended to so many
derogatory uses (arch-rogue, arch-knave, etc.) that by mid-17c. it acquired a meaning of roguish,
mischievous, since softened to saucy. Also found in archwife (late 14c.), variously defined as a
wife of a superior order or a dominating woman, virago.


knavish (adj.)

late 14c., from knave + -ish. Related: Knavishly; knavishness.


sloven (n.)

late 15c., immoral woman, later (16c.) also rascal, knave (regardless of gender); probably from a
continental Germanic source, compare Middle Flemish sloovin a scold, sloef untidy, shabby, Dutch
slof careless, negligent, Middle Low German sloven put on clothes carelessly, from Proto-Germanic
*slaubjan, from PIE *sleubh- to slide, slip (see sleeve). Meaning person careless of dress or
negligent of cleanliness is from 1520s. Also see slut.


villain (n.)

c.1300 (late 12c. as a surname), base or low-born rustic, from Anglo-French and Old French vilain
peasant, farmer, commoner, churl, yokel (12c.), from Medieval Latin villanus farmhand, from Latin
villa country house, farm (see villa).  The most important phases of the sense development of this
word may be summed up as follows: 'inhabitant of a farm; peasant; churl, boor; clown; miser; knave,
scoundrel.' Today both Fr. vilain and Eng. villain are used only in a pejorative sense. [Klein]
Meaning character in a novel, play, etc. whose evil motives or actions help drive the plot is from
1822.


goblin (n.)

early 14c., a devil, incubus, fairy, from Old French gobelin (12c., as Medieval Latin Gobelinus, the
name of a spirit haunting the region of Evreux, in chronicle of Ordericus Vitalis), of uncertain
origin, perhaps related to German kobold (see cobalt), or from Medieval Latin cabalus, from Greek
kobalos rogue, knave, kobaloi wicked spirits invoked by rogues, of unknown origin. Another
suggestion is that it is a diminutive of the proper name Gobel.    Though French gobelin was not
recorded until almost 250 years after appearance of the English term, it is mentioned in the
Medieval Latin text of the 1100's, and few people who believed in folk magic used Medieval Latin.
[Barnhart]


pimp (n.)

c.1600, of unknown origin, perhaps from Middle French pimpant alluring in dress, seductive, present
participle of pimper to dress elegantly (16c.), from Old French pimpelorer, pipelorer decorate,
color, beautify. Weekley suggests Middle French pimpreneau, defined in Cotgrave (1611) as a knave,
rascall, varlet, scoundrell, but Liberman is against this.    Judging by such recorded meanings of
pimp as 'helper in mines; servant in logging camps,' this word was originally applied to boys and
servants. [Liberman]    The word also means informer, stool pigeon in Australia and New Zealand and
in South Africa, where by early 1960s it existed in Swahili form impimpsi. Pimpmobile first recorded
1973 (six years before Popemobile).    PIMP. A male procurer, or cock bawd; also a small faggot used
about London for lighting fires, named from introducing the fire to the coals. [Grose, Dictionary of
the Vulgar Tongue, London, 1785]


satire (n.)

late 14c., work intended to ridicule vice or folly, from Middle French satire (14c.) and directly
from Latin satira satire, poetic medley, earlier satura, in lanx satura mixed dish, dish filled with
various kinds of fruit, literally full dish, from fem. of satur sated (see saturate).    First used
in the literary sense in Latin in reference to a collection of poems in various meters on a variety
of subjects by the late republican Roman poet Ennius. The matter of the little that survives of his
verse does not seem to be particularly satiric, but in classical Latin the word came to mean
especially a poem which assailed the prevailing vices, one after another. Altered in Latin by
influence of Greek satyr, on mistaken notion that the literary form is related to the Greek satyr
drama (see satyr).<b>Satire</b>, n. An obsolete kind of literary composition in which the vices and
follies of the author's enemies were expounded with imperfect tenderness. In this country satire
never had more than a sickly and uncertain existence, for the soul of it is wit, wherein we are
dolefully deficient, the humor that we mistake for it, like all humor, being tolerant and
sympathetic. Moreover, although Americans are 'endowed by their Creator' with abundant vice and
folly, it is not generally known that these are reprehensible qualities, wherefore the satirist is
popularly regarded as a sour-spirited knave, and his every victim's outcry for codefendants evokes a
national assent. [Ambrose Bierce, Devil's Dictionary, 1911]   <hr />   Proper satire is
distinguished, by the generality of the reflections, from a lampoon which is aimed against a
particular person, but they are too frequently confounded. [Johnson]   <hr />   [I]n whatever
department of human expression, wherever there is objective truth there is satire [Wyndham Lewis,
Rude Assignment, 1950]    For nuances of usage, see humor (n.).


