knead (v.)

Old English cnedan to knead, from Proto-Germanic *knedan (cognates: Old Saxon knedan, Middle Dutch
cneden, Dutch kneden, Old High German knetan, German kneten, Old Norse kno&eth;a to knead).
Originally a strong verb (past tense cn&aelig;d, past participle cneden).


magma (n.)

mid-15c., dregs, from Latin magma dregs of an ointment, from Greek magma thick unguent, ointment,
from root of  massein to knead, mold, from PIE *mag- to knead (see macerate). Geological meaning
molten rock is 1859. Related: Magmalic.


fiction (n.)

late 14c., something invented, from Old French ficcion (13c.) dissimulation, ruse; invention, and
directly from Latin fictionem (nominative fictio) a fashioning or feigning, noun of action from past
participle stem of fingere to shape, form, devise, feign, originally to knead, form out of clay,
from PIE *dheigh- to build, form, knead (source also of Old English dag dough; see dough). As a
branch of literature, 1590s.


mass (n.1)

lump, quantity, size, late 14c., from Old French masse lump, heap, pile; crowd, large amount; ingot,
bar (11c.), and directly from Latin massa kneaded dough, lump, that which adheres together like
dough, probably from Greek maza barley cake, lump, mass, ball, related to massein to knead, from PIE
root *mag- to knead (source of Lithuanian minkyti to knead, see macerate). Sense extended in English
1580s to a large quantity, amount, or number. Strict sense in physics is from 1704.    As an
adjective from 1733, first attested in mass meeting in American English. mass culture is from 1916
in sociology (earlier in biology); mass hysteria is from 1914; mass media is from 1923; mass
movement is from 1897; mass production is from 1920; mass grave is from 1918; mass murder from 1880.


mingle (v.)

mid-15c., to bring together, frequentative of Middle English myngen to mix, from Old English mengan
(related to second element in among), from Proto-Germanic *mangjan to knead together (cognates: Old
Saxon mengian, Old Norse menga, Old Frisian mendza, German mengen), from PIE *mag- to knead,
fashion, fit (see macerate). The formation may have been suggested by cognate Middle Dutch mengelen.
Of persons, to join with others, be sociable (intransitive), from c.1600. Related: Mingled;
mingling.


macerate (v.)

late 15c., a back-formation from maceration or else from Latin maceratus, past participle of
macerare soften, make soft, soak, steep, related to maceria garden wall, originally of kneaded clay,
from PIE *mak-ero-, suffixed form of root *mag- to knead (cognates: Greek magis kneaded mass, cake,
mageus one who kneads, baker; Old Church Slavonic mazo to anoint, smear; Breton meza to knead;
Middle Irish maistir to churn), also to fashion, fit (compare make (v.)). Related: Macerated;
macerating.


walk (v.)

travel on foot, c.1200, a merger of two verbs, 1. Old English wealcan to toss, roll, move round
(past tense weolc, past participle wealcen), and 2. wealcian to roll up, curl, from Proto-Germanic
*welk- (cognates: Old Norse valka to drag about, Danish valke to full (cloth), Middle Dutch walken
to knead, press, full (cloth), Old High German walchan to knead, German walken to full), perhaps
ultimately from PIE root *wel- (3) to turn, roll (see volvox).    The shift in sense is perhaps from
a colloquial use of the Old English word or via the sense of to full cloth (by treading on it),
though this sense does not appear until after the change in meaning. In 13c. it is used of snakes
and the passage of time, and in 15c. of wheeled carts. Rarely is there so specific a word as NE
walk, clearly distinguished from both go and run [Buck]. Meaning to go away is recorded from mid-
15c. Transitive meaning to exercise a dog (or horse) is from late 15c.; meaning to escort (someone)
in a walk is from 1620s. Meaning move (a heavy object) by turning and shoving it in a manner
suggesting walking is by 1890. To walk it off, of an injury, etc., is from 1741. Related: Walked;
walking.


mold (v.)

also mould, mid-14c., to mix, blend; late 14c. to knead, shape, from mold (n.1). Figurative sense
(of character, etc.) is from c.1600. Related: Molded; molding.


mongrel (n.)

late 15c., mixed-breed dog, from obsolete mong mixture, from Old English gemong mingling (base of
among), from Proto-Germanic *mangjan to knead together (see mingle). With pejorative suffix -rel.
Meaning person not of pure race is from 1540s. As an adjective from 1570s.


shampoo (v.)

1762, to massage, from Anglo-Indian shampoo, from Hindi champo, imperative of champna to press,
knead the muscles, perhaps from Sanskrit capayati pounds, kneads. Meaning wash the hair first
recorded 1860; extended 1954 to carpets, upholstery, etc. Related: Shampooed; shampooing.


yogurt (n.)

also yoghurt, 1620s, a mispronunciation of Turkish yogurt, in which the -g- is a soft sound, in many
dialects closer to an English w. The root yog means roughly to condense and is related to yogun
intense, yogush liquify (of water vapor), yogur knead.


brioche (n.)

enriched type of French bread, 1826, from French brioche (15c.), from brier to knead the dough,
Norman form of broyer to grind, pound, from West Germanic *brekan to break (see break (v.)).


massage (n.)

1874, from French massage friction of kneading, from masser to massage, possibly from Arabic massa
to touch, feel, handle; if so, probably picked up in Egypt during the Napoleonic campaign there.
Other possibility is that French got it in colonial India from Portuguese amassar knead, a verb from
Latin massa mass, dough (see mass (n.1)). Massage parlor first attested 1894, from the start a
euphemism for house of prostitution.


dough (n.)

Old English dag dough, from Proto-Germanic *daigaz something kneaded (cognates: Old Norse deig,
Swedish deg, Middle Dutch deech, Dutch deeg, Old High German teic, German Teig, Gothic daigs dough),
from PIE *dheigh- to build, to form, to knead (cognates: Sanskrit dehah body, literally that which
is formed, dih- to besmear; Greek teikhos wall; Latin fingere to form, fashion, figura a shape,
form, figure; Gothic deigan to smear; Old Irish digen firm, solid, originally kneaded into a compact
mass). Meaning money is from 1851.


make (v.)

Old English macian to make, form, construct, do; prepare, arrange, cause; behave, fare, transform,
from West Germanic *makon to fashion, fit (cognates: Old Saxon makon, Old Frisian makia to build,
make, Middle Dutch and Dutch maken, Old High German mahhon to construct, make, German machen to
make), from PIE *mag- to knead, mix; to fashion, fit (see macerate). If so, sense evolution perhaps
is via prehistoric houses built of mud. Gradually replaced the main Old English word, gewyrcan (see
work (v.)).    Meaning to arrive at (a place), first attested 1620s, originally was nautical.
Formerly used in many places where specific verbs now are used, such as to make Latin (c.1500) to
write Latin compositions. This broader usage survives in some phrases, such as to make water to
urinate, to make a book arrange a series of bets (1828), make hay to turn over mown grass to expose
it to sun. Make the grade is 1912, perhaps from the notion of railway engines going up an incline.
Read the valuable suggestions in Dr. C.V. Mosby's book -- be prepared to surmount obstacles before
you encounter them -- equipped with the power to make the grade in life's climb. [advertisement for
Making the Grade, December 1916]    But the phrase also was in use in a schoolwork context at the
time. Make do manage with what is available is attested from 1867. Make time go fast is 1849; make
tracks in this sense is from 1834. To make a federal case out of (something) popularized in 1959
movie Anatomy of a Murder; to make an offer (one) can't refuse is from Mario Puzo's 1969 novel The
Godfather. To make (one's) day is from 1909; menacing make my day is from 1971, popularized by Clint
Eastwood in film Sudden Impact (1983). Related: Made; making.


