knitter (n.)

mid-15c., agent noun from knit (v.).


knitting (n.)

knitted work, 1848, from present participle of knit (v.). Knitting-needle is from 1590s.


knit (v.)

Old English cnyttan to tie with a knot, bind, fasten, related to Old Norse knytja bind together,
Middle Low German  kn&uuml;tten to tie, knot, Old English cnotta a knot, from Proto-Germanic
*knuttjan, from stem *knutt-. Of brows, late 14c. Meaning to do knitting (especially plain stitch)
is from 1520s. Related: Knitted; knitting.


braid (v.)

to plait, knit, weave, twist together, c.1200, breidan, from Old English bregdan to move quickly,
pull, shake, swing, throw (in wrestling), draw (a sword); bend, weave, knit, join together; change
color, vary; scheme, feign, pretend (class III strong verb, past tense br&aelig;gd, past participle
brogden), from Proto-Germanic *bregthan make sudden jerky movements from side to side (compare Old
Norse breg&eth;a to brandish, turn about, braid; Old Saxon bregdan to weave; Dutch breien to knit;
Old High German brettan to draw, weave, braid), from PIE root *bherek- to gleam, flash (compare
Sanskrit bhrasate flames, blazes, shines). In English the verb survives only in the narrow
definition of plait hair. Related: Braided; braiding.


mesh (n.)

late 14c., mesche, open space in a net, probably from late Old English max net, earlier
m&aelig;scre, from Proto-Germanic *mask- (cognates: Old Norse m&ouml;skvi, Danish maske, Swedish
maska, Old Saxon masca, Middle Dutch maessce, Dutch maas mesh, Old High German masca, German Masche
mesh), from PIE root *mezg- to knit, plait, twist (cognates: Lithuanian mezgu to knit, mazgas knot).


tricot (n.)

knitted fabric, 1859, from French tricot knitting, knitted work, from tricoter to knit, of uncertain
origin, probably a variant of Old French estriquer to smooth, from a Germanic source (such as Middle
Low German striken pass over lightly).


purl (v.1)

knit with inverted stitches, 1825; earlier embroider with gold or silver thread (1520s), probably
from Middle English pirlyng revolving, twisting, of unknown origin. The two senses usually are taken
as one word, but even this is not certain. Klein suggests a source in Italian pirolare to twirl,
from pirolo top. As a noun, from late 14c. as bordering, frills, 1530s as twisted thread of gold and
silver.


tow (n.1)

the coarse, broken fibers of flax, hemp, etc., separated from the finer parts, late 14c., probably
from Old English tow- spinning (in towlic fit for spinning, tow-hus spinning-room), perhaps cognate
with Gothic taujan to do, make, Middle Dutch touwen to knit, weave, from Proto-Germanic *taw- to
manufacture (see taw (v.)).


unknit (v.)

Old English uncnyttan; see un- (2) reverse + knit (v.). Related: Unknitted; unknitting.


signify (v.)

late 13c., be a sign of, indicate, mean, from Old French signifier (12c.), from Latin significare to
make signs, show by signs, point out, express; mean, signify; foreshadow, portend, from significus
(adj.), from signum sign (see sign (n.)) + root of facere to make (see factitious). Intransitive
sense of to be of importance is attested from 1660s. Meaning engage in mock-hostile banter is
American English black slang first recorded 1932.    ...'signifying,' which in Harlemese means
making a series of oblique remarks apparently addressed to no one in particular, but unmistakable in
intention in such a close-knit circle. [Down Beat, March 7, 1968]


sew (v.)

Old English siwian to stitch, sew, mend, patch, knit together, earlier siowian, from Proto-Germanic
*siwjanan (cognates: Old Norse syja, Swedish sy, Danish sye, Old Frisian sia, Old High German
siuwan, Gothic siujan to sew), from PIE root *syu- to bind, sew (cognates: Sanskrit sivyati sews,
sutram thread, string; Greek hymen thin skin, membrane, hymnos song; Latin suere to sew, sew
together; Old Church Slavonic &#353;ijo to sew, &#353;ivu seam; Lettish siuviu, siuti to sew,
siuvikis tailor; Russian &#353;vec tailor). Related: Sewed; sewing. To sew (something) up bring it
to a conclusion is a figurative use attested by 1904.


charm (n.)

c.1300, incantation, magic charm, from Old French charme (12c.) magic charm, magic, spell;
incantation, song, lamentation, from Latin carmen song, verse, enchantment, religious formula, from
canere to sing (see chant (v.)), with dissimilation of -n- to -r- before -m- in intermediate form
*canmen (for a similar evolution, see Latin germen germ, from *genmen). The notion is of chanting or
reciting verses of magical power.    A yet stronger power than that of herb or stone lies in the
spoken word, and all nations use it both for blessing and cursing. But these, to be effective, must
be choice, well knit, rhythmic words (verba concepta), must have lilt and tune; hence all that is
strong in the speech wielded by priest, physician, magician, is allied to the forms of poetry.
[Jacob Grimm, Teutonic Mythology (transl. Stallybrass), 1883]    Sense of pleasing quality evolved
17c. Meaning small trinket fastened to a watch-chain, etc. first recorded 1865. Quantum physics
sense is from 1964. To work like a charm (figuratively) is recorded by 1824.


