knotty (adj.)

mid-13c. (figurative use early 13c.), from knot (n.) + -y (2). Related: Knottiness.


claviger (n.)

one who carries a club, c.1600, from Latin claviger (an epithet of Hercules), from clava club,
knotty branch + stem of gerere to bear (see gest).


glaive (v.)

late 13c., used in Middle English of various weapons, from Old French glaive lance, spear, sword,
also figuratively used for violent death (12c.), from Latin gladius sword (see gladiator);
influenced by clava knotty branch, cudgel, club, related to clavus nail.


knurl (n.)

hard excrescence, c.1600, probably a diminutive of Middle English knor knot (c.1400), related to
gnarl, from Proto-Germanic *knur- (cognates: German knorren a knotty excrescence). Related: Knurly.


clog (n.)

early 14c., clogge a lump of wood, origin unknown. Also used in Middle English of large pieces of
jewelry and large testicles. Compare Norwegian klugu knotty log of wood. Meaning anything that
impedes action is from 1520s. The sense of wooden-soled shoe is first recorded late 14c.; they were
used as overshoes until the introduction of rubbers c.1840. Originally all wood (hence the name),
later wooden soles with leather uppers for the front of the foot only. Later revived in fashion
(c.1970), primarily for women. Clog-dancing is attested from 1863.


knothead (n.)

stupid person, by 1899, American English, from knot (n.) + head (n.). Joe Knothead is the name of a
character in an 1857 blackface satire publication. And a local history from Massachusetts published
in 1879 describes an old-time character known as knot-head because [d]uring the hottest days of
summer ... he worked bare-headed in the sun ....   Knothead also was used as a term in cattle and
sheep raising, defined in 1922 as a type of poorly bred, stunted northern cattle, about the size of
yearlings, but with heavy horns indicating that they are older. It turns up, however, in an 1849
petition to the Ohio Legislature, recommending a certain person for a court position, in part
because he is a knot-head, which the report of the petition notes is a term of praise for a judge
because they are asked to untangle knotty legal questions, but which phrase, it adds, is believed
not to be in use among gentlemen in the north part of the State. [Appendix to the Journal of the
Ohio House of Representatives, Session of 1848-9]


