laboriously (adv.)

early 15c., with difficulty, laboriously, slowly, from laborious + -ly (2). Meaning earnestly,
strongly is from c.1500.


laborious (adj.)

late 14c., hard-working, industrious, from Old French laborios arduous, wearisome; hard-working
(12c., Modern French laborieux), from Latin laboriosus toilsome, wearisome, troublesome, from labor
(see labor (n.)). Meaning costing much labor, burdensome is from early 15c.; meaning resulting from
hard work is mid-15c. Related: Laboriousness.


Amelia

fem. proper name, of Germanic origin, literally laborious (cognates: Old Norse ama to trouble),
later assimilated with Roman gens name Aemilia.


ascetic (adj.)

1640s, from Greek asketikos rigorously self-disciplined, laborious, from asketes monk, hermit,
earlier one who practices an art or trade, from askein to exercise, train, originally to train for
athletic competition, practice gymnastics, exercise.


operose (adj.)

involving much labor, 1670s, from Latin operosus taking great pains, laborious, active, industrious,
from opus (genitive operis) work (see opus). Related: Operosity.


lamp (n.)

c.1200, from Old French lampe lamp, lights (12c.), from Latin lampas a light, torch, flambeau, from
Greek lampas torch, lamp, beacon, meteor, light, from lampein to shine, from nasalized form of PIE
root *lap- to shine (cognates: Lithuanian lope light, Old Irish lassar flame). Replaced Old English
leohtf&aelig;t light vessel. To smell of the lamp be a product of laborious night study is from
1570s.


tough (adj.)

Old English toh strong and firm in texture, tenacious, sticky, from Proto-Germanic *tanhu-
(cognates: Middle Low German tege, Middle Dutch taey, Dutch taai, Old High German zach, German
z&auml;h), which Watkins suggests is from PIE *denk- to bite, from the notion of holding fast. See
rough for spelling change.    From c.1200 as strong, powerful; c.1300 as not tender or fragile;
early 14c. as difficult to chew, also hard to endure. Figurative sense of steadfast is mid-14c.;
that of hard to do, trying, laborious is from 1610s. Verb tough it endure the experience is first
recorded 1830, American English. Tough guy attested from 1901. Tough-minded first recorded 1907 in
William James. Tough luck first recorded 1912; tough shit, dismissive retort to a complaint, is from
1946.


