lachrymose (adj.)

1660s, tear-like, from Latin lacrimosus tearful, sorrowful, weeping, also causing tears, lamentable,
from lacrima tear, a dialect-altered borrowing of Greek dakryma tear, from dakryein to shed tears,
from dakry tear, from PIE *dakru- (see tear (n.1)). Meaning given to tears, tearful is first
attested 1727; meaning of a mournful character is from 1822.    The -d- to -l- alteration in Latin
is the so-called Sabine -L-; compare Latin olere smell, from root of odor, and Ulixes, the Latin
form of Greek Odysseus. The Medieval Latin practice of writing -ch- for -c- before Latin -r- also
altered anchor, pulchritude, sepulchre. The -y- is pedantic, from belief in a Greek origin. Middle
English had lacrymable tearful (mid-15c.).


lachrymal (adj.)

also lachrimal, early 15c., from Medieval Latin lacrimalis, from Latin lacrima (see lachrymose).


Ulysses

Latin name for Odysseus, from Latin Ulysses, Ulixes. Famous for wandering as well as craftiness and
ability at deceit. For -d- to -l- alteration, see lachrymose.


laurel (n.)

c.1300, lorrer, from Old French laurier (12c.), from Latin laurus laurel tree, probably related to
Greek daphne laurel (for change of d- to l- see lachrymose), probably from a pre-IE Mediterranean
language. The change of second -r- to -l- after mid-14c. is by dissimilation. An emblem of victory
or of distinction, hence the phrase to rest (originally repose) on one's laurels, first attested
1831.


pilot (n.)

1510s, one who steers a ship, from Middle French pillote (16c.), from Italian piloto, supposed to be
an alteration of Old Italian pedoto, which usually is said to be from Medieval Greek *pedotes
rudder, helmsman, from Greek pedon steering oar, related to pous (genitive podos) foot (see foot
(n.)). Change of -d- to -l- in Latin (Sabine -l-) parallels that in odor/olfactory; see lachrymose.
Sense extended 1848 to one who controls a balloon, and 1907 to one who flies an airplane. As an
adjective, 1788 as pertaining to a pilot; from 1928 as serving as a prototype. Thus the noun pilot
meaning pilot episode (etc.), attested from 1962. Pilot light is from 1890.


letter (n.1)

c.1200, graphic symbol, alphabetic sign, written character, from Old French letre (10c., Modern
French lettre) character, letter; missive, note, in plural, literature, writing, learning, from
Latin littera (also litera) letter of the alphabet, of uncertain origin, perhaps via Etruscan from
Greek diphthera tablet, with change of d- to l- as in lachrymose. In this sense it replaced Old
English bocst&aelig;f, literally book staff (compare German Buchstabe letter, character, from Old
High German buohstab, from Proto-Germanic *bok-staba-m).    Latin littera also meant a writing,
document, record, and in   plural litter&aelig; a letter, epistle, a sense first attested in English
early 13c., replacing Old English &aelig;rendgewrit, literally errand-writing. The Latin plural also
meant literature, books, and figuratively learning, liberal education, schooling (see letters).
School letter in sports, attested by 1908, were said to have been first awarded by University of
Chicago football coach Amos Alonzo Stagg. Expression to the letter precisely is from 1520s (earlier
as after the letter). Letter-perfect is from 1845, originally in theater jargon, in reference to an
actor knowing the lines exactly. Letter-press, in reference to matter printed from relief surfaces,
is from 1840.


