ladder (n.)

Old English hl&aelig;der ladder, steps, from Proto-Germanic *khlaidri (cognates: Old Frisian
hledere, Middle Dutch ledere, Old High German leitara, German Leiter), from PIE root *klei- to lean
(cognates: Greek klimax ladder; see lean (v.)). In late Old English, rungs were
l&aelig;ddrest&aelig;f&aelig; and the side pieces were ledder steles. The belief that walking under
one brings bad luck is attested from 1787, but its origin likely is more pragmatic than symbolic.
Ladder-back (adj.) as a type of chair is from 1898.


scalar (adj.)

resembling a ladder, 1650s, from Latin scalaris of or pertaining to a ladder, from scalae (plural)
ladder, steps, flight of steps (see scale (n.2)). Mathematical sense first recorded 1846.


scale (v.1)

to climb by or as by a ladder, late 14c., from scale (n.) a ladder, from Latin scala ladder, flight
of stairs, from *scansla, from stem of scandere to climb (see scan (v.)). Related: Scaled; scaling.


echelon (n.)

1796, step-like arrangement of troops, from French &eacute;chelon level, echelon, literally rung of
a ladder, from Old French eschelon, from eschiele ladder, from Late Latin scala stair, slope, from
Latin scalae (plural) ladder, steps, from PIE *skand- to spring, leap (see scan). Sense of level,
subdivision is from World War I.


step-ladder (n.)

also stepladder, one with flat steps instead of rungs, 1728, from step (n.) + ladder.


escalade (n.)

1590s, action of using ladders to scale the walls of a fortified place, from Middle French escalade
(16c.) an assault with ladders on a fortification, from Italian scalata, fem. past participle of
scalare to climb by means of a ladder, from scala ladder, related to Latin scandere to climb (see
scan). For initial e-, see e-.


back down (v.)

in figurative sense of withdraw a charge, 1859, American English, from notion of descending a
ladder, etc.; from back (v.) + down (adv.).


pompier (n.)

fireman's scaling ladder, French, literally fireman, from pompe pump (see pump (n.)).


stile (n.)

Old English stigel, stile device for climbing, ladder, related to stigen to climb, from Proto-
Germanic *stig- to climb (see stair). An arrangement to allow persons to pass but not sheep and
cattle.


Jacob

masc. proper name, name of Old Testament patriarch, son of Isaac and Rebecca and father of the
founders of the twelve tribes, from Late Latin Iacobus, from Greek Iakobos, from Hebrew Ya'aqobh,
literally one that takes by the heel (Gen. xxviii:12), a derivative of 'aqebh heel. The most popular
name for boys born in the U.S. from 1999 through 2008. Jacob's ladder, in various transferred uses
from 1733, is from Gen. xxviii:12.


schlemazel (n.)

also schlimazel, born loser, 1948, from Yiddish shlim mazel rotten luck, from Middle High German
slim crooked + Hebrew mazzal luck. British slang shemozzle an unhappy plight (1889) is probably from
the same source.    A shlemiel is the fellow who climbs to the top of a ladder with a bucket of
paint and then drops it. A shimazl is the fellow on whose head the bucket falls. [Rep. Stephen J.
Solarz (D.-N.Y.), 1986]


climacteric

c.1600 (adj.), 1620s (n.), from Latin climactericus, from Greek klimakterikos of a critical period,
from klimakter rung of a ladder (see climax (n.)). A critical stage in human life, a period supposed
to be especially liable to change. By some, held to be the years that are multiples of 7 (7, 14, 21,
etc.), by others only the odd multiples (7, 21, 35, etc.), and by still others the multiples of 9.
The Great Climacteric was the 63rd year (7x9), supposed to be especially critical.


stalk (n.)

stem of a plant, early 14c., probably a diminutive (with -k suffix) of stale one of the uprights of
a ladder, handle, stalk, from Old English stalu wooden part (of a tool or instrument), from Proto-
Germanic *stalla- (cognates: Old English steala stalk, support, steall place), from PIE *stol-no-,
suffixed form of *stol-, variant of root *stel- to put, stand (see stall (n.1)). Of similar
structures in animals from 1826.


scale (n.3)

series of registering marks to measure by; marks laid down to determine distance along a line, late
14c., from Latin scala ladder, staircase (see scale (v.1)). Meaning succession or series of steps is
from c.1600; that of standard for estimation (large scale, small scale, etc.) is from 1620s. Musical
sense (1590s), and the meaning proportion of a representation to the actual object (1660s) are via
Italian scala, from Latin scala.


acrophobia (n.)

morbid fear of heights, 1887, medical Latin, from Greek akros at the end, the top (see acrid) +
-phobia fear. Coined by Italian physician Dr. Andrea Verga in a paper describing the condition, from
which Verga himself suffered.    In this paper, read somewhat over a year ago at the congress of
alienists at Pavia, the author makes confession of his own extreme dread of high places. Though
fearless of the contagion of cholera, he has palpitations on mounting a step-ladder, finds it
unpleasant to ride on the top of a coach or to look out of even a first-story window, and has never
used an elevator. [American Journal of Psychology, Nov. 1888, abstract of Verga's report]


louse (n.)

parasitic insect infecting human hair and skin, Old English lus, from Proto-Germanic *lus (cognates:
Old Norse lus, Middle Dutch luus, Dutch luis, Old High German lus, German Laus), from PIE *lus-
louse (cognates: Welsh lleuen louse). Slang meaning obnoxious person is from 1630s. The plural lice
(Old English lys) shows effects of i-mutation. The verb meaning to clear of lice is from late 14c.;
to louse up ruin, botch first attested 1934, from the literal sense (of bedding), from 1931. Grose
[Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, 1785] has louse ladder A stitch fallen in a stocking.


climax (n.)

1580s, in the rhetorical sense (a chain of reasoning in graduating steps from weaker to stronger),
from Late Latin climax (genitive climacis), from Greek klimax propositions rising in effectiveness,
literally ladder, from root of klinein to slope, from PIE root *klei- to lean (see lean (v.)).
The rhetorical meaning evolved in English through series of steps by which a goal is achieved, to
escalating steps, to (1789) high point of intensity or development, a usage credited by the OED to
popular ignorance. The meaning sexual orgasm is recorded by 1880 (also in terms such as climax of
orgasm), said to have been promoted from c.1900 by birth-control pioneer Marie Stopes (1880-1958)
and others as a more accessible word than orgasm (n.).


rung (n.)

Old English hrung rod, bar, from Proto-Germanic *khrungo (cognates: Middle Low German runge, Old
High German runga stake, stud, stave, German Runge stake, stud, stave, Middle Dutch ronghe, Dutch
rong rung, Gothic hrugga staff), of unknown origin with no connections outside Germanic. Sense in
English narrowed to round or stave of a ladder (first attested late 13c.), but usage of cognate
words remains more general in other Germanic languages.    This [rungs] has generally been
considered as a mere corruption of rounds; and people of education use only this latter word. [John
Pickering, A Vocabulary or Collection of Words and Phrases which have been Supposed to be Peculiar
to the United States of America, Boston, 1816]


stage (n.)

mid-13c., story of a building; early 14c., raised platform used for public display (also the
platform beneath the gallows), from Old French estage building, dwelling place; stage for
performance; phase, stage, rest in a journey (12c., Modern French &#233;tage story of a house,
stage, floor, loft), from Vulgar Latin *staticum a place for standing, from Latin statum, past
participle of stare to stand (see stet). Meaning platform for presentation of a play is attested
from late 14c.; generalized for profession of an actor from 1580s.    Sense of period of development
or time in life first recorded early 14c., probably from Middle English sense of degree or step on
the 'ladder' of virtue, 'wheel' of fortune, etc., in parable illustrations and morality plays.
Meaning a step in sequence, a stage of a journey is late 14c. Meaning level of water in a river,
etc. is from 1814, American English.   Stage-name is from 1727. Stage-mother (n.) in the overbearing
mother-of-an-actress sense is from 1915. Stage-door is from 1761, hence Stage-Door Johnny young man
who frequents stage doors seeking the company of actresses, chorus girls, etc. (1907). Stage
whisper, such as used by an actor on stage to be heard by the audience, first attested 1865. Stage-
manage (v.) is from 1871.


