lag (v.)

fail to keep pace, 1520s, earlier as a noun meaning last person (1510s), later also as an adjective
(1550s, as in lag-mon last man), all of uncertain relationship, possibly from a Scandinavian source
(compare Norwegian lagga go slowly), or some dialectal version of last, lack, or delay. Related:
Lag; lagging. The noun meaning retardation is from 1855. First record of lag time is from 1951.


lager (n.)

1858, American English, short for lager beer (1845), from German Lagerbier beer brewed for keeping
some months before being drunk, from Lager storehouse (see lair) + Bier beer.


laggard

1702 (adj.), from lag (v.) + -ard. From 1757 as a noun.


lagniappe (n.)

dividend, something extra, 1849, from New Orleans creole, of unknown origin though much speculated
upon. Originally a bit of something given by New Orleans shopkeepers to customers. Said to be from
American Spanish la &ntilde;apa the gift. Klein says this is in turn from Quechua yapa something
added, gift.We picked up one excellent word -- a word worth travelling to New Orleans to get; a
nice, limber, expressive, handy word -- 'lagniappe.' They pronounce it lanny-yap. It is Spanish --
so they said. [Mark Twain, Life on the Mississippi]


lagoon (n.)

1670s, lagune, earlier laguna (1610s), from French lagune or directly from Italian laguna pond,
lake, from Latin lacuna pond, hole, from lacus pond (see lake (n.1)). Originally in reference to the
region of Venice; applied 1769 (by Capt. Cook) to the lake-like stretch of water enclosed in a South
Seas atoll. Also see -oon.


anlage (n.)

basis of a later development (plural anlagen), 1892, from German anlage foundation, basis, from
anlagen (v.) to establish, from an on + legen to lay (see lay (v.)).


archipelago (n.)

c.1500, from Italian arcipelago the Aegean Sea (13c.), from Greek arkhipelagos, from arkhi- chief
(see archon) + pelagos sea (see pelagic). The Aegean Sea being full of island chains, the meaning
was extended in Italian to any sea studded with islands. Klein, noting the absence of arkhipelagos
in ancient or Medieval Greek (the modern word in Greek is borrowed from Italian) believe it is an
Italian mistake for Aigaion pelagos Aegean Sea (Medieval Latin Egeopelagus), or influenced by that
name.


assemblage (n.)

c.1704, from French assemblage gathering, assemblage, from assembler (see assemble). Earlier English
words in the same sense include assemblement, assemblance (both late 15c.).


camouflage

1917, noun, verb, and adjective, from French camoufler, Parisian slang, to disguise, from Italian
camuffare to disguise, of uncertain origin, perhaps a contraction of capo muffare to muffle the
head. Probably altered by influence of French camouflet puff of smoke, on the notion of blow smoke
in someone's face. The British navy in World War I called it dazzle-painting.    Since the war
started the POPULAR SCIENCE MONTHLY has published photographs of big British and French field pieces
covered with shrubbery, railway trains painted out of the landscape, and all kinds of devices to
hide the guns, trains, and the roads from the eyes of enemy aircraft.    Until recently there was no
one word in any language to explain this war trick. Sometimes a whole paragraph was required to
explain this military practice. Hereafter one word, a French word, will save all this needless
writing and reading. Camouflage is the new word, and it means fooling the enemy. [Popular Science
Monthly, August 1917]


cartilage (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French cartilage (16c.) and directly from Latin cartilaginem (nominative
cartilago) cartilage, gristle, possibly related to Latin crates wickerwork.


cartilaginous (adj.)

1540s, from French cartilagineux and directly from Latin cartilaginosus, from cartilago (genitive
cartilaginis) cartilage, gristle (see cartilage).


collage (n.)

1919, from French collage a pasting, from Old French coller to glue, from Greek kolla glue. Earliest
reference is in Wyndham Lewis.


collagen (n.)

structural protein of connective tissue, 1843, from French collag&egrave;ne, from Greek kolla glue +
-gen giving birth to (see -gen).


conflagrate (v.)

1650s, to catch fire, from Latin conflagrat-, past participle stem of conflagrare (see
conflagration). Meaning to set on fire is from 1835.


conflagration (n.)

1550s, from Middle French conflagration (16c.) or directly from Latin conflagrationem (nominative
conflagratio), present participle of conflagrare to burn up, from com-, intensive prefix (see com-),
+ flagrare to burn (see flagrant).


curtilage (n.)

early 14c., from Anglo-French curtilage, from Old French cortil little court, walled garden, yard,
from Medieval Latin cortile court, yard, from Latin cortis (see court (n.)).


deflagration (n.)

c.1600, from Latin deflagrationem (nominative deflagratio) a burning up, conflagration, noun of
action from past participle stem of deflagrare, from de- (see de-) + flagrare (see flagrant).


flag (n.1)

cloth ensign, late 15c., now in all modern Germanic languages, but apparently first recorded in
English, origin unknown, but likely connected with flag (v.) or else, like it, perhaps imitative. A
less likely guess is that it is from the flag in flagstone on notion of being square and flat. U.S.
Flag Day (1894) is in reference to the adopting of the Stars and Stripes by the Continental Congress
on June 14, 1777.


flag (v.)

1540s, flap about loosely, perhaps a variant of Middle English flakken, flacken to flap, flutter
(late 14c.), probably from Old Norse flakka to flicker, flutter, perhaps imitative of something
flapping lazily in the wind.    Sense of go limp, droop is first recorded 1610s. Meaning to
designate as someone who will not be served more liquor is from 1980s, probably from use of flags to
signal trains, etc., to halt, which led to the verb in this sense (1856, American English). Related:
Flagged; flagging.


flag (n.2)

flat, split stone, c.1600, earlier piece cut from turf or sod (mid-15c.), from Old Norse flaga stone
slab, perhaps related to Old Norse flak (see flake (n.)).


flag (n.3)

aquatic plant, late 14c., reed, rush, perhaps from a Scandinavian source (compare Danish fl&aelig;g
yellow iris) or Dutch flag; perhaps ultimately connected to flag (v.) on notion of fluttering in the
breeze.


flagellant (n.)

late 16c., from Latin flagellantem (nominative flagellans), present participle of flagellare to
scourge, lash (see flagellum).


flagellate (v.)

1620s, from Latin flagellatus, past participle of flagellare to scourge, lash (see flagellum).
Related: Flagellated; flagellating. An earlier verb for this was flagellen (mid-15c.).


flagellation (n.)

early 15c., the scourging of Christ, from French flagellation or directly from Latin flagellationem
(nominative flagellatio) a scourging, from past participle stem of flagellare (see flagellum).


flagellum (n.)

1852, in reference to microbes, from Latin flagellum whip, scourge, diminutive of flagrum whip, from
PIE root *bhlag- to strike.


flagitious (adj.)

shamefully wicked, criminal, late 14c., from Old French flagicieux or directly from Latin
flagitiosus shameful, disgraceful, infamous, from flagitium shameful act, passionate deed,
disgraceful thing, related to flagrum a whip, scourge, lash, flagitare to demand importunately, from
PIE root *bhlag- to strike. Related: Flagitiously; flagitiousness.


flagon (n.)

mid-15c., from Middle French flacon, Old French flascon, from Late Latin flasconem (nominative
flasco) bottle (see flask).


flagrance (n.)

1610s, from French flagrance or directly from Latin flagrantia, noun of quality from flagrantem (see
flagrant).


flagrant (adj.)

c.1500, resplendent, from Latin flagrantem (nominative flagrans) burning, blazing, glowing,
figuratively glowing with passion, eager, vehement, present participle of flagrare to burn, blaze,
glow from Latin root *flag-, corresponding to PIE *bhleg- to shine, flash, burn (cognates: Greek
phlegein to burn, scorch, Latin fulgere to shine), from root *bhel- (1) to shine, flash, burn (see
bleach (v.)). Sense of glaringly offensive first recorded 1706, probably from common legalese phrase
in flagrante delicto red-handed, literally with the crime still blazing. Related: Flagrantly.


flagship (n.)

1670s, ship bearing an admiral's flag, from flag (n.) + ship (n.). Figurative use by 1933.


flagstaff (n.)

1610s, from flag (n.) + staff (n.). The settlement in Arizona, U.S., so called for a July 4, 1876,
celebration in which a large flag was flown from a tall tree.


flagstone (n.)

1730, from flag (n.2) flat, split stone + stone (n.).


fuselage (n.)

1909, from French fuselage, from fusel&eacute; spindle-shaped, from Old French *fus spindle, from
Latin fusus spindle (see fuse (n.)). So called from its shape.


Gallagher

surname, from Irish Gallchobhar foreign-help.


Glagolitic (n.)

1861, from Serbo-Croatian glagolica Glagolitic alphabet, from Old Church Slavonic glagolu word, from
PIE *gal-gal-, reduplicated form of root *gal- (2) to call, shout (see call (v.)) + Greek suffix
-itic. The older of the two Slavic writing systems (Cyrillic is the other), it was designed by
Cyrillus c.863 C.E.


gulag (n.)

system of prisons and labor camps, especially for political detainees, in the former Soviet Union;
rough acronym from Russian Glavnoe upravlenie ispravitel'no-trudovykh lagerei Chief Administration
of Corrective Labor Camps, set up in 1931.


haulage (n.)

1826, from haul + -age.


jet lag (n.)

also jetlag, 1966, from jet (n.2) + lag (n.). Also known in early days as time zone syndrome.


Malaga (n.)

c.1600, white wine exported from the Spanish port of Malaga, founded by the Phoenicians and probably
from Phoenician malha salt.


Malagasy

pertaining to Madagascar, large island off the coast of Africa, 1835, apparently a native alteration
of Madagascar.


millage (n.)

1871, from mill (n.2) + -age.


mucilage (n.)

late 14c., mussillage, viscous substance found in vegetable material, from Old French mucilage
(14c.), from Late Latin mucilago musty or moldy juice (4c.), from Latin mucere be musty or moldy,
from mucus mucus  (see mucus). Meaning adhesive is first attested 1859.


mucilaginous (adj.)

early 15c., viscous, sticky, from Medieval Latin muscilaginosus, from Late Latin mucilaginosus, from
mucillago (see mucilage). Related: Mucilaginously.


pelage (n.)

coat of a mammal, from French pelage hair or wool of an animal (16c.), from Old French pel hair,
from Latin pilus hair (see pile (n.3)).


Pelagian

1530s (n.); 1570s (adj.), from Medieval Latin Pelagianus, from Pelagius, Latinized form of the name
of 4c. British monk who denied the doctrine of original sin. Combated by Augustine, condemned by
Pope Zosimus in 418 C.E. His name in Welsh was said to have been Morgan, literally sea-dweller
(hence his Church name, from Greek pelagos sea; see pelagic). Related: Pelagianism.


pelagic (adj.)

pertaining to the sea, 1650s, from Latin pelagicus, from Greek pelagikos, from pelagos sea, high
sea, open sea, main, from PIE *pelag- to spread out (source of Greek plagos side, Latin plaga
hunting net, curtain, region), possibly from root *plak- (1) to spread out, be flat (see placenta).


pellagra (n.)

chronic disease caused by dietary deficiency and characterized by skin eruptions, 1811, a hybrid
formed from Latin pellis skin (see film (n.)) + Greek agra a catching, seizure, related to agrein to
take, seize. But OED suggests it might be originally Italian pelle agra rough skin. Related:
Pellagrous.


persiflage (n.)

1757, from French persiflage, from persifler to banter (18c.), from Latin per- through (see per) +
French siffler to whistle, hiss, from collateral form of Latin sibilare to hiss, possibly of
imitative origin. Said to have been introduced in English by Chesterfield.


pillage (n.)

late 14c., act of plundering (especially in war), from Old French pilage (14c.) plunder, from
pillier to plunder, loot, ill-treat, possibly from Vulgar Latin *piliare to plunder, probably from a
figurative use of Latin pilare to strip of hair, perhaps also meaning to skin (compare figurative
extension of verbs pluck, fleece), from pilus a hair (see pile (n.3)).


pillage (v.)

plunder, despoil, 1590s, from pillage (n.). Related: Pillaged; pillaging. The earlier verb in
English was simply pill (late Old English), which probably is from Latin pilare.


