laity (n.)

body of people not in religious orders, early 15c., from Anglo-French laite, from lay (adj.) + -ity.


cloister (n.)

early 13c., from Old French cloistre monastery, convent; enclosure (12c., Modern French
clo&icirc;tre), from Medieval Latin claustrum portion of monastery closed off to laity, from Latin
claustrum (usually in plural, claustra) place shut in, enclosure; bar, bolt, means of shutting in,
from past participle stem of claudere (see close (v.)).    The original purpose of cloisters was to
afford a place in which the monks could take exercise and recreation [Century Dictionary]. Spelling
in French influenced by cloison partition. Old English had clustor, clauster in the sense prison,
lock, barrier, directly from Latin, and compare, from the same source, Dutch klooster, German
Kloster, Polish klasztor.


cleric (n.)

1620s (also in early use as an adjective), from Church Latin clericus clergyman, priest, noun use of
adjective meaning priestly, belonging to the clerus; from Ecclesiastical Greek klerikos pertaining
to an inheritance, but in Greek Christian jargon by 2c., of the clergy, belonging to the clergy, as
opposed to the laity; from kleros a lot, allotment; piece of land; heritage, inheritance, originally
a shard or wood chip used in casting lots, related to klan to break (see clastic).   Kleros was used
by early Greek Christians for matters relating to ministry, based on Deut. xviii:2 reference to
Levites as temple assistants: Therefore shall they have no inheritance among their brethren: the
Lord is their inheritance, kleros being used as a translation of Hebrew nahalah inheritance, lot. Or
else it is from the use of the word in Acts i:17. A word taken up in English after clerk (n.)
shifted to its modern meaning.


beard (n.)

Old English beard beard, from West Germanic *barthaz (cognates: Old Frisian berd, Middle Dutch
baert, Old High German bart, German bart), seemingly from PIE *bhardh-a- beard (cognates: Old Church
Slavonic brada, Lithuanian barzda, and perhaps Latin barba beard).    The Greek and Roman Churches
have long disputed about the beard. While the Romanists have at different times practised shaving,
the Greeks, on the contrary, have strenuously defended the cause of long beards. Leo III. (795 AD)
was the first shaved Pope. Pope Gregory IV., after the lapse of only 30 years, fulminated a Bull
against bearded priests. In the 12th century the prescription of the beard was extended to the
laity. Pope Honorius III. to disguise his disfigured lip, allowed his beard to grow. Henry I. of
England was so much moved by a sermon directed against his beard that he resigned it to the barber.
Frederick Barbarossa is said to have been equally tractable. [Tom Robinson, M.D., Beards, St.
James's Magazine, 1881]    Pubic hair sense is from 1600s (but ne&thorn;ir berd pubic hair is from
late 14c.); in the 1811 Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, the phrase beard-splitter is defined as, A
man much given to wenching (see beaver).


folk (n.)

Old English folc common people, laity; men; people, nation, tribe; multitude; troop, army, from
Proto-Germanic *folkom (cognates: Old Frisian folk, Middle Dutch volc, German Volk people), from
Proto-Germanic *fulka-, perhaps originally host of warriors; compare Old Norse folk people, also
army, detachment; and Lithuanian pulkas crowd, Old Church Slavonic pluku division of an army, both
believed to have been borrowed from Proto-Germanic. Old English folcstede could mean both dwelling-
place and battlefield.    Some have attempted to link the word to Greek plethos multitude; Latin
plebs people, mob, populus people or vulgus; OED and Klein discount this theory but it is accepted
in Watkins. The plural form has been usual since 17c. Superseded in most senses by people. Old
English folc was commonly used in forming compounds, such as folccwide popular saying, folcgemot
town or district meeting; folcwoh deception of the public. Folk-etymology is attested from 1890.
By Folk-etymology is meant the influence exercised upon words, both as to their form and meaning, by
the popular use and misuse of them. In a special sense, it is intended to denote the corruption
which words undergo, owing either to false ideas about their derivation, or to a mistaken analogy
with other words to which they are supposed to be related. [The Rev. A. Smythe Palmer, Folk-
Etymology, 1890]


