lament (n.)

1590s, from Middle French lament and directly from Latin lamentum (see lamentation).


lamented (adj.)

mourned for, 1610, from past participle of lament (v.).


lamentable (adj.)

c.1400, from Middle French lamentable and directly from Latin lamentabilis full of sorrow, mournful,
lamentable, from lamentari to lament (see lamentation). Related: Lamentably.


lamentation (n.)

late 14c., from Old French lamentacion and directly from Latin lamentationem (nominative lamentatio)
wailing, moaning, weeping, noun of action from past participle stem of lamentari to wail, moan,
weep, lament, from lamentum a wailing, from PIE root *la- to shout, cry, probably ultimately
imitative. Replaced Old English cwi&thorn;an.


lament (v.)

mid-15c., back-formation from lamentation or else from Middle French lamenter to moan, bewail (14c.)
and directly from Latin lamentari, from lamentum (see lamentation). Related: Lamented; lamenting.


complain (v.)

late 14c., find fault, lament, from stem of Old French complaindre to lament (12c.), from Vulgar
Latin *complangere, originally to beat the breast, from Latin com-, intensive prefix (see com-), +
plangere to strike, beat the breast (see plague (n.)). Older sense of lament died out 17c. Related:
Complained; complaining.


croon (v.)

c.1400, originally Scottish, from Middle Dutch kronen to lament, mourn, perhaps imitative.
Originally to bellow like a bull as well as to utter a low, murmuring sound (mid-15c.). Popularized
by Robert Burns. Sense evolved to lament, then to sing softly and sadly. Related: Crooned; crooning.


plaint (n.)

expression of sorrow, c.1200, from Old French plainte lament, lamentation (12c.), from Latin
planctus lamentation, wailing, beating of the breast, from past participle stem of plangere to
lament, to strike (see plague (n.)). Connecting notion probably is beating one's breast in grief.


moan (v.)

mid-13c., mourn (someone); regret, bewail; c.1300, to lament, grieve; utter moans; probably from Old
English *manan, related to m&#230;nan to lament (see moan (n.)). From 1724 as to make a low,
mournful sound. Related: Moaned; moaning.


keen (v.)

lament, 1811, from Irish caoinim I weep, wail, lament, from Old Irish coinim I wail. Related:
Keened; keening. As a noun from 1830.


yammer (v.)

late 15c., to lament, probably from Middle Dutch jammeren and cognate Middle English yeoumeren, to
mourn, complain, from Old English geomrian to lament, from geomor sorrowful, probably of imitative
origin. Cognate with Old Saxon jamar sad, sorrowful, German Jammer lamentation, misery. Meaning to
make loud, annoying noise is attested from 1510s. Related: Yammered; yammering.


care (v.)

Old English carian, cearian be anxious, grieve; to feel concern or interest, from Proto-Germanic
*karo- lament, hence grief, care (cognates: Old High German charon to lament, Old Saxon karon to
care, to sorrow), from the same source as care (n.). OED emphasizes that it is in no way related to
L. cura. Related: Cared; caring.    To not care as a negative dismissal is attested from mid-13c.
Phrase couldn't care less is from 1946; could care less in the same sense (with an understood
negative) is from 1957. Care also figures in many similies of indifference in the form don't care a
_____, with the blank filled by fig, pin, button, cent, straw, rush, point, farthing, snap, etc.,
etc.    Positive senses, such as have an inclination (1550s); have fondness for (1520s) seem to have
developed later as mirrors to the earlier negative ones.


unlamented (adj.)

1590s, from un- (1) not + past participle of lament (v.).


grieve (v.)

early 13c., cause pain, from tonic stem of Old French grever to burden, oppress, aggravate (see
grief). Meaning be very sad, lament is from c.1300. Related: Grieved; grieving.


complaint (n.)

late 14c., lamentation, grief, from Old French complainte (12c.) complaint, lament, noun use of fem.
past participle of complaindre (see complain). Meaning bodily ailment is from 1705 (often in U.S.
colloquial use generalized as complaints).


sob (v.)

c.1200, to cry with short breaths, probably of imitative origin, related to Old English seofian to
lament, Old High German sufan to draw breath, West Frisian sobje to suck. Related: Sobbed; sobbing.


Rudra

storm god in Vedic mythology, from Sanskrit Rudrah, according to Klein literally the howler, roarer,
from stem of rudati weeps, laments, bewails, cognate with Latin rudere to roar, bellow, Lithuanian
rauda wail, lamentation, Old English reotan to wail, lament.


woe (n.)

late 12c., from the interjection, Old English wa!, a common exclamation of lament in many languages
(compare Latin v&aelig;, Greek oa, German weh, Lettish wai, Old Irish fe, Welsh gwae, Armenian vay).


wail (v.)

c.1300 (intransitive); mid-14c. (transitive), from Old Norse v&aelig;la to lament, from v&aelig; woe
(see woe). Of jazz musicians, to play very well, attested from 1955, American English slang (wailing
excellent is attested from 1954). Related: Wailed; wailer.


deplore (v.)

1550s, to give up as hopeless, from French d&eacute;plorer (13c.), from Latin deplorare deplore,
bewail, lament, give up for lost, from de- entirely (see de-) + plorare weep, cry out. Meaning to
regret deeply is from 1560s. Related: Deplored; deploring.


quarrel (n.1)

angry dispute, mid-14c., originally ground for complaint, from Old French querele matter, concern,
business; dispute, controversy (Modern French querelle), from Latin querella complaint, accusation;
lamentation, from queri to complain, lament. Replaced Old English sacan. Sense of contention between
persons is from 1570s.


bemoan (v.)

Old English bem&aelig;nan to bemoan, wail, lament; see be- + moan (v.). Related: Bemoaned;
bemoaning.


commiseration (n.)

1580s, from Middle French commis&eacute;ration, from Latin commiserationem (nominative commiseratio)
act or fact of pitying, noun of action from past participle stem of commiserari to pity, from com-
intensive prefix (see com-) + miserari bewail, lament, from miser wretched (see miser).


miserable (adj.)

early 15c., full of misery, causing wretchedness (of conditions), from Old French miserable prone to
pity, merciful, and directly from Latin miserabilis pitiable, miserable, deplorable, lamentable,
from miserari to pity, lament, deplore, from miser wretched (see miser). Of persons, existing in a
state of misery it is attested from 1520s.


feeble (adj.)

late 12c., from Old French feble (12c., Modern French faible) weak, feeble, from Latin flebilis
lamentable, literally that is to be wept over, from flere weep, cry, shed tears, lament, from PIE
*bhle- to howl (see bleat). The first -l- was dropped in Old French by dissimilation. The noun
meaning feeble person is recorded from mid-14c.


elegy (n.)

1510s, from Middle French elegie, from Latin elegia, from Greek elegeia ode an elegaic song, from
elegeia, fem. of elegeios elegaic, from elegos poem or song of lament, perhaps from a Phrygian word.


roar (v.)

Old English rarian roar, wail, lament, bellow, cry, probably of imitative origin (compare Middle
Dutch reeren, German r&ouml;hren to roar; Sanskrit ragati barks; Lithuanian reju to scold; Old
Church Slavonic revo I roar; Latin raucus hoarse). Related: Roared; roaring.


groan (v.)

Old English granian to groan, murmur, lament, from Proto-Germanic *grain- (cognates: Old Norse
grenja to howl), of imitative origin, or related to grin. Meaning complain is from early 13c.,
especially in Middle English phrase grutchen and gronen. Related: Groaned; groaning.


languish (v.)

early 14c., fail in strength, exhibit signs of approaching death, from languiss-, present participle
stem of Old French languir be listless, pine, grieve, fall ill, from Vulgar Latin *languire, from
Latin languere be weak or faint (see lax). Weaker sense be lovesick, grieve, lament, grow faint, is
from mid-14c. Related: Languished; languishing.


ululation (n.)

1590s, from Latin ululationem (nominative ululatio) a howling or wailing, noun of action from past
participle stem of ululare to howl, yell, shriek, wail, lament loudly, from a reduplicated imitative
root (cognates: Greek ololyzein to cry aloud, Sanskrit ululih a howling, Lithuanian uluti howl,
Gaelic uileliugh wail of lamentation, Old English ule owl).


threnody (n.)

song of lamentation, 1630s, from Greek threnodia lamentation, from threnos dirge, lament + oide ode
(see ode). Greek threnos probably is from PIE imitative root *dher- (3) to drone, murmur, hum;
cognates: Old English dran drone, Gothic drunjus sound, Greek tenthrene a kind of wasp.


mean (v.1)

intend, have in mind, Old English m&aelig;nan to mean, intend, signify; tell, say; complain, lament,
from West Germanic *mainijan (cognates: Old Frisian mena to signify, Old Saxon menian to intend,
signify, make known, Dutch menen, German meinen think, suppose, be of the opinion), from PIE *meino-
opinion, intent (cognates: Old Church Slavonic meniti to think, have an opinion, Old Irish mian
wish, desire, Welsh mwyn enjoyment), perhaps from root *men- think (see mind (n.)). Conversational
question you know what I mean? attested by 1834.


golf (n.)

mid-15c., Scottish gouf, usually taken as an alteration of Middle Dutch colf, colve stick, club,
bat, from Proto-Germanic *kulth- (cognates: Old Norse kolfr clapper of a bell, German Kolben mace,
club). The game is from 14c., the word is first mentioned (along with fut-bol) in a 1457 Scottish
statute on forbidden games. Golf ball attested from 1540s. <b>Despite what you read on the Internet,
golf is not an acronym</b>. Golf widow is from 1890.    Oh! who a golfer's bride would be,  Fast
mated with a laddie  Who every day goes out to tee And with him takes the caddie.  [The Golf Widow's
Lament, in Golf, Oct. 31, 1890]


regret (v.)

to look back with distress or sorrowful longing; to grieve for on remembering, late 14c., from Old
French regreter long after, bewail, lament someone's death; ask the help of (Modern French
regretter), from re-, intensive prefix (see re-), + -greter, possibly from Frankish or some other
Germanic source (compare Old English gr&aelig;tan to weep; Old Norse grata to weep, groan), from
Proto-Germanic *gretan weep. Not found in other Romance languages, and variously explained [Century
Dictionary].    Related: Regretted; regretting. Replaced Old English of&thorn;yncan, from of- off,
away, here denoting opposition, + &thorn;yncan seem, seem fit (as in methinks).


care (n.)

Old English caru, cearu sorrow, anxiety, grief, also burdens of mind; serious mental attention, from
Proto-Germanic *karo (cognates: Old Saxon kara sorrow; Old High German chara wail, lament; Gothic
kara sorrow, trouble, care; German Karfreitag Good Friday), from PIE root *gar- cry out, call,
scream (cognates: Irish gairm shout, cry, call; see garrulous).    Different sense evolution in
related Dutch karig scanty, frugal, German karg stingy, scanty. The sense development in English is
from cry to lamentation to grief. Meaning charge, oversight, protection is attested c.1400, the
sense in care of in addressing. To take care of take in hand, do is from 1580s.


call (v.)

Old English ceallian to call, shout, less common than clipian; replaced by related Old Norse kalla
to cry loudly, from Proto-Germanic *kall- (cognates: Dutch kallen to talk, Old High German kallon to
call), from PIE root *gal- (2) to call, scream, shriek, shout (cognates: Sanskrit garhati bewail,
criticize; Latin gallus cock; Old High German klaga, German Klage complaint, grievance, lament,
accusation; Old English clacu affront; Old Church Slavonic glasu voice, glagolu word; Welsh galw
call). Related: Called; calling.    Meaning to give a name to is mid-13c. Coin-toss sense is from
1801. Meaning to visit (Middle English) was literally to stand at the door and call.
Telephone/telegraph sense is from 1889. To call out someone to fight (1823) corresponds to French
provoquer. To call it a day is from 1834.


plague (n.)

late 14c., plage, affliction, calamity, evil, scourge; early 15c., malignant disease, from Old
French plage (14c.), from Late Latin plaga, used in Vulgate for pestilence, from Latin plaga stroke,
wound, probably from root of plangere to strike, lament (by beating the breast), from or cognate
with Greek (Doric) plaga blow, from PIE *plak- (2) to strike, to hit (cognates: Greek plazein to
drive away, plessein to beat, strike; Old English flocan to strike, beat; Gothic flokan to bewail;
German fluchen, Old Frisian floka to curse).    The Latin word also is the source of Old Irish plag
(genitive plaige) plague, pestilence, German Plage, Dutch plaage. Meaning epidemic that causes many
deaths is from 1540s; specifically in reference to bubonic plague from c.1600. Modern spelling
follows French, which had plague from 15c. Weakened sense of anything annoying is from c.1600.


prose (n.)

c.1300, story, narration, from Old French prose (13c.), from Latin prosa oratio straightforward or
direct speech (without the ornaments of verse), from prosa, fem. of prosus, earlier prorsus
straightforward, direct, from Old Latin provorsus (moving) straight ahead, from pro- forward (see
pro-) + vorsus turned, past participle of vertere to turn (see verse).    Good prose, to say nothing
of the original thoughts it conveys, may be infinitely varied in modulation. It is only an extension
of metres, an amplification of harmonies, of which even the best and most varied poetry admits but
few. [Walter Savage Landor, Imaginary Conversations]    Meaning prose writing; non-poetry is from
mid-14c. The sense of dull or commonplace expression is from 1680s, out of earlier sense plain
expression (1560s). Those who lament the want of an English agent noun to correspond to poet might
try prosaist (1776), proser (1620s), or Frenchified prosateur (1880), though the first two in their
day also acquired in English the secondary sense dull writer.


cry (v.)

early 13c., beg, implore, from Old French crier, from Vulgar Latin *critare, from Latin quiritare to
wail, shriek (source of Italian gridare, Old Spanish cridar, Spanish and Portuguese gritar), of
uncertain origin; perhaps a variant of quirritare to squeal like a pig, from *quis, echoic of
squealing, despite ancient folk etymology that traces it to call for the help of the Quirites, the
Roman constabulary. The meaning was extended 13c. to weep, which it largely replaced by 16c.
Related: Cried; crying.    Most languages, in common with English, use the general word for cry out,
shout, wail to also mean weep, shed tears to express pain or grief. Romance and Slavic, however, use
words for this whose ultimate meaning is beat (the breast), compare French pleurer, Spanish llorar,
both from Latin plorare cry aloud, but probably originally plodere beat, clap the hands. Also
Italian piangere (cognate with French plaindre lament, pity) from Latin plangere, originally beat,
but especially of the breast, as a sign of grief. U.S. colloquial for crying out loud is 1924,
probably another euphemism for for Christ's sake.


