lampoon (v.)

1650s, from lampoon (n.), or else from French lamponner, from the Middle French noun. Related:
Lampooned; lampooning.


lampoon (n.)

A personal satire; abuse; censure written not to reform but to vex [Johnson], 1640s, from French
lampon (17c.), of unknown origin, said by French etymologists to be from lampons let us drink,
popular refrain for scurrilous 17c. songs, from lamper to drink, guzzle, a nasalized form of laper
to lap, from a Germanic source akin to lap (v.). Also see -oon.


flim-flam (n.)

also flimflam, 1530s, a contemptuous echoic construction, perhaps connected to some unrecorded
dialectal word from Scandinavian (compare Old Norse flim a lampoon). From 1650s as a verb.


rat fink (n.)

also ratfink, 1963, teen slang, see rat (n.) + fink (n.). Popularized by, and perhaps coined by,
U.S. custom car builder Ed Big Daddy Roth (1932-2001), who made a hot-rod comic character of it,
supposedly to lampoon Mickey Mouse.


iambic

1570s (n.); 1580s (adj.), from Latin iambicus, from Greek iambikos, from iambos metrical foot of one
unaccented followed by one accented syllable, from iaptein to assail (in words), literally to put
forth. The meter of invective and lampoon in classical Greek from the time it was used for such by
Archilochos, 7c. B.C.E.


pasquinade (n.)

a lampoon, 1650s, from Middle French, from Italian pasquinata (c.1500), from Pasquino, name given to
a mutilated ancient statue (now known to represent Menelaus dragging the dead Patroclus) set up by
Cardinal Caraffa in his palace in Rome in 1501; the locals named it after a schoolmaster (or tailor,
or barber) named Pasquino who lived nearby. A custom developed of posting satirical verses and
lampoons on the statue.


pizazz (n.)

also pizzaz; pizzazz, 1937, probably originally college or show-biz slang.Pizazz, to quote the
editor of the Harvard Lampoon, is an indefinable dynamic quality, the je ne sais quoi of function;
as for instance, adding Scotch puts pizazz into a drink. Certain clothes have it, too. [Harper's
Bazaar, March 1937]


scold (n.)

mid-12c., person of ribald speech, later person fond of abusive language (c.1300), especially a
shrewish woman [Johnson defines it as A clamourous, rude, mean, low, foul-mouthed woman], from Old
Norse skald poet (see skald). The sense evolution might reflect the fact that Germanic poets (like
their Celtic counterparts) were famously feared for their ability to lampoon and mock (as in
skaldskapr poetry, also, in Icelandic law books, libel in verse).


satire (n.)

late 14c., work intended to ridicule vice or folly, from Middle French satire (14c.) and directly
from Latin satira satire, poetic medley, earlier satura, in lanx satura mixed dish, dish filled with
various kinds of fruit, literally full dish, from fem. of satur sated (see saturate).    First used
in the literary sense in Latin in reference to a collection of poems in various meters on a variety
of subjects by the late republican Roman poet Ennius. The matter of the little that survives of his
verse does not seem to be particularly satiric, but in classical Latin the word came to mean
especially a poem which assailed the prevailing vices, one after another. Altered in Latin by
influence of Greek satyr, on mistaken notion that the literary form is related to the Greek satyr
drama (see satyr).<b>Satire</b>, n. An obsolete kind of literary composition in which the vices and
follies of the author's enemies were expounded with imperfect tenderness. In this country satire
never had more than a sickly and uncertain existence, for the soul of it is wit, wherein we are
dolefully deficient, the humor that we mistake for it, like all humor, being tolerant and
sympathetic. Moreover, although Americans are 'endowed by their Creator' with abundant vice and
folly, it is not generally known that these are reprehensible qualities, wherefore the satirist is
popularly regarded as a sour-spirited knave, and his every victim's outcry for codefendants evokes a
national assent. [Ambrose Bierce, Devil's Dictionary, 1911]   <hr />   Proper satire is
distinguished, by the generality of the reflections, from a lampoon which is aimed against a
particular person, but they are too frequently confounded. [Johnson]   <hr />   [I]n whatever
department of human expression, wherever there is objective truth there is satire [Wyndham Lewis,
Rude Assignment, 1950]    For nuances of usage, see humor (n.).


