lance (v.)

to pierce with a lance, c.1300, from Old French lancier, from Late Latin lanceare wield a lance;
pierce with a lance, from lancea (see lance (n.)). The surgical sense (properly with reference to a
lancet) is from late 15c. Related: Lanced; lancing.


lance (n.)

late 13c. (late 12c. as a surname), from Old French lance (12c.), from Latin lancea light spear,
Spanish lance (Italian lancia, Spanish lanza), possibly of Celt-Iberian origin. The French word
spread into Germanic (German Lanze, Middle Dutch lanse, Dutch lans, Danish landse). Lance corporal
(1786) is from obsolete lancepesade officer of lowest rank (1570s), from Old Italian lancia spezzata
old soldier, literally broken lance.


lancet (n.)

late 14c., launcet, from Old French lancette small lance (12c.), diminutive of lance (see lance
(n.)).


lancer (n.)

1580s, soldier armed with a lance, from French lancier, from Old French lance (see lance (n.)).


fer de lance (n.)

large poisonous snake of American tropics, 1880, from French, lance-head, literally iron of a lance.
So called for its shape.


freelance (n.)

also free lance, free-lance, medieval mercenary warrior, 1820 (Ivanhoe), from free (adj.) + lance
(n.); apparently a coinage of Sir Walter Scott's. Figurative sense is from 1864; specifically of
journalism by 1882.


kopeck (n.)

1/100 of a ruble, from Russian kopeika, from kop'e lance (cognate with Greek kopis chopper, cleaver;
see hatchet); so called because the coin showed the czar with lance in hand.


tilt (v.2)

to joust, 1590s, from tilt (n.1). Related: Tilted; tilting. The figurative sense of tilting at
windmills is suggested in English by 1798; the image is from Don Quixote, who mistook them for
giants.    So saying, and heartily recommending himself to his lady Dulcinea, whom he implored to
succour him in this emergency, bracing on his target, and setting his lance in the rest, he put his
Rozinante to full speed, and assaulting the nearest windmill, thrust it into one of the sails, which
was drove about by the wind with so much fury, that the lance was shivered to pieces, and both
knight and steed whirled aloft, and overthrown in very bad plight upon the plain. [Smollett
translation, 1755]


launch (v.)

c.1300, to rush, plunge, leap, start forth; to be set into sudden motion, from Old North French
lancher (Old French lancier) to fling, hurl, throw, cast, from Late Latin lanceare wield a lance,
from Latin lancea light spear (see lance (n.)). Sense of set (a boat) afloat first recorded c.1400,
from notion of throwing it out on the water; generalized by 1600 to any sort of beginning. The noun
meaning a leap or a bound is from mid-15c., from the verb. Meaning the liftoff of a missile,
spacecraft, etc. is from 1935. Launch pad attested from 1960.


elan (n.)

1877, from French &eacute;lan (16c.), spring, bound, impetus, noun derived from &eacute;lancer to
rush, dart, from Old French elancer, from e- out (see ex-) + lancer to throw, originally to throw a
lance, from Late Latin lanceare, from Latin lancea (see lance (n.)).


spud (n.)

mid-15c., small or poor knife, of uncertain origin probably related to Danish spyd, Old Norse spjot
spear, German Spiess spear, lance). Meaning spade is from 1660s; sense of short or stumpy person or
thing is from 1680s; that of potato is first recorded 1845 in New Zealand English.


picador (n.)

1797, from Spanish picador, literally pricker, from picar to pierce, from Vulgar Latin *piccare to
pierce (see pike (n.2)). He pricks the bull with a lance to provoke it.


glaive (v.)

late 13c., used in Middle English of various weapons, from Old French glaive lance, spear, sword,
also figuratively used for violent death (12c.), from Latin gladius sword (see gladiator);
influenced by clava knotty branch, cudgel, club, related to clavus nail.


epee (n.)

1889, from French &eacute;p&eacute;e, literally sword from Old French espe (9c., spede) spear,
lance, from Latin spatha (see epaulet).


styrene (n.)

colorless hydrocarbon, 1885, from Styrax, name of a genus of trees (the chemical is found in their
resin), 1786, from Latin styrax, from Greek styrax, the tree name, of Semitic origin (compare Hebrew
tsori terebinth resin). Form influenced by Greek styrax shaft of a lance.


joust (v.)

c.1300, fight with a spear or lance on horseback with another knight; tilt in a tournament, from Old
French joster to joust, tilt, from Vulgar Latin *iuxtare to approach, come together, meet,
originally be next to, from Latin iuxta beside, near, related to iungere join together (see
jugular). Formerly spelled, and until modern times pronounced, just. Related: Jousted; jousting.


joust (n.)

c.1300, from Old French joustes, from joster (see joust (v.)). The sport was popular with Anglo-
Norman knights.  These early tournaments were very rough affairs, in every sense, quite unlike the
chivalrous contests of later days; the rival parties fought in groups, and it was considered not
only fair but commendable to hold off until you saw some of your adversaries getting tired and then
to join in the attack on them; the object was not to break a lance in the most approved style, but
frankly to disable as many opponents as possible for the sake of obtaining their horses, arms, and
ransoms. [L.F. Salzman, English Life in the Middle Ages, Oxford, 1950]


pounce (n.)

claw of a bird of prey, late 15c., pownse, probably from Old French ponchon lance, javelin; spine,
quill (Modern French poin&ccedil;on; see punch (v.)). So called for being the claws that punch holes
in things. In falconry, the heel claw is a talon, and others are pounces. Meaning an act of jumping
or falling upon is from 1825. In Middle English also the name of a tool for punching holes or
embossing metal (late 14c.).


beak (n.)

mid-13c., bird's bill, from Old French bec beak, figuratively mouth, also tip or point of a nose, a
lance, a ship, a shoe, from Latin beccus (source also of Italian becco, Spanish pico), said by
Suetonius (De vita Caesarum 18) to be of Gaulish origin, perhaps from Gaulish beccus, possibly
related to Celtic stem bacc- hook. Or there may be a link in Old English becca pickax, sharp end.
Jocular sense of human nose is from 1854 (but also was used mid-15c. in the same sense).


spar (n.1)

early 14c., rafter; late 14c., stout pole, from or cognate with Middle Low German or Middle Dutch
sparre, from Proto-Germanic *sparron (cognates: Old English *spere spear, lance, Old Norse sperra
rafter, beam, German Sparren spar, rafter), from PIE root *sper- (1) spear, pole (see spear (n.1)).
Nautical use, in reference to one used as a mast, yard, boom, etc., dates from 1630s. Also borrowed
in Old French as esparre, which might be the direct source of the English word.


spear (n.1)

weapon with a penetrating head and a long wooden shaft, meant to be thrust or thrown, Old English
spere spear, javelin, lance, from Proto-Germanic *speri (cognates: Old Norse spj&ouml;r, Old Saxon,
Old Frisian sper, Dutch speer, Old High German sper, German Speer spear), from PIE root *sper- (1)
spear, pole (cognates: Old Norse sparri spar, rafter, and perhaps also Latin sparus hunting spear).


Frank

one of the Germanic people that conquered Celtic northern Gaul from the Romans c.500 C.E. and made
it into France, from Frankish *Frank (cognate with Old High German Franko, Old English Franca). The
origin of the ethnic name is uncertain; it traditionally is said to be from the old Germanic word
*frankon javelin, lance (compare Old English franca), their preferred weapon, but the reverse may be
the case. Compare also Saxon, traditionally from root of Old English seax knife. In the Levant, this
was the name given to anyone of Western nationality (compare Feringhee and lingua franca).


sackbut (n.)

medieval wind instrument, c.1500, from French saquebute, a bass trumpet with a slide like a
trombone; presumably identical with Old North French saqueboute (14c.), a lance with an iron hook
for pulling down mounted men, said to be from Old North French saquier to pull, draw + bouter to
thrust, from Germanic *buton (see butt (v.)). Originally in English with many variant spellings,
including sagbutt, shakbott, shagbush.    In Dan. iii:5, used wrongly to translate Aramaic sabbekha,
name of a stringed instrument (translated correctly in Septuagint as sambuke, and in Vulgate as
sambuca, both names of stringed instruments, and probably ultimately cognate with the Aramaic word).
The error began with Coverdale (1535), who evidently thought it was a wind instrument and rendered
it with shawm; the Geneva translators, evidently following Coverdale, chose sackbut because it
sounded like the original Aramaic word, and this was followed in KJV and Revised versions.


key (n.1)

metal piece that works a lock, from Old English c&aelig;g key, of unknown origin, with no certain
cognates other than Old Frisian kei. Perhaps related to Middle Low German keie lance, spear on
notion of tool to cleave with, from Proto-Germanic *ki- to cleaver, split (cognates: German Keil
wedge, Gothic us-kijans come forth, said of seed sprouts, keinan to germinate). But Liberman writes,
The original meaning of *kaig-jo- was presumably '*pin with a twisted end.' Words with the root
*kai- followed by a consonant meaning 'crooked, bent; twisted' are common only in the North Germanic
languages. Modern pronunciation is a northern variant predominating from c.1700; earlier it was
often spelled and pronounced kay.    Figurative sense of that which serves to open or explain was in
Old English; meaning that which holds together other parts is from 1520s. As answer to a test, it is
from chess, short for key move, first move in a solution to a set problem. Musical sense of tone,
note is 15c., but modern sense of scale is 1580s, probably as a translation of Latin clavis or
French clef (see clef; also see keynote). Extended c.1500 to mechanism on a musical instrument. As a
verb meaning to scratch (a car's paint job) with a key it is recorded by 1986.


