lancet (n.)

late 14c., launcet, from Old French lancette small lance (12c.), diminutive of lance (see lance
(n.)).


conscientious objector (n.)

1896, in reference to those with religious scruples about mandatory vaccination. Military sense
predominated from World War I.    After a chequered career full of startling episodes and reversals,
the Vaccination Bill becomes virtually the Vaccination Act. In Parliament the hottest of the contest
centred round the conscientious objector. [The Lancet, Aug. 13, 1898]


heroin (n.)

1898, from German Heroin, coined 1898 as trademark registered by Friedrich Bayer &amp; Co. for their
morphine substitute, traditionally from Greek heros (see hero (n.1)) because of the euphoric feeling
the drug provides, but no evidence for this seems to have been found so far.    A new hypnotic, to
which the name of heroin has been given, has been tried in the medical clinic of Professor Gerhardt
in Berlin. [The Lancet, Dec. 3, 1898]


fleam (n.)

sharp instrument for opening veins in bloodletting, late Old English, from Old French flieme (Modern
French flamme), from Medieval Latin fletoma, from Late Latin flebotomus, from Greek phlebotomos a
lancet (see phlebotomy).


lance (v.)

to pierce with a lance, c.1300, from Old French lancier, from Late Latin lanceare wield a lance;
pierce with a lance, from lancea (see lance (n.)). The surgical sense (properly with reference to a
lancet) is from late 15c. Related: Lanced; lancing.


erogenous (adj.)

formed 1889 from Greek eros sexual love (see Eros) + -genous producing. A slightly earlier variant
was erogenic (1887), from French &eacute;rog&eacute;nique. Both, as OED laments, are improperly
formed. Erogenous zone attested by 1905.    In this connection reference may be made to the well-
known fact that in some hysterical subjects there are so-called erogenous zones simple pressure on
which suffices to evoke the complete orgasm. There is, perhaps, some significance, from our present
point of view, in the fact that, as emphasized by Savill (Hysterical Skin Symptoms, Lancet, January
30 1904) the skin is one of the very best places to study hysteria. [Havelock Ellis, Studies in the
Psychology of Sex, 1914]


kleptomania (n.)

1830, formed from mania + Greek kleptes thief, from kleptein to steal, act secretly, from PIE *klep-
to steal, an extention of root *kel- (2) to cover, conceal (see cell; cognate with Latin clepere to
steal, listen secretly to, Old Prussian au-klipts hidden, Old Church Slavonic poklopu cover,
wrapping, Gothic hlifan to steal, hliftus thief). Much-derided 19c. as a fancy term for old-
fashioned thievery and an opportunity for the privileged to claim a psychological motive for
criminal misbehavior.    There is a popular belief that some of the criminal laws under which the
poor are rigorously punished are susceptible of remarkable elasticity when the peccadilloes of the
rich are brought under judgment, and that there is some truth in the old adage which declares that
one man may steal a horse where another dare not look over the hedge. This unwholesome distrust is
not likely to diminish if, in cases of criminal prosecutions where so-called respectable persons
commit theft without sufficiently obvious motive for the act, they have their crime extenuated on
the plea of kleptomania, as has recently occurred in several notable instances. [Kleptomania, The
Lancet, Nov. 16, 1861]


