language (n.)

late 13c., langage words, what is said, conversation, talk, from Old French langage (12c.), from
Vulgar Latin *linguaticum, from Latin lingua tongue, also speech, language (see lingual). The form
with -u- developed in Anglo-French. Meaning a language is from c.1300, also used in Middle English
of dialects:    Mercii, &thorn;at bee&thorn; men of myddel Engelond[,] vnderstonde&thorn; bettre
&thorn;e side langages, nor&thorn;erne and sou&thorn;erne, &thorn;an nor&thorn;erne and
sou&thorn;erne vnderstonde&thorn; ei&thorn;er o&thorn;er. [John of Trevisa, translation of
Bartholomew de Glanville's De proprietatibus rerum, 1398]   <hr />   In o&thorn;ir inglis was it
drawin, And turnid ic haue it til ur awin Language of the nor&thorn;in lede, &THORN;at can na
no&thorn;ir inglis rede. [Cursor Mundi, early 14c.]   Language barrier attested from 1933.


linguist (n.)

1580s, a master of language, one who uses his tongue freely, a hybrid from Latin lingua language,
tongue (see lingual) + -ist. Meaning a student of language first attested 1640s.


Twi (n.)

chief language of Ghana in West Africa; also known as Akan, it is in the Niger-Congo language
family.


Aramaic

northern branch of Semitic language group, 1834, from biblical land of Aram, roughly corresponding
to modern Syria; probably related to Hebrew and Aramaic rum to be high, thus originally highland.
Aramaic became the lingua franca of the Assyrian empire and later for centuries was the official
language of the Persian kingdom and the daily language of Israel at the time of Christ.


Urdu

official language of Pakistan, 1796, from Hindustani urdu camp, from Turkish ordu (source of horde);
short for zaban-i-urdu language of the camp. Compare Dzongkha, a variant of Tibetan and the official
language of Bhutan, literally the language of the fortress. So named because it grew up since the
eleventh century in the camps of the Mohammedan conquerors of India as a means of communication
between them and the subject population of central Hindustan. [Century Dictionary]


buckra (n.)

disparaging term among U.S. blacks for white person, especially a poor one, 1790, apparently from an
African language; compare mbakara master in Efik, a language of the Ibibio people of southern
Nigeria.


pulque (n.)

1690s, from American Spanish pulque, of unknown origin, said to be a word from Araucanian (native
language spoken in part of Chile), or else from some language of Mexico.


Ameslan (n.)

1972, acronym of Ame(rican) S(ign) Lan(guage), known by that name since 1960, but its history goes
back to 1817, evolving from French Sign Language (introduced at American School for the Deaf in
Hartford, Conn.) and indigenous sign languages, especially that of Martha's Vineyard. [See Everyone
Here Spoke Sign Language, Nora Ellen Groce, Harvard University Press, 1985]


Frankish (adj.)

1802, from Frank + -ish. As the name of the West Germanic language spoken by the ancient Franks,
from 1863. (Frenkis is recorded c.1400.). The language influenced French, especially in the northern
regions from which the Normans conquered England in 1066.


pooh-pooh (v.)

to dismiss lightly and contemptuously, 1827, a slang reduplication of dismissive expression pooh.
Among the many 19th century theories of the origin of language was the Pooh-pooh theory (1860),
which held that language grew from natural expressions of surprise, joy, pain, or grief.


glotto-

word-forming element meaning language, from Attic Greek glotto-, from glotta tongue, language (see
gloss (n.2)).


Nahuatl

1822, from Spanish, from Nahuatl (Aztecan) Nahuatl, the people's name, something that makes an
agreeable sound; someone who speaks well or speaks one's own language. As a language name, usually
in the compound form nahuatlahotol-li.


pidgin (n.)

1876, from pigeon English (1859), the reduced form of the language used in China for communication
with Europeans, from pigeon (1826), itself a pidgin word, representing a Chinese pronunciation of
business. Meaning extended 1891 to any simplified language.


Farsi (n.)

1878, modern Persian language, the usual Iranian word for it, from Fars, Arabic name for region of
Pars (no p in Arabic) in southwestern Iran, where the modern language evolved from Indo-European-
based Persian with many Arabic elements.


legalese (n.)

the language of legal documents, 1914, from legal + language name ending -ese.


vernacular (adj.)

c.1600, native to a country, from Latin vernaculus domestic, native, indigenous; pertaining to home-
born slaves, from verna home-born slave, native, a word of Etruscan origin. Used in English in the
sense of Latin vernacula vocabula, in reference to language. As a noun, native speech or language of
a place, from 1706.    For human speech is after all a democratic product, the creation, not of
scholars and grammarians, but of unschooled and unlettered people. Scholars and men of education may
cultivate and enrich it, and make it flower into the beauty of a literary language; but its rarest
blooms are grafted on a wild stock, and its roots are deep-buried in the common soil. [Logan
Pearsall Smith, Words and Idioms, 1925]


Gallo-Roman (adj.)

belonging to Gaul when it was part of the Roman Empire, from comb. form of Gaul + Roman. In
reference to a language, and as a noun, it means the language spoken in France from the end of the
fifth century C.E. to the middle of the ninth, a form of Vulgar Latin with local modifications and
additions from Gaulish that then developed into what linguists call Old French.


wyandotte (n.)

type of hen, 1884, from Wyandot, name of an Iroquoian people (1749) and their language, from French
Ouendat, perhaps from Huron wendat forest or yandata village, or from the people's self-designation
wedat, which is perhaps a shortening of a longer form akin to Mohawk skawe:nat one language.


Pali

1690s, Middle High Indian dialect used in sacred Buddhist writings (the lingua franca of northern
India from c. 6c. B.C.E.-2c. B.C.E.), from Sanskrit Pali, from pali bhasa language of the canonical
books, from pali line, role, canon + bhasa language.


politically correct (adj.)

first attested in prevailing current sense 1970; abbreviation P.C. is from 1986.    [T]here is no
doubt that political correctness refers to the political movement and phenomenon, which began in the
USA, with the aim to enforce a set of ideologies and views on gender, race and other minorities.
Political correctness refers to language and ideas that may cause offence to some identity groups
like women and aims at giving preferential treatment to members of those social groups in schools
and universities. [Thuy Nguyen, Political Correctness in the English Language,2007]


Americanism (n.)

1781, in reference to words or phrases distinct from British use, coined by John Witherspoon
(1723-1794), president of Princeton College, from American + -ism. (American English English
language as spoken in the United States is first recorded 1806, in Webster.) Americanism in the
patriotic sense attachment to the U.S. is attested from 1797, first found in the writings of Thomas
Jefferson.    I have been not a little disappointed, and made suspicious of my own judgment, on
seeing the Edinburgh Reviews, the ablest critics of the age, set their faces against the
introduction of new words into the English language; they are particularly apprehensive that the
writers of the United States will adulterate it. Certainly so great growing a population, spread
over such an extent of country, with such a variety of climates, of productions, of arts, must
enlarge their language, to make it answer its purpose of expressing all ideas, the new as well as
the old. [Jefferson to John Waldo, Aug. 16, 1813]


Afrikaans (n.)

Germanic language of South Africa, the Dutch language as spoken in South Africa, 1892, from Dutch
Afrikaansch Africanish (see Afrikander). Also known as South African Dutch.


Walloon (adj.)

1520s, of a people of what is now souther and southeastern Belgium, also of their language, from
Middle French Wallon, literally foreigner, of Germanic origin (compare Old High German walh
foreigner). The people are of Gaulish origin and speak a French dialect. The name is a form of the
common appellation of Germanic peoples to Romanic-speaking neighbors. See Vlach, also Welsh. As a
noun from 1560s; as a language name from 1640s.


voodoo (n.)

religious witchcraft of Haiti and Southern U.S., ultimately of African origin, 1850, from Louisiana
French voudou, from a West African language (such as Ewe and Fon vodu spirit, demon, deity, also
Vandoo, supposedly the name of an African deity, from a language of Dahomey). Compare vodun fetish
connected with snake worship in Dahomey, said to be from vo to be afraid, or vo harmful. The verb is
attested from 1880.


Sanskrit (n.)

1610s, from Sanskrit samskrtam put together, well-formed, perfected, neuter of samskrta, from sam
together  (see same) + krta- to make, do, perform, from PIE *kwer- to make, form (see terato-). so
called as being the cultivated or literary language, distinguished from the vulgar dialects, or,
some say, because regarded as a perfect language, the speech of the gods, formed by infallible rules
[Century Dictionary].


Yoruba

west Nigerian people, also the name of their language.


dialect (n.)

1570s, form of speech of a region or group, from Middle French dialecte, from Latin dialectus local
language, way of speaking, conversation, from Greek dialektos talk, conversation, speech; also the
language of a country, dialect, from dialegesthai converse with each other, from dia- across,
between (see dia-) + legein speak (see lecture (n.)).


proto-language (n.)

1948, from proto- + language.


Telugu (n.)

Dravidian language of southern India, 1731.


tongue (n.)

Old English tunge tongue, organ of speech; speech, a people's language, from Proto-Germanic *tungon
(cognates: Old Saxon and Old Norse tunga, Old Frisian tunge, Middle Dutch tonghe, Dutch tong, Old
High German zunga, German Zunge, Gothic tuggo), from PIE *dnghwa- (cognates: Latin lingua tongue,
speech, language, from Old Latin dingua; Old Irish tenge, Welsh tafod, Lithuanian liezuvis, Old
Church Slavonic jezyku).    For substitution of -o- for -u-, see come. The spelling of the ending of
the word apparently is a 14c. attempt to indicate proper pronunciation, but the result is neither
etymological nor phonetic, and is only in a very small degree historical [OED]. In the knowledge of
a foreign language sense in the Pentecostal miracle, from 1520s. Tongue-tied is first recorded
1520s. To hold (one's) tongue refrain from speaking was in Old English. Johnson has tonguepad A
great talker.


Romance (adj.)

mid-14c., French; in the vernacular language of France (contrasted to Latin), from Old French romanz
French; vernacular, from Late Latin Romanice, from Latin Romanicus (see Roman). Extended 1610s to
other modern tongues derived from Latin (Spanish, Italian, etc.); thus pertaining to the languages
which arose out of the Latin language of the provinces of Rome. Compare romance (n.).


Latin (n.)

the language of the (ancient) Romans, Old English latin, from Latin latinium (see Latin (adj.)). The
more common form in Old English was l&aelig;den, from Vulgar Latin *ladinum, probably influenced by
Old English leoden language.


maguey (n.)

agave, 1550s, from Spanish, from Taino, a native Haitian language.


Xhosa (n.)

South African Bantu people, 1801, their self-designation. Also of their language.


COBOL (n.)

1960, U.S. Defense Department acronym, from Common Business-Oriented Language.


Wolof (n.)

African people of Senegal and Gambia. Also the name of the Niger-Congo language they speak.


gloss (n.2)

word inserted as an explanation, 1540s (earlier gloze, c.1300), from Latin glossa obsolete or
foreign word, one that requires explanation; hence also explanation, note, from Greek glossa
(Ionic), glotta (Attic) obscure word, language, also mouthpiece, literally tongue, from PIE *glogh-
thorn, point, that which is projected (source also of Old Church Slavonic glogu thorn). Figurative
use from 1540s. Both glossology (1716) and glottology (1841) have been used in the sense science of
language.


Mau Mau (n.)

African secret society devoted to ending European rule, 1950, from the Kikuyu language of Kenya.


Pig Latin (n.)

childish deformed language (there are many different versions), by 1889 (hog Latin in same sense by
1807).    The animals play quite an important part in the naming [of children's languages], as the
hog, dog, fly, goose, pigeon, pig, all give names, with Mr. Hog leading. Among the names the Latins
take the lead, and Hog Latin leads the list, being accredited as naming nearly as many languages as
all the other names combined. Besides Hog Latin, there is Dog Latin, Pig Latin, Goose Latin, and Bum
Latin. Then there is Greekish and Peddlers' French and Pigeon English. ... Very few can give any
reason for the naming of the languages. In fact, no one can fully say where the great majority of
names came from, for in most cases in the naming the following pretty well expresses the difficulty:
It was born before I was. I can't tell how young I was when I first heard of it. [The Secret
Language of Children, in The North Western Monthly, October 1897]


bunyip (n.)

1848, fabulous swamp-dwelling animal (supposedly inspired by fossil bones), from an Australian
aborigine language.


Chappaquiddick

place in Dukes County, Mass., from a native New England Algonquian language, literally island
adjacent to the mainland.


chore (n.)

1751, American English, variant of char, from Middle English cherre odd job, from Old English cerr,
cierr turn, change, time, occasion, affair business.   Chore, a corruption of char, is an English
word, still used in many parts of England, as a char-man, a char-woman; but in America, it is
perhaps confined to New England. It signifies small domestic jobs of work, and its place cannot be
supplied by any other single word in the language. [Noah Webster, Dissertations on the English
Language, 1789]


languedoc (n.)

language of medieval France south of the Loire, 1660s, from French langue d'oc speech of the south
of France, literally the language of 'yes,'  from oc the word used for yes in southern France, from
Latin hoc this; as opposed to langue d'o&#239;l, from the way of saying yes in the north of France
(Modern French oui); each from a different word in Latin phrase hoc ille (fecit) this he (did). The
langue d'o&#239;l has developed into standard Modern French.


HTML

1992, standing for Hypertext Markup Language.


Zuni (n.)

native people and language of New Mexico, 1834, from Spanish, from a local native word.


swearing (n.)

utterance of profane language, mid-14c., verbal noun from swear (v.).


Tupi (n.)

a native language group of South America, also Tupian.


Jordan

river in ancient Palestine; the crossing of it is symbolic of death in high-flown language as a
reference to Num. xxxiii:51. The modern nation-state dates to 1921.


Breton (n.)

native or language of Brittany, late 14c., from French form of Briton (q.v.).


Muskoegan

North American Indian language family, 1891, from Creek maskoki.


