languid (adj.)

1590s, from Middle French languide (16c.) and directly from Latin languidus faint, listless, from
languere be weak or faint, from PIE root *(s)leg- to be slack (see lax). Related: Languidly;
languidness.


lax (adj.)

c.1400, loose (in reference to bowels), from Latin laxus wide, loose, open, figuratively loose,
free, wide, from PIE root *(s)leg- to be slack, be languid (cognates: Greek legein to leave off,
stop, lagos hare, literally with drooping ears, lagnos lustful, lascivious, lagaros slack, hollow,
shrunken; Latin languere to be faint, weary, languidis faint, weak, dull, sluggish, languid). Of
rules, discipline, etc., attested from mid-15c.


remiss (adj.)

early 15c., weak, dissolved, from Latin remissus relaxed, languid; negligent, past participle of
remittere slacken, abate, let go (see remit). Meaning characterized by lack of strictness is
attested from mid-15c.; that of characterized by negligence is from mid-15c.


drowsy (adj.)

1520s, probably ultimately from Old English drusan, drusian sink, also become languid, slow, or
inactive (related to dreosan to fall), from Proto-Germanic *drus- (see dreary). But there is no
record of it in Middle English. Related: Drowsily; drowsiness.


catalectic (adj.)

1580s, in a line of verse, wanting an unaccented syllable in the last foot, from Late Latin
catalecticus, from Greek katalektikos leaving off, from kata- down (see cata-) + legein to leave
off, cease from, from PIE *(s)leg- to be slack, be languid (see lax). A complete line is said to be
acatalectic.


sulky (adj.)

quietly sullen, 1744, of uncertain origin. Connection has been suggested to obsolete, rare sulke
hard to sell (1630s) and to Old English asolcen idle, lazy, slow, past participle adjective from
aseolcan become sluggish, be weak or idle (related to besylcan be languid), from Proto-Germanic
*seklan (cognates: Middle High German selken to drop, fall). But words of similar meaning often are
held to be imitative (compare miff, mope, boudoir). Related: Sulkily; sulkiness.


slack (adj.)

Old English sl&aelig;c remiss, lax, characterized by lack of energy, sluggish, indolent, languid;
slow, gentle, easy, from Proto-Germanic *slakas (cognates: Old Saxon slak, Old Norse slakr, Old High
German slah slack, Middle Dutch lac fault, lack), from PIE root *(s)leg- to be slack (see lax).
Sense of not tight (in reference to things) is first recorded c.1300. As an adverb from late 14c.
Slack-key (1975) translates Hawaiian ki ho'alu. Slack water (n.) time when tide is not flowing is
from 1769. Slack-handed remiss is from 1670s. Slack-baked baked imperfectly, half-baked is from
1823; figuratively from 1840.


late (adj.)

Old English l&aelig;t occurring after the customary or expected time, originally slow, sluggish,
from Proto-Germanic *lata- (cognates: Old Norse latr sluggish, lazy, Middle Dutch, Old Saxon lat,
German la&szlig; idle, weary, Gothic lats weary, sluggish, lazy, latjan to hinder), from PIE *led-
slow, weary (cognates: Latin lassus faint, weary, languid, exhausted, Greek ledein to be weary),
from root *le- to let go, slacken (see let (v.)).    The sense of deceased (as in the late Mrs.
Smith) is from late 15c., from an adverbial sense of recently. Of women's menstrual periods,
attested colloquially from 1962. Related: Lateness. As an adverb, from Old English late.


