lanky (adj.)

1630s, straight and flat, used of hair, from lank + -y (2); sense of awkwardly tall and thin is
first recorded 1818. Related: Lankiness.


lank (adj.)

Old English hlanc loose and empty, slender, flaccid, from Proto-Germanic *khlankaz, perhaps from a
root meaning flexible (cognates: German lenken to bend, turn aside, Old Norse hlykkr bend, noose,
loop), from PIE root *kleng- to bend, turn (see link (n.)). Some examples may be long adj. with
unvoicing of g [Middle English Dictionary]


rat-tail (n.)

also rat's-tail, used since 16c. of conditions or devices held to resemble a rat's long, hairless
tail in some sense, including lank lock of hair (1810); end of a rope (1867); from rat (n.) + tail
(n.).


leio-

word-forming element meaning smooth, from Greek leio-, comb. form of leios smooth. E.g. leiotrichy
condition of having straight, lank hair (1924).


sheep-shank (n.)

also sheepshank, 1670s, leg of a sheep, from sheep + shank (n.). A type of something lank, slender,
or weak. Attested earlier in transferred sense of type of sailor's knot used to shorten a rope
without cutting it (1620s).


slab (n.)

late 13c., large, flat mass, of unknown origin, possibly related to Old French escopel, escalpe thin
fragment of wood, which according to Klein is possibly a Gaulish word (compare Breton scolp, Welsh
ysgolp splinter, chip). But OED rejects this on formal grounds. Meaning rectangular block of pre-
cast concrete used in building is from 1927. Slab-sided is having flat sides like slabs, hence tall
and lank (1817, American English).


twitter (v.)

late 14c., twiteren, in reference to birds, of imitative origin (compare Old High German zwizziron,
German zwitschern, Danish kvidre, Old Swedish kvitra). The noun meaning condition of tremulous
excitement is attested from 1670s. The microblogging service with the 140-character limit was
introduced in 2006. The following is considered an unrelated word of obscure origin:    TWITTER. 1.
That part of a thread that is spun too small. Yarn is said to be twined to twitters, when twined too
small, S. Hence, to twitter yarn, to spin it unequally, A. Bor. Ray.  2. It is transferred to any
person or thing that is slender or feeble. It is said of a lank delicate girl: She is a mere
twitter, S. [Jamieson, Etymological Dictionary of the Scottish Language, Edinburgh, 1808]


