lap (n.)

Old English l&aelig;ppa (plural l&aelig;ppan) skirt or flap of a garment, from Proto-Germanic *lapp-
(cognates: Old Frisian lappa, Old Saxon lappo, Middle Dutch lappe, Dutch lap, Old High German lappa,
German Lappen rag, shred, Old Norse leppr patch, rag), from PIE root *leb- be loose, hang down.
Sense of lower part of a shirt led to that of upper legs of seated person (c.1300). Used
figuratively (bosom, breast) from late 14c., as in lap of luxury, first recorded 1802. From 15c.-In
17c. the word (often in plural) was a euphemism for female pudendum, but this is not the source of
lap dance, which is first recorded 1993.To lap dance, you undress, sit your client down, order him
to stay still and fully clothed, then hover over him, making a motion that you have perfected by
watching Mister Softee ice cream dispensers. [Anthony Lane, review of Showgirls, New Yorker, Oct.
16, 1995]That this is pleasure and not torment for the client is something survivors of the late
20c. will have to explain to their youngers.


lap (v.1)

take up liquid with the tongue, from Old English lapian to lap up, drink, from Proto-Germanic
*lapajan (cognates: Old High German laffen to lick, Old Saxon lepil, Dutch lepel, German L&ouml;ffel
spoon), from PIE imitative base *lab- (cognates: Greek laptein to sip, lick, Latin lambere to lick),
indicative of licking, lapping, smacking lips. Meaning splash gently first recorded 1823, based on
similarity of sound. Related: Lapped; lapping.


lap (v.2)

to lay one part over another, early 14c., to surround (something with something else), from lap
(n.). Figurative use, to envelop (in love, sin, desire, etc.) is from mid-14c. The sense of to get a
lap ahead (of someone) on a track is from 1847, on notion of overlapping. The noun in this sense is
1670s, originally something coiled or wrapped up; meaning a turn around a track (1861) also is from
this sense. Related: Lapped; lapping; laps.


laparoscopy (n.)

1855, from -scopy + Greek lapara flank, from laparos soft, from PIE *lep- to peel; + -scopy.
Related: Laparoscopic; laparoscope.


lapdog (n.)

also lap-dog, 1640s, from lap (n.) + dog (n.); figurative sense of subservient person is by 1950.
Senator McCarthy (R-Wis) renewed his Communists-in-Government charges today and called Senator
Tydings (D-Md) the Truman administration's whimpering lap dog. [AP news story, Aug. 7, 1950]


lapel (n.)

1751 (implied in lapelled), from lap (n.) + -el, diminutive suffix. Compare lappet.


lapful (n.)

1610s, from lap (n.) + -ful.


lapidary (n.)

one skilled in working with precious stones, late 14c., from Old French lapidaire (12c.), from Latin
lapidarius stonecutter, originally an adjective of or working with stone, from lapis (genitive
lapidis) stone. Meaning a treatise on precious stones is late 14c. Related: Lapidarist.


lapidation (n.)

stoning to death, 1610s, from Latin lapidationem (nominative lapidatio), noun of action from past
participle stem of lapidare to throw stones at, from the stem of lapis stone.


lapis lazuli (n.)

early 15c., from Middle Latin lapis lazuli, literally stone of azure, from Latin lapis stone +
Medieval Latin lazuli, genitive of lazulum, from Arabic lazuward (see azure).


Laplace

in scientific phrases, a reference to French astronomer and mathematician Pierre Simon, Marquis de
Laplace (1749-1827).


Lapland

1570s, from Lapp, the Swedish name for this Finnic people (their name for themselves was Sabme),
which probably originally was an insulting coinage (compare Middle High German lappe simpleton). In
English traditionally the home of witches and wizards who had power to conjure winds and tempests.
Related: Laplander.


Lapp

1859; see Lapland.


lappet (n.)

a small flap, 1570s; earlier lobe of a body part (early 15c.), from Middle English lappe lap (see
lap (n.)) + -et, diminutive suffix.


lapse (n.)

mid-15c., elapsing of time, expiration; also temporary forfeiture of a legal right, from Middle
French laps lapse, from Latin lapsus a slipping and falling, flight (of time), falling into error,
from labi to slip, glide, fall. Meaning moral transgression, sin is c.1500; that of slip of the
memory is 1520s; that of a falling away from one's faith is from 1650s.


lapse (v.)

early 15c., said to be from lapse (n.) or from Latin lapsare to lose one's footing. Related: Lapsed;
lapses; lapsing.


laptop

also lap-top, as a type of portable computer, 1984, from lap (n.) + top (1), on model of desktop.


lapwing (n.)

Middle English lappewinke (late 14c.), lapwyngis (early 15c.), folk etymology alteration of Old
English hleapewince, probably literally leaper-winker, from hleapan to leap + wince totter, waver,
move rapidly, related to wincian to wink. Said to be so called from the manner of its flight [OED]
in reference to its irregular flapping manner of flight [Barnhart], but the lapwing also flaps on
the ground pretending to have a broken wing to lure egg-hunters away from its nest, which seems a
more logical explanation. Its Greek name was polyplagktos luring on deceitfully.


burlap (n.)

1690s, probably from Middle English borel coarse cloth, from Old French burel (see bureau); or Dutch
boeren coarse, perhaps confused with boer peasant. The second element, -lap, meant piece of cloth
(see lap (n.)).


clap (v.)

Old English cl&aelig;ppan to throb, beat, common Germanic, echoic (cognate with Old Frisian klapa to
beat, Old Norse klappa, Old High German klaphon, German klappen, Old Saxon klapunga). Meaning to
strike or knock is from c.1300. Meaning to make a sharp noise is late 14c. Of hands, to beat them
together to get attention or express joy, from late 14c. To clap (someone) on the back is from
1520s. Related: Clapped; clapping.


clap (n.1)

loud noise, c.1200, from clap (v.). Of thunder, late 14c. Meaning sudden blow is from c.1400;
meaning noise made by slapping the palms of the hands together is from 1590s.


clap (n.2)

gonorrhea, 1580s, of unknown origin, perhaps from Middle English clapper rabbit-hole, from Old
French clapoire (Modern French clapier), originally rabbit burrow (of uncertain origin), but given a
slang extension to brothel and also the name of a disease of some sort. In English originally also a
verb, to infect with clap. Related: Clap-doctor.


clapboard (n.)

1520s, partial translation of Middle Dutch klapholt (borrowed into English late 14c. as clapholt),
from klappen to fit + Low German holt wood, board (see holt). Compare German Klappholz. Originally
small boards of split oak, imported from northern Germany and cut by coopers to make barrel staves;
the meaning long, thin board used for roofing or to cover the exterior of wooden buildings is from
1640s, American English.


clapper (n.)

late 13c., agent noun from clap (v.). Meaning tongue of a bell is from late 14c. Old English had
clipur. Meaning hinged board snapped in front of a camera at the start of filming to synchronize
picture and sound is from 1940.


clapperclaw (v.)

to fight at arm's length with the hands and nails, 1590s, from clap (v.) + claw (v.). Related:
Clapperclawed; clapperclawing.


claptrap (n.)

c.1730, trick to 'catch' applause, a stage term; from clap (v.) + trap (n.). Extended sense of
cheap, showy language is from 1819; hence nonsense, rubbish.


collapsable (adj.)

1843, from collapse (v.) + -able.


collapse (v.)

1732, from Latin collapsus, past participle of collabi fall together, from com- together (see com-)
+ labi to fall, slip (see lapse (n.)). The adjective collapsed is attested from c.1600, from Latin
collapsus, and perhaps this suggested a verb. Related: Collapsing.


collapse (n.)

1801, from collapse (v.).


collapsible (adj.)

1875, alternative spelling of collapsable.


dewlap (n.)

mid-14c., dewe lappe, from lappe loose piece (Old English l&aelig;ppa), first element of unknown
origin or meaning. Originally of cattle.


dilapidate (v.)

1560s, to bring a building to ruin, from Latin dilapidatus, past participle of dilapidare to
squander, waste, originally to throw stones, scatter like stones; see dilapidation. Perhaps the
English word is a back-formation from dilapidation.


dilapidated (adj.)

in ruins, broken down, 1806, past participle adjective from dilapidate.


dilapidation (n.)

early 15c., from Late Latin dilapidationem (nominative dilapidatio) a squandering, noun of action
from past participle stem of Latin dilapidare throw away, squander, waste, literally pelt with
stones (thus ruin, destroy) or else scatter like stones, from dis- asunder (see dis-) + lapidare
throw stones at, from lapis (genitive lapidis) stone. Taken in Eng. in a more literal sense than was
usual in Latin [OED].


elapse (v.)

1640s, from Middle French elapser, from Latin elapsus, past participle of elabi slip or glide away,
escape, from ex- out, away (see ex-) + labi to slip, glide (see lapse (n.)). The noun now
corresponding to elapse is lapse. Related: Elapsed; elapsing.


flap (n.)

mid-14c., flappe a blow, slap, probably imitative of the sound of striking. Meaning something that
hangs down is first recorded 1520s. Sense of motion or noise like a bird's wing is 1774; meaning
disturbance, noisy tumult is 1916, British slang.


flap (v.)

early 14c., dash about, shake; later strike, hit; see flap (n.). Meaning to swing loosely is from
1520s. Related: Flapped; flapping.


flapdoodle (n.)

1833, originally the stuff they feed fools on [Marryat]; an arbitrary formation.


flapjack (n.)

pre-1600, from flap + jack (n.), using the personal name in its generic object sense.


flapper (n.)

forward young woman, 1921 slang, from flap (v.), but the exact connection is disputed. Perhaps from
flapper young wild-duck or partridge (1747), with reference to flapping wings while learning to fly,
of which many late 19c. examples are listed in Wright's English Dialect Dictionary (1900), including
one that defines it as A young partridge unable to fly. Applied in joke to a girl of the bread-and-
butter age.    But other suggested sources are late 19c. northern English dialectal use for teen-age
girl (on notion of one with the hair not yet put up), or an earlier meaning prostitute (1889), which
is perhaps from dialectal flap young woman of loose character (1610s). Any or all of these might
have converged in the 1920s sense. Wright also has flappy, of persons, wild, unsteady, flighty, with
the note that it was also Applied to a person's character, as 'a flappy lass,' and further on he
lists flappy sket (n.) an immoral woman.    In Britain the word took on political tones in reference
to the debate over voting rights.Flapper is the popular press catch-word for an adult woman worker,
aged twenty-one to thirty, when it is a question of giving her the vote under the same conditions as
men of the same age. [Punch, Nov. 30, 1927]


Galapagos

islands named for the tortoises (Spanish galapagos) who live there; discovered by Europeans in 1535.


infralapsarian (adj.)

1731, from infra- + Latin lapsus a fall (see lapse (n.)) + ending from unitarian, etc. In reference
to the Calvinist doctrine that god's election of some to everlasting life was consequent to his
decree to allow the Fall of man, and was thus a remedial measure. Contrasted to supralapsarian, in
reference to the belief that He always meant to consign most of mankind to eternal fire and that the
decision to create some men to be damned was his first decree. There's also a moderate sublapsarian
view. Here the decree to elect those who would believe and leave those who do not believe to
damnation also comes after the decree to allow the fall, but the decree to provide salvation for man
comes immediately after the decree to elect.


jalapeno (n.)

type of pepper, by 1957, literally of Jalapa, from Mexican Spanish Jalapa, place in Mexico, from
Aztec Xalapan, literally sand by the water, from xalli sand + atl water + -pan place.


lollapalooza (n.)

also lallapaloosa, lallapalootza, etc.; remarkable or wonderful person or thing, 1901, American
English, fanciful formation. The annual North American alternative pop music concert of the same
name dates from 1991.


malapert (adj.)

impudent, early 15c., from Old French mal apert, literally ill-skilled, from mal- badly (see mal-) +
apert skillful, variant of espert experienced, skillful, clever (from Latin expertus; see expert).
Related: Malapertly; malapertness.


malaprop (n.)

1823, from name of theatrical character Mrs. Malaprop (see malapropism). Related: Malapropian.


malapropism (n.)

1826, from Mrs. Malaprop, character in Sheridan's play The Rivals (1775), noted for her ridiculous
misuse of large words (such as contagious countries for contiguous countries), her name coined from
malapropos.


malapropos (adv.)

1660s, from French mal &agrave; propos inopportunely, inappropriately, literally badly for the
purpose, from mal (see mal-) + proposer propose (see propose).


mud-flap (n.)

1903, from mud (n.) + flap (n.).


overlap (v.)

to partially extend over, 1726, over- + lap (v.). Related: Overlapped; overlapping.


