lascivious (adj.)

mid-15c., from Middle French lascivieux or directly from Late Latin lasciviosus (used in a scolding
sense by Isidore and other early Church writers), from Latin lascivia lewdness, playfulness,
frolicsomeness, jolity, from lascivus lewd, playful, frolicsome, wanton, from PIE *las-ko-, from
*las- to be eager, wanton, or unruly (cognates: Sanskrit -lasati yearns, lasati plays, frolics,
Hittite ilaliya- to desire, covet, Greek laste harlot, Old Church Slavonic laska flattery, Slovak
laska love, Old Irish lainn greedy, Gothic lustus, Old English lust lust). Related: Lasciviously;
lasciviousness. In 17c. also with a verbal form, lasciviate.


luxurious (adj.)

c.1300, lascivious, lecherous, unchaste, from Old French luxurios lustful, lascivious (Modern French
luxurieux), from Latin luxuriosus, from luxuria (see luxury). Meaning given to luxury, voluptuous
(of persons) is from c.1600. Of things, meaning characterized by luxury is attested from c.1650.
Related: Luxuriously; luxuriousness.


wanton (n.)

one who is ill-behaved, mid-15c., especially lascivious, lewd person (1520s), from wanton (adj.).


womanly (adj.)

c.1200, of a man, wanton, lascivious; late 14c. of a woman, feminine, of qualities, proper to a
woman; from woman + -ly (1). From c.1400 of men with the sense effeminate, weak.  Related:
Womanliness.


lubric (adj.)

smooth, slippery, late 15c., also lascivious, wanton, from Middle French lubrique (15c.) or directly
from Latin lubricus slippery (see lubricant (adj.)). Related: Lubrical.


lubricous (adj.)

1530s, lascivious, from Latin lubricus slippery, smooth, from lubricus slippery (see lubricant
(adj.)). Literal meaning slippery, oily is from 1650s in English; figurative sense of shifty,
elusive is from 1640s. Also lubricious (1580s).


sultry (adj.)

1590s, oppressively hot, close and moist (of weather), ultimately from swelter + alteration of -y
(2), either as a contraction of sweltry or from obsolete verb sulter to swelter (1580s), alteration
of swelter. Figurative sense of hot with lust is attested from 1704; of women, lascivious, sensual,
arousing desire it is recorded from 1940. Related: Sultriness.


prurient (adj.)

1630s, itching, later, and now exclusively, having an itching desire (1650s), especially lascivious,
lewd, (1746), from Latin prurientem (nominative pruriens), present participle of prurire to itch; to
long for, be wanton, perhaps related to pruna glowing coals, from PIE root *preus- to freeze; burn
(see freeze (v.)). Related: Pruriently.


sensuous (adj.)

1640s, pertaining to the senses apparently coined by Milton to recover the original meaning of
sensual and avoid the lascivious connotation that the older word had acquired, but by 1870 sensuous,
too, had begun down the same path and come to mean alive to the pleasures of the senses. Rare before
Coleridge popularized it To express in one word all that appertains to the perception, considered as
passive and merely recipient .... (1814). From Latin sensus (see sense (n.)) + -ous. Related:
Sensuously; sensuousness.


stallion (n.)

mid-15c., earlier staloun (c.1300), male horse kept for breeding purposes, from Anglo-French
estaloun, Old French estalon stallion, uncastrated male horse (Modern French &#233;talon), from
Frankish *stal, cognate with Old High German stal stable, from Proto-Germanic *stalla- (see stall
(n.1)). The notion is probably of a horse kept in a stable to service mares. Transferred sense of
robustly lascivious man is attested from 1550s.


lax (adj.)

c.1400, loose (in reference to bowels), from Latin laxus wide, loose, open, figuratively loose,
free, wide, from PIE root *(s)leg- to be slack, be languid (cognates: Greek legein to leave off,
stop, lagos hare, literally with drooping ears, lagnos lustful, lascivious, lagaros slack, hollow,
shrunken; Latin languere to be faint, weary, languidis faint, weak, dull, sluggish, languid). Of
rules, discipline, etc., attested from mid-15c.


strumpet (n.)

harlot; bold, lascivious woman, early 14c., of uncertain origin. One theory connects it with Latin
stuprata, fem. past participle of stuprare have illicit sexual relations with, or Late Latin strupum
dishonor, violation. But evidence for this is wanting and others suggest Middle Dutch strompe a
stocking, or strompen to stride, to stalk (as a prostitute might a customer). The major sources
don't seem to give much preference to any of these. Weekley notes Gregory's Chronicle (c.1450) has
streppett in same sense. In 18c.-early 19c., often abbreviated as strum and also used as a verb,
which led to some odd dictionary entries:    TO STRUM: to have carnal knowledge of a woman, also to
play badly on the harpsichord or any other stringed instrument. [Capt. Francis Grose, A Classical
Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, 1785]


lust (n.)

Old English lust desire, appetite, pleasure, from Proto-Germanic *lustuz (cognates: Old Saxon, Old
Frisian, Dutch, German lust, Old Norse lyst, Gothic lustus pleasure, desire, lust), from PIE *las-
to be eager, wanton, or unruly (cognates: Latin lascivus wanton, playful, lustful; see lascivious).
In Middle English, any source of pleasure or delight, also an appetite, also a liking for a person,
also fertility (of soil). Sense of sinful sexual desire, degrading animal passion (now the main
meaning) developed in late Old English from the word's use in Bible translations (such as lusts of
the flesh to render Latin concupiscentia carnis [I John ii:16]); the cognate words in other Germanic
languages tend still to mean simply pleasure.


gay (adj.)

late 14c., full of joy, merry; light-hearted, carefree; also wanton, lewd, lascivious (late 12c. as
a surname, Philippus de Gay), from Old French gai joyful, happy; pleasant, agreeably charming;
forward, pert (12c.; compare Old Spanish gayo, Portuguese gaio, Italian gajo, probably French loan-
words). Ultimate origin disputed; perhaps from Frankish *gahi (related to Old High German wahi
pretty), though not all etymologists accept this. Meaning stately and beautiful; splendid and
showily dressed is from early 14c. The word gay by the 1890s had an overall tinge of promiscuity --
a gay house was a brothel. The suggestion of immorality in the word can be traced back at least to
the 1630s, if not to Chaucer:    But in oure bed he was so fressh and gay  Whan that he wolde han my
bele chose.    Slang meaning homosexual (adj.) begins to appear in psychological writing late 1940s,
evidently picked up from gay slang and not always easily distinguished from the older sense:
After discharge A.Z. lived for some time at home. He was not happy at the farm and went to a Western
city where he associated with a homosexual crowd, being gay, and wearing female clothes and makeup.
He always wished others would make advances to him. [Rorschach Research Exchange and Journal of
Projective Techniques, 1947, p.240]    The association with (male) homosexuality likely got a boost
from the term gay cat, used as far back as 1893 in American English for young hobo, one who is new
on the road, also one who sometimes does jobs.    A Gay Cat, said he, is a loafing laborer, who
works maybe a week, gets his wages and vagabonds about hunting for another 'pick and shovel' job. Do
you want to know where they got their monica (nickname) 'Gay Cat'? See, Kid, cats sneak about and
scratch immediately after chumming with you and then get gay (fresh). That's why we call them 'Gay
Cats'. [Leon Ray Livingston (America's Most Celebrated Tramp), Life and Adventures of A-no. 1, 1910]
Quoting a tramp named Frenchy, who might not have known the origin. Gay cats were severely and
cruelly abused by real tramps and bums, who considered them an inferior order of beings who begs of
and otherwise preys upon the bum -- as it were a jackal following up the king of beasts [Prof. John
J. McCook, Tramps, in The Public Treatment of Pauperism, 1893], but some accounts report certain
older tramps would dominate a gay cat and employ him as a sort of slave. In Sociology and Social
Research (1932-33) a paragraph on the gay cat phenomenon notes, Homosexual practices are more common
than rare in this group, and gey cat homosexual boy is attested in N. Erskine's 1933 dictionary of
Underworld &amp; Prison Slang (gey is a Scottish variant of gay).    The Dictionary of American
Slang reports that gay (adj.) was used by homosexuals, among themselves, in this sense since at
least 1920. Rawson [Wicked Words] notes a male prostitute using gay in reference to male homosexuals
(but also to female prostitutes) in London's notorious Cleveland Street Scandal of 1889. Ayto [20th
Century Words] calls attention to the ambiguous use of the word in the 1868 song The Gay Young Clerk
in the Dry Goods Store, by U.S. female impersonator Will S. Hays, but the word evidently was not
popularly felt in this sense by wider society until the 1950s at the earliest.    Gay (or gai) is
now widely used in French, Dutch, Danish, Japanese, Swedish, and Catalan with the same sense as the
English. It is coming into use in Germany and among the English-speaking upper classes of many
cosmopolitan areas in other countries. [John Boswell, Christianity, Social Tolerance, and
Homosexuality, 1980]   Gay as a noun meaning a (usually male) homosexual is attested from 1971; in
Middle English it meant excellent person, noble lady, gallant knight, also something gay or bright;
an ornament or badge (c.1400). As a slang word meaning bad, inferior, undesirable, from 2000.


