latch (n.)

a fastening for a door, etc., late 13c., probably from latch (v.).


latchkey

also latch-key, 1825, a key to draw back the latch of a door, from latch (n.) + key (n.1). Latchkey
child first recorded 1944, American English, in reference to children who come home from school
while both parents are at work.


latch (v.)

Old English l&aelig;ccan to grasp or seize, from Proto-Germanic *lakkijanan. Not found in other
Germanic languages; probably from PIE *(s)lagw- to seize (see analemma). In its original sense the
verb was paralleled in Middle English and then replaced by French import catch (v.). Meaning to
fasten with a latch is mid-15c. Related: Latched; latching.


locket (n.)

mid-14c., iron cross-bar of a window, from Old French loquet door-handle, bolt, latch, diminutive of
loc lock, latch, from Frankish or some other Germanic source (compare Old Norse lok fastening, lock;
see lock (n.1)). Meaning ornamental case with hinged cover (containing a lock of hair, miniature
portrait, etc.) first recorded 1670s.


caught

past tense and past participle of catch (v.), attested from 14c., predominant after c.1800,
replacing earlier catched. A rare instance of English strong verb with a French origin. This might
have been by influence of Middle English lacchen (see latch (v.)), which also then meant to catch
and was a synonym of catch (as their noun forms remain), and which then had past tense forms lahte,
lauhte, laught. The influence happened before latch switched to its modern weak conjugation.


haggaday (n.)

mid-14c., a kind of door latch, and said to be still the name for rings for raising thumb-latches in
the north of England, appears to be what it looks like: what you say when you open the door (have
good day, as in the 1414 record of them as hafgooddays).


letch (n.)

craving, longing, 1796, perhaps a back-formation from lecher, or from a figurative use of latch (v.)
in a secondary sense of grasp, grasp on to.


catch (n.)

late 14c., device to hold a latch of a door, also a trap; also a fishing vessel, from catch (v.).
Meaning action of catching attested from 1570s. Meaning that which is caught or worth catching
(later especially of spouses) is from 1590s. Sense of hidden cost, qualification, etc. is slang
first recorded 1855 in P.T. Barnum.


potlatch (n.)

1845, a gift, from Chinook jargon pot-latch, a gift, from Nootka (Wakashan) patshatl giving, gift.
Later (1865) in sense ceremony in which gifts are exchanged.


unlatch (v.)

1640s, from un- (2) reverse, opposite of + latch (v.).


clique (n.)

1711, a party of persons; a small set, especially one associating for exclusivity, from obsolete
French clique, originally (14c.) a sharp noise, also latch, bolt of a door, from Old French cliquer
click, clatter, crackle, clink, 13c., echoic. Apparently this word was at one time treated in French
as the equivalent of claque (q.v.) and partook of that word's theatrical sense.


accentuate (v.)

1731, from Medieval Latin accentuatus, past participle of accentuare to accent, from Latin accentus
(see accent (n.)). Originally to pronounce with an accent; meaning emphasize is recorded from 1865.
You've got to accentuate the positive  Eliminate the negative  Latch on to the affirmative  Don't
mess with Mister In-Between  [Ac-Cent-Tchu-Ate the Positive, 1944, music by Harold Arlen, lyrics by
Johnny Mercer]    Related: Accentuated; accentuating.


cling (v.)

Old English clingan hold fast, adhere closely; congeal, shrivel (strong verb, past tense clang, past
participle clungen), from Proto-Germanic *klingg- (cognates: Danish klynge to cluster; Old High
German klinga narrow gorge; Old Norse klengjask press onward; Danish klinke, Dutch klinken to
clench; German Klinke latch).    The main sense shifted in Middle English to adhere to (something
else), stick together. Of persons in embrace, c.1600. Figuratively (to hopes, outmoded ideas, etc.),
from 1580s. Of clothes from 1792. Related: Clung; clinging.


clitoris (n.)

erectile organ of female mammals, 1610s, coined in Modern Latin from Late Greek kleitoris, a
diminutive, but the exact sense intended by the coiners is uncertain. Perhaps from Greek kleiein to
sheathe, also to shut, in reference to its being covered by the labia minora. The related Greek noun
form kleis has a second meaning of a key, a latch or hook (to close a door); see close (v.), and
compare slot (n.2).    Alternatively, perhaps related to Greek kleitys, a variant of klitys side of
a hill, itself related to klinein to slope, from the same root as climax (see lean (v.)), and with a
sense of little hill. Some ancient medical sources give a supposed Greek verb kleitoriazein to touch
or titillate lasciviously, to tickle (compare German slang der Kitzler clitoris, literally the
tickler), but the verb is likely from the anatomy in this case.    The anatomist Mateo Renaldo
Colombo (1516-1559), professor at Padua, claimed to have discovered it (De re anatomica, 1559, p.
243). He called it amor Veneris, vel dulcedo the love or sweetness of Venus. It had been known
earlier to women.


