latent (adj.)

mid-15c., concealed, secret, from Latin latentem (nominative latens) lying hid, secret, unknown,
present participle of latere to lie hidden, from PIE *laidh-, from root *la- to be hidden (cognates:
Greek lethe forgetfulness, oblivion, Old Church Slavonic lajati to lie in wait for). Meaning dormant
is from 1680s.


latescent (adj.)

tending to become latent, 1836, from Latin latescentem (nominative latescens), present participle of
latescere to hide oneself, be hidden, inchoative of latere (see latent).


latency (n.)

1630s, condition of being concealed, from latent + -cy. Meaning delay between stimulus and response
is from 1882; computer sense (latency time) is from 1954.


development (n.)

1756, an unfolding; see develop + -ment. Of property, with the sense bringing out the latent
possibilities, from 1885 (Pickering's glossary of Americanisms, 1816, has betterments The
improvements made on new lands, by cultivation, and the erection of buildings, &amp;c.;). Meaning
state of economic advancement is from 1902. Meaning advancement through progressive stages is 1836.


Alethea

fem. proper name, from Greek aletheia truth, truthfulness, from alethes true, literally not
concealing, from privative prefix a- not (see a- (3)) + lethe forgetfulness, oblivion (see latent).


lanthanum (n.)

metallic rare earth element, 1841, coined in Modern Latin by Swedish chemist and mineralogist Carl
Gustav Mosander (1797-1858), who discovered it in 1839, from Greek lanthanein to lie hidden, escape
notice, from PIE root *ladh- to be hidden (see latent). So called because the element was concealed
in rare minerals.


Lethe

river of Hades (whose water when drunk caused forgetfulness of the past), from Greek lethe,
literally forgetfulness, oblivion, related to lethargos forgetful, lathre secretly, by stealth,
lathrios stealthy, lanthanein to be hidden. Cognate with Latin latere to be hidden (see latent).
Related: Lethean.


lethargy (n.)

late 14c., litarge, from Old French litargie or directly from Medieval Latin litargia, from Late
Latin lethargia, from Greek lethargia forgetfulness, from lethargos forgetful, originally inactive
through forgetfulness, from lethe forgetfulness (see latent) + argos idle (see argon). The form with
-th- is from 1590s in English.


quarantine (n.)

1520s, period of 40 days in which a widow has the right to remain in her dead husband's house.
Earlier quarentyne (15c.), desert in which Christ fasted for 40 days, from Latin quadraginta forty,
related to quattuor four (see four).    Sense of period a ship suspected of carrying disease is kept
in isolation is 1660s, from Italian quarantina giorni, literally space of forty days, from quaranta
forty, from Latin quadraginta. So called from the Venetian custom of keeping ships from plague-
stricken countries waiting off its port for 40 days (first enforced 1377) to assure that no latent
cases were aboard. The extended sense of any period of forced isolation is from 1670s.


