latitude (n.)

late 14c., breadth, from Old French latitude (13c.) and directly from Latin latitudo breadth, width,
extent, size, from latus wide, from PIE root *stele- to spread (cognates: Old Church Slavonic steljo
to spread out, Armenian lain broad). Geographical sense also is from late 14c., literally breadth of
a map of the known world. Figurative sense of allowable degree of variation is early 15c. Related:
Latitudinal.


latitudinarian (adj.)

1660s, characterized by broad-mindedness, especially in reference to Episcopal clergymen indifferent
to doctrinal details; from Latin latitudin-, from latitude in its meaning freedom from narrow
restrictions (c.1600). Related: Latitudinarianism.


longitude (n.)

late 14c., length, from Latin longitudo length, duration, from longus (see long (adj.)). For
origins, see latitude.


sextant (n.)

instrument for determining latitude, 1620s, from Modern Latin sextans, said to have been coined
c.1600 by Danish astronomer Tycho Brahe, from Latin sextans a sixth, from sex six (see six). So
called because the sextans has a graduated arc equal to a sixth part of a circle.


Arctic Circle

1550s, in reference to a celestial circle, a line around the sky which, in any location, bounds the
stars which   are ever-visible from that latitude (in the Northern Hemisphere, this is focused on
the celestial north pole); the concept goes back to the ancient Greeks, for whom this set of
constellations included most prominently the two bears (arktoi), hence the name for the circle (see
arctic). Of Earth, the circle 66 degrees 32 minutes north of the equator, marking the southern
extremity of the polar day, it is recorded from 1620s.


forties (n.)

1843 as the years of someone's life between 40 and 49; from 1840 as the fifth decade of years in a
given century. See forty. Also a designation applied in various places and times to certain
oligarchies, ruling classes, or governing bodies.    It is well known that society in the island
[Guernsey] is, or perhaps we ought to say, for many years was, divided into two sets, called
respectively the Sixties and the Forties, the former composed of the old families and those allied
to them, the latter of families of newly-acquired wealth and position. [The Dublin Review, October
1877]   Roaring Forties are rough parts of the ocean between 40 and 50 degrees latitude.


platitude (n.)

1812, dullness, from French platitude flatness, vapidness (late 17c.), from Old French plat flat
(see plateau (n.)); formed on analogy of latitude, etc. Meaning a flat, dull, or commonplace remark
is recorded from 1815. Related: Platitudinous. Hence platitudinarian (n.), 1855; platitudinize
(1867).


dilate (v.)

late 14c., from Old French dilater, from Late Latin dilatare make wider, enlarge, from dis- apart
(see dis-) + latus wide (see latitude). Related: Dilated; dilating.


dog days (n.)

1530s, from Latin dies caniculares, from Greek; so called because they occur around the time of the
heliacal rising of Sirius, the Dog Star (kyon seirios). Noted as the hottest and most unwholesome
time of the year; usually July 3 to Aug. 11, but variously calculated, depending on latitude and on
whether the greater Dog-star (Sirius) or the lesser one (Procyon) is reckoned.    The heliacal
rising of Sirius has shifted down the calendar with the precession of the equinoxes; in ancient
Egypt c.3000 B.C.E. it coincided with the summer solstice, which also was the new year and the
beginning of the inundation of the Nile. The dog association apparently began here (the star's
hieroglyph was a dog), but the reasons for it are obscure.


build (v.)

late Old English byldan construct a house, verb form of bold house, from Proto-Germanic *buthlam
(cognates: Old Saxon bodl, Old Frisian bodel building, house), from PIE *bhu- to dwell, from root
*bheue- to be, exist, grow (see be). Rare in Old English; in Middle English it won out over more
common Old English timbran (see timber). Modern spelling is unexplained. Figurative use from mid-
15c. Of physical things other than buildings from late 16c. Related: Builded (archaic); built;
building.    In the United States, this verb is used with much more latitude than in England. There,
as Fennimore Cooper puts it, everything is BUILT. The priest BUILDS up a flock; the speculator a
fortune; the lawyer a reputation; the landlord a town; and the tailor, as in England, BUILDS up a
suit of clothes. A fire is BUILT instead of made, and the expression is even extended to
individuals, to be BUILT being used with the meaning of formed. [Farmer, Slang and Its Analogues,
1890]


Charles&#039;s Wain (n.)

Old English Carles w&aelig;gn, a star-group associated in medieval times with Charlemagne, but
originally with the nearby bright star Arcturus, which is linked by folk etymology to Latin Arturus
Arthur. Which places the seven-star asterism at the crux of the legendary association (or confusion)
of Arthur and Charlemagne. Evidence from Dutch (cited in Grimm, Teutonic Mythology) suggests that it
might originally have been Woden's wagon. More recent names for it are the Plough (by 15c., chiefly
British) and the Dipper (19c., chiefly American).    The seven brights stars in the modern
constellation Ursa Major have borne a dual identity in Western history at least since Homer's time,
being seen as both a wagon and a bear: as in Latin plaustrum freight-wagon, ox cart and arctos bear,
both used of the seven-star pattern, as were equivalent Greek amaxa (Attic hamaxa) and arktos.
The identification with a wagon is easy to see, with four stars as the body and three as the pole.
The identification with a bear is more difficult, as the figure has a tail longer than its body. As
Allen writes, The conformation of the seven stars in no way resembles the animal,--indeed the
contrary .... But he suggests the identification may have arisen from Aristotle's idea that its
prototype was the only creature that dared invade the frozen north. The seven stars never were below
the horizon in the latitude of the Mediterranean in Homeric and classical times (though not today,
due to precession of the equinoxes). See also Arctic for the identification of the bear and the
north in classical times.     A variety of French and English sources from the early colonial period
independently note that many native North American tribes in the northeast had long seen the seven-
star group as a bear tracked by three hunters (or a hunter and his two dogs).    Among the Teutonic
peoples, it seems to have been only a wagon, not a bear. A 10c. Anglo-Saxon astronomy manual uses
the Greek-derived Aretos, but mentions that the unlearned call it Charles's Wain:    Arheton hatte
an tungol on nor&eth; d&aelig;le, se haef&eth; seofon steorran, &amp; is for &eth;i o&thorn;rum
naman ge-hatan septemtrio, &thorn;one hata&eth; l&aelig;wede meon carles-w&aelig;n. [Anglo-Saxon
Manual of Astronomy]    [Septemtrio, the seven oxen, was another Roman name.] The star picture was
not surely identified as a bear in English before late 14c.    The unlearned of today are corrected
that the seven stars are not the Great Bear but form only a part of that large constellation. But
those who applied the name Bear apparently did so originally only to these seven stars, and from
Homer's time down to Thales, the Bear meant just the seven stars. From Rome to Anglo-Saxon England
to Arabia to India, ancient astronomy texts mention a supposed duplicate constellation to the
northern bear in the Southern Hemisphere, never visible from the north. This perhaps is based on
sailors' tales of the Southern Cross.


