lauds (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French; morning Church service in which psalms of praise to God (Psalms 148-150)
are sung (see laud).


laudation (n.)

late 15c., from Latin laudationem (nominative laudatio) a praising, commendation, noun of action
from past participle stem of laudare to praise (see laud).


laudatory (adj.)

1550s, from Middle French laudatoire and directly from Late Latin laudatorius, from Latin laudare
(see laud).


laudable (adj.)

early 15c., from Old French laudable and directly from Latin laudabilis praiseworthy, from laudare
(see laud). Related: Laudably.


laud (v.)

late 14c., from Old French lauder praise, extol, from Latin laudare to praise, commend, honor,
extol, eulogize, from laus (genitive laudis) praise, fame glory. Probably cognate with Old English
leo&eth; song, poem, hymn, from Proto-Germanic *leuthan (cognates: Old Norse ljo&eth; strophe,
German Lied song, Gothic liu&thorn;on to praise), and from an echoic PIE root *leu-. Related:
Lauded; lauding.


cum laude

1872, originally at Harvard, from Medieval Latin, literally with praise, from Latin cum with +
laude, ablative of laus (genitive laudis) praise (see laud). Probably from earlier use (in Latin) at
Heidelberg and other German universities.


lute (n.)

stringed musical instrument, late 13c., from Old French lut, leut, from Old Proven&ccedil;al laut,
from Arabic al-'ud, the Arabian lute, literally the wood (source of Spanish laud, Portuguese alaude,
Italian liuto), where al is the definite article. A player is a lutist (1620s) or a lutanist
(c.1600, from Medieval Latin hybrid lutanista).


lied (n.)

German romantic song, 1852, from German Lied, literally song, from Middle High German liet, from Old
High German liod, from Proto-Germanic *leuthan (see laud). Hence Liederkranz, in reference to German
singing societies, literally garland of songs.


volkslied (n.)

folk-song, 1858, from German Volkslied, from Volk people (see folk (n.)) + Lied song (see laud
(v.)).


praise (v.)

c.1300, to laud, commend, flatter, from Old French preisier, variant of prisier to praise, value,
from Late Latin preciare, earlier pretiare (see price (n.)). Replaced Old English lof, hre&thorn;.
Specifically with God as an object from late 14c. Related: Praised; praising. Now a verb in most
Germanic languages (German preis, Danish pris, etc.), but only in English is it differentiated in
form from cognate price.


allow (v.)

early 14c., allouen, to commend, praise; approve of, be pleased with; appreciate the value of; also,
take into account or give credit for, also, in law and philosophy, recognize, admit as valid (a
privilege, an excuse, a statement, etc.). From late 14c. as sanction or permit; condone; in business
use from early 15c.    The Middle English word is from Anglo-French alouer, Old French aloer,
alloiier (13c.) allot, apportion, bestow, assign, from Latin allocare (see allocate). This word in
Old French was confused and ultimately merged with aloer; alloer to praise, commend, from Latin
allaudare, adlaudare, compound of ad- to (see ad-) + laudare to praise (see laud). From the first
word came the sense preserved in allowance as money granted; from the second came its meaning
permission based on approval.    Between the two primary significations there naturally arose a
variety of uses blending them in the general idea of assign with approval, grant, concede a thing
claimed or urged, admit a thing offered, permit, etc., etc. [OED].    Related: Allowed; allowing.


