laughing (n.)

mid-14c., verbal noun from laugh (v.). Laughing matter (usually with negative) is from 1560s.
Nitrous oxide has been called laughing gas since 1842 (for its exhilarating effects). Davy,
experimenting with the gas, discovered these as far back as 1779: When I took the bag from my mouth,
I immediately laughed. The laughter was involuntary, but highly pleasurable, accompanied by a thrill
all through me.


laughing-stock (n.)

also laughingstock; 1510s, formed by analogy with whipping-stock whipping post, later also object of
frequent whipping (but that word is not attested in writing in this sense until 1670s). See laughing
+ stock (n.1).


lol

by 1993, computer chat abbreviation of laughing out loud.


rofl

by 1993, online chat abbreviation for rolling on the floor laughing.


LMAO

by 1997, online abbreviation of laughing my ass off. Related: LMFAO (by 2000).


makeshift

also make-shift, 1560s, as a noun, shifty person, rogue, from make (v.) + shift (v.). Adjectival
sense of substitute is first recorded 1680s. Compare make-sport a laughing stock (1610s).


ridicule (n.)

1670s, absurd thing; 1680s, words or actions meant to invoke ridicule, from French ridicule, noun
use of adjective (15c.), or from Latin ridiculum laughing matter, joke, from noun use of neuter of
ridiculus (see ridiculous).    He who brings ridicule to bear against truth, finds in his hand a
blade without a hilt. [Walter Savage Landor, Imaginary Conversations]


Cheshire

1086, Cestre Scire, from Chester + scir district (see shire). Cheshire cat and its proverbial grin
are attested from 1770, but the signification is obscure.    I made a pun the other day, and palmed
it upon Holcroft, who grinned like a Cheshire cat. (Why do cats grin in Cheshire?--Because it was
once a county palatine, and the cats cannot help laughing whenever they think of it, though I see no
great joke in it.) I said that Holcroft, on being asked who were the best dramatic writers of the
day, replied, HOOK AND I. Mr Hook is author of several pieces, Tekeli, &amp;c.; You know what hooks
and eyes are, don't you? They are what little boys do up their breeches with. [Charles Lamb, letter
to Thomas Manning, Feb. 26, 1808]


stitch (n.)

Old English stice a prick, puncture, sting, stab, from Proto-Germanic *stikiz (cognates: Old Frisian
steke, Old High German stih, German Stich a pricking, prick, sting, stab), from PIE *stig-i-, from
root *steig- to stick; pointed (see stick (v.)). The sense of sudden, stabbing pain in the side was
in late Old English.    Senses in sewing and shoemaking first recorded late 13c.; meaning bit of
clothing one is (or isn't) wearing is from c.1500. Meaning a stroke of work (of any kind) is
attested from 1580s. Surgical sense first recorded 1520s. Sense of amusing person or thing is 1968,
from notion of laughing so much one gets stitches of pain (cognates: verbal expression to have
(someone) in stitches, 1935).


laugh (v.)

late 14c., from Old English (Anglian) hl&aelig;hhan, earlier hlihhan, from Proto-Germanic *klakhjan
(cognates: Old Norse hl&aelig;ja, Danish le, Old Frisian hlakkia, Old Saxon hlahhian, Middle Dutch
and Dutch lachen, Old High German hlahhan, German lachen, Gothic hlahjan), from PIE *kleg-, of
imitative origin (compare Latin cachinnare to laugh aloud, Sanskrit kakhati laughs, Old Church
Slavonic chochotati laugh, Lithuanian klageti to cackle, Greek kakhazein). Originally with a hard
-gh- sound, as in Scottish loch; the spelling remained after the pronunciation shifted to -f.    If
I coveted nowe to avenge the injuries that you have done me, I myght laughe in my slyve. [John Daus,
Sleidanes Commentaries, 1560]    Related: Laughed; laughing.


tun (n.)

large cask, especially one for wine, ale, or beer, Old English tunne tun, cask, barrel, a general
North Sea Germanic word (compare Old Frisian tunne, Middle Dutch tonne, Old High German tunna,
German tonne), also found in Medieval Latin tunna (9c.) and Old French tonne (diminutive tonneau);
perhaps from a Celtic source (compare Middle Irish, Gaelic tunna, Old Irish toun hide, skin). Tun-
dish (late 14c.) was a funnel made to fit into the bung of a tun.    -- That? said Stephen. -- Is
that called a funnel? Is it not a tundish? --  -- What is a tundish? --  --That. The ... the funnel.
--  --Is that called a tundish in Ireland? --  asked the dean. -- I never heard the word in my life.
--  -- It is called a tundish in Lower Drumcondra -- said Stephen, laughing -- where they speak the
best English.--  -- A tundish -- said the dean reflectively. -- That is a most interesting word I
must look that word up. Upon my word I must. --  His courtesy of manner rang a little false, and
Stephen looked at the English convert with the same eyes as the elder brother in the parable may
have turned on the prodigal. [Joyce, Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man]


