leash (v.)

to attach to or with a leash, 1590s, from leash (n.). Related: Leashed; leashing.


leash (n.)

thong for holding a dog or hound, c.1300, from Old French laisse hound's leash, from laissier
loosen, from Latin laxare, from laxus loose (see lax). Figurative sense attested from early 15c. The
meaning a set of three is from early 14c., originally in sporting language.


varvel (n.)

metal ring attached to the end of a hawk's jess and connecting it to the leash, 1530s, from Old
French vervelle falcon's leg fetter (14c.), from Vulgar Latin derivation of Latin vertibulum joint.
Related: Varvels.


unleash (v.)

1670s, from un- (2) reverse, opposite of + leash (v.). Related: Unleashed; unleashing.


loop (v.)

to form a loop, c.1400, draw (a leash through a ring), from loop (n.). Related: Looped; looping.
Slang looped drunk is from 1934. Loop the loop (1900) originally was in reference to roller-coasters
at amusement parks.    Loop-the-Loop is the name of a new entertainment which goes further in the
way of tempting Providence than anything yet invented. The Loop is an immense circle of track in the
air. A car on a mimic railway shoots down a very steep incline, and is impelled around the inner
side of this loop. ... The authorities at Coney Island are said to have prohibited looping-the-loop
because women break their corset strings in their efforts to catch their breath as they sweep down
the incline, and moreover, a young man is reported to have ruptured a blood vessel in his liver.
[Philadelphia Medical Journal, Aug. 10, 1901]


let (v.)

Old English l&aelig;tan to allow to remain; let go, leave, depart from; leave undone; to allow;
bequeath, also to rent (class VII strong verb; past tense let, past participle l&aelig;ten), from
Proto-Germanic *letan (cognates: Old Saxon latan, Old Frisian leta, Dutch laten, German lassen,
Gothic letan to leave, let), from PIE *le- (2) to let go, slacken (cognates: Latin lassus faint,
weary, Lithuanian leisti to let, to let loose; see lenient). If that derivation is correct, the
primary sense would be let go through weariness, neglect.    Of blood, from late Old English. To let
(something) slip originally (1520s) was a reference to hounds on a leash; figurative use from 1540s.
To let (someone) off allow to go unpunished is from 1814. To let on reveal, divulge is from 1725; to
let up cease, stop is from 1787. Let alone not to mention is from 1812.


