leaven (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French levain leaven, sourdough (12c.), from Latin levamen alleviation,
mitigation, but used in Vulgar Latin in its literal sense of a means of lifting, something that
raises, from levare to raise (see lever). Figurative use from late 14c.


leaven (v.)

c.1400, from leaven (n.). Related: Leavened; leavening.


sourdough (n.)

early 14c., leavened bread, also leaven (late 14c.), from sour (adj.) + dough. Meaning fermented
dough is from 1868. The meaning Arctic prospector or pioneer is from 1898 Yukon gold rush, from the
practice of saving a lump of fermented dough as leaven for raising bread baked during the winter.


ferment (v.)

late 14c., from Old French fermenter (13c.) and directly from Latin fermentare to leaven, ferment,
from fermentum substance causing fermentation, leaven, from root of fervere to boil, seethe (see
brew). Figurative use from 1650s. Related: Fermented; fermenting.


unleavened (adj.)

1520s, from un- (1) not + past participle of leaven (v.).


kvass (n.)

Russian fermented drink made from rye or barley, 1550s, from Russian kvas leaven, from Old Church
Slavonic kvasu yeast, cognate with Latin caseus cheese (see cheese (n.1)).


enzyme (n.)

1881, as a biochemical term, from German Enzym, coined 1878 by German physiologist Wilhelm
K&uuml;hne (1837-1900), from Modern Greek enzymos leavened, from en in (see en- (2)) + zyme leaven
(see zymurgy).


barm (n.)

Old English beorma yeast, leaven, also head of a beer, from Proto-Germanic *bermon- (cognates: Dutch
berm, Middle Low German barm), from PIE root *bher- (4) to cook, bake (cognates: Latin fermentum
substance causing fermentation, Sanskrit bhurati moves convulsively, quivers, Middle Irish berbaim I
boil, seethe; see brew (v.)).


juice (n.)

c.1300, liquid extract obtained by boiling herbs, from Old French jus juice, sap, liquid (13c.),
from Latin ius broth, sauce, juice, from PIE root *yeue- to blend, mix food (cognates: Sanskrit yus-
broth, Greek zyme a leaven, Old Church Slavonic jucha broth, soup, Lithuanian juse fish soup).
Meaning liquor is from 1828; that of electricity is first recorded 1896.


zymurgy (n.)

branch of chemistry which deals with wine-making and brewing, 1868, from Greek zymo-, comb. form of
zyme a leaven (from PIE root *yeue-; see juice) + -ourgia a working, from ergon work (see organ).
The last word in many standard English dictionaries (and this one); but Century Dictionary ends with
Zyxomma (A genus of Indian dragon-flies) and in the OED [2nd ed.] the last word is zyxt, an obsolete
Kentish form of the second person singular of see (v.).    At the dictionary's letter A  Mr. Brandt
is young and gay  But when at last he reaches zed  He's in his wheelchair, nearly dead  [Einar
Haugen]


beer (n.)

Old English beor strong drink, beer, mead, a word of much-disputed and ambiguous origin, cognate
with Old Frisian biar, Middle Dutch and Dutch bier, Old High German bior, German Bier.    Probably a
6c. West Germanic monastic borrowing of Vulgar Latin biber a drink, beverage (from Latin infinitive
bibere to drink; see imbibe). Another suggestion is that it comes from Proto-Germanic *beuwoz-, from
*beuwo- barley. The native Germanic word for the beverage was the one that yielded ale (q.v.).
Beer was a common drink among most of the European peoples, as well as in Egypt and Mesopotamia, but
was known to the Greeks and Romans only as an exotic product. [Buck]    They did have words for it,
however. Greek brytos, used in reference to Thracian or Phrygian brews, was related to Old English
breowan brew; Latin zythum is from Greek zythos, first used of Egyptian beer and treated as an
Egyptian word but perhaps truly Greek and related to zyme leaven. French bi&egrave;re is from
Germanic. Spanish cerveza is from Latin cervesia beer, perhaps related to Latin cremor thick broth.
Old Church Slavonic pivo, source of the general Slavic word for beer, is originally a drink (compare
Old Church Slavonic piti drink). French bi&egrave;re is a 16c. borrowing from German. U.S. slang
beer goggles, through which every potential romantic partner looks desirable, is from 1986.


cheese (n.1)

Old English cyse (West Saxon), cese (Anglian) cheese, from West Germanic *kasjus (cognates: Old
Saxon kasi, Old High German chasi, German K&auml;se, Middle Dutch case, Dutch kaas), from Latin
caseus cheese (source of Italian cacio, Spanish queso, Irish caise, Welsh caws).    Of unknown
origin; perhaps from a PIE root *kwat- to ferment, become sour (cognates: Prakrit chasi buttermilk;
Old Church Slavonic kvasu leaven; fermented drink, kyselu sour, -kyseti to turn sour; Czech kysati
to turn sour, rot; Sanskrit kvathati boils, seethes; Gothic hwa&thorn;jan foam). Also compare
fromage. Old Norse ostr, Danish ost, Swedish ost are related to Latin ius broth, sauce, juice.
Earliest references would be to compressed curds of milk used as food; pressed or molded cheeses
with rinds are 14c. Transferred to other cheese-like substances by 1530s. As a photographer's word
to make subjects hold a smile, it is attested from 1930, but in a reminiscence of schoolboy days,
which suggests an earlier use. Probably for the forced smile involved in making the -ee- sound.
Green cheese is that newly made; the notion that the moon is made of green cheese as a type of a
ridiculous assertion is from 1520s. To make cheeses was a schoolgirls' amusement (1835) of wheeling
rapidly so one's petticoats blew out in a circle then dropping down so they came to rest inflated
and resembling a wheel of cheese; hence, used figuratively for a deep curtsey.


