leave-taking (n.)

late 14c., from leave (n.) + present participle of take (v.).


so long (interj.)

parting salutation, 1860, of unknown origin, perhaps from a German idiom (compare German parting
salutation adieu so lange, the full sense of which probably is something like farewell, whilst
(we're apart)); or perhaps from Hebrew shalom (via Yiddish sholom). Some have noted a similarity to
Scandinavian leave-taking phrases, such as Norwegian Adj&oslash; s&#229; lenge, Farvel s&#229;
lenge, Mor'n s&#229; lenge, literally bye so long, farewell so long, morning so long; and Swedish
Hej s&#229; l&auml;nge good-bye for now, with s&#229; l&auml;nge for now attested since 1850
according to Swedish sources. Most etymology sources seem to lean toward the German origin.
Earlier guesses that it was a sailors' corruption of a South Pacific form of Arabic salaam are not
now regarded as convincing. Dictionary of American Slang also adds to the list of candidates Irish
sl&aacute;n safe, said to be used as a salutation in parting. The phrase seems to have turned up
simultaneously in America, Britain, and perhaps Canada, originally among lower classes. First
attested use is in title and text of the last poem in Whitman's Leaves of Grass in the 1860 edition.
An unknown sphere, more real than I dream'd, more direct, darts awakening rays about me -- So long!
Remember my words -- I may again return,   I love you -- I depart from materials;   I am as one
disembodied, triumphant, dead.   Whitman's friend and fan William Sloane Kennedy wrote in 1923:
The salutation of parting -- 'So long!' -- was, I believe, until recent years, unintelligible to the
majority of persons in America, especially in the interior, and to members of the middle and
professional classes. I had never heard of it until I read it in Leaves of Grass, but since then
have quite often heard it used by the laboring class and other classes in New England cities. Walt
wrote to me, defining 'so long' thus: A salutation of departure, greatly used among sailors, sports,
&amp; prostitutes -- the sense of it is 'Till we meet again,' -- conveying an inference that somehow
they will doubtless so meet, sooner or later. ... It is evidently about equivalent to our 'See you
later.' The phrase is reported as used by farm laborers near Banff, Scotland. In Canada it is
frequently heard; 'and its use is not entirely confined to the vulgar.' It is in common use among
the working classes of Liverpool and among sailors at Newcastle-upon-Tyne, and in Dorsetshire. ...
The London Globe suggests that the expression is derived from the Norwegian 'Saa laenge,' a common
form of 'farewell,' au revoir. If so, the phrase was picked up from the Norwegians in America, where
'So long' first was heard. The expression is now (1923) often used by the literary and artistic
classes.


powder (n.)

c.1300, ash, cinders; dust of the earth; early 14c., pulverized substance; mid-14c., medicinal
powder; late 14c. as gunpowder, from Old French poudre dust, powder; ashes; powdered substance
(13c.), earlier pouldre (11c.), from Latin pulverem (nominative pulvis) dust (see pollen).
Specialized sense gunpowder is from late 14c. In the sense powdered cosmetic, it is recorded from
1570s.    In figurative sense, powder keg is first attested 1855. Powder room, euphemistic for
women's lavatory, is attested from 1936. Earlier it meant place where gunpowder is stored on a
warship (1620s). Powder horn attested by 1530s. Powder puff first recorded 1704; as a symbol of
femaleness or effeminacy, in use from at least 1930s.    Phrase take a powder scram, vanish, is from
1920; it was a common phrase as a doctor's instruction, so perhaps from the notion of taking a
laxative medicine or a sleeping powder, with the result that one has to leave in a hurry (or, on
another guess, from a magician's magical powder, which made things disappear). Powder blue (1650s)
was smelt used in laundering; as a color name from 1894.


congee (n.)

early 14c., from Old French congi&eacute; permission, leave of absence, dismissal, ceremonial leave-
taking (Modern French cong&eacute;), from Latin commeatus passage, going to and fro, hence leave of
absence, from commeare, from com- with, together (see com-) + meare to go, pass (see mutable).
Probably lost 17c. and revived 19c. from Modern French.


valedictory (adj.)

1650s, pertaining or relating to leave-taking, from Latin valedictum (past participle of valedicere;
see valediction) + -ory. As a noun meaning valedictory address from 1779.


Abitur (n.)

German final secondary school exam, 1863, short for abiturium, from Modern Latin abitorire to wish
to leave, desiderative of Latin abire (neuter plural abitum) to go away, from ab- away (see ab-) +
ire to go (see ion).


quit (v.)

c.1200, to repay, discharge (a debt, etc.), from Old French quiter clear, establish one's innocence;
also transitive, release, let go, relinquish, abandon (12c.), from quite (see quit (adj.)).
Meaning to reward, give reward is mid-13c., that of take revenge; to answer, retort and to acquit
oneself are late 14c. From c.1300 as to acquit (of a charge), declare not guilty. Sense of leave,
depart is attested from c.1400; that of stop (doing something) is from 1640s. Meaning to give up,
relinquish is from mid-15c. Related: Quitted; quitting. Quitting time is from 1835.


awol (adj.)

also a.w.o.l., military initialism (acronym) for absent without leave. The -o- seems to be there
mostly so the assemblage can be pronounced as a word. In U.S. military use at least from World War
II, popular use by 1960.


bail (v.1)

to dip water out of, 1610s, from baile (n.) small wooden bucket (mid-14c.), from nautical Old French
baille bucket, pail, from Medieval Latin *bajula (aquae), literally porter of water, from Latin
bajulare to bear a burden (see bail (n.1)). To bail out leave suddenly (intransitive) is recorded
from 1930, originally of airplane pilots. Related: Bailed; bailing.


camera (n.)

1708, vaulted building, from Latin camera vaulted room (source of Italian camera, Spanish camara,
French  chambre), from Greek kamara vaulted chamber.    The word also was used early 18c. as a short
form of Modern Latin camera obscura dark chamber (a black box with a lens that could project images
of external objects), contrasted with camera lucida (Latin for light chamber), which uses prisms to
produce on paper beneath the instrument an image, which can be traced. It became the word for
picture-taking device when modern photography began, c.1840 (extended to television filming devices
1928). Camera-shy is attested from 1890. Old Church Slavonic komora, Lithuanian kamara, Old Irish
camra all are borrowings from Latin.


capillary (adj.)

1650s, of or pertaining to the hair, from Latin capillaris of hair, from capillus hair (of the
head); perhaps related to caput head (but de Vaan finds this difficult on the formal side and far
from compelling, since capillus is a diminutive, and would mean 'little head', which hardly amounts
to 'hair'). Borrowed earlier as capillar (14c.). Meaning taking place in capillary vessels is from
1809. Capillary attraction attested from 1813. As a noun, capillary blood vessel, from 1660s.


caption (n.)

late 14c., taking, seizure, from Old French capcion arrest, capture, imprisonment, or directly from
Latin captionem (nominative capito) a catching, seizing, holding, taking, noun of action from past
participle stem of capere to take (see capable).    From 17c. used especially in law, and there via
its appearance at the head of legal document involving seizure (Certificate of caption, etc.), the
word's sense was extended to the beginning of any document; thus heading of a chapter or section of
an article (1789), and, especially in U.S., description or title below an illustration (1919).


captious (adj.)

c.1400, capcyus, from Middle French captieux (15c.) or directly from Latin captiosus fallacious,
from captionem (nominative captio) a deceiving, fallacious argument, literally a taking (in), from
captus, past participle of capere to take, catch (see capable). Related: Captiously; captiousness.


capture (n.)

1540s, from Middle French capture a taking, from Latin captura a taking (especially of animals),
from captus (see captive).


deduct (v.)

early 15c., from Latin deductus, past participle of deducere lead down, bring away; see deduce, with
which it formerly was interchangeable. Technically, deduct refers to taking away portions or
amounts; subtract to taking away numbers. Related: Deducted; deducting.


eclipse (n.)

late 13c., from Old French eclipse eclipse, darkness (12c.), from Latin eclipsis, from Greek
ekleipsis an abandonment, an eclipse, from ekleipein to forsake a usual place, fail to appear, be
eclipsed, from ek out (see ex-) + leipein to leave (cognate with Latin linquere; see relinquish).


egoist (n.)

1785, in metaphysics, one who maintains there is no evidence of the existence of anything but the
self (taking ego in a sense of thinking subject), from French &eacute;goiste (1755); see ego + -ist.
Meaning selfish person is from 1879. Related: Egoistic; egoistical.


fang (n.)

Old English fang prey, spoils, plunder, booty; a seizing or taking, from gefangen, past participle
of fon seize, take, capture, from Proto-Germanic *fango- (cognates: Old Frisian fangia, Middle Dutch
and Dutch vangen, Old Norse fanga, German fangen, Gothic fahan), from PIE root *pag- to make firm,
fix; connected to Latin pax (genitive pacis) peace (see pact).    The sense of canine tooth (1550s)
probably developed from Old English fengto&eth;, literally catching- or grasping-tooth. Transferred
to the venom tooth of a serpent, etc., by 1800.


gainsay (v.)

contradict, c.1300, literally say against, from Old English gegn- against (see again) + say (v.).
Solitary survival of a once common prefix [Weekley], which was used to form such now-obsolete
compounds as gain-taking taking back again, gainclap a counterstroke, gainbuy redeem, and gainstand
to oppose. Related: Gainsaid; gainsaying.


habit (n.)

early 13c., characteristic attire of a religious or clerical order, from Old French habit, abit
(12c.) clothing, (ecclesiastical) habit; conduct, from Latin habitus condition, demeanor,
appearance, dress, originally past participle of habere to have, hold, possess; consider, think,
reason; manage, keep, from PIE root *ghabh- to seize, take, hold, have, give, receive (cognates:
Sanskrit gabhasti- hand, forearm; Old Irish gaibim I take, hold, I have, gabal act of taking;
Lithuanian gabana armful, gabenti to remove; Gothic gabei riches; Old English giefan, Old Norse gefa
to give).    Base sense probably to hold, which can be either in offering or in taking. Applied in
Latin to both inner and outer states of being, and taken over in both sense by English, though
meaning of dress is now restricted to monks and nuns. Meaning customary practice is early 14c. Drug
sense is from 1887.


idiot (n.)

early 14c., person so mentally deficient as to be incapable of ordinary reasoning; also in Middle
English simple man, uneducated person, layman (late 14c.), from Old French idiote uneducated or
ignorant person (12c.), from Latin idiota ordinary person, layman; outsider, in Late Latin
uneducated or ignorant person, from Greek idiotes layman, person lacking professional skill (opposed
to writer, soldier, skilled workman), literally private person (as opposed to one taking part in
public affairs), used patronizingly for ignorant person, from idios one's own (see idiom).Reader,
suppose you were an idiot. And suppose you were a member of Congress. But I repeat myself. [Mark
Twain, c.1882]Idiot box television set is from 1959; idiot light dashboard warning signal is
attested from 1968. Idiot savant attested by 1870.


laissez-faire

laissez faire, 1822, French, literally let (people) do (as they think best), from laissez,
imperative of laisser to let, to leave (from Latin laxare, from laxus loose; see lax) + faire to do
(from Latin facere; see factitious). From the phrase laissez faire et laissez passer, motto of
certain 18c. French economists, chosen to express the ideal of government non-interference in
business and industry.


oakum (n.)

loose fiber obtained from taking apart old hemp ropes, early 15c., from Old English acumba tow,
oakum, flax fibers separated by combing, literally what is combed out, from Proto-Germanic *us-
kambon (source of Old High German achambi); first element cognate with Old English a- away, out,
off; second element from stem of cemban to comb, from camb a comb; from PIE *gembh- tooth, nail (see
comb (n.)).


occupation (n.)

early 14c., fact of holding or possessing; mid-14c., a being employed in something, also a
particular action, from Old French occupacion pursuit, work, employment; occupancy, occupation
(12c.), from Latin occupationem (nominative occupatio) a taking possession; business, employment,
noun of action from past participle stem of occupare (see occupy). Meaning employment, business in
which one engages is late 14c. That of condition of being held and ruled by troops of another
country is from 1940.


off-base (adv.)

unawares, 1936, American English, from off (adv.) + base (n.); a figurative extension from baseball
sense of not in the right position (1898), from notion of a baserunner being picked off while taking
a lead.


Olaf

masc. proper name, from Old Norse An-leifr, literally ancestor's relic; first element related to Old
High German ano ancestor; second element related to Old English l&aelig;fan to leave (see leave
(v.)).


pro-

word-forming element meaning forward, forth, toward the front (as in proclaim, proceed); beforehand,
in advance (prohibit, provide); taking care of (procure); in place of, on behalf of (proconsul,
pronoun); from Latin pro on behalf of, in place of, before, for, in exchange for, just as, which
also was used as a prefix.    Also in some cases from cognate Greek pro before, in front of, sooner,
which also was used in Greek as a prefix (as in problem). Both the Latin and Greek words are from
PIE *pro- (cognates: Sanskrit pra- before, forward, forth; Gothic faura before, Old English fore
before, for, on account of, fram forward, from; Old Irish roar enough), extended form of root *per-
(1) forward, through (see per).    The common modern sense in favor of, favoring (pro-independence,
pro-fluoridation, pro-Soviet, etc.) was not in classical Latin and is attested in English from early
19c.


proboscis (n.)

c.1600, elephant's trunk, from Latin proboscis (Pliny), from Greek proboskis elephant's trunk,
literally means for taking food, from pro forward (see pro-) + boskein to nourish, feed, from
boskesthai graze, be fed, from stem *bot- (source of botane grass, fodder; see botanic).


prolepsis (n.)

1570s, the taking of something anticipated as already done or existing, from Latin prolepsis, from
Greek prolepsis an anticipating, literally a taking beforehand, from prolambanein to take before,
from pro- before (see pro-) + lambanein to take (see analemma). Related: Proleptic; proleptical;
proleptically.


pry (v.2)

raise by force, 1823, from a noun meaning instrument for prying, crowbar; alteration of prize (as
though it were a plural) in obsolete sense of lever (c.1300), from Old French prise a taking hold,
grasp (see prize (n.2)).


pseudo-science (n.)

also pseudoscience, a pretended or mistaken science, 1796 (the earliest reference is to alchemy),
from pseudo- + science.    The term pseudo-science is hybrid, and therefore objectionable.
Pseudognosy would be better etymology, but the unlearned might be apt to association with it the
idea of a dog's nose, and thus, instead of taking the eel of science by the tail, take the cur of
science by the snout; so that all things considered we had better adopt the current term pseudo-
sciences [The Pseudo-Sciences, in The St. James Magazine, January 1842]


pace (prep.)

with the leave of, 1863, from Latin pace, ablative of pax peace, as in pace tua with all deference
to you; from PIE *pak- to fasten (see pax). Used chiefly as a courteous or ironical apology for a
contradiction or difference of opinion [OED].


quadrille (n.)

1773, lively square dance for four couples, from French quadrille (17c.), originally one of four
groups of horsemen in a tournament (a sense attested in English from 1738), from Spanish cuadrilla,
diminutive of cuadro four-sided battle square, from Latin quadrum a square, related to quattuor four
(see four). The craze for the dance hit England in 1816, and it underwent a vigorous revival late
19c. among the middle classes.    Earlier the name of a popular card game for four hands, and in
this sense from French quadrille (1725), from Spanish cuartillo, from cuarto fourth, from Latin
quartus. OED notes it as fashionable from 1726 (and was in turn superseded by whist), the year of
Swift's (or Congreve's) satirical ballad on the craze:    The commoner, and knight, the peer,  Men
of all ranks and fame,  Leave to their wives the only care,  To propagate their name;  And well that
duty they fulfil  When the good husband's at Quadrille &amp;c.;


queen (n.)

Old English cwen queen, female ruler of a state, woman, wife, from Proto-Germanic *kwoeniz
(cognates: Old Saxon quan wife, Old Norse kvaen, Gothic quens), ablaut variant of *kwenon (source of
quean), from PIE *gwen- woman, wife supposedly originally honored woman (cognates: Greek gyn&eacute;
a woman, a wife; Gaelic bean woman; Sanskrit janis a woman, gn&aacute; wife of a god, a goddess;
Avestan jainish wife; Armenian kin woman; Old Church Slavonic zena, Old Prussian genna woman; Gothic
qino a woman, wife; q&eacute;ns a queen).    The original sense seems to have been wife, specialized
by Old English to wife of a king. In Old Norse, still mostly of a wife generally, as in kvan-fang
marriage, taking of a wife, kvanlauss unmarried, widowed, kvan-riki the domineering of a wife.
English is one of the few Indo-European languages to have a word for queen that is not a feminine
derivative of a word for king. The others are Scandinavian: Old Norse drottning, Danish dronning,
Swedish drottning queen, in Old Norse also mistress, but these also are held to be ultimately from
male words, such as Old Norse drottinn master.    Used of chess piece from mid-15c. (as a verb in
chess, in reference to a pawn that has reached the last rank, from 1789), of playing card from
1570s. Of bees from c.1600 (until late 17c., they generally were thought to be kings; as in Henry V,
I.ii); queen bee in a figurative sense is from 1807. Meaning male homosexual (especially a feminine
and ostentatious one) first certainly recorded 1924; probably here an alteration of quean, which is
earlier in this sense. Queen Anne first used 1878 for style characteristic of the time of Queen Anne
of Great Britain and Ireland, who reigned 1702-14. Cincinnati, Ohio, has been the Queen City (of the
West) since 1835.


rat (n.)

late Old English r&aelig;t rat, of uncertain origin. Similar words are found in Celtic (Gaelic
radan), Romanic (Italian ratto, Spanish rata, French rat) and Germanic (Old Saxon ratta; Dutch rat;
German Ratte, dialectal Ratz; Swedish r&#229;tta, Danish rotte) languages, but connection is
uncertain and origin unknown. In all this it is very much like cat.    Perhaps from Vulgar Latin
*rattus, but Weekley thinks this is of Germanic origin, the animal having come from the East with
the race-migrations and the word passing thence to the Romanic languages. American Heritage and
Tucker connect Old English r&aelig;t to Latin rodere and thus PIE *red- to scrape, scratch, gnaw,
source of rodent (q.v.). Klein says there is no such connection and suggests a possible cognate in
Greek rhine file, rasp. Weekley connects them with a question mark and Barnhart writes, the
relationship to each other of the Germanic, Romance, and Celtic words for rat is uncertain. OED says
probable the rat word spread from Germanic to Romanic, but takes no position on ultimate origin.
RATS. Of these there are the following kinds: a black rat and a grey rat, a py-rat and a cu-rat.
[Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, Grose, 1788]    Middle English common form was ratton, from
augmented Old French form raton. Sense of one who abandons his associates (1620s) is from belief
that rats leave a ship about to sink or a house about to fall and led to meaning traitor, informant
(1902; verb 1910). Interjection rats is American English, 1886. To smell a rat is 1540s; to be put
on the watch by suspicion as the cat by the scent of a rat; to suspect danger [Johnson]. _____-rat,
person who frequents _____ (in earliest reference dock-rat) is from 1864.


start (v.)

Old English *steortian, *stiertan, Kentish variants of styrtan to leap up (related to starian to
stare), from Proto-Germanic *stert- (cognates: Old Frisian stirta to fall, tumble, Middle Dutch
sterten, Dutch storten to rush, fall, Old High German sturzen, German st&uuml;rzen to hurl, throw,
plunge), of uncertain origin. According to Watkins, the notion is move briskly, move swiftly, and it
is from PIE root *ster- (1) stiff.    From move or spring suddenly, sense evolved by late 14c. to
awaken suddenly, flinch or recoil in alarm, and by 1660s to cause to begin acting or operating.
Meaning begin to move, leave, depart (without implication of suddenness) is from 1821. The
connection probably is from sporting senses (to force an animal from its lair, late 14c.).
Transitive sense of set in motion or action is from 1670s; specifically as to set (machinery) in
action from 1841.    Related: Started; starting. To start something cause trouble is 1915, American
English colloquial. To start over begin again is from 1912. Starting-line in running is from 1855;
starting-block in running first recorded 1937.


steal (v.)

Old English stelan to commit a theft, to take and carry off clandestinely and without right or leave
(class IV strong verb; past tense st&aelig;l, past participle stolen), from Proto-Germanic *stelan
(cognates: Old Saxon stelan, Old Norse, Old Frisian stela to steal, to rob one of, Dutch stelen, Old
High German stelan, German stehlen, Gothic stilan to steal), from PIE *stel-, possibly a variant of
*ster- (3) to rob, steal.    The notion of secrecy ... seems to be part of the original meaning of
the vb. [OED]. Intransitive meaning to depart or withdraw stealthily and secretly is from late Old
English. Most IE words for steal have roots in notions of hide, carry off, or collect, heap up.
Attested as a verb of stealthy motion from c.1300 (as in to steal away, late 14c.); of kisses from
late 14c.; of glances, sighs, etc., from 1580s. The various sports senses begin 1836. To steal
(someone) blind first recorded 1974.


step (v.)

Old English steppan (Anglian), st&aelig;ppan (West Saxon) take a step, from West Germanic *stap-
tread (cognates: Old Frisian stapa, Middle Dutch, Dutch stappen, Old High German stapfon, German
stapfen step), from PIE root *stebh- post, stem; to support, place firmly on (see staff (n.);
cognates: Old Church Slavonic stopa step, pace, stepeni step, degree). The notion is perhaps a
treading firmly on; a foothold.    Transitive sense (as in step foot in) attested from 1530s.
Related: Stepped; stepping. Originally strong (past tense stop, past participle bestapen); weak
forms emerged 13c., universal from 16c. To step out leave for a short time is from 1530s; meaning to
go out in public in style is from 1907. Step on it hurry up is 1923, from notion of gas pedal.


stone (n.)

Old English stan, used of common rocks, precious gems, concretions in the body, memorial stones,
from Proto-Germanic *stainaz (cognates: Old Norse steinn, Danish steen, Old Saxon sten, Old Frisian
sten, Dutch steen, Old High German stein, German Stein, Gothic stains), from PIE *stoi-no-, suffixed
form of root *stai- stone, also to thicken, stiffen (cognates: Sanskrit styayate curdles, becomes
hard; Avestan stay- heap; Greek stear fat, tallow, stia, stion pebble; Old Church Slavonic stena,
Russian stiena wall).    Sense of testicle is from late Old English. The British measure of weight
(usually equal to 14 pounds) is from late 14c., originally a specific stone. Stone-fruit, one with a
pit, is from 1520s. Stone's throw for a short distance is attested from 1580s. Stone Age is from
1864. To kill two birds with one stone is first attested 1650s. To leave no stone unturned is from
1540s.


strand (v.)

1620s, to drive aground on a shore, from strand (n.1); figurative sense of leave helpless, as of a
ship left aground by the tide, is first recorded 1837. Related: Stranded; stranding.


subconscious (adj.)

1823, not wholly conscious, feebly conscious (implied in subconsciously), from sub- + conscious.
First attested in De Quincey. The noun, in the psychological sense (mental processes taking place
without consciousness), is attested from 1886, from adjectival sense occurring in the mind, but not
in consciousness; earlier noun was subconsciousness (1845).


subtraction (n.)

c.1400, withdrawal, removal, from Late Latin subtractionem (nominative subtractio) a drawing back,
taking away, from past participle stem of Latin subtrahere take away, draw off, draw from below,
from sub from under (see sub-) + trahere to pull, draw (see tract (n.1)). The mathematical sense is
attested from early 15c.  &THORN;ou most know &thorn;at subtraccion is drawynge of one nowmber oute
of ano&thorn;er nomber. [The Crafte of Nombrynge, c.1425]


surprise (n.)

also formerly surprize, late 14c., unexpected attack or capture, from Old French surprise a taking
unawares (13c.), from noun use of past participle of Old French sorprendre to overtake, seize,
invade (12c.), from sur- over (see sur- (1)) + prendre to take, from Latin prendere, contracted from
prehendere to grasp, seize (see prehensile). Meaning something unexpected first recorded 1590s, that
of feeling of astonishment caused by something unexpected is c.1600. Meaning fancy dish is attested
from 1708.    A Surprize is ... a dish ... which promising little from its first appearance, when
open abounds with all sorts of variety. [W. King, Cookery, 1708]   Surprise party originally was a
stealth military detachment (1826); festive sense is attested by 1857; according to Thornton's
American Glossary, originally a gathering of members of a congregation at the house of their
preacher with the ostensible purpose of contributing provisions, &amp;c.;, for his support, and
sometimes called a donation party. Phrase taken by surprise is attested from 1690s.


syllable (n.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French sillable, alteration of Old French silabe syllable (12c., Modern French
syllabe), from Latin syllaba, from Greek syllabe that which is held together; a syllable, several
sounds or letters taken together, i.e. a taking together of letters; from syllambanein take or put
together, collect, gather, from assimilated form of syn- together (see syn-) + stem of lambanein to
take (see analemma). The unetymological -le apparently is by analogy with participle and principle.


scamper (v.)

to run quickly, 1680s, probably from Flemish schampeeren, frequentative of schampen run away, from
Old North French escamper (Old French eschamper) to run away, flee, quit the battlefield, escape,
from Vulgar Latin *excampare decamp, literally leave the field, from Latin ex campo, from ex out of
(see ex-) + campo, ablative of campus field (see campus). A vogue word late 17c. Related: Scampered;
scampering. The noun is 1680s, from the verb.


tabernacle (n.)

mid-13c., portable sanctuary carried by the Israelites in the wilderness, from Old French tabernacle
the Jewish Tabernacle; tent, canopy; tomb, monument (12c.), from Latin tabernaculum tent, especially
a tent of an augur (for taking observations), diminutive of taberna hut, cabin, booth (see tavern).
Use of the word in English transferred late 14c. to the Temple in Jerusalem (which continued its
function). Sense of house of worship first recorded 1690s. Also in Biblical language, the body as
the temporary abode of the soul (late 14c.). The Jewish Feast of Tabernacles (mid-October) was
observed as a thanksgiving for harvest. Related: Tabernacular.


take (v.)

late Old English tacan to take, seize, from a Scandinavian source (such as Old Norse taka take,
grasp, lay hold, past tense tok, past participle tekinn; Swedish ta, past participle tagit), from
Proto-Germanic *takan- (cognates: Middle Low German tacken, Middle Dutch taken, Gothic tekan to
touch), from Germanic root *tak- to take, of uncertain origin, perhaps originally meaning to touch.
As the principal verb for to take, it gradually replaced Middle English nimen, from Old English
niman, from the usual West Germanic *nem- root (source of German nehmen, Dutch nemen; see nimble).
OED calls take one of the elemental words of the language; take up alone has 55 varieties of meaning
in that dictionary's 2nd print edition. Basic sense is to lay hold of, which evolved to accept,
receive (as in take my advice) c.1200; absorb (take a punch) c.1200; choose, select (take the high
road) late 13c.; to make, obtain (take a shower) late 14c.; to become affected by (take sick)
c.1300.   Take five is 1929, from the approximate time it takes to smoke a cigarette. Take it easy
first recorded 1880; take the plunge act decisively is from 1876; take the rap accept (undeserved)
punishment is from 1930. Phrase take it or leave it is recorded from 1897. To take it out on
(someone or something) vent one's anger on other than what caused it is by 1840.


undercut (v.)

late 14c., to cut down or off, from under + cut (v.). In the commercial sense of sell at lower
prices (or work at lower wages) it is first attested 1884. Figurative sense of render unstable,
undermine is recorded from 1955, from earlier literal meaning cut so as to leave the upper portion
larger than the lower (1874).


vacate (v.)

1640s, to make void, to annul, from Latin vacatus, past participle of vacare be empty, be void (see
vain). Meaning to leave, give up, quit (a place) is attested from 1791. Related: Vacated; vacating.


vain (adj.)

c.1300, devoid of real value, idle, unprofitable, from Old French vain, vein worthless, void,
invalid, feeble; conceited (12c.), from Latin vanus empty, void, figuratively idle, fruitless, from
PIE *wa-no-, from root *eue- to leave, abandon, give out (cognates: Old English wanian to lessen,
wan deficient; Old Norse vanta to lack; Latin vacare to be empty, vastus empty, waste; Avestan va-
lack, Persian vang empty, poor; Sanskrit una- deficient, Armenian unain empty).    Meaning
conceited, elated with a high opinion of oneself first recorded 1690s in English; earlier silly,
idle, foolish (late 14c.). Phrase in vain to no effect (c.1300, after Latin in vanum) preserves the
original sense. Related: Vainly; vainness. Compare also vainglory.


