legend (n.)

early 14c., narrative dealing with a happening or an event, from Old French legende (12c., Modern
French l&#233;gende) and directly from Medieval Latin legenda legend, story, literally (things) to
be read, on certain days in church, etc., from Latin legendus, neuter plural gerundive of legere to
read, gather, select (see lecture (n.)).    Used originally of saints' lives; extended sense of
nonhistorical or mythical story first recorded late 14c. Meaning writing or inscription (especially
on a coin or medal) is from 1610s; on a map, illustration, etc., from 1903.


legendary (adj.)

mid-16c., from Medieval Latin legendarius, from legenda (see legend). Earlier it was a noun meaning
a collection of legends (1510s).


storied (adj.1)

late 15c., ornamented with scenes from history (of books, walls, etc.), from past participle of verb
form of story (n.1). Meaning celebrated in history or legend is from 1725.


Godiva

died 1067, Lady of Coventry and wife of Leofric, Earl of Mercia. Her legend is first recorded 100
years after her death, by Roger of Wendover. Peeping Tom aspect added by 1659. The name is a typical
Anglo-Saxon compound, apparently *God-gifu good gift.


beatnik (n.)

coined 1958 by San Francisco newspaper columnist Herb Caen during the heyday of -nik suffixes in the
wake of Sputnik. From Beat generation (1952), associated with beat (n.) in its meaning rhythm
(especially in jazz) as well as beat (past participle adjective) worn out, exhausted, but originator
Jack Kerouac (1922-1969) in 1958 connected it with beatitude.The origins of the word beat are
obscure, but the meaning is only too clear to most Americans. More than the feeling of weariness, it
implies the feeling of having been used, of being raw. It involves a sort of nakedness of the mind.
[New York Times Magazine, Oct. 2, 1952] <hr />   Beat is old carny slang. According to Beat Movement
legend (and it is a movement with a deep inventory of legend), Ginsberg and Kerouac picked it up
from a character named Herbert Huncke, a gay street hustler and drug addict from Chicago who began
hanging around Times Square in 1939 (and who introduced William Burroughs to heroin, an important
cultural moment). The term has nothing to do with music; it names the condition of being beaten
down, poor, exhausted, at the bottom of the world. [Louis Menand, New Yorker, Oct. 1, 2007]


Pygmalion

also the Pygmalion word, a British euphemistic substitute for bloody in mid-20c. from its notorious
use in Bernard Shaw's play of the same name (1914: Walk? Not bloody likely!). The Greek legend of
the sculptor/goldsmith and the beautiful statue he made and wished to life, is centered on Cyprus
and his name might ultimately be Phoenician.


Gorgon

late 14c., any of the three hideous sisters in Greek legend, whose look turned beholders to stone
(Madusa was one of them), from Greek Gorgo (plural Gorgones), from gorgos terrible, of unknown
origin. Transferred sense of terrifyingly ugly person is from 1520s.


Dick Whittington

The story is an old one, told under other names throughout Europe, of a poor boy who sends a cat he
had bought for a penny as his stake in a trading voyage; the captain sells it on his behalf for a
fortune to a foreign king whose palace is overrun by rats. The hero devotes part of his windfall to
charity, which may be why the legend attached in England since 16c. to Sir Richard Whittington
(d.1423), three times Lord Mayor of London, who died childless and devoted large sums in his will to
churches, almshouses, and St. Bartholomew's Hospital.


Noah

masc. proper name, from Hebrew Noah, literally rest. Phrase Noah's ark attested from 1610s. The
adjective Noachian, in reference to the flood legend, is from 1670s.


Lorelei

1843, from German, name of a rock in the River Rhine near Koblenz, Germany. In legend, a lovely
woman sat atop it and sang while combing her long blond hair, distracting sailors so their ships
foundered on the rock and they drowned. The second element of the name probably is Rhenish dialect
lei cliff, rock; the first element is perhaps from Middle High German l&#252;ren to lie in wait


motto (n.)

1580s, from Italian motto a saying, legend attached to a heraldic design, from Late Latin muttum
grunt, word, from Latin muttire to mutter, mumble, murmur (see mutter).


Barbara

fem. proper name, from Latin, fem. of barbarus strange, foreign, barbarous, from Greek barbaros (see
barbarian). For women, unlike men, the concept of alien presumably could be felt as exotic and thus
make an appealing name. Popularized as a Christian name by the legend of Saint Barbara, early 4c.
martyr, whose cult was popular from 7c. The common Middle English form was Barbary. A top 10 name in
popularity for girls born in the U.S. between 1927 and 1958.


mythology (n.)

early 15c., exposition of myths, from Middle French mythologie and directly from Late Latin
mythologia, from Greek mythologia legendary lore, a telling of mythic legends; a legend, story,
tale, from mythos myth (of unknown origin) + -logy study. Meaning a body of myths first recorded
1781.


snuff (v.1)

to cut or pinch off the burned part of a candle wick, mid-15c., from noun snoffe burned part of a
candle wick (late 14c.), of unknown origin, perhaps related to snuff (v.2). The meaning to die is
from 1865; that of to kill is from 1932; snuff-film, originally an urban legend, is from 1975.


pied (adj.)

late 14c., as if it were the past participle of a verb form of Middle English noun pie magpie (see
pie (n.2)), in reference to the bird's black and white plumage. Earliest use is in reference to the
pyed freres, an order of friars who wore black and white. Also in pied piper (1845, in Browning's
poem based on the German legend; used allusively by 1939).


Christopher

masc. proper name, Church Latin Christophoros, from Ecclesiastical Greek khristophoros, literally
Christ-bearing; from phoros bearer, from pherein to carry (see infer). In medieval legend he was a
giant (one of the rare virtuous ones) who aided travellers by carrying them across a river.
Medallions with his image worn by travellers are known from the Middle Ages (Chaucer's Yeoman had
one). Not a common name in medieval England.


Afghan

name of the people of Afghanistan, technically only correctly applied to the Durani Afghans; Old
Afghan chronicles trace the name to an Afghana, son of Jeremiah, sone of Israelite King Saul, from
whom they claimed descent, but this is a legend. The name is first attested in Arabic in al-'Utbi's
History of Sultan Mahmud written c.1030 C.E. and was in use in India from 13c. Attested from 1833 as
a type of blanket or wrap (in full, Afghan shawl); 1973 as a style of sheepskin coat; 1877 as a type
of carpet; 1895 as a breed of hunting dog.


Mephistopheles

1590s, the evil spirit to whom Faust sold his soul in the German legend, from German (1587), of
unknown origin. According to the speculation of eminent G&ouml;the scholar K.J. Schr&ouml;er (1886)
it is a compound of Hebrew mephitz destroyer + tophel liar (short for tophel sheqer, literally
falsehood plasterer; see Job xiii:4). Klein writes that the names of devils in the Middle Ages are
in most cases derived from Hebrew.


Sabrina

fem. proper name, personified as a nymph by Milton in Comus (1634), from a Welsh tale of a maiden
drowned in the river Severn by her stepmother, a legend found in Geoffrey of Monmouth and Giraldus
Cambrensis. The name appears to be the Romanized form of the name of the River Severn (Welsh Hafren,
Habren), which is Celtic and of unknown origin; it perhaps means boundary. Sabrina neckline is from
the 1954 film Sabrina starring Audrey Hepburn.


worthy (adj.)

mid-13c., having merit, from worth (n.) + -y (2). Old English had weor&thorn;ful in this sense.
Attested from late 14c. as a noun meaning person of merit (especially in Nine Worthies, famous men
of history and legend: Joshua, David, Judas Maccab&aelig;us, Hector, Alexander, Julius C&aelig;sar,
Arthur, Charlemagne, Godfrey of Bouillon -- three Jews, three gentiles, three Christians). Related:
Worthily; worthiness.


Prince Albert

piercing that consists of a ring which goes through the urethra and out behind the glans, mid-20c.,
supposedly so-called from the modern legend that Albert of Saxe-Coburg-Gotha (1819-1861), prince
consort of Queen Victoria, had one.    But the term seems to be not older than bodyart maven Doug
Malloy and his circle, and the stories about the prince may be fantastical inventions. Perhaps there
is some connection with Albert underworld/pawnshop slang for gold watch chain (1861), which probably
is from the common portraits of the prince in which he is shown with a conspicuous gold watch chain.
Many fashions in male dress made popular by him bore his name late 19c.


Adam&#039;s apple (n.)

1731, corresponding to Latin pomum Adami, perhaps an inexact translation of Hebrew tappuah haadam,
literally man's swelling, from ha-adam the man + tappuah anything swollen. The reference is to the
legend that a piece of the forbidden fruit (commonly believed to be an apple) that Eve gave Adam
stuck in his throat. The term is mentioned in early 15c. as the name of an actual oriental and
Mediterranean fruit, a variety of lime with an indentation fancied to resemble the marks of Adam's
teeth.


saw (n.2)

proverb, saying, maxim, Old English sagu saying, discourse, speech, study, tradition, tale, from
Proto-Germanic *saga-, *sagon- (cognates: Middle Low German, Middle Dutch sage, zage, German Sage
legend, fable, saga, myth, tradition, Old Norse saga story, tale, saga), from PIE root *sek(w)- to
say, utter (see say (v.)).


caesarian (n.)

1923, shortening of Caesarian section (1610s); supposedly from Caius Julius Caesar, who was said to
have been delivered surgically, thus legend traces his cognomen to Latin caesus past participle of
caedere to cut (see -cide).    But if this is the etymology of the name, it was likely an ancestor
who was so born (Caesar's mother lived to see his triumphs and such operations would have been fatal
to the woman in ancient times). And Pliny derives his cognomen from caesaries head of hair, because
the future dictator was born with a full one. Caesarian section may come directly from caesus.


George

masc. personal name, from Late Latin Georgius, from Greek Georgos husbandman, farmer, from ge earth
+ ergon work (see organ).    The name introduced in England by the Crusaders (a vision of St. George
played a key role in the First Crusade), but not common until after the Hanoverian succession
(18c.). St. George began to be recognized as patron of England in time of Edward III, perhaps
because of his association with the Order of the Garter (see garter). His feast day, April 23, was
made a holiday in 1222. The legend of his combat with the dragon is first found in Legenda Aurea
(13c.). The exclamation by (St.) George! is recorded from 1590s.


marvel (n.)

c.1300, miracle, also wonderful story or legend, from Old French merveille a wonder, surprise,
miracle, from Vulgar Latin *miribilia (also source of Spanish maravilla, Portuguese maravilha,
Italian maraviglia), altered from Latin mirabilia wonderful things, from neuter plural of mirabilis
wonderful, marvelous, extraordinary; strange, singular, from mirari to wonder at, from mirus
wonderful (see smile). A neuter plural treated in Vulgar Latin as a feminine singular. Related:
Marvels.


myth (n.)

1830, from French Mythe (1818) and directly from Modern Latin mythus, from Greek mythos speech,
thought, story, myth, anything delivered by word of mouth, of unknown origin.Myths are stories about
divine beings, generally arranged in a coherent system; they are revered as true and sacred; they
are endorsed by rulers and priests; and closely linked to religion. Once this link is broken, and
the actors in the story are not regarded as gods but as human heroes, giants or fairies, it is no
longer a myth but a folktale. Where the central actor is divine but the story is trivial ... the
result is religious legend, not myth. [J. Simpson &amp; S. Roud, Dictionary of English Folklore,
Oxford, 2000, p.254]General sense of untrue story, rumor is from 1840.


wander (v.)

Old English wandrian move about aimlessly, wander, from West Germanic *wandran to roam about
(cognates: Old Frisian wondria, Middle Low German, Middle Dutch wanderen, German wandern to wander,
a variant form of the root represented in Old High German wantalon to walk, wander), from PIE root
*wendh- to turn, wind, weave (see wind (v.1)). In reference to the mind, affections, etc., attested
from c.1400. Related: Wandered; wandering. The Wandering Jew of Christian legend first mentioned
13c. (compare French le juif errant, German der ewige Jude).


urban (adj.)

characteristic of city life, pertaining to cities or towns, 1610s (but rare before 1830s), from
Latin urbanus of or pertaining to a city or city life; in Rome, also in city fashion, polished,
refined, cultivated, courteous, but also sometimes witty, facetious, bold, impudent; as a noun, city
dweller, from urbs (genitive urbis) city, walled town, of unknown origin.    The word gradually
emerged in this sense as urbane became restricted to manners and styles of expression. In late 20c.
American English gradually acquiring a suggestion of African-American. Urban renewal, euphemistic
for slum clearance, is attested from 1955, American English. Urban sprawl recorded by 1958. Urban
legend attested by 1980.


pygmy (n.)

late 14c., Pigmei, member of a fabulous race of dwarfs, described by Homer and Herodotus and said to
inhabit Egypt or Ethiopia and India, from Latin Pygmaei (singular Pygmaeus), from Greek Pygmaioi,
plural of Pygmaios a Pygmy, noun use of adjective meaning dwarfish, literally of the length of a
pygme; a pygme tall, from pygme cubit, literally fist, the measure of length from the elbow to the
knuckle; related to pyx with clenched fist and to Latin pugnus fist (see pugnacious).    Figurative
use for person of small importance is from 1590s. Believed in 17c. to refer to chimpanzees or
orangutans, and occasionally the word was used in this sense. The ancient word was applied by
Europeans to the equatorial African race 1863, but the tribes probably were known to the ancients
and likely were the original inspiration for the legend. As an adjective from 1590s. Related:
Pygmean; Pygmaean.


faggot (n.2)

male homosexual, 1914, American English slang (shortened form fag is from 1921), probably from
earlier contemptuous term for woman (1590s), especially an old and unpleasant one, in reference to
faggot (n.1) bundle of sticks, as something awkward that has to be carried (compare baggage
worthless woman, 1590s). It may also be reinforced by Yiddish faygele homosexual, literally little
bird. It also may have roots in British public school slang fag a junior who does certain duties for
a senior (1785), with suggestions of catamite, from fag (v.). This also was used as a verb.He [the
prefect] used to fag me to blow the chapel organ for him. [Boy's Own Paper, 1889]Other obsolete
senses of faggot were man hired into military service simply to fill out the ranks at muster (1700)
and vote manufactured for party purposes (1817).    The oft-reprinted assertion that male
homosexuals were called faggots because they were burned at the stake as punishment is an
etymological urban legend. Burning was sometimes a punishment meted out to homosexuals in Christian
Europe (on the suggestion of the Biblical fate of Sodom and Gomorrah), but in England, where
parliament had made homosexuality a capital offense in 1533, hanging was the method prescribed. Any
use of faggot in connection with public executions had long become an English historical obscurity
by the time the word began to be used for male homosexual in 20th century American slang, whereas
the contemptuous slang word for woman (and the other possible sources or influences listed here) was
in active use. It was used in this sense in early 20c. by D.H. Lawrence and James Joyce, among
others.


fuck (v.)

until recently a difficult word to trace, in part because it was taboo to the editors of the
original OED when the F volume was compiled, 1893-97. Written form only attested from early 16c. OED
2nd edition cites 1503, in the form fukkit; earliest appearance of current spelling is 1535 --
Bischops ... may fuck thair fill and be vnmaryit [Sir David Lyndesay, Ane Satyre of the Thrie
Estaits], but presumably it is a much more ancient word than that, simply one that wasn't written in
the kind of texts that have survived from Old English and Middle English. Buck cites proper name
John le Fucker from 1278, but the surname could have other explanations. The word apparently is
hinted at in a scurrilous 15c. poem, titled Flen flyys, written in bastard Latin and Middle English.
The relevant line reads:Non sunt in celi quia fuccant uuiuys of heliThey [the monks] are not in
heaven because they fuck the wives of [the town of] Ely. Fuccant is pseudo-Latin, and in the
original it is written in cipher. The earliest examples of the word otherwise are from Scottish,
which suggests a Scandinavian origin, perhaps from a word akin to Norwegian dialectal fukka
copulate, or Swedish dialectal focka copulate, strike, push, and fock penis. Another theory traces
it to Middle English fyke, fike move restlessly, fidget, which also meant dally, flirt, and probably
is from a general North Sea Germanic word; compare Middle Dutch fokken, German ficken fuck, earlier
make quick movements to and fro, flick, still earlier itch, scratch; the vulgar sense attested from
16c. This would parallel in sense the usual Middle English slang term for have sexual intercourse,
swive, from Old English swifan to move lightly over, sweep (see swivel). But OED remarks these
cannot be shown to be related to the English word. Chronology and phonology rule out Shipley's
attempt to derive it from Middle English firk to press hard, beat.    Germanic words of similar form
(f + vowel + consonant) and meaning 'copulate' are numerous. One of them is G. ficken. They often
have additional senses, especially 'cheat,' but their basic meaning is 'move back and forth.' ...
Most probably, fuck is a borrowing from Low German and has no cognates outside Germanic. [Liberman]
French foutre and Italian fottere look like the English word but are unrelated, derived rather from
Latin futuere, which is perhaps from PIE root *bhau(t)- knock, strike off, extended via a figurative
use from the sexual application of violent action [Shipley; compare the sexual slang use of bang,
etc.]. Popular and Internet derivations from acronyms (and the pluck yew fable) are merely
<b>ingenious trifling</b>. The Old English word was h&aelig;man, from ham dwelling, home, with a
sense of take home, co-habit. Fuck was outlawed in print in England (by the Obscene Publications
Act, 1857) and the U.S. (by the Comstock Act, 1873). As a noun, it dates from 1670s. The word may
have been shunned in print, but it continued in conversation, especially among soldiers during World
War I.It became so common that an effective way for the soldier to express this emotion was to omit
this word. Thus if a sergeant said, 'Get your ----ing rifles!' it was understood as a matter of
routine. But if he said 'Get your rifles!' there was an immediate implication of urgency and danger.
[John Brophy, Songs and Slang of the British Soldier: 1914-1918, pub. 1930]The legal barriers broke
down in the 20th century, with the Ulysses decision (U.S., 1933) and Lady Chatterley's Lover (U.S.,
1959; U.K., 1960). Johnson excluded the word, and fuck wasn't in a single English language
dictionary from 1795 to 1965. The Penguin Dictionary broke the taboo in the latter year. Houghton
Mifflin followed, in 1969, with The American Heritage Dictionary, but it also published a Clean
Green edition without the word, to assure itself access to the lucrative public high school market.
The abbreviation F (or eff) probably began as euphemistic, but by 1943 it was being used as a cuss
word, too. In 1948, the publishers of The Naked and the Dead persuaded Norman Mailer to use the
euphemism fug instead. When Mailer later was introduced to Dorothy Parker, she greeted him with, So
you're the man who can't spell 'fuck'  [The quip sometimes is attributed to Tallulah Bankhead].
Hemingway used muck in For whom the Bell Tolls (1940). The major breakthrough in publication was
James Jones' From Here to Eternity (1950), with 50 fucks (down from 258 in the original manuscript).
Egyptian legal agreements from the 23rd Dynasty (749-21 B.C.E.) frequently include the phrase, If
you do not obey this decree, may a donkey copulate with you! [Reinhold Aman, Maledicta, Summer
1977]. Fuck-all nothing first recorded 1960.  Verbal phrase fuck up to ruin, spoil, destroy first
attested c.1916. A widespread group of Slavic words (such as Polish pierdoli&#263;) can mean both
fornicate and make a mistake. Fuck off attested from 1929; as a command to depart, by 1944. Flying
fuck originally meant have sex on horseback and is first attested c.1800 in broadside ballad New
Feats of Horsemanship. For the unkillable urban legend that this word is an acronym of some sort (a
fiction traceable on the Internet to 1995 but probably predating that) see here, and also here.
Related: Fucked; fucking. Agent noun fucker attested from 1590s in literal sense; by 1893 as a term
of abuse (or admiration).    DUCK F-CK-R. The man who has the care of the poultry on board a
&#383;hip of war. [Classical Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, 1796]


