lethality (n.)

1650s, from lethal + -ity.


lethal (adj.)

1580s, from Late Latin lethalis, alteration of Latin letalis deadly, fatal, from letum death, of
uncertain origin. Form altered in Late Latin by association with lethe hydor water of oblivion in
Hades in Greek mythology, from Greek lethe forgetfulness.


legionnaire (n.)

1818, from French l&eacute;gionnaire, from l&eacute;gion (see legion). Legionnaires' Disease, caused
by Legionella pneumophilia, was named after the lethal outbreak of July 1976 at the American Legion
convention in Philadelphia's Bellevue Stratford Hotel. Hence Legionella as the name of the bacterium
that causes it.


booby (n.)

1590s, from Spanish bobo stupid person, slow bird (used of various ungainly seabirds), probably from
Latin balbus stammering, from an imitative root (see barbarian).   Booby prize is by 1883: an object
of little value given to the loser of a game; booby trap is 1850, originally a schoolboy prank; the
more lethal sense developed during World War I.    At the end of every session the dominie had the
satirical custom of presenting his tawse as a booby-prize to some idle or stupid lout whom he picked
out as meriting this distinction so that next time they met he might start fresh and fair with new
pair for a new set of classes. [Ascott R. Hope, Dumps, Young England magazine, 1883]


cholera (n.)

late 14c., bile, melancholy (originally the same as choler), from Middle French cholera or directly
from Late Latin cholera, from Greek kholera a type of disease characterized by diarrhea, supposedly
caused by choler (Celsus), from khole gall, bile, from khloazein to be green, from khloros (see
Chloe). But another sense of khole was drainpipe, gutter.    Revived 1560s in classical sense as a
name for a severe digestive disorder (rarely fatal to adults); and 1704 (especially as cholera
morbus), for a highly lethal disease endemic in India, periodically breaking out in global
epidemics, especially that reaching Britain and America in the early 1830s.


