levy (n.)

an act of levying, early 15c., from Anglo-French leve, Old French lev&#233;e a raising, lifting;
levying, noun use of fem. past participle of lever to raise (see lever).


levy (v.)

early 13c., act of raising or collecting, from Anglo-French leve, from Old French lev&eacute;e act
of raising, noun use of fem. past participle of lever to raise (see lever). Originally of taxes,
later of men for armies (c.1500). Related: Levied; levying.


cess (n.)

tax, levy, 1530s, short for assess (q.v.).


recruit (n.)

military reinforcement, one of a newly raised body of troops, 1640s, from recruit (v)., replacing
earlier recrew, recrue; or from obsolete French recrute, alteration of recreue a supply, recrue a
levy of troops (late 16c.), Picardy or Hainault dialect variant of recrue a levy, a recruit,
literally new growth, from Old French recreu (12c.), past participle of recreistre grow or increase
again, from re- again (see re-) + creistre to grow, from Latin crescere to grow (see crescent). The
French word first appeared in literary use in gazettes published in Holland, and was disapproved of
by French writers in the latter part of the 17th c. [OED]. The French word also is the source of
Dutch recruut, German Recrut, Swedish rekryt.


raise (n.)

act of raising or lifting, 1530s, from raise (v.). Meaning an increase in amount or value is from
1728. Meaning increase in salary or wages is from 1898, chiefly American English (British preferring
rise). Earliest attested use (c.1500) is in obsolete sense of a levy.


recruit (v.)

1630s, to strengthen, reinforce, from French recruter (17c.), from recrute a levy, a recruit (see
recruit (n.)). Sense of to enlist new soldiers is attested from 1650s; of student athletes, from
1913. Related: Recruited; recruiting.


banish (v.)

late 14c., banischen, from banniss-, extended stem of Old French banir announce, proclaim; levy;
forbid; banish, proclaim an outlaw, from a Germanic source (perhaps Frankish *bannjan to order or
prohibit under penalty), or from Vulgar Latin cognate *bannire (see bandit). Related: Banished;
banishing.


impress (v.)

late 14c., have a strong effect on the mind or heart, from Latin impressus, past participle of
imprimere press into or upon, stamp, from assimilated form of in- into, in, on, upon (see in- (2)) +
premere to press (see press (v.1)). Literal sense of  to apply with pressure, make a permanent image
in, indent, imprint is from early 15c. in English. Sense of to levy for military service is from
1590s, a meaning more from press (v.2). Related: Impressed; impressing.


real (n.)

small Spanish silver coin, 1580s, from Spanish real, noun use of real (adj.) regal, from Latin
regalis regal (see regal). Especially in reference to the real de plata, which circulated in the
U.S. till c.1850 and in Mexico until 1897. The same word was used in Middle English in reference to
various coins, from Old French real, cognate of the Spanish word.    The old system of reckoning by
shillings and pence is continued by retail dealers generally; and will continue, as long as the
Spanish coins remain in circulation. [Bartlett, Dictionary of Americanisms, 1848]    He adds that,
due to different exchange rates of metal to paper money in the different states, the Spanish money
had varying names from place to place. The Spanish real of one-eighth of a dollar or 12 and a half
cents was a ninepence in New England, one shilling in New York, elevenpence or a levy in
Pennsylvania, and in many of the Southern States, a bit. The half-real was in New York a sixpence,
in New England a fourpence, in Pennsylvania a fip, in the South a picayune.


