lewd (adj.)

Old English l&aelig;wede nonclerical, of uncertain origin but probably ultimately from Vulgar Latin
*laigo-, from Latin laicus (see lay (adj.)). Sense of unlettered, uneducated (early 13c.) descended
to coarse, vile, lustful by late 14c. Related: Lewdly; lewdness.


giglot (n.)

lewd, wanton woman (mid-14c.); later a giddy, romping girl; of unknown origin; compare gig (n.1).


wanton (n.)

one who is ill-behaved, mid-15c., especially lascivious, lewd person (1520s), from wanton (adj.).


bawd (n.)

a complicated word of uncertain history. First attested late 15c., lewd person (of either sex; since
c.1700 applied only to women), probably from baude-strote procurer of prostitutes (mid-14c.), which
may be from Middle English bawde (adj.) merry, joyous, from Old French baud gay, licentious (from
Frankish bald bold or some such Germanic source). It would not be the first time a word meaning
joyous had taken on a sexual sense. The sense evolution shading from bold to lewd is not difficult;
compare Old French baudise ardor, joy, elation, act of boldness, presumption; baudie elation, high
spirits, fole baudie bawdry, shamelessness. The Old French word also is the source of French baudet
donkey, in Picardy dialect loose woman.    The second element in baude-strote would be trot one who
runs errands, or Germanic *strutt (see strut). But OED doubts all this. There was an Old French
baudestrote, baudetrot of the same meaning (13c.), and this may be the direct source of Middle
English baude-strote. The obsolete word bronstrops procuress, frequently found in Middleton's
comedies, probably is an alteration of baude-strote.


coltish (adj.)

late 14c., wild, frisky, also in early use lustful, lewd, from colt + -ish. Lit. sense of pertaining
to a colt is recorded from 1540s.


randy (adj.)

1690s, Scottish, aggressive, boisterous, probably from rand to rave, an obsolete variant of rant
(v.). In the original sense especially of beggars, and probably implying vagrant habits as well as
rude behavior [OED]. Sense of lewd, lustful first recorded 1847. Related: Randiness.


slovenly (adj.)

1510s, low, base, lewd, later untidy, dirty (1560s), from sloven + -ly (1). Related: Slovenliness;
also in this sense was slovenry (1540s), which OED reports in common use early 17c.


modest (adj.)

1560s, having moderate self-regard, from Middle French modeste (14c.), from Latin modestus keeping
due measure (see modesty). Of women, not improper or lewd, 1590s; of female attire, 1610s. Of
demands, etc., c.1600. Related: Modestly.


sensual (adj.)

early 15c., carnal, unspiritual; mid-15c., of or pertaining to the senses, from Middle French
sensuel (15c.) and directly from Late Latin sensualis endowed with feeling (see sensuality). Meaning
connected with gratification of the senses, especially lewd, unchaste is attested from late 15c.


Cyprian (adj.)

1620s, of Cyprus, from Latin Cyprianus, from Cyprius, from Greek Kyprios (see Cyprus). The island
was famous in ancient times as the birthplace of Aphrodite and for erotic worship rituals offered to
her there; hence Cyprian meant licentious, lewd, the earliest attested sense in English (1590s) and
was applied 18c.-19c. to prostitutes.


prurient (adj.)

1630s, itching, later, and now exclusively, having an itching desire (1650s), especially lascivious,
lewd, (1746), from Latin prurientem (nominative pruriens), present participle of prurire to itch; to
long for, be wanton, perhaps related to pruna glowing coals, from PIE root *preus- to freeze; burn
(see freeze (v.)). Related: Pruriently.


bawdy (adj.)

late 14c., soiled, dirty, filthy, from bawd + -y (2). Meaning lewd is from 1510s, from notion of
pertaining to or befitting a bawd; usually of language (originally to talk bawdy).  Bawdy Basket,
the twenty-third rank of canters, who carry pins, tape, ballads and obscene books to sell. [Grose,
Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, 1785]  Related: Bawdily; bawdiness.


gigolo (n.)

1922, from French gigolo, formed as a masc. of gigole tall, thin woman; dancing girl; prostitute,
perhaps from verb gigoter to move the shanks, hop, from gigue shank, also fiddle, of Germanic
origin. This is perhaps the same word that was borrowed earlier as Middle English giglot (early
14c.) lewd, wanton girl, which was later applied to males (mid-15c.) with the sense villainous man.
Middle English gigletry meant lasciviousness, harlotry (late 14c.).


ribald (adj.)

c.1500, from ribald, ribaud (n.), mid-13c., a rogue, ruffian, rascall, scoundrell, varlet, filthie
fellow [Cotgrave], from Old French ribaut, ribalt rogue, scoundrel, lewd lover, also as an
adjective, wanton, depraved, dissolute, licentious, of uncertain origin, perhaps (with suffix -ald)
from riber be wanton, sleep around, dally amorously, from a Germanic source (compare Old High German
riban be wanton, literally to rub, possibly from the common euphemistic use of rub words to mean
have sex), from Proto-Germanic *wribanan, from PIE root *wer- (3) to turn, bend (see versus).


lascivious (adj.)

mid-15c., from Middle French lascivieux or directly from Late Latin lasciviosus (used in a scolding
sense by Isidore and other early Church writers), from Latin lascivia lewdness, playfulness,
frolicsomeness, jolity, from lascivus lewd, playful, frolicsome, wanton, from PIE *las-ko-, from
*las- to be eager, wanton, or unruly (cognates: Sanskrit -lasati yearns, lasati plays, frolics,
Hittite ilaliya- to desire, covet, Greek laste harlot, Old Church Slavonic laska flattery, Slovak
laska love, Old Irish lainn greedy, Gothic lustus, Old English lust lust). Related: Lasciviously;
lasciviousness. In 17c. also with a verbal form, lasciviate.


blue (2)

lewd, indecent recorded from 1840 (in form blueness, in an essay of Carlyle's); the sense connection
is unclear, and is opposite to that in blue laws (q.v.). John Mactaggart's Scottish Gallovidian
Encyclopedia (1824) containing odd words he had learned while growing up in Galloway and elsewhere
in Scotland, has an entry for Thread o'Blue, any little smutty touch in song-singing, chatting, or
piece of writing. Farmer [Slang and Its Analogues Past and Present, 1890] offers the theory that
this meaning derives from the blue dress uniforms issued to harlots in houses of correction, but he
writes that the earlier slang authority John Camden Hotten suggests it as coming from the French
Biblioth&egrave;que Bleu, a series of books of very questionable character, and adds, from Hotten,
that, Books or conversation of an entirely opposite nature are said to be Brown or Quakerish, i.e.,
serious, grave, decent.


rank (adj.)

Old English ranc proud, overbearing, showy, from Proto-Germanic *rankaz (cognates: Danish rank
right, upright, German rank slender, Old Norse rakkr straight, erect), perhaps from PIE *reg- to
stretch, straighten (see right (adj.)). In reference to plant growth, vigorous, luxuriant, abundant,
copious it is recorded from c.1300. Related: Rankly; rankness.    Sense evolved in Middle English to
large and coarse (c.1300), then, via notion of excessive and unpleasant, to corrupt, loathsome, foul
(mid-14c.), perhaps from influence of Middle French rance rancid. In 17c. also lewd, lustful.
Much used 16c. as a pejorative intensive (as in rank folly). This is possibly the source of the verb
meaning to reveal another's guilt (1929, underworld slang), and that of to harass, abuse, 1934, U.S.
black dialect, though this also may be from the role of the activity in establishing social
hierarchy (from rank (n.)).


clean (adj.)

Old English cl&aelig;ne free from dirt or filth; pure, chaste, innocent; open, in the open, of
beasts, ritually safe to eat, from West Germanic *klainoz clear, pure (cognates: Old Saxon kleni
dainty, delicate, Old Frisian klene small, Old High German kleini delicate, fine, small, German
klein small; English preserves the original Germanic sense), from PIE root *gel- bright, gleaming
(cognates: Greek glene eyeball, Old Irish gel bright).    Largely replaced by clear, pure in the
higher senses [Weekley], but as a verb (mid-15c.) it has largely usurped what once belonged to
cleanse. Meaning whole, entire is from c.1300 (clean sweep in the figurative sense is from 1821).
Sense of innocent is from c.1300; that of not lewd is from 1867; that of not carrying anything
forbidden is from 1938; that of free of drug addiction is from 1950s. To come clean confess is from
1919, American English.


gay (adj.)

late 14c., full of joy, merry; light-hearted, carefree; also wanton, lewd, lascivious (late 12c. as
a surname, Philippus de Gay), from Old French gai joyful, happy; pleasant, agreeably charming;
forward, pert (12c.; compare Old Spanish gayo, Portuguese gaio, Italian gajo, probably French loan-
words). Ultimate origin disputed; perhaps from Frankish *gahi (related to Old High German wahi
pretty), though not all etymologists accept this. Meaning stately and beautiful; splendid and
showily dressed is from early 14c. The word gay by the 1890s had an overall tinge of promiscuity --
a gay house was a brothel. The suggestion of immorality in the word can be traced back at least to
the 1630s, if not to Chaucer:    But in oure bed he was so fressh and gay  Whan that he wolde han my
bele chose.    Slang meaning homosexual (adj.) begins to appear in psychological writing late 1940s,
evidently picked up from gay slang and not always easily distinguished from the older sense:
After discharge A.Z. lived for some time at home. He was not happy at the farm and went to a Western
city where he associated with a homosexual crowd, being gay, and wearing female clothes and makeup.
He always wished others would make advances to him. [Rorschach Research Exchange and Journal of
Projective Techniques, 1947, p.240]    The association with (male) homosexuality likely got a boost
from the term gay cat, used as far back as 1893 in American English for young hobo, one who is new
on the road, also one who sometimes does jobs.    A Gay Cat, said he, is a loafing laborer, who
works maybe a week, gets his wages and vagabonds about hunting for another 'pick and shovel' job. Do
you want to know where they got their monica (nickname) 'Gay Cat'? See, Kid, cats sneak about and
scratch immediately after chumming with you and then get gay (fresh). That's why we call them 'Gay
Cats'. [Leon Ray Livingston (America's Most Celebrated Tramp), Life and Adventures of A-no. 1, 1910]
Quoting a tramp named Frenchy, who might not have known the origin. Gay cats were severely and
cruelly abused by real tramps and bums, who considered them an inferior order of beings who begs of
and otherwise preys upon the bum -- as it were a jackal following up the king of beasts [Prof. John
J. McCook, Tramps, in The Public Treatment of Pauperism, 1893], but some accounts report certain
older tramps would dominate a gay cat and employ him as a sort of slave. In Sociology and Social
Research (1932-33) a paragraph on the gay cat phenomenon notes, Homosexual practices are more common
than rare in this group, and gey cat homosexual boy is attested in N. Erskine's 1933 dictionary of
Underworld &amp; Prison Slang (gey is a Scottish variant of gay).    The Dictionary of American
Slang reports that gay (adj.) was used by homosexuals, among themselves, in this sense since at
least 1920. Rawson [Wicked Words] notes a male prostitute using gay in reference to male homosexuals
(but also to female prostitutes) in London's notorious Cleveland Street Scandal of 1889. Ayto [20th
Century Words] calls attention to the ambiguous use of the word in the 1868 song The Gay Young Clerk
in the Dry Goods Store, by U.S. female impersonator Will S. Hays, but the word evidently was not
popularly felt in this sense by wider society until the 1950s at the earliest.    Gay (or gai) is
now widely used in French, Dutch, Danish, Japanese, Swedish, and Catalan with the same sense as the
English. It is coming into use in Germany and among the English-speaking upper classes of many
cosmopolitan areas in other countries. [John Boswell, Christianity, Social Tolerance, and
Homosexuality, 1980]   Gay as a noun meaning a (usually male) homosexual is attested from 1971; in
Middle English it meant excellent person, noble lady, gallant knight, also something gay or bright;
an ornament or badge (c.1400). As a slang word meaning bad, inferior, undesirable, from 2000.


whore (n.)

1530s spelling alteration (see wh-) of Middle English hore, from Old English hore prostitute,
harlot, from Proto-Germanic *horaz (fem. *horon-) one who desires (cognates: Old Norse hora
adulteress, Danish hore, Swedish hora, Dutch hoer, Old High German huora whore; in Gothic only in
the masc. hors adulterer, fornicator, also as a verb, horinon commit adultery), from PIE *ka- to
like, desire, a base that has produced words in other languages for lover (cognates: Latin carus
dear; Old Irish cara friend; Old Persian kama desire; Sanskrit Kama, name of the Hindu god of love,
kamah love, desire, the first element in Kama Sutra).   Whore itself is perhaps a Germanic euphemism
for a word that has not survived. The Old English vowel naturally would have yielded *hoor, which is
the pronunciation in some dialects; it might have shifted by influence of Middle English homonym
hore physical filth, slime, also moral corruption, sin, from Old English horh. The wh- form became
current 16c. A general term of abuse for an unchaste or lewd woman (without regard to money) from at
least c.1200. Of male prostitutes from 1630s. Whore of Babylon is from Rev. xvii:1, 5, etc. In
Middle English with occasional plural forms horen, heoranna.    The word, with its derivatives, is
now avoided polite speech; its survival in literature, so as it survives, is due to the fact that it
is a favorite word with Shakspere (who uses it, with its derivatives, 99 times) and is common in the
authorized English version of the Bible ... though the American revisers recommended the
substitution of harlot as less gross .... [Century Dictionary]     Some equivalent words in other
languages also derive from sources not originally pejorative, such as Bohemian nevestka, diminutive
of nevesta bride; Dutch deern, German dirne originally girl, lass, wench; also perhaps Old French
pute, perhaps literally girl, fem. of Vulgar Latin *puttus (but perhaps rather from Latin putidus
stinking; see poontang). Welsh putain whore is from French, probably via Middle English. Among other
languages, Greek porne prostitute is related to pernemi sell, with an original notion probably of a
female slave sold for prostitution; Latin meretrix is literally one who earns wages (source of Irish
mertrech, Old English miltestre whore, prostitute).    The vulgar Roman word was scortum, literally
skin, hide. Another term was lupa, literally she-wolf (preserved in Spanish loba, Italian lupa,
French louve; see wolf (n.)). And of course there was prostituta, literally placed in front, thus
publicly exposed, from the fem. past participle of prostituere (see prostitute (n.)). Another Old
Norse term was sk&aelig;kja, which yielded Danish sk&oslash;ge, Swedish sk&ouml;ka; probably from
Middle Low German schoke, which is perhaps from schode foreskin of a horse's penis, perhaps with the
sense of skin (compare Latin scortum) or perhaps via an intermediary sense of vagina. Spanish
ramera, Portuguese ramiera are from fem. form of ramero young bird of prey, literally little branch,
from ramo branch. Breton gast is cognate with Welsh gast bitch, of uncertain origin. Compare also
strumpet, harlot.    Old Church Slavonic ljubodejica is from ljuby dejati fornicate, a compound from
ljuby love + dejati put, perform. Russian bljad whore derives from Old Church Slavonic bladinica,
from bladu fornication. Polish nierz&#261;dnica is literally disorderly woman. Sanskrit vecya is a
derivation of veca- house, dwelling, especially house of ill-repute, brothel. Another term,
pumccali, means literally one who runs after men. Avestan jahika is literally woman, but only of
evil creatures; another term is kunairi, from pejorative prefix ku- + nairi woman.


