lexicon (n.)

c.1600, a dictionary, from Middle French lexicon or directly from Modern Latin lexicon, from Greek
lexikon (biblion) word (book), from neuter of lexikos pertaining to words, from lexis word, from
legein say (see lecture (n.)).    Used originally of dictionaries of Greek, Syriac, Hebrew and
Arabic, because these typically were in Latin and in Modern Latin lexicon, not dictionarius, was the
preferred word. The modern sense of vocabulary proper to some sphere of activity (1640s) is a
figurative extension.


lexico-

word-forming element, from Latinized comb. form of Greek lexikos (see lexicon).


lexical (adj.)

1833, from Greek lexikos pertaining to words (see lexicon) + -al (1). Related: Lexically.


lexeme (n.)

1937, from lexicon + -eme, ending abstracted from morpheme. Related: Lexemic.


Thaddeus

masc. proper name, from Latin Thaddaeus, from Greek Thaddaios, from Talmudic Hebrew Tadday. Klein
derives this from Aramaic tedhayya (pl.) breasts. Thayer's Greek-English Lexicon of the New
Testament suggests the sense might be large-hearted, hence courageous. In the Bible, a surname of
the apostle Jude, brother of James the Less.


lexicographer (n.)

1650s, from French lexicographe lexicographer, from Greek lexikographos, from lexikon wordbook (see
lexicon) + -graphos writer, from graphein to write (see -graphy).


weakling (n.)

1520s, coined by Tyndale from weak (adj.) + -ling as a loan-translation of Luther's Weichling
effeminate man (from German weich soft) in I Cor. vi.9, where the Greek is malakoi, from malakos
soft, soft to the touch, Like the Lat. mollis, metaph. and in a bad sense: effeminate, of a
catamite, a male who submits his body to unnatural lewdness [Thayer's Greek-English Lexicon of the
New Testament].


delirium tremens (n.)

1813, medical Latin, literally trembling delirium, introduced 1813 by British physician Thomas
Sutton, for that form of delirium which is rendered worse by bleeding, but improved by opium. By
Rayer and subsequent writers it has been almost exclusively applied to delirium resulting from the
abuse of alcohol [Sydenham Society Lexicon of Medicine]. As synonyms, Farmer lists barrel-fever,
gallon distemper, blue Johnnies, bottle ache, pink spiders, quart-mania snakes in the boots,
triangles, uglies, etc.


waive (v.)

c.1300, deprive of legal protection, from Anglo-French weyver to abandon, waive (Old French guever
to abandon, give back), probably from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse veifa to swing about,
from Proto-Germanic *waif- (see waif). In Middle English legal language, used of rights, goods, or
women.    If the defendant be a woman, the proceeding is called a waiver; for as women were not
sworn to the law by taking the oath of allegiance in the leet (as men anciently were when of the age
of twelve years and upwards), they could not properly be outlawed, but were said to be waived, i.e.,
derelicta, left out, or not regarded. [from section subtitled Outlawry in J.J.S. Wharton, Law-
Lexicon, or Dictionary of Jurisprudence, London, 1867]    Related: Waived; waiving.


kaput (adj.)

finished, worn out, dead, 1895, from German kaputt destroyed, ruined, lost (1640s), which in this
sense probably is a misunderstanding of the phrase capot machen, a partial translation of French
faire capot, a phrase which meant to win all the tricks (from the other player) in piquet, an
obsolete card game. Literally to make a bonnet; perhaps the notion is throwing a hood over the other
player, but faire capot also meant in French marine jargon to overset in a squall when under sail.
The word was popularized in English during World War I.   Kaput -- a slang word in common use which
corresponds roughly to the English done in, the French fichu. Everything enemy was kaput in the
early days of German victories. [F. Britten Austin, According to Orders, New York, 1919]    French
capot is literally cover, bonnet, also the name of a type of greatcloak worn by sailors and soldiers
(see capote). The card-playing sense attested in German only from 1690s, but capot in the
(presumably) transferred sense of destroyed, ruined, lost is attested from 1640s. [see William
Jervis Jones, A Lexicon of French Borrowings in the German Vocabulary (1575-1648), Berlin, de
Gruyter, 1976]. In Hoyle and other English gaming sources, faire capot is to win all the tricks, and
a different phrase, &ecirc;tre capot, to be a bonnet, is sometimes cited as the term for losing
them. The sense reversal in German might have come about because if someone wins all the tricks the
other player has to lose them, and the same word capot, when it entered English from French in the
mid-17c. meant to score a cabot against; to win all the tricks from.    There are others, says a
third, that have played with my Lady Lurewell at picquet besides my lord; I have capotted her myself
two or three times in an evening. [George Farquhar (1677-1707), Sir Harry Wildair]


