liable (adj.)

mid-15c., bound or obliged by law, probably from Anglo-French *liable, from Old French lier to bind,
tie up, fasten, tether; bind by obligation, from Latin ligare to bind, to tie (see ligament). With
-able. General sense of exposed to (something undesirable) is from 1590s. Incorrect use for likely
is attested by 1886.


liability (n.)

1790, originally a term in law; condition of being legally liable; see liable + -ity. General sense
is from 1809; meaning thing for which one is liable is first attested 1842. Related: Liabilities.


chargeable (adj.)

late 15c., burdensome, from charge (v.) + -able. Sense of subject to a tax or payment is from 1610s;
that of liable to be made an expense is from 1640s; that of liable to be charged (with an offense,
etc.) is from 1660s.


fragile (adj.)

1510s, liable to sin, morally weak; c.1600, liable to break; a back-formation from fragility, or
else from Middle French fragile (Old French fragele, 14c.), from Latin fragilis easily broken, from
root of frangere to break (see fraction). Transferred sense of of frail constitution (of persons) is
from 1858.


answerable (adj.)

liable to be held responsible, 1540s, from answer (v.) + -able. Less-common meaning able to be
answered is from 1690s.


rickety (adj.)

liable to fall down, 1680s, from rickets (with + -y (2)), via notion of weak, unhealthy. Literal
sense is from c.1720 but never common in English. Of material things, from 1799.


fencible (adj.)

early 15c., capable of making a defense, short for defensible; also see fence (n.). As a noun,
soldier enlisted to defend against invasion and not liable to serve abroad (1796).


cognizable (adj.)

1670s, capable of being known, also liable to be tried in a given court or jurisdiction, from stem
of cognizance + -able.


uncontroverted (adj.)

not liable to be called into question, 1640s, from un- (1) not + past participle of controvert (v.).


presentable (adj.)

mid-15c., of a benefice; also, in law, liable to formal charge of wrongdoing, from present (v.) +
-able. Meaning suitable in appearance is from 1800. Related: Presentably.


phobic (adj.)

1888, from phobia + -ic. As a noun from 1968. The Greek adjective was phobetikos liable to fear.


fallible (adj.)

early 15c., from Medieval Latin fallibilis liable to err, deceitful, literally that can be deceived,
from Latin fallere deceive (see fail (v.)).


accountable (adj.)

answerable, literally liable to be called to account, c.1400 (mid-14c. in Anglo-French); see account
(v.) + -able. Related: Accountably.


corruptible (adj.)

mid-14c., of material things, from Old French corroptible (14c.), from Late Latin corruptibilis
liable to decay, corruptible, from past participle stem of corrumpere (see corrupt (adj.)). Of
persons, from 1670s.


tributary (adj.)

late 14c., paying tribute, from Latin tributarius liable to tax or tribute, from tributum (see
tribute).


unstable (adj.)

early 13c., apt to move, from un- (1) not + stable (adj.). Similar formation in Middle High German
unstabel. Meaning liable to fall is recorded from c.1300; sense of fickle is attested from late 13c.
An Old English word for this was feallendlic, which might have become *fally.


miffy (adj.)

liable to 'take a miff,'  1810, from miff (n.) + -y (2). Related: Miffiness.


impeccable (adj.)

1530s, not capable of sin, from Middle French impeccable (15c.) or directly from Late Latin
impeccabilis not liable to sin, from assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + pecare
to sin, of unknown origin. Meaning faultless is from 1610s. Related: Impeccably.


accountant (n.)

mid-15c., accounting officer, one who renders accounts, from Old French acuntant (Modern French
accomptant), from present participle of accompter (see account (v.)). Sense of professional maker of
accounts is recorded from 1530s. The word also was an adjective in Middle English, accountable;
liable to render accounts (early 15c.).


inflammable (adj.)

early 15c., in medicine, liable to inflammation, from Middle French inflammable and directly from
Medieval Latin inflammabilis, from Latin inflammare (see inflame). As able to be set alight, c.1600.
Related: Inflammability.


voluble (adj.)

early 15c., liable to constant change, from Middle French voluble, from Latin volubilis that turns
around, rolling, flowing, figuratively (of speech) fluent, rapid, from volvere to turn around, roll
(see volvox). Meaning fluent, talkative first recorded 1580s. Related: Volubly.


unaccountable (adj.)

1640s, inexplicable, from un- (1) not + accountable. Meaning not liable to be called to account is
recorded from 1640s. Related: Unaccountably; unaccountability; unaccountableness.


vertiginous (adj.)

c.1600, of the nature of vertigo, from French vertigineux, from Latin vertiginosus suffering from
dizziness, from vertigo (see vertigo). From 1620s as dizzy; 1640s as liable to cause dizziness.
Related: Vertiginously.


susurrus (n.)

1809, earlier as a medical Latin word in English, from Latin susurrus, literally a humming,
muttering, whispering (see susurration).    Among the diseases of the ear, one of the most prevalent
is the Paracusis imaginaria, to which both sexes are equally liable; and another variety of the same
tribe, more frequent among female patients, called the Susurrus criticus, or Scandal-buzz. [The
Lounger, Dec. 23, 1786]


temperate (adj.)

late 14c., of persons, modest, forbearing, self-restrained, not swayed by passion; of climates or
seasons, not liable to excessive heat or cold, from Latin temperatus restrained, regulated, limited,
moderate, sober, calm, steady, from past participle of temperare to moderate, regulate (see temper
(v.)). Related: Temperately; temperateness. Temperate zone is attested from 1550s.


amenable (adj.)

1590s, liable, from Anglo-French amenable, Middle French amener answerable (to the law), from
&agrave; to (see ad-) + mener to lead, from Latin minare to drive (cattle) with shouts, variant of
minari threaten (see menace (n.)). Sense of tractable is from 1803, from notion of disposed to
answer or submit to influence. Related: Amenably.


prone (adj.)

c.1400, naturally inclined to something, apt, liable, from Latin pronus bent forward, leaning
forward, bent over, figuratively inclined to, disposed, perhaps from adverbial form of pro- before,
for, instead of (see pro-) + ending as in infernus, externus. Meaning lying face-down is first
recorded 1570s. Literal and figurative senses both were in Latin; figurative is older in English.
Related: Proneness.


climacteric

c.1600 (adj.), 1620s (n.), from Latin climactericus, from Greek klimakterikos of a critical period,
from klimakter rung of a ladder (see climax (n.)). A critical stage in human life, a period supposed
to be especially liable to change. By some, held to be the years that are multiples of 7 (7, 14, 21,
etc.), by others only the odd multiples (7, 21, 35, etc.), and by still others the multiples of 9.
The Great Climacteric was the 63rd year (7x9), supposed to be especially critical.


brittle (adj.)

late 14c., britel, perhaps from an unrecorded Old English adjective *brytel, related to brytan to
crush, pound, to break to pieces, from Proto-Germanic stem *brutila- brittle, from *breutan to break
up (cognates: Old Norse brjota to break, Old High German brodi fragile), from PIE *bhreu- to cut,
break up (see bruise (v.)). With -le, suffix forming adjectives with meaning liable to.


hemorrhoids (n.)

plural of hemorrhoid; late 14c., emeroudis, from Old French emorroides (13c.), from Latin
h&aelig;morrhoidae, from Greek haimorrhoides (phlebes) (veins) liable to discharge blood, plural of
haimorrhois, from haima blood (see -emia) + rhoos a stream, a flowing, from rhein to flow (see
rheum). Related: Hemmorhoidal.


frail (adj.)

mid-14c., morally weak, from Old French fraile, frele weak, frail, sickly, infirm (12c., Modern
French fr&ecirc;le), from Latin fragilis easily broken (see fragility). It is the Frenchified form
of fragile. Sense of easily destroyed, liable to break in English is from late 14c. The U.S. slang
noun meaning a woman is attested from 1908; perhaps with awareness of Shakespeare's Frailty, thy
name is woman.


suspect (adj.)

early 14c., suspected of wrongdoing, under suspicion; mid-14c., regarded with mistrust, liable to
arouse suspicion, from Old French suspect (14c.), from Latin suspectus suspected, regarded with
suspicion or mistrust, past participle of suspicere look up at, look upward, figuratively look up
to, admire, respect; also look at secretly, look askance at, hence, figuratively, mistrust, regard
with suspicion, from assimilated form of sub up to (see sub-) + specere to look at (see scope
(n.1)). The notion behind the word is look at secretly, hence, look at distrustfully.


pathetic (adj.)

1590s, affecting the emotions, exciting the passions, from Middle French path&eacute;tique moving,
stirring, affecting (16c.), from Late Latin patheticus, from Greek pathetikos subject to feeling,
sensitive, capable of emotion, from pathetos liable to suffer, verbal adjective of pathein to suffer
(see pathos). Meaning arousing pity, pitiful is first recorded 1737. Colloquial sense of so
miserable as to be ridiculous is attested from 1937.  Related: Pathetical (1570s); pathetically.
Pathetic fallacy (1856, first used by Ruskin) is the attribution of human qualities to inanimate
objects.


obnoxious (adj.)

1580s, subject to the authority of another, from Latin obnoxiosus hurtful, injurious, from obnoxius
subject, exposed to harm, from ob to, toward (see ob-) + noxa injury, hurt, damage entailing
liability (see noxious). Meaning subject to something harmful is 1590s; meaning offensive, hateful
is first recorded 1670s, influenced by noxious.Obnoxious has two very different senses, one of which
(exposed or open or liable to attack or injury) requires notice because its currency is now so
restricted that it is puzzling to the uninstructed. It is the word's rightful or de jure meaning,
and we may hope that scholarly writers will keep it alive. [Fowler]  Related: Obnoxiously;
obnoxiousness.


mutable (adj.)

late 14c., liable to change, from Latin mutabilis changeable, from mutare to change, from PIE root
*mei- (1) to change, go, move (cognates: Sanskrit methati changes, alternates, joins, meets; Avestan
mitho perverted, false; Hittite mutai- be changed into; Latin meare to go, pass, migrare to move
from one place to another; Old Church Slavonic mite alternately; Czech mijim to go by, pass by,
Polish mija&#263; avoid; Gothic maidjan to change); with derivatives referring to the exchange of
goods and services as regulated by custom or law (compare Latin mutuus done in exchange, munus
service performed for the community, duty, work).


empiricism (n.)

1650s, in the medical sense, from empiric + -ism. Later in a general sense of reliance on direct
observation rather than theory, especially an undue reliance on mere individual experience; in
reference to a philosophical doctrine which regards experience as the only source of knowledge from
1796.    Were I obliged to give a short name to the attitude in question, I should call it that of
radical empiricism, in spite of the fact that such brief nicknames are nowhere more misleading than
in philosophy. I say 'empiricism' because it is contented to regard its most assured conclusions
concerning matters of fact as hypotheses liable to modification in the course of future experience;
and I say 'radical,' because it treats the doctrine of monism itself as an hypothesis, and, unlike
so much of the half way empiricism that is current under the name of positivism or agnosticism or
scientific naturalism, it does not dogmatically affirm monism as something with which all experience
has got to square. The difference between monism and pluralism is perhaps the most pregnant of all
the differences in philosophy. [William James, preface to The Sentiment of Rationality in The Will
to Believe and Other Essays in Popular Philosophy, 1897]


berserk (adj.)

1844, from berserk (n.) Norse warrior, by 1835, an alternative form of berserker (1822), a word
which was introduced by Sir Walter Scott, from Old Norse berserkr (n.) raging warrior of superhuman
strength; probably from *ber- bear + serkr shirt, thus literally a warrior clothed in bearskin. Thus
not from Old Norse berr bare, naked.    Thorkelin, in the essay on the Berserkir, appended to his
edition of the Krisini Saga, tells that an old name of the Berserk frenzy was hamremmi, i.e.,
strength acquired from another strange body, because it was anciently believed that the persons who
were liable to this frenzy were mysteriously endowed, during its accesses, with a strange body of
unearthly strength. If, however, the Berserk was called on by his own name, he lost his mysterious
form, and his ordinary strength alone remained. [Notes and Queries, Dec. 28, 1850]     The
adjectival use probably is from such phrases as berserk frenzy, or as a title (Arngrim the Berserk).


they (pron.)

c.1200, from a Scandinavian source (Old Norse &#254;eir, Old Danish, Old Swedish &#254;er,
&#254;air), originally masculine plural demonstrative pronoun, from Proto-Germanic *thai, nominative
plural pronoun, from PIE *to-, demonstrative pronoun (see that). Gradually replaced Old English hi,
hie, plurals of he, heo she, hit it by c.1400. Colloquial use for anonymous people in authority is
attested from 1886. They say for it is said is in Milton.    The most important importation of this
kind [from Scandinavian to English] was that of the pronomial forms they, them and their, which
entered readily into the system of English pronouns beginning with the same sound (the, that, this)
and were felt to be more distinct than the old native forms which they supplanted. Indeed these were
liable to constant confusion with some forms of the singular number (he, him, her) after the vowels
has become obscured, so that he and hie, him and heom, her (hire) and heora could no longer be kept
easily apart. [Jespersen, Growth and Structure of the English Language]


kermes (n.)

shield louse, c.1600 of the insect preparation used as a dye, etc.; 1590s of the species of oak on
which the insects live, from Medieval Latin cremesinus (also source of French kerm&egrave;s, Italian
chermes, Spanish carmes), from Arabic qirmiz kermes, from Sanskrit krmi-ja a compound meaning (red
dye) produced by a worm.    The Sanskrit compound is krmih worm (from PIE root *kwrmi- worm and
cognate with Lithuanian kirmis, Old Irish cruim, Albanian krimp worm) + -ja- produced (from PIE
*gene-; see genus). The insect lives in the Levant and southern Europe on a species of oak (kermes
oak). They were esteemed from ancient times as a source of red and scarlet dye. The dye is harvested
from pregnant females, which in that state resemble small roundish grains about the size of peas and
cling immobile to the tree on which they live.    From this fact kermes dye was, for a long time,
mistaken in Europe as being from a seed or excrescence of the tree, and the word for it in Greek was
kokkos, literally a grain, seed (see cocco-). This was passed to Latin as coccum, coccus berry [sic]
yielding scarlet dye, in late use scarlet color, scarlet garment.   So important was kermes (coccus)
as a commercial source of scarlet dye that derivatives of the name for it have displaced the
original word for red in many languages, such as Welsh coch (from Latin), Modern Greek kokkinos.
Compare also crimson (n.).  Kermes dyes have been found in burial wrappings in Anglo-Scandinavian
York, but the use of kermes dyes seems to have been lost in Europe from the Dark Ages until early
15c. It fell out of use again with the introduction of cochineal (the word for which might itself be
from coccus) from the New World.    Cloths dyed with kermes are of a deep red colour; and though
much inferior in brilliancy to the scarlet cloths dyed with real Mexican cochineal, they retain the
colour better and are less liable to stain. The tapestries of Brussels and other parts of Flanders,
which have scarcely lost any thing of their original brilliancy, even after a lapse of 200 years,
were all dyed with kermes. [W.T. Brande, Dictionary of Science, Literature, &amp; Art, London, 1842]


