liberation (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French lib&#233;ration and directly from Latin liberationem (nominative
liberatio) a setting or becoming free, noun of action from past participle stem of liberare set free
(see liberate). Liberation theology (1969) translates Spanish teologia de la liberaci&oacute;n,
coined 1968 by Peruvian priest Gustavo Guti&eacute;rrez.


PLO

initialism (acronym) of Palestinian Liberation Organization, by 1965.


lib (n.)

1969, American English, shortening of liberation, used with possessives, originally in Women's Lib.
Colloquial shortening libber for liberationist is attested from 1971.


hurrah

1680s, alteration of huzza, similar to shouts recorded in German, Danish, Swedish. Perhaps picked up
during Thirty Years' War. Hurra was said to be the battle-cry of Prussian soldiers during the War of
Liberation (1812-13). Hooray is its popular form and is almost as old. Also hurray (1780); hurroo
(1824); hoorah (1798).


Symbionese (adj.)

in Symbionese Liberation Army (SLA), name adopted by a socialist revolutionary group active in U.S.
1972-76, coined from simbion an organism living in symbiosis, from symbioun (see symbiosis) +
people-name ending -ese.


animal (adj.)

late 14c., from animal (n.). Animal rights is attested from 1879; animal liberation from 1973.
Animal magnetism originally (1784) referred to mesmerism.


woman (n.)

adult female human, late Old English wimman, wiman (plural wimmen), literally woman-man, alteration
of wifman (plural wifmen) woman, female servant (8c.), a compound of wif woman (see wife) + man
human being (in Old English used in reference to both sexes; see man (n.)). Compare Dutch vrouwmens
wife, literally woman-man.    It is notable that it was thought necessary to join wif, a neuter
noun, representing a female person, to man, a masc. noun representing either a male or female
person, to form a word denoting a female person exclusively. [Century Dictionary]    The formation
is peculiar to English and Dutch. Replaced older Old English wif and quean as the word for female
human being. The pronunciation of the singular altered in Middle English by the rounding influence
of -w-; the plural retains the original vowel. Meaning wife, now largely restricted to U.S.
dialectal use, is attested from mid-15c. Woman-hater misogynist is from c.1600. Women's work is from
1660s. Women's liberation is attested from 1966; women's rights is from 1840, with an isolated
example in 1630s.


free (adj.)

Old English freo free, exempt from, not in bondage, also noble; joyful, from Proto-Germanic *frijaz
(cognates: Old Frisian fri, Old Saxon and Old High German vri, German frei, Dutch vrij, Gothic freis
free), from PIE *prijos dear, beloved, from root *pri- to love (cognates: Sanskrit priyah own, dear,
beloved, priyate loves; Old Church Slavonic prijati to help, prijatelji friend; Welsh rhydd free).
The primary sense seems to have been beloved, friend, to love; which in some languages (notably
Germanic and Celtic) developed also a sense of free, perhaps from the terms beloved or friend being
applied to the free members of one's clan (as opposed to slaves; compare Latin liberi, meaning both
free and children).    Compare Gothic frijon to love; Old English freod affection, friendship, friga
love, fri&eth;u peace; Old Norse fri&eth;r, German Friede peace; Old English freo wife; Old Norse
Frigg wife of Odin, literally beloved or loving; Middle Low German vrien to take to wife, Dutch
vrijen, German freien to woo.  Of nations, not subject to foreign rule or to despotism, it is
recorded from late 14c. (Free world non-communist nations attested from 1950.) Sense of given
without cost is 1580s, from notion of free of cost. Free lunch, originally offered in bars to draw
in business, by 1850, American English. Free pass on railways, etc., attested by 1850. Free speech
in Britain used of a privilege in Parliament since the time of Henry VIII. In U.S., as a civil
right, it became a prominent phrase in the debates over the Gag Rule (1836).   Free enterprise
recorded from 1890; free trade is from 1823. Free will is from early 13c. Free association in
psychology is from 1899. Free love sexual liberation attested from 1822. Free range (adj.) is
attested by 1960. Free and easy unrestrained is from 1690s.


man (n.)

Old English man, mann human being, person (male or female); brave man, hero; servant, vassal, from
Proto-Germanic *manwaz (cognates: Old Saxon, Swedish, Dutch, Old High German man, German Mann, Old
Norse ma&eth;r, Danish mand, Gothic manna man), from PIE root *man- (1) man (cognates: Sanskrit
manuh, Avestan manu-, Old Church Slavonic mozi, Russian muzh man, male).    Plural men (German
M&auml;nner) shows effects of i-mutation. Sometimes connected to root *men- to think (see mind),
which would make the ground sense of man one who has intelligence, but not all linguists accept
this. Liberman, for instance, writes, Most probably man 'human being' is a secularized divine name
from Mannus [Tacitus, Germania, chap. 2], believed to be the progenitor of the human race.    So I
am as he that seythe, `Come hyddr John, my man.' [1473]    Sense of adult male is late (c.1000); Old
English used wer and wif to distinguish the sexes, but wer began to disappear late 13c. and was
replaced by man. Universal sense of the word remains in mankind and manslaughter. Similarly, Latin
had homo human being and vir adult male human being, but they merged in Vulgar Latin, with homo
extended to both senses. A like evolution took place in Slavic languages, and in some of them the
word has narrowed to mean husband. PIE had two stems: *uiHro freeman (source of Sanskrit vira-,
Lithuanian vyras, Latin vir, Old Irish fer, Gothic wair) and *hner man, a title more of honor than
*uiHro (source of Sanskrit nar-, Armenian ayr, Welsh ner, Greek aner).    MANTRAP, a woman's
commodity. [Grose, Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, London, 1785]   Man also was in Old English as
an indefinite pronoun, one, people, they. The chess pieces so called from c.1400. As an interjection
of surprise or emphasis, first recorded c.1400, but especially popular from early 20c. Man-about-
town is from 1734; the Man the boss is from 1918. To be man or mouse be brave or be timid is from
1540s. Men's Liberation first attested 1970.At the kinges court, my brother, Ech man for himself.
[Chaucer, Knight's Tale, c.1386]


