libel (v.)

mid-15c., make an initial statement setting out a plaintiff's case (modern sense from 1560s), from
libel (n.), q.v. for sense development. Related: Libeled; libelled; libeling; libelling.


libelous (adj.)

also libellous, 1610s, from libel (n.) + -ous. Related: Libelously; libelousness.


libel (n.)

c.1300, formal written statement, especially, in civil law, plaintiff's statement of charges (mid-
14c.); from Old French libelle (fem.) small book; (legal) charge, claim; writ; written report
(13c.), from Latin libellus a little book, pamphlet; petition, written accusation, complaint,
diminutive of liber book (see library). Broader sense of any published or written statement likely
to harm a person's reputation is first attested 1630s.


scold (n.)

mid-12c., person of ribald speech, later person fond of abusive language (c.1300), especially a
shrewish woman [Johnson defines it as A clamourous, rude, mean, low, foul-mouthed woman], from Old
Norse skald poet (see skald). The sense evolution might reflect the fact that Germanic poets (like
their Celtic counterparts) were famously feared for their ability to lampoon and mock (as in
skaldskapr poetry, also, in Icelandic law books, libel in verse).


innuendo (n.)

1670s, oblique hint, indiscreet suggestion, usually a deprecatory one, from Latin innuendo by
meaning, pointing to, literally giving a nod to, ablative of gerund of innuere to mean, signify,
literally to nod to, from in- at + nuere to nod (see numinous). Originally a legal phrase (1560s)
from Medieval Latin, with the sense of to wit. It often introduced the derogatory meaning alleged in
libel cases, which influenced its broader meaning. As a verb, from 1706.


Philadelphia

city in Pennsylvania, U.S., from Greek, taken by William Penn to mean brotherly love, from philos
loving (see -phile) + adelphos brother (see Adelphia). Also the name recalls that of the ancient
city in Lydia, mentioned in the New Testament, which was so called in honor of Attalos II
Philadelphos, 2c B.C.E. king of Pergamon, who founded it. His title is said to have meant loving the
brethren. Philadelphia lawyer clever, shrewd attorney attested from 1788 in London, said originally
to have been applied to Andrew Hamilton, who obtained the famous acquittal of J.P. Zenger on libel
charges in 1735.    [C]ricket and coaching were after all popular in their day in places besides
Philadelphia. It was merely that Philadelphia kept on with them longer than most places. This is a
perennial Philadelphia trick, and gives to Philadelphia a sort of perpetual feeling of loss.
Philadelphians are always just now getting rid of things that are picturesque, like those gas lamps
on the streets, only because everybody else got rid of them long ago. [Nathaniel Burt, The Perennial
Philadelphians, 1963]


