licentious (adj.)

morally unrestrained, 1530s, from Medieval Latin licentiosus full of license, unrestrained, from
Latin licentia (see license). Related: Licentiously; licentiousness.


Messalina

scheming and licentious woman, 1887, in reference to Valeria Messalina, notorious third wife of
Roman emperor Claudius.


Cyprian (adj.)

1620s, of Cyprus, from Latin Cyprianus, from Cyprius, from Greek Kyprios (see Cyprus). The island
was famous in ancient times as the birthplace of Aphrodite and for erotic worship rituals offered to
her there; hence Cyprian meant licentious, lewd, the earliest attested sense in English (1590s) and
was applied 18c.-19c. to prostitutes.


peccadillo (n.)

slight sin, 1590s (earlier in corrupt form peccadilian, 1520s), from Spanish pecadillo, diminutive
of pecado a sin, from Latin peccatum a sin, fault, error, noun use of neuter past participle of
peccare to miss, mistake, make a mistake, do amiss; transgress, offend, be licentious, sin, perhaps
literally to stumble, from a PIE verbal root *ped- to walk, stumble, fall, related to the root of
foot (n.).


libertine (n.)

late 14c., a freedman, an emancipated slave, from Latin libertinus member of a class of freedmen,
from libertus one's freedmen, from liber free (see liberal). Sense of freethinker is first recorded
1560s, from French libertin (1540s) originally the name given to certain Protestant sects in France
and the Low Countries. Meaning dissolute or licentious person first recorded 1590s; the darkening of
meaning being perhaps due to misunderstanding of Latin libertinus in Acts vi:9. As an adjective by
1570s.


perfidy (n.)

1590s, from Middle French perfidie (16c.), from Latin perfidia faithlessness, falsehood, treachery,
from perfidus faithless, from phrase per fidem decipere to deceive through trustingness, from per
through (see per) + fidem (nominative fides) faith (see faith).    [C]ombinations of wickedness
would overwhelm the world by the advantage which licentious principles afford, did not those who
have long practiced perfidy grow faithless to each other. [Samuel Johnson, Life of Waller]


orgy (n.)

1560s, orgies (plural) secret rites in the worship of certain Greek and Roman gods, especially
Dionysus, from Middle French orgies (c.1500, from Latin orgia), and directly from Greek orgia
(plural) secret rites, especially those of Bacchus, from PIE root *werg- to do (see organ). The
singular, orgy, was first used in English 1660s for the extended sense of any licentious revelry.
OED says of the ancient rites that they were celebrated with extravagant dancing, singing, drinking,
etc., which gives etc. quite a workout.


ribald (adj.)

c.1500, from ribald, ribaud (n.), mid-13c., a rogue, ruffian, rascall, scoundrell, varlet, filthie
fellow [Cotgrave], from Old French ribaut, ribalt rogue, scoundrel, lewd lover, also as an
adjective, wanton, depraved, dissolute, licentious, of uncertain origin, perhaps (with suffix -ald)
from riber be wanton, sleep around, dally amorously, from a Germanic source (compare Old High German
riban be wanton, literally to rub, possibly from the common euphemistic use of rub words to mean
have sex), from Proto-Germanic *wribanan, from PIE root *wer- (3) to turn, bend (see versus).


smell (v.)

late 12c., emit or perceive an odor, not found in Old English, perhaps cognate with Middle Dutch
smolen, Low German smelen to smolder (see smolder). However, OED says no doubt of Old English
origin, but not recorded, and not represented in any of the cognate languages. Related: Smelled or
smelt; smelling.   Smelling salts (1840), used to revive the woozy, typically were a scented
preparation of carbonate of ammonia. Smell-feast (n.) one who finds and frequents good tables, one
who scents out where free food is to be had is from 1510s (very common c.1540-1700, OED). Smell-
smock licentious man was in use c.1550-c.1900. To smell a rat be suspicious is from 1540s.


goat (n.)

Old English gat she-goat, from Proto-Germanic *gaitaz (cognates: Old Saxon get, Old Norse geit,
Danish gjed, Middle Dutch gheet, Dutch geit, Old High German geiz, German Gei&szlig;, Gothic gaits
goat), from PIE *ghaid-o- young goat, also forming words for to play (cognates: Latin h&aelig;dus
kid).    The word for male goat in Old English was bucca (see buck (n.)) until late 1300s shift to
he-goat, she-goat (Nanny goat is 18c., billy goat 19c.). Meaning licentious man is attested from
1670s. To get (someone's) goat is from 1910, perhaps with notion of to steal a goat mascot from a
racehorse, or from French prendre sa ch&egrave;vre take one's source of milk.


suburb (n.)

early 14c., area outside a town or city, whether agricultural or residential but most frequently
residential, from Old French suburbe suburb of a town, from Latin suburbium an outlying part of a
city (especially Rome), from sub below, near (see sub-) + urbs (genitive urbis) city (see urban).
Glossed in Old English as underburg. Just beyond the reach of municipal jurisdiction, suburbs had a
bad reputation in 17c. England, especially those of London, and suburban had a sense of inferior,
debased, licentious (as in suburban sinner, slang for loose woman, prostitute). By 1817, the tinge
had shifted to of inferior manners and narrow views. Compare also French equivalent faubourg.
[T]he growth of the metropolis throws vast numbers of people into distant dormitories where ... life
is carried on without the discipline of rural occupations and without the cultural resources that
the Central District of the city still retains. [Lewis Mumford, 1922]


bawd (n.)

a complicated word of uncertain history. First attested late 15c., lewd person (of either sex; since
c.1700 applied only to women), probably from baude-strote procurer of prostitutes (mid-14c.), which
may be from Middle English bawde (adj.) merry, joyous, from Old French baud gay, licentious (from
Frankish bald bold or some such Germanic source). It would not be the first time a word meaning
joyous had taken on a sexual sense. The sense evolution shading from bold to lewd is not difficult;
compare Old French baudise ardor, joy, elation, act of boldness, presumption; baudie elation, high
spirits, fole baudie bawdry, shamelessness. The Old French word also is the source of French baudet
donkey, in Picardy dialect loose woman.    The second element in baude-strote would be trot one who
runs errands, or Germanic *strutt (see strut). But OED doubts all this. There was an Old French
baudestrote, baudetrot of the same meaning (13c.), and this may be the direct source of Middle
English baude-strote. The obsolete word bronstrops procuress, frequently found in Middleton's
comedies, probably is an alteration of baude-strote.


liberal (adj.)

mid-14c., generous, also, late 14c., selfless; noble, nobly born; abundant, and, early 15c., in a
bad sense extravagant, unrestrained, from Old French liberal befitting free men, noble, generous,
willing, zealous (12c.), from Latin liberalis noble, gracious, munificent, generous, literally of
freedom, pertaining to or befitting a free man, from liber free, unrestricted, unimpeded; unbridled,
unchecked, licentious, from PIE *leudh-ero- (source of Greek eleutheros free), probably originally
belonging to the people (though the precise semantic development is obscure), and a suffixed form of
the base *leudh- people (cognates: Old Church Slavonic ljudu, Lithuanian liaudis, Old English leod,
German Leute nation, people; Old High German liut person, people) but literally to mount up, to
grow.    With the meaning free from restraint in speech or action, liberal was used 16c.-17c. as a
term of reproach. It revived in a positive sense in the Enlightenment, with a meaning free from
prejudice, tolerant, which emerged 1776-88.    In reference to education, explained by Fowler as the
education designed for a gentleman (Latin liber a free man) &amp; ... opposed on the one hand to
technical or professional or any special training, &amp; on the other to education that stops short
before manhood is reached (see liberal arts). Purely in reference to political opinion, tending in
favor of freedom and democracy it dates from c.1801, from French lib&eacute;ral, originally applied
in English by its opponents (often in French form and with suggestions of foreign lawlessness) to
the party favorable to individual political freedoms. But also (especially in U.S. politics) tending
to mean favorable to government action to effect social change, which seems at times to draw more
from the religious sense of free from prejudice in favor of traditional opinions and established
institutions (and thus open to new ideas and plans of reform), which dates from
1823.<b>Conservative</b>, n. A statesman who is enamored of existing evils, as distinguished from
the Liberal, who wishes to replace them with others. [Ambrose Bierce, Devil's Dictionary, 1911]


