lien (n.)

right to hold property of another until debt is paid, 1530s, from Middle French lien a band or tie,
from Latin ligamen bond, from ligare to bind, tie (see ligament).


lieno-

word-forming element meaning spleen, from Latin lien spleen (see spleen).


spleen (n.)

c.1300, from Old French esplen, from Latin splen, from Greek splen the milt, spleen, from PIE
*spelgh- spleen, milt (cognates: Sanskrit plihan-, Avestan sperezan, Armenian p'aicaln, Latin lien,
Old Church Slavonic slezena, Lithuanian blu&#382;nis, Old Prussian blusne, Old Irish selg spleen).
Regarded in medieval physiology as the seat of morose feelings and bad temper. Hence figurative
sense of violent ill-temper (1580s, implied in spleenful); and thence spleenless free from anger,
ill-humor, malice, or spite (1610s).


surrealism (n.)

1927, from French surr&eacute;alisme (from sur- beyond + r&eacute;alisme realism), according to OED
coined c.1917 by Guillaume Apollinaire, taken over by Andre Breton as the name of the movement he
launched in 1924 with Manifeste de Surr&eacute;alisme. Taken up in English at first in the French
form; the anglicized version is from 1931.  De cette alliance nouvelle, car jusqu'ici les
d&eacute;cors et les costumes d'une part, la chor&eacute;graphie d'autre part, n'avaient entre eux
qu'un lien factice, il este r&eacute;sult&eacute;, dans 'Parade,' une sorte de surr&eacute;alisme.
[Apollinaire, Notes to 'Parade' ]    See sur- (1) + realism.


save (v.)

c.1200, to deliver from some danger; rescue from peril, bring to safety, also prevent the death of;
also theological, to deliver from sin or its consequences; admit to eternal life; gain salvation,
from Old French sauver keep (safe), protect, redeem, from Late Latin salvare make safe, secure, from
Latin salvus safe (see safe (adj.)). From c.1300 as reserve for future use, hold back, store up
instead of spending; hence keep possession of (late 14c.).   Save face (1898) first was used among
the British community in China and is said to be from Chinese; it has not been found in Chinese, but
tiu lien to lose face does occur. To not (do something) to save one's life is recorded from 1848. To
save (one's) breath cease talking or arguing is from 1926.


face (n.)

late 13c., front of the head, from Old French face (12c.) face, countenance, look, appearance, from
Vulgar Latin *facia (source also of Italian faccia), from Latin facies appearance, form, figure, and
secondarily visage, countenance; probably related to facere to make (see factitious).    Replaced
Old English andwlita (from root of wlitan to see, look) and ansyn, the usual word (from the root of
seon see). In French, the use of face for front of the head was given up 17c. and replaced by visage
(older vis), from Latin visus sight. To lose face (or save face), 1876, is said to be from Chinese
tu lien. Face value was originally (1878) of bank notes, postage stamps, etc.


