limp (adj.)

1706, flaccid, drooping, of obscure origin, perhaps related to limp (v.).


limp (v.)

1560s, of unknown origin, perhaps related to Middle English lympen to fall short (c.1400), which is
probably from Old English lemphealt halting, lame, limping, which has a lone cognate in the rare
Middle High German limphin, and perhaps is from a PIE root meaning slack, loose, to hang down
(cognates: Sanskrit lambate hangs down, Middle High German lampen to hang down). Related: Limped;
limping. As a noun, 1818, from the verb.


blimp (n.)

1916, of obscure origin, many claimants. One of the weird coinages of the airmen [Weekley]. Common
theory is that it is from designers' prototype nickname Type B-limp, in the sense of without
internal framework, as opposed to Type A-rigid; thus see limp (adj.).


hitch (n.)

1660s, a limp or hobble; 1670s, an abrupt movement, from hitch (v.). Meaning a means by which a rope
is made fast is from 1769, nautical. The sense of obstruction is first recorded 1748; military sense
of enlistment is from 1835.


gimp (n.1)

1925, a crippled leg, also a crippled person, perhaps by association with limp, or a corruption of
gammy (see game (adj.)).


haunch (n.)

early 13c., from Old French hanche (12c.) hip, thigh; haunch, from a Germanic source, perhaps
Frankish *hanka (cognates: Old High German hinkan to limp, ancha leg, literally joint; Middle Dutch
hanke haunch). It is only since the 18th c. that the spelling haunch has displaced hanch [OED].
Related: Haunches.


claudication (n.)

1550s, from Middle French claudication (13c.) or directly from Latin claudicationem (nominative
claudicatio) a limping, noun of action from past participle stem of claudicare to limp, be lame,
from claudus limping, halting, lame. Related: Claudicant (adj.); claudicate.


flag (v.)

1540s, flap about loosely, perhaps a variant of Middle English flakken, flacken to flap, flutter
(late 14c.), probably from Old Norse flakka to flicker, flutter, perhaps imitative of something
flapping lazily in the wind.    Sense of go limp, droop is first recorded 1610s. Meaning to
designate as someone who will not be served more liquor is from 1980s, probably from use of flags to
signal trains, etc., to halt, which led to the verb in this sense (1856, American English). Related:
Flagged; flagging.


limber (adj.)

pliant, flexible, 1560s, of uncertain origin, possibly from limb (n.1) on notion of supple boughs of
a tree [Barnhart], or from limp flaccid [Skeat], or somehow from Middle English lymer shaft of a
cart (see limber (n.)), but the late appearance of the -b- in that word argues against it. Related:
Limberness. Dryden used limber-ham (see ham (n.1) in the joint sense) as a name for a character
perswaded by what is last said to him, and changing next word.


limb (n.2)

late 14c., edge of a quadrant or other instrument, from Latin limbus border, hem, fringe, edge, of
uncertain origin. Klein suggests cognate with Sanskrit lambate hangs down, and English limp. But
Tucker writes that the sense appears to be that of something which twists, goes round, or binds ...
not of something which hangs loose, and suggests cognates in Lithuanian linta ribbon, Old Norse
linnr whether. Astronomical sense of edge of the disk of a heavenly body first attested 1670s.


shank (n.)

Old English sceanca leg, shank, shinbone, specifically, the part of the leg from the knee to the
ankle, from Proto-Germanic *skankon- (cognates: Middle Low German schenke, German schenkel shank,
leg), perhaps literally that which bends, from PIE root *skeng- crooked (cognates: Old Norse skakkr
wry, distorted, Greek skazein to limp). Shank's mare one's own legs as a means of transportation is
attested from 1774 (shanks-naig).


left (adj.)

c.1200, from Kentish and northern English form of Old English lyft- weak, foolish (compare lyft-adl
lameness, paralysis, East Frisian luf, Dutch dialectal loof weak, worthless). It emerged 13c. as
opposite of right (the left being usually the weaker hand), a derived sense also found in cognate
Middle Dutch and Low German luchter, luft. But German link, Dutch linker left are from Old High
German slinc and Middle Dutch slink left, related to Old English slincan crawl, Swedish linka limp,
slinka dangle.    Replaced Old English winestra, literally friendlier, a euphemism used
superstitiously to avoid invoking the unlucky forces connected with the left side (see sinister).
The Kentish word itself may have been originally a taboo replacement, if instead it represents PIE
root *laiwo-, meaning considered conspicuous (represented in Greek laios, Latin laevus, and Russian
levyi). Greek also uses a euphemism for left, aristeros the better one (compare also Avestan
vairyastara- to the left, from vairya- desirable). But Lithuanian kairys left and Lettish kreilis
left hand derive from a root that yields words for twisted, crooked.    As an adverb from early 14c.
As a noun from c.1200. Political sense arose from members of a legislative body assigned to the left
side of a chamber, first attested in English 1837 (by Carlyle, in reference to the French
Revolution), probably a loan-translation of French la gauche (1791), said to have originated during
the seating of the French National Assembly in 1789 in which the nobility took the seats on the
President's right and left the Third Estate to sit on the left. Became general in U.S. and British
political speech c.1900.    Used since at least c.1600 in various senses of irregular, illicit;
earlier proverbial sense was opposite of what is expressed (mid-15c.). Phrase out in left field out
of touch with pertinent realities is attested from 1944, from the baseball fielding position that
tends to be far removed from the play. To have two left feet be clumsy is attested by 1902. The Left
Bank of Paris (left bank of the River Seine, as you face downstream) has been associated with
intellectual and artistic culture since at least 1893.


