lineage (n.)

late 17c. alteration (by influence of line (n.)) of Middle English linage (c.1300), from Old French
lignage descent, extraction, race, from ligne line, from Latin linea (see line (n.)).


breed (n.)

race, lineage, stock (originally of animals), 1550s, from breed (v.). Of persons, from 1590s.
Meaning kind, species is from 1580s.


parentage (n.)

late 15c., parental conduct, from Middle French parentage (12c.), from parent (see parent). Meaning
lineage is from 1560s; figurative use from 1580s.


origin (n.)

c.1400, ancestry, race, from Old French origine origin, race, and directly from Latin originem
(nominative origo) a rise, commencement, beginning, source; descent, lineage, birth, from stem of
oriri to rise, become visible, appear (see orchestra).


progeny (n.)

early 14c., from Old French progenie (13c.) and directly from Latin progenies descendants,
offspring, lineage, race, family, from stem of progignere beget, from pro- forth (see pro-) +
gignere to produce, beget (see genus).


disparage (v.)

early 14c., degrade socially, from Old French desparagier (Modern French d&eacute;parager) reduce in
rank, degrade, devalue, depreciate, originally to marry unequally, and thus by extension the
disgrace or dishonor involved in this, from des- away (see dis-) + parage rank, lineage (see peer
(n.)). Sense of belittle first recorded 1530s. Related: Disparaged; disparaging; disparagingly.


strain (n.2)

line of descent, lineage, breed, ancestry, c.1200, from Old English strion, streon a gain,
acquisition, treasure; a begetting, procreation, from Proto-Germanic *streu-nam- to pile up, from
PIE root *stere- to spread, extend, stretch out (see structure (n.)). Hence race, stock, line (early
14c.). Applied to animal species from c.1600; usually involving fairly minor variations, but not
distinct from breed (n.). Normal sound development would have yielded *streen, but the word was
altered in late Middle English, apparently by influence of strain (n.1).


descent (n.)

c.1300, from Old French descente descent, descendance, lineage, formed from descendre (see descend)
on analogy of French nouns such as attente from attendre to expect, vente sale from vendre to sell,
pente slope from pendre to hang (the etymological English word from Latin would be *descence).
Figurative use is from late 14c. Meaning action of descending, also a downward slope is from 1590s.
Meaning act of descending from an ancestor is from mid-14c. Evolutionary sense is from 1859 in
Darwin, though there are uses which suggest essentially the same thing going back to 1630s.


birth (n.)

early 13c., from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse *byr&eth;r (replacing cognate Old English
gebyrd birth, descent, race; offspring; nature; fate), from Proto-Germanic *gaburthis (cognates: Old
Frisian berd, Old Saxon giburd, Dutch geboorte, Old High German giburt, German geburt, Gothic
gabaur&thorn;s), from PIE *bhrto past participle of root *bher- (1) to carry; to bear children
(cognates: Sanskrit bhrtih a bringing, maintenance, Latin fors, genitive fortis chance; see bear
(v.)).    Suffix -th is for process (as in bath, death). Meaning parentage, lineage, extraction
(revived from Old English) is from mid-13c. Birth control is from 1914; birth rate from 1859. Birth
certificate is from 1842.


race (n.2)

people of common descent, a word from the 16th century, from Middle French race, earlier razza race,
breed, lineage, family (16c.), possibly from Italian razza, of unknown origin (cognate with Spanish
and Portuguese raza). Etymologists say no connection with Latin radix root, though they admit this
might have influenced the tribe, nation sense.    Original senses in English included wines with
characteristic flavor (1520), group of people with common occupation (c.1500), and generation
(1540s). Meaning tribe, nation, or people regarded as of common stock is by 1560s. Modern meaning of
one of the great divisions of mankind based on physical peculiarities is from 1774 (though as OED
points out, even among anthropologists there never has been an accepted classification of
these).Just being a Negro doesn't qualify you to understand the race situation any more than being
sick makes you an expert on medicine. [Dick Gregory, 1964]  In mid-20c. U.S. music catalogues,
Negro. Klein suggests these derive from Arabic ra's head, beginning, origin (compare Hebrew rosh).
Old English &thorn;eode meant both race, folk, nation and language; as a verb, ge&thorn;eodan, it
meant to unite, to join.


string (n.)

Old English streng line, cord, thread, string of a bow or harp, in plural tackle, rigging; lineage,
race, from Proto-Germanic *strangiz (cognates: Old Norse strengr, Danish streng, Middle Dutch
strenge, Dutch streng, Old High German strang, German Strang rope, cord), from *strang- taut, stiff,
from PIE root *strenk- tight, narrow. Gradually restricted by early Middle English to lines that are
smaller than a rope. Sense of a number of objects arranged in a line first recorded late 15c.    Old
English meaning ligaments, tendons is preserved in hamstring, heartstrings. Meaning limitations,
stipulations (1888) is American English, probably from the common April Fool's joke of leaving a
purse that appears to be full of money on the sidewalk, then tugging it away with an attached string
when someone stoops to pick it up.    To pull strings control the course of affairs (1860) is from
the notion of puppet theater. First string, second string, etc. in athletics (1863) is from archers'
custom of carrying spare bowstrings in the event that one breaks. Strings stringed instruments is
attested from mid-14c. String bean is from 1759; string bikini is from 1974.


line (n.)

a Middle English merger of Old English line cable, rope; series, row, row of letters; rule,
direction, and Old French ligne guideline, cord, string; lineage, descent; both from Latin linea
linen thread, string, line, from phrase linea restis linen cord, from fem. of lineus (adj.) of
linen, from linum linen (see linen).    Oldest sense is rope, cord, string; extended late 14c. to a
thread-like mark (from sense cord used by builders for making things level, mid-14c.), also track,
course, direction. Sense of things or people arranged in a straight line is from 1550s. That of cord
bearing hooks used in fishing is from c.1300. Meaning one's occupation, branch of business is from
1630s, probably from misunderstood KJV translation of 2 Cor. x:16, And not to boast in another mans
line of things made ready to our hand, where line translates Greek kanon, literally measuring rod.
Meaning class of goods in stock is from 1834. Meaning telegraph wire is from 1847 (later telephone
wire).    Meaning policy or set of policies of a political faction is 1892, American English, from
notion of a procession of followers; this is the sense in party line. In British army, the Line
(1802) is the regular, numbered troops, as distinguished from guards and auxiliaries. In the Navy
(1704, as in ship of the line) it refers to the battle line. Lines words of an actor's part is from
1882. Lines of communication were originally transverse trenches in siegeworks.


family (n.)

early 15c., servants of a household, from Latin familia family servants, domestics collectively, the
servants in a household, thus also members of a household, the estate, property; the household,
including relatives and servants, from famulus servant, of unknown origin. The Latin word rarely
appears in the sense parents with their children, for which domus (see domestic) was used.    In
English, sense of collective body of persons who form one household under one head and one domestic
government, including parents, children, and servants, and as sometimes used even lodgers or
boarders [Century Dictionary] is from 1540s. From 1660s as parents with their children, whether they
dwell together or not, also in a more general sense, persons closely related by blood, including
aunts, uncles, cousins; and in the most general sense those who descend from a common progenitor
(1580s). Meaning those claiming descent from a common ancestor, a house, a lineage is early 15c.
Hence, any group of things classed as kindred based on common distinguishing characteristics
(1620s); as a scientific classification, between genus and order, from 1753.    I have certainly
known more men destroyed by the desire to have wife and child and to keep them in comfort than I
have seen destroyed by drink and harlots. [William Butler Yeats, Autobiography]    Replaced Old
English hiwscipe. As an adjective from c.1600; with the meaning suitable for a family, by 1807.
Family values first recorded 1966. Phrase in a family way pregnant is from 1796. Family circle is
1809; family man man devoted to wife and children, man inclined to lead a domestic life is 1856
(earlier it meant thief, 1788, from family in a slang sense of the fraternity of thieves).
<b>Happy family</b> an assemblage of animals of diverse habits and propensities living amicably, or
at least quietly, together in one cage. [Century Dictionary, 1902]    The phrase is attested from
1844.


