linear (adj.)

1640s, from French lin&#233;aire, from Latin linearis belonging to a line, from linea string, line
(see line (n.)). Essentially the same word as lineal; in Latin linearis the original suffix -alis
was dissimilated to -aris, but in Late Latin this rule was no longer productive and the formation or
re-formation in -alis remained unchanged. [Barnhart]. Linear A and Linear B (1902-3) were names
given to two related forms of linear Minoan writing discovered 1894-1901 in Crete by Sir Arthur
Evans.


non-linear (adj.)

also nonlinear, 1844, from non- + linear.


bilinear (adj.)

also bi-linear, 1851, from bi- + linear. Related: Bilinearly; bilinearity.


collinear (adj.)

1863, from col- + linear.


handful (n.)

Old English handful; see hand (n.) + -ful. Originally the quality that can be held in a hand; also a
medieval linear measurement of four inches. Meaning a small portion or part is from c.1400.
Figurative meaning as much as one can manage is from 1755.




1748, from linear + -ity.


survey (v.)

c.1400, to consider, contemplate, from Anglo-French surveier, Old French sorveoir look (down) at,
look upon, notice; guard, watch, from Medieval Latin supervidere oversee (see supervise). Meaning
examine the condition of is from mid-15c. That of to take linear measurements of a tract of ground
is recorded from 1540s. Related: Surveyed; surveying; surveyance (late 14c.).


interlinear (adj.)

late 14c., from Medieval Latin interlinearis that which is between the lines, from inter- (see
inter-) + Latin linearis (see linear).


inch (n.1)

linear measure, one-twelfth of a foot, late Old English ynce, Middle English unche (current spelling
c.1300), from Latin uncia a twelfth part, from root of unus one (see one). An early borrowing from
Latin, not found in any other Germanic language. Transferred and figurative sense of a very small
amount is attested from mid-14c. For phrase give him an inch ... see ell.


perch (n.1)

where a bird rests, late 13c., originally only a pole, rod, stick, stake, from Old French perche
unit of linear measurement (5.5 yards), also measuring rod, pole, bar used to measure this length
(13c.), from Latin pertica pole, long staff, measuring rod, related to Oscan perek pole, Umbrian
perkaf twigs, rods. Meaning a bar fixed horizontally for a hawk or tame bird to rest on is attested
from late 14c.; this led to general sense of any thing that any bird alights or rests on (late
15c.). Figurative sense of an elevated or secure position is recorded from 1520s. The land-measuring
rod sense also was in Middle English (c.1200), hence surviving meaning measure of land equal to a
square lineal perch (usually 160 to the acre), mid-15c.


ell (n.1)

unit of measure, Old English eln, originally forearm, length of the arm (as a measure, anywhere from
a foot and a half to two feet), from PIE *el- (1) elbow, forearm (cognates: Greek olene elbow, Latin
ulna, Armenian uln shoulder, Sanskrit anih part of the leg above the knee, Lithuanian alkune elbow).
The exact distance varied, in part depending on whose arm was used as the base and whether it was
measured from the shoulder to the fingertip or the wrist: the Scottish ell was 37.2 inches, the
Flemish 27 inches. Latin ulna also was a unit of linear measure, and compare cubit. The modern
English unit of 45 inches seems to have been set in Tudor times. Whereas shee tooke an inche of
liberty before, tooke an ell afterwardes [Humfrey Gifford, A Posie of Gilloflowers, 1580].


foot (n.)

Old English fot, from Proto-Germanic *fot (cognates: Old Saxon fot, Old Norse fotr, Dutch voet, Old
High German fuoz, German Fu&szlig;, Gothic fotus foot), from PIE *ped- (cognates: Avestan pad-;
Sanskrit pad-, accusative padam foot; Greek pos, Attic pous, genitive podos; Latin pes, genitive
pedis foot; Lithuanian padas sole, peda footstep). Plural form feet is an instance of i-mutation. Of
a bed, grave, etc., first recorded c.1300.  The linear measurement of 12 inches was in Old English,
from the length of a man's foot. Colloquial exclamation my foot! expressing contemptuous
contradiction [OED] is first attested 1923, probably a euphemism for my ass, in the same sense,
which dates back to 1796 (also see eyewash). The metrical foot (Old English, translating Latin pes,
Greek pous in the same sense) is commonly taken as a reference to keeping time by tapping the foot.
To get off on the right foot is from 1905; to put one's best foot foremost first recorded 1849
(Shakespeare has the better foot before, 1596). To put one's foot in (one's) mouth say something
stupid is attested by 1942; the expression put (one's) foot in something make a mess of it is from
1823.


hand (n.)

Old English hond, hand hand; side; power, control, possession, from Proto-Germanic *handuz
(cognates: Old Saxon, Old Frisian, Dutch, German hand, Old Norse h&ouml;nd, Gothic handus), of
uncertain origin. The original Old English plural handa was superseded in Middle English by handen,
later hands.    Meaning person who does something with his hands is from 1580s, hence hired workman
(1630s) and sailor in a ship's crew (1660s). Clock and watch sense is from 1570s. Meaning round of
applause is from 1838. The linear measure of 4 inches (originally 3) is from 1560s, now used only in
giving the height of horses. The meaning playing cards held in one player's hand is from 1620s; that
of a round at a card game is from 1620s.  First hand, second hand, etc. (mid-15c.) are from the
notion of something being passed down from hand to hand. Out of hand (1590s) is opposite of in hand
under control (c.1200). Hand over fist (1825) is suggestive of sailors and fishermen hauling in
nets. Hand jive is from 1958. To win something hands down (1855) is from horse racing, from a
jockey's gesture of letting the reins go loose in an easy victory.    The Two Thousand Guinea Stakes
was not the best contested one that it has been our fortune to assist at. ... [T]hey were won by
Meteor, with Scott for his rider; who went by the post with his hands down, the easiest of all easy
half-lengths. Wiseacre certainly did the best in his power to spoil his position, and Misdeal was at
one time a little vexatious. [The Sportsman, report from April 26, 1840]    To hand it to (someone)
acknowledge someone's ability is slang from c.1906. Phrase on the one hand ... on the other hand is
recorded from 1630s, a figurative use of the physical sense of hand in reference to position on one
side or the other side of the body (as in the lefthand side), which goes back to Old English Hands
up! as a command from a policeman, robber, etc., is from 1873. Hand-to-mouth is from c.1500. Hand-
in-hand attested from c.1500 as with hands clasped; figurative sense of concurrently recorded from
1570s.


