linguistic (adj.)

1856, from French linguistique (1833); see linguist + -ic. The use of linguistic to mean of or
pertaining to language or languages is hardly justifiable etymologically, according to OED, but has
arisen because lingual suggests irrelevant associations. Related: linguistically.


linguistics (n.)

the science of languages, 1847; see linguistic; also see -ics.


Semitic (adj.)

1797, denoting the language group that includes Hebrew, Arabic, Aramaic, Assyrian, etc.; 1826 as of
or pertaining to Semites, from Medieval Latin Semiticus (source of Spanish semitico, French
semitique, German semitisch), from Semita (see Semite). As a noun, as the name of a linguistic
family, from 1813. In non-linguistic use, perhaps directly from German semitisch. In recent use
often with the specific sense Jewish, but not historically so limited.


Panslavism (n.)

1846, from German Pansclavismus, coined as a linguistic term by Herkel in 1826.


analgesic (adj.)

tending to remove pain, 1848, from analgesia + -ic. Alternative form analgetic is preferred by
linguistic purists but is less common in use. The noun meaning an analgesic preparation recorded by
1860.


Altaic

1832 as a linguistic family, from French Alta&#239;que, from Alta&#239;en, from Altai, name of a
mountain range in Asia.


synchronic (adj.)

occurring at the same time, 1775, shortening of synchronical (1650s), from Late Latin synchronus
simultaneous (see synchronous). Linguistic sense is first recorded 1922, probably a borrowing from
French synchronique (de Saussure, 1913). Synchronal simultaneous is from 1650s. Related:
synchronically.


did (v.)

Old English dyde, past tense of do (v.). The only remainder in Germanic of the old linguistic
pattern of forming a past tense by reduplication of the stem of the present tense. Far back in
Germanic the equivalent of did was used as a suffix to make the past tenses of other verbs, hence
the English -ed suffix (Old English -de).


Gramophone (n.)

1887, trademark by German-born U.S. inventor Emil Berliner (1851-1929), an inversion of phonogram
(1884) the tracing made by a phonograph needle, coined from Greek phone voice, sound (see fame (n.))
+ gramma something written (see grammar).    Berliner's machine used a flat disc and succeeded with
the public. Edison's phonograph used a cylinder and did not. Despised by linguistic purists (Weekley
calls gramophone An atrocity formed by reversing phonogram) who tried to at least amend it to
grammophone, it was replaced by record player after mid-1950s.


philology (n.)

late 14c., love of learning, from Latin philologia love of learning, love of letters, love of study,
literary culture, from Greek philologia love of discussion, learning, and literature; studiousness,
from philo- loving (see philo-) + logos word, speech (see logos).    Meaning science of language is
first attested 1716 (philologue linguist is from 1590s; philologer linguistic scholar is from
1650s); this confusing secondary sense has not been popular in the U.S., where linguistics is
preferred. Related: Philological.


angry (adj.)

late 14c., from anger (n.) + -y (2). Originally full of trouble, vexatious; sense of enraged, irate
also is from late 14c. The Old Norse adjective was ongrfullr sorrowful, and Middle English had
angerful anxious, eager (mid-13c.). The phrase angry young man dates to 1941 but was popularized in
reference to the play Look Back in Anger (produced 1956) though it does not occur in that work.
There are three words in the English language that end in -gry. Two of them are angry and hungry.
What is the third? There is no third (except some extremely obscure ones). Richard Lederer calls
this one of the most outrageous and time-wasting linguistic hoaxes in our nation's history and
traces it to a New York TV quiz show from early 1975.


autocar (n.)

1895, from auto- + car.   <b>Which is it to be?</b> We observe that the London Times has lent the
weight of its authority to the word autocar, which it now prints without the significant inverted
commas but with a hyphen, auto-car. We believe that the vocable originated with a journal called the
Hardwareman, which succeeded in obtaining the powerful support of the Engineer for its offspring. As
for ourselves, being linguistic purists, we do not care for hybrid constructions--auto is Greek,
while car is Latin and Celtic. At the same time, such clumsy phrases as horseless carriages,
mechanical road carriages, and self-propelled vehicles are not meeting with general favour. Why not
therefore adopt the philogically sound motor-car, which could be run into a single word, motorcar?
[The Electrical Engineer, Dec. 20, 1895]


etymology (n.)

late 14c., ethimolegia facts of the origin and development of a word, from Old French et(h)imologie
(14c., Modern French &eacute;tymologie), from Latin etymologia, from Greek etymologia, properly
study of the true sense (of a word), from etymon true sense (neuter of etymos true, real, actual,
related to eteos true) + -logia study of, a speaking of (see -logy).    In classical times, of
meanings; later, of histories. Latinized by Cicero as veriloquium. As a branch of linguistic
science, from 1640s. Related: Etymological; etymologically.


Samoyed (n.)

Siberian Mongolian people, 1580s, from Russian samoyed (11c.), traditionally literally self-eaters,
i.e. cannibals (the first element cognate with same, the second with eat), but this might be Russian
folk etymology of a native name:    The common Russian etymology of the name Samoyed, meaning self-
eater, deepened the Russians' already exotic image of far-northerners. The most probable linguistic
origin of Samoyed, however, is from the Saami -- saam-edne, land of the people [Andrei V. Golovnev
and Gail Osherenko, Siberian Survival: The Nenets and Their Story, Cornell University, 1999]
Which would make the name a variant of Suomi Finn. The native name is Nenets. As the name of a type
of dog (once used as a working dog in the Arctic) it is attested from 1889.


vampire (n.)

spectral being in a human body who maintains semblance of life by leaving the grave at night to suck
the warm blood of the living as they sleep, 1734, from French vampire (18c.) or German Vampir (1732,
in an account of Hungarian vampires), from Hungarian vampir, from Old Church Slavonic opiri
(cognates: Serbian vampir, Bulgarian vapir, Ukrainian uper), said by Slavic linguist Franc
Miklo&#353;i&#269; to be ultimtely from Kazan Tatar ubyr witch, but Max Vasmer, an expert in this
linguistic area, finds that phonetically doubtful. An Eastern European creature popularized in
English by late 19c. gothic novels, however there are scattered English accounts of night-walking,
blood-gorged, plague-spreading undead corpses from as far back as 1196. Figurative sense of person
who preys on others is from 1741. Applied 1774 by French biologist Buffon to a species of South
American blood-sucking bat. Related: Vampiric.


bloody (adj.)

Old Engish blodig, adjective from blod (see blood). Common Germanic, compare Old Frisian blodich,
Old Saxon bl&#244;dag, Dutch bloedig, Old High German bluotag, German blutig.    It has been a
British intensive swear word since at least 1676. Weekley relates it to the purely intensive use of
the cognate Dutch bloed, German Blut. But perhaps it ultimately is connected with bloods in the
slang sense of rowdy young aristocrats (see blood (n.)) via expressions such as bloody drunk as
drunk as a blood.    Partridge reports that it was respectable before c.1750, and it was used by
Fielding and Swift, but heavily tabooed c.1750-c.1920, perhaps from imagined association with
menstruation; Johnson calls it very vulgar, and OED writes of it, now constantly in the mouths of
the lowest classes, but by respectable people considered 'a horrid word', on par with obscene or
profane language.    The onset of the taboo against bloody coincides with the increase in linguistic
prudery that presaged the Victorian Era but it is hard to say what the precise cause was in the case
of this specific word. Attempts have been made to explain the term's extraordinary shock power by
invoking etymology. Theories that derive it from such oaths as By our Lady or God's blood seem
farfetched, however. More likely, the taboo stemmed from the fear that many people have of blood
and, in the minds of some, from an association with menstrual bleeding. Whatever, the term was
debarred from polite society during the whole of the nineteenth century. [Rawson]    Shaw shocked
theatergoers when he put it in the mouth of Eliza Doolittle in Pygmalion (1914), and for a time the
word was known euphemistically as the Shavian adjective. It was avoided in print as late as 1936.
Bloody Sunday, Jan. 30, 1972, when 13 civilians were killed by British troops at protest in
Londonderry, Northern Ireland.


