linger (v.)

c.1300, lenger reside, dwell, northern England frequentative of lengen to tarry, from Old English
lengan prolong, lengthen, from Proto-Germanic *langjan to make long (cognates: Old Frisian lendza,
Old High German lengan, Dutch lengen to lengthen), source of Old English lang (see long (adj.)).
Sense of delay going, depart slowly and unwillingly is from 1520s. Related: Lingered; lingering.


demur (v.)

c.1200, to linger, tarry, delay, from Old French demorer delay, retard, from Latin demorari to
linger, loiter, tarry, from de- (see de-) + morari to delay, from mora a pause, delay (see
moratorium). Main modern sense of raise objections is first attested 1630s. Related: Demurred;
demurring.


hove (v.1)

wait, linger, hover, mid-13c., of unknown origin. Chiefly nautical at first, of ships standing off a
coast, also of birds in the air. Common 13c.-16c., then superseded by its derivative, hover.


drawl (v.)

1590s, perhaps from Middle Dutch dralen, East Frisian draulen to linger, delay, apparently an
intensive of the root of draw (v.). Or else a native formation along the same lines. Related:
Drawled; drawling. As a noun from 1760.


hover (v.)

c.1400, hoveren, frequentative of hoven hover, tarry, linger; see hove (1). Related: Hovered;
hovering. As a noun from 1510s.


pedantic (adj.)

formed in English c.1600, from pedant + -ic. The French equivalent is p&eacute;dantesque. Perhaps
first attested in John Donne's Sunne Rising, where he bids the morning sun let his love and him
linger in bed, telling it, Sawcy pedantique wretch, goe chide Late schooleboyes. Related: Pedantical
(1580s); pedantically.


tarry (v.)

early 14c., to delay, retard (transitive), of uncertain origin. Some suggest a connection to Latin
tardare to delay, or Old English tergan, tirgan to vex, irritate, exasperate, provoke, which yielded
a Middle English verb identical in form to this one. Intransitive meaning to linger is attested from
late 14c. Related: Tarried; tarrying; tarrysome.


reside (v.)

late 15c., to settle, from Middle French resider (15c.) and directly from Latin residere sit down,
settle; remain behind, rest, linger; be left, from re- back, again (see re-) + sedere to sit (see
sedentary). Meaning to dwell permanently first attested 1570s. Related: Resided; residing. Also from
the French word are Dutch resideren, German residiren.


while (v.)

to cause (time) to pass (without dullness), 1630s, earlier to occupy or engage (someone or
something) for a period of time (c.1600), new formation from while (n.), not considered to be from
Middle English hwulen to have leisure, which is from a Germanic verb form of while (n.) (compare
German weilen to stay, linger). An association with phrases such as Shakespearean beguile the day,
Latin diem decipere, French tromper le temps has led to the substitution of WILE v by some modern
writers [OED] (see wile (v.)).


loiter (v.)

early 15c., idle one's time, dawdle over work, from Middle Dutch loteren be loose or erratic, shake,
totter like a loose tooth or a sail in a storm; in modern Dutch, leuteren to delay, linger, loiter
over one's work. Probably cognate with Old English lutian lurk, and related to Old English loddere
beggar; Old High German lotar empty, vain, luzen lurk; German Lotterbube vagabond, rascal, lauschen
eavesdrop; Gothic luton mislead; Old English ly&eth;re base, bad, wicked. Related: Loitered;
loitering.


stay (v.1)

mid-15c., cease going forward, come to a halt, also (transitive) detain, hold back, from Old French
estai-, stem of estare to stay or stand, from Latin stare to stand, stand still, remain standing; be
upright, be erect; stand firm, stand in battle; abide; be unmovable; be motionless; remain, tarry,
linger; take a side, (source also of Italian stare, Spanish estar to stand, to be), from PIE root
*sta- to stand (see stet). Sense of remain is first recorded 1570s; that of reside as a guest for a
short period is from 1550s. Related: Stayed; staying.    Of things, remain in place, 1590s. Stay put
is first recorded 1843, American English. To stay put is to keep still, remain in order. A vulgar
expression [Bartlett]. Phrase stay the course is originally (1885) in reference to horses holding
out till the end of a race. Stay-stomach was (1800) a snack.


dwell (v.)

Old English dwellan to mislead, deceive, originally to make a fool of, lead astray, from Proto-
Germanic *dwelan to go or lead astray (cognates: Old Norse dv&ouml;l delay, dvali sleep; Middle
Dutch dwellen to stun, make giddy, perplex; Old High German twellen to hinder, delay; Danish dvale
trance, stupor, dvaelb&aelig;r narcotic berry, source of Middle English dwale nightshade), from PIE
*dhwel-, extended form of root *dheu- (1) dust, cloud, vapor, smoke (and related notions of
defective perception or wits).    Related to Old English gedweola error, heresy, madness. Sense
shifted in Middle English through hinder, delay, to linger (c.1200, as still in phrase to dwell
upon), to make a home (mid-13c.). Related: Dwelled; dwelt; dwells.


