listen (v.)

Old English hlysnan to listen, from Proto-Germanic *khlusinon (cognates: Dutch luisteren, Old High
German hlosen to listen, German lauschen to listen), from PIE root *kleu- hearing, to hear
(cognates: Sanskrit srnoti hears, srosati hears, obeys; Avestan sraothra ear; Middle Persian srod
hearing, sound; Lithuanian klausau to hear, slove splendor, honor; Old Church Slavonic slusati to
hear, slava fame, glory, slovo word; Greek klyo hear, be called, kleos report, rumor, fame glory,
kleio make famous; Latin cluere to hear oneself called, be spoken of; Old Irish ro-clui-nethar
hears, clunim I hear, clu fame, glory, cluada ears; Welsh clywaf I hear; Old English hlud loud,
hleo&eth;or tone, tune; Old High German hlut sound; Gothic hilu&thorn; listening, attention). The
-t- probably is by influence of Old English hlystan (see list (v.2)). For vowel evolution, see bury.
As a noun from 1788 (on the listen alert).


listener (n.)

1610s, one who listens; agent noun from listen. Meaning one who hears a radio broadcast is from
1912; hence listenership (1938).


listenable (adj.)

1919, from listen + -able. Related: Listenability.


tap (n.3)

device to listen in secretly on telephone calls, 1923, from tap (v.2) in the listen secretly sense.


auscultate (v.)

to listen (especially with a stethoscope), 1832, from Latin auscultatus, past participle of
auscultare to listen attentively to, from aus-, from auris ear (see ear (n.1)); the rest is doubtful
[OED]. Tucker suggests the second element is akin to clinere to lean, bend.


scout (v.1)

late 14c., observe or explore as a scout, travel in search of information, from Old French escouter
to listen, heed (Modern French &eacute;couter), from Latin auscultare to listen to, give heed to
(see auscultate).  Related: Scouted; scouting.


obey (v.)

late 13c., from Old French obeir obey, be obedient, do one's duty (12c.), from Latin obedire,
oboedire obey, be subject, serve; pay attention to, give ear, literally listen to, from ob to (see
ob-) + audire listen, hear (see audience). Same sense development is in cognate Old English
hiersumnian. Related: Obeyed; obeying.


client (n.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French clyent (c.1300), from Latin clientem (nominative cliens) follower,
retainer, perhaps a variant of present participle of cluere listen, follow, obey (see listen); or,
more likely, from clinare to incline, bend, from suffixed form of PIE root *klei- to lean (see lean
(v.)).    The ground sense apparently is of one who leans on another for protection. In ancient
Rome, a plebian under protection of a patrician (called patronus in this relationship; see patron);
in English originally a lawyer's customer, by c.1600 extended to any customer.


souffre-douleur (n.)

1845, French, literally suffer sorrow; one who is in a subservient position and must listen to or
share another's troubles, specifically a woman who acts as a paid companion to an older woman.


ablaut (n.)

systematic vowel alteration in the root of a word to indicate shades of meaning or tense, a
characteristic of Indo-European languages, 1849, from German Ablaut, literally off-sound, coined by
J.P. Zweigel in 1568 from ab off + Laut sound, tone, from Old High German hlut (see listen).
Popularized by Jacob Grimm.


list (v.2)

hear, hearken, now poetic or obsolete, from Old English hlystan hear, hearken, from hlyst hearing,
from Proto-Germanic *khlustiz, from PIE *kleu- to hear (see listen). Related: Listed; listing.


umlaut (n.)

1852, from German umlaut change of sound, from um about (see ambi-) + laut sound, from Old High
German hlut (see listen). Coined 1774 by poet Friedrich Gottlieb Klopstock (1724-1803) but first
used in its current sense modification of vowels 1819 by linguist Jakob Grimm (1785-1863).


Wenceslas

masc. proper name, from Medieval Latin Venceslaus (modern Czech Vaclav), from Old Czech
Veceslav&#365;, literally having greater glory, from Slavic *vetye- greater + *-slavu fame, glory,
from PIE *klou-, from root *kle- to hear (see listen).


leer (v.)

to look obliquely (now usually implying with a lustful or malicious intent), 1520s, probably from
Middle English noun ler cheek, from Old English hleor the cheek, the face, from Proto-Germanic
*khleuzas near the ear, from *kleuso- ear, from PIE root *kleu- to hear (see listen). The notion is
probably of looking askance (compare figurative development of cheek). Related: Leered; leering.


tap (v.2)

to supply with a tap, late Old English t&aelig;ppian, from source of tap (n.1); compare German
zapfen to tap. Meaning to draw liquor with a tap is from mid-15c. Extended sense make use of is
first recorded 1570s. Meaning listen in secretly (1869), originally was with reference to telegraph
wires. Tapped out broke is 1940s slang, perhaps from the notion of having tapped all one's
acquaintances for loans already (compare British slang on the tap begging, making requests for
loans, 1932).


Clio

muse of history, muse who sings of glorious actions, usually represented with a scroll and
manuscript case, from Latin Clio, from Greek Kleio, literally the proclaimer, from kleiein to tell
of, celebrate, make famous, from kleos rumor, report, news; good report, fame, glory, from PIE
*klew-yo-, from root *kleu- to hear (see listen). Related to the -kles in Damocles, etc.


hark (v.)

late 12c., from Old English *heorcian, perhaps an intensive form from base of hieran (see hear).
Compare talk/tale. Cognate with Old Frisian harkia listen, Middle Dutch horken, Old High German
horechon, German horchen. To hark back (1829) originally referred to hounds returning along a track
when the scent has been lost, till they find it again. Related: Harked; harking.


overhear (v.)

to hear what one is not meant to hear, 1540s, from over- + hear. The notion is perhaps to hear
beyond the intended range of the voice. Old English oferhieran also meant to not listen, to
disregard, disobey (compare overlook for negative force of over; also Middle High German
&uuml;berhaeren, Middle Dutch overhoren in same sense). Related: Overheard; overhearing.


greens (n.)

freshly cut branches used for decoration, 1690s; vegetables, 1725, from green. Greens ecology
political party, first recorded 1978, from German die Gr&uuml;nen (West Germany), an outgrowth of
Gr&uuml;ne Aktion Zukunft Green Campaign for the Future, a mainly anti-nuclear power movement,
and/or gr&uuml;ne Listen green lists (of environmental candidates). Green (adj.) in the sense of
environmental is attested from 1972; Greenpeace, the international conservation and environmental
protection group, is from 1971.


sweet-talk (v.)

Sweet-talk, 1935, from noun phrase; see sweet (adj.) + talk (n.). Earliest usages seem to refer to
conversation between black and white in segregated U.S.    I ain' gonna stay heah no longah. Don'
nevah keer, ef I do git cotched--or die. Tha's bettah than to stay heah an' listen to Maw Haney
sweet-talk the white folks, whilst they drives us clean to the grave. ... [The Crisis, July 1935]
Latin had suaviloquens, literally sweet-spoken.


Damocles

courtier of Dionysius I, tyrant of Syracuse; his name in Greek means literally fame of the people,
from demos, damos people (see demotic) + -kles fame, a common ending in Greek proper names (as in
Sophocles, Pericles), from PIE *klew-es, from root *kleu- to hear (see listen). To teach Damocles
how a tyrant lives, Dionysius seated him at a banquet with a sword suspended above his head by a
single hair.


list (v.4)

to be pleased, desire (archaic), mid-12c., lusten, listen to please, desire, from Old English lystan
to please, cause pleasure or desire, provoke longing, from Proto-Germanic *lustijan (cognates: Old
Saxon lustian, Dutch lusten to like, fancy, Old High German lusten, German l&uuml;sten, Old Norse
lysta); from the root of lust (n.). Related: Listed; listing. As a noun, c.1200, from the verb.
Somehow English has lost listy (adj.) pleasant, willing (to do something); ready, quick (mid-15c.).


blow (n.1)

hard hit, mid-15c., blowe, from northern and East Midlands dialects, perhaps from Middle Dutch
blouwen to beat, a common Germanic word of unknown origin (compare German bleuen, Gothic bliggwan to
strike). Influenced in English by blow (v.1). In reference to descriptions or accounts, blow-by-blow
is recorded from 1921, American English, originally of prize-fight broadcasts.    LIKE a hungry
kitten loves its saucer of warm milk, so do radio fans joyfully listen to the blow-by-blow broadcast
description of a boxing bout. [The Wireless Age, December 1922]


acid (n.)

1690s, from acid (adj.). Slang meaning LSD-25 first recorded 1966 (see LSD).    When I was on acid I
would see things that looked like beams of light, and I would hear things that sounded an awful lot
like car horns. [Mitch Hedberg, 1968-2005, U.S. stand-up comic]   Acid rock (type played by or
listen to by people using LSD) is also from 1966; acid house dance music style is 1988, probably
from acid in the hallucinogenic sense + house dance club DJ music style.


loud (adj.)

Old English hlud noisy, making noise, sonorous, from West Germanic *khluthaz heard (cognates: Old
Frisian and Old Saxon hlud, Middle Dutch luut, Dutch luid, Old High German hlut, German laut loud),
from PIE past participle *klutos- (cognates: Sanskrit srutah, Greek klytos heard of, celebrated,
Armenian lu known, Welsh clod praise), from root *kleu- to hear (see listen).    Application to
colors first recorded 1849. The adverb is from Old English hlude, from Proto-Germanic *khludai
(cognates: Dutch luid, German laut). Paired with clear since at least c.1650.


hear (v.)

Old English heran (Anglian), (ge)hieran, hyran (West Saxon) to hear, listen (to), obey, follow;
accede to, grant; judge, from Proto-Germanic *hauzjan (cognates: Old Norse heyra, Old Frisian hora,
Dutch horen, German h&ouml;ren, Gothic hausjan), perhaps from PIE *kous- to hear (see acoustic). The
shift from *-z- to -r- is a regular feature in some Germanic languages.    For spelling, see head
(n.); spelling distinction between hear and here developed 1200-1550. Old English also had the
excellent adjective hiersum ready to hear, obedient, literally hear-some with suffix from handsome,
etc. Hear, hear! (1680s) was originally imperative, used as an exclamation to call attention to a
speaker's words; now a general cheer of approval. Originally it was hear him!


kleptomania (n.)

1830, formed from mania + Greek kleptes thief, from kleptein to steal, act secretly, from PIE *klep-
to steal, an extention of root *kel- (2) to cover, conceal (see cell; cognate with Latin clepere to
steal, listen secretly to, Old Prussian au-klipts hidden, Old Church Slavonic poklopu cover,
wrapping, Gothic hlifan to steal, hliftus thief). Much-derided 19c. as a fancy term for old-
fashioned thievery and an opportunity for the privileged to claim a psychological motive for
criminal misbehavior.    There is a popular belief that some of the criminal laws under which the
poor are rigorously punished are susceptible of remarkable elasticity when the peccadilloes of the
rich are brought under judgment, and that there is some truth in the old adage which declares that
one man may steal a horse where another dare not look over the hedge. This unwholesome distrust is
not likely to diminish if, in cases of criminal prosecutions where so-called respectable persons
commit theft without sufficiently obvious motive for the act, they have their crime extenuated on
the plea of kleptomania, as has recently occurred in several notable instances. [Kleptomania, The
Lancet, Nov. 16, 1861]


to (prep.)

Old English to in the direction of, for the purpose of, furthermore, from West Germanic *to
(cognates: Old Saxon and Old Frisian to, Dutch too, Old High German zuo, German zu to), from PIE
pronomial base *do- to, toward, upward (cognates: Latin donec as long as, Old Church Slavonic do as
far as, to, Greek suffix -de to, toward, Old Irish do, Lithuanian da-), from demonstrative *de-.
Not found in Scandinavian, where the equivalent of till (prep.) is used. In Old English, the
preposition (go to town) leveled with the adverb (the door slammed to) except where the adverb
retained its stress (tired and hungry too); there it came to be written with -oo (see too).    The
nearly universal use of to with infinitives (to sleep, to dream, etc.) arose in Middle English out
of the Old English dative use of to, and it helped drive out the Old English inflectional endings
(though in this use to itself is a mere sign, without meaning).    Commonly used as a prefix in
Middle English (to-hear listen to, etc.), but few of these survive (to-do, together, and time
references such as today, tonight, tomorrow -- Chaucer also has to-yeere). To and fro side to side
is attested from mid-14c. Phrase what's it to you how does that concern you? (1819) is a modern form
of an old question:    Hu&aelig;d is &eth;ec &eth;&aelig;s?  [John xxi:22, in Lindisfarne Gospel,
c.950]


bury (v.)

Old English byrgan to raise a mound, hide, bury, inter, akin to beorgan to shelter, from Proto-
Germanic *burzjan- protection, shelter (cognates: Old Saxon bergan, Dutch bergen, Old Norse bjarga,
Swedish berga, Old High German bergan protect, shelter, conceal, German bergen, Gothic bairgan to
save, preserve), from PIE root *bhergh- (1) to hide, protect (cognates: Old Church Slavonic brego I
preserve, guard). Related: Buried; burying. Burying-ground cemetery attested from 1711.    The Old
English -y- was a short oo sound, like modern French -u-. Under normal circumstances it transformed
into Modern English -i- (as in bridge, kiss, listen, sister), but in bury and a few other words (as
in merry, knell) it retained a Kentish change to e that took place in the late Old English period.
In the West Midlands, meanwhile, the Old English -y- sound persisted, slightly modified over time,
giving the standard modern pronunciation of blush, much, church.


