littering (n.)

1540s, of animals, process of bringing forth young in a single birth, verbal noun from present
participle of litter (v.). Meaning act of furnishing with bedding is from c.1600. That of act of
dropping litter is from 1900.


litter (v.)

late 14c., provide with bedding, from litter (n.). Meaning to strew with objects is from 1713.
Transitive sense of to scatter in a disorderly way is from 1731. Related: Littered; littering.


litter (n.)

c.1300, a bed, also bed-like vehicle carried on men's shoulders (early 14c.), from Anglo-French
litere portable bed, Old French litiere litter, stretcher, bier; straw, bedding, from Medieval Latin
lectaria litter (altered in French by influence of lit bed), from Latin lectus bed, couch, from PIE
*legh-to-, from root *legh- to lie (see lie (v.2)).    Meaning extended early 15c. to straw used for
bedding (early 14c. in Anglo-French) and late 15c. to offspring of an animal at one birth (in one
bed); sense of scattered oddments, disorderly debris is first attested 1730, probably from Middle
English verb literen provide with bedding (late 14c.), with notion of strewing straw. Litter by 19c.
had come to mean both the straw bedding and the animal waste in it after use.


litterbug (n.)

1947, from litter + bug (n.). According to Mario Pei (The Story of Language, Lippincott, 1949)
coined by the New York subways on the analogy of 'jitterbug' ....


palanquin (n.)

a covered litter, 1580s, from Portuguese palanquim (early 16c.), from Malay and Javanese palangki
litter, sedan, ultimately from Sanskrit palyanka-s couch, bed, litter, from pari around + ancati it
bends, curves, related to anka-s a bend, hook, angle, and meaning, perhaps, that which bends around
the body. Some have noted the curious coincidence of Spanish palanca, from Latin phalanga pole to
carry a burden.


Anthony

masc. proper name, from Latin Antonius, name of a Roman gens (with excrescent -h- probably suggested
by many Greek loan words beginning anth-, such as anthros flower, anthropos man); St. Anthony (4c.),
Egyptian hermit, patron saint of swineherds, to whom one of each litter was usually vowed, hence
Anthony for smallest pig of the litter (1660s; in condensed form tantony pig from 1590s). St.
Anthony's Fire (1520s), popular name for erysipelas, is said to be so called from the tradition that
those who sought his intercession recovered from that distemper during a fatal epidemic in 1089.


patent (n.)

late 14c., open letter or document from some authority, shortened form of Anglo-French lettre patent
(also in Medieval Latin (litter&aelig;) patentes), literally open letter (late 13c.), from Old
French patente (see patent (adj.).  The Letters Patent were ... written upon open sheets of
parchment, with the Great Seal pendent at the bottom ... [while] the 'Litter&aelig; Claus&aelig;,'
or Letters Close, ... being of a more private nature, and addressed to one or two individuals only,
were closed or folded up and sealed on the outside. [S.R. Scargill-Bird, A Guide to the Principal
Classes of Documents at the Public Record Office, 1891]  Meaning a license covering an invention is
from 1580s.


clutter (n.)

1570s, things lying in heaps or confusion, from clutter (v.); the litter sense is from 1660s.


howdah

1774, from Persian and Urdu haudah, from Arabic haudaj litter carried by a camel (or elephant).


clutter (v.)

1550s, to collect in heaps, variant of clotern to form clots, to heap on (c.1400); related to clot
(n.). Sense of to litter is first recorded 1660s. Related: Cluttered; cluttering.


go-cart (n.)

also gocart, 1670s, originally a litter, sedan chair; also an infant's walker (1680s), from go +
cart (n.). The modern form go-kart (1959) was coined in reference to a kind of miniature racing car
with a frame body and a two-stroke engine.


runt (n.)

c.1500, old or decayed tree stump, of unknown origin. Meaning extended to small ox or cow (1540s)
and by 1610s generally to undersized animals and people. Specific American English sense of smallest
of a litter (especially of pigs) is attested from 1841. Some see a connection to Middle Dutch runt
ox, but OED thinks this unlikely, and pronounces the word of obscure origin. Related: Runty (1807).


clitellum (n.)

raised band around an earthworm, 1816, Modern Latin, from Latin clitellae a pack-saddle, diminutive
of *clitra litter, from PIE *klei-tro-, from root *klei- (see lean (v.)). Related: Clitellar.


coverlet (n.)

c.1300, perhaps a diminutive of cover (n.), but early form coverlite suggests an unrecorded Old
French or folk-etymology *covre-lit, from covrir to cover + lit bed (see litter (n.)).


farrow (n.)

Old English fearh young pig, from Proto-Germanic *farkhaz young pig (cognates: Middle Low German
ferken, Dutch varken, both diminutives, Old High German farh, German Ferkel), from PIE *porkos- (see
pork (n.)). Sense of a litter of pigs first recorded 1570s. As a verb, early 13c.


testimonial (adj.)

early 15c., of or pertaining to testimony, in part from testimonial (n.) and from Late Latin
testimonialis, from Latin testimonium (see testimony). Originally especially in phrase letters
testimonial (Middle French lettres testimoniaulx, Latin litter&aelig; testimoniales) document or
documents attesting to a fact or to the good standing of the bearer, literally letters serving for
evidence.


bier (n.)

Old English b&aelig;r (West Saxon), ber (Anglian) handbarrow, litter, bed, from West Germanic *bero
(cognates: Old Saxon, Old High German bara, Old Frisian bere, Middle Dutch bare, Dutch baar, German
Bahre bier), from PIE root *bher- (1) to carry; to bear children, and thus related to the Old
English verb beran to bear (see bear (v.)), making a bier etymologically anything used for carrying,
only later limited to funerary sense. Since c.1600, spelling influenced by French bi&egrave;re, from
Old French biere, from Frankish *bera, from the same Germanic root.


letter (n.1)

c.1200, graphic symbol, alphabetic sign, written character, from Old French letre (10c., Modern
French lettre) character, letter; missive, note, in plural, literature, writing, learning, from
Latin littera (also litera) letter of the alphabet, of uncertain origin, perhaps via Etruscan from
Greek diphthera tablet, with change of d- to l- as in lachrymose. In this sense it replaced Old
English bocst&aelig;f, literally book staff (compare German Buchstabe letter, character, from Old
High German buohstab, from Proto-Germanic *bok-staba-m).    Latin littera also meant a writing,
document, record, and in   plural litter&aelig; a letter, epistle, a sense first attested in English
early 13c., replacing Old English &aelig;rendgewrit, literally errand-writing. The Latin plural also
meant literature, books, and figuratively learning, liberal education, schooling (see letters).
School letter in sports, attested by 1908, were said to have been first awarded by University of
Chicago football coach Amos Alonzo Stagg. Expression to the letter precisely is from 1520s (earlier
as after the letter). Letter-perfect is from 1845, originally in theater jargon, in reference to an
actor knowing the lines exactly. Letter-press, in reference to matter printed from relief surfaces,
is from 1840.


child (n.)

Old English cild fetus, infant, unborn or newly born person, from Proto-Germanic *kiltham (cognates:
Gothic kil&thorn;ei womb, inkil&thorn;o pregnant; Danish kuld children of the same marriage; Old
Swedish kulder litter; Old English cildhama womb, lit. child-home); no certain cognates outside
Germanic. App[arently] originally always used in relation to the mother as the 'fruit of the womb'
[Buck]. Also in late Old English, a youth of gentle birth (archaic, usually written childe). In
16c.-17c. especially girl child.     The wider sense young person before the onset of puberty
developed in late Old English. Phrase with child pregnant (late 12c.) retains the original sense.
The sense extension from infant to child also is found in French enfant, Latin infans. Meaning one's
own child; offspring of parents is from late 12c. (the Old English word was bearn; see bairn).
Figurative use from late 14c. Most Indo-European languages use the same word for a child and one's
child, though there are exceptions (such as Latin liberi/pueri).    The difficulty with the plural
began in Old English, where the nominative plural was at first cild, identical with the singular,
then c.975 a plural form cildru (genitive cildra) arose, probably for clarity's sake, only to be re-
pluraled late 12c. as children, which is thus a double plural. Middle English plural cildre survives
in Lancashire dialect childer and in Childermas.   Child abuse is attested by 1963; child-molester
from 1950. Child care is from 1915. Child's play, figurative of something easy, is in Chaucer (late
14c.).


