livid (adj.)

early 15c., of a bluish-leaden color, from Middle French livide and directly from Latin lividus of a
bluish color, black and blue, figuratively envious, spiteful, malicious, from livere be bluish,
earlier *slivere, from PIE *sliwo-, suffixed form of root *(s)leie- bluish (cognates: Old Church
Slavonic and Russian sliva plum; Lithuanian slywas plum; Old Irish li, Welsh lliw color, splendor,
Old English sla sloe). The sense of furiously angry (1912) is from the notion of being livid with
rage.


perse (adj.)

late 14c., blue, bluish-gray, later purplish-black, from Old French pers (dark) blue, livid; wan,
pale, from Late Latin persus, perhaps a back-formation from one of the early European forms of
Persia.


pallor (n.)

c.1400, from Old French palor paleness, whiteness (12c.) and directly from Latin pallor, from
pallere be pale, turn pale, related to pallus dark-colored, dusky, from PIE root *pel- (2) pale;
gray (cognates: Sanskrit palitah gray, panduh whitish, pale; Greek pelios livid, dark, polios gray;
Old English fealo dull-colored, yellow, brown; Welsh llwyd gray).


lavender (n.)

fragrant plant of the mint family, c.1300, from Anglo-French lavendre, Old French lavendre, from
Medieval Latin lavendula lavender (10c.), perhaps from Latin lividus bluish, livid. Associated with
French lavande, Italian lavanda a washing (from Latin lavare to wash; see lave) because it was used
to scent washed fabrics and as a bath perfume. (An identical Middle English word meant laundress,
washerwoman; also, apparently, prostitute, whore; camp follower and is attested as a surname from
early 13c.). The adjective meaning pale purple color is from 1840.


sloe (n.)

fruit of the blackthorn, Old English slah (plural slan), from Proto-Germanic *slaikhwon (cognates:
Middle Dutch sleeu, Dutch slee, Old High German sleha, German Schlehe), from PIE *sleie- blue,
bluish, blue-black (see livid).    The vowel has been influenced by that in the old plural form,
which according to OED persisted into the 17c. Scottish slae preserves the older vowel. Sloe-eyed is
attested from 1804; sloe gin first recorded 1878.


black (adj.)

Old English bl&aelig;c dark, from Proto-Germanic *blakaz burned (cognates: Old Norse blakkr dark,
Old High German blah black, Swedish bl&auml;ck ink, Dutch blaken to burn), from PIE *bhleg- to burn,
gleam, shine, flash (cognates: Greek phlegein to burn, scorch, Latin flagrare to blaze, glow, burn),
from root *bhel- (1) to shine, flash, burn; see bleach (v.).    The same root produced Old English
blac bright, shining, glittering, pale; the connecting notions being, perhaps, fire (bright) and
burned (dark). The usual Old English word for black was sweart (see swart). According to OED: In ME.
it is often doubtful whether blac, blak, blake, means 'black, dark,' or 'pale, colourless, wan,
livid.'  Used of dark-skinned people in Old English.    Of coffee, first attested 1796. Meaning
fierce, terrible, wicked is late 14c. The color of sin and sorrow since at least c.1300; sense of
with dark purposes, malignant emerged 1580s (as in black magic). Black face in reference to a
performance style originated in U.S., is from 1868. Black flag, flown (especially by pirates) as a
signal of no mercy, from 1590s. Black dog melancholy attested from 1826. Black belt is from 1875 in
reference to districts of the U.S. South with heaviest African population; 1870 with reference to
fertility of soil; 1913 in judo sense. Black power is from 1966, associated with Stokely Carmichael.


blue (1)

c.1300, bleu, blwe, etc., from Old French blo pale, pallid, wan, light-colored; blond; discolored;
blue, blue-gray, from Frankish *blao or some other Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic
*bl&aelig;waz (cognates: Old English blaw, Old Saxon and Old High German blao, Danish blaa, Swedish
bl&#229;, Old Frisian blau, Middle Dutch bla, Dutch blauw, German blau blue), from PIE *bhle-was
light-colored, blue, blond, yellow, from PIE root bhel- (1) to shine, flash (see bleach (v.)).
The same PIE root yielded Latin flavus yellow, Old Spanish blavo yellowish-gray, Greek phalos white,
Welsh blawr gray, Old Norse bla livid (the meaning in black and blue), showing the usual slippery
definition of color words in Indo-European The present spelling is since 16c., from French influence
(Modern French bleu).    The exact color to which the Gmc. term applies varies in the older
dialects; M.H.G. bla is also 'yellow,' whereas the Scandinavian words may refer esp. to a deep,
swarthy black, e.g. O.N. blama&eth;r, N.Icel. blama&eth;ur 'Negro' [Buck]   <hr />   Few words enter
more largely into the composition of slang, and colloquialisms bordering on slang, than does the
word BLUE. Expressive alike of the utmost contempt, as of all that men hold dearest and love best,
its manifold combinations, in ever varying shades of meaning, greet the philologist at every turn.
[John S. Farmer, Slang and Its Analogues Past and Present, 1890, p.252]    The color of constancy
since Chaucer at least, but apparently for no deeper reason than the rhyme in true blue (c.1500).
From early times blue was the distinctive color of the dress of servants, which may be the reason
police uniforms are blue, a tradition Farmer dates to Elizabethan times. For blue ribbon see cordon
bleu under cordon. Blue whale attested from 1851, so called for its color. The flower name blue bell
is recorded by 1570s. Blue streak, of something resembling a bolt of lightning (for quickness,
intensity, etc.) is from 1830, U.S. Western slang.    Many Indo-European languages seem to have had
a word to describe the color of the sea, encompasing blue and green and gray; such as Irish glass
(see Chloe); Old English h&aelig;wen blue, gray, related to har (see hoar); Serbo-Croatian sinji
gray-blue, sea-green; Lithuanian &#353;yvas, Russian sivyj gray.


