loath (adj.)

Old English la&eth; hated; hateful; hostile; repulsive, from Proto-Germanic *laithaz (cognates: Old
Saxon, Old Frisian leth loathsome, Old Norse lei&eth;r hateful, hostile, loathed; Middle Dutch
lelijc, Dutch leelijk ugly; Old High German leid sorrowful, hateful, offensive, grievous, German
Leid sorrow; French laid ugly, from Frankish (Germanic) *laid), from PIE root *leit- to detest.
Weakened meaning averse, disinclined is attested from late 14c. Loath to depart, a line from some
long-forgotten song, is recorded since 1580s as a generic term expressive of any tune played at
farewells, the sailing of a ship, etc. Related: Loathness.


loathsome (adj.)

c.1300, foul, detestable, from loath in its older, stronger sense + -some (1). Related: Loathsomely;
loathsomeness.


loathly (adj.)

Old English la&eth;lic hateful, horrible, unpleasant; see loath + -ly (2). As an adverb, Old English
la&eth;lice.


loathe (v.)

Old English la&eth;ian to hate, to be disgusted with, from la&eth; hostile (see loath). Cognate with
Old Saxon lethon, Old Norse lei&eth;a. Related: Loathed; loathing.


loth (adj.)

alternative spelling of loath.


laidly (adj.)

c.1300, Scottish and northern English variant of loathly hideous, repulsive (see loath).


ugly (adj.)

mid-13c., uglike frightful or horrible in appearance, from a Scandinavian source, such as Old Norse
uggligr dreadful, fearful, from uggr fear, apprehension, dread (perhaps related to agg strife, hate)
+ -ligr -like (see -ly (1)). Meaning softened to very unpleasant to look at late 14c. Extended sense
of morally offensive is attested from c.1300; that of ill-tempered is from 1680s.    Among words for
this concept, ugly is unusual in being formed from a root for fear, dread. More common is a compound
meaning ill-shaped (such as Greek dyseides, Latin deformis, Irish dochrud, Sanskrit ku-rupa).
Another Germanic group has a root sense of hate, sorrow (see loath). Ugly duckling (1877) is from
the story by Hans Christian Andersen, first translated from Danish to English 1846. Ugly American
U.S. citizen who behaves offensively abroad is first recorded 1958 as a book title.


naked (adj.)

Old English nacod nude, bare; empty, also not fully clothed, from Proto-Germanic *nakwathaz
(cognates: Old Frisian nakad, Middle Dutch naket, Dutch naakt, Old High German nackot, German nackt,
Old Norse n&ouml;kkvi&eth;r, Old Swedish naku&thorn;er, Gothic naqa&thorn;s naked), from PIE root
*nogw- naked (cognates: Sanskrit nagna, Hittite nekumant-, Old Persian *nagna-, Greek gymnos, Latin
nudus, Lithuanian nuogas, Old Church Slavonic nagu-, Russian nagoi, Old Irish nocht, Welsh noeth
bare, naked). Related: Nakedly; nakedness. Applied to qualities, actions, etc., from late 14c.
(first in The Cloud of Unknowing); phrase naked truth is from 1585, in Alexander Montgomerie's The
Cherry and the Slae:    Which thou must (though it grieve thee) grant  I trumped never a man.  But
truely told the naked trueth,  To men that meld with mee,  For neither rigour, nor for rueth,  But
onely loath to lie.  [Montgomerie, 1585]    Phrase naked as a jaybird (1943) was earlier naked as a
robin (1879, in a Shropshire context); the earliest known comparative based on it was naked as a
needle (late 14c.). Naked eye is from 1660s, unnecessary in the world before telescopes and
microscopes.


