lofty (adj.)

exalted, of high rank, early 15c.; also with a high purpose, from loft + -y (2). From early 14c. as
a surname. Literal sense of high is attested from 1580s. Related: Loftily; loftiness.


steeple (n.)

Old English stepel (Mercian), stiepel (West Saxon) high tower, related to steap high, lofty, from
Proto-Germanic *staupilaz (see steep (adj.)). Also the name of a lofty style of women's head-dress
from the 14th century. Steeple-house (1640s) was the old Quaker way of referring to a church
edifice, to avoid in that sense using church, which had with them a more restricted meaning.


sublime (adj.)

1580s, expressing lofty ideas in an elevated manner, from Middle French sublime (15c.), or directly
from Latin sublimis uplifted, high, borne aloft, lofty, exalted, eminent, distinguished, possibly
originally sloping up to the lintel, from sub up to + limen lintel, threshold, sill (see limit
(n.)). The sublime (n.) the sublime part of anything, that which is stately or imposing is from
1670s. For Sublime Porte, former title of the Ottoman government, see Porte.


steep (adj.)

having a sharp slope, Old English steap high, lofty; deep; prominent, projecting, from Proto-
Germanic *staupaz (cognates: Old Frisian stap high, lofty, Middle High German *stouf), from PIE
*steup-, extended form of root *(s)teu- (1) to push, stick, knock, beat, with derivations referring
to projecting objects (cognates: Greek typtein to strike, typos a blow, mold, die; Sanskrit tup-
harm, tundate pushes, stabs; Gothic stautan push; Old Norse stuttr short). The sense of precipitous
is from c.1200. The slang sense at a high price is a U.S. coinage first attested 1856. Related:
Steeply; steepness. The noun meaning steep place is from 1550s.


Hiram

masc. proper name, from Phoenician/Hebrew Hiram, perhaps short for Ahiram, literally brother of the
lofty.


magniloquence (n.)

1620s, from Latin magniloquentia elevated language, lofty style; see magniloquent + -ence.


stalk (v.2)

walk haughtily (nearly the opposite meaning of stalk (v.1)), 1520s, perhaps from stalk (n.) with a
notion of long, awkward strides, or from Old English stealcung a stalking, act of going stealthily,
related to stealc steep, lofty.


erect (adj.)

late 14c., upright, not bending, from Latin erectus upright, elevated, lofty; eager, alert, aroused,
past participle of erigere raise or set up, from e- up + regere to direct, keep straight, guide (see
regal).


burly (adj.)

c.1300, perhaps from Old English burlic noble, stately, literally bowerly, fit to frequent a lady's
apartment (see bower). Sense descended through stout, and sturdy by 15c. to heavily built. Another
theory connects the Old English word to Old High German burlih lofty, exalted, related to burjan to
raise, lift.


Gaylord

masc. proper name, also a surname (from early 13c.), also Galliard, from Old French Gaillart, from
Proto-Germanic *Gailhard lofty-hard, or Old French gaillard lively, brisk, gay, high-spirited, from
PIE root *gal- (3) to be able, have power.


tell (n.)

mound, hill, 1864, from Arabic tall, related to Hebrew tel mount, hill, heap. Compare Hebrew talul
lofty, Akkadian tillu woman's breast.


high-minded (adj.)

c.1500, arrogant; 1550s, morally lofty, from high (adj.) + minded. Related: High-mindedness.


excelsior

Latin excelsior higher, comparative of excelsus (adj.) high, elevated, lofty, past participle of
excellere (see excel). Taken 1778 as motto of New York State, where it apparently was mistaken for
an adverb. Popularized 1841 as title of a poem by Longfellow. As a trade name for thin shavings of
soft wood used for stuffing cushions, etc., first recorded 1868, American English.


sublimation (n.)

late 14c., in alchemy, process of purifying by vaporizing then allowing to cool, from Medieval Latin
sublimationem (nominative sublimatio) refinement, literally a lifting up, deliverance, noun of
action from past participle stem of Latin sublimare to raise, elevate, from sublimis lofty, high,
exalted; eminent, distinguished (see sublime).


aerial (adj.)

c.1600, from Latin aerius airy, aerial, lofty, high (from Greek aerios of the air, pertaining to
air, from aer air; see air (n.1)) + adjectival suffix -al (1).


grandiloquence (n.)

1580s, from Latin grandiloquentia, from grandiloquus using lofty speech, bombastic, from grandis big
(see grand (adj.)) + -loquus speaking, from loqui to speak (see locution).


magniloquent (adj.)

1650s, a back-formation from magniloquence, or else from Latin magniloquentia lofty style of
language, from magniloquus pompous in talk, vaunting, boastful, from comb. form of magnus great (see
magnate) + -loquus speaking, from loqui to speak (see locution).


tower (n.1)

Old English torr tower, watchtower, from Latin turris a tower, citadel, high structure (also source
of Old French tor, 11c.; Spanish, Italian torre tower), possibly from a pre-Indo-European
Mediterranean language. Meaning lofty pile or mass is recorded from mid-14c. Also borrowed
separately 13c. as tour, from Old French tur; the modern spelling (1520s) represents a merger of the
two forms.


tor (n.)

high, rocky hill, Old English torr rock, crag; said to be a different word than torr tower.
Obviously cognate with Gaelic torr lofty hill, mound, Old Welsh twrr heap, pile; and perhaps
ultimately with Latin turris high structure (see tower (n.)). But sources disagree on whether the
Celts borrowed it from the Anglo-Saxons or the other way round.


self-interest (n.)

also self interest, 1640s, from self- + interest (n.). Related: Self-interested.    [Self-interest]
is a doctrine not very lofty, but clear and sure. It does not seek to attain great objects; but it
attains those it aims for without too much effort. ... [It] does not produce great devotion; but it
suggests little sacrifices each day; by itself it cannot make a man virtuous; but it forms a
multitude of citizens who are regulated, temperate, moderate, farsighted, masters of themselves; and
if it does not lead directly to virtue through the will, it brings them near to it insensibly
through habits. [Alexis de Tocqueville, Democracy in America]


Porte (n.)

Ottoman court at Constantinople, c.1600, from French, in full, la Sublime Porte, literally the high
gate, translation of Arabic al-Bab al-'Ali, lofty gate, official name of the central office of the
Ottoman government (compare Vatican for the Papacy, White House for the United States). Compare also
mikado. Supposedly a reference to the ancient custom of holding royal audience in the doorway of a
king's palace or tent.


excel (v.)

c.1400, from Latin excellere to rise, surpass, be eminent, from ex- out from (see ex-) + -cellere
rise high, tower, related to celsus high, lofty, great, from PIE root *kel- to rise, be elevated
(see hill). Related: Excelled; excelling.


ortho-

before vowels orth-, word-forming element meaning straight, upright, rectangular, regular; true,
correct, proper, now mostly in scientific and technical compounds, from Greek ortho-, stem of orthos
straight, true, correct, regular, from PIE *eredh- high (cognates: Sanskrit urdhvah high, lofty,
steep, Latin arduus high, steep, Old Irish ard high).


seraph (n.)

1667, first used by Milton (probably on analogy of cherub/cherubim), back-formed singular from Old
English seraphim (plural), from Late Latin seraphim, from Greek seraphim, from Hebrew seraphim (only
in Isa. vi), plural of *saraph (which does not occur in the Bible), probably literally the burning
one, from saraph it burned. Seraphs were traditionally regarded as burning or flaming angels, though
the word seems to have some etymological sense of flying, perhaps from confusion with the root of
Arabic sharafa be lofty. Some scholars identify it with a word found in other passages interpreted
as fiery flying serpent.


noble (adj.)

c.1200, illustrious, distinguished; worthy of honor or respect, from Old French noble of noble
bearing or birth, from Latin nobilis well-known, famous, renowned; excellent, superior, splendid;
high-born, of superior birth, earlier *gnobilis, literally knowable, from gnoscere to come to know,
from PIE root *gno- to know (see know). The prominent Roman families, which were well known,
provided most of the Republic's public officials.    Meaning distinguished by rank, title, or birth
is first recorded late 13c. Sense of having lofty character, having high moral qualities is from
c.1600. A noble gas (1902) is so called for its inactivity or intertness; a use of the word that had
been applied in Middle English to precious stones, metals, etc., of similar quality (late 14c.),
from the sense of having admirable properties (c.1300).


supercilious (adj.)

1520s, lofty with pride, haughtily contemptuous, from Latin superciliosus haughty, arrogant, from
supercilium haughty demeanor, pride, literally eyebrow (via notion of raising the eyebrow to express
haughtiness), from super above (see super-) + second element akin to cilium eyelid, related to
celare to cover, hide, from PIE root *kel- (2) to conceal (see cell).    Since cilium is more recent
than supercilium, the former can be interpreted as a back-formation to the latter .... If indeed
derived from the root *kel- 'to hide', we must still assume that a noun *kilium 'eyelid' existed,
since the eyelid can 'hide' the eye, whereas the eyebrow does not have such a function. Thus,
supercilium may originally have meant 'what is above the cilium'. [Michiel de Vaan, Etymological
Dictionary of Latin and the other Italic Languages, Leiden, 2008]    Related: Superciliously;
superciliousness.


tall (adj.)

high in stature, 1520s, probably from Middle English tal handsome, good-looking; valiant; lively in
speech; large, big; humble, meek, from Old English get&aelig;l prompt, active, from Germanic
*(ge)-tala- (cognates: Old High German gi-zal quick, Gothic un-tals indocile). Main modern sense
being of more than average height (and slim in proportion to height) probably evolved out of earlier
meanings brave, valiant, seemly, proper (c.1400), attractive, handsome (late 14c.).    Sense
evolution is remarkable [OED], but adjectives applied to persons can wander far in meaning (such as
pretty, buxom, German klein small, little, which in Middle High German meant the same as its English
cognate clean (adj.)). Meaning having a (defined) height, whether lofty or not is from 1580s.
Meaning exaggerated (as in tall tale) is American English colloquial attested by 1846. Phrase tall,
dark, and handsome is recorded from 1906. Related: Tallness.


grand (adj.)

late 14c., grant large, big (early 12c. in surnames), from Anglo-French graunt and directly from Old
French grant, grand (10c.) large, tall; grown-up; great, powerful, important; strict, severe;
extensive; numerous, from Latin grandis big, great; full, abundant, also full-grown; figuratively
strong, powerful, weighty, severe (perhaps cognate with Greek brenthyomai to swagger, be haughty).
It supplanted magnus in Romanic languages; in English with a special sense of imposing. The
connotations of noble, sublime, lofty, dignified, etc., were in Latin. As a general term of
admiration, magnificent, splendid, from 1816. Related: Grander; grandest.    The use of grand- in
compounds, with the sense of a generation older than, or younger than, is first attested c.1200, in
Anglo-French graund dame grandmother. Latin and Greek had similar usages.   Grand jury is late 15c.
Grand piano from 1797. The grand tour of the principal sites of continental Europe, as part of a
gentleman's education, is attested by that name from 1660s. The Grand Canyon was so called 1871 by
Maj. John Wesley Powell, scientific adventurer, who explored it; earlier it had been known as Big
Canyon.


high (adj.)

Old English heh (Anglian), heah (West Saxon) of great height, lofty, tall, exalted, high-class, from
Proto-Germanic *haukhaz (cognates: Old Saxon hoh, Old Norse har, Danish h&oslash;i, Swedish
h&ouml;g, Old Frisian hach, Dutch hoog, Old High German hoh, German hoch, Gothic hauhs high; also
German H&uuml;gel hill, Old Norse haugr mound), perhaps related to Lithuanian kaukara hill. Spelling
with -gh represents a final guttural sound in the original word, lost since 14c.    Of sound pitch,
late 14c. Of roads, most frequented or important, c.1200. Meaning euphoric or exhilarated from
alcohol is first attested 1620s, of drugs, 1932. Sense of proud, haughty, arrogant, supercilious
(c.1200) is reflected in high hand (late 14c.) and high horse. High seas first attested late 14c.,
with sense (also found in the Latin cognate) of deep as well as tall (cognates: Old English heahflod
deep water, also Old Persian bar&#353;an height, depth). Of an evil or a punishment, grave, serious,
severe (as in high treason), c.1200 (Old English had heahsynn deadly sin, crime).   High pressure
(adj.) is from 1824, of engines, 1891, of weather systems, 1933, of sales pitches. A child's high
chair is from 1848. High school school for advanced studies attested from late 15c. in Scotland; by
1824 in U.S. High time fully time, the fullness of time, is from late 14c. High noon is from early
14c.; the sense is full, total, complete. High and mighty is c.1200 (heh i mahhte). High finance
(1905) is that concerned with large sums. High and dry of beached things (especially ships) is from
1783. High-water mark is what is left by a flood or highest tide (1550s); figurative use by 1814.


