logical (adj.)

early 15c., based on reason, from logic + -al (1). Meaning pertaining to logic is c.1500. Attested
from 1860 as following as a reasonable consequence. Related: Logically.


post hoc

Latin, after this. Especially in post hoc, ergo propter hoc, logical fallacy, literally after this,
therefore because of this.


illogical (adj.)

1580s, from assimilated form of in- (1) not, opposite of + logical. Related: Illogically.


atomistic (adj.)

1809, in reference to the classical philosophical doctrine of atomism (1670s); modern philosophical
sense (logical atomism) traces to 1914 and Bertrand Russell.


a priori

1710, from cause to effect (a logical term, in reference to reasoning), Latin, literally from what
comes first, from priori, ablative of prior first (see prior (adj.)). Used loosely for in accordance
with previous knowledge (1834).


semiology (n.)

1690s, sign language, from Greek semeion a sign, mark, token, from sema (compare semiotic) + -ology.
As branch of medical science concerned with symptoms, 1839; as logical theory of signs from 1923.
Related: Semiological.


fisk (v.)

2002, an Internet argument tactic involving a reprinting of an article or blog post, interlarded
with rebuttals and refutations, often intended to show the original is a sandpile of flawed facts,
unfounded assertions, and logical fallacies. Named for English journalist Robert Fisk (b.1946),
Middle East correspondent for the Independent, whose writing often criticizes America and Israel and
is somewhat noted for looseness with details. Related: Fisked; fisking.


inconsequent (adj.)

1570s, not following as a logical conclusion, from Latin inconsequentem (nominative inconsequens)
not logically connected, from in- not, opposite of, without (see in- (1)) + consequens, past
participle of consequi to follow (see consequence).


logic (n.)

mid-14c., branch of philosophy that treats of forms of thinking, from Old French logique (13c.),
from Latin (ars) logica, from Greek logike (techne) reasoning (art), from fem. of logikos pertaining
to speaking or reasoning, from logos reason, idea, word (see logos). Meaning logical argumentation
is from c.1600.


argument (n.)

early 14c., statements and reasoning in support of a proposition, from Old French arguement
reasoning, opinion; accusation, charge (13c.), from Latin argumentum evidence, ground, support,
proof; a logical argument, from arguere to argue (see argue). Sense passed through subject of
contention to a quarrel, a sense formerly attached to argumentation.


crucial (adj.)

1706, cross-shaped, from French crucial, a medical term for ligaments of the knee (which cross each
other), from Latin crux (genitive crucis) cross (see cross (n.)). The meaning decisive, critical
(1830) is extended from a logical term, Instantias Crucis, adopted by Francis Bacon (1620); the
notion is of cross fingerboard signposts at forking roads, thus a requirement to choose.


reason (v.)

early 14c., resunmen, to question (someone), also to challenge, from Old French raisoner speak,
discuss; argue; address; speak to, from Late Latin rationare to discourse, from ratio (see reason
(n.)). Intransitive sense of to think in a logical manner is from 1590s; transitive sense of employ
reasoning (with someone) is from 1847. Related: Reasoned; reasoning.


topic (n.)

1630s, a class of considerations from which probable arguments can be drawn, singular form of Topics
(1560s), the name of a work by Aristotle on logical and rhetorical generalities, from Latin Topica,
from Greek Ta Topika, literally matters concerning topoi, commonplaces, neuter plural of noun use of
topikos pertaining to a common place, of a place, local, from topos place (see topos). The meaning
matter treated in speech or writing, subject, theme is first recorded 1720.


imply (v.)

late 14c., to enfold, enwrap, entangle (the classical Latin sense), from Old French emplier, from
Latin implicare involve (see implication). Meaning to involve something unstated as a logical
consequence first recorded c.1400; that of to hint at from 1580s. Related: Implied; implying. The
distinction between imply and infer is in What do you imply by that remark? But, What am I to infer
from that remark?


lapwing (n.)

Middle English lappewinke (late 14c.), lapwyngis (early 15c.), folk etymology alteration of Old
English hleapewince, probably literally leaper-winker, from hleapan to leap + wince totter, waver,
move rapidly, related to wincian to wink. Said to be so called from the manner of its flight [OED]
in reference to its irregular flapping manner of flight [Barnhart], but the lapwing also flaps on
the ground pretending to have a broken wing to lure egg-hunters away from its nest, which seems a
more logical explanation. Its Greek name was polyplagktos luring on deceitfully.


matrix (n.)

late 14c., uterus, womb, from Old French matrice womb, uterus, from Latin matrix (genitive matricis)
pregnant animal, in Late Latin womb, also source, origin, from mater (genitive matris) mother (see
mother (n.1)). Sense of place or medium where something is developed is first recorded 1550s; sense
of embedding or enclosing mass first recorded 1640s. Logical sense of array of possible combinations
of truth-values is attested from 1914. As a verb from 1951.


Homo sapiens (n.)

1802, in William Turton's translation of Linn&aelig;us, coined in Modern Latin from Latin homo man
(technically male human, but in logical and scholastic writing human being; see homunculus) +
sapiens, present participle of sapere be wise (see sapient). Used since in various Latin or pseudo-
Latin combinations intended to emphasize some aspect of humanity, as in Henri Bergson's Homo faber
man the tool-maker, in L'Evolution Cr&eacute;atrice (1907). Homo as a genus of the order Primates is
first recorded 1797.


homunculus (n.)

1650s, from Latin homunculus, literally little person, from homo (genitive hominis) man, human
being, the Latin word that means man, person, a human being (technically male human, but in logical
and scholastic writing human being), also the human race, mankind, perhaps from PIE *(dh)ghomon-,
literally earthling, from *dhghem- earth (see chthonic; also compare human). With -culus, Latin
diminutive suffix. Other Latin diminutives from homo included homullus, homuncio.


sensible (adj.)

late 14c., capable of sensation or feeling; also capable of being sensed or felt, perceptible to the
senses, hence easily understood; logical, reasonable, from Late Latin sensibilis having feeling,
perceptible by the senses, from sensus, past participle of sentire perceive, feel (see sense (n.)).
Of persons, aware, cognizant (of something) early 15c.; having good sense, capable of reasoning,
discerning, clever, mid-15c. Of clothes, shoes, etc., practical rather than fashionable it is
attested from 1855.    Other Middle English senses included susceptible to injury or pain (early
15c., now gone with sensitive); worldly, temporal, outward (c.1400); carnal, unspiritual (early
15c., now gone with sensual). Related: Sensibleness.


