loiter (v.)

early 15c., idle one's time, dawdle over work, from Middle Dutch loteren be loose or erratic, shake,
totter like a loose tooth or a sail in a storm; in modern Dutch, leuteren to delay, linger, loiter
over one's work. Probably cognate with Old English lutian lurk, and related to Old English loddere
beggar; Old High German lotar empty, vain, luzen lurk; German Lotterbube vagabond, rascal, lauschen
eavesdrop; Gothic luton mislead; Old English ly&eth;re base, bad, wicked. Related: Loitered;
loitering.


loitering (n.)

mid-14c., verbal noun from loiter.


muse (v.)

to reflect, to be absorbed in thought, mid-14c., from Old French muser (12c.) to ponder, dream,
wonder; loiter, waste time, literally to stand with one's nose in the air (or, possibly, to sniff
about like a dog who has lost the scent), from muse muzzle, from Gallo-Roman *musa snout, of unknown
origin. Probably influenced in sense by muse (n.). Related: Mused; musing.


demur (v.)

c.1200, to linger, tarry, delay, from Old French demorer delay, retard, from Latin demorari to
linger, loiter, tarry, from de- (see de-) + morari to delay, from mora a pause, delay (see
moratorium). Main modern sense of raise objections is first attested 1630s. Related: Demurred;
demurring.


hang (v.)

a fusion of Old English hon suspend (transitive, class VII strong verb; past tense heng, past
participle hangen), and Old English hangian (weak, intransitive, past tense hangode) be suspended;
also probably influenced by Old Norse hengja suspend, and hanga be suspended. All from Proto-
Germanic *hangen (intransitive) to hang (cognates: Old Frisian hangia, Dutch hangen, German
h&auml;ngen), from PIE *konk- to hang (cognates: Gothic hahan, Hittite gang- to hang, Sanskrit
sankate wavers, Latin cunctari to delay; see also second element in Stonehenge). As a method of
execution, in late Old English (but originally specifically of crucifixion).   Hung emerged as past
participle 16c. in northern England dialect, and hanged endured only in legal language (which tends
to be conservative) and metaphors extended from it (I'll be hanged). Teen slang sense of spend time
first recorded 1951; hang around idle, loiter is from 1830, and hang out (v.) is from 1811. Hang
fire (1781) was originally used of guns that were slow in communicating the fire through the vent to
the charge. To let it all hang out be relaxed and uninhibited is from 1967.


