loom (v.)

1540s, to come into view largely and indistinctly, perhaps from a Scandinavian source (compare
dialectal Swedish loma, East Frisian lomen move slowly), perhaps a variant from the root of lame
(adj.). Early used also of ships moving up and down. Figurative use from 1590s. Related: Loomed;
looming.


loom (n.)

weaving machine, Old English geloma utensil, tool, from ge-, perfective prefix, + -loma, of unknown
origin (compare Old English andloman (plural) apparatus, furniture). Originally implement or tool of
any kind (as in heirloom); thus, the penis (c.1400-1600). Specific meaning a machine in which yarn
or thread is woven into fabric is from c.1400.


Toyota

Japanese automaker, begun 1930s as a division of Toyoda Automatic Loom Works, named for the family
name of the founder. There seems to be no one accepted explanation for the change from -d- to -t-.


heirloom (n.)

early 15c., ayre lome, a hybrid from heir + loom in its original but now otherwise obsolete sense of
implement, tool. Technically, some piece of property that by will or custom passes down with the
real estate.


tantra (n.)

type of Hindu religious book, 1799, from Sanskrit tantram, literally loom, warp, hence,
figuratively, groundwork, system, doctrine, from tan to stretch, extend, from PIE root *ten- to
stretch, extend (see tenet).


slay (n.)

instrument on a weaver's loom to beat up the weft, Old English sl&#230;, slea, slahae, from root
meaning strike (see slay (v.)), so called from striking the web together. Hence the surname
Slaymaker maker of slays.


tiller (n.1)

mid-14c., stock of a crossbow, from Old French telier stock of a crossbow (c.1200), originally
weaver's beam, from Medieval Latin telarium, from Latin tela web; loom, from PIE *teks-la-, from
root *teks- to weave (see texture). Meaning bar to turn the rudder of a boat first recorded 1620s.


stamen (n.)

pollen-bearing organ of a flower, 1660s, from Modern Latin (1625, Spigelus), from Latin stamen
stamen (Pliny), literally foundation in weaving, thread of the warp in the upright loom (related to
stare to stand), from PIE *sta-men- (cognates: Greek stemon warp, also used by Hesychius for some
part of a plant, Gothic stoma, Sanskrit sthaman place, also strength), from root *sta- to stand (see
stet). The usual English plural is stamens because of the special use of the classical plural,
stamina.


tacky (adj.2)

in poor taste, 1888, from earlier sense of shabby, seedy (1862), adjectival use of tackey (n.) ill-
fed or neglected horse (1800), later extended to persons in like condition, hillbilly, cracker
(1888), of uncertain origin. Related: Tackiness.    The word tacky is a Southern colloquialism. It
was coined by a wealthier or more refined and educated class for general application to those who
were not sheltered by the branches of a family tree, who were tainted. Those who were wealthy and
yet had no great-grandfathers were tackies. The word was used both in contempt and in derision. It
is now nearly obsolete in both senses. There are no aristocrats in the South now, and therefore no
tackies. No man who has the instincts of a gentleman is spoken of as a tacky, whether he can
remember the name of his grandfather's uncle or not. But it has its uses. It is employed in
describing persons of low ideas and vulgar manners, whether rich or poor. It may mean an absence of
style. In dress, anything that is tawdry is tacky. A ribbon on the shopkeeper's counter, a curtain
in the bolt, a shawl or bonnet, a bolt of cloth fresh from the loom may be tacky, because it is
cheap and yet pretentious. In Louisiana the inferior grade of Creole ponies are known as tackies.
[Horace Ingraham, Charleston, S.C., in American Notes and Queries, Feb. 15, 1890]


tenet (n.)

principle, opinion, or dogma maintained as true by a person, sect, school, etc., properly a thing
held (to be true), early 15c., from Latin tenet he holds, third person singular present indicative
of tenere to hold, grasp, keep, have possession, maintain, also reach, gain, acquire, obtain; hold
back, repress, restrain; figuratively hold in mind, take in, understand.    The Latin word is from
PIE root *ten- to stretch (cognates: Sanskrit tantram loom, tanoti stretches, lasts; Persian tar
string; Lithuanian tankus compact, i.e. tightened; Greek teinein to stretch, tasis a stretching,
tension, tenos sinew, tetanos stiff, rigid, tonos string, hence sound, pitch; Latin tendere to
stretch, tenuis thin, rare, fine; Old Church Slavonic tento cord; Old English &thorn;ynne thin).
Connecting notion between stretch and hold is cause to maintain. The modern sense is probably
because tenet was used in Medieval Latin to introduce a statement of doctrine.


order (n.)

early 13c., body of persons living under a religious discipline, from Old French ordre position,
estate; rule, regulation; religious order (11c.), from earlier ordene, from Latin ordinem
(nominative ordo) row, rank, series, arrangement, originally a row of threads in a loom, from Italic
root *ord- to arrange, arrangement (source of ordiri to begin to weave; compare primordial), of
unknown origin.    Meaning a rank in the (secular) community is first recorded c.1300; meaning
command, directive is first recorded 1540s, from the notion of to keep in order. Military and
honorary orders grew our of the fraternities of Crusader knights. Business and commerce sense is
attested from 1837. In natural history, as a classification of living things, it is first recorded
1760. Meaning condition of a community which is under the rule of law is from late 15c.    Phrase in
order to (1650s) preserves etymological notion of sequence. The word reflects a medieval notion: a
system of parts subject to certain uniform, established ranks or proportions, and was used of
everything from architecture to angels. Old English expressed many of the same ideas with
endebyrdnes. In short order without delay is from 1834, American English; order of battle is from
1769.


