loop (v.)

to form a loop, c.1400, draw (a leash through a ring), from loop (n.). Related: Looped; looping.
Slang looped drunk is from 1934. Loop the loop (1900) originally was in reference to roller-coasters
at amusement parks.    Loop-the-Loop is the name of a new entertainment which goes further in the
way of tempting Providence than anything yet invented. The Loop is an immense circle of track in the
air. A car on a mimic railway shoots down a very steep incline, and is impelled around the inner
side of this loop. ... The authorities at Coney Island are said to have prohibited looping-the-loop
because women break their corset strings in their efforts to catch their breath as they sweep down
the incline, and moreover, a young man is reported to have ruptured a blood vessel in his liver.
[Philadelphia Medical Journal, Aug. 10, 1901]


loop (n.)

late 14c., loop of cloth, rope, leather, etc., probably of Celtic origin (compare Gaelic lub bend,
Irish lubiam), influenced by or blended with Old Norse hlaup a leap, run (see leap (v.)). In
reference to magnetic recording tape or film, first recorded 1931. Computer programming sense first
attested 1947.


loopy (adj.)

full of loops, 1856, from loop + -y (2). Slang sense crazy is attested from 1923. Earlier figurative
sense was cunning, deceitful (by 1825).


loophole (n.)

also loop-hole, mid-15c., from Middle English loupe opening in a wall for shooting through or
admitting light (c.1300), perhaps related to Middle Dutch lupen to watch, peer; + hole (n.).
Figurative sense of outlet, means of escape is from 1660s.


hoochy koochy (n.)

also hoochie-coochie, hootchy kootchy, erotic suggestive women's dance (involving a lot of hip-
grinding), 1898, of obscure origin, usually associated, without evidence, with the Chicago world's
fair of 1893 and belly-dancer Little Egypt (who might not even have been there), but the word itself
is attested from 1890, as the stage name of minstrel singer Hoochy-Coochy Rice, though its meaning
there is unclear, perhaps a nonsense word.    To-day, however, in place of the danse du ventre or
the coochie-coochie we have the loop-the-loop or the razzle-dazzle, which latter, while not exactly
edifying at least do not serve to deprave public taste. [The Redemption of 'Old Coney,' in Broadway
Magazine, April 1904]


frog (n.2)

fastening for clothing, 1719, originally a belt loop for carrying a weapon, of unknown origin;
perhaps from Portuguese froco, from Latin floccus flock of wool.


terry (n.)

loop raised in pile-weaving, left uncut, 1784, of uncertain origin, possibly an alteration of French
tir&eacute; drawn, from past participle of tirer draw out (compare German gezogener Sammet drawn
velvet).


sling (n.1)

c.1300, implement for throwing stones, from an unidentified continental Germanic source (such as
Middle Low German slinge a sling); see sling (v.). The notion probably is of a sling being twisted
and twirled before it is thrown. Sense of loop for lifting or carrying heavy objects first recorded
early 14c. Meaning piece of cloth tied around the neck to support an injured arm is first attested
1720.


slipknot (n.)

also slip-knot, 1650s, from slip (v.) + knot (n.). One which easily can be slipped or undone by
pulling on the loose end of the last loop.


strop (n.)

mid-14c., loop or strap on a harness, probably from Old French estrop, making it the older and more
correct form of strap (n.), replaced by it from 16c. Specific sense of leather strap used for
sharpening razors first recorded 1702. The verb in this sense is from 1841. Related: Stropped;
stropping. Distribution of senses between strap and strop is arbitrary.


sleave (v.)

to separate or divide (threads, strands, fibers), Old English -sl&#230;fan, from stem of -slifan to
separate, split, cleave, from Proto-Germanic *slifanan, perhaps related to the root of slip (v.).
Compare German Schleife a loop, knot, noose. Related: Sleaved; sleaving. As a noun, knotted, tangled
silk or thread, 1590s, from the verb; this is the word in Shakespeare's rauel'd Sleeue of Care
(Macbeth).


apse (n.)

semicircular extension at the end of a church, 1846, from Latin apsis an arch, a vault, from Greek
hapsis (Ionic apsis) loop, arch, originally a fastening, felloe of a wheel, from haptein fasten
together, of unknown origin. The original sense in Greek seems to have been the joining of the arcs
to form a circle, especially in making a wheel. The architectural term is earlier attested in
English in the Latin form (1706).


lank (adj.)

Old English hlanc loose and empty, slender, flaccid, from Proto-Germanic *khlankaz, perhaps from a
root meaning flexible (cognates: German lenken to bend, turn aside, Old Norse hlykkr bend, noose,
loop), from PIE root *kleng- to bend, turn (see link (n.)). Some examples may be long adj. with
unvoicing of g [Middle English Dictionary]


leap (n.)

c.1200, from Old English hliep, hlyp (West Saxon), *hlep (Mercian, Northumbrian) a leap, bound,
spring, sudden movement; thing to leap from; common Germanic (cognates: Old Frisian hlep, Dutch
loop, Old High German hlouf, German lauf); from the root of leap (v.). Leaps has been paired with
bounds since at least 1720.


strap (n.)

1610s, band of leather, from Scottish and/or nautical variant of strope loop or strap on a harness
(mid-14c.), probably from Old French estrop strap, from Latin stroppus strap, band, perhaps via
Etruscan, ultimately from Greek strophos twisted band; a cord, rope, from strephein to turn (see
strophe). Old English stropp, Dutch strop halter also are borrowed from Latin, and the Old English
word might be the source of the modern one. Slang meaning credit is from 1828.


bootstrap (n.)

also boot-strap, tab or loop at the back of the top of a men's boot, which the wearer hooked a
finger through to pull the boots on, 1870, from boot (n.) + strap (n.).    Circa 1900, to pull
(oneself) up by (one's) bootstraps was used figuratively of an impossible task (Among the practical
questions at the end of chapter one of Steele's Popular Physics schoolbook (1888) is, 30. Why can
not a man lift himself by pulling up on his boot-straps?). By 1916 its meaning expanded to include
better oneself by rigorous, unaided effort. The meaning fixed sequence of instructions to load the
operating system of a computer (1953) is from the notion of the first-loaded program pulling itself,
and the rest, up by the bootstrap.


twitterpated (adj.)

1942, apparently first attested in the Walt Disney movie Bambi (there also was a song by that name
but it was not in the studio release of the film), a past participle adjective formed from twitter
in the tremulous excitement noun sense (1670s) + pate (n.2) head (compare flutterpated, 1894).
Thumper: Why are they acting that way?   Friend Owl: Why, don't you know? They're twitterpated.
Flower, Bambi, Thumper: Twitterpated?   Friend Owl: Yes. Nearly everybody gets twitterpated in the
springtime. For example: You're walking along, minding your own business. You're looking neither to
the left, nor to the right, when all of a sudden you run smack into a pretty face. Woo-woo! You
begin to get weak in the knees. Your head's in a whirl. And then you feel light as a feather, and
before you know it, you're walking on air. And then you know what? You're knocked for a loop, and
you completely lose your head!   Thumper: Gosh, that's awful.


angle (n.)

space between intersecting lines, late 14c., from Old French angle angle, corner, and directly from
Latin angulus an angle, corner, a diminutive form from PIE root *ang-/*ank- to bend (cognates: Greek
ankylos bent, crooked, Latin ang(u)ere to compress in a bend, fold, strangle; Old Church Slavonic
aglu corner; Lithuanian anka loop; Sanskrit ankah hook, bent, angam limb; Old English ancleo ankle;
Old High German ango hook). Angle bracket is 1875 in carpentry; 1956 in typography.


I (pron.)

12c. shortening of Old English ic, first person singular nominative pronoun, from Proto-Germanic
*ekan (cognates: Old Frisian ik, Old Norse ek, Norwegian eg, Danish jeg, Old High German ih, German
ich, Gothic ik), from PIE *eg-, nominative form of the first person singular pronoun (cognates:
Sanskrit aham, Hittite uk, Latin ego (source of French Je), Greek ego, Russian ja, Lithuanian
a&#353;). Reduced to i by mid-12c. in northern England, it began to be capitalized mid-13c. to mark
it as a distinct word and avoid misreading in handwritten manuscripts.    The reason for writing
<b>I</b> is ... the orthographic habit in the middle ages of using a 'long i' (that is, j or I)
whenever the letter was isolated or formed the last letter of a group; the numeral 'one' was written
j or I (and three iij, etc.), just as much as the pronoun. [Otto Jespersen, Growth and Structure of
the English Language, p.233]    The form ich or ik, especially before vowels, lingered in northern
England until c.1400 and survived in southern dialects until 18c. The dot on the small letter -i-
began to appear in 11c. Latin manuscripts, to distinguish the letter from the stroke of another
letter (such as -m- or -n-). Originally a diacritic, it was reduced to a dot with the introduction
of Roman type fonts. The letter -y- also was written with a top dot in Old English and early Middle
English, when it tended to be written with a closed loop at the top and thus was almost
indistinguishable from the lower-case thorn (&#254;).


