lot (n.)

Old English hlot object (anything from dice to straw, but often a chip of wood with a name inscribed
on it) used to determine someone's share, also what falls to a person by lot, from Proto-Germanic
*khlutom (cognates: Old Norse hlutr lot, share, Old Frisian hlot lot, Old Saxon hlot, Middle Dutch,
Dutch lot, Old High German hluz share of land, German Los; Old English hleotan to cast lots, to
foretell), of unknown origin. The object was placed with others in a receptacle, which was shaken,
the winner being the one that fell out first. Hence, to cast lots. In some cases the lots were drawn
by hand. The word was adopted from Germanic into the Romanic languages (compare lottery, lotto).
Meaning choice resulting from the casting of lots first attested c.1200.    Sense of plot of land is
first recorded 1630s (distribution of the best property in new settlements often determined by
casting lots), that of group, collection is 1725, from notion of auction lots. The generalized sense
of great many is first attested in 1812. To cast (one's) lot with another is to agree to share
winnings.


lote (n.)

1510s, anglicized form of lotus.


loth (adj.)

alternative spelling of loath.


Lothario

masc. proper name, Italian form of Old High German Hlothari, Hludher (whence German Luther, French
Lothaire), literally famous warrior, from Old High German lut (see loud) + heri host, army (see
harry (v.)). As a characteristic name for a lady-killer, 1756, from the name of the principal male
character of Nicholas Rowe's The Fair Penitent (1703).


lotion (n.)

c.1400, loscion, from Old French lotion (14c.), from Latin lotionem (nominative lotio) a washing,
from lotus, popular form of lautus, past participle of lavere to wash (see lave). As a verb, from
1817. Related: Lotioned; lotioning.


lottery (n.)

1560s, arrangement for a distribution of prizes by chance, from Italian lotteria, from lotto lot,
portion, share, from same root as Old English hlot (see lot). Compare Middle French loterie, from
Middle Dutch loterje, from lot (n.).


Lottie

also Lotta, fem. proper name, a diminutive of Charlotte.


lotto (n.)

1778, type of card game, from French loto and directly from Italian lotto a lot, from Old French lot
lot, share, reward, prize, from Frankish or some other Germanic source (compare Old English and Old
Frisian hlot; see lot (n.)). Meaning a lottery, a game of chance is attested from 1787.


lotus (n.)

1540s, from Latin lotus, from Greek lotos, name used for several plants before it came to mean
Egyptian white lotus (a sense attested in English from 1580s); perhaps from a Semitic source
(compare Hebrew lot myrrh). The yogic sense is attested from 1848. Lotus-eaters (1812) are from
Greek lotophagoi, mentioned in Odyssey, book IX.


allot (v.)

late 15c., from Old French aloter (Modern French allotir) to divide by lots, to divide into lots,
from &agrave; to (see ad-) + loter lot, a word of Germanic origin (cognates: Gothic hlauts, Old High
German hloz, Old English hlot; see lot). Related: Allotted; allotting.


allotment (n.)

1570s, action of allotting, from Middle French allotement, from Old French aloter (see allot). Or
else a native formation from allot + -ment. Meaning portion assigned to someone or some purpose is
from 1670s.


allotrope (n.)

1847, back-formation from allotropy variation of physical properties without change of substance,
from allo- + -tropy manner (see -trope). Related: Allotropic.


autopilot (n.)

1935, from auto- + pilot (n.).


axolotl (n.)

1786, genus of Mexican salamanders, from Spanish, from Nahuatl, literally servant of water, from atl
water + xolotl slippery or wrinkled one, servant, slave [see Frances Karttunen, An Analytical
Dictionary of Nahuatl].


ballot (n.)

1540s, small ball used in voting, also secret vote taken by ballots, from Italian pallotte,
diminutive of palla ball, for small balls used as counters in secret voting (see balloon). Earliest
references are to Venice. By 1776 extended to tickets or sheets of paper used in secret voting.
Ballot box attested from 1670s; metonymically from 1834 as system or practice of voting by ballot.


ballot (v.)

1540s, from ballot (n.). Related: Balloted; balloting.


bed-clothes (n.)

also bedclothes, late 14c., from bed (n.) + clothes.


bibelot (n.)

small curio, 1873, from French bibelot knick-knack, from Old French beubelet trinket, jewel (12c.),
from belbel plaything, a reduplication of bel pretty.


blot (n.)

late 14c., originally blemish, perhaps from Old Norse blettr blot, stain, or from Old French blot,
variant of bloc block, or blestre blister, lump, clump of earth.


blot (v.)

early 15c., to make blots; mid-15c. to blot out, obliterate (words), from blot (n.). Related:
Blotted; blotting.


blotch (n.)

c.1600, perhaps a blend of blot and botch or patch.


blotchy (adj.)

1799, from blotch + -y (2). Related: Blotchiness.


blotter (n.)

1590s, thing for drying wet spots, agent noun from blot (v.). Meaning bad writer is from c.1600.
Sense of day book is from 1670s, and the word was applied early 19c. to rough drafts, scrap books,
notebooks, and draft account books. Hence the police jargon sense arrest record sheet, recorded from
1887.


blotting (n.)

mid-15c., verbal noun from blot (v.). Blotting paper is recorded from 1510s.


blotto (adj.)

drunk, c.1905, from some signification of blot (v.) in its soak up liquid meaning.


Camelot (n.)

a name first found in medieval French romances; it corresponds to Latin Camuladonum, the Roman
forerunner of Colchester, which was an impressive ruin in the Middle Ages. But Malory identifies it
with Winchester and Elizabethans tended to see it as Cadbury Castle, an Iron Age hill fort near
Glastonbury.


cephalothorax (n.)

1829, from cephalo- + thorax. Perhaps from French or German.


Charlotte

fem. proper name, from the French fem. of Charlot, a diminutive of Charles. Meaning apple marmalade
covered with bread-crumbs is attested from 1796, presumably from French (where, however, the dessert
name is attested only from 1804), possibly from the fem. proper name, but the connection is obscure.
Perhaps from some French dialect word. Compare Middle English charlette (mid-14c.) dish containing
meat, eggs, milk, etc., said to be probably from Old French char lait&#233; meat with milk.    The
city in North Carolina, U.S., was settled c.1750 and named for Princess Charlotte Sophia
(1744-1818), who married George III of England in 1761; Charlottetown, Prince Edward Island, Canada,
also was named for her (1763).


cheese cloth (n.)

1650s, originally cloth in which curds were pressed, from cheese (n.1) + cloth.


clot (n.)

Old English clott a round mass, lump, akin to Dutch kloot ball, Danish klods a block, lump, German
Klotz lump, block; probably related to cleat and clod.


clot (v.)

early 15c., from clot (n.). Of fluids from 1590s. Related: Clotted; clotting.


cloth (n.)

Old English cla&#254; a cloth, sail, cloth covering, woven or felted material to wrap around one,
hence, also, garment, from Proto-Germanic *kalithaz (cognates: Old Frisian klath cloth, Middle Dutch
cleet, Dutch kleed garment, dress, Middle High German kleit, German Kleid garment), of obscure
origin. As an adjective from 1590s. The cloth the clerical profession is from 17c. in reference to
characteristic dress.


clothe (v.)

Old English cla&#240;ian, from cla&#254; (see cloth). Related: Clothed, clothing. Other Old English
words for this were scrydan and gew&aelig;dian.


clothes (n.)

Old English cla&eth;as cloths, clothes, originally plural of cla&eth; cloth (see cloth), which, in
19c., after the sense of article of clothing had mostly faded from it, acquired a new plural form,
cloths, to distinguish it from this word.


clothes-horse (n.)

also clothes horse, upright wooden frame for hanging clothes to dry, 1788, from clothes + horse
(n.). Figurative sense of person whose sole function seems to be to show off clothes is 1850.


clothes-line (n.)

also clothesline, 1830, from clothes + line (n.). As a kind of high tackle in U.S. football (the
effect is similar to running into a taut clothesline) attested by 1970; as a verb in this sense by
1959.


clothes-pin (n.)

also clothespin, by 1834, American English, from clothes + pin (n.). Clothes-peg in the same sense
attested from 1812.


clothier (n.)

mid-14c., clother; late 15c., clothyer (late 13c. as a surname) Middle English agent noun from
cloth; also see -ier, which is unetymological in this word and probably acquired by bad influence.


Clothilde

fem. proper name, via French, from German Klothilde, literally famous in battle, from Old High
German *klod famous (related to Old English hlud; see loud (adj.)) + hild battle (see Hilda).


clothing (n.)

c.1200, action of dressing in clothes, verbal noun from clothe. From late 13c. as clothes
collectively; 1590s as an adjective.


Clotho

one of the three Fates, from Latin Clotho, from Greek Klotho, literally the spinner, from klothein
to spin. The three Fates together sometimes were called Klothes the spinners.


cloture (n.)

1871, the French word for closure, the action of closing, applied to debates in the French Assembly
(action of closing (debate) by will of a majority), then to the House of Commons and U.S. Congress,
from French cl&ocirc;ture, from Old French closture (see closure). It was especially used in English
by those opposed to the tactic.    In foreign countries the Cl&ocirc;ture has been used notoriously
to barricade up a majority against the pestilent criticism of a minority, and in this country every
whip and force is employed by the majority to re-assert its continued supremacy and to keep its
ranks intact whenever attacked. How this one-sided struggle to maintain solidarity can be construed
into good for all is inexplicable in the sense uttered. [The cl&ocirc;ture and the Recent Debate, a
Letter to Sir J. Lubbock, London, 1882]


copilot (n.)

1927, from co- + pilot (n.).


culottes (n.)

a divided skirt, 1911, from French culotte breeches (16c.), a diminutive of cul bottom, backside,
backside, anus, from Latin culus bottom, fundament. Earlier, in the singular cullote, it was used to
mean knee-breeches (1842). Por le cul bieu By God's arse was an Old French oath.


cyclotron (n.)

1935, from cyclo- + ending from electron.


dishcloth (n.)

also dish-cloth, 1828, from dish (n.) + cloth. It relegated earlier dish-clout (1520s) to dialect.


epiglottis (n.)

1520s, from Late Latin epiglottis, from Greek epiglottis, literally (that which is) upon the tongue,
from epi on (see epi-) + glottis, from glotta, variant of glossa tongue (see gloss (n.2)). An
earlier form was epiglote (c.1400), from Old French epiglotte. Related: Epiglottic.


flotation (n.)

1850s, from float (v.) + -ation. Spelling influenced by French (compare floatation).


flotilla (n.)

1711, a small fleet, from Spanish flotilla, diminutive of flota float, from flotar to float, of
Germanic origin (see float (v.)).


flotsam (n.)

c.1600, from Anglo-French floteson, from Old French flotaison a floating, from floter to float (of
Germanic origin; see float) + -aison, from Latin -ation(em). Spelled flotsen till mid-19c. when it
altered, perhaps under influence of many English words in -some.    In British law, flotsam are
goods found floating on the sea as a consequence of a shipwreck or action of wind or waves; jetsam
are things cast out of a ship in danger of being wrecked, and afterward washed ashore, or things
cast ashore by the sailors. Whatever sinks is lagan. Figurative use for odds and ends attested by
1861.


