lottery (n.)

1560s, arrangement for a distribution of prizes by chance, from Italian lotteria, from lotto lot,
portion, share, from same root as Old English hlot (see lot). Compare Middle French loterie, from
Middle Dutch loterje, from lot (n.).


keno (n.)

game of chance (akin to bingo), 1814, American English, probably from French quine five winning
numbers in a lottery, from Latin quini five each, distributive of quinque five (see five). The
numbers are arranged in rows of five.


tombola (n.)

Italian lotto-style lottery, 1880, from Italian tombola, apparently from tombolare to tumble, fall
upside down, from a Germanic source (see tumble (v.)).


lotto (n.)

1778, type of card game, from French loto and directly from Italian lotto a lot, from Old French lot
lot, share, reward, prize, from Frankish or some other Germanic source (compare Old English and Old
Frisian hlot; see lot (n.)). Meaning a lottery, a game of chance is attested from 1787.


blank (n.)

late 14c. as the name of a small French coin; 1550s as white space in the center of a target, from
the same source as blank (adj.). Meaning empty space (in a document, etc.) is from c.1570. Meaning
losing lottery ticket (1560s) is behind the expression draw a blank. The word has been for decorum's
sake, substituted for a word of execration [OED] from 1854. From 1896 as short for blank cartridge
(itself from 1826).


ticket (n.)

1520s, short note or document, from a shortened form of Middle French etiquet label, note, from Old
French estiquette a little note (late 14c.), especially one affixed to a gate or wall as a public
notice, literally something stuck (up or on), from estiquer to affix, stick on, attach, from
Frankish *stikkan, cognate with Old English stician to pierce, from Proto-Germanic *stikken to be
stuck, stative form from PIE *steig- to stick; pointed (see stick (v.)).    Meaning card or piece of
paper that gives its holder a right or privilege is first recorded 1670s, probably developing from
the sense of certificate, license, permit. The political sense of list of candidates put forward by
a faction has been used in American English since 1711. Meaning official notification of offense is
from 1930. Big ticket item is from 1953. Slang the ticket just the thing, what is expected is
recorded from 1838, perhaps with notion of a winning lottery ticket.


chance (n.)

c.1300, something that takes place, what happens, an occurrence (good or bad, but more often bad),
from Old French cheance accident, chance, fortune, luck, situation, the falling of dice (12c.,
Modern French chance), from Vulgar Latin *cadentia that which falls out, a term used in dice, from
neuter plural of Latin cadens, present participle of cadere to fall (see case (n.1)).    In English
frequently in plural, chances. The word's notions of opportunity and randomness are as old as the
record of it in English and now all but crowd out the word's original notion of mere occurrence.
Main chance thing of most importance is from 1570s, bearing the older sense. The mathematical (and
hence odds-making) sense is attested from 1778. To stand a chance (or not) is from 1796.    To take
(one's) chances accept what happens (early 14c.) is from the old, neutral sense; to take a
chance/take chances is originally (by 1814) participate in a raffle or lottery or game; extended
sense of take a risk is by 1826.


lot (n.)

Old English hlot object (anything from dice to straw, but often a chip of wood with a name inscribed
on it) used to determine someone's share, also what falls to a person by lot, from Proto-Germanic
*khlutom (cognates: Old Norse hlutr lot, share, Old Frisian hlot lot, Old Saxon hlot, Middle Dutch,
Dutch lot, Old High German hluz share of land, German Los; Old English hleotan to cast lots, to
foretell), of unknown origin. The object was placed with others in a receptacle, which was shaken,
the winner being the one that fell out first. Hence, to cast lots. In some cases the lots were drawn
by hand. The word was adopted from Germanic into the Romanic languages (compare lottery, lotto).
Meaning choice resulting from the casting of lots first attested c.1200.    Sense of plot of land is
first recorded 1630s (distribution of the best property in new settlements often determined by
casting lots), that of group, collection is 1725, from notion of auction lots. The generalized sense
of great many is first attested in 1812. To cast (one's) lot with another is to agree to share
winnings.


number (n.)

c.1300, sum, aggregate of a collection, from Anglo-French noumbre, Old French nombre and directly
from Latin numerus a number, quantity, from PIE root *nem- to divide, distribute, allot (related to
Greek nemein to deal out; see nemesis). Meaning symbol or figure of arithmetic value is from late
14c. Meaning single (numbered) issue of a magazine is from 1795. Meaning dialing combination to
reach a particular telephone receiver is from 1879; hence wrong number (1886). The modern meaning
musical selection (1885) is from vaudeville theater programs, where acts were marked by a number.
Earlier numbers meant Harmony; proportion calculated by number, and Verses, poetry [Johnson].
Number one oneself is from 1704 (mock-Italian form numero uno attested from 1973); the biblical Book
of Numbers (c.1400, Latin Numeri, Greek Arithmoi) so called because it begins with a census of the
Israelites. Slang number one and number two for urination and defecation attested from 1902. Number
cruncher is 1966, of machines; 1971, of persons. To get or have (someone's) number have someone
figured out is attested from 1853. The numbers illegal lottery is from 1897, American English.


