loutish (adj.)

1550s, from lout + -ish. Related: Loutishly; loutishness.


lout (n.)

1540s, awkward fellow, clown, bumpkin, perhaps from a dialectal survival of Middle English louten
(v.) bow down (c.1300), from Old English lutan bow low, from Proto-Germanic *lut- to bow, bend,
stoop (cognates: Old Norse lutr stooping, which might also be the source of the modern English
word), from PIE *leud- to lurk (cognates: Gothic luton to deceive, Old English lot deceit), also to
be small (see little). Non-Germanic cognates probably include Lithuanian liudeti to mourn; Old
Church Slavonic luditi to deceive, ludu foolish. Sense of cad is first attested 1857 in British
schoolboy slang.


trog (n.)

obnoxious person, boor, lout, 1956, short for troglodyte.


yob (n.)

a youth, 1859, British English, back-slang from boy. By 1930s with overtones of hooligan, lout.
Related: extended form yobbo.


yahoo (n.)

a brute in human form, 1726, from the race of brutish human creatures in Swift's Gulliver's Travels.
A made name, prob. meant to suggest disgust [Century Dictionary]. Freq. in mod. use, a person
lacking cultivation or sensibility, a philistine; a lout; a hooligan [OED]. The internet search
engine so called from 1994.


Jake

colloquial or familiar abbreviation of the masc. proper name Jacob (q.v.). As the typical name of a
rustic lout, from 1854. (Jakey still is the typical name for an Amishman among the non-Amish of
Pennsylvania Dutch country). Slang meaning excellent, fine is from 1914, American English, of
unknown origin.


lob (n.)

a word of widespread application to lumpish things, probably in Old English. Compare Middle Dutch,
Middle Low German lobbe, Old Norse lubba. From late 13c. as a surname; meaning pollack is from early
14c.; that of lazy lout is from late 14c.


hobo (n.)

1889, Western U.S., of unknown origin. Barnhart compares early 19c. English dialectal hawbuck lout,
clumsy fellow, country bumpkin. Or possibly from ho, boy, a workers' call on late 19c. western U.S.
railroads. Facetious formation hobohemia, community or life of hobos, is from 1923 (see bohemian).


lug (n.)

1620s, handle of a pitcher, from lugge (Scottish) earflap of a cap, ear (late 15c.; according to
OED, the common word for ear in 19c. Scotland), probably from Scandinavian (compare Swedish lugg
forelock, Norwegian lugg tuft of hair). The connecting notion is something that can be gripped and
pulled. Applied 19c. to mechanical objects that can be grabbed or gripped. Meaning stupid fellow is
from 1924; that of lout, sponger is 1931, American English. Compare lug-nut (1869), nut closed at
one end as a cap.


pumpernickel (n.)

dark rye bread, 1756, pompernickel, from German (Westphalian dialect) Pumpernickel (1663),
originally an abusive nickname for a stupid person, from pumpern to break wind + Nickel goblin,
lout, rascal, from proper name Niklaus (see Nicholas). An earlier German name for it was krankbrot,
literally sick-bread.


booby (n.)

1590s, from Spanish bobo stupid person, slow bird (used of various ungainly seabirds), probably from
Latin balbus stammering, from an imitative root (see barbarian).   Booby prize is by 1883: an object
of little value given to the loser of a game; booby trap is 1850, originally a schoolboy prank; the
more lethal sense developed during World War I.    At the end of every session the dominie had the
satirical custom of presenting his tawse as a booby-prize to some idle or stupid lout whom he picked
out as meriting this distinction so that next time they met he might start fresh and fair with new
pair for a new set of classes. [Ascott R. Hope, Dumps, Young England magazine, 1883]


lubber (n.)

mid-14c., big, clumsy, stupid fellow who lives in idleness, from lobre, earlier lobi lazy lout,
probably of Scandinavian origin (compare Swedish dialectal lubber a plump, lazy fellow). But OED
suggests a possible connection with Old French lobeor swindler, parasite, with sense altered by
association with lob (n.) in the bumpkin sense. A sailors' word since 16c. (as in landlubber), but
earliest attested use is of lazy monks (abbey-lubber). Compare also lubberwort, the name of the
mythical herb that produces laziness (1540s); and Lubberland imaginary land of plenty without work
(1590s). Sometimes also Lubbard (1580s).


