cunt (n.)

female intercrural foramen, or, as some 18c. writers refer to it, the monosyllable, Middle English
cunte female genitalia, by early 14c. (in Hendyng's Proverbs -- &#658;eve &#254;i cunte to
cunni[n]g, And crave affetir wedding), akin to Old Norse kunta, Old Frisian, Middle Dutch, and
Middle Low German kunte, from Proto-Germanic *kunton, of uncertain origin. Some suggest a link with
Latin cuneus wedge, others to PIE root *geu- hollow place, still others to PIE *gwen-, root of queen
and Greek gyne woman.    The form is similar to Latin cunnus female pudenda (also, vulgarly, a
woman), which is likewise of disputed origin, perhaps literally gash, slit, from PIE *sker- (1) to
cut, or literally sheath, from PIE *kut-no-, from root *(s)keu- to conceal, hide.   Hec vulva: a
cunt. Hic cunnus: idem est. [from Londesborough Illustrated Nominale, c.1500, in Anglo-Saxon and Old
English Vocabularies, eds. Wright and W&#252;lcker, vol. 1, 1884]    First known reference in
English apparently is in a compound, Oxford street name Gropecuntlane cited from c.1230 (and
attested through late 14c.) in Place-Names of Oxfordshire (Gelling &amp; Stenton, 1953), presumably
a haunt of prostitutes. Used in medical writing c.1400, but avoided in public speech since 15c.;
considered obscene since 17c.    in Middle English also conte, counte, and sometimes queinte,
queynte (for this, see q). Chaucer used quaint and queynte in Canterbury Tales (late 14c.), and
Andrew Marvell might be punning on quaint in To His Coy Mistress (1650).    What eyleth yow to
grucche thus and grone? Is it for ye wolde haue my queynte allone? [Wife of Bath's Tale]    Under
MONOSYLLABLE Farmer lists 552 synonyms from English slang and literature before launching into
another 5 pages of them in French, German, Italian, Spanish, and Portuguese. [A sampling: Botany
Bay, chum, coffee-shop, cookie, End of the Sentimental Journey, fancy bit, Fumbler's Hall,
funniment, goatmilker, heaven, hell, Itching Jenny, jelly-bag, Low Countries, nature's tufted
treasure, parenthesis, penwiper, prick-skinner, seminary, tickle-toby, undeniable, wonderful lamp,
and aphrodisaical tennis court. Dutch cognate de kont means a bottom, an arse, but Dutch also has
attractive poetic slang ways of expressing this part, such as liefdesgrot, literally cave of love,
and vleesroos rose of flesh.     Alternative form cunny is attested from c.1720 but is certainly
much earlier and forced a change in the pronunciation of coney (q.v.), but it was good for a pun
while coney was still the common word for rabbit: A pox upon your Christian cockatrices! They cry,
like poulterers' wives, 'No money, no coney.'  [Philip Massinger: The Virgin-Martyr, Act I, Scene 1,
1622]


Cupid

Roman god of passionate love, late 14c., from Latin Cupido, personification of cupido desire, love,
from cupere to desire (see cupidity). Identified with Greek Eros. Cupid's bow  as a shape,
especially of lips, is from 1858.


dearth (n.)

mid-13c., derthe scarcity (originally used of famines, when food was costly because scarce; extended
to other situations of scarcity from early 14c.), abstract noun formed from root of Old English
deore precious, costly (see dear) + abstract noun suffix -th (2). Common Germanic formation, though
not always with the same sense (cognates: Old Saxon diurtha splendor, glory, love, Middle Dutch
dierte, Dutch duurte, Old High German tiurida glory).


fall (v.)

Old English feallan (class VII strong verb; past tense feoll, past participle feallen) to fall;
fail, decay, die,  from Proto-Germanic *fallanan (cognates: Old Frisian falla, Old Saxon fallan,
Dutch vallen, Old Norse falla, Old High German fallan, German fallen), from PIE root *pol- to fall
(cognates: Armenian p'ul downfall, Lithuanian puola to fall, Old Prussian aupallai finds, literally
falls upon).    Most of the figurative senses had developed in Middle English. Meaning to be reduced
(as temperature) is from 1650s. To fall in love is attested from 1520s; to fall asleep is late 14c.
Fall through come to naught is from 1781. To fall for something is from 1903.


galvanize (v.)

1802, from French galvaniser, from galvanisme (see galvanism). Figurative sense of excite, stimulate
(as if by electricity) first recorded 1853. Meaning to coat with metal by means of galvanic
electricity (especially to plate iron with tin, but now typically to plate it with zinc) is from
1839.He'll swear that in her dancing she cuts all others out,Though like a Gal that's galvanized,
she throws her legs about.[Thomas Hood, Love has not Eyes, 1845]  Related: Galvanized; galvanizing.


half-wit (n.)

1670s, originally a would-be wit whose abilities are mediocre; sense of simpleton (one lacking all
his wits) is first attested 1755.Half-wits are fleas; so little and so light,We scarce could know
they live, but that they bite.[Dryden, All for Love]  Phrase out of half wit half out of one's mind
was in Middle English (late 14c.). Half-witted lacking common sense is from 1640s.


jealous (adj.)

c.1200, gelus, later jelus (early 14c.), possessive and suspicious, originally in the context of
sexuality or romance; in general use late 14c.; also in a more positive sense, fond, amorous,
ardent, from c.1300, from Old French jalos keen, zealous; avaricious; jealous (12c., Modern French
jaloux), from Late Latin zelosus, from zelus zeal, from Greek zelos, sometimes jealousy, but more
often in a good sense (emulation, rivalry, zeal). See zeal. In biblical language (early 13c.)
tolerating no unfaithfulness.    Most of the words for 'envy' ... had from the outset a hostile
force, based on 'look at' (with malice), 'not love,' etc. Conversely, most of those which became
distinctive terms for 'jealousy' were originally used also in a good sense, 'zeal, emulation.'
[Buck, pp.1138-9]    Among the ways to express this in other tongues are Swedish svartsjuka,
literally black-sick, from phrase bara svarta strumpor wear black stockings, also be jealous. Danish
skinsyg jealous, literally skin-sick, is from skind hide, skin said to be explained by Swedish
dialectal expression fa skinn receive a refusal in courtship.


Kama Sutra

also Kamasutra, 1874, from Sanskrit Kama Sutra, name of the ancient treatise on love and sexual
performance, from kama love (see whore) + sutra series of aphorisms (see sutra).


kiss (v.)

Old English cyssan to kiss, from Proto-Germanic *kussjan (cognates: Old Saxon kussian, Old Norse
kyssa, Old Frisian kessa, Middle Dutch cussen, Dutch, Old High German kussen, German k&uuml;ssen,
Norwegian and Danish kysse, Swedish kyssa), from *kuss-, probably ultimately imitative of the sound.
Related: Kissed; kissing. For vowel evolution, see bury. There appears to be no common Indo-European
root word for kiss, though suggestions of a common ku- sound may be found in the Germanic root and
Greek kynein to kiss, Hittite kuwash-anzi they kiss, Sanskrit cumbati he kisses.Kissing, as an
expression of affection or love, is unknown among many races, and in the history of mankind seems to
be a late substitute for the more primitive rubbing of noses, sniffing, and licking. [Buck,
p.1113]Some languages make a distinction between the kiss of affection and that of erotic love
(compare Latin saviari erotic kiss, vs. osculum, literally little mouth). French embrasser kiss, but
literally embrace, came about in 17c. when the older word baiser (from Latin basiare) acquired an
obscene connotation. Insulting invitation kiss my ass is at least from 1705, but probably much older
(see The Miller's Tale).


lady (n.)

c.1200, lafdi, lavede, from Old English hl&aelig;fdige mistress of a household, wife of a lord,
literally one who kneads bread, from hlaf bread (see loaf) + -dige maid, related to d&aelig;ge maker
of dough (see dey (n.1); also compare lord (n.)). The medial -f- disappeared 14c. Not found outside
English except where borrowed from it.    Sense of woman of superior position in society is c.1200;
woman whose manners and sensibilities befit her for high rank in society is from 1861 (ladylike in
this sense is from 1580s, and ladily from c.1400). Meaning woman as an object of chivalrous love is
from early 14c. Used commonly as an address to any woman since 1890s. Applied in Old English to the
Holy Virgin, hence many extended usages in plant names, place names, etc., from genitive singular
hl&aelig;fdigan, which in Middle English merged with the nominative, so that lady- often represents
(Our) Lady's, as in ladybug. Ladies' man first recorded 1784. Lady of pleasure recorded from 1640s.


lap (v.2)

to lay one part over another, early 14c., to surround (something with something else), from lap
(n.). Figurative use, to envelop (in love, sin, desire, etc.) is from mid-14c. The sense of to get a
lap ahead (of someone) on a track is from 1847, on notion of overlapping. The noun in this sense is
1670s, originally something coiled or wrapped up; meaning a turn around a track (1861) also is from
this sense. Related: Lapped; lapping; laps.


lascivious (adj.)

mid-15c., from Middle French lascivieux or directly from Late Latin lasciviosus (used in a scolding
sense by Isidore and other early Church writers), from Latin lascivia lewdness, playfulness,
frolicsomeness, jolity, from lascivus lewd, playful, frolicsome, wanton, from PIE *las-ko-, from
*las- to be eager, wanton, or unruly (cognates: Sanskrit -lasati yearns, lasati plays, frolics,
Hittite ilaliya- to desire, covet, Greek laste harlot, Old Church Slavonic laska flattery, Slovak
laska love, Old Irish lainn greedy, Gothic lustus, Old English lust lust). Related: Lasciviously;
lasciviousness. In 17c. also with a verbal form, lasciviate.


madrigal (n.)

short love poem, also part-song for three or more voices, 1580s, from Italian madrigale, probably
from Venetian dialect madregal simple, ingenuous, from Late Latin matricalis invented, original,
literally of or from the womb, from matrix (genitive matricis) womb (see matrix).


mahatma (n.)

1884, literally great-souled, from Sanskrit mahatman, from maha great, from PIE root *meg- great
(see magnate) + atman, soul, principle of life, properly breath (see atman). In esoteric Buddhism, a
person of supernatural powers. In common use, as a title, a mark of love and respect. Said to have
been applied to Gandhi (1869-1948) in 1915 by poet Rabrindranath Tagore.


main (adj.)

early 13c., large, bulky, strong, from Old English m&aelig;gen- power, strength, force, used in
compounds (such as m&aelig;gensibb great love, m&aelig;genbyr&#240;en heavy burden; see main (n.)),
probably also from or influenced by Old Norse megenn (adj.) strong, powerful. Sense of chief is
c.1400. Main course in the meal sense attested from 1829. Main man favorite male friend; hero is
from 1967, U.S. black slang.


majorette (n.)

baton-twirler, 1941, short for drum-majorette (1938), fem. of drum-major (1590s).    The perfect
majorette is a pert, shapely, smiling extrovert, who loves big, noisy crowds and knows how to make
those crowds love her. [Life magazine, Oct. 10, 1938]    (The article notes that the activity has
been going on for about six years now).


narcissism (n.)

1905, from German Narzissismus, coined 1899 (in Die sexuellen Perversit&auml;ten), by German
psychiatrist Paul N&auml;cke (1851-1913), on a comparison suggested 1898 by Havelock Ellis, from
Greek Narkissos, name of a beautiful youth in mythology (Ovid, Metamorphoses, iii.370) who fell in
love with his own reflection in a spring and was turned to the flower narcissus (q.v.). Coleridge
used the word in a letter from 1822.    But already Krishna, enamoured of himself, had resolved to
experience lust for his own self; he manifested his own Nature in the cow-herd girls and enjoyed
them. [Karapatri, Lingopasana-rahasya, Siddhanta, II, 1941-2]    Sometimes erroneously as narcism.


nebula (n.)

early 15c., nebule a cloud, mist, from Latin nebula mist, vapor, fog, smoke, exhalation,
figuratively darkness, obscurity, from PIE *nebh- cloud (cognates: Sanskrit nabhas- vapor, cloud,
mists, fog, sky; Greek nephele, nephos cloud; German nebel fog; Old English nifol dark, gloomy;
Welsh niwl cloud, fog; Slavic nebo).    Re-borrowed from Latin 1660s in sense of cataracts in the
eye; astronomical meaning cloud-like patch in the night sky first recorded c.1730. As early as
Hershel (1802) astronomers realized that some nebulae were star clusters, but certain distinction of
relatively nearby cosmic gas clouds from distant galaxies was not made until 1920s, using the new
100-inch Mt. Wilson telescope.


puppy (n.)

late 15c., woman's small pet dog, of uncertain origin but likely from Middle French poup&eacute;e
doll, toy (see puppet). Meaning shifted from toy dog to young dog (1590s), replacing Middle English
whelp. In early use in English puppet and puppy were not always distinct from each other. Also used
about that time in sense of vain young man. Puppy-dog first attested 1590s (in Shakespeare, puppi-
dogges). Puppy love is from 1823. Puppy fat is from 1937.


pamphlet (n.)

small, unbound treatise, late 14c., from Anglo-Latin panfletus, popular short form of Pamphilus, seu
de Amore (Pamphilus, or about Love), a short 12c. Latin love poem popular and widely copied in
Middle Ages; the name from Greek pamphilos loved by all, from pan- all + philos loving, dear see
-phile). Meaning brief work dealing with questions of current interest is late 16c.


pander (n.)

arranger of sexual liaisons, one who supplies another with the means of gratifying lust, 1520s,
procurer, pimp, from Middle English Pandare (late 14c.), used by Chaucer (Troylus and Cryseyde), who
borrowed it from Boccaccio (who had it in Italian form Pandaro in Filostrato) as name of the prince
(Greek Pandaros), who procured the love of Cressida (his niece in Chaucer, his cousin in Boccaccio)
for Troilus. The story and the name are medieval inventions. Spelling influenced by agent suffix
-er.


qualm (n.)

Old English cwealm (West Saxon) death, murder, slaughter; disaster; plague; torment, utcualm
(Anglian) utter destruction, probably related to cwellan to kill, murder, execute, cwelan to die
(see quell). Sense softened to feeling of faintness 1520s; figurative meaning uneasiness, doubt is
from 1550s; that of scruple of conscience is 1640s.    Evidence of a direct path from the Old
English to the modern senses is wanting, but it is plausible, via the notion of fit of sickness. The
other suggested etymology, less satisfying, is to take the fit of uneasiness sense from Dutch kwalm
steam, vapor, mist (cognate with German Qualm smoke, vapor, stupor), which also might be ultimately
from the same Germanic root as quell.


quodlibet (n.)

a nicety, subtlety, late 14c., Latin, literally what you will, what you please, from quod what,
neuter of qui (see who) + libet it pleases (see love (n.)).


sybarite (n.)

person devoted to pleasure, 1590s, literally inhabitant of Sybaris, ancient Greek town in southern
Italy, whose people were noted for their love of luxury. From Latin Sybarita, from Greek Sybarites.


upright (adj.)

Old English upriht erect, face-upward; see up (adv.) + right (adj.1). Similar compounds are found in
other Germanic languages (Old Frisian upriucht, Middle Dutch oprecht, Old High German ufreht, German
aufrecht, Old Norse uprettr). Figurative sense of good, honest, adhering to rectitude is first
attested 1520s.    As an adverb, Old English uprihte. As a noun, 1560s in the sense a vertical
front; c.1700 as a vertical timber in framing; 1742 in the sense something standing erect. Meaning
an upright piano is from 1860.    THREE-PENNY UPRIGHT. A retailer of love, who, for the sum
mentioned, dispenses her favours standing against a wall. [Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, 1811]
<hr />   The bent-over rear-entry posture they are talking about, of course, is kubda, the three-
obol position at the bottom-end of a prostitute's price-range. [James N. Davidson, Courtesans and
Fishcakes: The Consuming Passions of Classical Athens, 1997]


veneration (n.)

early 15c., from Old French veneracion, from Latin venerationem (nominative veneratio) reverence,
profoundest respect, noun of action from past participle stem of venerari to worship, revere, from
venus (genitive veneris) beauty, love, desire (see Venus).


venereal (adj.)

early 15c., of or pertaining to sexual desire or intercourse, from Latin venereus, venerius of
Venus; of sexual love, from venus (genitive veneris) sexual love, sexual desire (see Venus). Used of
sexually transmitted diseases from 1650s. Related: Venereally.


venery (n.1)

pursuit of sexual pleasure, mid-15c., from Medieval Latin veneria sexual intercourse, from Latin
venus (genitive veneris) sexual love, sexual desire (see Venus). In earlier use it may have been
felt as a play on now obsolete homonym venery (n.2) practice or sport of hunting, the chase.
Related: Venereous.


venial (adj.)

c.1300, pardonable, from Old French venial pardonable, excusable (13c.) and directly from Late Latin
venialis pardonable, from Latin venia forgiveness, indulgence, pardon, related to venus sexual love,
desire (see Venus). Related: Venially.


venom (n.)

mid-13c., venim, venym, poison secreted by some animals and transferred by biting, from Anglo-French
and Old French venim, venin poison; malice, from Vulgar Latin *venimen (source also of Italian
veleno, Spanish veneno), from Latin venenum poison, earlier (pre-classical) drug, medical potion,
also charm, seduction, probably originally love potion, from PIE *wenes-no-, from root *wen- (1) to
strive after, wish, desire (see Venus). Variously deformed in post-Latin languages, apparently by
dissimilation. Modern spelling in English from late 14c. The meaning bitter, virulent feeling or
language is first recorded c.1300.


Venus

late Old English, from Latin Venus (plural veneres), in ancient Roman mythology, the goddess of
beauty and love, especially sensual love, from venus love, sexual desire; loveliness, beauty, charm;
a beloved object, from PIE root *wen- (1) to strive after, wish, desire (cognates: Sanskrit veti
follows after, vanas- desire, vanati desires, loves, wins; Avestan vanaiti he wishes, is victorious,
vayeiti hunts; Lithuanian veju to hunt, pursue; Old Church Slavonic voji warrior; Old English
wa&thorn; hunting, wynn joy, wunian to dwell, wenian to accustom, train, wean, wyscan to wish; Old
Norse vei&eth;r chase, hunting, fishing). Applied by the Romans to Greek Aphrodite, Egyptian Hathor,
etc.    Applied in English to any beautiful, attractive woman by 1570s. As the name of the most
brilliant planet from late 13c., from this sense in Latin (Old English called it morgensteorra and
&aelig;fensteorra). The venus fly-trap (Dion&aelig;a muscipula) was discovered 1760 by Gov. Arthur
Dobbs in North Carolina and description sent to Collinson in England. The Central Atlantic Coast
Algonquian name for the plant, /titipiwitshik/, yielded regional American English tippity wichity.


yard (n.2)

measure of length, Old English gerd (Mercian), gierd (West Saxon) rod, staff, stick; measure of
length, from West Germanic *gazdijo, from Proto-Germanic *gazdjo- stick, rod (cognates: Old Saxon
gerda, Old Frisian ierde, Dutch gard rod; Old High German garta, German gerte switch, twig, Old
Norse gaddr spike, sting, nail), from PIE root *ghazdh-o- rod, staff, pole (cognates: Latin hasta
shaft, staff). The nautical yard-arm retains the original sense of stick.    Originally in Anglo-
Saxon times a land measure of roughly 5 meters (a length later called rod, pole, or perch). Modern
measure of three feet is attested from late 14c. (earlier rough equivalent was the ell of 45 inches,
and the verge). In Middle English and after, the word also was a euphemism for penis (as in Love's
Labour's Lost, V.ii.676). Slang meaning one hundred dollars first attested 1926, American English.
Middle English yerd (Old English gierd) also was yard-land, yard of land, a varying measure but
often about 30 acres or a quarter of a hide.


affair (n.)

c.1300, what one has to do, from Anglo-French afere, Old French afaire (12c., Modern French affaire)
business, event; rank, estate, from the infinitive phrase &agrave; faire to do, from Latin ad to
(see ad-) + facere to do, make (see factitious).    A Northern word originally, brought into general
use and given a French spelling by Caxton (15c.). General sense of vague proceedings (in romance,
war, etc.) first attested 1702. Meaning an affair of the heart; a passionate episode is from French
affaire de coeur (itself attested in English from 1809); to have an affair with someone in this
sense is by 1726, earlier have an affair of love:    'Tis manife&#383;tly contrary to the Law of
Nature, that one Woman &#383;hould cohabit or have an Affair of Love with more than one Man at the
&#383;ame time. [Pufendorf's Law of Nature and Nations, transl. J. Spavan, London, 1716]   <hr />
Thus, in our dialect, a vicious man is a man of pleasure, a sharper is one that plays the whole
game, a lady is said to have an affair, a gentleman to be a gallant, a rogue in business to be one
that knows the world. By this means, we have no such things as sots, debauchees, whores, rogues, or
the like, in the beau monde, who may enjoy their vices without incurring disagreeable appellations.
[George Berkeley, Alciphron or the Minute Philosopher, 1732]


affection (n.)

early 13c., an emotion of the mind, passion, lust as opposed to reason, from Old French afection
(12c.) emotion, inclination, disposition; love, attraction, enthusiasm, from Latin affectionem
(nominative affectio) a relation, disposition; a temporary state; a frame, constitution, noun of
state from past participle stem of afficere to do something to, act on (see affect (n.)). Sense
developed from disposition to good disposition toward (late 14c.). Related: Affections.


affray (n.)

c.1300, state of alarm produced by a sudden disturbance, from Old French effrei, esfrei disturbance,
fright, from esfreer (v.) to worry, concern, trouble, disturb, from Vulgar Latin *exfridare,
literally to take out of peace, from Latin ex- out of (see ex-) + Frankish *frithu peace, from
Proto-Germanic *frithuz peace, consideration, forbearance (cognates: Old Saxon frithu, Old English
fri&eth;u, Old High German fridu peace, truce), from PIE root *pri- to be friendly, love (see free
(adj.)). Meaning breach of the peace, riotous fight in public is from late 15c. Related verb afrey
(early 14c.) survives almost exclusively in its past participle, afraid (q.v.).


lovemaking (n.)

courtship, mid-15c., from love (n.) + make. Phrase make love is attested from 1570s in the sense pay
amorous attention to; as a euphemism for have sex, it is attested from c.1950.


Hathor

goddess of love and joy in ancient Egypt, from Greek Hathor, from Egyptian Het-Hert, literally the
house above, or possibly Het-Heru house of Horus.


inamorata (n.)

female lover, 1650s, from Italian innamorata, fem. of innamorato, past participle of innamorare to
fall in love, from in in + amore love (see Amy).


leave (n.)

permission, Old English leafe leave, permission, license, dative and accusative of leaf permission,
from Proto-Germanic *lauba (cognates: Old Norse leyfi permission, Old Saxon orlof, Old Frisian
orlof, German Urlaub leave of absence), from PIE *leubh- to care, desire, love, approve (see love
(n.)). Cognate with Old English lief dear, the original idea being approval resulting from pleasure.
Compare love, believe. In military sense, it is attested from 1771.


lesbian (adj.)

1590s, pertaining to the island of Lesbos, from Latin Lesbius, from Greek lesbios of Lesbos, Greek
island in northeastern Aegean Sea (the name originally may have meant wooded), home of Sappho, great
lyric poet whose erotic and romantic verse embraced women as well as men, hence meaning relating to
homosexual relations between women (1890; lesbianism in this sense is attested from 1870) and the
noun, first recorded 1925. Her particular association in English with erotic love between women
dates to at least 1825, though the words formed from it are later. Before this, the principal
figurative use (common in 17c.) was lesbian rule (c.1600) a mason's rule of lead, of a type used on
Lesbos, which could be bent to fit the curves of a molding; hence, pliant morality or judgment.And
this is the nature of the equitable, a correction of law where it is defective owing to its
universality. ... For when the thing is indefinite the rule also is indefinite, like the leaden rule
used in making the Lesbian moulding; the rule adapts itself to the shape of the stone and is not
rigid, and so too the decree is adapted to the facts. [Aristotle, Nicomachean Ethics]  See also
tribadism. Greek had a verb lesbiazein to imitate the Lesbians, which implied sexual initiative and
shamelessness among women, but not necessarily female homosexuality.


Neptune

late 14c., god of the sea, from Latin Neptunus, son of Saturn, brother of Jupiter, the Roman god of
the sea (later identified with Greek Poseidon), probably from PIE root *nebh- cloud (source of Latin
nebula fog, mist, cloud; see nebula), via a sense of moist, wet. The planet so named was discovered
by Galle in 1846. Until the identification of Pluto in 1930, it was the most distant planet known.


Nibelungenlied (n.)

German epic poem of 13c., literally song of the Nibelungs, a race of dwarves who lived in Norway and
owned a hoard of gold and a magic ring, literally children of the mist, related to Old High German
nebul mist, darkness, Old English nifol (see nebula).


nimbus (n.)

1610s, bright cloud surrounding a god, from Latin nimbus cloud, perhaps related to nebula cloud,
mist (see nebula). Meaning halo is first recorded c.1730. Meteorological sense of a rain cloud is
from 1803.


orc (n.)

ogre, devouring monster, Old English orc&thorn;yrs, orcneas (plural), perhaps from a Romanic source
akin to ogre, and ultimately from Latin Orcus Hell, a word of unknown origin. Revived by J.R.R.
Tolkien (1892-1973) as the name of a brutal race in Middle Earth.But Orcs and Trolls spoke as they
would, without love of words or things; and their language was actually more degraded and filthy
than I have shown it. [Return of the King, 1955]


paramour (n.)

c.1300, noun use of adverbial phrase par amour (c.1300) passionately, with strong love or desire,
from Anglo-French and Old French par amour, from accusative of amor love, from amare to love (see
Amy). Originally a term for Christ (by women) or the Virgin Mary (by men), it came to mean darling,
sweetheart (mid-14c.) and mistress, concubine, clandestine lover (late 14c.).


passion (n.)

late 12c., sufferings of Christ on the Cross, from Old French passion Christ's passion, physical
suffering (10c.), from Late Latin passionem (nominative passio) suffering, enduring, from past
participle stem of Latin pati to suffer, endure, possibly from PIE root *pe(i)- to hurt (cognates:
Sanskrit pijati reviles, scorns, Greek pema suffering, misery, woe, Old English feond enemy, devil,
Gothic faian to blame).    Sense extended to sufferings of martyrs, and suffering generally, by
early 13c.; meaning strong emotion, desire is attested from late 14c., from Late Latin use of passio
to render Greek pathos. Replaced Old English &thorn;olung (used in glosses to render Latin passio),
literally suffering, from &thorn;olian (v.) to endure.    Sense of sexual love first attested 1580s;
that of strong liking, enthusiasm, predilection is from 1630s. The passion-flower so called from
1630s.The name passionflower -- flos passionis -- arose from the supposed resemblance of the corona
to the crown of thorns, and of the other parts of the flower to the nails, or wounds, while the five
sepals and five petals were taken to symbolize the ten apostles -- Peter ... and Judas ... being
left out of the reckoning. [Encyclopaedia Britannica, 1885]


scent (v.)

late 14c., sent to find the scent of, from Old French sentir to feel, smell, touch, taste; realize,
perceive; make love to, from Latin sentire  to feel, perceive, sense, discern, hear, see (see sense
(n.)).    Originally a hunting term. The -c- appeared 17c., perhaps by influence of ascent, descent,
etc., or by influence of science. This was a tendency in early Modern English, also in scythe and
for a time threatening to make scite and scituate. Figurative use from 1550s. Transitive sense
impregnate with an odor, perfume is from 1690s. Related: Scented; scenting.


votary (n.)

1540s, one consecrated by a vow, from Latin votum a promise to a god; that which is promised (see
vow (n.)) + -ary. Originally a monk or nun, general sense of ardent devotee of some aim or pursuit
is from 1591 (in Shakespeare, originally in reference to love). Related: Votaress.


whore (n.)

1530s spelling alteration (see wh-) of Middle English hore, from Old English hore prostitute,
harlot, from Proto-Germanic *horaz (fem. *horon-) one who desires (cognates: Old Norse hora
adulteress, Danish hore, Swedish hora, Dutch hoer, Old High German huora whore; in Gothic only in
the masc. hors adulterer, fornicator, also as a verb, horinon commit adultery), from PIE *ka- to
like, desire, a base that has produced words in other languages for lover (cognates: Latin carus
dear; Old Irish cara friend; Old Persian kama desire; Sanskrit Kama, name of the Hindu god of love,
kamah love, desire, the first element in Kama Sutra).   Whore itself is perhaps a Germanic euphemism
for a word that has not survived. The Old English vowel naturally would have yielded *hoor, which is
the pronunciation in some dialects; it might have shifted by influence of Middle English homonym
hore physical filth, slime, also moral corruption, sin, from Old English horh. The wh- form became
current 16c. A general term of abuse for an unchaste or lewd woman (without regard to money) from at
least c.1200. Of male prostitutes from 1630s. Whore of Babylon is from Rev. xvii:1, 5, etc. In
Middle English with occasional plural forms horen, heoranna.    The word, with its derivatives, is
now avoided polite speech; its survival in literature, so as it survives, is due to the fact that it
is a favorite word with Shakspere (who uses it, with its derivatives, 99 times) and is common in the
authorized English version of the Bible ... though the American revisers recommended the
substitution of harlot as less gross .... [Century Dictionary]     Some equivalent words in other
languages also derive from sources not originally pejorative, such as Bohemian nevestka, diminutive
of nevesta bride; Dutch deern, German dirne originally girl, lass, wench; also perhaps Old French
pute, perhaps literally girl, fem. of Vulgar Latin *puttus (but perhaps rather from Latin putidus
stinking; see poontang). Welsh putain whore is from French, probably via Middle English. Among other
languages, Greek porne prostitute is related to pernemi sell, with an original notion probably of a
female slave sold for prostitution; Latin meretrix is literally one who earns wages (source of Irish
mertrech, Old English miltestre whore, prostitute).    The vulgar Roman word was scortum, literally
skin, hide. Another term was lupa, literally she-wolf (preserved in Spanish loba, Italian lupa,
French louve; see wolf (n.)). And of course there was prostituta, literally placed in front, thus
publicly exposed, from the fem. past participle of prostituere (see prostitute (n.)). Another Old
Norse term was sk&aelig;kja, which yielded Danish sk&oslash;ge, Swedish sk&ouml;ka; probably from
Middle Low German schoke, which is perhaps from schode foreskin of a horse's penis, perhaps with the
sense of skin (compare Latin scortum) or perhaps via an intermediary sense of vagina. Spanish
ramera, Portuguese ramiera are from fem. form of ramero young bird of prey, literally little branch,
from ramo branch. Breton gast is cognate with Welsh gast bitch, of uncertain origin. Compare also
strumpet, harlot.    Old Church Slavonic ljubodejica is from ljuby dejati fornicate, a compound from
ljuby love + dejati put, perform. Russian bljad whore derives from Old Church Slavonic bladinica,
from bladu fornication. Polish nierz&#261;dnica is literally disorderly woman. Sanskrit vecya is a
derivation of veca- house, dwelling, especially house of ill-repute, brothel. Another term,
pumccali, means literally one who runs after men. Avestan jahika is literally woman, but only of
evil creatures; another term is kunairi, from pejorative prefix ku- + nairi woman.


agape (n.)

c.1600, from Greek agape brotherly love, charity, from agapan greet with affection, love, of unknown
origin. Agape was used by early Christians for their love feast held in connection with the Lord's
Supper. In modern use, often in simpler sense of Christian love (1856, frequently opposed to eros as
carnal or sensual love).


