lucky (adj.)

mid-15c., of persons; 1540s, of actions or objects, likely to bring luck; from luck + -y (2).
Meaning occurring by chance is 1590s. Related: Luckier; luckiest; luckiness. Lucky break is attested
from 1884 in billiards; 1872 as failure or break-down which turns out to be fortunate. Lucky Strike
as the name of a brand of cigarettes (originally chewing tobacco) popular mid-20c. is said to date
from 1871; popular from 1935 when the brandâ&euro;&trade;s maker picked up sponsorship of
â&euro;&oelig;Your Hit Paradeâ&euro;? on radio.


fluke (n.2)

lucky stroke, chance hit, 1857, originally a lucky shot at billiards, of uncertain origin.


happy-go-lucky

also happy go lucky, 1670s as an adverb, haphazard; the adjective, of persons, recorded from 1856.


happy (adj.)

late 14c., lucky, favored by fortune, prosperous; of events, turning out well, from hap (n.) chance,
fortune + -y (2). Sense of very glad first recorded late 14c. Ousted Old English eadig (from ead
wealth, riches) and ges&aelig;lig, which has become silly. Meaning greatly pleased and content is
from 1520s. Old English bli&eth;e happy survives as blithe. From Greek to Irish, a great majority of
the European words for happy at first meant lucky. An exception is Welsh, where the word used first
meant wise.    Used in World War II and after as a suffix (as in bomb-happy, flak-happy) expressing
dazed or frazzled from stress. Happy medium is from 1778. Happy ending in the literary sense
recorded from 1756. Happy as a clam (1630s) was originally happy as a clam in the mud at high tide,
when it can't be dug up and eaten. Happy hunting ground, the reputed Indian paradise, is attested
from 1840, American English. Related: Happier; happiest.


chancy (adj.)

1510s, lucky, foreboding good fortune, from chance (n.) + -y (2). Meaning uncertain, subject to risk
is recorded from 1860. The possible sense full of opportunity seems to have been used regularly only
in cricket (1875).


happily (adv.)

mid-14c., by chance or accident, from happy + -ly (2). Meaning fortunate, lucky is late 14c.; that
of appropriately is from 1570s. Happily ever after recorded by 1853.


luckily (adv.)

1520s, from lucky + -ly (2).


unlucky (adj.)

1520s, marked by misfortune or failure, from un- (1) not + lucky (adj.). Similar formation in West
Frisian unlokkich, Mliddle Low German unluckich. Sense of boding ill is recorded from 1540s; that of
having bad luck is from 1550s; that of bringing bad luck is from 1580s. Related: Unluckily;
unluckiness.


fortunate (adj.)

late 14c., from Latin fortunatus prospered, prosperous; lucky, happy, past participle of fortunare
to make prosperous, from fortuna (see fortune). Fortunate Islands mythical abode of the blessed
dead, in the Western Ocean, early 15c., translates Latin Fortunatae Insulae.


Elizabethan (adj.)

1807 (Elizabethean); Coleridge (1817) has Elizabethian, and Carlyle (1840) finally attains the
modern form. Belonging to the period of Queen Elizabeth I (1558-1603). The noun is first attested
1881. See Elizabeth.    John Knox, one of the exiles for religion in Switzerland, publi&#383;hed his
Fir&#383;t Bla&#383;t of the Trumpet again&#383;t the Government of Women, in this reign [of
Elizabeth]. It was lucky for him that he was out of the queen's reach when he &#383;ounded the
trumpet. [The Rev. Mr. James Granger, A Biographical History of England, 1769]


Bellatrix

bright star in the left shoulder of Orion, from Latin bellatrix a female warrior, frequently used as
an adjective, warlike, skilled in war, fem. of bellator to wage war, from bellum war (see
bellicose). The Latin name, from the Alfonsine Tables (mid-13c.), very loosely translates the Arabic
name for the star, Al Najid the conqueror.    In astrology it was the natal star of all destined to
great civil or military honors, and rendered women born under its influence lucky and loquacious; or
as old Thomas Hood said, Women born under this constellation shall have mighty tongues. [Allen]


scratch (v.)

c.1400, probably a fusion of Middle English scratten and crachen, both meaning to scratch, both of
uncertain origin. Related: Scratched; scratching. Billiards sense of to hit the cue ball into a
pocket is first recorded 1909 (also, originally, itch), though earlier it meant a lucky shot (1850).
Meaning to withdraw (a horse) from a race is 1865, from notion of scratching name off list of
competitors; used in a non-sporting sense of cancel a plan, etc. from 1680s. To scratch the surface
make only slight progress in penetrating or understanding is from 1882. To scratch (one's) head as a
gesture of perplexity is recorded from 1712.


horseshoe (n.)

late 14c. (early 13c. as a proper name), from horse (n.) + shoe (n.). Horseshoes as another name for
the game of quoits, attested by 1822.    HORSE-SHOES, the game of coits, or quoits--because
sometimes actually played with horse-shoes. [John Trotter Brockett, A Glossary of North Country
Words, 1829]    The belief that finding a horseshoe by chance is lucky is attested from late 14c.,
and the practice of nailing one above a doorway to prevent a witch entering therein was common in
London down to c.1800. Of a type of bend in a river, 1770, American English. As a type of crab, from
1775.


bean (n.)

Old English bean bean, pea, legume, from Proto-Germanic *bauno (cognates: Old Norse baun, Middle
Dutch bone, Dutch boon, Old High German bona, German Bohne), perhaps from a PIE reduplicated base
*bha-bha- and related to Latin faba bean.    As a metaphor for something of small value it is
attested from c.1300. Meaning head is U.S. baseball slang c.1905 (in bean-ball a pitch thrown at the
head); thus slang verb bean meaning to hit on the head, attested from 1910.    The notion of lucky
or magic beans in English folklore is from the exotic beans or large seeds that wash up occasionally
in Cornwall and western Scotland, carried from the Caribbean or South America by the Gulf Stream.
They were cherished, believed to ward off the evil eye and aid in childbirth.    Slang bean-counter
accountant recorded by 1971. To not know beans (American English, 1933) is perhaps from the of
little worth sense, but may have a connection to colloquial expression recorded around Somerset, to
know how many beans make five be a clever fellow.


sinister (adj.)

early 15c., prompted by malice or ill-will, intending to mislead, from Old French senestre, sinistre
contrary, false; unfavorable; to the left (14c.), from Latin sinister left, on the left side
(opposite of dexter), of uncertain origin. Perhaps meaning properly the slower or weaker hand
[Tucker], but Klein and Buck suggest it's a euphemism (see left (adj.)) connected with the root of
Sanskrit saniyan more useful, more advantageous. With contrastive or comparative suffix -ter, as in
dexter (see dexterity).    The Latin word was used in augury in the sense of unlucky, unfavorable
(omens, especially bird flights, seen on the left hand were regarded as portending misfortune), and
thus sinister acquired a sense of harmful, unfavorable, adverse. This was from Greek influence,
reflecting the early Greek practice of facing north when observing omens. In genuine Roman auspices,
the augurs faced south and left was favorable. Thus sinister also retained a secondary sense in
Latin of favorable, auspicious, fortunate, lucky.    Meaning evil is from late 15c. Used in heraldry
from 1560s to indicate left, to the left. Bend (not bar) sinister in heraldry indicates illegitimacy
and preserves the literal sense of on or from the left side (though in heraldry this is from the
view of the bearer of the shield, not the observer of it).


dog (n.)

Old English docga, a late, rare word used of a powerful breed of canine. It forced out Old English
hund (the general Germanic and Indo-European word; see canine) by 16c. and subsequently was picked
up in many continental languages (French dogue (16c.), Danish dogge), but the origin remains one of
the great mysteries of English etymology.    Many expressions -- a dog's life (c.1600), go to the
dogs (1610s), etc. -- reflect earlier hard use of the animals as hunting accessories, not pampered
pets. In ancient times, the dog was the worst throw in dice (attested in Greek, Latin, and Sanskrit,
where the word for the lucky player was literally the dog-killer), which plausibly explains the
Greek word for danger, kindynas, which appears to be play the dog.    Slang meaning ugly woman is
from 1930s; that of sexually aggressive man is from 1950s. Adjectival phrase dog-eat-dog attested by
1850s. Dog tag is from 1918. To dog-ear a book is from 1650s; dog-eared in extended sense of worn,
unkempt is from 1894. Notwithstanding, as a dog hath a day, so may I perchance have time to declare
it in deeds. [Princess Elizabeth, 1550]  Phrase put on the dog get dressed up (1934) may look back
to the stiff stand-up shirt collars that in the 1890s were the height of male fashion (and were
known as dog-collars at least from 1883), with reference to collars worn by dogs. The common Spanish
word for dog, perro, also is a mystery word of unknown origin, perhaps from Iberian. A group of
Slavic dog words (Old Church Slavonic pisu, Polish pies, Serbo-Croatian pas) likewise are of unknown
origin.


