ludicrous (adj.)

1610s, pertaining to play or sport, from Latin ludicrus, from ludicrum a sport, game, toy, source of
amusement, joke, from ludere to play, which, with Latin ludus a game, play, perhaps is from
Etruscan, or perhaps from PIE root *leid- to play. Sense of ridiculous is attested from 1782.
Related: Ludicrously; ludicrousness.


antics (n.)

ludicrous behavior, 1520s; see antic.


ludic (adj.)

spontaneously playful, 1940, from French ludique, from Latin ludere to play (see ludicrous).


illude (v.)

early 15c., to mock, to trick, from Latin illudere to make sport of, from assimilated form of in-
in, into (see in- (2)) + ludere to play (see ludicrous).


lusory (adj.)

1650s, from Latin lusorius belonging to a player, from lusor player, from stem of ludere to play
(see ludicrous). Related: Lusorious.


interlude (n.)

c.1300, from Medieval Latin interludium an interlude, from Latin inter- between (see inter-) + ludus
a play (see ludicrous). Originally farcical episodes introduced between acts of long mystery plays;
transferred sense of interval in the course of some action is from 1751.


allude (v.)

1530s, mock, from Middle French alluder or directly from Latin alludere to play, sport, joke, jest,
from ad- to (see ad-) + ludere to play (see ludicrous). Meaning make an indirect reference, point in
passing is from 1570s. Related: Alluded; alluding.


chopping (adj.)

large and thriving, 1560s, past participle adjective from chop (v.). Compare strapping, whopping in
similar sense.   <b>chopping</b>. An epithet frequently applied to infants, by way of ludicrous
commendation: imagined by Skinner to signify lusty, from cas Sax. by others to mean a child that
would bring money at a market. Perhaps a greedy, hungry child, likely to live. [Johnson]


delude (v.)

c.1400, from Latin deludere to play false; to mock, deceive, from de- down, to one's detriment (see
de-) + ludere to play (see ludicrous). Related: Deluded; deluding.


illusory (adj.)

1590s, from French illusorie, from Late Latin illusorius ironical, of a mocking character, from
illus-, past participle stem of Latin illudere mock at, literally to play with, from assimilated
form of in- at, upon (see in- (2)) + ludere to play (see ludicrous).


collusion (n.)

late 14c., from Old French collusion, from Latin collusionem (nominative collusio) act of colluding,
from colludere, from com- together (see com-) + ludere to play, from ludus game (see ludicrous). The
notion of fraud or underhandedness is essential to collusion [Fowler].


prelude (n.)

1560s, from Middle French pr&eacute;lude notes sung or played to test the voice or instrument
(1530s), from Medieval Latin preludium prelude, preliminary, from Latin praeludere to play
beforehand for practice, preface, from prae- before (see pre-) + ludere to play (see ludicrous).
Purely musical sense first attested in English 1650s. Related: Prelusion.


elude (v.)

1530s, delude, make a fool of, from Latin eludere escape from, make a fool of, win from at play,
from ex- out, away (see ex-) + ludere to play (see ludicrous). Sense of evade is first recorded
1610s in a figurative sense, 1630s in a literal one. Related: Eluded; eludes; eluding.


prank (n.)

a ludicrous trick [Johnson], 1520s, of uncertain origin, perhaps related to obsolete verb prank
decorate, dress up (mid-15c.), related to Middle Low German prank display (compare also Dutch
pronken, German prunken to make a show, to strut). The verb in the modern sense also is from 1520s.
Related: Pranked; pranking.


illusion (n.)

mid-14c., act of deception, from Old French illusion a mocking, deceit, deception (12c.), from Latin
illusionem (nominative illusio) a mocking, jesting, irony, from illudere mock at, literally to play
with, from assimilated form of in- at, upon (see in- (2)) + ludere to play (see ludicrous). Sense of
deceptive appearance developed in Church Latin and was attested in English by late 14c. Related:
Illusioned full of illusions (1920).


harlequin (n.)

1580s, from Middle French harlequin, from Old French Herlequin, Hellequin, etc., leader of la
maisnie Hellequin, a troop of demons who rode the night air on horses. He corresponds to Old English
Herla cyning King Herla, mythical character sometimes identified as Woden; possibly also the same as
the German Erlk&ouml;nig Elf King of the Goethe poem. Sometimes also associated with Herrequin, 9c.
count of Boulogne, who was proverbially wicked. In English pantomime, a mute character who carries a
magic wand. His Italian form, arlecchino, is one of the stock characters of commedia del'arte. From
his ludicrous dress comes the English adjective meaning particolored (1779).


time zone (n.)

by 1885, from time (n.) + zone (n.). As in Britain and France, the movement to regulate time
nationally came from the railroads.    Previous to 1883 the methods of measuring time in the United
States were so varied and so numerous as to be ludicrous. There were 50 different standards used in
the United States, and on one road between New York and Boston, whose actual difference is 12
minutes, there were three distinct standards of time. Even small towns had two different standards
one known as town or local time and the other railroad time.     ... At noon on November 18, 1883,
there was a general resetting of watches and clocks all over the United States and Canada, and the
four great time zones, one hour apart, into which the country was divided came into being. So
smoothly did the plan work that the general readjustment was accomplished without great difficulty
and it has worked satisfactorily ever since. [Railroad Trainman, 1909]


vaudeville (n.)

1735, a country song, especially one for the stage, from French vaudeville (16c.), alteration (by
influence of ville town) of Middle French vaudevire, said to be from (chanson du) Vau de Vire (song
of the) valley of Vire, in the Calvados region of Normandy, first applied to the popular satirical
songs of Olivier Basselin, a 15c. poet who lived in Vire. The alternative explanation is that
vaudevire derives from Middle French dialectal vauder to go + virer to turn. From the popularity of
the songs in France grew a form of theatrical entertainment based on parodies of popular opera and
drama, interspersed with songs.    The Th&#233;atre du Vaudeville is rich in parodies, which follow
rapidly upon every new piece given at the Opera, or at the Th&#233;atre Fran&ccedil;ais. Their
parody upon Hamlet is too ludicrous for description, but irresistibly laughable; and the elegaut
light ballet of La Colombe Retrouv&#233;e [The Dove found again], I saw parodied at the Vaudeville
as La Maison Retrouv&#233;e [The House found again], with a breadth of farce quite beyond the genius
of Sadler's Wells. Some of the acting here, particularly that of the men, is exquisite; and the
orchestra like all the orchestras in Paris is full and excellent. [France in 1816, by Lady Morgan]
As a sort of popular stage variety entertainment show suitable for families, from c.1881 in U.S.,
displaced by movies after c.1914, considered dead from 1932.


