lumber (n.)

timber sawn into rough planks, 1660s, American English (Massachusetts), earlier disused bit of
furniture; heavy, useless objects (1550s), probably from lumber (v.), perhaps influenced by Lombard,
from the Italian immigrants famous as pawnbrokers and money-lenders in England (see Lombard).
Lumbar, Lumbard were old alternative forms of Lombard in English. The evolution of sense then would
be because a lumber-house (pawn shop) naturally accumulates odds and ends of furniture.    Live
Lumber, soldiers or passengers on board a ship are so called by the sailors. [Grose, Dictionary of
the Vulgar Tongue, 1785]   <hr />   LUMBER HOUSE. A house appropriated by thieves for the reception
of their stolen property. [Dictionary of Buckish Slang, University Wit, and Pickpocket Eloquence,
London, 1811]


lumberjack (n.)

1831, Canadian English, from lumber (n.) + Jack.


lumber (v.)

to move clumsily, c.1300, lomere, probably from a Scandinavian source (compare dialectal Swedish
loma move slowly, walk heavily, Old Norse lami lame), ultimately cognate with lame (adj.). Related:
Lumbered; lumbering.


plunder (v.)

1630s, from German pl&#252;ndern, from Middle High German plunderen to plunder, originally to take
away household furniture, from plunder (n.) household goods, clothes, also lumber, baggage (14c.;
compare Modern German Plunder lumber, trash), which is related to Middle Dutch plunder household
goods; Frisian and Dutch plunje clothes. A word acquired by English via the Thirty Years War and
applied in native use after the outbreak of the English Civil War in 1642. Related: Plundered;
plundering. Plunderbund was a U.S. colloquial word from 1914 referring to a corrupt alliance of
corporate and financial interests, with German Bund alliance, league.


swamper (n.)

1735, one who lives in a swampy district, from swamp (n.). Meaning workman who clears a lumber road
through swamp or forest is 1857, American English; meaning all-purpose assistant in a restaurant or
saloon is from 1907.


pickup (n.)

also pick-up, that which is picked up, 1848; see pick up (v.). As act of picking up from 1882.
Meaning capacity for acceleration is from 1909; that of recovery is from 1916. In reference to a
game between informal teams chosen on the spot, from 1905 (as an adjective in this sense by 1936).
Meaning small truck used for light loads, 1937, is shortened from pickup truck (pickup body is
attested from 1928). The notion probably being of a vehicle for use to pick up (feed, lumber, etc.)
and deliver it where it was needed.


haywire (n.)

soft wire for binding bales of hay, by 1891, from hay + wire (n.). Adjective meaning poorly
equipped, makeshift is 1905, American English, from the sense of something only held together with
haywire, particularly said to be from use of the stuff in New England lumber camps for jury-rigging
and makeshift purposes, so that hay wire outfit became the contemptuous term for loggers with poor
logging equipment [Bryant, Logging, 1913]. Its springy, uncontrollable quality led to the sense in
go haywire (by 1915).


trash (n.)

late 14c., thing of little use or value, waste, refuse, dross, perhaps from a Scandinavian source
(compare Old Norse tros rubbish, fallen leaves and twigs, Norwegian dialectal trask lumber, trash,
baggage, Swedish trasa rags, tatters), of unknown origin. Applied to ill-bred persons or groups from
1604 (Othello), and especially of poor whites in the U.S. South by 1831. Applied to domestic refuse
or garbage from 1906 (American English). Trash-can attested from 1914. To trash-talk someone or
something is by 1989.


slumber (v.)

mid-14c. alteration of slumeren (mid-13c.), frequentative form of slumen to doze, probably from Old
English sluma light sleep (compare Middle Dutch slumen, Dutch sluimeren, German schlummern to
slumber). Frequentative on the notion of intermittent light sleep. For the -b-, compare number,
lumber, chamber, etc. Related: Slumbered; slumbering.


logrolling (n.)

also log-rolling, in the legislative vote-trading sense, 1823, American English, from the notion of
neighbors on the frontier helping one another with the heavy work of clearing land and building
cabins (as in phrase you roll my log and I'll roll yours); see log (n.1) + rolling.    LOG-ROLLING.
1. In the lumber regions of Maine it is customary for men of different logging camps to appoint days
for helping each other in rolling the logs to the river, after they are felled and trimmed -- this
rolling being about the hardest work incident to the business. Thus the men of three or four camps
will unite, say on Monday, to roll for camp No. 1, -- on Tuesday for camp No. 2, -- on Wednesday for
camp No. 3, -- and so on, through the whole number of camps within convenient distance of each
other. [Bartlett]


