luminous (adj.)

early 15c., full of light, from Latin luminosus shining, full of light, from lumen (genitive
luminis) light, related to lucere to shine (see light (n.)). Related: Luminously.


luminosity (n.)

1630s, quality of being luminous, from French luminosit&#233; or else a native formation from
luminous + -ity. In astronomy, intrinsic brightness of a heavenly body (as distinguished from
apparent magnitude, which diminishes with distance), attested from 1906.


candela (n.)

unit of luminous intensity, 1950, from Latin candela (see candle).


lucent (adj.)

mid-15c., shining, bright, luminous, from Latin lucentem (nominative lucens), present participle of
lucere to shine (see light (n.)). Meaning lucid, clear is from 1820. Related: Lucently.


luminescence (n.)

1884, from Latin lumen (genitive luminis) light (see luminous) + -escence.    Fluorescence and
Phosphorescence -- Prof. E. Wiedmann has made a new study of these phenomena. He proposes the
general name luminescence for evolutions of light which do not depend on the temperature of the
substance concerned. [Photographic News, April 20, 1888]


white (n.)

Old English hwit whiteness, white food, white of an egg, from white (adj.). Also in late Old English
a highly luminous color devoid of chroma. Meaning white part of the eyeball is from c.1400. Meaning
white man, person of a race distinguished by light complexion is from 1670s; white man in this sense
is from 1690s. White man's burden is from Kipling's 1899 poem.    Take up the White Man's burden--
The savage wars of peace--  Fill full the mouth of Famine  And bid the sickness cease;  And when
your goal is nearest  The end for others sought,  Watch sloth and heathen Folly  Bring all your
hopes to nought.


meteor (n.)

late 15c., any atmospheric phenomenon, from Middle French meteore (13c.) and directly from Medieval
Latin meteorum (nominative meteora), from Greek ta meteora the celestial phenomena, things in heaven
above, plural of meteoron, literally thing high up, noun use of neuter of meteoros (adj.) high up,
raised from the ground, hanging, from meta- over, beyond (see meta-) + -aoros lifted, hovering in
air, related to aeirein to raise (see aorta).    Specific sense of fireball, shooting star is
attested from 1590s. Atmospheric phenomena were formerly classified as aerial meteors (wind),
aqueous meteors (rain, snow, hail), luminous meteors (aurora, rainbows), and igneous meteors
(lightning, shooting stars).


light (n.)

brightness, radiant energy, Old English leht, earlier leoht light, daylight; luminous, beautiful,
from Proto-Germanic *leukhtam (cognates: Old Saxon lioht, Old Frisian liacht, Middle Dutch lucht,
Dutch licht, Old High German lioht, German Licht, Gothic liuha&#254; light), from PIE *leuk- light,
brightness (cognates: Sanskrit rocate shines; Armenian lois light, lusin moon; Greek leukos bright,
shining, white; Latin lucere to shine, lux light, lucidus clear; Old Church Slavonic luci light;
Lithuanian laukas pale; Welsh llug gleam, glimmer; Old Irish loche lightning, luchair brightness;
Hittite lukezi is bright).    The -gh- was an Anglo-French scribal attempt to render the Germanic
hard -h- sound, which has since disappeared from this word. The figurative spiritual sense was in
Old English; the sense of mental illumination is first recorded mid-15c. Meaning something used for
igniting is from 1680s. Meaning a consideration which puts something in a certain view (as in in
light of) is from 1680s. Something that's a joy and a delight has been the light of (someone's) eyes
since Old English:   &#208;u eart dohtor min, minra eagna leoht [Juliana].    To see the light come
into the world is from 1680s; later in a Christian sense.


