lunar (adj.)

crescent-shaped, early 15c.; pertaining to the moon, 1620s, from Old French lunaire (15c.), from
Latin lunaris of the moon, from luna moon (with capital L- moon goddess); see Luna.


Tet (n.)

Vietnamese lunar new year, 1885, short for Tet Nguyen Dan feast of the first day. The North
Vietnamese Tet Offensive in the U.S. Vietnam War began Jan. 30, 1968.


mare (n.2)

broad, dark areas of the moon, 1765, from Latin mare sea (see marine), applied to lunar features by
Galileo and used thus in 17c. Latin works. They originally were thought to be actual seas.


neap (adj.)

Middle English, from Old English nepflod neap flood, the tide occurring at the end of the first and
third quarters of the lunar month, in which high waters are at their lowest, of unknown origin, with
no known cognates (Danish niptid probably is from English). Original sense perhaps is without power.
As a noun from 1580s.


yin (n.)

feminine or negative principle in Chinese philosophy, 1670s, from Chinese (Mandarin) yin, said to
mean female, night, lunar, or shade, feminine, the moon. Compare yang. Yin-yang is from 1850.


sublunary (adj.)

1590s, situated under the moon, hence earthly, mundane (old cosmology), from Modern Latin
sublunaris, from sub- (see sub-) + lunaris (see lunar).


Ramadan (n.)

ninth month of the Muslim year, 1590s, from Arabic Ramadan (Turkish and Persian ramazan), originally
the hot month, from ramida be burnt, scorched (compare Mishnaic Hebrew remetz hot ashes, embers). In
the Islamic lunar calendar, it passes through all seasons in a cycle of about 33 years, but
evidently originally it was a summer month.


meniscus (n.)

crescent-shaped body, 1690s in reference to lenses, c.1812 in reference to liquid surfaces, Modern
Latin meniscus, from Greek meniskos lunar crescent, diminutive of mene moon (see moon (n.)).
Related: Meniscoid.


epact (n.)

1550s, number of days by which the solar year exceeds a lunar one of 12 moons; also number of days
into the moon on which the solar year begins; from French &eacute;pacte (12c.), from Late Latin
epacta an intercalary day, from Greek epaktos, literally brought in, inported, verbal adjective of
epagein to intercalate, add, bring forward, from epi on (see epi-) + agein to bring, to lead (see
act (v.)).


phase (n.)

1705, phase of the moon, back-formed as a singular from Modern Latin phases, plural of phasis, from
Greek phasis appearance (of a star), phase (of the moon), from stem of phainein to show, to make
appear (see phantasm). Latin singular phasis was used in English from 1660. Non-lunar application is
first attested 1841. Meaning temporary difficult period (especially of adolescents) is attested from
1913.


month (n.)

Old English mona&eth;, from Proto-Germanic *menoth- (cognates: Old Saxon manoth, Old Frisian monath,
Middle Dutch manet, Dutch maand, Old High German manod, German Monat, Old Norse mana&eth;r, Gothic
meno&thorn;s month), related to *menon- moon (see moon (n.); the month was calculated from lunar
phases). Its cognates mean only month in the Romance languages, but in Germanic generally continue
to do double duty. Phrase a month of Sundays a very long time is from 1832 (roughly 7 and a half
months, but never used literally).


week (n.)

Old English wucu, wice, etc., from Proto-Germanic *wikon (cognates: Old Norse vika, Old Frisian
wike, Middle Dutch weke, Old High German wecha, German woche), probably originally with the sense of
a turning or succession (compare Gothic wikon in the course of, Old Norse vika sea-mile, originally
change of oar, Old English wican yield, give way), from PIE root *weik- (4) to bend, wind (see
vicarious). The vowel sound seems to have been uncertain in Old and Middle English and -e-, -i-,
-o-, -u-, -y-, and various diphthongs are attested for it.    Meaning primarily 'change,
alteration,' the word may once have denoted some earlier time division, such as the 'change of moon,
half month,' ... but there is no positive evidence of this [Buck]. No evidence of a native Germanic
week before contact with the Romans. The seven-day week is ancient, probably originating from the
28-day lunar cycle, divisible into four periods of seven day, at the end of each of which the moon
enters a new phase. Reinforced during the spread of Christianity by the ancient Jewish seven-day
week.    As a Roman astrological convention it was borrowed by other European peoples; the Germanic
tribes substituting their own deities for those of the Romans, without regard to planets. The
Coligny calendar suggests a Celtic division of the month into halves; the regular Greek division of
the month was into three decades; and the Romans also had a market week of nine days.    Greek
planetary names [for the days of the week] ... are attested for the early centuries of our era, but
their use was apparently restricted to certain circles; at any rate they never became popular. In
Rome, on the other hand, the planetary names became the established popular terms, too strongly
intrenched to be displaced by the eccl[esiastical] names, and spreading through most of western
Europe. [Buck]    Phrase a week, as in eight days a week recorded by 1540s; see a- (1).


