lunatic (n.)

lunatic person, late 14c., from lunatic (adj.).


lunatic (adj.)

late 13c., affected with periodic insanity, dependent on the changes of the moon, from Old French
lunatique, lunage insane, or directly from Late Latin lunaticus moon-struck, from Latin luna moon
(see Luna). Compare Old English monseoc lunatic, literally moon-sick; Middle High German lune humor,
temper, mood, whim, fancy (German Laune), from Latin luna. Compare also New Testament Greek
seleniazomai be epileptic, from selene moon. Lunatic fringe (1913) apparently was coined by U.S.
politician Theodore Roosevelt.    Then, among the wise and high-minded people who in self-respecting
and genuine fashion strive earnestly for peace, there are foolish fanatics always to be found in
such a movement and always discrediting it -- the men who form the lunatic fringe in all reform
movements. [Theodore Roosevelt, autobiography, 1913].    Earlier it was a term for a type of
hairstyle worn over the forehead (1877). Lunatic soup (1933) was Australian slang for alcoholic
drink.


lunacy (n.)

1540s, condition of being a lunatic, formed in English from lunatic + -cy. Originally in reference
to intermittent periods of insanity, such as were believed to be triggered by the moon's cycle. The
Old English equivalent was mona&eth;seocnes month-sickness.


bedlam (n.)

scene of mad confusion, 1660s, from colloquial pronunciation of Hospital of Saint Mary of Bethlehem
in London, founded 1247 as a priory, mentioned as a hospital 1330 and as a lunatic hospital 1402;
converted to a state lunatic asylum on dissolution of the monasteries in 1547. It was spelled Bedlem
in a will from 1418, and Betleem is recorded as a spelling of Bethlehem in Judea from 971.


fruitcake (n.)

1838 in the literal sense, from fruit + cake (n.). Slang meaning lunatic person is first attested
1952.


off (adv.)

by c.1200 as an emphatic form of Old English of (see of), employed in the adverbial use of that
word. The prepositional meaning away from and the adjectival sense of farther were not firmly fixed
in this variant until 17c., but once they were they left the original of with the transferred and
weakened senses of the word. Meaning not working is from 1861. Off the cuff (1938) is from the
notion of speaking from notes written in haste on one's shirt cuffs. Off the rack (adj.) is from
1963; off the record is from 1933; off the wall crazy is 1968, probably from the notion of a lunatic
bouncing off the walls or else in reference to carom shots in squash, handball, etc.


loony (adj.)

also loonie, looney, 1853, American English, short for lunatic, but also influenced by loon (n.2)
and perhaps loon (n.1), the bird being noted for its wild cry and method of escaping from danger. As
a noun by 1884, from the adjective. Slang loony bin insane asylum is from 1919. Looney left in
reference to holders of political views felt to be left-wing in the extreme is from 1977. Looney
Tunes, Warner Bros. studios' animated cartoon series, dates from 1930.


insane (adj.)

1550s, from Latin insanus mad, insane; outrageous, excessive, extravagant, from in- not (see in-
(1)) + sanus well, healthy, sane (see sane). Originally only of persons; of actions, from 1842.
Compare lunatic; and Italian pazzo insane, originally a euphemism, from Latin patiens suffering.
German verr&uuml;ckt, literally past participle of verr&uuml;cken to displace, applied to the brain
as to a clock that is 'out of order'  [Buck]. The noun meaning insane person is attested from 1786.


fool (n.)

late 13c., silly or stupid person, from Old French fol madman, insane person; idiot; rogue; jester,
also blacksmith's bellows, also an adjective meaning mad, insane (12c., Modern French fou), from
Latin follis bellows, leather bag (see follicle); in Vulgar Latin used with a sense of windbag,
empty-headed person. Compare also Sanskrit vatula- insane, literally windy, inflated with wind.
The word has in mod.Eng. a much stronger sense than it had at an earlier period; it has now an
implication of insulting contempt which does not in the same degree belong to any of its synonyms,
or to the derivative foolish. [OED]    Meaning jester, court clown first attested late 14c., though
it is not always possible to tell whether the reference is to a professional entertainer or an
amusing lunatic on the payroll. As the name of a kind of custard dish, it is attested from 1590s
(the food also was called trifle, which may be the source of the name).    There is no foole to the
olde foole [Heywood, 1546] Feast of Fools (early 14c.), from Medieval Latin festum stultorum) refers
to the burlesque festival celebrated in some churches on New Year's Day in medieval times. Fool's
gold iron pyrite is from 1829. Fool's paradise state of illusory happiness is from mid-15c.
Foolosopher, a most useful insult, turns up in a 1549 translation of Erasmus. Fool's ballocks is
described in OED as an old name for the green-winged orchid.


moon (n.)

Old English mona, from Proto-Germanic *menon- (cognates: Old Saxon and Old High German mano, Old
Frisian mona, Old Norse mani, Danish maane, Dutch maan, German Mond, Gothic mena moon), from PIE
*me(n)ses- moon, month (cognates: Sanskrit masah moon, month; Avestan ma, Persian mah, Armenian mis
month; Greek mene moon, men month; Latin mensis month; Old Church Slavonic meseci, Lithuanian
menesis moon, month; Old Irish mi, Welsh mis, Breton miz month), probably from root *me- to measure,
in reference to the moon's phases as the measure of time.    A masculine noun in Old English. In
Greek, Italic, Celtic, Armenian the cognate words now mean only month. Greek selene (Lesbian
selanna) is from selas light, brightness (of heavenly bodies). Old Norse also had tungl moon,
(replacing mani in prose - Buck), evidently an older Germanic word for heavenly body, cognate with
Gothic tuggl, Old English tungol heavenly body, constellation, of unknown origin or connection.
Hence Old Norse tunglfylling lunation, tungl&#339;rr lunatic (adj.).    Extended 1665 to satellites
of other planets. To shoot the moon leave without paying rent is British slang from c.1823; card-
playing sense perhaps influenced by gambler's shoot the works (1922) go for broke in shooting dice.
The moon race and the U.S. space program of the 1960s inspired a number of coinages, including, from
those skeptical of the benefits to be gained, moondoggle (based on boondoggle). The man in the moon
is mentioned since early 14c.; he carries a bundle of thorn-twigs and is accompanied by a dog. Some
Japanese, however, see a rice-cake-making rabbit in the moon.


