lurk (v.)

c.1300, lurken to hide, lie hidden, probably from Scandinavian (compare dialectal Norwegian lurka to
sneak away, dialectal Swedish lurka to be slow in one's work), perhaps ultimately related to Middle
English luren to frown, lurk (see lower (v.2)). Related: Lurked; lurking.


lurker (n.)

one who lurks, early 14c., agent noun from lurk (v.).


loiter (v.)

early 15c., idle one's time, dawdle over work, from Middle Dutch loteren be loose or erratic, shake,
totter like a loose tooth or a sail in a storm; in modern Dutch, leuteren to delay, linger, loiter
over one's work. Probably cognate with Old English lutian lurk, and related to Old English loddere
beggar; Old High German lotar empty, vain, luzen lurk; German Lotterbube vagabond, rascal, lauschen
eavesdrop; Gothic luton mislead; Old English ly&eth;re base, bad, wicked. Related: Loitered;
loitering.


lower (v.2)

to look dark and threatening, also lour, Middle English louren, luren to frown (early 13c.), to lurk
(mid-15c.), from Old English *luran or from its cognates, Middle Low German luren, Middle Dutch
loeren lie in wait. Form perhaps assimilated to lower (1). Related: Lowered; lowering.


clove (n.2)

slice of garlic, Old English clufu clove (of garlic), bulb, tuber, from Proto-Germanic *klubo cleft,
thing cloven, from PIE *gleubh- to tear apart, cleave (see cleave (v.1)). Its Germanic cognates
mostly lurk in compounds that translate as clove-leek, such as Old Saxon clufloc, Old High German
chlobilouh. Dissimilation produced Dutch knoflook, German knoblauch.


lout (n.)

1540s, awkward fellow, clown, bumpkin, perhaps from a dialectal survival of Middle English louten
(v.) bow down (c.1300), from Old English lutan bow low, from Proto-Germanic *lut- to bow, bend,
stoop (cognates: Old Norse lutr stooping, which might also be the source of the modern English
word), from PIE *leud- to lurk (cognates: Gothic luton to deceive, Old English lot deceit), also to
be small (see little). Non-Germanic cognates probably include Lithuanian liudeti to mourn; Old
Church Slavonic luditi to deceive, ludu foolish. Sense of cad is first attested 1857 in British
schoolboy slang.


