lust (n.)

Old English lust desire, appetite, pleasure, from Proto-Germanic *lustuz (cognates: Old Saxon, Old
Frisian, Dutch, German lust, Old Norse lyst, Gothic lustus pleasure, desire, lust), from PIE *las-
to be eager, wanton, or unruly (cognates: Latin lascivus wanton, playful, lustful; see lascivious).
In Middle English, any source of pleasure or delight, also an appetite, also a liking for a person,
also fertility (of soil). Sense of sinful sexual desire, degrading animal passion (now the main
meaning) developed in late Old English from the word's use in Bible translations (such as lusts of
the flesh to render Latin concupiscentia carnis [I John ii:16]); the cognate words in other Germanic
languages tend still to mean simply pleasure.


lust (v.)

c.1200, to wish, to desire, from lust (n.) and Old English lystan (see list (v.4)). Sense of to have
a strong sexual desire (for or after) is first attested 1520s in biblical use. Related: Lusted;
lusting.


lustgarden (n.)

1580s, translation or partial translation of German Lust-garten, Dutch lustgaard pleasure garden;
see lust (n.) + garden (n.).


luster (n.2)

one who lusts, 1590s, agent noun from lust (v.).


lusty (adj.)

early 13c., joyful, merry, from lust + -y (2). It largely has escaped the Christianization and
denigration of its root word. The sense of full of healthy vigor is from late 14c.; that of full of
desire is attested from c.1400. Related: Lustily; lustiness.


lustful (adj.)

Old English lustfull wishful, desirous, having an eager desire; see lust (n.) + -ful. Specifically
of sexual desire from 1570s. Related: Lustfully; lustfulness. Middle English also had lustsome,
which was used in a sense of voluptuous, lustful from c.1400. Old English had lustb&#230;re
desirable, pleasant, cheerful, joyous.


bloodlust (n.)

1847 (Bulwer Lytton), also blood-lust, from blood (n.) + lust (n.).


mutton (n.)

flesh of sheep used as food, late 13c., from Old French moton mutton; ram, wether, sheep (12c.,
Modern French mouton), from Medieval Latin multonem (8c.), probably from Gallo-Roman *multo-s,
accusative of Celtic *multo sheep (cognates: Old Irish molt wether, Mid-Breton mout, Welsh mollt);
the same word also was borrowed into Italian as montone a sheep. Transferred slang sense of food for
lust, loose women, prostitutes (1510s) led to extensive British slang uses down to the present day
for woman variously regarded as seeking lovers or as lust objects. Mutton chop is from 1720; as a
style of side whiskers, from 1865.


lascivious (adj.)

mid-15c., from Middle French lascivieux or directly from Late Latin lasciviosus (used in a scolding
sense by Isidore and other early Church writers), from Latin lascivia lewdness, playfulness,
frolicsomeness, jolity, from lascivus lewd, playful, frolicsome, wanton, from PIE *las-ko-, from
*las- to be eager, wanton, or unruly (cognates: Sanskrit -lasati yearns, lasati plays, frolics,
Hittite ilaliya- to desire, covet, Greek laste harlot, Old Church Slavonic laska flattery, Slovak
laska love, Old Irish lainn greedy, Gothic lustus, Old English lust lust). Related: Lasciviously;
lasciviousness. In 17c. also with a verbal form, lasciviate.


Merry Widow

1907, from the English title of Franz Lehar's operetta Die Lustige Witwe (1905). The Lusty Widow
would have been more etymological (see lust (n.)), but would have given the wrong impression in
English. Meaning a type of wide-brimmed hat (popularized in the play) is attested from 1908.


wanderlust (n.)

1902, from German Wanderlust, literally desire for wandering (see wander + lust).


desire (n.)

c.1300, from Old French desir, from desirer (see desire (v.)); sense of lust is first recorded mid-
14c.


wolf (n.)

Old English wulf wolf, wolfish person, devil, from Proto-Germanic *wulfaz (cognates: Old Saxon wulf,
Old Norse ulfr, Old Frisian, Dutch, Old High German, German wolf, Gothic wulfs), from PIE root
*wlkwo- wolf (cognates: Sanskrit vrkas, Avestan vehrka-; Albanian ul'k; Old Church Slavonic vluku;
Russian volcica; Lithuanian vilkas wolf; Old Persian Varkana- Hyrcania, district southeast of the
Caspian Sea, literally wolf-land; probably also Greek lykos, Latin lupus).    This manne can litle
skyl ... to saue himself harmlesse from the perilous accidentes of this world, keping ye wulf from
the doore (as they cal it). [The Institution of a Gentleman, 1555]    Probably extinct in England
from the end of the 15th century; in Scotland from the early 18th. Wolves as a symbol of lust are
ancient, such as Roman slang lupa whore, literally she-wolf (preserved in Spanish loba, Italian
lupa, French louve). The equation of wolf and prostitute, sexually voracious female persisted into
12c., but by Elizabethan times wolves had become primarily symbolic of male lust. The specific use
of wolf for sexually aggressive male first recorded 1847; wolf-whistle attested by 1945, American
English, at first associated with sailors. The image of a wolf in sheep's skin is attested from
c.1400. See here for a discussion of wolf in Indo-European history. The wolf-spider so called for
prowling and leaping on its prey rather than waiting in a web.


coquet (n.)

amorous, flirtatious person, 1690s, originally of both sexes (as it was in French), from French
coquet (17c.), diminutive of coq cock (see cock (n.1)). A figurative reference to its strut or its
lust. The distinction of fem. coquette began c.1700, and use in reference to males has faded out
since.


list (v.1)

tilt, lean, especially of a ship, 1880, earlier (1620s) lust, of unknown origin, perhaps an
unexplained spelling variant of Middle English lysten to please, desire, wish, like (see list (v.4))
with a sense development from the notion of leaning toward what one desires (compare incline).
Related: Listed; listing. The noun in this sense is from 1630s.


libido (n.)

psychic drive or energy, usually associated with sexual instinct, 1892, carried over untranslated in
English edition of Krafft-Ebing's Psychopathia Sexualis; and used in 1909 in A.A. Brill's
translation of Freud's Selected Papers on Hysteria (Freud's use of the term led to its popularity);
from Latin libido desire, lust, from libere to be pleasing, to please, ultimately cognate with Old
English lufu (see love (n.)).


sultry (adj.)

1590s, oppressively hot, close and moist (of weather), ultimately from swelter + alteration of -y
(2), either as a contraction of sweltry or from obsolete verb sulter to swelter (1580s), alteration
of swelter. Figurative sense of hot with lust is attested from 1704; of women, lascivious, sensual,
arousing desire it is recorded from 1940. Related: Sultriness.


pander (n.)

arranger of sexual liaisons, one who supplies another with the means of gratifying lust, 1520s,
procurer, pimp, from Middle English Pandare (late 14c.), used by Chaucer (Troylus and Cryseyde), who
borrowed it from Boccaccio (who had it in Italian form Pandaro in Filostrato) as name of the prince
(Greek Pandaros), who procured the love of Cressida (his niece in Chaucer, his cousin in Boccaccio)
for Troilus. The story and the name are medieval inventions. Spelling influenced by agent suffix
-er.


sado-masochism (n.)

also sadomasochism, 1916, from comb. form of sadism + masochism. Abbreviation S &amp; M first
attested 1965. An earlier word for sexualities that focused on violence was algolagnia (1900),
Modern Latin, coined in German in 1892 by German doctor and paranormalist Albert von Schrenck-
Notzing (1862-1929) from Greek algos pain + lagneia lust.


heartburn (n.)

mid-13c., herte-brine lust, later heartburn, indigestion (mid-15c.); also herte-brenning anger,
bitterness (c.1400), also heartburn (mid-15c.). See heart + burn (n.). Also see cardiac for
confusion of heart and stomach.


libidinous (adj.)

lustful, mid-15c., Old French libidineus (13c., Modern French libidineux), from Latin libidinosus
full of desire, lustful, from libido pleasure, desire, sensual passion, lust (see libido). Related:
Libidinously; libidinousness.


affection (n.)

early 13c., an emotion of the mind, passion, lust as opposed to reason, from Old French afection
(12c.) emotion, inclination, disposition; love, attraction, enthusiasm, from Latin affectionem
(nominative affectio) a relation, disposition; a temporary state; a frame, constitution, noun of
state from past participle stem of afficere to do something to, act on (see affect (n.)). Sense
developed from disposition to good disposition toward (late 14c.). Related: Affections.


covet (v.)

mid-13c., from Old French coveitier covet, desire, lust after (12c., Modern French convoiter,
influenced by con- words), probably ultimately from Latin cupiditas passionate desire, eagerness,
ambition, from cupidus very desirous, from cupere long for, desire (see cupidity). Related: Coveted;
coveting.


narcissism (n.)

1905, from German Narzissismus, coined 1899 (in Die sexuellen Perversit&auml;ten), by German
psychiatrist Paul N&auml;cke (1851-1913), on a comparison suggested 1898 by Havelock Ellis, from
Greek Narkissos, name of a beautiful youth in mythology (Ovid, Metamorphoses, iii.370) who fell in
love with his own reflection in a spring and was turned to the flower narcissus (q.v.). Coleridge
used the word in a letter from 1822.    But already Krishna, enamoured of himself, had resolved to
experience lust for his own self; he manifested his own Nature in the cow-herd girls and enjoyed
them. [Karapatri, Lingopasana-rahasya, Siddhanta, II, 1941-2]    Sometimes erroneously as narcism.


list (v.4)

to be pleased, desire (archaic), mid-12c., lusten, listen to please, desire, from Old English lystan
to please, cause pleasure or desire, provoke longing, from Proto-Germanic *lustijan (cognates: Old
Saxon lustian, Dutch lusten to like, fancy, Old High German lusten, German l&uuml;sten, Old Norse
lysta); from the root of lust (n.). Related: Listed; listing. As a noun, c.1200, from the verb.
Somehow English has lost listy (adj.) pleasant, willing (to do something); ready, quick (mid-15c.).


cupidity (n.)

mid-15c., from Anglo-French cupidite, Middle French cupidit&eacute;, from Latin cupiditatem
(nominative cupiditas) passionate desire, lust; ambition, from cupidus eager, passionate, from
cupere to desire (perhaps cognate with Sanskrit kupyati bubbles up, becomes agitated, Old Church
Slavonic kypeti to boil, Lithuanian kupeti to boil over). Despite the primarily erotic sense of the
Latin word, in English cupidity originally, and still especially, means desire for wealth.


uranian (adj.)

homosexual, 1893, from the reference to Aphrodite in Plato's Symposium; Urania Heavenly (Greek
Ourania; see Uranus) being an epithet of Aphrodite as born of Uranus and also as distinguished from
the vulgar Venus of commonplace lust.    But the son of the heavenly Aphrodite is sprung from a
mother in whose birth the female has no part, but she is from the male only; this is that love which
is of youths only, and the goddess being older has nothing of wantonness. Those who are inspired by
this love turn to the male, and delight in him who is the more valiant and intelligent nature; any
one may recognize the pure enthusiasts in the very character of their attachments. [B. Jowett,
transl., 1874]    Also as a noun, a homosexual person (1908). Related uranism homosexuality (1893).


luxury (n.)

c.1300, sexual intercourse; mid-14c., lasciviousness, sinful self-indulgence, from Old French
luxurie debauchery, dissoluteness, lust (Modern French luxure), from Latin luxuria excess, luxury,
extravagance, profusion; delicacy (source also of Spanish lujuria, Italian lussuria), from luxus
excess, extravagance, magnificence, probably a figurative use of luxus (adj.) dislocated, which is
related to luctari wrestle, strain (see reluctance).    Meaning sensual pleasure is late 14c. Lost
its pejorative taint 17c. Meaning habit of indulgence in what is choice or costly is from 1630s;
that of sumptuous surroundings is from 1704; that of something enjoyable or comfortable beyond
life's necessities is from 1780. Used as an adjective from 1916.


prostitute (v.)

1520s, to offer to indiscriminate sexual intercourse (usually in exchange for money), from Latin
prostitutus, past participle of prostituere to expose to prostitution, expose publicly, from pro-
before (see pro-) + statuere cause to stand, establish, from PIE root *sta- to stand, with
derivatives meaning place or thing that is standing (see stet). Related: Prostituted; prostituting.
The notion of sex for hire is not inherent in the etymology, which rather suggests one exposed to
lust or sex indiscriminately offered. However, this is now almost the official European term for the
institution: German prostituierte, Russian prostitutka, etc. Figurative sense (of abilities, etc.)
is from 1570s. Of men, in reference to homosexual acts, from 1886 (in form prostitution); phrase
male prostitute attested by 1948.


viper (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French vipere, earlier in English as vipera (c.1200), directly from Latin
vipera viper, snake, serpent, contraction of *vivipera, from vivus alive, living (see vital) +
parere bring forth, bear (see pare). In common with many snake species in cooler climates, in most
cases the viper's eggs are kept inside the mother until hatching.    Applied to persons of spiteful
character since at least 1590s. The only venomous snake found in Great Britain, but not especially
dangerous. The word replaced native adder. The flesh of the viper was formerly regarded as
possessing great nutritive or restorative properties, and was frequently used medicinally [OED];
hence viper-wine, wine medicated with some kind of extract from vipers, used 17c. by gray-bearded
gallants in a bid to feele new lust, and youthfull flames agin. [Massinger]


patience (n.)

c.1200, quality of being willing to bear adversities, calm endurance of misfortune, suffering, etc.,
from Old French pacience patience; sufferance, permission (12c.) and directly from Latin patientia
patience, endurance, submission, also indulgence, leniency; humility; submissiveness; submission to
lust; literally quality of suffering. It is an abstract noun formed from the adjective patientem
(nominative patiens) bearing, supporting; suffering, enduring, permitting; tolerant, but also firm,
unyielding, hard, used of persons as well as of navigable rivers, present participle of pati to
suffer, endure, from PIE root *pe(i)- to damage, injure, hurt (see passion).<b>Patience</b>, n. A
minor form of despair, disguised as a virtue. [Ambrose Bierce, Devil's Dictionary, 1911]Meaning
constancy in effort is attested from 1510s. Meaning card game for one person is from 1816.


thug (n.)

1810, member of a gang of murderers and robbers in India who strangled their victims, from Marathi
thag, thak cheat, swindler, Hindi thag, perhaps from Sanskrit sthaga-s cunning, fraudulent, from
sthagayati (he) covers, conceals, perhaps from PIE root *(s)teg- (2) to cover (see stegosaurus).
The thugs roamed about the country in bands of from 10 to 100, usually in the disguise of peddlers
or pilgrims, gaining the confidence of other travelers, whom they strangled, when a favorable
opportunity presented itself, with a handkerchief, an unwound turban, or a noosed cord. The shedding
of blood was seldom resorted to. The motive of the thugs was not so much lust of plunder as a
certain religious fanaticism. The bodies of their victims were hidden in graves dug with a
consecrated pickax, and of their spoil one third was devoted to the goddess Kali, whom they
worshiped. [Century Dictionary]    The more correct Indian name is phanseegur (from phansi noose),
and the activity was described in English as far back as c.1665. Rigorously prosecuted by the
British from 1831, they were driven from existence by century's end. Transferred sense of ruffian,
cutthroat, violent lowbrow is from 1839.


