luxuriant (adj.)

1530s, from Middle French luxuriant and directly from Latin luxuriantem (nominative luxurians),
present participle of luxuriare have to excess, grow profusely (see luxuriate). Related:
Luxuriantly.


luxuriance (n.)

1650s; see luxuriant + -ance. Related: Luxuriancy (1640s).


Thalia

fem. proper name, from Latinized form of Greek Thaleia, the joyful Muse, presiding over comedy and
idyllic poetry, literally the blooming one, fem. proper name from adjective meaning blooming,
luxuriant, bounteous, from thallein to bloom, related to thalia abundance, thallos young shoot (see
thallus). Also the name of one of the three Graces, patroness of festive meetings.


lush (adj.)

mid-15c., lax, flaccid, soft, tender, from Old French lasche soft, succulent, from laschier loosen,
from Late Latin laxicare become shaky, related to Latin laxare loosen, from laxus loose (see lax).
Sense of luxuriant in growth is first attested c.1600, in Shakespeare. Applied to colors since 1744.
Related: Lushly; lushness.


spirituality (n.)

early 15c., the clergy, also ecclesiastical property; things pertaining to the Church, from Middle
French spiritualite, from Late Latin spiritualitatem (nominative spiritualitas), from Latin
spiritualis (see spiritual). Meaning quality of being spiritual is from c.1500; seldom-used sense of
fact or condition of being a spirit is from 1680s. An earlier form was spiritualty (late 14c.).
English is blessed with multiple variant forms of many words. But it has made scant use of them; for
every pair historic/historical; realty/reality, or luxuriant/luxurious there is a
spiritualty/spirituality or a specialty/speciality, with two distinct forms, two senses requiring
differentiation, hundreds of years gone by, and but little progress made in in sorting them out.


rank (adj.)

Old English ranc proud, overbearing, showy, from Proto-Germanic *rankaz (cognates: Danish rank
right, upright, German rank slender, Old Norse rakkr straight, erect), perhaps from PIE *reg- to
stretch, straighten (see right (adj.)). In reference to plant growth, vigorous, luxuriant, abundant,
copious it is recorded from c.1300. Related: Rankly; rankness.    Sense evolved in Middle English to
large and coarse (c.1300), then, via notion of excessive and unpleasant, to corrupt, loathsome, foul
(mid-14c.), perhaps from influence of Middle French rance rancid. In 17c. also lewd, lustful.
Much used 16c. as a pejorative intensive (as in rank folly). This is possibly the source of the verb
meaning to reveal another's guilt (1929, underworld slang), and that of to harass, abuse, 1934, U.S.
black dialect, though this also may be from the role of the activity in establishing social
hierarchy (from rank (n.)).


hooker (n.)

prostitute, often traced to the disreputable morals of the Army of the Potomac (American Civil War)
under the tenure of Gen. Fighting Joe Hooker (early 1863), and the word might have been popularized
by this association at that time (though evidence is wanting). But it is reported to have been in
use in North Carolina c.1845 ([I]f he comes by way of Norfolk he will find any number of pretty
Hookers in the Brick row not far from French's hotel. Take my advice and touch nothing in the shape
of a prostitute when you come through Raleigh, for in honest truth the clap is there of luxuriant
growth. letter quoted in Norman E. Eliason, Tarheel Talk, 1956).    One early theory traces it to
Corlear's Hook, a section of New York City.    HOOKER. A resident of the Hook, i.e. a strumpet, a
sailor's trull. So called from the number of houses of ill-fame frequented by sailors at the Hook
(i.e. Corlear's Hook) in the city of New York. [John Russell Bartlett, Dictionary of Americanisms,
1859]    Perhaps related to hooker thief, pickpocket (1560s), but most likely a reference to
prostitutes hooking or snaring clients. Hook in the figurative sense of that by which anyone is
attracted or caught is recorded from early 15c.; and hook (v.) in the figurative sense of catch hold
of and draw in is attested from 1570s; in reference to fishing for a husband or a wife, it was in
common use from c.1800. All of which makes the modern sense seem a natural step.  Compare French
accrocheuse, raccrocheuse, common slang term for street-walker, prostitute, literally hooker of men.
The family name Hooker (attested from c.975 C.E.) would mean maker of hooks, or else refer to an
agricultural laborer who used a hook (compare Old English weodhoc weed-hook).


