Mace (n.3)

chemical spray originally used in riot control, 1966, technically Chemical Mace, a proprietary name
(General Ordnance Equipment Corp, Pittsburgh, Pa.), probably so called for its use as a weapon, in
reference to mace (1). The verb is first attested 1968. Related: Maced; macing.


mace (n.1)

heavy metal weapon, often with a spiked head, late 13c., from Old French mace a club, scepter
(Modern French masse), from Vulgar Latin *mattea (source also of Italian mazza, Spanish maza mace),
from Latin mateola (in Late Latin also matteola) a kind of mallet. The Latin word perhaps is cognate
with Sanskrit matyam harrow, club, Old Church Slavonic motyka mattock, Old High German medela plow
[Klein]. As a symbol of authority or office from mid-15c.


mace (n.2)

spice made from dry outer husk of nutmeg, late 14c., from Old French macis (in English taken as a
plural and stripped of its -s), of uncertain origin, sometimes said to be a scribal error for Latin
macir, the name of a red spicy bark from India, but OED finds this etymology unlikely.


maul (v.)

mid-13c., meallen strike with a heavy weapon, from Middle English mealle (mid-13c.) mace, wooden
club, heavy hammer (see maul (n.). The meaning damage seriously, mangle is first recorded 1690s.
Related: Mauled; mauling.


mashie (n.)

five iron, 1881, from Scottish, probably from French massue club, from Vulgar Latin *mattiuca, from
Latin mateola a tool for digging (see mace (n.1)). Related: Mashie-niblick (1903).


mattock (n.)

Old English m&aelig;ttoc, probably from Vulgar Latin *matteuca club, related to Latin mateola, a
kind of mallet (see mace (n.1)), but this is not certain, and synonymous Russian motyka, Lithuanian
matikkas suggest other possibilities. OED says similar words in Welsh and Gaelic are from English.


golf (n.)

mid-15c., Scottish gouf, usually taken as an alteration of Middle Dutch colf, colve stick, club,
bat, from Proto-Germanic *kulth- (cognates: Old Norse kolfr clapper of a bell, German Kolben mace,
club). The game is from 14c., the word is first mentioned (along with fut-bol) in a 1457 Scottish
statute on forbidden games. Golf ball attested from 1540s. <b>Despite what you read on the Internet,
golf is not an acronym</b>. Golf widow is from 1890.    Oh! who a golfer's bride would be,  Fast
mated with a laddie  Who every day goes out to tee And with him takes the caddie.  [The Golf Widow's
Lament, in Golf, Oct. 31, 1890]


machete (n.)

1590s (in pseudo-Spanish form macheto), from Spanish machete, probably a diminutive of macho sledge
hammer, alteration of mazo club, which is probably [Barnhart] a dialectal variant of maza mallet,
from Vulgar Latin *mattea war club (see mace (n.1)). An alternative explanation traces macho to
Latin marculus a small hammer, diminutive of marcus hammer, from a base parallel to that of Latin
malleus (see mallet).


