macerate (v.)

late 15c., a back-formation from maceration or else from Latin maceratus, past participle of
macerare soften, make soft, soak, steep, related to maceria garden wall, originally of kneaded clay,
from PIE *mak-ero-, suffixed form of root *mag- to knead (cognates: Greek magis kneaded mass, cake,
mageus one who kneads, baker; Old Church Slavonic mazo to anoint, smear; Breton meza to knead;
Middle Irish maistir to churn), also to fashion, fit (compare make (v.)). Related: Macerated;
macerating.


maceration (n.)

late 15c., from Latin macerationem (nominative maceratio), noun of action from past participle stem
of macerare (see macerate).


magma (n.)

mid-15c., dregs, from Latin magma dregs of an ointment, from Greek magma thick unguent, ointment,
from root of  massein to knead, mold, from PIE *mag- to knead (see macerate). Geological meaning
molten rock is 1859. Related: Magmalic.


mingle (v.)

mid-15c., to bring together, frequentative of Middle English myngen to mix, from Old English mengan
(related to second element in among), from Proto-Germanic *mangjan to knead together (cognates: Old
Saxon mengian, Old Norse menga, Old Frisian mendza, German mengen), from PIE *mag- to knead,
fashion, fit (see macerate). The formation may have been suggested by cognate Middle Dutch mengelen.
Of persons, to join with others, be sociable (intransitive), from c.1600. Related: Mingled;
mingling.


mass (n.1)

lump, quantity, size, late 14c., from Old French masse lump, heap, pile; crowd, large amount; ingot,
bar (11c.), and directly from Latin massa kneaded dough, lump, that which adheres together like
dough, probably from Greek maza barley cake, lump, mass, ball, related to massein to knead, from PIE
root *mag- to knead (source of Lithuanian minkyti to knead, see macerate). Sense extended in English
1580s to a large quantity, amount, or number. Strict sense in physics is from 1704.    As an
adjective from 1733, first attested in mass meeting in American English. mass culture is from 1916
in sociology (earlier in biology); mass hysteria is from 1914; mass media is from 1923; mass
movement is from 1897; mass production is from 1920; mass grave is from 1918; mass murder from 1880.


make (v.)

Old English macian to make, form, construct, do; prepare, arrange, cause; behave, fare, transform,
from West Germanic *makon to fashion, fit (cognates: Old Saxon makon, Old Frisian makia to build,
make, Middle Dutch and Dutch maken, Old High German mahhon to construct, make, German machen to
make), from PIE *mag- to knead, mix; to fashion, fit (see macerate). If so, sense evolution perhaps
is via prehistoric houses built of mud. Gradually replaced the main Old English word, gewyrcan (see
work (v.)).    Meaning to arrive at (a place), first attested 1620s, originally was nautical.
Formerly used in many places where specific verbs now are used, such as to make Latin (c.1500) to
write Latin compositions. This broader usage survives in some phrases, such as to make water to
urinate, to make a book arrange a series of bets (1828), make hay to turn over mown grass to expose
it to sun. Make the grade is 1912, perhaps from the notion of railway engines going up an incline.
Read the valuable suggestions in Dr. C.V. Mosby's book -- be prepared to surmount obstacles before
you encounter them -- equipped with the power to make the grade in life's climb. [advertisement for
Making the Grade, December 1916]    But the phrase also was in use in a schoolwork context at the
time. Make do manage with what is available is attested from 1867. Make time go fast is 1849; make
tracks in this sense is from 1834. To make a federal case out of (something) popularized in 1959
movie Anatomy of a Murder; to make an offer (one) can't refuse is from Mario Puzo's 1969 novel The
Godfather. To make (one's) day is from 1909; menacing make my day is from 1971, popularized by Clint
Eastwood in film Sudden Impact (1983). Related: Made; making.


