magistrate (n.)

late 14c., civil officer in charge of administering laws, from Old French magistrat, from Latin
magistratus a magistrate, public functionary, originally magisterial rank or office, from magistrare
serve as a magistrate, from magister chief, director (see master). Related: Magistracy.


magisterial (adj.)

1630s, from Medieval Latin magisterialis of or pertaining to the office of magistrate, director, or
teacher, from Late Latin magisterius having authority of a magistrate, from magister chief, director
(see master (n.)). Related: Magisterially.


consul (n.)

late 14c., magistrate in ancient Rome, from Old French consule and directly from Latin consul
magistrate in ancient Rome, probably originally one who consults the Senate, from consulere to
deliberate, take counsel (see consultation).    Modern sense began with use as appellation of
various foreign officials and magistrates, a representative chosen by a community of merchants
living in a foreign country; an agent appointed by a government or ruler to represent the interests
of its subjects and traders in a foreign place (c.1600), an extended sense that developed 13c. in
the Spanish form of the word.


lawman (n.)

1530s, lawyer, from law + man (n.). Meaning law-enforcement officer is from 1865. There is an Anglo-
Latin lagamannus magistrate from early 12c.


doge (n.)

chief magistrate of Venice or Genoa, 1540s, from Venetian dialect doge, from Latin ducem, accusative
of dux leader (see duke (n.)).


praetor (n.)

elected magistrate in ancient Rome (subordinate to consuls), early 15c., from Latin praetor one who
goes before; originally a consul as leader of an army, from prae before (see pre-) + root of ire to
go (see ion).


ephor (n.)

Spartan magistrate, 1580s, from Greek ephoros overseer, from epi- over (see epi-) + horan to see,
possibly from PIE root *wer- (4) to perceive (see ward (n.)).


demiurge (n.)

1670s, from Latinized form of Greek demiourgos, literally public or skilled worker (from demos
common people; see demotic + ergos work; see organ).    The title of a magistrate in some
Peloponnesian city-states and the Ach&aelig;an League; taken in Platonic philosophy as a name for
the maker of the world. In the Gnostic system, conceived as a being subordinate to the Supreme
Being, and sometimes as the author of evil [OED].


official (n.)

early 14c., from Old French oficial law officer; bishop's representative (12c.) and directly from
Late Latin officialis attendant to a magistrate, public official, noun use of officialis (adj.) of
or belonging to duty, service, or office (see official (adj.)). Meaning person in charge of some
public work or duty first recorded 1550s.


tribunal (n.)

early 15c., a judgement seat, from Old French tribunal justice seat, judgement seat (13c.) and
directly from Latin tribunal platform for the seat of magistrates, elevation, embankment, from
tribunus official in ancient Rome, magistrate, literally head of a tribe (see tribune). Hence, a
court of justice or judicial assembly (1580s).


fasces (n.)

1590s, from Latin fasces bundle of rods containing an axe with the blade projecting (plural of
fascis bundle of wood, etc.), perhaps from PIE *bhasko- band, bundle (cognates: Middle Irish basc
neckband, Welsh baich load, burden, Old English b&aelig;st inner bark of the linden tree). Carried
before a lictor, a superior Roman magistrate, as a symbol of power over life and limb: the sticks
symbolized punishment by whipping, the axe head execution by beheading.


maitre d&#039;hotel

1530s, head domestic, from French ma&icirc;tre d'h&ocirc;tel, literally house-master, from Old
French maistre master; skilled worker, educator (12c.), from Latin magistrum (see magistrate). Sense
of hotel manager, manager of a dining room is from 1890. Shortened form ma&icirc;tre d' is attested
from 1942; simple maitre from 1899.


tribune (n.)

late 14c., title of an official in ancient Rome, from Latin tribunus magistrate (specifically one of
the officers appointed to protect the rights and interests of the plebeians from the patricians),
originally head of a tribe (in the Roman sense), from tribus (see tribe). Also raised platform
(1762), from Italian tribuna, from Medieval Latin tribuna, from Latin tribunal in its classical
sense platform for the seats of magistrates in ancient Rome.


syndic (n.)

c.1600, a civil magistrate, especially in Geneva, from French syndic chief representative (14c.),
from Late Latin syndicus representative of a group or town, from Greek syndikos public advocate, as
an adjective, belonging jointly to, from syn- together (see syn-) + dike judgment, justice, usage,
custom (cognate with Latin dicere to show, tell; see diction). Meaning accredited representative of
a university or other corporation first found c.1600. Related: Syndical.


alderman (n.)

Old English aldormonn (Mercian), ealdormann (West Saxon) ruler, prince, chief; chief officer of a
shire, from aldor, ealder patriarch (comparative of ald old; see old) + monn, mann man (see man
(n.)). A relic of the days when the elders were automatically in charge of the clan or tribe, but
already in Old English used for king's viceroys, regardless of age. The word yielded in Old English
to eorl, and after the Norman Conquest to count (n.). Meaning headman of a guild (early 12c.) passed
to magistrate of a city (c.1200) as the guilds became identified with municipal government.


lynch (v.)

1835, from earlier Lynch law (1811), likely named after William Lynch (1742-1820) of Pittsylvania,
Virginia, who c.1780 led a vigilance committee to keep order there during the Revolution. Other
sources trace the name to Charles Lynch (1736-1796) a Virginia magistrate who fined and imprisoned
Tories in his district c.1782, but the connection to him is less likely. Originally any sort of
summary justice, especially by flogging; narrowing of focus to extralegal execution by hanging is
20c. Lynch mob is attested from 1838. The surname is perhaps from Irish Loingseach sailor. Compare
earlier Lydford law, from a place in Dartmoor, England, where was held a Stannaries Court of summary
jurisdiction [Weekley], hence:   Lydford law: is to hang men first, and indite them afterwards.
[Thomas Blount, Glossographia, 1656]    Related: Lynched; lynching.


censor (n.)

1530s, Roman magistrate who took censuses and oversaw public morals, from Middle French censor and
directly from Latin censor, from censere to appraise, value, judge, from PIE root *kens- speak
solemnly, announce (cognates: Sanskrit &#347;amsati recites, praises, &#347;asa song of praise).
There were two of them at a time in classical times, usually patricians, and they also had charge of
public finances and public works. Transferred sense of officious judge of morals and conduct in
English is from 1590s. Roman censor also had a transferred sense of a severe judge; a rigid
moralist; a censurer. Of books, plays (later films, etc.), 1640s. By the early decades of the 19c.
the meaning of the English word had shaded into state agent charged with suppression of speech or
published matter deemed politically subversive. Related: Censorial.


municipal (adj.)

1540s, from Middle French municipal, from Latin municipalis of a citizen of a free town, of a free
town, also of a petty town, provincial, from municipium free town, city whose citizens have the
privileges of Roman citizens but are governed by their own laws, from municeps citizen, inhabitant
of a free town. Second element is root of capere assume, take (see capable). First element is from
munus (plural munia) service performed for the community, duty, work, also public spectacle paid for
by the magistrate, (gladiatorial) entertainment, gift, from Old Latin moenus service, duty, burden,
from PIE *moi-n-es-, generally taken as a suffixed form of root *mei- (1) to change, go, move
(Watkins; see mutable); but Tucker says more probably from the other PIE root   *mei- meaning bind,
so that munia = obligations and communis = bound together.


