magnate (n.)

mid-15c., great man, noble, man of wealth, from Late Latin magnates, plural of magnas great person,
nobleman, from Latin magnus great, large, big (of size), abundant (of quantity), great, considerable
(of value), strong, powerful (of force); of persons, elder, aged, also, figuratively, great, mighty,
grand, important, from PIE *mag-no-, from root *meg- great (cognates: Sanskrit maha-, mahat- great;
Greek megas, fem. megale great, large; Gothic mikils, Old English micel great, big, many; see
mickle).


magna mater

fertility goddess, 1728, Latin, literally great mother. See magnate + mother (n.1).


magnum (n.)

1788, bottle containing two quarts of wine or spirits, from Latin magnum, neuter of magnus great in
size (see magnate). Registered 1935 by Smith &amp; Wesson Inc., of Springfield, Massachusetts, as
the name of a powerful type of handgun.


Magna Carta

also Magna Charta, 1560s, Medieval Latin, literally great charter (of English personal and political
liberty), attested in Anglo-Latin from 1279; obtained from King John, June 15, 1215. See magnate,
card (n.).


magni-

word-forming element meaning great, from Latin magni-, comb. form of magnus great (see magnate
(n.)).


major (adj.)

c.1300, from Latin maior (earlier *magjos), irregular comparative of magnus large, great (see
magnate). Used in music (of modes, scales, or chords) since 1690s, on notion of an interval a half-
tone greater than the minor.


Magnus

Scandinavian masc. proper name, popular with early kings, the first to use it was Magnus I, king of
Norway and Denmark (d.1047), who evidently took it in emulation of Charlemagne (Latin Carolus
Magnus) under the impression that magnus (Latin, literally great; see magnate) was a personal name.


maharishi (n.)

Hindu sage or holy man, 1785, from Sanskrit, from maha great, from PIE root *meg- great (see
magnate) + rishi inspired sage. In general use, a title for a popular spiritual leader.


magna cum laude

1900, Latin, literally with great praise; from magna (see magnate) + cum laude.


magniloquent (adj.)

1650s, a back-formation from magniloquence, or else from Latin magniloquentia lofty style of
language, from magniloquus pompous in talk, vaunting, boastful, from comb. form of magnus great (see
magnate) + -loquus speaking, from loqui to speak (see locution).


magnitude (n.)

c.1400, greatness of size or character, from Latin magnitudo greatness, bulk, size, from magnus
great (see magnate) + -tudo, suffix forming abstract nouns from adjectives and participles (see
-tude). Meaning size, extent is from early 15c. Of stars, brightness, from 1640s.


major (n.)

military rank, 1640s, from French major, short for sergent-major, originally a higher rank than at
present, from Medieval Latin major chief officer, magnate, superior person, from Latin maior an
elder, adult, noun use of the adjective (see major (adj.)). The musical sense attested by 1797.


Mahayana

type of Buddhism practiced in northern Asia, 1868, from Sanskrit, from maha great, from PIE root
*meg- great (see magnate) + yana vehicle, from PIE root *ei- to go (see ion).


majesty (n.)

c.1300, greatness, glory, from Old French majeste grandeur, nobility (12c.), from Latin maiestatem
(nominative maiestas) greatness, dignity, elevation, honor, excellence, from stem of maior (neuter
maius), comparative of magnus great (see magnate). Earliest English us is with reference to God; as
a title, in reference to kings and queens (late 14c.), it is from Romance languages and descends
from the Roman Empire.


mahatma (n.)

1884, literally great-souled, from Sanskrit mahatman, from maha great, from PIE root *meg- great
(see magnate) + atman, soul, principle of life, properly breath (see atman). In esoteric Buddhism, a
person of supernatural powers. In common use, as a title, a mark of love and respect. Said to have
been applied to Gandhi (1869-1948) in 1915 by poet Rabrindranath Tagore.


Maratha

state in southwestern India, also in reference to the Scytho-Dravidian race living there, 1763
(Mharatta), from Marathi Maratha, corresponding to Sanskrit Maharastrah, literally great country,
from maha- great (from PIE root *meg- great; see magnate) + rastra kingdom, from raj to rule (see
rajah).


maharajah (n.)

also maharaja, 1690s, from Hindi, great king, from Sanskrit maha great (from PIE root *meg- great;
see magnate) + rajan king (see rajah). The fem. equivalent is maharani (1855).


Maia

Roman goddess of fertility, Latin Maia, literally she who brings increase, related to magnus great
(see magnate). Maia, one of the Pleiades, is from Greek Maia, daughter of Atlas, mother of Hermes,
literally mother, good mother, dame; foster-mother, nurse, midwife, said by Watkins to be from
infant babbling (see mamma).


magnificence (n.)

mid-14c., great-mindedness, courage, from Old French magnificence splendor, nobility, grandeur, from
Latin magnificentia splendor, munificence, from stem of magnificus great, elevated, noble, eminent,
also splendid, rich, fine, costly, literally doing great deeds, from magnus great (see magnate) +
root of facere to make (see factitious). Meaning greatness, grandeur, glory in English is from late
14c. That of beauty, splendor, wealth is 15c. As one of the Aristotelian and scholastic virtues, it
translates Greek megaloprepeia liberality of expenditure combined with good taste.


magnanimity (n.)

mid-14c., loftiness of thought or purpose, from Old French magnanimit&#233; high-mindedness,
generosity of spirit, from Latin magnanimitatem (nominative magnanimitas) greatness of soul, high-
mindedness, from magnanimus having a great soul, from magnus great (see magnate) + animus mind,
soul, spirit (see animus). Probably a loan-translation of Greek megalopsykhos high-souled, generous
(Aristotle) or megathymus great-hearted.


