magnitude (n.)

c.1400, greatness of size or character, from Latin magnitudo greatness, bulk, size, from magnus
great (see magnate) + -tudo, suffix forming abstract nouns from adjectives and participles (see
-tude). Meaning size, extent is from early 15c. Of stars, brightness, from 1640s.


apparent (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French aparant evident, obvious, visible, from Latin apparentem (nominative
apparens) visible, manifest, present participle of apparere (see appear). First attested in phrase
heir apparent (see heir). Meaning superficial is c.1400. Apparent magnitude in astronomy (how bright
a heavenly body looks from earth, as opposed to absolute magnitude, which is how bright it really
is) is attested from 1875.


no-smoking (adj.)

1905; the sign wording itself is attested by 1817.    Smoking is a vice to [sic] -- and a national
one, of such magnitude that railroad corporations throughout all their routes in the United States,
have a special command in large letters, conspicuously placed at depots and inside of the cars -- No
smoking allowed here. [The Sailor's Magazine, December 1840]


magnitudinous (adj.)

1789; see magnitude + -ous.


luminosity (n.)

1630s, quality of being luminous, from French luminosit&#233; or else a native formation from
luminous + -ity. In astronomy, intrinsic brightness of a heavenly body (as distinguished from
apparent magnitude, which diminishes with distance), attested from 1906.


vector (n.)

quantity having magnitude and direction, 1846; earlier line joining a fixed point and a variable
point, 1704, from Latin vector one who carries or conveys, carrier (also one who rides), agent noun
from past participle stem of vehere carry, convey (see vehicle). Related: Vectorial.


size (n.)

c.1300, an ordinance to fix the amount of a payment or tax, from Old French sise, shortened form of
assise session, assessment, regulation, manner (see assize), probably a misdivision of l'assise as
la sise. The sense of extent, amount, volume, magnitude (c.1300) is from the notion of regulating
something by fixing the amount of it (weights, food portions, etc.). Specific sense of set of
dimensions of a manufactured article for sale is attested from 1590s.


recession (n.)

1640s, act of receding, a going back, from French r&#233;cession a going backward, a withdrawing,
and directly from Latin  recessionem (nominative recessio) a going back, noun of action from past
participle stem of recedere (see recede).    Sense of temporary decline in economic activity, 1929,
noun of action from recess (q.v.): The material prosperity of the United States is too firmly based,
in our opinion, for a revival in industrial activity -- even if  we have to face an immediate
recession of some magnitude -- to be long delayed. [Economist, Nov. 2, 1929]Ayto notes, There was
more than a hint of euphemism in the coining of this term.


absolute (adj.)

late 14c., unrestricted; complete, perfect; also not relative to something else (mid-15c.), from
Middle French absolut (14c., Old French asolu, Modern French absolu), from Latin absolutus, past
participle of absolvere to set free, make separate (see absolve).    Most of the current senses also
were in the Latin word. Sense evolution was detached, disengaged, thus perfect, pure. Meaning
despotic (1610s) is from notion of absolute in position. Absolute monarchy is recorded from 1735
(absolute king is recorded from 1610s); scientific absolute magnitude (1902), absolute value (1907)
are from early 20c. In metaphysics, the absolute that which is absolute is from 1809.


Sirius (n.)

brightest star by magnitude, late 14c., from Latin Sirius the Dog Star, from Greek Seirios, said to
mean literally scorching or the scorcher. But other related Greek words seem to derive from this
use, and the name might be a folk-etymologized borrowing from some other language. An Egyptian name
for it was Sothis. The connection of the star with scorching heat is from its ancient heliacal
rising at the summer solstice (see dog days). Also see dog star. Related: Sirian. The constellation
Canis Major seems to have grown from the star, not the other way.    Homer made much of it as
[Kyon], but his <b>Dog</b> doubtless was limited to the star Sirius, as among the ancients generally
till, at some unknown date, the constellation was formed as we have it, -- indeed till long
afterwards, for we find many allusions to the Dog in which we are uncertain whether the
constellation or its lucida is referred to. [Richard Hinckley Allen, Canis Major in Star Names and
Their Meanings, London: 1899]


Praesepe (n.)

loose (open) star cluster (M44) in Cancer, from Latin praesaepe the Roman name for the grouping,
literally enclosure, stall, manger, hive, from prae- (see pre-) + saepire to fence (see septum).
It is similar to the Hyades but more distant, about 600 light-years away, consists of about 1,000
stars, mostly older, the brightest of them around magnitude 6.5, thus not discernable to the naked
eye even on the clearest nights, but their collective light makes a visible fuzz of glow that the
ancients likened to a cloud (the original nebula); Galileo was the first to resolve it into stars
(1609). The modern name for it in U.S. and Britain, Beehive, seems no older than 1840. Greek names
included Nephelion Little Cloud and Akhlys Little Mist. In astrology, like all clusters, it
threatened mischief and blindness [Allen].    Manger to the Romans perhaps by influence of two
nearby stars, Gamma and Delta Cancri, dim and unspectacular but both for some reason figuring
largely in ancient astrology and weather forecasting, and known as the Asses (Latin Aselli),
supposedly those of Silenus.


great (adj.)

Old English great big, tall, thick, stout; coarse, from West Germanic *grautaz coarse, thick
(cognates: Old Saxon grot, Old Frisian grat, Dutch groot, German gro&szlig; great).    Said to have
meant originally big in size, coarse, and, if so, perhaps from PIE root *ghreu- to rub, grind. It
took over much of the sense of Middle English mickle, and is now largely superseded by big and large
except for non-material things.    As a prefix to terms denoting kinship one degree further removed
(early 15c., earliest attested use is in great uncle) it is from the similar use of French grand,
itself used as the equivalent of Latin magnus. An Old English way of saying great-grandfather was
&thorn;ridda f&aelig;der, literally third father.    In the sense of excellent, wonderful great is
attested from 1848. Great White Way Broadway in New York City is from 1901. Great Spirit high deity
of the North American Indians, 1703, originally translates Ojibwa kitchi manitou. The Great War
originally (1887) referred to the Napoleonic Wars, later (1914) to what we now call World War I (see
world).The Great War -- as, until the fall of France, the British continued to call the First World
War in order to avoid admitting to themselves that they were now again engaged in a war of the same
magnitude. [Arnold Toynbee, Experiences, 1969]  Also formerly with a verb form, Old English
greatian, Middle English greaten to become larger, increase, grow; become visibly pregnant, which
became archaic after 17c.


