maim (v.)

c.1300, maimen, from Old French mahaignier injure, wound, muitilate, cripple, disarm, possibly from
Vulgar Latin *mahanare (source also of Proven&ccedil;al mayanhar, Italian magagnare), of unknown
origin; or possibly from a Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic *mait- (source of Old Norse
mei&eth;a to hurt, related to mad (adj.)), or from PIE root *mai- to cut. Related: Maimed; maiming.


mangle (v.)

to mutilate, c.1400, from Anglo-French mangler, frequentative of Old French mangoner cut to pieces,
of uncertain origin, perhaps connected with Old French mahaignier to maim, mutilate, wound (see
maim). Meaning to mispronounce (words), garble is from 1530s. Related: Mangled; mangling.


Malcolm

masc. proper name, from Old Irish M&#225;el Coluim servant of (St.) Columba, from m&#225;el servant,
etymologically bald, shorn, hornless, from PIE base *mai- to cut (see maim).


mayhem (n.)

late 15c., from Anglo-French maihem (13c.), from Old French mahaigne injury, wrong, a hurt, harm,
damage; related to mahaignier to injure, wound, mutilate, cripple (see maim). Originally, in law,
the crime of maiming a person to make him less able to defend himself or annoy his adversary [OED].


hamper (v.)

late 14c., hampren to surround, imprison, confine, also to pack in a container, of unknown origin,
possibly from hamper (n.1), or somehow connected to Middle English hamelian to maim. Related:
Hampered; hampering.


truncate (v.)

late 15c., from Latin truncatus cut off, past participle of truncare to maim, mutilate, cut off,
from truncus mutilated, cut off, deprived of branches or limbs (see trunk). Related: Truncated;
truncating.


mutilate (v.)

1530s, of things; 1560s, of persons; from Latin mutilatus, past participle of mutilare to cut off,
lop off, cut short; maim, mutilate, from mutilus maimed (see mutilation). Technically, to deprive of
some principal part, especially by cutting off. Related: Mutilated; mutilating.


vulnerable (adj.)

c.1600, from Late Latin vulnerabilis wounding, from Latin vulnerare to wound, hurt, injure, maim,
from vulnus (genitive vulneris) wound, perhaps related to vellere pluck, to tear (see svelte), or
from PIE *wele-nes-, from *wele- (2) to strike, wound (see Valhalla).


ant (n.)

c.1500, from Middle English ampte (late 14c.), from Old English &aelig;mette ant, from West Germanic
*amaitjo (cognates: Old High German ameiza, German Ameise) from a compound of bases *ai- off, away +
*mai- cut, from PIE *mai- to cut (cognates: maim). Thus the insect's name is, etymologically, the
biter off.  As &thorn;ycke as ameten crepe&thorn; in an amete hulle [chronicle of Robert of
Gloucester, 1297] Emmet survived into 20c. as an alternative form. White ant termite is from 1729.
To have ants in one's pants be nervous and fidgety is from 1934, made current by a popular song;
antsy embodies the same notion.


mite (n.1)

tiny animal, minute arachnid, Old English mite, from Proto-Germanic *miton (cognates: Middle Dutch
mite, Dutch mijt, Old High German miza, Danish mide) originally meaning perhaps the cutter, in
reference to its bite, from Proto-Germanic *mait- (cognates: Gothic maitan, Old High German meizen
to cut), from PIE root *mai- to cut (see maim). Or else its original sense is something small, and
it is from PIE *mei- (2) small, in reference to size (see minus).


mad (adj.)

late 13c., from Old English gem&aelig;dde (plural) out of one's mind (usually implying also violent
excitement), also foolish, extremely stupid, earlier gem&aelig;ded rendered insane, past participle
of a lost verb *gem&aelig;dan to make insane or foolish, from Proto-Germanic *ga-maid-jan,
demonstrative form of *ga-maid-az changed (for the worse), abnormal (cognates: Old Saxon gimed
foolish, Old High German gimeit foolish, vain, boastful, Gothic gamai&thorn;s crippled, wounded, Old
Norse mei&eth;a to hurt, maim), from intensive prefix *ga- + PIE *moito-, past participle of root
*mei- (1) to change (cognates: Latin mutare to change, mutuus done in exchange, migrare to change
one's place of residence; see mutable).    Emerged in Middle English to replace the more usual Old
English word, wod (see wood (adj.)). Sense of beside oneself with excitement or enthusiasm is from
early 14c. Meaning beside oneself with anger is attested from early 14c., but deplored by Rev. John
Witherspoon (1781) as an Americanism. It now competes in American English with angry for this sense.
Of animals, affected with rabies, from late 13c. Phrase mad as a March hare is attested from 1520s,
via notion of breeding season; mad as a hatter is from 1829 as demented, 1837 as enraged, according
to a modern theory supposedly from erratic behavior caused by prolonged exposure to poison mercuric
nitrate, used in making felt hats. For mad as a wet hen see hen. Mad money is attested from 1922;
mad scientist is from 1891.


