makeshift

also make-shift, 1560s, as a noun, shifty person, rogue, from make (v.) + shift (v.). Adjectival
sense of substitute is first recorded 1680s. Compare make-sport a laughing stock (1610s).


haywire (n.)

soft wire for binding bales of hay, by 1891, from hay + wire (n.). Adjective meaning poorly
equipped, makeshift is 1905, American English, from the sense of something only held together with
haywire, particularly said to be from use of the stuff in New England lumber camps for jury-rigging
and makeshift purposes, so that hay wire outfit became the contemptuous term for loggers with poor
logging equipment [Bryant, Logging, 1913]. Its springy, uncontrollable quality led to the sense in
go haywire (by 1915).


Band-Aid (n.)

trademark registered 1924 by Johnson &amp; Johnson for a stick-on gauze pad or strip. See band (n.1)
+ aid (n.). The British equivalent was Elastoplast. Figurative sense of temporary or makeshift
solution to a problem, pallative (often lower case, sometimes bandaid) is first recorded 1968; as an
adjective, from 1970.


soap-box (n.)

also soapbox, 1650s, box for holding soap, later especially a wooden crate in which soap may be
packed; from soap (n.) + box (n.). Typical of a makeshift stand for a public orator since at least
1907. Also used by children to make racing carts, as in soap-box derby, annual race in Dayton, Ohio,
which dates to 1933.


jerry-built (adj.)

1869, in which jerry has a sense of bad, defective, probably a pejorative use of the male nickname
Jerry (a popular form of Jeremy; compare Jerry-sneak, mid-19c., sneaking fellow, a hen-pecked
husband [OED]). Or from or influenced by nautical slang jury temporary, which came to be used of all
sorts of makeshift and inferior objects (see jury (adj.)).


brat (n.)

c.1500, slang, beggar's child, originally northern, Midlands and western England dialect word for
makeshift or ragged garment; probably the same word as Old English bratt cloak, which is from a
Celtic source (compare Old Irish bratt cloak, cloth). The modern meaning is perhaps from notion of
child's apron. Hollywood Brat Pack (modeled on 1950s Rat Pack) is from 1985.


