malevolent (adj.)

c.1500, from Middle French malivolent and directly from Latin malevolentem (nominative malevolens)
ill-disposed, spiteful, envious, from male badly (see mal-) + volentem (nominative volens), present
participle of velle to wish (see will (v.)). Related: Malevolently.


malevolence (n.)

mid-15c., from Middle French malevolence and directly from Latin malevolentia ill-will, dislike,
hatred, from malevolentem (nominative malevolens) malevolent (see malevolent).


illing (n.)

evil-doing, malevolent treatment, early 13c.; see ill (v.).


dybbuk (n.)

malevolent spirit of a dead person possessing the body of a living one, 1903, from Jewish folklore,
from Hebrew dibbuk, from dabak to cling, cleave to.


peri (n.)

1777, from Persian pari, from Avestan pairika. Race of superhuman female beings originally
represented as malevolent, later as angelic genii (compare sense evolution of English fairy, to
which it is not related).


ill (adj.)

c.1200, morally evil (other 13c. senses were malevolent, hurtful, unfortunate, difficult), from Old
Norse illr ill, bad, of unknown origin. Not related to evil. Main modern sense of sick, unhealthy,
unwell is first recorded mid-15c., probably related to Old Norse idiom it is bad to me. Slang
inverted sense of very good, cool is 1980s. As a noun, something evil, from mid-13c.


troll (n.1)

supernatural being in Scandinavian mythology and folklore, 1610s (with an isolated use mid-14c.),
from Old Norse troll giant being not of the human race, evil spirit, monster. Some speculate that it
originally meant creature that walks clumsily, and derives from Proto-Germanic *truzlan, from
*truzlanan (see troll (v.)). But it seems to have been a general supernatural word, such as Swedish
trolla to charm, bewitch; Old Norse trolldomr witchcraft.    The old sagas tell of the troll-bull, a
supernatural being in the form of a bull, as well as boar-trolls. There were troll-maidens, troll-
wives, and troll-women; the trollman, a magician or wizard, and the troll-drum, used in Lappish
magic rites. The word was popularized in literary English by 19c. antiquarians, but it has been
current in the Shetlands and Orkneys since Viking times. The first record of the word in modern
English is from a court document from the Shetlands, regarding a certain Catherine, who, among other
things, was accused of airt and pairt of witchcraft and sorcerie, in hanting and seeing the Trollis
ryse out of the kyrk yeard of Hildiswick.    Originally conceived as a race of malevolent giants,
they have suffered the same fate as the Celtic Danann and by 19c. were regarded by peasants in in
Denmark and Sweden as dwarfs and imps supposed to live in caves or under the ground.    They are
obliging and neighbourly; freely lending and borrowing, and elsewise keeping up a friendly
intercourse with mankind. But they have a sad propensity to thieving, not only stealing provisions,
but even women and children. [Thomas Keightley, The Fairy Mythology, London, 1850]


