malicious (adj.)

early 13c., from Old French malicios showing ill will, spiteful, wicked (Modern French malicieux),
from Latin malitiosus wicked, malicious, from malitia badness, ill will, spite, from malus bad (see
mal-). In legal use (early 14c., Anglo-French), it means characterized by malice prepense.


maliciously (adv.)

late 14c., from malicious + -ly (2).


maliciousness (n.)

mid-15c., from malicious + -ness.


calumny (n.)

False &amp; malicious misrepresentation of the words or actions of others, calculated to injure
their reputation [Fowler], mid-15c., from Middle French calomnie (15c.), from Latin calumnia
trickery, subterfuge, misrepresentation, malicious charge, from calvi to trick, deceive, from PIE
root *kel- (6) to deceive, confuse (cognates: Greek kelein to bewitch, seduce, beguile, Gothic holon
to deceive, Old Norse hol praise, flattery, Old English hol slander, holian to slander).


snide (adj.)

1859, thieves' slang, counterfeit, sham, bad, spurious, of unknown origin. Of persons, cunning,
sharp, from 1883. Sense of sneering is first attested 1933, perhaps via sense of hypocrisy,
malicious gossip (1902). Related: Sneeringly.


mischievous (adj.)

early 14c., unfortunate, disastrous, probably from mischief + -ous. Sense of playfully malicious or
annoying first recorded 1670s. Related: Mischievously; mischievousness.


gloat (v.)

1570s, to look at furtively, from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse glotta to grin, smile
scornfully, show the teeth, Swedish dialectal glotta to peep; or from Middle High German glotzen to
stare, gape. Sense of to look at with malicious satisfaction first recorded 1748. Related: Gloated;
gloating. As a noun, from 1640s with sense of side-glance; 1899 as act of gloating.


Judas

biblical betrayer of Christ, Latin form of Greek Ioudas, from Hebrew Yehudha (see Judah). As a name
for a malicious traitor, it is attested from late 15c. Judas priest as an exclamation in place of
Jesus Christ is from 1914. Judas tree (1660s) supposedly was the type from which Judas hanged
himself. The Judas goat (1941) leads sheep to the shackling pen.


leer (v.)

to look obliquely (now usually implying with a lustful or malicious intent), 1520s, probably from
Middle English noun ler cheek, from Old English hleor the cheek, the face, from Proto-Germanic
*khleuzas near the ear, from *kleuso- ear, from PIE root *kleu- to hear (see listen). The notion is
probably of looking askance (compare figurative development of cheek). Related: Leered; leering.


discover (v.)

c.1300, divulge, reveal, disclose, from Old French descovrir uncover, unroof, unveil, reveal,
betray, from Late Latin discooperire, from Latin dis- opposite of (see dis-) + cooperire to cover up
(see cover). At first with a sense of betrayal or malicious exposure (discoverer originally meant
informant); the meaning to obtain knowledge or sight of what was not known is from 1550s. Related:
Discovered; discovering.


challenge (n.)

early 14c., something one can be accused of, a fault, blemish; mid-14c., false accusation, malicious
charge; accusation of wrong-doing, also act of laying claim (to something), from Anglo-French
chalenge, Old French chalonge calumny, slander; demand, opposition, in legal use, accusation, claim,
dispute, from Anglo-French chalengier, Old French chalongier to accuse, to dispute (see challenge
(v.)). Accusatory connotations died out 17c. Meanings an objection in law, etc.; a calling to fight
are from mid-15c. Meaning difficult task is from 1954.


smirk (v.)

Old English smearcian to smile. No exact cognates in other languages, but probably related to
smerian to laugh at, scorn, from Proto-Germanic *smer-, *smar-, variant of PIE *smei- to smile; see
smile (v.), which after c.1500 gradually restricted smirk to the unpleasant sense smile affectedly;
grin in a malicious or smug way. In some 18c. glossaries smirk is still simply to smile. Related:
Smirked; smirking. The noun is recorded by 1560s.


incendiary

c.1400 as a noun, person who sets malicious fires; mid-15c. as an adjective, capable of being used
to set fires, from Latin incendiarius causing a fire, from incendium conflagration, from incendere
set on fire, figuratively, incite, rouse, enrage, from in- into, in, on, upon (see in- (2)) +
*candere to set alight, cause to glow, related to candere to shine (see candle). Figurative sense of
enflaming passions (adj.) is from 1610s. Military use, of bombs, shells, etc., attested from 1871.
The obsolete verb incend is attested from c.1500.


amusement (n.)

c.1600, diversion of attention, especially in military actions, from French amusement, noun of
action from amuser (see amuse).    And because all bold and irreverent Speeches touching matters of
high nature, and all malicious and false Reports tending to Sedition, or to the Amusement of Our
People, are punishable ... (etc.) [Charles II, Proclamation of Oct. 26, 1688]  Meaning a pastime,
play, game, anything which pleasantly diverts the attention (from duty, work, etc.) is from 1670s,
originally depreciative; meaning pleasurable diversion attested from 1690s. Amusement hall is from
1862; amusement park first recorded 1897.


eerie (adj.)

c.1300, fearful, timid, north England and Scottish variant of Old English earg cowardly, fearful,
from Proto-Germanic *argaz (cognates: Old Frisian erg evil, bad, Middle Dutch arch bad, Dutch arg,
Old High German arg cowardly, worthless, German arg bad, wicked, Old Norse argr unmanly, voluptuous,
Swedish arg malicious).    Sense of causing fear because of strangeness is first attested 1792.
Related: Eerily. Finnish arka cowardly is a Germanic loan-word.


livid (adj.)

early 15c., of a bluish-leaden color, from Middle French livide and directly from Latin lividus of a
bluish color, black and blue, figuratively envious, spiteful, malicious, from livere be bluish,
earlier *slivere, from PIE *sliwo-, suffixed form of root *(s)leie- bluish (cognates: Old Church
Slavonic and Russian sliva plum; Lithuanian slywas plum; Old Irish li, Welsh lliw color, splendor,
Old English sla sloe). The sense of furiously angry (1912) is from the notion of being livid with
rage.


foe (n.)

Old English gefa foe, enemy, adversary in a blood feud (the prefix denotes mutuality), from fah at
feud, hostile, from Proto-Germanic *fakhaz (cognates: Old High German fehan to hate, Gothic faih
deception), probably from PIE root *peig- (2) evil-minded, treacherous, hostile (cognates: Sanskrit
pisunah malicious, picacah demon; Greek pikros bitter; Latin piget it irks, troubles, displeases,
piger reluctant, lazy; Lithuanian piktas wicked, angry, pekti to blame). Weaker sense of adversary
is first recorded c.1600.


schadenfreude (n.)

malicious joy in the misfortunes of others, 1922, German Schadenfreude, literally damage-joy, from
schaden damage, harm, injury (see scathe) + freude, from Old High German frewida joy, from fro
happy, literally hopping for joy, from Proto-Germanic *frawa- (see frolic).What a fearful thing is
it that any language should have a word expressive of the pleasure which men feel at the calamities
of others; for the existence of the word bears testimony to the existence of the thing. And yet in
more than one such a word is found. ... In the Greek epikhairekakia, in the German, 'Schadenfreude.'
[Richard C. Trench, On the Study of Words, 1852]


nasty (adj.)

c.1400, foul, filthy, dirty, unclean, of unknown origin; perhaps [Barnhart] from Old French nastre
miserly, envious, malicious, spiteful, shortened form of villenastre infamous, bad, from vilein
villain + -astre, pejorative suffix, from Latin -aster.    Alternative etymology [OED] is from Dutch
nestig dirty, literally like a bird's nest. Likely reinforced in either case by a Scandinavian
source (compare Swedish dialectal naskug dirty, nasty), which also might be the source of the Middle
English word. Of weather, from 1630s; of things generally, unpleasant, offensive, from 1705. Of
people, ill-tempered, from 1825. Noun meaning something nasty is from 1935. Related: Nastily;
nastiness.


perverse (adj.)

mid-14c., wicked, from Old French pervers unnatural, degenerate; perverse, contrary (12c.) and
directly from Latin perversus turned away, contrary, askew, figuratively, turned away from what is
right, wrong, malicious, spiteful, past participle of pervertere to corrupt (see pervert (v.)). The
Latin word is glossed in Old English by forcerred, from past participle of forcyrran to avoid, from
cierran to turn, return. Meaning wrong, not in accord with what is accepted is from 1560s; sense of
obstinate, stubborn is from 1570s. It keeps the non-sexual senses of pervert (v.) and allows the
psychological ones to go with perverted. Related: Perversely; perverseness.


scandal (n.)

1580s, discredit caused by irreligious conduct, from Middle French scandale (12c.), from Late Latin
scandalum cause for offense, stumbling block, temptation, from Greek skandalon a trap or snare laid
for an enemy, in New Testament, metaphorically as a stumbling block, offense; originally trap with a
springing device, from PIE *skand- to leap, climb (see scan (v.); also see slander (n.), which is
another form of the same word).    Attested from early 13c., but the modern word likely is a
reborrowing. Meaning malicious gossip, also shameful action or event is from 1590s; sense of person
whose conduct is a disgrace is from 1630s. Scandal sheet sensational newspaper is from 1939.
Scandal-monger is from 1702.


son of a bitch

1707 as a direct phrase, but implied much earlier, and Old Norse had bikkju-sonr. Abbreviated form
SOB from 1918; form sumbitch attested in writing by 1969.    Abide &thorn;ou &thorn;ef malicious!
Biche-sone &thorn;ou drawest amis  &thorn;ou schalt abigge it ywis!  [Of Arthour &amp; of Merlin,
c.1330]    Probably the most common American vulgarity from about the middle of the eighteenth
century to the middle of the twentieth [Rawson].     Our maid-of-all-work in that department
[indecency] is son-of-a-bitch, which seems as pale and ineffectual to a Slav or a Latin as fudge
does to us. There is simply no lift in it, no shock, no sis-boom-ah. The dumbest policeman in
Palermo thinks of a dozen better ones between breakfast and the noon whistle. [H.L. Mencken, The
American Language, 4th ed., 1936, p.317-8]    Elsewhere, complaining of the tepidity of the American
vocabulary of profanity, Mencken writes that the toned-down form son-of-a-gun is so lacking in punch
that the Italians among us have borrowed it as a satirical name for an American: la sanemagogna is
what they call him, and by it they indicate their contempt for his backwardness in the art that is
one of their great glories.    It was in 1934 also that the New York Daily News, with commendable
frankness, in reporting a hearing in Washington at which Senator Huey P. Long featured, forsook the
old-time dashes and abbreviations and printed the complete epithet son of a bitch. [Stanley Walker,
City Editor, 1934]


elf (n.)

one of a race of powerful supernatural beings in Germanic folklore, Old English elf (Mercian,
Kentish), &aelig;lf (Northumbrian), ylfe (plural, West Saxon), from Proto-Germanic *albiz (cognates:
Old Saxon alf, Old Norse alfr, German alp evil spirit, goblin, incubus), origin unknown, possibly
from PIE *albho- white. Used figuratively for mischievous person from 1550s.    In addition to
elf/&aelig;lf (masc.), Old English had parallel form *elfen (fem.), the plural of which was
*elfenna, -elfen, from Proto-Germanic *albinjo-. Both words survived into Middle English and were
active there, the former as elf (with the vowel of the plural), plural elves, the latter as elven,
West Midlands dialect alven (plural elvene).    The Germanic elf originally was dwarfish and
malicious (compare Old English &aelig;lfadl nightmare, &aelig;lfsogo&eth;a hiccup, thought to be
caused by elves); in the Middle Ages they were confused to some degree with faeries; the more noble
version begins with Spenser. Nonetheless a popular component in Anglo-Saxon names, many of which
survive as modern given names and surnames, such as &AElig;lfr&aelig;d Elf-counsel (Alfred),
&AElig;lfwine Elf-friend (Alvin), &AElig;lfric Elf-ruler (Eldridge), also women's names such as
&AElig;lffl&aelig;d Elf-beauty. Elf Lock hair tangled, especially by Queen Mab, which it was not
fortunate to disentangle [according to Robert Nares' glossary of Shakespeare] is from 1592.


sabotage (n.)

1907 (from 1903 as a French word in English), from French sabotage, from saboter to sabotage,
bungle, literally walk noisily, from sabot wooden shoe (13c.), altered (by association with Old
French bot boot) from Middle French savate old shoe, from an unidentified source that also produced
similar words in Old Proven&ccedil;al, Portuguese, Spanish (zapata), Italian (ciabatta), Arabic
(sabbat), and Basque (zapata).    In French, and at first in English, the sense of deliberately and
maliciously destroying property originally was in reference to labor disputes, but the oft-repeated
story (as old as the record of the word in English) that the modern meaning derives from strikers'
supposed tactic of throwing shoes into machinery is not supported by the etymology. Likely it was
not meant as a literal image; the word was used in French in a variety of bungling senses, such as
to play a piece of music badly. This, too, was the explanation given in some early usages.
SABOTAGE [chapter heading] The title we have prefixed seems to mean scamping work. It is a device
which, we are told, has been adopted by certain French workpeople as a substitute for striking. The
workman, in other words, purposes to remain on and to do his work badly, so as to annoy his
employer's customers and cause loss to his employer. [The Liberty Review, January 1907]   <hr />
You may believe that sabotage is murder, and so forth, but it is not so at all. Sabotage means
giving back to the bosses what they give to us. Sabotage consists in going slow with the process of
production when the bosses go slow with the same process in regard to wages. [Arturo M. Giovannitti,
quoted in report of the Sagamore Sociological Conference, June 1907]   <hr />   In English,
malicious mischief would appear to be the nearest explicit definition of sabotage, which is so much
more expressive as to be likely of adoption into all languages spoken by nations suffering from this
new force in industry and morals. Sabotage has a flavor which is unmistakable even to persons
knowing little slang and no French .... [Century Magazine, November 1910]


