malignant (adj.)

1560s, in reference to diseases, from Middle French malignant and directly from Late Latin
malignantem (nominative malignans) acting from malice, present participle of malignare injure
maliciously (see malign (v.)). Earlier in the church malignant followers of the antichrist, from
Latin ecclesiam malignantum in early Church writing, applied by Protestant writers to the Church in
Rome (1540s). As an adjective, Middle English used simple malign (early 14c.). Related: Malignantly.


malignancy (n.)

c.1600, malignant nature, from malignant + -cy. Of growths, tumors, from 1680s.


shrewish (adj.)

late 14c., wicked, malignant, from shrew + -ish. Of women, malignant and scolding, from 1560s.
Related: Shrewishly; shrewishness.


shrew (n.)

small insectivorous mammal, Old English screawa shrew-mouse, unknown outside English, and the
absence of evidence for the word between the OE. period and the 16th c is remarkable [OED]. Perhaps
from Proto-Germanic *skraw-, from PIE *skreu- to cut; cutting tool (see shred (n.)), in reference to
the shrew's pointed snout. Alternative Old English word for it was scirfemus, from sceorfan to gnaw.
The meaning peevish, malignant, clamorous, spiteful, vexatious, turbulent woman [Johnson] is late
14c., from earlier sense of spiteful person (male or female), mid-13c., traditionally said to derive
from some supposed malignant influence of the animal, which was once believed to have a venomous
bite and was held in superstitious dread (compare beshrew). Paired with sheep from 1560s as the
contrasting types of wives.


anthrax (n.)

late 14c., any severe boil or carbuncle, from Latin, from Greek anthrax charcoal, live coal, also
carbuncle, of unknown origin. Specific sense of the malignant disease in sheep and cattle (and
occasionally humans) is from 1876.


reptilian (adj.)

1846, from reptile + -ian. Transferred meaning malignant, cold, underhanded is from 1859.


blasted (adj.)

stricken by malignant forces (natural or supernatural), cursed, blighted, 1550s, from blast (v.),
with the notion of balefully breathed upon. In the sense of cursed, damned it is attested from
1680s. Meaning drunk or stoned dates from 1972 (blast (v.) smoke marijuana attested from 1959).


benignant (adj.)

c.1782, from benign + -ant (see -ent); on model of malignant. Related: Benignantly; benignancy.


carcinoma (n.)

malignant tumor, 1721, from Latin carcinoma, from Greek karkinoma a cancer, from karkinos cancer,
literally crab (see cancer) + -oma.


canker (n.)

late Old English cancer spreading ulcer, cancerous tumor, from Latin cancer malignant tumor,
literally crab (see cancer); influenced in Middle English by Old North French cancre canker, sore,
abscess (Old French chancre, Modern French chancre). The word was the common one for cancer until
c.1700. Also used since 15c. of caterpillars and insect larvae that eat plant buds and leaves. As a
verb from late 14c. Related: Cankered; cankerous. Canker blossom is recorded from 1580s.


cancer (n.)

Old English cancer spreading sore, cancer (also canceradl), from Latin cancer a crab, later,
malignant tumor, from Greek karkinos, which, like the Modern English word, has three meanings: crab,
tumor, and the zodiac constellation (late Old English), from PIE root *qarq- to be hard (like the
shell of a crab); cognates: Sanskrit karkatah crab, karkarah hard; and perhaps cognate with PIE root
*qar-tu- hard, strong, source of English hard.    Greek physicians Hippocrates and Galen, among
others, noted similarity of crabs to some tumors with swollen veins. Meaning person born under the
zodiac sign of Cancer is from 1894. The sun being in Cancer at the summer solstice, the
constellation had association in Latin writers with the south and with summer heat. Cancer stick
cigarette is from 1959.


plague (n.)

late 14c., plage, affliction, calamity, evil, scourge; early 15c., malignant disease, from Old
French plage (14c.), from Late Latin plaga, used in Vulgate for pestilence, from Latin plaga stroke,
wound, probably from root of plangere to strike, lament (by beating the breast), from or cognate
with Greek (Doric) plaga blow, from PIE *plak- (2) to strike, to hit (cognates: Greek plazein to
drive away, plessein to beat, strike; Old English flocan to strike, beat; Gothic flokan to bewail;
German fluchen, Old Frisian floka to curse).    The Latin word also is the source of Old Irish plag
(genitive plaige) plague, pestilence, German Plage, Dutch plaage. Meaning epidemic that causes many
deaths is from 1540s; specifically in reference to bubonic plague from c.1600. Modern spelling
follows French, which had plague from 15c. Weakened sense of anything annoying is from c.1600.


black (adj.)

Old English bl&aelig;c dark, from Proto-Germanic *blakaz burned (cognates: Old Norse blakkr dark,
Old High German blah black, Swedish bl&auml;ck ink, Dutch blaken to burn), from PIE *bhleg- to burn,
gleam, shine, flash (cognates: Greek phlegein to burn, scorch, Latin flagrare to blaze, glow, burn),
from root *bhel- (1) to shine, flash, burn; see bleach (v.).    The same root produced Old English
blac bright, shining, glittering, pale; the connecting notions being, perhaps, fire (bright) and
burned (dark). The usual Old English word for black was sweart (see swart). According to OED: In ME.
it is often doubtful whether blac, blak, blake, means 'black, dark,' or 'pale, colourless, wan,
livid.'  Used of dark-skinned people in Old English.    Of coffee, first attested 1796. Meaning
fierce, terrible, wicked is late 14c. The color of sin and sorrow since at least c.1300; sense of
with dark purposes, malignant emerged 1580s (as in black magic). Black face in reference to a
performance style originated in U.S., is from 1868. Black flag, flown (especially by pirates) as a
signal of no mercy, from 1590s. Black dog melancholy attested from 1826. Black belt is from 1875 in
reference to districts of the U.S. South with heaviest African population; 1870 with reference to
fertility of soil; 1913 in judo sense. Black power is from 1966, associated with Stokely Carmichael.


witch (n.)

Old English wicce female magician, sorceress, in later use especially a woman supposed to have
dealings with the devil or evil spirits and to be able by their cooperation to perform supernatural
acts, fem. of Old English wicca sorcerer, wizard, man who practices witchcraft or magic, from verb
wiccian to practice witchcraft (compare Low German wikken, wicken to use witchcraft, wikker, wicker
soothsayer).    OED says of uncertain origin; Liberman says None of the proposed etymologies of
witch is free from phonetic or semantic difficulties. Klein suggests connection with Old English
wigle divination, and wig, wih idol. Watkins says the nouns represent a Proto-Germanic *wikkjaz
necromancer (one who wakes the dead), from PIE *weg-yo-, from *weg- (2) to be strong, be lively (see
wake (v.)).    That wicce once had a more specific sense than the later general one of female
magician, sorceress perhaps is suggested by the presence of other words in Old English describing
more specific kinds of magical craft. In the Laws of &AElig;lfred (c.890), witchcraft was
specifically singled out as a woman's craft, whose practitioners were not to be suffered to live
among the West Saxons:    &ETH;a f&aelig;mnan &thorn;e gewunia&eth; onfon gealdorcr&aelig;ftigan
&amp; scinl&aelig;can &amp; wiccan, ne l&aelig;t &thorn;u &eth;a libban.    The other two words
combined with it here are gealdricge, a woman who practices incantations, and scinl&aelig;ce female
wizard, woman magician, from a root meaning phantom, evil spirit. Another word that appears in the
Anglo-Saxon laws is lybl&aelig;ca wizard, sorcerer, but with suggestions of skill in the use of
drugs, because the root of the word is lybb drug, poison, charm. Lybbestre was a fem. word meaning
sorceress, and lybcorn was the name of a certain medicinal seed (perhaps wild saffron). Weekley
notes possible connection to Gothic weihs holy and German weihan consecrate, and writes, the priests
of a suppressed religion naturally become magicians to its successors or opponents. In Anglo-Saxon
glossaries, wicca renders Latin augur (c.1100), and wicce stands for pythoness, divinatricem. In the
Three Kings of Cologne (c.1400) wicca translates Magi:    &THORN;e paynyms ... cleped &thorn;e iij
kyngis Magos, &thorn;at is to seye wicchis.    The glossary translates Latin necromantia (demonum
invocatio) with galdre, wiccecr&aelig;ft. The Anglo-Saxon poem called Men's Crafts has
wiccr&aelig;ft, which appears to be the same word, and by its context means skill with horses. In a
c.1250 translation of Exodus, witches is used of the Egyptian midwives who save the newborn sons of
the Hebrews: &ETH;e wicches hidden hem for-&eth;an, Biforen pharaun nolden he ben. Witch in
reference to a man survived in dialect into 20c., but the fem. form was so dominant by 1601 that
men-witches or he-witch began to be used. Extended sense of old, ugly, and crabbed or malignant
woman is from early 15c; that of young woman or girl of bewitching aspect or manners is first
recorded 1740. Witch doctor is from 1718; applied to African magicians from 1836.    At this day it
is indifferent to say in the English tongue, 'she is a witch,' or 'she is a wise woman.' [Reginald
Scot, The Discoverie of Witchcraft, 1584]


