mammalian (adj.)

1813, from mammal + -ian. As a noun, from 1835.


Mammalia (n.)

1773, from Modern Latin (Linnaeus), from neuter plural of Late Latin mammalis, from mamma (see
mammal).


mammal (n.)

1826, anglicized form of Modern Latin Mammalia (1773), coined 1758 by Linnaeus for the class of
mammals, from neuter plural of Late Latin mammalis of the breast, from Latin mamma breast, perhaps
cognate with mamma.


wombat (n.)

marsupial mammal of Australia, 1798, from aboriginal Australian womback, wombar.


mammo-

word-forming element meaning breast, from Latin mamma breast (see mammal).


pushmi-pullyu (n.)

fictional two-headed mammal, from Dr. Dolittle (1922), coined by Hugh Lofting from the expressions
push me, pull you. Popularized by the 1967 film version of the book.


panda (n.)

1835, from French, apparently from the Nepalese name of a raccoon-like mammal (lesser panda) found
there. First reference to the Giant Panda is from 1901; since its discovery in 1869 by French
missionary Armand David (1826-1900) it had been known as parti-colored bear, but the name was
changed after the zoological relationship to the red panda was established.


mole (n.2)

type of small burrowing mammal (Talpa europea), mid-14c., probably from obsolete moldwarp, literally
earth-thrower. Spy sense first recorded 1974 in John le Carr&eacute; (but suggested from early
20c.), from notion of burrowing. Metaphoric use for one who works in darkness is from c.1600.


baluchitherium (n.)

ancient mammal, Modern Latin, from Baluchi (see Baluchistan) + Greek therion beast (see fierce). So
called because its fossils originally were found there.


wolverine (n.)

carnivorous mammal, 1610s, alteration of wolvering (1570s), of uncertain origin, possibly from
wolv-, inflectional stem of wolf (n.); or perhaps from wolver one who behaves like a wolf (1590s).


pangolin (n.)

1774, scaly toothless mammal of Java, from Malay peng-goling roller, from its habit of curling into
a ball; from peng- (denominative prefix) + goling to roll. Later extended to related species in Asia
and Africa.


glyptodon (n.)

extinct gigantic mammal, 1838, irregularly formed from Greek glyptos engraved (verbal adjective of
glyphein; see glyph) + odon (genitive odontos) tooth (see tooth).


suckling (n.)

mid-15c., infant at the breast, from suck + diminutive suffix -ling. Similar formation in Middle
Dutch sogeling, Dutch zuigeling, German S&auml;ugling. Meaning calf or other young mammal is from
1520s. Meaning act of breast-feeding is attested from 1799. Adjectival sense not yet weaned is from
1799.


pelage (n.)

coat of a mammal, from French pelage hair or wool of an animal (16c.), from Old French pel hair,
from Latin pilus hair (see pile (n.3)).


sucker (n.)

young mammal before it is weaned, late 14c., agent noun from suck. Slang meaning person who is
easily deceived is first attested 1836, American English, on notion of naivete; but another theory
traces the slang meaning to the fish called a sucker (1753), on the notion of being easy to catch in
their annual migrations (the fish so called from the shape of its mouth). As a type of candy from
1823; especially lollipop by 1907. Meaning shoot from the base of a tree or plant is from 1570s.
Also the old name of inhabitants of Illinois.


mastodon (n.)

1813, from Modern Latin genus name Mastodon (1806), coined by French naturalist Georges
L&eacute;opole Chr&eacute;tien Fr&eacute;d&eacute;ric Dagobert, Baron Cuvier (1769-1832) from Greek
mastos breast (see masto-) + -odon tooth (see tooth); so called from the nipple-like projections on
the crowns of the extinct mammal's fossil molars. Related: Mastodontic.


dragon (n.)

early 13c., from Old French dragon, from Latin draconem (nominative draco) huge serpent, dragon,
from Greek drakon (genitive drakontos) serpent, giant seafish, apparently from drak-, strong aorist
stem of derkesthai to see clearly, from PIE *derk- to see. Perhaps the literal sense is the one with
the (deadly) glance.    The young are dragonets (14c.). Obsolete drake dragon is an older borrowing
of the same word. Used in the Bible to translate Hebrew tannin a great sea-monster, and tan, a
desert mammal now believed to be the jackal.


antelope (n.)

early 15c., from Old French antelop, from Medieval Latin ant(h)alopus (11c.), from Greek antholops
(attested in Eusebius of Antioch, c.336 C.E.), a fabulous animal haunting the banks of the
Euphrates, very savage, hard to catch and having long saw-like horns capable of cutting down trees.
Original sense and language unknown (it looks like Greek flower-eye, as if from anthos + ops, but
that may be a result of Greek folk etymology). A heraldic animal, also known in Medieval Latin as
talopus and calopus, the name was applied c.1600 to a living type of deer-like mammal. In the
western U.S., it is used in reference to the pronghorn.


sloth (n.)

late 12c., indolence, sluggishness, formed from Middle English slou, slowe (see slow (adj.)) +
abstract formative -th (2). Replaced Old English sl&aelig;w&eth; sloth, indolence. Sense of
slowness, tardiness is from mid-14c. As one of the deadly sins, it translates Latin accidia.    The
slow-moving mammal first so called 1610s, a translation of Portuguese pregui&ccedil;a slowness,
slothfulness, from Latin pigritia laziness (compare Spanish perezosa slothful, also the sloth).


sable (n.1)

fur or pelt of the European sable (Martes zibellina), early 15c., from Middle French sable (also
martre sable sable martin), in reference to the mammal or its fur, borrowed in Old French from
Germanic (Middle Dutch sabel, Middle Low German sabel, Middle High German zobel), ultimately from a
Slavic source (compare Russian, Czech sobol, Polish sob&oacute;l, the name of the animal), which
itself is borrowed from an East-Asiatic language [Klein], but Russian sources (such as Vasmer) find
none of the proposed candidates satisfactory.


echidna (n.)

Australian egg-laying hedgehog-like mammal, 1847, usually explained as from Greek ekhidna snake,
viper, from ekhis snake, from PIE *angwhi- snake, eel (cognates: Norwegian igle, Old High German
egala, German Egel leech, Latin anguis serpent, snake).    But this sense is difficult to reconcile
with this animal (unless it is a reference to the ant-eating tongue), and the name seems more
properly to belong to Latin echinus, Greek ekhinos sea-urchin, originally hedgehog (in Greek also
sharp points), which Watkins explains as snake-eater, from ekhis snake.


seal (n.2)

fish-eating mammal with flippers, Old English seolh seal, from Proto-Germanic *selkhaz (compare Old
Norse selr, Swedish sj&ouml;l, Danish s&#230;l, Middle Low German sel, Middle Dutch seel, Old High
German selah), of unknown origin, perhaps a borrowing from Finnic. Seal point dark brown marking on
a Siamese cat is recorded from 1934, from the dark brown color of seal fur; compare seal brown rich,
dark brown color, by 1875. Old English seolhb&#230;&#240;, literally seal's bath, was an Anglo-Saxon
kenning for the sea.


shrew (n.)

small insectivorous mammal, Old English screawa shrew-mouse, unknown outside English, and the
absence of evidence for the word between the OE. period and the 16th c is remarkable [OED]. Perhaps
from Proto-Germanic *skraw-, from PIE *skreu- to cut; cutting tool (see shred (n.)), in reference to
the shrew's pointed snout. Alternative Old English word for it was scirfemus, from sceorfan to gnaw.
The meaning peevish, malignant, clamorous, spiteful, vexatious, turbulent woman [Johnson] is late
14c., from earlier sense of spiteful person (male or female), mid-13c., traditionally said to derive
from some supposed malignant influence of the animal, which was once believed to have a venomous
bite and was held in superstitious dread (compare beshrew). Paired with sheep from 1560s as the
contrasting types of wives.


bat (n.2)

flying mammal (order Chiroptera), 1570s, a dialectal alteration of Middle English bakke (early
14c.), which is probably related to Old Swedish natbakka, Old Danish nathbakk&aelig; night bat, and
Old Norse le&eth;rblaka leather flapper, so original sense is likely flapper. The shift from -k- to
-t- may have come through confusion of bakke with Latin blatta moth, nocturnal insect.    Old
English word for the animal was hreremus, from hreran to shake (see rare (adj.2)), and rattle-mouse
is attested from late 16c., an old dialectal word for bat. As a contemptuous term for an old woman,
perhaps a suggestion of witchcraft (compare fly-by-night), or from bat as prostitute who plies her
trade by night [Farmer, who calls it old slang and finds French equivalent night swallow (hirondelle
de nuit) more poetic].


lemur (n.)

nocturnal Madagascar mammal, 1795, coined by Linnaeus, from Latin lemures (plural) spirits of the
dead in Roman mythology.     The oldest usage of lemur for a primate that we are aware of is in
Linnaeus's catalog of the Museum of King Adolf Frederick of Sweden (Tattersall, 1982); .... In this
work, he explained his use of the name lemur thus: Lemures dixi  hos, quod noctu imprimis
obambulant, hominibus quodanmodo similes, &amp; lento passu vagantur [I call them lemurs, because
they go around mainly by night, in a certain way similar to humans, and roam with a slow pace]
[Dunkel, Alexander R., et al., Giant rabbits, marmosets, and British comedies: etymology of lemur
names, part 1, in Lemur News, vol. 16, 2011-2012, p.65]   Lemuria (1864) was the name given by
English zoologist P.L. Sclater (1829-1913) to a hypothetical ancient continent connecting Africa and
Southeastern Asia (and including Madagascar), which was hypothesized to explain phenomena now
accounted for by continental drift. Earlier it was the name of the Roman feast of the Lemures.


sheep (n.)

ruminant mammal, Old English sceap, scep, from West Germanic *sk&aelig;pan (cognates: Old Saxon
scap, Old Frisian skep, Middle Low German schap, Middle Dutch scaep, Dutch schaap, Old High German
scaf, German Schaf), of unknown origin. Not found in Scandinavian (Danish has faar for sheep) or
Gothic (which uses lamb), and with no known cognates outside Germanic. The more usual Indo-European
word for the animal is represented in English by ewe.    The plural form was leveled with the
singular in Old English, but Old Northumbrian had a plural scipo. Used since Old English as a type
of timidity and figuratively of those under the guidance of God. The meaning stupid, timid person is
attested from 1540s. The image of the wolf in sheep's clothing was in Old English (from Matt.
vii:15); that of separating the sheep from the goats is from Matt. xxv:33. To count sheep in a bid
to induce sleep is recorded from 1854 but seems not to have been commonly written about until 1870s.
It might simply be a type of a tedious activity, but an account of shepherd life from Australia from
1849 [Sidney's Emigrant's Journal] describes the night-shepherd (hut-keeper) taking a count of the
sheep regularly at the end of his shift to protect against being answerable for any animals later
lost or killed.    Sheep's eyes loving looks is attested from 1520s (compare West Frisian
skiepseach, Dutch schaapsoog, German Schafsauge). A sheep-biter was a dog that worries sheep
(1540s); a mutton-monger (1590s); and a whore-monger (1610s, i.e. one who chases mutton); hence
Shakespeare's sheep-biting thieving, sneaky.


