mandate (v.)

1620s, to command, from mandate (n.). Meaning to delegate authority, permit to act on behalf of a
group is from 1958; used earlier in the context of the League of Nations, to authorize a power to
control a certain territory for some specified purpose (1919). Related: Mandated; mandating.


mandate (n.)

judicial or legal order, c.1500, from Middle French mandat (15c.) and directly from Latin mandatum
commission, command, order, noun use of neuter past participle of mandare to order, commit to one's
charge, literally to give into one's hand, probably from manus hand (see manual) + dare to give (see
date (n.1)). Political sense of approval supposedly conferred by voters to the policies or slogans
advocated by winners of an election is from 1796. League of Nations sense is from 1919.


mandatary (n.)

person to whom a mandate has been given, 1610s, from Latin mandatarius one to whom a charge or
commission has been given, from mandatus, past participle of mandare (see mandate (n.)).


mandatory (adj.)

1570s, of the nature of a mandate, from Late Latin mandatorius pertaining to a mandator, from Latin
mandatus, past participle of mandare (see mandate (n.)). Sense of obligatory because commanded is
from 1818.


Palestine

from Latin Palestina (name of a Roman province), from Greek Palaistine (Herodotus), from Hebrew
Pelesheth Philistia, land of the Philistines. Revived as an official political territorial name 1920
with the British mandate.    Under Turkish rule, Palestine was part of three administrative regions:
the Vilayet of Beirut, the Independent Sanjak of Jerusalem, and the Vilayet of Damascus. In 1917 the
country was conquered by British forces who held it under occupation until the mandate was
established April 25, 1920, by the Supreme Council of the Allied Powers at San Remo. During the
occupation Palestine formed Occupied Enemy Territory Administration (South), with headquarters at
Jerusalem.


mandamus (n.)

1530s, writ from a superior court to an inferior one, specifying that something be done, (late 14c.
in Anglo-French), from Latin, literally we order, first person plural present indicative of mandare
to order (see mandate (n.)).


countermand (v.)

early 15c., from Old French contremander reverse an order or command (13c.), from contre- against
(see contra-) + mander, from Latin mandare to order (see mandate (n.)). Related: Countermanded;
countermanding.


commend (v.)

mid-14c., comenden, from Latin commendare to commit to the care or keeping (of someone), to entrust
to; to commit to writing; hence to set off, render agreeable, praise, from com-, intensive prefix
(see com-), + mandare to commit to one's charge (see mandate (n.)). In some senses, a shortening of
recommend. Related: Commended; commending.


command (v.)

c.1300, from Old French comander to order, enjoin, entrust (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *commandare,
from Latin commendare to recommend, entrust to (see commend), altered by influence of Latin mandare
to commit, entrust (see mandate (n.)). Replaced Old English bebeodan. Related: Commanded;
commanding.


remand (v.)

mid-15c., from Middle French remander send for again (12c.) or directly from Late Latin remandare to
send back word, repeat a command, from Latin re- back (see re-) + mandare to consign, order, commit
to one's charge (see mandate (n.)). Specifically in law, send back (a prisoner) on refusing an
application for discharge. Related: Remanded; remanding.


Maundy Thursday

Thursday before Easter, mid-15c., from Middle English maunde the Last Supper, also ceremony of
washing the feet, from Old French mand&eacute;, from Latin mandatum commandment (see mandate); said
to be so called in reference to the opening words of the church service for this day, Mandatum novum
do vobis A new commandment I give unto you (John xiii:34), words supposedly spoken by Jesus to the
Apostles after washing their feet at the Last Supper.


demand (v.)

late 14c., ask, make inquiry, from Old French demander (12c.) to request; to demand, from Latin
demandare entrust, charge with a commission (in Vulgar Latin, to ask, request, demand), from de-
completely (see de-) + mandare to order (see mandate). Meaning to ask for as a right is early 15c.,
from Anglo-French legal use. Related: Demanded; demanding.


