manger (n.)

early 14c., from Old French mangeoire crib, manger, from mangier to eat (see mange) + -oire, common
suffix for implements and receptacles.


mange (n.)

skin disease of animals, early 15c., from Old French manjue the itch, also hunger, appetite;
itching, longing, literally the eating, verbal noun from a collateral form of Old French mangier to
eat (Modern French manger) to eat, from Late Latin manducare to chew, eat, from manducus glutton,
from Latin mandere to chew (see mandible).


psoriasis (n.)

1680s, from medical Latin psoriasis, in Late Latin mange, scurvy, from Greek psoriasis being itchy,
from psorian to have the itch, from psora itch, mange, scab, related to psen to rub (see psilo-).
Related: Psoriatic.


mangy (adj.)

by 1745, from mange + -y (2).


mangle (n.)

clothes-pressing machine, 1774, from Dutch mangel, apparently short for mangelstok, from stem of
mangelen to mangle, from Middle Dutch mange, ultimately from root of mangonel.


yuck (1)

exclamation of disgust, 1966, origin perhaps echoic (compare Newfoundland slang yuck to vomit, 1963;
U.S. slang yuck despised person, 1943; provincial English yuck the itch, mange, scabies). Variant
yech is by 1969.


scabies (n.)

skin disease, the itch, c.1400, from Latin scabies mange, itch, roughness, from scabere to scratch,
scrape, from PIE root *(s)kep-, a base forming words meaning to cut, scrape, hack (cognates: Gothic
scaban, Old English sceafan to scrape, shave; Greek skaptein to dig; Old Church Slavonic skobli
scraper; Lithuanian skabus sharp, skabeti to cut; Lettish skabrs splintery, sharp). Related:
Scabious.


scab (n.)

mid-13c., skin disease, developed from Old English sceabb scab, itch (related to scafan to shave,
scrape, scratch) and from Old Norse skabb scab, itch, both from Proto-Germanic *skab- scratch,
shave, from PIE *(s)kep- to cut, scrape, hack (see scabies). Sense reinforced by cognate Latin
scabies scab, itch, mange (from scabere to scratch).    Meaning crust which forms over a wound or
sore is first attested c.1400. Meaning strikebreaker first recorded 1806, from earlier sense of
person who refuses to join a trade union (1777), probably from meaning despicable person (1580s),
possibly borrowed in this sense from Middle Dutch.


