manifestation (n.)

early 15c., action of manifesting; exhibition, demonstration, from Late Latin manifestationem
(nominative manifestatio), noun of action from past participle stem of Latin manifestare (see
manifest (adj.)). Meaning an object, action, or presence by which something is made manifest is from
1785. The spiritualism sense is attested from 1853.


epiphany (n.)

early 14c., festival of the manifestation of Christ to the gentiles (celebrated Jan. 6; usually with
a capital -E-), from Old French epiphanie, from Late Latin epiphania, neuter plural (taken as
feminine singular), from late Greek epiphaneia manifestation, striking appearance (in New Testament,
advent or manifestation of Christ), from epiphanes manifest, conspicuous, from epiphainein to
manifest, display, from epi on, to (see epi-) + phainein to show (see phantasm).    Of divine beings
other than Christ, first recorded 1660s; general literary sense of any manifestation or revelation
appeared 1840, first in De Quincey.


tiffany (n.)

type of thin, transparent fabric, c.1600; earlier a common name for the festival of the Epiphany
(early 14c.; in Anglo-French from late 13c.), from Old French Tifinie, Tiphanie Epiphany (c.1200),
from Late Latin Theophania Theophany, another name for the Epiphany, from Greek theophania the
manifestation of a god (see theophany).    Also popular in Old French and Middle English as a name
given to girls born on Epiphany Day. The fabric sense is found only in English and is of obscure
origin and uncertain relation to the other meanings, unless holiday silk or as a fanciful or playful
allusion to manifestation:    The invention of that fine silke, Tiffanie, Sarcenet, and Cypres,
which instead of apparell to cover and hide, shew women naked through them. [Holland's Pliny, 1601]
The fashionable N.Y. jewelry firm Tiffany &amp; Co. (1895) is named for its founder, goldsmith
Charles L. Tiffany (1812-1902) and his son, Louis C. Tiffany (1848-1933), who was the art nouveau
decorator noted for his glassware. The surname is attested in English from 1206.


gratulation (n.)

late 15c., gratulacyon expression of thanks, from Latin gratulationem (nominative gratulatio) a
manifestation of joy, wishing joy, rejoicing, from past participle stem of gratulari give thanks,
show joy, from gratus agreeable (see grace (n.)).


besot (v.)

 affect with a foolish manifestation, 1570s, from be- + sot. Related: Besotted; besotting.


manifest (n.)

ship's cargo, 1706; see manifest (adj.). Earlier, a public declaration (c.1600; compare manifesto),
from French manifeste, verbal noun from manifester. Earlier still in English as a manifestation
(1560s).


opening (n.)

Old English openung act of opening (a door, mouth, etc.), disclosure, manifestation, verbal noun
from present participle of open (v.). Meaning vacant space, hole, aperture, doorway is attested from
c.1200. Meaning act of opening (a place, to the public) is from late 14c. Sense of action of
beginning (something) is from 1712; meaning first performance of a play is 1855; start of an art
exhibit is from 1905. Sense of opportunity, chance is from 1793.


muster (n.)

late 14c., action of showing, manifestation, from Old French mostre illustration, proof;
examination, inspection (13c., Modern French montre), literally that which is shown, from mostrer
(see muster (v.)). Meaning act of gathering troops is from c.1400. To pass musters (1570s)
originally meant to undergo military review without censure.


cunnilingus (n.)

1887, from Latin cunnus vulva (see cunt) + lingere to lick (see lick (v.)). The Latin properly would
mean one who licks a vulva, but it is used in English in reference to the action, not the actor. The
verb ought to be *cunnilingue.Cunnilingus was a very familiar manifestation in classical times; ...
it tends to be especially prevalent at all periods of high civilization. [Havelock Ellis, 1905]


blithe (adj.)

Old English bli&thorn;e joyous, kind, cheerful, pleasant, from Proto-Germanic *blithiz gentle, kind
(cognates: Old Saxon bli&eth;i bright, happy, Middle Dutch blide, Dutch blijde, Old Norse bli&eth;r
mild, gentle, Old High German blidi gay, friendly, Gothic blei&thorn;s kind, friendly, merciful).
Rare since 16c. No cognates outside Germanic. The earlier application was to the outward expression
of kindly feeling, sympathy, affection to others, as in Gothic and ON.; but in OE. the word had come
more usually to be applied to the external manifestation of one's own pleased or happy frame of
mind, and hence even to the state itself. [OED]


illustration (n.)

c.1400, a shining; early 15c., a manifestation; mid-15c., a spiritual illumination, from Old French
illustration apparition, appearance, and directly from Latin illustrationem (nominative illustratio)
vivid representation (in writing), literally an enlightening, from past participle stem of
illustrare light up, make light, illuminate; figuratively make clear, disclose, explain; adorn,
render distinguished, from assimilated form of in- in (see in- (2)) + lustrare make bright,
illuminate, related to lucere shine, lux light (see light (n.)). Mental sense of act of making clear
in the mind is from 1580s. Meaning an illustrative picture is from 1816.


kindergarten (n.)

1852, from German, literally children's garden, from Kinder children (plural of Kind child; see kin
(n.)) + Garten garden (see yard (n.1)). Coined 1840 by German educator Friedrich Fr&ouml;bel
(1782-1852) in reference to his method of developing intelligence in young children.   Kindergarten
means a garden of children, and Froebel, the inventor of it, or rather, as he would prefer to
express it, the discoverer of the method of Nature, meant to symbolize by the name the spirit and
plan of treatment. How does the gardener treat his plants? He studies their individual natures, and
puts them into such circumstances of soil and atmosphere as enable them to grow, flower, and bring
forth fruit,-- also to renew their manifestation year after year. [Mann, Horace, and Elizabeth P.
Peabody, Moral Culture of Infancy and Kindergarten Guide, Boston, 1863]    The first one in England
was established 1850 by Johannes Ronge, German Catholic priest; in America, 1868, by Elizabeth
Peabody of Boston, Mass. Taken into English untranslated, whereas other nations that borrowed the
institution nativized the name (Danish b&ouml;rnehave, Modern Hebrew gan yeladim, literally garden
of children). Sometimes partially anglicized as kindergarden (attested by 1879).


