manifold (n.)

in mechanical sense, first as pipe or chamber with several outlets, 1884, see manifold (adj.);
originally as manifold pipe (1857), with reference to a type of musical instrument mentioned in the
Old Testament.


manifold (adv.)

Old English manigfealdlic in various ways, manifoldly, from the source of manifold (adj.).


manifold (adj.)

Old English monigfald (Anglian), manigfeald (West Saxon), various, varied in appearance,
complicated; numerous, abundant, from manig (see many) + -feald (see -fold). A common Germanic
compound (Old Frisian manichfald, Middle Dutch menichvout, German mannigfalt, Swedish m&#229;ngfalt,
Gothic managfal&thorn;s), perhaps a loan-translation of Latin multiplex (see multiply). Retains the
original pronunciation of many. Old English also had a verbal form, manigfealdian to multiply,
abound, increase, extend.


multiplicable (adj.)

late 15c., from Latin multiplicabilis manifold, from multiplicare (see multiply). Alternative
multipliable is recorded from 1620s.


polymorphous (adj.)

1785, from Greek polymorphos multiform, of many forms, manifold, from poly- many (see poly-) +
morphe shape, form (see Morpheus). Related: Polymorphic; polymorphously; polymorphousness.


multifarious (adj.)

1590s, from Latin multifarius manifold, from multifariam (adv.) on many sides; in many places or
parts, perhaps originally that which can be expressed in many ways, from multi- many (see multi-) +
-fariam, adverbial suffix (compare bifariam in two places), from PIE *dwi-dhe- making two. Related:
Multifariously; multifariousness. Earlier forms of the word in English were multiphary (adv.);
multipharie (adj.), both mid-15c.


multiform (adj.)

also multi-form, c.1600, from French multiforme or Latin multiformis many-shaped, manifold, from
multus much, many (see multi-) + forma shape  (see form (n.)).


multiple (adj.)

1640s, involving many parts, from French multiple (14c.), from Late Latin multiplus manifold, from
Latin multi- many, much (see multi-) + -plus -fold (see -plus). The noun is from 1680s, in
mathematics, from the adjective. Multiple choice as a type of question attested from 1828. Multiple
exposure first recorded 1923.


-fold

multiplicative word-forming element, from Old English -feald, related to Old Norse -faldr; German
-falt; Gothic fal&thorn;s; from combining form of PIE *pel- (3) to fold (cognates: Greek -paltos,
-plos; Latin -plus; see fold (v.). Crowded out in English by Latinate double, triple, etc., but
still in manifold, hundredfold, etc.


many (adj.)

Old English monig, manig many, many a, much, from Proto-Germanic *managaz (cognates: Old Saxon
manag, Swedish m&aring;ngen, Old Frisian manich, Dutch menig, Old High German manag, German manch,
Gothic manags), from PIE *menegh- copious (cognates: Old Church Slavonic munogu much, many, Old
Irish menicc, Welsh mynych frequent, Old Irish magham gift). Pronunciation altered by influence of
any (see manifold).


blue (1)

c.1300, bleu, blwe, etc., from Old French blo pale, pallid, wan, light-colored; blond; discolored;
blue, blue-gray, from Frankish *blao or some other Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic
*bl&aelig;waz (cognates: Old English blaw, Old Saxon and Old High German blao, Danish blaa, Swedish
bl&#229;, Old Frisian blau, Middle Dutch bla, Dutch blauw, German blau blue), from PIE *bhle-was
light-colored, blue, blond, yellow, from PIE root bhel- (1) to shine, flash (see bleach (v.)).
The same PIE root yielded Latin flavus yellow, Old Spanish blavo yellowish-gray, Greek phalos white,
Welsh blawr gray, Old Norse bla livid (the meaning in black and blue), showing the usual slippery
definition of color words in Indo-European The present spelling is since 16c., from French influence
(Modern French bleu).    The exact color to which the Gmc. term applies varies in the older
dialects; M.H.G. bla is also 'yellow,' whereas the Scandinavian words may refer esp. to a deep,
swarthy black, e.g. O.N. blama&eth;r, N.Icel. blama&eth;ur 'Negro' [Buck]   <hr />   Few words enter
more largely into the composition of slang, and colloquialisms bordering on slang, than does the
word BLUE. Expressive alike of the utmost contempt, as of all that men hold dearest and love best,
its manifold combinations, in ever varying shades of meaning, greet the philologist at every turn.
[John S. Farmer, Slang and Its Analogues Past and Present, 1890, p.252]    The color of constancy
since Chaucer at least, but apparently for no deeper reason than the rhyme in true blue (c.1500).
From early times blue was the distinctive color of the dress of servants, which may be the reason
police uniforms are blue, a tradition Farmer dates to Elizabethan times. For blue ribbon see cordon
bleu under cordon. Blue whale attested from 1851, so called for its color. The flower name blue bell
is recorded by 1570s. Blue streak, of something resembling a bolt of lightning (for quickness,
intensity, etc.) is from 1830, U.S. Western slang.    Many Indo-European languages seem to have had
a word to describe the color of the sea, encompasing blue and green and gray; such as Irish glass
(see Chloe); Old English h&aelig;wen blue, gray, related to har (see hoar); Serbo-Croatian sinji
gray-blue, sea-green; Lithuanian &#353;yvas, Russian sivyj gray.


