mantle (v.)

to wrap in a mantle, early 13c.; figurative use from mid-15c., from mantle (n.) or from Old French
manteler. Related: Mantled; mantling.


mantle (n.)

Old English mentel loose, sleeveless cloak, from Latin mantellum cloak (source of Italian mantello,
Old High German mantal, German Mantel, Old Norse m&#246;tull), perhaps from a Celtic source.
Reinforced and altered 12c. by cognate Old French mantel cloak, mantle; bedspread, cover (Modern
French manteau), also from the Latin source. Figurative sense that which enshrouds is from c.1300.
Allusive use for symbol of literary authority or artistic pre-eminence is from Elijah's mantle [2
Kings ii:13]. As a layer of the earth between the crust and core (though not originally
distinguished from the core) it is attested from 1940.


mantua (n.)

loose gown worn by women 17c.-18c., 1670s, from French manteau cloak, mantle, from Old French mantel
(see mantle); form influenced in English by Mantua, name of a city in Italy. Mantua-maker (1690s)
became the general early 19c. term for dressmaker.


manteau (n.)

cloak, mantle, 1670s, from French manteau, from Old French mantel (see mantle).


portmanteau (n.)

1580s, traveling case or bag for clothes and other necessaries, from Middle French portemanteau
traveling bag, originally court official who carried a prince's mantle (1540s), from porte,
imperative of porter to carry (see porter (n.1)) + manteau cloak (see mantle (n.)).   Portmanteau
word word blending the sound of two different words (1882), coined by Lewis Carroll (Charles L.
Dodgson, 1832-1898) for the sort of words he invented for Jabberwocky, on notion of two meanings
packed up into one word. As a noun in this sense from 1872.


duds (n.)

c.1300, dudde cloak, mantle, later in plural, ragged clothing (1560s), of uncertain origin.


chador (n.)

cloth worn as a shawl by Muslim women, from Persian chadar tent, mantle, scarf, veil, sheet, table-
cloth.


asthenosphere (n.)

layer of the Earth's upper mantle, 1914, from Greek asthenos (see asthenia) + sphere.


chlamydia (n.)

type of genital infection, 1984, from the name of the bacteria that causes it (1945), which is
formed from Latinized comb. form of Greek khlamys (genitive khlamydos) short mantle, military cloak,
of unknown origin, + -ia.


mantel (n.)

c.1200, short, loose, sleeveless cloak, variant of mantle (q.v.). Sense of movable shelter for
soldiers besieging a fort is from 1520s. Meaning timber or stone supporting masonry above a
fireplace first recorded 1510s, a shortened form of Middle English mantiltre mantletree (late 15c.).


matchcoat (n.)

fur-skinned mantle worn by Native Americans, 1640s, originally matchco, probably a native word
(compare Ojibwa majigoode petticoat, woman's dress), altered by influence of coat (n.).


plaid (n.)

1510s, from Scottish, from or related to Gaelic plaide blanket, mantle, of unknown origin, perhaps a
contraction of peallaid sheepskin, from peall skin, from Latin pellis (but OED finds this
phonetically improbable). The wearing of it by males forbidden by act of parliament, under penalty
of transportation, 1746-82. As an adjective c.1600, from the noun.


camisole (n.)

1816, from French camisole (16c.), from Proven&ccedil;al camisola mantle, diminutive of camisa
shirt, from Late Latin camisia shirt, nightgown (see chemise).


Templar (n.)

late 13c., from Anglo-French templer, Old French templier (c.1200), from Medieval Latin templaris
(mid-12c.), member of the medieval religious/military order known as Knights Templars (c.1118-1312),
so called because they had headquarters in a building near Solomon's Temple in Jerusalem (see temple
(n.1)). Their distinguishing garb was a white mantle with a red cross.


dismantle (v.)

1570s, from Middle French desmanteler to tear down the walls of a fortress, literally strip of a
cloak, from des- off, away (see dis-) + manteler to cloak (see mantle). Related: Dismantled;
dismantling.


manta (n.)

very large ray (also called devilfish), 1760, from Spanish manta blanket (which is attested in
English from 1748 in this sense, specifically in reference to a type of wrap or cloak worn by
Spaniards), from Late Latin mantum cloak, back-formation from Latin mantellum cloak (see mantle
(n.)). The ray so called for being broad and long like a quilt [Jorge Juan and Antonio de Ulloa, A
Voyage to South America].


drape (v.)

c.1400, to ornament with cloth hangings; mid-15c., to weave into cloth, from Old French draper to
weave, make cloth (13c.), from drap cloth, piece of cloth, sheet, bandage, from Late Latin drapus,
perhaps of Gaulish origin (compare Old Irish drapih mantle, garment). Meaning to cover with drapery
is from 1847. Meaning to cause to hang or stretch out loosely or carelessly is from 1943. Related:
Draped; draping.


Munchkin (n.)

1900, coined by U.S. author L. Frank Baum (1856-1919) in The Wonderful Wizard of Oz. He never
explained how he got the word. The word most like it is perhaps mutchkin, an old Scottish measure of
capacity for liquids, which was used by Scott. (It comes from Middle Dutch mutseken, originally a
little cap, from mutse cap, earlier almutse amice, hood, headdress, from Latin amictus mantle,
cloak, noun use of past participle of amicire to wrap, throw around, a compound from ambi- (see
ambi-) + iacere (see jet (v.).)


hackle (n.)

Old English hacele cloak, mantle (cognate with Old High German hachul, Gothic hakuls cloak; Old
Norse hekla hooded frock), of uncertain origin. Sense of bird plumage is first recorded early 15c.,
though this might be from unrelated Middle English hackle flax comb (see heckle (n.)) on supposed
resemblance of comb to ruffled feathers. Metaphoric extension found in raise one's hackles (as a
cock does when angry) is first recorded 1881.


escape (v.)

c.1300, from Old North French escaper, Old French eschaper (12c., Modern French &eacute;chapper),
from Vulgar Latin *excappare, literally get out of one's cape, leave a pursuer with just one's cape,
from Latin ex- out of (see ex-) + Late Latin cappa mantle (see cap (n.)). Related: Escaped;
escaping.


tassel (n.)

c.1300, mantle fastener, from Old French tassel tassel, fringe, hem; a fastening, clasp (12c.,
Modern French tasseau), from Vulgar Latin *tassellus, said to be from Latin taxillus small die or
cube, a diminutive of talus knucklebone (used as a die in gaming), ankle (see talus (n.1)). But OED
finds this doubtful and calls attention to the variant form tossel and suggests association with
toss (v.). Meaning hanging bunch of small cords is first recorded late 14c.


coat (n.)

early 14c., outer garment, from Old French cote coat, robe, tunic, overgarment, from Frankish *kotta
coarse cloth or some other Germanic source (compare Old Saxon kot woolen mantle, Old High German
chozza cloak of coarse wool, German Kotze a coarse coat), of unknown origin. Transferred to animal's
natural covering late 14c. Extended 1660s to a layer of any substance covering any surface. Spanish,
Portuguese cota, Italian cotta are Germanic loan-words.


frock (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French froc a monk's habit (12c.), of unknown origin; perhaps from Frankish *hrok
or some other Germanic source (compare Old High German hroc mantle, coat; Old Norse rokkr, Old
English rocc, Old Frisian rokk, German Rock coat), from PIE root *rug- to spin.    Another theory
traces it to Medieval Latin floccus, from Latin floccus flock of wool. Meaning outer garment for
women or children is from 1530s. Frock-coat attested by 1823.


housing (n.2)

ornamental covering, c.1300, houce covering for the back and flanks of a horse, from Old French
houce mantle, horse-blanket (Modern French housse), from Medieval Latin hultia protective covering,
from a Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic *hulfti (cognates: Middle Dutch hulfte pocket for bow
and arrow, Middle High German hulft covering), from PIE root *kel- (2) to cover, conceal (see cell).
Sense of case or enclosure for machine or part is first recorded 1882.


caparison        (n.)

1570s, cloth spread over a saddle, also personal dress and ornaments, from Middle French caparasson
(15c., Modern French capara&ccedil;on), from Spanish caparaz&#243;n, perhaps from augmentative of
Old Proven&ccedil;al caparasso a mantle with a hood, or Medieval Latin caparo, the name of a type of
cape worn by women, literally chaperon (see chaperon). Past participle adjective caparisoned is
attested from c.1600, from a verb caparison (1590s), from French capara&ccedil;onner, from
capara&ccedil;on.


toga (n.)

c.1600, from Latin toga cloak or mantle, from PIE *tog-a- covering, from root *(s)teg- to cover (see
stegosaurus). The outer garment of a Roman citizen in time of peace.    The toga as the Roman
national dress was allowed to be worn by free citizens only. A stranger not in full possession of
the rights of a Roman citizen could not venture to appear in it. Even banished Romans were in
imperial times precluded from wearing it. The appearance in public in a foreign dress was considered
as contempt of the majesty of the Roman people. Even boys appeared in the toga, called, owing to the
purple edge attached to it (a custom adopted from the Etruscans) toga praetexta. On completing his
sixteenth, afterward his fifteenth, year (tirocinium fori), the boy exchanged the toga praetexta for
the toga virilis, pura, or libera--a white cloak without the purple edge. Roman ladies (for these
also wore the toga) abandoned the purple edge on being married. [Guhl &amp; Koner, The Life of the
Greeks and Romans, transl. Francis Hueffer, 1876]    Breeches, like the word for them (Latin bracae)
were alien to the Romans, being the dress of Persians, Germans, and Gauls, so that bracatus wearing
breeches was a term in Roman geography meaning north of the Alps. College fraternity toga party was
re-popularized by movie Animal House (1978), but this is set in 1962 and the custom seems to date
from at least the mid-1950s.    Down on Prospect Street, Campus Club held a toga party, at which
everyone wore togas. Charter held a come-as-you-are party, at which everyone wore what they happened
to have on, and Cloister held a party called A Night in Tahiti, at which we'd hate to guess what
everyone wore. The borough police reported that only one false alarm was turned in. [Princeton
Alumni Weekly, March 19, 1954]


