mar (v.)

Old English merran (Anglian), mierran (West Saxon) to waste, spoil, from Proto-Germanic *marzjan
(cognates: Old Frisian meria, Old High German marren to hinder, obstruct, Gothic marzjan to hinder,
offend), from PIE root *mers- to trouble, confuse (cognates: Sanskrit mrsyate forgets, neglects,
Lithuanian mirszati to forget). Related: Marred; marring.


maraca (n.)

gourd rattle used as a percussion instrument, 1813, from Portuguese, from Brazilian native name.


maracas

see maraca.


Maranatha

late 14c., a Bible word, from Greek maranatha, untranslated Semitic word in I Cor. xvi:22, where it
follows Greek anathema, and therefore has been taken as part of a phrase and used as a curse.
Usually assumed to be from Aramaic maran atha Our Lord has come, which would make the common usage
erroneous (see OED entry), but possibly it is a false transliteration of Hebrew mohoram atta you are
put under the ban, which would make more sense in the context. [Klein]


maraschino (n.)

1791, cherry liqueur, from Italian maraschino strong, sweet liqueur made from juice of the marasca
(a bitter black cherry), a shortening of amarasca, from amaro bitter, from Latin amarus sour, from
PIE root *om- raw, bitter. Maraschino cherry, one preserved in real or imitation maraschino, first
recorded 1820.


marasmus (n.)

wasting away of the body, 1650s, Modern Latin, from Greek marasmos a wasting away, withering, decay,
from marainein to quench, weaken, wither, from PIE root *mer- to rub away, harm (see morbid). Maras
(n.) evidently in the same sense is attested from mid-15c. Related: Marasmic.


Maratha

state in southwestern India, also in reference to the Scytho-Dravidian race living there, 1763
(Mharatta), from Marathi Maratha, corresponding to Sanskrit Maharastrah, literally great country,
from maha- great (from PIE root *meg- great; see magnate) + rastra kingdom, from raj to rule (see
rajah).


marathon (n.)

1896, marathon race, from story of Greek hero Pheidippides, who in 490 B.C.E. ran the 26 miles and
385 yards to Athens from the Plains of Marathon to tell of the allied Greek victory there over
Persian army. The original story (Herodotus) is that he ran from Athens to Sparta to seek aid, which
arrived too late to participate in the battle. Introduced as an athletic event in the 1896 revival
of the Olympic Games, based on a later, less likely story, and quickly extended to mean any very
long event or activity. Related: Marathoner (by 1912).


maraud (v.)

1690s, from French marauder (17c.), from Middle French maraud rascal (15c.), of unknown origin,
perhaps from French dialectal maraud tomcat, echoic of its cry. A word popularized in several
languages during the Thirty Years War (Spanish merodear, German marodiren, marodieren to maraud,
marodebruder straggler, deserter) by punning association with Count M&eacute;rode, imperialist
general. Related: Marauded; marauding.


marauder (n.)

1690s, agent noun from maraud (v.).


marble (n.)

type of stone much used in sculpture, monuments, etc., early 14c., by dissimilation from marbra
(mid-12c.), from Old French marbre (which itself underwent dissimilation of 2nd -r- to -l- in 14c.;
marbre persisted in English into early 15c.), from Latin marmor, from or cognate with Greek marmaros
marble, gleaming stone, of unknown origin, perhaps originally an adjective meaning sparkling, which
would connect it with marmairein to shine. The Latin word was taken directly into Old English as
marma. German Marmor is restored Latin from Old High German marmul. Meaning little balls of marble
used in a children's game is attested from 1690s.


marble (adj.)

late 14c., of marble, from marble (n.). Meaning mottled like marble is mid-15c. Marble cake is
attested from 1864.


marble (v.)

1590s (implied in marbled), to give (something) the appearance of marble, from marble (n.). Related:
Marbling.


marbles (n.)

children's game, from plural of marble (n.); first recorded by that name in 1709 but probably older
(it was known in 13c. German as tribekugeln) and originally played with small balls of polished
marble or alabaster, later clay; the modern glass ones with the colored swirl date from 1840s.
Meaning mental faculties, common sense is from 1927, American English slang, perhaps [OED] from
earlier slang marbles furniture, personal effects, 'the goods'  (1864, Hotten), a corrupt
translation of French meubles (plural) furniture (see furniture).


marcasite (n.)

crystalized pyrite, early 15c., from Medieval Latin marchasita, of obscure origin, perhaps via
Spanish, probably from Arabic, though OED doubts this. Perhaps ultimately from Persian marquashisha
[Klein]. This name has been used for a number of substances but mainly for iron pyrites and
especially for the crystalline forms used in the 18th century for ornaments. [Flood]


Marcella

fem. proper name, Latin, fem. of Marcellus.


Marcellus

masc. proper name, Latin, diminutive of Marcus.


marcescent (adj.)

withering, 1727, from Latin marcescentem (nominative marcescens), present participle of marcescere
to wither, languish, droop, decay, pine away, inchoative of marcere to wither, droop, be faint, from
PIE root *merk- to decay.


march (v.)

to walk with regular tread, early 15c., from Middle French marcher to march, walk, from Old French
marchier to stride, march, originally to trample, tread underfoot, perhaps from Frankish *markon or
some other Germanic source related to obsolete Middle English march (n.) borderland (see march
(n.2)). Or possibly from Gallo-Roman *marcare, from Latin marcus hammer, via notion of tramping the
feet. Meaning to cause to march is from 1590s. Related: Marched; marching. Marching band is attested
from 1852. Italian marciare, Spanish marchar are said to be from French.


march (n.2)

boundary, late 13c. (in reference to the borderlands beside Wales, rendering Old English Mercia),
from Old French marche boundary, frontier, from Frankish *marka or some other Germanic source
(compare Old High German marchon to mark out, delimit, German Mark boundary; see mark (n.1)). Now
obsolete. There was a verb in Middle English (c.1300), tohave a common boundary, from Old French
marchier border upon, lie alongside.


March

third month, c.1200, from Anglo-French marche, Old French marz, from Latin Martius (mensis) (month)
of Mars, from Mars (genitive Martis). Replaced Old English hre&eth;mona&thorn;, the first part of
which is of uncertain meaning, perhaps from hr&aelig;d quick, nimble, ready, active, alert, prompt.
For March hare, proverbial type of madness, see mad.


march (n.1)

act of marching, 1580s, from march (v.) or else from Middle French marche (n.), from marcher (v.).
The musical sense first attested 1570s, from notion of rhythmic drumbeat for marching. Transferred
sense of forward motion is from 1620s.


marchen (n.)

1871, German fairy or folk tale, from German M&auml;rchen, a story or tale, from Middle High German
merechyn short verse narrative, from Old High German mari news, tale, from Proto-Germanic
*m&aelig;rjo- renowned, famous, illustrious (source of Old English m&aelig;re) + diminutive suffix
-chen.


marchioness (n.)

16c., from Medieval Latin marchionissa, fem. of marchio marquis, from marca  (see marquis (n.)).


Marcia

fem. proper name, from Latin Marcia, fem. of Marcius, a Roman gens, related to Marcus (q.v.).


Marcionite (n.)

1540, early Christian sect, named for Gnostic Marcion of Sinope (c.140), who denied any connection
between the Old Testament and the New. They contrasted the barbaric and incompetent creator in the
Old Testament, who favored bandits and killers, with the higher god of Christ. They also emphasized
virginity and rejection of marriage. They flourished, especially in the East, until late 4c.


Marcomanni

name of a Teutonic tribe, from Latin Marcomanni, from a Germanic compound, literally men of the
border; first element cognate with Old High German mark, Old English mearc border (see march (n.2)).
For second element, see man (n.).


Marcus

masc. proper name, from Latin Marcus, Roman praenomen, traditionally said to be related to Mars,
Roman god of war.


Mardi Gras (n.)

1690s, from French, literally fat Tuesday, from mardi Tuesday (12c., from Latin Martis diem day of
the planet Mars; see Tuesday) + gras fat, from Latin crassus, thick. Day of eating and merrymaking
before the fasting season of Lent.


mare (n.1)

female horse, Old English mere (Mercian), myre (West Saxon), fem. of mearh horse, from Proto-
Germanic *markhjon- (cognates: Old Saxon meriha, Old Norse merr, Old Frisian merrie, Dutch merrie,
Old High German meriha, German M&auml;hre mare), said to be of Gaulish origin (compare Irish and
Gaelic marc, Welsh march, Breton marh horse). No known cognates beyond Germanic and Celtic. As the
name of a throw in wrestling, it is attested from c.1600. Mare's nest illusory discovery, excitement
over something which does not exist is from 1610s.


mare (n.2)

broad, dark areas of the moon, 1765, from Latin mare sea (see marine), applied to lunar features by
Galileo and used thus in 17c. Latin works. They originally were thought to be actual seas.


mare (n.3)

night-goblin, incubus, Old English mare incubus, nightmare, monster, from mera, m&aelig;re, from
Proto-Germanic *maron goblin (cognates: Middle Low German mar, Middle Dutch mare, Old High German
mara, German Mahr incubus, Old Norse mara nightmare, incubus), from PIE *mora- incubus (cognates:
first element in Old Irish Morrigain demoness of the corpses, literally queen of the nightmare, also
Bulgarian, Serbian mora, Czech mura, Polish zmora incubus; French cauchemar, with first element from
Old French caucher to trample), from root *mer- to rub away, harm (see morbid).


Margaret

fem. proper name (c.1300), from Old French Margaret (French Marguerite), from Late Latin Margarita,
female name, literally pearl, from Greek margarites (lithos) pearl, of unknown origin, probably
adopted from some Oriental language [OED]; compare Sanskrit manjari cluster of flowers, also said by
Indian linguists to mean pearl, cognate with manju beautiful. Arabic marjan probably is from Greek,
via Syraic marganitha. The word was widely perverted in Germanic languages by folk-etymology, for
example Old English meregrot, which has been altered to mean literally sea-pebble.


margaric (adj.)

1819, from French margarique (Chevreul), from Greek margaron pearl + -ic. Obsolete in science.


margarin (n.)

1836, from French margarine, a chemical term given to a fatty substance obtained from animal and
vegetable oil, coined by French chemist Michel Eug&egrave;ne Chevreul (1786-1889) in 1813 from
(acide) margarique margaric (acid); literally pearly, from Greek margarites pearl (see Margaret). So
called for the luster of the crystals. Now discarded in this sense as a chemical term, but preserved
in margarine.


margarine (n.)

butter substitute, 1873, from French margarine (see margarin). Invented 1869 by French scientist
Hippolyte M&egrave;ge-Mouries and made in part from edible fats and oils.    The enterprising
merchant of Paris, who sells Margarine as a substitute for Butter, and does not sell his customers
by selling it as Butter, and at Butter's value, has very likely found honesty to be the best policy.
That policy might perhaps be adopted with advantage by an enterprising British Cheesemonger. [Punch,
Feb. 21, 1874]


Margarita (n.)

cocktail made with tequila, 1963, from the fem. proper name, the Spanish form of Margaret. Earlier a
Spanish wine (1920).


margarite (n.)

a pearl, late Old English, from Late Latin margarita (see Margaret). Figuratively, that which is
precious or excellent, a priceless quality or attribute; also used as an epithet for Christ, Mary,
etc., late 13c. Also margerie (mid-14c.).


marge (n.)

edge, border, 1560s, now chiefly poetic, shortening of margin (n.).


Margery

fem. proper name, from Old French Margerie, related to Late Latin margarita pearl (see Margaret).


margin (n.)

mid-14c., edge of a sea or lake; late 14c., space between a block of text and the edge of a page,
from Latin marginem (nominative margo) edge, brink, border, margin, from PIE *merg- edge, border,
boundary (see mark (n.1)). General sense of boundary space; rim or edge of anything is from late
14c. Meaning comfort allowance, cushion is from 1851; margin of safety first recorded 1888. Stock
market sense of sum deposited with a broker to cover risk of loss is from 1848. Related: Margins.


margin (v.)

c.1600, to furnish with marginal notes, from margin (n.). From 1715 as to furnish with a margin.


marginal (adj.)

1570s, written on the margin, from Medieval Latin marginalis, from Latin margo (see  margin). Sense
of of little effect or importance first recorded 1887. Related: Marginally.


marginalia (n.)

1832, from Latin marginalia, neuter plural of adjective marginalis marginal, from marginis (see
margin).


marginalise (v.)

chiefly British English spelling of marginalize (q.v.); for suffix, see -ize. Related:
marginalisation; marginalised; marginalising.


marginality (n.)

1849, from marginal + -ity.


marginalization (n.)

1974, from marginalize + -ation.


marginalize (v.)

1832, to make marginal notes, from marginal + -ize. The meaning force into a position of
powerlessness attested by 1929. Related: Marginalized; marginalizing.


margrave (n.)

military governor of a German border province, 1550s, from Middle Dutch markgrave (Dutch markgraaf),
literally count of the border, from Old High German marcgravo; second element from graf count, earl
(Old High German gravo, gravjo), from West Germanic *grafa a designation of rank, possibly borrowed
from Greek grapheus scribe. For first element see mark (n.1). Later a hereditary title under the
Holy Roman Empire. His wife was a margravine.


marguerite (n.)

oxeye daisy, 1866, from French marguerite (see Margaret). According to French etymologists, this use
of F. marguerite is not from the personal name, but comes directly from the sense 'pearl.'  [OED] In
Middle English, margaret a daisy is attested from early 15c.


