margin (v.)

c.1600, to furnish with marginal notes, from margin (n.). From 1715 as to furnish with a margin.


margin (n.)

mid-14c., edge of a sea or lake; late 14c., space between a block of text and the edge of a page,
from Latin marginem (nominative margo) edge, brink, border, margin, from PIE *merg- edge, border,
boundary (see mark (n.1)). General sense of boundary space; rim or edge of anything is from late
14c. Meaning comfort allowance, cushion is from 1851; margin of safety first recorded 1888. Stock
market sense of sum deposited with a broker to cover risk of loss is from 1848. Related: Margins.


marginal (adj.)

1570s, written on the margin, from Medieval Latin marginalis, from Latin margo (see  margin). Sense
of of little effect or importance first recorded 1887. Related: Marginally.


marginalia (n.)

1832, from Latin marginalia, neuter plural of adjective marginalis marginal, from marginis (see
margin).


marge (n.)

edge, border, 1560s, now chiefly poetic, shortening of margin (n.).


edge (v.)

late 13c., to give an edge to (implied in past participle egged), from edge (n.). Meaning to move
edgeways (with the edge toward the spectator), advance slowly is from 1620s, originally nautical.
Meaning to defeat by a narrow margin is from 1953. The meaning urge on, incite (16c.) often must be
a mistake for egg (v.). Related: Edged; edging.


brim (n.)

c.1200, brymme edge of the sea, of obscure origin, perhaps akin to Old Norse barmr rim, brim,
probably related to German br&auml;me margin, border, fringe, from PIE *bhrem- point, spike, edge.
(Old English had brim in the sense sea, surf, but this probably was from the Germanic stem *brem- to
roar, rage.) Extended by 1520s to cups, basins, hats.


profit (n.)

mid-13c., income; c.1300, benefit, advantage;from Old French prufit, porfit profit, gain (mid-12c.),
from Latin profectus profit, advance, increase, success, progress, noun use of past participle of
proficere (see proficiency). As the opposite of loss, it replaced Old English gewinn. Profit margin
attested from 1853.


curb (n.)

late 15c., strap passing under the jaw of a horse (used to restrain the animal), from Old French
courbe (12c.) curb on a horse, from Latin curvus, from curvare to bend (see curve (v.)). Meaning
enclosed framework is from 1510s, probably originally with a notion of curved; extended to margins
of garden beds 1731; to margin of stone between a sidewalk and road 1791 (sometimes spelled kerb).
Figurative sense of a check, a restraint is from 1610s.


fringe (n.)

early 14c., from Old French frenge thread, strand, fringe, hem (early 14c.), from Vulgar Latin
*frimbia, metathesis of Latin fimbriae (plural) fibers, threads, fringe, of uncertain origin.
Figurative sense of outer edge, margin, is first recorded 1894. Related: Fringes. Fringe benefits is
recorded from 1952.


rand (n.)

rocky ridge overlooking a river valley, 1839, South African English, from Afrikaans, from Dutch rand
edge, margin, cognate with Old English rand brink, bank. As a unit of currency, adopted by the
Republic of South Africa in 1961 (see Krugerrand). Johnson's dictionary has rand Border; seam: as
the rand of a woman's shoe.


gloss (v.)

1570s as insert a word as an explanation, from gloss (n.2). From 1650s as to add luster, from gloss
(n.1). Figurative sense of smooth over, hide is from 1729, mostly from gloss (n.1) but showing
influence of gloss (n.2) in the extended verbal sense of explain away (1630s), from idea of a note
inserted in the margin of a text to explain a difficult word. Related: Glossed; glossing.


frontier (n.)

c.1400, from Old French frontier prow of a ship, front rank of an army (13c.), noun use of adjective
frontier facing, neighboring, from front brow (see front (n.)).    Originally the front line of an
army, sense of borderland is first attested early 15c. In reference to North America, from 1670s;
later with a specific sense:What is the frontier? ... In the census reports it is treated as the
margin of that settlement which has a density of two or more to the square mile. [F.J. Turner, The
Frontier in American History, 1920]Frontiersman is from 1782.


paragraph (n.)

late 15c., from Middle French paragraphe division of text (13c., Old French paragrafe), from
Medieval Latin paragraphus sign for start of a new section of discourse (the sign looked something
like a stylized letter -P-), from Greek paragraphos short stroke in the margin marking a break in
sense, also a passage so marked, literally anything written beside, from paragraphein write by the
side, from para- beside (see para- (1)) + graphein to write (see -graphy).


lip (n.)

Old English lippa, from Proto-Germanic *lepjon (cognates: Old Frisian lippa, Middle Dutch lippe,
Dutch lip, Old High German lefs, German Lefze, Swedish l&auml;pp, Danish l&aelig;be), from PIE *leb-
to lick; lip (source also of Latin labium).    French lippe is from a Germanic source. Transferred
sense of edge or margin of a cup, etc. is from 1590s. Slang sense saucy talk is from 1821, probably
from move the lip (1570s) utter even the slightest word (against someone). To bite (one's) lip show
vexation is from early 14c. Stiff upper lip as a sign of courage is from 1833. Lip gloss is attested
from 1939; lip balm from 1877. Related: Lips.


coast (n.)

margin of the land, early 14c.; earlier rib as a part of the body (early 12c.), from Old French
coste rib, side, flank; slope, incline; later coast, shore (12c., Modern French c&ocirc;te), from
Latin costa a rib, perhaps related to a root word for bone (compare Old Church Slavonic kosti bone,
also see osseous).    Latin costa developed a secondary sense in Medieval Latin of the shore, via
notion of the side of the land, as well as side of a hill, and this passed into Romanic (Italian
costa coast, side, Spanish cuesta slope, costa coast), but only in the Germanic languages that
borrowed it is it fully specialized in this sense (Dutch kust, Swedish kust, German K&uuml;ste,
Danish kyst). French also used this word for hillside, slope, which led to verb meaning sled
downhill, first attested 1775 in American English. Expression the coast is clear (16c.) is an image
of landing on a shore unguarded by enemies.


mark (n.1)

trace, impression, Old English mearc (West Saxon), merc (Mercian) boundary, sign, limit, mark, from
Proto-Germanic *marko (cognates: Old Norse merki boundary, sign, m&ouml;rk forest, which often
marked a frontier; Old Frisian merke, Gothic marka boundary, frontier, Dutch merk mark, brand,
German Mark boundary, boundary land), from PIE *merg- edge, boundary, border (cognates: Latin margo
margin; Avestan mareza- border, Old Irish mruig, Irish bruig borderland, Welsh bro district).    The
primary sense is probably boundary, which had evolved by Old English through sign of a boundary,
through sign in general, then to impression or trace forming a sign. Meaning any visible trace or
impression first recorded c.1200. Sense of line drawn to indicate starting point of a race (as in on
your marks ...) first attested 1887. The Middle English sense of target (c.1200) is the notion in
marksman and slang sense victim of a swindle (1883). The notion of sign, token is behind the meaning
numerical award given by a teacher (1829). Influenced by Scandinavian cognates.


