marine (n.)

14c., seacoast; see marine (adj.). Meaning collective shipping of a country is from 1660s. Meaning
soldier who serves on a ship is from 1670s, a separate borrowing from French marine, from the French
adjective. Phrase tell that to the marines (1806) originally was the first half of a retort
expressing skepticism:    Upon my soul, sir, answered the lieutenant, when I thought she scorned my
passion, I wept like a child.    Belay there! cried the captain; you may tell that to the marines,
but I'll be d----d if the sailors will believe it. [John Moore, The Post-Captain; or, the Wooden
Walls Well Manned, 1805]    The book, a rollicking sea romance/adventure novel, was popular in its
day and the remark is a recurring punch line in it (repeated at least four times). It was written by
naval veteran John Davis (1774-1854) but published under the name John Moore. Walsh records that,
The marines are among the 'jolly' jack-tars a proverbially gullible lot, capable of swallowing any
yarn, in size varying from a yawl-boat to a full-rigged frigate.


marine (adj.)

early 15c., pertaining to the sea, from Middle French marin, from Old French marin of the sea,
maritime, from Latin marinus of the sea, from mare sea, the sea, seawater, from PIE *mori- body of
water, lake (see mere (n.)). The Old English word was s&aelig;lic.


mariner (n.)

mid-13c., from Anglo-French mariner, Old French marinier seaman, sailor (12c.), from Medieval Latin
marinarius sailor, from Latin marinus of the sea (see marine). Earlier and long more common than
sailor. A sailor also could be a brimgeist in Old English.


nautilus (n.)

marine cephalopod, c.1600, from Latin nautilus, in Pliny a kind of marine snail (including also
squid, cuttlefish, polyps, etc.), from Greek nautilos paper nautilus, literally sailor, from nautes
sailor, from naus ship (see naval). The cephalopod formerly was thought to use its webbed arms as
sails.


gunnel (n.)

small marine fish, 1680s, of unknown origin; perhaps from Cornish.


gizmo (n.)

1942, Marine and Navy usage for any old thing you can't put a name to [Life magazine, July 30,
1945], of unknown origin, perhaps a made-up word.


squid (n.)

marine mollusk, cuttlefish, 1610s, of unknown origin; perhaps a sailors' variant of squirt, so
called for the ink it squirts out.


mosasaurus (n.)

marine dinosaur, 1830, from Latin Mosa the river Meuse + -saurus. the fossils of the ancient reptile
were first discovered 1780 near Maastricht, on the Meuse.


jarhead (n.)

U.S. Marine, by 1985 (but in a biographical book with a World War II setting), from jar + head. Also
used as a general term of insult (by 1979) and by 1922 as a Georgia dialectal word for mule.


tautog (n.)

edible marine fish of the Atlantic coast of North America, 1640s, from Narragansett tautauog, plural
of taut. Translated by Roger Williams as sheep's head.


cetacean (n.)

1836, from Cetacea, name of the order of marine mammals, + -an. As an adjective from 1839.


crabgrass (n.)

c.1600, from crab (n.1) + grass. Originally a marine grass of salt marshes; modern meaning is from
1743. Perhaps partly for its crooked form.


abalone (n.)

type of marine shell, 1850, American English, from Spanish abulon from Costanoan (a California
coastal Indian language family) aluan red abalone.


leatherneck (n.)

U.S. Marine, 1914, Navy slang, from leather + neck (n.). So called for the leather collars of their
early uniforms; earlier in British use (1890) as a sailor's term for a soldier.


mare (n.2)

broad, dark areas of the moon, 1765, from Latin mare sea (see marine), applied to lunar features by
Galileo and used thus in 17c. Latin works. They originally were thought to be actual seas.


iridium (n.)

1804, Modern Latin, coined by its discoverer, English chemist Smithson Tennant (1761-1815) from
Greek iris (genitive iridos) rainbow; so called for the striking variety of colours which it gives
while dissolving in marine acid [Tennant]


marina (n.)

1805, a promenade by the sea, from Spanish or Italian marina shore, coast, from Latin marinus (see
marine (adj.)). Meaning dock or basin with moorings for yachts and small craft is 1935, American
English.


limpet (n.)

marine gastropod mollusk, early 14c., from Old English lempedu, from Medieval Latin lampreda limpet
(see lamprey).


gurnard (n.)

small marine fish, early 14c., from Old French gournart (13c.), formed by metathesis of gronir, from
Latin grunire to grunt. The fish so called for the sound it makes when pulled from the water.


ultramarine (n.)

1590s, blue pigment made from lapis lazuli, from Medieval Latin ultramarinus, literally beyond the
sea, from ultra- beyond + marinus of the sea (see marine (adj.)). Said to be so called because the
mineral was imported from Asia.


submarine (adj.)

1640s, from sub- + marine (adj.).


wahoo (n.)

type of large marine fish caught near Key West, 1884, of unknown origin. As the name of North
American trees or shrubs, 1770, from distortions of native names; especially the burning bush, from
Dakota (Siouan) wahu, from wa- arrow + -hu wood. In reference to the winged elm, it is from Muskogee
vhahwv.


marlin (n.)

large marine game-fish, 1917, shortening of marlinspike fish (1907), from marlinspike, name of a
pointed iron tool used by sailors (see marlinspike). The fish was so called from the shape of its
elongated upper jaw.


trilobite (n.)

extinct marine arthropod, 1820, from Modern Latin Trilobites (Walch, 1771), from Greek tri- three
(see three) + lobos lobe (see lobe); so called because its body is divided into three lobes.


Cetacea (n.)

order of marine mammals containing whales, 1830, Modern Latin, from Latin cetus any large sea
creature (whales, seals, dolphins), from Greek ketos a whale, a sea monster, of unknown origin, +
-acea. Hence cetology the study of whales, first attested 1851 in Moby Dick.


classic (n.)

a Greek or Roman writer or work, 1711, from classic (adj.). So, by mid-19c., any work in any context
held to have a similar quality or relationship. In classical Latin noun use of classicus meant a
Marine (miles classicus) from the military division sense of classis.


chlorine (n.)

nonmetallic element, the name coined 1810 by English chemist Sir Humphry Davy (1778-1829) from
Latinized form of Greek khloros pale green (see Chloe) + chemical suffix -ine (2). Named for its
color. Discovered 1774, but known at first as oxymuriatic acid gas, or dephlogisticated marine acid.


marinate (v.)

1640s, from French mariner to pickle in (sea) brine, from Old French marin (adj.) of the sea, from
Latin marinus (see marine (adj.)). Related: Marinated; marinating.


turtle (n.1)

tortoise, c.1600, originally marine tortoise, from French tortue, tortre (13c.) turtle, tortoise
(often associated with diabolical beasts), of unknown origin. The English word perhaps is a sailors'
mauling of the French one, influenced by the similar sounding turtle (n.2). Later extended to land
tortoises; sea-turtle is attested from 1610s.


aquarium (n.)

1830, noun use of neuter of Latin aquarius pertaining to water, as a noun, water-carrier, genitive
of aqua water (see aqua-). The word existed in Latin, but there it meant drinking place for cattle.
Originally especially for growing aquatic plants; An earlier attempt at a name for fish tank was
marine vivarium.


underwrite (v.)

Old English underwritan write at the foot of; subscribe; see under + write (v.). A loan-translation
of Latin subscribere (see subscribe). Used literally at first; modern sense of to accept the risk of
insurance (1620s) is from notion of signing a marine insurance policy. Meaning to support by a
guarantee of money is recorded from 1890.


Lloyd

male proper name, from Welsh Llwyd, literally gray, from PIE *pel- (2) pale (see pallor).  Lloyd's,
meaning the London-based association of marine underwriters, is first recorded as such 1805, from
Lloyd's Coffee House, Tower Street, London, opened in 1688 by Edward Lloyd, who supplied shipping
information to his patrons.


whelk (n.)

marine snail with a spiral shell, Old English weoloc, wioloc, from Proto-Germanic *weluka-
(cognates: Middle Dutch willoc, Dutch wulk), perhaps from PIE root *wel- (3) to turn, revolve (see
volvox; also volute). The unetymological spelling with wh- dates from 15c.


shrimp (n.)

early 14c., slender, edible marine crustacean, probably from Old Norse skreppa thin person, from
Proto-Germanic *skrimp- (see scrimp). Related to Old English scrimman to shrink; the connecting
notion is probably thinness (compare Danish dialectal skrimpe thin cattle). The meaning puny person
in English is attested from late 14c.; an especially puny one might be a shrimplet (1680s).


gung ho

also gung-ho, gungho, 1942, slang motto of Carlson's Raiders (2nd Marine Raider Battalion, under Lt.
Col. Evans Carlson, 1896-1947), U.S. guerrilla unit operating in the Pacific in World War II, from
Chinese kung ho work together, cooperate. Widely adopted in American English c.1959.Borrowing an
idea from China, Carlson frequently has what he calls 'kung-hou' meetings .... Problems are threshed
out and orders explained. [New York Times Magazine, Nov. 8, 1942]


mullet (n.1)

edible type of spiny-finned fish, mid-15c., from Anglo-French molett (late 14c.), Old French mulet,
from Medieval Latin muletus, from Latin mulettus, from mullus red mullet, from Greek myllos a marine
fish, related to melos black, from PIE *mel- of darkish color (see melanin).


rosemary (n.)

late 14c., earlier rosmarine (c.1300), from Latin rosmarinus, literally dew of the sea (compare
French romarin), from ros dew + marinus (see marine (adj.)). Perhaps so called because it grew near
coasts. Form altered in English by influence of rose and Mary.    Latin ros is from PIE *ers- to be
wet (cognates: Lithuanian rasa, Old Church Slavonic rosa dew, Sanskrit rasah sap, juice, fluid,
essence, Hittite arszi flows, and perhaps also Rha, Scythian name of the River Volga (see rhubarb)).


aquamarine (n.)

1590s, agmarine, bluish-green type of beryl, from French or Proven&ccedil;al, from Latin aqua marina
sea water, from aqua water (see aqua-) + marina, fem. of marinus of the sea (see marine (adj.)).
Apparently first used as a description of a bluish-green color by John Ruskin, 1846. Abbreviation
aqua is attested from 1936.


waterlogged (adj.)

1759 (in an account of the Battle of Lagos in Universal Magazine, September), from water (n.1) + log
(n.); the notion apparently is of reduce to a log-like condition.     WATER LOGGED, the state of a
ship when, by receiving a great quantity of water into her hold, by leaking, &amp;c.;, she has
become heavy and inactive upon the sea, so as to yield without resistance to the efforts of every
wave rushing over her decks. As, in this dangerous situation, the center of gravity is no longer
fixed, but fluctuating from place to place, the stability of the ship is utterly lost. She is
therefore almost totally deprived of the use of her sails, which would operate to overset her, or
press the head under water. Hence there is no resource for the crew, except to free her by the
pumps, or to abandon her by the boats as soon as possible. [William Falconer, An Universal
Dictionary of the Marine, London, 1784]    The verb waterlog (1779) appears to be a back-formation.


sponge (n.)

Old English sponge, spunge, from Latin spongia a sponge, also sea animal from which a sponge comes,
from Greek spongia, related to spongos sponge, of unknown origin. The Latin word is the source of
Old Saxon spunsia, Middle Dutch spongie, Old French esponge, Spanish esponja, Italian spugna.    In
English in reference to the marine animal from 1530s. To throw in the sponge quit, submit (1860) is
from prizefighting, in reference to the sponges used to cleanse the faces of combatants between
rounds (compare later throw in the towel). Sponge-cake is attested from 1808.


jettison (v.)

1848, from jettison (n.) act of throwing overboard to lighten a ship. This noun was an 18c. Marine
Insurance writers' restoration of the earlier form and original sense of the 15c. word that had
become jetsam, probably because jetsam had taken on a sense of things cast overboard and an
unambiguous word was needed for act of throwing overboard.    Middle English jetteson (n.) act of
throwing overboard is from Anglo-French getteson, from Old French getaison act of throwing (goods
overboard), especially to lighten a ship in distress, from Late Latin iactionem (nominative
iactatio) act of throwing, noun of action from past participle stem of iectare toss about (see jet
(v.)). Related: Jettisoned.


police (n.)

c.1530, at first essentially the same word as policy (n.1); from Middle French police (late 15c.),
from Latin politia civil administration, from Greek polis city (see polis).    Until mid-19c. used
in England for civil administration; application to administration of public order (1716) is from
French (late 17c.), and originally in English referred to France or other foreign nations. The first
force so-named in England was the Marine Police, set up 1798 to protect merchandise at the Port of
London. Police state state regulated by means of national police first recorded 1865, with reference
to Austria. Police action in the international sense of military intervention short of war,
ostensibly to correct lawlessness is from 1933. Police officer is attested from 1800. Police station
is from 1817.


barratry (n.)

early 15c., sale of ecclesiastical or state offices, from Old French baraterie deceit, guile,
trickery, from barat malpractice, fraud, deceit, trickery, of unknown origin, perhaps from Celtic.
In marine law, wrongful conduct by a ship's crew or officer, resulting in loss to owners, from
1620s. Meaning offense of habitually starting legal suits is from 1640s. Sense somewhat confused
with that of Middle English baratri combat, fighting (c.1400), from Old Norse baratta fight, contest
strife. This was an active word in Middle English, with forms such as baraten to disturb the peace
(mid-15c.); baratour inciter to riot, bully (late 14c., mid-13c. as a surname). Barataria Bay,
Louisiana, U.S., is from Spanish baratear to cheat, deceive, cognate of the French word; the bay so
called in reference to the difficulty of its entry passages.


lobster (n.)

marine shellfish, Old English loppestre lobster, locust, corruption of Latin locusta, lucusta
lobster, locust, by influence of Old English loppe spider, a variant of lobbe. The ending of Old
English loppestre is the fem. agent noun suffix (as in Baxter, Webster; see -ster), which
approximated the Latin sound.  Perhaps a transferred use of the Latin word; trilobite fossils in
Worcestershire limestone quarries were known colloquially as locusts, which seems to be the generic
word for unidentified arthropod, as apple is for foreign fruit. OED says the Latin word originally
meant lobster or some similar crustacean, the application to the locust being suggested by the
resemblance in shape. Locusta in the sense lobster also appears in French (langouste now crawfish,
crayfish, but in Old French lobster and locust; a 13c. psalter has God giving over the crops of
Egypt to the langoustes) and Old Cornish (legast). As slang for a British soldier since 1640s,
originally in reference to the jointed armor of the Roundhead cuirassiers, later (1660) to the red
coat.Sir William Waller having received from London [in June 1643] a fresh regiment of five hundred
horse, under the command of sir Arthur Haslerigge, which were so prodigiously armed that they were
called by the other side the regiment of lobsters, because of their bright iron shells with which
they were covered, being perfect curasseers. [Clarendon, History of the Rebellion, 1647]


shark (n.)

1560s, of uncertain origin; apparently the word and the first specimen were brought to London by
Capt. John Hawkins's second expedition (landed 1565; see Hakluyt).  There is no proper name for it
that I knowe, but that sertayne men of Captayne Haukinses doth call it a 'sharke' [handbill
advertising an exhibition of the specimen, 1569]    The meaning dishonest person who preys on
others, though attested only from 1599 (sharker artful swindler in this sense is from 1594), may be
the original sense, later transferred to the large, voracious marine fish. If so, it is possibly
from German Schorck, a variant of Schurke scoundrel, villain, agent noun of Middle High German
sch&uuml;rgen (German sch&uuml;ren) to poke, stir.    But on another theory, the English word is
from a Mayan word, xoc, which might have meant shark. Northern Europeans seem not to have been
familiar with sharks before voyages to the tropics began. A slightly earlier name for it in English
was tiburon, via Spanish (where it is attested by 1520s), from the Carib name for the fish.    The
English word was applied (or re-applied) to voracious or predatory persons, on the image of the
fish, from 1707 (originally of pick-pockets); loan shark is attested from 1905. Sharkskin (1851) was
used for binding books, etc. As the name of a type of fabric held to resemble it, it is recorded
from 1932.    There is the ordinary Brown Shark, or sea attorney, so called by sailors; a grasping,
rapacious varlet, that in spite of the hard knocks received from it, often snapped viciously at our
steering oar. [Herman Melville, Mardi]


kaput (adj.)

finished, worn out, dead, 1895, from German kaputt destroyed, ruined, lost (1640s), which in this
sense probably is a misunderstanding of the phrase capot machen, a partial translation of French
faire capot, a phrase which meant to win all the tricks (from the other player) in piquet, an
obsolete card game. Literally to make a bonnet; perhaps the notion is throwing a hood over the other
player, but faire capot also meant in French marine jargon to overset in a squall when under sail.
The word was popularized in English during World War I.   Kaput -- a slang word in common use which
corresponds roughly to the English done in, the French fichu. Everything enemy was kaput in the
early days of German victories. [F. Britten Austin, According to Orders, New York, 1919]    French
capot is literally cover, bonnet, also the name of a type of greatcloak worn by sailors and soldiers
(see capote). The card-playing sense attested in German only from 1690s, but capot in the
(presumably) transferred sense of destroyed, ruined, lost is attested from 1640s. [see William
Jervis Jones, A Lexicon of French Borrowings in the German Vocabulary (1575-1648), Berlin, de
Gruyter, 1976]. In Hoyle and other English gaming sources, faire capot is to win all the tricks, and
a different phrase, &ecirc;tre capot, to be a bonnet, is sometimes cited as the term for losing
them. The sense reversal in German might have come about because if someone wins all the tricks the
other player has to lose them, and the same word capot, when it entered English from French in the
mid-17c. meant to score a cabot against; to win all the tricks from.    There are others, says a
third, that have played with my Lady Lurewell at picquet besides my lord; I have capotted her myself
two or three times in an evening. [George Farquhar (1677-1707), Sir Harry Wildair]


