marital (adj.)

c.1600, from French maritale and directly from Latin maritalis of or belonging to married people,
from maritus married man, husband (see marry).


premarital (adj.)

also pre-marital, 1863, from pre- + marital. Phrase pre-marital sex attested from 1953.


seven-year itch (n.)

1899, American English, some sort of skin condition (sometimes identified with poison ivy infection)
that either lasts seven years or returns every seven years. Jocular use for urge to stray from
marital fidelity is attested from 1952, as the title of the Broadway play (made into a film, 1955)
by George Axelrod (1922-2003), in which the lead male character reads an article describing the high
number of men have extra-marital affairs after seven years of marriage.


extramarital (adj.)

also extra-marital, by 1844, from extra- + marital.


disloyalty (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French desloyaulte, from Old French desloiaute, desleaut&eacute; disloyalty,
faithlessness, marital infidelity, from desloial (see disloyal). Especially of allegiance to a state
or sovereign since c.1600.


marriage (n.)

c.1300, action of marrying, entry into wedlock; also state or condition of being husband and wife,
matrimony, wedlock; from Old French mariage marriage; dowry (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *maritaticum
(11c.), from Latin maritatus, past participle of maritatre to wed, marry, give in marriage (see
marry (v.)). The Vulgar Latin word also is the source of Italian maritaggio, Spanish maridaje.
Meaning a union of a man and woman for life by marriage, a particular matrimonial union is early
14c. Meanings the marriage vow, formal declaration or contract by which two join in wedlock; also a
wedding, celebration of a marriage; the marriage ceremony are from late 14c. Figurative use (non-
theological) intimate union, a joining as if by marriage is from early 15c.[W]hen two people are
under the influence of the most violent, most insane, most delusive, and most transient of passions,
they are required to swear that they will remain in that excited, abnormal, and exhausting condition
until death do them part. [G.B. Shaw, preface to Getting Married, 1908]Marriage counseling recorded
by 1939. Marriage bed, figurative of marital intercourse generally, is attested from 1580s (bed of
marriage is from early 15c.).


