maritime (adj.)

1540s, of or pertaining to the sea, from Middle French maritime (16c.) or directly from Latin
maritimus of the sea, near the sea, from mare (genitive maris) sea (see mere (n.)) + Latin ending
-timus, originally a superlative suffix (compare intimus inmost, ultimus last), here denoting close
association with. Maritimes seacoast regions of a country is from 1590s; specifically of the
southeasternmost provinces of Canada by 1926.


trucial (adj.)

1876, from truce + -ial. Trucial States, the pre-1971 name of the United Arab Emirates, is attested
from 1891, in reference to the 1835 maritime truce between Britain and the Arab sheiks of Oman.


argosy (n.)

1570s, from Italian (nave) Ragusea (vessel) of Ragusa, maritime city on the Dalmatian coast of the
Adriatic (modern Dubrovnik in Croatia). Their large merchant ships brought rich Eastern goods to
16c. England. The city name sometimes was Aragouse or Arragosa in 16c. English.


Attica

traditionally explained as from Greek Attikos (Latin Atticus) of Athens (see Athens); but perhaps
ultimately from Greek akte shore, maritime place, also raised place.


marine (adj.)

early 15c., pertaining to the sea, from Middle French marin, from Old French marin of the sea,
maritime, from Latin marinus of the sea, from mare sea, the sea, seawater, from PIE *mori- body of
water, lake (see mere (n.)). The Old English word was s&aelig;lic.


average (n.)

late 15c., financial loss incurred through damage to goods in transit, from French avarie damage to
ship, and Italian avaria; a word from 12c. Mediterranean maritime trade (compare Spanish averia;
other Germanic forms, Dutch avarij, German haferei, etc., also are from Romanic languages), of
uncertain origin. Sometimes traced to Arabic 'arwariya damaged merchandise. Meaning shifted to equal
sharing of such loss by the interested parties. Transferred sense of statement of a medial estimate
is first recorded 1735. The mathematical extension is from 1755.


Laurence

masc. proper name, from Old French Lorenz (French Laurent), from Latin Laurentius, literally of
Laurentum, a maritime town in Latium, literally town of bay trees, from laurus (see laurel). The
Italian form is Lorenzo. A popular given name in the Middle Ages, as a surname it is attested in
England from mid-12c. Larkin is a pet-form. For some reason, the name since at least 18c. has been
the personification of indolence (compare German der faule Lenz Lazy Lawrence). But in Scotland, the
pet form Lowrie has been used for a fox (c.1500), also for a crafty person (1560s).


Basque

1817 (adj.), 1835 (n.), from French, from Spanish vasco (adj.), from vascon (n.), from Latin
Vascones (Vasconia was the Roman name for the up-country of the western Pyrenees), said by von
Humboldt to originally mean foresters but more likely a Latinized version of the people's name for
themselves, euskara or eskuara.    This contains a basic element -sk- which is believed to relate to
maritime people or sailors, and which is also found in the name of the Etruscans .... [Room,
Placenames of the World, 2006]      Earlier in English was Basquish (1610s, noun and adjective);
Baskles (plural noun, late 14c.); Baskon (mid-15c.).


