marked (adj.)

having a mark, Old English gemearcodan (see mark (v.)). Meaning clearly defined (pronounced as two
syllables) is from 1795. Related: Markedly. Marked man one who is watched with hostile intent is
from 1769.


markedly (adv.)

1799, from marked + -ly (2). A favorite 19th c. adverb [OED].


brindled (adj.)

marked with streaks, streaked with a dark color, 1670s, from Middle English brended (early 15c.),
from bren brown color (13c.), noun made from past participle of brennen burn (see burn (v.)); the
derived adjective perhaps means marked as though by branding or burning. Form altered perhaps by
influence of kindled.


Chattahoochee

river between Georgia and Alabama, from Muskogee cato-hocce hvcce marked-rock river, from cvto rock,
hocce marked + hvcce stream.


Han

Chinese dynasty, 206 B.C.E.-220 C.E., its rule marked by prosperity, military success, and the
introduction of Buddhism.


Meiji

period of rule of emperor Mutsuhito (1868-1912), which was marked by modernization and
Westernization, 1873, from Japanese, literally enlightened government.


swinging (adj.)

1550s, moving to and fro, present participle adjective from swing (v.). Meaning marked by a free,
sweeping movement is from 1818. Sense of uninhibited is from 1958.


urge (n.)

1610s, act of urging, from urge (v.). Marked as rare in Century Dictionary (1902); in frequent use
from c.1910 [OED].


spotty (adj.)

mid-14c., marked with spots, from spot (n.) + -y (2). Meaning unsteady, uneven is attested from
1932, from a more specific use with reference to painting (1812).


needways (adv.)

by necessity, c.1300, a northern and Scottish word, marked as obsolete in OED; from need (n.) + way
(n.), with adverbial genitive.


submittal (n.)

act or process of submitting, 1866, from submit (v.) + -ance. Marked rare in Century Dictionary and
OED. Submittance (17c.) also is used.


care-worm (n.)

a word listed in 2nd print edition OED, whose editors found it once, in the 1598 edition of W.
Phillip's translation of John Huyghen van Linschoten's account of his voyage to the East Indies, and
marked it ? error for EAREWORM. But care-worm could be a useful word.


guideline (n.)

1785, line marked on a surface before cutting, from guide + line (n.). Meaning rope for steering a
hot-air balloon is from 1846. In figurative use by 1948. Related: Guidelines.


chiastic (adj.)

1856, from Latinized fdorm of Greek khiastos arranged diagonally; marked with an X (i.e., resembling
the Greek letter chi) + -ic.


considerate (adj.)

1570s, marked by deliberation, from Latin consideratus, past participle of considerare (see
consider). Of persons, deliberate, prudent, 1580s; meaning showing consideration for others is from
c.1700. Related: Considerately; considerateness.


chit (n.1)

note, 1776, short for chitty, from Mahrati (Hindi) chitthi letter, note, from Sanskrit chitra-s
distinctively marked (see cheetah).


lined (adj.)

having a lining or backing (of some other material), mid-15c., from past participle of line (v.1);
meaning marked with lines is from 1776, from past participle of line (v.2).


nake (v.)

to make naked, early 14c., from naked, perhaps with misapprehension of the -d as a past tense
suffix. Marked as Obs[olete] exc[ept] Sc[ottish] in OED. Earlier was naken to strip naked (mid-
13c.); a later generation coined nakedize (1858).


rink (n.)

late 14c., Scottish dialect, probably from Old French renc, reng row, line, from Frankish and
ultimately connected with ring (n.1). Probably confused in meaning with ring (n.1) in sense of area
marked out for a sporting contest. From 1787 in curling; ice hockey sense first attested 1896.


toe (v.)

touch or reach with the toes, 1813, from toe (n.). First recorded in expression toe the mark, which
seems to be nautical in origin.The chief mate ... marked a line on the deck, brought the two boys up
to it, making them toe the mark. [R.H. Dana, Two Years Before the Mast, 1840]  Related: Toed;
toeing.


unsteady (adj.)

1590s, not firm or secure in position, from un- (1) not + steady (adj.). Similar formation in Old
Frisian unstadich, German unst&auml;tig, Middle Dutch onstadich. Meaning marked by irregularity is
from 1680s. Related: Unsteadily (1550s).


punctate (adj.)

dotted, marked with dots, 1760, from Modern Latin punctuatus, from Latin punctum point (see point).
Related: Punctation.


monsoon (n.)

1580s, trade wind of the Indian Ocean, from Dutch monssoen, from Portuguese mon&ccedil;ao, from
Arabic mawsim time of year, appropriate season (for a voyage, pilgrimage, etc.), from wasama he
marked. When it blows from the southwest (April through October) it brings heavy rain, hence heavy
episode of rainfall during the rainy season (1747).


unlucky (adj.)

1520s, marked by misfortune or failure, from un- (1) not + lucky (adj.). Similar formation in West
Frisian unlokkich, Mliddle Low German unluckich. Sense of boding ill is recorded from 1540s; that of
having bad luck is from 1550s; that of bringing bad luck is from 1580s. Related: Unluckily;
unluckiness.


dord (n.)

1934, a ghost word printed in Webster's New International Dictionary and defined as a noun used by
physicists and chemists, meaning density. In sorting out and separating abbreviations from words in
preparing the dictionary's second edition, a card marked D or d meaning density somehow migrated
from the abbreviations stack to the words stack. The D or d entry ended up being typeset as a word,
dord, and defined as a synonym for density. The mistake was discovered in 1939.


pre-order (v.)

1630s, from pre- + order (v.). Marked in OED 2nd ed. as rare. Related: Pre-ordered; pre-ordering.


grope (v.)

Old English grapian to feel about (as one blind or in darkness), originally lay hold of, seize,
touch, attain, related to gripan grasp at (see gripe). Figurative sense is from early 14c. Indecent
sense (marked as obsolete in OED) is from c.1200. Related: Groped; groping. The noun is Old English
grap.


unconscious (adj.)

1712, unaware, not marked by conscious thought, from un- (1) not + conscious. Meaning temporarily
insensible, knocked out is recorded from 1860. Related: Unconsciously; unconsciousness. In
psychology, the noun the unconscious (1876) is a loan-translation of German das Unbewusste. The
adjective in this sense is recorded from 1912.


rumba (n.)

1919, from Cuban Spanish rumba, originally spree, carousal, derived from Spanish rumbo spree, party,
earlier ostentation, pomp, leadership, perhaps originally the course of a ship, from rombo rhombus,
in reference to the compass, which is marked with a rhombus. The verb is recorded from 1932.
Related: Rumbaed; rumbaing.


Octavian

masc. proper name, from Latin, from Octavius, from octavus eighth, from octo (see eight).    But
although we find so marked differences in the use of the numerals as names, it is impossible to
believe that this use did not arise in the same way for all; that is, that they were at first used
to distinguish children by the order of birth. But when we find them as praenomina in historical
times it is evident that they no longer referred to order of birth. [George Davis Chase, The Origin
of Roman Praenomina, Harvard Studies in Classical Philology, 1897]


cheetah (n.)

1704, from Hindi chita leopard, from Sanskrit chitraka hunting leopard, tiger, literally speckled,
from chitra-s distinctively marked, variegated, many-colored, bright, clear (from PIE *kit-ro-, from
root *(s)kai- (1) bright, shining; see shine (v.)) + kayah body, from PIE *kwei- to build, make (see
poet).


diagram (n.)

1610s, from French diagramme, from Latin diagramma, from Greek diagramma geometric figure, that
which is marked out by lines, from diagraphein mark out by lines, delineate, from dia- across, out
(see dia-) + graphein write, mark, draw (see -graphy). The verb is 1840, from the noun.


lane (n.)

Old English lane, lanu narrow hedged-in road, common Germanic (cognates: Old Frisian lana, Middle
Dutch lane, Dutch laan lane, Old Norse l&ouml;n row of houses), of unknown origin. As one track of a
marked road, from 1921, American English.


Spock

half-alien character in the Star Trek U.S. entertainment franchise, developed and named 1964 by
series creator Gene Roddenberry, who later said he was searching for an alien-sounding word and not
thinking of U.S. physician and child-care specialist Benjamin M. Spock (1903-1998), whose name is of
Dutch origin. The doctor wrote the enormously popular Common Sense Book of Baby and Child Care
(1946) and is the source of the first element in Spock-marked (1967), defined in OED as (Adversely)
affected by an upbringing held to be in accordance with the principles of Dr. Spock ....


virile (adj.)

late 15c., characteristic of a man; marked by manly force, from Middle French viril (14c.) and
directly from Latin virilis of a man, manly, worthy of a man, from vir a man, a hero, from PIE *wi-
ro- man, freeman (cognates: Sanskrit virah, Avestan vira-, Lithuanian vyras, Old Irish fer, Welsh
gwr, Gothic wair, Old English wer man). Virile member for penis is recorded from 1540s.


pinto (n.)

1860, a horse marked black and white, from American Spanish pinto, literally painted, spotted, from
Spanish, from Vulgar Latin *pinctus, variant of Latin pictus painted, past participle of pingere to
paint (see paint (v.)). Pinto bean is attested from 1916, so called for its markings.


sleeping (adj.)

c.1300, past participle adjective from sleep (v.). Sleeping-pill is from 1660s; sleeping-bag is from
1850; sleeping sickness as a specific African tropical disease is first recorded 1875; sleeping has
been used since late 14c. for diseases marked by morbid conditions. Sleeping Beauty (1729) is
Perrault's La belle au bois dormant.    It is ill wakyng of a sleapyng dogge. [Heywood, 1562]   <hr
/>   It is nought good a slepyng hound to wake. [Chaucer, c.1385]


pock-mark (n.)

also pockmark, 1670s, from pock (n.) + mark (n.). As a verb from 1756. Related: Pockmarked; pock-
marked.


fascism (n.)

1922, originally used in English 1920 in its Italian form (see fascist). Applied to similar groups
in Germany from 1923; applied to everyone since the rise of the Internet.A form of political
behavior marked by obsessive preoccupation with community decline, humiliation or victimhood and by
compensatory cults of unity, energy and purity, in which a mass-based party of committed nationalist
militants, working in uneasy but effective collaboration with traditional elites, abandons
democratic liberties and pursues with redemptive violence and without ethical or legal restraints
goals of internal cleansing and external expansion. [Robert O. Paxton, The Anatomy of Fascism, 2004]


re-mark (v.)

to mark again, 1610s, from re- + mark (v.). Related: Re-marked; re-marking.


chi (n.)

22nd letter of the Greek alphabet, representing a -kh- sound (see ch). The letter is shaped like an
X, and so the Greek letter name was used figuratively to signify such a shape or arrangement (as in
khiasma two things placed crosswise; khiastos arranged diagonally; marked with an X; khiazein to
mark with an 'X', to write the letter 'X'). Some dialects used chi to represent the -ks- sound
properly belonging to xi; Latin picked this up and the sound value of chi in Latin-derived alphabets
is now that of English X.


paragraph (n.)

late 15c., from Middle French paragraphe division of text (13c., Old French paragrafe), from
Medieval Latin paragraphus sign for start of a new section of discourse (the sign looked something
like a stylized letter -P-), from Greek paragraphos short stroke in the margin marking a break in
sense, also a passage so marked, literally anything written beside, from paragraphein write by the
side, from para- beside (see para- (1)) + graphein to write (see -graphy).


e-

the later Romans evidently found words beginning in sc-, sp-, st- difficult or unpleasant to
pronounce; in Late Latin forms begin to emerge in i- (such as ispatium, ispiritu), and from 5c. this
shifted to e-. The development was carried into the Romanic languages, especially Old French, and
the French words were modified further after 15c. by natural loss of -s- (the suppression being
marked by an acute accent on the e-), while in other cases the word was formally corrected back to
the Latin spelling (for example sp&#233;cial). Hence French &#233;tat for Old French estat for Latin
status, etc.


level (n.)

mid-14c., tool to indicate a horizontal line, from Old French livel a level (13c.), ultimately from
Latin libella a balance, level, diminutive of libra balance, scale, unit of weight, from PIE
*lithra. Cognate Spanish nivel, Modern French niveau are from the same source but altered by
dissimilation. Meaning horizontality is from c.1400. Meaning position as marked by a horizontal line
is from 1530s. Phrase on the level fair, honest is from 1872; earlier it meant moderate, without
great ambition (1790).


calendar (n.)

c.1200, system of division of the year; mid-14c. as table showing divisions of the year; from Old
French calendier list, register, from Latin calendarium account book, from calendae/kalendae calends
the first day of the Roman month -- when debts fell due and accounts were reckoned -- from calare to
announce solemnly, call out, as the priests did in proclaiming the new moon that marked the calends,
from PIE root kele- (2) to call, shout (see claim (v.)).    Taken by the early Church for its
register list of saints and their feast days. The -ar spelling in English is 17c. to differentiate
it from the now obscure calender cloth-presser.


splendid (adj.)

1620s, marked by grandeur, probably a shortening of earlier splendidious (early 15c.), from Latin
splendidus bright, shining, glittering; sumptuous, gorgeous, grand; illustrious, distinguished,
noble; showy, fine, specious, from splendere be bright, shine, gleam, glisten, from PIE *splend- to
shine, glow (cognates: Lithuanian splendziu I shine, Middle Irish lainn bright). An earlier form was
splendent (late 15c.). From 1640s as brilliant, dazzling; 1640s as conspicuous, illustrious; very
fine, excellent. Ironic use (as in splendid isolation, 1843) is attested from 17c.


defenestration (n.)

1620, the action of throwing out of a window, from Latin fenestra window (see fenestration). A word
invented for one incident: the Defenestration of Prague, May 21, 1618, when two Catholic deputies to
the Bohemian national assembly and a secretary were tossed out the window (into a moat) of the
castle of Hradshin by Protestant radicals. It marked the start of the Thirty Years War. Some
linguists link fenestra with Greek verb phainein to show; others see in it an Etruscan borrowing,
based on the suffix -(s)tra, as in Latin loan-words aplustre the carved stern of a ship with its
ornaments, genista the plant broom, lanista trainer of gladiators. Related: Defenestrate (1915);
defenestrated (1620).


dismal (adj.)

c.1400, from Anglo-French dismal (mid-13c.), from Old French (li) dis mals (the) bad days, from
Medieval Latin dies mali evil or unlucky days (also called dies &AElig;gyptiaci), from Latin dies
days (see diurnal) + mali, plural of malus bad (see mal-).    Through the Middle Ages, calendars
marked two days of each month as unlucky, supposedly based on the ancient calculations of Egyptian
astrologers (Jan. 1, 25; Feb. 4, 26; March 1, 28; April 10, 20; May 3, 25; June 10, 16; July 13, 22;
Aug. 1, 30; Sept. 3, 21; Oct. 3, 22; Nov. 5, 28; Dec. 7, 22). Modern sense of gloomy, dreary first
recorded in English 1590s, in reference to sounds. Related: Dismally.


campaign (n.)

1640s, operation of an army in the field, during a single season, in a particular region, or in a
definite enterprise; from French campagne campaign, literally open country, from Old French
champagne countryside, open country (suited to military maneuvers), from Late Latin campania level
country (source of Italian campagna, Spanish campa&ntilde;a, Portuguese campanha), from Latin campus
a field (see campus). Old armies spent winters in quarters and took to the open field to seek battle
in summer. Extension of meaning to political activity before an election, marked by organized action
in influencing the voters [DAE] is American English, 1809.


armistice (n.)

1707, from French armistice (1680s), coined on the model of Latin solstitium (see solstice), etc.,
from Latin arma arms (see arm (n.2)) + -stitium (used only in compounds), from PIE *ste-ti-,
suffixed form of root *sta- to stand (see stet).    The word is attested in English from 1660s in
the Latin form armistitium. German Waffenstillstand is a loan-translation from French. Armistice Day
(1919) marked the end of the Great War of 1914-18 on Nov. 11, 1918. In Britain, after World War II,
it merged with Remembrance Day. In U.S., Armistice Day became a national holiday in 1926. In 1954,
to honor World War II and Korean War veterans as well, it was re-dubbed Veterans Day.


