marrow (n.)

late 14c., from Old English mearg marrow, earlier m&aelig;rh, from Proto-Germanic *mazga- (cognates:
Old Norse mergr, Old Saxon marg, Old Frisian merg, Middle Dutch march, Dutch merg, Old High German
marg, German Mark marrow), from PIE *mozgo- marrow (cognates: Sanskrit majjan-, Avestan mazga-
marrow, Old Church Slavonic mozgu, Lithuanian smagenes brain). Figurative sense of inmost or central
part is attested from c.1400.


marrowbone (n.)

late 14c., from marrow + bone (n.). A poetic Old English word for bone was mearhcofa marrow-chamber.


myelo-

before vowels myel-, word-forming element meaning marrow, spinal cord, from Greek myelos marrow; the
brain, of unknown origin.


medulla (n.)

hindmost segment of the brain, 1650s, from Latin medulla, literally marrow, also pith of plants, of
unknown origin, perhaps related to or influenced by medius middle (but compare also Old Irish smiur,
Welsh mer marrow). The word was used in the Latin senses in Middle English. Related: Medular;
medullary.


myeloma (n.)

1857, from comb. form of Greek myelos marrow + -oma.


myelin (n.)

also myeline, soft material found in nerve tissues, 1867, from German Myelin (1854), from Greek
myelos marrow; the brain, innermost part, of unknown origin.


pit (n.2)

hard seed, 1841, from Dutch pit kernel, seed, marrow, from Middle Dutch pitte, ultimately from West
Germanic *pithan-, source of pith (q.v.).


nuchal (adj.)

pertaining to the spinal cord, 1835, medical Latin, from nucha spinal cord (c.1400), from Medieval
Latin nucha, from Arabic nukha spinal marrow.


ossifrage (n.)

sea-eagle, osprey, c.1600, from Latin ossifraga vulture, fem. of ossifragus, literally bone-breaker,
from ossifragus (adj.) bone-breaking, from os (genitive ossis) bone (see osseous) + stem of frangere
to break (see fraction). By this name Pliny meant the lammergeier (from German, literally lamb-
vulture), a very large Old World vulture that swallows and digests bones and was believed also to
drop them from aloft to break them and get at the marrow. But in England and France, the word was
transferred to the osprey, perhaps on similarity of sound between the two words.


poliomyelitis (n.)

1874, also polio-myelitis, coined by German physician Adolph Kussmaul (1822-1902) from Greek polios
grey (see fallow (adj.)) + myelos marrow + -itis inflammation. So called because the gray matter in
the spinal cord is inflamed, which causes paralysis. The earlier name was infantile paralysis
(1843).    In many respects, also, this affection resembles the acute spinal paralysis of infancy,
which, from the researches of Charcot, Joffroy, and others, have been shown pathologically to be an
acute myelitis of the anterior cornua. Hence, for these forms of paralysis, Professor Kussmaul
suggests the name of 'poliomyelitis anterior.' [London Medical Record, Dec. 9, 1874]


mast (n.2)

fallen nuts; food for swine, Old English m&aelig;st, from Proto-Germanic *masto (cognates: Dutch,
Old High German, German mast mast; Old English verb m&aelig;sten to fatten, feed), perhaps from PIE
*mad-sta-, from root *mad- moist, wet, also used of various qualities of food (cognates: Sanskrit
madati it bubbles, gladdens, medah fat, marrow; Latin madere be sodden, be drunk; Middle Persian
mast drunk; Old English mete food, Old High German muos meal, mushlike food, Gothic mats food).


smear (v.)

Old English smerian, smierwan to anoint or rub with grease, oil, etc., from Proto-Germanic *smerwjan
to spread grease on (cognates: Old Norse smyrja to anoint, rub with ointment, Danish sm&oslash;re,
Swedish sm&ouml;rja, Dutch smeren, Old High German smirwen apply salve, smear, German schmieren to
smear; Old Norse sm&#246;r butter), from PIE *smeru- grease (cognates: Greek myron unguent, balsam,
Old Irish smi(u)r marrow, Old English smeoru fat, grease, ointment, tallow, lard, suet, Lithuanian
smarsas fat).    Figurative sense of assault a public reputation with unsubstantiated charges is
from 1879. Related: Smeared; smearing. Smear-word, one used regardless of its literal meaning but
invested with invective, is from 1938.


