Franglais (n.)

French marred by many English words, 1959, from French, from fran&ccedil;ais French + anglais
English.


mar (v.)

Old English merran (Anglian), mierran (West Saxon) to waste, spoil, from Proto-Germanic *marzjan
(cognates: Old Frisian meria, Old High German marren to hinder, obstruct, Gothic marzjan to hinder,
offend), from PIE root *mers- to trouble, confuse (cognates: Sanskrit mrsyate forgets, neglects,
Lithuanian mirszati to forget). Related: Marred; marring.


orchid (n.)

1845, introduced by John Lindley in School Botanty, from Modern Latin Orchide&aelig; (Linnaeus), the
plant's family name, from Latin orchis, a kind of orchid, from Greek orkhis (genitive orkheos)
orchid, literally testicle, from PIE *orghi-, the standard root for testicle (cognates: Avestan
erezi testicles, Armenian orjik, Middle Irish uirgge, Irish uirge testicle, Lithuanian erzilas
stallion). The plant so called because of the shape of its root. Earlier in English in Latin form,
orchis (1560s), and in Middle English it was ballockwort (c.1300; see ballocks). Marred by
extraneous -d- in an attempt to extract the Latin stem.


vicious (adj.)

late 14c., unwholesome, impure, of the nature of vice, wicked, corrupting, pernicious, harmful; of a
text, erroneous, corrupt, from Anglo-French vicious, Old French vicios wicked, cunning, underhand;
defective, illegal (Modern French vicieux), from Latin vitiosus (Medieval Latin vicious) faulty,
full of faults, defective, corrupt; wicked, depraved, from vitium fault (see vice (n.1)).    Meaning
inclined to be savage or dangerous is first recorded 1711 (originally of animals, especially
horses); that of full of spite, bitter, severe is from 1825. In law, marred by some inherent fault
(late 14c.), hence also this sense in logic (c.1600), as in vicious circle in reasoning (c.1792,
Latin circulus vitiosus), which was given a general sense of a situation in which action and
reaction intensify one another by 1839. Related: Viciously (mid-14c., sinfully); viciousness.


youth (n.)

Old English geogu&eth; youth; young people, junior warriors; young of cattle, related to geong
young, from Proto-Germanic *jugunthi- (cognates: Old Saxon juguth, Old Frisian jogethe, Middle Dutch
joghet, Dutch jeugd, Old High German jugund, German Jugend, Gothic junda youth), from suffixed form
of PIE root *yeu- vital force, youthful vigor (see young (adj.)) + Proto-Germanic abstract noun
suffix *-itho (see -th (2)).    According to OED, the Proto-Germanic form apparently was altered
from *juwunthiz by influence of its contrast, *dugunthiz ability (source of Old English dugu&eth;).
In Middle English, the medial -g- became a yogh, which then disappeared.  They said that age was
truth, and that the youngMarred with wild hopes the peace of slavery[Shelley]


