marshal (v.)

early 15c., to tend (horses), from marshal (n.). Meaning to arrange, place in order is from mid-
15c.; that of to arrange for fighting is from mid-15c. Figurative use by 1690s. Related: Marshaled;
marshaling.


marshal (n.)

early 13c. as a surname; mid-13c. as high officer of the royal court; from Old French mareschal
commanding officer of an army; officer in charge of a household (Modern French mar&#233;chal),
originally stable officer, horse tender, groom (Frankish Latin mariscaluis) from Frankish *marhskalk
or a similar Germanic word, literally horse-servant (compare Old High German marahscalc groom,
Middle Dutch maerschalc), from Proto-Germanic *markhaz horse (see mare (n.1)) + *skalkaz servant
(source of Old English scealc servant, retainer, member of a crew, Dutch schalk rogue, wag, Gothic
skalks servant).    Cognate with Old English hors&thorn;egn. From c.1300 as stable officer; early
14c. as military commander, general in the army. For development history, compare constable. Also
from Germanic are Italian scalco steward, Spanish mariscal marshal.


Bluchers (n.)

type of old-style boots, from Prussian Field Marshal Gebhard Leberecht Bl&uuml;cher (1742-1819).


praline (n.)

1727, prawlin, from French praline (17c.), from the name of Marshal Duplessis-Praslin (1598-1675,
pronounced praline), whose cook invented this confection [Klein]. Modern spelling in English from
1809.


extradition (n.)

1833, from French extradition (18c.), apparently a coinage of Voltaire's, from Latin ex out (see
ex-) + traditionem (nominative traditio) a delivering up, handing over, noun of action from tradere
to hand over (see tradition).    This word might be adopted in our language with advantage, as we
have none which conveys the same meaning. Extradition signifies the delivering up of criminals who
may have sought refuge in any country, to the government whose subjects they are, on a claim being
made to this effect. [from a footnote to the word extradition in translation of Memoirs of Marshal
Ney, London, 1833]


muster (v.)

c.1300, to display, reveal, appear, from Old French mostrer appear, show, reveal, also in a military
sense (10c., Modern French montrer), from Latin monstrare to show, from monstrum omen, sign (see
monster). Meaning to collect, assemble is early 15c.; figurative use (of qualities, etc.) is from
1580s. To muster out gather to be discharged from military service is 1834, American English. To
muster up in the figurative and transferred sense of gather, summon, marshal is from 1620s. Related:
Mustered; mustering.


provost (n.)

Old English profost, reinforced by Old French cognate provost, both from Late Latin propositus
(reinforced by Old French cognate provost), from Latin propositus/praepositus a chief, prefect
(source of Old Proven&ccedil;al probost, Old High German probost, German Propst), literally placed
before, in charge of, from past participle of praeponere put before (see preposition). Provost
marshal first recorded 1510s.


seneschal (n.)

late 14c., steward, majordomo, officer in a royal household in charge of ceremonies and feasts, from
Old French seneschal, title of a high administrative court officer, from Frankish Latin siniscalcus,
from Proto-Germanic *sini-skalk senior servant; first element cognate with Latin senex old (see
senile); second element from Proto-Germanic *skalkoz servant (cognates: Gothic skalks, Old High
German scalc, Old English scealc servant; see second element of marshal).


saint (n.)

early 12c., from Old French saint, seinte a saint; a holy relic, displacing or altering Old English
sanct, both from Latin sanctus holy, consecrated (used as a noun in Late Latin; also source of
Spanish santo, santa, Italian san, etc.), properly past participle of sancire consecrate (see
sacred). Adopted into most Germanic languages (Old Frisian sankt, Dutch sint, German Sanct).
Originally an adjective prefixed to the name of a canonized person; by c.1300 it came to be regarded
as a noun. Meaning person of extraordinary holiness is recorded from 1560s.  <b>Saint</b>, n. A dead
sinner revised and edited. The Duchess of Orleans relates that the irreverent old calumniator,
Marshal Villeroi, who in his youth had known St. Francis de Sales, said, on hearing him called
saint: 'I am delighted to hear that Monsieur de Sales is a saint. He was fond of saying indelicate
things, and used to cheat at cards. In other respects he was a perfect gentleman, though a fool.'
[Ambrose Bierce, Devil's Dictionary, 1911]   <hr />   Perhaps you have imagined that this humility
in the saints is a pious illusion at which God smiles. That is a most dangerous error. It is
theoretically dangerous, because it makes you identify a virtue (i.e., a perfection) with an
illusion (i.e., an imperfection), which must be nonsense. It is practically dangerous because it
encourages a man to mistake his first insights into his own corruption for the first beginnings of a
halo round his own silly head. No, depend upon it; when the saints say that they--even they--are
vile, they are recording truth with scientific accuracy. [C.S. Lewis, The Problem of Pain, 1940]
Saint Bernard, the breed of mastiff dogs (1839), so called because the monks of the hospice of the
pass of St. Bernard (between Italy and Switzerland) sent them to rescue snowbound travelers; St.
Elmo's Fire corposant (1560s) is from Italian fuoco di Sant'Elmo, named for the patron saint of
Mediterranean sailors, a corruption of the name of St. Erasmus, an Italian bishop martyred in 303.


