martial arts (n.)

1909, translating Japanese bujutsu; see martial.


martial (adj.)

late 14c., warlike, from Latin martialis of Mars or war, from Mars (genitive Martis), Roman god of
war; see Mars. Related: Martially. Martial law, military rule over civilians, first recorded 1530s.


court martial (n.)

also court-martial, 1650s (plural courts martial), originally martial court (1570s), from court +
martial. As a verb, from 1859.


freestyle (n.)

1912, in swimming, in reference to a distance race in which the swimmers may use whatever stroke
they choose; 1950 in general use, from free + style. As an adjective, from 1957; as a verb, by 1970
(in martial arts).


tournament (n.)

medieval martial arts contest, c.1200 (figurative), c.1300 (literal), from Old French tornement
contest between groups of knights on horseback (12c.), from tornoier to joust, tilt, take part in
tournaments (see tourney). Modern use, in reference to games of skill, is recorded from 1761.


tai chi (n.)

1736, the supreme ultimate in Taoism and Neo-Confucianism, from Chinese tai extreme + ji limit. As
the name of a form of martial arts training (said to have been developed by a priest in the Sung
dynasty, 960-1279) it is first attested 1962, in full, tai chi ch'uan, with Chinese quan fist.


Confucius

1837, Latinization of Chinese K'ung Fu-tzu K'ung the philosopher (or Master) (c.551 B.C.E.-c.479
B.C.E.). The name first appears in a Latin publication of Chinese works (Paris, 1687). Connection
with the martial arts kung-fu is obscure, uncertain. His philosophy based on the Golden Rule: What
you do not like when done to yourself do not do to others. Related: Confucian (adj., 1837);
Confucianism (1846).


basket (n.)

early 13c., from Anglo-French bascat, origin obscure despite much speculation. On one theory from
Latin bascauda kettle, table-vessel, said by the Roman poet Martial to be from Celtic British and
perhaps cognate with Latin fascis bundle, faggot, in which case it probably originally meant wicker
basket. But OED frowns on this, and there is no evidence of such a word in Celtic unless later words
in Irish and Welsh, counted as borrowings from English, are original.


Alyssum (n.)

genus name for plants of the mustard family, 1550s, from Latin alysson, from Greek alysson, which is
perhaps the neuter of adjective alyssos curing madness, from privative prefix a- + lyssa madness,
martial rage, fury, rabies, literally wolf-ness, related to lykos wolf (see wolf (n.)).


plagiarism (n.)

1620s, from -ism + plagiary (n.) plagiarist, literary thief (1590s), from Latin plagiarius
kidnapper, seducer, plunderer, one who kidnaps the child or slave of another, used by Martial in the
sense of literary thief, from plagiare to kidnap, plagium kidnapping, from plaga snare, hunting net,
perhaps from PIE *plag- (on notion of something extended), from root *plak- (1) to be flat (see
placenta).


felon (n.)

late 13c., from Old French felon evil-doer, scoundrel, traitor, rebel, the Devil (9c.), from
Medieval Latin fellonem (nominative fello) evil-doer, of uncertain origin, perhaps from Frankish
*fillo, *filljo person who whips or beats, scourger (source of Old High German fillen to whip); or
from Latin fel gall, poison, on the notion of one full of bitterness.    Another theory (advanced by
Professor R. Atkinson of Dublin) traces it to Latin fellare to suck (see fecund), which had an
obscene secondary meaning in classical Latin (well-known to readers of Martial and Catullus), which
would make a felon etymologically a cock-sucker. OED inclines toward the gall explanation, but finds
Atkinson's most plausible of the others.


play (n.)

Old English plega (West Saxon), pl&aelig;ga (Anglian) quick motion; recreation, exercise, any brisk
activity (the latter sense preserved in swordplay, etc.), from or related to Old English plegan (see
play (v.)). Meaning dramatic performance is attested by early 14c., perhaps late Old English.
Meaning free or unimpeded movement of mechanisms, etc., is from c.1200. By early Middle English it
could mean variously, a game, a martial sport, activity of children, joke or jesting, revelry,
sexual indulgence. Sporting sense the playing of a game first attested mid-15c.; sense of specific
maneuver or attempt is from 1868. To be in play (of a hit ball, etc.) is from 1788. Play-by-play is
attested from 1927. Play on words is from 1798. Play-money is attested from 1705 as money won in
gambling, by 1920 as pretend money.


cat (n.)

Old English catt (c.700), from West Germanic (c.400-450), from Proto-Germanic *kattuz (cognates: Old
Frisian katte, Old Norse k&ouml;ttr, Dutch kat, Old High German kazza, German Katze), from Late
Latin cattus.    The near-universal European word now, it appeared in Europe as Latin catta
(Martial, c.75 C.E.), Byzantine Greek katta (c.350) and was in general use on the continent by
c.700, replacing Latin feles. Probably ultimately Afro-Asiatic (compare Nubian kadis, Berber
kadiska, both meaning cat). Arabic qitt tomcat may be from the same source. Cats were domestic in
Egypt from c.2000 B.C.E., but not a familiar household animal to classical Greeks and Romans. The
nine lives have been proverbial since at least 1560s.    The Late Latin word also is the source of
Old Irish and Gaelic cat, Welsh kath, Breton kaz, Italian gatto, Spanish gato, French chat (12c.).
Independent, but ultimately from the same source are words in the Slavic group: Old Church Slavonic
kotuka, kotel'a, Bulgarian kotka, Russian ko&#353;ka, Polish kot, along with Lithuanian kate and
non-Indo-European Finnish katti, which is from Lithuanian.    Extended to lions, tigers, etc.
c.1600. As a term of contempt for a woman, from early 13c. Slang sense of prostitute is from at
least c.1400. Slang sense of fellow, guy, is from 1920, originally in U.S. Black English; narrower
sense of jazz enthusiast is recorded from 1931.   Cat's paw (1769, but cat's foot in the same sense,
1590s) refers to old folk tale in which the monkey tricks the cat into pawing chestnuts from a fire;
the monkey gets the nuts, the cat gets a burnt paw. Cat bath hurried or partial cleaning is from
1953. Cat burglar is from 1907, so called for stealth. Cat-witted small-minded, obstinate, and
spiteful (1670s) deserved to survive. For Cat's meow, cat's pajamas, see bee's knees.


