martyr (n.)

Old English martyr, from Late Latin martyr, from Doric Greek martyr, earlier martys (genitive
martyros), in Christian use martyr, literally witness, probably related to mermera care, trouble,
from mermairein be anxious or thoughtful, from PIE *(s)mrtu- (cognates: Sanskrit smarati remember,
Latin memor mindful; see memory).    Adopted directly into most Germanic languages, but Norse
substituted native formation pislarvattr, literally torture-witness. General sense of constant
sufferer is from 1550s. Martyr complex exaggerated desire for self-sacrifice is attested from 1920.


martyr (v.)

Old English martyrian, from martyr (see martyr (n.)). Middle English also had a verb martyrize.


martyrology (n.)

1590s, a native formation from martyr (n.) + -ology, or else from Church Latin martyrologium, from
Ecclesiastical Greek martyrologicon.


martyrdom (n.)

Old English martyrdom; see martyr (n.) + -dom.


Vincent

masc. proper name, from French, shortened from Latin Vincentius, from vincentem (nominative vincens)
conquering, from vincere to overcome (see victor). The name of a 3c. martyr, it was introduced in
England c.1200.


Barbara

fem. proper name, from Latin, fem. of barbarus strange, foreign, barbarous, from Greek barbaros (see
barbarian). For women, unlike men, the concept of alien presumably could be felt as exotic and thus
make an appealing name. Popularized as a Christian name by the legend of Saint Barbara, early 4c.
martyr, whose cult was popular from 7c. The common Middle English form was Barbary. A top 10 name in
popularity for girls born in the U.S. between 1927 and 1958.


witness (n.)

Old English witnes attestation of fact, event, etc., from personal knowledge; also one who so
testifies; originally knowledge, wit, formed from wit (n.) + -ness. Christian use (late 14c.) is as
a literal translation of Greek martys (see martyr). Witness stand is recorded from 1853.


Sistine (adj.)

1769, literally pertaining to Pope Sixtus, from Italian sistino, from Sixtus, name of five popes,
from Latin sextus sixth (see Sextus). The chapel is named for Sixtus IV (Francesco della Rovere),
pope 1471-84, who had it built. The painting by Raphael known as the Sistine Madonna is so called
because it also shows Sixtus II, a 3c. martyr and saint; it is better known now for the two cherubs
at the bottom of the picture who by 1900 were well-known in isolation from the rest of the picture
in engravings, etc.


Stephen

masc. proper name, from Latin Stephanus, from Greek Stephanos, from stephanos crown, wreath,
garland, chaplet; crown of victory, hence victory, prize, honor, glory, properly that which
surrounds; also used of the ring of spectators around a fight or the wall of a town, from stephein
to encircle, crown, wreathe, tie around, from PIE root *stebh- post, stem; place firmly on, fasten
(see step (v.)). Exclusively a monk's name in Old English, it became common after the Conquest.
Saint Stephen, stoned to death, was said to be Christianity's first martyr.


pantaloons (n.)

1660s, kind of tights (originally a French fashion and execrated as such by late 17c. English
writers), associated with Pantaloun (1580s), silly old man character in Italian comedy who wore
tight trousers over his skinny legs, from Italian Pantalone, originally San Pantaleone, Christian
martyr, a popular saint in Venice (Pantaleone in the comedies represents the Venetian). The name is
of Greek origin and means all-compassionate (or, according to Klein, entirely lion). Applied to
tight long trousers (replacing knee-breeches) by 1798; pants is a shortened form first recorded
1840.


relic (n.)

early 13c., body part or other object from a holy person, from Old French relique (11c., plural
reliques), from Late Latin reliqui&aelig; (plural) remains of a martyr, in classical Latin remains,
remnants, noun use of fem. plural of reliquus remaining, that which remains, related to relinquere
(perfective reliqui) to leave behind (see relinquish). Sense of remains, ruins is from early 14c.
Old English used reliquias, directly from Latin.


confessor (n.)

late Old English, one who avows his religion, especially in the face of danger, but does not suffer
martyrdom, from Latin confessor, agent noun from confiteri (see confess). Meaning one who hears
confessions is from mid-14c.; this properly would be Latin confessarius, but Latin confessor was
being used in this sense from the 9th century.   Edward the Confessor (c.1003-1066, canonized 1161),
last Anglo-Saxon king, was pious enough but does not seem to fit his title; perhaps so called to
distinguish him from another Anglo-Saxon saint/king, Edward the Martyr, who does fit his.


tirade (n.)

a long, vehement speech, a 'volley of words,'  1801, from French tirade a volley, a shot; a pull; a
long speech or passage; a drawing out (16c.), from tirer draw out, endure, suffer, or the French
noun is perhaps from or influenced by cognate Italian tirata a volley, from past participle of
tirare to draw. The whole Romanic word group is of uncertain origin. Barnhart suggests it is a
shortening of the source of Old French martirer endure martyrdom (see martyr).


Catherine

fem. proper name, from French Catherine, from Medieval Latin Katerina, from Latin Ecaterina, from
Greek Aikaterine. The -h- was introduced 16c., probably a folk etymology from Greek katheros pure.
The initial Greek vowel is preserved in Russian form Ekaterina.    As the name of a type of pear,
attested from 1640s. Catherine wheel (early 13c.) is named for St. Catherine of Alexandria,
legendary virgin martyr from the time of Maximinus who was tortured on a spiked wheel. Her name day
is Nov. 25. A popular saint in the Middle Ages, which accounts for the popularity of the given name.


cunt (n.)

female intercrural foramen, or, as some 18c. writers refer to it, the monosyllable, Middle English
cunte female genitalia, by early 14c. (in Hendyng's Proverbs -- &#658;eve &#254;i cunte to
cunni[n]g, And crave affetir wedding), akin to Old Norse kunta, Old Frisian, Middle Dutch, and
Middle Low German kunte, from Proto-Germanic *kunton, of uncertain origin. Some suggest a link with
Latin cuneus wedge, others to PIE root *geu- hollow place, still others to PIE *gwen-, root of queen
and Greek gyne woman.    The form is similar to Latin cunnus female pudenda (also, vulgarly, a
woman), which is likewise of disputed origin, perhaps literally gash, slit, from PIE *sker- (1) to
cut, or literally sheath, from PIE *kut-no-, from root *(s)keu- to conceal, hide.   Hec vulva: a
cunt. Hic cunnus: idem est. [from Londesborough Illustrated Nominale, c.1500, in Anglo-Saxon and Old
English Vocabularies, eds. Wright and W&#252;lcker, vol. 1, 1884]    First known reference in
English apparently is in a compound, Oxford street name Gropecuntlane cited from c.1230 (and
attested through late 14c.) in Place-Names of Oxfordshire (Gelling &amp; Stenton, 1953), presumably
a haunt of prostitutes. Used in medical writing c.1400, but avoided in public speech since 15c.;
considered obscene since 17c.    in Middle English also conte, counte, and sometimes queinte,
queynte (for this, see q). Chaucer used quaint and queynte in Canterbury Tales (late 14c.), and
Andrew Marvell might be punning on quaint in To His Coy Mistress (1650).    What eyleth yow to
grucche thus and grone? Is it for ye wolde haue my queynte allone? [Wife of Bath's Tale]    Under
MONOSYLLABLE Farmer lists 552 synonyms from English slang and literature before launching into
another 5 pages of them in French, German, Italian, Spanish, and Portuguese. [A sampling: Botany
Bay, chum, coffee-shop, cookie, End of the Sentimental Journey, fancy bit, Fumbler's Hall,
funniment, goatmilker, heaven, hell, Itching Jenny, jelly-bag, Low Countries, nature's tufted
treasure, parenthesis, penwiper, prick-skinner, seminary, tickle-toby, undeniable, wonderful lamp,
and aphrodisaical tennis court. Dutch cognate de kont means a bottom, an arse, but Dutch also has
attractive poetic slang ways of expressing this part, such as liefdesgrot, literally cave of love,
and vleesroos rose of flesh.     Alternative form cunny is attested from c.1720 but is certainly
much earlier and forced a change in the pronunciation of coney (q.v.), but it was good for a pun
while coney was still the common word for rabbit: A pox upon your Christian cockatrices! They cry,
like poulterers' wives, 'No money, no coney.'  [Philip Massinger: The Virgin-Martyr, Act I, Scene 1,
1622]


