Mason jar

1885, named for John Latin Mason of New York, who patented it in 1858.


Masonite

1926, proprietary name of a type of fiberboard, by Mason Fibre Company, Laurel, Mississippi, U.S. As
a word in mineralogy for a type of chloritoid, it honors Owen Mason of Providence, R.I.


mason (n.)

c.1200, stoneworker (as a surname, early 12c.), from Old French masson, ma&#231;on stone mason (Old
North French machun), probaby from Frankish *makjo or some other Germanic source (compare Old High
German steinmezzo stone mason, Modern German Steinmetz, second element related to mahhon to make;
see make (v.)). But it also might be from, or influenced by, Medieval Latin machio, matio (7c.)
which is said by Isidore to be derived from machina (see machine). The medieval word also might be
from the root of Latin maceria wall. Meaning a Freemason is attested from early 15c. in Anglo-
French.


Mason-Dixon Line

1779, named for Charles Mason and Jeremiah Dixon, English astronomers who surveyed (1763-7) the
disputed boundary between the colonial holdings of the Penns (Pennsylvania) and the Calverts
(Maryland). It became the technical boundary between free and slave states after 1804, when the last
slaveholding state above it (New Jersey) passed its abolition act. As the line between the North and
the South in U.S. culture, it is attested by 1834.


masonic (adj.)

1797, pertaining to freemasons; 1810, pertaining to stone masons; see mason + -ic.


masonry (n.)

stonework, mid-14c., from Old French ma&ccedil;onerie (14c.), from ma&ccedil;on (see mason).


layer (n.)

late 14c., one who or that lays (especially stones, a mason), agent noun from lay (v.). Passive
sense of that which is laid over a surface first recorded 1610s, but because earliest English use
was in cookery, this is perhaps from French liue binding, used of a thickened sauce. Layer cake
attested from 1881.


Dixie (n.)

1859, first attested in the song of that name, which was popularized, if not written, by Ohio-born
U.S. minstrel musician and songwriter Dan Emmett (1815-1904); perhaps a reference to the Mason-Dixon
Line, but there are other well-publicized theories dating back to the Civil War. Popularized
nationwide in minstrel shows. Dixieland style of jazz developed in New Orleans c.1910, so called
from 1919.


third degree (n.)

intense interrogation by police, 1900, probably a reference to Third Degree of master mason in
Freemasonry (1772), the conferring of which included an interrogation ceremony. Third degree as a
measure of severity of burns (most severe) is attested from 1866, from French (1832); in American
English, as a definition of the seriousness of a particular type of crime (the least serious type)
it is recorded from 1865.


stonemason (n.)

1733, from stone (n.) + mason. Another name for the profession was hard-hewer (15c.). Stone-cutter
is from 1530s; Old English had stanwyrhta stone-wright.


Suzie

also Susie, familiar form of fem. proper name Susan, Susanna. Suzie Wong is in reference to The
World of Suzie Wong, 1957 novel by R.L. Mason featuring a Hong Kong prostitute. Susie Q as the name
of a popular dance is from 1936.


Portland

in Portland cement, 1720, named by its inventor, English mason Joseph Aspdin, from resemblance of
the color to the stone of Portland peninsula on the coast of Dorsetshire. The place name is
literally land surrounding a harbor, Old English Portlanda. Portland, Maine, U.S.A., took its name
1786, for the place in England. Portland, Oregon, was said to have been named for the city in Maine,
which won the honor by a coin toss over Boston.


scantling (adj.)

1520s, measured or prescribed size, altered from scantlon, scantiloun dimension (c.1400), earlier a
type of mason's tool for measuring thickness (c.1300), a shortening of Old French escantillon
(Modern French &#233;chantillon sample pattern), of uncertain origin; perhaps ultimately from Latin
scandere to climb (see scan (v.)). Sense influenced by scant. Meaning small wooden beam is 1660s.
Related: Scantlings.


Freemason (n.)

late 14c., originally a traveling guild of masons with a secret code; in the early 17c. they began
accepting honorary members and teaching them the secrets and lore, which by 1717 had developed into
the fraternity of Free and Accepted Masons.    The exact origin of the free- is a subject of
dispute. Some [such as Klein] see a corruption of French fr&egrave;re brother, from
fr&egrave;rema&ccedil;on brother mason; others say it was because the masons worked on free-standing
stones; still others see them as free from the control of local guilds or lords [OED].


mortarboard (n.)

also mortar-board, academic cap, 1854, probably from mortar (1) + board (n.1); so called because it
resembles a mason's square board for carrying mortar.  Earlier it was called a mortar cap (1680s) or
simply morter (c.1600), from French mortier.


harpoon (n.)

1610s, from French harpon, from Old French harpon cramp iron, clamp, clasp (described as a mason's
tool for fastening stones together), from harper to grapple, grasp, possibly of Germanic origin; or
from Latin harpa- hook (related to harpagonem grappling hook), from Greek harpe sickle, from PIE
root *serp- (1) sickle, hook. Earlier harping-iron (mid-15c.). Sense and spelling perhaps influenced
by Dutch (Middle Dutch harpoen) or Basque, the language of the first whaling peoples, who often
accompanied English sailors on their early expeditions. Also see -oon.


gavel (n.)

small mallet used by presiding officers at meetings, 1805, American English, of unknown origin;
perhaps connected with German dialectal gaffel brotherhood, friendly society, from Middle High
German gaffel society, guild, related to Old English gafol tribute, giefan to give (see habit). But
in some sources gavel also is identified as a type of mason's tool, in which case the extended
meaning may be via freemasonry. As a verb, by 1887, from the noun. Old English had tabule wooden
hammer struck as a signal for assembly among monks, an extended sense of table (n.).


starvation (n.)

1778, hybrid noun of action from starve. Famously (but not certainly) introduced in English by Henry
Dundas during debate in the House of Commons in 1775 on American affairs. It earned him the nickname
Starvation Dundas, though sources disagree on whether this was given in objection to the harshness
of his suggestion of starving the rebels into submission or in derision at the barbarous formation
of the word. It is one of the earliest instances of -ation used with a native Germanic word
(flirtation is earlier).    As to Lord Chatham, the victories, conquests, extension of our empire
within these last five years, will annihilate his fame of course, and he may be replaced by
Starvation Dundas, whose pious policy suggested that the devil of rebellion could be expelled only
by fasting, though that never drove him out of Scotland. [Horace Walpole, letter to the Rev. William
Mason, April 25, 1781]


Vanessa

fem. proper name, also the name of a butterfly genus. As a name, not much used in U.S. before 1950.
It appears to have been coined by Swift c.1711 as a pseudonym for Esther Vanhomrigh, who was
romantically attached to him, and composed of elements of her name. He used it in private
correspondence and published it in the poem Cadenus and Vanessa (1713).    The name Cadenus is an
anagram of Decanus; that of Vanessa is formed much in the same way, by placing the first syllable of
her sir-name before her christian-name, Hessy. [William Monck Mason, History and Antiquities of the
Collegiate and Cathedral Church of St. Patrick, Near Dublin, 1820]    As the name of a genus of
butterflies that includes the Red Admiral and the Painted Lady, it dates to 1808, chosen by Danish
entomologist Johan Christian Fabricius (1745-1808) for unknown reasons. He has no obvious connection
to Swift, and the theory that it was intended for *Phanessa, from Greek phanes a mystical divinity
in the Orphic system does no honor to his classical learning.


lesbian (adj.)

1590s, pertaining to the island of Lesbos, from Latin Lesbius, from Greek lesbios of Lesbos, Greek
island in northeastern Aegean Sea (the name originally may have meant wooded), home of Sappho, great
lyric poet whose erotic and romantic verse embraced women as well as men, hence meaning relating to
homosexual relations between women (1890; lesbianism in this sense is attested from 1870) and the
noun, first recorded 1925. Her particular association in English with erotic love between women
dates to at least 1825, though the words formed from it are later. Before this, the principal
figurative use (common in 17c.) was lesbian rule (c.1600) a mason's rule of lead, of a type used on
Lesbos, which could be bent to fit the curves of a molding; hence, pliant morality or judgment.And
this is the nature of the equitable, a correction of law where it is defective owing to its
universality. ... For when the thing is indefinite the rule also is indefinite, like the leaden rule
used in making the Lesbian moulding; the rule adapts itself to the shape of the stone and is not
rigid, and so too the decree is adapted to the facts. [Aristotle, Nicomachean Ethics]  See also
tribadism. Greek had a verb lesbiazein to imitate the Lesbians, which implied sexual initiative and
shamelessness among women, but not necessarily female homosexuality.


tailor (n.)

c.1300, from Anglo-French tailour, Old French tailleor tailor, also stone-mason (13c., Modern French
tailleur), literally a cutter, from tailler to cut, from Late Latin or old Medieval Latin taliare to
split (compare Medieval Latin taliator vestium a cutter of clothes), from Latin talea a slender
stick, rod, staff; a cutting, twig.    Although historically the tailor is the cutter, in the trade
the 'tailor' is the man who sews or makes up what the 'cutter' has shaped. [OED]    The post-Latin
sense development would be piece of a plant cut for grafting, hence a verb, cut a shoot, then,
generally, to cut. Possible cognates include Sanskrit talah wine palm, Old Lithuanian talokas a
young girl, Greek talis a marriageable girl (for sense, compare slip of a girl, twiggy), Etruscan
Tholna, name of the goddess of youth.   Kent. ... You cowardly rascal, nature disclaims in thee; a
tailor made thee.  Corn. Thou art a strange fellow: a tailor make a man?  Kent. Ay, a tailor, sir: a
stone cutter, or a painter, could not have made him so ill, though they had been but two hours at
the trade.  [King Lear]    One who makes outer garments to order, as opposed to a clothier, who
makes them for sale ready-made. Tailor-made first recorded 1832 (in a figurative sense); literal
sense was heavy and plain, with attention to exact fit and with little ornamentation, as of women's
garments made by a tailor rather than a dress-maker.


