Massachusetts

plural, originally (1614) a name for the Algonquian native people who lived around the bay, from
Algonquian Massachusett at the large hill, in reference to Great Blue Hill, southwest of Boston.


basketball (n.)

1892, American English, from basket + ball (n.1). The game was invented 1891 by James A. Naismith
(1861-1939), physical education instructor in Springfield, Massachusetts, U.S.


MIT

originally M.I.T., abbreviation of Massachusetts Institute of Technology, attested from 1892.


Smith &amp; Wesson

proprietary name of a type of firearm, 1860, from the gunsmith firm of Horace Smith (1808-1893) and
Daniel B. Wesson (1825-1906) in Springfield, Massachusetts.


Dalton

in reference to a system of school education designed by Helen Parkhurst, 1920, from Dalton,
Massachusetts, U.S., where it was first adopted. For Daltonism see color blindness.


magnum (n.)

1788, bottle containing two quarts of wine or spirits, from Latin magnum, neuter of magnus great in
size (see magnate). Registered 1935 by Smith &amp; Wesson Inc., of Springfield, Massachusetts, as
the name of a powerful type of handgun.


Bunker Hill

battle site in Massachusetts, U.S., was land assigned in 1634 to George Bunker, who came from the
vicinity of Bedford, England. The name dates from 1229, as Bonquer and is from Old French bon quer
good heart.


short-sleeve (n.)

1630s, from short (adj.) + sleeve. First recorded in an ordinance of Massachusetts Bay colony,
forbidding short sleeves, whereby the nakedness of the arme may be discovered.


Nantucket

island off Massachusetts, early forms include Natocke, Nantican, Nautican; from an obscure southern
New England Algonquian word, perhaps meaning in the middle of waters. Related: Nantucketer.


Harvard

U.S. college named for John Harvard (1607-1638), Puritan immigrant minister who bequeathed half his
estate and 260 books to the yet-unorganized college that had been ordered by the Massachusetts
colonial government. The surname is cognate with Hereward, Old English hereweard, literally army
guard.


Pete

familiar form of masc. proper name Peter. For Pete's sake is attested from 1903 in a list of
children's expressions published in Massachusetts, probably a euphemistic use of the disciple's name
in place of Christ; as an exclamation or quasi-oath, Peter! was in use 14c., but this likely is not
connected to the modern use.


Beverly Hills

city in southern California, U.S., named 1911, earlier Beverly (1907), named for Beverly Farms,
Massachusetts, summer home of U.S. President Taft, which ultimately is named for the Yorkshire town
Beverly, which means, in Old English, beaver lodge.


Plymouth

city in Devon, England, named for its location at the mouth of the Plym River; the river is in turn
named for Plympton, literally plum-tree farm. Earlier Plymouth was Sutton Prior. The town in
Massachusetts, U.S., was named 1620 by immigrants on the Mayflower, which had sailed from Plymouth,
England, and landed at what became known as Plymouth Rock.


gerrymander

1812 as both a noun and verb, American English, from Elbridge Gerry + (sala)mander. Gerry, governor
of Massachusetts, was lampooned when his party redistricted the state in a blatant bid to preserve
an Antifederalist majority. One Essex County district resembled a salamander, and a newspaper editor
dubbed it Gerrymander. Related: Gerrymandered; gerrymandering.


American dream

coined 1931 by James Truslow Adams (1878-1949), U.S. writer and popular historian (unrelated to the
Massachusetts Adamses), in Epic of America.    [The American Dream is] that dream of a land in which
life should be better and richer and fuller for everyone, with opportunity for each according to
ability or achievement. It is a difficult dream for the European upper classes to interpret
adequately, and too many of us ourselves have grown weary and mistrustful of it. It is not a dream
of motor cars and high wages merely, but a dream of social order in which each man and each woman
shall be able to attain to the fullest stature of which they are innately capable, and be recognized
by others for what they are, regardless of the fortuitous circumstances of birth or position.
[Adams]    Others have used the term as they will.


tea party (n.)

1772, from tea + party (n.). Political references to tea party all trace to the Boston tea party of
1773 (the name seems to date from 1824), in which radicals in Massachusetts colony boarded British
ships carrying tea and threw the product into Boston Harbor in protest royal taxation. It has been a
model for other libertarian political actions in the U.S. (mostly symbolic), including citizen
gatherings begun in early 2009 to protest government spending.


Podunk

legendary small town, 1846, originally the name of a small group of Indians who lived around the
Podunk River in Connecticut; the tribe name is in colonial records from 1656 (as Potunck), from
southern New England Algonquian (Mohegan or Massachusetts) Potunk, probably from pautaunke, from
pot- to sink + locative suffix -unk, thus a boggy place. Its popularity as the name of a typical (if
mythical) U.S. small town dates from a series of witty Letters from Podunk which ran in the Buffalo
Daily National Pilot newspaper beginning Jan. 5, 1846.


fluff (n.)

light, feathery stuff, 1790, apparently a variant of floow wooly substance, down, nap (1580s),
perhaps from Flemish vluwe, from French velu shaggy, hairy, from Latin vellus fleece, or Latin
villus tuft of hair (see velvet). OED suggests fluff as an imitative modification of floow,
imitating the action of puffing away some light substance. Slang bit of fluff young woman is from
1903. The marshmallow confection Fluff dates to c.1920 in Massachusetts, U.S.


hacker (n.)

a chopper, cutter, perhaps also one who makes hacking tools, early 13c. (as a surname), agent noun
from hack (v.1). Meaning one who gains unauthorized access to computer records is attested by 1983,
agent noun from hack (v.2). Said to be from slightly earlier tech slang sense of one who works like
a hack at writing and experimenting with software, one who enjoys computer programming for its own
sake, 1976, reputedly a usage that evolved at Massachusetts Institute of Technology (however an MIT
student from the late 1960s recalls hack (n.) being used then and there in the general sense of
creative prank, which clouds its sense connection with the writing for hire word, and there may be a
source or an influence here in hack (v.1)).


Indian

inhabit of India or South Asia, c.1300 (noun and adjective); applied to the native inhabitants of
the Americas from at least 1553, on the mistaken notion that America was the eastern end of Asia.
Red Indian, to distinguish them from inhabitants of India, is first attested 1831 (Carlyle) but was
not commonly used in North America. More than 500 modern phrases include Indian, most of them U.S.
and most impugning honesty or intelligence, such as Indian giver, first attested 1765 in Indian
gift:An Indian gift is a proverbial expression, signifying a present for which an equivalent return
is expected. [Thomas Hutchinson, History of Massachusetts Bay, 1765]Meaning one who gives a gift and
then asks for it back first attested 1892.


bundling (n.)

1640s, a gathering into a bundle, verbal noun from bundle (v.). Meaning sharing a bed for the night,
fully dressed, wrapped up with someone of the opposite sex (1782) is a former local custom in New
England (especially Connecticut and southeastern Massachusetts). It was noted there from about 1750s
and often regarded by outsiders as grossly immoral, but New Englanders wrote defenses of it and
claimed it was practiced elsewhere, too. It seems to have died out with the 18th century.    I am no
advocate for temptation; yet must say, that bundling has prevailed 160 years in New England, and, I
verily believe, with ten times more chastity than the sitting on a sofa. I had daughters, and speak
from near forty years' experience. Bundling takes place only in cold seasons of the year--the sofa
in summer is more dangerous than the bed in winter. [The Rev. Samuel Peters, A general history of
Connecticut, 1782]


lumber (n.)

timber sawn into rough planks, 1660s, American English (Massachusetts), earlier disused bit of
furniture; heavy, useless objects (1550s), probably from lumber (v.), perhaps influenced by Lombard,
from the Italian immigrants famous as pawnbrokers and money-lenders in England (see Lombard).
Lumbar, Lumbard were old alternative forms of Lombard in English. The evolution of sense then would
be because a lumber-house (pawn shop) naturally accumulates odds and ends of furniture.    Live
Lumber, soldiers or passengers on board a ship are so called by the sailors. [Grose, Dictionary of
the Vulgar Tongue, 1785]   <hr />   LUMBER HOUSE. A house appropriated by thieves for the reception
of their stolen property. [Dictionary of Buckish Slang, University Wit, and Pickpocket Eloquence,
London, 1811]


knothead (n.)

stupid person, by 1899, American English, from knot (n.) + head (n.). Joe Knothead is the name of a
character in an 1857 blackface satire publication. And a local history from Massachusetts published
in 1879 describes an old-time character known as knot-head because [d]uring the hottest days of
summer ... he worked bare-headed in the sun ....   Knothead also was used as a term in cattle and
sheep raising, defined in 1922 as a type of poorly bred, stunted northern cattle, about the size of
yearlings, but with heavy horns indicating that they are older. It turns up, however, in an 1849
petition to the Ohio Legislature, recommending a certain person for a court position, in part
because he is a knot-head, which the report of the petition notes is a term of praise for a judge
because they are asked to untangle knotty legal questions, but which phrase, it adds, is believed
not to be in use among gentlemen in the north part of the State. [Appendix to the Journal of the
Ohio House of Representatives, Session of 1848-9]


Yankee (n.)

1683, a name applied disparagingly by Dutch settlers in New Amsterdam (New York) to English
colonists in neighboring Connecticut. It may be from Dutch Janke, literally Little John, diminutive
of common personal name Jan; or it may be from Jan Kes familiar form of John Cornelius, or perhaps
an alteration of Jan Kees, dialectal variant of Jan Kaas, literally John Cheese, the generic
nickname the Flemings used for Dutchmen.    [I]t is to be noted that it is common to name a droll
fellow, regarded as typical of his country, after some favorite article of food, as E[nglish] Jack-
pudding, G[erman] Hanswurst (Jack Sausage), F[rench] Jean Farine (Jack Flour). [Century Dictionary,
1902, entry for macaroni]    Originally it seems to have been applied insultingly to the Dutch,
especially freebooters, before they turned around and slapped it on the English. A less-likely
theory (attested by 1832) is that it represents some southern New England Algonquian language
mangling of English. In English a term of contempt (1750s) before its use as a general term for
native of New England (1765); during the American Revolution it became a disparaging British word
for all American natives or inhabitants. Contrasted with southerner by 1828. Shortened form Yank in
reference to an American first recorded 1778. Latin-American form Yanqui attested in English by 1914
(in Mexican Spanish by 1835).    The rule observed in this country is, that the man who receives
that name [Yankee] must come from some part north of him who gives it. To compensate us for giving
each other nicknames, John Bull lumps us all together, and calls us all Yankees. [Who is a Yankee?
Massachusetts Spy, June 6, 1827]


pull (v.)

c.1300, to move forcibly by pulling, to drag, from Old English pullian to pluck off (wool), to draw
out, of unknown origin, perhaps related to Low German pulen remove the shell or husk, Frisian
p&#251;lje to shell, husk, Middle Dutch polen to peel, strip, Icelandic pula work hard.    Early
14c. as to pick, pull off, gather (fruit, flowers, berries, leaves, petals, etc.); mid-14c. as to
uproot, pull up (of teeth, weeds, etc.). Sense of to draw, attract (to oneself) is from c.1400;
sense of to pluck at with the fingers is from c.1400. Meaning tear to pieces is mid-15c. By late
16c. it had replaced draw in these senses. Related: Pulled; pulling.    Common in slang usages
19c.-20c.; Bartlett (1859) has to pull foot walk fast; run; pull it to run. To pull up check a
course of action is from 1808, figurative of the lifting of the reins in horse-riding. To pull
(someone's) chain in figurative sense is from 1974, perhaps on the notion of a captive animal; the
expression was also used for to contact (someone), on the notion of the chain that operates a
signaling mechanism.    To pull (someone's) leg is from 1882, perhaps on notion of playfully
tripping (compare pull the long bow exaggerate, 1830, and pulling someone's leg also sometimes was
described as a way to awaken a sleeping person in a railway compartment, ship's berth, etc.).
Thornton's American Glossary (1912) has pull (n.) a jest (to have a pull at (someone)), which it
identifies as local and illustrates with an example from the Massachusetts Spy of May 21, 1817,
which identifies it as a Georgian phrase. To pull (one's) punches is from 1920 in pugilism, from
1921 figuratively. To pull in arrive (1892) and pull out depart (1868) are from the railroads.    To
pull (something) off accomplish, succeed at is originally in sporting, to win the prize money
(1870). To pull (something) on (someone) is from 1916; to pull (something) out of one's ass is Army
slang from 1970s. To pull rank is from 1919; to pull the rug from under (someone) figuratively is
from 1946.


patriot (n.)

1590s, compatriot, from Middle French patriote (15c.) and directly from Late Latin patriota fellow-
countryman (6c.), from Greek patriotes fellow countryman, from patrios of one's fathers, patris
fatherland, from pater (genitive patros) father (see father (n.)); with -otes, suffix expressing
state or condition. Liddell &amp; Scott write that patriotes was applied to barbarians who had only
a common [patris], [politai] being used of Greeks who had a common [polis] (or free-state).
Meaning loyal and disinterested supporter of one's country is attested from c.1600, but became an
ironic term of ridicule or abuse from mid-18c. in England, so that Johnson, who at first defined it
as one whose ruling passion is the love of his country, in his fourth edition added, It is sometimes
used for a factious disturber of the government.The name of patriot had become [c.1744] a by-word of
derision. Horace Walpole scarcely exaggerated when he said that ... the most popular declaration
which a candidate could make on the hustings was that he had never been and never would be a
patriot. [Macaulay, Horace Walpole, 1833]Somewhat revived in reference to resistance movements in
overrun countries in World War II, it has usually had a positive sense in American English, where
the phony and rascally variety has been consigned to the word patrioteer (1928). Oriana Fallaci [The
Rage and the Pride, 2002] marvels that Americans, so fond of patriotic, patriot, and patriotism,
lack the root noun and are content to express the idea of patria by cumbersome compounds such as
homeland. (Joyce, Shaw, and H.G. Wells all used patria as an English word early 20c., but it failed
to stick.) Patriots' Day (April 19, anniversary of the 1775 skirmishes at Lexington and Concord
Bridge) was observed as a legal holiday in Maine and Massachusetts from 1894.


