masterful (adj.)

c.1300, fond of being a master, from master (n.) + -ful. Sense evolved through having capabilities
to command (c.1400) to characterized by a master's skill (1610s). Related: Masterfully.


mastery (n.)

early 13c., mesterie, condition of being a master, also superiority, victory; from Old French
maistrie, from maistre master (see master (n.)). Meaning intellectual command (of a topic, etc.) is
from 1660s.


master&#039;s degree (n.)

late 14c., originally a degree giving one authority to teach in a university; from master (n.) in
its general sense of man of learning (early 13c.), a teacher (c.1200).


master-stroke (n.)

masterly line or touch (especially in painting), 1670s, from master (n.) + stroke (n.). Probably
based on a Dutch or German model.


masterpiece (n.)

c.1600, from master (n.) + piece (n.). A loan-translation of Dutch meesterstuk work by which a
craftsman attains the rank of master (or its German cognate Meisterst&uuml;ck).


master-work (n.)

c.1600, from master (n.) + work (n.). Probably based on a Dutch or German model.


master (v.)

early 13c., to get the better of, from master (n.) and also from Old French maistrier, from Medieval
Latin magistrare. Meaning to reduce to subjugation is early 15c.; that of to acquire complete
knowledge is from 1740s. Related: Mastered; mastering.


masterly (adj.)

1530s, overbearing; 1660s, skillful, from master (n.) + -ly.


mastermind (n.)

1720, an outstanding intellect, from master (n.) + mind (n.). Meaning head of a criminal enterprise
is first attested 1872. As a verb from 1940. Related: Masterminded; masterminding.


master (n.)

late Old English m&aelig;gester one having control or authority, from Latin magister (n.) chief,
head, director, teacher (source of Old French maistre, French ma&icirc;tre, Spanish and Italian
maestro, Portuguese mestre, Dutch meester, German Meister), contrastive adjective (he who is
greater) from magis (adv.) more, from PIE *mag-yos-, comparative of root *meg- great (see mickle).
Form influenced in Middle English by Old French cognate maistre. Meaning original of a recording is
from 1904. In academic senses (from Medieval Latin magister) it is attested from late 14c.,
originally a degree conveying authority to teach in the universities. As an adjective from late 12c.


ipse dixit

Latin, literally he (the master) said it, translation of Greek autos epha, phrase used by disciples
of Pythagoras when quoting their master.


maestro (n.)

master of music, great teacher or composer, 1797, from Italian maestro, literally master, from Latin
magisterium, accusative of magister (see master (n.)). Applied in Italian to eminent musical
composers. Meaning conductor, musical director is short for maestro di cappella (1724), literally
master of the chapel (compare German kapellmeister).


swami (n.)

1773, Hindu idol, later, Hindu religious teacher (1901), from Hindi swami master (used as a term of
address to a Brahmin), from Sanskrit svamin lord, prince, master, (one's own) master, from sva-s
one's own (from PIE *s(u)w-o- one's own, from root *s(w)e-; see idiom) + amah pressure, vehemence.


rabbi (n.)

Jewish doctor of religious law, late 15c. (in Old English in biblical context only; in Middle
English also as a title prefixed to personal names), from Late Latin rabbi, from Greek rhabbi, from
Mishnaic Hebrew rabbi my master, from rabh master, great one, title of respect for Jewish doctors of
law + -i, first person singular pronominal suffix. From Semitic root r-b-b to be great or numerous
(compare robh multitude; Aramaic rabh great; chief, master, teacher; Arabic rabba was great, rabb
master).


kapellmeister (n.)

conductor, 1838, German, literally chapel master, from Kapelle chapel (also the name given to a band
or orchestra) + Meister master.


magistral (adj.)

1570s, from Latin magistralis of a master, from magister chief, director (see master (n.)).


scoutmaster (n.)

also scout-master, 1570s, from scout (n.) + master (n.). Boy Scouting sense from 1908.


patron (n.)

a lord-master, a protector, c.1300, from Old French patron patron, protector, patron saint (12c.)
and directly from Medieval Latin patronus patron saint, bestower of a benefice, lord, master, model,
pattern, from Latin patronus defender, protector, former master (of a freed slave); advocate, from
pater (genitive patris) father (see father (n.)). Meaning one who advances the cause (of an artist,
institution, etc.), usually by the person's wealth and power, is attested from late 14c.; commonly a
wretch who supports with insolence, and is paid with flattery [Johnson]. Commercial sense of regular
customer first recorded c.1600. Patron saint (1717) originally was simply patron (late 14c.).


domino (n.)

1801, from French domino (1771), perhaps (on comparison of the black tiles of the game) from the
meaning hood with a cloak worn by canons or priests (1690s), from Latin dominus lord, master (see
domain), but the connection is not clear. Klein thinks it might be directly from dominus, because he
who has first disposed his pieces becomes 'the master.'  Metaphoric use in geopolitics is from April
1954, first used by U.S. President Eisenhower in a New York Times piece, in reference to what
happens when you set up a row of dominos and knock the first one down.


meistersinger (n.)

1845, from German Meistersinger, literally master singer; see master (adj.) + singer.


mistral (n.)

cold northerly wind on the Mediterranean coast of France, c.1600, from French, from Proven&ccedil;al
mistral, literally the dominant wind, from mistral (adj.) dominant, from Latin magistralis dominant,
from magister master (see master (n.)).


domination (n.)

late 14c., rule, control, from Old French dominacion (12c.) domination, rule, power, from Latin
dominationem (nominative dominatio), noun of action from past participle stem of dominari to rule,
have dominion over, from dominus lord, master, literally master of the house, from domus home (see
domestic) + -nus, suffix denoting ownership or relation. Sexual sense by 1961.


maitre d&#039;hotel

1530s, head domestic, from French ma&icirc;tre d'h&ocirc;tel, literally house-master, from Old
French maistre master; skilled worker, educator (12c.), from Latin magistrum (see magistrate). Sense
of hotel manager, manager of a dining room is from 1890. Shortened form ma&icirc;tre d' is attested
from 1942; simple maitre from 1899.


non compos mentis

Latin, literally not master of one's mind.


mistress (n.)

early 14c., female teacher, governess, from Old French maistresse mistress (lover); housekeeper;
governess, female teacher (Modern French ma&#238;tresse), fem. of maistre master (see master (n.)).
Sense of a woman who employs others or has authority over servants is from early 15c. Sense of kept
woman of a married man is from early 15c.


boss (n.1)

overseer, 1640s, American English, from Dutch baas a master, Middle Dutch baes, of obscure origin.
If original sense was uncle, perhaps it is related to Old High German basa aunt, but some sources
discount this theory. The Dutch form baas is attested in English from 1620s as the standard title of
a Dutch ship's captain. The word's popularity in U.S. may reflect egalitarian avoidance of master
(n.) as well as the need to distinguish slave from free labor. The slang adjective meaning excellent
is recorded in 1880s, revived, apparently independently, in teen and jazz slang in 1950s.


Bhagavad-Gita (n.)

dialogue between Krishna and Arjuna inserted in Mahabharata, from Sanskrit, Song of the Sublime One,
from Bhaga, a god of wealth, from Sanskrit bhagah, literally allotter, distributor, master, lord,
from bhajati assigns, allots, apportions, enjoys, loves (related to Avestan baga, Old Persian baga
master, lord, god) + gita song, fem. past participle of gayate sings, calls, from PIE root *gei- to
sing (cognates: Avestan gatha song, Lithuanian giedoti to sing).


despot (n.)

1560s, absolute ruler, from Old French despot (14c.), from Medieval Latin despota, from Greek
despotes master of a household, lord, absolute ruler, from PIE *dems-pota- house-master; for first
element see domestic (adj.); second element cognate with Latin potis, potens (see potent).
Faintly pejorative in Greek, progressively more so as used in various languages for Roman emperors,
Christian rulers of Ottoman provinces, and Louis XVI during the French Revolution. The female
equivalent was despoina lady, queen, mistress, source of the proper name Despina.


Massa

supposedly representing the colloquial black English pronunciation of master (n.), from 1774.


mister

as a title of courtesy before a man's Christian name, mid-15c., unaccented variant of master. As a
form of address, without a name and with a tinge of rudeness, from 1760.


danger (n.)

mid-13c., power of a lord or master, jurisdiction, from Anglo-French daunger, Old French dangier
power, power to harm, mastery, authority, control (12c., Modern French danger), alteration (due to
assoc. with damnum) of dongier, from Vulgar Latin *dominarium power of a lord, from Latin dominus
lord, master (see domain).    Modern sense of risk, peril (from being in the control of someone or
something else) evolved first in French and was in English late 14c. Replaced Old English pleoh; in
early Middle English this sense is found in peril.


kung fu (n.)

1966, from dialectal Chinese kung fu, said to meant literally merit master, but Barnhart has it as
boxing method.


buckra (n.)

disparaging term among U.S. blacks for white person, especially a poor one, 1790, apparently from an
African language; compare mbakara master in Efik, a language of the Ibibio people of southern
Nigeria.


dobbie (n.)

household sprite, 1811, from playful use of the proper name represented in dobbin (q.v.). In Sussex,
such apparitions were called Master Dobbs.


domestic (adj.)

early 15c., from Middle French domestique (14c.) and directly from Latin domesticus belonging to the
household, from domus house, from PIE *dom-o- house, from root *dem- house, household (cognates:
Sanskrit damah house; Avestan demana- house; Greek domos house, despotes master, lord; Latin dominus
master of a household; Old Church Slavonic domu, Russian dom house; Lithuanian dimstis enclosed
court, property; Old Norse topt homestead).    It represents the usual Indo-European word for house
(Italian, Spanish casa are from Latin casa cottage, hut; Germanic *hus is of obscure origin). The
noun meaning household servant is 1530s (a sense also found in Old French domestique). Domestics,
originally articles of home manufacture, is attested from 1620s. Related: Domestically. Domestic
violence is attested from 19c. as revolution and insurrection; 1977 as spouse abuse, violence in the
home.


Bel

heaven-and-earth god of Babylonian religion, from Akkadian Belu, literally lord, owner, master,
cognate with Hebrew ba'al.


emcee (n.)

1933, abbreviation of M.C., for master of ceremonies, a phrase attested from the 1660s.


aga (n.)

title of rank, especially in Turkey, c.1600, from Turkish agha chief, master, lord, related to East
Turk. agha elder brother.


grandmaster (n.)

as a chess title, 1927, from grand (adj.) + master (n.). Earlier as a title in Freemasonry (1724)
and in military orders of knighthood (1550s).


ringmaster (n.)

1842, from ring (n.1) in the circus sense + master (n.).


tyrant (n.)

c.1300, absolute ruler, especially one without legal right; cruel, oppressive ruler, from Old French
tiran, tyrant (12c.), from Latin tyrannus lord, master, monarch, despot, especially arbitrary ruler,
cruel governor, autocrat (source also of Spanish tirano, Italian tiranno), from Greek tyrannos lord,
master, sovereign, absolute ruler unlimited by law or constitution, a loan-word from a language of
Asia Minor (probably Lydian); Klein compares Etruscan Turan mistress, lady (surname of Venus).  In
the exact sense, a tyrant is an individual who arrogates to himself the royal authority without
having a right to it. This is how the Greeks understood the word 'tyrant': they applied it
indifferently to good and bad princes whose authority was not legitimate. [Rousseau, The Social
Contract]    Originally in Greek the word was not applied to old hereditary sovereignties
(basileiai) and despotic kings, but it was used of usurpers, even when popular, moderate, and just
(such as Cypselus of Corinth), however it soon became a word of reproach in the usual modern sense.
The spelling with -t arose in Old French by analogy with present participle endings in -ant. Fem.
form tyranness is recorded from 1590 (Spenser); Medieval Latin had tyrannissa (late 14c.).


webmaster (n.)

1993, from web in the Internet sense + master (n.).


unmastered (adj.)

1560s, from un- (1) not + past participle of master (v.).


Orphic (adj.)

1670s, from Greek orphikos pertaining to Orpheus, master musician of Thrace, son of Eagrus and
Calliope, husband of Eurydice, whose name (of unknown origin) was associated with mystic doctrines.
Related: Orphism.


footman (n.)

c.1300, foot soldier; late 14c., one who goes on foot; as a personal attendant, originally one who
ran before or alongside his master's carriage, announcing its arrival (and keeping it from tipping
over). The modern, non-jogging servant sense is from c.1700, though the running footmen still were
in service mid-18c. From foot (n.) + man (n.).


Dom Perignon

trademark name, 1954 (in use from 1936), from monk of that name (1638-1715), blind cellarmaster of
the monastery of Hautvilliers near Epernay, France, who was said to have discovered the advantage of
corked bottles in fermentation. Dom was a title of authority, from Latin dominus lord, master (see
domain).


headmaster (n.)

1570s, from head (adj.) + master (n.).


postmaster (n.)

1510s, from post (n.3) + master (n.).


taskmaster (n.)

overseer, one who imposes a task, 1520s, from task (n.) + master (n.).


mullah (n.)

title given in Muslim lands to one learned in theology and sacred law, 1610s, from Turkish molla,
Persian and Urdu mulla, from Arabic mawla master, from waliya reigned, governed.


