maternal (adj.)

late 15c., from Old French maternel (14c.), from Vulgar Latin *maternalis, from Latin maternus
maternal, of a mother, from mater mother (see mother (n.1)).


uncle (n.)

late 13c., from Old French oncle, from Latin avunculus mother's brother (father's brother was
patruus), literally little grandfather, diminutive of avus grandfather, from PIE root *awo-
grandfather, adult male relative other than one's father (cognates: Armenian hav grandfather,
Lithuanian avynas maternal uncle, Old Church Slavonic uji uncle, Welsh ewythr uncle).    Replaced
Old English eam (usually maternal; paternal uncle was f&aelig;dera), which represents the Germanic
form of the root (cognates: Dutch oom, Old High German oheim maternal uncle, German Ohm uncle).
Also from French are German, Danish, Swedish onkel. As a familiar title of address to an old man,
attested by 1793; in the U.S. South, especially a kindly title for a worthy old negro [Century
Dictionary]. First record of Dutch uncle (and his blunt, stern, benevolent advice) is from 1838;
Welsh uncle (1747) was the male first cousin of one's parent. To say uncle as a sign of submission
in a fight is North American, attested from 1909, of uncertain signification.


earth-mother (n.)

1904, folkloric spirit of the earth, conceived as sensual, maternal; a translation of German
erdmutter.


dey (n.2)

1650s, title of a military commander in Muslim north Africa, from Turkish dai maternal uncle, a
friendly title used of older men, especially by the Janissaries of Algiers of their commanding
officers. There were also deys in Tunis and Tripoli.


broody (adj.)

1510s, apt to breed, from brood (v.) + -y (2). Figuratively, of persons, from 1851. Also, in modern
use, sometimes full of maternal yearning. Related: Broodily; broodiness.


maternity (n.)

1610s, quality or condition of being a mother, from French maternit&eacute; motherhood (15c.), from
Medieval Latin maternitatem (nominative maternitas) motherhood, from Latin maternus (see maternal).
Used from 1893 as a quasi-adjective in reference to garments designed for pregnant women.


metronymic (adj.)

derived from the name of a mother or maternal ancestor, 1881, from Late Greek metronymikos named for
one's mother, from meter (genitive metros) mother (see mother (n.1)) + onyma (see name (n.)).
Related: Metronymically (1822).


avuncular (adj.)

1789, from Latin avunculus maternal uncle, diminutive of avus (see uncle) + -ar. Used humorously for
of a pawnbroker (uncle was slang for pawnbroker from c.1600 through 19c.).My only good suit is at
present under the avuncular protection. [Fraser's Magazine, 1832]


