matrimony (n.)

c.1300, from Old French matremoine matrimony, marriage and directly from Latin matrimonium wedlock,
marriage, from matrem (nominative mater) mother (see mother (n.1)) + -monium, suffix signifying
action, state, condition.


matrimonial (adj.)

mid-15c., from Middle French matrimonial (14c.) and directly from Late Latin matrimonialis, from
Latin matrimonium (see matrimony). Earlier as a noun meaning a marriage (late 15c.). Related:
Matrimonially.


patrimony (n.)

mid-14c., property of the Church, also spiritual legacy of Christ, from Old French patremoine
heritage, patrimony (12c.) and directly from Latin patrimonium a paternal estate, inheritance from a
father, also figurative, from pater (genitive patris) father (see father (n.)) + -monium, suffix
signifying action, state, condition. Meaning property inherited from a father or ancestors is
attested from late 14c. Figurative sense of immaterial things handed down from the past is from
1580s. A curious sense contrast to matrimony.


sacrament (n.)

outward and visible sign of inward and spiritual grace, also the eucharist, c.1200, from Old French
sacrament consecration; mystery (12c., Modern French sacrement) and directly from Latin sacramentum
a consecrating (also source of Spanish sacramento, German Sakrament, etc.), from sacrare to
consecrate (see sacred); a Church Latin loan-translation of Greek mysterion (see mystery).
Meaning a holy mystery in English is from late 14c. The seven sacraments are baptism, penance,
confirmation, holy orders, the Eucharist, matrimony, and anointing of the sick (extreme unction).


union (n.)

early 15c., action of joining one thing to another, also agreement, accord, also state of matrimony,
from Anglo-French unioun, Old French union (12c.), from Late Latin unionem (nominative unio)
oneness, unity, a uniting, also in Latin meaning a single pearl or onion, from unus one, from PIE
*oi-no- one, unique (see one).    Sense of action of uniting into one political body is attested
from 1540s. Meaning group of people or states is from 1650s. Short for trade union, it is recorded
from 1833. U.S. political sense is attested from 1775; used especially during the Civil War, in
reference to the remainder of the United States after the Southern secession.


marriage (n.)

c.1300, action of marrying, entry into wedlock; also state or condition of being husband and wife,
matrimony, wedlock; from Old French mariage marriage; dowry (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *maritaticum
(11c.), from Latin maritatus, past participle of maritatre to wed, marry, give in marriage (see
marry (v.)). The Vulgar Latin word also is the source of Italian maritaggio, Spanish maridaje.
Meaning a union of a man and woman for life by marriage, a particular matrimonial union is early
14c. Meanings the marriage vow, formal declaration or contract by which two join in wedlock; also a
wedding, celebration of a marriage; the marriage ceremony are from late 14c. Figurative use (non-
theological) intimate union, a joining as if by marriage is from early 15c.[W]hen two people are
under the influence of the most violent, most insane, most delusive, and most transient of passions,
they are required to swear that they will remain in that excited, abnormal, and exhausting condition
until death do them part. [G.B. Shaw, preface to Getting Married, 1908]Marriage counseling recorded
by 1939. Marriage bed, figurative of marital intercourse generally, is attested from 1580s (bed of
marriage is from early 15c.).


marry (v.)

c.1300, to give (offspring) in marriage, from Old French marier to get married; to marry off, give
in marriage; to bring together in marriage, from Latin maritare to wed, marry, give in marriage
(source of Italian maritare, Spanish and Portuguese maridar), from maritus (n.) married man,
husband, of uncertain origin, originally a past participle, perhaps ultimately from provided with a
*mari, a young woman, from PIE root *mari- young wife, young woman, akin to *meryo- young man
(source of Sanskrit marya- young man, suitor).    Meaning to get married, join (with someone) in
matrimony is early 14c. in English, as is that of to take in marriage. Said from 1520s of the
priest, etc., who performs the rite. Figurative use from early 15c. Related: Married; marrying.
Phrase the marrying kind, describing one inclined toward marriage and almost always used with a
negative, is attested by 1824, probably short for marrying kind of men, which is from a popular 1756
essay by Chesterfield.    In some Indo-European languages there were distinct marry verbs for men
and women, though some of these have become generalized. Compare Latin ducere uxorem (of men),
literally to lead a wife; nubere (of women), perhaps originally to veil [Buck]. Also compare Old
Norse kvangask (of men) from kvan wife (see quean), so, take a wife; giptask (of women), from gipta,
a specialized use of to give (see gift (n.)), so, to be given.


