Maxim

single-barreled water-cooled machine gun, 1885, named for inventor, U.S.-born British engineer Sir
Hiram S. Maxim (1840-1916).


maxim (n.)

precept, principle, early 15c., from Middle French maxime, from Late Latin maxima, shortened from
phrases such as maxima propositio, maxima sententarium axiom, literally greatest premise, greatest
among propositions (one which is general and absolute), from fem. of maximus greatest (see maximum).


pom-pom (n.)

Maxim automatic gun, 1899, of imitative origin, soldiers' slang from the Boer War. For the
ornamental tuft, see pompom.


lectio difficilior

Latin, literally harder reading, from phrase maxim difficilior lectio potior. In textual
reconstruction (of the Bible, etc.) the idea that, of two alternative manuscript readings, the one
whose meaning is less obvious is less likely to be a copyist's alteration, and therefore should be
given precedence.


Murphy&#039;s law

1958, used of various pessimistic aphorisms. If there ever was a real Murphy his identity is lost to
history. Said to be military originally, and probably pre-dates the earliest printed example (the
1958 citation calls it an old military maxim).


vox populi (n.)

1540s, Latin, literally voice of the people. The full maxim (first attested in Medieval Latin) is
vox populi, vox Dei the voice of the people is the voice of God. Short form vox pop attested by
1964.


gnomic (adj.)

full of instructive sayings, 1815, from French gnomique (18c.) and directly from Late Latin gnomicus
concerned with maxims, didactic, from Greek gnomikos, from gnome thought, opinion, maxim,
intelligence, from root of gignoskein to come to know (see gnostic). English gnome meant short,
pithy statement of general truth (1570s). Gnomical is attested from 1610s.


precept (n.)

late 14c., from Old French percept, percet (12c.), from Latin praeceptum maxim, rule of conduct,
order, noun use of neuter past participle of praecipere give rules to, order, advise, literally take
beforehand, from prae before (see pre-) + capere (past participle captus) to take (see capable). For
change of vowel, see biennial.


proverb (n.)

c.1300, in boke of Prouerbyys, the Old Testament work, from Old French proverbe (12c.) and directly
from Latin proverbium a common saying, old adage, maxim, literally words put forward, from pro-
forth (see pro-) + verbum word (see verb). Used generally from late 14c. The Book of Proverbs in Old
English was cwidboc, from cwide speech, saying, proverb, homily, related to cwiddian to talk, speak,
say, discuss; cwiddung speech, saying, report.


saw (n.2)

proverb, saying, maxim, Old English sagu saying, discourse, speech, study, tradition, tale, from
Proto-Germanic *saga-, *sagon- (cognates: Middle Low German, Middle Dutch sage, zage, German Sage
legend, fable, saga, myth, tradition, Old Norse saga story, tale, saga), from PIE root *sek(w)- to
say, utter (see say (v.)).


divide (v.)

early 14c., from Latin dividere to force apart, cleave, distribute, from dis- apart (see dis-) +
-videre to separate, from PIE root *weidh- to separate (see widow; also see with).    Mathematical
sense is from early 15c. Divide and rule (c.1600) translates Latin divide et impera, a maxim of
Machiavelli. Related: Divided; dividing.


item

late 14c. (adv.) moreover, in addition, from Latin item (adv.) likewise, just so, moreover, used to
introduce a new fact or statement, probably from ita thus, id it (see id) + adverbial ending -tem
(compare idem the same). Thus a statement or maxim (of the kind formerly introduced by the word
item), first recorded 1560s. Meaning detail of information (especially in a newspaper) is from 1819;
item sexually linked unmarried couple is 1970, probably from notion of being an item in the gossip
columns. Noun sense of an article of any kind (1570s) developed from adverbial sense of moreover, in
addition, which was used before every article in a list (such as an inventory or bill).


aphorism (n.)

1520s (especially in reference to the Aphorisms of Hippocrates), from Middle French aphorisme (14c.,
aufforisme), from Late Latin aphorismus, from Greek aphorismos definition, pithy sentence, from
aphorizein to mark off, divide, from apo- from (see apo-) + horizein to bound (see horizon).    An
aphorism is a short, pithy statement containing a truth of general import; an axiom is a statement
of self-evident truth; a theorem is a demonstrable proposition in science or mathematics; an epigram
is like an aphorism, but lacking in general import. Maxim and saying can be used as synonyms for
aphorism.


vacuum (n.)

1540s, emptiness of space, from Latin vacuum an empty space, vacant place, a void, noun use of
neuter of vacuus empty, unoccupied, devoid of, figuratively free, unoccupied, related to vacare be
empty (see vain). Properly a loan-translation of Greek kenon, literally that which is empty. Meaning
a space emptied of air is attested from 1650s. Vacuum tube glass thermionic device is attested from
1859. Vacuum cleaner is from 1903; shortened form vacuum (n.) first recorded 1910.    The
metaphysicians of Elea, Parmenides and Melissus, started the notion that a vacuum was impossible,
and this became a favorite doctrine with Aristotle. All the scholastics upheld the maxim that nature
abhors a vacuum. [Century Dictionary]


rule (n.)

c.1200, principle or maxim governing conduct, formula to which conduct must be conformed from Old
French riule, Norman reule rule, custom, (religious) order (in Modern French partially re-Latinized
as r&#232;gle), from Vulgar Latin *regula, from Latin regula straight stick, bar, ruler;
figuratively a pattern, a model, related to regere to rule, straighten, guide (see regal). Replaced
Old English wealdan.    Meaning regulation governing play of a game, etc. is from 1690s. Phrase rule
of thumb first attested 1690s. Rule of law supremacy of impartial and well-defined laws to any
individual's power is from 1883. Meaning strip used for making straight lines or measuring is
recorded from mid-14c. Typography sense is attested from 1680s.


sentence (n.)

c.1200, doctrine, authoritative teaching; an authoritative pronouncement, from Old French sentence
judgment, decision; meaning; aphorism, maxim; statement of authority (12c.) and directly from Latin
sententia thought, way of thinking, opinion; judgment, decision, also a thought expressed; aphorism,
saying, from sentientem, present participle of sentire be of opinion, feel, perceive (see sense
(n.)). Loss of first -i- in Latin by dissimilation.    From early 14c. as judgment rendered by God,
or by one in authority; a verdict, decision in court; from late 14c. as understanding, wisdom;
edifying subject matter. From late 14c. as subject matter or content of a letter, book, speech,
etc., also in reference to a passage in a written work. Sense of grammatically complete statement is
attested from mid-15c. Meaning, then meaning expressed in words. Related: Sentential.


no

negative reply, early 13c., from Old English na (adv.) no, never, not at all, from ne not, no + a
ever. First element from Proto-Germanic *ne (cognates: Old Norse, Old Frisian, Old High German ne,
Gothic ni not), from PIE root *ne no, not (see un-). Second element from PIE *aiw- vital force,
life, long life, eternity (see aye (adv.)).    As an adjective meaning not any (c.1200) it is
reduced from Old English nan (see none), the final -n omitted first before consonants and then
altogether. As a noun from c.1300. Phrase no can do it is not possible is attested from 1827, a
locution of English-speaking Chinese noted 19c. in China, Australia and West Coast of U.S.    We
repeated our advice again and again, but got no answer but a loud horse-laugh, and their national
maxim of No can do: Europe fashion no do in China. [Reminiscences of a Voyage to and from China, in
Paxton's Horticultural Register, London, 1836]    Construction no X, no Y attested from 1530s (in no
peny no pardon). No problem as an interjection of assurance first attested 1963. No way as an
expression meaning it can't be done is attested by 1968 (no way by no means is from c.1400).


