meddlesome (adj.)

1610s, from meddle + -some (1). Earlier was medlous quarrelsome, meddlesome (mid-15c.). Related:
Meddlesomely. Character name Meddlesome Mattie attested from 1814.


busybody (n.)

meddlesome person, 1520s, from busy (adj.) in the otherwise-obsolete sense prying, meddlesome + body
person.


officious (adj.)

1560s, zealous, eager to serve, from Latin officiosus full of courtesy, dutiful, obliging, from
officium duty, service (see office). Sense of meddlesome, doing more than is asked or required had
emerged by 1600 (in officiously). An officious lie (1570s) is one told to do good to another person
(from Latin mendocium officiosum or French mensonge officieux). Related: Officiousness.


curious (adj.)

mid-14c., eager to know (often in a bad sense), from Old French curios solicitous, anxious,
inquisitive; odd, strange (Modern French curieux) and directly from Latin curiosus careful,
diligent; inquiring eagerly, meddlesome, akin to cura care (see cure (n.)). The objective sense of
exciting curiosity is 1715 in English. In booksellers' catalogues, the word means erotic,
pornographic. Curiouser and curiouser is from Alice in Wonderland (1865).


busy (adj.)

Old English bisig careful, anxious, later continually employed or occupied, cognate with Old Dutch
bezich, Low German besig; no known connection with any other Germanic or Indo-European language.
Still pronounced as in Middle English, but for some unclear reason the spelling shifted to -u- in
15c.    The notion of anxiousness has drained from the word since Middle English. Often in a bad
sense in early Modern English, prying, meddlesome (preserved in busybody). The word was a euphemism
for sexually active in 17c. Of telephone lines, 1893. Of display work, excessively detailed,
visually cluttered, 1903.


pragmatic (adj.)

1610s, meddlesome, impertinently busy, short for earlier pragmatical, or else from Middle French
pragmatique (15c.), from Latin pragmaticus skilled in business or law, from Greek pragmatikos fit
for business, active, business-like; systematic, from pragma (genitive pragmatos) a deed, act; that
which has been done; a thing, matter, affair, especially an important one; also a euphemism for
something bad or disgraceful; in plural, circumstances, affairs (public or private), often in a bad
sense, trouble, literally a thing done, from stem of prassein/prattein to do, act, perform (see
practical). Meaning matter-of-fact is from 1853. In some later senses from German pragmatisch.


