medium (adj.)

1660s, average, from medium (n.). The Latin adjective was medius. Meaning intermediate is from 1796.
As a size designation from 1711. as a designation of cooked meat, it is attested from 1931, short
for medium-rare (1881).


medium (n.)

1580s, a middle ground, quality, or degree, from Latin medium the middle, midst, center; interval,
noun use of neuter of adjective medius (see medial (adj.)). Meaning intermediate agency, channel of
communication is from c.1600. That of person who conveys spiritual messages first recorded 1853,
from notion of substance through which something is conveyed. Artistic sense (oil, watercolors,
etc.) is from 1854. Happy medium is the golden mean, Horace's aurea mediocritas.


medieval (adj.)

1827, pertaining to or suggestive of the Middle Ages, coined in English from Latin medium the middle
(see medium (n.)) + aevum age (see eon).


in medias res

Latin, literally in the midst of things (see medium).


psychic (n.)

a medium; 1870; see psychic (adj.).


media (n.)

newspapers, radio, TV, etc. 1927, perhaps abstracted from mass media (1923, a technical term in
advertising), plural of medium, on notion of intermediate agency, a sense found in that word in
English from c.1600.


Sherman

type of U.S. medium tank used in World War II, 1942, named for U.S. Civil War Gen. William T.
Sherman (1820-1891). The surname is from Old English scearra shears + mann man; hence shearer of
woolen garments.


Middle Ages (n.)

period between ancient and modern times (formerly roughly 500-1500 C.E., now more usually
1000-1500), attested from 1610s, translating Latin medium aevum (compare German mittelalter, French
moyen &acirc;ge).


spiritualist (n.)

1852, one who believes in the ability of the living to communicate with the dead via a medium, from
spiritual + -ist (also see spirit (n.)). Earlier (1640s) one with regard for spiritual things.
Related Spiritualistic.    Every two or three years the Americans have a paroxysm of humbug -- ...
at the present time it is Spiritual-ism. [J.Dix, Transatlantic Tracings, 1853]


oracle (n.)

late 14c., a message from a god, expressed by divine inspiration, from Old French oracle temple,
house of prayer; oracle (12c.) and directly from Latin oraculum divine announcement, oracle; place
where oracles are given, from orare pray, plead (see orator), with material instrumental suffix
-culo-. In antiquity, the agency or medium of a god, also the place where such divine utterances
were given. This sense is attested in English from c.1400.


mediocrity (n.)

early 15c., moderation; intermediate state or amount, from Middle French m&#233;diocrit&#233; and
directly from Latin mediocritatem (nominative mediocritas) a middle state, middling condition,
medium, from mediocris (see mediocre). Neutral at first; disparaging sense began to predominate from
late 16c. The meaning person of mediocre abilities or attainments is from 1690s. Before the tinge of
disparagement crept in, another name for the Golden Mean was golden mediocrity.


mail-order (adj.)

1875, from mail (n.1) + order. Before television and the Internet, the bane of retailers and shop-
owners.    The origin, foundation and principle of mail order trading is universally recognized as
wrong. It was conceived in iniquity and brought forth in despair as the world's greatest destructive
medium. Mail Order Trading was born in the brain of knaves and thieves who fired their building for
insurance profits, then sold the salvaged and damaged stock to the unsuspecting sons of man in
distant territory. [Thomas J. Sullivan, Merchants and Manufacturers on Trial, Chicago, 1914]


psychopath (n.)

1885, in the criminal psychology sense, a back-formation from psychopathic.    The Daily Telegraph
had, the other day, a long article commenting on a Russian woman who had murdered a little girl. A
Dr. Balinsky prevailed upon the jury to give a verdict of acquittal, because she was a psychopath.
The Daily Telegraph regards this term as a new coinage, but it has been long known amongst
Spiritualists, yet in another sense. [The Medium and Daybreak, Jan. 16, 1885]    The case alluded
to, and the means of acquittal, were briefly notorious in England and brought the word into currency
in the modern sense.


citrus (adj.)

1825, from Modern Latin genus name, from Latin citrus citron tree, name of an African tree with
aromatic wood and lemon-like fruit, the first citrus fruit to become available in the West. The
name, like the tree, is probably of Asiatic origin [OED]. But Klein traces it to Greek kedros cedar,
and writes that the change of dr into tr shows that the word came from Greek into Latin through the
medium of the Etruscans. As a noun, tree of the genus Citrus, from 1885.


specie (n.)

coin, money in the form of coins, metallic money as a medium of exchange (as opposed to paper money
or bullion), 1670s, from phrase in specie in the real or actual form (1550s), from Latin in specie
in kind (in Medieval Latin, in coin), from ablative of species kind, form, sort (see species).


mean (adj.2)

occupying a middle or intermediate place, mid-14c., from Anglo-French meines (plural), Old French
meien, variant of moiien mid-, medium, common, middle-class (12c., Modern French moyen), from Late
Latin medianus of the middle, from Latin medius in the middle (see medial (adj.)). Meaning
intermediate in time is from mid-15c. Mathematical sense is from late 14c.


govern (v.)

late 13c., from Old French governer (11c., Modern French gouverner) govern, from Latin gubernare to
direct, rule, guide, govern (source also of Spanish gobernar, Italian governare), originally to
steer, a nautical borrowing from Greek kybernan to steer or pilot a ship, direct (the root of
cybernetics). The -k- to -g- sound shift is perhaps via the medium of Etruscan. Related: Governed;
governing.


baleen (n.)

early 14c., whalebone, from Old French balaine (12c.) whale, whalebone, from Latin ballaena, from
Greek phallaina whale (apparently related to phallos swollen penis, probably because of a whale's
shape), from PIE root *bhel- (2) to blow, inflate, swell (see bole). Klein writes that the Greek to
Latin transition was through the medium of the Illyrian language, a fact which explains the
transition of Gk. -ph- into Latin -b- (instead of -p-).


tube (n.)

1610s, from Middle French tube (15c.), from Latin tubus tube, pipe, of unknown origin. The London
subway was christened the Twopenny Tube (H.D. Browne, in the Londoner of June 30, 1900) before it
even opened; tube for cylindrical railway tunnel is attested from 1847. The meaning TV as a medium
is from 1959, short for cathode ray tube or picture tube. Tube top as a women's clothing style is
attested from 1972. Tube steak is attested from 1963 as frankfurter, slang meaning penis is recorded
by mid-1980s.


milieu (n.)

surroundings, 1877, from French milieu, middle, medium, mean, literally middle place (12c.), from mi
middle (from Latin medius; see medial (adj.)) + lieu place (see lieu).


vehicle (n.)

1610s, a medium through which a drug or medicine is administered, also any means of conveying or
transmitting, from French v&eacute;hicule (16c.), from Latin vehiculum means of transport, vehicle,
carriage, conveyance, from vehere to bear, carry, convey, from PIE *wegh- to go, transport in a
vehicle (cognates: Old English wegan to carry; Old Norse vegr, Old High German weg way; Middle Dutch
wagen wagon; see wagon). Sense of cart or other conveyance in English first recorded 1650s.


matrix (n.)

late 14c., uterus, womb, from Old French matrice womb, uterus, from Latin matrix (genitive matricis)
pregnant animal, in Late Latin womb, also source, origin, from mater (genitive matris) mother (see
mother (n.1)). Sense of place or medium where something is developed is first recorded 1550s; sense
of embedding or enclosing mass first recorded 1640s. Logical sense of array of possible combinations
of truth-values is attested from 1914. As a verb from 1951.


pawn (n.1)

something left as security, late 15c. (mid-12c. as Anglo-Latin pandum), from Old French pan, pant
pledge, security, also booty, plunder, perhaps from Frankish or some other Germanic source (compare
Old High German pfant, German Pfand, Middle Dutch pant, Old Frisian pand pledge), from West Germanic
*panda, of unknown origin.    The Old French word is identical to pan cloth, piece of cloth, from
Latin pannum (nominative pannus) cloth, piece of cloth, garment and Klein's sources feel this is the
source of both the Old French and West Germanic words (perhaps on the notion of cloth used as a
medium of exchange).


griffin (n.)

c.1200 (as a surname), from Old French grifon a bird of prey, also fabulous bird of Greek mythology
(with head and wings of an eagle, body and hind quarters of a lion, believed to inhabit Scythia and
guard its gold), from Late Latin gryphus, misspelling of grypus, variant of gryps (genitive grypos),
from Greek gryps (genitive grypos) curved, hook-nosed, in reference to its beak.    Klein suggests a
Semitic source, through the medium of the Hittites, and cites Hebrew kerubh a winged angel, Akkad.
karibu, epithet of the bull-colossus (see cherub). The same or an identical word was used, with
uncertain connections, in mid-19c. Louisiana to mean mulatto (especially one one-quarter or two-
fifths white) and in India from late 18c. to mean newly arrived European.


happy (adj.)

late 14c., lucky, favored by fortune, prosperous; of events, turning out well, from hap (n.) chance,
fortune + -y (2). Sense of very glad first recorded late 14c. Ousted Old English eadig (from ead
wealth, riches) and ges&aelig;lig, which has become silly. Meaning greatly pleased and content is
from 1520s. Old English bli&eth;e happy survives as blithe. From Greek to Irish, a great majority of
the European words for happy at first meant lucky. An exception is Welsh, where the word used first
meant wise.    Used in World War II and after as a suffix (as in bomb-happy, flak-happy) expressing
dazed or frazzled from stress. Happy medium is from 1778. Happy ending in the literary sense
recorded from 1756. Happy as a clam (1630s) was originally happy as a clam in the mud at high tide,
when it can't be dug up and eaten. Happy hunting ground, the reputed Indian paradise, is attested
from 1840, American English. Related: Happier; happiest.


radio (n.)

wireless transmission of voice signals with radio waves, 1907, abstracted from earlier combinations
such as radio-receiver (1903), radiophone (1881), radio-telegraphy (1898), from radio- as a comb.
form of Latin radius beam. Use for radio receiver is first attested 1913; sense of sound
broadcasting as a medium is from 1913.    It is not a dream, but a probability that the radio will
demolish blocs, cut the strings of red tape, actuate the voice back home, dismantle politics and
entrench the nation's executive in a position of power unlike that within the grasp of any executive
in the world's history. [The Reading Eagle, Reading, Pa., U.S.A., March 16, 1924]   Wireless
remained more widespread until World War II, when military preference for radio turned the tables.
As an adjective by 1912, by radio transmission; meaning controlled by radio from 1974. Radio _______
radio station or service from _______ is recorded from 1920. A radio shack (1946) was a small
building housing radio equipment.


television (n.)

1907, as a theoretical system to transmit moving images over telegraph or telephone wires; formed in
English or borrowed from French t&eacute;l&eacute;vision, from tele- + vision.    Television is not
impossible in theory. In practice it would be very costly without being capable of serious
application. But we do not want that. On that day when it will be possible to accelerate our methods
of telephotography by at least ten times, which does not appear to be impossible in the future, we
shall arrive at television with a hundred telegraph wires. Then the problem of sight at a distance
will without doubt cease to be a chimera. [Telegraphing Pictures in Windsor Magazine, 1907]    Other
proposals for the name of a then-hypothetical technology for sending pictures over distance were
telephote (1880) and televista (1904). The technology was developed in the 1920s and '30s. Nativized
in German as Fernsehen. Shortened form TV is from 1948. Meaning a television set is from 1941.
Meaning television as a medium is from 1927.  Television is the first truly democratic culture --
the first culture available to everyone and entirely governed by what the people want. The most
terrifying thing is what people do want. [Clive Barnes, New York Times, Dec. 30, 1969]


picture (n.)

early 15c., drawing, painting, from Latin pictura painting, from pictus, past participle of pingere
to make pictures, to paint, to embroider, (see paint (v.)). Picture window is from 1938. Picture
post-card first recorded 1899. Phrase every picture tells a story first attested 1900, in
advertisements for an illustrated life of Christ. To be in (or out of) the picture in the figurative
sense dates to 1900.    Expression a picture is worth a thousand words, attested from 1918, probably
was from the publication trade (the notion that a picture was worth 1,000 words is in printers'
publications by 1911). The phrase also was in use in the form worth a million words, the form used
by American newspaper editor Arthur Brisbane (1864-1936) in an editorial much-read c.1916 titled
What is a Good Newspaper in the New York Evening Journal. In part it read, After news and humor come
good pictures. In this day of hurry we learn through the eye, and one picture may be worth a million
words. It seems to have emerged into general use via the medium of advertising (which scaled down
the number and also gave the expression its spurious origin story as a Japanese proverb or some such
thing, by 1919). Earlier various acts or deeds (and in one case the arrow) were said to be worth a
thousand words.


