meditation (n.)

c.1200, contemplation; devout preoccupation; devotions, prayer, from Old French meditacion thought,
reflection, study, and directly from Latin meditationem (nominative meditatio) a thinking over,
meditation, noun of action from past participle stem of meditari to meditate, think over, reflect,
consider, frequentative form from PIE root *med- to measure, limit, consider, advise, take
appropriate measures (cognates: Greek medesthai think about, medon ruler; Latin modus measure,
manner, modestus moderate, modernus modern, mederi to heal, medicus physician; Sanskrit midiur I
judge, estimate; Welsh meddwl mind, thinking; Gothic miton, Old English metan to measure; also see
medical).    Meaning discourse on a subject is early 14c.; meaning act of meditating, continuous
calm thought upon some subject is from late 14c. The Latin verb also had stronger senses: plan,
devise, practice, rehearse, study.


meditate (v.)

1580s, to ponder, back-formation from meditation, or else from Latin meditatus, past participle of
meditari (see meditation). Related: Meditated; meditating.


ascetic (n.)

one of the early Christians who retired to the desert to live solitary lives of meditation and
prayer, 1670s, from ascetic (adj.).


Agamemnon

king of Mycenae, leader of the Greeks in the Trojan War, his name perhaps represents Greek Aga-
medmon, literally ruling mightily, from agan very much + medon ruler (see meditation).


Zen (n.)

school of Mahayana Buddhism, 1727, from Japanese, from Chinese ch'an, ultimately from Sanskrit
dhyana thought, meditation, from PIE root *dheie- to see, look (cognates: Greek sema sign, mark,
token). As an adjective from 1881.


mantra (n.)

1808, that part of the Vedas which contains hymns, from Sanskrit mantra-s sacred message or text,
charm, spell, counsel, literally instrument of thought, related to manyate thinks, from PIE root
*men- to think (see mind (n.)). Sense of special word used for meditation is first recorded in
English 1956.


samadhi (n.)

intense esoteric meditation through yoga, 1795, from Sanskrit samadhi-, literally a putting or
joining together, from sam- together + a- toward + stem of dadhati puts, places (see factitious).


faience (n.)

1714, from French fa&#239;ence (16c.), probably from Fayence, French form of Faenza, city in Italy
that was a noted ceramics center 16c. The city name is Latin faventia, literally silence,
meditation, perhaps a reference to a tranquil location.


versed (adj.)

practiced, conversant, acquainted, c.1600, from past participle of obsolete verse to turn over (a
book, subject, etc.) in study or investigation, from Middle French verser to turn, revolve as in
meditation (12c.), from Latin versare be employed, busy oneself, literally to turn to, turn often;
think over (see versus).


meditative (adj.)

1650s, from Late Latin meditativus, from meditat-, past participle stem of Latin meditari (see
meditation). Related: Meditatively; meditativeness.


Medea

famous sorceress, daughter of the king of Colchis, from Latin Medea, from Greek Medeia, literally
cunning, related to medos counsel, plan, device, cunning, medein to protect, rule over, from PIE
root *med- to measure, limit, consider (see meditation).


premeditation (n.)

early 15c., from Old French premeditacion and directly from Latin praemeditationem (nominative
praemeditatio) consideration beforehand, noun of action from past participle stem of praemeditari to
consider beforehand, from prae- before (see pre-) + meditari to consider (see meditation).


transcendental (adj.)

1660s, from Medieval Latin transcendentalis, from Latin transcendentem (see transcendent). Related:
Transcendentally. Transcendental meditation attested by 1966.


recluse (n.)

c.1200, person shut up from the world for purposes of religious meditation, from Old French reclus
(fem. recluse) hermit, recluse, also confinement, prison; convent, monastery, noun use of reclus
(adj.) shut up, from Late Latin reclusus, past participle of recludere to shut up, enclose (but in
classical Latin to throw open), from Latin re-, intensive prefix, + claudere to shut (see close
(v.)).


medical (adj.)

1640s, from French m&eacute;dical, from Late Latin medicalis of a physician, from Latin medicus
physician, surgeon, medical man (n.); healing, madicinal (adj.), from mederi to heal, give medical
attention to, cure, originally know the best course for, from an early specialization of the PIE
root *med- to measure, limit, consider, advise, take appropriate measures (cognates: Greek medomai
be mindful of, medein to rule;  Avestan vi-mad- physician; Latin meditari think or reflect on,
consider; Irish miduir judge; Old English metan to measure out); also see meditation. The earlier
adjective in English in this sense was medicinal. Related: Medically.


