medley (n.)

c.1300, hand-to-hand combat, from Old French medlee, variant of meslee (see meddle). Meaning
combination, mixture is from mid-15c.; that of musical combination consisting of diverse parts is
from 1620s.


olio (n.)

medley dish of Iberian origin, 1640s, from Spanish olla, Portuguese olha, both from Vulgar Latin
olla pot, jar. Sense transferred to any mixture or medley.


pastiche (n.)

a medley made up of fragments from different works, 1878, from French pastiche (18c.), from Italian
pasticcio medley, pastry cake, from Vulgar Latin *pasticium composed of paste, from Late Latin pasta
paste, pastry cake (see pasta). Borrowed earlier (1752) in the Italian form.


miscellany (n.)

a mixture, medley, 1590s, from Latin miscellanea a writing on miscellaneous subjects, originally
meat hash, hodge-podge (food for gladiators), neuter plural of miscellaneus (see miscellaneous).


farrago (n.)

1630s, from Latin farrago medley, mix of grains for animal feed, from far grain (see barley).


Babel

capital of Babylon, late 14c., from Hebrew Babhel (Gen. xi), from Akkadian bab-ilu Gate of God (from
bab gate + ilu god). The name is a translation of Sumerian Ka-dingir. Meaning confused medley of
sounds (1520s) is from the biblical story of the Tower of Babel.


melee (n.)

1640s, from French m&ecirc;l&eacute;e, from Old French meslee brawl, confused fight; mixture, blend
(12c.), noun use of fem. past participle of mesler to mix, mingle (see meddle). See also medley.
Borrowed in Middle English as melle but lost and then reborrowed 17c.


pie (n.3)

also pi, printers' slang for a mass of type jumbled together (also pi, pye), 1650s, perhaps from pie
(n.1) on notion of a medley, or pie (n.2); compare pica (n.1). As a verb from 1870. Related: Pied.


satirical (adj.)

1520s, from Late Latin satiricus, from Latin satira satire, poetic medley (see satire (n.)) + -al
(1). Related: Satirically.


gallimaufry (n.)

a medley, 1550s, from French galimafr&eacute;e hash, ragout, from Old French calimafree sauce made
of mustard, ginger, and vinegar; a stew of carp (14c.), origin unknown, perhaps from Old French
galer to make merry, live well (see gallant) + Old North French mafrer to eat much, from Middle
Dutch maffelen [Klein]. Weekley sees in the second element the proper name Maufr&eacute;.


potpourri (n.)

also pot-pourri, 1610s, mixed meats served in a stew, from French pot pourri stew, literally rotten
pot (loan-translation of Spanish olla podrida), from pourri, past participle of pourrir to rot, from
Vulgar Latin *putrire, from Latin putrescere grow rotten (see putrescent). Notion of medley led to
meaning mixture of dried flowers and spices, first recorded in English 1749. Figurative sense
(originally in music) of miscellaneous collection is recorded from 1855.


smorgasbord (n.)

1893, from Swedish sm&ouml;rg&#229;sbord, literally butter-goose table, from sm&ouml;rg&#229;s,
slice of bread and butter, compounded from sm&#246;r butter (see smear (n.)) and g&#229;s, literally
goose (and from the same Germanic root that yielded English goose (n.)).    [Sm&ouml;rg&#229;s]
properly signifies a slice of bread-and-butter; and has come by custom--in much the same way as when
we familiarly speak of taking a sandwich for partaking of some light refreshment--to be applied
synecdochically to the preliminary relish or appetizer partaken of before meals. [Notes and Queries,
Nov. 15, 1884]     The final element is bord table, from Proto-Germanic *burdam plank, board, table
(see board (n.1)). Figurative sense of medley, miscellany is recorded from 1948.


satire (n.)

late 14c., work intended to ridicule vice or folly, from Middle French satire (14c.) and directly
from Latin satira satire, poetic medley, earlier satura, in lanx satura mixed dish, dish filled with
various kinds of fruit, literally full dish, from fem. of satur sated (see saturate).    First used
in the literary sense in Latin in reference to a collection of poems in various meters on a variety
of subjects by the late republican Roman poet Ennius. The matter of the little that survives of his
verse does not seem to be particularly satiric, but in classical Latin the word came to mean
especially a poem which assailed the prevailing vices, one after another. Altered in Latin by
influence of Greek satyr, on mistaken notion that the literary form is related to the Greek satyr
drama (see satyr).<b>Satire</b>, n. An obsolete kind of literary composition in which the vices and
follies of the author's enemies were expounded with imperfect tenderness. In this country satire
never had more than a sickly and uncertain existence, for the soul of it is wit, wherein we are
dolefully deficient, the humor that we mistake for it, like all humor, being tolerant and
sympathetic. Moreover, although Americans are 'endowed by their Creator' with abundant vice and
folly, it is not generally known that these are reprehensible qualities, wherefore the satirist is
popularly regarded as a sour-spirited knave, and his every victim's outcry for codefendants evokes a
national assent. [Ambrose Bierce, Devil's Dictionary, 1911]   <hr />   Proper satire is
distinguished, by the generality of the reflections, from a lampoon which is aimed against a
particular person, but they are too frequently confounded. [Johnson]   <hr />   [I]n whatever
department of human expression, wherever there is objective truth there is satire [Wyndham Lewis,
Rude Assignment, 1950]    For nuances of usage, see humor (n.).


