memorial (n.)

late 14c., fame, renown, reputation, also commemorative gesture, monument, or rite; in general,
something by which the memory of a person, thing, or event is preserved, from Old French memorial
record, report, and directly from Late Latin memoriale a memorial, noun use of neuter of Latin
memorialis (adj.) of or belonging to memory, from memoria memory (see memory). Meaning memorial act,
commemoration is from mid-15c.


memorial (adj.)

late 14c., memorable, excellent; remembered, committed to memory, from Old French memorial mindful
of, remembering, from Latin memorialis (adj.) of or belonging to memory, from memoria memory (see
memory).


memorialize (v.)

1798, from memorial + -ize. Related: Memorialized; memorializing. Earlier verb was simply memorial
(1731).


Memorial Day

used in a general sense is from 1830s; as a specific holiday commemorating U.S. war dead (originally
Northern soldiers killed in the Civil War) it began informally in late 1860s. officially from 1869
among veterans' organizations.


monument (n.)

late 13c., a sepulchre, from Old French monument grave, tomb, monument, and directly from Latin
monumentum a monument, memorial structure, statue; votive offering; tomb; memorial record, literally
something that reminds, from monere to remind, warn (see monitor (n.)). Sense of structure or
edifice to commemorate a notable person, action, or event first attested c.1600.


immemorial (adj.)

c.1600, from French imm&eacute;morial (16c.) old beyond memory, from Medieval Latin immemorialis,
from assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + memorialis (see memorial). Something
immemorial is ancient beyond memory; something immemorable is not memorable.


trophy (n.)

1510s, a spoil or prize of war, from Middle French troph&eacute;e (15c.) from Latin trophaeum a sign
of victory, monument, originally tropaeum, from Greek tropaion monument of an enemy's defeat, noun
use of neuter of adjective tropaios of defeat, causing a rout, from trope a rout, originally a
turning (of the enemy); see trope. In ancient Greece, spoils or arms taken in battle and set up on
the field and dedicated to a god. Figurative extension to any token or memorial of victory is first
recorded 1560s. As a symbolic representation of a classical trophy from 1630s. Trophy wife attested
by 1984.


stone (n.)

Old English stan, used of common rocks, precious gems, concretions in the body, memorial stones,
from Proto-Germanic *stainaz (cognates: Old Norse steinn, Danish steen, Old Saxon sten, Old Frisian
sten, Dutch steen, Old High German stein, German Stein, Gothic stains), from PIE *stoi-no-, suffixed
form of root *stai- stone, also to thicken, stiffen (cognates: Sanskrit styayate curdles, becomes
hard; Avestan stay- heap; Greek stear fat, tallow, stia, stion pebble; Old Church Slavonic stena,
Russian stiena wall).    Sense of testicle is from late Old English. The British measure of weight
(usually equal to 14 pounds) is from late 14c., originally a specific stone. Stone-fruit, one with a
pit, is from 1520s. Stone's throw for a short distance is attested from 1580s. Stone Age is from
1864. To kill two birds with one stone is first attested 1650s. To leave no stone unturned is from
1540s.


memory (n.)

mid-13c., recollection (of someone or something); awareness, consciousness, also fame, renown,
reputation, from Anglo-French memorie (Old French memoire, 11c., mind, memory, remembrance;
memorial, record) and directly from Latin memoria memory, remembrance, faculty of remembering, noun
of quality from memor mindful, remembering, from PIE root *(s)mer- to remember (Sanskrit smarati
remembers, Avestan mimara mindful; Greek merimna care, thought, mermeros causing anxiety,
mischievous, baneful; Serbo-Croatian mariti to care for; Welsh marth sadness, anxiety; Old Norse
Mimir, name of the giant who guards the Well of Wisdom; Old English gemimor known, murnan mourn,
remember sorrowfully; Dutch mijmeren to ponder). Meaning faculty of remembering is late 14c. in
English.  I am grown old and my memory is not as active as it used to be. When I was younger I could
remember anything, whether it had happened or not; but my faculties are decaying now and soon I
shall be so I cannot remember any but the things that never happened.  It is sad to go to pieces
like this, but we all have to do it. [Mark Twain, Autobiography]  Computer sense, device which
stores information, is from 1946. Related: Memories.


toleration (n.)

1510s, permission granted by authority, license, from Middle French tol&eacute;ration (15c.), from
Latin tolerationem (nominative toleratio) a bearing, supporting, enduring, noun of action from past
participle stem of tolerare to endure, sustain, support, suffer, literally to bear, from PIE *tele-
to bear, carry (see extol).    Meaning forbearance, sufferance is from 1580s. The specific religious
sense is from 1609; as in Act of Toleration (1689), statute granting freedom of religious worship
(with conditions) to dissenting Protestants in England. In this it means recognition of the right of
private judgment in matters of faith and worship; liberty granted by the government to preach and
worship as one pleases; equality under the law without regard to religion.    If any man err from
the right way, it is his own misfortune, no injury to thee; nor therefore art thou to punish him in
the things of this life because thou supposest he will be miserable in that which is to come.
Nobody, therefore, in fine, neither single persons nor churches, nay, nor even commonwealths, have
any just title to invade the civil rights and worldly goods of each other upon pretence of religion.
[John Locke, Letter Concerning Toleration, 1689]   <hr />   Before any man can be considered as a
member of Civil Society, he must be considered as a subject of the Governour of the Universe: And if
a member of Civil Society, do it with a saving of his allegiance to the Universal Sovereign. We
maintain therefore that in matters of Religion, no man's right is abridged by the institution of
Civil Society and that Religion is wholly exempt from its cognizance. [James Madison, Memorial and
Remonstrance Against Religious Assessments, 1785]   <hr />   Unlimited tolerance must lead to the
disappearance of tolerance. If we extend unlimited tolerance even to those who are intolerant, if we
are not prepared to defend a tolerant society against the onslaught of the intolerant, then the
tolerant will be destroyed, and tolerance with them. [Karl Popper, The Open Society and Its Enemies,
1962]


