memoirs (n.)

personal record of events, 1650s, plural of memoir.


memoir (n.)

early 15c., written record, from Anglo-French memorie note, memorandum, something written to be kept
in mind (early 15c., Old French memoire), from Latin memoria (see memory). Meaning person's written
account of his life is from 1670s.


commentary (n.)

1530s, from Middle French commentaire, or directly from Latin commentarius notebook, annotation;
diary, memoir, noun use of adjective, relating to comments, from commentum (see comment (n.)).
Perhaps the Latin noun is short for volumen commentarium. Originally in English as an adjective
(early 15c.).


pyromania (n.)

1840, from pyro- fire + mania madness, frenzy. Used in German in the 1830s.    The propensity which
leads an insane person to accomplish his purpose by burning, has been considered to merit particular
notice, and to constitute a variety of monomania. Dr. Marc, of France, has published a memoir on the
subject; he gives the name of pyromania to it, and considers that, like other insane propensities,
it may be the result of instinct, or it may be the result of delusion--reasoning upon erroneous
principles. [Alexander Morrison, M.D., The Physiognomy of Mental Diseases, London, 1840]    An older
word for it was incendiarism.


fourth estate (n.)

the press, by 1824, and especially from 1831, British English. For the other three, see estate.
Earlier the term had been applied in various senses that did not stick, including the mob (1752),
the lawyers (1825). The extension to the press is perhaps an outgrowth of the former.  Hence,
through the light of letters and the liberty of the press, public opinion has risen to the rank of a
fourth estate in our constitution; in times of quiet and order, silent and still, but in the
collisions of the different branches of our government, deciding as an umpire with unbounded
authority. [Memoir of James Currie, M.D., 1831]   <hr />   [Newspapers] began to assume some degree
of political importance, during the civil wars of the seventeenth century, in England; but it is not
until within the last fifty years that they have become, -- as they are now justly styled, -- a
Fourth Estate, exercising a more powerful influence on the public affairs of the countries in which
they are permitted to circulate freely, than the other three put together. [Alexander H. Everett,
Address to the Phi Beta Kappa Society of Bowdoin College, 1834]


