mendicant (n.)

a beggar, mid-15c., from mendicant (adj.) or from Latin mendicantem (nominative mendicans), noun use
of present participle of mendicare.


mendicant (adj.)

late 14c., from Latin mendicantem (nominative mendicans) present participle of mendicare to beg, ask
alms, from mendicus beggar, originally cripple (connection via cripples who must beg), from menda
fault, physical defect (see mendacious). As an adjective from 1540s. Also in Middle English was
mendinant (mid-14c.), from Old French mendinant, present participle of mendiner to beg, from the
same Latin source.


Carmelite (n.)

c.1500, from Medieval Latin Carmelites, member of an order of mendicant friars (White Friars)
founded 12c. by Berthold of Calabria on Mount Carmel in what is now northwest Israel.


friar (n.)

late 13c., from Old French frere brother, friar (9c.), originally the mendicant orders (Franciscans,
Augustines, Dominicans, Carmelites), who reached England early 13c., from Latin frater brother (see
brother).


maunder (v.)

to wander about aimlessly, c.1746, earlier to mumble, grumble (1620s), both senses perhaps from
frequentative of maund to beg (1560s), which is possibly from French mendier to beg, from Latin
mendicare (see mendicant). Related: Maundered; maundering.


dervish (n.)

1580s, from Turkish dervish, from Persian darvesh, darvish beggar, poor, hence religious mendicant;
equivalent of Arabic faqir (see fakir). The whirling dervishes are just one order among many.
Originally dervis; modern spelling is from mid-19c.


mendicancy (n.)

state or condition of beggary, 1790, from mendicant + -cy. Also in this sense was mendicity
(c.1400), from Old French mendicit&eacute; begging, from Latin mendicitatem (nominative mendicitas)
beggary, mendicity.


beggar (n.)

c.1200, from Old French begart, originally a member of the Beghards, lay brothers of mendicants in
the Low Countries, from Middle Dutch beggaert mendicant, of uncertain origin, with pejorative suffix
(see -ard). Compare Beguine. Early folk etymology connected the English word with bag. Form with -ar
attested from 14c., but begger was more usual 15c.-17c. The feminine form beggestere is attested as
a surname from c.1300. Beggar's velvet was an old name for dust bunnies. Beggers should be no
choosers is in Heywood (1562).


monk (n.)

Old English munuc monk (used also of women), from Proto-Germanic *muniko- (cognates: Old Frisian
munek, Middle Dutch monic, Old High German munih, German M&ouml;nch), an early borrowing from Vulgar
Latin *monicus (source of French moine, Spanish monje, Italian monaco), from Late Latin monachus
monk, originally religious hermit, from Ecclesiastical Greek monakhos monk, noun use of a classical
Greek adjective meaning solitary, from monos alone (see mono-). For substitution of -o- for -u-, see
come. In England, before the Reformation, the term was not applied to the members of the mendicant
orders, who were always called friars. From the 16th c. to the 19th c., however, it was usual to
speak of the friars as a class of monks. In recent times the distinction between the terms has been
carefully observed by well-informed writers. In French and Ger. the equivalent of monk is applied
equally to 'monks' and 'friars.' [OED]


Beguine (n.)

late 15c., from French b&eacute;guine (13c.), Medieval Latin beguina, a member of a women's
spiritual order said to have been founded c.1180 in Liege in the Low Countries. They are said to
take their name from the surname of Lambert le B&egrave;gue Lambert the Stammerer, a Liege priest
who was instrumental in their founding, and it's likely the word was pejorative at first.    The
order generally preserved its reputation, though it quickly drew imposters who did not; nonetheless
it eventually was condemned as heretical. A male order, called Beghards founded communities by the
1220s in imitation of them, but they soon degenerated (compare Old French beguin (male) Beguin, also
hypocrite) and wandered begging in the guise of religion; they likely were the source of the words
beg and beggar, though there is disagreement over whether Beghard produced Middle Dutch beggaert
mendicant or was produced by it.    Cole Porter's Begin the Beguine (1935) refers to a kind of
popular dance of West Indian origin, from French colloquial b&eacute;guin an infatuation, boyfriend,
girlfriend, earlier child's bonnet, and before that nun's headdress (14c.), from Middle Dutch
beggaert, ultimately the same word.


