merit (n.)

c.1200, spiritual credit (for good works, etc.); c.1300, spiritual reward, from Old French merite
wages, pay, reward; thanks; merit, moral worth, that which assures divine pity, and directly from
Latin meritum a merit, service, kindness, benefit, favor; worth, value, importance, neuter of
meritus, past participle of merere, meriri to earn, deserve, acquire, gain, from PIE root *(s)mer-
to allot, assign (cognates: Greek meros part, lot, moira share, fate, moros fate, destiny, doom,
Hittite mark to divide a sacrifice).    Sense of worthiness, excellence is from early 14c.; from
late 14c. as condition or conduct that deserves either reward or punishment; also a reward, benefit.
Related: Merits. Merit system attested from 1880. Merit-monger was in common use 16c.-17c. in a
sense roughly of do-gooder.


merit (v.)

late 15c., to be entitled to, from Middle French meriter (Modern French m&#233;riter), from merite
(n.), or directly from Latin meritare to earn, yield, frequentative of mereri to earn (money); also
to serve as a soldier (see merit (n.)). Related: Merited; meriting.


merited (adj.)

well-earned, c.1600, past participle adjective from merit (v.).


meritocracy (n.)

coined 1958 by British sociologist Michael Young (1915-2002) and used in title of his book, The Rise
of the Meritocracy; from merit (n.) + -cracy. Related: Meritocratic.


meritorious (adj.)

early 15c., deserving of divine grace, from Latin meritorius that for which money is paid, that by
which money is earned, from meritus, past participle of merere to earn (see merit (n.)). Related:
Meritoriously; meritoriousness.


meritless (adj.)

1590s, from merit (n.) + -less. Related: Meritlessly; meritlessness.


demerit (n.)

late 14c., from Old French desmerite blame, demerit (Modern French d&eacute;m&eacute;rite), from
des- not, opposite (see dis-) + merite merit (see merit (n.)). Latin demereri meant to merit,
deserve, from de- in its completive sense. But Medieval Latin demeritum meant fault. Both senses
existed in the Middle French form of the word. Meaning penalty point in school is attested from
1862.


worthy (adj.)

mid-13c., having merit, from worth (n.) + -y (2). Old English had weor&thorn;ful in this sense.
Attested from late 14c. as a noun meaning person of merit (especially in Nine Worthies, famous men
of history and legend: Joshua, David, Judas Maccab&aelig;us, Hector, Alexander, Julius C&aelig;sar,
Arthur, Charlemagne, Godfrey of Bouillon -- three Jews, three gentiles, three Christians). Related:
Worthily; worthiness.


kung fu (n.)

1966, from dialectal Chinese kung fu, said to meant literally merit master, but Barnhart has it as
boxing method.


legit

colloquial shortening of legitimate, 1897, originally in theater, in reference to legitimate drama,
that which has literary merit (Shakespeare, etc.).


worth (n.)

Old English weor&thorn; value, price, price paid; worth, worthiness, merit; equivalent value amount,
monetary value, from worth (adj.). From c.1200 as excellence, nobility.


distinctly (adv.)

late 14c., from distinct + -ly (2).   <b>[D]istinctly</b>, in the sense really quite, is the badge
of the superior person indulgently recognizing unexpected merit in something that we are to
understand is not quite worthy of his notice. [Fowler]


unmerited (adj.)

1640s, from un- (1) not + past participle of merit (v.).    An ingenuous mind feels in unmerited
praise the bitterest reproof. If you reject it you are unhappy, if you accept it you are undone.
[Walter Savage Landor, Imaginary Conversations]


mero-

before vowels mer-, word-forming element meaning part, partial, fraction, from comb. form of Greek
meros part, fraction (see merit (n.)).


monomer (n.)

1914, from mono- + Greek meros part (see merit (n.)). Related: Monomerous.


meristem (n.)

growing cellular tissues of plants, 1862, formed irregularly from Greek meristos divided, divisible
(from merizein to divide, distribute, from meros a part, a share; see merit (n.)) + ending from
xylem, etc.


polymer (n.)

a substance built from a large number of simple molecules of the same kind, 1855, probably from
German Polymere (Berzelius, 1830), from Greek polymeres having many parts, from polys many (see
poly-) + meros part (see merit (n.)).


isomer (n.)

1866, back-formation from isomeric. Greek isomeres meant sharing equality, from iso- (see iso-) +
meros part, share (see merit (n.)).


meretricious (adj.)

1620s, pertaining to harlots, from Latin meretricius of or pertaining to prostitutes, from meretrix
(genitive meretricis) prostitute, literally woman who earns money, from merere, mereri to earn, gain
(see merit (n.)). Meaning gaudily alluring is from 1630s. Related: Meretriciously; meretriciousness.


shady (adj.)

affording shade, 1570s; protected by shade, 1590s; from shade (n.) + -y (2). Meaning disreputable
(1862) probably is from earlier university slang sense of of questionable merit, unreliable (1848).
Related: Shadily; shadiness. Old English had sceadlic shady, 'shadely.'


Moira

fem. proper name, one of the Fates, from Greek Moira, literally share, fate, related to moros fate,
destiny, doom, meros part, lot, meiresthai to receive one's share (see merit (n.)).


merism (n.)

1894 in biological sense repetition of parts in living things; earlier in rhetoric, synecdoche in
which totality is expressed by contrasting parts (such as high and low, young and old); from Modern
Latin merismus, from Greek merismos a dividing, division, a partition, from merizein to divide, from
meros part, share (see merit (n.)). Related: Merismatic.


valiance (n.)

valiant character (obsolete or archaic), mid-15c., earlier vailance (late 14c.), from Anglo-French
vaillaunce, valiauns (c.1300) or Old French vaillance value, price; merit, worth; virtue, fine
qualities; courage, valor (12c.), from Old French valiant (see valiant).


emeritus (adj.)

c.1600, from Latin emeritus veteran soldier who has served his time, literally that has finished
work, past service, past participle of emerere serve out, complete one's service, from ex- out (see
ex-) + merere to serve, earn, from PIE *(s)mer- to get a share of something (see merit (n.)). First
used of retired professors 1794 in American English.


pyromania (n.)

1840, from pyro- fire + mania madness, frenzy. Used in German in the 1830s.    The propensity which
leads an insane person to accomplish his purpose by burning, has been considered to merit particular
notice, and to constitute a variety of monomania. Dr. Marc, of France, has published a memoir on the
subject; he gives the name of pyromania to it, and considers that, like other insane propensities,
it may be the result of instinct, or it may be the result of delusion--reasoning upon erroneous
principles. [Alexander Morrison, M.D., The Physiognomy of Mental Diseases, London, 1840]    An older
word for it was incendiarism.


caliber (n.)

1560s, degree of merit or importance, a figurative use from Middle French calibre (late 15c.),
apparently ultimately from Arabic qalib a mold for casting. Arabic also used the word in the sense
mold for casting bullets, which is the oldest literal meaning in English. Meaning inside diameter of
a gun barrel is attested from 1580s. Barnhart remarks that Spanish calibre, Italian calibro appear
too late to act as intermediate forms between the Arabic word and the French.


deserve (v.)

early 13c., from Old French deservir (Modern French desservir) deserve, be worthy of, earn, merit,
from Latin deservire serve well, from de- completely (see de-) + servire to serve (see serve). From
be entitled to because of good service (a sense found in Late Latin), meaning generalized c.1300 to
be worthy of. Related: Deserved; deserving.


credit (n.)

1520s, from Middle French cr&eacute;dit (15c.) belief, trust, from Italian credito, from Latin
creditum a loan, thing entrusted to another, from past participle of credere to trust, entrust,
believe (see credo). The commercial sense was the original one in English (creditor is mid-15c.).
Meaning honor, acknowledgment of merit, is from c.1600. Academic sense of point for completing a
course of study is 1904. Movie/broadcasting sense is 1914. Credit rating is from 1958; credit union
is 1881, American English.


valor (n.)

c.1300, value, worth, from Old French valor, valour valor, moral worth, merit, courage, virtue
(12c.), from Late Latin valorem (nominative valor) value, worth (in Medieval Latin strength, valor),
from stem of Latin valere be strong, be worth (see valiant). The meaning courage is first recorded
1580s, from Italian valore, from the same Late Latin word. (The Middle English word also had a sense
of worth or worthiness in respect of manly qualities).


rebel (n.)

person who makes war on his country for political motives, mid-14c., from rebel (adj.). Meaning
supporter of the American cause in the War of Independence is from 1775; sense of supporter of the
Southern cause in the American Civil War is attested from April 15, 1861. Rebel yell in an American
Civil War context attested from 1862, but the thing itself is older and was said to have been picked
up by southwestern men in their periodic wars against the Indians.  The Southern troops, when
charging or to express their delight, always yell in a manner peculiar to themselves. The Yankee
cheer is more like ours; but the Confederate officers declare that the rebel yell has a particular
merit, and always produces a salutary and useful effect upon their adversaries. A corps is sometimes
spoken of as a 'good yelling regiment.' [A.J.L. Fremantle, The Battle of Gettysburg and the Campaign
in Pennsylvania, in Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine, Sept. 1863]


medal (n.)

1580s, from Middle French m&eacute;daille (15c.), from Italian medaglia a medal, according to OED
from Vulgar Latin *metallea (moneta) metal (coin), from Latin metallum (see metal). The other theory
[Klein, Barnhart, Watkins] is that medaglia originally meant coin worth half a denarius, and is from
Vulgar Latin *medalia, from Late Latin medialia little halves, neuter plural of medialis of the
middle (see medial (adj.)). Originally a trinket or charm; as a reward for merit, proficiency, etc.,
attested from 1751.


purchase (v.)

c.1300, acquire, obtain; get, receive; procure, provide, also accomplish or bring about; instigate;
cause, contrive, plot; recruit, hire, from Anglo-French purchaser go after, Old French porchacier
search for, procure; purchase; aim at, strive for, pursue eagerly (11c., Modern French pourchasser),
from pur- forth (possibly used here as an intensive prefix; see pur-) + Old French chacier run
after, to hunt, chase (see chase (v.)).    Originally to obtain or receive as due in any way,
including through merit or suffering; specific sense of acquire for money, pay money for, buy is
from mid-14c., though the word continued to be used for to get by conquest in war, obtain as booty
up to 17c. Related: Purchased; purchasing.


earn (v.)

Old English earnian deserve, earn, merit, win, get a reward for labor, from Proto-Germanic *aznojan
(source also of Old Frisian esna reward, pay), from *azna labor especially field labor (source of
Old Norse &ouml;nn work in the field), from PIE *aznon to do harvest work, serve (source of Old High
German arnon to reap), denominative verb from *es-en- harvest, fall (cognates: Old High German aren
harvest, crop, German Ernte harvest, Old English ern harvest, Gothic asans harvest, summer, Old
Church Slavonic jeseni, Russian osen, Old Prussian assanis autumn).    Also from the same root are
Gothic asneis, Old High German esni hired laborer, day laborer, Old English esne serf, laborer, man.
Related: Earned; earning.


California

name of an imaginary realm in Las sergas de Esplandi&aacute;n (Exploits of Esplad&aacute;n), a
romance by Spanish writer Garci Ord&oacute;&ntilde;ez de Montalvo, published in 1510. It was a
sequel to his Amadis de Gaula, and was said to have been influential among Spanish explorers of the
New World. It could have led them to misidentify Baja California as this mythical land and to
mistake it for an island. The Amadis tales are the Iberian equivalent of the Arthurian romances;
they are older than 1510 (traces of them have been found mid-14c.) and were wildly popular. That
conquistadors and sailors would have known the story in all its imaginative detail is hardly
surprising.   Amadis de Gaula ... set a fashion: all later Spanish writers of books of chivalry
adopted the machinery of Amadis de Gaula. Later knights were not less brave (they could not be
braver than) Amadis; heroines were not less lovely (they could not be lovelier) than Oriana; there
was nothing for it but to make the dragons more appalling, the giants larger, the wizards craftier,
the magic castles more inaccessible, the enchanted lakes deeper. Subsequent books of chivalry are
simple variants of the types in Amadis de Gaula: Cervantes made his barber describe it as 'the best
of all books of this kind.' This verdict is essentially just. Amadis de Gaula was read everywhere,
especially in the French version of Herberay des Essarts. It was done into Hebrew during the
sixteenth century, and attracted readers as different as St Ignatius of Loyola and Henry of Navarre.
Its vogue perhaps somewhat exceeded its merit, but its merits are not inconsiderable. [James
Fitzmaurice-Kelly, Spanish Literature, 1922 edition]    Where Montalvo got the name and what it
means, if anything, is a mystery. Californian is attested from 1785. The element Californium (1950)
was named in reference to University of California, where it was discovered.


