merry-go-round (n.)

1729, from merry (adj.) + go (v.) + round. Figurative use by 1838. Merry-totter (mid-15c.) was a
Middle English name for a swing or see-saw. Also compare merry-go-down strong ale (c.1500); merry-
go-sorry a mix of joy and sorrow (1590s).


merry man (n.)

companion in arms, follower of a knight, outlaw, etc., is attested from late 14c., from merry (adj.)
+ man (n.). Related: Merry men.


merrymaking (n.)

also merry-making, 1714; see merry + make (v.). Related: Merry-maker (1827).


merry-andrew (n.)

a buffoon; a zany; a jack-pudding [Johnson], originally mountebank's assistant, 1670s, from merry +
masc. proper name Andrew, but there is no certain identification with an individual.


merry (adj.)

Old English myrge pleasing, agreeable, pleasant, sweet; pleasantly, melodiously, from Proto-Germanic
*murgijaz, which probably originally meant short-lasting, (compare Old High German murg short,
Gothic gamaurgjan to shorten), from PIE *mreghu- short (see brief (adj.)). The only exact cognate
for meaning outside English was Middle Dutch mergelijc joyful.    Connection to pleasure is likely
via notion of making time fly, that which makes the time seem to pass quickly (compare German
Kurzweil pastime, literally a short time; Old Norse skemta to amuse, entertain, amuse oneself, from
skamt, neuter of skammr short). There also was a verbal form in Old English, myrgan be merry,
rejoice. For vowel evolution, see bury (v.).Bot vchon enle we wolde were fyf, &thorn;e mo &thorn;e
myryer. [c.1300]The word had much wider senses in Middle English, such as pleasant-sounding (of
animal voices), fine (of weather), handsome (of dress), pleasant-tasting (of herbs). Merry-bout an
incident of sexual intercourse was low slang from 1780. Merry-begot illegitimate (adj.), bastard
(n.) is from 1785. Merrie England (now frequently satirical or ironic) is 14c. meri ingland,
originally in a broader sense of bountiful, prosperous. Merry Monday was a 16c. term for the Monday
before Shrove Tuesday (Mardi Gras).


Merry Widow

1907, from the English title of Franz Lehar's operetta Die Lustige Witwe (1905). The Lusty Widow
would have been more etymological (see lust (n.)), but would have given the wrong impression in
English. Meaning a type of wide-brimmed hat (popularized in the play) is attested from 1908.


merrythought (n.)

wishbone, c.1600, from merry (adj.) + thought. Also see wishbone.


revel (n.)

late 14c., riotous merry-making, from Old French revel entertainment, revelry, verbal noun from
reveler be disorderly, make merry (see revel (v.)). Related: Revels; revel-rout.


gallant (adj.)

mid-15c., showy, finely dressed; gay, merry, from Old French galant courteous, earlier amusing,
entertaining; lively, bold (14c.), present participle of galer rejoice, make merry, generally held
to be from Latinized verb form of Frankish *wala- good, well, from Proto-Germanic *wal- (source also
of Old High German wallon to wander, go on a pilgrimage), from PIE root *wel- (2) to wish, will (see
will (v.)), but the transition of sense offers difficulties that are not fully cleared up [OED].
Sense of politely attentive to women was adopted 17c. from French.


jolly (adj.)

c.1300 (late 13c. as a surname), from Old French jolif festive, merry, amorous, pretty (12c.) of
uncertain origin (cognate with Italian giulivo merry, pleasant).    Perhaps a Germanic loan-word
from a source akin to Old Norse jol a winter feast (see yule), or from Latin gaudere to rejoice,
from PIE *gau- to rejoice (see joy). For loss of -f, compare tardy, hasty. Related: Jollily;
jolliness.


frolic

1530s, as an adjective, joyous, merry, from Middle Dutch vrolyc (adj.) happy, from vro- merry, glad
+ lyc like (see like (adj.)). Cognate with German fr&ouml;hlich happy. The stem is cognate with Old
Norse frar swift, Middle English frow hasty, from PIE *preu- (see frog (n.1)), giving the whole an
etymological sense akin to jumping for joy. The verb is first attested 1580s. Related: Frolicked;
frolicking. As a noun, from 1610s.


rest (v.2)

to be left, remain, mid-15c., from Old French rester to remain, from Latin restare stand back, be
left, from re- back (see re-) + stare to stand (see stet). Partially confused and merged with the
other verb rest. Sense of to continue to be is in rest assured. Transitive sense of to keep, cause
to continue to remain was common in 16c.-17c., used with a predicate adjective following and
qualifying the object [Century Dictionary], hence phrase rest you merry (1540s);  God rest you
merry, gentlemen, often is mis-punctuated.


merriment (n.)

1570s, comedic entertainment, from merry + -ment. General sense of mirth is from 1580s.


jai alai (n.)

1902, American English, originally in a Cuban context, from Basque, from jai celebration + alai
merry.


go-round (n.)

act of going around, originally especially a merry-go-round, 1886, from go (v.) + round (adv.).
Figurative sense of argument, bout, fight, etc. is from 1891.


merrily (adv.)

Old English myriglice pleasantly, melodiously; see merry + -ly (2).


lusty (adj.)

early 13c., joyful, merry, from lust + -y (2). It largely has escaped the Christianization and
denigration of its root word. The sense of full of healthy vigor is from late 14c.; that of full of
desire is attested from c.1400. Related: Lustily; lustiness.


mirth (n.)

Old English myrg&eth; joy, pleasure, from Proto-Germanic *murgitha (cognates: Middle Dutch merchte),
noun of quality from *murgjo- (see merry; also see -th (2)). Mirthquake entertainment that excites
convulsive laughter first attested 1928, in reference to Harold Lloyd movies.


aurora borealis (n.)

1620s, Northern Lights, literally northern dawn, said to have been coined by French philosopher
Petrus Gassendus (1592-1655) after a spectacular display seen in France Sept. 2, 1621; see aurora +
boreal. In northern Scotland and among sailors, sometimes called the dancers or the merry dancers.


revel (v.)

early 14c., to feast in a noisy manner; late 14c., take part in revels, from Old French reveler,
also rebeller be disorderly, make merry; rebel, be riotous, from Latin rebellare to rebel (see rebel
(v.)). The meaning take great pleasure in first recorded 1754. Related: Reveled; reveling; revelled;
revelling.


Euphrosyne

name of one of the three Graces in Greek mythology, from Latin, from Greek Euphrosyne, literally
mirth, merriment, from euphron cheerful, merry, of a good mind, from eu well (see eu-) + phren
(genitive phrenos) mind, of unknown origin.


hilarity (n.)

mid-15c., from Latin hilaritatem (nominative hilaritas) cheerfulness, gaiety, merriment, from
hilaris cheerful, gay, from Greek hilaros cheerful, gay, merry, joyous, related to hilaos graceful,
kindly. In ancient Rome, Hilaria (neuter plural of hilaris) were a class of holidays, times of pomp
and rejoicing; there were public ones in honor of Cybele at the spring equinoxes as well as private
ones on the day of a marriage or a son's birth.


joyous (adj.)

c.1300, from Anglo-French joyous, Old French joios happy, cheerful, merry, glad (12c., Modern French
joyeux), from joie (see joy). Related: Joyously; joyousness.


exhilarate (v.)

1530s, from Latin exhilaratus cheerful, merry, past participle of exhilarare gladden, cheer, from
ex- thoroughly (see ex-) + hilarare make cheerful, from hilarus cheerful (see hilarity). Related:
Exhilarated; exhilarating.


gallimaufry (n.)

a medley, 1550s, from French galimafr&eacute;e hash, ragout, from Old French calimafree sauce made
of mustard, ginger, and vinegar; a stew of carp (14c.), origin unknown, perhaps from Old French
galer to make merry, live well (see gallant) + Old North French mafrer to eat much, from Middle
Dutch maffelen [Klein]. Weekley sees in the second element the proper name Maufr&eacute;.


jovial (adj.)

1580s, under the influence of the planet Jupiter, from Middle French jovial (16c.), from Italian
joviale, literally pertaining to Jupiter, and directly from Latin Iovialis of Jupiter, from Iovius
(used as genitive of Iuppiter) Jupiter, Roman god of the sky (see Jove). The meaning good-humored,
merry, is from astrological belief that those born under the sign of the planet Jupiter are of such
dispositions. Related: Jovially.


joker (n.)

1729, jester, merry fellow, agent noun from joke (v.). In generic slang use for any man, fellow,
chap by 1811, which probably is the source of the meaning odd face card in the deck (1868). An 1857
edition of Hoyle's Games lists a card game called Black Joke in which all face cards were called
jokers.  American manufacturers of playing-cards are wont to include a blank card at the top of the
pack; and it is, alas! true that some thrifty person suggested that the card should not be wasted.
This was the origin of the joker. [St. James's Gazette, 1894]


droll (adj.)

1620s, from French dr&ocirc;le odd, comical, funny (1580s), in Middle French a noun meaning a merry
fellow, possibly from Middle Dutch drol fat little fellow, goblin, or Middle High German trolle
clown, ultimately from Old Norse troll giant, troll (see troll (n.)). Related: Drolly; drollish.


gala (n.)

1620s, festive dress or attire, from French en gala, perhaps from Old French gale merriment, from
galer rejoice, make merry (see gallant). Klein suggests the French word is from Italian gala (as in
phrase vestito di gala robe of state), perhaps from Arabic khil'a fine garment given as a
presentation. Sense of festive occasion (characterized by display of finery) first recorded 1777.


carousel (n.)

merry-go-round, 1670s, earlier playful tournament of knights in chariots or on horseback (1640s),
from French carrousel a tilting match, from Italian carusiello, possibly from carro chariot, from
Latin carrus (see car).A new and rare invencon knowne by the name of the royalle carousell or
tournament being framed and contrived with such engines as will not only afford great pleasure to us
and our nobility in the sight thereof, but sufficient instruction to all such ingenious young
gentlemen as desire to learne the art of perfect horsemanshipp. [letter of 1673]


regale (v.)

entertain splendidly, 1650s, from French r&eacute;galer to entertain or feast, from Old French
regale, rigale, from gale merriment, from galer make merry (see gallant (adj.)). Influenced in Old
French by se rigoler amuse oneself, rejoice, of unknown origin. Italian regalo is from French.
Related: Regaled; regaling.


oyster (n.)

early 14c., from Old French oistre (Modern French hu&icirc;tre), from Latin ostrea, plural or fem.
of ostreum oyster, from Greek ostreon, from PIE *ost- bone (see osseous). Related to Greek ostrakon
hard shell and to osteon bone.Why then the world's mine Oyster, which I, with sword will open.
[Shakespeare, The Merry Wives of Windsor, II.ii.2]


kite (n.)

bird of prey (Milvus ictinus), Old English cyta kind of hawk, probably imitative of its cries
(compare ciegan to call, German Kauz screech owl). The toy kite first so-called 1660s, from its way
of hovering in the air like a bird. The dismissive invitation to go fly a kite is attested by 1942,
American English, probably tracing to the popular song of the same name (lyrics by Johnny Burke),
sung by Bing Crosby in The Star Maker (1939):    Go fly a kite and tie your troubles to the tail
They'll be blown away by a merry gale,   Go fly a kite and toss your worries to the wind   And they
won't come back, they'll be too chagrined.


frisk (v.)

1510s, to dance, frolic, from Middle English frisk lively (mid-15c.), from Middle French frisque
lively, brisk, from Old French frisque fresh, new; merry, animated (13c.), possibly from a Germanic
source (compare Middle Dutch vrisch fresh, Old High German frisc lively; see fresh (adj.1)). Sense
of pat down in a search first recorded 1781. Related: Frisked; frisking. As a noun from 1520s.


gamble (v.)

1726 (implied in gambling), from a dialectal survival of Middle English gammlen, variant of gamenen
to play, jest, be merry, from Old English gamenian to play, joke, pun, from gamen (see game). Or
possibly gamble is from a derivative of gamel to play games (1590s), itself likely a frequentative
from game. Originally regarded as a slang word. The intrusive -b- may be from confusion with gambol.
Related: Gambled; gambling.


feast (n.)

c.1200, religious anniversary characterized by rejoicing (rather than fasting), from Old French
feste (12c., Modern French f&ecirc;te) religious festival; noise, racket, from Vulgar Latin *festa
(fem. singular; also source of Italian festa, Spanish fiesta), from Latin festa holidays, feasts,
noun use of neuter plural of festus festive, joyful, merry, related to feriae holiday and fanum
temple, from PIE *dhes- root of words in religious concepts [Watkins]. The spelling -ea- was used in
Middle English to represent the sound we mis-call long e. Meaning abundant meal (whether public or
private) is from late 14c.


gaudy (adj.)

showy, tastelessly rich, 1580s, probably ultimately from Middle English gaudi large, ornamental bead
in a rosary (early 14c.); but there is a parallel sense of gaudy as full of trickery (1520s), from
Middle English gaud deception, trick, from gaudi a jest, trick, possibly from Anglo-French gaudir be
merry, scoff, from Latin gaudere rejoice (see joy).    Alternative etymology of the adjective is
from Middle English gaudegrene yellowish-green (early 14c.), originally green dye obtained from a
plant formerly known as weld, from a Germanic source (see weld (n.)), which became gaude in Old
French. The English term supposedly shifted sense from weld-dye to bright. As a noun, feast,
festival 1650s, from gaudy day day of rejoicing (1560s).


spree (n.)

a frolic, drinking bout, 1804, slang, earliest use in Scottish dialect works, of uncertain origin.
Perhaps [Barnhart] an alteration of French esprit lively wit (see esprit). According to Klein, Irish
spre seems to be a loan-word from Old Norse sprakr. Watkins proposes a possible origin as an
alteration of Scots spreath cattle raid, from Gaelic spr&#233;dh, spr&#233;, cattle; wealth, from
Middle Irish preit, preid, booty, ultimately from Latin praeda plunder, booty (see prey (n.)).
The splore is a frolic, a merry meeting. In the slang language of the inhabitants of St Giles's, in
London, it is called a spree or a go. [Note in Select Scottish Songs, Ancient and Modern, vol. II,
London, 1810]    In Foote's comedy The Maid of Bath (1794) the word appears as a Scottish dialect
pronunciation of spry:  'When I intermarried with Sir Launcelot Coldstream, I was en siek a spree
lass as yoursel; and the baronet bordering upon his grand climacteric;'  etc.


ale (n.)

Old English ealu ale, beer, from Proto-Germanic *aluth- (cognates: Old Saxon alo, Old Norse
&ouml;l), perhaps from PIE root meaning bitter (cognates: Latin alumen alum), or from PIE *alu-t
ale, from root *alu-, which has connotations of sorcery, magic, possession, intoxication. The word
was borrowed from Germanic into Lithuanian (alus) and Old Church Slavonic (olu).  In the fifteenth
century, and until the seventeenth, ale stood for the unhopped fermented malt liquor which had long
been the native drink of these islands. Beer was the hopped malt liquor introduced from the Low
Countires in the fifteenth century and popular first of all in the towns. By the eighteenth century,
however, all malt liquor was hopped and there had been a silent mutation in the meaning of the two
terms. For a time the terms became synonymous, in fact, but local habits of nomenclature still
continued to perpetuate what had been a real difference: 'beer' was the malt liquor which tended to
be found in towns, 'ale' was the term in general use in the country districts. [Peter Mathias, The
Brewing Industry in England, Cambridge University Press, 1959]Meaning festival or merry-meeting at
which much ale was drunk was in Old English (see bridal).


bawd (n.)

a complicated word of uncertain history. First attested late 15c., lewd person (of either sex; since
c.1700 applied only to women), probably from baude-strote procurer of prostitutes (mid-14c.), which
may be from Middle English bawde (adj.) merry, joyous, from Old French baud gay, licentious (from
Frankish bald bold or some such Germanic source). It would not be the first time a word meaning
joyous had taken on a sexual sense. The sense evolution shading from bold to lewd is not difficult;
compare Old French baudise ardor, joy, elation, act of boldness, presumption; baudie elation, high
spirits, fole baudie bawdry, shamelessness. The Old French word also is the source of French baudet
donkey, in Picardy dialect loose woman.    The second element in baude-strote would be trot one who
runs errands, or Germanic *strutt (see strut). But OED doubts all this. There was an Old French
baudestrote, baudetrot of the same meaning (13c.), and this may be the direct source of Middle
English baude-strote. The obsolete word bronstrops procuress, frequently found in Middleton's
comedies, probably is an alteration of baude-strote.


bury (v.)

Old English byrgan to raise a mound, hide, bury, inter, akin to beorgan to shelter, from Proto-
Germanic *burzjan- protection, shelter (cognates: Old Saxon bergan, Dutch bergen, Old Norse bjarga,
Swedish berga, Old High German bergan protect, shelter, conceal, German bergen, Gothic bairgan to
save, preserve), from PIE root *bhergh- (1) to hide, protect (cognates: Old Church Slavonic brego I
preserve, guard). Related: Buried; burying. Burying-ground cemetery attested from 1711.    The Old
English -y- was a short oo sound, like modern French -u-. Under normal circumstances it transformed
into Modern English -i- (as in bridge, kiss, listen, sister), but in bury and a few other words (as
in merry, knell) it retained a Kentish change to e that took place in the late Old English period.
In the West Midlands, meanwhile, the Old English -y- sound persisted, slightly modified over time,
giving the standard modern pronunciation of blush, much, church.


wet (adj.)

Old English w&aelig;t moist, rainy, liquid, also as a noun. moisture, liquid drink, from Proto-
Germanic *weta- (source also of Old Frisian wet ). Also from cognate Old Norse vatr; all from PIE
*wed- (1) water, wet (see water (n.1)). Of paint, ink, etc., not yet dry from 1510s. Opposed to dry
in reference to the U.S. battles over prohibition from 1870. Wet blanket person who has a
dispiriting effect is recorded from 1871, from use of blankets drenched in water to smother fires
(the phrase is attested in this literal sense from 1660s).    Do we not know them, those wet
blankets who come down on our pleasant little fires and extinguish them, with no more ruth than the
rain feels when it pours on the encampment of the merry picnic party, or floods the tents of a
flower show? [Wet Blankets, in Godey's Lady's Book and Magazine, February, 1871]   All wet in the
wrong is recorded from 1923, American English; earlier simply wet ineffectual, and perhaps
ultimately from slang meaning drunken (c.1700). Wet-nurse is from 1610s. The diver's wet-suit is
from 1955. Wet dream is from 1851; in the same sense Middle English had ludificacioun an erotic
dream.    He knew som tyme a man of religion, &thorn;at gaff hym gretelie vnto chastitie bothe of
his harte &amp; of his body noghtwithstondyng he was tempid with grete ludificacions on &thorn;e
nyght. [Alphabet of Tales, c.1450]


silly (adj.)

Old English ges&aelig;lig happy, fortuitous, prosperous (related to s&aelig;l happiness), from
Proto-Germanic *s&aelig;ligas (cognates: Old Norse s&aelig;ll happy, Old Saxon salig, Middle Dutch
salich, Old High German salig, German selig blessed, happy, blissful, Gothic sels good,
kindhearted), from PIE *sele- of good mood; to favor, from root *sel- (2) happy, of good mood; to
favor (cognates: Latin solari to comfort, Greek hilaros cheerful, gay, merry, joyous).    This is
one of the few instances in which an original long e (ee) has become shortened to i. The same change
occurs in breeches, and in the American pronunciation of been, with no change in spelling. [Century
Dictionary]    The word's considerable sense development moved from happy to blessed to pious, to
innocent (c.1200), to harmless, to pitiable (late 13c.), weak (c.1300), to feeble in mind, lacking
in reason, foolish (1570s). Further tendency toward stunned, dazed as by a blow (1886) in knocked
silly, etc. Silly season in journalism slang is from 1861 (August and September, when newspapers
compensate for a lack of hard news by filling up with trivial stories). Silly Putty trademark claims
use from July 1949.


comedy (n.)

late 14c., from Old French comedie (14c., a poem, not in the theatrical sense), from Latin comoedia,
from Greek komoidia a comedy, amusing spectacle, probably from komodios actor or singer in the
revels, from komos revel, carousal, merry-making, festival, + aoidos singer, poet, from aeidein to
sing, related to oide (see ode).    The passage on the nature of comedy in the Poetic of Aristotle
is unfortunately lost, but if we can trust stray hints on the subject, his definition of comedy
(which applied mainly to Menander) ran parallel to that of tragedy, and described the art as a
purification of certain affections of our nature, not by terror and pity, but by laughter and
ridicule. [Rev. J.P. Mahaffy, A History of Classical Greek Literature, London, 1895]    The
classical sense of the word, then, was amusing play or performance, which is similar to the modern
one, but in the Middle Ages the word came to mean poems and stories generally (albeit ones with
happy endings), and the earliest English sense is narrative poem (such as Dante's Commedia).
Generalized sense of quality of being amusing dates from 1877.   Comedy aims at entertaining by the
fidelity with which it presents life as we know it, farce at raising laughter by the outrageous
absurdity of the situation or characters exhibited, &amp; burlesque at tickling the fancy of the
audience by caricaturing plays or actors with whose style it is familiar. [Fowler]


gay (adj.)

late 14c., full of joy, merry; light-hearted, carefree; also wanton, lewd, lascivious (late 12c. as
a surname, Philippus de Gay), from Old French gai joyful, happy; pleasant, agreeably charming;
forward, pert (12c.; compare Old Spanish gayo, Portuguese gaio, Italian gajo, probably French loan-
words). Ultimate origin disputed; perhaps from Frankish *gahi (related to Old High German wahi
pretty), though not all etymologists accept this. Meaning stately and beautiful; splendid and
showily dressed is from early 14c. The word gay by the 1890s had an overall tinge of promiscuity --
a gay house was a brothel. The suggestion of immorality in the word can be traced back at least to
the 1630s, if not to Chaucer:    But in oure bed he was so fressh and gay  Whan that he wolde han my
bele chose.    Slang meaning homosexual (adj.) begins to appear in psychological writing late 1940s,
evidently picked up from gay slang and not always easily distinguished from the older sense:
After discharge A.Z. lived for some time at home. He was not happy at the farm and went to a Western
city where he associated with a homosexual crowd, being gay, and wearing female clothes and makeup.
He always wished others would make advances to him. [Rorschach Research Exchange and Journal of
Projective Techniques, 1947, p.240]    The association with (male) homosexuality likely got a boost
from the term gay cat, used as far back as 1893 in American English for young hobo, one who is new
on the road, also one who sometimes does jobs.    A Gay Cat, said he, is a loafing laborer, who
works maybe a week, gets his wages and vagabonds about hunting for another 'pick and shovel' job. Do
you want to know where they got their monica (nickname) 'Gay Cat'? See, Kid, cats sneak about and
scratch immediately after chumming with you and then get gay (fresh). That's why we call them 'Gay
Cats'. [Leon Ray Livingston (America's Most Celebrated Tramp), Life and Adventures of A-no. 1, 1910]
Quoting a tramp named Frenchy, who might not have known the origin. Gay cats were severely and
cruelly abused by real tramps and bums, who considered them an inferior order of beings who begs of
and otherwise preys upon the bum -- as it were a jackal following up the king of beasts [Prof. John
J. McCook, Tramps, in The Public Treatment of Pauperism, 1893], but some accounts report certain
older tramps would dominate a gay cat and employ him as a sort of slave. In Sociology and Social
Research (1932-33) a paragraph on the gay cat phenomenon notes, Homosexual practices are more common
than rare in this group, and gey cat homosexual boy is attested in N. Erskine's 1933 dictionary of
Underworld &amp; Prison Slang (gey is a Scottish variant of gay).    The Dictionary of American
Slang reports that gay (adj.) was used by homosexuals, among themselves, in this sense since at
least 1920. Rawson [Wicked Words] notes a male prostitute using gay in reference to male homosexuals
(but also to female prostitutes) in London's notorious Cleveland Street Scandal of 1889. Ayto [20th
Century Words] calls attention to the ambiguous use of the word in the 1868 song The Gay Young Clerk
in the Dry Goods Store, by U.S. female impersonator Will S. Hays, but the word evidently was not
popularly felt in this sense by wider society until the 1950s at the earliest.    Gay (or gai) is
now widely used in French, Dutch, Danish, Japanese, Swedish, and Catalan with the same sense as the
English. It is coming into use in Germany and among the English-speaking upper classes of many
cosmopolitan areas in other countries. [John Boswell, Christianity, Social Tolerance, and
Homosexuality, 1980]   Gay as a noun meaning a (usually male) homosexual is attested from 1971; in
Middle English it meant excellent person, noble lady, gallant knight, also something gay or bright;
an ornament or badge (c.1400). As a slang word meaning bad, inferior, undesirable, from 2000.


