mesh (v.)

1530s, originally in the figurative sense of entangle, involve, from mesh (n.). Literal sense to
become enmeshed is from 1580s. Meaning to fit in, combine is from 1944. Related: Meshed; meshing.


mesh (n.)

late 14c., mesche, open space in a net, probably from late Old English max net, earlier
m&aelig;scre, from Proto-Germanic *mask- (cognates: Old Norse m&ouml;skvi, Danish maske, Swedish
maska, Old Saxon masca, Middle Dutch maessce, Dutch maas mesh, Old High German masca, German Masche
mesh), from PIE root *mezg- to knit, plait, twist (cognates: Lithuanian mezgu to knit, mazgas knot).


mail (n.2)

metal ring armor, c.1300, from Old French maille link of mail, mesh of net, from Latin macula mesh
in a net, originally spot, blemish, on notion that the gaps in a net or mesh looked like spots.


intermesh (v.)

1909, from inter- + mesh.


maillot (n.)

tight-fitting one-piece swimsuit, 1928, from French maillot swaddling clothes, from Old French
mailloel (13c.), probably an alteration of maille mesh (see mail (n.2)). Borrowed earlier by English
in the sense of tights (1888).


enmesh (v.)

c.1600, from en- (1) + mesh (v.). Related: Enmeshed; enmeshing.


trammel (n.)

mid-14c., net to catch fish (implied in trammeller one who fishes with a trammel net), from Old
French tramail fine-gauged fishnet (13c.), from Late Latin tremaculum, perhaps meaning a net made
from three layers of meshes, from Latin tri- three (see tri-) + macula a mesh (see mail (n.2)).
Meaning anything that hinders is from 1650s, originally a hobble for a horse (c.1500). Italian
tramaglio, Spanish trasmallo are French loan-words.


net (n.)

Old English net netting, network, spider web, mesh used for capturing, also figuratively, moral or
mental snare or trap, from Proto-Germanic *natjan (cognates: Old Saxon net, Old Norse, Dutch net,
Swedish n&auml;t, Old High German nezzi, German Netz, Gothic nati net), originally something
knotted, from PIE *ned- to twist, knot (cognates: Sanskrit nahyati binds, ties, Latin nodus knot,
Old Irish nascim I bind, oblige).


mask (n.)

1530s, from Middle French masque covering to hide or guard the face (16c.), from Italian maschera,
from Medieval Latin masca mask, specter, nightmare, of uncertain origin, perhaps from Arabic
maskharah buffoon, mockery, from sakhira be mocked, ridiculed. Or via Proven&ccedil;al mascarar,
Catalan mascarar, Old French mascurer to black (the face), perhaps from a Germanic source akin to
English mesh (q.v.). But compare Occitan mascara to blacken, darken, derived from mask- black, which
is held to be from a pre-Indo-European language, and Old Occitan masco witch, surviving in dialects;
in Beziers it means dark cloud before the rain comes. [See Walther von Wartburg, Franz&ouml;sisches
Etymologisches W&ouml;rterbuch: Eine Darstellung galloromanischen sprachschatzes]. Figurative use by
1570s.


fly (n.)

Old English fleoge fly, winged insect, from Proto-Germanic *fleugjon (cognates: Old Saxon fleiga,
Old Norse fluga, Middle Dutch vlieghe, Dutch vlieg, Old High German flioga, German Fliege fly);
literally the flying (insect) (compare Old English fleogende flying), from same source as fly (v.1).
Originally any winged insect (hence butterfly, etc.); long used by farmers and gardeners for any
insect parasite. The Old English plural in -n (as in oxen) gradually normalized 13c.-15c. to -s. Fly
on the wall unseen observer first recorded 1881. An Old English word for curtain was fleonet fly-
net. Fly-swatter as a bit of wire mesh on a handle first attested 1917. Fly-fishing is from 1650s.
From the verb and the notion of flapping as a wing does comes the noun sense of tent flap (1810),
which yielded covering for buttons that close up a garment (1844). The sense of a flight, flying is
from mid-15c. Baseball fly ball attested by 1866.  To do something on the fly is 1856, apparently
from baseball.    When the catcher sees several fielders running to catch a ball, he should name the
one he thinks surest to take it, when the others should not strive to catch the ball on the fly, but
only, in case of its being missed, take it on the bound. [The American Boys Book of Sports and
Games, New York, 1864]


