metaphoric (adj.)

1590s, from metaphor + -ic. Greek metaphorikos meant apt at metaphors.


metaphorical (adj.)

1550s, from metaphor + -ical. Related: metaphorically.


metaphor (n.)

late 15c., from Middle French metaphore (Old French metafore, 13c.), and directly from Latin
metaphora, from Greek metaphora a transfer, especially of the sense of one word to a different word,
literally a carrying over, from metapherein transfer, carry over; change, alter; to use a word in a
strange sense, from meta- over, across (see meta-) + pherein to carry, bear (see infer).


pinko (n.)

1936, derogatory slang form of pink (n.), used of people whose social or political views have a
tendency toward 'red;'  a metaphor that had existed since at least 1837. As an adjective by 1957.


frontrunner (n.)

also front-runner, of political candidates, 1908, American English, a metaphor from horse racing
(where it is used by 1903 of a horse that runs best while in the lead).


rise (n.)

upward movement, 1570s, from rise (v.). Meaning a piece of rising ground is from 1630s. Meaning
spring, source, origin, beginning is from 1620s. Phrase to get a rise out of (someone) (1829) is a
metaphor from angling (1650s).


eye-candy (n.)

also eye candy, attractive woman on a TV show, etc., by 1978, based on a metaphor also found in nose
candy cocaine (1930).


parabole (n.)

comparison, metaphor, 1580s, from Greek parabole comparison (see parable).


akimbo

c.1400, in kenebowe, of unknown origin, perhaps from Middle English phrase in keen bow at a sharp
angle, or from a Scandinavian word akin to Icelandic kengboginn bow-bent, but this seems not to have
been used in this exact sense. Many languages use a teapot metaphor for this, such as French faire
le pot a deux anses to play the pot with two handles.


ringleader (n.)

c.1500, from Middle English phrase to lead the ring (mid-14c.), probably from a medieval metaphor
from dancing. See ring (n.1) + lead (v.1).


cotton (v.)

to get on with someone (usually with to), 1560s, perhaps from Welsh cytuno consent, agree. But
perhaps also a metaphor from cloth finishing and thus from cotton (n.). Related: Cottoned;
cottoning.


stake (v.2)

to risk, wager, 1520s, perhaps from notion of post on which a gambling wager was placed (see stake
(n.2)), though Weekley suggests there is a tinge of the burning or baiting metaphor in this usage.
Meaning to maintain surveillance (usually stake out) is first recorded 1942, American English
colloquial, probably form earlier sense of mark off territory. Related: Staked; staking.


overplay (v.)

to emphasize (something) too much, 1933, a metaphor from card games, in to overplay (one's) hand, to
spoil one's hand by bidding in excess of its value (1926), from over- + play (v.). The word was used
earlier in a theatrical sense. Related: Overplayed; overplaying.


lemon (n.2)

worthless thing, 1909, American English slang; from lemon (n.1), perhaps via criminal slang sense of
a person who is a loser, a simpleton, which is perhaps from the notion of someone a sharper can suck
the juice out of. A pool hall hustle was called a lemon game (1908); while to hand someone a lemon
was British slang (1906) for to pass off a sub-standard article as a good one. Or it simply may be a
metaphor for something which leaves a bad taste in one's mouth.


running (n.)

Old English &#230;rning, verbal noun from run (v.); to be in (or out) of the running among (or not
among) the lead competitors in a race (1863) is a metaphor from horse racing, where make the running
set the pace is recorded from 1837. Running shoe is from 1884.


stake (n.2)

that which is placed at hazard, 1530s, from stake (v.). Perhaps literally that which is put up, from
notion of post on which a gambling wager was placed, though OED points out there is no evidence of
the existence of such a custom. Weekley suggests there is a tinge of the burning or baiting metaphor
in this usage. Hence, an interest, something to gain or lose (1784). Plural stakes, sum of money to
be won in a (horse) race, first recorded 1690s (compare sweepstakes). To have a stake in is recorded
from 1784.


delirium (n.)

1590s, from Latin delirium madness, from deliriare be crazy, rave, literally go off the furrow, a
plowing metaphor, from phrase de lire, from de off, away (see de-) + lira furrow, earth thrown up
between two furrows, from PIE *leis- (1) track, furrow (see learn).


summit (n.)

c.1400, highest point, peak, from Middle French somete, from Old French somete summit, top,
diminutive of som, sum highest part, top of a hill, from Latin summum, neuter of noun use of summus
highest, related to super over (see sum (n.)). The meaning meeting of heads of state (1950) is from
Winston Churchill's metaphor of a parley at the summit.


second (adj.)

next after first, c.1300, from Old French second, secont, and directly from Latin secundus
following, next in time or order, also secondary, subordinate, inferior, from root of sequi follow
(see sequel). Replaced native other in this sense because of the ambiguousness of the earlier word.
Second sight is from 1610s; an etymologically perverse term, because it means in reality the sight
of events before, not after, they occur. Second fiddle first attested 1809:    A metaphor borrowed
from a musical performer who plays the second or counter to one who plays the first or the air.
[Bartlett, Dictionary of Americanisms, 1848]


courage (n.)

c.1300, from Old French corage (12c., Modern French courage) heart, innermost feelings; temper, from
Vulgar Latin *coraticum (source of Italian coraggio, Spanish coraje), from Latin cor heart (see
heart) which remains a common metaphor for inner strength.    In Middle English, used broadly for
what is in one's mind or thoughts, hence bravery, but also wrath, pride, confidence, lustiness, or
any sort of inclination. Replaced Old English ellen, which also meant zeal, strength.


consider (v.)

late 14c., from Old French considerer (13c.) reflect on, consider, study, from Latin considerare to
look at closely, observe, perhaps literally to observe the stars, from com- with (see com-) + sidus
(genitive sideris) constellation (see sidereal).    Perhaps a metaphor from navigation, but more
likely reflecting Roman obsession with divination by astrology. Tucker doubts the connection with
sidus, however, because it is quite inapplicable to desiderare, and suggests derivation instead from
the PIE root of English side meaning stretch, extend, and a sense for the full word of survey on all
sides or dwell long upon. Related: Considered; considering.


chest (n.)

Old English cest box, coffer, casket, from Proto-Germanic *kista (cognates: Old Norse and Old High
German kista, Old Frisian, Middle Dutch, German kiste, Dutch kist), an early borrowing from Latin
cista chest, box, from Greek kiste a box, basket, from PIE *kista woven container. Meaning extended
to thorax 1520s, replacing breast (n.), on the metaphor of the ribs as a box for the organs. Chest
of drawers is from 1590s.


grain (n.)

early 13c., scarlet dye made from insects (late 12c. in surnames), from Old French grain (12c.)
seed, grain, particle, berry, scarlet dye (see kermes for last sense), from Latin granum seed, a
grain, small kernel (see corn (n.1)).    As a collective singular meaning seed of wheat and allied
grasses used as food, it is attested from early 14c. Extended from c.1300 to other objects (such as
salt, sand). As a unit of weight, from 1540s. Used of wood (1560s), from the arrangement of fibers,
which resemble seeds. Hence, against the grain (1650), a metaphor from carpentry: cutting across the
fibers of the wood is more difficult than cutting along them.


bat (n.1)

a stick, a club, Old English *batt cudgel, perhaps from Celtic (compare Irish and Gaelic bat, bata
staff, cudgel), influenced by Old French batte, from Late Latin battre beat; all from PIE root
*bhat- to strike. Also a lump, piece (mid-14c.), as in brickbat. As a kind of paddle used to play
cricket, it is attested from 1706.    Phrase right off the bat is 1888, also hot from the bat
(1888), probably a baseball metaphor, but cricket is possible as a source; there is an early
citation from Australia (in an article about slang): Well, it is a vice you'd better get rid of
then. Refined conversation is a mark of culture. Let me hear that kid use slang again, and I'll give
it to him right off the bat. I'll wipe up the floor with him. I'll  --- [The Australian Journal,
November 1888].


dogfish (n.)

a name for various types of small shark, late 15c., dokefyche, from dog (n.) + fish (n.). Said to be
so called because they hunt in packs. This was the image of sharks in classical antiquity as well.
But in the Mediterranean, among the Greeks and Romans of antiquity, closer contact with sharks had
left an impression of vicious dogs of the sea. Thus, Pliny's canis marinus. The metaphor of the dog
spread to the North to dominate the European image of the shark, from the Italian pescecane and
French chien de mer to the German Meerhund and Hundfisch and English sea dog and dogfish. [Tom
Jones, The Xoc, the Sharke and the Sea Dogs, in Fifth Palenque Round Table, 1983, edited by Virginia
M. Field, 1985.]


punch (n.3)

a quick blow with the fist, by 1570s, probably from punch (v.). In early use also of blows with the
foot or jabs with a staff or club. Originally especially of blows that sink in to some degree (...
whom he unmercifully bruises and batters from head to foot: here a slap in the chaps, there a black
eye, now a punch in the stomach, and then a kick on the breech, Monthly Review, 1763). Figurative
sense of forceful, vigorous quality is recorded from 1911. To beat (someone) to the punch in the
figurative sense is from 1915, a metaphor from boxing (attested by 1913). Punch line (also punch-
line) is from 1915 (originally in popular-song writing); punch-drunk is from 1915 (alternative form
slug-nutty is from 1933).


hook (n.)

Old English hoc hook, angle, perhaps related to Old English haca bolt, from Proto-Germanic
*hokaz/*hakan- (cognates: Old Frisian hok, Middle Dutch hoek, Dutch haak, German Haken hook), from
PIE *keg- hook, tooth (cognates: Russian kogot claw). For spelling, see hood (n.1).    Boxing sense
of short, swinging blow with the elbow bent is from 1898. Figurative sense was in Middle English
(see hooker). By hook or by crook (late 14c.) probably alludes to tools of professional thieves.
Hook, line, and sinker completely is 1838, a metaphor from angling.


kenning (n.)

Old English cenning procreation; declaration in court, present participle of ken (v.). From early
14c. in senses sign, token; teaching, instruction; c.1400 as mental cognition. From 1871 as
periphrastic expression in early Germanic poetry; in this sense it probably is from a modern learned
use of Old Norse cognate verb kenna to know, to recognize, to feel or perceive; to call, to name (in
a formal poetic metaphor).    In the whole poem of Beowulf there are scarcely half a dozen of them
[similes], and these of the simplest character, such as comparing a ship to a bird. Indeed, such a
simple comparison as this is almost equivalent to the more usual kenning (as it is called in
Icelandic), such as brimfugol, where, instead of comparing the ship to a bird, the poet simply calls
it a sea-bird, preferring the direct assertion to the indirect comparison. [Henry Sweet, Sketches of
the History of Anglo-Saxon Poetry, London, 1871]


torch (n.)

mid-13c., from Old French torche torch, also handful of straw (for wiping or cleaning, hence French
torcher to wipe, wipe down), originally twisted thing, then torch formed of twisted tow dipped in
wax, probably from Vulgar Latin *torca, alteration of Late Latin torqua, from Latin torquere to
twist (see torque (n.)).    In Britain, also applied to the battery-driven version (in U.S., a
flashlight). To pass the torch is an ancient metaphor from the Greek torch-races (lampadedromia)
where the goal was to reach the finish line with the torch still burning. Torch-bearer leader of a
cause is from 1530s. Torch song is 1927 (My Melancholy Baby, performed by Tommy Lyman, is said to
have been the first so called), from carry a torch suffer an unrequited love (also 1927), Broadway
slang, but the sense is obscure.


crack (n.)

a split, an opening, mid-15c., earlier a splitting sound; a fart; the sound of a trumpet (late
14c.), probably from crack (v.). Meaning rock cocaine is first attested 1985. The superstition that
it is bad luck to step on sidewalk cracks has been traced to c.1890. Meaning try, attempt first
attested 1830, nautical, probably a hunting metaphor, from slang sense of fire a gun.    At their
head, apart from the rest, was a black bull, who appeared to be their leader; he came roaring along,
his tail straight an end, and at times tossing up the earth with his horns. I never felt such a
desire to have a crack at any thing in all my life. He drew nigh the place where I was standing; I
raised my beautiful Betsey to my shoulder, took deliberate aim, blazed away, and he roared, and
suddenly stopped. [A Narrative of the Life of David Crockett, Written by Himself, Philadelphia,
1834]    Adjectival meaning top-notch, superior (as in a crack shot) is slang from 1793, perhaps
from earlier verbal sense of do any thing with quickness or smartness (Johnson). Grose (1796) has
THE CRACK, or ALL THE CRACK. The fashionable theme, the go.


roll (v.)

c.1300 turn over and over, move by rotating (intransitive); late 14c. as to move (something) by
turning it over and over; from Old French roeller roll, wheel round (Modern French rouler), from
Medieval Latin rotulare, from Latin rotula, diminutive of rota wheel (see rotary). Related: Rolled;
rolling.    Of sounds (such as thunder) somehow suggestive of a rolling ball, 1590s; of a drum from
1680s. Of eyes, from late 14c. Of a movie camera, to start filming, from 1938. Sense of rob a
stuporous drunk is from 1873, from the action required to get to his pockets. To roll up gather,
congregate is from 1861, originally Australian. To be on a roll is from 1976. To roll with the
punches is a metaphor from boxing (1940). Heads will roll is a Hitlerism:If our movement is
victorious there will be a revolutionary tribunal which will punish the crimes of November 1918.
Then decapitated heads will roll in the sand. [1930]


eight (n.)

late 14c., eighte, earlier ehte (c.1200), from Old English eahta, &aelig;hta, from Proto-Germanic
*akhto(u) (cognates: Old Saxon ahto, Old Frisian ahta, Old Norse atta, Swedish &#229;tta, Dutch
acht, Old High German Ahto, German acht, Gothic ahtau), from PIE *okto(u) eight (cognates: Sanskrit
astau, Avestan ashta, Greek okto, Latin octo, Old Irish ocht-n, Breton eiz, Old Church Slavonic
osmi, Lithuanian a&#353;tuoni).    Klein calls it an old dual form, orig. meaning 'twice four.'  For
spelling, see fight (v.). Meaning eight-man crew of a rowing boat is from 1847. The Spanish piece of
eight (1690s) was so called because it was worth eight reals (see piece (n.)). Figure (of) eight as
the shape of a race course, etc., attested from c.1600. To be behind the eight ball in trouble
(1932) is a metaphor from shooting pool.


text (n.)

late 14c., wording of anything written, from Old French texte, Old North French tixte text, book;
Gospels (12c.), from Medieval Latin textus the Scriptures, text, treatise, in Late Latin written
account, content, characters used in a document, from Latin textus style or texture of a work,
literally thing woven, from past participle stem of texere to weave, to join, fit together, braid,
interweave, construct, fabricate, build, from PIE root *teks- to weave, to fabricate, to make; make
wicker or wattle framework (see texture (n.)).    An ancient metaphor: thought is a thread, and the
raconteur is a spinner of yarns -- but the true storyteller, the poet, is a weaver. The scribes made
this old and audible abstraction into a new and visible fact. After long practice, their work took
on such an even, flexible texture that they called the written page a textus, which means cloth.
[Robert Bringhurst, The Elements of Typographic Style]


bean (n.)

Old English bean bean, pea, legume, from Proto-Germanic *bauno (cognates: Old Norse baun, Middle
Dutch bone, Dutch boon, Old High German bona, German Bohne), perhaps from a PIE reduplicated base
*bha-bha- and related to Latin faba bean.    As a metaphor for something of small value it is
attested from c.1300. Meaning head is U.S. baseball slang c.1905 (in bean-ball a pitch thrown at the
head); thus slang verb bean meaning to hit on the head, attested from 1910.    The notion of lucky
or magic beans in English folklore is from the exotic beans or large seeds that wash up occasionally
in Cornwall and western Scotland, carried from the Caribbean or South America by the Gulf Stream.
They were cherished, believed to ward off the evil eye and aid in childbirth.    Slang bean-counter
accountant recorded by 1971. To not know beans (American English, 1933) is perhaps from the of
little worth sense, but may have a connection to colloquial expression recorded around Somerset, to
know how many beans make five be a clever fellow.


character (n.)

mid-14c., carecter, symbol marked or branded on the body; mid-15c., symbol or drawing used in
sorcery, from Old French caratere feature, character (13c., Modern French caract&egrave;re), from
Latin character, from Greek kharakter engraved mark, also symbol or imprint on the soul, also
instrument for marking, from kharassein to engrave, from kharax pointed stake, from PIE root *gher-
(4) to scrape, scratch. Meaning extended in ancient times by metaphor to a defining quality.You
remember Eponina, who kept her husband alive in an underground cavern so devotedly and heroically?
The force of character she showed in keeping up his spirits would have been used to hide a lover
from her husband if they had been living quietly in Rome. Strong characters need strong nourishment.
[Stendhal de l'Amour, 1822]Meaning sum of qualities that define a person is from 1640s. Sense of
person in a play or novel is first attested 1660s, in reference to the defining qualities he or she
is given by the author. Meaning a person in the abstract is from 1749; especially eccentric person
(1773). Colloquial sense of chap, fellow is from 1931. The Latin ch- spelling was restored from
1500s. Character actor attested from 1861; character assassination from 1888; character-building
(n.) from 1886.


verse (n.)

late Old English (replacing Old English fers, an early West Germanic borrowing directly from Latin),
line or section of a psalm or canticle, later line of poetry (late 14c.), from Anglo-French and Old
French vers line of verse; rhyme, song, from Latin versus a line, row, line of verse, line of
writing, from PIE root *wer- (3) to turn, bend (see versus). The metaphor is of plowing, of turning
from one line to another (vertere = to turn) as a plowman does.    Verse was invented as an aid to
memory. Later it was preserved to increase pleasure by the spectacle of difficulty overcome. That it
should still survive in dramatic art is a vestige of barbarism. [Stendhal de l'Amour, 1822]    The
English New Testament first was divided fully into verses in the Geneva version (1550s). Meaning
metrical composition is recorded from c.1300; as the non-repeating part of a modern song (between
repetitions of the chorus) by 1918.    The Negroes say that in form their old songs usually consist
in what they call Chorus and Verses. The chorus, a melodic refrain sung by all, opens the song; then
follows a verse sung as a solo, in free recitative; the chorus is repeated; then another verse;
chorus again;--and so on until the chorus, sung for the last time, ends the song. [Natalie Curtis-
Burlin, Negro Folk-Songs, 1918]


