metaphysical (adj.)

early 15c., pertaining to metaphysics, from methaphesik (late 14c.) + -al, and in part from Medieval
Latin metaphysicalis, from Medieval Latin metaphysica (see metaphysics). It came to be used in the
sense of abstract, speculative (among others by Johnson, who applied it to certain 17c. poets,
notably Donne and Cowley, who used witty conceits and abstruse imagery). Related: Metaphysically.


ontology (n.)

metaphysical science or study of being, 1660s (Gideon Harvey), from Modern Latin ontologia (c.1600),
from onto- + -logy.


architectonic (adj.)

1670s (architectonical is from c.1600), pertaining to architecture, from Latin architectonicus, from
Greek arkhitektonikos pertaining to a master builder, from arkhitekton (see architect). Metaphysical
sense, pertaining to systematization of knowledge, is from 1801.


adhesion (n.)

1620s, from French adh&eacute;sion or directly from Latin adhaesionem (nominative adhaesio) a
sticking to, noun of action from past participle stem of adhaerare (see adherent (adj.)).   Adhesion
is generally used in the material, and adherence in the metaphysical sense. [Johnson]


phenomenal (adj.)

1803, of the nature of a phenomenon, a hybrid from phenomenon + -al (1). Meaning remarkable,
exceptional is from 1850.    [Phenomenal] is a metaphysical term with a use of its own. To divert it
from this proper use to a job for which it is not needed, by making it do duty for remarkable,
extraordinary, or prodigious, is a sin against the English language. [Fowler]    Related:
Phenomenally.


kinetic (adj.)

relating to motion, 1841, from Greek kinetikos moving, putting in motion, from kinetos moved, verbal
adjective of kinein to move (see cite).    Buster Keaton's subject was kinetic man, a being he
approached with the almost metaphysical awe we reserve for a Doppelg&auml;nger. This being was,
eerily, himself, played by himself, then later in a projection room, watched by himself: an
experience never possible to any generation of actors in the previous history of the world. [Hugh
Kenner, The Counterfeiters, 1968]    Related: Kinetical; kinetically.


logos (n.)

1580s, Logos, the divine Word, second person of the Christian Trinity, from Greek logos word,
speech, discourse, also reason, from PIE root *leg- to collect (with derivatives meaning to speak,
on notion of to pick out words; see lecture (n.)); used by Neo-Platonists in various metaphysical
and theological senses and picked up by New Testament writers.    Other English formations from
logos include logolatry worship of words, unreasonable regard for words or verbal truth (1810 in
Coleridge); logomania (1870); logophobia (1923).


