mete (n.)

boundary, now only in phrase metes and bounds, late 15c., from Old French mete limit, bounds,
frontier, from Latin meta goal, boundary, post, pillar.


mete (v.)

to allot, Old English metan to measure, mete out; compare, estimate (class V strong verb; past tense
m&aelig;t, past participle meten), from Proto-Germanic *metan (cognates: Old Saxon metan, Old
Frisian, Old Norse meta, Dutch meten, Old High German mezzan, German messen, Gothic mitan to
measure), from PIE *med- to take appropriate measures (see medical). Used now only with out.
Related: Meted; meting.


meter (n.3)

device for measuring, abstracted 1832 from gas-meter, etc., from French -m&egrave;tre, used in
combinations (in English from 1790), from Latin metrum measure or cognate Greek metron measure (see
meter (n.2)). Influenced by English meter person who measures (late 14c., agent noun from mete
(v.)). As short for parking meter from 1960. Meter maid first recorded 1957; meter reader 1963.


emmet (n.)

ant, from Old English &aelig;mete (see ant), surviving as a dialect word in parts of England; also,
in Cornwall, a colloquial name for holiday tourists.


chickweed (n.)

late 14c., chekwede, from chick + weed (n.). In Old English it was cicene mete chicken food.


sweetmeat (n.)

a sweet thing to eat, Old English swete mete; see sweet (adj.) + meat (n.).


meat (n.)

Old English mete food, item of food (paired with drink), from Proto-Germanic *mati (cognates: Old
Frisian mete, Old Saxon meti, Old Norse matr, Old High German maz, Gothic mats food, Middle Dutch,
Dutch metworst, German Mettwurst type of sausage), from PIE *mad-i-, from root *mad- moist, wet,
also with reference to food qualities, (cognates: Sanskrit medas- fat (n.), Old Irish mat pig; see
mast (n.2)).  Narrower sense of flesh used as food is first attested c.1300; similar sense evolution
in French viande meat, originally food. Figurative sense of essential part is from 1901. Dark meat,
white meat popularized 19c., supposedly as euphemisms for leg and breast, but earliest sources use
both terms without apparent embarrassment.    The choicest parts of a turkey are the side bones, the
breast, and the thigh bones. The breast and wings are called light meat; the thigh-bones and side-
bones dark meat. When a person declines expressing a preference, it is polite to help to both kinds.
[Lydia Maria Child, The American Frugal Housewife, Boston, 1835]    First record of meat loaf is
from 1876. Meat market place where one looks for sex partners is from 1896 (meat in various sexual
senses of penis, vagina, body regarded as a sex object, prostitute are attested from 1590s); meat
wagon ambulance is from 1920, American English slang, said to date from World War I (in a literal
sense by 1857). Meat-grinder in the figurative sense attested by 1951. Meat-hook in colloquial
transferred sense arm attested by 1919.


moot (n.)

assembly of freemen, mid-12c., from Old English gemot meeting (especially of freemen, to discuss
community affairs or mete justice), society, assembly, council, from Proto-Germanic *ga-motan
(compare Old Low Frankish muot encounter, Middle Dutch moet, Middle High German muoz), from
collective prefix *ga- + *motan (see meet (v.)).


undern (n.)

an obsolete Old English and Middle English word for morning; in Old English originally third hour of
the day; 9 a.m. (corresponding to tierce). Hence underngeweorc, undernmete breakfast. Common
Germanic: Old Frisian unden, Old Saxon undorn, Middle Dutch onderen, Old High German untarn, Old
Norse undorn; of uncertain origin. By extension, period from 9 a.m. to noon; but from 13c. shifting
to midday, noon (as in undern-mete lunch, 14c.); and by late 15c. to late afternoon or early
evening.


mast (n.2)

fallen nuts; food for swine, Old English m&aelig;st, from Proto-Germanic *masto (cognates: Dutch,
Old High German, German mast mast; Old English verb m&aelig;sten to fatten, feed), perhaps from PIE
*mad-sta-, from root *mad- moist, wet, also used of various qualities of food (cognates: Sanskrit
madati it bubbles, gladdens, medah fat, marrow; Latin madere be sodden, be drunk; Middle Persian
mast drunk; Old English mete food, Old High German muos meal, mushlike food, Gothic mats food).


tight (adj.)

c.1400, tyght dense, close, compact, from Middle English thight, from Old Norse &thorn;ettr
watertight, close in texture, solid, and also from Old English -&thorn;iht (compare second element
in mete&thorn;iht stout from eating), both from Proto-Germanic *thinhta- (cognates: Middle High
German dihte dense, thick, German dicht dense, tight, Old High German gidigan, German gediegen
genuine, solid, worthy), from PIE root *tenk- (2) to become firm, curdle, thicken (cognates: Irish
techt curdled, coagulated, Lithuanian tankus close, tight, Persian tang tight, Sanskrit tanakti
draws together, contracts).    Sense of drawn, stretched is from 1570s; meaning fitting closely (as
of garments) is from 1779; that of evenly matched (of a contest, bargain, etc.) is from 1828,
American English; that of drunk is from 1830. Of persons, close, intimate, sympathetic from 1956.
From 1670s as an adverb; to sit tight is from 1738. Related: Tightly; tightness. Tight-assed
unwilling to relax is attested from 1903. Tight-laced is recorded from 1741 in both the literal and
figurative senses. Tight-lipped is first attested 1872.


