meticulousness (n.)

1862, from meticulous + -ness. Earlier in the same sense was meticulosity (1650s).


meticulously (adv.)

1680s, from meticulous + -ly (2).


meticulous (adj.)

1530s, fearful, timid, from Latin meticulosus fearful, timid, literally full of fear, from metus
fear, dread, apprehension, anxiety, of unknown origin. Sense of fussy about details is first
recorded in English 1827, from French m&eacute;ticuleux timorously fussy. Related: Meticulosity.


death (n.)

Old English dea&eth; death, dying, cause of death, in plura, ghosts, from Proto-Germanic *dauthaz
(cognates: Old Saxon doth, Old Frisian dath, Dutch dood, Old High German tod, German Tod, Old Norse
dau&eth;i, Danish d&oslash;d, Swedish d&ouml;d, Gothic dau&thorn;as death), from verbal stem *dheu-
(3) to die (see die (v.)) + *-thuz suffix indicating act, process, condition.    I would not that
death should take me asleep. I would not have him meerly seise me, and onely declare me to be dead,
but win me, and overcome me. When I must shipwrack, I would do it in a sea, where mine impotencie
might have some excuse; not in a sullen weedy lake, where I could not have so much as exercise for
my swimming. [John Donne, letter to Sir Henry Goodere, Sept. 1608]   Death's-head, a symbol of
mortality, is from 1590s. Death row first recorded 1940s. Death knell is attested from 1814; death
penalty from 1875; death rate from 1859. Slang be death on be very good at is from 1839. Death wish
first recorded 1896. The death-watch beetle (1660s) inhabits houses, makes a ticking noise like a
watch, and was superstitiously supposed to portend death.    FEW ears have escaped the noise of the
death-watch, that is, the little clickling sound heard often in many rooms, somewhat resembling that
of a watch; and this is conceived to be of an evil omen or prediction of some person's death:
wherein notwithstanding there is nothing of rational presage or just cause of terror unto melancholy
and meticulous heads. For this noise is made by a little sheathwinged grey insect, found often in
wainscot benches and wood-work in the summer. [Browne, Vulgar Errors]


