metropolis (n.)

seat of a metropolitan bishop, 1530s, from Late Latin metropolis; see metropolitan. Meaning chief
town or capital city of a province is first attested 1580s, earlier metropol (late 14c.).


metropolitan (adj.)

1540s, belonging to an ecclesiastical metropolis, from Late Latin metropolitanus, from Greek
metropolites resident of a city, from metropolis (see metropolitan (n.)). Meaning belonging to a
chief or capital city is from 1550s. In reference to underground city railways, it is attested from
1867.


queer (v.)

to spoil, ruin, 1812, from queer (adj.). Related: Queered; queering. Earlier it meant to puzzle,
ridicule, cheat (1790). To queer the pitch (1846) is in reference to the patter of an itinerant
tradesman or showman (see pitch (n.1)).    These wanderers, and those who are still seen
occasionally in the back streets of the metropolis, are said to 'go a-pitching ;' the spot they
select for their performance is their 'pitch,' and any interruption of their feats, such as an
accident, or the interference of a policeman, is said to 'queer the pitch,'--in other words, to
spoil it. [Thomas Frost, Circus Life and Circus Celebrities, London, 1875]


metropolitan (n.)

early 15c., bishop having oversight of other bishops, from Late Latin metropolitanus, from Greek
metropolis mother city (from which others have been colonized), also capital city, from meter mother
(see mother (n.1)) + polis city (see polis).    In Greek, parent state of a colony; later, see of a
metropolitan bishop. In the West, the position now roughly corresponds to archbishop, but in the
Greek church it ranks above it.


suburb (n.)

early 14c., area outside a town or city, whether agricultural or residential but most frequently
residential, from Old French suburbe suburb of a town, from Latin suburbium an outlying part of a
city (especially Rome), from sub below, near (see sub-) + urbs (genitive urbis) city (see urban).
Glossed in Old English as underburg. Just beyond the reach of municipal jurisdiction, suburbs had a
bad reputation in 17c. England, especially those of London, and suburban had a sense of inferior,
debased, licentious (as in suburban sinner, slang for loose woman, prostitute). By 1817, the tinge
had shifted to of inferior manners and narrow views. Compare also French equivalent faubourg.
[T]he growth of the metropolis throws vast numbers of people into distant dormitories where ... life
is carried on without the discipline of rural occupations and without the cultural resources that
the Central District of the city still retains. [Lewis Mumford, 1922]


morgue (n.)

mortuary, 1821, from French Morgue, originally a specific building in Paris where bodies were
exposed for identification:    There is, in the most populous part of the French metropolis, an
establishment entitled La Morgue, destined for the reception and exposition of bodies drowned in the
Seine, and caught in nets, which are placed in different parts of the river for that purpose. The
object of this exposition is, that the deceased may be recognised by their friends or relatives, and
receive the rights of sepulture accordingly. The Morgue is open at all hours of the day, to
passengers of every description, and often displays at a time, five or six horrible carcasses
stretched, without covering, on an inclined platform, and subjected to the promiscuous gaze of the
mob. [American Review, January 1811]     Before that it was the place where new prisoners were
displayed to keepers to establish their identification. Thus the name is believed to be probably
from French morgue haughtiness, originally a sad expression, solemn look, from Old French morguer
look solemnly, from Vulgar Latin *murricare to make a face, pout, from *murrum muzzle, snout. The
1768 Dictionnaire Royal Fran&#231;ois-Anglois Et Anglois-Fran&#231;ois defines French morgue both as
A proud, big, haughty or stately look, stare, surliness, or surly look and A little gratel room
wherein a new prisoner is set, and must continue some hours, that the Jailer's ordinary servants may
the better take notice of his face.    Adopted as a general term in U.S., 1880s, replacing earlier
dead house, etc. In newspaper slang, collection of pre-written obituary material of living persons
(1903), hence library of clips, photos, etc., 1918.


