mime (n.)

c.1600, a buffoon who practices gesticulations [Johnson], from French mime (16c.) and directly from
Latin mimus, from Greek mimos imitator, mimic, actor, mime, buffoon, of unknown origin. In reference
to a performance, 1640s in a classical context; 1932 as a pantomime.


mime (v.)

1610s, to act without words, from mime (n.). The transferred sense of to imitate is from 1733 (Greek
mimeisthai meant to imitate). Meaning to pretend to be singing a pre-recorded song is from 1965.
Related: mimed; miming.


mimeograph (n.)

1889, copying machine (invented by Edison), from Greek mimeisthai to mimic, represent, imitate,
portray, in art, to express by means of imitation, from mimos mime (see mime (n.)) + -graphos, from
graphein to write (see -graphy). A proprietary name from 1903 to 1948. The verb meaning to reproduce
by means of a mimeograph is first attested 1895. Related: Mimeographed; mimeographing.


pantomime (n.)

1610s, mime actor, from Latin pantomimus mime, dancer, from Greek pantomimos actor, literally
imitator of all, from panto- (genitive of pan) all (see pan-) + mimos imitator (see mime (n.)).
Meaning drama or play without words first recorded 1735. The English dramatic performances so
called, usually at Christmas and with words and songs and stock characters, are attested by this
name from 1739; said to have originated c.1717. Related: Pantomimic; pantomimical.


mimic (n.)

1580s, a mime, from Latin mimicus, from Greek mimikos of or pertaining to mimes, from mimos mime.


mimosa (n.)

genus of leguminous shrubs, 1731, coined in Modern Latin (1619) from Latin mimus mime (see mime
(n.)) + -osa, adjectival suffix (fem. of -osus). So called because some species (including the
common Sensitive Plant) fold leaves when touched, seeming to mimic animal behavior. The alcoholic
drink (by 1977) is so called from its yellowish color, which resembles that of the mimosa flower.


meme (n.)

1976, introduced by evolutionary biologist Richard Dawkins in The Selfish Gene, coined by him from
Greek sources, such as mimeisthai to imitate (see mime), and intended to echo gene.    We need a
name for the new replicator, a noun that conveys the idea of a unit of cultural transmission, or a
unit of imitation. 'Mimeme' comes from a suitable Greek root, but I want a monosyllable that sounds
a bit like 'gene'. I hope my classicist friends will forgive me if I abbreviate mimeme to meme. If
it is any consolation, it could alternatively be thought of as being related to 'memory', or to the
French word m&#234;me. It should be pronounced to rhyme with 'cream'. [Richard Dawkins, The Selfish
Gene, 1976]


