mingle (v.)

mid-15c., to bring together, frequentative of Middle English myngen to mix, from Old English mengan
(related to second element in among), from Proto-Germanic *mangjan to knead together (cognates: Old
Saxon mengian, Old Norse menga, Old Frisian mendza, German mengen), from PIE *mag- to knead,
fashion, fit (see macerate). The formation may have been suggested by cognate Middle Dutch mengelen.
Of persons, to join with others, be sociable (intransitive), from c.1600. Related: Mingled;
mingling.


mix (v.)

1530s, back-formation from Middle English myxte (early 15c.) composed of more than one element, of
mixed nature, from Anglo-French mixte, from Latin mixtus, past participle of miscere to mix, mingle,
blend; fraternize with; throw into confusion, from PIE *meik- to mix (cognates: Sanskrit misrah
mixed, Greek misgein, mignynai to mix, mix up, mingle; to join, bring together; join (battle); make
acquainted with, Old Church Slavonic me&#353;o, mesiti to mix, Russian meshat, Lithuanian
mai&#353;au to mix, mingle, Welsh mysgu). Also borrowed in Old English as miscian. Related: Mixed;
mixing.


among (prep.)

early 12c., from Old English onmang, from phrase on gemang in a crowd, from gemengan to mingle (see
mingle). Collective prefix ge- dropped 12c. leaving onmong, amang, among. Compare Old Saxon angimang
among, amid; Old Frisian mong among.


meddle (v.)

early 14c., to mingle, blend, mix, from Old North French medler (Old French mesler, 12c., Modern
French m&#234;ler) to mix, mingle, to meddle, from Vulgar Latin *misculare (source of
Proven&ccedil;al mesclar, Spanish mezclar, Italian mescolare, meschiare), from Latin miscere to mix
(see mix (v.)). From late 14c. as busy oneself, be concerned with, engage in; also disparagingly
interfere, be officious, make a nuisance of oneself (the notion is of meddling too much). From mid-
14c. to 1700, it also was a euphemism for have sexual intercourse. Related: Meddled; meddling.


sozzled (adj.)

drunk, 1886, from sozzle to mix or mingle sloppily (1836).


mixer (n.)

1610s, worker who mixes, agent noun from mix (v.). As a type of machine, from 1876. Meaning
troublemaker attested by 1938; sense of social gathering to mingle and get acquainted dates from
1916.


comingle (v.)

c.1600, the better (because mingle is not from Latin), but less-used, English form of commingle.
Related: comingled; comingling.


mixo-

word-forming element meaning mixed, from Greek mixo-, from mixis a mixing, mingling, intercourse,
from root of mignynai to mix, mix up, mingle (see mix (v.)). E.g. Mixolydian.


melange (n.)

1650s, from French m&eacute;lange (15c.), from m&ecirc;ler to mix, mingle, from Old French mesler
(see meddle).


intermingle (v.)

late 15c., from inter- + mingle. Related: Intermingled; intermingling.


mongrel (n.)

late 15c., mixed-breed dog, from obsolete mong mixture, from Old English gemong mingling (base of
among), from Proto-Germanic *mangjan to knead together (see mingle). With pejorative suffix -rel.
Meaning person not of pure race is from 1540s. As an adjective from 1570s.


socialize (v.)

1828, to render social, from social (adj.). Meaning to be sociable, to mingle is recorded from 1895.
Meaning to make socialistic is from 1846. Related: Socialized; socializing. The phrasing in
socialized medicine is by 1912.


melee (n.)

1640s, from French m&ecirc;l&eacute;e, from Old French meslee brawl, confused fight; mixture, blend
(12c.), noun use of fem. past participle of mesler to mix, mingle (see meddle). See also medley.
Borrowed in Middle English as melle but lost and then reborrowed 17c.


pell-mell (adv.)

confusedly, 1570s, from Middle French p&ecirc;le-m&ecirc;le, from Old French pesle mesle (12c.),
apparently a jingling rhyme on the second element, which is from the stem of the verb mesler to mix,
mingle (see meddle). Phonetic French form pelly melly is attested in English from mid-15c.


commingle (v.)

1620s, from com- + mingle. See comingle. Related: Commingled; commingling.


distemper (v.)

mid-14c., to disturb, from Old French destemprer, from Medieval Latin distemperare vex, make ill,
literally upset the proper balance (of bodily humors), from dis- un-, not (see dis-) + Latin
temperare mingle in the proper proportion (see temper (v.)). Related: Distempered.


metis (n.)

person of mixed parentage, especially French Canadian and North American Indian, from French
m&eacute;tis, from Late Latin mixticus of mixed race, from Latin mixtus mixed, past participle of
miscere to mix, mingle (see mix (v.)). Compare mestizo.


circulate (v.)

1540s (late 15c. as a past participle adjective), as a chemical term for alternating vaporization
and condensation, from Latin circulatus, past participle of circulare to form a circle, from
circulus (see circle (n.)). Meaning to move around, revolve is from 1670s; of blood, from 1650s; of
persons, to mingle in a social gathering, from 1863. Sense of to pass about freely is from 1660s; of
newspapers from 1885. Related: Circulated; circulating.


mestizo (adj.)

1580s, from Spanish mestizo of mixed European and Amerindian parentage, from Late Latin mixticius
mixed, mongrel, from Latin mixtus mixed, past participle of miscere to mix, mingle (see mix (v.)).
Fem. form mestiza is attested from 1580s.


temperature (n.)

mid-15c., fact of being tempered, proper proportion; 1530s, character or nature of a substance, from
Latin temperatura a tempering, moderation, from temperatus, past participle of temperare to be
moderate; to mingle in due proportion (see temper (v.)). Sense of degree of heat or cold first
recorded 1670 (Boyle), from Latin temperatura, used in this sense by Galileo. Meaning fever, high
temperature is attested from 1898.


confuse (v.)

1550s, in literal sense mix or mingle things so as to render the elements indistinguishable;
attested from mid-18c. in active, figurative sense of discomfit in mind or feeling; not in general
use until 19c., taking over senses formerly belonging to confound, dumbfound, flabbergast etc. The
past participle confused (q.v.) is attested much earlier (serving as an alternative past tense to
confound), and the verb here might be a back-formation from it. Related: Confusing.


broil (v.2)

early 15c., to quarrel, brawl, also mix up, present in disorder, from Anglo-French broiller mix up,
confuse, Old French brooillier to mix, mingle, figuratively to have sexual intercourse (13c., Modern
French brouiller), perhaps from breu, bro stock, broth, brew, from Frankish or another Germanic
source (compare Old High German brod broth) akin to broth (see brew (v.)); also compare imbroglio.


found (v.2)

cast metal, late 14c., to mix, mingle, from Middle French fondre pour out, melt, mix together, from
Old French fondre, from Latin fundere melt, cast, pour out, from PIE *gheud- (cognates: Gothic
giutan, German gie&szlig;en, Old English geotan to pour), from root *gheu- to pour (cognates: Greek
khein to pour, khoane funnel, khymos juice). Meaning to cast metal is from 1560s.


confound (v.)

c.1300, make uneasy, abash, from Anglo-French confoundre, Old French confondre (12c.) crush, ruin,
disgrace, throw into disorder, from Latin confundere to confuse, literally to pour together, mix,
mingle, from com- together (see com-) + fundere to pour (see found (v.2)).    The figurative sense
of confuse, fail to distinguish, mix up emerged in Latin, passed into French and thence into Middle
English, where it is mostly found in Scripture; the sense of destroy utterly is recorded in English
from c.1300. Meaning perplex is late 14c. The Latin past participle confusus, meanwhile, became
confused (q.v.).


blend (v.)

c.1300, blenden, to mix, mingle, stir up a liquid, in northern writers, from or akin to rare Old
English blandan to mix, blondan (Mercian) or Old Norse blanda to mix, or a combination of the two;
from Proto-Germanic *blandan to mix, which comes via a notion of to make cloudy from an extended
Germanic form of the PIE root *bhel- (1) to shine, flash, burn (see bleach (v.); also blind (adj.)).
Compare Old Saxon and Old High German blantan, Gothic blandan, Middle High German blenden to mix;
German Blendling bastard, mongrel, and outside Germanic, Lithuanian blandus troubled, turbid, thick;
Old Church Slavonic blesti to go astray. Figurative use from early 14c. Related: Blended; blending.


confused (adj.)

early 14c., discomfited, routed, defeated (of groups), serving at first as an alternative past
participle of confound, as Latin confusus was the past participle of confundere to pour together,
mix, mingle; to join together; hence, figuratively, to throw into disorder; to trouble, disturb,
upset. The Latin past participle also was used as an adjective, with reference to mental states,
troubled, embarrassed, and this passed into Old French as confus dejected, downcast, undone,
defeated, discomfited in mind or feeling, which passed to Middle English as confus (14c.; for
example Chaucer's I am so confus, that I may not seye), which then was assimilated to the English
past participle pattern by addition of -ed. Of individuals, discomfited in mind, perplexed, from
mid-14c.; of ideas, speech, thought, etc., from 1610s. By mid-16c., the word seems to have been felt
as a pure adj., and it evolved a back-formed verb in confuse. Few English etymologies are more
confused.


board (n.2)

side of ship, Old English bord border, rim, ship's side, from Proto-Germanic *bordaz (cognates: Old
Saxon bord, Dutch boord, German Bord, Old High German bart, Old Norse bar&eth;), perhaps from the
same source as board (n.1), but not all sources accept this. Connected to border; see also
starboard.    If not etymologically related to board (n.1), the two forms represented in English by
these words were nonetheless confused at an early date in most Germanic languages, a situation made
worse in English because this Germanic root also was adopted as Medieval Latin bordus (source of
Italian and Spanish bordo). It also entered Old French as bort beam, board, plank; side of a ship
(12c., Modern French bord), either from Medieval Latin or Frankish, and from thence it came over
with the Normans to mingle with its native cousins. By now the senses are inextricably tangled. Some
etymology dictionaries treat them as having been the same word all along.


higgledy-piggledy

confusedly, hurriedly, 1590s, a vocal gesture [OED] probably formed from pig and the animal's
suggestions of mess and disorder. Reduplications in the h-/p- pattern are common (as in hanky-panky,
hocus-pocus, hinch(y)-pinch(y), an obsolete children's game, attested from c.1600).    Edward Moor,
Suffolk Words and Phrases (London, 1823), quotes a list of reduplications from Ray's Collection of
English Words (1768), all said to signify any confusion or mixture; the list has higgledy-piggledy,
hurly-burly, hodge-podge, mingle-mangle, arsy-versy, kim-kam, hub-bub, crawly-mauly, and hab-nab. To
which he might have added, Moor writes, crincum-crankum, crinkle-crankle, flim-flam, fiddle-faddle,
gibble-gabble, harum-scarum, helter-skelter, hiccup-suickup, hocus-pocus, hotch-potch, hugger-
mugger, hum-drum, hum-strum, hurry-scurry, jibber-jabber, prittle-prattle, shilly-shally, tittle-
tattle, and topsy-turvy. Many of them seem to date to the 16th century.


meld (v.)

to blend together, merge, unite (intransitive), by 1910, of uncertain origin. OED suggests perh. a
blend of MELT v.1 and WELD v. Said elsewhere to be a verb use of melled mingled, blended, past
participle of dialectal mell to mingle, mix, combine, blend.    [T]he biplane grew smaller and
smaller, the stacatto clatter of the motor became once more a drone which imperceptibly became
melded with the waning murmur of country sounds .... [Aircraft magazine, October 1910]      But it
is perhaps an image from card-playing, where the verb meld is attested by 1907 in a sense of combine
two cards for a score:    Upon winning a trick, and before drawing from the stock, the player can
meld certain combinations of cards. [rules for two-hand pinochle in Hoyle's Games, 1907]    The rise
of the general sense of the word in English coincides with the craze for canasta, in which melding
figures. The card-playing sense is said to be apparently from German melden make known, announce,
from Old High German meldon, from Proto-Germanic *meldojan (source of Old English meldian to
declare, tell, display, proclaim), and the notion is of declaring the combination of cards. Related:
Melded; melding.


