minute (n.)

sixtieth part of an hour or degree, late 14c., from Old French minut (13c.) or directly from
Medieval Latin minuta minute, short note, from Latin minuta, noun use of fem. of minutus small,
minute (see minute (adj.)). In Medieval Latin, pars minuta prima first small part was used by
mathematician Ptolemy for one-sixtieth of a circle, later of an hour (next in order was secunda
minuta, which became second (n.)). German Minute, Dutch minuut also are from French. Used vaguely
for short time from late 14c. As a measure expressing distance (travel time) by 1886. Minute hand is
attested from 1726.


minutes (n.)

record of proceedings, c.1710, perhaps from Latin minuta scriptura rough notes, literally small
writing; see minute (adj.). Minute rough draft is attested from c.1500.


minute (adj.)

early 15c., chopped small, from Latin minutus little, small, minute, past participle of minuere to
lessen, diminish (see minus). Meaning very small in size or degree is attested from 1620s. Related:
Minutely; minuteness.


second (n.1)

one-sixtieth of a minute of degree, also sixtieth part of a minute of time, late 14c. in geometry,
from Old French seconde, from Medieval Latin secunda, short for secunda pars minuta second
diminished part, the result of the second division of the hour by sixty (the first being the prime
minute, now called the minute), from Latin secunda, fem. of secundus (see second (adj.)). The second
hand of a clock is attested from 1759.


minuet (n.)

slow dance in triple measure, 1670s, from French menuet, from Old French menuet (adj.) small, fine,
delicate, narrow, from menu small, from Latin minutus small, minute (see minute (adj.)). So called
from the short steps taken in the dance. Spelling influenced in English by Italian minuetto.


hang on (v.)

to remain clinging, 1860; as a command to be patient, wait a minute, from 1936, originally in
telephone conversations.


rpm

1906, initialism (acronym) from revolutions per minute.


moment (n.)

mid-14c., very brief portion of time, instant, in moment of time, from Old French moment (12c.)
moment, minute; importance, weight, value or directly from Latin momentum movement, motion; moving
power; alteration, change; also short time, instant (also source of Spanish, Italian momento),
contraction of *movimentum, from movere to move (see move (v.)). Some (but not OED) explain the
sense evolution of the Latin word by notion of a particle so small it would just move the pointer of
a scale, which led to the transferred sense of minute time division. Sense of importance, 'weight'
is attested in English from 1520s.    Phrase never a dull moment first recorded 1889 in Jerome K.
Jerome's Three Men in a Boat. Phrase moment of truth first recorded 1932 in Hemingway's Death in the
Afternoon, from Spanish el momento de la verdad, the final sword-thrust in a bull-fight.


tessellation (n.)

minute arrangement of parts or colors, 1650s, noun of action from Late Latin tessellatus (see
tessellated).


minim (n.)

mid-15c., in music, from Latin minimus smallest, least; minute, trifling, insignificant; of time,
least, shortest, very short; of age, youngest; as a noun, least price, lowest price (see minimum).
Calligraphy sense is from c.1600.


horsepower (n.)

1806, from horse (n.) + power (n.); established by Watt as the power needed to lift 33,000 pounds
one foot in one minute, which is actually about 1.5 times the power of a strong horse.


trace (n.1)

track made by passage of a person or thing, c.1300, from Old French trace mark, imprint, tracks
(12c.), back-formation from tracier (see trace (v.)). Scientific sense of indication of minute
presence in some chemical compound is from 1827. Traces vestiges is from c.1400.


New York

former New Amsterdam (city), New Netherlands (colony), renamed after British acquisition in 1664 in
honor of the Duke of York and Albany (1633-1701), the future James II, who had an interest in the
territory. See York. Related: New Yorker. New York minute very short time attested by 1976.


microscopic (adj.)

1732, like a microscope; see microscope + -ic. Meaning of minute size is from 1760s. Related:
Microscopical; microscopically.


point (n.)

c.1200, minute amount, single item in a whole; sharp end of a sword, etc., a merger of two words,
both ultimately from Latin pungere prick, pierce, puncture (see pungent). The Latin neuter past
participle punctum was used as a noun, meaning small hole made by pricking, subsequently extended to
anything that looked like one, hence, dot, particle, etc. This yielded Old French point dot;
smallest amount, which was borrowed in Middle English by c.1300.    Meanwhile the Latin fem. past
participle of pungere was puncta, which was used in Medieval Latin to mean sharp tip, and became Old
French pointe point of a weapon, vanguard of an army, which also passed into English, early 14c.
The senses have merged in English, but remain distinct in French. Extended senses are from the
notion of minute, single, or separate items in an extended whole. Meaning small mark, dot in English
is mid-14c. Meaning distinguishing feature is recorded from late 15c. Meaning a unit of score in a
game is first recorded 1746. As a typeface unit (in Britain and U.S., one twelfth of a pica), it
went into use in U.S. 1883. As a measure of weight for precious stones (one one-hundredth of a
carat) it is recorded from 1931.   The point the matter being discussed is attested from late 14c.;
meaning sense, purpose, advantage (usually in the negative, as in what's the point?) is first
recorded 1903. Point of honor (1610s) translates French point d'honneur. Point of no return (1941)
is originally aviators' term for the point in a flight before which any engine failure requires an
immediate turn around and return to the point of departure, and beyond which such return is no
longer practical.


nicety (n.)

mid-14c., folly, stupidity, from Old French nicet&eacute; foolishness, childishness, simplicity,
from nice silly (see nice). Underwent sense evolution parallel to nice, arriving at minute, subtle
point 1580s and exactitude in 1650s. Phrase to a nicety exactly is attested from 1795.


trichinosis (n.)

disease caused by trichinae, 1864, coined by Bernhard Rupprecht (1815-1877) by 1864 from trichina
(1835), Modern Latin, genus name of the minute, hair-like parasitic worms that cause it, from Greek
trikhine, fem. of trikhinos of or like hair, from thrix (genitive trikhos) hair.


biographer (n.)

1715; see biography + -er (1). Earlier was biographist (1660s).    Of every great and eminent
character, part breaks forth into public view, and part lies hid in domestic privacy. Those
qualities which have been exerted in any known and lasting performances may, at any distance of
time, be traced and estimated; but silent excellencies are soon forgotten; and those minute
peculiarities which discriminate every man from all others, if the are not recorded by those whom
personal knowledge enabled to observe them, are irrecoverably lost. [Johnson, Life of Sir Thomas
Browne, 1756]


LP

1948, abbreviation of long-playing phonograph record.    The most revolutionary development to hit
the recording industry since the invention of the automatic changer is the Long Playing record,
which can hold an entire 45-minute symphony or musical-comedy score on a single 12-inch disk. ...
The disks, released a few weeks ago by Columbia Records and made of Vinylite, have phenomenally
narrow grooves (.003 of an inch). They are played at less than half the speed of the standard old-
style records. [Life magazine, July 26, 1948]


distill (v.)

also distil, late 14c., from Old French distiller (14c.), from Latin distillare trickle down in
minute drops, from dis- apart (see dis-) + stillare to drip, drop, from stilla drop. Related:
Distilled; distilling.


pore (n.)

minute opening, late 14c., from Old French pore (14c.) and directly from Latin porus a pore, from
Greek poros a pore, literally passage, way, from PIE *por- going, passage, from root *per- to lead,
pass over (see port (n.1)).


particle (n.)

late 14c., small part or division of a whole, minute portion of matter, from Latin particula little
bit or part, grain, jot, diminutive of pars (genitive partis) part; see part (n.). Particle physics
attested from 1969. In construction, particle board (1957) is so called because it is made from
chips and shavings of wood.


double (adj.)

early 13c., from Old French doble (10c.) double, two-fold; two-faced, deceitful, from Latin duplus
twofold, twich as much from duo two (see two) + -plus more (see -plus). Double standard attested by
1951. Military double time (1833) originally was 130 steps per minute.


molecule (n.)

1794, extremely minute particle, from French mol&eacute;cule (1670s), from Modern Latin molecula,
diminutive of Latin moles mass, barrier (see mole (3)). A vague meaning at first; the vogue for the
word (used until late 18c. only in Latin form) can be traced to the philosophy of Descartes. First
used of Modern Latin molecula in modern scientific sense by Amedeo Avogadro (1811).


global (adj.)

1670s, spherical, from globe + -al (1). Meaning worldwide, universal is from 1892, from French.
Global village first attested 1960, popularized, if not coined, by Canadian educator Marshall
McLuhan (1911-1980).Postliterate man's electronic media contract the world to a village or tribe
where everything happens to everyone at the same time: everyone knows about, and therefore
participates in, everything that is happening the minute it happens. Television gives this quality
of simultaneity to events in the global village. [Carpenter &amp; McLuhan, Explorations in
Communication, 1960]


minutia (n.)

1751, plural minutiae, from Latin minutia smallness (plural minutiae, in Late Latin trifles), from
minutus small (see minute (adj.)).


mince (v.)

late 14c., to chop in little pieces, from Old French mincier make into small pieces, from Vulgar
Latin *minutiare make small, from Late Latin minuti&aelig; small bits, from Latin minutus small (see
minute (adj.)). Of speech, to clip affectedly in imitation of elegance, 1540s; of words or language,
to restrain in the interest of decorum, 1590s. Meaning to walk with short or precise steps is from
1560s. Related: Minced; mincing.


last (adj., adv.)

following all others, from Old English latost (adj.) and l&aelig;test (adv.), superlative of
l&aelig;t (see late). Cognate with Old Frisian lest, Dutch laatst, Old High German laggost, German
letzt. Meaning most recent is from c.1200. The noun, last person or thing, is c.1200, from the
adjective. Last hurrah is from the title of Edwin O'Connor's 1956 novel. Last word final, definitive
statement is from 1650s. A dying person's last words so called by 1740. As an adjective, last-minute
attested from 1913. Last-chance (adj.) is from 1962.


midget (n.)

as a type of tiny biting insect, 1839, American English, from midge, perhaps with diminutive suffix
-et.    Dr. Webster is in error in saying the word midge is not in use at the present day. In the
neighboring Green mountain districts, one or more most annoying species of Simulium that there
abound, are daily designated in common conversation as the midges, or, as the name is often
corrupted, the midgets. From Dr. Harris' treatise it appears that the same name is in popular use
for the same insects in Maine. The term is limited in this country, we believe, exclusively to those
minute insects, smaller than the musketoe, which suck the blood of other animals. [Transactions of
the New-York State Agricultural Society, vol. VI, Albany, 1847]    Transferred sense of very small
person is attested by 1854. It is also noted mid-19c. as a pet form of Margaret.


mite (n.1)

tiny animal, minute arachnid, Old English mite, from Proto-Germanic *miton (cognates: Middle Dutch
mite, Dutch mijt, Old High German miza, Danish mide) originally meaning perhaps the cutter, in
reference to its bite, from Proto-Germanic *mait- (cognates: Gothic maitan, Old High German meizen
to cut), from PIE root *mai- to cut (see maim). Or else its original sense is something small, and
it is from PIE *mei- (2) small, in reference to size (see minus).


Coca-Cola

invented 1886 in Atlanta, Georgia, U.S., by druggist Dr. John S. Pemberton. So called because
original ingredients were derived from coca leaves and cola nuts. It contained minute amounts of
cocaine until 1909.  Drink the brain tonic and intellectual soda fountain beverage Coca-Cola.
[Atlanta Evening Journal, June 30, 1887] Coca-colanization, also Coca-colonization coined 1950
during an attempt to ban the beverage in France, led by the communist party and the wine-growers.
France's Communist press bristled with warnings against US Coca-Colonization. Coke salesmen were
described as agents of the OSS and the U.S. State Department. Tremble, roared Vienna's Communist Der
Abend, Coca-Cola is on the march! [Time Magazine, 1950]   Coca-colonialism attested by 1956.


knot (n.)

Old English cnotta intertwining of ropes, cords, etc., from Proto-Germanic *knuttan- (cognates: Low
German kn&uuml;tte, Old Frisian knotta knot, Dutch knot, Old High German knoto, German Knoten,
perhaps also Old Norse knutr knot, knob). Figurative sense of difficult problem was in Old English
(compare Gordian knot). Symbolic of the bond of wedlock, early 13c. As an ornament of dress, first
attested c.1400. Meaning thickened part or protuberance on tissue of a plant is from late 14c. The
nautical unit of measure (1630s) is from the practice of attaching knotted string to the log line.
The ship's speed can be measured by the number of knots that play out while the sand glass is
running.The distance between the knots on the log-line should contain 1/120 of a mile, supposing the
glass to run exactly half a minute. [Jorge Juan and Antonio de Ulloa, A Voyage to South America
1760]


mile (n.)

Old English mil, from West Germanic *milja (cognates: Middle Dutch mile, Dutch mijl, Old High German
mila, German meile), from Latin milia thousands, plural of mille a thousand (neuter plural was
mistaken in Germanic as a fem. singular), of unknown origin.    The Latin word also is the source of
French mille, Italian miglio, Spanish milla. The Scandinavian words (Old Norse mila, etc.) are from
English. An ancient Roman mile was 1,000 double paces (one step with each foot), for about 4,860
feet, but there were many local variants and a modern statute mile is about 400 feet longer. In
Germany, Holland, and Scandinavia in the Middle Ages, the Latin word was applied arbitrarily to the
ancient Germanic rasta, a measure of from 3.25 to 6 English miles. Mile-a-minute (adj.) very fast is
attested from 1957.


needle (n.)

Old English n&aelig;dl, from Proto-Germanic *n&aelig;thlo (cognates: Old Saxon nathla, Old Norse
nal, Old Frisian nedle, Old High German nadala, German Nadel, Gothic ne&thorn;la needle), literally
a tool for sewing, from PIE *net-la-, from root *(s)ne- to sew, to spin (cognates: Sanskrit snayati
wraps up, Greek nein to spin, Latin nere to spin, German n&#228;hen to sew, Old Church Slavonic niti
thread, Old Irish snathat needle, Welsh nyddu to sew, nodwydd needle) + instrumental suffix *-tla.To
seke out one lyne in all hys bookes wer to go looke a nedle in a meadow. [Thomas More,
c.1530]Meaning piece of magnetized steel in a compass is from late 14c. (on a dial or indicator from
1928); the surgical instrument so called from 1727; phonographic sense from 1902; sense of leaf of a
fir or pine tree first attested 1797. Needledom the world of sewing is from 1847. Needle's eye,
figurative of a minute opening, often is a reference to Matt. xix:24.


affair (n.)

c.1300, what one has to do, from Anglo-French afere, Old French afaire (12c., Modern French affaire)
business, event; rank, estate, from the infinitive phrase &agrave; faire to do, from Latin ad to
(see ad-) + facere to do, make (see factitious).    A Northern word originally, brought into general
use and given a French spelling by Caxton (15c.). General sense of vague proceedings (in romance,
war, etc.) first attested 1702. Meaning an affair of the heart; a passionate episode is from French
affaire de coeur (itself attested in English from 1809); to have an affair with someone in this
sense is by 1726, earlier have an affair of love:    'Tis manife&#383;tly contrary to the Law of
Nature, that one Woman &#383;hould cohabit or have an Affair of Love with more than one Man at the
&#383;ame time. [Pufendorf's Law of Nature and Nations, transl. J. Spavan, London, 1716]   <hr />
Thus, in our dialect, a vicious man is a man of pleasure, a sharper is one that plays the whole
game, a lady is said to have an affair, a gentleman to be a gallant, a rogue in business to be one
that knows the world. By this means, we have no such things as sots, debauchees, whores, rogues, or
the like, in the beau monde, who may enjoy their vices without incurring disagreeable appellations.
[George Berkeley, Alciphron or the Minute Philosopher, 1732]


