mirthless (adj.)

late 14c., from mirth + -less. Related: Mirthlessly.


mirth (n.)

Old English myrg&eth; joy, pleasure, from Proto-Germanic *murgitha (cognates: Middle Dutch merchte),
noun of quality from *murgjo- (see merry; also see -th (2)). Mirthquake entertainment that excites
convulsive laughter first attested 1928, in reference to Harold Lloyd movies.


mirthful (adj.)

c.1300, from mirth + -ful. Related: Mirthfully; mirthfulness.


merriment (n.)

1570s, comedic entertainment, from merry + -ment. General sense of mirth is from 1580s.


Euphrosyne

name of one of the three Graces in Greek mythology, from Latin, from Greek Euphrosyne, literally
mirth, merriment, from euphron cheerful, merry, of a good mind, from eu well (see eu-) + phren
(genitive phrenos) mind, of unknown origin.


dream (n.)

mid-13c. in the sense sequence of sensations passing through a sleeping person's mind (also as a
verb), probably related to Old Norse draumr, Danish dr&oslash;m, Swedish dr&ouml;m, Old Saxon drom
merriment, noise, Old Frisian dram dream, Dutch droom, Old High German troum, German traum dream,
perhaps from Proto-Germanic *draugmas deception, illusion, phantasm (cognates: Old Saxon bidriogan,
Old High German triogan, German tr&uuml;gen to deceive, delude, Old Norse draugr ghost, apparition).
Possible cognates outside Germanic are Sanskrit druh- seek to harm, injure, Avestan druz- lie,
deceive.    But Old English dream meant only joy, mirth, noisy merriment, also music. And much study
has failed to prove that Old English dream is the root of the modern word for sleeping vision,
despite being identical in spelling. Either the meaning of the word changed dramatically or vision
was an unrecorded secondary Old English meaning of dream, or there are two separate words here. OED
offers this theory: It seems as if the presence of dream 'joy, mirth, music,' had caused dream
'dream' to be avoided, at least in literature, and swefn, lit. 'sleep,' to be substituted ....
Words for sleeping vision in Old English were m&aelig;ting and swefn. Old English swefn originally
meant sleep, as did a great many Indo-European dream nouns, such as Lithuanian sapnas, Old Church
Slavonic sunu, and the Romanic words (French songe, Spanish sue&#241;o, Italian sogno all from Latin
somnium (from PIE *swep-no-; cognate with Greek hypnos; see somnolence; Old English swefn is from
the same root). Dream in the sense of ideal or aspiration is from 1931, from earlier sense of
something of dream-like beauty or charm (1888).


glee (n.)

Old English gliu, gliw entertainment, mirth, jest, play, sport, presumably from a Proto-Germanic
*gleujam but absent in other Germanic languages except for the rare Old Norse gly joy; probably
related to glad. A poetry word in Old English and Middle English, obsolete c.1500-c.1700, it somehow
found its way back to currency late 18c. In Old English, an entertainer was a gleuman (female
gleo-m&aelig;gden). Glee club (1814) is from the secondary sense of unaccompanied part-song (1650s)
as a form of musical entertainment.


charade (n.)

1776, from French charade (18c.), probably from Proven&ccedil;al charrado long talk, chatter, of
obscure origin, perhaps from charrar to chatter, gossip, of echoic origin. Compare Italian ciarlare,
Spanish charlar to talk, prattle. Originally not silent, but relying rather on enigmatic
descriptions of the words or syllables.    As we have ever made it a Rule to shew our Attention to
the Reader, by 'catching the Manners living, as they rise,' as Mr. Pope expresses it, we think
ourselves obliged to give Place to the following Specimens of a new Kind of SMALL WIT, which, for
some Weeks past, has been the Subject of Conversation in almost every Society, from the Court to the
Cottage. The CHARADE is, in fact, a near Relation of the old Rebus. It is usually formed from a Word
of two Syllables; the first Syllable is described by the Writer; then the second; they are
afterwards united and the whole Word marked out .... [supplement to The Universal Magazine of
Knowledge and Pleasure, volumes 58-59, 1776]    Among the examples given are:    My first makes all
nature appear of one face;  At the next we find music, and beauty and grace;  And, if this Charade
is most easily read,  I think that the third shou'd be thrown at my head.  [The answer is snow-
ball.]    The silent form, the main modern form, was at first a variant known as dumb charades and
at first it was not a speed contest; rather it adhered to the old pattern, and the performing team
acted out all the parts in order before the audience team began to guess.    There is one species of
charade which is performed solely by dumb motions, somewhat resembling the child's game of trades
and professions; but the acting charade is a much more amusing. and more difficult matter. [Goldoni,
and Modern Italian Comedy, in The Foreign And Colonial Quarterly Review, Volume 6, 1846]    An 1850
book, Acting Charades, reports that Charades en Action were all the rage in French society, and that
Lately, the game has been introduced into the drawing-rooms of a few mirth-loving Englishmen. Its
success has been tremendous.  Welsh siarad obviously is a loan-word from French or English, but its
meaning of speak, a talk is closer to the Proven&ccedil;al original.


