mischief (n.)

c.1300, evil condition, misfortune, need, want, from Old French meschief misfortune, harm, trouble;
annoyance, vexation (12c., Modern French m&eacute;chef), verbal noun from meschever come or bring to
grief, be unfortunate (opposite of achieve), from mes- badly (see mis- (2)) + chever happen, come to
a head, from Vulgar Latin *capare head, from Latin caput head (see capitulum). Meaning harm or evil
considered as the work of some agent or due to some cause is from late 15c. Sense of playful malice
first recorded 1784.   Mischief Night in 19c. England was the eve of May Day and of Nov. 5, both
major holidays, and perhaps the original point was pilfering for the next day's celebration and
bonfire; but in Yorkshire, Scotland, and Ireland the night was Halloween. The useful Middle English
verb mischieve (early 14c.) has, for some reason, fallen from currency.


Ate

Greek goddess of infatuation and evil, from ate infatuation, bane, ruin, mischief, of uncertain
origin.


inconveniency (n.)

mid-15c., mischief, injury, from Latin inconvenientia (see inconvenience (n.)). Meaning trouble,
disadvantage is from 1550s.


Hob (n.)

clown, prankster, short for hobgoblin (q.v.). Hence, to play (the) hob make mischief (by 1834).


firebrand (n.)

c.1200, piece of wood kindled at a fire, from fire (n.) + brand (n.). Figurative sense of one who
kindles mischief or passions is from late 14c.


mischievous (adj.)

early 14c., unfortunate, disastrous, probably from mischief + -ous. Sense of playfully malicious or
annoying first recorded 1670s. Related: Mischievously; mischievousness.


fencing (n.)

mid-15c., defending, act of protecting; 1580s in the sword-fighting sense; noun from present
participle of fence (v.). In spite of the re-enactment in 1285 of the Assize of Arms of 1181,
fencing was regarded as unlawful in England. The keeping of fencing schools was forbidden in the
City of London, as fools who delight in mischief do learn to fence with buckler, and thereby are
encouraged in their follies. Meaning putting up fences is from 1620s; that of an enclosure is from
1580s; meaning receiving stolen goods is from 1851 (see fence (n.)); meaning materials for an
enclosure is from 1856.


Ralph

masc. proper name, shortened from Radulf, from Old Norse Ra&eth;ulfr (Old English R&aelig;dwulf),
literally wolf-counsel, from ra&eth; counsel (see read (n.)) + ulfr wolf (see wolf (n.)). The
Century Dictionary also lists it as English printers' slang for An alleged or imagined evil spirit
who does mischief in a printing house.


mis- (2)

in mischief, miscreant, etc., represents Old French mes- bad, badly, wrong, wrongly, from Vulgar
Latin minus-, from Latin minus less (see minus), which was not used as a prefix. Perhaps influenced
in Old French by *miss-, the Frankish equivalent of mis- (1).


baleful (adj.)

Old English bealu-full dire, wicked, cruel, from bealu harm, injury, ruin, evil, mischief,
wickedness, a noxious thing, from Proto-Germanic *balwom (cognates: Old Saxon balu, Old Frisian balu
evil, Old High German balo destruction, Old Norse bol, Gothic balwjan to torment), from PIE root
*bhelu- to harm. During Anglo-Saxon times, the noun was in poetic use only (in compounds such as
bealubenn mortal wound, bealu&eth;onc evil thought), and for long baleful has belonged exclusively
to poets. Related: Balefully.


Praesepe (n.)

loose (open) star cluster (M44) in Cancer, from Latin praesaepe the Roman name for the grouping,
literally enclosure, stall, manger, hive, from prae- (see pre-) + saepire to fence (see septum).
It is similar to the Hyades but more distant, about 600 light-years away, consists of about 1,000
stars, mostly older, the brightest of them around magnitude 6.5, thus not discernable to the naked
eye even on the clearest nights, but their collective light makes a visible fuzz of glow that the
ancients likened to a cloud (the original nebula); Galileo was the first to resolve it into stars
(1609). The modern name for it in U.S. and Britain, Beehive, seems no older than 1840. Greek names
included Nephelion Little Cloud and Akhlys Little Mist. In astrology, like all clusters, it
threatened mischief and blindness [Allen].    Manger to the Romans perhaps by influence of two
nearby stars, Gamma and Delta Cancri, dim and unspectacular but both for some reason figuring
largely in ancient astrology and weather forecasting, and known as the Asses (Latin Aselli),
supposedly those of Silenus.


sin (n.)

Old English synn moral wrongdoing, injury, mischief, enmity, feud, guilt, crime, offense against
God, misdeed, from Proto-Germanic *sun(d)jo- sin (cognates: Old Saxon sundia, Old Frisian sende,
Middle Dutch sonde, Dutch zonde, German S&uuml;nde sin, transgression, trespass, offense, extended
forms), probably ultimately it is true, i.e. the sin is real (compare Gothic sonjis, Old Norse sannr
true), from PIE *snt-ya-, a collective form from *es-ont- becoming, present participle of root *es-
to be (see is).    The semantic development is via notion of to be truly the one (who is guilty), as
in Old Norse phrase ver&eth; sannr at be found guilty of, and the use of the phrase it is being in
Hittite confessional formula. The same process probably yielded the Latin word sons (genitive
sontis) guilty, criminal from present participle of sum, esse to be, that which is. Some
etymologists believe the Germanic word was an early borrowing directly from the Latin genitive. Also
see sooth.   Sin-eater is attested from 1680s. To live in sin cohabit without marriage is from 1838;
used earlier in a more general sense. Ice hockey slang sin bin penalty box is attested from 1950.


sabotage (n.)

1907 (from 1903 as a French word in English), from French sabotage, from saboter to sabotage,
bungle, literally walk noisily, from sabot wooden shoe (13c.), altered (by association with Old
French bot boot) from Middle French savate old shoe, from an unidentified source that also produced
similar words in Old Proven&ccedil;al, Portuguese, Spanish (zapata), Italian (ciabatta), Arabic
(sabbat), and Basque (zapata).    In French, and at first in English, the sense of deliberately and
maliciously destroying property originally was in reference to labor disputes, but the oft-repeated
story (as old as the record of the word in English) that the modern meaning derives from strikers'
supposed tactic of throwing shoes into machinery is not supported by the etymology. Likely it was
not meant as a literal image; the word was used in French in a variety of bungling senses, such as
to play a piece of music badly. This, too, was the explanation given in some early usages.
SABOTAGE [chapter heading] The title we have prefixed seems to mean scamping work. It is a device
which, we are told, has been adopted by certain French workpeople as a substitute for striking. The
workman, in other words, purposes to remain on and to do his work badly, so as to annoy his
employer's customers and cause loss to his employer. [The Liberty Review, January 1907]   <hr />
You may believe that sabotage is murder, and so forth, but it is not so at all. Sabotage means
giving back to the bosses what they give to us. Sabotage consists in going slow with the process of
production when the bosses go slow with the same process in regard to wages. [Arturo M. Giovannitti,
quoted in report of the Sagamore Sociological Conference, June 1907]   <hr />   In English,
malicious mischief would appear to be the nearest explicit definition of sabotage, which is so much
more expressive as to be likely of adoption into all languages spoken by nations suffering from this
new force in industry and morals. Sabotage has a flavor which is unmistakable even to persons
knowing little slang and no French .... [Century Magazine, November 1910]


