miscellany (n.)

a mixture, medley, 1590s, from Latin miscellanea a writing on miscellaneous subjects, originally
meat hash, hodge-podge (food for gladiators), neuter plural of miscellaneus (see miscellaneous).


foreplay (n.)

in sexual sense, by 1911, from fore- + play (n.). Earlier as a theatrical term (by 1857).    In fact
the poem which Mr. Brooks has translated is but the prologue to the swelling theme, the fore-play to
the actual drama of Faust. [The Christian Examiner and Religious Miscellany, Jan.-May 1857]


jackdaw (n.)

1540s, the common name of the daw (Corvus monedula), which frequents church towers, old buildings,
etc.; noted for its loquacity and thievish propensities [OED]. See jack (n.) + daw.    In modern
times, parrots are almost the only birds that have the gift of speech, though connoisseurs are not
ignorant that starlings and jackdaws have good abilities in that way, when properly educated.
[Chambers' Home Book and Pocket Miscellany, 1853]


Goldilocks

name for a person with bright yellow hair, 1540s, from adj. form of gold + lock in the hair sense.
The story of the Three Bears first was printed in Robert Southey's miscellany The Doctor (1837), but
the central figure there was a bad-tempered old woman. Southey did not claim to have invented the
story, and older versions have been traced, either involving an old woman or a silver-haired girl
(though in at least one version it is a fox who enters the house). The identification of the girl as
Goldilocks is attested only from c.1875.


Mary

fem. proper name, Old English Maria, Marie, mother of Jesus, from Latin Maria, from Greek Mariam,
Maria, from Aramaic Maryam, from Hebrew Miryam, sister of Moses (Ex. xv.), of unknown origin, said
to mean literally rebellion. Nursery rhyme Mary had a Little Lamb written early 1830 by Sarah
Josepha Hale of Boston; published Sept. 1830 in Juvenile Miscellany, a popular magazine for
children. Mary Jane is 1921 as the proprietary name of a kind of low-heeled shoe worn chiefly by
young girls, 1928 as slang for marijuana.


Edda (n.)

1771, by some identified with the name of the old woman in the Old Norse poem Rigs&thorn;ul, by
others derived from Old Norse o&eth;r spirit, mind, passion, song, poetry (cognate with Old Irish
faith poet, Welsh gwawd poem, Old English wo&thorn; sound, melody, song, Latin vates seer,
soothsayer; see wood (adj.)).    It is the name given to two Icelandic books, the first a miscellany
of poetry, mythology, and grammar by Snorri Sturluson (d.1241), since 1642 called the Younger or
Prose Edda; and a c.1200 collection of ancient Germanic poetry and religious tales, called the Elder
or Poetic Edda.


smorgasbord (n.)

1893, from Swedish sm&ouml;rg&#229;sbord, literally butter-goose table, from sm&ouml;rg&#229;s,
slice of bread and butter, compounded from sm&#246;r butter (see smear (n.)) and g&#229;s, literally
goose (and from the same Germanic root that yielded English goose (n.)).    [Sm&ouml;rg&#229;s]
properly signifies a slice of bread-and-butter; and has come by custom--in much the same way as when
we familiarly speak of taking a sandwich for partaking of some light refreshment--to be applied
synecdochically to the preliminary relish or appetizer partaken of before meals. [Notes and Queries,
Nov. 15, 1884]     The final element is bord table, from Proto-Germanic *burdam plank, board, table
(see board (n.1)). Figurative sense of medley, miscellany is recorded from 1948.


creationism (n.)

1847, originally a Christian theological position that God immediately created a soul for each
person born; from creation + -ism. As a name for the religious reaction to Darwin, opposed to
evolution, it is attested from 1880.  James Ussher (1581-1656), Archbishop of Armagh, Primate of All
Ireland, and Vice-Chancellor of Trinity College in Dublin was highly regarded in his day as a
churchman and as a scholar. Of his many works, his treatise on chronology has proved the most
durable. Based on an intricate correlation of Middle Eastern and Mediterranean histories and Holy
writ, it was incorporated into an authorized version of the Bible printed in 1701, and thus came to
be regarded with almost as much unquestioning reverence as the Bible itself. Having established the
first day of creation as Sunday 23 October 4004 B.C. ... Ussher calculated the dates of other
biblical events, concluding, for example, that Adam and Eve were driven from Paradise on Monday 10
November 4004 BC, and that the ark touched down on Mt Ararat on 5 May 1491 BC on a Wednesday.
[Craig, G.Y., and E.J. Jones, A Geological Miscellany, Princeton University Press, 1982.]


