miser (n.)

1540s, miserable person, wretch, from Latin miser (adj.) unhappy, wretched, pitiable, in distress,
of unknown origin. Original sense now obsolete; main modern meaning of money-hoarding person
recorded 1560s, from presumed unhappiness of such people.    Besides general wretchedness, the Latin
word connoted also intense erotic love (compare slang got it bad deeply infatuated) and hence was a
favorite word of Catullus. In Greek a miser was kyminopristes, literally a cumin seed splitter. In
Modern Greek, he might be called hekentabelones, literally one who has sixty needles. The German
word, filz, literally felt, preserves the image of the felt slippers which the miser often wore in
caricatures. Lettish mantrausis miser is literally money-raker.


misery (n.)

late 14c., condition of external unhappiness, from Old French misere miserable situation,
misfortune, distress (12c.), from Latin miseria wretchedness, from miser (see miser). Meaning
condition of one in great sorrow or mental distress is from 1530s. Meaning bodily pain is 1825,
American English.


miserable (adj.)

early 15c., full of misery, causing wretchedness (of conditions), from Old French miserable prone to
pity, merciful, and directly from Latin miserabilis pitiable, miserable, deplorable, lamentable,
from miserari to pity, lament, deplore, from miser wretched (see miser). Of persons, existing in a
state of misery it is attested from 1520s.


Miserere (n.)

51st Psalm (one of the Penitential Psalms), 13c., from Miserere mei Deus Have mercy upon me, O God,
opening line, from Latin miserere feel pity, have compassion, commiserate, imperative of misereri to
have mercy, from miser (see miser). From 15c.-17c. used as an informal measure of time, the time it
takes to recite the Miserere. Also in miserere mei kind of severe colic ('iliac passion')
accompanied by excruciating cramps and vomiting of excrement (1610s), literally have mercy on me.


miserly (adj.)

1590s, from miser + -ly (1). Related: Miserliness.


commiseration (n.)

1580s, from Middle French commis&eacute;ration, from Latin commiserationem (nominative commiseratio)
act or fact of pitying, noun of action from past participle stem of commiserari to pity, from com-
intensive prefix (see com-) + miserari bewail, lament, from miser wretched (see miser).


snudge (n.)

a miser, a mean avaricious person, 1540s, very common from c.1550-1610 [OED].


mesel

leprous (adj.); a leper (n.); both c.1300,  from Old French mesel wretched, leprous; a wretch, from
Latin misellus wretched, unfortunate, as a noun, a wretch, in Medieval Latin, a leper, diminutive of
miser wretched, unfortunate, miserable (see miser). Also from Latin misellus are Old Italian misello
sick, leprous, Catalan mesell sick.


scraper (n.)

instrument for scraping, 1550s, agent noun from scrape (v.). From 1560s as miser, money-grubber;
1610s as fiddler; 1792 as barber.


Scrooge (n.)

generic for miser, 1940, from curmudgeonly character in Dickens' 1843 story A Christmas Carol. It
does not appear to be a genuine English surname. Compare scrounge.


bagger (n.)

mid-15c., retailer in grain (as a surname from mid-13c., probably maker of bags), also, 1740, miser;
agent noun from bag (v.). Of persons who bag various things for a living, from 19c.; meaning machine
that puts things in bags is from 1896.


skinflint (n.)

miser, one who makes use of contemptible economy to keep money, 1700, slang; literally kind of
person who would skin a flint to save or gain something, from skin (v.) + flint. Flay-flint in same
sense is from 1670s.


niggard (n.)

mean person, miser, late 14c., nygart, of uncertain origin. The suffix suggests French origin (see
-ard), but the root word is possibly from earlier nig stingy (c.1300), perhaps from a Scandinavian
source related to Old Norse hn&oslash;ggr stingy, from Proto-Germanic *khnauwjaz (source of Swedish
njugg close, careful, German genau precise, exact), and to Old English hneaw stingy, niggardly,
which did not survive in Middle English.


villain (n.)

c.1300 (late 12c. as a surname), base or low-born rustic, from Anglo-French and Old French vilain
peasant, farmer, commoner, churl, yokel (12c.), from Medieval Latin villanus farmhand, from Latin
villa country house, farm (see villa).  The most important phases of the sense development of this
word may be summed up as follows: 'inhabitant of a farm; peasant; churl, boor; clown; miser; knave,
scoundrel.' Today both Fr. vilain and Eng. villain are used only in a pejorative sense. [Klein]
Meaning character in a novel, play, etc. whose evil motives or actions help drive the plot is from
1822.


