misnomer (n.)

mid-15c., mistaken identification of an accused or convicted person, from Anglo-French, Old French
mesnomer to misname, wrongly name, noun use of infinitive, from mes- wrongly (see mis- (2)) + nomer
to name, from Latin nominare nominate (see nominate). For noun use of French infinitives, see
waiver.


Panama

probably from an unknown Guarani word, traditionally said to mean place of many fish. Originally the
name of the settlement founded 1519 (destroyed 1671 but subsequently rebuilt). Panama hat, made from
the leaves of the screw pine, attested from 1833, a misnomer, because it originally was made in
Ecuador, but perhaps so called in American English because it was distributed north from Panama
City. Panama red as a variety of Central American marijuana is attested from 1967.


stalemate (n.)

1765, in chess, from stale stalemate (early 15c.) + mate (n.2) checkmate. Middle English stale is
probably from Anglo-French estale standstill (see stall (n.2)). A misnomer, because a stale is not a
mate. In England from the 17th c. to the beginning of the 19th c. the player who received stalemate
won the game [OED]. Figurative sense is recorded from 1885. As a verb from 1765; figurative from
1861.


waiver (n.)

act of waiving, 1620s (modern usage is often short for waiver clause); from Anglo-French legal usage
of infinitive as a noun (see waive). Baseball waivers is recorded from 1907. Other survivals of noun
use of infinitives in Anglo-French legalese include disclaimer, merger, rejoinder, misnomer, ouster,
retainer, attainder.


civil war (n.)

battles among fellow citizens or within a community, from civil in a sense of occurring among fellow
citizens attested from late 14c. in batayle ciuile civil battle, etc. The exact phrase civil war is
attested from late 15c. (the Latin phrase was bella civicus).    Early use typically was in
reference to ancient Rome. Later, in England, to the struggle between Parliament and Charles I
(1641-1651); in U.S., to the War of Secession (1861-1865), an application often decried as wholly
inaccurate but in use (among other names) in the North during the war and boosted by the use of the
term in the popular Battles and Leaders of the Civil War series published 1884-87 in Century
Magazine.    The war between the States, which a good many Southerners prefer, is both bookish and
inexact. Civil war is an utter misnomer. It was used and is still used by courteous people, the same
people who are careful to say Federal and Confederate. War of the rebellion, which begs the very
question at issue, has become the official designation of the struggle, but has found no acceptance
with the vanquished. To this day no Southerner uses it except by way of quotation .... The war of
secession is still used a good deal in foreign books, but it has no popular hold. The war, without
any further qualification, served the turn of Thucydides and Aristophanes for the Peloponnesian war.
It will serve ours, let it be hoped, for some time to come. [Basil L. Gildersleeve, The Creed of the
Old South, 1915]


