missile (n.)

thing thrown or discharged as a weapon, is 1650s, from missile (adj.), 1610s, capable of being
thrown, chiefly in phrase missile weapon, from French missile and directly from Latin missilis that
may be thrown or hurled (also, in plural, as a noun, weapons that can be thrown, darts, javelins),
from missus a throwing, hurling, past participle of mittere to send (see mission). Sense of self-
propelled rocket or bomb is first recorded 1738; the modern remote guidance projectile so called
from 1945.


astrobleme (n.)

1961, from astro- + Greek bleme throw of a missile; wound caused by a missile, from ballein to throw
(see ballistics).


SAM

1958, acronym for surface to air missile.


ABM (n.)

1963, initialism (acronym) for anti-ballistic missile.


ICBM (n.)

1955, initialism (acronym) for Inter-Continental Ballistic Missile.


Star Wars (n.)

name of a popular science fiction film released in 1977; also the informal name for a space-based
missile defense system proposed in 1983 by U.S. president Ronald Reagan.


snark (n.)

imaginary animal, coined 1876 by Lewis Carroll in The Hunting of the Snark. In 1950s, name of a type
of U.S. cruise missile and in 1980s of a type of sailboat. Meaning caustic, opinionated, critical
rhetoric is from c.2002 (see snarky) and not directly related, if at all.


spitball (n.)

1846 in the schoolboy sense, bit of paper chewed and rounded as a missile; 1904 in the baseball
sense, from spit (n.1) + ball (n.1).


shy (v.1)

to throw (a missile) with a jerk or toss, 1787, colloquial, of unknown origin and uncertain
connection to shy (adj.). Related: Shied; shying.


brickbat (n.)

mid-16c., piece of brick (half or less) used as a missile, from brick (n.) + bat (n.1). Figurative
use, of comments, insults, etc., is from 1640s.


payload (n.)

also pay-load, 1917, from pay + load (n.). Originally the part of a truck's (later an aircraft's)
load from which revenue is derived (passengers, cargo, mail); figurative sense of bombs, etc.
carried by a plane or missile is from 1936.


warhead (n.)

also war-head, 1898, explosive part of a torpedo, from war (n.) + head (n.). Later transferred to
any missile (1944).


confrontation (n.)

1630s, action of bringing two parties face to face, from Medieval Latin confrontationem, noun of
action from past participle stem of confrontare (see confront). International political sense is
attested from 1963 and traces to the Cuban missile crisis of the previous year.


hand-grenade (n.)

1660s, from hand (n.) + grenade, which at that time referred to any explosive missile.


Cuba

said to be from Taino (Arawakan) Cubanacan, the name of the people who occupied the island. Related:
Cuban (1829), Cuban heel (1908); Cuban Missile Crisis (October 16-28, 1962).


ballistic (adj.)

1775, pertaining to thrown objects, ultimately from Greek ballein to throw (see ballistics). Of
rockets or missiles (ones that are guided while under propulsion, but fall freely), from 1949.
Ballistic missile first attested 1954; they attain extreme heights, hence figurative expression go
ballistic (1981) become irrationally angry.


aim (v.)

early 14c., to estimate, calculate, also to intend, from Old French aesmer value, rate; count,
estimate, from Latin aestimare appraise (see estimation); current meaning apparently developed from
esteem, to calculate, to calculate with a view to action (c.1400), then to direct a missile, a blow,
etc. (1570s). Related: Aimed; aiming.


destruct (v.)

to destroy, 1958, probably a back-formation from destruction in the jargon of U.S. aerospace and
defense workers to refer to deliberate destruction of a missile in flight by a friendly agent;
popularized 1966 in form self-destruct in the voice-over at the beginning of popular TV spy drama
Mission Impossible. OED records an isolated use of destruct from 17c., in this case probably from
Latin destruct-, past participle stem of destruere.


hyperbole (n.)

early 15c., from Latin hyperbole, from Greek hyperbole exaggeration, extravagance, related to
hyperballein to throw over or beyond, from hyper- beyond + bole a throwing, a casting, the stroke of
a missile, bolt, beam, from bol-, nominative stem of ballein to throw (see ballistics). Rhetorical
sense is found in Aristotle and Isocrates.


Exocet (n.)

1970, proprietary name of a rocket-propelled short-range guided missile, trademarked 1970 by
Soci&eacute;t&eacute; Nationale Industrielle Aerospatiale, from French exocet flying fish (16c.),
from Latin exocoetus, from Greek exokoitos sleeping fish, fish that sleeps upon the beach, from exo
outside (see exo-) + koitos bed.


scud (v.)

to move quickly, 1530s, of uncertain origin, perhaps a variant of Middle English scut rabbit,
rabbit's tail, in reference to its movements (see scut (n.1)), but there are phonetic difficulties.
Perhaps rather from a North Sea Germanic source akin to Middle Low German, Middle Dutch schudden to
shake (see quash). Related: Scudded; scudding. As a noun from c.1600, from the verb. It also was the
NATO reporting name for a type of Soviet missile introduced in the 1960s.


goad (n.)

Old English gad point, spearhead, arrowhead, from Proto-Germanic *gaido (cognates: Lombardic gaida
spear), from PIE root *ghei- (1) to propel, prick (cognates: Sanskrit hetih missile, projectile,
himsati he injures; Avestan zaena- weapon; Greek khaios shepherd's staff; Old English gar spear; Old
Irish gae spear). Figurative use is since 16c., probably from the Bible.


Polaris (n.)

1769, short for stella polaris, Modern Latin, literally the pole star (see polar). The ancient
Greeks called it Phoenice, the Phoenician (star), because the Phoenicians used it for navigation,
though due to precession of the equinoxes it was not then the pole star. Also see pole (n.2). The
Old English word for it was Scip-steorra ship-star, reflecting its importance in navigation. As the
name of a U.S. Navy long-range submarine-launched guided nuclear missile, it dates from 1957.


launch (v.)

c.1300, to rush, plunge, leap, start forth; to be set into sudden motion, from Old North French
lancher (Old French lancier) to fling, hurl, throw, cast, from Late Latin lanceare wield a lance,
from Latin lancea light spear (see lance (n.)). Sense of set (a boat) afloat first recorded c.1400,
from notion of throwing it out on the water; generalized by 1600 to any sort of beginning. The noun
meaning a leap or a bound is from mid-15c., from the verb. Meaning the liftoff of a missile,
spacecraft, etc. is from 1935. Launch pad attested from 1960.


ballpark (n.)

baseball stadium, 1899, from (base)ball + park (n.). Figurative sense of acceptable range of
approximation first recorded 1954, originally in the jargon of atomic weapons scientists, perhaps
originally referring to area within which a missile was expected to return to earth; the reference
is to broad but reasonably predictable dimensions.    The result, according to the author's
estimate, is a stockpile equivalent to one billion tons of TNT. Assuming this estimate is in the
ball park, clearly there is valid reason for urging candor on the part of our government. [Ralph E.
Lapp, Atomic Candor, in Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, October 1954]


silo (n.)

1835, from Spanish silo, traditionally derived from Latin sirum (nominative sirus), from Greek siros
a pit to keep corn in.  The change from r to l in Spanish is abnormal and Greek siros was a rare
foreign term peculiar to regions of Asia Minor and not likely to emerge in Castilian Spain
[Barnhart]. Alternatively, the Spanish word is from a pre-Roman Iberian language word represented by
Basque zilo, zulo dugout, cave or shelter for keeping grain. Meaning underground housing and launch
tube for a guided missile is attested from 1958.


scot-free (adj.)

Old English scotfreo exempt from royal tax, from scot royal tax, from Old Norse skot contribution,
literally a shooting, shot; thing shot, missile, from PIE *skeud- to shoot, chase, throw (see shoot
(v.); the Old Norse verb form, skjota, has a secondary sense of transfer to another; pay) + freo
(see free (adj.)). First element related to Old English sceotan to pay, contribute, Dutch schot,
German Scho&szlig; tax, contribution. French &eacute;cot share (Old French escot) is from Germanic.


symbol (n.)

early 15c., creed, summary, religious belief, from Late Latin symbolum creed, token, mark, from
Greek symbolon token, watchword, sign by which one infers; ticket, a permit, license (the word was
applied c.250 by Cyprian of Carthage to the Apostles' Creed, on the notion of the mark that
distinguishes Christians from pagans), literally that which is thrown or cast together, from
assimilated form of syn- together (see syn-) + bole a throwing, a casting, the stroke of a missile,
bolt, beam, from bol-, nominative stem of ballein to throw (see ballistics).    The sense evolution
in Greek is from throwing things together to contrasting to comparing to token used in comparisons
to determine if something is genuine. Hence, outward sign of something. The meaning something which
stands for something else first recorded 1590 (in Faerie Queene). As a written character, 1610s.


warp (v.)

to bend, twist, distort, Old English weorpan to throw, throw away, hit with a missile, from Proto-
Germanic *werpan to fling by turning the arm (cognates: Old Saxon werpan, Old Norse verpa to throw,
Swedish v&auml;rpa to lay eggs, Old Frisian werpa, Middle Low German and Dutch werpen, German
werfen, Gothic wairpan to throw), from PIE *werp- to turn, wind, bend (cognates: Latin verber whip,
rod; Greek rhabdos rod, rhombos magic wheel), from root *wer- (3) to turn, bend (see versus).
Connection between turning and throwing is perhaps in the notion of rotating the arm in the act of
throwing; compare Old Church Slavonic vre&#353;ti to throw, from the same PIE root. The meaning
twist out of shape is first recorded c.1400; intransitive sense is from mid-15c. Related: Warped;
warping.


hit (v.)

late Old English hyttan, hittan come upon, meet with, fall in with, 'hit' upon, from a Scandinavian
source such as Old Norse hitta to light upon, meet with, also to hit, strike; Swedish hitta to find,
Danish and Norwegian hitte to hit, find, from Proto-Germanic *hitjan, of uncertain origin. Related:
Hitting. Meaning shifted in late Old English period to strike, via to reach with a blow or missile,
and replaced Old English slean in this sense. Original sense survives in phrases such as hit it off
(1780, earlier in same sense hit it, 1630s) and is revived in hit on (1970s).    Underworld slang
meaning to kill by plan is 1955 (as a noun in this sense from 1970). To hit the bottle drink alcohol
is from 1889. To hit the nail on the head (1570s) is from archery. Hit the road leave is from 1873;
to hit (someone) up request something is from 1917. Hit and run is 1899 as a baseball play, 1924 as
a driver failing to stop at a crash he caused. To not know what hit (one) is from 1923.


shot (n.)

Old English scot, sceot a shot, a shooting, an act of shooting; that which is discharged in
shooting, what is shot forth; darting, rapid motion, from Proto-Germanic *skutan (cognates: Old
Norse skutr, Old Frisian skete, Middle Dutch scote, German Schu&szlig; a shot), related to sceotan
to shoot (see shoot (v.)).    Meaning discharge of a bow, missile, also is from related Old English
gesceot. Extended to other projectiles in Middle English, and to sports (hockey, basketball, etc.)
1868. Another original meaning, payment (perhaps literally money thrown down) is preserved in scot-
free. Throwing down might also have led to the meaning a drink, first attested 1670s, the more
precise meaning small drink of straight liquor by 1928 (shot glass by 1955). Camera view sense is
from 1958. Sense of hypodermic injection first attested 1904; figurative phrase shot in the arm
stimulant first recorded 1922. Meaning try, attempt is from 1756; sense of remark meant to wound is
recorded from 1841. Meaning an expert in shooting is from 1780. To call the shots control events,
make decisions is American English, 1922, perhaps from sport shooting. Shot in the dark uninformed
guess is from 1885. Big shot important person is from 1861.


strike (v.)

Old English strican (past tense strac, past participle stricen) pass lightly over, stroke, smooth,
rub, also go, move, proceed, from Proto-Germanic *strikan- (cognates: Old Norse strykva to stroke,
Old Frisian strika, Middle Dutch streken, Dutch strijken to smooth, stroke, rub, Old High German
strihhan, German streichen), from PIE root *streig- to stroke, rub, press (see strigil). Related to
streak and stroke, and perhaps influenced in sense development by cognate Old Norse striuka.
Sense of to deal a blow developed by early 14c.; meaning to collide is from mid-14c.; that of to hit
with a missile is from late 14c. Meaning to cancel or expunge (as with the stroke of a pen) is
attested from late 14c. A Middle English sense is preserved in strike for go toward. Sense of come
upon, find is from 1835 (especially in mining, well-digging, etc., hence strike it rich, 1854).
Baseball sense is from 1853.  To strike a balance is from the sense balance accounts (1530s).
Meaning refuse to work to force an employer to meet demands is from 1768, perhaps from notion of
striking or downing one's tools, or from sailors' practice of striking (lowering) a ship's sails as
a symbol of refusal to go to sea (1768), which preserves the verb's original sense of make level,
smooth.


throw (v.)

to project, propel, c.1300, from Old English &thorn;rawan to twist, turn, writhe, curl, (past tense
&thorn;reow, past participle &thorn;rawen), from Proto-Germanic *threw- (cognates: Old Saxon
thraian, Middle Dutch dr&aelig;yen, Dutch draaien, Old High German draen, German drehen to turn,
twist; not found in Scandinavian or Gothic), from PIE *tere- (1) to rub, turn, rub by turning, bore
(cognates: Sanskrit turah wounded, hurt, Greek teirein to rub, rub away, Latin terere to rub,
thresh, grind, wear away, Old Church Slavonic tiro to rub, Lithuanian trinu to rub, Old Irish
tarathar borer, Welsh taraw to strike).    Not the usual Old English word for to throw (weorpan,
related to warp (v.) was common in this sense). The sense evolution may be via the notion of
whirling a missile before throwing it. The sense of put by force (as in throw in jail) is first
recorded 1550s; that of confuse, flabbergast is from 1844; that of lose deliberately is from 1868.
To throw the book at (someone) is 1932, from notion of judge sentencing a criminal from a law book
full of possible punishments. To throw (one's) hat in the ring issue a challenge, especially to
announce one's candidacy, first recorded 1917. To throw up vomit is first recorded 1732. To throw
(someone) off confuse by a false scent is from 1891.


