mist (n.)

Old English mist dimness (of eyesight), mist (earliest in compounds, such as misthleo&eth;u misty
cliffs, w&aelig;lmist mist of death), from Proto-Germanic *mikhstaz (cognates: Middle Low German
mist, Dutch mist, Icelandic mistur, Norwegian and Swedish mist), perhaps from PIE *meigh- to urinate
(cognates: Greek omikhle, Old Church Slavonic migla, Sanskrit mih, megha cloud, mist; see
micturition).Sometimes distinguished from fog, either as being less opaque or as consisting of drops
large enough to have a perceptible downward motion. [OED]Also in Old English in sense of dimness of
the eyes, either by illness or tears, and in figurative sense of things that obscure mental vision.


mist (v.)

Old English mistian to become misty, to be or grow misty; see mist (n.). Meaning To cover with mist
is early 15c. Related: Misted; misting.


misty (adj.)

Old English mistig; see mist (n.) + -y (2). Related: Mistily; mistiness.


Nibelungenlied (n.)

German epic poem of 13c., literally song of the Nibelungs, a race of dwarves who lived in Norway and
owned a hoard of gold and a magic ring, literally children of the mist, related to Old High German
nebul mist, darkness, Old English nifol (see nebula).


nebulizer (n.)

1865, agent noun from verb nebulize to reduce to a mist or spray (1865), from Latin nebula mist (see
nebula) + -ize. Related: Nebulization.


nebula (n.)

early 15c., nebule a cloud, mist, from Latin nebula mist, vapor, fog, smoke, exhalation,
figuratively darkness, obscurity, from PIE *nebh- cloud (cognates: Sanskrit nabhas- vapor, cloud,
mists, fog, sky; Greek nephele, nephos cloud; German nebel fog; Old English nifol dark, gloomy;
Welsh niwl cloud, fog; Slavic nebo).    Re-borrowed from Latin 1660s in sense of cataracts in the
eye; astronomical meaning cloud-like patch in the night sky first recorded c.1730. As early as
Hershel (1802) astronomers realized that some nebulae were star clusters, but certain distinction of
relatively nearby cosmic gas clouds from distant galaxies was not made until 1920s, using the new
100-inch Mt. Wilson telescope.


muggy (adj.)

1731, from mugen to drizzle (late 14c.), from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse mugga
drizzling mist, possibly from PIE *meug- slimy, slippery (see mucus).


atomize (v.)

reduce to atoms, 1845; reduce a liquid to a very fine mist, 1865, verb formed from atom + -ize.
Related: Atomized; atomizing. Originally in reference to medical treatment for injured or diseased
lungs; sense of to destroy with atomic weapons is from 1945.


haze (n.)

1706, probably a back-formation of hazy. Sense of confusion, vagueness is 1797. The English
differentiation of haze, mist, fog (and other dialectal words) is unmatched in other tongues, where
the same word generally covers all three and often cloud as well, and this may be seen as an effect
of the English climate on the language.


dumps (n.)

low spirits, 1520s, plural of dumpe a fit of musing, possibly from Dutch domp haze, mist, from
Middle Dutch damp vapor (see damp (n.)).


nimbus (n.)

1610s, bright cloud surrounding a god, from Latin nimbus cloud, perhaps related to nebula cloud,
mist (see nebula). Meaning halo is first recorded c.1730. Meteorological sense of a rain cloud is
from 1803.


Cimmerian (adj.)

late 16c., pertaining to the Cimmerii, an ancient nomadic people who, according to Herodotus,
inhabited the region around the Crimea, and who, according to Assyrian sources, overran Asia Minor
7c. B.C.E.; from Latin Cimmerius, from Greek Kimmerios. Homer described their land as a place of
perpetual mist and darkness beyond the ocean, but whether he had in mind the same people Herodotus
did, or any real place, is unclear.


brume (n.)

fog, mist, 1808, from French brume fog (14c.), in Old French, wintertime, from Latin bruma winter,
perhaps with an original sense season of the shortest day, from *brevima, contracted from
brevissima, superlative of brevis short (see brief (adj.)).


fog (n.1)

thick, obscuring mist, 1540s, probably from a Scandinavian source akin to Danish fog spray, shower,
snowdrift, Old Norse fok snow flurry, fjuk snow storm. Compare also Old English fuht, Dutch vocht,
German Feucht moist. Figurative phrase in a fog at a loss what to do first recorded c.1600.


Neptune

late 14c., god of the sea, from Latin Neptunus, son of Saturn, brother of Jupiter, the Roman god of
the sea (later identified with Greek Poseidon), probably from PIE root *nebh- cloud (source of Latin
nebula fog, mist, cloud; see nebula), via a sense of moist, wet. The planet so named was discovered
by Galle in 1846. Until the identification of Pluto in 1930, it was the most distant planet known.


vaporize (v.)

1630s, to smoke (tobacco), from vapor + -ize. Later convert into vapor, cause to become vapor
(1803), and spray with fine mist (1900). Intransitive sense become vaporous is from 1828. Related:
Vaporized; vaporizing. An earlier verb was simply vapor (c.1400, transitive and intransitive), from
Latin vaporare.


nuance (n.)

1781, from French nuance slight difference, shade of color (17c.), from nuer to shade, from nue
cloud, from Gallo-Roman *nuba, from Latin nubes a cloud, mist, vapor, from PIE *sneudh- fog
(cognates: Avestan snaoda clouds, Latin obnubere to veil, Welsh nudd fog, Greek nython, in Hesychius
dark, dusky). According to Klein, a reference to the different colors of the clouds.


dust (n.)

Old English dust, from Proto-Germanic *dunstaz (cognates: Old High German tunst storm, breath,
German Dunst mist, vapor, Danish dyst milldust, Dutch duist), from PIE *dheu- (1) dust, smoke, vapor
(cognates: Sanskrit dhu- shake, Latin fumus smoke). Meaning that to which living matter decays was
in Old English, hence, figuratively, mortal life.


qualm (n.)

Old English cwealm (West Saxon) death, murder, slaughter; disaster; plague; torment, utcualm
(Anglian) utter destruction, probably related to cwellan to kill, murder, execute, cwelan to die
(see quell). Sense softened to feeling of faintness 1520s; figurative meaning uneasiness, doubt is
from 1550s; that of scruple of conscience is 1640s.    Evidence of a direct path from the Old
English to the modern senses is wanting, but it is plausible, via the notion of fit of sickness. The
other suggested etymology, less satisfying, is to take the fit of uneasiness sense from Dutch kwalm
steam, vapor, mist (cognate with German Qualm smoke, vapor, stupor), which also might be ultimately
from the same Germanic root as quell.


dumb (adj.)

Old English dumb silent, unable to speak, from PIE *dheubh- confusion, stupefaction, dizziness, from
root *dheu- (1) dust, mist, vapor, smoke, and related notions of defective perception or wits.
The Old English, Old Saxon (dumb), Gothic (dumbs), and Old Norse (dumbr) forms of the word meant
only mute, speechless; in Old High German (thumb) it meant both this and stupid, and in Modern
German this latter became the only sense. Meaning foolish, ignorant was occasionally in Middle
English, but modern use (1823) comes from influence of German dumm. Related: dumber; dumbest.
Applied to silent contrivances, hence dumbwaiter. As a verb, in late Old English, to become mute;
c.1600, to make mute. To dumb (something) down is from 1933.


air (n.1)

c.1300, invisible gases that make up the atmosphere, from Old French air atmosphere, breeze, weather
(12c.), from Latin aerem (nominative aer) air, lower atmosphere, sky, from Greek aer (genitive
aeros) air (related to aenai to blow, breathe), of unknown origin, possibly from a base *awer- and
thus related to aeirein to raise and arteria windpipe, artery (see aorta) on notion of lifting, that
which rises. In Homer mostly thick air, mist; later air as one of the four elements.    Words for
air in Indo-European languages tend to be associated with wind, brightness, sky. In English, air
replaced native lyft, luft (see loft (n.)). To be in the air in general awareness is from 1875; up
in the air uncertain, doubtful is from 1752. To build castles in the air is from 1590s (in 17c.
English had airmonger one preoccupied with visionary projects). Broadcasting sense (as in on the
air) first recorded 1927. To give (someone) the air dismiss is from 1900. Air pollution is attested
by 1870.


Praesepe (n.)

loose (open) star cluster (M44) in Cancer, from Latin praesaepe the Roman name for the grouping,
literally enclosure, stall, manger, hive, from prae- (see pre-) + saepire to fence (see septum).
It is similar to the Hyades but more distant, about 600 light-years away, consists of about 1,000
stars, mostly older, the brightest of them around magnitude 6.5, thus not discernable to the naked
eye even on the clearest nights, but their collective light makes a visible fuzz of glow that the
ancients likened to a cloud (the original nebula); Galileo was the first to resolve it into stars
(1609). The modern name for it in U.S. and Britain, Beehive, seems no older than 1840. Greek names
included Nephelion Little Cloud and Akhlys Little Mist. In astrology, like all clusters, it
threatened mischief and blindness [Allen].    Manger to the Romans perhaps by influence of two
nearby stars, Gamma and Delta Cancri, dim and unspectacular but both for some reason figuring
largely in ancient astrology and weather forecasting, and known as the Asses (Latin Aselli),
supposedly those of Silenus.


typhus (n.)

acute infectious fever, usually accompanied by prostration, delirium, and small reddish spots, 1785,
from medical Latin, from Greek typhos stupor caused by fever, literally smoke, from typhein to
smoke, related to typhos blind, typhon whirlwind, from PIE *dheubh-, perhaps an extended form of
root *dheu- (1) to fly about like dust.    The Greek term [typhos] (smoke, mist, fog) was employed
by Hippocrates to define a confused state of the intellect, with a tendency to stupor (stupor
attonitus); and in this sense it is aptly applied to typhus fever with its slow cerebration and
drowsy stupor. Boissier de Sauvages first (in 1760) called this fever typhus, and the name was
adopted by Cullen of Edinburgh in 1769. Previous to the time of de Sauvages typhus was known as
Pestilential or Putrid Fever, or by some name suggested by the eruption, or expressive of the
locality in which it appeared, as Camp, Jail, Hospital, or Ship Fever (Murchison). [Thomas Clifford,
ed., A System of Medicine, New York, 1897]    Related: typhous (adj.).


hell (n.)

Old English hel, helle, nether world, abode of the dead, infernal regions, from Proto-Germanic
*haljo the underworld (cognates: f. Old Frisian helle, Dutch hel, Old Norse hel, German H&ouml;lle,
Gothic halja hell) the underworld, literally concealed place (compare Old Norse hellir cave,
cavern), from PIE *kel- (2) to cover, conceal (see cell).    The English word may be in part from
Old Norse Hel (from Proto-Germanic *halija one who covers up or hides something), in Norse mythology
the name of Loki's daughter, who rules over the evil dead in Niflheim, the lowest of all worlds
(nifl mist). Transfer of a pagan concept and word to a Christian idiom. In Middle English, also of
the Limbus Patrum, place where the Patriarchs, Prophets, etc. awaited the Atonement. Used in the KJV
for Old Testament Hebrew Sheol and New Testament Greek Hades, Gehenna. Used figuratively for state
of misery, any bad experience since at least late 14c. As an expression of disgust, etc., first
recorded 1670s.    Expression Hell in a handbasket is attested by 1867, in a context implying use
from a few years before, and the notion of going to Heaven in a handbasket is from 1853, with a
sense of easy passage to the destination. Hell or high water (1874) apparently is a variation of
between the devil and the deep blue sea. To wish someone would go to hell is in Shakespeare
(Merchant of Venice). Snowball's chance in hell no chance is from 1931; till hell freezes over never
is from 1832. To ride hell for leather is from 1889, originally with reference to riding on
horseback. Hell on wheels is said to be from 1843 in DAS; popularity dates from 1869 in reference to
the temporary workers' towns along the U.S. transcontinental railroad and their vices.


