mite (n.2)

little bit, mid-14c., from Middle Dutch or Middle Low German mite tiny animal, from Proto-Germanic
*miton-, from PIE *mei- (2) small (see minus), and thus probably identical with mite (n.1). Also the
name of a medieval Flemish copper coin of very small value, proverbial in English for a very small
unit of money, hence used since Wyclif to translate Latin minutum from Vulgate in Mark xii:43,
itself a translation of Greek lepton. French mite (14c.) is a loan-word from Dutch.


mite (n.1)

tiny animal, minute arachnid, Old English mite, from Proto-Germanic *miton (cognates: Middle Dutch
mite, Dutch mijt, Old High German miza, Danish mide) originally meaning perhaps the cutter, in
reference to its bite, from Proto-Germanic *mait- (cognates: Gothic maitan, Old High German meizen
to cut), from PIE root *mai- to cut (see maim). Or else its original sense is something small, and
it is from PIE *mei- (2) small, in reference to size (see minus).


mitrailleuse (n.)

kind of machine gun, from French mitrailleuse (19c.), from Old French mitaille (14c.) small coins,
hence old iron, scrap iron, then grapeshot; originally a diminutive of mite a small coin (see mite
(n.2)). For sense development it should be borne in mind that orig. guns used to be loaded with
scrap iron [Klein].


jigger (n.)

1.5-ounce shot glass, 1836, American English, in early use also of the drink itself, from jigger
illicit distillery (1824), of unknown origin; or else perhaps from jigger, a 1756 alteration of
chigger tiny mite or flea. As a name for various appliances, the word is attested by 1825, from jig.


eeny

the children's counting-out rhyme is first attested 1855 as eeny meeny moany mite; form eene meenee
mainee mo is attested from 1923. Another variation is eeny meeny tipty te.


vermin (n.)

c.1300, noxious animals, from Anglo-French and Old French vermin moth, worm, mite, in plural
troublesome creatures (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *verminum vermin, possibly including bothersome
insects, collective noun formed from Latin vermis worm (see worm (n.)). Extended to low, obnoxious
people by 1560s.


Semite (n.)

1847, a Jew, Arab, Assyrian, or Aramaean (an apparently isolated use from 1797 refers to the Semitic
language group), back-formation from Semitic or else from French S&#233;mite (1845), from Modern
Latin Semita, from Late Latin Sem Shem, one of the three sons of Noah (Gen. x:21-30), regarded as
the ancestor of the Semites (in old Bible-based anthropology), from Hebrew Shem. In modern sense
said to have been first used by German historian August Schl&#246;zer in 1781.


mitten (n.)

late 14c., from Old French mitaine mitten, half-glove (12c.), from Old French mite mitten, and from
Medieval Latin mitta, which are perhaps from Middle High German mittemo, Old High German mittamo
middle, midmost (reflecting notion of half-glove), or from Vulgar Latin *medietana divided in the
middle, from Latin medius (see medial (adj.)).


mutable (adj.)

late 14c., liable to change, from Latin mutabilis changeable, from mutare to change, from PIE root
*mei- (1) to change, go, move (cognates: Sanskrit methati changes, alternates, joins, meets; Avestan
mitho perverted, false; Hittite mutai- be changed into; Latin meare to go, pass, migrare to move
from one place to another; Old Church Slavonic mite alternately; Czech mijim to go by, pass by,
Polish mija&#263; avoid; Gothic maidjan to change); with derivatives referring to the exchange of
goods and services as regulated by custom or law (compare Latin mutuus done in exchange, munus
service performed for the community, duty, work).


widow (n.)

Old English widewe, wuduwe, from Proto-Germanic *widuwo (cognates: Old Saxon widowa, Old Frisian
widwe, Middle Dutch, Dutch weduwe, Dutch weeuw, Old High German wituwa, German Witwe, Gothic
widuwo), from PIE adjective *widhewo (cognates: Sanskrit vidhuh lonely, solitary, vidhava widow;
Avestan vithava, Latin vidua, Old Church Slavonic vidova, Russian vdova, Old Irish fedb, Welsh
guedeu widow; Persian beva, Greek eitheos unmarried man; Latin viduus bereft, void), from root
*weidh- to separate (source of second element in Latin di-videre to divide; see with).    Extended
to woman separated from or deserted by her husband from mid-15c. (usually in a combination, such as
grass widow). As a prefix to a name, attested from 1570s. Meaning short line of type (especially at
the top of a column) is 1904 print shop slang. Widow's mite is from Mark xii:43. Widow's peak is
from the belief that hair growing to a point on the forehead is an omen of early widowhood,
suggestive of the peak of a widow's hood. The widow bird (1747) so-called in reference to the long
black tail feathers of the males, suggestive of widows' veils.


