mobile (n.)

early 15c. in astronomy, outer sphere of the universe, from mobile (adj.); the artistic sense is
first recorded 1949 as a shortening of mobile sculpture (1936). Now-obsolete sense of the common
people, the rabble (1670s) led to mob (n.).


mobile (adj.)

late 15c., from Middle French mobile (14c.), from Latin mobilis movable, easy to move; loose, not
firm, figuratively, pliable, flexible, susceptible, nimble, quick; changeable, inconstant, fickle,
contraction of *movibilis, from movere to move (see move (v.)). Sociology sense from 1927. Mobile
home first recorded 1940.


Mobile

city in Alabama, U.S., attested c.1540 in Spanish as Mauvila, referring to an Indian group and
perhaps from Choctaw (Muskogean) moeli to paddle. Related: Mobilian.


primum mobile (n.)

the first source of motion, mid-15c., from Medieval Latin (11c.), literally the first movable thing;
see prime (adj.) + mobile. A translation of Arabic al-muharrik al-awwal the first moving (Avicenna).


mob (n.)

1680s, disorderly part of the population, rabble, slang shortening of mobile, mobility common
people, populace, rabble (1670s, probably with a conscious play on nobility), from Latin mobile
vulgus fickle common people (the phrase attested c.1600 in English), from mobile, neuter of mobilis
fickle, movable, mobile (see mobile (adj.)). In Australia and New Zealand, used without
disparagement for a crowd. Meaning gang of criminals working together is from 1839, originally of
thieves or pick-pockets; American English sense of organized crime in general is from 1927.    The
Mob was not a synonym for the Mafia. It was an alliance of Jews, Italians, and a few Irishmen, some
of them brilliant, who organized the supply, and often the production, of liquor during the thirteen
years, ten months, and nineteen days of Prohibition. ... Their alliance -- sometimes called the
Combination but never the Mafia -- was part of the urgent process of Americanizing crime. [Pete
Hamill, Why Sinatra Matters, 1998]   Mob scene crowded place first recorded 1922.


mobilize (v.)

1833 in the military sense; 1838 as render capable of movement, bring into circulation, from French
mobiliser, from mobile movable (see mobile). Related: Mobilized; mobilizing.


automobile (adj.)

1883, in reference to electric traction cars, from French automobile (adj.), 1861, a hybrid from
Greek autos self (see auto-) + French mobile moving, from Latin mobilis movable (see mobile (adj.)).


M.A.S.H.

1950, U.S. military acronym for Mobile Army Surgical Hospital.


autocade (n.)

1922, from auto(mobile) + ending from cavalcade.


furniture (n.)

1520s, act of furnishing, from Middle French fourniture, from fournir furnish (see furnish). Sense
of chairs, tables, etc.; household stuff (1570s) is unique to English; most other European languages
derive their words for this from Latin mobile movable.


yuppie (n.)

1982, acronym from young urban professional, ousting competition from yumpie (1984), from young
upward-mobile professional, and yap (1984), from young aspiring professional. The word was felt as
an insult by 1985.


chasseur (n.)

mobile foot-soldier, 1796, French, literally huntsman, from Old French chaceor huntsman, hunter,
from chacier to chase (see chase (v.)).


trailer (n.)

1580s, hound or huntsman that follows a trail, agent noun from trail (v.). From 1610s as Something
that trails. From 1890 as vehicle pulled by another; originally a small carriage drawn along by a
bicycle. Meaning preview of a coming movie first attested 1928. Trailer park mobile home community
recorded by 1936. Trailer trash in use by 1986.


mobility (n.)

early 15c., capacity for motion, from Old French mobilit&eacute; changeableness, inconsistency,
fickleness, from Latin mobilitatem (nominative mobilitas) activity, speed, figuratively
changeableness, fickleness, inconstancy, from mobilis (see mobile (adj.)). Socio-economics sense is
from 1900 and writers in sociology.


text (v.)

to send a text message by mobile system, 2005; see text (n.).  Related: Texted; texting. Formerly it
meant to write in text letters (1590s), text letters being a kind of large writing used by clerks in
the text or body of a manuscript (distinguished from the smaller hand used in the notes).


cellular (adj.)

1753, with reference to cellular tissue, from Modern Latin cellularis of little cells, from cellula
little cell, diminutive of cella (see cell). Of mobile phone systems (in which the area served is
divided into cells of a few square miles served by transmitters), 1977. Related: Cellularity.


caravan (n.)

1580s, from Middle French caravane, from Old French carvane, carevane caravan (13c.), or Medieval
Latin caravana, picked up during the Crusades from Persian karwan group of desert travelers (which
Klein connects to Sanskrit karabhah camel). Used in English for vehicle 17c., especially for a
covered cart. Hence, in modern British use (from 1930s), often a rough equivalent of the U.S. mobile
home.


immobile (adj.)

mid-14c., from Old French immoble immovable, fixed, motionless, from Latin immobilis immovable
(also, figuratively, hard-hearted), from assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) +
mobilis (see mobile (adj.)). Hence, immobilism policy of extreme conservatism (1949, from French
immobilisme).


ambulance (n.)

1798, mobile or field hospital, from French (h&ocirc;pital) ambulant, literally walking (hospital),
from Latin ambulantem (nominative ambulans), present participle of ambulare to walk (see amble).
AMBULANCE, s. f. a moveable hospital. These were houses constructed in a manner so as to be taken to
pieces, and carried from place to place, according to the movements of the army; and served as
receptacles in which the sick and wounded men might be received and attended. [Lexicographica-
Neologica Gallica (The Neological French Dictionary), William Dupr&#233;, London, 1801]    The word
was not common in English until the meaning transferred from field hospital to vehicle for conveying
wounded from field (1854) during the Crimean War. In late 19c. U.S. the word was used dialectally to
mean prairie wagon. Ambulance-chaser as a contemptuous term for a type of lawyer dates from 1897.


