mock (adj.)

1540s, from mock, verb and noun. Mock-heroic is attested from 1711, describing a satirical use of a
serious form; mock-turtle calf's head dressed to resemble a turtle, is from 1763; as a kind of soup
from 1783.


mock (n.)

derisive action or speech, early 15c., from mock (v.).


mockup (n.)

also mock-up, model, simulation 1919, perhaps World War I, from mock (v.) + up (adv.). The verbal
phrase mock up is attested from 1911.


mockingbird (n.)

also mocking-bird, 1670s, from mocking (adj.), 1520s, from present participle of mock (v.) + bird
(n.1). Earlier form was mock-bird (1640s).


mock (v.)

early 15c., to deceive; mid-15c. make fun of, from Old French mocquer deride, jeer, of unknown
origin, perhaps from Vulgar Latin *muccare to blow the nose (as a derisive gesture), from Latin
mucus; or possibly from Middle Dutch mocken to mumble or Middle Low German mucken grumble. Or
perhaps simply imitative of such speech. Related: Mocked; mocking; mockingly. Replaced Old English
bysmerian. Sense of imitating, as in mockingbird and mock turtle (1763), is from notion of derisive
imitation.


mocker (n.)

late 15c., agent noun from mock (v.).


mockery (n.)

early 15c., from Old French moquerie sneering, mockery, sarcasm (13c.), from moquer (see mock (v.)).


gab (v.)

to reproach, c.1200, via Scottish and northern England dialect, from a Scandinavian source, such as
Old Norse gabba to mock, or from Old French gabber mock, boast, both perhaps ultimately imitative.
Related: Gabbed; gabbing. Meaning to talk much is from 1786, probably a back-formation from gabble.


cavil (v.)

1540s, from Middle French caviller to mock, jest, from Latin cavillari to jeer, mock; satirize,
argue scoffingly (also source of Italian cavillare, Spanish cavilar), from cavilla jest, jeering,
related to calumnia (see calumny).


sundog (n.)

mock sun, parhelion, 1650s; the second element is of obscure origin.


olde

pseudo-archaic mock-antique variant of old, 1927.


panjandrum (n.)

mock name for a pompous personage, 1755, invented by Samuel Foote (1720-1777) in a long passage full
of nonsense written to test the memory of actor Charles Macklin (1697-1797), who said he could
repeat anything after hearing it once.


jibe (n.)

1560s, perhaps from Middle French giber to handle roughly, or an alteration of gaber to mock.


scoptic (adj.)

1660s, mocking, scoffing, from Greek skoptikos given to mockery, from skoptein to mock, jest.


blackguard (n.)

1530s, scullion, kitchen knave. Perhaps once an actual military or guard unit; more likely
originally a mock-military reference to scullions and kitchen-knaves of noble households, of black-
liveried personal guards, and of shoeblacks. By 1736, sense had emerged of one of the criminal
class. Hence the adjectival use (1784), of low or worthless character.


moot (adj.)

debatable; not worth considering from moot case, earlier simply moot (n.) discussion of a
hypothetical law case (1530s), in law student jargon. The reference is to students gathering to test
their skills in mock cases.


sable (n.2)

black as a heraldic color, early 14c., commonly identified with sable (n.1), but the animal's fur is
brown and this may be a different word of unknown origin; or it might reflect a medieval custom
(unattested) of dyeing sable fur black. As an adjective from late 14c. Emblematic of mourning or
grief from c.1600; c.1800 as black with reference to Africans and their descendants, often with mock
dignity.


monkey (v.)

1859, to mock, mimic, from monkey (n.). Meaning play foolish tricks is from 1881. Related: Monkeyed;
monkeying.


trifle (v.)

treat lightly, 1520s, from trifle (n.). Earlier cheat, mock (c.1300). Related: Trifled; trifling.


hair-raising (adj.)

exciting, 1837, from hair + raise (v.). In 19c. works, sometimes as jocular mock-classical
tricopherous.


absquatulate (v.)

1837, Facetious U.S. coinage [Weekley], perhaps based on a mock-Latin negation of squat to settle.
Said to have been used by the U.S. Western character Nimrod Wildfire in the play The Kentuckian, as
re-written by British author William B. Bernard and staged in London in 1833. Related:
Absquatulated; absquatulating.


send-up (n.)

a spoof, British slang, 1958, from verbal phrase send up to mock, make fun of (1931), from send (v.)
+ up (adv.), perhaps a transferred sense of the public school term for to send a boy to the
headmaster (usually for punishment), which is attested from 1821.


illude (v.)

early 15c., to mock, to trick, from Latin illudere to make sport of, from assimilated form of in-
in, into (see in- (2)) + ludere to play (see ludicrous).


jeer (v.)

1550s, gyr, to deride, to mock, of uncertain origin; perhaps from Dutch gieren to cry or roar, or
German scheren to plague, vex, literally to shear. OED finds the suggestion that it is an ironical
use of cheer plausible and phonetically feasible, ... but ... beyond existing evidence. Related:
Jeered; jeering.


scout (v.2)

to reject with scorn, 1710, earlier to mock (c.1600), of Scandinavian origin (compare Old Norse
skuta, skute to taunt), probably from a source related to shout (v.). Related: Scouted; scouting;
scoutingly.


bull (n.3)

false talk, fraud, Middle English, apparently from Old French bole deception, trick, scheming,
intrigue, and perhaps connected to modern Icelandic bull nonsense.  Sais christ to ypocrites ... yee
ar ... all ful with wickednes, tresun and bull. [Cursor Mundi, early 14c.]  There also was a verb
bull meaning to mock, cheat, which dates from 1530s.


rudesby (n.)

insolent person, 1560s, mock surname from rude + -by, common place-name (and thus surname) ending
element, as in Grimsby, Rigby. Similar formations in idlesby, sneaksby paltry, sneaking fellow
(1570s), suresby.


jape (v.)

late 14c., to trick, beguile, jilt, perhaps from Old French japer to howl, bawl, scream, of echoic
origin, or from Old French gaber to mock, deride. Phonetics suits the former, but sense the latter
explanation. Took on a slang sense mid-15c. of have sex with, and disappeared from polite usage.
Revived in harmless Middle English sense of say or do something in jest by Scott, etc. Related:
Japed; japing.


scold (n.)

mid-12c., person of ribald speech, later person fond of abusive language (c.1300), especially a
shrewish woman [Johnson defines it as A clamourous, rude, mean, low, foul-mouthed woman], from Old
Norse skald poet (see skald). The sense evolution might reflect the fact that Germanic poets (like
their Celtic counterparts) were famously feared for their ability to lampoon and mock (as in
skaldskapr poetry, also, in Icelandic law books, libel in verse).


allude (v.)

1530s, mock, from Middle French alluder or directly from Latin alludere to play, sport, joke, jest,
from ad- to (see ad-) + ludere to play (see ludicrous). Meaning make an indirect reference, point in
passing is from 1570s. Related: Alluded; alluding.


delude (v.)

c.1400, from Latin deludere to play false; to mock, deceive, from de- down, to one's detriment (see
de-) + ludere to play (see ludicrous). Related: Deluded; deluding.


frumpy (adj.)

1746, cross-tempered, from frump (n.) bad temper (1660s) and an earlier verb meaning to mock,
browbeat (1550s), of obscure origin, perhaps imitative of a sneer or derisive snort. Sense of sour-
looking, unfashionable is from 1825, but this may be a shortening of frumple to wrinkle, crumple
(late 14c.), from Middle Dutch verrompelen, from ver- completely + rompelen to rumple. Related:
Frumps. See also frump.


desperado (n.)

c.1600, a person in despair, mock-Spanish version of desperate (n.) reckless criminal (1560s),  from
Latin desperatus (see desperation). There was an adjective desperado in Old Spanish, meaning out of
hope, desperate, but apparently it never was used as a noun and it probably has nothing to do with
the English word. Meaning a desperate or reckless man is recorded from 1640s.


illusory (adj.)

1590s, from French illusorie, from Late Latin illusorius ironical, of a mocking character, from
illus-, past participle stem of Latin illudere mock at, literally to play with, from assimilated
form of in- at, upon (see in- (2)) + ludere to play (see ludicrous).


shiver (v.2)

to break in or into many small pieces, c.1200, from the source of shiver (n.). Chiefly in phrase
shiver me timbers (1835), a mock oath attributed in comic fiction to sailors [OED]. My timbers! as a
nautical oath (probably euphemistic) is attested from 1789 (see timber (n.)). Related: Shivered;
shivering.


simulation (n.)

mid-14c., a false show, false profession, from Old French simulation pretence and directly from
Latin simulationem (nominative simulatio) an imitating, feigning, false show, hypocrisy, noun of
action from past participle stem of simulare imitate, from stem of similis like (see similar).
Meaning a model or mock-up for purposes of experiment or training is from 1954.


parhelion (n.)

1640s, from Greek parelion a mock sun, from para- beside (see para- (1)) + helios sun (see sol).


parody (n.)

1590s (first recorded use in English is in Ben Jonson), from or in imitation of Latin parodia
parody, from Greek paroidia burlesque song or poem, from para- beside, parallel to (see para- (1),
in this case, mock-) + oide song, ode (see ode). The meaning poor or feeble imitation is from 1830.
Related: Parodic; parodical.


Bayard (n.)

generic or mock-heroic name for a horse, mid-14c., from Old French Baiard, name of the bay-colored
magic steed given by Charlemagne to Renaud in the legends, from Old French baiart bay-colored (see
bay (adj.)). Also by early 14c. proverbial as a blind person or thing, for now-unknown reasons. The
name later was used attributively of gentlemen of courage and integrity, in this sense from Pierre
du Terrail, seigneur de Bayard (1473-1524), French knight celebrated as Chevalier sans peur et sans
reproche. The surname is perhaps in reference to hair color.


gobbledygook (n.)

also gobbledegook, the overinvolved, pompous talk of officialdom [Klein], 1944, American English,
first used by U.S. Rep. Maury Maverick, D.-Texas, (1895-1954), a grandson of the original maverick
and chairman of U.S. Smaller War Plants Corporation during World War II. First used in a memo dated
March 30, 1944, banning gobbledygook language and mock-threateaning, anyone using the words
activation or implementation will be shot. Maverick said he made up the word in imitation of turkey
noise. Another word for it, coined about the same time, was bafflegab (1952).


illusion (n.)

mid-14c., act of deception, from Old French illusion a mocking, deceit, deception (12c.), from Latin
illusionem (nominative illusio) a mocking, jesting, irony, from illudere mock at, literally to play
with, from assimilated form of in- at, upon (see in- (2)) + ludere to play (see ludicrous). Sense of
deceptive appearance developed in Church Latin and was attested in English by late 14c. Related:
Illusioned full of illusions (1920).


scoff (v.)

mid-14c., jest, make light of something; mid-15c., make fun of, mock, from the noun meaning
contemptuous ridicule (c.1300), from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse skaup, skop mockery,
ridicule, Middle Danish skof jest, mockery; perhaps from Proto-Germanic *skub-, *skuf- (cognates:
Old English scop poet, Old High German scoph fiction, sport, jest, derision), from PIE *skeubh- to
shove (see shove (v.)).


hobby (n.)

late 13c., hobyn, small horse, pony, later mock horse used in the morris dance, and c.1550 child's
toy riding horse, which led to hobby-horse in a transferred sense of favorite pastime or avocation,
first recorded 1670s, shortened to hobby by 1816. The connecting notion being activity that doesn't
go anywhere. Probably originally a proper name for a horse (see dobbin), a diminutive of Robert or
Robin. The original hobbyhorse was a Tourney Horse, a wooden or basketwork frame worn around the
waist and held on with shoulder straps, with a fake tail and horse head attached, so the wearer
appears to be riding a horse. These were part of church and civic celebrations at Midsummer and New
Year's throughout England.


signify (v.)

late 13c., be a sign of, indicate, mean, from Old French signifier (12c.), from Latin significare to
make signs, show by signs, point out, express; mean, signify; foreshadow, portend, from significus
(adj.), from signum sign (see sign (n.)) + root of facere to make (see factitious). Intransitive
sense of to be of importance is attested from 1660s. Meaning engage in mock-hostile banter is
American English black slang first recorded 1932.    ...'signifying,' which in Harlemese means
making a series of oblique remarks apparently addressed to no one in particular, but unmistakable in
intention in such a close-knit circle. [Down Beat, March 7, 1968]


doughty (adj.)

Old English dohtig competent, good, valiant, from dyhtig strong, related to dugan to be fit, be
able, be strong, and influenced by its past participle, dohte.    All from Proto-Germanic *duhtiz-
(cognates: Middle High German t&uuml;htec, German t&uuml;chtig, Middle Dutch duchtich), from PIE
*dheugh- to be fit, be of use, proper (cognates: German Tugend virtue, Greek teukhein to make ready,
Irish dual becoming, fit, Russian du&#382;ij strong, robust). Rare after 17c.; in deliberately
archaic or mock-heroic use since c.1800. If it had survived, its modern form would be dighty.


jabroni (n.)

c.2000, professional wrestling slang for one whose main purpose is to make the better-known
wrestlers of the organization look good; he or she does this by losing to them. More commonly known
as a jobber (though some enthusiasts claim there is a difference), and perhaps a mock-Italianized
form of that word (but compare jaboney naive person, immigrant, hoodlum, of unknown origin, American
English, in use c.1990).   <b>Jobber</b> -- A performer who regularly loses on television and
doesn't receive much if any push. A comparable term for such a performer is jabroni, which is a
favorite catch-phrase of Dwayne The Rock Johnson. To soften the blow of such labels, some wrestling
promotions refer to jobbers as enhancement talent. Carpenter was the phrase used by earlier
generations. [The Professional Wrestlers' Instructional and Workout Guide, 2005]


trump (v.2)

fabricate, devise, 1690s, from trump deceive, cheat (1510s), from Middle English trumpen (late
14c.), from Old French tromper to deceive, of uncertain origin. Apparently from se tromper de to
mock, from Old French tromper to blow a trumpet. Brachet explains this as to play the horn, alluding
to quacks and mountebanks, who attracted the public by blowing a horn, and then cheated them into
buying .... The Hindley Old French dictionary has baillier la trompe blow the trumpet as act the
fool, and Donkin connects it rather to trombe waterspout, on the notion of turning (someone) around.
Connection with triumph also has been proposed. Related: Trumped; trumping. Trumped up false,
concocted first recorded 1728.


scorn (n.)

c.1200, a shortening of Old French escarn mockery, derision, contempt, a common Romanic word
(Spanish escarnio, Italian scherno) of Germanic origin, from Proto-Germanic *skarnjan mock, deride
(cognates: Old High German skern mockery, jest, sport, Middle High German scherzen to jump with
joy).    Probably influenced by Old French escorne affront, disgrace, which is a back-formation from
escorner, literally to break off (someone's) horns, from Vulgar Latin *excornare (source of Italian
scornare treat with contempt), from Latin ex- without (see ex-) + cornu horn (see horn (n.)).


wise (adj.)

Old English wis learned, sagacious, cunning; sane; prudent, discreet; experienced; having the power
of discerning and judging rightly, from Proto-Germanic *wissaz (cognates: Old Saxon, Old Frisian
wis, Old Norse viss, Dutch wijs, German weise wise), from past participle adjective *wittos of PIE
root *weid- to see, hence to know (see vision). Modern slang meaning aware, cunning first attested
1896. Related to the source of Old English witan to know, wit.  A wise man has no extensive
knowledge; He who has extensive knowledge is not a wise man. [Lao-tzu, Tao te Ching, c.550 B.C.E.]
Wise man was in Old English. Wise guy is attested from 1896, American English; wise-ass (n.) by
1966, American English (probably a literal sense is intended by the phrase in the 1607 comedy
Westward Hoe by Dekker and Webster). Wisenheimer, with mock German or Yiddish surname suffix, first
recorded 1904.


geek (n.)

sideshow freak, 1916, U.S. carnival and circus slang, perhaps a variant of geck a fool, dupe,
simpleton (1510s), apparently from Low German geck, from an imitative verb found in North Sea
Germanic and Scandinavian meaning to croak, cackle, and also to mock, cheat. The modern form and the
popular use with reference to circus sideshow wild men is from 1946, in William Lindsay Gresham's
novel Nightmare Alley (made into a film in 1947 starring Tyrone Power).    An ordinary geek doesn't
actually eat snakes, just bites off chunks of 'em, chicken heads and rats. [Arthur H. Lewis,
Carnival, 1970]    By c.1983, used in teenager slang in reference to peers who lacked social graces
but were obsessed with new technology and computers (such as the Anthony Michael Hall character in
1984's Sixteen Candles).   <b>geek out</b> vi. To temporarily enter techno-nerd mode while in a non-
hackish context, for example at parties held near computer equipment. [Eric S. Raymond, The New
Hacker's Dictionary, 1996]


