mode (n.2)

current fashion, 1640s, from French mode manner, fashion, style (15c.), from Latin modus manner (see
mode (n.1)).


mode (n.1)

manner, late 14c., kind of musical scale, from Latin modus measure, extent, quantity; proper
measure, rhythm, song; a way, manner, fashion, style (in Late Latin also mood in grammar and logic),
from PIE root *med- to measure, limit, consider, advise, take appropriate measures (see medical).
Meaning manner in which a thing is done first recorded 1660s.


modesty (n.)

1530s, freedom from exaggeration, self-control, from Middle French modestie or directly from Latin
modestia moderation, sense of honor, correctness of conduct, from modestus moderate, keeping
measure, sober, gentle, temperate, from modus measure, manner (see mode (n.1)). Meaning quality of
having a moderate opinion of oneself is from 1550s; that of womanly propriety is from 1560s.   La
pudeur donne des plaisirs bien flatteurs &#224; l'amant: elle lui fait sentir quelles lois l'on
transgresse pour lui;  (Modesty both pleases and flatters a lover, for it lays stress on the laws
which are being transgressed for his sake.) [Stendhal de l'Amour, 1822]


modern (adj.)

c.1500, now existing; 1580s, of or pertaining to present or recent times; from Middle French moderne
(15c.) and directly from Late Latin modernus modern (Priscian, Cassiodorus), from Latin modo just
now, in a (certain) manner, from modo (adv.) to the measure, ablative of modus manner, measure (see
mode (n.1)). Extended form modern-day attested from 1909.    In Shakespeare, often with a sense of
every-day, ordinary, commonplace. Slang abbreviation mod first attested 1960. Modern art is from
1807 (by contrast to ancient); modern dance first attested 1912; first record of modern jazz is from
1954. Modern conveniences first recorded 1926.


model (n.)

1570s, likeness made to scale; architect's set of designs, from Middle French modelle (16c., Modern
French mod&egrave;le), from Italian modello a model, mold, from Vulgar Latin *modellus, from Latin
modulus a small measure, standard, diminutive of modus manner, measure (see mode (n.1)).    Sense of
thing or person to be imitated is 1630s. Meaning motor vehicle of a particular design is from 1900
(such as Model T, 1908; Ford's other early models included C, F, and B). Sense of artist's model is
first recorded 1690s; that of fashion model is from 1904. German, Swedish modell, Dutch, Danish
model are from French or Italian.


a la mode

1640s, from French &agrave; la mode (15c.), literally in the fashion (see mode (n.2)). In 17c.,
sometimes nativized as all-a-mode. Cookery sense of a dessert served with ice cream is 1903,
American English.


modal (adj.)

1560s, term in logic, from Middle French modal and directly from Medieval Latin modalis of or
pertaining to a mode, from Latin modus measure, manner, mode (see mode (n.1)). Musical sense is from
1590s.


style (n.)

early 14c., stile, writing instrument, pen, stylus; piece of written discourse, a narrative,
treatise; also characteristic rhetorical mode of an author, manner or mode of expression, and way of
life, manner, behavior, conduct, from Old French stile, estile style, fashion, manner; a stake,
pale, from Latin stilus stake, instrument for writing, manner of writing, mode of expression,
perhaps from the same source as stick (v.)). Spelling modified incorrectly by influence of Greek
stylos pillar, which probably is not directly related. As distinguished from substance, 1570s.
Meaning mode of dress is from 1814.


ton (n.2)

prevailing mode, style, fashionable ways, 1769, from French ton (see tone (n.)).


modus operandi (n.)

way of doing or accomplishing, 1650s, Latin, literally mode of operating (see modus). Abbreviation
m.o. is attested from 1955.


outmoded (adj.)

no longer in fashion, out of date, 1894, from out + mode (q.v.); perhaps formed on model of French
d&eacute;moder.


rut (n.1)

narrow track worn or cut in the ground, 1570s, probably from Middle English route (see route (n.));
though OED finds this improbable. Metaphoric meaning narrow, monotonous routine; habitual mode of
behavior first attested 1839.


modist (n.)

follower of fashion, 1837, from mode (n.2) + -ist.


vocalization (n.)

1842, action of vocalizing; 1855, mode or manner of vocalizing; from French vocalisation (1835) or
else formed in English from vocalize + -ation.


morphosis (n.)

mode of formation, Modern Latin, from Greek morphosis a forming, shaping, from morphe form, shape;
outward appearance (see Morpheus).


mody (adj.)

fashionable, 1701, from mode (n.2) + -y (2).


dissipation (n.)

early 15c., act of scattering, from Latin dissipationem (nominative dissipatio), noun of action from
past participle stem of dissipare (see dissipate). Meaning intemperate mode of living is from 1784.


inchworm (n.)

1844, American English, from inch (v.) + worm (n.). Other old names for it included loaper
caterpiller and surveyor, all from its mode of progress.


modish (adj.)

1650s, from mode (n.2) + -ish. Very common in 17-18 c.; now somewhat arch[aic]. [OED].


jussive

grammatical mode expressing command, 1846, from Latin iuss-, past participle stem of iubere to bid,
command, from PIE *yeudh- to move violently, fight; + -ive.


mood (n.2)

grammatical form indicating the function of a verb, 1560s, an alteration of mode (n.1), but the
grammatical and musical (1590s) usages of it influenced the meaning of mood (n.1) in phrases such as
light-hearted mood.


ornithopter (n.)

1908, from French ornithopt&egrave;re (1908), a machine designed to fly be mechanical flapping of
wings, from ornitho- + Greek pteron wing (see pterodactyl). A mode of flight considered promising at
least since Leonardo's day.


raga (n.)

1788, from Sanskrit raga-s harmony, melody, mode in music, literally color, mood, related to rajyati
it is dyed, from PIE *reg- (3) to dye (cognates: Greek rhegos blanket, rug).


Jamesian (adj.)

of or in the mode of James, 1875 in reference to William James (1842-1910) U.S. philosopher and
exponent of pragmatism; 1905 in reference to his brother Henry James (1843-1916), U.S. expatriate
novelist.


pronunciation (n.)

early 15c., mode in which a word is pronounced, from Middle French prononciation and directly from
Latin pronuntiationem (nominative pronuntiatio) act of speaking, utterance, delivery, also
proclamation, public declaration, noun of action from past participle stem of pronuntiare announce
(see pronounce).


Anschauung (n.)

sense-perception, c.1856, from German Anschauung mode of view, literally looking at, from anschauen
to look at, from Middle High German aneschouwen (related to show (v.)). A term in Kantian
philosophy.


Phrygian

late 15c., native of Phrygia, region in ancient Asia Minor; Phrygian mode in ancient Greek music
theory was held to be of a warlike character. Phrygian cap (1796) was the type adopted by freed
slaves in Roman times, and subsequently identified as the cap of Liberty.


Dorian (adj.)

c.1600, in reference to the mode of ancient Greek music, literally of Doris, from Greek Doris,
district in central Greece, traditionally named for Doros, legendary ancestor of the Dorians, whose
name is probably related to doron gift (see date (n.1)).


art (n.)

early 13c., skill as a result of learning or practice, from Old French art (10c.), from Latin artem
(nominative ars) work of art; practical skill; a business, craft, from PIE *ar-ti- (cognates:
Sanskrit rtih manner, mode; Greek arti just, artios complete, suitable, artizein to prepare; Latin
artus joint; Armenian arnam make; German art manner, mode), from root *ar- fit together, join (see
arm (n.1)).    In Middle English usually with a sense of skill in scholarship and learning (c.1300),
especially in the seven sciences, or liberal arts. This sense remains in Bachelor of Arts, etc.
Meaning human workmanship (as opposed to nature) is from late 14c. Sense of cunning and trickery
first attested c.1600. Meaning skill in creative arts is first recorded 1610s; especially of
painting, sculpture, etc., from 1660s. Broader sense of the word remains in artless.   Fine arts,
those which appeal to the mind and the imagination first recorded 1767. Expression art for art's
sake (1824) translates French l'art pour l'art. First record of art critic is from 1847. Arts and
crafts decorative design and handcraft first attested in the Arts and Crafts Exhibition Society,
founded in London, 1888.    Supreme art is a traditional statement of certain heroic and religious
truths, passed on from age to age, modified by individual genius, but never abandoned. The revolt of
individualism came because the tradition had become degraded, or rather because a spurious copy had
been accepted in its stead. [William Butler Yeats]


module (n.)

1580s, allotted measure, from Middle French module (1540s) or directly from Latin modulus small
measure, diminutive of modus measure, manner (see mode (n.1)). Meaning interchangeable part first
recorded 1955; that of separate section of a spacecraft is from 1961.


modicum (n.)

small quantity or portion, late 15c., Scottish, from Latin modicum a little, noun use of neuter of
modicus moderate, having a proper measure; ordinary, scanty, small, few, from modus measure, manner
(see mode (n.1)).


reciprocation (n.)

1520s, mode of expression; 1560s, act of reciprocating, from Latin reciprocationem (nominative
reciprocatio) retrogression, alternation, ebb, noun of action from past participle stem of
reciprocare move back, turn back, also come and go, move back and forth; from reciprocus (see
reciprocal).


lock-step (n.)

1802, in military writing, for a very tight style of mass marching, from lock (n.) + step (n.).
Lock-step. A mode of marching by a body of men going one after another as closely as possible, in
which the leg of each moves at the same time with and closely follows the corresponding leg of the
person directly before him. [Thomas Wilhelm, Military Dictionary and Gazetteer, Philadelphia, 1881]
Figurative use by 1836.


modus (n.)

way in which anything is done, 1640s, from Latin modus (plural modi), literally a measure, extent,
quantity; manner (see mode (n.1)). Especially in modus operandi and modus vivendi.


tack (v.2)

turn a ship's course toward the wind at an angle, 1550s, from tack (n.1) in the ship-rigging sense
(the ropes were used to move the vessel temporarily to one side or another of its general line of
course, to take advantage of a side-wind); hence tack (n.) course of conduct or mode of action
suited to some purpose (1670s), from figurative use of the verb (1630s). Related: Tacked; tacking.


modify (v.)

late 14c., from Old French modifier (14c.), from Latin modificare to limit, measure off, restrain,
from modus measure, manner (see mode (n.1)) + root of facere to make (see factitious). Related:
Modified; modifying.


oration (n.)

late 14c., prayer, from Late Latin orationem (nominative oratio) a speaking, speech, discourse;
language, faculty of speech, mode of expressing; prayer, noun of action from past participle stem of
Latin orare to pray, plead, speak before an assembly (see orator). Meaning formal speech, discourse
first recorded c.1500.


filet (n.)

1841 in cookery, reborrowing from French of the same word that had been taken 14c. and anglicized as
fillet (q.v.). Filet mignon is attested as a French word in English from 1815.  The 'Chateaubriand,'
the 'entrec&ocirc;te,' and the 'filet mignon' (of mutton), with other forms, are all due to the more
enlarged sympathies of the French butcher for what is perfect. We must entirely change the mode of
cutting up the carcase before we can arrive at the same perfection in form of meat purchasable, and
as that is hopeless, so is it useless to insist further on the subject on behalf of the public. [The
Kitchen and the Cellar, Quarterly Review, April 1877]


commode (n.)

1786, chest of drawers, earlier (1680s) name of a type of fashionable ladies' headdress, from French
commode, noun use of adjective meaning convenient, suitable, from Latin commodus proper, fit,
appropriate, convenient, satisfactory, from com-, intensive prefix (see com-), + modus measure,
manner (see mode (n.1)). Meaning chair housing a chamber pot first attested 1851 from notion of
convenience.


titties (n.)

1746, tetties (plural), a nursery or dialect diminutive variant of teats (see teat).   Margery.
Come, be quite;--be quite, es zey, a grabbling o' wone's Tetties.---Es wont ha' ma Tetties a
grabbled zo ; ner es wont be mullad and foulad.---Stand azide; come, gi' o'er. [Exmoor Courtship,
or, A Suitoring Discourse, in the Devonshire Dialect and Mode, near the forest of Exmoor, 1746]


quasimodo (n.)

Low Sunday, 1706, Quasimodo Sunday, from Latin quasi modo, first words of introit for the first
Sunday after Easter: quasi modo geniti infantes as newborn babes (1 Pet. ii:2). The hunchback in
Victor Hugo's novel was supposed to have been abandoned as an infant at Notre Dame on this day,
hence his name. For first element, see quasi; for second see mode (n.1).


costume (n.)

1715, style of dress, an art term, from French costume (17c.), from Italian costume fashion, habit,
from Latin consuetudinem (nominative consuetudo) custom, habit, usage. Essentially the same word as
custom but arriving by a different etymology. From customary clothes of the particular period in
which the scene is laid, meaning broadened by 1818 to any defined mode of dress. Costume jewelry is
first attested 1933.


Scilly

isles off Cornwall, of unknown origin. Pliny has Silumnus, Silimnis. Perhaps connected with the
Roman god Sulis (compare Aquae sulis Bath). The -y might be Old Norse ey island The -c- added
16c.-17c. [A]bout the only certain thing that can be said is that the c of the modern spelling is
not original but was added for distinction from ModE silly as this word developed in meaning from
'happy, blissful' to 'foolish.' [Victor Watts, Cambridge Dictionary of English Place-Names, 2004].


scrutiny (n.)

early 15c., a vote to choose someone to decide a question, from Late Latin scrutinium a search,
inquiry (in Medieval Latin, a mode of election by ballot), from Latin scrutari to examine,
investigate, search, from PIE root *skreu- to cut; cutting tool (see shred (n.)). Meaning close
examination first recorded c.1600. Perhaps the original notion of the Latin word is to search
through trash, via scruta (plural) trash, rags (shreds); or the original sense might be to cut into,
scratch.


plagal (adj.)

1590s, from Medieval Latin plagalis, from plaga the plagal mode, probably from plagius, from
Medieval Greek plagius plagal, in classical Greek oblique, from plagos side (see plagio-).


jargon (n.)

mid-14c., unintelligible talk, gibberish; chattering, jabbering, from Old French jargon a chattering
(of birds), also language, speech, especially idle talk; thieves' Latin. Ultimately of echoic origin
(compare Latin garrire to chatter, English gargle). Often applied to something the speaker does not
understand, hence meaning mode of speech full of unfamiliar terms (1650s). Middle English also had
it as a verb, jargounen to chatter (late 14c.), from French.


mold (n.1)

also mould, hollow shape, c.1200, originally fashion, form; nature, native constitution, character,
metathesized from Old French modle model, plan, copy; way, manner (12c., Modern French moule), from
Latin modulum (nominative modulus) measure, model, diminutive of modus manner (see mode (1)). From
c.1300 as pattern or model by which something is shaped or made. To break the mold render impossible
the creation of another is from 1560s.


beg (v.)

c.1200, perhaps from Old English bedecian to beg, from Proto-Germanic *beth-; or possibly from
Anglo-French begger, from Old French begart (see beggar). The Old English word for beg was
w&aelig;dlian, from w&aelig;dl poverty. Of trained dogs, 1816.    As a courteous mode of asking (beg
pardon, etc.), first attested c.1600. To beg the question translates Latin petitio principii, and
means to assume something that hasn't been proven as a basis of one's argument, thus asking one's
opponent to give something unearned, though more of the nature of taking it for granted without
warrant.


accent (n.)

late 14c., particular mode of pronunciation, from Middle French accent, from Old French acent
(13c.), from Latin accentus song added to speech, from ad- to (see ad-) + cantus a singing, past
participle of canere to sing (see chant (v.)). Loan-translation of Greek prosoidia, from pros- to +
oide song, which apparently described the pitch scheme in Greek verse. The decorating sense of
something that emphasizes or highlights is from 1972.


crucify (v.)

c.1300, from Old French crucifer (12c., Modern French crucifier), from Vulgar Latin *crucificare,
from Late Latin crucifigere to fasten to a cross, from cruci, dative of Latin crux cross (see cross
(n.)) + figere fasten (see fix (v.)). An ancient mode of capital punishment considered especially
ignominious by the Romans. Figurative sense of to torment is 1620s. Related: Crucified; crucifying.


