molten (adj.)

late 13c., from archaic past participle of Old English meltian, a class III strong verb (see melt
(v.)).


melt (n.)

1854, molten metal, from melt (v.). In reference to a type of sandwich topped by melted cheese,
1980, American English.


Bessemer

in reference to the process for decarbonizing and desiliconizing pig iron by passing air through the
molten metal, 1856, named for engineer and inventor Sir Harry Bessemer (1813-1898) who invented it.


tektite (n.)

small roundish glass bodies, probably of meteoric origin, 1909, from German tektit (Suess, 1900),
from Greek tektos molten, from tekein to melt.


gutter (v.)

late 14c., to make or run in channels, from gutter (n.). In reference to candles (1706) it is from
the channel that forms on the side as the molten wax flows off. Related: Guttered; guttering.


puddle (v.)

to dabble in water, poke in mud, mid-15c., from puddle (n.); extended sense in iron manufacture is
turn and stir (molten iron) in a furnace. Related: Puddled; puddling.


lede (n.)

by 1965, alternative spelling of lead (n.2) in the newspaper journalism sense (see lead (v.)), to
distinguish this sense from other possible meanings of the written word, perhaps especially the
molten lead (n.1) used in typesetting machines.


projection (n.)

late 15c., in alchemy, transmutation by casting a powder on molten metal; 1550s in the
cartographical sense drawing of a map or chart according to scale, from Middle French projection,
from Latin proiectionem (nominative proiectio), from past participle stem of proicere (see project
(n.)). From 1590s as action of projecting.


cliche (n.)

1825, electrotype, stereotype, from French clich&eacute;, a technical word in printer's jargon for
stereotype block, noun use of past participle of clicher to click (18c.), supposedly echoic of the
sound of a mold striking molten metal. Figurative extension to trite phrase, worn-out expression is
first attested 1888, following the course of stereotype. Related: Cliched (1928).


rabble (n.2)

iron bar for stirring molten metal, 1864, from French r&#226;ble, from Old French roable, from Latin
rutabulum rake, fire shovel, from ruere  to rake up (perhaps cognate with Lithuanian raju to pluck
out, German roden to root out).


cast iron (n.)

1660s, from cast (past participle adjective) made by melting and being left to harden in a mold
(1530s), from past participle of cast (v.) in sense to throw something in a particular way (c.1300),
especially form metal into a shape by pouring it molten (1510s). From 1690s as an adjective, cast-
iron.


magma (n.)

mid-15c., dregs, from Latin magma dregs of an ointment, from Greek magma thick unguent, ointment,
from root of  massein to knead, mold, from PIE *mag- to knead (see macerate). Geological meaning
molten rock is 1859. Related: Magmalic.


lava (n.)

1750, from Italian (Neapolitan or Calabrian dialect) lava torrent, stream, traditionally from Latin
lavare to wash (see lave). Originally applied in Italian to flash flood rivulets after downpours,
then to streams of molten rock from Vesuvius. Alternative etymology is from Latin labes a fall, from
labi to fall. Lava lamp is attested from 1965, also lava light (reg. U.S., 1968, as Lava Lite).


thaw (v.)

Old English &thorn;awian (transitive), from Proto-Germanic *thawon- (cognates: Old Norse
&thorn;eyja, Middle Low German doien, Dutch dooien, Old High German douwen, German tauen to thaw),
from PIE root *ta- to melt, dissolve (cognates: Sanskrit toyam water, Ossetic thayun to thaw, Welsh
tawadd molten, Doric Greek takein to melt, waste, be consumed, Old Irish tam pestilence, Latin tabes
a melting, wasting away, putrefaction, Old Church Slavonic tajati to melt). Intransitive sense from
early 14c. Related: Thawed; thawing.


melt (v.)

Old English meltan become liquid, consume by fire, burn up (class III strong verb; past tense mealt,
past participle molten), from Proto-Germanic *meltanan; fused with Old English gem&aelig;ltan
(Anglian), gemyltan (West Saxon) make liquid, from Proto-Germanic *gamaltijan (cognates: Old Norse
melta to digest), both from PIE *meldh-, (cognates: Sanskrit mrduh soft, mild, Greek meldein to
melt, make liquid, Latin mollis soft, mild), from root *mel- soft, with derivatives referring to
soft or softened (especially ground) materials (see mild). Figurative use by c.1200. Related:
Melted; melting.    Of food, to melt in (one's) mouth is from 1690s. Melting pot is from 1540s;
figurative use from 1855; popularized with reference to America by play The Melting Pot by Israel
Zangwill (1908).


