monastic (adj.)

mid-15c., from Middle French monastique monkish, monastic, or directly from Late Latin monasticus,
from Ecclesiastical Greek monastikos solitary, pertaining to a monk, from Greek monazein to live
alone (see monastery). Related: Monastical (c.1400).


monasticism (n.)

1795, from monastic + -ism.


Cistercian (adj.)

c.1600, pertaining to the Cistercian order of monks, with -an + Medieval Latin Cistercium (French
C&icirc;teaux), site of an abbey near Dijon, where the monastic order was founded 1098 by Robert of
Molesme. As a noun, monk of the Cistercian order, from 1610s.


religion (n.)

c.1200, state of life bound by monastic vows, also conduct indicating a belief in a divine power,
from Anglo-French religiun (11c.), Old French religion piety, devotion; religious community, and
directly from Latin religionem (nominative religio) respect for what is sacred, reverence for the
gods; conscientiousness, sense of right, moral obligation; fear of the gods; divine service,
religious observance; a religion, a faith, a mode of worship, cult; sanctity, holiness, in Late
Latin monastic life (5c.).    According to Cicero derived from relegere go through again (in reading
or in thought), from re- again (see re-) + legere read (see lecture (n.)). However, popular
etymology among the later ancients (Servius, Lactantius, Augustine) and the interpretation of many
modern writers connects it with religare to bind fast (see rely), via notion of place an obligation
on, or bond between humans and gods. In that case, the re- would be intensive. Another possible
origin is religiens careful, opposite of negligens. In English, meaning particular system of faith
is recorded from c.1300; sense of recognition of and allegiance in manner of life (perceived as
justly due) to a higher, unseen power or powers is from 1530s.   To hold, therefore, that there is
no difference in matters of religion between forms that are unlike each other, and even contrary to
each other, most clearly leads in the end to the rejection of all religion in both theory and
practice. And this is the same thing as atheism, however it may differ from it in name. [Pope Leo
XIII, Immortale Dei, 1885]


cell (n.)

early 12c., small monastery, subordinate monastery (from Medieval Latin in this sense), later small
room for a monk or a nun in a monastic establishment; a hermit's dwelling (c.1300), from Latin cella
small room, store room, hut, related to Latin celare to hide, conceal.    The Latin word represents
PIE root *kel- (2) to cover, conceal (cognates: Sanskrit cala hut, house, hall; Greek kalia hut,
nest, kalyptein to cover, koleon sheath, kelyphos shell, husk; Latin clam secret; Old Irish cuile
cellar, celim hide, Middle Irish cul defense, shelter; Gothic hulistr covering, Old English heolstor
lurking-hole, cave, covering, Gothic huljan cover over, hulundi hole, hilms helmet, halja hell, Old
English hol cave, holu husk, pod).    Sense of monastic rooms extended to prison rooms (1722). Used
in 14c., figuratively, of brain compartments; used in biology by 17c. of various cavities (wood
structure, segments of fruit, bee combs), gradually focusing to the modern sense of basic structure
of living organisms (which OED dates to 1845).    Electric battery sense is from 1828, based on
original form. Meaning small group of people working within a larger organization is from 1925. Cell
body is from 1851; cell division from 1846; cell membrane from 1837 (but cellular membrane is 1732);
cell wall from 1842.


active (adj.)

mid-14c., given to worldly activity (opposed to contemplative or monastic), from Old French actif
(12c.) or directly from Latin activus, from actus (see act (n.)). As capable of acting (opposed to
passive), from late 14c. Meaning energetic, lively is from 1590s; that of working, effective, in
operation is from 1640s. Active voice is recorded from 1765 (grammatical use of active dates from
mid-15c.).


larder (n.)

c.1300, supply of salt pork, bacon, and other meats, later in reference to the room for processing
and storing such (late 14c.), from Anglo-French larder, Old French lardier a place for meats, from
Medieval Latin lardarium a room for meats, from Latin lardum lard, bacon (see lard (n.)). Meaning
department of the royal household or of a monastic house in charge of stored meats is mid-15c.
Surname Lardner person in charge of a larder is attested from mid-12c.


kitchen (n.)

c.1200, from Old English cycene, from Proto-Germanic *kokina (cognates: Middle Dutch c&ouml;kene,
Old High German chuhhina, German K&uuml;che, Danish kj&oslash;kken), probably borrowed from Vulgar
Latin *cocina (source also of French cuisine, Spanish cocina), variant of Latin coquina kitchen,
from fem. of coquinus of cooks, from coquus cook, from coquere to cook (see cook (n.)).    The Old
English word might be directly from Vulgar Latin. Kitchen cabinet informal but powerful set of
advisors is American English slang, 1832, originally in reference to administration of President
Andrew Jackson. Kitchen midden (1863) in archaeology translates Danish kj&oslash;kken
m&oslash;dding. Surname Kitchener (one in charge of a monastic kitchen) is from early 14c. Old
English also had cycen&#240;enung service in the kitchen.


beer (n.)

Old English beor strong drink, beer, mead, a word of much-disputed and ambiguous origin, cognate
with Old Frisian biar, Middle Dutch and Dutch bier, Old High German bior, German Bier.    Probably a
6c. West Germanic monastic borrowing of Vulgar Latin biber a drink, beverage (from Latin infinitive
bibere to drink; see imbibe). Another suggestion is that it comes from Proto-Germanic *beuwoz-, from
*beuwo- barley. The native Germanic word for the beverage was the one that yielded ale (q.v.).
Beer was a common drink among most of the European peoples, as well as in Egypt and Mesopotamia, but
was known to the Greeks and Romans only as an exotic product. [Buck]    They did have words for it,
however. Greek brytos, used in reference to Thracian or Phrygian brews, was related to Old English
breowan brew; Latin zythum is from Greek zythos, first used of Egyptian beer and treated as an
Egyptian word but perhaps truly Greek and related to zyme leaven. French bi&egrave;re is from
Germanic. Spanish cerveza is from Latin cervesia beer, perhaps related to Latin cremor thick broth.
Old Church Slavonic pivo, source of the general Slavic word for beer, is originally a drink (compare
Old Church Slavonic piti drink). French bi&egrave;re is a 16c. borrowing from German. U.S. slang
beer goggles, through which every potential romantic partner looks desirable, is from 1986.


