monetary (adj.)

pertaining to money, 1802, from Late Latin monetarius pertaining to money, originally of a mint,
from Latin moneta mint, coinage (see money). Related: Monetarily.


leu (n.)

monetary unit of Romania, introduced 1867, literally lion. Monetary names in the Balkans often
translate as lion because Dutch gold coins stamped with lions circulated widely in the region in the
17c. and the word for lion came to be a word for money in some languages in the region.


Euro (n.)

name for the basic monetary unit of a pan-European currency, from 1996.


lev (n.)

monetary unit of Bulgaria, introduced 1881, literally lion (see leu).


franc (n.)

French coin, late 14c., from Medieval Latin Francorum Rex King of the Franks, inscribed on gold
coins first made during the reign of Jean le Bon (1350-64). An official monetary unit of France from
1795.


sucre (n.)

monetary unit of Ecuador, 1886, named for Antonio Jos&eacute; de Sucre (1795-1830), Venezuelan
general and liberator of Ecuador.


worth (n.)

Old English weor&thorn; value, price, price paid; worth, worthiness, merit; equivalent value amount,
monetary value, from worth (adj.). From c.1200 as excellence, nobility.


monetarist (adj.)

1914, from monetary + -ist. Related Monetarism (1963).


yen (n.1)

Japanese monetary unit, 1875, from Japanese yen, from Chinese yuan round, round object, circle,
dollar.


undervalue (v.)

1590s, to rate as inferior in value (to), from under + value (v.). Sense of to estimate or esteem
too low is recorded from 1610s. Meaning to rate at too low a monetary value is attested from 1620s.
Related: Undervalued; undervaluing.


deposit (n.)

1620s, from Latin depositum, from deponere (see deposit (v.)). Geological sense is from 1781;
monetary sense is from 1737.


lira (n.)

Italian monetary unit, 1610s, from Italian lira, literally pound, from Latin libra (see Libra).


zloty (n.)

monetary unit of Poland, 1842, from Polish z&#322;oty, literally of gold, from z&#322;oto gold,
related to Russian zoloto, Czech zlato gold (see gold).


ruble (n.)

unit of the Russian monetary system, 1550s, via French rouble, from Russian rubl', perhaps from Old
Russian rubiti to chop, cut, hew, so called because the original metallic currency of Russia (14c.)
consisted of silver bars, from which the necessary amount was cut off; from Proto-Slavic *rub-, from
PIE root *reub-, *reup- to snatch (see rip (v.)).


denomination (n.)

late 14c., a naming, act of giving a name to, from Old French denominacion nominating, naming, from
Latin denominationem (nominative denominatio) a calling by anything other than the proper name,
metonymy, from denominare to name, from de- completely (see de-) + nominare to name (see nominate).
Meaning a class is from mid-15c. Monetary sense is 1650s; meaning religious sect is 1716.


inflation (n.)

mid-14c., swelling caused by gathering of 'wind' in the body; flatulence; figuratively, outbursts of
pride, from Latin inflationem (nominative inflatio) a puffing up; flatulence, noun of action from
past participle stem of inflare blow into, puff up, from in- into (see in- (2)) + flare to blow (see
blow (v.1)). Monetary sense of enlargement of prices (originally by an increase in the amount of
money in circulation) first recorded 1838 in American English.


piaster (n.)

also piastre, 1620s, Spanish dollar, piece of eight, also used as the name of a monetary unit and
coin of Turkey (1610s, in Turkish called ghurush, but originally debased Spanish dollars), from
French piastre, from Italian piastra thin metal plate, short for impiastro plaster, from Latin
emplastrum, from Greek emplastron (see plaster). The Italian word was applied to the Spanish silver
peso, later to the Turkish coin based on it. Compare shinplaster.


cash (n.)

1590s, money box; also money in hand, coin, from Middle French caisse money box (16c.), from
Proven&ccedil;al caissa or Italian cassa, from Latin capsa box (see case (n.2)); originally the
money box, but the secondary sense of the money in it became sole meaning 18c. Cash crop is attested
from 1831; cash flow from 1954; the mechanical cash register from 1878.    Like many financial terms
in English (bankrupt, etc.), ultimately from Italian. Not related to (but influencing the form of)
the colonial British cash Indian monetary system, Chinese coin, etc., which is from Tamil kasu,
Sanskrit karsha, Sinhalese kasi.


crown (n.)

early 12c., royal crown, from Anglo-French coroune, Old French corone (13c., Modern French
couronne), from Latin corona crown, originally wreath, garland, related to Greek korone anything
curved, kind of crown. Old English used corona, directly from Latin.    Extended to coins bearing
the imprint of a crown (early 15c.), especially the British silver 5-shilling piece. Also monetary
units in Iceland, Sweden (krona), Norway, Denmark (krone), and formerly in German Empire and
Austria-Hungary (krone). Meaning top of the skull is from c.1300. Crown-prince is 1791, a
translation of German kronprinz.


talent (n.)

late 13c., inclination, disposition, will, desire, from Old French talent (12c.), from Medieval
Latin talenta, plural of talentum inclination, leaning, will, desire (11c.), in classical Latin
balance, weight; sum of money, from Greek talanton a balance, pair of scales, hence weight, definite
weight, anything weighed, and in later times sum of money, from PIE *tele- to lift, support, weigh,
with derivatives referring to measured weights and thence money and payment [Watkins]; see extol.
An ancient denomination of weight, originally Babylonian (though the name is Greek), and varying
widely in value among different peoples and at different times. [Century Dictionary]    According to
Liddell &amp; Scott, as a monetary sum, considered to consist of 6,000 drachmae, or, in Attica,
57.75 lbs. of silver. Also borrowed in other Germanic languages and Celtic. Attested in Old English
as talente). The Medieval Latin and common Romanic sense developed from figurative use of the word
in the sense of money. Meaning special natural ability, aptitude, gift committed to one for use and
improvement developed by mid-15c., in part perhaps from figurative sense wealth, but mostly from the
parable of the talents in Matt. xxv:14-30. Meaning persons of ability collectively is from 1856.


dollar (n.)

1550s, from Low German daler, from German taler (1530s, later thaler), abbreviation of
Joachimstaler, literally (gulden) of Joachimstal, coin minted 1519 from silver from mine opened 1516
near Joachimstal, town in Erzgebirge Mountains in northwest Bohemia. German Tal is cognate with
English dale.    The thaler was a large silver coin of varying value in the German states (and a
unit of the German monetary union of 1857-73 equal to three marks); it also served as a currency
unit in Denmark and Sweden. English colonists in America used the word in reference to Spanish
pieces of eight. Continental Congress July 6, 1785, adopted dollar when it set up U.S. currency, on
suggestion of Gouverneur Morris and Thomas Jefferson, because the term was widely known but not
British. But none were circulated until 1794.    When William M. Evarts was Secretary of State he
accompanied Lord Coleridge on an excursion to Mount Vernon. Coleridge remarked that he had heard it
said that Washington, standing on the lawn, could throw a dollar clear across the Potomac. Mr.
Evarts explained that a dollar would go further in those days than now. [Walsh]    Phrase dollars to
doughnuts attested from 1890; dollar diplomacy is from 1910. The dollar sign ($) is said to derive
from the image of the Pillars of Hercules, stamped with a scroll, on the Spanish piece of eight.
However, according to the <b>Bureau of Engraving and Printing</b> of the U.S. Department of the
Treasury:    [T]he most widely accepted explanation is that the symbol is the result of evolution,
independently in different places, of the Mexican or Spanish P's for pesos, or piastres, or pieces
of eight. The theory, derived from a study of old manuscripts, is that the S gradually came to be
written over the P, developing a close equivalent of the $ mark. It was widely used before the
adoption of the United States dollar in 1785.


