mongrel (n.)

late 15c., mixed-breed dog, from obsolete mong mixture, from Old English gemong mingling (base of
among), from Proto-Germanic *mangjan to knead together (see mingle). With pejorative suffix -rel.
Meaning person not of pure race is from 1540s. As an adjective from 1570s.


hybrid (n.)

c.1600, from Latin hybrida, variant of ibrida mongrel, specifically offspring of a tame sow and a
wild boar, of unknown origin but probably from Greek and somehow related to hubris. A rare word
before c.1850. The adjective is attested from 1716.


piebald (adj.)

of two different colors, 1580s, formed from pie (n.2) magpie + bald in its older sense of spotted,
white; in reference to the black-and-white plumage of the magpie. Hence, of mixed character,
mongrel. Technically only of black-and-white colorings.


tyke (n.)

late 14c., cur, mongrel, from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse tik bitch, from Proto-Germanic
*tikk- (cognates: Middle Low German tike). Also applied in Middle English to a low-bred or lazy man.
The meaning child is from 1902, though the word was used in playful reproof from 1894. As a nickname
for a Yorkshireman, from c.1700; Perhaps originally opprobrious; but now accepted and owned [OED].


mestizo (adj.)

1580s, from Spanish mestizo of mixed European and Amerindian parentage, from Late Latin mixticius
mixed, mongrel, from Latin mixtus mixed, past participle of miscere to mix, mingle (see mix (v.)).
Fem. form mestiza is attested from 1580s.


mastiff (n.)

large, powerful breed of dog, early 14c., from Old French mastin great cur, mastiff (Modern French
m&#226;tin) or Proven&ccedil;al mastis, both from Vulgar Latin *mansuetinus domesticated, tame, from
Latin mansuetus tame, gentle (see mansuetude). Probably originally meaning a dog that stays in the
house, thus a guard-dog or watchdog. Form in English perhaps influenced by Old French mestif
mongrel.


blend (v.)

c.1300, blenden, to mix, mingle, stir up a liquid, in northern writers, from or akin to rare Old
English blandan to mix, blondan (Mercian) or Old Norse blanda to mix, or a combination of the two;
from Proto-Germanic *blandan to mix, which comes via a notion of to make cloudy from an extended
Germanic form of the PIE root *bhel- (1) to shine, flash, burn (see bleach (v.); also blind (adj.)).
Compare Old Saxon and Old High German blantan, Gothic blandan, Middle High German blenden to mix;
German Blendling bastard, mongrel, and outside Germanic, Lithuanian blandus troubled, turbid, thick;
Old Church Slavonic blesti to go astray. Figurative use from early 14c. Related: Blended; blending.


yellow (adj.)

Old English geolu, geolwe, yellow, from Proto-Germanic *gelwaz (cognates: Old Saxon, Old High German
gelo, Middle Dutch ghele, Dutch geel, Middle High German gel, German gelb, Old Norse gulr, Swedish
gul yellow), from PIE *ghel- (2) to shine, with derivatives referring to bright materials and gold
(see glass).    Occasionally in Middle English used of a color closer to blue-gray or gray, of frogs
or hazel eyes, and to translate Latin caeruleus, glauco. Also as a noun in Old English. Meaning
light-skinned (of blacks) first recorded 1808. Applied to Asiatics since 1787, though the first
recorded reference is to Turkish words for inhabitants of India. Yellow peril translates German die
gelbe gefahr. Sense of cowardly is 1856, of unknown origin; the color was traditionally associated
rather with jealousy and envy (17c.). Yellow-bellied cowardly is from 1924, probably a semi-rhyming
reduplication of yellow; earlier yellow-belly was a sailor's name for a half-caste (1867) and a
Texas term for Mexican soldiers (1842, based on the color of their uniforms). Yellow dog mongrel is
attested from c.1770; slang sense of contemptible person first recorded 1881. Yellow fever attested
from 1748, American English (jaundice is a symptom).


