morbidity (n.)

1721, from morbid + -ity.


morbid (adj.)

1650s, of the nature of a disease, indicative of a disease, from Latin morbidus diseased, from
morbus sickness, disease, ailment, illness, from root of mori to die, which is possibly from PIE
root *mer- to rub, pound, wear away (cognates: Sanskrit mrnati crushes, bruises; Greek marainein to
consume, exhaust, put out, quench, marasmus consumption). Transferred use, of mental states, is from
1777. Related: Morbidly; morbidness.


premorbid (adj.)

also pre-morbid, 1905, from pre- + morbid.


phobophobia (n.)

morbid dread of being alarmed, 1890; see phobia.


swelling (n.)

tumor, morbid enlargement, Old English; verbal noun from swell (v.).


Werther

love-lorn hero of Goethe's Die Leiden des jungen Werthers (The Sorrows of Young Werther), popular
and influential short novel published in 1774. His name was used as a type of morbid sentimentality.


dipsomania (n.)

1843, morbid craving for alcohol, coined in medical Latin from Greek dipsa thirst (of unknown
origin) + mania.


swell (n.)

c.1200, a morbid swelling, from swell (v.). In reference to a rise of the sea, it is attested from
c.1600; of music, by 1803. The meaning wealthy, elegant person is first recorded 1786, connected to
the now-obsolete sense pompousness, arrogance (1724), both from the notion of puffed-up demeanor or
behavior.


pyrophobia (n.)

morbid fear or fire, 1871, from pyro- + -phobia.


black comedy (n.)

first recorded 1961, from black (adj.) in a figurative sense of morbid; compare French pi&egrave;ce
noire. In a racial sense, from 1921.


-iasis

medical Latin word-forming element meaning process; morbid condition, from Greek -iasis, from aorist
of verbs in -iao, which often express disease.


androphobia (n.)

morbid fear of the male sex (sometimes, rather, of the human race or of crowds), 1844, from andro- +
-phobia. Related: Androphobic.


claustrophilia (n.)

morbid desire to be shut up in a confined space, 1884, from claustro-, abstracted from
claustrophobia, + -philia.


graphomania (n.)

morbid desire for writing, 1840; see -graphy + mania. Related: Graphomaniac (1827).


erotomaniac (n.)

one driven mad by passionate love (sometimes also used in the sense of nymphomaniac), 1858, from
erotomania (1813, defined then as Desperate love; sentimentalism producing morbid feelings), from
comb. form of erotic + mania.


nephrolithiasis (n.)

1837, probably from German, from nephro- + lithos stone (see litho-) + -iasis pathological or morbid
condition.


sitophobia (n.)

morbid aversion to food (or certain foods), 1882, from Greek sitos wheat, corn, meal; food, of
unknown origin, + -phobia. Related: Sitophobe; sitophobic.


Satanophobia (n.)

morbid dread of Satan, 1860, from Satan + -phobia, with connective -o-.


autism (n.)

1912, from German Autismus, coined 1912 by Swiss psychiatrist Paul Bleuler (1857-1939) from comb.
form of Greek autos- self (see auto-) + -ismos suffix of action or of state. The notion is of morbid
self-absorption.


pathological (adj.)

1680s, pertaining to disease, formed in English from pathologic + -al (1). Sense of worthy to be a
subject of pathology, morbid, excessive (as in pathological liar) is attested from 1845. Related:
Pathologically.


self-conscious (adj.)

1680s, aware of one's action, a word of the English Enlightenment (Locke was using it by 1690), from
self- + conscious. Morbid sense of preoccupied with one's own personality is attested from 1834 (in
J.S. Mill). Related: Self-consciously; self-consciousness.


sclerosis (n.)

morbid hardening of the tissue, late 14c., from Medieval Latin sclirosis a hardness, hard tumor,
from Greek sklerosis hardening, from skleros hard (see sclero-). Figurative use by 1954.


ailurophobia (n.)

morbid fear of cats, 1905, from -phobia fear + ailouros cat, of unknown origin. Folk etymology
connects it with aiolos quick-moving + oura tail. Related: Ailurophobe (1914).


tumefaction (n.)

morbid swelling, early 15c., from Medieval Latin tumefaccionem (nominative tumefaccio), noun of
action from Latin tumefactus, from tumescere (see tumescence).


irritation (n.)

early 15c., in reference to sores and morbid swelling, from Middle French irritation or directly
from Latin irritationem (nominative irritatio) incitement, irritation, noun of action from past
participle stem of irritare (see irritate).


marasmus (n.)

wasting away of the body, 1650s, Modern Latin, from Greek marasmos a wasting away, withering, decay,
from marainein to quench, weaken, wither, from PIE root *mer- to rub away, harm (see morbid). Maras
(n.) evidently in the same sense is attested from mid-15c. Related: Marasmic.


synechia (n.)

plural synechiae, morbid union of parts, especially of the eye, 1842, medical Latin, from Greek
synekheia continuity, from synekhes continuous, from syn together (see syn-) + ekhein to hold (see
scheme (n.)).


-oma

word-forming element, from Greek -oma, with lengthened stem vowel + -ma, suffix forming neuter nouns
and nouns that indicate result of verbal action (equivalent of Latin -men); especially taken in
medical use as morbid growth, tumor, based on sarcoma, carcinoma.


elephantiasis (n.)

1580s, from Greek elephantos, genitive of elephas elephant (see elephant) + -iasis pathological or
morbid condition. It refers to two diseases, one characterized by thickening of a body part (E.
Arabum), the other, older meaning is disease characterized by skin resembling an elephant's (E.
Gr&aelig;corum, also called Egyptian leprosy).


nymphomania (n.)

1775, in English translation of Nymphomania, or a Dissertation Concerning the Furor Uterinus, by
French doctor M.D.T. Bienville, coined from Greek nymphe bride (see nymph) + mania madness (see
mania). Perhaps influenced by earlier French nymphomanie. Defined as a female disease characterized
by morbid and uncontrollable sexual desire. Compare also nympholepsy.


cerebral (adj.)

1816, pertaining to the brain, from French c&eacute;r&eacute;bral (16c.), from Latin cerebrum the
brain (also the understanding), from PIE *keres-, from root *ker- (1) top of the head (see horn
(n.)). Meaning intellectual, clever is from 1929. Cerebral palsy attested from 1824, originally a
general term for cases of paralysis that seemed to be traceable to a morbid state of the encephalon.
Later used in a more specific sense from c.1860, based on the work of English surgeon Dr. William
Little.


claustrophobia (n.)

morbid fear of being shut up in a confined space, coined 1879 (in article by Italian-born, French-
naturalized Swiss-English physician Dr. Benjamin Ball (1834-1892)) from Latin claustrum a bolt, a
means of closing; a place shut in, confined place, frontier fortress (in Medieval Latin cloister),
past participle of claudere to close (see close (v.)) + -phobia fear.


cheesy (adj.)

cheese-like, late 14c., from cheese (n.1) + -y (2). Meaning cheap, inferior is attested from 1896,
perhaps originally U.S. student slang, along with cheese (n.) an ignorant, stupid person. In late
19c. British slang, cheesy was fine, showy (1858), probably from cheese (n.2) and some suggest the
modern derogatory use is an ironic reversal of this. The word was in common use in medical writing
in the late 19c. to describe morbid substances found in tubers, decaying flesh, etc.


mortar (n.2)

bowl for pounding, c.1300, from Old French mortier bowl; builder's mortar, from Latin mortarium bowl
for mixing or pounding, also material prepared in it, of unknown origin and impossible now to
determine which sense was original (Watkins says probably from PIE root *mer- to rub away, harm; see
morbid). Late Old English had mortere, from the same Latin source, which might also be a source of
the modern word. German M&#246;rser also is from Latin.


sleeping (adj.)

c.1300, past participle adjective from sleep (v.). Sleeping-pill is from 1660s; sleeping-bag is from
1850; sleeping sickness as a specific African tropical disease is first recorded 1875; sleeping has
been used since late 14c. for diseases marked by morbid conditions. Sleeping Beauty (1729) is
Perrault's La belle au bois dormant.    It is ill wakyng of a sleapyng dogge. [Heywood, 1562]   <hr
/>   It is nought good a slepyng hound to wake. [Chaucer, c.1385]


acrophobia (n.)

morbid fear of heights, 1887, medical Latin, from Greek akros at the end, the top (see acrid) +
-phobia fear. Coined by Italian physician Dr. Andrea Verga in a paper describing the condition, from
which Verga himself suffered.    In this paper, read somewhat over a year ago at the congress of
alienists at Pavia, the author makes confession of his own extreme dread of high places. Though
fearless of the contagion of cholera, he has palpitations on mounting a step-ladder, finds it
unpleasant to ride on the top of a coach or to look out of even a first-story window, and has never
used an elevator. [American Journal of Psychology, Nov. 1888, abstract of Verga's report]


quail (v.)

c.1400, have a morbid craving; early 15c., grow feeble or sick; mid-15c., to fade, fail, give way,
of unknown origin, perhaps from Middle Dutch quelen to suffer, be ill, from Proto-Germanic *kwaljan,
from PIE *gwele- (1) to throw, to pierce (see quell). Or from obsolete quail to curdle (late 14c.),
from Old French coailler, from Latin coagulare (see coagulate). Sense of lose heart, shrink, cower
is attested from 1550s. According to OED, common 1520-1650, then rare until 19c., when apparently it
was revived by Scott. Related: Quailed; quailing.


hype (n.)

excessive or misleading publicity or advertising, 1967, American English (the verb is attested from
1937), probably in part a back-formation of hyperbole, but also from underworld slang sense swindle
by overcharging or short-changing (1926), a back-formation of hyper short-change con man (1914),
from prefix hyper- meaning over, to excess. Also possibly influenced by drug addicts' slang hype,
1913 shortening of hypodermic needle. Related: Hyped; hyping. In early 18c., hyp morbid depression
of the spirits was colloquial for hypochondria (usually as the hyp or the hyps).


ambergris (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French ambre gris gray amber (see amber), a wax-like substance of ashy
colour, found floating in tropical seas, a morbid secretion from the intestines of the sperm-whale.
Used in perfumery, and formerly in cookery [OED]. Its origin was a mystery in Johnson's day, and he
records nine different theories. King Charles II's favorite dish was said to be eggs and ambergris
[Macauley, History of England]. French gris is from Frankish *gris or some other Germanic source
(cognates: Dutch grijs, Old High German gris; see gray). Praise is like ambergris; a little whiff of
it, by snatches, is very agreeable; but when a man holds a whole lump of it to his nose, it is a
stink and strikes you down. [Pope, c.1720]


coulrophobia (n.)

morbid fear of clowns, by 2001 (said in Web sites to date from 1990s or even 1980s), a popular term,
not from psychology, possibly facetious, though the phenomenon is real enough; said to be built from
Greek kolon limb, with some supposed sense of stilt-walker, hence clown + -phobia.    Ancient Greek
words for clown were skl&ecirc;ro-paikt&ecirc;s, from paizein to play (like a child); or
deikeliktas; other classical words used for theatrical clowns were related to rustic, peasant
(compare Latin fossor clown, literally laborer, digger, related to fossil).    The whole creation
looks suspiciously like the sort of thing idle pseudo-intellectuals invent on the Internet and which
every smarty-pants takes up thereafter; perhaps it is a mangling of Modern Greek klooun clown, which
is the English word borrowed into Greek.


mare (n.3)

night-goblin, incubus, Old English mare incubus, nightmare, monster, from mera, m&aelig;re, from
Proto-Germanic *maron goblin (cognates: Middle Low German mar, Middle Dutch mare, Old High German
mara, German Mahr incubus, Old Norse mara nightmare, incubus), from PIE *mora- incubus (cognates:
first element in Old Irish Morrigain demoness of the corpses, literally queen of the nightmare, also
Bulgarian, Serbian mora, Czech mura, Polish zmora incubus; French cauchemar, with first element from
Old French caucher to trample), from root *mer- to rub away, harm (see morbid).


mortal (adj.)

mid-14c., deadly, also doomed to die, from Old French mortel destined to die; deserving of death,
from Latin mortalis subject to death, mortal, of a mortal, human, from mors (genitive mortis) death,
from PIE base *mer- to die, with derivatives referring to death and human beings (cognates: Sanskrit
mrtih death, martah mortal man; Avestan miryeite dies, Old Persian martiya- man; Armenian meranim
die; Latin mori to die; Lithuanian mirtis mortal man; Greek brotos mortal (hence ambrotos immortal);
Old Church Slavonic mrutvu dead; Old Irish marb, Welsh marw died; Old English mor&thorn; murder).
The most widespread Indo-European root for to die, forming the common word for it except in Greek
and Germanic. Watkins says it is possibly the same as PIE *mer- rub, pound, wear away (see morbid).


knuckle (n.)

mid-14c., knokel finger joint; any joint of the body, especially a knobby one; morbid lump or
swelling; common Germanic (cognates: Middle Low German kn&ouml;kel, Middle Dutch cnockel, German
kn&ouml;chel), literally little bone, a diminutive of Proto-Germanic root *knuck- bone (compare
German Knochen bone).    As a verb from 1740, originally in the game of marbles. To knuckle down
apply oneself earnestly is 1864 in American English, extended from marbles (putting a knuckle on the
ground in assuming the hand position preliminary to shooting); to knuckle under submit, give in is
first recorded 1740, supposedly from the former more general sense of knuckle and here meaning knee,
hence to kneel. The face-busting knuckle-duster is from 1858 (a duster was a type of protective coat
worn by workmen).


