morose (adj.)

1530s gloomy, from Latin morosus morose, peevish, hypercritical, fastidious, from mos (genitive
moris) habit, custom (see moral (adj.)). In English, manners by itself means (good) manners, but
here the implication in Latin is (bad) manners. Related: Morosity.


morosely (adv.)

1650s, from morose + -ly (2).


moroseness (n.)

1660s, from morose + -ness. Earlier in the same sense was morosity (1530s), from Middle French
morosit&#233;, from Latin morositas.


splenetic (adj.)

1540s, pertaining to the spleen, from Late Latin spleneticus, from splen (see spleen). Meaning
irritably morose is from 1590s. Alternative splenic (1610s) is from French spl&#233;nique (16c.).
Gloomy, Sullen, Sulky, Morose, Splenetic. These words are arranged in the order of their intensity
and of their degree of activity toward others. [Century Dictionary]


saturnine (adj.)

gloomy, morose, sluggish, grave, mid-15c., literally born under the influence of the planet Saturn,
from Middle English Saturne (see Saturn) + -ine (1). Medieval physiology believed these
characteristics to be caused by the astrological influence of the planet Saturn, which was the most
remote from the Sun (in the limited knowledge of the times) and thus coldest and slowest in its
revolution.


sullen (adj.)

1570s, alteration of Middle English soleyn unique, singular, from Anglo-French *solein, formed on
the pattern of Old French solain lonely, from soul single, from Latin solus by oneself, alone (see
sole (adj.)). The sense shift in Middle English from solitary to morose (i.e. remaining alone
through ill-humor) occurred late 14c. Related: Sullenly; sullenness.


grump (n.)

ill-humor, 1727, in humps and grumps surly remarks, later the grumps a fit of ill-humor (1844), then
a person in ill humor (1900); perhaps an extended sense of grum morose, surly, which probably is
related to Danish grum cruel; or perhaps suggested by grumble, grunt, etc.


spleen (n.)

c.1300, from Old French esplen, from Latin splen, from Greek splen the milt, spleen, from PIE
*spelgh- spleen, milt (cognates: Sanskrit plihan-, Avestan sperezan, Armenian p'aicaln, Latin lien,
Old Church Slavonic slezena, Lithuanian blu&#382;nis, Old Prussian blusne, Old Irish selg spleen).
Regarded in medieval physiology as the seat of morose feelings and bad temper. Hence figurative
sense of violent ill-temper (1580s, implied in spleenful); and thence spleenless free from anger,
ill-humor, malice, or spite (1610s).


Munich

Bavarian capital, German M&uuml;nchen, from root of M&ouml;nch monk (see monk); founded 1158 as a
market town by Benedictine monks. In allusions to appeasement it is from the meeting of German,
British, French and Italian representatives there in Sept. 29, 1938, which resulted in the cession
of Sudetenland to Germany in exchange for Hitler's pledges.    During the flight Daladier sat silent
and morose, worried about the reception he would receive at Le Bourget, about how the French would
react to his having betrayed Czechoslovakia and France's promises. As the plane circled for landing,
he and others saw a massive crowd awaiting them. Expecting jeers, hisses, rotten fruit, and maybe
worse, Daladier declared stolidly: 'They are going to mob me, I suppose. ... I appreciate their
feelings,' and insisted on absorbing their wrath by being the first off the plane. But as he stood
dumbfounded on the gangplank, thousands surged forward carrying flags and flowers, shouting 'Hurrah
for France! Hurrah for England! Hurrah for peace!' Daladier turned back to L&eacute;ger and cursed,
'The God-damned fools!' [Benjamin F. Martin, France in 1938]


R

In a circle, meaning registered (trademark), first incorporated in U.S. statues 1946. R&R; rest and
relaxation, first recorded 1953, American English; R&B; rhythm and blues (type of popular music)
first attested 1949, American English.    If all our r's that are written are pronounced, the sound
is more common than any other in English utterance (over seven per cent.); the instances of
occurrence before a vowel, and so of universal pronunciation, are only half as frequent. There are
localities where the normal vibration of the tip of the tongue is replaced by one of the uvula,
making a guttural trill, which is still more entitled to the name of dog's letter than is the
ordinary r; such are considerable parts of France and Germany; the sound appears to occur only
sporadically in English pronunciation. [Century Dictionary]   <hr />   The moment we encounter the
added r's of purp or dorg in our reading we know that we have to do with humor, and so with school-
marm. The added consonants are supposed to be spoken, if the words are uttered, but, as a matter of
fact, they are less often uttered than seen. The words are, indeed, largely visual forms; the humor
is chiefly for the eye. [Louise Pound, The Humorous 'R,' American Mercury, October 1924]    She goes
on to note that in British humorous writing, -ar popularly indicates the sound of the vowel in
father and formations like larf (for laugh) are to be read with the broad vowel but no uttered r.
She also quotes Henry James on the characteristic prominence of the medial -r- sound (which tends to
be dropped in England and New England) in the speech of the U.S. Midwest, under some strange impulse
received toward consonantal recovery of balance, making it present even in words from which it is
absent, bringing it in everywhere as with the small vulgar effect of a sort of morose grinding of
the back teeth.


