mortarboard (n.)

also mortar-board, academic cap, 1854, probably from mortar (1) + board (n.1); so called because it
resembles a mason's square board for carrying mortar.  Earlier it was called a mortar cap (1680s) or
simply morter (c.1600), from French mortier.


mortar (n.1)

mixture of cement, late 13c., from Old French mortier builder's mortar, plaster; bowl for mixing
(13c.), from Latin mortarium mortar, also crushed drugs, probably the same word as mortarium bowl
for mixing or pounding (see mortar (n.2)). Dutch mortel, German M&#246;rtel are from Latin or
French.


mortar (n.3)

short cannon, 1550s, originally mortar-piece, from Middle French mortier short cannon, in Old
French, bowl for mixing or pounding (see mortar (n.2)). So called for its shape.


mortar (n.2)

bowl for pounding, c.1300, from Old French mortier bowl; builder's mortar, from Latin mortarium bowl
for mixing or pounding, also material prepared in it, of unknown origin and impossible now to
determine which sense was original (Watkins says probably from PIE root *mer- to rub away, harm; see
morbid). Late Old English had mortere, from the same Latin source, which might also be a source of
the modern word. German M&#246;rser also is from Latin.


cement (n.)

c.1300, from Old French ciment cement, mortar, pitch, from Latin c&aelig;menta stone chips used for
making mortar (singular caementum), from caedere to cut down, chop, beat, hew, fell, slay (see
-cide). The sense evolution from small broken stones to powdered stones used in construction took
place before the word reached English.


lime (n.1)

chalky mineral used in making mortar, from Old English lim sticky substance, birdlime, mortar,
cement, gluten, from Proto-Germanic *leimaz (cognates: Old Saxon, Old Norse, Danish lim, Dutch lijm,
German Leim birdlime), from PIE root *(s)lei- slime, slimy, sticky (cognates: Latin limus slime,
mud, mire, linere to smear; see slime (n.)). Lime is made by putting limestone or shells in a red
heat, which burns off the carbonic acid and leaves a brittle white solid which dissolves easily in
water. Hence lime-kiln (late 13c.), lime-burner (early 14c.). As a verb, c.1200, from the noun.


bombard (n.)

early 15c., catapult, military engine for throwing large stones, from Middle French bombarde mortar,
catapult (14c.), from bombe (see bomb (n.)). The same word, from the same source, was used in
English and French late 14c. in reference to the bass shawm, a bassoon-like musical instrument,
preserving the buzzing sense in the Latin.


bombard (v.)

1590s, from French bombarder, from bombarde mortar, catapult (see bombard (n.)). Figurative sense by
1765. Related: Bombarded; bombarding.


trowel (n.)

mid-14c., tool for spreading plaster or mortar, from Old French truele trowel (13c.), from Late
Latin truella small ladle, dipper (mid-12c.), diminutive of Latin trua a stirring spoon, ladle,
skimmer. The gardening tool was so called since 1796.


grout (n.)

1580s, thin, fluid mortar, originally coarse porridge, perhaps from Old English gruta (plural)
coarse meal, related to Old English grytta (see grits). As a verb from 1838. Related: grouted;
grouting.


fresco (n.)

1590s, in fresco, literally in fresh, with a sense of painted on fresh mortar or plaster, from
Italian fresco cool, fresh, from Proto-Germanic *friskaz (see fresh (adj.1)).


Bertha

fem. proper name, from Old High German Berahta, Perahta, the name of a goddess, literally the bright
one, from Old High German beraht, related to Old English beorht (see bright). Soldiers' nickname Big
Bertha for large-bore German mortar of World War I is a reference to Frau Bertha Krupp von Bohlen
und Halbach, owner of Krupp steel works 1903-43.


bomb (n.)

1580s, from French bombe, from Italian bomba, probably from Latin bombus a deep, hollow noise; a
buzzing or booming sound, from Greek bombos deep and hollow sound, echoic. Originally of mortar
shells, etc.; modern sense of explosive device placed by hand or dropped from airplane is 1909.
Meaning old car is from 1953. Meaning success is from 1954 (late 1990s slang the bomb the best is
probably a fresh formation); opposite sense of a failure is from 1963. The bomb atomic bomb is from
1945.


pot (n.1)

vessel, from late Old English pott and Old French pot pot, container, mortar (also in erotic
senses), both from a general Low Germanic (Old Frisian pott, Middle Dutch pot) and Romanic word from
Vulgar Latin *pottus, of uncertain origin, said by Barnhart and OED to be unconnected to Late Latin
potus drinking cup. Celtic forms are said to be borrowed from English and French.    Slang meaning
large sum of money staked on a bet is attested from 1823. Pot roast is from 1881; phrase go to pot
(16c.) suggests cooking. In phrases, the pot calls the kettle black-arse is from c.1700; shit or get
off the pot is traced by Partridge to Canadian armed forces in World War II.


stamp (v.)

Old English stempan to pound in a mortar, from Proto-Germanic *stamp- (cognates: Old Norse stappa,
Danish stampe, Middle Dutch stampen, Old High German stampfon, German stampfen to stamp with the
foot, beat, pound, German Stampfe pestle), from nasalized form of PIE root *stebh- to support, place
firmly on (cognates: Greek stembein to trample, misuse; see staff (n.)). The vowel altered in Middle
English, perhaps by influence of Scandinavian forms.    Sense of strike the foot forcibly downwards
is from mid-14c. The meaning impress or mark (something) with a die is first recorded 1550s. Italian
stampa stamp, impression, Spanish estampar to stamp, print, French &#233;tamper (13c., Old French
estamper) to stamp, impress are Germanic loan-words. Related: Stamped; stamping. To stamp out
originally was extinguish a fire by stamping on it; attested from 1851 in the figurative sense.
Stamping ground one's particular territory (1821) is from the notion of animals. A stamped addressed
envelope (1873) was one you enclosed in a letter to speed or elicit a reply.


