mosaic (n.)

c.1400, from Old French mosaicq mosaic work, from Italian mosaico, from Medieval Latin musaicum
mosaic work, work of the Muses, noun use of neuter of musaicus of the Muses, from Latin Musa (see
muse). Medieval mosaics were often dedicated to the Muses. The word formed in Medieval Latin as
though from Greek, but the (late) Greek word for mosaic work was mouseion (Klein says this sense was
borrowed from Latin). Figurative use is from 1640s. As an adjective in English from 1580s. Related:
Mosaicist.


Mosaic (adj.)

pertaining to Moses, 1660s (earlier Mosaical, 1560s), from Modern Latin Mosaicus, from Moses.


Ebionite

1640s, sect (1c.-2c.) that held Jesus was a mere man and Christians continued bound by Mosaic Law,
from Latin ebonita, from Hebrew ebyon poor.


sabbatical (adj.)

1640s, of or suitable for the Sabbath, from Latin sabbaticus, from Greek sabbatikos of the Sabbath
(see Sabbath). Noun meaning a year's absence granted to researchers (originally one year in seven,
to university professors) is from 1934, short for sabbatical year, etc., first recorded 1886 (the
thing itself is attested from 1880, at Harvard), related to sabbatical year (1590s) in Mosaic law,
the seventh year, in which land was to remain untilled and debtors and slaves released.


tablet (n.)

c.1300, slab or flat surface for an inscription (especially the two Mosaic tables of stone), from
Old French tablete small table, merchant's display counter (13c., Modern French tablette),
diminutive of table slab, or from Medieval Latin tabuleta (source also of Spanish tableta, Italian
tavoletta), diminutive of Latin tabula (see table (n.)). The meaning lozenge, pill is first recorded
1580s; that of pad of writing paper in 1880.


tradition (n.)

late 14c., statement, belief, or practice handed down from generation to generation, especially
belief or practice based on Mosaic law, from Old French tradicion transmission, presentation,
handing over (late 13c.) and directly from Latin traditionem (nominative traditio) delivery,
surrender, a handing down, a giving up, noun of action from past participle stem of tradere deliver,
hand over, from trans- over (see trans-) + dare to give (see date (n.1)). The word is a doublet of
treason (q.v.). Meaning a long-established custom is from 1590s. The notion is of customs, ways,
beliefs, doctrines, etc. handed down from one generation to the next.    Nobody can make a
tradition; it takes a century to make it. [Hawthorne, Septimius Felton, 1872]


