motto (n.)

1580s, from Italian motto a saying, legend attached to a heraldic design, from Late Latin muttum
grunt, word, from Latin muttire to mutter, mumble, murmur (see mutter).


Annuit Coeptis

on the Great Seal of the United States of America, condensed by Charles Thompson, designer of the
seal in its final form, from Latin Juppiter omnipotes, audacibus annue coeptis All-powerful Jupiter
favor (my) daring undertakings, line 625 of book IX of Virgil's Aeneid. The words also appear in
Virgil's Georgics, book I, line 40: Da facilem cursam, atque audacibus annue coeptis Give (me) an
easy course, and favor (my) daring undertakings. Thompson changed the imperative annue to annuit,
the third person singular form of the same verb in either the present tense or the perfect tense.
The motto also lacks a subject.    The motto is often translated as He (God) is favorable to our
undertakings, but this is not the only possible translation. Thomson wrote: The pyramid signifies
Strength and Duration: The Eye over it &amp; Motto allude to the many signal interpositions of
providence in favour of the American cause. The original design (by William Barton) showed the
pyramid and the motto Deo Favente Perennis God favoring through the years.


ne plus ultra

utmost limit to which one can go, Latin, literally no more beyond; the motto traditionally inscribed
on the Pillars of Hercules.


honi soit qui mal y pense

Middle French, shame on him who thinks evil of it; proverbial expression recorded from c.1300, used
as motto of the Order of the Garter.


watchword (n.)

also watch-word, c.1400, password, from watch (n.) in the military sense of period of standing guard
duty + word (n.). In the sense of motto, slogan it dates from 1738.


excelsior

Latin excelsior higher, comparative of excelsus (adj.) high, elevated, lofty, past participle of
excellere (see excel). Taken 1778 as motto of New York State, where it apparently was mistaken for
an adverb. Popularized 1841 as title of a poem by Longfellow. As a trade name for thin shavings of
soft wood used for stuffing cushions, etc., first recorded 1868, American English.


epigraph (n.)

1620s, inscription on a building, statue, etc., from Greek epigraphe an inscription, from
epigraphein to write on, from epi on (see epi-) + graphein to write (see -graphy). Sense of motto;
short, pithy sentence at the head of a book or chapter first recorded in English 1844.


prepare (v.)

mid-15c., a back formation from preparation and in part from Middle French preparer (14c.), from
Latin praeparare make ready beforehand (see preparation). Related: Prepared; preparing. Be prepared
as the Boy Scouts' motto is attested from 1911.


gung ho

also gung-ho, gungho, 1942, slang motto of Carlson's Raiders (2nd Marine Raider Battalion, under Lt.
Col. Evans Carlson, 1896-1947), U.S. guerrilla unit operating in the Pacific in World War II, from
Chinese kung ho work together, cooperate. Widely adopted in American English c.1959.Borrowing an
idea from China, Carlson frequently has what he calls 'kung-hou' meetings .... Problems are threshed
out and orders explained. [New York Times Magazine, Nov. 8, 1942]


level (v.)

mid-15c., to make level, from level (n.). From c.1600 as to bring to a level; 1958 as to cease
increasing. Meaning to aim a gun is late 15c. Slang sense of tell the truth is from 1920. To level
up to rise is attested by 1863.    A word here as to the misconception labored under by our English
neighbor; he evidently does not understand the American manner of doing things. We never level down
in this country; we are always at work on the up grade. Level up! Level up! is the motto of the
American people. [James E. Garretson, Professional Education, in The Dental Cosmos, Philadelphia,
1865]    To level off cease rising or falling is from 1920, originally in aviation.


mot (n.)

a witty saying, 1580s, from French mot (12c.) remark, short speech, literally word, cognate of
Italian motto, from Latin mutum grunt, murmur (see mutter). Mot juste (1912) is French, literally
exact word, the precisely appropriate expression in some situation.The mot juste is an expression
which readers would like to buy of writers who use it, as one buys one's neighbour's bantam cock for
the sake of hearing its voice no more. [Fowler]


mammoth (n.)

1706, from Russian mammot', probably from Ostyak, a Finno-Ugric language of northern Russia (compare
Finnish maa earth). Because the remains were dug from the earth, the animal was believed to root
like a mole. As an adjective, gigantic, from 1802; in this sense the word appears to be originally
American [Thornton, American Glossary], and its first uses are in derogatory accounts to the cheese
wheel, more than 4 feet in diameter, sent to President Jefferson by the ladies of the Baptist
congregation in Cheshire, Mass., as a present, engraved with the motto Rebellion to tyrants is
obedience to God. Federalist editors mocked the affair, and called up the word mammoth (known from
Peale's exhibition) to characterize it.


laissez-faire

laissez faire, 1822, French, literally let (people) do (as they think best), from laissez,
imperative of laisser to let, to leave (from Latin laxare, from laxus loose; see lax) + faire to do
(from Latin facere; see factitious). From the phrase laissez faire et laissez passer, motto of
certain 18c. French economists, chosen to express the ideal of government non-interference in
business and industry.


