multiplicity (n.)

mid-15c., from Middle French multiplicit&#233;, from Late Latin multiplicitas manifoldness,
multiplicity, from Latin multiplic- (see multiple). Related: Multiplicitous.


biplicity (n.)

1731; see bi- + ending from multiplicity. A useful and non-pejorative alternative to duplicity.


multiplication (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French multiplicacion (12c.) multiplication, duplication; multiplicity,
diversity, from Latin multiplicationem (nominative multiplicatio), noun of action from past
participle stem of multiplicare (see multiply). Mathematical sense is attested from late 14c.


polyphony (n.)

1828, multiplicity of sounds, from Greek polyphonia variety of sounds, from polyphonos having many
sounds or voices, from polys many (see poly-) + phone voice, sound (see fame (n.)). The meaning
counterpoint (1864) is perhaps a back-formation from the adjective.


hydra (n.)

1835, genus name of a freshwater polyp, from Greek Hydra, many-headed Lernaean water serpent slain
by Hercules (this sense is attested in English from late 14c.), from hydor (genitive hydatos) water
(see water (n.1)); related to Sanskrit udrah aquatic animal and Old English ottur otter. Used
figuratively for any multiplicity of evils [Johnson]. The fabulous beast's heads were said to grown
back double when cut off, and the sea creature is said to be so called for its regenerative
capabilities.


divers (adj.)

mid-13c., not alike (sense now in diverse); late 13c., separate, distinct; various, from Old French
divers (11c.) different, various, singular, odd, exceptional, wretched, treacherous, perverse, from
Latin diversus turned different ways, in Late Latin various, past participle of divertere (see
divert).    Sense of several, numerous is recorded from c.1300, referring originally and in form to
the variety of objects; but, as variety implies number, becoming an indefinite numeral word
expressing multiplicity [OED], a sense that emerged by c.1400.


parcel (n.)

late 14c., a portion of something, a part (sense preserved in phrase parcel of land, c.1400), from
Old French parcele small piece, particle, parcel, from Vulgar Latin *particella, diminutive of Latin
particula small part, little bit, itself a diminutive of pars (genitive partis) part (see part
(n.)).    Meaning package is first recorded 1640s, earlier a quantity of goods in a package (mid-
15c.), from late 14c. sense of an amount or quantity of anything. The expression part and parcel
(early 15c.) also preserves the older sense; both words mean the same, the multiplicity is for
emphasis.


hello

1883, alteration of hallo, itself an alteration of holla, hollo, a shout to attract attention, which
seems to go back to at least c.1400. Perhaps from holla! stop, cease. OED cites Old High German
hala, hola, emphatic imperative of halon, holon to fetch, used especially in hailing a ferryman.
Fowler lists halloo, hallo, halloa, halloo, hello, hillo, hilloa, holla, holler, hollo, holloa,
hollow, hullo, and writes, The multiplicity of forms is bewildering .... Popularity as a greeting
coincides with use of the telephone, where it won out over Alexander Graham Bell's suggestion, ahoy.
Central telephone exchange operators were known as hello-girls (1889).Hello, formerly an
Americanism, is now nearly as common as hullo in Britain (Say who you are; do not just say 'hello'
is the warning given in our telephone directories) and the Englishman cannot be expected to give up
the right to say hello if he likes it better than his native hullo. [H.W. Fowler, A Dictionary of
Modern English Usage, 1926]


