mundane (adj.)

mid-15c., of this world, from Old French mondain of this world, worldly, earthly, secular; also
pure, clean; noble, generous (12c.), from Late Latin mundanus belonging to the world (as distinct
from the Church), in classical Latin a citizen of the world, cosmopolite, from mundus universe,
world, literally clean, elegant; used as a translation of Greek khosmos (see cosmos) in its
Pythagorean sense of the physical universe (the original sense of the Greek word was orderly
arrangement). Latin mundus also was used of a woman's ornaments, dress, and is related to the
adjective mundus clean, elegant (used of women's dress, etc.). Related: Mundanely.


antemundane (adj.)

existing or happening before the creation of the world, 1731; see ante- + mundane.


mundanity (n.)

c.1500, from Middle French mondanit&#233; or directly from Medieval Latin mundanitatem (nominative
mundanitas), from Late Latin mundanus belonging to the world (see mundane).


sublunary (adj.)

1590s, situated under the moon, hence earthly, mundane (old cosmology), from Modern Latin
sublunaris, from sub- (see sub-) + lunaris (see lunar).


trance (n.)

late 14c., state of extreme dread or suspense, also a half-conscious or insensible condition, state
of insensibility to mundane things, from Old French transe fear of coming evil, originally coma,
passage from life to death (12c.), from transir be numb with fear, originally die, pass on, from
Latin transire cross over (see transient). French trance in its modern sense has been reborrowed
from English.


beau monde (n.)

also beau-monde, the fashionable world, 1714, French; see beau + monde, from Latin mundus world (see
mundane).


just (adj.)

late 14c., righteous in the eyes of God; upright, equitable, impartial; justifiable, reasonable,
from Old French juste just, righteous; sincere (12c.), from Latin iustus upright, equitable, from
ius right, especially legal right, law, from Old Latin ious, perhaps literally sacred formula, a
word peculiar to Latin (not general Italic) that originated in the religious cults, from PIE root
*yewes- law (cognates: Avestan yaozda- make ritually pure; see jurist). The more mundane Latin law-
word lex covered specific laws as opposed to the body of laws. The noun meaning righteous person or
persons is from late 14c.


charisma (n.)

gift of leadership, power of authority, c.1930, from German, used in this sense by Max Weber
(1864-1920) in Wirtschaft u. Gesellschaft (1922), from Greek kharisma favor, divine gift, from
kharizesthai to show favor to, from kharis grace, beauty, kindness (Charis was the name of one of
the three attendants of Aphrodite) related to khairein to rejoice at, from PIE root *gher- (5) to
desire, like (see hortatory). More mundane sense of personal charm recorded by 1959.    Earlier, the
word had been used in English with a sense of grace, talent from God (1875), directly from Latinized
Greek; and in the form charism (plural charismata) it is attested with this sense in English from
1640s. Middle English, meanwhile, had karisme spiritual gift, divine grace (c.1500).


map (n.)

1520s, shortening of Middle English mapemounde map of the world (late 14c.), and in part from Middle
French mappe, shortening of Old French mapemonde, both English and French words from Medieval Latin
mappa mundi map of the world; first element from Latin mappa napkin, cloth (on which maps were
drawn), tablecloth, signal-cloth, flag, said by Quintilian to be of Punic origin (compare Talmudic
Hebrew mappa, contraction of Mishnaic menaphah a fluttering banner, streaming cloth) + Latin mundi
of the world, from mundus universe, world (see mundane). Commonly used 17c. in a figurative sense of
epitome; detailed representation. To put (something) on the map bring it to wide attention is from
1913.


demi-monde (n.)

1855, also demimonde, from French demi-monde so-so society, literally half-world, from demi- half +
monde, from Latin mundus world (see mundane).    Popularized by use as title of a comedy by
Alexandre Dumas fils (1824-1895). Dumas' Demi-Monde is the link between good and bad society ... the
world of compromised women, a social limbo, the inmates of which ... are perpetually struggling to
emerge into the paradise of honest and respectable ladies [Fraser's Magazine, 1855]. Not properly
used of courtesans. Compare 18th-century English demi-rep (1749, the second element short for
reputation), defined as a woman that intrigues with every man she likes, under the name and
appearance of virtue ... in short, whom every body knows to be what no body calls her [Fielding].


