mural (n.)

painting on a wall, 1921, short for mural painting (1850), from mural (adj.) pertaining to walls
(mid-15c.), from Latin muralis of a wall, from murus wall (Old Latin moiros, moerus), from PIE *mei-
to fix; to build fences or fortifications (cognates: Old English m&#230;re boundary, border,
landmark; Old Norse -m&#230;ri boundary, border-land; Latin munire to fortify, protect).


intramural (adj.)

1846, literally within the walls, from intra- within + Latin muralis pertaining to a wall, from
murus wall (see mural). Activity within the walls of a city, building, community, school, etc.
Equivalent to Late Latin intramuranus.


immure (v.)

1580s, from Middle French emmurer and directly from Medieval Latin immurare, literally to shut up
within walls, from assimilated form of in- into, in (see in- (2)) + Latin murus wall (see mural).
Related: Immured; immuring.


intermural (adj.)

1650s, from Latin intermuralis situated between walls, from inter- between (see inter-) + murus
(genitive muralis) wall (see mural).


munition (n.)

mid-15c., from Middle French municion fortification, defense, defensive wall (14c.), from Latin
munitionem (nominative munitio) a defending, fortification, protecting, noun of action from past
participle stem of munire to fortify, from moenia defensive walls, related to murus wall (see
mural). By 1530s the sense had passed through military stores to become ammunition.


merestone (n.)

stone serving as a landmark, Old English m&#230;rstan boundary stone, from m&#230;re boundary,
object indicating a boundary, from Proto-Germanic *mairjo- (cognates: Middle Dutch mere boundary
mark, stake, Old Norse -m&#230;ri boundary, border-land), related to Latin murus wall (see mural).
Hence also meresman man appointed to find boundaries (of a parish, etc.).


wall (n.)

Old English weall, Anglian wall rampart, dike, earthwork (natural as well as man-made), dam, cliff,
rocky shore, also defensive fortification around a city, side of a building, an Anglo-Frisian and
Saxon borrowing (Old Saxon, Old Frisian, Middle Low German, Middle Dutch wal) from Latin vallum
wall, rampart, row or line of stakes, apparently a collective form of vallus stake, from PIE *walso-
a post. Swedish vall, Danish val are from Low German.    Meaning interior partition of a structure
is mid-13c. In this case, English uses one word where many languages have two, such as German Mauer
outer wall of a town, fortress, etc., used also in reference to the former Berlin Wall, and wand
partition wall within a building (compare the distinction, not always rigorously kept, in Italian
muro/parete, Irish mur/fraig, Lithuanian muras/siena, etc.). The Latin word for defensive wall was
murus (see mural).    Anatomical use from late 14c. To give (someone) the wall allow him or her to
walk on the (cleaner) wall side of the pavement is from 1530s. To turn (one's) face to the wall
prepare to die is from 1570s. Phrase up the wall angry, crazy is from 1951; off the wall unorthodox,
unconventional is recorded from 1966, American English student slang. To go over the wall escape
(originally from prison) is from 1933. Wall-to-wall (adj.) recorded 1939, of shelving, etc.;
metaphoric use (usually disparaging) is from 1967.


