murmur (n.)

late 14c., expression of discontent by grumbling, from Old French murmure murmur, sound of human
voices; trouble, argument (12c.), noun of action from murmurer to murmur, from Latin murmurare to
murmur, mutter, from murmur (n.) a hum, muttering, rushing, probably from a PIE reduplicative base
*mor-mor, of imitative origin (cognates: Sanskrit murmurah crackling fire, Greek mormyrein to roar,
boil, Lithuanian murmlenti to murmur). Meaning softly spoken words is from 1670s.


murmur (v.)

late 14c., from Old French murmurer murmur, grouse, grumble (12c.), from murmur rumbling noise (see
murmur (n.)). Related: Murmured; murmuring.


murmuring (n.)

late 14c., verbal noun from murmur (v.).


susurration (n.)

a whispering, a murmur, c.1400, from Latin susurrationem (nominative susurratio), from past
participle stem of susurrare to hum, murmur, from susurrus a murmur, whisper, a reduplication of the
PIE imitative base *swer- (2) to buzz, whisper (cognates: Sanskrit svarati sounds, resounds, Greek
syrinx flute, Latin surdus dull, mute, Old Church Slavonic svirati to whistle, Lithuanian surmo
pipe, shawm, German schwirren to buzz, Old English swearm a swarm).


mutter (v.)

early 14c., moteren to mumble, from a common PIE imitative *mut- to grunt, mutter (cognates: Old
Norse mu&eth;la to murmur, Latin muttire to mutter, Old High German mutilon to murmur, mutter; to
drizzle), with frequentative suffix -er. Related: Muttered; muttering.


grutch (v.)

c.1200, grucchen, to murmur, complain, from Old French grouchier to murmur, to grumble, of unknown
origin, probably ultimately imitative. Meaning to begrudge is c.1400. Compare gruccild (early 13c.)
woman who complains, from grutch + suffix of unknown origin. Related: Grutched; grutching. As a noun
from c.1400.


grudge (v.)

mid-15c., to murmur, complain, variant of grutch. Meaning to begrudge is c.1500. Related: Grudged;
grudges; grudging; grudgingly. The noun is mid-15c., from the verb.


susurrant (adj.)

1791, from Latin susurrantem (nominative susurrans), present participle of susurrare to hum, murmur
(see susurration). Susurrous (adj.) is from 1824.


motto (n.)

1580s, from Italian motto a saying, legend attached to a heraldic design, from Late Latin muttum
grunt, word, from Latin muttire to mutter, mumble, murmur (see mutter).


misspeak (v.)

late 14c., to say amiss, also to speak insultingly, from mis- (1) + speak (v.). Related:
Misspeaking; misspoken. Old English missprecan meant to grumble, murmur.


moan (n.)

c.1200, lamentation, mourning, weeping; complaining, the expressing of complaints; a complaint;
lover's complaint; accusation, charge, probably from an unrecorded Old English *man complaint,
related to Old English m&aelig;nan complain, moan, also tell, intend, signify (see mean (v.1)); but
OED discounts this connection. Meaning long, low inarticulate murmur from some prolonged pain is
first recorded 1670s, with onomatopoeic suggestion [OED].


grumble (v.)

1580s, from Middle French grommeler mutter between the teeth or directly from Middle Dutch grommelen
murmur, mutter, grunt, from grommen to rumble, growl. Imitative, or perhaps akin to grim. Related:
Grumbled; grumbling.


begrudge (v.)

mid-14c., from be- + Middle English grucchen to murmur (see grudge). Related: Begrudged; begrudging;
begrudgingly.


grouse (v.)

complain, 1885 (implied in grouser), British Army slang, of uncertain origin but perhaps from Norman
French dialectal groucer, from Old French groucier to murmur, grumble, of imitative origin (compare
Greek gru a grunt, gruzein to grumble). Related: Groused; grousing. As a noun from 1918, from the
verb.


groan (v.)

Old English granian to groan, murmur, lament, from Proto-Germanic *grain- (cognates: Old Norse
grenja to howl), of imitative origin, or related to grin. Meaning complain is from early 13c.,
especially in Middle English phrase grutchen and gronen. Related: Groaned; groaning.


bon mot (n.)

1735, French, good saying,  literally good word, from bon good + mot (12c.), from Vulgar Latin
muttum, from Latin muttire to mutter, mumble, murmur (see mutter).


threnody (n.)

song of lamentation, 1630s, from Greek threnodia lamentation, from threnos dirge, lament + oide ode
(see ode). Greek threnos probably is from PIE imitative root *dher- (3) to drone, murmur, hum;
cognates: Old English dran drone, Gothic drunjus sound, Greek tenthrene a kind of wasp.


mot (n.)

a witty saying, 1580s, from French mot (12c.) remark, short speech, literally word, cognate of
Italian motto, from Latin mutum grunt, murmur (see mutter). Mot juste (1912) is French, literally
exact word, the precisely appropriate expression in some situation.The mot juste is an expression
which readers would like to buy of writers who use it, as one buys one's neighbour's bantam cock for
the sake of hearing its voice no more. [Fowler]


whisper (v.)

Old English hwisprian speak very softly, murmur (only in a Northumbrian gloss for Latin murmurare),
from Proto-Germanic *hwis- (cognates: Middle Dutch wispelen, Old High German hwispalon, German
wispeln, wispern, Old Norse hviskra to whisper), from PIE *kwei- to hiss, whistle, imitative.
Transitive sense is from 1560s. Related: Whispered; whispering. An alternative verb, now obsolete,
was whister (late 14c., from Old English hw&aelig;strian), and Middle English had whistringe
grucchere a slanderer.


meld (v.)

to blend together, merge, unite (intransitive), by 1910, of uncertain origin. OED suggests perh. a
blend of MELT v.1 and WELD v. Said elsewhere to be a verb use of melled mingled, blended, past
participle of dialectal mell to mingle, mix, combine, blend.    [T]he biplane grew smaller and
smaller, the stacatto clatter of the motor became once more a drone which imperceptibly became
melded with the waning murmur of country sounds .... [Aircraft magazine, October 1910]      But it
is perhaps an image from card-playing, where the verb meld is attested by 1907 in a sense of combine
two cards for a score:    Upon winning a trick, and before drawing from the stock, the player can
meld certain combinations of cards. [rules for two-hand pinochle in Hoyle's Games, 1907]    The rise
of the general sense of the word in English coincides with the craze for canasta, in which melding
figures. The card-playing sense is said to be apparently from German melden make known, announce,
from Old High German meldon, from Proto-Germanic *meldojan (source of Old English meldian to
declare, tell, display, proclaim), and the notion is of declaring the combination of cards. Related:
Melded; melding.


