muse (v.)

to reflect, to be absorbed in thought, mid-14c., from Old French muser (12c.) to ponder, dream,
wonder; loiter, waste time, literally to stand with one's nose in the air (or, possibly, to sniff
about like a dog who has lost the scent), from muse muzzle, from Gallo-Roman *musa snout, of unknown
origin. Probably influenced in sense by muse (n.). Related: Mused; musing.


muse (n.)

late 14c., protectors of the arts, from Old French Muse and directly from Latin Musa, from Greek
Mousa, the Muse, also music, song, from PIE root *men- to think, remember (see mind (n.)). Meaning
inspiring goddess of a particular poet is from late 14c. The traditional names and specialties of
the nine Muses, daughters of Zeus and Mnemosyne, are: Calliope (epic poetry), Clio (history), Erato
(love poetry, lyric art), Euterpe (music, especially flute), Melpomene (tragedy), Polymnia (hymns),
Terpsichore (dance), Thalia (comedy), Urania (astronomy).


museum (n.)

1610s, the university building in Alexandria, from Latin museum library, study, from Greek mouseion
place of study, library or museum, school of art or poetry, originally a seat or shrine of the
Muses, from Mousa Muse (see muse (n.)). Earliest use in reference to English institutions was of
libraries (such as the British Museum); sense of building to display objects first recorded 1680s.


Clio

muse of history, muse who sings of glorious actions, usually represented with a scroll and
manuscript case, from Latin Clio, from Greek Kleio, literally the proclaimer, from kleiein to tell
of, celebrate, make famous, from kleos rumor, report, news; good report, fame, glory, from PIE
*klew-yo-, from root *kleu- to hear (see listen). Related to the -kles in Damocles, etc.


amuse (v.)

late 15c., to divert the attention, beguile, delude, from Middle French amuser divert, cause to
muse, from a at, to (but here probably a causal prefix) + muser ponder, stare fixedly (see muse
(v.)). Sense of divert from serious business, tickle the fancy of is recorded from 1630s, but
through 18c. the primary meaning was deceive, cheat by first occupying the attention. Bemuse retains
more of the original meaning. Related: Amused; amusing.


Melpomene

Muse of tragedy, from Latin, from Greek Melpomene, literally songstress, from melpein to sing, of
unknown origin.


musing (n.)

late 14c., complaint, verbal noun from muse (v.). Meaning pondering is from mid-15c. Related:
Musingly; musings.


music (n.)

mid-13c., musike, from Old French musique (12c.) and directly from Latin musica the art of music,
also including poetry (also source of Spanish musica, Italian musica, Old High German mosica, German
Musik, Dutch muziek, Danish musik), from Greek mousike (techne) (art) of the Muses, from fem. of
mousikos pertaining to the Muses, from Mousa Muse (see muse (n.)). Modern spelling from 1630s. In
classical Greece, any art in which the Muses presided, but especially music and lyric poetry.    The
use of letters to denote music pitch probably is at least as old as ancient Greece, as their
numbering system was ill-suited to the job. Natural scales begin at C (not A) because in ancient
times the minor mode was more often used than the major one, and the natural minor scale begins at
A.   Music box is from 1773, originally barrel organ; music hall is from 1842, especially hall
licensed for musical entertainment (1857). To face the music accept the consequences is from 1850;
the exact image is uncertain, one theory ties it to stage performers, another to cavalry horses
having to be taught to stay calm while the regimental band plays. To make (beautiful) music with
someone have sexual intercourse is from 1967.


bemuse (v.)

to make utterly confused, from be- + muse (compare amuse); attested from 1735 but probably older, as
Pope (1705) punned on it as devoted utterly to the Muses.


Erato

muse who presided over lyric poetry, from Greek erastos loved, beloved; lovely, charming, verbal
adjective of eran to love, to be in love with (see Eros).


terpsichorean (adj.)

pertaining to dancing, 1869, literally of Terpsichore, from Latinized form of Greek Terpsikhore,
muse of dancing and dramatic chorus (see Terpsichore). Hence theatrical slang terp stage dancer,
chorus girl (1937).


Urania

name of the Muse of astronomy and celestial forces, from Latin Urania, from Greek Ourania, fem. of
ouranios, literally heavenly, from ouranos (see Uranus).


saunter (v.)

late 15c., santren to muse, be in reverie, of uncertain origin despite many absurd speculations.
Meaning walk with a leisurely gait is from 1660s, and may be a different word. Klein suggests this
sense of the word derives via Anglo-French sauntrer (mid-14c.) from French s'aventurer to take
risks, but OED finds this unlikely. Related: Sauntered; sauntering.


Thalia

fem. proper name, from Latinized form of Greek Thaleia, the joyful Muse, presiding over comedy and
idyllic poetry, literally the blooming one, fem. proper name from adjective meaning blooming,
luxuriant, bounteous, from thallein to bloom, related to thalia abundance, thallos young shoot (see
thallus). Also the name of one of the three Graces, patroness of festive meetings.


Terpsichore (n.)

the muse of the dance, Greek Terpsikhore, literally enjoyment of dance, from terpein to delight
(from PIE root *terp- to satisfy; cognates: Sanskrit trpyati takes one's fill, Lithuanian tarpstu to
thrive, prosper) + khoros dance, chorus (see chorus).


Euterpe

muse of music, from Greek Euterpe, literally pleasing, from eu well (see eu-) + terpein to delight,
please (see Terpsichore).


calliope (n.)

1858, steam-whistle keyboard organ, named for Calliope, ninth and chief muse, presiding over
eloquence and epic poetry, Latinized from Greek Kalliope, literally beautiful-voiced, from kalli-,
combining form of kallos beauty (see Callisto) + opos (genitive of *ops) voice, related to Latin vox
(see voice (n.)).


muzzle (n.)

late 14c., device put over an animal's mouth to stop it from biting, eating, or rooting, from Old
French musel muzzle, also snout, nose (12c., Modern French museau), from muse muzzle, from Gallo-
Roman *musa snout (source also of Proven&ccedil;al mus, Old Spanish mus, Italian muso), of unknown
origin, possibly related to Latin morsus bite (but OED finds serious difficulties with this).
Meaning projecting part of the head of an animal is from early 15c. in English; sense of open end of
a firearm first recorded 1560s.


mosaic (n.)

c.1400, from Old French mosaicq mosaic work, from Italian mosaico, from Medieval Latin musaicum
mosaic work, work of the Muses, noun use of neuter of musaicus of the Muses, from Latin Musa (see
muse). Medieval mosaics were often dedicated to the Muses. The word formed in Medieval Latin as
though from Greek, but the (late) Greek word for mosaic work was mouseion (Klein says this sense was
borrowed from Latin). Figurative use is from 1640s. As an adjective in English from 1580s. Related:
Mosaicist.


mouse (n.)

Old English mus small rodent, also muscle of the arm, from Proto-Germanic *mus (cognates: Old Norse,
Old Frisian, Middle Dutch, Danish, Swedish mus, Dutch muis, German Maus mouse), from PIE *mus-
(cognates: Sanskrit mus mouse, rat, Old Persian mush mouse, Old Church Slavonic mysu, Latin mus,
Lithuanian muse mouse, Greek mys mouse, muscle).    Plural form mice (Old English mys) shows effects
of i-mutation. Contrasted with man (n.) from 1620s. Meaning black eye (or other discolored lump) is
from 1842. Computer sense is from 1965, though applied to other things resembling a mouse in shape
since 1750, mainly nautical.   Parturiunt montes, nascetur ridiculus mus [Horace]


study (v.)

early 12c., to strive toward, devote oneself to, cultivate (translating Latin occupatur), from Old
French estudiier to study, apply oneself, show zeal for; examine (13c., Modern French
&eacute;tudier), from Medieval Latin studiare, from Latin studium study, application, originally
eagerness, from studere to be diligent (to be pressing forward), from PIE *(s)teu- (1) to push,
stick, knock, beat (see steep (adj.)).    Martha swanc and becarcade to gefor&eth;igene &thorn;an
H&aelig;lende and his &thorn;eowen &thorn;a lichamlice behef&eth;en. Seo studdede emb &thorn;a
uterlice &thorn;ing. [Homily for the Feast of the Virgin Mary, c.1125]    From c.1300 as apply
oneself to the acquisition of learning, pursue a formal course of study, also read a book or
writings intently or meditatively. From mid-14c. as reflect, muse, think, ponder. Meaning regard
attentively is from 1660s. Related: Studied; studying.


