muster (v.)

c.1300, to display, reveal, appear, from Old French mostrer appear, show, reveal, also in a military
sense (10c., Modern French montrer), from Latin monstrare to show, from monstrum omen, sign (see
monster). Meaning to collect, assemble is early 15c.; figurative use (of qualities, etc.) is from
1580s. To muster out gather to be discharged from military service is 1834, American English. To
muster up in the figurative and transferred sense of gather, summon, marshal is from 1620s. Related:
Mustered; mustering.


muster (n.)

late 14c., action of showing, manifestation, from Old French mostre illustration, proof;
examination, inspection (13c., Modern French montre), literally that which is shown, from mostrer
(see muster (v.)). Meaning act of gathering troops is from c.1400. To pass musters (1570s)
originally meant to undergo military review without censure.


wapentake (n.)

division of certain English counties (equivalent to a hundred in other places), Old English
w&aelig;penget&aelig;c division of a riding, from Old Norse vapnatak, from vapna, genitive plural of
vapn weapon (see weapon) + tak a touching, a taking hold, a grasping, from taka to take, grasp, from
Proto-Germanic *tak- (see take (v.)). Perhaps it originally was an armed muster with inspection of
weapons, or else an assembly where consent was expressed by brandishing swords and spears.


faggot (n.2)

male homosexual, 1914, American English slang (shortened form fag is from 1921), probably from
earlier contemptuous term for woman (1590s), especially an old and unpleasant one, in reference to
faggot (n.1) bundle of sticks, as something awkward that has to be carried (compare baggage
worthless woman, 1590s). It may also be reinforced by Yiddish faygele homosexual, literally little
bird. It also may have roots in British public school slang fag a junior who does certain duties for
a senior (1785), with suggestions of catamite, from fag (v.). This also was used as a verb.He [the
prefect] used to fag me to blow the chapel organ for him. [Boy's Own Paper, 1889]Other obsolete
senses of faggot were man hired into military service simply to fill out the ranks at muster (1700)
and vote manufactured for party purposes (1817).    The oft-reprinted assertion that male
homosexuals were called faggots because they were burned at the stake as punishment is an
etymological urban legend. Burning was sometimes a punishment meted out to homosexuals in Christian
Europe (on the suggestion of the Biblical fate of Sodom and Gomorrah), but in England, where
parliament had made homosexuality a capital offense in 1533, hanging was the method prescribed. Any
use of faggot in connection with public executions had long become an English historical obscurity
by the time the word began to be used for male homosexual in 20th century American slang, whereas
the contemptuous slang word for woman (and the other possible sources or influences listed here) was
in active use. It was used in this sense in early 20c. by D.H. Lawrence and James Joyce, among
others.


