mute (n.)

1570s, stage actor in a dumb show; 1610s as person who does not speak, from mute (adj.). Musical
sense first recorded 1811 of stringed instruments, 1841, of horns.


mute (v.)

deaden the sound of, 1861, from mute (n.). Related: Muted; muting.


mute (adj.)

late 14c., mewet silent, from Old French muet dumb, mute (12c.), diminutive of mut, mo, from Latin
mutus silent, speechless, dumb, probably from imitative base *meue- (cognates: Sanskrit mukah dumb,
Greek myein to be shut, of the mouth). Form assimilated in 16c. to Latin mutus.


muted (adj.)

1861, in reference to musical instruments, past participle adjective from mute (v.). Figuratively by
1879. Of colors by 1939. Related: mutedness.


muteness (n.)

1580s, from mute (adj.) + -ness.


mutely (adv.)

1620s, from mute (adj.) + -ly (2).


mutism (n.)

state of being mute, 1824, from French mutisme (1741), from Latin mutus (see mute (adj.)).


speechless (adj.)

Old English sp&aelig;cleas permanently mute; see speech + -less. Meaning mute by effect of
astonishment is from late 14c. Related: Speechlessly; speechlessness.


dumb (adj.)

Old English dumb silent, unable to speak, from PIE *dheubh- confusion, stupefaction, dizziness, from
root *dheu- (1) dust, mist, vapor, smoke, and related notions of defective perception or wits.
The Old English, Old Saxon (dumb), Gothic (dumbs), and Old Norse (dumbr) forms of the word meant
only mute, speechless; in Old High German (thumb) it meant both this and stupid, and in Modern
German this latter became the only sense. Meaning foolish, ignorant was occasionally in Middle
English, but modern use (1823) comes from influence of German dumm. Related: dumber; dumbest.
Applied to silent contrivances, hence dumbwaiter. As a verb, in late Old English, to become mute;
c.1600, to make mute. To dumb (something) down is from 1933.


shtoom (adj.)

speechless, silent, from Yiddish, from German stumm silent, mute (see stammer (v.)).


dummy (n.)

1590s, mute person, from dumb (adj.) + -y (3). Extended by 1845 to figure representing a person.
Used in card games (originally whist) since 1736. Meaning dolt, blockhead is from 1796.


beck (n.)

late 14c., mute signal, from noun use of bekken (v.), variant of becnan to beckon (see beckon).
Transferred sense of slightest indication of will is from late 15c.


absurdity (n.)

late 15c., from Middle French absurdit&eacute;, from Late Latin absurditatem (nominative absurditas)
dissonance, incongruity, noun of state from Latin absurdus out of tune; figuratively incongruous,
silly, senseless, from ab-, intensive prefix, + surdus dull, deaf, mute (see susurration).


tinsel (n.)

mid-15c., a kind of cloth made with interwoven gold or silver thread, from Middle French estincelle
spark, spangle (see stencil (n.)). In 14-15th c. Fr., the s of es- had long been mute [OED]. Meaning
very thin sheets or strips of shiny metal is recorded from 1590s. Figurative sense of anything showy
with little real worth is from 1650s, suggested from at least 1590s. First recorded use of
Tinseltown for Hollywood is from 1972.


miosis (n.)

1819, from Greek myein to shut (the eyes) + -osis. Greek myein is perhaps originally to close the
lips, from PIE *meue- to be silent (see mute (adj.)). Related: Miotic.


myopia (n.)

short-sightedness, 1727, medical Latin, from Late Greek myopia near-sightedness, from myops near-
sighted, literally closing the eyes, from myein to shut (see mute (adj.)) + ops (genitive opos) eye
(see eye (n.)).


herb (n.)

c.1300, erbe non-woody plant, from Old French erbe grass, herb, plant (12c.), from Latin herba
grass, an herb, herbage, turf. Refashioned after Latin since 15c., but the h- was mute until 19c.
Slang meaning marijuana is attested from 1960s.


beckon (v.)

Old English gebecnian (West Saxon beacnian) to make a mute sign, derivative of beacen a sign,
beacon, from Proto-Germanic *bauknjan (cognates: Old Saxon boknian, Old High German bouhnen), from
PIE root *bha- (1) to shine (see beacon). Related: Beckoned; beckoning. The noun is attested from
1718, from the verb.


wah-wah

1926, in jazz slang, in reference to the effect on brass instruments made by manipulating the mute;
of imitative origin. Later also in reference to an electric guitar effect. As an imitation of the
sound of a baby crying, it is recorded from 1938. Wah-wah pedal is recorded from 1969. Compare
Chinook jargon wawa talk, speak, call, ask, sermon, language; Cree (Algonquian) wehwew goose, Lenape
(Algonquian) wava snow goose, all probably of imitative origin.


susurration (n.)

a whispering, a murmur, c.1400, from Latin susurrationem (nominative susurratio), from past
participle stem of susurrare to hum, murmur, from susurrus a murmur, whisper, a reduplication of the
PIE imitative base *swer- (2) to buzz, whisper (cognates: Sanskrit svarati sounds, resounds, Greek
syrinx flute, Latin surdus dull, mute, Old Church Slavonic svirati to whistle, Lithuanian surmo
pipe, shawm, German schwirren to buzz, Old English swearm a swarm).


stammer (v.)

Old English stamerian to stammer, from Proto-Germanic *stamro- (cognates: Old Norse stammr
stammering, Old Saxon stamaron, Gothic stamms stammering, Middle Dutch and Dutch stameren, Old High
German stammalon, German stammeln to stammer, a frequentative verb related to adjective forms such
as Old Frisian and German stumm mute). Related: Stammered; stammerer; stammering; stammeringly.


harlequin (n.)

1580s, from Middle French harlequin, from Old French Herlequin, Hellequin, etc., leader of la
maisnie Hellequin, a troop of demons who rode the night air on horses. He corresponds to Old English
Herla cyning King Herla, mythical character sometimes identified as Woden; possibly also the same as
the German Erlk&ouml;nig Elf King of the Goethe poem. Sometimes also associated with Herrequin, 9c.
count of Boulogne, who was proverbially wicked. In English pantomime, a mute character who carries a
magic wand. His Italian form, arlecchino, is one of the stock characters of commedia del'arte. From
his ludicrous dress comes the English adjective meaning particolored (1779).


deaf (adj.)

Old English deaf deaf, also empty, barren, specialized from Proto-Germanic *daubaz (cognates: Old
Saxon dof, Old Norse daufr, Old Frisian daf, Dutch doof deaf, German taub, Gothic daufs deaf,
insensate), from PIE dheubh-, which was used to form words meaning confusion, stupefaction,
dizziness (cognates: Greek typhlos blind, typhein to make smoke; Old English dumb unable to speak;
Old High German tumb).    The word was pronounced to rhyme with reef until 18c. Deaf-mute is from
1837, after French sourd-muet. Deaf-mutes were sought after in 18c.-19c. Britain as fortune-tellers.
Deaf as an adder (Old English) is from Psalms lviii:5.


mystery (n.1)

early 14c., in a theological sense, religious truth via divine revelation, hidden spiritual
significance, mystical truth, from Anglo-French *misterie, Old French mistere secret, mystery,
hidden meaning (Modern French myst&#232;re), from Latin mysterium secret rite, secret worship; a
secret thing, from Greek mysterion (usually in plural mysteria) secret rite or doctrine, from mystes
one who has been initiated, from myein to close, shut (see mute (adj.)); perhaps referring to the
lips (in secrecy) or to the eyes (only initiates were allowed to see the sacred rites).    The Greek
word was used in Septuagint for secret counsel of God, translated in Vulgate as sacramentum. Non-
theological use in English, a hidden or secret thing, is from late 14c. In reference to the ancient
rites of Greece, Egypt, etc. it is attested from 1640s. Meaning detective story first recorded in
English 1908.


