mutilate (v.)

1530s, of things; 1560s, of persons; from Latin mutilatus, past participle of mutilare to cut off,
lop off, cut short; maim, mutilate, from mutilus maimed (see mutilation). Technically, to deprive of
some principal part, especially by cutting off. Related: Mutilated; mutilating.


mangle (v.)

to mutilate, c.1400, from Anglo-French mangler, frequentative of Old French mangoner cut to pieces,
of uncertain origin, perhaps connected with Old French mahaignier to maim, mutilate, wound (see
maim). Meaning to mispronounce (words), garble is from 1530s. Related: Mangled; mangling.


mayhem (n.)

late 15c., from Anglo-French maihem (13c.), from Old French mahaigne injury, wrong, a hurt, harm,
damage; related to mahaignier to injure, wound, mutilate, cripple (see maim). Originally, in law,
the crime of maiming a person to make him less able to defend himself or annoy his adversary [OED].


truncate (v.)

late 15c., from Latin truncatus cut off, past participle of truncare to maim, mutilate, cut off,
from truncus mutilated, cut off, deprived of branches or limbs (see trunk). Related: Truncated;
truncating.


deface (v.)

mid-14c., to obliterate, from Old French desfacier mutilate, destroy, disfigure, from des- away from
(see dis-) + Vulgar Latin *facia (see face (n.)). Weaker sense of to mar, make ugly is late 14c. in
English. Related: Defaced; defacing.


spill (v.)

Old English spillan destroy, mutilate, kill, also in late Old English to waste, variant of spildan
destroy, from Proto-Germanic *spilthjan (cognates: Old High German spildan to spill, Old Saxon
spildian destroy, kill, Old Norse spilla to destroy, Danish spilde lose, spill, waste, Middle Dutch
spillen to waste, spend), from PIE *spel- (1) to split, break off (cognates: Middle Dutch spalden,
Old High German spaltan to split; Greek aspalon skin, hide, spolas flayed skin; Lithuanian spaliai
shives of flax; Old Church Slavonic rasplatiti to cleave, split; Middle Low German spalden, Old High
German spaltan to split; Sanskrit sphatayati splits).    Sense of let (liquid) fall or run out
developed mid-14c. from use of the word in reference to shedding blood (early 14c.). Intransitive
sense to run out and become wasted is from 1650s. Spill the beans recorded by 1910 in a sense of
spoil the situation; 1919 as reveal a secret. To cry for spilt milk (usually with negative) is
attested from 1738. Related: Spilled; spilt; spilling.


