mutter (v.)

early 14c., moteren to mumble, from a common PIE imitative *mut- to grunt, mutter (cognates: Old
Norse mu&eth;la to murmur, Latin muttire to mutter, Old High German mutilon to murmur, mutter; to
drizzle), with frequentative suffix -er. Related: Muttered; muttering.


mutter (n.)

1630s, from mutter (v.).


motto (n.)

1580s, from Italian motto a saying, legend attached to a heraldic design, from Late Latin muttum
grunt, word, from Latin muttire to mutter, mumble, murmur (see mutter).


grumble (v.)

1580s, from Middle French grommeler mutter between the teeth or directly from Middle Dutch grommelen
murmur, mutter, grunt, from grommen to rumble, growl. Imitative, or perhaps akin to grim. Related:
Grumbled; grumbling.


bon mot (n.)

1735, French, good saying,  literally good word, from bon good + mot (12c.), from Vulgar Latin
muttum, from Latin muttire to mutter, mumble, murmur (see mutter).


blather (v.)

1520s, Scottish, probably from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse bla&eth;ra mutter, wag the
tongue, perhaps of imitative origin. Related: Blathered; blathering.


mummer (n.)

one who performs in a mumming, actor in a dumb show, early 15c., probably a fusion of Middle French
momeur mummer (from Old French momer mask oneself, from momon mask) and Middle English mommen to
mutter, be silent, related to mum (interjection).


lull (v.)

early 14c., lullen hush to sleep, probably  imitative of lu-lu sound used to lull a child to sleep
(compare Swedish lulla to hum a lullaby, German lullen to rock, Sanskrit lolati moves to and fro,
Middle Dutch lollen to mutter). Figurative use from 1570s. Related: Lulled; lulling.


murmur (n.)

late 14c., expression of discontent by grumbling, from Old French murmure murmur, sound of human
voices; trouble, argument (12c.), noun of action from murmurer to murmur, from Latin murmurare to
murmur, mutter, from murmur (n.) a hum, muttering, rushing, probably from a PIE reduplicative base
*mor-mor, of imitative origin (cognates: Sanskrit murmurah crackling fire, Greek mormyrein to roar,
boil, Lithuanian murmlenti to murmur). Meaning softly spoken words is from 1670s.


marmoset (n.)

small monkey, late 14c., from Old French marmoset grotesque figurine; fool, jester (late 13c.),
perhaps a variant of marmote long-tailed monkey, ape, then, as a term of endearment, little child;
said to be from marmonner, marmotter to mutter, mumble, probably of imitative origin. Some French
authorities suggest a derivation of marmoset from marmor marble, as if little marble figurine.


mot (n.)

a witty saying, 1580s, from French mot (12c.) remark, short speech, literally word, cognate of
Italian motto, from Latin mutum grunt, murmur (see mutter). Mot juste (1912) is French, literally
exact word, the precisely appropriate expression in some situation.The mot juste is an expression
which readers would like to buy of writers who use it, as one buys one's neighbour's bantam cock for
the sake of hearing its voice no more. [Fowler]


mother (n.1)

Old English modor female parent, from Proto-Germanic *moth&aelig;r (cognates: Old Saxon modar, Old
Frisian moder, Old Norse mo&#240;ir, Danish moder, Dutch moeder, Old High German muoter, German
Mutter), from PIE *mater- mother (cognates: Latin mater, Old Irish mathir, Lithuanian mote, Sanskrit
matar-, Greek meter, Old Church Slavonic mati), [b]ased ultimately on the baby-talk form *m&#257;-
(2); with the kinship term suffix *-ter- [Watkins]. Spelling with -th- dates from early 16c., though
that pronunciation is probably older (see father (n.)).   Mother nature first attested c.1600;
mother earth is from 1580s. Mother tongue one's native language first attested late 14c. Mother of
all ________ 1991, is Gulf War slang, from Saddam Hussein's use in reference to the coming battle;
it is an Arabic idiom (as well as an English one), for instance Ayesha, second wife of Muhammad, is
known as Mother of Believers. Mother Carey's chickens is late 18c. sailors' nickname for storm
petrels, or for snowflakes. Mother lode attested by c.1882, from mining [1849].


