mythology (n.)

early 15c., exposition of myths, from Middle French mythologie and directly from Late Latin
mythologia, from Greek mythologia legendary lore, a telling of mythic legends; a legend, story,
tale, from mythos myth (of unknown origin) + -logy study. Meaning a body of myths first recorded
1781.


Thetis

name of a sea goddess in Greek mythology, mother of Achilles by Peleus. Since Roman times,
sometimes, in poetry, the sea personified.


Icarus

son of Daedalus in Greek mythology; he flew too high on artificial wings and so plunged to his
death. Used allusively from 1580s. The name is of unknown origin.


Io

in Greek mythology, daughter of the river god Inachus, she was pursued by Zeus and consequently
changed into a heifer. The Jovian moon was discovered in 1610 and named for her by Galileo.


Typhon

giant in Greek mythology; see typhoon.


Actaeon

in Greek mythology, the name of the hunter who discovered Artemis bathing and was changed by her to
a stag and torn to death by his hounds. The name is of unknown origin. Sometimes used figuratively
in 17c. for a cuckold (because of his horns).


Iron Age

1590s, originally from Greek and Roman mythology, the last and worst age of the world; the
archaeological sense of period in which humans used iron tools and weapons is from 1879.


Briareus

hundred-handed giant in Greek mythology, from Greek briaros strong, stout.


Ra

hawk-headed sovereign sun god of Egyptian mythology, from Egyptian R' sun, day.


Niobe

in Greek mythology, a queen of Thebes, daughter of Tantalus, changed to a stone while weeping for
her children (slain, after she boasted of them overmuch, by Artemis and Apollo); hence the name is
used figuratively for bereavement and woe. The name is said to mean literally snowy; snowy-bright.


Telamon

in Greek mythology, father of Ajax, brother of Peleus, literally the Bearer, from Greek telamon
broad strap for bearing something.


naga (n.)

in Hindu mythology, race of serpent demons, offspring of Kaduru, guardians of the under-regions;
1785, from Sanskrit naga serpent, snake, of unknown origin.


Daphne

fem. proper name, from Greek daphne laurel, bay tree; in mythology the name of a nymph, daughter of
the river Peneus, metamorphosed into a laurel by Gaia to save her from being ravished as she was
pursued by Apollo.


Daedalus

father of Icarus in Greek mythology, builder of the Cretan labyrinth, from Greek Daidalos, literally
the cunning worker, from daidallein to work artfully.


Danaid (n.)

in Greek mythology, one of the 50 daughters of Danaus, king of Argos, from Greek Danaides (plural).
On command of their father, all (except Hypermnestra) killed their husbands and consequently were
condemned to draw water perpetually in bottomless buckets.


Acheron

1580s, fabled river of the Lower World in Greek mythology. The name perhaps means marsh-like
(compare Greek akherousai marshlike water); the derivation from Greek akhos woe is considered folk
etymology.


Cassiopeia (n.)

northern constellation, in Greek mythology queen of Ethiopia and mother of Andromeda, from Latinized
form of Greek Kassiepeia, Kassiopeia, of unknown etymology. Related: Cassiopeian.


niobium (n.)

named by German scientist Heinrich Rose, who discovered it in 1844 in a mineral then called
tantalum; so called because in Greek mythology Niobe was the daughter of Tantalus.


Philemon

masc. proper name, in Greek mythology a pious man, husband of Baucis; from Greek philemon, literally
loving, affectionate, from philein to love (see philo-).


Kore

in Greek mythology, the daughter of Zeus and Demeter, also called Persephone in her aspect as
Hades's wife, from Greek kore maiden (see crescent).


Tartarus (n.)

in Homer and older Greek mythology, the sunless abyss below Hades, from Greek Tartaros, of uncertain
origin; prob. a word of imitative origin, suggestive of something frightful [Klein]. Later in Greek
almost synonymous with Hades.


brontosaurus (n.)

1879, Modern Latin, from Greek bronte thunder (perhaps from PIE imitative root *bhrem- to growl) +
-saurus. Brontes was the name of one of the Cyclopes in Greek mythology.


Eblis

prince of the fallen angels in Arabic mythology and religion, from Arabic Iblis. Klein thinks this
may be Greek diablos, passed through Syriac where the first syllable was mistaken for the Syriac
genitive particle di and dropped.


mythological (adj.)

1610s, from Late Latin mythologicus, from Greek mythologikos versed in legendary lore, from
mythologia (see mythology). Related: Mythologically.


Callisto

fourth moon of Jupiter; in classical mythology a nymph, mother of Arcas by Zeus, turned to a bear by
Hera, from Greek kallistos, superlative of kalos beautiful, from PIE *kal- (2) beautiful. Feminized
as proper name Callista.


daedal (adj.)

1580s, skillful, cunning, from Latin daedalus, from Greek daidalos skillful, cunningly wrought. Also
an anglicized form of the name Daedalus from Greek mythology (1610s).


Norn (n.)

1770, from Old Norse norn (plural nornir), one of the female fates of Scandinavian mythology,
related to Swedish dialectal norna to warn, to communicate secretly, perhaps ultimately imitative of
low murmuring (compare Middle High German narren to growl, snarl).


Fomorian

pertaining to the monstrous race in Irish mythology, 1876, from Irish fomor pirate, monster, from fo
under + mor sea. Cognate with Gaelic famhair.


Atalanta

in Greek mythology the daughter of king Schoeneus, famous for her swiftness, Latin, from Greek
Atalante, fem. of atalantos having the same value (as a man), from a- one, together + talanton
balance, weight, value (compare talent).


troll (n.1)

supernatural being in Scandinavian mythology and folklore, 1610s (with an isolated use mid-14c.),
from Old Norse troll giant being not of the human race, evil spirit, monster. Some speculate that it
originally meant creature that walks clumsily, and derives from Proto-Germanic *truzlan, from
*truzlanan (see troll (v.)). But it seems to have been a general supernatural word, such as Swedish
trolla to charm, bewitch; Old Norse trolldomr witchcraft.    The old sagas tell of the troll-bull, a
supernatural being in the form of a bull, as well as boar-trolls. There were troll-maidens, troll-
wives, and troll-women; the trollman, a magician or wizard, and the troll-drum, used in Lappish
magic rites. The word was popularized in literary English by 19c. antiquarians, but it has been
current in the Shetlands and Orkneys since Viking times. The first record of the word in modern
English is from a court document from the Shetlands, regarding a certain Catherine, who, among other
things, was accused of airt and pairt of witchcraft and sorcerie, in hanting and seeing the Trollis
ryse out of the kyrk yeard of Hildiswick.    Originally conceived as a race of malevolent giants,
they have suffered the same fate as the Celtic Danann and by 19c. were regarded by peasants in in
Denmark and Sweden as dwarfs and imps supposed to live in caves or under the ground.    They are
obliging and neighbourly; freely lending and borrowing, and elsewise keeping up a friendly
intercourse with mankind. But they have a sad propensity to thieving, not only stealing provisions,
but even women and children. [Thomas Keightley, The Fairy Mythology, London, 1850]


Hippolyte

Amazon in Greek mythology, daughter of Ares, from Greek Hippolyte, fem. of Hippolytos (see
Hippolytus).


-ology

word-forming element indicating branch of knowledge, science, now the usual form of -logy.
Originally used c.1800 in nonce formations (commonsensology, etc.), it gained legitimacy by
influence of the proper formation in geology, mythology, etc., where the -o- is a stem vowel in the
previous element.


Hippolytus

masc. proper name, son of Theseus in Greek mythology, from Greek Hippolytos, literally letting
horses loose, from hippos horse (see equine) + stem of lyein (see lose).


Vulcan (n.)

god of fire and metal-work in Roman mythology, 1510s, from Latin Vulcanus, Volcanus, according to
Klein a word of Etruscan origin. Often with allusions to his lameness and the unfaithfulness of his
wife, Venus. As the name of a hypothetical planet between Mercury and the Sun, it is attested from
1860. French physician Edmond Modeste Lescarbault claimed to have discovered it crossing the Sun's
disk in 1859. The Roman feast of Vulcanalia was on Aug. 23.


Rudra

storm god in Vedic mythology, from Sanskrit Rudrah, according to Klein literally the howler, roarer,
from stem of rudati weeps, laments, bewails, cognate with Latin rudere to roar, bellow, Lithuanian
rauda wail, lamentation, Old English reotan to wail, lament.


cilice (n.)

Old English cilic, from Latin cilicium a covering, a type of coarse garment (used especially by
soldiers and sailors), originally one of Cilician goat hair, from Greek kilikion coarse cloth, from
Kilikia Cilicia in Asia Minor. By tradition in Greek mythology the place was named for Cilix, a son
of the Phoenician king Agenor.


Argus

hundred-eyed giant of Greek mythology, late 14c., from Latin, from Greek Argos, literally the bright
one, from argos shining, bright (see argent). His epithet was Panoptes all-eyes. After his death,
Hera transferred his eyes to the peacock's tail. Used in figurative sense of very vigilant person.


agave (n.)

American aloe plant, 1797, from Latin Agave, from Greek Agaue, proper name in mythology (mother of
Pentheus), from agauos noble, perhaps from agasthai wonder at, from gaiein to rejoice, exult, with
intensive prefix a-. The name seems to have been taken generically by botanists, the plant perhaps
so called for its stately flower stem.


satyr (n.)

woodland deity, companion of Bacchus, late 14c., from Latin satyrus, from Greek satyros, of unknown
origin. In pre-Roman Greek art, a man-like being with the tail and ears of a horse; the modern
conception of a being part man, part goat is from Roman sculptors, who seem to have assimilated them
to the fauns of native mythology. In some English bibles used curiously to translate Hebrew se'irim,
a type of hairy monster superstitiously believed to inhabit deserts.


Euphrosyne

name of one of the three Graces in Greek mythology, from Latin, from Greek Euphrosyne, literally
mirth, merriment, from euphron cheerful, merry, of a good mind, from eu well (see eu-) + phren
(genitive phrenos) mind, of unknown origin.


asphodel (n.)

late 14c., from Latin asphodelus, from Greek asphodelos asphodel, king's spear, plant of the lily
kind, of unknown origin (see daffodil). It was the peculiar plant of the dead; and in Greek
mythology and English poetic use it overspreads the Elysian meadows.To embathe In nectared lavers
strewed with asphodel. [Milton, Comus, 1634]


Ragnarok (n.)

in Norse mythology, the last battle of the world, in which gods and men will be destroyed by
monsters and darkness, 1770, from Old Norse ragna, genitive of r&ouml;gn gods + r&ouml;k destined
end or r&ouml;kr twilight. Also see Gotterdammerung.


Andromeda

constellation, 1667 (earlier Andromece, mid-15c.); in classical mythology the daughter of Cepheus
and Cassiopeia, from Greek, literally mindful of her husband, from andros, genitive of aner man (see
anthropo-) + medesthai to be mindful of, think on, related to medea (neuter plural) counsels, plans,
devices, cunning (and source of the name Medea).


raven (n.)

Old English hr&aelig;fn (Mercian), hrefn; hr&aelig;fn (Northumbrian, West Saxon), from Proto-
Germanic *khrabanas (cognates: Old Norse hrafn, Danish ravn, Dutch raaf, Old High German hraban,
German Rabe raven, Old English hroc rook), from PIE root *ker- (2), imitative of harsh sounds
(cognates: Latin crepare to creak, clatter, cornix crow, corvus raven; Greek korax raven, korone
crow; Old Church Slavonic kruku raven; Lithuanian krauklys crow). Raven mythology shows considerable
homogeneity throughout the whole area [northern regions of the northern hemisphere] in spite of
differences in detail. The Raven peeps forth from the mists of time and the thickets of mythology,
as a bird of slaughter, a storm bird, a sun and fire bird, a messenger, an oracular figure and a
craftsman or culture hero. [Edward A. Armstrong, The Folklore of Birds, 1958]Old English also used
hr&aelig;mn, hremm. The raven standard was the flag of the Danish Vikings. The Quran connects the
raven with Cain's murder of Abel; but in Christianity the bird plays a positive role in the stories
of St. Benedict, St. Paul the Hermit, St. Vincent, etc. It was anciently believed to live to great
old age, but the ancients also believed it wanting in parental care. The vikings, like Noah, were
said to have used the raven to discover land. When uncertain of their course they let one loose, and
steered the vessel in his track, deeming that the land lay in the direction of his flight; if he
returned to the ship, it was supposed to be at a distance [Charles Swainson, The Folk Lore and
Provincial Names of British Birds, London, 1886].


lethal (adj.)

1580s, from Late Latin lethalis, alteration of Latin letalis deadly, fatal, from letum death, of
uncertain origin. Form altered in Late Latin by association with lethe hydor water of oblivion in
Hades in Greek mythology, from Greek lethe forgetfulness.


larva (n.)

1650s, a ghost, specter, from Latin larva (plural larvae), earlier larua ghost, also mask; applied
in biological sense 1768 by Linnaeus because immature forms of insects mask the adult forms. On the
double sense of the Latin word, Carlo Ginzburg, among other students of mythology and folklore, has
commented on the well-nigh universal association between masks and the spirits of the dead.


Jason

masc. proper name, from Greek Eason, from Hebrew Yehoshua, a common name among Hellenistic Jews (see
Joshua). In Greek mythology, son of Aeson, leader of the Argonauts, from Latin Jason, from Greek
Iason, perhaps related to iasthai to heal (see -iatric). The names were somewhat merged in Christian
Greek.


Hyades

star cluster in constellation Taurus, late 14c., from Greek Hyades, popularly explained as rain-
bringers (from hyein to rain), because wet weather supposedly began coincidentally with their
heliacal rising, but in fact probably from hys swine (the popular Latin word for them was Suculae
little pigs). Grimm (Teutonic Mythology) lists the Anglo-Saxon glosses of Hyades as Raedgastran,
Raedgasnan, Redgaesrum.


Orion

bright constellation, late 14c., from Greek Oarion, name of a giant in Greek mythology, loved by
Aurora, slain by Artemis, of unknown origin, though some speculate on Akkadian Uru-anna the Light of
Heaven. Another Greek name for the constellation was Kandaon, a title of Ares, god of war, and the
star pattern is represented in many cultures as a giant (such as Old Irish Caomai the Armed King,
Old Norse Orwandil, Old Saxon Ebu&eth;rung).


Eurydice

wife of Orpheus in Greek mythology, from Latin, from Greek Eurydike, literally wide justice, from
eurys wide (see aneurysm) + dike right, custom, usage, law; justice (cognate with Latin dicere to
show, tell; see diction).


