narrative (n.)

a tale, story, 1560s, from Middle French narrative and from narrative (adj.).


narrative (adj.)

mid-15c., from Middle French narratif, from Late Latin narrativus suited to narration, from Latin
narrat-, stem of narrare (see narration).


narration (n.)

early 15c., from Old French narracion account, statement, a relating, recounting, narrating,
narrative tale, and directly from Latin narrationem (nominative narratio) a relating, narrative,
noun of action from past participle stem of narrare to tell, relate, recount, explain, literally to
make acquainted with, from gnarus knowing, from PIE suffixed zero-grade *gne-ro-, from root *gno- to
know (see know).


Robinson Crusoe

man without companionship, 1768, from the eponymous hero of Daniel Defoe's fictional shipwreck
narrative (1719).


story (n.1)

connected account or narration of some happening, c.1200, originally narrative of important events
or celebrated persons of the past, from Old French estorie, estoire story, chronicle, history, from
Late Latin storia, shortened from Latin historia history, account, tale, story (see history).
Meaning recital of true events first recorded late 14c.; sense of narrative of fictitious events
meant to entertain is from c.1500. Not differentiated from history till 1500s. As a euphemism for a
lie it dates from 1690s. Meaning newspaper article is from 1892. Story-line first attested 1941.
That's another story that requires different treatment is attested from 1818. Story of my life sad
truth first recorded 1938, from typical title of an autobiography.


history (n.)

late 14c., relation of incidents (true or false), from Old French estoire, estorie chronicle,
history, story (12c., Modern French histoire), from Latin historia narrative of past events,
account, tale, story, from Greek historia a learning or knowing by inquiry; an account of one's
inquiries, history, record, narrative, from historein inquire, from histor wise man, judge, from PIE
*wid-tor-, from root *weid- to know, literally to see (see vision).    Related to Greek idein to
see, and to eidenai to know. In Middle English, not differentiated from story; sense of record of
past events probably first attested late 15c. As a branch of knowledge, from 1842. Sense of
systematic account (without reference to time) of a set of natural phenomena (1560s) is now obsolete
except in natural history.    One difference between history and imaginative literature ... is that
history neither anticipates nor satisfies our curiosity, whereas literature does. [Guy Davenport,
Wheel Ruts, 1996]


nouvelle (n.)

short fictitious narrative dealing with a single situation or aspect of a character, 1670s, French
nouvelle (11c.), literally new (see novel (adj.)).


fairy tale (n.)

oral narrative centered on magical tests, quests, and transformations, 1749, translating French
Conte de fe&eacute;s of Madame d'Aulnois (1698, translated into English 1699). As an adjective (also
fairytale), attested by 1963.


toast (v.2)

to propose or drink a toast, 1700, from toast (n.1). This probably is the source of the Jamaican and
U.S. black word meaning extemporaneous narrative poem or rap (1962). Related: Toasted; toasting.


drub (v.)

1630s (in an Oriental travel narrative), probably from Arabic darb a beating, from daraba he beat up
(see discussion in OED). Related: Drubbed; Drubbing.


teratology (n.)

study of marvels and monstrosities, 1842, from terato- + -logy. Earlier it meant marvelous narrative
(1670s), from Greek teratologia a telling of marvels. Related: Teratological; teratologist.


Munchausen

in reference to unbelievable stories (1850) is in reference to Baron Karl Friedrich Hieronymus von
M&uuml;nchhausen (1720-1797), German adventurer who served in the Russian army against the Turks;
wildly exaggerated exploits attributed to him are told in the 1785 English book Baron Munchausen,
Narrative of his Marvellous Travels, written by Rudolph Erich Raspe (1734-1794). As a syndrome
involving feigned dramatic illness, it is attested from 1951.


saga (n.)

1709, an antiquarians' revival to describe the medieval prose narratives of Iceland and Norway, from
Old Norse saga saga, story, cognate with Old English sagu a saying (see saw (n.2)). Properly, a
narrative composition of Iceland or Norway in the Middle Ages, or one that has their
characteristics. Meaning long, convoluted story is from 1857.


jest (n.)

early 13c., geste, narrative of exploits, from Old French geste action, exploit, from Latin gesta
deeds, neuter plural of gestus, past participle of gerere to carry, behave, act, perform (see gest).
Sense descended through idle tale (late 15c.) to mocking speech, raillery (1540s) to joke (1550s).


romance (v.)

late 14c., recite a narrative, from Old French romancier narrate in French; translate into French,
from romanz (see romance (n.)). Later invent fictitious stories (1670s), then be romantically
enthusiastic (1849); meaning court as a lover is from 1938, probably from romance (n.). Related:
Romanced; romancing.


reckoning (n.)

early 14c., narrative, account, verbal noun from reckon (v.). Meaning a settling of accounts is from
mid-14c.; that of calculation is from late 14c. Compare Dutch rekening a bill, account, reckoning,
Old High German rechenunga, German rechnung, Danish regning a reckoning, computation. Day of
reckoning attested from c.1600.


writing (n.)

Old English writing action of forming letters and characters, verbal noun from write (v.). From
c.1200 as text; body of poetry, narrative, etc. in written form; written material. From c.1300 as a
particular text; mid-14c. as act of composing a written text. From late 14c. as craft of writing;
also one's own handwriting or penmanship. Also late 14c. as act of sending a letter; a letter,
message. Writing-desk is from 1610s.


marchen (n.)

1871, German fairy or folk tale, from German M&auml;rchen, a story or tale, from Middle High German
merechyn short verse narrative, from Old High German mari news, tale, from Proto-Germanic
*m&aelig;rjo- renowned, famous, illustrious (source of Old English m&aelig;re) + diminutive suffix
-chen.


episode (n.)

1670s, commentary between two choric songs in a Greek tragedy, also an incidental narrative or
digression within a story, poem, etc., from French &eacute;pisode or directly from Greek epeisodion
addition, noun use of neuter of epeisodios coming in besides, from epi in addition (see epi-) +
eisodos a coming in, entrance (from eis into + hodos way). Sense of outstanding incident, experience
first recorded in English 1773. Transferred by 1930s to individual broadcasts of serial radio
programs.


epic (adj.)

1580s, perhaps via Middle French &eacute;pique or directly from Latin epicus, from Greek epikos,
from epos word, story, poem, from PIE *wekw- to speak (see voice). Extended sense of grand, heroic
first recorded in English 1731. From 1706 as a noun in reference to an epic poem, A long narrative
told on a grand scale of time and place, featuring a larger-than-life protagonist and heroic actions
[Miller Williams, Patterns of Poetry].


novel (n.)

fictitious narrative, 1560s, from Italian novella short story, originally new story, from Latin
novella new things (source of Middle French novelle, French nouvelle), neuter plural or fem. of
novellus (see novel (adj.)). Originally one of the tales or short stories in a collection
(especially Boccaccio's), later (1630s) long work of fiction, works which had before that been
called romances.    A novel is like a violin bow; the box which gives off the sounds is the soul of
the reader. [Stendhal, Life of Henri Brulard]


legend (n.)

early 14c., narrative dealing with a happening or an event, from Old French legende (12c., Modern
French l&#233;gende) and directly from Medieval Latin legenda legend, story, literally (things) to
be read, on certain days in church, etc., from Latin legendus, neuter plural gerundive of legere to
read, gather, select (see lecture (n.)).    Used originally of saints' lives; extended sense of
nonhistorical or mythical story first recorded late 14c. Meaning writing or inscription (especially
on a coin or medal) is from 1610s; on a map, illustration, etc., from 1903.


fable (n.)

c.1300, falsehood, lie, pretense, from Old French fable (12c.) story, fable, tale; fiction, lie,
falsehood, from Latin fabula story, play, fable, narrative, account, tale, literally that which is
told, related to fari speak, tell, from PIE root *bha- (2) speak (see fame (n.)). Sense of animal
story (early 14c.) comes from Aesop. In modern folklore terms, defined as a short, comic tale making
a moral point about human nature, usually through animal characters behaving in human ways. Most
trace to Greece or India.


romantic (adj.)

1650s, of the nature of a literary romance, from French romantique, from Middle French romant a
romance, oblique case of Old French romanz verse narrative (see romance (n.)).    As a literary
style, opposed to classical since before 1812; in music, from 1885. Meaning characteristic of an
ideal love affair (such as usually formed the subject of literary romances) is from 1660s. Meaning
having a love affair as a theme is from 1960. Related: Romantical (1670s); romantically. Compare
romanticism.


style (n.)

early 14c., stile, writing instrument, pen, stylus; piece of written discourse, a narrative,
treatise; also characteristic rhetorical mode of an author, manner or mode of expression, and way of
life, manner, behavior, conduct, from Old French stile, estile style, fashion, manner; a stake,
pale, from Latin stilus stake, instrument for writing, manner of writing, mode of expression,
perhaps from the same source as stick (v.)). Spelling modified incorrectly by influence of Greek
stylos pillar, which probably is not directly related. As distinguished from substance, 1570s.
Meaning mode of dress is from 1814.


veranda (n.)

also verandah, 1711, from Hindi varanda, which probably is from Portuguese varanda, originally long
balcony or terrace, of uncertain origin, possibly related to Spanish baranda railing, and ultimately
from Vulgar Latin *barra barrier, bar. French v&eacute;randa is borrowed from English.    That the
word as used in England and in France was brought by the English from India need not be doubted. But
either in the same sense, or in one closely analogous, it appears to have existed, quite
independently, in Portuguese and Spanish; and the manner in which it occurs without explanation in
the very earliest narrative of the adventure of the Portuguese in India ... seems almost to preclude
the possibility of their having learned it in that country for the first time .... [Col. Henry Yule
and A.C. Burnell, Hobson-Jobson, A Glossary of Colloquial Anglo-Indian Words and Phrases, 1903]


evangelist (n.)

late 12c., Matthew, Mark, Luke or John, from Old French evangelist and directly from Late Latin
evangelista, from Greek euangelistes preacher of the gospel, literally bringer of good news, from
euangelizesthai bring good news, from eu- good (see eu-) + angellein announce, from angelos
messenger (see angel).    In early Greek Christian texts, the word was used of the four supposed
authors of the narrative gospels. Meaning itinerant preacher was another early Church usage, revived
in Middle English (late 14c.). Classical Greek euangelion meant the reward of good tidings; sense
transferred in Christian use to the glad tidings themselves. In Late Latin, Greek eu- regularly was
consonantized to ev- before vowels.


speech (n.)

Old English sp&aelig;c act of speaking; power of speaking; manner of speaking; statement, discourse,
narrative, formal utterance; language, variant of spr&aelig;c, from Proto-Germanic *sprek-, *spek-
(cognates: Danish sprog, Old Saxon spraca, Old Frisian spreke, Dutch spraak, Old High German
sprahha, German Sprache speech; see speak (v.))    The spr- forms were extinct in English by 1200.
Meaning address delivered to an audience first recorded 1580s.    And I honor the man who is willing
to sink  Half his present repute for the freedom to think,  And, when he has thought, be his cause
strong or weak,  Will risk t' other half for the freedom to speak,  Caring naught for what vengeance
the mob has in store,  Let that mob be the upper ten thousand or lower.   [James Russell Lowell, A
Fable for Critics, 1848]


spell (n.1)

Old English spell story, saying, tale, history, narrative, fable; discourse, command, from Proto-
Germanic *spellam (see spell (v.1)). Compare Old Saxon spel, Old Norse spjall, Old High German spel,
Gothic spill report, discourse, tale, fable, myth; German Beispiel example. From c.1200 as an
utterance, something said, a statement, remark; meaning set of words with supposed magical or occult
powers, incantation, charm first recorded 1570s; hence any means or cause of enchantment.    The
term 'spell' is generally used for magical procedures which cause harm, or force people to do
something against their will -- unlike charms for healing, protection, etc. [Oxford Dictionary of
English Folklore]    Also in Old English, doctrine; a sermon; religious instruction or teaching; the
gospel; a book of the Bible; compare gospel.


crack (n.)

a split, an opening, mid-15c., earlier a splitting sound; a fart; the sound of a trumpet (late
14c.), probably from crack (v.). Meaning rock cocaine is first attested 1985. The superstition that
it is bad luck to step on sidewalk cracks has been traced to c.1890. Meaning try, attempt first
attested 1830, nautical, probably a hunting metaphor, from slang sense of fire a gun.    At their
head, apart from the rest, was a black bull, who appeared to be their leader; he came roaring along,
his tail straight an end, and at times tossing up the earth with his horns. I never felt such a
desire to have a crack at any thing in all my life. He drew nigh the place where I was standing; I
raised my beautiful Betsey to my shoulder, took deliberate aim, blazed away, and he roared, and
suddenly stopped. [A Narrative of the Life of David Crockett, Written by Himself, Philadelphia,
1834]    Adjectival meaning top-notch, superior (as in a crack shot) is slang from 1793, perhaps
from earlier verbal sense of do any thing with quickness or smartness (Johnson). Grose (1796) has
THE CRACK, or ALL THE CRACK. The fashionable theme, the go.


romance (n.)

c.1300, a story, written or recited, of the adventures of a knight, hero, etc., often one designed
principally for entertainment, from Old French romanz verse narrative (Modern French roman),
originally an adverb, in the vernacular language, from Vulgar Latin *romanice scribere to write in a
Romance language (one developed from Latin instead of Frankish), from Latin Romanicus of or in the
Roman style, from Romanus Roman (see Roman).    The sense evolution is because medieval vernacular
tales usually told chivalric adventures full of marvelous incidents and heroic deeds. In reference
to literary works, often in Middle English meaning ones written in French but also applied to native
compositions. Literary sense extended by 1660s to a love story. Meaning adventurous quality first
recorded 1801; that of love affair is from 1916. Romance novel attested from 1964. Compare Romance
(adj.).


fame (n.)

early 13c., character attributed to someone; late 13c., celebrity, renown, from Old French fame
fame, reputation, renown, rumor, from Latin fama talk, rumor, report, reputation, from PIE root
*bha- (2) to speak, tell, say (cognates: Sanskrit bhanati speaks; Latin fari to say, fabula
narrative, account, tale, story; Armenian ban, bay word, term; Old Church Slavonic bajati to talk,
tell; Old English boian to boast, ben prayer, request; Greek pheme talk, phone voice, sound, phanai
to speak; Old Irish bann law).    The goddess Fama was the personification of rumor in Roman
mythology. The Latin derivative fabulare was the colloquial word for speak, talk since the time of
Plautus, whence Spanish hablar.    I've always been afraid I was going to tap the world on the
shoulder for 20 years, and when it finally turned around I was going to forget what I had to say.
[Tom Waits, Playboy magazine interview, March, 1988]


tale (n.)

Old English talu series, calculation, also story, tale, statement, deposition, narrative, fable,
accusation, action of telling, from Proto-Germanic *talo (cognates: Dutch taal speech, language,
Danish tale speech, talk, discourse, German Erz&#228;hlung story, Gothic talzjan to teach), from PIE
root *del- (2) to recount, count. The secondary Modern English sense of number, numerical reckoning
(c.1200) probably was the primary one in Germanic; see tell (v.), teller and Old Frisian tale,
Middle Dutch tal, Old Saxon tala, Danish tal, Old High German zala, German Zahl number.    The
ground sense of the Modern English word in its main meaning, then, might have been an account of
things in their due order. Related to talk (v.) and tell (v.). Meaning things divulged that were
given secretly, gossip is from mid-14c.; first record of talebearer tattletale is late 15c.


comedy (n.)

late 14c., from Old French comedie (14c., a poem, not in the theatrical sense), from Latin comoedia,
from Greek komoidia a comedy, amusing spectacle, probably from komodios actor or singer in the
revels, from komos revel, carousal, merry-making, festival, + aoidos singer, poet, from aeidein to
sing, related to oide (see ode).    The passage on the nature of comedy in the Poetic of Aristotle
is unfortunately lost, but if we can trust stray hints on the subject, his definition of comedy
(which applied mainly to Menander) ran parallel to that of tragedy, and described the art as a
purification of certain affections of our nature, not by terror and pity, but by laughter and
ridicule. [Rev. J.P. Mahaffy, A History of Classical Greek Literature, London, 1895]    The
classical sense of the word, then, was amusing play or performance, which is similar to the modern
one, but in the Middle Ages the word came to mean poems and stories generally (albeit ones with
happy endings), and the earliest English sense is narrative poem (such as Dante's Commedia).
Generalized sense of quality of being amusing dates from 1877.   Comedy aims at entertaining by the
fidelity with which it presents life as we know it, farce at raising laughter by the outrageous
absurdity of the situation or characters exhibited, &amp; burlesque at tickling the fancy of the
audience by caricaturing plays or actors with whose style it is familiar. [Fowler]


