natural (n.)

person with a natural gift or talent, 1925, originally in prizefighting, from natural (adj.). In
Middle English, the word as a noun meant natural capacity, physical ability or power (early 14c.),
and it was common in sense a native of a place in Shakespeare's day. Also in 17c., a mistress.


naturally (adv.)

late 13c., inherently, intrinsically, characteristically, from natural + -ly (2). From late 14c. as
in accord with natural law; also normally; usually, expectedly; as a matter of course, consequently,
understandably. The notion is as a natural result. From early 15c. as without artificial assistance,
by a natural process.


natural (adj.)

c.1300, naturel, of one's inborn character; hereditary, by birth; early 14c. as of the world of
nature (especially as opposed to man), from Old French naturel of nature, conforming to nature; by
birth, and directly from Latin naturalis by birth, according to nature, from natura nature (see
nature).    From late 15c. as not miraculous, in conformity with nature. Meaning easy, free from
affectation is attested from c.1600. Of things, not artificially created, c.1600. As a euphemism for
illegitimate, bastard (of children), it is first recorded c.1400, on notion of blood kinship (but
not legal status).   Natural science is from late 14c.; natural law is from early 15c. Natural order
apparent order in nature is from 1690s. Natural childbirth first attested 1933. Natural life,
usually in reference to the duration of life, is from late 15c. Natural history is from 1560s (see
history). To die of natural causes is from 1570s.


naturalist (n.)

student of plants and animals, c.1600, from French naturaliste, from natural (see natural (adj.)).
Earlier one who studies natural, rather than spiritual, things (1580s).


naturality (n.)

1530s, natural character, from French naturalit&#233;, from Late Latin naturalitatem (nominative
naturalitas), from Latin naturalis (see natural (adj.)). Meaning natural feeling is from 1620s.


naturalism (n.)

1630s, action based on natural instincts, from natural + -ism. In philosophy, as a view of the world
and humanity's relationship to it, from 1750. As a tendency in art and literature, from 1850.


naturalize (v.)

admit (an alien) to rights of a citizen, 1550s (implied in naturalized), from natural (adj.) in its
etymological sense of by birth + -ize; in some instances from Middle French naturaliser, from
natural. Of things, from 1620s; of plants or animals, from 1796. Related: Naturalizing.


natural-born (adj.)

1580s, from natural (adj.) + born.


naturalistic (adj.)

1840, in reference to the doctrine of naturalism; from natural + -istic. From 1849 as aiming for
realism.


naturalness (n.)

normality, early 15c., from natural (adj.) + -ness.


au naturel (adj.)

1817, French, literally in the natural state; originally meaning uncooked, but used euphemistically
for undressed. See natural (adj.).


physics (n.)

1580s, natural science, from physic in sense of natural science. Also see -ics. Based on Latin
physica (neuter plural), from Greek ta physika, literally the natural things, name of Aristotle's
treatise on nature. Specific sense of science treating of properties of matter and energy is from
1715.


kind (adj.)

friendly, deliberately doing good to others, from Old English gecynde natural, native, innate,
originally with the feeling of relatives for each other, from Proto-Germanic *kundi- natural,
native, from *kunjam family (see kin), with collective prefix *ga- and abstract suffix *-iz. Sense
development from with natural feelings, to well-disposed (c.1300), benign, compassionate (c.1300).


physico-

word-forming element meaning physical, physically; natural, from Latinized comb. form of Greek
physikos natural, physical (see physic).


naive (adj.)

1650s, natural, simple, artless, from French na&#239;ve, fem. of na&#239;f, from Old French naif
naive, natural, genuine; just born; foolish, innocent; unspoiled, unworked (13c.), from Latin
nativus not artificial, also native, rustic, literally born, innate, natural (see native (adj.)).
Related: Naively.


unkindly (adj.)

early 13c., not natural, unnatural, from un- (1) not + kindly (adj.). From c.1300 as without natural
affection, unfraternally. Old English had ungecyndelic.


physiology (n.)

1560s, study and description of natural objects, from Middle French physiologie or directly from
Latin physiologia natural science, study of nature, from Greek physiologia natural science, inquiry
into nature, from physio- nature (see physio-) + logia study (see -logy). Meaning science of the
normal function of living things is attested from 1610s. Related: Physiologic; physiologist.


vein (n.)

c.1300, from Old French veine vein, artery, pulse (12c.), from Latin vena a blood vessel, also a
water course, a vein of metal, a person's natural ability or interest, of unknown origin. The mining
sense is attested in English from late 14c. (Greek phleps vein had the same secondary sense).
Figurative sense of strain or intermixture (of some quality) is recorded from 1560s; that of a humor
or mood, natural tendency is first recorded 1570s.


sic (adv.)

insertion in printed quotation to call attention to error in the original; Latin, literally so,
thus, in this way, related to or emphatic of si if, from PIE root *so- this, that (cognates: Old
English sio she). Used regularly in English articles from 1876, perhaps by influence of similar use
in French (1872).    [I]t amounts to Yes, he did say that, or Yes, I do mean that, in spite of your
natural doubts. It should be used only when doubt is natural; but reviewers &amp; controversialists
are tempted to pretend that it is, because (sic) provides them with a neat &amp; compendious form of
sneer. [Fowler]   Sic passim is generally so throughout.


genuine (adj.)

1590s, natural, not acquired, from Latin genuinus native, natural, from root of gignere beget (see
genus), perhaps influenced in form by contrasting adulterinus spurious. [Alternative etymology is
from Latin genu knee, from a supposed ancient custom of a father acknowledging paternity of a
newborn by placing it on his knee.] Meaning really proceeding from its reputed source is from 1660s.
Related: Genuinely; genuineness.


genius (n.)

late 14c., tutelary god (classical or pagan), from Latin genius guardian deity or spirit which
watches over each person from birth; spirit, incarnation, wit, talent; also prophetic skill,
originally generative power, from root of gignere beget, produce (see kin), from PIE root *gen-
produce. Sense of characteristic disposition is from 1580s. Meaning person of natural intelligence
or talent and that of natural ability are first recorded 1640s.


ta

1772, natural infantile sound of gratitude [Weekley].


artificial (adj.)

late 14c., in the phrase artificial day part of the day from sunrise to sunset, from Old French
artificial, from Latin artificialis of or belonging to art, from artificium (see artifice). Meaning
made by man (opposite of natural) is from early 15c. Applied to things that are not natural, whether
real (artificial light) or not (artificial flowers). Artificial insemination dates from 1897.
Artificial intelligence the science and engineering of making intelligent machines was coined in
1956.


wow (interj.)

1510s, Scottish, a natural expression of amazement. This old interjection had a new popularity in
the early 1900s and again during the 1960s and later [DAS].


Perrier

proprietary name of a natural mineral water from southern France, first attested in English 1904.


native (adj.)

late 14c., natural, hereditary, connected with something in a natural way, from Old French natif
native, born in; raw, unspoiled (14c.) and directly from Latin nativus innate, produced by birth,
from natus, past participle of nasci (Old Latin gnasci) be born, related to gignere beget, from PIE
root *gene-/*gen- to give birth, beget, with derivatives referring to familial and tribal groups
(see genus). From late 15c. as born in a particular place. From early 15c. as of one's birth, also
used from mid-15c. in sense of bound; born in servitude or serfdom, also, as a noun a bondsman,
serf. Native American attested from 1956.


tut (interj.)

1520s, along with tush (mid-15c.), a natural interjection expressing impatient or dismissive
contempt.


oops

a natural exclamation [OED] of surprise at doing something awkward, but attested only from 1933
(compare whoops).


astrology (n.)

late 14c., from Latin astrologia astronomy, the science of the heavenly bodies, from Greek
astrologia telling of the stars, from astron star (see astro-) + -logia treating of (see -logy).
Originally identical with astronomy, it had also a special sense of practical astronomy, astronomy
applied to prediction of events. This was divided into natural astrology the calculation and
foretelling of natural phenomenon (tides, eclipses, etc.), and judicial astrology the art of judging
occult influences of stars on human affairs (also known as astromancy, 1650s). Differentiation
between astrology and astronomy began late 1400s and by 17c. this word was limited to reading
influences of the stars and their effects on human destiny.


physic (n.)

c.1300, fysike, art of healing, medical science, also natural science (c.1300), from Old French
fisike natural science, art of healing (12c.) and directly from Latin physica (fem. singular of
physicus) study of nature, from Greek physike (episteme) (knowledge) of nature, from fem. of
physikos pertaining to nature, from physis nature, from phyein to bring forth, produce, make to grow
(related to phyton growth, plant, phyle tribe, race, phyma a growth, tumor) from PIE root *bheue- to
be exist, grow (see be). Spelling with ph- attested from late 14c. (see ph). As a noun, medicine
that acts as a laxative, 1610s. The verb meaning to dose with medicine is attested from late 14c.


ley (n.)

line of a prehistoric track; alignment of natural and artificial features, 1922 [Alfred Watkins],
apparently a variant of lea. Popular topic in Britain in 1920s and 30s and again in 1960s-70s.


sophisticated (adj.)

c.1600, mixed with a foreign substance, impure; no longer simple or natural, past participle
adjective from sophisticate (v.). Of persons, with a positive sense, worldly-wise, discriminating,
cultured, from 1895.


cardinal (adj.)

chief, pivotal, early 14c., from Latin cardinalis principal, chief, essential, from cardo (genitive
cardinis) that on which something turns or depends; pole of the sky, originally door hinge, of
unknown origin. Related: Cardinally.    The cardinal points (1540s) are north, south, east, west.
The cardinal sins (c.1600) are too well known to require rehearsal. The cardinal virtues (c.1300)
were divided into natural (justice prudence, temperance, fortitude) and theological (faith, hope,
charity). The natural ones were the original classical ones, which were amended by Christians. But
typically in Middle English only the first four were counted as the cardinal virtues:    Of &#254;e
uour uirtues cardinales speke&#254; moche &#254;e yealde philosofes. [Ayenbite of Inwyt, c.1340]
By analogy of this, and cardinal points, cardinal winds, cardinal signs (four zodiacal signs marking
the equinoxes and the solstices), the adjective in Middle English acquired an association with the
number four.


nature (n.)

late 13c., restorative powers of the body, bodily processes; powers of growth; from Old French
nature nature, being, principle of life; character, essence, from Latin natura course of things;
natural character, constitution, quality; the universe, literally birth, from natus born, past
participle of nasci to be born, from PIE *gene- to give birth, beget (see genus).    From late 14c.
as creation, the universe; also heredity, birth, hereditary circumstance; essential qualities,
innate disposition (as in human nature); nature personified, Mother Nature. Specifically as material
world beyond human civilization or society from 1660s. Nature and nurture have been contrasted since
1874.  Nature should be avoided in such vague expressions as 'a lover of nature,' 'poems about
nature.' Unless more specific statements follow, the reader cannot tell whether the poems have to do
with natural scenery, rural life, the sunset, the untouched wilderness, or the habits of squirrels.
[Strunk &amp; White, The Elements of Style, 3rd ed., 1979]


history (n.)

late 14c., relation of incidents (true or false), from Old French estoire, estorie chronicle,
history, story (12c., Modern French histoire), from Latin historia narrative of past events,
account, tale, story, from Greek historia a learning or knowing by inquiry; an account of one's
inquiries, history, record, narrative, from historein inquire, from histor wise man, judge, from PIE
*wid-tor-, from root *weid- to know, literally to see (see vision).    Related to Greek idein to
see, and to eidenai to know. In Middle English, not differentiated from story; sense of record of
past events probably first attested late 15c. As a branch of knowledge, from 1842. Sense of
systematic account (without reference to time) of a set of natural phenomena (1560s) is now obsolete
except in natural history.    One difference between history and imaginative literature ... is that
history neither anticipates nor satisfies our curiosity, whereas literature does. [Guy Davenport,
Wheel Ruts, 1996]


cultured (adj.)

1743 in the literal sense of cultivated, of land, etc., past participle adjective from culture;
meaning developed under controlled natural conditions is from 1906, originally of pearls. Meaning
improved by exposure to intellectual culture is from 1777.


unsophisticated (adj.)

1620s, unmixed, from un- (1) not + sophisticated (adj.). Meaning ingenuous, natural, inexperienced
is recorded from 1660s.


outgrowth (n.)

1837, from out (adv.) + growth. Figurative sense natural product is earlier (1828).


Jansenism (n.)

1650s, in reference to doctrine of Cornelius Jansen (1585-1638), Catholic bishop of Ypres, who
maintained the perverseness and inability for good of the natural human will. Related: Jansenist.


crimp (n.)

1863, from crimp (v.). Originally natural curl in wool fiber. To put a crimp in (something) is 1896,
U.S. slang.


psychography (n.)

1883, history of an individual soul; the natural history of the phenomenon of mind, from psycho- +
-graphy. Meaning spirit-writing is from 1876.


inorganic (adj.)

1794, without organized organic structure, from in- (1) not, opposite of + organic. Sense of not
arriving by natural growth recorded from 1862.


untaught (adj.)

mid-14c., not instructed or educated, from un- (1) not + taught. Hence spontaneous, natural (mid-
15c.).


music (n.)

mid-13c., musike, from Old French musique (12c.) and directly from Latin musica the art of music,
also including poetry (also source of Spanish musica, Italian musica, Old High German mosica, German
Musik, Dutch muziek, Danish musik), from Greek mousike (techne) (art) of the Muses, from fem. of
mousikos pertaining to the Muses, from Mousa Muse (see muse (n.)). Modern spelling from 1630s. In
classical Greece, any art in which the Muses presided, but especially music and lyric poetry.    The
use of letters to denote music pitch probably is at least as old as ancient Greece, as their
numbering system was ill-suited to the job. Natural scales begin at C (not A) because in ancient
times the minor mode was more often used than the major one, and the natural minor scale begins at
A.   Music box is from 1773, originally barrel organ; music hall is from 1842, especially hall
licensed for musical entertainment (1857). To face the music accept the consequences is from 1850;
the exact image is uncertain, one theory ties it to stage performers, another to cavalry horses
having to be taught to stay calm while the regimental band plays. To make (beautiful) music with
someone have sexual intercourse is from 1967.


unstudied (adj.)

late 14c., not made a subject of study, from un- (1) not + past participle of study (v.). From 1650s
as natural, not artificial.


unkind (adj.)

Old English uncynde unnatural, not natural; see un- (1) not + kind (adj.). Meaning lacking in
kindness is recorded from mid-14c.


womanhood (n.)

late 14c., condition of being a woman, also qualities or characteristics considered natural to a
woman, from woman + -hood. Meaning women collectively is attested from 1520s.


pileated (adj.)

1728, from Latin pileatus capped, from pileus felt cap without a brim, from Greek pilos. Applied in
natural history to certain birds and sea urchins.


idyllic (adj.)

full of natural, simple charm, 1831, literally suitable for an idyll (late 18c. in sense pertaining
to an idyll); from idyll + -ic.


blow-fly (n.)

1720, from fly (n.) + blow (v.1) in an obsolete sense to deposit eggs, to infect with eggs, in
reference to to insects, apparently connected with old notions of natural history [OED].


