nauseate (v.)

1630s, to feel sick, to become affected with nausea, from nauseat- past participle stem of Latin
nauseare to feel seasick, to vomit, also to cause disgust, from nausea (see nausea). Related:
Nauseated; nauseating;  nauseatingly. In its early life it also had transitive senses of to reject
(food, etc.) with a feeling of nausea (1640s) and to create a loathing in, to cause nausea (1650s).
Careful writers use nauseated for sick at the stomach and reserve nauseous (q.v.) for sickening to
contemplate.


nauseant (n.)

1834, from Latin nauseant-, present participle stem of nauseare (see nauseate (v.)).


nauseous (adj.)

c.1600, inclined to nausea, easily made queasy (obsolete), from nausea + -ous. Sense of causing
nausea or squeamishness is attested from 1610s. For distinction from nauseated see nauseate.
Related: Nauseously; nauseousness.


turn (v.)

late Old English turnian to rotate, revolve, in part also from Old French torner to turn away or
around; draw aside, cause to turn; change, transform; turn on a lathe (Modern French tourner), both
from Latin tornare to polish, round off, fashion, turn on a lathe, from tornus lathe, from Greek
tornos lathe, tool for drawing circles, from PIE root *tere- (1) to rub, rub by turning, turn, twist
(see throw (v.)). Transitive sense in English is from c.1300. Related: Turned; turning.    Use in
expression to turn (something) into (something else) probably retains the classical sense of to
shape on a lathe. To turn up arrive, make an appearance is recorded from 1755. Turn about by turns,
alternately is recorded from 1640s. To turn (something) loose set free is recorded from 1590s. Turn
down (v.) reject first recorded 1891, American English. Turn in go to bed is attested from 1690s,
originally nautical. To turn the stomach nauseate is recorded from 1620s. To turn up one's nose as
an expression of contempt is attested from 1779.   Turning point is attested by 1640s in a
figurative sense point at which a decisive change takes place; literal sense point on which a thing
turns; point at which motion in one direction ceases and that in another or contrary direction
begins is from 1660s.


