nauseate (v.)

1630s, to feel sick, to become affected with nausea, from nauseat- past participle stem of Latin
nauseare to feel seasick, to vomit, also to cause disgust, from nausea (see nausea). Related:
Nauseated; nauseating;  nauseatingly. In its early life it also had transitive senses of to reject
(food, etc.) with a feeling of nausea (1640s) and to create a loathing in, to cause nausea (1650s).
Careful writers use nauseated for sick at the stomach and reserve nauseous (q.v.) for sickening to
contemplate.


nausea (n.)

early 15c., vomiting, from Latin nausea seasickness, from Ionic Greek nausia (Attic nautia)
seasickness, nausea, disgust, literally ship-sickness, from naus ship (see naval). Despite its
etymology, the word in English seems never to have been restricted to seasickness.


nauseous (adj.)

c.1600, inclined to nausea, easily made queasy (obsolete), from nausea + -ous. Sense of causing
nausea or squeamishness is attested from 1610s. For distinction from nauseated see nauseate.
Related: Nauseously; nauseousness.


noise (n.)

early 13c., loud outcry, clamor, shouting, from Old French noise din, disturbance, uproar, brawl
(11c., in modern French only in phrase chercher noise to pick a quarrel), also rumor, report, news,
apparently from Latin nausea disgust, annoyance, discomfort, literally seasickness (see nausea).
Another theory traces the Old French word to Latin noxia hurting, injury, damage. OED considers that
the sense of the word is against both suggestions, but nausea could have developed a sense in Vulgar
Latin of unpleasant situation, noise, quarrel (compare Old Proven&ccedil;al nauza noise, quarrel).
Meaning loud or unpleasant sound is from c.1300. Replaced native gedyn (see din).


ad nauseam

to a sickening extent, Latin, literally to sickness, from ad to (see ad-) + nauseam, accusative of
nausea (see nausea).


Dramamine

proprietary name of an anti-nausea drug, 1949. Said to have been originally developed as an anti-
allergy drug at Johns Hopkins.


sickening (adj.)

falling sick, 1725; causing revulsion, disgust, or nausea, 1789, present participle adjective from
sicken. Related: Sickeningly.


crapulous (adj.)

1530s, sick from too much drinking, from Latin crapula, from Greek kraipale hangover, drunken
headache, nausea from debauching. The Romans used it for drunkenness itself. English has used it in
both senses. Related: Crapulously; crapulousness.


disgust (v.)

c.1600, from Middle French desgouster have a distaste for (see disgust (n.)). Sense has strengthened
over time, and subject and object have been reversed; the older use looks like this: It is not very
palatable, which makes some disgust it (1660s). The reverse sense of to excite nausea is attested
from 1640s. Related: Disgusted; disgusting.


wl-

an initial sound cluster in words in Old English and early Middle English; among the Old English
words were wlanc stately, splendid; wl&#230;tung nausea; wlenc pride, arrogance (Middle English
wlonk); wlite brightness, beauty, splendor; wlitig radiant, physically beautiful (Middle English
wliti).


sick (adj.)

unwell, Old English seoc ill, diseased, feeble, weak; corrupt; sad, troubled, deeply affected, from
Proto-Germanic *seukaz, of uncertain origin. The general Germanic word (Old Norse sjukr, Danish syg,
Old Saxon siok, Old Frisian siak, Middle Dutch siec, Dutch ziek, Old High German sioh, Gothic siuks
sick, ill), but in German and Dutch displaced by krank weak, slim, probably originally with a sense
of twisted, bent (see crank (n.)).    Restricted meaning having an inclination to vomit, affected
with nausea is from 1610s; sense of tired or weary (of something), disgusted from satiety is from
1590s; phrase sick and tired of is attested from 1783. Meaning mentally twisted in modern colloquial
use is from 1955, a revival of the word in this sense from 1550s (sense of spiritually or morally
corrupt was in Old English, which also had seocmod infirm of mind); sick joke is from 1958.


