navigable (adj.)

mid-15c., from Old French navigable (14c.) or directly from Latin navigabilis, from navigat-, past
participle stem of navigare (see navigation). Related: Navigability.


Senegal

African nation, named for the river through it, perhaps from a local word meaning navigable.


portage (n.)

early 15c., action of carrying, said to be from Old French portage, Medieval Latin portaticum,
though the meaning of these was tax paid on entering a town, from Latin portare to carry (see port
(n.1)). Sense of carrying of boats from one navigable water to another is from 1690s, reinforced in
Canadian French.


pluvial (adj.)

1650s, pertaining to rain, from French pluvial (12c.), from Latin pluvialis pertaining to rain,
rainy, rain-bringing, from (aqua) pluvia rain (water), from fem. of pluvius rainy, from plovere to
rain, from PIE root *pleu- to flow, to swim (cognates: Sanskrit plavate navigates, swims; Greek
plynein to wash, plein to navigate, ploein to float, swim, plotos floating, navigable; Armenian
luanam I wash; Old English flowan to flow; Old Church Slavonic plovo to flow, navigate; Lithuanian
pilu, pilti to pour out, plauju, plauti to swim, rinse).


patience (n.)

c.1200, quality of being willing to bear adversities, calm endurance of misfortune, suffering, etc.,
from Old French pacience patience; sufferance, permission (12c.) and directly from Latin patientia
patience, endurance, submission, also indulgence, leniency; humility; submissiveness; submission to
lust; literally quality of suffering. It is an abstract noun formed from the adjective patientem
(nominative patiens) bearing, supporting; suffering, enduring, permitting; tolerant, but also firm,
unyielding, hard, used of persons as well as of navigable rivers, present participle of pati to
suffer, endure, from PIE root *pe(i)- to damage, injure, hurt (see passion).<b>Patience</b>, n. A
minor form of despair, disguised as a virtue. [Ambrose Bierce, Devil's Dictionary, 1911]Meaning
constancy in effort is attested from 1510s. Meaning card game for one person is from 1816.


