nebular (adj.)

1821, pertaining to an (astronomical) nebula or nebulae, from nebula + -ar.


nebula (n.)

early 15c., nebule a cloud, mist, from Latin nebula mist, vapor, fog, smoke, exhalation,
figuratively darkness, obscurity, from PIE *nebh- cloud (cognates: Sanskrit nabhas- vapor, cloud,
mists, fog, sky; Greek nephele, nephos cloud; German nebel fog; Old English nifol dark, gloomy;
Welsh niwl cloud, fog; Slavic nebo).    Re-borrowed from Latin 1660s in sense of cataracts in the
eye; astronomical meaning cloud-like patch in the night sky first recorded c.1730. As early as
Hershel (1802) astronomers realized that some nebulae were star clusters, but certain distinction of
relatively nearby cosmic gas clouds from distant galaxies was not made until 1920s, using the new
100-inch Mt. Wilson telescope.


nimbus (n.)

1610s, bright cloud surrounding a god, from Latin nimbus cloud, perhaps related to nebula cloud,
mist (see nebula). Meaning halo is first recorded c.1730. Meteorological sense of a rain cloud is
from 1803.


Neptune

late 14c., god of the sea, from Latin Neptunus, son of Saturn, brother of Jupiter, the Roman god of
the sea (later identified with Greek Poseidon), probably from PIE root *nebh- cloud (source of Latin
nebula fog, mist, cloud; see nebula), via a sense of moist, wet. The planet so named was discovered
by Galle in 1846. Until the identification of Pluto in 1930, it was the most distant planet known.


nebulous (adj.)

late 14c., cloudy, misty, from Latin nebulosus cloudy, misty, foggy, full of vapor, from nebula (see
nebula). The figurative sense of hazy, vague, formless is first attested 1831. Astronomical sense is
from 1670s. Related: Nebulously; nebulousness.


nebulosity (n.)

1738, from French n&#233;bulosit&#233;, from Late Latin nebulositatem (nominative nebulositas), from
Latin nebulosus, from nebula (see nebula).


nebulizer (n.)

1865, agent noun from verb nebulize to reduce to a mist or spray (1865), from Latin nebula mist (see
nebula) + -ize. Related: Nebulization.


Messier

in reference to a catalogue of about 100 nebulae, star clusters and galaxies begun in 1758 by French
astronomer and comet-hunter Charles Messier (1730-1817), who found his telescopic searches deceived
by fuzzy objects that resembled distant comets but turned out to be fixed.    What caused me to
undertake the catalog was the nebula I discovered above the southern horn of Taurus on September 12,
1758, whilst observing the comet of that year. This nebula had such a resemblance to a comet in its
form and brightness that I endeavored to find others, so that astronomers would no more confuse
these same nebulae with comets just beginning to appear. [Messier, 1800]    The first version of the
catalogue was published 1771, and the fuller version in 1781.


Nibelungenlied (n.)

German epic poem of 13c., literally song of the Nibelungs, a race of dwarves who lived in Norway and
owned a hoard of gold and a magic ring, literally children of the mist, related to Old High German
nebul mist, darkness, Old English nifol (see nebula).


planetary (adj.)

1590s; see planet + -ary. Probably from Late Latin planetarius pertaining to a planet or planets,
but this is attested only as an astrologer. Planetary nebula, so called for its shape, attested from
1785.


imbrication (n.)

1640s, from French imbrication, from Latin imbricare to cover with tiles, from imbricem (nominative
imbrex) curved roof tile used to draw off rain, from imber (genitive imbris) rain, from PIE *ombh-
ro- rain (cognates: Sanskrit abhra cloud, thunder-cloud, rainy weather, Greek ombros rain), from
root *nebh- moist, water (see nebula).


crab (n.1)

crustacean, Old English crabba, from a general Germanic root (compare Dutch krab, Old High German
krebiz, German Krabbe, Old Norse krabbi crab), related to Low German krabben, Dutch krabelen to
scratch, claw, from PIE root *gerbh- to scratch, carve (see carve). The constellation name is
attested in English from c.1000; the Crab Nebula (1840), however, is in Taurus, the result of the
supernova of 1054, and is so called for its shape. French crabe (13c.) is from Germanic, probably
Old Norse.


Praesepe (n.)

loose (open) star cluster (M44) in Cancer, from Latin praesaepe the Roman name for the grouping,
literally enclosure, stall, manger, hive, from prae- (see pre-) + saepire to fence (see septum).
It is similar to the Hyades but more distant, about 600 light-years away, consists of about 1,000
stars, mostly older, the brightest of them around magnitude 6.5, thus not discernable to the naked
eye even on the clearest nights, but their collective light makes a visible fuzz of glow that the
ancients likened to a cloud (the original nebula); Galileo was the first to resolve it into stars
(1609). The modern name for it in U.S. and Britain, Beehive, seems no older than 1840. Greek names
included Nephelion Little Cloud and Akhlys Little Mist. In astrology, like all clusters, it
threatened mischief and blindness [Allen].    Manger to the Romans perhaps by influence of two
nearby stars, Gamma and Delta Cancri, dim and unspectacular but both for some reason figuring
largely in ancient astrology and weather forecasting, and known as the Asses (Latin Aselli),
supposedly those of Silenus.


