nectarine (n.)

type of peach with smooth skin, 1660s, noun use of adjective meaning of or like nectar (1610s; see
nectar + -ine (1)). Probably inspired by German nektarpfirsich nectar-peach. Earlier in English as
nectrine.


nectar (n.)

1550s, from Latin nectar, from Greek nektar, name of the drink of the gods, which is said to be a
compound of nek- death (see necro-) + -tar overcoming, from PIE *tere- (2) to cross over, pass
through, overcome (see through). Meaning sweet liquid in flowers first recorded c.1600.


pop (n.1)

a hit with an explosive sound, c.1400, of imitative origin.  Meaning flavored carbonated beverage is
from 1812.A new manufactory of a nectar, between soda-water and ginger-beer, and called pop, because
'pop goes the cork' when it is drawn. [Southey, letter, 1812]  Sense of ice cream on a stick is from
1923 (see popsicle). Meaning the (brief) time of a 'pop' is from 1530s. Pop goes the weasel, a
country dance, was popular 1850s in school yards, with organ grinders, at court balls, etc.


sap (n.1)

liquid in a plant, Old English s&aelig;pm from Proto-Germanic *sapam (cognates: Middle Low German,
Middle Dutch, Dutch sap, Old High German saf, German Saft juice), from PIE root *sab- juice, fluid
(cognates: Sanskrit sabar- sap, milk, nectar, Latin sapere to taste, Irish sug, Russian soku sap,
Lithuanian sakas tree-gum). As a verb meaning To drain the sap from, 1725.


mildew (n.)

mid-13c., mildeu honeydew, nectar, from Old English meledeaw honeydew (sticky stuff exuded by
aphids), from Proto-Germanic compound of *melith honey (see Melissa) + *dawwaz dew (see dew).
Similar formation in Old Saxon milidou, Dutch meeldauw, German Meltau mildew.    First element in
many cases assimilated to forms of meal (n.2) ground grain. As a kind of fungus it is first recorded
mid-14c., so called from its being sticky and originally growing in plants. As a verb from 1550s.
Related: Mildewed.


Melissa

fem. proper name, from Latin, from Greek (Ionic) melissa (Attic melitta) honeybee, also one of the
priestesses of Delphi, from PIE *melit-ya, suffixed form of *melit- honey (cognates: Greek meli,
Latin mel honey; sweetness; Albanian mjal' honey; Old Irish mil honey, Irish milis sweet; Old
English mildeaw nectar, milisc honeyed, sweet; Old High German milsken to sweeten; Gothic
mili&thorn; honey).


tear (n.1)

fluid drop from the eye, Old English tear tear, drop, nectar, what is distilled in drops, from
earlier teahor, t&aelig;hher, from Proto-Germanic *tahr-, *tagr- (cognates: Old Norse, Old Frisian
tar, Old High German zahar, German Z&auml;hre, Gothic tagr tear), from PIE *dakru- (cognates: Latin
lacrima, Old Latin dacrima, Irish der, Welsh deigr, Greek dakryma). To be in tears weeping is from
1550s. Tear gas first recorded 1917.


Hesperus

late 14c., poetic for the evening star, from Latin Hesperus, from Greek hesperos (aster) western
(star), from PIE *wes-pero- evening, night (see vesper). Hence also Hesperides (1590s), from Greek,
daughters of the West, the nymphs (variously numbered but originally three) who tended the garden
with the golden apples. Their name has been mistakenly transferred to the garden itself.    The
Hesperides were daughters of Atlas, an enormous giant, who, as the ancients believed, stood upon the
western confines of the earth, and supported the heavens on his shoulders. Their mother was
Hesperis, a personification of the region of the West, where the sun continued to shine after he had
set on Greece, and where, as travellers told, was an abundance of choice delicious fruits, which
could only have been produced by a special divine influence. The Gardens of the Hesperides with the
golden apples were believed to exist in some island in the ocean, or, as it was sometimes thought,
in the islands on the north or west coast of Africa. They were far-famed in antiquity; for it was
there that springs of nectar flowed by the couch of Zeus, and there that the earth displayed the
rarest blessings of the gods; it was another Eden. As knowledge increased with regard to western
lands, it became necessary to move this paradise farther and farther out into the Western Ocean.
[Alexander Murray, Manual of Mythology, 1888]


