nemesis

1570s, Nemesis, Greek goddess of vengeance, personification of divine wrath, from Greek nemesis just
indignation, righteous anger, literally distribution (of what is due), related to nemein distribute,
allot, apportion one's due, from PIE root *nem- to divide, distribute, allot, to take (cognates: Old
English, Gothic niman to take, German nehmen; see nimble). With a lower-case -n-, in the sense of
retributive justice, attested from 1590s. General sense of anything by which it seems one must be
defeated is 20c.


Adrastea

nemesis, daughter of Zeus, distributor of rewards and punishments, from Greek Adrasteia, literally
she from whom there is no escape, from adrastos not running away, from privative prefix a- + stem of
drasmos a running away, related to dromos course (see dromedary).


nomad (n.)

1550s, from Middle French nomade (16c.), from Latin Nomas (genitive Nomadis) wandering groups in
Arabia, from Greek nomas (genitive nomados, plural nomades) roaming, roving, wandering (to find
pastures for flocks or herds), related to nomos pasture, pasturage, grazing, literally land
allotted, from PIE root *nem- to divide, distribute, allot (see nemesis).


numismatic (adj.)

1765, pertaining to historical coins and coinage, from French numismatique (late 16c.), from Latin
numismat-, stem of numisma coin, currency, from Greek nomisma current coin, money, usage, literally
what has been sanctioned by custom or usage, from nomizein have in use, adopt a custom, from nomos
custom, law, usage, from PIE root *nem- to divide, distribute, allot (see nemesis). Related:
Numismatical (1716). Earlier in the same sense was nummary (1650s), from Latin nummarius, from
nummus a coin.


nimble (adj.)

agile, light-footed, c.1300, nemel, from Old English n&aelig;mel quick to grasp (attested but once),
related to niman to take, from Proto-Germanic *neman (cognates: Old Saxon, Old Dutch, Gothic niman,
Old Norse nema, Old Frisian nima, German nehmen to take), from PIE root *nem- to divide, distribute,
allot, also to take (cognates: Greek nemein to deal out, nemesis just indignation, Latin numerus
number, Lithuanian nuoma rent, interest, Middle Irish nos custom, usage). With excrescent -b- from
c.1500 (compare limb (n.1)). Related: Nimbleness. In 17c., English had nimblechaps talkative fellow.


number (n.)

c.1300, sum, aggregate of a collection, from Anglo-French noumbre, Old French nombre and directly
from Latin numerus a number, quantity, from PIE root *nem- to divide, distribute, allot (related to
Greek nemein to deal out; see nemesis). Meaning symbol or figure of arithmetic value is from late
14c. Meaning single (numbered) issue of a magazine is from 1795. Meaning dialing combination to
reach a particular telephone receiver is from 1879; hence wrong number (1886). The modern meaning
musical selection (1885) is from vaudeville theater programs, where acts were marked by a number.
Earlier numbers meant Harmony; proportion calculated by number, and Verses, poetry [Johnson].
Number one oneself is from 1704 (mock-Italian form numero uno attested from 1973); the biblical Book
of Numbers (c.1400, Latin Numeri, Greek Arithmoi) so called because it begins with a census of the
Israelites. Slang number one and number two for urination and defecation attested from 1902. Number
cruncher is 1966, of machines; 1971, of persons. To get or have (someone's) number have someone
figured out is attested from 1853. The numbers illegal lottery is from 1897, American English.


