netherworld (n.)

also nether-world, 1630s, place beneath the earth, from nether + world.


Netherlands

from Dutch Nederland, literally lower land (see nether); said to have been used by the Austrians
(who ruled much of the southern part of the Low Countries from 1713 to 1795), by way of contrast to
the mountains they knew, but the name is older than this. The Netherlands formerly included Flanders
and thus were equivalent geographically and etymologically to the Low Countries. Related:
Netherlander; Netherlandish (c.1600).


nether (adj.)

Old English ni&thorn;era, neo&thorn;era down, downwards, below, beneath, from Proto-Germanic
*nitheraz (cognates: Old Saxon nithar, Old Norse ni&eth;r, Old Frisian nither, Dutch neder, German
nieder), from comparative of PIE *ni- down, below (cognates: Sanskrit ni down, nitaram downward,
Greek neiothen from below, Old Church Slavonic niz&#365; low, down). Has been replaced in most
senses by lower (adj.).


Stygian (adj.)

pertaining to Styx or the nether world, 1560s, from Latin Stygius, from Greek Stygios, from Styx
(genitive Stygos); see Styx.


beneath (adv., adj.)

Old English beneo&eth;an beneath, under, below, from be- by + neo&eth;an below, originally from
below, from Proto-Germanic *ni&thorn;ar lower, farther down, down (see nether). Meaning unworthy of
is attested from 1849 (purists prefer below in this sense). The be- gave or emphasized the notion of
'where,' excluding that of 'whence' pertaining to the simple ni&eth;an [OED].


nitre (n.)

c.1400, native sodium carbonate, from Old French nitre (13c.), from Latin nitrum, from Greek nitron,
which is possibly of Eastern origin (compare Hebrew nether carbonate of soda; Egyptian ntr).
Originally a word for native soda, but also associated from Middle Ages with saltpeter (potassium
nitrate) for obscure reasons; this became the predominant sense by late 16c.


Upanishad (n.)

one of a class of speculative treatises in Sanskrit literature, 1805, from Sanskrit upa-nishad,
literally a sitting down beside. From upa near to (see up (adv.)) + ni-shad to sit or lie down, from
ni downward (from PIE *ni-, see nether) + -sad sitting, From PIE *sed- (1) to sit (see sedentary).


hell (n.)

Old English hel, helle, nether world, abode of the dead, infernal regions, from Proto-Germanic
*haljo the underworld (cognates: f. Old Frisian helle, Dutch hel, Old Norse hel, German H&ouml;lle,
Gothic halja hell) the underworld, literally concealed place (compare Old Norse hellir cave,
cavern), from PIE *kel- (2) to cover, conceal (see cell).    The English word may be in part from
Old Norse Hel (from Proto-Germanic *halija one who covers up or hides something), in Norse mythology
the name of Loki's daughter, who rules over the evil dead in Niflheim, the lowest of all worlds
(nifl mist). Transfer of a pagan concept and word to a Christian idiom. In Middle English, also of
the Limbus Patrum, place where the Patriarchs, Prophets, etc. awaited the Atonement. Used in the KJV
for Old Testament Hebrew Sheol and New Testament Greek Hades, Gehenna. Used figuratively for state
of misery, any bad experience since at least late 14c. As an expression of disgust, etc., first
recorded 1670s.    Expression Hell in a handbasket is attested by 1867, in a context implying use
from a few years before, and the notion of going to Heaven in a handbasket is from 1853, with a
sense of easy passage to the destination. Hell or high water (1874) apparently is a variation of
between the devil and the deep blue sea. To wish someone would go to hell is in Shakespeare
(Merchant of Venice). Snowball's chance in hell no chance is from 1931; till hell freezes over never
is from 1832. To ride hell for leather is from 1889, originally with reference to riding on
horseback. Hell on wheels is said to be from 1843 in DAS; popularity dates from 1869 in reference to
the temporary workers' towns along the U.S. transcontinental railroad and their vices.


