network (v.)

1887, to cover with a network, from network (n.). From 1940 as to broadcast over a (radio) network;
1972 in reference to computers; 1980s in reference to persons. Related: Networked; networking.


network (n.)

net-like arrangement of threads, wires, etc., 1550s, from net (n.) + work (n.). Extended sense of
any complex, interlocking system is from 1839 (originally in reference to transport by rivers,
canals, and railways). Meaning broadcasting system of multiple transmitters is from 1914; sense of
interconnected group of people is from 1947.


ARPANET

acronym from Advanced Research Projects Agency Network, set up in 1969 by a branch of the U.S.
Department of Defense in partnership with four universities; acknowledged as the world's first
operational packet switching network and predecessor of the Internet.


plexus (n.)

1680s, Modern Latin, literally braid, network, noun use of past participle of Latin plectere to
twine, braid, fold (see complex (adj.)); used of a network, such as solar plexus network of nerves
in the abdomen (see solar). Related: Plexal.


Teletex (n.)

proprietary name for a computer data-sharing network, 1978.


Underground Railroad (n.)

network of U.S. anti-slavery activists helping runaways elude capture, attested from 1847, but said
to date from 1831 and to have been coined in jest by bewildered trackers after their slaves vanished
without a trace. Originally mostly the term for escape networks in the (then) western states of the
U.S.


grid (n.)

1839, shortening of gridiron. City planning sense is from 1954 (hence gridlock). Meaning network of
transmission lines first recorded 1926.


Internet (n.)

1985, the linked computer networks of the U.S. Defense Department, shortened from internetwork, from
inter- + network (n.).


fibrin (n.)

blood-clotting substance, 1800, from Latin fibra (see fiber) + chemical suffix -in (2). So called
because it is deposited as a network of fibers that cause the blood to clot.


reticule (n.)

a ladies' small bag, 1801, from French r&eacute;ticule (18c.) a net for the hair, a reticule, from
Latin reticulum a little net, network bag (see reticulate (adj.)).


flame (v.)

early 14c., flamen, from Old French flamer, from flamme (see flame (n.)). The sense of unleash
invective on a computer network is from 1980s. Related: Flamed; flaming.


retina (n.)

late 14c., from Medieval Latin retina the retina, probably from Vulgar Latin (tunica) *retina,
literally net-like tunic, on resemblance to the network of blood vessels at the back of the eye, and
ultimately from Latin rete net (see reticulate (adj.)). The Vulgar Latin phrase might be Gerard of
Cremona's 12c. translation of Arabic (tabaqa) shabakiyyah netlike (layer), itself probably a
translation of Greek amphiblestroeides (khiton).


net (n.)

Old English net netting, network, spider web, mesh used for capturing, also figuratively, moral or
mental snare or trap, from Proto-Germanic *natjan (cognates: Old Saxon net, Old Norse, Dutch net,
Swedish n&auml;t, Old High German nezzi, German Netz, Gothic nati net), originally something
knotted, from PIE *ned- to twist, knot (cognates: Sanskrit nahyati binds, ties, Latin nodus knot,
Old Irish nascim I bind, oblige).


phreak (n.)

1972, originally in phone phreak, one of a set of technically creative people who electronically
hacked or defrauded telephone companies of the day.    The phreaks first appeared on the US scene in
the early 1960s, when a group of MIT students were found to have conducted a late night dialling
experiment on the Defense Department's secret network. They were rewarded with jobs when they
explained their system to Bell investigators. ... The name phone phreak identified the enthisiasts
with the common underground usage of freak as someone who was cool and used drugs. [New Scientist,
Dec. 13, 1973]    The ph- in phone may have suggested the alteration, and this seems to be the
original of the 1990s slang fad for substituting ph- for f- (as in phat).


nuts (adj.)

crazy, 1846, from earlier be nutts upon be very fond of (1785), which is possibly from nuts (plural
noun) any source of pleasure (1610s), from nut (q.v.). Sense influenced probably by metaphoric
application of nut to head (1846, as in to be off one's nut be insane, 1860). Nuts as a derisive
retort is attested from 1931.    Connection with the slang testicle sense has tended to nudge it
toward taboo. On the N.B.C. network, it is forbidden to call any character a nut; you have to call
him a screwball. [New Yorker, Dec. 23, 1950] Please eliminate the expression 'nuts to you' from
Egbert's speech. [Request from the Hays Office regarding the script of The Bank Dick, 1940] This
desire for avoidance accounts for the euphemism nerts (c.1925).


irrepressible (adj.)

1767, from assimilated form of in- (1) not, opposite of + repressible (see repress).    Increase of
population, which is filling the States out to their very borders, together with a new and extended
network of railroads and other avenues, and an internal commerce which daily becomes more intimate,
is rapidly bringing the States into a higher and more perfect social unity or consolidation. Thus,
these antagonistic systems are continually coming into closer contact, and collision results.
Shall I tell you what this collision means? They who think that it is accidental, unnecessary, the
work of interested or fanatical agitators, and therefor ephemeral, mistake the case altogether. It
is an irrepressible conflict between opposing and enduring forces, and it means that the United
States must and will, sooner or later, become either entirely a slaveholding nation, or entirely a
free-labor nation. [William H. Seward, speech at Rochester, N.Y., Oct. 2, 1858]    Related:
Irrepressibly.


allay (v.)

Old English alecgan to put down, remit, give up, a Germanic compound (cognates: Gothic uslagjan, Old
High German irleccan, German erlegen), from a- down, aside + lecgan to lay (see lay).    Early
Middle English pronunciations of -y- and -g- were not always distinct, and the word was confused in
Middle English with various senses of Romanic-derived alloy and allege, especially the latter in an
obsolete sense of to lighten, from Latin ad- to + levis (see lever).  Amid the overlapping of
meanings that thus arose, there was developed a perplexing network of uses of allay and allege, that
belong entirely to no one of the original vbs., but combine the senses of two or more of them.
[OED]The double -l- is 17c., a mistaken Latinism. Related: Allayed; allaying.


texture (n.)

early 15c., network, structure, from Middle French texture and directly from Latin textura web,
texture, structure, from stem of texere to weave, from PIE root *teks- to weave, to fabricate, to
make; make wicker or wattle framework (cognates: Sanskrit taksati he fashions, constructs, taksan
carpenter; Avestan ta&#353;a ax, hatchet, thwax&#353;- be busy; Old Persian tax&#353;- be active;
Latin tela web, net, warp of a fabric; Greek tekton carpenter, tekhne art; Old Church Slavonic tesla
ax, hatchet; Lithuanian tasau to carve; Old Irish tal cooper's ax; Old High German dahs, German
Dachs badger, literally builder; Hittite taksh- to join, unite, build). Meaning structural character
is recorded from 1650s. Related: Textural.


social (adj.)

late 15c., devoted to or relating to home life; 1560s as living with others, from Middle French
social (14c.) and directly from Latin socialis of companionship, of allies; united, living with
others; of marriage, conjugal, from socius companion, ally, probably originally follower, from PIE
*sokw-yo-, suffixed form of root *sekw- (1) to follow, and thus related to sequi to follow (see
sequel). Compare Old English secg, Old Norse seggr companion, which seem to have been formed on the
same notion). Related: Socially.    Sense of characterized by friendliness or geniality is from
1660s. Meaning living or liking to live with others; companionable, disposed to friendly intercourse
is from 1720s. Meaning of or pertaining to society as a natural condition of human life first
attested 1695, in Locke. Sense of pertaining to fashionable society is from 1873.  Social climber is
from 1893; social work is 1890; social worker 1886. Social drinking first attested 1807. Social
studies as an inclusive term for history, geography, economics, etc., is attested from 1916. Social
security system of state support for needy citizens is attested from 1907 (the Social Security Act
was passed by U.S. Congress in 1935). Social butterfly is from 1867, in figurative reference to
flitting.   Social contract (1763) is from translations of Rousseau. Social Darwinism attested from
1887. Social engineering attested from 1899. Social science is from 1785.  In late 19c. newspapers,
social evil is prostitution. Social justice is attested by 1718; social network by 1971; social
networking by 1984; social media by 2008.


