nib (n.)

1580s, beak or bill of a bird, Scottish variant of Old English neb (see neb). Meaning point (of a
pen or quill) first recorded 1610s.


nibble (v.)

to bite gently, c.1500, perhaps from Low German nibbeln to nibble, gnaw, related to Middle Low
German nibbelen, Middle Dutch knibbelen to gnaw, source of Dutch knibbelen to cavail, squabble.
Related: Nibbled; nibbling.


nibble (n.)

1650s, act of nibbling, from nibble (v.). As a small bite, from 1838.


Nibelungenlied (n.)

German epic poem of 13c., literally song of the Nibelungs, a race of dwarves who lived in Norway and
owned a hoard of gold and a magic ring, literally children of the mist, related to Old High German
nebul mist, darkness, Old English nifol (see nebula).


niblick (n.)

golf club with a heavy head, of unknown origin.


nibs (n.)

especially in His Nibs boss, employer, self-important person, 1821, of unknown origin; perhaps a
variant of nob person of high position.


cannibal (n.)

human that eats human flesh, 1550s, from Spanish canibal, caribal a savage, cannibal, from Caniba,
Christopher Columbus' rendition of the Caribs' name for themselves (see Caribbean). The natives were
believed to be anthropophagites. Columbus, seeking evidence that he was in Asia, thought the name
meant the natives were subjects of the Great Khan. Shakespeare's Caliban (in The Tempest) is from a
version of this word, with -n- and -l- interchanged, found in Hakluyt's Voyages (1599). The Spanish
word had reached French by 1515. Used of animals from 1796. An Old English word for cannibal was
self&aelig;ta.


cannibalism (n.)

1796, from cannibal + -ism. Perhaps from French cannibalisme, from the same year.


cannibalistic (adj.)

1840, from cannibal + -istic. Elder but failing to flourish were cannibalic, cannibalish (both from
1824).


cannibalization (n.)

by 1907, noun of action from cannibalize.


cannibalize (v.)

1798 (in Burke's memoirs), figurative, and meaning be perverted into cannibalism, from cannibal +
-ize. Meaning take parts from one construction and use them in another is from 1943, originally of
military equipment. Related: Cannibalized; cannibalizing.


discernible (adj.)

also discernable, 1560s, from French discernable, from discerner (see discern). Form with -a- was
more common at first; spelling changed to -i- 17c. to conform to Latin discernibilis.


Hannibal

masc. proper name, name of the Carthaginian general who hounded Rome in the 2nd Punic War, Punic
Hannibha'al, literally my favor is with Baal; first element related to Hebrew hanan he was gracious,
showed favor (see Hannah); for second element see Baal.


indiscernible (adj.)

1630s, from in- (1) not, opposite of + discernible. Related: Indiscernibly; indiscernibility.


omnibus (n.)

1829, four-wheeled public vehicle with seats for passengers, from French (voiture) omnibus
(carriage) for all, common (conveyance), from Latin omnibus for all, dative plural of omnis all (see
omni-). Introduced by Jacques Lafitte in Paris in 1819 or '20, in London from 1829. In reference to
legislation, the word is recorded from 1842. Meaning man or boy who assists a waiter at a restaurant
is attested from 1888 (compare busboy). As an adjective in English from 1842.


