nimble (adj.)

agile, light-footed, c.1300, nemel, from Old English n&aelig;mel quick to grasp (attested but once),
related to niman to take, from Proto-Germanic *neman (cognates: Old Saxon, Old Dutch, Gothic niman,
Old Norse nema, Old Frisian nima, German nehmen to take), from PIE root *nem- to divide, distribute,
allot, also to take (cognates: Greek nemein to deal out, nemesis just indignation, Latin numerus
number, Lithuanian nuoma rent, interest, Middle Irish nos custom, usage). With excrescent -b- from
c.1500 (compare limb (n.1)). Related: Nimbleness. In 17c., English had nimblechaps talkative fellow.


chipper (adj.)

1834, lively, nimble, American English, from northern British dialectal kipper nimble, frisky, the
origin of which is obscure.


whippet (n.)

small, fast type of dog, c.1600, probably from whip (v.) in the sense of move quickly + diminutive
suffix -et. Used earlier (1540s) in reference to a brisk, nimble woman.


Babbitt (n.)

conventional, complacent, materialistic American businessman, 1923, from George Babbitt, title
character of Sinclair Lewis' novel (1922).    His name was George F. Babbitt. He was forty-six years
old now, in April 1920, and he made nothing in particular, neither butter nor shoes nor poetry, but
he was nimble in the selling of houses for more money than people could afford to pay. [Sinclair
Lewis, Babbitt, 1922]


agile (adj.)

1580s, from Middle French agile (14c.) and directly from Latin agilis nimble, quick, from agere to
move, drive (see act (n.)). Related: Agilely.


nimbly (adv.)

mid-14c., from nimble + -ly (adv.).


chopstick (n.)

also chop-stick, 1690s, sailors' partial translation of Chinese k'wai tse, variously given as fast
ones or nimble boys, first element from pidgin English chop, from Cantonese kap urgent. Chopsticks,
the two-fingered piano exercise, is first attested 1893, probably from the resemblance of the
fingers to chopsticks.


numb (adj.)

c.1400, nome, deprived of motion or feeling, literally taken, seized, from past participle of nimen
to take, seize, from Old English niman to take, catch, grasp (see nimble). The extraneous -b (to
conform to comb, limb, etc.) appeared 17c. The notion is of being taken with palsy, shock, and
especially cold. Figurative use from 1560s.


spry (adj.)

1746, active, nimble, vigorous, lively, dialectal, perhaps a shortening and alteration of sprightly
[Barnhart], or from a Scandinavian source (compare Old Norse spr&aelig;kr, dialectal Swedish sprygg
brisk, active), from Proto-Germanic *sprek-, from PIE root *(s)preg- (2) to jerk, scatter (see
sparse).


dapper (adj.)

mid-15c., elegant, from Middle Dutch or Middle Low German dapper bold, strong, sturdy, later quick,
nimble, from Proto-Germanic *dapraz, perhaps with ironical shift of meaning (cognates: Old High
German tapfar heavy, German tapfer brave), from PIE root *dheb- dense, firm, compressed.


mobile (adj.)

late 15c., from Middle French mobile (14c.), from Latin mobilis movable, easy to move; loose, not
firm, figuratively, pliable, flexible, susceptible, nimble, quick; changeable, inconstant, fickle,
contraction of *movibilis, from movere to move (see move (v.)). Sociology sense from 1927. Mobile
home first recorded 1940.


nim (v.)

to take, to steal (archaic), Old English niman to take, accept, receive, grasp, catch (cognates: Old
Frisian nima, Middle Dutch nemen, German nehmen, Gothic niman; see nimble). The native word,
replaced by Scandinavian-derived take (v.) and out of use from c.1500 except in slang sense of to
steal, which endured into 19c.


strenuous (adj.)

characterized by great effort, mid-15c. (implied in strenuously), from Latin strenuus active, brisk,
quick, nimble, prompt, vigorous, keen. Probably cognate with Greek strenes, strenos keen, strong,
strenos arrogance, eager desire, Old English stierne hard, severe, keen (see stern (adj.)). Mocked
by Ben Jonson as a pedantic neologism in Poetaster (1601). Sense of requiring much energy is first
recorded 1670s. Related: Strenuousness; strenuosity.


March

third month, c.1200, from Anglo-French marche, Old French marz, from Latin Martius (mensis) (month)
of Mars, from Mars (genitive Martis). Replaced Old English hre&eth;mona&thorn;, the first part of
which is of uncertain meaning, perhaps from hr&aelig;d quick, nimble, ready, active, alert, prompt.
For March hare, proverbial type of madness, see mad.


nemesis

1570s, Nemesis, Greek goddess of vengeance, personification of divine wrath, from Greek nemesis just
indignation, righteous anger, literally distribution (of what is due), related to nemein distribute,
allot, apportion one's due, from PIE root *nem- to divide, distribute, allot, to take (cognates: Old
English, Gothic niman to take, German nehmen; see nimble). With a lower-case -n-, in the sense of
retributive justice, attested from 1590s. General sense of anything by which it seems one must be
defeated is 20c.


thimble (n.)

Old English &thorn;ymel sheath or covering for the thumb, from thuma (see thumb) + -el, suffix used
in forming names of instruments (compare handle). Excrescent -b- began mid-15c. (compare humble,
nimble). Originally of leather, metal ones came into use 17c. Related: Thimbleful. Thimblerig, con
game played with three thimbles and a pea or button, is attested from 1825 by this name, though
references to thimble cheats, probably the same swindle, date back to 1716 (see rig (v.)).


rather (adv.)

Old English hra&thorn;or more quickly, earlier, sooner, also more readily, comparative of
hra&thorn;e, hr&aelig;&thorn;e quickly, hastily, promptly, readily, immediately, which is related to
hr&aelig;&eth; quick, nimble, prompt, ready, from Proto-Germanic *khratha- (cognates: Old Norse
hra&eth;r, Old High German hrad), from PIE *kret- to shake. The base form rathe was obsolete by 18c.
except in poetry (Tennyson); superlative rathest fell from use by 17c. Meaning more willingly is
recorded from c.1300; sense of more truly is attested from late 14c.    The rather lambes bene
starved with cold  [Spenser, The Shepheardes Calender (Februarie), 1579]


rash (adj.)

late 14c., nimble, quick, vigorous (early 14c. as a surname), a Scottish and northern word, perhaps
from Old English -r&aelig;sc (as in ligr&aelig;sc flash of lightning) or one of its Germanic
cognates, from Proto-Germanic *raskuz (cognates: Middle Low German rasch, Middle Dutch rasc quick,
swift, German rasch quick, fast). Related to Old English horsc quick-witted. Sense of reckless,
impetuous, heedless of consequences is attested from c.1500. Related: Rashly; rashness.


lever (n.)

c.1300, from Old French levier (Modern French leveur) a lifter, a lever, agent noun from lever to
raise, from Latin levare to raise, from levis light in weight, from PIE root *legwh- light, having
little weight; easy, agile, nimble (cognates: Sanskrit laghuh quick, small; Greek elakhys small,
elaphros light; Old Church Slavonic liguku, Lithuanian lengvas light; Old Irish laigiu smaller,
worse; Gothic leihts, Old English leoht light (adj.)). As a verb, 1856, from the noun.


limb (n.1)

part or member, Old English lim limb, joint, main branch of a tree, from Proto-Germanic *limu-
(cognates: Old Norse limr limb, lim small branch of a tree), a variant of *li&thorn;u- (source of
Old English li&thorn;, Old Frisian lith, Old Norse li&eth;r, Gothic li&thorn;us a limb; and with
prefix ga-, source of German Glied limb, member), from PIE root *lei- to bend, be movable, be
nimble. The parasitic -b began to appear late 1500s for no etymological reason (perhaps by influence
of limb (n.2)). In Old and Middle English, and until lately in dialects, it could mean any visible
body part.The lymmes of generacion were shewed manyfestly. [Caxton, The subtyl historyes and fables
of Esope, Auyan, Alfonce, and Poge, 1484]Hence, limb-lifter fornicator (1570s). To go out on a limb
in figurative sense enter a risky situation is from 1897. Life and limb in reference to the body
inclusively is from c.1200.


lung (n.)

human respiratory organ, c.1300, from Old English lungen (plural), from Proto-Germanic *lungw-
(cognates: Old Norse lunge, Old Frisian lungen, Middle Dutch longhe, Dutch long, Old High German
lungun, German lunge lung), literally the light organ, from PIE *legwh- not heavy, having little
weight; easy, agile, nimble (cognates: Russian l&#235;gkij, Polish lekki light; Russian l&#235;gkoje
lung, Greek elaphros light in weight; see also lever).    The notion probably is from the fact that,
when thrown into a pot of water, lungs of a slaughtered animal float, while the heart, liver, etc.,
do not. Compare also Portuguese leve lung, from Latin levis light; Irish scaman lungs, from scaman
light; Welsh ysgyfaint lungs, from ysgafn light. See also lights, pulmonary. Lung cancer attested
from 1882.


take (v.)

late Old English tacan to take, seize, from a Scandinavian source (such as Old Norse taka take,
grasp, lay hold, past tense tok, past participle tekinn; Swedish ta, past participle tagit), from
Proto-Germanic *takan- (cognates: Middle Low German tacken, Middle Dutch taken, Gothic tekan to
touch), from Germanic root *tak- to take, of uncertain origin, perhaps originally meaning to touch.
As the principal verb for to take, it gradually replaced Middle English nimen, from Old English
niman, from the usual West Germanic *nem- root (source of German nehmen, Dutch nemen; see nimble).
OED calls take one of the elemental words of the language; take up alone has 55 varieties of meaning
in that dictionary's 2nd print edition. Basic sense is to lay hold of, which evolved to accept,
receive (as in take my advice) c.1200; absorb (take a punch) c.1200; choose, select (take the high
road) late 13c.; to make, obtain (take a shower) late 14c.; to become affected by (take sick)
c.1300.   Take five is 1929, from the approximate time it takes to smoke a cigarette. Take it easy
first recorded 1880; take the plunge act decisively is from 1876; take the rap accept (undeserved)
punishment is from 1930. Phrase take it or leave it is recorded from 1897. To take it out on
(someone or something) vent one's anger on other than what caused it is by 1840.


shoot (v.)

Old English sceotan to hurl missiles, cast; strike, hit, push; run, rush; send forth swiftly; wound
with missiles (class II strong verb; past tense sceat, past participle scoten), from Proto-Germanic
*skeutanan (cognates: Old Saxon skiotan, Old Norse skjota to shoot with (a weapon); shoot, launch,
push, shove quickly, Old Frisian skiata, Middle Dutch skieten, Dutch schieten, Old High German
skiozan, German schie&szlig;en), from PIE root *skeud- to shoot, to chase, to throw, to project
(cognates: Sanskrit skundate hastens, makes haste, Old Church Slavonic iskydati to throw out,
Lithuanian skudrus quick, nimble).    In reference to pool playing, from 1926. Meaning to strive
(for) is from 1967, American English. Sense of descend (a river) quickly is from 1610s. Meaning to
inject by means of a hypodermic needle is attested from 1914. Meaning photograph (especially a
movie) is from 1890. As an interjection, an arbitrary euphemistic alteration of shit, it is recorded
from 1934. Shoot the breeze chat first recorded 1941. Shoot-'em-up (adj.) in reference to violent
entertainment (Western movies, etc.) is from 1942. Shoot to kill first attested 1867. Shoot the cat
to vomit is from 1785. To shoot the moon originally meant depart by night with ones goods to escape
back rent (1829).    O, 'tis cash makes such crowds to the gin shops roam, And 'tis cash often
causes a rumpus at home ;  'Tis when short of cash people oft shoot the moon ;  And 'tis cash always
keeps our pipes in tune.  Cash! cash! &amp;c.;  [The Melodist and Mirthful Olio, An Elegant
Collection of the Most Popular Songs, vol. IV, London, 1829]


