nine (n.)

Old English nigen, from Proto-Germanic *niwun (cognates: Old Saxon nigun, Old Frisian niugun, Old
Norse niu, Swedish nio, Middle Dutch neghen, Dutch negen, Old High German niun, German neun, Gothic
niun nine), from PIE newn nine (cognates: Sanskrit nava, Avestan nava, Greek ennea, Albanian nende,
Latin novem (with change of -n- to -m- by analogy of septem, decem), Lithuanian devnyi, Old Church
Slavonic deveti (the Balto-Slavic forms by dissimilation of -n- to -d-), Old Irish noin, Welsh naw).
Nine to five the average workday is attested from 1935. Nine days has been proverbial since 14c. for
the time which a wonder or novelty holds attention.


ninefold

Old English nigonfeald; see nine + -fold.


ninepins (n.)

1570s, from nine + plural of pin (n.). From the number of pins to be knocked down.


nines (n.)

in phrase to the nines to perfection (1787) first attested in Burns, apparently preserves the
ancient notion of the perfection of the number as three times three (such as the nine Muses).[T]he
Book of St. Albans, in the sections on blasonry, lays great stress on the nines in which all perfect
things (orders of angels, virtues, articles of chivalry, differences of coat armour, etc.) occur.
[Weekley]No one seems to consider that it might be a corruption and misdivision of to then anes,
literally for the one (purpose or occasion), a similar construction to the one that yielded nonce
(q.v.).


nineteen (n.)

late Old English nigontene (Anglian), nigontyne (West Saxon); see nine + -teen.


nineteenth (adj.)

late 14c., nyntenthe; from nineteen + -th (1); a replacement or modification of nigonteo&#254;a,
from Old English nigon-teo&#240;a. Nineteenth hole bar-room in a golf clubhouse is attested from
1901.


nineties (n.)

1857 as the years of someone's life between 90 and 99; from 1848 as the tenth decade of years in a
given century; 1849 with reference to Fahrenheit temperature. See ninety.    Many still live who
remember those days; if the old men cannot tell you the exact date, they will say: 'It were in the
nineties;' (etc.) [Chambers's Journal, Nov. 1, 1856]    In Britain, the naughty nineties was a
popular name 1920s-30s for the 1890s, based on the notion of a relaxing of morality and mood in
contrast to earlier Victorian times. In U.S., gay nineties in reference to the same decade is
attested from 1927, and was the title of a regular nostalgia feature in Life magazine about that
time.    The long, dreary blue-law Sunday afternoons were periods of the Nineties which no amount of
rosy retrospect will ever be able to recall as gay, especially to a normal healthy boy to whom all
activities were taboo except G. A. Henty and the bound volumes of Leslie's Weekly of the Civil War.
[Life, Sept. 1, 1927]


ninetieth

late 14c., nyntithe; see ninety + -th (1). Replaced Old English nigenteo&#254;an.


ninety (n.)

Old English nigontig, from nine + -tig group of ten (see -ty (1)). Cognate with Old Frisian
niontich, Middle Dutch negentich, Dutch negentig, German neunzig.


adenine (n.)

crystaline base, 1885, coined by German physiologist/chemist Albrecht Kossel (1853-1927) from Greek
aden gland (see inguinal) + chemical suffix -ine (2). So called because it was derived from the
pancreas of an ox.


Antonine (adj.)

1680s, in reference to Roman emperors Antoninus Pius (ruled 138-161 C.E.) and Marcus Aurelius
Antoninus (161-180).


asinine (adj.)

c.1600, obstinate, stupid, from Latin asininus stupid, literally like an ass, from asinus ass, also
dolt, blockhead (see ass (n.1)). The literal sense in English is recorded from 1620s.


canine (n.)

pointed tooth, late 14c., from Latin caninus of the dog, genitive of canis dog (source of Italian
cane, French chien), from PIE root *kwon- dog (cognates: Greek kyon, Old English hund, Old High
German hunt, Old Irish cu, Welsh ci, Sanskrit svan-, Avestan spa, Russian sobaka (apparently from an
Iranian source, such as Median spaka), Armenian shun, Lithuanian &#353;uo). The noun meaning dog is
first recorded 1869.


canine (adj.)

c.1600, of teeth, from canine (n.) or Latin caninus. Meaning pertaining to a dog or dogs is from
1620s.


cat-o&#039;-nine-tails (n.)

1690s, probably so called in reference to its claws. It was a legal instrument of punishment in
British Navy until 1881.


cloud nine (n.)

by 1950, sometimes also cloud seven (1956, perhaps by confusion with seventh heaven), American
English, of uncertain origin or significance. Some connect the phrase with the 1895 International
Cloud-Atlas (Hildebrandsson, Riggenbach and Teisserenc de Bort), long the basic source for cloud
shapes, in which, of the ten cloud types, cloud No. 9, cumulonimbus, was the biggest, puffiest, most
comfortable-looking. Shipley suggests the sense in this and other expressions might be because, As
the largest one-figure integer, nine is sometimes used for emphasis. The phrase might appear in the
1935 aviation-based play Ceiling Zero by Frank Wilbur Wead.


creatinine (n.)

by 1847, from creatine + chemical suffix -ine (2).


feminine (adj.)

mid-14c., of the female sex, from Old French femenin (12c.) feminine, female; with feminine
qualities, effeminate, from Latin femininus feminine (in the grammatical sense at first), from
femina woman, female, literally she who suckles, from root of felare to suck, suckle (see fecund).
Sense of woman-like, proper to or characteristic of women is recorded from mid-15c.    The interplay
of meanings now represented in female, feminine, and effeminate, and the attempt to make them clear
and separate, has led to many coinages: feminitude (1878); feminile feminine (1640s); feminility
womanliness (1838); femality (17c., effeminacy; 1754 female nature). Also feminality (1640s, quality
or state of being female), from rare adjective feminal (late 14c.), from Old French feminal. And
femineity quality or state of being feminine, from Latin femineus of a woman, pertaining to a woman.


Fescennine (adj.)

vulgar, obscene, scurrilous, from Latin Fescenninus (versus), a rude form of dramatic or satiric
verse, from Fescennia, city in Etruria, noted for such productions.    The Fescennine Songs were the
origin of the Satire, the only important species of literature not derived from the Greeks, and
altogether peculiar to Italy. These Fescennine Songs were rude dialogues, in which the country
people assailed and ridiculed one another in extempore verses, and which were introduced as an
amusement in various festivals. [William Smith, A Smaller History of Rome, London, 1870]


guanine (n.)

1850, from guano, from which the chemical first was isolated, + chemical suffix -ine (2).


Johannine (adj.)

of or pertaining to the Apostle John, 1861, from Latin Joannes (see John) + -ine (1).


leonine (adj.)

lion-like, late 14c., from Old French leonin or directly from Latin leoninus belonging to or
resembling a lion, from leo (genitive leonis) lion. Weekley thinks that Leonine verse (1650s),
rhymed in the middle as well as the end of the line, probably is from the name of some medieval
poet, perhaps Leo, Canon of St. Victor, Paris, 12c.


mezzanine (n.)

1711, a low story between two tall ones in a building, from French mezzanine (17c.), from Italian
mezzanino, from mezzano middle, from Latin medianus of the middle, from medius (see medial (adj.)).
Sense of lowest balcony in a theater first recorded 1927.


quinine (n.)

alkaloid responsible for curative properties in the cinchona tree, 1821, from French quinine (1820),
with chemical ending -ine (2) + Spanish quina cinchona bark (from which it is extracted), from
Quechua (Peru) kina. Earlier in reduplicated form quinaquina (1727).


saturnine (adj.)

gloomy, morose, sluggish, grave, mid-15c., literally born under the influence of the planet Saturn,
from Middle English Saturne (see Saturn) + -ine (1). Medieval physiology believed these
characteristics to be caused by the astrological influence of the planet Saturn, which was the most
remote from the Sun (in the limited knowledge of the times) and thus coldest and slowest in its
revolution.


sixty-nine (n.)

in sexual sense, 1888, as a translation of French faire soixante neuf, literally to do 69. So called
from the similarity of positions to the arrangement of the numerals.


stanine (n.)

nine-point scale for test scores, introduced by the U.S. Air Force in 1942, from sta(ndard) + nine.


strychnine (n.)

powerful poisonous alkaloid, 1819, from French strychnine, from Modern Latin Strychnos, the genus
name of the plant (nux vomica) from which the poison is obtained, from Greek strychnon, a kind of
nightshade, of uncertain origin. The chemical was discovered 1818 by Pelletier and Caventou in the
Asian tree Strychnos ignatii.


whole nine yards (n.)

by 1970, of unknown origin; perhaps arbitrary (see cloud nine). Among the guesses that have been
made without real evidence: concrete mixer trucks were said to have dispensed in this amount. Or the
yard might be the word used in the slang sense of one hundred dollars. Several similar phrases
meaning everything arose in the 1940s (whole ball of wax, which is likewise of obscure origin, whole
schmear); older examples include whole hog (see hog (n.)) and whole shooting match (1896); whole
shebang (1895).


