nocturnal (adj.)

late 15c., from Old French nocturnal nightly, nocturnal, or directly from Late Latin nocturnalis,
from Latin nocturnus belonging to the night, from nox (genitive noctis) night, cognate with Old
English neaht (see night) + -urnus, suffix forming adjectives of time. Nocturnal emission
involuntary ejaculation during sleep first recorded 1813.


nocturne (n.)

1862, composition of a dreamy character, from French nocturne, literally composition appropriate to
the night, noun use of Old French nocturne nocturnal, from Latin nocturnus (see nocturnal). Said to
have been coined c.1814 by John Field, who wrote many of them, in a style that Chopin mastered in
his own works, which popularized the term.


nightjar (n.)

nocturnal bird, goatsucker, 1620s, from night + jar (v.). So called for the jarring sounds made by
the male when the female is brooding, which have been described as a churring trill that seems to
change direction as it rises and falls. An Old English word for it was nihthr&aelig;fn night raven.


nocturn (n.)

a division of the office of matins, early 13c., from Old French nocturne evening service; curfew,
from Medieval Latin nocturna, group of Psalms used in the nocturns, from Latin nocturnus (see
nocturnal).


lucubration (n.)

1590s, literary work showing signs of too-careful elaboration, from Latin lucubrationem (nominative
lucubratio) nocturnal study, night work, noun of action from past participle stem of lucubrare,
literally to work by artificial light, from stem of lucere to shine (see light (n.)).


nightly (adj.)

Old English nihtlic nocturnal, of the night, at night; see night + -ly (1). As an adverb, Middle
English nihtlich, from the adjective.


owl (n.)

Old English ule owl, from Proto-Germanic *uwwalon- (cognates: Middle Dutch, Dutch uil, Old High
German uwila, German Eule, Old Norse ugla), a diminutive of PIE root *u(wa)l-, which is imitative of
a wail or an owl's hoot (compare Latin ulula owl; also see ululation). The bird was employed
proverbially and figuratively in reference to nocturnal habits, ugliness, and appearance of gravity
and wisdom (often ironic).


bat (n.2)

flying mammal (order Chiroptera), 1570s, a dialectal alteration of Middle English bakke (early
14c.), which is probably related to Old Swedish natbakka, Old Danish nathbakk&aelig; night bat, and
Old Norse le&eth;rblaka leather flapper, so original sense is likely flapper. The shift from -k- to
-t- may have come through confusion of bakke with Latin blatta moth, nocturnal insect.    Old
English word for the animal was hreremus, from hreran to shake (see rare (adj.2)), and rattle-mouse
is attested from late 16c., an old dialectal word for bat. As a contemptuous term for an old woman,
perhaps a suggestion of witchcraft (compare fly-by-night), or from bat as prostitute who plies her
trade by night [Farmer, who calls it old slang and finds French equivalent night swallow (hirondelle
de nuit) more poetic].


lemur (n.)

nocturnal Madagascar mammal, 1795, coined by Linnaeus, from Latin lemures (plural) spirits of the
dead in Roman mythology.     The oldest usage of lemur for a primate that we are aware of is in
Linnaeus's catalog of the Museum of King Adolf Frederick of Sweden (Tattersall, 1982); .... In this
work, he explained his use of the name lemur thus: Lemures dixi  hos, quod noctu imprimis
obambulant, hominibus quodanmodo similes, &amp; lento passu vagantur [I call them lemurs, because
they go around mainly by night, in a certain way similar to humans, and roam with a slow pace]
[Dunkel, Alexander R., et al., Giant rabbits, marmosets, and British comedies: etymology of lemur
names, part 1, in Lemur News, vol. 16, 2011-2012, p.65]   Lemuria (1864) was the name given by
English zoologist P.L. Sclater (1829-1913) to a hypothetical ancient continent connecting Africa and
Southeastern Asia (and including Madagascar), which was hypothesized to explain phenomena now
accounted for by continental drift. Earlier it was the name of the Roman feast of the Lemures.


night (n.)

Old English niht (West Saxon neaht, Anglian n&aelig;ht, neht) night, darkness; the vowel indicating
that the modern word derives from oblique cases (genitive nihte, dative niht), from Proto-Germanic
*nakht- (cognates: Old Saxon and Old High German naht, Old Frisian and Dutch nacht, German Nacht,
Old Norse natt, Gothic nahts).    The Germanic words are from PIE *nekwt- night (cognates: Greek
nuks a night, Latin nox, Old Irish nochd, Sanskrit naktam at night, Lithuanian naktis night, Old
Church Slavonic nosti, Russian noch', Welsh henoid tonight), according to Watkins, probably from a
verbal root *neg- to be dark, be night. For spelling with -gh- see fight.The fact that the Aryans
have a common name for night, but not for day (q.v.), is due to the fact that they reckoned by
nights. [Weekley]Compare German Weihnachten Christmas. In early times, the day was held to begin at
sunset, so Old English monanniht Monday night was the night before Monday, or what we would call
Sunday night.    To work nights preserves the Old English genitive of time. Night shift is attested
from 1710 in the sense of garment worn by a woman at night (see shift (n.1)); meaning gang of
workers employed after dark is from 1839. Night soil excrement (1770) is so called because it was
removed (from cesspools, etc.) after dark. Night train attested from 1838. Night life habitual
nocturnal carousing attested from 1852.


