nomenclature (n.)

c.1600, a name, from Middle French nomenclature (16c.), from Latin nomenclatura calling of names,
from nomenclator namer, from nomen name (see name (n.)) + calator caller, crier, from calare call
out (see claim (v.)).   Nomenclator in Rome was the title of a steward whose job was to announce
visitors, and also of a prompter who helped a stumping politician recall names and pet causes of his
constituents. Meaning list or catalogue of names first attested 1630s; that of system of naming is
from 1660s; sense of terminology of a science is from 1789.


nomenklatura (n.)

Russian, literally a listing of positions to be filled, from Latin nomenclatura (see nomenclature).


-yl

chemical suffix used in forming names of radicals, from French -yle, from Greek hyle wood, also
building stuff, raw material (from which something is made), of unknown origin. The use in chemistry
traces to the latter sense (except in methylene, where it means wood).    It was introduced into
chemical nomenclature by Liebig and Wohler when, in 1832, they used the term benzoyle for the
radical which appeared to be the essential material of benzoic acid and related compounds. [Flood]


vitamin (n.)

1920, originally vitamine (1912) coined by Polish biochemist Casimir Funk (1884-1967), from Latin
vita life (see vital) + amine, because they were thought to contain amino acids. The terminal -e
formally was stripped off when scientists learned the true nature of the substance; -in was
acceptable because it was used for neutral substances of undefined composition. The lettering system
of nomenclature (Vitamin A, B, C, etc.) was introduced at the same time (1920).


protein (n.)

1844, from French prot&eacute;ine, coined 1838 by Dutch chemist Gerhard Johan Mulder (1802-1880),
perhaps on suggestion of Berzelius, from Greek proteios the first quality, from protos first (see
proto-) + -ine (2).    Originally a theoretical substance thought to be essential to life, further
studies of the substances he was working with overthrew this, but the words protein and proteid
continued to be used in international work on the matter and also for other organic compounds; the
modern use as a general name for a class of bodies arose in German. The confusion became so great a
committee was set up in 1907 to sort out the nomenclature, which it did, giving protein its modern
meaning and banishing proteid.


Shakespeare

surname recorded from 1248; it means a spearman. This was a common type of English surname
(Shakelance (1275), Shakeshaft (1332)). Shake (v.) in the sense of to brandish or flourish (a
weapon) is attested from late Old English  Heo sc&aelig;ken on heore honden speren swi&eth;e
stronge.  [Laymon, Brut, c. 1205]  Compare also shake-buckler a swaggerer, a bully; shake-rag ragged
fellow, tatterdemalion. Never a name in English nomenclature so simple or so certain in origin. It
is exactly what it looks -- Shakespear [Bardsley, Dictionary of English and Welsh Surnames, 1901].
Nevertheless, speculation flourishes. The name was variously written in contemporary records, also
Shakespear, Shakespere, the last form being the one adopted by the New Shakespere Society of London
and the first edition of the OED. Related: Shakespearian (1753); Shakesperean (1796); Shakesperian
(1755).


ale (n.)

Old English ealu ale, beer, from Proto-Germanic *aluth- (cognates: Old Saxon alo, Old Norse
&ouml;l), perhaps from PIE root meaning bitter (cognates: Latin alumen alum), or from PIE *alu-t
ale, from root *alu-, which has connotations of sorcery, magic, possession, intoxication. The word
was borrowed from Germanic into Lithuanian (alus) and Old Church Slavonic (olu).  In the fifteenth
century, and until the seventeenth, ale stood for the unhopped fermented malt liquor which had long
been the native drink of these islands. Beer was the hopped malt liquor introduced from the Low
Countires in the fifteenth century and popular first of all in the towns. By the eighteenth century,
however, all malt liquor was hopped and there had been a silent mutation in the meaning of the two
terms. For a time the terms became synonymous, in fact, but local habits of nomenclature still
continued to perpetuate what had been a real difference: 'beer' was the malt liquor which tended to
be found in towns, 'ale' was the term in general use in the country districts. [Peter Mathias, The
Brewing Industry in England, Cambridge University Press, 1959]Meaning festival or merry-meeting at
which much ale was drunk was in Old English (see bridal).


