nominalism (n.)

1820, view that treats abstract concepts as names only, not realities, from French nominalisme
(1752), from nominal, from Latin nominalis (see nominal). Related: Nominalist.


nominally (adv.)

1660s, as regards a name, from nominal + -ly (2). Meaning in name only (as opposed to really) is
attested from 1748.


nominal (adj.)

early 15c., pertaining to nouns, from Latin nominalis pertaining to a name or names, from nomen
(genitive nominis) name, cognate with Old English nama (see name (n.)). Meaning of the nature of
names (in distinction to things) is from 1610s. Meaning being so in name only first recorded 1620s.


token (adj.)

nominal, 1915, from token (n.). In integration sense, first recorded 1960.


samurai (n.)

1727, from Japanese samurai warrior, knight, originally the military retainer of the daimio, variant
of saburai, nominal form of sabura(h)u to be in attendance, to serve.


quit-rent (n.)

early 15c., rent paid by a tenant in exchange for being discharged from required service; also,
nominal rent as acknowledgment of tenure, from quit (adj.) + rent (n.).


ptosis (n.)

1743, from Greek ptosis, literally falling, a fall, also the case of a noun, nominal derivative of
piptein to fall (see symptom). In English, especially of the eyelid. Related: Ptotic.


kabuki (n.)

1896, from Japanese, popular theater (as opposed to shadow puppet-plays or lyrical Noh dramas),
literally art of song and dance, from ka song + bu dance + ki art, skill [Barnhart, OED].
Alternative etymology (in Webster's) is from nominal form of kabuku to be divergent, to deviate,
from early opinion of this form of drama. Since c.1650, all parts are played by males.


ptomaine (n.)

1880, from Italian ptomaina, coined by Professor Francesco Selmi of Bologna, 1878, from Greek ptoma
corpse, on notion of poison produced in decaying matter. Greek ptoma is literally a fall, a falling,
via the notion of fallen thing, fallen body; nominal derivative of piptein to fall (see symptom).
Incorrectly formed, and Selmi is roundly scolded for it in OED, which says proper Greek would be
*ptomatine.


-ling

diminutive word-forming element, early 14c., from Old English -ling a nominal suffix (not originally
diminutive), from Proto-Germanic *-linga-; attested in historical Germanic languages as a simple
suffix, but probably representing a fusion of two suffixes: 1. that represented by English -le
(thimble, handle), from Old English -ol, -ul, -el, representing PIE *-lo- (see -ule); and 2. -ing,
suffix indicating person or thing of a specific kind or origin; in masculine nouns also son of
(farthing, atheling, Old English horing adulterer, fornicator), from PIE *-(i)ko- (see -ic).    Both
these suffixes had occasional diminutive force, but this was only slightly evident in Old English
-ling and its equivalents in Germanic languages except Norse, where it commonly was used as a
diminutive suffix, especially in words designating the young of animals (such as g&aelig;slingr
gosling). Thus it is possible that the diminutive use that developed in Middle English is from Old
Norse.


