noose (n.)

mid-15c., perhaps from Old French nos or cognate Old Proven&ccedil;al nous knot, from Latin nodus
knot (see net (n.)). Rare before c.1600.


snare (n.1)

noose for catching animals, late Old English, from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse snara
noose, snare, related to soenri twisted rope, from Proto-Germanic *snarkho (cognates: Middle Dutch
snare, Dutch snaar, Old High German snare, German Schnur noose, cord, Old English snear a string,
cord). Figuratively from c.1300.


snarl (v.1)

to tangle, to catch in a snare or noose (trans.), late 14c., from a noun snarl a snare, a noose
(late 14c.), probably a diminutive of snare (n.1). Intransitive sense become twisted or entangled is
from c.1600. Related: Snarled; snarling.


lace (n.)

early 13c., laz, cord made of braided or interwoven strands of silk, etc., from Old French laz a
net, noose, string, cord, snare (Modern French lacs), from Vulgar Latin *lacium, from Latin laqueum
(nominative laqueus) noose, snare (source also of Italian laccio, Spanish lazo), a trapping and
hunting term, probably from Italic base *laq- to ensnare (compare Latin lacere to entice). Later
also net, noose, snare (c.1300); and piece of cord used to draw together the edges of slits or
openings in an article of clothing (late 14c., as in shoelace). The ornamental net pattern meaning
is first recorded 1550s. As an adjective, lace-curtain middle class (or lower-class with middle-
class pretensions), usually is used in reference to Irish-Americans, is attested by 1928.


snarl (n.1)

late 14c., a snare, noose, from snarl (v.1). Meaning a tangle, a knot is first attested c.1600.
Meaning a traffic jam is from 1933.


hempen (adj.)

made of hemp, late 14c., from hemp + -en (2). In many figurative expressions 15c.-19c. it is in
reference to the hangman's noose.


lasso

1807 (v.); 1808 (n.), American English, from Spanish lazo, from Latin laqueum (nominative laqueus)
noose, snare (see lace (n.)).


wag (n.1)

person fond of making jokes, 1550s, perhaps a shortening of waghalter gallows bird, person destined
to swing in a noose or halter, applied humorously to mischievous children, from wag (v.) + halter.
Or possibly directly from wag (v.); compare wagger one who stirs up or agitates (late 14c.).


elicit (v.)

1640s, from Latin elicitus, past participle of elicere draw forth, from ex- out (see ex-) + -licere,
comb. form of lacere to entice, lure, deceive (related to laqueus noose, snare; see lace (n.)).
Related: Elicited; eliciting; elicits; elicitation.


enlace (v.)

late 14c., from Old French enlacer, from Late Latin *inlaciare, from in- + *lacius, from Latin
laqueus noose (see lace (n.)). Related: Enlaced; enlacing.


sleave (v.)

to separate or divide (threads, strands, fibers), Old English -sl&#230;fan, from stem of -slifan to
separate, split, cleave, from Proto-Germanic *slifanan, perhaps related to the root of slip (v.).
Compare German Schleife a loop, knot, noose. Related: Sleaved; sleaving. As a noun, knotted, tangled
silk or thread, 1590s, from the verb; this is the word in Shakespeare's rauel'd Sleeue of Care
(Macbeth).


lank (adj.)

Old English hlanc loose and empty, slender, flaccid, from Proto-Germanic *khlankaz, perhaps from a
root meaning flexible (cognates: German lenken to bend, turn aside, Old Norse hlykkr bend, noose,
loop), from PIE root *kleng- to bend, turn (see link (n.)). Some examples may be long adj. with
unvoicing of g [Middle English Dictionary]


chignon (n.)

knot or coil of hair worn at the back of the neck, from French chignon nape of the neck, from Old
French chaignon iron collar, shackles, noose (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *catenionem (nominative
*catenio), from Latin catena chain, fetter, restraint (see chain (n.)). Popular 1780s, 1870s, 1940s.
Form influenced in French by tignon coil of hair.


anodyne (adj.)

1540s, from Medieval Latin anodynus pain-removing, allaying pain, from Latin anodynus painless, from
Greek anodynos free from pain, from an- without (see an- (1)) + odyne pain, a word perhaps from PIE
root *ed- to eat (source of Lithuanian ed&#382;ioti to devour, bite, ed&#382;iotis to suffer pain;
see eat). In old slang, frequently a euphemism for death; as in anodyne necklace hangman's noose.


delicious (adj.)

c.1300 (implied in deliciously), from Old French delicios (Modern French d&eacute;licieux), from
Late Latin deliciosus delicious, delicate, from Latin delicia (plural deliciae) a delight,
allurement, charm, from delicere to allure, entice, from de- away (see de-) + lacere lure, deceive
(related to laqueus noose, snare; see lace). As a name of a type of apple, attested from 1903, first
grown by Jesse Hiatt of Iowa, U.S.A. Colloquial shortening delish is attested from 1920.


whisk (n.)

late 14c., quick stroke, sweeping movement, probably from Old Norse visk wisp of hay, something to
sweep with, from Proto-Germanic *wisk- move quickly (cognates: Danish visk broom, Middle Dutch
wisch, Dutch wis, Old High German wisc, German wisch wisp, brush), from PIE root *weis- to turn,
twist (cognates: Sanskrit veskah noose, Czech vechet a wisp of straw, Old English wiscian to plait,
weoxian to clean with a whisk or brush). Unetymological spelling with wh- is from 1570s. Meaning
implement for beating eggs, etc. first recorded 1660s.


sling (v.)

c.1200, to knock down using a sling, later to throw (mid-13c.), especially with a sling, from Old
Norse slyngva, from Proto-Germanic *slingwanan (cognates: Old High German slingan, German schlingen
to swing to and fro, wind, twist; Old English slingan to creep, twist; Old Frisian slinge, Middle
Dutch slinge, Old High German slinga, German Schlinge sling; Middle Swedish slonga noose, knot,
snare), from PIE *slengwh to slide, make slide; sling, throw. Meaning to hang from one point to
another (as a hammock) is from 1690s. Related: Slung; slinging.


thug (n.)

1810, member of a gang of murderers and robbers in India who strangled their victims, from Marathi
thag, thak cheat, swindler, Hindi thag, perhaps from Sanskrit sthaga-s cunning, fraudulent, from
sthagayati (he) covers, conceals, perhaps from PIE root *(s)teg- (2) to cover (see stegosaurus).
The thugs roamed about the country in bands of from 10 to 100, usually in the disguise of peddlers
or pilgrims, gaining the confidence of other travelers, whom they strangled, when a favorable
opportunity presented itself, with a handkerchief, an unwound turban, or a noosed cord. The shedding
of blood was seldom resorted to. The motive of the thugs was not so much lust of plunder as a
certain religious fanaticism. The bodies of their victims were hidden in graves dug with a
consecrated pickax, and of their spoil one third was devoted to the goddess Kali, whom they
worshiped. [Century Dictionary]    The more correct Indian name is phanseegur (from phansi noose),
and the activity was described in English as far back as c.1665. Rigorously prosecuted by the
British from 1831, they were driven from existence by century's end. Transferred sense of ruffian,
cutthroat, violent lowbrow is from 1839.


rope (n.)

Old English rap rope, cord, cable, from Proto-Germanic *raipaz (cognates: Old Norse reip, West
Frisian reap, Middle Dutch, Dutch reep rope, Old Frisian silrap shoe-thong, Gothic skauda-raip shoe-
lace, Old High German, German reif ring, hoop). Technically, only cordage above one inch in
circumference and below 10 (bigger-around than that is a cable). Nautical use varies. Finnish raippa
hoop, rope, twig is a Germanic loan-word.    To know the ropes (1840, Dana) originally is a seaman's
term. Phrase on the ropes defeated is attested from 1924, a figurative extension from the fight
ring, where ropes figure from 1829. To be at the end of (one's) rope out of resources and options is
first attested 1680s. Formerly also in many slang and extended uses related to punishment by
hanging, such as John Roper's window a noose, rope-ripe deserving to be hanged, both 16c. To give
someone (enough) rope (to hang himself) is from 1650s.


