Norse (n.)

1590s, a Norwegian, from obsolete Dutch Noorsch (adj.) Norwegian, from noordsch northern, nordic,
from noord north (see north). Also in some cases borrowed from cognate Danish or Norwegian norsk. As
a language, from 1680s. Old Norse attested from 1844. An Old English word for a Norwegian was
Nor&eth;man. As an adjective from 1768.    In Old French, Norois as a noun meant a Norse, Norseman,
also action worth of a man from the North (i.e. usually considered as deceitful) [Hindley, et. al.];
as an adjective it meant northern, Norse, Norwegian, also proud, fierce, fiery, strong.


Asgard (n.)

home of the gods in Norse religion, from Old Norse ass god, from Proto-Germanic *ansu- (cognates:
Old High German ansi, Old English os, Gothic ans god), from PIE *ansu- spirit (cognates:   first
element in Ahura Mazda, from Avestan) + Old Norse gar&eth;r enclosure, yard, garden (see yard
(n.1)).


haver (n.1)

oats, Northern English, late 13c., probably from Old Norse hafre, from Proto-Germanic *habron-
(cognates: Old Norse hafri, Old Saxon havoro, Dutch haver, Old High German habaro, German Haber,
Hafer). Buck suggests it is perhaps literally goat-food and compares Old Norse hafr he-goat. Haver
is a common word in the northern countries for oats. [Johnson]


flag (n.2)

flat, split stone, c.1600, earlier piece cut from turf or sod (mid-15c.), from Old Norse flaga stone
slab, perhaps related to Old Norse flak (see flake (n.)).


ill (adj.)

c.1200, morally evil (other 13c. senses were malevolent, hurtful, unfortunate, difficult), from Old
Norse illr ill, bad, of unknown origin. Not related to evil. Main modern sense of sick, unhealthy,
unwell is first recorded mid-15c., probably related to Old Norse idiom it is bad to me. Slang
inverted sense of very good, cool is 1980s. As a noun, something evil, from mid-13c.


skite (n.)

contemptible person, 1790, Scottish and Northern, earlier sudden stroke or blow (1785), perhaps from
Old Norse skyt-, from skjota to shoot (see shoot (v.)). Compare Old Norse skita to shit, which might
have had some influence.


race (n.1)

act of running, c.1300, from Old Norse ras running, rush (of water), cognate with Old English
r&aelig;s a running, a rush, a leap, jump; a storming, an attack; or else a survival of the Old
English word with spelling influenced by the Old Norse one. The Norse and Old English words are from
Proto-Germanic *res- (cognates: Middle Dutch rasen to rave, rage, German rasen, Old English
raesettan to rage (of fire)), from a variant form of PIE *ers- (1) be in motion (see err).
Originally a northern word, it became general in English c.1550. Meaning act of running is from
early 14c. Meaning contest of speed first recorded 1510s.


seemly (adj.)

of pleasing or good appearance, also proper, tasteful, decorous, early 13c., semlich, from Old Norse
soemiligr becoming, honorable, from soemr (see seem). Related: Seemliness. Old Norse also had
soemleitr fine to look at.


whoredom (n.)

late 12c., practice of sexual immorality, probably from Old Norse hordomr adultery, from Proto-
Germanic *horaz (see whore (n.)) + Old Norse -domr condition  (see -dom).


bait (n.)

food put on a hook or trap to lure prey, c.1300, from Old Norse beita food, related to Old Norse
beit pasture, Old English bat food, literally to cause to bite (see bait (v.)). Figurative sense
anything used as a lure is from c.1400.


gale (n.)

storm at sea, 1540s, from gaile wind, origin uncertain, perhaps from Old Norse gol breeze, or Old
Danish gal bad, furious (often used of weather), from Old Norse galinn bewitched. Or perhaps it is
from Old English galan to sing (the second element in nightingale), or giellan to yell. In technical
meteorological use, a wind between 32 and 63 miles per hour.


Ragnarok (n.)

in Norse mythology, the last battle of the world, in which gods and men will be destroyed by
monsters and darkness, 1770, from Old Norse ragna, genitive of r&ouml;gn gods + r&ouml;k destined
end or r&ouml;kr twilight. Also see Gotterdammerung.


raft (n.1)

floating platform, late 15c., originally rafter (c.1300), from a Scandinavian source such as Old
Norse raptr log (Old Norse -pt- pronounced as -ft-), related to Middle Low German rafter, rachter
rafter (see rafter).


vanadium (n.)

rare metallic element, 1833, named 1830 by Swedish chemist Nils Gabriel Sefstr&ouml;m (1787-1845),
from Old Norse Vanadis, one of the names of the Norse beauty goddess Freyja (perhaps from PIE *wen-
(1) to desire, strive for, which would connect it to Venus); the metal perhaps so called for of its
colorful compounds (an earlier name for it was erythronium, for the redness of its salts when
heated). Related: Vanadous; vanadious.


anger (n.)

mid-13c., distress, suffering; anguish, agony, also hostile attitude, ill will, surliness, from Old
Norse angr distress, grief. sorrow, affliction, from the same root as anger (v.). Sense of rage,
wrath is early 14c. Old Norse also had angr-gapi rash, foolish person; angr-lauss free from care;
angr-lyndi sadness, low spirits.


gasp (v.)

late 14c., gaspen, of uncertain origin, perhaps from Old Norse geispa to yawn, or its Danish
derivative gispe gasp, which probably are related to Old Norse gapa (see gape). Related: Gasped;
gasping.


Scarborough

place in Yorkshire, earlier Scar&#240;abork, etc., apparently a viking name, from Old Norse and
meaning fortified place of a man called Skarthi, identified in old chronicles as Thorgils Skarthi,
literally Thorgils Harelip, from Old Norse skart&#240; notch, hack (in the edge of a thing);
mountain pass. It has been noted that a literal reading of the name as gap-hill suits the location.
Scarborough warning short notice or none is from 1540s.


scant (adj.)

mid-14c., from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse skamt, neuter of skammr short, brief, from
Proto-Germanic *skamma- (cognates: Old English scamm short, Old High German skemmen to shorten),
perhaps ultimately hornless, from PIE *kem- (see hind (n.)). Also in Middle English as a noun, scant
supply, scarcity, from Old Norse. As a verb and adverb from mid-15c.


berserk (adj.)

1844, from berserk (n.) Norse warrior, by 1835, an alternative form of berserker (1822), a word
which was introduced by Sir Walter Scott, from Old Norse berserkr (n.) raging warrior of superhuman
strength; probably from *ber- bear + serkr shirt, thus literally a warrior clothed in bearskin. Thus
not from Old Norse berr bare, naked.    Thorkelin, in the essay on the Berserkir, appended to his
edition of the Krisini Saga, tells that an old name of the Berserk frenzy was hamremmi, i.e.,
strength acquired from another strange body, because it was anciently believed that the persons who
were liable to this frenzy were mysteriously endowed, during its accesses, with a strange body of
unearthly strength. If, however, the Berserk was called on by his own name, he lost his mysterious
form, and his ordinary strength alone remained. [Notes and Queries, Dec. 28, 1850]     The
adjectival use probably is from such phrases as berserk frenzy, or as a title (Arngrim the Berserk).


snub (v.)

mid-14c., to check, reprove, rebuke, from Old Norse snubba to curse, chide, snub, scold, reprove.
The ground sense is perhaps to cut off, and the word probably is related to snip. Compare Swedish
snobba lop off, snuff (a candle), Old Norse snubbotr snubbed, nipped, with the tip cut off. Meaning
treat coldly appeared early 18c. Related: Snubbed; snubbing.


daze (v.)

early 14c., dasen, perhaps from Old Norse *dasa (compare dasask to become weary, with reflexive
suffix -sk). Or perhaps from Middle Dutch dasen act silly. Perhaps originally to make weary with
cold, which is the sense of Icelandic dasask (from the Old Norse word). Related: Dazed.


shag (n.)

1590s, cloth having a velvet nap on one side, perhaps from Old English sceacga rough matted hair or
wool, from Proto-Germanic *skagjan (cognates: Old Norse skegg, Swedish sk&#228;gg beard), perhaps
related to Old High German scahho promontory, Old Norse skagi a cape, headland, with a connecting
sense of jutting out, projecting. But the word appears to be missing in Middle English. Of tobacco,
cut in fine shreds, it is recorded from 1789; of carpets, rugs, etc., from 1946.


geld (v.)

to castrate, c.1300, from Old Norse gelda castrate from geldr barren, from Proto-Germanic *galdu-,
from PIE *ghel- (3) to cut. Related: Gelded. Compare Old Norse geldr yielding no milk, dry, Old High
German galt barren, said of a cow.


blaze (n.2)

light-colored mark or spot, 1630s, northern English dialect, probably from Old Norse blesi white
spot on a horse's face (from the same root as blaze (n.1)). A Low German cognate of the Norse word
also has been suggested as the source. Applied 1660s in American English to marks cut on tree trunks
to indicate a track; thus the verb meaning to mark a trail; first recorded 1750, American English.
Related: Blazed; blazing.


fartlek (n.)

1952, Swedish, from fart speed (cognate with Old Norse fara to go, move; see fare (v.)) + lek play
(cognate with Old Norse leika play; see lark (v.)).


butt (n.1)

thick end, c.1400, butte, which probably is related to Middle Dutch and Dutch bot, Low German butt
blunt, dull, Old Norse bauta (see beat (v.)). Or related somehow to Old English buttuc end, small
piece of land, and Old Norse butr short. In sense of human posterior it is recorded from mid-15c.
Meaning remainder of a smoked cigarette first recorded 1847.


berserker (n.)

alternative form of berserk (q.v.), from Old Norse berserkr, accusative of berserk. This is the
oldest form of the word in its revival in Modern English (1822), and perhaps Scott, who introduced
it, mistook the -r for an agent-noun suffix. Further compicated because it has the form of the Old
Norse plural, and English berserker sometimes is plural.


lark (n.1)

songbird, early 14c., earlier lauerche (c.1200), from Old English lawerce (late Old English
laferce), from Proto-Germanic *laiw(a)rikon (cognates: Old Saxon lewerka, Frisian liurk, Old Norse
l&aelig;virik, Dutch leeuwerik, German Lerche), of unknown origin. Some Old English and Old Norse
forms suggest a compound meaning treason-worker, but there is no folk tale to explain or support
this.


reef (n.2)

horizontal section of sail, late 14c. (mid-14c. in rif-rope), from a Scandinavian source such as Old
Norse rif reef of a sail, probably a transferred use of rif ridge under the sea; rib (see rib (n.)
and compare reef (n.1)). German reff, Swedish ref, Norwegian riv, Danish reb likely all are from the
Old Norse word.


Skraeling (n.)

1767, Norse name for inhabitants of Greenland encountered by the Viking settlers there, from Old
Norse Skr&aelig;ingjar (plural), apparently literally little men (compare Icelandic skr&aelig;lna
shrink); another term for them was smair menn. The name may have been used first in reference to the
inhabitants of Vineland (who would have been Indians), then transferred to Eskimos, who adopted it
into their own language as Kalaleq.  Hans Egede, who published a dictionary of Greenland Eskimo in
1739, says that the Eskimos themselves told him that they got the name from the Norsemen who once
lived in Greenland. [Gordon, p.217-8]


yelp (v.)

Old English gielpan (West Saxon), gelpan (Anglian) to boast, exult, from Proto-Germanic *gel-
(cognates: Old Saxon galpon, Old Norse gjalpa to yelp, Old Norse gjalp boasting, Old High German
gelph outcry), from PIE root *ghel- (1) to cry out (see yell (v.)). Meaning utter a quick, sharp,
bark or cry is 1550s, probably from the noun. Related: Yelped; yelping.


mistletoe (n.)

Old English mistiltan, from mistel mistletoe (see missel) + tan twig. Similar formation in Old Norse
mistilteinn, Norwegian misteltein, Danish mistelten. The second element is cognate with Old Saxon
and Old Frisian ten, Old Norse teinn, Dutch teen, Old High German zein, Gothic tains twig. Venerated
by the Druids; the custom of hanging it at Christmas and kissing under it is mentioned by Washington
Irving.


dapple (v.)

early 15c. (implied in past participle adjective dappled), perhaps from a Scandinavian source akin
to Old Norse depill spot, Norwegian dape puddle. Perhaps a back-formation from, or merger with,
Middle English adjective dapple-gray apple-gray (late 14c.), based on resemblance to the markings on
an apple (compare Old Norse apalgrar dapple-gray), or, as it was used of gray horses with round
blotches, perhaps via resemblance to apples themselves.


grovel (v.)

1590s, Shakespearian back-formation of groveling (Middle English), regarded as a present participle
but really an adverb, from Old Norse grufe prone + obsolete adverbial suffix -ling (which survives
also as the -long in headlong, sidelong); first element from Old Norse a grufu on proneness. Perhaps
related to creep. Related: Groveled; grovelled; groveling; grovelling.


Utgard

abode of the giants in Norse mythology, from Old Norse Utgar&eth;ar, from ut out (see out (adv.)) +
gar&eth;r yard (see yard (n.1)).


dale (n.)

Old English d&aelig;l dale, valley, gorge, from Proto-Germanic *dalan valley (cognates: Old Saxon,
Dutch, Gothic dal, Old Norse dalr, Old High German tal, German Tal valley), from PIE *dhel- a hollow
(cognates: Old Church Slavonic dolu pit, Russian dol valley). Preserved by Norse influence in north
of England.


booth (n.)

mid-12c., from Old Danish bo&thorn; temporary dwelling, from East Norse *boa to dwell, from Proto-
Germanic *bowan-, from PIE root *bheue- to be, exist, grow (see be). See also bound (adj.2). Compare
German Bude booth, stall, Middle Dutch boode, Lithuanian butas house, Old Irish both hut, Bohemian
bouda, Polish buda, some probably borrowed from East Norse, some formed from the PIE root.


Vinland

name supposedly given by Leif Erikssson to lands he explored in northeastern North America c.1000;
it could mean either vine-land or meadow-land, and either way was perhaps coined to encourage
settlement (compare Greenland).    After Columbus' journeys and the European exploration of the New
World, evidence in the old sagas of the earlier Norse discovery of America had been noticed from
time to time by those who could read them. In early 19c. the notion was seriously debated by
Humboldt and other European scholars before winning their general acceptance by the 1830s. The case
for the identification of Vinland with North America began to be laid out in English-language
publications in 1840. Physical evidence of the Norse discovery was uncovered by the excavations at
L'Anse aux Meadows in 1960.


lee (n.)

Old English hleo shelter, cover, defense, protection, from Proto-Germanic *khlewaz (cognates: Old
Norse hle, Danish l&aelig;, Old Saxon hleo, Dutch lij lee, shelter). No known cognates outside
Germanic; original sense uncertain and might have been warm (compare German lau tepid, Old Norse hly
shelter, warmth), which might link it to PIE *kele- (1) warm. As an adjective, 1510s, from the noun.


knife (n.)

late Old English cnif, probably from Old Norse knifr, from Proto-Germanic *knibaz (cognates: Middle
Low German knif, Middle Dutch cnijf, German kneif), of uncertain origin. To further confuse the
etymology, there also are forms in -p-, such as Dutch knijp, German kneip. French canif penknife
(mid-15c.) is borrowed from Middle English or Norse.


walrus (n.)

1650s, from Dutch walrus, which was probably a folk-etymology alteration (by influence of Dutch
walvis whale and ros horse) of a Scandinavian word, such as Old Norse rosmhvalr walrus, hrosshvalr a
kind of whale, or rostungr walrus. Old English had horschw&aelig;l, and later morse, from Lapp morsa
or Finnish mursu, which ultimately might be the source, much garbled, of the first element in Old
Norse rosmhvalr.


Viking (n.)

Scandinavian pirate, 1801, vikingr, in The History of the Anglo-Saxons by English historian Sharon
H. Turner (1768-1847); he suggested the second element might be connected to king:    The name by
which the pirates were at first distinguished was Vikingr, which perhaps originally meant kings of
the bays. It was in bays that they ambushed, to dart upon the passing voyager.     But this later
was dismissed as incorrect. The form viking is attested in 1820, in Jamieson's notes to The Bruce.
The word is a historians' revival; it was not used in Middle English, but it was reintroduced from
Old Norse vikingr freebooter, sea-rover, pirate, viking, which usually is explained as meaning
properly one who came from the fjords, from vik creek, inlet, small bay (cognates: Old English wic,
Middle High German wich bay, and second element in Reykjavik). But Old English wicing and Old
Frisian wizing are almost 300 years older than the earliest attestation of the Old Norse word, and
probably derive from wic village, camp (large temporary camps were a feature of the Viking raids),
related to Latin vicus village, habitation (see villa).    The connection between the Norse and Old
English words is still much debated. The period of Viking activity was roughly 8c. to 11c. In the
Anglo-Saxon Chronicle, the raiding armies generally were referred to as &thorn;a Deniscan the Danes,
while those who settled in England were identified by their place of settlement. Old Norse viking
(n.) meant freebooting voyage, piracy; one would go on a viking (fara &#237; viking).


slaughter (n.)

c.1300, killing of a cattle or sheep for food, killing of a person, from a Scandinavian *slahtr,
akin to Old Norse slatr a butchering, butcher meat, slatra to slaughter, slattr a mowing from Proto-
Germanic *slukhtis, related to Old Norse sla to strike (see slay (v.)) + formative suffix (as in
laugh/laughter). Meaning killing of a large number of persons in battle is attested from mid-14c.
Old English had slieht stroke, slaughter, murder, death; animals for slaughter; as in sliehtswyn pig
for killing.


ransack (v.)

mid-13c., from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse rannsaka to pillage, literally search the
house (especially legally, for stolen goods), from rann house, from Proto-Germanic *rasnan (c.f.
Gothic razn, Old English &aelig;rn house; see barn) + saka to search, related to Old Norse soekja
seek (see seek). Sense influenced by sack (v.). Related: Ransacked; ransacking.


groove (n.)

c.1400, cave, mine, pit (late 13c. in place names), from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse
grod pit, or from Middle Dutch groeve furrow, ditch, both from Proto-Germanic *grobo (cognates: Old
Norse grof brook, river bed, Old High German gruoba ditch, Gothic groba pit, cave, Old English
gr&aelig;f ditch), related to grave (n.). Sense of long, narrow channel or furrow is 1650s. Meaning
spiral cut in a phonograph record is from 1902. Figurative sense of routine is from 1842, often
deprecatory at first, a rut.


health (n.)

Old English h&aelig;l&thorn; wholeness, a being whole, sound or well, from Proto-Germanic *hailitho,
from PIE *kailo- whole, uninjured, of good omen (cognates: Old English hal hale, whole; Old Norse
heill healthy; Old English halig,  Old Norse helge holy, sacred; Old English h&aelig;lan to heal).
With Proto-Germanic abstract noun suffix *-itho (see -th (2)). Of physical health in Middle English,
but also prosperity, happiness, welfare; preservation, safety.


urine (n.)

c.1300, from Old French orine, urine (12c.) and directly from Latin urina urine, from PIE *ur-
(cognates: Greek ouron urine), variant of root *we-r- water, liquid, milk (cognates: Sanskrit var
water, Avestan var rain, Lithuanian jures sea, Old English w&aelig;r, Old Norse ver sea, Old Norse
ur drizzling rain), related to *eue-dh-r (see udder).


alder (n.)

tree related to the birch, Old English alor alder (with intrusive -d- added 14c.; the historical
form aller survived until 18c. in literary English and persists in dialects, such as Lancashire
owler, which is partly from Norse), from Proto-Germanic *aliso (cognates: Old Norse &ouml;lr, Danish
elle, Swedish al, Dutch els, German erle), from *el-, the ancient PIE name of the tree (cognates:
Russian olicha, Polish olcha, Latin alnus, Lithuanian alksnis).


boat (n.)

Old English bat boat, ship, vessel, from Proto-Germanic *bait- (cognates: Old Norse batr, Dutch
boot, German Boot), possibly from PIE root *bheid- to split (see fissure), with the sense of making
a boat by hollowing out a tree trunk; or it may be an extension of the name for some part of a ship.
French bateau boat is from Old English or Norse. Spanish batel, Italian battello, Medieval Latin
batellus likewise probably are from Germanic.


haven (n.)

Old English h&aelig;fen haven, port, from Old Norse h&ouml;fn haven, harbor or directly from Proto-
Germanic *hafno- (cognates: Danish havn, Middle Low German havene, German Hafen), perhaps from PIE
*kap- to seize, hold contain (see have) on notion of place that holds ships, but compare Old Norse
haf, Old English h&aelig;f sea (see haff). Figurative sense of refuge, now practically the only
sense, is c.1200.


