nostalgia (n.)

1770, severe homesickness considered as a disease, Modern Latin, coined 1668 in a dissertation on
the topic at the University of Basel by scholar Johannes Hofer (1669-1752) as a rendering of German
heimweh (for which see home + woe). From Greek algos pain, grief, distress (see -algia) + nostos
homecoming, from PIE *nes- to return safely home (cognate with Old Norse nest food for a journey,
Sanskrit nasate approaches, joins, German genesen to recover, Gothic ganisan to heal, Old English
genesen to recover). French nostalgie is in French army medical manuals by 1754.    Originally in
reference to the Swiss and said to be peculiar to them and often fatal, whether by its own action or
in combination with wounds or disease. By 1830s the word was used of any intense homesickness: that
of sailors, convicts, African slaves. The bagpipes produced the same effects sometimes in the Scotch
regiments while serving abroad [Penny Magazine, Nov. 14, 1840]. It is listed among the endemic
diseases in the Cyclopaedia of Practical Medicine [London, 1833, edited by three M.D.s], which
defines it as The concourse of depressing symptoms which sometimes arise in persons who are absent
from their native country, when they are seized with a longing desire of returning to their home and
friends and the scenes their youth .... It was a military medical diagnosis principally, and was
considered a serious medical problem by the North in the American Civil War:    In the first two
years of the war, there were reported 2588 cases of nostalgia, and 13 deaths from this cause. These
numbers scarcely express the real extent to which nostalgia influenced the sickness and mortality of
the army. To the depressing influence of home-sickness must be attributed the fatal result in many
cases which might otherwise have terminated favorably. [Sanitary Memoirs of the War, U.S. Sanitary
Commission, N.Y.: 1867]    Transferred sense (the main modern one) of wistful yearning for the past
first recorded 1920, perhaps from such use of nostalgie in French literature. The longing for a
distant place also necessarily involves a separation in time.


Madeleine

fem. proper name, variation of Madeline. The kind of small, rich confection is attested from 1845,
said in OED to be named for Madeleine Paulmier, 19c. French pastry cook; any use with a sense of
small thing that evokes powerful nostalgia is due to Proust (1922).


Nestor

name for old king renowned for wise counsel, 1580s, from Greek, name of the aged and wise hero in
the Iliad, king of Pylus, who outlived three generations. Klein says the name is literally one who
blesses, and is related to nostimos blessed; Watkins connects it with the root of the first element
in nostalgia.


nostalgic (adj.)

1806, from nostalgia + -ic. Related: Nostalgically.


homesickness (n.)

1756, translating German heimweh, from Heim home + Weh woe, pain; the compound is from Swiss
dialect, expressing the longing for the mountains. The word was introduced to other European
languages 17c. by Swiss mercenaries. Also see nostalgia.


nineties (n.)

1857 as the years of someone's life between 90 and 99; from 1848 as the tenth decade of years in a
given century; 1849 with reference to Fahrenheit temperature. See ninety.    Many still live who
remember those days; if the old men cannot tell you the exact date, they will say: 'It were in the
nineties;' (etc.) [Chambers's Journal, Nov. 1, 1856]    In Britain, the naughty nineties was a
popular name 1920s-30s for the 1890s, based on the notion of a relaxing of morality and mood in
contrast to earlier Victorian times. In U.S., gay nineties in reference to the same decade is
attested from 1927, and was the title of a regular nostalgia feature in Life magazine about that
time.    The long, dreary blue-law Sunday afternoons were periods of the Nineties which no amount of
rosy retrospect will ever be able to recall as gay, especially to a normal healthy boy to whom all
activities were taboo except G. A. Henty and the bound volumes of Leslie's Weekly of the Civil War.
[Life, Sept. 1, 1927]


harness (n.)

c.1300, personal fighting equipment, body armor, also armor or trappings of a war-horse, from Old
French harnois arms, equipment; harness; male genitalia; tackle; household equipment, of uncertain
origin, perhaps from Old Norse *hernest provisions for an army, from herr army (see harry) + nest
provisions (see nostalgia). Non-military sense of fittings for a beast of burden is from early 14c.
German Harnisch harness, armor is the French word, borrowed into Middle High German. The Celtic
words also are believed to be from French, as are Spanish arnes, Portuguese arnez, Italian arnese.
Prive harness (late 14c.) was a Middle English term for sex organs.


