notable (adj.)

mid-14c., from Old French notable well-known, notable, remarkable (13c.) and directly from Latin
notabilis noteworthy, extraordinary, from notare to note (see note (v.)). The noun meaning a person
of distinction is first recorded 1815. Related: Notably; notableness.


notabilia (n.)

notable things, from Latin notabilia, neuter plural of notabilis (see notable).


Junoesque (adj.)

in reference to stately, mature beauty, 1861, from Juno + -esque. Qualities associated with the
Roman goddess, who also was notable for her fits of rage.


memorabilia (n.)

things worth remembering, 1806, from Latin memorabilia notable achievements, noun use of neuter
plural of memorabilis worthy of being remembered (see memorable).


expensive (adj.)

1620s, given to profuse expenditure, from expense (n.) + -ive. Meaning costly is from 1630s. Earlier
was expenseful (c.1600). Expenseless was in use mid-17c.-18c., but there seems now nothing notable
to which it applies, and the dictionaries label it obsolete.


signal (adj.)

remarkable, striking, notable (serving as a sign), 1640s, from French signal&eacute;, past
participle of signaler to distinguish, signal (see signal (n.)).


notability (n.)

late 14c., from Old French notabilite, from Medieval Latin *notabilitatem (nominative *notabilitas),
from Latin notabilis (see notable).


liberal (n.)

1820, member of the Liberal party of Great Britain, from liberal (adj.). Used early 20c. of less
dogmatic Christian churches; in reference to a political ideology not conservative or fascist but
short of socialism, from c.1920.    This is the attitude of mind which has come to be known as
liberal. It implies vigorous convictions, tolerance for the opinions of others, and a persistent
desire for sound progress. It is a method of approach which has played a notable and constructive
part in our history, and which merits a thorough trial today in the attack on our absorbingly
interesting American task. [Guy Emerson, The New Frontier, 1920]


monument (n.)

late 13c., a sepulchre, from Old French monument grave, tomb, monument, and directly from Latin
monumentum a monument, memorial structure, statue; votive offering; tomb; memorial record, literally
something that reminds, from monere to remind, warn (see monitor (n.)). Sense of structure or
edifice to commemorate a notable person, action, or event first attested c.1600.


prominent (adj.)

mid-15c., projecting, jutting out, from Latin prominentem (nominative prominens) prominent, present
participle of prominere jut or stand out, be prominent, overhang, from pro- before, forward (see
pro-) + minere to project, from minae projections, threats (see menace (n.)). Meaning conspicuous is
from 1759; that of notable, leading is from 1849. Related: Prominently.


blue laws

1781, severe Puritanical code said to have been enacted 18c. in New Haven, Connecticut; of uncertain
origin, perhaps from one of the ground senses behind blues, or from notion of coldness. Or perhaps
connected to bluestocking in the sense of puritanically plain or mean (see bluestocking, which is a
different application of the same term; the parliament of 1653 was derisively called the
bluestocking parliament). The common explanation that they were written on blue paper is not
considered valid; pale blue paper was used for many old U.S. legal documents and there would have
been nothing notable about its use in this case.


Swiss (n.)

1510s, from Middle French Suisse, from Middle High German Suizer, from Suiz Switzerland (see
Switzerland and compare Switzer (1570s), archaic word for a Swiss, and German Schweiz). As an
adjective from 1520s. Swiss banks were notable for assuring anonymity and security by 1949. Swiss
cheese is attested from 1808; as a type of something full of holes, from 1924.


luminary (n.)

mid-15c., lamp, source of (artificial) light, from Old French luminarie (12c.), lamp, lights,
lighting; candles; brightness, illumination, from Late Latin luminare light, torch, lamp, heavenly
body, literally that which gives light, from Latin lumen (genitive luminis) light, related to lucere
to shine (see light (n.)). Sense of notable person is first recorded 1690s, though the Middle
English word also had a figurative sense of source of spiritual light, example of holiness.


regency (n.)

early 15c., government by regents, from Medieval Latin regentia, from Latin regens (see regent).
Notable instances were: France 1715-1723 (under Philip, Duke of Orleans), Britain 1811-1820 (under
George, Prince of Wales, Prince Regent), in each case with suggestion of debauchery [Weekley]. In
reference to the style of that time, attested from 1880 (there is an unexplained use in Jane Austen
from 1793). Compare French equivalent R&eacute;gence, attested in English from 1919. U.S. Albany
Regency refers to dominant political faction in New York state c.1820-1850.


Pegasus

winged horse in Greek mythology, late 14c., from Latin, from Greek Pegasos, usually said to be from
pege fountain, spring; a well fed by a spring (plural pegai), especially in springs of Ocean, near
which Medusa was said to have been killed by Perseus (Pegasus sprang from her blood). But this may
be folk etymology, and the ending of the word indicates non-Greek origin. Advances since the 1990s
in the study of the Luwians, neighbors of the Hittites in ancient Anatolia, show a notable
convergence of the Greek name with Piha&#353;&#353;a&#353;&#353;i, the name of a Luwian weather-god:
the mythological figure of Pegasus carrying the lightning and thunderbolt of Zeus, ... is likely to
represent an avatar of the Luwian Storm-God of Lightning .... [Alice Mouton, et al., eds., Luwian
Identities, 2013]


sycamore (n.)

mid-14c., sicamour mulberry-leaved fig tree, from Old French sicamor, sagremore, from Latin
sycomorus, from Greek sykomoros African fig-tree, literally fig-mulberry, from sykon fig (see fig) +
moron  (see mulberry). But according to many sources this is more likely a folk-etymology of Hebrew
shiqmah mulberry.    A Biblical word, originally used for a wide-spreading shade tree with fig-like
fruit (Ficus sycomorus) common in Egypt, Palestine, Syria, etc., whose leaves somewhat resemble
those of the mulberry; applied in English from 1580s to a large species of European maple (also
plane-tree), perhaps because both it and the Biblical tree were notable for their shadiness (the
Holy Family took refuge under a sycamore on the flight to Egypt), and from 1814 to the North
American shade tree that also is called a buttonwood, which was introduced to Europe from Virginia
1637 by Filius Tradescant).    Spelling apparently influenced by sycamine black mulberry tree, which
is from Greek sykcaminos, which also is mentioned in the Bible (Luke xvii:6). For the sake of
clarity, some writers have used the more Hellenic sycomore in reference to the Biblical tree.


kleptomania (n.)

1830, formed from mania + Greek kleptes thief, from kleptein to steal, act secretly, from PIE *klep-
to steal, an extention of root *kel- (2) to cover, conceal (see cell; cognate with Latin clepere to
steal, listen secretly to, Old Prussian au-klipts hidden, Old Church Slavonic poklopu cover,
wrapping, Gothic hlifan to steal, hliftus thief). Much-derided 19c. as a fancy term for old-
fashioned thievery and an opportunity for the privileged to claim a psychological motive for
criminal misbehavior.    There is a popular belief that some of the criminal laws under which the
poor are rigorously punished are susceptible of remarkable elasticity when the peccadilloes of the
rich are brought under judgment, and that there is some truth in the old adage which declares that
one man may steal a horse where another dare not look over the hedge. This unwholesome distrust is
not likely to diminish if, in cases of criminal prosecutions where so-called respectable persons
commit theft without sufficiently obvious motive for the act, they have their crime extenuated on
the plea of kleptomania, as has recently occurred in several notable instances. [Kleptomania, The
Lancet, Nov. 16, 1861]


Lombard (n.)

from Late Latin Langobardus, proper name of a Germanic people who conquered Italy 6c. and settled in
the northern region that became known as Lombardy, from Proto-Germanic Langgobardoz, often said to
mean literally Long-beards, but perhaps rather from *lang- tall, long + the proper name of the
people (Latin Bardi). Their name in Old English was Langbeardas (plural), but also Hea&eth;obeardan,
from hea&eth;o war.    In Middle English the word meant banker, money-changer, pawnbroker (late
14c.), from Old French Lombart Lombard, also money-changer; usurer; coward, from Italian Lombardo
(from Medieval Latin Lombardus).    Lombards in Middle Ages were notable throughout Western Europe
as bankers and money-lenders, also pawn-brokers; they established themselves in France from 13c.,
especially in Montpellier and Cahors, and London's Lombard Street (c.1200) originally was the site
of the houses of Lombard bankers. French also gave the word in this sense to Middle Dutch and Low
German. Lombardy poplar, originally from Italy but planted in North American colonies as an
ornamental tree, is attested from 1766.


woman (n.)

adult female human, late Old English wimman, wiman (plural wimmen), literally woman-man, alteration
of wifman (plural wifmen) woman, female servant (8c.), a compound of wif woman (see wife) + man
human being (in Old English used in reference to both sexes; see man (n.)). Compare Dutch vrouwmens
wife, literally woman-man.    It is notable that it was thought necessary to join wif, a neuter
noun, representing a female person, to man, a masc. noun representing either a male or female
person, to form a word denoting a female person exclusively. [Century Dictionary]    The formation
is peculiar to English and Dutch. Replaced older Old English wif and quean as the word for female
human being. The pronunciation of the singular altered in Middle English by the rounding influence
of -w-; the plural retains the original vowel. Meaning wife, now largely restricted to U.S.
dialectal use, is attested from mid-15c. Woman-hater misogynist is from c.1600. Women's work is from
1660s. Women's liberation is attested from 1966; women's rights is from 1840, with an isolated
example in 1630s.


seven (n.)

Old English seofon, from Proto-Germanic *sebun (cognates: Old Saxon sibun, Old Norse sjau, Swedish
sju, Danish syv, Old Frisian sowen, siugun, Middle Dutch seven, Dutch zeven, Old High German sibun,
German sieben, Gothic sibun), from PIE *septm seven (cognates: Sanskrit sapta, Avestan hapta,
Hittite shipta, Greek hepta, Latin septem, Old Church Slavonic sedmi, Lithuanian septyni, Old Irish
secht, Welsh saith).    Long regarded as a number of perfection (seven wonders; seven sleepers, the
latter translating Latin septem dormientes; seven against Thebes, etc.), but that notion is late in
Old English and in German a nasty, troublesome woman could be eine b&ouml;se Sieben an evil seven
(1662).    Magical power or healing skill associated since 16c. with the seventh son [The seuenth
Male Chyld by iust order (neuer a Gyrle or Wench being borne betweene), Thomas Lupton, A Thousand
Notable Things, 1579]. The typical number for very great, strong, as in seven-league boots in the
fairy story of Hop o'my Thumb. The Seven Years' War (1756-63) is also the Third Silesian War.    The
Seven Stars (Old English sibunsterri), usually refers to the Pleiades, though in 15c. and after this
name occasionally was given to the Big Dipper (which also has seven stars), or the seven planets of
classical astronomy. Popular as a tavern sign, it might also (with six in a circle, one in the
center) be a Masonic symbol.    FOOL:  ... The reason why the     seven stars are no more than seven
is a pretty reason.     LEAR:  Because they are not eight?  FOOL:  Yes, indeed: thou wouldst make a
good fool.  [King Lear, I.v.]


