notch (n.)

1570s, probably a misdivision of an otch (see N for other examples), from Middle French oche notch,
from Old French ochier to notch, of unknown origin. Said to be unconnected to nock.


notch (v.)

1590s, from notch (n.). Earlier verb (before misdivision) was Middle English ochen to cut, slash
(c.1400). Related: Notched; notching.


top-notch (adj.)

also top notch, 1848, from top (adj.) + notch (n.). Figurative of the highest point of something,
but the exact mechanical image is uncertain.


nock (n.)

notch on a bow, late 14c., of uncertain origin, probably from a Scandinavian source (such as Swedish
nock notch), but compare Low German nokk, Dutch nok tip of a sail. Perhaps connected to nook.


cranny (n.)

mid-15c., possibly from a diminutive of Middle French cran notch, fissure (14c.), from crener to
notch, split, from Medieval Latin crenare, possibly from Latin cernere to separate, sift (see
crisis). But OED casts doubt on this derivation.


scotch (v.)

stamp out, crush, 1825, earlier make harmless for a time (1798; a sense that derives from an
uncertain reading of Macbeth III.ii.13), from scocchen to cut, score, gash, make an incision (early
15c.), of unknown origin, perhaps [Barnhart] from Anglo-French escocher, Old French cocher to notch,
nick, from coche a notch, groove, perhaps from Latin coccum berry of the scarlet oak, which appears
notched, from Greek kokkos. Related: Scotched; scotching.


crenel (n.)

open space on an embattlement, early 14c., from Old French crenel (12c.), apparently a diminutive of
cren notch (see cranny).


jagged (adj.)

mid-15c., from verb jaggen (c.1400) to pierce, slash, cut; to notch or nick; cut or tear unevenly,
Scottish and northern English, of unknown origin. Originally of garments with regular toothed edges;
meaning with the edge irregularly cut is from 1570s. Related: Jaggedly; jaggedness.


nick (v.)

1520s, to make a notch in, from nick (n.). Sense of to steal is from 1869, probably from earlier
slang sense of to catch, take unawares, arrest (1620s). The precise sense connection is unclear.
Related: Nicked; nicking.


score (n.)

late Old English scoru twenty, from Old Norse skor mark, notch, incision; a rift in rock, also, in
Icelandic, twenty, from Proto-Germanic *skura-, from PIE root *(s)ker- (1) to cut (see shear).
The connecting notion probably is counting large numbers (of sheep, etc.) with a notch in a stick
for each 20. That way of counting, called vigesimalism, also exists in French: In Old French, twenty
(vint) or a multiple of it could be used as a base, as in vint et doze (32), dous vinz et diz (50).
Vigesimalism was or is a feature of Welsh, Irish, Gaelic and Breton (as well as non-IE Basque), and
it is speculated that the English and the French picked it up from the Celts. Compare tally (n.).
The prehistoric sense of the Germanic word, then, likely was straight mark like a scratch, line
drawn by a sharp instrument, but in English this is attested only from c.1400, along with the sense
mark made (on a chalkboard, etc.) to keep count of a customer's drinks in a tavern. This sense was
extended by 1670s to mark made for purpose of recording a point in a game or match, and thus
aggregate of points made by contestants in certain games and matches (1742, originally in whist).
From the tavern-keeping sense comes the meaning amount on an innkeeper's bill (c.1600) and thus the
figurative verbal expression settle scores (1775).  Meaning printed piece of music first recorded
1701, said to be from the practice of connecting related staves by scores of lines. Especially music
composed for a film (1927). Meaning act of obtaining narcotic drugs is by 1951.   Scoreboard is from
1826;   score-keeping- from 1905; newspaper sports section score line is from 1965; baseball score-
card is from 1877.


Scarborough

place in Yorkshire, earlier Scar&#240;abork, etc., apparently a viking name, from Old Norse and
meaning fortified place of a man called Skarthi, identified in old chronicles as Thorgils Skarthi,
literally Thorgils Harelip, from Old Norse skart&#240; notch, hack (in the edge of a thing);
mountain pass. It has been noted that a literal reading of the name as gap-hill suits the location.
Scarborough warning short notice or none is from 1540s.


nick (n.)

notch, groove, slit, late 15c., nyke, of unknown origin, possibly influenced by Middle French niche
(see niche), or from it. Nick of time is first attested 1640s (nick of opportunity is 1610s),
possibly from an old custom of recording time as it passed by making notches on a tally stick,
though nick in the general sense of critical moment is older (1570s, Hanmer, who adds as commonly we
say) than the phrase.


shard (n.)

also sherd, Old English sceard incision, cleft, gap; potshard, a fragment, broken piece, from Proto-
Germanic *skardas (cognates: Middle Dutch schaerde a fragment, a crack, Dutch schaard a flaw, a
fragment, German Scharte a notch, Danish skaar chink, potsherd), a past participle from the root of
Old English sceran to cut (see shear). Meaning fragment of broken earthenware developed in late Old
English. Used late 14c. as scale of a dragon. French &eacute;charde prickle, splinter is a Germanic
loan-word.


indent (v.)

early 15c., indenten/endenten to make notches; to give (something) a toothed or jagged appearance,
also to make a legal indenture, from Old French endenter to notch or dent, give a serrated edge to,
from Medieval Latin indentare to furnish with teeth, from in- into, in, on, upon (see in- (2)) +
Latin dens (genitive dentis) tooth (see tooth). Related: Indented; indenting.  The printing sense is
first attested 1670s. The noun is first recorded 1590s, from the verb. An earlier noun sense of a
written agreement (late 15c.) is described in Middle English Dictionary as scribal abbrev. of
endenture.


carve (v.)

Old English ceorfan (class III strong verb; past tense cearf, past participle corfen) to cut, cut
down, slay; to carve, cut out, engrave, from West Germanic *kerfan (cognates: Old Frisian kerva,
Middle Dutch and Dutch kerven, German kerben to cut, notch), from PIE root *gerbh- to scratch,
making carve the English cognate of Greek graphein to write, originally to scratch on clay tablets
with a stylus.    Once extensively used, most senses now usurped by cut (v.). Meaning specialized to
sculpture, meat, etc., by 16c. Related: Carved; carving. Original strong conjugation has been
abandoned, but archaic carven lingers.


entomology (n.)

1766, from French entomologie (1764), coined from Greek entomon insect + -logia study of (see
-logy). Entomon is neuter of entomos having a notch or cut (at the waist), from en in (see en- (2))
+ temnein to cut (see tome).    So called by Aristotle in reference to the segmented division of
insect bodies. Compare insect. Related: Entomological. Hybrid insectology (1766, from French
insectologie, 1744) is not much used.  I have given the name insectology to that part of natural
history which has insects for its object; that of entomology ... would undoubtedly have been more
suitable ... but its barbarous sound terryfy'd me. [Charles Bonnet's English translation of his
Contemplation de la nature, 1766]


tally (n.)

mid-15c., stick marked with notches to indicate amount owed or paid, from Anglo-French tallie (early
14c., Old French taille notch in a piece of wood signifying a debt), Anglo-Latin talea (late 12c.),
from Medieval Latin tallia, from Latin talea a cutting, rod, stick (see tailor (n.), and compare
sense history of score). Meaning a thing that matches another first recorded 1650s, from practice of
splitting a tally lengthwise across the notches, debtor and creditor each retaining one of the
halves; the usual method of keeping accounts before writing became general (the size of the notches
varied with the amount). Sports sense of a total score is from 1856. Also in 19c. British provincial
verbal expression live tally, make a tally bargain live as husband and wife without marrying.


crack (n.)

a split, an opening, mid-15c., earlier a splitting sound; a fart; the sound of a trumpet (late
14c.), probably from crack (v.). Meaning rock cocaine is first attested 1985. The superstition that
it is bad luck to step on sidewalk cracks has been traced to c.1890. Meaning try, attempt first
attested 1830, nautical, probably a hunting metaphor, from slang sense of fire a gun.    At their
head, apart from the rest, was a black bull, who appeared to be their leader; he came roaring along,
his tail straight an end, and at times tossing up the earth with his horns. I never felt such a
desire to have a crack at any thing in all my life. He drew nigh the place where I was standing; I
raised my beautiful Betsey to my shoulder, took deliberate aim, blazed away, and he roared, and
suddenly stopped. [A Narrative of the Life of David Crockett, Written by Himself, Philadelphia,
1834]    Adjectival meaning top-notch, superior (as in a crack shot) is slang from 1793, perhaps
from earlier verbal sense of do any thing with quickness or smartness (Johnson). Grose (1796) has
THE CRACK, or ALL THE CRACK. The fashionable theme, the go.


