notion (n.)

late 14c., from Latin notionem (nominative notio) concept, conception, idea, notice, noun of action
from past participle stem of noscere come to know (see know). Coined by Cicero as a loan-translation
of Greek ennoia act of thinking, notion, conception, or prolepsis previous notion, previous
conception.


notions (n.)

miscellaneous articles, 1805, American English, from notion with the idea of clever invention.


notional (adj.)

pertaining to notions, 1590s, from notion + -al (earlier nocional, late 14c., from Medieval Latin
notionalis). Meaning full of whims is from 1791. Grammatical sense is from 1928 (Jespersen);
economics use is from 1958.


rounder (n.)

1620s, a sentinel, agent noun from round (n.) on notion of one who makes the rounds. Sense of
chronic drunkard or criminal is from 1854, on notion of one who is habitually in and out of jails or
bars. Rounders, a baseball-like game, attested from 1828.


flat-footed (adj.)

c.1600, with flat feet; see flat (adj.) + foot (n.). Meaning unprepared is from 1912, U.S. baseball
slang, on notion of not on one's toes; earlier in U.S. colloquial adverbial use it meant
straightforwardly, downright, resolute (1828), from notion of standing firmly.


skid (v.)

1670s, apply a skid to (a wheel, to keep it from turning), from skid (n.). Meaning slide along first
recorded 1838; extended sense of slip sideways (on a wet road, etc.) first recorded 1884. The
original notion is of a block of wood for stopping a wheel; the modern senses are from the notion of
a wheel slipping when blocked from revolving.


stiff (n.)

corpse, dead body, 1859, slang, from stiff (adj.) which had been associated with notion of rigor
mortis since c.1200. Meaning working man first recorded 1930, from earlier genitive sense of
contemptible person, but sometimes merely man, fellow (1882). Slang meaning something or someone
bound to lose is 1890 (originally of racehorses), from notion of corpse.


flare (v.)

1540s, spread out (hair), of unknown origin, perhaps from Scandinavian or from Dutch vlederen.
Meaning shine out with a sudden light is from 1630s. The notion of spreading out in display is
behind the notion of spreading gradually outward (1640s). Related: Flared; flaring.


fence (n.)

early 14c., action of defending, resistance; means of protection, fortification, shortening of
defens (see defense). The same pattern also yielded fend, fender; and obsolete fensive defensive
(late 16c.). Spelling alternated between -c- and -s- in Middle English. Sense of enclosure is first
recorded mid-15c. on notion of that which serves as a defense. Sense of dealer in stolen goods is
thieves' slang, first attested c.1700, from notion of such transactions taking place under defense
of secrecy.    To be figuratively on the fence uncommitted is from 1828, perhaps from the notion of
spectators at a fight, or a simple literal image: A man sitting on the top of a fence, can jump down
on either side with equal facility. [Bartlett, Dictionary of Americanisms, 1848].


pet (n.2)

peevishness, offense at feeling slighted, 1580s, in phrase take the pet take offense. Perhaps from
pet (n.1) on a similar notion to that in American English that gets my goat, but the underlying
notion is obscure, and the form of the original expression makes this doubtful. This word seems to
have been originally a southern English term, while pet (n.1) was northern and Scottish.


conceit (n.)

late 14c., something formed in the mind, thought, notion, from conceiven (see conceive) based on
analogy of deceit and receipt. Sense evolved from something formed in the mind, to fanciful or witty
notion (1510s), to vanity (c.1600) through shortening of self-conceit (1580s).


flyer (n.)

also flier, mid-15c., that which flies, thing or creature that flies, agent noun of fly (v.1).
Meaning something that goes fast is from 1795. Meaning speculative investment, financial venture is
from 1846 (on the notion of a flying leap). Meaning small handbill or fly-sheet is from 1889, U.S.
slang (originally especially of police bulletins), on notion of made to be scattered broadcast.
Meaning aviator (1916) developed in World War I. Related: Fliers; flyers.


sucker (n.)

young mammal before it is weaned, late 14c., agent noun from suck. Slang meaning person who is
easily deceived is first attested 1836, American English, on notion of naivete; but another theory
traces the slang meaning to the fish called a sucker (1753), on the notion of being easy to catch in
their annual migrations (the fish so called from the shape of its mouth). As a type of candy from
1823; especially lollipop by 1907. Meaning shoot from the base of a tree or plant is from 1570s.
Also the old name of inhabitants of Illinois.


vagary (n.)

1570s, a wandering, a roaming journey, from Italian vagare or directly from Latin vagari to wander,
stroll about, roam, be unsettled, spread abroad, from vagus roving, wandering (see vague). The
infinitive appears to have been adopted in English as a noun and conformed to nouns in -ary, but
this can hardly be explained except as an orig. university use [Century Dictionary]. Current meaning
of eccentric notion or conduct (1620s) is from notion of mental wandering. Related: Vagaries.


spell (n.2)

1620s, a turn of work in place of another, from spell (v.2); compare Old English gespelia a
substitute. Meaning shifted toward continuous course of work (1706), probably via notion of shift
work (as at sea) where one man or crew regularly spelled another. Hence continuous stretch of
something (weather, etc.), recorded by 1728. Hence also, via the notion in give a spell (1750)
relieve another by taking a turn of work came the sense interval of rest or relaxation (1845), which
took the word to a sense opposite what it had at the start.


seal (v.)

to fasten with (or as with) a seal, c.1200, from seal (n.1). Meaning to place a seal on (a document)
is recorded from mid-14c.; hence to conclude, ratify, render official (late 15c.). Sense of to close
up with wax, lead, cement, etc. is attested from 1660s, from the notion of wax seals on envelopes.
In reference to the actions of wood-coatings, 1940. Related: Sealed; sealing. Sealing-wax is
attested from c.1300. To seal (one's) fate (1799) probably reflects the notion of a seal on an
execution warrant.


veterinarian (n.)

animal doctor, 1640s, from Latin veterinarius of or having to do with beasts of burden, also, as a
noun, cattle doctor, from veterinum beast of burden, perhaps from vetus (genitive veteris) old (see
veteran), possibly from the notion of experienced, or of one year old (hence strong enough to draw
burdens). Another theory connects it to Latin vehere to draw, on notion of used as a draft animal.
Replaced native dog-leech (1520s).


ptomaine (n.)

1880, from Italian ptomaina, coined by Professor Francesco Selmi of Bologna, 1878, from Greek ptoma
corpse, on notion of poison produced in decaying matter. Greek ptoma is literally a fall, a falling,
via the notion of fallen thing, fallen body; nominal derivative of piptein to fall (see symptom).
Incorrectly formed, and Selmi is roundly scolded for it in OED, which says proper Greek would be
*ptomatine.


off (adv.)

by c.1200 as an emphatic form of Old English of (see of), employed in the adverbial use of that
word. The prepositional meaning away from and the adjectival sense of farther were not firmly fixed
in this variant until 17c., but once they were they left the original of with the transferred and
weakened senses of the word. Meaning not working is from 1861. Off the cuff (1938) is from the
notion of speaking from notes written in haste on one's shirt cuffs. Off the rack (adj.) is from
1963; off the record is from 1933; off the wall crazy is 1968, probably from the notion of a lunatic
bouncing off the walls or else in reference to carom shots in squash, handball, etc.


flag (n.1)

cloth ensign, late 15c., now in all modern Germanic languages (German Flagge, Dutch vlag, Danish
flag, Swedish flagg, etc.) but apparently first recorded in English, of unknown origin, but likely
connected to flag (v.1) or else an independent imitative formation expressing the notion of
something flapping in the wind [OED]. A guess considered less likely is that it is from flag (n.2)
on the notion of being square and flat.    Meaning name and editorial information on a newspaper is
by 1956. U.S. Flag Day (1894) is in reference to the adopting of the Stars and Stripes by the
Continental Congress on June 14, 1777.


shaft (n.1)

Old English sceaft long, slender rod, staff, pole; spear-shaft; spear, from Proto-Germanic *skaftaz
(cognates: Old Norse skapt, Old Saxon skaft, Old High German scaft, German schaft, Dutch schacht,
not found in Gothic), which some connect with a Germanic passive past participle of PIE root
*(s)kep- to cut, to scrape (source of Old English scafan to shave, scrape, polish) on notion of tree
branch stripped of its bark. But compare Latin scapus shaft, stem, shank, Greek skeptron a staff
(see scepter) which appear to be cognates.    Meaning beam or ray (of light, etc.) is attested from
c.1300. Sense of an arrow is from c.1400; that of a handle from 1520s. Mechanical sense is from
1680s. Vulgar slang meaning penis first recorded 1719 on notion of columnar part (late 14c.); hence
probably shaft (v.) and the related noun sense act of unfair treatment (1959), though some early
sources insist this is from the notion of a wound.


polish (v.)

early 14c., polischen make smooth, from Old French poliss-, present participle stem of polir (12c.)
to polish, decorate, see to one's appearance, from Latin polire to polish, make smooth; decorate,
embellish; figuratively refine, improve, said to be from Proto-Indo-European *pel- to thrust,
strike, drive (via the notion of fulling cloth). The sense of free from coarseness, to refine first
recorded in English mid-14c. Related: Polished; polishing.  Slang polish off finish is 1837, from
notion of applying a coat of polish being the final step in a piece of work.


bag (n.)

c.1200, bagge, from Old Norse baggi or a similar Scandinavian source; not found in other Germanic
languages, perhaps ultimately of Celtic origin. Disparaging slang for woman dates from 1924 (though
various specialized senses of this are much older). Meaning person's area of interest or expertise
is 1964, from Black English slang, from jazz sense of category, probably via notion of putting
something in a bag.    To be left holding the bag (and presumably nothing else), cheated, swindled
is attested by 1793. Many figurative senses, such as the verb meaning to kill game (1814) and its
colloquial extension to catch, seize, steal (1818) are from the notion of the game bag (late 15c.)
into which the product of the hunt was placed. To let the cat out of the bag reveal the secret is
from 1760.


pageant (n.)

late 14c., play in a cycle of mystery plays, from Medieval Latin pagina, of uncertain origin,
perhaps from Latin pagina page of a book (see page (n.1)) on notion of manuscript of a play.    But
an early sense in Middle English also was stage or scene of a play (late 14c.) and Klein says a
sense of Latin pagina was movable scaffold (probably from the etymological sense of stake). With
excrescent -t as in ancient (adj.). Generalized sense of showy parade, spectacle is first attested
1805, though this notion is found in pageantry (1650s).


odd (adj.)

c.1300, constituting a unit in excess of an even number, from Old Norse oddi third or additional
number, as in odda-ma&eth;r third man, odd man (who gives the casting vote), odda-tala odd number.
The literal meaning of Old Norse oddi is point of land, angle (related via notion of triangle to
oddr point of a weapon); from Proto-Germanic *uzdaz pointed upward (cognates: Old English ord point
of a weapon, spear, source, beginning, Old Frisian ord point, place, Dutch oord place, region, Old
High German ort point, angle, German Ort place), from PIE *uzdho- (cognates: Lithuanian us-nis
thistle). None of the other languages, however, shows the Old Norse development from point to third
number. Used from late 14c. to indicate a surplus over any given sum.    Sense of strange, peculiar
first attested 1580s from notion of odd one out, unpaired one of three (attested earlier, c.1400, as
singular in a positive sense of renowned, rare, choice). Odd job (c.1770) is so called from notion
of not regular. Odd lot incomplete or random set is from 1897. The international order of Odd
Fellows began as local social clubs in England, late 18c., with Masonic-type trappings; formally
organized 1813 in Manchester.


order (n.)

early 13c., body of persons living under a religious discipline, from Old French ordre position,
estate; rule, regulation; religious order (11c.), from earlier ordene, from Latin ordinem
(nominative ordo) row, rank, series, arrangement, originally a row of threads in a loom, from Italic
root *ord- to arrange, arrangement (source of ordiri to begin to weave; compare primordial), of
unknown origin.    Meaning a rank in the (secular) community is first recorded c.1300; meaning
command, directive is first recorded 1540s, from the notion of to keep in order. Military and
honorary orders grew our of the fraternities of Crusader knights. Business and commerce sense is
attested from 1837. In natural history, as a classification of living things, it is first recorded
1760. Meaning condition of a community which is under the rule of law is from late 15c.    Phrase in
order to (1650s) preserves etymological notion of sequence. The word reflects a medieval notion: a
system of parts subject to certain uniform, established ranks or proportions, and was used of
everything from architecture to angels. Old English expressed many of the same ideas with
endebyrdnes. In short order without delay is from 1834, American English; order of battle is from
1769.


G.I. (adj.)

also GI, 1936 as an adjective meaning U.S. Army equipment, American English, apparently an
abbreviation of Government Issue, and applied to anything associated with servicemen. Transferred
noun sense of U.S. Army soldier arose during World War II (first recorded 1943), apparently from the
jocular notion that the men themselves were manufactured by the government.    An earlier G.I.
(1908) was an abbreviation of galvanized iron, especially in G.I. can, a type of metal trash can;
the term was picked up by U.S. soldiers in World War I as slang for a similar-looking type of German
artillery shells. But it is highly unlikely that this G.I. came to mean soldier. No two sources seem
to agree on the entire etymology, but none backs the widespread notion that it stands for *General
Infantry. GI Joe any U.S. soldier attested from 1942 (date in OED is a typo).


temple (n.1)

building for worship, edifice dedicated to the service of a deity or deities, Old English tempel,
from Latin templum piece of ground consecrated for the taking of auspices, building for worship of a
god, of uncertain signification. Commonly referred to PIE root *tem- to cut (see tome), on notion of
place reserved or cut out [Watkins], or to root *temp- to stretch [Klein's sources], on notion of
cleared space in front of an altar (see tenet). Compare Greek temenos sacred area around a temple,
literally place cut off, from stem of temnein to cut. Figurative sense of any place regarded as
occupied by divine presence was in Old English. Applied to Jewish synagogues from 1590s.


soused (adj.)

drunk, 1610s, from past participle of souse (v.), on notion of one pickled in liquor.


temple (n.2)

side of the forehead, mid-14c., from Old French temple side of the forehead (11c.), from Vulgar
Latin *tempula (plural taken as fem. singular), from Latin tempora, plural of tempus (genitive
temporis) side of the forehead, perhaps originally the thin stretch of skin at the side of the
forehead, from PIE *temp- to stretch, an extension of the root *ten- to stretch (see tenet), from
the notion of stretched, thus thin, which is the notion in cognate Old English &eth;unwange,
literally thin cheek. Or possibly associated with tempus span timely space (for a mortal blow with a
sword).


sheer (adj.)

c.1200, exempt, free from guilt (as in Sheer Thursday, the Thursday of Holy Week); later schiere
thin, sparse (c.1400), from Old English scir bright, clear, gleaming; translucent; pure, unmixed,
and influenced by Old Norse cognate sc&aelig;r bright, clean, pure, both from Proto-Germanic
*skeran- (cognates: Old Saxon skiri, Old Frisian skire, German schier, Gothic skeirs clean, pure),
from PIE root *(s)ker- (1) to cut (see shear (v.)).     Sense of absolute, utter (sheer nonsense)
developed 1580s, probably from the notion of unmixed; that of very steep (a sheer cliff) is first
recorded 1800, probably from notion of continued without halting. Meaning diaphanous is from 1560s.
As an adverb from c.1600.


miter (n.2)

in the carpentry sense of joint at a 45 degree angle, 1670s, perhaps from mitre, via notion of
joining of the two peaks of the folded cap. As a verb from 1731.


stunner (n.)

1829, in pugilism, agent noun from stun. Meaning beautiful woman attested by 1848 on notion of one
who astounds or amazes.


girder (n.)

main supporting beam that carries flooring, 1610s, agent noun from gird, on notion of something that
holds up something else. Used of iron bridge supports from 1853.


proceeds (n.)

results, profits, 1660s, from proceed (v.) on the notion of that which proceeds from some event or
activity.


ding-a-ling (n.)

one who is crazy, 1935, from notion of hearing bells in the head (see ding (v.)).


jalousie (n.)

1766, French, literally jealousy (see jealousy), from notion of looking through blinds without being
seen.


rose-colored (adj.)

optimistic, 1854, from rose (n.1) on the notion of something uncommonly beautiful.


flip (n.2)

sailors' hot drink usually containing beer, brandy and sugar, 1690s, from flip (v.); so called from
notion of it being whipped up or beaten.


hopper (n.2)

container with narrow opening at bottom, late 13c., perhaps an agent noun from hop (v.) via notion
of grain juggling in a mill hopper.


joint (n.)

late 13c., a part of a body where two bones meet and move in contact with one another, from Old
French joint joint of the body (12c.), from Latin iunctus united, connected, associated, past
participle of iungere join (see jugular). Related: Joints. Slang meaning of place, building,
establishment (especially one where persons meet for shady activities) first recorded 1877, American
English, from an earlier Anglo-Irish sense (1821), perhaps on the notion of a side-room, one joined
to a main room. The original U.S. sense was especially of an opium-smoking den.    Meaning marijuana
cigarette (1938) is perhaps from notion of something often smoked in common, but there are other
possibilities; earlier joint in drug slang meant hypodermic outfit (1935). Meaning prison is
attested from 1953 but probably is older. Out of joint in the figurative sense is from early 15c.
(literally, of bone displacement, late 14c.).


AC/DC (adj.)

electronics abbreviation of alternating current/direct current, by 1898. As slang for bisexual,
1959, said to have been in use orally from c.1940; the notion is of working both ways.


bonkers (adj.)

crazy, 1957, British slang, perhaps from earlier naval slang meaning slightly drunk (1948), from
notion of a thump (bonk) on the head.


gut (n.)

Old English guttas (plural) bowels, entrails, related to geotan to pour, from PIE *gheu- pour (see
found (v.2)). Related to Middle Dutch gote, Dutch goot, German Gosse gutter, drain, Middle English
gote channel, stream. Meaning abdomen, belly is from c.1400. Meaning easy college course is student
slang from 1916, probably from obsolete slang sense of feast (the connecting notion is something
that one can eat up). Sense of inside contents of anything (usually plural) is from 1570s. To hate
(someone's) guts is first attested 1918. The notion of the intestines as a seat of emotions is
ancient (see bowel) and probably explains expressions such as gut reaction (1963), gut feeling (by
1970), and compare guts. Gut check attested by 1976.


corker (n.)

1837, slang, something that settles a debate, discussion, conflict, etc.; hence something
astonishing (1880s). Probably an agent noun from cork (v.) on the notion is of putting a cork in a
bottle as an act of finality.


cutter (n.)

late 12c., one who cuts in any sense, agent noun from cut (v.). As a type of small, single-masted
vessel, from 1762, earlier boat belonging to a ship of war (1745), perhaps so called from the notion
of cutting through the water.


wrinkle (n.)

fold or crease in the extenal body, late 14c.; in cloth or clothing from early 15c., probably from
wrinkle (v.). Meaning defect, problem first recorded 1640s; that of idea, device, notion (especially
a new one) is from 1817.


sulky (n.)

light carriage with two wheels, 1756, apparently a noun use of sulky (adj.), on notion of
standoffishness, because the carriage has room for only one person and obliges the rider to be
alone.


step (v.)

Old English steppan (Anglian), st&aelig;ppan (West Saxon) take a step, from West Germanic *stap-
tread (cognates: Old Frisian stapa, Middle Dutch, Dutch stappen, Old High German stapfon, German
stapfen step), from PIE root *stebh- post, stem; to support, place firmly on (see staff (n.);
cognates: Old Church Slavonic stopa step, pace, stepeni step, degree). The notion is perhaps a
treading firmly on; a foothold.    Transitive sense (as in step foot in) attested from 1530s.
Related: Stepped; stepping. Originally strong (past tense stop, past participle bestapen); weak
forms emerged 13c., universal from 16c. To step out leave for a short time is from 1530s; meaning to
go out in public in style is from 1907. Step on it hurry up is 1923, from notion of gas pedal.


batting (n.)

sheets of cotton fiber, 1875, variant of obsolete bat felted mass of fur, wool, etc., from bat
(n.1), on notion of beaten fabric.


