nourishing (adj.)

late 14c., past participle adjective from nourish (v.).


nourishment (n.)

early 15c., food, sustenance, from Old French norissement food, nourishment, from norrir (see
nourish). From c.1300 as fostering.


nourish (v.)

late 13c., to bring up, nurture (a child, a feeling, etc.), from Old French norriss-, stem of norrir
raise, bring up, nurture, foster; maintain, provide for (12c., Modern French nourrir), from Latin
nutrire to feed, nurse, foster, support, preserve, from *nutri (older form of nutrix nurse),
literally she who gives suck, from PIE *nu- (from root *(s)nau- to swim, flow, let flow, hence to
suckle; see nutriment) + fem. agent suffix. Related: Nourished; nourishing.


nutrient (n.)

a nutritious substance, 1828, noun use of adjective (1640s) meaning providing nourishment, from
Latin nutrientem (nominative nutriens), present participle of nutrire to nourish, suckle, feed,
foster (see nourish).


nutritive (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French nutritif and directly from Medieval Latin nutritivus nourishing, from
past participle stem of Latin nutrire to nourish (see nourish).


nutrition (n.)

early 15c., from Old French nutrition (14c.) and directly from Latin nutritionem (nominative
nutritio) a nourishing, noun of action from past participle stem of nutrire to nourish, suckle (see
nourish).


alimentary (adj.)

1610s, from Medieval Latin alimentarius pertaining to food, from Latin alimentum nourishment, from
alere to nourish, rear, support, maintain, from PIE root *al- to grow, nourish (see old).


nursery (n.)

c.1400, breeding, nursing, from Old French norture, norreture food, nourishment; education,
training, from Late Latin nutritia a nursing, suckling, from Latin nutrire to nourish, suckle (see
nourish). Meaning place or room for infants and young children and their nurse is from c.1300. As a
type of school, 1580s. Horticultural sense is from 1560s. Nursery rhyme is from 1832.


old (adj.)

Old English ald (Anglian), eald (West Saxon) aged, antique, primeval; elder, experienced, from
Proto-Germanic *althas grown up, adult (cognates: Old Frisian ald, Gothic al&thorn;eis, Dutch oud,
German alt), originally a past participle stem of a verb meaning grow, nourish (compare Gothic alan
to grow up, Old Norse ala to nourish), from PIE root *al- to grow, nourish (cognates: Greek aldaino
make grow, strengthen, althein,  althainein to get well; Latin alere to feed, nourish, bring up,
increase, altus high, literally grown tall, almus nurturing, nourishing, alumnus fosterling, step-
child; Old Irish alim I nourish).    The usual PIE root is *sen- (see senior (adj.)). A few Indo-
European languages distinguish words for old (vs. young) from words for old (vs. new), and some have
separate words for aged persons as opposed to old things. Latin senex was used of aged living
things, mostly persons, while vetus (literally having many years) was used of inanimate things.
Greek geraios was used mostly of humans; Greek palaios was used mostly of things, of persons only in
a derogatory sense. Greek also had arkhaios, literally belonging to the beginning, which parallels
French ancien, used mostly with reference to things of former times.    Old English also had fyrn
ancient, related to Old English feor far, distant (see far, and compare Gothic fairneis, Old Norse
forn old, of old, of former times, Old High German firni old, experienced). The original Old English
vowel is preserved in Scots auld, also in alderman. The original comparative and superlative (elder,
eldest) are retained in particular uses.    First record of old-timer is from 1860. Expression old
as the hills first recorded 1819. The good old days dates from 1828. Of old of old times is from
late 14c. Old Glory for the American flag is first attested 1862. Old maid woman who remains single
well beyond the usual marrying age is from 1520s; the card game is attested by that name from 1844.
Old man man who has lived long is from c.1200; sense of husband, father, boss is from 1854, earlier
(1830) it was military slang for commanding officer; old lady wife, mother is attested from c.1775.
Old English is attested from 1701, originally as a type of font. Old boy originally was a former
pupil of one of the English public schools. Old Testament attested from mid-14c.


aliment (n.)

food, late 15c., from Latin alimentum nourishment, in plural, food, provisions, from alere to
nourish (see alimentary).


undernourished (adj.)

also under-nourished, 1820, from under + past participle of nourish (v.).


malnourished (adj.)

1906, from mal- bad, badly + nourished (see nourish).


nurse (v.)

1530s, to suckle (an infant); 1520s in the passive sense, to bring up (a child); alteration of
Middle English nurshen (13c.; see nourish), Sense of take care of (a sick person) is first recorded
1736. Related: Nursed; nursing.


nurture (v.)

to feed or nourish, early 15c., from nurture (n.). Related: Nurtured; nurturing.


-trophy

word-forming element meaning food, nourishment, from Greek -trophia, from trophe food, nourishment,
related to trephein make thrive, nourish, rear; to make solid, congeal, thicken.


nutritious (adj.)

1660s, from Latin nutricius that which nourishes, nurses, from nutrix (genitive nutricis) a nurse,
from nutrire (see nourish). Related: Nutritiously.


Alma

fem. proper name, from Latin Alma nourishing, fem. of almus; from alere to nourish (see old).


alimony (n.)

1650s, nourishment, also allowance to a wife from a husband's estate, or in certain cases of
separation, from Latin alimonia food, support, nourishment, sustenance, from alere to nourish (see
old) + -monia suffix signifying action, state, condition (cognate with Greek -men). Derived form
palimony coined 1979.


alumnus (n.)

1640s, from Latin alumnus a pupil, literally foster son, vestigial present passive participle of
alere to nourish (see old), with ending akin to Greek -omenos. Plural is alumni. Fem. is alumna
(1882), fem. plural alumnae.


sustentation (n.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French, Old French sustentacion, sostentacion sustaining of life, from Latin
sustentationem (nominative sustentatio) maintenance, noun of action from past participle stem of
sustentare hold upright, hold up; feed, nourish, support; hold out, endure, suffer, frequentative of
sustinere (see sustain).


Alma Mater (n.)

late 14c., Latin, literally bountiful mother, a title Romans gave to goddesses, especially Ceres and
Cybele, from alma, fem. of almus nourishing, from alere to nourish (see old) + mater mother (see
mother (n.1)). First used 1710 in sense of one's university or school in reference to British
universities.


proboscis (n.)

c.1600, elephant's trunk, from Latin proboscis (Pliny), from Greek proboskis elephant's trunk,
literally means for taking food, from pro forward (see pro-) + boskein to nourish, feed, from
boskesthai graze, be fed, from stem *bot- (source of botane grass, fodder; see botanic).


nutriment (n.)

1540s, from Latin nutrimentum nourishment; support, from nutrire to nourish, suckle, feed, from PIE
*nu-tri-, from root *(s)nau- to swim, flow, let flow, hence to suckle (cognates: Sanskrit snauti she
drips, gives milk; Greek nan I flow), extended form of root *sna- to swim (see natatorium).


feed (v.)

Old English fedan nourish, feed, sustain, foster, from Proto-Germanic *fodjan (cognates: Old Saxon
fodjan, Old Frisian feda, Dutch voeden, Old High German fuotan, Old Norse foe&eth;a, Gothic fodjan
to feed), from PIE *pa- to protect, feed (see food). Feeding frenzy is from 1989, metaphoric
extension of a phrase that had been used of sharks since 1950s.


adolescent (n.)

mid-15c., youth, young man, from Middle French adolescent (15c.) or directly from Latin adolescentem
(nominative adolescens) growing, near maturity, youthful, present participle of adolescere grow up,
come to maturity, ripen, from ad- to (see ad-) + alescere be nourished, hence, increase, grow up,
inchoative of alere to nourish (see old). Adolesce was a back-formed verb used early 20c. by H.G.
Wells, G.B. Shaw, Louis MacNeice, but it seems not to have taken.


foster (v.)

Old English *fostrian to supply with food, nourish, support, from fostor food, nourishment, bringing
up, from Proto-Germanic *fostrom, from root *foth-/*fod- (see food).    Meaning to bring up a child
with parental care is from c.1200; that of to encourage or help grow is early 13c. of things; 1560s
of feelings, ideas, etc. Old English also had the adjective meaning in the same family but not
related, in fostorf&aelig;der, etc. Related: Fostered; fostering.


nurse (n.1)

12c., nurrice wet-nurse, foster-mother to a young child (modern form from late 14c.), from Old
French norrice foster-mother, wet-nurse, nanny (source of proper name Norris), from Late Latin
*nutricia nurse, governess, tutoress, noun use of fem. of Latin nutricius that suckles, nourishes,
from nutrix (genitive nutricis) wet-nurse, from nutrire to suckle (see nourish). Meaning person who
takes care of sick in English first recorded 1580s.


atheling (n.)

member of a noble family, Old English &aelig;&eth;ling, from &aelig;&eth;el noble family, related to
Old English &aelig;&eth;ele noble, from Proto-Germanic *athala-, from PIE *at-al- race, family, from
*at(i)- over, beyond, super + *al- to nourish. With suffix -ing belonging to. A common Germanic word
(cognates: Old Saxon ediling, Old Frisian etheling, Old High German adaling).


prolific (adj.)

1640s, from French prolifique (16c.), from Medieval Latin prolificus, from Latin proles offspring +
root of facere to make (see factitious). Latin proles is contracted from *pro-oles, from PIE *pro-
al-, from *pro- forth (see pro-) + *al- to grow, nourish (see old). Related: Prolifical (c.1600).
<b>Prolific</b> is in common use, but to make a satisfactory noun from it has passed the wit of man.
[Fowler]


abolish (v.)

mid-15c., from Middle French aboliss-, present participle stem of abolir to abolish (15c.), from
Latin abolere destroy, cause to die out, retard the growth of, perhaps from ab- from (see ab-) +
adolere to grow, from PIE *ol-eye-, causative of root *al- to grow, nourish (see old), and perhaps
formed as an antonym to adolere. But the Latin word rather could be from a root in common with Greek
ollymi, apollymi destroy. Tucker writes that there has been a confusion of forms in Latin, based on
similar roots, one meaning to grow, the other to destroy. Application to persons and concrete
objects has long been obsolete. Related: Abolished; abolishing.


