nourishment (n.)

early 15c., food, sustenance, from Old French norissement food, nourishment, from norrir (see
nourish). From c.1300 as fostering.


tropho-

before vowels, troph-, word-forming element meaning nourishment, food, from comb. form of Greek
trophe nourishment (see -trophy).


trophic (adj.)

of or pertaining to nutrition, food, or nourishment, 1856, from Greek trophikos, from trophe
nourishment, food (see -trophy).


-trophy

word-forming element meaning food, nourishment, from Greek -trophia, from trophe food, nourishment,
related to trephein make thrive, nourish, rear; to make solid, congeal, thicken.


alimony (n.)

1650s, nourishment, also allowance to a wife from a husband's estate, or in certain cases of
separation, from Latin alimonia food, support, nourishment, sustenance, from alere to nourish (see
old) + -monia suffix signifying action, state, condition (cognate with Greek -men). Derived form
palimony coined 1979.


atrophy (n.)

a wasting away through lack of nourishment, 1620s (atrophied is from 1590s), from French atrophie,
from Late Latin atrophia, from Greek atrophia a wasting away, noun of state from atrophos ill-fed,
un-nourished, from a- not + trophe nourishment, from trephein to fatten (see -trophy).


victuals (n.)

c.1300, vitaylle (singular), from Anglo-French and Old French vitaille food, nourishment,
provisions, from Late Latin victualia provisions, noun use of plural of victualis of nourishment,
from victus livelihood, food, sustenance, that which sustains life, from past participle stem of
vivere to live (see vital). Spelling altered early 16c. to conform with Latin, but pronunciation
remains vittles.


oligotrophy (n.)

1928, from oligo- small, little + -trophy food, nourishment. Related: Oligotrophic.


aliment (n.)

food, late 15c., from Latin alimentum nourishment, in plural, food, provisions, from alere to
nourish (see alimentary).


nurture (n.)

c.1300, breeding, upbringing, from Old French norture, nourreture food, nourishment; education,
training, from Late Latin nutritia (see nursery).


nutrient (n.)

a nutritious substance, 1828, noun use of adjective (1640s) meaning providing nourishment, from
Latin nutrientem (nominative nutriens), present participle of nutrire to nourish, suckle, feed,
foster (see nourish).


malnourishment (n.)

1899, see mal- + nourishment.


hypertrophy (n.)

1821, from hyper- + Greek -trophe nourishment (see -trophy). Related: Hypertrophic.


alimentary (adj.)

1610s, from Medieval Latin alimentarius pertaining to food, from Latin alimentum nourishment, from
alere to nourish, rear, support, maintain, from PIE root *al- to grow, nourish (see old).


dystrophy (n.)

also distrophy, defective nutrition, 1858, from Modern Latin dystrophia, distrophia, from Greek dys-
hard, bad, ill (see dys-) + trophe nourishment (see -trophy). Related: Dystrophic.


amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (n.)

by 1881, from French, first word from Greek a-, privative prefix, + mys, myos muscle (see muscle
(n.)) + trophikos feeding, from trophe nourishment (see -trophy). Often known in U.S. as Lou
Gehrig's disease, after the New York Yankees baseball player (1903-1941) who was diagnosed with it
in 1939.


manna (n.)

Old English borrowing from Late Latin manna, from Greek manna, from Hebrew man, probably literally
substance exuded by the tamarisk tree, but used in Greek and Latin specifically with reference to
the substance miraculously supplied to the Children of Israel during their wandering in the
Wilderness (Ex. xvi:15). Meaning spiritual nourishment is attested from late 14c. Generalized sense
of something provided unexpectedly is from 1590s.


pabulum (n.)

food for anything, 1670s, from Latin pabulum fodder, food, nourishment, from PIE root *pa- to
protect, feed (see food) + instrumentive suffix *-dhlom.   Pablum (1932), derived from this, is a
trademark (Mead Johnson &amp; Co.) for a soft, bland cereal used as a food for infants and weak and
invalid people, hence figurative use (attested from 1970, first by U.S. Vice President Spiro Agnew)
in reference to mushy political prose.


sustenance (n.)

c.1300, means of living, subsistence, livelihood, from Old French sostenance support, aid (Modern
French soutenance), from Late Latin sustinentia endurance, from present participle stem of Latin
sustinere (see sustain). Meaning action of sustaining life by food is from late 14c. Sense of
nourishment is recorded from late 15c. Related: Sustenant.


nursery (n.)

c.1400, breeding, nursing, from Old French norture, norreture food, nourishment; education,
training, from Late Latin nutritia a nursing, suckling, from Latin nutrire to nourish, suckle (see
nourish). Meaning place or room for infants and young children and their nurse is from c.1300. As a
type of school, 1580s. Horticultural sense is from 1560s. Nursery rhyme is from 1832.


pittance (n.)

c.1200, pious donation to a religious house or order to provide extra food; the extra food provided,
also a small portion, scanty rations, from Old French pitance pity, mercy, compassion; refreshment,
nourishment; portion of food allowed a monk or poor person by a pious bequest, apparently literally
pity, from piti&eacute; (see pity). Meaning small amount, portion first recorded 1560s.


nutriment (n.)

1540s, from Latin nutrimentum nourishment; support, from nutrire to nourish, suckle, feed, from PIE
*nu-tri-, from root *(s)nau- to swim, flow, let flow, hence to suckle (cognates: Sanskrit snauti she
drips, gives milk; Greek nan I flow), extended form of root *sna- to swim (see natatorium).


foster (v.)

Old English *fostrian to supply with food, nourish, support, from fostor food, nourishment, bringing
up, from Proto-Germanic *fostrom, from root *foth-/*fod- (see food).    Meaning to bring up a child
with parental care is from c.1200; that of to encourage or help grow is early 13c. of things; 1560s
of feelings, ideas, etc. Old English also had the adjective meaning in the same family but not
related, in fostorf&aelig;der, etc. Related: Fostered; fostering.


orgasm (n.)

1680s, sexual climax, from French orgasme or Modern Latin orgasmus, from Greek orgasmos excitement,
swelling, from organ be in heat, become ripe for, literally to swell, be excited, related to orge
impulse, excitement, anger, from PIE root *wrog- to burgeon, swell with strength (cognates: Sanskrit
urja a nourishment, sap, vigor, Old Irish ferc, ferg anger). Also used 17c. of other violent
excitements of emotion or other bodily functions.


attract (v.)

early 15c., from Latin attractus, past participle of attrahere to draw, pull; to attract, from ad-
to (see ad-) + trahere draw (see tract (n.1)).    Originally a medical term for the body's tendency
to absorb fluids, nourishment, etc., or for a poultice treatment to draw out diseased matter
(1560s). Of the ability of people or animals to draw others to them, it is attested from 1560s; of
physical forces (magnetism, etc.), from c.1600 (implied in attraction). Related: Attracted;
attracting.


food (n.)

Old English foda food, nourishment; fuel, also figurative, from Proto-Germanic *fodon (cognates:
Gothic fodeins), from Germanic root *fod-, equivalent of PIE *pa- to tend, keep, pasture, to
protect, to guard, to feed (cognates: Greek pateisthai to feed; Latin pabulum food, fodder, panis
bread, pasci to feed, pascare to graze, pasture, feed, pastor shepherd, literally feeder; Avestan
pitu- food; Old Church Slavonic pasti feed cattle, pasture; Russian pishcha food).   Food chain is
from 1917. Food poisoning attested by 1864; food processor in the kitchen appliance sense from 1973.


character (n.)

mid-14c., carecter, symbol marked or branded on the body; mid-15c., symbol or drawing used in
sorcery, from Old French caratere feature, character (13c., Modern French caract&egrave;re), from
Latin character, from Greek kharakter engraved mark, also symbol or imprint on the soul, also
instrument for marking, from kharassein to engrave, from kharax pointed stake, from PIE root *gher-
(4) to scrape, scratch. Meaning extended in ancient times by metaphor to a defining quality.You
remember Eponina, who kept her husband alive in an underground cavern so devotedly and heroically?
The force of character she showed in keeping up his spirits would have been used to hide a lover
from her husband if they had been living quietly in Rome. Strong characters need strong nourishment.
[Stendhal de l'Amour, 1822]Meaning sum of qualities that define a person is from 1640s. Sense of
person in a play or novel is first attested 1660s, in reference to the defining qualities he or she
is given by the author. Meaning a person in the abstract is from 1749; especially eccentric person
(1773). Colloquial sense of chap, fellow is from 1931. The Latin ch- spelling was restored from
1500s. Character actor attested from 1861; character assassination from 1888; character-building
(n.) from 1886.


