nova (n.)

1877, from Latin nova, fem. singular adjective of novus new (see new), used with stella star (a
feminine noun in Latin) to describe a new star not previously known. Classical plural is novae.


bossa nova

1962, Brazilian style of music, from Portuguese, literally new tendency.


supernova (n.)

1934, from super- + nova.


Algonquian

also Algonkian, 1885, an ethnologist's word, modified from Algonquin + -ian. Both forms of the name
have been used as adjectives and nouns. An American-Indian language family spread over a wide area
of northeast and north-central North America, from Nova Scotia (Micmac) to Montana (Cheyenne).


totem (n.)

animal or natural object considered as the emblem of a family or clan, 1760, from Algonquian
(probably Ojibwa) -doodem, in odoodeman his sibling kin, his group or family, hence, his family
mark; also attested in French c.1600 in form aoutem among the Micmacs or other Indians of Nova
Scotia. Totem pole is 1808, in reference to west coast Canadian Indians.


Acadian

1705, from Acadia, Latinized form of Acadie, French name of Nova Scotia, probably from Archadia, the
name given to the region by Verrazano in 1520s, from Greek Arkadia, emblematic in pastoral poetry of
a place of rural peace (see Arcadian); the name may have been suggested to Europeans by the native
Micmac (Algonquian) word akadie fertile land. The Acadians, expelled by the English in 1755, settled
in large numbers in Louisiana (see Cajun, which is a corruption of Acadian).


news (n.)

late 14c., new things, plural of new (n.) new thing, from new (adj.); after French nouvelles, used
in Bible translations to render Medieval Latin nova (neuter plural) news, literally new things.
Sometimes still regarded as plural, 17c.-19c. Meaning tidings is early 15c. Meaning radio or
television program presenting current events is from 1923. Bad news unpleasant person or situation
is from 1926. Expression no news, good news can be traced to 1640s. Expression news to me is from
1889.      The News in the Virginia city Newport News is said to derive from the name of one of its
founders, William Newce.


