novelty (n.)

late 14c., quality of being new, also a new manner or fashion, an innovation; something new or
unusual, from Old French novelet&eacute; newness, innovation, change; news, new fashion (Modern
French nouveaut&eacute;), from novel new (see novel (adj.)). Meaning newness is attested from late
14c.; sense of useless but amusing object is attested from 1901 (as in novelty shop, 1973).


newfangled (adj.)

late 15c., addicted to novelty, literally ready to grasp at all new things, from adj. newefangel
fond of novelty (late 14c.), from new + -fangel inclined to take, from root of Old English fon to
capture (see fang). Sense of lately come into fashion first recorded 1530s.


Deely-bobber (n.)

headband with springs carrying ornaments, 1982 trademark name held by Ace Novelty Company. Earlier
it had been a patent name for a type of building blocks, manufactured 1969-1973.


Ouija

1891, a trademark name (originally by Kennard Novelty Co., Baltimore, Md.), compounded from French
oui + German ja, both meaning yes.


whoopee (n.)

1845, noisy, unrestrained revelry, extended form of whoop, originally American English. Popular song
Makin' Whoopee is from 1928. The novelty whoopee cushion is from 1931.


trite (adj.)

used till so common as to have lost its novelty and interest, 1540s, from Latin tritus worn, oft-
trodden, of language much-used, familiar, commonplace, past participle adjective from terere to rub,
wear down (see throw (v.)). Related: Tritely; triteness.


misoneism (n.)

hatred of novelty, 1886, from miso- + Greek neos new (see new) + -ism. Related: Misoneist.


grocery (n.)

mid-15c., goods sold by a grocer (now groceries, 1630s), earlier the name of the Grocer's Hall in
London (early 15c.), from Old French grosserie, from grossier (see grocer). Meaning a grocer's shop
is 1828, American English.    GROCERY. A grocer's shop. This word is not in the English dictionaries
except in the sense of grocer's ware, such as tea, sugar, spice, etc.; in which sense we also use it
in the plural. [Bartlett, Dictionary of Americanisms, 1859]    Self-service groceries were a novelty
in 1913 when a Montana, U.S., firm copyrighted the word groceteria (with the ending from cafeteria
used in an un-etymological sense) to name them. The term existed through the 1920s.


nine (n.)

Old English nigen, from Proto-Germanic *niwun (cognates: Old Saxon nigun, Old Frisian niugun, Old
Norse niu, Swedish nio, Middle Dutch neghen, Dutch negen, Old High German niun, German neun, Gothic
niun nine), from PIE newn nine (cognates: Sanskrit nava, Avestan nava, Greek ennea, Albanian nende,
Latin novem (with change of -n- to -m- by analogy of septem, decem), Lithuanian devnyi, Old Church
Slavonic deveti (the Balto-Slavic forms by dissimilation of -n- to -d-), Old Irish noin, Welsh naw).
Nine to five the average workday is attested from 1935. Nine days has been proverbial since 14c. for
the time which a wonder or novelty holds attention.


slang (n.)

1756, special vocabulary of tramps or thieves, later jargon of a particular profession (1801), of
uncertain origin, the usual guess being that it is from a Scandinavian source, such as Norwegian
slengenamn nickname, slengja kjeften to abuse with words, literally to sling the jaw, related to Old
Norse slyngva to sling. But OED, while admitting some approximation in sense, discounts this
connection based on date and early associations. Liberman also denies it, as well as any connection
with French langue (or language or lingo). Rather, he derives it elaborately from an old slang word
meaning narrow piece of land, itself of obscure origin. Century Dictionary says there is no evidence
to establish a Gipsy origin. Sense of very informal language characterized by vividness and novelty
first recorded 1818.    [S]lang is a conscious offence against some conventional standard of
propriety. A mere vulgarism is not slang, except when it is purposely adopted, and acquires an
artificial currency, among some class of persons to whom it is not native. The other distinctive
feature of slang is that it is neither part of the ordinary language, nor an attempt to supply its
deficiencies. The slang word is a deliberate substitute for a word of the vernacular, just as the
characters of a cipher are substitutes for the letters of the alphabet, or as a nickname is a
substitute for a personal name. [Henry Bradley, from Slang, in Encyclopedia Britannica, 11th ed.]
A word that ought to have survived is slangwhanger (1807, American English) noisy or abusive talker
or writer.


