noxious (adj.)

c.1500, from Latin noxius hurtful, injurious, from noxa injury, hurt, damage entailing liability
(related to nocere to hurt, and to nex slaughter), from PIE *nek-ro-, causative form of root *nek-
(1) death (see necro-).


obnoxious (adj.)

1580s, subject to the authority of another, from Latin obnoxiosus hurtful, injurious, from obnoxius
subject, exposed to harm, from ob to, toward (see ob-) + noxa injury, hurt, damage entailing
liability (see noxious). Meaning subject to something harmful is 1590s; meaning offensive, hateful
is first recorded 1670s, influenced by noxious.Obnoxious has two very different senses, one of which
(exposed or open or liable to attack or injury) requires notice because its currency is now so
restricted that it is puzzling to the uninstructed. It is the word's rightful or de jure meaning,
and we may hope that scholarly writers will keep it alive. [Fowler]  Related: Obnoxiously;
obnoxiousness.


nocuous (adj.)

1630s, noxious, harmful, from Latin nocuus harmful, from stem of nocere to hurt, injure, harm (see
innocuous).


mephitic (adj.)

1620s, of poisonous smell, from Late Latin mephiticus, from Latin mephitis, mefitis noxious vapor
(also personified as a goddess believed to have the power to avert it).


pest (n.)

1550s (in imprecations, a pest upon ____, etc.), plague, pestilence, from Middle French peste
(1530s), from Latin pestis deadly contagious disease; a curse, bane, of uncertain origin. Meaning
noxious or troublesome person or thing first recorded c.1600.


subduction (n.)

early 15c., withdrawal, removal (originally of noxious substances from the body), from Latin
subductionem (nominative subductio) a withdrawal, drawing up, hauling ashore, noun of action from
past participle stem of subducere to draw away, take away (see subduce). Geological sense is
attested from 1970, from French (1951).


deleterious (adj.)

1640s, from Medieval Latin deleterius, from Greek deleterios noxious, from deleter destroyer, from
deleisthai to hurt, injure. Related: Deleteriously; deleteriousness.


noisome (adj.)

late 14c., harmful, noxious, from noye harm, misfortune, shortened form of anoi annoyance (from Old
French anoier, see annoy) + -some (1). Meaning bad-smelling first recorded 1570s. Related:
Noisomeness.


injurious (adj.)

early 15c., abusive, from Middle French injurios (14c., Modern French injurieux) and directly from
Latin injuriosus unlawful, wrongful, harmful, noxious, from injuria (see injury). Related:
Injuriously.


damp (n.)

early 14c., a noxious vapor, perhaps in Old English but there is no record of it. If not, probably
from Middle Low German damp; ultimately in either case from Proto-Germanic *dampaz (cognates: Old
High German damph, German Dampf vapor; Old Norse dampi dust). Sense of moisture, humidity is first
certainly attested 1706.


vermin (n.)

c.1300, noxious animals, from Anglo-French and Old French vermin moth, worm, mite, in plural
troublesome creatures (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *verminum vermin, possibly including bothersome
insects, collective noun formed from Latin vermis worm (see worm (n.)). Extended to low, obnoxious
people by 1560s.


pestilence (n.)

c.1300, from Old French pestilence plague, epidemic (12c.) and directly from Latin pestilentia a
plague, an unwholesome atmosphere, noun of condition from pestilentem (nominative pestilens)
infected, unwholesome, noxious, from pestis deadly disease, plague (see pest).


pestiferous (adj.)

mid-15c., mischievous, pernicious, figurative use of Latin pestiferus that brings plague or
destruction, variant of pestifer bringing plague, destructive, noxious, from pestis plague (see
pest) + ferre carry (see infer). Related: Pestiferously; pestiferousness.


nuisance (n.)

c.1400, injury, hurt, harm, from Anglo-French nusaunce, Old French nuisance harm, wrong, damage,
from past participle stem of nuire to harm, from Latin nocere to hurt (see noxious). Sense has
softened over time, to anything obnoxious to a community (bad smells, pests, eyesores), 1660s, then
source of annoyance, something personally disagreeable (1831). Applied to persons from 1690s.


miasma (n.)

1660s, from Modern Latin miasma noxious vapors, from Greek miasma (genitive miasmatos) stain,
pollution, defilement, taint of guilt, from stem of miainein to pollute, from possible PIE root
*mai- to stain, soil, defile (source of Old English mal stain, mark, see mole (n.1)). Earlier form
was miasm (1640s), from French miasme. Related: Miasmatic; miasmal.


pernicious (adj.)

early 15c., from Middle French pernicios (13c., Modern French pernicieux) and directly from Latin
perniciosus destructive, from pernicies destruction, death, ruin, from per- completely (see per) +
necis violent death, murder, related to necare to kill, nocere to hurt, injure, harm, noxa harm,
injury (see noxious). Related: Perniciously; perniciousness.


internecine (adj.)

1660s, deadly, destructive, from Latin internecinus very deadly, murderous, destructive, from
internecare kill or destroy, from inter (see inter-) + necare kill (see noxious). Considered in the
OED as misinterpreted in Johnson's Dictionary [1755], which defined it as endeavouring mutual
destruction, on association of inter- with mutual when the prefix supposedly is used in this case as
an intensive. From Johnson, wrongly or not, has come the main modern definition of mutually
destructive.


tare (n.1)

kind of fodder plant, vetch, c.1300, perhaps cognate with or from Middle Dutch tarwe wheat, from a
Germanic source perhaps related to Breton draok, Welsh drewg darnel, Sanskrit durva a kind of millet
grass, Greek darata, daratos bread, Lithuanian dirva a wheat-field. Used in 2nd Wyclif version
(1388) of Matt. xxiii:25 to render Greek zizania as a weed among corn (earlier darnel and cockle had
been used in this place); hence figurative use for something noxious sown among something good
(1711).


innocent (adj.)

mid-14c., doing no evil, free from sin or guilt, from Old French inocent harmless; not guilty; pure
(11c.), from Latin innocentem (nominative innocens) not guilty, harmless, blameless, from in- not
(see in- (1)) + nocentem (nominative nocens), present participle of nocere to harm (see noxious).
Meaning free from guilt of a specific crime or charge is from late 14c. The earliest use was as a
noun, person who is innocent of sin or evil (c.1200). The Holy Innocents (early 14c.) were the young
children slain by Herod sfter the birth of Jesus (Matt. ii:16).


baleful (adj.)

Old English bealu-full dire, wicked, cruel, from bealu harm, injury, ruin, evil, mischief,
wickedness, a noxious thing, from Proto-Germanic *balwom (cognates: Old Saxon balu, Old Frisian balu
evil, Old High German balo destruction, Old Norse bol, Gothic balwjan to torment), from PIE root
*bhelu- to harm. During Anglo-Saxon times, the noun was in poetic use only (in compounds such as
bealubenn mortal wound, bealu&eth;onc evil thought), and for long baleful has belonged exclusively
to poets. Related: Balefully.


