nuance (v.)

1886, from nuance (n.). Related: Nuanced.


nuanced (adj.)

1896, past participle adjective from verb nuance (q.v.).    The new co-operative history of English
literature which the University of Cambridge is now publishing prints genre without italics. And it
even permits one contributor--and a contributor who is discussing Shakespeare!--to say that
something is delicately nuanced. Is there now an English verb to nuance? It is terrible to think of
the bad language the scholars of the venerable English university might have used if nuanced had
been first discovered in the text of an American author. [Scribner's Magazine, January 1911]


nuance (n.)

1781, from French nuance slight difference, shade of color (17c.), from nuer to shade, from nue
cloud, from Gallo-Roman *nuba, from Latin nubes a cloud, mist, vapor, from PIE *sneudh- fog
(cognates: Avestan snaoda clouds, Latin obnubere to veil, Welsh nudd fog, Greek nython, in Hesychius
dark, dusky). According to Klein, a reference to the different colors of the clouds.


Nubia

ultimately from a local word, said to be related to Coptic noubti to weave, or from Nubian nub gold.
In the fashion sense woman's light scarf it is from French, from Latin nubes cloud (see nuance).


obnubilate (v.)

1580s, from Latin obnibulatus, past participle of obnubilare to cover with clouds or fog, from ob-
(see ob-) + verb from Latin nubes cloud (see nuance). Related: Obnubilated; obnubilating;
obnubilation.


civil (adj.)

late 14c., relating to civil law or life; pertaining to the internal affairs of a state, from Old
French civil civil, relating to civil law (13c.) and directly from Latin civilis relating to a
citizen, relating to public life, befitting a citizen, hence by extension popular, affable,
courteous; alternative adjectival derivation of civis townsman (see city).    The sense of polite
was in classical Latin, from the courteous manners of citizens, as opposed to those of soldiers. But
English did not pick up this nuance of the word until late 16c. Courteous is thus more commonly said
of superiors, civil of inferiors, since it implies or suggests the possibility of incivility or
rudeness [OED]. Civil case (as opposed to criminal) is recorded from 1610s. Civil liberty is by
1640s. Civil service is from 1772, originally in reference to the East India Company.


shade (n.)

Middle English schade, Kentish ssed, from late Old English scead partial darkness; shelter,
protection, also partly from sceadu shade, shadow, darkness; shady place, arbor, protection from
glare or heat, both from Proto-Germanic *skadwaz (cognates: Old Saxon skado, Middle Dutch scade,
Dutch schaduw, Old High German scato, German Schatten, Gothic skadus), from PIE *skot-wo-, from root
*skot- dark, shade (cognates: Greek skotos darkness, gloom, Albanian kot darkness, Old Irish scath,
Old Welsh scod, Breton squeut darkness, Gaelic sgath shade, shadow, shelter).    Figurative use in
reference to comparative obscurity is from 1640s. Meaning a ghost is from 1610s; dramatic (or mock-
dramatic) expression shades of _____ to invoke or acknowledge a memory is from 1818, from the ghost
sense. Meaning lamp cover is from 1780. Sense of window blind first recorded 1845. Meaning cover to
protect the eyes is from 1801. Meaning grade of color first recorded 1680s; that of degree or
gradiation of darkness in a color is from 1680s (compare nuance, from French nue cloud). Meaning
small amount or degree is from 1782.


