nurse (n.1)

12c., nurrice wet-nurse, foster-mother to a young child (modern form from late 14c.), from Old
French norrice foster-mother, wet-nurse, nanny (source of proper name Norris), from Late Latin
*nutricia nurse, governess, tutoress, noun use of fem. of Latin nutricius that suckles, nourishes,
from nutrix (genitive nutricis) wet-nurse, from nutrire to suckle (see nourish). Meaning person who
takes care of sick in English first recorded 1580s.


nurse (n.2)

dogfish, shark, late 15c., of unknown origin.


nurse (v.)

1530s, to suckle (an infant); 1520s in the passive sense, to bring up (a child); alteration of
Middle English nurshen (13c.; see nourish), Sense of take care of (a sick person) is first recorded
1736. Related: Nursed; nursing.


nursery (n.)

c.1400, breeding, nursing, from Old French norture, norreture food, nourishment; education,
training, from Late Latin nutritia a nursing, suckling, from Latin nutrire to nourish, suckle (see
nourish). Meaning place or room for infants and young children and their nurse is from c.1300. As a
type of school, 1580s. Horticultural sense is from 1560s. Nursery rhyme is from 1832.


amah (n.)

wet-nurse, 1839, Anglo-Indian, from Portuguese ama nurse, from Medieval Latin amma mother, from PIE
root *am-, forming nursery words.


nursling (n.)

also nurseling, object of a nurse's care, 1550s, from nurse (v.) + -ling.


ayah (n.)

native nurse, children's governess, Anglo-Indian, 1782, from Portuguese aia, cognate with Spanish
aya, Italian aja, etc., nurse, from Latin avia grandmother, fem. of avus grandfather (see uncle).


nourish (v.)

late 13c., to bring up, nurture (a child, a feeling, etc.), from Old French norriss-, stem of norrir
raise, bring up, nurture, foster; maintain, provide for (12c., Modern French nourrir), from Latin
nutrire to feed, nurse, foster, support, preserve, from *nutri (older form of nutrix nurse),
literally she who gives suck, from PIE *nu- (from root *(s)nau- to swim, flow, let flow, hence to
suckle; see nutriment) + fem. agent suffix. Related: Nourished; nourishing.


nana

child's word for grandmother or, sometimes, nurse, first recorded c.1844 (see nanny).


nursing (n.)

1530s, verbal noun from nurse (v.). Meaning profession of one who nurses the sick is from 1860.


candy-striper (n.)

young female volunteer nurse at a hospital, by 1962, so called from the pink-striped design of her
uniform, similar to patterns on peppermint candy.


nutritious (adj.)

1660s, from Latin nutricius that which nourishes, nurses, from nutrix (genitive nutricis) a nurse,
from nutrire (see nourish). Related: Nutritiously.


educator (n.)

1560s, one who nourishes or rears; 1670s, one who trains or instructs, from Latin educator (in
classical Latin, a foster father as well as a tutor), agent noun from past participle stem of
educare (see educate). Latin educatrix meant a nurse.


nuzzle (v.)

early 15c., to bring the nose to the ground, back-formation from noselyng on the nose, prostrate,
frequentative of nose (v.); meaning burrow with the nose is first attested 1520s; that of lie snug
is from 1590s, influenced by nestle, or by nursle, frequentative of nurse. Related: Nuzzled;
nuzzling.


register (v.)

late 14c. (transitive), enter in a listing, from Old French registrer note down, include (13c.) and
directly from Medieval Latin registrare, from registrum (see register (n.)). Intransitive sense, of
instruments, from 1797; of persons and feelings, make an impression, from 1901. Meaning to enter
one's name in a list for some purpose is from 1940. Related: Registered; registering. Registered
nurse attested from 1879.


rocker (n.)

a rocking chair, 1852, American English, from rock (v.1); earlier nurse charged with rocking a
cradle (early 14c.). In sense of one of the curved pieces of wood that makes a chair or cradle rock
it dates from 1787. Slang off (one's) rocker crazy first recorded 1897. Meaning one who enjoys rock
music (as opposed to mod (n.1)) is recorded from 1963, from rock (v.2).


Maia

Roman goddess of fertility, Latin Maia, literally she who brings increase, related to magnus great
(see magnate). Maia, one of the Pleiades, is from Greek Maia, daughter of Atlas, mother of Hermes,
literally mother, good mother, dame; foster-mother, nurse, midwife, said by Watkins to be from
infant babbling (see mamma).


nanny (n.)

children's nurse, 1795, from widespread child's word for female adult other than mother (compare
Greek nanna aunt). The word also is a nickname form of the fem. proper name Ann, which probably is
the sense in nanny goat (1788, compare billy goat). Nanny-house brothel is slang from c.1700. Nanny
state, in reference to overintrusive government policies is attested by 1987, the term associated
with British political leader Margaret Thatcher, who criticized the tendency.


ward (v.)

Old English weardian to keep guard, watch, protect, preserve, from Proto-Germanic *wardon to guard
(cognates: Old Saxon wardon, Old Norse var&eth;a to guard, Old Frisian wardia, Middle Dutch waerden
to take care of, Old High German warten to guard, look out for, expect, German warten to wait, wait
on, nurse, tend), from PIE *war-o- (see ward (n.)). French garder, Italian guardare, Spanish guardar
are Germanic loan-words. Meaning to parry, to fend off (now usually with off) is recorded from
1570s. Related: Warded; warding.


fecund (adj.)

early 15c., from Middle French fecond, from Latin fecundus fruitful, fertile, productive, from *fe-
kwondo-, suffixed form of Latin root *fe-, corresponding to PIE *dhe(i)- to suck, suckle, also
produce, yield (cognates: Sanskrit dhayati sucks, dhayah nourishing; Greek thele mother's breast,
nipple, thelys female, fruitful; Old Church Slavonic dojiti to suckle, dojilica nurse, deti child;
Lithuanian dele leech; Old Prussian dadan milk; Gothic daddjan to suckle; Old Swedish dia suckle;
Old High German tila female breast; Old Irish denaim I suck, dinu lamb).    Also from the same Latin
root come felare to suck; femina woman (*fe-mna-, literally she who suckles); felix happy,
auspicious, fruitful; fetus offspring, pregnancy; fenum hay (probably literally produce); and
probably filia/filius daughter/son, assimilated from *felios, originally a suckling.


wet (adj.)

Old English w&aelig;t moist, rainy, liquid, also as a noun. moisture, liquid drink, from Proto-
Germanic *weta- (source also of Old Frisian wet ). Also from cognate Old Norse vatr; all from PIE
*wed- (1) water, wet (see water (n.1)). Of paint, ink, etc., not yet dry from 1510s. Opposed to dry
in reference to the U.S. battles over prohibition from 1870. Wet blanket person who has a
dispiriting effect is recorded from 1871, from use of blankets drenched in water to smother fires
(the phrase is attested in this literal sense from 1660s).    Do we not know them, those wet
blankets who come down on our pleasant little fires and extinguish them, with no more ruth than the
rain feels when it pours on the encampment of the merry picnic party, or floods the tents of a
flower show? [Wet Blankets, in Godey's Lady's Book and Magazine, February, 1871]   All wet in the
wrong is recorded from 1923, American English; earlier simply wet ineffectual, and perhaps
ultimately from slang meaning drunken (c.1700). Wet-nurse is from 1610s. The diver's wet-suit is
from 1955. Wet dream is from 1851; in the same sense Middle English had ludificacioun an erotic
dream.    He knew som tyme a man of religion, &thorn;at gaff hym gretelie vnto chastitie bothe of
his harte &amp; of his body noghtwithstondyng he was tempid with grete ludificacions on &thorn;e
nyght. [Alphabet of Tales, c.1450]


