oath (n.)

Old English a&eth; oath, judicial swearing, solemn appeal to deity in witness of truth or a promise,
from Proto-Germanic *aithaz (cognates: Old Norse ei&eth;r, Swedish ed, Old Saxon, Old Frisian eth,
Middle Dutch eet, Dutch eed, German eid, Gothic ai&thorn;s oath), from PIE *oi-to- an oath
(cognates: Old Irish oeth oath). Common to Celtic and Germanic, possibly a loan-word from one to the
other, but the history is obscure. In reference to careless invocations of divinity, from late 12c.


adjure (v.)

late 14c., to bind by oath; to question under oath, from Latin adiurare confirm by oath, add an
oath, to swear to in addition, in Late Latin to put (someone) to an oath, from ad- to (see ad-) +
iurare swear, from ius (genitive iuris) law (see jurist). Related: Adjured; adjuring.


exorcism (n.)

early 15c., a calling up or driving out of evil spirits, from Late Latin exorcismus, from Greek
exorkismos, from exorkizein exorcize, bind by oath, from ex out of (see ex-) + horkizein cause to
swear, from horkos oath. Earlier in the same sense was exorcization (late 14c.).


shiver (v.2)

to break in or into many small pieces, c.1200, from the source of shiver (n.). Chiefly in phrase
shiver me timbers (1835), a mock oath attributed in comic fiction to sailors [OED]. My timbers! as a
nautical oath (probably euphemistic) is attested from 1789 (see timber (n.)). Related: Shivered;
shivering.


marry (interj.)

a common oath in the Middle Ages, mid-14c., now obsolete, a corruption of the name of the Virgin
Mary.


golly

euphemism for God, first recorded 1775, in a source that refers to it as a sort of jolly kind of
oath, or asseveration much in use among our carters, &amp; the lowest people.


swear (v.)

Old English swerian take an oath (class VI strong verb; past tense swor, past participle sworen),
from Proto-Germanic *swarjan-, (cognates: Old Saxon swerian, Old Frisian swera, Old Norse sverja,
Danish sverge, Middle Dutch swaren, Old High German swerien, German schw&ouml;ren, Gothic swaren to
swear), from PIE root *swer- (1) to speak, talk, say (cognates: Old Church Slavonic svara quarrel,
Oscan sverrunei to the speaker).    Also related to the second element in answer. The secondary
sense of use bad language (early 15c.) developed from the notion of invoke sacred names. Swear off
desist as with a vow is from 1898. Swear in install in office by administration of an oath is from
1700 in modern use, echoing Old English.


jeez (interj.)

minced oath, also jeeze, 1922, American English, euphemistic corruption Jesus.


Bathsheba

Biblical wife of King David, mother of Solomon, from Hebrew Bathshebha, literally daughter of the
oath, from bath daughter.


jurat (n.)

one who has taken an oath, early 15c. (mid-14c. in Anglo-French), from Medieval Latin iuratus,
literally sworn man, noun use of past participle of iurare to swear (see jury (n.)).


zounds (interj.)

c.1600, oath of surprise or anger, altered from (by) God's wounds!, in reference to the wounds of
Christ on the Cross. One of the innumerable oaths having reference to Christ's passion [Century
Dictionary]. Compare gadzooks.


abjuration (n.)

mid-15c., from Latin abjurationem (nominative abjuratio) a denying on oath, noun of action from past
participle stem of abjurare (see abjure).


egad

1670s, I gad, a softened oath, second element God, first uncertain; perhaps it represents
exclamation ah.


violate (v.)

early 15c., to break (an oath, etc.), from Latin violatus, past participle of violare treat with
violence, dishonor, outrage (see violation). Sense of ravish is first recorded mid-15c. Related:
Violated; violating.


Hippocratic (adj.)

1610s, from Medieval Latin Hippocraticus, pertaining to Hippocrates (c.460-377 B.C.E.), the famous
ancient Greek physician. Hippocratic Oath is attested from 1747; it is in the spirit of Hippocrates
but was not written by him. The name is literally one superior in horses.


Pete

familiar form of masc. proper name Peter. For Pete's sake is attested from 1903 in a list of
children's expressions published in Massachusetts, probably a euphemistic use of the disciple's name
in place of Christ; as an exclamation or quasi-oath, Peter! was in use 14c., but this likely is not
connected to the modern use.


affirmation (n.)

early 15c., assertion that something is true, from Old French afermacion (14c.), from Latin
affirmationem (nominative affirmatio) an affirmation, solid assurance, noun of action from past
participle stem of affirmare (see affirm). In law, as the Quaker alternative to oath-taking, it is
attested from 1690s.


goddamn

late 14c., from god + damn.   Mais, fussent-ils [les anglais] cent mille Goddem de plus qu'a
present, ils n'auront pas ce royaume. [Joan of Arc, 1431, quoted in Prosper de Barante's Histoire
des ducs de Bourgogne]   Goddammes was the nickname given by Puritans to Cavaliers, in consequence
of the latter's supposed frequent employment of that oath.


rap (v.2)

talk informally, chat, 1929, popularized c.1965 in Black English, possibly first in Caribbean
English and from British slang meaning say, utter (1879), originally to utter a sudden oath (1540s),
ultimately from rap (n.). As a noun in this sense from 1898. Meaning to perform rap music is
recorded by 1979. Related: Rapped; rapping.


jiminy

exclamation of surprise, 1803, a disguised oath, perhaps for Jesu Domine Jesus Lord. Extended form
jiminy cricket is attested from 1848 and suggests Jesus Christ (compare also Jiminy Christmas,
1890).


forswear (v.)

Old English forswerian swear falsely, also abandon or renounce on oath, from for- completely +
swerian to swear. Related: Forswore; forsworn; forswearing.


perjure (v.)

mid-15c. swear falsely (implied in perjured; late 13c. in Anglo-French), from Old French parjurer to
break one's word, renege on a promise (11c.), from Latin periurare to swear falsely, break one's
oath (see perjury). Reflexive sense is from 18c.


Gemini

constellation, late Old English, from Latin gemini (plural of adjective geminus) twins (see
geminate). The twins are Castor and Pollux. Meaning a person born under the sign of Gemini is
recorded from 1894. As an oath, from 1660s (also found in Dutch and German), perhaps a corruption of
Jesu (compare jiminy).


pledge (v.)

c.1400, to promise (something to someone), to give over as security for repayment, also promise
faith to, from pledge (n.) and from Old French plegier, from plege (n.). From mid-15c. as to stand
surety for, be responsible for; late 15c. as to mortgage. Meaning put (someone) under oath is from
1570s; sense of to solemnly promise or guarantee is from 1590s, as is sense to drink a toast.
Related: Pledged; pledging.


Elizabeth

fem. proper name, Biblical name of the wife of Aaron, from Late Latin Elisabeth, from Greek
Eleisabeth, Eleisabet, from Hebrew Elishebha God is an oath, the second element said by Klein to be
related to shivah (fem. sheva) seven, and to nishba he swore, originally he bound himself by (the
sacred number) seven. Has never ranked lower than 26th in popularity among the names given to baby
girls in the U.S. in any year since 1880, the oldest for which a reliable list is available.


culottes (n.)

a divided skirt, 1911, from French culotte breeches (16c.), a diminutive of cul bottom, backside,
backside, anus, from Latin culus bottom, fundament. Earlier, in the singular cullote, it was used to
mean knee-breeches (1842). Por le cul bieu By God's arse was an Old French oath.


blamed (adv.)

confoundedly 1833, later also as an adjective, from past participle of blame (v.), as a euphemistic
evasion of the horrible word damn. [Bartlett, Dictionary of Americanisms, 1848].    This adjective
'blamed' is the virtuous oath by which simple people, who are improving their habits, cure
themselves of a stronger epithet. [Edward Everett Hale, If, Yes, and Perhaps, 1868]    Compare also
blamenation (1837) as an expletive. The imprecation blame me is attested from 1830.


abjure (v.)

early 15c., from Middle French abjurer or directly from Latin abiurare deny on oath, from ab- away
(see ab-) + iurare to swear, related to ius (genitive iuris) law (see jurist). Related: Abjured;
abjuring.


exorcise (v.)

c.1400, to invoke spirits, from Old French exorciser (14c.), from Late Latin exorcizare, from Greek
exorkizein banish an evil spirit; bind by oath (see exorcism). Sense of calling up evil spirits to
drive them out became dominant 16c. A rare case where -ise trumps -ize on both sides of the
Atlantic, perhaps by influence of exercise. Related: Exorcised; exorcising.


conjure (v.)

late 13c., command on oath, from Old French conjurer invoke, conjure (12c.), from Latin coniurare to
swear together; conspire, from com- together (see com-) + iurare to swear (see jury (n.)). Magical
sense is c.1300, for constraining by spell a demon to do one's bidding. Related: Conjured;
conjuring. Phrase conjure up cause to appear in the mind (as if by magic) attested from 1580s.


sacre bleu (interj.)

stereotypical French oath, 1869, from French sacr&eacute; bleu, literally holy blue, a euphemism for
sacr&eacute; Dieu (1768), holy God. From Old French sacrer, from Latin sacrare (see sacred).


loyalty (n.)

c.1400, from Old French loialt&eacute;, leaut&eacute; loyalty, fidelity; legitimacy; honesty; good
quality (Modern French loyaut&eacute;), from loial (see loyal). Earlier leaute (mid-13c.), from the
older French form. Loyalty oath first attested 1852.


oblige (v.)

c.1300, to bind by oath, from Old French obligier engage one's faith, commit (oneself), pledge
(13c.), from Latin obligare to bind, bind up, bandage, figuratively put under obligation, from ob to
(see ob-) + ligare to bind, from PIE root *leig- to bind (see ligament). Main modern meaning to make
(someone) indebted by conferring a benefit or kindness is from 1560s. Related: obliged; obliging.


affidavit (n.)

1590s, from Medieval Latin affidavit, literally he has stated on oath, third person singular
perfective of affidare to trust, from Latin ad- to (see ad-) + fidare to trust, from fidus faithful,
from fides faith (see faith). So called from being the first word of sworn statements.


deposition (n.)

late 14c., dethronement, putting down from dignity or authority, from Old French deposicion (12c.),
from Latin depositionem (nominative depositio), noun of action from past participle stem of deponere
(see deposit (v.)).    Meaning statements made in court under oath is from early 15c. Meaning action
of depositing is from 1590s. Properly, deposition belongs to deposit, but deposit and depose have
become totally confused and English deposition partakes of senses belonging to both.


perjury (n.)

late 14c., act of swearing to a statement known to be false, via Anglo-French perjurie (late 13c.)
and Old French parjur&#233;e perjury, false witness, both from Latin periurium a false oath, from
periurare swear falsely, from per- away, entirely (see per) + iurare to swear (see jury (n.)).
Related: Perjurious.


jury (n.)

early 14c. (attested from late 12c. in Anglo-Latin), from Anglo-French juree (late 13c.), from
Medieval Latin iurata an oath, an inquest, fem. past participle of Latin iurare to swear, from ius
(genitive iuris) law (see jurist). Meaning body of persons chosen to award prizes at an exhibition
is from 1851. Grand jury attested from early 15c. in Anglo-French (le graund Jurre).


Jesus

late 12c. (Old English used h&aelig;lend savior), from Greek Iesous, which is an attempt to render
into Greek the Aramaic proper name Jeshua (Hebrew Yeshua) Jah is salvation, a common Jewish personal
name, the later form of Hebrew Yehoshua (see Joshua).    As an oath, attested from late 14c. For
Jesus H. Christ (1924), see I.H.S. First record of Jesus freak is from 1970. Jesu, common in Middle
English, is from the Old French objective case.


Moses

masc. proper name, name of Hebrew prophet and lawgiver, from Latin, from Greek Mouses, from Hebrew
Mosheh, of unknown origin.Most scholars see in it the Hebraization of Egyptian mes, mesu 'child,
son,' which is often used in theophorous names. According to this derivation the words of Pharaoh's
daughter in Ex. 2:10, 'For out of the water I drew him' are not the explanation of the Hebrew name
Mosheh, but express the idea that the Egyptian name given by Pharaoh's daughter resembles in sound,
and therefore, reminds us of, the Hebrew verb mashah 'he drew out,' which is suggestive of the words
spoken by Pharaoh's daughter. [Dr. Ernest Klein, A Comprehensive Etymological Dictionary of the
English Language]  As an expletive or oath, 1840.


deuce (n.)

late 15c., the 2 in dice or cards, also a roll of 2 in dice (1510s), from Middle French deus (Modern
French deux), from Latin duos (nominative duo) two (see two).    Became a mild oath by 1710, about
50 years after it was first attested in the sense of bad luck, the devil, etc., perhaps because two
was the lowest score, and probably by similarity to Latin deus and related words meaning god. Low
German had der daus! in same sense 16c., which perhaps influenced the English form. Deuce coupe is
1940s hot-rodder slang for souped up two-door car, especially a 1932 Ford. Related: Deuced;
deucedly.


Huguenot

1562, from Middle French Huguenot, according to French sources originally political, not religious.
The name was applied in 1520s to Genevan partisans opposed to the Duke of Savoy (who joined Geneva
to the Swiss Confederation), and it is probably an alteration of Swiss German Eidgenoss confederate,
from Middle High German eitgenoze, from eit oath + genoze comrade (related to Old English geneat
comrade, companion). The form of the French word probably altered by association with Hugues
Besan&ccedil;on, leader of the Genevan partisans. In France, applied generally to French Protestants
because Geneva was a Calvinist center.


waive (v.)

c.1300, deprive of legal protection, from Anglo-French weyver to abandon, waive (Old French guever
to abandon, give back), probably from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse veifa to swing about,
from Proto-Germanic *waif- (see waif). In Middle English legal language, used of rights, goods, or
women.    If the defendant be a woman, the proceeding is called a waiver; for as women were not
sworn to the law by taking the oath of allegiance in the leet (as men anciently were when of the age
of twelve years and upwards), they could not properly be outlawed, but were said to be waived, i.e.,
derelicta, left out, or not regarded. [from section subtitled Outlawry in J.J.S. Wharton, Law-
Lexicon, or Dictionary of Jurisprudence, London, 1867]    Related: Waived; waiving.


warlock (n.)

Old English w&aelig;rloga traitor, liar, enemy, devil, from w&aelig;r faith, fidelity; a compact,
agreement, covenant, from Proto-Germanic *wera- (cognates: Old High German wara truth, Old Norse
varar solemn promise, vow), from PIE *were-o- true, trustworthy (see very, also Varangian). Second
element is an agent noun related to leogan to lie (see lie (v.1); and compare Old English wordloga
deceiver, liar).    Original primary sense seems to have been oath-breaker; given special
application to the devil (c.1000), but also used of giants and cannibals. Meaning one in league with
the devil is recorded from c.1300. Ending in -ck (1680s) and meaning male equivalent of a witch
(1560s) are from Scottish. Related: Warlockery.


bigot (n.)

1590s, sanctimonious person, religious hypocrite, from French bigot (12c.), of unknown origin.
Earliest French use of the word is as the name of a people apparently in southern Gaul, which led to
the now-doubtful, on phonetic grounds, theory that the word comes from Visigothus. The typical use
in Old French seems to have been as a derogatory nickname for Normans, the old theory (not
universally accepted) being that it springs from their frequent use of the Germanic oath bi God. But
OED dismisses in a three-exclamation-mark fury one fanciful version of the by god theory as absurdly
incongruous with facts. At the end, not much is left standing except Spanish bigote mustache, which
also has been proposed but not explained, and the chief virtue of which as a source seems to be
there is no evidence for or against it.    In support of the by God theory, as a surname Bigott,
Bygott are attested in Normandy and in England from the 11c., and French name etymology sources
(such as Dauzat) explain it as a derogatory name applied by the French to the Normans and
representing by god. The English were known as goddamns 200 years later in Joan of Arc's France, and
during World War I Americans serving in France were said to be known as les sommobiches (see also
son of a bitch). But the sense development in bigot is difficult to explain. According to Donkin,
the modern use first appears in French 16c. This and the earliest English sense, religious
hypocrite, especially a female one, might have been influenced by beguine and the words that cluster
around it. Sense extended 1680s to other than religious opinions.


Wicca (n.)

An Old English masc. noun meaning male witch, wizard, soothsayer, sorcerer, astrologer, magician;
see witch. Use of the word in modern contexts traces to English folklorist Gerald Gardner
(1884-1964), who is said to have joined circa 1939 an occult group in New Forest, Hampshire,
England, for which he claimed an unbroken tradition to medieval times. Gardner seems to have first
used it in print in 1954, in his book Witchcraft Today (Witches were the Wica or wise people, with
herbal  knowledge and a working occult teaching usually used for good ....). In published and
unpublished material, he apparently only ever used the word as a mass noun referring to adherents of
the practice and not as the name of the practice itself. Some of his followers continue to use it in
this sense. According to Gardner's book The Meaning of Witchcraft (1959), the word, as used in the
initiation ceremony, played a key role in his experience:    I realised that I had stumbled upon
something interesting; but I was half-initiated before the word, 'Wica' which they used hit me like
a thunderbolt, and I knew where I was, and that the Old Religion still existed. And so I found
myself in the Circle, and there took the usual oath of secrecy, which bound me not to reveal certain
things.    In the late 1960s the term came into use as the title of a modern pagan movement
associated with witchcraft.  The first printed reference in this usage seems to be 1969, in The
Truth About Witchcraft by freelance  author Hans Holzer:    If the practice of the Old Religion,
which is also called Wicca (Craft of the Wise), and thence, witchcraft, is a reputable and useful
cult, then it is worthy of public interest.    And, quoting witch Alex Sanders:    No, a witch
wedding still needs a civil ceremony to make it legal. Wicca itself as a religion is not registered
yet. But it is about time somebody registered it, I think. I've done all I can to call attention to
our religion.    Sanders was a highly visible representative of neo-pagan Witchcraft in the late
1960s and early 1970s. During this time he appears to have popularized use of the term in this
sense.  Later books c.1989 teaching modernized witchcraft using the same term account for its rise
and popularity, especially in U.S.


