obituary (n.)

1706, register of deaths, from Medieval Latin obituarius a record of the death of a person,
literally pertaining to death, from Latin obitus departure, a going to meet, encounter (a euphemism
for death), from stem of obire go toward, go to meet (as in mortem obire meet death), from ob to,
toward (see ob-) + ire to go (see ion). Meaning record or announcement of a death, especially in a
newspaper, and including a brief biographical sketch is from 1738. As an adjective from 1828. A
similar euphemism is in Old English cognate for&eth;faran to die, literally to go forth; utsi&eth;
death, literally going out, departure.


obit (n.)

late 14c., death, from Middle French obit or directly from Latin obitus death, noun use of past
participle of obire to die, literally to go toward (see obituary). In modern usage (since 1874) it
is usually a clipped form of obituary, though it had the same meaning of published death notice
15c.-17c. The scholarly abbreviation ob. with date is from Latin obiit (he) died, third person
singular of obire.


necrology (n.)

register of deaths, obituary, 1705, from necro- + -logy.


obiter (adv.)

Latin, literally by the way, from ob to, toward (see ob-) + iter journey (see ion). Klein's sources,
however, say it is ob- with the suffix -iter in analogy of circiter about from circa. Also see
obituary.


trespass (v.)

c.1300, transgress in some active manner, commit an aggressive offense, to sin, from Old French
trespasser pass beyond or across, cross, traverse; infringe, violate, from tres- beyond (from Latin
trans-; see trans-) + passer go by, pass (see pass (v.)). Meaning enter unlawfully is first attested
in forest laws of Scottish Parliament (c.1455). The Modern French descendant of Old French
trespasser, tr&eacute;passer, has come to be used euphemistically for to die (compare euphemistic
use of cross over, and obituary). Related: Trespassed; trespassing.


morgue (n.)

mortuary, 1821, from French Morgue, originally a specific building in Paris where bodies were
exposed for identification:    There is, in the most populous part of the French metropolis, an
establishment entitled La Morgue, destined for the reception and exposition of bodies drowned in the
Seine, and caught in nets, which are placed in different parts of the river for that purpose. The
object of this exposition is, that the deceased may be recognised by their friends or relatives, and
receive the rights of sepulture accordingly. The Morgue is open at all hours of the day, to
passengers of every description, and often displays at a time, five or six horrible carcasses
stretched, without covering, on an inclined platform, and subjected to the promiscuous gaze of the
mob. [American Review, January 1811]     Before that it was the place where new prisoners were
displayed to keepers to establish their identification. Thus the name is believed to be probably
from French morgue haughtiness, originally a sad expression, solemn look, from Old French morguer
look solemnly, from Vulgar Latin *murricare to make a face, pout, from *murrum muzzle, snout. The
1768 Dictionnaire Royal Fran&#231;ois-Anglois Et Anglois-Fran&#231;ois defines French morgue both as
A proud, big, haughty or stately look, stare, surliness, or surly look and A little gratel room
wherein a new prisoner is set, and must continue some hours, that the Jailer's ordinary servants may
the better take notice of his face.    Adopted as a general term in U.S., 1880s, replacing earlier
dead house, etc. In newspaper slang, collection of pre-written obituary material of living persons
(1903), hence library of clips, photos, etc., 1918.


