objective (n.)

1738, something objective to the mind, from objective (adj.). Meaning goal, aim (1881) is from
military term objective point (1852), reflecting a sense evolution in French.


objective (adj.)

1610s, originally in the philosophical sense of considered in relation to its object (opposite of
subjective), formed on pattern of Medieval Latin objectivus, from objectum object (see object (n.))
+ -ive. Meaning impersonal, unbiased is first found 1855, influenced by German objektiv. Related:
Objectively.


objectivism (n.)

1854 in philosophical sense, the doctrine that knowledge is based on objective reality, from
objective (adj.) + -ism.


incurious (adj.)

1560s, negligent, heedless, from Latin incuriosus careless, negligent, unconcerned, from in- not,
opposite of, without (see in- (1)) + curiosus (see curious). Meaning uninquisitive is from 1610s.
Objective sense of unworthy of attention is from 1747.


postmodernism (n.)

also post-modernism, by 1977, from post- + modernism. Defined by Terry Eagleton as the contemporary
movement of thought which rejects ... the possibility of objective knowledge and is therefore
skeptical of truth, unity, and progress [After Theory, 2003]. Related: post-modernist (1965).


herself

Old English hire self; see her (objective case) + self. Originally dative, but since 14c. often
treated as genitive, hence her own sweet self, etc. Also see himself.


berk (n.)

fool, 1936, abbreviation of Berkshire Hunt (or Berkeley Hunt), rhyming slang for cunt but typically
applied only to contemptible persons, not to the body part.  This is not an objective, anatomical
term, neither does it imply coitus. It connects with that extension of meaning of the unprintable, a
fool, or a person whom one does not like. [Dictionary of Rhyming Slang, 1960]


garcon (n.)

boy, c.1300, from Old French gar&ccedil;un (11c.; Modern French gar&ccedil;on) menial, servant-boy,
page; man of base condition, originally objective case of gars, perhaps from Frankish *wrakjo-, from
Proto-Germanic *wrakjon- (cognates: Old High German recko, Old Saxon wrekkio a banished person,
exile; English wretch). Meaning waiter (especially one in a French restaurant) is from 1788.


curious (adj.)

mid-14c., eager to know (often in a bad sense), from Old French curios solicitous, anxious,
inquisitive; odd, strange (Modern French curieux) and directly from Latin curiosus careful,
diligent; inquiring eagerly, meddlesome, akin to cura care (see cure (n.)). The objective sense of
exciting curiosity is 1715 in English. In booksellers' catalogues, the word means erotic,
pornographic. Curiouser and curiouser is from Alice in Wonderland (1865).


barrage (n.)

1859, action of barring; man-made barrier in a stream, from French barrer to stop, from barre bar,
from Old French barre (see bar (n.1)). Artillery sense is 1916, from World War I French phrase tir
de barrage barrier fire intended to isolate the objective. As a verb by 1917. Related: Barraged;
barraging.


whom (pron.)

objective case of who, Old English hwam (Proto-Germanic *hwam), dative form of hwa (see who).
Ungrammatical use of who form whom is attested from c.1300.


zeal (n.)

passionate ardor in pursuit of an objective or course of action, late 14c., from Old French zel
(Modern French z&#232;le) and directly from Late Latin zelus zeal, emulation (source also of Italian
zelo, Spanish celo), a Church word, from Greek zelos ardor, eager rivalry, emulation, a noble
passion [Liddell &amp; Scott], but also jealousy; prom PIE *ya- to seek, request, desire. From mid-
15c. as devotion.


Jesus

late 12c. (Old English used h&aelig;lend savior), from Greek Iesous, which is an attempt to render
into Greek the Aramaic proper name Jeshua (Hebrew Yeshua) Jah is salvation, a common Jewish personal
name, the later form of Hebrew Yehoshua (see Joshua).    As an oath, attested from late 14c. For
Jesus H. Christ (1924), see I.H.S. First record of Jesus freak is from 1970. Jesu, common in Middle
English, is from the Old French objective case.


perversion (n.)

late 14c., action of turning aside from truth, corruption, distortion (originally of religious
beliefs), from Latin perversionem (nominative perversio) a turning about, noun of action from past
participle stem of pervertere (see pervert (v.)). Psychological sense of disorder of sexual behavior
in which satisfaction is sought through channels other than those of normal heterosexual intercourse
is from 1892, originally including homosexuality.Perversions are defined as unnatural acts, acts
contrary to nature, bestial, abominable, and detestable. Such laws are interpretable only in
accordance with the ancient tradition of the English common law which ... is committed to the
doctrine that no sexual activity is justifiable unless its objective is procreation. [A.C. Kinsey,
et.al., Sexual Behavior in the Human Male, 1948]


you (pron.)

Old English eow, dative and accusative plural of &thorn;u (see thou), objective case of ge, ye (see
ye), from Proto-Germanic *juz-, *iwwiz (cognates: Old Norse yor, Old Saxon iu, Old Frisian iuwe,
Middle Dutch, Dutch u, Old High German iu, iuwih, German euch), from PIE *yu, second person (plural)
pronoun.    Pronunciation of you and the nominative form ye gradually merged from 14c.; the
distinction between them passed out of general usage by 1600. Widespread use of French in England
after 12c. gave English you the same association as French vous, and it began to drive out singular
nominative thou, originally as a sign of respect (similar to the royal we) when addressing
superiors, then equals and strangers, and ultimately (by c.1575) becoming the general form of
address. Through 13c. English also retained a dual pronoun ink you two; your two selves; each other.


abstract (adj.)

late 14c., originally in grammar (of nouns), from Latin abstractus drawn away, past participle of
abstrahere to drag away, detach, pull away, divert; also figuratively, from ab(s)- away (see ab-) +
trahere draw (see tract (n.1)).    Meaning withdrawn or separated from material objects or practical
matters is from mid-15c. That of difficult to understand, abstruse is from c.1400. Specifically in
reference to modern art, it dates from 1914; abstract expressionism as an American-based uninhibited
approach to art exemplified by Jackson Pollock is from 1952, but the term itself had been used in
the 1920s of Kandinsky and others.    Oswald Herzog, in an article on Der Abstrakte Expressionismus
(Sturm, heft 50, 1919) gives us a statement which with equal felicity may be applied to the artistic
attitude of the Dadaists. Abstract Expressionism is perfect Expressionism, he writes. It is pure
creation. It casts spiritual processes into a corporeal mould. It does not borrow objects from the
real world; it creates its own objects .... The abstract reveals the will of the artist; it becomes
expression. ... [William A. Drake, The Life and Deeds of Dada, 1922]   <hr />   Then, that art we
have called abstract for want of any possible descriptive term, with which we have been patient,
and, even, appreciative, getting high stimulation by the new Guggenheim non-objective Art Museum, is
reflected in our examples of surrealism, dadaism, and what-not, to assert our acquaintance in every
art, fine or other. [Report of the Art Reference Department of Pratt Institute Free Library for year
ending June 30, 1937]


thee (pron.)

Old English &thorn;e (accusative and dative singular of &thorn;u thou), from Proto-Germanic *theke
(cognates: Old Frisian thi, Middle Dutch di, Old High German dih, German dich, Old Norse &thorn;ik,
Norwegian deg, Gothic &thorn;uk), from PIE *tege-, accusative of root *tu-, second person singular
pronoun (see thou). The verb meaning to use the pronoun 'thee' to someone is recorded from 1662, in
connection with the rise of Quakerism.    In Middle English, people began to use plural forms in all
cases, at first as a sign of respect to superiors, then as a courtesy to equals. By the 1600s, the
singular forms had come to represent familiarity and lack of status, and fell from use except in the
case of a few dialects, notably in the north of England. People in Lancashire north of the
Rossendale Forest and Yorkshire formerly were noted for use of the singular second person pronouns
tha (nom.) and thee (acc.). For religious reasons (Christian equality of persons, but also justified
as grammatically correct), the Quakers also retained the familiar forms.    Thou and Thee was a sore
cut to proud flesh and them that sought self-honour, who, though they would say it to God and
Christ, could not endure to have it said to themselves. So that we were often beaten and abused, and
sometimes in danger of our lives, for using those words to some proud men, who would say, What! you
ill-bred clown, do you Thou me? as though Christian breeding consisted in saying You to one; which
is contrary to all their grammar and teaching books, by which they instructed their youth. [George
Fox's journal, 1661]   <hr />   While the Quakers originally adopted thee and thou on account of
their grammatical correctness, they soon fell into the careless habit of using thee, the objective,
instead of thou, the nominative. Common illustrations are: How does thee do? or Will thee, etc.
[George Fox Tucker, A Quaker Home, Boston, 1891]


satire (n.)

late 14c., work intended to ridicule vice or folly, from Middle French satire (14c.) and directly
from Latin satira satire, poetic medley, earlier satura, in lanx satura mixed dish, dish filled with
various kinds of fruit, literally full dish, from fem. of satur sated (see saturate).    First used
in the literary sense in Latin in reference to a collection of poems in various meters on a variety
of subjects by the late republican Roman poet Ennius. The matter of the little that survives of his
verse does not seem to be particularly satiric, but in classical Latin the word came to mean
especially a poem which assailed the prevailing vices, one after another. Altered in Latin by
influence of Greek satyr, on mistaken notion that the literary form is related to the Greek satyr
drama (see satyr).<b>Satire</b>, n. An obsolete kind of literary composition in which the vices and
follies of the author's enemies were expounded with imperfect tenderness. In this country satire
never had more than a sickly and uncertain existence, for the soul of it is wit, wherein we are
dolefully deficient, the humor that we mistake for it, like all humor, being tolerant and
sympathetic. Moreover, although Americans are 'endowed by their Creator' with abundant vice and
folly, it is not generally known that these are reprehensible qualities, wherefore the satirist is
popularly regarded as a sour-spirited knave, and his every victim's outcry for codefendants evokes a
national assent. [Ambrose Bierce, Devil's Dictionary, 1911]   <hr />   Proper satire is
distinguished, by the generality of the reflections, from a lampoon which is aimed against a
particular person, but they are too frequently confounded. [Johnson]   <hr />   [I]n whatever
department of human expression, wherever there is objective truth there is satire [Wyndham Lewis,
Rude Assignment, 1950]    For nuances of usage, see humor (n.).


