oblivion (n.)

late 14c., state or fact of forgetting, from Old French oblivion (13c.) and directly from Latin
oblivionem (nominative oblivio) forgetfulness; a being forgotten, from oblivisci (past participle
oblitus) forget, originally even out, smooth over, efface, from ob over (see ob-) + root of levis
smooth, from PIE *lei-w-, from root *(s)lei- slime, slimy, sticky (see slime (n.)). Meaning state of
being forgotten is early 15c.


oblivious (adj.)

mid-15c., from Latin obliviosus forgetful, that easily forgets; producing forgetfulness, from
oblivion (see oblivion). Meaning unaware, unconscious (of something) is from 1862, formerly regarded
as erroneous, this is now the general meaning and the word has lost its original sense of no longer
aware or mindful. Properly should be used with to, not of. Related: Obliviously; obliviousness.


amnestic (adj.)

causing loss of memory, 1879, from Greek amnestia oblivion, forgetfulness; see amnesia.


obliviate (v.)

1660s, from Latin oblivium (see oblivion). Related: Obliviated; obliviating.


Alethea

fem. proper name, from Greek aletheia truth, truthfulness, from alethes true, literally not
concealing, from privative prefix a- not (see a- (3)) + lethe forgetfulness, oblivion (see latent).


latent (adj.)

mid-15c., concealed, secret, from Latin latentem (nominative latens) lying hid, secret, unknown,
present participle of latere to lie hidden, from PIE *laidh-, from root *la- to be hidden (cognates:
Greek lethe forgetfulness, oblivion, Old Church Slavonic lajati to lie in wait for). Meaning dormant
is from 1680s.


lethal (adj.)

1580s, from Late Latin lethalis, alteration of Latin letalis deadly, fatal, from letum death, of
uncertain origin. Form altered in Late Latin by association with lethe hydor water of oblivion in
Hades in Greek mythology, from Greek lethe forgetfulness.


Lethe

river of Hades (whose water when drunk caused forgetfulness of the past), from Greek lethe,
literally forgetfulness, oblivion, related to lethargos forgetful, lathre secretly, by stealth,
lathrios stealthy, lanthanein to be hidden. Cognate with Latin latere to be hidden (see latent).
Related: Lethean.


oubliette (n.)

secret dungeon reached only via trapdoor, 1819, from French oubliette (14c.), from Middle French
oublier to forget, show negligence, Old French oblier, oblider, from Vulgar Latin *oblitare, from
Latin oblitus, past participle of oblivisci to forget (see oblivion).


Boeotian (adj.)

1590s, ignorant, dull, from Boeotia, district around Thebes in ancient Greece (said to have been so
called for its cattle pastures; Greek bous = ox), whose inhabitants were characterized as
proverbially dull and countrified by their neighbors, the Athenians. The Boeotians presumably held
reciprocal opinions, but their great writers, Plutarch and Pindar, though patriots, are full of
praise for Athenian deeds and institutions.    Though his aim was to vindicate Boeotia, [Pindar] has
probably done her a disservice, in that he has helped to immortalise the scurrilous proverb
&#914;&#959;&#953;&#969;&#964;&#943;&#945; &#973;&#962;, which he wished to confute. ... If left to
itself, the slander might have passed into oblivion long ago. [W. Rhys Roberts, The Ancient
Boeotians, 1895]


limbo (n.1)

region supposed to exist on the border of Hell reserved for pre-Christian saints (Limbus patrum) and
unbaptized infants (Limbus infantum); c.1300, from Latin limbo, ablative of limbus edge, border (see
limb (2)). It emerged from Latin in the ablative form from frequent use in phrases such as in limbo
(patrum), etc. Figurative sense of condition of neglect or oblivion is from 1640s.


