obnoxious (adj.)

1580s, subject to the authority of another, from Latin obnoxiosus hurtful, injurious, from obnoxius
subject, exposed to harm, from ob to, toward (see ob-) + noxa injury, hurt, damage entailing
liability (see noxious). Meaning subject to something harmful is 1590s; meaning offensive, hateful
is first recorded 1670s, influenced by noxious.Obnoxious has two very different senses, one of which
(exposed or open or liable to attack or injury) requires notice because its currency is now so
restricted that it is puzzling to the uninstructed. It is the word's rightful or de jure meaning,
and we may hope that scholarly writers will keep it alive. [Fowler]  Related: Obnoxiously;
obnoxiousness.


trog (n.)

obnoxious person, boor, lout, 1956, short for troglodyte.


cocksucker (n.)

1890s, one who does fellatio (especially a male homosexual); 1920s as contemptible person, American
English, from cock (n.1) in phallic sense + sucker (n.). Used curiously for aggressively obnoxious
men; the ancients would have recoiled at this failure to appreciate the difference between passive
and active roles; Catullus, writing of his boss, employs the useful Latin insult irrumator, which
means someone who forces others to give him oral sex, hence one who treats people with contempt.


putz (n.)

obnoxious man, fool, 1964, from Yiddish, from German putz, literally finery, adornment, obviously
used here in an ironic sense. Attested in writing earlier in slang sense of penis (1934, in Tropic
of Cancer). A non-ironic sense is in putz Nativity display around a Christmas tree (1873), from
Pennsylvania Dutch (German), which retains the old German sense.


vermin (n.)

c.1300, noxious animals, from Anglo-French and Old French vermin moth, worm, mite, in plural
troublesome creatures (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *verminum vermin, possibly including bothersome
insects, collective noun formed from Latin vermis worm (see worm (n.)). Extended to low, obnoxious
people by 1560s.


nuisance (n.)

c.1400, injury, hurt, harm, from Anglo-French nusaunce, Old French nuisance harm, wrong, damage,
from past participle stem of nuire to harm, from Latin nocere to hurt (see noxious). Sense has
softened over time, to anything obnoxious to a community (bad smells, pests, eyesores), 1660s, then
source of annoyance, something personally disagreeable (1831). Applied to persons from 1690s.


louse (n.)

parasitic insect infecting human hair and skin, Old English lus, from Proto-Germanic *lus (cognates:
Old Norse lus, Middle Dutch luus, Dutch luis, Old High German lus, German Laus), from PIE *lus-
louse (cognates: Welsh lleuen louse). Slang meaning obnoxious person is from 1630s. The plural lice
(Old English lys) shows effects of i-mutation. The verb meaning to clear of lice is from late 14c.;
to louse up ruin, botch first attested 1934, from the literal sense (of bedding), from 1931. Grose
[Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, 1785] has louse ladder A stitch fallen in a stocking.


shit (n.)

Old English scitte purging, diarrhea, from source of shit (v.). Sense of excrement dates from 1580s
(Old English had scytel, Middle English shitel for dung, excrement; the usual 14c. noun seems to
have been turd). Use for obnoxious person is since at least 1508; meaning misfortune, trouble is
attested from 1937. Shit-faced drunk is 1960s student slang; shit list is from 1942. Up shit creek
in trouble is from 1937 (compare salt river). To not give a shit not care is from 1922. Pessimistic
expression Same shit different day attested from 1997. Shitticism is Robert Frost's word for
scatological writing.    The expression [the shit hits the fan] is related to, and may well derive
from, an old joke. A man in a crowded bar needed to defecate but couldn't find a bathroom, so he
went upstairs and used a hole in the floor. Returning, he found everyone had gone except the
bartender, who was cowering behind the bar. When the man asked what had happened, the bartender
replied, 'Where were you when the shit hit the fan?' [Hugh Rawson, Wicked Words, 1989]


