obsequious (adj.)

late 15c., prompt to serve, from Middle French obs&#233;quieux (15c.), from Latin obsequiosus
compliant, obedient, from obsequium compliance, dutiful service, from obsequi to accommodate oneself
to the will of another, from ob after (see ob-) + sequi to follow (see sequel). Pejorative sense of
fawning, sycophantic had emerged by 1590s. Related: Obsequiously; obsequiousness (mid-15c.).


kowtow (n.)

also kow-tow, 1804, from Chinese k'o-t'ou custom of touching the ground with the forehead to show
respect or submission, literally knock the head, from k'o knock, bump + t'ou head. The verb in the
figurative sense of act in an obsequious manner is from 1826. Related: Kowtowed; kowtowing.


obsequy (n.)

late 14c., from Old French obseque, osseque funeral rites, from Medieval Latin obsequiae, influenced
in sense by confusion of Latin obsequium compliance (see obsequious) with exsequiae funeral rites.
Now usually in plural, obsequies.


buxom (adj.)

late 12c., buhsum humble, obedient, from Proto-Germanic *buh- stem of Old English bugen to bow  (see
bow (v.)) + -som, for a total meaning capable of being bent. Meaning progressed from compliant,
obliging, through lively, jolly, healthily plump, vigorous, to (in women, and perhaps influenced by
lusty) plump, comely (1580s). In Johnson [1755] the primary meaning still is obedient, obsequious.
Used often of breasts, and by 1950s it had begun to be used more narrowly for bosomy and could be
paired with slim (adj.). Dutch buigzaam, German biegsam flexible, pliable hew closer to the original
sense of the English cognate.


supple (adj.)

c.1300, soft, tender, from Old French souple, sople pliant, flexible; humble, submissive (12c.),
from Gallo-Roman *supples, from Latin supplex submissive, humbly begging, beseeching, kneeling in
entreaty, literally bending, kneeling down, perhaps an altered form of *supplacos humbly pleading,
appeasing, from sub under + placare appease (see placate). Meaning pliant is from late 14c.;
figurative sense of artfully obsequious, capable of adapting oneself to the wishes and opinions of
others is from c.1600. Supple-chapped (c.1600) was used of a flatterer. Related: Suppleness.


