obtuse (adj.)

early 15c., dull, blunted, from Middle French obtus (fem. obtuse), from Latin obtusus blunted, dull,
also used figuratively, past participle of obtundere to beat against, make dull, from ob against
(see ob-) + tundere to beat, from PIE *(s)tud-e- to beat, strike, push, thrust, from root *(s)teu-
to push, stick, knock, beat (cognates: Latin tudes hammer, Sanskrit tudati he thrusts). Sense of
stupid is first found c.1500. Related: Obtusely; obtuseness.


blunt (adj.)

c.1200, dull, obtuse, perhaps from or related to Old Norse blundra (see blunder (v.)). Of tools or
weapons, late 14c. Meaning abrupt of speech or manner is from 1580s.


obtund (v.)

c.1400, (transitive) to render dead, make dull, used occasionally in English, especially in medical
jargon; from Latin obtundere to blunt, make dull, weaken, exhaust, literally to beat against (see
obtuse). Related: Obtundation; obtunded.


contusion (n.)

c.1400, from Middle French contusion, from Latin contusionem (nominative contusio) crushing,
bruising, from contus-, past participle stem of contundere to beat, break to pieces, from com-,
intensive prefix (see com-), + tundere to beat (see obtuse).


stultify (v.)

1766, allege to be of unsound mind (legal term), from Late Latin stultificare turn into foolishness,
from Latin stultus foolish (literally uneducated, unmovable, from PIE root *stel- to put, stand) +
root of facere to make (see factitious). The first element is cognate with Latin stolidus slow,
dull, obtuse (see stolid). Meaning cause to appear foolish or absurd is from 1809. Hence stultiloquy
foolish talk, silly babbling (1650s). Related: Stultified; stultifying.


pierce (v.)

late 13c. make a hole in; force one's way through, from Anglo-French perser, Old French percier
pierce, transfix, drive through (12c., Modern French percer), probably from Vulgar Latin
*pertusiare, frequentative of Latin pertusus, past participle of pertundere to thrust or bore
through, from per- through (see per) + tundere to beat, pound, from PIE *tund-, from root *(s)teu-
to push, strike, knock, beat, thrust (see obtuse). Related: Pierced; piercing.


toil (n.1)

hard work, c.1300, originally turmoil, contention, dispute, from Anglo-French toil (13c.), from
toiler agitate, stir up, entangle, writhe about, from Old French toeillier drag about, make dirty
(12c.), usually said to be from Latin tudiculare crush with a small hammer, from tudicula mill for
crushing olives, instrument for crushing, from Latin tudes hammer, from PIE *tud-, variant of
*(s)teu- to push, stroke, knock, beat (see obtuse). Sense of hard work, labor (1590s) is from the
related verb (see toil (v.)).


lozenge (n.)

figure having four equal sides and two acute and two obtuse angles, early 14c., from Old French
losenge windowpane, small square cake, etc., used for many flat quadrilateral things (Modern French
losange). It has cognates in Spanish losanje, Catalan llosange, Italian lozanga. Probably from a
pre-Roman Celtic language, perhaps Iberian *lausa or Gaulish *lausa flat stone (compare
Proven&ccedil;al lausa, Spanish losa, Catalan llosa, Portuguese lousa slab, tombstone), from a pre-
Celtic language.    Originally in English a term in heraldry; meaning small cake or tablet
(originally diamond-shaped) of medicine and sugar, etc., meant to be held in the mouth and dissolved
is from 1520s.


