occultism (n.)

1870, from occult + -ism. Related: Occultist.


occultation (n.)

early 15c., disguise or concealment of identity, from Latin occultationem (nominative occultatio),
noun of action from past participle stem of occultare to hide, conceal, frequentative of occulere
(see occult).


occult (adj.)

1530s, secret, not divulged, from Middle French occulte and directly from Latin occultus hidden,
concealed, secret, past participle of occulere cover over, conceal, from ob over (see ob-) + a verb
related to celare to hide, from PIE root *kel- (2) to cover, conceal (see cell). Meaning not
apprehended by the mind, beyond the range of understanding is from 1540s. The association with the
supernatural sciences (magic, alchemy, astrology, etc.) dates from 1630s.


elemental (adj.)

late 15c., pertaining to the four elements, from Medieval Latin elementalis, from Latin elementum
(see element). Meaning simple, uncomplicated is from 1550s; that of relating to first principles is
from 1570s. The noun in the occult sense is from 1877.


influent (adj.)

mid-15c., abundant, in reference to occult power of the stars, etc., also of grace, from Latin
influentem (nominative influens), present participle of influere â&euro;&oelig;to flow inâ&euro;?
(see influence).


cryptic (adj.)

1630s, hidden, occult, mystical, from Late Latin crypticus, from Greek kryptikos fit for concealing,
from kryptos hidden (see crypt). Meaning mysterious, enigmatic is recorded from 1920. Related:
Cryptically.


speculator (n.)

1550s, one who engages in mental speculation, from Latin speculator a looker-out, spy, scout,
explorer; investigator, examiner, agent noun from speculari (see speculation). The financial sense
is from 1778. Formerly also observer, onlooker, especially an occult seer (1650s). Fem. form
speculatrix attested from 1610s. Related: Speculatory.


hermetic (adj.)

c.1600 (implied in hermetically), completely sealed, also (1630s) dealing with occult science or
alchemy, from Latin hermeticus, from Greek Hermes, god of science and art, among other things,
identified by Neoplatonists, mystics, and alchemists with the Egyptian god Thoth as Hermes
Trismegistos Thrice-Great Hermes, who supposedly invented the process of making a glass tube
airtight (a process in alchemy) using a secret seal.


influenza (n.)

1743, borrowed during an outbreak of the disease in Europe, from Italian influenza influenza,
epidemic, originally visitation, influence (of the stars), from Medieval Latin influentia (see
influence). Used in Italian for diseases since at least 1504 (as in influenza di febbre scarlattina
scarlet fever) on notion of astral or occult influence. The 1743 outbreak began in Italy. Often
applied since mid-19c. to severe colds.


numerology (n.)

1911, study of the occult meaning of numbers, a hybrid from Latin numerus a number (see number (n.))
+ Greek -logia (see -logy). A correct formation would be arithmology, from Greek arithmos number.
Related: Numerological; numerologist.


Wicca (n.)

An Old English masc. noun meaning male witch, wizard, soothsayer, sorcerer, astrologer, magician;
see witch. Use of the word in modern contexts traces to English folklorist Gerald Gardner
(1884-1964), who is said to have joined circa 1939 an occult group in New Forest, Hampshire,
England, for which he claimed an unbroken tradition to medieval times. Gardner seems to have first
used it in print in 1954, in his book Witchcraft Today (Witches were the Wica or wise people, with
herbal  knowledge and a working occult teaching usually used for good ....). In published and
unpublished material, he apparently only ever used the word as a mass noun referring to adherents of
the practice and not as the name of the practice itself. Some of his followers continue to use it in
this sense. According to Gardner's book The Meaning of Witchcraft (1959), the word, as used in the
initiation ceremony, played a key role in his experience:    I realised that I had stumbled upon
something interesting; but I was half-initiated before the word, 'Wica' which they used hit me like
a thunderbolt, and I knew where I was, and that the Old Religion still existed. And so I found
myself in the Circle, and there took the usual oath of secrecy, which bound me not to reveal certain
things.    In the late 1960s the term came into use as the title of a modern pagan movement
associated with witchcraft.  The first printed reference in this usage seems to be 1969, in The
Truth About Witchcraft by freelance  author Hans Holzer:    If the practice of the Old Religion,
which is also called Wicca (Craft of the Wise), and thence, witchcraft, is a reputable and useful
cult, then it is worthy of public interest.    And, quoting witch Alex Sanders:    No, a witch
wedding still needs a civil ceremony to make it legal. Wicca itself as a religion is not registered
yet. But it is about time somebody registered it, I think. I've done all I can to call attention to
our religion.    Sanders was a highly visible representative of neo-pagan Witchcraft in the late
1960s and early 1970s. During this time he appears to have popularized use of the term in this
sense.  Later books c.1989 teaching modernized witchcraft using the same term account for its rise
and popularity, especially in U.S.


wizard (n.)

early 15c., philosopher, sage, from Middle English wys wise (see wise (adj.)) + -ard. Compare
Lithuanian zynyste magic, zynys sorcerer, zyne witch, all from zinoti to know. The ground sense is
perhaps to know the future. The meaning one with magical power, one proficient in the occult
sciences did not emerge distinctly until c.1550, the distinction between philosophy and magic being
blurred in the Middle Ages. As a slang word meaning excellent it is recorded from 1922.


mystic (adj.)

late 14c., spiritually allegorical, pertaining to mysteries of faith, from Old French mistique
mysterious, full of mystery (14c.), or directly from Latin mysticus mystical, mystic, of secret
rites (source also of Italian mistico, Spanish mistico), from Greek mystikos secret, mystic,
connected with the mysteries, from mystes one who has been initiated (see mystery (n.1)). Meaning
pertaining to occult practices or ancient religions first recorded 1610s.


sigil (n.)

a sign, mark, or seal, mid-15c., from Late Latin sigillum, from Latin sigilla (neuter plural)
statuettes, little images, seal, diminutive of signum sign (see sign (n.)). In astrology, an occult
device supposed to have great power (1650s).    When my mistress died, she had under her arm-hole a
small scarlet bag full of many things, which, one that was there delivered unto me. There was in
this bag several sigils, some of Jupiter in Trine, others of the nature of Venus, some of iron, and
one of gold, of pure angel-gold, of the bigness of a thirty-three shilling piece of King James's
coin. [The Antiquarian Repertory, London, 1780]


glamour (n.)

1720, Scottish, magic, enchantment (especially in phrase to cast the glamor), a variant of Scottish
gramarye magic, enchantment, spell, alteration of English grammar (q.v.) with a medieval sense of
any sort of scholarship, especially occult learning, the latter sense attested from c.1500 in
English but said to have been more common in Medieval Latin. Popularized by the writings of Sir
Walter Scott (1771-1832). Sense of magical beauty, alluring charm first recorded 1840. Jamieson's
1825 supplement to his Etymological Dictionary of the Scottish Language has glamour-gift the power
of enchantment; metaph. applied to female fascination. Jamieson's original edition (1808) looks to
Old Norse for the source of the word. Zoega's Old Icelandic dictionary has gl&#225;m-s&#253;ni
illusion.


astrology (n.)

late 14c., from Latin astrologia astronomy, the science of the heavenly bodies, from Greek
astrologia telling of the stars, from astron star (see astro-) + -logia treating of (see -logy).
Originally identical with astronomy, it had also a special sense of practical astronomy, astronomy
applied to prediction of events. This was divided into natural astrology the calculation and
foretelling of natural phenomenon (tides, eclipses, etc.), and judicial astrology the art of judging
occult influences of stars on human affairs (also known as astromancy, 1650s). Differentiation
between astrology and astronomy began late 1400s and by 17c. this word was limited to reading
influences of the stars and their effects on human destiny.


spell (n.1)

Old English spell story, saying, tale, history, narrative, fable; discourse, command, from Proto-
Germanic *spellam (see spell (v.1)). Compare Old Saxon spel, Old Norse spjall, Old High German spel,
Gothic spill report, discourse, tale, fable, myth; German Beispiel example. From c.1200 as an
utterance, something said, a statement, remark; meaning set of words with supposed magical or occult
powers, incantation, charm first recorded 1570s; hence any means or cause of enchantment.    The
term 'spell' is generally used for magical procedures which cause harm, or force people to do
something against their will -- unlike charms for healing, protection, etc. [Oxford Dictionary of
English Folklore]    Also in Old English, doctrine; a sermon; religious instruction or teaching; the
gospel; a book of the Bible; compare gospel.


gas (n.)

1650s, from Dutch gas, probably from Greek khaos empty space (see chaos). The sound of Dutch g is
roughly equivalent to that of Greek kh. First used by Flemish chemist J.B. van Helmont (1577-1644),
probably influenced by Paracelsus, who used khaos in an occult sense of proper elements of spirits
or ultra-rarified water, which was van Helmont's definition of gas.    Modern scientific sense began
1779, with later specialization to combustible mix of vapors (1794, originally coal gas); anesthetic
(1894, originally nitrous oxide); and poison gas (1900). Meaning intestinal vapors is from 1882. The
success of this artificial word is unique [Weekley]. Slang sense of empty talk is from 1847; slang
meaning something exciting or excellent first attested 1953, from earlier hepster slang gasser in
the same sense (1944). Gas also meant fun, a joke in Anglo-Irish and was used so by Joyce (1914). As
short for gasoline, it is American English, first recorded 1905.


grammar (n.)

early 14c., gramarye (late 12c. in surnames), from Old French gramaire learning, especially Latin
and philology, grammar, (magic) incantation, spells, mumbo-jumbo, irregular semi-popular adoption
[OED] of Latin grammatica, from Greek grammatike tekhne art of letters, with a sense of both
philology and literature in the broadest sense, fem. adjective from gramma letter, from stem of
graphein to draw or write (see -graphy). An Old English word for it was st&aelig;fcr&aelig;ft (see
staff (n.)).    Form grammar is from late 14c. Restriction to rules of language is a post-classical
development, but as this type of study was until 16c. limited to Latin, Middle English gramarye also
came to mean learning in general, knowledge peculiar to the learned classes (early 14c.), which
included astrology and magic; hence the secondary meaning of occult knowledge (late 15c.), which
evolved in Scottish into glamor (q.v.).    A grammar school (late 14c.) originally was a school in
which the learned languages are grammatically taught [Johnson, who also has grammaticaster a mean
verbal pedant]. In U.S. (1842) the term was put to use in the graded system for a school between
primary and secondary where English grammar is taught.


