odds (n.)

in wagering sense, found first in Shakespeare (2 Henry IV, 1597), probably from earlier sense of
amount by which one thing exceeds or falls short of another (1540s), from odd (q.v.), though the
sense evolution is uncertain. Until 19c. treated as a singular, though obviously a plural (compare
news).


handicap (n.)

1650s, from hand in cap, a game whereby two bettors would engage a neutral umpire to determine the
odds in an unequal contest. The bettors would put their hands holding forfeit money into a hat or
cap. The umpire would announce the odds and the bettors would withdraw their hands -- hands full
meaning that they accepted the odds and the bet was on, hands empty meaning they did not accept the
bet and were willing to forfeit the money. If one forfeited, then the money went to the other. If
both agreed either on forfeiting or going ahead with the wager, then the umpire kept the money as
payment. The custom, though not the name, is attested from 14c. (Piers Plowman).  Reference to horse
racing is 1754 (Handy-Cap Match), where the umpire decrees the superior horse should carry extra
weight as a handicap; this led to sense of encumbrance, disability first recorded 1890. The main
modern sense, disability, is the last to develop, early 20c.


chop suey (n.)

1885, American English, from Chinese (Cantonese dialect) tsap sui odds and ends, mixed bits.


rundown (n.)

in baseball, 1908, from verbal phrase, from run (v.) + down (adv.). Meaning list of entries in a
horse race and the odds is from 1935; slang generalized sense of summary, account, list of
information or facts is from 1945.


toiletries (n.)

odds and ends used in grooming, 1924, from toiletry (1892); see toilet + -ry.


haggis (n.)

dish of chopped entrails, c.1400, now chiefly Scottish, but it was common throughout Middle English,
perhaps from Old French agace magpie, on analogy of the odds and ends the bird collects. The other
theory [Klein, Watkins] traces it to Old English haggen to chop (see hack (v.1)).


rattletrap

1766, originally a noun, knick-knacks, trifles, odds and ends, from rattle (adj.) + trap, perhaps in
the sense in traps (n.2). Hence, a shabby, rattling object, especially a rickety coach or other
vehicle (1822). The adjectival sense of rickety is recorded from 1834.


dissent (v.)

early 15c., from Latin dissentire differ in sentiments, disagree, be at odds, contradict, quarrel,
from dis- differently (see dis-) + sentire to feel, think (see sense (n.)). Related: Dissented;
dissenting. The noun is 1580s, from the verb.  Has there ever been a society which has died of
dissent? Several have died of conformity in our lifetime. [Jacob Bronowski Science and Human Values,
1956]


scratch (n.)

1580s, slight skin tear produced by a sharp thing, from scratch (v.). Meaning mark or slight furrow
in metal, etc. is from 1660s. American English slang sense of money is from 1914, of uncertain
signification. Many figurative senses (such as up to scratch, originally ready to meet one's
opponent) are from sporting use for line or mark drawn as a starting place, attested from 1778 (but
the earliest use is figurative); meaning nothing (as in from scratch) is 1918, generalized from
specific 19c. sporting sense of starting point of a competitor who receives no odds in a handicap
match. Sense in billiards is from 1850. Scratch-pad is attested from 1883.


baloney (n.)

1894, variant of bologna sausage (q.v.). As slang for nonsense, 1922, American English (popularized
1930s by N.Y. Gov. Alfred E. Smith; in this sense sometimes said to have been one of the coinages of
legendary Variety staffer Jack Conway), from earlier sense of idiot (by 1915), perhaps influenced by
blarney, but usually regarded as being from the sausage, as a type traditionally made from odds and
ends. It also was ring slang early 20c. for an inferior fighter.    The aristocratic Kid's first
brawl for sugar was had in Sandusky, Odryo, with a boloney entitled Young Du Fresne. He gave the
green and nervous Kid a proper pastin' for six rounds and the disgusted Dummy sold me his find for a
hundred bucks, leavin' the clubhouse just in time to miss seein' the boy get stung, get mad, and win
by a knockout. [H.C. Witwer, The Leather Pushers, Colliers, Oct. 16, 1920]


flotsam (n.)

c.1600, from Anglo-French floteson, from Old French flotaison a floating, from floter to float (of
Germanic origin; see float) + -aison, from Latin -ation(em). Spelled flotsen till mid-19c. when it
altered, perhaps under influence of many English words in -some.    In British law, flotsam are
goods found floating on the sea as a consequence of a shipwreck or action of wind or waves; jetsam
are things cast out of a ship in danger of being wrecked, and afterward washed ashore, or things
cast ashore by the sailors. Whatever sinks is lagan. Figurative use for odds and ends attested by
1861.


million (n.)

late 14c., from Old French million (late 13c.), from Italian millione (now milione), literally a
great thousand, augmentative of mille thousand, from Latin mille, which is of uncertain origin. Used
mainly by mathematicians until 16c. India, with its love of large numbers, had names before 3c. for
numbers well beyond a billion. The ancient Greeks had no name for a number greater than ten
thousand, the Romans for none higher than a hundred thousand. A million in Latin would have been
decies centena milia, literally ten hundred thousand. Million to one as a type of long odds is
attested from 1761. Related: Millions.


paraphernalia (n.)

1650s, a woman's property besides her dowry, from Medieval Latin paraphernalia (short for
paraphernalia bona paraphernal goods), neuter plural of paraphernalis (adj.), from Late Latin
parapherna a woman's property besides her dowry, from Greek parapherna, neuter plural, from para-
beside (see para- (1)) + pherne dowry, related to pherein to carry (see infer). Meaning equipment,
apparatus is first attested 1791, from notion of odds and ends.


lumber (n.)

timber sawn into rough planks, 1660s, American English (Massachusetts), earlier disused bit of
furniture; heavy, useless objects (1550s), probably from lumber (v.), perhaps influenced by Lombard,
from the Italian immigrants famous as pawnbrokers and money-lenders in England (see Lombard).
Lumbar, Lumbard were old alternative forms of Lombard in English. The evolution of sense then would
be because a lumber-house (pawn shop) naturally accumulates odds and ends of furniture.    Live
Lumber, soldiers or passengers on board a ship are so called by the sailors. [Grose, Dictionary of
the Vulgar Tongue, 1785]   <hr />   LUMBER HOUSE. A house appropriated by thieves for the reception
of their stolen property. [Dictionary of Buckish Slang, University Wit, and Pickpocket Eloquence,
London, 1811]


chance (n.)

c.1300, something that takes place, what happens, an occurrence (good or bad, but more often bad),
from Old French cheance accident, chance, fortune, luck, situation, the falling of dice (12c.,
Modern French chance), from Vulgar Latin *cadentia that which falls out, a term used in dice, from
neuter plural of Latin cadens, present participle of cadere to fall (see case (n.1)).    In English
frequently in plural, chances. The word's notions of opportunity and randomness are as old as the
record of it in English and now all but crowd out the word's original notion of mere occurrence.
Main chance thing of most importance is from 1570s, bearing the older sense. The mathematical (and
hence odds-making) sense is attested from 1778. To stand a chance (or not) is from 1796.    To take
(one's) chances accept what happens (early 14c.) is from the old, neutral sense; to take a
chance/take chances is originally (by 1814) participate in a raffle or lottery or game; extended
sense of take a risk is by 1826.


six (n.)

Old English siex, six, sex, from Proto-Germanic *sekhs (cognates: Old Saxon and Danish seks, Old
Norse, Swedish, and Old Frisian sex, Middle Dutch sesse, Dutch zes, Old High German sehs, German
sechs, Gothic saihs), from PIE *s(w)eks (cognates: Sanskrit sas, Avestan kshvash, Persian shash,
Greek hex, Latin sex, Old Church Slavonic sesti, Polish sze&#347;&#263;, Russian shesti, Lithuanian
szeszi, Old Irish se, Welsh chwech).   Six-shooter, usually a revolver with six chambers, is first
attested 1844; six-pack of beverage containers is from 1952, of abdominal muscles by 1995. Six of
one and half-a-dozen of the other little difference is recorded from 1833. Six-figure in reference
to hundreds of thousands (of dollars, etc.) is from 1840. Six feet under dead is from 1942.
Phrase at sixes and sevens originally was hazarding all one's chances, first in Chaucer, perhaps
from dicing (the original form was on six and seven); it could be a corruption of on cinque and
sice, using the French names (which were common in Middle English) for the highest numbers on the
dice. Meaning at odds, in disagreement or confusion is from 1785, perhaps via a notion of left
unsettled.


