odyssey (n.)

c.1600, Odyssey, from Latin Odyssea, from Greek Odysseia, name of the Homeric epic poem of ancient
Greece, relating the ten-year wanderings of Odysseus, king of Ithaca, after the Trojan War.
Figurative sense of long, adventurous journey is first recorded 1889.


Polyphemus

name of a Cyclops (Odyssey, IX), also used as the name for a one-eyed animal; the name is literally
many-voiced or else much-spoken-of (see poly- + fame (n.)).


Circe (n.)

enchantress of the isle of Aea who transformed into swine those who drank from her cup (Odyssey),
late 14c., from Latin Circe, from Greek Kirke. Related: Circean.


Homer

name of the supposed author of the Iliad and the Odyssey, from Latin Homerus, from Greek Homeros.
The name first occurs in a fragment of Hesiod. It is identical to Greek homeros hostage, also blind
(connecting notion is going with a companion).


Penelope

fem. proper name, name of the faithful wife in the Odyssey, from Greek Penelopeia, probably related
to pene thread on the bobbin, from penos web, cognate with Latin pannus cloth garment (see pane
(n.)). Used in English as the type of the virtuous wife (1580) as it was in Latin.


Calypso

sea nymph in the Odyssey, literally hidden, hider (perhaps originally a death goddess) from Greek
kalyptein to cover, conceal, from PIE *kel- to cover, conceal, save, root of English Hell (see
cell). The West Indian type of song is so called from 1934, of unknown origin or connection to the
nymph.


nepenthe (n.)

1570s, nepenthes, from Greek nepenthes, from ne- no, not (see un-) + penthos pain, grief, from PIE
*kwent(h)- to suffer (see pathos). A drug of Egypt mentioned in the Odyssey as capable of banishing
grief or trouble from the mind. The -s is a proper part of the word, but likely was mistaken in
English as a plural affix and dropped.


lotus (n.)

1540s, from Latin lotus, from Greek lotos, name used for several plants before it came to mean
Egyptian white lotus (a sense attested in English from 1580s); perhaps from a Semitic source
(compare Hebrew lot myrrh). The yogic sense is attested from 1848. Lotus-eaters (1812) are from
Greek lotophagoi, mentioned in Odyssey, book IX.


mentor (n.)

wise advisor, 1750, from Greek Mentor, friend of Odysseus and adviser of Telemachus (but often
actually Athene in disguise) in the Odyssey, perhaps ultimately meaning  adviser, because the name
appears to be an agent noun of mentos intent, purpose, spirit, passion from PIE *mon-eyo- (cognates:
Sanskrit man-tar- one who thinks, Latin mon-i-tor one who admonishes), causative form of root *men-
to think (see mind (n.)). The general use of the word probably is via later popular romances, in
which Mentor played a larger part than he does in Homer.


siren (n.)

mid-14c., sea nymph who by her singing lures sailors to their destruction, from Old French sereine
(12c., Modern French sir&#232;ne) and directly from Latin Siren (Late Latin Sirena), from Greek
Seiren [Odyssey, xii.39 ff.], one of the Seirenes, mythical sisters who enticed sailors to their
deaths with their songs, also in Greek a deceitful woman, perhaps literally binder, entangler, from
seira cord, rope.    Meaning device that makes a warning sound (on an ambulance, etc.) first
recorded 1879, in reference to steamboats, perhaps from similar use of the French word. Figurative
sense of one who sings sweetly and charms is recorded from 1580s. The classical descriptions of them
were mangled in medieval translations and glosses, resulting in odd notions of what they looked
like.


