offensive (n.)

condition of attacking, aggressive action, 1720, from offensive (adj.).


offensive (adj.)

attacking (1540s), insulting (1570s), both  from Middle French offensif (16c.) and directly from
Medieval Latin offensivus, from Latin offens-, past participle stem of offendere offend (see
offend). Related: Offensively; offensiveness.


obscene (adj.)

1590s, offensive to the senses, or to taste and refinement, from Middle French obsc&#232;ne (16c.),
from Latin obscenus offensive, especially to modesty, originally boding ill, inauspicious, of
unknown origin; perhaps from ob onto (see ob-) + caenum filth. Meaning offensive to modesty or
decency is attested from 1590s. Legally, in U.S., it hinged on whether to the average person,
applying contemporary community standards, the dominant theme of the material taken as a whole
appeals to a prurient interest. [Justice William Brennan, Roth v. United States, June 24, 1957];
refined in 1973 by Miller v. California:    The basic guidelines for the trier of fact must be: (a)
whether 'the average person, applying contemporary community standards' would find that the work,
taken as a whole, appeals to the prurient interest, (b) whether the work depicts or describes, in a
patently offensive way, sexual conduct specifically defined by the applicable state law; and (c)
whether the work, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific
value.    Related: Obscenely.


galling (adj.)

irritating, offensive, 1580s, figurative use of present participle of gall (v.).


stink (v.)

Old English stincan emit a smell of any kind; exhale; rise (of dust, vapor, etc.) (class III strong
verb; past tense stanc, past participle stuncen), common West Germanic (cognates: Old Saxon stincan,
West Frisian stjonke, Old High German stinkan, Dutch stinken), from the root of stench. Old English
had swote stincan to smell sweet, but offensive sense also was in Old English and predominated by
mid-13c.; smell now tends the same way. Figurative meaning be offensive is from early 13c.; meaning
be inept is recorded from 1924. To stink to high heaven first recorded 1963.


stink (n.)

mid-13c., strong offensive odor, from stink (v.). Sense of extensive fuss first recorded 1812.


mundungus (n.)

tobacco with an offensive odor, 1640s, from Spanish mondongo paunch, tripe, intestines, related to
modejo paunch, belly (of a pig).


Tet (n.)

Vietnamese lunar new year, 1885, short for Tet Nguyen Dan feast of the first day. The North
Vietnamese Tet Offensive in the U.S. Vietnam War began Jan. 30, 1968.


indelicate (adj.)

1742, offensive to propriety, from in- (1) not, opposite of + delicate. Related: Indelicately.


darky (n.)

black person (now offensive), 1775, from dark (adj.) + -y (3). Related: Darkies.


eyesore (n.)

something offensive to the eye, 1520s, from eye (n.) + sore (n.).


reeky (adj.)

c.1400, giving out offensive vapors, from reek (n.) + -y (2). Meaning smoky is c.1600. Related:
Reekily; reekiness.


tripe (n.)

c.1300, from Old French tripe guts, intestines, entrails used as food (13c.), of unknown origin,
perhaps via Spanish tripa from Arabic therb suet [Klein, Barnhart]. Applied contemptuously to
persons (1590s), then to anything considered worthless, foolish, or offensive (1892).


shocking (adj.)

1690s, offensive, present participle adjective from shock (v.1). From 1704 as causing a jolt of
indignation, horror, etc.; from 1798 as so bad as to be shocking. Related: Shockingly. Shocking pink
introduced February 1937 by Italian-born fashion designer Elsa Schiaparelli.


squaw (n.)

American Indian woman, 1630s, from Massachuset (Algonquian) squa woman (cognate with Narraganset
squaws woman). Over the years it has come to have a derogatory sense and is now considered offensive
by many Native Americans [Bright]. Widespread in U.S. place names, sometimes as a translation of a
local native word for woman.


villainous (adj.)

c.1300, offensive, abusive, from Old French vileneus worthless, base, from vilain (see villain).
Sense of despicable, shameful, morally corrupt is from c.1400 in English. Related: Villainously;
villainousness.


black sheep (n.)

by 1822 in figurative sense of member of some group guilty of offensive conduct and unlike the other
members, supposedly because a real black sheep had wool that could not be dyed and was thus worth
less. But one black sheep in a flock was considered good luck by shepherds in Sussex, Somerset,
Kent, Derbyshire. Baa Baa Black Sheep nursery rhyme's first known publication is in Tommy Thumb's
Pretty Song Book (c.1744).


blatant (adj.)

1596, in blatant beast, coined by Edmund Spenser in The Faerie Queen to describe a thousand-tongued
monster representing slander; probably suggested by Latin blatire to babble. It entered general use
1650s, as noisy in an offensive and vulgar way; the sense of obvious, glaringly conspicuous is from
1889. Related: Blatantly.


inoffensive (adj.)

1590s, from in- (1) not, opposite of + offensive. Related: Inoffensively; inoffensiveness.


rancid (adj.)

1640s, from Latin rancidus rank, stinking, offensive (also source of Italian rancido, Spanish
rancio), from rancere be spoiled or rotten, of unknown origin. German ranzig is from French rancide.
Related: Rancidness.


obscenity (n.)

1580s, obscene quality, from French obsc&#233;nit&#233;, from Latin obscenitatem (nominative
obscenitas) inauspiciousness, filthiness, from obscenus offensive (see obscene). Meaning a foul or
loathsome act is 1610s. Sense of an obscene utterance or word is attested by 1690. Related:
Obscenities.


fetor (n.)

offensive smell, mid-15c., from Latin fetor, foetor, from fetere (see fetid).


Polack (n.)

Polish person, 1570s, from Polish Polak (male) Polish person, related to Polanie Poles, Polska
Poland, polski Polish (see Pole). In North American usage, Polish immigrant, person of Polish
descent (1879) and in that context considered offensive in English. As an adjective from c.1600.


Brit (n.)

U.S. colloquial shortening of Britisher or Briton, 1901, formerly (in common with Britisher) highly
offensive to Englishmen traveling in the States, who regarded it as yet another instance of the
odious vulgarism of the Americans, but Bret and Bryt were common Old English words for the (Celtic)
Britons and survived until c.1300. In Old French, Bret as an adjective meant British, Breton;
cunning, crafty; simple-minded, stupid.


fulsome (adj.)

Middle English compound of ful full (see full (adj.)) + -som (see -some (1)). Sense evolved from
abundant, full (mid-13c.) to plump, well-fed (mid-14c.) to overgrown, overfed (1640s) and thus, of
language, offensive to taste or good manners (1660s). Since the 1960s, however, it commonly has been
used in its original, favorable sense, especially in fulsome praise. Related: Fulsomely;
fulsomeness.


odious (adj.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French odious, from Old French odieus (late 14c., Modern French odieux) or
directly from Latin odiosus hateful, offensive, unpleasant, from odium hatred (see odium).


garrote (n.)

also garrotte, 1620s, Spanish method of capital punishment by strangulation, from Spanish garrote
stick for twisting cord, of unknown origin, perhaps from Old French guaroc club, stick, rod, shaft
of a crossbow, probably ultimately Celtic, but possibly from Frankish *wrokkan to twist (cognate
with Middle Dutch wroken to twist).   I have no hesitation in pronouncing death by the garrot, at
once the most manly, and the least offensive to the eye. [Major John Richardson, British Legion,
1837]


odium (n.)

c.1600, fact of being hated, from Latin odium ill-will, hatred, grudge, animosity; offense,
offensive conduct, related to odi I hate (infinitive odisse), from PIE root *od- to hate (cognates:
Armenian ateam I hate, Old Norse atall, Old English atol dire, horrid, loathsome). Meaning hatred,
detestation is from 1650s. Often in an extended form, such as odium theologicum hatred which is
proverbially characteristic of theological disputes (1670s).


retard (v.)

late 15c., make slow or slower, from French retarder restrain, hold (someone) back, keep (someone
from doing something); come to a stop (13c.) or directly from Latin retardare make slow, delay, keep
back, hinder (see retardation). Related: Retarded; retarding.    The noun is recorded from 1788 in
the sense retardation, delay; from 1970 in offensive meaning retarded person, originally American
English, with accent on first syllable. Other words used for one who is mentally retarded include
retardate (1956), retardee (1971).


horrid (adj.)

early 15c., hairy, shaggy, bristling, from Latin horridus bristly, prickly, rough, horrid,
frightful, from horrere to bristle with fear, shudder (see horror). Meaning horrible, causing horror
is from c.1600. Sense weakened 17c. to unpleasant, offensive.    [W]hile both [horrible and horrid]
are much used in the trivial sense of disagreeable, horrible is still quite common in the graver
sense inspiring horror, which horrid tends to lose .... [Fowler]    Related: Horridly.


offend (v.)

early 14c., to sin against (someone), from Old French ofendre transgress, antagonize, and directly
from Latin offendere to hit, strike against, figuratively to stumble, commit a fault, displease,
trespass against, provoke, from ob against (see ob-) + -fendere to strike (found only in compounds;
see defend).    Meaning to violate (a law), to make a moral false step, to commit a crime is from
late 14c. Meaning to wound the feelings is from late 14c. The literal sense of to attack, assail is
attested from late 14c.; this has been lost in Modern English, but is preserved in offense and
offensive. Related: Offended; offending.


harsh (adj.)

originally of texture, hairy, 1530s, probably from harske rough, coarse, sour (c.1300), a northern
word of Scandinavian origin (compare Danish and Norwegian harsk rancid, rank), related to Middle Low
German harsch rough, raw, German harst a rake; perhaps from PIE root *kars- to scrape, scratch, rub,
card (cognates: Lithuanian karsiu to comb, Old Church Slavonic krasta, Russian korosta to itch,
Latin carduus thistle, Sanskrit kasati rubs, scratches). Meaning offensive to feelings is from
1570s; disagreeable, rude from 1610s.


bitch (n.)

Old English bicce female dog, probably from Old Norse bikkjuna female of the dog (also fox, wolf,
and occasionally other beasts), of unknown origin. Grimm derives the Old Norse word from Lapp
pittja, but OED notes that the converse is equally possible. As a term of contempt applied to women,
it dates from c.1400; of a man, c.1500, playfully, in the sense of dog. Used among male homosexuals
from 1930s. In modern (1990s, originally black English) slang, its use with reference to a man is
sexually contemptuous, from the woman insult.BITCH. A she dog, or doggess; the most offensive
appellation that can be given to an English woman, even more provoking than that of whore.
[Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, 1811] Bitch goddess coined 1906 by William James; the original one
was success.


nasty (adj.)

c.1400, foul, filthy, dirty, unclean, of unknown origin; perhaps [Barnhart] from Old French nastre
miserly, envious, malicious, spiteful, shortened form of villenastre infamous, bad, from vilein
villain + -astre, pejorative suffix, from Latin -aster.    Alternative etymology [OED] is from Dutch
nestig dirty, literally like a bird's nest. Likely reinforced in either case by a Scandinavian
source (compare Swedish dialectal naskug dirty, nasty), which also might be the source of the Middle
English word. Of weather, from 1630s; of things generally, unpleasant, offensive, from 1705. Of
people, ill-tempered, from 1825. Noun meaning something nasty is from 1935. Related: Nastily;
nastiness.


flagrant (adj.)

c.1500, resplendent, from Latin flagrantem (nominative flagrans) burning, blazing, glowing,
figuratively glowing with passion, eager, vehement, present participle of flagrare to burn, blaze,
glow from Latin root *flag-, corresponding to PIE *bhleg- to shine, flash, burn (cognates: Greek
phlegein to burn, scorch, Latin fulgere to shine), from root *bhel- (1) to shine, flash, burn (see
bleach (v.)). Sense of glaringly offensive first recorded 1706, probably from common legalese phrase
in flagrante delicto red-handed, literally with the crime still blazing. Related: Flagrantly.


obnoxious (adj.)

1580s, subject to the authority of another, from Latin obnoxiosus hurtful, injurious, from obnoxius
subject, exposed to harm, from ob to, toward (see ob-) + noxa injury, hurt, damage entailing
liability (see noxious). Meaning subject to something harmful is 1590s; meaning offensive, hateful
is first recorded 1670s, influenced by noxious.Obnoxious has two very different senses, one of which
(exposed or open or liable to attack or injury) requires notice because its currency is now so
restricted that it is puzzling to the uninstructed. It is the word's rightful or de jure meaning,
and we may hope that scholarly writers will keep it alive. [Fowler]  Related: Obnoxiously;
obnoxiousness.


loath (adj.)

Old English la&eth; hated; hateful; hostile; repulsive, from Proto-Germanic *laithaz (cognates: Old
Saxon, Old Frisian leth loathsome, Old Norse lei&eth;r hateful, hostile, loathed; Middle Dutch
lelijc, Dutch leelijk ugly; Old High German leid sorrowful, hateful, offensive, grievous, German
Leid sorrow; French laid ugly, from Frankish (Germanic) *laid), from PIE root *leit- to detest.
Weakened meaning averse, disinclined is attested from late 14c. Loath to depart, a line from some
long-forgotten song, is recorded since 1580s as a generic term expressive of any tune played at
farewells, the sailing of a ship, etc. Related: Loathness.


ugly (adj.)

mid-13c., uglike frightful or horrible in appearance, from a Scandinavian source, such as Old Norse
uggligr dreadful, fearful, from uggr fear, apprehension, dread (perhaps related to agg strife, hate)
+ -ligr -like (see -ly (1)). Meaning softened to very unpleasant to look at late 14c. Extended sense
of morally offensive is attested from c.1300; that of ill-tempered is from 1680s.    Among words for
this concept, ugly is unusual in being formed from a root for fear, dread. More common is a compound
meaning ill-shaped (such as Greek dyseides, Latin deformis, Irish dochrud, Sanskrit ku-rupa).
Another Germanic group has a root sense of hate, sorrow (see loath). Ugly duckling (1877) is from
the story by Hans Christian Andersen, first translated from Danish to English 1846. Ugly American
U.S. citizen who behaves offensively abroad is first recorded 1958 as a book title.


puke (n.)

1737, a medicine which excites vomiting; 1966 as material thrown up in vomiting, from puke (v.).
U.S. colloquial meaning native of Missouri (1835) might be a different word, of unknown origin.
It is well known, that the inhabitants of the several western States are called by certain
nicknames. Those of Michigan are called wolverines; of Indiana, hooshers; of Illinois, suckers; of
Ohio, buckeyes; of Kentucky, corn-crackers; of Missouri pukes, &amp;c.; To call a person by his
right nickname, is always taken in good part, and gives no offence; but nothing is more offensive
than to mis-nickname--that is, were you to call a hoosher a wolverine, his blood would be up in a
moment, and he would immediately show fight. [A.A. Parker, Trip to the West and Texas, Concord,
N.H., 1835]    Bartlett (1859) has A nickname for a native of Missouri as the second sense of puke
(n.), the first being A mean, contemptible fellow. The association of the state nickname with the
vomit word is at least from 1858, and folk etymology talks of the old state literally vomiting forth
immigrants to California.


foul (adj.)

Old English ful rotten, unclean, vile, corrupt, offensive to the senses, from Proto-Germanic *fulaz
(cognates: Old Saxon and Old Frisian ful, Middle Dutch voul, Dutch vuil, Old High German f&uuml;l,
German faul, Gothic f&uuml;ls), from root *fu-, corresponding to PIE *pu-, perhaps from the sound
made in reaction to smelling something bad (compare Sanskrit puyati rots, stinks, putih foul,
rotten; Greek puon discharge from a sore; Latin pus putrid matter, putere to stink, putridus rotten;
Lithuanian puviu to rot).  Old English ful occasionally meant ugly (as contrasted with f&aelig;ger
(adj.), modern fair (adj.)), a sense frequently found in Middle English, and the cognate in Swedish
is the usual word for ugly. Of weather, first recorded late 14c. In the sporting sense of irregular,
unfair it is first attested 1797, though foul play is recorded from mid-15c. Baseball sense of out
of play attested by 1860. Foulmart was a Middle English word for polecat (from Old English mear&eth;
marten).


mean (adj.1)

low-quality, c.1200, shared by all, from imene, from Old English gem&aelig;ne common, public,
general, universal, shared by all, from Proto-Germanic *ga-mainiz possessed jointly (cognates: Old
Frisian mene, Old Saxon gimeni, Middle Low German gemeine, Middle Dutch gemene, Dutch gemeen, German
gemein, Gothic gamains common), from PIE *ko-moin-i- held in common, a compound adjective formed
from collective prefix *ko- together (Proto-Germanic *ga-) + *moi-n-, suffixed form of PIE root
*mei- (1) to change, exchange (see mutable). Compare second element in common (adj.), a word with a
sense evolution parallel to that of this word.  Of things, inferior, second-rate, from late 14c. (a
secondary sense in Old English was false, wicked). Notion of so-so, mediocre led to confusion with
mean (n.). Meaning inferior in rank or status (of persons) emerged early 14c.; that of ordinary from
late 14c.; that of stingy, nasty first recorded 1660s; weaker sense of disobliging, pettily
offensive is from 1839, originally American English slang. Inverted sense of remarkably good (i.e.
plays a mean saxophone) first recorded c.1900, perhaps from phrase no mean _______ not inferior
(1590s, also, not average, reflecting further confusion with mean (n.)).


