officer (n.)

early 14c., one who holds an office (originally a high office), from Old French oficier officer,
official (early 14c.), from Medieval Latin officarius an officer, from Latin officium a service, a
duty (see office). The military sense is first recorded 1560s. Applied to petty officials of justice
from 16c.; U.S. use in reference to policemen is from 1880s.


office (n.)

mid-13c., a post, an employment to which certain duties are attached, from Anglo-French and Old
French ofice place or function; divine service (12c. in Old French) or directly from Latin officium
service, kindness, favor; official duty, function, business; ceremonial observance, (in Church
Latin, church service), literally work-doing, from ops (genitive opis) power, might, abundance,
means (related to opus work; see opus) + stem of facere do, perform (see factitious). Meaning place
for conducting business first recorded 1560s. Office hours attested from 1841.


presidency (n.)

1590s, office of a president, from Medieval Latin praesidentia office of a president (mid-13c.),
from Latin praesidentem (nominative praesidens) president, governor (see president). Earlier in same
sense was presidentship (1520s). Meaning a president's term in office is from 1610s.


official (adj.)

late 14c., performing a service; required by duty, from Old French oficial official; main, principal
(14c., Modern French officiel) or directly from Late Latin officialis of or belonging to duty,
service, or office, from Latin officium (see office). Meaning pertaining to an office or official
position is from c. 1600.


post office (n.)

1650s, public department in charge of letter-carrying, from post (n.3) + office. Meaning building
where postal business is carried on is from 1650s. In slang or euphemistic sense of a sexual game it
refers to an actual parlor game first attested early 1850s in which pretend letters were paid for by
kisses.


unseat (v.)

1590s, to throw down from a seat (especially on horseback), from un- (2) reverse, opposite of + seat
(v.). Meaning to deprive of rank or office is attested from 1610s; especially of elected office in a
representative body from 1834. Related: Unseated; unseating.


candidate (n.)

c. 1600s, from Latin candidatus one aspiring to office, originally white-robed, past participle of
candidare to make white or bright, from candidus (see candid). Office-seekers in ancient Rome wore
white togas.


consulate (n.)

late 14c., government of Rome by the consuls, from Latin consulatus office of a consul, from consul
(see consul). Also used in reference to the consular government of France from 1799-1804. In
reference to the office of a modern consul, from 1702.


disappoint (v.)

early 15c., dispossess of appointed office, from Middle French desappointer (14c.) undo the
appointment, remove from office, from des- (see dis-) + appointer appoint (see appoint).    Modern
sense of to frustrate expectations (late 15c.) is from secondary meaning of fail to keep an
appointment. Related: Disappointed; disappointing.


nominate (v.)

1540s, to call by name, back-formation from nomination or else from Latin nominatus, past participle
of nominare to name, call by name, give a name to, also name for office, from nomen name (see name
(n.)). Later to appoint to some office or duty (1560s); to formally enter (someone) as a candidate
for election (c. 1600). It also occasionally was used from c. 1600 with a sense give a name to.
Related: Nominated; nominating.


factory (n.)

1550s, estate manager's office, from Middle French factorie (15c.), from Late Latin factorium office
for agents ('factors'), also oil press, mill, from Latin factor doer, maker (see factor (n.)). From
1580s as establishment of merchants and factors in a foreign place. Sense of building for making
goods is first attested 1610s. Factory farm attested from 1890.


abdicate (v.)

1540s, to disown, disinherit (children), from Latin abdicatus, past participle of abdicare to
disown, disavow, reject (specifically abdicare magistratu renounce office), from ab- away (see ab-)
+ dicare proclaim, from stem of dicere to speak, to say (see diction). Meaning divest oneself of
office first recorded 1610s. Related: Abdicated; abdicating.


deep-freeze (n.)

registered trademark (U.S. Patent Office, 1941) of a type of refrigerator; used generically for cold
storage since 1949.


inquisition (n.)

late 14c., judicial investigation, act or process of inquiring, from Old French inquisicion inquiry,
investigation (12c.), from Latin inquisitionem (nominative inquisitio) a searching into, legal
examination, noun of action from past participle stem of inquirere (see inquire).    In Church
history, inquisitors were appointed from 382 C.E. to root out heretics, and the Inquisition refers
to the ecclesiastical court (Congregation of the Holy Office) appointed 13c. by Innocent III to
suppress heresy. It never operated in Britain. The capital letter form appeared in English only
after c. 1500, and usually refers to the office's reorganization 1478-1483 in Spain as what is
commonly called the Spanish Inquisition.


embassy (n.)

1570s, position of an ambassador, from Middle French embassee mission, charge, office of ambassador,
Old French ambassee, from Italian ambasciata, from Old Proven&ccedil;al ambaisada office of
ambassador, from Gaulish *ambactos dependant, vassal, literally one going around, from PIE *amb(i
)-ag-to, from *ambi- (see ambi-) + *ambi- around (see ambi-) + *ag- to drive, move (see act (n.)).
Meaning official residence and retinue of an ambassador is from 1764. In earlier use were embassade
(late 15c.), ambassade (early 15c.), from Old French variant ambassade.


box (n.1.)

Old English box a wooden container, also the name of a type of shrub, from Late Latin buxis, from
Greek pyxis boxwood box, from pyxos box tree, which is of uncertain origin. See OED entry for
discussion. German B&uuml;chse also is a Latin loan word.    Meaning compartment at a theater is
from c. 1600. Meaning pigeon-hole at a post office is from 1832. Meaning television is from 1950.
Slang meaning vulva is attested 17c., according to Dictionary of American Slang; modern use seems to
date from c.World War II, perhaps originally Australian, on notion of box of tricks. Box office is
1786; in the figurative sense of financial element of a performance it is first recorded 1904. Box
lunch (n.) attested from 1899. The box set, multiple-album, CD or cassette issue of the work of an
artist is attested by 1955.


Dacron (n.)

1951, proprietary name (reg. U.S. Patent Office) by E.I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Co.; an invented
word, on the model of nylon, etc.


post restante

direction on mail that it be held at that post office until called for, French, literally remaining
post.


verge (n.)

edge, rim, mid-15c., from Old French verge twig, branch; measuring rod; penis; rod or wand of office
(12c.), hence, from the last sense, scope, territory dominated (as in estre suz la verge de be under
the authority of), from Latin virga shoot, rod, stick, slender green branch, of unknown origin.
Earliest attested sense in English is now-obsolete meaning male member, penis (c. 1400). Modern
sense is from the notion of within the verge (c. 1500, also as Anglo-French dedeinz la verge), i.e.
subject to the Lord High Steward's authority (as symbolized by the rod of office), originally a
12-mile radius round the king's court. Sense shifted to the outermost edge of an expanse or area.
Meaning point at which something happens (as in on the verge of) is first attested c. 1600. A very
curious sense development. [Weekley]


subordinate (n.)

one inferior in power, rank, office, etc., 1630s, from subordinate (adj.).


CIA

U.S. civilian espionage agency, initialism (acronym) of Central Intelligence Agency, founded 1947 as
successor to the Office of Strategic Services (OSS).


Reuters (n.)

news service begun in London 1851 by Baron Paul Julius von Reuter (1816-1899), founder of a
telegraph office and pigeon post bureau in Aachen in 1849.


pontification (n.)

1520s, office of a bishop, noun of action from past participle stem of Medieval Latin pontificare
(see pontificate (v.)). Meaning something pontificated is from 1925.


compositor (n.)

a typesetter engaged in picking up arranging and distributing letters or type in a printing office,
1560s, agent noun from past participle stem of Latin componere (see composite).


episcopacy (n.)

1640s, government of the church by bishops; 1650s, a bishop's period in office; see episcopal + -cy.


displacement (n.)

1610s, removal from office; see displace + -ment. Physics sense is from c. 1810.


esquire (n.)

late 14c., from Middle French esquier squire, literally shield-bearer (for a knight), from Old
French escuier shield-bearer (attendant young man in training to be a knight), groom (Modern French
&#233;cuyer), from Medieval Latin scutarius shield-bearer, guardsman (in classical Latin, shield-
maker), from scutum shield (see hide (n.1)). For initial e-, see e-. Compare squire (n.). Originally
the feudal rank below knight, sense broadened 16c. to a general title of courtesy or respect for the
educated and professional class, especially, later, in U.S., regarded as belonging especially to
lawyers.    In our own dear title-bearing, democratic land, the title of esquire, officially and by
courtesy, has come to include pretty much everybody. Of course everybody in office is an esquire,
and all who have been in office enjoy and glory in the title. And what with a standing army of
legislators, an elective and ever-changing magistracy, and almost a whole population of militia
officers, present and past, all named as esquires in their commissions, the title is nearly
universal. [N.Y. Commercial Advertiser newspaper, quoted in Bartlett, 1859]


readership (n.)

1719, office of a reader, from reader + -ship. Meaning total number of readers of a publication is
from 1914.


air conditioner (n.)

from air (n.1) + agent noun from condition; along with air-conditioning, first attested 1909,
originally an industrial process; main modern use in residences and office buildings is from 1930s.


tipstaff (n.)

1540s, tipped staff (truncheon with a tip or cap of metal) carried as an emblem of office, from tip
(n.) + staff (n.). As the name of an official who carries one (especially a sheriff's officer,
bailiff, constable, court crier, etc.) it is recorded from 1560s.


appointment (n.)

early 15c., an agreement, also a fixing of a date for official business, from Middle French
apointement, from apointer (see appoint). Meaning act of placing in office is attested from 1650s.


actuary (n.)

1550s, registrar, clerk, from Latin actuarius copyist, account-keeper, from actus public business
(see act (n.)). Modern insurance office meaning first recorded 1849.


censorship (n.)

1590s, office of a censor, from censor (n.) + -ship. Meaning action of censoring is from 1824.


avoidance (n.)

late 14c., action of emptying, from avoid + -ance. Sense of action of dodging or shunning is
recorded from early 15c.; it also meant action of making legally invalid, 1620s; becoming vacant (of
an office, etc.), mid-15c.


tabloid (n.)

1884, Tabloid, small tablet of medicine, trademark name (by Burroughs, Wellcome and Co.) for
compressed or concentrated chemicals and drugs, a hybrid formed from tablet + Greek-derived suffix
-oid. By 1898, it was being used figuratively to mean a compressed form or dose of anything, hence
tabloid journalism (1901), and newspapers that typified it (1917), so called for having short,
condensed news articles and/or for being small in size. Associated originally with Alfred C.
Harmsworth, editor and proprietor of the London Daily Mail.    Mr. Harmsworth entered a printing
office twenty years ago as office-boy, and today owns thirty periodicals besides The Mail. Upon a
friendly challenge from Mr. Pulitzer of The New York World, the English journalist issued the first
number of The World for the new century in the ideal form. The size of the page was reduced to four
columns and the general make-up was similar in appearance to that of one of the weekly magazines.
Current news was presented in condensed and tabulated form, of which the editor says: The world
enters today upon the twentieth or time-saving century. I claim that by my system of condensed or
tabloid journalism hundreds of working hours can be saved each year. [The Twentieth Century
Newspaper, in The Social Gospel, February 1901]


receivership (n.)

late 15c., office of a receiver (of public revenues), from receiver + -ship. As condition of being
under control of a receiver, 1884.


interoffice (adj.)

by 1934, from inter- + office.


deprivation (n.)

mid-15c., removal from office or position, from Medieval Latin deprivationem (nominative
deprivatio), noun of action from past participle stem of deprivare (see deprive).


Eames

type of modern office chair, 1946, named for U.S. architect and designer Charles Eames (1907-1978).
The surname is from Old English eam uncle, cognate with German Ohm.


suzerainty (n.)

late 15c., supremacy, from Old French suserenete office or jurisdiction of a suzerain, from suserain
(see suzerain).


inability (n.)

mid-15c., inhabilite, disqualification for office, from in- (1) + ability. Earlier was unability
incapability; incompetence (late 14c.). General sense by c. 1500.


Hooverville

1933, American English, from U.S. president Herbert C. Hoover (1874-1964), who was in office when
the Depression began, + common place-name ending -ville. Earlier his name was the basis of Hooverize
economize on food (1917) from his role as wartime head of the U.S. Food Administration.


inbox (n.)

by 1984 in electronic mail sense, from in + mailbox (n.). Compare in-basket, in reference to office
mail systems, by 1940.


ambitious (adj.)

late 14c., from Latin ambitiosus going around to canvass for office, from ambitio (see ambition).
Related: Ambitiously.


hallmark (n.)

1721, official stamp of purity in gold and silver articles, from Goldsmiths' Hall in London, site of
the assay office; see hall + mark (n.1). General sense of mark of quality first recorded 1864. As a
verb from 1773.


functionary (n.)

one who has a certain function, one who holds an office, 1791, from or patterned on French
fonctionnaire, a word of the Revolution; from fonction (see function (n.)). As an adjective in
English from 1822, functional. Related: Functionarism.


nocturn (n.)

a division of the office of matins, early 13c., from Old French nocturne evening service; curfew,
from Medieval Latin nocturna, group of Psalms used in the nocturns, from Latin nocturnus (see
nocturnal).


IRS

also I.R.S., initialism (acronym) of Internal Revenue Service, U.S. federal government tax
collection agency, attested by 1954. The office dates to 1862; name changed 1953 from Bureau of
Internal Revenue.


pontificate (n.)

1580s, from Latin pontificatus office of a pontiff, from pontifex (see pontifex).


censure (n.)

late 14c., originally ecclesiastical, from Latin censura judgment, opinion, also office of a censor,
from census, past participle of censere appraise, estimate, assess (see censor (n.)). General sense
of a finding of fault and an expression of condemnation is from c. 1600.


