ominously (adv.)

1590s, from ominous + -ly (2). In earliest use, of good omen, auspicious; meaning of evil omen first
attested 1640s, in Milton.


ominous (adj.)

1580s, from Latin ominosus full of foreboding, from omen (genitive ominis) foreboding (see omen).
Related: Ominousness.


prodigious (adj.)

1550s, ominous, from Middle French prodigieux and directly from Latin prodigiosus strange,
wonderful, marvelous, unnatural, from prodigium (see prodigy). Meaning vast, enormous is from
c.1600. Related: Prodigiously; prodigiosity.


Davy Jones

the spirit of the sea, 1751, first mentioned in Smollett's The Adventures of Peregrin Pickle
(chapter 15) as an ominous and terrifying fiend who presides over all the evil spirits of the deep,
and is often seen in various shapes, perching among the rigging on the eve of hurricanes, shipwrecks
and other disasters. Davy Jones's Locker bottom of the sea, is 1803, from nautical slang, of unknown
origin; second element may be from biblical Jonah, regarded as unlucky by sailors.


travail (n.)

labor, toil, mid-13c., from Old French travail work, labor, toil, suffering or painful effort,
trouble; arduous journey (12c.), from travailler to toil, labor, originally to trouble, torture,
torment, from Vulgar Latin *tripaliare to torture, from *tripalium (in Late Latin trepalium)
instrument of torture, probably from Latin tripalis having three stakes (from tria three; see three
+ palus stake; see pale (n.)), which sounds ominous, but the exact notion is obscure. The verb is
recorded from late 13c. in English, from the verb in Old French.


gross (adj.)

mid-14c., large; early 15c., coarse, plain, simple, from Old French gros big, thick, fat, tall,
pregnant; coarse, rude, awkward; ominous, important; arrogant (11c.), from Late Latin grossus thick,
coarse (of food or mind), of obscure origin, not in classical Latin. Said to be unrelated to Latin
crassus, which meant the same thing, or to German gross large, but said by Klein to be cognate with
Old Irish bres, Middle Irish bras big. Its meaning forked in English to glaring, flagrant, monstrous
(1580s) on the one hand and entire, total, whole (early 15c.) on the other. Meaning disgusting is
first recorded 1958 in U.S. student slang, from earlier use as an intensifier of unpleasant things
(gross stupidity, etc.). Earlier coarse in behavior or manners (1530s) and, of things, inferior,
common (late 15c.). Gross national product first recorded 1947.


