onslaught (n.)

1620s, anslaight, somehow from or on analogy of Dutch aanslag attack, from Middle Dutch aenslach,
from aen on (see on) + slach blow, related to slaen slay. Spelling influenced by obsolete (since
c.1400) English slaught (n.) slaughter, from Old English sleaht (see slaughter (n.)). No record of
its use in 18c.; apparently revived by Scott.


upcoming (adj.)

1848, rising; 1949, forthcoming, from up (adv.) + coming (see come (v.)). It was a noun in Middle
English, meaning action of ascending (mid-14c.), also attack, onslaught (c.1300).


access (n.)

early 14c., an attack of fever, from Old French acces onslaught, attack; onset (of an illness)
(14c.), from Latin accessus a coming to, an approach, noun use of past participle of accedere
approach (see accede). The later senses are directly from Latin. Meaning an entrance is from c.1600.
Meaning habit or power of getting into the presence of (someone or something) is from late 14c.


brush (v.2)

move briskly especially past or against something or someone, 1670s, from earlier sense (c.1400) to
hasten, rush, probably from brush (n.2), on the notion of a horse, etc., passing through dense
undergrowth (compare Old French brosser travel (through woods), and Middle English noun brush
charge, onslaught, encounter, mid-14c.), but brush (n.1) probably has contributed something to it as
well. Related: Brushed; brushing.


toleration (n.)

1510s, permission granted by authority, license, from Middle French tol&eacute;ration (15c.), from
Latin tolerationem (nominative toleratio) a bearing, supporting, enduring, noun of action from past
participle stem of tolerare to endure, sustain, support, suffer, literally to bear, from PIE *tele-
to bear, carry (see extol).    Meaning forbearance, sufferance is from 1580s. The specific religious
sense is from 1609; as in Act of Toleration (1689), statute granting freedom of religious worship
(with conditions) to dissenting Protestants in England. In this it means recognition of the right of
private judgment in matters of faith and worship; liberty granted by the government to preach and
worship as one pleases; equality under the law without regard to religion.    If any man err from
the right way, it is his own misfortune, no injury to thee; nor therefore art thou to punish him in
the things of this life because thou supposest he will be miserable in that which is to come.
Nobody, therefore, in fine, neither single persons nor churches, nay, nor even commonwealths, have
any just title to invade the civil rights and worldly goods of each other upon pretence of religion.
[John Locke, Letter Concerning Toleration, 1689]   <hr />   Before any man can be considered as a
member of Civil Society, he must be considered as a subject of the Governour of the Universe: And if
a member of Civil Society, do it with a saving of his allegiance to the Universal Sovereign. We
maintain therefore that in matters of Religion, no man's right is abridged by the institution of
Civil Society and that Religion is wholly exempt from its cognizance. [James Madison, Memorial and
Remonstrance Against Religious Assessments, 1785]   <hr />   Unlimited tolerance must lead to the
disappearance of tolerance. If we extend unlimited tolerance even to those who are intolerant, if we
are not prepared to defend a tolerant society against the onslaught of the intolerant, then the
tolerant will be destroyed, and tolerance with them. [Karl Popper, The Open Society and Its Enemies,
1962]


