opaque (adj.)

early 15c., opake, from Latin opacus shaded, in the shade, shady, dark, darkened, obscure, of
unknown origin. Spelling influenced after c.1650 by French opaque (c.1500), from the Latin.
Figurative use from 1761. Related: Opaquely; opaqueness.


opacity (n.)

1550s, darkness of meaning, obscurity, from French opacit&eacute;, from Latin opacitatem (nominative
opacitas) shade, shadiness, from opacus shaded, dark, opaque (see opaque). The literal sense
condition of being impervious to light first recorded 1630s.


Mexico

from Spanish, from Nahuatl (Aztecan) mexihco, the name of the ancient Aztec capital.  The etymology
of this is opaque. Because of the difference in vowel length, it cannot be derived from ME-TL
'maguey.' The sequence XIH also differs in vowel length from XIC-TLI 'navel,' which has been
proposed as a component element. The final element is locative -C(O). [Kartunnen]


chalk (n.)

Old English cealc chalk, lime, plaster; pebble, a West Germanic borrowing from Latin calx (2)
limestone, lime (crushed limestone), small stone, from Greek khalix small pebble, which many trace
to a PIE root for split, break up. In most Germanic languages still with the limestone sense, but in
English transferred to the opaque, white, soft limestone found abundantly in the south of the
island. Modern spelling is from early 14c. The Latin word for chalk was creta, which also is of
unknown origin.


mist (n.)

Old English mist dimness (of eyesight), mist (earliest in compounds, such as misthleo&eth;u misty
cliffs, w&aelig;lmist mist of death), from Proto-Germanic *mikhstaz (cognates: Middle Low German
mist, Dutch mist, Icelandic mistur, Norwegian and Swedish mist), perhaps from PIE *meigh- to urinate
(cognates: Greek omikhle, Old Church Slavonic migla, Sanskrit mih, megha cloud, mist; see
micturition).Sometimes distinguished from fog, either as being less opaque or as consisting of drops
large enough to have a perceptible downward motion. [OED]Also in Old English in sense of dimness of
the eyes, either by illness or tears, and in figurative sense of things that obscure mental vision.


