opus (n.)

a work, composition, especially a musical one, 1809, from Latin opus a work, labor, exertion (source
of Italian opera, French oeuvre, Spanish obra), from PIE root *op- (1) to work, produce in abundance
(Germanic *ob-) to work, produce in abundance, originally of agriculture later extended to religious
acts (cognates: Sanskrit apas- work, religious act; Avestan hvapah- good deed; Old High German uoben
to start work, to practice, to honor; German &uuml;ben to exercise, practice; Dutch oefenen, Old
Norse &aelig;fa, Danish &oslash;ve to exercise, practice; Old English &aelig;fnan to perform, work,
do, afol power). The plural, seldom used as such, is opera.


operose (adj.)

involving much labor, 1670s, from Latin operosus taking great pains, laborious, active, industrious,
from opus (genitive operis) work (see opus). Related: Operosity.


magnum opus

masterpiece, a person's greatest work, Latin, literally great work (see magnum + opus).


opulence (n.)

c.1510, from Middle French opulence (16c.), from Latin opulentia, from opulentus wealthy,
dissimilated from *op-en-ent-, related to ops wealth, power, resources, opus work, labor, exertion,
from PIE root *op- (1) to work, produce in abundance (see opus).


officinal (adj.)

kept in stock by a druggist, c.1720, from French officinal, from Medieval Latin officinalis,
literally of or belonging in an officina, a storeroom (of a monastery) for medicines and
necessaries, in classical Latin workshop, manufactory, laboratory, contraction of *opificina, from
opifex (genitive opificis) worker, workman, maker, doer (from opus work; see opus) + -fex, -ficis
one who does, from facere do, perform (see factitious). Related: Officinally.


operation (n.)

late 14c., action, performance, work, also the performance of some science or art, from Old French
operacion operation, working, proceedings, from Latin operationem (nominative operatio) a working,
operation, from past participle stem of operari to work, labor (in Late Latin to have effect, be
active, cause), from opera work, effort, related to opus (genitive operis) a work (see opus). The
surgical sense is first attested 1590s. Military sense of series of movements and acts is from 1749.


op. cit.

abbreviation of Latin opus citatum, literally the work quoted.


office (n.)

mid-13c., a post, an employment to which certain duties are attached, from Anglo-French and Old
French ofice place or function; divine service (12c. in Old French) or directly from Latin officium
service, kindness, favor; official duty, function, business; ceremonial observance, (in
Ecclesiastical Latin, church service), literally work-doing, from ops (genitive opis) power, might,
abundance, means (related to opus work; see opus) + stem of facere do, perform (see factitious).
Meaning place for conducting business first recorded 1560s. Office hours attested from 1841.


opera (n.)

a drama sung [Klein], 1640s, from Italian opera, literally a work, labor, composition, from Latin
opera work, effort (Latin plural regarded as feminine singular), secondary (abstract) noun from
operari to work, from opus (genitive operis) a work (see opus). Defined in Elson's Music Dictionary
as, a form of musical composition evolved shortly before 1600, by some enthusiastic Florentine
amateurs who sought to bring back the Greek plays to the modern stage. No good opera plot can be
sensible. ... People do not sing when they are feeling sensible. [W.H. Auden, 1961]As a branch of
dramatic art, it is attested from 1759. First record of opera glass small binoculars for use at the
theater is from 1738. Soap opera is first recorded 1939, as a disparaging reference to daytime radio
dramas sponsored by soap manufacturers.


omni-

word-forming element meaning all, from Latin omni-, combining form of omnis all, every, the whole,
of every kind, of unknown origin, perhaps literally abundant, from *op-ni-, from PIE root *op- (1)
to work, produce in abundance (see opus).


oeuvre (n.)

a work, especially a work of literature, also the body of work produced by an artist, 1875, from
French oeuvre work (12c.), from Latin opera (see opus).


Oscan (adj.)

of or pertaining to the ancient people of southern Italy, 1590s, from Latin Osci, Opsci (plural)
Oscans, literally worshippers of Ops, a harvest goddess, the name related to Latin ops (genitive
opis) abundance, plenty, wealth, riches, from PIE *op- (1) to work, produce in abundance (see opus).


inure (v.)

early 15c., in ure in practice, from obsolete ure work, practice, exercise, use, probably from Old
French uevre, oeuvre work, from Latin opera (see opus). Related: Inured; inuring.


copious (adj.)

mid-14c., from Latin copiosus plentiful, from copia an abundance, ample supply, profusion, plenty,
from com- with (see com-) + ops (genitive opis) power, wealth, resources, from PIE root *op- (1) to
work, produce in abundance, (see opus). Related: Copiously.


hors d&#039;oeuvre

1714, as an adverb, out of the ordinary, from French hors d'oeuvre, outside the ordinary courses (of
a meal), literally apart from the main work, from hors, variant of fors outside (from Latin foris;
see foreign) + de from + oeuvre work, from Latin opera (see opus). Meaning extra dish set out before
a meal or between courses attested in English from 1742.


