oracular (adj.)

1670s, from Latin oraculum (see oracle) + -ar.


mantic (adj.)

1850, from Greek mantikos prophetic, oracular, of or for a soothsayer, from mantis prophet,
literally one touched by divine madness (see mantis). Related: Mantical (1580s).


prophetic (adj.)

late 15c., from Middle French proph&eacute;tique (15c.) and directly from Late Latin propheticus,
from Greek prophetikos pertaining to a prophet, oracular, from prophetes (see prophet). Related:
Prophetical (mid-15c.); prophetically.


vates (n.)

1620s, poet or bard, specifically Celtic divinely inspired poet (1728), from Latin vates sooth-
sayer, prophet, seer, from a Celtic source akin to Old Irish faith poet, Welsh gwawd poem, from PIE
root *wet- (1) to blow; inspire, spiritually arouse (cognates: Old English wod mad, frenzied, god-
name Woden; see wood (adj.)). Hence vaticination oracular prediction (c.1600).


sort (n.)

late 14c., group of people, animals, etc.; kind or variety of person or animal, from Old French
sorte class, kind, from Latin sortem (nominative sors) lot; fate, destiny; share, portion; rank,
category; sex, class, oracular response, prophecy, from PIE root *ser- (3) to line up (cognates:
Latin serere to arrange, attach, join; see series). The sense evolution in Vulgar Latin is from what
is allotted to one by fate, to fortune, condition, to rank, class, order. Later (mid-15c.) group,
class, or category of items; kind or variety of thing; pattern, design. Out of sorts not in usual
good condition is attested from 1620s, with literal sense of out of stock.


raven (n.)

Old English hr&aelig;fn (Mercian), hrefn; hr&aelig;fn (Northumbrian, West Saxon), from Proto-
Germanic *khrabanas (cognates: Old Norse hrafn, Danish ravn, Dutch raaf, Old High German hraban,
German Rabe raven, Old English hroc rook), from PIE root *ker- (2), imitative of harsh sounds
(cognates: Latin crepare to creak, clatter, cornix crow, corvus raven; Greek korax raven, korone
crow; Old Church Slavonic kruku raven; Lithuanian krauklys crow). Raven mythology shows considerable
homogeneity throughout the whole area [northern regions of the northern hemisphere] in spite of
differences in detail. The Raven peeps forth from the mists of time and the thickets of mythology,
as a bird of slaughter, a storm bird, a sun and fire bird, a messenger, an oracular figure and a
craftsman or culture hero. [Edward A. Armstrong, The Folklore of Birds, 1958]Old English also used
hr&aelig;mn, hremm. The raven standard was the flag of the Danish Vikings. The Quran connects the
raven with Cain's murder of Abel; but in Christianity the bird plays a positive role in the stories
of St. Benedict, St. Paul the Hermit, St. Vincent, etc. It was anciently believed to live to great
old age, but the ancients also believed it wanting in parental care. The vikings, like Noah, were
said to have used the raven to discover land. When uncertain of their course they let one loose, and
steered the vessel in his track, deeming that the land lay in the direction of his flight; if he
returned to the ship, it was supposed to be at a distance [Charles Swainson, The Folk Lore and
Provincial Names of British Birds, London, 1886].


hag (n.)

early 13c., ugly old woman, probably a shortening of Old English h&aelig;gtesse witch, fury (on
assumption that -tesse was a suffix), from Proto-Germanic *hagatusjon-, of unknown origin. Similar
shortening produced Dutch heks, German Hexe witch from cognate Middle Dutch haghetisse, Old High
German hagzusa.    First element is probably cognate with Old English haga enclosure, portion of
woodland marked off for cutting (see hedge). Old Norse had tunri&eth;a and Old High German zunritha,
both literally hedge-rider, used of witches and ghosts. Second element may be connected with
Norwegian tysja fairy; crippled woman, Gaulish dusius demon, Lithuanian dvasia spirit, from PIE
*dhewes- to fly about, smoke, be scattered, vanish.    One of the magic words for which there is no
male form, suggesting its original meaning was close to diviner, soothsayer, which were always
female in northern European paganism, and h&aelig;gtesse seem at one time to have meant woman of
prophetic and oracular powers (&AElig;lfric uses it to render the Greek pythoness, the voice of the
Delphic oracle), a figure greatly feared and respected. Later, the word was used of village wise
women.   Haga is also the haw- in hawthorn, which is an important tree in northern European pagan
religion. There may be several layers of folk etymology here. Confusion or blending with heathenish
is suggested by Middle English h&aelig;htis, h&aelig;gtis hag, witch, fury, etc., and haetnesse
goddess, used of Minerva and Diana.    If the h&aelig;gtesse was once a powerful supernatural woman
(in Norse it is an alternative word for Norn, any of the three weird sisters, the equivalent of the
Fates), it might originally have carried the hawthorn sense. Later, when the pagan magic was reduced
to local scatterings, it might have had the sense of hedge-rider, or she who straddles the hedge,
because the hedge was the boundary between the civilized world of the village and the wild world
beyond. The h&aelig;gtesse would have a foot in each reality. Even later, when it meant the local
healer and root collector, living in the open and moving from village to village, it may have had
the mildly pejorative sense of hedge- in Middle English (hedge-priest, etc.), suggesting an
itinerant sleeping under bushes, perhaps. The same word could have contained all three senses before
being reduced to its modern one.


