oratory (n.1)

formal public speaking, the art of eloquence, 1580s, from Latin (ars) oratoria oratorical (art),
fem. of oratorius of speaking or pleading, pertaining to an orator, from orare to speak, pray, plead
(see orator).


orator (n.)

late 14c., one who pleads or argues for a cause, from Anglo-French oratour (Modern French orateur),
from Latin orator speaker, from orare to speak, speak before a court or assembly, pray, plead, from
PIE root *or- to pronounce a ritual formula (cognates: Sanskrit aryanti they praise, Homeric Greek
are, Attic ara prayer, Hittite ariya- to ask the oracle, aruwai- to revere, worship). Meaning public
speaker is attested from early 15c.


oratory (n.2)

small chapel, c.1300, from Old French oratorie and directly from Late Latin oratorium place of
prayer (especially the Oratory of St. Philip Neri in Rome, where musical services were presented),
noun use of an adjective, as in oratorium templum, from neuter of Latin oratorius of or for praying,
from orare to pray, plead, speak (see orator).


oratorical (adj.)

1580s, from orator or oratory + -ical, or else from Latin oratorius (see oratory (n.1)). Related:
Oratorical; oratorically.


rhetoric (n.)

early 14c., from Old French rethorique, from Latin rhetorice, from Greek rhetorike techne art of an
orator, from rhetor (genitive rhetoros) speaker, orator, teacher of rhetoric, related to rhesis
speech, rhema word, phrase, verb, literally that which is spoken, from PIE *wre-tor-, from root
*were- (3) to speak (cognates: Old English word, Latin verbum, Greek eirein to say; see verb).


cicerone (n.)

a local guide in Italy, 1726, from Italian cicerone, from Latin Ciceronem, from the name of the
great Roman orator (see Ciceronian). Perhaps in reference to the loquacity of the guides.


Ciceronian (adj.)

eloquent, a reference to Roman statesman and orator Marcus Tullius Cicero (106-43 B.C.E.); also
often known as Tully in early Modern English writers; Cicero being a cognomen of the genus Tullia.


soap-box (n.)

also soapbox, 1650s, box for holding soap, later especially a wooden crate in which soap may be
packed; from soap (n.) + box (n.). Typical of a makeshift stand for a public orator since at least
1907. Also used by children to make racing carts, as in soap-box derby, annual race in Dayton, Ohio,
which dates to 1933.


rhetorical (adj.)

mid-15c., eloquent, from Latin rhetoricus, from Greek rhetorikos oratorical, rhetorical; skilled in
speaking, from rhetor orator (see rhetoric). Meaning pertaining to rhetoric is from 1520s.
Rhetorical question is from 1670s. Related: Rhetorically.


peroration (n.)

mid-15c., from Latin perorationem (nominative peroratio) the ending of a speech or argument of a
case, from past participle stem of perorare argue a case to the end, bring a speech to a close, from
per- to the end (see per) + orare to speak, plead (see orator).


orate (v.)

c.1600, to pray, to plead, from Latin oratus, past participle of orare speak, pray, plead, speak
before a court or assembly (see orator). The meaning make a formal speech emerged c.1860 in American
English as a back-formation of oration. Related: Orated; orating.


oration (n.)

late 14c., prayer, from Late Latin orationem (nominative oratio) a speaking, speech, discourse;
language, faculty of speech, mode of expressing; prayer, noun of action from past participle stem of
Latin orare to pray, plead, speak before an assembly (see orator). Meaning formal speech, discourse
first recorded c.1500.


oracle (n.)

late 14c., a message from a god, expressed by divine inspiration, from Old French oracle temple,
house of prayer; oracle (12c.) and directly from Latin oraculum divine announcement, oracle; place
where oracles are given, from orare pray, plead (see orator), with material instrumental suffix
-culo-. In antiquity, the agency or medium of a god, also the place where such divine utterances
were given. This sense is attested in English from c.1400.


inexorable (adj.)

1550s, from Middle French inexorable and directly from Latin inexorabilis that cannot be moved by
entreaty, from in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + exorabilis able to be entreated, from exorare to
prevail upon, from ex- out (see ex-) + orare pray (see orator). Related: Inexorably; inexorability.


orison (n.)

late 12c., from Anglo-French oreison, Old French oreisun (12c., Modern French oraison) oration, from
Latin orationem (nominative oratio) speech, oration, in Church Latin prayer, appeal to God, noun of
action from orare (see orator). Etymologically, a doublet of oration.


adore (v.)

late 14c., aouren, to worship, pay divine honors to, bow down before, from Old French aorer to
adore, worship, praise (10c.), from Latin adorare speak to formally, beseech, ask in prayer, in Late
Latin to worship, from ad- to (see ad-) + orare speak formally, pray (see orator). Meaning to honor
very highly is attested from 1590s; weakened sense of to be very fond of emerged by 1880s. Related:
Adored; adoring.


apostrophe (n.)

mark indicating omitted letter, 1580s, from Middle French apostrophe, from Late Latin apostrophus,
from Greek apostrophos (prosoidia) (the accent of) turning away, thus, a mark showing where a letter
has been omitted, from apostrephein avert, turn away, from apo- from (see apo-) + strephein to turn
(see strophe).    In English, the mark often represents loss of -e- in -es, possessive ending. It
was being extended to all possessives, whether they ever had an -e- or not, by 18c. Greek also used
this word for a turning aside of an orator in speech to address some individual, a sense first
recorded in English 1530s.


-ory

adjective and noun suffix, having to do with, characterized by, tending to, place for, from Middle
English -orie, from Old North French -ory, -orie (Old French -oir, -oire), from Latin -orius, -oria,
-orium.    Latin adjectives in -orius, according to An Etymological Dictionary of the French
Language, tended to indicate a quality proper to the action accomplished by the agent; as oratorius
from orator; laudatorius from laudator. The neuter of these adjectives was early employed as a
substantive, and usually denoted the place of residence of the agent or the instrument that he uses;
as praetorium from praetor; dormitorium from dormitor; auditorium, dolatorium.    These newer words,
already frequent under the Empire, became exceedingly numerous at a later time, especially in
ecclesiastical and scholastic Latin; as purgatorium, refectorium, laboratorium, observatorium,
&amp;c.; [transl. G.W. Kitchin, Oxford, 1878]


