ordain (v.)

late 13c., to appoint or admit to the ministry of the Church, from stem of Old French ordener place
in order, arrange, prepare; consecrate, designate (Modern French ordonner) and directly from Latin
ordinare put in order, arrange, dispose, appoint, from ordo (genitive ordinis) order (see order
(n.)). The notion is to confer holy orders upon. Meaning to decree, enact is from c.1300; sense of
to set (something) that will continue in a certain order is from early 14c. Related: Ordained;
ordaining.


ordinate (adj.)

late 14c., from Latin ordinatus, past participle of ordinare arrange, set in order (see ordain).
Related: Ordinately.


ordination (n.)

early 15c., the act of conferring holy orders, from Old French ordinacion (12c.) or directly from
Latin ordinationem (nominative ordinatio) a setting in order, ordinance, noun of action from past
participle stem of ordinare arrange (see ordain).


ordinate (v.)

1560s, from Latin ordinatus, past participle of ordinare arrange, set in order (see ordain).
Related: Ordinated; ordinating.


foreordained (adj.)

early 15c., for-ordenede; see fore- + ordain (v.). A hybrid word. Related: Foreordain.


predestine (v.)

late 14c., to foreordain, from Old French pr&eacute;destiner (12c.) predestine, ordain (of God) and
directly from Latin praedestinare determine beforehand (see predestination). Related: Predestined;
predestining; predestinate.


preordain (v.)

1530s, from pre- + ordain (q.v.). Related: Preordained; preordaining.


prescription (n.)

late 14c., in law, the right to something through long use, from Old French prescription (13c.) and
directly from Latin praescriptionem (nominative praescriptio) a writing before, order, direction,
noun of action from past participle stem of praescribere write before, prefix in writing; ordain,
determine in advance, from prae before (see pre-) + scribere to write (see script (n.)). Medical
sense of written directions from a doctor first recorded 1570s.


ordinance (n.)

c.1300, an authoritative direction, decree, or command (narrower or more transitory than a law),
from Old French ordenance (Modern French ordonnance) or directly from Medieval Latin ordinantia,
from Latin ordinantem (nominative ordinans), present participle of ordinare put in order (see
ordain). By early 14c. senses had emerged of arrangement in ranks or rows (especially in order of
battle), also warlike provisions, equipment (a sense now in ordnance).


-ship

word-forming element meaning quality, condition; act, power, skill; office, position; relation
between, Middle English -schipe, from Old English -sciepe, Anglian -scip state, condition of being,
from Proto-Germanic *-skapaz (cognates: Old Norse -skapr, Danish -skab, Old Frisian -skip, Dutch
-schap, German -schaft), from *skap- to create, ordain, appoint, from PIE root *(s)kep- (see shape
(v.)).


direct (v.)

late 14c., to write (to someone), to address, from Latin directus straight, past participle of
dirigere set straight, from dis- apart (see dis-) + regere to guide (see regal). Compare dress;
address.    Meaning to govern, regulate is from c.1500; to order, ordain is from 1650s. Sense of to
write the destination on the outside of a letter is from 16c. Of plays, films, etc., from 1913.
Related: Directed; directing.


disorder (v.)

late 15c., from dis- not (see dis-) + the verb order (v.). Replaced earlier disordeine (mid-14c.),
from Old French desordainer, from Medieval Latin disordinare throw into disorder, from Latin
ordinare to order, regulate (see ordain). Related: Disordered; disordering.


subordinate (adj.)

mid-15c., having an inferior rank, from Medieval Latin subordinatus placed in a lower order, made
subject, past participle of subordinare place in a lower order, from Latin sub under (see sub-) +
ordinare arrange, set in order (see ordain). Related: Subordinance; subordinant; subordinately. For
of or pertaining to the classificatory rank of a suborder, subordinal (1842) is used.


hallow (v.)

Old English halgian to make holy, to honor as holy, consecrate, ordain, related to halig holy, from
Proto-Germanic *haila-ga- (cognates: Old Saxon helagon, Middle Dutch heligen, Old Norse helga), from
PIE root *kailo- whole, uninjured, of good omen (see health). Used in Christian translations to
render Latin sanctificare. Also used since Old English as a noun meaning holy person, saint.
Related: Hallowed; hallowing.


dight (v.)

to adorn (archaic or poetic), Old English dihtan dictate, appoint, ordain; guide; compose, an early
borrowing from Latin dictare to dictate (see dictate (v.)).    The Latin word borrowed even earlier
into continental Germanic became Old High German dihton to write compose, German dichten to write
poetry. In Middle English, dight exploded to a vast array of meanings (including to rule, to handle,
to abuse, to have sex with, to kill, to clothe, to make ready, to repair) till it was one of the
most-used verbs in the language, but all senses have faded now into obscurity, dialect, or poetic
use.


shrive (v.)

Old English scrifan assign, prescribe, ordain, decree; impose penance, hear confession; have regard
for, care for, apparently originally to write (strong, past tense scraf, past participle scrifen),
from Proto-Germanic *skriban (cognates: Old Saxon scriban, Old Frisian skriva write; impose penance;
Old Dutch scrivan, Dutch schrijven, German schreiben to write, draw, paint; Danish skrifte confess),
an early borrowing from Latin scribere to write (see script (n.)), which in Old English and
Scandinavian developed further to confess, hear confession.


sacred (adj.)

late 14c., past participle adjective from obsolete verb sacren to make holy (c.1200), from Old
French sacrer consecrate, anoint, dedicate (12c.) or directly from Latin sacrare to make sacred,
consecrate; hold sacred; immortalize; set apart, dedicate, from sacer (genitive sacri) sacred,
dedicated, holy, accursed, from Old Latin saceres, from PIE root *sak- to sanctify. Buck groups it
with Oscan sakrim, Umbrian sacra and calls it a distinctive Italic group, without any clear outside
connections. Related: Sacredness.    Nasalized form is sancire make sacred, confirm, ratify, ordain.
Sacred cow object of Hindu veneration, is from 1891; figurative sense of one who must not be
criticized is first recorded 1910, reflecting Western views of Hinduism. Sacred Heart the heart of
Jesus as an object of religious veneration is from 1765.


shape (v.)

Old English scapan, past participle of scieppan to create, form, destine (past tense scop), from
Proto-Germanic *skapjanan create, ordain (cognates: Old Norse skapa, Danish skabe, Old Saxon scapan,
Old Frisian skeppa, Middle Dutch schappen do, treat, Old High German scaffan, German schaffen shape,
create, produce), from PIE root *(s)kep- a base forming words meaning to cut, scrape, hack (see
scabies), which acquired broad technical senses and in Germanic a specific sense of to create.
Old English scieppan survived into Middle English as shippen, but shape emerged as a regular verb
(with past tense shaped) by 1500s. The old past participle form shapen survives in misshapen. Middle
English shepster (late 14c.) dressmaker, female cutter-out, is literally shape-ster, from Old
English scieppan.    Meaning to form in the mind is from late 14c. Phrase Shape up (v.) is literally
to give form to by stiff or solid material; attested from 1865 as progress; from 1938 as reform;
shape up or ship out is attested from 1956, originally U.S. military slang, with the sense being do
right or get shipped up to active duty.


