ordeal (n.)

Old English ordel, ordal, trial by physical test, literally judgment, verdict, from Proto-Germanic
noun *uz-dailjam (cognates: Old Saxon urdeli, Old Frisian urdel, Dutch oordeel, German urteil
judgment), literally that which is dealt out (by the gods), from *uzdailijan share out, related to
Old English ad&aelig;lan to deal out (see deal (n.1)). Curiously absent in Middle English, and
perhaps reborrowed 16c. from Medieval Latin or Middle French, which got it from Germanic.    The
notion is of the kind of arduous physical test (such as walking blindfolded and barefoot between
red-hot plowshares) that was believed to determine a person's guilt or innocence by immediate
judgment of the deity, an ancient Teutonic mode of trial. English retains a more exact sense of the
word; its cognates in German, etc., have been generalized.    Metaphoric extension to anything which
tests character or endurance is attested from 1650s. The prefix or- survives in English only in this
word, but was common in Old English and other Germanic languages (Gothic ur-, Old Norse or-, etc.)
and originally was an adverb and preposition meaning out.


trial (n.)

mid-15c., act or process of testing, a putting to proof by examination, experiment, etc., from
Anglo-French trial, noun formed from triet to try (see try (v.)). Sense of examining and deciding of
the issues between parties in a court of law is first recorded 1570s; extended to any ordeal by
1590s. As an adjectival phrase, trial-and-error is recorded from 1806. Trial balloon (1826)
translates French ballon d'essai, a small balloon sent up immediately before a manned ascent to
determine the direction and tendency of winds in the upper air, though the earliest use in English
is figurative.


orthopraxy (n.)

1840, from ortho- + Greek praxis a doing, action, performance (see praxis).   Errata -- Page 263,
line 9 from bottom, for 'orthodoxy' read orthopraxy. This is a new coin from the mint of Dr.
[Andrew] Wylie [of Bloomington College, Indiana], at least I have not before noticed it. Its
etymology places it in a just contrast with orthodoxy: for if that consecrated word indicates
thinking right, orthopraxy will legitimately import doing right, and hence, as Mr. Wylie says,
orthopraxy in the last dread day will pass the divine ordeal incomparably better than orthodoxy. O!
that a zeal for orthopraxy would transcend the zeal for orthodoxy! [The Millennial Harbinger, vol.
IV, no. VIII, Bethany, Va., August 1840]


