orientation (n.)

1839, originally arrangement of a building, etc., to face east or any other specified direction,
noun of action from orient (v.). Sense of action of determining one's bearings is from 1868. Meaning
introduction to a situation is from 1942.


reorientation (n.)

also re-orientation, 1893, from re- + orientation.


oriented (adj.)

having an orientation, 1918, past participle adjective from orient (v.)


orientate (v.)

1849, back-formation from orientation. Related: Orientated; orientating.


disorientation (n.)

1860; see dis- + orientation.


sexual (adj.)

1650s, of or pertaining to the fact of being male or female, from Late Latin sexualis relating to
sex, from Latin sexus (see sex (n.)). Meaning pertaining to copulation or generation is from 1766;
sexual intercourse attested by 1778; sexual orientation by 1967; sexual harassment by 1975. Sexual
revolution attested by 1962. Sexual politics is from 1970. Related: Sexually.


Australia

from Latin Terra Australis (16c.), from australis southern + -ia. A hypothetical southern continent,
known as terra australis incognita, had been proposed since 2c. Dutch explorers called the newfound
continent New Holland; the current name was suggested 1814 by Matthew Flinders as an improvement
over Terra Australis as being more agreeable to the ear, and an assimilation to the name of the
other great portions of the earth [Voyage to Terra Australis]. In 1817 Gov. Lachlan Macquarie,
having read Flinders' suggestion, began using it in official correspondence. The ultimate source is
Latin auster south wind, hence, the south country.    The Latin sense shift in australis, if it is
indeed the same word other Indo-European languages use for east (see aurora), for which Latin uses
oriens (see orient), perhaps is based on a false assumption about the orientation of the Italian
peninsula, with shift through 'southeast' explained by the diagonal position of the axis of Italy
[Buck]; see Walde, Alois, Lateinisches etymologisches W&ouml;rterbuch, 3rd. ed., vol. 1, p.87;
Ernout, Alfred, and Meillet, Alfred, Dictionnaire &eacute;tymologique de la langue latine, 2nd. ed.,
p.94. Or perhaps the connection is more ancient, and from PIE root *aus- to shine, source of aurora,
which also produces words for burning, with reference to the hot south wind that blows into Italy.
Thus auster (hot) south wind, metaphorically extended to south.


