Orient (n.)

c.1300, the East (originally usually meaning what is now called the Middle East), from Old French
orient east (11c.), from Latin orientem (nominative oriens) the rising sun, the east, part of the
sky where the sun rises, originally rising (adj.), present participle of oriri to rise (see
orchestra). The Orient Express was a train that ran from Paris to Istanbul via Vienna 1883-1961,
from the start associated with espionage and intrigue.


orient (v.)

c.1727, originally to arrange facing east, from French s'orienter to take one's bearings, literally
to face the east (also the source of German orientierung), from Old French orient east, from Latin
orientum (see Orient (n.)). Extended meaning determine bearings first attested 1842; figurative
sense is from 1850. Related: Oriented; orienting.


orienteering

in reference to a competitive sport, 1948, from orient (v.).


oriented (adj.)

having an orientation, 1918, past participle adjective from orient (v.)


orientation (n.)

1839, originally arrangement of a building, etc., to face east or any other specified direction,
noun of action from orient (v.). Sense of action of determining one's bearings is from 1868. Meaning
introduction to a situation is from 1942.


Orientalism (n.)

in reference to character, style, trait, or idiom felt to be from the Orient, 1769, from oriental +
-ism. Related: Orientalist.


oriental (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French oriental eastern, from the east (12c.) and directly from Latin orientalis
of the east, from orientem (see Orient (n.)). Originally in reference to the sky, geographical sense
is attested from late 15c.; oriental carpet first recorded 1868 (in C.Latin Eastlake).


reorient (v.)

also re-orient, 1897 (transitive), 1937 (intransitive), from re- back, again + orient (v.). Related:
Reoriented; reorienting. Alternative reorientate also is recorded from 1913.


Levant

Mediterranean lands east of Italy, late 15c., from Middle French levant the Orient, from present
participle of lever to rise (from Latin levare to raise; see lever). The region so called in
reference to the direction of sunrise.


disorient (v.)

1650s, from French d&eacute;sorienter to cause to lose one's bearings, literally to turn from the
east, from d&eacute;s- (see dis-) + orienter (see orient (v.)). Related: Disoriented; disorienting.


peanut (n.)

1807, earlier ground nut, ground pea (1769). The plant is native to S.America. Portuguese traders
took peanuts from Brazil and Peru to Africa by 1502 and it is known to have been cultivated in
Chekiang Province in China by 1573, probably arriving with Portuguese sailors who made stops in
Brazil en route to the Orient. Peanut butter attested by 1892; peanut brittle is from 1894. Peanut
gallery topmost rows of a theater is from 1874, American English; peanuts trivial sum is from 1934.


Europe

from Latin Europa Europe, from Greek Europe, of uncertain origin; as a geographic name, first the
Homeric hymn to Apollo (522 B.C.E. or earlier):    Telphusa, here I am minded to make a glorious
temple, an oracle for men, and hither they will always bring perfect hecatombs, both those who live
in rich Peloponnesus and those of Europe and all the wave-washed isles, coming to seek oracles.
Often explained as broad face, from eurys wide (see aneurysm) + ops face. But also traditionally
linked with Europa, Phoenician princess in Greek mythology. Klein (citing Heinrich Lewy) suggests a
possible Semitic origin in Akkad. erebu to go down, set (in reference to the sun) which would
parallel orient. Another suggestion along those lines is Phoenician 'ereb evening, hence west.


Australia

from Latin Terra Australis (16c.), from australis southern + -ia. A hypothetical southern continent,
known as terra australis incognita, had been proposed since 2c. Dutch explorers called the newfound
continent New Holland; the current name was suggested 1814 by Matthew Flinders as an improvement
over Terra Australis as being more agreeable to the ear, and an assimilation to the name of the
other great portions of the earth [Voyage to Terra Australis]. In 1817 Gov. Lachlan Macquarie,
having read Flinders' suggestion, began using it in official correspondence. The ultimate source is
Latin auster south wind, hence, the south country.    The Latin sense shift in australis, if it is
indeed the same word other Indo-European languages use for east (see aurora), for which Latin uses
oriens (see orient), perhaps is based on a false assumption about the orientation of the Italian
peninsula, with shift through 'southeast' explained by the diagonal position of the axis of Italy
[Buck]; see Walde, Alois, Lateinisches etymologisches W&ouml;rterbuch, 3rd. ed., vol. 1, p.87;
Ernout, Alfred, and Meillet, Alfred, Dictionnaire &eacute;tymologique de la langue latine, 2nd. ed.,
p.94. Or perhaps the connection is more ancient, and from PIE root *aus- to shine, source of aurora,
which also produces words for burning, with reference to the hot south wind that blows into Italy.
Thus auster (hot) south wind, metaphorically extended to south.


