ornate (adj.)

early 15c., from Latin ornatus fitted out, furnished, supplied; adorned, decorated, embellished,
past participle of ornare adorn, fit out, from stem of ordo order (see order (n.)). Earliest
reference is to literary style. Related: Ornately; ornateness.


imagery (n.)

mid-14c., piece of sculpture, carved figures, from Old French imagerie (13c.), from imagier painter,
from image (see image (n.)). Meaning ornate description (in poetry, etc.) is from 1580s.


Asiatic (adj.)

1630s, from Latin Asiaticus (surname of Latin Corn. Scipio), from Greek Asiatikos, from Asia (see
Asia; also compare Asian). As a noun, by 1763. In ancient Rome, Asiatici oratores was florid and
overly ornate prose.


ornament (n.)

early 13c., an accessory, from Old French ornement ornament, decoration, and directly from Latin
ornamentum apparatus, equipment, trappings; embellishment, decoration, trinket, from ornare equip,
adorn (see ornate). Meaning decoration, embellishment in English is attested from late 14c. (also a
secondary sense in classical Latin). Figurative use from 1550s.


frieze (n.)

sculptured horizontal band in architecture, 1560s, from Middle French frise, originally a ruff, from
Medieval Latin frisium embroidered border, variant of frigium, probably from Latin Phrygium
Phrygian, Phrygian work, from Phrygia, the ancient country in Asia Minor known for its embroidery
(compare Phrygiae vestes ornate garments). Meaning decorative band along the top of a wall was in
Old French.


flamboyant (adj.)

1832, first used of a 15c.-16c. architectural style with flame-like curves, from French flamboyant
flaming, wavy, present participle of flamboyer to flame, from Old French flamboier (12c.), from
flambe flame, from flamble, variant of flamme, from Latin flammula (see flame (n.)). Extended sense
of showy, ornate is 1879. Related: Flamboyantly.


rococo (adj.)

1836, old-fashioned, from French rococo (19c.), apparently a humorous alteration of rocaille
shellwork, pebble-work from Middle French roche rock, from Vulgar Latin *rocca stone. Specifically
of furniture or architecture of the time of Louis Quatorze and Louis Quinze, from 1841. If this is
correct, the reference is to the excessive use of shell designs in this lavish style. For
differentiation, see baroque. The general sense of tastelessly florid or ornate is from 1844.
Much of the painting, engraving, porcelain-work, etc., of the time has ... a real decorative charm,
though not of a very high order in art. Hence rococo is used attributively in contempt to note
anything feebly pretentious and tasteless in art or literature. [Century Dictionary, 1902]


bloviate (v.)

1857, American English, a Midwestern word for to talk aimlessly and boastingly; to indulge in 'high
falutin', according to Farmer (1890), who seems to have been the only British lexicographer to
notice it. He says it was based on blow (v.) on the model of deviate, etc.    It seems to have been
felt as outdated slang already by late 19c. (It was a leasure for him to hear the Doctor talk, or,
as it was inelegantly expressed in the phrase of the period, 'bloviate' .... [Overland Monthly, San
Francisco, 1872, describing a scene from 1860]), but it enjoyed a revival early 1920s during the
presidency of Warren G. Harding, who wrote a notoriously ornate and incomprehensible prose (e.e.
cummings eulogized him as The only man, woman or child who wrote a simple declarative sentence with
seven grammatical errors) at which time the word took on its connection with political speech; it
faded again thereafter, but, with its derivative, bloviation, it enjoyed a revival in the 2000 U.S.
election season that continued through the era of blogging.


