orthodoxy (n.)

1620s, from French orthodoxie and directly from Late Latin orthodoxia, from late Greek orthodoxia
right opinion, noun of quality from orthodoxos (see orthodox).


orthodox (adj.)

mid-15c., of opinions, faith, from Late Latin orthodoxus, from Greek orthodoxos having the right
opinion, from orthos right, true, straight (see ortho-) + doxa opinion, praise, from dokein to seem,
from PIE root *dek- to take, accept (see decent). As the name of the Eastern Church, first recorded
in English 1772; in reference to a branch of Judaism, first recorded 1853.


heresy (n.)

an opinion of private men different from that of the catholick and orthodox church [Johnson],
c.1200, from Old French heresie (12c.), from Latin h&aelig;resis, school of thought, philosophical
sect, used by Christian writers for unorthodox sect or doctrine, from Greek hairesis a taking or
choosing, a choice, from haireisthai take, seize, middle voice of hairein to choose, of unknown
origin, perhaps from PIE *ser- (5) to seize (cognates: Hittite &#353;aru booty, Welsh herw booty).
The Greek word was used in the New Testament in reference to the Sadducees, Pharisees, and even the
Christians, as sects of Judaism, but in English bibles it usually is translated sect. Meaning
religious belief opposed to the orthodox doctrines of the Church evolved in Late Latin. Transferred
(non-religious) use from late 14c.


yeshiva (n.)

Orthodox Jewish college or seminary, 1851, from Hebrew yesibah academy, literally a sitting, from
yashav to sit.


Hicksite

1828, noun and adjective, in reference to a seceding group of American Quakers, from the name of
their spiritual leader, Elias Hicks. The remainder were known as Orthodox Friends.


Sunni (n.)

1620s, from Arabic, adherent of the Sunnah; Muslim who accepts the orthodox tradition as well as the
Quran, from Sunna traditional teachings of Muhammad (not, like the Quran, committed to writing, but
preserved from his lips by his disciples or founded on his actions), literally way, custom, course,
tradition, usage. Related: Sunnite.


unorthodox (adj.)

1650s, from un- (1) not + orthodox (adj.).


bugger (n.)

sodomite, 1550s, earlier heretic (mid-14c.), from Medieval Latin Bulgarus a Bulgarian (see
Bulgaria), so called from bigoted notions of the sex lives of Eastern Orthodox Christians or of the
sect of heretics that was prominent there 11c. Compare Old French bougre Bulgarian, also heretic;
sodomite. Softened secondary sense of fellow, chap, is in British English from mid-19c. Related:
Buggerly.


eastern (adj.)

Old English easterne of the east, from the east; oriental; of the Eastern Orthodox Church; of the
eastern part of the globe, from east + -erne, suffix denoting direction. Cognate with Old Saxon
ostroni, Old High German ostroni, Old Norse austroenn. Eastern Shore of Maryland and Virginia so
called from 1620s.


iconoclast (n.)

breaker or destroyer of images, 1590s, from French iconoclaste and directly from Medieval Latin
iconoclastes, from Late Greek eikonoklastes, from eikon (genitive eikonos) image + klastes breaker,
from klas- past tense stem of klan to break (see clastic). Originally those in the Eastern Church in
8c. and 9c. whose mobs of followers destroyed icons and other religious objects on the grounds that
they were idols. Applied to 16c.-17c. Protestants in Netherlands who vandalized former Catholic
churches on similar grounds. Extended sense of one who attacks orthodox beliefs or institutions is
first attested 1842.


Pennsylvania

American colony, later U.S. state, 1681, literally Penn's Woods, a hybrid formed from the surname
Penn (Welsh, literally head) + Latin sylvania (see sylvan). Not named for William Penn, the
proprietor, but, on suggestion of Charles II, for Penn's late father, Admiral William Penn
(1621-1670), who had lent the king the money that was repaid to the son in the form of land for a
Quaker settlement in America. The story goes that the younger Penn wanted to call it New Wales, but
the king's secretary, a Welshman of orthodox religion, wouldn't hear of it. Pennsylvania Dutch is
attested from 1824.


