osseous (adj.)

bony, early 15c., from Medieval Latin ossous, from Latin osseus bony, of bone, from os (genitive
ossis) bone, from PIE *ost- bone (cognates: Sanskrit asthi, Hittite hashtai-, Greek osteon bone,
Greek ostrakon oyster shell, Avestan ascu- shinbone, Welsh asgwrn, Armenian oskr, Albanian asht
bone). The word was later reformed in English (1680s), perhaps by influence of French osseux.


ossicle (n.)

1570s, from Latin ossiculum, diminutive of os bone (see osseous).


osteo-

before vowels oste-, word-forming element meaning bone, bones, from Greek osteon bone (see osseous).


ossification (n.)

1690s, from Latin ossis of bones, genitive of os bone (see osseous) + -fication.


osteology (n.)

1660s, from French ost&#232;ologie, from Modern Latin osteologia, from Greek osteon bone (see
osseous) + -logia (see -logy).


ossuary (n.)

urn for the bones of the dead, 1650s, from Late Latin ossuarium charnel house, from neuter of Latin
ossuarius of bones, from Latin os (plural ossua) bone (see osseous) on model of mortuarium.


ossify (v.)

1713, to turn into bone, a back-formation from ossification, or else modeled on French ossifier
(18c.) and formed from Latin os (genitive ossis) bone (see osseous) + -fy. Figurative sense is from
1858. Related: Ossified; ossifying.


osteopathy (n.)

1857, disease of the bones, from Greek osteon bone (see osseous) + -pathy, from Greek -patheia,
comb. form of pathos suffering, disease, feeling (see pathos). As a system of treating ailments by
the manipulation of bones, it dates from 1889.


oyster (n.)

early 14c., from Old French oistre (Modern French hu&icirc;tre), from Latin ostrea, plural or fem.
of ostreum oyster, from Greek ostreon, from PIE *ost- bone (see osseous). Related to Greek ostrakon
hard shell and to osteon bone.Why then the world's mine Oyster, which I, with sword will open.
[Shakespeare, The Merry Wives of Windsor, II.ii.2]


periosteum (n.)

1590s, from Modern Latin periosteum, Late Latin periosteon, from Greek periosteon, neuter of
periosteos round the bones, from peri- (see peri-) + osteon (see osseous).


bone (n.)

Old English ban bone, tusk, from Proto-Germanic *bainam (cognates: Old Frisian ben, Old Norse bein,
Danish ben, German Bein). No cognates outside Germanic (the common PIE root is *os-; see osseous);
the Norse, Dutch, and German cognates also mean shank of the leg, and this is the main meaning in
Modern German, but English never seems to have had this sense.


ossifrage (n.)

sea-eagle, osprey, c.1600, from Latin ossifraga vulture, fem. of ossifragus, literally bone-breaker,
from ossifragus (adj.) bone-breaking, from os (genitive ossis) bone (see osseous) + stem of frangere
to break (see fraction). By this name Pliny meant the lammergeier (from German, literally lamb-
vulture), a very large Old World vulture that swallows and digests bones and was believed also to
drop them from aloft to break them and get at the marrow. But in England and France, the word was
transferred to the osprey, perhaps on similarity of sound between the two words.


sacrum (n.)

bone at the base of the spine, 1753, from Late Latin os sacrum sacred bone, from Latin os bone (see
osseous) + sacrum, neuter of sacer sacred (see sacred). Said to be so called because the bone was
the part of animals that was offered in sacrifices. Translation of Greek hieron osteon. Greek hieros
also can mean strong, and some sources suggest the Latin is a mistranslation of Galen, who was
calling it the strong bone.


ostracism (n.)

1580s, a method of 10-year banishment in ancient Athens, by which the citizens gathered and each
wrote on a potsherd or tile the name of a man they deemed dangerous to the liberties of the people,
and a man whose name turned up often enough was sent away. From Middle French ostracisme (16c.),
Modern Latin ostracismus, or directly from Greek ostrakismos, from ostrakizein to ostracize, from
ostrakon tile, potsherd, from PIE *ost-r-, from root *ost- bone (see osseous). The Greek word is
related to osteon bone, ostreion oyster (and cognate with German Estrich pavement, which is from
Medieval Latin astracus pavement, ultimately from Greek ostrakon).    A similar practice in ancient
Syracuse (with banishment for five years) was by writing names on olive leaves, and thus was called
petalismos.


coast (n.)

margin of the land, early 14c.; earlier rib as a part of the body (early 12c.), from Old French
coste rib, side, flank; slope, incline; later coast, shore (12c., Modern French c&ocirc;te), from
Latin costa a rib, perhaps related to a root word for bone (compare Old Church Slavonic kosti bone,
also see osseous).    Latin costa developed a secondary sense in Medieval Latin of the shore, via
notion of the side of the land, as well as side of a hill, and this passed into Romanic (Italian
costa coast, side, Spanish cuesta slope, costa coast), but only in the Germanic languages that
borrowed it is it fully specialized in this sense (Dutch kust, Swedish kust, German K&uuml;ste,
Danish kyst). French also used this word for hillside, slope, which led to verb meaning sled
downhill, first attested 1775 in American English. Expression the coast is clear (16c.) is an image
of landing on a shore unguarded by enemies.


