outcast (n.)

mid-14c., a person cast out or rejected, originally past participle of Middle English outcasten,
from out + casten to cast (see cast (v.)). The adjective is attested from late 14c. In an Indian
context, outcaste one who has been expelled from his caste is from 1876; see caste.


ronin (n.)

masterless man, outcast, outlaw, 1871, from Japanese, from ro wave + nin man.


Ishmael

masc. proper name, biblical son of Abraham and Hagar, from Hebrew Yishma'el, literally God hears,
from yishma, imperf. of shama he heard. The Arabs claim descent from him. Figurative sense of an
outcast, whose hand is against every man, and every man's hand against him is from Gen. xvi:12.


refuse (n.)

mid-14c., an outcast; mid-14c., a rejected thing, waste material, trash, from Old French refus waste
product, rubbish; refusal, denial, rejection, a back-formation from the past participle of refuser
(see refuse (v.)). As an adjective from late 14c., despised, rejected; early 15c., of low quality.


pariah (n.)

1610s, from Portuguese paria or directly from Tamil paraiyar, plural of paraiyan drummer (at
festivals, the hereditary duty of members of the largest of the lower castes of southern India),
from parai large festival drum. Especially numerous at Madras, where its members supplied most of
the domestics in European service [OED]. Applied by Hindus and Europeans to any members of low Hindu
castes and even to outcastes. Extended meaning social outcast is first attested 1819.


tangram (n.)

Chinese geometric puzzle, 1864, said to be an arbitrary formation based on anagram, etc. First
element perhaps Chinese t'an to extend, or t'ang, commonly used in Cantonese for Chinese. Some
suggest it is the name of the inventor, but no such person is known to Chinese scholars [OED].
Another theory involves the Tanka, an outcast aboriginal people of southern China, and Western
sailors who discovered the puzzle from their Tanka girlfriends. Perhaps from an obscure sense of
tram. The Chinese name is Ch'i ch'iao t'u seven ingenious plan.


wretch (n.)

Old English wrecca wretch, stranger, exile, from Proto-Germanic *wrakjon pursuer; one pursued
(cognates: Old Saxon wrekkio, Old High German reckeo a banished person, exile, German recke renowned
warrior, hero), related to Old English wreccan to drive out, punish (see wreak). The contrast in the
development of the meaning in Eng. and German is remarkable [OED]. Sense of vile, despicable person
developed in Old English, reflecting the sorry state of the outcast, as presented in Anglo-Saxon
verse (such as The Wanderer). Compare German Elend misery, from Old High German elilenti sojourn in
a foreign land, exile.


waif (n.)

late 14c., unclaimed property, flotsam, stray animal, from Anglo-French waif (13c., Old French
guaif) ownerless property, something lost; as an adjective, not claimed, outcast, abandoned,
probably from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse veif waving thing, flag, from Proto-Germanic
*waif-, from PIE *weip- to turn, vacillate, tremble ecstatically (see vibrate). Compare Medieval
Latin waivium thing thrown away by a thief in flight. A Scottish/northern English parallel form was
wavenger (late 15c.).    Meaning person (especially a child) without home or friends first attested
1784, from legal phrase waif and stray (1620s), from the adjective in the sense lost, strayed,
homeless. Neglected children being uncommonly thin, the word tended toward this sense. Connotations
of fashionable, small, slender woman began 1991 with application to childishly slim supermodels such
as Kate Moss.


