outlaw (v.)

Old English utlagian to outlaw, banish, from utlaga an outlaw (see outlaw (n.)). Related: Outlawed;
outlawing.


outlaw (n.)

Old English utlaga one put outside the law (and thereby deprived of its benefits and protections),
from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse utlagi (n.) outlaw, from utlagr (adj.) outlawed,
banished, from ut out (see out (adv.)) + *lagu, plural of lag law (see law).[G]if he man to
dea&eth;e gefylle, beo he &thorn;onne utlah [Laws of Edward &amp; Guthrum, c.924] Meaning one living
a lawless life is first recorded 1880. As an adjective from Old English.


outlawry (n.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French utlagerie, a hybrid from Old English utlaga (see outlaw (n.)) + -ary.


butch (n.)

tough youth, 1902, first attested in nickname of U.S. outlaw George Cassidy  (1866-?), probably an
abbreviation of butcher (n.). Sense of aggressive lesbian is 1940s.


ronin (n.)

masterless man, outcast, outlaw, 1871, from Japanese, from ro wave + nin man.


attainder (n.)

extinction of rights of a person sentenced to death or outlaw, mid-15c., from noun use of Old French
ataindre to touch upon, strike, hit, seize, accuse, condemn (see attain). For use of French
infinitives as nouns, especially in legal language, see waiver.


merry man (n.)

companion in arms, follower of a knight, outlaw, etc., is attested from late 14c., from merry (adj.)
+ man (n.). Related: Merry men.


proscribe (v.)

early 15c., write before, prefix, from Latin proscribere publish in writing (literally write in
front of), including senses of publish as having forfeited one's property, condemn, outlaw before
the world, from pro- before (see pro-) + scribere to write (see script (n.)). Meaning prohibit as
wrong or dangerous first recorded 1620s.


banish (v.)

late 14c., banischen, from banniss-, extended stem of Old French banir announce, proclaim; levy;
forbid; banish, proclaim an outlaw, from a Germanic source (perhaps Frankish *bannjan to order or
prohibit under penalty), or from Vulgar Latin cognate *bannire (see bandit). Related: Banished;
banishing.


bandit (n.)

1590s, from Italian bandito (plural banditi) outlaw, past participle of bandire proscribe, banish,
from Vulgar Latin *bannire to proclaim, proscribe, from Proto-Germanic *bann (see ban (v.)).
*Bannire (or its Frankish cognate *bannjan) in Old French became banir-, which, with lengthened
stem, became English banish.


cleavage (n.)

1816, in geology, action of splitting (rocks or gems) along natural fissures, from cleave (v.1) +
-age. General meaning action or state of cleaving or being cleft is from 1867.    The sense of cleft
between a woman's breasts in low-cut clothing is first recorded 1946, defined in a Time magazine
article [Aug. 5] as the Johnston Office trade term for the shadowed depression dividing an actress'
bosom into two distinct sections; traditionally first used in this sense by U.S. publicist Joseph I.
Breen (1888-1965), head of the Production Code Administration (replaced 1945 by Eric Johnston),
enforcers of Hollywood self-censorship, in reference to Jane Russell's costumes and poses in The
Outlaw.


Tory (n.)

1566, an outlaw, specifically one of a class of Irish robbers noted for outrages and savage cruelty,
from Irish toruighe plunderer, originally pursuer, searcher, from Old Irish toirighim I pursue, from
toir pursuit, from Celtic *to-wo-ret- a running up to, from PIE root *ret- to run, roll (see
rotary).    About 1646, it emerged as a derogatory term for Irish Catholics dispossessed of their
land (some of whom subsequently turned to outlawry); c.1680 applied by Exclusioners to supporters of
the Catholic Duke of York (later James II) in his succession to the throne of England. After 1689,
Tory was the name of a British political party at first composed of Yorkist Tories of 1680.
Superseded c.1830 by Conservative, though it continues to be used colloquially. In American history,
Tory was the name given after 1769 to colonists who remained loyal to George III of England; it
represents their relative position in the pre-revolutionary English political order in the colonies.
As an adjective from 1680s.


enemy (n.)

early 13c., from Old French enemi (12c.), earlier inimi (9c.) enemy, adversary, foe, demon, the
Devil, from Latin inimicus hostile, unfriendly; an enemy (source of Italian nemico, Catalan enamic,
Spanish enemigo, Portuguese inimigo), from in- not (see in- (1)) + amicus friend related to amare to
love (see Amy).    Most words for personal enemy cover also enemy in war, but certain languages have
special terms for the latter, such as Greek polemioi (distinct from ekhthroi), Latin hostis,
originally stranger (distinct from inimicus), Russian neprijatel' (distinct from vrag).    Russian
vrag (Old Church Slavonic vragu) is cognate with Lithuanian vargas misery (see urge (v.)), and
probably is related to Proto-Germanic *wargoz, source of Old Norse vargr outlaw, hence wolf;
Icelandic vargur fox, Old English wearg criminal, felon; which likely were the inspirations for
J.R.R. Tolkien's warg a kind of large ferocious wolf in The Hobbit (1937) and Lord of the Rings.
Related: Enemies.


