outlook (n.)

mental view or survey, 1742, from out (adv.) + look (v.). The meaning prospect for the future is
attested from 1851. Earliest sense was a look-out (1660s). The literal sense of vigilant watch, act
or practice of looking out (1815) is rare; look-out being used instead for this.


perspective (n.)

late 14c., science of optics, from Old French perspective and directly from Medieval Latin
perspectiva ars science of optics, from fem. of perspectivus of sight, optical from Latin perspectus
clearly perceived, past participle of perspicere inspect, look through, look closely at, from per-
through (see per) + specere look at (see scope (n.1)). Sense of art of drawing objects so as to give
appearance of distance or depth is first found 1590s, influenced by Italian prospettiva, an artists'
term. The figurative meaning mental outlook over time is first recorded 1762.


commencement (n.)

late 13c., beginning, from Old French comencement beginning, start (Modern French commencement),
from comencier (see commence). Meaning school graduation ceremony attested by 1850, American
English. (Sense entrance upon the privileges of a master or doctor in a university is from late
14c.)    I know what you are thinking of -- the class members grouped in a semicircle on the stage,
the three scared boys in new ready-made black suits, the seventeen pretty girls in fluffy white
dresses (the gowns of the year), each senior holding a ribbon-tied manuscript bulging with thoughts
on Beyond the Alps Lies Italy, Our Ship is Launched -- Whither Shall it Sail? and similar topics.
[Charles Moreau Harger, The Real Commencement, New Outlook, May 8, 1909]


sunny (adj.)

full of sun, early 14c., from sun (n.) + -y (2). Compare Dutch zonnig, German sonnig. Figurative
sense of cheerful is attested from 1540s. Sunny side in reference to optimistic outlook is from
1831. Eggs served sunny side up first attested 1887, in lunch counter slang, in reference to
appearance when served.    Young Man (in Park Row coffee-and-cake saloon)--Waiter, I want a
beefsteak, unpeeled potatoes, and a couple of eggs fried on one side only!    Waiter
(vociferously)--Slaughter in the pan, a Murphy with his coat on, an' two white wings with the sunny
side up! [Puck, April 27, 1887]     Related: Sunnily; sunniness. As a noun meaning sunfish from
1835.


pork (n.)

c.1300 (early 13c. in surname Porkuiller), flesh of a pig as food, from Old French porc pig, swine,
boar, and directly from Latin porcus pig, tame swine, from PIE *porko- young swine (cognates:
Umbrian purka; Old Church Slavonic prase young pig; Lithuanian parsas pig; and Old English fearh,
Middle Dutch varken, both from Proto-Germanic *farhaz).   Pork barrel in the literal sense is from
1801, American English; meaning state's financial resources (available for distribution) is attested
from 1907 (in full, national pork barrel); it was noted as an expression of U.S. President President
William Howard Taft:    Now there is a proposition that we issue $500,000,000 or $1,000,000,000 of
bonds for a waterway, and then that we just apportion part to the Mississippi and part to the
Atlantic, a part to the Missouri and a part to the Ohio. I am opposed to it. I am opposed to it
because it not only smells of the pork barrel, but it will be the pork barrel itself. Let every
project stand on its bottom. [The Outlook, Nov. 6, 1909, quoting Taft]    The magazine article that
includes the quote opens with:    We doubt whether any one knows how or when, or from what
application of what story, the phrase the National pork barrel has come into use. If not a very
elegant simile, it is at least an expressive one, and suggests a graphic picture of Congressmen
eager for local advantage going, one after another, to the National pork barrel to take away their
slices for home consumption.   Pork in this sense is attested from 1862 (compare figurative use of
bacon). Pork chop is attested from 1858. Pork pie is from 1732; pork-pie hat (1855) originally
described a woman's style popular c.1855-65, so called for its shape.


