outrageous (adj.)

c.1300, excessive, extravagant, from Old French outrageus, outrajos immoderate, excessive, violent,
lawless (Modern French outrageux), from outrage, oltrage (see outrage). Meaning flagrantly evil is
late 14c.; modern teen slang usages of it unwittingly approach the original and etymological sense
of outrage. Related: Outrageously; outrageousness.


outrage (v.)

c.1300, to go to excess, act immoderately, from outrage (n.). From 1580s with meaning do violence
to. Related: Outraged; outraging.


outrage (n.)

c.1300, evil deed, offense, crime; affront, indignity, from Old French outrage harm, damage; insult;
criminal behavior; presumption, insolence, overweening (12c.), earlier oltrage (11c.), from Vulgar
Latin *ultraticum excess, from Latin ultra beyond (see ultra-). Etymologically, the passing beyond
reasonable bounds in any sense; meaning narrowed in English toward violent excesses because of folk
etymology from out + rage. Of injuries to feelings, principles, etc., from 1769.


violate (v.)

early 15c., to break (an oath, etc.), from Latin violatus, past participle of violare treat with
violence, dishonor, outrage (see violation). Sense of ravish is first recorded mid-15c. Related:
Violated; violating.


hubris (n.)

also hybris, 1884, a back-formation from hubristic or else from Greek hybris wanton violence,
insolence, outrage, originally presumption toward the gods; the first element probably PIE *ud- up,
out, but the meaning of the second is  debated.


outre (adj.)

exaggerated, extravagant, eccentric, 1722, from French outr&eacute; exaggerated, excessive, extreme,
past participle of outrer to carry to excess, overdo, overstrain, exaggerate, from outre beyond (see
outrage).


excess (n.)

late 14c., from Old French exces (14c.) excess, extravagance, outrage, from Latin excessus
departure, a going beyond the bounds of reason or beyond the subject, from stem of excedere to
depart, go beyond (see exceed). As an adjective from late 15c.


snape (v.)

also sneap, to be hard upon, rebuke, revile, snub, early 14c., from Old Norse sneypa to outrage,
dishonor, disgrace, probably related to similar-sounding words meaning cut (compare snip (v.)).
Verbal meaning bevel the end (of a timber) to fit an inclined surface is of uncertain origin or
connection. Snaiping rebuking, reproaching, reviling is attested from early 14c.


indignity (n.)

1580s, unworthiness, also unworthy treatment; act intended to expose someone to contempt, from Latin
indignitatem (nominative indignitas) unworthiness, meanness, baseness, also unworthy conduct, an
outrage, noun of quality from indignus unworthy (see indignation). Related: Indignities.


violation (n.)

c.1400, from Old French violacion and directly from Latin violationem (nominative violatio) an
injury, irreverence, profanation, from past participle stem of violare to treat with violence,
outrage, dishonor, perhaps an irregular derivative of vis strength, force, power, energy, from PIE
root *weie- to go after, pursue with vigor or desire, with noun derivatives meaning force, desire
(see venison).


supprise (n.)

mid-15c., injury, wrong, outrage, from supprise (v.) overpower, subdue, put down; grieve, afflict
(c.1400), also take unawares, attack unexpectedly (mid-15c.), from Anglo-French supprise, fem. past
participle of supprendre, variant of sorprendre (see surprise (n.)). The noun later also had sense
oppression; surprise attack, but perhaps originally was an alternate form of surprise used in a
specific sense.


taw (v.)

to prepare (leather), from Old English tawian prepare, make ready, make; cultivate, also harass,
insult, outrage to do, make, from Proto-Germanic *tawjan (cognates: Old Frisian tawa, Old Saxon
toian, Middle Dutch tauwen, Dutch touwen, Old High German zouwen to prepare, Old High German zawen
to succeed, Gothic taujan to make, prepare), from Proto-Germanic root *taw- to make, manufacture
(compare tool (n.)).


shirt (n.)

Old English scyrte skirt, tunic, from Proto-Germanic *skurtjon a short garment (cognates: Old Norse
skyrta, Swedish skjorta skirt, kirtle; Middle Dutch scorte, Dutch schort apron; Middle High German
schurz, German Schurz apron), related to Old English  scort, sceort short, from PIE *(s)ker- (1) to
cut (see shear (v.)).    Formerly of the chief garment worn by both sexes, but in modern use long
only of that for men; in reference to women's tops, reintroduced 1896. Bloody shirt, exposed as a
symbol of outrage, is attested from 1580s. To give (someone) the shirt off one's back is from 1771.
To lose one's shirt suffer total financial loss is from 1935. To keep one's shirt on be patient
(1904) is from the notion of (not) stripping down for a fight.


