overwhelmed (adj.)

mid-15c., past participle adjective from overwhelm.


overwhelm (v.)

early 14c., to turn upside down, to overthrow, from over- + Middle English whelmen to turn upside
down (see whelm). Meaning to submerge completely is mid-15c. Perhaps the connecting notion is a
boat, etc., washed over, and overset, by a big wave. Figurative sense of to bring to ruin is
attested from 1520s. Related: Overwhelmed; overwhelming; overwhelmingly.


wow (v.)

overwhelm with delight or amazement, 1924, American English slang, from wow (interj.). Related:
Wowed; wowing. Used as a noun meaning unqualified success since 1920.


swamp (v.)

overwhelm, sink (as if in a swamp), 1772, from swamp (n.). Figurative sense is from 1818. Related:
Swamped; swamping.


underwhelm (v.)

1953 (implied in underwhelming), a facetious play on overwhelm, with under. Related: Underwhelmed;
underwhelmingly.


amaze (v.)

early 13c., amasian stupefy, make crazy, from a-, probably used here as an intensive prefix, +
-masian, related to maze (q.v.). Sense of overwhelm with wonder is from 1580s. Related: Amazed;
amazing.


submerge (v.)

c.1600 (transitive), from French submerger (14c.) or directly from Latin submergere to plunge under,
sink, overwhelm, from sub under (see sub-) + mergere to plunge, immerse (see merge). Intransitive
meaning sink under water, sink out of sight is from 1650s, made common 20c. in connection with
submarines. Related: Submerged; submerging.


woebegone (adj.)

c.1300, in expressions such as me is wo bigone woe has beset me, from woe + begon to beset,
surround, overwhelm, from Old English began go over, traverse; inhabit, occupy; surround, beset,
overrun; from be + go.


involve (v.)

late 14c., envelop, surround, from Latin involvere envelop, surround, overwhelm, literally roll
into, from in- in (see in- (2)) + volvere to roll (see volvox). Originally envelop, surround, sense
of take in, include first recorded c.1600. Related: Involved; Involving.


transport (v.)

late 14c., convey from one place to another, from Old French transporter carry or convey across;
overwhelm (emotionally) (14c.) or directly from Latin transportare carry over, take across, convey,
remove, from trans- across (see trans-) + portare to carry (see port (n.1)). Sense of carry away
with strong feelings is first recorded c.1500. Meaning to carry away into banishment is recorded
from 1660s.


perfidy (n.)

1590s, from Middle French perfidie (16c.), from Latin perfidia faithlessness, falsehood, treachery,
from perfidus faithless, from phrase per fidem decipere to deceive through trustingness, from per
through (see per) + fidem (nominative fides) faith (see faith).    [C]ombinations of wickedness
would overwhelm the world by the advantage which licentious principles afford, did not those who
have long practiced perfidy grow faithless to each other. [Samuel Johnson, Life of Waller]


overcome (v.)

Old English ofercuman to reach, overtake, also to conquer, prevail over, from ofer (see over) +
cuman to come (see come (v.)). A common Germanic compound (Middle Dutch overkomen, Old High German
ubarqueman, German &uuml;berkommen). In reference to mental or chemical force, to overwhelm, render
helpless, it is in late Old English. Meaning to surmount (a difficulty or obstacle) is from c.1200.
The Civil Rights anthem We Shall Overcome was put together c.1950s from lyrics from Charles
Tindley's spiritual I'll Overcome Some Day (1901), and melody from pre-Civil War spiritual No More
Auction Block for Me. Related: Overcame; overcoming.


mortify (v.)

late 14c., to kill, from Old French mortefiier destroy, overwhelm, punish, from Late Latin
mortificare cause death, kill, put to death, literally make dead, from mortificus producing death,
from Latin mors (genitive mortis) death (see mortal (adj.)) + root of facere to make (see
factitious). Religious sense of to subdue the flesh by abstinence and discipline first attested
early 15c. Sense of humiliate first recorded 1690s (compare mortification). Related: Mortified;
mortifying.


cover (v.)

mid-12c., from Old French covrir (12c., Modern French couvrir) to cover, protect, conceal,
dissemble, from Late Latin coperire, from Latin cooperire to cover over, overwhelm, bury, from com-,
intensive prefix (see com-), + operire to close, cover (see weir). Related: Covered; covering.
Military sense is from 1680s; newspaper sense first recorded 1893; use in football dates from 1907.
Betting sense is 1857. OF horses, as a euphemism for copulate it dates from 1530s. Covered wagon
attested from 1745.


gulf (n.)

late 14c., profound depth; geographic sense is c.1400; from Old French golf a gulf, whirlpool, from
Italian golfo a gulf, a bay, from Late Latin colfos, from Greek kolpos bay, gulf, earlier trough
between waves, fold of a garment, originally bosom, the common notion being curved shape, from PIE
*kwelp- to arch, to vault (compare Old English hwealf, a-hwielfan to overwhelm). Latin sinus
underwent the same development, being used first for bosom, later for gulf. Replaced Old English
s&aelig;-earm. Figurative sense of a wide interval is from 1550s. The Gulf Stream (1775) takes its
name from the Gulf of Mexico.


snow (v.)

c.1300, from the noun, replacing Old English sniwan, which would have yielded modern snew (which
existed as a parallel form until 17c. and, in Yorkshire, even later), from the root of snow (n.).
The Old English verb is cognate with Middle Dutch sneuuwen, Dutch sneeuwen, Old Norse snjova,
Swedish sn&#246;ga.  Also &thorn;ikke as snow &thorn;at snew,  Or al so hail &thorn;at stormes blew.
[Robert Mannyng of Brunne, transl. Wace's Chronicle, c.1330]    The figurative sense of overwhelm;
surround, cover, and imprison (as deep snows can do to livestock) is 1880, American English, in
phrase to snow (someone) under. Snow job strong, persistent persuasion in a dubious cause is World
War II armed forces slang, probably from the same metaphoric image.


slay (v.)

Old English slean to smite, strike, beat, also to kill with a weapon, slaughter (class VI strong
verb; past tense sloh, slog, past participle slagen), from Proto-Germanic *slahan, from root *slog-
to hit (cognates: Old Norse and Old Frisian sla, Danish slaa, Middle Dutch slaen, Dutch slaan, Old
High German slahan, German schlagen, Gothic slahan to strike). The Germanic words are from PIE root
*slak- to strike (cognates: Middle Irish past participle slactha struck, slacc sword).    Modern
German cognate schlagen maintains the original sense of to strike. Meaning overwhelm with delight
(mid-14c.) preserves one of the wide range of meanings the word once had, including, in Old English,
stamp (coins); forge (weapons); throw, cast; pitch (a tent), to sting (of a snake); to dash, rush,
come quickly; play (the harp); gain by conquest.


