overthrow (v.)

early 14c., to knock down, from over- + throw (v.). Figurative sense of to cast down from power,
defeat is attested from late 14c. Related: Overthrown; overthrowing. Earlier in same senses was
overwerpen to overturn (something), overthrow; destroy, from Old English oferweorpan (see warp
(v.)).


overthrow (n.)

1510s, act of overthrowing, from over- + throw (n.).


subversion (n.)

late 14c., physical destruction, demolition, ruination; overthrow of a system or law, from Old
French subversion downfall, overthrow (12c.), from Late Latin subversionem (nominative subversio) an
overthrow, ruin, destruction, noun of action from past participle stem of subvertere (see subvert).


supplant (v.)

early 14c., to trip up, overthrow, defeat, dispossess, from Old French suplanter, sosplanter to trip
up, overthrow, drive out, usurp, or directly from Latin supplantare trip up, overthrow, from sub
under (see sub-) + planta sole of the foot (see plant (n.)). Meaning replace one thing with another
first recorded 1670s. There is a sense evolution parallel in Hebrew akabh he beguiled, from akebh
heel.


subvert (v.)

late 14c., to raze, destroy, overthrow, undermine, overturn, from Old French subvertir overthrow,
destroy (13c.), or directly from Latin subvertere to turn upside down, overturn, overthrow, from sub
under (see sub-) + vertere to turn (see versus). Related: Subverted; subverting.


revolt (v.)

1540s, from Middle French revolter (15c.), from Italian rivoltare to overthrow, overturn, from
Vulgar Latin *revolvitare to overturn, overthrow, frequentative of Latin revolvere (past participle
revolutus) turn, roll back (see revolve). Related: Revolted; revolting.


confusion (n.)

late 13c., overthrow, ruin, from Old French confusion (11c.) disorder, confusion, shame, from Latin
confusionem (nominative confusio) a mingling, mixing, blending; confusion, disorder, noun of action
from confundere to pour together, also to confuse (see confound). Sense of a putting to shame (a
sort of mental overthrow) is late 14c. in English, while that of mental perplexity is from 1590s.


confounded (adj.)

as an intensive execration, odious, detestable, damned, 1650s, from past participle of confound, in
its older English sense of overthrow utterly.


Gotterdammerung

from German G&ouml;tterd&auml;mmerung, literally twilight of the gods, used by Wagner as the title
of the last opera in the Ring cycle; used in English from 1909 in the figurative sense of complete
overthrow of something.


coup d&#039;etat (n.)

1640s, from French coup d'&eacute;tate, literally stroke of the state (see coup). Technically any
sudden, decisive political act but popularly restricted to the overthrow of a government.


overcast (adj.)

c.1300, of weather, past participle adjective from verb overcast (early 13c.), to overthrow, also to
cover, to overspread as with a garment, usually of weather, from over- + cast (v.).


mine (v.1)

to dig, c.1300, to tunnel under fortifications to overthrow them, from mine (n.1) or from Old French
miner to dig, mine; exterminate. From mid-14c. as to dig in the earth (for treasure, etc.).
Figurative use from mid-14c. Related: Mined; mining.


convulse (v.)

1640s, transitive; 1680s, intransitive; from Latin convulsus, past participle of convellere
(transitive only) to pull away, to pull this way and that, wrench, hence to weaken, overthrow,
destroy (see convulsion). Related: Convulsed (1630s); convulsing.


labefaction (n.)

1610s, process of shaking; downfall, noun of action from Latin labefactus, past participle of
labefacere to cause to totter, shake; overthrow, from labi to slip, slide (see lapse (n.)) + facere
to make, do (see factitious). Related: Labefy.


overwhelm (v.)

early 14c., to turn upside down, to overthrow, from over- + Middle English whelmen to turn upside
down (see whelm). Meaning to submerge completely is mid-15c. Perhaps the connecting notion is a
boat, etc., washed over, and overset, by a big wave. Figurative sense of to bring to ruin is
attested from 1520s. Related: Overwhelmed; overwhelming; overwhelmingly.


foil (v.)

c.1300, foilen to spoil a trace or scent by running over it, irregularly from Old French fouler
trample, from Vulgar Latin *fullare to clean cloth (by treading on it), from Latin fullo one who
cleans cloth, fuller, of unknown origin.    Hence, to overthrow, defeat (1540s). Sense of frustrate
the efforts of first recorded 1560s. Related: Foiled; foiling. Foiled again! as a cry of defeat and
dismay is from at least 1847.


mine (n.1)

pit or tunnel in the earth for obtaining metals and minerals, c.1300, from Old French mine vein,
lode; tunnel, shaft; mineral ore; mine (for coal, tin, etc,), of uncertain origin, probably from a
Celtic source (compare Welsh mwyn, Irish mein ore, mine), from Old Celtic *meini-. Italy and Greece
were relatively poor in minerals, thus they did not contribute a word for this to English, but there
was extensive mining from an early date in Celtic lands (Cornwall, etc.). From c.1400 as a tunnel
under fortifications to overthrow them.


stability (n.)

mid-14c., firmness of resolve, mental equilibrium (of persons), from Old French stablete, establete
firmness, solidity, stability; durability, constancy (Modern French stabilit&#233;), from Latin
stabilitatem (nominative stabilitas) a standing fast, firmness, figuratively security,
steadfastness, from stabilis steadfast, firm (see stable (adj.)). In physical sense, state of being
difficult to overthrow, power of remaining upright, it is recorded from early 15c. Meaning
continuance in the same state is from 1540s.


filibuster (n.)

1580s, flibutor pirate, probably ultimately from Dutch vrijbuiter freebooter, a word which used of
pirates in the West Indies in Spanish (filibustero) and French (flibustier) forms, either or both of
which gave the word to American English (see freebooter).    Used 1850s and '60s of lawless
adventurers from the U.S. who tried to overthrow Central American governments. The legislative sense
is not in Bartlett (1859) and seems not to have been in use in U.S. legislative writing before 1865.
Probably the extension in sense is because obstructionist legislators pirated debate or overthrew
the usual order of authority. Not technically restricted to U.S. Senate, but that's where the
strategy works best.


afflict (v.)

late 14c., to cast down, from Old French aflicter, from Latin afflictare to damage, harass, torment,
frequentative of affligere (past participle afflictus) to dash down, overthrow, from ad- to (see
ad-) + fligere (past participle flictus) to strike, from PIE root *bhlig- to strike (cognates: Greek
phlibein to press, crush, Czech blizna scar, Welsh blif catapult). Transferred meaning of trouble,
distress, is first recorded 1530s. Related: Afflicted; afflicting.


trebuchet (n.)

medieval stone-throwing engine of war, c.1300 (in Anglo-Latin from early 13c.), from Old French
trebuchet (12c.) stone-throwing siege engine, from trabuchier to overturn, fall to the ground,
overthrow (11c.), from tra- (from Latin trans-, here expressing displacement) + Old French buc
trunk, bulk, from Frankish *buk- trunk of the body, from Proto-Germanic *bheu-, variant of *beu-,
used in forming words loosely associated with swelling (such as German bauch belly; see bull (n.2)).


cumber (v.)

c.1300, to overthrow, destroy; to be overwhelmed; to harass, apparently from French, but Old French
combrer to seize hold of, lay hands on, grab, snatch, take by force, rape, has not quite the same
sense. Perhaps a shortened formation from a verb akin to Middle English acombren obstructing
progress, from Old French encombrer, from combre obstruction, barrier, from Vulgar Latin *comboros
that which is carried together, perhaps from a Gaulish word.    The likely roots are PIE *kom (see
com-) + *bher- (1) to bear (see infer). Weakened sense of to hamper, to obstruct or weigh down is
late 14c. Related: Cumbered; cumbering.


revolution (n.)

late 14c., originally of celestial bodies, from Old French revolucion course, revolution (of
celestial bodies) (13c.), or directly from Late Latin revolutionem (nominative revolutio) a
revolving, noun of action from past participle stem of Latin revolvere turn, roll back (see
revolve).    General sense of instance of great change in affairs is recorded from mid-15c.
Political meaning overthrow of an established political system first recorded c.1600, derived from
French, and was especially applied to the expulsion of the Stuart dynasty under James II in 1688 and
transfer of sovereignty to William and Mary.


pervert (v.)

c.1300 (transitive), to turn someone aside from a right religious belief to a false or erroneous
one, from Old French pervertir pervert, undo, destroy (12c.) and directly from Latin pervertere
overthrow, overturn, figuratively to corrupt, subvert, abuse, literally turn the wrong way, turn
about, from per- away (see per) + vertere to turn (see versus).    Related: Perverted; perverting.
Replaced native froward, which embodies the same image. Old English had mishweorfed perverted,
inverted, an identical formation to the Latin word using native elements.


sedition (n.)

mid-14c., rebellion, uprising, revolt, concerted attempt to overthrow civil authority; violent
strife between factions, civil or religious disorder, riot; rebelliousness against authority, from
Old French sedicion (14c., Modern French s&#233;dition) and directly from Latin seditionem
(nominative seditio) civil disorder, dissention, strife; rebellion, mutiny, literally a going apart,
separation, from se- apart (see secret) + itio a going, from past participle of ire to go (see ion).
Meaning conduct or language inciting to rebellion against a lawful government is from 1838. An Old
English word for it was folcslite. Less serious than treason, as wanting an overt act, But it is not
essential to the offense of sedition that it threaten the very existence of the state or its
authority in its entire extent [Century Dictionary].


