overturn (v.)

early 13c., of a wheel, to rotate, roll over, from over- + turn (v.). Attested from c.1300 in
general transitive sense to throw over violently; figurative meaning to ruin, destroy is from late
14c. Of judicial decisions, to reverse, it is attested from 1826. Related: Overturned; overturning.


revolt (v.)

1540s, from Middle French revolter (15c.), from Italian rivoltare to overthrow, overturn, from
Vulgar Latin *revolvitare to overturn, overthrow, frequentative of Latin revolvere (past participle
revolutus) turn, roll back (see revolve). Related: Revolted; revolting.


subvert (v.)

late 14c., to raze, destroy, overthrow, undermine, overturn, from Old French subvertir overthrow,
destroy (13c.), or directly from Latin subvertere to turn upside down, overturn, overthrow, from sub
under (see sub-) + vertere to turn (see versus). Related: Subverted; subverting.


welt (n.)

early 15c., a shoemaker's term, perhaps related to Middle English welten to overturn, roll over
(c.1300), from Old Norse velta to roll (related to welter (v.)). Meaning ridge on the skin from a
wound is first recorded 1800.


upset (v.)

mid-15c., to set up, fix, from up (adv.) + set (v.). Similar formation in Middle Dutch opsetten set
up, propose, German aufsetzen. Modern sense of overturn, capsize (1803) is that of obsolete overset.
In reference to the stomach, from 1834. Meaning to throw into mental discomposure is from 1805.
Related: Upsetting.


overthrow (v.)

early 14c., to knock down, from over- + throw (v.). Figurative sense of to cast down from power,
defeat is attested from late 14c. Related: Overthrown; overthrowing. Earlier in same senses was
overwerpen to overturn (something), overthrow; destroy, from Old English oferweorpan (see warp
(v.)).


catastrophe (n.)

1530s, reversal of what is expected (especially a fatal turning point in a drama), from Latin
catastropha, from Greek katastrophe an overturning; a sudden end, from katastrephein to overturn,
turn down, trample on; to come to an end, from kata down (see cata-) + strephein turn (see strophe).
Extension to sudden disaster is first recorded 1748.


tip (v.1)

c.1300, to knock down, overturn, topple, knock askew (transitive), of uncertain origin, possibly
from Scandinavian (compare Swedish tippa to tip, dump), or from a special use of tip (n.).
Intransitive sense of to fall over, be overturned is from mid-15c. Related: Tipped; tipping. To tip
the scales at weigh (so much is from 1879. Tipping point attested by 1972. To tip (one's) hand
reveal one's intentions is from 1907, an image from poker-playing.


trebuchet (n.)

medieval stone-throwing engine of war, c.1300 (in Anglo-Latin from early 13c.), from Old French
trebuchet (12c.) stone-throwing siege engine, from trabuchier to overturn, fall to the ground,
overthrow (11c.), from tra- (from Latin trans-, here expressing displacement) + Old French buc
trunk, bulk, from Frankish *buk- trunk of the body, from Proto-Germanic *bheu-, variant of *beu-,
used in forming words loosely associated with swelling (such as German bauch belly; see bull (n.2)).


pervert (v.)

c.1300 (transitive), to turn someone aside from a right religious belief to a false or erroneous
one, from Old French pervertir pervert, undo, destroy (12c.) and directly from Latin pervertere
overthrow, overturn, figuratively to corrupt, subvert, abuse, literally turn the wrong way, turn
about, from per- away (see per) + vertere to turn (see versus).    Related: Perverted; perverting.
Replaced native froward, which embodies the same image. Old English had mishweorfed perverted,
inverted, an identical formation to the Latin word using native elements.


topsy-turvy (adv.)

1520s, but prob. in popular use from an earlier period [OED]; compare top over terve to fall over
(mid-15c.); likely from tops, plural of top (n.1) highest point + obsolete terve turn upside down,
topple over, from Old English tearflian to roll over, overturn, from Proto-Germanic *terbanan
(cognates: Old High German zerben to turn round). Century Dictionary calls it A word which, owing to
its popular nature, its alliterative type, and to ignorance of its origin, leading to various
perversions made to suggest some plausible origin, has undergone, besides the usual variations of
spelling, extraordinary modifications of form. It lists 31 variations. As an adjective from 1610s.


straw (n.)

Old English streaw (rare) stems or stalks of certain species of grains, apparently literally that
which is scattered or strewn, related to streowian (see strew), from Proto-Germanic *strawam that
which is scattered (cognates: Old Norse stra, Danish straa, Swedish str&#229;, Old Saxon stro, Old
Frisian stre, Old Dutch, Old High German stro, Dutch stroo, German Stroh straw), from PIE *stere- to
spread (see structure (n.)). The notion perhaps is of dried grain stalks strewn on a floor as
carpeting or bedding.    As a type of what is trifling or unimportant, attested from late 13c.
Meaning hollow tube through which a drink is sucked is recorded from 1851. To draw straws as a means
of deciding something is recorded from 1779 (the custom probably is older). As an adjective, made of
straw, mid-15c.; hence false, sham. Straw poll is from 1932; earlier straw vote (1866). Straw hat
first attested mid-15c. To clutch (or grasp or catch) at straws (1748) is what a drowning man
proverbially would do. The last straw (1836 apart from the full phrase) is from the proverbial
image: it is the last straw that breaks the camel's back (or, less often, the mare's, the horse's,
or the elephant's), an image in use in English by 1755.    Let it not, however, be inferred that
taxation cannot be pushed too far : it is, as the Oriental proverb says, the last straw that
overloads the camel ; a small addition, if ill-timed, may overturn the whole. [The Scots Magazine,
April 1799]


