overwhelmed (adj.)

mid-15c., past participle adjective from overwhelm.


awestruck (adj.)

1630s, overwhelmed by reverential fear, from awe (n.) + struck (see strike (v.)).


stricken (adj.)

1510s, wounded, affected (by disease, trouble, etc.), adjective use of archaic past participle of
strike (v.). Figurative meaning overwhelmed with terror, grief, etc. is from 1530s. An earlier
development is reflected in 13c. phrase striken in elde advanced in years, from strike in the sense
of to move, go, hence far advanced.


overwhelm (v.)

early 14c., to turn upside down, to overthrow, from over- + Middle English whelmen to turn upside
down (see whelm). Meaning to submerge completely is mid-15c. Perhaps the connecting notion is a
boat, etc., washed over, and overset, by a big wave. Figurative sense of to bring to ruin is
attested from 1520s. Related: Overwhelmed; overwhelming; overwhelmingly.


pooped (adj.)

tired, 1931, of unknown origin, perhaps imitative of the sound of heavy breathing from exhaustion
(compare poop (n.2)). But poop, poop out were used in 1920s in aviation, of an engine, to die. Also
there is a verb poop, of ships, to be overwhelmed by a wave from behind, often with catastrophic
consequences (see poop (n.1)); hence in figurative nautical use, to be overcome and defeated
(attested in 1920s).    It is an easy thing to run; the difficulty is to know when to stop. There is
always the possibility of being pooped, which simply means being overtaken by a mountain of water
and crushed into the depths out of harm's way for good and all. [Ralph Stock, The Cruise of the
Dream Ship, 1921]


cumber (v.)

c.1300, to overthrow, destroy; to be overwhelmed; to harass, apparently from French, but Old French
combrer to seize hold of, lay hands on, grab, snatch, take by force, rape, has not quite the same
sense. Perhaps a shortened formation from a verb akin to Middle English acombren obstructing
progress, from Old French encombrer, from combre obstruction, barrier, from Vulgar Latin *comboros
that which is carried together, perhaps from a Gaulish word.    The likely roots are PIE *kom (see
com-) + *bher- (1) to bear (see infer). Weakened sense of to hamper, to obstruct or weigh down is
late 14c. Related: Cumbered; cumbering.


