overseer (n.)

late 14c., agent noun from oversee (v.).


oversee (v.)

Old English oferseon to look down upon, keep watch over, survey, observe; see over + see (v.).
Meaning to supervise is attested from mid-15c. The verb lacks the double sense of similar overlook,
but this emerges in the noun form oversight. Related: Oversaw; overseen.


supervise (v.)

late 15c., to look over (implied in supervising), from Medieval Latin supervisus, past participle of
supervidere oversee, inspect, from Latin super over (see super-) + videre see (see vision). Meaning
to oversee and superintend the work or performance of others is attested from 1640s. Related:
Supervised.


oversight (n.)

supervision, early 14c., from over- + sight. Meaning omission of notice, fact of passing over
without seeing attested from late 15c.; compare oversee.


supervisor (n.)

one who inspects and directs the work of others, mid-15c., from Medieval Latin supervisor, agent
noun from supervidere oversee, inspect (see supervise).


supervision (n.)

1630s, from Medieval Latin supervisionem (nominative supervisio), noun of action from past
participle stem of supervidere oversee, inspect (see supervise).


superintend (v.)

to have charge and direction of, 1610s, from Church Latin superintendere to oversee (see
superintendent). Related: Superintended; superintending.


survey (v.)

c.1400, to consider, contemplate, from Anglo-French surveier, Old French sorveoir look (down) at,
look upon, notice; guard, watch, from Medieval Latin supervidere oversee (see supervise). Meaning
examine the condition of is from mid-15c. That of to take linear measurements of a tract of ground
is recorded from 1540s. Related: Surveyed; surveying; surveyance (late 14c.).


surveillance (n.)

1802, from French surveillance oversight, supervision, a watch, noun of action from surveiller
oversee, watch (17c.), from sur- over (see sur- (1)) + veiller to watch, from Latin vigilare, from
vigil watchful (see vigil). Seemingly a word that came to English from the Terror in France
(surveillance committees were formed in every French municipality in March 1793 by order of the
Convention to monitor the actions and movements of suspect persons, outsiders, and dissidents).


superintendent (n.)

1550s, originally an ecclesiastical word meaning bishop or minister who supervises churches within a
district (ultimately a loan-translation of Greek episkopos overseer), from Medieval Latin
superintendentem (nominative superintendens), present participle of Late Latin superintendere
oversee, from Latin super above (see super-) + intendere turn one's attention to, direct (see
intend). Famously used by 16c. radical Protestants in place of bishop, which to them was tainted by
Papacy.    [Martinists] studie to pull downe Bishopps, and set vp Superintendents, which is nothing
else, but to raze out good Greeke, &amp; enterline bad Latine. [Lyly, Pappe with an Hatchet, 1589]
The general sense of a person who has charge of some business is first recorded 1580s. Meaning
janitor, custodian is from c.1935. Shortened form super first attested 1857, especially at first of
overseers of sheep ranches in Australia. As an adjective meaning superintending, from 1590s.


