overt (adj.)

early 14c., open to view, from Old French overt (Modern French ouvert), past participle of ovrir to
open, from Latin aperire to open, uncover, from PIE compound *ap-wer-yo- from *ap- off, away (see
abo-) + base *wer- (5) to cover (see weir). Compare Latin operire to cover, from the same root with
PIE prefix *op- over; and Lithuanian atveriu open, uzveriu shut.


overtly (adv.)

early 14c., from overt + -ly (2).


overture (n.)

mid-13c., opening, aperture; early 15c. as an introductory proposal, from Old French overture
opening; proposal (Modern French ouverture), from Latin apertura opening, from aperire to open,
uncover (see overt). Orchestral sense first recorded in English 1660s.


aperture (n.)

early 15c., from Latin apertura an opening, from apertus, past participle of aperire to open (see
overt).


apert (adj.)

c.1300, from Old French apert and directly from Latin apertus open, past participle of aperire to
open, uncover (see overt).


apricate (v.)

1690s, to bask in the sun, from Latin apricatus, past participle of apricari to bask in the sun,
from apricus exposed (to the sun); perhaps contracted from *apericus, from aperire to open (see
overt). Transitive sense is recorded from 1851.


aperitif (n.)

1894, alcoholic drink taken before a meal to stimulate the appetite, from French ap&eacute;ritif
laxative, laxative liqueur, literally opening, from Latin aperitivus, from aperire to open (see
overt). Compare Middle English apertive (adj.), a medical word meaning capable of opening or
dilating (pores, etc.), early 15c.


pert (adj.)

c.1300 (implied in pertly), evident, unconcealed, shortened form of Middle English apert open,
frank, from Old French apert, from Latin apertus, past participle of aperire to open (see overt).
Sense of saucy, bold first recorded late 14c. Less pejorative meaning lively, brisk, in good spirits
(c.1500) survives in U.S. dialectal peart (with Middle English alternative spelling). Related:
Pertness.


sedition (n.)

mid-14c., rebellion, uprising, revolt, concerted attempt to overthrow civil authority; violent
strife between factions, civil or religious disorder, riot; rebelliousness against authority, from
Old French sedicion (14c., Modern French s&#233;dition) and directly from Latin seditionem
(nominative seditio) civil disorder, dissention, strife; rebellion, mutiny, literally a going apart,
separation, from se- apart (see secret) + itio a going, from past participle of ire to go (see ion).
Meaning conduct or language inciting to rebellion against a lawful government is from 1838. An Old
English word for it was folcslite. Less serious than treason, as wanting an overt act, But it is not
essential to the offense of sedition that it threaten the very existence of the state or its
authority in its entire extent [Century Dictionary].


gunsel (n.)

1914, American English, from hobo slang, a catamite; specifically a young male kept as a sexual
companion, especially by an older tramp, from Yiddish genzel, from German G&auml;nslein gosling,
young goose. The secondary, non-sexual meaning young hoodlum seems to be entirely traceable to
Dashiell Hammett, who sneaked it into The Maltese Falcon (1929) while warring with his editor over
the book's racy language.    Another thing, Spade repeated, glaring at the boy: Keep that gunsel
away from me while you're making up your mind. I'll kill him.    The context implies some connection
with gun and a sense of gunman, and evidently the editor bought it. The word was retained in the
script of the 1941 movie made from the book, so evidently the Motion Picture Production Code censors
didn't know it either.    The relationship between Kasper Gutman (Sidney Greenstreet) and his young
hit-man companion, Wilmer Cook (Elisha Cook, Jr.), is made fairly clear in the movie, but the overt
mention of sexual perversion would have been deleted if the censors hadn't made the same mistaken
assumption as Hammett's editor. [Hugh Rawson, Wicked Words, 1989, p.184]


