pacify (v.)

late 15c., appease, allay the anger of (someone), from Middle French pacifier make peace, from Latin
pacificare to make peace; pacify, from pacificus (see pacific). Of countries or regions, to bring to
a condition of calm, c.1500, from the start with suggestions of submission and terrorization.
Related: Pacified; pacifying.


pay (v.)

c.1200, to appease, pacify, satisfy, from Old French paier to pay, pay up (12c., Modern French
payer), from Latin pacare to please, pacify, satisfy (in Medieval Latin especially satisfy a
creditor), literally make peaceful, from pax (genitive pacis) peace (see peace). Meaning to give
what is due for goods or services arose in Medieval Latin and was attested in English by early 13c.;
sense of please, pacify died out in English by 1500. Sense of suffer, endure (a punishment, etc.) is
first recorded late 14c. Related: Paid; paying.


pacification (n.)

a setting at peace, early 15c., from Middle French pacification act of making peaceful (15c.), from
Latin pacificationem (nominative pacificatio) a peace-making, noun of action from past participle
stem of pacificare to pacify (see pacify).


pacifier (n.)

one who pacifies or appeases, 1530s, agent noun from pacify. The meaning nipple-shaped device for
babies is first recorded 1904.


appease (v.)

c.1300 to reconcile, from Anglo-French apeser, Old French apaisier to pacify, make peace, appease,
be reconciled, placate (12c.), from the phrase a paisier bring to peace, from a to (see ad-) + pais,
from Latin pacem (nominative pax) peace (see peace). Related: Appeased; appeasing.


assuage (v.)

c.1300, from Anglo-French assuager, Old French assoagier soften, moderate, alleviate, calm, soothe,
pacify, from Vulgar Latin *adsuaviare, from Latin ad- to (see ad-) + suavis sweet, agreeable (see
sweet (adj.)). For sound development in French, compare deluge from Latin diluvium, abridge from
abbreviare. Related: Assuaged; assuaging.


mollify (v.)

late 14c., to soften (a substance), from Old French mollifier or directly from Late Latin
mollificare make soft, mollify from mollificus softening, from Latin mollis soft (see melt (v.)) +
root of facere to make (see factitious). Transferred sense of soften in temper, appease, pacify is
recorded from early 15c. Related: Mollified; mollifying.


mitigate (v.)

early 15c., relieve (pain), from Latin mitigatus, past participle of mitigare soften, make tender,
ripen, mellow, tame, figuratively, make mild or gentle, pacify, soothe, ultimately from mitis
gentle, soft (from PIE *mei- mild) + root of agere do, make, act (see act). First element is from
PIE root *mei- soft, mild. Related: Mitigated; mitigating; mitigates.


