pallbearer (n.)

also pall-bearer, 1707, from pall (n.) + agent noun of bear (v.). Originally one who holds the
corners of the pall at a funeral.


pall-mall

see mall.


pall (v.)

become tiresome, 1700, from Middle English pallen to become faint, fail in strength (late 14c.),
shortened form of appallen to dismay, fill with horror or disgust (see appall). Related: Palled;
palling.


palliate (v.)

alleviate without curing, early 15c., from Medieval Latin palliatus, literally cloaked, from past
participle of Late Latin palliare cover with a cloak, conceal, from Latin pallium cloak (see pall
(n.)). Related: Palliated; palliating; palliation.


pall (n.)

Old English p&aelig;ll rich cloth or cloak, purple robe, altar cloth, from Latin pallium cloak,
coverlet, covering, in Tertullian, the garment worn by Christians instead of the Roman toga; related
to pallo robe, cloak, palla long upper garment of Roman women, perhaps from the root of pellis skin.
Notion of cloth spread over a coffin (mid-15c.) led to figurative sense of dark, gloomy mood (1742).


tarpaulin (n.)

c.1600, evidently a hybrid from tar (n.1) + palling, from pall heavy cloth covering (see pall (n.));
probably so called because the canvas sometimes is coated in tar to make it waterproof. Originally
tarpawlin, tarpawling, etc., the spelling settled down early 18c.


mall (n.)

1737, shaded walk serving as a promenade, generalized from The Mall, name of a broad, tree-lined
promenade in St. James's Park, London (so called from 1670s, earlier Maill, 1640s), which was so
called because it formerly was an open alley that was used to play pall-mall, a croquet-like game
involving hitting a ball with a mallet through a ring, from French pallemaille, from Italian
pallamaglio, from palla ball (see balloon) + maglio mallet (see mallet). Modern sense of enclosed
shopping gallery is from 1963. Mall rat is from 1985.


pole (n.1)

stake, late Old English pal stake, pole, post, a general Germanic borrowing (Old Frisian and Old
Saxon pal stake, Middle Dutch pael, Dutch paal, Old High German pfal, Old Norse pall) from Latin
palus stake (see pale (n.)).    Racing sense of inside fence surrounding a course is from 1851; pole
position in auto racing attested from 1904.  A ten-foot pole as a metaphoric measure of something
one would not touch something (or someone) else with is by 1839, American English. The ten-foot pole
was a common tool used to set stakes for fences, etc., and the phrase Can't touch de bottom with a
ten foot pole is in the popular old minstrel show song Camptown Races.    I saw her eat.  No very
unnatural occurrence I should think.  But she ate an onion!  Right my boy, right, never marry a
woman who would touch an onion with a ten foot pole.  [The Collegian, University of Virginia, 1839]


