palm (n.2)

tropical tree, Old English palma, Old French palme, both from Latin palma palm tree, originally palm
of the hand; the tree so called from the shape of its leaves, like fingers of a hand (see palm
(n.1)).    The word traveled early to northern Europe, where the tree does not grow, via
Christianity, and took root in the local languages (such as Old Saxon palma, Old High German palma,
Old Norse palmr). Palm Sunday is Old English palm-sunnand&aelig;g.    In ancient times, a leaf or
frond was carried or worn as a symbol of victory or triumph, or on feast days; hence figurative use
of palm for victory, triumph (late 14c.). Palm court large room in a hotel, etc., usually decorated
with potted palms first recorded 1908.


palm (v.)

impose (something) on (someone), 1670s, from palm (n.1). Extended form palm off is from 1822.


palm (n.1)

flat of the hand, c.1300, from Old French palme (Modern French paume), from Latin palma palm of the
hand, also flat end of an oar; palm tree, from PIE *pel- to spread out; flat (cognates: Greek palame
open hand, Old Irish lam, Welsh llaw, Old English folm, Old High German folma hand, Sanskrit panih
hand, hoof). Palm oil is earlier in the punning sense of bribe (1620s) than in the literal sense of
oil from the fruit of the West African palm (1705, from palm (n.2)).


palmer (n.)

 pilgrim who has returned from the Holy Land, late 12c. (as a surname), from Anglo-French palmer
(Old French palmier), from Medieval Latin palmarius, from Latin palma palm tree (see palm (n.2)). So
called because they wore palm branches in commemoration of the journey.


palmetto (n.)

1580s, from Spanish palmito dwarf fan palm tree, diminutive of palma palm tree, from Latin palma
(see palm (n.2)). The suffix was subsequently Italianized. The Palmetto Flag was an emblem of South
Carolina after secession (1860); the state was called Palmetto State from at least 1837.


palm-tree (n.)

Old English palm-treo; see palm (n.2) + tree (n.).


palmistry (n.)

divination from the palm of the hand, early 15c., from palme (see palm (n.1)) + obscure second
element, perhaps -estre (as in Middle English webbestre weaver) or -rie (as in Middle English
archerie archery). Palmist (n.) is an 1886 back-formation.


palmy (adj.)

triumphant, c.1600, from palm (n.2) in the triumph sense + -y (2). Literal meaning full of palms
attested from 1660s.


toddy (n.)

1610s, alteration of taddy (1610s), tarrie (c.1600) beverage made from fermented palm sap, from
Hindi tari palm sap (in which the -r- sounds close to an English -d-), from tar palm tree, from
Sanskrit tala-s, probably from a Dravidian language (compare Kannada tar, Telugu tadu). Meaning
beverage made of alcoholic liquor with hot water, sugar, and spices first recorded 1786.


racquet (n.)

handled hitting device used in tennis, etc., c.1500, probably originally tennis-like game played
with open hand (late 14c.), from Middle French rachette, requette (Modern French raquette) racket
for hitting; palm of the hand, perhaps via Italian racchetta or Spanish raqueta, both often said to
be from Arabic rahat, a form of raha palm of the hand, but this has been doubted. Compare French jeu
de paume tennis, literally play with the palm of the hand, and compare tennis).


tamarisk (n.)

southern European evergreen shrub, c.1400, from Late Latin tamariscus, variant of tamarix, of
unknown origin, probably a borrowing from a non-Indo-European language; perhaps Semitic and related
to Hebrew tamar palm tree, date palm (see tamarind).


tamarind (n.)

c.1400, fruit of the tamarind tree, used medicinally, ultimately from Arabic tamr hindi, literally
date of India, from hind India. First element cognate with Hebrew tamar palm tree, date palm. Of the
tree itself, from 1610s.


date (n.2)

the fruit, late 13c., from Old French date, from Old Proven&ccedil;al datil, from Latin dactylus,
from Greek daktylos date, originally finger, toe; so called because of fancied resemblance between
oblong fruit of the date palm and human digits. Possibly from a Semitic source (compare Hebrew
deqel, Aramaic diqla, Arabic daqal date palm) and assimilated to the Greek word for finger.


sallow (n.)

shrubby willow plant, Old English sealh (Anglian salh), from Proto-Germanic *salhjon (cognates: Old
Norse selja, Old High German salaha, and first element in German compound Salweide), from PIE
*sal(i)k- willow (cognates: Latin salix willow, Middle Irish sail, Welsh helygen, Breton halegen
willow). French saule willow is from Frankish salha, from the Germanic root. Used in Palm Sunday
processions and decorations in England before the importing of real palm leaves began.


glove (n.)

Old English glof glove, covering for the hand, also palm of the hand, from Proto-Germanic *galofo
(cognates: Old Norse glofi), probably from *ga- collective prefix + *lofi hand (cognates: Old Norse
lofi, Middle English love, Gothic lofa flat of the hand), from PIE *lep- be flat; palm, sole,
shoulder blade (cognates: Russian lopata shovel; Lithuanian lopa claw, lopeta shovel, spade).
German Handschuh, the usual word for glove, literally hand-shoe (Old High German hantscuoh; also
Danish and Swedish hantsche) is represented by Old English Handscio (the name of one of Beowulf's
companions, eaten by Grendel), but this is attested only as a proper name. To fit like a glove is
first recorded 1771.


arrack (n.)

c.1600, probably picked up in India, ultimately from Arabic araq, literally sweat, juice; used of
native liquors in Eastern countries, especially those distilled from fermented sap of coconut palm,
sometimes from rice or molasses.


smacker (n.)

money, c.1918, American English slang, perhaps from smack (v.1) on notion of something smacked into
the palm of the hand. Extended form smackeroo is attested from 1939.


tennis (n.)

mid-14c., most likely from Anglo-French tenetz hold! receive! take!, from Old French tenez,
imperative of tenir to hold, receive, take (see tenet), which was used as a call from the server to
his opponent. The original version of the game (a favorite sport of medieval French knights) was
played by striking the ball with the palm of the hand, and in Old French was called la paulme,
literally the palm, but to an onlooker the service cry would naturally seem to identify the game.
Century Dictionary says all of this is purely imaginary.    The use of the word for the modern game
is from 1874, short for lawn tennis, which originally was called sphairistike (1873), from Greek
sphairistike (tekhne) (skill) in playing at ball, from the root of sphere. It was invented, and
named, by Maj. Walter C. Wingfield and first played at a garden party in Wales, inspired by the
popularity of badminton.    The name 'sphairistike,' however, was impossible (if only because people
would pronounce it as a word of three syllables to rhyme with 'pike') and it was soon rechristened.
[Times of London, June 10, 1927] Tennis-ball attested from mid-15c.; tennis-court from 1560s;
tennis-elbow from 1883; tennis-shoes from 1887.


macaw (n.)

species of large, long-tailed birds, 1660s, from Portuguese macau, from a word in a Brazilian
language, perhaps Tupi macavuana, which may be the name of a type of palm tree the fruit of which
the birds eat.


napalm (n.)

1942, from na(phthenic) palm(itic) acids, used in manufacture of the chemical that thickens
gasoline. The verb is 1950, from the noun. Related: Napalmed; napalming.


loof (n.)

palm of the hand, Scottish and Northern English, c.1300, from Old Norse lofe, cognate with Gothic
lofa, Russian lapa paw, Lettish lepa paw.


coco (n.)

palm tree, mid-16c., from Spanish and Portuguese coco grinning face, on resemblance of the three
holes at the base of the shell to a human face. The earlier word for it was the Latinized form
cocus, which sometimes was anglicized as cocos.


cycad (n.)

1845, Modern Latin, from Greek kykas, a word found in Theophrastus, but now thought to be a scribal
error for koikas palm trees, accusative plural of koix, a word from an unknown non-Greek language.


Florida

U.S. state, formerly a Spanish colony, probably from Spanish Pascua florida, literally flowering
Easter, a Spanish name for Palm Sunday, because the peninsula was discovered on that day (March 20,
1513) by the expedition of Spanish explorer Ponce de Le&oacute;n (1474-1521). From Latin floridus
(see florid).


grease (v.)

c.1300, from grease (n.). Sense of ply with bribe or protection money is 1520s, from notion of
grease the wheels make things run smoothly (mid-15c.). To grease (someone's) palm is from 1580s.
Expression greased lightning, representing something that goes very fast, is American English, by
1832.


sago (n.)

starch made of the piths of palms, 1570s, via Portuguese and Dutch from Malay sagu, the name of the
palm tree from which it is obtained (attested in English in this sense from 1550s). Also borrowed in
French (sagou), Spanish (sagu), German (Sago).


supinate (v.)

1831, to place the hand so that the palm is turned upward, from Latin supinatus, past participle of
supinare to bend back, related to supinus (see supine). Related: Supinated; supinating; supinator.


foist (v.)

1540s, from Dutch vuisten take in hand, from Middle Dutch vuist fist (see fist). Earliest sense was
cheating at dice by concealing a loaded one in the palm of the hand with the intention of
introducing it into play; meaning introduce surreptitiously is from 1560s. Related: Foisted;
foisting.


itchy (adj.)

Old English giccig; see itch + -y (2). Figurative itchy palm is attested by 1590s. Related:
Itchiness.


flatter (v.)

early 13c., from Old French flater to flatter (13c.), originally stroke with the hand, caress, from
Frankish *flat palm, flat of the hand (see flat (adj.)). [O]ne of many imitative verbs beginning
with fl- and denoting unsteady or light, repeated movement [Liberman]. Related: Flattered;
flattering.


sole (n.1)

bottom of the foot (technically, the planta, corresponding to the palm of the hand, Century
Dictionary), early 14c., from Old French sole, from Vulgar Latin *sola, from Latin solea sandal,
bottom of a shoe; a flatfish, from solum bottom, ground, foundation, lowest point of a thing (hence
sole of the foot), of uncertain origin. In English, the meaning bottom of a shoe or boot is from
late 14c.


schmear (n.)

1961, bribery, from Yiddish shmir spread, from shmirn to grease, smear, from Middle High German
smiren, from Old High German smirwen to smear (see smear (v.); compare slang to grease (someone's)
palm to bribe). Phrase the whole schmear the entire affair is attested from 1969, originally show
business jargon,


bushel (n.)

early 14c., measure of capacity containing four pecks or eight gallons, from Old French boissel
bushel (13c., Modern French boisseau), probably from boisse, a grain measure based on Gallo-Roman
*bostia handful, from Gaulish *bosta palm of the hand (compare Irish bass, Breton boz the hollow of
the hand). The exact measure varied from place to place and according to commodity, and since late
14c. it has been used loosely to mean a large quantity or number.


luff (n.)

c.1200, in sailing, from Old French lof spar, or some other nautical device, point of sail, also
windward side, probably from Germanic (compare Middle Dutch lof windward side of a ship (Dutch
loef), which might also be the direct source of the English word), from Proto-Germanic *lofo
(cognates: Old Norse lofi, Gothic lofa palm of the hand, Danish lab, Swedish labb paw), from PIE
*lep- to be flat (see glove). As a verb from late 14c., from the noun.


tailor (n.)

c.1300, from Anglo-French tailour, Old French tailleor tailor, also stone-mason (13c., Modern French
tailleur), literally a cutter, from tailler to cut, from Late Latin or old Medieval Latin taliare to
split (compare Medieval Latin taliator vestium a cutter of clothes), from Latin talea a slender
stick, rod, staff; a cutting, twig.    Although historically the tailor is the cutter, in the trade
the 'tailor' is the man who sews or makes up what the 'cutter' has shaped. [OED]    The post-Latin
sense development would be piece of a plant cut for grafting, hence a verb, cut a shoot, then,
generally, to cut. Possible cognates include Sanskrit talah wine palm, Old Lithuanian talokas a
young girl, Greek talis a marriageable girl (for sense, compare slip of a girl, twiggy), Etruscan
Tholna, name of the goddess of youth.   Kent. ... You cowardly rascal, nature disclaims in thee; a
tailor made thee.  Corn. Thou art a strange fellow: a tailor make a man?  Kent. Ay, a tailor, sir: a
stone cutter, or a painter, could not have made him so ill, though they had been but two hours at
the trade.  [King Lear]    One who makes outer garments to order, as opposed to a clothier, who
makes them for sale ready-made. Tailor-made first recorded 1832 (in a figurative sense); literal
sense was heavy and plain, with attention to exact fit and with little ornamentation, as of women's
garments made by a tailor rather than a dress-maker.


