paltry (adj.)

1560s, probably an adjectival use of noun paltry worthless thing (1550s), associated with dialectal
palt, pelt trash, cognate with Middle Low German and East Frisian palte rag, Middle Dutch palt
broken or torn fragment. Similar formation in Low German paltrig rubbishy, East Frisian palterig
ragged, torn.


exiguous (adj.)

scanty, 1650s, from Latin exiguus small, petty, paltry, scanty in measure or number, from exigere
(see exact (v.)).


theologian (n.)

late 15c., from Old French theologien (14c.), from theologie; see theology. A petty or paltry
theologist is a theologaster (1620s), used in Medieval Latin by Martin Luther (1518).


palter (v.)

1530s, speak indistinctly, of unknown origin. It has the form of a frequentative, but no verb palt
is known. Connection with paltry is uncertain. Hence play fast and loose (c.1600). Related:
Paltered; paltering; palterer.


sixpence (n.)

late 14c., sum of six pennies, from six + pence. As a specific British coin, from 1590s. Sixpenny
(adj.) had a figurative sense paltry, cheap, petty, worthless by 1560s; sixpenny nails (early 15c.)
cost so much per hundred.


rudesby (n.)

insolent person, 1560s, mock surname from rude + -by, common place-name (and thus surname) ending
element, as in Grimsby, Rigby. Similar formations in idlesby, sneaksby paltry, sneaking fellow
(1570s), suresby.


picayune (n.)

1804, coin of small value, probably from Louisiana French picaillon coin worth 5 cents, earlier the
French name of an old copper coin of Savoy (1750), from Proven&ccedil;al picaioun small copper coin,
from picaio money, of uncertain origin. Adjectival figurative sense of paltry, mean recorded from
1813.


footle (v.)

to trifle, 1892, from dialectal footer to trifle, footy mean, paltry (1752), perhaps from French se
foutre to care nothing, from Old French foutre to copulate with, from Latin futuere, originally to
strike, thrust (see confute). But OED derives the English dialect words from foughty (c.1600), from
Dutch vochtig or Danish fugtig damp, musty; related to fog (n.).


cottage (n.)

late 13c., from Old French cote hut, cottage + Anglo-French suffix -age (probably denoting the
entire property attached to a cote). Old French cot is probably from Old Norse kot hut, cognate of
Old English cot, cote cottage, hut, from Proto-Germanic *kutan (cognates: Middle Dutch cot, Dutch
kot).    Meaning small country residence (without suggestion of poverty or tenancy) is from 1765.
Modern French cottage is a 19c. reborrowing from English. Cottage industry is attested from 1921.
Cottage cheese is attested from 1831, American English, earliest in reference to Philadelphia:
There was a plate of rye-bread, and a plate of wheat, and a basket of crackers; another plate with
half a dozen paltry cakes that looked as if they had been bought under the old Court House; some
morsels of dried beef on two little tea-cup plates: and a small glass dish of that preparation of
curds, which in vulgar language is called smear-case, but whose nom de guerre is cottage-cheese, at
least that was the appellation given it by our hostess. [Miss Leslie, Country Lodgings, Godey's
Lady's Book, July 1831]


chicken (n.)

Old English cicen (plural cicenu) young fowl, which by early Middle English had came to mean young
chicken, then later any chicken, from Proto-Germanic *kiukinam (cognates: Middle Dutch kiekijen,
Dutch kieken, Old Norse kjuklingr, Swedish kyckling, German K&uuml;ken chicken), from root *keuk-
(echoic of the bird's sound and possibly also the root of cock (n.1)) + diminutive suffixes.
Applied to the young of other bird species from early 13c. Adjective sense of cowardly is at least
as old as 14c. (compare hen-herte a chicken-hearted person, mid-15c.). As the name of a game of
danger to test courage, it is first recorded 1953. Chicken feed paltry sum of money is by 1897,
American English slang; literal use (it is made from the from lowest quality of grain) by 1834.
Chicken lobster young lobster, is from c.1960s, American English, apparently from chicken in its
sense of young. Generic words for chicken in Indo-European tend to be extended uses of hen words, as
hens are more numerous among domestic fowl, but occasionally they are from words for the young, as
in English and in Latin pullus.


