pantomime (v.)

1768, from pantomime (n.). Related: Pantomimed; pantomiming.


pantomime (n.)

1610s, mime actor, from Latin pantomimus mime, dancer, from Greek pantomimos actor, literally
imitator of all, from panto- (genitive of pan) all (see pan-) + mimos imitator (see mime (n.)).
Meaning drama or play without words first recorded 1735. The English dramatic performances so
called, usually at Christmas and with words and songs and stock characters, are attested by this
name from 1739; said to have originated c.1717. Related: Pantomimic; pantomimical.


pierrot (n.)

stock character in French pantomime, in English, a buffoon, from French Pierrot, diminutive of
Pierre; considered a typical name of a French peasant.


buffoon (n.)

1540s, type of pantomime dance; 1580s, clown, from Middle French bouffon (16c.), from Italian
buffone jester, from buffa joke, jest, pleasantry, from buffare to puff out the cheeks, a comic
gesture, of echoic origin. Also see -oon.


mime (n.)

c.1600, a buffoon who practices gesticulations [Johnson], from French mime (16c.) and directly from
Latin mimus, from Greek mimos imitator, mimic, actor, mime, buffoon, of unknown origin. In reference
to a performance, 1640s in a classical context; 1932 as a pantomime.


harlequin (n.)

1580s, from Middle French harlequin, from Old French Herlequin, Hellequin, etc., leader of la
maisnie Hellequin, a troop of demons who rode the night air on horses. He corresponds to Old English
Herla cyning King Herla, mythical character sometimes identified as Woden; possibly also the same as
the German Erlk&ouml;nig Elf King of the Goethe poem. Sometimes also associated with Herrequin, 9c.
count of Boulogne, who was proverbially wicked. In English pantomime, a mute character who carries a
magic wand. His Italian form, arlecchino, is one of the stock characters of commedia del'arte. From
his ludicrous dress comes the English adjective meaning particolored (1779).


clown (n.)

1560s, clowne, also cloyne, rustic, boor, peasant, origin uncertain. Perhaps from Scandinavian
dialect (compare Icelandic klunni clumsy, boorish fellow; Swedish kluns a hard knob; a clumsy
fellow, Danish klunt log, block), or akin to North Frisian kl&ouml;nne clumsy person. Or, less
likely, from Latin colonus colonist, farmer, though awareness of this word might have influenced the
sense development in English.    Meaning professional fool, professional or habitual jester is
c.1600. The pantomime clown represents a blend of the Shakes[pearean] rustic with one of the stock
types of the It. comedy [Weekley]. Meaning contemptible person is from 1920s. Fem. form clowness
attested from 1801.


tongue-in-cheek (adv.)

1856, from phrase to speak with one's tongue in one's cheek to speak insincerely (1748), suggestive
of sly irony or humorous insincerity, perhaps a stage trick to convey irony to the audience.    Hem!
Pray, Sir, said he to the Bard, after thrusting his Tongue into a Corner of his Cheek, and rolling
his Eyes at Miss Willis, (Tricks which he had caught by endeavouring to take off a celebrated
Comedian) were these fine Tragedies of yours ever acted? [anonymous, Emily, or the History of a
Natural Daughter, 1761]   <hr />   This arietta, however, she no sooner began to perform, than he
and the justice fell asleep ; but the moment she ceased playing, the knight waked snorting, and
exclaimed,--'O cara! what d'ye think, gentlemen? Will you talk any more of your Pargolesi and your
Corelli ?'--At the same time, he thrust his tongue in one cheek, and leered with one eye at the
doctor and me, who sat on his left hand--He concluded the pantomime with a loud laugh, which he
could command at all times extempore. [Smollett, The Expedition of Humphrey Clinker, 1771]


