papyrus (n.)

late 14c., from Latin papyrus the paper plant, paper made from it, from Greek papyros any plant of
the paper plant genus, said to be of Egyptian origin. Proper plural is papyri.


taper (n.)

Old English tapur, taper candle, lamp-wick, not found outside English, possibly a dissimilated
borrowing from Latin papyrus (see papyrus), which was used in Medieval Latin and some Romance
languages for wick of a candle (such as Italian papijo wick), because these often were made from the
pith of papyrus. Compare also German kerze candle, from Old High German charza, from Latin charta,
from Greek khartes papyrus, roll made from papyrus, wick made from pith of papyrus.


paper (n.)

mid-14c., from Anglo-French paper, Old French papier paper, document, from Latin papyrus paper,
paper made of papyrus stalks (see papyrus).    Meaning paper money attested from 1722. As shortened
form of newspaper, first attested 1640s. In plural, collection of papers to establish one's
identity, credentials, etc., it is attested from 1680s. Paper chase is British slang from 1932.


Byblos

ancient Phoenician port (modern Jebeil, Lebanon) from which Egyptian papyrus was exported to Greece.
The name probably is a Greek corruption of Phoenician Gebhal, said to mean literally frontier town
(compare Hebrew gebhul frontier, boundary, Arabic jabal mountain), or perhaps it is Canaanite gubla
mountain. The Greek name also might have been influenced by, or come from, an Egyptian word for
papyrus.


bulrush (n.)

also bullrush, type of tall plant growing in or near water (in Biblical use, the Egyptian papyrus),
mid-15c., bolroysche, from rush (n.); the signification of bull is doubtful.


Bible (n.)

early 14c., from Anglo-Latin biblia, Old French bible (13c.) the Bible, also any large book
generally, from Medieval and Late Latin biblia (neuter plural interpreted as feminine singular), in
phrase biblia sacra holy books, a translation of Greek ta biblia to hagia the holy books, from Greek
biblion paper, scroll, the ordinary word for book, originally a diminutive of byblos Egyptian
papyrus, possibly so called from Byblos (modern Jebeil, Lebanon), the name of the Phoenician port
from which Egyptian papyrus was exported to Greece (compare parchment). Or the place name might be
from the Greek word, which then would be probably of Egyptian origin. The Christian scripture was
referred to in Greek as Ta Biblia as early as c.223. Bible replaced Old English biblio&eth;ece (see
bibliothek) as the ordinary word for the Scriptures. Figurative sense of any authoritative book is
from 1804.    Walter Scott and Pope's Homer were reading of my own election, but my mother forced
me, by steady daily toil, to learn long chapters of the Bible by heart; as well as to read it every
syllable through, aloud, hard names and all, from Genesis to the Apocalypse, about once a year; and
to that discipline -- patient, accurate, and resolute -- I owe, not only a knowledge of the book,
which I find occasionally serviceable, but much of my general power of taking pains, and the best
part of my taste in literature. ... [O]nce knowing the 32nd of Deuteronomy, the 119th Psalm, the
15th of 1st Corinthians, the Sermon on the Mount, and most of the Apocalypse, every syllable by
heart, and having always a way of thinking with myself what words meant, it was not possible for me,
even in the foolishest times of youth, to write entirely superficial or formal English .... [John
Ruskin, Fors Clavigera, 1871]


parchment (n.)

c.1300, parchemin (c.1200 as a surname), from Old French parchemin (11c., Old North French
parcamin), from Late Latin pergamena parchment, noun use of adjective (as in pergamena charta,
Pliny), from Late Greek pergamenon of Pergamon, from Pergamon Pergamum (modern Bergama), city in
Mysia in Asia Minor where parchment supposedly first was adopted as a substitute for papyrus, 2c.
B.C.E. Possibly influenced in Vulgar Latin by Latin parthica (pellis) Parthian (leather). Altered in
Middle English by confusion with nouns in -ment and by influence of Medieval Latin collateral form
pergamentum.


page (n.1)

sheet of paper, 1580s, from Middle French page, from Old French pagene page, text (12c.), from Latin
pagina page, leaf of paper, strip of papyrus fastened to others, related to pagella small page, from
pangere to fasten, from PIE root *pag- to fix (see pact).    Earlier pagne (12c.), directly from Old
French. Usually said to be from the notion of individual sheets of paper fastened into a book. Ayto
and Watkins offer an alternative theory: vines fastened by stakes and formed into a trellis, which
led to sense of columns of writing on a scroll. When books replaced scrolls, the word continued to
be used. Related: Paginal. Page-turner book that one can't put down is from 1974.


schedule (n.)

late 14c., sedule, cedule ticket, label, slip of paper with writing on it, from Old French cedule
(Modern French c&#233;dule), from Late Latin schedula strip of paper (in Medieval Latin also a note,
schedule), diminutive of Latin scheda, scida one of the strips forming a papyrus sheet, from Greek
skhida splinter, from stem of skhizein to cleave, split (see shed (v.)). Also from the Latin word
are Spanish c&#233;dula, German Zettel.    The notion is of slips of paper attached to a document as
an appendix (a sense maintained in U.S. tax forms). The specific meaning printed timetable is first
recorded 1863 in railway use. Modern spelling is a 15c. imitation of Latin, but pronunciation
remained sed-yul for centuries afterward; the modern British pronunciation (shed-yul) is from French
influence, while the U.S. pronunciation (sked-yul) is from the practice of Webster, based on the
Greek original.


card (n.1)

c.1400, playing card, from Middle French carte (14c.), from Latin charta leaf of paper, tablet, from
Greek khartes layer of papyrus, probably from Egyptian. Form influenced after 14c. by Italian carta
(see chart (n.)).    Sense of playing cards also is oldest in French. Sense in English extended by
1590s to similar small, flat, stiff bits of paper. Meaning printed ornamental greetings for special
occasions is from 1869. Application to clever or original persons (1836, originally with an
adjective, as in smart card) is from the playing-card sense, via expressions such as sure card an
expedient certain to attain an object (c.1560).   Card table is from 1713. Card-sharper is 1859.
House of cards in the figurative sense is from 1640s, first attested in Milton. To have a card up
(one's) sleeve is 1898; to play the _______ card is from 1886, originally the Orange card, meaning
appeal to Northern Irish Protestant sentiment (for political advantage).


