parasite (n.)

1530s, a hanger-on, a toady, person who lives on others, from Middle French parasite (16c.) or
directly from Latin parasitus toady, sponger, and directly from Greek parasitos one who lives at
another's expense, person who eats at the table of another, from noun use of an adjective meaning
feeding beside, from para- beside (see para- (1)) + sitos food, of unknown origin. Scientific
meaning animal or plant that lives on others is first recorded 1640s (implied in parasitical).


parasitic (adj.)

1620s, from Latin parasiticus, from Greek parasitikos of or pertaining to a parasite; the trade of a
parasite, from parasitos (see parasite). Biological sense is from 1731. Related: Parasitical, 1570s
in reference to toadies; from 1640s in the biological sense.


sponger (n.)

1670s, parasite, agent noun from sponge (v.) in figurative sense. As a job on a cannon crew, by
1828.


parasitism (n.)

1610s, from parasite + -ism. Biological sense is from 1853.


toady (n.)

servile parasite, 1826, apparently shortened from toad-eater fawning flatterer (1742), originally
(1620s) the assistant of a charlatan, who ate a toad (believed to be poisonous) to enable his master
to display his skill in expelling the poison. The verb is recorded from 1827. Related: Toadied;
toadying.


fluke (n.3)

flatfish, Old English floc flatfish, related to Old Norse floke flatfish, flak disk, floe (see flake
(n.)). The parasite worm (1660s) so called from resemblance of shape.


shirk (v.)

1630s, to practice fraud or trickery, also a noun (1630s, now obsolete) a needy, disreputable
parasite [OED], perhaps from German schurke scoundrel, rogue, knave, villain (see shark (n.)). Sense
of evade one's work or duty first recorded 1785, originally in slang. Related: Shirked; shirking.


Hessian (n.)

resident of the former Landgraviate of Hessen-Kassel, western Germany; its soldiers being hired out
by the ruler to fight for other countries, especially the British during the American Revolution,
the name Hessians (unjustly) became synonymous with mercenaries. Hessian fly (Cecidomyia destructor)
was a destructive parasite the ravaged U.S. crops late 18c., so named 1787 in erroneous belief that
it was carried into America by the Hessians.


soothe (v.)

Old English so&eth;ian show to be true, from so&eth; true (see sooth). Sense of quiet, comfort,
mollify is first recorded 1690s, via notion of to assuage one by asserting that what he says is true
(i.e. to be a yes-man), a sense attested from 1560s (and compare Old English geso&eth; a parasite,
flatterer). Meaning reduce the intensity (of a pain, etc.) is from 1711. Related: Soothed; soothing.


host (n.1)

person who receives guests, late 13c., from Old French hoste guest, host, hostess, landlord (12c.,
Modern French h&ocirc;te), from Latin hospitem (nominative hospes) guest, host, literally lord of
strangers, from PIE *ghostis- stranger (cognates: Old Church Slavonic  gosti guest, friend, gospodi
lord, master; see guest). The biological sense of animal or plant having a parasite is from 1857.


lubber (n.)

mid-14c., big, clumsy, stupid fellow who lives in idleness, from lobre, earlier lobi lazy lout,
probably of Scandinavian origin (compare Swedish dialectal lubber a plump, lazy fellow). But OED
suggests a possible connection with Old French lobeor swindler, parasite, with sense altered by
association with lob (n.) in the bumpkin sense. A sailors' word since 16c. (as in landlubber), but
earliest attested use is of lazy monks (abbey-lubber). Compare also lubberwort, the name of the
mythical herb that produces laziness (1540s); and Lubberland imaginary land of plenty without work
(1590s). Sometimes also Lubbard (1580s).


flea (n.)

Old English flea, from Proto-Germanic *flauhaz (cognates: Old Norse flo, Middle Dutch vlo, German
Floh), perhaps related to Old English fleon to flee, with a notion of the jumping parasite, or
perhaps from PIE *plou- flea (cognates: Latin pulex, Greek psylla; see puce).   Flea-bag bed is from
1839; flea circus is from 1886; flea collar is from 1953.    A man named 'Mueller' put on the first
trained-flea circus in America at the old Stone and Austin museum in Boston nearly forty years ago.
Another German named 'Auvershleg' had the first traveling flea circus in this country thirty years
ago. In addition to fairs and museums, I get as high as $25 for a private exhibition. [Professor
William Heckler, quoted in Popular Mechanics, February 1928. Printed at the top of his programs were
Every action is visible to the naked eye and No danger of desertion.]


fly (n.)

Old English fleoge fly, winged insect, from Proto-Germanic *fleugjon (cognates: Old Saxon fleiga,
Old Norse fluga, Middle Dutch vlieghe, Dutch vlieg, Old High German flioga, German Fliege fly);
literally the flying (insect) (compare Old English fleogende flying), from same source as fly (v.1).
Originally any winged insect (hence butterfly, etc.); long used by farmers and gardeners for any
insect parasite. The Old English plural in -n (as in oxen) gradually normalized 13c.-15c. to -s. Fly
on the wall unseen observer first recorded 1881. An Old English word for curtain was fleonet fly-
net. Fly-swatter as a bit of wire mesh on a handle first attested 1917. Fly-fishing is from 1650s.
From the verb and the notion of flapping as a wing does comes the noun sense of tent flap (1810),
which yielded covering for buttons that close up a garment (1844). The sense of a flight, flying is
from mid-15c. Baseball fly ball attested by 1866.  To do something on the fly is 1856, apparently
from baseball.    When the catcher sees several fielders running to catch a ball, he should name the
one he thinks surest to take it, when the others should not strive to catch the ball on the fly, but
only, in case of its being missed, take it on the bound. [The American Boys Book of Sports and
Games, New York, 1864]


