parallel (v.)

1590s, from parallel (n.).


parallel (adj.)

1540s, from Middle French parall&egrave;le (16c.) and directly from Latin parallelus, from Greek
parallelos parallel, from para allelois beside one another, from para- beside (see para- (1)) +
allelois each other, from allos other (see alias (adv.)). As a noun from 1550s. Parallel bars as
gymnastics apparatus are recorded from 1868.


parallelogram (n.)

1560s, from Middle French parall&eacute;logramme (1550s) and directly from Late Latin
parallelogrammum, from Greek parallelogrammon noun use of neuter adjective meaning bounded by
parallel lines, from parallelos (see parallel) + stem of graphein to write (see -graphy).


parallelism (n.)

c.1600, from Greek parallelismos, from parallelizein (see parallel).


trapezoid (n.)

1706, a trapezium, from Modern Latin trapezoides, from Late Greek trapezoeides, noun use by Euclid
of Greek trapezoeides trapezium-shaped, from trapeza, literally table (see trapezium), + -oeides
shaped (see -oid). Technically, a plane four-sided figure with no two sides parallel. But in English
since c.1800, often confused with trapezium in its sense of a quadrilateral figure having only sides
parallel and two not.


striation (n.)

1849, a parallel streak, noun of action from striate (v.).


drumlin (n.)

1833, diminutive of drum (1725) ridge or long, narrow hill, often separating two parallel valleys,
from Gaelic and Irish druim back, ridge.


unparalleled (adj.)

1590s, from un- (1) not + past participle of parallel (v.). Unparallel as an adjective is recorded
from 1650s.


polemicist (n.)

1859, American English formation parallel to polemist (1825), from Greek polemistes a warrior, from
polemizein to wage war, to make war.


disheveled (adj.)

also dishevelled, early 15c., without dressed hair, parallel form of dishevel (adj.); see dishevel.
General sense of with disordered dress is from c.1600.


shirr (v.)

to gather (cloth) on parallel threads, 1860 (implied in shirring), back-formation from shirred
(1847), from shirr (n.) elastic webbing, of unknown origin.


rapscallion (n.)

1690s, alteration of rascallion (1640s), a fanciful elaboration of rascal (q.v.). It had a parallel
in now-extinct rampallion (1590s), from Middle English ramp (n.2) ill-behaved woman.


tanist (n.)

elected heir of a Celtic chief, 1530s, from Gaelic tanaiste presumptive or apparent heir to a lord,
literally parallel, second, from Old Irish tanaise designated successor, from Celtic *tani-hessio-
one who is waited for.


simile (n.)

late 14c., from Latin simile a like thing; a comparison, likeness, parallel, neuter of similis like
(see similar). Both things must be mentioned and the comparison directly stated. To Johnson, A
simile, to be perfect, must both illustrate and ennoble the subject.


hatch (v.2)

engrave, draw fine parallel lines, late 14c., from Old French hachier chop up, hack (14c.), from
hache ax (see hatchet). Related: Hatched; hatching. The noun meaning an engraved line or stroke is
from 1650s.


subtile (adj.)

late 14c., clever, dexterous, crafty; not dense, thin, rarefied, from Old French subtil (14c.), a
learned Latinized reformation of earlier sotil (12c.), source of subtle (q.v.). Still used in some
Bible translations in Gen. iii:1, and it survived after 17c. as a parallel formation to subtle in
some material senses (fine, delicate, thin).


asleep (adj.)

c.1200, aslepe, o sl&aelig;pe, from Old English on sl&aelig;pe (see sleep). The parallel form on
sleep continued until c.1550. Of limbs, numb through stoppage of circulation, from late 14c. Meaning
inattentive, off guard is from mid-14c.


horizontal (adj.)

1550s, relating to or near the horizon, from French horizontal, from Latin horizontem (see horizon).
Meaning flat (i.e., parallel to the horizon) is from 1630s. Related: horizontally.


concordance (n.)

late 14c., alphabetical arrangement of all the words in a book (especially the Bible), from Old
French concordance (12c.) agreement, harmony, from Late Latin concordantia, from concordantem
(nominative concordans; see concord). Originally a citation of parallel passages. Literal meaning
fact of agreeing attested in English from mid-15c.


equal (adj.)

late 14c., from Latin aequalis uniform, identical, equal, from aequus level, even, just, of unknown
origin. Parallel formation egal (from Old French egal) was in use late 14c.-17c. The noun is
recorded from 1570s.


conjecture (v.)

early 15c., from conjecture (n.). In Middle English also with a parallel conjecte (n.), conjecten
(v.). Related: Conjectured; conjecturing.


nicety (n.)

mid-14c., folly, stupidity, from Old French nicet&eacute; foolishness, childishness, simplicity,
from nice silly (see nice). Underwent sense evolution parallel to nice, arriving at minute, subtle
point 1580s and exactitude in 1650s. Phrase to a nicety exactly is attested from 1795.


also (adv.)

Old English eallswa just as, even as, as if, so as, likewise, compound of all + so. The
demonstrative sense of similarly weakened to in addition to in 12c., replacing eke. The compound has
parallel forms in German also, Dutch alzoo.


onto (prep.)

1580s, as on to, from on + to. Appeared much later than parallel into. As a closed compound (on
analogy of into), first recorded 1715.


whelm (v.)

early 14c., probably from a parallel form of Old English -hwielfan (West Saxon), -hwelfan (Mercian),
in ahwelfan cover over; probably altered by association with Old English helmian to cover, from
Proto-Germanic *hwalbjan, from PIE *kwelp- to arch (see gulf (n.)).


practice (n.)

early 15c., practise, practical application, originally especially of medicine but also alchemy,
education, etc.; from Old French pratiser, from Medieval Latin practicare (see practice (v.)). From
early 15c. often assimilated in spelling to nouns in -ice. Also as practic, which survived in
parallel into 19c.


downward (adv.)

c.1200, from down (adv.) + -ward. Old English had aduneweard in this sense. Downwards, with
adverbial genitive, had a parallel in Old English ofduneweardes.


stew (n.)

c.1300, vessel for cooking, from stew (v.). Later heated room, especially for bathing (late 14c.).
The meaning stewed meat with vegetables is first recorded 1756. The obsolete slang meaning brothel
(mid-14c., usually plural, stews) is from a parallel sense of public bath house (mid-14c.), carried
over from Old French estuve bath, bath house; bawdy house, reflecting the reputation of medieval
bath houses.


carburetor (n.)

device to enhance a gas flame, 1866, from carburet compound of carbon and another substance (1795,
now displaced by carbide), also used as a verb, to combine with carbon (1802); from carb-, comb.
form of carbon, + -uret, an archaic suffix formed from Modern Latin -uretum to parallel French words
in -ure. Motor vehicle sense is from 1896.


sack (v.1)

to plunder, 1540s, from Middle French sac, in the phrase mettre &agrave; sac put it in a bag, a
military leader's command to his troops to plunder a city (parallel to Italian sacco, with the same
range of meaning), from Vulgar Latin *saccare to plunder, originally to put plundered things into a
sack, from Latin saccus bag (see sack (n.1)). The notion is probably of putting booty in a bag.


ewer (n.)

early 14c., from Anglo-French *ewiere, Old French eviere water pitcher, parallel form of aiguiere
(Modern French aigui&egrave;re), from fem. of Latin aquarius of or for water, from aqua water (see
aqua-).


pod (n.1)

seed of beans, 1680s, of uncertain origin; found earlier in podware seed of legumes, seed grain
(mid-15c.), which had a parallel form codware husked or seeded plants (late 14c.), related to cod
husk of seeded plants, which was in Old English. In reference to pregnancy from 1890; in reference
to a round belly from 1825. Meaning detachable body of an aircraft is from 1950. Pod people (1956)
is from movie Invasion of the Body Snatchers, based on novel by Jack Finney.


tattle (v.)

late 15c., to stammer, prattle, in Caxton's translation of Reynard the Fox, probably from Middle
Flemish tatelen to stutter, parallel to Middle Dutch, Middle Low German, East Frisian tateren to
chatter, babble, possibly of imitative origin. The meaning tell tales or secrets is first recorded
1580s. Sense influenced by tittle. Related: Tattled; tattling. As a noun from 1520s. Tattler, the
name of the famous periodical by Addison and Steele (1709-1711), means idle talker, a gossip.


publication (n.)

late 14c., the act of making publicly known, from Old French publicacion (14c.) and directly from
Latin publicationem (nominative publicatio) a making public, noun of action from past participle
stem of publicare make public, from publicus (see public (adj.)). Meaning the issuing of a written
or printed work is first recorded 1570s; as the word for the thing so issued, from 1650s. Parallel
publishment had a shadowy existence alongside this word, in local and specialized use, into the 18c.


parody (n.)

1590s (first recorded use in English is in Ben Jonson), from or in imitation of Latin parodia
parody, from Greek paroidia burlesque song or poem, from para- beside, parallel to (see para- (1),
in this case, mock-) + oide song, ode (see ode). The meaning poor or feeble imitation is from 1830.
Related: Parodic; parodical.


supplant (v.)

early 14c., to trip up, overthrow, defeat, dispossess, from Old French suplanter, sosplanter to trip
up, overthrow, drive out, usurp, or directly from Latin supplantare trip up, overthrow, from sub
under (see sub-) + planta sole of the foot (see plant (n.)). Meaning replace one thing with another
first recorded 1670s. There is a sense evolution parallel in Hebrew akabh he beguiled, from akebh
heel.


shatter (v.)

early 14c., transitive, probably a variant of Middle English scateren (see scatter (v.)). Compare
Old Dutch schetteren Low German schateren. Formations such as scatter-brained had parallel forms in
shatter-brained, etc. Intransitive sense from 1560s. Related: Shattered; shattering. Carlyle (1841)
used shatterment. Shatters fragments is from 1630s.


plenty (n.)

mid-13c., as much as one could desire, from Old French plentee, earlier plentet abundance, profusion
(12c., Modern French dialectal plent&eacute;), from Latin plenitatem (nominative plenitas) fullness,
from plenus complete, full (see plenary). Meaning condition of general abundance is from late 14c.
The colloquial adverb meaning very much is first attested 1842. Middle English had parallel
formation plenteth, from the older Old French form of the word.


antique (adj.)

1530s, aged, venerable, from Middle French antique old (14c.), from Latin antiquus (later anticus)
ancient, former, of olden times; old, long in existence, aged; venerable; old-fashioned, from PIE
*anti in sense of before (see ante) + *okw- appearance (see eye (n.)). Originally pronounced in
English like its parallel antic, but French pronunciation and spelling were adopted from c.1700.


female (n.)

early 14c., from Old French femelle (12c.) woman, female, from Medieval Latin femella a female, from
Latin femella young female, girl, diminutive of femina woman (see feminine).    Sense extended in
Vulgar Latin from humans to female of other animals. Spelling altered late 14c. on mistaken parallel
of male. As an adjective, from early 14c. Reference to sockets, etc., is from 1660s.


twill (n.)

cloth woven in parallel diagonal lines, early 14c., Scottish and northern English variant of Middle
English twile, from Old English twili woven with double thread, twilled, partial loan-translation of
Latin bilix with a double thread (with Old English twi- substituted for cognate Latin bi-); the
second element from Latin licium thread, which is of uncertain origin.


wee (adj.)

extremely small, mid-15c., from earlier noun use in sense of quantity, amount (such as a littel wei
a little thing or amount, c.1300), from Old English w&aelig;ge weight (see weigh). Adjectival use
wee bit apparently developed as parallel to such forms as a bit thing a little thing. Wee hours is
attested by 1891, from Scottish phrase wee sma' hours (1819). Wee folk faeries is recorded from
1819. Weeny tiny, small is from 1790.


quadrant (n.)

late 14c., a quarter of a day, six hours, from Middle French quadrant, from Latin quadrantem
(nominative quadrans) fourth part, also the name of a coin worth a quarter of an as, noun use of
present participle of quadrare to make square; put in order, arrange, complete; run parallel, be
exact, figuratively to fit, suit, be proper, related to quadrus a square, quattuor four (see four).
The surveying instrument is first so called c.1400, because it forms a quarter circle. Related:
Quadrantal.


collateral (adj.)

late 14c., accompanying, also descended from the same stock, from Old French collateral (13c.), from
Medieval Latin collateralis accompanying, literally side by side, from Latin com- together (see
com-) + lateralis of the side, from latus a side (see oblate (n.)). Literal sense of parallel, along
the side of attested in English from mid-15c.  Related: Collaterally.


engross (v.)

c.1400, to buy up the whole stock of (in Anglo-French from c.1300), from Old French en gros in bulk,
in a large quantity, at wholesale, as opposed to en detail. See gross.    Figurative sense of absorb
the whole attention is first attested 1709. A parallel engross, meaning to write (something) in
large letters, is from Anglo-French engrosser, from Old French en gros in large (letters). Related:
Engrossed; engrossing.


strip (n.)

long, narrow, flat piece, mid-15c., narrow piece of cloth, probably related to or from Middle Low
German strippe strap, thong, and from the same source as stripe (n.1). Sense extension to wood,
land, etc. first recorded 1630s.    Sense in comic strip is from 1920. Airport sense is from 1936;
race track sense from 1941. Meaning street noted for clubs, bars, etc. is attested from 1939,
originally in reference to Los Angeles' Sunset Strip. Strip mine (n.) attested by 1892, as a verb by
1916; so called because the surface material is removed in successive parallel strips.


bin (n.)

receptacle, Old English binne basket, manger, crib, probably from Gaulish, from Old Celtic *benna,
akin to Welsh benn a cart, especially one with a woven wicker body. The same Celtic word seems to be
preserved in Italian benna dung cart, French benne grape-gatherer's creel, Dutch benne large basket,
all from Late Latin benna cart, Medieval Latin benna basket. Some linguists think there was a
Germanic form parallel to the Celtic one.


below (adv.)

early 14c., biloogh, from be- by, about + logh, lou, lowe low (see low (adj.)). Apparently a variant
of earlier a-lowe (influenced by other adverbs in be-; see before), the parallel form to an-high
(now on high). Beneath was the usual word; below was very rare in Middle English and gained currency
only in 16c. It is frequent in Shakespeare. As a preposition from 1570s. According to Fowler, below
is the opposite of above and concerns difference of level and suggests comparison of independent
things. Under is the opposite of over and is concerned with superposition and subjection and
suggests some interrelation.


Guadalcanal

largest of the Solomon Islands, discovered 1568 by Spanish explorer &Aacute;lvaro de Menda&ntilde;a
de Neira and named for his hometown in Spain. The place name contains the Spanish form of Arabic
wadi river which occurs in other Spanish place names (such as Guadalajara, from Arabic Wadi Al-
Bajara River of the Stones, either a parallel formation to or ultimately a translation of the
ancient Iberian name for the river that gave the place its earlier name, based on caruca stony;
Guadalquivir, from Arabic Al-Wadi Al-Kabir Big River; and Guadalupe, from the Arabic river word and
the Roman name of the river, Lupus, literally wolf).


machete (n.)

1590s (in pseudo-Spanish form macheto), from Spanish machete, probably a diminutive of macho sledge
hammer, alteration of mazo club, which is probably [Barnhart] a dialectal variant of maza mallet,
from Vulgar Latin *mattea war club (see mace (n.1)). An alternative explanation traces macho to
Latin marculus a small hammer, diminutive of marcus hammer, from a base parallel to that of Latin
malleus (see mallet).


