parable (n.)

mid-13c., parabol, modern form from early 14c., saying or story in which something is expressed in
terms of something else, from Old French parable parable, parabolic style in writing (13c.), from
Latin parabola comparison, from Greek parabole a comparison, parable, literally a throwing beside,
hence a juxtaposition, from para- alongside (see para- (1)) + bole a throwing, casting, beam, ray,
related to ballein to throw (see ballistics).    Replaced Old English bispell. In Vulgar Latin,
parabola took on the meaning word, hence Italian parlare, French parler to speak (see parley (n.)).


parabole (n.)

comparison, metaphor, 1580s, from Greek parabole comparison (see parable).


parabola (n.)

1570s, from Modern Latin parabola, from Greek parabole parabola, comparison, analogy; application
(see parable), so called by Apollonius of Perga c.210 B.C.E. because it is produced by application
of a given area to a given straight line. It had a different sense in Pythagorean geometry. Related:
Parabolic.


parabolic (adj.)

mid-15c., from Late Latin parabolicus, from late Greek parabolikos figurative, from parabole (see
parable). Related: Parabolical.


Dives

traditional name for a rich man, late 14c., from Latin dives rich (man); see Dis. Used in Luke xvi
in Vulgate and commonly mistaken as the proper name of the man in the parable. Related to divus
divine, and originally meaning favored by the gods (see divine (adj.)).


irreparable (adj.)

early 15c., from Old French irr&eacute;parable (12c.), from Latin irreparabilis irreparable,
irrecoverable, from assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + reparabilis that can be
repaired (see repair).


parole (n.)

1610s, word of honor, especially promise by a prisoner of war not to escape, from French parole
word, speech (in parole d'honneur word of honor) from Vulgar Latin *paraula speech, discourse, from
Latin parabola (see parable). Sense of conditional release of a prisoner before full term is first
attested 1908 in criminal slang.


parley (n.)

conference, speech, especially with an enemy, mid-15c., from Middle French parl&eacute;e, from fem.
past participle of Old French parler to speak (11c.), from Vulgar Latin *paraulare, from Late Latin
parabolare to speak (in parables), from parabola speech, discourse, from Latin parabola comparison
(see parable).


palaver (n.)

1733 (implied in palavering), talk, conference, discussion, sailors' slang, from Portuguese palavra
word, speech, talk, traders' term for negotiating with the natives in West Africa, metathesis of
Late Latin parabola speech, discourse, from Latin parabola comparison (see parable). Meaning idle
talk first recorded 1748. The verb is 1733, from the noun. Related: Palavering.


tun (n.)

large cask, especially one for wine, ale, or beer, Old English tunne tun, cask, barrel, a general
North Sea Germanic word (compare Old Frisian tunne, Middle Dutch tonne, Old High German tunna,
German tonne), also found in Medieval Latin tunna (9c.) and Old French tonne (diminutive tonneau);
perhaps from a Celtic source (compare Middle Irish, Gaelic tunna, Old Irish toun hide, skin). Tun-
dish (late 14c.) was a funnel made to fit into the bung of a tun.    -- That? said Stephen. -- Is
that called a funnel? Is it not a tundish? --  -- What is a tundish? --  --That. The ... the funnel.
--  --Is that called a tundish in Ireland? --  asked the dean. -- I never heard the word in my life.
--  -- It is called a tundish in Lower Drumcondra -- said Stephen, laughing -- where they speak the
best English.--  -- A tundish -- said the dean reflectively. -- That is a most interesting word I
must look that word up. Upon my word I must. --  His courtesy of manner rang a little false, and
Stephen looked at the English convert with the same eyes as the elder brother in the parable may
have turned on the prodigal. [Joyce, Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man]


talent (n.)

late 13c., inclination, disposition, will, desire, from Old French talent (12c.), from Medieval
Latin talenta, plural of talentum inclination, leaning, will, desire (11c.), in classical Latin
balance, weight; sum of money, from Greek talanton a balance, pair of scales, hence weight, definite
weight, anything weighed, and in later times sum of money, from PIE *tele- to lift, support, weigh,
with derivatives referring to measured weights and thence money and payment [Watkins]; see extol.
An ancient denomination of weight, originally Babylonian (though the name is Greek), and varying
widely in value among different peoples and at different times. [Century Dictionary]    According to
Liddell &amp; Scott, as a monetary sum, considered to consist of 6,000 drachmae, or, in Attica,
57.75 lbs. of silver. Also borrowed in other Germanic languages and Celtic. Attested in Old English
as talente). The Medieval Latin and common Romanic sense developed from figurative use of the word
in the sense of money. Meaning special natural ability, aptitude, gift committed to one for use and
improvement developed by mid-15c., in part perhaps from figurative sense wealth, but mostly from the
parable of the talents in Matt. xxv:14-30. Meaning persons of ability collectively is from 1856.


stage (n.)

mid-13c., story of a building; early 14c., raised platform used for public display (also the
platform beneath the gallows), from Old French estage building, dwelling place; stage for
performance; phase, stage, rest in a journey (12c., Modern French &#233;tage story of a house,
stage, floor, loft), from Vulgar Latin *staticum a place for standing, from Latin statum, past
participle of stare to stand (see stet). Meaning platform for presentation of a play is attested
from late 14c.; generalized for profession of an actor from 1580s.    Sense of period of development
or time in life first recorded early 14c., probably from Middle English sense of degree or step on
the 'ladder' of virtue, 'wheel' of fortune, etc., in parable illustrations and morality plays.
Meaning a step in sequence, a stage of a journey is late 14c. Meaning level of water in a river,
etc. is from 1814, American English.   Stage-name is from 1727. Stage-mother (n.) in the overbearing
mother-of-an-actress sense is from 1915. Stage-door is from 1761, hence Stage-Door Johnny young man
who frequents stage doors seeking the company of actresses, chorus girls, etc. (1907). Stage
whisper, such as used by an actor on stage to be heard by the audience, first attested 1865. Stage-
manage (v.) is from 1871.


