arid (adj.)

1650s, dry, parched, from French aride (15c.) or directly from Latin aridus dry, arid, parched, from
arere to be dry, from PIE root *as- to burn, glow (see ash (n.1)). Figurative sense of uninteresting
is from 1827. Related: Aridly.


hominy (n.)

1629, first recorded by Capt. John Smith, probably from Powhatan (Algonquian) appuminneonash parched
corn, probably literally that which is ground or beaten. See grits.


parch (v.)

late 14c., to roast or dry (peas, beans, corn, etc.), of uncertain origin. Klein and OED reject
derivations from Old North French perchier (Old French percer) to pierce and Latin persiccare to dry
thoroughly. Barnhart suggests possibly from Middle English perchen, variant of perishen to perish
(see perish). Klein tentatively suggests a back-formation from parchment. Surname Parchecorn is
attested from mid-14c. Meaning to dry with excessive heat is mid-15c. Related: Parched; parching.


leak (v.)

to let water in or out [Johnson], late 14c., from Middle Dutch leken to drip, to leak, or from Old
Norse leka, both of them related to Old English leccan to moisten (which did not survive into Middle
English), all from Proto-Germanic *lek- deficiency (cognates: Old High German lecchen to become dry,
German lechzen to be parched with thirst), from PIE root *leg- to dribble, trickle. The figurative
meaning come to be known in spite of efforts at concealment dates from at least 1832; transitive
sense first recorded 1859. Related: Leaked; leaking.


ash (n.1)

powdery remains of fire, Old English &aelig;sce ash, from Proto-Germanic *askon (cognates: Old Norse
and Swedish aska, Old High German asca, German asche, Gothic azgo ashes), from PIE root *as- to
burn, glow (cognates: Sanskrit asah ashes, dust, Armenian azazem I dry up, Greek azein to dry up,
parch, Latin ardus parched, dry). Spanish and Portuguese ascua red-hot coal are Germanic loan-words.
Symbol of grief or repentance; hence Ash Wednesday (c.1300), from custom introduced by Pope Gregory
the Great of sprinkling ashes on the heads of penitents on the first day of Lent. Ashes meaning
mortal remains of a person is late 13c., in reference to the ancient custom of cremation.


