parchment (n.)

c.1300, parchemin (c.1200 as a surname), from Old French parchemin (11c., Old North French
parcamin), from Late Latin pergamena parchment, noun use of adjective (as in pergamena charta,
Pliny), from Late Greek pergamenon of Pergamon, from Pergamon Pergamum (modern Bergama), city in
Mysia in Asia Minor where parchment supposedly first was adopted as a substitute for papyrus, 2c.
B.C.E. Possibly influenced in Vulgar Latin by Latin parthica (pellis) Parthian (leather). Altered in
Middle English by confusion with nouns in -ment and by influence of Medieval Latin collateral form
pergamentum.


scroll (n.)

c.1400, roll of parchment or paper, altered (by association with rolle roll) from scrowe (c.1200),
from Anglo-French escrowe, Old French escroe scrap, roll of parchment, from Frankish *skroda shred
or a similar Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic *skrauth- (cognates: Old English screada piece cut
off, cutting, scrap; see shred (n.)). As an ornament on furniture or in architecture, from 1610s.


pell (n.)

a parchment, mid-15c., earlier skin, hide (mid-14c.), from Anglo-French pell, Old French pel skin
(13c., Modern French peau), from Latin pellem, pellis skin, leather, parchment, hide (see film
(n.)).


roll (n.)

early 13c., rolled-up piece of parchment or paper (especially one inscribed with an official
record), from Old French rolle document, parchment scroll, decree (12c.), from Medieval Latin
rotulus a roll of paper (source also of Spanish rollo, Italian ruollo), from Latin rotula small
wheel, diminutive of rota wheel (see rotary).    Meaning a register, list, catalogue is from late
14c., common from c.1800. Meaning dough which is rolled before baking is first recorded mid-15c.
Sense of act of rolling is from 1743. Meaning quantity of material rolled up is from late 14c.;
meaning quantity of paper money is from 1846; sense of quantity of (rolled) film is from 1890.
Meaning act of sexual intercourse is attested from 1942 (roll in the hay), from roll (v.). Dutch
rol, German Rolle, Danish rulle, etc. are from French.


vellum (n.)

early 15c., from Old French velin parchment made from calfskin (13c.), from vel, veel calf (see
veal).


sheepskin (n.)

c.1200, the skin of a sheep, from sheep + skin (n.). Meaning diploma dates from 1804; so called
because formerly made of sheepskin parchment.


palimpsest (n.)

parchment from which earlier writing has been removed to clear it for new writing, 1660s, from Latin
palimpsestus, from Greek palimpsestos scraped again, from palin again (see palindrome) + verbal
adjective of psen to rub smooth (of uncertain origin).


membrane (n.)

early 15c., thin layer of skin or tissue, a term in anatomy, from Latin membrana a skin, membrane;
parchment (skin prepared for writing), from membrum limb, member of the body (see member). The
etymological sense is that which covers the members of the body.


indenture (n.)

contract for services, late 14c., from Anglo-French endenture, Old French endenteure indentation,
from endenter (see indent). Such contracts (especially between master craftsmen and apprentices)
were written in full identical versions on a sheet of parchment, which was then cut apart in a
zigzag, or notched line. Each party took one, and the genuineness of a document of indenture could
be proved by juxtaposition with its counterpart. As a verb, 1650s, from the noun.


syllabus (n.)

1650s, table of contents of a series of lectures, etc., from Late Latin syllabus list, ultimately a
misreading of Greek sittybos parchment label, table of contents, of unknown origin. The misprint
appeared in a 15c. edition of Cicero's Ad Atticum (see OED). Had it been a real word, the proper
plural would be syllabi.


escrow (n.)

1590s, from Anglo-French escrowe, from Old French escroue scrap, roll of parchment, from a Germanic
source akin to Old High German scrot a scrap, shred, a piece cut off (see shred (n.)). Originally a
deed delivered to a third person until a future condition is satisfied; sense of deposit held in
trust or security is from 1888.


pellicle (n.)

1540s, from Middle French pellicle (Modern French pellicule), from Latin pellicula small or thin
skin, diminutive of pellis skin, leather, parchment, hide (see film (n.)). Related: Pellicular.


library (n.)

place for books, late 14c., from Anglo-French librarie, Old French librairie collection of books
(14c.), noun use of adj. librarius concerning books, from Latin librarium chest for books, from
liber (genitive libri) book, paper, parchment, originally the inner bark of trees, probably a
derivative of PIE root *leub(h)- to strip, to peel (see leaf). The equivalent word in most Romance
languages now means bookseller's shop. Old English had bochord, literally book hord.


parch (v.)

late 14c., to roast or dry (peas, beans, corn, etc.), of uncertain origin. Klein and OED reject
derivations from Old North French perchier (Old French percer) to pierce and Latin persiccare to dry
thoroughly. Barnhart suggests possibly from Middle English perchen, variant of perishen to perish
(see perish). Klein tentatively suggests a back-formation from parchment. Surname Parchecorn is
attested from mid-14c. Meaning to dry with excessive heat is mid-15c. Related: Parched; parching.


panel (n.)

early 14c., from Old French panel piece of cloth, piece, saddle cushion (Modern French panneau),
from Vulgar Latin *pannellus, diminutive of Latin pannus piece of cloth (see pane). Anglo-French
legalese sense of piece of parchment (cloth) listing jurors led by late 14c. to meaning jury.
General sense of persons called on to advise, judge, discuss, etc. is from 1570s. Sense of distinct
part of surface of a wall, door, etc. is first recorded c.1600.


volume (n.)

late 14c., roll of parchment containing writing; a bound book, from Old French volume scroll, book;
work, volume; girth, size (13c.) and directly from Latin volumen (genitive voluminis) roll (of a
manuscript); coil, wreath, literally that which is rolled, from volvere to turn around, roll (see
volvox). Meaning book forming part of a set is 1520s in English, from that sense in French.
Generalized sense of bulk, mass, quantity (1620s) developed from that of bulk or size of a book
(1520s), again following the sense evolution in the French word.


tambourine (n.)

1782, in the modern sense of parchment-covered hoop with pieces of metal attached; earlier a small
drum (1570s), from French tambourin long narrow drum used in Provence, diminutive of tambour drum,
altered by influence of Arabic tunbur lute, from Old French tabour (see tabor).    The sense
evolutions present some difficulties, and in some 17c. and early 18c. references it is difficult to
say what sort of instrument is intended. Earlier names for this type of instrument were tambour de
basque (1680s), also timbre and timbrel. Tambour itself is attested in English from late 15c., and
Shakespeare has tabourine.


patent (n.)

late 14c., open letter or document from some authority, shortened form of Anglo-French lettre patent
(also in Medieval Latin (litter&aelig;) patentes), literally open letter (late 13c.), from Old
French patente (see patent (adj.).  The Letters Patent were ... written upon open sheets of
parchment, with the Great Seal pendent at the bottom ... [while] the 'Litter&aelig; Claus&aelig;,'
or Letters Close, ... being of a more private nature, and addressed to one or two individuals only,
were closed or folded up and sealed on the outside. [S.R. Scargill-Bird, A Guide to the Principal
Classes of Documents at the Public Record Office, 1891]  Meaning a license covering an invention is
from 1580s.


French (adj.)

Old English frencisc of the Franks, from Franca (see Frank). The noun is from Old English Frencisc.
As the name of a language, from late 13c.    Euphemistic meaning bad language (pardon my French) is
from 1895. Used in many combination-words, often dealing with food or sex. French dressing recorded
by 1860; French toast is from 1630s. French letter condom (c.1856, perhaps on resemblance of
sheepskin and parchment), French (v.) perform oral sex on (c.1917) and French kiss (1923) all
probably stem from the Anglo-Saxon equation of Gallic culture and sexual sophistication, a sense
first recorded 1749 in the phrase French novel.    To take French leave, depart without telling the
host, is 1771, from a social custom then prevalent. However, this is said to be called in France
filer &agrave; l'anglaise, literally to take English leave.


Bible (n.)

early 14c., from Anglo-Latin biblia, Old French bible (13c.) the Bible, also any large book
generally, from Medieval and Late Latin biblia (neuter plural interpreted as feminine singular), in
phrase biblia sacra holy books, a translation of Greek ta biblia to hagia the holy books, from Greek
biblion paper, scroll, the ordinary word for book, originally a diminutive of byblos Egyptian
papyrus, possibly so called from Byblos (modern Jebeil, Lebanon), the name of the Phoenician port
from which Egyptian papyrus was exported to Greece (compare parchment). Or the place name might be
from the Greek word, which then would be probably of Egyptian origin. The Christian scripture was
referred to in Greek as Ta Biblia as early as c.223. Bible replaced Old English biblio&eth;ece (see
bibliothek) as the ordinary word for the Scriptures. Figurative sense of any authoritative book is
from 1804.    Walter Scott and Pope's Homer were reading of my own election, but my mother forced
me, by steady daily toil, to learn long chapters of the Bible by heart; as well as to read it every
syllable through, aloud, hard names and all, from Genesis to the Apocalypse, about once a year; and
to that discipline -- patient, accurate, and resolute -- I owe, not only a knowledge of the book,
which I find occasionally serviceable, but much of my general power of taking pains, and the best
part of my taste in literature. ... [O]nce knowing the 32nd of Deuteronomy, the 119th Psalm, the
15th of 1st Corinthians, the Sermon on the Mount, and most of the Apocalypse, every syllable by
heart, and having always a way of thinking with myself what words meant, it was not possible for me,
even in the foolishest times of youth, to write entirely superficial or formal English .... [John
Ruskin, Fors Clavigera, 1871]


