parer (n.)

1570s, agent noun from pare (v.).


parent (n.)

early 15c. (late 12c. as a surname), from Old French parent father, parent, relative, kin (11c.),
from Latin parentem (nominative parens) father or mother, ancestor, noun use of present participle
of parere bring forth, give birth to, produce, from PIE root *pere- (1) to bring forth (see pare).
Began to replace native elder after c.1500.


pare (v.)

to trim by cutting close, c.1300, from Old French parer arrange, prepare; trim, adorn, and directly
from Latin parare make ready, prepare, furnish, provide, arrange, order; contrive, design, intend,
resolve; procure, acquire, obtain, get; get with money, buy, purchase (related to parere produce,
bring forth, give birth to), from PIE *par-a-, suffixed form of root *pere- (1) produce, procure,
bring forward, bring forth, and derived words in diverse senses (cognates: Lithuanian pariu to
brood, Greek poris calf, bull, Old High German farro, German Farre bullock, Old English fearr bull,
Sanskrit prthukah child, calf, young of an animal, Czech spratek brat, urchin, premature calf).
Generalized meaning to reduce something little by little is from 1520s. Related: Pared; paring.


rattan

1650s, from Malay rotan, from raut to trim, strip, peel, pare.


-parous

word-forming element meaning bearing, producing, from Latin -parus (as in viviparus bringing forth
young alive), from parere to produce, bring forth (see pare).


multiparous (adj.)

bringing forth many young at a birth, 1640s, from Modern Latin multiparus, from multi- + stem of
parere to bring forth (see pare).


biparous (adj.)

bringing forth two at birth, 1731, from bi- + Latin -parus, from parere bring forth, bear (see
pare).


oviparous (adj.)

producing eggs that are hatched outside the body of the female, 1640s, from Latin oviparus, from
ovum egg (see egg (n.)) + stem of parere to bring forth (see pare).


parturient (adj.)

about to give birth, 1590s, from Latin parturientem (nominative parturiens), present participle of
parturire be in labor, literally desire to bring forth, desiderative of parere to bear (see pare).
Related: Parturiency.


para- (2)

word-forming element meaning defense, protection against; that which protects from, from Italian
para, imperative of parare to ward off, from Latin parare make ready (see pare).


apparatus (n.)

1620s, from Latin apparatus tools, implements, equipment; preparation, a preparing, noun of state
from past participle stem of apparare prepare, from ad- to (see ad-) + parare make ready (see pare).


comparison (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French comparaison (12c.), from Latin comparationem (nominative comparatio), noun
of action from past participle stem of comparare make equal with, liken, bring together for a
contest, literally to couple together, to form in pairs, from com- with (see com-) + parare prepare
(see pare).


preparation (n.)

late 14c., act of preparing, from Latin praeparationem (nominative praeparatio) a making ready, noun
of action from past participle stem of praeparare prepare, from prae before (see pre-) + parare make
ready (see pare). Meaning a substance especially prepared is from 1640s.


skive (v.1)

split or cut into strips, pare off, grind away, 1825, from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse
skifa to cut, split, from Proto-Germanic *skif-, from Proto-Indo-European *skei- to cut, split (see
shed (v.)). Related: Skived; skiving.


imperative (adj.)

1520s, from Late Latin imperativus pertaining to a command, from imperatus commanded, past
participle of imperare to command, to requisition, from assimilated form of in- into, in (see in-
(2)) + parare prepare (see pare).


puerperal (adj.)

1768, with -al (1) + Latin puerperus bringing forth children; bearing a child (as a noun, woman in
labor), from puer child, boy (see puerility) + parere to bear (see pare). Earlier puerperial
(1620s).


separate (v.)

late 14c., from Latin separatus, past participle of separare to pull apart, from se- apart (see
secret) + parare make ready, prepare (see pare). Sever (q.v.) is a doublet, via French. Related:
Separated; separating.


nulliparous (adj.)

1859, from medical Latin nullipara female who has never given birth, from nulli-, stem of nullus no
(see null) + -para, fem. of parus, from parere to bring forth (see pare) + -ous.


viviparous (adj.)

1640s, from Late Latin viviparus bringing forth alive, from Latin vivus alive, living (see vivid) +
parere bring forth, bear (see pare). See viper.


retail (v.)

mid-14c. sell in small quantities or parcels, from Old French retaillier cut back, cut off, pare,
clip, reduce, circumcise, from re- back (see re-) + taillier to cut, trim (see tailor (n.)).
Sometimes also to deal out (information, etc.) in small quantities; hand down by report; recount,
tell over again (1590s). Related: Retailed; retailing.


disparate (adj.)

c.1600, unlike in kind, from Latin disparatus, past participle of disparare divide, separate, from
dis- apart (see dis-) + parare get ready, prepare (see pare); meaning influenced by Latin dispar
unequal, unlike. Related: Disparately; disparateness.


retrench (v.2)

cut off, cut down, pare away (expenses, etc.), 1620s, from obsolete French retrencher to cut off,
lessen, shorten (Modern French retrancher, Old French retrenchier), from re- back (see re-) + Old
French trenchier to cut (see trench). Related: Retrenched; retrenching.


chip (v.)

early 15c., to chip (intransitive, of stone); from Old English forcippian to pare away by cutting,
cut off, verbal form of cipp small piece of wood (see chip (n.)). Transitive meaning to cut up, cut
or trim is from late 15c. Sense of break off fragments is 18c. To chip in contribute (1861) is
American English, perhaps from card-playing. Related: Chipped; chipping. Chipped beef attested from
1826.


repair (v.1)

to mend, to put back in order, mid-14c., from Old French reparer repair, mend (12c.), from Latin
reparare restore, put back in order, from re- again (see re-) + parare make ready, prepare (see
pare). Related: Repaired; repairing.


vituperation (n.)

mid-15c., but rare before early 19c., from Latin vituperationem (nominative vituperatio) blame, a
blaming, censuring, from  past participle stem of vituperare disparage, find fault with, from
vitiperos having faults, from vitium fault, defect (see vice (n.1)) + parare prepare, provide,
procure (see pare). Vituperatio was stronger than either Latin reprehensio or Modern English
vituperation.


parade (n.)

1650s, a show of bravado, also an assembly of troops for inspections, from French parade display,
show, military parade, from Middle French parade (15c.), or from Italian parate a warding or
defending, a garish setting forth, or Spanish parada a staying or stopping, all from Vulgar Latin
*parata, from Latin parere arrange, prepare, adorn (see pare), which developed widespread senses in
Romanic derivatives. Non-military sense of march, procession is first recorded 1670s.


post-partum (adj.)

also postpartum, 1837, occurring after birth, from Latin post partum after birth, from post after
(see post-) + accusative of partus a bearing, a bringing forth, from partus, past participle of
parere to bring forth (see pare). Phrase Post-partum depression first attested 1929.


spar (v)

late 14c., go quickly, rush, dart, spring; c.1400, to strike or thrust, perhaps from Middle French
esparer to kick (Modern French &#233;parer), from Italian sparare to fling, from Latin ex- (see ex-)
+ parare make ready, prepare, hence ward off, parry (see pare). Etymologists consider a connection
with spur unlikely. Used in 17c. in reference to preliminary actions in a cock fight; figurative
sense of to dispute, bandy with words is from 1690s. Extension to humans, in a literal sense, with
meaning to engage in or practice boxing is attested from 1755. Related: Sparred; sparring.


rampart (n.)

earthen elevation around a place for fortification, sometimes also including parapets, 1580s, from
Middle French rempart, rampart, from remparer to fortify, from re- again (see re-) + emparer
fortify, take possession of, from Old Proven&ccedil;al amparer, from Vulgar Latin *anteparare
prepare, properly to make preparations beforehand, from Latin ante- before (see ante) + parare
prepare (see pare). With excrescent -t in French, perhaps by influence of boulevart (see boulevard).


pre-

word-forming element meaning before, from Old French pre- and Medieval Latin pre-, both from Latin
prae (adverb and preposition) before in time or place, from PIE *peri- (cognates: Oscan prai,
Umbrian pre, Sanskrit pare thereupon, Greek parai at, Gaulish are- at, before, Lithuanian pre at,
Old Church Slavonic pri at, Gothic faura, Old English fore before), extended form of root *per- (1)
beyond (see per).    The Latin word was active in forming verbs. Also see prae-. Sometimes in Middle
English muddled with words in pro- or per-.


empire (n.)

early 14c., from Old French empire rule, authority, kingdom, imperial rule, from Latin imperium
rule, command, from imperare to command, from im- in (see in- (2)) + parare to order, prepare (see
pare).    Not etymologically restricted to territory ruled by an emperor, but used that way. The
Empire, meaning the British Empire, first recorded 1772 (it officially devolved into The
Commonwealth in 1931); before that it meant the Holy Roman Empire (1670s). Empire style (especially
in reference to a style of dresses with high waistlines) is 1869, from the Second Empire rule of
Napoleon III of France (1852-70). New York has been called the Empire State since 1834.


viper (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French vipere, earlier in English as vipera (c.1200), directly from Latin
vipera viper, snake, serpent, contraction of *vivipera, from vivus alive, living (see vital) +
parere bring forth, bear (see pare). In common with many snake species in cooler climates, in most
cases the viper's eggs are kept inside the mother until hatching.    Applied to persons of spiteful
character since at least 1590s. The only venomous snake found in Great Britain, but not especially
dangerous. The word replaced native adder. The flesh of the viper was formerly regarded as
possessing great nutritive or restorative properties, and was frequently used medicinally [OED];
hence viper-wine, wine medicated with some kind of extract from vipers, used 17c. by gray-bearded
gallants in a bid to feele new lust, and youthfull flames agin. [Massinger]


poor (adj.)

c.1200, lacking money or resources, destitute; needy, indigent; small, scanty, from Old French povre
poor, wretched, dispossessed; inadequate; weak, thin (Modern French pauvre), from Latin pauper poor,
not wealthy, from pre-Latin *pau-paros producing little; getting little, a compound from the roots
of paucus little (see paucity) and parare to produce, bring forth (see pare).    Replaced Old
English earm. Figuratively from early 14c. Meaning of inferior quality is from c.1300. Of inhabited
places from c.1300; of soil, etc., from late 14c. The poor boy sandwich, made of simple but filling
ingredients, was invented and named in New Orleans in 1921. To poor mouth deny one's advantages is
from 1965 (to make a poor mouth whine is Scottish dialect from 1822). Slang poor man's ________ the
cheaper alternative to _______, is from 1854.


