parish (n.)

c.1300, district with its own church; members of such a church, from Anglo-French paroche, parosse
(late 11c.), Old French paroisse, from Late Latin parochia a diocese, alteration of Late Greek
paroikia a diocese or parish, from paroikos a sojourner (in Christian writers), in classical Greek,
neighbor, from para- near (see para- (1)) + oikos house (see villa).    Sense development unclear,
perhaps from sojourner as epithet of early Christians as spiritual sojourners in the material world.
In early Church writing the word was used in a more general sense than Greek diokesis, though by
13c. they were synonymous. Replaced Old English preostscyr, literally priest-shire.


parishioner (n.)

mid-15c., with -er (1), from earlier parishen parishioner (c.1200), from Old French paroissien,
parochien, from paroisse (see parish). Doublet form parochian was obsolete by 1700.


parochial (adj.)

late 14c., pertaining to a parish, from Anglo-French parochiel (late 13c.), from Old French
parochial, from Late Latin parochialis of a parish (c.600), from parochia (see parish).
Figurative sense, limited, narrow, as if confined to a small region, is from 1856 (also see
parochialism). Parochial school is attested from 1755.


township (n.)

Old English tunscipe inhabitants or population of a town; see town + -ship. Applied in Middle
English to manor, parish, or other division of a hundred. Specific sense of local division or
district in a parish, each with a village or small town and its own church is from 1530s; as a local
municipal division of a county in U.S. and Canada, first recorded 1685. In South Africa, area set
aside for non-whites from 1934.


parakeet (n.)

1620s, from Spanish perquito; earlier English form parroket (1580s) is from Middle French paroquet,
from Old French paroquet (14c.), which is said by etymologists of French to be from Italian
parrocchetto, literally little priest, from parroco parish priest, from Church Latin parochus (see
parish), or parrucchetto, diminutive of parrucca peruke, periwig, in reference to the head plumage.
The Spanish form, meanwhile, is sometimes said to be a diminutive of Perico, familiar form of Pedro
Peter, and the Old French word is likewise perhaps from or influenced by a diminutive of Pierre
Peter. The relations of the Spanish and Italian forms, and the influence of folk etymology on either
or both, are uncertain.


plaquemines

parish at the mouth of the Mississippi in Louisiana, U.S., from Louisiana French, literally
persimmon (18c.), probably from Miami/Illinois (Algonquian)  piakimina.


strontium (n.)

light metallic element, 1808, coined in Modern Latin by English chemist Sir Humphry Davy (1778-1829)
from Strontian, name of a parish in Argyllshire, Scotland, the site of lead mines where strontium
was first found, in 1787.


cure (n.2)

parish priest, from French cur&eacute; (13c.), from Medieval Latin curatus (see curate).


curate (n.)

late 14c., spiritual guide, from Medieval Latin curatus one responsible for the care (of souls),
from Latin curatus, past participle of curare to take care of (see cure (v.)). Church of England
sense of paid deputy priest of a parish first recorded 1550s.


beadle (n.)

Old English bydel herald, messenger from an authority, preacher, from beodan to proclaim (see bid).
Sense of warrant officer, tipstaff was in late Old English; that of petty parish officer, which has
given the job a bad reputation, is from 1590s. French b&eacute;deau (Old French bedel, 12c.) is a
Germanic loan-word.


visitation (n.)

c.1300, a visit by an ecclesiastical representative to examine the condition of a parish, abbey,
etc., from Anglo-French visitacioun, Old French visitacion and directly from Latin visitationem
(nominative visitatio), noun of action from past participle stem of visitare (see visit (v.)). The
supernatural sense of a sight, apparition, a coming of God to a mortal is attested from mid-14c.


mortuary (n.)

early 14c., from Anglo-French mortuarie gift to a parish priest from a deceased parishioner, from
Medieval Latin mortuarium, noun use of neuter of Late Latin adjective mortuarius pertaining to the
dead, from Latin mortuus, past participle of mori to die (see mortal (adj.)). Meaning place where
bodies are kept temporarily first recorded 1865, a euphemism for earlier deadhouse.


provincialism (n.)

1820 in the political sense, local attachment as opposed to national unity, from provincial + -ism.
Meaning manners or modes of a certain province or of provinces generally (as opposed to the big city
or capital) is from 1836. Sense of a local word or usage or expression is from 1770.
PROVINCIALISM consists in:  (a) An ignorance of the manners, customs and nature of people living
outside one's own village, parish, or nation.  (b) A desire to coerce others into uniformity.  [Ezra
Pound, Provincialism the Enemy, 1917]


vestry (n.)

mid-15c., probably from Anglo-French *vesterie, from Old French vestiaire room for vestments,
dressing room (12c.), from Latin vestarium wardrobe, noun use of neuter of vestiarius (adj.) of
clothes, from vestis garment (see vest (v.)). Often also a meeting room for the transaction of
parish business, and retained in non-liturgical churches as the name of a separate room used for
Sunday school, prayer meetings, etc., hence transferred secular use (as in vestryman, 1610s).


merestone (n.)

stone serving as a landmark, Old English m&#230;rstan boundary stone, from m&#230;re boundary,
object indicating a boundary, from Proto-Germanic *mairjo- (cognates: Middle Dutch mere boundary
mark, stake, Old Norse -m&#230;ri boundary, border-land), related to Latin murus wall (see mural).
Hence also meresman man appointed to find boundaries (of a parish, etc.).


sinecure (n.)

1660s, church benefice with an emolument but without parish duties, from Medieval Latin beneficium
sine cura benefice without care (of souls), from Latin sine without (see sans) + cura, ablative
singular of cura care (see cure (n.1)).


rogation (n.)

late 14c., from Latin rogationem (nominative rogatio) an asking, prayer, entreaty, noun of action
from past participle stem of rogare to ask, apparently a figurative use and meaning literally to
stretch out (the hand), from PIE *rog-, 0-grade form of root *reg- move in a straight line (see
regal). Related: Rogations.   Rogation days were the Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday before Ascension
Day, a time for processions round fields blessing crops and praying for good harvest, also blessing
the boundary markers of each parish. Discouraged by Protestants as superstitious, but continued or
revived in modified form as beating the bounds.


vicar (n.)

early 14c., from Anglo-French vicare, Old French vicaire deputy, second in command, also in the
ecclesiastical sense (12c.), from Latin vicarius a substitute, deputy, proxy, noun use of adjective
vicarius substituted, delegated, from vicis change, interchange, succession; a place, position (see
vicarious). The original notion is of earthly representative of God or Christ; but also used in
sense of person acting as parish priest in place of a real parson (early 14c.).    The original
Vicar of Bray (in figurative use from 1660s) seems to have been Simon Allen, who held the benefice
from c.1540 to 1588, thus serving from the time of Henry VIII to Elizabeth I, being twice a Catholic
and twice a Protestant but always vicar of Bray. The village is near Maidenhead in Berkshire.


