parlance (n.)

1570s, speaking, speech, especially in debate; 1787 as way of speaking, from Anglo-French (c.1300)
and Old French parlance, from Old French parlaunce, from parler to speak (see parley).


gaper (n.)

1630s, agent noun from gape (v.). Gaper delay in traffic control parlance attested by 1995.


NASCAR

acronym for National Association for Stock Car Auto Racing, U.S. auto racing promotion group founded
1948 in Daytona Beach, Florida. NASCAR dad in U.S. political parlance, small-town, often Southern
white man who abandons traditional Democratic leanings to vote Republican at least once every four
years coined 2003 by Democratic pollster Celinda Lake.


store (n.)

c.1300, supplies or provisions for a household, camp, etc., from store (v.) or else from Old French
estore provisions; a fleet, navy, army, from estorer or from Medieval Latin staurum, instaurum
store. General sense of sufficient supply is attested from late 15c. The meaning place where goods
are kept for sale is first recorded 1721 in American English (British English prefers shop (n.)),
from the sense place where supplies and provisions are kept (1660s).    The word store is of larger
signification than the word shop. It not only comprehends all that is embraced in the word shop,
when that word is used to designate a place in which goods or merchandise are sold, but more, a
place of deposit, a store house. In common parlance the two words have a distinct meaning. We speak
of shops as places in which mechanics pursue their trades, as a carpenter's shop a blacksmith's shop
a shoemaker's shop. While, if we refer to a place where oods and merchandise are bought and sold,
whether by wholesale or retail, we speak of it as a store. [C.J. Brickell, opinion in Sparrenberger
v. The State of Alabama, December term, 1875]   Stores articles and equipment for an army is from
1630s. In store laid up for future use (also of events, etc.) is recorded from late 14c. Store-
bought is attested from 1912, American English; earlier store-boughten (1872).


