parley (v.)

late 14c., to speak, talk, confer, probably a separate borrowing of Old French parler to speak (see
parley (n.)). Related: Parleyed; parleying. Meaning to discuss terms is 1560s, from the noun.


parleyvoo

colloquial for the French language, 1754, from French parlez-vous (fran&ccedil;ais?) do you speak
(French?) For parlez, see parley (n.).


parley (n.)

conference, speech, especially with an enemy, mid-15c., from Middle French parl&eacute;e, from fem.
past participle of Old French parler to speak (11c.), from Vulgar Latin *paraulare, from Late Latin
parabolare to speak (in parables), from parabola speech, discourse, from Latin parabola comparison
(see parable).


parlance (n.)

1570s, speaking, speech, especially in debate; 1787 as way of speaking, from Anglo-French (c.1300)
and Old French parlance, from Old French parlaunce, from parler to speak (see parley).


parliament (n.)

c.1300, consultation; formal conference, assembly, from Old French parlement (11c.), originally a
speaking, talk, from parler to speak (see parley (n.)); spelling altered c.1400 to conform with
Medieval Latin parliamentum.    Anglo-Latin parliamentum is attested from early 13c. Specific sense
representative assembly of England or Ireland emerged by mid-14c. from general meaning a conference
of the secular and/or ecclesiastical aristocracy summoned by a monarch.


parlor (n.)

c.1200, parlur, window through which confessions were made, also apartment in a monastery for
conversations with outside persons; from Old French parleor courtroom, judgment hall, auditorium
(12c., Modern French parloir), from parler to speak (see parley (n.)).    Sense of sitting room for
private conversation is late 14c.; that of show room for a business (as in ice cream parlor) first
recorded 1884. As an adjective, advocating radical views from a position of comfort, 1910.


summit (n.)

c.1400, highest point, peak, from Middle French somete, from Old French somete summit, top,
diminutive of som, sum highest part, top of a hill, from Latin summum, neuter of noun use of summus
highest, related to super over (see sum (n.)). The meaning meeting of heads of state (1950) is from
Winston Churchill's metaphor of a parley at the summit.


parable (n.)

mid-13c., parabol, modern form from early 14c., saying or story in which something is expressed in
terms of something else, from Old French parable parable, parabolic style in writing (13c.), from
Latin parabola comparison, from Greek parabole a comparison, parable, literally a throwing beside,
hence a juxtaposition, from para- alongside (see para- (1)) + bole a throwing, casting, beam, ray,
related to ballein to throw (see ballistics).    Replaced Old English bispell. In Vulgar Latin,
parabola took on the meaning word, hence Italian parlare, French parler to speak (see parley (n.)).


