partition (v.)

1741, from partition (n.). Related: Partitioned; partitioning.


partition (n.)

early 15c., division into shares, distinction, from Old French particion (12c.), from Latin
partitionem (nominative partitio) a sharing, division, partition, distribution; method of dividing,
from past participle stem of partire to part (see part (v.)). Sense of that which separates first
recorded late 15c.


partner (n.)

c.1300, altered from parcener (late 13c.), from Old French par&ccedil;onier partner, associate;
joint owner, joint heir, from par&ccedil;on partition, division. portion, share, lot, from Latin
partitionem (nominative partitio) a sharing, partition, division, distribution (see partition (n.)).
Form in English influenced by part (n.). The word also may represent Old French part tenour part
holder.


septum (n.)

partition between the nostrils, 1690s, Modern Latin, from Latin saeptum a fence, enclosure,
partition, from neuter past participle of saepire to hedge in, from saepes hedge, fence. Related:
Septal.


divider (n.)

1520s, agent noun from divide (v.). Meaning partition or screen, especially in a room, is from 1959.


berlin (n.)

old type of four-wheeled covered carriage, 1690s, so called because it was introduced in
Brandenburg, c.1670; see Berlin. Hence berline (from the French form) automobile with a glass
partition behind the driver's seat. In reference to a type of wool and the popular patterns made for
it, from 1841.


wall (n.)

Old English weall, Anglian wall rampart, dike, earthwork (natural as well as man-made), dam, cliff,
rocky shore, also defensive fortification around a city, side of a building, an Anglo-Frisian and
Saxon borrowing (Old Saxon, Old Frisian, Middle Low German, Middle Dutch wal) from Latin vallum
wall, rampart, row or line of stakes, apparently a collective form of vallus stake, from PIE *walso-
a post. Swedish vall, Danish val are from Low German.    Meaning interior partition of a structure
is mid-13c. In this case, English uses one word where many languages have two, such as German Mauer
outer wall of a town, fortress, etc., used also in reference to the former Berlin Wall, and wand
partition wall within a building (compare the distinction, not always rigorously kept, in Italian
muro/parete, Irish mur/fraig, Lithuanian muras/siena, etc.). The Latin word for defensive wall was
murus (see mural).    Anatomical use from late 14c. To give (someone) the wall allow him or her to
walk on the (cleaner) wall side of the pavement is from 1530s. To turn (one's) face to the wall
prepare to die is from 1570s. Phrase up the wall angry, crazy is from 1951; off the wall unorthodox,
unconventional is recorded from 1966, American English student slang. To go over the wall escape
(originally from prison) is from 1933. Wall-to-wall (adj.) recorded 1939, of shelving, etc.;
metaphoric use (usually disparaging) is from 1967.


cloison (n.)

a partition, a dividing band, 1690s, from French cloison, from Vulgar Latin *clausionem (nominative
*clausio), noun of action from past participle stem of Latin claudere to close, shut (see clause).
Related: Cloisonnage.


cloisonne (adj.)

divided into compartments, 1863, from French cloisonn&eacute;, from cloison a partition (12c., in
Old French, enclosure), from Proven&ccedil;al clausio, from Vulgar Latin *clausio, noun of action
from past participle stem of claudere to close, shut (see clause).


transept (n.)

transverse section of a cruciform church, 1530s, from Medieval Latin transeptum, from Latin trans-
across (see trans-) + saeptum fence, partition, enclosure (see septum). Rare before 1700. Related:
Transeptal.


merism (n.)

1894 in biological sense repetition of parts in living things; earlier in rhetoric, synecdoche in
which totality is expressed by contrasting parts (such as high and low, young and old); from Modern
Latin merismus, from Greek merismos a dividing, division, a partition, from merizein to divide, from
meros part, share (see merit (n.)). Related: Merismatic.


diaphragm (n.)

late 14c., from Late Latin diaphragma, from Greek diaphragma partition, barrier, muscle which
divides the thorax from the abdomen, from diaphrassein to barricade, from dia- across (see dia-) +
phrassein to fence or hedge in. The native word is midriff. Meaning contraceptive cap is from 1933.


multipartite (adj.)

also multi-partite, 1721, from Latin multipartitus divided into many parts, from multi- (see multi-)
+ partitus, past participle of partire to divide (see partition).


wainscot (n.)

mid-14c., imported oak of superior quality (well-grained and without knots), probably from Middle
Dutch or Middle Flemish waghenscote superior quality oak wood, board used for paneling (though
neither of these is attested as early as the English word), related to Middle Low German wagenschot
(late 14c.), from waghen (see wagon) + scote partition, crossbar. So called perhaps because the wood
originally was used for wagon building and coachwork, but the sense evolution is not entirely clear.
Meaning panels lining the walls of rooms is recorded from 1540s. Wainscoting is from 1570s.


cabin (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French cabane hut, cabin, from Old Proven&ccedil;al cabana, from Late Latin
capanna hut (source of Spanish cabana, Italian capanna), of doubtful origin. French cabine (18c.),
Italian cabino are English loan-words. Meaning room or partition of a vessel is from late 14c. Cabin
fever first recorded by 1918 in the need to get out and about sense; earlier (1820s) it was a term
for typhus.


pact (n.)

early 15c., from Old French pacte agreement, treaty, compact (14c.), from Latin pactum agreement,
contract, covenant, noun use of neuter past participle of pacisci to covenant, to agree, make a
treaty, from PIE root *pag- fix, join together, unite, make firm (cognates: Sanskrit pasa- cord,
rope, Avestan pas- to fetter, Greek pegnynai to fix, make firm, fast or solid, Latin pangere to fix,
to fasten, Slavonic pa&#382; wooden partition, Old English fegan to join, fon to catch seize).


separate (adj.)

detached, kept apart, c.1600, from separate (v.) or from Latin separatus. Separate but equal in
reference to U.S. segregation policies on railroads is attested from 1888. Separate development,
official name of apartheid in South Africa, is from 1955. Related: Separately (1550s); separateness.
Frequently the colored coach is little better than a cattle car. Generally one half the smoking car
is reserved for the colored car. Often only a cloth curtain or partition run half way up separates
this so-called colored car from the smoke, obscene language, and foul air of the smokers' half of
the car. All classes and conditions of colored humanity, from the most cultured and refined to the
most degraded and filthy, without regard to sex, good breeding or ability to pay for better
accommodation, are crowded into this separate, but equal (?) half car. [Rev. Norman B. Wood, The
White Side of a Black Subject, 1897]


cloister (n.)

early 13c., from Old French cloistre monastery, convent; enclosure (12c., Modern French
clo&icirc;tre), from Medieval Latin claustrum portion of monastery closed off to laity, from Latin
claustrum (usually in plural, claustra) place shut in, enclosure; bar, bolt, means of shutting in,
from past participle stem of claudere (see close (v.)).    The original purpose of cloisters was to
afford a place in which the monks could take exercise and recreation [Century Dictionary]. Spelling
in French influenced by cloison partition. Old English had clustor, clauster in the sense prison,
lock, barrier, directly from Latin, and compare, from the same source, Dutch klooster, German
Kloster, Polish klasztor.


shift (v.)

Old English sciftan, scyftan arrange, place, order, also divide, partition; distribute, allot,
share, from Proto-Germanic *skiftan (cognates: Old Norse skipta to divide, change, separate, Old
Frisian skifta to decide, determine, test, Dutch schiften to divide, turn, German schichten to
classify, Schicht shift). This is said to be related to the source of Old English sceadan divide,
separate, (see shed (v.)).    c.1200 as to dispose; make ready; set in order, control, also
intransitive, take care of oneself. From c.1300 as to go, move, depart; move (someone or something),
transport. Sense of to alter, to change appeared mid-13c. (compare shiftless). Meaning change the
gear setting of an engine is from 1910; to shift gears in the figurative sense is from 1961.
Related: Shifted; shifting.


