partial (adj.)

early 15c., one-sided, biased, from Old French parcial (14c., Modern French partial), from Medieval
Latin partialis divisible, solitary, partial, from Latin pars (genitive partis) part (see part
(n.)). Sense of not whole, incomplete is attested from late 14c. Related: Partially (mid-15c. as
incompletely).


partialness (n.)

incompleteness, 1701, from partial + -ness.


partiality (n.)

one-sidedness, early 15c., from Middle French parcialit&eacute;, from Medieval Latin partialitatem
(nominative partialitas), from partialis (see partial).


undress (n.)

state of partial or incomplete dress, 1680s, from undress (v.). Meaning ordinary dress is from 1748.


impartial (adj.)

formed in English 1590s from assimilated form of in- (1) not, opposite of + partial. First recorded
in Richard II.


subluxation (n.)

partial dislocation, 1680s, from Latin subluxationem (nominative subluxatio).


demijohn (n.)

1769, partial translation and word-play from French damejeanne (late 17c.) Lady Jane, term used for
large globular wicker-wrapped bottle, perhaps because its shape suggested a stout woman in the
costume of the period. A general Mediterranean word, with forms found in Spanish, Portuguese,
Italian, and Arabic.


U-boat (n.)

1916 (said to have been in use from 1913), partial translation of German U-Boot, short for
Unterseeboot, literally undersea boat.


grosbeak (n.)

1670s, partial translation of French grosbec; see gross + beak.


low-profile (adj.)

1957, in reference to automobile wheels, from low (adj.) + profile (n.). General sense by 1970,
American English, in reference to Nixon Administration policy of partial U.S. disengagement from
burdensome commitments abroad.


mero-

before vowels mer-, word-forming element meaning part, partial, fraction, from comb. form of Greek
meros part, fraction (see merit (n.)).


sketch (v.)

1690s, present the essential facts of, from sketch (n.). Meaning draw, portray in outline and
partial shading is from 1725. Related: Sketched; sketcher; sketching.


Refusenik (n.)

Soviet Jew who has been refused permission to emigrate to Israel, 1975, a partial translation of
Russian otkaznik, from otkazat to refuse; with English refuse (v.). Also see -nik.


example (n.)

late 14c., partial re-Latinization of earlier essample, asaumple (mid-13c.), from Old French
essemple sample, model, example, precedent, cautionary tale, from Latin exemplum a sample, literally
that which is taken out, from eximere take out, remove (see exempt (adj.)). Oldest English senses
are of behavior and punishment.


tallboy (n.)

also tall-boy, high-stemmed glass or goblet, 1670s, from tall + boy, though the exact signification
is unclear. In reference to a high chest of drawers it is recorded from 1769, here perhaps a partial
loan-translation of French haut bois, literally high wood.


kickback (n.)

also kick-back, c.1900 in various mechanical senses, from kick (v.) + back (adv.). By 1926 in a
slang sense of be forced to return pelf, pay back to victims, which was extended to illegal partial
give-backs of government-set wages that were extorted from workers by employers. Hence sense of
illegal or improper payment (1932).


chopstick (n.)

also chop-stick, 1690s, sailors' partial translation of Chinese k'wai tse, variously given as fast
ones or nimble boys, first element from pidgin English chop, from Cantonese kap urgent. Chopsticks,
the two-fingered piano exercise, is first attested 1893, probably from the resemblance of the
fingers to chopsticks.


overtone (n.)

1867, in literal sense, from over + tone (n.); a loan-translation of German Oberton, first used by
German physicist Hermann Ludwig Ferdinand von Helmholtz (1821-1894) as a contraction of
Overpartialton upper partial tone. Figurative sense of subtle implication is from 1890, first
attested in writings of William James.


uvea (n.)

late 14c., from medical Latin uvea, from Latin uva grape; uvula (see uvula). Partial loan-
translation of Greek hrago-eides (khiton) (the covering) resembling berries or grapes (Galen).
Related: Uveal.


liverwurst (n.)

1869, American English, partial translation of German Leberwurst, from Leber liver (see liver (n.1))
+ Wurst sausage (see wurst).


penumbra (n.)

1660s, from Modern Latin penumbra partial shadow outside the complete shadow of an eclipse, coined
1604 by Kepler from Latin p&aelig;ne almost + umbra shadow (see umbrage). Related: Penumbral.


lustgarden (n.)

1580s, translation or partial translation of German Lust-garten, Dutch lustgaard pleasure garden;
see lust (n.) + garden (n.).


endeavor (n.)

early 15c., pains taken to attain an object, literally in duty, from phrase put (oneself) in dever
make it one's duty (a partial translation of Old French mettre en deveir put in duty), from Old
French dever duty, from Latin debere to owe (see debt). One's endeavors meaning one's utmost effort
is from late 15c.


paresis (n.)

partial paralysis, 1690s, Modern Latin, from Greek paresis letting go, slackening of strength,
paralysis, from stem of parienai to let go, from para- (see para- (1)) + hienai to send, throw (see
jet (v.)).


iceberg (n.)

1774, partial loan-translation of Dutch ijsberg, literally ice mountain, from ijs ice (see ice (n.))
+ berg mountain (see barrow (n.2)).  An earlier term was sea-hill (1690s). Phrase tip of the
iceberg, in a figurative sense, first recorded 1962. Iceberg lettuce attested from 1893.


loafer (n.)

idler, person who loafs, 1830, of uncertain origin, often regarded as a variant of land loper
(1795), a partial loan-translation of German Landl&auml;ufer vagabond, from Land land + L&auml;ufer
runner, from laufen to run (see leap (v.)). But OED finds this connection not very probable. As a
type of shoe, 1937. Related: Loafers.


favorable (adj.)

mid-14c., from Old French favorable well-disposed, favorable, partial, from Latin favorabilis
favored, in favor, from favor (see favor (n.)). Related: Favorably.


sequence (n.)

late 14c., hymn sung after the Hallelujah and before the Gospel, from Old French sequence answering
verses (13c.), from Medieval Latin sequentia a following, a succession, from Latin sequentem
(nominative sequens), present participle of sequi to follow (see sequel). In Church use, a partial
loan-translation of Greek akolouthia, from akolouthos following. General sense of succession, also a
sequence at cards, appeared 1570s.


wiseacre (n.)

1590s, partial translation of Middle Dutch wijssegger soothsayer (with no derogatory connotation),
probably altered by association with Middle Dutch segger sayer from Old High German wizzago prophet,
from wizzan to know, from Proto-Germanic *wit- to know (see wit (v.)). The deprecatory sense of one
who pretends to know everything may have come through confusion with obsolete English segger sayer,
which also had a sense of braggart (mid-15c.).


newspaper (n.)

1660s, though the thing itself is older (see gazette); from news (n.) + paper (n.).    [T]he
newspaper that drops on your doorstep is a partial, hasty, incomplete, inevitably somewhat flawed
and inaccurate rendering of some of the things we have heard about in the past twenty-four hours --
distorted, despite our best efforts to eliminate gross bias, by the very process of compression that
makes it possible for you to lift it from the doorstep and read it in about an hour. If we labeled
the product accurately, then we could immediately add: But it's the best we could do under the
circumstances, and we will be back tomorrow with a corrected and updated version. [David Broder,
Pulitzer Prize acceptance speech, 1973]


clapboard (n.)

1520s, partial translation of Middle Dutch klapholt (borrowed into English late 14c. as clapholt),
from klappen to fit + Low German holt wood, board (see holt). Compare German Klappholz. Originally
small boards of split oak, imported from northern Germany and cut by coopers to make barrel staves;
the meaning long, thin board used for roofing or to cover the exterior of wooden buildings is from
1640s, American English.


demi-

word-forming element meaning half, half-sized, partial, early 15c., from Old French demi half
(12c.), from Late Latin dimedius, from Latin dimidius half, one-half, which contains the elements
dis- apart (see dis-) + medius middle (see medial).


twill (n.)

cloth woven in parallel diagonal lines, early 14c., Scottish and northern English variant of Middle
English twile, from Old English twili woven with double thread, twilled, partial loan-translation of
Latin bilix with a double thread (with Old English twi- substituted for cognate Latin bi-); the
second element from Latin licium thread, which is of uncertain origin.


hemi-

word-forming element meaning half, from Greek hemi- half, from PIE root *semi-, which is the source
of Sanskrit sami, Latin semi- (see semi-), Old High German sami- half, and Old English sam-,
denoting a partial or imperfect condition (see sandblind).


coleslaw (n.)

also cole-slaw, cole slaw, 1794, American English, partial translation of Dutch koolsla, from kool
cabbage (see cole) + sla salad (see slaw). Commonly cold slaw in English until 1860s, when Middle
English cole cabbage was revived.


semi-

before vowels sem-, word-forming element meaning half, part, partly; partial, imperfect; twice, from
Latin semi- half, from PIE *semi- half (cognates: Sanskrit sami half, Greek hemi- half, Old English
sam-, Gothic sami- half).    Old English cognate sam- was used in such compounds as samhal poor
health, literally half-whole; samsoden half-cooked, figuratively stupid (compare half-baked);
samcucu half-dead, literally half-alive; and the last survivor of the group, sandblind dim-sighted
(q.v.). Common in Latin (as in semi-gravis half-drunk, semi-hora half hour, semi-mortuus half-dead,
semi-nudus half-naked, semi-vir half-man, hermaphrodite). The Latin-derived form in English has been
active in forming native words since 15c.


forlorn (adj.)

mid-12c., forloren disgraced, depraved, past participle of obsolete forlesan be deprived of, lose,
abandon, from Old English forleosan to lose, abandon, let go; destroy, ruin, from for- completely +
leosan to lose (see lose). In the Mercian hymns, Latin perditionis is glossed by Old English
forlorenisse.    Sense of forsaken, abandoned is 1530s; that of wretched, miserable first recorded
1580s. A common Germanic compound (cognates: Old Saxon farilosan, Old Frisian urliasa, Middle Dutch
verliesen, Dutch verliezen, Old High German virliosan, German verlieren, Gothic fraliusan to lose).
Commonly in forlorn hope (1570s), which is a partial translation of Dutch verloren hoop, in which
hoop means troop, band, literally heap, and the sense of the whole phrase is of a suicide mission.
The phrase is usually used incorrectly in English, and the misuse has colored the sense of forlorn.
Related: Forlornly; forlornness.


bombast (n.)

1560s, cotton padding, corrupted from earlier bombace (1550s), from Old French bombace cotton,
cotton wadding, from Late Latin bombacem, accusative of bombax cotton, 'linteorum aut aliae quaevis
quisquiliae,'  a corruption and transferred use of Latin bombyx silk, from Greek bombyx silk,
silkworm (which also came to mean cotton in Medieval Greek), from some oriental word, perhaps
related to Iranian pambak (modern panba) or Armenian bambok, perhaps ultimately from a PIE root
meaning to twist, wind. From stuffing and padding for clothes or upholstery, meaning extended to
pompous, empty speech (1580s).    Also from the same source are Swedish bomull, Danish bomuld
cotton, and, via Turkish forms, Modern Greek mpampaki, Rumanian bumbac, Serbo-Croatian pamuk. German
baumwolle cotton is probably from the Latin word but altered by folk-etymology to look like tree
wool. Polish bawe&#322;na, Lithuanian bovelna are partial translations from German.


askance (adv.)

1520s, sideways, asquint, of obscure origin. OED has separate listings for askance and obsolete
Middle English askance(s) and no indication of a connection, but Barnhart and others derive the
newer word from the older one. The Middle English word, recorded early 14c. as ase quances and found
later in Chaucer, meant in such a way that; even as; as if; and as an adverb insincerely,
deceptively. It has been analyzed as a compound of as and Old French quanses (pronounced kanses) how
if, from Latin quam how + si if.    The E[nglish] as is, accordingly, redundant, and merely added by
way of partial explanation. The M.E. askances means as if in other passages, but here means, as if
it were, i.e. possibly, perhaps; as said above. Sometimes the final s is dropped .... [Walter W.
Skeat, glossary to Chaucer's Man of Law's Tale, 1894]    Also see discussion in Leo Spitzer, Anglo-
French Etymologies, Philological Quarterly 24.23 (1945), and see OED entry for askance (adv.) for
discussion of the mysterious ask- word cluster in English. Other guesses about the origin of askance
include Old French a escone, from past participle of a word for hidden; Italian a scancio obliquely,
slantingly; or that it is a cognate of askew.


diversity (n.)

mid-14c., quality of being diverse, mostly in a neutral sense, from Old French diversit&eacute;
(12c.) difference, diversity, unique feature, oddness: also wickedness, perversity, from Latin
diversitatem (nominative diversitas) contrariety, contradiction, disagreement; also, as a secondary
sense, difference, diversity, from diversus turned different ways (in Late Latin various), past
participle of divertere (see divert).    Negative meaning, being contrary to what is agreeable or
right; perversity, evil existed in English from late 15c. but was obsolete from 17c. Diversity as a
virtue in a nation is an idea from the rise of modern democracies in the 1790s, where it kept one
faction from arrogating all power (but this was not quite the modern sense, as ethnicity, gender,
sexual identity, etc. were not the qualities in mind):    The dissimilarity in the ingredients which
will compose the national government, and still more in the manner in which they will be brought
into action in its various branches, must form a powerful obstacle to a concert of views in any
partial scheme of elections. There is sufficient diversity in the state of property, in the genius,
manners, and habits of the people of the different parts of the Union, to occasion a material
diversity of disposition in their representatives towards the different ranks and conditions in
society. [Federalist #60, Feb. 26, 1788 (Hamilton)]    Specific focus (in a positive sense) on race,
gender, etc. is from 1992.


third (adj.)

late Old English metathesis of &thorn;ridda, from Proto-Germanic *thridja- (cognates: Old Frisian
thredda, Old Saxon thriddio, Middle Low German drudde, Dutch derde, Old High German dritto, German
dritte, Old Norse &thorn;ri&eth;e, Danish tredie, Swedish tredje, Gothic &thorn;ridja), from PIE
*tri-tyo- (cognates: Sanskrit trtiyas, Avestan thritya, Greek tritos, Latin tertius (source of
Italian terzo, Spanish tercio, French tiers), Old Church Slavonic tretiji, Lithuanian trecias, Old
Irish triss, Welsh tryde), suffixed form of root *trei-  (see three).    Metathesis of thrid into
third is attested from c.950 in Northumbrian, but overall thrid was prevalent up to 16c. The noun
meaning third part of anything is recorded from late 14c. Third rail in electric railway sense is
recorded from 1890. Third World War as a possibility first recorded 1947. Third-rate of poor quality
is from 1814, ultimately from classification of ships (1640s); third class in railway travel is from
1839. Third Reich (1930) is a partial translation of German drittes Reich (1923). Third party in
law, insurance, etc., is from 1818.


shade (n.)

Middle English schade, Kentish ssed, from late Old English scead partial darkness; shelter,
protection, also partly from sceadu shade, shadow, darkness; shady place, arbor, protection from
glare or heat, both from Proto-Germanic *skadwaz (cognates: Old Saxon skado, Middle Dutch scade,
Dutch schaduw, Old High German scato, German Schatten, Gothic skadus), from PIE *skot-wo-, from root
*skot- dark, shade (cognates: Greek skotos darkness, gloom, Albanian kot darkness, Old Irish scath,
Old Welsh scod, Breton squeut darkness, Gaelic sgath shade, shadow, shelter).    Figurative use in
reference to comparative obscurity is from 1640s. Meaning a ghost is from 1610s; dramatic (or mock-
dramatic) expression shades of _____ to invoke or acknowledge a memory is from 1818, from the ghost
sense. Meaning lamp cover is from 1780. Sense of window blind first recorded 1845. Meaning cover to
protect the eyes is from 1801. Meaning grade of color first recorded 1680s; that of degree or
gradiation of darkness in a color is from 1680s (compare nuance, from French nue cloud). Meaning
small amount or degree is from 1782.


Saturday (n.)

seventh day of the week, Old English s&aelig;terd&aelig;g, s&aelig;ternesd&aelig;g, literally day of
the planet Saturn, from S&aelig;ternes (genitive of S&aelig;tern; see Saturn) + Old English
d&aelig;g (see day). Partial loan-translation of Latin Saturni dies Saturn's day (compare Dutch
Zaterdag, Old Frisian Saterdi, Middle Low German Satersdach; Irish dia Sathuirn, Welsh dydd Sadwrn).
The Latin word itself is a loan-translation of Greek kronou hemera, literally the day of Cronus.
Unlike other day names, no god substitution seems to have been attempted, perhaps because the
northern European pantheon lacks a clear corresponding figure to Roman Saturn. A homely ancient
Nordic custom, however, seems to be preserved in Old Norse laugardagr, Danish l&oslash;rdag, Swedish
l&ouml;rdag Saturday, literally bath day (Old Norse laug bath).    German Samstag (Old High German
sambaztag) appears to be from a Greek *sambaton, a nasalized colloquial form of sabbaton sabbath,
also attested in Old Church Slavonic sabota, Polish sobota, Russian subbota, Hungarian szombat,
French samedi.   Saturday night has been used figuratively to suggest drunkenness and looseness in
relations between the young men and young women since at least mid-19c. Saturday-night special
cheap, low-caliber handgun is American English, attested from 1976 (earlier Saturday-night pistol,
1929).


kaput (adj.)

finished, worn out, dead, 1895, from German kaputt destroyed, ruined, lost (1640s), which in this
sense probably is a misunderstanding of the phrase capot machen, a partial translation of French
faire capot, a phrase which meant to win all the tricks (from the other player) in piquet, an
obsolete card game. Literally to make a bonnet; perhaps the notion is throwing a hood over the other
player, but faire capot also meant in French marine jargon to overset in a squall when under sail.
The word was popularized in English during World War I.   Kaput -- a slang word in common use which
corresponds roughly to the English done in, the French fichu. Everything enemy was kaput in the
early days of German victories. [F. Britten Austin, According to Orders, New York, 1919]    French
capot is literally cover, bonnet, also the name of a type of greatcloak worn by sailors and soldiers
(see capote). The card-playing sense attested in German only from 1690s, but capot in the
(presumably) transferred sense of destroyed, ruined, lost is attested from 1640s. [see William
Jervis Jones, A Lexicon of French Borrowings in the German Vocabulary (1575-1648), Berlin, de
Gruyter, 1976]. In Hoyle and other English gaming sources, faire capot is to win all the tricks, and
a different phrase, &ecirc;tre capot, to be a bonnet, is sometimes cited as the term for losing
them. The sense reversal in German might have come about because if someone wins all the tricks the
other player has to lose them, and the same word capot, when it entered English from French in the
mid-17c. meant to score a cabot against; to win all the tricks from.    There are others, says a
third, that have played with my Lady Lurewell at picquet besides my lord; I have capotted her myself
two or three times in an evening. [George Farquhar (1677-1707), Sir Harry Wildair]


-or

word-forming element making nouns of quality, state, or condition, from Middle English -our, from
Old French -our (Modern French -eur), from Latin -orem (nominative -or), a suffix added to pp.
verbal stems. Also in some cases from Latin -atorem (nominative -ator).    In U.S., via Noah
Webster, -or is nearly universal (but not in glamour, curious, generous), while in Britain -our is
used in most cases (but with many exceptions: author, error, senator, ancestor, horror etc.). The
-our form predominated after c.1300, but Mencken reports that the first three folios of
Shakespeare's plays used both spellings indiscriminately and with equal frequency; only in the
Fourth Folio of 1685 does -our become consistent.    A partial revival of -or on the Latin model
took place from 16c. (governour began to lose its -u- 16c. and it was gone by 19c.), and also among
phonetic spellers in both England and America (John Wesley wrote that -or was a fashionable
impropriety in England in 1791).    Webster criticized the habit of deleting -u- in -our words in
his first speller (A Grammatical Institute of the English Language, commonly called the Blue-Black
Speller) in 1783. His own deletion of the -u- began with the revision of 1804, and was enshrined in
the influential Comprehensive Dictionary of the English Language (1806), which also established in
the U.S. -ic for British -ick and -er for -re, along with many other attempts at reformed spelling
which never caught on (such as masheen for machine). His attempt to justify them on the grounds of
etymology and the custom of great writers does not hold up.    Fowler notes the British drop the -u-
when forming adjectives ending in -orous (humorous) and derivatives in -ation and -ize, in which
cases the Latin origin is respected (such as vaporize). When the Americans began to consistently
spell it one way, however, the British reflexively hardened their insistence on the other. The
American abolition of -our in such words as honour and favour has probably retarded rather than
quickened English progress in the same direction. [Fowler]


cat (n.)

Old English catt (c.700), from West Germanic (c.400-450), from Proto-Germanic *kattuz (cognates: Old
Frisian katte, Old Norse k&ouml;ttr, Dutch kat, Old High German kazza, German Katze), from Late
Latin cattus.    The near-universal European word now, it appeared in Europe as Latin catta
(Martial, c.75 C.E.), Byzantine Greek katta (c.350) and was in general use on the continent by
c.700, replacing Latin feles. Probably ultimately Afro-Asiatic (compare Nubian kadis, Berber
kadiska, both meaning cat). Arabic qitt tomcat may be from the same source. Cats were domestic in
Egypt from c.2000 B.C.E., but not a familiar household animal to classical Greeks and Romans. The
nine lives have been proverbial since at least 1560s.    The Late Latin word also is the source of
Old Irish and Gaelic cat, Welsh kath, Breton kaz, Italian gatto, Spanish gato, French chat (12c.).
Independent, but ultimately from the same source are words in the Slavic group: Old Church Slavonic
kotuka, kotel'a, Bulgarian kotka, Russian ko&#353;ka, Polish kot, along with Lithuanian kate and
non-Indo-European Finnish katti, which is from Lithuanian.    Extended to lions, tigers, etc.
c.1600. As a term of contempt for a woman, from early 13c. Slang sense of prostitute is from at
least c.1400. Slang sense of fellow, guy, is from 1920, originally in U.S. Black English; narrower
sense of jazz enthusiast is recorded from 1931.   Cat's paw (1769, but cat's foot in the same sense,
1590s) refers to old folk tale in which the monkey tricks the cat into pawing chestnuts from a fire;
the monkey gets the nuts, the cat gets a burnt paw. Cat bath hurried or partial cleaning is from
1953. Cat burglar is from 1907, so called for stealth. Cat-witted small-minded, obstinate, and
spiteful (1670s) deserved to survive. For Cat's meow, cat's pajamas, see bee's knees.


