passive (adj.)

late 14c., in grammatical sense (opposed to active), Old French passif suffering, undergoing
hardship (14c.) and directly from Latin passivus capable of feeling or suffering, from pass-, past
participle stem of pati to suffer (see passion). Meaning not active is first recorded late 15c.;
sense of enduring suffering without resistance is from 1620s. Related: Passively. Passive resistance
first attested 1819 in Scott's Ivanhoe, used throughout 19c.; re-coined by Gandhi c.1906 in South
Africa. Passive-aggressive with reference to behavior is attested by 1971.


passiveness (n.)

1650s, from passive + -ness.


noumenon (n.)

1796, object of intellectual intuition (opposed to a phenomenon), term introduced by Kant, from
Greek noumenon that which is perceived, neuter passive present participle of noein to apprehend,
perceive by the mind (from noos mind). With passive suffix -menos.


hight (v.)

named, called (archaic), from levelled past participle of Middle English highte, from Old English
hatte I am called (passive of hatan to call, name, command) merged with heht called, active past
tense of the same verb. Hatte was the only survival in Old English of the old Germanic synthetic
passive tense. The word is related to Old Norse heita, Dutch heten, German hei&szlig;en, Gothic
haitan to call, be called, command (see cite).


passivist (n.)

1895, originally in reference to sex roles, from passive + -ist.


deponent (adj.)

1520s, originally grammatical (of verbs passive in form but active in sense), from Latin deponentem
putting down or aside, present participle of deponere (see deposit (v.)). Noun meaning one who makes
a deposition is from 1540s.


imprimatur (n.)

1640, Modern Latin, literally let it be printed, the formula of a book licenser, third person
singular present subjunctive passive of Latin imprimere to print (see impress). Originally of state
license to print books, later only of Roman Catholic Church.


debenture (n.)

written acknowledgment of a debt, early 15c., from Latin debentur there are due (said to have been
the first word in formal certificates of indebtedness), passive present third person plural of
debere to owe (see debt).


-pathic

word-forming element from Latin pathicus, from Greek pathikos suffering, remaining passive, from
pathein to suffer (see pathos).


drift (v.)

late 16c., from drift (n.). Figurative sense of be passive and listless is from 1822. Related:
Drifted; drifting.


layer (n.)

late 14c., one who or that lays (especially stones, a mason), agent noun from lay (v.). Passive
sense of that which is laid over a surface first recorded 1610s, but because earliest English use
was in cookery, this is perhaps from French liue binding, used of a thickened sauce. Layer cake
attested from 1881.


femme (n.)

French, literally woman, from Old French feme, from Latin femina (see feminine). Slang meaning
passive and more feminine partner in a lesbian couple attested by 1961.


supposed (adj.)

believed or thought to exist, 1580s, past participle adjective from suppose (v.); often with the -e-
pronounced, to distinguish it from the passive past tense supposed, now common in the sense of to
have a duty or obligation (1859).


certiorari

legal Latin, to be certified, to be informed or shown, from a word figuring in the opening phrase of
such writs from superior to inferior courts seeking the records of a case. Passive present
infinitive of certorare to certify, inform, from certior, comp. of certus sure (see certain).


frightful (adj.)

mid-13c., timid; c.1600 alarming; from fright + -ful. In common with most -ful adjectives, it once
had both an active and passive sense. Meaning dreadful, horrible, shocking (often hyperbolic) is
attested from c.1700; Johnson noted it as a cant word among women for anything unpleasing. Related:
Frightfully.


catechumen (n.)

new convert, 15c., from French cat&eacute;chum&egrave;ne, from Church Latin catechumenus, from Greek
katekhoumenos one being instructed, passive present participle of katekhein (see catechesis).


nurse (v.)

1530s, to suckle (an infant); 1520s in the passive sense, to bring up (a child); alteration of
Middle English nurshen (13c.; see nourish), Sense of take care of (a sick person) is first recorded
1736. Related: Nursed; nursing.


passivity (n.)

1650s, from passive + -ity.


effortless (adj.)

1801, passive, from effort + -less. Meaning easy is from 1831. Related: Effortlessly;
effortlessness.


phloem (n.)

1870, from German phlo&#235;m (1858), coined by German botanist Karl Wilhelm von N&#228;geli
(1817-1891) from Greek phloos, phloios bark of trees, of uncertain origin, + passive suffix -ema.


impassive (adj.)

1660s, not feeling pain, from assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + passive.
Meaning void of emotions is from 1690s. Related: Impassively; impassiveness (1640s).


Saul

masc. proper name, Biblical first king of Israel, from Latin Saul, from Hebrew Shaul, literally
asked for, passive participle of sha'al he asked for.


cocksucker (n.)

1890s, one who does fellatio (especially a male homosexual); 1920s as contemptible person, American
English, from cock (n.1) in phallic sense + sucker (n.). Used curiously for aggressively obnoxious
men; the ancients would have recoiled at this failure to appreciate the difference between passive
and active roles; Catullus, writing of his boss, employs the useful Latin insult irrumator, which
means someone who forces others to give him oral sex, hence one who treats people with contempt.


phenomenon (n.)

1570s, fact, occurrence, from Late Latin ph&aelig;nomenon, from Greek phainomenon that which appears
or is seen, noun use of neuter present participle of phainesthai to appear, passive of phainein (see
phantasm). Meaning extraordinary occurrence first recorded 1771. Plural is phenomena.


hapax legomenon (n.)

(plural legomena), word occurring only once, Greek, literally once said, from hapax once +
legomenon, neuter passive present participle of legein to say.


fiat (n.)

authoritative sanction, 1630s, from Latin fiat let it be done (also used in the opening of Medieval
Latin proclamations and commands), third person singular present subjunctive of fieri, used as
passive of facere to make, do (see factitious). Also sometimes a reference to fiat lux let there be
light in the Book of Genesis.


alumnus (n.)

1640s, from Latin alumnus a pupil, literally foster son, vestigial present passive participle of
alere to nourish (see old), with ending akin to Greek -omenos. Plural is alumni. Fem. is alumna
(1882), fem. plural alumnae.


fastidious (adj.)

mid-15c., full of pride, from Latin fastidiosus disdainful, squeamish, exacting, from fastidium
loathing, squeamishness, most likely from *fastu-taidiom, a compound of fastus contempt, arrogance
and taedium aversion, disgust. Early use in English was both in passive and active senses. Meaning
squeamish, over-nice emerged in English 1610s. Related: Fastidiously; fastidiousness.


inveigh (v.)

late 15c., to introduce, from Latin invehi to attack with words, originally carry oneself against,
passive infinitive of invehere bring in, carry in, from in- against (see in- (1)) + vehere to carry
(see vehicle). Meaning to give vent to violent denunciation is from 1520s. Related: Inveighed;
inveighing.


satyagraha (n.)

Indian form of passive resistance, 1920, in writings of M.K. Gandhi, from Sanskrit satyagraha
insistence on truth, from satya truth, truthfulness (from sat- existing, true, virtuous, from PIE
*es- to be; see essence) + agraha pertinacity, from PIE *ghrebh- (1) to seize, reach (see grab
(v.)).


active (adj.)

mid-14c., given to worldly activity (opposed to contemplative or monastic), from Old French actif
(12c.) or directly from Latin activus, from actus (see act (n.)). As capable of acting (opposed to
passive), from late 14c. Meaning energetic, lively is from 1590s; that of working, effective, in
operation is from 1640s. Active voice is recorded from 1765 (grammatical use of active dates from
mid-15c.).


ecumenical (adj.)

late 16c., representing the entire (Christian) world, formed in English as an ecclesiastical word,
from Late Latin oecumenicus general, universal, from Greek oikoumenikos, from he oikoumene ge the
inhabited world (as known to the ancient Greeks); the Greeks and their neighbors considered as
developed human society, from oikoumenos, present passive participle of oikein inhabit, from oikos
house, habitation (see villa).


prolegomenon (n.)

1650s, learned preamble to a book, from Greek prolegomenon, noun use of neuter passive present
participle of prolegein to say beforehand, from pro- before (see pro-) + legein to speak (see
lecture (n.)) + suffix -menos (as in alumnus). The same sense is in preface (n.). Related:
Prolegomenary; prolegomenous.


malversation (n.)

professional or official corruption, 1540s, from French malversation, from malverser, from Latin
male versari, from male wrongly, ill (see mal-) + versari to behave, conduct oneself, passive
frequentative of vertere to turn (see versus).


sensuous (adj.)

1640s, pertaining to the senses apparently coined by Milton to recover the original meaning of
sensual and avoid the lascivious connotation that the older word had acquired, but by 1870 sensuous,
too, had begun down the same path and come to mean alive to the pleasures of the senses. Rare before
Coleridge popularized it To express in one word all that appertains to the perception, considered as
passive and merely recipient .... (1814). From Latin sensus (see sense (n.)) + -ous. Related:
Sensuously; sensuousness.


species (n.)

late 14c. as a classification in logic, from Latin species a particular sort, kind, or type (opposed
to genus), originally a sight, look, view, appearance, hence also a spectacle; mental appearance,
idea, notion; a look; a pretext; a resemblance; a show or display, typically in passive senses; in
Late Latin, a special case; related to specere to look at, to see, behold, from PIE *spek- (see
scope (n.1)). From 1550s as appearance, outward form; 1560s as distinct class (of something) based
on common characteristics. Biological sense is from c.1600. Endangered species first attested 1964.


scrod (n.)

1841, young cod, split and fried or boiled, possibly from Dutch schrood piece cut off, from Middle
Dutch scrode shred (cognate with Old English screade piece cut off; see shred (n.)). If this is the
origin, the notion is probably of fish cut into pieces for drying or cooking.A Boston brahmin is on
a business trip to Philadelphia. In search of dinner, and hungry for that Boston favorite, broiled
scrod, he hops into a cab and asks the driver, My good man, take me someplace where I can get scrod.
The cabbie replies, Pal, that's the first time I've ever been asked that in the passive pluperfect
subjunctive. [an old joke in Philadelphia, this version of it from Vex, Hex, Smash, Smooch,
Constance Hale, 2012]


poise (v.)

late 14c., to have a certain weight, from stressed form of Old French peser to weigh, be heavy;
weigh down, be a burden; worry, be a concern, from Vulgar Latin *pesare, from Latin pensare to weigh
carefully, weigh out, counter-balance, frequentative of pendere (past participle pensus) to weigh
(see pendant). For form evolution from Latin to French, see OED. Meaning to place in equilibrium is
from 1630s (compare equipoise). Passive sense of to be ready (to do something) is from 1932.
Related: Poised; poising. In 15c. a poiser was an official who weighed goods.


taste (n.)

early 14c., act of tasting, from Old French tast sense of touch (Modern French t&acirc;t), from
taster (see taste (v.)). From late 14c. as a small portion given; also faculty or sense by which the
flavor of a thing is discerned; also savor, sapidity, flavor.    Meaning aesthetic judgment, faculty
of discerning and appreciating what is excellent is first attested 1670s (compare French go&#251;t,
German geschmack, Russian vkus, etc.).    Of all the five senses, 'taste' is the one most closely
associated with fine discrimination, hence the familiar secondary uses of words for 'taste, good
taste' with reference to aesthetic appreciation. [Buck]   <hr />  Taste is active, deciding,
choosing, changing, arranging, etc.; sensibility is passive, the power to feel, susceptibility of
impression, as from the beautiful. [Century Dictionary]


shaft (n.1)

Old English sceaft long, slender rod, staff, pole; spear-shaft; spear, from Proto-Germanic *skaftaz
(cognates: Old Norse skapt, Old Saxon skaft, Old High German scaft, German schaft, Dutch schacht,
not found in Gothic), which some connect with a Germanic passive past participle of PIE root
*(s)kep- to cut, to scrape (source of Old English scafan to shave, scrape, polish) on notion of tree
branch stripped of its bark. But compare Latin scapus shaft, stem, shank, Greek skeptron a staff
(see scepter) which appear to be cognates.    Meaning beam or ray (of light, etc.) is attested from
c.1300. Sense of an arrow is from c.1400; that of a handle from 1520s. Mechanical sense is from
1680s. Vulgar slang meaning penis first recorded 1719 on notion of columnar part (late 14c.); hence
probably shaft (v.) and the related noun sense act of unfair treatment (1959), though some early
sources insist this is from the notion of a wound.


wife (n.)

Old English wif (neuter) woman, female, lady, also, but not especially, wife, from Proto-Germanic
*wiban (cognates: Old Saxon, Old Frisian wif, Old Norse vif, Danish and Swedish viv, Middle Dutch,
Dutch wijf, Old High German wib, German Weib), of uncertain origin, not found in Gothic.
Apparently felt as inadequate in its basic sense, leading to the more distinctive formation wifman
(source of woman). Dutch wijf now means, in slang, girl, babe, having softened somewhat from earlier
sense of bitch. German cognate Weib also tends to be slighting or derogatory and has been displaced
by Frau.    The more usual Indo-European word is represented in English by queen/quean. Words for
woman also double for wife in some languages. Some proposed PIE roots for wife include *weip- to
twist, turn, wrap, perhaps with sense of veiled person (see vibrate); and more recently  *ghwibh-, a
proposed root meaning shame, also pudenda, but the only examples of it would be the Germanic words
and Tocharian (a lost IE language of central Asia) kwipe, kip female pudenda.    The modern sense of
female spouse began as a specialized sense in Old English; the general sense of woman is preserved
in midwife, old wives' tale, etc. Middle English sense of mistress of a household survives in
housewife; and the later restricted sense of tradeswoman of humble rank in fishwife. By 1883 as
passive partner in a homosexual couple. Wife-swapping is attested from 1954.


