pastorale (n.)

musical composition from rustic tunes or representing pastoral scenes, 1724, from Italian pastorale,
noun use of adjective, from Latin pastoralis (see pastoral).


pastoral (adj.)

of or pertaining to shepherds, early 15c., from Old French pastoral (13c.), from Latin pastoralis of
herdsmen, of shepherds, from pastor (see pastor (n.)). The noun sense of poem dealing with country
life generally, usually dealing with it in an idealized form and emphasizing the purity and
happiness of it, is from 1580s.


pastoralism (n.)

1854, from pastoral + -ism.


pastoralist (n.)

1793, from pastoral + -ist.


idyll (n.)

also idyl, c.1600, picturesque pastoral poem, from Latin idyllium, from Greek eidyllion short,
descriptive poem, usually of rustic or pastoral type, literally a little picture, diminutive of
eidos form (see -oid).


Sylvester

masc. proper name, from Latin silvestris, literally of a wood, of a forest, woody, rural, pastoral,
from silva wood, forest (see sylvan). St. Sylvester's Day is Dec. 31.


Colin

masc. proper name, from French Colin, a diminutive of Col, itself a diminutive of Nicolas. A common
shepherd's name in pastoral verse.


villanelle (n.)

poetic form (or a poem in this form) of five 3-lined stanzas and a final quatrain, with only two
rhymes throughout, usually of pastoral or lyric nature, 1580s, from French villanelle, from Italian
villanella ballad, rural song, from fem. of villanello rustic, from Medieval Latin villanus (see
villain).


Hackney

late 12c., from Old English Hacan ieg Haca's Isle (or possibly Hook Island), the isle element here
meaning dry land in a marsh. Now well within London, it once was pastoral and horses apparently were
kept there. Hence hackney small saddle horse let out for hire (c.1300), with subsequent
deterioration of sense (see hack (n.2)). And compare French haquen&eacute;e ambling nag, an English
loan-word.


eclogue (n.)

short poem, especially a pastoral dialogue, mid-15c., from Latin ecloga selection, short poem,
eclogue, from Greek ekloge selection, from eklegein to select (see eclectic).


crozier (n.)

late 13c., from Old French crocier, from Medieval Latin crociarius bearer of a cross, from crocia
cross; also from Old French croisier one who bears or has to do with a cross (see cross (n.)). The
two words merged in Middle English. Technically, the bearer of a bishop's pastoral staff;
erroneously applied to the staff itself since 1733.


swain (n.)

mid-12c., young man attendant upon a knight, from Old Norse sveinn boy, servant, attendant, from
Proto-Germanic *swainaz attendant, servant, properly one's own (man), from PIE *swoi-no-, from root
*s(w)e- oneself, alone, apart (see idiom). Cognate with Old English swan shepherd, swineherd, Old
Saxon swen, Old High German swein. Meaning country or farm laborer is from 1570s; that of lover,
wooer (in pastoral poetry) is from 1580s.


Acadian

1705, from Acadia, Latinized form of Acadie, French name of Nova Scotia, probably from Archadia, the
name given to the region by Verrazano in 1520s, from Greek Arkadia, emblematic in pastoral poetry of
a place of rural peace (see Arcadian); the name may have been suggested to Europeans by the native
Micmac (Algonquian) word akadie fertile land. The Acadians, expelled by the English in 1755, settled
in large numbers in Louisiana (see Cajun, which is a corruption of Acadian).


Phyllis

fem. proper name, generic proper name for a comely rustic maiden in pastoral poetry (1630s), from
Latin Phyllis, a girl's name in Virgil, Horace, etc., from Greek Phyllis, female name, literally
foliage of a tree, from phyllon leaf, from PIE *bholyo- leaf, from root *bhel- (3) to thrive, bloom,
possibly identical with *bhel- (2) to blow, inflate, swell (see bole). In English, often spelled
Phillis, probably from influence of phil- loving. Her sweetheart usually was Philander.


bucolic (adj.)

1610s, earlier bucolical (1520s), from Latin bucolicus, from Greek boukolikos pastoral, rustic, from
boukolos cowherd, herdsman, from bous cow (see cow (n.)) + -kolos tending, related to Latin colere
to till (the ground), cultivate, dwell, inhabit (the root of colony). Middle Irish b&#250;achaill,
Welsh bugail shepherd are Celtic words form from the same root material as Greek boukolos.


staff (n.)

Old English st&aelig;f (plural stafas), walking stick, strong pole used for carrying, rod used as a
weapon, pastoral staff, probably originally *st&aelig;b, from Proto-Germanic *stabaz (cognates: Old
Saxon staf, Old Norse stafr, Danish stav, Old Frisian stef, Middle Low German and Middle Dutch staf,
Old High German stab, German Stab, Gothic *stafs element; Middle Dutch stapel pillar, foundation),
from PIE root *stebh- post, stem, to support, place firmly on, fasten (cognates: Old Lithuanian
stabas idol, Lithuanian stebas staff, pillar; Old Church Slavonic stoboru pillar; Sanskrit stabhnati
supports; Greek stephein to tie around, encircle, wreathe, staphyle grapevine, bunch of grapes; Old
English stapol post, pillar).    As pole from which a flag is flown, 1610s. In musical notation from
1660s. Sense of group of military officers that assists a commander is attested from 1702,
apparently from German, from the notion of the baton that is a badge of office or authority (a sense
attested in English from 1530s); hence staff officer (1702), staff-sergeant (1811). Meaning group of
employees (as at an office or hospital) is first found 1837. Staff of life bread is from the
Biblical phrase break the staff of bread meaning cut off the supply of food (Lev. xxvi:26),
translating Hebrew matteh lekhem.    The Old English word, in plural, was the common one used for
letter of the alphabet, character, hence writing, literature, and many compounds having to do with
writing, such as st&aelig;fcr&aelig;ft grammar, st&aelig;fcr&aelig;ftig lettered,  st&aelig;flic
literary, st&aelig;fleahtor grammatical error, with leahtor vice, sin, offense.


