patent (v.)

to obtain right to land, 1670s, from patent (n.). The meaning copyright an invention is first
recorded 1822, from earlier meaning obtain exclusive right or monopoly (1789), a privilege granted
by the Crown via letters patent. Related: Patented; patenting.


patent (n.)

late 14c., open letter or document from some authority, shortened form of Anglo-French lettre patent
(also in Medieval Latin (litter&aelig;) patentes), literally open letter (late 13c.), from Old
French patente (see patent (adj.).  The Letters Patent were ... written upon open sheets of
parchment, with the Great Seal pendent at the bottom ... [while] the 'Litter&aelig; Claus&aelig;,'
or Letters Close, ... being of a more private nature, and addressed to one or two individuals only,
were closed or folded up and sealed on the outside. [S.R. Scargill-Bird, A Guide to the Principal
Classes of Documents at the Public Record Office, 1891]  Meaning a license covering an invention is
from 1580s.


patent (adj.)

late 14c., in letters patent, literally open letter, from Old French patente, from Latin patentum
(nominative patens) open, lying open, present participle of patere lie open, be open, from PIE
*pete- to spread (see pace (n.)). Sense of open to view, plain, clear is first recorded c.1500.
Related: Patently.


deep-freeze (n.)

registered trademark (U.S. Patent Office, 1941) of a type of refrigerator; used generically for cold
storage since 1949.


Dacron (n.)

1951, proprietary name (reg. U.S. Patent Office) by E.I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Co.; an invented
word, on the model of nylon, etc.


Deely-bobber (n.)

headband with springs carrying ornaments, 1982 trademark name held by Ace Novelty Company. Earlier
it had been a patent name for a type of building blocks, manufactured 1969-1973.


referee (n.)

1620s, person who examines patent applications (see refer). Sporting use recorded by 1820
(specifically of baseball from 1856).


dobro (n.)

1952, American English, contracted from the name of its Slovakia-born inventors, the Dopera Brothers
(John, Rudy, Emil). The word also happens to mean good thing in Slovak. Patent filed 1947, claims
use from 1929.


Pepsi-Cola

U.S. patent filed Sept. 23, 1902, by Caleb D. Bradham (1867-1934), pharmacist and drugstore owner of
New Bern, N.C., probably from pepsin; early Pepsi ads tout it as a digestive aid.


Phillips

proper name of a cross-slot screw and corresponding screwdriver, 1935, named for its inventor, U.S.
businessman Henry F. Phillips (1890-1958) of Portland, Ore. It was designed for car makers, hence
the handyman's complaint that they are difficult to un-screw. Phillips lost the patent in 1949.


autoharp (n.)

1882, name on a patent taken out by Charles F. Zimmermann of Philadelphia, U.S.A., for an improved
type of harp, an instrument considerably different from the modern autoharp, actually a chord
zither, which was invented about the same time by K.A. G&uuml;tter of Markneukirchen, Germany, who
called it a Volkszither.


Tupperware (n.)

1954, trademark (reg. U.S.), from Earl S. Tupper, president of Tupper Corp., + ware. Patent claims
use from 1950.


mackintosh (n.)

waterproof outer coat, 1836, named for Charles Macintosh (1766-1843), inventor of a waterproofing
process (patent #4804, June 17, 1823). The surname is from Gaelic Mac an toisich Son of the
chieftain.


fluorescent (adj.)

1853, from fluor- + -escent (see fluorescence). The fluorescent electric lamp patent was applied for
in 1896 by U.S. inventor Thomas A. Edison, but such lights were rare before 1938.


tootsy (n.)

also tootsie, 1854, baby-talk substitution for foot (n.). Candy bar Tootsie Roll patent claims use
from 1908.


patency (n.)

1650s, from patent + -cy.


moxie (n.)

courage, 1930, from Moxie, brand name of a bitter, non-alcoholic drink, 1885, perhaps as far back as
1876 as the name of a patent medicine advertised to build up your nerve; despite legendary origin
stories put out by the company that made it, it is perhaps ultimately from a New England Indian word
(it figures in river and lake names in Maine, where it is apparently from Abenaki and means dark
water). Much-imitated in its day; in 1917 the Moxie Company won an infringement suit against a
competitor's beverage marketed as Proxie.


Bren

type of machine gun used by the British army in World War II, 1937, short for Bren gun, coined from
first letters of Brno, Czechoslovakia, and Enfield, near London. The patent was purchased in Brno,
and the gun was manufactured in Enfield.


Mercedes-Benz

motorcar brand first marketed 1926 after merger of two earlier companies. The firstg part of the
name, Mercedes, marketed as a car name from 1901, chosen by Austrian manufacturer Emil Jellinik for
his daughter, Mercedes. The Benz is from the other company, from name of Karl Benz, creator of the
Benz Patent Motorwagen (1886).


bowler (n.1)

hard round hat, 1861, said to be from a J. Bowler, 19c. London hat manufacturer. A John Bowler of
Surrey, hat manufacturer, was active from the 1820s to the 1840s, and a William Bowler, hat-
manufacturer, of Southwark Bridge Road, Surrey, sought a patent in 1854 for improvements in hats and
other coverings for the head. But perhaps the word is simply from bowl (n.); compare Old English
heafodbolla brainpan, skull. The earliest usages are with a lower-case b-.


razzle-dazzle (n.)

1886, American English slang, varied reduplication of dazzle (q.v.).    My confr&#232;re, The
Chevalier, last month gave a new name to the scarfs of disjointed pattern when he called them the
razzle-dazzle. The name was evidently a hit of the most patent character, for in several avenue and
Broadway stores the clerks have thrown out a display of broken figures before me and explained that
the ruling style at present was the razzle-dazzle, and the word seems to have been equally effective
with the public, for when it is quoted by the live salesman, the customer, I am told is at once
interested and caught by it. [Clothier and Furnisher magazine, Jan. 1889]    Meaning state of
confusion is from 1889.


kaleidoscope (n.)

1817, literally observer of beautiful forms, coined by its inventor, Scottish scientist David
Brewster (1781-1868), from Greek kalos beautiful (see Callisto) + eidos shape (see -oid) + -scope,
on model of telescope, etc. They sold by the thousands in the few years after their invention, but
Brewster failed to secure a patent.    Figurative meaning constantly changing pattern is first
attested 1819 in Lord Byron, whose publisher had sent him one of the toys. As a verb, from 1891. A
kaleidophone (1827) was invented by English physicist Sir Charles Wheatstone (1802-1875) to make
sound waves visible.


velocipede (n.)

1819, wheeled vehicle propelled by alternate thrusts of each foot on the ground, 1819, from French
v&eacute;locip&egrave;de (19c.), from Latin velox (genitive velocis) swift, speedy (see velocity) +
pedem, accusative of pes foot (see foot (n.)). The mechanical ancestor of the bicycle, it was
tinkered with and improved; the name continued for some time and was applied to an early kind of
modern bicycle or tricycle from 1849. See bicycle (n.).    The Velocipede has been introduced into
England, under letters patent, by Mr. Johnson, a coachmaker in Long-Acre, by whom it has been
greatly improved, both in lightness and strength. The road from Ipswich to Whitton, says the Bury
paper, is travelled every evening by several pedestrian hobby-horses; no less than six are seen at a
time, and the distance, which is 3 miles, is performed in 15 minutes. [The Athenaeum, May 1, 1819]


ambrotype (n.)

1855, American English, apparently from Greek ambrotos immortal, imperishable (see ambrosia), with
second element from daguerreotype. A type of photograph on glass with lights given by silver and
shades by a dark background showing through.    This invention consists in an improved process of
taking photographic pictures upon glass, and also of beautifying and preserving the same, which
process I have styled ambrotype. My improved process has reference to the art of taking pictures
photographically on a film of collodion upon the surface of a sheet of glass, the collodion being
suitably prepared for the purpose. By the use of the said process, the beauty and permanency of such
pictures are greatly increased, and I have on this account styled the process ambrotype, from the
Greek word ambrotos, immortal. [Specification of the Patent granted to James A. Cutting, of Boston,
in the United States of America, Photographer, for an Improved Process of taking Photographic
Pictures upon Glass and also of Beautifying and Preserving the same. Dated London, July 26, 1854,
printed in Journal of the Franklin Institute, September 1855]


Realtor (n.)

1916, real estate agent, American English, coined by real estate agent Charles N. Chadbourn of
Minneapolis, Minn., to distinguish the legitimate section of the business; popularized 1920s;
patented as Realtor by the National Association of Real Estate Boards.    The 1916 Convention of the
National Association of Real Estate Boards (NAREB) approved the adoption of the term as the official
designation of an active member of the Association. In 1920 the District Court of Hennepin County,
Minnesota, decided in favor of the Realtors in a case against a telephone directory publisher that
had indiscriminately used the word in listings. The court asserted that the word had never been used
in any way whatsoever until so invented and could thus be used only by those duly licensed by the
National Association of Real Estate Boards. Until the Lanham Acts of 1948 changed federal patent
regulations to allow protection for registered collective marks, the National Association fought and
won sixteen cases on the local and state levels to protect its symbolic property. [Jeffrey M.
Hornstein, The Rise of Realtor, in The Middling Sorts: Explorations in the History of the American
Middle Class, New York, 2001]


Shrewsbury

one of the most etymologically complex of English place names, it illustrates the changes wrought in
Old English words by Anglo-French scribes who could not pronounce them. Recorded 1016 as
Scrobbesbyrig, it originally may have meant the fortified place in (a district called) The Scrub.
The initial consonant cluster was impossible for the scribes, who simplified it to sr-, then added a
vowel (sar-) to make it easier still.    The name was also changed by Anglo-French loss or
metathesis of liquids in words containing -l-, -n-, or -r- (also evident in the derivatives of Old
French Berengier bear-spear -- Old High German Beringar -- name of one of the paladins in the
Charlemagne romances and a common given name in England 12c. and 13c., which has come down in
surnames as Berringer, Bellanger, Benger, etc.). Thus Sarop- became Salop- and in the 12c. and 13c.
the overwhelming spelling in government records was Salopesberie, which accounts for the
abbreviation Salop for the modern county.    During all this, the Anglo-Saxon inhabitants (as
opposed to the French scribes) still pronounced it properly, and regular sound evolutions probably
produced a pronunciation something like Shrobesbury (which turns up on a 1327 patent roll). After a
predictable -b- to -v- (a vowel in the Middle Ages) to -u- shift, the modern spelling begins to
emerge 14c. and is fully established 15c.   Shrewsbury clock, for some reason, became proverbial for
exactness, and thus, naturally, proverbial as indicating exaggeration of accuracy (1590s).


medicine (n.)

c.1200, medical treatment, cure, remedy, also used figuratively, of spiritual remedies, from Old
French medecine (Modern French m&#233;dicine) medicine, art of healing, cure, treatment, potion,
from Latin medicina the healing art, medicine; a remedy, also used figuratively, perhaps originally
ars medicina the medical art, from fem. of medicinus (adj.) of a doctor, from medicus a physician
(see medical); though OED finds evidence for this is wanting. Meaning a medicinal potion or plaster
in English is mid-14c.    To take (one's) medicine submit to something disagreeable is first
recorded 1865. North American Indian medicine-man shaman is first attested 1801, from American
Indian adoption of the word medicine in sense of magical influence. The U.S.-Canadian boundary they
called Medicine Line (first attested 1910), because it conferred a kind of magic protection:
punishment for crimes committed on one side of it could be avoided by crossing over to the other.
Medicine show traveling show meant to attract a crowd so patent medicine can be sold to them is
American English, 1938. Medicine ball stuffed leather ball used for exercise is from 1889.    It is
called a medicine ball and it got that title from Prof. Roberts, now of Springfield, whose fame is
widespread, and whose bright and peculiar dictionary of terms for his prescription department in
physical culture is taught in every first-class conducted Y.M.C.A. gymnasium in America. Prof.
Roberts calls it a medicine ball because playful exercise with it invigorates the body, promotes
digestion, and restores and preserves one's health. [Scientific American Supplement, March 16, 1889]


