pathos (n.)

quality that arouses pity or sorrow, 1660s, from Greek pathos suffering, feeling, emotion, calamity,
literally what befalls one, related to paskhein to suffer, and penthos grief, sorrow; from PIE root
*kwent(h)- to suffer, endure (cognates: Old Irish cessaim I suffer, Lithuanian ken&#269;iu to
suffer, pakanta patience).


-path

word-forming element used in modern formations to mean one suffering from (a disease or condition),
from Greek -pathes, from pathos suffering (see pathos). Also one versed in (a certain type of
treatment), in which cases it is a back-formation from -pathy in the related sense.


psychopathic (adj.)

1847, from psychopathy on model of German psychopatisch, from Greek psykhe- mind (see psyche) +
pathos suffering (see pathos).


patho-

before vowels path-, word-forming element meaning Suffering, disease, from Greek patho-, comb. form
of pathos suffering, disease (see pathos).


anthropopathy (n.)

ascribing of human feelings to god, 1640s, from Greek anthropopatheia humanity, literally human
feeling, from anthropo- + -patheia, comb. form of pathos suffering, disease, feeling (see pathos).
Related: Anthropopathic; anthropopathically.


osteopathy (n.)

1857, disease of the bones, from Greek osteon bone (see osseous) + -pathy, from Greek -patheia,
comb. form of pathos suffering, disease, feeling (see pathos). As a system of treating ailments by
the manipulation of bones, it dates from 1889.


idiopathy (n.)

1640s, Modern Latin, from Greek idiopatheia, from comb. form of idios one's own (see idiom) +
-patheia, comb. form of pathos suffering, disease, feeling (see pathos). Related: idiopathic.


antipathy (n.)

c.1600, from Latin antipathia, from Greek antipatheia, noun of state from antipathes opposed in
feeling, having opposite feeling; in return for suffering; felt mutually, from anti- against (see
anti-) + root of pathos feeling (see pathos).


apathy (n.)

c.1600, freedom from suffering, from French apathie (16c.), from Latin apathia, from Greek apatheia
freedom from suffering, impassability, want of sensation, from apathes without feeling, without
suffering or having suffered, from a- without (see a- (3)) + pathos emotion, feeling, suffering (see
pathos). Originally a positive quality; sense of indolence of mind, indifference to what should
excite is from c.1733.


empathy (n.)

1903, from German Einf&uuml;hlung (from ein in + F&uuml;hlung feeling), coined 1858 by German
philosopher Rudolf Lotze (1817-1881) as a translation of Greek empatheia passion, state of emotion,
from en in (see en- (2)) + pathos feeling (see pathos). A term from a theory of art appreciation
that maintains appreciation depends on the viewer's ability to project his personality into the
viewed object.


pathology (n.)

science of diseases, 1610s, from French pathologie (16c.), from medical Latin pathologia study of
disease, from Greek pathos suffering (see pathos) + -logia study (see -logy). In reference to the
study of abnormal mental conditions from 1842. Ancient Greek pathologia was study of the passions;
the Greek word for science of diseases was pathologike (pathologics).


pathogenic (adj.)

producing disease, 1836, from French pathog&eacute;nique, from Greek pathos disease (see pathos) +
French -g&eacute;nique producing (see -gen). Related: Pathogenetic (1838); pathogenicity.


sympathy (n.)

1570s, affinity between certain things, from Middle French sympathie (16c.) and directly from Late
Latin sympathia community of feeling, sympathy, from Greek sympatheia fellow-feeling, community of
feeling, from sympathes having a fellow feeling, affected by like feelings, from assimilated form of
syn- together (see syn-) + pathos feeling (see pathos).    In English, almost a magical notion at
first; used in reference to medicines that heal wounds when applied to a cloth stained with blood
from the wound. Meaning conformity of feelings is from 1590s; sense of fellow feeling, compassion is
first attested c.1600. An Old English loan-translation of sympathy was efensargung.


-pathic

word-forming element from Latin pathicus, from Greek pathikos suffering, remaining passive, from
pathein to suffer (see pathos).


existentialism (n.)

1941, from German Existentialismus (1919), replacing Existentialforhold (1849), ultimately from
Danish writer S&oslash;ren Kierkegaard (1813-1855), who wrote (1846) of Existents-Forhold condition
of existence, existentielle Pathos, etc. (see existential), and whose name means, literally,
churchyard.


-pathy

word-forming element meaning feeling, suffering, emotion; disorder, disease, from Latin -pathia,
from Greek -patheia act of suffering, feeling (see pathos). Meaning system of treatment of disease
is abstracted from homeopathy (q.v.).


nepenthe (n.)

1570s, nepenthes, from Greek nepenthes, from ne- no, not (see un-) + penthos pain, grief, from PIE
*kwent(h)- to suffer (see pathos). A drug of Egypt mentioned in the Odyssey as capable of banishing
grief or trouble from the mind. The -s is a proper part of the word, but likely was mistaken in
English as a plural affix and dropped.


bathetic (adj.)

1834, from bathos on the model of pathetic, which, however, does not come directly from pathos (see
pathetic), so the formation is either erroneous or humorous. Bathotic (1863, perhaps on model of
chaotic) is not much better.


pathetic (adj.)

1590s, affecting the emotions, exciting the passions, from Middle French path&eacute;tique moving,
stirring, affecting (16c.), from Late Latin patheticus, from Greek pathetikos subject to feeling,
sensitive, capable of emotion, from pathetos liable to suffer, verbal adjective of pathein to suffer
(see pathos). Meaning arousing pity, pitiful is first recorded 1737. Colloquial sense of so
miserable as to be ridiculous is attested from 1937.  Related: Pathetical (1570s); pathetically.
Pathetic fallacy (1856, first used by Ruskin) is the attribution of human qualities to inanimate
objects.


passion (n.)

late 12c., sufferings of Christ on the Cross, from Old French passion Christ's passion, physical
suffering (10c.), from Late Latin passionem (nominative passio) suffering, enduring, from past
participle stem of Latin pati to suffer, endure, possibly from PIE root *pe(i)- to hurt (cognates:
Sanskrit pijati reviles, scorns, Greek pema suffering, misery, woe, Old English feond enemy, devil,
Gothic faian to blame).    Sense extended to sufferings of martyrs, and suffering generally, by
early 13c.; meaning strong emotion, desire is attested from late 14c., from Late Latin use of passio
to render Greek pathos. Replaced Old English &thorn;olung (used in glosses to render Latin passio),
literally suffering, from &thorn;olian (v.) to endure.    Sense of sexual love first attested 1580s;
that of strong liking, enthusiasm, predilection is from 1630s. The passion-flower so called from
1630s.The name passionflower -- flos passionis -- arose from the supposed resemblance of the corona
to the crown of thorns, and of the other parts of the flower to the nails, or wounds, while the five
sepals and five petals were taken to symbolize the ten apostles -- Peter ... and Judas ... being
left out of the reckoning. [Encyclopaedia Britannica, 1885]


