pathological (adj.)

1680s, pertaining to disease, formed in English from pathologic + -al (1). Sense of worthy to be a
subject of pathology, morbid, excessive (as in pathological liar) is attested from 1845. Related:
Pathologically.


nephrolithiasis (n.)

1837, probably from German, from nephro- + lithos stone (see litho-) + -iasis pathological or morbid
condition.


pica (n.2)

pathological craving for substance unfit for food (such as chalk), 1560s, from Medieval Latin pica
magpie  (see pie (n.2)), probably translating Greek kissa, kitta magpie, jay, also false appetite.
The connecting notion may be the birds' indiscriminate feeding.


extroversion (n.)

mid-17c., condition of being turned inside out, noun of action from obsolete verb extrovert (v.) to
turn inside out, from extro- + Latin vertere (see versus). Earliest as a word in mysticism;
pathological sense attested from 1836; modern use in psychology attested by 1920.


ataxia (n.)

also anglicized as ataxy, irregularity of bodily functions, 1610s, confusion, disorder, medical
Latin, from Greek ataxia, from a-, privative prefix, + taxis arrangement, order, from stem of
tassein to arrange (see tactics). Pathological sense is attested from 1660s.


hallucination (n.)

in the pathological/psychological sense of seeing or hearing something which is not there, 1640s,
from Latin hallucinationem (nominative hallucinatio), from past participle stem of hallucinari (see
hallucinate). Hallucination is distinct from illusion in not necessarily involving a false belief.
Related: Hallucinations.


elephantiasis (n.)

1580s, from Greek elephantos, genitive of elephas elephant (see elephant) + -iasis pathological or
morbid condition. It refers to two diseases, one characterized by thickening of a body part (E.
Arabum), the other, older meaning is disease characterized by skin resembling an elephant's (E.
Gr&aelig;corum, also called Egyptian leprosy).


vegetative (adj.)

late 14c., endowed with the power of growth, from Old French vegetatif (naturally) growing, from
Medieval Latin vegetativus, from vegetat-, past participle stem of vegetare (see vegetable (adj.)).
Middle English transferred sense was characterized by growth. Modern pathological sense of brain-
dead, lacking intellectual activity, mentally inert is from 1893, via notion of having only such
functions which perform involuntarily or unconsciously and thus are likened to the processes of
vegetable growth.


