pathology (n.)

science of diseases, 1610s, from French pathologie (16c.), from medical Latin pathologia study of
disease, from Greek pathos suffering (see pathos) + -logia study (see -logy). In reference to the
study of abnormal mental conditions from 1842. Ancient Greek pathologia was study of the passions;
the Greek word for science of diseases was pathologike (pathologics).


pathologic (adj.)

pertaining to pathology, 1650s, from Greek pathologikos (see pathology).


aphasia (n.)

loss of ability to speak, especially as result of brain injury or disorder, 1867, from Modern Latin
aphasia, from Greek aphasia speechlessness, from a- without (see a- (3)) + phasis utterance, from
phanai to speak, related to pheme voice, report, rumor (see fame (n.)).    APHASIA is the term which
has recently been given to the loss of the faculty of articulate language, the organs of phonation
and of articulation, as well as the intelligence, being unimpaired. The pathology of this affection
is at the present time the subject of much discussion in the scientific world; the French Academy
devoted several of their s&#233;ances during the year 1865 to its special elucidation, and the
Medical Journals of France and of our own country have lately contained a good deal of original
matter bearing upon this obscure feature in cerebral pathology. [Frederic Bateman, M.D., Aphasia,
London, 1868]


psychopathology (n.)

1847, from psycho- + pathology, on model of German psychopathologie.


inoculation (n.)

mid-15c. in horticulture; 1714 in pathology, from Latin inoculationem (nominative inoculatio) an
engrafting, budding, noun of action from past participle stem of inoculare (see inoculate).


sequela (n.)

plural sequelae, 1793, originally in pathology, from Latin sequela that which follows, consequence
(see sequel).


inflammatory (adj.)

1680s (n.), from Latin inflammat-, past participle stem of inflammare (see inflame) + -ory. As an
adjective, tending to rouse passions or desires, 1711; from 1732 in pathology.


pathologist (n.)

1640s, from pathology + -ist.


pathological (adj.)

1680s, pertaining to disease, formed in English from pathologic + -al (1). Sense of worthy to be a
subject of pathology, morbid, excessive (as in pathological liar) is attested from 1845. Related:
Pathologically.


rickettsia (n.)

parasitic organism, 1919, named 1916 in Modern Latin by H. da Rocha-Lima in honor of U.S.
pathologist H.T. Ricketts (1871-1910), who first identified it in 1909 and died of typhus as a
result of his contact with it. The bacteria causes typhus and Rocky Mountain spotted fever, but is
unrelated by pathology or etymology to rickets (q.v.), which is the result of vitamin D deficiency.
The surname is a development from Rickard, variant of Richard, or else from the diminutive form
Ricot.


syncope (n.)

1520s, contraction of a word by omission of middle sounds or letters, from Latin syncope contraction
of a word by elision, from Greek synkope contraction of a word, originally a cutting off, cutting
up, cutting short, from synkoptein to cut up, from syn- together, thoroughly (see syn-) + koptein to
cut, from PIE root *kop- to beat, strike (see hatchet (n.)).    An earlier use of the word in
pathology is represented by Middle English syncopis, sincopin loss of consciousness accompanied by
weak pulse (c.1400, from Late Latin accusative syncopen); compare Old French syncope illness,
fainting fit (failure of the heart's action, hence unconsciousness). The spelling of this was re-
Latinized 16c. Related: Syncopic; syncoptic.


