patina (n.)

greenish film on old bronze, 1748, from French patine (18c.), from Italian patina, perhaps from
Latin patina dish, pan (see pan (n.)), on the notion of encrustation on ancient bronze dishes. Sense
of refinement, cultural sophistication first recorded 1933.


pate (n.1)

top of the head, early 14c. (late 12c. in surnames), of unknown origin; perhaps a shortened form of
Old French patene or Medieval Latin patena, both from Latin patina pan, dish (see pan (n.)).


paten (n.)

plate for bread at Eucharist, c.1300, from Old French patene and directly, from Medieval Latin
patena, from Latin patina pan, dish (see pan (n.)).


patella (n.)

knee cap, 1690s, from Latin patella pan, kneecap, diminutive of patina pan (see pan (n.)). So called
from its shape. Related: Patellar; patelliform.


paddle (n.)

c.1400, padell small spade, from Medieval Latin padela, of uncertain origin, perhaps from Latin
patella small pan, little dish, plate, diminutive of patina (see pan (n.)).    Meaning short oar
with a wide blade is from 1620s. As an instrument used for beating clothes (and slaves, and
schoolboys), it is recorded from 1828, American English. Paddle-ball attested from 1935.


pail (n.)

mid-14c., of uncertain origin, probably from Old French paele, paelle cooking or frying pan, warming
pan; also a liquid measure, from Latin patella small pan, little dish, platter, diminutive of patina
broad shallow pan, stewpan (see pan (n.)).    Old English had p&aelig;gel wine vessel, but etymology
does not support a connection. This Old English word possibly is from Medieval Latin pagella a
measure, from Latin pagella column, diminutive of pagina (see page (n.1)).


pan (n.)

Old English panne, earlier ponne (Mercian) pan, from Proto-Germanic *panna pan (cognates: Old Norse
panna, Old Frisian panne, Middle Dutch panne, Dutch pan, Old Low German panna, Old High German
phanna, German pfanne), probably an early borrowing (4c. or 5c.) from Vulgar Latin *patna, from
Latin patina shallow pan, dish, stewpan, from Greek patane plate, dish, from PIE *pet-ano-, from
root *pete- to spread (see pace (n.)). Irish panna probably is from English, and Lithuanian pana is
from German.    Used of pan-shaped parts of mechanical apparatus from c.1590; hence flash in the
pan, a figurative use from early firearms, where a pan held the priming (and the gunpowder might
flash, but no shot ensue).  To go out of the (frying) pan into the fire is first found in Spenser
(1596).


