patriarchal (adj.)

mid-15c., pertaining to a (Church) patriarch, from patriarch + -al, or else from Late Latin
patriarchalis, from patriarcha.


patriarchy (n.)

1560s, in ecclesiastical sense, from Greek patriarkhia, from patriarkhes (see patriarch). Meaning
system of society or government by fathers or elder males of the community first recorded 1630s.


patriarch (n.)

late 12c., from Old French patriarche one of the Old Testament fathers (11c.) and directly from Late
Latin patriarcha (Tertullian), from Greek patriarkhes chief or head of a family, from patria family,
clan, from pater father (see father (n.)) + arkhein to rule (see archon). Also used as an honorific
title of certain bishops in the early Church, notably those of Antioch, Alexandria, and Rome.


matriarch (n.)

mother who heads a family or tribe, c.1600, from matri- + -arch, abstracted from patriarch.


Isaac

masc. proper name, name of a biblical patriarch, from Late Latin, from Greek Isaak, from Hebrew
Yitzhaq, literally he laughs, imperf. of tzahaq he laughed.


Nestorian (n.)

in Church history (mid-15c.), a follower of Nestorius (Latinized form of Nestor), 5c. patriarch of
Constantinople, whose doctrine attributed distinct divine and human persons to Christ and was
condemned as heresy. As an adjective from 1560s. Related: Nestorianism.


Raskolnik

dissenter from the Russian Church, an Old Believer, 1723, from Russian Raskolnik separatist, from
raskol schism, separation. The schism was a result of reforms by Patriarch Nikon in 1667.


Jacob

masc. proper name, name of Old Testament patriarch, son of Isaac and Rebecca and father of the
founders of the twelve tribes, from Late Latin Iacobus, from Greek Iakobos, from Hebrew Ya'aqobh,
literally one that takes by the heel (Gen. xxviii:12), a derivative of 'aqebh heel. The most popular
name for boys born in the U.S. from 1999 through 2008. Jacob's ladder, in various transferred uses
from 1733, is from Gen. xxviii:12.


alderman (n.)

Old English aldormonn (Mercian), ealdormann (West Saxon) ruler, prince, chief; chief officer of a
shire, from aldor, ealder patriarch (comparative of ald old; see old) + monn, mann man (see man
(n.)). A relic of the days when the elders were automatically in charge of the clan or tribe, but
already in Old English used for king's viceroys, regardless of age. The word yielded in Old English
to eorl, and after the Norman Conquest to count (n.). Meaning headman of a guild (early 12c.) passed
to magistrate of a city (c.1200) as the guilds became identified with municipal government.


pope (n.)

Old English papa (9c.), from Church Latin papa bishop, pope (in classical Latin, tutor), from Greek
papas patriarch, bishop, originally father. Applied to bishops of Asia Minor and taken as a title by
the Bishop of Alexandria c.250. In Western Church, applied especially to the Bishop of Rome since
the time of Leo the Great (440-461) and claimed exclusively by them from 1073 (usually in English
with a capital P-). Popemobile, his car, is from 1979. Papal, papacy, later acquisitions in English,
preserve the original vowel.


