patrician (n.)

early 15c., member of the ancient Roman noble order, from Middle French patricien, from Latin
patricius of the rank of the nobles, of the senators; of fatherly dignity, from patres conscripti
Roman senators, literally fathers, plural of pater father (see father (n.)). Contrasted, in ancient
Rome, with plebeius. Applied to noble citizens and higher orders of free folk in medieval Italian
and German cities (sense attested in English from 1610s); hence nobleman, aristocrat in a modern
sense (1630s). As an adjective, attested from 1610s, from the noun.


Patrick

masc. proper name, from Old Irish Patraicc (Irish Padraig), from Latin Patricius, literally a
patrician (see patrician). As a given name, chiefly in northern England and Scotland, in Ireland
only a popular name after 1600, due probably to the Scots settlers in Ulster. [Reaney]


Patricia

fem. proper name, from Latin, fem. of patricius patrician, noble (see Patrick).


client (n.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French clyent (c.1300), from Latin clientem (nominative cliens) follower,
retainer, perhaps a variant of present participle of cluere listen, follow, obey (see listen); or,
more likely, from clinare to incline, bend, from suffixed form of PIE root *klei- to lean (see lean
(v.)).    The ground sense apparently is of one who leans on another for protection. In ancient
Rome, a plebian under protection of a patrician (called patronus in this relationship; see patron);
in English originally a lawyer's customer, by c.1600 extended to any customer.


aristocracy (n.)

1560s, from Middle French aristocracie (Modern French aristocratie), from Late Latin aristocratia,
from Greek aristokratia government or rule of the best, from aristos best (originally most fitting,
from PIE *ar-isto-, superlative form of *ar- to fit together; see arm (n.1)) + kratos rule, power
(see -cracy).    At first in a literal sense of government by those who are the best citizens;
meaning rule by a privileged class (best-born or best-favored by fortune) is from 1570s and became
paramount 17c. Hence, the meaning patrician order (1650s). In early use contrasted with monarchy;
after French and American revolutions, with democracy.


