peaceful (adj.)

early 14c., inclined to peace, friendly, pacific, from peace + -ful. Meaning tranquil, calm, full of
peace is from mid-14c. In reference to nonviolent methods of effecting social change, it is attested
from 1876. Related: Peacefully; peacefulness. Peaceful coexistence (1920) originally was in regard
to Soviet policy toward the capitalist West.


pacific (adj.)

1540s, tending to make peace, from Middle French pacifique, from Latin pacificus peaceful, peace-
making, from pax (genitive pacis) peace (see peace) + root of facere to make (see factitious).
Meaning peaceful, calm is first recorded 1630s. Related: Pacifical (mid-15c.); pacifically.


Shiloh

village on the west bank of the Jordan River, perhaps from an alteration of Hebrew shalo to be
peaceful. The American Civil War battle (April 6-7, 1862) was so called for being fought around the
Shiloh church in Tennessee, which was destroyed in the battle.


unsettled (adj.)

1590s, not peaceful, not firmly established, from unsettle (v.) or else from un- (1) not + past
participle of settle (v.). Meaning not occupied by settlers is attested from 1724.


coexistence (n.)

also co-existence, mid-15c., joint existence; see co- + existence. As peaceful relations between
states of different ideologies, 1954, a Cold War term.


peaceable (adj.)

early 14c., from Old French paisible peaceful (12c.), from pais (see peace). Related: Peacably.


placid (adj.)

1620s, from French placide (15c.) and directly from Latin placidus pleasing, peaceful, quiet,
gentle, still, calm, from placere to please (see please). Related: Placidly; placidness.


United Nations

1942, the Allied nations at war with the Axis powers; the international body (officially the United
Nations Organization) was chartered in 1945.    Such negotiation as may occur in New York is not
conducted within the walls of the tall building by the East River: it is carried out elsewhere, in
accordance with those principles of courtesy, confidence and discretion which must for ever remain
the only principles conducive to the peaceful settlement of disputes. [Harold Nicholson, The
Evolution of Diplomatic Method, 1954]


restful (adj.)

mid-14c., characterized by rest; late 14c., quiet, peaceful; from rest (n.1) + -ful. Related:
Restfully; restfulness.


serene (adj.)

mid-15c., clear, calm, from Latin serenus peaceful, calm, clear (of weather), figuratively cheerful,
glad, tranquil, of uncertain origin; perhaps from a suffixed variant of PIE *ksero- dry, source of
Greek xeros dry (see xerasia). In English, applied to persons since 1630s. Related: Serenely.


pacification (n.)

a setting at peace, early 15c., from Middle French pacification act of making peaceful (15c.), from
Latin pacificationem (nominative pacificatio) a peace-making, noun of action from past participle
stem of pacificare to pacify (see pacify).


placate (v.)

1670s, a back-formation from placation or else from Latin placatus soothed, quiet, gentle, calm,
peaceful, past participle of placare to calm, appease, quiet, soothe, assuage, related to placere to
please (see please). Related: Placated; placating; placatingly.


caduceus (n.)

1590s, from Latin caduceus, alteration of Doric Greek karykeion herald's staff, from karyx (genitive
karykos) a herald, from PIE *karu-, from root *kar- to praise loudly, extol (cognates: Sanskrit
carkarti mentions with praise, Old English hre&eth; fame, glory). Token of a peaceful embassy;
originally an olive branch. Especially the wand carried by Mercury, messenger of the gods, usually
represented with two serpents twined round it.


Solomon

masc. proper name, Biblical name of David's son, king of Judah and Israel and wisest of all men,
from Greek Solomon, from Hebrew Sh'lomoh, from shelomo peaceful, from shalom peace. The Arabic form
is Suleiman. The common medieval form was Salomon (Vulgate, Tyndale, Douai); Solomon was used in
Geneva Bible and KJV. Used allusively for a wise ruler since 1550s. Related: Solomonic; Solomonian.
The Solomon Islands were so named 1568 by Spanish explorers in hopeful expectation of having found
the source of the gold brought to King Solomon in I Kings ix:29.


serenade (n.)

1640s, musical performance at night in open air (especially one given by a lover under the window of
his lady), from French s&eacute;r&eacute;nade (16c.), from Italian serenata an evening song,
literally calm sky, from sereno the open air, noun use of sereno clear, calm, from Latin serenus
peaceful, calm, serene. Sense influenced by Italian sera evening, from Latin sera, fem. of serus
late. Meaning piece of music suitable for a serenade is attested from 1728.


pay (v.)

c.1200, to appease, pacify, satisfy, from Old French paier to pay, pay up (12c., Modern French
payer), from Latin pacare to please, pacify, satisfy (in Medieval Latin especially satisfy a
creditor), literally make peaceful, from pax (genitive pacis) peace (see peace). Meaning to give
what is due for goods or services arose in Medieval Latin and was attested in English by early 13c.;
sense of please, pacify died out in English by 1500. Sense of suffer, endure (a punishment, etc.) is
first recorded late 14c. Related: Paid; paying.


farm (n.)

c.1300, fixed payment (usually in exchange for taxes collected, etc.), fixed rent, from Old French
ferme rent, lease, from Medieval Latin firma fixed payment, from Latin firmare to fix, settle,
confirm, strengthen, from firmus firm (see firm (adj.)).    Sense of tract of leased land is first
recorded early 14c.; that of cultivated land (leased or not) is 1520s. Phrase buy the farm die in
battle, is at least from World War II, perhaps a cynical reference to the draftee's dream of getting
out of the war and going home, in many cases to a peaceful farmstead. But fetch the farm is prisoner
slang from at least 1879 for get sent to the infirmary, with reference to the better diet and
lighter duties there.


exploitation (n.)

1803, productive working of something, a positive word among those who used it first, though
regarded as a Gallicism, from French exploitation, noun of action from exploiter (see exploit (v.)).
Bad sense developed 1830s-50s, in part from influence of French socialist writings (especially Saint
Simon), also perhaps influenced by U.S. anti-slavery writing; and the insulting word was hurled at
activities it once had crowned as praise.    It follows from this science [conceived by Saint
Simon] that the tendency of the human race is from a state of antagonism to that of an universal
peaceful association -- from the dominating influence of the military spirit to that of the
industriel one; from what they call l'exploitation de l'homme par l'homme to the exploitation of the
globe by industry. [Quarterly Review, April &amp; July 1831]


Slav (n.)

late 14c., Sclave, from Medieval Latin Sclavus (c.800), from Byzantine Greek Sklabos (c.580), from
Old Church Slavonic Sloveninu a Slav, probably related to slovo word, speech, which suggests the
name originally identified a member of a speech community (compare Old Church Slavonic Nemici
Germans, related to nemu dumb; and Old English &thorn;eode, which meant both race and language).
Identical with the -slav in personal names (such as Russian Miroslav, literally peaceful fame;
Mstislav vengeful fame; Jaroslav famed for fury; Czech Bohuslav God's glory; and see Wenceslas).
Spelled Slave c.1788-1866, influenced by French and German Slave. As an adjective from 1876.


