pecuniary (adj.)

c.1500, from Latin pecuniarius pertaining to money, from pecunia money, property, wealth, from pecu
cattle, flock, from PIE root *peku- wealth, movable property, livestock (source of Sanskrit pasu-
cattle, Gothic faihu money, fortune, Old English feoh cattle, money).    Livestock was the measure
of wealth in the ancient world. For a possible parallel sense development in Old English, see fee,
and compare, evolving in the other direction, cattle. Compare also Welsh tlws jewel, cognate with
Irish tlus cattle, connected via notion of valuable thing.


finances (n.)

pecuniary resources, 1730, modeled on the French cognate, from plural of finance (n.).


Micawber (n.)

as a type of a childishly impractical man living in optimistic fantasy, from the character of
Wilkins Micawber in Dickens' David Copperfield (1850).    I am at present, my dear Copperfield,
engaged in the sale of corn upon commission. It is not an avocation of a remunerative description --
in other words it does not pay -- and some temporary embarrassments of a pecuniary nature have been
the consequence. I am however delighted to add that I have now an immediate prospect of something
turning up ....


pecunious (adj.)

late 14c., from Latin pecuniosus abounding in money, from pecunia money (see pecuniary). Related:
Pecuniously; pecuniousness.


impecunious (adj.)

lacking in money, 1590s, from assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + Latin
pecuniosus rich, from pecunia money, property (see pecuniary). Related: Impecuniously;
impecuniosity.


peculiar (adj.)

mid-15c., belonging exclusively to one person, from Latin peculiaris of one's own (property), from
peculium private property, literally property in cattle (in ancient times the most important form of
property), from pecu cattle, flock, related to pecus cattle (see pecuniary). Meaning unusual is
first attested c.1600 (earlier distinguished, special, 1580s; for sense development, compare idiom).
Related: Peculiarly.


cattle (n.)

mid-13c., property, from Anglo-French catel property (Old North French catel, Old French chatel),
from Medieval Latin capitale property, stock, noun use of neuter of Latin adjective capitalis
principal, chief (see capital (n.1)). Compare sense development of fee, pecuniary. Sense originally
was of movable property, especially livestock; it began to be limited to cows and bulls from late
16c.


charge (n.)

c.1200, a load, a weight, from Old French charge load, burden; imposition, from chargier to load, to
burden (see charge (v.)). Meaning responsibility, burden is mid-14c. (as in take charge, late 14c.;
in charge, 1510s), which progressed to pecuniary burden, cost, burden of expense (mid-15c.), and
then to price demanded for service or goods (1510s). Legal sense of accusation is late 15c.; earlier
injunction, order (late 14c.). Electrical sense is from 1767. Slang meaning thrill, kick (American
English) is from 1951.


capital (n.1)

early 15c., a capital letter, from capital (adj.). The meaning capital city is first recorded 1660s
(the Old English word was heafodstol). The financial sense is from 1610s (Middle English had chief
money principal fund, mid-14c.), from Medieval Latin capitale stock, property, noun use of neuter of
capitalis capital, chief, first. (The noun use of this adjective in classical Latin was for a
capital crime.)    [The term capital] made its first appearance in medieval Latin as an adjective
capitalis (from caput, head) modifying the word pars, to designate the principal sum of a money
loan. The principal part of a loan was contrasted with the usury--later called interest--the payment
made to the lender in addition to the return of the sum lent. This usage, unknown to classical
Latin, had become common by the thirteenth century and possibly had begun as early as 1100 A.D., in
the first chartered towns of Europe. [Frank A. Fetter, Reformulation of the Concepts of Capital and
Income in Economics and Accounting, 1937, in Capital, Interest, &amp; Rent, 1977]    Also see
cattle, and compare sense development of fee, pecuniary.


