pedanticism (n.)

19c., from pedantic + -ism. Earlier was pedantism (1590s).


pedantic (adj.)

formed in English c.1600, from pedant + -ic. The French equivalent is p&eacute;dantesque. Perhaps
first attested in John Donne's Sunne Rising, where he bids the morning sun let his love and him
linger in bed, telling it, Sawcy pedantique wretch, goe chide Late schooleboyes. Related: Pedantical
(1580s); pedantically.


calcitrant (adj.)

1866, as if from Latin calcitrantem (nominative calcitrans) kicking (see recalcitrant). Pedantic
humor; probably a back-formation.


nitpicker (n.)

pedantic critic, 1951; see nit (n.) + pick (v.).


ideation (n.)

1829; see idea + -ation. Related: Ideational.    As we say Sensation, we might say also, Ideation;
it would be a very useful word; and there is no objection to it, except the pedantic habit of
decrying a new term. [James Mill, Analysis of the Phenomena of the Human Mind, London, 1829]


precieuse (n.)

pedantic woman, woman aiming at refined delicacy of language and taste (1727), from French
pr&eacute;cieuse, noun use of fem. of pr&eacute;cieux (see precious (adj.)); especially as lampooned
in Moli&egrave;re's comedy Les Pr&eacute;cieuses ridicules (1659).


hebdomadally (adv.)

weekly, 1816, pedantic humor, from Latin hebdomas, from Greek hebdomas the number seven; a period of
seven (days), from hepta seven (from PIE *septm; see seven) + -mos, suffix used to form ordinal
numbers, cognate with Latin -mus.


rhinoceros (n.)

c.1300, from Latin rhinoceros, from Greek rhinokeros, literally nose-horned, from rhinos nose (a
word of unknown origin) + keras horn (see kerato-). Related: Rhinocerotic.What is the plural of
rhinoceros? ... Well, Liddell and Scott seem to authorize 'rhinocerotes,' which is pedantic, but
'rhinoceroses' is not euphonious. [Sir Charles Eliot, The East Africa Protectorate, 1905]


anchor (n.)

Old English ancor, borrowed 9c. from Latin ancora anchor, from or cognate with Greek ankyra anchor,
hook (see ankle). A very early borrowing and said to be the only Latin nautical term used in the
Germanic languages. The -ch- form emerged late 16c., a pedantic imitation of a corrupt spelling of
the Latin word. The figurative sense of that which gives stability or security is from late 14c.
Meaning host or presenter of a TV or radio program is from 1965, short for anchorman.


strenuous (adj.)

characterized by great effort, mid-15c. (implied in strenuously), from Latin strenuus active, brisk,
quick, nimble, prompt, vigorous, keen. Probably cognate with Greek strenes, strenos keen, strong,
strenos arrogance, eager desire, Old English stierne hard, severe, keen (see stern (adj.)). Mocked
by Ben Jonson as a pedantic neologism in Poetaster (1601). Sense of requiring much energy is first
recorded 1670s. Related: Strenuousness; strenuosity.


psalm (n.)

Old English psealm, salm, partly from Old French psaume, saume, partly from Church Latin psalmus,
from Greek psalmos song sung to a harp, originally performance on stringed instrument; a plucking of
the harp (compare psaltes harper), from psallein play on a stringed instrument, pull, twitch (see
feel (v.)).    Used in Septuagint for Hebrew mizmor song, especially the sort sung by David to the
harp. Related: Psalmodize; psalmody. After some hesitation, the pedantic ps- spelling prevailed in
English, as it was in many neighboring languages (German, French, etc.), but English is almost alone
in not pronouncing the p-.


lachrymose (adj.)

1660s, tear-like, from Latin lacrimosus tearful, sorrowful, weeping, also causing tears, lamentable,
from lacrima tear, a dialect-altered borrowing of Greek dakryma tear, from dakryein to shed tears,
from dakry tear, from PIE *dakru- (see tear (n.1)). Meaning given to tears, tearful is first
attested 1727; meaning of a mournful character is from 1822.    The -d- to -l- alteration in Latin
is the so-called Sabine -L-; compare Latin olere smell, from root of odor, and Ulixes, the Latin
form of Greek Odysseus. The Medieval Latin practice of writing -ch- for -c- before Latin -r- also
altered anchor, pulchritude, sepulchre. The -y- is pedantic, from belief in a Greek origin. Middle
English had lacrymable tearful (mid-15c.).


apothecary (n.)

mid-14c., shopkeeper, especially one who stores, compounds, and sells medicaments, from Old French
apotecaire (13c., Modern French apothicaire), from Late Latin apothecarius storekeeper, from Latin
apotheca storehouse, from Greek apotheke barn, storehouse, literally a place where things are put
away, from apo- away (see apo-) + tithenai to put, to place (see theme). Same root produced French
boutique and Spanish bodega. Cognate compounds produced Sanskrit apadha- concealment, Old Persian
apadana- palace.    Drugs and herbs being among the chief items of non-perishable goods, the meaning
narrowed 17c. to druggist (Apothecaries' Company of London separated from the Grocers' in 1617).
Apothecaries formerly were notorious for the assumed gravity and affectation of knowledge generally
put on by the gentlemen of this profession, who are commonly as superficial in their learning as
they are pedantic in their language [Francis Grose, A Classical Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue,
1796]. Hence, Apothecary's Latin, barbarously mangled, also known as Dog Latin.


H

the pronunciation aitch was in Old French (ache name of the letter H), and is from a presumed Late
Latin *accha (compare Italian effe, elle, emme), with the central sound approximating the value of
the letter when it passed from Roman to Germanic, where it at first represented a strong, distinctly
aspirated -kh- sound close to that in Scottish loch. In earlier Latin the letter was called ha.
In Romanic languages, the sound became silent in Late Latin and was omitted in Old French and
Italian, but it was restored in Middle English spelling in words borrowed from French, and often
later in pronunciation, too. Thus Modern English has words ultimately from Latin with missing -h-
(as in able, from Latin habile); with a silent -h- (as in heir,  hour); with a formerly silent -h-
now often vocalized (as in humble, humor, herb); and even a few with an excrescent -h- fitted in
confusion to words that never had one (as in hostage, hermit).    Relics of the formerly unvoiced
-h- persist in pedantic insistence on an historical (object) and in obsolete mine host. The use in
digraphs (as in -sh-, -th-) goes back to the ancient Greek alphabet, which used it in -ph-, -th-,
-kh- until -H- took on the value of a long e and the digraphs acquired their own characters. The
letter passed into Roman use before this evolution, and thus retained there more of its original
Semitic value.


