pedantocracy (n.)

1842, from pedant + -cracy. Coined (in French) by Mill in a letter to Comte.


pedantic (adj.)

formed in English c.1600, from pedant + -ic. The French equivalent is p&eacute;dantesque. Perhaps
first attested in John Donne's Sunne Rising, where he bids the morning sun let his love and him
linger in bed, telling it, Sawcy pedantique wretch, goe chide Late schooleboyes. Related: Pedantical
(1580s); pedantically.


pedantry (n.)

1610s, from Italian pedanteria, from pedante, or from French p&eacute;danterie, from p&eacute;dant
(see pedant).


pedant (n.)

1580s, schoolmaster, from Middle French p&eacute;dant (1560s) or directly from Italian pedante,
literally teacher, schoolmaster, of uncertain origin, apparently an alteration of Late Latin
paedagogantem (nominative paedagogans), present participle of paedagogare (see pedagogue). Meaning
person who trumpets minor points of learning first recorded 1590s.


conundrum (n.)

1590s, Oxford University slang for pedant, also whim, etc., later (1790) riddle, puzzle. Also
spelled quonundrum. The sort of ponderous pseudo-Latin word that was once the height of humor in
learned circles.


scholastic (adj.)

1590s, of or pertaining to Scholastic theologians (Churchmen in the Middle Ages whose theology and
philosophy was based on Church Fathers and Aristotle), from Middle French scholastique (14c.), from
Latin scholasticus of a school, from Greek skholastikos enjoying leisure; devoting one's leisure to
learning, hence, as a noun, a scholar, also in a bad sense, a pedant; a simpleton, from skhola (see
school (n.1)). In English, meaning pertaining to schools or to school education is from 1640s. As a
noun from 1640s. Related: Scholastical (1530s in the relating to a school sense); scholastically.


grammar (n.)

early 14c., gramarye (late 12c. in surnames), from Old French gramaire learning, especially Latin
and philology, grammar, (magic) incantation, spells, mumbo-jumbo, irregular semi-popular adoption
[OED] of Latin grammatica, from Greek grammatike tekhne art of letters, with a sense of both
philology and literature in the broadest sense, fem. adjective from gramma letter, from stem of
graphein to draw or write (see -graphy). An Old English word for it was st&aelig;fcr&aelig;ft (see
staff (n.)).    Form grammar is from late 14c. Restriction to rules of language is a post-classical
development, but as this type of study was until 16c. limited to Latin, Middle English gramarye also
came to mean learning in general, knowledge peculiar to the learned classes (early 14c.), which
included astrology and magic; hence the secondary meaning of occult knowledge (late 15c.), which
evolved in Scottish into glamor (q.v.).    A grammar school (late 14c.) originally was a school in
which the learned languages are grammatically taught [Johnson, who also has grammaticaster a mean
verbal pedant]. In U.S. (1842) the term was put to use in the graded system for a school between
primary and secondary where English grammar is taught.


