pedestrian (n.)

walker, 1793, from pedestrian (adj.).


pedestrian (adj.)

1716, prosaic, dull (of writing), from Latin pedester (genitive pedestris) plain, not versified,
prosaic, literally on foot (sense contrasted with equester on horseback), from pedes one who goes on
foot, from pes (genitive pedis) foot (see foot (n.)). Meaning going on foot is first attested 1791
in English (it also was a sense of Latin pedester). The earlier adjective in English was pedestrial
(1610s).


peon (n.)

unskilled worker, 1826, from Mexican Spanish peon agricultural laborer (especially a debtor held in
servitude by his creditor), from Spanish peon day laborer, also pedestrian, originally foot soldier,
from Medieval Latin pedonem foot soldier (see pawn (n.2)). The word entered British English earlier
(c.1600) in the sense native constable, soldier, or messenger in India, via Portuguese peao
pedestrian, foot soldier, day laborer.


lift (n.)

late 15c., act of lifting, from lift (v.). Meaning act of helping is 1630s; that of cheering
influence is from 1861. Sense of elevator is from 1851; that of upward force of an aircraft is from
1902. Meaning help given to a pedestrian by taking him into a vehicle is from 1712.


footer (n.)

c.1600, pedestrian; 1781, a kick at football; 1863, British student slang, the game of football; see
foot (n.), football, -er.


velocipede (n.)

1819, wheeled vehicle propelled by alternate thrusts of each foot on the ground, 1819, from French
v&eacute;locip&egrave;de (19c.), from Latin velox (genitive velocis) swift, speedy (see velocity) +
pedem, accusative of pes foot (see foot (n.)). The mechanical ancestor of the bicycle, it was
tinkered with and improved; the name continued for some time and was applied to an early kind of
modern bicycle or tricycle from 1849. See bicycle (n.).    The Velocipede has been introduced into
England, under letters patent, by Mr. Johnson, a coachmaker in Long-Acre, by whom it has been
greatly improved, both in lightness and strength. The road from Ipswich to Whitton, says the Bury
paper, is travelled every evening by several pedestrian hobby-horses; no less than six are seen at a
time, and the distance, which is 3 miles, is performed in 15 minutes. [The Athenaeum, May 1, 1819]


find (v.)

Old English findan come upon, meet with, discover; obtain by search or study (class III strong verb;
past tense fand, past participle funden), from Proto-Germanic *finthan to come upon, discover
(cognates: Old Saxon findan, Old Frisian finda, Old Norse finna, Middle Dutch vinden, Old High
German findan, German finden, Gothic fin&thorn;an), originally to come upon.    The Germanic word is
from PIE root *pent- to tread, go (cognates: Old High German fendeo pedestrian; Sanskrit panthah
path, way; Avestan panta way; Greek pontos open sea, patein to tread, walk; Latin pons (genitive
pontis) bridge; Old Church Slavonic poti path, peta heel; Russian put' path, way). To find out to
discover by scrutiny is from 1550s (Middle English had a verb, outfinden, c.1300).


