pedestal (n.)

1560s, base supporting a column, statue, etc., from Middle French pi&eacute;destal (1540s), from
Italian piedistallo base of a pillar, from pie foot + di of + stallo stall, place, seat, from a
Germanic source (see stall (n.1)).    Spelling in English influenced by Latin pedem foot.  An Old
English word for it was fotstan, literally foot-stone. Figurative sense of put (someone) on a
pedestal regard as highly admirable is attested from 1859.


base (n.)

bottom, foundation, pedestal, early 14c., from Old French bas depth (12c.), from Latin basis
foundation, from Greek basis step, pedestal, from bainein to step (see come). The military sense is
from 1860. The chemical sense (1810) was introduced in French 1754 by French chemist Guillaume-
Fran&ccedil;ois Rouelle (1703-1770). Sporting sense of starting point ia from 1690s, also
destination of a runner (1812). As a safe spot in a tag-like game, suggested from mid-15c. (as the
name of the game later called prisoner's base).


podium (n.)

1743, raised platform around an ancient arena, also projecting base of a pedestal, from Latin podium
raised platform, from Greek podion foot of a vase, diminutive of pous (genitive podos) foot (see
foot (n.)). Meaning raised platform at the front of a hall or stage is from 1947.


analemma (n.)

1650s, from Latin analemma the pedestal of a sundial, hence the sundial itself, from Greek analemma
prop, support, from analambanein to receive, take up, restore, from ana- up (see ana-) + lambanein
to take, from PIE root *(s)lagw- to seize, take (cognates: Sanskrit labhate, rabhate seizes; Old
English l&aelig;ccan to seize, grasp; Greek lazomai I take, grasp; Old Church Slavonic leca to
catch, snare; Lithuanian lobis possession, riches).


stet

direction to printer to disregard correction made to text, 1755, from Latin stet let it stand, third
person singular present subjunctive of stare to stand, stand upright, be stiff, from PIE root *sta-
to stand, set down, make or be firm, with derivatives meaning place or thing that is standing
(cognates: Sanskrit tisthati stands; Avestan histaiti to stand; Persian -stan country, literally
where one stands; Greek histemi put, place, cause to stand; weigh, stasis a standing still, statos
placed, stater a weight, coin, stylos pillar; Latin sistere stand still, stop, make stand, place,
produce in court, status manner, position, condition, attitude, stare to stand, statio station,
post; Lithuanian stojus place myself, statau place; Old Church Slavonic staja place myself, stanu
position; Gothic standan, Old English standan to stand, stede place, steall place where cattle are
kept; Old Norse ste&eth;i anvil, stallr pedestal for idols, altar; German Stall a stable; Old Irish
sessam the act of standing).


stall (n.1)

place in a stable for animals, Old English steall standing place, position, state; place where
cattle are kept, fishing ground, from Proto-Germanic *stalla- (cognates: Old Norse stallr pedestal
for idols, altar; crib, manger, Old Frisian stal, Old High German stall stand, place, stable, stall,
German Stall stable, Stelle place), from PIE root *stel- to put, stand, with derivatives referring
to a standing object or place (cognates: Greek stele standing block, slab, stellein to set in order,
arrange, array, equip, make ready; Latin stolidus insensible, dull, brutish, properly unmovable).
Meaning partially enclosed seat in a choir is attested from c.1400; that of urinal in a men's room
is from 1967. Several meanings, including that of a stand for selling (mid-13c., implied in
stallage), probably are from (or influenced by) Anglo-French and Old French estal station, position;
stall of a stable; stall in a market; a standing still; a standing firm (12c., Modern French
&eacute;tal butcher's stall). This, along with Italian stallo place, stalla stable is a borrowing
from a Germanic source from the same root as the native English word.


