peer (n.)

c.1300, an equal in rank or status (early 13c. in Anglo-Latin), from Anglo-French peir, Old French
per (10c.), from Latin par equal (see par (n.)). Sense of a noble (late 14c.) is from Charlemagne's
Twelve Peers in the old romances, who, like the Arthurian knights of the Round Table, originally
were so called because all were equal. Sociological sense of one of the same age group or social set
is from 1944. Peer review attested by 1970. Peer pressure is first recorded 1971.


peerage (n.)

mid-15c., peers collectively, from peer (n.) + -age. Probably on model of Old French parage.


peerless (adj.)

c.1300, from peer (n.) + -less.


peer (v.)

to look closely, 1590s, variant of piren (late 14c.), with a long -i-, probably related to or from
East Frisian piren to look, of uncertain origin. Influenced in form and sense by Middle English
peren (late 14c.), shortened form of aperen (see appear). Related: Peered; peering.


BitTorrent

peer-to-peer file sharing protocol, implemented in 2001, from bit (n.2) in the computing sense +
torrent.


tout (v.)

1700, thieves' cant, to act as a lookout, spy on, from Middle English tuten to peep, peer, probably
from a variant of Old English totian to stick out, peep, peer, from Proto-Germanic *tut- project
(cognates: Dutch tuit sprout, snout, Middle Dutch tute nipple, pap, Middle Low German tute horn,
funnel, Old Norse tota teat, toe of a shoe). The sense developed to look out for jobs, votes,
customers, etc., to try to get them (1731), then praise highly in an attempt to sell (1920).
Related: Touted; touting.


loophole (n.)

also loop-hole, mid-15c., from Middle English loupe opening in a wall for shooting through or
admitting light (c.1300), perhaps related to Middle Dutch lupen to watch, peer; + hole (n.).
Figurative sense of outlet, means of escape is from 1660s.


pry (v.1)

look inquisitively, c.1300, from prien to peer in, of unknown origin, perhaps related to late Old
English bepriwan to wink. Related: Pried; prying. As a noun, act of prying, from 1750; meaning
inquisitive person is from 1845.


overlook (v.)

mid-14c., to examine, scrutinize, inspect, from over- + look (v.). Another Middle English sense was
to peer over the top of. These two literal senses have given rise to the two main modern meanings.
Meaning to look over or beyond and thus not see, via notion of to choose to not notice is first
recorded 1520s. Seemingly contradictory sense of to watch over officially, keep an eye on,
superintend is from 1530s. Related: Overlooked; overlooking. In Shekaspeare's day, overlooking also
was a common term for inflicting the evil eye on (someone or something).


disparage (v.)

early 14c., degrade socially, from Old French desparagier (Modern French d&eacute;parager) reduce in
rank, degrade, devalue, depreciate, originally to marry unequally, and thus by extension the
disgrace or dishonor involved in this, from des- away (see dis-) + parage rank, lineage (see peer
(n.)). Sense of belittle first recorded 1530s. Related: Disparaged; disparaging; disparagingly.


pear (n.)

Old English pere, peru pear, common West Germanic (Middle Dutch, Middle Low German pere, Old High
German pira, bira, Dutch peer), from Vulgar Latin *pera, variant of Latin pira, plural (taken for
fem. singular) of pirum pear, a loan word from an unknown source. It likely shares an origin with
Greek apion pear, apios pear tree.


quadrille (n.)

1773, lively square dance for four couples, from French quadrille (17c.), originally one of four
groups of horsemen in a tournament (a sense attested in English from 1738), from Spanish cuadrilla,
diminutive of cuadro four-sided battle square, from Latin quadrum a square, related to quattuor four
(see four). The craze for the dance hit England in 1816, and it underwent a vigorous revival late
19c. among the middle classes.    Earlier the name of a popular card game for four hands, and in
this sense from French quadrille (1725), from Spanish cuartillo, from cuarto fourth, from Latin
quartus. OED notes it as fashionable from 1726 (and was in turn superseded by whist), the year of
Swift's (or Congreve's) satirical ballad on the craze:    The commoner, and knight, the peer,  Men
of all ranks and fame,  Leave to their wives the only care,  To propagate their name;  And well that
duty they fulfil  When the good husband's at Quadrille &amp;c.;


