pejorative (adj.)

depreciative, disparaging, 1888, from French p&eacute;joratif, from Late Latin peiorat-, past
participle stem of peiorare make worse, from Latin peior worse, related to pessimus worst, pessum
downward, to the ground, from PIE *ped-yos-, comparative of root *ped- to walk, stumble, impair (see
peccadillo). As a noun from 1882. English had a verb pejorate to worsen from 1640s.


enthusiast (n.)

1560s, pejorative, one who believes himself possessed of divine revelations or special communication
from God, from Greek enthousiastes a person inspired, from enthousiazein (see enthusiasm). General
sense (not always entirely pejorative) is from mid-18c.


yok (n.)

slang, gentile, non-Jew, pejorative, 1920, from Yiddish, where it is back slang, a reversed and
altered form of goy.


pejoration (n.)

1650s, noun of action from pejorate (see pejorative).


wastrel (n.)

spendthrift, idler, 1847, from waste (v.) + pejorative suffix -rel. Earlier something useless or
imperfect (1790).


Jap

Colloquial abbreviation of Japanese, by 1880 as a noun, 1892 as an adjective, not originally
pejorative but became so during World War II. It was protested by Japanese before the war, but did
not begin to be taboo in the U.S. before 1960s. For some years after World War II in American
English the word also functioned as a verb, to execute a sneak attack upon, a reference to Pearl
Harbor.


priestcraft (n.)

late 15c., business of being a priest, from priest + craft (n.). After rise of Protestantism and the
Enlightenment, it acquired a pejorative sense of arts and devices of ambitious priests for attaining
and holding temporal power and social control (1680s).


biplicity (n.)

1731; see bi- + ending from multiplicity. A useful and non-pejorative alternative to duplicity.


drank

Old English dranc, singular past tense of drink. It also became past participle 17c.-19c., probably
to avoid the pejorative associations of drunk.


pelf (n.)

mid-14c., stolen goods, from Anglo-French pelf, Old French pelfre booty, spoils (11c.), of unknown
origin; also see pilfer. Meaning money, riches, with a pejorative overtone first recorded c.1500.


doggerel

late 14c. (adj.); 1630s (n.), Any rhyming verse in which the meter is forced into metronomic
regularity by the stressing of normally unstressed syllables and in which rhyme is forced or banal
[Miller Williams, Patterns of Poetry]. probably from dog (n.) + pejorative suffix -rel and applied
to bad poetry perhaps with a suggestion of puppyish clumsiness, or being fit only for dogs. Attested
as a surname from mid-13c., but the sense is not evident.


crunchy (adj.)

1892, from crunch + -y (2). Student slang sense of annoyingly intense about health or environmental
issues is by 1990, short for crunchy granola (considered as natural and wholesome); not entirely
pejorative at first. Related: Crunchiness.


pickerel (n.)

young pike, late 13c., diminutive of pike, the fish (see pike (n.3)), with French pejorative suffix
-rel; perhaps formed in Anglo-French.


sentimental (adj.)

1749, pertaining to or characterized by sentiment, from sentiment + -al (1). At first without
pejorative connotations; meaning having too much sentiment, apt to be swayed by prejudice had
emerged by 1793 (implied in sentimentalist). Related: Sentimentally.


solicitor (n.)

early 15c., one who urges, from Middle French soliciteur, from soliciter (see solicit). Meaning one
who conducts matters on behalf of another is from early 15c. As a name for a specific class of legal
practitioners in Britain, it is attested from 1570s. Both the fem. forms, solicitress (1630s) and
solicitrix (1610s), have been in the sexual sense, but the latter seems more common in non-
pejorative use.


poetaster (n.)

1590s, from Middle French poetastre (1550s), from Latin poeta (see poet) + -aster, diminutive
(pejorative) suffix. Old Norse had skaldfifl poetaster.


mongrel (n.)

late 15c., mixed-breed dog, from obsolete mong mixture, from Old English gemong mingling (base of
among), from Proto-Germanic *mangjan to knead together (see mingle). With pejorative suffix -rel.
Meaning person not of pure race is from 1540s. As an adjective from 1570s.


dilettante (n.)

1733, borrowing of Italian dilettante lover of music or painting, from dilettare to delight, from
Latin delectare (see delight (n.)). Originally without negative connotation, devoted amateur, the
pejorative sense emerged late 18c. by contrast with professional.


artsy (adj.)

pretentiously artistic, 1902, from arts (see art (n.)); originally especially artsy-craftsy, with
reference to the arts and crafts movement; always more or less dismissive or pejorative; artsy-
fartsy was in use by 1971.


duffer (n.)

inept person; old man, especially bad golfer, 1842, perhaps from Scottish duffar dull or stupid
person, from dowf stupid, literally deaf, from Old Norse daufr, with pejorative suffix -art. Or
perhaps from 18c. thieves' slang duff (v.) to dress or manipulate an old thing and make it look new.


epicure (n.)

late 14c., follower of Epicurus, from Latin Epicurus, from Greek Epicouros (341-270 B.C.E.),
Athenian philosopher who taught that pleasure is the highest good and identified virtue as the
greatest pleasure; the first lesson recalled, the second forgotten, and the name used pejoratively
for one who gives himself up to sensual pleasure (1560s), especially glutton, sybarite (1774).
Epicurus' school opposed by stoics, who first gave his name a reproachful sense. Non-pejorative
meaning one who cultivates refined taste in food and drink is from 1580s.


cherry-pick (v.)

to select the very best selfishly, 1959 (implied in cherry-picking), American English (Billboard), a
pejorative figurative sense,from cherry (n.) + pick (v.). Related: Cherry-picked.


talkative (adj.)

early 15c.; see talk (v.) + -ative. An early hybrid word in English. Originally especially boastful,
but now considered less pejorative than loquacious, garrulous. Related: Talkatively; talkativeness.


caitiff (adj.)

c.1300, wicked, base, cowardly, from Old North French caitive captive, miserable (Old French
chaitif, 12c., Modern French ch&eacute;tif puny, sickly, poor, weak), from Latin captivum (see
captive, which was a later, scholarly borrowing of the same word). In most Romance languages, it has
acquired a pejorative sense.


cabochon (n.)

1570s, from French cabochon (14c.), augmentative of caboche (12c.), augmentative or pejorative
formation, ultimately from Latin caput head (see capitulum). Essentially the same word as cabbage.


mesalliance (n.)

marriage with a person of lower social position, 1782, from French m&eacute;salliance, from
pejorative prefix mes- (from Latin mis-; see mis-) + alliance (see alliance).


-aster

word-forming element expressing incomplete resemblance (such as poetaster), usually diminutive and
deprecatory, from Latin, from Greek -aster, suffix originally forming nouns from verbs ending in
-azein, later generalized as a pejorative suffix, as in Greek patraster he who plays the father.


leprosy (n.)

1530s (earlier lepruse, mid-15c.), from leprous; see leper. First used in Coverdale Bible, where it
renders Hebrew cara'ath, which apparently was a comprehensive term for skin diseases. Because of
pejorative associations, the use of the word in medical context has been banned by the World Health
Organization and replaced by Hansen's disease, named for Norwegian physician Armauer Hansen
(1841-1912) who in 1871 discovered the bacillus that causes it.


jerry-built (adj.)

1869, in which jerry has a sense of bad, defective, probably a pejorative use of the male nickname
Jerry (a popular form of Jeremy; compare Jerry-sneak, mid-19c., sneaking fellow, a hen-pecked
husband [OED]). Or from or influenced by nautical slang jury temporary, which came to be used of all
sorts of makeshift and inferior objects (see jury (adj.)).


weenie (n.)

frankfurter, 1906, with slang sense of penis following soon after, from German wienerwurst Vienna
sausage (see wiener). Meaning ineffectual person, effeminate young man is slang from 1963;
pejorative sense via penis shape, or perhaps from weenie in the sense of small (see wee).


pis aller (n.)

last resource, what one would do at the worst, 1670s, French, literally to go worse, from pis worse,
from Latin peius, neuter of peior worse (see pejorative) + aller to go.


populace (n.)

1570s, from Middle French populace (16c.), from Italian popolaccio riffraff, rabble, from popolo
people (from Latin populus people; see people (n.)) + pejorative suffix -accio.


obsequious (adj.)

late 15c., prompt to serve, from Middle French obs&#233;quieux (15c.), from Latin obsequiosus
compliant, obedient, from obsequium compliance, dutiful service, from obsequi to accommodate oneself
to the will of another, from ob after (see ob-) + sequi to follow (see sequel). Pejorative sense of
fawning, sycophantic had emerged by 1590s. Related: Obsequiously; obsequiousness (mid-15c.).


villein (n.)

early 14c., vileyn, spelling variant of villain in its reference to a feudal class of half-free
peasants. It tends to keep the literal, historical sense of the word and let the pejorative meanings
go with villain; Century Dictionary writes that the forms villain, villein, etc., are historically
one, and the attempt to differentiate them in meaning is idle, but Fowler finds this a useful piece
of differentiation. Related: Villeinage.


appeasement (n.)

mid-15c., pacification, from Middle French apeisement, Old French apaisement appeasement, calming,
noun of action from apaisier (see appease). First recorded 1919 in international political sense;
not pejorative until failure of Chamberlain's policy toward Germany in 1939 (Methods of appeasement
was Chamberlain's description of his policy).


disaster (n.)

1590s, from Middle French d&eacute;sastre (1560s), from Italian disastro ill-starred, from dis-,
here merely pejorative (see dis-) + astro star, planet, from Latin astrum, from Greek astron (see
star (n.)). The sense is astrological, of a calamity blamed on an unfavorable position of a planet.


deceive (v.)

c.1300, from Old French decevoir (12c., Modern French d&eacute;cevoir) to deceive, from Latin
decipere to ensnare, take in, beguile, cheat, from de- from or pejorative + capere to take (see
capable). Related: Deceived; deceiver; deceiving.


propaganda (n.)

1718, committee of cardinals in charge of Catholic missionary work, short for Congregatio de
Propaganda Fide congregation for propagating the faith, a committee of cardinals established 1622 by
Gregory XV to supervise foreign missions. The word is properly the ablative fem. gerundive of Latin
propagare (see propagation). Hence, any movement to propagate some practice or ideology (1790).
Modern political sense dates from World War I, not originally pejorative. Meaning material or
information propagated to advance a cause, etc. is from 1929.


terse (adj.)

1590s (implied in tersely), clean-cut, burnished, neat, from French ters clean, and directly from
Latin tersus wiped off, clean, neat, from past participle of tergere to rub, polish, wipe. Sense of
concise or pithy in style or language is from 1777, which led to a general sense of neatly concise.
The pejorative meaning brusque is a fairly recent development. Related: Terseness.


curtail (v.)

late 15c., from Middle French courtault made short, from court short (Old French cort, from Latin
curtus; see curt) + -ault pejorative suffix of Germanic origin. Originally curtal; used of horses
with docked tails, which probably influenced the spelling in general use; curtal is retained in
poetics to describe a shortened stanza or poem. Related: Curtailed; curtailing.


junker (n.)

young German noble, 1550s, from German Junker, from Old High German juncherro, literally young lord,
from junc young (see young) + herro lord (see Herr). Pejorative sense of reactionary younger member
of the Prussian aristocracy (1865) dates from Bismarck's domestic policy.


educrat (n.)

1968, usually pejorative; first element from education, second from bureaucrat. Said to have been
coined by Claude R. Kirk Jr. (b.1926), governor of Florida.    While political leaders and corporate
CEOs, focusing as usual on the quarterly return, call for workers for the new economy, their
educational reforms are producing just that: students with a grab-bag of minor skills and
competencies and minds that are sadly uneventful, incapable of genuine intellectual achievement and
lacking any sense of continuity with the historical and cultural traditions of our society. Their
world is small, bleak, and limited; their world will become ours. [David Solway, The Turtle
Hypodermic of Sickenpods, Quebec, 2000]


grotesque (adj.)

c.1600s, originally a noun (1560s), from Middle French crotesque (16c., Modern French grotesque),
from Italian grottesco, literally of a cave, from grotta (see grotto). The usual explanation is that
the word first was used of paintings found on the walls of basements of Roman ruins (Italian pittura
grottesca), which OED finds intrinsically plausible. Originally fanciful, fantastic, sense became
pejorative after mid-18c. Related: Grotesquely; grotesqueness.


for-

prefix usually meaning away, opposite, completely, from Old English for-, indicating loss or
destruction, or completion, also used as an intensive or pejorative element, which is related to Old
Norse for-, Dutch ver-, Old High German fir-, German ver-; from PIE *pr-, from root *per- (1)
forward, through (see per). Probably originally in Germanic with a sense of forward, forth, but with
complex sense developments in the various languages. Ultimately from the same root as fore (adv.).


wiener (n.)

1900, shortening of wienerwurst (1874, American English), from German Wiener of Vienna (from Wien
Vienna, from Latin Vindo-bona; see Vienna) + Wurst sausage (see wurst). Colloquial wienie is
attested by 1911. Extensive pejorative senses developed from its penis-like shape. Wiener roast is
from 1910.


grimace (n.)

1650s, from French grimace, from Middle French grimache, from Old French grimuce grotesque face,
ugly mug, possibly from Frankish (compare Old Saxon grima face mask, Old English grima mask,
helmet), from same Germanic root as grim (adj.). With pejorative suffix -azo (from Latin -aceus).


pert (adj.)

c.1300 (implied in pertly), evident, unconcealed, shortened form of Middle English apert open,
frank, from Old French apert, from Latin apertus, past participle of aperire to open (see overt).
Sense of saucy, bold first recorded late 14c. Less pejorative meaning lively, brisk, in good spirits
(c.1500) survives in U.S. dialectal peart (with Middle English alternative spelling). Related:
Pertness.


political (adj.)

1550s, pertaining to a polity, civil affairs, or government; from Latin politicus of citizens or the
state (see politic (adj.)) + -al (1). Meaning taking sides in party politics (usually pejorative) is
from 1749. Political prisoner first recorded 1860; political science is from 1779 (first attested in
Hume). Political animal translates Greek politikon zoon (Aristotle, Politics, I.ii.9) an animal
intended to live in a city; a social animal.


braggart (n.)

1570s, from French bragard (16c.), with pejorative ending (see -ard) + Middle French braguer to
flaunt, brag, perhaps originally to show off clothes, especially breeches, from brague breeches (see
bracket). There may be an element of codpiece-flaunting in all this.    The word in English has been
at least influenced by brag (v.), even if, as some claim, it is unrelated to it. Bragger arrogant or
boastful person, agent noun from brag (v.), attested in English from late 14c.


phlegmatic (adj.)

cool, calm, self-possessed, and in a more pejorative sense, cold, dull, apathetic, 1570s, from
literal sense abounding in phlegm (as a bodily humor) (mid-14c., fleumatik), from Old French
fleumatique (13c., Modern French flegmatique), from Late Latin phlegmaticus, from Greek phlegmatikos
abounding in phlegm (see phlegm).A verry flewmatike man is in the body lustles, heuy and slow. [John
of Trevisa, translation of Bartholomew de Glanville's De proprietatibus rerum, 1398]


