pell-mell (adv.)

confusedly, 1570s, from Middle French p&ecirc;le-m&ecirc;le, from Old French pesle mesle (12c.),
apparently a jingling rhyme on the second element, which is from the stem of the verb mesler to mix,
mingle (see meddle). Phonetic French form pelly melly is attested in English from mid-15c.


tele-

before vowels tel-, word-forming element meaning far, far off, operating over distance (also, since
c.1940, television), from Greek tele-, combining form of tele far off, afar, at or to a distance,
related to teleos (genitive telos) end, goal, completion, perfection, literally completion of a
cycle, from PIE *kwel-es- (cognates: Sanskrit caramah the last, Breton pell far off, Welsh pellaf
uttermost), perhaps from root *kwel- (1) (see cycle (n.)).


division (n.)

late 14c., from Old French division, from Latin divisionem (nominative divisio), from divid-, stem
of dividere (see divide). Military sense is first recorded 1590s. Mathematical sense is from early
15c. The mathematical division sign supposedly was invented by British mathematician John Pell
(1611-1685) who taught at Cambridge and Amsterdam.


meld (v.)

to blend together, merge, unite (intransitive), by 1910, of uncertain origin. OED suggests perh. a
blend of MELT v.1 and WELD v. Said elsewhere to be a verb use of melled mingled, blended, past
participle of dialectal mell to mingle, mix, combine, blend.    [T]he biplane grew smaller and
smaller, the stacatto clatter of the motor became once more a drone which imperceptibly became
melded with the waning murmur of country sounds .... [Aircraft magazine, October 1910]      But it
is perhaps an image from card-playing, where the verb meld is attested by 1907 in a sense of combine
two cards for a score:    Upon winning a trick, and before drawing from the stock, the player can
meld certain combinations of cards. [rules for two-hand pinochle in Hoyle's Games, 1907]    The rise
of the general sense of the word in English coincides with the craze for canasta, in which melding
figures. The card-playing sense is said to be apparently from German melden make known, announce,
from Old High German meldon, from Proto-Germanic *meldojan (source of Old English meldian to
declare, tell, display, proclaim), and the notion is of declaring the combination of cards. Related:
Melded; melding.


creampuff (n.)

also cream puff, by 1859 as a kind of light confection, from cream (n.) + puff (n.). In figurative
sense of weakling, sissy, it is recorded from 1935.    I remember my first campaign. My opponent
called me a cream puff. That's what he said. Well, I rushed out and got the baker's union to endorse
me. [Sen. Claiborne Pell, D-R.I., 1987]    As a salesman's word, something that is a tremendous
bargain, it is from 1940s.


pell (n.)

a parchment, mid-15c., earlier skin, hide (mid-14c.), from Anglo-French pell, Old French pel skin
(13c., Modern French peau), from Latin pellem, pellis skin, leather, parchment, hide (see film
(n.)).


mell (v.)

to mix, meddle, c.1300, mellen, from Old French meller, variant of mesler (see meddle). Related:
Melled; melling.


