penance (n.)

late 13c., religious discipline or self-mortification as a token of repentance and as atonement for
some sin, from Anglo-French penaunce, Old French peneance (12c.), from Latin p&aelig;nitentia (see
penitence). Transferred sense is recorded from c.1300.


shrift (n.)

Old English scrift confession to priest, followed by penance and absolution, verbal noun from
scrifan to impose penance, from an early Germanic borrowing of Latin scribere to write (see script
(n.)) that produced nouns for penance, confession in Old English and Scandinavian (such as Old Norse
skrjpt penance, confession), but elsewhere in Germanic is used in senses writing, scripture,
alphabet letter; see shrive. Short shrift originally was the brief time for a condemned criminal to
confess before execution (1590s); figurative extension to little or no consideration is first
attested 1814.


shrive (v.)

Old English scrifan assign, prescribe, ordain, decree; impose penance, hear confession; have regard
for, care for, apparently originally to write (strong, past tense scraf, past participle scrifen),
from Proto-Germanic *skriban (cognates: Old Saxon scriban, Old Frisian skriva write; impose penance;
Old Dutch scrivan, Dutch schrijven, German schreiben to write, draw, paint; Danish skrifte confess),
an early borrowing from Latin scribere to write (see script (n.)), which in Old English and
Scandinavian developed further to confess, hear confession.


penitentiary (n.)

early 15c., place of punishment for offenses against the church, from Medieval Latin penitentiaria,
from fem. of penitentiarius (adj.) of penance, from Latin paenitentia penitence (see penitence).
Meaning house of correction (originally an asylum for prostitutes) is from 1806, short for
penitentiary house (1776). Slang shortening pen is attested from 1884.


boot (n.2)

profit, use, Old English bot help, relief, advantage; atonement, literally a making better, from
Proto-Germanic *boto (see better (adj.)). Compare German Bu&szlig;e penance, atonement, Gothic botha
advantage. Now mostly in phrase to boot (Old English to bote).


sacrament (n.)

outward and visible sign of inward and spiritual grace, also the eucharist, c.1200, from Old French
sacrament consecration; mystery (12c., Modern French sacrement) and directly from Latin sacramentum
a consecrating (also source of Spanish sacramento, German Sakrament, etc.), from sacrare to
consecrate (see sacred); a Church Latin loan-translation of Greek mysterion (see mystery).
Meaning a holy mystery in English is from late 14c. The seven sacraments are baptism, penance,
confirmation, holy orders, the Eucharist, matrimony, and anointing of the sick (extreme unction).


script (n.)

late 14c., something written, earlier scrite (c.1300), from Old French escrit piece of writing,
written paper; credit note, IOU; deed, bond (Modern French &eacute;crit) from Latin scriptum a
writing, book; law; line, mark, noun use of neuter past participle of scribere to write, from PIE
*skribh- to cut, separate, sift (cognates: Greek skariphasthai to scratch an outline, sketch,
Lettish skripat scratch, write, Old Norse hrifa scratch), from root *(s)ker- (1) to cut (see shear
(v.)) on the notion of carving marks in stone, wood, etc.    Meaning handwriting is recorded from
1860. Theatrical use, short for manuscript, is attested from 1884. The importance of Rome to the
spread of civilization in Europe is attested by the fact that the word for write in Celtic and
Germanic (as well as Romanic) languages derives from scribere (French &eacute;crire, Irish
scriobhaim, Welsh ysgrifennu, German schreiben). The cognate Old English scrifan means to allot,
assign, decree (see shrive; also compare Old Norse skript penance) and Modern English uses write
(v.) to express this action.


