pending (prep.)

1640s, during, in the process of, preposition formed from root of French pendant during, literally
hanging, present participle of pendere to hang, to suspend (see pendant). Meaning patterned on a
secondary sense of Latin pendente not decided, literally hanging, in legal phrase pendente lite
while the suit is pending. Use of the present participle before nouns caused it to be regarded as a
preposition. As an adjective from 1797.


modus vivendi (n.)

1879, Latin, literally way of living or getting along (see modus).   Modus vivendi is any temporary
compromise that enables parties to carry on pending settlement of a dispute that would otherwise
paralyse their activities. [Fowler]


first (adj., adv.)

Old English fyrst foremost, superlative of fore; from Proto-Germanic *furisto- (cognates: Old Saxon
fuirst first, Old High German furist, Old Norse fyrstr, Danish f&oslash;rste, Old Frisian ferist,
Middle Dutch vorste prince, Dutch vorst first, German F&uuml;rst prince), superlative of
*fur-/*for-, from PIE root *per- (1) forward, through (see per).   First-class (adj.) is from 1837;
first-rate (1660s) is from classes of warships in the British navy. First aid is that given at the
scene, pending the arrival of a doctor.   First Lady as an informal title for the wife of a U.S.
president was in use by 1908, short for First lady of the land (by 1863 with reference to the
president's wife). First name is attested from mid-13c.; first-born is from mid-14c. First base a
start (1938) is a figurative use from the game of baseball.


penny (n.)

Old English pening, penig, Northumbrian penning penny, from Proto-Germanic *panninggaz (cognates:
Old Norse penningr, Swedish p&auml;nning, Danish penge, Old Frisian panning, Old Saxon pending,
Middle Dutch pennic, Dutch penning, Old High German pfenning, German Pfennig, not recorded in
Gothic, where skatts is used instead), of unknown origin.    Offa's reformed coinage on light, broad
flans is likely to have begun c.760-5 in London, with an awareness of developments in Francia and
East Anglia. ... The broad flan penny established by Offa remained the principal denomination, with
only minor changes, until the fourteenth century. [Anna Gannon, The Iconography of Early Anglo-Saxon
Coinage, Oxford, 2003]    The English coin was originally set at one-twelfth of a shilling and was
of silver, later copper, then bronze. There are two plural forms: pennies of individual coins, pence
collectively. In translations it rendered various foreign coins of small denomination, especially
Latin denarius, whence comes its abbreviation d.   As American English colloquial for cent, it is
recorded from 1889. Penny-a-liner writer for a journal or newspaper is attested from 1834. Penny
dreadful cheap and gory fiction dates from c.1870. Phrase penny-wise and pound-foolish is recorded
from c.1600. Penny-pincher miserly person is recorded from 1906 (as an adjective penny-pinching is
recorded from 1858, American English). Penny loafers attested from 1960.


