penitence (n.)

c.1200, from Old French penitence (11c.) and directly from Latin paenitentia repentance, noun of
condition from paenitentum (nominative paenitens) penitent, present participle of paenitere cause or
feel regret, probably originally is not enough, is unsatisfactory, from paene nearby, almost.


penitentiary (n.)

early 15c., place of punishment for offenses against the church, from Medieval Latin penitentiaria,
from fem. of penitentiarius (adj.) of penance, from Latin paenitentia penitence (see penitence).
Meaning house of correction (originally an asylum for prostitutes) is from 1806, short for
penitentiary house (1776). Slang shortening pen is attested from 1884.


penitent (adj.)

mid-14c., from Old French p&eacute;nitent (14c.) and directly from Latin paenitentem (see
penitence). As a noun, late 14c., from the adjective.


penitential (adj.)

c.1500, from Medieval Latin penitentialis, from Latin paenitentia repentance (see penitence).


penance (n.)

late 13c., religious discipline or self-mortification as a token of repentance and as atonement for
some sin, from Anglo-French penaunce, Old French peneance (12c.), from Latin p&aelig;nitentia (see
penitence). Transferred sense is recorded from c.1300.


impenitent (adj.)

early 15c., from Latin impaenitentem, from assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) +
paenitens (see penitence).


repentance (n.)

c.1300, from Old French repentance penitence (12c.), from present participle stem of repentir (see
repent).   Repentance goes beyond feeling to express distinct purposes of turning from sin to
righteousness; the Bible word most often translated repentance means a change of mental and
spiritual attitude toward sin. [Century Dictionary]


metanoia (n.)

1768, penitence, spiritual conversion, from Greek metanoia afterthought, repentance, from metanoein
to change one's mind or purpose, from meta- (see meta) + noein to have mental perception, from noos
mind, thought.


rue (n.2)

sorrow, repentance, Old English hreow grief, repentance, sorrow, regret, penitence, common Germanic
(Frisian rou, Middle Dutch rou, Dutch rouw, Old High German (h)riuwa, German reue), related to the
root of rue (v.).


purple (n., adj.)

Old English purpul, dissimilation (first recorded in Northumbrian, in Lindisfarne gospel) of purpure
purple dye, a purple garment, purpuren (adj.) purple, a borrowing by 9c. from Latin purpura purple
color, purple-dyed cloak, purple dye, also shellfish from which purple was made, and splendid attire
generally, from Greek porphyra purple dye, purple (see porphyry), of uncertain origin, perhaps
Semitic, originally the name for the shellfish (murex) from which it was obtained. Purpur continued
as a parallel form until 15c., and through 19c. in heraldry. As a color name, attested from early
15c. Tyrian purple, produced around Tyre, was prized as dye for royal garments.    Also the color of
mourning or penitence (especially in royalty or clergy). Rhetorical for splendid, gaudy (of prose)
from 1590s. Purple Heart, U.S. decoration for service members wounded in combat, instituted 1932;
originally a cloth decoration begun by George Washington in 1782. Hendrix' Purple Haze (1967) is
slang for LSD.


