penis (n.)

1670s, perhaps from French p&eacute;nis or directly from Latin penis penis, earlier tail, from PIE
*pes- penis (cognates: Sanskrit pasas-, Greek peos, posthe penis, probably also Old English
f&aelig;sl progeny, offspring, Old Norse f&ouml;sull, German Fasel young of animals, brood). The
proper plural is penes. The adjective is penial. In psychological writing, penis envy is attested
from 1924.


phallus (n.)

1610s, an image of the penis, from Latin phallus, from Greek phallos penis, also carving or image of
an erect penis (symbolizing the generative power in nature) used in the cult of Dionysus, from PIE
*bhel-no-, from root *bhel- (2) to blow, inflate, swell (cognates: Old Norse boli bull, Old English
bulluc little bull, and possibly Greek phalle whale; see bole). Used of the penis itself (often in
symbolic context) from 1924, originally in jargon of psychoanalysis.


choad (n.)

also chode, penis, c. 1968, U.S. teen slang, of unknown origin. Guesses include supposed Navajo
chodis penis [Cassell's Dictionary of Slang 2005], or a supposed Hindi, Bengali or Gujarati
vernacular word for copulate [New Hacker's Dictionary, 1996].


weenie (n.)

frankfurter, 1906, with slang sense of penis following soon after, from German wienerwurst Vienna
sausage (see wiener). Meaning ineffectual person, effeminate young man is slang from 1963;
pejorative sense via penis shape, or perhaps from weenie in the sense of small (see wee).


dong (n.)

penis, 1891, of unknown origin.


wang (n.)

penis, 1933, slang, probably from whangdoodle, an earlier term for gadget, thing for which the
correct name is not known. Many such words (thingy, dingus, etc.) have been used in slang for penis,
not because the actual name was unknown, but because it was unmentionable. Another possibility is
that the slang word is a variant of whang large, thick slice (1630s), which earlier was used in the
sense of thong (1530s) and is itself a variant of thwang, an alternative form of thong (see thong).
In Old English, wang meant cheek, jaw, hence wangto&#240; cheek-tooth, molar.


schlong (n.)

penis, 1969, from Yiddish shlang, literally snake.


pencil (n.)

early 14c., an artist's fine brush of camel hair, from Old French pincel artist's paintbrush (13c.,
Modern French pinceau), from Latin penicillus painter's brush, hair-pencil, literally little tail,
diminutive of peniculus brush, itself a diminutive of penis tail (see penis). Small brushes formerly
were used for writing before modern lead or chalk pencils; meaning graphite writing implement
apparently evolved late 16c. Derogatory slang pencil-pusher office worker is from 1881; pencil neck
weak person first recorded 1973.


johnson (n.)

penis, 1863, perhaps related to British slang John Thomas, which has the same meaning (1887).


pecker (n.)

one who pecks, 1690s, agent noun from peck (v.); slang sense of penis is from 1902.


myriad (n.)

1550s, from Middle French myriade and directly from Late Latin myrias (genitive myriadis) ten
thousand, from Greek myrias (genitive myriados) a number of ten thousand, countless numbers, from
myrios (plural myrioi) innumerable, countless, infinite; boundless, as a definite number, ten
thousand (the greatest number in Greek expressed by one word, Liddell &amp; Scott say), of unknown
origin; perhaps from PIE *meue- abundant (cognates: Hittite muri- cluster of grapes, Latin muto
penis, Middle Irish moth penis). Specific use is usually in translations from Greek or Latin.


rantallion (n.)

One whose scrotum is so relaxed as to be longer than his penis, i. e. whose shot pouch is longer
than the barrel of his piece. [Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, Grose, 1785]


verge (n.)

edge, rim, mid-15c., from Old French verge twig, branch; measuring rod; penis; rod or wand of office
(12c.), hence, from the last sense, scope, territory dominated (as in estre suz la verge de be under
the authority of), from Latin virga shoot, rod, stick, slender green branch, of unknown origin.
Earliest attested sense in English is now-obsolete meaning male member, penis (c. 1400). Modern
sense is from the notion of within the verge (c. 1500, also as Anglo-French dedeinz la verge), i.e.
subject to the Lord High Steward's authority (as symbolized by the rod of office), originally a
12-mile radius round the king's court. Sense shifted to the outermost edge of an expanse or area.
Meaning point at which something happens (as in on the verge of) is first attested c. 1600. A very
curious sense development. [Weekley]


cock (n.1)

male chicken, Old English cocc male bird, Old French coc (12c., Modern French coq), Old Norse kokkr,
all of echoic origin. Old English cocc was a nickname for one who strutted like a cock, thus a
common term in the Middle Ages for a pert boy, used of scullions, apprentices, servants, etc.    A
common personal name till c. 1500, it was affixed to Christian names as a pet diminutive, as in
Wilcox, Hitchcock, etc. Slang sense of penis is attested since 1610s (but compare pillicock penis,
from c. 1300); cock-teaser is from 1891. A cocker spaniel (1823) was trained to start woodcocks.
Cock-and-bull is first recorded 1620s, perhaps an allusion to Aesop's fables, with their incredible
talking animals, or to a particular story, now forgotten. French has parallel expression
coq-&agrave;-l'&acirc;ne.


arbor vitae (n.)

type of evergreen shrub, 1660s, name given by French physician and botanist Charles de
L&eacute;cluse (1525-1609), Latin, literally tree of life. Also used in late 18c. rogue's slang as a
cant word for penis.


caramba

exclamation of dismay or surprise, 1835, from Spanish, said to be a euphemism for carajo penis, from
Vulgar Latin *caraculum little arrow.


dickhead (n.)

stupid, contemptible person, by 1969, from dick in the penis sense + head.


wrinkly (adj.)

early 15c. (in reference to the penis), from wrinkle (n.) + -y (2). As teen slang noun for old
person, from 1972 (old being relative; a British reference from 1982 applies it to people in their
40s).


glans (n.)

head of the penis or clitoris, 1640s, from Latin glans acorn, also used of acorn-shaped things (see
gland).


dork (n.)

stupid person, 1967, originally U.S. student slang, perhaps from earlier meaning penis (1964),
itself probably an alteration of dick. Related: Dorky; dorkiness.


boner (n.)

blunder, 1912, baseball slang, probably from bonehead. Meaning erect penis is 1950s, from earlier
bone-on (1940s), probably a variation (with connecting notion of hardness) of hard-on (1893).


schmuck (n.)

also shmuck, contemptible person, 1892, from East Yiddish shmok, literally penis, probably from Old
Polish smok grass snake, dragon, and likely not the same word as German Schmuck jewelry, adornments,
which is related to Low German smuck supple, tidy, trim, elegant, and to Old Norse smjuga slip, step
through (see smock).    In Jewish homes, the word was regarded as so vulgar as to be taboo [Leo
Rosten, The Joys of Yiddish, 1968] and Lenny Bruce wrote that saying it on stage got him arrested on
the West Coast by a Yiddish undercover agent who had been placed in the club several nights running
to determine if my use of Yiddish terms was a cover for profanity. Euphemized as schmoe, which was
the source of Al Capp's cartoon strip creature the shmoo.    [A]dditional associative effects from
German schmuck 'jewels, decoration' cannot be excluded (cross-linguistically commonplace slang: cf.
Eng. 'family jewels') [Mark R.V. Southern, Contagious Couplings: Transmission of Expressives in
Yiddish Echo Phrases, 2005]. But the English phrase refers to the testicles and is a play on words,
the family element being the essential ones. Words for decoration seem not to be among the
productive sources of European penis slang terms.


pud (n.)

slang for penis, 1939 (in James Joyce), according to OED and DAS from pudding in the same slang
sense (1719); from the original sausage sense of pudding (q.v.).


pivot (n.)

1610s, from French pivot, from Old French pivot hinge pin, pivot (12c.), also penis, of uncertain
origin. Figurative sense of central point is recorded from 1813.


erection (n.)

mid-15c., establishment; advancement, from Late Latin erectionem (nominative erectio), noun of
action from past participle stem of erigere to set up, erect (see erect (adj.)). Meanings the
putting up (of a building, etc.), stiffening of the penis (also sometimes of the turgidity and
rigidity of the clitoris) are both from 1590s.


dip (n.)

stupid person, eccentric person, 1920s slang, perhaps a back-formation from dippy. Dipshit is an
emphatic form of dip (2); dipstick may be a euphemism or may reflect putative dipstick 'penis'
[DAS].


pizzle (n.)

penis of a bull used as a flogging instrument, 1520s, from Low German pesel or Flemish pezel,
diminutive of root of Dutch pees sinew, from Old Low German root *pisa.


rooster (n.)

1772, agent noun from roost (v.); earlier roost cock, c. 1600, in sense of the roosting bird.
Favored in the U.S. originally as a puritan alternative to cock (n.) after it had acquired the
secondary sense penis (and compare roach).


priapism (n.)

persistent erection of the penis, 1620s, from Late Latin priapismus, from Greek priapismos, from
priapizein, from Priapos (see priapic + -ism).


jockstrap (n.)

also jock-strap, supporter of the male genital organs, used in sports, 1897, with strap (n.) + jock
slang for penis c. 1650-c. 1850, probably from Jock, the nickname for John, which was used
generically for common man from c. 1500.


putz (n.)

obnoxious man, fool, 1964, from Yiddish, from German putz, literally finery, adornment, obviously
used here in an ironic sense. Attested in writing earlier in slang sense of penis (1934, in Tropic
of Cancer). A non-ironic sense is in putz Nativity display around a Christmas tree (1873), from
Pennsylvania Dutch (German), which retains the old German sense.


ithyphallic

1610s, poem in ithyphallic meter, from Greek ithyphallos phallos carried in the festivals, from
ithys straight + phallos erect penis (see phallus). As an adjective from 1795. The meter was that of
the Bacchic hymns, which were sung in the rites during which such phalloses were carried. Thus, in
Victorian times, the word also meant grossly indecent (1864).


prepuce (n.)

c. 1400, from Old French prepuce, from Latin praeputium foreskin, possibly from pr&aelig;- before
(see pre-) + *putos penis. Earlier in English as prepucy (late 14c.), directly from Latin.


dick (n.)

fellow, lad, man, 1550s, rhyming nickname for Rick, short for Richard, one of the commonest English
names, it has long been a synonym for fellow, and so most of the slang senses are probably very old,
but naturally hard to find in the surviving records. The meaning penis is attested from 1891 in
Farmer's slang dictionary (possibly British army slang). Meaning detective is recorded from 1908,
perhaps as a shortened variant of detective.


loom (n.)

weaving machine, Old English geloma utensil, tool, from ge-, perfective prefix, + -loma, of unknown
origin (compare Old English andloman (plural) apparatus, furniture). Originally implement or tool of
any kind (as in heirloom); thus, the penis (c. 1400-1600). Specific meaning a machine in which yarn
or thread is woven into fabric is from c. 1400.


foreman (n.)

early 13c., a leader, from fore- + man (n.). From 1530s as principal juror; 1570s in the sense of
principal workman. Similar formation in Dutch voorman, German Vormann, Danish formand. Also in 17c.,
a slang word for penis. Fem. form forewoman is from 1709, originally of a jury; forelady is from
1867 in reference to juries, 1888 of shops, American English.


tool (n.)

Old English tol instrument, implement used by a craftsman or laborer, weapon, from Proto-Germanic
*to(w)lam implement (cognates: Old Norse tol), from a verb stem represented by Old English tawian
prepare (see taw). The ending is the instrumental suffix -el (1). Figurative sense of person used by
another for his own ends is recorded from 1660s. Slang meaning penis first recorded 1550s.


virile (adj.)

late 15c., characteristic of a man; marked by manly force, from Middle French viril (14c.) and
directly from Latin virilis of a man, manly, worthy of a man, from vir a man, a hero, from PIE *wi-
ro- man, freeman (cognates: Sanskrit virah, Avestan vira-, Lithuanian vyras, Old Irish fer, Welsh
gwr, Gothic wair, Old English wer man). Virile member for penis is recorded from 1540s.


jack (v.)

1860, jack up hoist, raise, American English, from the noun (see jack (n.)). Figurative sense
increase (prices, etc.) is 1904, American English. Related: Jacked; jacking. Jack off (v.) to
masturbate is attested from 1916, probably from jack (n.) in the sense of penis.


hair-splitting (n.)

making over-nice distinctions, by 1739, from hair + verbal noun from split (v.). To split hairs make
over-fine distinctions is first recorded 1650s, as to cut the hair. Hair also being 18c. slang for
female pudendum, hair-splitter was noted in 1811 as slang for penis.


wiener (n.)

1900, shortening of wienerwurst (1874, American English), from German Wiener of Vienna (from Wien
Vienna, from Latin Vindo-bona; see Vienna) + Wurst sausage (see wurst). Colloquial wienie is
attested by 1911. Extensive pejorative senses developed from its penis-like shape. Wiener roast is
from 1910.


weapon (n.)

Old English w&aelig;pen instrument of fighting and defense, sword, also penis, from Proto-Germanic
*w&aelig;pnan (cognates: Old Saxon wapan, Old Norse vapn, Danish vaaben, Old Frisian wepin, Middle
Dutch wapen, Old High German wafan, German Waffe weapon), from *webno-m, of unknown origin with no
cognates outside Germanic.


queue (n.)

late 15c., band attached to a letter with seals dangling on the free end, from French queue a tail,
from Old French cue, coe tail (12c., also penis), from Latin coda (dialectal variant or alternative
form of cauda) tail, of unknown origin. Also in literal use in 16c. English, tail of a beast,
especially in heraldry. The Middle English metaphoric extension to line of dancers (c. 1500) led to
extended sense of line of people, etc. (1837). Also used 18c. in sense of braid of hair hanging down
behind (first attested 1748).


baleen (n.)

early 14c., whalebone, from Old French balaine (12c.) whale, whalebone, from Latin ballaena, from
Greek phallaina whale (apparently related to phallos swollen penis, probably because of a whale's
shape), from PIE root *bhel- (2) to blow, inflate, swell (see bole). Klein writes that the Greek to
Latin transition was through the medium of the Illyrian language, a fact which explains the
transition of Gk. -ph- into Latin -b- (instead of -p-).


Yankee Doodle (n.)

popular tune of the American Revolution, apparently written c. 1755 by British Army surgeon Dr.
Richard Schuckburgh while campaigning with Amherst's force in upper New York during the French and
Indian War. The original verses mocked the colonial troops (see Yankee) serving alongside the
regulars, and the Doodle element might have been, or hinted at, the 18c. slang term for penis. The
song naturally was popular with British troops in the colonies during the Revolutionary War, but
after the colonials began to win skirmishes with them in 1775, they took the tune as a patriotic
prize and re-worked the lyrics. The current version seems to have been written in 1776 by Edward
Bangs, a Harvard sophomore who also was a Minuteman.


tube (n.)

1610s, from Middle French tube (15c.), from Latin tubus tube, pipe, of unknown origin. The London
subway was christened the Twopenny Tube (H.D. Browne, in the Londoner of June 30, 1900) before it
even opened; tube for cylindrical railway tunnel is attested from 1847. The meaning TV as a medium
is from 1959, short for cathode ray tube or picture tube. Tube top as a women's clothing style is
attested from 1972. Tube steak is attested from 1963 as frankfurter, slang meaning penis is recorded
by mid-1980s.


masturbation (n.)

1711 (earlier as mastupration, 1620s), from French masturbation and directly from Modern Latin
masturbationem (nominative masturbatio), noun of action from past participle stem of Latin
masturbari to masturbate. The long-standing speculation is that this Latin word is altered (probably
by influence of turbare to stir up) from *manstuprare, from manu, ablative of manus hand (see
manual) + stuprare defile (oneself), from stuprum defilement, dishonor, related to stupere to be
stunned, stupefied (see stupid). But perhaps the first element represents an unattested *mazdo-
penis [OED]. An earlier technical word for this was Onanism. Related: Masturbational.


rod (n.)

Old English rodd a rod, pole, which is probably cognate with Old Norse rudda club, from Proto-
Germanic *rudd- stick, club, from PIE *reudh- to clear land.    As a long, tapering elastic pole for
fishing, from mid-15c. Figurative sense of offshoot (mid-15c.) led to Biblical meaning scion, tribe.
As an instrument of punishment, attested from mid-12c.; also used figuratively for any sort of
correction or punishment, but the basic notion is of beating someone with a stick.    As a unit of
measure (5&#189; yards or 16&#189; feet, also called perch or pole) first attested mid-15c., from
the stick used to measure it off. As a measure of area, a square perch, from late 15c., the usual
measure in brickwork. Meaning light-sensitive cell in a retina is from 1866, so-called for its
shape. Slang meaning penis is recorded from 1902; that of gun, revolver is from 1903.


bole (n.)

early 14c., from Old Norse bolr tree trunk, from Proto-Germanic *bulas (cognates: Middle Dutch bolle
trunk of a tree), from PIE *bhel- (2) to blow, inflate, swell (cognates: Greek phyllon leaf, phallos
swollen penis; Latin flos flower, florere to blossom, flourish, folium leaf; Old Prussian balsinis
cushion; Old Norse belgr bag, bellows; Old English bolla pot, cup, bowl; Old Irish bolgaim I swell,
blath blossom, flower, bolach pimple, bolg bag; Breton bolc'h flax pod; Serbian buljiti to stare, be
bug-eyed; Serbo-Croatian blazina pillow).


goose (v.)

jab in the rear, c. 1880, from goose (n.), possibly from resemblance of the upturned thumb to a
goose's beak, or from the notion of creating nervous excitement. Related: Goosed; goosing. In 19c.
theatrical slang, to be goosed meant to be hissed (by 1818). A broad range of sexual slang senses
historically cluster around goose and gooseberry; goose and duck was rhyming slang for fuck; Farmer
identifies Winchester goose as a woman; whence, by implication, the sexual favor, and goose as a
verb to go wenching, to womanize, also to possess a woman. He also has goose-grease for a woman's
sexual juices, while gooser and goose's neck meant the penis. Gooseberries (they are hairy) was
testicles, and gooseberry pudding a woman.


