penitential (adj.)

c.1500, from Medieval Latin penitentialis, from Latin paenitentia repentance (see penitence).


sackcloth (n.)

penitential or grieving garb, late 13c., literally cloth of which sacks are made, from sack (n.1) +
cloth. In the Biblical sense it was of goats' or camels' hair, the coarsest possible clothing.


Miserere (n.)

51st Psalm (one of the Penitential Psalms), 13c., from Miserere mei Deus Have mercy upon me, O God,
opening line, from Latin miserere feel pity, have compassion, commiserate, imperative of misereri to
have mercy, from miser (see miser). From 15c.-17c. used as an informal measure of time, the time it
takes to recite the Miserere. Also in miserere mei kind of severe colic ('iliac passion')
accompanied by excruciating cramps and vomiting of excrement (1610s), literally have mercy on me.


discipline (n.)

early 13c., penitential chastisement; punishment, from Old French descepline (11c.) discipline,
physical punishment; teaching; suffering; martyrdom, and directly from Latin disciplina instruction
given, teaching, learning, knowledge, also object of instruction, knowledge, science, military
discipline, from discipulus (see disciple (n.)).    Sense of treatment that corrects or punishes is
from notion of order necessary for instruction. The Latin word is glossed in Old English by
&thorn;eodscipe.  Meaning branch of instruction or education is first recorded late 14c. Meaning
military training is from late 15c.; that of orderly conduct as a result of training is from c.1500.


watch (n.)

Old English w&aelig;cce a watching, state of being or remaining awake, wakefulness; also act or
practice of refraining from sleep for devotional or penitential purposes; from w&aelig;ccan (see
watch (v.)). From c.1200 as one of the periods into which the night is divided, in reference to
ancient times translating Latin vigilia, Greek phylake, Hebrew ashmoreth.    The Hebrews divided the
night into three watches, the Greeks usually into four (sometimes five), the Romans (followed by the
Jews in New Testament times) into four. [OED]   <hr />   On &#254;is niht be&#240; fowuer niht
wecches: Biforen euen &#254;e bilimpe&#240; to children; Mid-niht &#240;e bilimpe&#240; to
frumberdligges; hanecrau &#254;e bilimpe&#240; &#254;owuene men; morgewile to alde men. [Trinity
Homilies, c.1200]     From mid-13c. as a shift of guard duty; an assignment as municipal watchman;
late 13c. as person or group obligated to patrol a town (especially at night) to keep order, etc.
Also in Middle English, the practice of remaining awake at night for purposes of debauchery and
dissipation; hence wacches of wodnesse late-night revels and debauchery. The alliterative
combination watch and ward preserves the old distinction of watch for night-time municipal patrols
and ward for guarding by day; in combination, they meant continuous vigilance.    Military sense of
military guard, sentinel is from late 14c. General sense of careful observation, watchfulness,
vigilance is from late 14c.; to keep watch is from late 14c. Meaning period of time in which a
division of a ship's crew remains on deck is from 1580s. The meaning small timepiece is from 1580s,
developing from that of a clock to wake up sleepers (mid-15c.).


