perennial (adj.)

1640s, evergreen, formed in English from Latin perennis lasting through the year (or years), from
per- through (see per) + annus year (see annual). Botanical sense of Remaining alive through a
number of years is attested from 1670s; figurative meaning of enduring, permanent is from 1750.
Related: Perennially. For vowel change, see biennial. The noun meaning a perennial plant is from
1763.


Philadelphia

city in Pennsylvania, U.S., from Greek, taken by William Penn to mean brotherly love, from philos
loving (see -phile) + adelphos brother (see Adelphia). Also the name recalls that of the ancient
city in Lydia, mentioned in the New Testament, which was so called in honor of Attalos II
Philadelphos, 2c B.C.E. king of Pergamon, who founded it. His title is said to have meant loving the
brethren. Philadelphia lawyer clever, shrewd attorney attested from 1788 in London, said originally
to have been applied to Andrew Hamilton, who obtained the famous acquittal of J.P. Zenger on libel
charges in 1735.    [C]ricket and coaching were after all popular in their day in places besides
Philadelphia. It was merely that Philadelphia kept on with them longer than most places. This is a
perennial Philadelphia trick, and gives to Philadelphia a sort of perpetual feeling of loss.
Philadelphians are always just now getting rid of things that are picturesque, like those gas lamps
on the streets, only because everybody else got rid of them long ago. [Nathaniel Burt, The Perennial
Philadelphians, 1963]


Ethan

masc. proper name, from Hebrew ethan strong, permanent, perennial, ever-flowing (of rivers).


kudzu (n.)

1893, from Japanese kuzu. Perennial climbing plant native to Japan and China, introduced in U.S.
southeast as forage (1920s) and to stop soil erosion (1930s) and quickly got out of hand.


rue (n.1)

perennial evergreen shrub, late 14c., from Old French rue (13c.), earlier rude, from Latin ruta rue,
probably from Greek rhyte, of uncertain etymology, originally a Peloponnesian word. The bitter taste
of its leaves led to many punning allusions to rue (n.2.).


sorrel (n.)

small perennial plant, late 14c., from Old French surele (12c., Modern French surelle), from sur
sour, from Frankish *sur or some other Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic *sura- sour (cognates:
Old High German, Old English sur sour; see sour (adj.)). So called for the taste of its leaves.


tansy (n.)

perennial herb native to northern Eurasia, mid-13c., from Old French tanesie (13c., Modern French
tanaisie), from Vulgar Latin *tanaceta (neuter plural mistaken for fem. singular), from Late Latin
tanacetum wormwood, from shortened form of Greek athanasia immortality, from athanatos immortal,
from a- not, privative prefix, + thanatos death (see thanatology). So called probably for its
persistence. English folklore associates it with pregnancy, either as an aid to contraception or to
provoke miscarriage.


Met (n.)

1879 as colloquial shortening of Metropolitan (n.) member of the New York Metropolitan Base-Ball
Club.    THE baseball season has opened, and along with the twittering of the birds, the budding of
the trees, and the clattering of the truck, comes the news that the Mets were beaten yesterday 17 to
5. It is an infallible sign of spring when the Mets are beaten 17 to 5, and we invariably put on our
thinner clothing when we read that refreshing, though perennial news in the papers. [Life, May 12,
1887]    Used variously to abbreviate other proper names beginning with Metropolitan, such as
Metropolitan Museum of Art (N.Y.), by 1919; Metropolitan Railway (stock), by 1890; Metropolitan
Opera Company (N.Y.), by 1922. Related: Mets.


carnation (n.)

Dianthus Caryophyllus, commonly also called pink, herbaceous perennial flowering plant native to
southern Europe and abundant in Normandy, 1530s, of uncertain origin. The early forms are confused;
perhaps (on evidence of early spellings) it is a corruption of coronation, from the flower's being
used in chaplets or from the toothed crown-like look of the petals.    Or it might be called for its
pinkness and derive from Middle French carnation person's color or complexion (15c.), which probably
is from Italian dialectal carnagione flesh color, from Late Latin carnationem (nominative carnatio)
fleshiness, from Latin caro flesh (see carnage). This carnation had been borrowed separately into
English as color of human flesh (1530s) and as an adjective meaning flesh-colored (1560s; the
earliest use of the word in English was to mean the incarnation of Christ, mid-14c.). OED points out
that not all the flowers are this color.


main line (n.)

principal line of a railway, 1841; meaning affluent area of residence is by 1917, originally (with
capitals) that of Philadelphia, from the main line of the Pennsylvania Railroad which added local
stops to a string of backwater towns west of the city late 19c. that helped turn them into
fashionable suburbs.    The Main Line, Philadelphia's most famous suburban district, was
deliberately conceived in the 1870's and 1880's by the [Pennsylvania] Railroad, which built high-
toned housing developments, ran hotels, more or less forced its executives to plunk their estates
out there, and created a whole series of somewhat spurious Welsh towns along the railroad tracks.
... Now everybody assumes these all date from 1682, like the Robertses; but as Chestnut Hill people
like to say, nobody but Welsh peasants lived on the Main Line till the Railroad built it up.
[Nathaniel Burt, The Perennial Philadelphians, 1963]    The original station stops were, in order
out from the city, Overbrook, Merion, Narberth, Wynnewood, Ardmore, Haverford, Bryn Mawr, Paoli. The
train line for commuters along it is the Paoli Local.


