periphery (n.)

late 14c., atmosphere around the earth, from Old French periferie (Modern French
p&#233;riph&#233;rie), from Medieval Latin periferia, from Late Latin peripheria, from Greek
peripheria circumference, outer surface, line round a circular body, literally a carrying around,
from peripheres rounded, moving round, revolving, peripherein carry or move round, from peri- round
about (see peri-) + pherein to carry (see infer). Meaning outside boundary of a surface attested in
English from 1570s; general sense of boundary is from 1660s.


circumference (n.)

late 14c., from Latin circumferentia, neuter plural of circumferens, present participle of
circumferre to lead around, take around, carry around, from circum around (see circum-) + ferre to
carry (see infer). A loan-translation of Greek periphereia periphery, the line round a circular
body, literally a carrying round (see periphery). Related: Circumferential.


pi (n.)

Greek letter, from Hebrew, literally little mouth. As the name of the mathematical constant, from
1841 in English, used in Latin 1748 by Swiss mathematician Leonhart Euler (1707-1783), as an
abbreviation of Greek periphereia periphery. For the meaning printer's term for mixed type, see pie
(3).


peripheral (adj.)

1803, from periphery + -al (1). An earlier formation was peripherial (1670s). Related: Peripherally.
As a noun, peripherals, peripheral devices of a computer, is from 1966.


centralize (v.)

1795, to bring to a center; 1800, come to a center, from central + -ize, on model of French
centraliser (1790). A word from the French Revolution. Related: Centralized; centralizing.
Government should have a central point throughout its whole periphery. The state of the monthly
expences amounted to four hundred millions; but within these seven months, it is reduced to one
hundred and eighty millions. Such is the effect of the centralization of government; and the more we
centralize it, the more we shall find our expenses decrease. [Saint-Just, Discourse on the State of
the Finances]


