pernicious (adj.)

early 15c., from Middle French pernicios (13c., Modern French pernicieux) and directly from Latin
perniciosus destructive, from pernicies destruction, death, ruin, from per- completely (see per) +
necis violent death, murder, related to necare to kill, nocere to hurt, injure, harm, noxa harm,
injury (see noxious). Related: Perniciously; perniciousness.


niggardly (adj.)

1560s, from niggard + -ly (1).    It was while giving a speech in Washington, to a very
international audience, about the British theft of the Elgin marbles from the Parthenon. I described
the attitude of the current British authorities as niggardly. Nobody said anything, but I privately
resolved -- having felt the word hanging in the air a bit -- to say parsimonious from then on.
[Christopher Hitchens, The Pernicious Effects of Banning Words, Slate.com, Dec. 4, 2006]    As an
adverb from 1520s. Related: Niggardliness.


pestiferous (adj.)

mid-15c., mischievous, pernicious, figurative use of Latin pestiferus that brings plague or
destruction, variant of pestifer bringing plague, destructive, noxious, from pestis plague (see
pest) + ferre carry (see infer). Related: Pestiferously; pestiferousness.


vicious (adj.)

late 14c., unwholesome, impure, of the nature of vice, wicked, corrupting, pernicious, harmful; of a
text, erroneous, corrupt, from Anglo-French vicious, Old French vicios wicked, cunning, underhand;
defective, illegal (Modern French vicieux), from Latin vitiosus (Medieval Latin vicious) faulty,
full of faults, defective, corrupt; wicked, depraved, from vitium fault (see vice (n.1)).    Meaning
inclined to be savage or dangerous is first recorded 1711 (originally of animals, especially
horses); that of full of spite, bitter, severe is from 1825. In law, marred by some inherent fault
(late 14c.), hence also this sense in logic (c.1600), as in vicious circle in reasoning (c.1792,
Latin circulus vitiosus), which was given a general sense of a situation in which action and
reaction intensify one another by 1839. Related: Viciously (mid-14c., sinfully); viciousness.


