perpetual (adj.)

mid-14c., from Old French perpetuel without end (12c.) and directly from Latin perpetualis
universal, in Medieval Latin permanent, from perpetuus continuous, universal, from perpetis,
genitive of Old Latin perpes lasting, probably from per- through + root of petere to seek, go to,
aim at (see petition (n.)). Related: Perpetually. Perpetual motion is attested from 1590s.


perpetuous (adj.)

perpetual, 1610s, from Latin perpetuus continuous, unbroken, uninterrupted (see perpetual).


perpetuate (v.)

1520s, a back-formation from perpetuation or else from Latin perpetuatus, past participle of
perpetuare to make perpetual, from perpetuus (see perpetual). Related: Perpetuated; Perpetuating.


Cimmerian (adj.)

late 16c., pertaining to the Cimmerii, an ancient nomadic people who, according to Herodotus,
inhabited the region around the Crimea, and who, according to Assyrian sources, overran Asia Minor
7c. B.C.E.; from Latin Cimmerius, from Greek Kimmerios. Homer described their land as a place of
perpetual mist and darkness beyond the ocean, but whether he had in mind the same people Herodotus
did, or any real place, is unclear.


perdurable (adj.)

mid-13c. (implied in perdurably), from Old French pardurable eternal, everlasting, perpetual (12c.),
from Late Latin perdurabilis, from perdurare, from per-, intensive prefix, + durare to endure (see
endure).


perpetuity (n.)

late 14c., from Old French perpetuit&eacute; permanence, duration (13c., Modern French
perp&eacute;tuit&eacute;) and directly from Latin perpetuitatem (nominative perpetuitas)
uninterrupted duration, continuity, continuous succession, from perpetuus (see perpetual).


Philadelphia

city in Pennsylvania, U.S., from Greek, taken by William Penn to mean brotherly love, from philos
loving (see -phile) + adelphos brother (see Adelphia). Also the name recalls that of the ancient
city in Lydia, mentioned in the New Testament, which was so called in honor of Attalos II
Philadelphos, 2c B.C.E. king of Pergamon, who founded it. His title is said to have meant loving the
brethren. Philadelphia lawyer clever, shrewd attorney attested from 1788 in London, said originally
to have been applied to Andrew Hamilton, who obtained the famous acquittal of J.P. Zenger on libel
charges in 1735.    [C]ricket and coaching were after all popular in their day in places besides
Philadelphia. It was merely that Philadelphia kept on with them longer than most places. This is a
perennial Philadelphia trick, and gives to Philadelphia a sort of perpetual feeling of loss.
Philadelphians are always just now getting rid of things that are picturesque, like those gas lamps
on the streets, only because everybody else got rid of them long ago. [Nathaniel Burt, The Perennial
Philadelphians, 1963]


grave (n.)

Old English gr&aelig;f grave, ditch, cave, from Proto-Germanic *graban (cognates: Old Saxon graf,
Old Frisian gref, Old High German grab grave, tomb; Old Norse gr&ouml;f cave, Gothic graba ditch),
from PIE root *ghrebh- (2) to dig, to scratch, to scrape (source also of Old Church Slavonic grobu
grave, tomb); related to Old English grafan to dig (see grave (v.)).    The normal mod.
representation of OE. gr&aelig;f would be graff; the ME. disyllable grave, from which the standard
mod. form descends, was prob. due to the especially frequent occurrence of the word in the dat.
(locative) case. [OED]    From Middle Ages to 17c., they were temporary, crudely marked repositories
from which the bones were removed to ossuaries after some years and the grave used for a fresh
burial. Perpetual graves became common from c.1650. To make (someone) turn in his grave behave in
some way that would have offended the dead person is first recorded 1888.


long (adj.)

that extends considerably from end to end, Old English lang long, from Proto-Germanic *langgaz
(cognates: Old Frisian and Old Saxon lang, Old High German and German lang, Old Norse langr, Middle
Dutch lanc, Dutch lang, Gothic laggs long).    The Germanic words are perhaps from PIE *dlonghos-
(cognates: Latin longus, Old Persian darga-, Persian dirang, Sanskrit dirghah, Greek dolikhos long,
Greek endelekhes perpetual, Latin indulgere to indulge), from root *del- long.    The adverb is from
Old English lange, longe, from the adjective. No longer not as formerly is from c.1300; to be not
long for this world soon to die is from 1714.    The word illustrates the Old English tendency for
short a to become short o before -n- (also retained in bond/band and West Midlands dialectal lond
from land and hond from hand).   Long vowels (c.1000) originally were pronounced for an extended
time. Sporting long ball is from 1744, originally in cricket. Long jump as a sporting event is
attested from 1864. A ship's long-boat so called from 1510s. Long knives, name Native Americans gave
to white settlers (originally in Virginia/Kentucky) is from 1774.  Long in the tooth (1841 of
persons) is from horses showing age by recession of gums. Long time no see, imitative of American
Indian speech, is first recorded 1900. To be long on something, have a lot of it, is from 1900,
American English slang.


