personification (n.)

1755, noun of action from personify. Sense of embodiment of a quality in a person is attested from
1807.


Jeeves

personification of the perfect valet, 1930, from character in P.G. Wodehouse's novels.


impersonation (n.)

1800, personification; 1825 as an acting of a part or character; noun of action from impersonate
(v.).


braggadocio (n.)

Spenser's coinage, 1590, as a name for his personification of vainglory, from brag, with
augmentative ending by analogy to the Italian words then in vogue in England. In general use by 1594
for an empty swaggerer; of the talk of such persons, from 1734.


reaper (n.)

Old English ripere, agent noun from reap (v.). As the name of a personification of death, from 1839.


Ivan

masc. proper name, from Russian, literally John, from Greek Ioannes John. As the personification of
Russia, or the typical name for a Russian man (originally a Russian soldier), attested from 1870.


Endymion

beautiful youth loved by Moon-goddess Selene, from Greek, perhaps literally diver, plunger, from
endyein to enter into, sink into, plunge, dive, which was used in reference to the sun or stars
setting into the sea. On this theory, he originally was a solar deity, a personification of the
setting sun.


Cronus

from Greek Kronos, youngest of the first generation of Titans, and their leader; of uncertain
origin, but probably not related to Khronos, personification of time.


Marianne

fem. proper name, from French, a variant of Marian; sometimes anglicized as Mary Anne. Name of a
republican secret society formed in France in 1851, hence personification of the French Republic.


simpleton (n.)

1640s, probably a jocular formation from simple and -ton, suffix extracted from surnames. Compare
skimmington, personification of an ill-used spouse, c.1600.


jackanapes (n.)

mid-15c., a monkey, also an impertinent, conceited fellow; apparently from Jack of Naples, but
whether this is some specific personification or folk etymology of jack (n.) + ape is unknown. See
note in OED.


Momus (n.)

humorously disagreeable person, 1560s, from Latin, from Greek Momos, nme of the god of ridicule and
sarcasm (Greek momos, literally blame, ridicule, disgrace, of unknown origin); also used in English
as personification of fault-finding and captious criticism.


Mammon (n.)

personification of wealth, mid-14c., from Late Latin mammona, from Greek mamonas, from Aramaic
mamona, mamon riches, gain; left untranslated in Greek New Testament (e.g. Matt. vi:24, Luke
xvi:9-13) retained in the Vulgate, and regarded mistakenly by medieval Christians as the name of a
demon.


Juventus

Roman god of youth, personification of iuventas youth, from iuvenis a young person (see young).


Pan

Arcadian shepherd god with upper body of a man and horns and lower part like a goat, late 14c., a
god of the woods and fields, from Latin, from Greek Pan. Klein says perhaps cognate with Sanskrit
pusan, a Vedic god, guardian and multiplier of cattle and other human possessions, literally
nourisher. Similarity to pan all (see pan-) led to his being regarded as a personification of
nature. Pan-pipe, upon which he supposedly played, is attested from 1820.


tom-fool (n.)

also tom-fool, buffoon, clown, 1640s, from Middle English Thom Foole, personification of a mentally
deficient man (mid-14c.), see Tom + fool (n.).


barleycorn (n.)

late 14c., from barley + corn (n.). Perhaps to distinguish the barley plant or the grain from its
products. In Britain and U.S., the grain is used mainly to prepare liquor, hence personification as
John Barleycorn (1620) in popular ballad, and many now-obsolete figures of speech, such as to wear a
barley cap (16c.) to be drunk.


Cupid

Roman god of passionate love, late 14c., from Latin Cupido, personification of cupido desire, love,
from cupere to desire (see cupidity). Identified with Greek Eros. Cupid's bow  as a shape,
especially of lips, is from 1858.


Favonius

personification of the west wind in Roman mythology, OED says from Latin favere to favor; Klein says
by dissimilation from *fovonius, literally the warming wind, from fovere to warm (see fever). This
is the source (via Old High German phonno, 10c., via Vulgar Latin contraction *faonius) of German
F&ouml;hn warm, dry wind blowing down Alpine valleys.


harmony (n.)

late 14c., from Old French armonie harmony, also the name of a musical instrument (12c.), from Latin
harmonia, from Greek harmonia agreement, concord of sounds, also as a proper name, the
personification of music, literally means of joining, used of ship-planks, etc., also settled
government, order, related to harmos fastenings of a door; shoulder, from PIE *ar-ti-, from *ar- to
fit together (see arm (n.1)). Musical sense is oldest in English; that of agreement of feeling,
concord is from late 14c.


Gaia

Earth as a goddess, from Greek Gaia, spouse of Uranus, mother of the Titans, personification of gaia
earth, as opposed to heaven, land, as opposed to sea, a land, country, soil, a collateral form of ge
(Dorian ga) earth, of unknown origin, perhaps pre-Indo-European. The Roman equivalent goddess of the
earth was Tellus (see tellurian), sometimes used in English poetically or rhetorically for Earth
personified or the Earth as a planet.


nemesis

1570s, Nemesis, Greek goddess of vengeance, personification of divine wrath, from Greek nemesis just
indignation, righteous anger, literally distribution (of what is due), related to nemein distribute,
allot, apportion one's due, from PIE root *nem- to divide, distribute, allot, to take (cognates: Old
English, Gothic niman to take, German nehmen; see nimble). With a lower-case -n-, in the sense of
retributive justice, attested from 1590s. General sense of anything by which it seems one must be
defeated is 20c.


Laurence

masc. proper name, from Old French Lorenz (French Laurent), from Latin Laurentius, literally of
Laurentum, a maritime town in Latium, literally town of bay trees, from laurus (see laurel). The
Italian form is Lorenzo. A popular given name in the Middle Ages, as a surname it is attested in
England from mid-12c. Larkin is a pet-form. For some reason, the name since at least 18c. has been
the personification of indolence (compare German der faule Lenz Lazy Lawrence). But in Scotland, the
pet form Lowrie has been used for a fox (c.1500), also for a crafty person (1560s).


Columbia

poetic name for United States of America, earlier for the British colonies there, 1730s, also the
nation's female personification, from name of Christopher Columbus (also see Colombia) with Latin
country ending -ia. A popular name for places and institutions in the U.S. in the post-Revolutionary
years, when former tributes to king and crown were out of fashion: such as Columbia University (New
York, U.S.) founded in 1754 as King's College; re-named 1784. Also District of Columbia (1791, as
Territory of Columbia); Hail, Columbia (Joseph Hopkinson, 1798), Barlow's Columbiad (1809).


chimera (n.)

fabulous monster, late 14c., from Old French chimere or directly from Medieval Latin chimera, from
Latin Chimaera, from Greek khimaira, name of a mythical creature, slain by Bellerophon, with a
lion's head, a goat's body, and a serpent's tail (supposedly personification of snow or winter);
literally year-old she-goat (masc. khimaros), from kheima winter season (see hibernation).
Figurative meaning wild fantasy first recorded 1580s in English (attested 13c. in French).Beestis
clepid chymeres, that han a part of ech beest, and suche ben not, no but oonly in opynyoun. [Wyclif,
Prologue]


Peoria

small city in Illinois, U.S., originally the name of a subdivision of the Miami/Illinois people
(1673), from native /peewaareewa/. Their own name is said to mean carriers. The place name also is
found in Oklahoma and Iowa, but it is the Illinois city that has been proverbially regarded as the
typical measure of U.S. cultural and intellectual standards at least since Ambrose Bierce (c.1890).
Also the butt of baseball player jokes (c.1920-40, when it was part of the St. Louis Cardinals farm
system) and popularized in the catchphrase It'll play in Peoria (often negative), meaning the
average American will approve, which was popular in the Nixon White House (1969-74) but seems to
have had a vaudeville origin. Personification in little old lady in Peoria is said to be from Harold
Ross of the New Yorker. Peoria's rivals as embodiment of U.S. small city values and standards
include Dubuque, Iowa; Hoboken and Hackensack, N.J.; Oakland (Gertrude Stein: When you get there,
there isn't any there there) and Burbank, Calif., and the entire state of North Dakota.


fame (n.)

early 13c., character attributed to someone; late 13c., celebrity, renown, from Old French fame
fame, reputation, renown, rumor, from Latin fama talk, rumor, report, reputation, from PIE root
*bha- (2) to speak, tell, say (cognates: Sanskrit bhanati speaks; Latin fari to say, fabula
narrative, account, tale, story; Armenian ban, bay word, term; Old Church Slavonic bajati to talk,
tell; Old English boian to boast, ben prayer, request; Greek pheme talk, phone voice, sound, phanai
to speak; Old Irish bann law).    The goddess Fama was the personification of rumor in Roman
mythology. The Latin derivative fabulare was the colloquial word for speak, talk since the time of
Plautus, whence Spanish hablar.    I've always been afraid I was going to tap the world on the
shoulder for 20 years, and when it finally turned around I was going to forget what I had to say.
[Tom Waits, Playboy magazine interview, March, 1988]


Hesperus

late 14c., poetic for the evening star, from Latin Hesperus, from Greek hesperos (aster) western
(star), from PIE *wes-pero- evening, night (see vesper). Hence also Hesperides (1590s), from Greek,
daughters of the West, the nymphs (variously numbered but originally three) who tended the garden
with the golden apples. Their name has been mistakenly transferred to the garden itself.    The
Hesperides were daughters of Atlas, an enormous giant, who, as the ancients believed, stood upon the
western confines of the earth, and supported the heavens on his shoulders. Their mother was
Hesperis, a personification of the region of the West, where the sun continued to shine after he had
set on Greece, and where, as travellers told, was an abundance of choice delicious fruits, which
could only have been produced by a special divine influence. The Gardens of the Hesperides with the
golden apples were believed to exist in some island in the ocean, or, as it was sometimes thought,
in the islands on the north or west coast of Africa. They were far-famed in antiquity; for it was
there that springs of nectar flowed by the couch of Zeus, and there that the earth displayed the
rarest blessings of the gods; it was another Eden. As knowledge increased with regard to western
lands, it became necessary to move this paradise farther and farther out into the Western Ocean.
[Alexander Murray, Manual of Mythology, 1888]


