persistent (adj.)

1723, from persistence or from Latin persistentem (nominative persistens), present participle of
persistere (see persist). Related: Persistently.


persistence (n.)

1540s, from Middle French persistance, from persistant lasting, enduring, permanent, from Latin
persistentem (nominative persistens), present participle of persistere (see persist). Often spelled
persistance 16c. Related: Persistency.


persist (v.)

1530s, from Middle French persister (14c.), from Latin persistere abide, continue steadfastly, from
per- thoroughly (see per) + sistere come to stand, cause to stand still (see assist). Related:
Persisted; persisting.


hang in (v.)

persist in spite of adversity, 1969, see hang (v.) + in.


soldier (v.)

to serve as a soldier, 1640s, from soldier (n.). Related: Soldiered; soldiering. To soldier on
persist doggedly is attested from 1954.


insist (v.)

1580s, from Latin insistere persist, dwell upon, stand upon, from in- upon (see in- (2)) + sistere
take a stand (see assist). Perhaps in some cases a back-formation from insistence. Related:
Insisted; insisting.


obstinate (adj.)

mid-14c., from Latin obstinatus resolute, resolved, determined, inflexible, stubborn, past
participle of obstinare persist, stand stubbornly, set one's mind on, from ob by (see ob-) + stinare
(related to stare stand) from PIE *ste-no-, from root *sta- to stand (see stet). Related:
Obstinately.


persevere (v.)

mid-14c., from Old French perseverer continue, persevere, endure and directly from Latin perseverare
continue steadfastly, persist, from persevereus very strict, earnest, from per- very (see per) +
severus strict (see severity). Related: Persevered; persevering.


obdurate (adj.)

mid-15c., stubborn; hardened, from Latin obduratus hardened, past participle of obdurare be hard,
hold out, persist, endure, from ob against (see ob-) + durare harden, render hard, from durus hard
(see endure). Related: Obdurately.


kike (n.)

derogatory slang for a Jew, by 1901, American English; early evidence supports the belief that it
was used at first among German-American Jews in reference to newcomers from Eastern Europe, perhaps
because the names of the latter ended in -ki or -ky.    There is no charity organization of any kind
here [a small city in Pennsylvania] and, what is sadder to relate, the Jews in this city will not
form one; that is, if the present temper of the people can be used as a criterion. The German Jews
are bitterly opposed to the Kikes, as they persist in calling the Russian Jews .... [Report of the
National Conference of Jewish Charities in the United States, Cleveland, 1912]    Philip Cowen,
first editor of The American Hebrew, suggests a source in Yiddish kikel circle. According to him,
Jewish immigrants, ignorant of writing with the Latin alphabet, signed their entry forms with a
circle, eschewing the X as a sign of Christianity. On this theory, Ellis Island immigration
inspectors began calling such people kikels, and the term shortened as it passed into general use.


live (v.)

Old English lifian (Anglian), libban (West Saxon) to be, to live, have life; to experience, also to
supply oneself with food, to pass life (in some condition), from Proto-Germanic *liben (cognates:
Old Norse lifa to live, remain, Old Frisian libba, German leben, Gothic liban to live), from PIE
root *leip- to remain, continue (source also of Greek liparein to persist, persevere; see leave).
Meaning to make a residence, dwell is from c.1200. Related: Lived; living.According to the Dutch
Prouerbe ... Leuen ende laetan leuen, To liue and to let others liue. [Malynes, 1622]To live it up
live gaily and extravagantly is from 1903. To live up to act in accordance with is 1690s, from
earlier live up live on a high (moral or mental) level (1680s). To live (something) down outwear
(some slander or embarrassment) is from 1842. To live with cohabit as husband and wife is attested
from 1749; sense of to put up with is attested from 1937. Expression live and learn is attested from
c.1620.


H

the pronunciation aitch was in Old French (ache name of the letter H), and is from a presumed Late
Latin *accha (compare Italian effe, elle, emme), with the central sound approximating the value of
the letter when it passed from Roman to Germanic, where it at first represented a strong, distinctly
aspirated -kh- sound close to that in Scottish loch. In earlier Latin the letter was called ha.
In Romanic languages, the sound became silent in Late Latin and was omitted in Old French and
Italian, but it was restored in Middle English spelling in words borrowed from French, and often
later in pronunciation, too. Thus Modern English has words ultimately from Latin with missing -h-
(as in able, from Latin habile); with a silent -h- (as in heir,  hour); with a formerly silent -h-
now often vocalized (as in humble, humor, herb); and even a few with an excrescent -h- fitted in
confusion to words that never had one (as in hostage, hermit).    Relics of the formerly unvoiced
-h- persist in pedantic insistence on an historical (object) and in obsolete mine host. The use in
digraphs (as in -sh-, -th-) goes back to the ancient Greek alphabet, which used it in -ph-, -th-,
-kh- until -H- took on the value of a long e and the digraphs acquired their own characters. The
letter passed into Roman use before this evolution, and thus retained there more of its original
Semitic value.


