persevere (v.)

mid-14c., from Old French perseverer continue, persevere, endure and directly from Latin perseverare
continue steadfastly, persist, from persevereus very strict, earnest, from per- very (see per) +
severus strict (see severity). Related: Persevered; persevering.


perseveration (n.)

early 15c., duration, quality of persisting; will to persevere, from Old French perseveracion
persistence, stubbornness (13c.) and directly, from Latin perseverationem (nominative perseveratio),
noun of action from past participle stem of perseverare (see persevere). Psychological sense (1915)
is from German.


sticktoitiveness (n.)

by 1971, from phrase stick to it persevere.


verbarian (n.)

word-coiner, 1873, from Latin verbum word (see verb) + -arian. Coleridge (or the friend he was
quoting) had used it earlier as an adjective, and with a different sense, in wishing for: a
verbarian Attorney-General, authorised to bring informations ex officio against the writer or editor
of any work in extensive circulation, who, after due notice issued, should persevere in misusing a
word (1830).


perseverant (adj.)

mid-14c. (implied in perseverantly), from Middle French pers&eacute;v&eacute;rant (12c.), present
participle of pers&eacute;v&eacute;rer (see persevere).


perseverance (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French perseverance persistence, endurance (12c., Modern French
pers&eacute;v&eacute;rance) and directly from Latin perseverantia steadfastness, constancy, from
perseverantem (nominative perseverans), from perseverare (see persevere).


maintain (v.)

mid-13c., to practice habitually, from Anglo-French meintenir (Old French maintenir, 12c.) keep (a
wife), sustain; persevere in, practice continually, from Latin manu tenere hold in the hand, from
manu, ablative of manus hand (see manual) + tenere to hold (see tenet). Meaning to carry on, keep up
is from mid-14c.; that of to keep oneself, to support is from late 14c. Sense of to defend in speech
is from mid-14c. Related: Maintained; maintaining; maintains.


sue (v.)

c.1200, continue, persevere, from Anglo-French suer follow after, continue, Old French suir, sivre
pursue, follow after, sue in court (Modern French suivre), from Vulgar Latin *sequere follow, from
Latin sequi follow (see sequel). Sense of start a lawsuit against first recorded c.1300, on notion
of following up a matter in court. Sometimes short for ensue or pursue. Meaning make entreaty,
petition, plead (usually with for) is from late 14c. Related: Sued; suing.


life (n.)

Old English life (dative lif) existence, lifetime, way of life, condition of being a living thing,
opposite of death, from Proto-Germanic *libam (cognates: Old Norse lif life, body, Dutch lijf body,
Old High German lib life, German Leib body), properly continuance, perseverance, from PIE *leip- to
remain, persevere, continue; stick, adhere (see leave (v.)). Much of the modern range of meanings
was present in Old English. Meaning property which distinguishes living from non-living matter is
from 1560s. Sense of vitality, energy is from 1580s. Extended 1703 to term of duration (of inanimate
objects).   Life-jacket is from 1840; life-preserver from 1630s of anything that is meant to save a
life, 1803 of devices worn to prevent drowning. Life-saver is from 1883, figurative use from 1909,
as a brand of hard sugar candy, from 1912, so called for shape. Life-form is from 1861. Life cycle
is from 1855.


live (v.)

Old English lifian (Anglian), libban (West Saxon) to be, to live, have life; to experience, also to
supply oneself with food, to pass life (in some condition), from Proto-Germanic *liben (cognates:
Old Norse lifa to live, remain, Old Frisian libba, German leben, Gothic liban to live), from PIE
root *leip- to remain, continue (source also of Greek liparein to persist, persevere; see leave).
Meaning to make a residence, dwell is from c.1200. Related: Lived; living.According to the Dutch
Prouerbe ... Leuen ende laetan leuen, To liue and to let others liue. [Malynes, 1622]To live it up
live gaily and extravagantly is from 1903. To live up to act in accordance with is 1690s, from
earlier live up live on a high (moral or mental) level (1680s). To live (something) down outwear
(some slander or embarrassment) is from 1842. To live with cohabit as husband and wife is attested
from 1749; sense of to put up with is attested from 1937. Expression live and learn is attested from
c.1620.


