pert (adj.)

c.1300 (implied in pertly), evident, unconcealed, shortened form of Middle English apert open,
frank, from Old French apert, from Latin apertus, past participle of aperire to open (see overt).
Sense of saucy, bold first recorded late 14c. Less pejorative meaning lively, brisk, in good spirits
(c.1500) survives in U.S. dialectal peart (with Middle English alternative spelling). Related:
Pertness.


peart (adj.)

variant of pert (q.v.).


cit (n.)

colloquial shortening of citizen, 1640s; contrasted to a countryman or a gentleman, usually with
some measure of opprobrium (Johnson defines it as A pert low townsman; a pragmatical trader).


gamine (n.)

small, slim, pert young girl, 1899, from French gamine, fem. of gamin.


cocky (adj.)

arrogantly pert, 1768; originally lecherous (1540s); from cock (n.1) + -y (2). Related: Cockiness.


skipjack (n.)

1550s, a pert shallow-brained fellow; a puppy, a whipper-snapper; a conceited fop or dandy [OED],
from skip (v.) + generic name jack (n.). Applied 1703 to tropical fishes with leaping tendencies. In
reference to a kind of sailing boat used on Chesapeake Bay, attested from 1887.


majorette (n.)

baton-twirler, 1941, short for drum-majorette (1938), fem. of drum-major (1590s).    The perfect
majorette is a pert, shapely, smiling extrovert, who loves big, noisy crowds and knows how to make
those crowds love her. [Life magazine, Oct. 10, 1938]    (The article notes that the activity has
been going on for about six years now).


soubrette (n.)

1753, theatrical jargon word for lady's maid characters in plays and operas, who typically were
pert, flirtatious, and intriguing, from French soubrette, from Proven&ccedil;al soubreto affected,
conceited, fem. of soubret coy, reserved, from soubra to set aside, originally to exceed, from Old
Proven&ccedil;al sobrar, from Latin superare to rise above, overcome, from super over, above, beyond
(see super-).


patter (v.2)

talk rapidly, c.1400, from pater mumble prayers rapidly (c.1300), shortened form of paternoster.
Perhaps influenced by patter (v.1). The related noun is first recorded 1758, originally cant
language of thieves and beggars. Compare Devil's paternoster (1520s) a grumbling and mumbling to
oneself.    PATTERING. The maundering or pert replies of servants; also talk or palaver in order to
amuse one intended to be cheated. [Grose, Classical Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, 2nd edition.
1788]


minx (n.)

1540s, mynx pet dog, later a young, pert, wanton girl [Johnson] (1590s), of uncertain origin,
perhaps a shortening of minikin girl, woman, from Middle Dutch minnekijn darling, beloved, from
minne love (see minnesinger) + -kijn, diminutive suffix. Klein's sources suggest the word is from
Low German minsk a man, also an impudent woman, related to German Mensch (see mensch), which also
has a sense in vulgar use of wench, hussy, slut.


cock (n.1)

male chicken, Old English cocc male bird, Old French coc (12c., Modern French coq), Old Norse kokkr,
all of echoic origin. Old English cocc was a nickname for one who strutted like a cock, thus a
common term in the Middle Ages for a pert boy, used of scullions, apprentices, servants, etc.    A
common personal name till c.1500, it was affixed to Christian names as a pet diminutive, as in
Wilcox, Hitchcock, etc. Slang sense of penis is attested since 1610s (but compare pillicock penis,
from c.1300); cock-teaser is from 1891. A cocker spaniel (1823) was trained to start woodcocks.
Cock-and-bull is first recorded 1620s, perhaps an allusion to Aesop's fables, with their incredible
talking animals, or to a particular story, now forgotten. French has parallel expression
coq-&agrave;-l'&acirc;ne.


flirt (v.)

1550s, originally to turn up one's nose, sneer at, then to rap or flick, as with the fingers
(1560s). The noun is first attested 1540s, from the verb, with the meaning stroke of wit. It's
possible that the original word was imitative, along the lines of flip (v.), but there seems to be
some influence from flit, such as in the flirt sense of to move in short, quick flights, attested
from 1580s.    Meanwhile flirt (n.) had come to mean a pert young hussey [Johnson] by 1560s, and
Shakespeare has flirt-gill (i.e. Jill) a woman of light or loose behavior, while flirtgig was a 17c.
Yorkshire dialect word for a giddy, flighty girl. All or any of these could have fed into the main
modern verbal sense of play at courtship (1777), which also could have grown naturally from the
earlier meaning to flit inconstantly from object to object (1570s), perhaps influenced by Old French
fleureter talk sweet nonsense, also to touch a thing in passing, diminutive of fleur flower and
metaphoric of bees skimming from flower to flower.    The noun meaning person who flirts is from
1732. The English word also is possibly related to East Frisian flirt a flick or light blow, and
flirtje a giddy girl. French flirter to flirt is a 19c. borrowing from English. Related: Flirted;
flirting.


gay (adj.)

late 14c., full of joy, merry; light-hearted, carefree; also wanton, lewd, lascivious (late 12c. as
a surname, Philippus de Gay), from Old French gai joyful, happy; pleasant, agreeably charming;
forward, pert (12c.; compare Old Spanish gayo, Portuguese gaio, Italian gajo, probably French loan-
words). Ultimate origin disputed; perhaps from Frankish *gahi (related to Old High German wahi
pretty), though not all etymologists accept this. Meaning stately and beautiful; splendid and
showily dressed is from early 14c. The word gay by the 1890s had an overall tinge of promiscuity --
a gay house was a brothel. The suggestion of immorality in the word can be traced back at least to
the 1630s, if not to Chaucer:    But in oure bed he was so fressh and gay  Whan that he wolde han my
bele chose.    Slang meaning homosexual (adj.) begins to appear in psychological writing late 1940s,
evidently picked up from gay slang and not always easily distinguished from the older sense:
After discharge A.Z. lived for some time at home. He was not happy at the farm and went to a Western
city where he associated with a homosexual crowd, being gay, and wearing female clothes and makeup.
He always wished others would make advances to him. [Rorschach Research Exchange and Journal of
Projective Techniques, 1947, p.240]    The association with (male) homosexuality likely got a boost
from the term gay cat, used as far back as 1893 in American English for young hobo, one who is new
on the road, also one who sometimes does jobs.    A Gay Cat, said he, is a loafing laborer, who
works maybe a week, gets his wages and vagabonds about hunting for another 'pick and shovel' job. Do
you want to know where they got their monica (nickname) 'Gay Cat'? See, Kid, cats sneak about and
scratch immediately after chumming with you and then get gay (fresh). That's why we call them 'Gay
Cats'. [Leon Ray Livingston (America's Most Celebrated Tramp), Life and Adventures of A-no. 1, 1910]
Quoting a tramp named Frenchy, who might not have known the origin. Gay cats were severely and
cruelly abused by real tramps and bums, who considered them an inferior order of beings who begs of
and otherwise preys upon the bum -- as it were a jackal following up the king of beasts [Prof. John
J. McCook, Tramps, in The Public Treatment of Pauperism, 1893], but some accounts report certain
older tramps would dominate a gay cat and employ him as a sort of slave. In Sociology and Social
Research (1932-33) a paragraph on the gay cat phenomenon notes, Homosexual practices are more common
than rare in this group, and gey cat homosexual boy is attested in N. Erskine's 1933 dictionary of
Underworld &amp; Prison Slang (gey is a Scottish variant of gay).    The Dictionary of American
Slang reports that gay (adj.) was used by homosexuals, among themselves, in this sense since at
least 1920. Rawson [Wicked Words] notes a male prostitute using gay in reference to male homosexuals
(but also to female prostitutes) in London's notorious Cleveland Street Scandal of 1889. Ayto [20th
Century Words] calls attention to the ambiguous use of the word in the 1868 song The Gay Young Clerk
in the Dry Goods Store, by U.S. female impersonator Will S. Hays, but the word evidently was not
popularly felt in this sense by wider society until the 1950s at the earliest.    Gay (or gai) is
now widely used in French, Dutch, Danish, Japanese, Swedish, and Catalan with the same sense as the
English. It is coming into use in Germany and among the English-speaking upper classes of many
cosmopolitan areas in other countries. [John Boswell, Christianity, Social Tolerance, and
Homosexuality, 1980]   Gay as a noun meaning a (usually male) homosexual is attested from 1971; in
Middle English it meant excellent person, noble lady, gallant knight, also something gay or bright;
an ornament or badge (c.1400). As a slang word meaning bad, inferior, undesirable, from 2000.


