pertinent (adj.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French purtinaunt (late 13c.), Old French partenant (mid-13c.) and directly
from Latin pertinentem (nominative pertinens) pertaining, present participle of pertinere to relate,
concern (see pertain). Related: Pertinently.


pertinence (n.)

1650s, from French pertenance or formed in English from pertinent + -ence.


relevant (adj.)

pertinent to the matter at hand, 1550s, from Middle French relevant depending upon, originally
helpful, from Medieval Latin relevantem (nominative relevans), from stem of Latin relevare to
lessen, lighten (see relieve). Not generally used until after 1800.


works (n.)

Old English, (someone's) deeds, acts, or actions, the things one has done in life, often especially
good deeds, acts of piety, demonstrations of virtue, plural of work (n.). Meaning operations
pertinent to maintaining a large physical place (private, religious, or municipal) is from late 14c.
Meaning industrial place (usually with qualifying adjective) is from late 15c. To be in the works in
the extended sense of in the process of being done or made is by 1973.


impertinent (adj.)

late 14c., unconnected, unrelated, not to the point, from Old French impertinent (14c.) or directly
from Late Latin impertinentem (nominative impertinens) not belonging, literally not to the point,
from assimilated form of Latin in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + pertinens (see pertinent). Sense
of rudely bold is 1680s, from earlier sense of not appropriate to the situation, probably modeled on
similar use in French, especially by Moli&egrave;re, from notion of meddling with what is beyond
one's proper sphere.


question (n.)

early 13c., philosophical or theological problem; early 14c. as utterance meant to elicit an answer
or discussion, also as a difficulty, a doubt, from Anglo-French questiun, Old French question
question, difficulty, problem; legal inquest, interrogation, torture, from Latin quaestionem
(nominative quaestio) a seeking, a questioning, inquiry, examining, judicial investigation, noun of
action from past participle stem of quaerere ask, seek (see query (v.)).   No question undoubtedly
is from mid-15c; no questions asked accountability not required is from 1879 (especially in
newspaper advertisements seeking the return of something lost or stolen). Question mark is from
1849, sometimes also question stop (1862); figurative use is from 1869. To be out of the question
(c.1700) is to be not pertinent to the subject, hence not to be considered.


left (adj.)

c.1200, from Kentish and northern English form of Old English lyft- weak, foolish (compare lyft-adl
lameness, paralysis, East Frisian luf, Dutch dialectal loof weak, worthless). It emerged 13c. as
opposite of right (the left being usually the weaker hand), a derived sense also found in cognate
Middle Dutch and Low German luchter, luft. But German link, Dutch linker left are from Old High
German slinc and Middle Dutch slink left, related to Old English slincan crawl, Swedish linka limp,
slinka dangle.    Replaced Old English winestra, literally friendlier, a euphemism used
superstitiously to avoid invoking the unlucky forces connected with the left side (see sinister).
The Kentish word itself may have been originally a taboo replacement, if instead it represents PIE
root *laiwo-, meaning considered conspicuous (represented in Greek laios, Latin laevus, and Russian
levyi). Greek also uses a euphemism for left, aristeros the better one (compare also Avestan
vairyastara- to the left, from vairya- desirable). But Lithuanian kairys left and Lettish kreilis
left hand derive from a root that yields words for twisted, crooked.    As an adverb from early 14c.
As a noun from c.1200. Political sense arose from members of a legislative body assigned to the left
side of a chamber, first attested in English 1837 (by Carlyle, in reference to the French
Revolution), probably a loan-translation of French la gauche (1791), said to have originated during
the seating of the French National Assembly in 1789 in which the nobility took the seats on the
President's right and left the Third Estate to sit on the left. Became general in U.S. and British
political speech c.1900.    Used since at least c.1600 in various senses of irregular, illicit;
earlier proverbial sense was opposite of what is expressed (mid-15c.). Phrase out in left field out
of touch with pertinent realities is attested from 1944, from the baseball fielding position that
tends to be far removed from the play. To have two left feet be clumsy is attested by 1902. The Left
Bank of Paris (left bank of the River Seine, as you face downstream) has been associated with
intellectual and artistic culture since at least 1893.


