perversion (n.)

late 14c., action of turning aside from truth, corruption, distortion (originally of religious
beliefs), from Latin perversionem (nominative perversio) a turning about, noun of action from past
participle stem of pervertere (see pervert (v.)). Psychological sense of disorder of sexual behavior
in which satisfaction is sought through channels other than those of normal heterosexual intercourse
is from 1892, originally including homosexuality.Perversions are defined as unnatural acts, acts
contrary to nature, bestial, abominable, and detestable. Such laws are interpretable only in
accordance with the ancient tradition of the English common law which ... is committed to the
doctrine that no sexual activity is justifiable unless its objective is procreation. [A.C. Kinsey,
et.al., Sexual Behavior in the Human Male, 1948]


kicksie-wicksie (n.)

a fanciful word for wife in Shakespeare (All's Well, II iii.297), 1601, apparently a perversion of
kickshaw a fancy dish in cookery.


pervert (n.)

1660s, one who has forsaken a doctrine or system regarded as true, apostate, from pervert (v.).
Psychological sense of one who has a perversion of the sexual instinct is attested from 1897
(Havelock Ellis), originally especially of homosexuals.


twisted (adj.)

late 15c., intertwined, past participle adjective from twist (v.). Meaning perverted, mentally
strange (1900) probably is from twist (n.) in a sense of mental peculiarity, perversion attested by
1811.


verbicide (n.)

the killing of a word by perversion from its original meaning, 1836, from Latin verbum word (see
verb) + -cide.


doggone (adj.)

1851, American English, a fantastic perversion of god-damned [Weekley]. But Mencken favors the
theory that it is a blend form of dog on it; in fact it is still often used with it following. It is
thus a brother to the old English phrase, 'a pox upon it,' but is considerably more decorous.


transmogrify (v.)

to change completely, 1650s, apparently a perversion of transmigure, from transmigrate, perhaps
influenced by modify. Related: Transmogrified; transmogrifying.


coprolalia (n.)

obsessive use of obscene language, either through mental illness or perversion, 1886, from French
coprolalie, coined 1885 by de la Tourette, from copro- dung, filth + Greek lalia talk, prattle, a
speaking, from lalein to speak, prattle, of echoic origin.


isinglass (n.)

1520s, said to be perversion of Dutch huysenblas, literally sturgeon bladder, from huysen sturgeon +
blas bladder; so called because the substance was obtained from it.


head over heels (adv.)

1771, a curious perversion [Weekley] of Middle English heels over head. Head (n.) and heels have
been paired in alliterative phrases since at least c.1400, and the whole image also was in classical
Latin (per caput pedesque ire).


rarebit

1785, perversion of (Welsh) rabbit, as if from rare + bit. See Welsh.


Murphy

Gaelic Murchadh sea-warrior. The Celtic sea element is also in names Muriel (q.v.), Murdoch (Old
Irish Muireadhach, Old Welsh Mordoc mariner), etc. Murphy bed (1925) is named for U.S. inventor
William Lawrence Murphy (1876-1959). By happy coincidence, Murphy was an illiterate 18c.-19c.
perversion of Morpheus, god of sleep.


catachresis (n.)

1580s, from Latin catachresis, from Greek katakhresis misuse (of a word), from katakhresthai to
misuse, from kata- down (here with a sense of perversion; see cata-) + khresthai to use (see
hortatory). Related: Catachrestic; catachrestical; catachrestically.


blog (n.)

1998, short for weblog (which is attested from 1994, though not in the sense online journal), from
(World Wide) Web + log. Joe Bloggs (c.1969) was British slang for any hypothetical person (compare
U.S. equivalent Joe Blow); earlier blog meant a servant boy in one of the college houses (c.1860,
see Partridge, who describes this use as a perversion of bloke), and, as a verb, to defeat in
schoolboy slang. The Blogger online publishing service was launched in 1999.


deadbeat (n.)

worthless sponging idler, 1863, American English slang, perhaps originally Civil War slang, from
dead (adj.) + beat. Earlier used colloquially as an adjectival expression to mean completely beaten
(1821), and perhaps the base notion is of worn out, good for nothing. It is noted in a British
source from 1861 as a term for a pensioner.    In England dead beat means worn out, used up. ... But
here, dead beat is used, as a substantive, to mean a scoundrel, a shiftless, swindling vagabond. We
hear it said that such a man is a beat or a dead beat. The phrase thus used is not even good slang.
It is neither humorous nor descriptive. There is not in it even a perversion of the sense of the
words of which it is composed. Its origin is quite beyond conjecture. [Americanisms, in The Galaxy,
January 1878]    It also was used of a kind of regulating mechanism in pendulum clocks.


hocus-pocus

1620s, Hocas Pocas, common name of a magician or juggler, a sham-Latin invocation used in tricks,
probably based on a perversion of the sacramental blessing from the Mass, Hoc est corpus meum This
is my body. The first to make this speculation on its origin apparently was English prelate John
Tillotson (1630-1694).I will speak of one man ... that went about in King James his time ... who
called himself, the Kings Majesties most excellent Hocus Pocus, and so was called, because that at
the playing of every Trick, he used to say, Hocus pocus, tontus tabantus, vade celeriter jubeo, a
dark composure of words, to blinde the eyes of the beholders, to make his Trick pass the more
currantly without discovery. [Thomas Ady, A Candle in the Dark, 1655]


adultery (n.)

voluntary violation of the marriage bed, c.1300, avoutrie, from Old French avouterie (12c.), noun of
condition from avoutre, from Latin adulterare to corrupt (see adulteration). Modern spelling, with
the re-inserted -d-, is from early 15c. (see ad-).    In Middle English, also sex between husband
and wife for recreational purposes; idolatry, perversion, heresy. Classified as single adultery
(with an unmarried person) and double adultery (with a married person). Old English word was
&aelig;wbryce breach of law(ful marriage) (compare German Ehebruch). Adultery Dune in Arizona
corresponds to Navajo sei adilehe adultery sand, where illicit lovers met privately.


alms (n.)

Old English &aelig;lmesse alms, almsgiving, from Proto-Germanic *alemosna (cognates: Old Saxon
alamosna, Old High German alamuosan, Old Norse &ouml;lmusa), an early borrowing of Vulgar Latin
*alemosyna (source of Old Spanish almosna, Old French almosne, Italian limosina), from Church Latin
eleemosyna (Tertullian, 3c.), from Greek eleemosyne pity, mercy, in Ecclesiastical Greek charity,
alms, from eleemon compassionate, from eleos pity, mercy, of unknown origin, perhaps imitative of
cries for alms. Spelling perversion in Vulgar Latin is perhaps by influence of alimonia.


gunsel (n.)

1914, American English, from hobo slang, a catamite; specifically a young male kept as a sexual
companion, especially by an older tramp, from Yiddish genzel, from German G&auml;nslein gosling,
young goose. The secondary, non-sexual meaning young hoodlum seems to be entirely traceable to
Dashiell Hammett, who sneaked it into The Maltese Falcon (1929) while warring with his editor over
the book's racy language.    Another thing, Spade repeated, glaring at the boy: Keep that gunsel
away from me while you're making up your mind. I'll kill him.    The context implies some connection
with gun and a sense of gunman, and evidently the editor bought it. The word was retained in the
script of the 1941 movie made from the book, so evidently the Motion Picture Production Code censors
didn't know it either.    The relationship between Kasper Gutman (Sidney Greenstreet) and his young
hit-man companion, Wilmer Cook (Elisha Cook, Jr.), is made fairly clear in the movie, but the overt
mention of sexual perversion would have been deleted if the censors hadn't made the same mistaken
assumption as Hammett's editor. [Hugh Rawson, Wicked Words, 1989, p.184]


paraphilia (n.)

1913, from German paraphilie (by 1903), apparently coined by Austrian ethnologist Friedrich Salomo
Krauss (1859-1938) as literally inverted erotic instinct, from Greek para- beside, aside (see para-
(1)) + philos loving (see -phile).    The neurotic whose accompanying fancies always lead into
forbidden ground (and this is what constitutes the guilt feeling of pollutions) fights against
masturbation [pollutions] because it is connected with incest fancies, criminal desires,
perversions, or as F.S. Krauss calls them, paraphilias. [Wm. J. Robinson, M.D., Masturbation --
Injurious or Harmless, American Journal of Urology, May 1913]   <hr />  Krauss bereichert uns um das
neue Wort Paraphilie anstelle der Psychopathie, ein fortschrittlich-oppositionelles Wort zwar, aber
auch nur ein Wort und als Aufkl&#228;rung etwa so bedeutsam wie Seitenspr&#252;nge. [Rezensionen
&#252;ber die Anthropophyteia Jahrb&#252;cher, Leipzig, 1907]    Popularized in psychology circles
in English from c.1918 in translation of work by Viennese-born psychotherapist Wilhelm Stekel
(1868-1940); not in widespread use until 1950s. first used in Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders in 1980, as a morally neutral and more dignified label than perversion, to which it
is nonetheless etymologically similar. Related: Paraphiliac; paraphilic.


