perverse (adj.)

mid-14c., wicked, from Old French pervers unnatural, degenerate; perverse, contrary (12c.) and
directly from Latin perversus turned away, contrary, askew, figuratively, turned away from what is
right, wrong, malicious, spiteful, past participle of pervertere to corrupt (see pervert (v.)). The
Latin word is glossed in Old English by forcerred, from past participle of forcyrran to avoid, from
cierran to turn, return. Meaning wrong, not in accord with what is accepted is from 1560s; sense of
obstinate, stubborn is from 1570s. It keeps the non-sexual senses of pervert (v.) and allows the
psychological ones to go with perverted. Related: Perversely; perverseness.


peevish (adj.)

late 14c., peyvesshe perverse, capricious, silly, of uncertain origin, possibly modeled on Latin
perversus reversed, perverse, past participle of pervertere to turn about (see pervert (v.)).
Meaning cross, fretful first recorded 1520s. Related: Peevishly; peevishness.


perversity (n.)

1520s, from Middle French perversit&eacute; depravity, degeneracy (12c.), from Latin perversitatem
(nominative perversitas) forwardness, untowardness, from perversus (see perverse).


refractory (adj.)

stubborn, obstinate, perverse, 1610s (earlier refractorious, 1550s, refractary, c.1600), from Latin
refractarius obstinate, stubborn, from past participle stem of refringere (see refraction). Related:
Refractorily; refractoriness.


divers (adj.)

mid-13c., not alike (sense now in diverse); late 13c., separate, distinct; various, from Old French
divers (11c.) different, various, singular, odd, exceptional, wretched, treacherous, perverse, from
Latin diversus turned different ways, in Late Latin various, past participle of divertere (see
divert).    Sense of several, numerous is recorded from c.1300, referring originally and in form to
the variety of objects; but, as variety implies number, becoming an indefinite numeral word
expressing multiplicity [OED], a sense that emerged by c.1400.


queer (adj.)

c.1500, strange, peculiar, eccentric, from Scottish, perhaps from Low German (Brunswick dialect)
queer oblique, off-center, related to German quer oblique, perverse, odd, from Old High German twerh
oblique, from PIE root *terkw- to turn, twist, wind (see thwart (adv.)).    Sense of homosexual
first recorded 1922; the noun in this sense is 1935, from the adjective. Related: Queerly. Queer
studies as an academic discipline attested from 1994.


second (adj.)

next after first, c.1300, from Old French second, secont, and directly from Latin secundus
following, next in time or order, also secondary, subordinate, inferior, from root of sequi follow
(see sequel). Replaced native other in this sense because of the ambiguousness of the earlier word.
Second sight is from 1610s; an etymologically perverse term, because it means in reality the sight
of events before, not after, they occur. Second fiddle first attested 1809:    A metaphor borrowed
from a musical performer who plays the second or counter to one who plays the first or the air.
[Bartlett, Dictionary of Americanisms, 1848]


thwart (adv.)

c.1200, from a Scandinavian source, probably Old Norse &thorn;vert across, originally neuter of
thverr (adj.) transverse, across, cognate with Old English &thorn;weorh transverse, perverse, angry,
cross, from Proto-Germanic *thwerh- twisted, oblique (cognates: Middle Dutch dwers, Dutch dwars
cross-grained, contrary, Old High German twerh, German quer, Gothic &thorn;wairhs angry), altered
(by influence of *thwer- to turn) from *therkh-, from PIE *terkw- to twist (cognates: Latin torquere
to twist, Sanskrit tarkuh spindle, Old Church Slavonic traku band, girdle, Old High German drahsil
turner, German drechseln to turn on a lathe), possibly a variant of *twerk- to cut. From mid-13c. as
an adjective.


