pervert (n.)

1660s, one who has forsaken a doctrine or system regarded as true, apostate, from pervert (v.).
Psychological sense of one who has a perversion of the sexual instinct is attested from 1897
(Havelock Ellis), originally especially of homosexuals.


pervert (v.)

c.1300 (transitive), to turn someone aside from a right religious belief to a false or erroneous
one, from Old French pervertir pervert, undo, destroy (12c.) and directly from Latin pervertere
overthrow, overturn, figuratively to corrupt, subvert, abuse, literally turn the wrong way, turn
about, from per- away (see per) + vertere to turn (see versus).    Related: Perverted; perverting.
Replaced native froward, which embodies the same image. Old English had mishweorfed perverted,
inverted, an identical formation to the Latin word using native elements.


perverted (adj.)

1660s, turned from the right way, past participle adjective from pervert (v.). With implied sexual
sense by 1897.


sicko (n.)

1977, from sick (adj.) in the mental sense + ending as in weirdo. Sickie a pervert is attested from
1972; sicknik (1959) pervert, obscene comedian (applied to Lenny Bruce) has fad ending -nik.


deprave (v.)

late 14c., corrupt, lead astray, pervert, from Old French depraver (14c.) or directly from Latin
depravare distort, disfigure; figuratively to pervert, seduce, corrupt, from de- completely (see
de-) + pravus crooked. Related: Depraved; depraving.


perverse (adj.)

mid-14c., wicked, from Old French pervers unnatural, degenerate; perverse, contrary (12c.) and
directly from Latin perversus turned away, contrary, askew, figuratively, turned away from what is
right, wrong, malicious, spiteful, past participle of pervertere to corrupt (see pervert (v.)). The
Latin word is glossed in Old English by forcerred, from past participle of forcyrran to avoid, from
cierran to turn, return. Meaning wrong, not in accord with what is accepted is from 1560s; sense of
obstinate, stubborn is from 1570s. It keeps the non-sexual senses of pervert (v.) and allows the
psychological ones to go with perverted. Related: Perversely; perverseness.


perv (n,)

also perve, 1944, slang shortening of (sexual) pervert (n.). As a slang verb, by 1941 as to act
erotically (intransitive), by 1959 as to eroticize something (transitive).


beshrew (v.)

early 14c., deprave, pervert, corrupt, from be- + shrew (v.) to curse; see shrew. Meaning to invoke
evil upon is from late 14c.


deviate (v.)

1630s, from Late Latin deviatus, past participle of deviare to turn out of the way (see deviant).
Related: Deviated; deviating. The noun meaning sexual pervert is attested from 1912.


corrupt (v.)

mid-14c., contaminate, impair the purity of, from Latin corruptus, past participle of corrumpere
(see corrupt (adj.)). Late 14c. as pervert the meaning of, also putrefy. Related: Corrupted;
corrupting.


peevish (adj.)

late 14c., peyvesshe perverse, capricious, silly, of uncertain origin, possibly modeled on Latin
perversus reversed, perverse, past participle of pervertere to turn about (see pervert (v.)).
Meaning cross, fretful first recorded 1520s. Related: Peevishly; peevishness.


malign (v.)

to slander, mid-15c., from earlier more literal sense of to plot, to contrive (early 15c.), from Old
French malignier to plot, deceive, pervert, from Late Latin malignare to do maliciously, from
malignus (see malign (adj.)). Related: Maligned; maligning.


disuse (v.)

c.1400, misuse, pervert; mid-15c., become unaccustomed, from or on analogy of Old French desuser,
from des- not (see dis-) + user use (see use (v.)). Related: Disused.


perversion (n.)

late 14c., action of turning aside from truth, corruption, distortion (originally of religious
beliefs), from Latin perversionem (nominative perversio) a turning about, noun of action from past
participle stem of pervertere (see pervert (v.)). Psychological sense of disorder of sexual behavior
in which satisfaction is sought through channels other than those of normal heterosexual intercourse
is from 1892, originally including homosexuality.Perversions are defined as unnatural acts, acts
contrary to nature, bestial, abominable, and detestable. Such laws are interpretable only in
accordance with the ancient tradition of the English common law which ... is committed to the
doctrine that no sexual activity is justifiable unless its objective is procreation. [A.C. Kinsey,
et.al., Sexual Behavior in the Human Male, 1948]


