pestle (n.)

mid-14c. (as a surname late 13c.), from Old French pestel, from Latin pistillum pounder, pestle,
related to pinsere to pound, from PIE *pis-to-, suffixed form of root *peis- to crush (cognates:
Sanskrit pinasti pounds, crushes, pistah anything ground, meal, Greek ptissein to winnow, Old Church
Slavonic pi&#353;o, pichati to push, thrust, strike, pi&#353;enica wheat, Russian pseno millet).


pistil (n.)

female organ of a flower, 1718, from French pistil, from Modern Latin pistillum a pistil, so called
from resemblance to a pestle, from Latin pistillum pestle (see pestle). Related: Pistillary;
pistillaceous; pistillate; pistilline.


piston (n.)

1704, from French piston, from Middle French piston large pestle, from Old Italian pistone a piston,
variant of pestone a pestle, from pestare to pound, from Late Latin pistare, frequentative of Latin
pinsere (past participle pistus) to pound (see pestle). As a verb from 1930.


pesto (n.)

olive oil-based pasta sauce, 1937, from Italian pesto, contracted form of pestato, past participle
of pestare to pound, to crush, in reference to the crushed herbs and garlic in it, from Latin root
of pestle.


tisane (n.)

medicinal tea, 1931, from French tisane; earlier ptisan (14c.), from Latin ptisana, from Greek
ptisane crushed barley, related to ptissein to winnow, crush, peel (see pestle).


piste (n.)

also pist, 1727, from French piste, from Latin pista (via) beaten (track), from pistus, past
participle of pinsere to pound, stamp (see pestle).


pile (n.2)

heavy pointed beam, from Old English pil stake, also arrow, from Latin pilum heavy javelin of the
Roman foot soldier, literally pestle (source of Old Norse pila, Old High German pfil, German Pfeil
arrow), of uncertain origin.


stamp (v.)

Old English stempan to pound in a mortar, from Proto-Germanic *stamp- (cognates: Old Norse stappa,
Danish stampe, Middle Dutch stampen, Old High German stampfon, German stampfen to stamp with the
foot, beat, pound, German Stampfe pestle), from nasalized form of PIE root *stebh- to support, place
firmly on (cognates: Greek stembein to trample, misuse; see staff (n.)). The vowel altered in Middle
English, perhaps by influence of Scandinavian forms.    Sense of strike the foot forcibly downwards
is from mid-14c. The meaning impress or mark (something) with a die is first recorded 1550s. Italian
stampa stamp, impression, Spanish estampar to stamp, print, French &#233;tamper (13c., Old French
estamper) to stamp, impress are Germanic loan-words. Related: Stamped; stamping. To stamp out
originally was extinguish a fire by stamping on it; attested from 1851 in the figurative sense.
Stamping ground one's particular territory (1821) is from the notion of animals. A stamped addressed
envelope (1873) was one you enclosed in a letter to speed or elicit a reply.


