petroleum (n.)

early 15c. petroleum, rock oil (mid-14c. in Anglo-French), from Medieval Latin petroleum, from Latin
petra rock (see petrous) + oleum oil (see oil (n.)).


petro- (2)

word-forming element used from mid-20c. to mean of or having to do with petroleum products, from
petroleum.


petrol (n.)

gasoline, 1895, from French p&eacute;trol (1892); earlier used (1580s) in reference to the unrefined
substance, from Middle French petrole petroleum, from Old French (13c.), from Medieval Latin
petroleum (see petroleum).


Vaseline (n.)

1872, trademark for an ointment made from petroleum and marketed by Chesebrough Manufacturing Co.,
coined from German Wasser water + Greek elaion oil + scientific-sounded ending -ine. Robert A.
Chesebrough was of the opinion that petroleum was a product of the underground decomposition of
water.    The name is of mixed origin, being derived from Wasser, water, and elaion [Greek in the
original], oil (water-oil), and indicates the belief of the discoverer that petroleum, the mother of
Vaseline, is produced by the agency of heat and pressure from the carbon of certain rocks, and the
hydrogen of water. [The Monthly Review of Dental Surgery, February 1877]


Seven Sisters

the Pleiades, early 15c. (see Pleiades), seven daughters of Atlas and Pleione, placed among the
stars by Zeus. The Pleiades also are known as the Seven Stars  (see seven). As a late-20c. name for
the major multi-national petroleum companies, it is attested from 1962. They were listed in 1976 as
Exxon, Mobil, Gulf, Standard Oil of California, Texaco, British Petroleum, and Royal Dutch Shell.


OPEC

initialism (acronym) for Organization of Petroleum-Exporting Countries, founded 1960.


STP (n.)

commercial motor oil additive, probably an initialism (acronym) of scientifically treated petroleum.
As the street name of a type of psychedelic drug, attested from 1967.


petrodollar (n.)

1974, surplus of petroleum exports over imports of all other goods, as a notational unit of currency
(in reference to OPEC nations), formed in English from petro- (2) + dollar.


refinery (n.)

1727, from refine + -ery. Originally in metallurgy and sugar-making; of petroleum by 1865.


Qatar

probably from Arabic katran tar, resin, in reference to petroleum. Related: Qatari.


propane (n.)

colorless gas occurring in petroleum, 1866, with chemical suffix -ane + prop(ionic acid) (1850),
from French propionique (1847), from Greek pro forward (see pro-) + pion fat (see fat (adj.)), in
reference to its being first in order of the fatty acids.


naphtha (n.)

inflammable liquid distilled from petroleum, 1570s, from Latin, from Greek naphtha bitumen, perhaps
from Persian neft pitch, or Aramaic naphta, nephta, but these could as well be from Greek. In Middle
English as napte (late 14c.), from Old French napte, but the modern word is a re-introduction.


oil (n.)

late 12c., olive oil, from Anglo-French and Old North French olie, from Old French oile, uile oil
(12c., Modern French huile), from Latin oleum oil, olive oil (source of Spanish, Italian olio), from
Greek elaion olive tree, from elaia (see olive). Old English &aelig;le, Dutch olie, German &Ouml;l,
etc. all are from Latin. It meant olive oil exclusively till c.1300, when meaning began to be
extended to any fatty, greasy substance. Use for petroleum first recorded 1520s, but not common
until 19c. The artist's oils (1660s), short for oil-color (1530s), are paints made by grinding
pigment in oil.


