petty (adj.)

late 14c., small, from phonemic spelling of Old French petit small (see petit). In English, not
originally disparaging (as still in petty cash, 1834; petty officer, 1570s). Meaning of small
importance is recorded from 1520s; that of small-minded is from 1580s. Related: Pettily; pettiness.
An old name for Northern Lights was petty dancers.


pettifogger (n.)

1560s, from petty; the second element possibly from obsolete Dutch focker, from Flemish focken to
cheat, or from cognate Middle English fugger, from Fugger the renowned family of merchants and
financiers of 15c.-16c. Augsburg. In German, Flemish and Dutch, the name became a word for
monopolist, rich man, usurer.A 'petty Fugger' would mean one who on a small scale practices the
dishonourable devices for gain popularly attributed to great financiers; it seems possible that the
phrase 'petty fogger of the law,' applied in this sense to some notorious person, may have caught
the popular fancy. [OED first edition, in a rare burst of pure speculation]However, OED also calls
attention to pettifactor legal agent who undertakes small cases (1580s), which, though attested
slightly later, might be the source of this. Related: Pettifoggery.


spiv (n.)

petty crook who will turn his hand to anything so long as it does not involve honest work, 1934,
British slang, probably dating back to late 19c. and connected with spiff (see spiffy) in one of its
various senses. Being a flashy dresser was a spiv characteristic.    The spiv reached his apotheosis
during World War II and the succeeding years, when the disrupted economic conditions allowed ample
scope for unofficial trading (a pair of nylons here, a few packets of cigarettes there) and other
petty crime. He became a stock figure in the English social comedy, represented on screen by such
stereotypes as 'Flash Harry' (played by George Cole) in the St. Trinian's films and Pte. Walker in
Dad's Army. [Ayto, 20th Century Words]


Bumble

self-important petty official, 1856, from the name of the fussy, pompous, stupid beadle in Dickens'
Oliver Twist.


tiff (n.)

1727, outburst of temper, later petty quarrel (1754), of uncertain origin; OED suggests imitative,
from the sound of a slight puff of air or gas.


scribbler (n.)

petty author, 1550s, agent noun from scribble (v.).


stocks (n.)

instrument of punishment and confinement formerly widely used in Europe and America (usually for
vagrants and petty offenders), early 14c., from stock (n.1), because they consisted of large wooden
blocks.


one-horse (adj.)

small-scale, petty 1853, American English, colloquial, in reference to towns so small they only had
one horse.


spat (n.1)

petty quarrel, 1804, American English, of unknown origin; perhaps somehow imitative (compare spat
smack, slap, attested from 1823).


potty (adj.)

crazy, silly, 1916, slang, of unknown origin, perhaps connected to potter (v.). Earlier slang senses
were easy to manage (1899) and feeble, petty (1860).


sectarianism (n.)

1670s, disposition to petty sects in opposition to things established [Johnson]; see sectarian +
-ism.


vagrancy (n.)

life of idle begging, 1706, from vagrant + -cy. Earlier in a figurative sense, mental wandering
(1640s). By late 18c. used in law as a catch-all for miscellaneous petty offenses against public
order.


micro-

word-forming element meaning small, microscopic; magnifying; one millionth, from Latinized comb.
form of Greek mikros small, little, petty, trivial, slight (see mica).


tinhorn (adj.)

petty but flashy, 1857, from tin + horn (n.); originally of low-class gamblers, from the tin cans
they used for shaking dice.


bush league (adj.)

mean, petty, unprofessional, 1906, from baseball slang for the small-town baseball clubs below the
minor league where talent was developed (by 1903), from bush (n.) in the slang sense of rural,
provincial, which originally was not a value judgment.


historiaster (n.)

petty or contemptible historian, 1887, from historian with ending altered to -aster.


politicaster (n.)

a petty, feeble, or contemptible politician [OED], 1640s, from Italian or Spanish politicastro, noun
use of adjective meaning political, from Latin politicus (see political).


workhouse (n.)

Old English weorchus workshop; see work (n.) + house (n.). From 1650s in the sense of place where
the able-bodied poor or petty criminals are lodged and compelled to work.


exiguous (adj.)

scanty, 1650s, from Latin exiguus small, petty, paltry, scanty in measure or number, from exigere
(see exact (v.)).


theologian (n.)

late 15c., from Old French theologien (14c.), from theologie; see theology. A petty or paltry
theologist is a theologaster (1620s), used in Medieval Latin by Martin Luther (1518).


nitpick (v.)

seek petty faults, also nit-pick, 1962, back-formation from earlier nitpicker. Related: Nitpicking;
nitpicky.


sixpence (n.)

late 14c., sum of six pennies, from six + pence. As a specific British coin, from 1590s. Sixpenny
(adj.) had a figurative sense paltry, cheap, petty, worthless by 1560s; sixpenny nails (early 15c.)
cost so much per hundred.


micrology (n.)

hair splitting, exaggerated attention to petty things, 1650s, from Greek mikrologia pettiness, care
for trifles, from micros (see micro-) + -logia (see -logy).


steno-

before vowels sten-, word-forming element meaning narrow, from comb. form of Greek stenos narrow,
strait, as a noun straits of the sea, narrow strip of land, also metaphorically, close, confined;
scanty, petty, from PIE *sten- narrow.


summoner (n.)

petty officer who cites persons to appear in court, secular or ecclesiastical, early 14c. (mid-13c.
as a surname), from Anglo-French sumenour, Old French somoneor, from Medieval Latin summonitorem,
from past participle stem of summonere (see summon). Contracted form sumner is from mid-14c.


huckster (n.)

c.1200, petty merchant, peddler (often contemptuous), from Middle Dutch hokester peddler, from hoken
to peddle (see hawk (v.1)) + agent suffix -ster (which was typically feminine in English, but not in
Low German). Specific sense of advertising salesman is from 1946 novel by Frederick Wakeman. As a
verb, from 1590s. Related: Huckstered; huckstering.


beadle (n.)

Old English bydel herald, messenger from an authority, preacher, from beodan to proclaim (see bid).
Sense of warrant officer, tipstaff was in late Old English; that of petty parish officer, which has
given the job a bad reputation, is from 1590s. French b&eacute;deau (Old French bedel, 12c.) is a
Germanic loan-word.


pinprick (n.)

also pin-prick, 1851, from pin (n.) + prick (n.). Used figuratively of petty irritations from 1885.
Earlier pin's prick (1825).


dicker (v.)

haggle, bargain in a petty way, 1802, American English, perhaps from dicker (n.) a unit or package
of tens, especially hides (attested from late 13c.), perhaps from Latin decuria parcel of ten
(supposedly a unit of barter on the Roman frontier; compare German Decher set of ten things), from
decem ten (see ten) on model of centuria from centum.


officer (n.)

early 14c., one who holds an office (originally a high office), from Old French oficier officer,
official (early 14c.), from Medieval Latin officarius an officer, from Latin officium a service, a
duty (see office). The military sense is first recorded 1560s. Applied to petty officials of justice
from 16c.; U.S. use in reference to policemen is from 1880s.


petticoat (n.)

early 15c., pety coote, literally a small coat, from petty + coat (n.). Originally a padded coat
worn by men under armor, applied mid-15c. to a garment worn by women and young children. By 1590s,
the typical feminine garment, hence a symbol of female sex or character.Men declare that the
petticoatless female has unsexed herself and has left her modesty behind. [Godey's Magazine, April
1896]


pet (n.1)

tamed animal, originally in Scottish and northern England dialect (and exclusively so until mid-
18c.), of unknown origin. Sense of indulged child (c.1500) is recorded slightly earlier than that of
animal kept as a favorite (1530s), but the latter may be the primary meaning. Probably associated
with or influenced by petty. As a term of endearment by 1849. Teacher's pet is attested from 1890.
Pet-shop from 1928.    Know nature's children all divide her care;  The fur that warms a monarch
warm'd a bear.  While man exclaims, 'See all things for my use!'  'See man for mine!' replies a
pamper'd goose:     [Alexander Pope, Essay on Man]


banal (adj.)

trite, commonplace, 1840, from French banal, belonging to a manor, common, hackneyed, commonplace,
from Old French banel communal (13c.), from ban decree; legal control; announcement; authorization;
payment for use of a communal oven, mill, etc. (see ban (v.)). The modern sense evolved from the
word's use in designating things like ovens or mills that belonged to feudal serfs, or else
compulsory military service; in either case it was generalized in French through open to everyone to
commonplace, ordinary, to trite, petty.


provincial (adj.)

late 14c., pertaining to a province, from Old French provincial belonging to a particular province
(of friars) (13c.), from Latin provincialis of a province, from provincia (see province).    Meaning
of the small towns and countryside (as opposed to the capital and urban center) is from 1630s, a
borrowed idiom from French, transferred from sense of particular to the province, hence local.
Suggestive of rude, petty, or narrow society by 1755. Classical Latin provincialis seems not to have
had this tinge. In British use, with reference to the American colonies, from 1680s.


narrow (adj.)

Old English nearu narrow, constricted, limited; petty; causing difficulty, oppressive; strict,
severe, from West Germanic *narwaz narrowness (cognates: Frisian nar, Old Saxon naru, Middle Dutch
nare, Dutch naar); not found in other Germanic languages and of unknown origin. The narrow seas
(c.1400) were the waters between Great Britain and the continent and Ireland. Related: Narrowness.


bet

1590s, as both a verb and noun, in the argot of petty criminals, of unknown origin; probably a
shortening of abet or else from obsolete beet to make good, from Old English b&aelig;tan make
better, arouse, stimulate, from Proto-Germanic *baitjan, in which case the verb would be the
original. The original notion is perhaps to improve a contest by wagering on it, or it is from the
bait sense in abet. Used since 1852 in various American English slang assertions (compare you bet be
assured, 1857). Related: Betting.


microcosm (n.)

c.1200, mycrocossmos (modern form from early 15c.), human nature, man viewed as the epitome of
creation, literally miniature world, from Middle French microcosme and in earliest use directly from
Medieval Latin microcosmus, from Greek mikros small (see mica) + kosmos world (see cosmos). General
sense of a community constituting a world unto itself is attested from 1560s. Related: Microcosmic.
A native expression in the same sense was petty world (c.1600).


drab (n.)

1680s, color of natural, undyed cloth, from Middle French drap (see drape (n.)). Figurative sense is
c.1880. Apparently not related to earlier word meaning a dirty, untidy woman (1510s), a prostitute
(1520s), which seems to be connected with Irish drabog, Gaelic drabag dirty woman, and perhaps with
Low German drabbe dirt. Ultimately perhaps from PIE *dher- (1) to make muddy. Meaning small, petty
debt (the sense in dribs and drabs) is 1828, of uncertain connection to the other senses.


monger (n.)

Old English mangere merchant, trader, broker, from mangian to traffic, trade, from Proto-Germanic
*mangojan (cognates: Old Saxon mangon, Old Norse mangari monger, higgler), from Latin mango
(genitive mangonis) dealer, trader, slave-dealer, related to mangonium displaying of wares. Not in
Watkins, but Buck (with Tucker) describes it as one who adorns his wares to give them an appearance
of greater value and writes it is probably a loan-word based on Greek manganon means of charming or
bewitching. Used in comb. form in English since at least 12c.; since 16c. chiefly with overtones of
petty and disreputable.


yeoman (n.)

c.1300, attendant in a noble household, of unknown origin, perhaps a contraction of Old English
iunge man young man, or from an unrecorded Old English *geaman, equivalent of Old Frisian gaman
villager, from Old English -gea district, region, village, cognate with Old Frisian ga, ge, German
Gau, Gothic gawi, from Proto-Germanic *gaujan.    Sense of commoner who cultivates his land is
recorded from early 15c.; also the third order of fighting men (late 14c., below knights and
squires, above knaves), hence yeomen's service good, efficient service (c.1600). Meaning naval petty
officer in charge of supplies is first attested 1660s. Yeowoman first recorded 1852: Then I am yeo-
woman O the clumsy word! [Tennyson, The Foresters]


job (n.)

1550s, in phrase jobbe of worke piece of work (contrasted with continuous labor), of uncertain
origin, perhaps a variant of gobbe mass, lump (c.1400; see gob) via sense of a cart-load. Sense of
work done for pay first recorded 1650s. Thieves' slang sense of theft, robbery, a planned crime is
from 1722. Printing sense is from 1795. Slang meaning specimen, thing, person is from 1927.    job.
(1) A low mean lucrative busy affair. (2) Petty, piddling work; a piece of chance work. [Johnson's
Dictionary]   On the job hard at work is from 1882. Job lot is from obsolete sense of cartload,
lump, which might also ultimately be from gob. Job security attested by 1954; job description by
1920; job-sharing by 1972.


petit (adj.)

mid-14c., trifling, from Old French petit small, little, young, few in numbers (11c.), probably from
stem of Late Latin pitinnus small, of uncertain origin; it corresponds to no known Latin form and
perhaps is from a Celtic root pett- part, piece, bit also found in Italian pezza, English piece.
Attested as a surname from 1086. Replaced by petty in most usages, except in established forms such
as petit bourgeois conventional middle-class (1832; used in English by Charlotte Bront&#235; earlier
than by Marx or Engels); petit mal (1842, literally little evil, mild form of epilepsy), and petit
four (1884), which in French means little oven, from Old French four oven, from Latin furnus.


tin (n.)

Old English tin, from Proto-Germanic *tinom (cognates: Middle Dutch and Dutch tin, Old High German
zin, German Zinn, Old Norse tin), of unknown origin, not found outside Germanic.    Other Indo-
European languages often have separate words for tin as a raw metal and tin plate; such as French
&eacute;tain, fer-blanc. Pliny refers to tin as plumbum album white lead, and for centuries it was
regarded as a form of silver debased by lead; hence its figurative use for mean, petty, worthless.
The chemical symbol Sn is from Late Latin stannum (see stannic).    Meaning container made of tin is
from 1795. Tin-can is from 1770; as naval slang for destroyer, by 1937. Tin-type in photography is
from 1864. Tin ear lack of musical discernment is from 1909. Tin Lizzie early Ford, especially a
Model T, first recorded 1915.


municipal (adj.)

1540s, from Middle French municipal, from Latin municipalis of a citizen of a free town, of a free
town, also of a petty town, provincial, from municipium free town, city whose citizens have the
privileges of Roman citizens but are governed by their own laws, from municeps citizen, inhabitant
of a free town. Second element is root of capere assume, take (see capable). First element is from
munus (plural munia) service performed for the community, duty, work, also public spectacle paid for
by the magistrate, (gladiatorial) entertainment, gift, from Old Latin moenus service, duty, burden,
from PIE *moi-n-es-, generally taken as a suffixed form of root *mei- (1) to change, go, move
(Watkins; see mutable); but Tucker says more probably from the other PIE root   *mei- meaning bind,
so that munia = obligations and communis = bound together.


silhouette (n.)

1798, from French silhouette, in reference to &Eacute;tienne de Silhouette (1709-1767), French
minister of finance in 1759. Usually said to be so called because it was an inexpensive way of
making a likeness of someone, a derisive reference to Silhouette's petty economies to finance the
Seven Years' War, which were unpopular among the nobility. But other theories are that it refers to
his brief tenure in office, or the story that he decorated his chateau with such portraits.
Silhouette portraits were so called simply because they came into fashion in the year (1759) in
which M. de Silhouette was minister. [A. Brachet, An Etymological Dictionary of the French Language,
transl. G.W. Kitchin, 1882]    Used of any sort of dark outline or shadow in profile from 1843. The
verb is recorded from 1876, from the noun. The family name is a Frenchified form of a Basque
surname; Arnaud de Silhouette, the finance minister's father, was from Biarritz in the French Basque
country; the southern Basque form of the name would be Zuloeta or Zulueta, which contains the suffix
-eta abundance of and zulo hole (possibly here meaning cave).


chapman (n.)

peddler, itinerant tradesman, Middle English form of Old English ceapman tradesman, from West
Germanic compound *kaupman- (cognates: Old High German choufman, German Kauffman, Middle Dutch and
Dutch koopman), formed with equivalents of man (n.) + West Germanic *kaup- (cognates: Old Saxon cop,
Old Frisian kap trade, purchase, Middle Dutch coop, Dutch koop trade, market, bargain, kauf trader,
Old English ceap barter, business; a purchase), from Proto-Germanic *kaupoz- (cognates: Danish
kj&oslash;b purchase, bargain, Old Norse kaup bargain, pay; compare also Old Church Slavonic kupiti
to buy, a Germanic loan-word), probably an early Germanic borrowing from Latin caupo (genitive
cauponis) petty tradesman, huckster, of unknown origin. Compare also cheap (adj.).


cheap (adj.)

low in price, that may be bought at small cost, c.1500, ultimately from Old English noun ceap
traffic, a purchase, from ceapian (v.) trade, probably from an early Germanic borrowing from Latin
caupo petty tradesman, huckster (see chapman).    The sense evolution is from the noun meaning a
barter, a purchase to a purchase as rated by the buyer, hence adjectival meaning inexpensive, the
main modern sense, via Middle English phrases such as god chep favorable bargain (12c., a
translation of French a bon march&eacute;).    Sense of lightly esteemed, common is from 1590s
(compare similar evolution of Latin vilis). The meaning low in price was represented in Old English
by undeor, literally un-dear (but deop ceap, literally deep cheap, meant high price).    The word
also was used in Old English for market (as in ceapd&aelig;g market day), a sense surviving in place
names Cheapside, East Cheap, etc. Related: Cheaply. Expression on the cheap is first attested 1888.
Cheap shot originally was U.S. football jargon for a head-on tackle; extended sense unfair hit in
politics, etc. is by 1970. German billig cheap is from Middle Low German billik, originally fair,
just, with a sense evolution via billiger preis fair price, etc.


pick (v.)

early 13c., picken to peck; c.1300, piken to work with a pick, probably representing a fusion of Old
English *pician to prick, (implied by picung a piercing, pricking, an 8c. gloss on Latin stigmata)
with Old Norse pikka to prick, peck, both from a Germanic root (source also of Middle Dutch picken,
German picken to pick, peck), perhaps imitative. Influence from Middle French piquer to prick, sting
(see pike (n.2)) also is possible, but that French word generally is not considered a source of the
English word. Related: Picked; picking.    Meaning to eat with small bites is from 1580s. The
meaning to choose, select, pick out emerged late 14c., from earlier meaning to pluck with the
fingers (early 14c.). Sense of to rob, plunder (c.1300) weakened to a milder sense of steal petty
things by late 14c. Of forcing locks with a pointed tool, by 1540s. Meaning to pluck (a banjo) is
recorded from 1860. To pick a quarrel, etc. is from mid-15c.; to pick at find fault with is from
1670s. Pick on single out for adverse attention is from late 14c.; pick off shoot one by one is
recorded from 1810; baseball sense of to put out a runner on base is from 1939. Also see pick up. To
pick and choose select carefully is from 1660s (choose and pick is attested from c.1400).


