phalanx (n.)

1550s, line of battle in close ranks, from Latin phalanx compact body of heavily armed men in battle
array, or directly from Greek phalanx (genitive phalangos) line of battle, battle array, also finger
or toe bone, originally round piece of wood, trunk, log, of unknown origin. Perhaps from PIE root
*bhelg- plank, beam (source of Old English balca balk; see balk (n.)). The Macedonian phalanx
consisted of 50 close files of 16 men each. In anatomy, originally the whole row of finger joints,
which fit together like infantry in close order. Figurative sense of number of persons banded
together in a common cause is attested from 1600 (compare Spanish Falangist, member of a fascist
organization founded in 1933).


phalange (n.)

mid-15c., phalanx, ancient military division, from Middle French phalange phalanx (13c.), from Latin
phalangem (nominative phalanx); see phalanx. It is the earlier form of this word in English.


Falangist (n.)

1937, member of the Falange, the fascist party in Spain (founded 1933), from Spanish Falange
(Espa&ntilde;ola) (Spanish) Phalanx, from Latin phalanx (genitive phalangis); see phalanx.


phalanstery (n.)

1846, from French phalanst&egrave;re, name for one of the socialistic communities of c.1,800 people,
living together as family, proposed as the basic unit of society in the system of French social
scientist Fran&ccedil;ois-Marie-Charles Fourier (1772-1837), coined by Fourier from phalange,
properly phalanx (see phalanx) + ending after monast&egrave;re monastery.


serried (adj.)

pressed close together, 1667 (in Paradise Lost), probably a  past participle adjective from serry to
press close together (1580s), a military term, from Middle French serre close, compact (12c.), past
participle of serrer press close, fasten, from Vulgar Latin *serrare to bolt, lock up, from Latin
serare, from sera a bolt, bar, cross-bar, perhaps from PIE *ser- (3) to line up (see series). Modern
use is due to the popularity of Scott, who used it with phalanx.


balk (n.)

Old English balca ridge, bank, from or influenced by Old Norse balkr ridge of land, especially
between two plowed furrows, both from Proto-Germanic *balkon- (cognates: Old Saxon balko, Danish
bjelke, Old Frisian balka, Old High German balcho, German Balken beam, rafter), from PIE *bhelg-
beam, plank (cognates: Latin fulcire to prop up, support, fulcrum bedpost; Lithuanian balziena
cross-bar; and possibly Greek phalanx trunk, log, line of battle). Modern senses are figurative,
representing the balk as a hindrance or obstruction (see balk (v.)). Baseball sense is first
attested 1845.


