pharmaceutical (adj.)

1640s (pharmaceutic in the same sense is from 1540s), from Late Latin pharmaceuticus of drugs, from
Greek pharmakeutikos, from pharmakeus preparer of drugs, poisoner (see pharmacy). Related:
Pharmaceuticals; pharmaceutically.


parmaceutics (n.)

1660s, from pharmaceutic (see pharmaceutical); also see -ics.


lemon (n.1)

type of citrus fruit, c.1400, lymon, from Old French limon citrus fruit (12c.), via Proven&#231;al
or Italian from Arabic laimun, from Persian limu(n), generic terms for citrus fruits (compare lime
(n.2)); cognate with Sanskrit nimbu the lime. Slang meaning a Quaalude is 1960s, from Lemmon, name
of a pharmaceutical company that once manufactured the drug.


alchemy (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French alchimie (14c.), alquemie (13c.), from Medieval Latin alkimia, from Arabic
al-kimiya, from Greek khemeioa (found c.300 C.E. in a decree of Diocletian against the old writings
of the Egyptians), all meaning alchemy. Perhaps from an old name for Egypt (Khemia, literally land
of black earth, found in Plutarch), or from Greek khymatos that which is poured out, from khein to
pour, related to khymos juice, sap [Klein, citing W. Muss-Arnolt, calls this folk etymology]. The
word seems to have elements of both origins.Mahn ... concludes, after an elaborate investigation,
that Gr. khymeia was probably the original, being first applied to pharmaceutical chemistry, which
was chiefly concerned with juices or infusions of plants; that the pursuits of the Alexandrian
alchemists were a subsequent development of chemical study, and that the notoriety of these may have
caused the name of the art to be popularly associated with the ancient name of Egypt. [OED]The al-
is the Arabic definite article, the. The art and the name were adopted by the Arabs from
Alexandrians and thence returned to Europe via Spain. Alchemy was the chemistry of the Middle Ages
and early modern times; since c.1600 the word has been applied distinctively to the pursuit of the
transmutation of baser metals into gold, which, along with the search for the universal solvent and
the panacea, were the chief occupations of early chemistry.


aspirin (n.)

coined 1899 by German chemist Heinrich Dreser (1860-1924) in German as a trademark name, from Latin
Spiraea (ulmaria) meadow-sweet, the plant in whose flowers or leaves the processed acid in the
medicine is naturally found, + common chemical ending -in (see -ine (2)). Spiraea (Tournefort, 1700)
is from Latinized form of Greek speiraia meadow-sweet, so called from the shape of its follicles
(see spiral (adj.)). The initial -a- is to acknowledge acetylation; Dreser said the word was a
contraction of acetylierte spirs&auml;ure, the German name of the acid, which now is obsolete,
replaced by salicylic acid.   Die Bezeichnung Aspirin ist abgeleitet aus Spirs&#228;ure -- alter
Name der Salicyls&#228;ure und A = Acetyl; statt Acetylirte Spirs&#228;ure, kurzweg Aspirin. [H,
Dreser, Pharmakologisches &#252;ber Aspirin (Acetylsalicyls&#228;ure), in Archiv f&#252;r die
Gesammte Physiologie des Menschen und der Thiere, 1899, p.307]    The custom of giving commercial
names to medicinal products began in Germany in the late 19th century, when nascent pharmaceutical
firms were discovering medical uses for common, easily made chemicals. To discourage competitors
they would market the substance under a short trademarked name a doctor could remember, rather than
the long chemical compound word. German law required prescriptions to be filled exactly as written.


