phenomena (n.)

plural of phenomenon. Sometimes also erroneously used as a singular.


meteor (n.)

late 15c., any atmospheric phenomenon, from Middle French meteore (13c.) and directly from Medieval
Latin meteorum (nominative meteora), from Greek ta meteora the celestial phenomena, things in heaven
above, plural of meteoron, literally thing high up, noun use of neuter of meteoros (adj.) high up,
raised from the ground, hanging, from meta- over, beyond (see meta-) + -aoros lifted, hovering in
air, related to aeirein to raise (see aorta).    Specific sense of fireball, shooting star is
attested from 1590s. Atmospheric phenomena were formerly classified as aerial meteors (wind),
aqueous meteors (rain, snow, hail), luminous meteors (aurora, rainbows), and igneous meteors
(lightning, shooting stars).


observatory (n.)

building for observing astronomical phenomena, 1670s (in reference to Greenwich), from French
observatoire, from observer (v.); see observe.


meteorologist (n.)

1620s, from meteorology + -ist. Earlier was meteorologician (1570s). Greek meteorologos meant one
who deals with celestial phenomena, astronomer.


ideation (n.)

1829; see idea + -ation. Related: Ideational.    As we say Sensation, we might say also, Ideation;
it would be a very useful word; and there is no objection to it, except the pedantic habit of
decrying a new term. [James Mill, Analysis of the Phenomena of the Human Mind, London, 1829]


deja vu

1903, from French d&#233;j&#224; vu, literally already seen. The phenomenon also is known as
promnesia. Similar phenomena are d&eacute;j&agrave; entendu already heard (of music, etc.), 1965;
and d&eacute;j&agrave; lu already read.


phenomenon (n.)

1570s, fact, occurrence, from Late Latin ph&aelig;nomenon, from Greek phainomenon that which appears
or is seen, noun use of neuter present participle of phainesthai to appear, passive of phainein (see
phantasm). Meaning extraordinary occurrence first recorded 1771. Plural is phenomena.


phenology (n.)

study of the influence of climate on recurring natural phenomena, 1881, from German
(ph&#228;nologisch, Karl Fritsch, 1853) from Latin phaeno-, from Greek phaino-, from phainein to
show (see phantasm) + -logy. Related: Phenological (1875).


sociology (n.)

the science of social phenomena, 1842, from French sociologie, a hybrid coined 1830 by French
philosopher Isidore Auguste Comte (1798-1857), from Latin socius associate (see social (adj.)) +
Greek-derived suffix -logie (see -logy).


luminescence (n.)

1884, from Latin lumen (genitive luminis) light (see luminous) + -escence.    Fluorescence and
Phosphorescence -- Prof. E. Wiedmann has made a new study of these phenomena. He proposes the
general name luminescence for evolutions of light which do not depend on the temperature of the
substance concerned. [Photographic News, April 20, 1888]


meteorology (n.)

science of the atmosphere, weather forecasting, 1610s, from French m&eacute;t&eacute;orologie and
directly from Greek meteorologia treatise on celestial phenomena, discussion of high things, from
meteoron, literally thing high up (see meteor), + -logia treatment of (see -logy).


catastrophism (n.)

as a geological or biological theory, 1869, coined by Huxley from catastrophe + -ism.    By
CATASTROPHISM I mean any form of geological speculation which, in order to account for the phenomena
of geology, supposes the operation of forces different in their nature, or immeasurably different in
power, from those which we at present see in action in the universe. [T.H. Huxley, Address to the
Geological Society of London, Feb. 19, 1869]    Related: Catastrophist.


second nature (n.)

late 14c., from Latin secundum naturam according to nature (Augustine, Macrobius, etc.), literally
following nature; from medieval Aristotelian philosophy, contrasted to phenomena that were super
naturam (above nature, such as God's grace), extra naturam (outside nature), supra naturam (beyond
nature, such as miracles), contra naturam against nature, etc.


Occam&#039;s razor

when two competing hypotheses explain the data equally well, choose the simpler. Or, as Sir William
Hamilton puts it, Neither more, nor more onerous, causes are to be assumed, than are necessary to
account for the phenomena. Named for English philosopher William of Ockham or Occam (c.1285-c.1349),
who expressed it with Entia non sunt multiplicanda praeter ncccssitatem.    So called after William
of Occam (died about 1349): but, as a historical fact, Occam does not make much use of this
principle, which belongs rather to the contemporary nominalist William Durand de St. Pour&#231;ain
(died 1332). [Century Dictionary]


lemur (n.)

nocturnal Madagascar mammal, 1795, coined by Linnaeus, from Latin lemures (plural) spirits of the
dead in Roman mythology.     The oldest usage of lemur for a primate that we are aware of is in
Linnaeus's catalog of the Museum of King Adolf Frederick of Sweden (Tattersall, 1982); .... In this
work, he explained his use of the name lemur thus: Lemures dixi  hos, quod noctu imprimis
obambulant, hominibus quodanmodo similes, &amp; lento passu vagantur [I call them lemurs, because
they go around mainly by night, in a certain way similar to humans, and roam with a slow pace]
[Dunkel, Alexander R., et al., Giant rabbits, marmosets, and British comedies: etymology of lemur
names, part 1, in Lemur News, vol. 16, 2011-2012, p.65]   Lemuria (1864) was the name given by
English zoologist P.L. Sclater (1829-1913) to a hypothetical ancient continent connecting Africa and
Southeastern Asia (and including Madagascar), which was hypothesized to explain phenomena now
accounted for by continental drift. Earlier it was the name of the Roman feast of the Lemures.


history (n.)

late 14c., relation of incidents (true or false), from Old French estoire, estorie chronicle,
history, story (12c., Modern French histoire), from Latin historia narrative of past events,
account, tale, story, from Greek historia a learning or knowing by inquiry; an account of one's
inquiries, history, record, narrative, from historein inquire, from histor wise man, judge, from PIE
*wid-tor-, from root *weid- to know, literally to see (see vision).    Related to Greek idein to
see, and to eidenai to know. In Middle English, not differentiated from story; sense of record of
past events probably first attested late 15c. As a branch of knowledge, from 1842. Sense of
systematic account (without reference to time) of a set of natural phenomena (1560s) is now obsolete
except in natural history.    One difference between history and imaginative literature ... is that
history neither anticipates nor satisfies our curiosity, whereas literature does. [Guy Davenport,
Wheel Ruts, 1996]


new (adj.)

Old English neowe, niowe, earlier niwe new, fresh, recent, novel, unheard-of, different from the
old; untried, inexperienced, from Proto-Germanic *newjaz (cognates: Old Saxon niuwi, Old Frisian
nie, Middle Dutch nieuwe, Dutch nieuw, Old High German niuwl, German neu, Danish and Swedish ny,
Gothic niujis new), from PIE *newo- new (cognates: Sanskrit navah, Persian nau, Hittite newash,
Greek neos, Lithuanian naujas, Old Church Slavonic novu, Russian novyi, Latin novus, Old Irish nue,
Welsh newydd new).    The adverb is Old English niwe, from the adjective. New math in reference to a
system of teaching mathematics based on investigation and discovery is from 1958. New World (adj.)
to designate phenomena of the Western Hemisphere first attested 1823, in Lord Byron; the noun phrase
is recorded from 1550s. New Deal in the FDR sense attested by 1932. New school in reference to the
more advanced or liberal faction of something is from 1806. New Left (1960) was a coinage of U.S.
political sociologist C. Wright Mills (1916-1962). New light in reference to religions is from
1640s. New frontier, in U.S. politics, reform and social betterment, is from 1934 but associated
with John F. Kennedy's use of it in 1960.


