philanthropy (n.)

c.1600, from Late Latin philanthropia, from Greek philanthropia kindliness, humanity, benevolence,
love to mankind (from gods, men, or things), from philanthropos (adj.) loving mankind, useful to
man, from phil- loving  (see philo-) + anthropos mankind (see anthropo-). Originally in English in
the Late Latin form; modern spelling attested from 1620s.


slum (v.)

visit slums of a city, especially for diversion or amusement, often under guise of philanthropy,
1884, from slum (n.). Pastime popularized by East End novels. Earlier it meant to visit slums for
disreputable purposes or in search of vice (1860). Related: Slumming.


philanthropist (n.)

1731, from philanthropy + -ist. Related: Philanthropism.


philanthrope (n.)

1734, from Latin philanthropos, from Greek philanthropos loving mankind (see philanthropy).


philanthropic (adj.)

1789, from French philanthropique (18c.), from Greek philanthropikos (adj.), from philanthropia
humanity, benevolence, kindliness (see philanthropy). Related: Philanthropical; philanthropically
(1787).


humanity (n.)

late 14c., kindness, graciousness, from Old French humanit&eacute;, umanit&eacute; human nature;
humankind, life on earth; pity, from Latin humanitatem (nominative humanitas) human nature;
philanthropy, kindness; good breeding, refinement; the human race, mankind, from humanus (see
human). Sense of human nature, human form is c.1400; that of human race first recorded mid-15c.


ergophobia (n.)

fear of work, 1905, coinage by British medical man Dr. William Dunnett Spanton, from Greek ergos
work (see organ) + -phobia fear.    Mr. W.D. Spanton (Leeds) considered that the most prominent
causes of physical degeneration were--efforts to rear premature and diseased infants, absurd
educational high pressure, cigarette smoking in the younger generation, and late hours at night; in
fact, the love of pleasure and ergophobia in all classes of society. He considered that there was
too much cheap philanthropy, that life was made too easy for the young poor, and that by modern
educational methods proper parental discipline was rendered almost impossible. [report on the 73rd
annual meeting of the British Medical Association, Nature, Aug. 3, 1905]


