philology (n.)

late 14c., love of learning, from Latin philologia love of learning, love of letters, love of study,
literary culture, from Greek philologia love of discussion, learning, and literature; studiousness,
from philo- loving (see philo-) + logos word, speech (see logos).    Meaning science of language is
first attested 1716 (philologue linguist is from 1590s; philologer linguistic scholar is from
1650s); this confusing secondary sense has not been popular in the U.S., where linguistics is
preferred. Related: Philological.


philologist (n.)

1640s, literary person; 1716, student of language, from philology + -ist.


grammar (n.)

early 14c., gramarye (late 12c. in surnames), from Old French gramaire learning, especially Latin
and philology, grammar, (magic) incantation, spells, mumbo-jumbo, irregular semi-popular adoption
[OED] of Latin grammatica, from Greek grammatike tekhne art of letters, with a sense of both
philology and literature in the broadest sense, fem. adjective from gramma letter, from stem of
graphein to draw or write (see -graphy). An Old English word for it was st&aelig;fcr&aelig;ft (see
staff (n.)).    Form grammar is from late 14c. Restriction to rules of language is a post-classical
development, but as this type of study was until 16c. limited to Latin, Middle English gramarye also
came to mean learning in general, knowledge peculiar to the learned classes (early 14c.), which
included astrology and magic; hence the secondary meaning of occult knowledge (late 15c.), which
evolved in Scottish into glamor (q.v.).    A grammar school (late 14c.) originally was a school in
which the learned languages are grammatically taught [Johnson, who also has grammaticaster a mean
verbal pedant]. In U.S. (1842) the term was put to use in the graded system for a school between
primary and secondary where English grammar is taught.


henotheism (n.)

1860, from Greek henos, neuter of eis one (from PIE *sem- one, as one) + theism. Devotion to a
single god without asserting that he is the only god. Coined by (Friedrich) Max M&uuml;ller
(1823-1900), professor of comparative philology at Oxford. Related: Henotheist.


morphology (n.)

1824 in biology (from German Morphologie, 1817); 1869 in philology; from morpho- + -logy. Related:
Morphological; morphologist. Related: Morphologist.


Octavian

masc. proper name, from Latin, from Octavius, from octavus eighth, from octo (see eight).    But
although we find so marked differences in the use of the numerals as names, it is impossible to
believe that this use did not arise in the same way for all; that is, that they were at first used
to distinguish children by the order of birth. But when we find them as praenomina in historical
times it is evident that they no longer referred to order of birth. [George Davis Chase, The Origin
of Roman Praenomina, Harvard Studies in Classical Philology, 1897]


affinity (n.)

c.1300, relation by marriage (as opposed to consanguinity), from Old French afinit&eacute; (12c.),
from Latin affinitatem (nominative affinitas) neighborhood, relationship by marriage, noun of state
from affinis adjacent, also kin by marriage, literally bordering on, from ad- to (see ad-) + finis a
border, an end (see finish (v.)). Used figuratively since c.1600 of structural relationships in
chemistry, philology, etc. Meaning natural attraction (as though by family) is from 1610s.


