philologist (n.)

1640s, literary person; 1716, student of language, from philology + -ist.


Roget

in reference to the Thesaurus of English Words and Phrases published 1852 by English physician and
philologist Peter Mark Roget (1779-1869). Related: Roget's.


metanalysis (n.)

1914, from meta- + analysis. Coined by Danish philologist Otto Jespersen (1860-1943).


grammarian (n.)

student of or writer on (Latin) grammar; philologist, etymologist; in general use, learned man, late
14c., from Old French gramairien (Modern French grammairien) grammarian, wise man, person who knows
Latin; magician, agent noun from grammaire (see grammar).


litterateur (n.)

a literary man, 1806, from French litt&eacute;rateur, from Latin litterator a grammarian,
philologist, from littera letter (see letter (n.1)). Sometimes Englished as literator (1630s, often
with a deprecatory sense). Fem. form is litt&eacute;ratrice.


sequoia (n.)

large American coniferous tree, 1857, from Modern Latin tree genus name given 1847 by Austrian
botanist Stephan Endlicher (1804-1849), originally to a different tree, the coast redwood,
apparently in honor of Sequoya (a.k.a. George Guess, 1760-1843), Cherokee man who invented a system
of writing for his people's language, whose name is from Cherokee (Iroquoian) Sikwayi, a word of
unknown etymology.    Endlicher was a specialist in conifers, and he also was a philologist. But he
never gave an etymology of this name and a search of his papers discovered no mention of Sequoya or
the Cherokee writing system, and the connection is an assumption that some botanists have
challenged, though no better candidate for a source has yet been found.    The giant sequoia was
unseen by Europeans until 1833 and unknown to scientists until 1852. In May 1855, a pair of American
botanists named it Taxodium giganteum, but that name was deemed inappropriate for several scientific
reasons. Meanwhile, English botanist John Lindley, who had never been to California, in 1853 named
it Wellingtonia in honor of the Duke of Wellington. As high as Wellington towers above his
contemporaries, as high towers this California tree above the forest surrounding it. Therefore, it
shall bear for all time to come the name Wellingtonia gigantea. This sat poorly with the Americans,
and much ink was spilled until a French botanist provided the solution by transferring Endlicher's
name. In Britain still popularly called Wellingtonia.


Aryan

c.1600, as a term in classical history, from Latin Arianus, Ariana, from Greek Aria, Areia, names
applied in classical times to the eastern part of ancient Persia and to its inhabitants. Ancient
Persians used the name in reference to themselves (Old Persian ariya-), hence Iran. Ultimately from
Sanskrit arya- compatriot; in later language noble, of good family.    Also the name Sanskrit-
speaking invaders of India gave themselves in the ancient texts, from which early 19c. European
philologists (Friedrich Schlegel, 1819, who linked the word with German Ehre honor) applied it to
the ancient people we now call Indo-Europeans (suspecting that this is what they called themselves);
this use is attested in English from 1851. The term fell into the hands of racists, and in German
from 1845 it was specifically contrasted to Semitic (Lassen).    German philologist Max M&uuml;ller
(1823-1900) popularized the term in his writings on comparative linguistics, recommending it as the
name (replacing Indo-European, Indo-Germanic, Caucasian, Jshortened) for the group of related,
inflected languages connected with these peoples, mostly found in Europe but also including Sanskrit
and Persian. Arian was used in this sense from 1839 (and is more philologically correct), but this
spelling caused confusion with Arian, the term in ecclesiastical history.    Gradually replaced in
comparative linguistics c.1900 by Indo-European, except when used to distinguish Indo-European
languages of India from non-Indo-European ones. Used in Nazi ideology to mean member of a Caucasian
Gentile race of Nordic type. As an ethnic designation, however, it is properly limited to Indo-
Iranians (most justly to the latter) and has fallen from general academic use since the Nazi era.


blue (1)

c.1300, bleu, blwe, etc., from Old French blo pale, pallid, wan, light-colored; blond; discolored;
blue, blue-gray, from Frankish *blao or some other Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic
*bl&aelig;waz (cognates: Old English blaw, Old Saxon and Old High German blao, Danish blaa, Swedish
bl&#229;, Old Frisian blau, Middle Dutch bla, Dutch blauw, German blau blue), from PIE *bhle-was
light-colored, blue, blond, yellow, from PIE root bhel- (1) to shine, flash (see bleach (v.)).
The same PIE root yielded Latin flavus yellow, Old Spanish blavo yellowish-gray, Greek phalos white,
Welsh blawr gray, Old Norse bla livid (the meaning in black and blue), showing the usual slippery
definition of color words in Indo-European The present spelling is since 16c., from French influence
(Modern French bleu).    The exact color to which the Gmc. term applies varies in the older
dialects; M.H.G. bla is also 'yellow,' whereas the Scandinavian words may refer esp. to a deep,
swarthy black, e.g. O.N. blama&eth;r, N.Icel. blama&eth;ur 'Negro' [Buck]   <hr />   Few words enter
more largely into the composition of slang, and colloquialisms bordering on slang, than does the
word BLUE. Expressive alike of the utmost contempt, as of all that men hold dearest and love best,
its manifold combinations, in ever varying shades of meaning, greet the philologist at every turn.
[John S. Farmer, Slang and Its Analogues Past and Present, 1890, p.252]    The color of constancy
since Chaucer at least, but apparently for no deeper reason than the rhyme in true blue (c.1500).
From early times blue was the distinctive color of the dress of servants, which may be the reason
police uniforms are blue, a tradition Farmer dates to Elizabethan times. For blue ribbon see cordon
bleu under cordon. Blue whale attested from 1851, so called for its color. The flower name blue bell
is recorded by 1570s. Blue streak, of something resembling a bolt of lightning (for quickness,
intensity, etc.) is from 1830, U.S. Western slang.    Many Indo-European languages seem to have had
a word to describe the color of the sea, encompasing blue and green and gray; such as Irish glass
(see Chloe); Old English h&aelig;wen blue, gray, related to har (see hoar); Serbo-Croatian sinji
gray-blue, sea-green; Lithuanian &#353;yvas, Russian sivyj gray.


