phoenix (n.)

Old English and Old French fenix, from Medieval Latin phenix, from Latin phoenix, from Greek
phoinix, mythical bird of Arabia which flew to Egypt every 500 years to be reborn, also the date
(fruit and tree), also Phoenician, literally purple-red, perhaps a foreign word (Egyptian has been
suggested), or from phoinos blood-red. Exact relation and order of the senses in Greek is
unclear.&ETH;one wudu wearda&thorn; wundrum f&aelig;gerfugel fe&thorn;rum se is fenix hatan[Phoenix,
c.900]Spelling assimilated to Greek 16c. (see ph). Figurative sense of that which rises from the
ashes of what was destroyed is attested from 1590s. The city in Arizona, U.S., so called because it
was founded in 1867 on the site of an ancient Native American settlement.


Arabian

c.1300, adjective and noun; see Arab + -ian. As a prized type of horse, it is attested from 1660s.
The Arabian bird was the phoenix.


Phoenician (n.)

late 14c., from Middle French phenicien, from Latin Phoenice, from Greek Phoinike Phoenicia
(including Carthage), perhaps literally land of the purple (i.e., source of purple dye, the earliest
use of which was ascribed to the Phoenicians by the Greeks). Identical with phoenix (q.v.), but the
relationship is obscure. In reference to a language from 1836; as an adjective from c.1600.


oe

found in Greek borrowings into Latin, representing Greek -oi-. Words with -oe- that came early into
English from Old French or Medieval Latin usually already had been levelled to -e- (economic, penal,
cemetery), but later borrowings directly from Latin or Greek tended to retain it at first (oestrus,
diarrhoea, amoeba) as did proper names (Oedipus, Phoebe, Phoenix) and purely technical terms.
British English tends to be more conservative with it than American, which has done away with it in
all but a few instances.    It also occurred in some native Latin words (foedus treaty, league,
foetere to stink, hence occasionally in English foetid, foederal, which was the form in the original
publications of the Federalist papers). In these it represents an ancient -oi- in Old Latin (for
example Old Latin oino, Classical Latin unus), which apparently passed through an -oe- form before
being leveled out but was preserved into Classical Latin in certain words, especially those
belonging to the realms of law (such as foedus) and religion, which, along with the vocabulary of
sailors, are the most conservative branches of any language in any time, through a need for
precision, immediate comprehension, demonstration of learning, or superstition. But in foetus it was
an unetymological spelling in Latin that was picked up in English and formed the predominant
spelling of fetus into the early 20c.


