phraseology (n.)

1550s, coined erroneously in Greek as phraseologia (1550s), from Greek phrasis way of speaking (see
phrase (n.)) + -logia (see -logy). The correct form would be *phrasiology. Originally a phrase book,
meaning way of arranging words, characteristic style of expression is from 1660s.


phrase (n.)

1520s, manner or style of expression, also group of words with some unity, from Late Latin phrasis
diction, from Greek phrasis speech, way of speaking, enunciation, phraseology, from phrazein to
express, tell, from phrazesthai to consider, from PIE *gwhren- to think (see frenetic). The musical
sense of short passage is from 1789.


cant (n.1)

insincere talk, 1709, earlier it was slang for whining of beggars (1640s), from the verb in this
sense (1560s), from Old North French canter (Old French chanter) to sing, chant, from Latin cantare,
frequentative of canere to sing (see chant (v.)). Sense in English developed after 1680 to mean the
jargon of criminals and vagabonds, thence applied contemptuously by any sect or school to the
phraseology of its rival.    ... Slang is universal, whilst Cant is restricted in usage to certain
classes of the community: thieves, vagrom men, and -- well, their associates. ... Slang boasts a
quasi-respectability denied to Cant, though Cant is frequently more enduring, its use continuing
without variation of meaning for many generations. [John S. Farmer, Forewords to Musa Pedestris,
1896]


fiddle (n.)

late 14c., fedele, earlier fithele, from Old English fi&eth;ele, which is related to Old Norse
fi&eth;la, Middle Dutch vedele, Dutch vedel, Old High German fidula, German Fiedel; all of uncertain
origin.    Perhaps from Medieval Latin vitula stringed instrument, which is perhaps related to Latin
vitularia celebrate joyfully, from Vitula, Roman goddess of joy and victory, who probably, like her
name, originated among the Sabines [Klein, Barnhart]. Unless the Medieval Latin word is from the
Germanic ones.   Fiddle has been relegated to colloquial usage by its more proper cousin, violin, a
process encouraged by phraseology such as fiddlesticks, contemptuous nonsense word fiddlededee
(1784), and fiddle-faddle. Fit as a fiddle is from 1610s.


term (n.)

c.1200, terme limit in time, set or appointed period, from Old French terme limit of time or place,
date, appointed time, duration (11c.), from Latin terminus end, boundary line, in Medieval Latin
expression, definition, related to termen boundary, end (see terminus). Old English had termen term,
end, from Latin. Sense of period of time during which something happens first recorded c.1300,
especially of a school or law court session (mid-15c.).    The meaning word or phrase used in a
limited or precise sense is first recorded late 14c., from Medieval Latin use of terminus to render
Greek horos boundary, employed in mathematics and logic. Hence in terms of in the language or
phraseology peculiar to. Meaning completion of the period of pregnancy is from 1844. Term-paper in
U.S. educational sense is recorded from 1931.


idiom (n.)

1580s, form of speech peculiar to a people or place, from Middle French idiome (16c.) and directly
from Late Latin idioma a peculiarity in language, from Greek idioma peculiarity, peculiar
phraseology, from idioumai to appropriate to oneself, from idios personal, private, properly
particular to oneself, from PIE *swed-yo-, suffixed form of root *s(w)e-, pronoun of the third
person and reflexive (referring back to the subject of a sentence), also used in forms denoting the
speaker's social group, (we our-)selves (cognates: Sanskrit svah, Avestan hva-, Old Persian huva
one's own, khva-data lord, literally created from oneself; Greek hos he, she, it; Latin suescere to
accustom, get accustomed, sodalis companion; Old Church Slavonic svoji his, her, its, svojaku
relative, kinsman; Gothic swes one's own; Old Norse sik oneself; German Sein; Old Irish fein self,
himself). Meaning phrase or expression peculiar to a language is from 1620s.


