physiological (adj.)

c.1600, pertaining to natural science, from physiology + -ical. From 1814 as pertaining to
physiology. Related: Physiologically.


infantilism (n.)

1894 in a psychological sense; see infantile + -ism. Earlier in a physiological sense, retarded and
imperfect physical development.


sympathize (v.)

have fellow-feeling, c.1600, from Middle French sympathiser, from sympathie (see sympathy). Earlier
in a physiological sense (1590s). As express sympathy, from 1748. Related: Sympathized;
sympathizing.


isometric (adj.)

1838, literally of the same measure, coined from Greek isos equal (see iso-) + metron measure (see
meter (n.2)). Originally a method of using perspective in drawing; the physiological sense relating
to muscular action is from 1891, from German isometrisch in this sense (1882).


elaboration (n.)

1570s, in a physiological sense relating to tissue development, from Late Latin elaborationem
(nominative elaboratio), noun of action from past participle stem of elaborare work out, produce by
labor, from ex- out (see ex-) + laborare to labor (see labor (v.)).


tolerance (n.)

early 15c., endurance, fortitude (in the face of pain, hardship, etc.), from Old French tolerance
(14c.), from Latin tolerantia a bearing, supporting, endurance, from tolerans, present participle of
tolerare to bear, endure, tolerate (see toleration). Of individuals, with the sense tendency to be
free from bigotry or severity in judging other, from 1765. Meaning allowable amount of variation
dates from 1868; and physiological sense of ability to take large doses first recorded 1875.


reaction (n.)

action in resistance or response to another action or power, 1610s, from re- again, anew + action
(q.v.). Modeled on French r&eacute;action, older Italian reattione, from Medieval Latin reactionem
(nominative reactio), noun of action formed in Late Latin from past participle stem of Latin reagere
react, from re- back + agere to do, act (see act (v.)).    Originally scientific; physiological
sense is attested from 1805; psychological sense first recorded 1887; general sense of action or
feeling in response (to a statement, event, etc.) is recorded from 1914. Reaction time, time
elapsing between the action of an external stimulus and the giving of a signal in reply, attested by
1874.


