piety (n.)

early 14c. (late 12c. as a surname), mercy, tenderness, pity, from Old French piete piety, faith;
pity, compassion (12c.), from Latin pietatem (nominative pietas) dutiful conduct, sense of duty;
religiousness, piety; loyalty, patriotism; faithfulness to natural ties, in Late Latin gentleness,
kindness, pity; from pius kind (see pious). Meaning piousness attested in English from c.1600. Also
see pity (n.).


pity (n.)

early 13c., from Old French pite, pitet pity, mercy, compassion, care, tenderness; pitiful state,
wretched condition (11c., Modern French piti&eacute;), from Latin pietatem (nominative pietas)
piety, loyalty, duty (see piety). Replaced Old English mildheortness, literally mild-heartness,
itself a loan-translation of Latin misericordia. English pity and piety were not fully distinguished
until 17c. Transferred sense of grounds or cause for pity is from late 14c.


pietism (n.)

also Pietism, 1690s, from German Pietismus, originally applied in derision to the movement to revive
personal piety in the Lutheran Church, begun in Frankfurt c.1670 by Philipp Jakob Spener
(1635-1705). See piety + -ism.


devotion (n.)

early 13c., from Old French devocion devotion, piety, from Latin devotionem (nominative devotio),
noun of action from past participle stem of devovere dedicate by a vow, sacrifice oneself, promise
solemnly, from de- down, away (see de-) + vovere to vow, from votum vow (see vow (n.)).    In
ancient Latin, act of consecrating by a vow, also loyalty, fealty, allegiance; in Church Latin,
devotion to God, piety. This was the original sense in English; the etymological sense, including
secular situations, returned 16c. via Italian and French.


Pieta (n.)

Virgin holding the dead body of Christ, 1640s, from Italian pieta, from Latin pietatem (see piety).


works (n.)

Old English, (someone's) deeds, acts, or actions, the things one has done in life, often especially
good deeds, acts of piety, demonstrations of virtue, plural of work (n.). Meaning operations
pertinent to maintaining a large physical place (private, religious, or municipal) is from late 14c.
Meaning industrial place (usually with qualifying adjective) is from late 15c. To be in the works in
the extended sense of in the process of being done or made is by 1973.


Tartuffe (n.)

pretender to piety, 1670s, from name of the principal character in the comedy by Moli&egrave;re
(1664), apparently from Old French tartuffe truffle (see truffle), perhaps chosen for suggestion of
concealment (Tartuffe is a religious hypocrite), or in allusion to the fancy that truffles were a
diseased product of the earth. Italian Tartufo is said to have been the name of a hypocritical
character in Italian comedy.


Lollard

name for certain heretics, late 14c. (in Chaucer, Loller, c.1386), from Middle Dutch lollaerd,
applied pejoratively to members of reforming sects c.1300 who devoted themselves to the care of the
sick and poor, literally mumbler, mutterer, so called by critics who regarded them as heretics
pretending to humble piety, from lollen to mumble or doze. Generic late Middle English term for
groups suspected of heresy, especially followers of John Wyclif.


hyperborean (adj.)

1590s, from Late Latin hyperboreanus, from Latin hyperboreus, from Greek hyperboreos pertaining to
the regions of the far north, from hyper (see hyper-) + Boreas (see boreal). The Hyperboreans were
an imagined Arctic people believed by the ancients to be distinguished by piety and happiness.
Middle English had iperborie the far north of the Earth (mid-15c.).


piteous (adj.)

c.1300, from Anglo-French pitous, Old French pitos pious; merciful, compassionate, moved to pity;
pitiful (12c., Modern French piteux), from Medieval Latin pietosus merciful, pitiful, in Vulgar
Latin dutiful, from Latin pietas dutiful conduct, compassion (see piety). Related: Piteously;
piteousness.


virgin (n.)

c.1200, unmarried or chaste woman noted for religious piety and having a position of reverence in
the Church, from Anglo-French and Old French virgine virgin; Virgin Mary, from Latin virginem
(nominative virgo) maiden, unwedded girl or woman, also an adj., fresh, unused, probably related to
virga young shoot. For sense evolution, compare Greek talis a marriageable girl, cognate with Latin
talea rod, stick, bar.    Meaning young woman in a state of inviolate chastity is recorded from
c.1300. Also applied since early 14c. to a chaste man. Meaning naive or inexperienced person is
attested from 1953. The adjective is recorded from 1550s in the literal sense; figurative sense of
pure, untainted is attested from c.1300. The Virgin Islands were named (in Spanish) by Columbus for
St. Ursula and her 11,000 martyred virgin companions.


religion (n.)

c.1200, state of life bound by monastic vows, also conduct indicating a belief in a divine power,
from Anglo-French religiun (11c.), Old French religion piety, devotion; religious community, and
directly from Latin religionem (nominative religio) respect for what is sacred, reverence for the
gods; conscientiousness, sense of right, moral obligation; fear of the gods; divine service,
religious observance; a religion, a faith, a mode of worship, cult; sanctity, holiness, in Late
Latin monastic life (5c.).    According to Cicero derived from relegere go through again (in reading
or in thought), from re- again (see re-) + legere read (see lecture (n.)). However, popular
etymology among the later ancients (Servius, Lactantius, Augustine) and the interpretation of many
modern writers connects it with religare to bind fast (see rely), via notion of place an obligation
on, or bond between humans and gods. In that case, the re- would be intensive. Another possible
origin is religiens careful, opposite of negligens. In English, meaning particular system of faith
is recorded from c.1300; sense of recognition of and allegiance in manner of life (perceived as
justly due) to a higher, unseen power or powers is from 1530s.   To hold, therefore, that there is
no difference in matters of religion between forms that are unlike each other, and even contrary to
each other, most clearly leads in the end to the rejection of all religion in both theory and
practice. And this is the same thing as atheism, however it may differ from it in name. [Pope Leo
XIII, Immortale Dei, 1885]


