pigment (n.)

late 14c., from Latin pigmentum coloring matter, pigment, paint, figuratively prnament, from stem of
pingere to color, paint (see paint (v.)). Variants of this word could have been known in Old English
(compare 12c. pyhmentum). As a verb from 1900. Related: Pigmented; pigmenting.


pigmentocracy (n.)

1952, apparently coined in the Economist, from pigment + -cracy.


pigmentation (n.)

1866, from pigment + -ation. Perhaps modeled on French.


orpiment (n.)

late 13c., from Old French orpiment arsenic trisulphide, yellow color, from Latin auripigmentum,
from aurum gold (see aureate) + pigmentum coloring matter, pigment, paint (see pigment).


Prussian

1550s (n.), 1560s (adj.), from Prussia + -an. Prussian blue pigment (1724) came to English from
French bleu de Prusse, so called for being discovered in Berlin, the Prussian capital.    All in
all, it seems that Prussian blue was synthesised for the first time around 1706 by the Swiss
immigrant Johann Jacob Diesbach in Berlin. [Jens Bartoll and B&auml;rbel Jackisch, Prussian Blue: A
Chronology of the Early Years, Zeitschrift f&uuml;r Kunsttechnologie und Konservierung 24, No. 1,
2010]    Early German sources refer to it as Preu&szlig;isches Ultra-Marin and berliner blau.
Prussic acid (1790), is from French acide prussique, so called in reference to prussian blue
pigment, to which it is chemically related.


pimento (n.)

1680s, pimiento (modern form from 1718), from Spanish pimiento green or red pepper, also pimienta
black pepper, from Late Latin pigmenta, plural of pigmentum vegetable juice, from Latin pigmentum
pigment (see pigment (n.)). So called because it added a dash of color to food or drink.[I]n med.L.
spiced drink, hence spice, pepper (generally), Sp. pimiento, Fr. piment are applied to Cayenne or
Guinea pepper, capsicum; in Eng. the name has passed to allspice or Jamaica pepper. [OED]The piece
of red sweet pepper stuffed in a pitted olive so called from 1918, earlier pimiento (1901), from
Spanish. French piment is from Spanish.


lamp-black (n.)

pigment made from pure, fine carbon, originally from the soot produced by burning oil in lamps,
1590s, see lamp.


ultramarine (n.)

1590s, blue pigment made from lapis lazuli, from Medieval Latin ultramarinus, literally beyond the
sea, from ultra- beyond + marinus of the sea (see marine (adj.)). Said to be so called because the
mineral was imported from Asia.


chromatophore (n.)

pigment cell, 1864, from chromato- + Greek -phoros bearing, bearer, from pherein to carry (see
infer).


tattoo (n.2)

pigment design in skin, 1769 (noun and verb, both first attested in writing of Capt. Cook), from a
Polynesian noun (such as Tahitian and Samoan tatau, Marquesan tatu puncture, mark made on skin).
Century Dictionary (1902) describes them as found on sailors and uncivilized people or as a sentence
of punishment.


watercolor (n.)

also water-color, 1590s, pigment that dissolves in water, from water (n.1) + color (n.). Meaning
picture painted in watercolors is attested from 1854.


cinnabar (n.)

mid-15c., red or crystalline form of mercuric sulphide, also applied to other ores of mercury,
originally with reference to its use as a pigment; from Old French cinabre (13c.), from Late Latin
cinnabaris, from Greek kinnabari, of oriental origin (compare Persian zanjifrah in the same sense).
Also used 14c.-17c. of red resinous juice of a certain Eastern tree, which was believed to be a
mixture of dragon's and elephant's blood.


tattoo (v.)

mark the skin with pigment, 1769, tattow, from tattoo (n.2). Related: Tattooed; tattooing. Thackeray
has tattooage.


pastel (n.)

1660s, crayons, chalk-like pigment used in crayons, from French pastel crayon, from Italian pastello
a pastel, literally material reduced to a paste, from Late Latin pastellus dye from the leaves of
the woad plant, diminutive of pasta (see pasta). Meaning pale or light color (like that of pastels)
first recorded 1899. As an adjective from 1884.


cyanide (n.)

a salt of hydrocyanic acid, 1826, coined from cyan-, comb. form for carbon and nitrogen compounds,
from Greek kyanos dark blue (see cyan) + chemical ending -ide, on analogy of chloride. So called
because it first had been obtained by heating the dye pigment powder known as Prussian blue (see
Prussian).


sepia (n.)

rich brown pigment, 1821, from Italian seppia cuttlefish (borrowed with that meaning in English by
1560s), from Latin sepia cuttlefish, from Greek sepia cuttlefish, related to sepein to make rotten
(see sepsis). The color was that of brown paint or ink prepared from the fluid secretions of the
cuttlefish. Meaning a sepia drawing is recorded from 1863.


melanin (n.)

dark brown or black pigment found in animal bodies, 1832, Modern Latin, with chemical suffix -in
(2); first element from Greek melas (genitive melanos) black, from PIE root *mel- (2) of darkish
color (cognates: Sanskrit malinah dirty, stained, black, Lithuanian melynas blue, Latin mulleus
reddish). Related: Melanism; melanistic.


bilirubin (n.)

reddish pigment found in bile, 1871, from German bilirubin (1864), from bili- (see bile) + Latin
ruber red (see red (1)) + -ine (2).


umber (n.)

brown earthy pigment, 1560s, from Middle French ombre (in terre d'ombre), or Italian ombra (in terra
di ombra), both from Latin umbra shade, shadow (see umbrage) or else from Umbra, fem. of Umber
belonging to Umbria, region in central Italy from which the coloring matter first came (compare
Sienna). Burnt umber, specially prepared and redder in color, is attested from c.1650, distinguished
from raw umber.


oil (n.)

late 12c., olive oil, from Anglo-French and Old North French olie, from Old French oile, uile oil
(12c., Modern French huile), from Latin oleum oil, olive oil (source of Spanish, Italian olio), from
Greek elaion olive tree, from elaia (see olive). Old English &aelig;le, Dutch olie, German &Ouml;l,
etc. all are from Latin. It meant olive oil exclusively till c.1300, when meaning began to be
extended to any fatty, greasy substance. Use for petroleum first recorded 1520s, but not common
until 19c. The artist's oils (1660s), short for oil-color (1530s), are paints made by grinding
pigment in oil.


