pillage (v.)

plunder, despoil, 1590s, from pillage (n.). Related: Pillaged; pillaging. The earlier verb in
English was simply pill (late Old English), which probably is from Latin pilare.


pillage (n.)

late 14c., act of plundering (especially in war), from Old French pilage (14c.) plunder, from
pillier to plunder, loot, ill-treat, possibly from Vulgar Latin *piliare to plunder, probably from a
figurative use of Latin pilare to strip of hair, perhaps also meaning to skin (compare figurative
extension of verbs pluck, fleece), from pilus a hair (see pile (n.3)).


piller (n.)

plunderer, early 14c., from obsolete verb pill to plunder, to pillage (see pillage (v.)).


spoil (v.)

c.1300, to strip (someone) of clothes, strip a slain enemy, from Old French espillier to strip,
plunder, pillage, from Latin spoliare to strip, uncover, lay bare; strip of clothing, rob, plunder,
pillage, from spolia, plural of spolium arms taken from an enemy, booty; originally skin stripped
from a killed animal, from PIE *spol-yo-, perhaps from root *spel- to split, to break off (see spill
(v.)).    From late 14c. in English as strip with violence, rob, pillage, plunder, dispossess;
impoverish with excessive taxation. Used c.1400 as the verb to describe Christ's harrowing of Hell.
Sense of destroy, ruin, damage so as to render useless is from 1560s; that of to over-indulge (a
child, etc.) is from 1640s (implied in spoiled). Intransitive sense of become tainted, go bad, lose
freshness is from 1690s. To be spoiling for (a fight, etc.) is from 1865, from notion that one will
spoil if he doesn't get it.


depredate (v.)

1620s, from Latin depredatus, past participle of depraedare to pillage, ravage (see depredation).


vandalism (n.)

1794, from French vandalisme, first used by Henri Gr&eacute;goire, Bishop of Blois, in a report
decrying the pillage and destruction of art in the course of the French Revolution; see vandal +
-ism.


rapine (n.)

early 15c., plunder, from Middle French rapine (12c.), from Latin rapina act of robbery, plundering,
pillage, from rapere seize, carry off, rob (see rapid).


sack (n.3)

plunder; act of plundering, the plundering of a city or town after storming and capture, 1540s, from
French sac pillage, plunder, from Italian sacco (see sack (v.1)).


prey (v.)

c.1300, to plunder, pillage, ravage, from prey (n.) and in part from Old French preer, earlier
preder (c.1040), from Late Latin praedare, from praeda (see prey (n.)). Its sense of to kill and
devour is attested from mid-14c. Related: Preyed; preying.


reave (v.)

Old English reafian to rob (something from someone), plunder, pillage, from Proto-Germanic *raubjon
(cognates: Old Frisian ravia, Middle Dutch roven, Dutch rooven, Old High German roubon, German
rauben), from PIE *reup- to snatch (see rip (v.)). Related: Reaved; reaving.


depredation (n.)

late 15c., from Middle French d&eacute;pr&eacute;dation, from Late Latin depraedationem (nominative
depraedatio) a plundering, from past participle stem of Latin depraedari to pillage, from de-
thoroughly (see de-) + praedari to plunder, literally to make prey of, from praeda prey (see prey
(n.)).


ransack (v.)

mid-13c., from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse rannsaka to pillage, literally search the
house (especially legally, for stolen goods), from rann house, from Proto-Germanic *rasnan (c.f.
Gothic razn, Old English &aelig;rn house; see barn) + saka to search, related to Old Norse soekja
seek (see seek). Sense influenced by sack (v.). Related: Ransacked; ransacking.


rob (v.)

late 12c., from Old French rober rob, steal, pillage, ransack, rape, from West Germanic *rauba booty
(cognates: Old High German roubon to rob, roub spoil, plunder; Old English reafian, source of the
reave in bereave), from Proto-Germanic *raubon to rob, from PIE *reup-, *reub- to snatch (see rip
(v.)).Lord, hou schulde God approve &thorn;at &thorn;ou robbe Petur, and gif &thorn;is robbere to
Poule in &thorn;e name of Crist? [Wyclif, c.1380]To rob the cradle is attested from 1864 in
reference to drafting young men in the American Civil War; by 1949 in reference to seductions or
romantic relationships with younger persons. Related: Robbed; robbing.


ravine (n.)

1760, deep gorge, from French ravin a gully (1680s, from Old French raviner to pillage, sweep down,
cascade), and from French ravine violent rush of water, gully worn by a torrent, from Old French
ravine violent rush of water, waterfall; avalanche; robbery, rapine, both ultimately from Latin
rapina act of robbery, plundering (see rapine); sense influenced by Latin rapidus rapid. Middle
English ravine meant booty, plunder, robbery from c.1350-1500. Compare ravening.


purchase (n.)

c.1300, purchas, acquisition, gain; also, something acquired or received, a possession; property,
goods; especially booty, spoil; goods gained by pillage or robbery (to make purchase was to seize by
robbery). Also mercenary soldier, one who fights for booty. From Anglo-French purchace, Old French
porchaz acquisition, gain, profit; seizing, plunder; search pursuit, effort, from Anglo-French
purchaser, Old French porchacier (see purchase (v.)).    From early 14c. as endeavor, effort,
exertion; instigation, contrivance; late 14c. as act of acquiring, procurement. Meaning that which
is bought is from 1580s. The sense of hold or position for advantageously applying power (1711) is
extended from the nautical verb meaning to haul or draw (especially by mechanical power), often used
in reference to hauling up anchors, attested from 1560s. Wif of purchase (early 14c.) was a term for
concubine.


caterpillar (n.)

mid-15c., catyrpel, probably altered (by association with Middle English piller plunderer; see
pillage) from Old North French caterpilose caterpillar (Old French chatepelose), literally shaggy
cat (probably in reference to the wooly-bear variety), from Late Latin catta pilosa, from catta cat
(see cat (n.)) + pilosus hairy, shaggy, covered with hair, from pilus hair (see pile (n.3)). Compare
also French chenille caterpillar, literally little dog. A Swiss German name for it is teufelskatz
devil's cat. The caterpillar has in many idioms received the name of other animals [Kitchin, who
cites also Milanese cagnon little dog, Italian dialectal gattola little cat, Kentish hop-dog, hop-
cat, Portuguese lagarta lizard. Compare also American English wooly-bear for the hairy variety. An
Old English name for it was cawelworm cole-worm. Caterpillar tractor is from 1908.


