pillory (v.)

c.1600, from pillory (n.). Figurative sense of expose publicly to ridicule or abuse is from 1690s.
Related: Pilloried.


pillory (n.)

late 13c. (attested in Anglo-Latin from late 12c.), from Old French pilori pillory (mid-12c.),
related to Medieval Latin pilloria, of uncertain origin, perhaps a diminutive of Latin pila pillar,
stone barrier (see pillar), but OED finds this proposed derivation phonologically unsuitable.


parenthesis (n.)

1540s, words, clauses, etc. inserted into a sentence, from Middle French parenth&egrave;se (15c.),
from Late Latin parenthesis addition of a letter to a syllable in a word, from Greek parenthesis,
literally a putting in beside, from parentithenai put in beside, from para- beside (see para- (1)) +
en- in + tithenai put, place (see theme). Sense extension by 1715 from the inserted words to the
curved brackets that indicate the words inserted.    A wooden parenthesis; the pillory. An iron
parenthesis; a prison. [Dictionary of Buckish Slang, University Wit and Pickpocket Eloquence,
London, 1811]


stock (n.1)

Old English stocc stump, post, stake, tree trunk, log, also pillory (usually plural, stocks), from
Proto-Germanic *stukkaz tree trunk (cognates: Old Norse stokkr block of wood, trunk of a tree, Old
Saxon, Old Frisian stok, Middle Dutch stoc tree trunk, stump, Dutch stok stick, cane, Old High
German stoc tree trunk, stick, German Stock stick, cane; also Dutch stuk, German St&uuml;ck piece),
from PIE *(s)teu- (1) to push, stick, knock, beat (see steep (adj.)).    Meaning ancestry, family
(late 14c.) is a figurative use of the tree trunk sense (as in family tree). This is also the root
of the meaning heavy part of a tool, and part of a rifle held against the shoulder (1540s). Meaning
person as dull and senseless as a block or log is from c.1300; hence a dull recipient of action or
notice (1540s).    Meaning framework on which a boat was constructed (early 15c.) led to figurative
phrase on stocks planned and commenced (1660s). Taking stock making an inventory is attested from
1736. Stock, lock, and barrel the whole of a thing is recorded from 1817. Stock-still (late 15c.) is
literally as still as a tree trunk.


