pine (n.)

coniferous tree, Old English pin (in compounds), from Old French pin and directly from Latin pinus
pine, pine-tree, fir-tree, perhaps in reference to the sap or pitch, from PIE *peie- to be fat,
swell (see fat (adj.)). Compare Sanskrit pituh juice, sap, resin, pitudaruh pine tree, Greek pitys
pine tree. Also see pitch (n.1). Pine-top cheap illicit whiskey, first recorded 1858, Southern U.S.
slang. Pine-needle (n.) attested from 1866.


pineapple (n.)

late 14c., pine cone, from pine (n.) + apple. The reference to the fruit of the tropical plant (from
resemblance of shape) is first recorded 1660s, and pine cone emerged 1690s to replace pineapple in
its original sense except in dialect. For pine cone, Old English also used pinhnyte pine nut.


pineal (adj.)

1680s, in reference to the gland in the brain, from French pin&eacute;al, literally like a pine
cone, from Latin pinea pine cone, from pinus pine tree (see pine (n.)).


pine cone (n.)

1690s, from pine (n.) + cone (n.). An earlier word for it was pine nut (Old English pinhnyte); also
see pineapple.


pine-barren (n.)

1731, American-English, from pine (n.) + barren (n.).


pine-tree (n.)

Old English pintreow; see pine (n.) + tree (n.).


pine (v.)

Old English pinian to torture, torment, afflict, cause to suffer, from *pine pain, torture,
punishment, possibly ultimately from Latin poena punishment, penalty, from Greek poine (see penal).
A Latin word borrowed into Germanic (Middle Dutch pinen, Old High German pinon, German Pein, Old
Norse pina) with Christianity. Intransitive sense of to languish, waste away, the main modern
meaning, is first recorded early 14c. Related: Pined; pining.


ponderosa (n.)

type of pine in western U.S., 1878, from scientific name Pinus ponderosa (1836), literally heavy
pine, from Latin ponderosus (see ponderous).


pinata (n.)

1887, from Mexican Spanish pi&ntilde;ata, in Spanish literally jug, pot, ultimately from Latin pinea
pine cone, from pinus (see pine (n.)).


Padua

Italian city, Italian Padova, from Latin Patavium, probably from Gaulish *padi pine, in reference to
the pine forests thereabouts. Related: Paduan.


periwinkle (n.2)

kind of sea snail, 1520s, apparently an alteration of Old English pinewincle (probably by influence
of Middle English parvink; see periwinkle (n.1)); from Old English pine-, which probably is from
Latin pina mussel, from Greek pine. The second element is wincel corner; spiral shell, from Proto-
Germanic *winkil-, from PIE root *weng- to bend, curve (see wink (v.)).


pinot (n.)

type of grape vine used in wine-making, 1912, American English variant spelling of French pineau
(attested in English from 1763), name of a family of wine grapes, from pin pine tree (see pine (n.))
+ diminutive suffix -eau. So called from the shape of the grape clusters. Variants are pinot noir,
black, pinot blanc, white, and pinot gris, gray.


pinnace (n.)

small, light vessel, 1540s, from Middle French pinace (earlier spinace, 15c., from Old French
espinace, Modern French p&#233;niche; also attested as Anglo-Latin spinachium (mid-14c.)); of
unknown origin. The French word perhaps is from Italian pinaccia or Spanish pinaza, from pino pine
tree; ship (Latin pinus pine tree also had a secondary sense of ship, vessel). But variations in
early forms makes this uncertain.


pitch (n.2)

resinous substance, wood tar, late 12c., pich, from Old English pic pitch, from a Germanic borrowing
(Old Saxon and Old Frisian pik, Middle Dutch pik, Dutch pek, Old High German pek, German Pech, Old
Norse bik) of Latin pix (genitive picis) pitch, from PIE root *pi- sap, juice (cognates: Greek
pissa, Lithuanian pikis, Old Church Slavonic piklu pitch; see pine (n.)). Applied to pine resins
from late 14c. Pitch-black is attested from 1590s; pitch-dark from 1680s.


Wellington (n.)

boot so called from 1817, for Arthur, 1st Duke of Wellington (1769-1852), who also in his lifetime
had a style of coat, hat, and trousers named for him as well as a variety of apple and pine tree.


thyrsus (n.)

1590s, from Latinized form of Greek thyrsos, literally stalk or stem of a plant, a non-Greek word of
unknown origin. The staff or spear, tipped with an ornament like a pine cone and sometimes wreathed
in ivy and vine branches, borne by Dionysus and his votaries.


Schenectady

place in New York state, from Mohawk (Iroquoian) skah-nehtati the other side of the pines,
containing -hneht- pine tree.


pinguid (adj.)

1630s, from Latin pinguis fat (adj.), juicy, figuratively dull, gross, heavy; comfortable, from stem
of pinguere, from PIE *pei- fat, sap, juice (see pine (n.)).


immarcessible (adj.)

unfading, imperishable, 1540s, from Late Latin immarcessabilis from assimilated form of in- not (see
in- (1)) + marcessare to wither, pine away.


repine (v.)

to be fretfully discontented, mid-15c., probably from re-, here likely an intensive prefix, + pine
(v.) yearn. Related: Repined; repining.


Norfolk

Nordfolc (1066) (Territory of the) Northern People (of the East Angles). The Norfolk pine (1778),
used as an ornamental tree, is from Norfolk Island in the South Pacific, northwest of New Zealand.


pituitary (adj.)

1610s, from Latin pituitarius mucous, from pituita clammy moisture, phlegm, mucus, slime, possibly
from PIE root *peie- to be fat, swell (see pine (n.)). Taken as the name for the gland because it
was believed that it channeled mucus to the nose. As a noun by 1899.


resin (n.)

late 14c., from Old French resine gum, resin, and directly from Latin resina resin, from Greek
rhetine resin of the pine, of unknown origin.


deal (n.2)

plank or board of pine, c.1400, from Low German (compare Middle Low German dele), from Proto-
Germanic *theljon, from PIE root *tel- ground, floor. An Old English derivative was &thorn;elu hewn
wood, board, flooring.


marcescent (adj.)

withering, 1727, from Latin marcescentem (nominative marcescens), present participle of marcescere
to wither, languish, droop, decay, pine away, inchoative of marcere to wither, droop, be faint, from
PIE root *merk- to decay.


Panama

probably from an unknown Guarani word, traditionally said to mean place of many fish. Originally the
name of the settlement founded 1519 (destroyed 1671 but subsequently rebuilt). Panama hat, made from
the leaves of the screw pine, attested from 1833, a misnomer, because it originally was made in
Ecuador, but perhaps so called in American English because it was distributed north from Panama
City. Panama red as a variety of Central American marijuana is attested from 1967.


cone (n.)

1560s, from Middle French cone (16c.) or directly from Latin conus a cone, peak of a helmet, from
Greek konos cone, spinning top, pine cone, perhaps from PIE root *ko- to sharpen (cognates: Sanskrit
sanah whetstone, Latin catus sharp, Old English han stone).


languish (v.)

early 14c., fail in strength, exhibit signs of approaching death, from languiss-, present participle
stem of Old French languir be listless, pine, grieve, fall ill, from Vulgar Latin *languire, from
Latin languere be weak or faint (see lax). Weaker sense be lovesick, grieve, lament, grow faint, is
from mid-14c. Related: Languished; languishing.


witch hazel (n.)

1540s, probably from Old English wice Applied generally or vaguely to various trees having pliant
branches [OED], from wican to bend, related to weak (see vicarious) + h&aelig;sel, used for any bush
of the pine family (see hazel (n.)). The North American bush, from which a soothing lotion is made,
was so called from 1670s. This is the source of the verb witch in dowsing.


fir (n.)

14c.; Old English had furhwudu pine wood, but the modern word is more likely from Old Norse fyri-
fir or Old Danish fyr, all from Proto-Germanic *furkhon (cognates: Old High German foraha, German
F&ouml;hre fir), from PIE root *perkos, originally oak (cognates: Sanskrit paraktah the holy fig
tree, Hindi pargai the evergreen oak, Latin quercus oak, Lombardic fereha a kind of oak).


spine (n.)

c.1400, backbone, later thornlike part (early 15c.), from Old French espine thorn, prickle;
backbone, spine (12c., Modern French &eacute;pine), from Latin spina backbone, originally thorn,
prickle (figuratively, in plural, difficulties, perplexities), from PIE *spe-ina-, from root *spei-
sharp point (see spike (n.1)). Meaning the back of a book is first attested 1922.


mourn (v.)

Old English murnan to mourn, bemoan, long after, also be anxious about, be careful (class III strong
verb; past tense mearn, past participle murnen), from Proto-Germanic *murnan to remember sorrowfully
(cognates: Old Saxon mornon, Old High German mornen, Gothic maurnan to mourn, Old Norse morna to
pine away), probably from PIE root *(s)mer- to remember (see memory); or, if the Old Norse sense is
the base one, from *mer- to die, wither. Related: Mourned; mourning.


tar (n.1)

a viscous liquid, Old English teoru, teru tar, bitumen, resin, gum, literally the pitch of (certain
kinds of) trees, from Proto-Germanic *terwo- (cognates: Old Norse tjara, Old Frisian tera, Middle
Dutch tar, Dutch teer, German Teer), probably a derivation of *trewo-, from PIE *derw-, variant of
root *deru-, *dreu- in its sense wood, tree (see tree (n.)).   Tar baby a sticky problem, also a
derogatory term for black person, is from an 1881 Uncle Remus story by Joel Chandler Harris. Tarheel
for North Carolina resident first recorded 1864, probably from the gummy resin of pine woods. Tar
water, an infusion of tar in cold water, was popular as a remedy from c.1740 through late 18c.


shrink (v.)

Old English scrincan to draw in the limbs, contract, shrivel up; wither, pine away (class III strong
verb; past tense scranc, past participle scruncen), from Proto-Germanic *skrink- (cognates: Middle
Dutch schrinken), probably from PIE root *(s)ker- (3) to turn, bend (see ring (n.1)).    Originally
with causal shrench (compare drink/drench). Sense of become reduced in size recorded from late 13c.
The meaning draw back, recoil (early 14c.) perhaps was suggested by the behavior of snails.
Transitive sense, cause to shrink is from late 14c. Shrink-wrap is attested from 1961 (shrinking-
wrap from 1959). Shrinking violet shy person attested from 1882.


waste (v.)

c.1200, devastate, ravage, ruin, from Anglo-French and Old North French waster to waste, squander,
spoil, ruin (Old French gaster; Modern French g&#226;ter), altered (by influence of Frankish
*wostjan) from Latin vastare lay waste, from vastus empty, desolate, waste (see vain). Related:
wasted; wasting.    The Germanic word also existed in Old English as westan to lay waste, ravage.
Spanish gastar, Italian guastare also are from Germanic. Meaning to lose strength or health; pine;
weaken is attested from c.1300; the sense of squander, spend or consume uselessly is first recorded
mid-14c.; meaning to kill is from 1964. Waste not, want not attested from 1778.


needle (n.)

Old English n&aelig;dl, from Proto-Germanic *n&aelig;thlo (cognates: Old Saxon nathla, Old Norse
nal, Old Frisian nedle, Old High German nadala, German Nadel, Gothic ne&thorn;la needle), literally
a tool for sewing, from PIE *net-la-, from root *(s)ne- to sew, to spin (cognates: Sanskrit snayati
wraps up, Greek nein to spin, Latin nere to spin, German n&#228;hen to sew, Old Church Slavonic niti
thread, Old Irish snathat needle, Welsh nyddu to sew, nodwydd needle) + instrumental suffix *-tla.To
seke out one lyne in all hys bookes wer to go looke a nedle in a meadow. [Thomas More,
c.1530]Meaning piece of magnetized steel in a compass is from late 14c. (on a dial or indicator from
1928); the surgical instrument so called from 1727; phonographic sense from 1902; sense of leaf of a
fir or pine tree first attested 1797. Needledom the world of sewing is from 1847. Needle's eye,
figurative of a minute opening, often is a reference to Matt. xix:24.


cracker (n.2)

Southern U.S. derogatory term for poor, white trash (1766), probably an agent noun from crack (v.)
in the sense to boast (as in not what it's cracked up to be). Compare Latin crepare to rattle,
crack, creak, with a secondary figurative sense of boast of, prattle, make ado about.I should
explain to your Lordship what is meant by crackers; a name they have got from being great boasters;
they are a lawless set of rascalls on the frontiers of Virginia, Maryland, the Carolinas and
Georgia, who often change their places of abode. [1766, G. Cochrane]  But DARE compares corn-cracker
poor white farmer (1835, U.S. Midwest colloquial). Especially of Georgians by 1808, though often
extended to residents of northern Florida. Another name in mid-19c. use was sand-hiller poor white
in Georgia or South Carolina.    Not very essentially different is the condition of a class of
people living in the pine-barrens nearest the coast [of South Carolina], as described to me by a
rice-planter. They seldom have any meat, he said, except they steal hogs, which belong to the
planters, or their negroes, and their chief diet is rice and milk. They are small, gaunt, and
cadaverous, and their skin is just the color of the sand-hills they live on. They are quite
incapable of applying themselves steadily to any labor, and their habits are very much like those of
the old Indians. [Frederick Law Olmsted, A Journey in the Seaboard Slave States, 1856]


tree (n.)

Old English  treo, treow tree (also timber, wood, beam, log, stake), from Proto-Germanic *treuwaz-
(cognates: Old Frisian tre, Old Saxon trio, Old Norse tre, Gothic triu tree), from PIE *drew-o-,
from *deru- oak (cognates: Sanskrit dru tree, wood, daru wood, log; Greek drys oak, drymos copse,
thicket, doru beam, shaft of a spear; Old Church Slavonic drievo tree, wood; Serbian drvo tree, drva
wood; Russian drevo tree, wood; Czech drva; Polish drwa wood; Lithuanian derva pine, wood; Old Irish
daur, Welsh derwen oak, Albanian drusk oak). This is from PIE *drew-o-, a suffixed form of the root
*deru- to be firm, solid, steadfast (see true), with specialized sense wood, tree and derivatives
referring to objects made of wood.    The line which divides trees from shrubs is largely arbitrary,
and dependent upon habit rather than size, the tree having a single trunk usually unbranched for
some distance above the ground, while a shrub has usually several stems from the same root and each
without a proper trunk. [Century Dictionary]    The widespread use of words originally meaning oak
in the sense tree probably reflects the importance of the oak to ancient Indo-Europeans. In Old
English and Middle English also thing made of wood, especially the cross of the Crucifixion and a
gallows (such as Tyburn tree, famous gallows outside London). Middle English also had plural treen,
adjective treen (Old English treowen of a tree, wooden). For Dutch boom, German Baum, the usual
words for tree, see beam (n.). Meaning framework of a saddle is from 1530s. Meaning representation
of familial relationships in the form of a tree is from c.1300. Tree-hugger, contemptuous for
environmentalist is attested by 1989.    Minc'd Pyes do not grow upon every tree,  But search the
Ovens for them, and there they be.  [Poor Robin, Almanack, 1669]


