pinnacle (n.)

c.1300, mountain, peak, promontory, from Old French pinacle top, gable (13c.) and directly from Late
Latin pinnaculum peak, pinnacle, gable, diminutive of Latin pinna peak, point, (see pin (n.1)).
Figurative use is attested from c.1400.


ziggurat (n.)

also zikkurat, 1858, from Assyrian ziqquratu height, pinnacle, from zaqaru to be high.


panache (n.)

1550s, a tuft or plume of feathers, from Middle French pennache tuft of feathers, from Italian
pennaccio, from Late Latin pinnaculum small wing, gable, peak (see pinnacle). Figurative sense of
display, swagger first recorded 1898 (in translation of Cyrano de Bergerac), from French.


tine (n.)

mid-14c., from Old English tind spike, beak, prong, tooth of a fork, a general Germanic word
(compare Old High German zint sharp point, spike, Old Norse tindr tine, point, top, summit, German
Zinne pinnacle), of unknown origin (see zinc).


pinion (n.2)

small wheel with teeth to gear with a larger one (as in rack and pinion), 1650s, from French pignon
pinion (16c.), literally gable, from Old French pignon pointed gable, summit, from Vulgar Latin
*pinnionem, augmentative of Latin pinna battlement, pinnacle (see pin (n.)).


carrack (n.)

merchant ship, late 14c., from Old French caraque large, square-rigged sailing vessel, from Spanish
carraca, related to Medieval Latin carraca, Italian caracca, all of uncertain origin, perhaps from
Arabic qaraqir, plural of qurqur merchant ship. The Arabic word perhaps was from Latin carricare
(see charge (v.)) or Greek karkouros boat, pinnacle.


shelf (n.)

late 14c., from Middle Low German schelf shelf, set of shelves, or from Old English cognate scylfe,
which perhaps meant shelf, ledge, floor, and scylf peak, pinnacle, from Proto-Germanic *skelf-
split, possibly from the notion of a split piece of wood (compare Old Norse skj&ouml;lf bench), from
PIE root *(s)kel- (1) to cut, cleave (see scale (n.1)).   Shelf life first recorded 1927. Phrase on
the shelf out of the way, inactive is attested from 1570s; of unmarried women with no prospects from
1839. Off the shelf ready-made is from 1936. Meaning ledge of rock is from 1809, perhaps from or
influenced by shelf (n.2). Related: Shelves.


pen (n.1)

writing implement, late 13c., from Old French pene quill pen; feather (12c.) and directly from Latin
penna a feather, plume, in plural a wing, in Late Latin, a pen for writing, from Old Latin petna,
pesna, from PIE *pet-na-, suffixed form of root *pet- to rush; to fly (see petition (n.)).    Latin
penna and pinna a feather, plume; in plural a wing; also a pinnacle; battlement (see pin (n.)) are
treated as identical in Watkins, etc., but regarded as separate (but confused) Latin words by Tucker
and others, who derive pinna from PIE *spei- sharp point (see spike (n.1)) and see the feather/wing
sense as secondary.    In later French, this word means only long feather of a bird, while the
equivalent of English plume is used for writing implement, the senses of the two words thus are
reversed from the situation in English. Pen-and-ink (adj.) is attested from 1670s. Pen name is
recorded from mid-19c.


pin (n.)

late Old English pinn peg, bolt, from Proto-Germanic *penn- jutting point or peak (cognates: Old
Saxon pin peg, Old Norse pinni peg, tack, Middle Dutch pin pin, peg, Old High German pfinn, German
Pinne pin, tack) from Latin pinna a feather, plume; in plural a wing; also fin, scoop of a water
wheel; also a pinnacle; a promontory, cape; battlement (as in Luke iv:9 in Vulgate) and so applied
to points of various sorts, from PIE *pet- (see pen (n.1)).    Latin pinna and penna a feather,
plume, in plural a wing, are treated as identical in Watkins, etc., but regarded as separate (but
confused) Latin words by Tucker and others, who derive pinna from PIE *spei- sharp point (see spike
(n.1)) and see the feather/wing sense as secondary.    The modern slender wire pin is first attested
by this name late 14c. Transferred sense of leg is recorded from 1520s and hold the older sense.
Pin-money annual sum allotted to a woman for personal expenses on dress, etc. is attested from
1620s. Pins and needles tingling sensation is from 1810. The sound of a pin dropping as a type of
something all but silent is from 1775.


