pious (adj.)

mid-15c., from Latin pius dutiful, devout, conscientious, religious; faithful to kindred; inspired
by friendship, prompted by natural affections, perhaps [Klein] related to Latin purus pure, clean
(see pure). Often coupled with fraud (n.) from at least 1630s. Related: Piously; piousness.


Pius

masc. proper name, from Latin pius dutiful, pious (see pious).


Hasidim

also Chasidim, 1812, adherents of a conservative Jewish religious movement founded 1750 by Rabbi
Israel ben Eliezer Baal Shem Tobh, from Hebrew hasidhim, literally pious ones, plural of hasidh
kind, pious. Earlier used in Hebrew of adherents of an anti-Hellenistic faction during the time of
the Maccabean Wars.


pittance (n.)

c.1200, pious donation to a religious house or order to provide extra food; the extra food provided,
also a small portion, scanty rations, from Old French pitance pity, mercy, compassion; refreshment,
nourishment; portion of food allowed a monk or poor person by a pious bequest, apparently literally
pity, from piti&eacute; (see pity). Meaning small amount, portion first recorded 1560s.


good will

Old English godes willan virtuous, pious, upright, also state of wishing well to another. One-word
form goodwill (18c.) is used especially in commercial senses.


Pallas

Greek goddess' name, literally little maiden, related to pallake concubine, and probably somehow
connected to Avestan pairika beautiful women seducing pious men.


Philemon

masc. proper name, in Greek mythology a pious man, husband of Baucis; from Greek philemon, literally
loving, affectionate, from philein to love (see philo-).


reverence (v.)

late 14c., treat with respect, honor; venerate, pay pious homage to; esteem, value; bow to
(someone); do honor to, from reverence (n.). Related: Reverenced; reverencing.


devout (adj.)

early 13c., from Old French devot pious, devoted, assiduous, from Latin devotus given up by vow,
devoted, past participle of devovere dedicate by vow (see devotion).


Topsy

slave-girl character in Uncle Tom's Cabin (1852), immortal in cliche for her response to a question
about her origin put to her by the pious Northern abolitionist Miss Ophelia:    Have you ever heard
anything about God, Topsy?  The child looked bewildered, but grinned, as usual.  Do you know who
made you?  Nobody as I knows on, said the child, with a short laugh.  The idea appeared to amuse her
considerably; for her eyes twinkled, and she added--  I spect I grow'd. Don't think nobody never
made me.    In addition to being often misquoted by the addition of a just (or jes'), the line is
sometimes used inappropriately in 20c. writing to indicate something that got large without anyone
intending it to.


Essene (n.)

1550s, member of a Jewish sect (first recorded 2c. B.C.E.), from Latin, from Greek Essenoi, of
disputed etymology, perhaps from Hebrew tzenum the modest ones, or Hebrew hashaim the silent ones.
Klein suggests Syriac hasen, plural absolute state of hase pious.


impious (adj.)

1590s, from Latin impius without reverence, irreverent, wicked; undutiful, unpatriotic, from
assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + pius (see pious). Related: Impiously;
impiousness.


fraud (n.)

criminal deception, early 14c., from Old French fraude deception, fraud (13c.), from Latin fraudem
(nominative fraus) deceit, injury. The noun meaning impostor, humbug is attested from 1850. Pious
fraud deception practiced for the sake of what is deemed a good purpose is from 1560s.


oblation (n.)

early 15c., from Old French oblacion offering, pious donation and directly from Latin oblationem
(nominative oblatio) an offering, presenting, gift, in Late Latin sacrifice, from Latin oblatus (see
oblate (n.)).


deodand (n.)

1520s, from Anglo-French deodande (late 13c.), from Medieval Latin deodandum, from Deo dandum a
thing to be given to God, from dative of deus god (see Zeus) + neuter gerundive of dare to give (see
date (n.1)). In English law, a personal chattel which, having been the immediate cause of the death
of a person, was forfeited to the Crown to be applied to pious uses. Abolished 1846.


pitiable (adj.)

mid-15c., merciful, compassionate, from Old French piteable compassionate, merciful, pious (13c.;
Modern French pitoyable), from piteer to pity (see pity). Meaning deserving pity is recorded from
late 15c. Related: Pitiably.


religious (adj.)

c.1200, devout, pious, imbued with or expressive of religious devotion, from Anglo-French religius,
Old French religious (12c., Modern French religieux) and directly from Latin religiosus, from
religio (see religion). Meaning pertaining to religion is from 1530s. Transferred sense of
scrupulous, exact is recorded from 1590s. Related: Religiousness.


Uncle Tom (n.)

servile black man, 1922, somewhat inaccurately in reference to the humble, pious, but strong-willed
main character in Harriet Beecher Stowe's novel, Uncle Tom's Cabin (1852). The image implied in the
insult perhaps is more traceable to the late 19c. minstel show versions of the story, which reached
a far wider audience than the book.    I don't recall anyone in the 1920s using the term 'Uncle Tom'
as an epithet. But what's amazing is how fast it caught on (in the 1930s). Black scholars picked up
(the term) and just started throwing it at each other. [Ernest Allen, quoted in Hamilton, Kendra,
The Strange Career of Uncle Tom, Black Issues in Higher Education, June 2002]    As a verb, attested
from 1937.


piety (n.)

early 14c. (late 12c. as a surname), mercy, tenderness, pity, from Old French piete piety, faith;
pity, compassion (12c.), from Latin pietatem (nominative pietas) dutiful conduct, sense of duty;
religiousness, piety; loyalty, patriotism; faithfulness to natural ties, in Late Latin gentleness,
kindness, pity; from pius kind (see pious). Meaning piousness attested in English from c.1600. Also
see pity (n.).


piteous (adj.)

c.1300, from Anglo-French pitous, Old French pitos pious; merciful, compassionate, moved to pity;
pitiful (12c., Modern French piteux), from Medieval Latin pietosus merciful, pitiful, in Vulgar
Latin dutiful, from Latin pietas dutiful conduct, compassion (see piety). Related: Piteously;
piteousness.


expiation (n.)

early 15c., via Middle French expiation or directly from Latin expiationem (nominative expiatio)
satisfaction, atonement, noun of action from past participle stem of expiare make amends, from ex-
completely (see ex-) + piare propitiate, appease, from pius faithful, loyal, devout (see pious).The
sacrifice of expiation is that which tendeth to appease the wrath of God. [Thomas Norton,
translation of Calvin's Institutes of Christian Religion, 1561]


resolution (n.)

late 14c., a breaking into parts, from Old French resolution (14c.) or directly from Latin
resolutionem (nominative resolutio) process of reducing things into simpler forms, from past
participle stem of resolvere loosen (see resolve). Sense of a solving (as of mathematical problems)
first recorded 1540s, as is that of power of holding firmly (compare resolute). Sense of decision or
expression of a meeting is from c.1600. Meaning effect of an optical instrument is from 1860. New
Year's resolutions in reference to a specific intention to better oneself is at least from 1780s,
and through 19c. generally of a pious nature.


confessor (n.)

late Old English, one who avows his religion, especially in the face of danger, but does not suffer
martyrdom, from Latin confessor, agent noun from confiteri (see confess). Meaning one who hears
confessions is from mid-14c.; this properly would be Latin confessarius, but Latin confessor was
being used in this sense from the 9th century.   Edward the Confessor (c.1003-1066, canonized 1161),
last Anglo-Saxon king, was pious enough but does not seem to fit his title; perhaps so called to
distinguish him from another Anglo-Saxon saint/king, Edward the Martyr, who does fit his.


starvation (n.)

1778, hybrid noun of action from starve. Famously (but not certainly) introduced in English by Henry
Dundas during debate in the House of Commons in 1775 on American affairs. It earned him the nickname
Starvation Dundas, though sources disagree on whether this was given in objection to the harshness
of his suggestion of starving the rebels into submission or in derision at the barbarous formation
of the word. It is one of the earliest instances of -ation used with a native Germanic word
(flirtation is earlier).    As to Lord Chatham, the victories, conquests, extension of our empire
within these last five years, will annihilate his fame of course, and he may be replaced by
Starvation Dundas, whose pious policy suggested that the devil of rebellion could be expelled only
by fasting, though that never drove him out of Scotland. [Horace Walpole, letter to the Rev. William
Mason, April 25, 1781]


Veronica

fem. proper name, French Veronique, a variant of Greek Berenike (see Berenice). The popular Saint
Veronica (not in the Roman Martyrology) traditionally was a pious woman who wiped the face of Christ
when he fell carrying the cross to Calvary. The image of his face remained on the cloth, and the
veil of Veronica has been preserved in Rome from the 8c. Her popularity rose with the propagation of
the Stations of the Cross, and this connection led to the folk-etymology derivation of the name from
Latin vera true + Greek eikon image. Some also identified her with the woman with the issue of
blood, cured by Christ, as in the East this woman was identified from an early date by the name
Berenike. Hence vernicle (mid-14c.) picture of the face of Christ, from Old French veronicle,
variant of veronique St. Veronica's cloth.


pontifex (n.)

member of the supreme college of priests in ancient Rome, 1570s, from Latin pontifex high priest,
chief of the priests, probably from pont-, stem of pons bridge (see pons) + -fex, -ficis, root of
facere make (see factitious). If so, the word originally meant bridge-maker, or path-maker.
Weekley points out that, bridge-building has always been regarded as a pious work of divine
inspiration. Or the term may be metaphoric of bridging the earthly world and the realm of the gods.
Other suggestions trace it to Oscan-Umbrian puntis propitiary offering, or to a lost Etruscan word,
in either case altered by folk etymology to resemble the Latin for bridge-maker. In Old English,
pontifex is glossed in the Durham Ritual (Old Northumbrian dialect) as brycgwyrcende bridge-maker.


silly (adj.)

Old English ges&aelig;lig happy, fortuitous, prosperous (related to s&aelig;l happiness), from
Proto-Germanic *s&aelig;ligas (cognates: Old Norse s&aelig;ll happy, Old Saxon salig, Middle Dutch
salich, Old High German salig, German selig blessed, happy, blissful, Gothic sels good,
kindhearted), from PIE *sele- of good mood; to favor, from root *sel- (2) happy, of good mood; to
favor (cognates: Latin solari to comfort, Greek hilaros cheerful, gay, merry, joyous).    This is
one of the few instances in which an original long e (ee) has become shortened to i. The same change
occurs in breeches, and in the American pronunciation of been, with no change in spelling. [Century
Dictionary]    The word's considerable sense development moved from happy to blessed to pious, to
innocent (c.1200), to harmless, to pitiable (late 13c.), weak (c.1300), to feeble in mind, lacking
in reason, foolish (1570s). Further tendency toward stunned, dazed as by a blow (1886) in knocked
silly, etc. Silly season in journalism slang is from 1861 (August and September, when newspapers
compensate for a lack of hard news by filling up with trivial stories). Silly Putty trademark claims
use from July 1949.


saint (n.)

early 12c., from Old French saint, seinte a saint; a holy relic, displacing or altering Old English
sanct, both from Latin sanctus holy, consecrated (used as a noun in Late Latin; also source of
Spanish santo, santa, Italian san, etc.), properly past participle of sancire consecrate (see
sacred). Adopted into most Germanic languages (Old Frisian sankt, Dutch sint, German Sanct).
Originally an adjective prefixed to the name of a canonized person; by c.1300 it came to be regarded
as a noun. Meaning person of extraordinary holiness is recorded from 1560s.  <b>Saint</b>, n. A dead
sinner revised and edited. The Duchess of Orleans relates that the irreverent old calumniator,
Marshal Villeroi, who in his youth had known St. Francis de Sales, said, on hearing him called
saint: 'I am delighted to hear that Monsieur de Sales is a saint. He was fond of saying indelicate
things, and used to cheat at cards. In other respects he was a perfect gentleman, though a fool.'
[Ambrose Bierce, Devil's Dictionary, 1911]   <hr />   Perhaps you have imagined that this humility
in the saints is a pious illusion at which God smiles. That is a most dangerous error. It is
theoretically dangerous, because it makes you identify a virtue (i.e., a perfection) with an
illusion (i.e., an imperfection), which must be nonsense. It is practically dangerous because it
encourages a man to mistake his first insights into his own corruption for the first beginnings of a
halo round his own silly head. No, depend upon it; when the saints say that they--even they--are
vile, they are recording truth with scientific accuracy. [C.S. Lewis, The Problem of Pain, 1940]
Saint Bernard, the breed of mastiff dogs (1839), so called because the monks of the hospice of the
pass of St. Bernard (between Italy and Switzerland) sent them to rescue snowbound travelers; St.
Elmo's Fire corposant (1560s) is from Italian fuoco di Sant'Elmo, named for the patron saint of
Mediterranean sailors, a corruption of the name of St. Erasmus, an Italian bishop martyred in 303.


