pirate (v.)

1570s, from pirate (n.). Related: Pirated; pirating.


pirate (n.)

c. 1300 (mid-13c. as a surname), from Latin pirata sailor, corsair, sea robber (source of Spanish,
Italian pirata, Dutch piraat, German Pirat), literally one who attacks (ships), from Greek peirates
brigand, pirate, literally one who attacks, from peiran to attack, make a hostile attempt on, try,
from peira trial, an attempt, attack, from PIE root *per- (3) to try, risk (cognates: Latin peritus
experienced, periculum trial, experiment; attempt on or against; enterprise; see peril). An Old
English word for it was s&aelig;scea&#240;a. Meaning one who takes another's work without permission
first recorded 1701; sense of unlicensed radio broadcaster is from 1913.


picaroon (n.)

1620s, rogue, thief, adventurer; pirate, sea-robber; small pirate ship, from Spanish picaron,
augmentative of picaro rogue (see picaresque); also see -oon.


brigantine (n.)

small two-masted ship, 1520s, from Middle French brigandin (15c.), from Italian brigantino, perhaps
skirmishing vessel, pirate ship, from brigante skirmisher, pirate, brigand from brigare fight (see
brigade).


piratical (adj.)

1570s, from Latin piraticus pertaining to pirates, from Greek peiratikos, from peirates pirate (see
pirate (n.)) + -ical. Related: Piratically (1540s).


rover (n.)

late 14c., sea-robber, pirate, from Middle Dutch rover robber, predator, plunderer, especially in
zeerovere pirate, literally sea-robber, from roven to rob, from Middle Dutch roof spoil, plunder,
related to Old English reaf spoil, plunder, reafian to reave (see reave (v.)). Meaning remote-
controlled surface vehicle is from 1970.


busking (n.)

1851, slang, described variously as selling articles or obscene ballads in public houses, playing
music on the streets, or performing as a sort of informal stand-up comedy act in pubs, perhaps from
an earlier word meaning to cruise as a pirate (see busker).


sea-dog (n.)

1590s, harbor seal, from sea + dog (n.). Also pirate (1650s). Meaning old seaman, sailor who has
been long afloat is attested from 1840.


Easter Island

so called because it was discovered by Dutch navigator Jakob Roggeveen on April 2, 1722, which was
Easter Monday. It earlier had been visited by English pirate Edward Davis (1695), but he neglected
to name it. The native Polynesian name is Mata-kite-ran Eyes that Watch the Stars.


anorak (n.)

Eskimo's waterproof, hooded jacket, 1924, from Greenland Eskimo anoraq. Applied to Western
imitations of this garment from 1930s. In British slang, socially inept person (Partridge associates
it with a fondness for left-wing politics and pirate radio) by 1983, on the notion that that sort of
person typically wears this sort of coat.


Viking (n.)

Scandinavian pirate, 1801, vikingr, in The History of the Anglo-Saxons by English historian Sharon
H. Turner (1768-1847); he suggested the second element might be connected to king:    The name by
which the pirates were at first distinguished was Vikingr, which perhaps originally meant kings of
the bays. It was in bays that they ambushed, to dart upon the passing voyager.     But this later
was dismissed as incorrect. The form viking is attested in 1820, in Jamieson's notes to The Bruce.
The word is a historians' revival; it was not used in Middle English, but it was reintroduced from
Old Norse vikingr freebooter, sea-rover, pirate, viking, which usually is explained as meaning
properly one who came from the fjords, from vik creek, inlet, small bay (cognates: Old English wic,
Middle High German wich bay, and second element in Reykjavik). But Old English wicing and Old
Frisian wizing are almost 300 years older than the earliest attestation of the Old Norse word, and
probably derive from wic village, camp (large temporary camps were a feature of the Viking raids),
related to Latin vicus village, habitation (see villa).    The connection between the Norse and Old
English words is still much debated. The period of Viking activity was roughly 8c. to 11c. In the
Anglo-Saxon Chronicle, the raiding armies generally were referred to as &thorn;a Deniscan the Danes,
while those who settled in England were identified by their place of settlement. Old Norse viking
(n.) meant freebooting voyage, piracy; one would go on a viking (fara &#237; viking).


money-pit (n.)

edifice or project requiring constant outlay of cash with little to show for it, 1986 (year of a
movie of the same name); see money (n.) + pit (n.). Before that (1930s), it was used for the shaft
on Oak Island, Nova Scotia, that supposedly leads to treasure buried by Capt. Kidd or some other
pirate. Whether that name refers to the treasure or the several million dollars spent trying to get
the treasure out is unclear. [Popular Mechanics, Sept. 1976]


Fomorian (adj.)

pertaining to the monstrous race in Irish mythology, 1876, from Irish fomor pirate, monster, from fo
under + mor sea. Cognate with Gaelic famhair.


piracy (n.)

early 15c., from Medieval Latin piratia, from Greek peirateia piracy, from peirates (see pirate
(n.)).


busker (n.)

itinerant entertainer, 1857, from busk (v.) to offer goods for sale only in bars and taprooms, 1851
(in Mayhew), perhaps from busk to cruise as a pirate, which was used in a figurative sense by 1841,
in reference to people living shiftless and peripatetic lives. Busker has been mistakenly derived
from buskin in the stage sense.


hussar (n.)

1530s, from German Husar, from Hungarian husz&aacute;r light horseman, originally freebooter, from
Old Serbian husar, variant of kursar pirate, from Italian corsaro (see corsair). Bodies of light
horsemen organized in Hungary late 15c., widely imitated elsewhere in Europe.


Algeria

North African country, named for Algiers, city chosen by the French as its capital when they
colonized it in 1830 + Latinate country suffix -ia. The city name is Arabic al-Jazair, literally the
islands, in reference to four islands formerly off the coast but joined to the mainland since 1525.
A resident of the place formerly was an Algerine (1650s), and the word was practically synonymous
with pirate in English and U.S. usage early 19c.


corsair (n.)

1540s, from Middle French corsaire (15c.), from Proven&ccedil;al cursar, Italian corsaro, from
Medieval Latin cursarius pirate, from Latin cursus course, a running, from currere to run (see
current (adj.)). Meaning of the Medieval Latin verb evolved from course to journey to expedition to
an expedition specifically for plunder.


yacht (n.)

1550s, yeaghe a light, fast-sailing ship, from Norwegian jaght or early Dutch jaght, both from
Middle Low German jacht, shortened form of jachtschip fast pirate ship, literally ship for chasing,
from jacht chase, from jagen to chase, hunt, from Old High German jagon, from Proto-Germanic *yago-,
from PIE root *yek- (2) to hunt (cognates: Hittite ekt- hunting net). Related: Yachting; yachtsman.


plank (n.)

late 13c. (c. 1200 as a surname), from Old North French planke, variant of Old French planche plank,
slab, little wooden bridge (12c.), from Late Latin planca broad slab, board, probably from Latin
plancus flat, flat-footed, from PIE *plak- (1) to be flat (see placenta). Technically, timber sawed
to measure 2 to 6 inches thick, 9 inches or more wide, and 8 feet or more long. Political sense of
item of a party platform is U.S. coinage from 1848. To walk the plank, supposedly a pirate
punishment, is first attested 1789 and most early references are to slave-traders disposing of
excess human cargo in crossing the ocean.


Roger

masc. proper name, from Old French Rogier, from Old High German Hrotger, literally famous with the
spear, from hruod- fame, glory + ger spear (see gar (n.)). As a generic name for a person, attested
from 1630s. Slang meaning penis was popular c. 1650-c. 1870; hence the slang verb sense of to
copulate with (a woman), attested from 1711.    The use of the word in radio communication to mean
yes, I understand is attested from 1941, from the U.S. military phonetic alphabet word for the
letter -R-, in this case an abbreviation for received. Said to have been used by the R.A.F. since
1938. The Jolly Roger pirate flag is first attested 1723, of unknown origin; jolly here has its
otherwise obsolete Middle English sense high-hearted, gallant. Roger de Coverley, once a favorite
English country dance, is so called from 1685, in reference to Addison's character in the Spectator.
French roger-bontemps jovial, carefree man, is attested there from 15c.


filibuster (n.)

1580s, flibutor pirate, especially, in history, West Indian buccaneer of the 17th century (mainly
French, Dutch, and English adventurers), probably ultimately from Dutch vrijbueter (now vrijbuiter)
freebooter, a word which was used of pirates in the West Indies in Spanish (filibustero) and French
(flibustier, earlier fribustier) forms. See freebooter.    According to Century Dictionary, the
spread of the word is owing to a Dutch work (De Americaensche Zee-Roovers, 1678) written by a
bucaneer named John Oexmelin, otherwise Exquemelin or Esquemeling, and translated into French and
Spanish, and subsequently into English (1684). Spanish inserted the -i- in the first syllable;
French is responsible for the -s-, inserted but not originally pronounced, a common fact in 17th
century F[rench], after the analogy of words in which an original s was retained in spelling, though
it had become silent in pronunciation [Century Dictionary].    In American English, from 1851 in
reference to lawless military adventurers from the U.S. who tried to overthrow Central American
governments. The major expeditions were those of Narciso Lopez of New Orleans against Cuba (1850-51)
and by William Walker of California against the Mexican state of Sonora (1853-54) and against
Nicaragua (1855-58).      FILIBUSTERING is a term lately imported from the Spanish, yet destined, it
would seem, to occupy an important place in our vocabulary. In its etymological import it is nearly
synonymous with piracy. It is commonly employed, however, to denote an idea peculiar to the modern
progress, and which may be defined as the right and practice of private war, or the claim of
individuals to engage in foreign hostilities aside from, and even in opposition to the government
with which they are in political membership. [Harper's New Monthly Magazine, January 1853]    The
noun in the legislative sense is not in Bartlett (1859) and seems not to have been in use in U.S.
legislative writing before 1865 (filibustering in this sense is from 1861). Probably the extension
in sense is because obstructionist legislators pirated debate or overthrew the usual order of
authority. Originally of the senator who led it; the maneuver itself so called by 1893. Not
technically restricted to U.S. Senate, but that's where the strategy works best. [The 1853 use of
filibustering by U.S. Rep. Albert G. Brown of Mississippi reported in the Congressional Globe and
cited in the OED does not refer to legislative obstruction, merely to national policy toward Cuba.]


