pith (n.)

Old English pi&thorn;a pith of plants, also essential part, from West Germanic *pithan- (cognates:
Middle Dutch pitte, Dutch pit, East Frisian pit), a Low German root of uncertain origin. Figurative
sense was in Old English. Pith helmet (1889, earlier pith hat, 1884) so called because it is made
from the dried pith of the Bengal spongewood.


pith (v.)

to kill by piercing the spinal cord, 1805, from pith (n.). Related: Pithed; pithing.


pithy (adj.)

early 14c., strong, vigorous, from pith (n.) + -y (2). Meaning full of substance or significance is
from 1520s; literal meaning full of pith not attested until 1560s. Related: Pithily; pithiness.


taper (n.)

Old English tapur, taper candle, lamp-wick, not found outside English, possibly a dissimilated
borrowing from Latin papyrus (see papyrus), which was used in Medieval Latin and some Romance
languages for wick of a candle (such as Italian papijo wick), because these often were made from the
pith of papyrus. Compare also German kerze candle, from Old High German charza, from Latin charta,
from Greek khartes papyrus, roll made from papyrus, wick made from pith of papyrus.


pit (n.2)

hard seed, 1841, from Dutch pit kernel, seed, marrow, from Middle Dutch pitte, ultimately from West
Germanic *pithan-, source of pith (q.v.).


epithet (n.)

1570s, descriptive name for a person or thing, from Middle French &eacute;pith&egrave;te or directly
from Latin epitheton, from Greek epitheton something added, adjective often used as noun, from
neuter of epithetos attributed, added, from epitithenai to add on, from epi in addition (see epi-) +
tithenai to put (see theme).


medulla (n.)

hindmost segment of the brain, 1650s, from Latin medulla, literally marrow, also pith of plants, of
unknown origin, perhaps related to or influenced by medius middle (but compare also Old Irish smiur,
Welsh mer marrow). The word was used in the Latin senses in Middle English. Related: Medular;
medullary.


spunk (n.)

1530s, a spark, Scottish, from Gaelic spong tinder, pith, sponge, from Latin spongia (see sponge
(n.)). The sense of courage, pluck, mettle is first attested 1773. A similar sense evolution took
place in cognate Irish sponnc sponge, tinder, spark; courage, spunk. Vulgar slang sense of seminal
fluid is recorded from c.1888.


pulp (n.)

c.1400, fleshy part of a fruit or plant, from Latin pulpa animal or plant pulp; pith of wood,
earlier *pelpa, perhaps from the same root as pulvis dust, pollen fine flour (see pollen); extended
to other similar substances by early 15c. The adjective meaning sensational is from pulp magazine
(1931), so called from pulp in sense of type of rough paper used in cheaply made magazines and books
(1727). As a genre name, pulp fiction attested by 1943 (pulp writer writer of pulp fiction was in
use by 1939). The opposite adjective in reference to magazines was slick.


