pithy (adj.)

early 14c., strong, vigorous, from pith (n.) + -y (2). Meaning full of substance or significance is
from 1520s; literal meaning full of pith not attested until 1560s. Related: Pithily; pithiness.


aphorism (n.)

1520s (especially in reference to the Aphorisms of Hippocrates), from Middle French aphorisme (14c.,
aufforisme), from Late Latin aphorismus, from Greek aphorismos definition, pithy sentence, from
aphorizein to mark off, divide, from apo- from (see apo-) + horizein to bound (see horizon).    An
aphorism is a short, pithy statement containing a truth of general import; an axiom is a statement
of self-evident truth; a theorem is a demonstrable proposition in science or mathematics; an epigram
is like an aphorism, but lacking in general import. Maxim and saying can be used as synonyms for
aphorism.


apothegm (n.)

pithy saying, 1550s, from Greek apophthegma terse, pointed saying, literally something clearly
spoken, from apophthengesthai to speak one's opinion plainly, from apo- from (see apo-) +
phthengesthai to utter. See aphorism for nuances of usage. Spelling apophthegm, restored by Johnson,
is preferred in England, according to OED.


epigraph (n.)

1620s, inscription on a building, statue, etc., from Greek epigraphe an inscription, from
epigraphein to write on, from epi on (see epi-) + graphein to write (see -graphy). Sense of motto;
short, pithy sentence at the head of a book or chapter first recorded in English 1844.


sententious (adj.)

mid-15c., full of meaning, from Middle French sententieux, from Latin sententiosus full of meaning,
pithy, from sententia thought; expression of a thought (see sentence (n.)). Meaning addicted to
pompous moralizing first recorded 1590s. Related: Sententiously; sententiousness.


gnomic (adj.)

full of instructive sayings, 1815, from French gnomique (18c.) and directly from Late Latin gnomicus
concerned with maxims, didactic, from Greek gnomikos, from gnome thought, opinion, maxim,
intelligence, from root of gignoskein to come to know (see gnostic). English gnome meant short,
pithy statement of general truth (1570s). Gnomical is attested from 1610s.


terse (adj.)

1590s (implied in tersely), clean-cut, burnished, neat, from French ters clean, and directly from
Latin tersus wiped off, clean, neat, from past participle of tergere to rub, polish, wipe. Sense of
concise or pithy in style or language is from 1777, which led to a general sense of neatly concise.
The pejorative meaning brusque is a fairly recent development. Related: Terseness.


pregnant (adj.2)

convincing, weighty, pithy, late 14c., cogent, convincing, compelling (of evidence, an argument,
etc.); sense of full of meaning is from c.1400. According to OED from Old French preignant, present
participle of preindre press, squeeze, stamp, crush, from earlier priembre, from Latin premere to
press (see press (v.1)). But Watkins has it from Latin praehendere to grasp, seize, and in Barnhart
it is from Latin praegnans with child, literally before birth and thus identical with pregnant
(adj.1).


