placate (v.)

1670s, a back-formation from placation or else from Latin placatus soothed, quiet, gentle, calm,
peaceful, past participle of placare to calm, appease, quiet, soothe, assuage, related to placere to
please (see please). Related: Placated; placating; placatingly.


placatory (adj.)

1630s, from Latin placatorius pertaining to appeasing, from placat-, past participle stem of placare
to appease (see placate).


placation (n.)

1580s, from French placation (16c.), from Latin placationem (nominative placatio) an appeasing,
pacifying, quieting, noun of action from past participle stem of placare (see placate).


placable (adj.)

c.1500, pleasing, from Middle French placable forgiving, conciliatory and directly from Latin
placabilis easily appeased or pacified, from placare to appease (see placate). From 1580s as capable
of being pleased. Related: Placably; placability.


implacable (adj.)

early 15c., from Old French implacable, from Latin implacabilis unappeasable, from assimilated form
of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + placabilis easily appeased (see placate). Related:
Implacably.


appease (v.)

c.1300 to reconcile, from Anglo-French apeser, Old French apaisier to pacify, make peace, appease,
be reconciled, placate (12c.), from the phrase a paisier bring to peace, from a to (see ad-) + pais,
from Latin pacem (nominative pax) peace (see peace). Related: Appeased; appeasing.


supple (adj.)

c.1300, soft, tender, from Old French souple, sople pliant, flexible; humble, submissive (12c.),
from Gallo-Roman *supples, from Latin supplex submissive, humbly begging, beseeching, kneeling in
entreaty, literally bending, kneeling down, perhaps an altered form of *supplacos humbly pleading,
appeasing, from sub under + placare appease (see placate). Meaning pliant is from late 14c.;
figurative sense of artfully obsequious, capable of adapting oneself to the wishes and opinions of
others is from c.1600. Supple-chapped (c.1600) was used of a flatterer. Related: Suppleness.


