plait (n.)

c.1400, a fold, a crease, from Anglo-French pleit, Old French ploit, earlier pleit, fold, manner of
folding, from Latin plicatus, past participle of plicare to lay, fold, twist (see ply (v.1)).
Meaning interlaced strands of hair, ribbon, etc. is from 1520s, perhaps from plait (v.).


plait (v.)

late 14c., to fold, gather in pleats, also to braid or weave, from Old French pleir to fold, variant
of ploier, ployer to fold, bend, from Latin plicare to fold (see ply (v.1)). Related: Plaited;
plaiting.


ply (v.1)

work with, use, late 14c., shortened form of applien join to, apply (see apply). The core of this is
Latin plicare to lay, fold, twist, from PIE root *plek- to plait, twist (cognates: Greek plekein to
plait, twine, plektos twisted; Latin plectere (past participle plexus) to plait, braid, intertwine;
Old Church Slavonic plesti to braid, plait, twist; Gothic flahta braid; Old English fleax cloth made
with flax, linen).    Sense of travel regularly is first 1803, perhaps from earlier sense steer a
course (1550s). Related: Plied; plies; plying.


pleat (n.)

a fold, 1580s, variant of plait (n.). With a gap in the printed record 17c.-18c., but probably it
was in continuous oral use.


braid (v.)

to plait, knit, weave, twist together, c.1200, breidan, from Old English bregdan to move quickly,
pull, shake, swing, throw (in wrestling), draw (a sword); bend, weave, knit, join together; change
color, vary; scheme, feign, pretend (class III strong verb, past tense br&aelig;gd, past participle
brogden), from Proto-Germanic *bregthan make sudden jerky movements from side to side (compare Old
Norse breg&eth;a to brandish, turn about, braid; Old Saxon bregdan to weave; Dutch breien to knit;
Old High German brettan to draw, weave, braid), from PIE root *bherek- to gleam, flash (compare
Sanskrit bhrasate flames, blazes, shines). In English the verb survives only in the narrow
definition of plait hair. Related: Braided; braiding.


R.S.V.P.

also RSVP, c.1845, from French initialism (acronym) of r&eacute;pondez, s'il vous plait reply, if
you please, as it might have been written on a letter or envelope.


pleat (v.)

1560s, used as the verb version of plait (n.) and probably representing an alternative
pronunciation. Related: Pleated; pleating.


plat (v.)

to interweave, late 14c., variant of plait (v.). Related: Platted; platting.


plex

in various usages, from Latin plex-, past participle stem of plectere to plait (see complex (adj.)).


wind (v.1)

move by turning and twisting, Old English windan to turn, twist, plait, curl, brandish, swing (class
III strong verb; past tense wand, past participle wunden), from Proto-Germanic *windan to wind
(cognates: Old Saxon windan, Old Norse vinda, Old Frisian winda, Dutch winden, Old High German
wintan, German winden, Gothic windan to wind), from PIE *wendh- to turn, wind, weave (cognates:
Latin viere twist, plait, weave, vincire bind; Lithuanian vyti twist, wind).    Related to wend,
which is its causative form, and to wander. The past tense and past participle merged in Middle
English. Meaning to twine, entwine oneself around is from 1590s; transitive sense of turn or twist
round and round (on something) is from c.1300. Meaning set a watch, clockwork, etc. in operating
mode by tightening its spring is from c.1600. Wind down come to a conclusion is recorded from 1952;
wind up come to a conclusion is from 1825; earlier in transitive sense put (affairs) in order in
advance of a final settlement (1780). Winding sheet shroud of a corpse is attested from early 15c.


plash (v.2)

to interlace, late 15c., from Old French plaissier, from Latin plectere to plait (see complex
(adj.)). Related: Plashed; plashing.


tress (n.)

c.1300, long lock of hair, from Old French tresse a plait or braid of hair (12c.), of uncertain
origin, perhaps from Vulgar Latin *trichia braid, rope, from Greek trikhia rope, from thrix
(genitive trikhos) hair. Related: Tresses.


multiply (v.)

mid-12c., multeplier, to cause to become many, from Old French multiplier, mouteplier (12c.)
increase, get bigger; flourish; breed; extend, enrich, from Latin multiplicare to increase, from
multiplex (genitive multiplicis) having many folds, many times as great in number, from comb. form
of multus (see multi-) + -plex -fold, from PIE *plek- to plait (see ply (v.1.)). Mathematical sense
is attested from late 14c. Related: Multiplied; multiplying.


complex (adj.)

1650s, composed of parts, from French complexe complicated, complex, intricate (17c.), from Latin
complexus surrounding, encompassing, past participle of complecti to encircle, embrace, in
transferred use, to hold fast, master, comprehend, from com- with (see com-) + plectere to weave,
braid, twine, entwine, from PIE *plek-to-, from root *plek- to plait (see ply (v.1)). The meaning
not easily analyzed is first recorded 1715. Complex sentence is attested from 1881.


simplex (adj.)

characterized by a single part, 1590s, from Latin simplex single, simple, plain, unmixed,
uncompounded, literally onefold, from PIE root *sem- one, together (cognates: Latin semper always,
literally once for all; Sanskrit sam together; see same) + *plac- -fold, from PIE *plek- to plait
(see ply (v.1.)). The noun is attested from 1892, simple uncompounded word.


flax (n.)

Old English fleax cloth made with flax, linen, from Proto-Germanic *flakhsan (cognates: Old Frisian
flax, Middle Dutch and Dutch vlas, Old Saxon flas, Old High German flahs, German Flachs), probably
from Proto-Germanic base *fleh-, corresponding to PIE *plek- to weave, plait (see ply (v.1)). But
some connect it with PIE *pleik- (see flay) from the notion of stripping fiber to prepare it.


rush (n.1)

plant growing in marshy ground, Old English resc, earlier risc, from Proto-Germanic *rusk-
(cognates: Middle Low German rusch, Middle High German rusch, German Rausch, West Frisian risk,
Dutch rusch), from PIE *rezg- to plait, weave, wind (cognates: Latin restis cord, rope).    Old
French rusche probably is from a Germanic source. Used for making torches and finger rings, also
strewn on floors when visitors arrived; it was attested a type of something of no value from c.1300.
See OED for spelling variations.


mesh (n.)

late 14c., mesche, open space in a net, probably from late Old English max net, earlier
m&aelig;scre, from Proto-Germanic *mask- (cognates: Old Norse m&ouml;skvi, Danish maske, Swedish
maska, Old Saxon masca, Middle Dutch maessce, Dutch maas mesh, Old High German masca, German Masche
mesh), from PIE root *mezg- to knit, plait, twist (cognates: Lithuanian mezgu to knit, mazgas knot).


whisk (n.)

late 14c., quick stroke, sweeping movement, probably from Old Norse visk wisp of hay, something to
sweep with, from Proto-Germanic *wisk- move quickly (cognates: Danish visk broom, Middle Dutch
wisch, Dutch wis, Old High German wisc, German wisch wisp, brush), from PIE root *weis- to turn,
twist (cognates: Sanskrit veskah noose, Czech vechet a wisp of straw, Old English wiscian to plait,
weoxian to clean with a whisk or brush). Unetymological spelling with wh- is from 1570s. Meaning
implement for beating eggs, etc. first recorded 1660s.


wire (n.)

Old English wir metal drawn out into a fine thread, from Proto-Germanic *wira- (cognates: Old Norse
viravirka filigree work, Swedish vira to twist, Old High German wiara fine gold work), from PIE
*wei- (1) to turn, twist, plait (cognates: Old Irish fiar, Welsh gwyr bent, crooked; Latin viere to
bend, twist, viri&aelig; bracelets, of Celtic origin). A wire as marking the finish line of a
racecourse is attested from 1883; hence the figurative down to the wire. Wire-puller in the
political sense is 1848, American English, on the image of pulling the wires that work a puppet.


plea (n.)

early 13c., lawsuit, from Anglo-French plai (late 12c.), Old French plait lawsuit, decision, decree
(9c.), from Medieval Latin placitum lawsuit, in classical Latin, opinion, decree, literally that
which pleases, thing which is agreed upon, properly neuter past participle of placere (see please).
Sense development seems to be from something pleasant, to something that pleases both sides, to
something that has been decided. Meaning a pleading, an agreement in a suit is attested from late
14c. Plea-bargaining is first attested 1963. Common pleas (early 13c.) originally were legal
proceedings over which the Crown did not claim exclusive jurisdiction (as distinct from pleas of the
Crown); later actions brought by one subject against another.


flask (n.)

mid-14c., from Medieval Latin flasco container, bottle, from Late Latin flasconem bottle, perhaps
from a Germanic source (compare Old English flasce, Old High German flaska, Middle Dutch flasce,
German Flasche bottle), and if so, perhaps originally meaning a bottle plaited round, case bottle
(compare Old High German flechtan to weave, Old English fleohtan to braid, plait), from Proto-
Germanic base *fleh- (see flax).    Another theory traces it to a metathesis of Latin vasculum. The
assumption that the word is of Teut. origin is chronologically legitimate, and presents no
difficulty exc. the absence of any satisfactory etymology [OED].


fold (v.)

Old English faldan (Mercian), fealdan (West Saxon), transitive, to bend cloth back over itself,
class VII strong verb (past tense feold, past participle fealden), from Proto-Germanic *falthan,
*faldan (cognates: Middle Dutch vouden, Dutch vouwen, Old Norse falda, Middle Low German volden, Old
High German faldan, German falten, Gothic fal&thorn;an).    The Germanic words are from PIE *pel-to-
(cognates: Sanskrit putah fold, pocket, Albanian pale fold, Middle Irish alt a joint, Lithuanian
pleta I plait), from root *pel- (3) to fold (also source of Greek ploos fold, Latin -plus).    The
weak form developed from 15c. In late Old English also of the arms. Intransitive sense, become
folded is from c.1300 (of the body or limbs); earlier give way, fail (mid-13c.). Sense of to yield
to pressure is from late 14c. Related: Folded; folding.


spin (v.)

Old English spinnan (transitive) draw out and twist fibers into thread, strong verb (past tense
spann, past participle spunnen), from Proto-Germanic *spenwan (cognates: Old Norse and Old Frisian
spinna, Danish spinde, Dutch spinnen, Old High German spinnan, German spinnen, Gothic spinnan), from
PIE *spen-wo-, from root *(s)pen- to draw, stretch, spin (cognates: Armenian henum I weave; Greek
patos garment, literally that which is spun; Lithuanian pinu I plait, braid, spandau I spin; Middle
Welsh cy-ffiniden spider; see span (v.)).    Intransitive senses of to form threads from fibrous
stuff; to twist, writhe developed in late Old English. Transitive sense of cause to turn rapidly is
from 1610s; intransitive meaning revolve, turn around rapidly first recorded 1660s. Meaning attempt
to influence reporters' minds after an event has taken place but before they have written about it
seems to have risen to popularity in the 1984 U.S. presidential campaign; as in spin doctor, first
attested 1984.


