plaintiff (n.)

c.1400, from Anglo-French pleintif (late 13c.), noun use of Old French plaintif complaining;
wretched, miserable, from plainte (see plaint). Identical with plaintive at first; the form that
receded into legal usage retained the older -iff spelling.


John Doe (n.)

fictitious plaintiff in a legal action, attested from 1768 (in Blackstone). The fictitious defendant
was Richard Roe. If female, Jane Doe, Jane Roe. Replaced earlier John-a-nokes (1530s) or Jack Nokes,
who usually was paired with John-a-stiles or Tom Stiles. Also used of plaintiffs or defendants who
have reason to be anonymous. By 1852, John Doe was being used in North America for any man whose
name is not known, but Britain tended to preserve it in the narrower legal sense name of the
fictitious plaintiff in actions of ejectment. John Doe warrant attested from 1935.


nolle prosequi

formal notice to a plaintiff that the prosecutor will not continue a suit, Latin, literally to be
unwilling to pursue. The verb nolle-pross is attested from 1880.


challenger (n.)

late 13c., a claimant; mid-14c., one who makes false charges; mid-15c., one who disputes something,
objector, from Anglo-French chalengeour (Old French chalongeor slanderer, petitioner, plaintiff),
agent noun from challenge (v.). Specific sense of one who calls out another in a contest is from
1510s.


actor (n.)

late 14c., an overseer, guardian, steward, from Latin actor an agent or doer, also theatrical
player, from past participle stem of agere (see act (n.)). Mid-15c. as a doer, maker, also a
plaintiff. Sense of one who performs in plays is 1580s, originally applied to both men and women.


libel (v.)

mid-15c., make an initial statement setting out a plaintiff's case (modern sense from 1560s), from
libel (n.), q.v. for sense development. Related: Libeled; libelled; libeling; libelling.


suitor (n.)

c.1300, a frequenter; late 14c., follower, disciple, from Anglo-French seutor, suitor or directly
from Late Latin secutor follower, pursuer, from sect- past participle stem of sequi to follow (see
suit (n.)). Meaning plaintiff in a lawsuit is from mid-15c. Meaning one who seeks (a woman) in
marriage is from 1580s.


libel (n.)

c.1300, formal written statement, especially, in civil law, plaintiff's statement of charges (mid-
14c.); from Old French libelle (fem.) small book; (legal) charge, claim; writ; written report
(13c.), from Latin libellus a little book, pamphlet; petition, written accusation, complaint,
diminutive of liber book (see library). Broader sense of any published or written statement likely
to harm a person's reputation is first attested 1630s.


crime (n.)

mid-13c., sinfulness, from Old French crimne (12c., Modern French crime), from Latin crimen
(genitive criminis) charge, indictment, accusation; crime, fault, offense, perhaps from cernere to
decide, to sift (see crisis). But Klein (citing Brugmann) rejects this and suggests *cri-men, which
originally would have been cry of distress (Tucker also suggests a root in cry words and refers to
English plaint, plaintiff, etc.). Meaning offense punishable by law is from late 14c. The Latin word
is glossed in Old English by facen, also deceit, fraud, treachery. Crime wave first attested 1893,
American English.


