plane (n.4)

tree of the genus Platanus, late 14c., from Old French plane, earlier plasne (14c.), from Latin
platanus, from Greek platanos, earlier platanistos plane tree, a species from Asia Minor, associated
with platys broad (see plaice (n.)), in reference to its leaves. Applied since 1778 in Scotland and
northern England to the sycamore, whose leaves somewhat resemble those of the true plane tree.


plane (n.3)

tool for smoothing surfaces, mid-14c., from Old French plane, earlier plaine (14c.), from Late Latin
plana, back-formation from planare make level, from Latin planus level, flat (see plane (n.1)).


plane (v.2)

soar, glide on motionless wings, early 15c., from Old French planer to hover (as a bird), to lie
flat, from plan (n.) plane, from Latin planum flat surface (see plane (n.1)), on notion of bird
gliding with flattened wings. Of boats, etc., to skim over the surface of water, it is first found
1913. Related: Planed; planing.


plane (n.1)

flat surface, c.1600, from Latin planum flat surface, plane, level, plain, noun use of neuter of
adjective planus flat, level, even, plain, clear, from PIE *pla-no- (cognates: Lithuanian plonas
thin; Celtic *lanon plain; perhaps also Greek pelanos sacrificial cake, a mixture offered to the
gods, offering (of meal, honey, and oil) poured or spread), suffixed form of root *pele- (2) to
spread out, broad, flat (cognates: Old Church Slavonic polje flat land, field, Russian polyi open;
Old English and Old High German feld, Middle Dutch veld field). Introduced (perhaps by influence of
French plan in this sense) to differentiate the geometrical senses from plain, which in mid-16c.
English also meant geonetric plane. Figurative sense is attested from 1850. As an adjective from
1660s.


plane (v.1)

to make smooth, early 14c., to gloss over, explain away; mid-14c. as to make smooth or even, from
Old French planer to smooth, level off; wipe away, erase (12c.), from Late Latin planare make level,
from Latin planus level, flat (see plane (n.1)). In early use in English often plain. Related:
Planed; planing.


plane (n.2)

1908, short for aeroplane (see airplane).


planar (adj.)

1850, from Latin planaris level, flat, from planum plane (see plane (n.1)).


plani-

word-forming element meaning level, plane, from Latin plani-, from planus flat, level (see plane
(n.1)).


plantain (n.1)

banana, 1550s, plantan, from Spanish pl&aacute;tano, pl&aacute;ntano, probably from Carib palatana
banana (Arawak pratane), and altered by association with Spanish pl&aacute;tano plane tree, from
Medieval Latin plantanus plane tree, itself altered (by association with Latin planta plant) from
Latin platanus (see plane (n.4)). So called from the shape of its leaves. There is no similarity or
relation between this plant and plantain (n.2).


plan (n.)

1670s as a technical term in perspective drawing; 1706 as drawing, sketch, or diagram of any object,
from French plan ground plan, map, literally plane surface (mid-16c.), from Latin planum level or
flat surface, noun use of adjective planus level, flat (see plane (n.1)). The notion is of a drawing
on a flat surface. Meaning scheme of action, design is first recorded 1706, possibly influenced by
French planter to plant, from Italian planta ground plan.


Polaroid (n.)

material which in thin sheets produces a high degree of plane polarization of light passing through
it, 1936, proprietary name (Sheet Polarizer Co., Union City, N.J.). As a type of camera producing
prints rapidly, it is attested from 1961.


Munich

Bavarian capital, German M&uuml;nchen, from root of M&ouml;nch monk (see monk); founded 1158 as a
market town by Benedictine monks. In allusions to appeasement it is from the meeting of German,
British, French and Italian representatives there in Sept. 29, 1938, which resulted in the cession
of Sudetenland to Germany in exchange for Hitler's pledges.    During the flight Daladier sat silent
and morose, worried about the reception he would receive at Le Bourget, about how the French would
react to his having betrayed Czechoslovakia and France's promises. As the plane circled for landing,
he and others saw a massive crowd awaiting them. Expecting jeers, hisses, rotten fruit, and maybe
worse, Daladier declared stolidly: 'They are going to mob me, I suppose. ... I appreciate their
feelings,' and insisted on absorbing their wrath by being the first off the plane. But as he stood
dumbfounded on the gangplank, thousands surged forward carrying flags and flowers, shouting 'Hurrah
for France! Hurrah for England! Hurrah for peace!' Daladier turned back to L&eacute;ger and cursed,
'The God-damned fools!' [Benjamin F. Martin, France in 1938]


wingman (n.)

pilot of the plane beside the lead aircraft in a formation, 1943 (earlier as a football position),
from wing (n.) + man (n.). With figurative extensions, including the dating-sidekick one that was in
use by 2006.


biplane (n.)

airplane with two full wings, one above the other, 1874, as a theoretical notion; first attested
1908 in reference to the real thing; from bi- + plane (n.1). So called from the two planes of the
double wings.


hyperbola (n.)

1660s, from Latinized form of Greek hyperbole extravagance, literally a throwing beyond (see
hyperbole). Perhaps so called because the inclination of the plane to the base of the cone exceeds
that of the side of the cone.


nonagon (n.)

plane figure with nine sides, 1680s, a hybrid from Latin nonus ninth (see nones) + ending from
pentagon, etc.


hydroplane (n.)

motorboat that glides on the surface of water, 1895, coined by U.S. engineer Harvey D. Williams
[Sibley Journal of Engineering, Cornell University, vol. X, p.81]; from hydro- + plane (from
airplane).


slant (n.)

1650s, an oblique direction or plane (originally of landforms), from slant (v.). Meaning a way of
regarding something is from 1905. Derogatory slang sense of a slant-eyed Asian person is recorded
from 1943, from earlier slant-eyes (1929).


runcinate (adj.)

1776, saw-toothed, from Modern Latin runcinatus, from Latin runcina a (carpenter's) plane.


payload (n.)

also pay-load, 1917, from pay + load (n.). Originally the part of a truck's (later an aircraft's)
load from which revenue is derived (passengers, cargo, mail); figurative sense of bombs, etc.
carried by a plane or missile is from 1936.


piolet (n.)

1868, from Savoy French piolet climber's ice-axe (19c.), diminutive of piolo axe, perhaps from
Medieval Latin piola plane, scraper.


spoiler (n.)

1530s, one who robs or plunders, agent noun from spoil (v.). Meaning one who mars another's chance
at victory is attested from 1950 in U.S. politics, perhaps from boxing. Aeronautics sense is from
1928, because the flap thwarts the lift on the plane; transferred to structures serving a similar
purpose on speedboats (1957) and motor vehicles (1963). Meaning information about the plot of a
movie, etc., which might 'spoil' it for one who has not seen it is attested by 1982.


buttonwood (n.)

also button-wood, North American plane tree, 1690s, from button (n.) + wood (n.). So called for
their characteristic round fruit.


seaplane (n.)

1913, from sea + plane (n.2).


deplane (v.)

1923; see de- + plane (n.2).


explanation (n.)

late 14c., from Latin explanationem (nominative explanatio), noun of action from past participle
stem of explanare to make plain or clear, explain, literally make level, flatten, from ex- out (see
ex-) + planus flat (see plane (n.1)).


Planaria (n.)

flat worm-like animal, 1819, from Modern Latin (1776) noun use of fem. of Latin planarius, literally
on level ground (here used to mean flat), from planum, planus flat, level, even, plain (see plane
(n.1)). Related: Planarian.


airplane (n.)

1907, from air (n.1) + plane (n.1); though the original references are British, the word caught on
in American English, where it largely superseded earlier aeroplane (1873 in this sense and still
common in British English). Aircraft airplane also is from 1907. Lord Byron, speculatively, used
air-vessel (1822).


planisphere (n.)

late 14c., from Medieval Latin planisphaerium, from Latin planus (see plane (n.1)) + sphaera (see
sphere (n.)).


quarrel (n.2)

square-headed bolt for a crossbow, mid-13c., from Old French quarel, carrel bolt, arrow, from Vulgar
Latin *quadrellus, diminutive of Late Latin quadrus (adj.) square, related to quattuor four (see
four). Now-archaic sense of square or diamond-shaped plane of glass first recorded mid-15c.


pants (n.)

trousers, 1840, see pantaloons. Colloquial singular pant is attested from 1893. To wear the pants be
the dominant member of a household is first attested 1931. To do something by the seat of (one's)
pants by human instinct is from 1942, originally of pilots, perhaps with some notion of being able
to sense the condition and situation of the plane by engine vibrations, etc. To be caught with
(one's) pants down discovered in an embarrassing condition is from 1932.


Pole (n.)

inhabitant or native of Poland, 1650s, from German Pole, singular of Polen, from Polish Polanie
Poles, literally field-dwellers, from pole field, related to Old Church Slavonic polje field, from
PIE root *pele- (2) flat, to spread (see plane (n.1)).


aeroplane (n.)

1866, from French a&eacute;roplane (1855), from Greek aero- air (see air (n.1)) + stem of French
planer to soar, from Latin planus level, flat (see plane (n.1)). Originally in reference to surfaces
(such as the protective shell casings of beetles' wings); meaning heavier than air flying machine
first attested 1873, probably an independent English coinage (see airplane).


tachymeter (n.)

surveying instrument, 1836, from tachy- swift + -meter. Related: Tachymetry.    M. GAETANO
CA&#207;RO has invented an instrument, to which he has given the name of Tachymeter (rapid
measurer). Its object is to give the area of plane surfaces bounded by any outline whatever, without
the necessity of any arithmetical operation. [Magazine of Popular Science and Journal of the Useful
Arts, Volume 2, 1836]


plasma (n.)

1712, form, shape (earlier plasm), from Late Latin plasma, from Greek plasma something molded or
created, hence image, figure; counterfeit, forgery; formed style, affectation, from plassein to
mold, originally to spread thin, from PIE *plath-yein, from root *pele- (2) flat, to spread (see
plane (n.1)). Sense of liquid part of blood is from 1845; that of ionized gas is 1928.


jet (n.1)

stream of water, 1690s, from French jet, from jeter (see jet (v.)). Sense of spout or nozzle for
emitting water, gas, fuel, etc. is from 1825. Hence jet propulsion (1867) and the noun meaning
airplane driven by jet propulsion (1944, from jet engine, 1943). The first one to be in service was
the German Messerschmitt Me 262. Jet stream is from 1947. Jet set first attested 1951, slightly
before jet commuter plane flights began. Jet age is attested from 1952.


llano (n.)

1610s, American Spanish, prairie, from Spanish llano plain, even, level, smooth, ultimately from
Latin planum plain, from planus smooth (see plane (n.1)). Hence, llanero a Latin-American cowboy
(1819), literally plainsman.


explain (v.)

early 15c., from Latin explanare to make level, smooth out; also to explain, make clear (see
explanation).    Originally explane, spelling altered by influence of plain. Also see plane (v.2).
In 17c., occasionally used more literally, of the unfolding of material things: Evelyn has buds that
explain into leaves [Sylva, or, A discourse of forest-trees, and the propagation of timber in His
Majesties dominions, 1664]. Related: Explained; explaining; explains.


pianoforte (n.)

1767, from Italian, from piano e forte soft and loud, in full, gravicembalo col piano e forte
harpsichord with soft and loud (c.1710), said to have been so named by inventor Bartolomeo
Cristofori (1655-1731) of Padua because the ability via dampers to vary the tone is one of the main
changes from the harpsichord. Italian piano (adj.) ultimately is from Latin planus flat, smooth,
even, later soft (see plane (n.1)).


plain (n.)

level country, c.1300 (in reference to Salisbury Plain), from Old French plain open countryside,
from Latin planum level ground, plain, noun use of neuter of planus (adj.) flat, even, level (see
plane (n.1)). Latin planum was used for level ground but much more common was campus.


trapezoid (n.)

1706, a trapezium, from Modern Latin trapezoides, from Late Greek trapezoeides, noun use by Euclid
of Greek trapezoeides trapezium-shaped, from trapeza, literally table (see trapezium), + -oeides
shaped (see -oid). Technically, a plane four-sided figure with no two sides parallel. But in English
since c.1800, often confused with trapezium in its sense of a quadrilateral figure having only sides
parallel and two not.


ellipse (n.)

1753, from French ellipse (17c.), from Latin ellipsis ellipse, also, a falling short, deficit, from
Greek elleipsis (see ellipsis). So called because the conic section of the cutting plane makes a
smaller angle with the base than does the side of the cone, hence, a falling short. The Greek word
was first applied by Apollonius of Perga (3c. B.C.E.). to the curve which had been previously called
the section of the acute-angled cone, but it had previously been technically applied to a rectangle
one of whose sides coincides with a part of a given line (Euclid, VI. 27).


flake (n.)

thin, flat piece, early 14c., possibly from Old English *flacca flakes of snow, from Old Norse flak
loose or torn piece (related to Old Norse fla to skin, see flay), from Proto-Germanic *flago-
(cognates: Middle Dutch vlac, Dutch vlak flat, level, Middle High German vlach, German Flocke
flake); from PIE *plak- (1) to be flat, extended form of root *pele- (2) flat, to spread (see plane
(n.1)).


plaice (n.)

type of European edible flatfish, late 13c., from Old French plaise (12c., Modern French plie), from
Late Latin platessa plaice, flatfish, perhaps related to or from Greek platys broad, flat, from PIE
*plat- to spread (cognates: Sanskrit prathati spreads out; Hittite palhi broad; Lithuanian platus
broad; German Fladen flat cake; Old Norse flatr flat; Old English flet floor, dwelling; Old Irish
lethan broad); extended variant form of root *pele- (2) flat; to spread (see plane (n.1)).


pentagon (n.)

plane figure with five angles and five sides, 1560s, from Middle French pentagone or directly from
Late Latin pentagonum pentagon, from Greek pentagonon, noun use of neuter of adjective pentagonos
five-angled, from pente five (see five) + gonia angle (see knee (n.)). The U.S. military
headquarters Pentagon was completed 1942, so called for its shape; used allusively for U.S. military
leadership from 1945. Related: Pentagonal.    In nature, pentagonal symmetry is rare in inanimate
forms. Packed soap bubbles seem to strive for it but never quite succeed, and there are no mineral
crystals with true pentagonal structures. But pentagonal geometry is basic to many living things,
from roses and forget-me-nots to sea urchins and starfish. [Robert Bringhurst, The Elements of
Typographic Style, 1992]


placenta (n.)

1670s of plants, 1690s of mammals, from Modern Latin placenta uterina uterine cake (so called 16c.
by Italian anatomist Realdo Colombo), from Latin placenta a cake, flat cake, from Greek plakoenta,
accusative of plakoeis flat, related to plax (genitive plakos) level surface, anything flat, from
PIE *plak- (1) to be flat (cognates: Greek plakoeis flat, Lettish plakt to become flat, Old Norse
flaga layer of earth, Norwegian flag open sea, Old English floh piece of stone, fragment, Old High
German fluoh cliff), extended form of root *pele- (2) flat, to spread (see plane (n.1)). So called
from the shape.


plain (adj.)

c.1300, flat, smooth, from Old French plain flat, smooth, even (12c.), from Latin planus flat, even,
level (see plane (n.1)). Sense of evident is from, c.1300; that of free from obstruction is early
14c.; meaning simple, sincere, ordinary is recorded from late 14c., especially of dress,
unembellished, without decoration.    In reference to the dress and speech of Quakers, it is
recorded from 1824; of Amish and Mennonites, from 1894 (in the Dutch regions of Pennsylvania Plain
with the capital is shorthand adjective for Amish and Old Order Mennonite). Of appearance, as a
euphemism for ill-favored, ugly it dates from 1749. Of envelopes from 1913. As an adverb from early
14c. Plain English is from c.1500. Plain dealer one who deals plainly or speaks candidly is from
1570s, marked Now rare in OED 2nd edition. To be as plain as the nose on (one's) face is from 1690s.


floor (n.)

Old English flor floor, pavement, ground, bottom (of a lake, etc.), from Proto-Germanic *floruz
floor (cognates: Middle Dutch and Dutch vloer, Old Norse flor floor, Middle High German vluor,
German Flur field, meadow), from PIE *plaros flat surface (source also of Welsh llawr ground),
enlarged from *pele- (2) flat, to spread (see plane (n.1)).    Meaning level of a house is from
1580s. The figurative sense in legislative assemblies (as opposed to the platform) is first recorded
1774. Spanish suelo floor is from Latin solum bottom, ground, soil; German Boden is cognate with
English bottom. Floor plan attested from 1867.


slight (adj.)

early 14c., flat, smooth; hairless, probably from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse slettr
smooth, sleek, from Proto-Germanic *slikhtaz (cognates: Old Saxon slicht; Low German slicht smooth,
plain common; Old English -sliht level, attested in eor&eth;slihtes level with the ground; Old
Frisian sliucht smooth, slight, Middle Dutch sleht even, plain, Old High German sleht, Gothic
slaihts smooth), probably from a collateral form of PIE *sleig- to smooth, glide, be muddy, from
root *(s)lei- slimy (see slime (n.)).    Sense evolution probably is from smooth (c.1300), to slim,
slender; of light texture, hence not good or strong; insubstantial, trifling, inferior,
insignificant (early 14c.). Meaning small in amount is from 1520s. Sense of German cognate schlecht
developed from smooth, plain, simple to bad, mean, base, and as it did it was replaced in the
original senses by schlicht, a back-formation from schlichten to smooth, to plane, a derivative of
schlecht in the old sense [Klein].


sycamore (n.)

mid-14c., sicamour mulberry-leaved fig tree, from Old French sicamor, sagremore, from Latin
sycomorus, from Greek sykomoros African fig-tree, literally fig-mulberry, from sykon fig (see fig) +
moron  (see mulberry). But according to many sources this is more likely a folk-etymology of Hebrew
shiqmah mulberry.    A Biblical word, originally used for a wide-spreading shade tree with fig-like
fruit (Ficus sycomorus) common in Egypt, Palestine, Syria, etc., whose leaves somewhat resemble
those of the mulberry; applied in English from 1580s to a large species of European maple (also
plane-tree), perhaps because both it and the Biblical tree were notable for their shadiness (the
Holy Family took refuge under a sycamore on the flight to Egypt), and from 1814 to the North
American shade tree that also is called a buttonwood, which was introduced to Europe from Virginia
1637 by Filius Tradescant).    Spelling apparently influenced by sycamine black mulberry tree, which
is from Greek sykcaminos, which also is mentioned in the Bible (Luke xvii:6). For the sake of
clarity, some writers have used the more Hellenic sycomore in reference to the Biblical tree.


