plastered (adj.)

coated with plaster, late 14c., past participle adjective from plaster (v.). Slang meaning very
drunk attested by 1912, perhaps from plaster in medical sense of to apply a remedy to; to soothe
(see plaster (n.)).


plaster (v.)

to coat with plaster, early 14c., from plaster (n.) and partly Old French plastrier to cover with
plaster (Modern French pl&#226;trer), from plastre (see plaster (n.). Related: Plastered;
plastering. Figurative use from c.1600. Meaning to bomb (a target) heavily is first recorded 1915.
Sports sense of to defeat decisively is from 1919.


plaster (n.)

late Old English plaster medicinal application, from Vulgar Latin plastrum, shortened from Latin
emplastrum a plaster (in the medical as well as the building sense), from Greek emplastron salve,
plaster (used by Galen instead of more usual emplaston), noun use of neuter of emplastos daubed on,
from en- on + plastos molded, from plassein to mold (see plasma). The building construction material
is first recorded in English c.1300, via Old French plastre, from the same source, and in early use
the English word often had the French spelling.


plaster of Paris (n.)

mid-15c.; originally it was made from the extensive gypsum deposits of Montmartre in Paris.


shinplaster (n.)

also shin-plaster, piece of paper soaked in vinegar and used to treat sore legs, from shin (n.) +
plaster (n.). In U.S. history, jocularly or as a term of abuse for devalued low-denomination paper
currency (1824).


gypsum (n.)

substance (hydrated calcium sulphate) used in making plaster, late 14c., from Latin gypsum, from
Greek gypsos chalk, according to Klein, perhaps of Semitic origin (compare Arabic jibs, Hebrew
gephes plaster).


placard (n.)

late 15c., formal document authenticated by an affixed seal, from Middle French placquard official
document with a large, flat seal, also plate of armor, from Old French plaquier to lay on, cover up,
plaster over, from Middle Dutch placken to patch (a garment), to plaster, related to Middle High
German placke patch, stain, German Placken spot, patch. Meaning poster first recorded 1550s in
English; this sense is in Middle French from 15c.


piaster (n.)

also piastre, 1620s, Spanish dollar, piece of eight, also used as the name of a monetary unit and
coin of Turkey (1610s, in Turkish called ghurush, but originally debased Spanish dollars), from
French piastre, from Italian piastra thin metal plate, short for impiastro plaster, from Latin
emplastrum, from Greek emplastron (see plaster). The Italian word was applied to the Spanish silver
peso, later to the Turkish coin based on it. Compare shinplaster.


Sheetrock (n.)

1921, proprietary name (claiming use from 1917) of a type of plaster wall-board, U.S. Gypsum Co.,
Chicago, Ill.;   from sheet (n.1) + rock (n.).


slapdash (adv.)

1670s, from slap (v.) + dash (v.). As an adjective, dashing, offhand, careless, from 1792. As a
noun, rough-coat, coarse plaster, from 1796.


paper (v.)

1590s, to write down on paper, from paper (n.). Meaning to decorate a room with paper hangings is
from 1774. Related: Papered; papering. Verbal phrase paper over in the figurative sense is from
1955, from the notion of hiding plaster cracks with wallaper.


plastid (n.)

1876, from German plastid, coined by Haeckel from Greek plastos molded, formed (see plaster) + -id.


gesso

plaster of Paris, 1590s, from Italian gesso, from Latin gypsum (see gypsum).


trowel (n.)

mid-14c., tool for spreading plaster or mortar, from Old French truele trowel (13c.), from Late
Latin truella small ladle, dipper (mid-12c.), diminutive of Latin trua a stirring spoon, ladle,
skimmer. The gardening tool was so called since 1796.


fresco (n.)

1590s, in fresco, literally in fresh, with a sense of painted on fresh mortar or plaster, from
Italian fresco cool, fresh, from Proto-Germanic *friskaz (see fresh (adj.1)).


daub (v.)

late 14c. (Dauber as a surname is recorded from mid-13c.), from Old French dauber to whitewash,
plaster (13c.), perhaps from Latin dealbare, from de- thoroughly + albare to whiten, from albus
white (see alb). Painting sense is from 1620s. Related: Daubed; daubing. As a noun, from mid-15c.


stucco (n.)

fine plaster used as a wall coating, 1590s, from Italian stucco, from a Germanic source (compare Old
High German stukki crust, piece, fragment), from Proto-Germanic *stukkjam, from PIE root *(s)teu-
(1) to push, stick, knock, beat (see stock (n.1)). The verb is attested from 1726. Related:
Stuccoed; stuccoing.


al fresco

1753, Italian, literally in the fresh (air). Italian al represents a contraction of words from Latin
ad to (see ad-) + ille that. Alfresco also meant painted on plaster that was still fresh or moist
(1764; see fresco).


glue (n.)

early 13c., from Old French glu birdlime (12c.), from Late Latin glutem (nominative glus) glue, from
Latin gluten glue, beeswax, from PIE *gleit- to glue, paste (cognates: Lithuanian glitus sticky,
glitas mucus; Old English cli&eth;a plaster), from root *glei- to stick together (see clay). In
reference to glue from boiled animal hoofs and hides, c.1400. Glue-sniffing attested from 1963.


mortar (n.1)

mixture of cement, late 13c., from Old French mortier builder's mortar, plaster; bowl for mixing
(13c.), from Latin mortarium mortar, also crushed drugs, probably the same word as mortarium bowl
for mixing or pounding (see mortar (n.2)). Dutch mortel, German M&#246;rtel are from Latin or
French.


amalgam (n.)

c.1400, blend of mercury with another metal; soft mass formed by chemical manipulation, from Old
French amalgame or directly from Medieval Latin amalgama, alloy of mercury (especially with gold or
silver), an alchemists' word, perhaps an alteration of Latin malagma poultice, plaster, probably
from Arabic al-malgham an emollient poultice or unguent for sores (especially warm) [Francis
Johnson, A Dictionary of Persian, Arabic, and English], perhaps from Greek malagma softening
substance, from malassein to soften, from malakos soft.


chalk (n.)

Old English cealc chalk, lime, plaster; pebble, a West Germanic borrowing from Latin calx (2)
limestone, lime (crushed limestone), small stone, from Greek khalix small pebble, which many trace
to a PIE root for split, break up. In most Germanic languages still with the limestone sense, but in
English transferred to the opaque, white, soft limestone found abundantly in the south of the
island. Modern spelling is from early 14c. The Latin word for chalk was creta, which also is of
unknown origin.


clammy (adj.)

soft and sticky, late 14c., probably from Middle English clam viscous, sticky, muddy (mid-14c.),
from Old English cl&aelig;m mud, sticky clay, from Proto-Germanic *klaimaz clay (cognates: Flemish
klammig, Low German klamig sticky, damp, Old English cl&aelig;man to smear, plaster; cognates:
clay). With -y (2). Related: Clammily; clamminess.


medicine (n.)

c.1200, medical treatment, cure, remedy, also used figuratively, of spiritual remedies, from Old
French medecine (Modern French m&#233;dicine) medicine, art of healing, cure, treatment, potion,
from Latin medicina the healing art, medicine; a remedy, also used figuratively, perhaps originally
ars medicina the medical art, from fem. of medicinus (adj.) of a doctor, from medicus a physician
(see medical); though OED finds evidence for this is wanting. Meaning a medicinal potion or plaster
in English is mid-14c.    To take (one's) medicine submit to something disagreeable is first
recorded 1865. North American Indian medicine-man shaman is first attested 1801, from American
Indian adoption of the word medicine in sense of magical influence. The U.S.-Canadian boundary they
called Medicine Line (first attested 1910), because it conferred a kind of magic protection:
punishment for crimes committed on one side of it could be avoided by crossing over to the other.
Medicine show traveling show meant to attract a crowd so patent medicine can be sold to them is
American English, 1938. Medicine ball stuffed leather ball used for exercise is from 1889.    It is
called a medicine ball and it got that title from Prof. Roberts, now of Springfield, whose fame is
widespread, and whose bright and peculiar dictionary of terms for his prescription department in
physical culture is taught in every first-class conducted Y.M.C.A. gymnasium in America. Prof.
Roberts calls it a medicine ball because playful exercise with it invigorates the body, promotes
digestion, and restores and preserves one's health. [Scientific American Supplement, March 16, 1889]


