Platonic (adj.)

1530s, of or pertaining to Greek philosopher Plato (429 B.C.E.-c.347 B.C.E.), from Latin Platonicus,
from Greek Platonikos. The name is Greek Platon, properly broad-shouldered (from platys broad; see
plaice (n.)). His original name was Aristocles. The meaning love free of sensual desire (1630s),
which the word usually carries nowadays, is a Renaissance notion; it is based on Plato's writings in
Symposium about the kind of interest Socrates took in young men, which originally had no reference
to women. Related: Platonically.


idea (n.)

late 14c., archetype of a thing in the mind of God; Platonic `idea,' from Latin idea idea, and in
Platonic philosophy archetype, from Greek idea ideal prototype, literally the look of a thing (as
opposed to the reality); form; kind, sort, nature, from idein to see, from PIE *wid-es-ya-, suffixed
form of root *weid- to see (see vision). Sense of result of thinking first recorded 1640s.    Men of
one idea, like a hen with one chicken, and that a duckling. [Thoreau, Walden]   Id&eacute;e fixe
(1836) is from French, literally fixed idea.


Neoplatonism (n.)

also Neo-platonism, 1827, a philosophical and religious system mixing Platonic ideas and oriental
mysticism, originating 3c. at Alexandria, especially in writings of Plotinus, Porphyry, and Proclus.
Neoplatonian is attested from 1831. Related: Neoplatonic; Neoplatonist.


Platonism (n.)

1560s, from Plato (see Platonic) + -ism.


Platonist (n.)

1540s, from Plato (see Platonic) + -ist.


ideal (adj.)

early 15c., pertaining to an archetype or model,  from Late Latin idealis existing in idea, from
Latin idea in the Platonic sense (see idea). Sense of perfect first recorded 1610s.


demiurge (n.)

1670s, from Latinized form of Greek demiourgos, literally public or skilled worker (from demos
common people; see demotic + ergos work; see organ).    The title of a magistrate in some
Peloponnesian city-states and the Ach&aelig;an League; taken in Platonic philosophy as a name for
the maker of the world. In the Gnostic system, conceived as a being subordinate to the Supreme
Being, and sometimes as the author of evil [OED].


idealist (n.)

one who represents things in an ideal form, 1829, from ideal + -ist. Earlier (1796) in a
philosophical sense one who believes reality consists only in (Platonic) ideals.    It seems even
incredible, that any Idealist in any age could forget himself so far as to run his head against a
post, merely because he found in his system, that no external world does exist, and that therefore
nothing could be without to hurt him. [F.A. Nitsch, A General and Introductory View of Professor
Kant's Principles, 1796]    Earlier still, one who holds doctrines of philosophical idealism (1701).


evocation (n.)

1570s, from Latin evocationem (nominative evocatio), noun of action from past participle stem of
evocare call out, rouse, summon, from ex- out (see ex-) + vocare to call (see voice (n.)).
Evocation was used of the Roman custom of petitioning the gods of an enemy city to abandon it and
come to Rome; it also was used to translate the Platonic Greek anamnesis a calling up of knowledge
acquired in a previous state of existence.


psyche (n.)

1640s, animating spirit, from Latin psyche, from Greek psykhe the soul, mind, spirit; breath; life,
one's life, the invisible animating principle or entity which occupies and directs the physical
body; understanding (personified as Psykhe, the beloved of Eros), akin to psykhein to blow, cool,
from PIE root *bhes- to blow, to breathe (source also of Sanskrit bhas-), Probably imitative
[Watkins].    Also in ancient Greek, departed soul, spirit, ghost, and often represented
symbolically as a butterfly or moth. The word had extensive sense development in Platonic philosophy
and Jewish-influenced theological writing of St. Paul (compare spirit (n.)). Meaning human soul is
from 1650s. In English, psychological sense mind, is attested by 1910.


