plausible (adj.)

1540s, acceptable, agreeable, from Latin plausibilis deserving applause, acceptable, from plaus-,
past participle stem of plaudere to applaud (see plaudit). Meaning having the appearance of truth is
recorded from 1560s. Related: Plausibly.


carpaccio (n.)

raw meat or fish served as an appetizer, late 20c., from Italian, often connected to the name of
Renaissance painter Vittore Carpaccio (c.1460-1526) but without any plausible explanation except
perhaps that his pictures often feature an orange-red hue reminiscent of some raw meat.


ofay (n.)

American English black slang, white person, 1925, of unknown origin. If, as is sometimes claimed, it
derives from an African word, none corresponding to it has been found. Perhaps the most plausible
speculation is Yoruba &oacute;f&eacute; to disappear (as from a powerful enemy), with the sense
transferred from the word of self-protection to the source of the threat. OED regards the main
alternative theory, that it is pig Latin for foe, to be no more than an implausible guess.


plausibility (n.)

1590s, from plausible + -ity.


implausible (adj.)

c.1600, from assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + plausible. Related:
Implausibly.


jeer (v.)

1550s, gyr, to deride, to mock, of uncertain origin; perhaps from Dutch gieren to cry or roar, or
German scheren to plague, vex, literally to shear. OED finds the suggestion that it is an ironical
use of cheer plausible and phonetically feasible, ... but ... beyond existing evidence. Related:
Jeered; jeering.


dukes (n.)

hands, 1874, now mainly in put up your dukes (phrase from 1859), probably not connected to duke
(n.). Chapman [Dictionary of American Slang] suggests Romany dook the hand as read in palmistry,
one's fate; but Partridge [Slang To-day and Yesterday] gives it a plausible, if elaborate, etymology
as a contraction of Duke of Yorks, rhyming slang for forks, a Cockney term for fingers, thus hands.


specious (adj.)

late 14c., pleasing to the sight, fair, from Latin speciosus good-looking, beautiful, fair, also
showy, pretended, plausible, specious, from species appearance, form, figure, beauty (see species).
Meaning seemingly desirable, reasonable or probable, but not really so; superficially fair, just, or
correct in English is first recorded 1610s. Related: Speciously; speciosity; speciousness.


grotesque (adj.)

c.1600s, originally a noun (1560s), from Middle French crotesque (16c., Modern French grotesque),
from Italian grottesco, literally of a cave, from grotta (see grotto). The usual explanation is that
the word first was used of paintings found on the walls of basements of Roman ruins (Italian pittura
grottesca), which OED finds intrinsically plausible. Originally fanciful, fantastic, sense became
pejorative after mid-18c. Related: Grotesquely; grotesqueness.


ease (n.)

early 13c., from Old French aise comfort, pleasure, well-being; opportunity, of unknown origin,
despite attempts to link it to various Latin verbs.    The earliest senses in French appear to be 1.
elbow-room (from an 11th century Hebrew-French glossary) and 2. opportunity. This led Sophus Bugge
to suggest an origin in Vulgar Latin asa, a shortened form of Latin ansa handle, which could be used
in the figurative sense of opportunity, occasion, as well as being a possible synonym for elbow,
because Latin ansatus furnished with handles also was used to mean having the arms akimbo. OED
editors report this theory, and write, This is not very satisfactory, but it does not appear that
any equally plausible alternative has yet been proposed.


topsy-turvy (adv.)

1520s, but prob. in popular use from an earlier period [OED]; compare top over terve to fall over
(mid-15c.); likely from tops, plural of top (n.1) highest point + obsolete terve turn upside down,
topple over, from Old English tearflian to roll over, overturn, from Proto-Germanic *terbanan
(cognates: Old High German zerben to turn round). Century Dictionary calls it A word which, owing to
its popular nature, its alliterative type, and to ignorance of its origin, leading to various
perversions made to suggest some plausible origin, has undergone, besides the usual variations of
spelling, extraordinary modifications of form. It lists 31 variations. As an adjective from 1610s.


sincere (adj.)

1530s, pure, unmixed, from Middle French sincere (16c.), from Latin sincerus, of things, whole,
clean, pure, uninjured, unmixed, figuratively sound, genuine, pure, true, candid, truthful, of
uncertain origin. Ground sense seems to be that which is not falsified. Meaning free from pretense
or falsehood in English is from 1530s.    There has been a temptation to see the first element as
Latin sine without. But there is no etymological justification for the common story that the word
means without wax (*sin cerae), which is dismissed out of hand by OED and others, and the stories
invented to justify that folk etymology are even less plausible. Watkins has it as originally of one
growth (i.e. not hybrid, unmixed), from PIE *sm-ke-ro-, from *sem- one (see same) + root of crescere
to grow (see crescent).


qualm (n.)

Old English cwealm (West Saxon) death, murder, slaughter; disaster; plague; torment, utcualm
(Anglian) utter destruction, probably related to cwellan to kill, murder, execute, cwelan to die
(see quell). Sense softened to feeling of faintness 1520s; figurative meaning uneasiness, doubt is
from 1550s; that of scruple of conscience is 1640s.    Evidence of a direct path from the Old
English to the modern senses is wanting, but it is plausible, via the notion of fit of sickness. The
other suggested etymology, less satisfying, is to take the fit of uneasiness sense from Dutch kwalm
steam, vapor, mist (cognate with German Qualm smoke, vapor, stupor), which also might be ultimately
from the same Germanic root as quell.


felon (n.)

late 13c., from Old French felon evil-doer, scoundrel, traitor, rebel, the Devil (9c.), from
Medieval Latin fellonem (nominative fello) evil-doer, of uncertain origin, perhaps from Frankish
*fillo, *filljo person who whips or beats, scourger (source of Old High German fillen to whip); or
from Latin fel gall, poison, on the notion of one full of bitterness.    Another theory (advanced by
Professor R. Atkinson of Dublin) traces it to Latin fellare to suck (see fecund), which had an
obscene secondary meaning in classical Latin (well-known to readers of Martial and Catullus), which
would make a felon etymologically a cock-sucker. OED inclines toward the gall explanation, but finds
Atkinson's most plausible of the others.


varus (n.)

foot deformity in which the feet are extroverted, so that the inner ankle rests on the ground, while
the sole of the foot is more or less turned outwards, 1800, from Latin varus bent, bent outwards,
turned awry, crooked, specifically with legs bent inward, knock-kneed, of uncertain origin.    If
the original meaning was 'with the legs opened', varus might be compared with vanus and vastus, and
reflect *wa-ro- 'going apart, letting go'. In any case, none of the other etymologies proposed seems
plausible. [de Vaan]    The use of classical varus and valgus, which denoted deformities of the
legs, in modern medicine to describe deformities of the feet, was criticized by learned writers (see
Edinburgh Medical and Surgical Journal, July 1838).


prick (n.)

Middle English prikke, from Old English prica (n.) point, puncture; particle, small portion of space
or time, common Proto-Germanic (compare Low German prik point, Middle Dutch prick, Dutch prik,
Swedish prick point, dot). Meaning pointed weapon, dagger is first attested 1550s.    Earliest
recorded use for penis is 1590s (Shakespeare puns upon it). My prick was used 16c.-17c. as a term of
endearment by immodest maids for their boyfriends. As a term of abuse, it is attested by 1929.
Prick-teaser attested from 1958. The use in kick against the pricks (Acts ix:5, first in the
translation of 1382) probably is from sense of a goad for oxen (mid-14c.), which made it a plausible
translation of Latin stimulus; advorsum stimulum calces was proverbial in Latin.


indri (n.)

1839, European name for the babakoto, a lemur-like arboreal primate of Madagascar (Indris
Lichanotus); the common story since late 19c. is that the name was given in error by French
naturalist Pierre Sonnerat (1748-1814), c.1780, from mistaken use of Malagasy indry! look! See!
Evidently this was what his native guides said when they spotted the creature and called his
attention to it.    However, as Hacking (1981) pointed out, Sonnerat was far too familiar with
indris -- he described and figured them in detail, and apparently kept at least one in captivity --
for this story to be plausible. Furthermore, endrina is actually recorded as a native name for the
indri (Cousins, 1885), and indri could easily be a variant of this name. Although the word endrina
is first recorded in Malagasy only in 1835, there is no evidence that it could be a back-formation
from the French indri (Hacking, 1981), and it seems implausible that the Malagasy would adopt an
erroneous French name for an animal they were them selves familiar with. [Dunkel, Alexander R., et
al., Giant rabbits, marmosets, and British comedies: etymology of lemur names, part 1, in Lemur
News, vol. 16, 2011-2012, p.67]


