playful (adj.)

mid-13c., from play (v.) + -ful. Related: Playfully; playfulness.


missy (n.)

young girl, 1670s, playful form of miss (n.2), chiefly among servants at first.


Pocahontas

(c.1595-1617), daughter of Algonquian leader Powhatan, the name is said to be Algonquian
Pokachantesu she is playful.


dobbie (n.)

household sprite, 1811, from playful use of the proper name represented in dobbin (q.v.). In Sussex,
such apparitions were called Master Dobbs.


sporting (adj.)

c.1600, playful; 1799 as characterized by conduct constant with that of a sportsman (as in sporting
chance, 1897), present participle adjective from sport (v.).


caper (n.2)

by 1590s, playful leap or jump, from caper (v.); meaning prank is from 1840; that of crime is from
1926. To cut capers dance in a frolicsome way is from c.1600.


land (v.2)

to make contact, to hit home (of a blow, etc.), by 1881, perhaps altered from lend in a playful
sense, or else an extension of land (v.1).


ludic (adj.)

spontaneously playful, 1940, from French ludique, from Latin ludere to play (see ludicrous).


chit (n.2)

small child, 1620s, originally young of a beast (late 14c.); unrelated to chit (n.1); perhaps a
playful deformation of kitten, but the Middle English Dictionary compares Old High German kizzin
kid.


game (adj.2)

brave, spirited, 1725, especially in game-cock bird for fighting, from game (n.). Middle English had
gamesome (adj.) joyful, playful, sportive.


whisker (n.)

hair of a man's face (usually plural), c.1600, originally a playful formation, from Middle English
wisker anything that whisks or sweeps (early 15c.), agent noun from whisk (v.). In reference to
animal lip hair, recorded from 1670s. Related: Whiskered; whiskers.


tyke (n.)

late 14c., cur, mongrel, from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse tik bitch, from Proto-Germanic
*tikk- (cognates: Middle Low German tike). Also applied in Middle English to a low-bred or lazy man.
The meaning child is from 1902, though the word was used in playful reproof from 1894. As a nickname
for a Yorkshireman, from c.1700; Perhaps originally opprobrious; but now accepted and owned [OED].


gallivant (v.)

1809, of uncertain origin, perhaps a playful elaboration of gallant in an obsolete verbal sense of
play the gallant, flirt, gad about. Related: Gallivanted; gallivanting.    Young Lobski said to his
ugly wife,  I'm off till to-morrow to fish, my life;  Says Mrs. Lobski, I'm sure you a'nt,  But you
brute you are going to gallivant.    What Mrs. Lobski said was right, Gay Mr. Lobski was out all
night.  He ne'er went to fish, 'tis known very well  But where he went I shall not tell.  [Songs
from the Exile, in Literary Panorama, London, 1809]


toots (n.)

slang familiar form of address to a woman or girl, 1936, American English, short for tootsie,
tootsy, from tootsy-wootsy (1895), a familiar form of address to a sweetheart, originally a playful
or nursery name for a small foot, from childish pronunciation of foot (n.); compare tootsy.


carousel (n.)

merry-go-round, 1670s, earlier playful tournament of knights in chariots or on horseback (1640s),
from French carrousel a tilting match, from Italian carusiello, possibly from carro chariot, from
Latin carrus (see car).A new and rare invencon knowne by the name of the royalle carousell or
tournament being framed and contrived with such engines as will not only afford great pleasure to us
and our nobility in the sight thereof, but sufficient instruction to all such ingenious young
gentlemen as desire to learne the art of perfect horsemanshipp. [letter of 1673]


wile (n.)

late Old English, wil stratagem, trick, sly artifice, perhaps from Old North French *wile (Old
French guile), or directly from a Scandinavian source (compare Old Norse vel trick, craft, fraud,
vela defraud). Perhaps ultimately related to Old English wicca wizard (see Wicca). Lighter sense of
amorous or playful trick is from c.1600.


slut (n.)

c.1400, a dirty, slovenly, or untidy woman, according to OED Of doubtful origin, but probably
cognate with dialectal German Schlutt slovenly woman, dialectal Swedish slata idle woman, slut, and
Dutch slodde slut, slodder a careless man, but the exact relationship of all these is obscure.
Chaucer uses sluttish (late 14c.) in reference to the appearance of an untidy man. Also a kitchen
maid, a drudge (mid-15c.; hard pieces in a bread loaf from imperfect kneading were called slut's
pennies, 18c.).    Specific modern sense of woman who enjoys sex in a degree considered shamefully
excessive is by 1966. Meaning woman of loose character, bold hussy is attested from mid-15c., but
the primary association through 18c. was untidiness. Johnson has it (second definition) as A word of
slight contempt to a woman but sexual activity does not seem to figure into his examples. Playful
use of the word, without implication of messiness or loose morals, is attested by 1660s:    My wife
called up the people to washing by four o'clock in the morning; and our little girl Susan is a most
admirable slut, and pleases us mightily, doing more service than both the others, and deserves wages
better. [Pepys, diary, Feb. 21, 1664]    Compare playful use of scamp, etc., for boys. Sometimes
used 19c. as a euphemism for bitch to describe a female dog.    There is a group of North Sea
Germanic words in sl- that mean sloppy, and also slovenly woman and, less often, slovenly man, and
that tend to evolve toward woman of loose morals. Compare slattern, also English dialectal slummock
a dirty, untidy, or slovenly person (1861), variant of slammacks slatternly woman, said to be from
slam ill-shaped, shambling fellow. Also slammakin (from 1756 as a type of loose gown; 1785 as
slovenly female, 1727 as a character name in Gay's Beggar's Opera), with variants slamkin,
slammerkin. Also possibly related are Middle Dutch slore a sluttish woman, Dutch slomp, German
schlampe a slattern.


buster (n.)

1838, anything large; a man of great strength, American English slang (originally
Missouri/Arkansas), perhaps meaning something that takes one's breath away and an agent noun from
bust (v.). Around the same years, buster (as an extended form of bust (n.)) also meant a frolic, a
spree. Hence a roistering blade (OED; probably not the favored definition in old Missouri and
Arkansas), attested from 1850. As a generic or playful address to a male, from 1948, American
English. Meaning horse-breaker is from 1891, American English; hence back-formed verb bust (v.)
break a horse.


rogue (n.)

1560s, idle vagrant, perhaps a shortened form of roger (with a hard -g-), thieves' slang for a
begging vagabond who pretends to be a poor scholar from Oxford or Cambridge, which is perhaps an
agent noun in English from Latin rogare to ask. Another theory [Klein] traces it to Celtic (compare
Breton rog haughty); OED says, There is no evidence of connexion with F. rogue 'arrogant.'     In
playful or affectionate use, one who is mischievous, 1590s. Meaning large wild beast living apart
from the herd is from 1859, originally of elephants. Meaning something uncontrolled or undisciplined
is from 1964. Also common in 17c. as a verb. Rogue's gallery police collection of mug shots is
attested from 1859.


splendiferous (adj.)

considered a playful elaboration since its re-birth in 1843, but in 15c. it was good English, from
Medieval Latin splendorifer, from splendor (see splendor) + ferre to bear (see infer). Compare 15c.
splendidious, also splendacious (1843). Bartlett (1859) offers this, allegedly from An itinerant
gospeller ... holding forth to a Kentuckian audience on the kingdom of heaven:    Heaven, my beloved
hearers, said he, is a glorious, a beautiful, a splendiferous, an angeliferous place. Eye hath not
seen, ear hath not heard, it has not entered into the imagination of any Cracker in these here
diggings what carryings on the just made perfect have up thar.


lascivious (adj.)

mid-15c., from Middle French lascivieux or directly from Late Latin lasciviosus (used in a scolding
sense by Isidore and other early Church writers), from Latin lascivia lewdness, playfulness,
frolicsomeness, jolity, from lascivus lewd, playful, frolicsome, wanton, from PIE *las-ko-, from
*las- to be eager, wanton, or unruly (cognates: Sanskrit -lasati yearns, lasati plays, frolics,
Hittite ilaliya- to desire, covet, Greek laste harlot, Old Church Slavonic laska flattery, Slovak
laska love, Old Irish lainn greedy, Gothic lustus, Old English lust lust). Related: Lasciviously;
lasciviousness. In 17c. also with a verbal form, lasciviate.


lust (n.)

Old English lust desire, appetite, pleasure, from Proto-Germanic *lustuz (cognates: Old Saxon, Old
Frisian, Dutch, German lust, Old Norse lyst, Gothic lustus pleasure, desire, lust), from PIE *las-
to be eager, wanton, or unruly (cognates: Latin lascivus wanton, playful, lustful; see lascivious).
In Middle English, any source of pleasure or delight, also an appetite, also a liking for a person,
also fertility (of soil). Sense of sinful sexual desire, degrading animal passion (now the main
meaning) developed in late Old English from the word's use in Bible translations (such as lusts of
the flesh to render Latin concupiscentia carnis [I John ii:16]); the cognate words in other Germanic
languages tend still to mean simply pleasure.


mischief (n.)

c.1300, evil condition, misfortune, need, want, from Old French meschief misfortune, harm, trouble;
annoyance, vexation (12c., Modern French m&eacute;chef), verbal noun from meschever come or bring to
grief, be unfortunate (opposite of achieve), from mes- badly (see mis- (2)) + chever happen, come to
a head, from Vulgar Latin *capare head, from Latin caput head (see capitulum). Meaning harm or evil
considered as the work of some agent or due to some cause is from late 15c. Sense of playful malice
first recorded 1784.   Mischief Night in 19c. England was the eve of May Day and of Nov. 5, both
major holidays, and perhaps the original point was pilfering for the next day's celebration and
bonfire; but in Yorkshire, Scotland, and Ireland the night was Halloween. The useful Middle English
verb mischieve (early 14c.) has, for some reason, fallen from currency.


tiffany (n.)

type of thin, transparent fabric, c.1600; earlier a common name for the festival of the Epiphany
(early 14c.; in Anglo-French from late 13c.), from Old French Tifinie, Tiphanie Epiphany (c.1200),
from Late Latin Theophania Theophany, another name for the Epiphany, from Greek theophania the
manifestation of a god (see theophany).    Also popular in Old French and Middle English as a name
given to girls born on Epiphany Day. The fabric sense is found only in English and is of obscure
origin and uncertain relation to the other meanings, unless holiday silk or as a fanciful or playful
allusion to manifestation:    The invention of that fine silke, Tiffanie, Sarcenet, and Cypres,
which instead of apparell to cover and hide, shew women naked through them. [Holland's Pliny, 1601]
The fashionable N.Y. jewelry firm Tiffany &amp; Co. (1895) is named for its founder, goldsmith
Charles L. Tiffany (1812-1902) and his son, Louis C. Tiffany (1848-1933), who was the art nouveau
decorator noted for his glassware. The surname is attested in English from 1206.


devil (n.)

Old English deofol evil spirit, a devil, the devil, false god, diabolical person, from Late Latin
diabolus (also the source of Italian diavolo, French diable, Spanish diablo; German Teufel is Old
High German tiufal, from Latin via Gothic diabaulus).    The Late Latin word is from Ecclesiastical
Greek diabolos, in Jewish and Christian use, Devil, Satan (scriptural loan-translation of Hebrew
satan), in general use accuser, slanderer, from diaballein to slander, attack, literally throw
across, from dia- across, through + ballein to throw (see ballistics). Jerome re-introduced Satan in
Latin bibles, and English translators have used both in different measures.    In Vulgate, as in
Greek, diabolus and d&aelig;mon (see demon) were distinct, but they have merged in English and other
Germanic languages.    Playful use for clever rogue is from c.1600. Meaning sand spout, dust storm
is from 1835. In U.S. place names, the word often represents a native word such as Algonquian
manito, more properly spirit, god. Phrase a devil way (c.1300) was originally Hell-ward, to Hell,
but by late 14c. as an expression of irritation.   Devil's books playing cards is from 1729, but the
cited quote says they've been called that time out of mind (the four of clubs is the devil's
bedposts); devil's coach-horse is from 1840, the large rove-beetle, which is defiant when disturbed.
Talk of the Devil, and he's presently at your elbow [1660s].


medicine (n.)

c.1200, medical treatment, cure, remedy, also used figuratively, of spiritual remedies, from Old
French medecine (Modern French m&#233;dicine) medicine, art of healing, cure, treatment, potion,
from Latin medicina the healing art, medicine; a remedy, also used figuratively, perhaps originally
ars medicina the medical art, from fem. of medicinus (adj.) of a doctor, from medicus a physician
(see medical); though OED finds evidence for this is wanting. Meaning a medicinal potion or plaster
in English is mid-14c.    To take (one's) medicine submit to something disagreeable is first
recorded 1865. North American Indian medicine-man shaman is first attested 1801, from American
Indian adoption of the word medicine in sense of magical influence. The U.S.-Canadian boundary they
called Medicine Line (first attested 1910), because it conferred a kind of magic protection:
punishment for crimes committed on one side of it could be avoided by crossing over to the other.
Medicine show traveling show meant to attract a crowd so patent medicine can be sold to them is
American English, 1938. Medicine ball stuffed leather ball used for exercise is from 1889.    It is
called a medicine ball and it got that title from Prof. Roberts, now of Springfield, whose fame is
widespread, and whose bright and peculiar dictionary of terms for his prescription department in
physical culture is taught in every first-class conducted Y.M.C.A. gymnasium in America. Prof.
Roberts calls it a medicine ball because playful exercise with it invigorates the body, promotes
digestion, and restores and preserves one's health. [Scientific American Supplement, March 16, 1889]


