pleased (adj.)

satisfied, contented, late 14c., past participle adjective from please (v.).


gruntle (v.)

1938, in gruntled pleased, satisfied, a back-formation from disgruntled. The original verb (early
15c.) meant to utter a little or low grunt.


Rama

incarnation of Vishnu, from Sanskrit Ramah, literally lovely, from stem of ramate stands still,
rests, is pleased.


tickled (adj.)

pleased, happy, 1580s, past participle adjective from tickle (v.). To be tickled pink is from 1909.


please (v.)

early 14c., to be agreeable, from Old French plaisir to please, give pleasure to, satisfy (11c.,
Modern French plaire, the form of which is perhaps due to analogy of faire), from Latin placere to
be acceptable, be liked, be approved, related to placare to soothe, quiet (source of Spanish placer,
Italian piacere), possibly from PIE *plak-e- to be calm, via notion of still water, etc., from root
*plak- (1) to be flat (see placenta).    Meaning to delight in English is from late 14c. Inverted
use for to be pleased is from c.1500, first in Scottish, and paralleling the evolution of synonymous
like (v.). Intransitive sense (do as you please) first recorded c.1500; imperative use (please do
this), first recorded 1620s, was probably a shortening of if it please (you) (late 14c.). Related:
Pleased; pleasing; pleasingly.    Verbs for please supply the stereotype polite word (Please come
in, short for may it please you to ...) in many languages (French, Italian), But more widespread is
the use of the first singular of a verb for 'ask, request'  [Buck, who cites German bitte, Polish
prosz&#281;, etc.]. Spanish favor is short for hace el favor do the favor. Danish has in this sense
v&aelig;r saa god, literally be so good.


Eastlake

style of furniture, 1878, often a mere debased Gothic, but at its best inspired by English designer
Charles Locke Eastlake (1836-1906) and his book Hints on Household Taste.I find American tradesmen
continually advertising what they are pleased to call 'Eastlake' furniture, with the production of
which I have had nothing whatever to do, and for the taste of which I should be very sorry to be
considered responsible [C.L. Eastlake, 1878]


complacent (adj.)

1650s, pleasing, from Latin complacentem (nominative complacens) pleasing, present participle of
complacere be very pleasing (see complacence). Meaning pleased with oneself is from 1767. Related:
Complacently.


placable (adj.)

c.1500, pleasing, from Middle French placable forgiving, conciliatory and directly from Latin
placabilis easily appeased or pacified, from placare to appease (see placate). From 1580s as capable
of being pleased. Related: Placably; placability.


Punch (n.)

the puppet show star, 1709, shortening of Punchinello (1666), from Italian (Neapolitan)
Pollecinella, Pollecenella, diminutive of pollecena turkey pullet, probably in allusion to his big
nose. The phrase pleased as punch apparently refers to his unfailing triumph over enemies. The comic
weekly of this name was published in London from 1841.


chuff

pleased, happy, c.1860, British dialect, from obsolete chuff swollen with fat (1520s). A second
British dialectal chuff has an opposite meaning, displeased, gruff (1832), from chuff rude fellow,
or, as Johnson has it, a coarse, fat-headed, blunt clown (mid-15c.), of unknown origin. Related:
Chuffed.


complacence (n.)

mid-15c., pleasure, from Medieval Latin complacentia satisfaction, pleasure, from Latin complacentem
(nominative complacens), present participle of complacere to be very pleasing, from com-, intensive
prefix (see com-), + placere to please (see please). Sense of pleased with oneself is 18c.


encore (interj.)

1712, from French encore still, yet, again (12c.), generally explained as being from Vulgar Latin
phrase *hinc ad horam from then to this hour (Italian ancora again, still, yet is said to be a
French loan-word).Whenever any Gentlemen are particularly pleased with a Song, at their crying out
Encore ... the Performer is so obliging as to sing it over again. [Steele, Spectator No. 314, 1712]
<hr />   There appears to be no evidence that either the Fr. or It. word was ever similarly used in
its native country. The corresponding word both in Fr. and It. is bis; in It. da capo was formerly
used. [OED]    As a noun, from 1763; as a verb, from 1748.


list (v.4)

to be pleased, desire (archaic), mid-12c., lusten, listen to please, desire, from Old English lystan
to please, cause pleasure or desire, provoke longing, from Proto-Germanic *lustijan (cognates: Old
Saxon lustian, Dutch lusten to like, fancy, Old High German lusten, German l&uuml;sten, Old Norse
lysta); from the root of lust (n.). Related: Listed; listing. As a noun, c.1200, from the verb.
Somehow English has lost listy (adj.) pleasant, willing (to do something); ready, quick (mid-15c.).


blithe (adj.)

Old English bli&thorn;e joyous, kind, cheerful, pleasant, from Proto-Germanic *blithiz gentle, kind
(cognates: Old Saxon bli&eth;i bright, happy, Middle Dutch blide, Dutch blijde, Old Norse bli&eth;r
mild, gentle, Old High German blidi gay, friendly, Gothic blei&thorn;s kind, friendly, merciful).
Rare since 16c. No cognates outside Germanic. The earlier application was to the outward expression
of kindly feeling, sympathy, affection to others, as in Gothic and ON.; but in OE. the word had come
more usually to be applied to the external manifestation of one's own pleased or happy frame of
mind, and hence even to the state itself. [OED]


gusto (n.)

1620s, from Italian gusto taste, from Latin gustus a tasting, related to gustare to taste, take a
little of, from PIE root *geus- to taste, choose (cognates: Sanskrit jus- enjoy, be pleased, Avestan
zaosa- pleasure, Old Persian dau&#353;- enjoy), a root that forms words for taste in Greek and
Latin, but mostly meaning try or choose in Germanic and Celtic (such as Old English cosan, cesan to
choose, Gothic kausjan to test, to taste of, Old High German koston try, German kosten taste of).
The semantic development could have been in either direction. In English, guste organ of taste,
sense of taste, is mid-15c., from French.


hat trick (n.)

1879, originally from cricket, taking three wickets on three consecutive deliveries; extended to
other sports c.1909, especially ice hockey (In an earlier contest we had handed Army a 6-2 defeat at
West Point as Billy Sloane performed hockey's spectacular 'hat trick' by scoring three goals
[Princeton Alumni Weekly, Feb. 10, 1941]). Allegedly because it entitled the bowler to receive a hat
from his club commemorating the feat (or entitled him to pass the hat for a cash collection), but
also influenced by the image of a conjurer pulling things from his hat (an act attested by 1876).
The term was used earlier for a different sort of magic trick:    Place a glass of liquor on the
table, put a hat over it, and say, I will engage to drink every drop of that liquor, and yet I'll
not touch the hat. You then get under the table; and after giving three knocks, you make a noise
with your mouth, as if you were swallowing the liquor. Then, getting from under the table, say Now,
gentlemen, be pleased to look. Some one, eager to see if you have drunk the liquor, will raise the
hat; when you instantly take the glass and swallow the contents, saying, Gentlemen I have fulfilled
my promise: you are all witnesses that I did not touch the hat. [Wit and Wisdom, London, 1860]


happy (adj.)

late 14c., lucky, favored by fortune, prosperous; of events, turning out well, from hap (n.) chance,
fortune + -y (2). Sense of very glad first recorded late 14c. Ousted Old English eadig (from ead
wealth, riches) and ges&aelig;lig, which has become silly. Meaning greatly pleased and content is
from 1520s. Old English bli&eth;e happy survives as blithe. From Greek to Irish, a great majority of
the European words for happy at first meant lucky. An exception is Welsh, where the word used first
meant wise.    Used in World War II and after as a suffix (as in bomb-happy, flak-happy) expressing
dazed or frazzled from stress. Happy medium is from 1778. Happy ending in the literary sense
recorded from 1756. Happy as a clam (1630s) was originally happy as a clam in the mud at high tide,
when it can't be dug up and eaten. Happy hunting ground, the reputed Indian paradise, is attested
from 1840, American English. Related: Happier; happiest.


allow (v.)

early 14c., allouen, to commend, praise; approve of, be pleased with; appreciate the value of; also,
take into account or give credit for, also, in law and philosophy, recognize, admit as valid (a
privilege, an excuse, a statement, etc.). From late 14c. as sanction or permit; condone; in business
use from early 15c.    The Middle English word is from Anglo-French alouer, Old French aloer,
alloiier (13c.) allot, apportion, bestow, assign, from Latin allocare (see allocate). This word in
Old French was confused and ultimately merged with aloer; alloer to praise, commend, from Latin
allaudare, adlaudare, compound of ad- to (see ad-) + laudare to praise (see laud). From the first
word came the sense preserved in allowance as money granted; from the second came its meaning
permission based on approval.    Between the two primary significations there naturally arose a
variety of uses blending them in the general idea of assign with approval, grant, concede a thing
claimed or urged, admit a thing offered, permit, etc., etc. [OED].    Related: Allowed; allowing.


