pliant (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French ploiant bending, supple; compliant, fickle, as a noun, turncoat (13c.),
present participle of ploier to bend (see ply (n.)). Figurative sense of easily influenced is from
c.1400. Related: Pliancy.


supple (adj.)

c.1300, soft, tender, from Old French souple, sople pliant, flexible; humble, submissive (12c.),
from Gallo-Roman *supples, from Latin supplex submissive, humbly begging, beseeching, kneeling in
entreaty, literally bending, kneeling down, perhaps an altered form of *supplacos humbly pleading,
appeasing, from sub under + placare appease (see placate). Meaning pliant is from late 14c.;
figurative sense of artfully obsequious, capable of adapting oneself to the wishes and opinions of
others is from c.1600. Supple-chapped (c.1600) was used of a flatterer. Related: Suppleness.


tractable (adj.)

manageable, early 15c., from Latin tractabilis that may be touched or handled, workable, tangible,
manageable, figuratively, pliant, from tractare to handle, manage (see treat (v.)). Related:
Tractability.


strepto-

word-forming element used in science to mean twisted, from Latinized comb. form of Greek streptos
twisted, easy to bend, pliant, verbal adjective of strephein to turn, twist, from PIE *streb(h)- to
wind, turn (see strophe).


lento

slowly (musical direction), 1724, from Italian lento slow, from Latin lentus flexible, pliant, slow,
sluggish (see lithe). Related: Lentissimo.


facile (adj.)

late 15c., from Middle French facile easy, from Latin facilis easy to do and, of persons, pliant,
courteous, from facere to do (see factitious).


flexible (adj.)

early 15c., from Middle French flexible or directly from Latin flexibilis that may be bent, pliant,
flexible, yielding; figuratively tractable, inconstant, from flexus, past participle of flectere to
bend, of uncertain origin. Related: Flexibly.


witch hazel (n.)

1540s, probably from Old English wice Applied generally or vaguely to various trees having pliant
branches [OED], from wican to bend, related to weak (see vicarious) + h&aelig;sel, used for any bush
of the pine family (see hazel (n.)). The North American bush, from which a soothing lotion is made,
was so called from 1670s. This is the source of the verb witch in dowsing.


meek (adj.)

c.1200, gentle, quiet, unaggressive; benevolent, kind; courteous, humble, unassuming; of a woman,
modest, from a Scandinavian source such as Old Norse mjukr soft, pliant, gentle, from Proto-Germanic
*meukaz (cognates: Gothic muka-modei humility, Dutch muik soft), of uncertain origin, perhaps from
PIE *meug- slippery, slimy. In the Bible, it translates Latin mansuetus from Vulgate (see
mansuetude). Sense of submissive is from mid-14c.


limber (adj.)

pliant, flexible, 1560s, of uncertain origin, possibly from limb (n.1) on notion of supple boughs of
a tree [Barnhart], or from limp flaccid [Skeat], or somehow from Middle English lymer shaft of a
cart (see limber (n.)), but the late appearance of the -b- in that word argues against it. Related:
Limberness. Dryden used limber-ham (see ham (n.1) in the joint sense) as a name for a character
perswaded by what is last said to him, and changing next word.


lock (n.2)

tress of hair, Old English locc lock of hair, curl, from Proto-Germanic *lukkoz (cognates: Old Norse
lokkr, Old Saxon, Old Frisian, Dutch lok, Old High German loc, German Locke lock of hair), from PIE
*lugnos-, perhaps related to Greek lygos pliant twig, withe, Lithuanian lugnas flexible.


wicker (n.)

mid-14c., wickerwork, from a Scandinavian source (compare Danish viger, Middle Swedish viker willow,
willow branch), from Proto-Germanic *wik- (cognates: Old Norse vikja to move, turn, Swedish vika to
bend, Old English wican to give way, yield), from PIE root *weik- (4) to bend, twine (see weak). The
notion is of pliant twigs. As an adjective, made of wicker, from c.1500.


reluctance (n.)

1640s, act of struggling against, from obsolete verb reluct to struggle or rebel against (1520s),
from Latin reluctari to struggle against, resist, make opposition, from re- against (see re-) +
luctari to struggle, wrestle, perhaps shares a common origin with Greek lygos pliant twig, lygizein
to bend, twist, Old English locc twist of hair (see lock (n.2)). Meaning unwillingness is first
attested 1660s. Related: Reluctancy (1620s.).


linden (n.)

the lime tree, 1570s, noun use of an adjective, of linden wood, from Old English lind linden (n.),
from Proto-Germanic *lindjo (cognates: Old Saxon linda, Old Norse lind, Old High German linta,
German linde), probably from PIE *lent-o- flexible (see lithe); with reference to the tree's pliant
bast. Compare Russian lut&#301;ij&#243; forest of lime trees, Polish &#322;&#281;t switch, twig,
Lithuanian lenta board, plank.


lithe (adj.)

Old English li&eth;e soft, mild, gentle, meek, from Proto-Germanic *linthja- (cognates: Old Saxon
lithi soft, mild, gentle, Old High German lindi, German lind, Old Norse linr, with characteristic
loss of n before th in English), from PIE root *lent- flexible (cognates: Latin lentus flexible,
pliant, slow, Sanskrit lithi). In Middle English, used of the weather. Current sense of easily
flexible is from c.1300. Related: Litheness.


weak (adj.)

c.1300, from Old Norse veikr weak, cognate with Old English wac weak, pliant, soft, from Proto-
Germanic *waikwa- yield (cognates: Old Saxon wek, Swedish vek, Middle Dutch weec, Dutch week weak,
soft, tender, Old High German weih yielding, soft, German weich soft), from PIE root *weik- (4) to
bend, wind (see vicarious).    Sense of lacking authority is first recorded early 15c.; that of
lacking moral strength late 14c. In grammar, denoting a verb inflected by regular syllabic addition
rather than by change of the radical vowel, from 1833. Related: Weakly. Weak-kneed wanting in
resolve is from 1870.


swank (adj.)

stylish, classy, posh, 1913, from earlier noun or verb; A midland and s.w. dial. word taken into
general slang use at the beginning of the 20th cent. [OED]; compare swank (n.) ostentatious
behavior, noted in 1854 as a Northampton word; swank (v.), from 1809 as to strut, behave
ostentatiously. Perhaps ultimately from Proto-Germanic *swank-, from PIE *sweng(w)-, a Germanic root
meaning to swing, turn, toss (cognates: Middle High German swanken to sway, totter, turn, swing, Old
High German swingan to swing; see swing (v.)). Perhaps the notion is of swinging the body
ostentatiously (compare swagger).    A separate word-thread derives from Old English swancor pliant,
bending, and from this comes swanky (n.) active or clever young fellow (c.1500).


switch (n.)

1590s, slender riding whip, probably from a Flemish or Low German word akin to Middle Dutch swijch
bough, twig, or swutsche, variant of Low German zwukse long thin stick, switch, from Germanic base
*swih- (cognates: Old High German zwec wooden peg, German Zweck aim, design, originally peg as a
target, Zwick wooden peg), perhaps connected with PIE root *swei- (2) to swing, bend, to turn.
The meaning device for changing the direction of something or making or breaking a connection is
first recorded 1797. The peg sense suits the mech(anical) applications [Weekley], cognates:
switchblade, and these senses in English may be a direct borrowing from those senses in Continental
Germanic languages rather than a continuation of the pliant wand sense. The meaning a change from
one to another, a reversal, an exchange, a substitution is first recorded 1920; extended form
switcheroo is by 1933.


lesbian (adj.)

1590s, pertaining to the island of Lesbos, from Latin Lesbius, from Greek lesbios of Lesbos, Greek
island in northeastern Aegean Sea (the name originally may have meant wooded), home of Sappho, great
lyric poet whose erotic and romantic verse embraced women as well as men, hence meaning relating to
homosexual relations between women (1890; lesbianism in this sense is attested from 1870) and the
noun, first recorded 1925. Her particular association in English with erotic love between women
dates to at least 1825, though the words formed from it are later. Before this, the principal
figurative use (common in 17c.) was lesbian rule (c.1600) a mason's rule of lead, of a type used on
Lesbos, which could be bent to fit the curves of a molding; hence, pliant morality or judgment.And
this is the nature of the equitable, a correction of law where it is defective owing to its
universality. ... For when the thing is indefinite the rule also is indefinite, like the leaden rule
used in making the Lesbian moulding; the rule adapts itself to the shape of the stone and is not
rigid, and so too the decree is adapted to the facts. [Aristotle, Nicomachean Ethics]  See also
tribadism. Greek had a verb lesbiazein to imitate the Lesbians, which implied sexual initiative and
shamelessness among women, but not necessarily female homosexuality.


