plight (v.)

to pledge (obsolete except in archaic plight one's troth), from Old English pligtan, plihtan to
endanger, imperil, compromise, verb form of pliht (n.) danger, risk (see plight (n.2)). Related:
Plighted; plighting.


plight (n.2)

pledge, mid-13c., pledge, promise, usually involving risk or loss in default, from Old English pliht
danger, risk, peril, damage, from Proto-Germanic *pleg- (cognates: Old Frisian plicht danger,
concern, care, Middle Dutch, Dutch plicht obligation, duty, Old High German pfliht, German Pflicht
obligation, duty (see plight (v.)). Compare Old English plihtere look-out man at the prow of a ship,
plihtlic perilous, dangerous.


plight (n.1)

condition or state (usually bad), late 12c., danger, harm, strife, from Anglo-French plit, pleit,
Old French pleit, ploit condition (13c.), originally way of folding, from Vulgar Latin *plictum,
from Latin plicitum, neuter past participle of Latin plicare to fold, lay (see ply (v.1)).
Originally in neutral sense (as in modern French en bon plit in good condition), sense of harmful
state (and current spelling) probably is from convergence and confusion with plight (n.2) via notion
of entangling risk, pledge or promise with great risk to the pledger.


troth (n.)

truth, verity, late 12c., from a phonetic variant of Old English treow&eth; faithfulness, veracity,
truth (see truth). Restricted to Midlands and Northern England dialect after 16c., and to certain
archaic phrases (such as plight one's troth). Also see betroth.


schlemazel (n.)

also schlimazel, born loser, 1948, from Yiddish shlim mazel rotten luck, from Middle High German
slim crooked + Hebrew mazzal luck. British slang shemozzle an unhappy plight (1889) is probably from
the same source.    A shlemiel is the fellow who climbs to the top of a ladder with a bucket of
paint and then drops it. A shimazl is the fellow on whose head the bucket falls. [Rep. Stephen J.
Solarz (D.-N.Y.), 1986]


strait (n.)

mid-14c., narrow, confined space or place, specifically of bodies of water from late 14c., from Old
French estreit, estrait narrow part, pass, defile, narrow passage of water, noun use of adjective
(see strait (adj.)). Sense of difficulty, plight (usually straits) first recorded 1540s. Strait and
narrow conventional or wisely limited way of life is recorded from mid-14c. (compare straight
(adj.2)).


tilt (v.2)

to joust, 1590s, from tilt (n.1). Related: Tilted; tilting. The figurative sense of tilting at
windmills is suggested in English by 1798; the image is from Don Quixote, who mistook them for
giants.    So saying, and heartily recommending himself to his lady Dulcinea, whom he implored to
succour him in this emergency, bracing on his target, and setting his lance in the rest, he put his
Rozinante to full speed, and assaulting the nearest windmill, thrust it into one of the sails, which
was drove about by the wind with so much fury, that the lance was shivered to pieces, and both
knight and steed whirled aloft, and overthrown in very bad plight upon the plain. [Smollett
translation, 1755]


pickle (n.)

c.1400, probably from Middle Dutch pekel pickle, brine, or related words in Low German and East
Frisian (Dutch pekel, East Frisian p&auml;kel, German p&ouml;kel), of uncertain origin or original
meaning. Klein suggests the name of a medieval Dutch fisherman who developed the process. Originally
a sauce served with meat or fowl; meaning cucumber preserved in pickle first recorded 1707, via use
of the word for the salty liquid in which meat, etc. was preserved (c.1500). Figurative sense of
sorry plight first recorded 1560s, from the time when the word still meant a sauce served on meat
about to be eaten. Meaning troublesome boy is from 1788, perhaps from the notion of being imbued
with roguery.


pledge (n.)

mid-14c., surety, bail, from Old French plege (Modern French pleige) hostage, security, bail,
probably from Frankish *plegan to guarantee, from *pleg-, a West Germanic root meaning have
responsibility for (cognates: Old Saxon plegan vouch for, Middle Dutch plien to answer for,
guarantee, Old High German pflegan to care for, be accustomed to, Old English pleon to risk the loss
of, expose to danger; see plight (v.)).    Meaning allegiance vow attested by drinking with another
is from 1630s. Sense of solemn promise first recorded 1814, though this notion is from 16c. in the
verb. Weekley notes the curious contradiction in pledge (v.) to toast with a drink (1540s) and
pledge (n.) the vow to abstain from drinking (1833). Meaning student who has agreed to join a
fraternity or sorority dates from 1901.


