pluck (n.)

c.1400, act of plucking, from pluck (v.). Meaning courage, boldness (1785), originally in pugilism
slang, is a figurative use from earlier meaning heart, viscera (1610s) as that which is plucked from
slaughtered livestock. Perhaps influenced by figurative use of the verb in pluck up (one's courage,
etc.), attested from c.1300.


pluck (v.)

late Old English ploccian, pluccian pull off, cull, from West Germanic *plokken (cognates: Middle
Low German plucken, Middle Dutch plocken, Dutch plukken, Flemish plokken, German pfl&#252;cken),
perhaps from Vulgar Latin *piluccare (source of Old French peluchier, late 12c.; Italian piluccare),
a frequentative, ultimately from Latin pilare pull out hair, from pilus hair (see pile (n.3)). But
despite the similarities, OED finds difficulties with this and cites gaps in historical evidence.
Related: Plucked; plucking.  To pluck a rose, an expression said to be used by women for going to
the necessary house, which in the country usually stands in the garden. [F. Grose, Classical
Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, 1785]This euphemistic use is attested from 1610s. To pluck up
summon up is from c.1300.


plucky (adj.)

1831, from pluck (n.) + -y (2). Related: Pluckily; pluckiness.


tweak (v.)

pinch, pluck, twist, usually to the nose, c.1600, probably from Middle English twikken to draw, tug,
pluck (mid-15c.), from Old English twiccian to pluck, of obscure origin; perhaps related to twitch.
Meaning to make fine adjustments is attested from 1966. Related: Tweaked; tweaking.


carpe diem

1786, Latin, enjoy the day, literally pluck the day (while it is ripe), an aphorism from Horace
(Odes I.xi), from PIE *kerp- to gather, pluck, harvest (see harvest (n.)).


excerpt (v.)

early 15c. (implied in excerpte), from Latin excerptus, past participle of excerpere pluck out, pick
out, extract, excerpt, from ex- out (see ex-) + carpere pluck, gather, from PIE *kerp- to gather,
pluck, harvest (see harvest (n.)). Related: Excerpted; excerpting.


nap (n.1)

downy surface of cloth, mid-15c., from Middle Dutch or Middle Low German noppe nap, tuft of wool,
probably introduced by Flemish cloth-workers. Cognate with Old English hnoppian to pluck, ahneopan
pluck off, Old Swedish niupa to pinch, Gothic dis-hniupan to tear.


plush (n.)

soft fabric, 1590s, from Middle French pluche shag, plush, contraction of peluche hairy fabric, from
Old French peluchier to pull, to tug, to pluck (the final process in weaving plush), from Vulgar
Latin *piluccare remove hair (see pluck (v.)). Related: Plushy; plushness.


svelte (adj.)

slender, lithe, 1817, from French svelte slim, slender (17c.), from Italian svelto slim, slender,
originally pulled out, lengthened, past participle of svellere to pluck or root out, from Vulgar
Latin *exvellere, from Latin ex- out (see ex-) + vellere to pluck, stretch, from PIE *wel-no-,
suffixed form of root *wel- (4) to tear, pull.


scarce (adj.)

c.1300, restricted in quantity, from Old North French scars scanty, scarce (Old French eschars,
Modern French &#233;chars) from Vulgar Latin *scarsus, from *escarpsus, from *excarpere pluck out,
from classical Latin excerpere pluck out (see excerpt). As an adverb early 14c. from the adjective.
Phrase to make oneself scarce go away first attested 1771, noted as a current cant phrase. Related:
Scarcely.


carpet (n.)

late 13c., coarse cloth; mid-14c., tablecloth, bedspread; from Old French carpite heavy decorated
cloth, carpet, from Medieval Latin or Old Italian carpita thick woolen cloth, probably from Latin
carpere to card, pluck, probably so called because it was made from unraveled, shreded, plucked
fabric; from PIE *kerp- to gather, pluck, harvest (see harvest (n.)). Meaning shifted 15c. to floor
coverings.    From 16c.-19c. as an adjective often with a tinge of contempt, when used of men (as in
carpet-knight, 1570s) by association with luxury, ladies' boudoirs, and drawing rooms. On the carpet
summoned for reprimand is 1900, U.S. colloquial (but compare carpet (v.) call (someone) to be
reprimanded, 1823, British servants' slang). To sweep or push something under the carpet in the
figurative sense is first recorded 1953.


tweak (n.)

c.1600, a twitch, a pluck, from tweak (v.). As a fine adjustment by 1989.


harvest (n.)

Old English h&aelig;rfest autumn, period between August and November, from Proto-Germanic *harbitas
(cognates: Old Saxon hervist, Old Frisian and Dutch herfst, German Herbst autumn, Old Norse haust
harvest), from PIE *kerp- to gather, pluck, harvest (cognates: Sanskrit krpana- sword, krpani
shears; Greek karpos fruit, karpizomai make harvest of; Latin carpere to cut, divide, pluck;
Lithuanian kerpu cut; Middle Irish cerbaim cut).    The borrowing of autumn and the use of fall in a
seasonal sense gradually focused the meaning of harvest to the time of gathering crops (mid-13c.),
then to the action itself and the product of the action (after c.1300). Figurative use by 1530s.
Harvest home (1590s) is the occasion of bringing home the last of the harvest; harvest moon (1706)
is that which is full within a fortnight of the autumnal equinox.


plunk (v.)

1805, to pluck a stringed instrument; 1808 in sense of drop down abruptly; 1888 as to hit, wound,
shoot. Probably of imitative origin in all cases. Related: Plunked; plunking.


plume (v.)

late 14c., to pluck, strip, from plume (n.). From mid-15c. as to adorn with plumes. Meaning to dress
the feathers is from 1702. Related: Plumed; pluming.


pick (v.)

early 13c., picken to peck; c.1300, piken to work with a pick, probably representing a fusion of Old
English *pician to prick, (implied by picung a piercing, pricking, an 8c. gloss on Latin stigmata)
with Old Norse pikka to prick, peck, both from a Germanic root (source also of Middle Dutch picken,
German picken to pick, peck), perhaps imitative. Influence from Middle French piquer to prick, sting
(see pike (n.2)) also is possible, but that French word generally is not considered a source of the
English word. Related: Picked; picking.    Meaning to eat with small bites is from 1580s. The
meaning to choose, select, pick out emerged late 14c., from earlier meaning to pluck with the
fingers (early 14c.). Sense of to rob, plunder (c.1300) weakened to a milder sense of steal petty
things by late 14c. Of forcing locks with a pointed tool, by 1540s. Meaning to pluck (a banjo) is
recorded from 1860. To pick a quarrel, etc. is from mid-15c.; to pick at find fault with is from
1670s. Pick on single out for adverse attention is from late 14c.; pick off shoot one by one is
recorded from 1810; baseball sense of to put out a runner on base is from 1939. Also see pick up. To
pick and choose select carefully is from 1660s (choose and pick is attested from c.1400).


carpel (n.)

1835, from Modern Latin carpellum (1817 in French), a diminutive form from Greek karpos fruit (also
returns, profit), literally that which is plucked, from PIE root *kerp- to gather, pluck, harvest
(see harvest (n.)).


tweeze (v.)

to pluck with tweezers, 1921, back-formation from tweezers. Related: Tweezed; tweezing. Earlier verb
was tweezer (1806).


pashmina (adj.)

from Persian pashmin woolen, from pashm wool, down, from PIE *pek- to pluck out (see fight (v.)).


carp (v.)

complain, early 13c., originally to talk, from Old Norse karpa to brag, of unknown origin; meaning
turned toward find fault with (late 14c.), probably by influence of Latin carpere to slander,
revile, literally to pluck (see harvest (n.)). Related: Carped; carping.


plectrum (n.)

something used to pluck the strings of a musical instrument, 1620s, from Latin plectrum, from Greek
plektron thing to strike with (pick for a lyre, cock's spur, spear point, etc.), from plek-, root of
plessein to strike (see plague (n.)).


convulsion (n.)

1580s, from Latin convulsionem (nominative convulsio), noun of action from past participle stem of
convellere to tear loose, from com- together (see com-) + vellere to pluck, pull violently (see
svelte).


pizzicato (n.)

1845, from Italian pizzicato plucked, past participle of pizzicare to pluck (strings), pinch, from
pizzare to prick, to sting, from Old Italian pizzo point, edge, from Vulgar Latin *pits-, probably
of imitative origin. As an adjective from 1880.


rabble (n.2)

iron bar for stirring molten metal, 1864, from French r&#226;ble, from Old French roable, from Latin
rutabulum rake, fire shovel, from ruere  to rake up (perhaps cognate with Lithuanian raju to pluck
out, German roden to root out).


teasel (n.)

also teazel, teazle, type of plant, Old English t&aelig;sel large thistle used in teasing cloth,
from Proto-Germanic *taisilo (cognates: Old High German zeisala), from root of Old English
t&aelig;san to pluck (see tease (v.)).


plume (n.)

late 14c., a feather (especially a large and conspicuous one), from Old French plume soft feather,
down; feather bed, and directly from Latin pluma a feather, down; the first beard, from PIE root
*pleus- to pluck; a feather, fleece (source of Old English fleos fleece). Meaning a long streamer of
smoke, etc. is first attested 1878.


spasm (n.)

late 14c., sudden violent muscular contraction, from Old French spasme (13c.) and directly from
Latin spasmus a spasm, from Greek spasmos a spasm, convulsion, from span draw up, tear away,
contract violently, pull, pluck, from PIE *spe- stretch. Figurative sense of a sudden convulsion (of
emotion, politics, etc.) is attested from 1817.


psaltery (n.)

ancient stringed instrument, c.1300, from Old French psalterie (12c.), from Latin psalterium
stringed instrument, from Greek psalterion stringed instrument, from psallein play on a stringed
instrument, pull, pluck (see psalm).


psalter (n.)

the Book of Psalms, Old English saltere, psaltere, from Church Latin psalterium the songs of David,
in secular Latin, stringed instrument played by twanging, from Greek psalterion stringed instrument,
psaltery, harp, from psallein to pluck, play on a stringed instrument (see psalm).


twitch (v.)

late 12c., to-twic-chen pull apart with a quick jerk, related to Old English twiccian to pluck,
gather, catch hold of, from Proto-Germanic *twikjon- (cognates: Low German twicken, Dutch twikken,
Old High German gizwickan, German zwicken to pinch, tweak). Related: Twitched; twitching.


pull (v.)

c.1300, to move forcibly by pulling, to drag, from Old English pullian to pluck off (wool), to draw
out, of unknown origin, perhaps related to Low German pulen remove the shell or husk, Frisian
p&#251;lje to shell, husk, Middle Dutch polen to peel, strip, Icelandic pula work hard.    Early
14c. as to pick, pull off, gather (fruit, flowers, berries, leaves, petals, etc.); mid-14c. as to
uproot, pull up (of teeth, weeds, etc.). Sense of to draw, attract (to oneself) is from c.1400;
sense of to pluck at with the fingers is from c.1400. Meaning tear to pieces is mid-15c. By late
16c. it had replaced draw in these senses. Related: Pulled; pulling.    Common in slang usages
19c.-20c.; Bartlett (1859) has to pull foot walk fast; run; pull it to run. To pull up check a
course of action is from 1808, figurative of the lifting of the reins in horse-riding. To pull
(someone's) chain in figurative sense is from 1974, perhaps on the notion of a captive animal; the
expression was also used for to contact (someone), on the notion of the chain that operates a
signaling mechanism.    To pull (someone's) leg is from 1882, perhaps on notion of playfully
tripping (compare pull the long bow exaggerate, 1830, and pulling someone's leg also sometimes was
described as a way to awaken a sleeping person in a railway compartment, ship's berth, etc.).
Thornton's American Glossary (1912) has pull (n.) a jest (to have a pull at (someone)), which it
identifies as local and illustrates with an example from the Massachusetts Spy of May 21, 1817,
which identifies it as a Georgian phrase. To pull (one's) punches is from 1920 in pugilism, from
1921 figuratively. To pull in arrive (1892) and pull out depart (1868) are from the railroads.    To
pull (something) off accomplish, succeed at is originally in sporting, to win the prize money
(1870). To pull (something) on (someone) is from 1916; to pull (something) out of one's ass is Army
slang from 1970s. To pull rank is from 1919; to pull the rug from under (someone) figuratively is
from 1946.


linnet (n.)

small finch-like songbird, 1530s, from Middle French linette grain of flax, diminutive of lin flax,
from Latin linum linen (see linen). Flaxseed forms much of the bird's diet. Old English name for the
bird was linetwige, with second element perhaps meaning pluck. This yielded Middle English and
dialectal lintwhite.


spunk (n.)

1530s, a spark, Scottish, from Gaelic spong tinder, pith, sponge, from Latin spongia (see sponge
(n.)). The sense of courage, pluck, mettle is first attested 1773. A similar sense evolution took
place in cognate Irish sponnc sponge, tinder, spark; courage, spunk. Vulgar slang sense of seminal
fluid is recorded from c.1888.


pillage (n.)

late 14c., act of plundering (especially in war), from Old French pilage (14c.) plunder, from
pillier to plunder, loot, ill-treat, possibly from Vulgar Latin *piliare to plunder, probably from a
figurative use of Latin pilare to strip of hair, perhaps also meaning to skin (compare figurative
extension of verbs pluck, fleece), from pilus a hair (see pile (n.3)).


cull (v.)

c.1200, originally put through a strainer, from Old French coillir (12c., Modern French cueillir)
collect, gather, pluck, select, from Latin colligere gather together, collect, originally choose,
select (see collect). Related: Culled; culling. As a noun, from 1610s.


vulture (n.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French vultur, Old French voutoir, voutre (Modern French vautour), from Latin
vultur, earlier voltur, perhaps related to vellere to pluck, to tear (see svelte). Figurative sense
is recorded from 1580s. Related: Vulturine; vulturous.


deracinate (n.)

1590s, to pluck up by the roots, from French d&eacute;raciner, from Old French desraciner uproot,
dig out, pull up by the roots, from des- (see dis-) + racine root, from Late Latin radicina,
diminutive of Latin radix (see radish). Related: Deracinated.


vulnerable (adj.)

c.1600, from Late Latin vulnerabilis wounding, from Latin vulnerare to wound, hurt, injure, maim,
from vulnus (genitive vulneris) wound, perhaps related to vellere pluck, to tear (see svelte), or
from PIE *wele-nes-, from *wele- (2) to strike, wound (see Valhalla).


grit (n.)

Old English greot sand, dust, earth, gravel, from Proto-Germanic *greutan tiny particles of crushed
rock (cognates: Old Saxon griot, Old Frisian gret, Old Norse grjot rock, stone, German Grie&szlig;
grit, sand), from PIE *ghreu- rub, grind (cognates: Lithuanian grudas corn, kernel, Old Church
Slavonic gruda clod). Sense of pluck, spirit first recorded American English, 1808.


trice (v.)

late 14c., haul up and fasten with a rope, from Middle Dutch trisen hoist, from trise pulley, of
unknown origin. Hence at a tryse (mid-15c.) in a very short time, literally at a single pluck or
pull. The Middle Dutch word is the source of Dutch trijsen to hoist and is cognate with Middle Low
German trissen (source of Danish trisse, German triezen); its ultimate origin is unknown.


tuck (v.)

late 14c., to pull or gather up, earlier to pluck, stretch (implied in tucker one who finishes
clothes by stretching them on tenters, late 13c. as a surname), probably from Middle Low German or
Middle Dutch tucken pull up, draw up, tug (cognate with Old English tucian mistreat, torment, and
related to Old English togian to pull, German zucken; see tow (v.)). Sense of thrust into a snug
place is first recorded 1580s. Slang meaning to consume, swallow, put into one's stomach is recorded
from 1784. Related: Tucked; tucking.


fleece (n.)

Old English fleos, from West Germanic *flusaz (cognates: Middle Dutch vluus, Dutch vlies, Middle
High German vlius, German Vlies), probably from PIE *pleus- to pluck, also a feather, fleece
(cognates: Latin pluma feather, down, Lithuanian plunksna feather).


plug (n.)

1620s, originally a seamen's term, probably from Dutch plug, Middle Dutch plugge bung, stopper,
related to Norwegian plugg, Danish pl&oslash;g, North Frisian plaak, Middle Low German pluck, German
Pflock; ultimate origin uncertain. Irish and Gaelic words are from English. Sense of wad or stick of
tobacco is attested from 1728, based on resemblance. Electrical sense is from 1883, based on being
inserted; meaning sparking device in an internal combustion engine is from 1886. Meaning
advertisement first recorded 1902, American English, perhaps from verb sense work energetically at
(c.1865).


raffle (n.)

late 14c., dice game, from Old French rafle dice game, also plundering, perhaps from a Germanic
source (compare Middle Dutch raffel dice game, Old Frisian hreppa to move, Old Norse hreppa to
reach, get, Swedish rafs rubbish, Old High German raspon to scrape together, snatch up in haste,
German raffen to snatch away, sweep off), from Proto-Germanic *khrap- to pluck out, snatch off. The
notion would be to sweep up (the stakes), to snatch (the winnings). Dietz connects the French word
with the Germanic root, but OED is against this. Meaning sale of chances first recorded 1766.


strigil (n.)

ancient tool for scraping the skin after a bath, 1580s, from Latin strigilis scraper, horse-comb,
from stringere (1) draw along a surface, graze, touch lightly; strip off, pluck off, cut away; clip,
prune; lay bare, unsheathe, figuratively waste, consume, reduce; touch, move, affect, cause pain,
from PIE root *streig- to stroke, rub, press (cognates: Latin striga stroke, strike, furrow, stria
furrow, channel; Old Church Slavonic striga shear; Old English stracian to stroke; German streichen
to stroke, rub). Etymologists dispute over whether this is connected to Latin stringere (2), root of
strain (v.).


rock (v.1)

to sway, late Old English roccian move a child gently to and fro, related to Old Norse rykkja to
pull, tear, move, Swedish rycka to pull, pluck, Middle Dutch rucken, Old High German rucchan, German
r&uuml;cken to move jerkily.    Meaning cause to sway back and forth is from late 13c. Intransitive
sense from late 14c. For popular music senses, see rock (v.2). Related: Rocked; rocking. To rock the
boat in the figurative sense stir up trouble is from 1914. Rock-a-bye first recorded 1805 in nursery
rhyme.


tease (v.)

formerly also teaze, Old English t&aelig;san pluck, pull, tear; pull apart, comb (fibers of wool,
flax, etc.), from Proto-Germanic *taisijan (cognates: Danish t&aelig;se, Middle Dutch tesen, Dutch
tezen to draw, pull, scratch, Old High German zeisan to tease, pick wool).    The original sense is
of running thorns through wool or flax to separate, shred, or card the fibers. The figurative sense
of vex, worry, annoy (sometimes done in good humor) emerged 1610s. For similar sense development,
compare heckle. Hairdressing sense is recorded from 1957. Related: Teased; teasing; teasingly.


feel (v.)

Old English felan to touch, perceive, from Proto-Germanic *foljan (cognates: Old Saxon gifolian, Old
Frisian fela, Dutch voelen, Old High German vuolen, German f&uuml;hlen to feel, Old Norse falma to
grope), from PIE root *pal- to touch, feel, shake, strike softly (cognates: Greek psallein to pluck
(the harp), Latin palpare to touch softly, stroke, palpitare to move quickly), perhaps ultimately
imitative.    The sense in Old English was to perceive through senses which are not referred to any
special organ. Sense of be conscious of a sensation or emotion developed by late 13c.; that of to
have sympathy or compassion is from c.1600. To feel like want to attested from 1829.


tape (n.)

Old English t&aelig;ppe narrow strip of cloth used for tying, measuring, etc., of uncertain origin;
perhaps [Klein] a back-formation from Latin tapete cloth, carpet, compare also Old Frisian tapia,
Middle Low German tapen to pull, pluck, tear. The original short vowel became long in Middle
English.   Adhesive tape is from 1885; also in early use sometimes friction tape. Tape recorder
device for recording sound on magnetic tape first attested 1932; from earlier meaning device for
recording data on ticker tape (1892), from tape in the sense of paper strip of a printer (1884).
Tape-record (v.) is from 1950. Tape-measure is attested from 1873; tape-delay is from 1968.


tick (v.)

early 13c., to touch or pat, perhaps from an Old English verb corresponding to tick (n.2), and
perhaps ultimately echoic. Compare Old High German zeckon to pluck, Dutch tikken to pat, Norwegian
tikke touch lightly. Meaning make a ticking sound is from 1721. Related: Ticked; ticking.    To tick
(someone) off is from 1915, originally to reprimand, scold. The verbal phrase tick off was in use in
several senses at the time: as what a telegraph instrument does when it types out a message (1873),
as what a clock does in marking the passage of time (1777), to enumerate on one's fingers (1899),
and in accountancy, etc., make a mark beside an item on a sheet with a pencil, etc., often
indicating a sale (by 1881, from tick (n.2) in sense small mark or dot). This last might be the
direct source of the phrase, perhaps via World War I military bureaucratic sense of being marked off
from a list as dismissed or ineligible. Meaning to annoy is recorded by 1971.


