plume (v.)

late 14c., to pluck, strip, from plume (n.). From mid-15c. as to adorn with plumes. Meaning to dress
the feathers is from 1702. Related: Plumed; pluming.


plume (n.)

late 14c., a feather (especially a large and conspicuous one), from Old French plume soft feather,
down; feather bed, and directly from Latin pluma a feather, down; the first beard, from PIE root
*pleus- to pluck; a feather, fleece (source of Old English fleos fleece). Meaning a long streamer of
smoke, etc. is first attested 1878.


plumed (adj.)

adorned with plumes, 1520s, past participle adjective from plume (v.).


plumassier (n.)

dealer in ornamental feathers, from French plumassier, from Middle French plumasse plume of feather,
from plume (see plume).


nom (n.)

French, name (9c.), from Latin nomen (see name (n.)). Used in various phrases, such as nom de guerre
(1670s), name used by a person engaged in some action, literally war name; nom de plume (1823),
literally pen name; nom de th&eacute;&acirc;tre (1874) stage name. Nom de plume is open to the
criticism that it is ridiculous for English writers to use a French phrase that does not come from
France [Fowler].


plumage (n.)

late 14c., feathers, from Old French plumage plumage, appearance (14c.), from plume (see plume
(n.)).


pen (n.1)

writing implement, late 13c., from Old French pene quill pen; feather (12c.) and directly from Latin
penna a feather, plume, in plural a wing, in Late Latin, a pen for writing, from Old Latin petna,
pesna, from PIE *pet-na-, suffixed form of root *pet- to rush; to fly (see petition (n.)).    Latin
penna and pinna a feather, plume; in plural a wing; also a pinnacle; battlement (see pin (n.)) are
treated as identical in Watkins, etc., but regarded as separate (but confused) Latin words by Tucker
and others, who derive pinna from PIE *spei- sharp point (see spike (n.1)) and see the feather/wing
sense as secondary.    In later French, this word means only long feather of a bird, while the
equivalent of English plume is used for writing implement, the senses of the two words thus are
reversed from the situation in English. Pen-and-ink (adj.) is attested from 1670s. Pen name is
recorded from mid-19c.


pin (n.)

late Old English pinn peg, bolt, from Proto-Germanic *penn- jutting point or peak (cognates: Old
Saxon pin peg, Old Norse pinni peg, tack, Middle Dutch pin pin, peg, Old High German pfinn, German
Pinne pin, tack) from Latin pinna a feather, plume; in plural a wing; also fin, scoop of a water
wheel; also a pinnacle; a promontory, cape; battlement (as in Luke iv:9 in Vulgate) and so applied
to points of various sorts, from PIE *pet- (see pen (n.1)).    Latin pinna and penna a feather,
plume, in plural a wing, are treated as identical in Watkins, etc., but regarded as separate (but
confused) Latin words by Tucker and others, who derive pinna from PIE *spei- sharp point (see spike
(n.1)) and see the feather/wing sense as secondary.    The modern slender wire pin is first attested
by this name late 14c. Transferred sense of leg is recorded from 1520s and hold the older sense.
Pin-money annual sum allotted to a woman for personal expenses on dress, etc. is attested from
1620s. Pins and needles tingling sensation is from 1810. The sound of a pin dropping as a type of
something all but silent is from 1775.


panache (n.)

1550s, a tuft or plume of feathers, from Middle French pennache tuft of feathers, from Italian
pennaccio, from Late Latin pinnaculum small wing, gable, peak (see pinnacle). Figurative sense of
display, swagger first recorded 1898 (in translation of Cyrano de Bergerac), from French.


crest (n.)

early 14c., from Old French creste tuft, comb (Modern French cr&ecirc;te), from Latin crista tuft,
plume, perhaps related to word for hair (such as crinis), but it also was used for crest of a cock
or a helmet. Replaced Old English hris.


shako (n.)

cylindrical soldier's hat with plume, 1815, from Hungarian cs&aacute;k&oacute;, short for
cs&aacute;k&oacute;s s&uuml;veg peaked cap, from adjectival form of cs&aacute;ko peak, projecting
point of a cow's horn, which some European etymologists derive from German zacken point, spike, but
which Hungarian sources regard as of unknown origin.


plum (n.)

Old English plume plum, plum tree, from an early Germanic borrowing (Middle Dutch prume, Dutch
pruim, Old High German pfluma, pfruma, German Pflaume) from Vulgar Latin *pruna, from Latin prunum
plum, from Greek prounon, later form of proumnon, of unknown origin, perhaps from an Asiatic
language (Phrygian?). Also see prune (n.). Change of pr- to pl- is peculiar to Germanic. The vowel
shortened in early modern English. Meaning something desirable is first recorded 1780, probably in
reference to the sugar-rich bits of a plum pudding, etc.


