plumage (n.)

late 14c., feathers, from Old French plumage plumage, appearance (14c.), from plume (see plume
(n.)).


flicker (n.)

woodpecker, 1808, American English, possibly echoic of bird's note, or from white spots on plumage
that seem to flicker as it flits from tree to tree.


quetzal (n.)

central American bird with brilliant plumage, 1827, from Spanish quetzal, from Aztec quetzalli the
bird name, literally tail-feather.


piebald (adj.)

of two different colors, 1580s, formed from pie (n.2) magpie + bald in its older sense of spotted,
white; in reference to the black-and-white plumage of the magpie. Hence, of mixed character,
mongrel. Technically only of black-and-white colorings.


pied (adj.)

late 14c., as if it were the past participle of a verb form of Middle English noun pie magpie (see
pie (n.2)), in reference to the bird's black and white plumage. Earliest use is in reference to the
pyed freres, an order of friars who wore black and white. Also in pied piper (1845, in Browning's
poem based on the German legend; used allusively by 1939).


feather (v.)

Old English fi&eth;erian to furnish with feathers or wings, from fe&eth;er (see feather (n.)).
Meaning to fit (an arrow) with feathers is from early 13c.; that of to deck, adorn, or provide with
plumage is from late 15c. In reference to oars (later paddles, propellers, etc.) from 1740. Phrase
feather one's nest enrich oneself is from 1580s. Related: Feathered; feathering.


pile (n.3)

soft, raised surface upon cloth, mid-14c., downy plumage, from Anglo-French pyle or Middle Dutch
pijl, both from Latin pilus a hair (source of Italian pelo, Old French pel). Phonological evidence
rules out transmission of the English word via Old French cognate peil, poil. Meaning nap upon cloth
is from 1560s.


perk (v.)

late 14c., to make oneself trim or smart, perhaps from Old North French perquer to perch (Modern
French percher; see perch (n.1)), on notion of a bird preening its plumage. Sense of raise oneself
briskly is first attested 1520s; perk up recover liveliness is from 1650s. Related: Perked; perking.


bluebird (n.)

also blue-bird, North American warbler-like bird, 1680s, from blue (1) in reference to its plumage +
bird (n.1). Figurative use in bluebird of happiness is from 1909 play romance l'Oiseau bleu,
literally The Blue Bird, by Belgian dramatist and poet Maurice Maeterlinck (1862-1949).


bunting (n.2)

lark-like bird, c.1300, bountyng, of unknown origin. Perhaps from buntin plump (compare baby
bunting, also Scots buntin short and thick; Welsh bontin rump, and bontinog big-assed), or a double
diminutive of French bon. Or it might be named in reference to speckled plumage and be from an
unrecorded Old English word akin to German bunt speckled, Dutch bont.


oriole (n.)

1776, from French oriol golden oriole, Old Proven&ccedil;al auriol, from Medieval Latin oryolus,
from Latin aureolus golden, from PIE *aus- (2) gold (see aureate). Originally in reference to the
golden oriole (Oriolus galbula), a bird of black and yellow plumage that summers in Europe (but is
uncommon in England). Applied from 1791 to the unrelated but similarly colored North American
species Icterus baltimore.


hackle (n.)

Old English hacele cloak, mantle (cognate with Old High German hachul, Gothic hakuls cloak; Old
Norse hekla hooded frock), of uncertain origin. Sense of bird plumage is first recorded early 15c.,
though this might be from unrelated Middle English hackle flax comb (see heckle (n.)) on supposed
resemblance of comb to ruffled feathers. Metaphoric extension found in raise one's hackles (as a
cock does when angry) is first recorded 1881.


parakeet (n.)

1620s, from Spanish perquito; earlier English form parroket (1580s) is from Middle French paroquet,
from Old French paroquet (14c.), which is said by etymologists of French to be from Italian
parrocchetto, literally little priest, from parroco parish priest, from Church Latin parochus (see
parish), or parrucchetto, diminutive of parrucca peruke, periwig, in reference to the head plumage.
The Spanish form, meanwhile, is sometimes said to be a diminutive of Perico, familiar form of Pedro
Peter, and the Old French word is likewise perhaps from or influenced by a diminutive of Pierre
Peter. The relations of the Spanish and Italian forms, and the influence of folk etymology on either
or both, are uncertain.


