plumb (v.)

early 15c., to sink (like lead), from plumb (n.). Meaning take soundings with a plumb is first
recorded 1560s; figurative sense of to get to the bottom of is from 1590s. Related: Plumbed;
plumbing.


plumb (adj.)

perpendicular, vertical, mid-15c., from plumb (n.). The notion of exact measurement led to extended
sense of completely, downright (1748), sometimes spelled plump, plum, or plunk.


plumb-bob (n.)

1835, from plumb (n.) + bob (n.1).


plumbo-

word-forming element meaning lead (the metal), from comb. form of Latin plumbum lead (see plumb
(n.)).


plumbic (adj.)

combined with lead, 1799, from Latin plumbum  (see plumb (n.)) + -ic.


plumbous (adj.)

1680s, leaden; 1854 in chemistry sense, containing lead (especially in a low valence), from Latin
plumbosus full of lead, from plumbum (see plumb (n.)).


plumb (n.)

lead hung on a string to show the vertical line, early 14c., from Old French *plombe, plomee
sounding lead, and directly from Late Latin *plumba, originally plural of Latin plumbum lead (the
metal), lead ball; pipe; pencil, a word of unknown origin, related to Greek molybdos lead (dialectal
bolimos) and perhaps from an extinct Mediterranean language, perhaps Iberian.


plumbago (n.)

graphite, 1784, from Latin plumbago a type of lead ore, black lead, from plumbum lead (see plumb
(n.)); it renders Greek molybdaina, which was used of yellow lead oxide and also of a type of plant
(leadwort). Attested in English in the yellow oxide sense from 1610s; as a type of plant from 1747.
Related: Plumbaginous.


plumber (n.)

late 14c. (from c.1100 as a surname), a worker in any sort of lead (roofs, gutters, pipes), from Old
French plomier lead-smelter (Modern French plombier) and directly from Latin plumbarius worker in
lead, noun use of adjective meaning pertaining to lead, from plumbum lead (see plumb (n.)). Meaning
focused 19c. on workman who installs pipes and fittings as lead water pipes became the principal
concern of the trade. In U.S. Nixon administration (1969-74), the name of a special unit for
investigation of leaks of government secrets.


plumbing (n.)

mid-15c., the weighting of a fishing line, verbal noun from plumb (v.). Specific meaning water and
drainage pipes is recorded by 1875, American English.    THE apparatus by which the water from a
reservoir is carried about over a building and delivered at points convenient for use, is called by
the general name of plumbing. The word plumbing means lead-work; and it is used to signify this
water apparatus of a house because the pipes of which it largely consists are usually made of lead.
[Edward Abbott, Long Look House: A Book for Boys and Girls, Boston, 1877]    Alternative plumbery
also is mid-15c. Slang meaning a person's reproductive organs attested by 1975.


aplomb (n.)

assurance, confidence, 1828, from French aplomb (16c.), literally perpendicularity, from phrase
&agrave; plomb poised upright, balanced, literally on the plumb line, from Latin plumbum (the metal)
lead (see plumb (n.)), of which the weight at the end of the line was made.


plummet (n.)

late 14c., ball of lead, plumb of a bob-line, from Old French plomet graphite, lead; plummet,
sounding lead, diminutive of plom sounding lead (see plumb (n.)).


perpendicular (adj.)

late 15c., from adverb (late 14c.), from Old French perpendiculer, from Latin perpendicularis
vertical, as a plumb line, from perpendiculum plumb line, from perpendere balance carefully, from
per- thoroughly (see per) + pendere to weigh, to hang (see pendant). As a noun from 1570s. Related:
Perpendicularly; perpendicularity.


molybdenum (n.)

metallic element, 1816, from molybdena, used generally for lead-like minerals, from Greek molybdos
lead, also black graphite, related to Latin plumbum lead (see plumb (n.)), and like it probably
borrowed from a lost Mediterranean language, perhaps Iberian. The element so called because of its
resemblance to lead ore.


plunge (v.)

late 14c., to put or thrust violently into, also intransitive, from Old French plongier plunge, sink
into; plunge into, dive in (mid-12c., Modern French plonger), from Vulgar Latin *plumbicare to heave
the lead, from Latin plumbum lead (see plumb (n.)). Original notion perhaps is of a sounding lead or
a fishing net weighted with lead. Related: Plunged; plunging. Plunging neckline attested from 1949.


