politically (adv.)

1580s, in a politic manner; 1630s in a political manner, from politic or political + -ly (2).


politicking (n.)

1928, from present participle of politic (v.). For the -k-, see picnic.


politico (n.)

politician, political agent, usually in a derogatory sense, 1620s, from Italian or Spanish politico,
noun use of adjective meaning political, from Latin politicus (see politic (adj.)).


politic (v.)

also politick, to engage in political activity, 1917, a back-formation from politics. Related:
Politicked; politicking (for the -k- see picnic).


political (adj.)

1550s, pertaining to a polity, civil affairs, or government; from Latin politicus of citizens or the
state (see politic (adj.)) + -al (1). Meaning taking sides in party politics (usually pejorative) is
from 1749. Political prisoner first recorded 1860; political science is from 1779 (first attested in
Hume). Political animal translates Greek politikon zoon (Aristotle, Politics, I.ii.9) an animal
intended to live in a city; a social animal.


politic (adj.)

early 15c., pertaining to public affairs, from Middle French politique political (14c.) and directly
from Latin politicus of citizens or the state, civil, civic, from Greek politikos of citizens,
pertaining to the state and its administration; pertaining to public life, from polites citizen,
from polis city (see polis). Replaced in most adjectival senses by political. From mid-15c. as
prudent, judicious.


politics (n.)

1520s, science of government, from politic (adj.), modeled on Aristotle's ta politika affairs of
state, the name of his book on governing and governments, which was in English mid-15c. as
Polettiques. Also see -ics.Politicks is the science of good sense, applied to public affairs, and,
as those are forever changing, what is wisdom to-day would be folly and perhaps, ruin to-morrow.
Politicks is not a science so properly as a business. It cannot have fixed principles, from which a
wise man would never swerve, unless the inconstancy of men's view of interest and the capriciousness
of the tempers could be fixed. [Fisher Ames (1758-1808)]Meaning a person's political allegiances or
opinions is from 1769.


impolitic (adj.)

not according to good policy, c.1600, from assimilated form of in- (1) not, opposite of + politic.


cosmopolite (n.)

late 16c., man of the world; citizen of the world, from Greek kosmopolites citizen of the world,
from kosmos world (see cosmos) + polites citizen (see politic). In common use 17c. in a neutral
sense; it faded out in 18c. but was revived from c.1800 with a tinge of reproachfulness (opposed to
patriot).


incorporate (v.)

late 14c., to put (something) into the body or substance of (something else), from Late Latin
incorporatus, past participle of incorporare unite into one body, from Latin in- into, in, on, upon
(see in- (2)) + corpus (genitive corporis) body (see corporeal). Meaning to legally form a body
politic is from 1460s. Related: Incorporated; incorporating.


state (n.2)

political organization of a country, supreme civil power, government, c.1300, from special use of
state (n.1); this sense grew out of the meaning condition of a country with regard to government,
prosperity, etc. (late 13c.), from Latin phrases such as status rei public&aelig; condition (or
existence) of the republic.    The sense of a semi-independent political entity under a federal
authority, one of the bodies politic which together make up a federal republic is from 1774. The
British North American colonies occasionally were called states as far back as 1630s; the States has
been short for the United States of America since 1777; also of the Netherlands. State rights in
U.S. political sense is attested from 1798; form states rights is first recorded 1858. Church and
state have been contrasted from 1580s. State-socialism attested from 1850.


body (n.)

Old English bodig trunk, chest (of a man or animal); related to Old High German botah, of unknown
origin. Not elsewhere in Germanic, and the word has died out in German (replaced by leib, originally
life, and k&ouml;rper, from Latin). In English, extension to person is from late 13c. Meaning main
part of anything was in late Old English, hence its use in reference to vehicles (1520s).
Contrasted with soul since at least mid-13c. Meaning corpse (short for dead body) is from late 13c.
Transferred to matter generally in Middle English (as in heavenly body, late 14c.). Body politic the
nation, the state first recorded 1520s, legalese, with French word order. Body image was coined
1935. Body language is attested from 1967, perhaps from French langage corporel (1966). Phrase over
my dead body attested by 1833.


estate (n.)

early 13c., rank, standing, condition, from Anglo-French astat, Old French estat state, position,
condition, health, status, legal estate (Modern French &eacute;tat), from Latin status state or
condition, from PIE root *sta- to stand (see stet).    For the excrescent e-, see e-. Sense of
property is late 14c., from that of worldly prosperity; specific application to landed property
(usually of large extent) is first recorded in American English 1620s. A native word for this was
Middle English ethel (Old English &aelig;&eth;el) ancestral land or estate, patrimony. Meaning
collective assets of a dead person or debtor is from 1830.    The three estates (in Sweden and
Aragon, four) conceived as orders in the body politic date from late 14c. In France, they are the
clergy, nobles, and townsmen; in England, originally the clergy, barons, and commons, later Lords
Spiritual, Lords Temporal, and commons. For Fourth Estate see four.


