ponderous (adj.)

c.1400, thick; early 15c., heavy, weighty, clumsy, from Latin ponderosus of great weight; full of
meaning, from pondus (genitive ponderis) weight (see pound (n.1)). Meaning tedious is first recorded
1704. Related: Ponderously; ponderousness.


conundrum (n.)

1590s, Oxford University slang for pedant, also whim, etc., later (1790) riddle, puzzle. Also
spelled quonundrum. The sort of ponderous pseudo-Latin word that was once the height of humor in
learned circles.


ponderosa (n.)

type of pine in western U.S., 1878, from scientific name Pinus ponderosa (1836), literally heavy
pine, from Latin ponderosus (see ponderous).


jocose (adj.)

1670s, from Latin iocosus full of jesting, joking, from iocus pastime, sport; a jest, joke (see joke
(n.)). Implies ponderous humor. Related: Jocosely; jocoseness.


sad (adj.)

Old English s&aelig;d sated, full, having had one's fill (of food, drink, fighting, etc.), weary of,
from Proto-Germanic *sathaz (cognates: Old Norse sa&eth;r, Middle Dutch sat, Dutch zad, Old High
German sat, German satt, Gothic sa&thorn;s satiated, sated, full), from PIE *seto- (cognates: Latin
satis enough, sufficient, Greek hadros thick, bulky, Old Church Slavonic sytu, Lithuanian sotus
satiated, Old Irish saith satiety, sathach sated), from root *sa- to satisfy (cognates: Sanskrit
a-sinvan insatiable).    Sense development passed through the meaning heavy, ponderous (i.e. full
mentally or physically), and weary, tired of before emerging c.1300 as unhappy. An alternative
course would be through the common Middle English sense of steadfast, firmly established, fixed (as
in sad-ware tough pewter vessels) and serious to grave. In the main modern sense, it replaced Old
English unrot, negative of rot cheerful, glad.    Meaning very bad is from 1690s. Slang sense of
inferior, pathetic is from 1899; sad sack is 1920s, popularized by World War II armed forces
(specifically by cartoon character invented by Sgt. George Baker, 1942, and published in U.S. Armed
Forces magazine Yank), probably a euphemistic shortening of common military slang phrase sad sack of
shit.


