portentous (adj.)

1540s, from Latin portentosus monstrous, marvelous, threatening, from portentem portent (see
portend). Related: Portentously.


portent (n.)

1560s, from Middle French portente, from Latin portentum a sign, token, omen; monster, monstrosity,
noun use of neuter of portentus, past participle of portendre (see portend).


prodigy (n.)

late 15c., sign, portent, something extraordinary from which omens are drawn, from Latin prodigium
prophetic sign, omen, portent, prodigy, from pro- forth (see pro-) + -igium, a suffix or word of
unknown origin, perhaps from *agi-, root of aio I say (see adage). Meaning child with exceptional
abilities first recorded 1650s.


foreboding (n.)

late 14c., a predilection, portent, omen, from fore- + verbal noun from bode. Meaning sense of
something bad about to happen is from c.1600. Old English forebodung meant prophecy.


augury (n.)

late 14c., divination from the flight of birds, from Old French augure divination, soothsaying,
sorcery, enchantment, or directly from Latin augurium divination, the observation and interpretation
of omens (see augur). Figurative sense of omen, portent, indication is from 1797 (also often in
plural as auguries).


semantic (adj.)

1894, from French s&eacute;mantique, applied by Michel Br&eacute;al (1883) to the psychology of
language, from Greek semantikos significant, from semainein to show by sign, signify, point out,
indicate by a sign, from sema sign, mark, token; omen, portent; constellation; grave (Doric sama),
from PIE root *dheie- to see, look (cognates: Sanskrit dhyati he meditates; see zen).


beacon (n.)

Old English beacen sign, portent, lighthouse, from West Germanic *baukna beacon, signal (cognates:
Old Frisian baken, Old Saxon bokan, Old High German bouhhan); not found outside Germanic. Perhaps
borrowed from Latin bucina a crooked horn or trumpet, signal horn. But more likely from PIE *bhew-,
a variant of the base *bha- (1) to gleam, shine (see phantasm). Figurative use from c.1600.


monster (n.)

early 14c., malformed animal or human, creature afflicted with a birth defect, from Old French
monstre, mostre monster, monstrosity (12c.), and directly from Latin monstrum divine omen, portent,
sign; abnormal shape; monster, monstrosity, figuratively repulsive character, object of dread, awful
deed, abomination, from root of monere warn (see monitor (n.)). Abnormal or prodigious animals were
regarded as signs or omens of impending evil. Extended by late 14c. to imaginary animals composed of
parts of creatures (centaur, griffin, etc.). Meaning animal of vast size is from 1520s; sense of
person of inhuman cruelty or wickedness is from 1550s. As an adjective, of extraordinary size, from
1837. In Old English, the monster Grendel was an agl&aelig;ca, a word related to agl&aelig;c
calamity, terror, distress, oppression.


