portend (v.)

early 15c., from Latin portendere foretell, reveal; point out, indicate, originally to stretch
forward, from por- (variant of pro-; see pro-) forth, forward + tendere to stretch, extend (see
tenet). Related: Portended; portending.


portentous (adj.)

1540s, from Latin portentosus monstrous, marvelous, threatening, from portentem portent (see
portend). Related: Portentously.


portent (n.)

1560s, from Middle French portente, from Latin portentum a sign, token, omen; monster, monstrosity,
noun use of neuter of portentus, past participle of portendre (see portend).


signify (v.)

late 13c., be a sign of, indicate, mean, from Old French signifier (12c.), from Latin significare to
make signs, show by signs, point out, express; mean, signify; foreshadow, portend, from significus
(adj.), from signum sign (see sign (n.)) + root of facere to make (see factitious). Intransitive
sense of to be of importance is attested from 1660s. Meaning engage in mock-hostile banter is
American English black slang first recorded 1932.    ...'signifying,' which in Harlemese means
making a series of oblique remarks apparently addressed to no one in particular, but unmistakable in
intention in such a close-knit circle. [Down Beat, March 7, 1968]


death (n.)

Old English dea&eth; death, dying, cause of death, in plura, ghosts, from Proto-Germanic *dauthaz
(cognates: Old Saxon doth, Old Frisian dath, Dutch dood, Old High German tod, German Tod, Old Norse
dau&eth;i, Danish d&oslash;d, Swedish d&ouml;d, Gothic dau&thorn;as death), from verbal stem *dheu-
(3) to die (see die (v.)) + *-thuz suffix indicating act, process, condition.    I would not that
death should take me asleep. I would not have him meerly seise me, and onely declare me to be dead,
but win me, and overcome me. When I must shipwrack, I would do it in a sea, where mine impotencie
might have some excuse; not in a sullen weedy lake, where I could not have so much as exercise for
my swimming. [John Donne, letter to Sir Henry Goodere, Sept. 1608]   Death's-head, a symbol of
mortality, is from 1590s. Death row first recorded 1940s. Death knell is attested from 1814; death
penalty from 1875; death rate from 1859. Slang be death on be very good at is from 1839. Death wish
first recorded 1896. The death-watch beetle (1660s) inhabits houses, makes a ticking noise like a
watch, and was superstitiously supposed to portend death.    FEW ears have escaped the noise of the
death-watch, that is, the little clickling sound heard often in many rooms, somewhat resembling that
of a watch; and this is conceived to be of an evil omen or prediction of some person's death:
wherein notwithstanding there is nothing of rational presage or just cause of terror unto melancholy
and meticulous heads. For this noise is made by a little sheathwinged grey insect, found often in
wainscot benches and wood-work in the summer. [Browne, Vulgar Errors]


