posterity (n.)

late 14c., from Old French posterit&eacute; (14c.), from Latin posteritatem (nominative posteritas)
future, future time; after-generation, offspring; literally the condition of coming after, from
posterus coming after, subsequent, from post after (see post-). Old English words for this included
&aelig;ftercneoreso, framcynn.


posterior (n.)

buttocks, euphemistic, 1610s, from posterior (adj.). Earlier it meant those who come after,
posterity (1530s). Compare Lithuanian pasturas the last, the hindmost, from pas at, by.


hinder (adj,)

situated in the rear, toward the back, late 14c., probably from Old English hinder (adv.) behind,
back, afterward, but treated as a comparative of hind (adj.). Related to Old High German hintar,
German hinter, Gothic hindar behind. Middle English had hinderhede, literally hinder-hood; posterity
in time, inferiority in rank; and hinderling person fallen from moral or social respectability,
wretch.


semen (n.)

late 14c., from Latin semen seed of plants, animals, or men; race, inborn characteristic; posterity,
progeny, offspring, figuratively origin, essence, principle, cause, from PIE *si-so-, reduplication
of root *se- (1) to sow (cognates: Latin serere to sow, Old Prussian semen seed, Lithuanian semens
seed of flax, Old Church Slavonic seme, Old High German samo seed, German Same; see sow (v.)).


seed (n.)

Old English sed, s&aelig;d that which may be sown; an individual grain of seed; offspring,
posterity, from Proto-Germanic *sediz seed (cognates: Old Norse sa&eth;, Old Saxon sad, Old Frisian
sed, Middle Dutch saet, Old High German sat, German Saat), from PIE *se-ti- sowing, from root *se-
(1) to sow (see sow (v.)). Figurative use in Old English. Meaning offspring, progeny rare now except
in biblical use. Meaning semen is from c.1300. For sporting sense, see seed (v.).


abomination (n.)

early 14c., abominable thing or action; late 14c., feeling of disgust, hatred, loathing, from Old
French abominacion abomination, horror, repugnance, disgust (13c.), from Latin abominationem
(nominative abominatio) abomination, noun of action from past participle stem of abominari shun as
an ill omen, from ab- off, away from (see ab-) + omin-, stem of omen (see omen). Meaning intensified
by folk etymology derivation from Latin ab homine away from man, thus beastly.    Doubtless, the
life of an Irregular is hard; but the interests of the Greater Number require that it shall be hard.
If a man with a triangular front and a polygonal back were allowed to exist and to propagate a still
more Irregular posterity, what would become of the arts of life? Are the houses and doors and
churches in Flatland to be altered in order to accommodate such monsters? [Edwin Abbot, Flatland: A
Romance of Many Dimensions, 1885]


