posture (n.)

c.1600, from French posture (16c.), from Italian postura position, posture, from Latin positura
position, station, from postulus, past participle of ponere put, place (see position (n.)).


posture (v.)

1620s, literal, from posture (n.). The figurative sense of take up an artificial mental position is
attested from 1877. Related: Postured; posturing.


attitude (n.)

1660s, via French attitude (17c.), from Italian attitudine disposition, posture, also aptness,
promptitude, from Late Latin aptitudinem (nominative aptitudo; see aptitude). Originally 17c. a
technical term in art for the posture of a figure in a statue or painting; later generalized to a
posture of the body supposed to imply some mental state (1725). Sense of settled behavior reflecting
feeling or opinion is first recorded 1837. Connotations of antagonistic and uncooperative developed
by 1962 in slang.


Posturpedic (n.)

trademark name (Sealy, Inc., Chicago, U.S.A.) for a brand of mattress, filed in 1951; from posture
(n.) + second element from orthopedic.


squat (n.)

c.1400, bump, heavy fall, from squat (v.). Meaning posture of one who squats is from 1570s; that of
act of squatting is from 1580s. Slang noun sense of nothing at all first attested 1934, probably
suggestive of squatting to defecate. Weight-lifting sense is from 1954.


cock (v.)

mid-12c., cocken, to fight; 1570s, to swagger; seeming contradictory modern senses of to stand up
(as in cock one's ear), c.1600, and to bend (1898) are from the two cock nouns. The first is
probably in reference to the posture of the bird's head or tail, the second to the firearm position.
To cock ones hat carries the notion of defiant boastfulness.


gesture (n.)

early 15c., manner of carrying the body, from Medieval Latin gestura bearing, behavior, from Latin
gestus gesture, carriage, posture (see gest). Restricted sense of a movement of the body or a part
of it is from 1550s; figurative sense of action undertaken in good will to express feeling is from
1916.


gesticulate (v.)

c.1600, from Latin gesticulatus, past participle of gesticulari to gesture, mimic, from gesticulus a
mimicking gesture, diminutive of gestus gesture, carriage, posture (see gest). Related:
Gesticulated; gesticulating.


stasis (n.)

stoppage of circulation, 1745, from medical Latin, from Greek stasis a standing still, a standing;
the posture of standing; a position, a point of the compass; position, state, or condition of
anything; also a party, a company, a sect, especially one for seditious purposes; related to statos
placed, verbal adjective of histemi cause to stand, from PIE root *sta- to stand (see stet).


laid

past tense and past participle of lay (v.). Laid-up injured, sick, originally was a nautical term
(1769) describing a ship moored in harbor. Laid off temporarily unemployed is from 1916. Get laid
have sex (with someone) attested from 1952, U.S. slang. Laid-back relaxed is first attested 1973,
perhaps in reference to the posture of highway motorcyclists. Laid up incapacitated originally was
of ships.


scheme (n.)

1550s, figure of speech, from Medieval Latin schema shape, figure, form, appearance; figure of
speech; posture in dancing, from Greek skhema (genitive skhematos) figure, appearance, the nature of
a thing, related to skhein to get, and ekhein to have, from PIE root *segh- to hold, to hold in
one's power, to have (cognates: Sanskrit sahate he masters, overcomes, sahah power, victory; Avestan
hazah power, victory; Greek ekhein to have, hold; Gothic sigis, Old High German sigu, Old Norse
sigr, Old English sige victory).    The sense program of action first is attested 1640s. Unfavorable
overtones (selfish, devious) began to creep in early 18c. Meaning complex unity of coordinated
component elements is from 1736. Color scheme is attested from 1884.


upright (adj.)

Old English upriht erect, face-upward; see up (adv.) + right (adj.1). Similar compounds are found in
other Germanic languages (Old Frisian upriucht, Middle Dutch oprecht, Old High German ufreht, German
aufrecht, Old Norse uprettr). Figurative sense of good, honest, adhering to rectitude is first
attested 1520s.    As an adverb, Old English uprihte. As a noun, 1560s in the sense a vertical
front; c.1700 as a vertical timber in framing; 1742 in the sense something standing erect. Meaning
an upright piano is from 1860.    THREE-PENNY UPRIGHT. A retailer of love, who, for the sum
mentioned, dispenses her favours standing against a wall. [Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, 1811]
<hr />   The bent-over rear-entry posture they are talking about, of course, is kubda, the three-
obol position at the bottom-end of a prostitute's price-range. [James N. Davidson, Courtesans and
Fishcakes: The Consuming Passions of Classical Athens, 1997]


stork (n.)

Old English storc stork, from Proto-Germanic *sturkaz (cognates: Old Norse storkr, Swedish and
Danish stork, Middle Dutch storc, Old High German storah, German Storch stork), from PIE *ster-
stiff (cognates: Old English stear stiff, strong; see stark). Perhaps so called with reference to
the bird's stiff or rigid posture. But some connect the word to Greek torgos vulture.    Old Church
Slavonic struku, Russian sterkhu, Lithuanian starkus, Hungarian eszterag, Albanian sterkjok stork
are said to be Germanic loan-words. The children's fable that babies are brought by storks (told by
adults who aren't ready to go into the details) is in English by 1854, from German and Dutch nursery
stories, no doubt from the notion that storks nesting on one's roof meant good luck, often in the
form of family happiness.


state (n.1)

c.1200, circumstances, position in society, temporary attributes of a person or thing, conditions,
from Old French estat position, condition; status, stature, station, and directly from Latin status
a station, position, place; way of standing, posture; order, arrangement, condition, figuratively
standing, rank; public order, community organization, noun of action from past participle stem of
stare to stand from PIE root *sta- to stand (see stet). Some Middle English senses are via Old
French estat (French &eacute;tat; see estate).    The Latin word was adopted into other modern
Germanic languages (German, Dutch staat) but chiefly in the political senses only. Meaning physical
condition as regards form or structure is attested from late 13c. Meaning mental or emotional
condition is attested from 1530s (phrase state of mind first attested 1749); colloquial sense of
agitated or perturbed state is from 1837.     He [the President] shall from time to time give to the
Congress Information of the State of the Union, and recommend to their Consideration such Measures
as he shall judge necessary and expedient. [U.S. Constitution, Article II, Section iii]


