potentate (n.)

c.1400, from Old French potentat and directly from Late Latin potentatus a ruler, also political
power, from Latin potentatus might, power, rule, dominion, from potentem (nominative potens)
powerful (see potent).


potential (adj.)

late 14c., possible (as opposed to actual), from Old French potenciel and directly from Late Latin
potentialis potential, from Latin potentia power, might, force; figuratively political power,
authority, influence, from potens powerful (see potent). The noun, meaning that which is possible,
is first attested 1817, from the adjective.


potent (adj.)

early 15c., from Latin potentem (nominative potens) powerful, present participle of *potere be
powerful, from potis powerful, able, capable; possible; of persons, better, preferable; chief,
principal; strongest, foremost, from PIE root *poti- powerful, lord (cognates: Sanskrit patih
master, husband, Greek posis, Lithuanian patis husband). Meaning having sexual power is first
recorded 1899.


potency (n.)

mid-15c., from Latin potentia power, from potentem potent (see potent).


impotent (adj.)

late 14c., physically weak, enfeebled, crippled, from Old French impotent powerless, weak,
incapable, from Latin imponentem (nominative impotens) lacking control, powerless, from assimilated
form of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + ponentem (nominative potens) potent (see potent).
Meaning having no power to accomplish anything is from mid-15c.; that of completely lacking in
sexual power (of males) is from mid-15c. Middle English also had a native term for this: Cunt-beaten
(mid-15c.). The figurative sense in Latin was without self-control, headstrong, violent. Related:
Impotently.


idempotent

1870, from Latin idem the same + potentem powerful (see potent).


potence (n.)

potency, early 15c., from Old French potence power, from Latin potentia (see potent).


possible (adj.)

mid-14c., from Old French possible and directly from Latin possibilis that can be done, from posse
be able (see potent).


sinsemilla (n.)

potent strain of marijuana, 1975, from Mexican Spanish, literally without seed, from Latin sine
without (see sans) + semen seed (see semen).


totipotent (adj.)

1896, from Latin toti-, comb. form of totus whole (see total (adj.)) + potent. Perhaps immediately
from German totipotent, which is attested by 1893. Related: Totipotency.


plenipotentiary (adj.)

1640s, from French pl&#233;nipotentiaire and directly from Medieval Latin plenipotentiarius having
full power, from Late Latin plenipotens, from Latin plenus full (see plenary) + potentem powerful
(see potent). As a noun from 1650s.


Acapulco

in full, Acapulco de Juarez, resort town in western Mexico, from Nahuatl (Aztecan) acapulco place of
the large canes, from aca(tl) cane (plant) + -pul large + -co place. Acapulco gold as the name of a
local grade of potent marijuana is attested from 1965.


dynamic (adj.)

1817 as a term in philosophy; 1827 in the sense pertaining to force producing motion (the opposite
of static), from French dynamique introduced by German mathematician Gottfried Leibnitz (1646-1716)
in 1691 from Greek dynamikos powerful, from dynamis power, from dynasthai to be able, to have power,
be strong enough, of unknown origin. The figurative sense of active, potent, energetic is from 1856
(in Emerson). Related: Dynamically.


shamus (n.)

police officer, detective, 1920, apparently first in The Shamus, a detective story published that
year by Harry J. Loose (1880-1943), a Chicago police detective and crime writer; the book was
marketed as a true tale of thiefdom and an expose of the real system in crime. The word is said to
be probably from Yiddish shames, literally sexton of a synagogue (a potent personage only next in
influence to the President [Israel Zangwill]), from Hebrew shamash servant; influenced by Celtic
Seamus James, as a typical name for an Irish cop.


omnipotent (adj.)

early 14c., from Old French omnipotent almighty, all-powerful (11c.) or directly from Latin
omnipotentem (nominative omnipotens) all-powerful, almighty, from omnis all (see omni-) + potens
(genitive potentis) powerful (see potent). Strictly only of God or a deity; general sense of having
absolute power or authority is attested from 1590s.


pasha

Turkish honorary title formerly given to officers of high rank, 1640s, from Turkish pasha, earlier
basha, from bash head, chief (no clear distinction between -b- and -p- in Turkish), from Old Persian
pati- master, from PIE *poti- (see potent) + root of shah. Earlier in English as bashaw (1530s).


virtuous (adj.)

c.1300, characterized by vigor or strength; having qualities befitting a knight; valiant, hardy,
courageous; from Old French vertuos righteous; potent; of good quality; mighty, valiant, brave
(12c.), from Late Latin virtuosus good, virtuous, from Latin virtus (see virtue). From mid-14c. in
English as having beneficial or efficacious properties; late 14c. (of persons) as having excellent
moral qualities; conforming to religious law. Related: Virtuously; virtuousness.


sovereign (adj.)

early 14c., great, superior, supreme, from Old French soverain highest, supreme, chief, from Vulgar
Latin *superanus chief, principal (source also of Spanish soberano, Italian soprano), from Latin
super over (see super-). Spelling influenced by folk-etymology association with reign. Milton
spelled it sovran, as though from Italian sovrano. Of remedies or medicines, potent in a high
degree, from late 14c.


compos mentis

Latin, literally in command of one's mind; from compos having the mastery of, from com- with (see
com-) + stem of potis powerful, master (see potent); + mentis, genitive of mens mind (see mind
(n.)).


posse (n.)

1640s (in Anglo-Latin from early 14c.), shortening of posse comitatus the force of the county
(1620s, in Anglo-Latin from late 13c.), from Medieval Latin posse body of men, power, from Latin
posse have power, be able (see potent) + comitatus of the county, genitive of Late Latin word for
court palace (see comitatus). Modern slang meaning small gang is probably from Western movies.


possess (v.)

late 14c., to hold, occupy, reside in (without regard to ownership), a back formation from
possession and in part from Old French possesser to have and hold, take, be in possession of (mid-
13c.), from Latin possess-, past participle stem of possidere to have and hold, possess, be master
of, own, from posse to be able, from potis able, powerful (see potent) + esse to be (see be).
Meaning to hold as property is recorded from c.1500. Demonic sense is recorded from 1530s (implied
in possessed). Related: Possessed; possessing.


despot (n.)

1560s, absolute ruler, from Old French despot (14c.), from Medieval Latin despota, from Greek
despotes master of a household, lord, absolute ruler, from PIE *dems-pota- house-master; for first
element see domestic (adj.); second element cognate with Latin potis, potens (see potent).
Faintly pejorative in Greek, progressively more so as used in various languages for Roman emperors,
Christian rulers of Ottoman provinces, and Louis XVI during the French Revolution. The female
equivalent was despoina lady, queen, mistress, source of the proper name Despina.


virus (n.)

late 14c., venomous substance, from Latin virus poison, sap of plants, slimy liquid, a potent juice,
probably from PIE root *weis- to melt away, to flow, used of foul or malodorous fluids, with
specialization in some languages to poisonous fluid (cognates: Sanskrit visam poison, visah
poisonous; Avestan vish- poison; Latin viscum sticky substance, birdlime; Greek ios poison, ixos
mistletoe, birdlime; Old Church Slavonic vi&#353;nja cherry; Old Irish fi poison; Welsh gwy fluid,
water, gwyar blood). Main modern meaning agent that causes infectious disease first recorded 1728
(in reference to venereal disease). The computer sense is from 1972.


power (n.)

c.1300, ability; ability to act or do; strength, vigor, might, especially in battle; efficacy;
control, mastery, lordship, dominion; legal power or authority; authorization; military force, an
army, from Anglo-French pouair, Old French povoir, noun use of the infinitive, to be able, earlier
podir (9c.), from Vulgar Latin *potere, from Latin potis powerful (see potent).    Whatever some
hypocritical ministers of government may say about it, power is the greatest of all pleasures. It
seems to me that only love can beat it, and love is a happy illness that can't be picked up as
easily as a Ministry. [Stendhal de l'Amour, 1822]    Meaning one who has power is late 14c. Meaning
specific ability or capacity is from early 15c. Meaning a state or nation with regard to
international authority or influence [OED] is from 1726. Used for a large number of from 1660s.
Meaning energy available for work is from 1727. Sense of electrical supply is from 1896.    Phrase
the powers that be is from Rom. xiii:1. As a statement wishing good luck, more power to (someone) is
recorded from 1842. A power play in ice hockey so called by 1940. Power failure is from 1911; power
steering from 1921.


proud (adj.)

late Old English  prud, prute excellent, splendid; arrogant, haughty, probably from Old French prud,
oblique case of adjective prouz brave, valiant (11c., Modern French preux; compare prud'homme brave
man), from Late Latin prode advantageous, profitable (source also of Italian prode valiant), a back-
formation from Latin prodesse be useful, from pro- before, for, instead of (see pro-) + esse to be
(see essence). Also see pride (n.), prowess.    Meaning elated by some act, fact, or thing is from
mid-13c. To do (someone) proud attested by 1819. Related: Proudness. The -d- in prodesse is probably
due to the influence of forms like red-eo-, 'I go back,' red-imo- 'I buy back,' etc. [OED]. The Old
English form with -te probably is from or influenced by pride.    The sense of have a high opinion
of oneself, not found in Old French, might reflect the Anglo-Saxons' opinion of the Norman knights
who called themselves proud. Old Norse pru&eth;r, probably from the same French source, had only the
sense brave, gallant, magnificent, stately (compare Icelandic pru&eth;ur, Middle Swedish prudh,
Middle Danish prud). Likewise a group of pride words in the Romance languages -- such as French
orgueil, Italian orgoglio, Spanish orgullo -- are borrowings from Germanic, where they had positive
senses (Old High German urgol distinguished).    Most Indo-European languages use the same word for
proud in its good and bad senses, but in many the bad sense seems to be the earlier one. The usual
way to form the word is by some compound of terms for over or high and words for heart, mood,
thought, or appearance; such as Greek hyperephanos, literally over-appearing; Gothic
hauh&thorn;uhts, literally high-conscience. Old English had ofermodig over-moody (mood in Anglo-
Saxon was a much more potent word than presently) and heahheort high-heart. Words for proud in other
Indo-European languages sometimes reflect a physical sense of being swollen or puffed up; such as
Welsh balch, probably from a root meaning to swell, and Modern Greek kamari, from ancient Greek
kamarou furnish with a vault or arched cover, with a sense evolution via make an arch, to puff out
the chest, to be puffed up (compare English slang chesty).


