potential (adj.)

late 14c., possible (as opposed to actual), from Old French potenciel and directly from Late Latin
potentialis potential, from Latin potentia power, might, force; figuratively political power,
authority, influence, from potens powerful (see potent). The noun, meaning that which is possible,
is first attested 1817, from the adjective.


potentiality (n.)

1620s, from potential + -ity, or else from Medieval Latin potentialitas, from potentialis (see
potential).


potentially (adv.)

early 15c., in possibility, opposed to actually; from potential + -ly (2).


Black Hand (n.)

Italian immigrant secret society in U.S., 1904; earlier a Spanish anarchist society, both from the
warning mark they displayed to potential victims.


boodle (n.)

1833, crowd; 1858, phony money, especially graft money, actual or potential (1883), both American
English slang, either or both based on bundle, or from Dutch boedel property.


potentiometer (n.)

1868, a hybrid formed from comb. form of Latin potentia power (see potential) + Greek-derived
-meter.


Esalen

alternative philosophy and human potential movement, 1966, from Esalen Institute in Big Sur,
California, U.S., from Esselen, name of an extinct Native American people of the California coast.


pussy (n.1)

cat, 1726, diminutive of puss (n.1), also used of a rabbit (1715). As a term of endearment for a
girl or woman, from 1580s (also used of effeminate men). To play pussy was World War II RAF slang
for to take advantage of cloud cover, jumping from cloud to cloud to shadow a potential victim or
avoid recognition.


pluripotential (adj.)

1925, from pluri- + potential. Related: Pluripotent; pluripotency.


potentiate (v.)

1817 (Coleridge) endow with power, from Latin potentia power, might, force (see potential) + -ate
(2) on model of German potenzieren. Related: Potentiated; potentiating; potentiation.


actual (adj.)

early 14c., pertaining to an action, from Old French actuel now existing, up to date (13c.), from
Late Latin actualis active, pertaining to action, adjectival form of Latin actus (see act (n.)). The
broader sense of real, existing (as opposed to potential, ideal, etc.) is from late 14c.


kamikaze (n.)

suicide flier, 1945, Japanese, literally divine wind, from kami god, providence, divine (see kami) +
kaze wind. Originally the name given in folklore to a typhoon which saved Japan from Mongol invasion
by wrecking Kublai Khan's fleet (August 1281). The attacks began in October 1944 off the
Philippines.    As an aside, at war's end, the Japanese had, by actual count, a total of 16,397
aircraft still available for service, including 6,374 operational fighters and bombers, and if they
had used only the fighters and bombers for kamikaze missions, they might have realized,
additionally, 900 ships sunk or damaged and 22,000 sailors killed or injured. In fact, however, the
Japanese had outfitted many aircraft, including trainers, as potential suicide attackers. As
intelligence estimates indicated, the Japanese believed they could inflict at least 50,000
casualties to an invasion force by kamikaze attacks alone. [Richard P. Hallion, Military Technology
and the Pacific War, 1995]    As an adjective by 1946.


guest (n.)

Old English g&aelig;st, giest (Anglian gest) guest; enemy; stranger, the common notion being
stranger, from Proto-Germanic *gastiz (cognates: Old Frisian jest, Dutch gast, German Gast, Gothic
gasts guest, originally stranger), from PIE root *ghos-ti- stranger, guest; host (cognates: Latin
hostis enemy, hospes host -- from *hosti-potis host, guest, originally lord of strangers -- Greek
xenos guest, host, stranger; Old Church Slavonic gosti guest, friend, gospodi lord, master); the
root sense, according to Watkins, probably is someone with whom one has reciprocal duties of
hospitality, representing a mutual exchange relationship highly important to ancient Indo-European
society. But as strangers are potential enemies as well as guests, the word has a forked path.
Spelling evolution influenced by Old Norse cognate gestr (the usual sound changes from the Old
English word would have yielded Modern English *yest). Phrase be my guest in the sense of go right
ahead first recorded 1955.


beer (n.)

Old English beor strong drink, beer, mead, a word of much-disputed and ambiguous origin, cognate
with Old Frisian biar, Middle Dutch and Dutch bier, Old High German bior, German Bier.    Probably a
6c. West Germanic monastic borrowing of Vulgar Latin biber a drink, beverage (from Latin infinitive
bibere to drink; see imbibe). Another suggestion is that it comes from Proto-Germanic *beuwoz-, from
*beuwo- barley. The native Germanic word for the beverage was the one that yielded ale (q.v.).
Beer was a common drink among most of the European peoples, as well as in Egypt and Mesopotamia, but
was known to the Greeks and Romans only as an exotic product. [Buck]    They did have words for it,
however. Greek brytos, used in reference to Thracian or Phrygian brews, was related to Old English
breowan brew; Latin zythum is from Greek zythos, first used of Egyptian beer and treated as an
Egyptian word but perhaps truly Greek and related to zyme leaven. French bi&egrave;re is from
Germanic. Spanish cerveza is from Latin cervesia beer, perhaps related to Latin cremor thick broth.
Old Church Slavonic pivo, source of the general Slavic word for beer, is originally a drink (compare
Old Church Slavonic piti drink). French bi&egrave;re is a 16c. borrowing from German. U.S. slang
beer goggles, through which every potential romantic partner looks desirable, is from 1986.


