potion (n.)

c.1300, pocioun medicinal drink, from Old French pocion potion, draught, medicine (12c.), from Latin
potionem (nominative potio) a potion, a drinking, also poisonous draught, magic potion, from potus,
irregular past participle of potare to drink, from PIE root *po(i)- to drink (cognates: Sanskrit
pati drinks, panam beverage; Greek pinein to drink, poton that which one drinks, potos drinking
bout; Old Church Slavonic piti to drink, pivo beverage). Potus as a past participle adjective in
Latin meant drunken.


potation (n.)

early 15c., from Old French potacion, from Latin potationem (nom. potatio) a drinking; poisonous
drink, potion, noun of action from past participle stem of potare to drink (see potion).


philtre (n.)

also philter, love potion, 1580s, from Middle French philtre (1560s), from Latin philtrum (plural
philtra) love potion, from Greek philtron a love-charm, literally to make oneself beloved, from
philein to love (from philos loving; see philo-) + instrumental suffix -tron.


venom (n.)

mid-13c., venim, venym, poison secreted by some animals and transferred by biting, from Anglo-French
and Old French venim, venin poison; malice, from Vulgar Latin *venimen (source also of Italian
veleno, Spanish veneno), from Latin venenum poison, earlier (pre-classical) drug, medical potion,
also charm, seduction, probably originally love potion, from PIE *wenes-no-, from root *wen- (1) to
strive after, wish, desire (see Venus). Variously deformed in post-Latin languages, apparently by
dissimilation. Modern spelling in English from late 14c. The meaning bitter, virulent feeling or
language is first recorded c.1300.


poison (n.)

c.1200, a deadly potion or substance, also figuratively, from Old French poison, puison (12c.,
Modern French poison) a drink, especially a medical drink, later a (magic) potion, poisonous drink
(14c.), from Latin potionem (nominative potio) a drinking, a drink, also poisonous drink (Cicero),
from potare to drink (see potion).    For form evolution from Latin to French, compare raison from
rationem. The Latin word also is the source of Old Spanish pozon, Italian pozione, Spanish pocion.
The more usual Indo-European word for this is represented in English by virus. The Old English word
was ator (see attercop) or lybb. Slang sense of alcoholic drink first attested 1805, American
English.    For sense evolution, compare Old French enerber, enherber to kill with poisonous plants.
In many Germanic languages poison is named by a word equivalent to English gift (such as Old High
German gift, German Gift, Danish and Swedish gift; Dutch gift, vergift). This shift might have been
partly euphemistic, partly by influence of Greek dosis a portion prescribed, literally a giving,
used by Galen and other Greek physicians to mean an amount of medicine (see dose (n.)).
Figuratively from late 15c.; of persons by 1910. As an adjective from 1520s; with plant names from
18c. Poison ivy first recorded 1784; poison oak is from 1743. Poison gas first recorded 1915.
Poison-pen (letter) popularized 1913 by a notorious criminal case in Pennsylvania, U.S.; the phrase
dates to 1898.


concoction (n.)

1530s, digestion, from Latin concoctionem (nominative concoctio) digestion, noun of action from past
participle stem of concoquere (see concoct). Meaning preparation of a medicinal potion is from 1851;
sense of a made-up story is from 1823.


potable (adj.)

early 15c., from Old French potable (14c.) and directly from Late Latin potabilis drinkable, from
Latin potare to drink (see potion).


medicine (n.)

c.1200, medical treatment, cure, remedy, also used figuratively, of spiritual remedies, from Old
French medecine (Modern French m&#233;dicine) medicine, art of healing, cure, treatment, potion,
from Latin medicina the healing art, medicine; a remedy, also used figuratively, perhaps originally
ars medicina the medical art, from fem. of medicinus (adj.) of a doctor, from medicus a physician
(see medical); though OED finds evidence for this is wanting. Meaning a medicinal potion or plaster
in English is mid-14c.    To take (one's) medicine submit to something disagreeable is first
recorded 1865. North American Indian medicine-man shaman is first attested 1801, from American
Indian adoption of the word medicine in sense of magical influence. The U.S.-Canadian boundary they
called Medicine Line (first attested 1910), because it conferred a kind of magic protection:
punishment for crimes committed on one side of it could be avoided by crossing over to the other.
Medicine show traveling show meant to attract a crowd so patent medicine can be sold to them is
American English, 1938. Medicine ball stuffed leather ball used for exercise is from 1889.    It is
called a medicine ball and it got that title from Prof. Roberts, now of Springfield, whose fame is
widespread, and whose bright and peculiar dictionary of terms for his prescription department in
physical culture is taught in every first-class conducted Y.M.C.A. gymnasium in America. Prof.
Roberts calls it a medicine ball because playful exercise with it invigorates the body, promotes
digestion, and restores and preserves one's health. [Scientific American Supplement, March 16, 1889]


receipt (n.)

late 14c., act of receiving; also statement of ingredients in a potion or medicine; from Anglo-
French or Old North French receite receipt, recipe, prescription (c.1300), altered (by influence of
receit he receives, from Vulgar Latin *recipit) from Old French recete, from Latin recepta received,
fem. past participle of recipere (see receive). Meaning written acknowledgment of money or goods
received is from c.1600.


imbibe (v.)

late 14c., from Old French imbiber, embiber to soak into, from Latin imbibere absorb, drink in,
inhale, from assimilated form of in- into, in, on, upon (see in- (2)) + bibere to drink, related to
potare to drink, from PIE *po(i)- to drink (see potion). Figurative sense of mentally drink in
(knowledge, ideas, etc.) was the main one in classical Latin, first attested in English 1550s.
Related: Imbibed; imbibing.


symposium (n.)

1580s, account of a gathering or party, from Latin symposium drinking party, symposium, from Greek
symposion drinking party, convivial gathering of the educated (related to sympotes drinking
companion), from assimilated form of syn- together (see syn-) + posis a drinking, from a stem of
Aeolic ponen to drink, cognate with Latin potare to drink (see potion).    The symposium usually
followed a dinner, for the Greeks did not drink at meals. Its enjoyment was heightened by
intellectual or agreeable conversation, by the introduction of music or dancers, and by other
amusements. [Century Dictionary]  The sense of a meeting on some subject is from 1784. Reflecting
the Greek fondness for mixing wine and intellectual discussion, the modern sense is especially from
the word being used as a title for one of Plato's dialogues. Greek plural is symposia, and the
leader of one is a symposiarch (c.1600 in English). Related: Symposiac (adj.); symposial.


