practically (adv.)

1620s, in a practical manner, from practical + -ly (2). Meaning for practical purposes, as good as
is from 1748; loosened sense of almost is from 1869.


practical (adj.)

early 15c., practicale of or pertaining to matters of practice; applied, with -al (1) + earlier
practic (adj.) dealing with practical matters, applied, not merely theoretical (early 15c.), or
practic (n.) method, practice, use (late 14c.). In some cases directly from Old French practique
(adj.) fit for action, earlier pratique (13c.) and Medieval Latin practicalis, from Late Latin
practicus practical, active, from Greek praktikos fit for action, fit for business; business-like,
practical; active, effective, vigorous, from praktos done; to be done, verbal adjective of prassein,
prattein to do, act, effect, accomplish.


practicality (n.)

1809, from practical + -ity. Related: Practicalities.


practic (n.)

late 14c., a way of doing something, method; practice, custom, usage; also an applied science; from
Old French practique practice, usage (13c.) and directly from Medieval Latin practica practice,
practical knowledge, ultimately from Greek praktike practical (as opposed to theoretical; see
practical). From early 15c. as practical aspect or application of something; practice as opposed to
theory; also, knowledge of the practical aspect of something, practical experience.


practice (v.)

c.1400, to do, act; early 15c., to follow or employ; to carry on a profession, especially medicine,
from Old French pratiser, practiser to practice, alteration of practiquer, from Medieval Latin
practicare to do, perform, practice, from Late Latin practicus practical, from Greek praktikos
practical (see practical).    From early 15c. as to perform repeatedly to acquire skill, to learn by
repeated performance; mid-15c. as to perform, to work at, exercise. Related: Practiced; practicing.


chiropractic

coined in American English, 1898 (adj.); 1899 (n.), from chiro- hand + praktikos practical (see
practical), the whole of it loosely meant as done by hand.


solvitur ambulando

an appeal to practical experience for a solution or proof, Latin, literally (the problem) is solved
by walking, originally in reference to the proof by Diogenes the Cynic of the possibility of motion.


Cyrene

ancient Greek colony in Libya; the name is of unknown origin. Cyrenaic referred to the philosophy
(practical hedonism) of Aristippus of Cyrene (c.435-c.356 B.C.E.).


applied (adj.)

put to practical use, (as opposed to abstract or theoretical), 1650s, from past participle of apply.
Earlier it was used in a sense of folded (c.1500).


impractical (adj.)

1823, from assimilated form of in- (1) not, opposite of + practical. Impracticable in the same sense
dates from 1670s.


realistic (adj.)

true to reality (of art, literature, etc.), 1829; involving a practical view of life (opposed to
idealistic), 1831; from realist + -ic. Related: Realistically.


pragmatical (adj.)

1590s, concerned with practical results, from Latin pragmaticus (see pragmatic) + -al (1). Related:
Pragmatically.


hard-headed (adj.)

also hardheaded, 1580s, stubborn, from hardhead dull person (1510s), from hard + head (n.). Meaning
practical is attested from 1779.


skilled (adj.)

1550s, past participle adjective from skill (v.) to have personal and practical knowledge (c.1200),
from Old Norse skilja separate, part, divide; break off, break up; part company, take leave;
discern, distinguish; understand, find out; decide, settle, from the source of skill (n.).


practicum (n.)

1904, from Late Latin practicum, neuter of practicus (see practical). Compare German praktikum.


league (n.2)

distance of about three miles, late 14c., ultimately from Late Latin leuga (source also of French
lieue, Spanish legua, Italian lega), said by Roman writers to be from Gaulish. A vague measure
(perhaps originally an hour's hike) never in official use in England, where it is recorded more
often in poetic than in practical writing.


practicable (adj.)

1670s, from Middle French pratiquable (1590s), from pratiquer to practice, from Medieval Latin
practicare to practice (see practical). Related: practicableness (1640s).


technique (n.)

1817, at first especially in criticism of art and music, from French technique formal practical
details in artistic expression (18c.), noun use of technique (adj.) of art, technical, from Greek
tekhnikos pertaining to art, from tekhne art, skill, craft in work (see techno-).


doctrinaire (n.)

1820, from French doctrinaire impractical person, originally adherent of doctrines (14c.), from
Latin doctrina (see doctrine).    At first used in the context of French politics, contemptuously
applied by rival factions to those who tried to reconcile liberty with royal authority after 1815.
Hence, anyone who applies doctrine without making allowance for practical considerations (1831). As
an adjective, from 1834.


realpolitik (n.)

1914, from German Realpolitik, which can be translated as practical politics. See real (adj.) +
politics.


academic (adj.)

1580s, relating to an academy, also collegiate, scholarly, from Latin academicus of the Academy,
from academia (see academy). Meaning theoretical, not practical, not leading to a decision (such as
university debates or classroom legal exercises) is from 1886. Academic freedom is attested from
1901. Related: Academically.


speculative (adj.)

late 14c., contemplative, also purely scientific, in theory only (opposed to practical), from Old
French speculatif worth great attention; theoretical, or directly from Late Latin speculativus, from
past participle stem of speculari (see speculation). Meaning given to (financial) speculation is
from 1763. Related: Speculatively.


experiment (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French esperment practical knowledge, cunning, enchantment; trial, proof,
example, lesson, from Latin experimentum a trial, test, proof, experiment, noun of action from
experiri to test, try (see experience (n.)).


practice (n.)

early 15c., practise, practical application, originally especially of medicine but also alchemy,
education, etc.; from Old French pratiser, from Medieval Latin practicare (see practice (v.)). From
early 15c. often assimilated in spelling to nouns in -ice. Also as practic, which survived in
parallel into 19c.


liberal arts

late 14c., translating Latin artes liberales; the seven attainments directed to intellectual
enlargement, not immediate practical purpose, and thus deemed worthy of a free man (liberal in this
sense is opposed to servile or mechanical). They were divided into the trivium -- grammar, logic,
rhetoric (see trivial) -- and the quadrivium -- arithmetic, geometry, music, astronomy.


savvy (n.)

1785, practical sense, intelligence; also a verb, to know, to understand; West Indies pidgin
borrowing of French savez(-vous)? do you know? or Spanish sabe (usted) you know, both from Vulgar
Latin *sapere, from Latin sapere be wise, be knowing (see sapient). The adjective is first recorded
1905, from the noun. Related: Savvily; savviness.


prudence (n.)

mid-14c. (c.1200 as a surname), mid-14c., intelligence; discretion, foresight; wisdom to see what is
suitable or profitable; also one of the four cardinal virtues, wisdom to see what is virtuous; from
Old French prudence (13c.) and directly from Latin prudentia a foreseeing, foresight, sagacity,
practical judgment, contraction of providentia foresight (see providence). Secondary sense of wisdom
(late 14c.) is preserved in jurisprudence.


landfall (n.)

sighting of land, 1620s, also the first land 'made' on a sea voyage; from land (v.1) + fall (v.) in
the sense of happen. From the days of imprecise nautical navigation.   Land-fall. The first land
discovered after a sea voyage. Thus a good land fall implies the land expected or desired; a bad
landfall the reverse. [John Hamilton Moore, The New Practical Navigator, London, 1814]    Of
hurricanes, by 1932.


Sophia

fem. proper name, from Greek sophia skill, knowledge of, acquaintance with; sound judgement,
practical wisdom; cunning, shrewdness; philosophy, also wisdom personified, abstract noun from
sophos wise (see sophist). Saint Sophia in ancient church names and place names in the East is not
necessarily a reference to a person; the phrase also is the English translation of the Greek for
divine wisdom, holy wisdom, to which churches were dedicated.


praxis (n.)

1580s, from Medieval Latin praxis practice, exercise, action (mid-13c., opposite of theory), from
Greek praxis practice, action, doing, from stem of prassein, prattein to do, to act (see practical).


snooker (n.)

1889, the game and the word said in an oft-told story to have been invented in India by British
officers as a diversion from billiards. The name is perhaps a reference (with regard to the rawness
of play by a fellow officer) to British slang snooker newly joined cadet, first-term student at the
R.M. Academy (1872). Tradition ascribes the coinage to Col. Sir Neville Chamberlain (not the later
prime minister of the same name), at the time subaltern in the Devonshire Regiment in Jubbulpore.
One of the first descriptions of the game is in A.W. Drayson's The Art  of Practical Billiards for
Amateurs (1889), which states in a footnote The rules of the game of snooker are the copyright of
Messrs. Burroughes &amp; Watts, from whom they may be obtained, they being manufacturers of billiard
tables.


snooker (v.)

to cheat, early 1900s, from snooker (n.). Related: Snookered; snookering.    One of the great
amusements of this game is, by accuracy in strength, to place the white ball so close behind a pool
ball that the next player cannot hit a pyramid ball, he being snookered from all of them. If he fail
to strike a pyramid ball, this failure counts one to the adversary. If, however, in attempting to
strike a pyramid ball off a cushion, he strike a pool ball, his adversary is credited with as many
points as the pool ball that is struck would count if pocketed by rule. [Maj.-Gen. A.W. Drayson, The
Art of Practical Billiards for Amateurs, 1889]


joke (n.)

1660s, joque, a jest, something done to excite laughter, from Latin iocus joke, sport, pastime, from
PIE root *yek- (1) to speak (cognates: Breton iez language, Old High German jehan to say, German
Beichte confession).    Originally a colloquial or slang word. Meaning something not to be taken
seriously is 1791. Practical joke trick played on someone for the sake of a laugh at his expense is
from 1804 (earlier handicraft joke, 1741). Black joke is old slang for smutty song (1730s), from use
of that phrase in the refrain of a then-popular song as a euphemism for the monosyllable.


theoretical (adj.)

1610s, contemplative, with -al (1) + Late Latin theoreticus of or pertaining to theory, from Greek
theoretikos contemplative, speculative, pertaining to theory (by Aristotle contrasted to praktikos),
from theoretos that may be seen or considered, from theorein to consider, look at (see theory).
Meaning pertaining to theory, making deductions from theory not from fact (opposed to practical) is
from 1650s; earlier in this sense was theorical (c.1500). Meaning ideal, hypothetical is from 1790s
(implied in theoretically). Related: theoretician.


pragmatic (adj.)

1610s, meddlesome, impertinently busy, short for earlier pragmatical, or else from Middle French
pragmatique (15c.), from Latin pragmaticus skilled in business or law, from Greek pragmatikos fit
for business, active, business-like; systematic, from pragma (genitive pragmatos) a deed, act; that
which has been done; a thing, matter, affair, especially an important one; also a euphemism for
something bad or disgraceful; in plural, circumstances, affairs (public or private), often in a bad
sense, trouble, literally a thing done, from stem of prassein/prattein to do, act, perform (see
practical). Meaning matter-of-fact is from 1853. In some later senses from German pragmatisch.


bootstrap (n.)

also boot-strap, tab or loop at the back of the top of a men's boot, which the wearer hooked a
finger through to pull the boots on, 1870, from boot (n.) + strap (n.).    Circa 1900, to pull
(oneself) up by (one's) bootstraps was used figuratively of an impossible task (Among the practical
questions at the end of chapter one of Steele's Popular Physics schoolbook (1888) is, 30. Why can
not a man lift himself by pulling up on his boot-straps?). By 1916 its meaning expanded to include
better oneself by rigorous, unaided effort. The meaning fixed sequence of instructions to load the
operating system of a computer (1953) is from the notion of the first-loaded program pulling itself,
and the rest, up by the bootstrap.


science (n.)

mid-14c., what is known, knowledge (of something) acquired by study; information; also assurance of
knowledge, certitude, certainty, from Old French science knowledge, learning, application; corpus of
human knowledge (12c.), from Latin scientia knowledge, a knowing; expertness, from sciens (genitive
scientis) intelligent, skilled, present participle of scire to know, probably originally to separate
one thing from another, to distinguish, related to scindere to cut, divide, from PIE root *skei- to
cut, to split (cognates: Greek skhizein to split, rend, cleave, Gothic skaidan, Old English sceadan
to divide, separate; see shed (v.)).    From late 14c. in English as book-learning, also a
particular branch of knowledge or of learning; also skillfulness, cleverness; craftiness. From
c.1400 as experiential knowledge; also a skill, handicraft; a trade. From late 14c. as collective
human knowledge (especially that gained by systematic observation, experiment, and reasoning).
Modern (restricted) sense of body of regular or methodical observations or propositions concerning a
particular subject or speculation is attested from 1725; in 17c.-18c. this concept commonly was
called philosophy. Sense of non-arts studies is attested from 1670s.    Science, since people must
do it, is a socially embedded activity. It progresses by hunch, vision, and intuition. Much of its
change through time does not record a closer approach to absolute truth, but the alteration of
cultural contexts that influence it so strongly. Facts are not pure and unsullied bits of
information; culture also influences what we see and how we see it. Theories, moreover, are not
inexorable inductions from facts. The most creative theories are often imaginative visions imposed
upon facts; the source of imagination is also strongly cultural. [Stephen Jay Gould, introduction to
The Mismeasure of Man, 1981]   <hr />   In science you must not talk before you know. In art you
must not talk before you do. In literature you must not talk before you think. [John Ruskin, The
Eagle's Nest, 1872]    The distinction is commonly understood as between theoretical truth (Greek
episteme) and methods for effecting practical results (tekhne), but science sometimes is used for
practical applications and art for applications of skill. To blind (someone) with science confuse by
the use of big words or complex explanations is attested from 1937, originally noted as a phrase
from Australia and New Zealand.


sensible (adj.)

late 14c., capable of sensation or feeling; also capable of being sensed or felt, perceptible to the
senses, hence easily understood; logical, reasonable, from Late Latin sensibilis having feeling,
perceptible by the senses, from sensus, past participle of sentire perceive, feel (see sense (n.)).
Of persons, aware, cognizant (of something) early 15c.; having good sense, capable of reasoning,
discerning, clever, mid-15c. Of clothes, shoes, etc., practical rather than fashionable it is
attested from 1855.    Other Middle English senses included susceptible to injury or pain (early
15c., now gone with sensitive); worldly, temporal, outward (c.1400); carnal, unspiritual (early
15c., now gone with sensual). Related: Sensibleness.


telephone (n.)

1835, system for conveying words over distance by musical notes (devised in 1828 by French composer
Jean-Fran&#231;ois Sudr&eacute; (1787-1862); each tone played over several octaves represented a
letter of the alphabet), from French t&eacute;l&eacute;phone (c.1830), from t&eacute;l&eacute;- far
(see tele-) + phone sound (see fame (n.)). Sudr&eacute;'s system never proved practical. Also used
of other apparatus early 19c., including instrument similar to a foghorn for signaling from ship to
ship (1844). The electrical communication tool was first described in modern form by Philip Reis
(1861); developed by Scottish-born inventor Alexander Graham Bell (1847-1922), and so called by him
from 1876.


lurch (n.1)

sudden pitch to one side, 1784, from earlier lee-larches (1765), a nautical term for the sudden roll
which a ship makes to lee-ward in a high sea, when a large wave strikes her, and bears her weather-
side violently up, which depresses the other in proportion [Complete Dictionary of Arts and
Sciences, London 1765]; perhaps from French lacher to let go, from Latin laxus (see lax).    When a
Ship is brought by the Lee, it is commonly occa&#383;sioned by a large Sea, and by the Neglect of
the Helm's-man. When the Wind is two or three Points on the Quarter, the Ship taking a Lurch, brings
the Wind on the other Side, and lays the Sails all dead to the Ma&#383;t; as the Yards are braced
up, &#383;he then having no Way, and the Helm being of no Service, I would therefore brace about the
Head &#383;ails &#383;harp the other Way .... [John Hamilton Moore, Practical Navigator, 8th ed.,
1784]


astrology (n.)

late 14c., from Latin astrologia astronomy, the science of the heavenly bodies, from Greek
astrologia telling of the stars, from astron star (see astro-) + -logia treating of (see -logy).
Originally identical with astronomy, it had also a special sense of practical astronomy, astronomy
applied to prediction of events. This was divided into natural astrology the calculation and
foretelling of natural phenomenon (tides, eclipses, etc.), and judicial astrology the art of judging
occult influences of stars on human affairs (also known as astromancy, 1650s). Differentiation
between astrology and astronomy began late 1400s and by 17c. this word was limited to reading
influences of the stars and their effects on human destiny.


at (prep.)

Old English &aelig;t, from Proto-Germanic *at (cognates: Old Norse, Gothic at, Old Frisian et, Old
High German az), from PIE *ad- to, near, at (cognates: Latin ad to, toward Sanskrit adhi near; see
ad-).    Lost in German and Dutch, which use their equivalent of to; in Scandinavian, however, to
has been lost and at fills its place. In choosing between at church, in church, etc. at is properly
distinguished from in or on by involving some practical connection; a worshipper is at church; a
tourist is in the church.    The colloquial use of at after where (where it's at) is attested from
1859. At last is recorded from late 13c.; adverbial phrase at least was in use by 1775. At in Middle
English was used freely with prepositions (as in at after, which is in Shakespeare), but this has
faded with the exception of at about, which was used in modern times by Trollope, Virginia Woolfe,
D.H. Lawrence, and Evelyn Waugh, but nonetheless is regarded as a sign of incompetent writing by my
copy editor bosses.


telegraph (n.)

1794, semaphor apparatus (hence the Telegraph Hill in many cities), literally that which writes at a
distance, from French t&eacute;l&eacute;graphe, from t&eacute;l&eacute;- far (from Greek tele-; see
tele-) + -graphe (see -graphy). The signaling device had been invented in France in 1791 by the
brothers Chappe, who had called it tachygraphe, literally that which writes fast, but the better
name was suggested to them by French diplomat Comte Andr&eacute;-Fran&ccedil;ois Miot de
M&eacute;lito (1762-1841). First applied 1797 to an experimental electric telegraph (designed by Dr.
Don Francisco Salva at Barcelona); the practical version was developed 1830s by U.S. inventor Samuel
F.B. Morse (1791-1872). Meaning telegraphic message is from 1821. Related: Telegraphy.


business (n.)

Old English bisignes (Northumbrian) care, anxiety, occupation, from bisig careful, anxious, busy,
occupied, diligent (see busy (adj.)) + -ness. Middle English sense of state of being much occupied
or engaged (mid-14c.) is obsolete, replaced by busyness.    Sense of a person's work, occupation is
first recorded late 14c. (in late Old English bisig (adj.) appears as a noun with the sense
occupation, state of employment). Meaning what one is about at the moment is from 1590s. Sense of
trade, commercial engagements is first attested 1727. In 17c. it also could mean sexual intercourse.
Modern two-syllable pronunciation is 17c.   Business card first attested 1840; business letter from
1766. Business end the practical or effective part (of something) is American English, by 1874.
Phrase business as usual attested from 1865. To mean business be intent on serious action is from
1856. To mind (one's) own business is from 1620s. Johnson's dictionary also has busiless At leisure;
without business; unemployed.


abstract (adj.)

late 14c., originally in grammar (of nouns), from Latin abstractus drawn away, past participle of
abstrahere to drag away, detach, pull away, divert; also figuratively, from ab(s)- away (see ab-) +
trahere draw (see tract (n.1)).    Meaning withdrawn or separated from material objects or practical
matters is from mid-15c. That of difficult to understand, abstruse is from c.1400. Specifically in
reference to modern art, it dates from 1914; abstract expressionism as an American-based uninhibited
approach to art exemplified by Jackson Pollock is from 1952, but the term itself had been used in
the 1920s of Kandinsky and others.    Oswald Herzog, in an article on Der Abstrakte Expressionismus
(Sturm, heft 50, 1919) gives us a statement which with equal felicity may be applied to the artistic
attitude of the Dadaists. Abstract Expressionism is perfect Expressionism, he writes. It is pure
creation. It casts spiritual processes into a corporeal mould. It does not borrow objects from the
real world; it creates its own objects .... The abstract reveals the will of the artist; it becomes
expression. ... [William A. Drake, The Life and Deeds of Dada, 1922]   <hr />   Then, that art we
have called abstract for want of any possible descriptive term, with which we have been patient,
and, even, appreciative, getting high stimulation by the new Guggenheim non-objective Art Museum, is
reflected in our examples of surrealism, dadaism, and what-not, to assert our acquaintance in every
art, fine or other. [Report of the Art Reference Department of Pratt Institute Free Library for year
ending June 30, 1937]


art (n.)

early 13c., skill as a result of learning or practice, from Old French art (10c.), from Latin artem
(nominative ars) work of art; practical skill; a business, craft, from PIE *ar-ti- (cognates:
Sanskrit rtih manner, mode; Greek arti just, artios complete, suitable, artizein to prepare; Latin
artus joint; Armenian arnam make; German art manner, mode), from root *ar- fit together, join (see
arm (n.1)).    In Middle English usually with a sense of skill in scholarship and learning (c.1300),
especially in the seven sciences, or liberal arts. This sense remains in Bachelor of Arts, etc.
Meaning human workmanship (as opposed to nature) is from late 14c. Sense of cunning and trickery
first attested c.1600. Meaning skill in creative arts is first recorded 1610s; especially of
painting, sculpture, etc., from 1660s. Broader sense of the word remains in artless.   Fine arts,
those which appeal to the mind and the imagination first recorded 1767. Expression art for art's
sake (1824) translates French l'art pour l'art. First record of art critic is from 1847. Arts and
crafts decorative design and handcraft first attested in the Arts and Crafts Exhibition Society,
founded in London, 1888.    Supreme art is a traditional statement of certain heroic and religious
truths, passed on from age to age, modified by individual genius, but never abandoned. The revolt of
individualism came because the tradition had become degraded, or rather because a spurious copy had
been accepted in its stead. [William Butler Yeats]


point (n.)

c.1200, minute amount, single item in a whole; sharp end of a sword, etc., a merger of two words,
both ultimately from Latin pungere prick, pierce, puncture (see pungent). The Latin neuter past
participle punctum was used as a noun, meaning small hole made by pricking, subsequently extended to
anything that looked like one, hence, dot, particle, etc. This yielded Old French point dot;
smallest amount, which was borrowed in Middle English by c.1300.    Meanwhile the Latin fem. past
participle of pungere was puncta, which was used in Medieval Latin to mean sharp tip, and became Old
French pointe point of a weapon, vanguard of an army, which also passed into English, early 14c.
The senses have merged in English, but remain distinct in French. Extended senses are from the
notion of minute, single, or separate items in an extended whole. Meaning small mark, dot in English
is mid-14c. Meaning distinguishing feature is recorded from late 15c. Meaning a unit of score in a
game is first recorded 1746. As a typeface unit (in Britain and U.S., one twelfth of a pica), it
went into use in U.S. 1883. As a measure of weight for precious stones (one one-hundredth of a
carat) it is recorded from 1931.   The point the matter being discussed is attested from late 14c.;
meaning sense, purpose, advantage (usually in the negative, as in what's the point?) is first
recorded 1903. Point of honor (1610s) translates French point d'honneur. Point of no return (1941)
is originally aviators' term for the point in a flight before which any engine failure requires an
immediate turn around and return to the point of departure, and beyond which such return is no
longer practical.


nostalgia (n.)

1770, severe homesickness considered as a disease, Modern Latin, coined 1668 in a dissertation on
the topic at the University of Basel by scholar Johannes Hofer (1669-1752) as a rendering of German
heimweh (for which see home + woe). From Greek algos pain, grief, distress (see -algia) + nostos
homecoming, from PIE *nes- to return safely home (cognate with Old Norse nest food for a journey,
Sanskrit nasate approaches, joins, German genesen to recover, Gothic ganisan to heal, Old English
genesen to recover). French nostalgie is in French army medical manuals by 1754.    Originally in
reference to the Swiss and said to be peculiar to them and often fatal, whether by its own action or
in combination with wounds or disease. By 1830s the word was used of any intense homesickness: that
of sailors, convicts, African slaves. The bagpipes produced the same effects sometimes in the Scotch
regiments while serving abroad [Penny Magazine, Nov. 14, 1840]. It is listed among the endemic
diseases in the Cyclopaedia of Practical Medicine [London, 1833, edited by three M.D.s], which
defines it as The concourse of depressing symptoms which sometimes arise in persons who are absent
from their native country, when they are seized with a longing desire of returning to their home and
friends and the scenes their youth .... It was a military medical diagnosis principally, and was
considered a serious medical problem by the North in the American Civil War:    In the first two
years of the war, there were reported 2588 cases of nostalgia, and 13 deaths from this cause. These
numbers scarcely express the real extent to which nostalgia influenced the sickness and mortality of
the army. To the depressing influence of home-sickness must be attributed the fatal result in many
cases which might otherwise have terminated favorably. [Sanitary Memoirs of the War, U.S. Sanitary
Commission, N.Y.: 1867]    Transferred sense (the main modern one) of wistful yearning for the past
first recorded 1920, perhaps from such use of nostalgie in French literature. The longing for a
distant place also necessarily involves a separation in time.


