pragmaticism (n.)

1865, officiousness, from pragmatic + -ism. From 1905 as a term in philosophy by American
philosopher C.S. Peirce (1839-1914).


pragmatical (adj.)

1590s, concerned with practical results, from Latin pragmaticus (see pragmatic) + -al (1). Related:
Pragmatically.


pragmatic (adj.)

1610s, meddlesome, impertinently busy, short for earlier pragmatical, or else from Middle French
pragmatique (15c.), from Latin pragmaticus skilled in business or law, from Greek pragmatikos fit
for business, active, business-like; systematic, from pragma (genitive pragmatos) a deed, act; that
which has been done; a thing, matter, affair, especially an important one; also a euphemism for
something bad or disgraceful; in plural, circumstances, affairs (public or private), often in a bad
sense, trouble, literally a thing done, from stem of prassein/prattein to do, act, perform (see
practical). Meaning matter-of-fact is from 1853. In some later senses from German pragmatisch.


pragmatism (n.)

matter-of-fact treatment, 1825, from Greek pragmat-, stem of pragma that which has been done (see
pragmatic) + -ism. As a philosophical doctrine, 1898, said to be from 1870s; probably from German
Pragmatismus. As a name for a political theory, from 1951. Related: Pragmatist (1630s as busybody;
1892 as adherent of a pragmatic philosophy).


humanism (n.)

along with humanist used in a variety of philosophical and theological senses 16c.-18c., especially
ones imitating Latin humanitas education befitting a cultivated man. See human + -ism. Main modern
sense in reference to revival of interest in the Classics traces to c.1860; as a pragmatic system of
thought, defined 1907 by co-founder F.C.S. Schiller as: The perception that the philosophical
problem concerns human beings striving to comprehend a world of human experience by the resources of
human minds.


ladder (n.)

Old English hl&aelig;der ladder, steps, from Proto-Germanic *khlaidri (cognates: Old Frisian
hledere, Middle Dutch ledere, Old High German leitara, German Leiter), from PIE root *klei- to lean
(cognates: Greek klimax ladder; see lean (v.)). In late Old English, rungs were
l&aelig;ddrest&aelig;f&aelig; and the side pieces were ledder steles. The belief that walking under
one brings bad luck is attested from 1787, but its origin likely is more pragmatic than symbolic.
Ladder-back (adj.) as a type of chair is from 1898.


