prancer (n.)

1560s, originally thieves' slang for a horse, agent noun from prance (v.).


prance (v.)

late 14c., originally of horses, of unknown origin, perhaps related to Middle English pranken to
show off, from Middle Dutch pronken to strut, parade (see prank); or perhaps from Danish dialectal
prandse to go in a stately manner. Klein suggests Old French paravancier. Related: Pranced;
prancing. As a noun from 1751, from the verb.


galumph (v.)

to prance about in a self-satisfied manner, 1872, coined by Lewis Carroll in Jabberwocky, apparently
by blending gallop and triumph. Related: Galumphing.


major (v.)

focus (one's) studies, 1910, American English, from major (n.) in sense of subject of specialization
(1890). Related: Majored; majoring. Earlier as a verb, in Scottish, to prance about, or walk
backwards and forwards with a military air and step [Jamieson, 1825].


jet (v.)

early 15c., to prance, strut, swagger, from Middle French jeter to throw, thrust, from Late Latin
iectare, abstracted from deiectare, proiectare, etc., in place of Latin iactare toss about,
frequentative of iacere to throw, cast, from PIE root *ye- to do (cognates: Greek iemi, ienai to
send, throw; Hittite ijami I make). Meaning to sprout or spurt forth is from 1690s. Related: Jetted;
jetting.


thresh (v.)

Old English &thorn;rescan, &thorn;erscan, to beat, sift grain by trampling or beating, from Proto-
Germanic *threskan to thresh, originally to tread, to stamp noisily (cognates: Middle Dutch
derschen, Dutch dorschen, Old High German dreskan, German dreschen, Old Norse &thorn;reskja, Swedish
tr&#246;ska, Gothic &thorn;riskan), from PIE root *tere- (1) to rub, turn (see throw (v.)).    The
basic notion is of men or oxen treading out wheat; later, with the advent of the flail, the word
acquired its modern extended sense of to knock, beat, strike. The original Germanic sense is
suggested by the use of the word in Romanic languages that borrowed it, such as Italian trescare to
prance, Old French treschier to dance, Spanish triscar to stamp the feet.


