prank (n.)

a ludicrous trick [Johnson], 1520s, of uncertain origin, perhaps related to obsolete verb prank
decorate, dress up (mid-15c.), related to Middle Low German prank display (compare also Dutch
pronken, German prunken to make a show, to strut). The verb in the modern sense also is from 1520s.
Related: Pranked; pranking.


prankster (n.)

1927, American English, from prank + -ster.


escapade (n.)

1650s, an escape from confinement, from French escapade (16c.) a prank or trick, from Spanish
escapada a prank, flight, an escape, noun use of fem. past participle of escapar to escape, from
Vulgar Latin *excappare (see escape). Or perhaps the French word is via Italian scappata, from
scappare, from the same Vulgar Latin source. Figurative sense (1814) is of breaking loose from rules
or restraints on behavior.


dido (n.)

prank, caper, 1807, American English slang, perhaps from the name of the Carthaginian queen in the
Aeneid. Usually in phrase to cut didoes.


caper (n.2)

by 1590s, playful leap or jump, from caper (v.); meaning prank is from 1840; that of crime is from
1926. To cut capers dance in a frolicsome way is from c.1600.


barring (n.)

late 14c., act of fastening with a bar, verbal noun from bar (v.). Meaning exclusion is from 1630s.
As a preposition, excepting, excluding, it is from late 15c. Schoolhouse prank of barring out the
teacher was in use before 1728.


wedgie (n.)

1940, wedge-heeled shoe, from wedge (n.) + -ie. The underwear prank so called by 1970s, from the
effect it gives the victim.


capriccio (n.)

1690s as a term in music for a kind of free composition, from Italian capriccio sudden start or
motion (see caprice). Earlier it meant prank, trick (1660s); caprice (c.1600).


hot-foot

c.1300 (adv.) hastily, from hot + foot (n.). As a verb, from 1896. As the name of a prank played
with matches, by 1934.


Kilroy

U.S. military graffito character, 1945, said to be either Sgt. Francis J. Kilroy Jr., U.S. Army Air
Transport, whose friend or friends began writing his name everywhere as a prank; or war
materi&eacute;ls inspector James J. Kilroy of Quincy, Mass., who wrote Kilroy was here on everything
he checked.


apple pie

attested from 1580s, from apple + pie; noted by 1893 as a typical American dish. Apple-pie bed as a
name for a childish prank is recorded from 1781; supposedly from the way of making apple turnovers,
but some think it a folk etymology of French nappe pli&eacute;e folded sheet.


gewgaw (n.)

early 13c., giuegaue, contemptuous reduplication, possibly connected with Old French gogue
rejoicing, jubilation; joke, prank, mockery, game; or jou-jou toy, baby-talk word, from jouer to
play, from Latin jocare (see joke).


prance (v.)

late 14c., originally of horses, of unknown origin, perhaps related to Middle English pranken to
show off, from Middle Dutch pronken to strut, parade (see prank); or perhaps from Danish dialectal
prandse to go in a stately manner. Klein suggests Old French paravancier. Related: Pranced;
prancing. As a noun from 1751, from the verb.


gaud (n.)

late 14c., jest, joke, prank, trick; also fraud, deception, trick, artifice. Also large, ornamental
bead in a rosary (mid-14c.); a bauble, trinket, plaything (mid-15c.). In some senses, from gaudy
(n.) (see gaudy). In some, from Latin gaudium joy, gaude rejoice thou (in hymns), or from Old French
gaudie, noun of action from gaudir. As a verb, to furnish with gauds, from late 14c. Related:
Gauded; gauding.


hacker (n.)

a chopper, cutter, perhaps also one who makes hacking tools, early 13c. (as a surname), agent noun
from hack (v.1). Meaning one who gains unauthorized access to computer records is attested by 1983,
agent noun from hack (v.2). Said to be from slightly earlier tech slang sense of one who works like
a hack at writing and experimenting with software, one who enjoys computer programming for its own
sake, 1976, reputedly a usage that evolved at Massachusetts Institute of Technology (however an MIT
student from the late 1960s recalls hack (n.) being used then and there in the general sense of
creative prank, which clouds its sense connection with the writing for hire word, and there may be a
source or an influence here in hack (v.1)).


booby (n.)

1590s, from Spanish bobo stupid person, slow bird (used of various ungainly seabirds), probably from
Latin balbus stammering, from an imitative root (see barbarian).   Booby prize is by 1883: an object
of little value given to the loser of a game; booby trap is 1850, originally a schoolboy prank; the
more lethal sense developed during World War I.    At the end of every session the dominie had the
satirical custom of presenting his tawse as a booby-prize to some idle or stupid lout whom he picked
out as meriting this distinction so that next time they met he might start fresh and fair with new
pair for a new set of classes. [Ascott R. Hope, Dumps, Young England magazine, 1883]


trick (n.)

early 15c., a cheat, a mean ruse, from Old North French trique trick, deceit, treachery, cheating,
from trikier to deceive, to cheat, variant of Old French trichier to cheat, trick, deceive, of
uncertain origin, probably from Vulgar Latin *triccare, from Latin tricari be evasive, shuffle, from
tric&aelig; trifles, nonsense, a tangle of difficulties, of unknown origin.    Meaning a roguish
prank is recorded from 1580s; sense of the art of doing something is first attested 1610s. Meaning
prostitute's client is first attested 1915; earlier it was U.S. slang for a robbery (1865). To do
the trick accomplish one's purpose is from 1812; to miss a trick fail to take advantage of
opportunity is from 1889; from 1872 in reference to playing the card-game of whist, which might be
the original literal sense. Trick-or-treat is recorded from 1942. Trick question is from 1907.


quiz (n.)

brief examination of a student on some subject, 1852, perhaps from quiz (v.), or from slang quiz odd
person (1782, perhaps originally university slang), via the notion of schoolboy prank or joke played
at the expense of a person deemed a quiz (a noun sense attested frequently 1840s).    A Quiz, in the
common acceptation of the word, signifies one who thinks, speaks, or acts differently from the rest
of the world in general. But, as manners and opinions are as various as mankind, it will be
difficult to say who shall be termed a Quiz, and who shall not: each person indiscriminately
applying the name of Quiz to every one who differs from himself .... [The London Magazine, November,
1783]     According to OED, the anecdote that credits this word to a bet by the Dublin theater-
manager Daly or Daley that he could coin a word is regarded by authorities as doubtful and the first
record of it appears to be in 1836 (in Smart's Walker Remodelled; the story is omitted in the
edition of 1840).    The word Quiz is a sort of a kind of a word  That people apply to some being
absurd;  One who seems, as t'were oddly your fancy to strike  In a sort of a fashion you somehow
don't like  A mixture of odd, and of queer, and all that  Which one hates, just, you know, as some
folks hate a cat;  A comical, whimsical, strange, droll -- that is,  You know what I mean; 'tis --
in short, -- 'tis a quiz!    [from Etymology of Quiz, Charles Dibdin, 1842]


