prattle (v.)

1530s, frequentative of prate (q.v.). Related: Prattled; prattling. The noun is attested from 1550s.


echolalia (n.)

1885, from Greek ekho (see echo (n.)) + lalia talk, prattle, a speaking, from lalein to speak,
prattle, of echoic origin.


coprolalia (n.)

obsessive use of obscene language, either through mental illness or perversion, 1886, from French
coprolalie, coined 1885 by de la Tourette, from copro- dung, filth + Greek lalia talk, prattle, a
speaking, from lalein to speak, prattle, of echoic origin.


glossolalia (n.)

speaking in tongues, 1879, from Greek glossa tongue, language (see gloss (n.2)) + lalia talk,
prattle, a speaking, from lalein to speak, prattle, of echoic origin.


lunch (n.)

mid-day repast, 1786, shortened form of luncheon (q.v.). The verb meaning to take to lunch (said to
be from the noun) also is attested from 1786:    PRATTLE. I always to be &#383;ure, makes a point to
keep up the dignity of the family I lives in. Wou'd you take a more &#383;olid refre&#383;hment?--
Have you lunch'd, Mr. Bribe?    BRIBE. Lunch'd O dear! Permit me, my dear Mrs. Prattle, to
refre&#383;h my sponge, upon the honey dew that clings to your ravi&#383;hing pouters. O! Mrs.
Prattle, this &#383;hall be my lunch. (ki&#383;&#383;es)     [The Mode, in William Davies' Plays
Written for a Private Theatre, London, 1786]    But as late as 1817 the only definition of lunch in
Webster's is a large piece of food. OED says in 1820s the word was regarded either as a vulgarism,
or as a fashionable affectation. Related: Lunched; lunching. Lunch money is attested from 1868;
lunch-time (n.) is from 1821; lunch hour is from 1840. Slang phrase out to lunch insane, stupid,
clueless first recorded 1955, on notion of being not there. Old English had nonmete afternoon meal,
literally noon-meat.


squabble (n.)

c.1600, probably from a Scandinavian source and of imitative origin (compare dialectal Swedish
skvabbel a quarrel, a dispute, dialectal German schwabbeln to babble, prattle). The verb also is
from c.1600. Related: Squabbled; squabbling.


charlatan (n.)

1610s, from French charlatan mountebank, babbler (16c.), from Italian ciarlatano a quack, from
ciarlare to prate, babble, from ciarla chat, prattle, perhaps imitative of ducks' quacking. Related:
Charlatanism; charlatanical; charlatanry.


la-la

nonsense refrain in songs, probably from Old English la, a common exclamation; but la-la is
imitative of babbling speech in many languages (compare Greek lalage babble, prattle, Sanskrit
lalalla imitation of stammering Latin lallare to sing to sleep, lull, German lallen to stammer,
Lithuanian laluoti to stammer).


smatter (v.)

early 15c., talk idly, chatter; talk ignorantly or superficially, of uncertain origin, perhaps
imitative. Similar forms are found in Middle High German smetern to chatter and Swedish smattra to
patter, rattle, and compare Danish snaddre chatter, jabber, Dutch snateren, German schnattern
cackle, chatter, prattle. Related: Smattered; smattering.


tattle (v.)

late 15c., to stammer, prattle, in Caxton's translation of Reynard the Fox, probably from Middle
Flemish tatelen to stutter, parallel to Middle Dutch, Middle Low German, East Frisian tateren to
chatter, babble, possibly of imitative origin. The meaning tell tales or secrets is first recorded
1580s. Sense influenced by tittle. Related: Tattled; tattling. As a noun from 1520s. Tattler, the
name of the famous periodical by Addison and Steele (1709-1711), means idle talker, a gossip.


argue (v.)

c.1300, to make reasoned statements to prove or refute a proposition, from Old French arguer
maintain an opinion or view; harry, reproach, accuse, blame (12c.), from Latin argutare to prattle,
prate, frequentative of arguere make clear, make known, prove, declare, demonstrate, from PIE *argu-
yo-, from root *arg- to shine, be white, bright, clear (see argent). Meaning to oppose, dispute is
from late 14c. Related: Argued; arguing.


babble (v.)

mid-13c., babeln to prattle, chatter, akin to other Western European words for stammering and
prattling (cognates: Swedish babbla, Old French babillier) attested from the same era, some of which
probably were borrowed from others, but etymologists cannot now determine which were original.
Probably imitative of baby-talk, in any case (compare Latin babulus babbler, Greek barbaros non-
Greek-speaking). No direct connexion with Babel can be traced; though association with that may have
affected the senses [OED]. Meaning to repeat oneself incoherently, speak foolishly is attested from
c.1400. Related: Babbled; babbler; babbling; babblement.


higgledy-piggledy

confusedly, hurriedly, 1590s, a vocal gesture [OED] probably formed from pig and the animal's
suggestions of mess and disorder. Reduplications in the h-/p- pattern are common (as in hanky-panky,
hocus-pocus, hinch(y)-pinch(y), an obsolete children's game, attested from c.1600).    Edward Moor,
Suffolk Words and Phrases (London, 1823), quotes a list of reduplications from Ray's Collection of
English Words (1768), all said to signify any confusion or mixture; the list has higgledy-piggledy,
hurly-burly, hodge-podge, mingle-mangle, arsy-versy, kim-kam, hub-bub, crawly-mauly, and hab-nab. To
which he might have added, Moor writes, crincum-crankum, crinkle-crankle, flim-flam, fiddle-faddle,
gibble-gabble, harum-scarum, helter-skelter, hiccup-suickup, hocus-pocus, hotch-potch, hugger-
mugger, hum-drum, hum-strum, hurry-scurry, jibber-jabber, prittle-prattle, shilly-shally, tittle-
tattle, and topsy-turvy. Many of them seem to date to the 16th century.


cracker (n.2)

Southern U.S. derogatory term for poor, white trash (1766), probably an agent noun from crack (v.)
in the sense to boast (as in not what it's cracked up to be). Compare Latin crepare to rattle,
crack, creak, with a secondary figurative sense of boast of, prattle, make ado about.I should
explain to your Lordship what is meant by crackers; a name they have got from being great boasters;
they are a lawless set of rascalls on the frontiers of Virginia, Maryland, the Carolinas and
Georgia, who often change their places of abode. [1766, G. Cochrane]  But DARE compares corn-cracker
poor white farmer (1835, U.S. Midwest colloquial). Especially of Georgians by 1808, though often
extended to residents of northern Florida. Another name in mid-19c. use was sand-hiller poor white
in Georgia or South Carolina.    Not very essentially different is the condition of a class of
people living in the pine-barrens nearest the coast [of South Carolina], as described to me by a
rice-planter. They seldom have any meat, he said, except they steal hogs, which belong to the
planters, or their negroes, and their chief diet is rice and milk. They are small, gaunt, and
cadaverous, and their skin is just the color of the sand-hills they live on. They are quite
incapable of applying themselves steadily to any labor, and their habits are very much like those of
the old Indians. [Frederick Law Olmsted, A Journey in the Seaboard Slave States, 1856]


charade (n.)

1776, from French charade (18c.), probably from Proven&ccedil;al charrado long talk, chatter, of
obscure origin, perhaps from charrar to chatter, gossip, of echoic origin. Compare Italian ciarlare,
Spanish charlar to talk, prattle. Originally not silent, but relying rather on enigmatic
descriptions of the words or syllables.    As we have ever made it a Rule to shew our Attention to
the Reader, by 'catching the Manners living, as they rise,' as Mr. Pope expresses it, we think
ourselves obliged to give Place to the following Specimens of a new Kind of SMALL WIT, which, for
some Weeks past, has been the Subject of Conversation in almost every Society, from the Court to the
Cottage. The CHARADE is, in fact, a near Relation of the old Rebus. It is usually formed from a Word
of two Syllables; the first Syllable is described by the Writer; then the second; they are
afterwards united and the whole Word marked out .... [supplement to The Universal Magazine of
Knowledge and Pleasure, volumes 58-59, 1776]    Among the examples given are:    My first makes all
nature appear of one face;  At the next we find music, and beauty and grace;  And, if this Charade
is most easily read,  I think that the third shou'd be thrown at my head.  [The answer is snow-
ball.]    The silent form, the main modern form, was at first a variant known as dumb charades and
at first it was not a speed contest; rather it adhered to the old pattern, and the performing team
acted out all the parts in order before the audience team began to guess.    There is one species of
charade which is performed solely by dumb motions, somewhat resembling the child's game of trades
and professions; but the acting charade is a much more amusing. and more difficult matter. [Goldoni,
and Modern Italian Comedy, in The Foreign And Colonial Quarterly Review, Volume 6, 1846]    An 1850
book, Acting Charades, reports that Charades en Action were all the rage in French society, and that
Lately, the game has been introduced into the drawing-rooms of a few mirth-loving Englishmen. Its
success has been tremendous.  Welsh siarad obviously is a loan-word from French or English, but its
meaning of speak, a talk is closer to the Proven&ccedil;al original.


