precocious (adj.)

1640s, developed before the usual time (of plants), with -ous + Latin praecox (genitive praecocis)
maturing early, from prae before (see pre-) + coquere to ripen, literally to cook (see cook (n.)).
Originally of flowers or fruits. Figurative use, of persons, dates from 1670s. Related:
Precociously; precociousness.


Lolita

fem. proper name, diminutive of Lola. Title and name of character in the 1958 novel by Vladimir
Nabokov (1899-1977) about a precocious schoolgirl seduced by an older man; by 1960 the name was in
widespread figurative use.


precocity (n.)

1630s, from French pr&eacute;cocit&eacute; (17c.), from pr&#233;coce precicious, from Latin
praecocem (nom. praecox); see precocious.


kibitz (v.)

1927, from Yiddish kibitsen to offer gratuitous advice as an outsider, from German kiebitzen to look
on at cards, to kibitz, originally in thieves' cant to visit, from Kiebitz, name of a shore bird
(European pewit, lapwing) with a folk reputation as a meddler, from Middle High German gibitz pewit,
imitative of its cry. Young lapwings are proverbially precocious and active, and were said to run
around with half-shells still on their heads soon after hatching.


apricot (n.)

1550s, abrecock, from Catalan abercoc, related to Portuguese albricoque, from Arabic al-birquq,
through Byzantine Greek berikokkia from Latin (malum) praecoquum early-ripening (fruit) (see
precocious). Form assimilated to French abricot.    Latin praecoquis early-ripe, can probably be
attributed to the fact that the fruit was considered a variety of peach that ripened sooner than
other peaches .... [Barnhart]     The older Latin name for it was prunum Armeniacum or malum
Armeniacum, in reference to supposed origin in Armenia. As a color name, first attested 1906.


dementia (n.)

1806, from Latin dementia madness, insanity, literally a being out of one's mind, from dement-, stem
of demens mad, raving (see dement) + abstract noun suffix -ia. It existed earlier in an anglicized
form, demency (1520s), from French d&eacute;mence. Dementia praecox is a Modern Latin form recorded
from 1899 in English, 1891 in German, from French d&eacute;mence pr&eacute;coce (1857). See
precocious.


