preciseness (n.)

precision, 1560s, from precise + -ness.


precise (adj.)

mid-15c., from Middle French pr&eacute;cis condensed, cut short (14c.) and directly from Medieval
Latin precisus, from Latin praecisus abrupt, abridged, cut off, past participle of praecidere to cut
off, shorten, from prae before (see pre-) + caedere to cut (see -cide; for Latin vowel change, see
acquisition). Related: Precisely (late 14c.).


exact (adj.)

precise, rigorous, accurate, 1530s, from Latin exactus precise, accurate, exact, past participle of
exigere demand, require, literally to drive or force out, also demand, finish, measure, from ex- out
(see ex-) + agere drive, lead, act (see act (n.)).


vernier (n.)

device for making precise measurements, 1766, from name of inventor, French mathematician Pierre
Vernier (1580-1637), who described it in 1631.


characterization (n.)

1560s, marking out of a precise form; see characterize + -ation. Meaning description of essential
features is from 1814.


precis (n.)

1760, from French noun use of Middle French pr&eacute;cis cut short, condensed (see precise). As a
verb, from 1856.


strait-laced (adj.)

early 15c., of stays or bodices, made close and tight; see strait (adj.) + lace (v.). Figurative
sense of over-precise, prudish, strict in manners or morals is from 1550s.


imagism (n.)

name of a movement in poetry that sought clarity of expression through use of precise visual images,
hard light, clear edges, coined 1912 by Ezra Pound; see image + -ism. Related: Imagist.


imprecise (adj.)

1805, from assimilated form of in- (1) not, opposite of + precise. Related: Imprecisely.


pernickety (adj.)

1808 (pernicktie, in Jamieson), precise, fastidious, extended form of Scottish pernicky, of
uncertain origin, perhaps somehow from particular.


precisian (n.)

one devoted to precision, 1570s, from precise + -ian on model of Christian, etc.


clean-cut (adj.)

precise, 1829 (of turf), from clean (adv.) + past participle of cut (v.).


nick (v.)

1520s, to make a notch in, from nick (n.). Sense of to steal is from 1869, probably from earlier
slang sense of to catch, take unawares, arrest (1620s). The precise sense connection is unclear.
Related: Nicked; nicking.


chronograph (n.)

precise time-measuring device, 1868, from chrono- time + -graph instrument for recording; something
written. Compare Greek khronographos recording time and events (adj.); a chronicler (n.).


beautician (n.)

first recorded 1924, American English (the Cleveland, Ohio, telephone directory, to be precise),
from beauty + ending as in technician. Beauty salon is from 1922, a substitution for prosaic beauty
shop (1901).


precision (n.)

1630s, a cutting off (mentally), abstraction, from French pr&eacute;cision (16c.) and directly from
Latin praecisionem (nominative praecisio) a cutting off, noun of action from past participle stem of
praecidere (see precise). Meaning preciseness is from 1740.


nitrous (adj.)

c.1600, from Latin nitrosus, from nitrum (see nitre). Originally of nitre, pertaining to nitre; more
precise use in chemistry (designating a compound in which the nitrogen has a lower valence than the
corresponding nitric compound) is from 1780s. Nitrous oxide attested from 1800.


bark (n.2)

any small ship, early 15c., from Middle French barque (15c.), from Late Latin barca (c.400 C.E.),
probably cognate with Vulgar Latin *barica (see barge). More precise sense of three-masted ship
(17c.) often is spelled barque to distinguish it.


definite (adj.)

1550s, from Latin definitus defined, bounded, limited, past participle of definire (see define).
Definite means defined, clear, precise, unmistakable; definitive means having the character of
finality.


locust (n.1)

grasshopper, early 14c., borrowed earlier in Old French form languste (c.1200), from Latin locusta
locust, lobster (see lobster).In the Hebrew Bible there are nine different names for the insect or
for particular species or varieties; in the English Bible they are rendered sometimes 'locust,'
sometimes 'beetle,' 'grasshopper,' 'caterpillar,' 'palmerworm,' etc. The precise application of
several names is unknown. [OED]


particular (adj.)

late 14c., pertaining to a single thing or person, from Old French particuler (14c., Modern French
particulier) and directly from Late Latin particularis of a part, concerning a small part, from
Latin particula particle (see particle). Sense of precise, exacting first recorded 1814.


prim

1680s (v.) to assume a formal, precise demeanor, perhaps from French prim thin, small, delicate,
from Old French prim fine, delicate, from Latin primus finest, literally first (see prime (adj.)).
Later, deck out, dress to effect (1721). Attested as a noun from 1700. The adjective, the sole
surviving sense, is from 1709. A cant word at first. Related: Primly; primness.


specific (adj.)

1630s, having a special quality, from French sp&eacute;cifique and directly from Late Latin
specificus constituting a kind or sort (in Medieval Latin specific, particular), from Latin species
kind, sort (see species). Earlier form was specifical (early 15c.). Meaning definite, precise first
recorded 1740. Related: Specifically; specificness.


dozen (n.)

c.1300, from Old French dozaine a dozen, from doze (12c.) twelve, from Latin duodecim twelve, from
duo two + decem ten (see ten).    The Old French fem. suffix -aine is characteristically added to
cardinals to form collectives in a precise sense (exactly 12, not about 12). The dozens invective
contest (1928) originated in slave culture, the custom probably African, the word probably from
bulldoze (q.v.) in its original sense of a whipping, a thrashing.


niggard (n.)

mean person, miser, late 14c., nygart, of uncertain origin. The suffix suggests French origin (see
-ard), but the root word is possibly from earlier nig stingy (c.1300), perhaps from a Scandinavian
source related to Old Norse hn&oslash;ggr stingy, from Proto-Germanic *khnauwjaz (source of Swedish
njugg close, careful, German genau precise, exact), and to Old English hneaw stingy, niggardly,
which did not survive in Middle English.


epoch (n.)

1610s, epocha, point marking the start of a new period in time (such as the founding of Rome, the
birth of Christ, the Hegira), from Late Latin epocha, from Greek epokhe stoppage, fixed point of
time, from epekhein to pause, take up a position, from epi on (see epi-) + ekhein to hold (see
scheme (n.)). Transferred sense of a period of time is 1620s; geological usage (not a precise
measurement) is from 1802.


aniline (n.)

chemical base used in making colorful dyes, 1843, coined 1841 by German chemist Carl Julius
Fritzsche (1808-1871) and adopted by Hofmann, ultimately from Portuguese anil the indigo shrub, from
Arabic an-nil the indigo, assimilated from al-nil, from Persian nila, ultimately from Sanskrit nili
indigo, from nilah dark blue. With suffix -ine indicating derived substance (see -ine (1); also see
-ine (2) for the later, more precise, use of the suffix in chemistry).


Salic (adj.)

based on or contained in the law code of the Salian Franks, 1540s, from French Salique, from
Medieval Latin Salicus, from the Salian Franks, a tribe that once lived near the Zuider Zee, the
ancestors of the Merovingian kings, literally those living near the river Sala (modern Ijssel).
Salic Law, code of law of Germanic tribes, was invoked 1316 by Philip V of France to exclude a woman
from succeeding to the throne of France (and later to combat the French claims of Edward III of
England), but the precise meaning of the passage is unclear.


mince (v.)

late 14c., to chop in little pieces, from Old French mincier make into small pieces, from Vulgar
Latin *minutiare make small, from Late Latin minuti&aelig; small bits, from Latin minutus small (see
minute (adj.)). Of speech, to clip affectedly in imitation of elegance, 1540s; of words or language,
to restrain in the interest of decorum, 1590s. Meaning to walk with short or precise steps is from
1560s. Related: Minced; mincing.


mega-

before vowels meg-, word-forming element often meaning large, great, but in precise scientific
language one million (megaton, megawatt, etc.), from Greek megas great, large, vast, big, high,
tall; mighty, important (fem. megale), from PIE *meg- great (cognates: Latin magnus, Old English
micel; see mickle). Mega began to be used alone as an adjective by 1982.High-speed computer stores
2.5 megabits [headline in Electronics magazine, Oct. 1, 1957]


rugged (adj.)

c.1300, rough, shaggy, careworn (originally of animals), from Old Norse rogg shaggy tuft (see rug).
The precise relationship to ragged is not quite clear, but the stem is no doubt ultimately the same
[OED]. Meaning vigorous, strong, robust is American English, by 1848.We were challenged with a
peace-time choice between the American system of rugged individualism and a European philosophy of
diametrically opposed doctrines -- doctrines of paternalism and state socialism. [Herbert Hoover,
speech in New York, Oct. 22, 1928]  Hoover said the phrase was not his own, and it is attested from
1897, though not in a patriotic context. Related: Ruggedly; ruggedness.


screw (v.)

to twist (something) like a screw, 1590s, from screw (n.). From 1610s as to attach with a screw.
Slang meaning to copulate dates from at least 1725, originally usually of the action of the male, on
the notion of driving a screw into something. Meaning defraud, cheat is from 1900. First recorded
1949 in exclamations as a euphemism. Related: Screwed; screwing. To screw up blunder is recorded
from 1942. Screwed up originally was figurative for tuned to a high or precise pitch (1907), an
image from the pegs of stringed instruments. Meaning confused, muddled attested from 1943.
Expression to have (one's) head screwed on the right (or wrong) way is from 1821.


re-

word-forming element meaning back to the original place; again, anew, once more, also with a sense
of undoing, c.1200, from Old French and directly from Latin re- again, back, anew, against, Latin
combining form concievably from Indo-European *wret-, metathetical variant of *wert- to turn
[Watkins]. Often merely intensive, and in many of the older borrowings from French and Latin the
precise sense of re- is lost in secondary senses or weakened beyond recognition. OED writes that it
is impossible to attempt a complete record of all the forms resulting from its use, and adds that
The number of these is practically infinite .... The Latin prefix became red- before vowels and h-,
as in redact, redeem, redolent, redundant.


prissy (adj.)

1895, probably Southern U.S. dialect, first attested in Joel Chandler Harris, perhaps an alteration
of precise (q.v.), or a merger of prim and sissy [OED]. Related: Prissily; prissiness.    []Then Mrs
Blue Hen rumpled up her feathers and got mad with herself, and went to setting. I reckon that's what
you call it. I've heard some call it 'setting' and others 'sitting.' Once, when I was courting, I
spoke of a sitting hen, but the young lady said I was too prissy for anything.    What is prissy?
asked Sweetest Susan.    Mr. Rabbit shut his eyes and scratched his ear. Then he shook his head
slowly.    It's nothing but a girl's word, remarked Mrs. Meadows by way of explanation. It means
that somebody's trying hard to show off.    I reckon that's so, said Mr. Rabbit, opening his eyes.
He appeared to be much relieved.  [Joel Chandler Harris, Mr. Rabbit at Home]


preen (v.)

to trim, to dress up, late 14c., perhaps a variation of Middle English proynen, proinen trim the
feather with the beak (see prune (v.)); or perhaps from Old French poroindre anoint before, and Old
French proignier round off, prune. Middle English prene (from Old English preon, a general Germanic
word) meant to pin, and probably influenced the form of this word. Watkins, however, connects it
with Latin unguere to smear, anoint.    Because of the popularity of falconry, bird activities
formerly were more closely observed and words for them were more precise in English than today.Youre
hawke proynith and not pikith and she prenyth not bot whan she begynnyth at hir leggys, and fetcheth
moystour like oyle at hir taill. [Book of St. Albans, 1486]


square (adj.)

early 14c., containing four equal sides and right angles, from square (n.), or from Old French
esquarre, past participle of esquarrer. Meaning honest, fair, is first attested 1560s; that of
straight, direct is from 1804. Of meals, from 1868.    Sense of old-fashioned is 1944, U.S. jazz
slang, said to be from shape of a conductor's hand gestures in a regular four-beat rhythm. Square-
toes meant nearly the same thing late 18c.: precise, formal, old-fashioned person, from the style of
men's shoes worn early 18c. and then fallen from fashion. Squaresville is attested from 1956. Square
dance attested by 1831; originally one in which the couples faced inward from four sides; later of
country dances generally.    [T]he old square dance is an abortive attempt at conversation while
engaged in walking certain mathematical figures over a limited area. [March 1868]


sonnet (n.)

1557 (in title of Surrey's poems), from Middle French sonnet (1540s) or directly from Italian
sonetto, literally little song, from Old Proven&ccedil;al sonet song, diminutive of son song, sound,
from Latin sonus sound (see sound (n.1)).    Originally in English also any short lyric poem;
precise meaning is from Italian, where Petrarch (14c.) developed a scheme of an eight-line stanza
(rhymed abba abba) followed by a six-line stanza (cdecde, the Italian sestet, or cdcdcd, the
Sicilian sestet). Shakespeare developed the English Sonnet for his rhyme-poor native tongue: three
Sicilian quatrains followed by a heroic couplet (ababcdcdefefgg). The first stanza sets a situation
or problem, and the second comments on it or resolves it.


thousand (adj.)

Old English &thorn;usend, from Proto-Germanic *thusundi (cognates: Old Frisian thusend, Dutch
duizend, Old High German dusunt, German tausend, Old Norse &thorn;usund, Gothic &thorn;usundi).
Related to words in Balto-Slavic (Lithuanian tukstantis, Old Church Slavonic tysashta, Polish
tysi&#261;c, Russian tysiacha, Czech tisic), and probably ultimately a compound with indefinite
meaning great multitude, several hundred, literally swollen-hundred, with first element from PIE
root *teue- (2) to swell (see thigh).    Used to translate Greek khilias, Latin mille, hence the
refinement into the precise modern meaning. There was no general Indo-European word for thousand.
Slang shortening thou first recorded 1867. Thousand island dressing (1916) presumably is named for
the region of New York on the St. Lawrence River.


term (n.)

c.1200, terme limit in time, set or appointed period, from Old French terme limit of time or place,
date, appointed time, duration (11c.), from Latin terminus end, boundary line, in Medieval Latin
expression, definition, related to termen boundary, end (see terminus). Old English had termen term,
end, from Latin. Sense of period of time during which something happens first recorded c.1300,
especially of a school or law court session (mid-15c.).    The meaning word or phrase used in a
limited or precise sense is first recorded late 14c., from Medieval Latin use of terminus to render
Greek horos boundary, employed in mathematics and logic. Hence in terms of in the language or
phraseology peculiar to. Meaning completion of the period of pregnancy is from 1844. Term-paper in
U.S. educational sense is recorded from 1931.


edge (n.)

Old English ecg corner, edge, point, also sword (also found in ecgplega, literally edge play,
ecghete, literally edge hate, both used poetically for battle), from Proto-Germanic *agjo (cognates:
Old Frisian egg edge; Old Saxon eggia point, edge; Middle Dutch egghe, Dutch eg; Old Norse egg, see
egg (v.); Old High German ecka, German Eck corner), from PIE root *ak- sharp, pointed (cognates:
Sanskrit asrih edge, Latin acies, Greek akis point; see acrid).    Spelling development of Old
English -cg to Middle English -gg to Modern English -dge represents a widespread shift in
pronunciation. To get the edge on (someone) is U.S. colloquial, first recorded 1911. Edge city is
from Joel Garreau's 1992 book of that name. Razor's edge as a perilous narrow path translates Greek
epi xyrou akmes. To have (one's) teeth on edge is from late 14c., though It is not quite clear what
is the precise notion originally expressed in this phrase [OED].


nice (adj.)

late 13c., foolish, stupid, senseless, from Old French nice (12c.) careless, clumsy; weak; poor,
needy; simple, stupid, silly, foolish, from Latin nescius ignorant, unaware, literally not-knowing,
from ne- not (see un-) + stem of scire to know (see science). The sense development has been
extraordinary, even for an adj. [Weekley] -- from timid (pre-1300); to fussy, fastidious (late
14c.); to dainty, delicate (c.1400); to precise, careful (1500s, preserved in such terms as a nice
distinction and nice and early); to agreeable, delightful (1769); to kind, thoughtful (1830).    In
many examples from the 16th and 17th centuries it is difficult to say in what particular sense the
writer intended it to be taken. [OED]    By 1926, it was pronounced too great a favorite with the
ladies, who have charmed out of it all its individuality and converted it into a mere diffuser of
vague and mild agreeableness. [Fowler]I am sure, cried Catherine, I did not mean to say anything
wrong; but it is a nice book, and why should I not call it so?  Very true, said Henry, and this is a
very nice day, and we are taking a very nice walk; and you are two very nice young ladies. Oh! It is
a very nice word indeed! It does for everything. [Jane Austen, Northanger Abbey, 1803]


subtle (adj.)

c.1300 (mid-13c. as a surname), sotil, penetrating; ingenious; refined (of the mind); sophisticated,
intricate, abstruse (of arguments), from Old French sotil, soutil, subtil adept, adroit; cunning,
wise; detailed; well-crafted (12c., Modern French subtil), from Latin subtilis fine, thin, delicate,
finely woven; figuratively precise, exact, accurate, in taste or judgment, fine, keen, of style,
plain, simple, direct, from sub under (see sub-) + -tilis, from tela web, net, warp of a fabric (see
texture (n.)).     From early 14c. in reference to things, of thin consistency; in reference to
craftsmen, cunning, skilled, clever; Depreciative sense insidious, treacherously cunning; deceitful
is from mid-14c. Material senses of not dense or viscous, light; pure; delicate, thin, slender;
fine, consisting of small particles are from late 14c. sotil wares were goods sold in powdered form
or finely ground. Partially re-Latinized in spelling, and also by confusion with subtile.


reptile (n.)

late 14c., creeping or crawling animal, from Old French reptile (early 14c.) and directly from Late
Latin reptile, noun use of neuter of reptilis (adj.) creping, crawling, from rept-, past participle
stem of repere to crawl, creep, from PIE root *rep- to creep, crawl (cognates: Lithuanian replioju
to creep). Used of persons of low character from 1749.    Precise scientific use began to develop
mid-18c., but the word was used as well at first of animals now known as amphibians, including
toads, frogs, salamanders; separation of Reptilia (1835 as a distinct class) and Amphibia took place
early 19c.; popular use lagged, and reptile still was used late 18c. with sense An animal that
creeps upon many feet [Johnson, who calls the scorpion a reptile], sometimes excluding serpents.
And the terrestrial animals may be divided into quadrupeds or beasts, reptiles, which have many
feet, and serpents, which have no feet at all. [Locke, Elements of Natural Philosophy, 1689]   <hr
/>   An inadvertent step may crush the snail  That crawls at ev'ning in the public path ;  But he
that has humanity, forewarn'd,  Will tread aside, and let the reptile live.  [Cowper, The Task,
1785]    The Old English word for reptile was slincend, related to slink.


shot (n.)

Old English scot, sceot a shot, a shooting, an act of shooting; that which is discharged in
shooting, what is shot forth; darting, rapid motion, from Proto-Germanic *skutan (cognates: Old
Norse skutr, Old Frisian skete, Middle Dutch scote, German Schu&szlig; a shot), related to sceotan
to shoot (see shoot (v.)).    Meaning discharge of a bow, missile, also is from related Old English
gesceot. Extended to other projectiles in Middle English, and to sports (hockey, basketball, etc.)
1868. Another original meaning, payment (perhaps literally money thrown down) is preserved in scot-
free. Throwing down might also have led to the meaning a drink, first attested 1670s, the more
precise meaning small drink of straight liquor by 1928 (shot glass by 1955). Camera view sense is
from 1958. Sense of hypodermic injection first attested 1904; figurative phrase shot in the arm
stimulant first recorded 1922. Meaning try, attempt is from 1756; sense of remark meant to wound is
recorded from 1841. Meaning an expert in shooting is from 1780. To call the shots control events,
make decisions is American English, 1922, perhaps from sport shooting. Shot in the dark uninformed
guess is from 1885. Big shot important person is from 1861.


bloody (adj.)

Old Engish blodig, adjective from blod (see blood). Common Germanic, compare Old Frisian blodich,
Old Saxon bl&#244;dag, Dutch bloedig, Old High German bluotag, German blutig.    It has been a
British intensive swear word since at least 1676. Weekley relates it to the purely intensive use of
the cognate Dutch bloed, German Blut. But perhaps it ultimately is connected with bloods in the
slang sense of rowdy young aristocrats (see blood (n.)) via expressions such as bloody drunk as
drunk as a blood.    Partridge reports that it was respectable before c.1750, and it was used by
Fielding and Swift, but heavily tabooed c.1750-c.1920, perhaps from imagined association with
menstruation; Johnson calls it very vulgar, and OED writes of it, now constantly in the mouths of
the lowest classes, but by respectable people considered 'a horrid word', on par with obscene or
profane language.    The onset of the taboo against bloody coincides with the increase in linguistic
prudery that presaged the Victorian Era but it is hard to say what the precise cause was in the case
of this specific word. Attempts have been made to explain the term's extraordinary shock power by
invoking etymology. Theories that derive it from such oaths as By our Lady or God's blood seem
farfetched, however. More likely, the taboo stemmed from the fear that many people have of blood
and, in the minds of some, from an association with menstrual bleeding. Whatever, the term was
debarred from polite society during the whole of the nineteenth century. [Rawson]    Shaw shocked
theatergoers when he put it in the mouth of Eliza Doolittle in Pygmalion (1914), and for a time the
word was known euphemistically as the Shavian adjective. It was avoided in print as late as 1936.
Bloody Sunday, Jan. 30, 1972, when 13 civilians were killed by British troops at protest in
Londonderry, Northern Ireland.


liberal (adj.)

mid-14c., generous, also, late 14c., selfless; noble, nobly born; abundant, and, early 15c., in a
bad sense extravagant, unrestrained, from Old French liberal befitting free men, noble, generous,
willing, zealous (12c.), from Latin liberalis noble, gracious, munificent, generous, literally of
freedom, pertaining to or befitting a free man, from liber free, unrestricted, unimpeded; unbridled,
unchecked, licentious, from PIE *leudh-ero- (source of Greek eleutheros free), probably originally
belonging to the people (though the precise semantic development is obscure), and a suffixed form of
the base *leudh- people (cognates: Old Church Slavonic ljudu, Lithuanian liaudis, Old English leod,
German Leute nation, people; Old High German liut person, people) but literally to mount up, to
grow.    With the meaning free from restraint in speech or action, liberal was used 16c.-17c. as a
term of reproach. It revived in a positive sense in the Enlightenment, with a meaning free from
prejudice, tolerant, which emerged 1776-88.    In reference to education, explained by Fowler as the
education designed for a gentleman (Latin liber a free man) &amp; ... opposed on the one hand to
technical or professional or any special training, &amp; on the other to education that stops short
before manhood is reached (see liberal arts). Purely in reference to political opinion, tending in
favor of freedom and democracy it dates from c.1801, from French lib&eacute;ral, originally applied
in English by its opponents (often in French form and with suggestions of foreign lawlessness) to
the party favorable to individual political freedoms. But also (especially in U.S. politics) tending
to mean favorable to government action to effect social change, which seems at times to draw more
from the religious sense of free from prejudice in favor of traditional opinions and established
institutions (and thus open to new ideas and plans of reform), which dates from
1823.<b>Conservative</b>, n. A statesman who is enamored of existing evils, as distinguished from
the Liberal, who wishes to replace them with others. [Ambrose Bierce, Devil's Dictionary, 1911]


