precipice (n.)

steep face of rock, 1630s, from Middle French pr&eacute;cipice, from Latin praecipitium a steep
place, literally a fall or leap, from praeceps (genitive praecipitis) steep, headlong, headfirst,
from prae before, forth (see pre-) + caput head (see head (n.)). Earlier in English as a verb
(1590s) meaning fall to great depth.


precipe (n.)

1610s, from Latin praecipes, variant of praeceps headfirst, headlong, precipitous, as a noun, a
precipice (see precipice).


precipitate (v.)

to hurl or fling down, 1520s, a back formation from precipitation or else from Latin praecipitatus,
past participle of praecipitare to throw or dive headlong, from praeceps steep, headlong, headfirst
(see precipice). Meaning to cause to happen, hurry the beginning of is recorded from 1620s. Chemical
sense is from 1620s; meteorological sense first attested 1863. Related: Precipitated; precipitating.


precipitation (n.)

late 15c., a casting down (of the evil angels from heaven), also, in alchemy separation of a solid
substance from a solution, from Middle French precipitation (15c.) and directly from Latin
praecipitationem (nominative praecipitatio) act or fact of falling headlong, haste, noun of action
from past participle stem of praecipitare fall, be hasty, from praeceps steep (see precipice).
Meaning sudden haste is c.1500. Meaning act of falling from a height is attested from 1610s.
Meteorological sense of rain, snow, dew, etc. is from 1670s.


riparian (adj.)

of or pertaining to river banks, 1849, with -an + Latin riparius of a river bank, from riparia
shore, later used in reference to the stream flowing between the banks, from ripa (steep) bank of a
river, shore, probably literally break (and indicating the drop off from ground level to the stream
bed), or else that which is cut out by the river, from PIE root *rei- to scratch, tear, cut
(cognates: Greek ereipia ruins, eripne slope, precipice; Old Norse rifa break, to tear apart; Danish
rift breach, Middle High German rif riverbank, seashore; English riven, rift).


