predicate (adj.)

1887, from Latin praedicatus, past participle of praedicare proclaim, announce (see predicate (n.)).


predicate (v.)

1550s, back formation from predication, or else from Latin praedicatus, past participle of
praedicare proclaim, announce (see predicate (n.)). Related: Predicated; predicating. Phrase
predicated on founded on, based on, is American English, first recorded 1766.


predicate (n.)

mid-15c., a term in logic, from Middle French predicat and directly from Medieval Latin predicatum,
from Latin praedicatum that which is said of the subject, noun use of neuter past participle of
praedicare assert, proclaim, declare publicly, from prae- forth, before (see pre-) + dicare
proclaim, from stem of dicere to speak, to say (see diction). Grammatical sense is from 1630s.
Related: Predicative; predicator; predicatory.


predication (n.)

early 14c., from Old French predicacion (12c.) and directly from Medieval Latin predicationem, from
Latin praedicationem (nominative praedicatio) a foretelling, prediction, noun of action from past
participle stem of praedicare (see predicate (n.)).


galore (adv.)

1670s, from Irish go le&oacute;r, and equivalent Scottish Gaelic gu le&oacute;ir sufficiently,
enough, from Old Irish roar enough, from Proto-Celtic *ro-wero- sufficiency. The particle go/gu
usually means to, but it also is affixed to adjectives to form adverbs, as here. Often used in
English with the force of a predicate adjective.


predicament (n.)

early 15c., category, class; one of Aristotle's 10 categories, from Medieval Latin predicamentum,
from Late Latin praedicamentum quality, category, something predicted, that which is asserted, from
Latin praedicatus, past participle of praedicare (see predicate). Praedicamentum is a loan-
translation of Greek kategoria, Aristotle's word. The meaning unpleasant situation is first recorded
1580s.


category (n.)

1580s, from Middle French cat&eacute;gorie, from Late Latin categoria, from Greek kategoria
accusation, prediction, category, verbal noun from kategorein to speak against; to accuse, assert,
predicate, from kata down to (or perhaps against; see cata-) + agoreuein to harangue, to declaim (in
the assembly), from agora public assembly (see agora). Original sense of accuse weakened to assert,
name by the time Aristotle applied kategoria to his 10 classes of things that can be named.
<b>category</b> should be used by no-one who is not prepared to state (1) that he does not mean
class, &amp; (2) that he knows the difference between the two .... [Fowler]


rest (v.2)

to be left, remain, mid-15c., from Old French rester to remain, from Latin restare stand back, be
left, from re- back (see re-) + stare to stand, from PIE root *sta- to stand, set down, make or be
firm (see stet). Partially confused and merged with the other verb rest. Sense of to continue to be
is in rest assured. Transitive sense of to keep, cause to continue to remain was common in
16c.-17c., used with a predicate adjective following and qualifying the object [Century Dictionary],
hence phrase rest you merry (1540s);  God rest you merry, gentlemen, often is mis-punctuated.


