predicament (n.)

early 15c., category, class; one of Aristotle's 10 categories, from Medieval Latin predicamentum,
from Late Latin praedicamentum quality, category, something predicted, that which is asserted, from
Latin praedicatus, past participle of praedicare (see predicate). Praedicamentum is a loan-
translation of Greek kategoria, Aristotle's word. The meaning unpleasant situation is first recorded
1580s.


scrape (n.)

mid-15c., a scraping instrument; late 15c., act of scraping or scratching, from scrape (v.). Meaning
a shave is slang from 1859. Meaning embarrassing or awkward predicament is recorded from 1709, as
OED suggests, probably from the notion of being 'scraped' in going through a narrow passage.


jam (n.2)

a tight pressing between two surfaces, 1806, from jam (v.). Jazz meaning short, free improvised
passage performed by the whole band dates from 1929, and yielded jam session (1933); but this is
perhaps from jam (n.1) in sense of something sweet, something excellent. Sense of machine blockage
is from 1890, which probably led to the colloquial meaning predicament, tight spot, first recorded
1914.


yours (pron.)

absolutive form of your, c.1300, on model of his, ours, etc. Yours truly myself is from 1833, from
the common subscription of letters.    It is difficult to say what will succeed, and still more to
pronounce what will not. I am at this moment in that uncertainty (on our own score,) and it is no
small proof of the author's powers to be able to charm and fix a mind's attention on similar
subjects and climates in such a predicament. That he may have the same effect upon all his readers
is very sincerely the wish, and hardly the doubt, of yours truly,  B.  [Lord Byron to John Murray,
Dec. 4, 1813]


lurch (n.2)

predicament, 1580s, from Middle English lurch (v.) to beat in a game of skill (often by a great many
points), mid-14c., probably literally to make a complete victory in lorche, a game akin to
backgammon, from Old French lourche. The game name is perhaps related to Middle English lurken,
lorken to lie hidden, lie in ambush, or it may be adopted into French from Middle High German lurz
left, also wrong.


