predilection (n.)

1742, from French pr&eacute;dilection (16c.), noun of action from Medieval Latin praedilectus, past
participle of prediligere prefer before others, from Latin prae- before (see pre-) + diligere
choose, love (see diligent).


foreboding (n.)

late 14c., a predilection, portent, omen, from fore- + verbal noun from bode. Meaning sense of
something bad about to happen is from c.1600. Old English forebodung meant prophecy.


lover (n.)

early 13c., agent noun from love (v.). Old English had lufend for male lovers, lufestre for women.
Meaning one who has a predilection for (a thing, concept, pursuit, etc.) is mid-14c. As a form of
address to a lover, from 1911. Related: Loverly.


passion (n.)

late 12c., sufferings of Christ on the Cross, from Old French passion Christ's passion, physical
suffering (10c.), from Late Latin passionem (nominative passio) suffering, enduring, from past
participle stem of Latin pati to suffer, endure, possibly from PIE root *pe(i)- to hurt (cognates:
Sanskrit pijati reviles, scorns, Greek pema suffering, misery, woe, Old English feond enemy, devil,
Gothic faian to blame).    Sense extended to sufferings of martyrs, and suffering generally, by
early 13c.; meaning strong emotion, desire is attested from late 14c., from Late Latin use of passio
to render Greek pathos. Replaced Old English &thorn;olung (used in glosses to render Latin passio),
literally suffering, from &thorn;olian (v.) to endure.    Sense of sexual love first attested 1580s;
that of strong liking, enthusiasm, predilection is from 1630s. The passion-flower so called from
1630s.The name passionflower -- flos passionis -- arose from the supposed resemblance of the corona
to the crown of thorns, and of the other parts of the flower to the nails, or wounds, while the five
sepals and five petals were taken to symbolize the ten apostles -- Peter ... and Judas ... being
left out of the reckoning. [Encyclopaedia Britannica, 1885]


thing (n.)

Old English &thorn;ing meeting, assembly, council, discussion, later entity, being, matter (subject
of deliberation in an assembly), also act, deed, event, material object, body, being, creature, from
Proto-Germanic *thingam assembly (cognates: Old Frisian thing assembly, council, suit, matter,
thing, Middle Dutch dinc court-day, suit, plea, concern, affair, thing, Dutch ding thing, Old High
German ding public assembly for judgment and business, lawsuit, German ding affair, matter, thing,
Old Norse &thorn;ing public assembly). The Germanic word is perhaps literally appointed time, from a
PIE *tenk- (1), from root *ten- stretch, perhaps on notion of stretch of time for a meeting or
assembly.    The sense meeting, assembly did not survive Old English. For sense evolution, compare
French chose, Spanish cosa thing, from Latin causa judicial process, lawsuit, case; Latin res
affair, thing, also case at law, cause. Old sense is preserved in second element of hustings and in
Icelandic Althing, the nation's general assembly.    Of persons, often pityingly, from late 13c.
Used colloquially since c.1600 to indicate things the speaker can't name at the moment, often with
various meaningless suffixes (see thingamajig). Things personal possessions is from c.1300. The
thing what's stylish or fashionable is recorded from 1762. Phrase do your thing follow your
particular predilection, though associated with hippie-speak of 1960s is attested from 1841.


