prehensile (adj.)

1771, from French pr&eacute;hensile adapted for grasping (Buffon), from Latin prehensus, past
participle of prehendere to grasp, seize, get hold of, from prae- before (see pre-) + -hendere, from
PIE root *ghend- to seize, take (see get (v.)). Latin -hendere is related to hedera ivy, via notion
of clinging.


prehension (n.)

1530s, seizure, arrest, from Latin prehensionem (nominative prehensio), noun of action from past
participle stem of prehendere (see prehensile). Use in philosophy is from 1925.


pregnable (adj.)

1530s, alteration of Middle English preignable, earlier prenable (early 15c.), from Old French
prenable assailable, vulnerable, from stem of prendre to take, grasp, seize, from Latin prehendere
to take hold of, to seize (see prehensile).


reprehend (v.)

mid-14c., from Latin reprehendere blame, censure, rebuke; seize, restrain, literally pull back, hold
back, from re- back (see re-) + prehendere to grasp, seize (see prehensile).


comprehend (v.)

mid-14c., to understand, from Latin comprehendere to take together, to unite; include; seize (of
catching fire or the arrest of criminals); also to comprehend, perceive (to seize or take in the
mind), from com- completely (see com-) + prehendere to catch hold of, seize (see prehensile).
Related: Comprehended; comprehending.


emprise (n.)

c.1300, chivalrous endeavor, from Old French emprise (12c.) enterprise, venture, adventure,
undertaking, from Vulgar Latin *imprensa (source of Proven&ccedil;al empreza, Spanish empresa,
Italian impresa), from *imprendere to undertake, from in- + prehendere to take (see prehensile).
Archaic in English; in French now with a literal sense a hold, a grip.


prize (n.2)

something taken by force, mid-13c., prise a taking, holding, from Old French prise a taking,
seizing, holding, noun use of fem. past participle of prendre to take, seize, from Latin prendere,
contraction of prehendere lay hold of, grasp, seize, catch (see prehensile). Especially of ships
captured at sea (1510s). The spelling with -z- is from late 16c.


impresario (n.)

1746, from Italian impresario operatic manager, literally undertaker (of a business), from impresa
undertaking, fem. of impreso, past participle of imprendere undertake, from Vulgar Latin imprendere,
from assimilated form of in- into, in, on, onto (see in- (2)) + prehendere to grasp (see
prehensile).


enterprise (n.)

early 15c., an undertaking, from Old French enterprise an undertaking, noun use of fem. past
participle of entreprendre undertake, take in hand, from entre- between (see entre-) + prendre to
take, contraction of prehendere (see prehensile). Abstract sense of readiness to undertake
challenges, spirit of daring is from late 15c.


prey (n.)

mid-13c., animal hunted for food, also that which is taken in war, from Old French preie booty,
animal taken in the chase (mid-12c., Modern French proie), from Latin praeda booty, plunder, game
hunted, earlier praeheda, literally something seized before, from PIE *prai-heda-; for first element
see prae-; second element related to the second element in prehendere to grasp, seize (see
prehensile).


prison (n.)

early 12c., from Old French prisoun captivity, imprisonment; prison; prisoner, captive (11c., Modern
French prison), altered (by influence of pris taken; see prize (n.2)) from earlier preson, from
Vulgar Latin *presionem, from Latin prensionem (nominative prensio), shortening of prehensionem
(nominative *prehensio) a taking, noun of action from past participle stem of prehendere to take
(see prehensile). Captivity, hence by extension a place for captives, the main modern sense.


apprehend (v.)

mid-14c., to grasp in the senses or mind, from Old French aprendre (12c.) teach; learn; take, grasp;
acquire, or directly from Latin apprehendere to take hold of, grasp, from ad- to + prehendere to
seize (see prehensile). Metaphoric extension to seize with the mind took place in Latin, and was the
sole sense of cognate Old French aprendre (Modern French apprendre to learn, to be informed about;
also compare apprentice). Original sense returned in English in meaning to seize in the name of the
law, arrest, recorded from 1540s, which use probably was taken directly from Latin. Related:
Apprehended; apprehending.


misprision (n.)

wrong action, a failure on the part of authority, early 15c., from Anglo-French mesprisioun mistake,
error, wrong action or speech, from Old French mesprision mistake, wrongdoing, fault, blame, crime,
from mespris, past participle of mesprendre to mistake, act wrongly, trespass, transgress, break a
law, from mes- wrongly (see mis- (2)) + prendre take, from Latin prendere, contracted from
prehendere seize (see prehensile).    In 16c., misprision of treason was used for lesser degrees of
guilt (those not subject to capital punishment), especially for knowing of treasonable actions or
plots but not informing the authorities. This led to the common supposition in legal writers that
the word means failure to denounce a crime.


surprise (n.)

also formerly surprize, late 14c., unexpected attack or capture, from Old French surprise a taking
unawares (13c.), from noun use of past participle of Old French sorprendre to overtake, seize,
invade (12c.), from sur- over (see sur- (1)) + prendre to take, from Latin prendere, contracted from
prehendere to grasp, seize (see prehensile). Meaning something unexpected first recorded 1590s, that
of feeling of astonishment caused by something unexpected is c.1600. Meaning fancy dish is attested
from 1708.    A Surprize is ... a dish ... which promising little from its first appearance, when
open abounds with all sorts of variety. [W. King, Cookery, 1708]   Surprise party originally was a
stealth military detachment (1826); festive sense is attested by 1857; according to Thornton's
American Glossary, originally a gathering of members of a congregation at the house of their
preacher with the ostensible purpose of contributing provisions, &amp;c.;, for his support, and
sometimes called a donation party. Phrase taken by surprise is attested from 1690s.


