premise (v.)

to state before something else, mid-15c., from premise (n.). Related: Premised; premising.


premises (n.)

building and grounds, 1730; see premise (n.).


premise (n.)

late 14c., in logic, a previous proposition from which another follows, from Old French premisse
(14c.), from Medieval Latin premissa (propositio or sententia) (the proposition) set before, noun
use of fem. past participle of Latin praemittere send forward, put before, from prae before (see
pre-) + mittere to send (see mission). In legal documents it meant matter previously stated (early
15c.), which in deeds or wills often was a house or building, hence the extended meaning house or
building, with grounds (1730).


dilemma (n.)

1520s, from Late Latin dilemma, from Greek dilemma double proposition, a technical term in rhetoric,
from di- two + lemma premise, anything received or taken, from root of lambanein to take (see
analemma). It should be used only of situations where someone is forced to choose between two
alternatives, both unfavorable to him. But even logicians disagree on whether certain situations are
dilemmas or mere syllogisms.


maxim (n.)

precept, principle, early 15c., from Middle French maxime, from Late Latin maxima, shortened from
phrases such as maxima propositio, maxima sententarium axiom, literally greatest premise, greatest
among propositions (one which is general and absolute), from fem. of maximus greatest (see maximum).


enthymeme (n.)

a syllogism in which one premise is omitted, 1580s, from Latin enthymema, from Greek enthymema
thought, argument, from enthymesthai to think, consider, literally to keep in mind, take to heart,
from en in (see en- (2)) + thymos mind (see fume (n.)).


minor (n.)

early 14c., a Franciscan, from Latin Fratres Minores lesser brethren, name chosen by St. Francis,
who founded the order, for the sake of humility; see minor (adj.). From c.1400 as minor premise of a
syllogism. From 1610s as person under legal age (Latin used minores (plural) for the young). Musical
sense is from 1797. Meaning secondary subject of study, subject of study with fewer credits than a
major is from 1890; as a verb in this sense from 1934.


assumption (n.)

c.1300, the reception, uncorrupted, of the Virgin Mary into Heaven, also the Church festival (Aug.
15) commemorating this, Feast of the Assumption, from Old French assumpcion and directly from Latin
assumptionem (nominative assumptio) a taking, receiving, noun of action from past participle stem of
assumere take up, take to oneself (see assume).    Meaning minor premise of a syllogism is late 14c.
Meaning appropriation of a right or possession is mid-15c. Meaning action of taking for oneself is
recorded from 1580s; that of something taken for granted is from 1620s.


