prepare (v.)

mid-15c., a back formation from preparation and in part from Middle French preparer (14c.), from
Latin praeparare make ready beforehand (see preparation). Related: Prepared; preparing. Be prepared
as the Boy Scouts' motto is attested from 1911.


taw (v.)

to prepare (leather), from Old English tawian prepare, make ready, make; cultivate, also harass,
insult, outrage to do, make, from Proto-Germanic *tawjan (cognates: Old Frisian tawa, Old Saxon
toian, Middle Dutch tauwen, Dutch touwen, Old High German zouwen to prepare, Old High German zawen
to succeed, Gothic taujan to make, prepare), from Proto-Germanic root *taw- to make, manufacture
(compare tool (n.)).


dresser (n.)

c.1300, person who prepares or furnishes, agent noun from dress (v.). Meaning table, sideboard, is
late 14c., from Old French dresseur, dre&ccedil;oir table to prepare food, from dresser prepare,
dress. Meaning chest, dressing bureau is from 1895.


embattle (v.)

late 14c., prepare for a fight, from Old French embataillier to prepare for battle, from en- (see
en- (1)) + bataille (see battle (n.)). Related: Embattled; embattling. Originally of armies; of
individuals as well since 1590s (first attested in Spenser).


concoct (v.)

1530s, to digest, from Latin concoctus, past participle of concoquere to digest; to boil together,
prepare; to consider well, from com- together (see com-) + coquere to cook (see cook (n.)). Meaning
to prepare an edible thing is from 1670s. First expanded metaphorically beyond cooking 1792.
Related: Concocted; concocting.


busk (v.)

to prepare, to dress oneself, also to go, set out, c.1300, probably from Old Norse buask to prepare
oneself, reflexive of bua to prepare (see bound (adj.2)) + contraction of Old Norse reflexive
pronoun sik. Most common in northern Middle English and surviving chiefly in Scottish and northern
English dialect. Related boun had the same senses in northern and Scottish Middle English. Related:
Busked; busking.    The nautical term is attested from 1660s (in a general sense of to tack, to beat
to windward), apparently from obsolete French busquer to shift, filch, prowl, which is related to
Italian buscare to filch, prowl, Spanish buscar (from Old Spanish boscar), perhaps originally from
bosco wood (see bush (n.)), with a hunting notion of beating a wood to flush game.


yare (adj.)

ready, prepared, Old English gearo ready, prepared, equipped, from gearwian to equip, prepare
(related to gearwe clothing, dress) from Proto-Germanic *garwian to make, prepare, equip, ready,
complete (see gear (n.)). Cognate with German gar, Dutch gaar. Related: Yarely.


rampart (n.)

earthen elevation around a place for fortification, sometimes also including parapets, 1580s, from
Middle French rempart, rampart, from remparer to fortify, from re- again (see re-) + emparer
fortify, take possession of, from Old Proven&ccedil;al amparer, from Vulgar Latin *anteparare
prepare, properly to make preparations beforehand, from Latin ante- before (see ante) + parare
prepare (see pare). With excrescent -t in French, perhaps by influence of boulevart (see boulevard).


dress (v.)

early 14c., make straight; direct, guide, control, prepare for cooking, from Old French dresser,
drecier raise (oneself), address, prepare, lift, raise, hoist, set up, arrange, set (a table), serve
(food), straighten, put right, direct, from Vulgar Latin *directiare, from Latin directus direct,
straight (see direct (v.)).    Sense of decorate, adorn is late 14c., as is that of put on clothing.
Original sense survives in military meaning align columns of troops. Dress up attire elaborately is
from 1670s; dressing down wearing clothes less formal than expected is from 1960. To dress (someone)
down (1769) is ironical. Related: Dressed; dressing.


pare (v.)

to trim by cutting close, c.1300, from Old French parer arrange, prepare; trim, adorn, and directly
from Latin parare make ready, prepare, furnish, provide, arrange, order; contrive, design, intend,
resolve; procure, acquire, obtain, get; get with money, buy, purchase (related to parere produce,
bring forth, give birth to), from PIE *par-a-, suffixed form of root *pere- (1) produce, procure,
bring forward, bring forth, and derived words in diverse senses (cognates: Lithuanian pariu to
brood, Greek poris calf, bull, Old High German farro, German Farre bullock, Old English fearr bull,
Sanskrit prthukah child, calf, young of an animal, Czech spratek brat, urchin, premature calf).
Generalized meaning to reduce something little by little is from 1520s. Related: Pared; paring.


unprepared (adj.)

1540s, from un- (1) not + past participle of prepare (v.).


prep (v.)

slang shortening of prepare, 1908. Related: Prepped; prepping.


coach (v.)

1610s, to convey in a coach, from coach (n.). Meaning to prepare (someone) for an exam is from 1849.
Related: Coached; coaching.


ready (v.)

early 13c., to administer; c.1300, to take aim; mid-14c., to prepare, make ready, from ready (adj.).
Related: Readied; readying.


groom (v.)

1809, from groom (n.1) in its secondary sense of male servant who attends to horses. Transferred
sense of to tidy (oneself) up is from 1843; figurative sense of to prepare a candidate is from 1887,
originally in U.S. politics. Related: Groomed; grooming.


process (v.1)

1530s, begin legal action against, from Middle French processer to prosecute, from proces (see
process (n.)). Meaning prepare by special process is from 1881, from the noun in English. Of
persons, to register and examine, by 1935. Related: Processed; processing.


maneuver (v.)

1777, from maneuver (n.), or else from French man&#339;urvrer work, work with one's hands; carry
out, prepare (12c.), from Medieval Latin manuoperare. Originally in a military sense. Figurative use
from 1801. Related: Maneuvered; maneuvering.


lard (v.)

prepare (meat) for roasting by inserting of pieces of salt pork, etc., into it, mid-14c., from Old
French larder to lard (12c.), from lard bacon fat (see lard (n.)). Figuratively, of speech or
writing, from 1540s. Related: Larded; larding.


brasserie (n.)

1864, brewery, from French brasserie, from Middle French brasser to brew, from Latin brace grain
used to prepare malt, said by Pliny to be a Celtic word (compare Welsh brag malt).


apparatus (n.)

1620s, from Latin apparatus tools, implements, equipment; preparation, a preparing, noun of state
from past participle stem of apparare prepare, from ad- to (see ad-) + parare make ready (see pare).


barleycorn (n.)

late 14c., from barley + corn (n.). Perhaps to distinguish the barley plant or the grain from its
products. In Britain and U.S., the grain is used mainly to prepare liquor, hence personification as
John Barleycorn (1620) in popular ballad, and many now-obsolete figures of speech, such as to wear a
barley cap (16c.) to be drunk.


expedient (adj.)

late 14c., advantageous, fit, proper, from Old French expedient (14c.) or directly from Latin
expedientem (nominative expediens) beneficial, present participle of expedire make fit or ready,
prepare (see expedite). The noun meaning a device adopted in an exigency, a resource is from 1650s.
Related: Expediential; expedientially (both 19c.)


comparison (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French comparaison (12c.), from Latin comparationem (nominative comparatio), noun
of action from past participle stem of comparare make equal with, liken, bring together for a
contest, literally to couple together, to form in pairs, from com- with (see com-) + parare prepare
(see pare).


summerize (v.)

1797, to spend the summer, from summer (n.1) + -ize. From 1935 as to prepare (something) for summer.
Related: Summerized; summerizing.


attire (v.)

c.1300, to fit out, equip; to dress in finery, to adorn, from Old French atirier to equip, ready,
prepare, from a- to + tire order, row, dress (see tier). Related: Attired; attiring.


preparation (n.)

late 14c., act of preparing, from Latin praeparationem (nominative praeparatio) a making ready, noun
of action from past participle stem of praeparare prepare, from prae before (see pre-) + parare make
ready (see pare). Meaning a substance especially prepared is from 1640s.


dishabille (n.)

1670s, from French d&eacute;shabill&eacute; (17c.), noun use of past participle of
d&eacute;shabiller to undress (oneself), from des- (see dis-) + habiller to dress, originally
prepare, arrange (see habit).


imperative (adj.)

1520s, from Late Latin imperativus pertaining to a command, from imperatus commanded, past
participle of imperare to command, to requisition, from assimilated form of in- into, in (see in-
(2)) + parare prepare (see pare).


separate (v.)

late 14c., from Latin separatus, past participle of separare to pull apart, from se- apart (see
secret) + parare make ready, prepare (see pare). Sever (q.v.) is a doublet, via French. Related:
Separated; separating.


sharpen (v.)

1520s, bring to an edge or point, from sharp (adj.) + -en (1). Related: Sharpened; sharpening. Old
English verb scearpian meant to score, scarify; also compare scearpung scarifying. To sharpen
(one's) pencil prepare to get to work is from 1957, American English.


Parabellum (n.)

proprietary name for a type of automatic firearm, 1904 (Mauser &amp; Deutsche Waffen und
Munitionsfabriken), from Latin phrase si vis pacem, para bellum, from para, imperative of parare to
prepare (see para- (2)) + bellum war (see bellicose).


provide (v.)

early 15c., from Latin providere look ahead, prepare, supply, act with foresight, from pro- ahead
(see pro-) + videre to see (see vision). Related: Provided; providing. Earlier in same sense was
purvey, which is the same word as deformed in Old French.


forecast (v.)

late 14c., to scheme, from fore- before + casten in the sense of contrive, plan, prepare (late 14c.;
see cast (v.)). Meaning predict events first attested late 15c. (cast (v.) to perceive, notice is
from late 14c.). Related: Forecasted; forecasting.


purvey (v.)

late 13c., from Anglo-French porveire, purveire and directly from Old French porveoir to provide,
prepare, arrange (Modern French pourvoir), from Latin providere make ready (see provide, which now
usually replaces it). Related: Purveyed; purveying.


extempore

1550s (adv.), 1630s (n.), from Latin phrase ex tempore offhand, in accordance with (the needs of)
the moment, literally out of time, from ex out of (see ex-) + tempore, ablative of tempus (genitive
temporis) time (see temporal). Of speaking, strictly without preparation, without time to prepare,
but now often with a sense merely of without notes or a teleprompter.


habiliment (n.)

often habiliments, early 15c., munitions, weapons, from Middle French habillement, from abiller
prepare or fit out, probably from habile fit, suitable (see able). Alternative etymology [Barnhart,
Klein] makes the French verb originally mean reduce a tree by stripping off the branches, from a- to
+ bille stick of wood. Sense of clothing, dress developed late 15c., by association with habit (n.).


minestrone (n.)

Italian vegetable soup, 1871, from Italian minestrone, with augmentative suffix -one + minestra
soup, pottage, literally that which is served, from minestrare to serve, to prepare (soup, etc.),
from Latin ministrare (see minister (v.)).


disparate (adj.)

c.1600, unlike in kind, from Latin disparatus, past participle of disparare divide, separate, from
dis- apart (see dis-) + parare get ready, prepare (see pare); meaning influenced by Latin dispar
unequal, unlike. Related: Disparately; disparateness.


tool (n.)

Old English tol instrument, implement used by a craftsman or laborer, weapon, from Proto-Germanic
*to(w)lam implement (cognates: Old Norse tol), from a verb stem represented by Old English tawian
prepare (see taw). The ending is the instrumental suffix -el (as in handle (n.)). Figurative sense
of person used by another for his own ends is recorded from 1660s. Slang meaning penis first
recorded 1550s.


discomfit (v.)

c.1200, as an adjective, from Old French desconfit vanquished, defeated, past participle of
desconfire to defeat, destroy, from des- not (see dis-) + confire make, prepare, accomplish, from
Latin conficere (see confection).    Used as a verb in English from c.1300. Weaker sense of
disconcert is first recorded 1520s in English, probably by confusion with discomfort. Related:
Discomfited; discomfiting.


baste (v.1)

sew together loosely, c.1400, from Old French bastir build, construct, sew up (a garment), baste,
make, prepare, arrange (12c., Modern French b&acirc;tir to build), probably from a Germanic source,
from Proto-Germanic *bastjan join together with bast (source also of Old High German besten; see
bast).


bound (adj.2)

ready to go, c.1200, boun, from Old Norse buinn past participle of bua to prepare, also to dwell, to
live, from Proto-Germanic *bowan (cognates: Old High German buan to dwell, Old Danish both dwelling,
stall), from PIE root *bheue- to be, exist, dwell (see be). Final -d is presumably through
association with bound (adj.1).


apparel (v.)

mid-13c., to equip (in any way), from Old French apareillier (12c.), from Vulgar Latin
*appariculare. This is either from Latin apparare prepare, make ready (see apparatus), or from
Vulgar Latin *ad-particulare to put things together. The meaning to attire in proper clothing is
from mid-14c. Cognate with Italian aparecchiare, Spanish aparejar, Portuguese aparelhar. Related:
Appareled; apparelled; appareling; apparelling.


curry (v.)

late 13c., to rub down a horse, from Anglo-French curreier to curry-comb a horse, from Old French
correier put in order, prepare, curry, from con-, intensive prefix (see com-), + reier arrange, from
a Germanic source (see ready). Related: Curried; currying.


repair (v.1)

to mend, to put back in order, mid-14c., from Old French reparer repair, mend (12c.), from Latin
reparare restore, put back in order, from re- again (see re-) + parare make ready, prepare (see
pare). Related: Repaired; repairing.


vituperation (n.)

mid-15c., but rare before early 19c., from Latin vituperationem (nominative vituperatio) blame, a
blaming, censuring, from  past participle stem of vituperare disparage, find fault with, from
vitiperos having faults, from vitium fault, defect (see vice (n.1)) + parare prepare, provide,
procure (see pare). Vituperatio was stronger than either Latin reprehensio or Modern English
vituperation.


ordain (v.)

late 13c., to appoint or admit to the ministry of the Church, from stem of Old French ordener place
in order, arrange, prepare; consecrate, designate (Modern French ordonner) and directly from Latin
ordinare put in order, arrange, dispose, appoint, from ordo (genitive ordinis) order (see order
(n.)). The notion is to confer holy orders upon. Meaning to decree, enact is from c.1300; sense of
to set (something) that will continue in a certain order is from early 14c. Related: Ordained;
ordaining.


parade (n.)

1650s, a show of bravado, also an assembly of troops for inspections, from French parade display,
show, military parade, from Middle French parade (15c.), or from Italian parate a warding or
defending, a garish setting forth, or Spanish parada a staying or stopping, all from Vulgar Latin
*parata, from Latin parere arrange, prepare, adorn (see pare), which developed widespread senses in
Romanic derivatives. Non-military sense of march, procession is first recorded 1670s.


bondage (n.)

c.1300, condition of a serf or slave, from Anglo-Latin bondagium, from Middle English bond a serf,
tenant farmer, from Old English bonda householder, from Old Norse boandi free-born farmer, noun use
of present participle of boa dwell, prepare, inhabit, from PIE *bhow-, from root *bheue- to be,
exist, dwell (see be). Meaning in English changed by influence of bond. The sexual sado-masochism
sense is recorded by 1966.


anticipate (v.)

1530s, to cause to happen sooner, a back-formation from anticipation, or else from Latin
anticipatus, past participle of anticipare take (care of) ahead of time, literally taking into
possession beforehand, from ante before (see ante) + capere to take (see capable).    Later to be
aware of (something) coming at a future time (1640s). Used in the sense of expect, look forward to
since 1749, but anticipate has an element of prepare for, forestall that should prevent its being
used as a synonym for expect. Related: Anticipated; anticipating.


