presage (v.)

1560s, from Middle French pr&eacute;sager (16c.), from pr&eacute;sage omen, from Latin praesagium
(see presage (n.)). Related: Presaged; presaging.


presage (n.)

late 14c., something that portends, from Latin praesagium a foreboding, from praesagire to perceive
beforehand, forebode, from praesagus (adj.) perceiving beforehand, prophetic, from prae before (see
pre-) + sagus prophetic, related to sagire perceive (see sagacious).


cledonism (n.)

avoidance of words deemed unlucky, 1885, from Latinized form of Greek kledon omen or presage
contained in a word or sound, also report, rumor, tidings; fame (see claim (v.)) + -ism.


death (n.)

Old English dea&eth; death, dying, cause of death, in plura, ghosts, from Proto-Germanic *dauthaz
(cognates: Old Saxon doth, Old Frisian dath, Dutch dood, Old High German tod, German Tod, Old Norse
dau&eth;i, Danish d&oslash;d, Swedish d&ouml;d, Gothic dau&thorn;as death), from verbal stem *dheu-
(3) to die (see die (v.)) + *-thuz suffix indicating act, process, condition.    I would not that
death should take me asleep. I would not have him meerly seise me, and onely declare me to be dead,
but win me, and overcome me. When I must shipwrack, I would do it in a sea, where mine impotencie
might have some excuse; not in a sullen weedy lake, where I could not have so much as exercise for
my swimming. [John Donne, letter to Sir Henry Goodere, Sept. 1608]   Death's-head, a symbol of
mortality, is from 1590s. Death row first recorded 1940s. Death knell is attested from 1814; death
penalty from 1875; death rate from 1859. Slang be death on be very good at is from 1839. Death wish
first recorded 1896. The death-watch beetle (1660s) inhabits houses, makes a ticking noise like a
watch, and was superstitiously supposed to portend death.    FEW ears have escaped the noise of the
death-watch, that is, the little clickling sound heard often in many rooms, somewhat resembling that
of a watch; and this is conceived to be of an evil omen or prediction of some person's death:
wherein notwithstanding there is nothing of rational presage or just cause of terror unto melancholy
and meticulous heads. For this noise is made by a little sheathwinged grey insect, found often in
wainscot benches and wood-work in the summer. [Browne, Vulgar Errors]


