presume (v.)

late 14c., to take upon oneself, to take liberty, also to take for granted, presuppose, especially
overconfidently, from Old French presumer (12c.) and directly from Latin praesumere anticipate, in
Late Latin, assume (see presumption). Related: Presumed; presumedly; presuming.


presumably (adv.)

1640s, with presumption, without examination, from presumable + -ly (2). As a qualifier, probably,
as one would presume, from 1830.


presumable (adj.)

1690s, from presume + -able.


overweening (adj.)

mid-14c., from present participle of verb overwenen be conceited, presume, be presumptuous, be over-
confident, from Old English oferwenian to be proud, become insolent or presumptuous; see over- +
ween.


venture (v.)

early 15c., to risk the loss (of something), shortened form of aventure, itself a form of adventure.
General sense of to dare, to presume is recorded from 1550s. Related: Ventured; venturing.    Nought
venter nought have [Heywood, Proverbs, 1546]


presumptive (adj.)

speculative, mid-15c., from French pr&eacute;somptif (15c.), from Medieval Latin presumptivus, from
Late Latin praesumptivus, from Latin praesumpt- past participle stem of praesumere (see presume).
The heir presumptive (1620s) is presumed to be the heir if the heir apparent is unavailable.
Related: Presumptively.


assume (v.)

early 15c., assumpten to receive up into heaven (especially of the Virgin Mary), also assumen to
arrogate, from Latin assumere, adsumere to take up, take to oneself, take besides, obtain in
addition, from ad- to, up (see ad-) + sumere to take, from sub under (see sub-) + emere to take (see
exempt (adj.)).    Meaning to suppose, to take for granted as the basis of argument is first
recorded 1590s; that of to take or put on (an appearance, etc.) is from c.1600. Related: Assumed;
assuming. Early past participle was assumpt. In rhetorical usage, assume expresses what the assumer
postulates, often as a confessed hypothesis; presume expresses what the presumer really believes.


dare (v.)

from first and third person singular of Old English durran to brave danger, dare; venture, presume,
from Proto-Germanic *ders- (cognates: Old Norse dearr, Old High German giturran, Gothic gadaursan),
from PIE *dhers- to dare, be courageous (cognates: Sanskrit dadharsha to be bold; Old Persian
dar&#353;- to dare; Greek thrasys bold; Old Church Slavonic druzate to be bold, dare; Lithuanian
dristi to dare, drasus courageous).    An Old English irregular preterite-present verb: darr,
dearst, dear were first, second and third person singular present indicative; mostly regularized
16c., though past tense dorste survived as durst, but is now dying, persisting mainly in northern
English dialect. Meaning to challenge or defy (someone) is first recorded 1570s.


sturdy (adj.)

c.1300, hard to manage, reckless, violent, from Old French estordi (11c., Modern French
&#233;tourdi) violent, originally dazed, past participle of estordiir to daze, stun, stupefy, from
Vulgar Latin *exturdire, which some presume to be from Latin intensive prefix ex- + turdus thrush.
Barnhart suggests the notion is of thrushes eating grape remnants at wineries and behaving as if
drunk (Italian tordo thrush also means simpleton, and French has the expression so&#251;l comme une
grive drunk as a thrush). OED, however, regards all this as open to grave objection. Century
Dictionary compares Latin torpidus dull.    Sense of solidly built, strong and hardy first recorded
late 14c. Related: Sturdily; sturdiness. Sturdy-boots obstinate person is from 1762; a sturdy beggar
in old language was one capable of work (c.1400).


Q

16th letter of the classical Roman alphabet, from the Phoenician equivalent of Hebrew koph, qoph,
which was used for the more guttural of the two k sounds in Semitic.    The letter existed in Greek,
but was little used and not alphabetized; the stereotypical connection with -u- began in Latin.
Anglo-Saxon scribes adopted the habit at first, but later used spellings with cw- or cu-. The qu-
pattern returned to English with the Norman Conquest and had displaced cw- by c.1300. In some
spelling variants of late Middle English, quh- also took work from wh-, especially in Scottish and
northern dialects, for example Gavin Douglas, Provost of St. Giles, in his vernacular Aeneid of
1513:    Lyk as the rois in June with hir sueit smell  The marygulde or dasy doith excell.  Quhy
suld I than, with dull forhede and vane,  With ruide engine and barrand emptive brane,  With bad
harsk speche and lewit barbour tong,  Presume to write quhar thi sueit bell is rong,  Or contirfait
sa precious wourdis deir?    Scholars use -q- alone to transliterate Semitic koph (as in Quran,
Qatar, Iraq ). In Christian theology, Q has been used since 1901 to signify the hypothetical source
of passages shared by Matthew and Luke, but not in Mark; in this sense probably it is an
abbreviation of German Quelle source.


