prestige (n.)

1650s, trick, from French prestige (16c.) deceit, imposture, illusion (in Modern French, illusion,
magic, glamour), from Latin praestigium delusion, illusion (see prestigious). Derogatory until 19c.;
sense of dazzling influence first applied 1815, to Napoleon.


prestigious (adj.)

1540s, practicing illusion or magic, deceptive, from Latin praestigious full of tricks, from
praestigiae juggler's tricks, probably altered by dissimilation from praestrigiae, from
praestringere to blind, blindfold, dazzle, from prae before (see pre-) + stringere to tie or bind
(see strain (v.)). Derogatory until 19c.; meaning having dazzling influence is attested from 1913
(see prestige). Related: Prestigiously; prestigiousness.


cachet (n.)

1630s, Scottish borrowing of French cachet seal affixed to a letter or document (16c.), from Old
French dialectal cacher to press, crowd, from Latin coactare constrain (see cache). Meaning evolving
through (letter under) personal stamp (of the king) to prestige. Compare French lettre de cachet
letter under seal of the king.


authority (n.)

early 13c., autorite book or quotation that settles an argument, from Old French auctorit&eacute;
authority, prestige, right, permission, dignity, gravity; the Scriptures (12c.; Modern French
autorit&eacute;), from Latin auctoritatem (nominative auctoritas) invention, advice, opinion,
influence, command, from auctor master, leader, author (see author (n.)).    Usually spelled with a
-c- in English till 16c., when it was dropped in imitation of the French. Meaning power to enforce
obedience is from late 14c.; meaning people in authority is from 1610s. Authorities those in charge,
those with police powers is recorded from mid-19c.


city (n.)

early 13c., in medieval usage a cathedral town, but originally any settlement, regardless of size
(distinction from town is 14c., though in English it always seems to have ranked above borough),
from Old French cite town, city (10c., Modern French cit&eacute;), from earlier citet, from Latin
civitatem (nominative civitas; in Late Latin sometimes citatem) originally citizenship, condition or
rights of a citizen, membership in the community, later community of citizens, state, commonwealth
(used, for instance of the Gaulish tribes), from civis townsman, from PIE root *kei- to lie; bed,
couch; homestead; beloved, dear (see cemetery).    The sense has been transferred from the
inhabitants to the place. The Latin word for city was urbs, but a resident was civis. Civitas seems
to have replaced urbs as Rome (the ultimate urbs) lost its prestige. Loss of Latin -v- is regular in
French in some situations (compare alleger from alleviare; neige from nivea; jeune from juvenis. A
different sound evolution from the Latin word yielded Italian citta, Catalan ciutat, Spanish ciudad,
Portuguese cidade.    Replaced Old English burh (see borough). London is the city from 1550s. As an
adjective from c.1300. City hall first recorded 1670s to fight city hall is 1913, American English;
city slicker first recorded 1916 (see slick); both American English. City limits is from 1825. The
newspaper city desk attested from 1878. Inner city first attested 1968. City state (also city-state)
is attested from 1877.


