pretend (n.)

fact of pretending, 1888, from children's talk, from pretend (v.). Earlier in same sense was verbal
noun pretending (1640s).


pretended (adj.)

mid-15c., so-called, past participle adjective from pretend (v.).


pretend (v.)

late 14c., to profess, assert, maintain (a claim, etc.), to direct (one's) efforts, from Old French
pretendre to lay claim, from Latin praetendere stretch in front, put forward, allege, from prae
before (see pre-) + tendere to stretch, from PIE root *ten- to stretch (see tend).    Main modern
sense of feign, put forward a false claim is recorded from c.1400; the older sense of simply to
claim is behind the string of royal pretenders (1690s) in English history. Meaning to play, make
believe is recorded from 1865. In 17c. pretend also could mean make a suit of marriage for, from a
sense in French. Related: Pretended; pretending.


pretender (n.)

1590s, one who intends; 1620s as one who puts forth a claim; agent noun from pretend (v.).
Specifically of a claimant to the English throne from 1690s.


mime (v.)

1610s, to act without words, from mime (n.). The transferred sense of to imitate is from 1733 (Greek
mimeisthai meant to imitate). Meaning to pretend to be singing a pre-recorded song is from 1965.
Related: mimed; miming.


post office (n.)

1650s, public department in charge of letter-carrying, from post (n.3) + office. Meaning building
where postal business is carried on is from 1650s. In slang or euphemistic sense of a sexual game it
refers to an actual parlor game first attested early 1850s in which pretend letters were paid for by
kisses.


pretension (n.)

mid-15c., assertion, allegation; objection; intention; signification, from Medieval Latin
pretensionem (nominative praetensio), noun of action from past participle stem of Latin praetendere
stretch in front, put forward, allege (see pretend (v.)). Meaning unproven claim is from c.1600.
Sense of ostentation is from 1727.


simulate (v.)

1620s, feign, pretend, assume falsely (implied in simulated), back-formation from simulation or else
from Latin simulatus, past participle of simulare to make like, imitate, copy. Meaning to use a
model to imitate certain conditions for purposes of study or training is from 1947. Related:
Simulating.


feign (v.)

c.1300, from Old French feign-, present participle stem of feindre pretend, represent, imitate,
shirk (12c.), from Latin fingere to touch, handle; devise; fabricate, alter, change (see fiction).
Related: Feigned; feigning.


feint (v.)

c.1300, feinten, to deceive, pretend, also become feeble or exhausted; to lack spirit or courage,
from feint (adj.); see feint (n.). Compare Old French feintir be slow, delay. Sense of to make a
sham attack is first attested 1833. Related: Feinted; feinting.


dissimulation (n.)

late 14c., from Old French dissimulation (12c.), from Latin dissimulationem (nominative
dissimulatio) a disguising, concealment, noun of action from past participle stem of dissimulare
make unlike, conceal, disguise, from dis- completely + simulare pretend, assume, simulate (see
simulation).


bravery (n.)

1540s, daring, defiance, boasting, from French braverie, from braver to brave (see brave) or else
from cognate Italian braveria, from bravare.    No Man is an Atheist, however he pretend it and
serve the Company with his Braveries. [Donne, 1631]    As a good quality, attested from 1580s.
Meaning fine clothes is from 1560s and holds the older sense.


pretentious (adj.)

1836, from French pr&eacute;tentieux (17c.), from pr&eacute;tention pretension, from Medieval Latin
pretentionem (nominative pretentio) pretension, noun of action from past participle stem of Latin
praetendere (see pretend (v.)).


sandbag (v.)

1860, furnish with sandbags, from sandbag (n.). Meaning pretend weakness, 1970s perhaps is extended
from poker-playing sense of refrain from raising at the first opportunity in hopes of raising more
steeply later (1940), which perhaps is from sandbagger in the sense of bully or ruffian who uses a
sandbag as a weapon to knock his intended victim unconscious (1882). Hence to fell or stun with a
blow from a sandbag (1887). Related: Sandbagged; sandbagging.


sic (adv.)

insertion in printed quotation to call attention to error in the original; Latin, literally so,
thus, in this way, related to or emphatic of si if, from PIE root *so- this, that (cognates: Old
English sio she). Used regularly in English articles from 1876, perhaps by influence of similar use
in French (1872).    [I]t amounts to Yes, he did say that, or Yes, I do mean that, in spite of your
natural doubts. It should be used only when doubt is natural; but reviewers &amp; controversialists
are tempted to pretend that it is, because (sic) provides them with a neat &amp; compendious form of
sneer. [Fowler]   Sic passim is generally so throughout.


pretense (n.)

also pretence, early 15c., the putting forth of a claim, from Anglo-French pretensse, Middle French
pretensse (Modern French pr&#233;tense), from Medieval Latin noun use of fem. of Late Latin
praetensus, altered from Latin praetentus, past participle of praetendere (see pretend). Meaning
false or hypocritical profession is from 1540s.


assemble (v.)

earlly 14c., transitive and intransitive, from Old French assembler come together, join, unite;
gather (11c.), from Latin assimulare to make like, liken, compare; copy, imitate; feign, pretend,
later to gather together, from ad- to (see ad-) + simulare to make like (see simulation). In Middle
English and in Old French it also was a euphemism for to couple sexually. Meaning to put parts
together in manufacturing is from 1852. Related: Assembled; assembling. Assemble together is
redundant.


malinger (v.)

1820, from French malingrer to suffer, perhaps also pretend to be ill, from malingre ailing, sickly
(13c.), of uncertain origin, possibly a blend of mingre sickly, miserable and malade ill. Mingre is
itself a blend of maigre meager + haingre sick, haggard, possibly from Germanic (compare Middle High
German hager thin). The sense evolution may be through notion of beggars with sham sores. Related:
Malingered; malingering; malingerer (1785).


mooch (v.)

mid-15c., pretend poverty, probably from Old French muchier, mucier to hide, sulk, conceal, hide
away, keep out of sight, of uncertain origin, perhaps from Celtic or Germanic (Liberman prefers the
latter, Klein the former). Or the word may be a variant of Middle English mucchen to hoard, be
stingy (c.1300), probably originally to keep coins in one's nightcap, from mucche nightcap, from
Middle Dutch muste cap, nightcap, ultimately from Medieval Latin almucia, of unknown origin. Sense
of sponge off others first recorded 1857.    Whatever the distant origin of mooch, the verb *mycan
and its cognates have been part of European slang for at least two millennia. [Liberman]    Related:
Mooched; mooching. As a noun meaning a moocher, from 1914.


hypocrisy (n.)

c.1200, ipocrisie, from Old French ypocrisie, from Late Latin hypocrisis, from Greek hypokrisis
acting on the stage, pretense, from hypokrinesthai play a part, pretend, also answer, from hypo-
under (see sub-) + middle voice of krinein to sift, decide (see crisis). The sense evolution in
Attic Greek is from separate gradually to answer to answer a fellow actor on stage to play a part.
The h- was restored in English 16c.    Hypocrisy is the art of affecting qualities for the purpose
of pretending to an undeserved virtue. Because individuals and institutions and societies most often
live down to the suspicions about them, hypocrisy and its accompanying equivocations underpin the
conduct of life. Imagine how frightful truth unvarnished would be. [Benjamin F. Martin, France in
1938, 2005]


play (n.)

Old English plega (West Saxon), pl&aelig;ga (Anglian) quick motion; recreation, exercise, any brisk
activity (the latter sense preserved in swordplay, etc.), from or related to Old English plegan (see
play (v.)). Meaning dramatic performance is attested by early 14c., perhaps late Old English.
Meaning free or unimpeded movement of mechanisms, etc., is from c.1200. By early Middle English it
could mean variously, a game, a martial sport, activity of children, joke or jesting, revelry,
sexual indulgence. Sporting sense the playing of a game first attested mid-15c.; sense of specific
maneuver or attempt is from 1868. To be in play (of a hit ball, etc.) is from 1788. Play-by-play is
attested from 1927. Play on words is from 1798. Play-money is attested from 1705 as money won in
gambling, by 1920 as pretend money.


braid (v.)

to plait, knit, weave, twist together, c.1200, breidan, from Old English bregdan to move quickly,
pull, shake, swing, throw (in wrestling), draw (a sword); bend, weave, knit, join together; change
color, vary; scheme, feign, pretend (class III strong verb, past tense br&aelig;gd, past participle
brogden), from Proto-Germanic *bregthan make sudden jerky movements from side to side (compare Old
Norse breg&eth;a to brandish, turn about, braid; Old Saxon bregdan to weave; Dutch breien to knit;
Old High German brettan to draw, weave, braid), from PIE root *bherek- to gleam, flash (compare
Sanskrit bhrasate flames, blazes, shines). In English the verb survives only in the narrow
definition of plait hair. Related: Braided; braiding.


poetry (n.)

late 14c., poetry; a poem; ancient literature; poetical works, fables, or tales, from Old French
poetrie (13c.), and perhaps directly from Medieval Latin poetria (c.650), from Latin poeta (see
poet). In classical Latin, poetria meant poetess.    ... I decided not to tell lies in verse. Not to
feign any emotion that I did not feel; not to pretend to believe in optimism or pessimism, or
unreversible progress; not to say anything because it was popular, or generally accepted, or
fashionable in intellectual circles, unless I myself believed it; and not to believe easily.
[Robinson Jeffers (1887-1962), forward to Selected Poems]    Figurative use from 1660s. Old English
had metergeweorc verse, metercr&#230;ft art of versification. Modern English lacks a true verb form
in this group of words, though poeticize (1804), poetize (1580s, from French po&eacute;tiser), and
poetrize (c.1600) have been tried. Poetry in motion (1826) perhaps is from poetry of motion (1813)
dance (also poetry of the foot, 1660s).


