pretentious (adj.)

1836, from French pr&eacute;tentieux (17c.), from pr&eacute;tention pretension, from Medieval Latin
pretentionem (nominative pretentio) pretension, noun of action from past participle stem of Latin
praetendere (see pretend (v.)).


pseudo (n.)

late 14c., false or spurious thing; see pseudo-. As an adjective in this sense from mid-15c. In
modern use, of persons, pretentious, insincere, from 1945; as a noun from 1959. Related: Pseudish.


chi-chi (adj.)

also chichi, extremely chic, sophisticated, also pretentious fussiness, 1908, from French chichi
airs, fuss. Perhaps, like frou-frou, imitative.


immodest (adj.)

1560s, arrogant, impudent, pretentious, from Latin immodestus unrestrained, excessive, from
assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + modestus (see modest). Meaning indecent is
from 1580s. Related: immodestly.


unpretentious (adj.)

1859, from un- (1) not + pretentious (adj.). Related: Unpretentiously; unpretentiousness.


brassy (adj.)

impudent, 1570s, from brass + -y (2). Compare brazen. Sense of debased and pretentious is from
1580s, from brass as contrasted with gold; sense of strident and artificial is from 1865. Related:
Brassily; brassiness.


Pharisee (n.)

from Old English Fariseos, Old French pharise (13c.), and directly from Late Latin Pharis&aelig;us,
from Greek Pharisaios, from Aramaic perishayya, emphatic plural of perish separated, separatist,
corresponding to Hebrew parush, from parash he separated. Ancient Jewish sect (2c. B.C.E.-1c. C.E.)
distinguished by strict observance but regarded as pretentious and self-righteous, at least by Jesus
(Matt. xxiii:27). Meaning self-righteous person, formalist, hypocrite is attested from 1580s.


rococo (adj.)

1836, old-fashioned, from French rococo (19c.), apparently a humorous alteration of rocaille
shellwork, pebble-work from Middle French roche rock, from Vulgar Latin *rocca stone. Specifically
of furniture or architecture of the time of Louis Quatorze and Louis Quinze, from 1841. If this is
correct, the reference is to the excessive use of shell designs in this lavish style. For
differentiation, see baroque. The general sense of tastelessly florid or ornate is from 1844.
Much of the painting, engraving, porcelain-work, etc., of the time has ... a real decorative charm,
though not of a very high order in art. Hence rococo is used attributively in contempt to note
anything feebly pretentious and tasteless in art or literature. [Century Dictionary, 1902]


tacky (adj.2)

in poor taste, 1888, from earlier sense of shabby, seedy (1862), adjectival use of tackey (n.) ill-
fed or neglected horse (1800), later extended to persons in like condition, hillbilly, cracker
(1888), of uncertain origin. Related: Tackiness.    The word tacky is a Southern colloquialism. It
was coined by a wealthier or more refined and educated class for general application to those who
were not sheltered by the branches of a family tree, who were tainted. Those who were wealthy and
yet had no great-grandfathers were tackies. The word was used both in contempt and in derision. It
is now nearly obsolete in both senses. There are no aristocrats in the South now, and therefore no
tackies. No man who has the instincts of a gentleman is spoken of as a tacky, whether he can
remember the name of his grandfather's uncle or not. But it has its uses. It is employed in
describing persons of low ideas and vulgar manners, whether rich or poor. It may mean an absence of
style. In dress, anything that is tawdry is tacky. A ribbon on the shopkeeper's counter, a curtain
in the bolt, a shawl or bonnet, a bolt of cloth fresh from the loom may be tacky, because it is
cheap and yet pretentious. In Louisiana the inferior grade of Creole ponies are known as tackies.
[Horace Ingraham, Charleston, S.C., in American Notes and Queries, Feb. 15, 1890]


common (adj.)

c.1300, belonging to all, general, from Old French comun common, general, free, open, public (9c.,
Modern French commun), from Latin communis in common, public, shared by all or many; general, not
specific; familiar, not pretentious, from PIE *ko-moin-i- held in common, compound adjective formed
from *ko- together + *moi-n-, suffixed form of root *mei- (1) change, exchange (see mutable), hence
literally shared by all.    Second element of the compound also is the source of Latin munia duties,
public duties, functions, those related to munia office. Perhaps reinforced in Old French by the
Germanic form of PIE *ko-moin-i- (compare Old English gem&aelig;ne common, public, general,
universal; see mean (adj.)), which came to French via Frankish.    Used disparagingly of women and
criminals since c.1300. Common pleas is 13c., from Anglo-French communs plets, hearing civil actions
by one subject against another as opposed to pleas of the crown. Common prayer is contrasted with
private prayer. Common stock is attested from 1888.


