prevalent (adj.)

early 15c., having great power or force, from Latin praevalentem (nominative praevalens) of superior
strength; mighty, present participle of praevalere to be more able (see prevail). Meaning
extensively existing, in general use is from 1650s.


Biedermeier

1854, from German, from Gottlieb Biedermeier, name of a fictitious writer of stodgy poems (invented
by Ludwig Eichrodt as a satire on bourgeois taste); the name generally applied to styles prevalent
in Germany 1815-48; also conventional, bourgeois.


madman (n.)

early 14c., mad man, from mad (adj.) + man (n.). One-word form attested from c.1400, prevalent from
16c.


beriberi (n.)

also beri-beri, paralytic disease prevalent in much of India, 1703, literally great weakness,
intensifying reduplication of Sinhalese beri weakness.


prevalence (n.)

1590s, fact of having mastery, from Middle French pr&eacute;valence (15c.), from Late Latin
praevalentia, from praevalens, present participle of praevalere (see prevalent). Meaning condition
of being widespread or general is from 1713.


Tudor

1779 in reference to the English royal family, from Welsh surname Tewdwr, used of the line of
English sovereigns from Henry VII to Elizabeth I, descended from Owen Tudor, who married Catherine,
widowed queen of Henry V. Applied from 1815 to a style of architecture prevalent during these
reigns. The name is the Welsh form of Theodore.


susurrus (n.)

1809, earlier as a medical Latin word in English, from Latin susurrus, literally a humming,
muttering, whispering (see susurration).    Among the diseases of the ear, one of the most prevalent
is the Paracusis imaginaria, to which both sexes are equally liable; and another variety of the same
tribe, more frequent among female patients, called the Susurrus criticus, or Scandal-buzz. [The
Lounger, Dec. 23, 1786]


cunnilingus (n.)

1887, from Latin cunnus vulva (see cunt) + lingere to lick (see lick (v.)). The Latin properly would
mean one who licks a vulva, but it is used in English in reference to the action, not the actor. The
verb ought to be *cunnilingue.Cunnilingus was a very familiar manifestation in classical times; ...
it tends to be especially prevalent at all periods of high civilization. [Havelock Ellis, 1905]


rife (adj.)

Old English rife abundant, common, prevalent, from Proto-Germanic *rif- (cognates: Old Norse rifr,
Swedish river, Norwegian riv, Middle Dutch riif, Middle Low German rive abundant, generous), said to
be from PIE root *rei- to scratch, tear, cut The prevalence of the word in early southern texts is
in favour of its being native in English, rather than an adoption from Scandinavian. [OED]


current (adj.)

c.1300, running, flowing, from Old French corant running, lively, eager, swift, present participle
of corre to run, from Latin currere to run, move quickly (of persons or things), from PIE *kers- to
run (cognates: Greek -khouros running, Lithuanian karsiu go quickly, Old Norse horskr swift, Old
Irish and Middle Welsh carr cart, wagon, Breton karr chariot, Welsh carrog torrent). Meaning
prevalent, generally accepted is from 1560s.


whoop (v.)

mid-14c., houpen, partly imitative, partly from Old French huper, houper to cry out, shout, also
imitative. It is attested as an interjection from at least mid-15c. Spelling with wh- is from mid-
15c. The noun is recorded from c.1600. Phrase whoop it up create a disturbance is recorded from
1881. Expression whoop-de-do is recorded from 1929. Whooping cough (1739) is now the prevalent
spelling of hooping cough; whooping crane is recorded from 1791.


French (adj.)

Old English frencisc of the Franks, from Franca (see Frank). The noun is from Old English Frencisc.
As the name of a language, from late 13c.    Euphemistic meaning bad language (pardon my French) is
from 1895. Used in many combination-words, often dealing with food or sex. French dressing recorded
by 1860; French toast is from 1630s. French letter condom (c.1856, perhaps on resemblance of
sheepskin and parchment), French (v.) perform oral sex on (c.1917) and French kiss (1923) all
probably stem from the Anglo-Saxon equation of Gallic culture and sexual sophistication, a sense
first recorded 1749 in the phrase French novel.    To take French leave, depart without telling the
host, is 1771, from a social custom then prevalent. However, this is said to be called in France
filer &agrave; l'anglaise, literally to take English leave.


arrow (n.)

early 14c., from Old English arwan, earlier earh arrow, possibly borrowed from Old Norse &ouml;r
(genitive &ouml;rvar), from Proto-Germanic *arkhwo (cognates: Gothic arhwanza), from PIE root *arku-
bow and/or arrow, source of Latin arcus (see arc (n.)). The ground sense would be the thing
belonging to the bow, perhaps a superstitious avoidance of the actual name.    A rare word in Old
English, where more common words for arrow were str&aelig;l (cognate with the word still common in
Slavic, once prevalent in Germanic, too; meaning related to flash, streak) and fla, flan, a North
Germanic word, perhaps originally with the sense of splinter. Str&aelig;l disappeared by 1200; fla
lingered in Scottish until after 1500. Meaning a mark like an arrow in cartography, etc. is from
1834.


hoist (v.)

1540s, to raise, earlier hoise (c.1500), probably originally past tense of Middle English hysse
(late 15c.), which is probably from Middle Dutch hyssen (Dutch hijsen) to hoist, related to Low
German hissen and Old Norse hissa upp raise. A nautical word found in most European languages
(French hisser, Italian issare, Spanish izar), but it is uncertain which had it first. Related:
Hoisted; hoisting. In phrase hoist with one's own petard, it is the past participle.    For 'tis the
sport, to have the engineer  Hoist with his own petar: and it shall go hard  But I will delve one
yard below their mines,  And blow them at the moon: O 'tis most sweet,  When in one line two crafts
directly meet.  [Hamlet, Act III, Scene iv]    Meaning to lift and remove was prevalent c.1550-1750.
As a noun, 1650s, from the verb.


axe (n.)

Old English &aelig;ces (Northumbrian acas) axe, pickaxe, hatchet, later &aelig;x, from Proto-
Germanic *akusjo (cognates: Old Saxon accus, Old Norse ex, Old Frisian axe, German Axt, Gothic
aqizi), from PIE *agw(e)si- (cognates: Greek axine, Latin ascia).    The spelling ax is better on
every ground, of etymology, phonology, and analogy, than axe, which became prevalent during the 19th
century; but it is now disused in Britain. [OED]   <hr />   The spelling ax, though better on every
ground, of etymology, phonology, &amp; analogy (OED), is so strange to 20th-c. eyes that it suggests
pedantry &amp; is unlikely to be restored. [Fowler]    Meaning musical instrument is 1955,
originally jazz slang for the saxophone; rock slang for guitar dates to 1967. The axe in figurative
sense of cutting of anything (expenses, workers, etc.), especially as a cost-saving measure, is from
1922, probably from the notion of the headman's literal axe (itself attested from mid-15c.). To have
an axe to grind is from an 1815 essay by U.S. editor and politician Charles Miner (1780-1865) in
which a man flatters a boy and gets him to do the chore of axe-grinding for him, then leaves without
offering thanks or recompense. Misattributed to Benjamin Franklin in Weekley, OED print edition, and
many other sources.


third (adj.)

late Old English metathesis of &thorn;ridda, from Proto-Germanic *thridja- (cognates: Old Frisian
thredda, Old Saxon thriddio, Middle Low German drudde, Dutch derde, Old High German dritto, German
dritte, Old Norse &thorn;ri&eth;e, Danish tredie, Swedish tredje, Gothic &thorn;ridja), from PIE
*tri-tyo- (cognates: Sanskrit trtiyas, Avestan thritya, Greek tritos, Latin tertius (source of
Italian terzo, Spanish tercio, French tiers), Old Church Slavonic tretiji, Lithuanian trecias, Old
Irish triss, Welsh tryde), suffixed form of root *trei-  (see three).    Metathesis of thrid into
third is attested from c.950 in Northumbrian, but overall thrid was prevalent up to 16c. The noun
meaning third part of anything is recorded from late 14c. Third rail in electric railway sense is
recorded from 1890. Third World War as a possibility first recorded 1947. Third-rate of poor quality
is from 1814, ultimately from classification of ships (1640s); third class in railway travel is from
1839. Third Reich (1930) is a partial translation of German drittes Reich (1923). Third party in
law, insurance, etc., is from 1818.


spring (n.1)

season following winter, the vernal season, c.1400, earlier springing time (late 14c.), which
replaced Lent, the Old English word. From spring (v.); also see spring (n.3). The notion is of the
spring of the year, when plants begin to rise (as in spring of the leaf, 1520s), from the noun in
its old sense of action or time of rising or springing into existence. It was used of sunrise, the
waxing of the moon, rising tides, etc.; compare 14c. spring of dai sunrise, spring of mone moonrise,
late Old English spring carbuncle, pustule.    Other Germanic languages tend to take words for fore
or early as their roots for the season name (Danish voraar, Dutch voorjaar, literally fore-year;
German Fr&uuml;hling, from Middle High German vrueje early). In 15c. English, the season also was
prime-temps, after Old French prin tans, tamps prim (French printemps, which replaced
primev&egrave;re 16c. as the common word for spring), from Latin tempus primum, literally first
time, first season.   Spring fever is from 1843 as surge of romantic feelings; earlier of a type of
disease or head-cold prevalent in certain places in spring; Old English had lenctenadle. First
record of spring cleaning in the domestic sense is by 1843 (in ancient Persia, the first month,
corresponding to March-April, was Adukanai&#353;a, which apparently means Irrigation-Canal-Cleaning
Month; Kent, p.167). Spring chicken small roasting chicken (usually 11 to 14 weeks) is recorded from
1780; transferred sense of young person first recorded 1906. Baseball spring training attested by
1889, earlier of militias, etc.


