prevailing (adj.)

1590s, vigorous; 1680s, widely accepted, present participle adjective from prevail (v.).


prevail (v.)

c.1400, be successful; be efficacious, from Old French prevaleir (Modern French pr&#233;valoir) and
directly from Latin praevalere be stronger, have greater power, from prae before (see pre-) + valere
have power, be strong (see valiant). Spelling in English perhaps influenced by avail. Related:
Prevailed; prevailing.


prevalent (adj.)

early 15c., having great power or force, from Latin praevalentem (nominative praevalens) of superior
strength; mighty, present participle of praevalere to be more able (see prevail). Meaning
extensively existing, in general use is from 1650s.


rule (v.)

c.1200, to control, guide, direct, from Old French riuler impose rule, from Latin regulare (see
regulate). Legal sense establish by decision is recorded from early 15c. Meaning mark with lines is
from 1590s. Meaning to dominate, prevail is from 1874. Rule Brittania, patriotic song, is from 1740.
Related: Ruled; ruling.


surmount (v.)

early 14c., to rise above, go beyond, from Old French surmonter rise above, from sur- beyond  (see
sur- (1)) + monter to go up (see mount (v.)). Meaning to prevail over, overcome is recorded from
late 14c. Related: Surmounted; surmounting.


countervail (v.)

late 14c., to be worth as much as, also to prevail against, from Anglo-French countrevaloir, Old
French contrevaloir to be effective against, be comparable to, from Latin phrase contra valere to be
worth against (see contra- and valiant). Related: Countervailing.


inexorable (adj.)

1550s, from Middle French inexorable and directly from Latin inexorabilis that cannot be moved by
entreaty, from in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + exorabilis able to be entreated, from exorare to
prevail upon, from ex- out (see ex-) + orare pray (see orator). Related: Inexorably; inexorability.


India

Old English, from Latin India, from Greek India region of the Indus River, later used of the region
beyond it, from Indos Indus River, from Old Persian Hindu, the name for the province of Sind, from
Sanskrit sindhu river. The more common Middle English form was Ynde or Inde, From French (see
Indies). India began to prevail 16c., perhaps under Spanish or Portuguese influence.


overcome (v.)

Old English ofercuman to reach, overtake, also to conquer, prevail over, from ofer (see over) +
cuman to come (see come (v.)). A common Germanic compound (Middle Dutch overkomen, Old High German
ubarqueman, German &uuml;berkommen). In reference to mental or chemical force, to overwhelm, render
helpless, it is in late Old English. Meaning to surmount (a difficulty or obstacle) is from c.1200.
The Civil Rights anthem We Shall Overcome was put together c.1950s from lyrics from Charles
Tindley's spiritual I'll Overcome Some Day (1901), and melody from pre-Civil War spiritual No More
Auction Block for Me. Related: Overcame; overcoming.


optimism (n.)

1759 (in translations of Voltaire), from French optimisme (1737), from Modern Latin optimum, used by
Gottfried Leibniz (in Th&eacute;odic&eacute;e, 1710) to mean the greatest good, from Latin optimus
the best (see optimum). The doctrine holds that the actual world is the best of all possible worlds,
in which the creator accomplishes the most good at the cost of the least evil.En termes de l'art, il
l'appelle la raison du meilleur ou plus savamment encore, et Theologiquement autant que
G&eacute;om&eacute;triquement, le syst&ecirc;me de l'Optimum, ou l'Optimisme. [M&eacute;moires de
Tr&eacute;voux, Feb. 1737]Launched out of philosophical jargon and into currency by Voltaire's
satire on it in Candide. General sense of belief that good ultimately will prevail in the world
first attested 1841 in Emerson; meaning tendency to take a hopeful view of things first recorded
1819 in Shelley.


