prey (v.)

c.1300, to plunder, pillage, ravage, from prey (n.) and in part from Old French preer, earlier
preder (c.1040), from Late Latin praedare, from praeda (see prey (n.)). Its sense of to kill and
devour is attested from mid-14c. Related: Preyed; preying.


prey (n.)

mid-13c., animal hunted for food, also that which is taken in war, from Old French preie booty,
animal taken in the chase (mid-12c., Modern French proie), from Latin praeda booty, plunder, game
hunted, earlier praeheda, literally something seized before, from PIE *prai-heda-; for first element
see prae-; second element related to the second element in prehendere to grasp, seize (see
prehensile).


depredation (n.)

late 15c., from Middle French d&eacute;pr&eacute;dation, from Late Latin depraedationem (nominative
depraedatio) a plundering, from past participle stem of Latin depraedari to pillage, from de-
thoroughly (see de-) + praedari to plunder, literally to make prey of, from praeda prey (see prey
(n.)).


predatory (adj.)

1580s, involving plundering, from Latin praedatorius pertaining to plunder, from praedator
plunderer, from praedor to plunder, from praeda prey (see prey (n.)). Of animals, from 1660s.


predation (n.)

late 15c., act of plundering or pillaging, from Latin praedationem (nominative praedatio) a
plundering, act of taking booty, from praedari to rob, to plunder, from praeda plunder, booty, prey
(see prey (n.)). Zoological sense recorded from 1907.


swoop (n.)

1540s, a blow, stroke, from swoop (v.). Meaning the sudden pouncing of a rapacious bird on its prey
is 1605, from Shakespeare:    Oh, Hell-Kite! All? What, All my pretty Chickens, and their Damme, At
one fell swoope? [Macbeth, IV.iii.219]


predate (v.)

to seek prey, 1974, a back-formation from predator, etc. Related: Predated; predating. For the word
meaning antedate; pre-exist, see pre-date.


tower (v.)

c.1400, rise high (implied in towered); see tower (n.). Also, of hawks, to fly high so as to swoop
down on prey (1590s). Related: Towering.


pilot-fish (n.)

1630s, from pilot (n.) + fish (n.). So called because they were thought to lead sharks to prey.


jaguar (n.)

big cat of the Americas (Felis onca), c.1600, from Portuguese jaguar, from Tupi jaguara, said to be
a name denoting any larger beast of prey [Klein]. Also a type of British-made car; in this sense the
abbreviation Jag is attested from 1959.


chicken hawk (n.)

type of hawk that is believed to prey on domestic fowl, 1802, American English. Figuratively, from
the secondary senses of both words, public person who advocates war but who declined significant
opportunity to serve in uniform during wartime, at least 1988, American English. From chicken (n.) +
hawk (n.).


flesh (v.)

1520s, to render (a hunting animal) eager for prey by rewarding it with flesh from a kill, with
figurative extensions, from flesh (n.). Meaning to clothe or embody with flesh, with figurative
extensions, is from 1660s. Related: Fleshed; fleshing.


ravening (adj.)

voracious, 1520s, present participle adjective from an extinct verb raven to prey, to plunder,
devour greedily (late 14c., implied in ravener), from Old French raviner (see ravenous). It is not
etymologically related to raven (n.).


osprey (n.)

fishing hawk, mid-15c., from Anglo-French ospriet, from Medieval Latin avis prede bird of prey, from
Latin avis praed&aelig;, a generic term apparently confused with this specific bird in Old French on
its similarity to ossifrage.


rape (n.1)

early 14c., booty, prey; mid-14c., forceful seizure; plundering, robbery, extortion, from Anglo-
French rap, rape, and directly from Latin rapere seize (see rape (v.)). Meaning act of abducting a
woman or sexually violating her or both is from early 15c., but perhaps late 13c. in Anglo-Latin.


bait (n.)

food put on a hook or trap to lure prey, c.1300, from Old Norse beita food, related to Old Norse
beit pasture, Old English bat food, literally to cause to bite (see bait (v.)). Figurative sense
anything used as a lure is from c.1400.


prowl (v.)

late 14c., prollen, move about in search of something, of unknown origin, with no known cognates.
Spelling with -w- is from 1500s (compare bowls), but pronounced pr&#244;ll till late 18c. Meaning go
stealthily in search of prey is first recorded 1580s. Related: Prowled; prowling. The noun, in on
the prowl, is attested from 1803.


aerie (n.)

eagle's nest, 1580s (attested in Anglo-Latin from early 13c.), from Old French aire nest, Medieval
Latin area nest of a bird of prey (12c.), perhaps from Latin area level ground, garden bed
[Littr&eacute;], though some doubt this [Klein]. Another theory connects it to atrium. Formerly
misspelled eyrie (1660s) on the mistaken assumption that it derived from Middle English ey egg.


talon (n.)

c.1400, talounz claws of a bird or beast, probably originally from Old French talon heel or hinder
part of the foot of a beast, or of a man, or of a shoe; foot-step (12c.), from Medieval Latin
talonem heel, from Latin talus ankle (see talus (n.1)). The extension to birds of prey, and
subsequent stages, are peculiar to English [OED].


pounce (n.)

claw of a bird of prey, late 15c., pownse, probably from Old French ponchon lance, javelin; spine,
quill (Modern French poin&ccedil;on; see punch (v.)). So called for being the claws that punch holes
in things. In falconry, the heel claw is a talon, and others are pounces. Meaning an act of jumping
or falling upon is from 1825. In Middle English also the name of a tool for punching holes or
embossing metal (late 14c.).


torpedo (n.)

1520s, electric ray (flat fish that produces an electric charge to stun prey or for defense), from
Latin torpedo electric ray, originally numbness, sluggishness (the fish so called from the effect of
being jolted by the ray's electric discharges), from torpere be numb (see torpor).    Torpedo. A
fish which while alive, if touched even with a long stick, benumbs the hand that so touches it, but
when dead is eaten safely. [Johnson]    The sense of explosive device used to blow up enemy ships is
first recorded 1776, as a floating mine; the self-propelled version is from c.1900. Related:
Torpedic.


tiger (n.)

Old English tigras (plural), also in part from Old French tigre tiger (mid-12c.), both from Latin
tigris tiger, from Greek tigris, possibly from an Iranian source akin to Old Persian tigra- sharp,
pointed, Avestan tighri- arrow, in reference to its springing on its prey, but no application of
either word, or any derivative, to the tiger is known in Zend. [OED]. Of tiger-like persons from
c.1500. The meaning shriek or howl at the end of a cheer is recorded from 1845, American English,
and is variously explained. Tiger's-eye yellowish-brown quartz is recorded from 1886.


ther-

often thero-, word-forming element meaning beast, from comb. form of Greek ther wild beast, beast of
prey, from PIE *ghwer- wild beast (cognates: Latin ferus wild, ferox fierce; see fierce). Also
therio-, from Greek therion.


kite (n.)

bird of prey (Milvus ictinus), Old English cyta kind of hawk, probably imitative of its cries
(compare ciegan to call, German Kauz screech owl). The toy kite first so-called 1660s, from its way
of hovering in the air like a bird. The dismissive invitation to go fly a kite is attested by 1942,
American English, probably tracing to the popular song of the same name (lyrics by Johnny Burke),
sung by Bing Crosby in The Star Maker (1939):    Go fly a kite and tie your troubles to the tail
They'll be blown away by a merry gale,   Go fly a kite and toss your worries to the wind   And they
won't come back, they'll be too chagrined.


gain (n.)

late 15c., from Middle French gain, from Old French gaaigne gain, profit, advantage; booty; arable
land (12c.), from gaaignier to gain (see gain (v.)). The original French sense enfolded the notions
of profit from agriculture and booty, prey. Implied earlier in Middle English gaignage (late 14c.)
profit from agriculture.


auspex (n.)

1590s, one who observes flights of birds for the purpose of taking omens, from Latin auspex
interpreter of omens given by birds, from PIE *awi-spek- observer of birds, from *awi- bird (see
aviary) + *spek- to see (see scope (n.1)). Compare Greek oionos bird of prey, also bird of omen,
omen, and ornis bird, which also could mean omen.


fang (n.)

Old English fang prey, spoils, plunder, booty; a seizing or taking, from gefangen, past participle
of fon seize, take, capture, from Proto-Germanic *fango- (cognates: Old Frisian fangia, Middle Dutch
and Dutch vangen, Old Norse fanga, German fangen, Gothic fahan), from PIE root *pag- to make firm,
fix; connected to Latin pax (genitive pacis) peace (see pact).    The sense of canine tooth (1550s)
probably developed from Old English fengto&eth;, literally catching- or grasping-tooth. Transferred
to the venom tooth of a serpent, etc., by 1800.


monopoly (n.)

exclusive control of a commodity or trade, 1530s, from Latin monopolium, from Greek monopolion right
of exclusive sale, from mono- + polein to sell, from PIE root *pel- (5) to sell (cognates: Sanskrit
panate barters, purchases, Lithuanian pelnas gain, Old Church Slavonic splenu, Russian polon prey,
booty, Old Norse falr, Dutch veil, German feil for sale, venal).    Alternative form monopole
(1540s, from the Old French form of the word) was common in 16c. The popular board game, invented by
Charles Darrow, is from 1935. Monopoly money unreal currency is attested from 1972, in reference to
the paper used in the game.


rape (v.)

late 14c., seize prey; abduct, take by force, from rape (n.) and from Anglo-French raper (Old French
rapir) to seize, abduct, a legal term, probably from past participle of Latin rapere seize, carry
off by force, abduct (see rapid).    Latin rapere was used for sexually violate, but only very
rarely; the usual Latin word being stuprare to defile, ravish, violate, related to stuprum (n.),
literally disgrace. Meaning to abduct (a woman), ravish; also seduce (a man) is from early 15c. in
English. Related: Raped; raping. Uncertain connection to Low German and Dutch rapen in the same
sense.


griffin (n.)

c.1200 (as a surname), from Old French grifon a bird of prey, also fabulous bird of Greek mythology
(with head and wings of an eagle, body and hind quarters of a lion, believed to inhabit Scythia and
guard its gold), from Late Latin gryphus, misspelling of grypus, variant of gryps (genitive grypos),
from Greek gryps (genitive grypos) curved, hook-nosed, in reference to its beak.    Klein suggests a
Semitic source, through the medium of the Hittites, and cites Hebrew kerubh a winged angel, Akkad.
karibu, epithet of the bull-colossus (see cherub). The same or an identical word was used, with
uncertain connections, in mid-19c. Louisiana to mean mulatto (especially one one-quarter or two-
fifths white) and in India from late 18c. to mean newly arrived European.


spree (n.)

a frolic, drinking bout, 1804, slang, earliest use in Scottish dialect works, of uncertain origin.
Perhaps [Barnhart] an alteration of French esprit lively wit (see esprit). According to Klein, Irish
spre seems to be a loan-word from Old Norse sprakr. Watkins proposes a possible origin as an
alteration of Scots spreath cattle raid, from Gaelic spr&#233;dh, spr&#233;, cattle; wealth, from
Middle Irish preit, preid, booty, ultimately from Latin praeda plunder, booty (see prey (n.)).
The splore is a frolic, a merry meeting. In the slang language of the inhabitants of St Giles's, in
London, it is called a spree or a go. [Note in Select Scottish Songs, Ancient and Modern, vol. II,
London, 1810]    In Foote's comedy The Maid of Bath (1794) the word appears as a Scottish dialect
pronunciation of spry:  'When I intermarried with Sir Launcelot Coldstream, I was en siek a spree
lass as yoursel; and the baronet bordering upon his grand climacteric;'  etc.


wolf (n.)

Old English wulf wolf, wolfish person, devil, from Proto-Germanic *wulfaz (cognates: Old Saxon wulf,
Old Norse ulfr, Old Frisian, Dutch, Old High German, German wolf, Gothic wulfs), from PIE root
*wlkwo- wolf (cognates: Sanskrit vrkas, Avestan vehrka-; Albanian ul'k; Old Church Slavonic vluku;
Russian volcica; Lithuanian vilkas wolf; Old Persian Varkana- Hyrcania, district southeast of the
Caspian Sea, literally wolf-land; probably also Greek lykos, Latin lupus).    This manne can litle
skyl ... to saue himself harmlesse from the perilous accidentes of this world, keping ye wulf from
the doore (as they cal it). [The Institution of a Gentleman, 1555]    Probably extinct in England
from the end of the 15th century; in Scotland from the early 18th. Wolves as a symbol of lust are
ancient, such as Roman slang lupa whore, literally she-wolf (preserved in Spanish loba, Italian
lupa, French louve). The equation of wolf and prostitute, sexually voracious female persisted into
12c., but by Elizabethan times wolves had become primarily symbolic of male lust. The specific use
of wolf for sexually aggressive male first recorded 1847; wolf-whistle attested by 1945, American
English, at first associated with sailors. The image of a wolf in sheep's skin is attested from
c.1400. See here for a discussion of wolf in Indo-European history. The wolf-spider so called for
prowling and leaping on its prey rather than waiting in a web.


whore (n.)

1530s spelling alteration (see wh-) of Middle English hore, from Old English hore prostitute,
harlot, from Proto-Germanic *horaz (fem. *horon-) one who desires (cognates: Old Norse hora
adulteress, Danish hore, Swedish hora, Dutch hoer, Old High German huora whore; in Gothic only in
the masc. hors adulterer, fornicator, also as a verb, horinon commit adultery), from PIE *ka- to
like, desire, a base that has produced words in other languages for lover (cognates: Latin carus
dear; Old Irish cara friend; Old Persian kama desire; Sanskrit Kama, name of the Hindu god of love,
kamah love, desire, the first element in Kama Sutra).   Whore itself is perhaps a Germanic euphemism
for a word that has not survived. The Old English vowel naturally would have yielded *hoor, which is
the pronunciation in some dialects; it might have shifted by influence of Middle English homonym
hore physical filth, slime, also moral corruption, sin, from Old English horh. The wh- form became
current 16c. A general term of abuse for an unchaste or lewd woman (without regard to money) from at
least c.1200. Of male prostitutes from 1630s. Whore of Babylon is from Rev. xvii:1, 5, etc. In
Middle English with occasional plural forms horen, heoranna.    The word, with its derivatives, is
now avoided polite speech; its survival in literature, so as it survives, is due to the fact that it
is a favorite word with Shakspere (who uses it, with its derivatives, 99 times) and is common in the
authorized English version of the Bible ... though the American revisers recommended the
substitution of harlot as less gross .... [Century Dictionary]     Some equivalent words in other
languages also derive from sources not originally pejorative, such as Bohemian nevestka, diminutive
of nevesta bride; Dutch deern, German dirne originally girl, lass, wench; also perhaps Old French
pute, perhaps literally girl, fem. of Vulgar Latin *puttus (but perhaps rather from Latin putidus
stinking; see poontang). Welsh putain whore is from French, probably via Middle English. Among other
languages, Greek porne prostitute is related to pernemi sell, with an original notion probably of a
female slave sold for prostitution; Latin meretrix is literally one who earns wages (source of Irish
mertrech, Old English miltestre whore, prostitute).    The vulgar Roman word was scortum, literally
skin, hide. Another term was lupa, literally she-wolf (preserved in Spanish loba, Italian lupa,
French louve; see wolf (n.)). And of course there was prostituta, literally placed in front, thus
publicly exposed, from the fem. past participle of prostituere (see prostitute (n.)). Another Old
Norse term was sk&aelig;kja, which yielded Danish sk&oslash;ge, Swedish sk&ouml;ka; probably from
Middle Low German schoke, which is perhaps from schode foreskin of a horse's penis, perhaps with the
sense of skin (compare Latin scortum) or perhaps via an intermediary sense of vagina. Spanish
ramera, Portuguese ramiera are from fem. form of ramero young bird of prey, literally little branch,
from ramo branch. Breton gast is cognate with Welsh gast bitch, of uncertain origin. Compare also
strumpet, harlot.    Old Church Slavonic ljubodejica is from ljuby dejati fornicate, a compound from
ljuby love + dejati put, perform. Russian bljad whore derives from Old Church Slavonic bladinica,
from bladu fornication. Polish nierz&#261;dnica is literally disorderly woman. Sanskrit vecya is a
derivation of veca- house, dwelling, especially house of ill-repute, brothel. Another term,
pumccali, means literally one who runs after men. Avestan jahika is literally woman, but only of
evil creatures; another term is kunairi, from pejorative prefix ku- + nairi woman.


