primary (n.)

1861, American English, short for primary election (1792, with reference to France; in a U.S.
context from 1835); earlier primary caucus (1821).


primary (adj.)

early 15c., of the first order, from Latin primarius of the first rank, chief, principal, excellent,
from primus first (see prime (adj.)). Meaning first in order is from 1802. Primary color is first
recorded 1610s (at first the seven of the spectrum, later the three from which others can be made);
primary school is 1802, from French &eacute;cole primaire.The Paris journals ... are full of a plan,
brought forward by Fourcroy, for the establishment of primary schools, which is not interesting to
an English reader. [London Times, April 27, 1802]  Related: Primarily.


fundamental (adj.)

mid-15c., primary, original, pertaining to a foundation, modeled on Late Latin fundamentalis of the
foundation, from Latin fundamentum foundation (see fundament). Fundamentals primary principles or
rules of anything is from 1630s.


p wave (n.)

1908 in geology, the p representing primary (adj.).


teller (n.)

bank clerk who pays or receives money, late 15c., person who keeps accounts, agent noun from tell
(v.) in its secondary sense of count, enumerate, which is the primary sense of cognate words in many
Germanic languages. Earlier person who announces or narrates (c.1300).


fanny (n.)

buttocks, 1920, American English, from earlier British meaning vulva (1879), perhaps from the name
of John Cleland's heroine in the scandalous novel Fanny Hill or Memoirs of a Woman of Pleasure
(1748). The fem. proper name is a diminutive of Frances. The genital sense is still the primary one
outside U.S., but is not current in American English, a difference which can have consequences when
U.S. TV programs and movies air in Britain.


pansexual (adj.)

1926 (pansexualism is from 1917), from pan- + sexual. Originally in reference to the view that the
sex instinct plays the primary part in all human activity, mental and physical; this was held by his
critics to be the view of Freud, therefore a term of reproach leveled at early psychology.


hadron (n.)

1962, from Greek hadros thick, bulky, the primary sense, also strong, great; large, well-grown,
ripe, from PIE root *sa- to satisfy (see sad). With elementary particle suffix -on. Coined in
Russian as adron.


secondary (adj.)

late 14c., from Latin secundarius pertaining to the second class, inferior, from secundus (see
second (adj.)). Of colors, from 1831; of education, from 1809. Of sex characteristics from 1780.
Opposed to primary or principal. Related: Secondarily.


premier (adj.)

mid-15c., first in time; late 15c. as first in rank, from Middle French premier first, chief, from
Latin primarius of the first rank, chief (see primary (adj.)).


primal (adj.)

c.1600, belonging to the earliest age, from Medieval Latin primalis primary, from Latin primus first
(see prime (adj.)). Psychological sense, in reference to Freud's theory of behaviors springing from
the earliest stage of emotional development, is attested from 1918. Primal scream is from a best-
selling book of 1971.


tray (n.)

Old English treg, trig flat wooden board with a low rim, from Proto-Germanic *traujam (cognates: Old
Swedish tro, a corn measure), from PIE *drou-, variant of *deru-, forming words refering to objects
made of wood (see tree (n.)). The primary sense may have been wooden vessel.


census (n.)

1610s, from Latin census the enrollment of the names and property assessments of all Roman citizens,
originally past participle of censere to assess (see censor (n.)). The modern census begins in the
U.S., 1790., and Revolutionary France. Property for taxation was the primary purpose in Rome, hence
Latin census also was used for one's wealth, one's worth, wealthiness.


journey (n.)

c.1200, a defined course of traveling; one's path in life, from Old French journee day's work or
travel (12c.), from Vulgar Latin diurnum day, noun use of neuter of Latin diurnus of one day (see
diurnal). Meaning act of traveling by land or sea is c.1300. In Middle English it also meant a day
(c.1400); a day's work (mid-14c.); distance traveled in one day (mid-13c.), and as recently as
Johnson (1755) the primary sense was still the travel of a day.


hallelujah

also halleluiah, 1530s, from Hebrew hallalu-yah praise ye Jehovah, from hallalu, plural imperative
of hallel to praise also song of praise, from hillel he praised, of imitative origin, with primary
sense being to trill. Second element is yah, shortened form of Yahweh, name of God. Replaced variant
formation alleluia (12c.).


divvy (v.)

1872, American English, originally a noun, a slang shortening of dividend; the verb was in use by
1877 and is primary now (the noun is not in Webster's New World Dictionary), leading some (such as
Webster's) to think the word is a slang alteration of divide. Related: Divvying. In early 20c.
British slang the same word was a shortening of divine (adj.).


pet (n.1)

tamed animal, originally in Scottish and northern England dialect (and exclusively so until mid-
18c.), of unknown origin. Sense of indulged child (c.1500) is recorded slightly earlier than that of
animal kept as a favorite (1530s), but the latter may be the primary meaning. Probably associated
with or influenced by petty. As a term of endearment by 1849. Teacher's pet is attested from 1890.
Pet-shop from 1928.    Know nature's children all divide her care;  The fur that warms a monarch
warm'd a bear.  While man exclaims, 'See all things for my use!'  'See man for mine!' replies a
pamper'd goose:     [Alexander Pope, Essay on Man]


subdue (v.)

late 14c., to conquer and reduce to subjection, from Old French souduire, but this meant deceive,
seduce, from Latin subducere draw away, lead away, carry off; withdraw (see subduce). The primary
sense in English seems to have been taken in Anglo-French from Latin subdere and attached to this
word. Related: Subdued; subduing. As an associated noun, subdual is attested from 1670s (subduction
having acquired other senses).


lymphatic (adj.)

1640s, from Latin lymphaticus, from lympha (see lymph). Also sometimes used in the classical Latin
sense mad, frenzied, which was the primary sense of lymphaticus in Latin: OED reports this difficult
to account for, but perhaps due to association of lympha with nymphe; compare Greek nymphian to be
frenzy-stricken.


swag (n.)

1650s, a lurching or swaying, from swag (v.). Meaning ornamental festoon (1794) is said to be
probably a separate development from the verb (but see swage). Swag lamp attested from 1966.
Colloquial sense of promotional material (from recording companies, etc.) was in use by 2001; swag
was English criminal's slang for quantity of stolen property, loot from c.1839. This might be
related to earlier senses of round bag (c.1300) and big, blustering fellow (1580s), which may
represent separate borrowings from the Scandinavian source. The primary meaning was 'a bulging bag'
[Klein].


tabula rasa (n.)

the mind in its primary state, 1530s, from Latin tabula rasa, literally scraped tablet, from which
writing has been erased, thus ready to be written on again, from tabula (see table (n.)) + rasa,
fem. past participle of radere to scrape away, erase (see raze). A loan-translation of Aristotle's
pinakis agraphos, literally unwritten tablet (De anima, 7.22).


amuse (v.)

late 15c., to divert the attention, beguile, delude, from Middle French amuser divert, cause to
muse, from a at, to (but here probably a causal prefix) + muser ponder, stare fixedly (see muse
(v.)). Sense of divert from serious business, tickle the fancy of is recorded from 1630s, but
through 18c. the primary meaning was deceive, cheat by first occupying the attention. Bemuse retains
more of the original meaning. Related: Amused; amusing.


pilsner (n.)

type of pale, hoppy lager beer, 1877, after Pilsen, German town in Bohemia (Czech Plzen) where it
first was brewed. Now designating a type, not an origin; pilsner from Plzen is Pilsner Urquell, from
German Urquell primary source. The place name is from Old Czech plz damp, moist. Related: Pils.


primitive (adj.)

late 14c., of an original cause; of a thing from which something is derived; not secondary (a sense
now associated with primary), from Old French primitif very first, original (14c.) and directly from
Latin primitivus first or earliest of its kind, from primitus at first, from primus first (see prime
(adj.)).    Meaning of or belonging to the first age is from early 15c. Meaning having the style of
an early or ancient time is from 1680s. In Christian sense of adhering to the qualities of the early
Church it is recorded from 1680s. Of untrained artists from 1942. Related: Primitively.


poplin (n.)

type of corded fabric, 1710, from French papeline cloth of fine silk and worsted (1660s), probably
from Proven&ccedil;al papalino, fem. of papalin of or belonging to the pope, from Medieval Latin
papalis papal (see papal). The reference is to Avignon, papal residence during the schism 1309-1408
(and regarded as a papal town until 1791), which also was a center of silk manufacture. Influenced
in English by Poperinghe, town in Flanders where the fabric was made (but from 18c. the primary
source was Ireland).


de-

active word-forming element in English and in many words inherited from French and Latin, from Latin
de down, down from, from, off; concerning (see de), also used as a prefix in Latin usually meaning
down, off, away, from among, down from, but also down to the bottom, totally hence completely
(intensive or completive), which is its sense in many English words. As a Latin prefix it also had
the function of undoing or reversing a verb's action, and hence it came to be used as a pure
privative -- not, do the opposite of, undo -- which is its primary function as a living prefix in
English, as in defrost (1895), defuse (1943), etc. Compare also dis-.


amour (n.)

c.1300, love, from Old French amour, from Latin amorem (nominative amor) love, affection, strong
friendly feeling (it could be used of sons or brothers, but especially of sexual love), from amare
to love (see Amy). The accent shifted 15c.-17c. to the first syllable as the word became nativized,
then shifted back as the naughty or intriguing sense became primary and the word was felt to be a
euphemism.    A common ME word for love, later accented &aacute;mour (cf. enamour). Now with
suggestion of intrigue and treated as a F[rench] word. [Weekley]


template (n.)

1670s, templet horizontal piece under a girder or beam, probably from French templet weaver's
stretcher, diminutive of temple, which meant the same thing, from Latin templum plank, rafter, also
consecrated place (see temple (n.1)).    The meaning pattern or gauge for shaping a piece of work is
first recorded 1819 in this form, earlier temple (1680s); the form was altered mid-19c., probably
influenced by plate [Barnhart], but the pronunciation did not begin to shift until more recently
(templet is still the primary entry for the word in Century Dictionary).


of (prep.)

Old English of, unstressed form of &aelig;f (prep., adv.) away, away from, from Proto-Germanic *af
(cognates: Old Norse af, Old Frisian af, of of, Dutch af off, down, German ab off, from, down), from
PIE *apo- off, away (see apo-). Primary sense in Old English still was away, but shifted in Middle
English with use of the word to translate Latin de, ex, and especially Old French de, which had come
to be the substitute for the genitive case. Of shares with another word of the same length, as, the
evil glory of being accessory to more crimes against grammar than any other. [Fowler]    Also from
1837 a non-standard or dialectal representation of have as pronounced in unstressed positions (could
of, must of, etc.)


buxom (adj.)

late 12c., buhsum humble, obedient, from Proto-Germanic *buh- stem of Old English bugen to bow  (see
bow (v.)) + -som, for a total meaning capable of being bent. Meaning progressed from compliant,
obliging, through lively, jolly, healthily plump, vigorous, to (in women, and perhaps influenced by
lusty) plump, comely (1580s). In Johnson [1755] the primary meaning still is obedient, obsequious.
Used often of breasts, and by 1950s it had begun to be used more narrowly for bosomy and could be
paired with slim (adj.). Dutch buigzaam, German biegsam flexible, pliable hew closer to the original
sense of the English cognate.


anatomy (n.)

late 14c., study of the structure of living beings; c.1400, anatomical structures, from Old French
anatomie, from Late Latin anatomia, from Greek anatomia, from anatome dissection, from ana- up (see
ana-) + temnein to cut (see tome). Dissection (1540s), mummy (1580s), and skeleton (1590s) were
primary senses of this word in Shakespeare's day; meaning the science of the structure of organized
bodies predominated from 17c. Often mistakenly divided as an atomy or a natomy.The scyence of the
Nathomy is nedefull and necessarye to the Cyrurgyen [1541]


super-

word-forming element meaning above, over, beyond, from Latin super-, from adverb and preposition
super above, over, on the top (of), beyond, besides, in addition to, from *(s)uper-, variant form of
PIE *uper over (cognates: Sanskrit upari, Avestan upairi over, above, beyond, Greek hyper, Old
English ofer over, Gothic ufaro over, across, Gaulish ver-, Old Irish for), comparative of root *upo
under (see sub-). In English words from Old French, it appears as sur-. The primary sense seems to
have shifted over time from usually meaning beyond to usually meaning very much, which can be
contradictory. E.g. supersexual, which is attested from 1895 as transcending sexuality, from 1968 as
very sexual.


connotation (n.)

1530s, from Medieval Latin connotationem (nominative connotatio), from connotat-, past participle
stem of connotare signify in addition to the main meaning, a term in logic, literally to mark along
with, from Latin com- together (see com-) + notare to mark (see note).    A word denotes its primary
meaning, its barest adequate definition -- father denotes one that has begotten. A word connotes the
attributes commonly associated with it -- father connotes male sex, prior existence, greater
experience, affection, guidance.


literal (adj.)

late 14c., taking words in their natural meaning (originally in reference to Scripture and opposed
to mystical or allegorical), from Old French literal and directly from Late Latin
literalis/litteralis of or belonging to letters or writing, from Latin litera/littera letter,
alphabetic sign; literature, books (see letter (n.1)). Meaning of or pertaining to alphabetic
letters is from late 15c. Sense of verbally exact is attested from 1590s, as is application to the
primary sense of a word or passage. Literal-minded is attested from 1791.


bosom (n.)

Old English bosm breast; womb; surface; ship's hold, from West Germanic *bosm- (cognates: Old
Frisian bosm, Old Saxon bosom, Middle Dutch boesem, Dutch boezem, Old High German buosam, German
Busen bosom, breast), perhaps from PIE root *bhou- to grow, swell, or *bhaghus arm (in which case
the primary notion would be enclosure formed by the breast and the arms). Narrowed meaning a woman's
breasts is from 1959; but bosomy big-breasted is from 1928. Bosom-friend is attested 1580s; bosom
buddy from 1920s.


perceive (v.)

c.1300, via Anglo-French parceif, Old North French *perceivre (Old French per&ccedil;oivre)
perceive, notice, see; recognize, understand, from Latin percipere obtain, gather, seize entirely,
take possession of, also, figuratively, to grasp with the mind, learn, comprehend, literally to take
entirely, from per thoroughly (see per) + capere to grasp, take (see capable).    Replaced Old
English ongietan. Both the Latin senses were in Old French, though the primary sense of Modern
French percevoir is literal, to receive, collect (rents, taxes, etc.), while English uses the word
almost always in the metaphorical sense. Related: Perceived; perceiving.


accusative (n.)

grammatical case whose primary function is to express destination or goal of motion, mid-15c., from
Anglo-French accusatif, Old French acusatif, or directly from Latin (casus) accusativus (case) of
accusing, from accusatus, past participle of accusare (see accuse).    Translating Greek ptosis
aitiatike case of that which is caused, on similarity of Greek aitiasthai accuse. Greek aitia is the
root of both, and means both cause and accusation, hence the confusion of the Romans. A more correct
translation would have been casus causativus. Typically the case of the direct object, but also
sometimes denoting motion towards. Nouns and adjectives in French, Spanish, and Italian, languages
from which English has borrowed heavily, generally were formed from the accusative case of a Latin
word.


warlock (n.)

Old English w&aelig;rloga traitor, liar, enemy, devil, from w&aelig;r faith, fidelity; a compact,
agreement, covenant, from Proto-Germanic *wera- (cognates: Old High German wara truth, Old Norse
varar solemn promise, vow), from PIE *were-o- true, trustworthy (see very, also Varangian). Second
element is an agent noun related to leogan to lie (see lie (v.1); and compare Old English wordloga
deceiver, liar).    Original primary sense seems to have been oath-breaker; given special
application to the devil (c.1000), but also used of giants and cannibals. Meaning one in league with
the devil is recorded from c.1300. Ending in -ck (1680s) and meaning male equivalent of a witch
(1560s) are from Scottish. Related: Warlockery.


let (v.)

Old English l&aelig;tan to allow to remain; let go, leave, depart from; leave undone; to allow;
bequeath, also to rent (class VII strong verb; past tense let, past participle l&aelig;ten), from
Proto-Germanic *letan (cognates: Old Saxon latan, Old Frisian leta, Dutch laten, German lassen,
Gothic letan to leave, let), from PIE *le- (2) to let go, slacken (cognates: Latin lassus faint,
weary, Lithuanian leisti to let, to let loose; see lenient). If that derivation is correct, the
primary sense would be let go through weariness, neglect.    Of blood, from late Old English. To let
(something) slip originally (1520s) was a reference to hounds on a leash; figurative use from 1540s.
To let (someone) off allow to go unpunished is from 1814. To let on reveal, divulge is from 1725; to
let up cease, stop is from 1787. Let alone not to mention is from 1812.


loo (n.2)

type of card game, 1670s, short for lanterloo (1660s), from French lanturelu, originally (1620s) the
refrain of a popular comic song; according to French sources the refrain expresses a mocking refusal
or an evasive answer and was formed on the older word for a type of song chorus, turelure;
apparently a jingling reduplication of loure bagpipe (perhaps from Latin lura bag, purse).     From
its primary signification -- a kind of bagpipe inflated from the mouth -- the word 'loure' came to
mean an old dance, in slower rhythm than the gigue, generally in 6-4 time. As this was danced to the
nasal tones of the 'loure,' the term 'loure' was gradually applied to any passage meant to be played
in the style of the old bagpipe airs. [Grove's Dictionary of Music and Musicians, London, 1906]
The refrain sometimes is met in English as turra-lurra.


leave (v.)

Old English l&aelig;fan to let remain; remain; have left; bequeath, from Proto-Germanic *laibijan
(cognates: Old Frisian leva to leave, Old Saxon farlebid left over), causative of *liban remain,
(source of Old English belifan, German bleiben, Gothic bileiban to remain), from root *laf- remnant,
what remains, from PIE *leip- to stick, adhere; also fat.    The Germanic root has only the sense
remain, continue, which also is in Greek lipares persevering, importunate. But this usually is
regarded as a development from the primary PIE sense of adhere, be sticky (compare Lithuanian lipti,
Old Church Slavonic lipet to adhere, Greek lipos grease, Sanskrit rip-/lip- to smear, adhere to.
Seemingly contradictory meaning of depart (early 13c.) comes from notion of to leave behind (as in
to leave the earth to die; to leave the field retreat).


copper (n.1)

malleable metallic element, Old English coper, from Proto-Germanic *kupar (cognates: Middle Dutch
koper, Old Norse koparr, Old High German kupfar), from Late Latin cuprum, contraction of Latin
Cyprium (aes) Cyprian (metal), after Greek Kyprios Cyprus (see Cyprus).    Latin aes originally was
copper, but this was extended to its alloy with tin, bronze, and as this was far more extensively
used than pure copper, the word's primary sense shifted to the alloy and a new word evolved for
copper, from the Latin form of the name of the island of Cyprus, where copper was mined. Aes passed
into Germanic (which originally did not distinguish copper from its alloys) and became English ore.
In Latin, aes was the common word for cash, coin, debt, wages in many figurative expressions.
Chemical symbol Cu is from cuprum.


holy (adj.)

Old English halig holy, consecrated, sacred, godly, from Proto-Germanic *hailaga- (cognates: Old
Norse heilagr, Old Frisian helich holy, Old Saxon helag, Middle Dutch helich, Old High German
heilag, German heilig, Gothic hailags holy). Adopted at conversion for Latin sanctus.    Primary
(pre-Christian) meaning is not possible to determine, but probably it was that must be preserved
whole or intact, that cannot be transgressed or violated, and connected with Old English hal (see
health) and Old High German heil health, happiness, good luck (source of the German salutation
Heil). Holy water was in Old English. Holy has been used as an intensifying word from 1837; used in
expletives since 1880s (such as holy smoke, 1883, holy mackerel, 1876, holy cow, 1914, holy moly
etc.), most of them euphemisms for holy Christ or holy Moses.


truth (n.)

Old English triew&eth; (West Saxon), treow&eth; (Mercian) faith, faithfulness, fidelity, loyalty;
veracity, quality of being true; pledge, covenant, from triewe, treowe faithful (see true (adj.)),
with Proto-Germanic abstract noun suffix *-itho (see -th (2)).    Sense of something that is true is
first recorded mid-14c. Meaning accuracy, correctness is from 1560s. English and most other IE
languages do not have a primary verb for for speak the truth, as a contrast to lie (v.). Truth squad
in U.S. political sense first attested in the 1952 U.S. presidential election campaign.    At
midweek the Republican campaign was bolstered by an innovation--the truth squad ..., a team of
senators who trailed whistle-stopping Harry Truman to field what they denounced as his wild pitches.
[Life, Oct. 13, 1952]   <hr />   Let [Truth] and Falsehood grapple; who ever knew Truth put to the
worse, in a free and open encounter. [Milton, Areopagitica, 1644]


tale (n.)

Old English talu series, calculation, also story, tale, statement, deposition, narrative, fable,
accusation, action of telling, from Proto-Germanic *talo (cognates: Dutch taal speech, language,
Danish tale speech, talk, discourse, German Erz&#228;hlung story, Gothic talzjan to teach), from PIE
root *del- (2) to recount, count. The secondary Modern English sense of number, numerical reckoning
(c.1200) probably was the primary one in Germanic; see tell (v.), teller and Old Frisian tale,
Middle Dutch tal, Old Saxon tala, Danish tal, Old High German zala, German Zahl number.    The
ground sense of the Modern English word in its main meaning, then, might have been an account of
things in their due order. Related to talk (v.) and tell (v.). Meaning things divulged that were
given secretly, gossip is from mid-14c.; first record of talebearer tattletale is late 15c.


allow (v.)

early 14c., allouen, to commend, praise; approve of, be pleased with; appreciate the value of; also,
take into account or give credit for, also, in law and philosophy, recognize, admit as valid (a
privilege, an excuse, a statement, etc.). From late 14c. as sanction or permit; condone; in business
use from early 15c.    The Middle English word is from Anglo-French alouer, Old French aloer,
alloiier (13c.) allot, apportion, bestow, assign, from Latin allocare (see allocate). This word in
Old French was confused and ultimately merged with aloer; alloer to praise, commend, from Latin
allaudare, adlaudare, compound of ad- to (see ad-) + laudare to praise (see laud). From the first
word came the sense preserved in allowance as money granted; from the second came its meaning
permission based on approval.    Between the two primary significations there naturally arose a
variety of uses blending them in the general idea of assign with approval, grant, concede a thing
claimed or urged, admit a thing offered, permit, etc., etc. [OED].    Related: Allowed; allowing.


dance (v.)

c.1300, from Old French dancier (12c., Modern French danser), of unknown origin, perhaps from Low
Frankish *dintjan and akin to Old Frisian dintje tremble, quiver. A word of uncertain origin but
which, through French influence in arts and society, has become the primary word for this activity
from Spain to Russia (Italian danzare, Spanish danzar, Rumanian dansa, Swedish dansa, German
tanzen).    In part the loanword from French is used mainly with reference to fashionable dancing
while the older native word persists in use with reference to folk-dancing, as definitively Russ.
pljasat' vs. tancovat' [Buck].    Replaced Old English sealtian, itself a borrowing from Latin
saltare to dance, frequentative of salire to leap (see salient (adj.); dance words frequently are
derived from words meaning jump, leap). Related: Danced; dancing.    It is strange, and will, I am
sure, appear to my readers almost incredible, that as far as I have ever read, there is no reference
that can be identified as containing a clear allusion to dancing in any of our really ancient MS.
books. [Eugene O'Curry, On the Manners and Customs of the Ancient Irish, vol. 2, p.406, 1873]


grammar (n.)

early 14c., gramarye (late 12c. in surnames), from Old French gramaire learning, especially Latin
and philology, grammar, (magic) incantation, spells, mumbo-jumbo, irregular semi-popular adoption
[OED] of Latin grammatica, from Greek grammatike tekhne art of letters, with a sense of both
philology and literature in the broadest sense, fem. adjective from gramma letter, from stem of
graphein to draw or write (see -graphy). An Old English word for it was st&aelig;fcr&aelig;ft (see
staff (n.)).    Form grammar is from late 14c. Restriction to rules of language is a post-classical
development, but as this type of study was until 16c. limited to Latin, Middle English gramarye also
came to mean learning in general, knowledge peculiar to the learned classes (early 14c.), which
included astrology and magic; hence the secondary meaning of occult knowledge (late 15c.), which
evolved in Scottish into glamor (q.v.).    A grammar school (late 14c.) originally was a school in
which the learned languages are grammatically taught [Johnson, who also has grammaticaster a mean
verbal pedant]. In U.S. (1842) the term was put to use in the graded system for a school between
primary and secondary where English grammar is taught.


mark (n.1)

trace, impression, Old English mearc (West Saxon), merc (Mercian) boundary, sign, limit, mark, from
Proto-Germanic *marko (cognates: Old Norse merki boundary, sign, m&ouml;rk forest, which often
marked a frontier; Old Frisian merke, Gothic marka boundary, frontier, Dutch merk mark, brand,
German Mark boundary, boundary land), from PIE *merg- edge, boundary, border (cognates: Latin margo
margin; Avestan mareza- border, Old Irish mruig, Irish bruig borderland, Welsh bro district).    The
primary sense is probably boundary, which had evolved by Old English through sign of a boundary,
through sign in general, then to impression or trace forming a sign. Meaning any visible trace or
impression first recorded c.1200. Sense of line drawn to indicate starting point of a race (as in on
your marks ...) first attested 1887. The Middle English sense of target (c.1200) is the notion in
marksman and slang sense victim of a swindle (1883). The notion of sign, token is behind the meaning
numerical award given by a teacher (1829). Influenced by Scandinavian cognates.


speak (v.)

Old English specan, variant of sprecan to speak, utter words; make a speech; hold discourse (with
others) (class V strong verb; past tense spr&aelig;c, past participle sprecen), from Proto-Germanic
*sprek-, *spek- (cognates: Old Saxon sprecan, Old Frisian spreka, Middle Dutch spreken, Old High
German sprehhan, German sprechen to speak, Old Norse spraki rumor, report), from PIE root *spreg-
(1) to speak, perhaps identical with PIE root *spreg- (2) to strew, on notion of speech as a
scattering of words.    The -r- began to drop out in Late West Saxon and was gone by mid-12c.,
perhaps from influence of Danish spage crackle, also used in a slang sense of speak (compare crack
(v.) in slang senses having to do with speech, such as wisecrack, cracker, all it's cracked up to
be). Elsewhere, rare variant forms without -r- are found in Middle Dutch (speken), Old High German
(spehhan), dialectal German (sp&#228;chten speak).    Not the primary word for to speak in Old
English (the Beowulf author prefers ma&thorn;elian, from m&aelig;&thorn;el assembly, council, from
root of metan to meet; compare Greek agoreuo to speak, explain, originally speak in the assembly,
from agora assembly).


