primordial (adj.)

late 14c., from Late Latin primordialis first of all, original, from Latin primordium a beginning,
the beginning, origin, commencement, from primus first (see prime (adj.)) + stem of ordiri to begin
(see order (n.)). Related: Primordially.


chaotic (adj.)

1713, in a state of primordial chaos, irregularly formed in English from chaos + -ic, probably on
model of eros/erotic, demos/demotic, hypnos/hypnotic, etc. Transferred or figurative meaning
confused, disordered is from 1747.


soup (n.)

liquid food, 1650s, from French soupe soup, broth (13c.), from Late Latin suppa bread soaked in
broth, from a Germanic source (compare Middle Dutch sop sop, broth), from Proto-Germanic *sup-, from
PIE *sub-, from root *seue- (2) to take liquid (see sup (v.2)).   Primordial soup is from a concept
first expressed 1929 by J.B.S. Haldane. Soup to nuts everything is from 1910. Soup-kitchen, public
establishment supported by voluntary contributions, for preparing and serving soup to the poor at no
cost is attested from 1839. In Ireland, souper meant Protestant clergyman seeking to make proselytes
by dispensing soup in charity (1854).


order (n.)

early 13c., body of persons living under a religious discipline, from Old French ordre position,
estate; rule, regulation; religious order (11c.), from earlier ordene, from Latin ordinem
(nominative ordo) row, rank, series, arrangement, originally a row of threads in a loom, from Italic
root *ord- to arrange, arrangement (source of ordiri to begin to weave; compare primordial), of
unknown origin.    Meaning a rank in the (secular) community is first recorded c.1300; meaning
command, directive is first recorded 1540s, from the notion of to keep in order. Military and
honorary orders grew our of the fraternities of Crusader knights. Business and commerce sense is
attested from 1837. In natural history, as a classification of living things, it is first recorded
1760. Meaning condition of a community which is under the rule of law is from late 15c.    Phrase in
order to (1650s) preserves etymological notion of sequence. The word reflects a medieval notion: a
system of parts subject to certain uniform, established ranks or proportions, and was used of
everything from architecture to angels. Old English expressed many of the same ideas with
endebyrdnes. In short order without delay is from 1834, American English; order of battle is from
1769.


