primate (n.)

high bishop, c.1200, from Old French primat and directly from Medieval Latin primatem (nominative
primas) church primate, noun use of Late Latin adjective primas of the first rank, chief, principal,
from primus first (see prime (adj.)).    Meaning animal of the biological order including monkeys
and humans is attested from 1876, from Modern Latin Primates (Linn&aelig;us), from plural of Latin
primas; so called from supposedly being the highest order of mammals (originally also including
bats).


primacy (n.)

late 14c., from Old French primacie (14c., in Modern French spelled primatie) and directly from
Medieval Latin primatia office of a church primate (late 12c.), from Late Latin primas (genitive
primatis) principal, chief, of the first rank (see primate).


loris (n.)

small primate of Sri Lanka, 1774, from French loris (Buffon), of unknown origin, said to be from
obsolete Dutch loeris booby, clown.


primatology (n.)

study of Primates, 1941, from primate (n.) + -ology.


-ate (1)

word-forming element used in forming nouns from Latin words ending in -atus, -atum (such as estate,
primate, senate). Those that came to English via Old and Middle French often arrived with -at, but
an -e was added after c.1400 to indicate the long vowel.    The suffix also can mark adjectives,
formed from Latin past participals in -atus, -ata (such as desolate, moderate, separate), again,
they often were adopted in Middle English as -at, with an -e appended after c.1400.


creationism (n.)

1847, originally a Christian theological position that God immediately created a soul for each
person born; from creation + -ism. As a name for the religious reaction to Darwin, opposed to
evolution, it is attested from 1880.  James Ussher (1581-1656), Archbishop of Armagh, Primate of All
Ireland, and Vice-Chancellor of Trinity College in Dublin was highly regarded in his day as a
churchman and as a scholar. Of his many works, his treatise on chronology has proved the most
durable. Based on an intricate correlation of Middle Eastern and Mediterranean histories and Holy
writ, it was incorporated into an authorized version of the Bible printed in 1701, and thus came to
be regarded with almost as much unquestioning reverence as the Bible itself. Having established the
first day of creation as Sunday 23 October 4004 B.C. ... Ussher calculated the dates of other
biblical events, concluding, for example, that Adam and Eve were driven from Paradise on Monday 10
November 4004 BC, and that the ark touched down on Mt Ararat on 5 May 1491 BC on a Wednesday.
[Craig, G.Y., and E.J. Jones, A Geological Miscellany, Princeton University Press, 1982.]


lemur (n.)

nocturnal Madagascar mammal, 1795, coined by Linnaeus, from Latin lemures (plural) spirits of the
dead in Roman mythology.     The oldest usage of lemur for a primate that we are aware of is in
Linnaeus's catalog of the Museum of King Adolf Frederick of Sweden (Tattersall, 1982); .... In this
work, he explained his use of the name lemur thus: Lemures dixi  hos, quod noctu imprimis
obambulant, hominibus quodanmodo similes, &amp; lento passu vagantur [I call them lemurs, because
they go around mainly by night, in a certain way similar to humans, and roam with a slow pace]
[Dunkel, Alexander R., et al., Giant rabbits, marmosets, and British comedies: etymology of lemur
names, part 1, in Lemur News, vol. 16, 2011-2012, p.65]   Lemuria (1864) was the name given by
English zoologist P.L. Sclater (1829-1913) to a hypothetical ancient continent connecting Africa and
Southeastern Asia (and including Madagascar), which was hypothesized to explain phenomena now
accounted for by continental drift. Earlier it was the name of the Roman feast of the Lemures.


indri (n.)

1839, European name for the babakoto, a lemur-like arboreal primate of Madagascar (Indris
Lichanotus); the common story since late 19c. is that the name was given in error by French
naturalist Pierre Sonnerat (1748-1814), c.1780, from mistaken use of Malagasy indry! look! See!
Evidently this was what his native guides said when they spotted the creature and called his
attention to it.    However, as Hacking (1981) pointed out, Sonnerat was far too familiar with
indris -- he described and figured them in detail, and apparently kept at least one in captivity --
for this story to be plausible. Furthermore, endrina is actually recorded as a native name for the
indri (Cousins, 1885), and indri could easily be a variant of this name. Although the word endrina
is first recorded in Malagasy only in 1835, there is no evidence that it could be a back-formation
from the French indri (Hacking, 1981), and it seems implausible that the Malagasy would adopt an
erroneous French name for an animal they were them selves familiar with. [Dunkel, Alexander R., et
al., Giant rabbits, marmosets, and British comedies: etymology of lemur names, part 1, in Lemur
News, vol. 16, 2011-2012, p.67]


