prim

1680s (v.) to assume a formal, precise demeanor, perhaps from French prim thin, small, delicate,
from Old French prim fine, delicate, from Latin primus finest, literally first (see prime (adj.)).
Later, deck out, dress to effect (1721). Attested as a noun from 1700. The adjective, the sole
surviving sense, is from 1709. A cant word at first. Related: Primly; primness.


primp (v.)

1801, probably an extension of prim (q.v.) in its verbal dress up sense; compare Scottish primpit
(c.1739) delicate, nice. Related: Primped; primping.


prime (n.)

earliest canonical hour (6 a.m.), Old English prim, from Medieval Latin prima the first service,
from Latin prima hora the first hour (of the Roman day). Meaning most vigorous stage first recorded
1530s; specifically springtime of human life (often meaning ages roughly 21 to 28) is from 1590s. In
classical Latin, noun uses of the adjective meant first part, beginning; leading place.


simper (v.)

1560s, to smile in an affected and silly way, perhaps from a Scandinavian source (such as dialectal
Danish semper affected, coy, prudish) or Middle Dutch zimperlijk affected, coy, prim, of unknown
origin. Related: Simpered; simpering. As a noun, 1590s, from the verb.


prude (n.)

1704, woman who affects or upholds modesty in a degree considered excessive, from French prude
excessively prim or demure woman, first recorded in Moli&egrave;re. Perhaps a false back-formation
or an ellipsis of preudefemme a discreet, modest woman, from Old French prodefame noblewoman,
gentlewoman; wife, consort, fem. equivalent of prudhomme a brave man (see proud); or perhaps a
direct noun use of the French adjective prude prudish, from Old French prude, prode, preude good,
virtuous, modest, a feminine form of the adjective preux. Also occasionally as an adjective in
English 18c.


prissy (adj.)

1895, probably Southern U.S. dialect, first attested in Joel Chandler Harris, perhaps an alteration
of precise (q.v.), or a merger of prim and sissy [OED]. Related: Prissily; prissiness.    []Then Mrs
Blue Hen rumpled up her feathers and got mad with herself, and went to setting. I reckon that's what
you call it. I've heard some call it 'setting' and others 'sitting.' Once, when I was courting, I
spoke of a sitting hen, but the young lady said I was too prissy for anything.    What is prissy?
asked Sweetest Susan.    Mr. Rabbit shut his eyes and scratched his ear. Then he shook his head
slowly.    It's nothing but a girl's word, remarked Mrs. Meadows by way of explanation. It means
that somebody's trying hard to show off.    I reckon that's so, said Mr. Rabbit, opening his eyes.
He appeared to be much relieved.  [Joel Chandler Harris, Mr. Rabbit at Home]


spring (n.1)

season following winter, the vernal season, c.1400, earlier springing time (late 14c.), which
replaced Lent, the Old English word. From spring (v.); also see spring (n.3). The notion is of the
spring of the year, when plants begin to rise (as in spring of the leaf, 1520s), from the noun in
its old sense of action or time of rising or springing into existence. It was used of sunrise, the
waxing of the moon, rising tides, etc.; compare 14c. spring of dai sunrise, spring of mone moonrise,
late Old English spring carbuncle, pustule.    Other Germanic languages tend to take words for fore
or early as their roots for the season name (Danish voraar, Dutch voorjaar, literally fore-year;
German Fr&uuml;hling, from Middle High German vrueje early). In 15c. English, the season also was
prime-temps, after Old French prin tans, tamps prim (French printemps, which replaced
primev&egrave;re 16c. as the common word for spring), from Latin tempus primum, literally first
time, first season.   Spring fever is from 1843 as surge of romantic feelings; earlier of a type of
disease or head-cold prevalent in certain places in spring; Old English had lenctenadle. First
record of spring cleaning in the domestic sense is by 1843 (in ancient Persia, the first month,
corresponding to March-April, was Adukanai&#353;a, which apparently means Irrigation-Canal-Cleaning
Month; Kent, p.167). Spring chicken small roasting chicken (usually 11 to 14 weeks) is recorded from
1780; transferred sense of young person first recorded 1906. Baseball spring training attested by
1889, earlier of militias, etc.


