prime (v.)

to fill, charge, load (a weapon), 1510s, probably from prime (adj.). Meaning to cover with a first
coat of paint or dye is from c.1600. To prime a pump (c.1840) meant to pour water down the tube,
which saturated the sucking mechanism and made it draw up water more readily. Related: Primed;
priming.


prime (adj.)

late 14c., first in order, from Latin primus first, the first, first part, figuratively chief,
principal; excellent, distinguished, noble (source also of Italian and Spanish primo), from pre-
Italic *prismos, superlative of PIE *preis- before, from root *per- (1) beyond, through (see per).
Meaning first in importance is from 1610s in English; that of first-rate is from 1620s. Arithmetical
sense (as in prime number) is from 1560s; prime meridian is from 1878. Prime time originally
(c.1500) meant spring time; broadcasting sense of peak tuning-in period is attested from 1961.


prime minister

1640s, see prime (adj.) and minister (n.). Applied to the First Minister of State of Great Britain
since 1694.


primer (n.1)

late 14c., prayer-book, also school book (senses not distinguished in Middle Ages, as reading was
taught from prayer books), from Medieval Latin primarius, from Latin primus first (see prime
(adj.)). The word also might be all or in part from prime (n.) on the same notion as a Book of
Hours. Meaning small introductory book on any topic is from 1807.


primer (n.3)

first layer of dye or paint, 1680s, from prime (v.).


primer (n.2)

explosive cap, 1819, agent noun from prime (v.).


prime (n.)

earliest canonical hour (6 a.m.), Old English prim, from Medieval Latin prima the first service,
from Latin prima hora the first hour (of the Roman day). Meaning most vigorous stage first recorded
1530s; specifically springtime of human life (often meaning ages roughly 21 to 28) is from 1590s. In
classical Latin, noun uses of the adjective meant first part, beginning; leading place.


primeval (adj.)

also primaeval, 1650s, with -al (1) + Latin primaevus early in life, youthful, from primus first
(see prime (adj.)) + aevum an age (see eon).


subprime (adj.)

also sub-prime, of loans, etc., by 1978, in frequent use from 1996, from sub- + prime (adj.).


primo

1740, in music terms, from Italian primo first, chief, from Latin primus (see prime (adj.)). As
slang for excellent, first-class, perhaps an elaboration of prime. Of drugs, by 1990s, street slang.


motor (n.)

mid-15c., controller, prime mover, from Latin motor, literally mover, agent noun from past
participle stem of movere to move (see move (v.)). From 15c. as controller, prime mover (in
reference to God); sense of agent or force that produces mechanical motion is first recorded 1660s;
that of machine that supplies motive power is from 1856. First record of slang motor-mouth fast-
talking person is from 1970.


primus

Latin for first, the first (see prime (adj.)).


priming (n.)

first coat of paint, c.1600, verbal noun from prime (v.). Meaning gunpowder in the pan of a firearm
is from 1590s.


Downing Street

short street in London, named for British diplomat Sir George Downing (c.1624-1684). It contains the
residence of the prime minister (at Number 10), hence its metonymic use for the British government,
attested from 1781.


privet (n.)

type of evergreen shrub, 1540s, of unknown origin. Early forms primet, primprint perhaps suggest
some connection with prime [Klein].


Nehru

of a type of long, narrow jacket with a standing collar (popular in Western fashion late 1960s),
1967, a reference to Jawaharlal Nehru (1889-1964), first prime minister of independent India
(1947-1964), who often wore such a jacket in public appearances.


primum mobile (n.)

the first source of motion, mid-15c., from Medieval Latin (11c.), literally the first movable thing;
see prime (adj.) + mobile. A translation of Arabic al-muharrik al-awwal the first moving (Avicenna).


Melbourne

city in Australia, named 1837 for William Lamb, 2nd Viscount Melbourne (1779-1848) then British
Prime Minister; the title is from Melbourne Hall, Derbyshire. The place name is literally mill
stream, Old English Mileburne (1086).


primigravida

1879, from earlier use in German, from Modern Latin, from Latin primus first (see prime (adj.)) +
gravidus laden, full, swollen, pregnant with child (see gravid).


Hebe (1)

c.1600, Greek goddess of youth, daughter of Zeus and Hera, wife of Hercules, from Greek hebe youth,
youthful prime, strength of youth (legally, the time before manhood, in Athens 16, in Sparta 18),
from PIE *yeg-wa- power, youth, strength.


pristine (adj.)

1530s, pertaining to the earliest period, primitive, ancient, from Middle French pristin or directly
from Latin pristinus former, early, original, from Old Latin pri before (see prime (adj.)). Meaning
unspoiled, untouched, pure is from 1899 (implied in a use of pristinely) but according to OED 2nd
ed. print still regarded as ignorant by many educated speakers.


primal (adj.)

c.1600, belonging to the earliest age, from Medieval Latin primalis primary, from Latin primus first
(see prime (adj.)). Psychological sense, in reference to Freud's theory of behaviors springing from
the earliest stage of emotional development, is attested from 1918. Primal scream is from a best-
selling book of 1971.


thatcher (n.)

early 14c. (late 12c. as a surname); agent noun from thatch (v.). Corresponds to Old English
&thorn;ecere, Dutch dekker, German Decker. Thatcherite in British politics (1976) refers to policies
and principles of Conservative politician and prime minister Margaret Thatcher (1925-2013).


primavera (n.)

spring, spring time, Italian, from Latin prima vera, plural of primus ver literally first spring;
see prime (adj.) + vernal. Related: Primaveral.


primipara (n.)

1842, Modern Latin, from Latin primus first (see prime (adj.)) + parus (see -parous).


prim

1680s (v.) to assume a formal, precise demeanor, perhaps from French prim thin, small, delicate,
from Old French prim fine, delicate, from Latin primus finest, literally first (see prime (adj.)).
Later, deck out, dress to effect (1721). Attested as a noun from 1700. The adjective, the sole
surviving sense, is from 1709. A cant word at first. Related: Primly; primness.


prima donna (n.)

1782, principal female singer in an opera, from Italian prima donna first lady, from Latin prima,
fem. of primus first (see prime (adj.)) + domina lady (see dame). Meaning temperamental person first
recorded 1834.


primordial (adj.)

late 14c., from Late Latin primordialis first of all, original, from Latin primordium a beginning,
the beginning, origin, commencement, from primus first (see prime (adj.)) + stem of ordiri to begin
(see order (n.)). Related: Primordially.


snooker (n.)

1889, the game and the word said in an oft-told story to have been invented in India by British
officers as a diversion from billiards. The name is perhaps a reference (with regard to the rawness
of play by a fellow officer) to British slang snooker newly joined cadet, first-term student at the
R.M. Academy (1872). Tradition ascribes the coinage to Col. Sir Neville Chamberlain (not the later
prime minister of the same name), at the time subaltern in the Devonshire Regiment in Jubbulpore.
One of the first descriptions of the game is in A.W. Drayson's The Art  of Practical Billiards for
Amateurs (1889), which states in a footnote The rules of the game of snooker are the copyright of
Messrs. Burroughes &amp; Watts, from whom they may be obtained, they being manufacturers of billiard
tables.


primogenitor (n.)

an ancestor, late 15c., from Medieval Latin primogenitor, from Latin primo (adv.) first in order of
time; at first, from primus first (see prime (adj.)) + genitor father, from genitus, past participle
of gignere to beget (see genus). Related: Primogenital; primogenitary. The fem. form is
primogenitrix (1875). The rights of a second son are secundogeniture.


prima facie

Latin, literally at first sight, ablative of prima facies first appearance, from prima, fem.
singular of primus first (see prime (adj.)) + facies form, face (see face (n.)).


primogeniture (n.)

right of succession of the first-born, c.1600, from French primogeniture and directly from Medieval
Latin primogenitura, from Late Latin primogenitus first-born, from Latin primo (adv.) first in order
of time, from primus first (see prime (adj.)) + genitus, past participle of gignere to beget (see
genus). Earlier it meant simply fact of being first-born (1590s).


primitive (adj.)

late 14c., of an original cause; of a thing from which something is derived; not secondary (a sense
now associated with primary), from Old French primitif very first, original (14c.) and directly from
Latin primitivus first or earliest of its kind, from primitus at first, from primus first (see prime
(adj.)).    Meaning of or belonging to the first age is from early 15c. Meaning having the style of
an early or ancient time is from 1680s. In Christian sense of adhering to the qualities of the early
Church it is recorded from 1680s. Of untrained artists from 1942. Related: Primitively.


sieve (n.)

Old English sife sieve, from Proto-Germanic *sib (cognates: Middle Dutch seve, Dutch zeef, Old High
German sib, German Sieb), from PIE *seib- to pour out, sieve, drip, trickle (see soap (n.)). Related
to sift. The Sieve of Eratosthenes (1803) is a contrivance for finding prime numbers. Sieve and
shears formerly were used in divinations.


primary (adj.)

early 15c., of the first order, from Latin primarius of the first rank, chief, principal, excellent,
from primus first (see prime (adj.)). Meaning first in order is from 1802. Primary color is first
recorded 1610s (at first the seven of the spectrum, later the three from which others can be made);
primary school is 1802, from French &eacute;cole primaire.The Paris journals ... are full of a plan,
brought forward by Fourcroy, for the establishment of primary schools, which is not interesting to
an English reader. [London Times, April 27, 1802]  Related: Primarily.


stag (n.)

late 12c., probably from Old English stagga a stag, from Proto-Germanic *stag-, from PIE *stegh- to
prick, sting (see sting (v.)). The Old Norse equivalent was used of male foxes, tomcats, and
dragons; and the Germanic root word perhaps originally meant male animal in its prime. Meaning
pertaining to or composed of males only (stag party) is American English slang from 1848. Stag film
pornographic movie is attested from 1968. Stag beetle, so called for its horns, is from 1680s.


second (n.1)

one-sixtieth of a minute of degree, also sixtieth part of a minute of time, late 14c. in geometry,
from Old French seconde, from Medieval Latin secunda, short for secunda pars minuta second
diminished part, the result of the second division of the hour by sixty (the first being the prime
minute, now called the minute), from Latin secunda, fem. of secundus (see second (adj.)). The second
hand of a clock is attested from 1759.


primate (n.)

high bishop, c.1200, from Old French primat and directly from Medieval Latin primatem (nominative
primas) church primate, noun use of Late Latin adjective primas of the first rank, chief, principal,
from primus first (see prime (adj.)).    Meaning animal of the biological order including monkeys
and humans is attested from 1876, from Modern Latin Primates (Linn&aelig;us), from plural of Latin
primas; so called from supposedly being the highest order of mammals (originally also including
bats).


flower (n.)

c.1200, from Old French flor flower, blossom; heyday, prime; fine flour; elite; innocence, virginity
(Modern French fleur), from Latin florem (nominative flos) flower (source of Italian fiore, Spanish
flor; see flora).    Modern spelling is 14c. Ousted Old English cognate blostm (see blossom (n.)).
Also used from 13c. in sense of finest part or product of anything and from c.1300 in the sense of
virginity. Flower children gentle hippies is from 1967.


prince (n.)

c.1200, ruler of a principality (mid-12c. as a surname), from Old French prince prince, noble lord
(12c.), from Latin princeps (genitive principis) first man, chief leader; ruler, sovereign, noun use
of adjective meaning that takes first, from primus first (see prime (adj.)) + root of capere to take
(see capable). German cognate f&uuml;rst, from Old High German furist first, is apparently an
imitation of the Latin formation. Colloquial meaning admirable or generous person is from 1911,
American English. Prince Regent was the title of George, Prince of Wales (later George VI) during
the mental incapacity of George III (1811-1820).


primrose (n.)

late 14c., prymrose, from Old French primerose, primerole (12c.) and directly from Medieval Latin
prima rosa, literally first rose, so called because it blooms early in spring (see prime (adj.)). As
the name of a pale yellow color, by 1844.    Parallel name primula (c.1100) is from Old French
primerole, from Medieval Latin primula primrose, shortened from primula veris firstling of spring,
thus properly fem. of Latin primulus, diminutive of primus; but primerole was used in Old French and
Middle English of other flowers (cowslips, field daisies). The primrose path is from Hamlet I, iii.


P

a rare letter in the initial position in Germanic, in part because by Grimm's Law PIE p- became
Germanic f-; even with the early Latin borrowings in Old English, -p- takes up a little over 4 pages
in J.R. Clark Hall's Concise Anglo-Saxon Dictionary, compared to 31 pages for B and more than 36 for
F. But it now is the third-most-common initial letter in the English vocabulary, and with C and S
comprises nearly a third of the dictionary, a testimony to the flood of words that have entered the
language since 1066 from Latin, Greek, and French.    To mind one's Ps and Qs (1779), possibly is
from confusion of these letters among children learning to write. Another theory traces it to old-
time tavern-keepers tracking their patrons' bar tabs in pints and quarts. But see also to be P and Q
(1610s), to be excellent, a slang phrase said to derive from prime quality.


girl (n.)

c.1300, gyrle child (of either sex), of unknown origin; current scholarship [OED says] leans toward
an unrecorded Old English *gyrele, from Proto-Germanic *gurwilon-, diminutive of *gurwjoz
(apparently also represented by Low German g&aelig;re boy, girl, Norwegian dialectal gorre, Swedish
dialectal gurre small child, though the exact relationship, if any, between all these is obscure),
from PIE *ghwrgh-, also found in Greek parthenos virgin. But this is highly conjectural. And
Liberman (2008) writes:   Girl does not go back to any Old English or Old Germanic form. It is part
of a large group of Germanic words whose root begins with a g or k and ends in r. The final
consonant in girl is a diminutive suffix. The g-r words denote young animals, children, and all
kinds of creatures considered immature, worthless, or past their prime.    Another candidate is Old
English gierela garment (for possible sense evolution in this theory, compare brat). Like boy, lass,
lad it is of obscure origin. Probably most of them arose as jocular transferred uses of words that
had originally different meaning [OED]. Specific meaning of female child is late 14c. Applied to any
young unmarried woman since mid-15c. Meaning sweetheart is from 1640s. Girl next door as a type of
unflashy attractiveness is recorded by 1953.    Doris [Day] was a big vocalist even before she hit
the movies in 1948. There, as the latest movie colony girl next door, sunny-faced Doris soon became
a leading movie attraction as well as the world's top female recording star. She's the girl next
door, all right, said one Hollywood admirer. Next door to the bank. [Life magazine, Dec. 22, 1958]
Girl Friday is from 1940, a reference to Robinson Crusoe.


spring (n.1)

season following winter, the vernal season, c.1400, earlier springing time (late 14c.), which
replaced Lent, the Old English word. From spring (v.); also see spring (n.3). The notion is of the
spring of the year, when plants begin to rise (as in spring of the leaf, 1520s), from the noun in
its old sense of action or time of rising or springing into existence. It was used of sunrise, the
waxing of the moon, rising tides, etc.; compare 14c. spring of dai sunrise, spring of mone moonrise,
late Old English spring carbuncle, pustule.    Other Germanic languages tend to take words for fore
or early as their roots for the season name (Danish voraar, Dutch voorjaar, literally fore-year;
German Fr&uuml;hling, from Middle High German vrueje early). In 15c. English, the season also was
prime-temps, after Old French prin tans, tamps prim (French printemps, which replaced
primev&egrave;re 16c. as the common word for spring), from Latin tempus primum, literally first
time, first season.   Spring fever is from 1843 as surge of romantic feelings; earlier of a type of
disease or head-cold prevalent in certain places in spring; Old English had lenctenadle. First
record of spring cleaning in the domestic sense is by 1843 (in ancient Persia, the first month,
corresponding to March-April, was Adukanai&#353;a, which apparently means Irrigation-Canal-Cleaning
Month; Kent, p.167). Spring chicken small roasting chicken (usually 11 to 14 weeks) is recorded from
1780; transferred sense of young person first recorded 1906. Baseball spring training attested by
1889, earlier of militias, etc.


hill (n.)

Old English hyll hill, from Proto-Germanic *hulni- (cognates: Middle Dutch hille, Low German hull
hill, Old Norse hallr stone, Gothic hallus rock, Old Norse holmr islet in a bay, Old English holm
rising land, island), from PIE root *kel- (4) to rise, be elevated, be prominent; hill (cognates:
Sanskrit kutam top, skull; Latin collis hill, columna projecting object, culmen top, summit, cellere
raise, celsus high; Greek kolonos hill, kolophon summit; Lithuanian kalnas mountain, kalnelis hill,
kelti raise). Formerly including mountains, now usually confined to heights under 2,000 feet. In
Great Britain heights under 2,000 feet are generally called hills; 'mountain' being confined to the
greater elevations of the Lake District, of North Wales, and of the Scottish Highlands; but, in
India, ranges of 5,000 and even 10,000 feet are commonly called 'hills,' in contrast with the
Himalaya Mountains, many peaks of which rise beyond 20,000 feet. [OED]   <hr />   The term mountain
is very loosely used. It commonly means any unusual elevation. In New England and central New York,
elevations of from one to two thousand feet are called hills, but on the plains of Texas, a hill of
a few hundred feet is called a mountain. [Ralph S. Tarr, Elementary Geology, Macmillan, 1903]   <hr
/>   Despite the differences in defining mountain systems, Penck (1896), Supan (1911) and Obst
(1914) agreed that the distinction between hills, mountains, and mountain systems according to areal
extent or height is not a suitable classification. [Geographic Information Science and Mountain
Geomorphology, 2004]    Phrase over the hill past one's prime is first recorded 1950.


