privy (adj.)

private, early 13c., from Old French priv&eacute; friendly, intimate; a private place, from Latin
privatus private, personal (see private (adj.)). Meaning participating in (a secret) (usually with
to) is attested from late 14c. Related: Privily. Privy Council is from c.1300 in a general sense;
specifically of the British government, first attested late 14c., as consaile priue. Privy member
organ of sex is from late 13c.


privy (n.)

toilet, c.1200, from Old French priv&eacute;, privee latrine, literally private place, from noun use
of adjective priv&eacute; (see privy (adj.)).


jakes (n.)

a privy, mid-15c., genitive singular of jack (n.).


cesspool (n.)

also cess-pool, 1670s, the first element perhaps an alteration of cistern, perhaps a shortened form
of recess [Klein]; or the whole may be an alteration of suspiral (c.1400), drainpipe, from Old
French sospiral a vent, air hole, from sospirer breathe, from Latin suspirare breathe deep
[Barnhart]. Meaning extended to tank at the end of the pipe, which would account for a possible
folk-etymology change in final syllable.    Other possible etymologies: Italian cesso privy, from
Latin secessus place of retirement (in Late Latin privy, drain); dialectal suspool, from suss, soss
puddle; or cess a bog on the banks of a tidal river.


outhouse (n.)

early 14c., shed, outbuilding, from out + house (n.). Sense of a privy (principally American
English) is first attested 1819.


chamber-lye (n.)

urine used as a detergent, 1570s, from chamber (n.) in the privy sense + lye.


water-closet (n.)

privy with a waste-pipe and means to carry off the discharge by a flush of water, 1755, from water
(n.1) + closet (n.).


conscious (adj.)

c.1600, knowing, privy to, from Latin conscius knowing, aware, from conscire (see conscience);
probably a loan-translation of Greek syneidos. A word adopted from the Latin poets and much mocked
at first. Sense of active and awake is from 1837.


Ajax

name of two Greek heroes in the Trojan War (Great Ajax, son of Telamon, and Little Ajax, son of
Oileus), Latin, from Greek Aias, perhaps originally the name of an earth-god, from aia earth. The
Elizabethans punned on the name as a jakes a privy.


latrine (n.)

c.1300, probably from Latin latrina, contraction of lavatrina washbasin, washroom, from lavatus,
past participle of lavare to wash (see lave) + -trina, suffix denoting workplace. Its reappearance
in 1640s is probably a re-borrowing from French; especially of a privy of a camp, barracks, college,
hospital, etc. Latrine rumor baseless gossip (of the kind that spreads in conversations in latrines)
is military slang, first recorded 1918.


necessary (adj.)

late 14c. needed, required, essential, indispensable, from Old French necessaire necessary, urgent,
compelling (13c.), and directly from Latin necessarius unavoidable, indispensable, necessary, from
necesse unavoidable, indispensable, originally no backing away, from ne- not + cedere to withdraw,
go away, yield (see cede). The root sense is of that from which there is no evasion, that which is
inevitable. Necessary house privy is from c.1600. Necessary evil is from 1540s (the original
reference was to woman).


connive (v.)

c.1600, from Latin connivere, also conivere to wink, hence, to wink at (a crime), be secretly privy,
from com- together (see com-) + base akin to nictare to wink, from PIE root *kneigwh- (see
nictitate). Related: Connived; conniving.


chamber (n.)

c.1200, room, usually a private one, from Old French chambre room, chamber, apartment, also used in
combinations to form words for latrine, privy (11c.), from Late Latin camera a chamber, room (see
camera). In anatomy from late 14c.; of machinery from 1769. Gunnery sense is from 1620s. Meaning
legislative body is from c.1400. Chamber music (1789) was that meant to be performed in private
rooms instead of public halls.


merkin (n.)

female pudenda, 1530s, apparently a variant of malkin in its sense of mop. Meaning artificial vagina
or 'counterfeit hair for a woman's privy parts'  is attested from 1610s. According to The Oxford
Companion to the Body, the custom of wearing merkins dates from mid-15c., was associated with
prostitutes, and was to disguise a want of pubic hair, shaved off either to exterminate body lice or
evidence of venereal disease.  This put a strange Whim in his Head; which was, to get the hairy
circle of [a prostitute's] Merkin .... This he dry'd well, and comb'd out, and then return'd to the
Cardinall, telling him, he had brought St. Peter's Beard. [Alexander Smith, A Complete History of
the Lives and Robberies of the most notorious Highwaymen, 1714]


stool (n.)

Old English stol seat for one person, from Proto-Germanic *stolaz (cognates: Old Frisian stol, Old
Norse stoll, Old High German stuol, German Stuhl seat, Gothic stols high seat, throne), from PIE
*sta-lo-, locative of root *sta- to stand (cognates: Lithuanian pa-stolas stand, Old Church Slavonic
stolu stool; see stet).    Originally used of thrones (as in cynestol royal seat, throne); decline
in sense began with adoption of chair (n.) from French, which relegated stool to small seats without
arms or backs, then to privy (early 15c.) and thence to bowel movement (1530s).


secretary (n.)

late 14c., person entrusted with secrets, from Medieval Latin secretarius clerk, notary,
confidential officer, confidant, a title applied to various confidential officers, noun use of
adjective meaning private, secret, pertaining to private or secret matters (compare Latin
secretarium a council-chamber, conclave, consistory), from Latin secretum a secret, a hidden thing
(see secret (n.)).    Meaning person who keeps records, write letters, etc., originally for a king,
first recorded c.1400. As title of ministers presiding over executive departments of state, it is
from 1590s. The word also is used in both French and English to mean a private desk, sometimes in
French form secretaire. The South African secretary bird so called (1786) in reference to its crest,
which, when smooth, resembles a pen stuck over the ear. Compare Late Latin silentiarius privy
councilor, 'silentiary, from Latin silentium a being silent.


