prize (n.1)

reward, prise (c.1300 in this sense), from Old French pris price, value, worth; reward (see price
(n.)). As an adjective, worthy of a prize, from 1803. The spelling with -z- is from late 16c. Prize-
fighter is from 1703; prize-fight from 1730 (prize-fighter from 1785).


prized (adj.)

highly esteemed, 1530s, adjective from prize (n.1.), or from past participle of Middle English
prisen to prize, value (late 14c.), from stem of Old French preisier to praise (see praise (v.)).


prize (v.)

to estimate, 1580s, alteration of Middle English prisen to prize, value (late 14c.), from stem of
Old French preisier to praise (see praise (v.)). Related: Prized; prizing.


prize (n.2)

something taken by force, mid-13c., prise a taking, holding, from Old French prise a taking,
seizing, holding, noun use of fem. past participle of prendre to take, seize, from Latin prendere,
contraction of prehendere lay hold of, grasp, seize, catch (see prehensile). Especially of ships
captured at sea (1510s). The spelling with -z- is from late 16c.


pry (v.2)

raise by force, 1823, from a noun meaning instrument for prying, crowbar; alteration of prize (as
though it were a plural) in obsolete sense of lever (c.1300), from Old French prise a taking hold,
grasp (see prize (n.2)).


price (n.)

c.1200, pris value, worth; praise, later cost, recompense, prize (mid-13c.), from Old French pris
price, value, wages, reward, also honor, fame, praise, prize (Modern French prix), from Late Latin
precium, from Latin pretium reward, prize, value, worth, from PIE *pret-yo-,   from root *per- (5)
to traffic in, to sell (cognates: Sanskrit aprata without recompense, gratuitously; Greek porne
prostitute, originally bought, purchased, pernanai to sell; Lithuanian perku I buy).   Praise,
price, and prize began to diverge in Old French, with praise emerging in Middle English by early
14c. and prize being evident by late 1500s with the rise of the -z- spelling. Having shed the extra
Old French and Middle English senses, the word now again has the base sense of the Latin original.
To set (or put) a price on someone, offer a reward for capture is from 1766.


cakewalk (n.)

1863, American English, from cake (n.) + walk (n.), probably in reference to the cake given as a
prize for the fanciest steps in a procession in a Southern black custom (explained by Thornton,
1912, as, A walking competition among negroes, in which the prize cake goes to the couple who put on
most style). Its figurative meaning of something easy (1863) is recorded before the literal one
(1879). As a verb, from 1909. This may also be the source of the phrase to take the cake (1847).


athlete (n.)

early 15c., from Latin athleta a wrestler, athlete, combatant in public games, from Greek athletes
prizefighter, contestant in the games, agent noun from athlein to contest for a prize, related to
athlos a contest and athlon a prize, of unknown origin. Before 1750, usually in Latin form. In this
sense, Old English had plegmann play-man. Athlete's foot first recorded 1928, for an ailment that
has been around much longer.


booby (n.)

1590s, from Spanish bobo stupid person, slow bird (used of various ungainly seabirds), probably from
Latin balbus stammering, from an imitative root (see barbarian).   Booby prize is by 1883: an object
of little value given to the loser of a game; booby trap is 1850, originally a schoolboy prank; the
more lethal sense developed during World War I.    At the end of every session the dominie had the
satirical custom of presenting his tawse as a booby-prize to some idle or stupid lout whom he picked
out as meriting this distinction so that next time they met he might start fresh and fair with new
pair for a new set of classes. [Ascott R. Hope, Dumps, Young England magazine, 1883]


barney (n.)

1859, British slang, lark, spree, rough enjoyment, of uncertain origin. Later also a fixed prize-
fight.


fancy (n.)

mid-15c., contraction of fantasy, it took the older and longer word's sense of inclination, whim,
desire. Meaning fans of an amusement or sport, collectively is attested by 1735, especially (though
not originally) of the prize ring. The adjective is recorded from mid-18c.


grand prix

1863, French, literally great prize, originally in English in reference to the Grand Prix de Paris,
international horse race for three-year-olds, run every June at Longchamps beginning in 1863.


decathlon (n.)

1912, from deca ten (see ten) + Greek athlon contest, prize, of uncertain origin. A modern Olympic
event consisting of 10 challenges.


Nobel

1900, in reference to five prizes (in physics, chemistry, medicine, literature, and peace)
established in the will of Alfred Nobel (1833-1896), Swedish chemist and engineer, inventor of
dynamite. A sixth prize, in economics, was added in 1969. Related: Nobelist.


saved (adj.)

delivered from damnation, c.1300, past participle adjective from save (v.). Saved by the bell is
from 1914 in reference to prize fighting; 1912 in reference to the classroom; figurative use from
1915, probably at first from the fighting sense.


hologram (n.)

1949, coined by Hungarian-born British scientist Dennis Gabor (G&aacute;bor D&eacute;nes), 1971
Nobel prize winner in physics for his work in holography; from Greek holos whole (in sense of three-
dimensional; see safe (adj.)) + -gram.


lotto (n.)

1778, type of card game, from French loto and directly from Italian lotto a lot, from Old French lot
lot, share, reward, prize, from Frankish or some other Germanic source (compare Old English and Old
Frisian hlot; see lot (n.)). Meaning a lottery, a game of chance is attested from 1787.


sweepstakes (n.)

prize won in a race or contest, 1773, from Middle English swepestake one who sweeps or wins all the
stakes in a game (late 14c. as a surname or nickname; late 15c. as the name of one of the King's
ships), from swepen to sweep (see sweep (v.)) + stake (n.2). Meaning any race for stakes contributed
is from 1862.


cracker-jack (n.)

also crackerjack, something excellent, 1893, U.S. colloquialism, apparently a fanciful construction,
earliest use in reference to racing horses. The caramel-coated popcorn-and-peanuts confection was
said to have been introduced at the World's Columbian Exposition (1893). Supposedly a salesman gave
it the name when he tasted some and said, That's a cracker-jack, using the then-popular expression.
The name was trademarked 1896. The Prize in Every Box was introduced 1912.    Your brother Bob is
traveling, isn't he?    Yep. He's with one of the big racing teams. I tell you, he's a cracker-jack!
Wins a bushel of diamonds and gold cups every week.  [Life, Aug. 1, 1895]


consolation (n.)

late 14c., act of consoling, from Old French consolacion (11c., Modern French consolation) solace,
comfort; delight, pleasure, from Latin consolationem (nominative consolatio-) consoling, comforting,
noun of action from consolat-, past participle stem of consolari (see console (v.)). Consolation
prize is recorded from 1886.


pentathlon (n.)

athletic contest of five events, 1852, from Greek pentathlon the contest of five exercises, from
pente five (see five) + athlon prize, contest, of uncertain origin. Earlier in English in Latin form
pentathlum (1706). The Greek version consisted of jumping, sprinting, discus and spear throwing, and
wrestling. The modern version (1912) consists of horseback riding, fencing, shooting, swimming, and
cross-country running.


antagonist (n.)

1590s, from French antagoniste (16c.) or directly from Late Latin antagonista, from Greek
antagonistes competitor, opponent, rival, agent noun from antagonizesthai to struggle against,
oppose, be a rival, from anti- against (see anti-) + agonizesthai to contend for a prize, from agon
contest (see agony). Originally in battle or sport, extended 1620s to any sphere of human activity.


newspaper (n.)

1660s, though the thing itself is older (see gazette); from news (n.) + paper (n.).    [T]he
newspaper that drops on your doorstep is a partial, hasty, incomplete, inevitably somewhat flawed
and inaccurate rendering of some of the things we have heard about in the past twenty-four hours --
distorted, despite our best efforts to eliminate gross bias, by the very process of compression that
makes it possible for you to lift it from the doorstep and read it in about an hour. If we labeled
the product accurately, then we could immediately add: But it's the best we could do under the
circumstances, and we will be back tomorrow with a corrected and updated version. [David Broder,
Pulitzer Prize acceptance speech, 1973]


scofflaw (n.)

1924, from scoff (v.) + law (n.). The winning entry in a national contest during Prohibition to coin
a word to characterize a person who drinks illegally, chosen from more than 25,000 entries; the $200
winning prize was split between two contestants who sent in the word separately: Henry Irving Dale
and Miss Kate L. Butler. Other similar attempts did not stick, such as pitilacker (1926), winning
entry in a contest by the Pennsylvania Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals to establish
a scolding word for one who mistreats animals (submitted by Mrs. M. McIlvaine Bready of Mickleton,
N.J.).


laureate (adj.)

late 14c., from Latin laureatus crowned with laurels, from laurea laurel crown (emblematic of
victory or distinction in poetry), from fem. of laureus of laurel, from laurus laurel. Laureat poete
first found in Canterbury Tales (form with the noun before the adjective, in imitation of Latin word
order, is from c.1400 in English); the first official one was probably Ben Jonson (1638), though the
first recorded one was Dryden (1668). Extended to Nobel prize winners, 1947. As a noun, 1520s, from
the adjective. Related: Laureateship.


hat (n.)

Old English h&aelig;t hat, head covering, from Proto-Germanic *hattuz hood, cowl (cognates: Frisian
hat, Old Norse hattr), from PIE root *kadh- cover, protect (cognates: Lithuanian kudas tuft or crest
of a bird, Latin cassis helmet). Now, head covering with a more or less horizontal brim. To throw
one's hat in the ring was originally (1847) to take up a challenge in prize-fighting. To eat one's
hat is said to have been originally To eat Old Rowley's [Charles II's] hat.


Stephen

masc. proper name, from Latin Stephanus, from Greek Stephanos, from stephanos crown, wreath,
garland, chaplet; crown of victory, hence victory, prize, honor, glory, properly that which
surrounds; also used of the ring of spectators around a fight or the wall of a town, from stephein
to encircle, crown, wreathe, tie around, from PIE root *stebh- post, stem; place firmly on, fasten
(see step (v.)). Exclusively a monk's name in Old English, it became common after the Conquest.
Saint Stephen, stoned to death, was said to be Christianity's first martyr.


sixty

Old English sixtig, from siex (see six) + -tig (see -ty (1)). Similar formation in Old Norse
sextugr, sext&#246;gr, sextigir, Old Frisian sextich, Middle Dutch sestig, Dutch zestig, Old High
German sehszug, German sechzig. Phrase sixty-four dollar question is 1942, from radio quiz show
where that was the top prize.


Yankee Doodle (n.)

popular tune of the American Revolution, apparently written c.1755 by British Army surgeon Dr.
Richard Schuckburgh while campaigning with Amherst's force in upper New York during the French and
Indian War. The original verses mocked the colonial troops (see Yankee) serving alongside the
regulars, and the Doodle element might have been, or hinted at, the 18c. slang term for penis. The
song naturally was popular with British troops in the colonies during the Revolutionary War, but
after the colonials began to win skirmishes with them in 1775, they took the tune as a patriotic
prize and re-worked the lyrics. The current version seems to have been written in 1776 by Edward
Bangs, a Harvard sophomore who also was a Minuteman.


distance (n.)

late 13c., quarrel, estrangement, discord, strife, from Old French destance (13c.), from Latin
distantia a standing apart, from distantem (nominative distans) standing apart, separate, distant,
present participle of distare stand apart, from dis- apart, off (see dis-) + stare to stand (see
stet).    Meaning remoteness, space between things or places is late 14c. The figurative sense of
aloofness is the same as in stand-offish. Phrase go the distance (1930s) seems to be originally from
the prize ring, where the word meant scheduled length of a bout.


blow (n.1)

hard hit, mid-15c., blowe, from northern and East Midlands dialects, perhaps from Middle Dutch
blouwen to beat, a common Germanic word of unknown origin (compare German bleuen, Gothic bliggwan to
strike). Influenced in English by blow (v.1). In reference to descriptions or accounts, blow-by-blow
is recorded from 1921, American English, originally of prize-fight broadcasts.    LIKE a hungry
kitten loves its saucer of warm milk, so do radio fans joyfully listen to the blow-by-blow broadcast
description of a boxing bout. [The Wireless Age, December 1922]


tragedy (n.)

late 14c., play or other serious literary work with an unhappy ending, from Old French tragedie
(14c.), from Latin tragedia a tragedy, from Greek tragodia a dramatic poem or play in formal
language and having an unhappy resolution, apparently literally goat song, from tragos goat + oide
song (see ode).    The connection may be via satyric drama, from which tragedy later developed, in
which actors or singers were dressed in goatskins to represent satyrs. But many other theories have
been made (including singer who competes for a goat as a prize), and even the goat connection is at
times questioned. Meaning any unhappy event, disaster is from c.1500.


prison (n.)

early 12c., from Old French prisoun captivity, imprisonment; prison; prisoner, captive (11c., Modern
French prison), altered (by influence of pris taken; see prize (n.2)) from earlier preson, from
Vulgar Latin *presionem, from Latin prensionem (nominative prensio), shortening of prehensionem
(nominative *prehensio) a taking, noun of action from past participle stem of prehendere to take
(see prehensile). Captivity, hence by extension a place for captives, the main modern sense.


clip (v.2)

fasten, hold together by pressure, also (mostly archaic) to embrace, from Old English clyppan to
embrace, clasp; surround; prize, honor, cherish; related to Old Frisian kleppa to embrace, love, Old
High German klaftra, German klafter fathom (on notion of outstretched arms). Also compare Lithuanian
glebys armful, globiu to embrace, support. Meaning to fasten, bind is early 14c. Meaning to fasten
with clips is from 1902. Related: Clipped; clipping. Original sense of the verb is preserved in U.S.
football clipping penalty.


trophy (n.)

1510s, a spoil or prize of war, from Middle French troph&eacute;e (15c.) from Latin trophaeum a sign
of victory, monument, originally tropaeum, from Greek tropaion monument of an enemy's defeat, noun
use of neuter of adjective tropaios of defeat, causing a rout, from trope a rout, originally a
turning (of the enemy); see trope. In ancient Greece, spoils or arms taken in battle and set up on
the field and dedicated to a god. Figurative extension to any token or memorial of victory is first
recorded 1560s. As a symbolic representation of a classical trophy from 1630s. Trophy wife attested
by 1984.


diligence (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French diligence attention, care; haste, speed, from Latin diligentia
attentiveness, carefulness, from diligentem (nominative diligens) attentive, assiduous, careful,
originally present participle of diligere single out, value highly, esteem, prize, love; aspire to,
be content with, appreciate, originally to pick out, select, from dis- apart (see dis-) + legere
choose, gather (see lecture (n.)).    Sense evolved from love through attentiveness to carefulness
to steady effort. From the secondary French sense comes the old useage of diligence for public stage
coach (1742; dilly for short), from a French shortening of carrosse de diligence.


gold (n.)

Old English gold, from Proto-Germanic *gulth- (cognates: Old Saxon, Old Frisian, Old High German
gold, German Gold, Middle Dutch gout, Dutch goud, Old Norse gull, Danish guld, Gothic gul&thorn;),
from PIE root *ghel- (2) to shine, with derivatives referring to bright materials and gold (compare
Old Church Slavonic zlato, Russian zoloto, Sanskrit hiranyam, Old Persian daraniya-, Avestan
zaranya- gold; see glass).    As an adjective from c.1200. In reference to the color of the metal,
it is recorded from c.1400. Gold rush is attested from 1859, originally in an Australian context.
Gold medal as first prize in a contest is from 1908.


purse (n.)

Old English pursa little bag made of leather, especially for carrying money, from Medieval Latin
bursa leather purse (source also of Old French borse, 12c., Modern French bourse; see bourse), from
Late Latin bursa, variant of byrsa hide, from Greek byrsa hide, leather. Change of b- to p- perhaps
by influence of Old English pusa, Old Norse posi bag.    Meaning woman's handbag is attested from
1951. Meaning sum of money collected as a prize in a race, etc., is from 1640s. Purse-strings,
figurative for control of money, is from early 15c. Purse-snatcher first attested 1902 (earlier
purse-picker, 1540s). The notion of drawn together by a thong also is behind purse-net (c.1400).


jackpot (n.)

also jack-pot, big prize, 1944, from slot machine sense (1932), from obsolete poker sense (1881) of
antes that begin when no player has a pair of jacks or better; from jack (n.) in the card-playing
sense + pot (n.1). Earlier, in criminal slang, it meant trouble, especially an arrest (1902).    The
regular Draw-Poker game is usually varied by occasional Jack-Pots, which are played once in so many
deals, or when all have refused to play, or when the player deals who holds the buck, a marker
placed in the pool with every jack-pot. In a jack-pot each player puts up an equal stake and
receives a hand. The pot must then be opened by a player holding a hand of the value of a pair of
knaves (jacks) or better. If no player holds so valuable a hand the deal passes and each player adds
a small sum to the pot or pool. When the pot is opened the opener does so by putting up any sum he
chooses, within the limit, and his companions must pay in the same amount or drop. They also possess
the right to raise the opener. The new cards called for are then dealt and the opener starts the
betting, the play proceeding as in the regular game. [Encyclopaedia Britannica, 11th ed., 1911,
Poker. The article notes Jack-Pots were introduced about 1870.]


money (n.)

mid-13c., coinage, metal currency, from Old French monoie money, coin, currency; change (Modern
French monnaie), from Latin moneta place for coining money, mint; coined money, money, coinage, from
Moneta, a title or surname of the Roman goddess Juno, in or near whose temple money was coined;
perhaps from monere advise, warn (see monitor (n.)), with the sense of admonishing goddess, which is
sensible, but the etymology is difficult. Extended early 19c. to include paper money.    It had been
justly stated by a British writer that the power to make a small piece of paper, not worth one cent,
by the inscribing of a few names, to be worth a thousand dollars, was a power too high to be
entrusted to the hands of mortal man. [John C. Calhoun, speech, U.S. Senate, Dec. 29, 1841]   <hr />
I am not interested in money but in the things of which money is the symbol. [Henry Ford]  To make
money earn pay is first attested mid-15c. Highwayman's threat your money or your life first attested
1841. Phrase in the money (1902) originally meant one who finishes among the prize-winners (in a
horse race, etc.). The challenge to put (one's) money where (one's) mouth is is first recorded 1942,
American English. money-grub one who is sordidly intent on amassing money is from 1768. The image of
money burning a hole in someone's pocket is attested from 1520s.


ring (n.1)

circular band, Old English hring small circlet, especially one of metal for wearing on the finger or
as part of a mail coat; anything circular, from Proto-Germanic *hringaz something curved, circle
(cognates: Old Norse hringr, Old Frisian hring, Danish, Swedish, Dutch ring, Old High German hring,
German Ring), from PIE *(s)kregh- nasalized form of (s)kregh-, from root *(s)ker- (3) to turn, bend,
with wide-ranging derivative senses (cognates: Latin curvus bent, curved, crispus curly; Old Church
Slavonic kragu circle, and perhaps Greek kirkos ring, koronos curved).    Other Old English senses
were circular group of persons, also horizon. Meaning place for prize fight and wrestling bouts
(early 14c.) is from the space in a circle of bystanders in the midst of which such contests once
were held, ... a circle formed for boxers, wrestlers, and cudgel players, by a man styled Vinegar;
who, with his hat before his eyes, goes round the circle, striking at random with his whip to
prevent the populace from crowding in [Grose, 1785]. Meaning combination of interested persons is
from 1829. Of trees, from 1670s; fairy ring is from 1620s. Ring finger is Old English hringfingr, a
compound found in other Germanic languages. To run rings round (someone) be superior to is from
1891.    Nursery rhyme ring a ring a rosie is attested in an American form (with a different ending)
from c.1790. The belief that the rhyme originated with the Great Plague is now almost universal, but
has no evidence to support it and is almost certainly nonsense [Oxford Dictionary of English
Folklore]. This proposal of connection dates only to the late 1960s.


smock (n.)

Old English smoc garment worn by women, corresponding to the shirt on men, from Proto-Germanic
*smukkaz (cognates: Old Norse smokkr a smock, but this is perhaps from Old English; Old High German
smoccho smock, a rare word; North Frisian smok woman's shift, but this, too, perhaps from English).
Klein's sources, Barnhart and the OED see this as connected to a group of Germanic sm- words having
to do with creeping or pressing close, such as Old Norse smjuga to creep (through an opening), to
put on (a garment), smuga narrow cleft to creep through; small hole; Old Swedish smog a round hole
for the head; Old English smugan, smeogan to creep, smygel a burrow. Compare also German schmiegen
to cling to, press close, nestle; and Schmuck jewelry, adornments, from schmucken to adorn,
literally to dress up.    Watkins, however, traces it to a possible Germanic base *(s)muk- wetness,
figuratively slipperiness, from PIE root*meug- slimy, slippery (see mucus). Either way, the original
notion, then, seems generally to have been garment one creeps or slips into, by the same pattern
that produced sleeve and slip (n.2).    Now replaced by euphemistic shift (n.2); smock was the
common word down to 18c., and was emblematic of womanhood generally, as in verb smock to render (a
man) effeminate or womanish (1610s); smocker man who consorts with women (18c.); smock-face person
having a pale, effeminate face (c.1600). A smock-race (1707) was an old country pastime, a foot-race
for women and girls with a smock as a prize. Modern meaning woman's or child's loose dress or blouse
is from 1907; sense of loose garment worn by artists over other clothes is from 1938.


pull (v.)

c.1300, to move forcibly by pulling, to drag, from Old English pullian to pluck off (wool), to draw
out, of unknown origin, perhaps related to Low German pulen remove the shell or husk, Frisian
p&#251;lje to shell, husk, Middle Dutch polen to peel, strip, Icelandic pula work hard.    Early
14c. as to pick, pull off, gather (fruit, flowers, berries, leaves, petals, etc.); mid-14c. as to
uproot, pull up (of teeth, weeds, etc.). Sense of to draw, attract (to oneself) is from c.1400;
sense of to pluck at with the fingers is from c.1400. Meaning tear to pieces is mid-15c. By late
16c. it had replaced draw in these senses. Related: Pulled; pulling.    Common in slang usages
19c.-20c.; Bartlett (1859) has to pull foot walk fast; run; pull it to run. To pull up check a
course of action is from 1808, figurative of the lifting of the reins in horse-riding. To pull
(someone's) chain in figurative sense is from 1974, perhaps on the notion of a captive animal; the
expression was also used for to contact (someone), on the notion of the chain that operates a
signaling mechanism.    To pull (someone's) leg is from 1882, perhaps on notion of playfully
tripping (compare pull the long bow exaggerate, 1830, and pulling someone's leg also sometimes was
described as a way to awaken a sleeping person in a railway compartment, ship's berth, etc.).
Thornton's American Glossary (1912) has pull (n.) a jest (to have a pull at (someone)), which it
identifies as local and illustrates with an example from the Massachusetts Spy of May 21, 1817,
which identifies it as a Georgian phrase. To pull (one's) punches is from 1920 in pugilism, from
1921 figuratively. To pull in arrive (1892) and pull out depart (1868) are from the railroads.    To
pull (something) off accomplish, succeed at is originally in sporting, to win the prize money
(1870). To pull (something) on (someone) is from 1916; to pull (something) out of one's ass is Army
slang from 1970s. To pull rank is from 1919; to pull the rug from under (someone) figuratively is
from 1946.


