prodigy (n.)

late 15c., sign, portent, something extraordinary from which omens are drawn, from Latin prodigium
prophetic sign, omen, portent, prodigy, from pro- forth (see pro-) + -igium, a suffix or word of
unknown origin, perhaps from *agi-, root of aio I say (see adage). Meaning child with exceptional
abilities first recorded 1650s.


wunderkind (n.)

child prodigy (especially in music), 1883 in English (earlier as a German word in German contexts),
from German Wunderkind, literally wonder-child.


prodigious (adj.)

1550s, ominous, from Middle French prodigieux and directly from Latin prodigiosus strange,
wonderful, marvelous, unnatural, from prodigium (see prodigy). Meaning vast, enormous is from
c.1600. Related: Prodigiously; prodigiosity.


sooth (n.)

Old English so&eth; truth, justice, righteousness, rectitude; reality, certainty, noun use of
so&eth; (adj.) true, genuine, real; just, righteous, originally *son&eth;-, from Proto-Germanic
*santhaz (cognates: Old Norse sannr, Old Saxon soth, Old High German sand true, Gothic sunja truth).
The group is related to Old English synn sin and Latin sontis guilty (truth is related to guilt via
being the one; see sin (v.)), from PIE *es-ont- being, existence, thus real, true, from present
participle of root *es-, the s-form of the verb to be (see be), preserved in Latin sunt they are and
German sind. Archaic in English, it is the root of modern words for true in Swedish (sann) and
Danish (sand). In common use until mid-17c., then obsolete until revived as an archaism early 19c.
by Scott, etc. Used for Latin pro- in translating compounds into Old English, such as so&eth;tacen
prodigy, so&eth;fylgan prosequi.


swan (n.)

Old English swan swan, from Proto-Germanic *swanaz singer (cognates: Old Saxon swan, Old Norse
svanr, Danish svane, Swedish svan, Middle Dutch swane, Dutch zwaan, Old High German swan, German
Schwan), probably literally the singing bird, from PIE root *swen- to sing, make sound (see sound
(n.1)); thus related to Old English geswin melody, song and swinsian to make melody.    In classical
mythology, sacred to Apollo and to Venus. The singing of swans before death was alluded to by
Chaucer (late 14c.), but swan-song (1831) is a translation of German Schwanengesang. The ancient
Indo-European mythical swan-maiden so called by mythographers from 1829. Swan dive is recorded from
1898. A black swan was proverbial for something extremely rare or non-existent (late 14c.), after
Juvenal [Sat. vi. 164], but later they turned up in Australia (Chenopsis atratus).    Do you say no
worthy wife is to be found among all these crowds? Well, let her be handsome, charming, rich and
fertile; let her have ancient ancestors ranged about her halls; let her be more chaste than all the
dishevelled Sabine maidens who stopped the war--a prodigy as rare upon the earth as a black swan!
yet who could endure a wife that possessed all perfections?  I would rather have a Venusian wench
for my wife than you, O Cornelia, mother of the Gracchi, if, with all your virtues, you bring me a
haughty brow, and reckon up Triumphs as part of your marriage portion. [Juvenal]


