prod (n.)

1787, pointed instrument used in prodding; 1802, act of prodding; from prod (v.).


prod (v.)

1530s, to poke with a stick, of uncertain origin; possibly [Barnhart] a variant of brod, from Middle
English brodden to goad, from Old Norse broddr shaft, spike (see brad), or perhaps imitative [OED].
Figurative sense is recorded from 1871. Related: Prodded; prodding.


prog

1958, colloquial shortening of progressive (q.v.). Earlier it was British student slang for proctor
(1890) and earlier still a cant word for food, provisions (1650s), perhaps from verb prog to poke
about (1610s), of unknown origin, perhaps related to prod (v.). Related: Progged; progging.


prong (n.)

early 15c., prange pointed instrument; mid-15c., pronge pain, from Anglo-Latin pronga prong, pointed
tool, of unknown origin, perhaps related to Middle Low German prange stick, restraining device,
prangen to press, pinch. See also prod, which might be related. Prong-horned antelope is from 1815
(short form pronghorn attested from 1826).


nip (v.)

to pinch sharply; to bite suddenly, late 14c., related to Middle Low German nipen to nip, to pinch,
Middle Dutch nipen to pinch, Dutch nijpen, Old Norse hnippa to prod, but the exact evolution of the
stem is obscure. Related: Nipped; nipping. To nip (something) in the bud in the figurative sense is
first recorded c.1600.


poke (v.)

to push, prod, thrust, especially with something pointed, c.1300, puken to poke, nudge, of uncertain
origin, perhaps from or related to Middle Dutch poken to poke (Dutch beuken), or Middle Low German
poken to stick with a knife (compare German pochen to knock, rap), both from Proto-Germanic root
*puk-, perhaps imitative. Related: Poked; poking. To poke fun tease first attested 1840; to poke
around search is from 1809. To poke along advance lazily; walk at a leisurely pace is from 1833.


poach (v.1)

steal game, 1520s, to push, poke, from Middle French pocher to thrust, poke, from Old French pochier
poke out, gouge, prod, jab, from a Germanic source (compare Middle High German puchen to pound,
beat, knock, German pochen, Middle Dutch boken to beat) related to poke (v.). Sense of trespass for
the sake of stealing is first attested 1610s, perhaps via notion of thrusting oneself onto another's
property, or perhaps from French pocher to pocket (see poach (v.2)). Related: Poached; poaching.


punch (v.)

to thrust, push; jostle; also, prod, to drive (cattle, etc.) by poking and prodding, late 14c., from
Old French ponchonner to punch, prick, stamp, from ponchon pointed tool, piercing weapon (see punch
(n.1)). Meaning to pierce, emboss with a tool is from early 15c.; meaning to stab, puncture is from
mid-15c. To punch a ticket, etc., is from mid-15c. To punch the clock record one's arrival at or
departure from the workplace using an automated timing device is from 1900. Related: Punched;
punching.    Perhaps you are some great big chief, who has a lot to say.  Who lords it o'er the
common herd who chance to come your way;  Well, here is where your arrogance gets a dreadful shock,
When you march up, like a private, salute, and PUNCH THE CLOCK.  [from Punch the Clock, by The
Skipper, The Commercial Telegraphers' Journal, May 1912]    Specialized sense to hit with the fist
first recorded 1520s. Compare Latin pugnare to fight with the fists, from a root meaning to pierce,
sting. In English this was probably influenced by punish; punch or punsch for punish is found in
documents from 14c.-15c.:    punchyth me, Lorde, and spare my blyssyd wyff Anne. [Coventry Mystery
Plays, late 15c.]    To punch (someone) out beat up is from 1971.


