prodigious (adj.)

1550s, ominous, from Middle French prodigieux and directly from Latin prodigiosus strange,
wonderful, marvelous, unnatural, from prodigium (see prodigy). Meaning vast, enormous is from
c.1600. Related: Prodigiously; prodigiosity.


Stakhanovite (n.)

1935, from name of hard-working Soviet coal miner Aleksei Grigorevich Stakhanov (1906-1977), in
reference to an efficiency system in which workers increase their piecework production and are
rewarded with bonuses and privileges. Soviet authorities publicized his prodigious output as part of
a campaign to increase productivity.


roc (n.)

large, ferocious bird of fable, 1570s, from Arabic rukhkh, from Persian rukh. Mentioned in Marco
Polo's account of Madagascar, modern use is mostly from Arabian Nights. Hence roc's egg something
marvelous or prodigious.


aphid (n.)

1884, anglicized from Modern Latin aphides, plural of aphis, coined by Linnaeus (1758), though where
he got it and why he applied it to the plant louse are mysteries. The theory favored by OED as least
improbable is that it derives from the plural of Greek apheides unsparing, lavishly bestowed, in
reference either to the prodigious rate of production of the insects or their voracity. They also
are known as ant-cows.


phenomenal (adj.)

1803, of the nature of a phenomenon, a hybrid from phenomenon + -al (1). Meaning remarkable,
exceptional is from 1850.    [Phenomenal] is a metaphysical term with a use of its own. To divert it
from this proper use to a job for which it is not needed, by making it do duty for remarkable,
extraordinary, or prodigious, is a sin against the English language. [Fowler]    Related:
Phenomenally.


powerful (adj.)

c.1400, from power (n.) + -ful. Meaning of great quality or number is from 1811; colloquial sense of
exceedingly (adv.) is from 1822. Related: Powerfully. Thornton (American Glossary) notes powerful as
Much used by common people in the sense of very, along with monstrous and cites curious expressions
such as devilish good, monstrous pretty (1799), dreadful polite, cruel pretty, abominable fine
(1803), or when a young lady admires a lap dog for being so vastly small and declares him prodigious
handsome (1799).


meta-

word-forming element meaning 1. after, behind, 2. changed, altered, 3. higher, beyond; from Greek
meta (prep.) in the midst of, in common with, by means of, in pursuit or quest of, from PIE *me- in
the middle (cognates: German mit, Gothic mi&thorn;, Old English mi&eth; with, together with, among;
see mid). Notion of changing places with probably led to senses change of place, order, or nature,
which was a principal meaning of the Greek word when used as a prefix (but also denoting community,
participation; in common with; pursuing).    Third sense, higher than, transcending, overarching,
dealing with the most fundamental matters of, is due to misinterpretation of metaphysics as science
of that which transcends the physical. This has led to a prodigious erroneous extension in modern
usage, with meta- affixed to the names of other sciences and disciplines, especially in the academic
jargon of literary criticism, which affixes it to just about anything that moves and much that
doesn't.


monster (n.)

early 14c., malformed animal or human, creature afflicted with a birth defect, from Old French
monstre, mostre monster, monstrosity (12c.), and directly from Latin monstrum divine omen, portent,
sign; abnormal shape; monster, monstrosity, figuratively repulsive character, object of dread, awful
deed, abomination, from root of monere warn (see monitor (n.)). Abnormal or prodigious animals were
regarded as signs or omens of impending evil. Extended by late 14c. to imaginary animals composed of
parts of creatures (centaur, griffin, etc.). Meaning animal of vast size is from 1520s; sense of
person of inhuman cruelty or wickedness is from 1550s. As an adjective, of extraordinary size, from
1837. In Old English, the monster Grendel was an agl&aelig;ca, a word related to agl&aelig;c
calamity, terror, distress, oppression.


