profane (v.)

late 14c., from Old French profaner, prophaner (13c.) and directly from Latin profanare to
desecrate, render unholy, violate, from profanus unholy, not consecrated (see profane (adj.)).
Related: Profaned; profaning.


profane (adj.)

mid-15c., un-ecclesiastical, secular, from Old French profane (12c.) and directly from Latin
profanus unholy, not consecrated, according to Barnhart from pro fano not admitted into the temple
(with the initiates), literally out in front of the temple, from pro- before (see pro-) + fano,
ablative of fanum temple (see feast (n.)). Sense of unholy, polluted is recorded from c.1500.
Related: Profanely.


swearing (n.)

utterance of profane language, mid-14c., verbal noun from swear (v.).


profanity (n.)

c.1600, from Late Latin profanitas, from Latin profanus (see profane (adj.)). Extended sense of foul
language is from Old Testament commandment against profaning the name of the Lord.


desecrate (v.)

1670s, formed from de- do the opposite of (see de-) + stem of consecrate. Old French had dessacrer
to profane, and there is a similar formation in Italian; but Latin desecrare meant to make holy,
with de- in this case having a completive sense. Related: Desecrated; desecrating.


profanation (n.)

1550s, from Old French prophanation (15c., Modern French profanation) or directly from Late Latin
profanationem (nominative profanatio), noun of action from past participle stem of profanare (see
profane (adj.)).


unholy (adj.)

Old English unhalig, impious, profane, wicked, from un- (1) not + halig (see holy). Similar
formation in Middle Dutch onheilich, Old Norse uheilagr, Danish unhellig, Swedish ohelig. In
reference to actions, it is attested from late 14c. Colloquial sense of awful, dreadful is recorded
from 1842.


gutter (n.)

late 13c., watercourse, water drainage channel along the side of a street, from Anglo-French gotere,
Old French guitere, goutiere (13c., Modern French goutti&egrave;re) gutter, spout (of water), from
goute a drop, from Latin gutta a drop. Meaning furrow made by running water is from 1580s. Meaning
trough under the eaves of a roof to carry off rainwater is from mid-14c. Figurative sense of low,
profane is from 1818. In printers' slang, from 1841.


defile (v.)

c.1400, to desecrate, profane; mid-15c., to make foul or dirty, alteration of earlier defoulen, from
Old French defouler trample down, violate, also ill-treat, dishonor, from de- down (see de-) + foler
to tread, from Latin fullo person who cleans and thickens cloth by stamping on it  (see foil (v.)).
The alteration (or re-formation) in English is from influence of Middle English filen (v.) to render
foul; make unclean or impure, literal and figurative, from Old English fylen (trans.), related to
Old English fulian (intrans.) to become foul, rot, from the source of foul (adj.). Compare befoul,
which also had a parallel form befilen. Related: Defiled; defiling.


bloody (adj.)

Old Engish blodig, adjective from blod (see blood). Common Germanic, compare Old Frisian blodich,
Old Saxon bl&#244;dag, Dutch bloedig, Old High German bluotag, German blutig.    It has been a
British intensive swear word since at least 1676. Weekley relates it to the purely intensive use of
the cognate Dutch bloed, German Blut. But perhaps it ultimately is connected with bloods in the
slang sense of rowdy young aristocrats (see blood (n.)) via expressions such as bloody drunk as
drunk as a blood.    Partridge reports that it was respectable before c.1750, and it was used by
Fielding and Swift, but heavily tabooed c.1750-c.1920, perhaps from imagined association with
menstruation; Johnson calls it very vulgar, and OED writes of it, now constantly in the mouths of
the lowest classes, but by respectable people considered 'a horrid word', on par with obscene or
profane language.    The onset of the taboo against bloody coincides with the increase in linguistic
prudery that presaged the Victorian Era but it is hard to say what the precise cause was in the case
of this specific word. Attempts have been made to explain the term's extraordinary shock power by
invoking etymology. Theories that derive it from such oaths as By our Lady or God's blood seem
farfetched, however. More likely, the taboo stemmed from the fear that many people have of blood
and, in the minds of some, from an association with menstrual bleeding. Whatever, the term was
debarred from polite society during the whole of the nineteenth century. [Rawson]    Shaw shocked
theatergoers when he put it in the mouth of Eliza Doolittle in Pygmalion (1914), and for a time the
word was known euphemistically as the Shavian adjective. It was avoided in print as late as 1936.
Bloody Sunday, Jan. 30, 1972, when 13 civilians were killed by British troops at protest in
Londonderry, Northern Ireland.


