profusion (n.)

1540s, from Middle French profusion (16c.) and directly from Late Latin profusionem (nominative
profusio) a pouring out, noun of action from past participle stem of profundere (see profuse).


luxe

luxury, elegance, 1550s, from French luxe luxury, sumptuousness, profusion, from Latin luxus (see
luxury).


redound (v.)

late 14c., to overflow, from Old French redonder overflow, abound, be in profusion (12c.), from
Latin redundare to overflow (see redundant). Meaning to flow or go back (to a place or person) is
from late 14c.; hence to rebound (c.1500), and to contribute to (the credit, honor, etc.), early
15c. Related: Redounded; redounding.


copious (adj.)

mid-14c., from Latin copiosus plentiful, from copia an abundance, ample supply, profusion, plenty,
from com- with (see com-) + ops (genitive opis) power, wealth, resources, from PIE root *op- (1) to
work, produce in abundance, (see opus). Related: Copiously.


plenty (n.)

mid-13c., as much as one could desire, from Old French plentee, earlier plentet abundance, profusion
(12c., Modern French dialectal plent&eacute;), from Latin plenitatem (nominative plenitas) fullness,
from plenus complete, full (see plenary). Meaning condition of general abundance is from late 14c.
The colloquial adverb meaning very much is first attested 1842. Middle English had parallel
formation plenteth, from the older Old French form of the word.


luxury (n.)

c.1300, sexual intercourse; mid-14c., lasciviousness, sinful self-indulgence, from Old French
luxurie debauchery, dissoluteness, lust (Modern French luxure), from Latin luxuria excess, luxury,
extravagance, profusion; delicacy (source also of Spanish lujuria, Italian lussuria), from luxus
excess, extravagance, magnificence, probably a figurative use of luxus (adj.) dislocated, which is
related to luctari wrestle, strain (see reluctance).    Meaning sensual pleasure is late 14c. Lost
its pejorative taint 17c. Meaning habit of indulgence in what is choice or costly is from 1630s;
that of sumptuous surroundings is from 1704; that of something enjoyable or comfortable beyond
life's necessities is from 1780. Used as an adjective from 1916.


