profound (adj.)

c.1300, characterized by intellectual depth, from Old French profund (12c., Modern French profond),
from Latin profundus deep, bottomless, vast, also obscure; profound; immoderate, from pro- forth
(see pro-) + fundus bottom (see fund (n.)). The literal and figurative senses both were in Latin,
but English, having already deep, employed this word primarily in its figurative sense. Related:
Profoundly.


sage (n.2)

man of profound wisdom, mid-14c., from sage (adj.). Originally applied to the Seven Sages -- Thales,
Solon, Periander, Cleobulus, Chilon, Bias, and Pittacus.


profundity (n.)

early 15c., bottom of the sea, from Old French profundite (Modern French profondit&eacute;) and
directly from Late Latin profunditatem (nominative profunditas) depth, intensity, immensity, from
profundus deep, vast (see profound). Meaning depth of intellect in English is from c.1500.


Jekyll and Hyde

in reference to opposite aspects of a person's character, from Robert Louis Stevenson's story, The
Strange Case of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde, published 1886. The surname Jekyll is of Breton origin and
was originally a personal name.    Though so profound a double-dealer, I was in no sense a
hypocrite. Both sides of me were in dead earnest; I was no more myself when I laid aside restraint
and plunged in shame, than when I labored, in the eye of day, at the furtherance of knowledge or the
relief of sorrow and suffering. [Robert Louis Stevenson, The Strange Case of Dr. Jekyll and Mr.
Hyde, 1886]


recondite (adj.)

1640s, removed or hidden from view, from Old French recondit, from Latin reconditus, past participle
of recondere store away, hide, conceal, put back again, put up again, lay up, from re- away, back
(see re-) + condere to store, hide, put together, from con- together (see con-) + -dere to put,
place, comb. form of dare to give (see date (n.1)). Meaning removed from ordinary understanding,
profound is from 1650s; of writers or sources, obscure, it is recorded from 1817.


gulf (n.)

late 14c., profound depth; geographic sense is c.1400; from Old French golf a gulf, whirlpool, from
Italian golfo a gulf, a bay, from Late Latin colfos, from Greek kolpos bay, gulf, earlier trough
between waves, fold of a garment, originally bosom, the common notion being curved shape, from PIE
*kwelp- to arch, to vault (compare Old English hwealf, a-hwielfan to overwhelm). Latin sinus
underwent the same development, being used first for bosom, later for gulf. Replaced Old English
s&aelig;-earm. Figurative sense of a wide interval is from 1550s. The Gulf Stream (1775) takes its
name from the Gulf of Mexico.


heavy (adj.)

Old English hefig heavy, having much weight; important, grave; oppressive; slow, dull, from Proto-
Germanic *hafiga containing something; having weight (cognates: Old Saxon, Old High German hebig,
Old Norse hofugr, Middle Dutch hevich, Dutch hevig), from PIE *kap- to grasp (see capable). Jazz
slang sense of profound, serious is from 1937 but would have been comprehensible to an Anglo-Saxon.
Heavy industry recorded from 1932. Heavy metal attested by 1839 in chemistry; in nautical jargon
from at least 1744 in sense large-caliber guns on a ship.    While we undervalue the nicely-balanced
weight of broadsides which have lately been brought forward with all the grave precision of Cocker,
we are well aware of the decided advantages of heavy metal. [United Services Journal, London, 1830]
As a type of rock music, from 1972.


deep (adj.)

Old English deop profound, awful, mysterious; serious, solemn; deepness, depth, deope (adv.), from
Proto-Germanic *deupaz (cognates: Old Saxon diop, Old Frisian diap, Dutch diep, Old High German
tiof, German tief, Old Norse djupr, Danish dyb, Swedish djup, Gothic diups deep), from PIE *dheub-
deep, hollow (cognates: Lithuanian dubus deep, hollow, Old Church Slavonic duno bottom, foundation,
Welsh dwfn deep, Old Irish domun world, via sense development from bottom to foundation to earth to
world).    Figurative senses were in Old English; extended 16c. to color, sound. Deep pocket wealth
is from 1951. To go off the deep end lose control of oneself is slang first recorded 1921, probably
in reference to the deep end of a swimming pool, where a person on the surface can no longer touch
bottom. When 3-D films seemed destined to be the next wave and the biggest thing to hit cinema since
talkies, they were known as deepies (1953).


