progeny (n.)

early 14c., from Old French progenie (13c.) and directly from Latin progenies descendants,
offspring, lineage, race, family, from stem of progignere beget, from pro- forth (see pro-) +
gignere to produce, beget (see genus).


proles (n.)

offspring, 1670s, from Latin proles offspring, progeny (see prolific).


philoprogenitive (adj.)

prolific, 1815, irregularly formed from philo- + Latin progenit-, past participle stem of progignere
(see progeny). Related: Philoprogenitiveness. Important words among the phrenologists.


proletarian

1650s (n.) member of the lowest class; 1660s (adj.) of the lowest class of people; with -ian + Latin
proletarius citizen of the lowest class (as an adjective, relating to offspring), in ancient Rome,
propertyless people, exempted from taxes and military service, who served the state only by having
children; from proles offspring, progeny (see prolific).


progenitor (n.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French progenitour (mid-14c.), Old French progeniteur (14c.) and directly from
Latin progenitor ancestor, the founder of a family, agent noun from progenitus, past participle of
progignere (see progeny). Related: Progenitive; progenital; progenitrix (c.1600).


promise (v.)

c.1400, from promise (n.). Related: Promised; promising. Promised land (1530s) is a reference to the
land of Canaan promised to Abraham and his progeny (Hebrew xi:9, etc.; Greek ten ges tes
epangelias).


penis (n.)

1670s, perhaps from French p&eacute;nis or directly from Latin penis penis, earlier tail, from PIE
*pes- penis (cognates: Sanskrit pasas-, Greek peos, posthe penis, probably also Old English
f&aelig;sl progeny, offspring, Old Norse f&ouml;sull, German Fasel young of animals, brood). The
proper plural is penes. The adjective is penial. In psychological writing, penis envy is attested
from 1924.


semen (n.)

late 14c., from Latin semen seed of plants, animals, or men; race, inborn characteristic; posterity,
progeny, offspring, figuratively origin, essence, principle, cause, from PIE *si-so-, reduplication
of root *se- (1) to sow (cognates: Latin serere to sow, Old Prussian semen seed, Lithuanian semens
seed of flax, Old Church Slavonic seme, Old High German samo seed, German Same; see sow (v.)).


seed (n.)

Old English sed, s&aelig;d that which may be sown; an individual grain of seed; offspring,
posterity, from Proto-Germanic *sediz seed (cognates: Old Norse sa&eth;, Old Saxon sad, Old Frisian
sed, Middle Dutch saet, Old High German sat, German Saat), from PIE *se-ti- sowing, from root *se-
(1) to sow (see sow (v.)). Figurative use in Old English. Meaning offspring, progeny rare now except
in biblical use. Meaning semen is from c.1300. For sporting sense, see seed (v.).


team (n.)

Old English team descendant, family, race, line; child-bearing, brood; company, band; set of draft
animals yoked together, from Proto-Germanic *tau(h)maz (cognates: Old Norse taumr, Old Frisian tam
bridle; progeny, line of descent, Dutch toom, Old High German zoum, German Zaum bridle), probably
literally that which draws, from PIE *douk-mo-, from root *deuk- to pull (see duke (n.)).    Applied
in Old English to groups of persons working together for some purpose, especially group of people
acting together to bring suit; modern sense of persons associated in some joint action is from
1520s. Team spirit is recorded from 1928. Team player attested from 1886, originally in baseball.


