projectile (n.)

1660s, from Modern Latin projectilis, from Latin proiectus, past participle of proicere (see project
(n.)). Projectile vomiting attested from 1985.


shot (adj.)

early 15c., past participle adjective from from shoot (v.). Meaning wounded or killed by a bullet or
other projectile is from 1837. Figurative sense ruined, worn out is from 1833.


thunderbolt (n.)

mid-15c., from thunder (n.) + bolt (n.) arrow, projectile.


windage (n.)

1710, allowance of space between the projectile and the diameter of the tube of a firearm, from wind
(n.1) + -age. Meaning allowance for wind deflection is from 1867.


brad (n.)

small wire nail, late 13c., brod, from Old Norse broddr spike, point, arrow, from Proto-Germanic
*brozda- (cognates: Old English brord point, prick, blade of grass, Old High German brort point,
edge, crown), from PIE *bhrs-dh-, from root *bhars- projectile, point, bristle (see bristle (n.)).


goad (n.)

Old English gad point, spearhead, arrowhead, from Proto-Germanic *gaido (cognates: Lombardic gaida
spear), from PIE root *ghei- (1) to propel, prick (cognates: Sanskrit hetih missile, projectile,
himsati he injures; Avestan zaena- weapon; Greek khaios shepherd's staff; Old English gar spear; Old
Irish gae spear). Figurative use is since 16c., probably from the Bible.


missile (n.)

thing thrown or discharged as a weapon, is 1650s, from missile (adj.), 1610s, capable of being
thrown, chiefly in phrase missile weapon, from French missile and directly from Latin missilis that
may be thrown or hurled (also, in plural, as a noun, weapons that can be thrown, darts, javelins),
from missus a throwing, hurling, past participle of mittere to send (see mission). Sense of self-
propelled rocket or bomb is first recorded 1738; the modern remote guidance projectile so called
from 1945.


rocket (n.2)

type of self-propelling projectile, 1610s, from Italian rocchetto a rocket, literally a bobbin,
diminutive of rocca a distaff, so called because of cylindrical shape. The Italian word probably is
from a Germanic source (compare Old High German rocko distaff, Old Norse rokkr), from Proto-Germanic
*rukkon-, from PIE root *rug- fabric, spun yarn.    Originally fireworks rocket, meaning device
propelled by a rocket engine first recorded 1919; rocket-ship in the modern sense first attested
February 1927 (Popular Science); earlier as a type of naval warship firing projectiles. Rocket
science in the figurative sense of difficult, complex process or topic is attested by 1985. Rocket
scientist is from 1952.    That such a feat is considered within the range of possibility is
evidenced by the activities of scientists in Europe as well as in America. Two of them, Prof. Herman
Oberth and Dr. Franz Hoeff, of Vienna, are constructing a five-ton rocket ship in which they hope to
reach the moon in two days. [Popular Science, Feb. 1927]


