prolong (v.)

early 15c., back-formation from prolongation or else from Old French prolonguer, porloignier (13c.),
from Late Latin prolongare to prolong, extend, from Latin pro- forth (see pro-) + longus long
(adj.); see long (adj.). Related: Prolonged; prolonging; prolongable.


prolongation (n.)

late 14c., from Old French prolongation (14c.), from Late Lation prolongationem (nominative
prolongatio), noun of action from past participle stem of Latin prolongare (see prolong).


elongate (v.)

1530s, from Late Latin elongatus, past participle of elongare to prolong, protract (see elongation).
Earlier in the same sense was elongen (mid-15c.). Related: Elongated; elongating.


protract (v.)

1530s, a back-formation from protraction and in part from Latin protractus, past participle of
protrahere to draw forth, prolong. Etymologically identical with portray, which was altered in
French. Related: Protracted; protracting.


elixir (n.)

mid-13c., from Medieval Latin elixir philosopher's stone, believed by alchemists to transmute baser
metals into gold and/or to cure diseases and prolong life, from Arabic al-iksir, probably from late
Greek xerion powder for drying wounds, from xeros dry (see xerasia). General sense of strong tonic
is 1590s; used for quack medicines from at least 1630s.


prorogue (v.)

early 15c., to prolong, extend, from Old French proroger, proroguer (14c.), from Latin prorogare,
literally to ask publicly, from pro before (see pro-) + rogare to ask (see rogation). Perhaps the
original sense in Latin was to ask for public assent to extending someone's term in office.
Legislative meaning discontinue temporarily is attested from mid-15c. Related: Prorogation.


macrobiotic (adj.)

also macro-biotic, inclined to prolong life, 1797, from Greek makrobiotikos long-lived, from makros
long (see macro-) + bios life (see bio-). The specific reference to a Zen Buddhist dietary system
dates from 1936.


linger (v.)

c.1300, lenger reside, dwell, northern England frequentative of lengen to tarry, from Old English
lengan prolong, lengthen, from Proto-Germanic *langjan to make long (cognates: Old Frisian lendza,
Old High German lengan, Dutch lengen to lengthen), source of Old English lang (see long (adj.)).
Sense of delay going, depart slowly and unwillingly is from 1520s. Related: Lingered; lingering.


