prologue (n.)

early 14c., from Old French prologue (12c.) and directly from Latin prologus, from Greek prologos
preface to a play, speaker of a prologue, literally a speech beforehand, from pro- before (see pro-)
+ logos discourse, speech, from legein to speak (see lecture (n.)).


foreplay (n.)

in sexual sense, by 1911, from fore- + play (n.). Earlier as a theatrical term (by 1857).    In fact
the poem which Mr. Brooks has translated is but the prologue to the swelling theme, the fore-play to
the actual drama of Faust. [The Christian Examiner and Religious Miscellany, Jan.-May 1857]


inquisitive (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French inquisitif, from Late Latin inquisitivus making inquiry, from Latin
inquisit-, past participle stem of inquirere (see inquire).An housbonde shal nat been Inquisityf of
goddes pryuetee nor of his wyf. [Chaucer, Miller's Prologue]  Related: Inquisitively;
inquisitiveness.


preface (n.)

late 14c., from Old French preface opening part of sung devotions (14c.) and directly from Medieval
Latin prefatia, from Latin praefationem (nominative praefatio) fore-speaking, introduction, in
Medieval Latin prologue, noun of action from past participle stem of praefari to say beforehand,
from prae before (see pre-) + fari speak (see fame (n.)).


constellation (n.)

early 14c., from Old French constellacion constellation, conjuncture (of planets), from Late Latin
constellationem (nominative constellatio) set with stars, from constellatus, from Latin com- with
(see com-) + past participle of stellare to shine, from stella star (see star). Originally in
astrology, of position of planets (stars) in regard to one another on a given day, usually one's
birth day, as a determination of one's character. I folwed ay myn inclinacioun/By vertu of my
constillacioun (Chaucer, Wife's Prologue, c.1386). Modern astronomical sense is from 1550s.


chimera (n.)

fabulous monster, late 14c., from Old French chimere or directly from Medieval Latin chimera, from
Latin Chimaera, from Greek khimaira, name of a mythical creature, slain by Bellerophon, with a
lion's head, a goat's body, and a serpent's tail (supposedly personification of snow or winter);
literally year-old she-goat (masc. khimaros), from kheima winter season (see hibernation).
Figurative meaning wild fantasy first recorded 1580s in English (attested 13c. in French).Beestis
clepid chymeres, that han a part of ech beest, and suche ben not, no but oonly in opynyoun. [Wyclif,
Prologue]


Anglo-Saxon

Old English Angli Saxones (plural), from Latin Anglo-Saxones, in which Anglo- is an adjective, thus
literally English Saxons, as opposed to those of the Continent (now called Old Saxons). Properly in
reference to the Saxons of ancient Wessex, Essex, Middlesex, and Sussex.    I am a suthern man, I
can not geste 'rum, ram, ruf' by letter. [Chaucer, Parson's Prologue and Tale]    After the Norman-
French invasion of 1066, the peoples of the island were distinguished as English and French, but
after a few generations all were English, and Latin-speaking scribes, who knew and cared little
about Germanic history, began to use Anglo-Saxones to refer to the pre-1066 inhabitants and their
descendants. When interest in Old English writing revived c.1586, the word was extended to the
language we now call Old English. It has been used rhetorically for English in an ethnological sense
from 1832, and revisioned as Angle + Saxon.


