prolific (adj.)

1640s, from French prolifique (16c.), from Medieval Latin prolificus, from Latin proles offspring +
root of facere to make (see factitious). Latin proles is contracted from *pro-oles, from PIE *pro-
al-, from *pro- forth (see pro-) + *al- to grow, nourish (see old). Related: Prolifical (c.1600).
<b>Prolific</b> is in common use, but to make a satisfactory noun from it has passed the wit of man.
[Fowler]


proles (n.)

offspring, 1670s, from Latin proles offspring, progeny (see prolific).


philoprogenitive (adj.)

prolific, 1815, irregularly formed from philo- + Latin progenit-, past participle stem of progignere
(see progeny). Related: Philoprogenitiveness. Important words among the phrenologists.


proliferation (n.)

1859, formation or development of cells, from French prolif&#233;ration, from prolif&#232;re
producing offspring, from Latin proles offspring (see prolific) + ferre to bear (see infer). Meaning
enlargement, extension, increase is from 1920; especially of nuclear weapons (1966).


proletarian

1650s (n.) member of the lowest class; 1660s (adj.) of the lowest class of people; with -ian + Latin
proletarius citizen of the lowest class (as an adjective, relating to offspring), in ancient Rome,
propertyless people, exempted from taxes and military service, who served the state only by having
children; from proles offspring, progeny (see prolific).


sine prole

legalistic Latin, without issue, from sine without (see sans) + prole, ablative of proles offspring
(see prolific).


teem (v.1)

abound, swarm, be prolific, Old English teman (Mercian), tieman (West Saxon) beget, give birth to,
bring forth, produce, propagate, from Proto-Germanic *tau(h)mjan (denominative), from PIE *deuk- to
lead (see duke (n.)). Related to team (n.) in its now-obsolete Old English sense of family, brood of
young animals. The meaning abound, swarm is first recorded 1590s, on the notion of be full of as if
ready to give birth. Related: Teemed; teeming.


prolicide (n.)

killing of one's child or children, 1824, introduced by Dr. John Gordon Smith in the 2nd edition of
his Principles of Forensic Medicine; from Latin proles offspring (see prolific) + -cide.    It is
hoped that this word will be considered entitled to reception, on the score of analogy. We have long
had parricide, fratricide, and infanticide, all (if I may use the figure of speech,) of the same
family; and recently the very appropriate term foeticide has been introduced into Forensic Medicine.
In both these last crimes there is a peculiarity arising from the person accused being, in almost
every instance, the parent .... In this relation to the beings destroyed, the general term of
murderer, or murder of offspring seems to be the fair converse of parricide; and will suit well the
purpose of the Medico-legal writer, who considers the two cases as parts of one subject, for the
designation of which collectively a proper term was wanting. [Smith]


un- (1)

prefix of negation, Old English un-, from Proto-Germanic *un- (cognates: Old Saxon, Old Frisian, Old
High German, German un-, Gothic un-, Dutch on-), from PIE *n- (source of Sanskrit a-, an- not, Greek
a-, an-, Old Irish an-, Latin in-), comb. form of PIE root *ne not (cognates: Avestan na, Old Church
Slavonic and Lithuanian ne not, Latin ne that not, Greek ne- not, Old Irish ni, Cornish ny not).
Often euphemistic (such as untruth for lie).     The most prolific of English prefixes, freely and
widely used in Old English, where it forms more than 1,000 compounds. It underwent a mass extinction
in early Middle English, but emerged with renewed vigor 16c. to form compounds with native and
imported words. It disputes with Latin-derived cognate in- (1) the right to form the negation of
certain words (indigestable/undigestable, etc.), and though both might be deployed in cooperation to
indicate shades of meaning (unfamous/infamous), typically they are not.    It also makes words from
phrases (such as uncalled-for, c.1600; undreamed-of, 1630s; uncome-at-able, 1690s; unputdownable,
1947, of a book; un-in-one-breath-utterable, Ben Jonson; etc., but the habit is not restricted to
un-; such as put-up-able-with, 1812). As a prefix in telegramese to replace not and save the cost of
a word, it is attested by 1936.


