promontory (n.)

1540s, from Middle French promontoire (15c.) and directly from Medieval Latin promontorium, altered
(by influence of Latin mons mount, hill) from Latin promunturium mountain ridge, headland, probably
related to prominere jut out (see prominent).


cliff (n.)

Old English clif rock, promontory, steep slope, from Proto-Germanic *kliban (cognates: Old Saxon
clif, Old Norse klif, Middle Dutch klippe, Dutch klip, Old High German klep, German Klippe cliff,
promontory, steep rock).   Clift has been a variant spelling since 15c. and was common in early
Modern English, influenced by or merged with clift, a variant of cleft (n.). Cliff-dweller first
attested 1889, American English.


Nagasaki

Japanese city, named for its situation, from naga long + saki headland, promontory.


gubber-tushed (adj.)

Gubber Tushed is when teeth stand out, and not in order. [R. Holme, Armoury, 1688].Every Lover
admires his Mistress, though she have ... a nose like a promontory, gubber-tushed, rotten teeth,
(etc.). [Robert Burton, Anatomy of Melancholy, 1621]


headland (n.)

Old English heafod lond strip of land left unplowed at the edge of a field to leave room for the
plow to turn, naturally identified with boundaries; see head (n.) + land (n.). Meaning high cape,
promontory is from 1520s.


ness (n.)

obsolete except in place names, Old English n&aelig;s a promontory, related to nasu nose (see nose
(n.)). Cognate with Old Norse nes, Danish n&#230;s, Swedish n&#228;s, Middle Dutch nesse.


cape (n.2)

promontory, late 14c., from Middle French cap cape; head, from Latin caput headland, head (see
capitulum). The Cape of Good Hope in southern Africa has been the Cape since 1660s. Sailors called
low cloud banks that could be mistaken for landforms on the horizon Cape fly-away (1769).


pinnacle (n.)

c.1300, mountain, peak, promontory, from Old French pinacle top, gable (13c.) and directly from Late
Latin pinnaculum peak, pinnacle, gable, diminutive of Latin pinna peak, point, (see pin (n.1)).
Figurative use is attested from c.1400.


Hamburg

German city, the -burg is German Burg fort, in reference to the moated castle built there c.825; the
first element is perhaps Old High German hamma ham, back of the knee in a transferred sense of bend,
angle, with reference to its position on a river bend promontory, or Middle High German hamme
enclosed area of pastureland.


shaw (n.)

strip of wood forming the border of a field, 1570s, from Old English sceaga copse, cognate with
North Frisian skage farthest edge of cultivated land, Old Norse skage promontory, and perhaps with
Old English sceaga rough matted hair (see shag (n.)). The Old English word also is the source of the
surname Shaw (attested from late 12c.) and its related forms.


shag (n.)

1590s, cloth having a velvet nap on one side, perhaps from Old English sceacga rough matted hair or
wool, from Proto-Germanic *skagjan (cognates: Old Norse skegg, Swedish sk&#228;gg beard), perhaps
related to Old High German scahho promontory, Old Norse skagi a cape, headland, with a connecting
sense of jutting out, projecting. But the word appears to be missing in Middle English. Of tobacco,
cut in fine shreds, it is recorded from 1789; of carpets, rugs, etc., from 1946.


mull (n.)

promontory (in Scottish place names), late 14c., perhaps from Old Norse muli a jutting crag,
projecting ridge (between two valleys), which probably is identical with muli snout, muzzle. The
Norse word is related to Old Frisian mula, Middle Dutch mule, muul, Old High German mula, German
Maul muzzle, mouth.  Alternative etymology traces it to Gaelic maol brow of a hill or rock, also
bald, from Old Celtic *mailo-s (cognates: Irish maol, Old Irish m&aacute;el, m&aacute;il, Welsh
moel).


problem (n.)

late 14c., a difficult question proposed for solution, from Old French probl&egrave;me (14c.) and
directly from Latin problema, from Greek problema a task, that which is proposed, a question; also
anything projecting, headland, promontory; fence, barrier; also a problem in geometry, literally
thing put forward, from proballein propose, from pro forward (see pro-) + ballein to throw (see
ballistics).    Meaning a difficulty is mid-15c. Mathematical sense is from 1560s in English.
Problem child first recorded 1920. Phrase _______ problem in reference to a persistent and seemingly
insoluble difficulty is attested at least from 1882, in Jewish problem. Response no problem that is
acceptable; that can be done without difficulty is recorded from 1968.


pin (n.)

late Old English pinn peg, bolt, from Proto-Germanic *penn- jutting point or peak (cognates: Old
Saxon pin peg, Old Norse pinni peg, tack, Middle Dutch pin pin, peg, Old High German pfinn, German
Pinne pin, tack) from Latin pinna a feather, plume; in plural a wing; also fin, scoop of a water
wheel; also a pinnacle; a promontory, cape; battlement (as in Luke iv:9 in Vulgate) and so applied
to points of various sorts, from PIE *pet- (see pen (n.1)).    Latin pinna and penna a feather,
plume, in plural a wing, are treated as identical in Watkins, etc., but regarded as separate (but
confused) Latin words by Tucker and others, who derive pinna from PIE *spei- sharp point (see spike
(n.1)) and see the feather/wing sense as secondary.    The modern slender wire pin is first attested
by this name late 14c. Transferred sense of leg is recorded from 1520s and hold the older sense.
Pin-money annual sum allotted to a woman for personal expenses on dress, etc. is attested from
1620s. Pins and needles tingling sensation is from 1810. The sound of a pin dropping as a type of
something all but silent is from 1775.


