prominent (adj.)

mid-15c., projecting, jutting out, from Latin prominentem (nominative prominens) prominent, present
participle of prominere jut or stand out, be prominent, overhang, from pro- before, forward (see
pro-) + minere to project, from minae projections, threats (see menace (n.)). Meaning conspicuous is
from 1759; that of notable, leading is from 1849. Related: Prominently.


bazooms (n.)

woman's breasts, especially when deemed prominent, 1955, American English slang alteration of
bosoms.


stroganoff (n.)

a beef dish cooked in sauce containing sour cream, 1932, from French, from name of the prominent
Russian family, usually said to be for specifically in honor of diplomat Count Paul Stroganov
(1774-1817).


backbencher (n.)

1874 in the House of Commons sense, from back (adj.) + bench (n.); occupants of the rear seats being
the least-prominent politicians.


encyclopaedia (n.)

see encyclopedia. The Latin spelling survives as a variant because many of the most prominent ones
(such as Britannica) have Latin names.


Devonian (adj.)

1837, as a geological era, from the English county of Devon, where the Old Red Sandstone formations
of that age are prominent, + -ian.


rapparee (n.)

Irish freebooter, 1680s, originally pikeman, from Irish rapairidhe, plural of rapaire half-pike.
Kind of soldier prominent in the war of 1688-92.


set off (v.)

verbal phrase; see set (v.) + off (adv.). From 1590s as make prominent by contrast, 1610s as adorn.
Intransitive sense of start on a journey is from 1774. Meaning separate from contect (in typography)
is from 1824; sense of ignite, discharge, cause to explode is from 1810.


prominence (n.)

1590s, projection, from obsolete French prominence (16c.), from Latin prominentia a jutting out (see
prominent). Meaning distinction, conspicuousness is attested by 1827. As a type of solar phenomenon,
from 1862.


hippy (adj.)

having prominent hips, 1919, from hip (n.1) + -y (2).


Montanist (n.)

mid-15c., millenarian and severely ascetic sect that believed in continual direct inspiration of the
spirit and offered prominent church roles to women, from Montanus, Christian-inspired prophet in the
wilds of Phrygia c.160 C.E. The heresy persisted into the 6c. and helped bring prophecy into
disrepute in the established Church. Related: Montanism.


outstanding (adj.)

1610s, projecting, prominent, detached, present participle adjective from outstand (v.) endure
successfully, hold out against, from out (adv.) + stand (v.). Figurative sense of conspicuous,
striking is first recorded 1830. Meaning unpaid, unsettled is from 1797. Related: Outstandingly.


cesium (n.)

also caesium, rare alkaline metal, 1861, coined by Bunsen and Kirchhoff in 1860 in Modern Latin
(caesium), from Latin caesius blue-gray (especially of eyes), in reference to the two prominent blue
lines in its spectrum, by which it was first identified.


costard (n.)

late 13c., coster, perhaps from Anglo-French or Old French coste rib (from Latin costa a rib; see
coast (n.)). A kind of large apple with prominent ribs, i.e. one having a shape more like a green
pepper than a plain, round apple. Also applied derisively to the head. Common 14c.-17c. but limited
to fruit-growers afterward.


promontory (n.)

1540s, from Middle French promontoire (15c.) and directly from Medieval Latin promontorium, altered
(by influence of Latin mons mount, hill) from Latin promunturium mountain ridge, headland, probably
related to prominere jut out (see prominent).


Hotchkiss

1878, type of gun named for its inventor, Benjamin B. Hotchkiss (1826-1885). In Japanese, the word
for stapler is hotchikisu after the E. H. Hotchkiss Company of Norwalk, Connecticut, U.S., early and
prominent manufacturer of staplers (incorporated 1895, name from 1897), which apparently was run by
relatives of the gun inventor. The surname (attested from late 15c. as Hochekys) is a variant of
Hodgkin.


bugger (n.)

sodomite, 1550s, earlier heretic (mid-14c.), from Medieval Latin Bulgarus a Bulgarian (see
Bulgaria), so called from bigoted notions of the sex lives of Eastern Orthodox Christians or of the
sect of heretics that was prominent there 11c. Compare Old French bougre Bulgarian, also heretic;
sodomite. Softened secondary sense of fellow, chap, is in British English from mid-19c. Related:
Buggerly.


sachem (n.)

chief of an American Indian tribe, 1620s, from Narragansett (Algonquian) sachim chief, ruler,
cognate with Abenaki sangman, Delaware sakima, Micmac sakumow, Penobscot sagumo. Applied jocularly
to a prominent member of any society from 1680s; specific political use in U.S. is from 1890, from
its use as the title of the 12 high officials of the Tammany Society of New York.


stand-out (n.)

also standout, one who is eminent, 1928; as an adjective in this sense from 1932; from verbal
phrase, from stand (v.) + out (adv.). Earlier it was used in a sense labor strike (1898). To stand
out is from 1530s as to project or seem to project, 1826 in the figurative sense be prominent.


column (n.)

mid-15c., vertical division of a page, also a pillar, post, from Old French colombe (12c., Modern
French colonne column, pillar), from Latin columna pillar, collateral form of columen top, summit,
from PIE root *kel- (4) to project, be prominent (see hill). Sense of matter written for a newspaper
dates from 1785.


Iraq

country name, 1920, from an Arabic name attested since 6c. for the region known in Greek as
Mesopotamia; often said to be from Arabic `araqa, covering notions such as perspiring, deeply
rooted, well-watered, which may reflect the impression the lush river-land made on desert Arabs. But
the name may be from, or influenced by, Sumerian Uruk (Biblical Erech), anciently a prominent city
in what is now southern Iraq (from Sumerian uru city).


back seat (n.)

also back-seat, 1832, originally of coaches, from back (adj.) + seat (n.). Used figuratively for
less or least prominent position by 1868. Back-seat driver first attested 1926.


holm (n.)

late Old English, from Old Norse holmr small island, especially in a bay or river, also meadow by a
shore, or cognate Old Danish hulm low lying land, from Proto-Germanic *hul-maz, from PIE root *kel-
(4) to rise, be elevated, be prominent; hill (see hill). Obsolete, but preserved in place names.
Cognate Old English holm (only attested in poetic language) meant sea, ocean, wave.


eminence (n.)

c.1400, projection, protuberance; early 15c., high or exalted position, from Old French eminence or
directly from Latin eminentia prominence, eminence, from eminentem (nominative eminens) excellent,
prominent (see eminent).    As a title of honor (now only of cardinals) it is attested from 1650s.
The original &Eacute;minence grise (French, literally gray eminence) was Fran&ccedil;ois Leclerc du
Trembley (1577-1638), confidential agent of Richelieu.


chief (adj.)

c.1300, highest in rank or power; most important or prominent; supreme, best, from Old French chief
chief, principal, first (10c., Modern French chef), from Vulgar Latin *capum (also source of Spanish
and Portuguese cabo, Italian capo, Proven&ccedil;al cap), from Latin caput head, also leader, guide,
chief person; summit; capital city (see capitulum).


autarky (n.)

1610s, self-sufficiency, from Greek autarkeia sufficiency in oneself, independence, from autarkes
self-sufficient, having enough, independent of others (also used of countries), from autos self (see
auto-) + arkein to ward off, keep off, also to be strong enough, sufficient, from PIE root *ark- to
hold, contain, guard (see arcane). From a different Greek source than autarchy, and thus the
spelling. As a term in international economics, prominent late 1930s. Related: Autarkic.


foremost (adj.)

Old English fyrmest earliest, first, most prominent, from Proto-Germanic *formo- (related to Old
English fruma beginning), superlative of the root of fore + additional superlative suffix -est. See
-most, and similarly formed Old Frisian formest, Gothic frumists. Altered on the assumption that it
is a compound of fore and most.


vortex (n.)

1650s, whirlpool, eddying mass, from Latin vortex, variant of vertex an eddy of water, wind, or
flame; whirlpool; whirlwind, from stem of vertere to turn (see versus). Plural form is vortices.
Became prominent in 17c. theories of astrophysics (by Descartes, etc.). In reference to human
affairs, it is attested from 1761. Vorticism as a movement in British arts and literature is
attested from 1914, coined by Ezra Pound. Related: Vortical; vorticist.


nobility (n.)

mid-14c., quality of being excellent or rare, from Old French nobilite high rank; dignity, grace;
great deed (12c., Modern French nobilit&eacute;), and directly from Latin nobilitatem (nominative
nobilitas) celebrity, fame; high birth; excellence, superiority; the nobles, from nobilis well-
known, prominent (see noble (adj.)). Meaning quality of being of noble rank or birth is attested
from late 14c.; sense of noble class collectively is from 1520s.


nosy (adj.)

also nosey, 1610s, having a prominent nose, from nose (n.) + -y (2). Earlier in this sense was nasee
(mid-14c.), from Anglo-French, from Old French nas&eacute;, ultimately from Latin nasus nose. Sense
of inquisitive first recorded 1882. Nosey Parker as a name for an inquisitive person is from 1907.


Arabic (adj.)

early 14c., from Old French Arabique (13c.), from Latin Arabicus Arabic (see Arab). Old English used
Arabisc Arabish. Originally in reference to gum arabic; noun meaning Arabic language is from late
14c.   Arabic numerals (actually Indian) first attested 1727; they were introduced in Europe by
Gerbert of Aurillac (later Pope Sylvester II) after a visit to Islamic Spain in 967-970. A prominent
man of science, he taught in the diocesan school at Reims, but the numbers made little headway
against conservative opposition in the Church until after the Crusades. The earliest depiction of
them in English, in The Crafte of Nombrynge (c.1350) correctly identifies them as teen figurys of
Inde.


rural (adj.)

early 15c., from Old French rural (14c.), from Latin ruralis of the countryside, from rus (genitive
ruris) open land, country, from PIE *reue- (1) to open; space (see room (n.)).In early examples,
there is usually little or no difference between the meanings of rural and rustic, but in later use
the tendency is to employ rural when the idea of locality (country scenes, etc.) is prominent, and
rustic when there is a suggestion of the more primitive qualities or manners naturally attaching to
country life. [OED]  Related: Rurally.


captain (n.)

late 14c., capitayn, a leader, chief, one who stands at the head of others, from Old French
capitaine captain, leader, from Late Latin capitaneus chief, noun use of adjective capitaneus
prominent, chief, from Latin caput (genitive capitis) head (see capitulum).    Military sense of
officer who commands a company (rank between major and lieutenant) is from 1560s; naval sense of
officer who commands a man-of-war is from 1550s, extended to master or commander of a vessel of any
kind by 1704. Sporting sense is first recorded 1823.


Magellanic clouds

1680s, from Modern Latin Magellanicus, from Latinized name of Portuguese navigator Fern&atilde;o de
Magalh&atilde;es (c.1470-1521), the first European to round the tip of South America. He described
them c.1520, hence the name in Europe; but at least the larger of the two had been mentioned by
Anghiera in 1515. In English they were earlier the Cape Clouds, because they became prominent as
sailors neared the Cape of Good Hope; but after Magellan became noted and fully described them they
took and have retained his name. [Allen]    Coompasinge abowte the poynt thereof, they myght see
throughowte al the heaven about the same, certeyne shynynge whyte cloudes here and there amonge the
starres, like unto theym whiche are scene in the tracte of heaven cauled Lactea via, that is the
mylke whyte waye. [Richard Eden, translation of Decades of the New World, 1555]


salient (adj.)

1560s, leaping, a heraldic term, from Latin salientem (nominative saliens), present participle of
salire to leap, from PIE root *sel- (4) to jump (cognates: Greek hallesthai to leap, Middle Irish
saltraim I trample, and probably Sanskrit ucchalati rises quickly).    It was used in Middle English
as an adjective meaning leaping, skipping. The meaning pointing outward (preserved in military
usage) is from 1680s; that of prominent, striking first recorded 1840, from salient point (1670s),
which refers to the heart of an embryo, which seems to leap, and translates Latin punctum saliens,
going back to Aristotle's writings. Hence, the starting point of anything.


ergophobia (n.)

fear of work, 1905, coinage by British medical man Dr. William Dunnett Spanton, from Greek ergos
work (see organ) + -phobia fear.    Mr. W.D. Spanton (Leeds) considered that the most prominent
causes of physical degeneration were--efforts to rear premature and diseased infants, absurd
educational high pressure, cigarette smoking in the younger generation, and late hours at night; in
fact, the love of pleasure and ergophobia in all classes of society. He considered that there was
too much cheap philanthropy, that life was made too easy for the young poor, and that by modern
educational methods proper parental discipline was rendered almost impossible. [report on the 73rd
annual meeting of the British Medical Association, Nature, Aug. 3, 1905]


mountain (n.)

c.1200, from Old French montaigne (Modern French montagne), from Vulgar Latin *montanea mountain,
mountain region, noun use of fem. of *montaneus of a mountain, mountainous, from Latin montanus
mountainous, of mountains, from mons (genitive montis) mountain (see mount (n.)).    Until 18c.,
applied to a fairly low elevation if it was prominent (such as Sussex Downs, the hills around
Paris). As an adjective from late 14c. Mountain dew raw and inferior whiskey first recorded 1839;
earlier a type of Scotch whiskey (1816); Jamieson's 1825 Supplement to his Scottish dictionary
defines it specifically as A cant term for Highland whisky that has paid no duty. Mountain-climber
recorded from 1839; mountain-climbing from 1836.


noble (adj.)

c.1200, illustrious, distinguished; worthy of honor or respect, from Old French noble of noble
bearing or birth, from Latin nobilis well-known, famous, renowned; excellent, superior, splendid;
high-born, of superior birth, earlier *gnobilis, literally knowable, from gnoscere to come to know,
from PIE root *gno- to know (see know). The prominent Roman families, which were well known,
provided most of the Republic's public officials.    Meaning distinguished by rank, title, or birth
is first recorded late 13c. Sense of having lofty character, having high moral qualities is from
c.1600. A noble gas (1902) is so called for its inactivity or intertness; a use of the word that had
been applied in Middle English to precious stones, metals, etc., of similar quality (late 14c.),
from the sense of having admirable properties (c.1300).


steep (adj.)

having a sharp slope, Old English steap high, lofty; deep; prominent, projecting, from Proto-
Germanic *staupaz (cognates: Old Frisian stap high, lofty, Middle High German *stouf), from PIE
*steup-, extended form of root *(s)teu- (1) to push, stick, knock, beat, with derivations referring
to projecting objects (cognates: Greek typtein to strike, typos a blow, mold, die; Sanskrit tup-
harm, tundate pushes, stabs; Gothic stautan push; Old Norse stuttr short). The sense of precipitous
is from c.1200. The slang sense at a high price is a U.S. coinage first attested 1856. Related:
Steeply; steepness. The noun meaning steep place is from 1550s.


vogue (n.)

1570s, the vogue, height of popularity or accepted fashion, from Middle French vogue fashion,
success; also drift, swaying motion (of a boat) literally a rowing, from Old French voguer to row,
sway, set sail (15c.), probably from a Germanic source. Compare Old High German wagon to float,
fluctuate, literally to balance oneself; German Wege wave, billow, wogen fluctuate, float (see
weigh).    Perhaps the notion is of being borne along on the waves of fashion. Italian voga a
rowing, Spanish boga rowing, but colloquially fashion, reputation also probably are from the same
Germanic source. Phrase in vogue having a prominent place in popular fashion first recorded 1643.
The fashion magazine began publication in 1892.


rise (v.)

Old English risan to rise, rise from sleep, get out of bed; stand up, rise to one's feet; get up
from table; rise together; be fit, be proper (usually arisan; class I strong verb; past tense ras,
past participle risen), from Proto-Germanic *us-risanan to go up (cognates: Old Norse risa, Old
Saxon risan, Gothic urreisan to rise, Old High German risan to rise, flow, German reisen to travel,
originally to rise for a journey).    From c.1200 as move from a lower to a higher position, move
upward; increase in number or amount; rise in fortune, prosper; become prominent; also rise from the
dead. Meaning come into existence, originate; result (from) is mid-13c. From early 14c. as rebel,
revolt; also occur, happen, come to pass; take place. Related to raise (v.). Related: Rose; risen.


sycophant (n.)

1530s (in Latin form sycophanta), informer, talebearer, slanderer, from Middle French sycophante and
directly from Latin sycophanta, from Greek sykophantes false accuser, slanderer, literally one who
shows the fig, from sykon fig (see fig) + phainein to show (see phantasm). Showing the fig was a
vulgar gesture made by sticking the thumb between two fingers, a display which vaguely resembles a
fig, itself symbolic of a vagina (sykon also meant vulva). The modern accepted explanation is that
prominent politicians in ancient Greece held aloof from such inflammatory gestures, but privately
urged their followers to taunt their opponents. The sense of mean, servile flatterer is first
recorded in English 1570s.    The explanation, long current, that it orig. meant an informer against
the unlawful exportation of figs cannot be substantiated. [OED]


enough (adj.)

c.1300, from Old English genog, a common Germanic formation (cognates: Old Saxon ginog, Old Frisian
enoch, Dutch genoeg, Old High German ginuog, German genug, Old Norse gnogr, Gothic ganohs).    This
is a compound of ge- with, together (also a participial, collective, intensive, or perfective
prefix) + root -nah, from PIE *nek- (2) to reach, attain (cognates: Sanskrit asnoti reaches, Hittite
ninikzi lifts, raises, Lithuanian ne&#353;ti to bear, carry, Latin nancisci to obtain). It is the
most prominent among the surviving examples of Old English ge-, the equivalent of Latin com- and
Modern German ge-, from PIE *kom- beside, near, by, with (see com-).    Meaning moderately, fairly,
tolerably (good enough) was in Middle English. Understated sense of have had enough have had too
much was in Old English (which relied heavily on double negatives and understatement). Colloquial
'nough said is attested from 1839.


gun (n.)

mid-14c., gunne an engine of war that throws rocks, arrows or other missiles, probably a shortening
of woman's name Gunilda, found in Middle English gonnilde cannon and in an Anglo-Latin reference to
a specific gun from a 1330 munitions inventory of Windsor Castle (...una magna balista de cornu quae
Domina Gunilda ...), from Old Norse Gunnhildr, woman's name, from gunnr + hildr, both meaning war,
battle. First element from PIE *gwhen- to strike, kill (see bane); for second, see Hilda.    The
identification of women with powerful weapons is common historically (such as Big Bertha, Brown
Bess, Mons Meg, etc.); meaning shifted with technology, from cannons to firearms as they developed
15c. Great guns (cannon, etc.) distinguished from small guns (such as muskets) from c.1400. Applied
to pistols and revolvers after 1744. Meaning thief, rascal is from 1858. For son of a gun, see son.
To jump the gun (1912, American English) is from track and field. Guns a woman's breasts (especially
if prominent) attested by 2006.


nose (n.)

Old English nosu, from Proto-Germanic *nusus (cognates: Old Norse n&ouml;s, Old Frisian nose, Dutch
neus, Old High German nasa, German Nase), from PIE *nas- nose (cognates: Sanskrit nasa, Old Persian
naham, Old Church Slavonic nasu, Lithuanian nosis, Latin nasus nose). Used of any prominent or
projecting part from 1530s. (nose cone in the space rocket sense is from 1949). Used to indicate
something obvious from 1590s. Meaning odor, scent is from 1894.  Kiv, It could bee no other then his
owne manne, that had thrust his nose so farre out of ioynte. [Barnabe Riche His Farewell to Military
Profession, 1581] Pay through the nose (1670s) seems to suggest bleed. Many extended meanings are
from the horse-racing sense of length of a horse's nose, as a measure of distance between two
finishers (1908). To turn up one's nose show disdain is from 1818 (earlier hold up one's nose,
1570s); similar notion in look down one's nose (1921). To say something is under (one's) nose in
plain view is from 1540s.


two-step (n.)

dance style, 1893, from two + step (n.); so called for the time signature of the music (as
distinguished from the three-step waltz). But as the positions taken by the dancers involved direct
contact, it was highly scandalous in its day and enormously popular.    A certain Division of an
Auxiliary gave a dance not long since. I went and looked on. What did they dance? Two-step, two-step
and two-step. How did they dance? When we used to waltz, we clasped arms easily, took a nice,
respectable position, and danced in a poetry of motion. Now, girls, how do you two-step? In nine
cases out of ten the dear girl reposes her head on the young man's shoulder, or else their faces
press each other. He presses her to his breast as closely as possible, and actually carries her
around. Disgraceful? I should say so. Do you wonder at the ministers preaching on dancing as a sin,
when it looks like this to a woman like myself who believes in dancing and has danced all her life?
Mothers, as you love your girls, forbid them to dance after this manner. [letter in the ladies'
section of Locomotive Engineers' Monthly Journal, March 1898]   <hr />   To the Two Step may be
accredited, serious injury to the Waltz, awkward and immodest positions assumed in round dancing,
also as being a prominent factor in overcrowding the profession and causing a general depression in
the business of the legitimate Master of Dancing. [The Director, March 1898]


hill (n.)

Old English hyll hill, from Proto-Germanic *hulni- (cognates: Middle Dutch hille, Low German hull
hill, Old Norse hallr stone, Gothic hallus rock, Old Norse holmr islet in a bay, Old English holm
rising land, island), from PIE root *kel- (4) to rise, be elevated, be prominent; hill (cognates:
Sanskrit kutam top, skull; Latin collis hill, columna projecting object, culmen top, summit, cellere
raise, celsus high; Greek kolonos hill, kolophon summit; Lithuanian kalnas mountain, kalnelis hill,
kelti raise). Formerly including mountains, now usually confined to heights under 2,000 feet. In
Great Britain heights under 2,000 feet are generally called hills; 'mountain' being confined to the
greater elevations of the Lake District, of North Wales, and of the Scottish Highlands; but, in
India, ranges of 5,000 and even 10,000 feet are commonly called 'hills,' in contrast with the
Himalaya Mountains, many peaks of which rise beyond 20,000 feet. [OED]   <hr />   The term mountain
is very loosely used. It commonly means any unusual elevation. In New England and central New York,
elevations of from one to two thousand feet are called hills, but on the plains of Texas, a hill of
a few hundred feet is called a mountain. [Ralph S. Tarr, Elementary Geology, Macmillan, 1903]   <hr
/>   Despite the differences in defining mountain systems, Penck (1896), Supan (1911) and Obst
(1914) agreed that the distinction between hills, mountains, and mountain systems according to areal
extent or height is not a suitable classification. [Geographic Information Science and Mountain
Geomorphology, 2004]    Phrase over the hill past one's prime is first recorded 1950.


free (adj.)

Old English freo free, exempt from, not in bondage, also noble; joyful, from Proto-Germanic *frijaz
(cognates: Old Frisian fri, Old Saxon and Old High German vri, German frei, Dutch vrij, Gothic freis
free), from PIE *prijos dear, beloved, from root *pri- to love (cognates: Sanskrit priyah own, dear,
beloved, priyate loves; Old Church Slavonic prijati to help, prijatelji friend; Welsh rhydd free).
The primary sense seems to have been beloved, friend, to love; which in some languages (notably
Germanic and Celtic) developed also a sense of free, perhaps from the terms beloved or friend being
applied to the free members of one's clan (as opposed to slaves; compare Latin liberi, meaning both
free and children).    Compare Gothic frijon to love; Old English freod affection, friendship, friga
love, fri&eth;u peace; Old Norse fri&eth;r, German Friede peace; Old English freo wife; Old Norse
Frigg wife of Odin, literally beloved or loving; Middle Low German vrien to take to wife, Dutch
vrijen, German freien to woo.  Of nations, not subject to foreign rule or to despotism, it is
recorded from late 14c. (Free world non-communist nations attested from 1950.) Sense of given
without cost is 1580s, from notion of free of cost. Free lunch, originally offered in bars to draw
in business, by 1850, American English. Free pass on railways, etc., attested by 1850. Free speech
in Britain used of a privilege in Parliament since the time of Henry VIII. In U.S., as a civil
right, it became a prominent phrase in the debates over the Gag Rule (1836).   Free enterprise
recorded from 1890; free trade is from 1823. Free will is from early 13c. Free association in
psychology is from 1899. Free love sexual liberation attested from 1822. Free range (adj.) is
attested by 1960. Free and easy unrestrained is from 1690s.


