promiscuous (adj.)

c.1600, people or things, mingled confusedly, grouped together without order, consisting of a
disorderly mix; indiscriminate, from Latin promiscuus mixed, indiscriminate, in common, without
distinction, from pro- forward (see pro-) + miscere to mix (see mix (v.)). Meaning indiscriminate in
sexual relations recorded by 1857, from promiscuity. The Latin adjective was used with conubia (such
as between patricians and plebeians). Related: Promiscuously.


chippy (n.)

promiscuous young woman; prostitute, 1880, U.S. slang, earlier (1864) short for chipping-bird
sparrow, perhaps ultimately a variant of cheep.


swinger (n.)

1540s, one who or that which swings, agent noun from swing (v.). Also (now obsolete) anything big or
great (1580s). Meaning person who is sexually promiscuous is from 1964. Old English swingere (n.)
meant one who strikes, scourger.


tramp (n.)

person who wanders about, idle vagrant, vagabond, 1660s, from tramp (v). Sense of steamship which
takes cargo wherever it can be traded (as opposed to one running a regular line) is attested from
c.1880. The meaning promiscuous woman is from 1922. Sense of a long, toilsome walk is from 1786.


epicene (adj.)

mid-15c., epycen, originally a grammatical term for nouns that may denote either gender, from Latin
epicoenus common, from Greek epikoinos common to many, promiscuous, from epi on (see epi-) + koinos
common (see coeno-). Extended sense of characteristic of both sexes first recorded in English
c.1600; that of effeminate 1630s.


promiscuity (n.)

1834, indiscriminate mixture, from French promiscuit&eacute; (1752), from Latin promiscuus mixed
(see promiscuous) + French -it&eacute; (see -ity). Sexual sense is from 1844. Earlier was
promiscuousness (by 1773 general; 1808 sexual).


naughty (adj.)

late 14c., naugti needy, having nothing, from Old English nawiht (see naught) + -y (2). Sense of
wicked, evil, morally wrong is attested from 1520s; specific meaning sexually promiscuous is from
1869. The more tame main modern sense of disobedient (especially of children) is attested from
1630s. Related: Naughtily; naughtiness. A woman of bad character c.1530-1750 might be called a
naughty pack (also sometimes of men and later of children).


swing (v.)

Old English swingan beat, strike; scourge, flog; to rush, fling oneself (strong verb, past tense
swang, past participle swungen), from Proto-Germanic *swingan (cognates: Old Saxon, Old High German
swingan, Old Frisian swinga, German schwingen to swing, swingle, oscillate), from PIE *sweng(w)- to
swing, turn, toss (perhaps Germanic only).    The meaning move freely back and forth is first
recorded 1540s. Transitive sense cause to oscillate is from 1550s. Sense of bring about, make happen
is from 1934. Sense of engage in promiscuous sex is from 1964; earlier, more generally, enjoy
oneself unconventionally (1957). Related: Swung; swinging. Swing-voter independent who often
determines the outcome of an election is from 1966.


morgue (n.)

mortuary, 1821, from French Morgue, originally a specific building in Paris where bodies were
exposed for identification:    There is, in the most populous part of the French metropolis, an
establishment entitled La Morgue, destined for the reception and exposition of bodies drowned in the
Seine, and caught in nets, which are placed in different parts of the river for that purpose. The
object of this exposition is, that the deceased may be recognised by their friends or relatives, and
receive the rights of sepulture accordingly. The Morgue is open at all hours of the day, to
passengers of every description, and often displays at a time, five or six horrible carcasses
stretched, without covering, on an inclined platform, and subjected to the promiscuous gaze of the
mob. [American Review, January 1811]     Before that it was the place where new prisoners were
displayed to keepers to establish their identification. Thus the name is believed to be probably
from French morgue haughtiness, originally a sad expression, solemn look, from Old French morguer
look solemnly, from Vulgar Latin *murricare to make a face, pout, from *murrum muzzle, snout. The
1768 Dictionnaire Royal Fran&#231;ois-Anglois Et Anglois-Fran&#231;ois defines French morgue both as
A proud, big, haughty or stately look, stare, surliness, or surly look and A little gratel room
wherein a new prisoner is set, and must continue some hours, that the Jailer's ordinary servants may
the better take notice of his face.    Adopted as a general term in U.S., 1880s, replacing earlier
dead house, etc. In newspaper slang, collection of pre-written obituary material of living persons
(1903), hence library of clips, photos, etc., 1918.


