promoter (n.)

late 14c., one who promotes (the interest of someone), supporter, agent noun from promote, and also
from Old French promoteur and directly from Medieval Latin promotor. Specific financial sense of one
who leads in forming a company is from 1876; sense of one who organizes sporting or entertainment
events is attested from 1936.


promote (v.)

late 14c., to advance (someone) to a higher grade or office, from Old French promoter and directly
from Latin promotus, past participle of promovere move forward, advance; cause to advance, push
onward; bring to light, reveal, from pro- forward (see pro-) + movere to move (see move (v.)).
General sense of to further the growth or progress of (anything) is from 1510s. Related: Promoted;
promoting.


demote (v.)

1881, American English coinage from de- + stem of promote. Said to have been Midwestern in origin.
Regarding an antithesis to 'promote,' the word universally in use in Cambridge, in Harvard College,
is drop. The same word is in use in the leading schools here (Boston). I hope I may be counted every
time against such barbarisms as 'demote' and 'retromote.' [Edward Everett Hale, 1892, letter to the
publishers of Funk &amp; Wagnalls' Standard Dictionary]    Related: Demoted; demoting.


pusher (n.)

1590s in a literal sense, agent noun from push (v.). Meaning peddler of illegal drugs (1935 in
prison slang) is from the verb in the promote sense.


merchandise (v.)

also merchandize, to buy and sell; to market, late 14c.; see merchant + -ize. Meaning promote the
sale of goods is from 1926. Related: Merchandising; merchandizing.


in-law (n.)

1894, anyone of a relationship not natural, abstracted from father-in-law, etc.The position of the
'in-laws' (a happy phrase which is attributed ... to her Majesty, than whom no one can be better
acquainted with the article) is often not very apt to promote happiness. [Blackwood's Magazine,
1894]The earliest recorded use of the phrase is in brother-in-law (13c.); the law is Canon Law,
which defines degrees of relationship within which marriage is prohibited.


populist

1892 (n.) adherent of populism; 1893 (adj.), American English, from Latin populus people (see people
(n.)) + -ist. Originally in reference to the U.S. Populist Party organized February 1892 to promote
certain issues important to farmers and workers. The term outlasted the party, and by 1920s came to
mean representing the views of the masses in a general way.


promotion (n.)

c.1400, advancement in rank or position, from Old French promocion election, promotion (14c., Modern
French promotion) and directly from Latin promotionem (nominative promotio) a moving forward, noun
of action from past participle stem of promovere (see promote). Meaning advertising, publicity first
recorded 1925.


calisthenics (n.)

1847 (calisthenic (adj.) is from 1839), formed on model of French callisthenie, from Latinized comb.
form of Greek kallos beauty (see Callisto) + sthenos strength + -ics. Originally, gymnastic
exercises suitable for girls and meant to develop the figure and promote graceful movement. The
proper Greek, if there was such a word in Greek, would have been *kallistheneia.


prefer (v.)

late 14c., to put forward or advance in rank or fortune, to promote, from Old French preferer (14c.)
and directly from Latin praeferre place or set before, carry in front, from prae before (see pre-) +
ferre to carry, to place (see infer). Meaning to esteem (something) more than others also is
recorded from late 14c. Original sense in English is preserved in preferment.


produce (v.)

early 15c., develop, proceed, extend, from Latin producere lead or bring forth, draw out,
figuratively to promote, empower; stretch out, extend, from pro- forth (see pro-) + ducere to bring,
lead (see duke). Sense of bring into being is first recorded 1510s; that of put (a play) on stage is
from 1580s. Related: Produced; producing.


farther (adj.)

c.1300, variant of further (q.v.), by 17c. it replaced ferrer as comparative of the descendant of
Old English fierr far (itself a comparative but no longer felt as one). Vowel change influenced by
the root vowel, and confusion with Middle English fer&thorn;eren to assist, promote, advance (see
forth). There is no historical basis for the notion that farther is of physical distance and further
of degree or quality.


suasion (n.)

late 14c., from Old French suasion (14c.) and directly from Latin suasionem (nominative suasio) a
recommending, advocacy, support, noun of action from past participle stem of suadere to urge,
incite, promote, advise, persuade, literally recommend as good (related to suavis sweet), from PIE
*swad- sweet, pleasant (see sweet (adj.)). Survives chiefly in phrase moral suasion (1640s). Latin
Suada was the goddess of persuasion.


zilch (n.)

nothing, 1957; insignificant person, 1933, from use of Zilch as a generic comical-sounding surname
for an insignificant person (especially Joe Zilch). There was a Mr. Zilch (1931), comic character in
the magazine Ballyhoo, and the use perhaps originated c.1922 in U.S. college or theater slang.
Probably a nonsense syllable, suggestive of the end of the alphabet, but Zilch is an actual German
surname of Slavic origin.    The [Cadence] agency aims to have each album cover actually promote the
record, on the theory that the day of pretty, boffy, zoomy and zingy covers for the sake of zilch is
no more. [Billboard, Oct. 28, 1957]


advance (v.)

mid-13c., avauncen, transitive, improve (something), further the development of, from Old French
avancier move forward (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *abanteare (source of Italian avanzare, Spanish
avanzar), from Late Latin abante from before, composed of ab- from (see ab-) + ante before, in front
of, against (see ante).    The -d- was inserted 16c. on mistaken notion that initial a- was from
Latin ad-. From c.1300 as to promote; intransitive sense is mid-14c., move forward. Meaning to give
money before it is legally due is first attested 1670s. Related: Advanced; advancing. The adjective
(in advance warning, etc.) is recorded from 1843.


frame (v.)

Old English framian to profit, be helpful, avail, benefit, from fram active, vigorous, bold,
originally going forward, from fram forward; from (see from).    Influenced by related Old English
fremman help forward, promote, further, do, perform, accomplish, and by Old Norse fremja to further,
execute. Sense focused in Middle English from make ready (mid-13c.) to prepare timber for building
(late 14c.). Meaning compose, devise is first attested 1540s.    The criminal slang sense of blame
an innocent person (1920s) is probably from earlier sense of plot in secret (1900), perhaps
ultimately from meaning fabricate a story with evil intent, first attested 1510s. Related: Framed;
framing.


push (v.)

early 14c., from Old French poulser (Modern French pousser), from Latin pulsare to beat, strike,
push, frequentative of pellere (past participle pulsus) to push, drive, beat (see pulse (n.1)).
Meaning promote is from 1714; meaning approach a certain age is from 1937. For palatization of -s-,
OED compares brush (n.1); quash. Related: Pushed; pushing.    Pushing up the daisies now, said a
soldier of his dead comrade. [The American Florist, vol. XLVIII, No. 1504, March 31, 1917]    To
push (someone) around is from 1923. To push (one's) luck is from 1754. To push the envelope in
figurative sense is late 1980s. To push up daisies be dead and buried is from World War I.


Orangemen (n.)

secret society founded 1795 in Belfast to promote Protestant power in Northern Ireland, named for
William of Orange (who became King William III of England and triumphed in Ireland at the head of a
Protestant army at the Battle of the Boyne), of the German House of Nassau. His cousins and their
descendants constitute the royal line of Holland.    The name is from the town of Orange on the
Rhone in France, which became part of the Nassau principality in 1530. Its Roman name was Arausio,
which is said in 19c. sources to be from aura a breeze and a reference to the north winds which rush
down the valley, but perhaps this is folk etymology of a Celtic word. The name subsequently was
corrupted to Auranche, then Orange. The town has no obvious association with the fruit other than
being on the road from Marseilles to Paris, along which masses of oranges were transported to
northern France and beyond. In this roundabout way the political/religious movement of Northern
Irish Protestantism acquired an association with the color orange, the Irish national flag acquired
its orange band, and Syracuse University in New York state acquired its Otto the Orange mascot.


talk (v.)

c.1200, talken, probably a diminutive or frequentative form related to Middle English tale story,
and ultimately from the same source as tale, with rare English formative -k (compare hark from hear,
stalk from steal, smirk from smile) and replacing that word as a verb. East Frisian has talken to
talk, chatter, whisper. Related: Talked; talking.    To talk (something) up discuss in order to
promote is from 1722. To talk shop is from 1854. To talk turkey is from 1824, supposedly from an
elaborate joke about a swindled Indian. To talk back answer impudently or rudely is from 1869.
Phrase talking head is by 1966 in the jargon of television production, an in-tight closeup of a
human head talking on television. In reference to a person who habitually appears on television in
talking-head shots (usually a news anchor), by 1970. The phrase is used earlier, in reference to the
well-known magic trick (such as Se&#241;or Wences's talking head-in-the-box Pedro on the Ed Sullivan
Show), and to actual talking heads in mythology around the world (Orpheus, Bran).


raise (v.)

c.1200, cause a rising of; lift upright, set upright; build, construct, from a Scandinavian source,
such as Old Norse reisa to raise, from Proto-Germanic *raizjan (cognates: Gothic ur-raisjan, Old
English r&aelig;ran to rear; see rear (v.)), causative of root *ris- to rise (see rise (v.)). At
first sharing many senses with native rear (v.).    Meaning make higher is from c.1300 in the
physical sense, as is that of restore to life. Of the voice, from late 14c. Meaning increase the
amount of is from c.1500; from 1530s of prices, etc. Meaning to bring up (a question, etc.) is from
1640s. Card-playing sense is from 1821. Meaning promote the growth of (plants, etc.) is from 1660s;
sense of foster, rear, bring up (of children) is from 1744. Meaning to elevate (the consciousness)
is from 1970. Related: Raised; raising.    Pickering (1816) has a long passage on the use of raise
and grow in reference to crops. He writes that in the U.S. raise is used of persons, in the sense
brought up, but it is never thus used in the Northern States. Bartlett [1848] adds that it is
applied in the Southern States to the breeding of negroes. It is sometimes heard at the North among
the illiterate; as 'I was raised in Connecticut,' meaning brought up there.


