pronounced (adj.)

spoken, 1570s, past participle adjective from pronounce (v.). Sense of emphatic is a figurative
meaning first attested c.1730.


taupe (n.)

dark brownish-gray color (the color of moleskin), 1906, from French taupe, the color, originally a
mole, Old French, from Latin talpa a mole. The story below lacks evidence appears to be a fanciful
attempt to divert the origin of the color name to something more appealing:    Before the season
advances very far you will find that taupe, pronounced tope, will be the most favored color in the
entire category of shades and blendings. The original word is taken from the German word taube
pronounced tob-a, which is the name for the dove, but the French have twisted the b into a p and
give us taupe. [The Illustrated Milliner, August, 1906]


pt-

An initial consonant combination common in Greek; the p- is typically silent in English words that
have it but pronounced in French, German, etc.


-ed

past participle suffix of weak verbs, from Old English -ed, -ad, -od (leveled to -ed in Middle
English), from Proto-Germanic *-do- (cognates: Old High German -ta, German -t, Old Norse -&thorn;a,
Gothic -da, -&thorn;s), from PIE *-to- (cognates: Sanskrit -tah, Greek -tos, Latin -tus; see -th
(1)).    Originally fully pronounced, as still in beloved (which, with blessed, accursed, and a few
others retains the full pronunciation through liturgical readings). In 16c.-18c. often written -t
when so pronounced (usually after a consonant or short vowel), and still so where a long vowel in
the stem is short in the past participle (as in crept, slept, etc.). In some older words both forms
exist, with different shades of meaning, as in gilded/gilt, burned/burnt.


bowie knife

1827, named for its inventor, U.S. fighter and frontiersman Col. James Jim Bowie (1799-1836), and
properly pronounced boo-ee.


pn-

consonant sound in some English words derived from Greek. The p- typically is silent in English but
pronounced in French, German, Spanish, etc.


kn-

Germanic consonant cluster; the sound is still evident in most sister languages but in English it
has been reduced to n- in standard pronunciation since before 1750, and for about a century before
that it had been pronounced hn-, dn-, tn-. It was fully voiced in Old and Middle English.


I.D.

also ID (but pronounced as separate letters), short for identification, attested from 1955.


hiss (v.)

late 14c., of imitative origin. Johnson wrote, it is remarkable, that this word cannot be pronounced
without making the noise which it signifies. Related: Hissed; hissing.


chivalric (adj.)

1797, from chivalry + -ic. Pronounced by poets with accent on the middle syllable, and because they
are the only ones who need it, that pronunciation might as well be accepted.


th

A sound found chiefly in words of Old English, Old Norse or Greek origin, unpronounceable by Normans
and many other Europeans. In Greek, the sound corresponds etymologically to Sanskrit -dh- and
English -d-; and it was represented graphically by -TH- and at first pronounced as a true aspirate
(as still in English outhouse, shithead, etc.). But by 2c. B.C.E. the Greek letter theta was in
universal use and had the modern -th- sound. Latin had neither the letter nor the sound, however,
and the Romans represented Greek theta by -TH-, which they generally pronounced, at least in Late
Latin, as simple -t- (passed down to Romanic languages, as in Spanish termal thermal, teoria theory,
teatro theater).    In Germanic languages it represents PIE *-t- and was common at the start of
words or after stressed vowels. To represent it, Old English and Old Norse used the characters &eth;
eth (a modified form of -d-) and &thorn; thorn, which originally was a rune. Old English, unlike Old
Norse, seems never to have standardized which of the two versions of the sound (hard and soft) was
represented by which of the two letters.    The digraph -th- sometimes appears in early Old English,
on the Roman model, and it returned in Middle English with the French scribes, driving out eth by
c.1250, but thorn persisted, especially in demonstratives (&thorn;at, &thorn;e, &thorn;is, etc.),
even as other words were being spelled with -th-. The advent of printing dealt its death-blow,
however, as types were imported from continental founders, who had no thorn. For a time y was used
in its place (especially in Scotland), because it had a similar shape, hence ye for the in
historical tourist trap Ye Olde _______ Shoppe (it never was pronounced ye, only spelled that way).
The awareness that some Latin words in t- were from Greek th- encouraged over-correction in English
and created unetymological forms such as Thames and author, while some words borrowed from Romanic
languages preserve, on the Roman model, the Greek -th- spelling but the simple Latin t pronunciation
(as in Thomas and thyme).


ch

digraph used in Old French for the tsh sound. In some French dialects, including that of Paris (but
not that of Picardy), Latin ca- became French tsha. This was introduced to English after the Norman
Conquest, in words borrowed from Old French such as chaste, charity, chief (adj.). Under French
influence, -ch- also was inserted into Anglo-Saxon words that had the same sound (such as bleach,
chest, church) which in Old English still was written with a simple -c-, and into those that had
formerly been spelled with a -c- and pronounced k such as chin and much.    As French evolved, the t
sound dropped out of it, so in later loan-words from France ch- has only the sound sh- (chauffeur,
machine (n.), chivalry, etc.).    It turns up as well in words from classical languages (chaos,
echo, etc.). Most uses of -ch- in Roman Latin were in words from Greek, which would be pronounced
correctly as k + h, as in blockhead, but most Romans would have said merely k. Sometimes ch- is
written to keep -c- hard before a front vowel, as still in modern Italian.    In some languages
(Welsh, Spanish, Czech) ch- can be treated as a separate letter and words in it are alphabetized
after -c- (or, in Czech and Slovak, after -h-). The sound also is heard in more distant languages
(as in cheetah, chintz), and the digraph also is used to represent the sound in Scottish loch.


a.s.a.p.

also asap, pronounced either as a word or as four letters; from initial letters of phrase as soon as
possible, 1955, originally U.S. Army jargon.


Illinois

U.S. territory created 1809; name is from a native Algonquian people who called themselves Inoca
(1725), also written Ilinouek, Old Ottawa for ordinary speaker. The modern form represents a 17c.
French spelling, pronounced ilinwe at that time. Admitted as a state 1818.


No.

as an abbreviation meaning (and pronounced) number, 1660s, from Latin numero, ablative singular of
numerus (see number (n.)).


supposed (adj.)

believed or thought to exist, 1580s, past participle adjective from suppose (v.); often with the -e-
pronounced, to distinguish it from the passive past tense supposed, now common in the sense of to
have a duty or obligation (1859).


awol (adj.)

also a.w.o.l., military initialism (acronym) for absent without leave. The -o- seems to be there
mostly so the assemblage can be pronounced as a word. In U.S. military use at least from World War
II, popular use by 1960.


praline (n.)

1727, prawlin, from French praline (17c.), from the name of Marshal Duplessis-Praslin (1598-1675,
pronounced praline), whose cook invented this confection [Klein]. Modern spelling in English from
1809.


wr-

common Germanic consonantal combination, especially to start words implying twisting or distortion.
Retained in Dutch and Flemish; reduced to -r- in Old High German and Old Norse; represented by vr-
in Danish and Swedish; still spelled -wr- in English, but the -w- ceased to be pronounced
c.1450-1700 except in dialects.


pronunciation (n.)

early 15c., mode in which a word is pronounced, from Middle French prononciation and directly from
Latin pronuntiationem (nominative pronuntiatio) act of speaking, utterance, delivery, also
proclamation, public declaration, noun of action from past participle stem of pronuntiare announce
(see pronounce).


rift (n.)

early 14c., a split, act of splitting, from a Scandinavian source (compare Danish and Norwegian rift
a cleft, Old Icelandic ript (pronounced rift) breach; related to Old Norse ripa to break a contract
(see riven). Figurative use from 1620s. Geological sense from 1921. As a verb, c.1300.


Aphrodite (n.)

Greek goddess of love and beauty; by the ancients, her name was derived from Greek aphros foam, from
the story of her birth, but perhaps it is ultimately from Phoenician Ashtaroth (Assyrian Ishtar). In
17c. English, pronounced to rhyme with night, right, etc.


marked (adj.)

having a mark, Old English gemearcodan (see mark (v.)). Meaning clearly defined (pronounced as two
syllables) is from 1795. Related: Markedly. Marked man one who is watched with hostile intent is
from 1769.


hop (n.2)

opium, 1887, from Cantonese nga-pin (pronounced HAH-peen) opium, a Chinese folk etymology of the
English word opium, literally crow peelings. Re-folk-etymologized back into English by association
with hop (n.1).


conk (v.)

as in conk out, 1918, coined by World War I airmen, perhaps in imitation of the sound of a stalling
motor, reinforced by conk (v.) hit on the head, originally punch in the nose (1821), from conk (n.),
slang for nose (1812), perhaps from fancied resemblance to a conch (pronounced conk) shell.


cocaine (n.)

1874, from Modern Latin cocaine (1856), coined by Albert Niemann of Gottingen University from coca
(from Quechua cuca) + chemical suffix -ine (2). A medical coinage, the drug was used 1870s as a
local anaesthetic for eye surgery, etc. It is interesting to note that although cocaine is
pronounced as a disyllabic word it is trisyllabic in its formation. [Flood]


homophone (n.)

a word pronounced the same as another (whether spelled the same or not) but different in meaning,
1843, from the adjective homophone (1620s), from Greek homos same (see homo- (1)) + phone sound (see
fame (n.)). Related: Homophonic.


crotchet (n.)

late 14c., crocket, later small hook (early 15c.), from Old French crochet (pronounced crotchet)
hook (see crochet). As a surgical instrument, from 1750. Figurative use in musical notation is from
mid-15c., from the shape of the notes. Meaning whimsical fancy is from 1570s; perhaps from the same
mechanical image in crank; but other authorities link this sense to the musical notation one.


homonym (n.)

a word spelled and pronounced the same as another but different in meaning, 1807, from French
homonyme and directly from Latin homonymum (Quintilian), from Greek homonymon, neuter of homonymos,
from homos same (see homo- (1)) + onyma, dialectal form of onoma name (see name (n.)).


Donald

surname, from 13c. Scottish Dofnald, Dufenald, probably from Gaelic Domhnall, Old Irish Domnall
(pronounced Dovnall), from Proto-Celtic *Dubno-valos world-mighty, ruler of the world, from *walos
ruler + PIE *dheub- (see deep (adj.)).


commandment (n.)

late 13c., an order from an authority, from Old French comandement order, command, from Latin
*commandamentum, from *commandare (see command (v.)). Pronounced as four syllables until 17c.    Of
&thorn;e x commandements ... &thorn;e first comondement is &thorn;is, O God we ssul honuri [c.1280]


publicly (adv.)

1560s, in public, from public (adj.) + -ly (2). From 1580s as by the public. Variant publically is
attested from 1812, perhaps based on the fact that publicly is the only exception in this class of
words, which as a rule are spelled -ically though often they are pronounced otherwise.


raft (n.1)

floating platform, late 15c., originally rafter (c.1300), from a Scandinavian source such as Old
Norse raptr log (Old Norse -pt- pronounced as -ft-), related to Middle Low German rafter, rachter
rafter (see rafter).


prowl (v.)

late 14c., prollen, move about in search of something, of unknown origin, with no known cognates.
Spelling with -w- is from 1500s (compare bowls), but pronounced pr&#244;ll till late 18c. Meaning go
stealthily in search of prey is first recorded 1580s. Related: Prowled; prowling. The noun, in on
the prowl, is attested from 1803.


sch-

this letter group can represent five distinct sounds in English; it first was used by Middle English
writers to render Old English sc-, a sound now generally pronounced (and spelled) -sh-. Sometimes it
was miswritten for -ch-. It also was taken in from German (schnapps) and Yiddish (schlemiel). In
words derived from classical languages, it represents Latin sch-, Greek skh-, but in some of these
words the spelling is a restoration and the pronunciation does not follow it (as in schism).


furlough (n.)

1620s, vorloffe, from Dutch verlof, literally permission, from Middle Dutch ver- completely, for +
laf, lof permission, which is related to the second element in believe and to leave (n.).    The -gh
spelling developed by 1770s and represents an f that was once pronounced at the end of the word but
disappeared fairly soon thereafter in English.


debut (n.)

1751, from French d&eacute;but first appearance, a figurative use from d&eacute;buter make the first
stroke at billiards, also to lead off at bowls (a game akin to bowling), 16c., from but mark, goal,
from Old French but end (see butt (n.3)). The verb is first attested 1830.   D&eacute;but can only
be pronounced as French, and should not be used by anyone who shrinks from the necessary effort.
[Fowler]


rile (v.)

1825, American English spelling alteration to reflect a dialectal pronunciation of roil (q.v.);
compare heist from hoist and in the same era spile for spoil (v.). Bartlett writes that in both
England and America roil is now commonly pronounced and written rile [Dictionary of Americanisms,
1848]. Related: Riled; riling.


joust (v.)

c.1300, fight with a spear or lance on horseback with another knight; tilt in a tournament, from Old
French joster to joust, tilt, from Vulgar Latin *iuxtare to approach, come together, meet,
originally be next to, from Latin iuxta beside, near, related to iungere join together (see
jugular). Formerly spelled, and until modern times pronounced, just. Related: Jousted; jousting.


scimitar (n.)

1540s, cimiterie, from Middle French cimeterre (15c.) or Italian scimitarra, of uncertain origin.
Turkish would be the expected source, but no such word has been found there. Perhaps from Persian
shimshir (pronounced shamsher, compare Greek sampsera a barbarian sword, from this source), but OED
finds this unsatisfactory as to form. Many early variations; the modern spelling is from influence
of the Italian form of the word. Century Dictionary (1902) has simitar as preferred spelling.


antique (adj.)

1530s, aged, venerable, from Middle French antique old (14c.), from Latin antiquus (later anticus)
ancient, former, of olden times; old, long in existence, aged; venerable; old-fashioned, from PIE
*anti in sense of before (see ante) + *okw- appearance (see eye (n.)). Originally pronounced in
English like its parallel antic, but French pronunciation and spelling were adopted from c.1700.


&Atilde;&brvbar;

symbol ultimately from Latin and used by scribes writing Old English for a vowel sound between a and
e; generally replaced by -a- after the Conquest. The Latin symbol represented Greek -ai-, and when
Latinate words flooded into English in the 16c., it reappeared with them, but only as an
etymological device, and it was pronounced simply e and eventually reduced to that letter in writing
(as in eon) in most cases except proper names: C&aelig;sar, &AElig;neas, &AElig;sculapius, <span
class=crossreferfence>&AElig;sop.


busy (adj.)

Old English bisig careful, anxious, later continually employed or occupied, cognate with Old Dutch
bezich, Low German besig; no known connection with any other Germanic or Indo-European language.
Still pronounced as in Middle English, but for some unclear reason the spelling shifted to -u- in
15c.    The notion of anxiousness has drained from the word since Middle English. Often in a bad
sense in early Modern English, prying, meddlesome (preserved in busybody). The word was a euphemism
for sexually active in 17c. Of telephone lines, 1893. Of display work, excessively detailed,
visually cluttered, 1903.


jail (n.)

late 13c., gayhol, from Old North French gaiole and Old French jaole, both meaning a cage, prison,
from Medieval Latin gabiola, from Late Latin caveola, diminutive of Latin cavea cage, enclosure,
stall, coop (see cave (n.)). Both forms carried into Middle English; now pronounced jail however it
is spelled. Persistence of Norman-derived gaol (preferred in Britain) is chiefly due to statutory
and official tradition [OED].


Ottoman

1580s (n.), c.1600 (adj.), from French Ottoman, from Italian Ottomano, from Arabic 'Uthmani of or
belonging to 'Uthman, Arabic masc. proper name, which in Turkish is pronounced Othman (see Osmanli),
name of the founder of the dynasty and empire. Ending altered in Italian by formation of a new false
singular, because -i was a plural inflection in Italian. Byron used the more correct form Othman,
and a few writers have followed him. The type of couch so called (1806) because one reclined on it,
which was associated with Eastern customs (see couch).


of (prep.)

Old English of, unstressed form of &aelig;f (prep., adv.) away, away from, from Proto-Germanic *af
(cognates: Old Norse af, Old Frisian af, of of, Dutch af off, down, German ab off, from, down), from
PIE *apo- off, away (see apo-). Primary sense in Old English still was away, but shifted in Middle
English with use of the word to translate Latin de, ex, and especially Old French de, which had come
to be the substitute for the genitive case. Of shares with another word of the same length, as, the
evil glory of being accessory to more crimes against grammar than any other. [Fowler]    Also from
1837 a non-standard or dialectal representation of have as pronounced in unstressed positions (could
of, must of, etc.)


Texas

Mexican province, briefly an independent nation and now a U.S. state, from Spanish Texas, Tejas,
earlier pronounced ta-shas, originally an ethnic name, from Caddo (eastern Texas Indian tribe)
taysha friends, allies, written by the Spanish as a plural. Related: Texan. Baseball Texas-leaguer
ball popped up just over the head of the infielders and falling too close for outfielders to catch
is recorded from 1905, named for the minor league that operated in Texas from 1902 (one theory is
that outfielders played unusually deep in Texas because hit balls bounced hard off the hard, sun-
baked ground).


is (v.)

third person singular present of be, Old English is, from Germanic stem *es- (cognates: Old High
German, German, Gothic ist, Old Norse es, er), from PIE *es-ti- (cognates: Sanskrit asti, Greek
esti, Latin est, Lithuanian esti, Old Church Slavonic jesti), from PIE root *es- to be. Old English
lost the final -t-. See be. Until 1500s, pronounced to rhyme with kiss. Phrase it is what it is,
indicating resigned acceptance of an unpleasant but inevitable situation or circumstance about which
nothing positive really can be said, is attested by 2001.


buy (v.)

Old English bycgan (past tense bohte) to buy, pay for, acquire; redeem, ransom; procure; get done,
from Proto-Germanic *bugjan (cognates: Old Saxon buggjan, Old Norse byggja, Gothic bugjan), of
unknown origin, not found outside Germanic.    The surviving spelling is southwest England dialect;
the word was generally pronounced in Old English and Middle English with a -dg- sound as budge, or
bidge. Meaning believe, accept as true first recorded 1926. Related: Bought; buying. To buy time
prevent further deterioration but make no improvement is attested from 1946.


ache (v.)

Old English acan to ache, suffer pain, from Proto-Germanic *akanan, perhaps from a PIE root *ag-es-
fault, guilt, represented also in Sanskrit and Greek, perhaps imitative of groaning. The verb was
pronounced ake, the noun ache (as in speak/speech) but while the noun changed pronunciation to
conform to the verb, the spelling of both was changed to ache c.1700 on a false assumption of a
Greek origin (specifically Greek akhos pain, distress, which is rather a distant relation of awe
(n.)). Related: Ached; aching.


