prone (adj.)

c.1400, naturally inclined to something, apt, liable, from Latin pronus bent forward, leaning
forward, bent over, figuratively inclined to, disposed, perhaps from adverbial form of pro- before,
for, instead of (see pro-) + ending as in infernus, externus. Meaning lying face-down is first
recorded 1570s. Literal and figurative senses both were in Latin; figurative is older in English.
Related: Proneness.


pronate

1848 (adj.); 1819 (v.), from Late Latin pronatus, past participle of pronare to bend forward, from
pronus prone (see prone). Related: Pronated; pronating.


volcanic (adj.)

1774, from French volcanique, from Italian vulcanico, from vulcano (see volcano). Figurative sense
of prone to explosive activity is attested from 1854.


shifty (adj.)

1560s, able to manage for oneself, fertile in expedients, from shift (n.1) in secondary sense of
dodge, trick, artifice + -y (2). Meaning habitually using dishonest methods, characterized by
trickery first recorded 1837. In a sense prone to shifting, of the wind, used from 1884. Related:
Shiftily; shiftiness.


miserable (adj.)

early 15c., full of misery, causing wretchedness (of conditions), from Old French miserable prone to
pity, merciful, and directly from Latin miserabilis pitiable, miserable, deplorable, lamentable,
from miserari to pity, lament, deplore, from miser wretched (see miser). Of persons, existing in a
state of misery it is attested from 1520s.


proclivity (n.)

1590s, from Middle French proclivit&#233; or directly from Latin proclivitatem (nominative
proclivitas) a tendency, predisposition, propensity, from proclivis prone to, literally sloping,
inclined, from pro- forward (see pro-) + clivus a slope, from PIE *klei-wo-, suffixed form of *klei
to lean (see lean (v.)).


propensity (n.)

1560s, disposition to favor, with -ty + obsolete adjective propense inclined, prone (1520s), from
Latin propensus, past participle of propendere incline to, hang forward, hang down, weigh over, from
pro- forward (see pro-) + pendere hang (see pendant).


scrofula (n.)

c.1400, scrophulas (plural) from Late Latin scroful&aelig; (plural) swelling of the glands of the
neck, literally little pigs, from Latin scrofa breeding sow (see screw (n.)). The connection may be
because the glands associated with the disease resemble the body of a sow or some part of it, or
because pigs were thought to be prone to it. Compare Greek khoirades (plural) scrofula, related to
khoiros young pig.


stratum (n.)

horizontal layer, 1590s, from Modern Latin special use of Latin stratum thing spread out, coverlet,
beadspread, horse-blanket; pavement, noun uses of neuter of stratus prostrate, prone, past
participle of sternere to spread out, lay down, stretch out, from PIE *stre-to- to stretch, extend,
from root *stere- to spread, extend, stretch out (see structure (n.)).


grovel (v.)

1590s, Shakespearian back-formation of groveling (Middle English), regarded as a present participle
but really an adverb, from Old Norse grufe prone + obsolete adverbial suffix -ling (which survives
also as the -long in headlong, sidelong); first element from Old Norse a grufu on proneness. Perhaps
related to creep. Related: Groveled; grovelled; groveling; grovelling.


