prong (n.)

early 15c., prange pointed instrument; mid-15c., pronge pain, from Anglo-Latin pronga prong, pointed
tool, of unknown origin, perhaps related to Middle Low German prange stick, restraining device,
prangen to press, pinch. See also prod, which might be related. Prong-horned antelope is from 1815
(short form pronghorn attested from 1826).


zinc (n.)

1650s, zinke, from German Zink, perhaps related to Zinke prong, point; said to have been used first
by Paracelsus (c.1526) on analogy of the form of its crystals after smelting. Zinke is from Old High
German zint a point, jag, from Proto-Germanic *teng- tine (cognates: Old Norse tindr point, top,
summit, Old English tind prong, spike), from PIE *denk- to bite. Spelling with -c- is from 1813,
from French influence.


tack (n.1)

clasp, hook, fastener, also a nail of some kind, c.1400, from Old North French taque nail, pin, peg
(Old French tache, 12c., nail, spike, tack; pin brooch), probably from a Germanic source (compare
Middle Dutch tacke twig, spike, Frisian tak a tine, prong, twig, branch, Low German takk tine,
pointed thing, German Zacken sharp point, tooth, prong), from Proto-Germanic *tag-. Meaning small,
sharp nail with a flat head is attested from mid-15c. The meaning rope to hold the corner of a sail
in place is first recorded late 15c.


pang (n.)

1520s, sudden physical pain, of unknown origin, perhaps related to prong (prongys of deth is
recorded from mid-15c.). Reference to mental or emotional pain is from 1560s. Related: Pangs.


tine (n.)

mid-14c., from Old English tind spike, beak, prong, tooth of a fork, a general Germanic word
(compare Old High German zint sharp point, spike, Old Norse tindr tine, point, top, summit, German
Zinne pinnacle), of unknown origin (see zinc).


zig-zag (n.)

also zigzag, 1712, from French zigzag (1670s), perhaps from German Zickzack (though this is attested
only from 1703), possibly a reduplication of Zacke tooth, prong. Earliest use in German is in
reference to military siege approaches. Originally in English used to describe the layout of certain
garden paths. As an adjective from 1750; the verb is recorded from 1774. The brand of cigarette
paper is from 1909. Related: Zig-zagged; zig-zagging.


tag (n.1)

small, hanging piece from a garment, c.1400, of uncertain origin but probably from a Scandinavian
source (compare Norwegian tagg point, prong, barb, Swedish tagg prickle, thorn) and related to
Middle Low German tagge branch, twig, spike), from Proto-Germanic *tag-. The sense development might
be point of metal at the end of a cord, string, etc., hence part hanging loose. Or perhaps
ultimately from PIE *dek-, a root forming words referring to fringe, horsetail, locks of hair (see
with tail (n.1)).    Meaning a label is first recorded 1835; sense of automobile license plate is
recorded from 1935, originally underworld slang. Meaning an epithet, popular designation is recorded
from 1961, hence slang verb meaning write graffiti in public places (1990).


