prophylactic (adj.)

1570s, originally of medicines, that tends to prevent disease, from Middle French prophylactique
(16c.) and directly as a Latinized borrowing of Greek prophylaktikos precautionary, from
prophylassein keep guard before, ward off, be on one's guard, from pro- before (see pro-) +
phylassein, Ionic variant of phylattein to watch over, to guard, but also cherish, keep, remain in,
preserve (see phylactery).    The noun is first recorded 1640s, a medicine or treatment to prevent
disease; meaning condom is from 1943, replacing earlier preventive (1822), preventative (1901).
Condoms originally were used more to thwart contagious disease than to prevent pregnancy.


prophylaxis (n.)

preventive treatment of disease, 1746, Modern Latin, from Greek pro (see pro-) + phylaxis a
watching, guarding (see prophylactic).


condom (n.)

1706, traditionally named for a British physician during reign of Charles II (a story traceable to
1709), but there is no evidence for that. Also spelled condam, quondam, which suggests it may be
from Italian guantone, from guanto a glove. A word omitted in the original OED (c.1890) and not used
openly in the U.S. and not advertised in mass media until November 1986 speech by Surgeon General C.
Everett Koop on AIDS prevention. Compare prophylactic.


anaphylactic (adj.)

1905, with -ic + medical Latin noun anaphylaxis exaggerated susceptibility, from French anaphylaxie
(1902), from Greek ana- (see ana-) + phylaxis watching, guarding (compare prophylactic).
Anaphylactic shock is attested by 1916.


Trojan (adj.)

Old English Troian of or pertaining to ancient Troy, from Latin Trojanus, from Troia, Troja Troy,
from the Greek name for the city, said to be from Tros, name of a king of Phrygia, the mythical
founder of Troy. Trojan horse was figurative of ambush-from-within in Roman times (equus Troianus);
attested in English from 1570s; the computer virus sense is attested by 1982.    As a noun from mid-
14c., inhabitant of ancient Troy; in early modern English, the noun could mean a determined fellow,
one who fights or works hard, from the Trojans' long resistance to the Greeks in the Trojan War, but
also in 17c., it was a colloquial term for person of dissolute life, carousing companion. The trade
name for a brand of prophylactic contraceptive was registered 1927 in U.S.


