propensity (n.)

1560s, disposition to favor, with -ty + obsolete adjective propense inclined, prone (1520s), from
Latin propensus, past participle of propendere incline to, hang forward, hang down, weigh over, from
pro- forward (see pro-) + pendere hang (see pendant).


Tasmania (n.)

1853, named for Dutch navigator Abel Tasman (1603-1659), who discovered it in 1642. It was called by
him Van Diemen's Land for the Dutch governor-general of the East Indies. The Tasmanian devil so
called since at least 1829, from its propensity for killing young lambs (other voracious fish or
animals also have been named devil).


proclivity (n.)

1590s, from Middle French proclivit&#233; or directly from Latin proclivitatem (nominative
proclivitas) a tendency, predisposition, propensity, from proclivis prone to, literally sloping,
inclined, from pro- forward (see pro-) + clivus a slope, from PIE *klei-wo-, suffixed form of *klei
to lean (see lean (v.)).


geophagy (n.)

dirt-eating, 1850, from Greek *geophagia (according to OED the actual Greek is geotragia), from
geo-, comb. form of ge earth (see Gaia) + phagein to eat.A diseased appetite ... prevails in several
parts of Alabama, where they eat clay. I heard various speculations on the origin of this singular
propensity, called 'geophagy' in some medical books. [Lyell, Second Visit to U.S., 1850]  See also
pica (n.2).


pyromania (n.)

1840, from pyro- fire + mania madness, frenzy. Used in German in the 1830s.    The propensity which
leads an insane person to accomplish his purpose by burning, has been considered to merit particular
notice, and to constitute a variety of monomania. Dr. Marc, of France, has published a memoir on the
subject; he gives the name of pyromania to it, and considers that, like other insane propensities,
it may be the result of instinct, or it may be the result of delusion--reasoning upon erroneous
principles. [Alexander Morrison, M.D., The Physiognomy of Mental Diseases, London, 1840]    An older
word for it was incendiarism.


socialist (n.)

one who advocates socialism, 1827, from French socialiste, or else a native formation based on it,
in reference to the teachings of Comte de Saint-Simon, founder of French socialism. The word begins
to be used in French in the modern sense c.1835. Socialista, with a different sense, was applied
18c. to followers and pupils of Dutch jurist Grotius (1583-1645), from his use of socialistus.
Socialist realism attested from 1934.    I find that socialism is often misunderstood by its least
intelligent supporters and opponents to mean simply unrestrained indulgence of our natural
propensity to heave bricks at respectable persons. [George Bernard Shaw, An Unsocial Socialist,
1900]   <hr />   Prison is a Socialist's Paradise, where equality prevails, everything is supplied
and competition is eliminated. [Elbert Hubbard, The Note Book, 1927]


troll (n.1)

supernatural being in Scandinavian mythology and folklore, 1610s (with an isolated use mid-14c.),
from Old Norse troll giant being not of the human race, evil spirit, monster. Some speculate that it
originally meant creature that walks clumsily, and derives from Proto-Germanic *truzlan, from
*truzlanan (see troll (v.)). But it seems to have been a general supernatural word, such as Swedish
trolla to charm, bewitch; Old Norse trolldomr witchcraft.    The old sagas tell of the troll-bull, a
supernatural being in the form of a bull, as well as boar-trolls. There were troll-maidens, troll-
wives, and troll-women; the trollman, a magician or wizard, and the troll-drum, used in Lappish
magic rites. The word was popularized in literary English by 19c. antiquarians, but it has been
current in the Shetlands and Orkneys since Viking times. The first record of the word in modern
English is from a court document from the Shetlands, regarding a certain Catherine, who, among other
things, was accused of airt and pairt of witchcraft and sorcerie, in hanting and seeing the Trollis
ryse out of the kyrk yeard of Hildiswick.    Originally conceived as a race of malevolent giants,
they have suffered the same fate as the Celtic Danann and by 19c. were regarded by peasants in in
Denmark and Sweden as dwarfs and imps supposed to live in caves or under the ground.    They are
obliging and neighbourly; freely lending and borrowing, and elsewise keeping up a friendly
intercourse with mankind. But they have a sad propensity to thieving, not only stealing provisions,
but even women and children. [Thomas Keightley, The Fairy Mythology, London, 1850]


