prophetic (adj.)

late 15c., from Middle French proph&eacute;tique (15c.) and directly from Late Latin propheticus,
from Greek prophetikos pertaining to a prophet, oracular, from prophetes (see prophet). Related:
Prophetical (mid-15c.); prophetically.


presage (n.)

late 14c., something that portends, from Latin praesagium a foreboding, from praesagire to perceive
beforehand, forebode, from praesagus (adj.) perceiving beforehand, prophetic, from prae before (see
pre-) + sagus prophetic, related to sagire perceive (see sagacious).


fateful (adj.)

1710s, prophetic, from fate + -ful. Meaning of momentous consequences is from c.1800. Related:
Fatefully.


enrapt (adj.)

c.1600, carried away by (prophetic) ecstasy, past participle adjective from en- make, put in (see
en- (1)) + rapt.


mantic (adj.)

1850, from Greek mantikos prophetic, oracular, of or for a soothsayer, from mantis prophet,
literally one touched by divine madness (see mantis). Related: Mantical (1580s).


charismatic (adj.)

1851, in Bible commentary and theology, in reference to the operation of the Holy Spirit and
prophetic ecstasy in the early Church (from the use of Greek kharismata in Rom. xii), from Latin
stem of charisma + -ic. As a movement in modern Christian churches which believes in divine gifts of
healing, etc., attested by 1936, reflecting the older sense of charisma.


superstitious (adj.)

late 14c., involving faith in supernatural powers or magic; characteristic of pagan religion or
false religion, from Anglo-French supersticius, Old French supersticios, or directly from Latin
superstitiosus prophetic; full of dread of the supernatural, from superstitio prophecy, soothsaying,
excessive fear of the gods (see superstition).


prodigy (n.)

late 15c., sign, portent, something extraordinary from which omens are drawn, from Latin prodigium
prophetic sign, omen, portent, prodigy, from pro- forth (see pro-) + -igium, a suffix or word of
unknown origin, perhaps from *agi-, root of aio I say (see adage). Meaning child with exceptional
abilities first recorded 1650s.


genius (n.)

late 14c., tutelary god (classical or pagan), from Latin genius guardian deity or spirit which
watches over each person from birth; spirit, incarnation, wit, talent; also prophetic skill,
originally generative power, from root of gignere beget, produce (see kin), from PIE root *gen-
produce. Sense of characteristic disposition is from 1580s. Meaning person of natural intelligence
or talent and that of natural ability are first recorded 1640s.


sagacity (n.)

c.1500, from Middle French sagacit&eacute;, from Latin sagacitatem (nominative sagacitas) keenness
of perception, quality of being acute, from sagax (genitive sagacis) of quick perception, acute,
related to sagus prophetic, sagire perceive keenly, from PIE root *sag- to track down, trace, seek
(cognates: Old English secan to seek; see seek). Also used 17c.-18c. of animals, meaning acute sense
of smell.


messiah (n.)

c.1300, Messias, from Late Latin Messias, from Greek Messias, from Aramaic meshiha and Hebrew
mashiah the anointed (of the Lord), from mashah anoint. This is the word rendered in Septuagint as
Greek Khristos (see Christ). In Old Testament prophetic writing, it was used of an expected
deliverer of the Jewish nation. The modern English form represents an attempt to make the word look
more Hebrew, and dates from the Geneva Bible (1560). Transferred sense of an expected liberator or
savior of a captive people is attested from 1660s.


fate (n.)

late 14c., from Latin fata, neuter plural of fatum prophetic declaration, oracle, prediction, thus
that which is ordained, destiny, fate, literally thing spoken (by the gods), from neuter past
participle of fari to speak, from PIE *bha- (2) speak (see fame (n.)).    The Latin sense evolution
is from sentence of the Gods (Greek theosphaton) to lot, portion (Greek moira, personified as a
goddess in Homer), also one of the three goddesses (Clotho, Lachesis, and Atropos) who determined
the course of a human life. The native word was wyrd (see weird).


prophet (n.)

late 12c., person who speaks for God; one who foretells, inspired preacher, from Old French
prophete, profete prophet, soothsayer (11c., Modern French proph&#232;te) and directly from Latin
propheta, from Greek prophetes (Doric prophatas) an interpreter, spokesman, especially of the gods,
inspired preacher or teacher, from pro- before (see pro-) + root of phanai to speak, from PIE *bha-
(2) speak (see fame (n.)).    The Greek word was used in Septuagint for Hebrew nabj soothsayer.
Early Latin writers translated Greek prophetes with Latin vates, but the Latinized form propheta
predominated in post-Classical times, chiefly due to Christian writers, probably because of pagan
associations of vates. In English, meaning prophetic writer of the Old Testament is from late 14c.
Non-religious sense is from 1848; used of Muhammad from 1610s (translating Arabic al-nabiy, and
sometimes also al-rasul, properly the messenger). The Latin word is glossed in Old English by witga.


hag (n.)

early 13c., ugly old woman, probably a shortening of Old English h&aelig;gtesse witch, fury (on
assumption that -tesse was a suffix), from Proto-Germanic *hagatusjon-, of unknown origin. Similar
shortening produced Dutch heks, German Hexe witch from cognate Middle Dutch haghetisse, Old High
German hagzusa.    First element is probably cognate with Old English haga enclosure, portion of
woodland marked off for cutting (see hedge). Old Norse had tunri&eth;a and Old High German zunritha,
both literally hedge-rider, used of witches and ghosts. Second element may be connected with
Norwegian tysja fairy; crippled woman, Gaulish dusius demon, Lithuanian dvasia spirit, from PIE
*dhewes- to fly about, smoke, be scattered, vanish.    One of the magic words for which there is no
male form, suggesting its original meaning was close to diviner, soothsayer, which were always
female in northern European paganism, and h&aelig;gtesse seem at one time to have meant woman of
prophetic and oracular powers (&AElig;lfric uses it to render the Greek pythoness, the voice of the
Delphic oracle), a figure greatly feared and respected. Later, the word was used of village wise
women.   Haga is also the haw- in hawthorn, which is an important tree in northern European pagan
religion. There may be several layers of folk etymology here. Confusion or blending with heathenish
is suggested by Middle English h&aelig;htis, h&aelig;gtis hag, witch, fury, etc., and haetnesse
goddess, used of Minerva and Diana.    If the h&aelig;gtesse was once a powerful supernatural woman
(in Norse it is an alternative word for Norn, any of the three weird sisters, the equivalent of the
Fates), it might originally have carried the hawthorn sense. Later, when the pagan magic was reduced
to local scatterings, it might have had the sense of hedge-rider, or she who straddles the hedge,
because the hedge was the boundary between the civilized world of the village and the wild world
beyond. The h&aelig;gtesse would have a foot in each reality. Even later, when it meant the local
healer and root collector, living in the open and moving from village to village, it may have had
the mildly pejorative sense of hedge- in Middle English (hedge-priest, etc.), suggesting an
itinerant sleeping under bushes, perhaps. The same word could have contained all three senses before
being reduced to its modern one.


