propagate (v.)

1560s, to cause to multiply, from Latin propagatus, past participle of propagare to set forward,
extend, procreate (see propagation). Intransitive sense reproduce one's kind is from c.1600.
Related: Propagated; propagating.


semination (n.)

1530s, action of sowing, from Latin seminationem (nominative seminato) a sowing, propagation, noun
of action from past participle stem of seminare to plant, propagate, from semen (genitive seminis)
seed (see semen).


team (v.)

1550s, to harness beasts in a team, from team (n.). From 1841 as drive a team. The meaning to come
together as a team (usually with up) is attested from 1932. Transitive sense to use (something) in
conjunction (with something else) is from 1948. Related: Teamed; teaming. The Old English verb,
teaman, tieman, is attested only in the sense bring forth, beget, engender, propagate.


propaganda (n.)

1718, committee of cardinals in charge of Catholic missionary work, short for Congregatio de
Propaganda Fide congregation for propagating the faith, a committee of cardinals established 1622 by
Gregory XV to supervise foreign missions. The word is properly the ablative fem. gerundive of Latin
propagare (see propagation). Hence, any movement to propagate some practice or ideology (1790).
Modern political sense dates from World War I, not originally pejorative. Meaning material or
information propagated to advance a cause, etc. is from 1929.


disseminate (v.)

c.1600, from Latin disseminatus, past participle of disseminare to spread abroad, disseminate, from
dis- in every direction (see dis-) + seminare to plant, propagate, from semen (genitive seminis)
seed (see semen). Related: Disseminated; disseminates; disseminating. Middle English had dissemen to
scatter (early 15c.).


verdure (n.)

late 14c., fresh green color, from Old French verdure greenness, greenery, green fields, herbs, from
verd, variant of vert green (12c.), from Latin viridis (source of Spanish, Italian verde), related
to virere be green, of unknown origin. Perhaps ultimately from a root meaning growing plant and
cognate with Lithuanian veisti propagate, Old Norse visir bud, sprout, Old English wise sprout,
stalk, etc. Meaning green plants, vegetation is attested from c.1400.


teem (v.1)

abound, swarm, be prolific, Old English teman (Mercian), tieman (West Saxon) beget, give birth to,
bring forth, produce, propagate, from Proto-Germanic *tau(h)mjan (denominative), from PIE *deuk- to
lead (see duke (n.)). Related to team (n.) in its now-obsolete Old English sense of family, brood of
young animals. The meaning abound, swarm is first recorded 1590s, on the notion of be full of as if
ready to give birth. Related: Teemed; teeming.


quadrille (n.)

1773, lively square dance for four couples, from French quadrille (17c.), originally one of four
groups of horsemen in a tournament (a sense attested in English from 1738), from Spanish cuadrilla,
diminutive of cuadro four-sided battle square, from Latin quadrum a square, related to quattuor four
(see four). The craze for the dance hit England in 1816, and it underwent a vigorous revival late
19c. among the middle classes.    Earlier the name of a popular card game for four hands, and in
this sense from French quadrille (1725), from Spanish cuartillo, from cuarto fourth, from Latin
quartus. OED notes it as fashionable from 1726 (and was in turn superseded by whist), the year of
Swift's (or Congreve's) satirical ballad on the craze:    The commoner, and knight, the peer,  Men
of all ranks and fame,  Leave to their wives the only care,  To propagate their name;  And well that
duty they fulfil  When the good husband's at Quadrille &amp;c.;


abomination (n.)

early 14c., abominable thing or action; late 14c., feeling of disgust, hatred, loathing, from Old
French abominacion abomination, horror, repugnance, disgust (13c.), from Latin abominationem
(nominative abominatio) abomination, noun of action from past participle stem of abominari shun as
an ill omen, from ab- off, away from (see ab-) + omin-, stem of omen (see omen). Meaning intensified
by folk etymology derivation from Latin ab homine away from man, thus beastly.    Doubtless, the
life of an Irregular is hard; but the interests of the Greater Number require that it shall be hard.
If a man with a triangular front and a polygonal back were allowed to exist and to propagate a still
more Irregular posterity, what would become of the arts of life? Are the houses and doors and
churches in Flatland to be altered in order to accommodate such monsters? [Edwin Abbot, Flatland: A
Romance of Many Dimensions, 1885]


