prop (n.1)

support, mid-15c., from Middle Dutch proppe vine prop, support, of unknown origin. Probably related
to Old High German pfropfo, German pfropfen to prop, perhaps from Latin propago a set, layer of a
plant (see propagation). Irish propa, Gaelic prop are from English.


prop (v.)

to support, mid-15c., probably from prop (n.1) or a related verb in Dutch. Related: Propped;
propping.


prop (n.3)

short for propeller, 1914.


prop (n.2)

object used in a play, 1898, from props (1841), shortened form of properties (which was in
theatrical use from early 15c.). Props as slang shortening for proper respects (or something
similar) appeared c.1999.


propane (n.)

colorless gas occurring in petroleum, 1866, with chemical suffix -ane + prop(ionic acid) (1850),
from French propionique (1847), from Greek pro forward (see pro-) + pion fat (see fat (adj.)), in
reference to its being first in order of the fatty acids.


shore (v.)

mid-14c., to prop, support with a prop; of obscure etymology though widespread in Germanic (Middle
Dutch schooren to prop up, support, Old Norse skor&eth;a (n.) a piece of timber set up as a
support). Related: Shored; shoring. Also as a noun, post or beam for temporary support of something
(mid-15c.), especially an oblique timber to brace the side of a building or excavation.


fulcrum (n.)

1670s, a prop, a support (on which a lever turns), from Latin fulcrum bedpost, from fulcire to prop
up, support (see balk).


stay (n.1)

support, prop, brace, 1510s, from Middle French estaie piece of wood used as a support, Old French
estaie prop, support, perhaps from Frankish *staka support or some other Germanic word, from Proto-
Germanic *stagaz (cognates: Middle Dutch stake stick, Old English steli steel, st&aelig;g rope used
to support a mast), from PIE *stak- to stand, place (see stay (n.2)). In some uses from stay (v.2).


underpinning (n.)

late 15c., action of supporting or strengthening from beneath, from under + present participle of
pin (v.). Figurative sense of prop, support is recorded from 1580s.


sprag (n.)

prop in a mine, 1841, of unknown origin. Transferred by 1878 to wood blocks, etc., used to brake
motor vehicles. As a verb, from 1841. Related: Spragged; spragging.


bazooka (n.)

metal tube rocket launcher, 1942, from name of a junkyard musical instrument used (c.1935) as a prop
by U.S. comedian Bob Burns (1896-1956); extension of bazoo, slang for mouth or boastful talk (1877),
probably from Dutch bazuin trumpet.


bolster (v.)

mid-15c. (implied in bolstered), propped up, made to bulge (originally of a woman's breasts), from
bolster (n.). Figurative sense is from c.1500, on the notion of to support with a bolster, prop up.
Related: Bolstering.


underpin (v.)

support or prop, 1520s (figurative); 1530s (literal), from under + pin (v.). Related: Underpinned;
underpinning.


wadi (n.)

watercourse, 1839, from Arabic wadi seasonal watercourse, prop. participle of wada it flowed. It
forms the Guadal- in Spanish river names.


bestead (v.)

to help, support, prop, 1580s, from be- + stead (v.); see stead.


pillar (n.)

c.1200, from Old French piler pillar, column, pier (12c., Modern French pilier) and directly from
Medieval Latin pilare, from Latin pila pillar, stone barrier. Figurative sense of prop or support of
an institution or community is first recorded early 14c. Phrase pillar to post is c.1600, originally
of tennis, exact meaning obscure.


support (v.)

late 14c., to aid, also to hold up, prop up, put up with, tolerate, from Old French suporter to
bear, endure, sustain, support (14c.), from Latin supportare convey, carry, bring up, bring forward,
from sub up from under (see sub-) + portare to carry (see port (n.1)). Related: Supported;
supporting.


stanchion (n.)

early 14c., post, pillar, or beam used for support, from Old French estanchon prop, brace, support
(13c., Modern French &eacute;tan&ccedil;on), probably from estant upright, from present participle
of ester be upright, stand, from Latin stare to stand, from PIE root *sta- to stand (see stet).


scepter (n.)

c.1300, ceptre, from Old French sceptre (12c.), from Latin sceptrum royal staff, from Greek skeptron
staff to lean on; royal scepter; in transferred use, royalty, from root of skeptein to prop or stay,
lean on. Apparently a cognate with Old English sceaft (see shaft (n.1)). The verb meaning to furnish
with a scepter is from 1520s. Related: sceptred.


scaffold (n.)

mid-14c., wooden framework used in building, etc., temporary structure for workmen to make walls, a
shortening of an Old North French variant of Old French eschafaut scaffold (Modern French
&#233;chafaud), probably altered (by influence of eschace a prop, support) from chaffaut, from
Vulgar Latin *catafalicum (see catafalque). Meaning platform for a hanging is from 1550s. Dutch
schavot, German Schafott, Danish skafot are from French. As a verb from 1540s.


pale (n.)

early 13c. (c.1200 in Anglo-Latin), stake, pole, stake for vines, from Old French pal and directly
from Latin palus stake, prop, wooden post, related to pangere to fix or fasten (see pact).    From
late 14c. as fence of pointed stakes; figurative sense of limit, boundary, restriction is from
c.1400. Barely surviving in beyond the pale and similar phrases. Meaning the part of Ireland under
English rule is from 1540s, via sense of territory held by power of a nation or people (mid-15c.).


impale (v.)

1520s, to enclose with stakes, fence in, from Middle French empaler and directly from Medieval Latin
impalare to push onto a stake, from assimilated form of in- into, in (see in- (2)) + Latin palus a
stake, prop, stay; wooden post, pole, from PIE *pak-slo-, from root *pag-/*pak- to fasten (see
pact). Sense of pierce with a pointed stake (as torture or punishment) first recorded 1610s.
Related: Impaled; impaling.


agitprop (n.)

also agit-prop, 1938, from Russian agitatsiya agitation (from French agitation; see agitation) +
propaganda, from German (see propaganda).


pediment (n.)

triangular part of the facade of a Greek-style building, 1660s, alteration of periment, peremint
(1590s), of unknown origin, said to be a workmen's term [OED]; probably a dialectal garbling of
pyramid, the connection perhaps being the triangular shape. Sometimes associated with ped- foot.
Other possibilities include Latin pedamentum vine-stalk, prop, and Italian pedamento, which at the
time this word entered English meant foundation, basework, footing. Meaning base, foundation is from
1726, by inflience of Latin pedem foot.


stud (n.1)

nailhead, knob, late 13c., from Old English studu pillar, prop, post, from Proto-Germanic *stud-
(cognates: Old Norse sto&eth; staff, stick, properly stay, Middle High German stud, Old English stow
place), from PIE *stu-, variant of root *sta- to stand (see stet). Sense expanded by late 14c. to
include ornamental devices fixed in and projecting from a surface. From the Old English meaning
comes the specific sense one of the small beams of a building which form a basis for the walls.


analemma (n.)

1650s, from Latin analemma the pedestal of a sundial, hence the sundial itself, from Greek analemma
prop, support, from analambanein to receive, take up, restore, from ana- up (see ana-) + lambanein
to take, from PIE root *(s)lagw- to seize, take (cognates: Sanskrit labhate, rabhate seizes; Old
English l&aelig;ccan to seize, grasp; Greek lazomai I take, grasp; Old Church Slavonic leca to
catch, snare; Lithuanian lobis possession, riches).


rate (n.)

estimated value or worth, early 15c., from Old French rate price, value and directly from Medieval
Latin rata (pars) fixed (amount), from Latin rata fixed, settled, fem. past participle of reri to
reckon, think (see reason (n.)). Meaning degree of speed (prop. ratio between distance and time) is
attested from 1650s. Currency exchange sense first recorded 1727. First-rate, second-rate, etc. are
1640s, from British Navy division of ships into six classes based on size and strength. Phrase at
any rate originally (1610s) meant at any cost; weakened sense of at least is attested by 1760.


balk (n.)

Old English balca ridge, bank, from or influenced by Old Norse balkr ridge of land, especially
between two plowed furrows, both from Proto-Germanic *balkon- (cognates: Old Saxon balko, Danish
bjelke, Old Frisian balka, Old High German balcho, German Balken beam, rafter), from PIE *bhelg-
beam, plank (cognates: Latin fulcire to prop up, support, fulcrum bedpost; Lithuanian balziena
cross-bar; and possibly Greek phalanx trunk, log, line of battle). Modern senses are figurative,
representing the balk as a hindrance or obstruction (see balk (v.)). Baseball sense is first
attested 1845.


prune (v.)

early 15c., prouyne, from Old French proignier cut back (vines), prune (Modern French provigner), of
unknown origin. Perhaps [Watkins] from Gallo-Roman *pro-retundiare cut in a rounded shape in front,
from pro- forth (see pro-) + *retundiare round off, from Latin rotundus (see round (adj.)). Klein
suggests the Old French word is from provain layer of a vine, from Latin propago (see prop (n.1)).
Or the Middle English word might be identical with the falconry term proinen, proynen trim the
feather with the beak (late 14c.), source of preen [Barnhart]. Related: Pruned; pruning. Pruning
hook is from 1610s; pruning knife from 1580s.


staple (n.1)

bent piece of metal with pointed ends, late 13c., from Old English stapol post, pillar, trunk of a
tree, steps to a house, from Proto-Germanic *stapulaz pillar (cognates: Old Saxon stapal candle,
small tub, Old Frisian stapul stem of a tooth, Dutch stapel a prop, foot-rest, seat, Middle Low
German stapel block for executions, German Stapel stake, beam), from *stap-, from PIE stebh- (see
staff (n.)).    A general Germanic word that apparently evolved a specialized meaning in English,
though OED finds the connection unclear and suggests the later sense in English might not be the
same word. Meaning piece of thin wire driven through papers to hold them together is attested from
1895.


shambles (n.)

early 15c., meat or fish market, from schamil table, stall for vending (c.1300), from Old English
scamol, scomul stool, footstool (also figurative); bench, table for vending, an early Proto-Germanic
borrowing (Old Saxon skamel stool, Middle Dutch schamel, Old High German scamel, German schemel,
Danish skammel footstool) from Latin scamillus low stool, a little bench, ultimately a diminutive of
scamnum stool, bench, from PIE root *skabh- to prop up, support. In English, sense evolved from
place where meat is sold to slaughterhouse (1540s), then figuratively place of butchery (1590s), and
generally confusion, mess (1901, usually in plural).


gazette (n.)

newspaper, c.1600, from French gazette (16c.), from Italian gazzetta, Venetian dialectal gazeta
newspaper, also the name of a small copper coin, literally little magpie, from gazza; applied to the
monthly newspaper (gazeta de la novit&agrave;) published in Venice by the government, either from
its price or its association with the bird (typical of false chatter), or both.  First used in
English 1665 for the paper issued at Oxford, whither the court had fled from the plague.    The coin
may have been so called for its marking; Gamillscheg writes the word is from French gai (see jay).
The general story of the origin of the word is broadly accepted, but there are many variations in
the details:    We are indebted to the Italians for the idea of newspapers. The title of their
gazettas was, perhaps, derived from gazzera, a magpie or chatterer; or, more probably, from a
farthing coin, peculiar to the city of Venice, called gazetta, which was the connom price of the
newspapers. Another etymologist is for deriving it from the Latin gaza, which would colloquially
lengthen into gazetta, and signify a little treasury of news. The Spanish derive it from the Latin
gaza, and likewise their gazatero, and our gazetteer, for a writer of the gazette and, what is
peculiar to themselves, gazetista, for a lover of the gazette. [Isaac Disraeli, Curiosities of
Literature, 1835]   <hr />  <b>Gazzetta</b> It., Sp. gazeta, Fr. E. gazette; prop. the name of a
Venetian coin (from gaza), so in Old English. Others derive gazette from gazza a magpie, which, it
is alleged, was the emblem figured on the paper; but it does not appear on any of the oldest
Venetian specimens preserved at Florence. The first newspapers appeared at Venice about the middle
of the 16th century during the war with Soliman II, in the form of a written sheet, for the
privilege of reading which a gazzetta (= a crazia) was paid. Hence the name was transferred to the
news-sheet. [T.C. Donkin, Etymological Dictionary of the Romance Languages (based on Diez), 1864]
<hr />   GAZETTE. A paper of public intelligence and news of divers countries, first printed at
Venice, about the year 1620, and so called (some say) because una gazetta, a small piece of Venetian
coin, was given to buy or read it. Others derive the name from gazza, Italian for magpie,  i.e.
chatterer.--Trusler. A gazette was printed in France in 1631; and one in Germany in 1715. [Haydn's
Dictionary of Dates, 1857]


