propriety (n.)

mid-15c., proper character, disposition, from Old French propriet&eacute; individuality,
peculiarity; property (12c.), from Latin proprietatem (nominative proprietas) appropriateness, also
ownership (see property). Meaning fitness, appropriateness is attested from 1610s; sense of
conformity to good manners is from 1782.


property (n.)

c.1300, properte, nature, quality, later possession, thing owned (early 14c., a sense rare before
17c.), from an Anglo-French modification of Old French propriete individuality, peculiarity;
property (12c., Modern French propret&eacute;; see propriety), from Latin proprietatem (nominative
proprietas) ownership, a property, propriety, quality, literally special character (a loan-
translation of Greek idioma), noun of quality from proprius one's own, special (see proper). For
possessions, private property Middle English sometimes used proper goods. Hot property sensation, a
success is from 1947 in Billboard stories.


indelicate (adj.)

1742, offensive to propriety, from in- (1) not, opposite of + delicate. Related: Indelicately.


bowdlerize (v.)

1836, from Thomas Bowdler (1754-1825), English editor who in 1818 published a notorious expurgated
Shakespeare, in which, according to his frontispiece, nothing is added to the original text; but
those words and expressions omitted which cannot with propriety be read aloud in a family. Related:
Bowdlerized; bowdlerizing.


deflection (n.)

also (and with more etymological propriety) deflexion, c.1600, from Latin deflexionem, noun of
action from past participle stem of deflectere (see deflect). Both forms were present 17c., but the
spelling with -c- has come to predominate.


absurd (adj.)

1550s, from Middle French absurde (16c.), from Latin absurdus out of tune; foolish (see absurdity).
The main modern sense (also present in Latin) is a figurative one, out of harmony with reason or
propriety. Related: Absurdly; absurdness.


sinful (adj.)

Old English synnfull full of sin, wicked, unholy, contrary to the laws of God; see sin (n.) + -ful.
Weakened sense of contrary to propriety or decency is from 1863. Related: Sinfully; sinfulness.


elegance (n.)

c.1500, tastefulness, correctness, harmoniousness, refinement, of speech or prose, from Middle
French &eacute;l&eacute;gance, from Latin elegantia taste, propriety, refinement, from elegantem
(see elegant). Earlier form was elegancy (early 15c.). Meaning refined luxury is from 1797.


indecent (adj.)

1560s, unbecoming, in bad taste, from French ind&eacute;cent (14c.), from Latin indecentem
(nominative indecens), from in- not, opposite of, without (see in- (1)) + decens (see decent). Sense
of offending against propriety is from 1610s. Indecent assault (1861) originally covered sexual
assaults other than rape or intended rape, but by 1934 it was being used as a euphemism for rape.
Related: Indecently


honesty (n.)

early 14c., splendor, honor; elegance, later honorable position; propriety of behavior, good
manners; virginity, chastity (late 14c.), from Old French honest&eacute; (Modern French
honn&ecirc;tet&eacute;), from Latin honestatem (nominative honestas) honor received from others;
reputation, character; figuratively uprightness, probity, integrity, virtue, from honestus (see
honest). Meaning moral purity, uprightness, virtue, justness is from c.1400; in English, the word
originally had more to do with honor than honest.


modesty (n.)

1530s, freedom from exaggeration, self-control, from Middle French modestie or directly from Latin
modestia moderation, sense of honor, correctness of conduct, from modestus moderate, keeping
measure, sober, gentle, temperate, from modus measure, manner (see mode (n.1)). Meaning quality of
having a moderate opinion of oneself is from 1550s; that of womanly propriety is from 1560s.   La
pudeur donne des plaisirs bien flatteurs &#224; l'amant: elle lui fait sentir quelles lois l'on
transgresse pour lui;  (Modesty both pleases and flatters a lover, for it lays stress on the laws
which are being transgressed for his sake.) [Stendhal de l'Amour, 1822]


licence (n.)

mid-14c., liberty (to do something), leave, from Old French licence freedom, liberty, power,
possibility; permission, (12c.), from Latin licentia freedom, liberty, license, from licentem
(nominative licens). present participle of licere to be allowed, be lawful, from PIE root *leik- to
offer, bargain (cognates: Lettish likstu I come to terms). Meaning formal (usually written)
permission from authority to do something (marry, hunt, drive, etc.) is first attested early 15c.
Meaning excessive liberty, disregard of propriety is from mid-15c. No etymological justification for
the spelling with -s-; attempts to confine license to verbal use and licence to noun use (compare
advise/advice, devise/device) seem to have failed.


liberty (n.)

late 14c., free choice, freedom to do as one chooses, from Old French libert&eacute; freedom,
liberty, free will (14c.), from Latin libertatem (nominative libertas) freedom, condition of a free
man; absence of restraint; permission, from liber free (see liberal)The spirit of liberty is the
spirit which is not too sure it is right. [Learned Hand, 1944]Nautical sense of leave of absence is
from 1758. To take liberties go beyond the bounds of propriety is from 1620s. Sense of privileges by
grant (14c.) led to sense of a person's private land (mid-15c.), which yielded sense in 18c. in both
England and America of a district within a county but having its own justice of the peace, and also
a district adjacent to a city and in some degree under its municipal jurisdiction (as in Northern
Liberties of Philadelphia). Also compare Old French libert&eacute;s local rights, laws, taxes.


thou (pron.)

2nd nominative singular personal pronoun, Old English &thorn;u, from Proto-Germanic *thu (cognates:
Old Frisian thu, Middle Dutch and Middle Low German du, Old High German and German du, Old Norse
&thorn;u, Gothic &thorn;u), from PIE *tu-, second person singular pronoun (cognates: Latin tu, Irish
tu, Welsh ti, Greek su, Lithuanian tu, Old Church Slavonic ty, Sanskrit twa-m).    Superseded in
Middle English by plural form you (from a different root), but retained in certain dialects (e.g.
early Quakers). The plural at first was used in addressing superior individuals, later also (to err
on the side of propriety) strangers, and ultimately all equals. By c.1450 the use of thou to address
inferiors gave it a tinge of insult unless addressed by parents to children, or intimates to one
another. Hence the verb meaning to use 'thou' to a person (mid-15c.).  Avaunt, caitiff, dost thou
thou me! I am come of good kin, I tell thee!  [Hickscorner, c.1530]    A brief history of the second
person pronoun in English can be found here.


slang (n.)

1756, special vocabulary of tramps or thieves, later jargon of a particular profession (1801), of
uncertain origin, the usual guess being that it is from a Scandinavian source, such as Norwegian
slengenamn nickname, slengja kjeften to abuse with words, literally to sling the jaw, related to Old
Norse slyngva to sling. But OED, while admitting some approximation in sense, discounts this
connection based on date and early associations. Liberman also denies it, as well as any connection
with French langue (or language or lingo). Rather, he derives it elaborately from an old slang word
meaning narrow piece of land, itself of obscure origin. Century Dictionary says there is no evidence
to establish a Gipsy origin. Sense of very informal language characterized by vividness and novelty
first recorded 1818.    [S]lang is a conscious offence against some conventional standard of
propriety. A mere vulgarism is not slang, except when it is purposely adopted, and acquires an
artificial currency, among some class of persons to whom it is not native. The other distinctive
feature of slang is that it is neither part of the ordinary language, nor an attempt to supply its
deficiencies. The slang word is a deliberate substitute for a word of the vernacular, just as the
characters of a cipher are substitutes for the letters of the alphabet, or as a nickname is a
substitute for a personal name. [Henry Bradley, from Slang, in Encyclopedia Britannica, 11th ed.]
A word that ought to have survived is slangwhanger (1807, American English) noisy or abusive talker
or writer.


