prosper (v.)

mid-14c., from Old French prosperer (14c.) and directly from Latin prosperare cause to succeed,
render happy, from prosperus favorable, fortunate, prosperous, perhaps literally agreeable to one's
wishes, traditionally regarded as from Old Latin pro spere according to expectation, according to
one's hope, from pro for + ablative of spes hope, from PIE root *spe- to flourish, succeed, thrive,
prosper (see speed (n.)).


prosperous (adj.)

early 15c., tending to bring success, from prosper + -ous, or else from obsolete Middle French
prospereus (15c.), from prosperer. The sense of flourishing is first recorded late 15c.


prosperity (n.)

c.1200, from Old French prosprete (12c., Modern French prosp&#233;rit&#233;) and directly from Latin
prosperitatem (nominative prosperitas) good fortune, from prosperus (see prosper).


get on

to put on, 1590s. Meaning prosper is from 1785; to advance, make progress is from 1798. That of be
friendly (with) is attested by 1816.


speed (v.)

Old English spedan (intransitive) to succeed, prosper, grow rich, advance, from the stem of speed
(n.). Compare Old Saxon spodian, Middle Dutch spoeden hasten, Old High German spuoton to succeed,
prosper, German sputen make haste, hurry. Meaning to go hastily from place to place, move rapidly is
attested from c.1200. Transitive meaning cause to advance toward success is from mid-13c.; that of
send forth with quickness, give a high speed to is first recorded 1560s; that of to increase the
work rate of (usually with up) is from 1856. Meaning drive an automobile too fast is from 1908.
Related: Speeded; sped; speeding.


flower (v.)

c.1200, be vigorous, prosper, thrive, from flower (n.). Of a plant or bud, to blossom, c.1300.
Related: Flowered; flowering.


goddamn

late 14c., from god + damn.   Mais, fussent-ils [les anglais] cent mille Goddem de plus qu'a
present, ils n'auront pas ce royaume. [Joan of Arc, 1431, quoted in Prosper de Barante's Histoire
des ducs de Bourgogne]   Goddammes was the nickname given by Puritans to Cavaliers, in consequence
of the latter's supposed frequent employment of that oath.


sperate (adj.)

of debts, having some likelihood of recovery, 1550s, from Latin speratus, past participle of sperare
to hope, denominative of spes hope, from PIE *spe-is-, from root spe- (1) to thrive, prosper (see
speed (n.)).


Terpsichore (n.)

the muse of the dance, Greek Terpsikhore, literally enjoyment of dance, from terpein to delight
(from PIE root *terp- to satisfy; cognates: Sanskrit trpyati takes one's fill, Lithuanian tarpstu to
thrive, prosper) + khoros dance, chorus (see chorus).


succeed (v.)

late 14c., intransitive and transitive, come next after, follow after another; take the place of
another, be elected or chosen for a position, from Old French succeder to follow on (14c.) and
directly from Latin succedere come after, follow after; go near to; come under; take the place of,
also go from under, mount up, ascend, hence get on well, prosper, be victorious, from sub next to,
after (see sub-) + cedere go, move (see cede).    Meaning to continue, endure is from early 15c. The
sense of turn out well, have a favorable result in English is first recorded late 15c., with
ellipsis of adverb (succeed well). Of persons, to be successful, from c.1500. Related: Succeeded;
succeeding.


rise (v.)

Old English risan to rise, rise from sleep, get out of bed; stand up, rise to one's feet; get up
from table; rise together; be fit, be proper (usually arisan; class I strong verb; past tense ras,
past participle risen), from Proto-Germanic *us-risanan to go up (cognates: Old Norse risa, Old
Saxon risan, Gothic urreisan to rise, Old High German risan to rise, flow, German reisen to travel,
originally to rise for a journey).    From c.1200 as move from a lower to a higher position, move
upward; increase in number or amount; rise in fortune, prosper; become prominent; also rise from the
dead. Meaning come into existence, originate; result (from) is mid-13c. From early 14c. as rebel,
revolt; also occur, happen, come to pass; take place. Related to raise (v.). Related: Rose; risen.


speed (n.)

Old English sped success, a successful course; prosperity, riches, wealth; luck; opportunity,
advancement, from Proto-Germanic *spodiz (cognates: Old Saxon spod success, Dutch spoed haste,
speed, Old High German spuot success, Old Saxon spodian to cause to succeed, Middle Dutch spoeden,
Old High German spuoten to haste), from PIE *spo-ti-, from root *spe- (1) to thrive, prosper
(cognates: Sanskrit sphayate increases, Latin sperare to hope, Old Church Slavonic spechu endeavor,
Lithuanian speju to have leisure).    Meaning rapidity of movement, quickness, swiftness emerged in
late Old English (at first usually adverbially, in dative plural, as in spedum feran). Meaning rate
of motion or progress (whether fast or slow) is from c.1200. Meaning gear of a machine is attested
from 1866. Meaning methamphetamine, or a related drug, first attested 1967, from its effect on
users.   Speed limit is from 1879 (originally of locomotives); speed-trap is from 1908. Speed bump
is 1975; figurative sense is 1990s. Full speed is recorded from late 14c. Speed reading first
attested 1965. Speedball mix of cocaine and morphine or heroin is recorded from 1909.


