prosperous (adj.)

early 15c., tending to bring success, from prosper + -ous, or else from obsolete Middle French
prospereus (15c.), from prosperer. The sense of flourishing is first recorded late 15c.


fortunate (adj.)

late 14c., from Latin fortunatus prospered, prosperous; lucky, happy, past participle of fortunare
to make prosperous, from fortuna (see fortune). Fortunate Islands mythical abode of the blessed
dead, in the Western Ocean, early 15c., translates Latin Fortunatae Insulae.


well-off (adj.)

1733, comfortable,  from well (adv.) + off. Meaning prosperous, not poor is recorded from 1849.


wealthy (adj.)

late 14c., happy, prosperous, from wealth + -y (2). Meaning rich, opulent is from early 15c. Noun
meaning wealthy persons collectively is from late 14c.


uptown (adv.)

1802, to or in the higher or upper portion of a town, from up (adv.) + town (n.). As an adjective
from 1838. As this usually was the residential portion of a town (especially a port) the word had
overtones of residential quarter as opposed to commercial and industrial district. As a noun from
1946, often meaning more prosperous area of town.


exurb (n.)

the outer, prosperous ring of the suburbs, 1955, American English, from exurban (adj.), by 1838 (it
seems to have arisen in the writings of the reform movement focused on getting cemeteries out of
cities), from ex- + -urb, on model of suburb. Related: Exurbanite; exurbia.


speedy (adj.)

Old English spedig prosperous, wealthy, from speed (n.) + -y (2). Meaning moving swiftly is from
late 14c. Related: Speedily; speediness. Speedy Gonzales, Warner Brothers studios talking cartoon
mouse, debuted in a 1953 short directed by Bob McKimson.


prosper (v.)

mid-14c., from Old French prosperer (14c.) and directly from Latin prosperare cause to succeed,
render happy, from prosperus favorable, fortunate, prosperous, perhaps literally agreeable to one's
wishes, traditionally regarded as from Old Latin pro spere according to expectation, according to
one's hope, from pro for + ablative of spes hope, from PIE root *spe- to flourish, succeed, thrive,
prosper (see speed (n.)).


flourish (v.)

c.1300, to blossom, grow, from Old French floriss-, stem of florir blossom, flower, bloom, flourish,
from Latin florere to bloom, blossom, flower, figuratively to flourish, be prosperous, from flos a
flower (see flora).    Metaphoric sense of thrive is mid-14c. Meaning to brandish (a weapon) first
attested late 14c. Related: Flourished; flourishing.


well (adv.)

in a satisfactory manner, Old English wel abundantly, very, very much; indeed, to be sure; with good
reason; nearly, for the most part, from Proto-Germanic *welo- (cognates: Old Saxon wela, Old Norse
vel, Old Frisian wel, Dutch wel, Old High German wela, German wohl, Gothic waila well), from PIE
root *wel- (2) to wish, will (cognates: Sanskrit prati varam at will, Old Church Slavonic vole well,
Welsh gwell better, Latin velle to wish, will, Old English willan to wish; see will (v.)).    Also
used in Old English as an interjection and an expression of surprise. The adjective was in Old
English in the sense in good fortune, happy, from the adverb; sense of satisfactory is from late
14c.; agreeable to wish or desire is from mid-15c.; in good health, not ailing is from 1550s. Well-
to-do prosperous is recorded from 1825.


happy (adj.)

late 14c., lucky, favored by fortune, prosperous; of events, turning out well, from hap (n.) chance,
fortune + -y (2). Sense of very glad first recorded late 14c. Ousted Old English eadig (from ead
wealth, riches) and ges&aelig;lig, which has become silly. Meaning greatly pleased and content is
from 1520s. Old English bli&eth;e happy survives as blithe. From Greek to Irish, a great majority of
the European words for happy at first meant lucky. An exception is Welsh, where the word used first
meant wise.    Used in World War II and after as a suffix (as in bomb-happy, flak-happy) expressing
dazed or frazzled from stress. Happy medium is from 1778. Happy ending in the literary sense
recorded from 1756. Happy as a clam (1630s) was originally happy as a clam in the mud at high tide,
when it can't be dug up and eaten. Happy hunting ground, the reputed Indian paradise, is attested
from 1840, American English. Related: Happier; happiest.


silly (adj.)

Old English ges&aelig;lig happy, fortuitous, prosperous (related to s&aelig;l happiness), from
Proto-Germanic *s&aelig;ligas (cognates: Old Norse s&aelig;ll happy, Old Saxon salig, Middle Dutch
salich, Old High German salig, German selig blessed, happy, blissful, Gothic sels good,
kindhearted), from PIE *sele- of good mood; to favor, from root *sel- (2) happy, of good mood; to
favor (cognates: Latin solari to comfort, Greek hilaros cheerful, gay, merry, joyous).    This is
one of the few instances in which an original long e (ee) has become shortened to i. The same change
occurs in breeches, and in the American pronunciation of been, with no change in spelling. [Century
Dictionary]    The word's considerable sense development moved from happy to blessed to pious, to
innocent (c.1200), to harmless, to pitiable (late 13c.), weak (c.1300), to feeble in mind, lacking
in reason, foolish (1570s). Further tendency toward stunned, dazed as by a blow (1886) in knocked
silly, etc. Silly season in journalism slang is from 1861 (August and September, when newspapers
compensate for a lack of hard news by filling up with trivial stories). Silly Putty trademark claims
use from July 1949.


merry (adj.)

Old English myrge pleasing, agreeable, pleasant, sweet; pleasantly, melodiously, from Proto-Germanic
*murgijaz, which probably originally meant short-lasting, (compare Old High German murg short,
Gothic gamaurgjan to shorten), from PIE *mreghu- short (see brief (adj.)). The only exact cognate
for meaning outside English was Middle Dutch mergelijc joyful.    Connection to pleasure is likely
via notion of making time fly, that which makes the time seem to pass quickly (compare German
Kurzweil pastime, literally a short time; Old Norse skemta to amuse, entertain, amuse oneself, from
skamt, neuter of skammr short). There also was a verbal form in Old English, myrgan be merry,
rejoice. For vowel evolution, see bury (v.).Bot vchon enle we wolde were fyf, &thorn;e mo &thorn;e
myryer. [c.1300]The word had much wider senses in Middle English, such as pleasant-sounding (of
animal voices), fine (of weather), handsome (of dress), pleasant-tasting (of herbs). Merry-bout an
incident of sexual intercourse was low slang from 1780. Merry-begot illegitimate (adj.), bastard
(n.) is from 1785. Merrie England (now frequently satirical or ironic) is 14c. meri ingland,
originally in a broader sense of bountiful, prosperous. Merry Monday was a 16c. term for the Monday
before Shrove Tuesday (Mardi Gras).


