prototype (n.)

c.1600, from French prototype (16c.) and directly from Medieval Latin prototypus original,
primitive, from Greek prototypon a first or primitive form, noun use of neuter singular of
prototypos original, primitive, from protos first (see proto-) + typos impression, mold, pattern
(see type (n.)). In English from 1590s as prototypon.


prototypical (adj.)

1640s, from prototype + -ical.


blimp (n.)

1916, of obscure origin, many claimants. One of the weird coinages of the airmen [Weekley]. Common
theory is that it is from designers' prototype nickname Type B-limp, in the sense of without
internal framework, as opposed to Type A-rigid; thus see limp (adj.).


Xanthippe

also (incorrectly) Xantippe, late 16c., spouse of Socrates (5c. B.C.E.), the prototype of the
quarrelsome, nagging wife. The name is related to the masc. proper name Xanthippos, a compound of
xanthos yellow (see xantho-) + hippos horse (see equine).


idea (n.)

late 14c., archetype of a thing in the mind of God; Platonic `idea,' from Latin idea idea, and in
Platonic philosophy archetype, from Greek idea ideal prototype, literally the look of a thing (as
opposed to the reality); form; kind, sort, nature, from idein to see, from PIE *wid-es-ya-, suffixed
form of root *weid- to see (see vision). Sense of result of thinking first recorded 1640s.    Men of
one idea, like a hen with one chicken, and that a duckling. [Thoreau, Walden]   Id&eacute;e fixe
(1836) is from French, literally fixed idea.


pilot (n.)

1510s, one who steers a ship, from Middle French pillote (16c.), from Italian piloto, supposed to be
an alteration of Old Italian pedoto, which usually is said to be from Medieval Greek *pedotes
rudder, helmsman, from Greek pedon steering oar, related to pous (genitive podos) foot (see foot
(n.)). Change of -d- to -l- in Latin (Sabine -l-) parallels that in odor/olfactory; see lachrymose.
Sense extended 1848 to one who controls a balloon, and 1907 to one who flies an airplane. As an
adjective, 1788 as pertaining to a pilot; from 1928 as serving as a prototype. Thus the noun pilot
meaning pilot episode (etc.), attested from 1962. Pilot light is from 1890.


Frisbee

1957, trademark registered 1959 by Wham-O Co., the prototype modeled on pie tins from Mrs. Frisbie's
Pies, made by the Frisbie Bakery of Bridgeport, Connecticut, U.S. Middlebury College students began
tossing them around in the 1930s (though Yale and Princeton also claim to have discovered their
aerodynamic qualities).  Thirteen years ago the Wham-O Manufacturing Company of San Gabriel, Calif.,
... brought out the first Frisbee. Wham-O purchased the rights from a Los Angeles building inspector
named Fred Morrison, who in turn had been inspired by the airworthy pie tins of the Frisbie Bakery
in Bridgeport, Conn. (which went out of business in March of 1958). He changed the spelling to avoid
legal problems. [Sports Illustrated, Aug. 3, 1970]  The family name is attested in English records
from 1226, from a place name in Leicestershire (Frisby on the Wreak), attested from 1086, from Old
Danish, meaning farmstead or village of the Frisians.


dude (n.)

1883, fastidious man, New York City slang of unknown origin; recent research suggests it is a
shortening of Yankee Doodle, based on the song's notion of foppish, over-fastidious male (compare
macaroni). The vogue word of 1883, originally used in reference to the devotees of the aesthetic
craze, later applied to city slickers, especially Easterners vacationing in the West (as in dude
ranch, first recorded 1921).    Now, tenderfoot is not to be construed as the Western equivalent of
that much evolved and more abused specimen of mankind, familiarly styled dude. For even the Montana
cowboy recognizes the latter. Not that he has ever seen the true prototype of a class that was
erstwhile so numerous among us. But he is convinced that a person caught in the act of wearing a
white linen collar, and who looks as though he might have recently shaved or washed his face, must
be a dude, true and proper. [Random Notes and Observations of a Trip through the Great Northwest,
The Medical Record, Oct. 20, 1883]    Application to any male is recorded by 1966, U.S., originally
in Black English.


Charles&#039;s Wain (n.)

Old English Carles w&aelig;gn, a star-group associated in medieval times with Charlemagne, but
originally with the nearby bright star Arcturus, which is linked by folk etymology to Latin Arturus
Arthur. Which places the seven-star asterism at the crux of the legendary association (or confusion)
of Arthur and Charlemagne. Evidence from Dutch (cited in Grimm, Teutonic Mythology) suggests that it
might originally have been Woden's wagon. More recent names for it are the Plough (by 15c., chiefly
British) and the Dipper (19c., chiefly American).    The seven brights stars in the modern
constellation Ursa Major have borne a dual identity in Western history at least since Homer's time,
being seen as both a wagon and a bear: as in Latin plaustrum freight-wagon, ox cart and arctos bear,
both used of the seven-star pattern, as were equivalent Greek amaxa (Attic hamaxa) and arktos.
The identification with a wagon is easy to see, with four stars as the body and three as the pole.
The identification with a bear is more difficult, as the figure has a tail longer than its body. As
Allen writes, The conformation of the seven stars in no way resembles the animal,--indeed the
contrary .... But he suggests the identification may have arisen from Aristotle's idea that its
prototype was the only creature that dared invade the frozen north. The seven stars never were below
the horizon in the latitude of the Mediterranean in Homeric and classical times (though not today,
due to precession of the equinoxes). See also Arctic for the identification of the bear and the
north in classical times.     A variety of French and English sources from the early colonial period
independently note that many native North American tribes in the northeast had long seen the seven-
star group as a bear tracked by three hunters (or a hunter and his two dogs).    Among the Teutonic
peoples, it seems to have been only a wagon, not a bear. A 10c. Anglo-Saxon astronomy manual uses
the Greek-derived Aretos, but mentions that the unlearned call it Charles's Wain:    Arheton hatte
an tungol on nor&eth; d&aelig;le, se haef&eth; seofon steorran, &amp; is for &eth;i o&thorn;rum
naman ge-hatan septemtrio, &thorn;one hata&eth; l&aelig;wede meon carles-w&aelig;n. [Anglo-Saxon
Manual of Astronomy]    [Septemtrio, the seven oxen, was another Roman name.] The star picture was
not surely identified as a bear in English before late 14c.    The unlearned of today are corrected
that the seven stars are not the Great Bear but form only a part of that large constellation. But
those who applied the name Bear apparently did so originally only to these seven stars, and from
Homer's time down to Thales, the Bear meant just the seven stars. From Rome to Anglo-Saxon England
to Arabia to India, ancient astronomy texts mention a supposed duplicate constellation to the
northern bear in the Southern Hemisphere, never visible from the north. This perhaps is based on
sailors' tales of the Southern Cross.


