protuberance (n.)

1640s, from Late Latin protuberantem (nominative protuberans), present participle of protuberare to
swell, bulge, grow forth, from Latin pro- forward (see pro-) + tuber lump, swelling (see tuber).


bum (n.1)

buttocks, late 14c., probably onomatop&#339;ic, to be compared with other words of similar sound and
with the general sense of 'protuberance, swelling.'  [OED]


bleb (n.)

c.1600, blister or swelling, imitative. Also used for bubble (1640s), protuberance on a cell surface
(1962).


bump (n.)

1590s, protuberance caused by a blow; 1610s as a dull, solid blow; see bump (v.). The dancer's bump
and grind attested from 1940.


crop (n.)

Old English cropp bird's craw, also head or top of a sprout or herb. The common notion is
protuberance. Cognate with Old High German kropf, Old Norse kroppr. Meaning harvest product is
c.1300, probably through the verbal meaning cut off the top of a plant (c.1200).


boss (n.2)

protuberance, button, c.1300, from Old French boce a hump, swelling, tumor (12c., Modern French
bosse), from either Frankish *botija or Vulgar Latin *bottia, both of uncertain origin.


protuberant (adj.)

1640s, from French protub&#233;rant (16c.) and directly from Late Latin protuberantem (moninative
protuberans), present participle of protuberare to swell, bulge out (see protuberance). Related:
Protuberantly.


papilla (n.)

plural papillae, 1690s, nipple, from Latin papilla nipple, diminutive of papula swelling (see pap
(n.2)). Meaning nipple-like protuberance attested from 1713.


bunch (n.)

early 14c., protuberance on the body, swelling, perhaps echoic of the sound of hitting and connected
to bump (compare, possibly in similar relationship, hump/hunch).    The sense of cluster is mid-
15c.; connection with the earlier sense is obscure, and this may be a separate word, perhaps through
a nasalized form of Old French bouge (2), 15c., from Flemish boudje diminutive of boud bundle.
Meaning a lot, a group is from 1620s.


snag (n.)

1570s, stump of a tree, branch, of Scandinavian origin, compare Old Norse snagi clothes peg, snaga a
kind of ax, snag-hyrndr snag-cornered, with sharp points. The ground sense seems to be a sharp
protuberance. The meaning sharp or jagged projection is first recorded 1580s; especially tree or
branch in water and partly near the surface, so as to be dangerous to navigation (1807). The
figurative meaning obstacle, impediment is from 1829.


eminence (n.)

c.1400, projection, protuberance; early 15c., high or exalted position, from Old French eminence or
directly from Latin eminentia prominence, eminence, from eminentem (nominative eminens) excellent,
prominent (see eminent).    As a title of honor (now only of cardinals) it is attested from 1650s.
The original &Eacute;minence grise (French, literally gray eminence) was Fran&ccedil;ois Leclerc du
Trembley (1577-1638), confidential agent of Richelieu.


shad (n.)

Old English sceadd shad, important food fish in the Atlantic, possibly from Scandinavian (Norwegian
dialectal skadd small whitefish); but compare Welsh ysgadan (plural), Irish and Gaelic sgadan
herring. OED says Low German schade may be from English.    Its importance suggested by its use in
forming the common names of U.S. East Coast plants and wildlife whose active period coincides with
the running of the shad up rivers, such as shad-bird, shad-bush, shad-flower, shad-fly, shad-frog.
From the shape of the fish comes shad-bellied, 1832 in reference to persons, having little abdominal
protuberance; of coats (1842) sloping apart in front, cut away, especially in reference to the
characteristic garb of male Quakers.


knot (n.)

Old English cnotta intertwining of ropes, cords, etc., from Proto-Germanic *knuttan- (cognates: Low
German kn&uuml;tte, Old Frisian knotta knot, Dutch knot, Old High German knoto, German Knoten,
perhaps also Old Norse knutr knot, knob). Figurative sense of difficult problem was in Old English
(compare Gordian knot). Symbolic of the bond of wedlock, early 13c. As an ornament of dress, first
attested c.1400. Meaning thickened part or protuberance on tissue of a plant is from late 14c. The
nautical unit of measure (1630s) is from the practice of attaching knotted string to the log line.
The ship's speed can be measured by the number of knots that play out while the sand glass is
running.The distance between the knots on the log-line should contain 1/120 of a mile, supposing the
glass to run exactly half a minute. [Jorge Juan and Antonio de Ulloa, A Voyage to South America
1760]


