proverbial (adj.)

early 15c. (implied in proverbially.), from Late Latin proverbialis pertaining to a proverb, from
proverbium (see proverb).


proverb (n.)

c.1300, in boke of Prouerbyys, the Old Testament work, from Old French proverbe (12c.) and directly
from Latin proverbium a common saying, old adage, maxim, literally words put forward, from pro-
forth (see pro-) + verbum word (see verb). Used generally from late 14c. The Book of Proverbs in Old
English was cwidboc, from cwide speech, saying, proverb, homily, related to cwiddian to talk, speak,
say, discuss; cwiddung speech, saying, report.


adage (n.)

brief, familiar proverb, 1540s, Middle French adage, from Latin adagium adage, proverb, apparently
from adagio, from ad- to (see ad-) + *agi-, root of aio I say, from PIE *ag- to speak. But Tucker
thinks the second element is rather ago set in motion, drive, urge.


cold feet (n.)

1893, American English; the presumed Italian original (avegh minga frecc i pee) is a Lombard proverb
meaning to have no money, but some of the earliest English usages refer to gamblers, so a connection
is possible.


byword (n.)

also by-word, Old English biword proverb, formed on the model of Latin proverbium or Greek parabole.
Meaning something that has become proverbial is from 1530s.


saying (n.)

utterance, recitation, action of the verb 'say,'  c.1300, verbal noun from say (v.); meaning
something that has been said (usually by someone thought important) is from c.1300; sense of a
proverb is first attested mid-15c.   <b>&#199;a va sans dire</b>, a familiar French locution, whose
English equivalent might be that is a matter of course, or that may be taken for granted. But
recently it has become the tendency to translate it literally, that goes without saying, and these
words, though originally uncouth and almost unmeaning to the unpractised ear, are gradually
acquiring the exact meaning of the French. [Walsh, 1892]


bark (n.3)

dog sound, Old English beorc, from bark (v.). Paired and compared with bite (n.) since at least
1660s; the proverb is older: Timid dogs bark worse than they bite was in Latin (Canis timidus
vehementius latrat quam mordet, Quintius Curtius).


verve (n.)

1690s, special talent in writing, enthusiasm in what pertains to art and literature, from French
verve enthusiasm (especially pertaining to the arts), in Old French caprice, odd humor, proverb,
saying; messenger's report (12c.), probably from Gallo-Roman *verva, from Latin verba (whimsical)
words, plural of verbum word (see verb). Meaning mental vigor is first recorded 1803.


roost (v.)

1520s, from roost (n.). Related: Roosted; roosting. Chickens come home to roost in reference to
eventual consequences of bad actions attested from 1824; the original proverb seems to have been
curses, like chickens, come home to roost.


shears (n.)

large scissors, Old English scearra (plural) shears, scissors, from Proto-Germanic *sker- to cut
(cognates: Middle Dutch schaer, Old High German scara, German Schere; see shear (v.)). In 17c., also
a device for raising the masts of ships (1620s). As scissors, OED labels it Scottish and dialectal.
Chalk is no shears (1640s) was noted as a Scottish proverb expressing the gap between planning and
doing.


Boeotian (adj.)

1590s, ignorant, dull, from Boeotia, district around Thebes in ancient Greece (said to have been so
called for its cattle pastures; Greek bous = ox), whose inhabitants were characterized as
proverbially dull and countrified by their neighbors, the Athenians. The Boeotians presumably held
reciprocal opinions, but their great writers, Plutarch and Pindar, though patriots, are full of
praise for Athenian deeds and institutions.    Though his aim was to vindicate Boeotia, [Pindar] has
probably done her a disservice, in that he has helped to immortalise the scurrilous proverb
&#914;&#959;&#953;&#969;&#964;&#943;&#945; &#973;&#962;, which he wished to confute. ... If left to
itself, the slander might have passed into oblivion long ago. [W. Rhys Roberts, The Ancient
Boeotians, 1895]


early (adv.)

Old English &aelig;rlic early, from &aelig;r soon, ere (see ere) + -lice, adverbial suffix (see -ly
(2)). Compare Old Norse arliga early. The early bird of the proverb is from 1670s. Related: Earlier;
earliest.


saw (n.2)

proverb, saying, maxim, Old English sagu saying, discourse, speech, study, tradition, tale, from
Proto-Germanic *saga-, *sagon- (cognates: Middle Low German, Middle Dutch sage, zage, German Sage
legend, fable, saga, myth, tradition, Old Norse saga story, tale, saga), from PIE root *sek(w)- to
say, utter (see say (v.)).


omelet (n.)

1610s, from French omelette (16c.), metathesis of alemette (14c.), from alemele omelet, literally
blade (of a knife or sword), probably a misdivision of la lemelle (mistaken as l'alemelle), from
Latin lamella thin, small plate, diminutive of lamina plate, layer (see laminate). The food so
called from its flat shape. The proverb you can't make an omelet without breaking eggs (1859)
translates French On ne saurait faire une omelette sans casser des oeufs. Middle English had hanonei
fried onions mixed with scrambled eggs (mid-15c.).


leap (v.)

c.1200, from Old English hleapan to jump, run, leap (class VII strong verb; past tense hleop, past
participle hleapen), from Proto-Germanic *hlaupan (cognates: Old Saxon hlopan, Old Norse hlaupa, Old
Frisian hlapa, Dutch lopen, Old High German hlouffan, German laufen to run, Gothic us-hlaupan to
jump up), of uncertain origin, with no known cognates beyond Germanic. Leap-frog, the children's
game, is attested by that name from 1590s; figurative use by 1704.    First loke and aftirward lepe
[proverb recorded from mid-15c.]    Related: Leaped; leaping.


cook (n.)

Old English coc, from Vulgar Latin cocus cook, from Latin coquus, from coquere to cook, prepare
food, ripen, digest, turn over in the mind from PIE root *pekw- to cook (cognates: Oscan popina
kitchen, Sanskrit pakvah cooked, Greek peptein, Lithuanian kepti to bake, roast, Old Church Slavonic
pecenu roasted, Welsh poeth cooked, baked, hot). Germanic languages had no one native term for all
types of cooking, and borrowed the Latin word (Old Saxon kok, Old High German choh, German Koch,
Swedish kock).There is the proverb, the more cooks the worse potage. [Gascoigne, 1575]


spade (n.1)

tool for digging, Old English spadu spade, from Proto-Germanic *spadan (cognates: Old Frisian spada
a spade, Middle Dutch spade a sword, Old Saxon spado, Middle Low German spade, German Spaten), from
PIE *spe-dh-, from root *spe- (2) long, flat piece of wood (cognates: Greek spathe wooden blade,
paddle, Old English spon chip of wood, splinter, Old Norse spann shingle, chip; see spoon (n.)).
A spade differs from a two-handed shovel chiefly in the form and thickness of the blade [Century
Dictionary]. To call a spade a spade use blunt language, call things by right names (1540s)
translates a Greek proverb (known to Lucian), ten skaphen skaphen legein to call a bowl a bowl, but
Erasmus mistook Greek skaphe trough, bowl for a derivative of the stem of skaptein to dig, and the
mistake has stuck [see OED].


picture (n.)

early 15c., drawing, painting, from Latin pictura painting, from pictus, past participle of pingere
to make pictures, to paint, to embroider, (see paint (v.)). Picture window is from 1938. Picture
post-card first recorded 1899. Phrase every picture tells a story first attested 1900, in
advertisements for an illustrated life of Christ. To be in (or out of) the picture in the figurative
sense dates to 1900.    Expression a picture is worth a thousand words, attested from 1918, probably
was from the publication trade (the notion that a picture was worth 1,000 words is in printers'
publications by 1911). The phrase also was in use in the form worth a million words, the form used
by American newspaper editor Arthur Brisbane (1864-1936) in an editorial much-read c.1916 titled
What is a Good Newspaper in the New York Evening Journal. In part it read, After news and humor come
good pictures. In this day of hurry we learn through the eye, and one picture may be worth a million
words. It seems to have emerged into general use via the medium of advertising (which scaled down
the number and also gave the expression its spurious origin story as a Japanese proverb or some such
thing, by 1919). Earlier various acts or deeds (and in one case the arrow) were said to be worth a
thousand words.


bear (n.)

Old English bera bear, from Proto-Germanic *beron, literally the brown (one) (cognates: Old Norse
bj&ouml;rn, Middle Dutch bere, Dutch beer, Old High German bero, German B&auml;r), from PIE *bher-
(3) bright, brown (see brown (adj.)).    Greek arktos and Latin ursus retain the PIE root word for
bear (*rtko; see Arctic), but it is believed to have been ritually replaced in the northern branches
because of hunters' taboo on names of wild animals (compare the Irish equivalent the good calf,
Welsh honey-pig, Lithuanian the licker, Russian medved honey-eater). Others connect the Germanic
word with Latin ferus wild, as if it meant the wild animal (par excellence) of the northern woods.
Symbolic of Russia since 1794. Used of uncouth persons since 1570s. Stock market meaning speculator
for a fall is 1709 shortening of bearskin jobber (from the proverb sell the bearskin before one has
caught the bear); i.e. one who sells stock for future delivery, expecting that meanwhile prices will
fall. Paired with bull from c.1720. Bear claw as a type of large pastry is from 1942, originally
chiefly western U.S.


glass (n.)

Old English gl&aelig;s glass, a glass vessel, from Proto-Germanic *glasam (cognates: Old Saxon glas,
Middle Dutch and Dutch glas, German Glas, Old Norse gler glass, looking glass, Danish glar), from
PIE *ghel- (2) to shine, with derivatives referring to bright materials and gold (cognates: Latin
glaber smooth, bald, Old Church Slavonic gladuku, Lithuanian glodus smooth), with derivatives
referring to colors and bright materials, a word that is the root of widespread words for gray,
blue, green, and yellow (such as Old English gl&aelig;r amber, Latin glaesum amber, Old Irish glass
green, blue, gray, Welsh glas blue; see glass). Sense of drinking glass is early 13c.    The glass
slipper in Cinderella is perhaps an error by Charles Perrault, translating in 1697, mistaking Old
French voir ermine, fur for verre glass. In other versions of the tale it is a fur slipper. The
proverb about people in glass houses throwing stones is attested by 1779, but earlier forms go back
to 17c.:    Who hath glass-windows of his own must take heed how he throws stones at his house. ...
He that hath a body made of glass must not throw stones at another. [John Ray, Handbook of Proverbs,
1670]


straw (n.)

Old English streaw (rare) stems or stalks of certain species of grains, apparently literally that
which is scattered or strewn, related to streowian (see strew), from Proto-Germanic *strawam that
which is scattered (cognates: Old Norse stra, Danish straa, Swedish str&#229;, Old Saxon stro, Old
Frisian stre, Old Dutch, Old High German stro, Dutch stroo, German Stroh straw), from PIE *stere- to
spread (see structure (n.)). The notion perhaps is of dried grain stalks strewn on a floor as
carpeting or bedding.    As a type of what is trifling or unimportant, attested from late 13c.
Meaning hollow tube through which a drink is sucked is recorded from 1851. To draw straws as a means
of deciding something is recorded from 1779 (the custom probably is older). As an adjective, made of
straw, mid-15c.; hence false, sham. Straw poll is from 1932; earlier straw vote (1866). Straw hat
first attested mid-15c. To clutch (or grasp or catch) at straws (1748) is what a drowning man
proverbially would do. The last straw (1836 apart from the full phrase) is from the proverbial
image: it is the last straw that breaks the camel's back (or, less often, the mare's, the horse's,
or the elephant's), an image in use in English by 1755.    Let it not, however, be inferred that
taxation cannot be pushed too far : it is, as the Oriental proverb says, the last straw that
overloads the camel ; a small addition, if ill-timed, may overturn the whole. [The Scots Magazine,
April 1799]


