provocative (adj.)

mid-15c., eliciting, from Middle French provocatif (15c.) and directly from Late Latin provocativus
calling forth, from provocat-, past participle stem of Latin provocare (see provoke). Specifically
of sexual desire from 1620s. Related: Provocatively; provocativeness. The earliest appearance of the
word in English is as a noun meaning an aphrodisiac (early 15c.).


camp (adj.)

tasteless, 1909, homosexual slang, of uncertain origin, perhaps from mid-17c. French camper to
portray, pose (as in se camper put oneself in a bold, provocative pose); popularized 1964 by Susan
Sontag's essay Notes on Camp. Campy is attested from 1959.


hector (n.)

late 14c., a valiant warrior, 1650s as slang for a blustering, turbulent, pervicacious, noisy fellow
[Johnson], Heck for short, both in reference to the provocative character of Hektor, Trojan hero,
oldest son of Priam and Hecuba, in the Iliad. It represents Greek hektor, literally holder, stayer;
an agent noun from ekhein to have, hold, possess (see scheme). The word was used mid-1600s in
reference to London street gangs. As a proper name it is rare in England but used in Scotland to
render Gaelic Eachdonn.


bitchy (adj.)

1925, U.S. slang, sexually provocative; later (1930s) spiteful, catty, bad-tempered (usually of
females); from bitch + -y (2). Earlier in reference to male dogs though to look less rough or coarse
than usual.    Mr. Ramsay says we would now call the old dogs bitchy in face. That is because the
Englishmen have gone in for the wrong sort of forefaces in their dogs, beginning with the days when
Meersbrook Bristles and his type swept the judges off their feet and whiskers and an exaggerated
face were called for in other varieties of terriers besides the wire haired fox. [James Watson, The
Dog Book, New York, 1906]    Related: Bitchily; bitchiness.


button (n.)

c.1300 (surname Botouner button-maker attested from mid-13c.), from Old French boton a button,
originally a bud (12c., Modern French bouton), from bouter, boter to thrust, common Romanic (Spanish
boton, Italian bottone), ultimately from Germanic (see butt (v.)). Thus a button is, etymologically,
something that pushes up, or thrusts out.    Meaning point of the chin is pugilistic slang, by 1921.
A button as something you push to create an effect by closing an (electrical) circuit is attested
from 1840s. Button-pusher as deliberately annoying or provocative person is attested by 1990 (in
reference to Bill Gates, in InfoWorld magazine, Nov. 19). In the 1980s it meant photographer.


