provincial (n.)

late 14c., ecclesiastical head of a province, from provincial (adj.). From c.1600 as native or
inhabitant of a province; from 1711 as country person.


provinciality (n.)

quality or condition of being provincial, 1759, from provincial + -ity.


provincial (adj.)

late 14c., pertaining to a province, from Old French provincial belonging to a particular province
(of friars) (13c.), from Latin provincialis of a province, from provincia (see province).    Meaning
of the small towns and countryside (as opposed to the capital and urban center) is from 1630s, a
borrowed idiom from French, transferred from sense of particular to the province, hence local.
Suggestive of rude, petty, or narrow society by 1755. Classical Latin provincialis seems not to have
had this tinge. In British use, with reference to the American colonies, from 1680s.


provincialism (n.)

1820 in the political sense, local attachment as opposed to national unity, from provincial + -ism.
Meaning manners or modes of a certain province or of provinces generally (as opposed to the big city
or capital) is from 1836. Sense of a local word or usage or expression is from 1770.
PROVINCIALISM consists in:  (a) An ignorance of the manners, customs and nature of people living
outside one's own village, parish, or nation.  (b) A desire to coerce others into uniformity.  [Ezra
Pound, Provincialism the Enemy, 1917]


fast and loose

described as a cheating game played with a stick and a belt or string, so arranged that a spectator
would think he could make the latter fast by placing a stick through its intricate folds, whereas
the operator could detach it at once. [James O. Halliwell, Dictionary of Archaic and Provincial
Words, 1847]. The figurative sense (1550s) is recorded earlier than the literal (1570s).


bush league (adj.)

mean, petty, unprofessional, 1906, from baseball slang for the small-town baseball clubs below the
minor league where talent was developed (by 1903), from bush (n.) in the slang sense of rural,
provincial, which originally was not a value judgment.


gangling (adj.)

by 1812, a frequentative of gang in some sense involving looseness.    GANGLING. Tall, slender,
delicate, generally applied to plants. Warw. [James O. Halliwell, A Dictionary of Archaic and
Provincial Words, 1846]


donut (n.)

see doughnut. It turns up as an alternate spelling in U.S. as early as 1870 (Josh Billings), common
from c.1920 in names of bakeries. Halliwell (Dictionary of Archaic and Provincial Words, 1847) has
donnut a pancake made of dough instead of batter, which Bartlett (1848) writes is no doubt the same
word as the American one.


small-town (adj.)

unsophisticated, provincial, 1824, from noun phrase, from small (adj.) + town.


hick (n.)

late 14c. as a pet form of masc. proper name Richard. Meaning awkward provincial person was
established by 1700 (see rube); earlier it was the characteristic name of a hosteler, hackneyman,
etc. (late 14c.), perhaps via alliteration. The adjective is recorded by 1914.A hick town is one
where there is no place to go where you shouldn't be. [attributed to U.S. humorist Robert Quillen
(1887-1948)]


yuck (1)

exclamation of disgust, 1966, origin perhaps echoic (compare Newfoundland slang yuck to vomit, 1963;
U.S. slang yuck despised person, 1943; provincial English yuck the itch, mange, scabies). Variant
yech is by 1969.


voivode (n.)

local or provincial ruler in Transylvania, Moldavia, etc., 1560s, from Russian voevoda, originally
leader of the army, from Old Church Slavonic voji warriors + -voda leader. Compare Hungarian vajvoda
(later vajda), Serbian vojvoda, Polish wojewoda.


patois (n.)

a provincial dialect, 1640s, from French patois native or local speech (13c.), of uncertain origin,
probably from Old French patoier handle clumsily, to paw, from pate a paw, from Vulgar Latin *patta
(see patten), from notion of clumsy manner of speaking. Compare French pataud properly, a young dog
with big paws, then an awkwardly built fellow [Brachet]. Especially in reference to Jamaican English
from 1934.


waffle (v.)

1690s, to yelp, bark, frequentative of provincial waff to yelp, to bark like a puppy (1610);
possibly of imitative origin. Figurative sense of talk foolishly (c.1700) led to that of vacillate,
equivocate (1803), originally a Scottish and northern English usage. Late 17c. Scottish also had
waff act of waving, variant of waft, which might have influenced the sense. Related: Waffled;
waffler; waffling.


count (n.)

title of nobility, c.1300, from Anglo-French counte (Old French conte), from Latin comitem
(nominative comes) companion, attendant, the Roman term for a provincial governor, from com- with
(see com-) + stem of ire to go (see ion). The term was used in Anglo-French to render Old English
eorl, but the word was never truly naturalized and mainly was used with reference to foreign titles.


westernize (adj.)

also westernise, 1837, originally in reference to the U.S. West, from western + -ize.    Emigrants
from Europe have brought the peculiarities of the nations and countries from whence they have
originated, but are fast losing their national manners and feelings, and, to use a provincial term,
will soon become westernized. [J.M. Peck, A New Guide for Emigrants to the West, Boston, 1837]    In
reference to Europeanizing of Middle Eastern or Asian places and persons, from 1867. Related:
Westernized; westernizing.


wuthering (adj.)

making a sullen roar (as the wind does), Northern England dialectal variant of Scottish and
dialectal whithering rushing, whizzing, blustering, from a verb whither (late 14c.) which was used
in reference to gusts of wind and coughing fits, from Old Norse *hvi&eth;ra (related to Norwegian
kvidra to go quickly to and fro, Old English hwi&thorn;a air, breeze).    Wuthering Heights is the
name of Mr. Heathcliff's dwelling. 'Wuthering' being a significant provincial adjective, descriptive
of the atmospheric tumult to which its station is exposed, in stormy weather. [Emily Bront&#235;,
Wuthering Heights, 1847]    Charlotte also used forms of the word in her novels.


mascot (n.)

talisman, charm, 1881, from provincial French mascotte sorcerer's charm, 'faerie friend,' good luck
piece (19c.), of uncertain origin, perhaps from or related to Proven&ccedil;al mascoto sorcery,
fetish (a Narbonnese manuscript of 1233 has mascotto procuress, enchantment, bewitchment in
gambling), from masco witch, from Old Proven&ccedil;al masca, itself of unknown origin, perhaps from
Medieval Latin masca mask, specter, nightmare (see mask (n.)). Popularized by French composer Edmond
Audran's 1880 comic operetta La Mascotte, about a household fairy who gives luck to an Italian
peasant, performed in a toned-down translation in England from fall 1881.


cranky (adj.)

cross-tempered, irritable, 1807, from crank (n.) + -y (2). The evolution would be from earlier
senses of crank, such as a twist or fanciful turn of speech (1590s); inaccessible hole or crevice
(1560s). Grose's 1787 Provincial Glossary has Cranky. Ailing sickly from the dutch crank, sick, and
identifies it as a Northern word. Jamieson's Scottish dictionary (1825) has crank in a secondary
sense of hard, difficult, as in crank word, a word hard to be understood; crank job, a work attended
with difficulty, or requiring ingenuity in the execution. Related: Crankily; crankiness.   Ben. Dang
it, don't you spare him--A cross grain'd cranky toad as ever crawl'd. (etc.) [Richard Cumberland,
Lovers Resolutions, Act I, 1813]


reckon (v.)

c.1200, recenen, from Old English gerecenian to explain, relate, recount, from Proto-Germanic
*(ga)rekenojan (cognates: Old Frisian rekenia, Middle Dutch and Dutch rekenen, Old High German
rehhanon, German rechnen, Gothic rahnjan to count, reckon), from Proto-Germanic *rakina- ready,
straightforward, from PIE *reg- to move in a straight line, with derivatives meaning direct in a
straight line, rule (see regal).    Intransitive sense make a computation is from c.1300. In I
reckon, the sense is hold an impression or opinion, and the expression, used parenthetically, dates
from c.1600 and formerly was in literary use (Richardson, etc.), but came to be associated with U.S.
Southern dialect and was regarded as provincial or vulgar. Related: Reckoned; reckoning.


bastard (n.)

illegitimate child, early 13c., from Old French bastard (11c., Modern French b&acirc;tard),
acknowledged child of a nobleman by a woman other than his wife, probably from fils de bast
packsaddle son, meaning a child conceived on an improvised bed (saddles often doubled as beds while
traveling), with pejorative ending -art (see -ard). Alternative possibly is that the word is from
Proto-Germanic *banstiz barn, equally suggestive of low origin.    Not always regarded as a stigma;
the Conqueror is referred to in state documents as William the Bastard. Figurative sense of
something not pure or genuine is late 14c.; use as a vulgar term of abuse for a man is attested from
1830. As an adjective from late 14c. Among the bastard words in Halliwell-Phillipps' Dictionary of
Archaic and Provincial Words are avetrol, chance-bairn, by-blow, harecoppe, horcop, and gimbo (a
bastard's bastard).


tally (n.)

mid-15c., stick marked with notches to indicate amount owed or paid, from Anglo-French tallie (early
14c., Old French taille notch in a piece of wood signifying a debt), Anglo-Latin talea (late 12c.),
from Medieval Latin tallia, from Latin talea a cutting, rod, stick (see tailor (n.), and compare
sense history of score). Meaning a thing that matches another first recorded 1650s, from practice of
splitting a tally lengthwise across the notches, debtor and creditor each retaining one of the
halves; the usual method of keeping accounts before writing became general (the size of the notches
varied with the amount). Sports sense of a total score is from 1856. Also in 19c. British provincial
verbal expression live tally, make a tally bargain live as husband and wife without marrying.


fudge (v.)

put together clumsily or dishonestly, 1610s, perhaps an alteration of fadge make suit, fit (1570s),
of unknown origin. As an interjection meaning lies, nonsense from 1766; the noun meaning nonsense is
1791. It could be a natural extension from the verb. But Farmer suggests provincial French fuche,
feuche, an exclamation of contempt from Low German futsch = begone.  The traditional English story
traces fudge in this sense to a sailor's retort to anything considered lies or nonsense, from
Captain Fudge, who always brought home his owners a good cargo of lies [Isaac Disraeli, 1791, citing
a pamphlet from 1700]. It seems there really was a late 17c. Captain Fudge, called Lying Fudge, and
perhaps his name reinforced this form of fadge in the sense of contrive without the necessary
materials. The surname is from Fuche, a pet form of the masc. proper name Fulcher, from Germanic and
meaning literally people-army.


municipal (adj.)

1540s, from Middle French municipal, from Latin municipalis of a citizen of a free town, of a free
town, also of a petty town, provincial, from municipium free town, city whose citizens have the
privileges of Roman citizens but are governed by their own laws, from municeps citizen, inhabitant
of a free town. Second element is root of capere assume, take (see capable). First element is from
munus (plural munia) service performed for the community, duty, work, also public spectacle paid for
by the magistrate, (gladiatorial) entertainment, gift, from Old Latin moenus service, duty, burden,
from PIE *moi-n-es-, generally taken as a suffixed form of root *mei- (1) to change, go, move
(Watkins; see mutable); but Tucker says more probably from the other PIE root   *mei- meaning bind,
so that munia = obligations and communis = bound together.


shoddy (adj.)

1862, having a delusive appearance of high quality, a Northern word from the American Civil War in
reference to the quality of government supplies for the armies, from earlier noun meaning rag-wool,
wool made of woolen waste and old rags (1832), perhaps a Yorkshire provincial word, of uncertain
origin.    Originally used for padding, English manufacturers began making coarse wearing clothes
from it, and when new it looked like broad-cloth but the gloss quickly wore off, giving the stuff a
bad reputation as a cheat. The 1860 U.S. census of manufactures notes import of more than 6 million
pounds of it, which was much used in the manufacture of army and navy cloths and blankets in the
United States according to an 1865 government report.    The Days of Shoddy, as the reader will
readily anticipate, are the opening months of the present war, at which time the opprobrious name
first came into general use as a designation for swindling and humbug of every character; and
nothing more need be said to indicate the scope of this novel. [Henry Morford, The Days of Shoddy: A
Novel of the Great Rebellion in 1861, Philadelphia, 1863]    Related: Shoddily; shoddiness.


wrong (adj.)

late Old English, twisted, crooked, wry, from Old Norse rangr, earlier *wrangr crooked, wry, wrong,
from Proto-Germanic *wrang- (cognates: Danish vrang crooked, wrong, Middle Dutch wranc, Dutch wrang
sour, bitter, literally that which distorts the mouth), from PIE *wrengh-, variant of *wergh- to
turn (see wring).    Sense of not right, bad, immoral, unjust developed by c.1300. Wrong thus is
etymologically a negative of right (adj.1), which is from Latin rectus, literally straight. Latin
pravus was literally crooked, but most commonly wrong, bad; and other words for crooked also have
meant wrong in Italian and Slavic. Compare French tort wrong, injustice, from Latin tortus twisted.
As an adverb from c.1200. Wrong-headed first recorded 1732. To get up on the wrong side (of the bed)
be in a bad mood is recorded from 1801, according to OED, from its supposed influence on one's
temper; it appears in Halliwell's Dictionary of Archaic and Provincial Words in 1846, but doesn't
seem to have been used much generally before late 1870s. To be on the wrong side of a given age,
older than, is from 1660s. Wrong side of the road (that reservbed for oncoming traffic) is by 1838.
To be from (or on) the wrong side of the tracks from the poor part of town is from 1921, American
English.


raven (n.)

Old English hr&aelig;fn (Mercian), hrefn; hr&aelig;fn (Northumbrian, West Saxon), from Proto-
Germanic *khrabanas (cognates: Old Norse hrafn, Danish ravn, Dutch raaf, Old High German hraban,
German Rabe raven, Old English hroc rook), from PIE root *ker- (2), imitative of harsh sounds
(cognates: Latin crepare to creak, clatter, cornix crow, corvus raven; Greek korax raven, korone
crow; Old Church Slavonic kruku raven; Lithuanian krauklys crow). Raven mythology shows considerable
homogeneity throughout the whole area [northern regions of the northern hemisphere] in spite of
differences in detail. The Raven peeps forth from the mists of time and the thickets of mythology,
as a bird of slaughter, a storm bird, a sun and fire bird, a messenger, an oracular figure and a
craftsman or culture hero. [Edward A. Armstrong, The Folklore of Birds, 1958]Old English also used
hr&aelig;mn, hremm. The raven standard was the flag of the Danish Vikings. The Quran connects the
raven with Cain's murder of Abel; but in Christianity the bird plays a positive role in the stories
of St. Benedict, St. Paul the Hermit, St. Vincent, etc. It was anciently believed to live to great
old age, but the ancients also believed it wanting in parental care. The vikings, like Noah, were
said to have used the raven to discover land. When uncertain of their course they let one loose, and
steered the vessel in his track, deeming that the land lay in the direction of his flight; if he
returned to the ship, it was supposed to be at a distance [Charles Swainson, The Folk Lore and
Provincial Names of British Birds, London, 1886].


