providence (n.)

late 14c., foresight, prudent anticipation, from Old French providence divine providence, foresight
(12c.) and directly from Latin providentia foresight, precaution, foreknowledge, from providentem
(nominative providens), present participle of providere (see provide).   Providence (usually
capitalized) God as beneficent caretaker, first recorded c.1600, from earlier use of the word for
God's beneficient care or guidance (14c.), short for divine providence, etc. The noun in Latin
occasionally had a similar sense.


providential (adj.)

1610s, pertaining to foresifght (implied in providentially); 1640s as pertaining to divine
providence, from Latin providentia (see providence) + -al (1). Meaning by divine interposition is
recorded from 1719.


Masonite

1926, proprietary name of a type of fiberboard, by Mason Fibre Company, Laurel, Mississippi, U.S. As
a word in mineralogy for a type of chloritoid, it honors Owen Mason of Providence, R.I.


photostat (n.)

1909, a type of copying machine (trademark Commercial Camera Company, Providence, R.I.) whose name
became a generic noun and verb (1914) for photocopy; from photo- + stat.


encouragement (n.)

1560s, from encourage + -ment, or from Middle French encoragement.  As a general rule, Providence
seldom vouchsafes to mortals any more than just that degree of encouragement which suffices to keep
them at a reasonably full exertion of their powers. [Hawthorne, House of Seven Gables]


purveyance (n.)

c.1300, from Anglo-French purveance and directly from Old French porveance, from Latin providentia
(see providence).


improvidence (n.)

lack of foresight, rashness, mid-15c., from Latin improvidentia, from assimilated form of in- not
(see in- (1)) + providentia (see providence).


prudence (n.)

mid-14c. (c.1200 as a surname), mid-14c., intelligence; discretion, foresight; wisdom to see what is
suitable or profitable; also one of the four cardinal virtues, wisdom to see what is virtuous; from
Old French prudence (13c.) and directly from Latin prudentia a foreseeing, foresight, sagacity,
practical judgment, contraction of providentia foresight (see providence). Secondary sense of wisdom
(late 14c.) is preserved in jurisprudence.


manifest (adj.)

late 14c., clearly revealed, from Old French manifest evident, palpable, (12c.), or directly from
Latin manifestus plainly apprehensible, clear, apparent, evident; of offenses, proved by direct
evidence; of offenders, caught in the act, probably from manus hand (see manual) + -festus struck
(compare second element of infest).  Other nations have tried to check ... the fulfillment of our
manifest destiny to overspread the Continent allotted by Providence for the free development of our
yearly multiplying millions. [John O'Sullivan (1813-1895), U.S. Magazine &amp; Democratic Review,
July 1845]  The phrase apparently is O'Sullivan's coinage; the notion is as old as the republic.


loop (v.)

to form a loop, c.1400, draw (a leash through a ring), from loop (n.). Related: Looped; looping.
Slang looped drunk is from 1934. Loop the loop (1900) originally was in reference to roller-coasters
at amusement parks.    Loop-the-Loop is the name of a new entertainment which goes further in the
way of tempting Providence than anything yet invented. The Loop is an immense circle of track in the
air. A car on a mimic railway shoots down a very steep incline, and is impelled around the inner
side of this loop. ... The authorities at Coney Island are said to have prohibited looping-the-loop
because women break their corset strings in their efforts to catch their breath as they sweep down
the incline, and moreover, a young man is reported to have ruptured a blood vessel in his liver.
[Philadelphia Medical Journal, Aug. 10, 1901]


kamikaze (n.)

suicide flier, 1945, Japanese, literally divine wind, from kami god, providence, divine (see kami) +
kaze wind. Originally the name given in folklore to a typhoon which saved Japan from Mongol invasion
by wrecking Kublai Khan's fleet (August 1281). The attacks began in October 1944 off the
Philippines.    As an aside, at war's end, the Japanese had, by actual count, a total of 16,397
aircraft still available for service, including 6,374 operational fighters and bombers, and if they
had used only the fighters and bombers for kamikaze missions, they might have realized,
additionally, 900 ships sunk or damaged and 22,000 sailors killed or injured. In fact, however, the
Japanese had outfitted many aircraft, including trainers, as potential suicide attackers. As
intelligence estimates indicated, the Japanese believed they could inflict at least 50,000
casualties to an invasion force by kamikaze attacks alone. [Richard P. Hallion, Military Technology
and the Pacific War, 1995]    As an adjective by 1946.


Annuit Coeptis

on the Great Seal of the United States of America, condensed by Charles Thompson, designer of the
seal in its final form, from Latin Juppiter omnipotes, audacibus annue coeptis All-powerful Jupiter
favor (my) daring undertakings, line 625 of book IX of Virgil's Aeneid. The words also appear in
Virgil's Georgics, book I, line 40: Da facilem cursam, atque audacibus annue coeptis Give (me) an
easy course, and favor (my) daring undertakings. Thompson changed the imperative annue to annuit,
the third person singular form of the same verb in either the present tense or the perfect tense.
The motto also lacks a subject.    The motto is often translated as He (God) is favorable to our
undertakings, but this is not the only possible translation. Thomson wrote: The pyramid signifies
Strength and Duration: The Eye over it &amp; Motto allude to the many signal interpositions of
providence in favour of the American cause. The original design (by William Barton) showed the
pyramid and the motto Deo Favente Perennis God favoring through the years.


