provision (v.)

to supply with provisions, 1787, from provision (n.). Related: Provisioned; provisioning.


provisional (adj.)

as a temporary arrangement for the present, c.1600, from provision (n.) + -al (1), or else from
Middle French provisionnal (15c.), from Old French provision. The notion is of something that will
provide for present needs. Related: Provisionally.


provision (n.)

late 14c., a providing beforehand, action of arranging in advance (originally in reference to
ecclesiastical appointments made before the position was vacant), from Old French provision
precaution, care (early 14c.), from Latin provisionem (nominative provisio) a foreseeing, foresight,
preparation, prevention, noun of action from past participle stem of providere look ahead (see
provide). Meaning something provided is attested from late 15c.; specific sense of supply of food is
from c.1600.


provisions (n.)

supply of food, c.1600; see provision.


provisioner (n.)

1814, agent noun from provision (v.).


improvision (n.)

want of forethought, 1640s, from assimilated form of in- (1) not, opposite of + provision.


entertainment (n.)

1530s, provision for support of a retainer; manner of social behavior, now obsolete, along with
other 16c. senses; from entertain + -ment. Meaning the amusement of someone is from 1610s; that
which entertains is from 1650s; public performance or display meant to amuse is from 1727.


chop-house (n.)

1680s, a mean house of entertainment, where provision ready dressed is sold [Johnson], from chop
(n.) in the meat sense + house (n.).


wharfinger (n.)

operator or manager of a wharf, 1550s, from wharfage provision or accomodation at wharves (mid-
15c.), from wharf + agent noun suffix -er (1) + intrusive -n- as in messenger.


viaticum (n.)

1560s, from Latin viaticum travelling money; provision for a journey, noun use of neuter of
adjective viaticus, from via way (see via). In Late Latin also money to pay the expenses of one
studying abroad, and in Church Latin, the eucharist given to a dying person.


garrison (n.)

c.1300, store, treasure, from Old French garison defense (Modern French gu&eacute;rison cure,
recovery, healing) from garir defend (see garret). Meaning fortified stronghold is from early 15c.;
that of body of troops in a fortress is from mid-15c., a sense taken over from Middle English
garnison body of armed men (late 14c.), from Old French garnison provision, munitions, from garnir
to furnish, provide.


store (v.)

mid-13c., to supply or stock, from Old French estorer erect, construct, build; restore, repair;
furnish, equip, provision, from Latin instaurare restore, renew, repair, make, in Medieval Latin
also to provide, store, from in- in + -staurare, from PIE *stau-ro-, suffixed extended form of root
*sta- to stand (see stet, and compare restore). The meaning to keep in store for future use (1550s)
probably is a back-formation from store (n.). Related: Stored; storing.


drug (n.)

late 14c. (early 14c. in Anglo-French), medicine, chemical ingredients, from Old French droge
supply, stock, provision (14c.), of unknown origin, perhaps from Middle Dutch or Middle Low German
droge-vate dry barrels, or droge waere, literally dry wares, but specifically drugs and spices, with
first element mistaken as word for the contents (see dry goods), or because medicines mostly
consisted of dried herbs.    Compare Latin species, in Late Latin wares, then specialized to spices
(French &eacute;pice, English spice). The same source produced Italian and Spanish droga, Swedish
drog.    Application to narcotics and opiates is late 19c., though association with poisons is
1500s. Druggie first recorded 1968. To be a drug on or in the market (mid-17c.) is of doubtful
connection and may be a different word, perhaps a play on drag, which was sometimes drug
c.1240-1800.


service (n.1)

c.1100, celebration of public worship, from Old French servise act of homage; servitude; service at
table; Mass, church ceremony, from Latin servitium slavery, condition of a slave, servitude, also
slaves collectively, from servus slave (see serve (v.)).    Meaning act of serving, occupation of an
attendant servant is attested from c.1200, as is that of assistance, help; a helpful act. From
c.1300 as provision of food; sequence of dishes served in a meal; from late 14c. as service at
table, attendance during a meal. Meaning the furniture of the table (tea service, etc.) is from mid-
15c.    Meanings state of being bound to undertake tasks for someone or at someone's direction;
labor performed or undertaken for another are mid-13c. Sense of service or employment in a court or
administration is from c.1300, as is that of military service (especially by a knight); employment
as a soldier; hence the military as an occupation (1706).     Also in Middle English sexual
intercourse, conjugal relations (mid-15c.; service of Venus, or flesh's service). Service industry
(as distinct from production) attested from 1938. A service station originally was a gas stop that
also repaired cars.


