proximity (n.)

late 15c., from Middle French proximit&eacute; nearness (14c.), from Latin proximitatem (nominative
proximitas) nearness, vicinity, from proximus nearest, next; most direct; adjoining, figuratively
latest, most recent; next, following; most faithful, superlative of prope near (see propinquity).


proxemics (n.)

1963, coined from proximity + -emics.


proximate (adj.)

neighboring, 1590s (implied in proximately), from Late Latin proximatus, past participle of
proximare to draw near, from proximus nearest, next (see proximity).


proximal (adj.)

1727, from Latin proximus nearest, next (see proximity) + -al (1). Related: Proximally.


close quarters

1753, originally nautical, also close-fights, bulkheads fore and aft for men to stand behind in
close engagements to fire on the enemy, it reflects the confusion of close (v.) and close (adj.);
now understood of proximity, but orig. 'closed' space on ship-board where last stand could be made
against boarders [Weekley]. Compare also closed-minded, a variant of close-minded attested from
1880s, with a sense of shut rather than tight.


vicinity (n.)

1550s, nearness in place, from Middle French vicinit&#233; and directly from Latin vicinitas of or
pertaining to neighbors or a neighborhood, as a noun, neighborhood, nearness, proximity, from
vicinus (adj.) of the neighborhood, near, neighboring, as a noun the neighborhood, a neighbor, from
vicus group of houses, village, related to the -wick, -wich in English place names, from PIE *weik-
(1) clan, social unit above the household (see villa). Meaning neighborhood, surrounding district in
English is attested by 1796.


Ethiop

late 14c., from Latin &AElig;thiops Ethiopian, negro, from Greek Aithiops, perhaps from aithein to
burn + ops face (compare aithops fiery-looking, later sunburned).Who the Homeric &AElig;thiopians
were is a matter of doubt. The poet elsewhere speaks of two divisions of them, one dwelling near the
rising, the other near the setting of the sun, both having imbrowned visages from their proximity to
that luminary, and both leading a blissful existence, because living amid a flood of light; and, as
a natural concomitant of a blissful existence, blameless, and pure, and free from every kind of
moral defilement. [Charles Anthon, note to The First Six Books of Homer's Iliad, 1878]


