prudent (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French prudent with knowledge, deliberate (c.1300), from Latin prudentem
(nominative prudens) knowing, skilled, sagacious, circumspect; rarely in literal sense foreseeing;
contraction of providens, present participle of providere to foresee (see provide). Related:
Prudently.


discreet (adj.)

mid-14c., morally discerning, prudent, circumspect, from Old French discret discreet, sensible,
intelligent, wise, from Latin discretus separated, distinct, in Medieval Latin discerning, careful,
past participle of discernere distinguish (see discern). Meaning separate, distinct in English is
late 14c.    Spellings discrete and nativized discreet co-existed until after c.1600, when discreet
became the common word for careful, prudent, and discrete was maintained in philosophy, medicine,
music and other disciplines that remembered Latin and made effort to obey it. Related: Discreetly.


sophrosyne (n.)

the quality of wise moderation; Greek, prudence, moderation in desires, discretion, temperance, from
sophron of sound mind, prudent, temperate (see Sophronia).


well-done (adj.)

c.1200, wise, prudent, from well (adv.) + done. Meaning thoroughly cooked, in reference to meat, is
attested from 1747. Well done! as an exclamation of approval is recorded from mid-15c.


provident (adj.)

c.1400, from Latin providentem (nominative providens) foreseeing, prudent, present participle of
providere to foresee (see provide).


considerate (adj.)

1570s, marked by deliberation, from Latin consideratus, past participle of considerare (see
consider). Of persons, deliberate, prudent, 1580s; meaning showing consideration for others is from
c.1700. Related: Considerately; considerateness.


forehand

tennis stroke, 1879 (adj.), 1909 (n.), from fore- + hand (n.). Earlier it meant position in front or
above (16c.); hence forehanded prudent. Earliest use of the word is in archery, forehand shaft arrow
for shooting straight in front (1540s).


thoughtful (adj.)

c.1200, contemplative, occupied with thought, from thought + -ful. Also in Middle English, prudent;
moody, anxious. Meaning showing consideration for others is from 1851 (compare thoughtless.)
Related: Thoughtfully; thoughtfulness.


judicious (adj.)

1590s, having sound judgment, from Middle French judicieux (16c.), from Latin iudicium judgment,
from iudicem (see judge (v.)). Meaning careful, prudent is from c.1600. Related: Judiciously;
judiciousness.


Gloucester

English county, Old English Gleawceaster, from Latin Coloniae Glev (2c.), from Glevo, a Celtic name
meaning bright place (perhaps influenced by Old English gleaw wise, prudent) + Old English ceaster
Roman town (see Chester).


Sophronia

fem. proper name, from Greek sophronia, from sophron (genitive sophronos) discreet, prudent,
sensible, having control over sensual desires, moderate, chaste, literally of sound mind, from sos
safe, sound, whole + phren midriff, heart, mind (see phreno-).


providence (n.)

late 14c., foresight, prudent anticipation, from Old French providence divine providence, foresight
(12c.) and directly from Latin providentia foresight, precaution, foreknowledge, from providentem
(nominative providens), present participle of providere (see provide).   Providence (usually
capitalized) God as beneficent caretaker, first recorded c.1600, from earlier use of the word for
God's beneficient care or guidance (14c.), short for divine providence, etc. The noun in Latin
occasionally had a similar sense.


politic (adj.)

early 15c., pertaining to public affairs, from Middle French politique political (14c.) and directly
from Latin politicus of citizens or the state, civil, civic, from Greek politikos of citizens,
pertaining to the state and its administration; pertaining to public life, from polites citizen,
from polis city (see polis). Replaced in most adjectival senses by political. From mid-15c. as
prudent, judicious.


wary (adj.)

late 15c., with -y (2) + ware, from Old English w&aelig;r prudent, aware, alert, wary, from Proto-
Germanic *waraz (cognates: Old Norse varr attentive, Gothic wars cautious, Old Saxon giwar, Middle
Dutch gheware, Old High German giwar, German gewahr aware), from PIE root *wer- (4) to perceive,
watch out for (see ward (n.)). Related: Warily; wariness.


wisdom (n.)

Old English wisdom knowledge, learning, experience, from wis (see wise (adj.)) + -dom. A common
Germanic compound (Old Saxon, Old Frisian wisdom, Old Norse visdomr, Old High German wistuom wisdom,
German Weistum judicial sentence serving as a precedent). Wisdom teeth so called from 1848 (earlier
teeth of wisdom, 1660s), a loan-translation of Latin dentes sapientiae, itself a loan-translation of
Greek sophronisteres (used by Hippocrates, from sophron prudent, self-controlled), so called because
they usually appear ages 17-25, when a person reaches adulthood.


sophist (n.)

one who makes use of fallacious arguments, mid-15c., earlier sophister (late 14c.), from Latin
sophista, sophistes, from Greek sophistes a master of one's craft; a wise or prudent man, one clever
in matters of daily life, from sophizesthai to become wise or learned, from sophos skilled in a
handicraft, cunning in one's craft; clever in matters of everyday life, shrewd; skilled in the
sciences, learned; clever; too clever, of unknown origin. Greek sophistes came to mean one who gives
intellectual instruction for pay, and at Athens, contrasted with philosopher, it became a term of
contempt.    Sophists taught before the development of logic and grammar, when skill in reasoning
and in disputation could not be accurately distinguished, and thus they came to attach great value
to quibbles, which soon brought them into contempt. [Century Dictionary]


wise (adj.)

Old English wis learned, sagacious, cunning; sane; prudent, discreet; experienced; having the power
of discerning and judging rightly, from Proto-Germanic *wissaz (cognates: Old Saxon, Old Frisian
wis, Old Norse viss, Dutch wijs, German weise wise), from past participle adjective *wittos of PIE
root *weid- to see, hence to know (see vision). Modern slang meaning aware, cunning first attested
1896. Related to the source of Old English witan to know, wit.  A wise man has no extensive
knowledge; He who has extensive knowledge is not a wise man. [Lao-tzu, Tao te Ching, c.550 B.C.E.]
Wise man was in Old English. Wise guy is attested from 1896, American English; wise-ass (n.) by
1966, American English (probably a literal sense is intended by the phrase in the 1607 comedy
Westward Hoe by Dekker and Webster). Wisenheimer, with mock German or Yiddish surname suffix, first
recorded 1904.


