Prudence

fem. proper name; see prudence.


prudence (n.)

mid-14c. (c.1200 as a surname), mid-14c., intelligence; discretion, foresight; wisdom to see what is
suitable or profitable; also one of the four cardinal virtues, wisdom to see what is virtuous; from
Old French prudence (13c.) and directly from Latin prudentia a foreseeing, foresight, sagacity,
practical judgment, contraction of providentia foresight (see providence). Secondary sense of wisdom
(late 14c.) is preserved in jurisprudence.


sophrosyne (n.)

the quality of wise moderation; Greek, prudence, moderation in desires, discretion, temperance, from
sophron of sound mind, prudent, temperate (see Sophronia).


forecast (n.)

early 15c., probably from forecast (v.); earliest sense was forethought, prudence; meaning
conjectured estimate of a future course is from 1670s. A Middle English word for weather forecasting
was aeromancy.


prudential (adj.)

mid-15c., from Medieval Latin prudentialis, from Latin prudentia a foreseeing, foresight (see
prudence). Related: Prudentially. Prudential, the U.S. insurance company, dates to the 1870s; its
logo featuring the Rock of Gibraltar dates from c.1900 and was widely known 20c.


jurisprudence (n.)

1620s, knowledge of law, from French jurisprudence (17c.) and directly from Late Latin
iurisprudentia the science of law, from iuris of right, of law (genitive of ius; see jurist) +
prudentia knowledge, a foreseeing (see prudence). Meaning the philosophy of law is first attested
1756. Related: Jurisprudential.


censure (v.)

1580s, from censure (n.) or else  from French censurer, from censure (n.). Related: Censured;
censuring.    Such men are so watchful to censure, that the have seldom much care to look for
favourable interpretations of ambiguities, to set the general tenor of life against single failures,
or to know how soon any slip of inadvertency has been expiated by sorrow and retractation; but let
fly their fulminations, without mercy or prudence, against slight offences or casual temerities,
against crimes never committed, or immediately repented. [Johnson, Life of Sir Thomas Browne, 1756]


cardinal (adj.)

chief, pivotal, early 14c., from Latin cardinalis principal, chief, essential, from cardo (genitive
cardinis) that on which something turns or depends; pole of the sky, originally door hinge, of
unknown origin. Related: Cardinally.    The cardinal points (1540s) are north, south, east, west.
The cardinal sins (c.1600) are too well known to require rehearsal. The cardinal virtues (c.1300)
were divided into natural (justice prudence, temperance, fortitude) and theological (faith, hope,
charity). The natural ones were the original classical ones, which were amended by Christians. But
typically in Middle English only the first four were counted as the cardinal virtues:    Of &#254;e
uour uirtues cardinales speke&#254; moche &#254;e yealde philosofes. [Ayenbite of Inwyt, c.1340]
By analogy of this, and cardinal points, cardinal winds, cardinal signs (four zodiacal signs marking
the equinoxes and the solstices), the adjective in Middle English acquired an association with the
number four.


virtue (n.)

c.1200, vertu, moral life and conduct; a particular moral excellence, from Anglo-French and Old
French vertu force, strength, vigor; moral strength; qualities, abilities (10c. in Old French), from
Latin virtutem (nominative virtus) moral strength, high character, goodness; manliness; valor,
bravery, courage (in war); excellence, worth, from vir man (see virile).    For my part I honour
with the name of virtue the habit of acting in a way troublesome to oneself and useful to others.
[Stendhal de l'Amour, 1822]    Especially (in women) chastity, sexual purity from 1590s. Phrase by
virtue of (early 13c.) preserves alternative Middle English sense of efficacy. Wyclif Bible has
virtue where KJV uses power. The seven cardinal virtues (early 14c.) were divided into the natural
(justice, prudence, temperance, fortitude) and the theological (hope, faith, charity). To make a
virtue of a necessity (late 14c.) translates Latin facere de necessitate virtutem [Jerome].


act (n.)

late 14c., a thing done, from Old French acte (official) document, and directly from Latin actus a
doing, a driving, impulse; a part in a play, act, and actum a thing done, originally a legal term,
both from agere to do, set in motion, drive, urge, chase, stir up, from PIE root *ag- to drive, draw
out or forth, move (cognates: Greek agein to lead, guide, drive, carry off, agon assembly, contest
in the games, agogos leader; Sanskrit ajati drives, ajirah moving, active; Old Norse aka to drive;
Middle Irish ag battle).    Theatrical (part of a play, 1510s) and legislative (early 15c.) senses
of the word also were in Latin. Meaning display of exaggerated behavior is from 1928. In the act in
the process is from 1590s, perhaps originally from the 16c. sense of the act as sexual intercourse.
Act of God uncontrollable natural force recorded by 1726.    An act of God is an accident which
arises from a cause which operates without interference or aid from man (1 Pars. on Cont. 635); the
loss arising wherefrom cannot be guarded against by the ordinary exertions of human skill and
prudence so as to prevent its effect. [William Wait, General Principles of the Law, Albany, 1879]


