prunella (n.)

stout textile used for men's robes and gowns, 1650s, from French prunelle, noun use of adjective
meaning plum-colored, from prunelle, diminutive of prune plum (see prune (n.)).


prune (n.)

mid-14c., a plum, also a dried plum (c.1200 in place name Prunhill), from Old French pronne plum
(13c.), from Vulgar Latin *pruna, fem. singular formed from Latin pruna, neuter plural of prunum a
plum, by dissimilation from Greek proumnon, from a language of Asia Minor. Slang meaning
disagreeable or disliked person is from 1895. Prune juice is from 1807.


prune (v.)

early 15c., prouyne, from Old French proignier cut back (vines), prune (Modern French provigner), of
unknown origin. Perhaps [Watkins] from Gallo-Roman *pro-retundiare cut in a rounded shape in front,
from pro- forth (see pro-) + *retundiare round off, from Latin rotundus (see round (adj.)). Klein
suggests the Old French word is from provain layer of a vine, from Latin propago (see prop (n.1)).
Or the Middle English word might be identical with the falconry term proinen, proynen trim the
feather with the beak (late 14c.), source of preen [Barnhart]. Related: Pruned; pruning. Pruning
hook is from 1610s; pruning knife from 1580s.


amputation (n.)

1610s, a cutting off of tree branches, a pruning, also operation of cutting off a limb, etc., of a
body, from Middle French amputation or directly from Latin amputationem (nominative amputatio), noun
of action from past participle stem of amputare cut off, lop off; cut around, to prune, from am(bi)-
about (see ambi-) + putare to prune, trim (see pave).


deputy (n.)

c.1400, one given the full power of an officer without holding the office, from Anglo-French
deput&eacute;, noun use of past participle of Middle French d&eacute;puter appoint, assign (14c.),
from Late Latin deputare to destine, allot, in classical Latin to esteem, consider, consider as,
literally to cut off, prune, from de- away (see de-) + putare to think, count, consider, literally
to cut, prune (see pave).


preen (v.)

to trim, to dress up, late 14c., perhaps a variation of Middle English proynen, proinen trim the
feather with the beak (see prune (v.)); or perhaps from Old French poroindre anoint before, and Old
French proignier round off, prune. Middle English prene (from Old English preon, a general Germanic
word) meant to pin, and probably influenced the form of this word. Watkins, however, connects it
with Latin unguere to smear, anoint.    Because of the popularity of falconry, bird activities
formerly were more closely observed and words for them were more precise in English than today.Youre
hawke proynith and not pikith and she prenyth not bot whan she begynnyth at hir leggys, and fetcheth
moystour like oyle at hir taill. [Book of St. Albans, 1486]


amputate (v.)

1630s, back-formation from amputation or else from Latin amputatus, past participle of amputare to
cut off, to prune. Related: Amputated; amputating.


impute (v.)

early 15c., from Old French imputer (14c.) and directly from Latin imputare to reckon, make account
of, charge, ascribe, from assimilated form of in- in, into (see in- (2)) + putare reckon, clear up,
trim, prune, settle (see pave). Related: Imputed; imputing.


putative (adj.)

early 15c., from Middle French putatif, from Late Latin putativus supposed, from Latin putat-, past
participle stem of putare to judge, suppose, believe, suspect, originally to clean, trim, prune (see
pave). At first especially in putative marriage, one which, though legally invalid, was contracted
in good faith by at least one party. Related: Putatively.


compute (v.)

1630s, from French computer, from Latin computare to count, sum up, reckon together, from com- with
(see com-) + putare to reckon, originally to prune (see pave). Related: Computed; computing.


shred (v.)

Old English screadian to peel, prune, cut off, from Proto-Germanic *skrauth- (cognates: Middle Dutch
scroden, Dutch schroeien, Old High German scrotan, German schroten to shred), from root of shred
(n.). Meaning cut or tear into shreds is from 1610s. Related: Shredded; shredding.


dispute (v.)

c.1300, from Old French desputer (12c.) dispute, fight over, contend for, discuss, from Latin
disputare weigh, examine, discuss, argue, explain, from dis- separately (see dis-) + putare to
count, consider, originally to prune (see pave).    Used in Vulgate in sense of to argue, contend
with words. Related: Disputable; disputed; disputing. The noun is not certainly recorded before
1590s (disputacioun in that sense is from late 14c.).


pave (v.)

early 14c., to cover (a street) with stones or other material, from Old French paver to pave (12c.),
perhaps a back-formation from Old French pavement or else from Vulgar Latin *pavare, from Latin
pavire to beat, ram, tread down, from PIE *pau- to cut, strike, stamp (cognates: Latin putare to
prune; Greek paiein to strike; Lithuanian piauju to cut, piuklas saw). Related: Paved; paving. The
figurative sense of make smooth (as in pave the way) is attested from 1580s.


plum (n.)

Old English plume plum, plum tree, from an early Germanic borrowing (Middle Dutch prume, Dutch
pruim, Old High German pfluma, pfruma, German Pflaume) from Vulgar Latin *pruna, from Latin prunum
plum, from Greek prounon, later form of proumnon, of unknown origin, perhaps from an Asiatic
language (Phrygian?). Also see prune (n.). Change of pr- to pl- is peculiar to Germanic. The vowel
shortened in early modern English. Meaning something desirable is first recorded 1780, probably in
reference to the sugar-rich bits of a plum pudding, etc.


strigil (n.)

ancient tool for scraping the skin after a bath, 1580s, from Latin strigilis scraper, horse-comb,
from stringere (1) draw along a surface, graze, touch lightly; strip off, pluck off, cut away; clip,
prune; lay bare, unsheathe, figuratively waste, consume, reduce; touch, move, affect, cause pain,
from PIE root *streig- to stroke, rub, press (cognates: Latin striga stroke, strike, furrow, stria
furrow, channel; Old Church Slavonic striga shear; Old English stracian to stroke; German streichen
to stroke, rub). Etymologists dispute over whether this is connected to Latin stringere (2), root of
strain (v.).


