pseudonym (n.)

1828, in part a back-formation from pseudonymous, in part from German pseudonym and French
pseudonyme (adj.), from Greek pseudonymos having a false name, under a false name, from pseudes
false (see pseudo-) + onyma, Aeolic dialectal variant of onoma name (see name (n.)).    Possibly a
dictionary word at first [Barnhart]. Fowler calls it a queer out-of-the-way term for an everyday
thing. Properly in reference to made-up names; the name of an actual author or person of reputation
affixed to a work he or she did not write is an allonym. An author's actual name affixed to his or
her own work is an autonym (1867).


pseudonymous (adj.)

1766, from Modern Latin pseudonymus, from Greek pseudonymos (see pseudonym). Related:
Pseudonymously.


Junius

masc. proper name, from Latin Junius, name of a Roman gens. The pseudonym of the author of a famous
series of letters in the Public Advertiser from 1768-1772.


Lenin

pseudonym or alias chosen c.1902 (for publishing clandestine political works in exile) by Russian
revolutionary Vladimir Il'ich Ulyanov (1870-1924). Related: Leninist (1917); Leninism (1918).


Orwellian (adj.)

1950 (first attested in Mary McCarthy), from English author George Orwell (pseudonym of Eric Blair,
1903-1950), especially in reference to his novel Nineteen Eighty-Four. Ironically, it has come to be
used in reference to the totalitarian systems he satirized.It is as if George Orwell had conceived
the nightmare instead of analyzed it, helped to create it instead of helping to dispel its
euphemistic thrall. [Clive James]


Zionism (n.)

movement for forming (later supporting) a Jewish national state in Palestine, 1896, from German
Zionismus (from Zion + Latin-derived suffix -ismus; see -ism); first recorded 1886 in
Selbstemancipation, by Matthias Acher (pseudonym of Nathan Birnbaum (1864-1937)).


Spartacist (n.)

German Bolshevik of November 1918 uprising, 1919, from German Spartakist, from Spartacus (d.71
B.C.E.), Thracian leader of Roman Servile War (73-71 B.C.E.), ultimately from Sparta; the name was
adopted 1916 as a pseudonym by Karl Liebknecht in his political tracts; thence Spartacist for the
socialist revolutionary group he founded with Rosa Luxemburg and Franz Mehring.


josh (v.)

to make fun of, to banter, 1845, American English, probably from the familiar version of the proper
name Joshua, but just which Joshua, or why, is long forgotten. Perhaps it was taken as a typical
name of an old farmer. The word was in use earlier than the career of U.S. humorist Josh Billings,
pseudonym of Henry Wheeler Shaw (1818-1885), who did not begin to write and lecture until 1860; but
his popularity after 1869 may have influence that of the word.About the most originality that any
writer can hope to achieve honestly is to steal with good judgment. [Josh Billings]  Related:
Joshed; joshing.


Vanessa

fem. proper name, also the name of a butterfly genus. As a name, not much used in U.S. before 1950.
It appears to have been coined by Swift c.1711 as a pseudonym for Esther Vanhomrigh, who was
romantically attached to him, and composed of elements of her name. He used it in private
correspondence and published it in the poem Cadenus and Vanessa (1713).    The name Cadenus is an
anagram of Decanus; that of Vanessa is formed much in the same way, by placing the first syllable of
her sir-name before her christian-name, Hessy. [William Monck Mason, History and Antiquities of the
Collegiate and Cathedral Church of St. Patrick, Near Dublin, 1820]    As the name of a genus of
butterflies that includes the Red Admiral and the Painted Lady, it dates to 1808, chosen by Danish
entomologist Johan Christian Fabricius (1745-1808) for unknown reasons. He has no obvious connection
to Swift, and the theory that it was intended for *Phanessa, from Greek phanes a mystical divinity
in the Orphic system does no honor to his classical learning.


yegg (n.)

also yegg-man, 1901, a word popular in the first decade of the 20th century and meaning vaguely hobo
burglar; safe-breaker; criminal beggar.    The great majority [of the Chicago criminal population]
are what certain detectives call Yegg-men, which is a term, by the way, that the detectives would do
well to define. As far as I can discover it means tramp-thieves, but the average tramp seldom uses
the word. Hoboes that break safes in country post-offices come under the Yegg-men classification.
[McClure's Magazine, Feb. 1901]    Popularized by the Pinkerton agency detectives. The 1900
Proceedings of the 26th annual convention of the American Bankers' Association, whose members were
protected by the Pinkerton's National Detective Agency, reported a letter dated Nov. 23 or 24, 1899,
returning $540, taken earlier that year, to the Scandinavian-American Bank of St. Paul, Minn.,
noting that the thieves had been so hounded by detectives that they gave up the gains and advised
the bank to advertise that it was a member of the American Bankers Association, because the American
Bankers Association is too tough for poor 'grafters.' The letter supposedly was signed John Yegg,
but this was said to be a pseudonym and the report identified the man arrested later in the case as
William Barrett.


