psyche (n.)

1640s, animating spirit, from Latin psyche, from Greek psykhe the soul, mind, spirit; breath; life,
one's life, the invisible animating principle or entity which occupies and directs the physical
body; understanding (personified as Psykhe, the beloved of Eros), akin to psykhein to blow, cool,
from PIE root *bhes- to blow, to breathe (source also of Sanskrit bhas-), Probably imitative
[Watkins].    Also in ancient Greek, departed soul, spirit, ghost, and often represented
symbolically as a butterfly or moth. The word had extensive sense development in Platonic philosophy
and Jewish-influenced theological writing of St. Paul (compare spirit (n.)). Meaning human soul is
from 1650s. In English, psychological sense mind, is attested by 1910.


psychedelic (adj.)

occasionally psychodelic, 1956, of drugs, suggested by British-born Canadian psychiatrist Humphry
Osmond (1917-2004) in a letter to Aldous Huxley and used by Osmond in a scientific paper published
the next year; from Greek psykhe- mind (see psyche) + deloun make visible, reveal, from delos
visible, clear, from PIE root *dyeu- to shine (see diurnal). In popular use from 1965 with reference
to anything producing effects similar to that of a psychedelic drug or enhancing the effects of such
a drug. As a noun from 1956.


metempsychosis (n.)

1580s, passing of the soul at death into another body, from Late Latin metempsychosis, from Greek
metempsychosis, from  meta change (see meta-) + empsykhoun to put a soul into, from en in + psyche
soul (see psyche). Pythagorean word for transmigration of souls at death. Related: Metempsychose
(v.), 1590s.


anima mundi

1670s, Medieval Latin, literally soul of the world; used by Abelard to render Greek psyche tou
kosmou.


psychro-

word-forming element meaning cold, from Latinized form of Greek psykhros cold, from psykhrein blow,
make cool or cold, from the same root as psyche.


psychopomp (n.)

1835, from Greek psykhopompos spirit-guide, a term applied to Charon, Hermes Trismegistos, Apollo;
from psykhe (see psyche) + pompos guide, conductor.


psycho-

word-forming element meaning mind, mental; spirit, unconscious, from Greek psykho-, combining form
of psykhe (see psyche). It also was used to form compounds in Greek, such as psychopates soul-
beguiling.


psychotic (adj.)

1889, coined from psychosis, on the model of neurotic/neurosis, from Greek psykhe- mind, soul (see
psyche).


psychosis (n.)

1847, mental derangement, Modern Latin, from Greek psykhe- mind (see psyche) + -osis abnormal
condition. Greek psykhosis meant a giving of life; animation; principle of life.


super-ego (n.)

also superego, that part of the psyche which controls the impulses of the id, 1924, as a translation
of German &uuml;ber-Ich; see super- and ego.


psychiatry (n.)

1846, from French psychiatrie, from Medieval Latin psychiatria, literally a healing of the soul,
from Latinized form of Greek psykhe- mind (see psyche) + iatreia healing, care (see -iatric).


psychopathic (adj.)

1847, from psychopathy on model of German psychopatisch, from Greek psykhe- mind (see psyche) +
pathos suffering (see pathos).


psychiatrist (n.)

1875, from psychiatry + -ist.A psychiatrist is a man who goes to the Folies Berg&egrave;re and looks
at the audience. [Anglican Bishop Mervyn Stockwood, 1961]  An older name was mad-doctor (1703); also
psychiater expert in mental diseases (1852), from Greek psyche + iatros. Also see alienist.


psychic (adj.)

1872, of or pertaining to the human soul (earlier psychical, 1640s), from Greek psykhikos of the
soul, spirit, or mind (opposed to somatikos), also (New Testament) concerned with the life only,
animal, natural, from psykhe soul, mind, life (see psyche). Meaning characterized by psychic gifts
first recorded 1871.


psychosomatic (adj.)

1847, pertaining to the relation between mind and body, from Greek psykhe- mind (see psyche) +
somatikos, from soma (genitive somatos) body (see somato-). Applied from 1938 to physical disorders
with psychological causes. Etymologically it could as easily apply to emotional disorders with
physical causes, but it is rarely used as such.


psychology (n.)

1650s, study of the soul, from Modern Latin psychologia, probably coined mid-16c. in Germany by
Melanchthon from Latinized form of Greek psykhe- breath, spirit, soul (see psyche) + logia study of
(see -logy). Meaning study of the mind first recorded 1748, from Christian Wolff's Psychologia
empirica (1732); main modern behavioral sense is from early 1890s.


psychoanalysis (n.)

1906, from Psychoanalyse, coined 1896 in French by Freud from Latinized form of Greek psykhe- mental
(see psyche) + German Analyse, from Greek analysis (see analysis). Freud earlier used psychische
analyse (1894).


holocaust (n.)

mid-13c., sacrifice by fire, burnt offering, from Greek holokauston a thing wholly burnt, neuter of
holokaustos burned whole, from holos whole (see holo-) + kaustos, verbal adjective of kaiein to
burn. Originally a Bible word for burnt offerings, given wider sense of massacre, destruction of a
large number of persons from 1833. The Holocaust Nazi genocide of European Jews in World War II,
first recorded 1957, earlier known in Hebrew as Shoah catastrophe. The word itself was used in
English in reference to Hitler's Jewish policies from 1942, but not as a proper name for them.
Auschwitz makes all too clear the principle that the human psyche can create meaning out of
anything. [Robert Jay Lifton, The Nazi Doctors]


