pterodactyl (n.)

extinct flying reptile, 1830, from French pt&eacute;rodactyle (1821), from Modern Latin genus name
Pterodactylus, from Greek pteron wing (see ptero-) + daktylos finger (see dactyl).


archaeopteryx (n.)

oldest known fossil bird, 1859, Modern Latin, from archaeo- ancient, primitive + Greek pteryx wing
(see pterodactyl).


eurypterid (n.)

fossil swimming crustacean of the Silurian and Devonian, 1874, from Greek eurys broad, wide (see
aneurysm) + pteron feather, wing (see pterodactyl); so called from their swimming appendages.


ornithopter (n.)

1908, from French ornithopt&egrave;re (1908), a machine designed to fly be mechanical flapping of
wings, from ornitho- + Greek pteron wing (see pterodactyl). A mode of flight considered promising at
least since Leonardo's day.


Hymenoptera

order of insects that includes ants, wasps, and bees, 1773, coined in Modern Latin 1748 by
Linn&aelig;us from Greek hymen (genitive hymenos) membrane (see hymen) + pteron wing (see
pterodactyl). Related: Hymenopterous.


coleoptera (n.)

1763, from Modern Latin, from Greek koleopteros, literally sheath-wing, used by Aristotle to
describe beetles, from koleos sheath (see cell) + pteron wing (see pterodactyl). Related:
Coleopterous.


Lepidoptera (n.)

1773, insects with four scaly wings, the biological classification that includes butterflies and
moths, coined 1735 in Modern Latin by Swedish botanist Carolus Linnaeus (Karl von Linn&eacute;,
1707-1778) from Greek lepido-, comb. form of lepis (genitive lepidos) (fish) scale (related to
lepein to peel; see leper) + pteron wing, feather (see pterodactyl).


helicopter (n.)

1861, from French h&eacute;licopt&egrave;re device for enabling airplanes to rise perpendicularly,
thus flying machine propelled by screws. The idea was to gain lift from spiral aerofoils, and it
didn't work. Used by Jules Verne and the Wright Brothers, the word transferred to helicopters in the
modern sense when those were developed in the 1920s. From Greek helix (genitive helikos) spiral (see
helix) + pteron wing (see pterodactyl). Nativized in Flemish as wentelwiek with rotary vanes.


