puberty (n.)

the time of life in which the two sexes begin first to be acquainted [Johnson], late 14c., from Old
French pubert&eacute; and directly from Latin pubertatem (nominative pubertas) age of maturity,
manhood, from pubes (genitive pubertis) adult, full-grown, manly. Related: Puberal; pubertal.


pubes (n.)

1560s, pubic hair, from Latin pubes pubescent, arrived at the age of puberty, of ripe years, grown
up, also, as a noun, a sign of puberty (such as pubic hair), also young men of the age of puberty
(see puberty). In 19c. also pubic bone, and earlier part of either hip bone that forms the front of
the pelvis, from Latin os pubis, from pubes genital area. In modern slang, monosyllable, a familiar
shortening of pubic hairs (see pubic).


pubescence (n.)

early 15c., Middle French pubescence, from Medieval Latin pubescentia, noun of state from Latin
pubescentem (nominative pubescens), present participle of pubescere grow up; ripen, come to
maturity; reach the age of puberty, arrive at puberty, from pubes adult, full-grown (see puberty).


childhood (n.)

period of life from birth to puberty, Old English cildhad; see child + -hood.


tween (prep.)

also 'tween, c.1300 as an abbreviation of between. As a noun meaning child nearing puberty
(approximately ages 9 to 12), attested by 1988, in this case by influence of teen. Earlier in this
sense was subteen (1952). Related: Tweens. Tweeny was a c.1900 term for a servant who assists two
others.


pubescent (adj.)

1610s, a back-formation from pubescence, or else from French pubescent (early 16c.) or directly from
Latin pubescentem (nominative pubescens), present participle of pubescere to reach puberty (see
pubescence).


pubic (adj.)

1811, with -ic + medical Latin pubis bone of the groin (1590s), short for Latin os pubis, from Latin
pubes (genitive pubis) genital area, groin, related to pubes (adj.) full-grown (see puberty).


child (n.)

Old English cild fetus, infant, unborn or newly born person, from Proto-Germanic *kiltham (cognates:
Gothic kil&thorn;ei womb, inkil&thorn;o pregnant; Danish kuld children of the same marriage; Old
Swedish kulder litter; Old English cildhama womb, lit. child-home); no certain cognates outside
Germanic. App[arently] originally always used in relation to the mother as the 'fruit of the womb'
[Buck]. Also in late Old English, a youth of gentle birth (archaic, usually written childe). In
16c.-17c. especially girl child.     The wider sense young person before the onset of puberty
developed in late Old English. Phrase with child pregnant (late 12c.) retains the original sense.
The sense extension from infant to child also is found in French enfant, Latin infans. Meaning one's
own child; offspring of parents is from late 12c. (the Old English word was bearn; see bairn).
Figurative use from late 14c. Most Indo-European languages use the same word for a child and one's
child, though there are exceptions (such as Latin liberi/pueri).    The difficulty with the plural
began in Old English, where the nominative plural was at first cild, identical with the singular,
then c.975 a plural form cildru (genitive cildra) arose, probably for clarity's sake, only to be re-
pluraled late 12c. as children, which is thus a double plural. Middle English plural cildre survives
in Lancashire dialect childer and in Childermas.   Child abuse is attested by 1963; child-molester
from 1950. Child care is from 1915. Child's play, figurative of something easy, is in Chaucer (late
14c.).


