pudding (n.)

c.1300, a kind of sausage: the stomach or one of the entrails of a pig, sheep, etc., stuffed with
minced meat, suet, seasoning, boiled and kept till needed, perhaps from a West Germanic stem *pud-
to swell (cognates: Old English puduc a wen, Westphalian dialect puddek lump, pudding, Low German
pudde-wurst black pudding, English dialectal pod belly; also see pudgy).    Other possibility is the
traditional one that it is from Old French boudin sausage, from Vulgar Latin *botellinus, from Latin
botellus sausage (change of French b- to English p- presents difficulties, but compare purse (n.)).
The modern sense had emerged by 1670, from extension to other foods boiled or steamed in a bag or
sack (16c.). German pudding, French pouding, Swedish pudding, Irish putog are from English. Pudding-
pie attested from 1590s.


puddinghead (n.)

amiable stupid person, 1851, from pudding + head (n.).


pud (n.)

slang for penis, 1939 (in James Joyce), according to OED and DAS from pudding in the same slang
sense (1719); from the original sausage sense of pudding (q.v.).


merry-andrew (n.)

a buffoon; a zany; a jack-pudding [Johnson], originally mountebank's assistant, 1670s, from merry +
masc. proper name Andrew, but there is no certain identification with an individual.


spot (v.)

mid-13c., to mark or stain with spots; late 14c. as to stain, sully, tarnish, from spot (n.).
Meaning to see and recognize, is from 1718, originally colloquial and applied to a criminal or
suspected person; the general sense is from 1860. Related: Spotted; spotting. Spotted dick suet
pudding with currants and raisins is attested from 1849.


York

city in northern England, Old English Eoforwic, earlier Eborakon (c.150), an ancient Celtic name,
probably meaning Yew-Tree Estate, but Eburos may also be a personal name. Related: Yorkist; Yorkish;
Yorker. Yorkshire pudding is recorded from 1747; Yorkshire terrier first attested 1872; short form
Yorkie is from 1950.


pudgy (adj.)

also podgy, 1824, from colloquial pudge anything short and thick + -y (2). Perhaps related to pudsy
plump (1754), possibly a diminutive of nursery word pud hand, forepaw (from 17c.). A connection with
pudding also has been conjectured. In late 19c. often on lists of English local or dialectal words;
sources also mention puddy, punchy, pluggy, pudget as relatives or variants. Related: Pudginess.


dip (v.)

Old English dyppan immerse, baptize by immersion, from Proto-Germanic *duppjan (cognates: Old Norse
deypa to dip, Danish d&oslash;be to baptize, Old Frisian depa, Dutch dopen, German taufen, Gothic
daupjan to baptize), related to Old English diepan immerse, dip, and perhaps ultimately to deep. As
a noun, from 1590s. Sense of downward slope is 1708. Meaning sweet sauce for pudding, etc. first
recorded 1825.


plum (n.)

Old English plume plum, plum tree, from an early Germanic borrowing (Middle Dutch prume, Dutch
pruim, Old High German pfluma, pfruma, German Pflaume) from Vulgar Latin *pruna, from Latin prunum
plum, from Greek prounon, later form of proumnon, of unknown origin, perhaps from an Asiatic
language (Phrygian?). Also see prune (n.). Change of pr- to pl- is peculiar to Germanic. The vowel
shortened in early modern English. Meaning something desirable is first recorded 1780, probably in
reference to the sugar-rich bits of a plum pudding, etc.


eccentric (n.)

early 15c., eccentric circle or orbit, originally a term in Ptolemaic astronomy, circle or orbit not
having the Earth precisely at its center, from Middle French eccentrique and directly from Medieval
Latin eccentricus (noun and adjective), from Greek ekkentros out of the center (as opposed to
concentric), from ek out (see ex-) + kentron center (see center (n.)). Meaning odd or whimsical
person attested by 1824.    June 4 [1800].--Died in the streets in Newcastle, William Barron, an
eccentric, well known for many years by the name of   Billy Pea-pudding. [John Sykes, Local Records,
or Historical Register of Remarkable Events which have Occurred Exclusively in the Counties of
Durham and Northumberland, Town and County of Newcastle Upon Tyne, and Berwick Upon Tweed,
Newcastle, 1824]


hasty (adj.)

mid-14c., speedy, quick, by 1500s replacing or nativizing earlier hastif (c.1300) eager, impetuous,
from Old French hastif speedy, rapid; forward, advanced; rash, impetuous (12c., Modern French
h&acirc;tif), from haste (see haste). Meaning requiring haste is late 14c. (the sense in hasty
pudding, 1590s, so called because it was made quickly); that of rash is from early 15c. Related:
Hastiness. Old French also had a form hasti (for loss of terminal -f, compare joli/jolif, etc.),
which may have influenced the form of the English word.    The termination was doubtless from the
first identified with native -i, -y, from OE -ig; and it is noticeable that the other Teutonic
langs. have formed corresponding adjs. of that type: Du. haastig, Ger., Da., Sw. hastig. [OED]


ketchup (n.)

1711, said to be from Malay kichap, but probably not original to Malay. It might have come from
Chinese koechiap brine of fish, which, if authentic, perhaps is from the Chinese community in
northern Vietnam [Terrien de Lacouperie, in Babylonian and Oriental Record, 1889, 1890]. Catsup
(earlier catchup, 1680s) is a failed attempt at Englishing, still in use in U.S., influenced by cat
and sup.    Originally a fish sauce, the word came to be used in English for a wide variety of
spiced gravies and sauces; Apicius Redivivus; or, the Cook's Oracle, by William Kitchiner, London,
1817, devotes 7 pages to recipes for different types of catsup (his book has 1 spelling of ketchup,
72 of catsup), including walnut, mushroom, oyster, cockle and mussel, tomata, white (vinegar and
anchovies figure in it), cucumber, and pudding catsup. Chambers's Encyclopaedia (1870) lists
mushroom, walnut, and tomato ketchup as the three most esteemed kinds. Tomato ketchup emerged c.1800
in U.S. and predominated from early 20c.


Yankee (n.)

1683, a name applied disparagingly by Dutch settlers in New Amsterdam (New York) to English
colonists in neighboring Connecticut. It may be from Dutch Janke, literally Little John, diminutive
of common personal name Jan; or it may be from Jan Kes familiar form of John Cornelius, or perhaps
an alteration of Jan Kees, dialectal variant of Jan Kaas, literally John Cheese, the generic
nickname the Flemings used for Dutchmen.    [I]t is to be noted that it is common to name a droll
fellow, regarded as typical of his country, after some favorite article of food, as E[nglish] Jack-
pudding, G[erman] Hanswurst (Jack Sausage), F[rench] Jean Farine (Jack Flour). [Century Dictionary,
1902, entry for macaroni]    Originally it seems to have been applied insultingly to the Dutch,
especially freebooters, before they turned around and slapped it on the English. A less-likely
theory (attested by 1832) is that it represents some southern New England Algonquian language
mangling of English. In English a term of contempt (1750s) before its use as a general term for
native of New England (1765); during the American Revolution it became a disparaging British word
for all American natives or inhabitants. Contrasted with southerner by 1828. Shortened form Yank in
reference to an American first recorded 1778. Latin-American form Yanqui attested in English by 1914
(in Mexican Spanish by 1835).    The rule observed in this country is, that the man who receives
that name [Yankee] must come from some part north of him who gives it. To compensate us for giving
each other nicknames, John Bull lumps us all together, and calls us all Yankees. [Who is a Yankee?
Massachusetts Spy, June 6, 1827]


