pugnacious (adj.)

1640s, a back-formation from pugnacity or else from Latin pugnacis, genitive of pugnax combative,
fond of fighting, from pugnare to fight, especially with the fists, contend against, from pugnus a
fist, from PIE *pung-, nasalized form of root *peuk-, *peug- to stick, stab, to prick (cognates:
Greek pyx with clenched fist, pygme fist, boxing, pyktes boxer; Latin pungere to pierce, prick).


pugnacity (n.)

c.1600, from Latin pugnacitas fondness for fighting, from pugnax (genitive pugnacis) combative (see
pugnacious).


pugilism (n.)

1789, from Latin pugil boxer, fist-fighter, related to pugnus fist (see pugnacious) + -ism.
Pugilation fighting with fists, now obsolete, is recorded from 1650s.


expugn (v.)

early 15c., eradicate, exterminate, also conquer, defeat, from Old French expugner, from Latin
expugnare to take by assault, storm, capture, from ex- (see ex-) + pugnare to fight (see
pugnacious). Related: Expugned.


impugn (v.)

attack by argument, late 14c., from Old French impugner, from Latin impugnare to assault, to attack,
from assimilated form of in- into, in, on, upon (see in- (2)) + pugnare to fight (see pugnacious).
Related: Impugned; impugning.


oppugn (v.)

mid-15c., from Latin oppugnare to fight against, attack, assail, from ob- toward, against (see ob-)
+ pugnare to fight (see pugnacious). Related: Oppugned; oppugning.


repugnant (adj.)

late 14c., contrary, contradictory, from Old French repugnant contradictory, opposing or directly
from Latin repugnantem (nominative repugnans), present participle of repugnare to resist, fight
back, oppose; disagree, be incompatible, from re- back (see re-) + pugnare to fight (see
pugnacious). Meaning distasteful, objectionable is from 1777.


poniard (n.)

1580s, from Middle French poinard (early 16c.), from Old French poignal dagger, literally anything
grasped with the fist, from poing fist, from Latin pungus fist, from PIE root *peuk- (see
pugnacious). Probably altered in French by association with poindre to stab. Compare Latin pugnus
fist, pugio dagger. As a verb from c.1600.


pugilist (n.)

1789, from Latin pugil boxer, fist-fighter, related to pugnus a fist (see pugnacious) + -ist.
Related: Pugilistic (1789); pugilistically. Pugil occasionally turns up in English as boxer, fist-
fighter (from 1640s), but it has not caught on. Pugil stick (1962) was introduced by U.S. military
as a substitute for rifles in bayonet drills.


keen (adj.)

c.1200, from Old English cene bold brave, later clever, wise, from Proto-Germanic *kan- be able to
(see can). Original prehistoric senses seem to have been both brave and skilled; cognate with Old
Norse k&aelig;nn skillful, wise, Middle Dutch coene bold, Dutch koen, Old High German kuon
pugnacious, strong, German k&uuml;hn bold, daring. Sense of eager is from mid-14c. The meaning sharp
is peculiar to English: of blades and edges early 13c., of sounds c.1400, of eyesight c.1720. A
popular word of approval in teenager and student slang from c.1900.


pungent (adj.)

1590s, sharp, poignant (of pain or grief), from Latin pungentem (nominative pungens), present
participle of pungere to prick, pierce, sting, figuratively, to vex, grieve, trouble, afflict,
related to pugnus fist (see pugnacious). Meaning having powerful odor or taste first recorded 1660s.
Literal sense sharp, pointed (c.1600) is very rare in English, mostly limited to botany. Middle
English and early Modern English also had a now-obsolete verb punge to prick, pierce; to smart,
cause to sting, from Latin pungere. Related: Pungently.


pygmy (n.)

late 14c., Pigmei, member of a fabulous race of dwarfs, described by Homer and Herodotus and said to
inhabit Egypt or Ethiopia and India, from Latin Pygmaei (singular Pygmaeus), from Greek Pygmaioi,
plural of Pygmaios a Pygmy, noun use of adjective meaning dwarfish, literally of the length of a
pygme; a pygme tall, from pygme cubit, literally fist, the measure of length from the elbow to the
knuckle; related to pyx with clenched fist and to Latin pugnus fist (see pugnacious).    Figurative
use for person of small importance is from 1590s. Believed in 17c. to refer to chimpanzees or
orangutans, and occasionally the word was used in this sense. The ancient word was applied by
Europeans to the equatorial African race 1863, but the tribes probably were known to the ancients
and likely were the original inspiration for the legend. As an adjective from 1590s. Related:
Pygmean; Pygmaean.


