pulpit (n.)

early 14c., from Late Latin pulpitum raised structure on which preachers stand, in classical Latin
scaffold; stage, platform for actors, of unknown origin. Also borrowed in Middle High German as
pulpit (German Pult desk). Sense of Christian preachers and ministers generally is from 1560s.
Pulpiteer, old contemptuous term for professional preacher, is recorded from 1640s.


tub (n.)

open wooden vessel made of staves, late 14c., from Middle Low German, Middle Dutch, or Middle
Flemish tubbe, of uncertain origin. Related to Old High German zubar vessel with two handles, wine
vessel, German Zuber. Considered to be unrelated to Latin tubus (see tube (n.)); one theory connects
it to the root of two based on the number of handles. Also 17c. slang for pulpit; hence tub-thumper
(1660s) speaker or preacher who thumps the pulpit for emphasis.


bully pulpit (n.)

1904, coined by U.S. president Teddy Roosevelt, in reference to the White House.


chair (n.)

early 13c., chaere, from Old French chaiere chair, seat, throne (12c.; Modern French chaire pulpit,
throne; the more modest sense having gone since 16c. with variant form chaise), from Latin cathedra
seat (see cathedral).    Figurative sense of authority was in Middle English, of bishops and
professors. Meaning office of a professor (1816) is extended from the seat from which a professor
lectures (mid-15c.). Meaning seat of a person presiding at  meeting is from 1640s. As short for
electric chair from 1900.


chaise (n.)

1701, pleasure carriage, from French chaise chair (15c.), dialectal variant of chaire (see chair
(n.)) due to 15c.-16c. Parisian accent swapping of -r- and -s-, a habit often satirized by French
writers. French chair and chaise then took respectively the senses of high seat, throne, pulpit and
chair, seat. Chaise lounge (1800) is corruption of French chaise longue long chair, the second word
confused in English with lounge.


jack (n.)

late 14c., jakke a mechanical device, from the masc. name Jack. The proper name was used in Middle
English for any common fellow (mid-14c.), and thereafter extended to various appliances replacing
servants (1570s). Used generically of men (jack-of-all-trades, 1610s), male animals (1620s, see
jackass, jackdaw, etc.), and male personifications (1520s, such as Jack Frost, 1826).    As the name
of a device for pulling off boots, from 1670s. The jack in a pack of playing cards (1670s) is in
German Bauer peasant. Jack shit nothing at all is attested by 1968, U.S. slang. The plant jack-in-
the-pulpit is attested by 1837. Jack the Ripper was active in London 1888. The jack of Union Jack is
a nautical term for small flag at the bow of a ship (1630s).


coward (n.)

mid-13c., from Old French coart coward (no longer the usual word in French, which has now in this
sense poltron, from Italian, and l&acirc;che), from coe tail, from Latin coda, popular dialect
variant of cauda tail, of uncertain origin + -ard, an agent noun suffix denoting one that carries on
some action or possesses some quality, with derogatory connotation (see -ard).    The word probably
reflects an animal metaphoric sense still found in expressions like turning tail and tail between
legs. Coart was the name of the hare in Old French versions of Reynard the Fox. Italian codardo,
Spanish cobarde are from French.    The identification of coward &amp; bully has gone so far in the
popular consciousness that persons &amp; acts in which no trace of fear is to be found are often
called coward(ly) merely because advantage has been taken of superior strength or position ....
[Fowler]    As a surname (attested from 1255) it represents Old English cuhyrde cow-herd. Farmer has
coward's castle a pulpit, Because a clergyman may deliver himself therefrom without fear of
contradiction or argument.


