pulse (v.)

to beat, throb, early 15c., from pulse (n.1) or else from Latin pulsare to beat, throb, and in part
from French. Related: Pulsed; pulsing.


pulse (n.1)

a throb, a beat, early 14c., from Old French pous, pulse (late 12c., Modern French pouls) and
directly from Latin pulsus (in pulsus venarum beating from the blood in the veins), past participle
of pellere to push, drive, from PIE *pel- (6) to thrust, strike, drive (cognates: Greek pallein to
wield, brandish, swing, pelemizein to shake, cause to tremble). Extended usages from 16c. Figurative
use for life, vitality, essential energy is from 1530s.


pulse (n.2)

peas, beans, lentils, late 13c., from Old French pouls, pols and directly from Latin puls thick
gruel, porridge, mush, probably via Etruscan, from Greek poltos porridge made from flour, from PIE
*pel- (1) dust, flour (see pollen; also compare poultice).


sphygmo-

word-forming element meaning pulse, from comb. form of Greek sphygmos a pulse, from sphyzein to
throb, pulse, beat.


asphyxia (n.)

1706, stoppage of pulse, absence of pulse, from Modern Latin, from Greek asphyxia stopping of the
pulse, from a- not (see a- (3)) + sphyzein to throb. Obsolete in its original sense; the transferred
sense of suffocation is from 1778, but it is a curious infelicity of etymology [OED] because victims
of suffocation have a pulse for some time after breathing has stopped.


legume (n.)

plant of the group of the pulse family, 1670s, from French l&eacute;gume (16c.), from Latin legumen
pulse, leguminous plant, of unknown origin. One suggestion ties it to Latin legere to gather (see
lecture (n.)), because they can be scooped by the handful. Used in Middle English in the Latin form
legumen (late 14c.).


ping (n.)

1835, imitative of the sound of a bullet striking something sharply. Meaning short, high-pitched
electronic pulse is attested from 1943. As a verb from 1855; in computer sense is from at least
1981. Related: Pinged; pinging.


pulsar (n.)

1968, from pulse (n.1), the form on analogy of quasar. When discovered in 1967, they were thought
perhaps to be signals from alien civilizations and astronomers informally dubbed them LGM for Little
Green Men.


sphygmomanometer (n.)

1891, from sphygmo- pulse + manometer.


poultice (n.)

16c. alteration of Middle English pultes (late 14c.), ultimately from Latin pultes, plural of puls
porridge (see pulse (n.2)).


Pyanepsia (n.)

festival in honor of Apollo on the 7th of Pyanepsion (fourth month of the Attic calendar,
corresponding to October-November), from Greek Pyanepsia (plural), literally the feast of cooking
beans, from pyanos, name of a kind of bean, of unknown origin, + epsein to boil, cook. At this
festival a dish of pulse was offered to the god.


catapult (n.)

1570s, from Middle French catapulte and directly from Latin catapulta war machine for throwing, from
Greek katapeltes, from kata against (see cata-) + base of pallein to toss, hurl (see pulse (n.1)).
As an airplane-launching device on an aircraft-carrier by 1927.


have-not (n.)

poor person, 1742, from have + not. Have in the sense of one who 'has,' one of the wealthier class
of persons is from the same source. Earliest in translation of Don Quixote:    'A fig for Basilius's
abilities! for, you are worth just as much as you have, and you have just as much as you are worth.
There are but two families in the world, as my grandmother used to say; the Have's and the Have-
not's, and she stuck to the former; and now-a-days, master Don Quixote, people are more inclined to
feel the pulse of Have than of Know.' [Don Quixote de la Mancha, transl. Charles Jarvis, London,
1742]


dal (n.)

1690s, from Hindi dal split pulse, from Sanskrit dala, from dal to split.


interpellation (n.)

late 15c., an appeal, from Latin interpellationem, noun of action from past participle stem of
interpellare to interrupt by speaking, from inter between (see inter-) + pellare, collateral form of
pellere to drive (see pulse (n.1)).


expel (v.)

late 14c., from Latin expellere drive out, from ex- out (see ex-) + pellere to drive (see pulse
(n.1)). Meaning to eject from a school is first recorded 1640s. Related: Expelled; expelling.


impel (v.)

early 15c., from Latin impellere to push, strike against, drive forward, urge on, from assimilated
form of in- into, in, on, upon (see in- (2)) + pellere to push, drive (see pulse (n.1)). Related:
Impelled; impelling.


vein (n.)

c.1300, from Old French veine vein, artery, pulse (12c.), from Latin vena a blood vessel, also a
water course, a vein of metal, a person's natural ability or interest, of unknown origin. The mining
sense is attested in English from late 14c. (Greek phleps vein had the same secondary sense).
Figurative sense of strain or intermixture (of some quality) is recorded from 1560s; that of a humor
or mood, natural tendency is first recorded 1570s.


repel (v.)

early 15c., to drive away, remove, from Old French repeller or directly from Latin repellere to
drive back, from re- back (see re-) + pellere to drive, strike (see pulse (n.1)). Meaning to affect
(a person) with distaste or aversion is from 1817. Related: Repelled; repelling.


dispel (v.)

c.1400, dispelen, from Latin dispellere drive apart, from dis- away (see dis-) + pellere to drive,
push (see pulse (n.1)). Since the meaning is to drive away in different directions it should not
have as an object a single, indivisible thing (you can dispel suspicion, but not an accusation).
Related: Dispelled; dispelling.


arrhythmic (adj.)

1853, without rhythm, in relation to musical sensibility, Modern Latin, from Greek arrhythmos
irregular, unrhythmical, without measure, from a- not (see a- (3)) + rhythmos (see rhythm). Medical
arrhythmia irregularity of pulse is attested from 1888, from Greek noun of action from arrhythmos.
Related: Arrhythmically.


pulsation (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French pulsation (14c.) and directly from Latin pulsationem (nominative
pulsatio) a beating or striking, noun of action from past participle stem of pulsare to beat,
strike, push against' hammer, keep hitting, figuratively drive forth, disturb, disquiet,
frequentative of pellere (past participle pulsus) to beat, strike (see pulse (n.1)).


compel (v.)

mid-14c., from Old French compellir, from Latin compellere to drive together, drive to one place (of
cattle), to force or compel (of persons), from com- together (see com-) + pellere to drive (see
pulse (n.1)). Related: Compelled; compelling.


felt (n.)

Old English felt, from West Germanic *feltaz something beaten, compressed wool (cognates: Old Saxon
filt, Middle Dutch vilt, Old High German filz, German Filz, Danish filt), from Proto-Germanic *felt-
to beat, from PIE *pel- (6) to thrust, strike, drive (source also of Old Church Slavonic plusti),
with a sense of beating (see pulse (n.1)).


propel (v.)

mid-15c., to drive away, expel, from Latin propellere push forward, drive forward, drive forth;
move, impel, from pro- forward (see pro-) + pellere to push, drive (see pulse (n.1)). Meaning to
drive onward, cause to move forward is from 1650s. Related: Propelled; propelling.


hectic (adj.)

late 14c., etik (in fever etik), from Old French etique consumptive, from Late Latin hecticus, from
Greek hektikos continuous, habitual, consumptive (of a disease, because of the constant fever), from
hexis a habit (of mind or body), from ekhein have, hold, continue (see scheme).    The Latin -h- was
restored in English 16c. Sense of feverishly exciting, full of disorganized activity first recorded
1904, but hectic also was used in Middle English as a noun meaning feverish desire, consuming
passion (early 15c.). Hectic fevers are characterized by rapid pulse, among other symptoms. Related:
Hecticness.


syncope (n.)

1520s, contraction of a word by omission of middle sounds or letters, from Latin syncope contraction
of a word by elision, from Greek synkope contraction of a word, originally a cutting off, cutting
up, cutting short, from synkoptein to cut up, from syn- together, thoroughly (see syn-) + koptein to
cut, from PIE root *kop- to beat, strike (see hatchet (n.)).    An earlier use of the word in
pathology is represented by Middle English syncopis, sincopin loss of consciousness accompanied by
weak pulse (c.1400, from Late Latin accusative syncopen); compare Old French syncope illness,
fainting fit (failure of the heart's action, hence unconsciousness). The spelling of this was re-
Latinized 16c. Related: Syncopic; syncoptic.


appeal (v.)

early 14c., originally in legal sense of to call to a higher judge or court, from Anglo-French
apeler to call upon, accuse, Old French apeler make an appeal (11c., Modern French appeler), from
Latin appellare to accost, address, appeal to, summon, name, iterative of appellere to prepare, from
ad- to (see ad-) + pellere to beat, drive (see pulse (n.1)). Related: Appealed; appealing.
Probably a Roman metaphoric extension of a nautical term for driving a ship toward a particular
landing. Popular modern meaning to be attractive or pleasing is quite recent, attested from 1907
(appealing in this sense is from 1891), from the notion of to address oneself in expectation of a
sympathetic response.


push (v.)

early 14c., from Old French poulser (Modern French pousser), from Latin pulsare to beat, strike,
push, frequentative of pellere (past participle pulsus) to push, drive, beat (see pulse (n.1)).
Meaning promote is from 1714; meaning approach a certain age is from 1937. For palatization of -s-,
OED compares brush (n.1); quash. Related: Pushed; pushing.    Pushing up the daisies now, said a
soldier of his dead comrade. [The American Florist, vol. XLVIII, No. 1504, March 31, 1917]    To
push (someone) around is from 1923. To push (one's) luck is from 1754. To push the envelope in
figurative sense is late 1980s. To push up daisies be dead and buried is from World War I.


spike (n.1)

large nail, mid-14c., perhaps from or related to a Scandinavian word, such as Old Norse spik
splinter, Middle Swedish spijk nail, from Proto-Germanic *spikaz (cognates: Middle Dutch spicher,
Dutch spijker nail, Old English spicing large nail, Old English spaca, Old High German speihha
spoke), from PIE root *spei- sharp point (cognates: Latin spica ear of corn, spina thorn, prickle,
backbone, and perhaps pinna pin (see pin (n.)); Greek spilas rock, cliff; Lettish spile wooden fork;
Lithuanian speigliai thorns, spitna tongue of a buckle, Old English spitu spit).    The English word
also might be influenced by and partly a borrowing of Latin spica (see spike (n.2)), from the same
root. Slang meaning needle is from 1923. Meaning pointed stud in athletic shoes is from 1832.
Electrical sense of pulse of short duration is from 1935.


