pungent (adj.)

1590s, sharp, poignant (of pain or grief), from Latin pungentem (nominative pungens), present
participle of pungere to prick, pierce, sting, figuratively, to vex, grieve, trouble, afflict,
related to pugnus fist (see pugnacious). Meaning having powerful odor or taste first recorded 1660s.
Literal sense sharp, pointed (c.1600) is very rare in English, mostly limited to botany. Middle
English and early Modern English also had a now-obsolete verb punge to prick, pierce; to smart,
cause to sting, from Latin pungere. Related: Pungently.


formaldehyde (n.)

pungent gas formed by oxidation of methyl alcohol, 1869, a contraction of formic aldehyde; see
formic + aldehyde. Discovered in 1863 by German chemist August Wilhelm von Hofmann (1818-1892).


pungency (n.)

1640s, from pungent + -cy.


bromide (n.)

compound of bromine and another metal or radical, 1836, from bromine, the pungent, poisonous
element, + -ide. Used as a sedative; figurative sense of dull, conventional person or trite saying
popularized by U.S. humorist Frank Gelett Burgess (1866-1951) in his book Are You a Bromide? (1906).
Related: Bromidic.


puncture (n.)

late 14c., from Late Latin punctura a pricking, from Latin punctus, past participle of pungere to
prick, pierce (see pungent).


ozone (n.)

1840, from German Ozon, coined in 1840 by German chemist Christian Friedrich Sch&ouml;nbein
(1799-1868) from Greek ozon, neuter present participle of ozein to smell (see odor). So called for
its pungent odor.


cayenne (n.)

pungent dried pepper, 1756, from Tupi (Brazil) kyynha capsicum, mistakenly associated with town of
Cayenne in French Guyana. The town name is the French form of Guyana.


oxy-

word-forming element meaning sharp, pointed; acid, from Greek oxy-, comb. form of oxys sharp,
pungent (see acrid). Also used as a comb. form of oxygen.


turmeric (n.)

pungent powder made from the root of an East Indian plant, 1530s, altered from Middle English
turmeryte (early 15c.), of uncertain origin, perhaps from Middle French terrem&eacute;rite saffron,
from Medieval Latin terra merita, literally worthy earth, though the reason why it would be called
this is obscure. Klein suggests it might be a folk-etymology corruption of Arabic kurkum curcuma,
saffron.


expunge (v.)

c.1600, from Latin expungere prick out, blot out, mark (a name on a list) for deletion by pricking
dots above or below it, literally prick out, from ex- out (see ex-) + pungere to prick, stab (see
pungent). Related: Expunged; expunging.


pink (v.)

c.1200, pungde pierce, stab, later (early 14c.) make holes in; spur a horse, of uncertain origin;
perhaps from a Romanic stem that also yielded French piquer, Spanish picar (see pike (n.2)). Or
perhaps from Old English pyngan and directly from Latin pungere to prick, pierce (see pungent).
Surviving mainly in pinking shears.


interpunction (n.)

punctuation, 1610s, from Latin interpunctionem (nominative interpunctio) a putting of points
between, noun of action from past participle stem of interpungere to put points between, from inter-
(see inter-) + pungere (see pungent).


oregano (n.)

1771, from Spanish or American Spanish oregano, from Latin origanus, origanum, from Greek oreiganon,
from oros mountain (see oread) + ganos brightness, ornament. The older form of the word in English
was the Latin-derived origanum (mid-13c.), also origan (early 15c.). In Europe, the dried leaves of
wild marjoram; in America, a different, and more pungent, shrub.


punch (n.1)

pointed tool for making holes or embossing, late 14c., short for puncheon (mid-14c.), from Old
French ponchon, poinchon pointed tool, piercing weapon, from Vulgar Latin *punctionem (nominative
*punctio) pointed tool, from past participle stem of Latin pungere to prick (see pungent). From mid-
15c. as a stab, thrust; late 15c. as a dagger. Meaning machine for pressing or stamping a die is
from 1620s.


nasturtium (n.)

mid-12c., plant of the mustard family, like watercress, from Latin nasturtium cress; the popular
etymology explanation of the name (Pliny) is that it is from Latin *nasitortium, literally nose-
twist, from nasus nose (see nose (n.)) + past participle of torquere to twist (see torque (n.)); the
plant so called for its pungent odor. Modern application to a South American trailing plant with
orange flowers first recorded 1704.


compunction (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French compunction (12c., Modern French componction), from Late Latin
compunctionem (nominative compunctio) remorse; a pricking (of conscience), noun of action from past
participle stem of Latin compungere to severely prick, sting, from com-, intensive prefix (see
com-), + pungere to prick (see pungent). Used in figurative sense by early Church writers.
Originally a much more intense feeling, similar to remorse, or contrition.


poignant (adj.)

late 14c., painful to physical or mental feeling (of sauce, spice, wine as well as things that
affect the feelings), from Old French poignant sharp, pointed (13c.), present participle of poindre
to prick, sting, from Latin pungere to prick (see pungent). Related: Poignantly.    The word
disguises a linguistics trick-play, a double reverse. Latin pungere is from the same root as Latin
pugnus fist, and represents a metathesis of -n- and -g- that later was reversed in French.


eager (adj.)

late 13c., strenuous, ardent, fierce, angry, from Old French aigre sour, acid; harsh, bitter, rough;
eager greedy; lively, active, forceful, from Latin acrem (nominative acer) keen, sharp, pointed,
piercing; acute, ardent, zealous (see acrid).    Meaning full of keen desire (early 14c.) seems to
be peculiar to English. The English word kept an alternative meaning of pungent, sharp-edged till
19c. (as in Shakespeare's The bitter clamour of two eager tongues, in Richard II). Related: Eagerly;
eagerness.


counterpoint (n.)

early 15c., of stitching, from Old French cuilte contrepointe quilt stitched through and through,
altered from coute pointe, from Medieval Latin culcita puncta quilted mattress, from Latin culcita
cushion + puncta, fem. past participle of pungere to prick, stab (see pungent).    Of music, mid-
15c., from Old French contrepoint, from Medieval Latin cantus contrapunctus, from contrapunctum,
from Latin contra + puncta, with reference to the indication of musical notes by pricking with a
pointed pen over or under the original melody on a manuscript.


spice (n.)

c.1200, something added to food or drink to enhance the flavor, vegetable substance aromatic or
pungent to the taste, also a spice used as a medication or an alchemical ingredient, from Old French
espice (Modern French &#233;pice), from Late Latin species (plural) spices, goods, wares, in
classical Latin kind, sort (see species). From c.1300 as an aromatic spice, also spices as
commodities; from early 14c. as a spice-bearing plant. Figurative sense of attractive or enjoyable
variation is from 13c.; that of slight touch or trace of something is recorded from 1530s. Meaning
specimen, sample is from 1790. Early druggists recognized four types of spices: saffron, clove,
cinnamon, nutmeg.


bitter (adj.)

Old English biter bitter, sharp, cutting; angry, embittered; cruel, from Proto-Germanic *bitras-
(cognates: Old Saxon bittar, Old Norse bitr, Dutch bitter, Old High German bittar, German bitter,
Gothic baitrs bitter), from PIE root *bheid- to split (cognates: Old English bitan to bite; see bite
(v.)). Evidently the meaning drifted in prehistoric times from biting, of pungent taste, to acrid-
tasting. Used figuratively in Old English of states of mind and words. Related: Bitterly.


hot (adj.)

Old English hat hot, flaming, opposite of cold, also fervent, fierce, intense, excited, from Proto-
Germanic *haita- (cognates: Old Saxon and Old Frisian het, Old Norse heitr, Middle Dutch and Dutch
heet, German hei&szlig; hot, Gothic heito heat of a fever), from PIE root *kai- heat (cognates:
Lithuanian kaistu to grow hot).    The association of hot with sexuality dates back to c.1500. Taste
sense of pungent, acrid, biting is from 1540s. Sense of exciting, remarkable, very good is 1895;
that of stolen is first recorded 1925 (originally with overtones of easily identified and difficult
to dispose of); that of radioactive is from 1942.   Hot flashes in the menopausal sense attested
from 1887. Hot air unsubstantiated statements, boastful talk is from 1900. Hot stuff for anything
good or excellent is by 1889. Hot potato in figurative sense is from 1846. The hot and cold in hide-
and-seek or guessing games are from hunting (1640s), with notion of tracking a scent.


acrid (adj.)

1712, formed irregularly from Latin acer (fem. acris) sharp, pungent, bitter, eager, fierce, from
PIE *akri- sharp, from root *ak- be sharp, rise (out) to a point, pierce (cognates: Oscan akrid
(ablative singular) sharply; Greek akis sharp point, akros at the farthest point, highest,
outermost, akantha thorn, akme summit, edge; also oxys sharp, bitter; Sanskrit acri- corner, edge,
acani- point of an arrow, asrih edge; Lithuanian a&#353;muo sharpness, akstis sharp stick; Old
Lithuanian a&#353;tras, Lithuanian a&#353;trus sharp; Old Church Slavonic ostru, Russian &#243;stryj
sharp; Old Irish er high; Welsh ochr edge, corner, border; Old Norse eggja goad; Old English ecg
sword). The -id suffix probably is in imitation of acid. Acrious (1670s) is a correct formation, but
seldom seen.


taste (v.)

c.1300, to touch, to handle, from Old French taster to taste, sample by mouth; enjoy (13c.), earlier
to feel, touch, pat, stroke (12c., Modern French t&#226;ter), from Vulgar Latin *tastare, apparently
an alteration (perhaps by influence of gustare) of taxtare, a frequentative form of Latin taxare
evaluate, handle (see tax (v.)). Meaning to take a little food or drink is from c.1300; that of to
perceive by sense of taste is recorded from mid-14c. Of substances, to have a certain taste or
flavor, it is attested from 1550s (replaced native smack (v.3) in this sense). For another PIE root
in this sense, see gusto.    The Hindus recognized six principal varieties of taste with sixty-three
possible mixtures ... the Greeks eight .... These included the four that are now regarded as
fundamental, namely 'sweet,' 'bitter,' 'acid,' 'salt.' ... The others were 'pungent' (Gk. drimys,
Skt. katuka-), 'astringent' (Gk. stryphnos, Skt. kasaya-), and, for the Greeks, 'rough, harsh'
(austeros), 'oily, greasy' (liparos), with the occasional addition of 'winy' (oinodes). [Buck]
Sense of to know by experience is from 1520s. Related: Tasted; tasting. Taste buds is from 1879;
also taste goblets.


point (n.)

c.1200, minute amount, single item in a whole; sharp end of a sword, etc., a merger of two words,
both ultimately from Latin pungere prick, pierce, puncture (see pungent). The Latin neuter past
participle punctum was used as a noun, meaning small hole made by pricking, subsequently extended to
anything that looked like one, hence, dot, particle, etc. This yielded Old French point dot;
smallest amount, which was borrowed in Middle English by c.1300.    Meanwhile the Latin fem. past
participle of pungere was puncta, which was used in Medieval Latin to mean sharp tip, and became Old
French pointe point of a weapon, vanguard of an army, which also passed into English, early 14c.
The senses have merged in English, but remain distinct in French. Extended senses are from the
notion of minute, single, or separate items in an extended whole. Meaning small mark, dot in English
is mid-14c. Meaning distinguishing feature is recorded from late 15c. Meaning a unit of score in a
game is first recorded 1746. As a typeface unit (in Britain and U.S., one twelfth of a pica), it
went into use in U.S. 1883. As a measure of weight for precious stones (one one-hundredth of a
carat) it is recorded from 1931.   The point the matter being discussed is attested from late 14c.;
meaning sense, purpose, advantage (usually in the negative, as in what's the point?) is first
recorded 1903. Point of honor (1610s) translates French point d'honneur. Point of no return (1941)
is originally aviators' term for the point in a flight before which any engine failure requires an
immediate turn around and return to the point of departure, and beyond which such return is no
longer practical.


