purse (v.)

c.1300, put in a purse; c.1600 as draw together and wrinkle (as the strings of a money bag), from
purse (n.). Related: Pursed; pursing.


purse (n.)

Old English pursa little bag made of leather, especially for carrying money, from Medieval Latin
bursa leather purse (source also of Old French borse, 12c., Modern French bourse; see bourse), from
Late Latin bursa, variant of byrsa hide, from Greek byrsa hide, leather. Change of b- to p- perhaps
by influence of Old English pusa, Old Norse posi bag.    Meaning woman's handbag is attested from
1951. Meaning sum of money collected as a prize in a race, etc., is from 1640s. Purse-strings,
figurative for control of money, is from early 15c. Purse-snatcher first attested 1902 (earlier
purse-picker, 1540s). The notion of drawn together by a thong also is behind purse-net (c.1400).


purser (n.)

mid-15c., treasurer, especially caretaker of accounts and provisions on a ship, originally also
maker of purses (late 15c.), agent noun from Middle English purse (see purse (n.)). From late 13c.
as a surname.


purse-seine (n.)

1870; see purse (n.) + seine.


bourse (n.)

stock exchange, 1570s, burse, from Old French borse money bag, purse (12c.), from Medieval Latin
bursa a bag (see purse (n.)). French spelling and modern sense of exchange for merchants is first
recorded 1845, from the name of the Paris stock exchange. The term originated because in 13c. Bruges
the sign of a purse (or perhaps three purses), hung on the front of the house where merchants met.


reimburse (v.)

1610s, from re- back + imburse to pay, enrich, literally put in a purse (c.1530), from Middle French
embourser, from Old French em- in + borser to get money, from borse purse, from Medieval Latin bursa
(see purse (n.)). Related: Reimbursed; reimbursing.


bursar (n.)

treasurer of a college, 1580s, from Anglo-Latin burser treasurer (13c.), from Medieval Latin
bursarius purse-bearer, from bursa (see purse (n.)). Related: Bursarial.


disburse (v.)

1520s, disbourse, from Old French desbourser (13c.) extract (money) from a purse, spend (money),
from des- (see dis-) + bourse purse (see bursar). Related: Disbursed; disbursing.


bursa (n.)

by 1788 as an English word in physiology, shortened from medieval Latin bursa mucosa mucus pouch,
from Medieval Latin bursa bag, purse, from Late Latin bursa, variant of byrsa hide, from Greek byrsa
hide, skin, wineskin, drum, of unknown origin; compare purse (n.).


poke (n.1)

small sack, early 13c., probably from Old North French poque (12c., Old French poche) purse, poke,
purse-net, probably from a Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic *puk- (cognates: Old English pohha,
pocca bag, pocket, Middle Dutch poke, Old Norse poki bag, pouch, pocket, dialectal German Pfoch),
from PIE root *beu-, an imitative root associated with words for to swell (see bull (n.2)).


sporran (n.)

furred leather pouch, 1818, from Gaelic sporan, Irish sparan purse, of uncertain origin.
Familiarized by Walter Scott (first attested English use is in Rob Roy).


cutpurse (n.)

one who steals by the method of cutting purses, a common practice when men wore their purses at
their girdles [Johnson], mid-14c., from cut (v.) + purse (n.). The word continued after the method
switched to picking pockets.


imburse (v.)

1520s, from Medieval Latin imbursare, from assimilated form of in- into, in, on, upon (see in- (2))
+ bursa purse. Related: Imbursement.


bud (n.)

late 14c., budde, origin unknown, perhaps from Old French boter push forward, thrust, itself a
Germanic word (compare Dutch bot bud, Old Saxon budil bag, purse, German Beutel), or perhaps from
Old English budd beetle.


pocketbook (n.)

also pocket-book, 1610s, originally a small book meant to be carried in one's pocket, from pocket
(n.) + book (n.). Meaning a booklike leather folder for papers, bills, etc. is from 1722. Meaning a
woman's purse is from 1816.


pouch (n.)

early 14c., bag for carrying things, especially (late 14c.) small bag in which money is carried,
from Anglo-French puche, Old North French pouche (13c.), Old French poche purse, poke, all from a
Germanic source (compare Old English pocca bag; see poke (n.1)). Extended to cavities in animal
bodies from c.1400.


satchel (n.)

small bag, mid-14c., from Old French sachel, from Late Latin saccellum money bag, purse, diminutive
of Latin sacculus, diminutive of saccus bag (see sack (n.1)).


marsupial (adj.)

1690s, with -al (1) + Modern Latin marsupialis having a pouch, coined from Late Latin marsupium
pouch, purse (Classical Latin marsuppium), from Greek marsipion, diminutive of marsipos bag, pouch,
of foreign, possibly oriental, origin. As a noun from 1805.


scrotum (n.)

purse-like tegumentary investment of the testes and part of the spermatic cord; the cod [Century
Dictionary], 1590s, from Latin scrotum, probably transposed from scortum a skin, hide (see corium),
perhaps by influence of scrautum leather quiver for arrows.  Isn't the sea what Algy calls it: a
grey sweet mother? The snotgreen sea. The scrotum-tightening sea. Epi oinopa ponton. [Joyce,
Ulysses]  Related: Scrotal.


bellows (n.)

c.1200, belwes, literally bags, plural of belu, belw, northern form of beli, from late Old English
belg bag, purse, leathern bottle (see belly (n.)). Reduced from bl&aelig;stb&aelig;lg, literally
blowing bag. Used exclusively in plural since 15c., probably due to the two handles.


pucker (v.)

1590s, prob. earlier in colloquial use [OED], possibly a frequentative form of pock, dialectal
variant of poke bag, sack (see poke (n.1)), which would give it the same notion as in purse (v.).
Verbs of this type often shorten or obscure the original vowel; compare clutter, flutter, putter,
etc. [Barnhart]. Related: Puckered; puckering.


pickpocket (n.)

also pick-pocket, 1590s, from pick (v.) + pocket (n.). Earlier was pick-purse (late 14c.). As a verb
from 1670s.


fiscal (adj.)

1560s, pertaining to public revenue, from Middle French fiscal, from Late Latin fiscalis of or
belonging to the state treasury, from Latin fiscus treasury, originally purse, basket made of twigs
(in which money was kept), of unknown origin. The general sense of financial (1865, American
English) was abstracted from phrases like fiscal calendar, fiscal year. Related: Fiscally.


scarf (n.1)

band of silk, strip of cloth, 1550s, a band worn across the body or over the shoulders, probably
from Old North French escarpe sash, sling, which probably is identical with Old French escherpe
pilgrim's purse suspended from the neck, perhaps from Frankish *skirpja or some other Germanic
source (compare Old Norse skreppa small bag, wallet, satchel), or from Medieval Latin scirpa little
bag woven of rushes, from Latin scirpus rush, bulrush, of unknown origin [Klein]. As a cold-weather
covering for the neck, first recorded 1844. Plural scarfs began to yield to scarves early 18c., on
model of half/halves, etc.


grouch (n.)

ill-tempered person, 1896, earlier state of irritable glumness (1890, in expressions such as to have
a grouch on), U.S. college student slang, of uncertain origin, possibly from grutching complaint,
grumbling (see grutch).     The Grouch, on the other Hand, gave a correct Imitation of a Bear with a
Sore Toe. His Conversation was largely made up of Grunts. He carried a Facial Expression that
frightened little Children in Street Cars and took all the Starch out of sentimental Young Ladies.
He seemed perpetually to carry the Hoof-Marks of a horrible Nightmare. [George Ade, People You Know,
1902]    The verb is 1916, from the noun. Related: Grouched; grouching. Grouch bag purse for
carrying hidden money (1908) is the source of the nickname of U.S. comedian Julius Groucho Marx
(1890-1977), who supposedly carried his money in one to poker games.


loo (n.2)

type of card game, 1670s, short for lanterloo (1660s), from French lanturelu, originally (1620s) the
refrain of a popular comic song; according to French sources the refrain expresses a mocking refusal
or an evasive answer and was formed on the older word for a type of song chorus, turelure;
apparently a jingling reduplication of loure bagpipe (perhaps from Latin lura bag, purse).     From
its primary signification -- a kind of bagpipe inflated from the mouth -- the word 'loure' came to
mean an old dance, in slower rhythm than the gigue, generally in 6-4 time. As this was danced to the
nasal tones of the 'loure,' the term 'loure' was gradually applied to any passage meant to be played
in the style of the old bagpipe airs. [Grove's Dictionary of Music and Musicians, London, 1906]
The refrain sometimes is met in English as turra-lurra.


pudding (n.)

c.1300, a kind of sausage: the stomach or one of the entrails of a pig, sheep, etc., stuffed with
minced meat, suet, seasoning, boiled and kept till needed, perhaps from a West Germanic stem *pud-
to swell (cognates: Old English puduc a wen, Westphalian dialect puddek lump, pudding, Low German
pudde-wurst black pudding, English dialectal pod belly; also see pudgy).    Other possibility is the
traditional one that it is from Old French boudin sausage, from Vulgar Latin *botellinus, from Latin
botellus sausage (change of French b- to English p- presents difficulties, but compare purse (n.)).
The modern sense had emerged by 1670, from extension to other foods boiled or steamed in a bag or
sack (16c.). German pudding, French pouding, Swedish pudding, Irish putog are from English. Pudding-
pie attested from 1590s.


string (n.)

Old English streng line, cord, thread, string of a bow or harp, in plural tackle, rigging; lineage,
race, from Proto-Germanic *strangiz (cognates: Old Norse strengr, Danish streng, Middle Dutch
strenge, Dutch streng, Old High German strang, German Strang rope, cord), from *strang- taut, stiff,
from PIE root *strenk- tight, narrow. Gradually restricted by early Middle English to lines that are
smaller than a rope. Sense of a number of objects arranged in a line first recorded late 15c.    Old
English meaning ligaments, tendons is preserved in hamstring, heartstrings. Meaning limitations,
stipulations (1888) is American English, probably from the common April Fool's joke of leaving a
purse that appears to be full of money on the sidewalk, then tugging it away with an attached string
when someone stoops to pick it up.    To pull strings control the course of affairs (1860) is from
the notion of puppet theater. First string, second string, etc. in athletics (1863) is from archers'
custom of carrying spare bowstrings in the event that one breaks. Strings stringed instruments is
attested from mid-14c. String bean is from 1759; string bikini is from 1974.


belly (n.)

Old English belg, bylg (West Saxon), b&aelig;lg (Anglian) leather bag, purse, bellows, from Proto-
Germanic *balgiz bag (cognates: Old Norse belgr bag, bellows, bylgja billow, Gothic balgs wineskin),
from PIE *bholgh-, from root *bhelgh- to swell, an extension of *bhel- (2) to blow, swell (see
bole). Meaning shifted to body (late 13c.), then focused to abdomen (mid-14c.). Meaning bulging part
or concave surface of anything is 1590s. The West Germanic root had a figurative or extended sense
of anger, arrogance (as in Old English bolgenmod enraged; belgan (v.) to become angry).    Indo-
European languages commonly use the same word for both the external belly and the internal (stomach,
womb, etc.), but the distinction of external and internal is somewhat present in English
belly/stomach; Greek gastr- (see gastric) in classical language denoted the paunch or belly, while
modern science uses it only in reference to the stomach as an organ. Fastidious avoidance of belly
in speech and writing (compensated for by stretching the senses of imported stomach and abdomen,
baby-talk tummy and misappropriated midriff) began late 18c. and the word was banished from Bibles
in many early 19c. editions. Belly punch (n.) is attested from 1811.


