putrid (adj.)

early 15c., from Latin putridus, from putrere to rot, from putris rotten, crumbling, related to
putere to stink, from PIE root *pu- to rot, stink (see pus). First in reference to putrid fever, an
old name for typhus (also known in Middle English as putrida). Related: Putrification.


putridity (n.)

1630s, from Medieval Latin putriditas, from Latin putridus (see putrid).


septicemia (n.)

1857, Modern Latin septic&aelig;mia, from French septicoemi, coined irregularly by French physician
Pierre-Adolphe Piorry (1794-1879) in 1837 from Greek septikos (see septic) + haima blood (see
-emia).    Dr. Piorry, in a second communication, insists upon the fact, that in a great number of
cases the decaying contents of the uterus, and the putrid infection of the blood from this source,
constitute the so-called puerperal fever, and he thinks that the discussion in the Academy is only a
fight about words, as the different speakers agree, without knowing it themselves, upon the nature
of the disease. He proposes the name of septicemia, as best designating the sources of the disease,
viz., from putrid infection from the uterus, and by the respiration of an atmosphere pregnant with
septic particles. ... The admission of this septicemia explains the putrid accidents, as observed in
men, the foetus, and wounded persons during a puerperal epidemic. [E. Noeggerath and A. Jacobi,
Contributions to Midwifery, New York, 1859]


addle (v.)

1712, from addle (n.) urine, liquid filth, from Old English adela mud, mire, liquid manure (cognate
with Old Swedish adel urine, Middle Low German adel, Dutch aal puddle).    Used in noun phrase addle
egg (mid-13c.) egg that does not hatch, rotten egg, literally urine egg, a loan-translation of Latin
ovum urinum, which is itself an erroneous loan-translation of Greek ourion oon putrid egg, literally
wind egg, from ourios of the wind (confused by Roman writers with ourios of urine, from ouron
urine). Because of this usage, from c.1600 the noun in English was taken as an adjective meaning
putrid, and thence given a figurative extension to empty, vain, idle, also confused, muddled,
unsound (1706). The verb followed a like course. Related: Addled; addling.


saprophyte (n.)

bacteria or fungus that grows on decaying organic matter, 1867, from French, from Greek sapros
putrid + phyton plant (see phyto-). Related: Saprophytism.


putrescence (n.)

1640s, from Latin putrescentem (nominative putrescens), present participle of putrescere grow
rotten, moulder, decay, inchoative of putrere be rotten (see putrid).


putrescent (adj.)

1732, a back-formation from putrescence, or else from Latin putrescentem (nominative putrescens),
present participle of putrescere grow rotten, moulder, decay, inchoative of putrere be rotten (see
putrid).


septic (adj.)

c.1600, from Latin septicus of or pertaining to putrefaction, from Greek septikos characterized by
putrefaction, from sepein make rotten or putrid, cause to rot (see sepsis). Septic tank is attested
from 1902.


putrefy (v.)

mid-15c., from Middle French putr&eacute;fier, from Latin putrefacere to make rotten, from putrere
(see putrid) + facere (see factitious). Related: Putrefied; putrefying.


pus (n.)

late 14c., from Latin pus pus, matter from a sore; figuratively bitterness, malice (related to puter
rotten; see putrid), from PIE *pu- (2) to rot, decay (cognates: Sanskrit puyati rots, stinks, putih
stinking, foul; Greek puon discharge from a sore, pythein to cause to rot; Gothic fuls, Old English
ful foul), perhaps originally echoic of a natural exclamation of disgust.


putrefaction (n.)

c.1400, from Old French putrefaction (14c.), from Latin putrefactionem (nominative putrefactio),
noun of action from past participle stem of putrefacere to make rotten, from putrere to be rotten
(see putrid) + facere to make, do (see factitious).


typhus (n.)

acute infectious fever, usually accompanied by prostration, delirium, and small reddish spots, 1785,
from medical Latin, from Greek typhos stupor caused by fever, literally smoke, from typhein to
smoke, related to typhos blind, typhon whirlwind, from PIE *dheubh-, perhaps an extended form of
root *dheu- (1) to fly about like dust.    The Greek term [typhos] (smoke, mist, fog) was employed
by Hippocrates to define a confused state of the intellect, with a tendency to stupor (stupor
attonitus); and in this sense it is aptly applied to typhus fever with its slow cerebration and
drowsy stupor. Boissier de Sauvages first (in 1760) called this fever typhus, and the name was
adopted by Cullen of Edinburgh in 1769. Previous to the time of de Sauvages typhus was known as
Pestilential or Putrid Fever, or by some name suggested by the eruption, or expressive of the
locality in which it appeared, as Camp, Jail, Hospital, or Ship Fever (Murchison). [Thomas Clifford,
ed., A System of Medicine, New York, 1897]    Related: typhous (adj.).


foul (adj.)

Old English ful rotten, unclean, vile, corrupt, offensive to the senses, from Proto-Germanic *fulaz
(cognates: Old Saxon and Old Frisian ful, Middle Dutch voul, Dutch vuil, Old High German f&uuml;l,
German faul, Gothic f&uuml;ls), from root *fu-, corresponding to PIE *pu-, perhaps from the sound
made in reaction to smelling something bad (compare Sanskrit puyati rots, stinks, putih foul,
rotten; Greek puon discharge from a sore; Latin pus putrid matter, putere to stink, putridus rotten;
Lithuanian puviu to rot).  Old English ful occasionally meant ugly (as contrasted with f&aelig;ger
(adj.), modern fair (adj.)), a sense frequently found in Middle English, and the cognate in Swedish
is the usual word for ugly. Of weather, first recorded late 14c. In the sporting sense of irregular,
unfair it is first attested 1797, though foul play is recorded from mid-15c. Baseball sense of out
of play attested by 1860. Foulmart was a Middle English word for polecat (from Old English mear&eth;
marten).


