qualify (v.)

mid-15c., to invest with a quality, from Middle French qualifier (15c.) and directly from Medieval
Latin qualificare attribute a quality to; make of a certain quality, from Latin qualis of what
sort?, correlative pronomial adjective (see quality) + facere to make (see factitious). Meaning to
limit, modify is from 1530s. Sense of be fit for a job first appeared 1580s. Related: Qualified;
qualifying.


qualifier (n.)

1560s, agent noun from qualify. Grammatical sense is from 1580s.


unqualified (adj.)

1550s, not having necessary qualifications, from un- (1) not + past participle of qualify (v.).
Meaning not modified or limited is recorded from 1796. As a verb, unqualify disqualify is from
1650s.


disqualify (v.)

1718 (implied in disqualified), from dis- + qualify. Related: Disqualifying.


qualification (n.)

1540s, restriction, modification, from Middle French qualification and directly from Medieval Latin
qualificationem (nominative qualificatio), noun of action from past participle stem of qualificare
(see qualify). Meaning accomplishment that qualifies someone to do something is from 1660s; that of
necessary precondition is from 1723. Related: Qualifications.


race (n.2)

people of common descent, a word from the 16th century, from Middle French race, earlier razza race,
breed, lineage, family (16c.), possibly from Italian razza, of unknown origin (cognate with Spanish
and Portuguese raza). Etymologists say no connection with Latin radix root, though they admit this
might have influenced the tribe, nation sense.    Original senses in English included wines with
characteristic flavor (1520), group of people with common occupation (c.1500), and generation
(1540s). Meaning tribe, nation, or people regarded as of common stock is by 1560s. Modern meaning of
one of the great divisions of mankind based on physical peculiarities is from 1774 (though as OED
points out, even among anthropologists there never has been an accepted classification of
these).Just being a Negro doesn't qualify you to understand the race situation any more than being
sick makes you an expert on medicine. [Dick Gregory, 1964]  In mid-20c. U.S. music catalogues,
Negro. Klein suggests these derive from Arabic ra's head, beginning, origin (compare Hebrew rosh).
Old English &thorn;eode meant both race, folk, nation and language; as a verb, ge&thorn;eodan, it
meant to unite, to join.


