consultant (n.)

1690s, of persons going to oracles, from consult + -ant. Of physicians, from 1878; meaning one
qualified to give professional advice is first attested 1893 in a Sherlock Holmes story. Related:
Consultancy (1955).


consummate (adj.)

mid-15c., from Latin consummatus perfected, complete, past participle of consummare sum up, complete
(see consummation). Of persons, accomplished, very qualified, from 1640s. Related: Consummately.


patronage (n.)

late 14c., right of presenting a qualified person to a church benefice, from Old French patronage
(14c.) from patron (see patron). Secular sense of action of giving influential support is from
1550s. General sense of power to give jobs or favors is from 1769; meaning regular business of
customers is 1804.


journeyman (n.)

qualified worker at a craft or trade who works for wages for another (a position between apprentice
and master), early 15c., from journey (n.), preserving the etymological sense of the word, + man
(n.). Figurative depricatory sense of hireling, drudge is from 1540s. Its American English
colloquial shortening jour (adj.) is attested from 1835.


fishing (n.)

verbal noun from fish (v.), c.1300, fysschynge; figurative use from 1540s. Fishing rod (1550s) is
older than fishing pole (1791). To go fishing is as old as Old English on fisco&eth; gan.  [O]f all
diversions which ingenuity ever devised for the relief of idleness, fishing is the worst qualified
to amuse a man who is at once indolent and impatient. [Scott, Waverly, 1814]


qualify (v.)

mid-15c., to invest with a quality, from Middle French qualifier (15c.) and directly from Medieval
Latin qualificare attribute a quality to; make of a certain quality, from Latin qualis of what
sort?, correlative pronomial adjective (see quality) + facere to make (see factitious). Meaning to
limit, modify is from 1530s. Sense of be fit for a job first appeared 1580s. Related: Qualified;
qualifying.


leg (n.)

late 13c., from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse leggr leg, bone of the arm or leg, from
Proto-Germanic *lagjaz, with no certain ulterior connections, perhaps from a PIE root meaning to
bend [Buck]. Compare German Bein leg, in Old High German bone, leg. Replaced Old English shank. Of
furniture supports from 1670s. The meaning a part or stage of a journey or race (1920) is from
earlier sailing sense of a run made on a single tack (1867), which was usually qualified as long
leg, short leg, etc. Slang phrase shake a leg dance is attested from 1881. To be on (one's) last
legs at the end of one's life is from 1590s.


compete (v.)

1610s,  to enter or be put in rivalry with, from Middle French comp&eacute;ter be in rivalry with
(14c.), or directly from Late Latin competere strive in common, in classical Latin to come together,
agree, to be qualified, later, strive together, from com- together (see com-) + petere to strive,
seek, fall upon, rush at, attack (see petition (n.)).    Rare 17c., revived from late 18c. in sense
to strive (alongside another) for the attainment of something and regarded early 19c. in Britain as
a Scottish or American word. Market sense is from 1840s (perhaps a back-formation from competition);
athletics sense attested by 1857. Related: Competed; competing.


two (adj.)

Old English twa two, fem. and neuter form of twegen two (see twain), from Proto-Germanic *twa
(cognates: Old Saxon and Old Frisian twene, twa, Old Norse tveir, tvau, Dutch twee, Old High German
zwene, zwo, German zwei, Gothic twai), from PIE *duwo, variant of dwo two (cognates: Sanskrit dvau,
Avestan dva, Greek duo, Latin duo, Old Welsh dou, Lithuanian dvi, Old Church Slavonic duva two,
first element in Hittite ta-ugash two years old).   Two-fisted is from 1774. Two cheers for _____,
expressing qualified enthusiasm first recorded 1951 in E.M. Forster's title Two Cheers for
Democracy. Two-dimensional is recorded from 1883; figurative sense of lacking substance or depth is
attested from 1934.


attorney (n.)

early 14c. (mid-13c. in Anglo-Latin), from Old French atorn&eacute; (one) appointed, past participle
of aturner to decree, assign, appoint, from atorner (see attorn). The legal Latin form attornare
influenced the spelling in Anglo-French. The sense is of one appointed to represent another's
interests.    In English law, a private attorney was one appointed to act for another in business or
legal affairs (usually for pay); an attorney at law or public attorney was a qualified legal agent
in the courts of Common Law who prepared the cases for a barrister, who pleaded them (the equivalent
of a solicitor in Chancery). So much a term of contempt in England that it was abolished by the
Judicature Act of 1873 and merged with solicitor.Johnson observed that he did not care to speak ill
of any man behind his back, but he believed the gentleman was an attorney. [Boswell]The double -t-
is a mistaken 15c. attempt to restore a non-existent Latin original. Attorney general first recorded
1530s in sense of legal officer of the state (late 13c. in Anglo-French), from French, hence the odd
plural (subject first, adjective second).


