quash (v.)

to make void, annul, early 14c., from Old French quasser, casser to annul, declare void, and
directly from Medieval Latin quassare, alteration of Late Latin cassare, from cassus null, void,
empty (see caste (n.)).    Meaning to break, crush, is early 14c., from Old French quasser, casser
to break, smash, injure, harm, weaken, from Latin quassare to shatter, frequentative of quatere
(past participle quassus) to shake, from PIE root *kwet- to shake (cognates: Greek passein to
sprinkle, Lithuanian kuteti to shake up, Old Saxon skuddian to move violently, German sch&#252;tteln
to shake, Old English scudan to hasten).    The words have influenced each other in form and sense
since Medieval Latin and now are somewhat grown together. Related: Quashed; quashing.


concussion (n.)

c.1400, from Latin concussionem (nominative concussio) a shaking, noun of action from past
participle stem of concutere shake violently, from com- together (see com-) + quatere to shake (see
quash). Modern brain injury sense is from 1540s.


cassation (n.)

anullment, early 15c., from Old French cassation, from casser, from Late Latin cassare, from Latin
quassare (see quash).


cask (n.)

mid-15c., from Middle French casque cask; helmet, from Spanish casco skull, cask, helmet, originally
potsherd, from cascar to break up, from Vulgar Latin *quassicare, frequentative of Latin quassare to
shake, shatter (see quash). The sense evolution is unclear.


pasta (n.)

1874, from Italian pasta, from Late Latin pasta dough, pastry cake, paste, from Greek pasta barley
porridge, probably originally a salted mess of food, from neuter plural of pastos (adj.) sprinkled,
salted, from passein to sprinkle, from PIE root *kwet- to shake (see quash).


percussion (n.)

early 15c., a striking, a blow; internal injury, contusion, from Latin percussionem (nominative
percussio) a beating, striking; a beat as a measure of time, noun of action from past participle
stem of percutere to strike hard, beat, smite; strike through and through, from per- through (see
per) + quatere to strike, shake (see quash). Reference to musical instruments is first recorded
1776.


scud (v.)

to move quickly, 1530s, of uncertain origin, perhaps a variant of Middle English scut rabbit,
rabbit's tail, in reference to its movements (see scut (n.1)), but there are phonetic difficulties.
Perhaps rather from a North Sea Germanic source akin to Middle Low German, Middle Dutch schudden to
shake (see quash). Related: Scudded; scudding. As a noun from c.1600, from the verb. It also was the
NATO reporting name for a type of Soviet missile introduced in the 1960s.


rescue (v.)

c.1300, from stem of Old French rescorre protect, keep safe; free, deliver (Modern French recourre),
from re-, intensive prefix (see re-), + escourre to cast off, discharge, from Latin excutere to
shake off, drive away, from ex- out (see ex-) + -cutere, combining form of quatere to shake (see
quash). Related: Rescued; rescuing.


fracas (n.)

1727, from French fracas (15c.), from Italian fracasso uproar, crash, back-formation from fracassare
to smash, crash, break in pieces, from fra-, a shortening of Latin infra below + Italian cassare to
break, from Latin quassare to shake (see quash).


squash (v.)

to crush, squeeze, early 14c., squachen, from Old French esquasser, escasser to crush, shatter,
destroy, break, from Vulgar Latin *exquassare, from Latin ex- out (see ex-) + quassare to shatter
(see quash to crush). Related: Squashed; squashing.


discussion (n.)

mid-14c., examination, investigation, judicial trial, from Old French discussion discussion,
examination, investigation, legal trial, from Late Latin discussionem (nominative discussio)
examination, discussion, in classical Latin, a shaking, from discussus, past participle of discutere
strike asunder, break up, from dis- apart (see dis-) + quatere to shake (see quash). Meaning a
talking over, debating in English first recorded mid-15c. Sense evolution in Latin appears to have
been from smash apart to scatter, disperse, then in post-classical times (via the mental process
involved) to investigate, examine, then to debate.


push (v.)

early 14c., from Old French poulser (Modern French pousser), from Latin pulsare to beat, strike,
push, frequentative of pellere (past participle pulsus) to push, drive, beat (see pulse (n.1)).
Meaning promote is from 1714; meaning approach a certain age is from 1937. For palatization of -s-,
OED compares brush (n.1); quash. Related: Pushed; pushing.    Pushing up the daisies now, said a
soldier of his dead comrade. [The American Florist, vol. XLVIII, No. 1504, March 31, 1917]    To
push (someone) around is from 1923. To push (one's) luck is from 1754. To push the envelope in
figurative sense is late 1980s. To push up daisies be dead and buried is from World War I.


