queer (v.)

to spoil, ruin, 1812, from queer (adj.). Related: Queered; queering. Earlier it meant to puzzle,
ridicule, cheat (1790). To queer the pitch (1846) is in reference to the patter of an itinerant
tradesman or showman (see pitch (n.1)).    These wanderers, and those who are still seen
occasionally in the back streets of the metropolis, are said to 'go a-pitching ;' the spot they
select for their performance is their 'pitch,' and any interruption of their feats, such as an
accident, or the interference of a policeman, is said to 'queer the pitch,'--in other words, to
spoil it. [Thomas Frost, Circus Life and Circus Celebrities, London, 1875]


queer (adj.)

c.1500, strange, peculiar, eccentric, from Scottish, perhaps from Low German (Brunswick dialect)
queer oblique, off-center, related to German quer oblique, perverse, odd, from Old High German twerh
oblique, from PIE root *terkw- to turn, twist, wind (see thwart (adv.)).    Sense of homosexual
first recorded 1922; the noun in this sense is 1935, from the adjective. Related: Queerly. Queer
studies as an academic discipline attested from 1994.


queerness (n.)

1680s, strangeness, from queer (adj.) + -ness. Meaning homosexuality is from 1971.


quirk (n.)

1560s, quibble, evasion, of unknown origin, perhaps connected to German quer (see queer (adj.)) via
notion of twisting and slanting; but its earliest appearance in western England dialect seems to
argue against this source. Perhaps originally a technical term for a twist or flourish in weaving.
Sense of peculiarity is c.1600.


quiz (v.)

1847, to question, quies, perhaps from Latin qui es? who are you?, first question in oral exams in
Latin in old-time grammar schools. Spelling quiz first recorded 1886, though it was in use as a noun
spelling from 1854, perhaps in this case from apparently unrelated slang word quiz odd person (1782,
source of quizzical). Compare quisby queer, not quite right; bankrupt (slang from 1807). From the
era of radio quiz shows comes quizzee (n.), 1940.


strange (adj.)

late 13c., from elsewhere, foreign, unknown, unfamiliar, from Old French estrange foreign, alien,
unusual, unfamiliar, curious; distant; inhospitable; estranged, separated (Modern French
&eacute;trange), from Latin extraneus foreign, external, from without (source also of Italian strano
strange, foreign, Spanish estra&#241;o), from extra outside of (see extra). In early use also
strounge, straunge. Sense of queer, surprising is attested from late 14c. In nuclear physics, from
1956.


pseudonym (n.)

1828, in part a back-formation from pseudonymous, in part from German pseudonym and French
pseudonyme (adj.), from Greek pseudonymos having a false name, under a false name, from pseudes
false (see pseudo-) + onyma, Aeolic dialectal variant of onoma name (see name (n.)).    Possibly a
dictionary word at first [Barnhart]. Fowler calls it a queer out-of-the-way term for an everyday
thing. Properly in reference to made-up names; the name of an actual author or person of reputation
affixed to a work he or she did not write is an allonym. An author's actual name affixed to his or
her own work is an autonym (1867).


shove (v.)

Old English scufan push away, thrust, push with violence (class II strong verb; past tense sceaf,
past participle scoven), from Proto-Germanic *skeub-, *skub- (cognates: Old Norse skufa, Old Frisian
skuva, Dutch schuiven, Old High German scioban, German schieben to push, thrust, Gothic af-skiuban),
from PIE root *skeubh- to shove (cognates: scuffle, shuffle, shovel; likely cognates outside
Germanic include Lithuanian skubti to make haste, skubinti to hasten). Related: Shoved; shoving.
Replaced by push in all but colloquial and nautical usage. Shove off leave (1844) is from boating.
Shove the queer (1859) was an old expression for to counterfeit money. Shove it had an earlier sense
of depart before it became a rude synonym for stick it (by 1941) with implied destination.


quiz (n.)

brief examination of a student on some subject, 1852, perhaps from quiz (v.), or from slang quiz odd
person (1782, perhaps originally university slang), via the notion of schoolboy prank or joke played
at the expense of a person deemed a quiz (a noun sense attested frequently 1840s).    A Quiz, in the
common acceptation of the word, signifies one who thinks, speaks, or acts differently from the rest
of the world in general. But, as manners and opinions are as various as mankind, it will be
difficult to say who shall be termed a Quiz, and who shall not: each person indiscriminately
applying the name of Quiz to every one who differs from himself .... [The London Magazine, November,
1783]     According to OED, the anecdote that credits this word to a bet by the Dublin theater-
manager Daly or Daley that he could coin a word is regarded by authorities as doubtful and the first
record of it appears to be in 1836 (in Smart's Walker Remodelled; the story is omitted in the
edition of 1840).    The word Quiz is a sort of a kind of a word  That people apply to some being
absurd;  One who seems, as t'were oddly your fancy to strike  In a sort of a fashion you somehow
don't like  A mixture of odd, and of queer, and all that  Which one hates, just, you know, as some
folks hate a cat;  A comical, whimsical, strange, droll -- that is,  You know what I mean; 'tis --
in short, -- 'tis a quiz!    [from Etymology of Quiz, Charles Dibdin, 1842]


