queller (n.)

Old English cwellere killer, agent noun from cwellan (see quell).


quell (v.)

Old English cwellan to kill, murder, execute, from Proto-Germanic *kwaljanan (cognates: Old English
cwelan to die, cwalu violent death; Old Saxon quellian to torture, kill; Old Norse kvelja to
torment; Middle Dutch quelen to vex, tease, torment; Old High German quellan to suffer pain, German
qu&auml;len to torment, torture), from PIE root *gwele- (1) to throw, reach, with extended sense of
to pierce (cognates: Armenian kelem I torture; Old Church Slavonic zali pain; Lithuanian galas end,
gela agony, gelati to sting; see ballistics). Milder sense of suppress, extinguish developed by
c.1300. Related: Quelled; quelling.


qualm (n.)

Old English cwealm (West Saxon) death, murder, slaughter; disaster; plague; torment, utcualm
(Anglian) utter destruction, probably related to cwellan to kill, murder, execute, cwelan to die
(see quell). Sense softened to feeling of faintness 1520s; figurative meaning uneasiness, doubt is
from 1550s; that of scruple of conscience is 1640s.    Evidence of a direct path from the Old
English to the modern senses is wanting, but it is plausible, via the notion of fit of sickness. The
other suggested etymology, less satisfying, is to take the fit of uneasiness sense from Dutch kwalm
steam, vapor, mist (cognate with German Qualm smoke, vapor, stupor), which also might be ultimately
from the same Germanic root as quell.


quale (n.)

death, destruction, Old English cwalu, cognate with Old Norse kval torment, torture, from a variant
of the root of quell.


deodorant (n.)

1848, originally of substances to quell the odor of manure, formed in English as if from de- + Latin
odorem smell (see odor (n.)). In reference to a substance to be used on the human body, from 1860.
An earlier version, a perfumed powder, was called empasm (1650s), from Greek *empasma to sprinkle
on.


kill (v.)

c.1200, to strike, hit, beat, knock; c.1300, to deprive of life, perhaps from an unrecorded variant
of Old English cwellan to kill (see quell), but the earliest sense suggests otherwise. Sense in to
kill time is from 1728. Related: Killed; killing. Kill-devil, colloquial for rum, especially if new
or of bad quality, is from 1630s.


quail (v.)

c.1400, have a morbid craving; early 15c., grow feeble or sick; mid-15c., to fade, fail, give way,
of unknown origin, perhaps from Middle Dutch quelen to suffer, be ill, from Proto-Germanic *kwaljan,
from PIE *gwele- (1) to throw, to pierce (see quell). Or from obsolete quail to curdle (late 14c.),
from Old French coailler, from Latin coagulare (see coagulate). Sense of lose heart, shrink, cower
is attested from 1550s. According to OED, common 1520-1650, then rare until 19c., when apparently it
was revived by Scott. Related: Quailed; quailing.


