quench (v.)

Old English acwencan to quench (of fire, light), from Proto-Germanic *cwandjan, probably a causative
form of root of Old English cwincan to go out, be extinguished, Old Frisian kwinka. Related:
Quenched; quenching.


extinguish (v.)

c.1500 (implied in extinguishable), from Latin extinguere/exstinguere quench, wipe out, obliterate,
from ex- out (see ex-) + stinguere quench, from PIE *steig- to prick, stick, pierce. Related:
Extinguished; extinguishing.


asbestos (n.)

1650s, earlier albeston, abestus (c.1100), name of a fabulous stone, which, set afire, could not be
extinguished; from Old French abeste, abestos, from Latin asbestos quicklime (which burns when cold
water is poured on it), from Greek asbestos, literally inextinguishable, from a- not (see a- (3)) +
sbestos, verbal adjective from sbennynai to quench, from PIE root *(s)gwes- to quench, extinguish
(cognates: Lithuanian gestu to go out, Old Church Slavonic gaso, Hittite kishtari is being put out).
The Greek word was used by Dioscorides as a noun meaning quicklime. Erroneously applied by Pliny to
an incombustible fibre, which he believed to be vegetable, but which was really the amiantos of the
Greeks [OED]. Meaning mineral capable of being woven into incombustible fabric is from c.1600 in
English; earlier this was called amiant (early 15c.), from Latin amiantus, from Greek amiantos,
literally undefiled (so called because it showed no mark or stain when thrown into fire). Supposed
in the Middle Ages to be salamanders' wool. Prester John, the Emperor of India, and Pope Alexander
III were said to have had robes or tunics made of it.


unquenchable (adj.)

late 14c., of fire; 1560s, of thirst, from un- (1) not + quench (v.) + -able. Related: Unquenchably.


quelch (v.)

1650s, shortening of squelch, perhaps influenced by quench. Related: Quelched; quelching.


marasmus (n.)

wasting away of the body, 1650s, Modern Latin, from Greek marasmos a wasting away, withering, decay,
from marainein to quench, weaken, wither, from PIE root *mer- to rub away, harm (see morbid). Maras
(n.) evidently in the same sense is attested from mid-15c. Related: Marasmic.


amaranth (n.)

1610s, from French amarante, from Latin amarantus, from Greek amarantos, name of an unfading flower,
literally everlasting, from a- not + stem of marainein die away, waste away, quench, extinguish,
from PIE *mer- to rub away, harm (see nightmare). In classical use, a poet's word for an imaginary
flower that never fades. It was applied to a genus of ornamental plants 1550s. Ending influenced by
plant names with Greek -anthos flower.


morbid (adj.)

1650s, of the nature of a disease, indicative of a disease, from Latin morbidus diseased, from
morbus sickness, disease, ailment, illness, from root of mori to die, which is possibly from PIE
root *mer- to rub, pound, wear away (cognates: Sanskrit mrnati crushes, bruises; Greek marainein to
consume, exhaust, put out, quench, marasmus consumption). Transferred use, of mental states, is from
1777. Related: Morbidly; morbidness.


slake (v.)

late Old English sleacian, slacian become slack or remiss; slacken an effort (intransitive); delay,
retard (transitive), from sl&aelig;c lax (see slack (adj.)). Transitive sense of make slack is from
late 12c. Sense of allay, diminish in force, quench, extinguish (in reference to thirst, hunger,
desire, wrath, etc.) first recorded early 14c. via notion of make slack or inactive. Related:
Slaked; slaking.


