query (v.)

to question, 1650s, from query (n.).  Related: Queried; querying.


query (n.)

1530s, quaere a question, from Latin quaere ask, imperative of quaerere to seek, look for; strive,
endeavor, strive to gain; ask, require, demand; figuratively seek mentally, seek to learn, make
inquiry, probably ultimately from PIE *kwo-, root forming the stem of relative and interrogative
pronouns (see who). Spelling Englished or altered c.1600 by influence of inquiry.


quaere

Latin imperative of quaerere to ask, inquire (see query (v.)). Hence one may ask (1530s) as an
introduction to a question.


querent (n.)

1590s, originally in astrology, from Latin quaerentem, present participle of quaerere (see query
(v.)).


disquisition (n.)

c.1600, subject for investigation, also systematic search, from Latin disquisitionem (nominative
disquisitio) an inquiry, investigation, noun of action from past participle stem of disquirere
inquire, from dis- apart (see dis-) + quaerere seek, ask (see query (v.)). Sense of long speech
first recorded 1640s.


Nome

city in Alaska, founded in the 1898 gold rush and originally Anvil City after the nearby Anvil
Creek, later renamed for nearby Cape Nome, which, according to one story is from a misreading of a
British cartographer's query, ?Name, written beside the peninsula on an 1849 map, and according to
another is from a supposed native no-me meaning I don't know, a plea of noncomprehension when asked
what the name of the place was.


conquer (v.)

c.1200, cunquearen, from Old French conquerre conquer, defeat, vanquish, from Vulgar Latin
*conquaerere (for Latin conquirere) to search for, procure by effort, win, from Latin com-,
intensive prefix (see com-), + quaerere to seek, gain (see query (v.)). Related: Conquered;
conquering.


acquisition (n.)

late 14c., act of obtaining, from Old French acquisicion (13c.) or directly from Latin acquisitionem
(nominative acquisitio), noun of action from past participle stem of acquirere get in addition,
accumulate, from ad- extra (see ad-) + quaerere to seek to obtain (see query (v.)). Meaning thing
obtained is from late 15c. The vowel change of -ae- to -i- in Latin is due to a Latin phonetic rule
involving unaccented syllables in compounds.


perquisite (n.)

mid-15c., property acquired other than by inheritance, from Medieval Latin perquisitum thing gained,
profit, in classical Latin, thing sought after, noun use of neuter past participle of perquirere to
seek, ask for, from per- thoroughly (see per) + qu&aelig;rere to seek (see query (v.)). For Latin
vowel change, see acquisition. General meaning fee or profit on top of regular wages first recorded
1560s.


inquire (v.)

late 13c., from Old French enquerre ask, inquire about (Modern French enqu&eacute;rir), from Vulgar
Latin *inquaerere, from Latin in- into (see in- (2)) + quaerere ask, seek (see query (v.)).
Respelled 14c. on Latin model, but half-Latinized enquire still persists. Related: Inquired;
inquiring; inquiringly.


exquisite (adj.)

early 15c., carefully selected, from Latin exquisitus carefully sought out, thus, choice, from past
participle of exquirere search out thoroughly, from ex- out (see ex-) + quaerere to seek (see query
(v.)).    Of any thing (good or bad, torture as well as art) brought to a highly wrought condition,
sometimes shading into disapproval. A vogue word 15c.-18c., given wide extensions of meaning, none
of which survives. The main modern sense of of consummate and delightful excellence is first
attested 1579, in Lyly's Euphues. Related: Exquisitely; exquisiteness. The noun meaning a dandy, fop
is from 1819.


require (v.)

late 14c., to ask a question, inquire, from Old French requerre seek, procure; beg, ask, petition;
demand, from Vulgar Latin *requaerere, from Latin requirere seek to know, ask, from re-, here
perhaps meaning repeatedly (see re-), + quaerere ask, seek (see query (v.)).    The original sense
of this word has been taken over by request (v.). Sense of demand (someone) to do (something) is
from 1751, via the notion of to ask for imperatively, or as a right (late 14c.). Related: Required;
requiring.


quest (n.)

c.1300, an inquest; early 14c., a search for something (especially of judicial inquiries or hounds
seeking game), from Old French queste search, quest, chase, hunt, pursuit; inquest, inquiry (12c.,
Modern French qu&ecirc;te), properly the act of seeking, and directly from Medieval Latin questa
search, inquiry, alteration of Latin quaesitus (fem. quaesita) sought-out, select, past participle
of quaerere seek, gain, ask (see query (n.)). Romance sense of adventure undertaken by a knight
(especially the search for the Grail) is attested from late 14c. Johnson's dictionary has
questmonger Starter of lawsuits or prosecutions.


question (n.)

early 13c., philosophical or theological problem; early 14c. as utterance meant to elicit an answer
or discussion, also as a difficulty, a doubt, from Anglo-French questiun, Old French question
question, difficulty, problem; legal inquest, interrogation, torture, from Latin quaestionem
(nominative quaestio) a seeking, a questioning, inquiry, examining, judicial investigation, noun of
action from past participle stem of quaerere ask, seek (see query (v.)).   No question undoubtedly
is from mid-15c; no questions asked accountability not required is from 1879 (especially in
newspaper advertisements seeking the return of something lost or stolen). Question mark is from
1849, sometimes also question stop (1862); figurative use is from 1869. To be out of the question
(c.1700) is to be not pertinent to the subject, hence not to be considered.


