quibble (v.)

equivocate, evade the point, turn from the point in question or the plain truth, 1650s, from quibble
(n.). Earlier to pun (1620s). Related: Quibbled; quibbling.


quibble (n.)

1610s, a pun, a play on words, probably a diminutive of obsolete quib evasion of point at issue,
based on an overuse of Latin quibus? in legal jargon, which supposedly gave it the association with
trivial argument. Meaning equivocation, evasion of the point is attested from 1660s.


quillet (n.)

a quibble, obsolete, prob. a corruption of L. quidlibet 'what you please' [Klein].


quirk (n.)

1560s, quibble, evasion, of unknown origin, perhaps connected to German quer (see queer (adj.)) via
notion of twisting and slanting; but its earliest appearance in western England dialect seems to
argue against this source. Perhaps originally a technical term for a twist or flourish in weaving.
Sense of peculiarity is c.1600.


quib (n.)

evasion of a point, 1540s, from Latin quibus by what (things)?, dative or ablative plural of quid in
what respect? to what extent?; how? why?, neuter of relative pronoun quis (see who). [A]s a word of
frequent occurrence in legal documents ... hence associated with the 'quirks and quillets' of the
law. [OED]. Also compare quibble.


quip (n.)

1530s, variant of quippy in same sense (1510s), perhaps from Latin quippe indeed, of course, as you
see, naturally, obviously (used sarcastically), from quid what (neuter of pronoun quis who; see
who), and compare quibble (n.)) + emphatic particle -pe.


chicane (n.)

in English in various senses, including act of chicanery (1670s), obstacles on a roadway (1955),
also a term in bridge (1880s), apparently all ultimately from an archaic verb chicane to trick
(1670s), from French chicane (16c.), from chicaner to pettifog, quibble (15c., see chicanery).


chicanery (n.)

c.1600, legal quibbling, sophistry, from French chicanerie trickery, from Middle French chicaner to
pettifog, quibble (15c.), of unknown origin, perhaps from Middle Low German schikken to arrange,
bring about, or from the name of a golf-like game once played in Languedoc. Thornton's American
Glossary has shecoonery (1845), which it describes as probably a corruption of chicanery.


quiddity (n.)

a trifling nicety in argument, a quibble, 1530s, from Medieval Latin quidditas the essence of
things, in Scholastic philosophy, that which distinguishes a thing from other things, literally
whatness, from Latin quid what, neuter of indefinite pronoun quis somebody, someone or other (see
who). Sense developed from scholastic disputes over the nature of things. Original classical meaning
real essence or nature of a thing is attested in English from late 14c.


sophistication (n.)

early 15c., use of sophistry; fallacious argument intended to mislead; adulteration; an adulterated
or adulterating substance, from Medieval Latin sophisticationem (nominative sophisticatio), noun of
action from past participle stem of sophisticare adulterate, cheat quibble, from Latin sophisticus
of sophists, from Greek sophistikos of or pertaining to a sophist, from sophistes a wise man,
master, teacher (see sophist). Meaning wordly wisdom, refinement, discrimination is attested from
1850.


challenge (v.)

c.1200, to rebuke, from Old French chalongier complain, protest; haggle, quibble, from Vulgar Latin
calumniare to accuse falsely, from Latin calumniari to accuse falsely, misrepresent, slander, from
calumnia trickery (see calumny).    From late 13c. as to object to, take exception to; c.1300 as to
accuse, especially to accuse falsely, also to call to account; late 14c. as to call to fight. Also
used in Middle English with sense claim, take to oneself. Related: Challenged; challenging.


