quicksilver (n.)

Old English cwicseolfor, literally living silver, translating Latin argentum vivum (source also of
Italian argento vivo), literally living silver; so called from its liquid mobility. See quick (adj.)
+ silver (n.). Similar formation in Dutch kwikzilver, Old High German quecsilbar, German
quecksilber, French vif-argent, Italian argenta viva.


mercurial (adj.)

late 14c., pertaining to the planet Mercury (see Mercury). Meaning sprightly, volatile, quick
(1590s) is from supposed qualities of those born under the planet Mercury (they also are the
qualities of the god Mercury), probably also partly by association with the qualities of
quicksilver. A variant in this sense was mercurious (1590s). Related: Mercurially; mercuriality.


hydrargyrum (n.)

mercury, quicksilver, 1560s, from Latin hydrargyrus, from Greek hydrargyros, from hydr-, stem of
hydor water (see water (n.1)) + argyros silver (see argent). Hence the chemical abbreviation Hg for
the element mercury.


mercury (n.)

silver-white fluid metallic element, late 14c., from Medieval Latin mercurius, from Latin Mercurius
(see Mercury). Prepared from cinnabar, it was one of the seven metals (bodies terrestrial) known to
the ancients, which were coupled in astrology and alchemy with the seven known heavenly bodies. This
one probably so associated for its mobility. The others were Sun/gold, Moon/silver, Mars/iron,
Saturn/lead, Jupiter/tin, Venus/copper. The Greek name for it was hydrargyros liquid silver, which
gives the element its symbol, Hg. Compare quicksilver.


argent (n.)

c.1300, quicksilver, the metal mercury, from Old French argent (11c.), from Latin argentum silver,
silver work, white money, from PIE *arg-ent- (cognates: Avestan erezata-, Old Persian ardata-,
Armenian arcat, Old Irish argat, Breton arc'hant silver), from root *arg- to shine; white, thus the
shining or white metal, silver (cognates: Greek argos white, arguron silver; Sanskrit arjuna- white,
shining, rajata- silver, Hittite harki- white). Meaning silver, silver coin is early 15c. in
English; the adjective sense silver-colored, late 15c.


