quirk (n.)

1560s, quibble, evasion, of unknown origin, perhaps connected to German quer (see queer (adj.)) via
notion of twisting and slanting; but its earliest appearance in western England dialect seems to
argue against this source. Perhaps originally a technical term for a twist or flourish in weaving.
Sense of peculiarity is c.1600.


quirky (adj.)

1806, shifty, from quirk + -y (2). Sense of idiosyncratic first recorded 1960. Related: Quirkily;
quirkiness.


-s (1)

suffix forming almost all Modern English plural nouns, gradually extended in Middle English from Old
English -as, the nominative plural and accusative plural ending of certain strong masculine nouns
(such as d&aelig;g day, nominative/accusative plural dagas days). The commonest Germanic declension,
traceable back to the original PIE inflection system, it is also the source of the Dutch -s plurals
and (by rhotacism) Scandinavian -r plurals (such as Swedish dagar).    Much more uniform today than
originally; Old English also had a numerous category of weak nouns that formed their plurals in -an,
and other strong nouns that formed plurals with -u. Quirk and Wrenn, in their Old English grammar,
estimate that 45 percent of the nouns a student will encounter will be masculine, nearly four-fifths
of them with genitive singular -es and nominative/accusative plural in -as. Less than half, but
still the largest chunk.    The triumphs of -'s possessives and -s plurals represent common patterns
in language: using only a handful of suffixes to do many jobs (such as -ing), and the most common
variant squeezing out the competition. To further muddy the waters, it's been extended in slang
since 1936 to singulars (such as ducks, sweets, babes) as an affectionate or diminutive suffix.
Old English single-syllable collectives (sheep, folk) as well as weights, measures, and units of
time did not use -s. The use of it in these cases began in Middle English, but the older custom is
preserved in many traditional dialects (ten pound of butter; more than seven year ago; etc.).


