quiver (n.)

case for holding arrows, early 14c., from Anglo-French quiveir, Old French quivre, cuivre, probably
of Germanic origin, from Proto-Germanic *kukur container (cognates: Old High German kohhari, German
K&#246;cher, Old Saxon kokar, Old Frisian koker, Old English cocur quiver); said to be from the
language of the Huns [Barnhart]. Related: Quiverful.


quiver (v.)

to tremble, late 15c., perhaps imitative, or possibly an alteration of quaveren (see quaver), or
from Old English cwifer- (in cwiferlice zealously), which is perhaps related to cwic alive (see
quick). Related: Quivered; quivering. As a noun in this sense from 1715, from the verb.


totter (v.)

c.1200, swing to and fro, of uncertain origin, perhaps from a Scandinavian source (compare dialectal
Norwegian totra to quiver, shake). Meaning stand or walk with shaky, unsteady steps is from c.1600.
Related: Tottered; tottering.


tremulous (adj.)

1610s, from Latin tremulus shaking, quivering, from tremere to shake, quake, quiver (see tremble
(v.)). Related: Tremulously; tremulousness.


aquiver (adv.)

1864, from a- (1) + quiver (v.).


palpitation (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French palpitation, from Latin palpitationem (nominative palpitatio), noun
of action from past participle stem of palpitare to throb, to flutter, to tremble, to quiver,
frequentative of palpare touch gently, stroke; wheedle, coax (see feel (v.)).


scrotum (n.)

purse-like tegumentary investment of the testes and part of the spermatic cord; the cod [Century
Dictionary], 1590s, from Latin scrotum, probably transposed from scortum a skin, hide (see corium),
perhaps by influence of scrautum leather quiver for arrows.  Isn't the sea what Algy calls it: a
grey sweet mother? The snotgreen sea. The scrotum-tightening sea. Epi oinopa ponton. [Joyce,
Ulysses]  Related: Scrotal.


vibrate (v.)

1610s (intransitive) move to and fro; 1660s, swing to and fro; from Latin vibratus, past participle
of vibrare set in tremulous motion, move quickly to and fro, quiver, tremble, shake, from PIE *wib-
ro-, from root *weip- to turn, vacillate, tremble ecstatically, move quickly to and fro (cognates:
Lithuanian wyburiu to wag (the tail), Danish vippe, Dutch wippen to swing, Old English wipan to
wipe). Transitive sense cause to vibrate is from c.1700. Related: Vibrated; vibrating.


bee (n.)

stinging insect, Old English beo bee, from Proto-Germanic *bion (cognates: Old Norse by, Old High
German bia, Middle Dutch bie), possibly from PIE root *bhi- quiver. Used metaphorically for busy
worker since 1530s.    Sense of meeting of neighbors to unite their labor for the benefit of one of
their number, 1769, American English, probably is from comparison to the social activity of the
insect; this was extended to other senses (such as spelling bee, first attested 1809; Raising-bee
(1814) for building construction; also hanging bee a lynching). To have a bee in (one's) bonnet
(1825), said of one who is harebrained or has an intense new notion or fancy, is said in Jamieson to
be Scottish, perhaps from earlier expressions such as head full of bees (1510s), denoting mad mental
activity.


post-modern (adj.)

also post-modern, post modern, by 1919, in frequent use from 1949, from post- + modern.    But it
has been only during the later decades of the modern era -- during that time interval that might
fairly be called the post-modern era -- that this mechanistic conception of things has begun
seriously to affect the current system of knowledge and belief; and it has not hitherto seriously
taken effect except in technology and in the material sciences. [Thorstein Veblen, The Vested
Interests and the Common Man, 1919]   <hr />   So much for the misapplied theory which has helped
set the artist's nerves a-quiver and incited him to the extremes of post modern art, literary and
other. [Wilson Follett, Literature and Bad Nerves, Harper's, June 1921]    Of architecture from
1940s; specific sense in the arts emerged 1960s (see postmodernism).


dance (v.)

c.1300, from Old French dancier (12c., Modern French danser), of unknown origin, perhaps from Low
Frankish *dintjan and akin to Old Frisian dintje tremble, quiver. A word of uncertain origin but
which, through French influence in arts and society, has become the primary word for this activity
from Spain to Russia (Italian danzare, Spanish danzar, Rumanian dansa, Swedish dansa, German
tanzen).    In part the loanword from French is used mainly with reference to fashionable dancing
while the older native word persists in use with reference to folk-dancing, as definitively Russ.
pljasat' vs. tancovat' [Buck].    Replaced Old English sealtian, itself a borrowing from Latin
saltare to dance, frequentative of salire to leap (see salient (adj.); dance words frequently are
derived from words meaning jump, leap). Related: Danced; dancing.    It is strange, and will, I am
sure, appear to my readers almost incredible, that as far as I have ever read, there is no reference
that can be identified as containing a clear allusion to dancing in any of our really ancient MS.
books. [Eugene O'Curry, On the Manners and Customs of the Ancient Irish, vol. 2, p.406, 1873]


