rabble-rouser (n.)

1842, agent noun from Rabble-rousing, which first attested 1802 in Sydney Smith; from rabble (n.1) +
rouse.


rabble (n.1)

c.1300, pack of animals, possibly related to Middle English rablen to gabble, speak in a rapid,
confused manner, probably imitative of hurry, noise, and confusion (compare Middle Dutch rabbelen,
Low German rabbeln to chatter). Meaning tumultuous crowd of vulgar, noisy people is from late 14c.;
applied contemptuously to the common or low part of any populace from 1550s.


rabble (n.2)

iron bar for stirring molten metal, 1864, from French r&#226;ble, from Old French roable, from Latin
rutabulum rake, fire shovel, from ruere  to rake up (perhaps cognate with Lithuanian raju to pluck
out, German roden to root out).


rascal (n.)

mid-14c., rascaile people of the lowest class, rabble of an army, also singular, low, tricky,
dishonest person, from Old French rascaille rabble, mob (12c., Modern French racaille, the rascality
or base and rascall sort, the scumme, dregs, offals, outcasts, of any company [Cotgrave, French-
English Dictionary, 1611]), perhaps a diminutive from Old French rascler, from Vulgar Latin
*rasicare to scrape (see rash (n.)). Used also in Middle English of animals not hunted as game.


mob (n.)

1680s, disorderly part of the population, rabble, slang shortening of mobile, mobility common
people, populace, rabble (1670s, probably with a conscious play on nobility), from Latin mobile
vulgus fickle common people (the phrase attested c.1600 in English), from mobile, neuter of mobilis
fickle, movable, mobile (see mobile (adj.)). In Australia and New Zealand, used without
disparagement for a crowd. Meaning gang of criminals working together is from 1839, originally of
thieves or pick-pockets; American English sense of organized crime in general is from 1927.    The
Mob was not a synonym for the Mafia. It was an alliance of Jews, Italians, and a few Irishmen, some
of them brilliant, who organized the supply, and often the production, of liquor during the thirteen
years, ten months, and nineteen days of Prohibition. ... Their alliance -- sometimes called the
Combination but never the Mafia -- was part of the urgent process of Americanizing crime. [Pete
Hamill, Why Sinatra Matters, 1998]   Mob scene crowded place first recorded 1922.


mobile (n.)

early 15c. in astronomy, outer sphere of the universe, from mobile (adj.); the artistic sense is
first recorded 1949 as a shortening of mobile sculpture (1936). Now-obsolete sense of the common
people, the rabble (1670s) led to mob (n.).


canaille (n.)

rabble, from French canaille (16c.), from Italian canaglia, literally a pack of dogs, from cane dog
(see canine).


lumpenproletariat (n.)

1897, from German Lumpenproletariat (1850), from Karl Marx, who coined it to mean rabble, poorest of
the working class, from German lump ragamuffin + proletariat. Secondary sense of boorish, stupid
people led to lumpen- being taken as a suffix meaning unenlightened.


populace (n.)

1570s, from Middle French populace (16c.), from Italian popolaccio riffraff, rabble, from popolo
people (from Latin populus people; see people (n.)) + pejorative suffix -accio.


ragtag (n.)

also rag-tag, ragged people collectively, 1820, from rag (n.) + tag (n.); originally in expression
rag-tag and bobtail the rabble (tag-rag and bobtail is found in 1650s), with bobtail an old 17c.
word for cur. Tag and rag was very common in 16-17th c. [OED]


ochlocracy (n.)

government by the rabble, 1580s, from French ochlocratie (1560s), from Greek okhlokratia (Polybius)
mob rule, the lowest grade of democracy, from kratos rule, power, strength (see -cracy) + okhlos
mob, populace, perhaps literally moving mass, from PIE *wogh-lo-, from root *wegh- to go, transport
in a vehicle (see weigh). For sense development, compare mob (n.). Related: Ochlocratic;
ochlocratical. Greek also had okhlagogos mob-leader, ochlagogue.


