rabies (n.)

1590s, from Latin rabies madness, rage, fury, related to rabere be mad, rave (see rage (v.)). Sense
of extremely fatal infectious disease causing madness in dogs was a secondary meaning in Latin.
Known hydrophobia in humans.


rage (n.)

c.1300, madness, insanity; fit of frenzy; anger, wrath; fierceness in battle; violence of storm,
fire, etc., from Old French rage, raige spirit, passion, rage, fury, madness (11c.), from Medieval
Latin rabia, from Latin rabies madness, rage, fury, related to rabere be mad, rave (compare rabies,
which originally had this sense), from PIE *rebh- violent, impetuous (cognates: Old English rabbian
to rage). Similarly, Welsh (cynddaredd) and Breton (kounnar) words for rage, fury originally meant
hydrophobia and are compounds based on the word for dog (Welsh ci, plural cwn; Breton ki). In
15c.-16c. it also could mean rabies. The rage fashion, vogue dates from 1785.


rabid (adj.)

1610s, furious, raving, from Latin rabidus raging, furious, enraged; inspired; ungoverned; rabid,
from rabere be mad, rave (see rage (v.)). Meaning made mad by rabies in English first recorded 1804.
Related: Rabidly; rabidness.


enrage (v.)

late 14c. (implied in enraged), from Old French enragier go wild, go mad, lose one's senses, from
en- make, put in (see en- (1)) + rage rabies, rage (see rage (n.)). Related: Enraging. Intransitive
only in Old French; transitive sense is oldest in English.


Alyssum (n.)

genus name for plants of the mustard family, 1550s, from Latin alysson, from Greek alysson, which is
perhaps the neuter of adjective alyssos curing madness, from privative prefix a- + lyssa madness,
martial rage, fury, rabies, literally wolf-ness, related to lykos wolf (see wolf (n.)).


hydrophobia (n.)

late 14c., idroforbia, a symptom of rabies in man (sometimes used for the disease itself), from Late
Latin hydrophobia (Celsius, 50 C.E.), from Greek hydrophobos dreading water, from hydr-, stem of
hydros water (see water (n.1)) + phobos dread, fear (see phobia). So called because human sufferers
show aversion to water and have difficulty swallowing it. In Old English as w&aelig;terfyrhtness.


mad (adj.)

late 13c., from Old English gem&aelig;dde (plural) out of one's mind (usually implying also violent
excitement), also foolish, extremely stupid, earlier gem&aelig;ded rendered insane, past participle
of a lost verb *gem&aelig;dan to make insane or foolish, from Proto-Germanic *ga-maid-jan,
demonstrative form of *ga-maid-az changed (for the worse), abnormal (cognates: Old Saxon gimed
foolish, Old High German gimeit foolish, vain, boastful, Gothic gamai&thorn;s crippled, wounded, Old
Norse mei&eth;a to hurt, maim), from intensive prefix *ga- + PIE *moito-, past participle of root
*mei- (1) to change (cognates: Latin mutare to change, mutuus done in exchange, migrare to change
one's place of residence; see mutable).    Emerged in Middle English to replace the more usual Old
English word, wod (see wood (adj.)). Sense of beside oneself with excitement or enthusiasm is from
early 14c. Meaning beside oneself with anger is attested from early 14c., but deplored by Rev. John
Witherspoon (1781) as an Americanism. It now competes in American English with angry for this sense.
Of animals, affected with rabies, from late 13c. Phrase mad as a March hare is attested from 1520s,
via notion of breeding season; mad as a hatter is from 1829 as demented, 1837 as enraged, according
to a modern theory supposedly from erratic behavior caused by prolonged exposure to poison mercuric
nitrate, used in making felt hats. For mad as a wet hen see hen. Mad money is attested from 1922;
mad scientist is from 1891.


