raffle (v.)

dispose of by raffle, 1851, from raffle (n.). Related: Raffled; raffling.


raffle (n.)

late 14c., dice game, from Old French rafle dice game, also plundering, perhaps from a Germanic
source (compare Middle Dutch raffel dice game, Old Frisian hreppa to move, Old Norse hreppa to
reach, get, Swedish rafs rubbish, Old High German raspon to scrape together, snatch up in haste,
German raffen to snatch away, sweep off), from Proto-Germanic *khrap- to pluck out, snatch off. The
notion would be to sweep up (the stakes), to snatch (the winnings). Dietz connects the French word
with the Germanic root, but OED is against this. Meaning sale of chances first recorded 1766.


riffraff (n.)

also riff-raff, late 15c., from earlier rif and raf one and all, everybody, every scrap, also
sweepings, refuse (mid-14c.), from Old French rif et raf, from rifler to spoil, strip (see rifle
(v.)). Second element from raffler carry off, related to rafle plundering, or from raffer to snatch,
to sweep together (see raffle (n.)).


rasp (v.)

mid-13c., to scrape, from Middle Dutch raspen and from Old French rasper (Modern French r&#226;per)
to grate, rasp, which is perhaps from a West Germanic source (compare Old English gehrespan) akin to
the root of raffle. Vocalic sense is from 1843. Related: Rasped; rasping.


chance (n.)

c.1300, something that takes place, what happens, an occurrence (good or bad, but more often bad),
from Old French cheance accident, chance, fortune, luck, situation, the falling of dice (12c.,
Modern French chance), from Vulgar Latin *cadentia that which falls out, a term used in dice, from
neuter plural of Latin cadens, present participle of cadere to fall (see case (n.1)).    In English
frequently in plural, chances. The word's notions of opportunity and randomness are as old as the
record of it in English and now all but crowd out the word's original notion of mere occurrence.
Main chance thing of most importance is from 1570s, bearing the older sense. The mathematical (and
hence odds-making) sense is attested from 1778. To stand a chance (or not) is from 1796.    To take
(one's) chances accept what happens (early 14c.) is from the old, neutral sense; to take a
chance/take chances is originally (by 1814) participate in a raffle or lottery or game; extended
sense of take a risk is by 1826.


