rake (v.)

mid-13c., clear (rubbish, grass, etc.) by raking; gather (grain) by raking, from rake (n.1), or from
a lost Old English verb related to it, or from a similar Scandinavian source (compare Swedish raka,
Danish rage rake). Of gunfire from 1630s. Related: Raked; raking. To rake in money or something like
it is from 1580s.


rake (n.2)

debauchee; idle, dissolute person, 1650s, shortening of rakehell. Hogarth's Rake's Progress
engravings were published in 1735.


rake (n.1)

toothed tool for drawing or scraping things together, Old English raca rake, earlier r&aelig;ce,
from Proto-Germanic *rak- gather, heap up (cognates: Old Norse reka spade, shovel, Old High German
rehho, German Rechen a rake, Gothic rikan to heap up, collect), from PIE *reg- (1) move in a
straight line (cognates: Greek oregein to reach, stretch out, Latin regere direct, rule; keep
straight, guide; see regal), perhaps via its action, or via the notion of implement with straight
pieces of wood [Watkins].


rakehell (n.)

1540s, possibly an alteration (by association with rake (n.1) and Hell) of Middle English rakel
(adj.) hasty, rash, headstrong, probably from raken to go, proceed, from Old English racian to go
forward, move, hasten, of unknown origin. Compare rakeshame (n.) one who lives shamefully (1590s).


moonraker (n.)

in England, a name traditionally given to Wiltshire people, attested from 1787, is from the stock
joke about fools who mistook the reflection of the moon in a pond for a cheese and tried to rake it
out. But as told in Wiltshire, the men were surprised trying to rake up kegs of smuggled brandy, and
put off the revenuers by acting foolish.


rabble (n.2)

iron bar for stirring molten metal, 1864, from French r&#226;ble, from Old French roable, from Latin
rutabulum rake, fire shovel, from ruere  to rake up (perhaps cognate with Lithuanian raju to pluck
out, German roden to root out).


raster (n.)

1934 in electrical engineering, from German Raster screen, frame, from Latin rastrum rake, from
rasum, from rodere to scrape (see raze). Related: Rasterization; rasterize. From Latin form
rastellum comes French r&#226;teau rake, formerly ratel, originally rastel.


rakish (adj.)

1706, debauched, disreputable, from rake (n.2) + -ish. Related: Rakishly; rakishness.    The meaning
smart, jaunty, dashing (1824) is said to be a different word, probably from rake slant, slope
(1620s), used especially in reference to a ship's hull or sails, of uncertain origin, perhaps from
Scandinavian (compare Old Swedish raka project, reach; Danish rage protrude, project) related to Old
English reccan stretch. The piratical craft of former times were distinguished for their rakish
build [Century Dictionary].


rehearse (v.)

c.1300, to give an account of, from Anglo-French rehearser, Old French rehercier (12c.) to go over
again, repeat, literally to rake over, turn over (soil, ground), from re- again (see re-) + hercier
to drag, trail (on the ground), be dragged along the ground; rake, harrow (land); rip, tear, wound;
repeat, rehearse; from herse a harrow (see hearse (n.)). Meaning to say over again, repeat what has
already been said or written is from mid-14c. in English; sense of practice a play, part, etc. is
from 1570s. Related: Rehearsed; rehearsing.


gallant (n.)

man of fashion and pleasure, mid-15c., earlier dissolute man, rake (early 15c.); from gallant
(adj.).


rip-saw (n.)

a hand saw, the teeth of which have more rake and less set than a cross-cut saw, used for cutting
wood in the direction of the grain, 1846, from rip (n.) split timber (see rip (v.) + saw (n.1)).


roue (n.)

debauchee, 1800, from French rou&eacute; dissipated man, rake, originally past participle of Old
French rouer to break on the wheel (15c.), from Latin rotare roll (see rotary). Said to have been
first applied in French c.1720 to dissolute friends of the Duke of Orleans (regent of France
1715-23), to suggest the punishment they deserved; but probably rather from a secondary, figurative
sense in French of jaded, worn out, from the notion of broken, run-over, beat down.


harrow (n.)

agricultural implement, heavy wooden rake, c.1300, haru, from Old English *hearwa, apparently
related to Old Norse harfr harrow, and perhaps connected with Old English h&aelig;rfest harvest (see
harvest). Or possibly from hergian (see harry).


rase (v.)

late 14c., remove by scraping, rub, scrape out, erase, from Old French raser to scrape, shave, from
Medieval Latin rasare, frequentative of Latin radere (past participle rasus) to scrape, shave,
perhaps from PIE *razd- (cognates: Latin rastrum rake), possible extended form of root *red- to
scrape, scratch, gnaw (see rodent). Related: Rased; rasing.


grate (v.)

to scrape, rub, late 14c. (implied in grated), from Old French grater to scrape (Modern French
gratter), from Frankish *kratton, from Proto-Germanic *krattojan (cognates: Old High German krazzon
to scratch, scrape, German kratzen to scratch, Swedish kratta, Danish kratte to rake), probably of
imitative origin. Senses of sound harshly, and annoy are mid-16c. Italian grattare also is from
Germanic. Related: Grated; grating.


harsh (adj.)

originally of texture, hairy, 1530s, probably from harske rough, coarse, sour (c.1300), a northern
word of Scandinavian origin (compare Danish and Norwegian harsk rancid, rank), related to Middle Low
German harsch rough, raw, German harst a rake; perhaps from PIE root *kars- to scrape, scratch, rub,
card (cognates: Lithuanian karsiu to comb, Old Church Slavonic krasta, Russian korosta to itch,
Latin carduus thistle, Sanskrit kasati rubs, scratches). Meaning offensive to feelings is from
1570s; disagreeable, rude from 1610s.


grab (v.)

1580s, from Middle Dutch or Middle Low German grabben to grab, from Proto-Germanic *grab (cognates:
Old English gr&aelig;ppian to seize, Old Saxon garva, Old High German garba sheaf, literally that
which is gathered up together), from PIE *ghrebh- to seize, reach (cognates: Sanskrit grbhnati
seizes, Old Persian grab- seize as possession or prisoner, Old Church Slavonic grabiti to seize,
rob, Lithuanian grebiu to rake). Sense of to get by unscrupulous methods reinforced by grab game, a
kind of swindle, attested from 1846. Related: Grabbed; grabbing.


muckraker (n.)

c.1600, one who rakes muck, from muck (n.) + agent noun from rake (v.). Meaning one who inquires
into and publishes scandal and allegations of corruption among political and business leaders,
popularized 1906 in speech by President Theodore Roosevelt, in reference to man ... with a Muckrake
in his hand in Bunyan's Pilgrim's Progress (1684) who seeks worldly gain by raking filth.The men
with the muck-rakes are often indispensable to the well-being of society, but only if they know when
to stop raking the muck. [T. Roosevelt, quoted in Cincinnati Enquirer, April 15, 1906.] Muckrake in
sense person who hunts scandal is attested from 1872. To muckrake (v.) in the literal sense is from
1879; figuratively from 1910. Related: Muckraking.


rastaquouere (n.)

1883, from French rastaquou&egrave;re, rastacou&egrave;re (19c.) social intruder, upstart
(especially one of exaggerated manners and dress, from a Mediterranean or South American country),
thus dashing but untrustworthy foreigner. Short form rasta attested from 1905. According to French
sources, the word is from South American Spanish rastacuero upstart, from arrastrar to drag, pull,
tow, trail along the ground + cuero leather. Arrastrar is said to be from Spanish rastro rake, from
Latin rastrum (see raster), while cuero is from Latin corium (see corium).


hearse (n.)

c.1300 (late 13c. in Anglo-Latin), flat framework for candles, hung over a coffin, from Old French
herse, formerly herce large rake for breaking up soil, harrow; portcullis, also large chandelier in
a church, from Medieval Latin hercia, from Latin hirpicem (nominative hirpex) harrow, from Oscan
hirpus wolf, supposedly in allusion to its teeth. Or the Oscan word may be related to Latin hirsutus
shaggy, bristly. The funeral display so called because it resembled a harrow; hearse in its sense of
portcullis is not attested in English before 15c. For spelling, see head. Sense extended to other
temporary frameworks built over dead people, then to vehicle for carrying a body, a sense first
recorded 1640s.


coal (n.)

Old English col charcoal, live coal, from Proto-Germanic *kula(n) (cognates: Old Frisian kole,
Middle Dutch cole, Dutch kool, Old High German chol, German Kohle, Old Norse kol), from PIE root
*g(e)u-lo- live coal (cognates: Irish gual coal).    Meaning mineral consisting of fossilized carbon
is from mid-13c. First mentioned (370 B.C.E.) by Theophrastus in his treatise On Stones under the
name lithos anthrakos (see anthrax). Traditionally good luck, coal was given as a New Year's gift in
England, said to guarantee a warm hearth for the coming year. The phrase drag (or rake) over the
coals was a reference to the treatment meted out to heretics by Christians. To carry coals do dirty
work, also submit to insult is from 1520s. To carry coals to Newcastle (c.1600) Anglicizes Greek
glauk eis Athenas owls to Athens.


