ramble (n.)

a roving or wandering, 1650s, from ramble (v.).


ramble (v.)

mid-15c., perhaps frequentative of romen to walk, go (see roam), perhaps via romblen (late 14c.) to
ramble. The vowel change perhaps by influence of Middle Dutch rammelen, a derivative of rammen
copulate, used of the night wanderings of the amorous cat [Weekley]. Meaning to talk or write
incoherently is from 1630s. Related: Rambled; rambling.


rambler (n.)

1620s, agent noun from ramble (v.).


rambling (adj.)

1623, present participle adjective from ramble (v.).


strip (v.)

make bare, early 13c., from Old English -striepan, -strypan to plunder, despoil (as in West Saxon
bestrypan to plunder), from Proto-Germanic *straupijan (cognates: Middle Dutch stropen to strip off,
to ramble about plundering, Old High German stroufen to strip off, plunder, German streifen strip
off, touch upon, to ramble, roam, rove). Meaning to unclothe is recorded from early 13c.
Intransitive sense from late 14c. Of screw threads, from 1839; of gear wheels, from 1873. Meaning
perform a strip-tease is from 1929. Related: Stripped; stripping. Strip poker is attested from 1916,
in a joke in The Technology Monthly and Harvard Engineering Journal:    Say, Bill how, did the game
come out?  It ended in a tie.  Oh, were you playing strip poker?    strip search is from 1947, in
reference to World War II prison camps.


scramble (n.)

1670s, an eager, rude contest or struggle, from scramble (v.). Meaning a walk or ramble involving
clambering and struggling with obstacles is from 1755. Meaning rapid take-off first recorded 1940,
R.A.F. slang.


perambulate (v.)

1560s, from Latin perambulatus, past participle of perambulare to walk through, go through, ramble
through, from per- through (see per) + ambulare to walk (see amble). Related: Perambulated;
perambulating.


divagate (v.)

1590s, from Latin divagatus, past participle of divagari to wander about, from di(s)- apart (see
dis-) + vagari to wander, ramble (see vague). Related: Divagated; divagating.


hallucinate (v.)

c.1600, deceive, from Latin alucinatus, later hallucinatus, past participle of alucinari wander (in
the mind), dream; talk unreasonably, ramble in thought, probably from Greek alyein, Attic halyein be
distraught, probably related to alaomai wander about [Barnhart, Klein]. The Latin ending probably
was influenced by vaticinari to prophecy, also to rave. Sense of to have illusions is from 1650s.
Occasionally used 19c. in transitive senses, to cause hallucination. Related: Hallucinated;
hallucinating.


tour (n.)

c.1300, a turn, a shift on duty, from Old French tor, tourn, tourn a turn, trick, round, circuit,
circumference, from torner, tourner to turn (see turn (v.)). Sense of a continued ramble or
excursion is from 1640s. Tour de France as a bicycle race is recorded in English from 1916 (Tour de
France Cycliste), distinguished from a motorcar race of the same name. The Grand Tour, a journey
through France, Germany, Switzerland, and Italy formerly was the finishing touch in the education of
a gentleman.


swivel (n.)

c.1300, coupling device that allows independent rotation, from frequentative form of stem of Old
English verb swifan to move in a course, revolve, sweep (a class I strong verb), from Proto-Germanic
*swif- (cognates: Old Frisian swiva to be uncertain, Old Norse svifa to rove, ramble, drift), from
PIE root *swei- (2) to turn, bend, move in a sweeping manner.    Related Middle English swive was
the principal slang verb for to have sexual intercourse with, a sense that developed c.1300. This
probably explains why, though the root is verbal, the verb swivel is not attested in Modern English
until 1794. Compare Middle English phrase smal-swivinge men men who copulate infrequently.


