rampart (n.)

earthen elevation around a place for fortification, sometimes also including parapets, 1580s, from
Middle French rempart, rampart, from remparer to fortify, from re- again (see re-) + emparer
fortify, take possession of, from Old Proven&ccedil;al amparer, from Vulgar Latin *anteparare
prepare, properly to make preparations beforehand, from Latin ante- before (see ante) + parare
prepare (see pare). With excrescent -t in French, perhaps by influence of boulevart (see boulevard).


wall (n.)

Old English weall, Anglian wall rampart, dike, earthwork (natural as well as man-made), dam, cliff,
rocky shore, also defensive fortification around a city, side of a building, an Anglo-Frisian and
Saxon borrowing (Old Saxon, Old Frisian, Middle Low German, Middle Dutch wal) from Latin vallum
wall, rampart, row or line of stakes, apparently a collective form of vallus stake, from PIE *walso-
a post. Swedish vall, Danish val are from Low German.    Meaning interior partition of a structure
is mid-13c. In this case, English uses one word where many languages have two, such as German Mauer
outer wall of a town, fortress, etc., used also in reference to the former Berlin Wall, and wand
partition wall within a building (compare the distinction, not always rigorously kept, in Italian
muro/parete, Irish mur/fraig, Lithuanian muras/siena, etc.). The Latin word for defensive wall was
murus (see mural).    Anatomical use from late 14c. To give (someone) the wall allow him or her to
walk on the (cleaner) wall side of the pavement is from 1530s. To turn (one's) face to the wall
prepare to die is from 1570s. Phrase up the wall angry, crazy is from 1951; off the wall unorthodox,
unconventional is recorded from 1966, American English student slang. To go over the wall escape
(originally from prison) is from 1933. Wall-to-wall (adj.) recorded 1939, of shelving, etc.;
metaphoric use (usually disparaging) is from 1967.


interval (n.)

early 14c., from Old French intervalle (14c.), earlier entreval (13c.), from Late Latin intervallum
space, interval, distance, originally space between palisades or ramparts, from inter between (see
inter-) + vallum rampart (see wall (n.)). Metaphoric sense of gap in time was present in Latin.


boulevard (n.)

1769, from French boulevard (15c.), originally top surface of a military rampart, from a garbled
attempt to adopt Middle Dutch bolwerc wall of a fortification (see bulwark) into French, which at
that time lacked a -w- in its alphabet. The notion is of a promenade laid out atop demolished city
walls, a way which would be much wider than urban streets. Originally in English with conscious
echoes of Paris; since 1929, in U.S., used of multi-lane limited-access urban highways. Early French
attempts to digest the Dutch word also include boloart, boulever, boloirque, bollvercq.


