rancid (adj.)

1640s, from Latin rancidus rank, stinking, offensive (also source of Italian rancido, Spanish
rancio), from rancere be spoiled or rotten, of unknown origin. German ranzig is from French rancide.
Related: Rancidness.


frowsty (adj.)

having an unpleasant smell, 1865, of unknown origin; perhaps related to Old French frouste ruinous,
decayed, or to Old English &thorn;roh rancid; both of which also are of uncertain origin.


butyl (n.)

hydrocarbon radical, 1868, from butyric acid, a product of fermentation found in rancid butter, from
Latin butyrum butter (see butter (n.)).


butane (n.)

paraffin hydrocarbon, 1875, from butyl, hydrocarbon from butyric acid, a product of fermentation
found in rancid butter, from Latin butyrum (see butter (n.)) + chemical suffix -ane.


Tallahassee

place in Florida, U.S.A., 1799, originally Seminole Tallahassee, from Muskogee /talaha:ssi/, name of
a tribal town, perhaps from /(i)talwa/ tribal town + /ahassi/ old, rancid.


rancor (n.)

c.1200, from Old French rancor bitterness, resentment; grief, affliction, from Late Latin rancorem
(nominative rancor) rancidness, a stinking smell (Palladius); grudge, bitterness (Hieronymus and in
Late Latin), from Latin rancere to stink (see rancid).


harsh (adj.)

originally of texture, hairy, 1530s, probably from harske rough, coarse, sour (c.1300), a northern
word of Scandinavian origin (compare Danish and Norwegian harsk rancid, rank), related to Middle Low
German harsch rough, raw, German harst a rake; perhaps from PIE root *kars- to scrape, scratch, rub,
card (cognates: Lithuanian karsiu to comb, Old Church Slavonic krasta, Russian korosta to itch,
Latin carduus thistle, Sanskrit kasati rubs, scratches). Meaning offensive to feelings is from
1570s; disagreeable, rude from 1610s.


rank (adj.)

Old English ranc proud, overbearing, showy, from Proto-Germanic *rankaz (cognates: Danish rank
right, upright, German rank slender, Old Norse rakkr straight, erect), perhaps from PIE *reg- to
stretch, straighten (see right (adj.)). In reference to plant growth, vigorous, luxuriant, abundant,
copious it is recorded from c.1300. Related: Rankly; rankness.    Sense evolved in Middle English to
large and coarse (c.1300), then, via notion of excessive and unpleasant, to corrupt, loathsome, foul
(mid-14c.), perhaps from influence of Middle French rance rancid. In 17c. also lewd, lustful.
Much used 16c. as a pejorative intensive (as in rank folly). This is possibly the source of the verb
meaning to reveal another's guilt (1929, underworld slang), and that of to harass, abuse, 1934, U.S.
black dialect, though this also may be from the role of the activity in establishing social
hierarchy (from rank (n.)).


