random (adj.)

having no definite aim or purpose, 1650s, from at random (1560s), at great speed (thus, carelessly,
haphazardly), alteration of Middle English noun randon impetuosity, speed (c.1300), from Old French
randon rush, disorder, force, impetuosity, from randir to run fast, from Frankish *rant a running or
some other Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic *randa (cognates: Old High German rennen to run, Old
English rinnan to flow, to run; see run (v.)).    In 1980s U.S. college student slang it began to
acquire a sense of inferior, undesirable. (A 1980 William Safire column describes it as a college
slang noun meaning person who does not belong on our dormitory floor.) Random access in reference to
computer memory is recorded from 1953. Related: Randomly; randomness.


randomize (v.)

1926, from random (adj.) + -ize. Related: Randomized; randomizing.


RAM (n.)

1957, acronym for random access memory (computerese).


static (n.)

random radio noise, 1912, from static (adj.). Figurative sense of aggravation, criticism is attested
from 1926.


bric-a-brac (n.)

1840, from obsolete French &agrave; bric et &agrave; brac (16c.) at random, any old way, a nonsense
phrase.


white noise (n.)

sound made up of a random mixture of frequencies and intensities, by 1970, from white (adj.) + noise
(n.).


nylon (n.)

1938, coined, according to DuPont, from random generic syllable nyl- + -on, common ending in fiber
names (compare rayon), said to be ultimately from cotton. Use (in plural) for nylon stockings is
from 1940.


bibliomancy (n.)

1753, divination by opening a book (especially the Bible) at random, the first verse presenting
itself being taken as a prognostication of future events, from biblio- + -mancy. In pagan times,
Homer (sortes Homericae) and Virgil (sortes Virgilianae) were used.


Virgilian (adj.)

1510s, from Latin Virgilianus of or characteristic of the Roman poet Virgil (Publius Vergilius Maro,
70-19 B.C.E.). Also in Virgilian lots (Latin sortes Virgilianae), opening Virgil at random as an
oracle.


mayday

distress call, 1923, apparently an Englished spelling of French m'aider, shortening of venez m'aider
come help me! But possibly a random coinage with coincidental resemblance:    May Day Is Airplane
SOS  ENGLISH aviators who use radio telephone transmitting sets on their planes, instead of
telegraph sets, have been puzzling over the problem of choosing a distress call for transmission by
voice. The letters SOS wouldn't do, and just plain help! was not liked, and so May Day was chosen.
This was thought particularly fitting since it sounds very much like the French m'aidez, which means
help me. [The Wireless Age, June 1923]


rove (v.)

to wander with no fixed destination, 1530s (earliest sense was to shoot arrows at a mark selected at
pleasure or at random, late 15c.); possibly a Midlands dialectal variant of northern English and
Scottish rave to wander, stray, from Middle English raven, probably from Old Norse rafa to wander,
rove (compare rave (v.)). Influenced by rover, if not a back-formation from it. Related: Roved;
roving.


temerity (n.)

late 14c., from Latin temeritatem (nominative temeritas) blind chance, accident; rashness,
indiscretion, foolhardiness, from temere by chance, at random; indiscreetly, rashly, related to
tenebrae darkness, from PIE root *teme- dark (cognates: Sanskrit tamas- darkness, tamsrah dark;
Avestan temah darkness; Lithuanian tamsa darkness, tamsus dark; Old Church Slavonic tima darkness;
Old High German dinstar dark; Old Irish temel darkness). The connecting notion is blindly, without
foreseeing.


dude (n.)

1883, fastidious man, New York City slang of unknown origin; recent research suggests it is a
shortening of Yankee Doodle, based on the song's notion of foppish, over-fastidious male (compare
macaroni). The vogue word of 1883, originally used in reference to the devotees of the aesthetic
craze, later applied to city slickers, especially Easterners vacationing in the West (as in dude
ranch, first recorded 1921).    Now, tenderfoot is not to be construed as the Western equivalent of
that much evolved and more abused specimen of mankind, familiarly styled dude. For even the Montana
cowboy recognizes the latter. Not that he has ever seen the true prototype of a class that was
erstwhile so numerous among us. But he is convinced that a person caught in the act of wearing a
white linen collar, and who looks as though he might have recently shaved or washed his face, must
be a dude, true and proper. [Random Notes and Observations of a Trip through the Great Northwest,
The Medical Record, Oct. 20, 1883]    Application to any male is recorded by 1966, U.S., originally
in Black English.


odd (adj.)

c.1300, constituting a unit in excess of an even number, from Old Norse oddi third or additional
number, as in odda-ma&eth;r third man, odd man (who gives the casting vote), odda-tala odd number.
The literal meaning of Old Norse oddi is point of land, angle (related via notion of triangle to
oddr point of a weapon); from Proto-Germanic *uzdaz pointed upward (cognates: Old English ord point
of a weapon, spear, source, beginning, Old Frisian ord point, place, Dutch oord place, region, Old
High German ort point, angle, German Ort place), from PIE *uzdho- (cognates: Lithuanian us-nis
thistle). None of the other languages, however, shows the Old Norse development from point to third
number. Used from late 14c. to indicate a surplus over any given sum.    Sense of strange, peculiar
first attested 1580s from notion of odd one out, unpaired one of three (attested earlier, c.1400, as
singular in a positive sense of renowned, rare, choice). Odd job (c.1770) is so called from notion
of not regular. Odd lot incomplete or random set is from 1897. The international order of Odd
Fellows began as local social clubs in England, late 18c., with Masonic-type trappings; formally
organized 1813 in Manchester.


ring (n.1)

circular band, Old English hring small circlet, especially one of metal for wearing on the finger or
as part of a mail coat; anything circular, from Proto-Germanic *hringaz something curved, circle
(cognates: Old Norse hringr, Old Frisian hring, Danish, Swedish, Dutch ring, Old High German hring,
German Ring), from PIE *(s)kregh- nasalized form of (s)kregh-, from root *(s)ker- (3) to turn, bend,
with wide-ranging derivative senses (cognates: Latin curvus bent, curved, crispus curly; Old Church
Slavonic kragu circle, and perhaps Greek kirkos ring, koronos curved).    Other Old English senses
were circular group of persons, also horizon. Meaning place for prize fight and wrestling bouts
(early 14c.) is from the space in a circle of bystanders in the midst of which such contests once
were held, ... a circle formed for boxers, wrestlers, and cudgel players, by a man styled Vinegar;
who, with his hat before his eyes, goes round the circle, striking at random with his whip to
prevent the populace from crowding in [Grose, 1785]. Meaning combination of interested persons is
from 1829. Of trees, from 1670s; fairy ring is from 1620s. Ring finger is Old English hringfingr, a
compound found in other Germanic languages. To run rings round (someone) be superior to is from
1891.    Nursery rhyme ring a ring a rosie is attested in an American form (with a different ending)
from c.1790. The belief that the rhyme originated with the Great Plague is now almost universal, but
has no evidence to support it and is almost certainly nonsense [Oxford Dictionary of English
Folklore]. This proposal of connection dates only to the late 1960s.


