ransack (v.)

mid-13c., from a Scandinavian source akin to Old Norse rannsaka to pillage, literally search the
house (especially legally, for stolen goods), from rann house, from Proto-Germanic *rasnan (c.f.
Gothic razn, Old English &aelig;rn house; see barn) + saka to search, related to Old Norse soekja
seek (see seek). Sense influenced by sack (v.). Related: Ransacked; ransacking.


inscrutable (adj.)

c.1500, from Late Latin inscrutabilis, from in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + scrutabilis, from
scrutari examine, ransack (see scrutiny). Related: Inscrutably.


rig (v.)

late 15c., originally nautical, to fit with sails, probably from a Scandinavian source (compare
Danish, Norwegian rigge to equip, Swedish rigga to rig, harness), though these may be from English;
perhaps ultimately from PIE *reig- to bind. Slang meaning to pre-arrange or tamper with results is
attested from 1938, perhaps a different word, from rig (n.) a trick, swindle, scheme (1775), earlier
sport, banter, ridicule (1725), of unknown origin. Also there is rig (v.) ransack from 1560s,
likewise of unknown origin. Related: Rigged; rigging.


ramshackle (adj.)

1809, back-formation from ramshackled, earlier ranshackled (1670s), alteration of ransackled, past
participle of ransackle (see ransack). The word seems to have been Scottish.    Reading over this
note to an American gentleman, he seemed to take alarm, lest the word ramshackle should be palmed on
his country. I take it home willingly, as a Scotticism, and one well applied, as may be afterwards
shown. [Robert Gourlay, General Introduction to a Statistical Account of Upper Canada, London, 1822]
Jamieson's Etymological Dictionary of the Scottish Language (1825) has it as a noun meaning
thoughtless, ignorant fellow.


rob (v.)

late 12c., from Old French rober rob, steal, pillage, ransack, rape, from West Germanic *rauba booty
(cognates: Old High German roubon to rob, roub spoil, plunder; Old English reafian, source of the
reave in bereave), from Proto-Germanic *raubon to rob, from PIE *reup-, *reub- to snatch (see rip
(v.)).Lord, hou schulde God approve &thorn;at &thorn;ou robbe Petur, and gif &thorn;is robbere to
Poule in &thorn;e name of Crist? [Wyclif, c.1380]To rob the cradle is attested from 1864 in
reference to drafting young men in the American Civil War; by 1949 in reference to seductions or
romantic relationships with younger persons. Related: Robbed; robbing.


