rant (n.)

boisterous, empty declamation; fierce or high-sounding language without much meaning or dignity of
thought; bombast; a ranting speech, 1640s, from rant (v.).


rant (v.)

c.1600, to be jovial and boisterous, also to talk bombastically, from Dutch randten (earlier ranten)
talk foolishly, rave, of unknown origin (compare German rantzen to frolic, spring about). Related:
Ranted; ranting. Ranters antinomian sect which arose in England c.1645 is attested from 1651;
applied 1823 to early Methodists. A 1700 slang dictionary has rantipole a rude wild Boy or Girl
(also as a verb and adjective); to ride rantipole meant The woman uppermost in the amorous congress
[Grose].


randy (adj.)

1690s, Scottish, aggressive, boisterous, probably from rand to rave, an obsolete variant of rant
(v.). In the original sense especially of beggars, and probably implying vagrant habits as well as
rude behavior [OED]. Sense of lewd, lustful first recorded 1847. Related: Randiness.


protuberant (adj.)

1640s, from French protub&#233;rant (16c.) and directly from Late Latin protuberantem (moninative
protuberans), present participle of protuberare to swell, bulge out (see protuberance). Related:
Protuberantly.


reverberant (adj.)

1570s, from French r&eacute;verb&eacute;rant or directly from Latin reverberantem (nominative
reverberans), present participle of reverberare (see reverberation).


tolerant (adj.)

1784, free from bigotry or severity in judging others, from French tol&#233;rant (16c.), and
directly from Latin tolerantem (nom. tolerans), present participle of tolerare to bear, endure,
tolerate (see toleration). Meaning able to bear (something) without being affected is from 1879.
Related: Tolerantly.


perseverant (adj.)

mid-14c. (implied in perseverantly), from Middle French pers&eacute;v&eacute;rant (12c.), present
participle of pers&eacute;v&eacute;rer (see persevere).


exuberant (adj.)

mid-15c., from Middle French exub&eacute;rant and directly from Latin exuberantem (nominative
exuberans) overabundance, present participle of exuberare be abundant, grow luxuriously, from ex-
thoroughly + uberare be fruitful, related to uber udder, from PIE root *eue-dh-r- (see udder).
Related: Exuberantly; exuberate; exuberating.


random (adj.)

having no definite aim or purpose, 1650s, from at random (1560s), at great speed (thus, carelessly,
haphazardly), alteration of Middle English noun randon impetuosity, speed (c.1300), from Old French
randon rush, disorder, force, impetuosity, from randir to run fast, from Frankish *rant a running or
some other Germanic source, from Proto-Germanic *randa (cognates: Old High German rennen to run, Old
English rinnan to flow, to run; see run (v.)).    In 1980s U.S. college student slang it began to
acquire a sense of inferior, undesirable. (A 1980 William Safire column describes it as a college
slang noun meaning person who does not belong on our dormitory floor.) Random access in reference to
computer memory is recorded from 1953. Related: Randomly; randomness.


