rapacious (adj.)

1650s, from Latin rapaci-, stem of rapax grasping, itself from stem of rapere to seize (see
rapacity) + -ous. Related: Rapaciously; rapaciousness.


swoop (n.)

1540s, a blow, stroke, from swoop (v.). Meaning the sudden pouncing of a rapacious bird on its prey
is 1605, from Shakespeare:    Oh, Hell-Kite! All? What, All my pretty Chickens, and their Damme, At
one fell swoope? [Macbeth, IV.iii.219]


ravenous (adj.)

late 14c., obsessed with plundering, extremely greedy, from Old French ravinos, of people,
rapacious, violent, of water, swift-flowing, from raviner to seize, from ravine violent rush,
robbery (see ravine). Meaning voracious, very hungry is from early 15c. Related: Ravenously;
ravenousness.


shark (n.)

1560s, of uncertain origin; apparently the word and the first specimen were brought to London by
Capt. John Hawkins's second expedition (landed 1565; see Hakluyt).  There is no proper name for it
that I knowe, but that sertayne men of Captayne Haukinses doth call it a 'sharke' [handbill
advertising an exhibition of the specimen, 1569]    The meaning dishonest person who preys on
others, though attested only from 1599 (sharker artful swindler in this sense is from 1594), may be
the original sense, later transferred to the large, voracious marine fish. If so, it is possibly
from German Schorck, a variant of Schurke scoundrel, villain, agent noun of Middle High German
sch&uuml;rgen (German sch&uuml;ren) to poke, stir.    But on another theory, the English word is
from a Mayan word, xoc, which might have meant shark. Northern Europeans seem not to have been
familiar with sharks before voyages to the tropics began. A slightly earlier name for it in English
was tiburon, via Spanish (where it is attested by 1520s), from the Carib name for the fish.    The
English word was applied (or re-applied) to voracious or predatory persons, on the image of the
fish, from 1707 (originally of pick-pockets); loan shark is attested from 1905. Sharkskin (1851) was
used for binding books, etc. As the name of a type of fabric held to resemble it, it is recorded
from 1932.    There is the ordinary Brown Shark, or sea attorney, so called by sailors; a grasping,
rapacious varlet, that in spite of the hard knocks received from it, often snapped viciously at our
steering oar. [Herman Melville, Mardi]


