rapport (n.)

1660s, reference, relation, relationship, from French rapport bearing, yield, produce; harmony,
agreement, intercourse, back-formation from rapporter bring back; refer to, from re- again (see re-)
+ apporter to bring, from Latin apportare to bring, from ad- to (see ad-) + portare to carry (see
port (n.1)).    Psychological meaning intense harmonious accord, as between therapist and patient,
is first attested 1894, though the word had been used in a very similar sense with reference to
mesmerism from 1845 (first recorded in Poe). See also report (n.). Johnson frowns on the word and
credits its use in English to Sir William Temple, naturalizer of French terms, who did use it but
was not the first to do so.


rapportage (n.)

the describing of events in writing, 1903, from French rapportage, literally tale-telling, from
rapporter (see rapport).


report (n.)

late 14c., an account brought by one person to another, rumor, from Old French report pronouncement,
judgment (Modern French rapport), from reporter to tell, relate (see report (v.)).    Meaning
resounding noise, sound of an explosion is from 1580s. Meaning formal statement of results of an
investigation first attested 1660s; sense of teacher's official statement of a pupil's work and
behavior is from 1873 (report card in the school sense first attested 1919).


connect (v.)

mid-15c., from Latin conectere join together (see connection). Displaced 16c. by connex (1540s),
from Middle French connexer, from Latin *connexare, a supposed frequentative of conectere (past
participle stem connex-). Connect was re-established 1670s.    A similar change took place in
French, where connexer was superseded by connecter. Meaning to establish a relationship (with) is
from 1881. Slang meaning get in touch with is attested by 1926, from telephone connections. Meaning
awaken meaningful emotions, establish rapport is from 1942. Of a hit or blow, to reach the target,
from c.1920. Related: Connected; connecting; connectedness.


