rapture (v.)

1630s, from rapture (n.). Related: Raptured; rapturing.


rapture (n.)

c.1600, act of carrying off, from Middle French rapture, from Medieval Latin raptura seizure, rape,
kidnapping, from Latin raptus a carrying off, abduction, snatching away; rape (see rapt). Earliest
attested use in English is of women and in 17c. it sometimes meant rape (v.), which word is a
cognate of this. Sense of spiritual ecstasy, state of mental transport first recorded c.1600
(raptures).


ecstasy (n.)

late 14c., in a frenzy or stupor, fearful, excited, from Old French estaise ecstasy, rapture, from
Late Latin extasis, from Greek ekstasis entrancement, astonishment; any displacement, in New
Testament a trance, from existanai displace, put out of place, also drive out of one's mind
(existanai phrenon), from ek out (see ex-) + histanai to place, cause to stand, from PIE root *sta-
to stand (see stet).    Used by 17c. mystical writers for a state of rapture that stupefied the body
while the soul contemplated divine things, which probably helped the meaning shift to exalted state
of good feeling (1610s). Slang use for the drug 3,4-methylendioxymethamphetamine dates from 1985.


rapturous (adj.)

1670s, from rapture + -ous. Related: Rapturously (1660s).


enrapture (v.)

1740, from en- (1) + rapture (n.). Related: Enraptured.


nympholepsy (n.)

frenzy or rapture supposed to take hold of a man upon gazing on a nymph, 1775, coined by Richard
Chandler, in Travels in Greece, from nymph, on model of epilepsy, with second element from stem of
Greek lambanein to take. Especially an ecstasy or frenzy caused by desire for the unattainable.
Ancient Greek had nympholeptos caught by nymphs. Related: Nympholept; nympholeptic.


rapt (adj.)

late 14c., carried away in an ecstatic trance, from Latin raptus, past participle of rapere seize,
carry off (see rape (v.)). A figurative sense, the notion is of carried up into Heaven (bodily or in
a dream), as in a saint's vision. Latin literal sense of carried away was in English from 1550s. In
15c.-17c. the word also sometimes could mean raped. Sense of engrossed first recorded c.1500. As a
past participle adjective, in English it spawned the back-formed verb rap to affect with rapture,
which was common c.1600-1750.


