rapture (n.)

c.1600, act of carrying off, from Middle French rapture, from Medieval Latin raptura seizure, rape,
kidnapping, from Latin raptus a carrying off, abduction, snatching away; rape (see rapt). Earliest
attested use in English is of women and in 17c. it sometimes meant rape (v.), which word is a
cognate of this. Sense of spiritual ecstasy, state of mental transport first recorded c.1600
(raptures).


rapt (adj.)

late 14c., carried away in an ecstatic trance, from Latin raptus, past participle of rapere seize,
carry off (see rape (v.)). A figurative sense, the notion is of carried up into Heaven (bodily or in
a dream), as in a saint's vision. Latin literal sense of carried away was in English from 1550s. In
15c.-17c. the word also sometimes could mean raped. Sense of engrossed first recorded c.1500. As a
past participle adjective, in English it spawned the back-formed verb rap to affect with rapture,
which was common c.1600-1750.


enrapt (adj.)

c.1600, carried away by (prophetic) ecstasy, past participle adjective from en- make, put in (see
en- (1)) + rapt.


obstreperous (adj.)

c.1600, from Latin obstreperus clamorous, from obstrepere drown with noise, make a noise against,
oppose noisily, from ob against (see ob-) + strepere make a noise, from PIE *strep-, said to be
imitative (compare Latin stertare to snore, Old Norse &#254;rapt chattering, Old English
&#254;r&#230;ft quarrel). Related: Obstreperously; obstreperousness.


enthusiasm (n.)

c.1600, from Middle French enthousiasme (16c.) and directly from Late Latin enthusiasmus, from Greek
enthousiasmos divine inspiration, from enthousiazein be inspired or possessed by a god, be rapt, be
in ecstasy, from entheos divinely inspired, possessed by a god, from en in (see en- (2)) + theos god
(see theo-). Acquired a derogatory sense of excessive religious emotion (1650s) under the Puritans;
generalized sense of fervor, zeal (the main modern sense) is first recorded 1716.


speculation (n.)

late 14c., intelligent contemplation, consideration; act of looking, from Old French speculacion
close observation, rapt attention, and directly from Late Latin speculationem (nominative
speculatio) contemplation, observation, noun of action from Latin speculatus, past participle of
speculari observe, from specere to look at, view (see scope (n.1)).    Meaning pursuit of the truth
by means of thinking is from mid-15c. Disparaging sense of mere conjecture is recorded from 1570s.
Meaning buying and selling in search of profit from rise and fall of market value is recorded from
1774; short form spec is attested from 1794.


