rasp (n.)

coarse file, 1540s, from Middle French raspe (Modern French r&#226;pe), from Old French rasper to
rasp (see rasp (v.)).


rasp (v.)

mid-13c., to scrape, from Middle Dutch raspen and from Old French rasper (Modern French r&#226;per)
to grate, rasp, which is perhaps from a West Germanic source (compare Old English gehrespan) akin to
the root of raffle. Vocalic sense is from 1843. Related: Rasped; rasping.


raspy (adj.)

1670s, of plants; by 1821 of voices, from rasp + -y (2).


raspberry (n.)

1620s, earlier raspis berry (1540s), possibly from  raspise a sweet rose-colored wine (mid-15c.),
from Anglo-Latin vinum raspeys, origin uncertain, as is the connection between this and Old French
raspe, Medieval Latin raspecia, raspeium, also meaning raspberry. One suggestion is via Old Walloon
raspoie thicket, of Germanic origin. Klein suggests it is via the French word, from a Germanic
source akin to English rasp (v.), with an original sense of rough berry, based on appearance.    A
native plant of Europe and Asiatic Russia, the name was applied to a similar vine in North America.
Meaning rude sound (1890) is shortening of raspberry tart, rhyming slang for fart.


rat (n.)

late Old English r&aelig;t rat, of uncertain origin. Similar words are found in Celtic (Gaelic
radan), Romanic (Italian ratto, Spanish rata, French rat) and Germanic (Old Saxon ratta; Dutch rat;
German Ratte, dialectal Ratz; Swedish r&#229;tta, Danish rotte) languages, but connection is
uncertain and origin unknown. In all this it is very much like cat.    Perhaps from Vulgar Latin
*rattus, but Weekley thinks this is of Germanic origin, the animal having come from the East with
the race-migrations and the word passing thence to the Romanic languages. American Heritage and
Tucker connect Old English r&aelig;t to Latin rodere and thus PIE *red- to scrape, scratch, gnaw,
source of rodent (q.v.). Klein says there is no such connection and suggests a possible cognate in
Greek rhine file, rasp. Weekley connects them with a question mark and Barnhart writes, the
relationship to each other of the Germanic, Romance, and Celtic words for rat is uncertain. OED says
probable the rat word spread from Germanic to Romanic, but takes no position on ultimate origin.
RATS. Of these there are the following kinds: a black rat and a grey rat, a py-rat and a cu-rat.
[Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, Grose, 1788]    Middle English common form was ratton, from
augmented Old French form raton. Sense of one who abandons his associates (1620s) is from belief
that rats leave a ship about to sink or a house about to fall and led to meaning traitor, informant
(1902; verb 1910). Interjection rats is American English, 1886. To smell a rat is 1540s; to be put
on the watch by suspicion as the cat by the scent of a rat; to suspect danger [Johnson]. _____-rat,
person who frequents _____ (in earliest reference dock-rat) is from 1864.


