rationalize (v.)

1767, explain in a rational way, make conformable to reason, from rational + -ize. In the
psychological sense of to give an explanation that conceals true motives it dates from 1922.
Related: Rationalized; rationalizing.


rationalist (n.)

one who follows reason and not authority in thought or speculation, originally especially physician
whose treatment is based on reason, 1620s, from rational + -ist. Applied to a philosophical doctrine
1640s. Related: Rationalism.


rationale (n.)

1650s, exposition of principles, from Late Latin rationale, noun use of neuter of Latin rationalis
of reason (see rational). Hence, fundamental reason (1680s).


rationalization (n.)

1825, a rendering rational, from rationalize + -ation. Psychological use is from 1908.    Of the
three works now on our table, the two which we have placed first have these laudable objects in
view; an improvement on the former versions of the Psalms as compositions, and the rationalization,
if we may so speak, of our Church psalmody. [The British Critic, London, Jan.-June 1825]


rational (adj.)

late 14c., pertaining to reason; mid-15c., endowed with reason, from Old French racionel and
directly from Latin rationalis of or belonging to reason, reasonable, from ratio (genitive rationis)
reckoning, calculation, reason (see ratio).


rationality (n.)

1620s, quality of having reason; 1650s, fact of being agreeable to reason, from French
rationalit&#233;, from Late Latin rationalitas reasonableness, rationality (also source of Spanish
racionalidad, Italian razionalita), from Latin rationalis (see rational).


raison d&#039;etre (n.)

excuse for being, 1864, first recorded in letter of J.S. Mill, from French raison d'&#234;tre,
literally rational grounds for existence.


arational (adj.)

not purporting to be governed by laws of reason, 1935; see a- (2) + rational.


anima (n.)

Jung's term for the inner part of the personality, or the female component of a masculine
personality, 1923, from fem. of Latin animus the rational soul; life; the mental powers,
intelligence (see animus).


sane (adj.)

1721, back-formation from sanity or else from Latin sanus sound, healthy, in figurative or
transferred use, of sound mind, rational, sane, also, of style, correct; of uncertain origin. Used
earlier, of the body, with the sense of healthy (1620s). Related: Sanely.


irrational (adj.)

late 15c., not endowed with reason (of beats, etc.); earlier (of quantities) inexpressible in
ordinary numbers (late 14c.); from Latin irrationalis without reason, from assimilated form of in-
not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + rationalis reason (see rational). Meaning illogical, absurd is
attested from 1640s. Related: Irrationally.


reasonable (adj.)

c.1300, having sound judgment, sane, rational, from Old French raisonable, from Latin rationabilis,
from ratio (see reason (n.)).What the majority of people consider to be 'reasonable' is that about
which there is agreement, if not among all, at least among a substantial number of people;
'reasonable' for most people, has nothing to do with reason, but with consensus. [Erich Fromm, The
Heart of Man, 1968]Meaning moderate in price is recorded from 1660s. Related: Reasonably.


simurgh (n.)

monstrous bird, rational and ancient, in Persian mythology, 1786, from Persian simurgh, from Pahlavi
sin eagle + murgh bird. Compare Avestan saeno merego eagle, Sanskrit syenah eagle, Armenian cin
kite. Probably identical with the roc (q.v.).


Catch-22 (n.)

from the title of Joseph Heller's 1961 novel. In widespread use only after release of the movie
based on the book in 1970. The catch is that a bomber pilot is insane if he flies combat missions
without asking to be relieved from duty, and is thus eligible to be relieved from duty. But if he
asks to be relieved from duty, that means he's sane and has to keep flying.  There was only one
catch and that was Catch-22, which specified that a concern for one's safety in the face of dangers
that were real and immediate was the process of a rational mind. Orr was crazy and could be
grounded. All he had to do was ask; and as soon as he did, he would no longer be crazy and would
have to fly more missions. Orr would be crazy to fly more missions and sane if he didn't, but if he
was sane he had to fly them. If he flew them he was crazy and didn't have to; but if he didn't want
to he was sane and had to. Yossarian was moved very deeply by the absolute simplicity of this clause
of Catch-22 and let out a respectful whistle.  That's some catch, that Catch-22, he observed.It's
the best there is, Doc Daneeka agreed.  See catch (n.).


enlightenment (n.)

1660s, action of enlightening, from enlighten + -ment. Used only in figurative sense, of spiritual
enlightenment, etc. Attested from 1865 as a translation of German Aufkl&auml;rung, a name for the
spirit and system of Continental philosophers in the 18c.The philosophy of the Enlightenment
insisted on man's essential autonomy: man is responsible to himself, to his own rational interests,
to his self-development, and, by an inescapable extension, to the welfare of his fellow man. For the
philosophes, man was not a sinner, at least not by nature; human nature -- and this argument was
subversive, in fact revolutionary, in their day -- is by origin good, or at least neutral. Despite
the undeniable power of man's antisocial passions, therefore, the individual may hope for
improvement through his own efforts -- through education, participation in politics, activity in
behalf of reform, but not through prayer. [Peter Gay, The Enlightenment]


ideology (n.)

1796, science of ideas, originally philosophy of the mind which derives knowledge from the senses
(as opposed to metaphysics), from French id&eacute;ologie study or science of ideas, coined by
French philosopher Destutt de Tracy (1754-1836) from id&eacute;o- of ideas, from Greek idea (see
idea) + -logy. Later used in a sense impractical theorizing (1813). Meaning systematic set of ideas,
doctrines first recorded 1909.Ideology ... is usually taken to mean, a prescriptive doctrine that is
not supported by rational argument. [D.D. Raphael, Problems of Political Philosophy, 1970]


animus (n.)

1820, temper (usually in a hostile sense), from Latin animus rational soul, mind, life, mental
powers; courage, desire, related to anima living being, soul, mind, disposition, passion, courage,
anger, spirit, feeling, from PIE root *ane- to blow, to breathe (cognates: Greek anemos wind,
Sanskrit aniti breathes, Old Irish anal, Welsh anadl breath, Old Irish animm soul, Gothic uzanan to
exhale, Old Norse anda to breathe, Old English e&eth;ian to breathe, Old Church Slavonic vonja
smell, breath, Armenian anjn soul). It has no plural. As a term in Jungian psychology for the
masculine component of a feminine personality, it dates from 1923.


death (n.)

Old English dea&eth; death, dying, cause of death, in plura, ghosts, from Proto-Germanic *dauthaz
(cognates: Old Saxon doth, Old Frisian dath, Dutch dood, Old High German tod, German Tod, Old Norse
dau&eth;i, Danish d&oslash;d, Swedish d&ouml;d, Gothic dau&thorn;as death), from verbal stem *dheu-
(3) to die (see die (v.)) + *-thuz suffix indicating act, process, condition.    I would not that
death should take me asleep. I would not have him meerly seise me, and onely declare me to be dead,
but win me, and overcome me. When I must shipwrack, I would do it in a sea, where mine impotencie
might have some excuse; not in a sullen weedy lake, where I could not have so much as exercise for
my swimming. [John Donne, letter to Sir Henry Goodere, Sept. 1608]   Death's-head, a symbol of
mortality, is from 1590s. Death row first recorded 1940s. Death knell is attested from 1814; death
penalty from 1875; death rate from 1859. Slang be death on be very good at is from 1839. Death wish
first recorded 1896. The death-watch beetle (1660s) inhabits houses, makes a ticking noise like a
watch, and was superstitiously supposed to portend death.    FEW ears have escaped the noise of the
death-watch, that is, the little clickling sound heard often in many rooms, somewhat resembling that
of a watch; and this is conceived to be of an evil omen or prediction of some person's death:
wherein notwithstanding there is nothing of rational presage or just cause of terror unto melancholy
and meticulous heads. For this noise is made by a little sheathwinged grey insect, found often in
wainscot benches and wood-work in the summer. [Browne, Vulgar Errors]


fundamentalist (adj.)

1920 in the religious sense (as is fundamentalism), from fundamental + -ist. Coined in American
English to name a movement among Protestants c.1920-25 based on scriptural inerrancy, etc., and
associated with William Jennings Bryan, among others.   Fundamentalist is said (by George McCready
Price) to have been first used in print by Curtis Lee Laws (1868-1946), editor of The Watchman
Examiner, a Baptist newspaper. The movement may have roots in the Presbyterian General Assembly of
1910, which drew up a list of five defining qualities of true believers which other evangelicals
published in a mass-circulation series of books called The Fundamentals. A World's Christian
Fundamentals Association was founded in 1918. The words reached widespread use in the wake of the
contentious Northern Baptist Convention of 1922 in Indianapolis.    Fundamentalism is a protest
against that rationalistic interpretation of Christianity which seeks to discredit supernaturalism.
This rationalism, when full grown, scorns the miracles of the Old Testament, sets aside the virgin
birth of our Lord as a thing unbelievable, laughs at the credulity of those who accept many of the
New Testament miracles, reduces the resurrection of our Lord to the fact that death did not end his
existence, and sweeps away the promises of his second coming as an idle dream. It matters not by
what name these modernists are known. The simple fact is that, in robbing Christianity of its
supernatural content, they are undermining the very foundations of our holy religion. They boast
that they are strengthening the foundations and making Christianity more rational and more
acceptable to thoughtful people. Christianity is rooted and grounded in supernaturalism, and when
robbed of supernaturalism it ceases to be a religion and becomes an exalted system of ethics. [Laws,
Herald &amp; Presbyter, July 19, 1922]    The original opposition to fundamentalist (within the
denominations) was modernist.    A new word has been coined into our vocabulary -- two new words --
'Fundamentalist' and 'Fundamentalism.' They are not in the dictionaries as yet -- unless in the very
latest editions. But they are on everyone's tongue. [Address Delivered at the Opening of the
Seminary, Sept. 20, 1922, by Professor Harry Lathrop Reed, Auburn Seminary Record]    Applied to
other religions, especially Islam, since 1957.


