ratify (v.)

mid-14c., from Old French ratifier (13c.), from Medieval Latin ratificare confirm, approve,
literally fix by reckoning, from Latin ratus fixed by calculation; determined; approved; certain,
sure; valid (past participle adjective from reri to reckon, think; see reason (v.)) + root of facere
to make (see factitious). Related: Ratified; ratifying.


sanction (n.)

early 15c., confirmation or enactment of a law, from Latin sanctionem (nominative sanctio) act of
decreeing or ordaining, also decree, ordinance, noun of action from past participle stem of sancire
to decree, confirm, ratify, make sacred (see saint (n.)). Originally especially of ecclesiastical
decrees.


ratification (n.)

mid-15c., from Middle French ratification (14c.) and directly from Medieval Latin ratificationem
(nominative ratificatio), noun of action from past participle stem of ratificare (see ratify).


seal (v.)

to fasten with (or as with) a seal, c.1200, from seal (n.1). Meaning to place a seal on (a document)
is recorded from mid-14c.; hence to conclude, ratify, render official (late 15c.). Sense of to close
up with wax, lead, cement, etc. is attested from 1660s, from the notion of wax seals on envelopes.
In reference to the actions of wood-coatings, 1940. Related: Sealed; sealing. Sealing-wax is
attested from c.1300. To seal (one's) fate (1799) probably reflects the notion of a seal on an
execution warrant.


consign (v.)

early 15c., to ratify by a sign or seal, from Middle French consigner (15c.), from Latin consignare
to seal, register, originally to mark with a sign, from com- together (see com-) + signare to sign,
mark, from signum sign (see sign (n.)). Commercial sense is from 1650s. Related: Consignee;
consignor.


confirm (v.)

mid-13c., confirmyn to ratify, from Old French confermer (13c., Modern French confirmer) strengthen,
establish, consolidate; affirm by proof or evidence; anoint (a king), from Latin confirmare make
firm, strengthen, establish, from com-, intensive prefix (see com-), + firmare to strengthen, from
firmus (see firm (adj.)). Related: Confirmative; confirmatory.


fasten (v.)

Old English f&aelig;stnian make fast, firm, also ratify, betroth, from Proto-Germanic *fastinon to
make firm or fast (cognates: Old Frisian festnia to make firm, bind fast, Old Saxon fastnon, Old
High German fastnion, Old Norse fastna to pledge, betroth), from *fastuz (see fast (adj.)). Related:
Fastened; fastener; fastening.


sacred (adj.)

late 14c., past participle adjective from obsolete verb sacren to make holy (c.1200), from Old
French sacrer consecrate, anoint, dedicate (12c.) or directly from Latin sacrare to make sacred,
consecrate; hold sacred; immortalize; set apart, dedicate, from sacer (genitive sacri) sacred,
dedicated, holy, accursed, from Old Latin saceres, from PIE root *sak- to sanctify. Buck groups it
with Oscan sakrim, Umbrian sacra and calls it a distinctive Italic group, without any clear outside
connections. Related: Sacredness.    Nasalized form is sancire make sacred, confirm, ratify, ordain.
Sacred cow object of Hindu veneration, is from 1891; figurative sense of one who must not be
criticized is first recorded 1910, reflecting Western views of Hinduism. Sacred Heart the heart of
Jesus as an object of religious veneration is from 1765.


