ration (v.)

put (someone) on a fixed allowance, 1859, from ration (n.); sense of apportion in fixed amounts is
from 1870. Related: Rationed; rationing.


ration (n.)

1550, reasoning, later, relation of one number to another (1660s), then fixed allowance of food
(1702, often rations, from French ration in this sense), from Latin rationem (nominative ratio) a
reckoning, calculation, proportion (see ratio). The military pronunciation (rhymes with fashion)
took over from the preferred civilian pronunciation (rhymes with nation) during World War I.


rationing (n.)

restriction to limited allotments, 1865, verbal noun from ration (v.). Specifically of restrictions
during wartime from 1917, from conditions in England during World War I.


FIFA

1915, acronym from F&eacute;d&eacute;ration Internationale de Football Association, founded 1904 in
Paris.


sizar (n.)

also sizer, at certain British universities, a student of limited means who received  school meals
for free, 1580s, from size (n.) in a specialized sense ration, allowance for provisions.


laceration (n.)

1590s, from Middle French lac&eacute;ration, from Latin lacerationem (nominative laceratio), noun of
action from past participle stem of lacerare (see lacerate).


incineration (n.)

1520s, from Middle French incin&eacute;ration (14c.), from Medieval Latin incinerationem (nominative
incineratio), noun of action from past participle stem of incinerare (see incinerate).


confederation (n.)

early 15c., act of confederating, from Middle French conf&eacute;d&eacute;ration, from Old French
confederacion (14c.), from Late Latin confoederationem (nominative confoederatio), noun of action
from confoederare (see confederate). Meaning states or persons united by a league is from 1620s.


consideration (n.)

mid-14c., a beholding, looking at, also keeping in mind, from Old French consideracion (12c., Modern
French consid&eacute;ration), from Latin considerationem (nominative consideratio) consideration,
contemplation, reflection, noun of action from past participle stem of considerare (see consider).
Meaning a taking into account is from mid-15c.; that of something given in payment is from c.1600.


proliferation (n.)

1859, formation or development of cells, from French prolif&#233;ration, from prolif&#232;re
producing offspring, from Latin proles offspring (see prolific) + ferre to bear (see infer). Meaning
enlargement, extension, increase is from 1920; especially of nuclear weapons (1966).


federation (n.)

1721, union by agreement, from French f&eacute;d&eacute;ration, from Late Latin foederationem
(nominative foederatio), noun of action from Latin foederare league together, from foedus covenant,
league (genitive foederis); see federal.


commiseration (n.)

1580s, from Middle French commis&eacute;ration, from Latin commiserationem (nominative commiseratio)
act or fact of pitying, noun of action from past participle stem of commiserari to pity, from com-
intensive prefix (see com-) + miserari bewail, lament, from miser wretched (see miser).


liberation (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French lib&#233;ration and directly from Latin liberationem (nominative
liberatio) a setting or becoming free, noun of action from past participle stem of liberare set free
(see liberate). Liberation theology (1969) translates Spanish teologia de la liberaci&oacute;n,
coined 1968 by Peruvian priest Gustavo Guti&eacute;rrez.


cooperation (n.)

late 15c., from Middle French coop&eacute;ration, or directly from Late Latin cooperationem
(nominative cooperatio) a working together, noun of action from past participle stem of cooperari to
work together, from com- with (see com-) + operari to work (see operation).


aeration (n.)

1570s, from French a&eacute;ration, from a&eacute;rer (v.), from Latin aer (see air (n.1)). In some
cases, from aerate.


enumeration (n.)

1550s, from Middle French &eacute;num&eacute;ration, from Latin enumerationem (nominative
enumeratio) a counting up, noun of action from past participle stem of enumerare to reckon up, count
over, enumerate, from ex- from (see ex-) + numerare to count, number, from numerus number (see
number (n.)).


livery (n.)

c.1300, household allowance of any kind (food, provisions, clothing) to retainers or servants, from
Anglo-French livere (late 13c.), Old French livr&eacute;e, allowance, ration, pay, originally
(clothes) delivered by a master to his retinue, from fem. past participle of livrer to dispense,
deliver, hand over, from Latin liberare (see liberate). The sense later was reduced to servants'
rations and provender for horses (mid-15c.). The former led to the meaning distinctive clothing
given to servants (early 14c.); the latter now is obsolete except in livery stable (1705). Related:
Liveried.


toleration (n.)

1510s, permission granted by authority, license, from Middle French tol&eacute;ration (15c.), from
Latin tolerationem (nominative toleratio) a bearing, supporting, enduring, noun of action from past
participle stem of tolerare to endure, sustain, support, suffer, literally to bear, from PIE *tele-
to bear, carry (see extol).    Meaning forbearance, sufferance is from 1580s. The specific religious
sense is from 1609; as in Act of Toleration (1689), statute granting freedom of religious worship
(with conditions) to dissenting Protestants in England. In this it means recognition of the right of
private judgment in matters of faith and worship; liberty granted by the government to preach and
worship as one pleases; equality under the law without regard to religion.    If any man err from
the right way, it is his own misfortune, no injury to thee; nor therefore art thou to punish him in
the things of this life because thou supposest he will be miserable in that which is to come.
Nobody, therefore, in fine, neither single persons nor churches, nay, nor even commonwealths, have
any just title to invade the civil rights and worldly goods of each other upon pretence of religion.
[John Locke, Letter Concerning Toleration, 1689]   <hr />   Before any man can be considered as a
member of Civil Society, he must be considered as a subject of the Governour of the Universe: And if
a member of Civil Society, do it with a saving of his allegiance to the Universal Sovereign. We
maintain therefore that in matters of Religion, no man's right is abridged by the institution of
Civil Society and that Religion is wholly exempt from its cognizance. [James Madison, Memorial and
Remonstrance Against Religious Assessments, 1785]   <hr />   Unlimited tolerance must lead to the
disappearance of tolerance. If we extend unlimited tolerance even to those who are intolerant, if we
are not prepared to defend a tolerant society against the onslaught of the intolerant, then the
tolerant will be destroyed, and tolerance with them. [Karl Popper, The Open Society and Its Enemies,
1962]


