rave (n.)

act of raving, 1590s, from rave (v.). Meaning temporary popular enthusiasm is from 1902; that of
highly flattering review is from 1926. Sense of rowdy party is from 1960; rave-up was British slang
for wild party from 1940; specific modern sense of mass party with loud, fast electronic music and
often psychedelic drugs is from 1989.


raver (n.)

c.1400, madman, agent noun from rave (v.). Meaning attendee at a mass party is from 1991. In Old
French, the noun resveor meant vagabond, night-prowler.


rave (v.)

early 14c., to show signs of madness or delirium, from Old French raver, variant of resver to dream;
wander here and there, prowl; behave madly, be crazy, of unknown origin (compare reverie). The
identical (in form) verb meaning to wander, stray, rove first appeared c.1300 in Scottish and
northern dialect, and is probably from an unrelated Scandinavian word (such as Icelandic rafa).
Sense of talk enthusiastically about first recorded 1704. Related: Raved; raving.


rove (v.)

to wander with no fixed destination, 1530s (earliest sense was to shoot arrows at a mark selected at
pleasure or at random, late 15c.); possibly a Midlands dialectal variant of northern English and
Scottish rave to wander, stray, from Middle English raven, probably from Old Norse rafa to wander,
rove (compare rave (v.)). Influenced by rover, if not a back-formation from it. Related: Roved;
roving.


reverie (n.)

mid-14c., reuerye, wild conduct, frolic, from Old French reverie, resverie revelry, raving, delirium
(Modern French r&#234;verie), from resver to dream, wander, rave (12c., Modern French r&#234;ver),
of uncertain origin (also the root of rave). Meaning daydream is first attested 1650s, a reborrowing
from French. As a type of musical composition, it is attested from 1880. Related: Reverist.


raving (adj.)

late 15c., delirious, frenzied, present participle adjective from rave (v.); sense of remarkable,
fit to excite admiration is from 1841, hence slang superlative use.


randy (adj.)

1690s, Scottish, aggressive, boisterous, probably from rand to rave, an obsolete variant of rant
(v.). In the original sense especially of beggars, and probably implying vagrant habits as well as
rude behavior [OED]. Sense of lewd, lustful first recorded 1847. Related: Randiness.


rabid (adj.)

1610s, furious, raving, from Latin rabidus raging, furious, enraged; inspired; ungoverned; rabid,
from rabere be mad, rave (see rage (v.)). Meaning made mad by rabies in English first recorded 1804.
Related: Rabidly; rabidness.


rampage (v.)

1715, in Scottish, probably from Middle English verb ramp rave, rush wildly about (c.1300),
especially of beasts rearing on their hind legs, as if climbing, from Old French ramper (see ramp
(n.1), also see rampant). Related: Rampaged; rampaging.


rabies (n.)

1590s, from Latin rabies madness, rage, fury, related to rabere be mad, rave (see rage (v.)). Sense
of extremely fatal infectious disease causing madness in dogs was a secondary meaning in Latin.
Known hydrophobia in humans.


patch (n.2)

fool, clown, 1540s, perhaps from Italian pazzo fool, of unknown origin. Possibly from Old High
German barzjan to rave [Klein].  But Buck says pazzo is originally euphemistic, and from Latin
patiens suffering, in medical use, the patient. Form perhaps influenced by folk etymology derivation
from patch (n.1), on notion of a fool's patched garb.


delirium (n.)

1590s, from Latin delirium madness, from deliriare be crazy, rave, literally go off the furrow, a
plowing metaphor, from phrase de lire, from de off, away (see de-) + lira furrow, earth thrown up
between two furrows, from PIE *leis- (1) track, furrow (see learn).


hallucinate (v.)

c.1600, deceive, from Latin alucinatus, later hallucinatus, past participle of alucinari wander (in
the mind), dream; talk unreasonably, ramble in thought, probably from Greek alyein, Attic halyein be
distraught, probably related to alaomai wander about [Barnhart, Klein]. The Latin ending probably
was influenced by vaticinari to prophecy, also to rave. Sense of to have illusions is from 1650s.
Occasionally used 19c. in transitive senses, to cause hallucination. Related: Hallucinated;
hallucinating.


rant (v.)

c.1600, to be jovial and boisterous, also to talk bombastically, from Dutch randten (earlier ranten)
talk foolishly, rave, of unknown origin (compare German rantzen to frolic, spring about). Related:
Ranted; ranting. Ranters antinomian sect which arose in England c.1645 is attested from 1651;
applied 1823 to early Methodists. A 1700 slang dictionary has rantipole a rude wild Boy or Girl
(also as a verb and adjective); to ride rantipole meant The woman uppermost in the amorous congress
[Grose].


race (n.1)

act of running, c.1300, from Old Norse ras running, rush (of water), cognate with Old English
r&aelig;s a running, a rush, a leap, jump; a storming, an attack; or else a survival of the Old
English word with spelling influenced by the Old Norse one. The Norse and Old English words are from
Proto-Germanic *res- (cognates: Middle Dutch rasen to rave, rage, German rasen, Old English
raesettan to rage (of fire)), from a variant form of PIE *ers- (1) be in motion (see err).
Originally a northern word, it became general in English c.1550. Meaning act of running is from
early 14c. Meaning contest of speed first recorded 1510s.


rage (n.)

c.1300, madness, insanity; fit of frenzy; anger, wrath; fierceness in battle; violence of storm,
fire, etc., from Old French rage, raige spirit, passion, rage, fury, madness (11c.), from Medieval
Latin rabia, from Latin rabies madness, rage, fury, related to rabere be mad, rave (compare rabies,
which originally had this sense), from PIE *rebh- violent, impetuous (cognates: Old English rabbian
to rage). Similarly, Welsh (cynddaredd) and Breton (kounnar) words for rage, fury originally meant
hydrophobia and are compounds based on the word for dog (Welsh ci, plural cwn; Breton ki). In
15c.-16c. it also could mean rabies. The rage fashion, vogue dates from 1785.


