ravine (n.)

1760, deep gorge, from French ravin a gully (1680s, from Old French raviner to pillage, sweep down,
cascade), and from French ravine violent rush of water, gully worn by a torrent, from Old French
ravine violent rush of water, waterfall; avalanche; robbery, rapine, both ultimately from Latin
rapina act of robbery, plundering (see rapine); sense influenced by Latin rapidus rapid. Middle
English ravine meant booty, plunder, robbery from c.1350-1500. Compare ravening.


ravenous (adj.)

late 14c., obsessed with plundering, extremely greedy, from Old French ravinos, of people,
rapacious, violent, of water, swift-flowing, from raviner to seize, from ravine violent rush,
robbery (see ravine). Meaning voracious, very hungry is from early 15c. Related: Ravenously;
ravenousness.


clough (n.)

ravine with a river, Old English cloh (in place names), of uncertain origin.


gulch (n.)

deep ravine, 1832, American English, perhaps from obsolete or dialectal verb gulsh sink in (of
land), gush out (of water), from Middle English gulchen to gush forth; to drink greedily (c.1200).
Compare gulche-cuppe a greedy drinker (mid-13c.).


coulee (n.)

deep ravine, seasonally flooded, 1804, a North American word, originally in areas explored by French
trappers, from French coul&eacute;e flow (17c.), from fem. past participle of couler to flow, from
Latin colare to filter, strain (see colander).


cheddar (n.)

type of cheese, 1660s (but the cheese presumably was made long before that), from Cheddar, village
in Somerset, England, where it originally was made, from Old English Ceodre (c.880), probably from
ceodor ravine (there is a gorge nearby).


bridge (n.1)

causeway over a ravine or river, Old English brycge, from Proto-Germanic *brugjo (cognates: Old
Saxon bruggia, Old Norse bryggja, Old Frisian brigge, Dutch brug, Old High German brucca, German
Br&uuml;cke), from PIE root *bhru log, beam, hence wooden causeway (cognates: Gaulish briva bridge,
Old Church Slavonic bruvuno beam, Serbian brv footbridge). For vowel evolution, see bury. Meaning
bony upper part of the nose is from early 15c.; of stringed instruments from late 14c.


