raze (v.)

1540s, alteration of racen pull or knock down (a building or town), from earlier rasen (14c.) to
scratch, slash, scrape, erase, from Old French raser to scrape, shave (see rase). Related: Razed;
razing.


radula (n.)

surgical instrument, 1753, from Latin radula scraper, scraping iron, from radere to scrape (see
raze). Related: Radular.


laconic (adj.)

concise, abrupt, 1580s, probably via Latin Laconicus, from Greek Lakonikos, from Lakon person from
Lakonia, the district around Sparta in southern Greece in ancient times, whose inhabitants were
famously proud of their brevity of speech. When Philip of Macedon threatened them with, If I enter
Laconia, I will raze Sparta to the ground, the Spartans' reply was, If. An earlier form was
laconical (1570s). Related: Laconically.


abrasion (n.)

1650s, from Medieval Latin abrasionem (nominative abrasio) a scraping, noun of action from past
participle stem of Latin abradere to scrape away, shave off, from ab- off (see ab-) + radere to
scrape (see raze).


erase (v.)

c.1600, from Latin erasus, past participle of eradere scrape out, scrape off, shave, from ex- out
(see ex-) + radere to scrape (see raze). Of magnetic tape, from 1945. Related: Erased; erasing.


raster (n.)

1934 in electrical engineering, from German Raster screen, frame, from Latin rastrum rake, from
rasum, from rodere to scrape (see raze). Related: Rasterization; rasterize. From Latin form
rastellum comes French r&#226;teau rake, formerly ratel, originally rastel.


tabula rasa (n.)

the mind in its primary state, 1530s, from Latin tabula rasa, literally scraped tablet, from which
writing has been erased, thus ready to be written on again, from tabula (see table (n.)) + rasa,
fem. past participle of radere to scrape away, erase (see raze). A loan-translation of Aristotle's
pinakis agraphos, literally unwritten tablet (De anima, 7.22).


subvert (v.)

late 14c., to raze, destroy, overthrow, undermine, overturn, from Old French subvertir overthrow,
destroy (13c.), or directly from Latin subvertere to turn upside down, overturn, overthrow, from sub
under (see sub-) + vertere to turn (see versus). Related: Subverted; subverting.


rash (n.)

eruption of small red spots on skin, 1709, perhaps from French rache a sore (Old French rasche rash,
scurf), from Vulgar Latin *rasicare to scrape (also source of Old Proven&ccedil;al rascar, Spanish
rascar to scrape, scratch, Italian raschina itch), from Latin rasus scraped, past participle of
radere to scrape (see raze). The connecting notion would be of itching. Figurative sense of any
sudden outbreak or proliferation first recorded 1820.


superintendent (n.)

1550s, originally an ecclesiastical word meaning bishop or minister who supervises churches within a
district (ultimately a loan-translation of Greek episkopos overseer), from Medieval Latin
superintendentem (nominative superintendens), present participle of Late Latin superintendere
oversee, from Latin super above (see super-) + intendere turn one's attention to, direct (see
intend). Famously used by 16c. radical Protestants in place of bishop, which to them was tainted by
Papacy.    [Martinists] studie to pull downe Bishopps, and set vp Superintendents, which is nothing
else, but to raze out good Greeke, &amp; enterline bad Latine. [Lyly, Pappe with an Hatchet, 1589]
The general sense of a person who has charge of some business is first recorded 1580s. Meaning
janitor, custodian is from c.1935. Shortened form super first attested 1857, especially at first of
overseers of sheep ranches in Australia. As an adjective meaning superintending, from 1590s.


