reactionary (adj.)

1831, on model of French r&eacute;actionnaire (19c.), from r&eacute;action (see reaction). In
Marxist use, tending toward reversing existing tendencies, opposed to revolutionary and used
opprobriously in reference to opponents of communism, by 1858. As a noun, person considered
reactionary, especially in politics, one who seeks to check or undo political action, by 1855.


junker (n.)

young German noble, 1550s, from German Junker, from Old High German juncherro, literally young lord,
from junc young (see young) + herro lord (see Herr). Pejorative sense of reactionary younger member
of the Prussian aristocracy (1865) dates from Bismarck's domestic policy.


conservative (adj.)

late 14c., conservatyf, from Middle French conservatif, from Late Latin conservativus, from Latin
conservatus, past participle of conservare (see conserve).    As a modern political tradition,
conservatism traces to Edmund Burke's opposition to the French Revolution (1790), but the word
conservative is not found in his writing. It was coined by his French disciples, (such as
Chateaubriand, who titled his journal defending clerical and political restoration Le Conservateur).
Conservative as the name of a British political faction first appeared in an 1830 issue of the
Quarterly Review, in an unsigned article sometimes attributed to John Wilson Croker. It replaced
Tory (q.v.) by 1843, reflecting both a change from the pejorative name (in use for 150 years) and
repudiation of some reactionary policies. Extended to similar spirits in other parties from
1845.Strictly speaking, conservatism is not a political system, but rather a way of looking at the
civil order. The conservative of Peru ... will differ greatly from those of Australia, for though
they may share a preference for things established, the institutions and customs which they desire
to preserve are not identical. [Russell Kirk (1918-1994)]  Phrases such as a conservative estimate
make no sense etymologically. The noun is attested from 1831, originally in the British political
sense.


