realm (n.)

late 13c., kingdom, from Old French reaume, probably from roiaume kingdom, altered (by influence of
Latin regalis regal) from Gallo-Roman *regiminem, accusative form of Latin regimen system of
government, rule (see regimen). Transferred sense sphere of activity is from late 14c.


satrap (n.)

late 14c., governor of a province of ancient Persia, from Latin satrapes, from Greek satrapes, from
Old Persian x&#353;athrapavan-, literally guardian of the realm, from x&#353;athra- realm, province
(related to x&#353;ayathiya king, cognate with Sanskrit kshatra; see shah) + pavan- guardian, from
PIE *pa- to protect, feed (see food). Related: Satrapy.


heavens (n.)

realm of the heavenly bodies, 1670s, from heaven.


wonderland (n.)

imaginary realm, 1787, from wonder (n.) + land (n.).


fandom (n.)

the realm of avid enthusiasts, 1903, from fan (n.2) + -dom.


metapolitics (n.)

1784, abstract political science; see meta- + politics. Related: metapolitical, attested from 1670s
in sense outside the realm of politics.


eldritch (adj.)

c.1500, apparently somehow from elf (compare Scottish variant elphrish), an explanation OED finds
suitable; Watkins connects its elements with Old English el- else, otherwise and rice realm.


aubain (n.)

1727, from French aubaine (12c.), of unknown origin, perhaps from Medieval Latin Albanus, but the
sense is obscure. Klein suggests Frankish *alibanus, literally belonging to another ban. A right of
French kings, whereby they claimed the property of every non-naturalized stranger who died in their
realm. Abolished 1819.


archbishopric (n.)

Old English arcebiscoprice, from archbishop + rice realm, dominion, province (see regal).


Lorraine

region in eastern France, from Medieval Latin Lotharingia, literally Lothar's Realm, name later
given to the northern portion of the lands assigned by the Treaty of Verdun (843 C.E.) to Lothair I
in the first division of the Carolingian empire. His empire stretched from the North Sea to the
Mediterranean. Before his death (855 C.E.), Lothair subdivided his lands among his three sons. His
son, Lothair (for whom the region is named), was given Lotharingia as his kingdom.


bourn (n.2)

destination, 1520s, from French borne, apparently a variant of bodne (see bound (n.)). Used by
Shakespeare in Hamlet's soliloquy (1602), from which it entered into English poetic speech. He meant
it probably in the correct sense of boundary, but it has been taken to mean goal (Wordsworth,
Matthew Arnold) or sometimes realm (Keats).The dread of something after death, The vndiscouered
Countrey; from whose Borne No Traueller returnes. [Hamlet III.i.79]


reign (n.)

early 13c., kingdom, from Old French reigne kingdom, land, country (Modern French r&#232;gne), from
Latin regnum kingship, dominion, rule, realm, related to regere (see regal). Meaning period of rule
first recorded mid-14c.


bishopric (n.)

Old English bisceoprice diocese, province of a bishop, from bishop + rice realm, dominion, province
(see regal).


ill (adv.)

c.1200, wickedly; with hostility; see ill (adj.). Meaning not well, poorly is from c.1300. It
generally has not shifted to the realm of physical sickess, as the adjective has done. Ill-fated
recorded from 1710; ill-informed from 1824; ill-tempered from c.1600; ill-starred from c.1600.
Generally contrasted with well, hence the useful, but now obsolete or obscure illcome (1570s),
illfare (c.1300), and illth.


chivalry (n.)

c.1300, body or host of knights; knighthood in the feudal social system; bravery in war, warfare as
an art, from Old French chevalerie knighthood, chivalry, nobility, cavalry, art of war, from
chevaler knight, from Medieval Latin caballarius horseman, from Latin caballus nag, pack-horse (see
cavalier). From late 14c. as the nobility as one of the estates of the realm, also as the word for
an ethical code emphasizing honor, valor, generosity and courtly manners. Modern use for social and
moral code of medieval feudalism probably is an 18c. historical revival.


pontifex (n.)

member of the supreme college of priests in ancient Rome, 1570s, from Latin pontifex high priest,
chief of the priests, probably from pont-, stem of pons bridge (see pons) + -fex, -ficis, root of
facere make (see factitious). If so, the word originally meant bridge-maker, or path-maker.
Weekley points out that, bridge-building has always been regarded as a pious work of divine
inspiration. Or the term may be metaphoric of bridging the earthly world and the realm of the gods.
Other suggestions trace it to Oscan-Umbrian puntis propitiary offering, or to a lost Etruscan word,
in either case altered by folk etymology to resemble the Latin for bridge-maker. In Old English,
pontifex is glossed in the Durham Ritual (Old Northumbrian dialect) as brycgwyrcende bridge-maker.


Reich (n.)

German, kingdom, realm, state, from Old High German rihhi, related to Old English rice, from Proto-
Germanic *rikja rule (cognates: Old Norse riki, Danish rige, Old Frisian and Middle Dutch rike,
Dutch rijk, Gothic reiki), from PIE *reg- (1) move in a straight line, hence, direct in a straight
line, rule, guide (see regal). Don Ringe, From Proto-Indo-European to Proto-Germanic [Oxford 2006]
identifies it as a Celtic loan-word in Germanic rather than a direct evolution from PIE, based on
the vowel. Used in English from 1871-1945 to refer to the German state, Germany. Most notoriously in
Third Reich (see third); there never was a First or Second in English usage.


California

name of an imaginary realm in Las sergas de Esplandi&aacute;n (Exploits of Esplad&aacute;n), a
romance by Spanish writer Garci Ord&oacute;&ntilde;ez de Montalvo, published in 1510. It was a
sequel to his Amadis de Gaula, and was said to have been influential among Spanish explorers of the
New World. It could have led them to misidentify Baja California as this mythical land and to
mistake it for an island. The Amadis tales are the Iberian equivalent of the Arthurian romances;
they are older than 1510 (traces of them have been found mid-14c.) and were wildly popular. That
conquistadors and sailors would have known the story in all its imaginative detail is hardly
surprising.   Amadis de Gaula ... set a fashion: all later Spanish writers of books of chivalry
adopted the machinery of Amadis de Gaula. Later knights were not less brave (they could not be
braver than) Amadis; heroines were not less lovely (they could not be lovelier) than Oriana; there
was nothing for it but to make the dragons more appalling, the giants larger, the wizards craftier,
the magic castles more inaccessible, the enchanted lakes deeper. Subsequent books of chivalry are
simple variants of the types in Amadis de Gaula: Cervantes made his barber describe it as 'the best
of all books of this kind.' This verdict is essentially just. Amadis de Gaula was read everywhere,
especially in the French version of Herberay des Essarts. It was done into Hebrew during the
sixteenth century, and attracted readers as different as St Ignatius of Loyola and Henry of Navarre.
Its vogue perhaps somewhat exceeded its merit, but its merits are not inconsiderable. [James
Fitzmaurice-Kelly, Spanish Literature, 1922 edition]    Where Montalvo got the name and what it
means, if anything, is a mystery. Californian is attested from 1785. The element Californium (1950)
was named in reference to University of California, where it was discovered.


street (n.)

Old English stret (Mercian, Kentish), str&aelig;t (West Saxon) street, high road, from Late Latin
strata, used elliptically for via strata paved road, from fem. past participle of Latin sternere lay
down, spread out, pave, from PIE *stre-to- to stretch, extend, from root *stere- to spread, extend,
stretch out (see structure (n.)).    One of the few words in use in England continuously from Roman
times. An early and widespread Germanic borrowing (Old Frisian strete, Old Saxon strata, Middle
Dutch strate, Dutch straat, Old High German straza, German Strasse, Swedish str&#229;t, Danish
str&#228;de street). The Latin is also the source of Spanish estrada, Old French estr&eacute;e,
Italian strada.    The normal term in OE for a paved way or Roman road, later extended to other
roads, urban streets, and in SE dialects to a street of dwellings, a straggling village or hamlet
[Cambridge Dictionary of English Place-Names]. Originally of Roman roads (Watling Street, Icknield
Street). In the Middle Ages, a road or way was merely a direction in which people rode or went, the
name street being reserved for the made road [Weekley].    Used since c.1400 to mean the people in
the street; modern sense of the realm of the people as the source of political support dates from
1931. The street for an especially important street is from 1560s (originally of London's Lombard-
street). Man in the street ordinary person, non-expert is attested from 1831. Street people the
homeless is from 1967; expression on the street homeless is from 1852. Street smarts is from 1971;
street-credibility is from 1979. Street-sweeper as an occupation is from 1848.


