rebus (n.)

c.1600, from Latin rebus by means of objects, ablative plural of res thing, object. According to
French sources, principally from the phrase de rebus qu&aelig; geruntur of things which are going
on, in reference to the satirical pieces composed by Picardy clerks at carnivals, subtle satires of
current events using pictures to suggest words, phrases or things. Or it may be from the
representations being non verbis sed rebus not by words, but by things. In either case from Latin
res thing.


charade (n.)

1776, from French charade (18c.), probably from Proven&ccedil;al charrado long talk, chatter, of
obscure origin, perhaps from charrar to chatter, gossip, of echoic origin. Compare Italian ciarlare,
Spanish charlar to talk, prattle. Originally not silent, but relying rather on enigmatic
descriptions of the words or syllables.    As we have ever made it a Rule to shew our Attention to
the Reader, by 'catching the Manners living, as they rise,' as Mr. Pope expresses it, we think
ourselves obliged to give Place to the following Specimens of a new Kind of SMALL WIT, which, for
some Weeks past, has been the Subject of Conversation in almost every Society, from the Court to the
Cottage. The CHARADE is, in fact, a near Relation of the old Rebus. It is usually formed from a Word
of two Syllables; the first Syllable is described by the Writer; then the second; they are
afterwards united and the whole Word marked out .... [supplement to The Universal Magazine of
Knowledge and Pleasure, volumes 58-59, 1776]    Among the examples given are:    My first makes all
nature appear of one face;  At the next we find music, and beauty and grace;  And, if this Charade
is most easily read,  I think that the third shou'd be thrown at my head.  [The answer is snow-
ball.]    The silent form, the main modern form, was at first a variant known as dumb charades and
at first it was not a speed contest; rather it adhered to the old pattern, and the performing team
acted out all the parts in order before the audience team began to guess.    There is one species of
charade which is performed solely by dumb motions, somewhat resembling the child's game of trades
and professions; but the acting charade is a much more amusing. and more difficult matter. [Goldoni,
and Modern Italian Comedy, in The Foreign And Colonial Quarterly Review, Volume 6, 1846]    An 1850
book, Acting Charades, reports that Charades en Action were all the rage in French society, and that
Lately, the game has been introduced into the drawing-rooms of a few mirth-loving Englishmen. Its
success has been tremendous.  Welsh siarad obviously is a loan-word from French or English, but its
meaning of speak, a talk is closer to the Proven&ccedil;al original.


