recession (n.)

1640s, act of receding, a going back, from French r&#233;cession a going backward, a withdrawing,
and directly from Latin  recessionem (nominative recessio) a going back, noun of action from past
participle stem of recedere (see recede).    Sense of temporary decline in economic activity, 1929,
noun of action from recess (q.v.): The material prosperity of the United States is too firmly based,
in our opinion, for a revival in industrial activity -- even if  we have to face an immediate
recession of some magnitude -- to be long delayed. [Economist, Nov. 2, 1929]Ayto notes, There was
more than a hint of euphemism in the coining of this term.


recessional (adj.)

1858, from recession + -al (1). As a noun, hymn sung while the clergy and choir are leaving church,
1864, with -al (2).


staycation (n.)

also stay-cation, 2008, American English, a word from the Great Recession of that year, from stay
(v.1) + ending from vacation.


reliction (n.)

in law, a recession of the sea from the land, 1670s, from Latin relictionem (nominative relictio),
noun of action from past participle stem of relinquere (see relinquish).


long (adj.)

that extends considerably from end to end, Old English lang long, from Proto-Germanic *langgaz
(cognates: Old Frisian and Old Saxon lang, Old High German and German lang, Old Norse langr, Middle
Dutch lanc, Dutch lang, Gothic laggs long).    The Germanic words are perhaps from PIE *dlonghos-
(cognates: Latin longus, Old Persian darga-, Persian dirang, Sanskrit dirghah, Greek dolikhos long,
Greek endelekhes perpetual, Latin indulgere to indulge), from root *del- long.    The adverb is from
Old English lange, longe, from the adjective. No longer not as formerly is from c.1300; to be not
long for this world soon to die is from 1714.    The word illustrates the Old English tendency for
short a to become short o before -n- (also retained in bond/band and West Midlands dialectal lond
from land and hond from hand).   Long vowels (c.1000) originally were pronounced for an extended
time. Sporting long ball is from 1744, originally in cricket. Long jump as a sporting event is
attested from 1864. A ship's long-boat so called from 1510s. Long knives, name Native Americans gave
to white settlers (originally in Virginia/Kentucky) is from 1774.  Long in the tooth (1841 of
persons) is from horses showing age by recession of gums. Long time no see, imitative of American
Indian speech, is first recorded 1900. To be long on something, have a lot of it, is from 1900,
American English slang.


