recess (v.)

1809, from recess (n.). Related: Recessed; recessing.


recess (n.)

1530s, act of receding, from Latin recessus a going back, retreat, from recessum, past participle of
recedere to recede (see recede). Meaning hidden or remote part first recorded 1610s; that of period
of stopping from usual work is from 1620s, probably from parliamentary notion of recessing into
private chambers.


recessive (adj.)

1670s, from Latin recess-, past participle stem of recedere (see recede) + -ive. Linguistics sense
is from 1879;  in genetics, 1900, from German recessiv (Mendel, 1865). Related: Recessiveness.


recession (n.)

1640s, act of receding, a going back, from French r&#233;cession a going backward, a withdrawing,
and directly from Latin  recessionem (nominative recessio) a going back, noun of action from past
participle stem of recedere (see recede).    Sense of temporary decline in economic activity, 1929,
noun of action from recess (q.v.): The material prosperity of the United States is too firmly based,
in our opinion, for a revival in industrial activity -- even if  we have to face an immediate
recession of some magnitude -- to be long delayed. [Economist, Nov. 2, 1929]Ayto notes, There was
more than a hint of euphemism in the coining of this term.


niche (n.)

1610s, shallow recess in a wall, from French niche recess (for a dog), kennel (14c.), perhaps from
Italian nicchia niche, nook, from nicchio seashell, said by Klein and Barnhart to be probably from
Latin mitulus mussel, but the change of -m- to -n- is not explained. Watkins suggests that the word
is from an Old French noun derived from nichier to nestle, nest, build a nest, via Gallo-Roman
*nidicare from Latin nidus nest; but that has difficulties, too. Figurative sense is first recorded
1725. Biological use dates from 1927.


alcove (n.)

1670s, vaulted recess, from French alc&ocirc;ve (17c.), from Spanish alcoba, from Arabic al-qobbah
the vaulted chamber, from Semitic base q-b-b to be bent, crooked, vaulted.


rabbet (n.)

rectangular groove cut out of the edge of a piece of wood or stone so that it may join by lapping
with others, late 14c., from Old French rabat a recess in a wall, a lower section, literally a
beating down, a back-formation from rabattre to beat down, beat back (see rebate (v.)). The verb is
attested from mid-15c. (implied in rabetynge).


pigeon-hole (n.)

also pigeonhole, 1570s, a small recess for pigeons to nest in, from pigeon + hole (n.). Meaning a
compartment in a writing desk, etc. is from 1680s, based on resemblance. The verb is from 1840
literally; figurative sense of label mentally is from 1870.    [Y]ou will have an inspector after
you with note-book and ink-horn, and you will be booked and pigeon-holed for further use when
wanted. [Civilisation--The Census, Blackwood's Magazine, Oct. 1854]    Related: Pigeonholed.


cesspool (n.)

also cess-pool, 1670s, the first element perhaps an alteration of cistern, perhaps a shortened form
of recess [Klein]; or the whole may be an alteration of suspiral (c.1400), drainpipe, from Old
French sospiral a vent, air hole, from sospirer breathe, from Latin suspirare breathe deep
[Barnhart]. Meaning extended to tank at the end of the pipe, which would account for a possible
folk-etymology change in final syllable.    Other possible etymologies: Italian cesso privy, from
Latin secessus place of retirement (in Late Latin privy, drain); dialectal suspool, from suss, soss
puddle; or cess a bog on the banks of a tidal river.


gorilla (n.)

1847, applied to the apes (Troglodytes gorills) by U.S. missionary Thomas Savage, from Greek
gorillai, plural of name given to wild, hairy people in a Greek translation of Carthaginian
navigator Hanno's account of his voyage along the N.W. coast of Africa, c.500 B.C.E. Allegedly an
African word.    In its inmost recess was an island similar to that formerly described, which
contained in like manner a lake with another island, inhabited by a rude description of people. The
females were much more numerous than the males, and had rough skins: our interpreters called them
Gorillae. We pursued but could take none of the males; they all escaped to the top of precipices,
which they mounted with ease, and threw down stones; we took three of the females, but they made
such violent struggles, biting and tearing their captors, that we killed them, and stripped off the
skins, which we carried to Carthage: being out of provisions we could go no further. [Hanno,
Periplus]    Of persons perceived as being gorilla-like, from 1884.


