reciprocal (adj.)

1560s, with -al (1) + stem of Latin reciprocus returning the same way, alternating, from pre-Latin
*reco-proco-, from *recus (from re- back; see re-, + -cus, adjective formation) + *procus (from pro-
forward; see pro-, + -cus. Related: Reciprocally. The noun meaning that which is reciprocal (to
another) is from 1560s.


each other

reciprocal pronoun, originally in late Old English a phrase, with each as the subject and other
inflected (as it were each to other, each from other, etc.).


interplay (n.)

1862, from inter- + play. Reciprocal play, thus free interaction.


another (adj.)

early 13c., merger of an other. Old English used simply o&thorn;er. Originally a second of two.
Compound reciprocal pronoun one another is recorded from 1520s.


reciprocity (n.)

1766, from French r&eacute;ciprocit&eacute; (18c.), from reciproque, from Latin reciprocus, past
participle of reciprocare (see reciprocal).


reciprocation (n.)

1520s, mode of expression; 1560s, act of reciprocating, from Latin reciprocationem (nominative
reciprocatio) retrogression, alternation, ebb, noun of action from past participle stem of
reciprocare move back, turn back, also come and go, move back and forth; from reciprocus (see
reciprocal).


reciprocate (v.)

to return, requite, 1610s, back-formation from reciprocation, or else from Latin reciprocatus, past
participle of reciprocare rise and fall, move back and forth; reverse the motion of, from reciprocus
(see reciprocal). Related: Reciprocated; reciprocating.


synallagmatic (adj.)

expressing reciprocal obligations, from Greek synallagmatikos, from synallagma a covenant, contract,
from syn- together with (see syn-) + allagma thing taken in exchange, from stem of allassein to
exchange, barter, from allos another (see alias (adv.)).


themselves (pron.)

mid-15c. in northern dialect, standard from 1540s, alteration of Middle English tham-self, emphatic
plural pronoun, also reciprocal pronoun (14c.); see them + self, with self, originally an inflected
adjective, treated as a noun with a meaning person and pluralized. Displacing Old English heom
selfum (dative). Themself returned late 20c. as some writers took to replacing himself with gender-
neutral everyone, anyone, etc.


alternate (adj.)

1510s, from Latin alternatus one after the other, past participle of alternare to do first one thing
then the other; exchange parts, from alternus one after the other, alternate, in turns, reciprocal,
from alter the other (see alter). Alternate means by turns; alternative means offering a choice.
Both imply two kinds or things.


Boeotian (adj.)

1590s, ignorant, dull, from Boeotia, district around Thebes in ancient Greece (said to have been so
called for its cattle pastures; Greek bous = ox), whose inhabitants were characterized as
proverbially dull and countrified by their neighbors, the Athenians. The Boeotians presumably held
reciprocal opinions, but their great writers, Plutarch and Pindar, though patriots, are full of
praise for Athenian deeds and institutions.    Though his aim was to vindicate Boeotia, [Pindar] has
probably done her a disservice, in that he has helped to immortalise the scurrilous proverb
&#914;&#959;&#953;&#969;&#964;&#943;&#945; &#973;&#962;, which he wished to confute. ... If left to
itself, the slander might have passed into oblivion long ago. [W. Rhys Roberts, The Ancient
Boeotians, 1895]


exchange (n.)

late 14c., act of reciprocal giving and receiving, from Anglo-French eschaunge, Old French eschange
(Modern French &eacute;change), from Late Latin excambium, from excambiare, from Latin ex- out (see
ex-) + cambire barter (see change). Practice of merchants or lenders meeting to exchange bills of
debt led to meaning building for mercantile business (1580s).


mutual (adj.)

late 15c., originally of feelings, from Middle French mutuel (14c.), from Latin mutuus reciprocal,
done in exchange, from PIE root *mei- (1) to change, exchange (see mutable).    The essence of its
meaning is that it involves the relation x is or does to y as y to x; &amp; not the relation, x is
or does to z as y to z. [Fowler]   Mutual Admiration Society (1851) seems to have been coined by
Thoreau. Mutual fund is recorded from 1950. The Cold War's mutual assured destruction attested from
1966. (Assured destruction was an early 1960s term in U.S. military policy circles in reference to
nuclear weapons as a deterrent, popularized c.1964 by Robert McNamara, U.S. Secretary of Defense
under Lyndon Johnson, e.g. statement before House Armed Services Committee, Feb. 18, 1965; the
mutual perhaps first added by Donald Brennan, conservative defense analyst and a public critic of
the policy, who also noted the acronym MAD.)


guest (n.)

Old English g&aelig;st, giest (Anglian gest) guest; enemy; stranger, the common notion being
stranger, from Proto-Germanic *gastiz (cognates: Old Frisian jest, Dutch gast, German Gast, Gothic
gasts guest, originally stranger), from PIE root *ghos-ti- stranger, guest; host (cognates: Latin
hostis enemy, hospes host -- from *hosti-potis host, guest, originally lord of strangers -- Greek
xenos guest, host, stranger; Old Church Slavonic gosti guest, friend, gospodi lord, master); the
root sense, according to Watkins, probably is someone with whom one has reciprocal duties of
hospitality, representing a mutual exchange relationship highly important to ancient Indo-European
society. But as strangers are potential enemies as well as guests, the word has a forked path.
Spelling evolution influenced by Old Norse cognate gestr (the usual sound changes from the Old
English word would have yielded Modern English *yest). Phrase be my guest in the sense of go right
ahead first recorded 1955.


