recipient (n.)

1550s, from Middle French r&eacute;cipient (16c.) and directly from Latin recipientem (nominative
recipiens), present participle of recipere (see receive). As an adjective from 1610s. Related:
Recipience; recipiency.


-ee

word-forming element in legal English (and in imitation of it), representing the Anglo-French
-&eacute; ending of past participles used as nouns. As these sometimes were coupled with agent nouns
in -or, the two suffixes came to be used as a pair to denote the initiator and the recipient of an
action.


medalist (n.)

1680s, one skilled in medals, from medal (n.) + -ist. Meaning medal-maker is from 1756; that of
recipient of a medal is from 1797.


collect (v.)

early 15c. (transitive), from Old French collecter to collect (late 14c.), from Latin collectus,
past participle of colligere gather together, from com- together (see com-) + legere to gather (see
lecture (n.)). The intransitive sense is attested from 1794. Related: Collected; collecting. As an
adjective meaning paid by the recipient it is attested from 1893, originally with reference to
telegrams.


sensuous (adj.)

1640s, pertaining to the senses apparently coined by Milton to recover the original meaning of
sensual and avoid the lascivious connotation that the older word had acquired, but by 1870 sensuous,
too, had begun down the same path and come to mean alive to the pleasures of the senses. Rare before
Coleridge popularized it To express in one word all that appertains to the perception, considered as
passive and merely recipient .... (1814). From Latin sensus (see sense (n.)) + -ous. Related:
Sensuously; sensuousness.


provender (n.)

c.1300, allowance paid each chapter member of a cathedral, from Anglo-French provendir, Old French
provendier provider; recipient, beneficiary, from Gallo-Roman *provenda, altered (by influence of
Latin providere supply) from Late Latin praebenda allowance, subsistence, from Latin praebenda
(things) to be furnished, neuter plural gerundive of praebere to furnish, offer, from prae before
(see pre-) + habere to hold (see habit (n.)). Meaning food, provisions, etc. (especially dry food
for horses) is recorded from mid-14c.


treat (v.)

c.1300, negotiate, bargain, deal with, from Old French traitier deal with, act toward; set forth (in
speech or writing) (12c.), from Latin tractare manage, handle, deal with, conduct oneself toward,
originally drag about, tug, haul, pull violently, frequentative of trahere (past participle tractus)
to pull, draw (see tract (n.1)).    Meaning to entertain with food and drink without expense to the
recipient by way of compliment or kindness (or bribery) is recorded from c.1500. Sense of deal with,
handle, or develop in speech or writing (early 14c.) led to the use in medicine to attempt to heal
or cure, to manage in the application of remedies (1781). Related: Treated; treating.


philately (n.)

stamp-collecting, 1865, from French philat&#233;lie, coined by French stamp collector Georges Herpin
(in Le Collectionneur de Timbres-poste, Nov. 15, 1864), from Greek phil- loving (see philo-) +
ateleia exemption from tax, the closest word Herpin could find in ancient Greek to the concept of
postage stamp (from a- without + telos tax; see toll (n.)). A reminder of the original function of
postage stamps, now often forgotten: the cost of letter-carrying formerly was paid by the recipient;
stamps indicated it had been pre-paid by the sender, thus the letters were carriage-free.    It is a
pity that for one of the most popular scientific pursuits one of the least popularly intelligible
names should have been found. [Fowler] Stampomania (1865) also was tried. Stamp-collecting is from
1862.  Related: Philatelic; philatelism; philatelist.


subject (n.)

early 14c., person under control or dominion of another, specifically a government or ruler, from
Old French sogit, suget, subget a subject person or thing (12c., Modern French sujet), from noun use
of Latin subiectus lying under, below, near bordering on, figuratively subjected, subdued, past
participle of subicere, subiicere to place under, throw under, bind under; to make subject,
subordinate, from sub under (see sub-) + combining form of iacere to throw (see jet (v.)). In 14c.,
sugges, sogetis, subgit, sugette; form re-Latinized in English 16c.    Meaning person or thing
regarded as recipient of action, one that may be acted upon is recorded from 1590s. Grammatical
sense is recorded from 1630s, from Latin subjectum grammatical subject, noun use of the neuter of
the Latin past participle. Likewise some restricted uses in logic and philosophy are borrowed
directly from Latin subjectum as foundation or subject of a proposition, a loan-translation of
Aristotle's to hypokeimenon. Meaning subject matter of an art or science is attested from 1540s,
probably short for subject matter (late 14c.), which is from Medieval Latin subjecta materia, a loan
translation of Greek hypokeimene hyle (Aristotle), literally that which lies beneath.


stock (n.1)

Old English stocc stump, post, stake, tree trunk, log, also pillory (usually plural, stocks), from
Proto-Germanic *stukkaz tree trunk (cognates: Old Norse stokkr block of wood, trunk of a tree, Old
Saxon, Old Frisian stok, Middle Dutch stoc tree trunk, stump, Dutch stok stick, cane, Old High
German stoc tree trunk, stick, German Stock stick, cane; also Dutch stuk, German St&uuml;ck piece),
from PIE *(s)teu- (1) to push, stick, knock, beat (see steep (adj.)).    Meaning ancestry, family
(late 14c.) is a figurative use of the tree trunk sense (as in family tree). This is also the root
of the meaning heavy part of a tool, and part of a rifle held against the shoulder (1540s). Meaning
person as dull and senseless as a block or log is from c.1300; hence a dull recipient of action or
notice (1540s).    Meaning framework on which a boat was constructed (early 15c.) led to figurative
phrase on stocks planned and commenced (1660s). Taking stock making an inventory is attested from
1736. Stock, lock, and barrel the whole of a thing is recorded from 1817. Stock-still (late 15c.) is
literally as still as a tree trunk.


