recite (v.)

early 15c., from Old French reciter (12c.) and directly from Latin recitare read aloud, read out,
repeat from memory, declaim, from re- back, again (see re-) + citare to summon (see cite). Related:
Recited; reciting.


record (v.)

c.1200, to repeat, reiterate, recite; rehearse, get by heart, from Old French recorder tell, relate,
repeat, recite, report, make known (12c.) and directly from Latin recordari remember, call to mind,
think over, be mindful of, from re- restore (see re-) + cor (genitive cordis) heart (as the
metaphoric seat of memory, as in learn by heart); see heart.    Meaning set down in writing first
attested mid-14c.; that of put sound or pictures on disks, tape, etc. is from 1892. Related:
Recorded; recording.


recital (n.)

1510s, a legal term, rehearsal or statement of relevant facts, from recite + -al. Meaning act of
reciting is from 1610s; musical performance sense is from 1811.


spell (v.1)

early 14c., read letter by letter, write or say the letters of; c.1400, form words by means of
letters, apparently a French word that merged with or displaced a native Old English one; both are
from the same Germanic root, but the French word had evolved a different sense. The native word is
Old English spellian to tell, speak, discourse, talk, from Proto-Germanic *spellam (cognates: Old
High German spellon to tell, Old Norse spjalla, Gothic spillon to talk, tell), from PIE *spel- (2)
to say aloud, recite.    But the current senses seem to come from Anglo-French espeller, Old French
espelir mean, signify, explain, interpret, also spell out letters, pronounce, recite, from Frankish
*spellon to tell or some other Germanic source, ultimately identical with the native word.
Related: Spelled; spelling. In early Middle English still to speak, preach, talk, tell, hence such
expressions as hear spell hear (something) told or talked about, spell the wind talk in vain (both
15c.). Meaning form words with proper letters is from 1580s. Spell out explain step-by-step is first
recorded 1940, American English. Shakespeare has spell (someone) backwards reverse the character of,
explain in a contrary sense, portray with determined negativity.


jester (n.)

mid-14c., jestour (Anglo-Latin), late 14c., gestour a minstrel, professional reciter of romances,
agent noun from gesten recite a tale, which was a jester's original function (see jest). Sense of
buffoon in a prince's court is from c.1500.


jest (v.)

1520s, to speak in a trifling manner; 1550s, to joke, from Middle English gesten recite a tale (late
14c.), from geste (see jest (n.)). Related: Jested; jesting.


reel (v.2)

to wind on a reel, late 14c., from reel (n.1). Verbal phrase reel off recite without pause or effort
is from 1837. Fishing sense is from 1849. Related: Reeled; reeling.


recitation (n.)

late 15c., act of detailing, from Old French r&eacute;citation (14c.) and directly from Latin
recitationem (nominative recitatio) public reading, a reading aloud, noun of action from past
participle stem of recitare (see recite). Meaning act of repeating aloud is from 1620s; that of
repetition of a prepared lesson is first recorded 1770, American English.


romance (v.)

late 14c., recite a narrative, from Old French romancier narrate in French; translate into French,
from romanz (see romance (n.)). Later invent fictitious stories (1670s), then be romantically
enthusiastic (1849); meaning court as a lover is from 1938, probably from romance (n.). Related:
Romanced; romancing.


recitative (n.)

style of musical declamation intermediate between speech and singing, form of song resembling
declamation, 1650s, from Italian recitativo, from recitato, past participle of recitare, from Latin
recitare read out, read aloud (see recite). From 1640s as an adjective. The Italian form of the word
was used in English from 1610s.


Miserere (n.)

51st Psalm (one of the Penitential Psalms), 13c., from Miserere mei Deus Have mercy upon me, O God,
opening line, from Latin miserere feel pity, have compassion, commiserate, imperative of misereri to
have mercy, from miser (see miser). From 15c.-17c. used as an informal measure of time, the time it
takes to recite the Miserere. Also in miserere mei kind of severe colic ('iliac passion')
accompanied by excruciating cramps and vomiting of excrement (1610s), literally have mercy on me.


charm (v.)

c.1300, to recite or cast a magic spell, from Old French charmer (13c.) to enchant, to fill
(someone) with desire (for something); to protect, cure, treat; to maltreat, harm, from Late Latin
carminare, from Latin carmen (see charm (n.)). In Old French used alike of magical and non-magical
activity. In English, to win over by treating pleasingly, delight from mid-15c. Related: Charmed;
charming. Charmed (short for I am charmed) as a conventional reply to a greeting or meeting is
attested by 1825.


intone (v.)

late 14c., entunen sing, chant, recite, from Old French entoner sing, chant (13c.), from Medieval
Latin intonare sing according to tone, from Latin in- in (see in- (2)) + tonus tone, from Greek
tonos (see tenet). A different verb intone was in use 17c.18c., from Latin intonare to thunder,
resound, figuratively to cry out vehemently, from tonare to thunder. Related: Intoned; intoning.


