reckon (v.)

c.1200, recenen, from Old English gerecenian to explain, relate, recount, from Proto-Germanic
*(ga)rekenojan (cognates: Old Frisian rekenia, Middle Dutch and Dutch rekenen, Old High German
rehhanon, German rechnen, Gothic rahnjan to count, reckon), from Proto-Germanic *rakina- ready,
straightforward, from PIE *reg- to move in a straight line, with derivatives meaning direct in a
straight line, rule (see regal).    Intransitive sense make a computation is from c.1300. In I
reckon, the sense is hold an impression or opinion, and the expression, used parenthetically, dates
from c.1600 and formerly was in literary use (Richardson, etc.), but came to be associated with U.S.
Southern dialect and was regarded as provincial or vulgar. Related: Reckoned; reckoning.


reckoner (n.)

early 13c., agent noun from reckon. Especially book of tables used in calculation, often known as a
ready reckoner.


reckoning (n.)

early 14c., narrative, account, verbal noun from reckon (v.). Meaning a settling of accounts is from
mid-14c.; that of calculation is from late 14c. Compare Dutch rekening a bill, account, reckoning,
Old High German rechenunga, German rechnung, Danish regning a reckoning, computation. Day of
reckoning attested from c.1600.


impute (v.)

early 15c., from Old French imputer (14c.) and directly from Latin imputare to reckon, make account
of, charge, ascribe, from assimilated form of in- in, into (see in- (2)) + putare reckon, clear up,
trim, prune, settle (see pave). Related: Imputed; imputing.


reputation (n.)

mid-14c., credit, good reputation, from Latin reputationem (nominative reputatio) consideration, a
thinking over, noun of action from past participle stem of reputare reflect upon, reckon, count
over, from re- repeatedly (see re-) + putare to reckon, consider (see putative).


compute (v.)

1630s, from French computer, from Latin computare to count, sum up, reckon together, from com- with
(see com-) + putare to reckon, originally to prune (see pave). Related: Computed; computing.


tell (v.)

Old English tellan to reckon, calculate, number, compute; consider, think, esteem, account (past
tense tealde, past participle teald), from Proto-Germanic *taljan to mention in order (cognates: Old
Saxon tellian tell, Old Norse telja to count, number; to tell, say, Old Frisian tella to count; to
tell, Middle Dutch and Dutch tellen, Old Saxon talon to count, reckon, Danish tale to speak, Old
High German zalon, German z&auml;hlen to count, reckon), from PIE root *del- (2) to count, reckon
(see tale).    Meaning to narrate, announce, relate in English is from c.1000; that of to make known
by speech or writing, announce is from early 12c. Sense of to reveal or disclose is from c.1400;
that of to act as an informer, to 'peach'  is recorded from 1901. Meaning to order (someone to do
something) is from 1590s. To tell (someone) off reprimand is from 1919.    Original sense in teller
and phrase to tell time. For sense evolution, compare French conter to count, raconter to recount;
Italian contare, Spanish contar to count, recount, narrate; German z&auml;hlen to count,
erz&auml;hlen to recount, narrate. Klein also compares Hebrew saphar he counted, sipper he told.


prissy (adj.)

1895, probably Southern U.S. dialect, first attested in Joel Chandler Harris, perhaps an alteration
of precise (q.v.), or a merger of prim and sissy [OED]. Related: Prissily; prissiness.    []Then Mrs
Blue Hen rumpled up her feathers and got mad with herself, and went to setting. I reckon that's what
you call it. I've heard some call it 'setting' and others 'sitting.' Once, when I was courting, I
spoke of a sitting hen, but the young lady said I was too prissy for anything.    What is prissy?
asked Sweetest Susan.    Mr. Rabbit shut his eyes and scratched his ear. Then he shook his head
slowly.    It's nothing but a girl's word, remarked Mrs. Meadows by way of explanation. It means
that somebody's trying hard to show off.    I reckon that's so, said Mr. Rabbit, opening his eyes.
He appeared to be much relieved.  [Joel Chandler Harris, Mr. Rabbit at Home]


tot (v.)

to reckon up, 1760, from tot (n.) total of an addition, first recorded 1680s, short for total (n.).
Hence, to mark (an account or a name) with the word 'tot.'


homologous (adj.)

1650s, from Greek homologos agreeing, of one mind, from homos same (see homo- (1)) + logos relation,
reasoning, computation, related to legein reckon, select, speak (see lecture (n.)).


ratio (n.)

1630s, reason, rationale, from Latin ratio reckoning, numbering, calculation; business affair,
procedure, also reason, reasoning, judgment, understanding, from rat-, past participle stem of reri
to reckon, calculate, also think (see reason (n.)). Mathematical sense relationship between two
numbers is attested from 1650s.


repute (v.)

late 14c., from Middle French reputer (late 13c.) or directly from Latin reputare to count over,
reckon; think over (see reputation). Related: Reputed; reputing.


computation (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French computation, from Latin computationem (nominative computatio), noun
of action from past participle stem of computare to sum up, reckon, compute (see compute).


sinistrorse (adj.)

1856, a word wanted by the botanists to describe the direction of spiral structures in nature, from
Latin sinistrorsus toward the left side, from sinister left (see sinister). It was paired with
dextrorse but confusion over what was the proper point of view to reckon leftward or rightward
spiraling prevented the word being as useful as it might have been.


analogize (v.)

explain by analogy, 1650s, from French analogiser (17c.) or directly from Greek analogizesthai to
reckon, sum up, from analogia (see analogy). Related: Analogized; analogizing.


sum (v.)

early 14c., to count, count up, calculate, reckon, from Old French sommer to count, add up, or
directly from Medieval Latin summare, from summa (see sum (n.)). Meaning briefly state the substance
of is first recorded 1620s (since c.1700 usually with up). Related: Summed; summing.


calculate (v.)

1560s, to compute, to estimate by mathematical means, from Latin calculatus, past participle of
calculare to reckon, compute, from calculus (see calculus). Meaning to plan, devise is from 1650s.
Replaced earlier calculen (mid-14c.), from Old French calculer. Related: Calculable.


calculation (n.)

late 14c., from Late Latin calculationem (nominative calculatio), noun of action from past
participle stem of calculare to reckon, compute, from Latin calculus reckoning, account, originally
pebble used in counting, diminutive of calx (genitive calcis) limestone (see chalk (n.)).


number (v.)

c.1300, to count, from Old French nombrer to count, reckon, from nombre (n.) number (see number
(n.)). Meaning to assign a number to is late 14c.; that of to ascertain the number of is from early
15c. Related: Numbered; numbering.


felicitate (v.)

1620s, to render happy; 1630s, to reckon happy; from Latin felicitatus, past participle of
felicitare to make happy, from felicitas fruitfulness, happiness, from felix (see felicity). Meaning
congratulate is from 1630s. Related: Felicitated; felicitating.


stroppy (adj.)

rebellious, by 1943, British nautical slang, perhaps a slang mangling of obstreperous. Sea Passages:
A Naval Anthology and Introduction to the Study of English [1943, Geoffrey Callender] quotes from a
letter:    Why Nobby should reckon that his raggie should blow the gaff, when there are crushers
everywhere, leaves me guessing; but there it is. In the last dog he rounded on me and called me a
white rat. I got stroppy and told him he was shooting a line: but all he said was, 'Oh! choke your
luff! I'm looking for another oppo you snivelling sand-catcher.' So that looks like paying off.
to which Callender adds, There is nothing in this letter which an active service rating could fail
to understand.


pro rata

1570s, from Latin pro rata (parte) according to the calculated (share), from pro for (see pro-) +
rata, ablative singular of ratus, past participle of reri to count, reckon (see rate (n.)).


ratify (v.)

mid-14c., from Old French ratifier (13c.), from Medieval Latin ratificare confirm, approve,
literally fix by reckoning, from Latin ratus fixed by calculation; determined; approved; certain,
sure; valid (past participle adjective from reri to reckon, think; see reason (v.)) + root of facere
to make (see factitious). Related: Ratified; ratifying.


Reynold

masc. proper name, from Old French Reinald (Modern French Renaut, Latinized as Reginaldus), a
popular name among the Normans, from Old High German Reginald, the first element related to reckon,
the second to Old English wealdan to rule (see wield). Related: Reynolds.


discount (v.)

1620s, reckon as an abatement or deduction, from Old French desconter (13c., Modern French
d&eacute;compter), from Medieval Latin discomputare, from dis- (see dis-) + computare to count (see
count (v.)). Hence, to abate, deduct (1650s), and figurative sense to leave out of account,
disregard (1702).  Related: Discounted; discounting.


calculator (n.)

late 14c., mathematician, one who calculates, from Latin calculator, from calculatus, past
participle of calculare to reckon, compute, from calculus (see calculus). Of mechanical adding
machine contraptions, from 1784. Of electronic ones, from 1946.    Electronic calculator uses 18,000
tubes to solve complex problems [Scientific American headline, June 1946]


Reynard (n.)

quasi-proper name for a fox, c.1300, from Old French Renart, Reynard name of the fox in Roman de
Renart, from Old High German personal name Reginhart strong in counsel, literally counsel-brave. The
first element is related to reckon, the second to hard. The tales were so popular that the name
became the word for fox in Old French. Old French also had renardie craftiness.


recount (v.1)

to tell, mid-15c., also recompt, from Old North French and Anglo-French reconter (12c., Modern
French raconter), from Old French re- (see re-) + conter to relate, reckon (see count (v)). Related:
Recounted; recounting.


enumeration (n.)

1550s, from Middle French &eacute;num&eacute;ration, from Latin enumerationem (nominative
enumeratio) a counting up, noun of action from past participle stem of enumerare to reckon up, count
over, enumerate, from ex- from (see ex-) + numerare to count, number, from numerus number (see
number (n.)).


rate (n.)

estimated value or worth, early 15c., from Old French rate price, value and directly from Medieval
Latin rata (pars) fixed (amount), from Latin rata fixed, settled, fem. past participle of reri to
reckon, think (see reason (n.)). Meaning degree of speed (prop. ratio between distance and time) is
attested from 1650s. Currency exchange sense first recorded 1727. First-rate, second-rate, etc. are
1640s, from British Navy division of ships into six classes based on size and strength. Phrase at
any rate originally (1610s) meant at any cost; weakened sense of at least is attested by 1760.


account (v.)

c.1300, to count, enumerate, from Old French aconter to count, render account (Modern French
conter), from a to (see ad-) + conter to count, tell (see count (v.)). Meaning to reckon for money
given or received, render a reckoning, is from late 14c.; sense of to explain (c.1710) is from
notion of answer for money held in trust. Transferred sense of value is from late 14c. Related:
Accounted; accounting.


reason (n.)

c.1200, intellectual faculty that adopts actions to ends, also statement in an argument, statement
of explanation or justification, from Anglo-French resoun, Old French raison course; matter;
subject; language, speech; thought, opinion, from Latin rationem (nominative ratio) reckoning,
understanding, motive, cause, from ratus, past participle of reri to reckon, think, from PIE root
*re(i)- to reason, count (source of Old English r&aelig;dan to advise; see read (v.)).    Meaning
sanity; degree of intelligence that distinguishes men from brutes is recorded from late 13c. Sense
of grounds for action, motive, cause of an event is from c.1300. Middle English sense of meaning,
signification (early 14c.) is in the phrase rhyme or reason. Phrase it stands to reason is from
1630s. Age of Reason the Enlightenment is first recorded 1794, as the title of Tom Paine's book.


swan (n.)

Old English swan swan, from Proto-Germanic *swanaz singer (cognates: Old Saxon swan, Old Norse
svanr, Danish svane, Swedish svan, Middle Dutch swane, Dutch zwaan, Old High German swan, German
Schwan), probably literally the singing bird, from PIE root *swen- to sing, make sound (see sound
(n.1)); thus related to Old English geswin melody, song and swinsian to make melody.    In classical
mythology, sacred to Apollo and to Venus. The singing of swans before death was alluded to by
Chaucer (late 14c.), but swan-song (1831) is a translation of German Schwanengesang. The ancient
Indo-European mythical swan-maiden so called by mythographers from 1829. Swan dive is recorded from
1898. A black swan was proverbial for something extremely rare or non-existent (late 14c.), after
Juvenal [Sat. vi. 164], but later they turned up in Australia (Chenopsis atratus).    Do you say no
worthy wife is to be found among all these crowds? Well, let her be handsome, charming, rich and
fertile; let her have ancient ancestors ranged about her halls; let her be more chaste than all the
dishevelled Sabine maidens who stopped the war--a prodigy as rare upon the earth as a black swan!
yet who could endure a wife that possessed all perfections?  I would rather have a Venusian wench
for my wife than you, O Cornelia, mother of the Gracchi, if, with all your virtues, you bring me a
haughty brow, and reckon up Triumphs as part of your marriage portion. [Juvenal]


Valentine (n.)

mid-15c., sweetheart chosen on St. Valentine's Day, from Late Latin Valentinus, the name of two
early Italian saints (from Latin valentia strength, capacity; see valence). Choosing a sweetheart on
this day originated 14c. as a custom in English and French court circles. Meaning letter or card
sent to a sweetheart first recorded 1824. The romantic association of the day is said to be from it
being around the time when birds choose their mates.    For this was on seynt Volantynys day  Whan
euery bryd cometh there to chese his make.  [Chaucer, Parlement of Foules, c.1381]    Probably the
date was the informal first day of spring in whatever French region invented the custom (many
surviving medieval calendars reckon the start of spring on the 7th or 22nd of February). No evidence
connects it with the Roman Lupercalia (an 18c. theory) or to any romantic or avian quality in either
of the saints. The custom of sending special cards or letters on this date flourished in England
c.1840-1870, declined around the turn of the 20th century, and revived 1920s.    To speak of the
particular Customs of the English Britons, I shall begin with Valentine's Day, Feb. 14. when young
Men and Maidens get their several Names writ down upon Scrolls of Paper rolled up, and lay 'em
asunder, the Men drawing the Maidens Names, and these the Mens; upon which, the Men salute their
chosen Valentines and present them with Gloves, &amp;c.; This Custom (which sometimes introduces a
Match) is grounded upon the Instinct of Animals, which about this Time of the Year, feeling a new
Heat by the approach of the Sun, begin to couple. [The Present State of Great Britain and Ireland
London, 1723]


