recluse (n.)

c.1200, person shut up from the world for purposes of religious meditation, from Old French reclus
(fem. recluse) hermit, recluse, also confinement, prison; convent, monastery, noun use of reclus
(adj.) shut up, from Late Latin reclusus, past participle of recludere to shut up, enclose (but in
classical Latin to throw open), from Latin re-, intensive prefix, + claudere to shut (see close
(v.)).


reclusive (adj.)

1590s, from recluse + -ive. Recluse alone formerly served also as an adjective in English (early
13c.).


anchoress (n.)

female recluse, nun, late 14c.; see anchorite + -ess.


solitaire (n.)

c.1500, widow; 1716, solitary person, recluse, from French solitaire, from Latin adjective
solitarius alone, lonely, isolated (see solitary). Sense of a precious stone set by itself is from
1727. Meaning card game played by one person is first attested 1746.


solitude (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French solitude loneliness (14c.) and directly from Latin solitudinem (nominative
solitudo) loneliness, a being alone; lonely place, desert, wilderness, from solus alone (see sole
(adj.)). Not in common use in English until the 17th c. [OED]  A man can be himself only so long as
he is alone; ... if he does not love solitude, he will not love freedom; for it is only when he is
alone that he is really free. [Schopenhauer, The World as Will and Idea, 1818] Solitudinarian
recluse, unsocial person is recorded from 1690s.


anchorite (n.)

mid-15c., hermit (especially those of the Eastern deserts), recluse, one who withdraws from the
world for religious reasons, from Medieval Latin anchorita, from Greek anakhoretes, literally one
who has retired, agent noun from anakhorein to retreat, go back, retire, from ana- back (see ana-) +
khorein withdraw, give place, from khoros place, space, free space, room. Replaced Old English
ancer, from Late Latin anchoreta.


hermit (n.)

early 12c., religious recluse, from Old French (h)eremite, from Late Latin ermita, from Greek
eremites, literally person of the desert, from eremia desert, solitude, from eremos uninhabited,
empty, desolate, bereft, from PIE *ere- (2) to separate (cognates: Latin rete net, Lithuanian retis
sieve). Transferred sense of person living in solitude is from 1799. The hermit crab (1735) was so
called for its solitary habits.


