recline (v.)

early 15c., from Old French recliner rest, lay; bend, lean over (13c.) and directly from Latin
reclinare to bend back, to lean back; cause to lean, from re- back, against (see re-) + clinare to
bend, from PIE *klei-n-, suffixed form of *klei to lean (see lean (v.)). Related: Reclined;
reclining.   Recline is always as strong as lean, and generally stronger, indicating a more
completely recumbent position, and approaching lie. [Century Dictionary]


recliner (n.)

1660s, agent noun from recline. From 1880 as a type of chair.


lying (n.1)

early 13c., action of lie (v.2) to recline. Lying-in being in childbed is attested from mid-15c.


recumbent (adj.)

1705, from Latin recumbentem (nominative recumbens), present participle of recumbere recline, lie
down, lie down again; of things, to fall, sink down, settle down, from re- back (see re-) + -cumbere
to lie down (see succumb). Related: Recumbency (1640s). A verb, recumb, has been attempted in
English occasionally since 1670s.


incumbent (n.)

early 15c., person holding a church position, from Medieval Latin incumbentem (nominative incumbens)
holder of a church position, noun use of present participle of incumbere to obtain or possess, from
Latin incumbere recline on, figuratively apply oneself to, from in- on (see in- (2)) + -cumbere lie
down, related to cubare to lie (see cubicle). Extended to holders of any office from 1670s.


lean (v.)

c.1200, from Old English hleonian to bend, recline, lie down, rest, from Proto-Germanic *khlinen
(cognates: Old Saxon hlinon, Old Frisian lena, Middle Dutch lenen, Dutch leunen, Old High German
hlinen, German lehnen to lean), from PIE root *klei- to lean, to incline (cognates: Sanskrit srayati
leans, sritah leaning; Old Persian cay to lean; Lithuanian slyti to slope, slieti to lean; Latin
clinare to lean, bend, clivus declivity, inclinare cause to bend, declinare bend down, turn aside;
Greek klinein to cause to slope, slant, incline; Old Irish cloin crooked, wrong; Middle Irish cle,
Welsh cledd left, literally slanting; Welsh go-gledd north, literally left -- for similar sense
evolution, see Yemen, Benjamin, southpaw).    Meaning to incline the body against something for
support is mid-13c. Figurative sense of to trust for support is from early 13c. Sense of to lean
toward mentally, to favor is from late 14c. Related: Leaned; leaning. Colloquial lean on put
pressure on (someone) is first recorded 1960.


