reconcile (v.)

mid-14c., of persons, from Old French reconcilier (12c.) and directly from Latin reconcilare to
bring together again; regain; win over again, conciliate, from re- again (see re-) + concilare make
friendly (see conciliate). Reflexive sense is recorded from 1530s. Meaning to make (discordant facts
or statements) consistent is from late 14c. Intransitive sense of become reconciled is from 1660s.
Related: Reconciled; reconciling.


settle (v.)

come to rest, Old English setlan cause to sit, place, put, from setl a seat (see settle (n.)).
Related: Settling. Compare German siedeln to settle, colonize.     From c.1300 of birds, etc., to
alight. From early 14c. as sink down, descend; cave in. Early 15c. in reference to suspended
particles in a liquid. Sense of establish a permanent residence first recorded 1620s; that of decide
is 1620s. Meaning secure title to by deed is from 1660s.    Meaning reconcile (a quarrel,
differences, etc.) perhaps is influenced by Middle English sahtlen to reconcile, from Old English
saht reconciliation, from Old Norse satt reconciliation. To settle down become content is from 1853;
transitive sense from 1520s; as what married couples do in establishing domesticity, from 1718. To
settle for content oneself with is from 1943.


unreconciled (adj.)

mid-15c., from un- (1) not + past participle of reconcile (v.).


reconciliation (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French reconciliacion (14c.) and directly from Latin reconciliationem (nominative
reconciliatio) a re-establishing, a reconciling, noun of action from past participle stem of
reconciliare (see reconcile).


reconcilable (adj.)

1610s, from reconcile + -able.


make up (v.)

end a quarrel, reconcile, 1660s, from make (v.) + up (adv.).


doctrinaire (n.)

1820, from French doctrinaire impractical person, originally adherent of doctrines (14c.), from
Latin doctrina (see doctrine).    At first used in the context of French politics, contemptuously
applied by rival factions to those who tried to reconcile liberty with royal authority after 1815.
Hence, anyone who applies doctrine without making allowance for practical considerations (1831). As
an adjective, from 1834.


irreconcilable (adj.)

1590s, from French irr&eacute;concilable (16c.), from Medieval Latin *irreconcilabilis, from
assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) + reconcilabilis (see reconcile). Related:
Irreconcilably. As a noun from 1748.


appease (v.)

c.1300 to reconcile, from Anglo-French apeser, Old French apaisier to pacify, make peace, appease,
be reconciled, placate (12c.), from the phrase a paisier bring to peace, from a to (see ad-) + pais,
from Latin pacem (nominative pax) peace (see peace). Related: Appeased; appeasing.


accord (v.)

early 12c., from Old French acorder (12c.) reconcile, agree, be in harmony, from Vulgar Latin
*accordare make agree, literally be of one heart, bring heart to heart, from Latin ad- to (see ad-)
+ cor (genitive cordis) heart (see heart). Related: Accorded; according.


echidna (n.)

Australian egg-laying hedgehog-like mammal, 1847, usually explained as from Greek ekhidna snake,
viper, from ekhis snake, from PIE *angwhi- snake, eel (cognates: Norwegian igle, Old High German
egala, German Egel leech, Latin anguis serpent, snake).    But this sense is difficult to reconcile
with this animal (unless it is a reference to the ant-eating tongue), and the name seems more
properly to belong to Latin echinus, Greek ekhinos sea-urchin, originally hedgehog (in Greek also
sharp points), which Watkins explains as snake-eater, from ekhis snake.


sibling (n.)

brother or sister, 1903, modern revival (in anthropology) of Old English sibling relative, kinsman,
from sibb kinship, relationship; love, friendship, peace, happiness, from Proto-Germanic *sibja-
blood relation, relative, properly one's own (cognates: Old Saxon sibba, Old Frisian, Middle Dutch
sibbe, Old High German sippa, German Sippe, Gothic sibja kin, kindred), from PIE s(w)e-bh(o)-
(cognates: Old Church Slavonic sobistvo, Russian sob character, individuality), an enlargement of
the root *swe- self (see idiom). Related to the second element in gossip.  The word 'sib' or
'sibling' is coming into use in genetics in the English-speaking world, as an equivalent of the
convenient German term 'Geschwister' [E.&amp;C.; Paul, Human Heredity, 1930]    In Old English, sibb
and its compounds covered grounds of brotherly love, familial affection which tended later to lump
into love (n.), as in sibsumnes peace, concord, brotherly love, sibbian (v.) bring together,
reconcile, sibbecoss kiss of peace. Sibship, however, is a modern formation (1908). Sib persisted
through Middle English as a noun, adjective, and verb expressing kinship and relationship.


