recount (n.)

also re-count, a new count (especially in an election), 1855, American English, from re- + count
(n).


recount (v.2)

also re-count, to enumerate again, 1764, from re- + count (v). Related: Recounted; recounting.


recount (v.1)

to tell, mid-15c., also recompt, from Old North French and Anglo-French reconter (12c., Modern
French raconter), from Old French re- (see re-) + conter to relate, reckon (see count (v)). Related:
Recounted; recounting.


raconteur (n.)

storyteller, person skilled in relating anecdotes, 1828, from French raconteur, from raconter to
recount, tell, narrate, from re- (see re-) + Old French aconter to count, render account (see
account (v.); and compare recount (v.1)). Related: Raconteuse (fem.).


tell (v.)

Old English tellan to reckon, calculate, number, compute; consider, think, esteem, account (past
tense tealde, past participle teald), from Proto-Germanic *taljan to mention in order (cognates: Old
Saxon tellian tell, Old Norse telja to count, number; to tell, say, Old Frisian tella to count; to
tell, Middle Dutch and Dutch tellen, Old Saxon talon to count, reckon, Danish tale to speak, Old
High German zalon, German z&auml;hlen to count, reckon), from PIE root *del- (2) to count, reckon
(see tale).    Meaning to narrate, announce, relate in English is from c.1000; that of to make known
by speech or writing, announce is from early 12c. Sense of to reveal or disclose is from c.1400;
that of to act as an informer, to 'peach'  is recorded from 1901. Meaning to order (someone to do
something) is from 1590s. To tell (someone) off reprimand is from 1919.    Original sense in teller
and phrase to tell time. For sense evolution, compare French conter to count, raconter to recount;
Italian contare, Spanish contar to count, recount, narrate; German z&auml;hlen to count,
erz&auml;hlen to recount, narrate. Klein also compares Hebrew saphar he counted, sipper he told.


narrate (v.)

1748, back-formation from narration or else from Latin narratus, past participle of narrare to tell,
relate, recount (see narration). Richardson and Johnson call it Scottish [OED], a stigma which kept
it from general use until 19c. A few mid-17c. instances are traceable to Spanish narrar. Related:
Narrated; narrating.


narration (n.)

early 15c., from Old French narracion account, statement, a relating, recounting, narrating,
narrative tale, and directly from Latin narrationem (nominative narratio) a relating, narrative,
noun of action from past participle stem of narrare to tell, relate, recount, explain, literally to
make acquainted with, from gnarus knowing, from PIE suffixed zero-grade *gne-ro-, from root *gno- to
know (see know).


retail (v.)

mid-14c. sell in small quantities or parcels, from Old French retaillier cut back, cut off, pare,
clip, reduce, circumcise, from re- back (see re-) + taillier to cut, trim (see tailor (n.)).
Sometimes also to deal out (information, etc.) in small quantities; hand down by report; recount,
tell over again (1590s). Related: Retailed; retailing.


relate (v.)

1520s, to recount, tell, from Middle French relater refer, report (14c.) and directly from Latin
relatus, used as past participle of referre bring back, bear back (see refer), from re- back, again
+ latus (see oblate (n.)).    Meaning stand in some relation; have reference or respect is from
1640s; transitive sense of bring (something) into relation with (something else) is from 1690s.
Meaning to establish a relation between is from 1771. Sense of to feel connected or sympathetic to
is attested from 1950, originally in psychology jargon. Related: Related; relating.


reckon (v.)

c.1200, recenen, from Old English gerecenian to explain, relate, recount, from Proto-Germanic
*(ga)rekenojan (cognates: Old Frisian rekenia, Middle Dutch and Dutch rekenen, Old High German
rehhanon, German rechnen, Gothic rahnjan to count, reckon), from Proto-Germanic *rakina- ready,
straightforward, from PIE *reg- to move in a straight line, with derivatives meaning direct in a
straight line, rule (see regal).    Intransitive sense make a computation is from c.1300. In I
reckon, the sense is hold an impression or opinion, and the expression, used parenthetically, dates
from c.1600 and formerly was in literary use (Richardson, etc.), but came to be associated with U.S.
Southern dialect and was regarded as provincial or vulgar. Related: Reckoned; reckoning.


tale (n.)

Old English talu series, calculation, also story, tale, statement, deposition, narrative, fable,
accusation, action of telling, from Proto-Germanic *talo (cognates: Dutch taal speech, language,
Danish tale speech, talk, discourse, German Erz&#228;hlung story, Gothic talzjan to teach), from PIE
root *del- (2) to recount, count. The secondary Modern English sense of number, numerical reckoning
(c.1200) probably was the primary one in Germanic; see tell (v.), teller and Old Frisian tale,
Middle Dutch tal, Old Saxon tala, Danish tal, Old High German zala, German Zahl number.    The
ground sense of the Modern English word in its main meaning, then, might have been an account of
things in their due order. Related to talk (v.) and tell (v.). Meaning things divulged that were
given secretly, gossip is from mid-14c.; first record of talebearer tattletale is late 15c.


