rectitude (n.)

early 15c., quality of being straight, from Middle French rectitude (14c.), from Late Latin
rectitudinem (nominative rectitudo) straightness, uprightness, from Latin rectus straight (see right
(adj.1)). Sense of upright in conduct or character is from 1530s.


stray (v.)

c.1300, a shortening of Old French estraier wander about, roam, drift, run loose, said of animals,
especially a horse without a master, also of persons, perhaps literally go about the streets, from
estree route, highway, from Late Latin via strata paved road (see street). On another theory, the
Old French word is from Vulgar Latin *estragare, a contraction of *estravagare, representing Latin
extra vagari to wander outside (see extravagant). Figurative sense of to wander from the path of
rectitude is attested from early 14c. Related: Strayed; straying.


sooth (n.)

Old English so&eth; truth, justice, righteousness, rectitude; reality, certainty, noun use of
so&eth; (adj.) true, genuine, real; just, righteous, originally *son&eth;-, from Proto-Germanic
*santhaz (cognates: Old Norse sannr, Old Saxon soth, Old High German sand true, Gothic sunja truth).
The group is related to Old English synn sin and Latin sontis guilty (truth is related to guilt via
being the one; see sin (v.)), from PIE *es-ont- being, existence, thus real, true, from present
participle of root *es-, the s-form of the verb to be (see be), preserved in Latin sunt they are and
German sind. Archaic in English, it is the root of modern words for true in Swedish (sann) and
Danish (sand). In common use until mid-17c., then obsolete until revived as an archaism early 19c.
by Scott, etc. Used for Latin pro- in translating compounds into Old English, such as so&eth;tacen
prodigy, so&eth;fylgan prosequi.


upright (adj.)

Old English upriht erect, face-upward; see up (adv.) + right (adj.1). Similar compounds are found in
other Germanic languages (Old Frisian upriucht, Middle Dutch oprecht, Old High German ufreht, German
aufrecht, Old Norse uprettr). Figurative sense of good, honest, adhering to rectitude is first
attested 1520s.    As an adverb, Old English uprihte. As a noun, 1560s in the sense a vertical
front; c.1700 as a vertical timber in framing; 1742 in the sense something standing erect. Meaning
an upright piano is from 1860.    THREE-PENNY UPRIGHT. A retailer of love, who, for the sum
mentioned, dispenses her favours standing against a wall. [Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, 1811]
<hr />   The bent-over rear-entry posture they are talking about, of course, is kubda, the three-
obol position at the bottom-end of a prostitute's price-range. [James N. Davidson, Courtesans and
Fishcakes: The Consuming Passions of Classical Athens, 1997]


right (adj.1)

morally correct, Old English riht just, good, fair; proper, fitting; straight, not bent, direct,
erect, from Proto-Germanic *rekhtaz (cognates: Old Frisian riucht right, Old Saxon reht, Middle
Dutch and Dutch recht, Old High German reht, German recht, Old Norse rettr, Gothic raihts), from PIE
root *reg- move in a straight line, also to rule, to lead straight, to put right (see regal;
cognates: Greek orektos stretched out, upright; Latin rectus straight, right; Old Persian rasta-
straight, right, ar&#353;ta- rectitude; Old Irish recht law; Welsh rhaith, Breton reiz just,
righteous, wise).    Compare slang straight (adj.1) honest, morally upright, and Latin rectus right,
literally straight, Lithuanian teisus right, true, literally straight. Greek dikaios just (in the
moral and legal sense) is from dike custom. As an emphatic, meaning you are right, it is recorded
from 1580s; use as a question meaning am I not right? is from 1961. The sense in right whale is
justly entitled to the name. Right stuff best human ingredients is from 1848, popularized by Tom
Wolfe's 1979 book about the first astronauts. Right of way is attested from 1767. Right angle is
from late 14c.


