redundant (adj.)

1590s, from Latin redundantem (nominative redundans), present participle of redundare, literally
overflow, pour over; be over-full; figuratively be in excess, from re- again (see re-) + undare rise
in waves, from unda a wave (see water (n.1)). Of persons, in employment situations, from 1928,
chiefly British. Related: Redundantly.


redundancy (n.)

c.1600; see redundant + -ancy. Sense in employment is from 1931, chiefly British.


redundance (n.)

1610s, from Latin redundantia an overflowing, superfluity, excess, from redundare (see redundant).


PIN

acronym for personal identification number, 1981, from the first reference used with redundant
number.


SALT (n.)

Cold War U.S.-U.S.S.R. nuclear weapons negotiations, 1968, acronym for Strategic Arms Limitation
Talks (which would make SALT talks redundant, but the last element sometimes also is understood as
treaty).


dander (n.)

1831, American English, temper, of unknown origin; perhaps originally from figurative use of West
Indies dander, dunder fermentation of sugar, from Spanish redundar to overflow, from Latin redundare
(see redundant).


redound (v.)

late 14c., to overflow, from Old French redonder overflow, abound, be in profusion (12c.), from
Latin redundare to overflow (see redundant). Meaning to flow or go back (to a place or person) is
from late 14c.; hence to rebound (c.1500), and to contribute to (the credit, honor, etc.), early
15c. Related: Redounded; redounding.


reinvent (v.)

1680s, from re- + invent. Related: Reinvented; reinventing. Phrase reinvent the wheel do redundant
work attested by 1971.


caterer (n.)

mid-15c., earlier simply cater (see cater (v.)). With redundant -er (compare poulterer, sorcerer,
upholsterer).


assemble (v.)

earlly 14c., transitive and intransitive, from Old French assembler come together, join, unite;
gather (11c.), from Latin assimulare to make like, liken, compare; copy, imitate; feign, pretend,
later to gather together, from ad- to (see ad-) + simulare to make like (see simulation). In Middle
English and in Old French it also was a euphemism for to couple sexually. Meaning to put parts
together in manufacturing is from 1852. Related: Assembled; assembling. Assemble together is
redundant.


re-

word-forming element meaning back to the original place; again, anew, once more, also with a sense
of undoing, c.1200, from Old French and directly from Latin re- again, back, anew, against, Latin
combining form concievably from Indo-European *wret-, metathetical variant of *wert- to turn
[Watkins]. Often merely intensive, and in many of the older borrowings from French and Latin the
precise sense of re- is lost in secondary senses or weakened beyond recognition. OED writes that it
is impossible to attempt a complete record of all the forms resulting from its use, and adds that
The number of these is practically infinite .... The Latin prefix became red- before vowels and h-,
as in redact, redeem, redolent, redundant.


thence (adv.)

late 13c., from Old English &thorn;anone, &thorn;anon from that place + adverbial genitive -es. Old
English &thorn;anone/&thorn;anon is from Proto-Germanic *thanana (cognates: Old Saxon thanana, Old
Norse &thorn;ana, Old Frisian thana, Old High German danana, German von dannen), related obscurely
to the root of then, and ultimately from PIE demonstrative base *to- (see the). Written with -c- to
indicate a voiceless s sound. Meaning from that time is from late 14c.; sense of for that reason is
from 1650s. From thence is redundant.


askance (adv.)

1520s, sideways, asquint, of obscure origin. OED has separate listings for askance and obsolete
Middle English askance(s) and no indication of a connection, but Barnhart and others derive the
newer word from the older one. The Middle English word, recorded early 14c. as ase quances and found
later in Chaucer, meant in such a way that; even as; as if; and as an adverb insincerely,
deceptively. It has been analyzed as a compound of as and Old French quanses (pronounced kanses) how
if, from Latin quam how + si if.    The E[nglish] as is, accordingly, redundant, and merely added by
way of partial explanation. The M.E. askances means as if in other passages, but here means, as if
it were, i.e. possibly, perhaps; as said above. Sometimes the final s is dropped .... [Walter W.
Skeat, glossary to Chaucer's Man of Law's Tale, 1894]    Also see discussion in Leo Spitzer, Anglo-
French Etymologies, Philological Quarterly 24.23 (1945), and see OED entry for askance (adv.) for
discussion of the mysterious ask- word cluster in English. Other guesses about the origin of askance
include Old French a escone, from past participle of a word for hidden; Italian a scancio obliquely,
slantingly; or that it is a cognate of askew.


