refrain (n.)

late 14c., from Old French refrain chorus (13c.), alteration of refrait, noun use of past participle
of refraindre repeat, also break off, from Vulgar Latin *refrangere break off, alteration of Latin
refringere break up, break open (see refraction) by influence of frangere to break. Influenced in
French by cognate Proven&ccedil;al refranhar singing of birds, refrain. The notion is of something
that causes a song to break off then resume. OED says not common before 19c.


refrain (v.)

mid-14c., from Old French refraigner restrain, repress, keep in check (12c., Modern French
R&#233;fr&#233;ner), from Latin refrenare to bridle, hold in with a bit, check, curb, keep down,
control, from re- back (see re-) + frenare restrain, furnish with a bridle, from frenum a bridle.
Related: Refrained; refraining.


loo (n.2)

type of card game, 1670s, short for lanterloo (1660s), from French lanturelu, originally (1620s) the
refrain of a popular comic song; according to French sources the refrain expresses a mocking refusal
or an evasive answer and was formed on the older word for a type of song chorus, turelure;
apparently a jingling reduplication of loure bagpipe (perhaps from Latin lura bag, purse).     From
its primary signification -- a kind of bagpipe inflated from the mouth -- the word 'loure' came to
mean an old dance, in slower rhythm than the gigue, generally in 6-4 time. As this was danced to the
nasal tones of the 'loure,' the term 'loure' was gradually applied to any passage meant to be played
in the style of the old bagpipe airs. [Grove's Dictionary of Music and Musicians, London, 1906]
The refrain sometimes is met in English as turra-lurra.


surcease (v.)

early 15c., cease from an action, desist, from Anglo-French surseser, Old French sursis, past
participle of surseoir to refrain, delay, from Latin supersedere forbear, refrain or desist from
(see supersede). The English spelling with -c- was influenced by the unrelated verb cease. As a noun
from 1580s.


doodah (n.)

excitement, 1915, from refrain of the minstrel song Camptown Races.


contango

1853, a stockbroker's invention, perhaps somehow derived from continue, or from Spanish contengo I
contain, refrain, restrain, check. As a verb, from 1900.


falderol (n.)

also falderal, folderol, 1701, nonsense refrain in songs; meaning gewgaw, trifle is attested from
1820.


supersedeas (n.)

writ to stay legal proceedings, Latin, literally you shall desist, second person singular present
subjunctive of supersedere desist, refrain from, forebear (see supersede).


riff (n.)

melodic phrase in jazz, 1935 (but said to have been used by musicians since c.1917), of uncertain
origin, perhaps a shortened form of riffle, or altered from refrain. The verb is attested from 1942,
from the noun. Also in extended use. Related: Riffed; riffing.


ballade (n.)

late 14c., an earlier borrowing of ballad (q.v.) with a specific metrical sense. Technically, a poem
consisting of one or more triplets of seven- (later eight-) lined stanzas, each ending with the same
line as the refrain, usually with an envoy. Popularized 19c. as a type of musical composition by
Fr&eacute;d&eacute;ric Chopin. Ballade royal is recorded from late 15c.


abstinent (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French abstinent (earlier astenant) moderate, abstemious, modest, from Latin
abstinentem (nominative abstinens) temperate, moderate, present participle of abstinere to refrain
from (see abstain).


la-la

nonsense refrain in songs, probably from Old English la, a common exclamation; but la-la is
imitative of babbling speech in many languages (compare Greek lalage babble, prattle, Sanskrit
lalalla imitation of stammering Latin lallare to sing to sleep, lull, German lallen to stammer,
Lithuanian laluoti to stammer).


parsimony (n.)

early 15c., from Latin parsimonia sparingness, frugality, thrift, from pars-, past participle stem
of parsi, perfect tense of parcere to spare, save, refrain from, use moderately (which is said to be
unrelated to Latin parvus small, parum too little) + -monia, suffix signifying action, state, or
condition.


lampoon (n.)

A personal satire; abuse; censure written not to reform but to vex [Johnson], 1640s, from French
lampon (17c.), of unknown origin, said by French etymologists to be from lampons let us drink,
popular refrain for scurrilous 17c. songs, from lamper to drink, guzzle, a nasalized form of laper
to lap, from a Germanic source akin to lap (v.). Also see -oon.


sandbag (v.)

1860, furnish with sandbags, from sandbag (n.). Meaning pretend weakness, 1970s perhaps is extended
from poker-playing sense of refrain from raising at the first opportunity in hopes of raising more
steeply later (1940), which perhaps is from sandbagger in the sense of bully or ruffian who uses a
sandbag as a weapon to knock his intended victim unconscious (1882). Hence to fell or stun with a
blow from a sandbag (1887). Related: Sandbagged; sandbagging.


yesteryear (n.)

coined 1870 by Dante Gabriel Rossetti from yester- + year to translate French antan (from Vulgar
Latin *anteannum the year before) in a refrain by Fran&ccedil;ois Villon: Mais ou sont les neiges
d'antan? which Rossetti rendered But where are the snows of yesteryear?


roundelay (n.)

1570s, from Middle French rondelet, diminutive of rondel short poem with a refrain, literally small
circle, diminutive of Old French rond circle, sphere, originally an adjective from roont (see round
(adj.)). Spelling developed by association with lay (n.) poem to be sung.


supersede (v.)

mid-15c., Scottish, postpone, defer, from Middle French superceder desist, delay, defer, from Latin
supersedere literally sit on top of; also, with ablative, stay clear of, abstain from, forbear,
refrain from, from super above (see super-) + sedere to sit (see sedentary). Meaning displace,
replace first recorded 1640s. Related: Superseded; superseding.


Archibald

masc. proper name, from Old High German Erchanbald, literally genuine bold, from erchan genuine +
bald (see bold). Archie, British World War I military slang for German anti-aircraft fire (1915)
supposedly is from black humor of airmen dodging hostile fire and thinking of the refrain of a
popular music hall song, Archibald, certainly not!


burden (n.2)

leading idea, 1640s, a figurative use from earlier sense refrain or chorus of a song, 1590s,
originally bass accompaniment to music (late 14c.), from Old French bordon bumble-bee, drone, or
directly from Medieval Latin burdonom drone, drone bass (source of French bourdon, Spanish bordon,
Portuguese bord&atilde;o, Italian bordone), of echoic origin.


descant (n.)

late 14c., from Old North French descant (Old French deschant), from Medieval Latin discantus
refrain, part-song, from Latin dis- asunder, apart (see dis-) + cantus song (see chant). Spelling
was partly Latinized 16c. Originally counterpoint.


abstain (v.)

late 14c., to withhold oneself, from Old French abstenir (14c.), earlier astenir (13c.) hold
(oneself) back, refrain, abstain (from), practice abstinence, from Latin abstinere withhold, keep
back, keep off, from ab(s)- from, away from (see ab-) + tenere to hold (see tenet). Specifically of
liquor, late 14c. Of voting, 1796. Related: Abstained; abstaining.


respect (v.)

1540s, to regard, from Middle French respecter look back; respect; delay, from Latin respectere,
frequentative of respicere (see respect (n.). Meaning treat with deferential regard or esteem is
from 1550s. Sense of refrain from injuring is from 1620s. Meaning have reference to is from 1560s.
Related: Respected; respecting.    To respect the person was show undue bias toward (or against)
based on regard for the outward circumstances of a person; hence respecter of persons, usually with
negative, from Acts x:34, in the 1611 translation.


spare (v.)

Old English sparian to refrain from harming, be indulgent to, allow to go free; use sparingly, from
the source of Old English sp&aelig;r sparing, frugal, from Proto-Germanic *sparaz (cognates: Old
Saxon sparon, Old Frisian sparia, Old Norse spara, Dutch sparen, Old High German sparon, German
sparen to spare). Meaning to dispense from one's own stock, give or yield up, is recorded from early
13c. Related: Spared; sparing.


joke (n.)

1660s, joque, a jest, something done to excite laughter, from Latin iocus joke, sport, pastime, from
PIE root *yek- (1) to speak (cognates: Breton iez language, Old High German jehan to say, German
Beichte confession).    Originally a colloquial or slang word. Meaning something not to be taken
seriously is 1791. Practical joke trick played on someone for the sake of a laugh at his expense is
from 1804 (earlier handicraft joke, 1741). Black joke is old slang for smutty song (1730s), from use
of that phrase in the refrain of a then-popular song as a euphemism for the monosyllable.


repress (v.)

late 14c., to check, restrain, from Latin repressus, past participle of reprimere hold back, curb,
figuratively check, confine, restrain, refrain, from re- back (see re-) + premere to push (see press
(v.1)).    Used of feelings or desires from late 14c.; in the purely psychological sense, it
represents German verdr&auml;ngen (Freud, 1893), first attested 1904 (implied in repressed). Meaning
to put down (a rebellion, etc.) is from late 15c. Related: Repressed; repressing.


jingo (n.)

mindless, gung-ho patriot, 1878, picked up from the refrain of a music hall song written by G.W.
Hunt, and sung by Gilbert H. MacDermott (1845-1901), supporting aggressive British policy toward
Russia at a time of international tension. (We don't want to fight, But by Jingo! if we do, We've
got the ships, we've got the men, We've got the money too.)    Hunt's patriotic song of 1878, with a
swinging tune ... became at Macdermott's instigation the watchword of the popular supporters of
England's bellicose policy. The Daily News on 11 March 1878 first dubbed the latter 'Jingoes' in
derision .... [Dictionary of National Biography, London, 1912]    As an asseveration, it was in
colloquial use since 1690s, and is apparently yet another euphemism for Jesus, influenced by
conjurer's gibberish presto-jingo (1660s). The frequent suggestion that it somehow derives from
Basque Jinko god is not impossible, but as yet unsupported by evidence [OED].


bite (v.)

Old English bitan (class I strong verb; past tense bat, past participle biten), from Proto-Germanic
*bitan (cognates: Old Saxon bitan, Old Norse and Old Frisian bita, Middle Dutch biten, Dutch bijten,
German beissen, Gothic beitan to bite), from PIE root *bheid- to split, crack (see fissure).    To
bite the bullet is said to be 1700s military slang, from old medical custom of having the patient
bite a lead bullet during an operation to divert attention from pain and reduce screaming.
Figurative use from 1891; the custom itself attested from 1840s. To bite (one's) tongue refrain from
speaking is 1590s. To bite the dust die is 1750 (Latin had the same image; compare Virgil's
procubuit moriens et humum semel ore momordit). To bite off more than one can chew (c.1880) is U.S.
slang, from plug tobacco.


tongue (n.)

Old English tunge tongue, organ of speech; speech, a people's language, from Proto-Germanic *tungon
(cognates: Old Saxon and Old Norse tunga, Old Frisian tunge, Middle Dutch tonghe, Dutch tong, Old
High German zunga, German Zunge, Gothic tuggo), from PIE *dnghwa- (cognates: Latin lingua tongue,
speech, language, from Old Latin dingua; Old Irish tenge, Welsh tafod, Lithuanian liezuvis, Old
Church Slavonic jezyku).    For substitution of -o- for -u-, see come. The spelling of the ending of
the word apparently is a 14c. attempt to indicate proper pronunciation, but the result is neither
etymological nor phonetic, and is only in a very small degree historical [OED]. In the knowledge of
a foreign language sense in the Pentecostal miracle, from 1520s. Tongue-tied is first recorded
1520s. To hold (one's) tongue refrain from speaking was in Old English. Johnson has tonguepad A
great talker.


chorus (n.)

1560s, from Latin chorus a dance in a circle, the persons singing and dancing, the chorus of a
tragedy, from Greek khoros band of dancers or singers, dance, dancing ground, perhaps from PIE
*gher- to grasp, enclose, if the original sense of the Greek word is enclosed dancing floor.
Extension from dance to voice is because Attic drama arose from tales inserted in the intervals of
the dance. In Attic tragedy, the khoros (of 12 or 15 (tragic) or 24 (comedic) persons) gave
expression, between the acts, to the moral and religious sentiments evoked by the actions of the
play.    When a Poet wished to bring out a piece, he asked a Chorus from the Archon, and the
expenses, being great, were defrayed by some rich citizen (the khoregos): it was furnished by the
Tribe and trained originally by the Poet himself [Liddell &amp; Scott]  Originally in English used
in theatrical sense; meaning of a choir first attested 1650s. Meaning the refrain of a song (which
the audience joins in singing) is 1590s. As a verb, 1703, from the noun. Chorus girl is 1894.


limerick (n.)

nonsense verse of five lines, 1896, perhaps from the county and city in Ireland, but if so the
connection is obscure. Often (after OED's Murray) attributed to a party game in which each guest in
turn made up a nonsense verse and all sang a refrain with the line Will you come up to Limerick? but
he reported this in 1898 and earlier evidence is wanting. Or perhaps from Learic, from Edward Lear
(1812-1888) English humorist who popularized the form. Earliest examples are in French, which
further complicates the quest for the origin. OED's first record of the word is in a letter of
Aubrey Beardsley. The place name is literally bare ground, from Irish Liumneach, from lom bare,
thin. It was famous for hooks.    The limerick may be the only traditional form in English not
borrowed from the poetry of another language. Although the oldest known examples are in French, the
name is from Limerick, Ireland. John Ciardi suggests that the Irish Brigade, which served in France
for most of the eighteenth centiry, might have taken the form to France or developed an English
version of a French form. ... The contemporary limerick usually depends on a pun or some other turn
of wit. It is also likely to be somewhat suggestive or downright dirty. [Miller Williams, Patterns
of Poetry, Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University, 1986]


verse (n.)

late Old English (replacing Old English fers, an early West Germanic borrowing directly from Latin),
line or section of a psalm or canticle, later line of poetry (late 14c.), from Anglo-French and Old
French vers line of verse; rhyme, song, from Latin versus a line, row, line of verse, line of
writing, from PIE root *wer- (3) to turn, bend (see versus). The metaphor is of plowing, of turning
from one line to another (vertere = to turn) as a plowman does.    Verse was invented as an aid to
memory. Later it was preserved to increase pleasure by the spectacle of difficulty overcome. That it
should still survive in dramatic art is a vestige of barbarism. [Stendhal de l'Amour, 1822]    The
English New Testament first was divided fully into verses in the Geneva version (1550s). Meaning
metrical composition is recorded from c.1300; as the non-repeating part of a modern song (between
repetitions of the chorus) by 1918.    The Negroes say that in form their old songs usually consist
in what they call Chorus and Verses. The chorus, a melodic refrain sung by all, opens the song; then
follows a verse sung as a solo, in free recitative; the chorus is repeated; then another verse;
chorus again;--and so on until the chorus, sung for the last time, ends the song. [Natalie Curtis-
Burlin, Negro Folk-Songs, 1918]


