Refusenik (n.)

Soviet Jew who has been refused permission to emigrate to Israel, 1975, a partial translation of
Russian otkaznik, from otkazat to refuse; with English refuse (v.). Also see -nik.


refuse (n.)

mid-14c., an outcast; mid-14c., a rejected thing, waste material, trash, from Old French refus waste
product, rubbish; refusal, denial, rejection, a back-formation from the past participle of refuser
(see refuse (v.)). As an adjective from late 14c., despised, rejected; early 15c., of low quality.


refuse (v.)

c.1300, from Old French refuser reject, disregard, avoid (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *refusare,
frequentative form from past participle stem of Latin refundere pour back, give back (see refund
(v.)). Related: Refused; refusing.


forsake (v.)

Old English forsacan object to, decline, oppose, refuse, deny, from for- completely + sacan to deny,
refuse (see sake). Related: Forsaking.


trash (n.)

late 14c., thing of little use or value, waste, refuse, dross, perhaps from a Scandinavian source
(compare Old Norse tros rubbish, fallen leaves and twigs, Norwegian dialectal trask lumber, trash,
baggage, Swedish trasa rags, tatters), of unknown origin. Applied to ill-bred persons or groups from
1604 (Othello), and especially of poor whites in the U.S. South by 1831. Applied to domestic refuse
or garbage from 1906 (American English). Trash-can attested from 1914. To trash-talk someone or
something is by 1989.


deny (v.)

early 14c., from Old French denoiir deny, repudiate, withhold, from Latin denegare to deny, reject,
refuse (source of Italian dinegarre, Spanish denegar), from de- away (see de-) + negare refuse, say
'no,'  from Old Latin nec not, from Italic base *nek- not, from PIE root *ne- no, not (see un-).
Related: Denied; denying.


garbage (n.)

early 15c., giblets of a fowl, waste parts of an animal, later confused with garble in its sense of
siftings, refuse. Perhaps some senses derive from Old French garbe a bundle of sheaves, entrails,
from Proto-Germanic *garba- (cognates: Dutch garf, German garbe sheaf), from PIE *ghrebh- (1) to
seize, reach (see grab (v.)). Sense of refuse, filth is first attested 1580s; used figuratively for
worthless stuff from 1590s. Garbology study of waste as a social science is from 1976.


lint (n.)

late 14c., flax prepared for spinning, also refuse of flax used as kindling, somehow from the source
of Old English lin flax (see linen), perhaps from or by influence of Middle French linette grain of
flax, diminutive of lin flax, from Latin linum flax, linen; Klein suggests from Latin linteum linen
cloth, neuter of adjective linteus. Later flax refuse used as tinder or for dressing wounds
(c.1400). Still used for flax in Scotland in Burns' time. Applied in American English to stray
cotton fluff.


swill (n.)

liquid kitchen refuse fed to pigs, 1550s, from swill (v.).


dump (n.)

place where refuse is dumped, 1865, originally of mining operations, from dump (v.). Meaning any
shabby place is from 1899. Meaning act of defecating is from 1942.


vegan (n.)

1944, from vegetable (n.) + -an; coined by English vegetarian Donald Watson (1910-2005) to
distinguish those who abstain from all animal products (eggs, cheese, etc.) from those who merely
refuse to eat the animals.


offal (n.)

late 14c., waste parts, refuse, from off + fall (v.); the notion being that which falls off the
butcher's block; perhaps a translation of Middle Dutch afval.


welch (v.)

1857, racing slang, to refuse or avoid payment of money laid as a bet, probably a disparaging use of
the national name Welsh. Related: Welched; welching.


nix (v.)

cancel, refuse, forbid, 1903, from nix (n.). Related: Nixed; nixing.


wild (v.)

to run wild, refuse to be tamed, Old English awildian (see wild (adj.)). Wilding (n.) in the teen
gang sense first recorded 1989. Earlier it meant plant that grows without cultivation (1520s).


refusal (n.)

late 15c., from refuse + -al (2).


abnegate (v.)

1650s, from Latin abnegatus, past participle of abnegare to refuse, deny (see abnegation). Related:
Abnegated; abnegating.


swash (n.)

1530s, the fall of a heavy body or blow, probably imitative. It also meant pig-wash, filth, wet
refuse (1520s) and may have been imitative of the sound of water dashing against solid objects. The
meaning a body of splashing water is first found 1670s; that of a dashing or splashing is from 1847.
Swash-letters (1883) are italic capitals with flourished projections.


recusant (adj.)

obstinate in refusal, 1550s, from Latin recusantem (nominative recusans) refusing to obey, present
participle of recusare make an objection against; decline, refuse, reject; be reluctant to (see
recuse). The noun meaning one obstinate in refusing is from 1610s.


balk (v.)

late 14c., to leave an unplowed ridge when plowing, from balk (n.). Extended meaning to omit,
intentionally neglect is mid-15c. Most modern senses are figurative, from the notion of a balk in
the fields as a hindrance or obstruction: sense of stop short (as a horse confronted with an
obstacle) is late 15c.; that of to refuse is 1580s. Related: Balked; balking.


negative (n.)

late 14c., a prohibition; absence, nonexistence; opposite, from Old French negatif and directly from
Latin negativus (see negative (adj.)). Meaning a negative statement is from 1560s. As a response, I
refuse, disagree, no, from 1945. Meaning a negative quality is from 1640s. In mathematics, a
negative number, from 1706. Photographic sense first recorded 1853.


slag (n.)

refuse from smelting, 1550s, from Middle Low German slagge (German Schlacke) splinter flying off
when metal is struck, related to Old High German slahan to strike, slay (see slay (v.)).


scrannel (adj.)

thin, meager, 1630s; any modern use traces to Milton (Lycidas, 124), who may have invented it out of
dialectal scranny (see scrawny). Or it might be from a Scandinavian source akin to Norwegian skran
rubbish. Compare English dialectal and Scottish skran scraps, broken victuals; refuse, in military
slang food.


negatory (adj.)

expressing negation, 1570s, from Middle French negatoire or directly from Medieval Latin negatorius
negative, from Latin negatus, past participle of negare deny, say no, to refuse (see deny). In the
sense no it is U.S. Air Force slang from the early 1950s.


soil (n.2)

filth, dirt, refuse matter, sewage, liquid likely to contain excrement, c.1600, earlier miry or
muddy place (early 15c.), from Old French soille miry place, from soillier (v.) to make dirty, and
in part a native formation from soil (v.). This is the sense in archaic night-soil.


slushy (adj.)

1791, covered with slush, from slush + -y (2). As slang for ship's cook, 1859, from slush (n.)
refuse from a cook's galley (1756). Related: Slushiness.


riffraff (n.)

also riff-raff, late 15c., from earlier rif and raf one and all, everybody, every scrap, also
sweepings, refuse (mid-14c.), from Old French rif et raf, from rifler to spoil, strip (see rifle
(v.)). Second element from raffler carry off, related to rafle plundering, or from raffer to snatch,
to sweep together (see raffle (n.)).


slop (n.)

c.1400, mudhole, probably from Old English -sloppe dung (in plant name cusloppe, literally cow
dung), related to slyppe slime (see slip (v.)). Meaning semiliquid food first recorded 1650s; that
of refuse liquid of any kind, household liquid waste (usually slops) is from 1815. Meaning affected
or sentimental material is from 1866.


disallow (v.)

late 14c., to refuse to praise, from Old French desalouer to blame, from des- (see dis-) + alouer
(see allow); meaning to reject is from 1550s. Related: Disallowed; disallowing; disallowance.


disoblige (v.)

c.1600, to free from obligation; 1630s, to refuse to oblige, from French d&eacute;sobliger (c.1300),
from des- (see dis-) + Latin obligare (see oblige). Related: Disobliged; disobliging.


disdain (v.)

late 14c., from Old French desdeignier disdain, scorn, refuse, repudiate, from des- do the opposite
of (see dis-) + deignier treat as worthy (see deign). Related: Disdained; disdaining.


disagree (v.)

late 15c., refuse to assent, from Old French desagreer (12c.), from des- (see dis-) + agreer (see
agree). Related: Disagreed; disagreeing.


recuse (v.)

late 14c., to reject another's authority as prejudiced, from Old French recuser (13c.), from Latin
recusare make an objection against; decline, refuse, reject; be reluctant to, from re- (see re-) +
causa (see cause (n.)). Specifically, in law, reject or challenge (a judge or juror) as disqualified
to act. The word now is used mostly reflectively. Related: Recused; recusing.


abnegation (n.)

late 14c., a negative assertion, c.1500 as self-denial, from Latin abnegationem (nominative
abnegatio) refusal, denial, noun of action from past participle stem of abnegare to refuse, deny,
from ab- off, away from (see ab-) + negare to deny (see deny).


disobey (v.)

late 14c., from Old French desobeir (13c.) disobey; refuse service or homage, from Vulgar Latin
*disoboedire, reformed with dis- from Late Latin inobedire, a back-formation from inobediens not
obeying, from Latin in- not + present participle of obedire (see obey). Related: Disobeyed;
disobeying.


junk (n.1)

worthless stuff, mid-14c., junke old cable or rope (nautical), of uncertain origin, perhaps from Old
French junc rush, reed, also used figuratively as a type of something of little value, from Latin
iuncus rush, reed (but OED finds no evidence of connexion). Nautical use extended to old refuse from
boats and ships (1842), then to old or discarded articles of any kind (1884). Junk food is from
1971; junk art is from 1966; junk mail first attested 1954.


slush (n.)

1640s, melting snow, snow and water, perhaps from a Scandinavian source (compare Norwegian and
Swedish slask slushy ground; obsolete Danish slus sleet), all probably imitative of the sound of
sloshing. Slush fund is first attested 1839, from an earlier sense of slush refuse fat (1756); the
money from the sale of a ship's slush was distributed among the officers, which was the original
sense of the phrase. The extended meaning money collected for bribes and to buy influence is first
recorded 1874, no doubt with suggestions of greasing palms.


refute (v.)

1510s, refuse, reject, from Middle French r&#233;futer (16c.) and directly from Latin refutare drive
back; rebut, disprove; repress, repel, resist, oppose, from re- back (see re-) + -futare to beat,
probably from PIE root *bhau- to strike down (see bat (n.1)).    Meaning prove wrong dates from
1540s. Since c.1964 linguists have frowned on the subtle shift in meaning towards to deny, as it is
used in connection with allegation. Related: Refuted; refuting.


dross (n.)

dirt, dregs, Old English dros the scum thrown off from metals in smelting, from Proto-Germanic
*drohs- (cognates: Middle Dutch droes, Dutch droesem, Middle Low German dros, Old High German
truosana, German Drusen dregs, husks), from PIE dher- (1) to make muddy. Meaning refuse, rubbish is
mid-15c.


waste (n.)

c.1200, desolate regions, from Anglo-French and Old North French wast waste, damage, destruction;
wasteland, moor (Old French gast), from Latin vastum, neuter of vastus waste (see waste (v.)).
Replaced or merged with Old English westen, woesten a desert, wilderness, from the Latin word.
Meanings consumption, depletion, also useless expenditure are from c.1300; sense of refuse matter is
attested from c.1400. Waste basket first recorded 1850.


Nebraska

U.S. territory organized 1854, admitted as a state 1867, from a native Siouan name for the Platte
River, either Omaha ni braska or Oto ni brathge, both literally water flat. The modern river name is
from French rivi&egrave;re platte, which means flat river. Related: Nebraskan.   <b>Bug eaters</b>,
a term applied derisively to the inhabitants of Nebraska by travellers on account of the poverty-
stricken appearance of many parts of the State. If one living there were to refuse to eat bugs, he
would, like Polonius, soon be not where he eats but where he is eaten. [Walsh, 1892]


repudiate (v.)

1540s, to cast off by divorce,     from Latin repudiatus, past participle of repudiare to cast off,
put away, divorce, reject, scorn, disdain, from repudium divorce, rejection, a putting away,
dissolution of marriage, from re- back, away (see re-) + pudium, probably related to pes-/ped- foot
[Barnhart]. If this is so, the original notion may be of kicking something away, but folk etymology
commonly connects it with pudere cause shame to. Of opinions, conduct, etc., to refuse to
acknowledge, attested from 1824. Earliest in English as an adjective meaning divorced, rejected,
condemned (mid-15c.). Related: Repudiated; repudiating.


decline (v.)

late 14c., to turn aside, deviate, from Old French decliner to sink, decline, degenerate, turn
aside, from Latin declinare to lower, avoid, deviate, to bend from, inflect, from de- from (see de-)
+ clinare to bend, from PIE *klei-n-, suffixed form of *klei- to lean (see lean (v.)). Sense has
been altered since c.1400 by interpretation of de- as downward. Meaning not to consent, politely
refuse, is from 1630s. Related: Declined; declining.


pollution (n.)

mid-14c., discharge of semen other than during sex, later, desecration, defilement (late 14c.), from
Late Latin pollutionem (nominative pollutio) defilement, noun of action from past participle stem of
Latin polluere to soil, defile, contaminate, from por- before + -luere smear, from PIE root *leu-
dirt; make dirty (cognates: Latin lutum mud, mire, clay, lues filth; Greek lyma filth, dirt,
disgrace, lymax rubbish, refuse; Old Irish loth mud, dirt; Lithuanian lutynas pool, puddle). Sense
of contamination of the environment first recorded c.1860, but not common until c.1955.


garble (v.)

early 15c., to inspect and remove refuse from (spices), from Anglo-French garbeler to sift (late
14c.), from Medieval Latin and Italian garbellare, from Arabic gharbala to sift and select spices,
related to kirbal sieve, perhaps from Late Latin cribellum, diminutive of Latin cribrum sieve (see
crisis). Apparently a widespread word among Mediterranean traders (compare Italian garbellare,
Spanish garbillo); sense of mix up, confuse, distort language (by selecting some things and omitting
others) first recorded 1680s. Related: Garbled; garbling.


scavenger (n.)

1540s, originally person hired to remove refuse from streets, from Middle English scawageour (late
14c.), London official in charge of collecting tax on goods sold by foreign merchants, from Anglo-
French scawager, from scawage toll or duty on goods offered for sale in one's precinct (c.1400),
from Old North French escauwage inspection, from a Germanic source (compare Old High German scouwon,
Old English sceawian to look at, inspect; see show (v.)).    It has come to be regarded as an agent
noun in -er, but the verb is a late back-formation from the noun. With intrusive -n- (c.1500) as in
harbinger, passenger, messenger. Extended to animals 1590s. Scavenger hunt is attested from 1937.


pass (v.)

late 13c. (transitive) to go by (something), also to cross over, from Old French passer (11c.), from
Vulgar Latin *passare to step, walk, pass (source also of Spanish pasar, Italian passare), from
Latin passus step, pace (see pace (n.)). Intransitive sense of to go on, to move forward, make one's
way is attested from c.1300. Figurative sense of to experience, undergo (as in pass the time) is
first recorded late 14c. Sense of to go through an examination successfully is from early 15c.
Meaning decline to do something is attested from 1869, originally in cards (euchre). In football,
hockey, soccer, etc., the meaning to transfer the ball or puck to another player is from c.1865.
Related: Passed; passing.    The meaning to be thought to be something one is not (especially in
racial sense) is from 1935, from pass oneself off (as), first found 1809. The general verb sense of
to be accepted as equivalent is from 1590s. Pass up decline, refuse is attested from 1896. Pass the
buck is from 1865, said to be poker slang reference to the buck horn-handled knife that was passed
around to signify whose turn it was to deal. Pass the hat seek contributions is from 1762. Pass-fail
as a grading method is attested from 1955, American English.


strike (v.)

Old English strican (past tense strac, past participle stricen) pass lightly over, stroke, smooth,
rub, also go, move, proceed, from Proto-Germanic *strikan- (cognates: Old Norse strykva to stroke,
Old Frisian strika, Middle Dutch streken, Dutch strijken to smooth, stroke, rub, Old High German
strihhan, German streichen), from PIE root *streig- to stroke, rub, press (see strigil). Related to
streak and stroke, and perhaps influenced in sense development by cognate Old Norse striuka.
Sense of to deal a blow developed by early 14c.; meaning to collide is from mid-14c.; that of to hit
with a missile is from late 14c. Meaning to cancel or expunge (as with the stroke of a pen) is
attested from late 14c. A Middle English sense is preserved in strike for go toward. Sense of come
upon, find is from 1835 (especially in mining, well-digging, etc., hence strike it rich, 1854).
Baseball sense is from 1853.  To strike a balance is from the sense balance accounts (1530s).
Meaning refuse to work to force an employer to meet demands is from 1768, perhaps from notion of
striking or downing one's tools, or from sailors' practice of striking (lowering) a ship's sails as
a symbol of refusal to go to sea (1768), which preserves the verb's original sense of make level,
smooth.


make (v.)

Old English macian to make, form, construct, do; prepare, arrange, cause; behave, fare, transform,
from West Germanic *makon to fashion, fit (cognates: Old Saxon makon, Old Frisian makia to build,
make, Middle Dutch and Dutch maken, Old High German mahhon to construct, make, German machen to
make), from PIE *mag- to knead, mix; to fashion, fit (see macerate). If so, sense evolution perhaps
is via prehistoric houses built of mud. Gradually replaced the main Old English word, gewyrcan (see
work (v.)).    Meaning to arrive at (a place), first attested 1620s, originally was nautical.
Formerly used in many places where specific verbs now are used, such as to make Latin (c.1500) to
write Latin compositions. This broader usage survives in some phrases, such as to make water to
urinate, to make a book arrange a series of bets (1828), make hay to turn over mown grass to expose
it to sun. Make the grade is 1912, perhaps from the notion of railway engines going up an incline.
Read the valuable suggestions in Dr. C.V. Mosby's book -- be prepared to surmount obstacles before
you encounter them -- equipped with the power to make the grade in life's climb. [advertisement for
Making the Grade, December 1916]    But the phrase also was in use in a schoolwork context at the
time. Make do manage with what is available is attested from 1867. Make time go fast is 1849; make
tracks in this sense is from 1834. To make a federal case out of (something) popularized in 1959
movie Anatomy of a Murder; to make an offer (one) can't refuse is from Mario Puzo's 1969 novel The
Godfather. To make (one's) day is from 1909; menacing make my day is from 1971, popularized by Clint
Eastwood in film Sudden Impact (1983). Related: Made; making.


