regal (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French regal royal (12c.) or directly from Latin regalis royal, kingly; of or
belonging to a king, worthy of a king, from rex (genitive regis) king, from PIE root *reg- move in a
straight line, hence, direct in a straight line, rule, guide (cognates: Sanskrit raj- a king, a
leader; Avestan razeyeiti directs; Persian rahst right, correct; Latin regere to rule, rex a king, a
leader, rectus right, correct; Old Irish ri, Gaelic righ a king; Gaulish -rix a king, in personal
names, such as Vircingetorix; Gothic reiks a leader; Old English rice kingdom, -ric king, rice rich,
powerful, riht correct; Gothic raihts, Old High German recht, Old Swedish reht, Old Norse rettr
correct). Related: Regally.


regalia (n.)

1530s, rights and powers of a king, royal privilege, from Latin regalia royal things, noun use of
neuter plural of regalis (see regal). Meaning decorations or insignia of an order first recorded
1670s.


real (n.)

small Spanish silver coin, 1580s, from Spanish real, noun use of real (adj.) regal, from Latin
regalis regal (see regal). Especially in reference to the real de plata, which circulated in the
U.S. till c.1850 and in Mexico until 1897. The same word was used in Middle English in reference to
various coins, from Old French real, cognate of the Spanish word.    The old system of reckoning by
shillings and pence is continued by retail dealers generally; and will continue, as long as the
Spanish coins remain in circulation. [Bartlett, Dictionary of Americanisms, 1848]    He adds that,
due to different exchange rates of metal to paper money in the different states, the Spanish money
had varying names from place to place. The Spanish real of one-eighth of a dollar or 12 and a half
cents was a ninepence in New England, one shilling in New York, elevenpence or a levy in
Pennsylvania, and in many of the Southern States, a bit. The half-real was in New York a sixpence,
in New England a fourpence, in Pennsylvania a fip, in the South a picayune.


royal (adj.)

mid-13c., fit for a king; late 14c., pertaining to a king, from Old French roial royal, regal;
splendid, magnificent (12c., Modern French royal), from Latin regalis of a king, kingly, royal,
regal, from rex (genitive regis) king (see rex). Meaning thorough, total attested from 1940s; that
of splendid, first-rate from 1853.    Battle royal (1670s) preserves the French custom of putting
the adjective after the noun (as in attorney general); the sense of the adjective here is on a grand
scale (compare pair-royal three of a kind in cards or dice, c.1600). The Royal Oak was a tree in
Boscobel in Shropshire in which Charles II hid himself during flight after the Battle of Worcester
in 1651. Sprigs of oak were worn to commemorate his restoration in 1660.


archbishopric (n.)

Old English arcebiscoprice, from archbishop + rice realm, dominion, province (see regal).


erect (adj.)

late 14c., upright, not bending, from Latin erectus upright, elevated, lofty; eager, alert, aroused,
past participle of erigere raise or set up, from e- up + regere to direct, keep straight, guide (see
regal).


Eric

masc. proper name, from Old Norse Eirikr, literally honored ruler, from Proto-Germanic *aiza- honor
+ *rik- ruler (see regal). The German form is Erich.


regicide (n.)

1540s, man who kills a king, formed from Latin rex (genitive regis) king (see regal) on model of
suicide. Meaning crime of killing a king is from c.1600.


regimen (n.)

c.1400, medical, course of diet, exercise, etc. for sake of health; mid-15c., act of governing, from
Old French regimen (14c.), from Latin regimen rule, guidance, government, means of guidance, rudder,
from regere to rule (see regal).


Regina

fem. proper name, from Latin, literally queen; related to rex (genitive regis) king (see regal).
Cognate with Sanskrit rajni queen, Welsh rhyain maiden, virgin. The city in Canada was named 1882 by
the then-governor general of Canada, Marquess of Lorne, in honor of Queen Victoria.


reign (n.)

early 13c., kingdom, from Old French reigne kingdom, land, country (Modern French r&#232;gne), from
Latin regnum kingship, dominion, rule, realm, related to regere (see regal). Meaning period of rule
first recorded mid-14c.


rector (n.)

late 14c. (early 13c. in Anglo-Latin), from Latin rector ruler, governor, director, guide, from
rect-, past participle stem of regere to rule, guide (see regal). Used originally of Roman governors
and God, by 18c. generally restricted to clergymen and college heads. Related: Rectorship.


bishopric (n.)

Old English bisceoprice diocese, province of a bishop, from bishop + rice realm, dominion, province
(see regal).


rectum (n.)

early 15c., from Latin intestinum rectum straight intestine, in contrast to the convolution of the
rest of the bowels, from neuter past participle of regere to straighten (see regal). A loan-
translation of Greek apeuthysmeon enteron, the name given to the lowest part of the large intestine
by Galen, who so called it because he dissected only animals whose rectum (in contradistinction to
that of man) is really straight [Klein].


ergo

c.1400, from Latin ergo therefore, in consequence of, possibly from *ex rogo from the direction,
from ex out of (see ex-) + root of regere to guide (see regal).


realm (n.)

late 13c., kingdom, from Old French reaume, probably from roiaume kingdom, altered (by influence of
Latin regalis regal) from Gallo-Roman *regiminem, accusative form of Latin regimen system of
government, rule (see regimen). Transferred sense sphere of activity is from late 14c.


rail (n.1)

horizontal bar passing from one post or support to another, c.1300, from Old French reille bolt,
bar, from Vulgar Latin *regla, from Latin regula straight stick, diminutive form related to regere
to straighten, guide (see regal). Used figuratively for thinness from 1872. To be off the rails in a
figurative sense is from 1848, an image from the railroads. In U.S. use, A piece of timber, cleft,
hewed, or sawed, inserted in upright posts for fencing [Webster, 1830].


correct (v.)

mid-14c., to set right, rectify (a fault or error), from Latin correctus, past participle of
corrigere to put straight, reduce to order, set right; in transferred use, to reform, amend,
especially of speech or writing, from com-, intensive prefix (see com-), + regere to lead straight,
rule (see regal). Originally of persons; with reference to writing, etc., attested from late 14c.
Related: Corrected; correcting.


regent (n.)

one who rules during the minority or absence of a sovereign, c.1400, from the adjective (now
archaic, attested in English late 14c.), from Old French regent and directly from Medieval Latin
regentem (nominative regens), from Latin regens ruler, governor, noun use of present participle of
regere to rule, direct (see regal). Senses of university faculty member is attested from mid-15c.,
originally Scottish.


surge (n.)

late 15c., fountain, stream, of uncertain origin, probably from Middle French sourge-, stem of
sourdre to rise, swell, from Latin surgere to rise, arise, get up, mount up, ascend; attack,
contraction of surrigere, from assimilated form of sub up from below (see sub-) + regere to keep
straight, guide (see regal). Meaning high, rolling swell of water is from 1520s; figurative sense of
excited rising up (as of feelings) is from 1510s.


regiment (n.)

late 14c., government, rule, control, from Old French regiment government, rule (14c.), from Late
Latin regimentum rule, direction, from Latin regere to rule (see regal). Meaning unit of an army
first recorded 1570s (originally the reference was to permanent organization and discipline), from
French. The exact number in the unit varies over time and place.


direct (v.)

late 14c., to write (to someone), to address, from Latin directus straight, past participle of
dirigere set straight, from dis- apart (see dis-) + regere to guide (see regal). Compare dress;
address.    Meaning to govern, regulate is from c.1500; to order, ordain is from 1650s. Sense of to
write the destination on the outside of a letter is from 16c. Of plays, films, etc., from 1913.
Related: Directed; directing.


anorexia (n.)

1590s, lack of appetite, Modern Latin, from Greek anorexia, from an-, privative prefix, without (see
an- (1)) + orexis appetite, desire, from oregein to desire, stretch out (cognate with Latin regere
to keep straight, guide, rule; see regal). In current use, often short for anorexia nervosa.


region (n.)

c.1300, tract of land of a considerable but indefinite extent, from Anglo-French regioun, Old French
region land, region, province (12c.), from Latin regionem (nominative regio) a district, portion of
a country, territory, district; a direction, line; boundary line, limit, noun of state from past
participle stem of regere to direct, rule (see regal). Phrase in the region of about (of numbers,
etc.) is recorded from 1961.


rex (n.)

a king, 1610s, from Latin rex (genitive regis) a king, related to regere to keep straight, guide,
lead, rule, from PIE root *reg- to rule, to lead straight, to put right (cognates: Sanskrit raj-
king; Old Irish ri king, genitive rig; see regal).


rajah (n.)

also raja, king or prince in India, 1550s, from Hindi, from Sanskrit rajan king, related to raj
kingdom, kingship, rajati he rules, and cognate with Latin rex, Old Irish rig king (see regal).
Related: Rajput, member of the ruling caste in northern India (1590s), from Sanskrit rajaputrah
prince, literally king's son, from putrah son, boy (see puerile).


regime (n.)

system of government or rule, 1792, from French r&eacute;gime, from Old French regimen (14c.), from
Latin regimen rule, guidance, government, means of guidance, rudder, from regere (see regal).
Earlier course of diet, exercise, late 15c. In French, l'ancien r&eacute;gime refers to the system
of government before the revolution of 1789.


rogation (n.)

late 14c., from Latin rogationem (nominative rogatio) an asking, prayer, entreaty, noun of action
from past participle stem of rogare to ask, apparently a figurative use and meaning literally to
stretch out (the hand), from PIE *rog-, 0-grade form of root *reg- move in a straight line (see
regal). Related: Rogations.   Rogation days were the Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday before Ascension
Day, a time for processions round fields blessing crops and praying for good harvest, also blessing
the boundary markers of each parish. Discouraged by Protestants as superstitious, but continued or
revived in modified form as beating the bounds.


rake (n.1)

toothed tool for drawing or scraping things together, Old English raca rake, earlier r&aelig;ce,
from Proto-Germanic *rak- gather, heap up (cognates: Old Norse reka spade, shovel, Old High German
rehho, German Rechen a rake, Gothic rikan to heap up, collect), from PIE *reg- (1) move in a
straight line (cognates: Greek oregein to reach, stretch out, Latin regere direct, rule; keep
straight, guide; see regal), perhaps via its action, or via the notion of implement with straight
pieces of wood [Watkins].


regular (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French reguler ecclesiastical (Modern French r*#233;gulier), from Late Latin
regularis containing rules for guidance, from Latin regula rule, from PIE *reg- move in a straight
line (see regal).    Earliest sense was of religious orders (the opposite of secular). Extended from
late 16c. to shapes, etc., that followed predictable or uniform patterns; sense of normal is from
1630s; meaning real, genuine is from 1821. Old English borrowed Latin regula and nativized it as
regol rule, regulation, canon, law, standard, pattern; hence regolsticca ruler (instrument);
regollic (adj.) canonical, regular.


reckon (v.)

c.1200, recenen, from Old English gerecenian to explain, relate, recount, from Proto-Germanic
*(ga)rekenojan (cognates: Old Frisian rekenia, Middle Dutch and Dutch rekenen, Old High German
rehhanon, German rechnen, Gothic rahnjan to count, reckon), from Proto-Germanic *rakina- ready,
straightforward, from PIE *reg- to move in a straight line, with derivatives meaning direct in a
straight line, rule (see regal).    Intransitive sense make a computation is from c.1300. In I
reckon, the sense is hold an impression or opinion, and the expression, used parenthetically, dates
from c.1600 and formerly was in literary use (Richardson, etc.), but came to be associated with U.S.
Southern dialect and was regarded as provincial or vulgar. Related: Reckoned; reckoning.


rule (n.)

c.1200, principle or maxim governing conduct, formula to which conduct must be conformed from Old
French riule, Norman reule rule, custom, (religious) order (in Modern French partially re-Latinized
as r&#232;gle), from Vulgar Latin *regula, from Latin regula straight stick, bar, ruler;
figuratively a pattern, a model, related to regere to rule, straighten, guide (see regal). Replaced
Old English wealdan.    Meaning regulation governing play of a game, etc. is from 1690s. Phrase rule
of thumb first attested 1690s. Rule of law supremacy of impartial and well-defined laws to any
individual's power is from 1883. Meaning strip used for making straight lines or measuring is
recorded from mid-14c. Typography sense is attested from 1680s.


Reich (n.)

German, kingdom, realm, state, from Old High German rihhi, related to Old English rice, from Proto-
Germanic *rikja rule (cognates: Old Norse riki, Danish rige, Old Frisian and Middle Dutch rike,
Dutch rijk, Gothic reiki), from PIE *reg- (1) move in a straight line, hence, direct in a straight
line, rule, guide (see regal). Don Ringe, From Proto-Indo-European to Proto-Germanic [Oxford 2006]
identifies it as a Celtic loan-word in Germanic rather than a direct evolution from PIE, based on
the vowel. Used in English from 1871-1945 to refer to the German state, Germany. Most notoriously in
Third Reich (see third); there never was a First or Second in English usage.


rack (n.1)

frame with bars, c.1300, possibly from Middle Dutch rec framework, literally something stretched
out, related to recken (modern rekken) stretch out, cognate with Old English reccan to stretch out,
from Proto-Germanic *rak- (cognates: Old Saxon rekkian, Old Frisian reza, Old Norse rekja, Old High
German recchen, German recken, Gothic uf-rakjan to stretch out), from PIE *rog-, from root *reg- to
move in a straight line (see regal).    Meaning instrument of torture first recorded early 15c.,
perhaps from German rackbank, originally an implement for stretching leather, etc. Mechanical
meaning toothed bar is from 1797 (see pinion). Meaning set of antlers is first attested 1945,
American English; hence slang sense of a woman's breasts (especially if large), by 1991. Meaning
framework for displaying clothes is from 1948; hence off the rack (1951) of clothing, as opposed to
tailored.


right (adj.1)

morally correct, Old English riht just, good, fair; proper, fitting; straight, not bent, direct,
erect, from Proto-Germanic *rekhtaz (cognates: Old Frisian riucht right, Old Saxon reht, Middle
Dutch and Dutch recht, Old High German reht, German recht, Old Norse rettr, Gothic raihts), from PIE
root *reg- move in a straight line, also to rule, to lead straight, to put right (see regal;
cognates: Greek orektos stretched out, upright; Latin rectus straight, right; Old Persian rasta-
straight, right, ar&#353;ta- rectitude; Old Irish recht law; Welsh rhaith, Breton reiz just,
righteous, wise).    Compare slang straight (adj.1) honest, morally upright, and Latin rectus right,
literally straight, Lithuanian teisus right, true, literally straight. Greek dikaios just (in the
moral and legal sense) is from dike custom. As an emphatic, meaning you are right, it is recorded
from 1580s; use as a question meaning am I not right? is from 1961. The sense in right whale is
justly entitled to the name. Right stuff best human ingredients is from 1848, popularized by Tom
Wolfe's 1979 book about the first astronauts. Right of way is attested from 1767. Right angle is
from late 14c.


