regimen (n.)

c.1400, medical, course of diet, exercise, etc. for sake of health; mid-15c., act of governing, from
Old French regimen (14c.), from Latin regimen rule, guidance, government, means of guidance, rudder,
from regere to rule (see regal).


realm (n.)

late 13c., kingdom, from Old French reaume, probably from roiaume kingdom, altered (by influence of
Latin regalis regal) from Gallo-Roman *regiminem, accusative form of Latin regimen system of
government, rule (see regimen). Transferred sense sphere of activity is from late 14c.


regime (n.)

system of government or rule, 1792, from French r&eacute;gime, from Old French regimen (14c.), from
Latin regimen rule, guidance, government, means of guidance, rudder, from regere (see regal).
Earlier course of diet, exercise, late 15c. In French, l'ancien r&eacute;gime refers to the system
of government before the revolution of 1789.


Pilates

c.1980, physical fitness regimen developed c.1920 by German-born physical fitness teacher Joseph
Pilates (1883-1967).


train (v.)

to discipline, teach, bring to a desired state by means of instruction, 1540s, probably from earlier
sense of draw out and manipulate in order to bring to a desired form (late 14c.), specifically of
the growth of branches, vines, etc. from mid-15c.; from train (n.). Sense of point or aim (a
firearm, etc.) is from 1841. Sense of fit oneself for a performance by a regimen or exercise is from
1832. The meaning to travel by railway is recorded from 1856. Related: Trained; training.


diet (n.1)

regular food, early 13c., from Old French diete (13c.) diet, pittance, fare, from Medieval Latin
dieta parliamentary assembly, also a day's work, diet, daily food allowance, from Latin diaeta
prescribed way of life, from Greek diaita, originally way of life, regimen, dwelling, related to
diaitasthai lead one's life, and from diaitan, originally separate, select (food and drink),
frequentative of *diainysthai take apart, from dia- apart + ainysthai take, from PIE root *ai- to
give, allot. Often with a sense of restriction since 14c.; hence put (someone) on a diet (mid-15c.).


jog (v.)

1540s, to shake up and down, perhaps altered from Middle English shoggen to shake, jolt, move with a
jerk (late 14c.), of uncertain origin. Meanings shake, stir up by hint or push, and walk or ride
with a jolting pace are from 16c. The main modern sense in reference to running as training mostly
dates from 1948; at first a regimen for athletes, it became a popular fad c.1967. Perhaps this sense
is extended from its use in horsemanship.   <b>Jogging.</b> The act of exercising, or working a
horse to keep him in condition, or to prepare him for a race. There is no development in jogging,
and it is wholly a preliminary exercise to bring the muscular organization to the point of
sustained, determined action. [Samuel L. Boardman, Handbook of the Turf, New York, 1910]    Related:
Jogged; jogging. As a noun from 1610s.


