regime (n.)

system of government or rule, 1792, from French r&eacute;gime, from Old French regimen (14c.), from
Latin regimen rule, guidance, government, means of guidance, rudder, from regere (see regal).
Earlier course of diet, exercise, late 15c. In French, l'ancien r&eacute;gime refers to the system
of government before the revolution of 1789.


ancien regime (n.)

1794, from French ancien r&eacute;gime, literally old rule, referring to the government and social
order of France before the Revolution there. See ancient + regime.


theocracy (n.)

1737; earlier as un-Latinized theocraty (1620s), form of government in which God is recognized as
supreme ruler and his laws form the statute book, originally of the sacerdotal government of Israel
before the rise of kings, from later Greek theokratia (Josephus), literally  the rule of God, from
theos god (see theo-) + kratos a rule, regime, strength (see -cracy). Meaning priestly or religious
body wielding political and civil power is recorded from 1825.  Related: Theocratic (1741).


cosmos (n.)

c.1200 (but not popular until 1848, as a translation of Humboldt's Kosmos), from Latinized form of
Greek kosmos order, good order, orderly arrangement, a word with several main senses rooted in those
notions: The verb kosmein meant generally to dispose, prepare, but especially to order and arrange
(troops for battle), to set (an army) in array; also to establish (a government or regime); to deck,
adorn, equip, dress (especially of women). Thus kosmos had an important secondary sense of ornaments
of a woman's dress, decoration (compare kosmokomes dressing the hair) as well as the universe, the
world.    Pythagoras is said to have been the first to apply this word to the universe, perhaps
originally meaning the starry firmament, but later it was extended to the whole physical world,
including the earth. For specific reference to the world of people, the classical phrase was he
oikoumene (ge) the inhabited (earth). Septuagint uses both kosmos and oikoumene. Kosmos also was
used in Christian religious writing with a sense of worldly life, this world (as opposed to the
afterlife), but the more frequent word for this was aion, literally lifetime, age.


Nazi

1930, noun and adjective, from German Nazi, abbreviation of German pronunciation of
Nationalsozialist (based on earlier German sozi, popular abbreviation of socialist), from
Nationalsozialistische Deutsche Arbeiterpartei National Socialist German Workers' Party, led by
Hitler from 1920.    The 24th edition of Etymologisches W&ouml;rterbuch der deutschen Sprache (2002)
says the word Nazi was favored in southern Germany (supposedly from c.1924) among opponents of
National Socialism because the nickname Nazi, Naczi (from the masc. proper name Ignatz, German form
of Ignatius) was used colloquially to mean a foolish person, clumsy or awkward person. Ignatz was a
popular name in Catholic Austria, and according to one source in World War I Nazi was a generic name
in the German Empire for the soldiers of Austria-Hungary.    An older use of Nazi for national-
sozial is attested in German from 1903, but EWdS does not think it contributed to the word as
applied to Hitler and his followers. The NSDAP for a time attempted to adopt the Nazi designation as
what the Germans call a despite-word, but they gave this up, and the NSDAP is said to have generally
avoided the term. Before 1930, party members had been called in English National Socialists, which
dates from 1923. The use of Nazi Germany, Nazi regime, etc., was popularized by German exiles
abroad. From them, it spread into other languages, and eventually was brought back to Germany, after
the war. In the USSR, the terms national socialist and Nazi were said to have been forbidden after
1932, presumably to avoid any taint to the good word socialist. Soviet literature refers to
fascists.


