regiment (v.)

to form into a regiment, 1610s, from regiment (n.). General sense of organize systematically is from
1690s. Related: Regimented; regimenting.


regimental (adj.)

1650s, from regiment (n.) + -al (1). As a noun, regimentals, dress proper to a particular regiment,
military uniform, is from 1742.


regiment (n.)

late 14c., government, rule, control, from Old French regiment government, rule (14c.), from Late
Latin regimentum rule, direction, from Latin regere to rule (see regal). Meaning unit of an army
first recorded 1570s (originally the reference was to permanent organization and discipline), from
French. The exact number in the unit varies over time and place.


regimentation (n.)

1856, noun of action from regiment (v.).


colors (n.)

flag of a regiment or ship 1580s, from color (n.).


linesman (n.)

1856, soldier in a regiment of the line, from genitive of line (n.) + man (n.). Sports sense, in
reference to umpires with specific duties in games with lines (originally tennis, also ice hockey)
is from 1890.


lobster (n.)

marine shellfish, Old English loppestre lobster, locust, corruption of Latin locusta, lucusta
lobster, locust, by influence of Old English loppe spider, a variant of lobbe. The ending of Old
English loppestre is the fem. agent noun suffix (as in Baxter, Webster; see -ster), which
approximated the Latin sound.  Perhaps a transferred use of the Latin word; trilobite fossils in
Worcestershire limestone quarries were known colloquially as locusts, which seems to be the generic
word for unidentified arthropod, as apple is for foreign fruit. OED says the Latin word originally
meant lobster or some similar crustacean, the application to the locust being suggested by the
resemblance in shape. Locusta in the sense lobster also appears in French (langouste now crawfish,
crayfish, but in Old French lobster and locust; a 13c. psalter has God giving over the crops of
Egypt to the langoustes) and Old Cornish (legast). As slang for a British soldier since 1640s,
originally in reference to the jointed armor of the Roundhead cuirassiers, later (1660) to the red
coat.Sir William Waller having received from London [in June 1643] a fresh regiment of five hundred
horse, under the command of sir Arthur Haslerigge, which were so prodigiously armed that they were
called by the other side the regiment of lobsters, because of their bright iron shells with which
they were covered, being perfect curasseers. [Clarendon, History of the Rebellion, 1647]


cadre (n.)

1830, from French cadre, literally a frame of a picture (16c.), so, a detachment forming the
skeleton of a regiment (1851), from Italian quadro, from Latin quadrum a square (see quadrille). The
communist sense is from 1930.


grenadier (n.)

1670s, originally a word for soldiers who were dexterous in flinging hand-granados [Evelyn], from
French grenadier (15c.), from Middle French grenade grenade (see grenade); later the tallest and
finest men in the regiment [OED].


diehard

also die-hard, 1844 (n.), in reference to the 57th Regiment of Foot in the British Army; as an
adjective, attested from 1871; from die (v.) + hard (adv.). As a brand name of an automobile
battery, DieHard, introduced by Sears in 1967.


company (n.)

mid-12c., large group of people, from Old French compagnie society, friendship, intimacy; body of
soldiers (12c.), from Late Latin companio (see companion). Meaning companionship is from late 13c.
Sense of business association first recorded 1550s, having earlier been used in reference to trade
guilds (c.1300). Meaning subdivision of an infantry regiment is from 1580s. Abbreviation co. dates
from 1670s.


band (n.2)

an organized group, late 15c., from Middle French bande, which is traceable to the Proto-Germanic
root of band (n.1), probably via a band of cloth worn as a mark of identification by a group of
soldiers or others (compare Gothic bandwa a sign). The extension to group of musicians is c.1660,
originally musicians attached to a regiment of the army. To beat the band (1897) is to make enough
noise to drown it out, hence to exceed everything.


battalion (n.)

1580s, from Middle French bataillon (16c.), from Italian battaglione battle squadron, from
diminutive of Vulgar Latin battalia battle, from Latin bauttere to beat (see batter (v.)). Specific
sense of part of a regiment is from 1708.Madame, lui r&eacute;pondit-il, ne vous y fiez pas: j'ay
t&ocirc;ujours v&#251; Dieu do cot&eacute; des gros Batallions. [E.Boursault, 1702]


snooker (n.)

1889, the game and the word said in an oft-told story to have been invented in India by British
officers as a diversion from billiards. The name is perhaps a reference (with regard to the rawness
of play by a fellow officer) to British slang snooker newly joined cadet, first-term student at the
R.M. Academy (1872). Tradition ascribes the coinage to Col. Sir Neville Chamberlain (not the later
prime minister of the same name), at the time subaltern in the Devonshire Regiment in Jubbulpore.
One of the first descriptions of the game is in A.W. Drayson's The Art  of Practical Billiards for
Amateurs (1889), which states in a footnote The rules of the game of snooker are the copyright of
Messrs. Burroughes &amp; Watts, from whom they may be obtained, they being manufacturers of billiard
tables.


martinet (n.)

1670s, system of strict discipline, from the name of Jean Martinet (killed at siege of Duisburg,
1672), lieutenant colonel in the R&#233;giment du Roi, who in 1668 was appointed inspector general
of the infantry. It was his responsibility to introduce and enforce the drill and strict discipline
of the French regiment of Guards across the whole infantry. [Olaf van Minwegen, The Dutch Army and
the Military Revolutions 1588-1688, 2006] The meaning an officer who is a stickler for strict
discipline is first attested 1779 in English. The surname is a diminutive of Latin Martinus (see
Martin).


colonel (n.)

1540s, coronell, from Middle French coronel (16c.), modified by dissimilation from Italian
colonnella commander of a column of soldiers at the head of a regiment, from compagna colonella
little column company, from Latin columna pillar (see column). English spelling modified 1580s in
learned writing to conform with the Italian form (via translations of Italian military manuals), and
pronunciations with r and l coexisted 17c.-18c., but the earlier pronunciation prevailed. Spanish
coronel, from Italian, shows a similar evolution by dissimilation.


rebel (n.)

person who makes war on his country for political motives, mid-14c., from rebel (adj.). Meaning
supporter of the American cause in the War of Independence is from 1775; sense of supporter of the
Southern cause in the American Civil War is attested from April 15, 1861. Rebel yell in an American
Civil War context attested from 1862, but the thing itself is older and was said to have been picked
up by southwestern men in their periodic wars against the Indians.  The Southern troops, when
charging or to express their delight, always yell in a manner peculiar to themselves. The Yankee
cheer is more like ours; but the Confederate officers declare that the rebel yell has a particular
merit, and always produces a salutary and useful effect upon their adversaries. A corps is sometimes
spoken of as a 'good yelling regiment.' [A.J.L. Fremantle, The Battle of Gettysburg and the Campaign
in Pennsylvania, in Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine, Sept. 1863]


whitey (n.)

'white' person, person of European descent, 1828, also whity, from white (adj.) + -y (2) and -y (3).
Earlier as an adjective, and Whitey-brown was a 19c. descriptive color name, used to describe, among
other things, mulatto skin.    Negro troops doing provost duty in Norfolk; keeping the white people
in order. On a visit to Norfolk one can see white Southerners, arrested for sundry misdemeanors,
working on the public streets, under negro guards. ... It is quite a change to see, in Norfolk,
negroes forcing white men to work, at the point of the bayonet; calling out to them: No loaf'n dar!
Move quicker, Sah! Hurry up dar, Old Whitey! and similar orders. Tables turned! [diary of Lieut. S.
Millett Thompson, 13th New Hampshire Volunteer regiment, U.S. Army, Jan. 25, 1864; diary published
1888 by Houghton, Mifflin &amp; Co.]


doughnut (n.)

1809, American English, from dough + nut (n.), probably on the notion of being a small round lump
(the holes came later, first mentioned c.1861). First recorded by Washington Irving, who described
them as balls of sweetened dough, fried in hog's fat, and called doughnuts, or olykoeks. Earlier
name for it was dough-boy (1680s). Bartlett (1848) meanwhile lists doughnuts and crullers among the
types of olycokes, a word he derives from Dutch olikoek, literally oil-cake, to indicate a cake
fried in lard.    The ladies of Augusta, Maine, set in operation and carried out a novel idea,
namely, the distribution of over fifty bushels of doughnuts to the Third volunteer regiment of that
State. A procession of ladies, headed by music, passed between double lines of troops, who presented
arms, and were afterwards drawn up in hollow square to receive from tender and gracious hands the
welcome doughnation. [Frazar Kirkland, Anecdotes of the Rebellion, 1866]     Meaning a driving in
tight circles is U.S. slang, 1981. Compare also donut.


