relevant (adj.)

pertinent to the matter at hand, 1550s, from Middle French relevant depending upon, originally
helpful, from Medieval Latin relevantem (nominative relevans), from stem of Latin relevare to
lessen, lighten (see relieve). Not generally used until after 1800.


recital (n.)

1510s, a legal term, rehearsal or statement of relevant facts, from recite + -al. Meaning act of
reciting is from 1610s; musical performance sense is from 1811.


irrelevant (adj.)

1680s, from assimilated form of in- (1) not, opposite of + relevant. Related: Irrelevantly.


relevance (n.)

1733; see relevant + -ance. Related: Relevancy (1560s).


deft (adj.)

Old English ged&aelig;fte mild, gentle, differentiated in Middle English into daft (q.v.) and this
word, via sense of apt, skillful, adept. Cognate with Gothic gadaban to be fit, Old Norse dafna to
grow strong, Dutch deftig important, relevant.


germane (adj.)

mid-14c., having the same parents, derived from german (adj.); compare human/humane, urban/urbane.
Main modern sense of closely connected, relevant (c.1600) derives from use in Hamlet Act V, Scene
ii: The phrase would bee more Germaine to the matter: If we could carry Cannon by our sides, which
is a figurative use of the word in the now-obsolete sense of closely related, akin (late 15c.) in
reference to things, not persons.


-ics

in the names of sciences or disciplines (acoustics, aerobics, economics, etc.) it represents a 16c.
revival of the classical custom of using the neuter plural of adjectives with -ikos (see -ic) to
mean matters relevant to and also as the titles of treatises about them. Subject matters that
acquired their names in English before c.1500, however, tend to remain in singular (such as
arithmetic, logic).


material (adj.)

mid-14c., real, ordinary; earthly, drawn from the material world; a term in scholastic philosophy
and theology, from Old French material, materiel (14c.) and directly from Late Latin materialis
(adj.) of or belonging to matter, from Latin materia matter, stuff, wood, timber (see matter). From
late 14c. as made of matter, having material existence; material, physical, substantial; from late
15c. as important, relevant.


fuck (v.)

until recently a difficult word to trace, in part because it was taboo to the editors of the
original OED when the F volume was compiled, 1893-97. Written form only attested from early 16c. OED
2nd edition cites 1503, in the form fukkit; earliest appearance of current spelling is 1535 --
Bischops ... may fuck thair fill and be vnmaryit [Sir David Lyndesay, Ane Satyre of the Thrie
Estaits], but presumably it is a much more ancient word than that, simply one that wasn't written in
the kind of texts that have survived from Old English and Middle English. Buck cites proper name
John le Fucker from 1278, but the surname could have other explanations. The word apparently is
hinted at in a scurrilous 15c. poem, titled Flen flyys, written in bastard Latin and Middle English.
The relevant line reads:Non sunt in celi quia fuccant uuiuys of heliThey [the monks] are not in
heaven because they fuck the wives of [the town of] Ely. Fuccant is pseudo-Latin, and in the
original it is written in cipher. The earliest examples of the word otherwise are from Scottish,
which suggests a Scandinavian origin, perhaps from a word akin to Norwegian dialectal fukka
copulate, or Swedish dialectal focka copulate, strike, push, and fock penis. Another theory traces
it to Middle English fyke, fike move restlessly, fidget, which also meant dally, flirt, and probably
is from a general North Sea Germanic word; compare Middle Dutch fokken, German ficken fuck, earlier
make quick movements to and fro, flick, still earlier itch, scratch; the vulgar sense attested from
16c. This would parallel in sense the usual Middle English slang term for have sexual intercourse,
swive, from Old English swifan to move lightly over, sweep (see swivel). But OED remarks these
cannot be shown to be related to the English word. Chronology and phonology rule out Shipley's
attempt to derive it from Middle English firk to press hard, beat.    Germanic words of similar form
(f + vowel + consonant) and meaning 'copulate' are numerous. One of them is G. ficken. They often
have additional senses, especially 'cheat,' but their basic meaning is 'move back and forth.' ...
Most probably, fuck is a borrowing from Low German and has no cognates outside Germanic. [Liberman]
French foutre and Italian fottere look like the English word but are unrelated, derived rather from
Latin futuere, which is perhaps from PIE root *bhau(t)- knock, strike off, extended via a figurative
use from the sexual application of violent action [Shipley; compare the sexual slang use of bang,
etc.]. Popular and Internet derivations from acronyms (and the pluck yew fable) are merely
<b>ingenious trifling</b>. The Old English word was h&aelig;man, from ham dwelling, home, with a
sense of take home, co-habit. Fuck was outlawed in print in England (by the Obscene Publications
Act, 1857) and the U.S. (by the Comstock Act, 1873). As a noun, it dates from 1670s. The word may
have been shunned in print, but it continued in conversation, especially among soldiers during World
War I.It became so common that an effective way for the soldier to express this emotion was to omit
this word. Thus if a sergeant said, 'Get your ----ing rifles!' it was understood as a matter of
routine. But if he said 'Get your rifles!' there was an immediate implication of urgency and danger.
[John Brophy, Songs and Slang of the British Soldier: 1914-1918, pub. 1930]The legal barriers broke
down in the 20th century, with the Ulysses decision (U.S., 1933) and Lady Chatterley's Lover (U.S.,
1959; U.K., 1960). Johnson excluded the word, and fuck wasn't in a single English language
dictionary from 1795 to 1965. The Penguin Dictionary broke the taboo in the latter year. Houghton
Mifflin followed, in 1969, with The American Heritage Dictionary, but it also published a Clean
Green edition without the word, to assure itself access to the lucrative public high school market.
The abbreviation F (or eff) probably began as euphemistic, but by 1943 it was being used as a cuss
word, too. In 1948, the publishers of The Naked and the Dead persuaded Norman Mailer to use the
euphemism fug instead. When Mailer later was introduced to Dorothy Parker, she greeted him with, So
you're the man who can't spell 'fuck'  [The quip sometimes is attributed to Tallulah Bankhead].
Hemingway used muck in For whom the Bell Tolls (1940). The major breakthrough in publication was
James Jones' From Here to Eternity (1950), with 50 fucks (down from 258 in the original manuscript).
Egyptian legal agreements from the 23rd Dynasty (749-21 B.C.E.) frequently include the phrase, If
you do not obey this decree, may a donkey copulate with you! [Reinhold Aman, Maledicta, Summer
1977]. Fuck-all nothing first recorded 1960.  Verbal phrase fuck up to ruin, spoil, destroy first
attested c.1916. A widespread group of Slavic words (such as Polish pierdoli&#263;) can mean both
fornicate and make a mistake. Fuck off attested from 1929; as a command to depart, by 1944. Flying
fuck originally meant have sex on horseback and is first attested c.1800 in broadside ballad New
Feats of Horsemanship. For the unkillable urban legend that this word is an acronym of some sort (a
fiction traceable on the Internet to 1995 but probably predating that) see here, and also here.
Related: Fucked; fucking. Agent noun fucker attested from 1590s in literal sense; by 1893 as a term
of abuse (or admiration).    DUCK F-CK-R. The man who has the care of the poultry on board a
&#383;hip of war. [Classical Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue, 1796]


