relinquish (v.)

mid-15c., desert, abandon; late 15c., give up, desist, from Old French relinquiss-, present
participle stem of relinquir (12c.), from Latin relinquere leave behind, forsake, abandon, give up,
from re- back (see re-) + linquere to leave, from PIE *linkw-, from root *leikw- to leave behind
(cognates: Sanskrit reknas inheritance, wealth, rinakti leaves; Greek leipein to leave; Gothic
leihvan, Old English l&aelig;nan to lend; Old High German lihan to borrow; Old Norse lan loan).
Related: Relinquished; relinquishing.


quit (v.)

c.1200, to repay, discharge (a debt, etc.), from Old French quiter clear, establish one's innocence;
also transitive, release, let go, relinquish, abandon (12c.), from quite (see quit (adj.)).
Meaning to reward, give reward is mid-13c., that of take revenge; to answer, retort and to acquit
oneself are late 14c. From c.1300 as to acquit (of a charge), declare not guilty. Sense of leave,
depart is attested from c.1400; that of stop (doing something) is from 1640s. Meaning to give up,
relinquish is from mid-15c. Related: Quitted; quitting. Quitting time is from 1835.


resign (v.)

late 14c., give up, surrender, abandon, submit; relinquish, from Old French resigner renounce,
relinquish (13c.), from Latin resignare to check off, annul, cancel, give back, give up, from re-
opposite (see re-) + signare to make an entry in an account book, literally to mark (see sign (v.)).
The sense is of making an entry (signum) opposite -- on the credit side -- balancing the former mark
and thus canceling the claim it represents. The specific meaning of give up a position is first
recorded late 14c. Sense of to give (oneself) up to some emotion or situation is from 1718. Related:
Resigned; resigning.


release (v.)

c.1300, to withdraw, revoke (a decree, etc.), cancel, lift; remit, from Old French relaissier,
relesser to relinquish, quit, let go, leave behind, abandon, acquit, variant of relacher release,
relax, from Latin relaxare loosen, stretch out (see relax), source also of Spanish relajar, Italian
relassare.    Meaning alleviate, ease is mid-14c., as is sense of free from (duty, etc.); exonerate.
From late 14c. as grant remission, forgive; set free from imprisonment, military service, etc. Also
give up, relinquish, surrender. In law, c.1400, to grant a release of property. Of press reports,
attested from 1904; of motion pictures, from 1912; of music recordings, from 1962. As a euphemism
for to dismiss, fire from a job it is attested in American English since 1904. Related: Released;
releasing.


reliction (n.)

in law, a recession of the sea from the land, 1670s, from Latin relictionem (nominative relictio),
noun of action from past participle stem of relinquere (see relinquish).


reliquiae (n.)

remains, 1650s, Latin plural of reliquus remainder, residue, noun use of adjective meaning that is
left, remaining, left over, related to relinquere (perfective reliqui) to leave behind (see
relinquish).


derelict (adj.)

1640s, from Latin derelictus solitary, deserted, past participle of dereliquere to abandon, forsake,
desert, from de- entirely + relinquere leave behind (see relinquish). Originally especially of
vessels abandoned at sea or stranded on shore. As a noun, from 1660s.


forgo (v.)

to relinquish, Old English forgan go away, pass over, leave undone, from for- away + gan go (see
go). Related: Forgoing; forgone.


ellipsis (n.)

1560s, an ellipse, from Latin ellipsis, from Greek elleipsis a falling short, defect, ellipse, from
elleipein to fall short, leave out, from en- in + leipein to leave (see relinquish). Grammatical
sense first recorded 1610s.


paralipsis (n.)

1580s, from Greek paraleipsis passing by omission, from paraleipein to leave on one side, pass over,
leave untold, from para- beside (see para- (1)) + leipein to leave (see relinquish).


relict (n.)

a widow, mid-15c., from Old French relict, fem. relicte person or thing left behind (especially a
widow) and directly from Medieval Latin relicta a widow, noun use of fem. of relictus abandoned,
left behind, past participle adjective from Latin relinquere to leave behind (see relinquish).


delinquent (n.)

late 15c., from Middle French d&eacute;linquant, from present participle of d&eacute;linquer (15c.),
and directly from Latin delinquentum (nominative delinquens), present participle of delinquere to
fail; be wanting, fall short; offend, from de- completely (see de-) + linquere to leave (see
relinquish). As an adjective, from c.1600.


eclipse (n.)

late 13c., from Old French eclipse eclipse, darkness (12c.), from Latin eclipsis, from Greek
ekleipsis an abandonment, an eclipse, from ekleipein to forsake a usual place, fail to appear, be
eclipsed, from ek out (see ex-) + leipein to leave (cognate with Latin linquere; see relinquish).


relic (n.)

early 13c., body part or other object from a holy person, from Old French relique (11c., plural
reliques), from Late Latin reliqui&aelig; (plural) remains of a martyr, in classical Latin remains,
remnants, noun use of fem. plural of reliquus remaining, that which remains, related to relinquere
(perfective reliqui) to leave behind (see relinquish). Sense of remains, ruins is from early 14c.
Old English used reliquias, directly from Latin.


loan (n.)

mid-13c., from Old Norse lan, related to lja to lend, from Proto-Germanic *laikhwniz (cognates: Old
Frisian len thing lent, Middle Dutch lene, Dutch leen loan, fief, Old High German lehan, German Lehn
fief, feudal tenure), originally to let have, to leave (to someone), from PIE *leikw- to leave (see
relinquish).    The Norse word also is cognate with Old English l&aelig;n gift, which did not
survive into Middle English, but its derived verb l&aelig;nan is the source of lend. As a verb, loan
is attested from 1540s, perhaps earlier, and formerly was current, but has now been supplanted in
England by lend, though it survives in American English.   Loan word (1874) is a translation of
German Lehnwort; loan-translation is attested 1933, from German Lehn&uuml;bersetzung. Slang loan
shark first attested 1900.


eleven (n.)

c.1200, elleovene, from Old English endleofan, literally one left (over ten), from Proto-Germanic
*ainlif- (compare Old Saxon elleban, Old Frisian andlova, Dutch elf, Old High German einlif, German
elf, Old Norse ellifu, Gothic ainlif), a compound of *ain one (see one) + PIE *leikw- leave, remain
(source of Greek leipein to leave behind; see relinquish).  FIREFLY: Give me a number from 1 to
10.CHICOLINI: eleven! FIREFLY: Right!  Viking survivors who escaped an Anglo-Saxon victory were
daro&thorn;a laf the leavings of spears, while hamora laf the leavings of hammers was an Old English
kenning for swords (both from The Battle of Brunanburgh). Twelve reflects the same formation.
Outside Germanic the only instance of this formation is in Lithuanian, which uses -lika left over
and continues the series to 19 (vienio-lika eleven, dvy-lika twelve, try-lika thirteen, keturio-lika
fourteen, etc.) Phrase eleventh hour (1829) is from Matthew xx:1-16.


