relish (v.)

1560s give flavor to (implied in relished), from relish (n.). The transferred sense of to enjoy,
take pleasure in is from 1590s. Related: Relishing.


relish (n.)

1520s, taste, flavor, alteration of reles scent, taste, aftertaste, (c.1300), from Old French
relais, reles, something remaining, that which is left behind, from relaisser to leave behind (see
release (v.)). Meaning enjoyment of the taste or flavor of something is attested from 1640s. Sense
of condiment, that which imparts flavor is first recorded 1797. The stuff you put on hot dogs is a
sweet green pickle relish.


curry (n.)

the spice, 1680s, from Tamil kari sauce, relish for rice.


salsa (n.)

kind of sauce, 1846; kind of dance music, 1975, from Spanish, literally sauce, from Vulgar Latin
*salsa condiment (see sauce (n.)). In American Spanish especially used of a kind of relish with
chopped-up ingredients; the music so called from its blend of Latin jazz and rock styles.


smorgasbord (n.)

1893, from Swedish sm&ouml;rg&#229;sbord, literally butter-goose table, from sm&ouml;rg&#229;s,
slice of bread and butter, compounded from sm&#246;r butter (see smear (n.)) and g&#229;s, literally
goose (and from the same Germanic root that yielded English goose (n.)).    [Sm&ouml;rg&#229;s]
properly signifies a slice of bread-and-butter; and has come by custom--in much the same way as when
we familiarly speak of taking a sandwich for partaking of some light refreshment--to be applied
synecdochically to the preliminary relish or appetizer partaken of before meals. [Notes and Queries,
Nov. 15, 1884]     The final element is bord table, from Proto-Germanic *burdam plank, board, table
(see board (n.1)). Figurative sense of medley, miscellany is recorded from 1948.


choose (v.)

Old English ceosan choose, seek out, select; decide, test, taste, try; accept, approve (class II
strong verb; past tense ceas, past participle coren), from Proto-Germanic *keus- (cognates: Old
Frisian kiasa, Old Saxon kiosan, Dutch kiezen, Old High German kiosan, German kiesen, Old Norse
kjosa, Gothic kiusan choose, Gothic kausjan to taste, test), from PIE root *geus- to taste, relish
(see gusto). Only remotely related to choice. Variant spelling chuse is Middle English, very
frequent 16c.-18c. The irregular past participle leveled out to chosen by 1200.


stomach (n.)

late 14c., earlier stomak (early 14c.), internal pouch into which food is digested, from Old French
stomaque, estomac stomach, from Latin stomachus throat, gullet; stomach, also taste, inclination,
liking; distaste, dislike; also pride, indignation, which were thought to have their origin in that
organ (source also of Spanish est&#243;mago, Italian stomaco), from Greek stomachos throat, gullet,
esophagus, literally mouth, opening, from stoma mouth (see stoma).    Applied anciently to the
openings of various internal organs, especially that of the stomach, then by the later Greek
physicians to the stomach itself. The native word is maw. Some 16c. anatomists tried to correct the
sense back to esophagus and introduce ventricle for what we call the stomach. Meaning belly,
midriff, part of the body that contains the stomach is from late 14c.    The spelling of the ending
of the word was conformed to Latin, but the pronunciation remains as in Middle English. Related:
stomachial (1580s); stomachical (c.1600); stomachic (1650s). Pugilistic stomacher punch in the
stomach is from 1814; from mid-15c. as vest or other garment which covers the belly. The Latin
figurative senses also were in Middle English (such as relish, inclination, desire, mid-15c.) or
early Modern English. Also sometimes regarded in Middle Ages as the seat of sexual desire.


