religious (adj.)

c.1200, devout, pious, imbued with or expressive of religious devotion, from Anglo-French religius,
Old French religious (12c., Modern French religieux) and directly from Latin religiosus, from
religio (see religion). Meaning pertaining to religion is from 1530s. Transferred sense of
scrupulous, exact is recorded from 1590s. Related: Religiousness.


religiously (adv.)

late 14c., in a religous manner, from religious + -ly (2). Transferred sense of strictly,
scrupulously attested by 1570s.


religieuse (n.)

a nun, a religious woman, 1690s, from French, fem. of religieux monk, noun use of adjective meaning
religious (see religious). As a type of pastry, attested from 1929.


sacrosanct (adj.)

superlatively sacred or inviolable, c.1600, from Latin sacrosanctus protected by religious sanction,
consecrated with religious ceremonies, from sacro, ablative of sacrum religious sanction (from
neuter singular of sacer sacred) + sanctus, past participle of sancire make sacred (for both, see
sacred). Earlier in partially anglicized form sacro-seint (c.1500).


feast (n.)

c.1200, religious anniversary characterized by rejoicing (rather than fasting), from Old French
feste (12c., Modern French f&ecirc;te) religious festival; noise, racket, from Vulgar Latin *festa
(fem. singular; also source of Italian festa, Spanish fiesta), from Latin festa holidays, feasts,
noun use of neuter plural of festus festive, joyful, merry, related to feriae holiday and fanum
temple, from PIE *dhes- root of words in religious concepts [Watkins]. The spelling -ea- was used in
Middle English to represent the sound we mis-call long e. Meaning abundant meal (whether public or
private) is from late 14c.


solemn (adj.)

mid-14c., performed with due religious ceremony or reverence, sacred, devoted to religious
observances, also, of a vow, etc., made under religious sanction, binding, from Old French solempne
(12c., Modern French solennel) and directly from Latin sollemnis annual, established, religiously
fixed, formal, ceremonial, traditional, perhaps related to sollus whole (see safe (adj.)).    The
explanation that Latin sollemnis was formed from sollus whole + annus year is not considered valid
[Barnhart], but some assimilation via folk-etymology is possible. In Middle English also famous,
important; imposing, grand, hence Chaucer's friar, a ful solempne man. Meaning marked by seriousness
or earnestness is from late 14c.; sense of fitted to inspire devout reflection is from c.1400.
Related: Solemnly.


sect (n.)

mid-14c., distinctive system of beliefs or observances; party or school within a religion, from Old
French secte, sete sect, religious community, or directly from Late Latin secta religious group,
sect in philosophy or religion, from Latin secta manner, mode, following, school of thought,
literally a way, road, beaten path, from fem. of sectus, variant past participle of sequi follow,
from PIE *sekw- (1) to follow (see sequel). Confused in this sense with Latin secta, fem. past
participle of secare to cut (see section (n.)). Meaning separately organized religious body is
recorded from 1570s.


procession (n.)

late Old English, act of marching or proceeding, from Old French procession procession (religious or
secular), 11c., and directly from Late Latin processionem (nominative processio) religious
procession, in classical Latin a marching onward, a going forward, advance, noun of action from past
participle stem of procedere (see proceed).


edification (n.)

mid-14c., in religious use, building up of the soul, from Old French edification and directly from
Latin aedificationem (nominative aedificatio) construction, building, in Late Latin spiritual
improvement, from past participle stem of aedificare (see edifice). Religious use is as translation
of Greek oikodome in I Cor. xiv. Meaning mental improvement is 1650s. Literal sense of building is
rare in English.


minister (v.)

early 14c., to perform religious rites, provide religious services; mid-14c., to serve (food or
drink); late 14c. render service or aid, from Old French menistrer to serve, be of service,
administer, attend, wait on, and directly from Latin ministrare to serve, attend, wait upon (see
minister (n.)). Related: Ministered; ministering.


talisman (n.)

1630s, magical figure cut or engraved under certain observances, from French talisman, in part via
Arabic tilsam (plural tilsaman), from Byzantine Greek telesma talisman, religious rite, payment,
earlier consecration, ceremony, originally in ancient Greek completion, from telein perform
(religious rites), pay (tax), fulfill, from telos end, fulfillment, completion (see tele-). The
Arabic word also was borrowed into Turkish, Persian, Hindi. Related: Talismanic; talismanical.


born-again (adj.)

of Protestant Christians, by 1920, based on John iii:3. Used in figurative (non-religious) sense by
1977.


Bat Mitzvah

1950, literally daughter of command; a Jewish girl who has reached age 12, the age of religious
majority. Extended to the ceremony held on occasion of this.


belief (n.)

late 12c., bileave, replacing Old English geleafa belief, faith, from West Germanic *ga-laubon to
hold dear, esteem, trust (cognates: Old Saxon gilobo, Middle Dutch gelove, Old High German giloubo,
German Glaube), from *galaub- dear, esteemed, from intensive prefix *ga- + *leubh- to care, desire,
like, love (see love (v.)). The prefix was altered on analogy of the verb believe. The distinction
of the final consonant from that of believe developed 15c.    The be-, which is not a natural prefix
of nouns, was prefixed on the analogy of the vb. (where it is naturally an intensive) .... [OED]
Belief used to mean trust in God, while faith meant loyalty to a person based on promise or duty (a
sense preserved in keep one's faith, in good (or bad) faith and in common usage of faithful,
faithless, which contain no notion of divinity). But faith, as cognate of Latin fides, took on the
religious sense beginning in 14c. translations, and belief had by 16c. become limited to mental
acceptance of something as true, from the religious use in the sense of things held to be true as a
matter of religious doctrine (a sense attested from early 13c.).


Bar Mitzvah

1861, in Judaism, male person who has completed his 13th year and thus reached the age of religious
responsibility, from Hebrew, literally son of command. As a name for the ceremony itself, by 1941.


bigot (n.)

1590s, sanctimonious person, religious hypocrite, from French bigot (12c.), of unknown origin.
Earliest French use of the word is as the name of a people apparently in southern Gaul, which led to
the now-doubtful, on phonetic grounds, theory that the word comes from Visigothus. The typical use
in Old French seems to have been as a derogatory nickname for Normans, the old theory (not
universally accepted) being that it springs from their frequent use of the Germanic oath bi God. But
OED dismisses in a three-exclamation-mark fury one fanciful version of the by god theory as absurdly
incongruous with facts. At the end, not much is left standing except Spanish bigote mustache, which
also has been proposed but not explained, and the chief virtue of which as a source seems to be
there is no evidence for or against it.    In support of the by God theory, as a surname Bigott,
Bygott are attested in Normandy and in England from the 11c., and French name etymology sources
(such as Dauzat) explain it as a derogatory name applied by the French to the Normans and
representing by god. The English were known as goddamns 200 years later in Joan of Arc's France, and
during World War I Americans serving in France were said to be known as les sommobiches (see also
son of a bitch). But the sense development in bigot is difficult to explain. According to Donkin,
the modern use first appears in French 16c. This and the earliest English sense, religious
hypocrite, especially a female one, might have been influenced by beguine and the words that cluster
around it. Sense extended 1680s to other than religious opinions.


superstition (n.)

early 13c., false religious belief; irrational faith in supernatural powers, from Latin
superstitionem (nominative superstitio) prophecy, soothsaying; dread of the supernatural, excessive
fear of the gods, religious belief based on fear or ignorance and considered incompatible with truth
or reason, literally a standing over, noun of action from past participle stem of superstare stand
on or over; survive, from super above (see super-) + stare to stand, from PIE root *sta- to stand
(see stet). There are many theories to explain the Latin sense developmen, but none has yet been
generally accepted.              (see superstitious). Originally especially of religion; sense of
unreasonable notion is from 1794.


brethren (n.)

alternative plural of brother (q.v.); predominant c.1200-1600s, but surviving now only in religious
usage.


juju (n.1)

object of religious veneration among West Africans, 1860, supposedly ultimately from French joujou
toy, plaything.


set (n.1)

collection of things, mid-15c., from Old French sette sequence, variant of secte religious
community, from Medieval Latin secta retinue, from Latin secta a following (see sect). [I]n
subsequent developments of meaning influenced by SET v.1 and apprehended as equivalent to 'number
set together' [OED]. The noun set was in Middle English, but only in the sense of religious sect
(late 14c.), which likely is the direct source of some modern meanings, such as group of persons
with shared status, habits, etc. (1680s).    Meaning complete collection of pieces is from 1680s.
Meaning group of pieces musicians perform at a club during 45 minutes (more or less) is from c.1925,
though it is found in a similar sense in 1580s. Set piece is from 1846 as grouping of people in a
work of visual art; from 1932 in reference to literary works.


heresy (n.)

an opinion of private men different from that of the catholick and orthodox church [Johnson],
c.1200, from Old French heresie (12c.), from Latin h&aelig;resis, school of thought, philosophical
sect, used by Christian writers for unorthodox sect or doctrine, from Greek hairesis a taking or
choosing, a choice, from haireisthai take, seize, middle voice of hairein to choose, of unknown
origin, perhaps from PIE *ser- (5) to seize (cognates: Hittite &#353;aru booty, Welsh herw booty).
The Greek word was used in the New Testament in reference to the Sadducees, Pharisees, and even the
Christians, as sects of Judaism, but in English bibles it usually is translated sect. Meaning
religious belief opposed to the orthodox doctrines of the Church evolved in Late Latin. Transferred
(non-religious) use from late 14c.


Swedenborgian

1791, from name of Emanuel Svedberg, Swedish mystic and religious philosopher (1668-1772). His
followers organized 1788 as The New Church.


ayatollah (n.)

honorific title for an Iranian Shiite religious leader, 1950, from Persian, from Arabic ayatu-llah,
literally miraculous sign of God.


Augustine (adj.)

c.1400 in reference to members of the religious order named for St. Augustine the Great (354-430),
bishop of Hippo.


opus (n.)

a work, composition, especially a musical one, 1809, from Latin opus a work, labor, exertion (source
of Italian opera, French oeuvre, Spanish obra), from PIE root *op- (1) to work, produce in abundance
(Germanic *ob-) to work, produce in abundance, originally of agriculture later extended to religious
acts (cognates: Sanskrit apas- work, religious act; Avestan hvapah- good deed; Old High German uoben
to start work, to practice, to honor; German &uuml;ben to exercise, practice; Dutch oefenen, Old
Norse &aelig;fa, Danish &oslash;ve to exercise, practice; Old English &aelig;fnan to perform, work,
do, afol power). The plural, seldom used as such, is opera.


spiritual (n.)

African-American religious song, 1866, from spiritual (adj.). Earlier a spiritual thing (1660s).


Almohades

12c. Muslim religious power that ruled Spain and North Africa, founded by Mohammed ibn Abdullah, the
name is literally the Unitarians, short for Arabic al-muwahhidun they who profess the unity (of
God), so called for their absolutist monotheism.


seeker (n.)

early 14c., agent noun from seek.  The religious sect of the Seekers is attested from 1645.


Taliban (n.)

Sunni fundamentalist movement begun in Afghanistan, Pashto plural of Arabic t&#257;lib student; so
called because it originated among students in Pakistani religious schools. Group formed c.1993.
Often incorrectly treated as singular in English.


umma (n.)

the Islamic community, founded by Muhammad and bound to one another by religious ties and
obligations, 1855, from Arabic 'umma people, community, nation.


heortology (n.)

study of religious feasts and calendars, 1900, from Greek heorte feast + -ology. The immediate
source of the English word is in French or German.


professed (adj.)

openly declared, 1560s, past participle adjective from profess. Earlier in a more specific sense of
having taken vows of a religious order (late 14c.). Related: Professedly.


Methodist (n.)

One of a new kind of puritans lately arisen, so called from their profession to live by rules and in
constant method [Johnson]. Protestant religious sect founded 1729 at Oxford University by John and
Charles Wesley, took that name almost from inception, but it had been used since at least 1686 for
various new methods of worship. Related: Methodism.


Quaker (n.)

1651, said to have been applied to them in 1650 by Justice Bennett at Derby, from George Fox's
admonition to his followers to tremble at the Word of the Lord; but the word was used earlier of
foreign sects given to fits of shaking during religious fervor, and that is likely the source here.
Either way, it never was an official name of the Religious Society of Friends. The word in a literal
sense is attested from early 15c., an agent noun from quake (v.).    There is not a word in the
Scripture, to put David's condition into rime and meeter: sometimes he quaked and trembled, and lay
roaring all the day long, that he watered his bed with his tears: and how can you sing these
conditions (but dishonour the Lord) and say all your bones quake, your flesh trembled, and that you
water your bed with your tears? when you live in pride and haughtiness, and pleasure, and
wantonness; etc. [A Brief Discovery of a threefold estate of Antichrist Now Extant in the world,
etc., an early Quaker work, London, 1653]    Quaker gun (1809, American English) was a log painted
black and propped up to look from a distance like a cannon, so called for the sect's noted pacifism.
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, has been known as the Quaker City since at least 1824. Related:
Quakerish; Quakeress (a female Quaker); Quakerism.


regular (n.)

c.1400, member of a religious order, from regular (adj.). Sense of soldier of a standing army is
from 1756. Meaning regular customer is from 1852; meaning leaded gasoline is from 1978.


secularism (n.)

doctrine that morality should be based on the well-being of man in the present life, without regard
to religious belief or a hereafter, 1846, from secular + -ism.


Lutheran

1521, from name of German religious reformer Martin Luther (1483-1546); used by Catholics 16c. in
reference to all Protestants, regardless of sect. Related: Lutheranism.


toleration (n.)

1510s, permission granted by authority, license, from Middle French tol&eacute;ration (15c.), from
Latin tolerationem (nominative toleratio) a bearing, supporting, enduring, noun of action from past
participle stem of tolerare to endure, sustain, support, suffer, literally to bear, from PIE *tele-
to bear, carry (see extol).    Meaning forbearance, sufferance is from 1580s. The specific religious
sense is from 1609; as in Act of Toleration (1689), statute granting freedom of religious worship
(with conditions) to dissenting Protestants in England. In this it means recognition of the right of
private judgment in matters of faith and worship; liberty granted by the government to preach and
worship as one pleases; equality under the law without regard to religion.    If any man err from
the right way, it is his own misfortune, no injury to thee; nor therefore art thou to punish him in
the things of this life because thou supposest he will be miserable in that which is to come.
Nobody, therefore, in fine, neither single persons nor churches, nay, nor even commonwealths, have
any just title to invade the civil rights and worldly goods of each other upon pretence of religion.
[John Locke, Letter Concerning Toleration, 1689]   <hr />   Before any man can be considered as a
member of Civil Society, he must be considered as a subject of the Governour of the Universe: And if
a member of Civil Society, do it with a saving of his allegiance to the Universal Sovereign. We
maintain therefore that in matters of Religion, no man's right is abridged by the institution of
Civil Society and that Religion is wholly exempt from its cognizance. [James Madison, Memorial and
Remonstrance Against Religious Assessments, 1785]   <hr />   Unlimited tolerance must lead to the
disappearance of tolerance. If we extend unlimited tolerance even to those who are intolerant, if we
are not prepared to defend a tolerant society against the onslaught of the intolerant, then the
tolerant will be destroyed, and tolerance with them. [Karl Popper, The Open Society and Its Enemies,
1962]


Hussite

1530s, follower of John Huss, Bohemian religious reformer burnt in 1415. His name is an abbreviation
of the name of his native village, Husinec, literally goose-pen.


hickscorner (n.)

libertine scoffer at religion and the religious, c.1530, from the name of the character in a work of
that name printed c.1512 by Wynkyn de Worde; from Hick, the common masc. nickname, + scorner.


Taoism (n.)

religious system founded by Lao Tzu (b. 604 B.C.E.), 1838, from Chinese tao way, path, right way (of
life), reason + -ism.


separatist

c.1600, from separate + -ist. First used in a denominational religious sense; of political
separations from 1871.


sharia (n.)

Islamic religious law, 1855, from Arabic shari'ah the revealed law, from shar' revelation.


sundae (n.)

1897, American English, thought to be an alteration of Sunday, perhaps re-spelled in deference to
religious feelings; but the reason for the name is uncertain; perhaps ice cream left over from
Sunday, on sale later. For a fuller account of the speculations, see H.L. Mencken, The American
Language, Supplement I (1945), pp.376-7.


sisterhood (n.)

state of being a sister, late 14c., from sister + -hood. Meaning a society of sisters (usually a
religious order) is from 1590s; sense of women having some common characteristic or calling is from
c.1600.


Ephesus

Greek city in ancient Asia Minor, center of worship for Artemis, Greek Ephesos, traditionally
derived from ephoros overseer, in reference to its religious significance, but this might be folk
etymology.


thuggery (n.)

1839, from thug + -ery. Also thugee, from the native Hindi name for the system of religious
assassination practiced by the thugs.


professional (adj.)

early 15c., of religious orders; 1747 of careers (especially of the skilled or learned trades from
c.1793); see profession. In sports, opposed to amateur, from 1846. Related: Professionally.


Bethesda

1857, name of a pool in Jerusalem (John v:2), from Greek Bethesda, from Aramaic beth hesda house of
mercy, or perhaps place of flowing water. Popular as a name for religious meeting houses among some
Protestant denominations.


reformist (n.)

1580s, originally religious; from reform + -ist. Political sense is from 1640s. Related: Reformism.


