reminiscence (n.)

1580s, act of remembering, from Middle French reminiscence (14c.) and directly from Late Latin
reminiscentia remembrance, recollection (a loan-translation of Greek anamnesis), from Latin
reminiscentem (nominative reminiscens), present participle of reminisci remember, recall to mind,
from re- again (see re-) + minisci to remember, from root of mens mind, from PIE root *men- mind,
understanding, reason (see mind (n.)). Meaning a recollection of something past is attested from
1811.


Piggly-Wiggly

chain of self-service grocery stores, started 1916 in Memphis. According to founder's reminiscence
from 1921 arbitrary coinage, simply something different from anything used before [Current Opinion].


reminisce (v.)

1829, to recollect, back-formation from reminiscence. Meaning indulge in reminiscences is from 1871.
Somewhat colloquial [OED]. Related: Reminisced; reminiscing.


Kriss Kringle

1830, Christ-kinkle (in a Pennsylvania German context, and as a reminiscence of times past, so
probably at least a generation older in that setting), from German Christkindlein, Christkind'l
Christ child. Properly Baby Jesus, not Santa Claus.


reminiscent (adj.)

1705, from Latin reminiscentem (nominative reminiscens), present participle of reminisci call to
mind, remember (see reminiscence). Related: Reminiscential (1640s).


cheese (n.1)

Old English cyse (West Saxon), cese (Anglian) cheese, from West Germanic *kasjus (cognates: Old
Saxon kasi, Old High German chasi, German K&auml;se, Middle Dutch case, Dutch kaas), from Latin
caseus cheese (source of Italian cacio, Spanish queso, Irish caise, Welsh caws).    Of unknown
origin; perhaps from a PIE root *kwat- to ferment, become sour (cognates: Prakrit chasi buttermilk;
Old Church Slavonic kvasu leaven; fermented drink, kyselu sour, -kyseti to turn sour; Czech kysati
to turn sour, rot; Sanskrit kvathati boils, seethes; Gothic hwa&thorn;jan foam). Also compare
fromage. Old Norse ostr, Danish ost, Swedish ost are related to Latin ius broth, sauce, juice.
Earliest references would be to compressed curds of milk used as food; pressed or molded cheeses
with rinds are 14c. Transferred to other cheese-like substances by 1530s. As a photographer's word
to make subjects hold a smile, it is attested from 1930, but in a reminiscence of schoolboy days,
which suggests an earlier use. Probably for the forced smile involved in making the -ee- sound.
Green cheese is that newly made; the notion that the moon is made of green cheese as a type of a
ridiculous assertion is from 1520s. To make cheeses was a schoolgirls' amusement (1835) of wheeling
rapidly so one's petticoats blew out in a circle then dropping down so they came to rest inflated
and resembling a wheel of cheese; hence, used figuratively for a deep curtsey.


