remittance (n.)

1705; see remit + -ance. Earlier in same sense were remitment (1610s of offenses; 1670s of money
sent); remital (1590s).


remitter (n.)

1540s, a legal principle, from Old French remitter, noun use of infinitive, from Latin remittere
send back (see remit). For legalese noun use of French infinitives, see waiver.


remit (v.)

late 14c., to forgive, pardon, from Latin remittere send back, slacken, let go back, abate, from re-
back (see re-) + mittere to send (see mission). Meaning allow to remain unpaid is from mid-15c.
Meaning send money (to someone) first recorded 1630s. Related: Remitted; remitting.


unremitted (adj.)

1640s, from un- (1) not + past participle of remit (v.).


unremitting (adj.)

1728, from un- (1) not + present participle of remit (v.). Related: Unremittingly.


remiss (adj.)

early 15c., weak, dissolved, from Latin remissus relaxed, languid; negligent, past participle of
remittere slacken, abate, let go (see remit). Meaning characterized by lack of strictness is
attested from mid-15c.; that of characterized by negligence is from mid-15c.


condone (v.)

1857, from Latin condonare to give up, remit, permit, from com-, intensive prefix (see com-), +
donare to give (see donation). Originally a legal term in the Matrimonial Causes Act, which made
divorce a civil matter in Britain. Related: Condoned; condoning.


remise (v.)

in law, give up, surrender, make over to another, late 15c., from noun remise, from Old French
remise, past participle of remettre to send back, from Latin remittere (see remit). Related:
Remised; remising.


remission (n.)

c.1200, forgiveness or pardon (of sins), from Old French remission forgiveness (of sins), relief
(12c.), from Latin remissionem (nominative remissio) relaxation, diminishing, lit. a sending back,
sending away, noun of action from past participle stem of remittere slacken, let go, abate (see
remit). Used of diseases since early 15c.


pardon (n.)

late 13c., papal indulgence, from Old French pardon, from pardoner to grant; forgive (11c., Modern
French pardonner), to grant, forgive, from Vulgar Latin *perdonare to give wholeheartedly, to remit,
from Latin per- through, thoroughly (see per) + donare give, present (see donation).    Meaning
passing over an offense without punishment is from c.1300, also in the strictly ecclesiastical
sense; sense of pardon for a civil or criminal offense; release from penalty or obligation is from
late 14c. earlier in Anglo-French. Weaker sense of excuse for a minor fault is attested from 1540s.


allay (v.)

Old English alecgan to put down, remit, give up, a Germanic compound (cognates: Gothic uslagjan, Old
High German irleccan, German erlegen), from a- down, aside + lecgan to lay (see lay).    Early
Middle English pronunciations of -y- and -g- were not always distinct, and the word was confused in
Middle English with various senses of Romanic-derived alloy and allege, especially the latter in an
obsolete sense of to lighten, from Latin ad- to + levis (see lever).  Amid the overlapping of
meanings that thus arose, there was developed a perplexing network of uses of allay and allege, that
belong entirely to no one of the original vbs., but combine the senses of two or more of them.
[OED]The double -l- is 17c., a mistaken Latinism. Related: Allayed; allaying.


release (v.)

c.1300, to withdraw, revoke (a decree, etc.), cancel, lift; remit, from Old French relaissier,
relesser to relinquish, quit, let go, leave behind, abandon, acquit, variant of relacher release,
relax, from Latin relaxare loosen, stretch out (see relax), source also of Spanish relajar, Italian
relassare.    Meaning alleviate, ease is mid-14c., as is sense of free from (duty, etc.); exonerate.
From late 14c. as grant remission, forgive; set free from imprisonment, military service, etc. Also
give up, relinquish, surrender. In law, c.1400, to grant a release of property. Of press reports,
attested from 1904; of motion pictures, from 1912; of music recordings, from 1962. As a euphemism
for to dismiss, fire from a job it is attested in American English since 1904. Related: Released;
releasing.


