remission (n.)

c.1200, forgiveness or pardon (of sins), from Old French remission forgiveness (of sins), relief
(12c.), from Latin remissionem (nominative remissio) relaxation, diminishing, lit. a sending back,
sending away, noun of action from past participle stem of remittere slacken, let go, abate (see
remit). Used of diseases since early 15c.


relaxation (n.)

late 14c., rupture; mid-15c., remission of a burden or penalty, from Old French relaxacion (14c.)
and directly from Latin relaxationem (nominative relaxatio) an easing, mitigation, relaxation, noun
of action from past participle stem of relaxare (see relax). Meaning relief from hard work or
ordinary cares is from 1540s.


absolution (n.)

remission, forgiveness, c.1200, from Old French absolucion, earlier assolucion, from Latin
absolutionem (nominative absolutio) completion, acquittal, noun of action from past participle stem
of absolvere to absolve (see absolve). Originally of sins; in general use from c.1400.


release (n.)

early 14c., abatement of distress; means of deliverance, from Old French relais, reles (12c.), a
back-formation from relesser, relaissier (see release (v.)). In law, mid-14c., transferring of
property or a right to another; late 14c. as release from an obligation; remission of a duty,
tribute, etc. Meaning act and manner of releasing (a bow, etc.) is from 1871. Sense of action of
publication is from 1907.


dispense (v.)

early 14c., from Old French dispenser give out (13c.), from Latin dispensare disburse, administer,
distribute (by weight), frequentative of dispendere pay out, from dis- out (see dis-) + pendere to
pay, weigh (see pendant).    In Medieval Latin, dispendere was used in the ecclesiastical sense of
grant license to do what is forbidden or omit what is required (a power of popes, bishops, etc.),
and thus acquired a sense of grant remission from punishment or exemption from law, hence to do away
with (1570s), do without (c.1600). Older sense is preserved in dispensary. Related: Dispensed;
dispensing.


indulgence (n.)

mid-14c., freeing from temporal punishment for sin, from Old French indulgence or directly from
Latin indulgentia complaisance, fondness, remission, from indulgentem (nominative indulgens)
indulgent, kind, tender, fond, present participle of indulgere be kind, yield, of unknown origin;
perhaps from in- in + derivative of PIE root *dlegh- to engage oneself.    Sense of gratification of
another's desire or humor is attested from late 14c. That of yielding to one's inclinations
(technically self-indulgence) is from 1640s. In British history, Indulgence also refers to grants of
certain liberties to Nonconformists under Charles II and James II, as special favors rather than
legal rights; specifically the Declarations of Indulgence of 1672, 1687, and 1688 in England and
1669, 1672, and 1687 in Scotland.


release (v.)

c.1300, to withdraw, revoke (a decree, etc.), cancel, lift; remit, from Old French relaissier,
relesser to relinquish, quit, let go, leave behind, abandon, acquit, variant of relacher release,
relax, from Latin relaxare loosen, stretch out (see relax), source also of Spanish relajar, Italian
relassare.    Meaning alleviate, ease is mid-14c., as is sense of free from (duty, etc.); exonerate.
From late 14c. as grant remission, forgive; set free from imprisonment, military service, etc. Also
give up, relinquish, surrender. In law, c.1400, to grant a release of property. Of press reports,
attested from 1904; of motion pictures, from 1912; of music recordings, from 1962. As a euphemism
for to dismiss, fire from a job it is attested in American English since 1904. Related: Released;
releasing.


jubilee (n.)

late 14c., in the Old Testament sense, from Old French jubileu jubille; anniversary; rejoicing, from
Late Latin jubilaeus the jubilee year, originally an adjective, of the jubilee, altered (by
association with Latin jubilare to shout with joy) from Greek iabelaios, from iobelos, from Hebrew
yobhel jubilee, formerly a trumpet, ram's horn, literally ram.    The original notion was of a year
of emancipation of slaves and restoration of lands, to be celebrated every 50th year (Levit. xxv:9);
it was proclaimed by the sounding of a ram's horn on the Day of Atonement. The Catholic Church sense
of a period for remission of sin penalties in exchange for pilgrimages, alms, etc. was begun in 1300
by Boniface VIII. The general sense of season of rejoicing is first recorded mid-15c., though
through early 20c. the word kept its specific association with 50th anniversaries. As a type of
African-American folk song, it is attested from 1872.


