reminiscent (adj.)

1705, from Latin reminiscentem (nominative reminiscens), present participle of reminisci call to
mind, remember (see reminiscence). Related: Reminiscential (1640s).


Cape Cod

named 1602 by English navigator Bartholomew Gosnold for the abundance of fish his men caught there.
Cape Cod, in reference to houses reminiscent of New England architecture, is attested from 1916.


carpaccio (n.)

raw meat or fish served as an appetizer, late 20c., from Italian, often connected to the name of
Renaissance painter Vittore Carpaccio (c.1460-1526) but without any plausible explanation except
perhaps that his pictures often feature an orange-red hue reminiscent of some raw meat.


squirrely (adj.)

also squirrelly, 1895, abounding in squirrels; 1910 as reminiscent in some way of a squirrel, from
squirrel (n.) + -y (2). Earlier was squirrelish (1834). Related: Squirreliness.


Louis

masc. proper name, from French Louis, from Old French Loois, probably via Medieval Latin Ludovicus,
a Latinization of Old High German Hluodowig, literally famous in war (cognate with Clovis; for
etymology, see Ludwig). Louis Quatorze (1855) refers to styles reminiscent of the time of King Louis
XIV of France (1643-1715).


nun (n.)

Old English nunne nun, vestal, pagan priestess, woman devoted to religious life under vows, from
Late Latin nonna nun, tutor, originally (along with masc. nonnus) a term of address to elderly
persons, perhaps from children's speech, reminiscent of nana (compare Sanskrit nona, Persian nana
mother, Greek nanna aunt, Serbo-Croatian nena mother, Italian nonna, Welsh nain grandmother; see
nanny).


chubby (adj.)

1610s, literally resembling a chub, from chub, the short, thick type of fish + -y (2). Perhaps
influenced by Old Norse kumba log, kumben stumpy.    ME chubbe ... was also used of a lazy,
spiritless fellow; a rustic, simpleton; dolt, fool (1558), whilst Bailey has Chub, a Jolt-head, a
great-headed, full-cheeked Fellow, a description reminiscent of that of the chevin, another name for
the chub ... Thus the nickname may have meant either short and thick, dumpy like a chub, or of the
nature of a chub, dull and clownish. [Dictionary of English Surnames]


