remote (adj.)

mid-15c., from Middle French remot or directly from Latin remotus afar off, remote, distant in
place, past participle of removere move back or away (see remove (v.)). Related: Remotely;
remoteness. Remote control fact of controlling from a distance is recorded from 1904; as a device
which allows this from 1920.


far (adj.)

Old English feorr far, remote, distant, to a great distance, long ago, from Proto-Germanic *ferro
(cognates: Old Saxon ferr, Old Frisian fer, Old Norse fjarre, Dutch ver, Old High German ferro,
German fern, Gothic fairra), from PIE *per- through, across, beyond (cognates: Sanskrit parah
farther, remote, ulterior, Hittite para outside of, Greek pera across, beyond, Latin per through,
Old Irish ire farther). Far East China, Japan, and surrounding regions is from 1838.


removed (adj.)

distant in relationship (by some expressed degree), 1540s, from past participle of remove (v.).
Meaning remote, separated, secluded is from 1610s.


outlying (adj.)

outside certain limits, 1660s, from out + present participle of lie (v.2). Meaning remote from the
center is first recorded 1680s.


far out (adj.)

also far-out, 1887, remote, distant; from far + out. Slang sense of excellent, wonderful, is from
1954, originally in jazz talk.


boondocks (n.)

1910s, from Tagalog bundok mountain. Adopted by occupying American soldiers in the Philippines for
remote and wild place. Reinforced or re-adopted during World War II. Hence, also boondockers shoes
suited for rough terrain, originally (1944) U.S. services slang word for field boots.


atavic (adj.)

pertaining to a remote ancestor, 1866, from Latin atavus ancestor (see atavism) + -ic.


recess (n.)

1530s, act of receding, from Latin recessus a going back, retreat, from recessum, past participle of
recedere to recede (see recede). Meaning hidden or remote part first recorded 1610s; that of period
of stopping from usual work is from 1620s, probably from parliamentary notion of recessing into
private chambers.


longinquity (n.)

remoteness, 1540s, from Latin longinquitas length, extent, duration, from longinquus long,
extensive, remote, distant, from longus (see long (adj.)) -inquus.


saturnine (adj.)

gloomy, morose, sluggish, grave, mid-15c., literally born under the influence of the planet Saturn,
from Middle English Saturne (see Saturn) + -ine (1). Medieval physiology believed these
characteristics to be caused by the astrological influence of the planet Saturn, which was the most
remote from the Sun (in the limited knowledge of the times) and thus coldest and slowest in its
revolution.


inland (adj.)

Old English inn lond land around the mansion of an estate, from in + land (n.). Meaning interior
parts of a country, remote from the sea or borders is from 1570s. As an adjective, of or pertaining
to interior parts of a country, from 1550s.


distant (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French distant (14c.), from Latin distantem (nominative distans), present
participle of distare to stand apart, be remote (see distance (n.)). Related: Distantly.


eschatology (n.)

1844, from Greek eskhatos last, furthest, uttermost, extreme, most remote (from ex out of, Boeotian
es-; see ex-) + -ology. Originally in theology, the study of the four last things: death, judgment,
heaven, hell. Related: Eschatological; eschatologically.


ulterior (adj.)

1640s, on the other side of, from Latin ulterior more distant, more remote, farther, on the farther
side, comparative of *ulter beyond (see ultra-). The sense not at present in view or consideration
(as in ulterior motives) is attested from 1735.


dissident (adj.)

1530s, from Latin dissidentem (nominative dissidens), present participle of dissidere to be remote;
disagree, be removed from, literally to sit apart, from dis- apart (see dis-) + sedere to sit (see
sedentary).


devious (adj.)

1590s, out of the way, from Latin devius out of the way, remote, off the main road, from de via (see
deviate). Originally in the Latin literal sense; figurative sense of deceitful is first recorded
1630s. Related: Deviously; deviousness. Figurative senses of the Latin word were retired,
sequestered, wandering in the byways, foolish, inconsistent.


ultimatum (n.)

final demand, 1731, from Modern Latin, from Medieval Latin ultimatum a final statement, noun use of
Latin adjective ultimatum last possible, final, neuter of ultimatus (see ultimate). The Latin plural
ultimata was used by the Romans as a noun, what is farthest or most remote; the last, the end. In
slang c.1820s, ultimatum was used for the buttocks.


missile (n.)

thing thrown or discharged as a weapon, is 1650s, from missile (adj.), 1610s, capable of being
thrown, chiefly in phrase missile weapon, from French missile and directly from Latin missilis that
may be thrown or hurled (also, in plural, as a noun, weapons that can be thrown, darts, javelins),
from missus a throwing, hurling, past participle of mittere to send (see mission). Sense of self-
propelled rocket or bomb is first recorded 1738; the modern remote guidance projectile so called
from 1945.


foreign (adj.)

mid-13c., ferren, foreyne out of doors, from Old French forain strange, foreign; outer, external,
outdoor; remote, out-of-the-way (12c.), from Medieval Latin foranus on the outside, exterior, from
Latin foris outside, literally out of doors, related to for1s door, from PIE *dhwor-ans-, from root
*dhwer- door, doorway (see door). Spelling altered 17c. perhaps by influence of reign, sovereign.
Replaced native fremd. Sense of not in one's own land is first attested late 14c.


rover (n.)

late 14c., sea-robber, pirate, from Middle Dutch rover robber, predator, plunderer, especially in
zeerovere pirate, literally sea-robber, from roven to rob, from Middle Dutch roof spoil, plunder,
related to Old English reaf spoil, plunder, reafian to reave (see reave (v.)). Meaning remote-
controlled surface vehicle is from 1970.


redoubt (n.)

also redout, small, enclosed military work, c.1600, from French redoute (17c.), from Italian
ridotto, earlier ridotta, place of retreat, from Medieval Latin reductus place of refuge, retreat,
noun use of past participle of reducere to lead or bring back (see reduce). The -b- was added by
influence of unrelated English redoubt (v.) to dread, fear (see redoubtable). As an adjective, Latin
reductus meant withdrawn, retired; remote, distant.


topaz (n.)

colored crystalline gem, late 13c., from Old French topace (11c.), from Latin topazus (source also
of Spanish topacio, Italian topazio), from Greek topazos, topazion, of obscure origin. Pliny says it
was named for a remote island in the Red or Arabian Sea, where it was mined, the island so named for
being hard to find (from Greek topazein to divine, to try to locate); but this might be folk
etymology, and instead the word might be from the root of Sanskrit tapas heat, fire. In the Middle
Ages used for almost any yellow stone. To the Greeks and Romans, possibly yellow olivine or yellow
sapphire. In modern science, fluo-silicate of aluminum. As a color name from 1908.


Saturn

Old English S&aelig;tern, a Roman god, also most remote planet (then known), from Latin Saturnus,
originally a name of an Italic god of agriculture, possibly from Etruscan. Derivation from Latin
serere (past participle satus) to sow is said to be folk-etymology.    An ancient Italic deity,
popularly believed to have appeared in Italy in the reign of Janus, and to have instructed the
people in agriculture, gardening, etc., thus elevating them from barbarism to social order and
civilization. His reign was sung by the poets as the golden age. [Century Dictionary]    Identified
with Greek Kronos, father of Zeus. Also the alchemical name for lead (late 14c.). In Akkadian, the
planet was kaiamanu, literally constant, enduring, hence Hebrew kiyyun, Arabic and Persian kaiwan
Saturn. Related: Saturnian.


niece (n.)

c.1300, from Old French niece niece, granddaughter (12c., Modern French ni&egrave;ce), earlier
niepce, from Latin neptia (also source of Portuguese neta, Spanish nieta), from neptis
granddaughter, in Late Latin niece, fem. of nepos grandson, nephew (see nephew). Replaced Old
English nift, from Proto-Germanic *neftiz, from the same PIE root (Old English also used
bro&#240;ordohter and nefene).    Until c.1600, it also commonly meant a granddaughter or any remote
female descendant. Cognate with Spanish nieta, Old Lithuanian nepte, Sanskrit naptih granddaughter;
Czech net, Old Irish necht, Welsh nith, German Nichte niece.


out (adv.)

Old English ut out, without, outside, common Germanic (Old Norse, Old Frisian, Old Saxon, Gothic ut,
Middle Dutch uut, Dutch uit, Old High German uz, German aus), from PIE root *ud- up, out, up away
(cognates: Sanskrit ut up, out, uttarah higher, upper, later, northern; Avestan uz- up, out, Old
Irish ud- out, Latin usque all the way to, without interruption, Greek hysteros the latter, Russian
vy- out). Meaning into public notice is from 1540s. As an adjective from c.1200. Meaning unconscious
is attested from 1898, originally in boxing. Sense of not popular or modern is from 1966. As a
preposition from mid-13c.    Sense in baseball (1860) was earlier in cricket (1746). Adverbial
phrase out-and-out thoroughly is attested from early 14c.; adjective usage is attested from 1813;
out-of-the-way (adj.) remote, secluded is attested from late 15c. Out-of-towner one not from a
certain place is from 1911. Shakespeare's It out-herods Herod (Hamlet) reflects Herod as stock
braggart and bully in old religious drama and was widely imitated 19c. Out to lunch insane is
student slang from 1955; out of this world excellent is from 1938; out of sight excellent, superior
is from 1891.


way (n.)

Old English weg road, path; course of travel; room, space, freedom of movement; also, figuratively,
course of life especially, in plural, habits of life as regards moral, ethical, or spiritual
choices, from Proto-Germanic *wegaz (cognates: Old Saxon, Dutch weg, Old Norse vegr, Old Frisian
wei, Old High German weg, German Weg, Gothic wigs way), from PIE *wegh- to move (see weigh).    From
c.1300 as manner in which something occurs. Adverbial constructions attested since Middle English
include this way in this direction, that way in that direction, both from late 15c.; out of the way
remote (c.1300). In the way so placed as to impede is from 1560s.    From the course of life sense
comes way of life (c.1600), get (or have) one's way (1590s), have it (one's) way (1709). From the
course of travel sense comes the figurative go separate ways (1837); one way or (the) other (1550s);
have it both ways (1847); and the figurative sense of come a long way (1922).    Adverbial phrase
all the way completely, to conclusion is by 1915; sexual sense implied by 1924. Make way is from
c.1200. Ways and means resources at a person's disposal is attested from early 15c. Way out means of
exit is from 1926. Encouragement phrase way to go is short for that's the way to go.


space (n.)

c.1300, extent or area; room (to do something), a shortening of Old French espace period of time,
distance, interval (12c.), from Latin spatium room, area, distance, stretch of time, of unknown
origin (also source of Spanish espacio, Italian spazio).    From early 14c. as a place, also amount
or extent of time. From mid-14c. as distance, interval of space; from late 14c. as ground, land,
territory; extension in three dimensions; distance between two or more points. From early 15c. as
size, bulk, also an assigned position. Typographical sense is attested from 1670s (typewriter space-
bar is from 1876, earlier space-key, 1860).    Astronomical sense of stellar depths apparently is
first recorded 1667 in Paradise Lost, common from 1890s. Space age is attested from 1946. Many
compounds first appeared in science fiction and speculative writing, such as spaceship (1894, A
Journey in Other Worlds, John Jacob Astor); spacecraft (1928, Popular Science); space travel (1931);
space station (1936, Rockets Through Space); spaceman (1942, Thrilling Wonder Stories). Space race
attested from 1959. Space shuttle attested by 1970.    Space isn't remote at all. It's only an
hour's drive away if your car could go straight upwards. [Sir Fred Hoyle, London Observer, 1979]


