remunerative (adj.)

1620s, inclined to remunerate, from remunerate + -ive. From 1670s as rewarding; 1859 as profitable.
Related: Remuneratively; remunerativeness.


Micawber (n.)

as a type of a childishly impractical man living in optimistic fantasy, from the character of
Wilkins Micawber in Dickens' David Copperfield (1850).    I am at present, my dear Copperfield,
engaged in the sale of corn upon commission. It is not an avocation of a remunerative description --
in other words it does not pay -- and some temporary embarrassments of a pecuniary nature have been
the consequence. I am however delighted to add that I have now an immediate prospect of something
turning up ....


work (n.)

Old English weorc, worc something done, discreet act performed by someone, action (whether voluntary
or required), proceeding, business; that which is made or manufactured, products of labor, also
physical labor, toil; skilled trade, craft, or occupation; opportunity of expending labor in some
useful or remunerative way; also military fortification, from Proto-Germanic *werkan (cognates: Old
Saxon, Old Frisian, Dutch werk, Old Norse verk, Middle Dutch warc, Old High German werah, German
Werk, Gothic gawaurki), from PIE *werg-o-, from root *werg- to do (see organ).    Work is less
boring than amusing oneself. [Baudelaire, Mon Coeur mis a nu, 1862]    In Old English, the noun also
had the sense of fornication. Meaning physical effort, exertion is from c.1200; meaning scholarly
labor or its productions is from c.1200; meaning artistic labor or its productions is from c.1200.
Meaning labor as a measurable commodity is from c.1300. Meaning embroidery, stitchery, needlepoint
is from late 14c. Work of art attested by 1774 as artistic creation, earlier (1728) artifice,
production of humans (as opposed to nature). Work ethic recorded from 1959. To be out of work
unemployed is from 1590s. To make clean work of is from c.1300; to make short work of is from 1640s.
Proverbial expression many hands make light work is from c.1300. To have (one's) work cut out for
one is from 1610s; to have it prepared and prescribed, hence, to have all one can handle. Work in
progress is from 1930 in a general sense, earlier as a specific term in accountancy and
parliamentary procedure.


