render (n.)

1580s, agent noun from rend (v.).


rendering (n.)

mid-15c., action of restoring, verbal noun from render (v.). Meaning a translation is from 1640s;
that of extracting or melting of fat is from 1792. Visual arts sense of reproduction, representation
is from 1862.


render (v.)

late 14c., repeat, say again, from Old French rendre give back, present, yield (10c.), from Vulgar
Latin *rendere (formed by dissimilation or on analogy of its antonym, prendre to take), from Latin
reddere give back, return, restore, from red- back (see re-) + comb. form of dare to give (see date
(n.1)).    Meaning hand over, deliver is recorded from late 14c.; to return (thanks, a verdict,
etc.) is attested from late 15c.; meaning represent, depict is first attested 1590s. Irregular
retention of -er in a French verb in English is perhaps to avoid confusion with native rend (v.) or
by influence of a Middle English legalese noun render a payment of rent, from French noun use of the
infinitive. Related: Rendered; rendering.


rent (n.1)

payment for use of property, mid-12c., a legal sense, originally income, revenue (late Old English),
from Old French rente payment due; profit, income, from Vulgar Latin *rendita, noun use of fem. past
participle of rendere to render (see render (v.)).


account (v.)

c.1300, to count, enumerate, from Old French aconter to count, render account (Modern French
conter), from a to (see ad-) + conter to count, tell (see count (v.)). Meaning to reckon for money
given or received, render a reckoning, is from late 14c.; sense of to explain (c.1710) is from
notion of answer for money held in trust. Transferred sense of value is from late 14c. Related:
Accounted; accounting.


sanctify (v.)

late 14c., seintefie to consecrate, from Old French saintefier sanctify (12c.,   Modern French
sanctifier), from Late Latin sanctificare to make holy, from sanctus holy (see saint (n.)) + root of
facere to make (see factitious). Form altered in English c.1400 to conform with Latin. Meaning to
render holy or legitimate by religious sanction is from c.1400; transferred sense of to render
worthy of respect is from c.1600. Related: Sanctified; sanctifying.


hamstring (v.)

1640s, to disable, render useless, a figurative verbal extension from the noun hamstring tendon at
the back of the knee (1560s), from ham bend of the knee (see ham (n.1)) + string (n.). Cutting this
would render a person or animal lame. Related: Hamstrung.    [I]n hamstring, -string is not the verb
string; we do not string the ham, but do something to the tendon called the hamstring; the verb,
that is, is made not from the two words ham &amp; string, but from the noun hamstring. It must
therefore make hamstringed. [Fowler]


anima mundi

1670s, Medieval Latin, literally soul of the world; used by Abelard to render Greek psyche tou
kosmou.


superannuate (v.)

1640s, render obsolete, back-formation from superannuated. Meaning impair or disqualify by old age
is from 1690s. Related: Superannuating.


serve (v.)

late 12c., to render habitual obedience to, also minister, give aid, give help, from Old French
servir to do duty toward, show devotion to; set table, serve at table; offer, provide with, from
Latin servire be a servant, be in service, be enslaved; figuratively be devoted; be governed by;
comply with; conform; flatter, originally be a slave, related to servus slave, perhaps from Etruscan
(compare Etruscan proper names Servi, Serve, Latinized as Servius).    By c.1200 also as to be in
the service of, perform a service for; attend upon, be personal servant to; be a slave; owe
allegiance to; officiate at Mass or other religious rites; from early 13c. as set food at table;
mid-14c. as to wait on (customers). From late 14c. as treat (someone or something) in some fashion.
To serve (someone) right to treat as he deserves is recorded from 1580s.    He no schuld neuer wond
To seruen him fro fot to hond  [Amis and Amiloun, c.1330]    Sense of be useful, be beneficial, be
suitable for a purpose or function is from early 14c.; that of take the place or meet the needs of,
be equal to the task is from late 14c.; that of suffice is from mid-15c. Meaning render active
military service is from 1510s. Sporting sense, in tennis, badminton, etc., first recorded 1580s.
Legal sense present (a writ, warrant,etc.), give legal notice of is from early 15c.


cathexis (n.)

1922, from Latinized form of Greek kathexis holding, retention, from PIE root *segh- to hold (see
scheme (n.)). Used by psychologists to render Freud's (libido)besetzung.


dwarf (v.)

to render dwarfish, 1620s, from dwarf (n.); sense of to cause to look small is from 1850. Related:
Dwarfed; dwarfing.


homogenize (v.)

make similar, 1742, from homogenous + -ize. Sense of render milk uniform in consistency is from
1901. Related: Homogenized; homogenizing.


cloud (v.)

early 15c., overspread with clouds, cover, darken, from cloud (n.). From 1510s as to render dim or
obscure; 1590s as to overspread with gloom. Intransitive sense of become cloudy is from 1560s.
Related: Clouded; clouding.


undercut (v.)

late 14c., to cut down or off, from under + cut (v.). In the commercial sense of sell at lower
prices (or work at lower wages) it is first attested 1884. Figurative sense of render unstable,
undermine is recorded from 1955, from earlier literal meaning cut so as to leave the upper portion
larger than the lower (1874).


passion (n.)

late 12c., sufferings of Christ on the Cross, from Old French passion Christ's passion, physical
suffering (10c.), from Late Latin passionem (nominative passio) suffering, enduring, from past
participle stem of Latin pati to suffer, endure, possibly from PIE root *pe(i)- to hurt (cognates:
Sanskrit pijati reviles, scorns, Greek pema suffering, misery, woe, Old English feond enemy, devil,
Gothic faian to blame).    Sense extended to sufferings of martyrs, and suffering generally, by
early 13c.; meaning strong emotion, desire is attested from late 14c., from Late Latin use of passio
to render Greek pathos. Replaced Old English &thorn;olung (used in glosses to render Latin passio),
literally suffering, from &thorn;olian (v.) to endure.    Sense of sexual love first attested 1580s;
that of strong liking, enthusiasm, predilection is from 1630s. The passion-flower so called from
1630s.The name passionflower -- flos passionis -- arose from the supposed resemblance of the corona
to the crown of thorns, and of the other parts of the flower to the nails, or wounds, while the five
sepals and five petals were taken to symbolize the ten apostles -- Peter ... and Judas ... being
left out of the reckoning. [Encyclopaedia Britannica, 1885]


environment (n.)

c.1600, state of being environed (see environ + -ment); sense of nature, conditions in which a
person or thing lives first recorded 1827 (used by Carlyle to render German Umgebung); specialized
ecology sense first recorded 1956.


wind (v.2)

to perceive by scent, get wind of, c.1400, from wind (n.1). Of horns, etc., make sound by blowing
through, from 1580s. Meaning tire, put out of breath; render temporarily breathless is from 1802,
originally in pugilism, in reference to the effect of a punch in the stomach. Related: Winded;
winding.


Erechtheus

legendary first king and founder of Athens, from Latin Erechtheus, from Greek Erekhtheos, literally
render, shaker (of the earth), from erekhthein to rend, break, shatter, shake. Hence, Erechtheum,
the name of a temple on the Athenian acropolis.


stun (v.)

early 14c., to daze or render unconscious (from a blow, powerful emotion, etc.), probably a
shortening of Old French estoner to stun (see astonish). Related: Stunned; stunning.


sober (v.)

late 14c., reduce to a quiet condition (transitive), from sober (adj.). Meaning render grave or
serious is from 1726. Intransitive sense of become sober (since 1847 often with up) is from 1820.
Related: Sobered; sobering.


sterilize (v.)

destroy the fertility of, 1690s (in reference to soil), from French st&#233;riliser or else from
sterile + -ize; of living things from 1828. Meaning render free of micro-organisms is from 1878.
Related: Sterilized; sterilizing.


rendition (n.)

c.1600, surrender of a place or possession, from obsolete French rendition a rendering, noun of
action from Old French rendre to deliver, to yield (see render (v.)). Meaning translation first
recorded 1650s; that of an acting, a performing first recorded 1858, American English.


Ecclesiastes (n.)

c.1300, name given to one of the Old Testament books, traditionally ascribed to Solomon, from Greek
ekklesiastes (see ecclesiastic), to render Hebrew qoheleth one who addresses an assembly, from qahal
assembly. The title is technically the designation of the speaker, but that word throughout is
usually rendered into English as The Preacher (which Klein calls erroneous).


mobilize (v.)

1833 in the military sense; 1838 as render capable of movement, bring into circulation, from French
mobiliser, from mobile movable (see mobile). Related: Mobilized; mobilizing.


obtund (v.)

c.1400, (transitive) to render dead, make dull, used occasionally in English, especially in medical
jargon; from Latin obtundere to blunt, make dull, weaken, exhaust, literally to beat against (see
obtuse). Related: Obtundation; obtunded.


gnu (n.)

1777, gnoo, from Dutch gnoe, used by German traveler Georg Forster (1754-1794) to render Hottentot
i-ngu wildebeest, from Southern Bushman !nu: (in which ! and : represent clicks).


flesh (v.)

1520s, to render (a hunting animal) eager for prey by rewarding it with flesh from a kill, with
figurative extensions, from flesh (n.). Meaning to clothe or embody with flesh, with figurative
extensions, is from 1660s. Related: Fleshed; fleshing.


neutralize (v.)

1734, to render neutral (in a chemical sense), from French neutraliser (17c.), from neutral (see
neutral (adj.)). Meaning to counterbalance, to kill by opposing is from 1795. Related: Neutralized;
neutralizing.


accountant (n.)

mid-15c., accounting officer, one who renders accounts, from Old French acuntant (Modern French
accomptant), from present participle of accompter (see account (v.)). Sense of professional maker of
accounts is recorded from 1530s. The word also was an adjective in Middle English, accountable;
liable to render accounts (early 15c.).


socialize (v.)

1828, to render social, from social (adj.). Meaning to be sociable, to mingle is recorded from 1895.
Meaning to make socialistic is from 1846. Related: Socialized; socializing. The phrasing in
socialized medicine is by 1912.


humble (v.)

late 14c. in the intransitive sense of to render oneself humble; late 15c. in the transitive sense
of to lower (someone) in dignity; see humble (adj.). Related: Humbled; humbling.


praecipe (n.)

c.1500 (in Magna Carta in Anglo-Latin), from Latin praecipe, imperative of praecipere to admonish,
enjoin, from the opening words of such a writ, praecipe quod reddat enjoin (him) that he render.


politicize (v.)

1758, take up politics, from politics + -ize. Meaning to render political is from 1846. Related:
Politicized; politicizing. Earlier was politize (late 16c.), but this was rare.


last-ditch (adj.)

on the last line of defense, 1715, attributed to William of Orange; if so, originally in a Dutch
context.    We have no space to enter into the detail of the heroic struggle maintained by the young
stadtholder and his faithful Dutchmen; how they laid their country under water, and successfully
kept the powerful invader at bay. Once the contest seemed utterly hopeless. William was advised to
compromise the matter, and yield up Holland as the conquest of Louis XIV. No, replied he; I mean to
die in the last ditch. A speech alone sufficient to render his memory immortal. [Agnes Strickland,
Lives of the Queens of England, London, 1847]


genie (n.)

1650s, tutelary spirit, from French g&eacute;nie, from Latin genius (see genius); used in French
translation of Arabian Nights to render Arabic jinni, singular of jinn, which it accidentally
resembled, and attested in English with this sense from 1748.


timbrel (n.)

percussive Middle Eastern instrument, c.1500, diminutive of timbre (14c.), from Old French timbre in
its older sense of drum (see timbre). Used in Bible translations, chiefly to render Hebrew toph,
cognate with Arabic duff drum, of imitative origin.


jaunty (adj.)

1660s, elegant, stylish, from French gentil nice, pleasing, in Old French noble (see gentle). Form
reflects attempt to render the French pronunciation of gentil. Meaning easy and sprightly in manner
first attested 1670s. Related: Jauntily; jauntiness.


facilitate (v.)

1610s, from French faciliter to render easy, from Latin facilis easy (see facile). Related:
Facilitated; facilitates; facilitating.


fiery (adj.)

late 13c., from Middle English fier fire (see fire (n.)) + -y (2). The spelling is a relic of one of
the attempts to render Old English y in fyr in a changing system of vowel sounds. Related:
Fieriness.


solemnize (v.)

late 14c., honor by ceremonies, from Old French solemnisier, from Medieval Latin solemnizare, from
Latin solemnis (see solemn). Meaning render solemn is from 1726. Related: Solemnized; solemnizing.


necessitate (v.)

1620s, from Medieval Latin necessitatus, past participle of necessitare to render necessary, from
Latin necessitas (see necessity). Earlier verb in English was necessen (late 14c.). Related:
Necessitated; necessitates; necessitating.


disable (v.)

mid-15c., from dis- do the opposite of + ablen (v.) to make fit (see able). Related: Disabled;
disabling. Earlier in the same sense was unable (v.) make unfit, render unsuitable (c.1400).


soever (adv.)

1550s, from so + ever. A word generally used in composition to extend or render indefinite the sense
of such words as who, what, where, when, how, etc. .... [Century Dictionary].


unfortunate (adj.)

mid-15c., unlucky, from un- (1) not + fortunate (adj.). Infortunate in same sense is from late 14c.
(along with a verb infortune to render unhappy). In late 18c.-early 19c., unfortunate woman was a
polite way to say prostitute. The noun meaning one who is not fortunate is recorded from 1630s.


profane (v.)

late 14c., from Old French profaner, prophaner (13c.) and directly from Latin profanare to
desecrate, render unholy, violate, from profanus unholy, not consecrated (see profane (adj.)).
Related: Profaned; profaning.


felicitate (v.)

1620s, to render happy; 1630s, to reckon happy; from Latin felicitatus, past participle of
felicitare to make happy, from felicitas fruitfulness, happiness, from felix (see felicity). Meaning
congratulate is from 1630s. Related: Felicitated; felicitating.


brace (v.)

mid-14c., to seize, grasp, also wrap, enshroud; tie up, fetter, from Old French bracier to embrace,
from brace (see brace (n.)). Meaning to render firm or steady by tensing is mid-15c., earlier in
figurative sense strengthen or comfort (someone), early 15c., with later extension to tonics, etc.
that brace the nerves (compare bracer stiff drink). Related: Braced; bracing.


undermine (v.)

c.1300, undermyne, render unstable by digging at the foundation, from under + mine (v.). The
figurative sense injure by invisible, secret, or dishonorable means is attested from early 15c.
Similar formation in Dutch ondermijnen, Danish underminere, German unterminiren. The Old English
verb was underdelfan. Related: Undermined; undermining.


impregnate (v.)

c.1600, from Late Latin impraegnatus pregnant, past participle of impraegnare to render pregnant,
from assimilated form of in- into, in (see in- (2)) + praegnare make pregnant (see pregnant).
Earlier in same sense was impregn (1530s).


