render (n.)

1580s, agent noun from rend (v.).


rend (v.)

Old English rendan, hrendan to tear, cut down, from West Germanic *randijan (cognates: Old Frisian
renda to cut, break, Middle Low German rende anything broken, German Rinde bark, crust), probably
related to rind. Related: Rended; rent; rending.


render (v.)

late 14c., repeat, say again, from Old French rendre give back, present, yield (10c.), from Vulgar
Latin *rendere (formed by dissimilation or on analogy of its antonym, prendre to take), from Latin
reddere give back, return, restore, from red- back (see re-) + comb. form of dare to give (see date
(n.1)).    Meaning hand over, deliver is recorded from late 14c.; to return (thanks, a verdict,
etc.) is attested from late 15c.; meaning represent, depict is first attested 1590s. Irregular
retention of -er in a French verb in English is perhaps to avoid confusion with native rend (v.) or
by influence of a Middle English legalese noun render a payment of rent, from French noun use of the
infinitive. Related: Rendered; rendering.


rent (n.2)

torn place, 1530s, noun use of Middle English renten to tear, rend (early 14c.), variant of renden
(see rend (v.)).


jag (n.2)

slash or rend in a garment, c.1400, of unknown origin.


riven (adj.)

split, cloven, rent, c.1300, past participle adjective from rive to tear, rend.


Erechtheus

legendary first king and founder of Athens, from Latin Erechtheus, from Greek Erekhtheos, literally
render, shaker (of the earth), from erekhthein to rend, break, shatter, shake. Hence, Erechtheum,
the name of a temple on the Athenian acropolis.


lacerate (v.)

early 15c., from Latin laceratus, past participle of lacerare tear to pieces, mangle, figuratively,
to slander, censure, abuse, from lacer torn, mangled, from PIE root *lek- to rend, tear (cognates:
Greek lakis tatter, rag, lakizein to tear to pieces; Russian lochma rag, tatter, scrap; Albanian
l'akur naked). Related: Lacerated; lacerating.


heart-rending (adj.)

also  heartrending, heart rending, 1680s, from heart + present participle of rend. Related: Heart-
rendingly.


rind (n.)

Old English rinde bark, crust, later peel of a fruit or vegetable (c.1400), from Proto-Germanic
*rind- (cognates: Old Saxon rinda, Middle Dutch and Dutch rinde bark of a tree, Old High German
rinda, German Rinde), probably related to Old English rendan (see rend (v.)).


slit (v.)

c.1200, from or related to Old English slitan to slit, tear, split, rend to pieces; bite, sting;
back-bite, from Proto-Germanic *slitan (cognates: Old Saxon slitan, Old Frisian slita, Old Norse
slita, Middle Low German and Middle Dutch sliten, Dutch slijten, Old High German slizan, German
schlei&szlig;en to slit). A more violent verb in Old English than after, as in slitcwealm death by
rending. Slit skirt is attested from 1913.A slitting-mill (1660s) cut iron plates into thin rods for
making nails, etc.


rip (v.)

tear apart, c.1400, probably of North Sea Germanic origin (compare Flemish rippen strip off roughly,
Frisian rippe to tear, rip) or else from a Scandinavian source (compare Swedish reppa, Danish rippe
to tear, rip). In either case, from Proto-Germanic *rupjan-, from PIE root *reup-, *reub- to snatch.
Meaning to slash open is from 1570s. Related: Ripped; ripping.    In garments we rip along the line
at which they were sewed; we tear the texture of the cloth. ... Rend implies great force or
violence. [Century Dictionary]    Meaning to move with slashing force (1798) is the sense in let her
rip, American English colloquial phrase attested from 1853. The noun is attested from 1711. The
parachutist's rip cord (1911) originally was a device in ballooning to open a panel and release air.


science (n.)

mid-14c., what is known, knowledge (of something) acquired by study; information; also assurance of
knowledge, certitude, certainty, from Old French science knowledge, learning, application; corpus of
human knowledge (12c.), from Latin scientia knowledge, a knowing; expertness, from sciens (genitive
scientis) intelligent, skilled, present participle of scire to know, probably originally to separate
one thing from another, to distinguish, related to scindere to cut, divide, from PIE root *skei- to
cut, to split (cognates: Greek skhizein to split, rend, cleave, Gothic skaidan, Old English sceadan
to divide, separate; see shed (v.)).    From late 14c. in English as book-learning, also a
particular branch of knowledge or of learning; also skillfulness, cleverness; craftiness. From
c.1400 as experiential knowledge; also a skill, handicraft; a trade. From late 14c. as collective
human knowledge (especially that gained by systematic observation, experiment, and reasoning).
Modern (restricted) sense of body of regular or methodical observations or propositions concerning a
particular subject or speculation is attested from 1725; in 17c.-18c. this concept commonly was
called philosophy. Sense of non-arts studies is attested from 1670s.    Science, since people must
do it, is a socially embedded activity. It progresses by hunch, vision, and intuition. Much of its
change through time does not record a closer approach to absolute truth, but the alteration of
cultural contexts that influence it so strongly. Facts are not pure and unsullied bits of
information; culture also influences what we see and how we see it. Theories, moreover, are not
inexorable inductions from facts. The most creative theories are often imaginative visions imposed
upon facts; the source of imagination is also strongly cultural. [Stephen Jay Gould, introduction to
The Mismeasure of Man, 1981]   <hr />   In science you must not talk before you know. In art you
must not talk before you do. In literature you must not talk before you think. [John Ruskin, The
Eagle's Nest, 1872]    The distinction is commonly understood as between theoretical truth (Greek
episteme) and methods for effecting practical results (tekhne), but science sometimes is used for
practical applications and art for applications of skill. To blind (someone) with science confuse by
the use of big words or complex explanations is attested from 1937, originally noted as a phrase
from Australia and New Zealand.


