rendition (n.)

c.1600, surrender of a place or possession, from obsolete French rendition a rendering, noun of
action from Old French rendre to deliver, to yield (see render (v.)). Meaning translation first
recorded 1650s; that of an acting, a performing first recorded 1858, American English.


Lazarus

Biblical character (Luke xvi:20), the poor man covered in sores; his name was extended in medieval
usage to any poor and visibly diseased person (compare lazar, mid-14c., one deformed and nauseous
with filthy and pestilential diseases [Johnson]). The name is from a Greek rendition of Hebrew
El'azar, literally God has helped.


forerunner (n.)

c.1300, from fore + runner. Middle English rendition of Latin praecursor, in reference to John the
Baptist as the forerunner of Christ. The Old English word was foreboda.


stiff-necked (adj.)

stubborn, obstinate, 1520s (in Tindale's rendition of Acts vii:51), from stiff (adj.) + neck (n.);
translating Latin dura cervice in Vulgate, from Greek sklero trachelos, a literal translation from
Hebrew qesheh 'oref.


Xerxes

king of Persia who reigned 486-465 B.C.E., Greek Xerxes, from Old Persian X&#353;ayar&#353;an,
literally male (i.e. 'hero') among kings, from X&#353;aya- to rule over (see shah) + ar&#353;an
male, man, hero. The Hebrew rendition was Ahashwerosh, Ahashresh.


cannibal (n.)

human that eats human flesh, 1550s, from Spanish canibal, caribal a savage, cannibal, from Caniba,
Christopher Columbus' rendition of the Caribs' name for themselves (see Caribbean). The natives were
believed to be anthropophagites. Columbus, seeking evidence that he was in Asia, thought the name
meant the natives were subjects of the Great Khan. Shakespeare's Caliban (in The Tempest) is from a
version of this word, with -n- and -l- interchanged, found in Hakluyt's Voyages (1599). The Spanish
word had reached French by 1515. Used of animals from 1796. An Old English word for cannibal was
self&aelig;ta.


cider (n.)

late 13c., from Old French cidre, cire pear or apple cider (12c., Modern French cidre), variant of
cisdre, from Late Latin sicera, Vulgate rendition of Hebrew shekhar, a word used for any strong
drink (translated in Old English as beor, taken untranslated in Septuagint Greek as sikera), related
to Arabic sakar strong drink, sakira was drunk. Meaning gradually narrowed in English to mean
exclusively fermented drink made from apples, though this sense also was in Old French.


brimstone (n.)

Old English brynstan, from brin- stem of brinnen to burn (see burn (v.)) + stan (see stone (n.)). In
Middle English the first element also recorded as brem-, brom-, brum-, bren-, brin-,  bron-, brun-,
bern-, born-, burn-, burned-, and burnt-. Formerly the mineral sulfur, now restricted to biblical
usage.    The Lord reynede vpon Sodom and Gomor brenstoon and fier. [Wycliff's rendition (1382) of
Gen. xix:24]    The Old Norse cognate compound brennusteinn meant amber, as does German Bernstein.


lodge (n.)

mid-13c. in surnames and place names; late 13c. as small building or hut, from Old French loge
arbor, covered walk; hut, cabin, grandstand at a tournament, from Frankish *laubja shelter (cognate
with Old High German louba porch, gallery, German Laube bower, arbor), from Proto-Germanic *laubja-
shelter, likely originally shelter of foliage, or roof made from bark, from root of leaf (n.).
Hunter's cabin sense is first recorded late 14c. Sense of local branch of a society is first
recorded 1680s, from mid-14c. logge workshop of masons. Also used of certain American Indian
buildings, hence lodge-pole (1805). Feste of Logges (c.1400) was a Middle English rendition of the
Old Testament Jewish Feast of Tabernacles.


kind (n.)

class, sort, variety, from Old English gecynd kind, nature, race, related to cynn family (see kin),
from Proto-Germanic *kundjaz family, race, from PIE *gene- to give birth, beget (see genus).
&AElig;lfric's rendition of the Book of Genesis into Old English came out gecyndboc. The prefix
disappeared 1150-1250. No exact cognates beyond English, but it corresponds to adjective endings
such as Goth -kunds, Old High German -kund. Also in English as a suffix (mankind, etc.). Other
earlier, now obsolete, senses in English included character, quality derived from birth and manner
or way natural or proper to anyone. Use in phrase a kind of (1590s) led to colloquial extension as
adverb (1804) in phrases such as kind of stupid (a kind of stupid (person)).


lily (n.)

Old English lilie, from Latin lilia, plural of lilium a lily, cognate with Greek leirion, both
perhaps borrowed from a corrupted pronunciation of an Egyptian word. Used in Old Testament to
translate Hebrew shoshanna and in New Testament to translate Greek krinon. As an adjective, 1530s,
white, pure, lovely; later pale, colorless (1580s).    Also from the Latin word are German lilie,
French lis, Spanish lirio, Italian giglio. The lily of the valley translates Latin lilium convallium
(Vulgate), a literal rendition of the Hebrew term in Song of Solomon ii:1. It apparently was applied
to a particular plant (Convallaria majalis) first by 16c. German herbalists. Lily pad is from 1834,
American English.


breeches (n.)

c.1200, a double plural, from Old English brec breeches, which already was plural of broc garment
for the legs and trunk, from Proto-Germanic *brokiz (cognates: Old Norse brok, Dutch broek, Danish
brog, Old High German bruoh, German Bruch, obsolete since 18c. except in Swiss dialect), perhaps
from PIE root *bhreg- (see break (v.)). The Proto-Germanic word is a parallel form to Celtic
*bracca, source (via Gaulish) of Latin braca (aource of French braies), and some propose that the
Germanic word group is borrowed from Gallo-Latin, others that the Celtic was from Germanic.
Expanded sense of part of the body covered by breeches, posterior led to senses in childbirthing
(1670s) and gunnery (the part of a firearm behind the bore, 1570s). As the popular word for trousers
in English, displaced in U.S. c.1840 by pants. The Breeches Bible (Geneva Bible of 1560) so called
on account of rendition of Gen. iii:7 (already in Wyclif) They sewed figge leaues together, and made
themselues breeches.


