renounce (v.)

late 14c., from Old French renoncier give up, cede (12c., Modern French renoncer), from Latin
renuntiare bring back word; proclaim; protest against, renounce, from re- against (see re-) +
nuntiare to report, announce, from nuntius messenger (see nuncio). Related: Renounced; renouncing.


defy (v.)

c.1300, to renounce one's allegiance; mid-14c., to challenge, defy, from Old French defier, desfier
to challenge, defy, provoke; renounce (a belief), repudiate (a vow, etc.), from Vulgar Latin
*disfidare renounce one's faith, from Latin dis- away (see dis-) + fidus faithful (see faith).


renunciation (n.)

late 14c., action of renouncing, from Latin renuntiationem (nominative renuntiatio), noun of action
from past participle stem of renuntiare renounce (see renounce).


culture (n.)

mid-15c., the tilling of land, from Middle French culture and directly from Latin cultura a
cultivating, agriculture, figuratively care, culture, an honoring, from past participle stem of
colere tend, guard, cultivate, till (see colony). The figurative sense of cultivation through
education is first attested c.1500. Meaning the intellectual side of civilization is from 1805; that
of collective customs and achievements of a people is from 1867.    For without culture or holiness,
which are always the gift of a very few, a man may renounce wealth or any other external thing, but
he cannot renounce hatred, envy, jealousy, revenge. Culture is the sanctity of the intellect.
[William Butler Yeats]    Slang culture vulture is from 1947. Culture shock first recorded 1940.


forswear (v.)

Old English forswerian swear falsely, also abandon or renounce on oath, from for- completely +
swerian to swear. Related: Forswore; forsworn; forswearing.


renege (v.)

1540s, deny, renounce, abandon, from Medieval Latin renegare, from Latin re-, here probably an
intensive prefix, + negare deny (see deny). Meaning change one's mind is from 1784. Related:
Reneged; reneging.


dismiss (v.)

early 15c., from Latin dimissus, past participle of dimittere send away, send different ways; break
up, discharge; renounce, abandon, from dis- apart, away (see dis-) + mittere send, let go (see
mission). Prefix altered by analogy with many dis- verbs. Dismit, in the same sense, is attested
from late 14c. Related: Dismissed; dismissing.


relapse (v.)

early 15c., renounce; 1560s, fall into a former state, from Latin relapsus, past participle of
relabi slip back, slide back, sink back, from re- back (see re-) + labi to slip (see lapse (n.)).
Related: Relapsed; relapsing.


abdicate (v.)

1540s, to disown, disinherit (children), from Latin abdicatus, past participle of abdicare to
disown, disavow, reject (specifically abdicare magistratu renounce office), from ab- away (see ab-)
+ dicare proclaim, from stem of dicere to speak, to say (see diction). Meaning divest oneself of
office first recorded 1610s. Related: Abdicated; abdicating.


resign (v.)

late 14c., give up, surrender, abandon, submit; relinquish, from Old French resigner renounce,
relinquish (13c.), from Latin resignare to check off, annul, cancel, give back, give up, from re-
opposite (see re-) + signare to make an entry in an account book, literally to mark (see sign (v.)).
The sense is of making an entry (signum) opposite -- on the credit side -- balancing the former mark
and thus canceling the claim it represents. The specific meaning of give up a position is first
recorded late 14c. Sense of to give (oneself) up to some emotion or situation is from 1718. Related:
Resigned; resigning.


