renown (n.)

c.1300, from Anglo-French renoun, Old French renon renown, fame, reputation, from renomer make
famous, from re- repeatedly (see re-) + nomer to name, from Latin nominare to name (see nominate).
The Middle English verb reknouen make known, acknowledge has been assimilated to the noun via
renowned. In old German university slang, a reknowner (German renommist) was a boaster, a swaggerer.


renowned (adj.)

celebrated, famous, late 14c., past participle adjective from renown.


glory (n.)

c.1200, gloire the splendor of God or Christ; praise offered to God, worship, from Old French glorie
(11c., Modern French gloire), from Latin gloria fame, renown, great praise or honor, of uncertain
origin.    Greek doxa expectation (Homer), later opinion, fame, and ultimately glory, was used in
Biblical writing to translate a Hebrew word which had a sense of brightness, splendor, magnificence,
majesty, and this subsequently was translated as Latin gloria, which has colored that word's meaning
in most European tongues. Wuldor was an Old English word used in this sense. Sense of magnificence
is c.1300 in English. Meaning worldly honor, fame, renown of the kingdom of Heaven, and of one who
is a source of glory are from mid-14c. Latin also had gloriola a little fame. Glory days was in use
by 1970.


fame (n.)

early 13c., character attributed to someone; late 13c., celebrity, renown, from Old French fame
fame, reputation, renown, rumor, from Latin fama talk, rumor, report, reputation, from PIE root
*bha- (2) to speak, tell, say (cognates: Sanskrit bhanati speaks; Latin fari to say, fabula
narrative, account, tale, story; Armenian ban, bay word, term; Old Church Slavonic bajati to talk,
tell; Old English boian to boast, ben prayer, request; Greek pheme talk, phone voice, sound, phanai
to speak; Old Irish bann law).    The goddess Fama was the personification of rumor in Roman
mythology. The Latin derivative fabulare was the colloquial word for speak, talk since the time of
Plautus, whence Spanish hablar.    I've always been afraid I was going to tap the world on the
shoulder for 20 years, and when it finally turned around I was going to forget what I had to say.
[Tom Waits, Playboy magazine interview, March, 1988]


kudos (n.)

fame, renown, 1799, probably originally in university slang, from Greek kydos glory, fame,
especially in battle, literally that which is heard of (see caveat). A singular noun in Greek, but
the final -s often is mistaken as a plural suffix in English, leading to the barbarous back-
formation kudo (attested by 1936).


bruit (v.)

to report, 1520s, from bruit (n.) rumor, tiding, fame, renown (mid-15c.), from French bruit (n.),
from bruire to make noise, roar, of uncertain origin. Related: Bruited; bruiting.


memorial (n.)

late 14c., fame, renown, reputation, also commemorative gesture, monument, or rite; in general,
something by which the memory of a person, thing, or event is preserved, from Old French memorial
record, report, and directly from Late Latin memoriale a memorial, noun use of neuter of Latin
memorialis (adj.) of or belonging to memory, from memoria memory (see memory). Meaning memorial act,
commemoration is from mid-15c.


clarity (n.)

c.1300, clarte brightness, from Old French clart&eacute; clarity, brightness, from Latin claritas
brightness, splendor, also, of sounds, clearness; figuratively celebrity, renown, fame, from clarare
make clear, from clarus clear (see clear (adj.)). Modern form is early 15c., perhaps a reborrowing
from Latin. Meaning clearness is from 1610s.


Hercules

hero, son of Zeus and Alcmene, c.1200 (originally in reference to the Pillars of Hercules), also
Ercules, from Latin Hercles, from Greek Herakles, literally Glory of Hera; from Hera (q.v.) + kleos
glory, renown (see Clio). Used figuratively of strength since late 14c. Vocative form Hercule was a
common Roman interjection (especially me Hercule!) assuredly, certainly.


worship (n.)

Old English wor&eth;scip, wur&eth;scip (Anglian), weor&eth;scipe (West Saxon) condition of being
worthy, dignity, glory, distinction, honor, renown, from weor&eth; worthy (see worth) + -scipe (see
-ship). Sense of reverence paid to a supernatural or divine being is first recorded c.1300. The
original sense is preserved in the title worshipful honorable (c.1300).


honor (n.)

c.1200, glory, renown, fame earned, from Anglo-French honour, Old French honor (Modern French
honneur), from Latin honorem (nominative honos, later honor) honor, dignity, office, reputation, of
unknown origin. Till 17c., honour and honor were equally frequent; the former now preferred in
England, the latter in U.S. by influence of Noah Webster's spelling reforms. Meaning a woman's
chastity first attested late 14c. Honors distinction in scholarship attested by 1782. Honor roll in
the scholastic sense attested by 1872. To do the honors (1650s) originally meant the customary
civilities and courtesies at a public entertainment, etc.


memory (n.)

mid-13c., recollection (of someone or something); awareness, consciousness, also fame, renown,
reputation, from Anglo-French memorie (Old French memoire, 11c., mind, memory, remembrance;
memorial, record) and directly from Latin memoria memory, remembrance, faculty of remembering, noun
of quality from memor mindful, remembering, from PIE root *(s)mer- to remember (Sanskrit smarati
remembers, Avestan mimara mindful; Greek merimna care, thought, mermeros causing anxiety,
mischievous, baneful; Serbo-Croatian mariti to care for; Welsh marth sadness, anxiety; Old Norse
Mimir, name of the giant who guards the Well of Wisdom; Old English gemimor known, murnan mourn,
remember sorrowfully; Dutch mijmeren to ponder). Meaning faculty of remembering is late 14c. in
English.  I am grown old and my memory is not as active as it used to be. When I was younger I could
remember anything, whether it had happened or not; but my faculties are decaying now and soon I
shall be so I cannot remember any but the things that never happened.  It is sad to go to pieces
like this, but we all have to do it. [Mark Twain, Autobiography]  Computer sense, device which
stores information, is from 1946. Related: Memories.


