rent (v.)

mid-15c., to rent out property, grant possession and enjoyment of in exchange for a consideration
paid, from Old French renter pay dues to, or from rent (n.1). Related: Rented; renting. Earlier
(mid-14c.) in the more general sense of provide with revenue. Sense of to take and hold in exchange
for rent is from 1520s. Intransitive sense of be leased for rent is from 1784. Prefix rent-a- first
attested 1921, mainly of businesses that rented various makes of car (Rentacar is a trademark
registered in U.S. 1924); extended to other temporary uses since 1961.


rental (n.)

mid-14c., rent roll; late 14c., income from rents, from Anglo-French rental, Medieval Latin rentale;
see rent (n.1) + -al (2). Meaning amount charged for rent is from 1630s; that of a car or house let
for rent is from 1952, American English.


renter (n.)

late 14c., one who lets or rents to others, proprietor, agent noun from rent (v.). Meaning lessee,
tenant, holder of property by payment of rent is from 1650s.


rent (n.2)

torn place, 1530s, noun use of Middle English renten to tear, rend (early 14c.), variant of renden
(see rend (v.)).


rentier (n.)

1847, from French rentier, holder of rental properties or investments that pay income, from rente
profit, income (see rent (n.1)).


rent (n.1)

payment for use of property, mid-12c., a legal sense, originally income, revenue (late Old English),
from Old French rente payment due; profit, income, from Vulgar Latin *rendita, noun use of fem. past
participle of rendere to render (see render (v.)).


quit-rent (n.)

early 15c., rent paid by a tenant in exchange for being discharged from required service; also,
nominal rent as acknowledgment of tenure, from quit (adj.) + rent (n.).


racket (n.1)

loud noise, 1560s, perhaps imitative. Klein compares Gaelic racaid noise. Meaning dishonest activity
(1785) is perhaps from racquet, via notion of game, reinforced by rack-rent extortionate rent
(1590s), from rack (n.1).


pension (n.)

mid-14c., payment for services, especially reward, payment out of a benefice (early 14c., in Anglo-
Latin), from Old French pension payment, rent (13c.) and directly from Latin pensionem (nominative
pensio) a payment, installment, rent, from past participle stem of pendere pay, weigh (see pendant).
Meaning regular payment in consideration of past service first recorded 1520s. Meaning boarding
house, boarding school first attested 1640s, from French, and usually in reference to places in
France or elsewhere on the Continent.


farm (n.)

c.1300, fixed payment (usually in exchange for taxes collected, etc.), fixed rent, from Old French
ferme rent, lease, from Medieval Latin firma fixed payment, from Latin firmare to fix, settle,
confirm, strengthen, from firmus firm (see firm (adj.)).    Sense of tract of leased land is first
recorded early 14c.; that of cultivated land (leased or not) is 1520s. Phrase buy the farm die in
battle, is at least from World War II, perhaps a cynical reference to the draftee's dream of getting
out of the war and going home, in many cases to a peaceful farmstead. But fetch the farm is prisoner
slang from at least 1879 for get sent to the infirmary, with reference to the better diet and
lighter duties there.


controlled (adj.)

1580s, past participle adjective from control (v.). Of rent, from c.1930.


riven (adj.)

split, cloven, rent, c.1300, past participle adjective from rive to tear, rend.


blackmail (n.)

1550s, from black (adj.) + Middle English male rent, tribute, from Old English mal lawsuit, terms,
bargaining, agreement, from Old Norse mal speech, agreement; related to Old English m&aelig;&eth;el
meeting, council, m&aelig;l speech, Gothic ma&thorn;l meeting place, from Proto-Germanic *mathla-,
from PIE *mod- to meet, assemble (see meet (v.)). From the practice of freebooting clan chieftains
who ran protection rackets against Scottish farmers. Black from the evil of the practice. Expanded
c.1826 to any type of extortion money. Compare silver mail rent paid in money (1590s); buttock-mail
(Scottish, 1530s) fine imposed for fornication.


mail (n.3)

rent, payment, from Old English mal (see blackmail (n.)).


slit (n.)

mid-13c., long cut or rent (in clothes), incision, from slit (v.). Slang sense of vulva is attested
from 1640s. Old English had slit (n.) with a sense of a rending, bite; backbiting.


deferent (adj.)

1620s, from French d&eacute;f&eacute;rent (16c.), from Latin deferentem (nominative deferens),
present participle of deferre to carry down or away (see defer (v.2)). Earlier in Middle English as
a word in astronomy (early 15c.).


quinta (n.)

country house, villa, 1754, from Spanish and Portuguese quinta, originally a farm and house let out
for a rent of one-fifth of its produce, from Latin quintus one fifth, related to quinque five (see
quinque-).


farm (v.)

mid-15c., to rent (land), from Anglo-French fermer, from ferme (see farm (n.)). The agricultural
sense is from 1719. Original sense is retained in to farm out.


coherent (adj.)

1550s, from Middle French coh&eacute;rent (16c.), from Latin cohaerentem (nominative cohaerens),
present participle of cohaerere cohere, from com- together (see co-)  + haerere to stick (see
hesitation).


hire (v.)

Old English hyrian pay for service, employ for wages, engage, from Proto-Germanic *hurjan (cognates:
Danish hyre, Old Frisian hera, Dutch huren, German heuern to hire, rent). Reflexively, to agree to
work for wages from mid-13c. Related: Hired; hiring.


boogie (v.)

originally dance to boogie music, a late 1960s style of rock music based on blues chords, from
earlier boogie, a style of blues (1941, also as a verb), short for boogie-woogie (1928), a
reduplication of boogie (1917), which meant rent party in American English slang. A song title, That
Syncopated Boogie-boo, appears in a copyright listing from 1912.


rend (v.)

Old English rendan, hrendan to tear, cut down, from West Germanic *randijan (cognates: Old Frisian
renda to cut, break, Middle Low German rende anything broken, German Rinde bark, crust), probably
related to rind. Related: Rended; rent; rending.


rack (v.)

to stretch out for drying, also to torture on the rack, early 15c., from rack (n.1). Of other pains
from 1580s. Figurative sense of to torment is from c.1600. Meaning raise above a fair level (of
rent, etc.) is from 1550s. Meaning fit with racks is from 1580s. Teenager slang meaning to sleep is
from 1960s (rack (n.) was Navy slang for bed in 1940s). Related: Racked; racking. Rack up register,
accumulate, achieve is first attested 1943 (in Billboard), probably from method of keeping score in
pool halls.


project (n.)

c.1400, a plan, draft, scheme, from Latin proiectum something thrown forth, noun use of neuter of
proiectus, past participle of proicere stretch out, throw forth, from pro- forward (see pro-) +
combining form of iacere (past participle iactus) to throw (see jet (v.)).    Meaning scheme,
proposal, mental plan is from c.1600. Meaning group of low-rent apartment buildings first recorded
1935, American English, short for housing project (1932). Related: Projects. Project manager
attested from 1913.


nimble (adj.)

agile, light-footed, c.1300, nemel, from Old English n&aelig;mel quick to grasp (attested but once),
related to niman to take, from Proto-Germanic *neman (cognates: Old Saxon, Old Dutch, Gothic niman,
Old Norse nema, Old Frisian nima, German nehmen to take), from PIE root *nem- to divide, distribute,
allot, also to take (cognates: Greek nemein to deal out, nemesis just indignation, Latin numerus
number, Lithuanian nuoma rent, interest, Middle Irish nos custom, usage). With excrescent -b- from
c.1500 (compare limb (n.1)). Related: Nimbleness. In 17c., English had nimblechaps talkative fellow.


toll (n.)

tax, fee, Old English toll impost, tribute, passage-money, rent, variant of toln, cognate with Old
Norse tollr, Old Frisian tolen, Old High German zol, German Zoll, probably representing an early
Germanic borrowing from Late Latin tolonium custom house, from Latin telonium tollhouse, from Greek
teloneion tollhouse, from telones tax-collector, from telos tax (see tele-; for sense, compare
finance). On the other theory it is native Germanic and related to tell (v.) on the notion of that
which is counted. Originally in a general sense of payment exacted by an authority; meaning charge
for right of passage along a road is from late 15c.


let (v.)

Old English l&aelig;tan to allow to remain; let go, leave, depart from; leave undone; to allow;
bequeath, also to rent (class VII strong verb; past tense let, past participle l&aelig;ten), from
Proto-Germanic *letan (cognates: Old Saxon latan, Old Frisian leta, Dutch laten, German lassen,
Gothic letan to leave, let), from PIE *le- (2) to let go, slacken (cognates: Latin lassus faint,
weary, Lithuanian leisti to let, to let loose; see lenient). If that derivation is correct, the
primary sense would be let go through weariness, neglect.    Of blood, from late Old English. To let
(something) slip originally (1520s) was a reference to hounds on a leash; figurative use from 1540s.
To let (someone) off allow to go unpunished is from 1814. To let on reveal, divulge is from 1725; to
let up cease, stop is from 1787. Let alone not to mention is from 1812.


render (v.)

late 14c., repeat, say again, from Old French rendre give back, present, yield (10c.), from Vulgar
Latin *rendere (formed by dissimilation or on analogy of its antonym, prendre to take), from Latin
reddere give back, return, restore, from red- back (see re-) + comb. form of dare to give (see date
(n.1)).    Meaning hand over, deliver is recorded from late 14c.; to return (thanks, a verdict,
etc.) is attested from late 15c.; meaning represent, depict is first attested 1590s. Irregular
retention of -er in a French verb in English is perhaps to avoid confusion with native rend (v.) or
by influence of a Middle English legalese noun render a payment of rent, from French noun use of the
infinitive. Related: Rendered; rendering.


still (adj.)

Old English stille motionless, stable, fixed, stationary, from Proto-Germanic *stilli- (cognates:
Old Frisian, Middle Low German, Middle Dutch stille, Dutch stil, Old High German stilli, German
still), from PIE root *stel- to put, stand, with derivatives referring to a standing object or place
(see stall (n.1)). Meaning quiet, calm, gentle, silent emerged in later Old English. Euphemistic for
dead in stillborn, etc. Still small voice is from KJV:    And he said, Go forth, and stand upon the
mount before the LORD. And, behold, the LORD passed by, and a great and strong wind rent the
mountains, and brake in pieces the rocks before the LORD; but the LORD was not in the wind: and
after the wind an earthquake; but the LORD was not in the earthquake: and after the earthquake a
fire; but the LORD was not in the fire: and after the fire a still small voice. [1 Kings 19:11-13]
Used as a conjunction from 1722.


capital (n.1)

early 15c., a capital letter, from capital (adj.). The meaning capital city is first recorded 1660s
(the Old English word was heafodstol). The financial sense is from 1610s (Middle English had chief
money principal fund, mid-14c.), from Medieval Latin capitale stock, property, noun use of neuter of
capitalis capital, chief, first. (The noun use of this adjective in classical Latin was for a
capital crime.)    [The term capital] made its first appearance in medieval Latin as an adjective
capitalis (from caput, head) modifying the word pars, to designate the principal sum of a money
loan. The principal part of a loan was contrasted with the usury--later called interest--the payment
made to the lender in addition to the return of the sum lent. This usage, unknown to classical
Latin, had become common by the thirteenth century and possibly had begun as early as 1100 A.D., in
the first chartered towns of Europe. [Frank A. Fetter, Reformulation of the Concepts of Capital and
Income in Economics and Accounting, 1937, in Capital, Interest, &amp; Rent, 1977]    Also see
cattle, and compare sense development of fee, pecuniary.


shoot (v.)

Old English sceotan to hurl missiles, cast; strike, hit, push; run, rush; send forth swiftly; wound
with missiles (class II strong verb; past tense sceat, past participle scoten), from Proto-Germanic
*skeutanan (cognates: Old Saxon skiotan, Old Norse skjota to shoot with (a weapon); shoot, launch,
push, shove quickly, Old Frisian skiata, Middle Dutch skieten, Dutch schieten, Old High German
skiozan, German schie&szlig;en), from PIE root *skeud- to shoot, to chase, to throw, to project
(cognates: Sanskrit skundate hastens, makes haste, Old Church Slavonic iskydati to throw out,
Lithuanian skudrus quick, nimble).    In reference to pool playing, from 1926. Meaning to strive
(for) is from 1967, American English. Sense of descend (a river) quickly is from 1610s. Meaning to
inject by means of a hypodermic needle is attested from 1914. Meaning photograph (especially a
movie) is from 1890. As an interjection, an arbitrary euphemistic alteration of shit, it is recorded
from 1934. Shoot the breeze chat first recorded 1941. Shoot-'em-up (adj.) in reference to violent
entertainment (Western movies, etc.) is from 1942. Shoot to kill first attested 1867. Shoot the cat
to vomit is from 1785. To shoot the moon originally meant depart by night with ones goods to escape
back rent (1829).    O, 'tis cash makes such crowds to the gin shops roam, And 'tis cash often
causes a rumpus at home ;  'Tis when short of cash people oft shoot the moon ;  And 'tis cash always
keeps our pipes in tune.  Cash! cash! &amp;c.;  [The Melodist and Mirthful Olio, An Elegant
Collection of the Most Popular Songs, vol. IV, London, 1829]


moon (n.)

Old English mona, from Proto-Germanic *menon- (cognates: Old Saxon and Old High German mano, Old
Frisian mona, Old Norse mani, Danish maane, Dutch maan, German Mond, Gothic mena moon), from PIE
*me(n)ses- moon, month (cognates: Sanskrit masah moon, month; Avestan ma, Persian mah, Armenian mis
month; Greek mene moon, men month; Latin mensis month; Old Church Slavonic meseci, Lithuanian
menesis moon, month; Old Irish mi, Welsh mis, Breton miz month), probably from root *me- to measure,
in reference to the moon's phases as the measure of time.    A masculine noun in Old English. In
Greek, Italic, Celtic, Armenian the cognate words now mean only month. Greek selene (Lesbian
selanna) is from selas light, brightness (of heavenly bodies). Old Norse also had tungl moon,
(replacing mani in prose - Buck), evidently an older Germanic word for heavenly body, cognate with
Gothic tuggl, Old English tungol heavenly body, constellation, of unknown origin or connection.
Hence Old Norse tunglfylling lunation, tungl&#339;rr lunatic (adj.).    Extended 1665 to satellites
of other planets. To shoot the moon leave without paying rent is British slang from c.1823; card-
playing sense perhaps influenced by gambler's shoot the works (1922) go for broke in shooting dice.
The moon race and the U.S. space program of the 1960s inspired a number of coinages, including, from
those skeptical of the benefits to be gained, moondoggle (based on boondoggle). The man in the moon
is mentioned since early 14c.; he carries a bundle of thorn-twigs and is accompanied by a dog. Some
Japanese, however, see a rice-cake-making rabbit in the moon.


