reparation (n.)

late 14c., reconciliation, from Old French reparacion and directly from Late Latin reparationem
(nominative reparatio) act of repairing, restoration, noun of action from past participle stem of
Latin reparare restore, repair (see repair (v.1)). Meaning act of repairing or mending is attested
from c.1400. Reparations compensation for war damaged owed by the aggressor is attested from 1921,
with reference to Germany, from French r&eacute;parations (1919).


repair (n.)

1590s, act of restoring, restoration after decay, from repair (v.1). Meaning state or condition in
respect to reparation is from c.1600.


mend (n.)

early 14c., recompense, reparation, from mend (v.). Meaning act of mending; a repaired hole or rip
in fabric is from 1888. Phrase on the mend attested from 1802.


amends (n.)

early 14c., restitution, collective singular, from Old French amendes fine, penalty, plural of
amende reparation, from amender to amend (see amend).


redressal (n.)

a setting right again, 1800, from redress + -al (2). An earlier noun was simply redress reparation,
compensation, adjustment (late 14c.), from Anglo-French redresce, Old French redrece, redresse


satisfy (v.)

early 15c., from Middle French satisfier, from Old French satisfaire pay, repay, make reparation
(14c., Modern French satisfaire), from Latin satisfacere discharge fully, comply with, make amends,
literally do enough, from satis enough (from PIE root *sa- to satisfy; see sad) + facere perform
(see factitious). Related: Satisfied; satisfying.


best (adj.)

Old English beste, reduced by assimilation of -t- from earlier Old English betst best, first, in the
best manner, originally superlative of bot remedy, reparation, the root word now only surviving in
to boot (see boot (n.2)), though its comparative, better, and superlative, best, have been
transferred to good (and in some cases well). From Proto-Germanic root *bat-, with comparative
*batizon and superlative *batistaz (cognates: Old Frisian, Old Saxon, Middle Dutch best, Old High
German bezzist, German best, Old Norse beztr, Gothic batists).    The best-laid schemes o' mice an'
men  Gang aft agley,  An' lea'e us nought but grief an' pain,  For promis'd joy!  [Burns]   Best-
seller as short for best-selling book is from 1902, apparently originally in the publishing trade;
best friend was in Chaucer (late 14c.). Best girl is first attested 1881, American English; best man
is 1814, originally Scottish, replacing groomsman. To be able to do something with the best of them
is recorded by 1748.


