repetition (n.)

early 15c., act of saying over again, from Old French repetition and directly from Latin
repetitionem (nominative repetitio) a repeating, noun of action from past participle stem of
repetere do or say again (see repeat (v.)). Of actions, attested from 1590s.


frequentative (n.)

verb which expresses repetition of action, 1520s, from French fr&eacute;quentatif, from Late Latin
frequentativus that which denotes the repetition of an act, from Latin frequentatus, past participle
of frequentare visit regularly, from frequentem (see frequent (adj.)).


troll (n.2)

act of going round, repetition, 1705, from troll (v.). Meaning song sung in a round is from 1820.


Mishnaic (adj.)

1718, of or belonging to the Mishnah, the collection of oral law which forms the basis of the
Talmud, from Hebrew, literally repetition, instruction, from shanah to repeat, in post-Biblical
Hebrew to teach or learn (oral tradition).


battology (n.)

needless repetition in speaking or writing, c.1600, from Greek battologia a speaking stammeringly,
from battos stammerer, of imitative origin, + -logia (see -logy).


duplication (n.)

early 15c., doubling, from Middle French duplicacion (13c.) and directly from Latin duplicationem
(nominative duplicatio), noun of action from past participle stem of duplicare (see duplicate
(adj.)). Meaning repetition is from 1580s.


psittacism (n.)

mere parroting, parrotry, repetition without reasoning, 1884, from French psittacisme (Liebnitz,
1765) or German psittazismus, from Latin psittacus parrot (see psittacine) + -ism.


rehearsal (n.)

late 14c., restatement, repetition of the words of another, from rehearse + -al (2), or from Old
French rehearsal a repeating. Sense in theater and music, act of rehearsing, is from 1570s. Pre-
wedding rehearsal dinner attested by 1953.


reiteration (n.)

early 15c., from Middle French reiteration and directly from Latin reiterationem (nominative
reiteratio) repetition, noun of action from past participle stem of reiterare (see reiterate).


plug (v.)

close tightly (a hole), fill, 1620s, from plug (n.) or from Dutch pluggen. Meaning work
energetically at is c.1865. Sense of popularize by repetition is from 1906. Slang sense put a bullet
into is recorded from 1870. Related: Plugged; plugging.


iteration (n.)

late 15c., from Latin iterationem (nominative iteratio) repetition, noun of action from past
participle stem of iterare do again, repeat, from iterum again, from PIE *i-tero-, from pronomial
root *i- (see yon).


repetitious (adj.)

employing repetition, often with suggestions of tiresomeness, 1670s, from Latin repetit-, past
participle stem of repetere do or say again (see repeat (v.)) + -ous. Related: Repetitiously;
repetitiousness.


iterative (adj.)

involving repetition, late 15c., from French iteratif (c.1400), from Late Latin iterativus, from
iterat-, past participle stem of iterare (see iteration). As a noun, from 1854. Related:
Iteratively.


recitation (n.)

late 15c., act of detailing, from Old French r&eacute;citation (14c.) and directly from Latin
recitationem (nominative recitatio) public reading, a reading aloud, noun of action from past
participle stem of recitare (see recite). Meaning act of repeating aloud is from 1620s; that of
repetition of a prepared lesson is first recorded 1770, American English.


replica (n.)

1824, from Italian replica copy, repetition, reply, from replicare to duplicate, from Latin
replicare to repeat (see reply (v.)). Properly, a copy of a work of art made by the original artist.


merism (n.)

1894 in biological sense repetition of parts in living things; earlier in rhetoric, synecdoche in
which totality is expressed by contrasting parts (such as high and low, young and old); from Modern
Latin merismus, from Greek merismos a dividing, division, a partition, from merizein to divide, from
meros part, share (see merit (n.)). Related: Merismatic.


anaphora (n.)

repetition of a word or phrase in successive clauses, 1580s, from Latin, from Greek anaphora
reference, literally a carrying back, from anapherein to carry back, to bring up, from ana back (see
ana-) + pherein to bear (see infer).


rep

1705 as abbreviation of reputation (n.); upon rep I swear it was a common 18c. slang asseveration.
As a shortening of repetition (n.) it is recorded from 1864, originally school slang; as a
shortening of representative (n.), especially sales representative, it is attested from 1896. As an
abbreviation of repertory (company) it is recorded from 1925.


scapegoat (n.)

1530, goat sent into the wilderness on the Day of Atonement, symbolic bearer of the sins of the
people, coined by Tyndale from scape (n.1) + goat to translate Latin caper emissarius, itself a
translation in Vulgate of Hebrew 'azazel (Lev. xvi:8,10,26), which was read as 'ez ozel goat that
departs, but which others hold to be the proper name of a devil or demon in Jewish mythology
(sometimes identified with Canaanite deity Aziz).    Jerome's reading also was followed by Martin
Luther (der ledige Bock), Symmachus (tragos aperkhomenos), and others (compare French bouc
&eacute;missaire), but the question of who, or what (or even where) is meant by 'azazel is a vexed
one. The Revised Version (1884) simply restores Azazel. But the old translation has its modern
defenders:   Azazel is an active participle or participial noun, derived ultimately from azal
(connected with the Arabic word azala, and meaning removed), but immediately from the reduplicate
form of that verb, azazal. The reduplication of the consonants of the root in Hebrew and Arabic
gives the force of repetition, so that while azal means removed, azalzal means removed by a
repetition of acts. Azalzel or azazel, therefore, means one who removes by a series of acts. ... The
interpretation is founded on sound etymological grounds, it suits the context wherever the word
occurs, it is consistent with the remaining ceremonial of the Day of Atonement, and it accords with
the otherwise known religious beliefs and symbolical practices of the Israelites. [Rev. F. Meyrick,
Leviticus, London, 1882]    Meaning one who is blamed or punished for the mistakes or sins of others
first recorded 1824; the verb is attested from 1943. Related: Scapegoated; scapegoating.   For the
formation, compare scapegrace, also scape-gallows one who deserves hanging.


anadiplosis (n.)

repetition of an initial word, 1580s, from Latin, from Greek anadiplosis, from anadiploesthai to be
doubled back, to be made double, from ana back (see ana-) + diploun to double, fold over (see
diploma).


ditto

1620s, Tuscan dialectal ditto (in) the said (month or year), literary Italian detto, past participle
of dire to say, from Latin dicere (see diction).    Originally used in Italian to avoid repetition
of month names in a series of dates; generalized meaning of same as above first recorded in English
1670s. Dittohead, self-description of followers of U.S. radio personality Rush Limbaugh, attested by
1995. dittoship is from 1869.


Deuteronomy (n.)

5th book of the Pentateuch, late 14c., from Late Latin Deuteronomium, from Greek Deuteronomion,
literally second law, from deuteros second + nomos law (see numismatics). A mistranslation of Hebrew
mishneh hattorah hazzoth a copy of this law [Deut. xvii:18]. The book is a repetition, with
comments, of the Decalogue and most of the laws of Exodus. The title was translated literally into
Old English as &aelig;fter&aelig;, literally after-law.


replication (n.)

late 14c., action of folding back, also legal reply (third step in the pleadings in a common-law
action), rejoinder, from Anglo-French replicacioun, Old French replicacion reply, answer, from Latin
replicationem (nominative replicatio) a reply, repetition, a folding back, from past participle stem
of replicare to repeat, reply, literally to fold back (see reply (v.)). Meaning a copy, reproduction
first recorded 1690s. Sense in genetics is from 1948.


eddy (n.)

mid-15c., Scottish ydy, possibly from Old Norse i&eth;a whirlpool, from Proto-Germanic *ith- a
second time, again, which is related to the common Old English prefix ed- again, backwards;
repetition, turning (forming such words as ed&eth;ingung reconciliation, edgift restitution,
edniwian to renew, restore, edhwierfan to retrace one's steps, edgeong to become young again).
Compare Old English edwielle eddy, vortex, whirlpool. The prefix is cognate with Latin et, Old High
German et-, Gothic i&thorn; and, but, however. Related: Eddies.


