repellent (adj.)

also repellant, 1640s, from Latin repellentem (nominative repelens), present participle of repellere
(see repel). Originally of medicines (that reduced tumors); meaning distasteful, disagreeable first
recorded 1797.


repel (v.)

early 15c., to drive away, remove, from Old French repeller or directly from Latin repellere to
drive back, from re- back (see re-) + pellere to drive, strike (see pulse (n.1)). Meaning to affect
(a person) with distaste or aversion is from 1817. Related: Repelled; repelling.


repulsive (adj.)

early 15c., able to repel, from Middle French repulsif (14c.) and directly from Medieval Latin
repulsivus, from repuls-, past participle stem of repellere (see repel). The sense of causing
disgust is first recorded 1816. Related: Repulsively; repulsiveness.


repulse (n.)

1530s, from Latin repulsa refusal, denial, noun use of fem. past participle of repellere (see
repel).


repulse (v.)

early 15c., from Latin repulsus, past participle of repellere drive back, reject (see repel).
Related: Repulsed; repulsing.


repulsion (n.)

early 15c., repudiation, from Late Latin repulsionem (nominative repulsio) a repelling, noun of
action from past participle stem of repellere (see repel). Meaning action of forcing or driving back
is attested from 1540s. Sense of strong dislike is from 1751.


reverberate (v.)

1570s, beat back, drive back, force back, from Latin reverberatus, past participle of reverberare
strike back, repel, cause to rebound (see reverberation). Meaning re-echo is from 1590s. Earlier
verb was reverberen (early 15c.). Related: Reverberated; reverberating.


repeal (n.)

late 15c., from repeal (v.), or from Anglo-French repel, Old French rapel (Modern French rappel) a
recall appeal, back-formation from rapeler.


commando (n.)

Afrikaans, a troop under a commander, from Portuguese, literally party commanded (see command (v.));
in use c.1809 during the Peninsula campaign, then from 1834, in a South African sense, of military
expeditions of the Boers against the natives; modern sense is from 1940 (originally shock troops to
repel the threatened German invasion of England), first attested in writings of Winston Churchill,
who could have picked it up during the Boer War. Phrase going commando not wearing underwear
attested by 1996, U.S. slang, perhaps on notion of being ready for instant action.


squad (n.)

1640s, small number of military men detailed for some purpose, from French esquade, from Middle
French escadre, from Spanish escuadra or Italian squadra battalion, literally square, from Vulgar
Latin *exquadra (see square (n.)). Before the widespread use of of automatic weapons, infantry
troops tended to fight in a square formation to repel cavalry or superior forces. Extended to sports
1902, police work 1905.


rush (v.)

mid-14c. (implied in rushing), to drive back or down, from Anglo-French russher, from Old French
ruser to dodge, repel (see ruse). Meaning to do something quickly is from 1650s; transitive sense of
to hurry up (someone or something) is from 1850. U.S. Football sense originally was in rugby (1857).
Fraternity/sorority sense is from 1896 (originally it was what the fraternity did to the student);
from 1899 as a noun in this sense. Earlier it was a name on U.S. campuses for various tests of
strength or athletic skill between freshmen and sophomores as classes (1860).


refute (v.)

1510s, refuse, reject, from Middle French r&#233;futer (16c.) and directly from Latin refutare drive
back; rebut, disprove; repress, repel, resist, oppose, from re- back (see re-) + -futare to beat,
probably from PIE root *bhau- to strike down (see bat (n.1)).    Meaning prove wrong dates from
1540s. Since c.1964 linguists have frowned on the subtle shift in meaning towards to deny, as it is
used in connection with allegation. Related: Refuted; refuting.


rebuke (v.)

early 14c., to reprimand, reprove; chide, scold, from Anglo-French rebuker to repel, beat back, Old
French rebuchier, from re- back (see re-) + buschier to strike, chop wood, from busche (French
bÃ&fnof;Â»che) wood, from Proto-Germanic *busk- (see bush (n.)). Related: Rebuked; rebuking.


reverberation (n.)

late 14c., reflection of light or heat, from Old French reverberacion great flash of light; intense
quality, from Medieval Latin reverberationem (nominative reverberatio), noun of action from past
participle stem of Latin reverberare beat back, strike back, repel, cause to rebound, from re- back
(see re-) + verberare to strike, to beat, from verber whip, lash, rod, related to verbena leaves and
branches of laurel, from PIE *werb- to turn, bend (see warp (v.)). Sense of an echo is attested from
1620s.


ruse (n.)

early 15c., dodging movements of a hunted animal; 1620s, a trick, from Old French ruse, reuse
diversion, switch in flight; trick, jest (14c.), back-formed noun from reuser to dodge, repel,
retreat; deceive, cheat, from Latin recusare deny, reject, oppose, from re-, intensive prefix (see
re-), + causari plead as a reason, object, allege, from causa reason, cause (see cause (n.)). It
also has been proposed that the French word may be from Latin rursus backwards, or a Vulgar Latin
form of refusare. Johnson calls it, A French word neither elegant nor necessary. The verb ruse was
used in Middle English.


salt (n.)

Old English sealt salt (n.; also as an adjective, salty, briny), from Proto-Germanic *saltom
(cognates: Old Saxon, Old Norse, Old Frisian, Gothic salt, Dutch zout, German Salz), from PIE *sal-
salt (cognates: Greek hals salt, sea, Latin sal, Old Church Slavonic soli, Old Irish salann, Welsh
halen salt).    Modern chemistry sense is from 1790. Meaning experienced sailor is first attested
1840, in reference to the salinity of the sea. Salt was long regarded as having power to repel
spiritual and magical evil. Many metaphoric uses reflect that this was once a rare and important
resource, such as worth one's salt (1830), salt of the earth (Old English, after Matt. v:13). Belief
that spilling salt brings bad luck is attested from 16c. To be above (or below) the salt (1590s)
refers to customs of seating at a long table according to rank or honor, and placing a large salt-
cellar in the middle of the dining table.   Salt-lick first recorded 1751; salt-marsh is Old English
sealtne mersc; salt-shaker is from 1882. Salt-and-pepper of dark and light color first recorded
1915. To take something with a grain of salt is from 1640s, from Modern Latin cum grano salis.


