repository (n.)

late 15c., vessel, etc., for storage, Middle French repositoire or directly from Late Latin
repositorium store, in classical Latin, a stand on which food is placed, from noun use of repositus,
past participle of reponere put away, store (see repose (v.2)). Figurative use is recorded from
1640s.


sacristy (n.)

repository for sacred things, mid-15c., from Anglo-French sacrestie, from Medieval Latin sacrista,
from Latin sacer sacred (see sacred).


bibliothek (n.)

Old English biblio&eth;ece the Scriptures, from Latin bibliotheka library, room for books;
collection of books, from Greek bibliotheke, literally book-repository (from biblion, see Bible, +
theke case, chest, sheath, from root of tithenai to put, place; see theme), used of the Bible by
Jerome and serving as the common Latin word for it until Biblia began to displace it 9c.


thesaurus (n.)

1823, treasury, storehouse, from Latin thesaurus treasury, a hoard, a treasure, something laid up,
figuratively repository, collection, from Greek thesauros a treasure, treasury, storehouse, chest,
from root of tithenai to put, to place (see theme). The meaning encyclopedia filled with information
is from 1840, but existed earlier as thesaurarie (1590s), used as a title by early dictionary
compilers, on the notion of thesaurus verborum a treasury of words. Meaning collection of words
arranged according to sense is first attested 1852 in Roget's title. Thesaurer is attested in Middle
English for treasurer and thesaur treasure was in use 15c.-16c.


case (n.2)

receptacle, early 14c., from Anglo-French and Old North French casse (Old French chasse case,
reliquary; Modern French ch&acirc;sse), from Latin capsa box, repository (especially for books),
from capere to take, hold (see capable).    Meaning outer protective covering is from late 14c. Also
used from 1660s with a sense frame (as in staircase, casement). Artillery sense is from 1660s, from
case-shot small projectiles put in cases (1620s). Its application in the printing trade (first
recorded 1580s) to the two trays where compositors keep their types in separate compartments for
easy access led to upper-case letter for a capital (1862) and lower-case for small letters.    The
cases, or receptacles, for the type, which are always in pairs, and termed the 'upper' and the
'lower,' are formed of two oblong wooden frames, divided into compartments or boxes of different
dimensions, the upper case containing ninety-eight and the lower fifty-four. In the upper case are
placed the capital, small capital, and accented letters, also figures, signs for reference to notes
&amp;c.; in the lower case the ordinary running letter, points for punctuation, spaces for
separating the words, and quadrats for filling up the short lines. [The Literary Gazette, Jan. 29,
1859]


