reposeful (adj.)

1852, full of repose, from repose (n.) + -ful. Earlier it meant responsible (1620s), from repose
(v.2).


repose (n.)

rest, c.1500, from Middle French repos (11c.), back-formation from reposer (see repose (v.1)).


repose (v.2)

put, place, mid-15c., from Latin repos-, stem of reponere put back, set back, replace, restore; put
away, lay out, stretch out, from re- back, away (see re-) + ponere to put, place (see position
(n.)). Or perhaps [Klein] formed in Middle English from Old French poser, on model of disposen
dispose.


repose (v.1)

lie at rest, mid-15c., from Middle French reposer, from Old French repauser (10c.), from Late Latin
repausare cause to rest, from Latin re-, here probably an intensive prefix (see re-), + Late Latin
pausare to stop (see pause (v.)). Related: Reposed; reposing.


quiet (n.)

c.1300, freedom from disturbance or conflict; calm, stillness, from Old French quiete rest, repose,
tranquility and directly from Latin quies (genitive quietis) a lying still, rest, repose, peace,
from PIE root *kweie- (2) to rest, be quiet (cognates: Old Persian shiyati-, Avestan shaiti- well-
being; Avestan shyata- happy; Gothic hveila, Old English hwil space of time; see while (n.)). Late
14c. as inactivity, rest, repose.


requiescat (n.)

name of a prayer for the repose of the dead, from Latin phrase requiescat in pace (often abbreviated
R.I.P.), literally may he (or she) begin to rest in peace, from third person singular inceptive of
requies rest, repose (see requiem).


rest (v.1)

repose, cease from action, Old English r&aelig;stan, restan take repose by lying down; lie in death
or in the grave; cease from motion, work, or performance; be without motion; be undisturbed, be free
from what disquiets; stand or lie as upon a support or basis, from root of rest (n.1). Transitive
senses give repose to; lay or place, as on a support or basis are from early 13c. Meaning cease
from, have intermission is late 14c., also rely on for support. Related: Rested; resting. Common
Germanic, with cognates in Old Frisian resta, Dutch rusten, Old High German raston, German rasten,
Swedish rasta, Danish raste to rest. Resting place is from mid-14c.


requiem (n.)

mass for repose of the soul of the dead, c.1300, from Latin requiem, accusative singular of requies
rest (after labor), repose, from re-, intensive prefix (see re-), + quies quiet (see quiet (adj.)).
It is the first word of the Mass for the Dead in the Latin liturgy: Requiem &aelig;ternam dona eis,
Domine .... [Grant them eternal rest, O Lord ....]


rest (n.1)

sleep, Old English r&aelig;ste, reste rest, bed, intermission of labor, mental peace, common
Germanic (Old Saxon resta resting place, burial-place, Dutch rust, Old High German rasta, German
Rast rest, peace, repose), of uncertain origin.    Original sense seems to be a measure of distance
(compare Old High German rasta, which in addition to rest meant league of miles, Old Norse rost
league, distance after which one rests, Gothic rasta mile, stage of a journey), perhaps a word from
the nomadic period. Unless the original sense is repose, thence extended secondarily to distance
between two resting place.    The meaning support, thing upon which something rests is attested from
1580s. At rest dead is from mid-14c., on the notion of last rest. Rest stop is from 1973. Colloquial
expression to give (something) a rest to stop talking about it is first recorded 1927, American
English.


reposition (n.)

1580s, act of replacing, from Late Latin repositionem (nominative repositio), noun of action from
past participle stem of Latin reponere (see repose (v.2)). Meaning act of laying up in safety is
from 1610s.


posada (n.)

inn, 1763, from Spanish posada home, lodging, from posar to repose, rest, lodge, from Latin pausare
(see pause (v.)).


repository (n.)

late 15c., vessel, etc., for storage, Middle French repositoire or directly from Late Latin
repositorium store, in classical Latin, a stand on which food is placed, from noun use of repositus,
past participle of reponere put away, store (see repose (v.2)). Figurative use is recorded from
1640s.


laurel (n.)

c.1300, lorrer, from Old French laurier (12c.), from Latin laurus laurel tree, probably related to
Greek daphne laurel (for change of d- to l- see lachrymose), probably from a pre-IE Mediterranean
language. The change of second -r- to -l- after mid-14c. is by dissimilation. An emblem of victory
or of distinction, hence the phrase to rest (originally repose) on one's laurels, first attested
1831.


sleep (n.)

Old English sl&aelig;p sleep, sleepiness, inactivity, from Proto-Germanic *slepaz, from the root of
sleep (v.); compare cognate Old Saxon slap, Old Frisian slep, Middle Dutch sl&aelig;p, Dutch slaap,
Old High German slaf, German Schlaf, Gothic sleps.    Personified in English from late 14c., on
model of Latin Somnus), Greek Hypnos. Figurative use for repose of death was in Old English; to put
(an animal) to sleep kill painlessly is recorded from 1923 (a similar imagery is in cemetery). Sleep
deprivation attested from 1906. Sleep-walker somnambulist is attested from 1747; sleep-walking is
from 1840. To be able to do something in (one's) sleep easily is recorded from 1953.


while (n.)

Old English hwile, accusative of hwil a space of time, from Proto-Germanic *hwilo (cognates: Old
Saxon hwil, Old Frisian hwile, Old High German hwila, German Weile, Gothic hveila space of time,
while), originally rest (compare Old Norse hvila bed, hvild rest), from PIE *kwi-lo-, suffixed form
of root *kweie- (2) to rest (cognates: Avestan shaitish joy, Old Persian &#353;iyatish joy, Latin
quies rest, repose, quiet, Old Church Slavonic po-koji rest). Notion of period of rest became in
Germanic period of time.    Now largely superseded by time except in formulaic constructions (such
as all the while). Middle English sense of short space of time spent in doing something now only
preserved in worthwhile and phrases such as worth (one's) while. As a conjunction, during or in the
time that; as long as (late Old English), it represents Old English &thorn;a hwile &thorn;e,
literally the while that. Form whiles is recorded from early 13c.; whilst is from late 14c., with
excrescent -st as in amongst, amidst. Service while-you-wait is attested from 1911.


