reproachful (adj.)

1540s, expressing reproach, also worthy of reproach, from reproach + -ful. Related: Reproachfully;
reproachfulness.


reproach (v.)

mid-14c., reprochen to rebuke, reproach, from  Anglo-French repruchier, Old French reprochier
upbraid, blame, accuse, speak ill of, from reproche (see reproach (n.)). Related: Reproached;
reproaching.


reproach (n.)

mid-14c., a rebuke, blame, censure; also object of scorn or contempt; c.1400, as disgrace, state of
disgrace, from Old French reproche blame, shame, disgrace (12c.), from reprochier to blame, bring up
against, said by some French etymologists to be from Vulgar Latin *repropiare, from Latin re-
opposite of + prope near (see propinquity), with suggestions of bring near to as in modern get in
(someone's) face. But others would have it from *reprobicare, from Latin reprobus/reprobare (see
reprobate (adj.)).


opprobrious (adj.)

full of reproach, intended to bring disgrace, late 14c., from Old French oprobrieus (Modern French
opprobrieux), or directly from Late Latin opprobriosus, from Latin opprobare to reproach, taunt,
from ob against (see ob-) + probrum reproach, infamy. Etymological sense is disgrace attached to
conduct considered shameful. Related: Opprobriously; opprobriousness.


twit (v.)

to blame, reproach, taunt, upbraid, 1520s, twite, shortened form of Middle English atwite, from Old
English &aelig;twitan to blame, reproach, from &aelig;t at + witan to blame, from Proto-Germanic
*witanan (cognates: Old English wite, Old Saxon witi, Old Norse viti punishment, torture; Old High
German wizzi punishment, wizan to punish; Dutch verwijten, Old High German firwizan, German
verweisen to reproach, reprove, Gothic fraweitan to avenge), from PIE root *weid- to see (see
vision). For sense evolution, compare Latin animadvertere, literally to give heed to, observe, later
to chastise, censure, punish. Related: Twitted; twitting. As a noun meaning a taunt from 1520s.


fly-by-night (n.)

1796, slang, said to be an old term of reproach to a woman signifying that she was a witch; extended
1823 to anyone who departs hastily from a recent activity, especially while owing money. The two
senses involve the two verbs fly.


cimex (n.)

Latin, bug, bedbug, also a term of reproach, of uncertain origin. Related: Cimiceous buggy; cimicine
smelling of bugs.


alack

late 15c., from ah, lack, from lack in Middle English sense of loss, failure, reproach, shame.
Originally an expression of dissatisfaction, later of regret or unpleasant surprise.


rally (v.2)

make fun of, tease, 1660s, from French railler to rail, reproach (see rail (v.)).


twit (n.)

foolish, stupid and ineffectual person, 1934, British slang, popular 1950s-60s, crossed over to U.S.
with British sitcoms. It probably developed from twit (v.) in the sense of reproach, but it may be
influenced by nitwit.


reproof (n.)

mid-14c., a shame, a disgrace, also a censure, a rebuke, from Old French reprove reproach,
rejection, verbal noun from reprover to blame, accuse (see reprove).


tongue (v.)

to touch with the tongue, lick, 1680s, from tongue (n.). Earlier as a verb it meant drive out by
order or reproach (late 14c.). Related: Tongued; tonguing.


pansexual (adj.)

1926 (pansexualism is from 1917), from pan- + sexual. Originally in reference to the view that the
sex instinct plays the primary part in all human activity, mental and physical; this was held by his
critics to be the view of Freud, therefore a term of reproach leveled at early psychology.


capitalist (n.)

1791, man of money, from French capitaliste, a coinage of the Revolution and a term of reproach; see
capital (n.1) + -ist. Related: Capitalistic.


blame (n.)

early 13c., from Old French blasme blame, reproach; condemnation, a back-formation from blasmer (see
blame (v.)).


gab (v.)

to reproach, c.1200, via Scottish and northern England dialect, from a Scandinavian source, such as
Old Norse gabba to mock, or from Old French gabber mock, boast, both perhaps ultimately imitative.
Related: Gabbed; gabbing. Meaning to talk much is from 1786, probably a back-formation from gabble.


grasshopper (n.)

mid-14c. (late 13c. as a surname), earlier greshoppe (c.1200), from Old English g&aelig;rshoppa; see
grass + hop. Similar formation in Middle Swedish gr&auml;shoppare, German Grash&uuml;pfer. As a term
of reproach, from Eccl. xii:5. Also recorded c.1300 as a name for the hare.


dunce (n.)

dullard, 1570s, from earlier Duns disciple follower of John Duns Scotus (c.1265-1308), Scottish
scholar of philosophy and theology supposed to have been born at Duns in Berwickshire. By 16c.,
humanist reaction against medieval theology singled him out as the type of the hairsplitting
scholastic. It became a general term of reproach applied to more conservative philosophical
opponents by 1520s, later extended to any dull-witted student.


elegant (adj.)

late 15c., from Middle French &eacute;l&eacute;gant (15c.), from Latin elegantem (nominative
elegans) choice, fine, tasteful, collateral form of present participle of eligere select with care,
choose. Elegans was originally a term of reproach, dainty, fastidious; the notion of tastefully
refined emerged in classical Latin. Related: Elegantly.


effeminate (adj.)

early 15c., from Latin effeminatus womanish, effeminate, past participle of effeminare make a woman
of, from ex- out (see ex-) + femina woman (see feminine). Rarely used without reproach. Related:
Effeminately.


backwood (n.)

1709, American English, from back (adj.) + wood (n.) forested tract. Also backwoods. As an
adjective, from 1784.    BACKWOODSMEN ... This word is commonly used as a term of reproach (and
that, only in a familiar style,) to designate those people, who, being at a distance from the sea
and entirely agricultural, are considered as either hostile or indifferent to the interests of the
commercial states. [John Pickering, A Vocabulary, or Collection of Words and Phrases Which Have Been
Supposed to be Peculiar to the United States of America, Boston, 1816]


blame (v.)

c.1200, find fault with; c.1300, lay blame on, from Old French blasmer (12c., Modern French
bl&acirc;mer) to rebuke, reprimand, condemn, criticize, from Vulgar Latin *blastemare, from Late
Latin blasphemare revile, reproach (see blaspheme). Replaced Old English witan with long i. Related:
Blamed; blaming.


irreproachable (adj.)

1630s, from French irr&eacute;prochable (15c.), from assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see
in- (1)) + r&eacute;prochable (see reproach). Related: Irreproachably.


Pilate (n.)

c.1400 as a term of reproach, from the Roman surname, especially that of Pontius, a governor of
Judaea, from Latin Pilatus, literally armed with javelins, from pilum javelin (see pile (n.2)).
Among slang and cant uses of Pontius Pilate mentioned in the 1811 Dictionary of Buckish Slang,
University Wit and Pickpocket Eloquence is (Cambridge) a Mr. Shepherd of Trinity College; who
disputing with a brother parson on the comparative rapidity with which they read the liturgy,
offered to give him as far as Pontius Pilate in the Belief.


accuse (v.)

c.1300, charge (with an offense, etc.), impugn, blame, from Old French acuser to accuse, indict,
reproach, blame (13c.), earlier announce, report, disclose (12c.), or directly from Latin accusare
to call to account, from ad- against (see ad-) + causari give as a cause or motive, from causa
reason (see cause (n.)). Related: Accused; accusing; accusingly.


blaspheme (v.)

mid-14c., from Old French blasfemer to blaspheme (14c., Modern French blasph&eacute;mer), from
Church Latin blasphemare (also in Late Latin revile, reproach), from Greek blasphemein to speak
lightly or amiss of sacred things, to slander, from blasphemos evil-speaking (see blasphemy). A
reintroduction after the original word had been worn down and sense-shifted to blame (v.). Related:
Blasphemed; blaspheming.


argue (v.)

c.1300, to make reasoned statements to prove or refute a proposition, from Old French arguer
maintain an opinion or view; harry, reproach, accuse, blame (12c.), from Latin argutare to prattle,
prate, frequentative of arguere make clear, make known, prove, declare, demonstrate, from PIE *argu-
yo-, from root *arg- to shine, be white, bright, clear (see argent). Meaning to oppose, dispute is
from late 14c. Related: Argued; arguing.


contumely (n.)

late 14c., from Old French contumelie, from Latin contumelia a reproach, insult, probably related to
contumax haughty, stubborn, from com-, intensive prefix (see com-), + tumere to swell up (see
tumid).    The unhappy man left his country forever. The howl of contumely followed him across the
sea, up the Rhine, over the Alps; it gradually waxed fainter; it died away; those who had raised it
began to ask each other, what, after all, was the matter about which they had been so clamorous, and
wished to invite back the criminal whom they had just chased from them. [Thomas Babington Macaulay,
Lord Byron, 1877]


interloper (n.)

1590s, enterloper, unauthorized trader trespassing on privileges of chartered companies, probably a
hybrid from inter- between + -loper (from landloper vagabond, adventurer, also, according to
Johnson, a term of reproach used by seamen of those who pass their lives on shore); perhaps a
dialectal form of leap, or from Middle Dutch loper runner, rover, from lopen to run, from Proto-
Germanic *hlaupan to leap (see leap (v.)). General sense of self-interested intruder is from 1630s.


inculpate (v.)

1799, to accuse, bring charges against, from Medieval Latin inculpatus, past participle of inculpare
to reproach, blame, censure, from Latin in- in (see in- (2)) + culpare to blame, from culpa fault.
But inculpable (late 15c.) means not culpable, free from blame, from Latin in- not (see in- (1)) +
culpare.


imperialism (n.)

1826, advocacy of empire, originally in a Napoleonic context, also of Rome and of British foreign
policy, from imperial + -ism. At times in British usage (and briefly in U.S.) with a neutral or
positive sense relating to national interests or the spread of the benefits of Western civilization,
but from the begining usually more or less a term of reproach. General sense of one country's rule
over another, first recorded 1878. Picked up disparagingly in Communist jargon by 1918.    It is the
old story of 1798, when French republicanism sick of its own folly and misdeeds, became
metamorphosed into imperialism, and consoled itself for its incapacity to found domestic freedom by
putting an iron yoke upon Europe, and covering it with blood and battle-fields. [Francis Lloyd, St.
James's Magazine, January 1842]


kick (v.)

late 14c., to strike out with the foot (earliest in biblical phrase now usually rendered as kick
against the pricks), of uncertain origin, perhaps from Old Norse kikna bend backwards, sink at the
knees. The doubts OED has about the Scandinavian origin of kick are probably unfounded [Liberman].
Related: Kicked; kicking.    Figurative sense of complain, protest, rebel against (late 14c.)
probably is from the Bible verse. Slang sense of die is attested from 1725 (kick the wind was slang
for be hanged, 1590s; see also bucket). Meaning to end one's drug habit is from 1936. Kick in
contribute is from 1908; kick out expel is from 1690s. To kick oneself in self-reproach is from
1891. The children's game of kick the can is attested from 1891.


kitsch (n.)

1926, from German kitsch, literally gaudy, trash, from dialectal kitschen to smear.    What we
English people call ugliness in German art is simply the furious reaction against what Germans call
s&uuml;sses Kitsch, the art of the picture postcard, and of what corresponds to the royalty ballad.
It has for years been their constant reproach against us that England is the great country of
Kitsch. Many years ago a German who loved England only too well said to me, 'I like your English
word plain; it is a word for which we have no equivalent in German, because all German women are
plain.' He might well have balanced it by saying that English has no equivalent for the word Kitsch.
[Edward J. Dent, The Music of Arnold Sch&ouml;nberg, The Living Age, July 9, 1921]


shend (n.)

shame, disgrace (obsolete or dialectal), Old English scand ignominy, shame, confusion, disgrace;
scandal, disgraceful thing; wretch, impostor, infamous man; bad woman, from the source of Old
English scamu shame (see shame (n.)) + -&#254;a, with change of -m- to -n- before a dental (compare
Old Frisian skande, Dutch schande, Old High German scanda, German Schande disgrace). Also in early
Modern English as a verb, shend (Old English scendan) put to shame; blame, reproach; bring to ruin.
It was active in forming compounds, such as shendful (Old English scandful) shameful, shendship
disgrace; Old English scandhus house of ill-fame, scandlic shameful, scandlufiende loving
shamefully, scandword obscene language).


feisty (adj.)

1896, aggressive, exuberant, touchy, American English, with -y (2) + feist small dog, earlier fice,
fist (American English, 1805); short for fysting curre stinking cur, attested from 1520s, from
Middle English fysten, fisten break wind (mid-15c.); related to Old English fisting stink, from
Proto-Germanic *fistiz- a fart, said to be from PIE *pezd- (see fart), but there are difficulties.
The 1811 slang dictionary defines fice as a small windy escape backwards, more obvious to the nose
than ears; frequently by old ladies charged on their lap-dogs. Compare also Danish fise to blow, to
fart, and obsolete English aske-fise, fire-tender, literally ash-blower (early 15c.), from an
unrecorded Norse source, used in Middle English for a kind of bellows, but originally a term of
reproach among northern nations for an unwarlike fellow who stayed at home in the chimney corner
[OED].


tyrant (n.)

c.1300, absolute ruler, especially one without legal right; cruel, oppressive ruler, from Old French
tiran, tyrant (12c.), from Latin tyrannus lord, master, monarch, despot, especially arbitrary ruler,
cruel governor, autocrat (source also of Spanish tirano, Italian tiranno), from Greek tyrannos lord,
master, sovereign, absolute ruler unlimited by law or constitution, a loan-word from a language of
Asia Minor (probably Lydian); Klein compares Etruscan Turan mistress, lady (surname of Venus).  In
the exact sense, a tyrant is an individual who arrogates to himself the royal authority without
having a right to it. This is how the Greeks understood the word 'tyrant': they applied it
indifferently to good and bad princes whose authority was not legitimate. [Rousseau, The Social
Contract]    Originally in Greek the word was not applied to old hereditary sovereignties
(basileiai) and despotic kings, but it was used of usurpers, even when popular, moderate, and just
(such as Cypselus of Corinth), however it soon became a word of reproach in the usual modern sense.
The spelling with -t arose in Old French by analogy with present participle endings in -ant. Fem.
form tyranness is recorded from 1590 (Spenser); Medieval Latin had tyrannissa (late 14c.).


liberal (adj.)

mid-14c., generous, also, late 14c., selfless; noble, nobly born; abundant, and, early 15c., in a
bad sense extravagant, unrestrained, from Old French liberal befitting free men, noble, generous,
willing, zealous (12c.), from Latin liberalis noble, gracious, munificent, generous, literally of
freedom, pertaining to or befitting a free man, from liber free, unrestricted, unimpeded; unbridled,
unchecked, licentious, from PIE *leudh-ero- (source of Greek eleutheros free), probably originally
belonging to the people (though the precise semantic development is obscure), and a suffixed form of
the base *leudh- people (cognates: Old Church Slavonic ljudu, Lithuanian liaudis, Old English leod,
German Leute nation, people; Old High German liut person, people) but literally to mount up, to
grow.    With the meaning free from restraint in speech or action, liberal was used 16c.-17c. as a
term of reproach. It revived in a positive sense in the Enlightenment, with a meaning free from
prejudice, tolerant, which emerged 1776-88.    In reference to education, explained by Fowler as the
education designed for a gentleman (Latin liber a free man) &amp; ... opposed on the one hand to
technical or professional or any special training, &amp; on the other to education that stops short
before manhood is reached (see liberal arts). Purely in reference to political opinion, tending in
favor of freedom and democracy it dates from c.1801, from French lib&eacute;ral, originally applied
in English by its opponents (often in French form and with suggestions of foreign lawlessness) to
the party favorable to individual political freedoms. But also (especially in U.S. politics) tending
to mean favorable to government action to effect social change, which seems at times to draw more
from the religious sense of free from prejudice in favor of traditional opinions and established
institutions (and thus open to new ideas and plans of reform), which dates from
1823.<b>Conservative</b>, n. A statesman who is enamored of existing evils, as distinguished from
the Liberal, who wishes to replace them with others. [Ambrose Bierce, Devil's Dictionary, 1911]


bad (adj.)

c.1200, inferior in quality; early 13c., wicked, evil, vicious, a mystery word with no apparent
relatives in other languages.* Possibly from Old English derogatory term b&aelig;ddel and its
diminutive b&aelig;dling effeminate man, hermaphrodite, pederast, probably related to b&aelig;dan to
defile. A rare word before 1400, and evil was more common in this sense until c.1700. Meaning
uncomfortable, sorry is 1839, American English colloquial.    Comparable words in the other Indo-
European languages tend to have grown from descriptions of specific qualities, such as ugly,
defective, weak, faithless, impudent, crooked, filthy (such as Greek kakos, probably from the word
for excrement; Russian plochoj, related to Old Church Slavonic plachu wavering, timid; Persian gast,
Old Persian gasta-, related to gand stench; German schlecht, originally level, straight, smooth,
whence simple, ordinary, then bad).    Comparative and superlative forms badder, baddest were common
14c.-18c. and used as recently as Defoe (but not by Shakespeare), but yielded to comparative worse
and superlative worst (which had belonged to evil and ill).    As a noun, late 14c., evil,
wickedness. In U.S. place names, sometimes translating native terms meaning supernaturally
dangerous. Ironic use as a word of approval is said to be at least since 1890s orally, originally in
Black English, emerging in print 1928 in a jazz context. It might have emerged from the ambivalence
of expressions like bad nigger, used as a term of reproach by whites, but among blacks sometimes
representing one who stood up to injustice, but in the U.S. West bad man also had a certain
ambivalence:    These are the men who do most of the killing in frontier communities, yet it is a
noteworthy fact that the men who are killed generally deserve their fate. [Farmer &amp; Henley]
*Farsi has bad in more or less the same sense as the English word, but this is regarded by linguists
as a coincidence. The forms of the words diverge as they are traced back in time (Farsi bad comes
from Middle Persian vat), and such accidental convergences exist across many languages, given the
vast number of words in each and the limited range of sounds humans can make to signify them. Among
other coincidental matches with English are Korean mani many, Chinese pei pay, Nahuatl (Aztecan)
huel well, Maya hol hole.


