reprisal (n.)

early 15c., seizing property or citizens of another nation in retaliation for loss inflicted on
one's own, from Anglo-French reprisaille (14c.), from Old French reprisaille (Modern French
repr&#233;saille), from early Italian ripresaglia, from ripreso, past participle of riprendere take
back, from Latin reprendere, earlier reprehendere (see reprehend). General sense of retaliation is
from 1710.


marque (n.)

seizure by way of reprisal, mid-15c., in letters of marque official permission to capture enemy
merchant ships, from Anglo-French mark (mid-14c.), via Old French from Old Proven&ccedil;al marca
reprisal, from marcar seize as a pledge, mark, probably from a Germanic source (compare Old High
German marchon delimit, mark; see mark (n.1)), but the sense evolution is difficult.


V

In Middle English, -u- and -v- were used interchangeably, though with a preference for v- as the
initial letter (vnder, vain, etc.) and -u- elsewhere (full, euer, etc.). The distinction into
consonant and vowel identities was established in English by 1630, under influence of continental
printers, but into 19c. some dictionaries and other catalogues continued to list -u- and -v- words
as a single series.    No native Anglo-Saxon words begin in v- except those (vane, vat, vixen)
altered by the southwestern England habit of replacing initial f- with v- (and initial s- with z-).
Confusion of -v- and -w- also was a characteristic of 16c. Cockney accents.    As a Roman numeral,
five. In German rocket weapons systems of World War II, it stood for Vergeltungswaffe reprisal
weapon. V-eight as a type of motor engine is recorded from 1929 (V-engine is attested from 1909), so
called for the arrangement. The V for victory hand sign was conceived January 1941 by Belgian
politician and resistance leader Victor de Laveleye, to signify French victoire and Flemish vrijheid
(freedom). It was broadcast into Europe by Radio Belgi&#235;/Radio Belgique and popularized by the
BBC by June 1941, from which time it became a universal allied gesture.


