repressive (adj.)

early 15c., from Middle French repressif, from Latin repress-, past participle stem of reprimere
(see repress). Related: Repressively.


repressed (adj.)

1660s, past participle adjective from repress (v.). Psychological sense by 1904.


repression (n.)

late 14c., noun of action from repress (v.), or else from Medieval Latin repressionem (nominative
repressio), noun of action from past participle stem of Latin reprimere. Psychological sense is from
1908; biochemical sense is from 1957.


repress (v.)

late 14c., to check, restrain, from Latin repressus, past participle of reprimere hold back, curb,
figuratively check, confine, restrain, refrain, from re- back (see re-) + premere to push (see press
(v.1)).    Used of feelings or desires from late 14c.; in the purely psychological sense, it
represents German verdr&auml;ngen (Freud, 1893), first attested 1904 (implied in repressed). Meaning
to put down (a rebellion, etc.) is from late 15c. Related: Repressed; repressing.


overbear (v.)

late 14c., to carry over, from over- + bear (v.). Meaning to bear down by weight of physical force
is from 1535 (in Coverdale), originally nautical, of an overwhelming wind; figurative sense of to
overcome and repress by power, authority, etc. is from 1560s.


confute (v.)

1520s, from Middle French confuter, from Latin confutare repress, check; disprove, restrain,
silence, from com-, intensive prefix (see com-), + *futare to beat, from PIE root *bhau- to strike,
beat (see batter (v.)). Related: Confuted; confuting.


reprimand (n.)

1630s, from French r&eacute;primande (16c.), from Middle French reprimende reproof, from Latin
reprimenda that is to be repressed (as in reprimenda culpa fault to be checked), fem. singular of
reprimendus, gerundive of reprimere reprove (see repress). Spelling influenced in French by mander
to summon.


restrain (v.)

mid-14c., from stem of Old French restreindre press, push together; curb, bridle; bandage (12c.),
from Latin restringere draw back tightly, confine, check (see restriction). Related: Restrained;
restraining.    That which we restrain we keep within limits; that which we restrict we keep within
certain definite limits; that which we repress we try to put out of existence. [Century Dictionary,
1902]


hinder (v.)

Old English hindrian to harm, injure, impair, check, repress, from Proto-Germanic *hinderojan
(cognates: Old Norse hindra, Dutch hinderen, Old High German hintaron, German hindern to keep back),
from a root meaning on that side of, behind (see hind (adj.)); thus the ground sense is to put or
keep back, though this sense in English is recorded only from late 14c. Related: Hindered;
hindering.


refute (v.)

1510s, refuse, reject, from Middle French r&#233;futer (16c.) and directly from Latin refutare drive
back; rebut, disprove; repress, repel, resist, oppose, from re- back (see re-) + -futare to beat,
probably from PIE root *bhau- to strike down (see bat (n.1)).    Meaning prove wrong dates from
1540s. Since c.1964 linguists have frowned on the subtle shift in meaning towards to deny, as it is
used in connection with allegation. Related: Refuted; refuting.


refrain (v.)

mid-14c., from Old French refraigner restrain, repress, keep in check (12c., Modern French
R&#233;fr&#233;ner), from Latin refrenare to bridle, hold in with a bit, check, curb, keep down,
control, from re- back (see re-) + frenare restrain, furnish with a bridle, from frenum a bridle.
Related: Refrained; refraining.


smother (v.)

c.1200, to suffocate with smoke, from smother (n.), earlier smorthre dense, suffocating smoke (late
12c.), from stem of Old English smorian to suffocate, choke, strangle, stifle, cognate with Middle
Dutch smoren, German schmoren; possibly connected to smolder. Meaning to kill by suffocation in any
manner is from 1540s; sense of to extinguish a fire is from 1590s. Sense of stifle, repress is first
recorded 1570s; meaning to cover thickly (with some substance) is from 1590s. Related: Smothered;
smothering.


irrepressible (adj.)

1767, from assimilated form of in- (1) not, opposite of + repressible (see repress).    Increase of
population, which is filling the States out to their very borders, together with a new and extended
network of railroads and other avenues, and an internal commerce which daily becomes more intimate,
is rapidly bringing the States into a higher and more perfect social unity or consolidation. Thus,
these antagonistic systems are continually coming into closer contact, and collision results.
Shall I tell you what this collision means? They who think that it is accidental, unnecessary, the
work of interested or fanatical agitators, and therefor ephemeral, mistake the case altogether. It
is an irrepressible conflict between opposing and enduring forces, and it means that the United
States must and will, sooner or later, become either entirely a slaveholding nation, or entirely a
free-labor nation. [William H. Seward, speech at Rochester, N.Y., Oct. 2, 1858]    Related:
Irrepressibly.


tenet (n.)

principle, opinion, or dogma maintained as true by a person, sect, school, etc., properly a thing
held (to be true), early 15c., from Latin tenet he holds, third person singular present indicative
of tenere to hold, grasp, keep, have possession, maintain, also reach, gain, acquire, obtain; hold
back, repress, restrain; figuratively hold in mind, take in, understand.    The Latin word is from
PIE root *ten- to stretch (cognates: Sanskrit tantram loom, tanoti stretches, lasts; Persian tar
string; Lithuanian tankus compact, i.e. tightened; Greek teinein to stretch, tasis a stretching,
tension, tenos sinew, tetanos stiff, rigid, tonos string, hence sound, pitch; Latin tendere to
stretch, tenuis thin, rare, fine; Old Church Slavonic tento cord; Old English &thorn;ynne thin).
Connecting notion between stretch and hold is cause to maintain. The modern sense is probably
because tenet was used in Medieval Latin to introduce a statement of doctrine.


