reprehensible (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French reprehensible (14c.) or directly from Late Latin reprehensibilis, from
reprehens-, past participle stem of Latin reprehendere (see reprehend). Related: Reprehensibly;
reprehensibility.


satire (n.)

late 14c., work intended to ridicule vice or folly, from Middle French satire (14c.) and directly
from Latin satira satire, poetic medley, earlier satura, in lanx satura mixed dish, dish filled with
various kinds of fruit, literally full dish, from fem. of satur sated (see saturate).    First used
in the literary sense in Latin in reference to a collection of poems in various meters on a variety
of subjects by the late republican Roman poet Ennius. The matter of the little that survives of his
verse does not seem to be particularly satiric, but in classical Latin the word came to mean
especially a poem which assailed the prevailing vices, one after another. Altered in Latin by
influence of Greek satyr, on mistaken notion that the literary form is related to the Greek satyr
drama (see satyr).<b>Satire</b>, n. An obsolete kind of literary composition in which the vices and
follies of the author's enemies were expounded with imperfect tenderness. In this country satire
never had more than a sickly and uncertain existence, for the soul of it is wit, wherein we are
dolefully deficient, the humor that we mistake for it, like all humor, being tolerant and
sympathetic. Moreover, although Americans are 'endowed by their Creator' with abundant vice and
folly, it is not generally known that these are reprehensible qualities, wherefore the satirist is
popularly regarded as a sour-spirited knave, and his every victim's outcry for codefendants evokes a
national assent. [Ambrose Bierce, Devil's Dictionary, 1911]   <hr />   Proper satire is
distinguished, by the generality of the reflections, from a lampoon which is aimed against a
particular person, but they are too frequently confounded. [Johnson]   <hr />   [I]n whatever
department of human expression, wherever there is objective truth there is satire [Wyndham Lewis,
Rude Assignment, 1950]    For nuances of usage, see humor (n.).


silk (n.)

c.1300, from Old English seoloc, sioloc silk, silken cloth, from Latin sericum silk, plural serica
silken garments, silks, literally Seric stuff, neuter of Sericus, from Greek Serikos silken;
pertaining to the Seres, an oriental people of Asia from whom the Greeks got silks. Western
cultivation began 552 C.E., when agents from Byzantium impersonating monks smuggled silkworms and
mulberry leaves out of China.    Chinese si silk, Manchurian sirghe, Mongolian sirkek have been
compared to this and the people name in Greek might be a rendering via Mongolian of the Chinese word
for silk, but this is uncertain.    Also found in Old Norse as silki but not elsewhere in Germanic.
The more common Germanic form is represented by Middle English say, from Old French seie, with
Spanish seda, Italian seta, Dutch zijde, German Seide  is from Medieval Latin seta  silk, perhaps
elliptical for seta serica, or else a particular use of seta bristle, hair (see seta (n.)).
According to some sources [Buck, OED], the use of -l- instead of -r- in the Balto-Slavic form of the
word (Old Church Slavonic &#353;elku, Lithuanian &#353;ilkai) passed into English via the Baltic
trade and may reflect a Chinese dialectal form, or a Slavic alteration of the Greek word. But the
Slavic linguist Vasmer dismisses that, based on the initial sh- in the Slavic words, and suggests
the Slavic words are from Scandinavian rather than the reverse.    As an adjective from mid-14c. In
reference to the hair of corn, 1660s, American English. Figurative use of silk-stocking (n.) is from
1590s; as an adjective meaning wealthy it is attested from 1798, American English (silk stockings,
especially worn by men, being regarded as extravagant and reprehensible, indicative of luxurious
habits). Silk-screen (n.) is first attested 1930; as a verb from 1961. Silk road so called in
English from 1931.


