reprove (v.)

c.1300, from Old French reprover accuse, blame (12c.), from Late Latin reprobare disapprove, reject,
condemn (see reprobate). Related: Reproved; reproving.


reproof (n.)

mid-14c., a shame, a disgrace, also a censure, a rebuke, from Old French reprove reproach,
rejection, verbal noun from reprover to blame, accuse (see reprove).


snub (v.)

mid-14c., to check, reprove, rebuke, from Old Norse snubba to curse, chide, snub, scold, reprove.
The ground sense is perhaps to cut off, and the word probably is related to snip. Compare Swedish
snobba lop off, snuff (a candle), Old Norse snubbotr snubbed, nipped, with the tip cut off. Meaning
treat coldly appeared early 18c. Related: Snubbed; snubbing.


reprimand (n.)

1630s, from French r&eacute;primande (16c.), from Middle French reprimende reproof, from Latin
reprimenda that is to be repressed (as in reprimenda culpa fault to be checked), fem. singular of
reprimendus, gerundive of reprimere reprove (see repress). Spelling influenced in French by mander
to summon.


tax (v.)

c.1300, impose a tax on, from Old French taxer impose a tax (13c.) and directly from Latin taxare
evaluate, estimate, assess, handle, also censure, charge, probably a frequentative form of tangere
to touch (see tangent (adj.)). Sense of to burden, put a strain on first recorded early 14c.; that
of censure, reprove is from 1560s. Its use in Luke ii for Greek apographein to enter on a list,
enroll is due to Tyndale. Related: Taxed; taxing.


chide (v.)

late 12c., scold, nag, rail, originally intransitive, from Old English cidan to contend, quarrel,
complain. Not found outside Old English (though Liberman says it is probably related to OHG
*k&icirc;dal 'wedge,' with a sense evolution from brandishing sticks to scold, reprove). Past tense,
past participle can be chided or chid or even (past participle) chidden (Shakespeare used it);
present participle is chiding.


reprieve (v.)

1570s, reprive, take back to prison, alteration (perhaps by influence of reprove) of Middle English
repryen to remand, detain (late 15c.), probably from Middle French repris, past participle of
reprendre take back (see reprise). Meaning to suspend an impending execution is recorded from 1590s;
this sense evolved because being sent back to prison was the alternative to being executed. Spelling
with -ie- is from 1640s, perhaps by analogy of achieve, etc. Related: Reprieved; reprieving.


rebuke (v.)

early 14c., to reprimand, reprove; chide, scold, from Anglo-French rebuker to repel, beat back, Old
French rebuchier, from re- back (see re-) + buschier to strike, chop wood, from busche (French
bÃ&fnof;Â»che) wood, from Proto-Germanic *busk- (see bush (n.)). Related: Rebuked; rebuking.


chastise (v.)

c.1300, chastisen, from Old French chastiier to warn, advise, instruct; chastise, admonish; punish;
dominate, tame (12c., Modern French ch&acirc;tier), from Latin castigare to set or keep right, to
reprove, chasten, to punish, literally to make pure (see castigate). Or perhaps from Middle English
chastien (see chasten) + -ise, though this would be early for such a native formation. The form of
the modern word is not easily accounted for [OED]. Related: Chastised; chastising.  He alone may
chastise who loves. [Rabindranath Tagore, The Crescent Moon, 1913]


twit (v.)

to blame, reproach, taunt, upbraid, 1520s, twite, shortened form of Middle English atwite, from Old
English &aelig;twitan to blame, reproach, from &aelig;t at + witan to blame, from Proto-Germanic
*witanan (cognates: Old English wite, Old Saxon witi, Old Norse viti punishment, torture; Old High
German wizzi punishment, wizan to punish; Dutch verwijten, Old High German firwizan, German
verweisen to reproach, reprove, Gothic fraweitan to avenge), from PIE root *weid- to see (see
vision). For sense evolution, compare Latin animadvertere, literally to give heed to, observe, later
to chastise, censure, punish. Related: Twitted; twitting. As a noun meaning a taunt from 1520s.


