repudiate (v.)

1540s, to cast off by divorce,     from Latin repudiatus, past participle of repudiare to cast off,
put away, divorce, reject, scorn, disdain, from repudium divorce, rejection, a putting away,
dissolution of marriage, from re- back, away (see re-) + pudium, probably related to pes-/ped- foot
[Barnhart]. If this is so, the original notion may be of kicking something away, but folk etymology
commonly connects it with pudere cause shame to. Of opinions, conduct, etc., to refuse to
acknowledge, attested from 1824. Earliest in English as an adjective meaning divorced, rejected,
condemned (mid-15c.). Related: Repudiated; repudiating.


repudiation (n.)

1540s, divorce (of a woman by a man), from Latin repudiationem (nominative repudiatio) a rejection,
refusal, noun of action from past participle stem of repudiare (see repudiate). Meaning action of
disowning is from 1840s.


repudiatory (adj.)

1820; see repudiate + -ory.


cornerstone (n.)

late 13c., from corner (n.) + stone (n.). The figurative use is from early 14c.    I endorse without
reserve the much abused sentiment of Governor M'Duffie, that Slavery is the corner-stone of our
republican edifice; while I repudiate, as ridiculously absurd, that much lauded but nowhere
accredited dogma of Mr. Jefferson, that all men are born equal. No society has ever yet existed, and
I have already incidentally quoted the highest authority to show that none ever will exist, without
a natural variety of classes. [James H. Hammond, Letter to an English Abolitionist 1845]


disdain (v.)

late 14c., from Old French desdeignier disdain, scorn, refuse, repudiate, from des- do the opposite
of (see dis-) + deignier treat as worthy (see deign). Related: Disdained; disdaining.


literally (adv.)

1530s, in a literal sense, from literal + -ly (2). Erroneously used in reference to metaphors,
hyperbole, etc., even by writers like Dryden and Pope, to indicate what follows must be taken in the
strongest admissible sense (1680s), which is opposite to the word's real meaning and a long step
down the path to the modern misuse of it.    We have come to such a pass with this emphasizer that
where the truth would require us to insert with a strong expression 'not literally, of course, but
in a manner of speaking', we do not hesitate to insert the very word we ought to be at pains to
repudiate; ... such false coin makes honest traffic in words impossible. [Fowler, 1924]


deny (v.)

early 14c., from Old French denoiir deny, repudiate, withhold, from Latin denegare to deny, reject,
refuse (source of Italian dinegarre, Spanish denegar), from de- away (see de-) + negare refuse, say
'no,'  from Old Latin nec not, from Italic base *nek- not, from PIE root *ne- no, not (see un-).
Related: Denied; denying.


defy (v.)

c.1300, to renounce one's allegiance; mid-14c., to challenge, defy, from Old French defier, desfier
to challenge, defy, provoke; renounce (a belief), repudiate (a vow, etc.), from Vulgar Latin
*disfidare renounce one's faith, from Latin dis- away (see dis-) + fidus faithful (see faith).


rum (n.)

liquor from sugar cane or molasses, 1650s, shortening of rumbullion (1651), rombostion (1652), of
uncertain origin, perhaps from rum (adj.).The chiefe fudling they make in the Island [i.e. Barbados]
is Rumbullion alias Kill-Devill, and this is made of suggar cane distilled, a hott, hellish and
terrible liquor. [A briefe Description of the Island of Barbados, 1651]The English word was borrowed
into Dutch, German, Swedish, Danish, Spanish, Portuguese, Italian, French, and Russian. Used since
1800 in North America as a general (hostile) name for intoxicating liquors.    Rum I take to be the
name which unwashed moralists apply alike to the product distilled from molasses and the noblest
juices of the vineyard. Burgundy in all its sunset glow is rum. Champagne, soul of the foaming grape
of Eastern France, is rum. ... Sir, I repudiate the loathsome vulgarism as an insult to the first
miracle wrought by the Founder of our religion! [Oliver Wendell Holmes, The Autocrat of the
Breakfast-Table, 1891]


