reputable (adj.)

1610s, from repute + -able. Meaning having a good reputation is from 1670s. Related: Reputably.


irreputable (adj.)

1709, from assimilated form of in- (1) not, opposite of + reputable.


disreputable (adj.)

1710 (implied in disreputableness); see dis- + reputable. Related: Disreputably.


Wicca (n.)

An Old English masc. noun meaning male witch, wizard, soothsayer, sorcerer, astrologer, magician;
see witch. Use of the word in modern contexts traces to English folklorist Gerald Gardner
(1884-1964), who is said to have joined circa 1939 an occult group in New Forest, Hampshire,
England, for which he claimed an unbroken tradition to medieval times. Gardner seems to have first
used it in print in 1954, in his book Witchcraft Today (Witches were the Wica or wise people, with
herbal  knowledge and a working occult teaching usually used for good ....). In published and
unpublished material, he apparently only ever used the word as a mass noun referring to adherents of
the practice and not as the name of the practice itself. Some of his followers continue to use it in
this sense. According to Gardner's book The Meaning of Witchcraft (1959), the word, as used in the
initiation ceremony, played a key role in his experience:    I realised that I had stumbled upon
something interesting; but I was half-initiated before the word, 'Wica' which they used hit me like
a thunderbolt, and I knew where I was, and that the Old Religion still existed. And so I found
myself in the Circle, and there took the usual oath of secrecy, which bound me not to reveal certain
things.    In the late 1960s the term came into use as the title of a modern pagan movement
associated with witchcraft.  The first printed reference in this usage seems to be 1969, in The
Truth About Witchcraft by freelance  author Hans Holzer:    If the practice of the Old Religion,
which is also called Wicca (Craft of the Wise), and thence, witchcraft, is a reputable and useful
cult, then it is worthy of public interest.    And, quoting witch Alex Sanders:    No, a witch
wedding still needs a civil ceremony to make it legal. Wicca itself as a religion is not registered
yet. But it is about time somebody registered it, I think. I've done all I can to call attention to
our religion.    Sanders was a highly visible representative of neo-pagan Witchcraft in the late
1960s and early 1970s. During this time he appears to have popularized use of the term in this
sense.  Later books c.1989 teaching modernized witchcraft using the same term account for its rise
and popularity, especially in U.S.


