reputed (adj.)

1540s, held in repute, past participle adjective from repute (v.). Meaning supposed to be is from
1570s. Related: Reputedly.


facilis descensus Averni

Latin, literally the descent of Avernus (is) easy [Aeneid, VI.126], in reference to Avernus, a deep
lake near Puteoli, a reputed entrance to the underworld; hence, it is easy to slip into moral ruin.


Faustian

1876, in reference to Johann Faust (c.1485-1541), German wandering astrologer and wizard, who was
reputed to have sold his soul to the Devil. Fantastic tales of his life were told as early as the
late 16c., and he was the hero of dramas by Marlowe and Goethe. The Latinized form of his name,
faustus, means of favorable omen.


Seljuk

Turkish dynasty of 11c.-13c., c.1600 (Selzuccian), from Turkish seljuq, name of reputed ancestor of
the dynasty.


Rosicrucian (n.)

1620s, from Modern Latin rosa crucis (DuCange) or crux, Latinization of German Rosenkreuz, French
rosecroix, from the secret society's reputed founder Christian Rosenkreuz, said to date from 1484,
but not mentioned before 1614. As an adjective from 1660s.


repute (v.)

late 14c., from Middle French reputer (late 13c.) or directly from Latin reputare to count over,
reckon; think over (see reputation). Related: Reputed; reputing.


kelpie (n.)

1747, Scottish, of unknown origin, perhaps related to Gaelic colpach heifer, steer, colt; colpa cow,
horse. The Lowland name of a demon in the shape of a horse that was reputed to haunt lakes and
rivers and to delight in causing drownings. But unlike its equivalents in Danish (n&oslash;kken) and
Icelandic (nykur), it occasionally was benevolent, especially to millers by keeping their streams
running.


Pierian (adj.)

literally of Pieria, 1590s, from Latin Pierius Pieria, from Greek Pieria, district in northern
Thessaly, reputed home of the Muses; thus pertaining to poetry.    A little Learning is a dang'rous
Thing;  Drink deep, or taste not the Pierian Spring:  [Pope, Essay on Criticism, 1711]


serpentine (n.)

c.1400, plant reputed to contain antivenom, from Old French serpentin name of a precious stone, noun
use of adjective meaning of a snake, snake-like; sly, deceptive, from Late Latin serpentius of a
serpent, from Latin serpentem (nominative serpens) snake (see serpent). As the name of a greenish
igneous rock consisting mainly of hydrous magnesium silicate, attested from early 15c.


hellebore (n.)

late 14c., from Old French ellebore, from Latin elleborus, from Greek helleboros, perhaps meaning
plant eaten by fawns, from Greek ellos/hellos fawn + bora food of beasts, from bibroskein to eat,
from PIE root *gwere- (4) to swallow (see voracity). Among the ancients, the name given to various
plants of both poisonous and medicinal qualities, reputed to cure madness.


genuine (adj.)

1590s, natural, not acquired, from Latin genuinus native, natural, from root of gignere beget (see
genus), perhaps influenced in form by contrasting adulterinus spurious. [Alternative etymology is
from Latin genu knee, from a supposed ancient custom of a father acknowledging paternity of a
newborn by placing it on his knee.] Meaning really proceeding from its reputed source is from 1660s.
Related: Genuinely; genuineness.


authentic (adj.)

mid-14c., authoritative, from Old French autentique (13c., Modern French authentique) authentic;
canonical, and directly from Medieval Latin authenticus, from Greek authentikos original, genuine,
principal, from authentes one acting on one's own authority, from autos self (see auto-) + hentes
doer, being, from PIE *sene- to accomplish, achieve. Sense of entitled to acceptance as factual is
first recorded mid-14c.    Traditionally (at least since the 18c.), authentic implies that the
contents of the thing in question correspond to the facts and are not fictitious; genuine implies
that the reputed author is the real one; though this distinction is not etymological and is not
always now recognized.


invention (n.)

c.1400, devised method of organization, from Old French invencion (13c.) and directly from Latin
inventionem (nominative inventio) faculty of invention; a finding, discovery, noun of action from
past participle stem of invenire devise, discover, find, from in- in, on (see in- (2)) + venire to
come (see venue).    Meaning finding or discovering of something is early 15c. in English; sense of
thing invented is first recorded 1510s. Etymological sense preserved in Invention of the Cross,
Church festival (May 3) celebrating the reputed finding of the Cross of the Crucifixion by Helena,
mother of Constantine, in 326 C.E.


happy (adj.)

late 14c., lucky, favored by fortune, prosperous; of events, turning out well, from hap (n.) chance,
fortune + -y (2). Sense of very glad first recorded late 14c. Ousted Old English eadig (from ead
wealth, riches) and ges&aelig;lig, which has become silly. Meaning greatly pleased and content is
from 1520s. Old English bli&eth;e happy survives as blithe. From Greek to Irish, a great majority of
the European words for happy at first meant lucky. An exception is Welsh, where the word used first
meant wise.    Used in World War II and after as a suffix (as in bomb-happy, flak-happy) expressing
dazed or frazzled from stress. Happy medium is from 1778. Happy ending in the literary sense
recorded from 1756. Happy as a clam (1630s) was originally happy as a clam in the mud at high tide,
when it can't be dug up and eaten. Happy hunting ground, the reputed Indian paradise, is attested
from 1840, American English. Related: Happier; happiest.


philosopher (n.)

from Old English philosophe, from Latin philosophus philosopher, from Greek philosophos philosopher,
sage, one who speculates on the nature of things and truth, literally lover of wisdom, from philos
loving (see -phile) + sophos wise, a sage (see sophist). Modern form with -r appears early 14c.,
from an Anglo-French or Old French variant of philosophe, with an agent-noun ending.  Pythagoras was
the first who called himself philosophos, instead of sophos, 'wise man,' since this latter term was
suggestive of immodesty. [Klein] Philosophy also was used of alchemy in Middle Ages, hence
Philosophers' stone (late 14c., translating Medieval Latin lapis philosophorum, early 12c.), a
reputed solid substance supposed by alchemists to change baser metals into gold or silver; also
identified with the elixir and thus given the attribute of prolonging life indefinitely and curing
wounds and disease. (French pierre philosophale, German der Stein der Weisen).


