reserve (n.)

something stored up, 1610s, from reserve (v.) or from French r&#233;serve, a Middle French back-
formation from reserver. Meaning self-imposed restraint on freedom of words or actions; habit of
keeping back the feelings is from 1650s.


reserved (adj.)

guarded (in manner), c.1600, past participle adjective from reserve (v.). Of seats, tables from
1858.


reserve (v.)

mid-14c., from Old French reserver set aside, withhold (12c.) and directly from Latin reservare keep
back, save up; retain, preserve, from re- back (see re-) + servare to keep, save, preserve, protect
(see observe). Meaning to book is from 1935. Related: Reserved; reserving.


subsidiary (adj.)

1540s, from Latin subsidiarius belonging to a reserve, of a reserve, reserved; serving to assist or
supplement, from subsidium a help, aid, relief, troops in reserve (see subsidy). As a noun, c.1600,
subsidiary thing. In Latin the word was used as a noun meaning the reserve.


reservoir (n.)

1680s, a place where something tends to collect, originally figurative, from French r&eacute;servoir
storehouse, from Old French reserver to reserve (see reserve (n.)). Specific meaning artificial
basin to collect and store a large body of water is from 1705.


R.O.T.C.

also ROTC, 1916, American English, initialism (acronym) for Reserve Officers' Training Corps,
established as part of the National Defense Act of 1916.


unreserved (adj.)

1530s, not restricted or withheld, from un- (1) not + past participle of reserve (v.). From 1713 as
open, frank. Related: Unreservedly.


reservist (n.)

soldier who belongs to the reserves, 1872, from French r&#233;serviste, from reserver (see reserve
(v.)).


restraint (n.)

action of restraining; means of restraint, early 15c., from Old French restreinte, noun use of fem.
past participle of restraindre (see restrain). Sense of reserve is from c.1600.


back up (v.)

1767, stand behind and support, from back (v.) + up. The noun meaning a standby, a reserve is
recorded from 1952 (often written as one word, backup); specific reference to computing is from
1965.


talesman (n.)

reserve member of a jury, 1670s, from tales writ ordering bystanders to serve in place of jurors not
in attendance (late 15c.), via Anglo-French (mid-13c.), from Latin tales (in tales de
circumstantibus such persons from those standing about, a clause featured in such a writ), noun use
of plural of talis such, of such kind (see that).


subsidy (n.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French subsidie, Old French subside help, aid, assistance, contribution, from
Latin subsidium a help, aid, assistance, (military) reinforcements, troops in reserve, from
subsidere to settle down, stay, remain (see subside).


cornerstone (n.)

late 13c., from corner (n.) + stone (n.). The figurative use is from early 14c.    I endorse without
reserve the much abused sentiment of Governor M'Duffie, that Slavery is the corner-stone of our
republican edifice; while I repudiate, as ridiculously absurd, that much lauded but nowhere
accredited dogma of Mr. Jefferson, that all men are born equal. No society has ever yet existed, and
I have already incidentally quoted the highest authority to show that none ever will exist, without
a natural variety of classes. [James H. Hammond, Letter to an English Abolitionist 1845]


ersatz (adj.)

1875, from German Ersatz units of the army reserve, literally compensation, replacement, substitute,
from ersetzen to replace, from Old High German irsezzen, from ir-, unaccented variant of ur- +
setzen to set (see set (v.)). As a noun, from 1892.


spare (adj.)

kept in reserve, not used, provided or held for extra need, late 14c., from or from the same root as
spare (v.). Old English had sp&#230;r sparing, frugal. Also compare Old Norse sparr (to be) spared.
In reference to time, from mid-15c.; sense of lacking in substance; lean, gaunt; flimsy, thin; poor,
is recorded from 1540s. Spare part is attested from 1888. Spare tire is from 1894 of bicycles; 1903
of automobiles; 1961 of waistlines.


reservation (n.)

late 14c., act of reserving, from Old French reservation (14c.) and directly from Late Latin
reservationem (nominative reservatio), noun of action from past participle stem of Latin reservare
(see reserve (n.)). Mental sense is from c.1600. U.S. sense tract of public land set aside for some
special use is recorded from 1789, originally in reference to the Six Nations in New York State.
Meaning act or fact of engaging a room, a seat, etc. is from 1904, originally American English.


kinetic (adj.)

relating to motion, 1841, from Greek kinetikos moving, putting in motion, from kinetos moved, verbal
adjective of kinein to move (see cite).    Buster Keaton's subject was kinetic man, a being he
approached with the almost metaphysical awe we reserve for a Doppelg&auml;nger. This being was,
eerily, himself, played by himself, then later in a projection room, watched by himself: an
experience never possible to any generation of actors in the previous history of the world. [Hugh
Kenner, The Counterfeiters, 1968]    Related: Kinetical; kinetically.


relay (n.)

late 14c., hounds placed along a line of chase, from Middle French relai reserve pack of hounds or
other animals (13c.), from Old French relaier to exchange tired animals for fresh, literally leave
behind, from re- back (see re-) + laier to leave (see delay (v.)). The etymological sense is to
leave (dogs) behind (in order to take fresh ones). Of horses, 1650s. Electromagnetic sense first
recorded 1860. As a type of foot-race, it is attested from 1898.


bench (n.)

Old English benc long seat, from Proto-Germanic *bankiz bank of earth, perhaps here man-made
earthwork, later bench, table (cognates: Old Frisian bank bench, Old Norse bekkr, Danish b&aelig;nk,
Middle Dutch banc, Old High German banch), from PIE root *bheg- to break. Used for office of a judge
since late 13c. Sporting sense reserve of players (in baseball, North American football, etc.) is by
1909, from literal sense of place where players sit when not in action (by 1889).


nauseate (v.)

1630s, to feel sick, to become affected with nausea, from nauseat- past participle stem of Latin
nauseare to feel seasick, to vomit, also to cause disgust, from nausea (see nausea). Related:
Nauseated; nauseating;  nauseatingly. In its early life it also had transitive senses of to reject
(food, etc.) with a feeling of nausea (1640s) and to create a loathing in, to cause nausea (1650s).
Careful writers use nauseated for sick at the stomach and reserve nauseous (q.v.) for sickening to
contemplate.


ice (n.)

Old English is ice (also the name of the rune for -i-), from Proto-Germanic *isa- (cognates: Old
Norse iss, Old Frisian is, Dutch ijs, German Eis), with no certain cognates beyond Germanic, though
possible relatives are Avestan aexa- frost, ice, isu- frosty, icy; Afghan asai frost. Slang meaning
diamonds is attested from 1906.   Ice cube attested from 1904. Ice age attested from 1832. To break
the ice to make the first opening to any attempt is from 1580s, metaphoric of making passages for
boats by breaking up river ice though in modern use usually with implications of cold reserve.


warren (n.)

late 14c., piece of land enclosed for breeding beasts and fowls, from Anglo-French and Old North
French warenne (Old French garenne) game park, hunting reserve, possibly from Gaulish *varenna
enclosed area, related to *varros post. More likely from the present participle of Old North French
warir (Old French garir) defend, keep, from Proto-Germanic *war- to protect, guard (see warrant
(n.)). Later especially piece of land for breeding of rabbits (c.1400), which led to the transferred
sense of cluster of densely populated living spaces (1640s).


save (v.)

c.1200, to deliver from some danger; rescue from peril, bring to safety, also prevent the death of;
also theological, to deliver from sin or its consequences; admit to eternal life; gain salvation,
from Old French sauver keep (safe), protect, redeem, from Late Latin salvare make safe, secure, from
Latin salvus safe (see safe (adj.)). From c.1300 as reserve for future use, hold back, store up
instead of spending; hence keep possession of (late 14c.).   Save face (1898) first was used among
the British community in China and is said to be from Chinese; it has not been found in Chinese, but
tiu lien to lose face does occur. To not (do something) to save one's life is recorded from 1848. To
save (one's) breath cease talking or arguing is from 1926.


