resolution (n.)

late 14c., a breaking into parts, from Old French resolution (14c.) or directly from Latin
resolutionem (nominative resolutio) process of reducing things into simpler forms, from past
participle stem of resolvere loosen (see resolve). Sense of a solving (as of mathematical problems)
first recorded 1540s, as is that of power of holding firmly (compare resolute). Sense of decision or
expression of a meeting is from c.1600. Meaning effect of an optical instrument is from 1860. New
Year's resolutions in reference to a specific intention to better oneself is at least from 1780s,
and through 19c. generally of a pious nature.


Mothers&#039; Day

the spelling used in the U.S. congressional resolution first recognizing it, May 9, 1908.


resolute (adj.)

early 15c., dissolved, of loose structure, also morally lax, from Latin resolutus, past participle
of resolvere untie, unfasten, loose, loosen (see resolution). Meaning determined, decided, absolute,
final is from c.1500, especially in resolute answer, a phrase common in 16th c. [OED]. From 1530s of
persons. The notion is of breaking (something) into parts as the way to arrive at the truth of it
and thus make the final determination (compare resolution). Related: Resolutely; resoluteness.


determined (adj.)

1560s, decided, past participle adjective from determine. Meaning limited is from c.1600; that of
characterized by resolution is from c.1600, of actions; 1772, of persons.


dictum (n.)

1660s, from Latin dictum thing said (a saying, bon-mot, prophecy, etc.), an order, command, neuter
of dictus, past participle of dicere say (see diction). In legal use, a judge's expression of
opinion which is not the formal resolution of a case.


termination (n.)

late 14c., authoritative resolution of a matter, from Old French terminacion (13c.) and directly
from Latin terminationem (nominative terminatio) a fixing of boundaries, a bounding, determining,
noun of action from past participle stem of terminare to limit, end (see terminus). Meaning end of a
person's employment is recorded from 1961; meaning artificial end of a pregnancy is attested from
1969; sense of assasination is recorded from 1975.


irresolution (n.)

1590s, from French irr&eacute;solution (16c.), from ir-, assimilated form of in- not, opposite of
(see in- (1)) + r&eacute;solution (see resolution).


analysis (n.)

1580s, resolution of anything complex into simple elements (opposite of synthesis), from Medieval
Latin analysis (15c.), from Greek analysis a breaking up, a loosening, releasing, noun of action
from analyein unloose, release, set free; to loose a ship from its moorings, in Aristotle, to
analyze, from ana up, throughout (see ana-) + lysis a loosening, from lyein to unfasten (see lose).
Psychological sense is from 1890. Phrase in the final (or last) analysis (1844), translates French
en derni&egrave;re analyse.


resolve (v.)

late 14c., melt, dissolve, reduce to liquid; intransitive sense from c.1400; from Old French
resolver or directly from Latin resolvere to loosen, loose, unyoke, undo; explain; relax; set free;
make void, dispel, from re-, perhaps intensive, or back (see re-), + solvere loosen (see solve).
Early 15c. as separate into components, hence the use in optics (1785). Meaning determine, decide
upon is from 1520s, hence pass a resolution (1580s). For sense evolution, compare resolute (adj.).
Related: Resolved; resolving.


plebiscite (n.)

direct vote of the people, 1860 (originally in reference to Italian unification), from French
pl&eacute;biscite (1776 in modern sense, originally with reference to Switzerland), from Latin
plebiscitum a decree or resolution of the people, from plebs (genitive plebis) the common people
(see plebeian (adj.)) + scitum decree, noun use of neuter past participle of sciscere to assent,
vote for, approve, inchoative of scire to know (see science). Used earlier (1530s) in a purely Roman
historical context. Related: Plebiscitary.


tragedy (n.)

late 14c., play or other serious literary work with an unhappy ending, from Old French tragedie
(14c.), from Latin tragedia a tragedy, from Greek tragodia a dramatic poem or play in formal
language and having an unhappy resolution, apparently literally goat song, from tragos goat + oide
song (see ode).    The connection may be via satyric drama, from which tragedy later developed, in
which actors or singers were dressed in goatskins to represent satyrs. But many other theories have
been made (including singer who competes for a goat as a prize), and even the goat connection is at
times questioned. Meaning any unhappy event, disaster is from c.1500.


vest (n.)

1610s, loose outer garment (worn by men in Eastern countries or in ancient times), from French veste
a vest, jacket (17c.), from Italian vesta, veste robe, gown, from Latin vestis clothing, from
vestire to clothe (see vest (v.)). The sleeveless garment worn by men beneath the coat was
introduced by Charles II in a bid to rein in men's attire at court, which had grown extravagant and
decadent in the French mode.    The King hath yesterday, in Council, declared his resolution of
setting a fashion for clothes .... It will be a vest, I know not well how; but it is to teach the
nobility thrift. [Pepys, Diary, Oct. 8, 1666]    Louis XIV of France is said to have mocked the
effort by putting his footmen in such vests.


machine (n.)

1540s, structure of any kind, from Middle French machine device, contrivance, from Latin machina
machine, engine, military machine; device, trick; instrument (source also of Spanish maquina,
Italian macchina), from Greek makhana, Doric variant of mekhane device, means, related to mekhos
means, expedient, contrivance, from PIE *maghana- that which enables, from root *magh- (1) to be
able, have power (cognates: Old Church Slavonic mogo be able, Old English m&aelig;g I can; see may
(v.)).    Main modern sense of device made of moving parts for applying mechanical power (1670s)
probably grew out of mid-17c. senses of apparatus, appliance and military siege-tower. In late 19c.
slang the word was used for both penis and vagina, one of the few so honored. Political sense is
U.S. slang, first recorded 1876. Machine age is attested by 1851:    The idea of remodelling society
at public meetings is one of the least reasonable which ever entered the mind of an agitator: and
the notion that the relations of the sexes can be re-arranged and finally disposed of by preamble
and resolution, is one of the latest, as it should have been the last, vagary of a machine age. [The
Literary World, Nov. 1, 1851]   Machine for living (in) house translates Le Corbusier's machine
&agrave; habiter (1923).


