resort (n.)

late 14c., that to which one has recourse for aid or assistance, from Old French resort resource, a
help, an aid, a remedy, back-formation from resortir to resort, literally to go out again, from re-
again (see re-) + sortir go out (see sortie). Meaning place people go for recreation is first
recorded 1754. Phrase in the last resort (1670s) translates French en dernier ressort, originally of
legal appeals.


resort (v.)

c.1400, issue; come out again; mid-15c., to go to (someone) for aid, from Old French resortir, from
resort (see resort (n.)). Related: Resorted; resorting.


homburg (n.)

type of soft felt had with a curled brim and a dented crown, 1894, from Homburg, resort town in
Prussia, where it was first made. Introduced to England by Edward VII.


Saratoga

in reference to a kind of large trunk, 1858, so called because it was much used by ladies traveling
to the summer resort of Saratoga, N.Y. The name, early recorded as saraghtogo, apparently is from an
Iroquoian language, but it is of unknown origin.


Sochi

Black Sea resort in Russia, ultimately from the name of the Cherkess (Circassian) people who live in
the region, whose name is of uncertain origin.


Coney Island

community in Brooklyn, N.Y., so called for the rabbits once found there (see coney) and was known to
the Dutch as Konijn Eiland, from which the English name probably derives. It emerged as a resort and
amusement park center after the U.S. Civil War.


Monte Carlo fallacy

1957, named for resort in Monaco famous for its gambling casinos. The fallacy of thinking that the
probability of a particular outcome rises with the successive number of opposite outcomes. Contrary
to the Monte Carlo fallacy, if the roulette wheel stops on black 99 times in a row, the chances that
the 100th spin will be red are still just under 50-50.


spa (n.)

medicinal or mineral spring, 1620s, from the name of the health resort in eastern Belgium, known
since 14c., that features mineral springs believed to have curative properties. The place name is
from Walloon espa spring, fountain. As commercial establishment offering health and beauty
treatments, 1960.


Lido

famous resort island off Venice, from Italian lido, from Latin litus shore.


Riviera (n.)

Mediterranean seacoast around Genoa, 1630s, from Italian riviera, literally bank, shore (see river).
In extended use, the coast from Marseilles to La Spezia, which became popular 19c. as a winter
resort. Thence adopted (sometimes ironically) in reference to areas of other countries, as in
American Riviera (Florida, 1887); English Riviera (Devonshire coast, 1882).


Acapulco

in full, Acapulco de Juarez, resort town in western Mexico, from Nahuatl (Aztecan) acapulco place of
the large canes, from aca(tl) cane (plant) + -pul large + -co place. Acapulco gold as the name of a
local grade of potent marijuana is attested from 1965.


Adirondack (adj.)

1906, in reference to a type of lawn or deck chair said to have been designed in 1903 by a Thomas
Lee, owner of the Westport Mountain Spring, a resort in the Adirondack region of New York State, and
commercially manufactured the following year, but said originally to have been called Westport chair
after the town where it was first made. Adirondack Mountains is a back-formation from Adirondacks,
treated as a plural noun but really from Mohawk (Iroquoian) adiro:daks tree-eaters, a name applied
to neighboring Algonquian tribes, in which the -s is an imperfective affix.


haunt (v.)

early 13c., to practice habitually, busy oneself with, take part in, from Old French hanter to
frequent, resort to, be familiar with (12c.), probably from Old Norse heimta bring home, from Proto-
Germanic *haimat-janan, from *haimaz- (see home). Meaning to frequent (a place) is c.1300 in
English. Use in reference to a spirit returning to the house where it had lived perhaps was in
Proto-Germanic, but it was reinforced by Shakespeare's plays, and it is first recorded 1590 in A
Midsummer Night's Dream. Related: Haunted; haunting. Middle English hauntingly meant frequently;
sense of so as to haunt one's thoughts or memory is from 1859.


tuxedo (n.)

man's evening dress for semiformal occasions, 1889, named for Tuxedo Park, N.Y., a rural resort
development for wealthy New Yorkers and site of a country club where it first was worn, supposedly
in 1886. The name is an attractive subject for elaborate speculation, and connections with
Algonquian words for bear or wolf were proposed. The authoritative Bright, however, says the tribe's
name probably is originally a place name, perhaps Munsee Delaware (Algonquian) p'tuck-sepo crooked
river.    There was a hue and cry raised against the Tuxedo coat upon its first appearance because
it was erroneously considered and widely written of as intended to displace the swallow tail. When
the true import of the tailless dress coat came to be realized it was accepted promptly by swelldom,
and now is widely recognized as one of the staple adjuncts of the jeunesse dor&#233;e. [Clothier and
Furnisher, August, 1889]


summer (n.1)

hot season of the year, Old English sumor summer, from Proto-Germanic *sumur- (cognates: Old Saxon,
Old Norse, Old High German sumar, Old Frisian sumur, Middle Dutch somer, Dutch zomer, German
Sommer), from PIE root *sem- (2) summer (cognates: Sanskrit sama season, half-year, Avestan hama in
summer, Armenian amarn summer, Old Irish sam, Old Welsh ham, Welsh haf summer).    As an adjective
from c.1300. Summer camp as an institution for youth is attested from 1886; summer resort is from
1823; summer school first recorded 1810; theatrical summer stock is attested from 1941 (see stock
(n.2)). Old Norse sumarsdag, first day of summer, was the Thursday that fell between April 9 and 15.


