resolute (adj.)

early 15c., dissolved, of loose structure, also morally lax, from Latin resolutus, past participle
of resolvere untie, unfasten, loose, loosen (see resolution). Meaning determined, decided, absolute,
final is from c.1500, especially in resolute answer, a phrase common in 16th c. [OED]. From 1530s of
persons. The notion is of breaking (something) into parts as the way to arrive at the truth of it
and thus make the final determination (compare resolution). Related: Resolutely; resoluteness.


manful (adj.)

late 14c., courageous, brave, resolute, from man (n.) + -ful.


fastly (adv.)

former adverbial cousin to fast (adj.), from Old English f&aelig;stlic firm, fixed, steadfast,
resolute; obsolete in 19c., simple fast taking its place.


obstinance (n.)

early 15c., from Medieval Latin obstinantia, from obstinantem, from obstinatus resolved, determined,
resolute (see obstinate).


decided (adj.)

resolute, 1790, past participle adjective from decide. A decided victory is one whose reality is not
in doubt; a decisive one goes far toward settling some issue. Related: Decidedly.


irresolute (adj.)

1570s, from Latin irresolutus, from assimilated form of in- not, opposite of (see in- (1)) +
resolutus (see resolute). Related: Irresolutely.


determination (n.)

mid-14c., decision, sentence, from Old French d&eacute;terminacion (14c.) determination, settlement,
definition, from Latin determinationem (nominative determinatio) conclusion, boundary, noun of
action from past participle stem of determinare (see determine).    As a bringing to an end
(especilly of a suit at law), late 15c. As fixed direction toward a goal, from 1650s, originally in
physics or anatomy; metaphoric sense fixation of will is from 1680s; that of quality of being
resolute is from 1822.


obstinate (adj.)

mid-14c., from Latin obstinatus resolute, resolved, determined, inflexible, stubborn, past
participle of obstinare persist, stand stubbornly, set one's mind on, from ob by (see ob-) + stinare
(related to stare stand) from PIE *ste-no-, from root *sta- to stand (see stet). Related:
Obstinately.


constant (adj.)

late 14c., steadfast, resolute, from Old French constant (14c.) or directly from Latin constantem
(nominative constans) standing firm, stable, steadfast, faithful, present participle of constare,
from com- together (see com-) + stare to stand, from PIE root *sta- to stand (see stet). Of actions
and conditions from 1650s. Related: Constantly.


steadfast (adj.)

Old English stedef&aelig;st secure in position, steady, firm in its place, from stede  (see stead) +
f&aelig;st (see fast (adj.)); similar formation in Middle Low German stedevast, Old Norse
sta&eth;fastr steadfast, firm; faithful, staunch, firm in one's mind. Of persons, in English,
unshakable, stubborn, resolute from c.1200. Related: Steadfastly, steadfastness.


resolve (v.)

late 14c., melt, dissolve, reduce to liquid; intransitive sense from c.1400; from Old French
resolver or directly from Latin resolvere to loosen, loose, unyoke, undo; explain; relax; set free;
make void, dispel, from re-, perhaps intensive, or back (see re-), + solvere loosen (see solve).
Early 15c. as separate into components, hence the use in optics (1785). Meaning determine, decide
upon is from 1520s, hence pass a resolution (1580s). For sense evolution, compare resolute (adj.).
Related: Resolved; resolving.


resolution (n.)

late 14c., a breaking into parts, from Old French resolution (14c.) or directly from Latin
resolutionem (nominative resolutio) process of reducing things into simpler forms, from past
participle stem of resolvere loosen (see resolve). Sense of a solving (as of mathematical problems)
first recorded 1540s, as is that of power of holding firmly (compare resolute). Sense of decision or
expression of a meeting is from c.1600. Meaning effect of an optical instrument is from 1860. New
Year's resolutions in reference to a specific intention to better oneself is at least from 1780s,
and through 19c. generally of a pious nature.


earnest (adj.)

from Old English eornoste (adj.) zealous, or from Old English noun eornost seriousness, serious
intent (surviving only in the phrase in earnest), from Proto-Germanic *ern vigor, briskness
(cognates: Old Saxon ernust, Old High German arnust seriousness, firmness, struggle, German Ernst
seriousness; Gothic arniba safely, securely; Old Norse ern able, vigorous, jarna fight, combat). The
proper name Ernest (literally resolute) is from the same root. Related: Earnestly; earnestness.


starch (v.)

late 14c., from Old English *stercan (Mercian), *stiercan (West Saxon) make rigid, found in
stercedferh&eth; fixed, hard, resolute (related to stearc stiff), from Proto-Germanic *starkijan to
make hard (cognates: German St&auml;rke strength, starch, Swedish st&#228;rka to starch), from PIE
root *ster- (1) strong, firm, stiff, rigid (see stark). Related: Starched; starching.


stalwart (adj.)

late 14c., resolute, determined, Scottish variant of stalworth, from Old English
st&aelig;lwier&eth;e good, serviceable, probably a contracted compound of sta&eth;ol base,
foundation, support; stability, security (from Proto-Germanic *stathlaz, from PIE root *sta- to
stand, set down, make or be firm; see stet) + wier&eth;e good, excellent, worthy (see worth).
Another theory traces the first element of st&aelig;lwier&eth;e to Old English st&aelig;l place,
from Proto-Germanic *st&aelig;laz.


sure (adj.)

early 13c., safe against attack, secure, later firm, reliable (c.1300); mentally certain, confident
(mid-14c.); firm, strong, resolute (c.1400), from Old French seur, sur safe, secure; undoubted,
dependable, trustworthy (12c.), from Latin securus free from care, untroubled, heedless, safe (see
secure (adj.)). Pronunciation development is that of sugar (n.).    As an affirmative meaning yes,
certainly it dates from 1803, from Middle English meanings firmly established; having no doubt, and
phrases like to be sure (1650s), sure enough (1540s), and for sure (1580s). The use as an adverb
meaning assuredly goes back to early 14c. Sure-footed is from 1630s, literal and figurative; sure
thing dates from 1836. In 16c.-17c., Suresby was an appellation for a person to be depended upon.


strong (adj.)

Old English strang physically powerful, powerful in effect; forceful, severe, firm, bold, brave;
constant, resolute; arduous, violent, from Proto-Germanic *strangaz (cognates: Old Norse strangr
strong, Dutch streng strict, rigorous, Old High German strang strong, bold, hard, German streng
strict, rigorous), possibly from PIE *strenk- tight, narrow. Originally compared strenger, strengest
(compare old/elder/eldest).    Grammatical sense, of noun and verb inflections, is first attested
1841, translating German stark, used in a grammatical sense by J. Grimm (the terms strong and weak
better fit German inflections). Strong suit (1865) is from card-playing. Strong man man of great
strength (especially one who displays it professionally) is recorded from 1690s; meaning dominating
man in a political organization is from 1859.


rock (n.1)

stone, mass of mineral matter, c.1300, from Old English rocc (as in stanrocc stone rock or obelisk)
and directly from Old North French roque, which is cognate with Medieval Latin rocca (8c.), from
Vulgar Latin *rocca, of uncertain origin, according to Klein sometimes said to be from Celtic
(compare Breton roch).    In Middle English it seems to have been used principally for rock
formations as opposed to individual stones. Meaning precious stone, especially a diamond, is 1908,
U.S. slang. Meaning crystallized cocaine is attested from 1973, in West Coast U.S. slang. Figurative
use for sure foundation (especially with reference to Christ) is from 1520s; but also from 1520s as
source of danger or destruction, in reference to shipwrecks (as in on the rocks). Also used
attributively in names of animals that frequent rocky habitats, as in rock lobster (1843). Between a
rock and a hard place first attested 1921:   to be between a rock and a hard place, vb. ph. To be
bankrupt. Common in Arizona in recent panics; sporadic in California. [Dialect Notes, vol. V, part
iv, 1921]    Rock-ribbed is from 1776, originally of land; figurative sense of resolute first
recorded 1887. Rock-happy (1945) was U.S. Pacific Theater armed forces slang for mentally unhinged
after too much time on one island. The rock-scissors-paper game is attested by that name from 1976;
from 1968 as paper-stone-scissors. A 1967 source says it is based on Japanese Jan Ken Pon (or Janken
for short), which is said to mean the same thing more or less.


Bible (n.)

early 14c., from Anglo-Latin biblia, Old French bible (13c.) the Bible, also any large book
generally, from Medieval and Late Latin biblia (neuter plural interpreted as feminine singular), in
phrase biblia sacra holy books, a translation of Greek ta biblia to hagia the holy books, from Greek
biblion paper, scroll, the ordinary word for book, originally a diminutive of byblos Egyptian
papyrus, possibly so called from Byblos (modern Jebeil, Lebanon), the name of the Phoenician port
from which Egyptian papyrus was exported to Greece (compare parchment). Or the place name might be
from the Greek word, which then would be probably of Egyptian origin. The Christian scripture was
referred to in Greek as Ta Biblia as early as c.223. Bible replaced Old English biblio&eth;ece (see
bibliothek) as the ordinary word for the Scriptures. Figurative sense of any authoritative book is
from 1804.    Walter Scott and Pope's Homer were reading of my own election, but my mother forced
me, by steady daily toil, to learn long chapters of the Bible by heart; as well as to read it every
syllable through, aloud, hard names and all, from Genesis to the Apocalypse, about once a year; and
to that discipline -- patient, accurate, and resolute -- I owe, not only a knowledge of the book,
which I find occasionally serviceable, but much of my general power of taking pains, and the best
part of my taste in literature. ... [O]nce knowing the 32nd of Deuteronomy, the 119th Psalm, the
15th of 1st Corinthians, the Sermon on the Mount, and most of the Apocalypse, every syllable by
heart, and having always a way of thinking with myself what words meant, it was not possible for me,
even in the foolishest times of youth, to write entirely superficial or formal English .... [John
Ruskin, Fors Clavigera, 1871]


