resolve (n.)

determination, firmness or fixedness of purpose; a determination, 1590s, from resolve (v.).


resolved (adj.)

determined, 1520s, past participle adjective from resolve (v.). Related: Resolvedly.


resolve (v.)

late 14c., melt, dissolve, reduce to liquid; intransitive sense from c.1400; from Old French
resolver or directly from Latin resolvere to loosen, loose, unyoke, undo; explain; relax; set free;
make void, dispel, from re-, perhaps intensive, or back (see re-), + solvere loosen (see solve).
Early 15c. as separate into components, hence the use in optics (1785). Meaning determine, decide
upon is from 1520s, hence pass a resolution (1580s). For sense evolution, compare resolute (adj.).
Related: Resolved; resolving.


unresolved (adj.)

1570s, undecided (of questions), from un- (1) not + past participle of resolve (v.). Meaning
uncertain in opinion is attested from 1590s.


resolvable (adj.)

1640s, from resolve (v.) + -able.


propound (v.)

late 16c. variant of Middle English proponen to put forward (late 14c.), from Latin proponere put
forth, set forth, lay out, display, expose to view, figuratively set before the mind; resolve;
intend, design, from pro- before (see pro-) + ponere to put (see position (n.)). Perhaps influenced
in form by compound, expound. Related: Propounded; propounding.


machine (v.)

mid-15c., decide, resolve, from Old French and Latin usages (see machine (n.)). Related: Machined;
machining. Meaning to make or form on a machine is from 1878. Related: Machined; machining.


vanity (n.)

c.1200, that which is vain, futile, or worthless, from Old French vanite self-conceit; futility;
lack of resolve (12c.), from Latin vanitatem (nominative vanitas) emptiness, aimlessness; falsity,
figuratively vainglory, foolish pride, from vanus empty, vain, idle (see vain). Meaning self-
conceited in English is attested from mid-14c. Vanity table is attested from 1936. Vanity Fair is
from Pilgrim's Progress (1678).


stability (n.)

mid-14c., firmness of resolve, mental equilibrium (of persons), from Old French stablete, establete
firmness, solidity, stability; durability, constancy (Modern French stabilit&#233;), from Latin
stabilitatem (nominative stabilitas) a standing fast, firmness, figuratively security,
steadfastness, from stabilis steadfast, firm (see stable (adj.)). In physical sense, state of being
difficult to overthrow, power of remaining upright, it is recorded from early 15c. Meaning
continuance in the same state is from 1540s.


constitute (v.)

mid-15c., verb use of adjective constitute, made up, formed (late 14c.), from Latin constitutus
arranged, settled, past participle adjective from constituere to cause to stand, set up, fix, place,
establish, set in order; form something new; resolve, of persons, to appoint to an office, from
com-, intensive prefix (see com-), + statuere to set, from PIE root *sta- to stand, with derivatives
meaning place or thing that is standing (see stet). Related: Constituted; constituting.


resolution (n.)

late 14c., a breaking into parts, from Old French resolution (14c.) or directly from Latin
resolutionem (nominative resolutio) process of reducing things into simpler forms, from past
participle stem of resolvere loosen (see resolve). Sense of a solving (as of mathematical problems)
first recorded 1540s, as is that of power of holding firmly (compare resolute). Sense of decision or
expression of a meeting is from c.1600. Meaning effect of an optical instrument is from 1860. New
Year's resolutions in reference to a specific intention to better oneself is at least from 1780s,
and through 19c. generally of a pious nature.


appoint (v.)

late 14c., to decide, resolve; to arrange the time of (a meeting, etc.), from Anglo-French
appointer, Old French apointier make ready, arrange, settle, place (12c.), from apointer duly,
fitly, from phrase &agrave; point to the point, from a- to (see ad-) + point point, from Latin
punctum (see point (n.)). The ground sense is to come to a point (about some matter), therefore
agree, settle. Meaning put (someone) in charge is early 15c. Related: Appointed; appointing.


weak (adj.)

c.1300, from Old Norse veikr weak, cognate with Old English wac weak, pliant, soft, from Proto-
Germanic *waikwa- yield (cognates: Old Saxon wek, Swedish vek, Middle Dutch weec, Dutch week weak,
soft, tender, Old High German weih yielding, soft, German weich soft), from PIE root *weik- (4) to
bend, wind (see vicarious).    Sense of lacking authority is first recorded early 15c.; that of
lacking moral strength late 14c. In grammar, denoting a verb inflected by regular syllabic addition
rather than by change of the radical vowel, from 1833. Related: Weakly. Weak-kneed wanting in
resolve is from 1870.


Praesepe (n.)

loose (open) star cluster (M44) in Cancer, from Latin praesaepe the Roman name for the grouping,
literally enclosure, stall, manger, hive, from prae- (see pre-) + saepire to fence (see septum).
It is similar to the Hyades but more distant, about 600 light-years away, consists of about 1,000
stars, mostly older, the brightest of them around magnitude 6.5, thus not discernable to the naked
eye even on the clearest nights, but their collective light makes a visible fuzz of glow that the
ancients likened to a cloud (the original nebula); Galileo was the first to resolve it into stars
(1609). The modern name for it in U.S. and Britain, Beehive, seems no older than 1840. Greek names
included Nephelion Little Cloud and Akhlys Little Mist. In astrology, like all clusters, it
threatened mischief and blindness [Allen].    Manger to the Romans perhaps by influence of two
nearby stars, Gamma and Delta Cancri, dim and unspectacular but both for some reason figuring
largely in ancient astrology and weather forecasting, and known as the Asses (Latin Aselli),
supposedly those of Silenus.


pare (v.)

to trim by cutting close, c.1300, from Old French parer arrange, prepare; trim, adorn, and directly
from Latin parare make ready, prepare, furnish, provide, arrange, order; contrive, design, intend,
resolve; procure, acquire, obtain, get; get with money, buy, purchase (related to parere produce,
bring forth, give birth to), from PIE *par-a-, suffixed form of root *pere- (1) produce, procure,
bring forward, bring forth, and derived words in diverse senses (cognates: Lithuanian pariu to
brood, Greek poris calf, bull, Old High German farro, German Farre bullock, Old English fearr bull,
Sanskrit prthukah child, calf, young of an animal, Czech spratek brat, urchin, premature calf).
Generalized meaning to reduce something little by little is from 1520s. Related: Pared; paring.


