resonance (n.)

mid-15c., in acoustics, prolongation of sound by reverberation; 1660s, act of resonating; from
Middle French resonance (15c.), from Latin resonantia echo, from resonare to sound again (see
resound). Earlier in same sense was resonation (early 15c.).


resonant (adj.)

1590s, from Latin resonantem (nominative resonans), present participle of resonare (see resonance).


resonate (v.)

1873, from Latin resonatus, past participle of resonare to sound again (see resonance). Literal at
first; figurative sense, of feelings, emotions, etc., by 1978. Related: Resonated; resonating.


ring (n.2)

1540s, set of church bells, from ring (v.1). Meaning a call on the telephone is from 1900; to give
(someone) a ring call on the telephone was in use by 1910. Meaning a ringing tone is from 1620s;
specifically the ringing sound made by a telephone by 1951. Meaning resonance of coin or glass as a
test of genuineness is from 1850, with transferred use (ring of truth, etc.).


silver (n.)

Old English seolfor, Mercian sylfur silver; money, from Proto-Germanic *silubra- (cognates: Old
Saxon silvbar, Old Frisian selover, Old Norse silfr, Middle Dutch silver, Dutch zilver, Old High
German silabar, German silber silver; money, Gothic silubr silver), from a common Germanic/Balto-
Slavic term (cognates: Old Church Slavonic s(u)rebo, Russian serebro, Polish srebro, Lithuanian
sidabras silver) of uncertain relationship and origin. According to Klein's sources, possibly from a
language of Asia Minor, perhaps from Akkadian sarpu silver, literally refined silver, related to
sarapu to refine, smelt.    As an adjective from late Old English (cognates: silvern). As a color
name from late 15c. Of voices, words, etc., from 1520s in reference to the metal's pleasing
resonance; silver-tongued is from 1590s. The silver age (1560s) was a phrase used by Greek and Roman
poets. Chemical abbreviation Ag is from Latin argentum silver, from the usual PIE word for the metal
(see argent), which is missing in Germanic.


