resound (v.)

late 14c., resownen, from Old French resoner reverberate (12c., Modern French r&#233;sonner), from
Latin resonare sound again, resound, echo, from re- back, again (see re-) + sonare to sound (see
sonata). Spelling influenced from mid-15c. by sound (v.). Related: Resounded; resounding.


resounding (adj.)

late 14c., present participle adjective from resound (v.). Figurative use from 1630s. Related:
Resoundingly.


echo (n.)

mid-14c., from Latin echo, from Greek echo, personified as a mountain nymph, from or related to ekhe
sound, ekhein to resound, from PIE root *swagh- to resound (cognates: Sanskrit vagnuh sound, Latin
vagire to cry, Old English swogan to resound). Related: Echoes.


catechesis (n.)

from Greek katekhesis instruction by word of mouth, from katekhein to instruct orally, originally to
resound (with sense evolution via to sound (something) in someone's ear; to teach by word of mouth.
From kata- down (in this case, thoroughly) + ekhein to sound, ring, from ekhe sound, from PIE
*(s)wagh- to resound (see echo (n.)). Related: Catachectic; catachectical.


knell (v.)

Old English cnyllan to toll a bell; strike, knock, cognate with Middle High German erknellen to
resound, Old Norse knylla to beat, thrash; probably imitative. Related: Knelled; knelling.


klaxon (n.)

loud warning horn, 1908, originally on automobiles, said to have been named for the company that
sold them (The Klaxon Company; distributor for Lovell-McConnell Mfg. Co., Newark, N.J.), but
probably the company was named for the horn, which bore a word likely based on Greek klazein to
roar, cognate with Latin clangere to resound.


resonance (n.)

mid-15c., in acoustics, prolongation of sound by reverberation; 1660s, act of resonating; from
Middle French resonance (15c.), from Latin resonantia echo, from resonare to sound again (see
resound). Earlier in same sense was resonation (early 15c.).


clang (v.)

1570s, echoic (originally of trumpets and birds), akin to or from Latin clangere resound, ring, and
Greek klange sharp sound, from PIE *klang-, nasalized form of root *kleg- to cry, sound. Related:
Clanged; clanging.


assonance (n.)

1727, resemblance of sounds between words, from French assonance, from assonant, from Latin
assonantem (nominative assonans), present participle of assonare to resound, respond to, from ad- to
(see ad-) + sonare to sound (see sonata). Properly, in prosody, rhyming of accented vowels, but not
consonants (1823).


catechize (v.)

early 15c., from Church Latin catechizare to teach by word of mouth (also source of French
cat&#233;chiser, Spanish catequizar, Italian catechizzare), from Greek katekhizein teach orally,
instruct by word of mouth, from katekhein to resound (see catechesis). Related: Catechized;
catechizing.


dun (v.)

to insist on payment of debt, 1620s, perhaps related to dunnen to sound, resound, make a din
(c.1200, dialectal variant of din), or shortened from dunkirk (c.1600) privateer, a private vessel
licensed to attack enemy ships during wartime, from Dunkirk, French port from which they sailed. The
oldest theory traces it to a Joe Dun, supposedly a London bailiff famous for catching defaulters.
Related: Dunned; dunning. As a noun from 1620s.


bound (v.2)

to leap, 1580s, from French bondir to rebound, resound, echo, from Old French bondir to leap,
rebound; make a noise, beat (a drum), 13c., ultimately to echo back, from Vulgar Latin *bombitire to
buzz, hum (see bomb (n.)), perhaps on model of Old French tentir, from Vulgar Latin *tinnitire.


rebound (v.)

late 14c., to spring, leap, also return to afflict (early 15c.), from Old French rebondir leap back,
resound; repulse, push back, from re- back (see re-) + bondir leap, bound (see bound (v.)). Sense of
to spring back from force of impact is recorded from late 14c. Sports use probably first in tennis;
basketball sense is attested from 1914. Related: Rebounded; rebounding.


intone (v.)

late 14c., entunen sing, chant, recite, from Old French entoner sing, chant (13c.), from Medieval
Latin intonare sing according to tone, from Latin in- in (see in- (2)) + tonus tone, from Greek
tonos (see tenet). A different verb intone was in use 17c.18c., from Latin intonare to thunder,
resound, figuratively to cry out vehemently, from tonare to thunder. Related: Intoned; intoning.


thunder (n.)

mid-13c., from Old English &thorn;unor thunder, thunderclap; the god Thor, from Proto-Germanic
*thunraz (cognates: Old Norse &thorn;orr, Old Frisian thuner, Middle Dutch donre, Dutch donder, Old
High German donar, German Donner thunder), from PIE *(s)tene- to resound, thunder (cognates:
Sanskrit tanayitnuh thundering, Persian tundar thunder, Latin tonare to thunder). Swedish
tord&ouml;n is literally Thor's din. The intrusive -d- also is found in Dutch and Icelandic versions
of the word. Thunder-stick, imagined word used by primitive peoples for gun, attested from 1904.


greet (v.)

Old English gretan to come in contact with (in sense of attack, accost as well as salute, welcome,
and touch, take hold of, handle), from West Germanic *grotjan (cognates: Old Saxon grotian, Old
Frisian greta, Dutch groeten, Old High German gruozen, German gr&uuml;&szlig;en to salute, greet),
perhaps originally to resound (via notion of cause to speak), causative of Proto-Germanic
*gr&aelig;tanan, root of Old English gr&aelig;tan (Anglian gretan) weep, bewail, from PIE *gher- (2)
to call out. Greet still can mean cry, weep in Scottish &amp; northern England dialect, though this
might be from a different root. Gr&aelig;tan is probably also the source of the second element in
regret. Related: Greeted; greeting.


yell (v.)

Old English giellan (West Saxon), gellan (Mercian) to yell, sound, shout, class III strong verb
(past tense geal, past participle gollen), from Proto-Germanic *gel- (cognates: Old Norse gjalla to
resound, Middle Dutch ghellen, Dutch gillen, Old High German gellan, German gellen to yell),
extended form of root of Old English galan to sing (source of the -gale in nightingale); from PIE
*ghel- (1) to call, cry out, shout, sing (cognates: Greek kikhle thrush, khelidon the swallow).
Intransitive sense from early 13c. Related: Yelled; yelling.


shilling (n.)

Old English scilling, a coin consisting of a varying number of pence (on the continent, a common
scale was 12 pennies to a shilling, 20 shillings to a pound), from Proto-Germanic *skillingoz-
(cognates: Old Saxon, Danish, Swedish, Old Frisian, Old High German skilling, Old Norse skillingr,
Dutch schelling, German Schilling, Gothic skilliggs).    Some etymologists trace this to the root
*skell- to resound, to ring, and others to the root *(s)kel- (1) to cut (perhaps via sense of shield
from resemblance or as a device on coins; see shield (n.)). The ending may represent the diminutive
suffix -ling, or Germanic -ing fractional part (compare farthing). Old Church Slavonic skulezi,
Polish szel&#261;g, Spanish escalin, French schelling, Italian scellino are loan-words from
Germanic.


