respiration (n.)

late 14c., from Latin respirationem (nominative respiratio) breathing, respiration, noun of action
from past participle stem of respirare (see respire).


respirator (n.)

1836, as an aid to breathing (originally a sort of gauze mask, agent noun from respire. As machine
to provide artificial respiration from 1929.


respiratory (adj.)

1660s, from Modern Latin respiratorius or French respiratoire; see respiration + -ory.


apnea (n.)

suspension of breathing, also apnoea, 1719, Modern Latin, from Greek apnoia absence of respiration,
from apnos without breathing, from a- not (see a- (3)) + pnein to breathe (see pneuma).


septicemia (n.)

1857, Modern Latin septic&aelig;mia, from French septicoemi, coined irregularly by French physician
Pierre-Adolphe Piorry (1794-1879) in 1837 from Greek septikos (see septic) + haima blood (see
-emia).    Dr. Piorry, in a second communication, insists upon the fact, that in a great number of
cases the decaying contents of the uterus, and the putrid infection of the blood from this source,
constitute the so-called puerperal fever, and he thinks that the discussion in the Academy is only a
fight about words, as the different speakers agree, without knowing it themselves, upon the nature
of the disease. He proposes the name of septicemia, as best designating the sources of the disease,
viz., from putrid infection from the uterus, and by the respiration of an atmosphere pregnant with
septic particles. ... The admission of this septicemia explains the putrid accidents, as observed in
men, the foetus, and wounded persons during a puerperal epidemic. [E. Noeggerath and A. Jacobi,
Contributions to Midwifery, New York, 1859]


iron (n.)

Old English is&aelig;rn (with Middle English rhotacism of -s-) the metal iron; an iron weapon, from
Proto-Germanic *isarnan (cognates: Old Saxon isarn, Old Norse isarn, Middle Dutch iser, Old High
German isarn, German Eisen) holy metal or strong metal (in contrast to softer bronze) probably an
early borrowing of Celtic *isarnon (compare Old Irish iarnhaiarn), from PIE *is-(e)ro- powerful,
holy, from PIE *eis strong (cognates: Sanskrit isirah vigorous, strong, Greek ieros strong).Right so
as whil that Iren is hoot men sholden smyte. [Chaucer, c.1386]  Chemical symbol Fe is from the Latin
word for the metal, ferrum (see ferro-). Meaning metal device used to press or smooth clothes is
from 1610s. The adjective is Old English iren, isern. To have (too) many irons in the fire to be
doing too much at once is from 1540s. Iron lung artificial respiration tank is from 1932.


spirit (n.)

mid-13c., animating or vital principle in man and animals, from Anglo-French spirit, Old French
espirit spirit, soul (12c., Modern French esprit) and directly from Latin spiritus a breathing
(respiration, and of the wind), breath; breath of a god, hence inspiration; breath of life, hence
life; also disposition, character; high spirit, vigor, courage; pride, arrogance, related to spirare
to breathe, from PIE *(s)peis- to blow (cognates: Old Church Slavonic pisto to play on the flute).
Meaning supernatural immaterial creature; angel, demon; an apparition, invisible corporeal being of
an airy nature is attested from mid-14c.; from late 14c. as a ghost (see ghost (n.)). From c.1500 as
a nature, character; sense of essential principle of something (in a non-theological context, as in
Spirit of St. Louis) is attested from 1680s, common after 1800; Spirit of '76 in reference to the
qualities that sparked and sustained the American Revolution is attested by 1797 in William
Cobbett's Porcupine's Gazette and Daily Advertiser.    From late 14c. in alchemy as volatile
substance; distillate; from c.1500 as substance capable of uniting the fixed and the volatile
elements of the philosopher's stone. Hence spirits volatile substance; sense narrowed to strong
alcoholic liquor by 1670s. This also is the sense in spirit level (1768). Also from mid-14c. as
character, disposition; way of thinking and feeling, state of mind; source of a human desire; in
Middle English freedom of spirit meant freedom of choice. From late 14c. as divine substance, divine
mind, God; also Christ or His divine nature; the Holy Ghost; divine power; also, extension of divine
power to man; inspiration, a charismatic state; charismatic power, especially of prophecy. Also
essential nature, essential quality. From 1580s in metaphoric sense animation, vitality.
According to Barnhart and OED, originally in English mainly from passages in Vulgate, where the
Latin word translates Greek pneuma and Hebrew ruah. Distinction between soul and spirit (as seat of
emotions) became current in Christian terminology (such as Greek psykhe vs. pneuma, Latin anima vs.
spiritus) but is without significance for earlier periods [Buck]. Latin spiritus, usually in
classical Latin breath, replaces animus in the sense spirit in the imperial period and appears in
Christian writings as the usual equivalent of Greek pneuma. Spirit-rapping is from 1852.


