restraint (n.)

action of restraining; means of restraint, early 15c., from Old French restreinte, noun use of fem.
past participle of restraindre (see restrain). Sense of reserve is from c.1600.


self-restraint (n.)

1754, from self- + restraint.


ball and chain (n.)

a type of prisoner's restraint, 1818; as one's wife, 1920.


reins (n.)

see rein (n.). Figurative sense means of controlling; control, check, restraint is from early 14c.


unimpressed (adj.)

1861, not awed, from un- (1) not + past participle of impress (v.). Used earlier in a sense of not
subjected to restraint (1743). Unimpressive is recorded from 1796.


unruly (adj.)

disposed to resist lawful restraint, c.1400, from un- (1) not + obsolete ruly (adj.) amenable to
rule. Related: Unruliness.


wild man (n.)

c.1200, man lacking in self-restraint, from wild (adj.) + man (n.). From mid-13c. as primitive,
savage. Late 14c. as a surname.


bridle (n.)

Old English bridel bridle, rein, curb, restraint, related to bregdan move quickly, from Proto-
Germanic *bregdilaz (see braid (v.)).


reserve (n.)

something stored up, 1610s, from reserve (v.) or from French r&#233;serve, a Middle French back-
formation from reserver. Meaning self-imposed restraint on freedom of words or actions; habit of
keeping back the feelings is from 1650s.


countenance (n.)

mid-13c., from Old French contenance demeanor, bearing, conduct, from Latin continentia restraint,
abstemiousness, moderation, literally way one contains oneself, from continentem, present participle
of continere (see contain). Meaning evolving Middle English from appearance to facial expression
betraying a state of mind, to face itself (late 14c.).


continent (adj.)

late 14c., self-restraining, from Old French continent and directly from Latin continentem
(nominative continens) holding together, continuous, present participle of continere hold together
(see contain). Meaning moved from exercising self-restraint to chaste 14c., and to bowel and bladder
control 19c.


hackamore (n.)

halter for breaking horses, 1850, American English, of uncertain origin. OED and Klein suggests a
corruption of Spanish jaquima (earlier xaquima) halter, headstall of a horse, which Klein suggests
is from Arabic shakimah bit of a bridle, curb, restraint.


continence (n.)

late 14c., self-restraint, from Old French continence (14c.), from Latin continentia a holding back,
repression, from continent-, present participle stem of continere (see continent). Especially of
sexual desire from late 14c.; of the body's eliminatory functions, from 1915. Related: Continency.


incontinent (adj.)

late 14c., wanting in self restraint, from Old French incontinent, from Latin incontinentem
(nominative incontinens) incontinent, immoderate, intemperate, from in- not, opposite of (see in-
(1)) + continens (see continent). Originally chiefly of sexual appetites; sense of unable to control
bowels or bladder first attested 1828.


abstinence (n.)

mid-14c., forbearance in indulgence of the appetites, from Old French abstinence (earlier
astenance), from Latin abstinentia abstinence, starvation; self-restraint, integrity, noun of
quality from abstinentem (nominative abstinens), present participle of abstinere (see abstain).
Specifically of sexual appetites from mid-14c., but also in Middle English of food, fighting,
luxury.


strait-jacket (n.)

also straitjacket, 1795 as a type of restraint for lunatics, from strait (adj.) + jacket (n.);
earlier in same sense was strait-waistcoat (1753). As a verb from 1863. Related: Strait-jacketed.


curb (n.)

late 15c., strap passing under the jaw of a horse (used to restrain the animal), from Old French
courbe (12c.) curb on a horse, from Latin curvus, from curvare to bend (see curve (v.)). Meaning
enclosed framework is from 1510s, probably originally with a notion of curved; extended to margins
of garden beds 1731; to margin of stone between a sidewalk and road 1791 (sometimes spelled kerb).
Figurative sense of a check, a restraint is from 1610s.


Jekyll and Hyde

in reference to opposite aspects of a person's character, from Robert Louis Stevenson's story, The
Strange Case of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde, published 1886. The surname Jekyll is of Breton origin and
was originally a personal name.    Though so profound a double-dealer, I was in no sense a
hypocrite. Both sides of me were in dead earnest; I was no more myself when I laid aside restraint
and plunged in shame, than when I labored, in the eye of day, at the furtherance of knowledge or the
relief of sorrow and suffering. [Robert Louis Stevenson, The Strange Case of Dr. Jekyll and Mr.
Hyde, 1886]


behave (v.)

early 15c., from be- intensive prefix + have in sense of to have or bear (oneself) in a particular
way, comport (compare German sich behaben, French se porter). Cognate Old English compound behabban
meant to contain, and alternatively the modern sense of behave might have evolved from behabban via
a notion of self-restraint. Related: Behaved; behaving.


distress (n.)

late 13c., circumstance that causes anxiety or hardship, from Old French destresse, from Vulgar
Latin *districtia restraint, affliction, narrowness, distress, from Latin districtus, past
participle of distringere draw apart, hinder, also, in Medieval Latin compel, coerce, from dis-
apart (see dis-) + stringere draw tight, press together (see strain (v.)). Meaning anguish,
suffering; grief is from c.1300.


temperance (n.)

mid-14c., self-restraint, moderation, from Anglo-French temperaunce (mid-13c.), from Latin
temperantia moderation, sobriety, discretion, self-control, from temperans, present participle of
temperare to moderate (see temper (v.)). Latin temperantia was used by Cicero to translate Greek
sophrosyne moderation. In English, temperance was used to render Latin continentia or abstinentia,
specifically in reference to drinking alcohol and eating; hence by early 1800s it had come to mean
abstinence from alcoholic drink.


chignon (n.)

knot or coil of hair worn at the back of the neck, from French chignon nape of the neck, from Old
French chaignon iron collar, shackles, noose (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *catenionem (nominative
*catenio), from Latin catena chain, fetter, restraint (see chain (n.)). Popular 1780s, 1870s, 1940s.
Form influenced in French by tignon coil of hair.


oppress (v.)

mid-14c., from Old French opresser oppress, afflict; torment, smother (13c.), from Medieval Latin
oppressare, frequentative of Latin opprimere press against, press together, press down; figuratively
crush, put down, subdue, prosecute relentlessly (in Late Latin to rape), from ob against (see ob-) +
premere to press, push (see press (v.1)).    It is the due [external] restraint and not the
moderation of rulers that constitutes a state of liberty; as the power to oppress, though never
exercised, does a state of slavery. [St. George Tucker, View of the Constitution of the United
States, 1803]    Related: Oppressed; oppressing.


exercise (n.)

mid-14c., condition of being in active operation; practice for the sake of training, from Old French
exercice (13c.) exercise, execution of power; physical or spiritual exercise, from Latin exercitium
training, exercise, from exercitare, frequentative of exercere keep busy, drive on, literally remove
restraint, from ex- off (see ex-) + arcere keep away, prevent, enclose, from PIE *ark- to hold,
contain, guard (see arcane).    Original sense may have been driving farm animals to the field to
plow. Meaning physical activity first recorded in English late 14c.; in reference to written
schoolwork from early 17c. The ending was abstracted for formations such as dancercise (1967);
jazzercise (1977); and boxercise (1985).


check (v.1)

late 15c., in chess, to attack the king; to put (the opponent's king) in check; earlier (late 14c.),
to stop, arrest; block, barricade; see check (n.).    A player in chess limits his opponent's
ability to move when he places his opponent's king in check. All the other senses seem to have
developed from the chess sense: To arrest, stop; then to hold in restraint (1620s); and finally to
hold up or control (an assertion, a person, etc.) by comparison with some authority or record,
1690s.    Hence, to check off (1839); to check up (1889); to check in or out (in a hotel, of a
library book, etc., by 1918). To check out (something) to look at, investigate is from 1959.
Related: Checked; checking.


liberty (n.)

late 14c., free choice, freedom to do as one chooses, from Old French libert&eacute; freedom,
liberty, free will (14c.), from Latin libertatem (nominative libertas) freedom, condition of a free
man; absence of restraint; permission, from liber free (see liberal)The spirit of liberty is the
spirit which is not too sure it is right. [Learned Hand, 1944]Nautical sense of leave of absence is
from 1758. To take liberties go beyond the bounds of propriety is from 1620s. Sense of privileges by
grant (14c.) led to sense of a person's private land (mid-15c.), which yielded sense in 18c. in both
England and America of a district within a county but having its own justice of the peace, and also
a district adjacent to a city and in some degree under its municipal jurisdiction (as in Northern
Liberties of Philadelphia). Also compare Old French libert&eacute;s local rights, laws, taxes.


liberal (adj.)

mid-14c., generous, also, late 14c., selfless; noble, nobly born; abundant, and, early 15c., in a
bad sense extravagant, unrestrained, from Old French liberal befitting free men, noble, generous,
willing, zealous (12c.), from Latin liberalis noble, gracious, munificent, generous, literally of
freedom, pertaining to or befitting a free man, from liber free, unrestricted, unimpeded; unbridled,
unchecked, licentious, from PIE *leudh-ero- (source of Greek eleutheros free), probably originally
belonging to the people (though the precise semantic development is obscure), and a suffixed form of
the base *leudh- people (cognates: Old Church Slavonic ljudu, Lithuanian liaudis, Old English leod,
German Leute nation, people; Old High German liut person, people) but literally to mount up, to
grow.    With the meaning free from restraint in speech or action, liberal was used 16c.-17c. as a
term of reproach. It revived in a positive sense in the Enlightenment, with a meaning free from
prejudice, tolerant, which emerged 1776-88.    In reference to education, explained by Fowler as the
education designed for a gentleman (Latin liber a free man) &amp; ... opposed on the one hand to
technical or professional or any special training, &amp; on the other to education that stops short
before manhood is reached (see liberal arts). Purely in reference to political opinion, tending in
favor of freedom and democracy it dates from c.1801, from French lib&eacute;ral, originally applied
in English by its opponents (often in French form and with suggestions of foreign lawlessness) to
the party favorable to individual political freedoms. But also (especially in U.S. politics) tending
to mean favorable to government action to effect social change, which seems at times to draw more
from the religious sense of free from prejudice in favor of traditional opinions and established
institutions (and thus open to new ideas and plans of reform), which dates from
1823.<b>Conservative</b>, n. A statesman who is enamored of existing evils, as distinguished from
the Liberal, who wishes to replace them with others. [Ambrose Bierce, Devil's Dictionary, 1911]


