retarder (n.)

1640s, agent noun from retard (v.). Of railway braking mechanisms from 1937.


retarded (adj.)

1810, delayed, past participle adjective from retard (v.). In childhood development sense, mentally
slow, attested from 1895 (perhaps inspired by Italian tardivi).


retardance (n.)

1550s, retardation, from Middle French retardance, from retarder (see retard (v.)). In reference to
resistance to fire, 1948.


retardant (adj.)

1640s, from retard (v.) + -ant or from Latin retardantem (nominative retardans), present participle
of retardare. From 1952 as a noun, retardant substance.


retard (v.)

late 15c., make slow or slower, from French retarder restrain, hold (someone) back, keep (someone
from doing something); come to a stop (13c.) or directly from Latin retardare make slow, delay, keep
back, hinder (see retardation). Related: Retarded; retarding.    The noun is recorded from 1788 in
the sense retardation, delay; from 1970 in offensive meaning retarded person, originally American
English, with accent on first syllable. Other words used for one who is mentally retarded include
retardate (1956), retardee (1971).


demurrer (n.)

legal pleading, 1530s, from Anglo-French demurrer, Old French demorer to delay, retard (see demur).


tarry (v.)

early 14c., to delay, retard (transitive), of uncertain origin. Some suggest a connection to Latin
tardare to delay, or Old English tergan, tirgan to vex, irritate, exasperate, provoke, which yielded
a Middle English verb identical in form to this one. Intransitive meaning to linger is attested from
late 14c. Related: Tarried; tarrying; tarrysome.


slake (v.)

late Old English sleacian, slacian become slack or remiss; slacken an effort (intransitive); delay,
retard (transitive), from sl&aelig;c lax (see slack (adj.)). Transitive sense of make slack is from
late 12c. Sense of allay, diminish in force, quench, extinguish (in reference to thirst, hunger,
desire, wrath, etc.) first recorded early 14c. via notion of make slack or inactive. Related:
Slaked; slaking.


demur (v.)

c.1200, to linger, tarry, delay, from Old French demorer delay, retard, from Latin demorari to
linger, loiter, tarry, from de- (see de-) + morari to delay, from mora a pause, delay (see
moratorium). Main modern sense of raise objections is first attested 1630s. Related: Demurred;
demurring.


purloin (v.)

mid-14c., remove, misappropriate, from Anglo-French purloigner remove, Old French porloigner put
off, retard, delay, drag out; be far away, from por- (from Latin pro- forth; see pro-) + Old French
loing far, from Latin longe, from longus (see long (adj.)). Sense of to steal (1540s) is a
development in English. Related: Purloined; purloining.


remora (n.)

1560s, from Latin remora sucking fish, literally delay, hindrance, from re- back (see re-) + mora
delay (see moratorium); so called because the fish were believed by the ancients to retard a vessel
to which they attached themselves. Hence, in 17c.-18c., an obstacle, an impediment (the first sense
of the word in Johnson's dictionary). In Greek, ekheneis, from ekhein to hold + naus (dative nei)
ship. Pliny writes that Antony's galley was delayed by one at Actium. Sometimes called in English
stayship or stopship.


abolish (v.)

mid-15c., from Middle French aboliss-, present participle stem of abolir to abolish (15c.), from
Latin abolere destroy, cause to die out, retard the growth of, perhaps from ab- from (see ab-) +
adolere to grow, from PIE *ol-eye-, causative of root *al- to grow, nourish (see old), and perhaps
formed as an antonym to adolere. But the Latin word rather could be from a root in common with Greek
ollymi, apollymi destroy. Tucker writes that there has been a confusion of forms in Latin, based on
similar roots, one meaning to grow, the other to destroy. Application to persons and concrete
objects has long been obsolete. Related: Abolished; abolishing.


