retain (v.)

late 14c., hold back, restrain; c.1400, continue keeping, keep possession of, from Old French
retenir keep, retain; take into feudal service; hold back; remember (12c.), from Latin retinere hold
back, keep back, detain, restrain, from re- back (see re-) + tenere to hold (see tenet). Meaning
keep (another) attached to one's person, keep in service is from mid-15c.; specifically of lawyers
from 1540s. Meaning keep in the mind is from c.1500. Related: Retained; retaining.


retainer (n.2)

servant, 1530s, agent noun from retain (v.). Also one who retains or holds (1540s). Meaning dental
structure used to hold a bridge in place is recorded from 1887.


retainer (n.1)

fee to secure services, mid-15c., originally act of keeping for oneself from retain, or perhaps from
or influenced by Middle French retenir, infinitive used as a noun. Meaning fee paid to an attorney
to secure his services is from 1818.


retinue (n.)

late 14c., from Old French retenue group of followers, state of service, literally that which is
retained, noun use of fem. past participle of retenir to employ, to retain, hold back (see retain).
Related: Retinular.


sampler (n.)

embroidery specimen by a beginner to show skill, 1520s, from sample (n.); earlier pattern, model,
example to be imitated (early 14c.). The connecting notion is probably piece of embroidery serving
as a pattern to be copied, or to fix and retain the pattern. As a collection of samples from 1912.


treasure (v.)

late 14c., to amass treasure; to store up for the future, also figurative, regard as precious,
retain carefully in the mind, from treasure (n.). Related: Treasured; treasuring.


retention (n.)

late 14c., from Latin retentionem (nominative retentio) a retaining, a holding back, noun of action
from past participle stem of retinere (see retain). Originally medical; mental sense is from late
15c.


retentive (adj.)

late 14c., able to hold or keep (mental or physical), from Old French retentif, from Medieval Latin
retentivus, from past participle stem of Latin retinere (see retain). Related: Retentively;
retentiveness.


incontinence (n.)

late 14c., inability to restrain sexual desire, sexual immorality, later inability to keep to a
religious rule (early 15c.), from Old French incontinence lack of abstinence, unchastity (12c.) or
directly from Latin incontinentia greediness; incontinence, noun of quality from incontinens
incontinent, immoderate, intemperate (see incontinent). Meaning inability to retain bodily functions
is from 1754.


subsist (v.)

1540s, to exist; c.1600, retain the existing state, from Middle French subsister and directly from
Latin subsistere to stand still or firm, take a stand, take position; abide, hold out, from sub
under, up to (see sub-) + sistere to assume a standing position, stand still, remain; set, place,
cause to stand still (see assist (v.)). Meaning to support oneself (in a certain way) is from 1640s.
Related: Subsisted; subsisting.


reserve (v.)

mid-14c., from Old French reserver set aside, withhold (12c.) and directly from Latin reservare keep
back, save up; retain, preserve, from re- back (see re-) + servare to keep, save, preserve, protect
(see observe). Meaning to book is from 1935. Related: Reserved; reserving.


rein (n.)

c.1300, strap fastened to a bridle, from Old French rene, resne reins, bridle strap, laces (Modern
French r&#234;ne), probably from Vulgar Latin *retina a bond, check, back-formation from Latin
retinere hold back (see retain). To give something free rein is originally of horses.


hence (adv.)

late 13c., hennes, from Old English heonan away, hence, from West Germanic *hin- (see Old Saxon
hinan, Old High German hinnan, German hinnen); related to Old English her here (see here). With
adverbial genitive -s. The modern spelling (mid-15c.) is phonetic, to retain the breathy -s- (see
twice, pence). Original sense is away from here; of time, from late 14c.; meaning from this (fact or
circumstance) first recorded 1580s. Wyclif (1382) uses hennys &amp; &#254;ennys for from here and
there, on both sides.


detain (v.)

early 15c., deteynen, from Old French detenir to hold off, keep back (12c.), from Latin detinere
hold off, keep back, from de- from, away (see de-) + tenere to hold (see tenet). Modern spelling is
17c., from influence of contain, retain, etc. Related: Detained; detaining.


remember (v.)

early 14c., keep in mind, retain in the memory, from Old French remembrer remember, recall, bring to
mind (11c.), from Latin rememorari recall to mind, remember, from re- again (see re-) + memorari be
mindful of, from memor mindful (see memory). Meaning recall to mind is late 14c.; sense of to
mention is from 1550s. Also in Middle English to remind (someone). An Anglo-Saxon verb for it was
gemunan.


pocket (adj.)

1610s, of or pertaining to or meant for a pocket, from pocket (n.). Pocket-knife is first recorded
1727; pocket-money is attested from 1630s. Often merely implying a small-sized version of something
(for example of of warships, from 1930; also compare Pocket Venus beautiful, small woman, attested
from 1808). Pocket veto attested from 1842, American English.    The pocket veto can operate only in
the case of bills sent to the President within ten days of Congressional adjournment. If he retain
such a bill (figuratively, in his pocket) neither giving it his sanction by signing it, nor
withholding his sanction in returning it to Congress, the bill is defeated. The President is not
bound to give reasons for defeating a bill by a pocket veto which he has not had at least ten days
to consider. In a regular veto he is bound to give such reasons. [James Albert Woodburn, The
American Republic and its Government, Putnam's, 1903]


Macbeth

masc. proper name, Gaelic, literally son of life. The first reference to bad luck associated with
Shakespeare's Macbeth, and to avoidance of naming it, is from 1896, alludes to an incident of 1885,
and says the tradition goes back so far as modern memory can recall. The original superstition seems
to have pertained particularly to the witches' scenes, which were played up dramatically in 19c.
productions, and especially to Matthew Locke's 17c. music to accompany the witches' song, which was
regularly played through the 19th century.    It is strange how the effect of this music has exerted
such a long surviving influence on members of the dramatic profession. It is still considered most
unlucky to sing, hum, or whistle the witch airs in the theatre except in the ways of business.
[Young-Stewart, The Three Witches, in The Shakespearean, Sept. 15, 1896]   <hr />   If you number an
actor or actress among your friends, and desire to retain his or her friendship, there are three
things you positively must not do, especially if the actor is of the old school. Do not whistle in
the theatre, do not look over his shoulder into the glass while he is making up, and do not hum the
witch's song from Macbeth. ... [O]lder actors would almost prefer to lose their salary than go on in
Macbeth on account of this song. They believe that it casts spells upon the members of the company.
[Some Odd Superstitions of the Stage, Theatre magazine, July 1909]


river (n.)

early 13c., from Anglo-French rivere, Old French riviere river, riverside, river bank (12c.), from
Vulgar Latin *riparia riverbank, seashore, river (source also of Spanish ribera, Italian riviera),
noun use of fem. of Latin riparius of a riverbank (see riparian). Generalized sense of a copious
flow of anything is from late 14c. The Old English word was ea river, cognate with Gothic ahwa,
Latin aqua (see aqua-). Romanic cognate words tend to retain the sense river bank as the main one,
or else the secondary Latin sense coast of the sea (compare Riviera).    U.S. slang phrase up the
river in prison (1891) is originally in reference to Sing Sing prison, which was literally up the
(Hudson) river from New York City. Phrase down the river done for, finished perhaps echoes sense in
sell down the river (1851), originally of troublesome slaves, to sell from the Upper South to the
harsher cotton plantations of the Deep South.


oe

found in Greek borrowings into Latin, representing Greek -oi-. Words with -oe- that came early into
English from Old French or Medieval Latin usually already had been levelled to -e- (economic, penal,
cemetery), but later borrowings directly from Latin or Greek tended to retain it at first (oestrus,
diarrhoea, amoeba) as did proper names (Oedipus, Phoebe, Phoenix) and purely technical terms.
British English tends to be more conservative with it than American, which has done away with it in
all but a few instances.    It also occurred in some native Latin words (foedus treaty, league,
foetere to stink, hence occasionally in English foetid, foederal, which was the form in the original
publications of the Federalist papers). In these it represents an ancient -oi- in Old Latin (for
example Old Latin oino, Classical Latin unus), which apparently passed through an -oe- form before
being leveled out but was preserved into Classical Latin in certain words, especially those
belonging to the realms of law (such as foedus) and religion, which, along with the vocabulary of
sailors, are the most conservative branches of any language in any time, through a need for
precision, immediate comprehension, demonstration of learning, or superstition. But in foetus it was
an unetymological spelling in Latin that was picked up in English and formed the predominant
spelling of fetus into the early 20c.


bear (v.)

Old English beran to bear, bring; bring forth, produce; to endure, sustain; to wear (class IV strong
verb; past tense b&aelig;r, past participle boren), from Proto-Germanic *beran (cognates: Old Saxon
beran, Old Frisian bera, Old High German beran, German geb&auml;ren, Old Norse bera, Gothic bairan
to carry, bear, give birth to), from PIE root *bher- (1) meaning both give birth (though only
English and German strongly retain this sense, and Russian has beremennaya pregnant) and carry a
burden, bring (see infer).   Ball bearings bear the friction. Many senses are from notion of move
onward by pressure. Old English past tense b&aelig;r became Middle English bare; alternative bore
began to appear c.1400, but bare remained the literary form till after 1600. Past participle
distinction of borne for carried and born for given birth is from late 18c. To bear (something) in
mind is from 1530s.


hold (v.)

Old English haldan (Anglian), healdan (West Saxon), to contain, grasp; retain; foster, cherish,
class VII strong verb (past tense heold, past participle healden), from Proto-Germanic *haldan
(cognates: Old Saxon haldan, Old Frisian halda, Old Norse halda, Dutch houden, German halten to
hold, Gothic haldan to tend), originally to keep, tend, watch over (as cattle), later to have.
Ancestral sense is preserved in behold. The original past participle holden was replaced by held
beginning 16c., but survives in some legal jargon and in beholden.   Hold back is 1530s, transitive;
1570s, intransitive; hold off is early 15c., transitive; c.1600, intransitive; hold out is 1520s as
to stretch forth, 1580s as to resist pressure. Hold on is early 13c. as to maintain one's course,
1830 as to keep one's grip on something, 1846 as an order to wait or stop. To hold (one's) tongue be
silent is from c.1300. To hold (one's) own is from early 14c. To hold (someone's) hand give moral
support is from 1935. Phrase hold your horses be patient is from 1844. To have and to hold have been
paired alliteratively since at least c.1200, originally of marriage but also of real estate.


bear (n.)

Old English bera bear, from Proto-Germanic *beron, literally the brown (one) (cognates: Old Norse
bj&ouml;rn, Middle Dutch bere, Dutch beer, Old High German bero, German B&auml;r), from PIE *bher-
(3) bright, brown (see brown (adj.)).    Greek arktos and Latin ursus retain the PIE root word for
bear (*rtko; see Arctic), but it is believed to have been ritually replaced in the northern branches
because of hunters' taboo on names of wild animals (compare the Irish equivalent the good calf,
Welsh honey-pig, Lithuanian the licker, Russian medved honey-eater). Others connect the Germanic
word with Latin ferus wild, as if it meant the wild animal (par excellence) of the northern woods.
Symbolic of Russia since 1794. Used of uncouth persons since 1570s. Stock market meaning speculator
for a fall is 1709 shortening of bearskin jobber (from the proverb sell the bearskin before one has
caught the bear); i.e. one who sells stock for future delivery, expecting that meanwhile prices will
fall. Paired with bull from c.1720. Bear claw as a type of large pastry is from 1942, originally
chiefly western U.S.


place (n.)

c.1200, space, dimensional extent, room, area, from Old French place place, spot (12c.) and directly
from Medieval Latin placea place, spot, from Latin platea courtyard, open space; broad way, avenue,
from Greek plateia (hodos) broad (way), fem. of platys broad (see plaice).    Replaced Old English
stow and stede. From mid-13c. as particular part of space, extent, definite location, spot, site;
from early 14c. as position or place occupied by custom, etc.; position on some social scale; from
late 14c. as inhabited place, town, country, also place on the surface of something, portion of
something, part, also, office, post. Meaning group of houses in a town is from 1580s.    Also from
the same Latin source are Italian piazza, Catalan plassa, Spanish plaza, Middle Dutch plaetse, Dutch
plaats, German Platz, Danish plads, Norwegian plass. Wide application in English covers meanings
that in French require three words: place, lieu, and endroit. Cognate Italian piazza and Spanish
plaza retain more of the etymological sense.    To take place happen is from mid-15c. To know
(one's) place is from c.1600; hence figurative expression put (someone) in his or her place (1855).
Place of worship attested from 1689, originally in official papers and in reference to assemblies of
dissenters from the Church of England. All over the place in disorder is attested from 1923.


kermes (n.)

shield louse, c.1600 of the insect preparation used as a dye, etc.; 1590s of the species of oak on
which the insects live, from Medieval Latin cremesinus (also source of French kerm&egrave;s, Italian
chermes, Spanish carmes), from Arabic qirmiz kermes, from Sanskrit krmi-ja a compound meaning (red
dye) produced by a worm.    The Sanskrit compound is krmih worm (from PIE root *kwrmi- worm and
cognate with Lithuanian kirmis, Old Irish cruim, Albanian krimp worm) + -ja- produced (from PIE
*gene-; see genus). The insect lives in the Levant and southern Europe on a species of oak (kermes
oak). They were esteemed from ancient times as a source of red and scarlet dye. The dye is harvested
from pregnant females, which in that state resemble small roundish grains about the size of peas and
cling immobile to the tree on which they live.    From this fact kermes dye was, for a long time,
mistaken in Europe as being from a seed or excrescence of the tree, and the word for it in Greek was
kokkos, literally a grain, seed (see cocco-). This was passed to Latin as coccum, coccus berry [sic]
yielding scarlet dye, in late use scarlet color, scarlet garment.   So important was kermes (coccus)
as a commercial source of scarlet dye that derivatives of the name for it have displaced the
original word for red in many languages, such as Welsh coch (from Latin), Modern Greek kokkinos.
Compare also crimson (n.).  Kermes dyes have been found in burial wrappings in Anglo-Scandinavian
York, but the use of kermes dyes seems to have been lost in Europe from the Dark Ages until early
15c. It fell out of use again with the introduction of cochineal (the word for which might itself be
from coccus) from the New World.    Cloths dyed with kermes are of a deep red colour; and though
much inferior in brilliancy to the scarlet cloths dyed with real Mexican cochineal, they retain the
colour better and are less liable to stain. The tapestries of Brussels and other parts of Flanders,
which have scarcely lost any thing of their original brilliancy, even after a lapse of 200 years,
were all dyed with kermes. [W.T. Brande, Dictionary of Science, Literature, &amp; Art, London, 1842]


