retinue (n.)

late 14c., from Old French retenue group of followers, state of service, literally that which is
retained, noun use of fem. past participle of retenir to employ, to retain, hold back (see retain).
Related: Retinular.


bodyguard (n.)

1735, retinue, escort, collective singular, from body + guard (n.). Attested 1861 as a soldier of
the bodyguard.


suit (n.)

c.1300, sute, also suete, suite, seute, a band of followers; a retinue, company; also set of
matching garments worn by such persons, matching livery or uniform; hence  kind, sort; the same
kind, a match; also pursuit, chase, and in law, obligation (of a tenant) to attend court; attendance
at court, from Anglo-French suit, siwete, from Old French suite, sieute pursuit, act of following,
hunt; retinue; assembly (12c., Modern French suite), from Vulgar Latin *sequita, fem. of *sequitus,
from Latin secutus, past participle of sequi to attend, follow (see sequel).    Legal sense of
lawsuit; legal action is from mid-14c. Meaning the wooing of a woman is from late 15c. Meaning set
of clothes to be worn together is attested from late 14c., also matching material or fabric, from
notion of the livery or uniform of court attendants. As a derisive term for businessman, it dates
from 1979. Meaning matched set of objects, number of objects of the same kind or pattern used
together is from late 14c., as is that of row, series, sequence. Meaning set of playing cards
bearing the same symbol is first attested 1520s, also ultimately from the notion of livery. To
follow suit (1670s) is from card-playing.


cortege (n.)

1640s, train of attendants, from French cort&egrave;ge (16c.), from Italian corteggio retinue, from
corte court, from Latin cohortem (see court (n.)).


bouche (n.)

French, literally mouth (Old French boche, 11c.), from Latin bucca, literally cheek, which in Late
Latin replaced os (see oral) as the word for mouth (and also is the source of Italian bocca, Spanish
boca). Borrowed in English in various senses, such as king's allowance of food for his retinue (mid-
15c.); mouth (1580s); metal plug for a cannon's vent (1862; verb in this sense from 1781).


suit (v.)

be agreeable or convenient, fall in with the views of, 1570s, from suit (n.), perhaps from the
notion of join a retinue clad in like clothes. Earlier seek out (mid-15c.); be becoming (mid-14c.).
Meaning make agreeable or convenient is from 1590s. Meaning provide with clothes is from 1570s; that
of dress oneself is from 1590s; with up (adv.) from 1945. Expression suit yourself attested by 1851.
Related: Suited; suiting.


cohort (n.)

early 15c., company of soldiers, from Middle French cohorte (14c.) and directly from Latin cohortem
(nominative cohors) enclosure, meaning extended to infantry company in Roman army (a tenth part of a
legion) through notion of enclosed group, retinue, from com- with (see co-) + root akin to hortus
garden, from PIE *ghr-ti-, from root *gher- (1) to grasp, enclose (see yard (n.1)). Sense of
accomplice is first recorded 1952, American English, from meaning group united in common cause
(1719).


livery (n.)

c.1300, household allowance of any kind (food, provisions, clothing) to retainers or servants, from
Anglo-French livere (late 13c.), Old French livr&eacute;e, allowance, ration, pay, originally
(clothes) delivered by a master to his retinue, from fem. past participle of livrer to dispense,
deliver, hand over, from Latin liberare (see liberate). The sense later was reduced to servants'
rations and provender for horses (mid-15c.). The former led to the meaning distinctive clothing
given to servants (early 14c.); the latter now is obsolete except in livery stable (1705). Related:
Liveried.


embassy (n.)

1570s, position of an ambassador, from Middle French embassee mission, charge, office of ambassador,
Old French ambassee, from Italian ambasciata, from Old Proven&ccedil;al ambaisada office of
ambassador, from Gaulish *ambactos dependant, vassal, literally one going around, from PIE *amb(i
)-ag-to, from *ambi- (see ambi-) + *ambi- around (see ambi-) + *ag- to drive, move (see act (n.)).
Meaning official residence and retinue of an ambassador is from 1764. In earlier use were embassade
(late 15c.), ambassade (early 15c.).


train (n.)

early 14c., a drawing out, delay; late 14c., trailing part of a skirt, gown, or cloak; also retinue,
procession, from Old French train tracks, path, trail (of a rome or gown); act of dragging, from
trainer to pull, drag, draw, from Vulgar Latin *traginare, extended from *tragere to pull, back-
formation from tractus, past participle of Latin trahere to pull, draw (see tract (n.1)).,
General sense of series, progression, succession, continuous course is from late 15c. Train of
thought first attested 1650s. The railroad sense locomotive and the cars coupled to it is recorded
from 1820 (publication year, dated 1816), from notion of a train of wagons or carriages pulled by a
mechanical engine.


set (n.1)

collection of things, mid-15c., from Old French sette sequence, variant of secte religious
community, from Medieval Latin secta retinue, from Latin secta a following (see sect). [I]n
subsequent developments of meaning influenced by SET v.1 and apprehended as equivalent to 'number
set together' [OED]. The noun set was in Middle English, but only in the sense of religious sect
(late 14c.), which likely is the direct source of some modern meanings, such as group of persons
with shared status, habits, etc. (1680s).    Meaning complete collection of pieces is from 1680s.
Meaning group of pieces musicians perform at a club during 45 minutes (more or less) is from c.1925,
though it is found in a similar sense in 1580s. Set piece is from 1846 as grouping of people in a
work of visual art; from 1932 in reference to literary works.


Hanseatic

1610s, from Hanseatic League, medieval confederation of North German towns, from Medieval Latin
Hanseaticus, from Middle Low German hanse fellowship, merchants' guild, from Old High German hansa
military troop, band, company. Related to Gothic hansa troop, company, multitude, Old English hos
attendants, retinue. Middle English borrowed hanse from Old French hanse and Medieval Latin hansa
(both from Old High German) in sense of a company of merchants (late 12c.). Compare hanshus guild
hall (12c.).


