retribution (n.)

late 14c., repayment, from Old French retribution and directly from Latin retributionem (nominative
retributio) recompense, repayment, noun of action from past participle stem of retribuere hand back,
repay, from re- back (see re-) + tribuere to assign, allot (see tribute). Originally that which is
given in return for past good or evil; restricted modern use of evil given for evil done (1560s) is
from day of retribution (1520s), in Christian theology the time of divine reward or punishment.


pain (n.)

late 13c., punishment, especially for a crime; also condition one feels when hurt, opposite of
pleasure, from Old French peine difficulty, woe, suffering, punishment, Hell's torments (11c.), from
Latin poena punishment, penalty, retribution, indemnification (in Late Latin also torment, hardship,
suffering), from Greek poine retribution, penalty, quit-money for spilled blood, from PIE *kwei- to
pay, atone, compensate (see penal). The earliest sense in English survives in phrase on pain of
death.    Phrase to give (someone) a pain be annoying and irritating is from 1908; localized as pain
in the neck (1924) and pain in the ass (1934), though this last might have gone long unrecorded and
be the original sense and the others euphemisms. Pains great care taken (for some purpose) is first
recorded 1520s (in the singular in this sense, it is attested from c.1300). First record of pain-
killer is from 1853.


acquittal (n.)

early 15c., payment of debt or retribution; see acquit + -al (2). Sense of a release from debt or
obligation is from mid-15c.; that of freeing from charge or offense (by legal process) is from
1530s.


vindicative (adj.)

mid-15c., vindictive, having vengeful intent, from Old French vindicatif (14c.) or directly from
Medieval Latin vindicativus, from vindicat-, past participle stem of vindicare (see vindicate). From
c.1600 as involving retribution or punishment, a sense common in 17th cent. [OED].


retribute (v.)

give in return, 1570s, from Latin retributus, past participle of retribuere give back, restore,
repay (see retribution). Related: Retributed; retributing.


Rambo

used allusively from 1985, in reference to John Rambo, hero of David Morrell's novel First Blood
(1972), popularized as portrayed by Sylvester Stallone in Hollywood movie version (1982), a U.S.
Vietnam veteran, macho and self-sufficient, and bent on violent retribution [OED]. The family name
is an old one in New Jersey and Pennsylvania, originally Swedish, sometimes said to represent
Swedish place name Ramberget, or to be from French Huguenots who took refuge in Sweden.


wildfire (n.)

late Old English wilde fyr destructive fire (perhaps caused by lightning); also erysipelas,
spreading skin disease; see from wild (adj.) + fire (n.). From c.1300 as Greek fire, also fire
rained down from the sky as divine retribution. Figurative sense from late 14c. By 1795 as sheet
lightning.


vengeance (n.)

c.1300, from Anglo-French vengeaunce, Old French vengeance, venjance revenge, retribution (12c.),
from vengier take revenge, from Latin vindicare assert a claim, claim as one's own; avenge, punish
(see vindicate).  Vengeance is mine, ... saith the Lord. Therefore if thine enemy hunger, feed him;
if he thirst, give him drink; for in so doing thou shalt heap coals of fire upon his head. [Paul to
the Romans, xii:19-20]


finance (n.)

c.1400, an end, settlement, retribution, from Middle French finance ending, settlement of a debt
(13c.), noun of action from finer to end, settle a dispute or debt, from fin (see fine (n.)).
Compare Medieval Latin finis a payment in settlement, fine or tax.    The notion is of ending (by
satisfying) something that is due (compare Greek telos end; plural tele services due, dues exacted
by the state, financial means). The French senses gradually were brought into English: ransom (mid-
15c.), taxation (late 15c.); the sense of management of money first recorded in English 1770.


