revelry (n.)

act of reveling; merrymaking, boisterous festivity, amusement, early 15c., from revel (n.) + -ery.


Comus (n.)

Greek god of joy and revelry, from Latin, from Greek komos revel, merrymaking (see comedy).


Dennis

masc. proper name, from French Denis, ultimately from Latin Dionysius, name of an important 6c.
Church father, from Greek Dionysos, god of wine and revelry.


whoopee (n.)

1845, noisy, unrestrained revelry, extended form of whoop, originally American English. Popular song
Makin' Whoopee is from 1928. The novelty whoopee cushion is from 1931.


bacchanalia (n.)

drunken revelry, 1630s, from the name of the Roman festival held in honor of Bacchus, from neuter
plural of Latin bacchanalis (see bacchanal). A participant is a Bacchant (1690s), fem. Bacchante,
from French. The plural of both is Bacchantes.


roaring (adj.)

late 14c., present participle adjective from roar (v.). Used of periods of years characterized by
noisy revelry, especially roaring twenties (1930); but also, in Britain, roaring fifties (1892).
Roaring forties in reference to exceptional rough seas between latitudes 40 and 50 south, is
attested from 1841.


Dionysian (adj.)

of or pertaining to Dionysos, Greek god of wine and revelry, identified with Roman Bacchus. His name
is of unknown origin. Or in reference to historical men named Dionysius such as the tyrants of
Syracuse and especially Dionysius Exiguus (see A.D.), such as Dionysian period of 532 Julian years,
when the moon phases recur on the same days of the week.


riot (v.)

late 14c., behave in a dissolute manner, engage in loose revelry, from Old French rioter chatter,
dispute, quarrel, from riote (see riot (n.)). Meaning take part in a public disturbance is from
1755. Related: Rioted; rioting.


Bacchus

Greek god of wine and revelry, a later name of Dionysus, late 15c., from Latin Bacchus, from Greek
Bakkhos, perhaps related to Latin bacca berry, olive-berry, bead, pearl. Perhaps originally a
Thracian fertility god.


revel (n.)

late 14c., riotous merry-making, from Old French revel entertainment, revelry, verbal noun from
reveler be disorderly, make merry (see revel (v.)). Related: Revels; revel-rout.


saturnalia (n.)

time of merrymaking, 1590s, from Latin Saturnalia, ancient Roman festivals of Saturn (held in
December), a time of merrymaking for all, from neuter plural of adjective Saturnalis pertaining to
Saturn, from Saturnus (see Saturn). They correspond to the Greek Kronia. The extended sense of
period of unrestrained revelry is first attested 1782. Related: Saturnalian.


reverie (n.)

mid-14c., reuerye, wild conduct, frolic, from Old French reverie, resverie revelry, raving, delirium
(Modern French r&#234;verie), from resver to dream, wander, rave (12c., Modern French r&#234;ver),
of uncertain origin (also the root of rave). Meaning daydream is first attested 1650s, a reborrowing
from French. As a type of musical composition, it is attested from 1880. Related: Reverist.


orgy (n.)

1560s, orgies (plural) secret rites in the worship of certain Greek and Roman gods, especially
Dionysus, from Middle French orgies (c.1500, from Latin orgia), and directly from Greek orgia
(plural) secret rites, especially those of Bacchus, from PIE root *werg- to do (see organ). The
singular, orgy, was first used in English 1660s for the extended sense of any licentious revelry.
OED says of the ancient rites that they were celebrated with extravagant dancing, singing, drinking,
etc., which gives etc. quite a workout.


play (n.)

Old English plega (West Saxon), pl&aelig;ga (Anglian) quick motion; recreation, exercise, any brisk
activity (the latter sense preserved in swordplay, etc.), from or related to Old English plegan (see
play (v.)). Meaning dramatic performance is attested by early 14c., perhaps late Old English.
Meaning free or unimpeded movement of mechanisms, etc., is from c.1200. By early Middle English it
could mean variously, a game, a martial sport, activity of children, joke or jesting, revelry,
sexual indulgence. Sporting sense the playing of a game first attested mid-15c.; sense of specific
maneuver or attempt is from 1868. To be in play (of a hit ball, etc.) is from 1788. Play-by-play is
attested from 1927. Play on words is from 1798. Play-money is attested from 1705 as money won in
gambling, by 1920 as pretend money.


