reverie (n.)

mid-14c., reuerye, wild conduct, frolic, from Old French reverie, resverie revelry, raving, delirium
(Modern French r&#234;verie), from resver to dream, wander, rave (12c., Modern French r&#234;ver),
of uncertain origin (also the root of rave). Meaning daydream is first attested 1650s, a reborrowing
from French. As a type of musical composition, it is attested from 1880. Related: Reverist.


saunter (v.)

late 15c., santren to muse, be in reverie, of uncertain origin despite many absurd speculations.
Meaning walk with a leisurely gait is from 1660s, and may be a different word. Klein suggests this
sense of the word derives via Anglo-French sauntrer (mid-14c.) from French s'aventurer to take
risks, but OED finds this unlikely. Related: Sauntered; sauntering.


rave (v.)

early 14c., to show signs of madness or delirium, from Old French raver, variant of resver to dream;
wander here and there, prowl; behave madly, be crazy, of unknown origin (compare reverie). The
identical (in form) verb meaning to wander, stray, rove first appeared c.1300 in Scottish and
northern dialect, and is probably from an unrelated Scandinavian word (such as Icelandic rafa).
Sense of talk enthusiastically about first recorded 1704. Related: Raved; raving.


plump (v.1)

c.1300, to fall or strike with a full impact, common Low German word, from or related to Middle
Dutch and Dutch plompen, East Frisian plumpen, Middle Low German plumpen, probably more or less
imitative of something hard striking something soft. Hence plump (n.) a firm blow, in pugilism
usually one to the stomach.    To plump; to strike, or shoot. I'll give you a plump in the bread
basket, or the victualling office; I'll give you a blow in the stomach. [Grose, Dictionary of the
Vulgar Tongue, London, 1785]   <hr />   Or, even if any of them should suspect me, I know how to
bring myself off. It is but pretending to be affronted, stripping directly, challenging him to
fight, and before he can be on his guard, hitting him a plump in the bread-basket, that shall make
him throw up his accounts; and I'll engage he will have but very little stomach to accuse me after.
[The Reverie: or A Flight to the Paradise of Fools, London, 1763]


