rhetorical (adj.)

mid-15c., eloquent, from Latin rhetoricus, from Greek rhetorikos oratorical, rhetorical; skilled in
speaking, from rhetor orator (see rhetoric). Meaning pertaining to rhetoric is from 1520s.
Rhetorical question is from 1670s. Related: Rhetorically.


rhetoric (n.)

early 14c., from Old French rethorique, from Latin rhetorice, from Greek rhetorike techne art of an
orator, from rhetor (genitive rhetoros) speaker, orator, teacher of rhetoric, related to rhesis
speech, rhema word, phrase, verb, literally that which is spoken, from PIE *wre-tor-, from root
*were- (3) to speak (cognates: Old English word, Latin verbum, Greek eirein to say; see verb).


rhetorician (n.)

early 15c., Old French rethoricien, from rethorique (see rhetoric). An Old English word for one was
wordsawere word-sower.


trope (n.)

1530s, from Latin tropus a figure of speech, from Greek tropos a turn, direction, course, way;
manner, fashion, in rhetoric, turn or figure of speech, related to trope a turning and trepein to
turn, from PIE root trep- (2) to turn (cognates: Sanskrit trapate is ashamed, confused, properly
turns away in shame; Latin trepit he turns). Technically, in rhetoric, a figure of speech which
consists in the use of a word or phrase in a sense other than that which is proper to it [OED], as
when we call a stupid fellow an ass, or a shrewd man a fox [Century Dictionary].


alternative (n.)

1620s, in rhetoric, from Medieval Latin alternativus (see alternative (adj.)). Of courses of action,
from 1814. Of objects, etc., the other of two which may be chosen, by 1838.


snark (n.)

imaginary animal, coined 1876 by Lewis Carroll in The Hunting of the Snark. In 1950s, name of a type
of U.S. cruise missile and in 1980s of a type of sailboat. Meaning caustic, opinionated, critical
rhetoric is from c.2002 (see snarky) and not directly related, if at all.


humanities

1702; plural of humanity, which was used in English from late 15c. in a sense class of studies
concerned with human culture (opposed variously at different times to divinity or sciences). Latin
literae humaniores, they were those branches of literature (ancient classics, rhetoric, poetry)
which tended to humanize or refine.


ethos (n.)

revived by Palgrave in 1851 from Greek ethos moral character, nature, disposition, habit, custom,
from suffixed form of PIE root *s(w)e- (see idiom). An important concept in Aristotle (as in
Rhetoric II xii-xiv).


mimesis (n.)

1540s, in rhetoric, from Greek mimesis imitation, representation, representation by art, from
mimeisthai to imitate (see mimeograph).


trivium (n.)

1804, from Medieval Latin trivium (9c.) grammar, rhetoric, and logic, the first three of the seven
liberal arts in the Middle Ages, considered initiatory and foundational to the other four:
arithmetic, geometry, astronomy, and music. From Latin trivium, in classical Latin place where three
roads meet; a frequented place; public street, highway (see trivial).


terminology (n.)

1770, from German Terminologie, a hybrid coined by Christian Gottfried Sch&uuml;tz (1747-1832),
professor of poetry and rhetoric at Jena, from Medieval Latin terminus word, expression (see
terminus) + Greek -logia a dealing with, a speaking of (see -logy). Related: Terminological.


dilemma (n.)

1520s, from Late Latin dilemma, from Greek dilemma double proposition, a technical term in rhetoric,
from di- two + lemma premise, anything received or taken, from root of lambanein to take (see
analemma). It should be used only of situations where someone is forced to choose between two
alternatives, both unfavorable to him. But even logicians disagree on whether certain situations are
dilemmas or mere syllogisms.


merism (n.)

1894 in biological sense repetition of parts in living things; earlier in rhetoric, synecdoche in
which totality is expressed by contrasting parts (such as high and low, young and old); from Modern
Latin merismus, from Greek merismos a dividing, division, a partition, from merizein to divide, from
meros part, share (see merit (n.)). Related: Merismatic.


liberal arts

late 14c., translating Latin artes liberales; the seven attainments directed to intellectual
enlargement, not immediate practical purpose, and thus deemed worthy of a free man (liberal in this
sense is opposed to servile or mechanical). They were divided into the trivium -- grammar, logic,
rhetoric (see trivial) -- and the quadrivium -- arithmetic, geometry, music, astronomy.


bullshit (n.)

eloquent and insincere rhetoric, 1915, American English slang; see bull (n.1) + shit (n.), probably
because it smells. But bull in the sense of trivial or false statements (1914), which usually is
associated with this, might be a continuation of Middle English bull false talk, fraud (see bull
(n.3)).


sermocination (n.)

1510s, a talk, from Latin sermonationem (nominative sermonatio), noun of action from past participle
stem of sermonari talk, discourse, harangue, from sermo (see sermon). From 1753 in rhetoric, a form
of prosopopoeia in which the speaker, having addressed a real or imaginary hearer with a remark or
especially a question, immediately answers for the hearer. Related: Sermocinator, agent noun;
sermocinatrix a female talker (1620s).


antithesis (n.)

1520s, from Late Latin antithesis, from Greek antithesis opposition, resistance, literally a placing
against, also a term in logic and rhetoric, noun of action from antitithenai to set against, oppose,
a term in logic, from anti- against (see anti-) + tithenai to put, place (see theme).


metastasis (n.)

1570s, originally in rhetoric, from Late Latin metastasis transition, from Greek metastasis a
removing, removal; migration; a changing; change, revolution, from methistanai to remove, change,
from meta- over, across (see meta-) + histanai to place, cause to stand, from PIE root *sta- to
stand (see stet). A rhetorical term in Late Latin for a sudden transition in subjects, medical use
for shift of disease from one part of the body to another dates from 1660s in English. Related:
Metastatic.


trivial (adj.)

ordinary (1580s); insignificant, trifling (1590s), from Latin trivialis common, commonplace, vulgar,
literally of or belonging to the crossroads, from trivium place where three roads meet, in
transferred use, an open place, a public place, from tri- three (see three) + via road (see via).
The sense connection is public, hence common, commonplace.    The earliest use of the word in
English was early 15c., a separate borrowing in the academic sense of the trivium (the first three
liberal arts -- grammar, rhetoric, and logic); from Medieval Latin use of trivialis in the sense of
the first three liberal arts, from trivium, neuter of the Latin adjective trivius of three roads, of
the crossroads. Related: Trivially. For sense evolution to pertaining to useless information, see
trivia.


hooligan (n.)

1890s, of unknown origin, first found in British newspaper police-court reports in the summer of
1898, almost certainly from the variant form of the Irish surname Houlihan, which figured as a
characteristic comic Irish name in music hall songs and newspapers of the 1880s and '90s.    As an
inventor and adapter to general purposes of the tools used by navvies and hodmen, Hooligan is an
Irish character who occupies week by week the front of a comic literary journal called Nuggets, one
of the series of papers published by Mr. James Henderson at Red Lion House. Previous to publication
in London, Hooligan appears, I believe, in New York in a comic weekly, and in London he is set off
against Schneider, a German, whose contrainventions and adaptations appear in the Garland (a very
similar paper to Nuggets), which also comes from Mr. Henderson's office. Hooligan and Schneider have
been running, I should think, for four or five years. [Notes and Queries, Oct. 15, 1898]
Internationalized 20c. in communist rhetoric as Russian khuligan, opprobrium for scofflaws,
political dissenters, etc.


silent (adj.)

c.1500, without speech, silent, not speaking, from Latin silentem (nominative silens) still, calm,
quiet, present participle of silere be quiet or still (see silence (n.)). Meaning free from noise or
sound is from 1580s.    Of letters, c.1600; of films, 1914. In the looser sense of few words, from
1840. Phrase strong, silent (type) is attested from 1905. Silent majority in the political sense of
mass of people whose moderate views are not publicly expressed and thus overlooked is first attested
1955 in a British context and was used by John F. Kennedy but is most associated in U.S. with the
rhetoric of the Nixon administration (1969-74).    It is time for America's silent majority to stand
up for its rights, and let us remember the American majority includes every minority. America's
silent majority is bewildered by irrational protest. [Spiro T. Agnew, May 9, 1969]    In Victorian
use, the phrase meant the dead (1874; compare Roman use of the noun plural of silent to mean the
dead). Silence is golden (1831) is Carlyle's translation [Sartor Resartus] of part of the Swiss
Inscription Sprechen ist silbern, Schweigen ist golden. In one 14c. text Latin one who is silent is
translated by a beere stille.


