ribald (adj.)

c.1500, from ribald, ribaud (n.), mid-13c., a rogue, ruffian, rascall, scoundrell, varlet, filthie
fellow [Cotgrave], from Old French ribaut, ribalt rogue, scoundrel, lewd lover, also as an
adjective, wanton, depraved, dissolute, licentious, of uncertain origin, perhaps (with suffix -ald)
from riber be wanton, sleep around, dally amorously, from a Germanic source (compare Old High German
riban be wanton, literally to rub, possibly from the common euphemistic use of rub words to mean
have sex), from Proto-Germanic *wribanan, from PIE root *wer- (3) to turn, bend (see versus).


ribaldry (n.)

early 14c., from Old French ribauderie debauchery, licentiousness, from ribalt (see ribald).


harlotry (n.)

late 14c., loose, crude, or obscene behavior; sexual immorality; ribald talk or jesting, from harlot
+ -ry.


gaff (n.2)

loud, rude talk, 1825, from Scottish dialect, perhaps a survival of Old English gafspr&aelig;c
blasphemous or ribald speech, or from gaff (n.1), and compare gaffe.


scold (n.)

mid-12c., person of ribald speech, later person fond of abusive language (c.1300), especially a
shrewish woman [Johnson defines it as A clamourous, rude, mean, low, foul-mouthed woman], from Old
Norse skald poet (see skald). The sense evolution might reflect the fact that Germanic poets (like
their Celtic counterparts) were famously feared for their ability to lampoon and mock (as in
skaldskapr poetry, also, in Icelandic law books, libel in verse).


bee&#039;s knees (n.)

1923, a survivor of a fad around this year for slang terms denoting excellence and based on animal
anatomy. Also existed in the more ribald form bee's nuts. Other versions that lasted through the
century are cat's whiskers (1923), cat's pajamas, cat's meow. More obscure examples are canary's
tusks, cat's nuts and flea's eyebrows. The fad still had a heartbeat in Britain at the end of the
century, as attested by the appearance of dog's bollocks in 1989. Bee's knee was used as far back as
1797 for something insignificant.


bun (n.)

late 14c., origin obscure, perhaps from Old French buignete a fritter, originally boil, swelling,
diminutive of buigne swelling from a blow, bump on the head, from a Germanic source (compare Middle
High German bunge clod, lump), or from Gaulish *bunia (compare Gaelic bonnach). Spanish bu&#241;elo
a fritter apparently is from the same source. Of hair coiled at the back of the head, first attested
1894. To have a bun in the oven be pregnant is from 1951.    The first record of buns in the sense
of male buttocks is from 1960s, perhaps from a perceived similarity; but bun also meant tail of a
hare (1530s) in Scottish and northern England dialect and was transferred to human beings (and
conveniently rhymed with nun in ribald ballads). This may be an entirely different word; OED points
to Gaelic bun stump, root.


