riddle (v.2)

to pose as a riddle, 1570s, from riddle (n.1). Related: Riddled; riddler; riddling.


riddle (n.1)

A word game or joke, comprising a question or statement couched in deliberately puzzling terms,
propounded for solving by the hearer/reader using clues embedded within that wording [Oxford
Dictionary of English Folklore], early 13c., from Old English r&aelig;dels riddle; counsel;
conjecture; imagination; discussion, common Germanic (Old Frisian riedsal riddle, Old Saxon radisli,
Middle Dutch raetsel, Dutch raadsel, Old High German radisle, German R&auml;tsel riddle).    The
first element is from Proto-Germanic *redaz-, from PIE *re-dh-, from PIE *re(1)- to reason, count
(cognates: Old English r&aelig;dan to advise, counsel, read, guess; see read (v.)). The ending is
Old English noun suffix -els, the -s of which later was mistaken for a plural affix and stripped
off. Meaning anything which puzzles or perplexes is from late 14c.


riddle (v.1)

perforate with many holes, 1817 (implied in riddled), earlier sift (early 13c.), from Middle English
ridelle coarse sieve, from late Old English hriddel sieve, altered by dissimilation from Old English
hridder sieve (see riddle (n.2)).


riddle (n.2)

coarse sieve, mid-14c., alteration of late Old English hriddel, dissimilated from hridder, from
Proto-Germanic *hrida- (cognates: German Reiter), from PIE root *krei- to sieve, and thus related to
Latin cribrum sieve, riddle, Greek krinein to separate, distinguish, decide (see crisis).


enigma (n.)

1580s, earlier enigmate (mid-15c.), from Latin aenigma riddle, from Greek ainigma (plural
ainigmata), from ainissesthai speak obscurely, speak in riddles, from ainos fable, riddle, of
unknown origin.


conundrum (n.)

1590s, Oxford University slang for pedant, also whim, etc., later (1790) riddle, puzzle. Also
spelled quonundrum. The sort of ponderous pseudo-Latin word that was once the height of humor in
learned circles.


logogriph (n.)

a type of word puzzle based on synonyms, etc., and often in the form of a verse, 1590s, from French
logogriphe, from Greek logos (see logos) + griphos riddle, literally fishing basket.


Oedipal (adj.)

1939, of or pertaining to desire felt for opposite-sex parent, from Oedipus complex (1910), coined
by Freud from Sophocles' play Oedipus Tyrannus, in which the title character, the Theban hero,
answers the Sphinx's riddle and unknowingly kills his father and marries his own mother; from Greek
Oedipus. The name was used figuratively in English from 1550s for one who is clever at guessing
riddles, which had adjectival form Oedipean (1620s).


sphinx (n.)

monster of Greek mythology having a lion's (winged) body and a woman's head; she waylaid travelers
around Thebes and devoured those who could not answer her questions; Oedipus solved the riddle and
the Sphinx killed herself. In English from early 15c., from Latin Sphinx, from Greek Sphinx, said to
mean literally the strangler, a back-formation from sphingein to squeeze, bind (see sphincter).
There also was an Egyptian form (usually male and wingless); in reference to this it is attested in
English from 1570s; specific reference to the colossal stone one near the pyramids as Giza is
attested from 1610s. Transferred sense of person or thing of mysterious nature is from c.1600. The
proper plural would be sphinges. As adjectives in English, sphingal, sphingian, sphingine,
sphinxian, sphinxine, and sphinx-like all have been tried.


read (v.)

Old English r&aelig;dan (West Saxon), redan (Anglian) to advise, counsel, persuade; discuss,
deliberate; rule, guide; arrange, equip; forebode; read, explain; learn by reading; put in order
(related to r&aelig;d, red advice), from Proto-Germanic *redan (cognates: Old Norse ra&eth;a, Old
Frisian reda, Dutch raden, Old High German ratan, German raten to advise, counsel, guess), from PIE
root *re(i)- to reason, count (cognates: Sanskrit radh- to succeed, accomplish, Greek arithmos
number amount, Old Church Slavonic raditi to take thought, attend to, Old Irish im-radim to
deliberate, consider). Words from this root in most modern Germanic languages still mean counsel,
advise.    Sense of make out the character of (a person) is attested from 1610s. Connected to riddle
via notion of interpret. Transference to understand the meaning of written symbols is unique to Old
English and (perhaps under English influence) Old Norse ra&eth;a. Most languages use a word rooted
in the idea of gather up as their word for read (such as French lire, from Latin legere). Read up
study is from 1842; read out (v.) expel by proclamation (Society of Friends) is from 1788. read-only
in computer jargon is recorded from 1961.


