ridership (n.)

mid-15c., position of a rider, from rider + -ship. From 1962 as number of passengers (on public
transportation, etc.).


rider (n.)

one who rides, Old English ridere rider, trooper, knight, mounted warrior, agent noun from ride
(v.). Meaning clause tacked on to a document after first draft is from 1660s. Related: Riderless.


rough rider (n.)

1733, horse-breaker, from rough (adj. or adv.) + rider. In specific military use, a non-commissioned
officer in cavalry regiments, from 1802; meaning irregular cavalryman is attested from 1884.


freedom (n.)

Old English freodom freedom, state of free will; charter, emancipation, deliverance; see free (adj.)
+ -dom. Freedom-rider recorded 1961, in reference to civil rights activists in U.S. trying to
integrate bus lines.    It has been said by some physicians, that life is a forced state. The same
may be said of freedom. It requires efforts, it presupposes mental and moral qualities of a high
order to be generally diffused in the society where it exists. [John C. Calhoun, speech, U.S. House
of Representatives, Jan. 31, 1816]   <hr />   Freedom Rider Situation Cuts Into Montgomery Juke,
Game Revenues [headline, Billboard, July 24, 1961]   Freedom fighter attested by 1903 (originally
with reference to Cuba).


biker (n.)

motorcycle rider (especially with reference to club affiliation), 1968, American English, from bike
(n.) in its slang sense of motorcycle (1939).


sulky (n.)

light carriage with two wheels, 1756, apparently a noun use of sulky (adj.), on notion of
standoffishness, because the carriage has room for only one person and obliges the rider to be
alone.


strap-hanger (n.)

also straphanger rider on a street-car, elevated-train, bus, or subway, 1901, from strap (n.) +
hanger. In reference to the hanging straps built in to cars and meant to be grasped for balance by
those without seats.


bogart (v.)

1969, to keep a joint in your mouth, dangling from the lip like Humphrey Bogart's cigarette in the
old movies, instead of passing it on. First attested in Easy Rider. The word was also used 1960s
with notions of get something by intimidation, be a tough guy (again with reference to the actor and
the characters he typically played). In old drinking slang, Captain Cork was a man slow in passing
the bottle.


pacemaker (n.)

also pace-maker, 1884, originally a rider or boat that sets the pace for others in training. Meaning
the node of the heart which determines the beat rate is from 1910; sense of man-made device for
stimulating and regulating heartbeat is from 1951. From pace (n.) + maker.


jennet (n.)

small Spanish horse, mid-15c., from French genet, from Spanish jinete a light horseman, perhaps from
Arabic Zenata, name of a Barbary tribe [Klein]. Sense transferred in English and French from the
rider to the horse.


outrider (n.)

mid-14c., from out (adv.) + rider.


daylight (n.)

c.1300 (as two words from mid-12c., daies liht), from day + light (n.); its figurative sense of
clearly visible open space between two things (1820) has been used in references to boats in a race,
U.S. football running backs avoiding opposing tackles, a rider and a saddle, and the rim of a glass
and the surface of the liquor. The (living) daylights that you beat out of someone were originally
slang for the eyes (1752), extended figuratively to the vital senses.


desultory (adj.)

1580s, skipping about, from Latin desultorius hasty, casual, superficial, adjective form of desultor
(n.) a rider in the circus who jumps from one horse to another while they are in gallop, from
desul-, stem of desilire jump down, from de- down (see de-) + salire to jump, leap (see salient
(adj.)). Sense of irregular, without aim or method is c.1740. Related: Desultorily; desultoriness.


saddle (n.)

Old English sadol seat for a rider, from Proto-Germanic *sathulaz (cognates: Old Norse
s&ouml;&eth;ull, Old Frisian sadel, Dutch zadel, zaal, German Sattel saddle), from PIE *sed- (1) to
sit (cognates: Latin sedere to sit, Old Church Slavonic sedlo saddle; see sedentary). Figurative
phrase in the saddle in an active position of management is attested from 1650s. Saddle stitch (n.)
was originally in bookbinding (1887).


bedridden (adj.)

also bed-ridden, mid-14c., from adjectival use of late Old English b&aelig;ddr&aelig;d&aelig;n
bedridden (man), from bedrid, from Old English bedreda, literally bedrider, bedridden (man), from
bed + rida rider (see ride (v.)). Originally a noun, it became an adjective in Middle English and
acquired an -en on the analogy of past participle adjectives from strong verbs such as ride.


stirrup (n.)

Old English stigrap a support for the foot of a person mounted on a horse, literally climbing rope,
from stige a climbing, ascent (from Proto-Germanic *stigaz climbing; see stair) + rap (see rope
(n.)). Originally a looped rope as a help for mounting. Germanic cognates include Old Norse
stigreip, Middle Dutch stegerep, Old High German stegareif, German stegreif. Surgical device used in
childbirth, etc., so called from 1884. Stirrup-cup (1680s) was a cup of wine or other drink handed
to a rider already on horseback and setting out on a journey, hence a parting glass (compare French
le vin de l'etrier).


hag (n.)

early 13c., ugly old woman, probably a shortening of Old English h&aelig;gtesse witch, fury (on
assumption that -tesse was a suffix), from Proto-Germanic *hagatusjon-, of unknown origin. Similar
shortening produced Dutch heks, German Hexe witch from cognate Middle Dutch haghetisse, Old High
German hagzusa.    First element is probably cognate with Old English haga enclosure, portion of
woodland marked off for cutting (see hedge). Old Norse had tunri&eth;a and Old High German zunritha,
both literally hedge-rider, used of witches and ghosts. Second element may be connected with
Norwegian tysja fairy; crippled woman, Gaulish dusius demon, Lithuanian dvasia spirit, from PIE
*dhewes- to fly about, smoke, be scattered, vanish.    One of the magic words for which there is no
male form, suggesting its original meaning was close to diviner, soothsayer, which were always
female in northern European paganism, and h&aelig;gtesse seem at one time to have meant woman of
prophetic and oracular powers (&AElig;lfric uses it to render the Greek pythoness, the voice of the
Delphic oracle), a figure greatly feared and respected. Later, the word was used of village wise
women.   Haga is also the haw- in hawthorn, which is an important tree in northern European pagan
religion. There may be several layers of folk etymology here. Confusion or blending with heathenish
is suggested by Middle English h&aelig;htis, h&aelig;gtis hag, witch, fury, etc., and haetnesse
goddess, used of Minerva and Diana.    If the h&aelig;gtesse was once a powerful supernatural woman
(in Norse it is an alternative word for Norn, any of the three weird sisters, the equivalent of the
Fates), it might originally have carried the hawthorn sense. Later, when the pagan magic was reduced
to local scatterings, it might have had the sense of hedge-rider, or she who straddles the hedge,
because the hedge was the boundary between the civilized world of the village and the wild world
beyond. The h&aelig;gtesse would have a foot in each reality. Even later, when it meant the local
healer and root collector, living in the open and moving from village to village, it may have had
the mildly pejorative sense of hedge- in Middle English (hedge-priest, etc.), suggesting an
itinerant sleeping under bushes, perhaps. The same word could have contained all three senses before
being reduced to its modern one.


easy (adj.)

c.1200, at ease, from Old French aisie comfortable, at ease, rich, well-off (Modern French
ais&eacute;), past participle of aisier to put at ease, from aise (see ease).    Sense of not
difficult to deal with is mid-14c.; of conditions, comfortable, late 14c. The concept of not
difficult was expressed in Old English and early Middle English by ea&thorn;e (adv.), ie&thorn;e
(adj.), apparently common West Germanic, but of disputed origin. Easy Street first printed 1901 in
Peck's Red-Headed Boy. Easy money attested by 1896; to take it easy relax is from 1867; easy does it
recorded by 1891. Easy rider (1912) was U.S. black slang for sexually satisfying lover. The easy
listening radio format is from 1965, defined by William Safire (in 1986) as, the music of the 60's
played in the 80's with the style of the 40's.  Related: Easier; easiest.


hand (n.)

Old English hond, hand hand; side; power, control, possession, from Proto-Germanic *handuz
(cognates: Old Saxon, Old Frisian, Dutch, German hand, Old Norse h&ouml;nd, Gothic handus), of
uncertain origin. The original Old English plural handa was superseded in Middle English by handen,
later hands.    Meaning person who does something with his hands is from 1580s, hence hired workman
(1630s) and sailor in a ship's crew (1660s). Clock and watch sense is from 1570s. Meaning round of
applause is from 1838. The linear measure of 4 inches (originally 3) is from 1560s, now used only in
giving the height of horses. The meaning playing cards held in one player's hand is from 1620s; that
of a round at a card game is from 1620s.  First hand, second hand, etc. (mid-15c.) are from the
notion of something being passed down from hand to hand. Out of hand (1590s) is opposite of in hand
under control (c.1200). Hand over fist (1825) is suggestive of sailors and fishermen hauling in
nets. Hand jive is from 1958. To win something hands down (1855) is from horse racing, from a
jockey's gesture of letting the reins go loose in an easy victory.    The Two Thousand Guinea Stakes
was not the best contested one that it has been our fortune to assist at. ... [T]hey were won by
Meteor, with Scott for his rider; who went by the post with his hands down, the easiest of all easy
half-lengths. Wiseacre certainly did the best in his power to spoil his position, and Misdeal was at
one time a little vexatious. [The Sportsman, report from April 26, 1840]    To hand it to (someone)
acknowledge someone's ability is slang from c.1906. Phrase on the one hand ... on the other hand is
recorded from 1630s, a figurative use of the physical sense of hand in reference to position on one
side or the other side of the body (as in the lefthand side), which goes back to Old English Hands
up! as a command from a policeman, robber, etc., is from 1873. Hand-to-mouth is from c.1500. Hand-
in-hand attested from c.1500 as with hands clasped; figurative sense of concurrently recorded from
1570s.


