rift (n.)

early 14c., a split, act of splitting, from a Scandinavian source (compare Danish and Norwegian rift
a cleft, Old Icelandic ript (pronounced rift) breach; related to Old Norse ripa to break a contract
(see riven). Figurative use from 1620s. Geological sense from 1921. As a verb, c.1300.


riparian (adj.)

of or pertaining to river banks, 1849, with -an + Latin riparius of a river bank, from riparia
shore, later used in reference to the stream flowing between the banks, from ripa (steep) bank of a
river, shore, probably literally break (and indicating the drop off from ground level to the stream
bed), or else that which is cut out by the river, from PIE root *rei- to scratch, tear, cut
(cognates: Greek ereipia ruins, eripne slope, precipice; Old Norse rifa break, to tear apart; Danish
rift breach, Middle High German rif riverbank, seashore; English riven, rift).


crevice (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French crevace (12c., Modern French crevasse) gap, rift, crack (also, vulgarly,
the female pudenda), from Vulgar Latin *crepacia, from Latin crepare to crack, creak (see raven);
meaning shifted from the sound of breaking to the resulting fissure.


thrift (n.)

c.1300, fact or condition of thriving, also prosperity, savings, from Middle English thriven to
thrive (see thrive), influenced by (or from) Old Norse &thorn;rift, variant of &thorn;rif
prosperity, from &thorn;rifask to thrive. Sense of habit of saving, economy first recorded 1550s
(thrifty in this sense is recorded from 1520s; also see spendthrift). Thrift shop attested by 1919.


score (n.)

late Old English scoru twenty, from Old Norse skor mark, notch, incision; a rift in rock, also, in
Icelandic, twenty, from Proto-Germanic *skura-, from PIE root *(s)ker- (1) to cut (see shear).
The connecting notion probably is counting large numbers (of sheep, etc.) with a notch in a stick
for each 20. That way of counting, called vigesimalism, also exists in French: In Old French, twenty
(vint) or a multiple of it could be used as a base, as in vint et doze (32), dous vinz et diz (50).
Vigesimalism was or is a feature of Welsh, Irish, Gaelic and Breton (as well as non-IE Basque), and
it is speculated that the English and the French picked it up from the Celts. Compare tally (n.).
The prehistoric sense of the Germanic word, then, likely was straight mark like a scratch, line
drawn by a sharp instrument, but in English this is attested only from c.1400, along with the sense
mark made (on a chalkboard, etc.) to keep count of a customer's drinks in a tavern. This sense was
extended by 1670s to mark made for purpose of recording a point in a game or match, and thus
aggregate of points made by contestants in certain games and matches (1742, originally in whist).
From the tavern-keeping sense comes the meaning amount on an innkeeper's bill (c.1600) and thus the
figurative verbal expression settle scores (1775).  Meaning printed piece of music first recorded
1701, said to be from the practice of connecting related staves by scores of lines. Especially music
composed for a film (1927). Meaning act of obtaining narcotic drugs is by 1951.   Scoreboard is from
1826;   score-keeping- from 1905; newspaper sports section score line is from 1965; baseball score-
card is from 1877.


