righteousness (n.)

Old English rehtwisnisse; see righteous + -ness.


righteous (adj.)

early 16c. alteration of rightwise, from Old English rihtwis, from riht (see right) + wis wise, way,
manner (see wise (adj.)). Suffix altered by influence of courteous, etc. Meaning genuine, excellent
is 1942 in jazz slang. Related: Righteously.


Boxer Rebellion

1900, a name based on mistranslation of Chinese xenophobic society I-He-T'uan, Righteous Harmony
Band, rendered by British as I-He-Ch'uan Righteous Uniting Fists, and so associated with the
pugilistic boxer.


just (adj.)

late 14c., righteous in the eyes of God; upright, equitable, impartial; justifiable, reasonable,
from Old French juste just, righteous; sincere (12c.), from Latin iustus upright, equitable, from
ius right, especially legal right, law, from Old Latin ious, perhaps literally sacred formula, a
word peculiar to Latin (not general Italic) that originated in the religious cults, from PIE root
*yewes- law (cognates: Avestan yaozda- make ritually pure; see jurist). The more mundane Latin law-
word lex covered specific laws as opposed to the body of laws. The noun meaning righteous person or
persons is from late 14c.


Melchizedek

name of a priest-king in the Old Testament, from Hebrew Malki-tzedeq, literally king of
righteousness, from melekh king; second element related to tzadaq he was righteous, tzaddiq just,
righteous.


self-righteous (adj.)

1680s, from self- + righteous. Related: Self-righteously; self-righteousness.


Pharisee (n.)

from Old English Fariseos, Old French pharise (13c.), and directly from Late Latin Pharis&aelig;us,
from Greek Pharisaios, from Aramaic perishayya, emphatic plural of perish separated, separatist,
corresponding to Hebrew parush, from parash he separated. Ancient Jewish sect (2c. B.C.E.-1c. C.E.)
distinguished by strict observance but regarded as pretentious and self-righteous, at least by Jesus
(Matt. xxiii:27). Meaning self-righteous person, formalist, hypocrite is attested from 1580s.


soothfast (adj.)

truthful, Old English so&#240;f&#230;st true, trustworthy, honest, just righteous; see sooth (n.) +
-fast. Related: Old English so&#240;f&#230;stnes truthfulness, fairness, fidelity;
so&#240;f&#230;stlic true, sincere; so&#240;f&#230;stlice truly, honestly.


unrighteous (adj.)

1520s; see un- (1) not + righteous (adj.). In Middle English, the word was unrightwis, from Old
English unrihtwis. Related: Unrighteously; unrighteousness.


justify (v.)

c.1300, to administer justice; late 14c., to show (something) to be just or right, from Old French
justifiier submit to court proceedings (12c.), from Latin iustificare act justly toward, make just,
from iustificus dealing justly, righteous, from iustus just (see just (adj.)) + root of facere to do
(see factitious). Of circumstances, to afford justification, from 1630s. Meaning to make exact (now
largely restricted to typesetting) is from 1550s. Related: Justified; justifying.


virtuous (adj.)

c.1300, characterized by vigor or strength; having qualities befitting a knight; valiant, hardy,
courageous; from Old French vertuos righteous; potent; of good quality; mighty, valiant, brave
(12c.), from Late Latin virtuosus good, virtuous, from Latin virtus (see virtue). From mid-14c. in
English as having beneficial or efficacious properties; late 14c. (of persons) as having excellent
moral qualities; conforming to religious law. Related: Virtuously; virtuousness.


nemesis

1570s, Nemesis, Greek goddess of vengeance, personification of divine wrath, from Greek nemesis just
indignation, righteous anger, literally distribution (of what is due), related to nemein distribute,
allot, apportion one's due, from PIE root *nem- to divide, distribute, allot, to take (cognates: Old
English, Gothic niman to take, German nehmen; see nimble). With a lower-case -n-, in the sense of
retributive justice, attested from 1590s. General sense of anything by which it seems one must be
defeated is 20c.


sooth (n.)

Old English so&eth; truth, justice, righteousness, rectitude; reality, certainty, noun use of
so&eth; (adj.) true, genuine, real; just, righteous, originally *son&eth;-, from Proto-Germanic
*santhaz (cognates: Old Norse sannr, Old Saxon soth, Old High German sand true, Gothic sunja truth).
The group is related to Old English synn sin and Latin sontis guilty (truth is related to guilt via
being the one; see sin (v.)), from PIE *es-ont- being, existence, thus real, true, from present
participle of root *es-, the s-form of the verb to be (see be), preserved in Latin sunt they are and
German sind. Archaic in English, it is the root of modern words for true in Swedish (sann) and
Danish (sand). In common use until mid-17c., then obsolete until revived as an archaism early 19c.
by Scott, etc. Used for Latin pro- in translating compounds into Old English, such as so&eth;tacen
prodigy, so&eth;fylgan prosequi.


right (adj.1)

morally correct, Old English riht just, good, fair; proper, fitting; straight, not bent, direct,
erect, from Proto-Germanic *rekhtaz (cognates: Old Frisian riucht right, Old Saxon reht, Middle
Dutch and Dutch recht, Old High German reht, German recht, Old Norse rettr, Gothic raihts), from PIE
root *reg- move in a straight line, also to rule, to lead straight, to put right (see regal;
cognates: Greek orektos stretched out, upright; Latin rectus straight, right; Old Persian rasta-
straight, right, ar&#353;ta- rectitude; Old Irish recht law; Welsh rhaith, Breton reiz just,
righteous, wise).    Compare slang straight (adj.1) honest, morally upright, and Latin rectus right,
literally straight, Lithuanian teisus right, true, literally straight. Greek dikaios just (in the
moral and legal sense) is from dike custom. As an emphatic, meaning you are right, it is recorded
from 1580s; use as a question meaning am I not right? is from 1961. The sense in right whale is
justly entitled to the name. Right stuff best human ingredients is from 1848, popularized by Tom
Wolfe's 1979 book about the first astronauts. Right of way is attested from 1767. Right angle is
from late 14c.


