rigidity (n.)

1620s, from Latin rigiditas stiffness, from rigidus (see rigid).


rigid (adj.)

early 15c., from Latin rigidus hard, stiff, rough, severe, from rigere be stiff, from PIE *reig-
stretch (tight), bind tightly, make fast (cognates: Old Irish riag torture, Middle High German ric
band, string). Related: Rigidly.


torpor (n.)

lethargy, listlessness, c.1600, from Latin torpor numbness, sluggishness, from torpere be numb, be
inactive, be dull, from PIE root *ster- (1) stiff, rigid, firm, strong (cognates: Old Church
Slavonic trupeti, Lithuanian tirpstu to become rigid; Greek stereos solid; Old English steorfan to
die; see stereo-).


stereo-

before vowels stere-, word-forming element meaning solid, firm; three-dimensional; stereophonic,
from comb. form of Greek stereos solid, from PIE *ster- (1) stiff, rigid, firm, strong (cognates:
Greek steresthai be deprived of, steira sterile, sterphnios stiff, rigid, sterphos hide, skin; Latin
sterilis barren, unproductive; Sanskrit sthirah hard, firm, starih a barren cow; Persian suturg
strong; Lithuanian storas thick, stregti to become frozen; Old Church Slavonic strublu strong, hard,
sterica a barren cow, staru old (hence Russian stary old); Gothic stairo barren; Old Norse stirtla a
barren cow, Old English starian to stare, stearc stiff, strong, rigid, steorfan to die, literally
become stiff, styrne severe, strict).


starch (v.)

late 14c., from Old English *stercan (Mercian), *stiercan (West Saxon) make rigid, found in
stercedferh&eth; fixed, hard, resolute (related to stearc stiff), from Proto-Germanic *starkijan to
make hard (cognates: German St&auml;rke strength, starch, Swedish st&#228;rka to starch), from PIE
root *ster- (1) strong, firm, stiff, rigid (see stark). Related: Starched; starching.


stark (adj.)

Old English stearc stiff, strong, rigid, obstinate; stern, severe, hard; harsh, rough, violent, from
Proto-Germanic *starkaz (cognates: Old Norse sterkr, Danish, Old Frisian sterk, Middle Dutch starc,
Old High German starah, German stark, Gothic *starks), from PIE root *ster- (1) stiff, rigid (see
stereo-). From the same root as stare (v.).    Meaning utter, sheer, complete first recorded c.1400,
perhaps from influence of common phrase stark dead (late 14c.), with stark mistaken as an intensive
adjective. Sense of bare, barren is from 1833. As an adverb from c.1200. Related: Starkly;
starkness. Stark-raving (adj.) is from 1640s; earlier stark-staring 1530s.


stare (v.)

Old English starian to stare, gaze, look fixedly at, from Proto-Germanic *staren be rigid (cognates:
Old Norse stara, Middle Low German and Middle Dutch staren, Old High German staren, German starren
to stare at; German starren to stiffen, starr stiff; Old Norse storr proud; Old High German storren
to stand out, project; Gothic andstaurran to be obstinate), from PIE root *ster- (1) strong, firm,
stiff, rigid (see stereo- and compare torpor).    Not originally implying rudeness. To stare
(someone) down is from 1848. Related: Stared; staring.


pointer (n.)

mid-14c., a tiler (early 13c. as a surname), agent noun from point (v.). From c.1500 as maker of
needlepoint lace. From 1570s as thing that points; meaning dog that stands rigid in the presence of
game, facing the quarry is recorded from 1717. Meaning item of advice first recorded 1883.


sclerotic (adj.)

early 15c., pertaining to sclerosis, from medical Latin scleroticus, from Greek skleroun (see
sclerosis). Figurative meaning unchanging, rigid is from 1961.


blimp (n.)

1916, of obscure origin, many claimants. One of the weird coinages of the airmen [Weekley]. Common
theory is that it is from designers' prototype nickname Type B-limp, in the sense of without
internal framework, as opposed to Type A-rigid; thus see limp (adj.).


censorious (adj.)

fond of criticizing, 1530s, from Latin censorius pertaining to a censor, also rigid, severe, from
censor (see censor (n.)). Related: Censoriously; censoriousness.


inflexible (adj.)

late 14c., incapable of being bent, physically rigid, also figuratively, unbending in temper or
purpose, from Middle French inflexible and directly from Latin inflexibilis, from inflexus, past
participle of inflectere (see inflect). In early 15c. an identical word had an opposite sense,
capable of being swayed or moved, from in- in, on. Related: Inflexibly.


sterile (adj.)

mid-15c., barren, from Middle French st&eacute;rile not producing fruit, from Latin sterilis barren,
unproductive, unfruitful; unrequited; unprofitable, from PIE *ster- (1) stiff, rigid, firm, strong
(see stereo-). Also see torpor. Originally in English with reference to soil; of persons (chiefly
females), from 1530s. The sense of sterilized, free from living germs is first recorded 1877.


bird (n.3)

middle finger held up in a rude gesture, slang derived from 1860s expression give the big bird to
hiss someone like a goose, kept alive in vaudeville slang with sense of to greet someone with boos,
hisses, and catcalls (1922), transferred 1960s to the up yours hand gesture (the rigid finger
representing the hypothetical object to be inserted) on notion of defiance and contempt. Gesture
itself seems to be much older (the human anatomy section of a 12c. Latin bestiary in Cambridge
describes the middle finger as that by means of which the pursuit of dishonour is indicated).


rigor (n.)

late 14c., from Old French rigor strength, hardness (13c., Modern French rigueur), from Latin
rigorem (nominative rigor) numbness, stiffness, hardness, firmness; roughness, rudeness, from rigere
be stiff (see rigid).


stere (n.)

unit of the metric system for solid measure, 1798, from French st&egrave;re unit of volume equal to
one cubic meter, from Greek stereos solid, stiff, firm, from PIE root *ster- (1) stiff, rigid (see
stereo-). Little used, cubic meter generally serving instead.


strut (n.)

supporting brace, 1580s, perhaps from strut (v.), or a cognate word in Scandinavian (compare
Norwegian strut a spout, nozzle) or Low German (compare Low German strutt rigid); ultimately from
Proto-Germanic *strutoz-, from root *strut- (see strut (v.)).


stern (adj.)

Old English styrne severe, strict, grave, hard, cruel, from Proto-Germanic *sternijaz (cognates:
Middle High German sterre, German starr stiff, st&ouml;rrig obstinate; Gothic andstaurran to be
stiff; Old Norse stara; Old English starian to look or gaze upon), from PIE root *ster- (1) rigid,
stiff (see stereo-). Related: Sternly; sternness.


stark-naked (adj.)

1520s, deformed (by influence of stark (adj.)) from Middle English start naked (early 13c.), from
Old English steort tail, rump, from Proto-Germanic *stertaz (cognates: Old Norse stertr, Danish
stjert, Middle Dutch stert, Dutch staart, Old High German sterz, German Sterz), from PIE *sterd-,
extended form of root *ster- (1) stiff, rigid, firm, strong (see stereo-). Hence British slang
starkers naked (1923).


stiff (adj.)

Old English stif rigid, inflexible, from Proto-Germanic *stifaz inflexible (cognates: Dutch stijf,
Old High German stif, German steif stiff; Old Norse stifla choke), from PIE *stipos-, from root
*steip- press together, pack, cram (cognates: Sanskrit styayate coagulates, stima slow; Greek stia,
stion small stone, steibo press together; Latin stipare pack down, press, stipes post, tree trunk;
Lithuanian stipti stiffen, stiprus strong; Old Church Slavonic stena wall). Of battles and
competitions, from mid-13c.; of liquor, from 1813. To keep a stiff upper lip is attested from 1815.
Related: Stiffly.


starve (v.)

Old English steorfan to die (past tense stearf, past participle storfen), literally become stiff,
from Proto-Germanic *sterban be stiff (cognates: Old Frisian sterva, Old Saxon sterban, Dutch
sterven, Old High German sterban to die, Old Norse stjarfi tetanus), from PIE root *ster- (1) stiff,
rigid (see stereo-).    The conjugation became weak in English by 16c. The sense narrowed to die of
cold (14c.); transitive meaning to kill with hunger is first recorded 1520s (earlier to starve of
hunger, early 12c.). Intransitive sense of to die of hunger dates from 1570s. German cognate sterben
retains the original sense of the word, but the English has come so far from its origins that starve
to death (1910) is now common.


censor (n.)

1530s, Roman magistrate who took censuses and oversaw public morals, from Middle French censor and
directly from Latin censor, from censere to appraise, value, judge, from PIE root *kens- speak
solemnly, announce (cognates: Sanskrit &#347;amsati recites, praises, &#347;asa song of praise).
There were two of them at a time in classical times, usually patricians, and they also had charge of
public finances and public works. Transferred sense of officious judge of morals and conduct in
English is from 1590s. Roman censor also had a transferred sense of a severe judge; a rigid
moralist; a censurer. Of books, plays (later films, etc.), 1640s. By the early decades of the 19c.
the meaning of the English word had shaded into state agent charged with suppression of speech or
published matter deemed politically subversive. Related: Censorial.


strut (v.)

walk in a vain, important manner, walk with affected dignity, 1590s, from Middle English strouten
display one's clothes proudly, vainly flaunt fine attire (late 14c.), earlier to stick out,
protrude, bulge, swell, from Old English strutian to stand out stiffly, swell or bulge out, from
Proto-Germanic *strut- (cognates: Danish strutte, German strotzen to be puffed up, be swelled,
German Strau&szlig; fight), from PIE root *ster- (1) strong, firm, stiff, rigid (see stereo-).
Originally of the air or the attitude; modern sense, focused on the walk, first recorded 1510s.
Related: Strutted; strutting. To strut (one's) stuff is first recorded 1926, from strut as the name
of a dance popular from c.1900. The noun meaning a vain and affectedly dignified manner of walking
is from c.1600.


stork (n.)

Old English storc stork, from Proto-Germanic *sturkaz (cognates: Old Norse storkr, Swedish and
Danish stork, Middle Dutch storc, Old High German storah, German Storch stork), from PIE *ster-
stiff (cognates: Old English stear stiff, strong; see stark). Perhaps so called with reference to
the bird's stiff or rigid posture. But some connect the word to Greek torgos vulture.    Old Church
Slavonic struku, Russian sterkhu, Lithuanian starkus, Hungarian eszterag, Albanian sterkjok stork
are said to be Germanic loan-words. The children's fable that babies are brought by storks (told by
adults who aren't ready to go into the details) is in English by 1854, from German and Dutch nursery
stories, no doubt from the notion that storks nesting on one's roof meant good luck, often in the
form of family happiness.


freeze (v.)

Old English freosan turn to ice (class II strong verb; past tense freas, past participle froren),
from Proto-Germanic *freusan to freeze (cognates: Old Norse frjosa, Old High German friosan, German
frieren to freeze, Gothic frius frost), from Proto-Germanic *freus-, equivalent to PIE root *preus-
to freeze, also to burn (cognates: Sanskrit prusva, Latin pruina hoarfrost, Welsh rhew frost,
Sanskrit prustah burnt, Albanian prus burning coals, Latin pruna a live coal).    Transitive sense
first recorded 14c., figurative sense c.1400. Meaning become rigid or motionless attested by 1720.
Sense of fix at a certain level, make non-transactable is 1922. Freeze frame is from 1960,
originally a briefly Frozen Shot after the Jingle to allow ample time for Change over at the end of
a T.V. 'Commercial.'  [ABC of Film &amp; TV, 1960].


tenet (n.)

principle, opinion, or dogma maintained as true by a person, sect, school, etc., properly a thing
held (to be true), early 15c., from Latin tenet he holds, third person singular present indicative
of tenere to hold, grasp, keep, have possession, maintain, also reach, gain, acquire, obtain; hold
back, repress, restrain; figuratively hold in mind, take in, understand.    The Latin word is from
PIE root *ten- to stretch (cognates: Sanskrit tantram loom, tanoti stretches, lasts; Persian tar
string; Lithuanian tankus compact, i.e. tightened; Greek teinein to stretch, tasis a stretching,
tension, tenos sinew, tetanos stiff, rigid, tonos string, hence sound, pitch; Latin tendere to
stretch, tenuis thin, rare, fine; Old Church Slavonic tento cord; Old English &thorn;ynne thin).
Connecting notion between stretch and hold is cause to maintain. The modern sense is probably
because tenet was used in Medieval Latin to introduce a statement of doctrine.


lesbian (adj.)

1590s, pertaining to the island of Lesbos, from Latin Lesbius, from Greek lesbios of Lesbos, Greek
island in northeastern Aegean Sea (the name originally may have meant wooded), home of Sappho, great
lyric poet whose erotic and romantic verse embraced women as well as men, hence meaning relating to
homosexual relations between women (1890; lesbianism in this sense is attested from 1870) and the
noun, first recorded 1925. Her particular association in English with erotic love between women
dates to at least 1825, though the words formed from it are later. Before this, the principal
figurative use (common in 17c.) was lesbian rule (c.1600) a mason's rule of lead, of a type used on
Lesbos, which could be bent to fit the curves of a molding; hence, pliant morality or judgment.And
this is the nature of the equitable, a correction of law where it is defective owing to its
universality. ... For when the thing is indefinite the rule also is indefinite, like the leaden rule
used in making the Lesbian moulding; the rule adapts itself to the shape of the stone and is not
rigid, and so too the decree is adapted to the facts. [Aristotle, Nicomachean Ethics]  See also
tribadism. Greek had a verb lesbiazein to imitate the Lesbians, which implied sexual initiative and
shamelessness among women, but not necessarily female homosexuality.


