robust (adj.)

1540s, from Middle French robuste (14c.) and directly from Latin robustus strong and hardy,
literally as strong as oak, originally oaken, from robur, robus hard timber, strength, also a
special kind of oak, named for its reddish heartwood, from Latin ruber red (related to robigo rust),
from PIE *reudh- (see red (adj.1)). Related: Robustly; robustness. Robustious (1540s) was a common
form in 17c. (see Hamlet iii.2); it fell from use by mid-18c., but was somewhat revived by mid-19c.
antiquarian writers.


rumpus (n.)

1764, of unknown origin, prob. a fanciful formation [OED], possibly an alteration of robustious
boisterous, noisy (1540s; see robust). First record of rumpus room play room for children in a
family home is from 1938.


strapping (adj.)

tall and sturdy, robust, originally applied to women, 1650s, from present participle of strap (v.).
Compare similar senses of whopping, spanking, bouncing and other present participle adjectives of
violent action expressing something large in size.


athletic (adj.)

1630s (athletical is from 1590s), pertaining to an athlete, from Latin athleticus, from Greek
athletikos, from athletes (see athlete). Meaning strong of body; vigorous; lusty; robust [Johnson,
who spells it athletick] is from 1650s.


vigorous (adj.)

c.1300 (early 13c. as a surname), from Anglo-French vigrus, Old French vigoros strong, robust,
powerful (12c., Modern French vigoreux), from Medieval Latin vigorosus, from Latin vigere be lively,
flourish, thrive (see vigor). Related: Vigorously.


corroborate (v.)

1530s, to give (legal) confirmation to, from Latin corroboratus, past participle of corroborare to
strengthen, invigorate, from com- together or thoroughly (see com-) + roborare to make strong, from
robur, robus strength, (see robust).    Meaning to strengthen by evidence, to confirm is from 1706.
Sometimes in early use the word also has its literal Latin sense, especially of medicines. Related:
Corroborated; corroborating; corroborative.


quean (n.)

young, robust woman, Old English cwene woman, also female serf, hussy, prostitute (as in portcwene
public woman), from Proto-Germanic *kwenon (cognates: Old Saxon quan, Old High German quena, Old
Norse kona, Gothic qino wife, woman); see queen. Popular 16c.-17c. in sense hussy. Sense of
effeminate homosexual is recorded from 1935, especially in Australian slang.


roil (v.)

1580s, of uncertain origin, probably from Middle French rouiller to rust, make muddy, from Old
French roil mud, muck, rust (12c.), from Vulgar Latin *robicula, from Latin robigo rust (see
robust). An earlier borrowing of the French verb is Middle English roil to roam or rove about (early
14c.). Related: Roiled; roiling.


rugged (adj.)

c.1300, rough, shaggy, careworn (originally of animals), from Old Norse rogg shaggy tuft (see rug).
The precise relationship to ragged is not quite clear, but the stem is no doubt ultimately the same
[OED]. Meaning vigorous, strong, robust is American English, by 1848.We were challenged with a
peace-time choice between the American system of rugged individualism and a European philosophy of
diametrically opposed doctrines -- doctrines of paternalism and state socialism. [Herbert Hoover,
speech in New York, Oct. 22, 1928]  Hoover said the phrase was not his own, and it is attested from
1897, though not in a patriotic context. Related: Ruggedly; ruggedness.


doughty (adj.)

Old English dohtig competent, good, valiant, from dyhtig strong, related to dugan to be fit, be
able, be strong, and influenced by its past participle, dohte.    All from Proto-Germanic *duhtiz-
(cognates: Middle High German t&uuml;htec, German t&uuml;chtig, Middle Dutch duchtich), from PIE
*dheugh- to be fit, be of use, proper (cognates: German Tugend virtue, Greek teukhein to make ready,
Irish dual becoming, fit, Russian du&#382;ij strong, robust). Rare after 17c.; in deliberately
archaic or mock-heroic use since c.1800. If it had survived, its modern form would be dighty.


