rolling (adj.)

14c., past participle adjective from roll (v.). Of prairie land from 1819. From mid-15c. as a verbal
noun. Rolling pin is recorded from late 15c. Rolling paper for cigarettes, etc., is from 1969.
Rolling stock wheeled vehicles on a railroad (locomotives, carriages, etc.) is from 1853.  The
rollyng stone neuer gatherth mosse. [John Heywood, A dialogue conteinying the nomber in effect of
all the proverbes in the Englishe tongue, 1546]


logrolling (n.)

also log-rolling, in the legislative vote-trading sense, 1823, American English, from the notion of
neighbors on the frontier helping one another with the heavy work of clearing land and building
cabins (as in phrase you roll my log and I'll roll yours); see log (n.1) + rolling.    LOG-ROLLING.
1. In the lumber regions of Maine it is customary for men of different logging camps to appoint days
for helping each other in rolling the logs to the river, after they are felled and trimmed -- this
rolling being about the hardest work incident to the business. Thus the men of three or four camps
will unite, say on Monday, to roll for camp No. 1, -- on Tuesday for camp No. 2, -- on Wednesday for
camp No. 3, -- and so on, through the whole number of camps within convenient distance of each
other. [Bartlett]


roller (n.)

late 13c., thing that rolls; early 15c., rolling pin, agent noun from roll (v.). Meaning hair-curler
is attested from 1795. Roller derby is from 1936  (see derby); roller hockey from 1926. Disparaging
religious term holy roller is attested from 1842, American English, from the alleged rolling in the
church aisles done by those in the Spirit.


rofl

by 1993, online chat abbreviation for rolling on the floor laughing.


roll (v.)

c.1300 turn over and over, move by rotating (intransitive); late 14c. as to move (something) by
turning it over and over; from Old French roeller roll, wheel round (Modern French rouler), from
Medieval Latin rotulare, from Latin rotula, diminutive of rota wheel (see rotary). Related: Rolled;
rolling.    Of sounds (such as thunder) somehow suggestive of a rolling ball, 1590s; of a drum from
1680s. Of eyes, from late 14c. Of a movie camera, to start filming, from 1938. Sense of rob a
stuporous drunk is from 1873, from the action required to get to his pockets. To roll up gather,
congregate is from 1861, originally Australian. To be on a roll is from 1976. To roll with the
punches is a metaphor from boxing (1940). Heads will roll is a Hitlerism:If our movement is
victorious there will be a revolutionary tribunal which will punish the crimes of November 1918.
Then decapitated heads will roll in the sand. [1930]


Rolodex (n.)

1958, said to be from rolling + index.


barrel (v.)

mid-15c., to put in barrels, from barrel (n.). Meaning to move quickly is 1930, American English
slang, perhaps suggestive of a rolling barrel. Related: Barreled; barreling.


rollback (n.)

also roll-back, action of rolling backward, 1937; reduction, 1942, American English, from verbal
phrase, from roll (v.) + back (adv.).


involution (n.)

late 14c., from Latin involutionem (nominative involutio) a rolling up, noun of action from past
participle stem of involvere (see involve). Related: Involutional.


scrap (n.1)

small piece, late 14c., from Old Norse skrap scraps, trifles, from skrapa to scrape, scratch, cut
(see scrape (v.)). Meaning remains of metal produced after rolling or casting is from 1790. Scrap
iron first recorded 1794.


rotund (adj.)

1705, from Latin rotundus rolling, round, circular, spherical, like a wheel, from rota wheel (see
rotary). Earlier was rotound (1610s); rotounde (early 15c.). Meaning full-toned style of oratory
(1830) is after Horace's ore rotundo in Poetics.


voluble (adj.)

early 15c., liable to constant change, from Middle French voluble, from Latin volubilis that turns
around, rolling, flowing, figuratively (of speech) fluent, rapid, from volvere to turn around, roll
(see volvox). Meaning fluent, talkative first recorded 1580s. Related: Volubly.


wallow (v.)

Old English wealwian to roll, from West Germanic *walwon, from PIE root *wel- (3) to roll (see
volvox). Figurative sense of to plunge and remain in some state or condition is attested from early
13c. Related: Wallowed; wallowing. The noun is recorded from 1590s as act of rolling; 1841 as place
where an animal wallows.


links (n.)

undulating sandy ground, 1728, from Scottish/Northumbrian link sandy, rolling ground near seashore,
from Old English hlinc rising ground, ridge; perhaps from the same Proto-Germanic root as lean (v.).
This type of landscape in Scotland was where golf first was played; the word has been part of the
names of golf courses since at least 1728.


lush (n.)

drunkard, 1890, from earlier (1790) slang meaning liquor (especially in phrase lush ken alehouse);
perhaps a humorous use of lush (adj.) or from Romany or Shelta (tinkers' jargon).    LUSHEY. Drunk.
The rolling kiddeys  had a spree, and got bloody lushey; the dashing lads went on a party of
pleasure, and got very drunk. [Dictionary of Buckish Slang, University Wit, and Pickpocket
Eloquence, London, 1811]


flux (n.)

late 14c., from Old French flus flowing, rolling, bleeding, or directly from Latin fluxus flowing,
loose, slack, past participle of fluere to flow (see fluent). Originally excessive flow (of blood or
excrement); an early name for dysentery; sense of continuous succession of changes is first recorded
1620s. The verb is early 15c., from the noun.


rumble (v.)

late 14c., make a deep, heavy, continuous sound, also move with a rolling, thundering sound, also
create disorder and confusion, probably related to Middle Dutch rommelen to rumble, Middle High
German rummeln, Old Norse rymja to shout, roar, all of imitative origin. Related: Rumbled; rumbling.


traction (n.)

early 15c., a drawing or pulling (originally the pulling of a dislocated limb to reposition it),
from Medieval Latin tractionem (nominative tractio) a drawing (mid-13c.), noun of action from past
participle stem of Latin trahere to pull, draw (see tract (n.1)). Sense of rolling friction of a
vehicle first appears 1825. In modern medical care, a sustained pull to a part of the body to hold
fractured bones in position, 1885.


surge (n.)

late 15c., fountain, stream, of uncertain origin, probably from Middle French sourge-, stem of
sourdre to rise, swell, from Latin surgere to rise, arise, get up, mount up, ascend; attack,
contraction of surrigere, from assimilated form of sub up from below (see sub-) + regere to keep
straight, guide (see regal). Meaning high, rolling swell of water is from 1520s; figurative sense of
excited rising up (as of feelings) is from 1510s.


alarm (n.)

early 14c., from Old French alarme (14c.), from Italian all'arme to arms! (literally to the arms).
An interjection that came to be used as the word for the call or warning (compare alert). Extended
16c. to any sound to warn of danger or to arouse. Weakened sense of apprehension, unease is from
1833. Variant alarum is due to the rolling -r- in the vocalized form. Sometimes in early years
anglicized as all-arm. Alarm clock is attested from 1690s (as A Larum clock).


walk (n.)

c.1200, a tossing, rolling; mid-13c., an act of walking, a going on foot; late 14c., a stroll, also
a path, a walkway; from walk (v.). The meaning broad path in a garden is from 1530s. Meaning
particular manner of walking is from 1650s. Meaning manner of action, way of living is from 1580s;
hence walk of life (1733). Meaning range or sphere of activity is from 1759. Sports sense of base on
balls is recorded from 1905; to win in a walk (1854) is from horse racing (see walk-over). As a type
of sponsored group trek as a fund-raising event, by 1971 (walk-a-thon is from 1963).


wold (n.)

Old English wald (Anglian), weald (West Saxon, Kentish) forest, wooded upland, from Proto-Germanic
*walthuz (cognates: Old Saxon and Old Frisian wald, Middle Dutch woude, wold, Dutch woud, Middle Low
German walde, Old High German wald, German Wald forest, Swedish vall pasture, Old Norse v&ouml;llr
soil, field, meadow), from PIE root *welt- woods; wild. The sense development from forested upland
to rolling open country (c.1200) perhaps is from Scandinavian influence, or a testimony to the
historical deforestation of Britain. Not current since mid-16c.; survives mainly in place names
(such as Cotswold).


troll (v.)

late 14c., to go about, stroll, later (early 15c.) roll from side to side, trundle, probably from
Old French troller, a hunting term, wander, to go in quest of game without purpose (Modern French
tr&#244;ler), from a Germanic source (compare Old High German trollen to walk with short steps),
from Proto-Germanic *truzlanan.    Sense of sing in a full, rolling voice (first attested 1570s) and
that of fish with a moving line (c.1600) both are extended technical uses from the general sense of
roll, trundle, the former from sing in the manner of a catch or round, the latter perhaps confused
with trail or trawl. Figurative sense of to lure on as with a moving bait, entice, allure is from
1560s. Meaning to cruise in search of sexual encounters is recorded from 1967, originally in
homosexual slang.


volvox (n.)

genus of fresh-water algae, 1798, from Latin volvere to roll, from PIE root *wel- (3) to turn,
revolve, with derivatives referring to curved, enclosing objects (cognates: Sanskrit valate turns
round, ulvam womb, vulva; Lithuanian valtis twine, net, vilnis wave, apvalus round; Old Church
Slavonic valiti roll, welter, vl&#365;na wave; Greek eluo wind, wrap, helix spiral object, eilein to
turn, squeeze; Gothic walwjan to roll; Old English wealwian roll, weoloc whelk, spiral-shelled
mollusk; Old High German walzan to roll, waltz; Old Irish fulumain rolling; Welsh olwyn wheel). So
called from their motion.


tongue-in-cheek (adv.)

1856, from phrase to speak with one's tongue in one's cheek to speak insincerely (1748), suggestive
of sly irony or humorous insincerity, perhaps a stage trick to convey irony to the audience.    Hem!
Pray, Sir, said he to the Bard, after thrusting his Tongue into a Corner of his Cheek, and rolling
his Eyes at Miss Willis, (Tricks which he had caught by endeavouring to take off a celebrated
Comedian) were these fine Tragedies of yours ever acted? [anonymous, Emily, or the History of a
Natural Daughter, 1761]   <hr />   This arietta, however, she no sooner began to perform, than he
and the justice fell asleep ; but the moment she ceased playing, the knight waked snorting, and
exclaimed,--'O cara! what d'ye think, gentlemen? Will you talk any more of your Pargolesi and your
Corelli ?'--At the same time, he thrust his tongue in one cheek, and leered with one eye at the
doctor and me, who sat on his left hand--He concluded the pantomime with a loud laugh, which he
could command at all times extempore. [Smollett, The Expedition of Humphrey Clinker, 1771]


surfing (n.)

1955, verbal noun from surf (v.). The surfing craze went nationwide in U.S. from California in 1963.
Surf-board is from 1826, originally in a Hawaiian and Polynesian context. Surf music attested from
1963.    It is highly amusing to a stranger to go out into the south part of this town, some day
when the sea is rolling in heavily over the reef, and to observe there the evolutions and rapid
career of a company of surf-players. The sport is so attractive and full of wild excitement to
Hawaiians, and withal so healthful, that I cannot but hope it will be many years before civilization
shall look it out of countenance, or make it disreputable to indulge in this manly, though it be
dangerous, exercise. [the Rev. Henry T. Cheever, Life in the Sandwich Islands, New York, 1851]   <hr
/>   The basis of surfing music is a rock and roll bass beat figuration, coupled with a raunch-type
weird-sounding lead guitar plus wailing saxes. Surfing music has to sound untrained with a certain
rough flavor to appeal to the teenagers. [music publisher Murray Wilson, quoted in Billboard, June
29, 1963]


roll (n.)

early 13c., rolled-up piece of parchment or paper (especially one inscribed with an official
record), from Old French rolle document, parchment scroll, decree (12c.), from Medieval Latin
rotulus a roll of paper (source also of Spanish rollo, Italian ruollo), from Latin rotula small
wheel, diminutive of rota wheel (see rotary).    Meaning a register, list, catalogue is from late
14c., common from c.1800. Meaning dough which is rolled before baking is first recorded mid-15c.
Sense of act of rolling is from 1743. Meaning quantity of material rolled up is from late 14c.;
meaning quantity of paper money is from 1846; sense of quantity of (rolled) film is from 1890.
Meaning act of sexual intercourse is attested from 1942 (roll in the hay), from roll (v.). Dutch
rol, German Rolle, Danish rulle, etc. are from French.


down (n.2)

Old English dun down, moor; height, hill, mountain, from Proto-Germanic *dunaz- (cognates: Middle
Dutch dunen sandy hill, Dutch duin), probably a pre-insular loan-word from Celtic [Cambridge
Dictionary of English Place-Names], in other words, borrowed at a very early period, before the
Anglo-Saxon migration, from PIE root *dheue- to close, finish, come full circle. Meaning elevated
rolling grassland is from c.1300.    The non-English Germanic words tend to mean dune, sand bank
(see dune), while the Celtic cognates tend to mean hill, citadel (compare Old Irish dun hill, hill
fort; Welsh din fortress, hill fort; and second element in place names London, Verdun, etc.). German
D&uuml;ne, French dune, Italian, Spanish duna are said to be loan-words from Dutch.


