roman (n.)

a novel, 1765, from French roman, from Old French romanz (see romance (n.)); roman &agrave; clef,
novel in which characters represent real persons, literally novel with a key (French), first
attested in English 1893. And, for those who can't get enough of it, roman policier a story of
police detection (1928).


Romano

strong-tasting hard cheese, 1908, from Italian, literally Roman (see Roman).


Romanic (adj.)

pertaining to Rome or the Roman people, 1708, originally in reference to languages descended from
Latin, from Latin Romanicus, from Romanus Roman (see Roman).


Roman (n.)

Old English, from Latin Romanus of Rome, Roman, from Roma Rome (see Rome). The adjective is c.1300,
from Old French Romain. The Old English adjective was romanisc, which yielded Middle English
Romanisshe.    As a type of numeral (usually contrasted to Arabic) it is attested from 1728; as a
type of lettering (based on the upright style typical of Roman inscriptions, contrasted to Gothic,
or black letter, and italic) it is recorded from 1510s. Roman nose is from 1620s. Roman candle as a
type of fireworks is recorded from 1834. Roman Catholic is attested from c.1600, a conciliatory
formation from the time of the Spanish Match, replacing Romanist, Romish which by that time had the
taint of insult in Protestant England.


Romanism (n.)

Roman Catholicism (usually, if not always, with a disparaging savor; in some contexts suggesting
political allegiance to the Vatican), 1670s, from Roman + -ism.


Roman holiday (n.)

occasion on which entertainment or profit is derived from injury or death, 1860, originally in
reference to holidays for gladiatorial combat; the expression seems to be entirely traceable to an
oft-quoted passage on a dying barbarian gladiator from the fourth canto (1818) of Byron's Childe
Harold's Pilgrimage:    But where his rude hut by the Danube lay  There were his young barbarians
all at play,  There was their Dacian mother. He, their sire,  Butcher'd to make a Roman holiday!


romance (n.)

c.1300, a story, written or recited, of the adventures of a knight, hero, etc., often one designed
principally for entertainment, from Old French romanz verse narrative (Modern French roman),
originally an adverb, in the vernacular language, from Vulgar Latin *romanice scribere to write in a
Romance language (one developed from Latin instead of Frankish), from Latin Romanicus of or in the
Roman style, from Romanus Roman (see Roman).    The sense evolution is because medieval vernacular
tales usually told chivalric adventures full of marvelous incidents and heroic deeds. In reference
to literary works, often in Middle English meaning ones written in French but also applied to native
compositions. Literary sense extended by 1660s to a love story. Meaning adventurous quality first
recorded 1801; that of love affair is from 1916. Romance novel attested from 1964. Compare Romance
(adj.).


Romania

Eastern European nation, name taken officially in 1861 at the union of Wallachia and Moldavia, from
Latin Romani people from Rome, which was used to describe the descendants of colonists there from
Roman times; see Roman + -ia. In early use often Rumania, or, from French, Roumania. Related:
Romanian; Rumanian; Roumanian.


Romanesque (adj.)

1715, originally descended from Latin (compare romance), later architectural style in Europe between
Roman and Gothic periods (1819), from Roman, influenced by French romanesque, from Late Latin
Romanice in Vulgar Latin (see romance (n.)).


Romano-

word-forming element meaning pertaining to Rome or Romans or their language, from comb. form of
Latin Romanus (see Roman).


Romance (adj.)

mid-14c., French; in the vernacular language of France (contrasted to Latin), from Old French romanz
French; vernacular, from Late Latin Romanice, from Latin Romanicus (see Roman). Extended 1610s to
other modern tongues derived from Latin (Spanish, Italian, etc.); thus pertaining to the languages
which arose out of the Latin language of the provinces of Rome. Compare romance (n.).


Gallo-Roman (adj.)

belonging to Gaul when it was part of the Roman Empire, from comb. form of Gaul + Roman. In
reference to a language, and as a noun, it means the language spoken in France from the end of the
fifth century C.E. to the middle of the ninth, a form of Vulgar Latin with local modifications and
additions from Gaulish that then developed into what linguists call Old French.


romaine (adj.)

type of lettuce, 1876, from French romaine (in laitue romaine, literally Roman lettuce), from fem.
of Old French romain Roman, from Latin Romanus (see Roman). Perhaps so called because of the
lettuce's introduction into France (by Bureau de la Rivi&egrave;re, chamberlain of Charles V and VI)
at the time of the Avignon papacy (1309-77).


imperator (n.)

commander-in-chief, Latin agent noun from stem of imperare to command (see imperative). In the Roman
republic, a commander; in the Roman Empire, the emperor.


Marcus

masc. proper name, from Latin Marcus, Roman praenomen, traditionally said to be related to Mars,
Roman god of war.


Pamplona

city in Spain, Roman Pompeiopolis, named for Pompey, Roman emperor who founded it 68 B.C.E.


Caius

variant of Gaius, common Roman praenomen. Both forms have the abbreviation C., and the confusion
reflects the early Roman uncertainty about the use of gamma (see C).


D

fourth letter of the Roman alphabet, from Greek delta, from Phoenician and Hebrew daleth, pausal
form of deleth door, so called from its shape. The sign for 500 in Roman numerals. 3-D for three-
dimensional is attested from 1953.


Vulcan (n.)

god of fire and metal-work in Roman mythology, 1510s, from Latin Vulcanus, Volcanus, according to
Klein a word of Etruscan origin. Often with allusions to his lameness and the unfaithfulness of his
wife, Venus. As the name of a hypothetical planet between Mercury and the Sun, it is attested from
1860. French physician Edmond Modeste Lescarbault claimed to have discovered it crossing the Sun's
disk in 1859. The Roman feast of Vulcanalia was on Aug. 23.


classic (adj.)

1610s, of the highest class; approved as a model, from French classique (17c.), from Latin classicus
relating to the (highest) classes of the Roman people, hence, superior, from classis (see class).
Originally in English, of the first class; meaning belonging to standard authors of Greek and Roman
antiquity is attested from 1620s.


W

not in the Roman alphabet, but the Modern English sound it represents is close to the devocalized
consonant expressed by Roman -U- or -V-. In Old English, this originally was written -uu-, but by
8c. began to be expressed by the runic character wyn (Kentish wen), which looked like this: &#447;
(the character is a late addition to the online font set and doesn't display properly on many
computers, so it's something like a combination of lower-case -p- and a reversed -y-). In 11c.,
Norman scribes introduced -w-, a ligatured doubling of Roman -u- which had been used on the
continent for the Germanic w sound, and wyn disappeared c.1300. -W- is not properly a letter in the
modern French alphabet, and it is used there only in borrowed foreign words, such as wagon, weekend,
Western, whisky, wombat.


Lucretia

fem. proper name, from Latin Lucretia (source also of French Lucr&#232;ce), fem. of Lucretius, Roman
masc. proper name, originally the name of a Roman gens.


satyr (n.)

woodland deity, companion of Bacchus, late 14c., from Latin satyrus, from Greek satyros, of unknown
origin. In pre-Roman Greek art, a man-like being with the tail and ears of a horse; the modern
conception of a being part man, part goat is from Roman sculptors, who seem to have assimilated them
to the fauns of native mythology. In some English bibles used curiously to translate Hebrew se'irim,
a type of hairy monster superstitiously believed to inhabit deserts.


Capitol (n.)

building where U.S. Congress meets, 1793 (in writings of Thomas Jefferson), from Latin Capitolium,
temple of Jupiter Optimus Maximus on the Capitoline Hill in ancient Rome. Used earlier of Virginia
state houses (1699). Its use in American public architecture deliberately evokes Roman republican
imagery. With reference to the Roman citadel, it is recorded in English from late 14c., via Old
North French capitolie. Relationship of Capitoline to capital is likely but not certain.


L

Roman letter, from Greek lambda, from Semitic lamed. The shape of the Roman letter is an early one
in Greek, adopted before it was superseded in Greek by the inverted form which became the Greek
lambda.


Roscius (n.)

name of a celebrated Roman actor.


Cornelius

masc. proper name, from the name of a Roman gens.


toga (n.)

c.1600, from Latin toga cloak or mantle, from PIE *tog-a- covering, from root *(s)teg- to cover (see
stegosaurus). The outer garment of a Roman citizen in time of peace.    The toga as the Roman
national dress was allowed to be worn by free citizens only. A stranger not in full possession of
the rights of a Roman citizen could not venture to appear in it. Even banished Romans were in
imperial times precluded from wearing it. The appearance in public in a foreign dress was considered
as contempt of the majesty of the Roman people. Even boys appeared in the toga, called, owing to the
purple edge attached to it (a custom adopted from the Etruscans) toga praetexta. On completing his
sixteenth, afterward his fifteenth, year (tirocinium fori), the boy exchanged the toga praetexta for
the toga virilis, pura, or libera--a white cloak without the purple edge. Roman ladies (for these
also wore the toga) abandoned the purple edge on being married. [Guhl &amp; Koner, The Life of the
Greeks and Romans, transl. Francis Hueffer, 1876]    Breeches, like the word for them (Latin bracae)
were alien to the Romans, being the dress of Persians, Germans, and Gauls, so that bracatus wearing
breeches was a term in Roman geography meaning north of the Alps. College fraternity toga party was
re-popularized by movie Animal House (1978), but this is set in 1962 and the custom seems to date
from at least the mid-1950s.    Down on Prospect Street, Campus Club held a toga party, at which
everyone wore togas. Charter held a come-as-you-are party, at which everyone wore what they happened
to have on, and Cloister held a party called A Night in Tahiti, at which we'd hate to guess what
everyone wore. The borough police reported that only one false alarm was turned in. [Princeton
Alumni Weekly, March 19, 1954]


Mars

Roman god of war, also the name of the bright red planet, late 14c., from Latin Mars (stem
*Mawort-), the Roman god of war, of unknown origin, apparently from earlier Mavors, related to Oscan
Mamers. According to Watkins the Latin word is from *Mawort- name of an Italic deity who became the
god of war at Rome .... He also had agricultural attributes, and might ultimately have been a
Spring-Dionysus. The planet was so named by the Romans, no doubt for its blood-like color. The
Greeks also called the planet Pyroeis the fiery.


solidus (n.)

late 14c., plural solidi, used of both English shilling and Roman gold coin, from Late Latin
solidus, an imperial Roman coin (worth about 25 denarii), from nummus solidus, literally solid coin,
properly a coin of thick or solid metal, not of thin plate (see solid (adj.)).


pall (n.)

Old English p&aelig;ll rich cloth or cloak, purple robe, altar cloth, from Latin pallium cloak,
coverlet, covering, in Tertullian, the garment worn by Christians instead of the Roman toga; related
to pallo robe, cloak, palla long upper garment of Roman women, perhaps from the root of pellis skin.
Notion of cloth spread over a coffin (mid-15c.) led to figurative sense of dark, gloomy mood (1742).


Chester

Cestre (1086), from Old English Legac&aelig;stir (735) City of the Legions, from Old English ceaster
Roman town or city, from Latin castrum fortified place (see castle (n.)). It was the base of the
Second Legion Adiutrix in the 70s C.E. and later the 20th Legion Valeria Victrix. But the town's
name in Roman times was Deoua (c.150 C.E.), from its situation on the River Dee, a Celtic river name
meaning the goddess, the holy one.


February (n.)

late 14c., from Latin februarius mensis month of purification, from februa purifications, expiatory
rites (plural of februum), of unknown origin, said to be a Sabine word. The last month of the
ancient (pre-450 B.C.E.) Roman calendar, so named in reference to the Roman feast of purification,
held on the ides of the month. In Britain, replaced Old English solmona&eth; mud month. English
first (c.1200) borrowed it from Old French Feverier, which yielded feoverel before a respelling to
conform to Latin.


ovation (n.)

1530s, in the Roman historical sense, from Middle French ovation or directly from Latin ovationem
(nominative ovatio) a triumph, rejoicing, noun of action from past participle stem of ovare exult,
rejoice, triumph, probably imitative of a shout (compare Greek euazein to utter cries of joy). In
Roman history, a lesser triumph, granted to a commander for achievements insufficient to entitle him
to a triumph proper. Figurative sense of burst of enthusiastic applause from a crowd is first
attested 1831.


Thetis

name of a sea goddess in Greek mythology, mother of Achilles by Peleus. Since Roman times,
sometimes, in poetry, the sea personified.


century (n.)

1530s, one hundred (of anything), from Latin centuria group of one hundred of things of one kind
(including a measure of land and a division of the Roman army, one-sixteenth of a legion, headed by
a centurion), from centum hundred (see hundred) on analogy of decuria a company of ten.    Used in
Middle English from late 14c. as a division of land, from Roman use. The Modern English meaning is
attested from 1650s, short for century of years (1620s). The older, general sense is preserved in
the meaning score of 100 points in cricket and some other sports. Related: Centurial.


patrician (n.)

early 15c., member of the ancient Roman noble order, from Middle French patricien, from Latin
patricius of the rank of the nobles, of the senators; of fatherly dignity, from patres conscripti
Roman senators, literally fathers, plural of pater father (see father (n.)). Contrasted, in ancient
Rome, with plebeius. Applied to noble citizens and higher orders of free folk in medieval Italian
and German cities (sense attested in English from 1610s); hence nobleman, aristocrat in a modern
sense (1630s). As an adjective, attested from 1610s, from the noun.


Pict (n.)

an ancient people of Great Britain, late 14c., from Late Latin Picti (late 3c., probably a nickname
given them by Roman soldiers), usually taken as derived from picti painted, but probably ultimately
from the Celtic name of the tribe, perhaps Pehta, Peihta, literally the fighters (compare Gaulish
Pictavi, a different people, who gave the name to the French city of Poitiers). They painted and
tattooed themselves, which may have suggested a Roman folk-etymology alteration of the name. The Old
English name for the people was Peohtas.In Scottish folk-lore the Pechts are often represented as a
dark pygmy race, or an underground people; and sometimes identified with elves, brownies, or
fairies. [OED]  Related: Pictish; Pictland.


emperor (n.)

early 13c., from Old French empereor (accusative; nominative emperere; Modern French empereur), from
Latin imperiatorem (nominative imperiator) commander, emperor, from past participle stem of imperare
to command (see empire).    Originally a title conferred by vote of the Roman army on a successful
general, later by the Senate on Julius and Augustus Caesar and adopted by their successors except
Tiberius and Claudius. In the Middle Ages, applied to rulers of China, Japan, etc.; only non-
historical European application in English was to the Holy Roman Emperors (who in German documents
are called kaiser), from late 13c., until in 1804 Napoleon took the title Emperor of the French.


Cassius

Roman gens, one of the oldest families of Rome. The conspirator against Caesar was C. Cassius
Longinus.


classics (n.)

Greek and Roman writers and works, 1711, from classic (adj.).


lares (n.)

Roman tutelary gods, household deities, Latin, plural of lar.


ampulla (n.)

late 14c., type of globular ancient Roman vessel; see ampoule.


Palladian (adj.)

1731, in the style of Roman architect Andrea Palladio (1518-1580).


Sens

city in north-central France, Roman Senones, the capital of the Gaulish people of the same name.


terminus (n.)

1550s, goal, end, final point, from Latin terminus (plural termini) end, boundary line, from PIE
*ter-men-, from root *ter-, base of words meaning peg, post, boundary, marker, goal (cognates:
Sanskrit tarati passes over, crosses over, tarantah sea; Hittite tarmaizzi he limits; Greek terma
boundary, end, limit; Gothic &#254;airh, Old English &#254;urh through; Old English &#254;yrel hole;
Old Norse &#254;r&#246;mr edge, chip, splinter).    In ancient Rome, Terminus was the name of the
deity who presided over boundaries and landmarks, focus of the important Roman festival of
Terminalia (held Feb. 23, the end of the old Roman year). Meaning either end of a transportation
line is first recorded 1836.


Iron Age

1590s, originally from Greek and Roman mythology, the last and worst age of the world; the
archaeological sense of period in which humans used iron tools and weapons is from 1879.


Protestant (n., adj.)

1539, from German or French protestant, from Latin protestantem (nominative protestans), present
participle of protestari (see protest (n.)). Originally used of German princes and free cities who
declared their dissent from (protested) the decision of the Diet of Speyer (1529), which reversed
the liberal terms allowed Lutherans in 1526.    When forced to make their choice between obedience
to God and obedience to the Emperor, they were compelled to choose the former. [Thomas M. Lindsay, A
History of the Reformation, New York, 1910]  The word was taken up by the Lutherans in Germany
(Swiss and French preferred Reformed). It became the general word for adherents of the Reformation
in Germany, then member of any Western church outside the Roman communion; a sense first attested in
English in 1553.In the 17c., 'protestant' was primarily opposed to 'papist,' and thus accepted by
English Churchmen generally; in more recent times, being generally opposed to 'Roman Catholic,' or
... to 'Catholic,' ... it is viewed with disfavour by those who lay stress on the claim of the
Anglican Church to be equally Catholic with the Roman. [OED]Often contemptuous shortened form Prot
is from 1725, in Irish English. Protestant (work) ethic (1926) is taken from Max Weber's work Die
protestantische Ethik und der 'Geist' des Kapitalismus (1904). Protestant Reformation attested by
1680s.


sh (interj.)

exclamation used to urge or request silence, 1847. The gesture of putting a finger to the lips to
express silence is attested from Roman times. As a transitive verb from 1887; intransitive from
1925.


Caledonia

Roman name of part of northern Britain, taken from the name of former inhabitants, of unknown
origin, perhaps Celtic; since 18c, applied poetically to Scotland or the Scottish Highlands.
Related: Caledonian.


