rout (v.)

drive into disordered flight by defeat, c.1600, from rout (n.). Related: Routed; routing.


rout (n.)

1590s, disorderly retreat following a defeat, from Middle French route disorderly flight of troops,
literally a breaking off, rupture, from Vulgar Latin rupta a dispersed group, literally a broken
group, from noun use of Latin rupta, fem. past participle of rumpere to break (see rupture (n.)).
The archaic English noun rout group of persons, assemblage, is the same word, from Anglo-French
rute, Old French route host, troop, crowd, from Vulgar Latin rupta a dispersed group, here with
sense of a division, a detachment. It first came to English meaning group of soldiers (early 13c.),
also gang of outlaws or rioters, mob (c.1300) before the more general sense developed 14c. Also as a
legal term. A rout-cake (1807) was one baked for use at a reception.


router (n.)

cutter that removes wood from a groove, 1818, from rout poke about, rummage (1540s), originally of
swine digging with the snout; a variant of root (v.1).


trophy (n.)

1510s, a spoil or prize of war, from Middle French troph&eacute;e (15c.) from Latin trophaeum a sign
of victory, monument, originally tropaeum, from Greek tropaion monument of an enemy's defeat, noun
use of neuter of adjective tropaios of defeat, causing a rout, from trope a rout, originally a
turning (of the enemy); see trope. In ancient Greece, spoils or arms taken in battle and set up on
the field and dedicated to a god. Figurative extension to any token or memorial of victory is first
recorded 1560s. As a symbolic representation of a classical trophy from 1630s. Trophy wife attested
by 1984.


discomfiture (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French desconfiture rout, defeat (12c.; Modern French d&eacute;confiture), from
desconfit (see discomfit).


revel (n.)

late 14c., riotous merry-making, from Old French revel entertainment, revelry, verbal noun from
reveler be disorderly, make merry (see revel (v.)). Related: Revels; revel-rout.


demolition (n.)

1540s, from Old French demolition (14c.) demolition; defeat, rout, from Latin demolitionem
(nominative demolitio), noun of action from past participle stem of demoliri (see demolish). Mencken
noted demolition engineer for house-wrecker by 1936. Demolition derby is recorded from 1956,
American English, defined by OED as a contest in which old cars are battered into one another, the
last one running being declared the winner.


