ruddy (adj.)

late Old English rudig rubicund, probably from rudu redness, related to read red (see red (adj.1)).
As a British slang euphemism for bloody (q.v.), first recorded 1914. Related: Ruddiness.


Rubicon (n.)

in phrase to cross (or pass) the Rubicon take a decisive step, 1620s, a reference to a small stream
to the Adriatic on the coast of northern Italy which in ancient times formed part of the southern
boundary of Cisalpine Gaul; crossed by Caesar Jan. 10, 49 B.C.E., when he left his province to
attack Pompey. The name is from Latin rubicundus ruddy, in reference to the color of the soil on its
banks.


florid (adj.)

1640s, strikingly beautiful, from French floride flourishing, from Latin floridus flowery, in bloom,
from flos flower (see flora). Sense of ruddy is first recorded 1640s. Meaning profusely adorned, as
with flowers, is from 1650s. Related: Floridly.


Colorado

U.S. state (organized as a territory 1861, admitted as a state 1876), named for the river, Spanish
Rio Colorado, from colorado ruddy, reddish, literally colored, past participle of colorar to color,
dye, paint, from Latin colorare (see coloration).


red (adj.1)

Old English read red, from Proto-Germanic *rauthaz (cognates: Old Norse rau&eth;r, Danish
r&oslash;d, Old Saxon rod, Old Frisian rad, Middle Dutch root, Dutch rood, German rot, Gothic
rau&thorn;s). As a noun from mid-13c.    The Germanic words are from PIE root *reudh- red, ruddy
(cognates: Latin ruber, also dialectal rufus light red, mostly of hair; Greek erythros; Sanskrit
rudhira-; Avestan raoidita-; Old Church Slavonic rudru, Polish rumiany, Russian rumjanyj flushed,
red, of complexions, etc.; Lithuanian raudas; Old Irish ruad, Welsh rhudd, Breton ruz red). The only
color for which a definite common PIE root word has been found. The initial -e- in the Greek word is
because Greek tends to avoid beginning words with -r-.    Along with dead, bread (n.), lead (n.1),
the vowel shortened in Middle English. The surname Read/Reid retains the original Old English long
vowel pronunciation and is the corresponding surname to Brown-, Black, White.    The color
designation of Native Americans in English from 1580s. The color as characteristic of British
possessions on a map is attested from 1885. Red-white-and-blue in reference to American patriotism,
from the colors of the flag, is from 1840; in a British context, in reference to the Union flag,
1852. The red flag was used as a symbol of defiance in battle on land or sea from c.1600. To see red
get angry is an American English expression first recorded 1898. Red rover, the children's game,
attested from 1891. Red light as a sign to stop is from 1849, long before traffic signals. As the
sign of a brothel, it is attested from 1899. As a children's game (in reference to the traffic light
meaning) it is recorded from 1953.   Red-letter day (late 14c.) was originally a saint's day, marked
on church calendars in red letters. Red ball signifying express in railroad jargon is 1904,
originally (1899) a system of moving and tracking freight cars. Red dog, type of U.S. football pass
rush, is recorded from 1959. Red meat is from 1808. Red shift in spectography is first recorded
1923. Red carpet sumptuous welcome is from 1934, but the custom for dignitaries is described as far
back as Aeschylus (Agamemnon); it also was the name of a type of English moth.


