ruffian (n.)

1530s, a boisterous, brutal fellow, one ready to commit any crime, from Middle French rufian a pimp
(15c.), from Italian ruffiano a pander, pimp, of uncertain origin, perhaps from a Germanic source
related to rough (adj.), but Dutch roffiaan, German Ruffian are said to be from French. English
meaning might have been influenced by similarity of sound to rough. Related: Ruffianly.    The
Romanic words (such as Medieval Latin ruffianus, Proven&ccedil;al rufian, Catalan rufia, Spanish
rufian) preserve the sense of protector or owner of whores. For sense evolution in English, compare
bully (n.).


bully (n.)

1530s, originally sweetheart, applied to either sex, from Dutch boel lover; brother, probably a
diminutive of Middle Dutch broeder brother (compare Middle High German buole brother, source of
German Buhle lover; see brother (n.)).    Meaning deteriorated 17c. through fine fellow and
blusterer to harasser of the weak (1680s, from bully-ruffian, 1650s). Perhaps this was by influence
of bull (n.1), but a connecting sense between lover and ruffian may be in protector of a prostitute,
which was one sense of bully (though not specifically attested until 1706). The expression meaning
worthy, jolly, admirable (especially in 1864 U.S. slang bully for you!) is first attested 1680s, and
preserves an earlier, positive sense of the word.


tough (n.)

street ruffian, 1866, American English, from tough (adj.).


plug-ugly (n.)

ruffian, 1856, originally in Baltimore, Maryland, from plug (n.), American English slang name for
the stovepipe hats then popular among young men, + ugly.


sandbag (v.)

1860, furnish with sandbags, from sandbag (n.). Meaning pretend weakness, 1970s perhaps is extended
from poker-playing sense of refrain from raising at the first opportunity in hopes of raising more
steeply later (1940), which perhaps is from sandbagger in the sense of bully or ruffian who uses a
sandbag as a weapon to knock his intended victim unconscious (1882). Hence to fell or stun with a
blow from a sandbag (1887). Related: Sandbagged; sandbagging.


roister (v.)

bluster, swagger, be bold, noisy, vaunting, or turbulent, 1580s, from an obsolete noun roister noisy
bully (1550s, displaced by 19c. by roisterer), from Middle French ruistre ruffian, from Old French
ruiste boorish, gross, uncouth, from Latin rusticus (see rustic (adj.)). Related: Roistered;
roistering. Ralph Royster-Doyster is the title and lead character of what is sometimes called the
first English comedy (Udall, 1555).


ribald (adj.)

c.1500, from ribald, ribaud (n.), mid-13c., a rogue, ruffian, rascall, scoundrell, varlet, filthie
fellow [Cotgrave], from Old French ribaut, ribalt rogue, scoundrel, lewd lover, also as an
adjective, wanton, depraved, dissolute, licentious, of uncertain origin, perhaps (with suffix -ald)
from riber be wanton, sleep around, dally amorously, from a Germanic source (compare Old High German
riban be wanton, literally to rub, possibly from the common euphemistic use of rub words to mean
have sex), from Proto-Germanic *wribanan, from PIE root *wer- (3) to turn, bend (see versus).


droog (n.)

gang member, young ruffian, a transliteration of the Russian word for friend, introduced by English
novelist Anthony Burgess in A Clockwork Orange (1962). The Russian word comes from Old Church
Slavonic drugu companion, friend, other (source of Bohemian drug companion, Serbo-Croatian drugi
other), which belongs to a group of related Indo-European words (such as Lithuanian draugas friend,
traveling companion; Gothic driugan do military service, ga-drauhts soldier; Old Norse drott, Old
English dryht, Old High German truht multitude, people, army) apparently with an original sense of
companion.


thug (n.)

1810, member of a gang of murderers and robbers in India who strangled their victims, from Marathi
thag, thak cheat, swindler, Hindi thag, perhaps from Sanskrit sthaga-s cunning, fraudulent, from
sthagayati (he) covers, conceals, perhaps from PIE root *(s)teg- (2) to cover (see stegosaurus).
The thugs roamed about the country in bands of from 10 to 100, usually in the disguise of peddlers
or pilgrims, gaining the confidence of other travelers, whom they strangled, when a favorable
opportunity presented itself, with a handkerchief, an unwound turban, or a noosed cord. The shedding
of blood was seldom resorted to. The motive of the thugs was not so much lust of plunder as a
certain religious fanaticism. The bodies of their victims were hidden in graves dug with a
consecrated pickax, and of their spoil one third was devoted to the goddess Kali, whom they
worshiped. [Century Dictionary]    The more correct Indian name is phanseegur (from phansi noose),
and the activity was described in English as far back as c.1665. Rigorously prosecuted by the
British from 1831, they were driven from existence by century's end. Transferred sense of ruffian,
cutthroat, violent lowbrow is from 1839.


