rule (v.)

c.1200, to control, guide, direct, from Old French riuler impose rule, from Latin regulare (see
regulate). Legal sense establish by decision is recorded from early 15c. Meaning mark with lines is
from 1590s. Meaning to dominate, prevail is from 1874. Rule Brittania, patriotic song, is from 1740.
Related: Ruled; ruling.


rule (n.)

c.1200, principle or maxim governing conduct, formula to which conduct must be conformed from Old
French riule, Norman reule rule, custom, (religious) order (in Modern French partially re-Latinized
as r&#232;gle), from Vulgar Latin *regula, from Latin regula straight stick, bar, ruler;
figuratively a pattern, a model, related to regere to rule, straighten, guide (see regal). Replaced
Old English wealdan.    Meaning regulation governing play of a game, etc. is from 1690s. Phrase rule
of thumb first attested 1690s. Rule of law supremacy of impartial and well-defined laws to any
individual's power is from 1883. Meaning strip used for making straight lines or measuring is
recorded from mid-14c. Typography sense is attested from 1680s.


ruler (n.)

one who rules, late 14c., agent noun from rule (v.). Meaning instrument used for making straight
lines is c.1400 (compare rule (n.)).


slide-rule (n.)

also slide rule, mathematical calculating tool, 1838, from slide (v.) + rule (n.). So called for its
method of operation. Earlier sliding-rule (1660s).


wield (v.)

Old English weldan (Mercian), wieldan, wealdan (West Saxon) have power over, compel, tame, subdue
(class VII strong verb; past tense weold, past participle gewealden), merged with weak verb wyldan,
both from Proto-Germanic *waldan to rule (cognates: Old Saxon and Gothic waldan, Old Frisian walda
to govern, rule, Old Norse valda to rule, wield, to cause, Old High German waltan, German walten to
rule, govern).    The Germanic words and cognates in Balto-Slavic (Old Church Slavonic vlado to
rule, vlasti power, Russian vladeti to reign, rule, possess, make use of, Lithuanian veldu to rule,
possess) probably are from PIE *woldh-, extended form of root *wal- to be strong, to rule (see
valiant). Related: Wielded; wielding.


regiment (n.)

late 14c., government, rule, control, from Old French regiment government, rule (14c.), from Late
Latin regimentum rule, direction, from Latin regere to rule (see regal). Meaning unit of an army
first recorded 1570s (originally the reference was to permanent organization and discipline), from
French. The exact number in the unit varies over time and place.


ruly (adj.)

conforming to (religious) rule; amenable to rule, disciplined, orderly, reuleli; from rule (n.) +
-ly (2).


archon (n.)

one of the nine chief magistrates of ancient Athens, 1650s, from Greek arkhon ruler, noun use of
present participle of arkhein to rule, from PIE *arkhein- to begin, rule, command, a Gk. verb of
unknown origin, but showing archaic Indo-European features ... with derivatives arkhe, 'rule,
beginning,' and arkhos, 'ruler'  [Watkins].


regulate (v.)

early 15c., adjust by rule, control, from Late Latin regulatus, past participle of regulare to
control by rule, direct, from Latin regula rule (see regular). Meaning to govern by restriction is
from 1620s. Related: Regulated; regulating.


Raj (n.)

British rule in India, 1859, from Hindi raj rule, dominion, kingdom (see rajah).


empire (n.)

early 14c., from Old French empire rule, authority, kingdom, imperial rule, from Latin imperium
rule, command, from imperare to command, from im- in (see in- (2)) + parare to order, prepare (see
pare).    Not etymologically restricted to territory ruled by an emperor, but used that way. The
Empire, meaning the British Empire, first recorded 1772 (it officially devolved into The
Commonwealth in 1931); before that it meant the Holy Roman Empire (1670s). Empire style (especially
in reference to a style of dresses with high waistlines) is 1869, from the Second Empire rule of
Napoleon III of France (1852-70). New York has been called the Empire State since 1834.


monarchy (n.)

state ruled by monarchical government, mid-14c.; rule by one person, late 14c.; from Old French
monarchie sovereignty, absolute power (13c.), from Late Latin monarchia, from Greek monarkhia
absolute rule, literally ruling of one, from monos alone (see mono-) + arkhein to rule (see archon).


domination (n.)

late 14c., rule, control, from Old French dominacion (12c.) domination, rule, power, from Latin
dominationem (nominative dominatio), noun of action from past participle stem of dominari to rule,
have dominion over, from dominus lord, master, literally master of the house, from domus home (see
domestic) + -nus, suffix denoting ownership or relation. Sexual sense by 1961.


canon (n.2)

clergyman, c.1200, from Anglo-French canun, from Old North French canonie (Modern French chanoine),
from Church Latin canonicus clergyman living under a rule, noun use of Latin adjective canonicus
according to rule (in ecclesiastical use, pertaining to the canon), from Greek kanonikos, from kanon
rule (see canon (n.1)).


aristocracy (n.)

1560s, from Middle French aristocracie (Modern French aristocratie), from Late Latin aristocratia,
from Greek aristokratia government or rule of the best, from aristos best (originally most fitting,
from PIE *ar-isto-, superlative form of *ar- to fit together; see arm (n.1)) + kratos rule, power
(see -cracy).    At first in a literal sense of government by those who are the best citizens;
meaning rule by a privileged class (best-born or best-favored by fortune) is from 1570s and became
paramount 17c. Hence, the meaning patrician order (1650s). In early use contrasted with monarchy;
after French and American revolutions, with democracy.


lesbian (adj.)

1590s, pertaining to the island of Lesbos, from Latin Lesbius, from Greek lesbios of Lesbos, Greek
island in northeastern Aegean Sea (the name originally may have meant wooded), home of Sappho, great
lyric poet whose erotic and romantic verse embraced women as well as men, hence meaning relating to
homosexual relations between women (1890; lesbianism in this sense is attested from 1870) and the
noun, first recorded 1925. Her particular association in English with erotic love between women
dates to at least 1825, though the words formed from it are later. Before this, the principal
figurative use (common in 17c.) was lesbian rule (c.1600) a mason's rule of lead, of a type used on
Lesbos, which could be bent to fit the curves of a molding; hence, pliant morality or judgment.And
this is the nature of the equitable, a correction of law where it is defective owing to its
universality. ... For when the thing is indefinite the rule also is indefinite, like the leaden rule
used in making the Lesbian moulding; the rule adapts itself to the shape of the stone and is not
rigid, and so too the decree is adapted to the facts. [Aristotle, Nicomachean Ethics]  See also
tribadism. Greek had a verb lesbiazein to imitate the Lesbians, which implied sexual initiative and
shamelessness among women, but not necessarily female homosexuality.


overrule (v.)

rule against; set aside, as by a higher authority, 1590s, from over- + rule (v.). It was used
earlier in a sense to govern, control (1570s). Related: Overruled; overruling.


-archy

word-forming element meaning rule, from Latin -archia, from Greek -arkhia rule, from arkhos leader,
chief, ruler, from arkhe beginning, origin, first place (see archon).


domineer (v.)

1580s, from Dutch domineren to rule (16c.), from Middle French dominer, from Latin dominari to rule,
'lord' it over (see domination). Shakespeare's usage is not the earliest in English. Related:
Domineering.


home rule (n.)

1860, originally in reference to Ireland, from home (n.) + rule (n.).


exception (n.)

late 14c., from Anglo-French excepcioun, Old French excepcion, from Latin exceptionem (nominative
exceptio), noun of action from past participle stem of excipere (see except).    The exception that
proves the rule is from law: exceptio probat regulam in casibus non exceptis, the exception proves
the rule in cases not excepted; exception here being action of excepting someone or something from
the rule in question, not the person or thing that is excepted. To take exception is from excipere
being used in Roman law as a modern attorney would say objection.


tyrannize (v.)

rule despotically or cruelly; rule tyrannically, late 15c., from Middle French tyranniser (14c.),
from tyrannie (see tyranny). Greek tyrannizein meant to take the part of tyrants in politics.
Related: Tyrannized; tyrannizing.


governance (n.)

late 14c., act or manner of governing, from Old French gouvernance government, rule, administration;
(rule of) conduct, from governer (see govern). Fowler writes that the word has now the dignity of
incipient archaism, but it might continue useful in its original sense as government comes primarily
to mean the governing power in a state.


regimen (n.)

c.1400, medical, course of diet, exercise, etc. for sake of health; mid-15c., act of governing, from
Old French regimen (14c.), from Latin regimen rule, guidance, government, means of guidance, rudder,
from regere to rule (see regal).


reign (n.)

early 13c., kingdom, from Old French reigne kingdom, land, country (Modern French r&#232;gne), from
Latin regnum kingship, dominion, rule, realm, related to regere (see regal). Meaning period of rule
first recorded mid-14c.


gerontocracy (n.)

rule by old men, 1830, from Greek geront-, from geron old man (see gerontology) + kratia rule (see
-cracy). Related: Gerontocratic.


formula (n.)

1630s, words used in a ceremony or ritual, from Latin formula form, draft, contract, regulation;
rule, method, formula, literally small form, diminutive of forma form (see form (n.)).    Modern
sense is colored by Carlyle's use (1837) of the word for rule slavishly followed without
understanding [OED].  Men who try to speak what they believe, are naked men fighting men quilted
sevenfold in formulae. [Charles Kingsley, Letters, 1861]  Mathematical use is from 1796; use in
chemistry is from c.1846.


kindred (n.)

c.1200, kinraden, compound of kin (q.v.) + -rede, from Old English r&aelig;den condition, rule,
related to r&aelig;dan to advise, rule (see read (v.)). With intrusive -d- (17c.) probably for
phonetic reasons (compare thunder) but perhaps encouraged by kind (n.). As an adjective, 1520s, from
the noun.


reign (v.)

to hold or exercise sovereign power, late 13c., from Old French regner rule, reign (12c.), from
Latin regnare have royal power, be king, rule, reign, from regnum (see reign (n.)). Related:
Reigned; reigning; regnal.


theocracy (n.)

1737; earlier as un-Latinized theocraty (1620s), form of government in which God is recognized as
supreme ruler and his laws form the statute book, originally of the sacerdotal government of Israel
before the rise of kings, from later Greek theokratia (Josephus), literally  the rule of God, from
theos god (see theo-) + kratos a rule, regime, strength (see -cracy). Meaning priestly or religious
body wielding political and civil power is recorded from 1825.  Related: Theocratic (1741).


plutocracy (n.)

1650s, from Greek ploutokratia rule or power of the wealthy or of wealth, from ploutos wealth (see
Pluto) + -kratia rule (see -cracy). Synonym plutarchy is slightly older (1640s). Pluto-democracy
plutocracy masquerading as democracy is from 1895.


ochlocracy (n.)

government by the rabble, 1580s, from French ochlocratie (1560s), from Greek okhlokratia (Polybius)
mob rule, the lowest grade of democracy, from kratos rule, power, strength (see -cracy) + okhlos
mob, populace, perhaps literally moving mass, from PIE *wogh-lo-, from root *wegh- to go, transport
in a vehicle (see weigh). For sense development, compare mob (n.). Related: Ochlocratic;
ochlocratical. Greek also had okhlagogos mob-leader, ochlagogue.


-cracy

word-forming element forming nouns meaning rule or government by, from French -cratie or directly
from Medieval Latin -cratia, from Greek -kratia power, might; rule, sway; power over; a power,
authority, from kratos strength, from PIE *kre-tes- power, strength, suffixed form of root
*kar-/*ker- hard (see hard). The connective -o- has come to be viewed as part of it. Productive in
English from c.1800.


Han

Chinese dynasty, 206 B.C.E.-220 C.E., its rule marked by prosperity, military success, and the
introduction of Buddhism.


enormous (adj.)

1530s, from Latin enormis out of rule, irregular, shapeless; extraordinary, very large, from ex- out
of (see ex-) + norma rule, norm (see norm), with English -ous substituted for Latin -is.    Meaning
extraordinary in size is attested from 1540s; original sense of outrageous is more clearly preserved
in enormity. Earlier in same sense was enormyous (mid-15c.). Related: Enormously.


rex (n.)

a king, 1610s, from Latin rex (genitive regis) a king, related to regere to keep straight, guide,
lead, rule, from PIE root *reg- to rule, to lead straight, to put right (cognates: Sanskrit raj-
king; Old Irish ri king, genitive rig; see regal).


regime (n.)

system of government or rule, 1792, from French r&eacute;gime, from Old French regimen (14c.), from
Latin regimen rule, guidance, government, means of guidance, rudder, from regere (see regal).
Earlier course of diet, exercise, late 15c. In French, l'ancien r&eacute;gime refers to the system
of government before the revolution of 1789.


Mau Mau (n.)

African secret society devoted to ending European rule, 1950, from the Kikuyu language of Kenya.


canon (n.1)

church law, Old English canon, from Old French canon or directly from Late Latin canon Church law,
in classical Latin, measuring line, rule, from Greek kanon any straight rod or bar; rule; standard
of excellence, perhaps from kanna reed (see cane (n.)). Taken in ecclesiastical sense for decree of
the Church. General sense of standard of judging is from c.1600. Harold Bloom writes that The
secular canon, with the word meaning a catalog of approved authors, does not actually begin until
the middle of the eighteenth century .... [The Western Canon, 1994]. Related: Canonicity.


Meiji

period of rule of emperor Mutsuhito (1868-1912), which was marked by modernization and
Westernization, 1873, from Japanese, literally enlightened government.


hierarchy (n.)

mid-14c., from Old French ierarchie, from Medieval Latin hierarchia ranked division of angels (in
the system of Dionysius the Areopagite), from Greek hierarkhia rule of a high priest, from
hierarkhes high priest, leader of sacred rites, from ta hiera the sacred rites (neuter plural of
hieros sacred; see ire) + arkhein to lead, rule (see archon). Sense of ranked organization of
persons or things first recorded 1610s, initially of clergy, sense probably influenced by higher.
Related: Hierarchal; hierarchical.


abnormal (adj.)

1835, displaced older abnormous (1742) and rival anormal (1835) under influence of Latin abnormis
deviating from a rule, from ab- off, away from (see ab-) + norma rule (see norm). The older forms
were via Old French anormal (13c.), from Medieval Latin anormalos, from Greek anomalos, from an- not
+ homalos, from homos same. The Greek word was altered in Latin by association with norma. Related:
Abnormally.


regular (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French reguler ecclesiastical (Modern French r*#233;gulier), from Late Latin
regularis containing rules for guidance, from Latin regula rule, from PIE *reg- move in a straight
line (see regal).    Earliest sense was of religious orders (the opposite of secular). Extended from
late 16c. to shapes, etc., that followed predictable or uniform patterns; sense of normal is from
1630s; meaning real, genuine is from 1821. Old English borrowed Latin regula and nativized it as
regol rule, regulation, canon, law, standard, pattern; hence regolsticca ruler (instrument);
regollic (adj.) canonical, regular.


normal (adj.)

c.1500, typical, common; 1640s, standing at a right angle, from Late Latin normalis in conformity
with rule, normal, from Latin normalis made according to a carpenter's square, from norma rule,
pattern, literally carpenter's square (see norm). Meaning conforming to common standards, usual is
from 1828, but probably older than the record [Barnhart].    As a noun meaning usual state or
condition, from 1890. Sense of normal person or thing is from 1894. Normal school (1834) is from
French &eacute;cole normale (1794), a republican foundation. The city of Normal, Illinois, U.S., was
named 1857 for the normal school established there.


ruling (n.)

determination by a judge or court on a point arising in the course of a trial or hearing, 1550s,
verbal noun from rule (v.).


valiant (adj.)

early 14c. (late 12c. in surnames), brave, courageous, intrepid in danger, from Anglo-French
vaylant, and Old French vaillant stalwart, brave, present participle adjective from valoir be
worthy, originally be strong, from Latin valere be strong, be well, be worth, have power, be able,
be in health, from PIE root *wal- be strong (cognates: Old English wealdan to rule, Old High German
-walt, -wald power (in personal names), Old Norse valdr ruler, Old Church Slavonic vlasti to rule
over, Lithuanian valdyti to have power, Celtic *walos- ruler, Old Irish flaith dominion, Welsh gallu
to be able). As a noun, valiant person, from c.1600. Related: Valiantly.


observer (n.)

1550s, one who keeps a rule, custom, etc., agent noun from observe. Meaning one who watches and
takes notice is from 1580s; this is the sense of the word in many newspaper names.


Reich (n.)

German, kingdom, realm, state, from Old High German rihhi, related to Old English rice, from Proto-
Germanic *rikja rule (cognates: Old Norse riki, Danish rige, Old Frisian and Middle Dutch rike,
Dutch rijk, Gothic reiki), from PIE *reg- (1) move in a straight line, hence, direct in a straight
line, rule, guide (see regal). Don Ringe, From Proto-Indo-European to Proto-Germanic [Oxford 2006]
identifies it as a Celtic loan-word in Germanic rather than a direct evolution from PIE, based on
the vowel. Used in English from 1871-1945 to refer to the German state, Germany. Most notoriously in
Third Reich (see third); there never was a First or Second in English usage.


regal (adj.)

late 14c., from Old French regal royal (12c.) or directly from Latin regalis royal, kingly; of or
belonging to a king, worthy of a king, from rex (genitive regis) king, from PIE root *reg- move in a
straight line, hence, direct in a straight line, rule, guide (cognates: Sanskrit raj- a king, a
leader; Avestan razeyeiti directs; Persian rahst right, correct; Latin regere to rule, rex a king, a
leader, rectus right, correct; Old Irish ri, Gaelic righ a king; Gaulish -rix a king, in personal
names, such as Vircingetorix; Gothic reiks a leader; Old English rice kingdom, -ric king, rice rich,
powerful, riht correct; Gothic raihts, Old High German recht, Old Swedish reht, Old Norse rettr
correct). Related: Regally.


regulation (n.)

1670s, act of regulating; state of being reduced to order, noun of action from regulate. Meaning
rule for management is from 1715. Related: Regulations.


