runic (adj.)

1660s, from Modern Latin runicus, from Old Norse run (see rune).


rune (n.)

Old English run, rune secret, mystery, dark mysterious statement, (secret) council, also a runic
letter (runst&#230;f), from Proto-Germanic *runo (cognates: Old Norse run a secret, magic sign,
runic character, Old High German runa a secret conversation, whisper, Gothic runa), from PIE *ru-
no-, source of technical terms of magic in Germanic and Celtic (cognates: Gaelic run a secret,
mystery, craft, deceit, purpose, intention, desire, Welsh rhin a secret, charm, virtue). Also see
Runnymede.    The word entered Middle English as roun and by normal evolution would have become
Modern English *rown, but it died out mid-15c. when the use of runes did. The modern usage is from
late 17c., from German philologists who had reintroduced the word in their writings from a
Scandinavian source (such as Danish rune, from Old Norse run). The runic alphabet is believed to
have developed by 2c. C.E. from contact with Greek writing, with the letters modified to be more
easily cut into wood or stone.


futhorc (n.)

1851, historians' name for the Germanic runic alphabet; so called from its first six letters, on the
model of alphabet.


wynn (n.)

runic letter in Old English and early Middle English, representing w, Old English wyn, so called for
being the first letter of that word, which literally means delight, pleasure (see Venus).


W

not in the Roman alphabet, but the Modern English sound it represents is close to the devocalized
consonant expressed by Roman -U- or -V-. In Old English, this originally was written -uu-, but by
8c. began to be expressed by the runic character wyn (Kentish wen), which looked like this: &#447;
(the character is a late addition to the online font set and doesn't display properly on many
computers, so it's something like a combination of lower-case -p- and a reversed -y-). In 11c.,
Norman scribes introduced -w-, a ligatured doubling of Roman -u- which had been used on the
continent for the Germanic w sound, and wyn disappeared c.1300. -W- is not properly a letter in the
modern French alphabet, and it is used there only in borrowed foreign words, such as wagon, weekend,
Western, whisky, wombat.


thorn (n.)

Old English &thorn;orn sharp point on a stem or branch, earlier thorny tree or plant, from Proto-
Germanic *thurnuz (cognates: Old Saxon, Old Frisian  thorn, Dutch doorn, Old High German dorn,
German Dorn, Old Norse &thorn;orn, Gothic &thorn;aurnus), from PIE *trnus (cognates: Old Church
Slavonic trunu thorn, Sanskrit trnam blade of grass, Greek ternax stalk of the cactus, Irish trainin
blade of grass), from *(s)ter-n- thorny plant, from root *ster- (1) stiff (see stark).    Figurative
sense of anything which causes pain is recorded from early 13c. (thorn in the flesh is from II Cor.
xii:7). Also an Anglo-Saxon and Icelandic runic letter (&thorn;), named for the word of which it was
the initial (see -th-).


