runt (n.)

c. 1500, old or decayed tree stump, of unknown origin. Meaning extended to small ox or cow (1540s)
and by 1610s generally to undersized animals and people. Specific American English sense of smallest
of a litter (especially of pigs) is attested from 1841. Some see a connection to Middle Dutch runt
ox, but OED thinks this unlikely, and pronounces the word of obscure origin. Related: Runty (1807).


cockney (n.)

c. 1600, usually said to be from rare Middle English cokenei, cokeney spoiled child, milksop (late
14c.), originally cokene-ey cock's egg (mid-14c.). Most likely disentangling of the etymology is to
start from Old English cocena cock's egg -- genitive plural of coc cock + &aelig;g egg -- medieval
term for runt of a clutch, extended derisively c. 1520s to town dweller, gradually narrowing
thereafter to residents of a particular neighborhood in the East End of London. Liberman, however,
disagrees:    [I]n all likelihood, not the etymon of ME cokeney 'milksop, simpleton; effeminate man;
Londoner,' which is rather a reshaping of [Old French] acoquin&eacute; 'spoiled' (participle).
However, this derivation poses some phonetic problems that have not been resolved.    The accent so
called from 1890, but the speech peculiarities were noted from 17c. As an adjective in this sense,
from 1630s.


suck (v.)

Old English sucan to suck, from a Germanic root of imitative origin (cognates: Old Saxon, Old High
German sugan, Old Norse suga, Danish suge, Swedish suga, Middle Dutch sughen, Dutch zuigen, German
saugen to suck), possibly from the same source as Latin sugere to suck, succus juice, sap; Old Irish
sugim, Welsh sugno to suck; see sup (v.2). As a noun from c. 1300.    Meaning do fellatio is first
recorded 1928. Slang sense of be contemptible first attested 1971 (the underlying notion is of
fellatio). Related: Sucked; sucking. Suck eggs is from 1906. Suck hind tit be inferior is American
English slang first recorded 1940.    The old, old saying that the runt pig always sucks the hind
teat is not so far wrong, as it quite approximates the condition that exists. [The Chester White
Journal, April 1921]


round (adj.)

late 13c., from Anglo-French rounde, Old French roont (12c., Modern French rond), probably
originally *redond, from Vulgar Latin *retundus (source also of Proven&ccedil;al redon, Spanish
redondo, Old Italian ritondo), from Latin rotundus like a wheel, circular, round, related to rota
wheel (see rotary).    As an adverb from c. 1300; as a preposition from c. 1600. In many uses it is
a shortened form of around. The French word is the source of Middle Dutch ront (Dutch rond), Middle
High German runt (German rund) and similar Germanic words.    Of numbers from mid-14c., from earlier
sense full, complete, brought to completion (mid-14c., notion of symmetry extended to that of
completeness). First record of round trip is from 1844, originally of railways. Round heels attested
from 1926, in reference to incompetent boxers, 1927 in reference to loose women, in either case
implying an inability to avoid ending up flat on one's back.


