ruse (n.)

early 15c., dodging movements of a hunted animal; 1620s, a trick, from Old French ruse, reuse
diversion, switch in flight; trick, jest (14c.), back-formed noun from reuser to dodge, repel,
retreat; deceive, cheat, from Latin recusare deny, reject, oppose, from re-, intensive prefix (see
re-), + causari plead as a reason, object, allege, from causa reason, cause (see cause (n.)). It
also has been proposed that the French word may be from Latin rursus backwards, or a Vulgar Latin
form of refusare. Johnson calls it, A French word neither elegant nor necessary. The verb ruse was
used in Middle English.


guile (n.)

mid-12c., from Old French guile deceit, wile, fraud, ruse, trickery, from Frankish *wigila trick,
ruse or a related Germanic source (cognates: Old Frisian wigila sorcery, witchcraft, Old English wil
trick; see wile).


put-on (n.)

ruse, deception, 1937, from earlier adjectival meaning assumed, feigned (1620s), a figurative
extension of the notion of putting on costumes or disguises; from put (v.) + on (adv.). The
expression put (someone) on play a trick on seems to be a back-formation from the noun.


sedulous (adj.)

1530s, from Latin sedulus attentive, painstaking, diligent, busy, zealous, probably from sedulo
(adv.) sincerely, diligently, from sedolo without deception or guile, from se- without, apart (see
secret) + dolo, ablative of dolus deception, guile, cognate with Greek dolos ruse, snare. Related:
Sedulously; sedulousness.


rush (v.)

mid-14c. (implied in rushing), to drive back or down, from Anglo-French russher, from Old French
ruser to dodge, repel (see ruse). Meaning to do something quickly is from 1650s; transitive sense of
to hurry up (someone or something) is from 1850. U.S. Football sense originally was in rugby (1857).
Fraternity/sorority sense is from 1896 (originally it was what the fraternity did to the student);
from 1899 as a noun in this sense. Earlier it was a name on U.S. campuses for various tests of
strength or athletic skill between freshmen and sophomores as classes (1860).


fiction (n.)

late 14c., something invented, from Old French ficcion (13c.) dissimulation, ruse; invention, and
directly from Latin fictionem (nominative fictio) a fashioning or feigning, noun of action from past
participle stem of fingere to shape, form, devise, feign, originally to knead, form out of clay,
from PIE *dheigh- to build, form, knead (source also of Old English dag dough; see dough). As a
branch of literature, 1590s.


trick (n.)

early 15c., a cheat, a mean ruse, from Old North French trique trick, deceit, treachery, cheating,
from trikier to deceive, to cheat, variant of Old French trichier to cheat, trick, deceive, of
uncertain origin, probably from Vulgar Latin *triccare, from Latin tricari be evasive, shuffle, from
tric&aelig; trifles, nonsense, a tangle of difficulties, of unknown origin.    Meaning a roguish
prank is recorded from 1580s; sense of the art of doing something is first attested 1610s. Meaning
prostitute's client is first attested 1915; earlier it was U.S. slang for a robbery (1865). To do
the trick accomplish one's purpose is from 1812; to miss a trick fail to take advantage of
opportunity is from 1889; from 1872 in reference to playing the card-game of whist, which might be
the original literal sense. Trick-or-treat is recorded from 1942. Trick question is from 1907.


