rusticity (n.)

1530s, from Middle French rusticite (15c.), from Latin rusticitatem (nominative rusticitas) country
life, from rusticus (see rustic (adj.)).


rustication (n.)

1620s, to reside in the country, back-formation from rustication, or else from Latin rusticationem
(nominative rusticatio) act or fact of living in the country, noun of action from past participle
stem of rusticari live or stay in the country, from rusticus (see rustic). Meaning send into the
country is from 1714.


rustic (adj.)

mid-15c., from Latin rusticus of the country, rural; country-like, plain, simple, rough, coarse,
awkward, from rus (genitive ruris) open land, country (see rural). Noun meaning a country person,
peasant is from 1550s (also in classical Latin). Related: Rustical (early 15c.).


Arcadian

ideally rustic or rural; an idealized rustic, 1580s, from Greek Arkadia, district in the
Peloponnesus, taken by poets as an ideal region of rural felicity, traditionally from Arkas
(genitive Arkadas), son of Zeus, name of the founder and first ruler of Arcadia.


upland (n.)

interior district of a country, Old English upland the country (as opposed to the town), from up- +
land (n.). As an adjective from 14c. Related: Uplandish (Old English uplendisc rural rustic);
uplander. Jock Upaland was a 16c.-17c. term for a rustic.


rural (adj.)

early 15c., from Old French rural (14c.), from Latin ruralis of the countryside, from rus (genitive
ruris) open land, country, from PIE *reue- (1) to open; space (see room (n.)).In early examples,
there is usually little or no difference between the meanings of rural and rustic, but in later use
the tendency is to employ rural when the idea of locality (country scenes, etc.) is prominent, and
rustic when there is a suggestion of the more primitive qualities or manners naturally attaching to
country life. [OED]  Related: Rurally.


clown (n.)

1560s, clowne, also cloyne, rustic, boor, peasant, origin uncertain. Perhaps from Scandinavian
dialect (compare Icelandic klunni clumsy, boorish fellow; Swedish kluns a hard knob; a clumsy
fellow, Danish klunt log, block), or akin to North Frisian kl&ouml;nne clumsy person. Or, less
likely, from Latin colonus colonist, farmer, though awareness of this word might have influenced the
sense development in English.    Meaning professional fool, professional or habitual jester is
c.1600. The pantomime clown represents a blend of the Shakes[pearean] rustic with one of the stock
types of the It. comedy [Weekley]. Meaning contemptible person is from 1920s. Fem. form clowness
attested from 1801.


Doric (adj.)

1560s, see Dorian; in reference to the architectural order, 1610s. The Doric dialect in ancient
Greek theater was broad and rustic, hence it has been applied in English to northern and Scots
dialects (1837).


Abderian laughter (n.)

from Abdera, in Thrace, whose citizens were proverbial as rustic simpletons who would laugh at
anything or anyone they didn't understand (making their town the Hellenic equivalent of Gotham).


Jasper

masc. proper name, English form of Caspar or of Gaspar, the traditional name of one of the Three
Kings. Said by Klein to be of Persian origin and meaning literally treasure-holder. Used from 1896
for a rustic simpleton.


gaffer (n.)

1580s, elderly rustic, apparently a contraction of godfather (compare gammer); originally old man,
it was applied from 1841 to foremen and supervisors, which sense carried over 20c. to electrician in
charge of lighting on a film set.


Joan

fem. proper name, originally Joanna, fem. of Johannes (see John). Often 17c.-18c. used as a generic
name for a female rustic. Among U.S. births, a top 10 name for girls born between 1930 and 1937.


hobnail (n.)

1590s, the first element probably identical with hob rounded peg or pin used as a mark or target in
games (1580s), of unknown origin. See hob. Because they were used to make rough shoes, the word was
used figuratively for rustic person 17c. and after. Related: Hobnailed.


Jake

colloquial or familiar abbreviation of the masc. proper name Jacob (q.v.). As the typical name of a
rustic lout, from 1854. (Jakey still is the typical name for an Amishman among the non-Amish of
Pennsylvania Dutch country). Slang meaning excellent, fine is from 1914, American English, of
unknown origin.


paesan (n.)

1930s, fellow countryman, native of one's own country, from Italian dialect, from Late Latin
pagensis peasant, rustic (see peasant). Spanish form paisano attested in English (New Mexico) from
1844.


Corydon

traditional poetic name for a shepherd or rustic swain, from Latin Corydon, from Greek Korydon, name
of a shepherd in Theocritus and Virgil.


pastorale (n.)

musical composition from rustic tunes or representing pastoral scenes, 1724, from Italian pastorale,
noun use of adjective, from Latin pastoralis (see pastoral).


clownish (adj.)

1560s, rustic; 1580s, boorish, ungainly, awkward, from clown (n.) + -ish. Related: Clownishly;
clownishness.


hoyden (n.)

1590s, of unknown origin; perhaps from Dutch heiden rustic, uncivilized man, from Middle Dutch
heiden heathen (see heathen). Originally in English rude, boorish fellow; sense of ill-bred,
boisterous female first recorded 1670s.


idyll (n.)

also idyl, c.1600, picturesque pastoral poem, from Latin idyllium, from Greek eidyllion short,
descriptive poem, usually of rustic or pastoral type, literally a little picture, diminutive of
eidos form (see -oid).


villanelle (n.)

poetic form (or a poem in this form) of five 3-lined stanzas and a final quatrain, with only two
rhymes throughout, usually of pastoral or lyric nature, 1580s, from French villanelle, from Italian
villanella ballad, rural song, from fem. of villanello rustic, from Medieval Latin villanus (see
villain).


clodhopper (n.)

1690s, slang, one who works on plowed land, a rustic, from clod (n.) + agent noun from hop (v.).
Compare in a similar sense clod-breaker, clod-crusher; in this word perhaps a play on grasshopper.
Sense extended by 1836 to the shoes worn by such workers.


Reuben

masc. proper name, Old Testament eldest son of Jacob and name of the tribe descended from him, from
Greek Rouben, from Hebrew Reubhen, probably literally Behold a son, from reu, imperative of ra'ah he
saw + ben a son. As a typical name of a farmer, rustic, or country bumpkin, from 1804. The reuben
sandwich (1956) is Not obviously connected with the sense in rube [OED], possibly from Reuben's
restaurant, a popular spot in New York's Lower East Side.


hayseed (n.)

1570s in the literal sense of grass seed shaken out of hay, from hay + seed (n.). In U.S. slang
sense of comical rustic it dates from 1875. To have hayseed in (one's) hair was a common mid-19c.
way in U.S. to indicate a country person.    The opinion of the court was delivered by Justice Hunt;
the chief justice, in whose hair the Ohio hayseed still lingers, delivering a dissenting opinion
(etc.) [The Chronicle, New York, Nov. 12, 1874]


scalawag (n.)

also scallawag, disreputable fellow, 1848, American English, originally in trade union jargon, of
uncertain origin; perhaps an alteration (by influence of wag habitual joker) of Scottish scallag
farm servant, rustic, itself an alteration of Scalloway, one of the Shetland Islands, wit the
reference being to little Shetland ponies (An early recorded sense of scalawag was undersized or
worthless animal, 1854). In U.S. history, used from 1862 as a derogatory term for anti-Confederate
native white Southerners.


naive (adj.)

1650s, natural, simple, artless, from French na&#239;ve, fem. of na&#239;f, from Old French naif
naive, natural, genuine; just born; foolish, innocent; unspoiled, unworked (13c.), from Latin
nativus not artificial, also native, rustic, literally born, innate, natural (see native (adj.)).
Related: Naively.


roister (v.)

bluster, swagger, be bold, noisy, vaunting, or turbulent, 1580s, from an obsolete noun roister noisy
bully (1550s, displaced by 19c. by roisterer), from Middle French ruistre ruffian, from Old French
ruiste boorish, gross, uncouth, from Latin rusticus (see rustic (adj.)). Related: Roistered;
roistering. Ralph Royster-Doyster is the title and lead character of what is sometimes called the
first English comedy (Udall, 1555).


toadstool (n.)

late 14c., apparently just what it looks like: a fanciful name from Middle English tadde toad (see
toad) + stole stool (see stool). Toads themselves were regarded as highly poisonous, and this word
is popularly restricted to poisonous or inedible fungi, as distinct from edible mushrooms [OED].
Compare toad-cheese, a poisonous fungi; toad's meat (1886), a rustic term for toadstool.


Phyllis

fem. proper name, generic proper name for a comely rustic maiden in pastoral poetry (1630s), from
Latin Phyllis, a girl's name in Virgil, Horace, etc., from Greek Phyllis, female name, literally
foliage of a tree, from phyllon leaf, from PIE *bholyo- leaf, from root *bhel- (3) to thrive, bloom,
possibly identical with *bhel- (2) to blow, inflate, swell (see bole). In English, often spelled
Phillis, probably from influence of phil- loving. Her sweetheart usually was Philander.


bucolic (adj.)

1610s, earlier bucolical (1520s), from Latin bucolicus, from Greek boukolikos pastoral, rustic, from
boukolos cowherd, herdsman, from bous cow (see cow (n.)) + -kolos tending, related to Latin colere
to till (the ground), cultivate, dwell, inhabit (the root of colony). Middle Irish b&#250;achaill,
Welsh bugail shepherd are Celtic words form from the same root material as Greek boukolos.


chubby (adj.)

1610s, literally resembling a chub, from chub, the short, thick type of fish + -y (2). Perhaps
influenced by Old Norse kumba log, kumben stumpy.    ME chubbe ... was also used of a lazy,
spiritless fellow; a rustic, simpleton; dolt, fool (1558), whilst Bailey has Chub, a Jolt-head, a
great-headed, full-cheeked Fellow, a description reminiscent of that of the chevin, another name for
the chub ... Thus the nickname may have meant either short and thick, dumpy like a chub, or of the
nature of a chub, dull and clownish. [Dictionary of English Surnames]


villain (n.)

c.1300 (late 12c. as a surname), base or low-born rustic, from Anglo-French and Old French vilain
peasant, farmer, commoner, churl, yokel (12c.), from Medieval Latin villanus farmhand, from Latin
villa country house, farm (see villa).  The most important phases of the sense development of this
word may be summed up as follows: 'inhabitant of a farm; peasant; churl, boor; clown; miser; knave,
scoundrel.' Today both Fr. vilain and Eng. villain are used only in a pejorative sense. [Klein]
Meaning character in a novel, play, etc. whose evil motives or actions help drive the plot is from
1822.


jamboree (n.)

1866, represented as typical of American English, perhaps from jam (n.) on pattern of shivaree
[Barnhart]. For the second element, Weekley suggests French bourree, a kind of rustic dance. Klein
thinks the whole thing is of Hindu origin (but he credits its introduction to English, mistakenly,
to Kipling). Boy Scouts use is from 1920. Noted earlier as a term in cribbage:   Jamboree signifies
the combination of the five highest cards, as, for example, the two Bowers [jacks], Ace, King, and
Queen of trumps in one hand, which entitles the holder to count sixteen points. The holder of such a
hand, simply announces the fact, as no play is necessary; but should he play the hand as a Jambone,
he can count only eight points, whereas he could count sixteen if he played it, or announced it as a
Jamboree. [The American Hoyle, New York, 1864]


coulrophobia (n.)

morbid fear of clowns, by 2001 (said in Web sites to date from 1990s or even 1980s), a popular term,
not from psychology, possibly facetious, though the phenomenon is real enough; said to be built from
Greek kolon limb, with some supposed sense of stilt-walker, hence clown + -phobia.    Ancient Greek
words for clown were skl&ecirc;ro-paikt&ecirc;s, from paizein to play (like a child); or
deikeliktas; other classical words used for theatrical clowns were related to rustic, peasant
(compare Latin fossor clown, literally laborer, digger, related to fossil).    The whole creation
looks suspiciously like the sort of thing idle pseudo-intellectuals invent on the Internet and which
every smarty-pants takes up thereafter; perhaps it is a mangling of Modern Greek klooun clown, which
is the English word borrowed into Greek.


coon (n.)

short for raccoon, 1742, American English. It was the nickname of Whig Party members in U.S.
c.1848-60, as the raccoon was the party's symbol, and it also had associations with frontiersmen
(who stereotypically wore raccoon-skin caps), which probably ultimately was the source of the Whig
Party sense (the party's 1840 campaign was built on a false image of wealthy William Henry Harrison
as a rustic frontiersman).    The insulting U.S. meaning black person was in use by 1837, said to be
ultimately from Portuguese barracoos building constructed to hold slaves for sale. No doubt boosted
by the enormously popular blackface minstrel act Zip Coon (George Washington Dixon) which debuted in
New York City in 1834. But it is perhaps older (one of the lead characters in the 1767 colonial
comic opera The Disappointment is a black man named Raccoon). Coon's age is 1843, American English,
probably an alteration of British a crow's age.


pagan (n.)

late 14c., from Late Latin paganus pagan, in classical Latin villager, rustic; civilian, non-
combatant noun use of adjective meaning of the country, of a village, from pagus country people;
province, rural district, originally district limited by markers, thus related to pangere to fix,
fasten, from PIE root *pag- to fix (see pact). As an adjective from early 15c.    Religious sense is
often said to derive from conservative rural adherence to the old gods after the Christianization of
Roman towns and cities; but the word in this sense predates that period in Church history, and it is
more likely derived from the use of paganus in Roman military jargon for civilian, incompetent
soldier, which Christians (Tertullian, c.202; Augustine) picked up with the military imagery of the
early Church (such as milites soldier of Christ, etc.). Applied to modern pantheists and nature-
worshippers from 1908.


swamp (n.)

c.1500 (implied in swampwatyr swamp-water), of uncertain origin, perhaps [Barnhart] a dialectal
survival from an Old English cognate of Old Norse sv&ouml;ppr sponge, fungus, from Proto-Germanic
*swampuz; but traditionally connected with Middle English sompe morass, swamp, which probably is
from Middle Dutch somp or Middle Low German sump swamp (see sump). All of these likely are
ultimately related to each other, from PIE *swombho- spongy; mushroom, via the notion of spongy
ground.    [B]y swamps then in general is to be understood any low grounds subject to inundations,
distinguished from marshes, in having a large growth of timber, and much underwood, canes, reeds,
wythes, vines, briers, and such like, so matted together, that they are in a great measure
impenetrable to man or beast .... [Bernard Romans, A Concise History of East and West Florida, 1775]
More popular in U.S. (swamp (n.) by itself is first attested 1624 in Capt. John Smith's description
of Virginia). Swamp-oak is from 1680s, American English. Swamp Yankee rural, rustic New Englander is
attested from 1941. Thornton's American Glossary (1912) has swamp-angel dweller in a swamp, swamp-
law might makes right.


onion (n.)

early 12c., from Anglo-French union, Old French oignon onion (formerly also oingnon), and directly
from Latin unionem (nominative unio), colloquial rustic Roman for a kind of onion, also pearl (via
notion of a string of onions), literally one, unity; sense connection is the successive layers of an
onion, in contrast with garlic or cloves.    Old English had ynne (in ynne-leac), from the same
Latin source, which also produced Irish inniun, Welsh wynwyn and similar words in Germanic. In
Dutch, the ending in -n was mistaken for a plural inflection and new singular ui formed. The usual
Indo-European name is represented by Greek kromion, Irish crem, Welsh craf, Old English hramsa,
Lithuanian kremuse.    The usual Latin word was cepa, a loan from an unknown language; it is the
source of Old French cive, Old English cipe, and, via Late Latin diminutive cepulla, Italian
cipolla, Spanish cebolla, Polish cebula. German Zwiebel also is from this source, but altered by
folk etymology in Old High German (zwibolla) from words for two and ball. Onion ring is attested
from 1952.   Onion dome attested from 1956; onion grass from 1883; onion skin as a type of paper
from 1892. Onions, the surname, is attested from mid-12c. (Ennian), from Old Welsh Enniaun,
ultimately from Latin Annianus, which was associated with Welsh einion anvil.


